
<<<PDFPAGE 1>>>
ino Nn 

<<<PDFPAGE 2>>>
’ 
=) BNR ils OG 
ee oe 
le ali 
fies 
ya 
Cal 
er ie a 
i 
Ne 

<<<PDFPAGE 3>>>
_ 
LPO 
He found himself drawn gradually, against 
his will, deeper and deeper into the shifting 
sands of Sicilian politics. Protracted at- 
tempts to remove the Queen, to impose a 
new constitution (modelled on British lines) 
upon an almost feudal society, and to free 
Sicily from Neapolitan domination led to 
Bentinck’s becoming a virtual dictator. 
Benevolent though his rule was, it began to 
crumble when he conceived an ill-timed plan 
to establish Sicily as a British Colony. This 
was resented, naturally enough, by the 
Sicilian Royalists, but also by his own 
Government, whose foreign policy at the 
time did not favour the move. Bentinck’s 
irresponsible behaviour as commander of 
an expeditionary force in Italy brought 
matters to a head, and he was recalled in 
disgrace in 1815. 
The war ended; Britain ceased to take an 
interest in Sicily’s domestic troubles, and all 
traces of the abortive Parliamentary system 
gradually disappeared. 
Such, in outline, is Dr Rosselli’s theme; 
and his telling of it is no less entertaining 
than the full story itself. His book will 
interest not only students of European 
history and British foreign policy, but all 
those who are concerned with the moral 
issues that arise when a great power inter- 
feres in the affairs of a smaller power. 

<<<PDFPAGE 4>>>
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/lordwilliambenti0O000ross_q3c3 

<<<PDFPAGE 5>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 6>>>
M. de Metternich a raison, une raison de barbare si vous 
voulez; mais il ne ment pas en avancant que le gouvernement 
de lopinion ou des deux Chambres n’est pas un véritable 
besoin pour l’Italie; ce n’est un besoin que pour quelques ames 
généreuses qui ont vu les pays étrangers ou fait des voyages. 
Et encore ces Ames délicates, arrivées au fait et au prendre, 
s’amusent 4 exprimer de beaux sentiments, comme les 
Girondins, et ne savent pas agir. Je ne vois nulle part des 
Mirabeau, des Danton, des Carnot. 
STENDHAL, Rome, Naples et Florence 

<<<PDFPAGE 7>>>
JOHNSROSSELLI 
POR Day TEETAM BEN TIN CK & 
areeeo 
Ri tISH OGGUPATION 
(OMe eMC IML NG 
1811-1814 
CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1956 
as 
rSitag 
BIBLIOTHECA 
Ottavionsi8 

<<<PDFPAGE 8>>>
B64 2 
Riot 
1956 
Printed in the Netherlands 
by Joh. Enschedé en Zonen, Haarlem 

<<<PDFPAGE 9>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 10>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 11>>>
Introduction 
CONTENTS 
page 
1 
I Britain Intervenes 
18 
II_ The Protectorate and the “Bases’ 
40 
Il The Constitution and the ‘Promise’ 
63 
IV The King’s Return: the Queen’s Departure 
82 
V_ The Constitution Fails 
102 
VI 
Dictatorship and the ‘Dream’ 
120 
VIL 
The End of the Protectorate 
139 
Appendixes 
A William Drummond’s Mission to Sicily, 1806-1808 
158 
B Documents concerning the ‘Dream’ 
164 
C Bentinck’s Conduct at Genoa 
168 
Notes 
172 
Index 
215 

<<<PDFPAGE 12>>>
diz 
fist oath 
Saas 
lS 
ry 
os F. 
4 
Wet 
bs 
7, 
ihe : 
; 
| 
t j T 
Par 
‘ 
5 
ath ten bat 

<<<PDFPAGE 13>>>
PREAACE 
This book—there is no disguising it—started out as a dissertation 
for the Ph.D. degree in the University of Cambridge, and later 
turned into a Thirlwall Prize essay. But I have revised and in 
part rewritten it for publication. As it stands it rests on a good 
deal of earlier work by British and Italian historians, notably 
Sir Charles Webster’s great work on Castlereagh. But I have 
tried to tell from the point of view of both countries the story 
of events which have to do at once with diplomatic and with 
local political history, as well as—in their abortive way—with 
the history of British colonial expansion. 
His Grace the Duke of Portland allowed me to use Lord 
William Bentinck’s papers, now on loan to Nottingham 
University Library. Professor Walter Maturi, of Turin Universi- 
ty, let me read his transcript of King Ferdinand’s Diary, which 
together with the other Bourbon papers in the Naples State 
Archives was destroyed in 1943; he also gave me much helpful 
advice. Miss H. M. Lackland (Mrs F. Best) lent me books and 
notes which she had made for her earlier study of the subject. 
The late Senator Benedetto Croce also let me see copies of 
documents in his possession. Professor Gaetano Salvemini read 
an early version of the MS., questioned a number of points, and 
so led me to do all I could to strengthen my argument. Mr G. 
Ellis Flack, librarian, and Miss J. Renshaw, archivist of Notting- 
ham University Library, gave me much practical help; so did 
Mr R.H. Ellis and other officials of the Public Record Office, 
and Dr E. Librino and Dr L. A. Pagano of the Palermo State 
Archives. I have also had advice and encouragement from 
Mr C. W. Crawley, Mr D. Mack Smith, and others. 
I am 
thankful to them all. What I owe the Master of Peterhouse the 
dedication tries to say. 
March 1955 
ya 

<<<PDFPAGE 14>>>
ie 
Sintictedh dase Stick 
.% 
ri ae thst 
+6 a 
We aS 
nik 
Mey 
4 
alls 

<<<PDFPAGE 15>>>
BOS 
Fs GRIPE 
When the Bourbons were driven out of Naples in 1860 they left 
behind one collection of State and private papers and took another 
with them into their Bavarian exile. The first collection, after 
having been made public only in 1930, was destroyed in 1943. 
The second has now been bought by the Italian State and returned 
to the Naples State Archives. Most of it-was there made available 
to students in the late summer of last year, when this book was 
already in page-proof. Through the courtesy of Count Filangieri, 
Superintendent of the Naples Archives, I was able on a recent 
visit to read some of the papers and to go through the inventory. 
Much of the collection, as it turns out, duplicates that which was 
lost in 1943 (and which several historians had previously studied). 
The new material concerning the Napoleonic period seems likely 
to yield some interesting details rather than to alter anyone’s 
interpretation of important matters. 
January 1956 
1h. 

<<<PDFPAGE 16>>>
NOTE * 
In transcribing from English documents of the period I have 
modernised the spelling and punctuation: with this exception, 
that to keep the flavour of Bentinek’s Journal I have left his 
punctuation (or the lack of it) unchanged, as well as his spelling 
of foreign words. 
An asterisk in the text refers the reader to the notes at the 
end of the book. 

<<<PDFPAGE 17>>>
INGRODUCGTION 
I 
When a Great Power defends a small one in time of war the 
Great Power often finds it hard not to meddle in the domestic 
concerns of the small Power. At the same time the Great Power 
is often less interested in these domestic concerns than the small 
Power (or the later historian) imagines. The British occupation 
of Sicily between 1806 and 1815 
illustrates both these truths. 
What is surprising is not that Britain interfered, but that her 
Governments twice decided to interfere in full and deliberate 
strength. The first attempt, in 1806, came to nothing. The 
second, in 1811, the Government entrusted to Lord William 
Bentinck to carry out as Minister to the Sicilian Court and 
Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean. This time the con- 
sequences were far beyond what anybody—Government or 
envoy—had had in mind at first. 
At the end of 1805 the Court of Naples, for the second time 
in seven years, abandoned their continental possessions to the 
French and fled to Sicily. From then on British Governments 
provided money, troops, and ships to keep the island—but for 
Sardinia the only piece of Italian soil outside French control—in 
friendly hands. For most of the next six years this was all they 
cared for. It was a negative policy: the highest stakes lay else- 
where. To people in Sicily, of course, things looked very 
different, and in particular to the British agents there. A month’s 
voyage separated them from home and left them mostly to 
their own devices. The problems they faced were thorny and 
seemed urgent. They distrusted the Court and the Court dis- 
trusted them. As the years wore on relations became steadily 
worse. By 1811, when the British Government made up its 
mind to intervene, and stuck to its decision, a succession of 
Ministers and Commanders had long been urging it to do so. 
What made this intervention notable was that it became 
inextricably mixed with a crisis in the domestic politics of Sicily. 
The internal struggle that led to the revolution of 1812 could 
not have taken the course it did without British help; nor could 

<<<PDFPAGE 18>>>
2 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
Britain have intervened as she did had that struggle not provided 
both occasion and warrant. 
The British Government, which thought it was trying to 
achieve immediate military ends, found itself forwarding a 
liberal revolution in Sicily and plans for independence and unity 
in continental Italy. This happened not merely because the chief 
agent, Bentinck, behaved as he did, but because (as so often 
before and since) diplomatic and domestic affairs could not be 
kept separate: they depended and acted on one another. 
What happened in Sicily to help along this interplay was the 
rise of a movement of resistance to royal power which in the 
end became the ‘English party’. But what was this movement? 
It has not even an accepted name: the ‘patriotic’ movement, a 
name used at the time, must do as well as any. Some historians 
have seen in it a straightforward liberal opposition to despotism, 
some (more recently) the embodiment of class privilege and 
insular tradition. But this is too simple. For it was their very 
particularism that led the more advanced patriots to attempt a 
reform, along English lines, of the country’s institutions; and if 
they had succeeded they would have ended by jettisoning many 
of the privileges which their movement as a whole had begun 
by defending. But although this attempt at making reform 
grow from an enduring root of conservatism had (not quite by 
chance) an affinity with English practice, it did not work in 
Sicily: the outcome was not a resolution but a lasting contra- 
diction which the movement was never able to get over. 
The movement began and ended as the affair of a small 
number of nobles and their dependents, mostly lawyers and 
clerics. Useless to look for political consciousness or strength 
elsewhere; useless, too, in a country where land-ownership 
conferred the highest prestige and tended to draw what wealth 
there was away from industry or trade, to look for a middle 
class apart from these people and from a number of landlords’ 
agents or chief tenants.* This aristocracy faced two dangers. One 
was external—the inroads of a monarchy bent on centralisation 
and authoritarian reform; the other internal—the gradual worsen- 
ing of the barons’ own economic position. The one scratched 
the juridical shell of Sicilian feudalism; the other threatened to 
eat it away from within. 

<<<PDFPAGE 19>>>
INTRODUCTION 
3 
The policy of the central Government—it was the typical 
enlightened absolutism of the time—was launched by the 
Viceroy Caracciolo in the 1780's; his successors then carried it 
forward with more or less determination. 
Caracciolo tried to restrict the extremely wide powers of 
alienation and succession which the barons had enjoyed ever 
since the period of feudal anarchy under the Aragonese kings; 
he investigated dubious titles; he attacked feudal jurisdictions; 
and above all he attempted to deprive the barons of their virtual 
freedom from taxation. All these measures constituted the first 
serious threat to the aristocracy as the ruling class, and led to 
a constitutional conflict between Crown and Parliament.* The 
conflict never came to a head in the 1780’s and 90’s, because the 
Crown chose to yield or compromise; but it was only put off; 
and meanwhile Parliament had begun to appear, for the first 
time, as the focus of baronial resistance to the Crown. This 
Parliament, the only one of its kind in Italy, had until then been 
no more than an Estates General, meeting once every four years 
to vote supply—an automatic process—and present petitions. 
But now its one real power, that of distributing taxation—a 
power of the greatest importance to the barons—had been 
challenged. From then on its members gradually became better 
aware of their constitutional rights than they had ever been 
while those rights were still unquestioned.” 
At the same time the barons were beginning to notice a more 
radical threat to their predominance. It has lately been pointed 
out* that the growth of absentee landlordship in the 18th century 
was accompanied by a sharp rise in prices: so that while the 
barons’ expenditure increased, the real value of the fixed rents 
they drew from their estates tended to fall. In other words, the 
barons, while they gradually surrendered to intermediaries their 
functions as feudal landlords, began to lose the benefits which 
those functions had once brought them. The greatest families 
were often unable to avoid huge burdens of debt and mortgages; 
some even went bankrupt. Hence the restrictions which the 
feudal system still placed on the alienation of lands began to 
appear burdensome, and the system itself to lose its raison d étre. 
This helps to explain why, in 1812, the barons’ triumphant 
assertion of the constitutional rights of Parliament went together 

<<<PDFPAGE 20>>>
4 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
with a spontaneous renunciation of feudal privileges—that is, of 
the very privileges in whose defence the rights of Parliament 
had in the first place been invoked. 
But these economic straits alone are not the whole explanation. 
It will not do to assume that men are always aware of their own 
interests. In fact, conservatism and esprit de corps often led a 
majority of the barons to act against what might have seemed 
their economic interest; and, in contrast, another reason for the 
growing concern with reform was the spread among the small 
class of educated Sicilians of the commonplaces of Enlightened 
thought. These motives in turn were often mixed. It is striking 
to see how the particularism and attachment to tradition charac- 
teristic of an island on the edge of Europe infused into the 
Enlightenment a distinct local colour. It is curious, for instance, 
that the historian and jurist Gregorio, writing at the end of the 
18th century, should have based his assertion of the supremacy 
of public law over private, and of the monarchy over particular 
privilege, on an appeal to the past—to the Norman Conquest 
and to the golden age of strong central government that followed 
it, as against the Aragonese period of baronial anarchy. Reform, 
in Gregorio’s view, was to be achieved not by wiping the slate 
clean, but by restoring the Sicilian Constitution to its pristine 
purity, shorn of later and ‘unnatural’ growths.* Similarly, the 
Abate Paolo Balsamo, a professor of agriculture and political 
economy, while he followed the teaching of Arthur Young and 
Adam Smith in these subjects, looked, when he came to deal 
with constitutional issues, to the Aragonese period as to the 
fount of Sicilian liberties; and when he turned to Blackstone 
for guidance in drafting the 1812 Constitution, he drew not 
merely on Blackstone’s paraphrase of Montesquieu, but on his 
interpretation of the English common law—between which and 
the inherited mass of Sicilian law a parallel could be drawn.* 
One may see as another sign of the Sicilians’ insularity and 
traditionalism the scant interest they took in the egalitarian 
ideas of Rousseau and the French Revolution, and, in contrast, 
the sympathy they shewed with English institutions. At a time 
when educated Sicilians were taking greater notice of local 
economic problems, it was natural enough that, comparing the 
backward condition of their country with England’s, they should 

<<<PDFPAGE 21>>>
INTRODUCTION 
S 
ascribe England’s wealth to her political constitution, and should 
see in that constitution a possible panacea for Sicilian ills. 
“Were we happy enough’, a Sicilian nobleman told the English traveller 
Brydone as early as 1770, ‘to enjoy the blessings of your constitution, you 
might call us rich indeed, many hidden doors of opulence would then be 
opened which now are not even thought of, and we should soon re- 
assume Our ancient name and consequence; but at present we are nothing.”* 
English institutions took on an added prestige in Sicilian eyes 
from the common origin of both nations in the Norman 
Conquest. The example of the English Constitution could there- 
fore be quoted in defence of Sicilian liberties; it seemed an 
attractive model to those who wished to mend rather than end 
their ancient institutions.* 
But Sicilian particularism took yet another form, and this the 
most deep-rooted, most widespread, and most lasting: resent- 
ment at seeing the country ruled in the interests of Naples, by 
Neapolitans who were too familiar to be foreigners, too foreign 
to be compatriots.* This resentment, fed by centuries of past 
rivalry, was re-awakened by Caracciolo’s attacks on local insti- 
tutions; it could only be exacerbated by the presence in Sicily, 
in 1799 and again from 1806 onwards, of a Court bent on 
recovering Naples and seemingly indifferent to Sicilian concerns, 
and of a Neapolitan Ministry hostile to Sicilian privileges. The 
revenues of the island were being used ‘to recover a kingdom 
which, once reunited to the Crown, would again reduce their 
own country to the harsh condition of a province’; and to 
support a flock of ‘foreign’ pensioners and officials. Desire for 
independence and an end to Neapolitan meddling was the one 
feeling that could be counted on to unite the Sicilians; it was 
shared even by staunch conservatives, devoted to the monarchy.” 
This local jealousy contributed more to the growth of the patri- 
otic movement than some Italian historians—with the later 
unification of Italy in mind—have been willing to allow. 
Thus the French Revolution and the ensuing wars widened 
and intensified the conflict between Crown and Parliament. 
True, the Revolution at first frightened the Court into calling 
a halt to the attempt to make Sicily a modern absolutist State; 
and the loss of Naples at the end of 1798 forced it once again 

<<<PDFPAGE 22>>>
6 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
to give in temporarily on the recurrent matter of the distribution 
of taxation, which had looked like bringing it into conflict with 
the Parliament of that year.* But the times fed the spirit of 
‘speculation and independence’ which Caracciolo’s reforms had 
aroused; and the presence, after 1805, of both the Court and the 
British helped to bring together all the causes for dissatisfaction 
and gropings towards reform already described, until in the end 
what had begun as a baronial protest against the loss of privileges 
took on more and more the appearance of a national movement 
of revolt. 
So much for the outline of a growing conflict. But when we 
come to look beyond outlines, classes, or abstract forces for the 
motives of individual men who took part in it, we find some 
curious blanks. The fact is that (for reasons that have less to do 
with Sicily’s backwardness at the time than with its backward- 
ness since) we are worse informed about the leading Sicilians 
of a century and a half ago than we are about many ancient or 
medieval characters. Most of them are names to which we can 
tack a few anecdotes. But even what we know shows clearly 
enough how hard it would be to fit these men into a convenient 
mould. Among the ‘patriots’ motives and actions were as various 
as the influences that set the movement going, and often no less 
contradictory. 
Take, for instance, the Prince of Cassaro: A leader of baronial 
resistance in the 1798 Parliament; later reconciled with the 
Court; re-emerging to head the patriots in the 1810 Parliament; 
following afterwards a line of conduct equally ambiguous and 
variable—this enigmatic figure seems nevertheless to have acted 
from some consistent principle besides mere opportunism: one 
may perhaps see in him a man attached to the old aristocratic 
constitution and equally opposed to royal interference and to 
liberal reform.* No such consistency, however, can be found in 
his sometime henchman the Prince of Aci, who throughout 
his various and violent shifts of allegiance seems to have been 
little more than a hothead.* As for the two most prominent 
patriotic barons, the Prince of Belmonte and his uncle the Prince 
of Castelnuovo, character and convictions differentiated and, in 
the end, divided them. 
Belmonte, rich, handsome, witty, a man of parts as well as a 

<<<PDFPAGE 23>>>
INTRODUCTION 
We 
grand seigneur, had made a grand tour through England and the 
Continent, and had been one of the first Sicilian noblemen to 
mix on equal terms with men of learning. Although ‘his worst 
enemies dared not deny him eloquence, dignity, courage, liber- 
ality and other heroic virtues’, even his hagiographer had to 
admit his unbounded vanity and occasional lack of judgement.” 
Castelnuovo, like Belmonte, had travelled and read widely: but 
while Belmonte was for a time on intimate terms with the Kin 
and Queen, and remained a fast friend of Louis-Philippe, Duke 
of Orleans, Castelnuovo led an austere and retired life, shunning 
the Court, which, indeed, thought him inclined to democratic 
ideas; while Belmonte had the confidence and the gifts of an 
active politician and party leader, and seems to have been some- 
what shallow and volatile where issues of public policy were 
concerned, Castelnuovo was rather the political theorist, the 
conscientious administrator, the dispassionate and often despond- 
ent observer, little suited for the rough-and-tumble of everyday 
politics. His friend Balsamo, though he praised ‘the uprightness 
and ready perspicacity of his mind, the firmness of his character, 
his delicate sense of honour, the purity of his morals and his 
disinterested devotion to public affairs’, nevertheless had to 
admit more than once that Castelnuovo was liable in moments 
of crisis to throw in his hand, with deplorable results, rather 
than compromise his Roman firmness in the cause he held right.* 
In both Belmonte and Castelnuovo an aristocratic, authoritarian 
streak came out often enough: but if Belmonte may be com- 
pared to a great Whig nobleman, Castelnuovo’s convictions 
sprang rather from an idealisation of Republican Rome and 
America; and his concern for equity led him into policies which 
could only undermine the existing aristocratic system. 
These men, and their no less varicoloured friends, the British 
representatives came to know very well. But in the early years 
of the occupation they were more familiar with disunity and 
inconsistency at Court. Here too several persons or cliques 
meddled in affairs of State, often at cross purposes—the Queen 
and her friends; the King when he took the trouble; the King’s 
favourite Ascoli; the Ministers. Jealousy and intrigue had endless 
play: it is not surprising to hear that the Sicilian Ambassador 
in London, Castelcicala, once received three conflicting instruc- 

<<<PDFPAGE 24>>>
8 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
tions on the same subject; let one person instruct him, he begged, 
else ‘que peut faire votre dévoué serviteur 
?” 
Ferdinand, or ‘Nasone’, with his great gawky body, his 
plebeian manners, his superstitious, diffident mind and his bursts 
of Neapolitan bonhomie—here was (the British representatives 
who dealt with him agreed) a man who might be trusted to act 
sensibly and loyally if only he was not bedevilled by intrigue. 
And if he took no more than a momentary interest in affairs, 
that was mere weakness and indolence. Certainly the King 
preferred to lead a simple life at one of his country villas, hunting 
or tunny-fishing. But his ‘indolence’ was rather a propensity 
for leaving others to do the dirty work of government and take 
the consequences. He always tried not to commit himself on 
important issues, and if he had to, he preferred to do so through 
members of his family or through subordinates who might 
later be repudiated. He could on occasion prove a master of 
delaying tactics in defence of his prerogative; and when he did 
take a hand in affairs he shewed a good deal of native shrewdness 
and common sense.” 
His wife, Maria Carolina, then in her fifties, had given birth 
to seventeen children, and the vicissitudes of her life had affected 
her health and mind, never very stable at the best of times. 
Bentinck was not far wrong in his impression ‘that with ex- 
ceeding good abilities, she probably never had any common 
sense and that her mind enfeebled by age, by vast quantities of 
opium and the operation of violent passions has reached a state 
little short of insanity’. She talked volubly and endlessly; she 
poured out her lamentations in innumerable letters whose 
breakneck style outran spelling, punctuation, syntax, and often 
sense. Occasionally she struck the dignified attitude of the 
daughter of Maria Theresa; but she generally lived at an extreme 
pitch of exultation or—more often—of despair; she saw treach- 
ery on every side; she would, she knew, perish at the block like 
her sister Marie-Antoinette. And since all opposition seemed to 
her disloyal, she surrounded herself with compliant French 
émigrés, Neapolitan adventurers, spies and dubious characters.* 
Through them she directed a traffic of intrigue and espionage 
which cost much but produced little; and as she lavished money 
on this and on charity she was perpetually insolvent. Her one 

<<<PDFPAGE 25>>>
INTRODUCTION 
9 
great desire was to recover Naples; she hated the Sicilians and 
they her.* Very likely the Queen had less to do with bringing 
about the critical state of affairs than her contemporaries be- 
lieved; but she herself, by appearing to do so much, gave them 
every reason to believe it.* 
Between these two poles of Court life swung the several 
members of the Royal Family. Somewhere about the middle 
stood the Hereditary Prince (later King Francis I), whose wari- 
ness and submission kept him as inconspicuous before Bentinck’s 
arrival as they were to make him unhappy afterwards; while 
a curious outrider was Louis-Philippe, Duke of Orleans, who, 
though Ferdinand’s son-in-law, was still a little suspect for his 
antecedents. But he shewed signs of what he was to become 
when interest and conviction led him to side with the British 
and with his friend Belmonte. As for the man the British saw 
most of, the Marquis of Circello (Foreign Secretary from 1806 
to 1812), he had to put up with remonstrances against measures 
he knew little about and had had no share in concerting. An 
elderly, affable Neapolitan courtier of the old school, he com- 
plained only on occasion of ‘all the tracasseries which really make 
my life very hard’.* Neither he nor the British agents had a happy 
time of it during the years of attrition between Great Power 
and small Power. Maria Carolina, indeed, was not the only Red 
Queen in Palermo. 
II 
The story of Anglo-Sicilian relations from 1806 onwards opens 
with a bang and goes on for five years as an extended whimper. 
It was after the failure of the 1806 peace talks with France that 
the Ministry of All the Talents decided to intervene. At first 
they tried to exhort without threatening; but very soon they 
decided on measures which, had they been enforced, would have 
brought about then what did not in fact take place until 1812. 
These measures would have turned Sicily into a virtual British 
protectorate in peace as well as war. Howick, then Foreign 
Secretary, proposed to remove the Queen’s Franco-Neapolitan 
faction from the Government, replace them by Sicilians, and 
put the Sicilian army under the British Commander-in-Chief. 

<<<PDFPAGE 26>>>
Io 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
The Court’s improvidence and ambiguity, Howick thought, 
had already lost Naples; if they were allowed to go on as before 
they might lose Sicily as well. But he and Grenville, it seems, 
also wanted to get value for money during the war and to secure 
Sicily as a useful naval and trading station in peace-time. What 
all this might have led to we cannot tell: the necessary instruc- 
tions were drawn up, but the Talents fell just in time to stop 
them from being sent out.” 
Canning, when he came to deal with Sicily, made no demands 
on the Court beyond vague ones for their confidence and co- 
operation. Later on he did insist—as Howick had—that Britain 
could not guarantee the return of Naples at a peace, though she 
would do her best. He also asked that the Sicilian army should 
come under the British Commander if the island was attacked; 
but he seems not to have been particularly worried about this, 
for the question still stood unresolved when he left office.” 
Otherwise Canning’s Sicilian policy, so far as he had one, was 
conciliatory; he wished to set at rest any suspicion the Court 
might entertain of England’s abandoning Sicily or meddling in 
her internal affairs. So far, indeed, was Canning from thinking 
of the British subsidy as a possible means of coercion that when 
a new treaty raised it to £400,000 a year he removed its payment 
from the hands of the British Minister at Palermo to those of 
the Sicilian Ambassador in London—and this on no more urgent 
grounds than that whoever paid it out bore the loss on the 
exchange.* 
The fact was that the strategic situation had changed. In 1806, 
after Maida, one could still think of using Sicily as a springboard 
for an invasion of Italy. In 1807, after the Peace of Tilsit, that 
hope was, for the time being, as good as lost. Sicily was now of 
little positive importance. The British Government accordingly 
treated the garrison as a reserve which might be drawn upon 
for service elsewhere, and whose task was the merely negative 
one of holding the place.* 
As for Howick’s envoy to Palermo, William Drummond, 
he had approved and even urged ‘measures which would have in 
fact rendered Sicily a province of Great Britain’, and had at 
first gone so far as to suspend the subsidy. But he changed his 
mind even before he knew of Howick’s fall. Drummond had 

<<<PDFPAGE 27>>>
INTRODUCTION 
II 
lost his early hopes of the Sicilians’ fitness to regenerate their 
country under British tutelage; but he came to believe that he 
could by his own influence neutralise the Queen and lead the 
King along the path of reform and cooperation. He therefore 
resumed payment of the subsidy, and took up a conciliatory 
attitude which, on the whole, he maintained until his recall in 
1808, despite recurrent friction and disappointment.* 
Occasions for mutual ill-feeling were not wanting. The Court, 
the Queen especially, wanted above all to recover Naples: not 
only would the British Government not guarantee Naples, but 
their generals had year after year to put off, for one reason or 
another, the expedition on which the Court pinned their hopes. 
And when an expedition was at last attempted in 1809, its failure 
coincided with the disastrous defeat of Austria. The Court were 
plunged into deeper dismay than ever. They could not be sure 
that England would win the war; and if she did, they might 
still be left stranded in Sicily at a peace, or worse, be deprived 
even of that. The Queen remembered with horror how close 
they had come to such a fate during the 1806 peace negotiations.” 
Perhaps, too, she knew something of the drastic measures 
Howick had planned: at any rate Lord Amherst, Drummond’s 
successor, found it difficult to remove from her mind ‘an im- 
pression to which she willingly recurs that it is still the intention 
of the British to render themselves masters of Sicily’.* She filled 
her letters with complaints of the English who ‘overpowered, 
humiliated, ill-treated’ her, and their least request seemed to her 
the beginning of subversion.* 
The British representatives had no less cause for anxiety. 
Invasion was always a possibility. The British forces were often 
depleted, and the subsidy seemed to bear no fruit whatever: 
Drummond had hoped to see the Sicilian army put into fighting 
shape, but three years later Amherst found it still ‘weak, ill- 
provided... dissatisfied’, and he urged that since the Court 
refused to grant a united command, the British Commander 
should at least be given control of the subsidy.” The Queen’s 
influence seemed the root of the trouble. She could not be kept out 
of affairs, as Drummond found after a premature announcement 
that she and her faction ‘ruled no longer, either in appearance 
or in reality’.* But the worst was not her meddling and suspicion. 

<<<PDFPAGE 28>>>
I2 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
From time to time alarming reports came in of the Queen’s 
intrigues with one or other of the Powers: Russia, or Austria, 
or even France or Murat. Her object was always the same: to 
restore her family to Naples by some arrangement, if necessary 
by the surrender of Sicily. These reports, though convincing, 
did not amount to proof; they grew still more alarming after 
the Austro-French 
alliance, for was not Marie-Louise 
the 
Queen’s granddaughter? But protests only drew counter-protes- 
tations of loyalty from the King and Circello, and furious re- 
criminations from the Queen.” 
Drummond had thought the Queen a mere dupe of the 
French faction, and Amherst would not at first believe the re- 
ports. But the military had no such scruples. As early as 1807 
Sir John Moore—then second-in-command—had urged that the 
Queen should be expelled and Sicily annexed to the British 
Empire. Even Sir John Stuart (commander 1808-1811), though 
at first more favourably disposed towards the Court, eventually 
lost his temper and blurted out in public: ‘as for the King, his 
cause is desperate; he has lost one kingdom, and he must lose 
the other. There is no alternative for England but to take Sicily 
for herself, or to abandon it altogether.” To Amherst he wrote 
that “we may (as eventually we must do) dictate to the Govern- 
ment its measures as well as its policy’. The staff officers at the 
Messina headquarters, long convinced of the Court’s treachery, 
derided Amherst and Stuart as fatuously blind to the perils that 
threatened them, and clamoured for drastic action.* 
This state of anxiety and frustration might perhaps have gone 
on indefinitely, had present danger not broken in on it. In May 
1810 Murat came down to the Straits of Messina to attempt an 
invasion. But not only did the Court profess a ‘strange incre- 
dulity’ as to the danger; not only did they persist in refusing 
the united command: they failed, for all Amherst’s remonstrances 
throughout the summer, to provide a single soldier for the 
defence of the Straits. Murat’s landing, when it came in Sep- 
tember, was repulsed by British soldiers and by Sicilian peasants 
armed with rifles, axes, and sticks.* Only with the greatest 
difficulty did Amherst induce the Court to make even a verbal 
stand, and to deny Murat’s published assertion that they awaited 
him as a liberator. Fresh evidence of the Queen’s traffic with 

<<<PDFPAGE 29>>>
INTRODUCTION 
13 
Naples came tumbling in to confirm the general belief that the 
Court were in league with Murat. Even the cautious Amherst 
became at length convinced that ‘jealousy of the designs of 
Great Britain predominates in the Queen’s mind over the hatred 
she may entertain for Bonaparte’: it was high time, he declared, 
‘to put an end to a system of duplicity and intrigue the existence 
of which I have been almost the last person in Sicily to believe’. 
He too now preached the need for interference. Britain, he said, 
could no longer afford to leave her troops open to defection in 
their rear: if the Queen continued to ‘separate her interests from 
England’, then England had better “direct the concerns of those 
who are themselves unequal to the task, and... administer by 
force the remedies on which the salvation of this kingdom will 
ultimately depend.”* 
Amherst had another ground for this opinion: the Sicilian 
people, he thought, detested their government to the point of 
welcoming foreign interference; if the English did not help 
them they might turn to the French. How much stronger, then, 
was the contrast that summer between the Court, who had 
‘trifled and temporised, and sought to palliate ambiguous con- 
duct by plausible but unsatisfactory explanation’, and the people, 
who had ‘shewn themselves boldly and openly the foes of 
France and the friends of England’. Their feeling for national 
independence seemed to provide the only alliance England could 
count on. One finds the official British paper appealing to it as 
the surest means of rallying the population: Murat’s design on 
Sicily, it said, was ‘to make her an integral part of the Kingdom of 
Naples; as they have destroyed law and religion, so they wish 
to do away with history as well.’ Sicily’s independence had been 
recognised by every King since Roger, but ‘Signor Murat now 
wishes .. 
. to humiliate the good Sicilians, and strip them of all 
the rights and prerogatives they have ever enjoyed’. So when 
the ‘patriots’ appealed to Amherst for help in defending these 
same rights, he was much more inclined to listen to them than 
before. 
What had happened was that a political crisis coincided with 
the military emergency of 1810; and that the conflict between 
Crown and Parliament now shifted decisively from merely 
fiscal to political and institutional ground. But taxation remained 

<<<PDFPAGE 30>>>
I4 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the first matter for dispute. The Court,were badly short of money 
when Parliament met for its regular session in January 1810.” 
The Speech from the Throne—whether as a sop to constitutional 
sentiment, or a warning against insubordination—exhorted 
members to safeguard from the democratic peril their Consti- 
tution and privileges, ‘institutions lost by other nations for lack 
of public spirit and national energy, and preserved only in the 
two most famous islands in the world, Great Britain and Sicily’.* 
The Government let it be known that they meant to obtain not 
only an extraordinary subsidy (donativo) of 360,000 ounces a 
year (about £ 235,000), but also a fairer distribution of taxation. 
The Barons, alarmed, and led by Belmonte and Cassaro, countered 
by voting to pay a larger share of a smaller sum. On the one 
hand they cut the donativo down to 150,000 oz.; on the other 
they adopted a plan for tax reform far more radical than the 
Government had intended. This plan, drawn up by Balsamo, 
swept away the ‘monstrous multiplicity’ of the old donativi and 
the cumbersome machinery for their collection; instead it estab- 
lished a single tax on every kind of real property, to be assessed 
according to a new survey. Thus ‘every Sicilian’, said Balsamo, 
‘was according to strict equity to pay the Exchequer in pro- 
portion to what he owned and consumed’; and the barons could 
no longer be accused of merely defending their own privileges. 
When the Ecclesiastico followed suit it came about that Parlia- 
ment, by a curious reversal, passed in 1810, against the Court’s 
wishes, the very reforms it had rejected when Caracciolo pro- 
posed them in 1783.* 
But after taking this first step Parliament was still unready to 
go any further. Belmonte, Castelnuovo, and Balsamo tried at 
the end of the session to carry several political resolutions: the 
most important of these would have made supply run for one 
year only, thus establishing an annual Parliament. But most of 
the resolutions failed.* This helps to explain why Belmonte and 
his friends then shifted their ground and started negotiating 
with the Court. 
These negotiations went on for several months after Parlia- 
ment had risen. They were complex and obscure. Belmonte’s 
friends, it seems clear, feared that the Court might take to 
unconstitutional measures if it was left badly short of money. 

<<<PDFPAGE 31>>>
INTRODUCTION 
I$ 
With Orleans’ support they approached the Queen and pro- 
posed a bargain. The Court was to dismiss the Neapolitan 
Ministers and put in Sicilians—among them, apparently, Bel- 
monte and Cassaro. Orleans was to command the army. Parlia- 
ment would meet again and effect a certain amount of consti- 
tutional reform; for their part, Belmonte’s friends would make 
sure that enough additional supply was passed to meet the 
Government’s needs. The Queen hesitated and toyed for some 
months with this proposal.* When, however, Parliament did 
meet for a second session in August, the Court—it is not clear 
from what motives—chose to secure the political defeat of 
Belmonte’s party by sacrificing the hope of increased supply. 
That is to say, they bought off Cassaro and a majority of the 
Barons—first with a reshuffle which made Cassaro a Councillor 
and two Sicilian nonentities Ministers; then with an undertaking 
that no more donativi would be asked for. Belmonte and his 
friends thus found themselves left out of the Government and 
outvoted in Parliament: oddly enough, they voted for more 
taxes than the Government majority.” 
At this point Belmonte’s party secretly appealed to Amherst 
for his and England’s help in getting concessions from the 
Crown. The old Sicilian Constitution, they told him, was in 
theory enough to maintain Sicilian liberties; but in practice it 
was constantly violated. 
What was needed was a reform of the Constitution inspired 
by that of England, but not copied from it; a genuine Sicilian 
administration; and the control of the Army by the British 
Commander. Parliamentary demands, they foresaw, would 
meet with no success. If England did not intervene, Sicily might 
yet rebel and call in the French. 
Ambherst told them his instructions did not allow him to do 
anything of the kind; he dissuaded them from taking action. 
But—as he wrote to Wellesley privately—he agreed with them 
entirely. The Court’s behaviour during the invasion scare made 
intervention of some kind necessary. If that intervention were 
not only to remove the Queen’s influence but to establish a 
native administration and a free Parliament, with a Sicilian 
Constitution remodelled along English lines, then one could 
expect as ‘natural consequences’ such reforms as would give 

<<<PDFPAGE 32>>>
16 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the Sicilians ‘the comforts and the blessings intended for them 
by nature, and of which nothing but a faulty and ill-adminis- 
tered government deprives them’. True, the government was 
not alone to blame: the Barons would have to give up some 
vexatious privileges; but he believed the patriots knew this. 
The King and Queen would not easily adapt themselves to free 
institutions, but a British Minister backed by the authority of 
his Government might induce them to do so: 
‘I think that if the language of earnest and friendly representation 
offered in respectful terms, and urged for His Sicilian Majesty’s benefit 
should fail of effect, the blind and interested counsels of certain weak 
and unprincipled advisers should not be suffered to stand in the way of 
the universal wishes of the country... I am aware, my Lord, how 
repugnant it is to the principles and practice of the British Government 
to interfere in the concerns of an independent sovereign; but if His 
Sicilian Majesty is to be preserved on his throne, he must be induced to 
listen to the admonitory voice of his disinterested ally.’ 
There might be advantages for England too in sucha reform: 
for the nation was ripe for resistance, and 
‘to become a province of England would not, I believe, be looked upon 
as a misfortune by the major part of its inhabitants. But an independent 
Government and a free Constitution would be considered as a boon, the 
attainment of which would irrevocably bind the Sicilians to the nation 
which should procure it for them.”* 
Amherst, however, was not to carry out the intervention he 
recommended: both he and Stuart resigned their posts in disgust.* 
For nothing ever seemed to go right after the summer of 1810. 
Even a fairly simple matter—a dispute over a ship under British 
licence which Sicilian privateers has seized—now took on a 
suspicious tinge and led to a string of acrimonious Notes.” 
But these diplomatic tensions mattered little amid the political 
storm that blew up in February 1811. The Court had won a 
hollow victory in Parliament, since it had cost them the chance 
of adequate supply. They could get no more out of the British.* 
At a loss for money, the Government in February 1811 issued 
three decrees imposing, by the King’s authority alone, a tax of 
1 % on all money payments whatever, a sale of Church and 

<<<PDFPAGE 33>>>
INTRODUCTION 
ny, 
common lands, and a lottery. There was little doubt that this 
was an unconstitutional act.* The Decrees at once rallied and 
strengthened the patriotic party, especially among the Barons, 
disunited since the last Parliament. Belmonte’s house became 
the headquarters of a group including not only the reformers 
but also a number of conservative Barons: Orleans gave them 
Open support. On March Ist a majority of the Peers then in 
Palermo addressed a petition to the delegate body which was 
supposed to watch over the enforcement of laws between 
Parliamentary sessions—the Deputation of the Realm. They 
asked the Deputation to remind the Crown of the ancient and 
unquestioned privileges of Parliament; protested against the 
Decrees; and asserted, nevertheless, their willingness to provide 
all necessary supply by constitutional means.* The Deputation 
dodged the petition for some weeks by failing to meet. But 
delay only increased the political tension. Amherst, about to 
leave, feared ‘the most fatal consequences’. The Decrees, he 
foresaw, would not solve the Court’s financial problems, while 
‘general discontent’ would certainly be produced, and ‘ultimate 
resistance’ might perhaps be expected.* 
It was at this point that the Foreign Secretary, Lord Wellesley, 
offered the mission to Lord William Bentinck. 

<<<PDFPAGE 34>>>
GHAR 
OE 
Ral 
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
‘A brilliant and unbalanced egoist,’ writes Sir Charles Webster, 
‘all the more dangerous because he was also imbued with a 
species of idealism’; but then the second son of the Duke of 
Portland ‘could not be denied a high military or diplomatic 
post’. That is one view, though an authoritative one; there are 
others. Was the Cabinet so careless, or its motive so irrelevant, 
when it chose Major-General Lord William Bentinck to fill at 
once the Palermo mission and the Mediterranean command? 
At 36 Bentinck had experienced a good deal of responsibility 
as a soldier and administrator; and he had already been in 
trouble. His Governorship of Madras (1803-1807) had ended 
in his recall amid bitter controversy; in earlier years (1799-1801) 
he had served as a young officer in Northern Italy and had learnt 
something of the country; earlier still he had fought in the 
Netherlands. More recently, at the start of the Peninsular War, 
he had carried out a mission to the Spanish Junta and held a 
command under Moore in the retreat to Corunna. If what the 
Government wanted was an orthodox diplomatist he was not 
their man. But if, as now seems clear, they had made up their 
mind to intervene in the domestic concerns of Sicily and needed 
a proconsul for the purpose, then their choice seems less arbi- 
trary.” 
It was indeed an arduous task. In Sicily Bentinck was to be at 
once diplomatist, politician, even for a time dictator, besides 
commanding two separate armies, one of them scattered as far 
abroad as Lissa, the Ionian Islands, and Catalonia. We have a 
picture of him at Palermo, immersed in a roomful of plans and 
documents and waving aside as so much waste paper the letters 
of recommendation brought by a young newcomer from Eng- 
land—let him work hard for promotion, he said bluntly.* We 
hear, too, from another who, just arrived from occupied Italy, 
found Bentinck a shrewd questioner: ‘he sucked me so dry that 
I came home in the shape and likeness of'a squeezed lemon. . .”.* 
Neither a careful subordinate nor a place-hunter of the kind 
that made up his father’s and other “connexions’, Bentinck had 

<<<PDFPAGE 35>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
I9Q 
about him something of the energy and forthrightness of the 
Victorian public servant. However one may judge what he did, 
he did it thoroughly and, in the circumstances, efficiently. A 
soldier, he shewed a rough but undeniable skill in the tactics of 
political management: where immoderate sentiments prevailed, 
his was often the moderating influence. Just as at Corunna, seated 
on his “quiet mule’, he had talked to Charles Napier through 
the heavy gunfire ‘as if we were going to breakfast... with 
perhaps an increase of good-humour and placidity’—‘this chap 
takes it coolly or the devil’s in it’, Napier exclaimed—so now in 
Sicily he often got his way by cool persistent bullying, stopping 
short of the limit beyond which he would have lost control.* 
Thus far the public man in Bentinck—and the public man is 
nearly all we can see of him. This figure, as it appears in official 
papers, is almost extravagantly simple. We see a man who must 
be doing; to whom le mieux est P ennemi du bien meant little; who 
had such an appetite for responsibility that, while he could 
rise to situations that would have tried most men hard, he in the 
end took too much upon himself and caused his own downfall. 
Through his eyes, again, we see men and events in black and 
white: character sharply defined, right and wrong sharply di- 
vided. Yet this is not the whole truth. There is a private Bentinck, 
who sometimes disconcerts us by confessing to ‘a great deal of 
irritable shyness’-—such a great deal that to have to wear the 
K.C.B. newly awarded him strikes him as ‘the infliction of a 
positive misery’.* There is a Bentinck who, far from being the 
doctrinaire Whig one would expect, shews in his political 
dealings a variety of moods—empirical, diffident, even des- 
pondent—which he none the less banishes from his official 
despatches. Altogether there seems to have been in him a divorce 
between ‘official’ beliefs and private feelings—feelings of which 
he was perhaps not quite aware, or which he hesitated to define 
clearly even to himself. It is a human condition, and among some 
men a peculiarly English condition. Bentinck cannot be charged 
with duplicity towards others. But because he wanted to see his 
world steadily he failed to see it whole: he deceived, if anyone, 
himself* 
This, then, was the man the Foreign Secretary had chosen. 
But exactly how did Wellesley judge the state of affairs in Sicily, 

<<<PDFPAGE 36>>>
20 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
and what kind of intervention had hein mind? It is not easy to 
tell. Until then he had taken virtually no interest in Sicily. Even 
now he apparently set little store by the reports of the Queen’s 
‘treachery’. Though he later claimed more general motives he 
may have been moved by a simple fact: the resignation of 
Ambherst and Stuart. Both men had from the start, most ex- 
ceptionally, done their best to placate the Sicilian Court; now 
that Court’s behaviour in the face of the threat from Murat had 
led both of them to throw up their posts in disgust. After that 
any Foreign Secretary must have found it difficult merely to go 
on with a policy of hopeful conciliation, or to avoid reaching 
some kind of decision.” 
But whatever his motives Wellesley, it seems clear, acted to 
meet a specific military and diplomatic crisis: he took no more 
notice than Canning had ever done of the demands for inter- 
vention on general grounds which some people in England had 
been putting forward for years. The Opposition regularly used 
the annual Commons debate on the subsidy to press for such a 
change of policy: the defence of the island, they said, would be 
surer and easier if its people could be relieved of an oppressive 
system of government; some of the London newspapers echoed 
them, one or two going so far as to contemplate the annexation 
of Sicily to the British Empire.* More important than these 
casual references were the writings of one or two publicists, 
particularly G.F. Leckie: with some knowledge of Sicilian con- 
ditions, he called for a wholesale reform under English tutelage: 
this was to induce the Italians to rise and unite against the French. 
At the same time Leckie looked forward to an expansion of 
British power all over the Mediterranean, such as would simul- 
taneously benefit British trade and prove to the world that 
‘while France conquers to devastate, Britain conquers to do 
good’.* Finally, the British merchants who at this time carried on 
most of Sicily’s foreign trade asked many times for redress of 
what they said were discriminatory practices by the Sicilian 
Government: but the Board of Trade turned a deaf ear to their 
petitions, and Wellesley seems to have given little thought to 
commercial advantage." 
Instead of settling from the start on a detailed policy of 
intervention, Wellesley asked the commander- and Minister- 

<<<PDFPAGE 37>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
21 
designate to submit his own proposals. Bentinck, after studying 
the diplomatic files, wrote a memorandum in which he reviewed 
at length the precarious situation of Sicily. The Court, he 
admitted, by failing to cooperate, had shewn only 
a 
negative kind 
of hostility; but so persistent had they been in this that ‘treason 
itself could scarcely have taken any other course’. Still it was not 
on the score of treachery—though it existed—that he proposed 
the British Government should act, but ‘upon the broad basis 
of mutual self-defence and welfare’. Everyone said the Sicilians 
were basically friendly to England, though disaffected to their 
own government almost to the point of revolt: their help would 
be essential if the island was ever to be safe. Britain should 
therefore demand: the united command, carrying with it control 
over the subsidy; a Sicilian administration; and a reform of 
abuses. Without a Sicilian administration the Queen’s party 
would never be curbed; as for reform, one might think it a 
‘natural consequence’ of the change of administration, “but the 
demand will please the people, and it may have a very great 
political effect in Italy, whenever ... the Italians shall be pre- 
pared to assert their independence’—for Bentinck, like Leckie, 
- already thought of Sicily as a stepping-stone towards the lib- 
eration of Italy. Should the Court reject these demands, he 
would withdraw to his camp, proclaiming his determination to 
defend the King and the country in accordance with the alliance 
and ‘in concurrence with the Sicilians’. Such a policy, Bentinck 
admitted, amounted to interference in the domestic affairs of 
Sicily, ‘almost a forcible seizure’ of the government; but it 
would be justified and disinterested, and its effect would be 
‘to place the King safely on his throne, to give happiness to an oppressed 
people, to make their island forever independent of French invasion, 
and to exalt the British character’. 
This course, he said, should prove ‘plain and easy’ if the 
British Government agreed to it; but if they still preferred a 
policy of mere representation, then he was not the man to carry 
it out.” 
Wellesley did not altogether accept Bentinck’s proposals, and 
Perceval objected to them strongly; they were, he said, neither 
justifiable nor necessary. The soldiers all claimed that Sicily could 

<<<PDFPAGE 38>>>
22 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
not be held without reform, and yet it was still held. Reform 
would in any case be a hazardous undertaking, and would have 
to deal with feudal as well as governmental abuses. The Queen’s 
‘treachery’ he discounted, commenting that her distrust of 
England was only natural after the revolution which Grey had 
planned and which the British in Sicily had freely canvassed 
ever since. Eventually, after some discussion, Bentinck yielded 
to Wellesley’s arguments, and to those of his friend Sir Edward 
Pellew (who was going out to the naval command in the 
Mediterranean): he agreed to carry out what instructions the 
government thought fit to give him.” 
These instructions, when they were drawn up, embodied an 
uneasy compromise between Bentinck’s view and Perceval’s. 
Bentinck was to represent that ‘the evident tendency of the 
measures now pursued being not only to destroy the resources 
of the island, but to exasperate the people to acts of violence 
against their Government’, Britain must warn the Court of the 
dangers to which they exposed themselves and their allies. If 
on the one hand, the Court treated the island as they ought—if 
they granted the Sicilians a greater share in the government, 
attended to the wishes of Parliament, and remedied abuses—then 
the British Government would do all in its power to maintain 
them in Sicily and to bring about their restoration to Naples. 
But if on the other hand they persisted in their present course, 
‘neither the terms nor the spirit of the alliance would require that the 
British arms should be employed to assist . 
. 
. in enforcing such a system 
of government against the resistance of the people of Sicily’. 
It was ‘not however inconsistent’ with these warnings to 
assert that not for a moment did the British Government mean 
to interfere in the domestic affairs of Sicily, or to change or 
upset the Constitution. Bentinck was not allowed to go beyond 
discreet representation: he might threaten to recommend the 
suspension of the subsidy if it seemed ill-spent; but the decision 
would rest with London. Wellesley’s instructions were like 
Howick’s of 1806—those which he gave Drummond before the 
Talents chose to intervene in full strength—in that they coupled 
unwelcome advice with professions of delicacy, and provided 
no means of enforcing it.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 39>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
23 
So closely, indeed, did Wellesley’s policy during the next 
few months follow Howick’s in its change from good advice to 
the threat of force that the British intervention in 1811-12 
reminds one of a theatrical performance, once rehearsed, then 
put off and given only after a lapse of five years. But those five 
years of mounting tension within Sicily and between the two 
allies made the final clash look inevitable, as it could scarcely 
have done in 1807. 
Bentinck landed at Palermo in July 1811 to find the Court 
in no mood to listen to advice. The Queen, apparently having 
got wind of the British Government’s intentions, had decided 
that only the most unbending resistance could foil what she 
saw as a plot to annex Sicily. For two months past relations 
between the Court and the British Legation had been poisoned 
by a matter trivial in itself—yet another dispute over the re- 
cognition of British shipping licences—but inflated out of all 
proportions in the tension of the moment. At the same time 
the Court had dealt with the Barons’ protest against the Febru- 
ary Decrees: they had got the Deputation to say that the decrees 
were legal, and the protest invalid; and three days before 
Bentinck’s arrival, five of the protesting Barons—Belmonte, 
Castelnuovo, Aci, Anjou and Villafranca—had suddenly been 
arrested and imprisoned on various islands off the coast of Sicily.* 
Bentinck, though he had no hope of achieving anything by 
persuasion in such a state of affairs, followed his instructions to 
the letter. Circello’s reply to his first representations was simple: 
if the British Government said they did not wish to interfere, 
then why did they in fact interfere? Besides, they must have 
been misled by malicious gossip, for Sicily was perfectly con- 
tented: so there was no case to answer. Bentinck could make 
no headway against a refusal even to discuss the situation. For 
this obduracy he blamed the Queen: her mania for Naples and 
distrust of England would wreck any chance of an improvement 
until she was removed from the government. “The Court’, he 
declared, ‘must be frightened into their duty to themselves and 
to us. Otherwise we shall all be sacrificed in the ruins of one of 
the best people upon earth’—by which he may have meant the 
Sicilians, but more likely the Italians, who might be freed if 
Sicily was once set in order. Meanwhile all he could do was 

<<<PDFPAGE 40>>>
24 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
to return home for fresh instructions. This he did, after lecturing 
Circello on the great chances thrown away by the Court's 
improvidence: had they respected the liberties of the people 
and of Parliament and won their support, Sicily would have 
been an inspiration to the Continent of Italy, and an army might 
have been spared for service there: 
‘Those times are past when personal attachment to a chief or a family 
was the greatest incentive to human action. At this time the world is too 
enlightened not to have discovered that the only security for individual 
liberty or national greatness is a free Constitution where the interests of 
the Sovereign and his People are happily blended and identified.”* 
The chance that Italy might rise against the French and win 
her independence with English help was another reason for 
returning to London. In June, Wellesley and Bentinck had 
discussed a proposal lately received from the Archduke Francis 
of Este—then in Sardinia—for the formation in the Mediter- 
ranean of a force made up of Italians and of Austrian officers 
unemployed since the Austro-French peace treaty. Its intended 
purpose was to raise the standard of revolt in Italy or in the 
conquered Austrian provinces, and eventually to establish an 
Italian Kingdom under the Archduke, at least as large as 
that founded by Napoleon. Bentinck had supported this plan 
warmly: Italy, he said, was thoroughly discontented with French 
rule and might prove another Spain; the country offered not 
only a long coastline accessible to British seapower, but also 
‘a people equally brave with the Spaniards, and equally en- 
thusiastic in the cause of liberty, but much more intelligent and 
more tractable’. All Wellesley had given him was a vague 
authorisation to look into the matter: the Government, taken 
up as they were with the Peninsula, could spare little attention 
for Italy, and Bentinck had had no illusions on the point.* Now, 
however, he had met the Archduke, and intelligence from the 
Continent confirmed his enthusiasm for the plan. On his return 
to London he pressed for, and got, an authorisation to promote 
it actively: he might form an Italo-Austrian force and make 
ready for a possible rising in Italy by getting in touch with the 
patriotic party there; for these purposes he might spend up to 
£100,000. At the same time it was ‘not the intention... to 

<<<PDFPAGE 41>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
25 
excite the people of Italy to any exertions which they may not 
think necessary’ or to act before the time was ripe: any plan for 
an expedition must be concerted with Wellington and other 
British agents in the Mediterranean.* 
To Bentinck’s mind intervention in Sicily was clearly con- 
nected with this plan for the liberation of Italy: the one must 
precede the other. Whether it was the same view that led Welles- 
ley to agree to stronger measures in Sicily is not clear.* At any 
rate he allowed Bentinck to press not only for the changes 
already asked for, but also for the united command, the recall of 
the imprisoned barons, and the removal from the government 
of persons hostile to the alliance. Bentinck was given great 
freedom of action: the only real limitation to his powers was 
that he must not resort to force so long as he had no proof of 
the Court’s treachery—but if such proof should come to hand 
it would justify ‘the most decided measures’. Meanwhile he 
could control and suspend the subsidy on his own authority; 
beyond this, the utmost retaliation to which the British Govern- 
ment would agree if the Court rejected their demands was the 
withdrawal of the garrison.* 
Bentinck now sailed again to Sicily, confident of success. His 
mood was not unlike that of a proconsul setting out on a puni- 
tive expedition: writing to Wellington, he compared the Court 
to a native Indian Durbar; to Wellesley he had already hinted 
that what he was now carrying out was ‘the same enlarged and 
enlightened system of policy, which has already saved another 
Empire... * He was by no means alone in his confidence or 
in his high hopes of Sicilian and Italian regeneration. He sailed, 
as it were, amid a chorus of good wishes from high-ranking 
generals, admirals and diplomatists. These men detested the 
Queen—‘the she wicked one’, they called her, or ‘the Lady’, 
or ‘the very high author of so much mischief’, or simply ‘“She’— 
and they had no doubt that she would be worsted in ‘a contest 
where treachery and deceit are pitted against virtue truth and 
honour’. Some hoped the birth of Sicilian happiness would 
‘take its date from the time of your arrival among them’. Leckie 
had sent Bentinck his books and his blessing. Amherst sent him 
suggestions for reforms, culminating in the maxim ‘Assimilate 
generally as much as possible to the British Constitution’. Others 

<<<PDFPAGE 42>>>
26 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
shared his view that Italy might soom rise, and Sicily therefore 
take on an ‘incalculable importance’. One voice alone preached 
caution, Wellington’s: he advised Bentinck merely to ‘maintain 
our position’ in Sicily; as for Italy, ‘trust nothing’, he wrote, 
‘to the enthusiasm of the people. Give them a strong and a just, 
and, if possible, a good government; but, above all, a strong one, 
which shall enforce them to do their duty by themselves and 
their country...’. Still, Bentinck might well believe, as he 
approached Palermo, what Pellew wrote to him at the time: 
‘The battle you have nobly fought, and the conquest will reward you 
amply . . 
. I think every obstacle will now fall prostrate and the Q... . be 
very happy to put herself 
in your harness. You have, or will now have, 
quite a smooth path and see your way clear.” 
Bentinck landed at Palermo on December 7 to find things 
no better than he had left them. His departure had at first startled 
the Court into a more cautious frame of mind; but they were 
unable to settle on any definite policy against his return. As 
usual the Queen and Ascoli were at odds. Ought they once 
again to try calling in the Russians? (The Queen wrote off to 
Petersburg.) Ought they to release the five Barons and so draw 
Bentinck’s teeth? (Afterwards the Queen and Ascoli each claimed 
to have advised this and to have been thwarted by the other’s 
influence.) Anyhow nothing was done.* At the same time all 
the old suspicions of treachery had flared up more strongly than 
ever during Bentinck’s absence: fresh correspondence came to 
light between the Court’s agents and the enemy, as well as 
various plots seemingly designed to bring about new Sicilian 
Vespers, this time against the British. The whole business was 
tangled and obscure, but Ascoli and, by inference, the Queen 
seemed to be involved. If the British staff and legation were 
highly alarmed, poor General Maitland, left in charge by 
Bentinck, was in despair: ‘I am quite sick of spies and devils... 
Where is Lord William and when will he come—I am groping 
in the dark ...’. Bentinck, hearing this news on his arrival, 
considered that it entitled him to take those ‘most decisive 
measures’ contemplated in his new instructions—that is, to use 
force if necessary.” 
At first, however, he attempted to bring the Court to heel 

<<<PDFPAGE 43>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
27 
by milder means. He began at once by suspending the subsidy. 
The Court were in no position to resist: if the ensuing crisis 
lasted as long as five weeks that was no doubt because they 
could not agree among themselves. The King fled at once to 
La Ficuzza, his shooting-lodge in the hills, leaving his wife and 
Circello to cope with Bentinck’s demands as best they could. 
In his fright he tried several times to abdicate: it was all the 
Queen could do to stop him. Bentinck, when consulted about 
this unexpected resolve of the King’s, advised abdication: it 
would save the King from a humiliating change of front, which 
coming from the Prince would be more like an act of grace. 
But he had to make it clear that he could not and would not 
ask for such a step.” The Queen, for her part, swung between 
despair and defiance. She knew she could not count on the King 
or on Ascoli, and she feared—rightly—that they might use her 
as a scapegoat.” At times she tried to conciliate Bentinck—she 
had always been English in feeling, ‘and now, she added smiling, 
I must be English par nécessité, vous voyez comme je vous 
parle franchement’; once she actually asked for a ship to take 
her away from Sicily. At other times she railed at him, accused 
the British of having always planned to seize Sicily, and refused 
to make the slightest concession. She sought for ways of doing 
without the subsidy; she harangued the Guards from the Palace 
window, bidding them resist the King’s enemies. They might 
use force, she cried, ‘but she would never yield, she could but 
die in the contest’.* 
The hubbub was at its height. There was talk of invasion; 
there were rumours of assassination. Some feared for Bentinck’s 
life, some for the five barons who where still in exile.* Altogether 
Bentinck’s negotiations with Circello could scarcely follow a 
coherent course. With some difficulty Bentinck won two points: 
the recall of the barons and the command of the Sicilian army. 
On the first he was willing to help the King by letting the 
barons’ recall look like a spontaneous act of grace: he wished, 
he said, to act as ‘a mediator between the violence of parties’. 
But the command was useless to him without a trustworthy 
Ministry. The Court, however, stood out longer against the 
change of administration than against any of his other demands. 
To Bentinck’s mind, the exiled Barons would make the most 

<<<PDFPAGE 44>>>
28 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
satisfactory Ministers; when Circello asked him whether he 
meant to impose them on the King, he replied that ‘those... 
who had created the embarrassment must take the Court out 
of it as well as they could... to the feelings of the King, the 
interests of the Nation were not to be sacrificed’. Still he tried 
not to be drawn into actually dictating a specific Ministry; in 
the end, after long bargaining, he and Circello reached a com- 
promise. Cassaro was to become a sort of interim Prime Minister 
(for he now appeared in the guise of a patriot and a man who 
could withstand the Queen’s influence); Circello might stay, 
while the other departments would be left to under-secretaries 
until such time as some of the exiled barons might decently 
come into them. No sooner had this arrangement been accepted 
in principle than the Court changed its mind—apparently after 
the usual tussle between the Queen and Ascoli, who was the 
more frightened of the two. A partial reshuffle was announced, 
which left the existing Ministry almost unchanged—the very 
arrangement to which Bentinck had objected most strongly in 
previous discussions. At the same time Circello stated in a Note 
that the Court could listen to no more demands. 
Bentinck now decided to use force: he ordered part of the 
British garrison in eastern Sicily to sail to Palermo. In a long 
conversation with the Hereditary Prince he recapitulated Britain’s 
grievances, and at the same time assured him of her good 
intentions: 
‘The fact of our never having assumed the possession of the island, when 
it had been in our power for six years together, and when it had been the 
general wish of the inhabitants, was the best proof of our intentions. .. 
. 
I concluded... by saying that I should use force if my representations 
were not attended to. This force was not against, but for the benefit of 
the King and his family. . 
. 
. If he himself at the head of the army should 
resist me unsuccessfully, I should, if his father still persisted in his retirement, 
be the first to place himself on the throne, and if he declined, to support 
the succession for his son. It was against the enemies of the Crown that 
my opposition would be directed. He was much struck with this statement 
and made me repeat it.’ 
In the face of this threat the Court’s resistance collapsed. On 
January 16th the King announced that ill-health compelled him 

<<<PDFPAGE 45>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
29 
to hand over power temporarily to the Prince, who was to be 
Vicar-General for Sicily and to act as his alter ego. The Prince 
at once repealed the 1° tax and recalled the barons. British 
troops garrisoned Palermo. The King stayed on at La Ficuzza 
and the Queen repaired to a villa in the suburbs. 
Bentinck had got a delegation of powers that he had not 
asked for, but he had not got a change of Ministry. The King, 
he was aware, had secretly arranged to keep the diplomatic 
correspondence in his own hands. He did not, however, realise 
as yet how little real power the King and Queen meant to 
delegate to their son; besides, he had formed a very favourable 
first impression of the Prince’s character and good intentions. 
He therefore resumed payment of the subsidy without exacting 
an immediate change of men or measures: ‘I was disposed’, he 
said, ‘to place all reliance in the Prince’s word and his assurance 
that certain things would be done would be satisfactory to me.’ 
At the same time, he agreed to give a personal guarantee of the 
Royal Family’s possession of Sicily (though not of Naples); he 
tried to moderate the novel anti-Neapolitan zeal of the Prince, 
who claimed that ‘now it was necessary everything should be 
Sicilian’; and he refused the offer of a seat on the Council: 
‘T thought it would not look well... and would not be pleasing to 
my Government—our principle had always been not to interfere in the 
internal concerns of our neighbours. We had only done so now because 
we were compelled.” 
Bentinck sent his government complete and detailed accounts 
of all these transactions, as he was to do with hardly any excep- 
tion throughout his mission. By the time they were received, 
Wellesley had resigned and Castlereagh was Foreign Secretary.” 
Castlereagh hastened to send Bentinck the government's ap- 
proval of his conduct in the ‘very delicate and arduous circum- 
stances’ he had been faced with. In a private letter he asked for 
proofs of the treachery which had regrettably compelled Ben- 
tinck to use his full powers: the proceeding might have to be 
defended in Parliament. Although his approval was unqualified, 
there was perhaps a slight hint in his expression of satisfaction 
at Bentinck’s having declined a seat on the Council: it shewed, 
he wrote, ‘that Your Lordship’s views were strictly confined to 

<<<PDFPAGE 46>>>
30 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the removal of evils incompatible swith the defence of the 
island, the safety of the British troops and the preservation of 
the alliance’.* 
The guarded and conciliatory policy which these words of 
Castlereagh’s implied was just what Bentinck himself had in 
mind immediately after the proclamation of the Vicariate. So 
eager was he to let the Prince and the Patriots carry on the 
government with the least interference possible from the British 
that he even decided to leave Palermo for a while. Yet Bentinck 
could neither think his task completed nor refrain from making 
plans for the future. As early as January 31st he noted 
‘my plan for Sicily—Parliament—Constitution and national force to 
protect it....’ But, he added, ‘I wish to go on gently and to accomplish 
by degrees and by fair measures rather than by force.”* 
Parliament, he thought, must meet in any case, as the govern- 
ment could scarcely go on without additional supply. But a new 
Constitution was rather more than the mere reform of abuses 
which he had been instructed to achieve. No doubt the patriots 
were convinced that the present Constitution would no longer 
work: it must be made anew; only thus could Sicily be restored 
to her ancient glory, and her inhabitants enabled to cry out one 
happy day “We too are a Nation!’ Bentinck met them more 
than half-way: when he saw Belmonte and Castelnuovo on 
their return from the islands he was the first to broach the 
subject, and he is said to have told the Queen: “Constitution or 
revolution: there isno middle way.” But itseems likely that what 
he wanted was rather a Constitution than a particular collection 
of reforms; that is to say, a political gesture which might have 
a resounding effect in Italy. Sicily was still to his mind a stepping- 
stone to the Continent; and he was stating his own opinion 
when he told the Prince that Sicily could 
‘contribute most powerfully to the conquest of Italy, not by its arms, 
but by the example of its happiness. The Italians are an intelligent people. 
They have long desired a Constitution which should give them national 
liberty. They never will submit to be transferred from one despotism to 
another. . . 
. If by the desire of the Prince a Constitution is given to Sicily 
which shall assure a moderate and reasonable freedom to its people, and 
shall promote its happiness and prosperity, from that period I should con- 

<<<PDFPAGE 47>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
31 
sider the conquest of Italy and the restoration of Naples as half achieved. 
All eyes on the Continent will be turned to Sicily’—and, he threw out 
as a further inducement—‘possibly not only Naples but many of the sur- 
rounding States may desire the blessings of the same Chief and the same 
Government’.* 
To achieve all this, Bentinck had to set up the Prince as a 
constitutional monarch, and the patriots as a responsible Minis- 
try. Both these ends, as it turned out, were harder to achieve than 
Bentinck had expected: indeed it took two months merely to 
change the Ministry. The Prince seemed at first disposed to 
make Bentinck his confidential mentor; he professed the most 
laudable constitutional sentiments, and he may even have meant 
them at the time, for it soon became clear that he could not 
think or act decidedly on any matter. He was afraid of his 
parents, of the British, of the barons. To Bentinck he ‘confessed 
his doubts and fears... they turned his head’—but, he added 
apologetically, ‘perhaps they are the effect of my anciennes 
habitudes which in time I shall overcome’. Bentinck combated 
these vacillations, assuring him that ‘no Prince ever had so fine 
a game’; but after a few weeks’ inconclusive discussion, his 
early esteem for the Prince began to wilt. This, he decided, was 
not the mere hesitancy of a novice; for when ‘a truth so evident 
was not acted upon’, must there not be ‘some secret cause which 
got the better’? Still he excused it, and rather blamed the influ- 
ence, past and present, of the Queen.* The Prince’s good in- 
tentions ought at least to be put to the test, as he told the barons: 
for they were inclined to stand on their dignity and refuse office 
altogether. “Why was I alone to act?’ he asked them: 
‘ 
.. take office and see if your advice is followed—if not go out and 
then I shall have ground to go on. Belles Paroles will not do—we must 
take things as we find them and act accordingly’. 
The use of force against the Royal Family, which Belmonte 
rather favoured, might achieve quick results, but no lasting 
settlement; whereas 
to persuade a stupid distrustful man would be a work of time and 
difficulty, but not impracticable—the good if done would be permanent.” 
Even so it was difficult to form a Ministry combining the 

<<<PDFPAGE 48>>>
32 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
right principles with the political skill needed to guide the 
Prince. Castelnuovo was too stiff, Aci too violent, Cassaro too 
conservative. Belmonte, on the other hand, though somewhat 
glib and transparently vain, seemed by his intelligence, boldness 
and fluency the only man able to hold the Prince and the barons 
together. Orleans—Bentinck’s new friend and counsellor— 
pressed Belmonte’s claims; and Bentinck set out to build him 
up into a Sicilian Prime Minister. Yet this course had disad- 
vantages which he could not perceive at the time. Belmonte 
united a desire for quick and forcible action (by the British) 
with a high regard for ‘public opinion’. By this he meant some- 
thing akin to ‘face’: without doubting the sincerity of his po- 
litical convictions, one may say that he had something of the 
typical Southern Italian faction leader of later times—he and 
his personal followers must achieve power, and be seen to 
achieve power, to the exclusion of all others.* Bentinck thought 
little of Sicilian public opinion, judging on past performance, 
though he appealed to it often enough when urging the Prince 
to carry out the desired changes; in any case, he told Belmonte, 
‘the only way to retain it was to deserve it and be indifferent 
to it’.* Nevertheless he gave in to Belmonte on several important 
points. The new ‘system’, he had thought at first, should start 
out by alienating as few sympathies as possible: advances from 
the sitting Councillors and Ministers (and there were plenty) 
should therefore not be rejected out of the hand, and some 
provision should be made for them. But Belmonte would not 
have it: he was sure he could manage both Government and 
Parliament alone; and he persuaded Bentinck to demand a 
Ministry and Council made up of none but supposedly safe 
Patriots. Now the Prince wished, as he said, to “unite all parties’ 
and consult all shades of opinion: Bentinck had therefore to 
expound to him the doctrine of Cabinet solidarity, a doctrine 
which, though he might hold it good in itself, he had not 
previously thought of applying so drastically in Sicily. Bentinck 
was similarly induced, against his better judgment, to foist Aci 
on the Prince as one of the proposed Ministers: this was a man 
whose incompetence everyone admitted, but whose recent exile 
gave him, according to Belmonte, a claim to favour. 
In any case Bentinck was steadily losing patience with the 

<<<PDFPAGE 49>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
33 
Prince, who plainly had no wish either to call Parliament or 
change his advisers. He had been mistaken, he admitted, in 
trusting him in the first place: now he exacted the new Minist 
and Council from the Prince by reminding him that he had 
merely delayed, not given up, carrying out the British Govern- 
ment’s instructions. The new Ministry, consisting of Belmonte 
(Foreign Affairs), Castelnuovo (Finance), Cassaro (Justice), and 
Aci (War), came in at the end of March; but only after the 
Prince had so far abandoned his constitutional professions as to 
insist on Bentinck’s signature to a document urging the change 
and so in a sense taking responsibility for it. ‘He was indeed 
acting very magnanimously towards me’, Bentinck told the 
Prince on this occasion. ‘I had wished to give him all the credit 
and none of the blame. He was now making me a return, by 
wishing to make it appear that he was compelled to the change, 
that he was always attached to the old system and to its agents.’ 
Bentinck was irritated at having lost two valuable months, 
at a time, too, when the rumoured approach of Franco-Russian 
hostilities promised a chance of action in Italy. Conciliation, he 
concluded, would not work after all: stronger measures would 
be needed, and steady support from home: 
‘Nothing but the firm and just exercise of our superiority will... 
secure to this country that better administration from whence its own 
happiness and greatness and our safety can alone be derived. I beg the 
British Government not to be deceived on this point.’* 
In three months Bentinck had come to see the need for nothing 
less than a continuing British protectorate over Sicily. His early 
hope that the new ‘system’ might go on almost by itself had 
rested on several assumptions: now these props were falling out 
one by one. He had wanted the Patriots to carry on the govern- 
ment by themselves, with the British Minister a mere paternal 
counsellor in the background: he soon found that they could 
not; by sheer force of circumstance, as will be seen, he himself 
had to become an active political leader. He had thought the 
Royal Family little more than a spent force: presently he found 
that he could not impose on Sicily a policy acceptable to the 
British Government without engaging in a running contest 

<<<PDFPAGE 50>>>
34 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
with the King and Queen; and the.contest went on almost 
without intermission for a whole year. 
But of all broken reeds the Prince was the most obvious. Not 
only had he delayed bringing in a new Ministry; he would not 
modernise the Army. In January he had accepted Bentinck’s 
plan for a smaller, efficient, national Sicilian Army, fit for service 
anywhere in the Mediterranean. But he was, after all, no less 
a Neapolitan at heart than his parents: he had no desire to lose 
his large inefficient Neapolitan army, and with it (as he thought) 
the chance of recovering Naples: try as Bentinck might, he 
could not get the Prince to act. The Prince proved equally 
reluctant to call Parliament, as his new Ministers at once urged 
him to do. Bentinck did his best to support them; he played on 
the Prince’s hopes of Naples, declaring that although the day 
for action in Italy might be near at hand, he could not take a 
single soldier out of the island until a Sicilian Parliament had 
given Italy the example she was waiting for. But the Prince 
feared a Long Parliament, and Bentinck’s guarantees did not 
reassure him. Even when he resigned himself to it, he objected 
to the mention of constitutional reform which Castelnuovo 
had inserted in his draft of the Royal Despatch summoning 
Parliament: and although Bentinck hammered away at the 
familiar tack of Italy, the magic word Constitution had to be 
omitted from the Despatch when it was finally issued on 1 May.* 
Bentinck’s regard for the Prince had by then quite evaporated. 
The man, he concluded, was inherently weak, distrustful and 
dilatory, at bottom as despotically-minded as his parents, super- 
stitiously afraid of them and incapable of taking an independent 
line. Fear and fear alone would make him go on in the path of 
constitutional monarchy.* 
Yet the Prince remained an ambiguous figure. The fact—more 
obvious now than at the time—was that although he had a 
policy of his own, he had not strength enough to be a free agent. 
He wished to conciliate the British, not out of conviction—his 
constitutional fervour, if sincere at all, was only momentary— 
but out of fear, a realisation of his own impotence, and a desire 
to save what could be saved for his family. Bentinck certainly 
frightened him into 
a wish to comply—‘gettiamo acqua! 
gettiamo acqua!’ he would cry on receiving one of Bentinck’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 51>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
35 
peremptory Notes.* But what pressure from one quarter did, 
pressure from another undid. The King had ostensibly delegated 
power to his son. But, he asked Bentinck on one occasion, ‘if 
I had appointed my son to manage my Estate [should I] not 
expect him to be subordinate to me?’ This was the King’s 
candid opinion: he regarded his kingdom as his personal proper- 
ty; he was ‘displeased at the Nation being mentioned . 
. 
. it was 
a new mode which did not exist in former times . . 
. his power 
came from God’.* His view of the Vicariate—like the Queen’s— 
was simple. Their position at the centre of affairs was for the 
moment inconvenient: the Prince must therefore take it over, 
and with it the embarrassment of dealing with Bentinck; but he 
was to be ‘like an egg in [the King’s] hand which he might 
preserve as long as he pleased and crush’ or rather set aside when 
it suited him.* This device was not new to the Royal Family; 
it had served at Naples in 1799, and it was to serve again in 1821. 
The King and Queen, then, considered that the government 
was still theirs, with the Prince as their puppet, and that the 
Ministers ought to be their Ministers: indeed, they dropped 
circuitous hints to Belmonte and his friends that their accession 
to the Ministry would be invalid unless they asked for and 
got the King’s approval.* The government ought to do nothing 
of importance (so the King thought) without first obtaining 
his consent: his insistence it was that delayed the summoning 
of Parliament until May, and then caused the text of the Despatch 
to be altered.* He rejected the Prince’s view that conciliation 
was safest: for a long time he refused to believe that Bentinck 
was not exceeding his instructions; stubborn and suspicious, he 
went on hoping that the British Government would recall or 
disown their Minister even when his own intelligence from 
London gave him no grounds for comfort.* He and the Queen 
therefore wanted the Prince to resist Bentinck at every point; if 
he deviated in the least from their commands they castigated 
him as an ‘enfant pervers’, an ‘ambitious and ungrateful son’.* 
He, for his part, was too weak either to assert or to resign his 
authority, though Bentinck often forced him to the former, and 
he himself often threatened the latter. 
In this dilemma, the Prince took to playing off one party 
against the other. If Bentinck wanted something to which the 

<<<PDFPAGE 52>>>
36 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
King and Queen objected, he would ask Bentinck to ‘make a 
Note of it’, preferably a strong one which he could produce to 
his parents as evidence of the British Minister’s terribilita and in 
justification of his own compliance. If the measure was im- 
portant—like the change of Ministry or the meeting of Parlia- 
ment—he would get Bentinck not only to press it in strong 
terms, but also to guarantee the Crown against any dangers to 
which it might give rise.* In this way he presumably thought to 
escape responsibility; but at the same time he played into 
Bentinck’s hands: for Bentinck could afterwards maintain that, 
since he had pledged himself to see that a particular measure did 
no harm, he must demand that it should be carried out as he 
wished. Thus the Prince bought present comfort at the cost of 
future trouble. Caught between two forces greater than his own 
(sometimes, to his despair, between three, when his parents 
were at odds)—or, to put it on a higher plane, with “Hell on one 
side and the reproach of Posterity on the other’*—the Prince 
swung to and fro, anxious to please everybody, unable to please 
anybody, and rightly accused by all of weakness and duplicity. 
Bentinck knew the Prince’s subjection to his parents, but not 
the full extent of it; he thought the Prince more responsible for 
his own actions than he was, and he did not at first guess how 
far the King interfered. This error was easy to fall into: Ferdinand 
had been notorious for decades as one of the idlest monarchs in 
Europe; in his present retreat at La Ficuzza he assiduously fed 
this reputation, declaring to all and sundry that he was suffering 
for his sins and wished to be considered a dead man. Bentinck 
naturally assumed that he cared no more for affairs than formerly, 
and—when he did act—that someone else was pulling the 
strings. Who then was to blame? Obviously the Queen.* 
Much has been written on the long struggle between Bentinck 
and Maria Carolina, perhaps too much: for the personal conflict, 
though dramatic in itself, was really no more than an outgrowth 
of the essential political conflict, a somewhat irrelevant descant. 
Bentinck, it is true, spent needless time and energy in his cam- 
paign against the Queen, only to discover too late that her 
expulsion—first from Palermo, then from Sicily altogether— 
was no remedy for the island’s political troubles.* But then all 
circumstances told against the Queen. She was the perfect scape- 

<<<PDFPAGE 53>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
37 
goat for everyone, above all for her own family. She was 
notorious, to begin with, as an insatiable meddler. The King 
had the sense to lie low; but she could not stop the flow of her 
wild talk and fruitless activity. To all who would listen she 
confided her fears of the block or of a trial before Parliament; 
her tirades against the ‘bestia feroce’ Bentinck; her sudden and 
ephemeral resolves to retire to Catania, to Vienna (where her 
nephew the Emperor had invited her), even to England.* She 
ever clung to the belief that Bentinck must shortly be recalled 
for exceeding his instructions, and she clutched at straws to 
justify it—a platitute of Castlereagh’s in a Commons debate, or 
the prattle of a visiting Englishman.* She dabbled in preposterous 
intrigues to bring the King back to power as a constitutional 
monarch; and the riffraff of spies and agents continued to infest 
her antechamber.* Then rumour amplified the whir of her 
activity; she was alleged to be fomenting popular disorder, 
plotting a counter-revolution, appealing to Austria and Russia 
for help.* Naturally those whom her fall from power had 
compromised now did their best to blame her. Her son, even 
while he was begging Bentinck not to ‘act horribly’ towards 
her, shewed plainly that he thought her the skeleton in the 
family cupboard, beloved but utterly irresponsible. “Ma mére 
a une telle téte, une telle téte’, he would cry. Her husband did 
the same; and his two confidants, Cassaro and his confessor 
Father Caccamo, scarcely let slip an opportunity of setting 
Bentinck against her. She was, they told him again and again, 
the arch mischief-maker; the King was under her thumb, though 
he would willingly be rid of her: ‘he had been married 44 
years .. 
. they were so many years of Martyre’.* So general was 
this attitude that when the Prince at one time became dangerously 
ill, she was suspected of having poisoned him: Bentinck 
suggested to the Prince’s physician that heat might be the cause, 
but ‘he cried out shaking with palsy all over, Ce n’est pas la 
chaleur—c’est sa mére—sa mére’.* 
In fact the Queen, as her letters shew, did interfere in affairs 
as much as she could. Her husband and son may on occasion 
have found her a convenient scapegoat, but there can be little 
doubt that they were often genuinely harassed and influenced 
by her outcries. It was quite natural that Bentinck should fasten 

<<<PDFPAGE 54>>>
38 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
on her the blame for the delays and difficulties he experienced. 
He therefore concluded that only her removal to a safe distance 
from Palermo could put an end to her evil influence over King, 
Prince and populace. She herself talked of going away; she even 
said she would leave Sicily altogether if England paid her debts. 
But Bentinck set no store by this, for, he said, ‘human nature 
was the same everywhere—She could not divest herself of habits 
of forty years’ continuance, that of governing ...’.” What he 
needed was a pretext. This came to hand unexpectedly in March 
1812, when one Cassetti, once a spy of the Queen’s, and now 
in prison, confessed to having acted as go-between to her and 
Murat and revealed her so-called plot for new Vespers against 
the English.* Bentinck did not take this information very seri- 
ously: ‘I did not believe that she had any serious intention of 
giving up the island. She had been instigated by her love even 
to madness of intrigue . . . this I believe to be the truth.’ But he 
could use the ‘proofs’ to attack what he really feared, the Queen’s 
political influence: he wrote her a letter respectful in manner if 
not in matter, suggesting that after this discovery—which he 
hoped to keep secret—she would do well to withdraw to a 
remoter part of Sicily.* Six weeks’ negotiations ensued; letters 
flew back and forth between the Queen, the King, the Prince, 
Bentinck and Caccamo. The King wanted Bentinck to shew 
his proofs to the Prince, to Cassaro, to anyone but himself; 
while Bentinck refused to shew them to anyone else. Finally, 
at the end of April, the Queen agreed to join the King (much 
against his wish) at La Ficuzza. The distance from Palermo, 
about 25 miles, still seemed too short to Bentinck; he contem- 
plated using force, but—reflecting that ‘the pushing things to 
an extremity might have had an appearance of cruelty —he let the 
matter drop for the moment. He could still return to the charge 
if necessary, brandishing his proofs, the validity of which the 
King had tacitly admitted by refusing to see them.* 
Castlereagh, whom Bentinck informed of all these trans- 
actions, took the proofs very seriously indeed: they justified, he 
said, all that Bentinck had done in Sicily; and he left it entirely 
to Bentinck’s discretion how far they should be disclosed, and 
‘what conditions with respect to Her Majesty’s residence and 
her abandoning all interference in the Government it may be 

<<<PDFPAGE 55>>>
BRITAIN INTERVENES 
39 
expedient to require’. In the Commons he had already described 
Bentinck’s conduct as ‘not less remarkable for mildness and 
forbearance than for a rigid execution of his instructions’. Now, 
in giving Bentinck fresh instructions, he agreed that there was 
still a lot of work for him to do: 
‘To recommend such necessary reforms of the Sicilian Constitution 
as may ensure the affections of the people, and make the Neapolitans 
anxious to receive equal advantages, together with the return of their 
lawful sovereigns: these will continue to be the objects of Your Lordship’s 
attention.”* 
With the Queen’s influence apparently out of the way, 
Bentinck could now address himself to the task of constructing 
a new political ‘system’ for Sicily. 

<<<PDFPAGE 56>>>
CHAPTER*II 
THE\PROTEGCTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
The theme of British policy in Sicily—so Bentinck had written 
home at the end of March—must be ‘the firm and just exercise 
of our superiority’. What exactly this might mean in practice 
was Bentinck’s chief problem throughout the ensuing year. 
By her intervention Britain had established a de facto protec- 
torate over Sicily; but it was a protectorate born under an am- 
biguous star. Apprehension and distrust, carefree optimism and 
good intentions, had all gone into the original decision to 
intervene; it is not surprising that the result was a diplomatic 
muddle. Britain could not very well appear to adopt Napoleon’s 
methods: the fiction had therefore to be kept up that the two 
nations were equal and independent allies. Castlereagh allowed 
Bentinck to go on using the language of force—though not 
force itself—to achieve British aims; but he repeatedly insisted 
that the ‘honour’, ‘dignity’, and ‘security’ of the Sicilian Royal 
Family must be safeguarded.* There was a pretence that some- 
how it was all for the good of the Crown and people of Sicily. 
Not the least reason for muddle was that this was not wholly 
a pretence. Bentinck really believed it; “an interference merely 
to carry some British object,’ he said, ‘might not be justifiable’; but 
‘listening to the call of the whole country and having no view but 
their benefit and most of all of the Royal Family themselves, the British 
Government will surely be considered by the present and future gener- 
ations as only fulfilling the duties of a good and great nation.”* 
Castlereagh, for his part, seems to have taken the fiction for 
granted until it became too inconvenient to keep up. Besides, 
no one had attempted to think out the possible consequences of 
intervention: Bentinck, Amherst and other British observers, 
by inference Wellesley himself, all had assumed that, the first 
crisis over, the ‘machine’ would run on smoothly without 
further interference. The negotiations over the new Ministry 
and the calling of Parliament had begun to undeceive Bentinck; 
they also provided a pattern for that vicious circle of demand, 
delay, mutual irritation, and finally grudging concession leading 

<<<PDFPAGE 57>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
AI 
to further demands, which was to bedevil nearly the whole of 
Bentinck’s mission.* 
Yet, in spite of the constant difficulties he experienced, 
Bentinck’s power seemed great, almost viceregal. He did, after 
all, control Sicily’s finances through the subsidy, and her army 
through his Captain-Generalship. His house was the headquarters 
of the Patriotic party.* He conferred with Orleans and Belmonte 
daily; saw the other Ministers, nobles, and politicians frequently; 
discussed military business with the Prince and the Sicilian staff. 
He raised public loans, distributed corn when it was short, 
arranged the redemption of Sicilian slaves from Tunis, and 
gave magnificent entertainments, some of which the Prince 
attended.* Noble families asked him to arbitrate their contested 
marriage settlements; the very Ministers he had driven out of 
office—one, indeed, into exile: Ascoli—now cringed to him and 
solicited his favour.* He did not hesitate to rebuke the Prince of 
Butera in strong terms when that first baron of Sicily became 
involved in riots against the government;* if a monk betrayed 
to the Queen a confidential letter of his, he made the government 
deport the monk to Lipari.* The supporters of the ‘good cause’ 
he marshalled and encouraged: true, his diplomatic position 
prevented him at first from appearing quite openly as the leader of 
a party: he refused, for instance, to see the masters of the Palermo 
guilds when, in the election of May 1812, they chose to flout 
tradition and the Prince’s wishes and came to him for advice; 
but secretly he sent a message urging them to stand firm. He was, 
in fact, already playing a dual role as British Minister and Sicilian 
politician; the new ‘system’ was patently his creation. To the 
Patriots he seemed, anyhow at first, the redeemer of Sicily, and in 
his praise they wrote a great mamy stanzas, satires and sonnets.* 
It may seem strange that with all this display of power 
Bentinck constantly complained of delay and frustration. The 
chief trouble was, of course, his running battle with the Royal 
Family; another was the peculiar character of the British inter- 
vention, which at once made Bentinck’s power irresistible, and 
prevented him from exerting it to the full. Furthermore, the 
weakness of the Patriots—which their accession to the Ministry 
soon revealed—hindered him even while it forced him to behave 
like an active local politician. 

<<<PDFPAGE 58>>>
42 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
When the new Ministers came in at the end of March, 
Bentinck conceived of himself as their friend and confidential 
adviser; he did not then mean to lay down the law. True, he and 
Belmonte were so close that it is difficult to speak of their acting 
independently of one another: a later but typical entry in 
Bentinck’s journal runs, “He [Belmonte] wrote me a Note 
asking it and helped me to write the refusal of it.’* Even so, 
Bentinck allowed Belmonte, as newly installed chief Minister, 
considerable play: he had previously seen and exhorted the 
Prince nearly every day, but he now left to Belmonte the task 
of managing both Prince and—later—Parliament. This Bel- 
monte was confident he could do; and his confidence outlasted 
that of all his friends. 
Everyone had assumed that the Ministry would be united 
and that they would be responsible, in the sense of being in 
actual control of the government. United they certainly were 
not. Aci proved a liability from the start: he and Bentinck 
clashed, and went on disputing for months, over details of 
day-to-day army administration. 
To Bentinck’s mind the 
Minister for War ought not to concern himself with this any 
more than the Secretary of State at home. Aci had larger views, 
and quoted a French Encyclopaedia (art. Ministre de la Guerre) 
in support. He promoted officers, moved troops without 
Bentinck’s knowledge, quarrelled with the Sicilian Chief of 
Staff, and generally displayed what Bentinck thought intolerable 
wrongheadedness and vanity, until Bentinck decided that he 
‘would not permit’ such behaviour any longer. But the Prince 
had taken a fancy to Aci, probably because of his very dis- 
agreements with Bentinck; if asked to dismiss him, he could 
retort that Bentinck had imposed Aci on him in the first place. 
Belmonte, whose nominee Aci had been, could neither control 
nor dislodge him. Indeed he asked Bentinck on occasion to 
write a Note to the Prince and so prevent some step which Aci 
was about to take and which he, Belmonte, disapproved.* 
Similarly Belmonte, finding that Cassaro was giving the 
Prince constitutional advice at variance with that of the other 
Ministers, asked Bentinck to tell him that ‘England would not 
allow any opposition to its views for the interests of both 
countries’; and Cassaro himself wanted Bentinck to intervene 

<<<PDFPAGE 59>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
43 
and prevent what he apprehended as revolutionary develop- 
ments.” 
The fact was that nothing like a Cabinet system had ever 
existed in Sicily or Naples. The Ministers were still very much 
the Prince’s secretaries; so true was this of Belmonte that the 
Prince did not even allow him to read the foreign despatches, in 
spite of his and Bentinck’s protests.* They worked independently 
of each other, meeting officially only in Council, with the Prince 
in attendance; and though they might hold informal councils of 
their own—which Bentinck sometimes attended—no discipline 
could be imposed on an individual Minister such as Aci or 
Cassaro. Furthermore, though there had been powerful chief 
Ministers at Naples in the past—Tanucci, Acton—it gradually 
became clear that Belmonte was not, after all, the man to emulate 
them: but it took Bentinck some time to realise his friend’s 
shortcomings. 
Altogether, the relations between Bentinck and the Sicilian 
patriots could only be described as peculiar. He must try to lead 
them, and most of them still wanted his advice and support; 
yet he was not of them. He was inevitably a foreigner, had 
still something of the East India official, observing with detached 
amusement the antics of the natives.” ‘I began to know my 
compatriots the Sicilians’, he said sarcastically; ‘vanity was the 
great defect of the country—I never had seen anything like it 
in any part of the world’. And he thought he detected in the 
blustering Aci the vices of a nation: ‘the Sicilians in general are 
bullies and are only to be managed by fear. They take advantage 
of the least concession and always construe conciliation into 
weakness’.* What, then, led him to persist in doing what he 
could (as he conceived it) to help the Sicilians? “Bonaparte made 
Kings, England makes Nations’, he is supposed to have said at 
one time; at another, that ‘England ought to give liberty to 
every country she could reach’.* Perhaps, too, pride forbade 
him to abandon an attempt the success of which he had confi- 
dently prophesied in his first despatches: he seems to have 
realised quite early how unlikely the new ‘system’ was to survive 
the withdrawal of British force—though this was probably the 
kind of truth which he could perceive but did not dwell upon.* 
Yet he seems also to have been moved by a genuine concern for 

<<<PDFPAGE 60>>>
44 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the Sicilians’ welfare—a concern of*which his indignation at 
their shortcomings might well be the revers de la médaille. This 
it was that led him to lecture the uninterested Prince on the 
greatness and prosperity which Sicily might recover through 
a better road system and a colonisation of the land; to oppose 
the grain-tax that crushed the peasantry; to realise (what many 
of the patriots did not) that the aristocracy were as unpopular 
as the former Neapolitan government, and their abuses no less 
burdensome.” He could so far shed insular intolerance as to 
attend Mass, kneeling side by side with Orleans in Alcamo 
church (they were on an excursion to Segesta) and feeling 
embarrassed because he did not know enough to bow at the 
Elevation.* Altogether his ironic detachment was not complete, 
his exasperation with the Sicilians not permanent; in an odd, 
intermittent way his affections were becoming engaged. Later 
on this emotional commitment was to lead him into steps both 
drastic and damaging to his own career; meanwhile he could 
only do his best to shore up and hold together his friends in office. 
In these circumstances, then, Bentinck set out on the more 
specifically political part of his programme. By May 1812 he 
had got several of the things his Government and he himself 
had wanted. The Queen’s mischief seemed temporarily checked; 
the Prince, though a disappointment, did not yet seem irre- 
trievably lost to Bentinck’s and Belmonte’s influence; and on 
the first of the month the Royal Despatch had at last gone out 
to summon a new Parliament. The time had come to launch 
that constitutional reform which Bentinck ardently desired as 
a rallying-cry for Italian patriotism, and which Castlereagh was 
at that very moment directing him to strive for. 
The Sicilian Constitution of 1812 has won some notoriety as 
that “which for the first time laid down in writing the glorious 
principles of the unwritten constitution of Britain’.* But this 
deliberate copy of an elusive foreign model came about partly 
through a chapter of accidents; Bentinck, far from imposing it, 
deplored it before he came to acquiesce in it. 
The Patriotic leaders began to discuss constitutional reform 
in February, soon after the establishment of the Vicariate. 
Balsamo undertook to draw up, in consultation with Belmonte 
and Castelnuovo, proposals for specific reforms. Bentinck saw 

<<<PDFPAGE 61>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
45 
this draft in April; he had not helped to prepare it except in the 
way of general conversation; it was only later that he discussed 
specific proposals with Castelnuovo and Belmonte, and that 
some of them were amended at his suggestion. Nobody at this 
early stage thought of drawing up an entirely new constitution; 
Balsamo and his friends agreed that the old one should be ad- 
hered to as much as possible. They wished on the one hand to 
restore it to its original state in the Aragonese period, and on 
the other hand to adapt it to modern conditions. To this end 
the reformers took as their guide the English constitution, 
‘recommended by the experience and success of centuries’, while 
they rejected the Spanish and French, ‘which are too democratic, 
and therefore tending to anarchy; and which assume in society 
that wisdom and virtue, which may be imagined, but are not 
to be found in man’. But when Balsamo produced his draft late 
in April, it was already clear that the Ministers and their followers 
were anything but unanimous, either as to the reforms them- 
selves or as to the means of carrying them out.* 
All were agreed on two points: first, the power of the Crown 
—on the increase for the last thirty years, and lately asserted in 
defiance of the Constitution—must be curtailed; second, Sicily 
must shake free of Neapolitan domination. A return to the 
Aragonese capitularies, such as Balsamo’s draft provided for, 
would serve both these purposes. But beyond this there were 
many points of disagreement. 
Constitutional reform had to resolve the crisis of 1810-1812. 
Not only had the conflict between Crown and Parliament then 
come to a head, but the barons’ standing as a class had been 
called in question. To some it might seem that Bentinck’s defeat 
of the Crown meant the setting up of a baronial oligarchy: 
that was what the Queen feared and Cassaro, for one, desired: 
he would be quite content if the clock was merely turned back 
to the status quo ante Caracciolo. He had formerly stood up to 
the Crown in defence of the barons’ privileges; now that the 
Crown was beaten he feared any innovations which might 
weaken or destroy the feudal system. This fear led him to ally 
himself with the King, and to advise the Prince that he had no 
right to call Parliament or set about reforming the Constitution 
without the King’s consent.* At the other extreme from Cassaro 

<<<PDFPAGE 62>>>
46 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
and those barons who, like him, had*resisted the Crown from 
purely conservative and class motives, stood another group with 
Castelnuovo as its head and Balsamo as its purveyor of political 
doctrine. Castelnuovo realised that the barons’ defence of 
Parliament had lately come to involve interests wider than those 
of their own class: though he wished to avoid the French ‘spirit 
of theory and system’, he declared that the barons would have 
to ‘make some significant sacrifice of their interests and preroga- 
tives for the sake of the Nation’s general welfare’.* Some of his 
friends went further: Airoldi, for instance, combined a vague 
philosophic republicanism with a desire to concentrate most of 
the powers of government in the legislature; in this his fear of 
the Crown led him to follow that very French theory and 
practice which he professed to dislike. Apart from these two 
groups, the rest of the patriotic party was typified rather than 
led by Belmonte, who seemed to have no very clear notion of 
what the reformed constitution should be like. He too wished 
to diminish the power of the sovereign, who was ‘now a Sultan’; 
one guesses that he inclined to an aristocratic form of govern- 
ment: “H.R.H. could not suppose’, he asked the Prince, ‘he 
wanted revolution and that born to the situation he was he 
could wish to lower himself to an equality with his groom.’ 
He talked at one time of reverting entirely to the old constitution, 
at another of having it ‘revised, well washed and cleaned and 
put into an English dress, habillé 4 anglaise’. Yet he must have 
been won over temporarily to Castelnuovo’s views, for Bal- 
samo’s draft—which they both approved—included a clause 
abolishing feudal privileges.* 
Bentinck deprecated this somewhat conservative attitude of 
Belmonte’s: he agreed with Castelnuovo that the day was past 
when the nobility could claim a monopoly of power. Yet he 
once again gave in to Belmonte on the important question of 
how constitutional reform was to be carried out. Castelnuovo, 
no less than Belmonte, feared democracy and the backward 
mob: for the very reason that he wished to establish political 
liberty and a measure of social change, he dreaded a recru- 
descence of faction and class egoism in the new Parliament; he 
therefore proposed that Parliament should be presented with 
a Constitution octroyée. Belmonte, fundamentally much less of 

<<<PDFPAGE 63>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
A7 
an innovator, preferred to please ‘public opinion’ by letting 
Parliament set itself up as a Constituent Assembly. Bentinck 
sided at first with Castelnuovo and the Prince in this matter; 
but Belmonte eventually persuaded him that Sicily should be 
allowed ‘spontaneously to give herself a constitution, without 
the interference of any authority, much less that of Sicilian or 
English bayonets’.* 
This decision made the election of a new Braccio demaniale 
or Third Estate all the more important. It took place in May, 
against a background of general economic confusion. The 
Ministry, faced from the outset with a running deficit of 40,000 
ounces a month,” could scarcely pay the army, let alone their 
creditors, for all Bentinck’s loans and advances. Corn had been 
short for months: and Castelnuovo made things worse by 
removing the traditional controls on the sale of bread. Popular 
discontent failed to move him: he knew the Palermitans, he 
said—‘it did not answer to caress them’. In this doctrinaire 
policy he was supported by Balsamo with the arguments of 
economic liberalism, and opposed by Bentinck with those of 
common sense. As a result there were bread riots at election-time 
in Palermo, and later on in other parts of the island.* 
The election itself was marked by a few incidents. In Palermo 
the masters of the guilds traditionally elected to the Demaniale 
their Lord Mayor (Pretore). Now, however, Aci and others 
—from motives of personal jealousy, it seems—induced them 
to break with custom. This was a mistake, for the Pretore, the 
Count of San Marco, though aristocratically inclined could have 
been made into a useful ally. Besides, independence went to 
the masters’ heads; they threatened to elect one of their own 
number instead of the pocket candidate whom Aci and his 
friends had provided for them. But in the end they fell into line. 
Elsewhere too the Government, like its predecessors, influenced 
the elections—to what extent it is impossible to tell.* 
Parliament was due to meet on June 18th. One month before 
that date the Ministers were still divided on constitutional 
reform; and the attitude of the Crown was most doubtful. 
Cassaro continued to assert that Balsamo’s draft went too far, 
and that in any case Parliament was not entitled to change the 
constitution without the King’s leave. Fear of the King appar- 

<<<PDFPAGE 64>>>
48 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
ently moved him, as well as conservatism— ‘they might suffer 
with their lives’, he said.* As the King’s confidant he had reason 
to know that his master was opposed to any change. To the 
King the word Constitution was as meaningless and distasteful 
as the word Nation: he was ‘a little displeased’ to learn from 
Cassaro what he professed not to have known before—that he 
had been a constitutional monarch in Sicily these 53 years. As 
early as January 29th, a fortnight after his delegation of power, 
he had warned the British Government through Castelcicala of 
the dangers which constitutional reform would entail. There is 
no sign that his attitude had changed in the meantime; and it 
was certainly not he who (as has been stated) first thought of 
adopting the English Constitution—quite the contrary. In fact 
he was the last to reconcile himself to reform of any kind; only 
later did he set himself up as the champion of the pure English 
Constitution.* The Queen, now her husband’s unwelcome 
companion, was said to be plotting for his return to power. 
The Prince wavered: he did not know exactly what reforms 
his ministers proposed, for Belmonte, fearful of future harm, 
would not shew him Balsamo’s draft without a written order; 
and this the Prince, no less fearful, refused to give. He and 
Belmonte both tried, for different reasons, to draw Bentinck 
into taking part in discussions with the other Ministers and so 
achieving an agreed draft. Belmonte wanted Bentinck to silence 
Cassaro’s feudal opposition; while the Prince still hoped for a 
Constitution octroyée as the lesser of two evils, and probably 
wished to throw the burden of responsibility for it on Bentinck. 
Bentinck, however, had come round to Belmonte’s view that 
Parliament should be given a free hand; besides, he said, ‘I 
would rather be left out... it was an interference which my 
Government might not like’. Still he gave in to Belmonte’s 
argument that Cassaro could not be persuaded otherwise, and 
that his interference would be quite unofficial. No sooner had 
he done so than the Prince decided, on May 20th, to put 
off the meeting of Parliament, on the pretext that it might 
lead to popular commotion. Bentinck, plausibly suspecting the 
influence of the King and Queen, riposted by holding up a 
badly needed loan. But with the Crown plainly hostile, and 
Cassaro still unreconciled, the prospect for reform was bleak.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 65>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
49 
At this point came the proposal to adopt the English Consti- 
tution in its entirety. It came from the unlikeliest quarter—Aci 
and the Prince of Moliterno—and it came linked with a plan 
for an immediate expedition to Italy. Aci, volatile as usual, seems 
to have acted on his own. He merely conceived a brilliant 
notion and put it to the Prince: if Sicily adopted the English 
Constitution, Naples would want a similar boon; an expedition 
would most likely succeed. Then Sicily would be independent 
with the Prince as her King; or, if Ferdinand persisted in his 
retirement, the Prince would rule at Naples and his brother at 
Palermo.* Moliterno, for his part, had long been full of wild 
schemes for the unification of Italy into one kingdom, with 
—of all people—Ferdinand as its constitutional ruler. He had 
approached Bentinck in March, proposing the formation of an 
‘Armée de la Constitution Italique’ to be subsidised by Britain, 
and vaunting his connections with the Italian patriots; but 
Bentinck had thought him no more than a crank and an ad- 
venturer. Now, however, Moliterno once again urged his plan 
on the King and Queen. An expedition meant a constitution: 
his own ideas on the subject were rather vague; since the 
prestigious English Constitution was now in the limelight, why 
not take it as a model and a slogan ?* 
These proposals of Aci’s and Moliterno’s did not spring fully 
armed from the inventors’ brains. Anglomania, as we have 
seen, already prevailed in Sicily at this period. It had not abated 
by 1812: the very terminology of British politics seemed to bear 
some magical virtue. The new constitution, when it came to 
be written, talked of bills and budgets; Aci thought to entice the 
clergy with the offer of a Convocation; those who considered the 
new constitution not ‘popular’ enough complained that “it even 
established Star Chamber’. The learned Balsamo himself won- 
dered for a moment whether Sicily had not better adopt the 
elaborate comedy of ‘fine and common recovery’ as a means 
of getting round entails.» When Aci spoke to the Prince, the 
English Constitution had already been chosen as an ‘inspiration’; 
Aci merely changed ‘inspiration’ to ‘model’. The state of Sicilian 
thought explains why he could do so. The circumstances of 
the moment explain why his proposal pleased nearly every- 
body. 

<<<PDFPAGE 66>>>
50 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
It pleased the Patriots for several reasons. A successful expe- 
dition would mean a wonderful chance to get rid of the Nea- 
politans and wrest from the King the independence of Sicily 
under a separate dynasty. The English Constitution they ee 
admired; even so they took to it—as will be seen—not so muc 
with the intention of copying it in toto as with a desire to gloss 
over their present differences. It suited Castelnuovo’s moderate 
reformism, as well as Belmonte’s aristocratic leanings and his 
hazy preference for the popular solution. It even suited Cassaro 
and Butera: on first hearing it proposed Cassaro ‘grew pale’, 
but presently his son ‘translated’ it—from what text we do not 
know— and he ‘read it with great pleasure’; Butera too thought 
‘anything was better than the speculations of those wild poli- 
ticians’.* 
The Prince ‘jumped at it’ naturally enough, since he saw a 
chance of moving against Murat with the support of both the 
British and the Sicilians. This the Bourbons could not do 
without; and they must not let Bentinck move without them, 
else he might throw them over in favour of the Archduke 
Francis and Naples might then slip out of their grasp. Perhaps, 
too, the Prince was ready to contemplate with momentary 
favour the separation of Sicily from Naples, since it would 
give him a kingdom to himself. But if there was to be an expe- 
dition there must be a Constitution; that was Bentinck’s price. 
And if there must be a Constitution, the English was safer than 
most: it would be something like a Constitution octroyée; it would, 
he said, calm the hotheads; Parliament would soon be over, 
‘and we can then turn our views to other matters’. Besides, it 
would keep Bentinck and his friends busy, and draw their 
attention away from more perilous matters. Above all the 
English Constitution had the great advantages of ‘the devil you 
know’: the Prince was so ready to accept it (Bentinck concluded) 
because 
‘he [had] always thought he would have less power than the King of 
England. ... He had often remarked to me, when I had talked of the 
Civil List and of other parliamentary interference—mais le Roi d’ Angle- 
terre a ce et ce pouvoir, not adverting to the particular point in question 
but generally as if it was intended to make a complete cypher of him.’* 

<<<PDFPAGE 67>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
51 
So the Prince took up Aci’s twin notions of expedition and 
English constitution with great zeal; he decided not to prorogue 
Parliament after all, and undertook to convert his parents. The 
King was suspicious from the first. The Prince’s ideas, he noted 
at the beginning of June, were ‘diametrically opposed’ to his 
own; in his son’s enthusiasm he thought he detected a mask 
for unfilial ambition. He still objected in principle, he told 
Cassaro, to any kind of new Constitution, and he wanted the 
meeting of Parliament put off until September, by which time 
he hoped Bentinck would have been recalled. But, he added, if 
Bentinck promised an expedition to Naples ‘he would consent 
to some Novita being introduced’. For a moment it seemed the 
Prince and Cassaro had persuaded him.* The Queen, however, 
was up in arms against Aci’s proposals, which she denounced 
to her husband as ‘malicious’ and ‘erroneous’. She urged him 
to set his face against a new Constitution and above all against 
the ‘rebellious proposal’ of the separation of Sicily from Naples. 
The King replied cautiously that he agreed with her but that 
British pressure might force him to accept some kind of Consti- 
tution for fear of ‘fatal consequences’. But he changed his mind 
once again: two days later (June 9th) he sent Bentinck, on his 
Own initiative, a questionnaire which shewed that he still thought 
Bentinck’s conduct revolutionary and probably unauthorised; 
he hinted at a desire to resume power, and demanded a pension 
for himself and his family (not including the Prince) in case 
Bentinck really meant to ‘annihilate’ him. At the same time he 
plunged the Prince into dismay by again refusing to countenance 
the opening of Parliament, which was now only a week off.* 
Bentinck was most annoyed. He replied that he had faithfully 
followed his instructions; if the King resumed he expected to 
see those engagements fulfilled which the Vicar had entered 
into—that is, Parliament, reform, and army reorganisation; and 
he seized the chance once again to press his case against the 
Queen, including the famous proofs. Encouraged by Cassaro, 
he blamed her as usual (and not altogether wrongly) for the 
King’s recalcitrance: ‘I had been justly punished for my moder- 
ation towards the Queen... it was only since her sejour with 
the King that H.M. had become uneasy, had interfered in the 
public business, and was now induced to resume the Govern- 

<<<PDFPAGE 68>>>
§2 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
ment.’ The King, to be sure, had good reasons of his own for 
balking at the separation of Sicily from Naples; and Bentinck’s 
plans for Italian independence were not such as to reassure him. 
But the Queen’s loud presence at his side may well have helped 
to goad him into action. However, this latest proof of Bentinck’s 
inflexibility swayed the King: he appeared to give way to his 
son’s views. But he did no more than suspend his obstruction: 
he did not commit himself to outright approval of the proposed 
constitution. The Queen went further in her sudden reversal. 
Persuaded, apparently, by Moliterno of the overriding ad- 
vantages of an expedition to Naples, by June 15th she was 
writing to her son in favour of the English Constitution for 
Sicily and a constitutional settlement for anything they might 
acquire on the Continent. “A most sensible letter,’ Bentinck 
thought; ‘... it was much to be regretted that she could talk 
and write so well and acted always so ill. Her misfortune is to 
have all sense but common sense.”* 
One person was not at all pleased with Aci’s plan—Bentinck. 
To him both the English Constitution and (just then) the 
proposed expedition came as unwelcome surprises. He was still 
ready to use the prospect of an expedition as a bait and so get 
the Royal Family’s consent to a Sicilian Parliament and Consti- 
tution; but he thought Aci was ‘pushing’ them too much, and 
he did not wish the Patriots to use his own influence to impose 
on the Crown the independence of Sicily and the English 
Constitution ‘as if I had insisted on it which I had not and when 
I even thought it would not suit them’. Independence might 
be good for Sicily, but not necessarily for Naples, Italy, or 
Britain; he had no powers to secure it. As for the constitution, 
he told Belmonte, 
‘I was very sorry that they had adopted the English Constitution 
which no one understood or could define. ... It would cast a ridicule 
upon their measures. . . . I infinitely preferred his plan which was founded 
upon the principles of the English Constitution.’ 
So slavish a copy might be dangerous as well as absurd—‘some 
leading principles might be omitted by mistake, an omission 
which might be fatal to their liberties by being construed into 
an intention’. He greeted the ‘translation’ by Cassaro’s son with 

<<<PDFPAGE 69>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
53 
sarcastic congratulations; when Aci read him ‘the leading princi- 
ples of the British Constitution as compiled from Delolme, 
Pinkerton(?) [sic] Blackstone in the course of two days’, he 
refused to pronounce on them—'I was no legiste’. But in the 
end he relented. Apparently Balsamo came to the rescue by 
putting together yet another draft which followed the English 
system but modified it to suit Sicilian conditions—and Balsamo 
was much the most reliable draftsman at hand. Anyhow when 
Bentinck wrote home he had so far changed his mind as to say: 
‘I must confess that at first I 
was very much against the adoption of the 
English Constitution. I doubted very much whether the people have 
sufficient steadiness, wisdom or virtue to execute it. I was however much 
better disposed to it when I saw that no other plan presented so few 
difficulties; and my fears were very much lessened when I read the outline 
of a Constitution formed upon that of England, but with great moderation 
and wisdom modified and adapted to the debased state of this society, 
by certain salutary restraints upon the liberty of the Press, and by sus- 
pending for the moment the Trial by Jury.’ 
For this great work he gave credit to Castelnuovo and Bel- 
monte, ‘men who would do honour to the most enlightened 
and virtuous nation’.* 
Did Bentinck really believe all this? Or had he perhaps made 
up his mind to stand by the new ‘system’ even though an im- 
portant element was brought into it against his better judgment? 
At all events his enthusiasm did him no good: by commending 
the English Constitution (however modified) he implanted in 
the minds of Ministers at home the notion that it was all his own 
work; and so enabled them later on to ‘cast a ridicule’ on his 
mission. 
Aci’s other main proposal—the expedition to Italy—was one 
which Bentinck himself had often talked of since his arrival; 
he had used it effectively as an inducement to reform in Sicily. 
But coming from the Prince at this particular moment the 
proposal was most embarrassing. Bentinck certainly wanted 
nothing so much as to liberate Italy. But the British Government 
had allowed him only to look into the possibility of doing so, 
and had told him to move only after consulting with Wellington 
and with themselves. Finding, on his return to Sicily in De- 
cember 1811, disappointingly little evidence that Italy was ripe 

<<<PDFPAGE 70>>>
54 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
for revolt, Bentinck told Liverpool so in a despatch of January 
25th. To him and to Wellington he suggested various uses to 
which part’ of his troops might meanwhile be put; one of them 
was making a temporary diversion in Catalonia. Nothing could 
have suited Wellington better; and Liverpool ordered Bentinck 
on March 4th to carry out the diversion, provided that the 
Sicilian situation allowed it and Italy remained quiescent. On 
May 17th Bentinck decided to send 6,000 men to Spain, though 
by then he would rather have kept them on hand; ‘we all think’, 
he noted, ‘that this force will do no good’. But Murat’s departure 
for the Russian campaign had left Sicily in safety; and Italy 
continued disappointing. The Archduke Francis’ plan to raise 
and liberate the country depended on slow and tenuous commu- 
nications with Vienna via the Balkans; months passed and 
nothing was done. Overtures to the Italian Patriots were more 
easily thought of than made: ‘I am taught to believe’, com- 
plained one of Bentinck’s agents, ‘that there is no more commu- 
nication with Italy than with China.’ Overtures from Italy there 
were none. As Bentinck told the Archduke, 
‘Le malheur est que I’Italie est trop humiliée par la police francaise. 
Elle ne fait aucune démonstration de cette décision sans laquelle sa cause 
n’intéressera jamais beaucoup le public anglais. Ils sont mécontents sans 
doute, et deviendraient puissans contre les Francais. Mais ils sont passifs. 
Je ne recois aucune proposition de l’'Italie, une circonstance que ne 
marque ni une inquiétude trés pénible avec 
leurs souffrances, ni le 
caractére de Grandeur d’ Ame qu’on a vu dans les Espagnols. Ce sont les 
plaintes d’esclaves plutét que les murmures d’un peuple magnanime qui 
veut vaincre ou mourir pour la liberté et l’indépendence.”* 
Bentinck wrote this in October, and it expressed the accumu-- 
lated disappointment of several months. At the beginning of June, 
when the Prince proposed an expedition, he was still fairly 
hopeful. None the less he now found himself committed to 
acting in Catalonia; and he had no evidence from Italy that 
would justify a change of plan. Just as the Court was ready to 
cooperate he could not. Perplexed, he asked for time.* 
At this very moment, decision came to Palermo in the shape 
of one Lucius Concannon, an Irishman connected with the 
Archduke’s party, who had travelled from Vienna by way of 

<<<PDFPAGE 71>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
55 
Italy. He reported the country to be at a high pitch of discontent, 
ready to rise for religion, peace, an end to conscription, and a 
British alliance—‘That cry from Venice to Naples... would 
not leave one Frenchman alive in three weeks . . .’. Switzerland 
and Tyrol were also ripe for revolt. Riper than any were the 
Neapolitans, but they would bear anything sooner than the 
return of the Bourbons. Concannon’s enthusiastic reports might 
normally have made little impression on Bentinck; in his present 
dilemma, however, they seemed to justify that change of plan 
which he personally inclined to. Even so Bentinck was not 
going to take so much upon himself unless he could run the 
expedition on his own terms. These he put to the Prince in an 
interview of June 8th—he had, indeed, mentioned most of 
them in earlier exchanges, but only hypothetically. Now he 
told the Prince outright that ‘the only chance of success was to 
declare at once to the people that the deliverance of Italy’ (and 
not merely of Naples) ‘from the French yoke was our sole 
object. The choice of a constitution and a chief must be left to 
the free will of the people’. He would neither mention the 
Royal Family in his proclamations nor allow any of them to 
accompany their own forces; for, he said, to thrust them upon 
Naples from the first would alienate the people. All that Ben- 
tinck would concede to the Prince, either then or later in the 
month, was that he would ‘do all in his power to persuade the 
Neapolitans to accept the Hereditary Prince for their sovereign’, 
and that he would take no other prince—meaning the Archduke 
or Orleans—with him to Italy. Bentinck’s terms naturally dis- 
mayed the Prince, though they were not entirely news to him; 
still he did not at first reject them.* Bentinck accordingly counter- 
manded the Catalan expedition on June 9th. 
In doing so he exposed himself for the first time to the charge 
that he had disregarded his instructions without sufficient cause. 
Wellington was of course much annoyed at the news, and so 
were Liverpool and Mulgrave. Bathurst, however—who was 
Bentinck’s only friend in the Cabinet—was more indulgent. 
Apparently he was not averse from Bentinck’s Italian plans in 
principle, and thought a descent on Venice a promising possi- 
bility. His Under-Secretary, Henry Bunbury—an old Sicilian 
hand—was more favourable still: if Russia held, he thought, 

<<<PDFPAGE 72>>>
56 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
‘the time is not far distant when we shall see all the nations 
from the Lake of Constance to the sea of Malta up in arms 
against Buonaparte’. Between them they passed over Bentinck’s 
step as an exercise of discretion which was permissible if ill- 
judged. Castlereagh, for his part, warned Bentinck privately 
that the Government would not hear of his encouraging the 
Neapolitans to ‘elect’ Ferdinand, whose recall, “however volun- 
tary on the part of his continental subjects, should be in fact a 
restoration rather than an election’. To which Bentinck replied 
that the Neapolitans would have resisted a plain restoration: 
‘I... thought that the expedition proposed to me could not succeed 
without the cooperation of the people and that this cooperation could 
not be obtained without the inducement of getting rid of the French 
Government and of substituting Freedom for Tyranny. Upon my own 
responsibility I can proceed on no other grounds... though the con- 
dition required seemed contrary to the King’s interest, yet in my opinion 
it was directly the reverse.’ 
Of Bentinck’s wider visions of Italian independence and self- 
determination Castlereagh, it may be noted, said nothing.* 
Meanwhile the prospect of an expedition, however stiff the 
terms that went with it, was enough to keep the Royal Family 
attached to the English Constitution. More than ever it seemed 
the one safe haven in the storm of constitutional speculation 
which then prevailed at Palermo. On the very eve of the opening 
of Parliament the Prince took fright at an anonymous paper 
proposing that Sicily should adopt part of the new Spanish 
Constitution. This he thought ‘the precursor of democracy and 
revolution’; he refused to open Parliament unless Bentinck 
pledged himself to see that the new constitution did not differ 
from the English. Bentinck objected that ‘this would have 
committed me directly and personally in the affairs of the 
Parliament and of the Government, which I have carefully 
avoided’. He did, however, sign a guarantee of his support to 
the legitimate exercise of the Prince’s authority against any 
possible disorder. The statement concluded: 
‘T certainly would not undertake to establish by force and against the 
will of the people even that Constitution which to my conviction were 

<<<PDFPAGE 73>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
$7 
the best. Y.R.H. knows that I have had no part either in the recommen- 
dation or selection of the British Constitution. Y.R.H. has the sole merit 
of deciding upon a Constitution which agreeing in many respects with 
the Constitution of Sicily, and sprung as it were from the same root, 
does promise under salutary modifications to confer the greatest degree 
of happiness and prosperity. ... The period with all its circumstances is 
truly glorious to the Prince and to the People.’ 
This statement, by eliciting which the Prince as usual hoped 
to escape responsibility, later served Bentinck as a pretext for the 
assertion of his own power; it also started a popular legend that 
Britain had in fact guaranteed the Constitution. For the moment 
it reassured the Prince. Parliament met on June 18th, and the 
Speech from the Throne pointed to the English Constitution 
as the fount of wise and moderate legislation.* 
But the honeymoon was brief. Bentinck knew he had taken 
a risk in deciding on an Italian instead of a Spanish expedition. 
Opinion among his military and naval colleagues in the Medi- 
terranean command was divided. All agreed that Italy was in 
principle a much more fruitful battleground than Catalonia; 
and some shared his hopes of independence for the whole of 
Italy. But 
Pellew, 
Maitland 
and 
his second-in-command 
McFarlane warned him that only the certainly of a resounding 
success could justify his disregard of instructions—a certainty 
which his Italian intelligence was too flimsy to establish. Then 
Nugent reported from Spain that the authorities there and at 
home were quite set on the Catalan expedition; they would 
not, he thought, take kindly to Bentinck’s about-turn. Even 
this advice—so Bentinck later said—would not have swayed 
him if the Court had gone with him all the way; but after some 
hesitation they found his terms too much to swallow and re- 
jected them. He accordingly changed his mind once more, and 
decided on June 28th to send the troops to Spain after all. They 
sailed at once under Maitland.* 
Thus the whole raison d’étre for the Crown’s acceptance of 
the English Constitution fell to the ground. As a result the 
Prince threw himself back into the arms of his parents, and 
appeared openly as what he was, ‘the King’s Prime Minister’, 
their differences made up. He began to complain of Bentinck’s 
interference; government business came practically to a stand- 

<<<PDFPAGE 74>>>
58 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
still; he took advice from Circello and other relics of the past 
regime; Parliament met no more after the State opening. The 
Royal Family fell back on the policy which had served them in 
1810, that of playing off the aristocratic against the progressive 
section of the patriotic party. The King let it be known that he 
was ready to revert to the Sicilian Constitution as it had stood 
at the beginning of his reign; that is to say, he would give up 
all the ‘enlightened’ legislation of the Neapolitan Viceroys, 
all the inroads made on the power of the nobility, all the fiscal 
reforms the Crown had attempted, for the sake of averting the 
present danger of revolutionary innovation. He did add that 
if innovation there must be, he would prefer the English 
Constitution to any other; but this was plainly a second-best. 
In order to convert Parliament to his proposals the King set 
about forming a party through the Neapolitan Archbishop of 
Palermo and through Cassaro, whose fears for feudal privilege 
had re-emerged. By juggling with proxies and by persuasion 
both sides in the conflict attempted to make sure of a majority 
when and if Parliament met.* 
This volte-face destroyed what little was left of Bentinck’s 
regard for the Prince, and of his early conciliatory attitude. 
Delay, he decided, was the cause: had he forced a meeting of 
Parliament in January, none of this would have happened: 
‘T have done violence to my own judgment and feelings in endeavour- 
ing to attain the objects of my instructions by the means of conciliation 
only. I regret the sacrifices of great advantages to the common cause 
which have arisen from this undeserved delicacy. I am not ashamed to 
confess that I have been deceived, because when acting for a great and 
magnanimous nation, I should have been sorry that from any illiberal 
construction of the motives of this court I had for a moment abused the 
power committed to my charge. Every act and advice on my part has 
been most sincerely and anxiously intended to promote [the Prince’s] 
own honour and greatness in the eyes of his own subjects and of the 
world. It has been all in vain. And I am now in the decided conviction 
that fear and nothing but fear can direct a mind which many believe to 
be as false and cunning as it is certainly weak.’* 
Bentinck now counterattacked on all fronts. In a Note he 
urged that Parliament should be reassembled. He made the 
Ministers tender their resignations. He suspended the subsidy 

<<<PDFPAGE 75>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
59 
on the ground that the reorganisation of the army, promised 
since January, had still not begun. These, he admitted, were 
negative weapons, ‘but I could do no more and with respect to 
the Ministers, although I could not name those who should be 
appointed, yet I could do as much by objecting to such as might 
be offered’. To Belmonte’s qualms he replied that ‘the more 
embarrassment there was the better’. He warned Cassaro and 
through him the Archbishop that ‘the Constitution must be 
carried—that was my business—It must be done either by the 
Parliament or by force’. The Prince tried to stand firm on the 
army question; but Bentinck returned to the charge, rubbing 
in Sicily’s need for British help; he urged the Prince to follow 
the example of Portugal by abandoning an ambiguous attitude 
which might seem ‘a lurking hatred, too weak to refuse obli- 
gations, too ungenerous to acknowledge them’. The present 
Sicilian army, he said, was a drag on Britain, even a danger; the 
subsidy treaties had not foreseen ‘a case... by which the one 
buys the privilege of defending the other at the price of £400,000 
a year, and is repaid by enmity and insecurity’. Finally, he 
threatened that if Britain resumed 
‘the right which the bad faith of the high Personage who directed the 
preceding administration has given [her] of adopting the most extreme 
measures, a right waived from mere respect and confidence in Your 
Royal Highness’ upright intentions, she will stand acquitted before God 
and man for preferring an open enemy to such a friend, the most active 
hostility to such an alliance’. 
‘Quite a declaration of war’, the Prince thought it; but he had 
to bend before the storm. The Ministers’ resignations were not 
accepted; and a meeting of Parliament was called for 20 July. 
On that date, in the course of an all-night sitting, Parliament 
passed fifteen fundamental articles or ‘Bases’ of the new Consti- 
tution. These were taken mainly from the draft in which 
Balsamo had sought to distil the quintessence of the English 
system while modifying it to suit the ‘debased state’ of Sicily. 
But Parliament made changes in the draft which shewed that 
the chosen model would not escape unscathed. On the contrary, 
it already faced a double challenge from conservative and 
‘democratic’ forces. 

<<<PDFPAGE 76>>>
60 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
The Bases established the separation of powers, with Parlia- 
ment taking to itself, besides the sole power of taxing and 
legislating (subject to the Royal Assent), that of trying and 
punishing Ministers, officials and magistrates. The three houses 
were reduced to two—Peers and Commons—the temporal and 
spiritual peers being merged into one house, and deprived of 
their plural votes; money bills were to originate in the Com- 
mons; and Parliament was to meet annually. No 
Sicilian could 
be deprived of liberty or property without due process of law. 
The articles where Parliament departed from Balsamo’s draft 
were those concerning finances and feudal rights. Article X 
gave the Royal Domain to the nation, in exchange for a Civil 
List, and vested the administration of the nation’s property and 
revenue in Parliament. This was the result of “democratic 
feeling, especially in the Braccio Demaniale, and ran counter to 
the Ministers’ opinions—Castelnuovo in particular objected that 
it would make him, the Minister of Finance, ‘a Comptroller 
only’. Articles XII and XIII abolished all feudal dues, juris- 
dictions, and privileges, and converted all fiefs into alods. But 
an amendment of Cassaro’s was carried by the barons—Bel- 
monte, Castelnuovo, Aci and seven of their friends dissenting — 
which made the surrender of certain privileges, such as local 
tolls and monopolies, subject to compensation by the communes 
benefited. This amendment met with resistance in the Dema- 
niale: Belmonte, however, went down to the lower House; 
overcoming his own distaste for the measure which he had just 
voted against, by his eloquence he persuaded the Demaniale 
members to overcome theirs also and thus maintain a united 
front. In the Ecclesiastico the Archbishop of Palermo could 
muster only a little less than one-third of the members to vote 
against the extinction of their own Estate. The final article of 
the Bases looked forward to the filling out of the Constitution by 
Parliament along the lines of the English model.* 
The Bases of the Constitution, particularly those concerning 
feudal rights, have given rise to a question which is still debated 
—how far did they spring from a genuine surge of national and 
reformist sentiment, how far from the desire of the baronial 
class to maintain, perhaps even to increase, their power in the 
state? The question must be considered later on. The Bases did 

<<<PDFPAGE 77>>>
THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’ 
61 
hold the seeds of those differences over institutional and feudal 
matters which were later to wreck the Constitution, and class 
egoism certainly damped the Barons’ reforming zeal in the 
matter of compensation. All the same we can have little doubt 
that the great majority of parliamentarians sincerely and (at any 
rate) consciously believed they had sacrificed their particular 
interests to the general good of the nation. The sitting of July 
2oth was thus the high-water mark of the patriotic movement, 
and in the eyes of the participants it stood for the rebirth of 
Sicily. Bentinck wrote home exultantly: 
‘So strong an expression of national feeling is scarcely upon record . 
. . 
an unanimity almost without a precedent, and more than ever surprising 
upon an occasion when the ancient privileges and jurisdictions of families 
were to be resigned, when long cherished prejudices were to be sacrificed, 
and when the two more powerful orders of the State were called upon 
to give up their preponderancy, to unite themselves into one Chamber, 
and co-operate to confer upon the third an influence which it had never 
possessed. These things are really honourable to the Sicilians, and the 
exultation and hope which prevail are universal’. 
In a quieter strain, he confided to G.F. Leckie—in a sense the 
first father of British intervention in Sicily—his satisfaction, 
tempered though it was with regret that feudal privileges had 
not been abolished outright: 
‘The business is new to all, but notwithstanding there is a good deal 
of vanity and egoism among the great and that there will be a good deal 
of scrambling for loaves and fishes among all, yet there is a great portion 
of good sense, honour and patriotism, that I hope will keep the ship 
right, even should she be in danger. There is also at hand our independent 
protecting force that I trust will be able effectually to secure this infant 
Constitution from all mishap—and a very gratifying and proud duty 
this is.”* 
This was undoubtedly the culminating point of Bentinck’s 
mission: never afterwards could he feel so unmixed a satisfaction. 
The credit for this golden moment he gave to his Sicilian 
friends, to Belmonte in particular. But it was he who received 
the congratulations of his British friends—of Ambherst, for 
instance, who wrote that Bentinck had accomplished, without 

<<<PDFPAGE 78>>>
62 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the usual attendants of bloodshed and confusion, one of the 
most complete and important revolutions recorded in the history 
of our eventful times. There now opens indeed a fair prospect 
of happiness, as well as of political power, to the inhabitants of 
the rich and beautiful island of Sicily.’ 

<<<PDFPAGE 79>>>
GHA PIE 
RAITT 
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
‘A work of Herculean labour....It 
is the triumph of humanity 
and Reason over darkness, cruelty and oppression and stamps you the 
Benefactor of Mankind... you will enjoy the prayers of millions who 
will ultimately derive freedom and happiness from this distant example... . 
Thus Pellew, on hearing of the Bases of the Sicilian Consti- 
tution. That this was not the mere effusion of a politically naive 
sea-dog is shewn by the chorus of praise and encouragement 
which reached Bentinck from British observers, both after his 
first victory over the Court in January and after the voting of 
the Bases on July 20th. It was perhaps not surprising that the 
generals and admirals should expect Sicily to reap great and 
sudden benefits from the change—like nearly everyone else they 
believed in her potential. prosperity, which (they thought) only 
misrule had stifled, and only the Queen’s mischief still imperiled. 
Nor was it strange that they, like Bentinck, should see in 
‘regenerated’ Sicily a great accession of strength to the British 
cause—'the world may be saved by it’, exclaimed Pellew. No 
doubt these illusions were the outcome of a classical education. 
But it was noteworthy that the Prince Regent himself, according 
to one report, praised Bentinck’s conduct highly in private; it 
was, one supposes, unusual for the Under-Secretary of State to 
tell the envoy who had just revolutionised the country to which 
he was accredited: ‘I congratulate you du fond de mon cceur’. 
This enthusiasm for Bentinck’s achievement was not confined 
to one party; it sprang from the most disparate motives: from 
the Benthamism ofa pompous East India official who wrote that 
Bentinck had done ‘that for a sea-girt isle in the Mediterranean, 
which one of your ancestors assisted in doing for the island of 
your birth’; or from the forthright John Bull attitude of the 
Bishop of Limerick, who trusted that ‘that miserable country 
will now be... made sensible of its good fortune in being 
placed under the control and protection of the British Govern- 
ment’. 
What doubts and suspicions there were likewise cut across 
party lines. A Government supporter like Lord Sheffield disliked 

<<<PDFPAGE 80>>>
64 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
‘crusading with our Constitution’ no less than did Sir Robert 
Wilson, Grey’s ambassador-at-large, for whom Sicily was an 
example of ‘the march of usurpation in English policy’. A 
Cabinet Minister—Harrowby—thought Bentinck “Whig-mad’ 
on the evidence of the new Constitution, which of course he 
took to be Bentinck’s own work; while another Benthamite 
—Blaquiere—complained of the ‘overstrained moderation’ of 
Bentinck’s measures. Indeed, those who knew something of 
Sicily and agreed most 
closely with Bentinck—Ambherst, 
Maitland, Pellew—had had their doubts at first; they had seen 
some of the difficulties of the situation, and particularly the 
danger that Sicily might lapse into feudal reaction: ‘these proud 
barons’, they agreed, must be induced to ‘lay aside selfishness; 
and take the people (not the mob) for something’. But they, as 
well as Bentinck, were quite satisfied on this score by the reso- 
lutions of July 20th. Not so Leckie: he complained bitterly that 
Bentinck had been deceived; the ‘English’ Constitution was 
‘one of the greatest fallacies ever exhibited’; it would lead to an 
‘unbalanced oligarchy’ more oppressive to the mass of the 
people than the former despotic monarchy. Bentinck was sensi- 
tive to this charge, which French propaganda in Italy fastened 
on from the first, and he had it refuted in the official British 
paper: significantly, the article was written, not by a Sicilian, 
but by a professed agent of the Italian patriots, and described 
the Constitution as the symbol of a risorgimento, a raising up of 
the whole people to a better condition of life.* 
To Bentinck these tokens of British commendation or blame 
mattered less than the official opinion of his Government. From 
Harrowby’s outburst, already mentioned, and from Liverpool’s 
later strictures, it is plain that those Ministers who considered 
the matter at all had no liking for the new constitution: they 
were ready if need be to explain it away as the by-blow of 
Bentinck’s Whiggish enthusiasm. Castlereagh was more cau- 
tious: he had, in May, made constitutional reform one of 
Britain’s official aims in Sicily; and he told Bentinck in Sep- 
tember that 
‘under the corrections and alterations which some of the articles are 
susceptible of and appear to require, there is a fair prospect of Sicily 
holding out to Italy and to Naples the safe and honourable example of 

<<<PDFPAGE 81>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
65 
a reformation without violence, and a regenerated constitution, under 
the sanction and with the aid of the legitimate sovereign’. 
But there remained unresolved a lasting, and, one may say, 
a fatal ambiguity in Castlereagh’s thinking. A statement of his 
in a Commons debate of April 1813 illustrates this. Whitbread 
had asked him whether the new measures taken in Sicily at 
Britain’s suggestion were likely to give the people those political 
advantages which had been hoped for. ‘It was a very great 
question’, Castlereagh replied, ‘which had been put to him’; the 
constitution was still incomplete, but 
‘he was sanguine enough to hope great advantages from it. He trusted 
it would prove beneficial to the Sicilians and their posterity, and secure 
their attachment to this country... this country had never attempted 
to exercise such a controlling power in Sicily as would be inconsistent 
with the independence of its government. It had been the endeavour of 
Ministers to unite the feelings of the people, and embark their whole means 
of defence in the common cause.’ 
Thus the Sicilian constitution could be seen in three different 
ways: as the outcome of deliberate British policy; as the hobby- 
horse of a Whiggish proconsul; or as the spontaneous achieve- 
ment of the Sicilian people, with which Britain and her Minister 
had nothing to do. The trouble was that Castlereagh held all 
three views simultaneously, kept them all, as it were, in reserve; 
or if, as seems likely, this statement implies a greater and more 
calculated attention than he could give to Sicilian policy, one 
may say that he never thought out until too late which view 
the British Government should adopt. True, Sicily was far away 
and he had to leave Bentinck great latitude. But flexibility is 
one thing, letting matters take their course is another. That the 
Foreign Secretary should keep in mind, and prepare for, every 
eventuality was not the same thing as that he should scarcely 
realise or even inquire what his own policy was leading to.* 
Meanwhile the Bases were only a beginning: the Constitution 
had yet to be worked out in detail; and the attitude of the Royal 
Family was 
still uncertain. They had been defeated in the 
attempt to avert a new constitution; they must now be made to 
acquiesce in their own defeat. This acquiescence Bentinck and 

<<<PDFPAGE 82>>>
66 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the Ministers decided to obtain at once. Even Cassaro was with 
them in this: Bentinck, he realised, having guaranteed that 
Parliament should not disturb the peace, was now entitled to 
demand that the Crown should not drive Parliament into violent 
opposition. In fact Parliament already looked like getting out 
of hand: only a week after the voting of the Bases, Bentinck 
had, at Belmonte’s request, to go to the Demaniale lobby and 
urge moderation on the more radical members, who shewed 
signs of wanting to set themselves up as a Long Parliament of 
Sicily. Here Belmonte’s own brother, Ventimiglia, was one of 
the leaders and another member—Sperlinga—threatened, if the 
Royal Assent was withheld, to move for a parliamentary com- 
mittee to investigate the abuses of the previous regime. Bentinck 
and his friends, however, decided—partly as a sop to Cassaro, 
partly as a safeguard for the future—that the King, not the 
Prince, should give the Royal Assent to the Bases.* 
The King, however, proved stubborn. Possibly the current 
report was true that he and the Queen had countenanced the 
English Constitution in the first place only because they had 
never expected Parliament to adopt it—the clergy would never 
agree to abolish their own Estate. At any rate the King, when 
Cassaro first approached him, began by threatening to dissolve 
Parliament and refusing to sanction any of the articles. Cassaro 
pointed out that Parliament had kept fairly closely to the 
English Constitution: “but who wanted, he cried, the English 
Constitution?’ The Queen agreed that they did not. On August 
1st Bentinck himself saw the King for the first time since 
January. The King still said he would never sanction the Bases, 
‘mai mai mai’; he obviously thought the Parliament null and 
void, reform abhorrent, and Bentinck’s acts unauthorised. He 
shifted his ground, however: he would sanction the English 
Constitution “but this was neither carne nor pesce neither 
English nor Sicilian... he had not slept for 15 nights... his 
conversation was very much mixed with religion’. He tried to 
bargain with Bentinck—let Britain, he said, guarantee the safety 
of the whole Royal Family (meaning the Queen), as well as 
the Civil List—and ‘no man royal or common ever played the 
beggar better’. But he found Bentinck, as he put it, ‘like an 
inanimate statue of the hardest marble’, and the interview ended 

<<<PDFPAGE 83>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
67 
inconclusively. The King, however, was now isolated. On one 
side was the Queen, plagued as ever with visions of Maric- 
Antoinette’s scaffold: 
“YOU ARE LOST FINISHED 
DISHONOURED,’, she fairly screamed in one of the notes 
that passed between them at La Ficuzza (underlining the last 
word nine times), ‘if you accept this [instead of putting] an 
end to these infamous deeds of a government, of Baboons, and 
Scoundrels’: 
‘the Tears, the blood, the harm to subjects entrusted to you by God, 
you want dishonour, you may have it, but to ruin Subjects, family, all 
and end dishonoured after 60 years, while you had the people, and the 
troops, on your side, I repeat to you, conquer this criminal poltroonery, 
awake from criminal lethargy, go tomorrow to Palermo, take up your 
duty again, or if not, expect the contempt, curse of a sacrificed people, 
of your ruined family, so much my duty forces me to tell you, praying 
God that He may enlighten you, your desperate afflicted most unhappy 
wife.’* 
We should not underrate the effect of such outbursts on a 
man who liked a quiet life. But on the other side Cassaro urged 
the King to give way, and so did the wretched and flustered 
Prince, whom Bentinck’s thunderings on the army question had 
deprived of any will to resist. Even so the King stood his ground 
as long as he could; he urged his son to dissolve Parliament and 
summon another to choose between the old Constitution and 
the English. In the end all he would consent to was to scribble 
a note authorising the Prince to sanction such articles as ‘con- 
formed absolutely to the English Constitution’.* 
There was reason to fear that this was one of the King’s usual 
devices to avoid committing himself; but it is doubtful whether 
any oath or signature would have bound him. What did matter 
was that from then on he invariably insisted that the new 
constitution must not depart by one iota from the English. He 
probably had no very clear notion of what the English system 
was like—he later decided to send to England for an authori- 
tative version—but it was at any rate known or ascertainable; 
it would set bounds on innovation; and it was something to 
which Bentinck could not easily object. The Prince’s assent to 
the Bases was accordingly published on August roth. By agree- 

<<<PDFPAGE 84>>>
68 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
ment with Castelnuovo and Bentinck—who now attended an 
official meeting of the Council for the first time—the Prince 
vetoed the’ article concerning the Civil List and the adminis- 
tration by Parliament of the national revenue, and reserved 
judgement on the proposed compensation for feudal rights—this 
last in the hope that the Barons might later be induced to 
surrender their privileges outright.” 
But the difficulties over the Royal Assent marked only the 
first act in the conflict that summer between Bentinck and the 
King. The second centred round the army question. The Sicilian 
Army was still not reorganised, and therefore the subsidy was 
still suspended. Bentinck decided after eight months’ delay that 
the matter must be brought to a head. He had, on July 22nd, 
suggested a new and more binding Anglo-Sicilian treaty of 
alliance; he now demanded several specific measures. A Sicilian 
corps in British pay must be formed to serve outside Sicily—first 
in Spain, later if possible in Italy; then the Captain-General 
must be given greater powers, designed to get round Aci’s 
meddling; and finally the King’s Neapolitan Guards must be 
reduced and partly replaced by Sicilians. This last measure was 
aimed at the Queen, who supposedly pinned her hopes on the 
Guards’ support if the King should attempt to resume power. 
The negotiations over the proposed treaty dragged on through- 
out August and into September. Meanwhile the army could not 
be paid, and the government were left at one time with only 
three days’ bread and forage in hand. The Prince kept up his 
threats of resignation and his desperate appeals to his parents, 
but the King found his letters ‘impertinent’ and ‘incomprehensi- 
ble’, while the Queen denounced him as ‘a traitor, a revolution- 
ary!’ When the Prince tried to convince them, on the strength 
of fresh despatches from Castelcicala, that Bentinck had the full 
backing of the British Government, ‘the answer sent back was 
that Castelcicala was either a fool or a traitor. The Hereditary 
Prince cried out que diable puis-je faire’. The King wanted to 
deal separately with Bentinck through Cassaro and Caccamo; 
once again he tried to bargain for a guarantee of the pure 
English Constitution and of the Civil List. He fought especially 
hard to keep his Guards intact; but once again he could not 
resist indefinitely, and once again he left the Prince the responsi- 

<<<PDFPAGE 85>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
69 
bility of signing, on September 12th, a new treaty. This embod- 
ied: all of Bentinck’s demands, together with a British guarantee 
of the possession of Sicily—though not, as the Prince had 
wished, of Naples. The King might, and did, assert that the 
treaty was invalid without his own assent; he tried to undermine 
it through Castelcicala, who was much more his personal am- 
bassador in London than the Prince’s, let alone the government’s; 
but the treaty could not be undone.* 
Bentinck now had in fact complete control over the Sicilian 
army; in a moment of optimism he foresaw that as soon as 
Parliament finished its work of constitution-making all Sicilian 
problems would be solved, and he would be able to join his 
‘distant flock’—‘the best and dearest part of my army’—in 
Catalonia. To his Government he wrote that the new treaty 
‘may be said to have been made not only between the two 
sovereigns, but between the two nations, sealed by the unani- 
mous gratitude of the Sicilians, and indissolubly fixed in the 
feelings of political interest, of liberty and of independence 
common to both’. To his friend Bunbury he had written a few 
days earlier: “We are now masters and kings if you please.” 
Yet there was still one more act to come, and one more 
problem to be settled: the Queen’s interference. Ever. since 
January Bentinck had had to complain of delay and obstruction 
at almost every point: the new Ministry, the summoning and 
later the meeting of Parliament, the reorganisation of the army, 
the sanctioning of the Bases, the new treaty. The ostensible 
cause was the King’s stubbornness: as he told the Prince: 
‘His Majesty, who had before renounced all business, now insisted 
upon seeing every paper, and directed every measure till at length the 
Government exhibited the singular spectacle of an ostensible head without 
any power, unable to decide upon any question, without the previous 
permission of a superior; and that superior at a distance from the capital, 
in no communication with the leading persons of the country, unac- 
quainted with the temper and circumstances of the nation, and viewing 
them through the false medium of the passions and prejudices of the 
single person in whom he reposed confidence.’ 
The Queen, as usual, seemed the real source of the trouble. 
Everyone said so: the Prince repeated that ‘if his mother was 
gone the King would be easily reconciled’; the King himself 

<<<PDFPAGE 86>>>
7O 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
*. 
had hinted something of the kind in the interview of August Ist; 
Cassaro and Caccamo kept saying that he really wished to send 
her away, but could not withstand her influence—‘if the King 
gave an opinion which the Queen disapproved’—Cassaro re- 
ported during the treaty negotiations—‘she gave him a nod and 
said that it went for a non-dit’. Cassaro also said the Queen’s 
emissaries were intriguing for fictitious protests against the new 
Constitution to be sent to Palermo from the provinces; a reputed 
agent of hers had recently thrown a bomb into the Parliament 
building; and rumour, as ever, had her plotting for the King’s 
return to power.” 
Bentinck therefore felt he had ample grounds for demanding 
her utter removal from the political scene, taking up the question 
where he had left off in April. Occasion served him: he had 
received at the end of August Castlereagh’s instruction giving 
him complete discretion in matters concerning the Queen; and 
she herself had made a fatal slip during the interview of August 
tst—when she and Bentinck had met face to face for the last 
time—by saying, in her distraction, that she meant to go to 
Vienna, and by asking for a frigate to take her away. In subse- 
quent weeks she announced and cancelled her departure several 
times. Bentinck was of course all for it; but ‘desirable as this 
event might be’, he felt “very great reluctance to enforce it—at 
the Queen’s time of life, in the state of her health, and at this 
advanced season such an act might appear cruel’. In the letter to 
the King with which he opened his attack on September 13th, 
he accordingly referred only to ‘positive orders’ from his govern- 
ment which made it imperative that the Queen should remove 
to a greater distance from Palermo—that is, by implication, 
that she should part from her husband. It was the resistance this 
demand met with that raised Bentinck’s terms to include, first 
a verbal, then a written promise by the King of her departure 
from Sicily altogether.* 
For this act ran its course like the other two—the limit of the 
King’s powers of resistance seems to have been a month or six 
weeks; this time he did not give in until October 25th. The 
tedious and familiar events recurred—the letters flying back 
and forth; the proofs tendered and refused; the Prince’s en- 
treaties; the King’s stubbornness; the Queen’s fury; the am- 

<<<PDFPAGE 87>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISR’ 
71 
biguous shuttling to and fro of Cassaro and Caccamo, the 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern of Sicily. As before, the Queen’s 
debts complicated the issue. Who was to pay them if she left 
Sicily ? 
When, somewhat later, Bentinck suggested that the King 
might, the Prince made a face “expressive of the opinion that he 
would not give her a farthing’. Bentinck himself had no au- 
thority to pay them, and in any case he thought power, not 
money, was the Queen’s object. Another difficulty was the way 
the King and Queen fastened on Castelcicala’s reports from 
London—and in particular on what Castlereagh and the Prince 
Regent had said about the Queen. Castlereagh had told the 
Sicilian Ambassador, and was still telling him at that time, that 
the Queen ought to go away—perhaps not out of Sicily alto- 
gether, though he could promise nothing; but he was sure 
Bentinck would ‘act with all due delicacy and forbearance’; 
the notion that force might be used against her was repugnant. 
The Regent had dropped some well-meaning remark to the 
effect that the Queen might come into Palermo now and again 
to see her family. The King and Queen took all this to mean 
that Bentinck had no powers to use force in the last resort: his 
threats and demands could therefore be discounted.* Faced with 
this opposition, Bentinck did contemplate the use of force: 
‘...it was impossible for me to recede. My influence and 
authority depended upon the result’, On October 8th he con- 
sidered sending troops to the neighbourhood of La Ficuzza and 
facing the King with the choice of abdicating or giving in; he 
even got Belmonte to draw up a form of abdication. If need 
be he was ready to expel the Queen bodily from the island, 
should the King refuse either alternative. After a further flurry 
of letters and talks Bentinck rode up to La Ficuzza on the rsth, 
with the form of abdication in his pocket; but the King would 
not see him, for fear of an attack of bile, and Bentinck had to 
deal with Father Caccamo. 
‘The question must be decided,’ he told him; ‘I had been burlato for 
the last six months by the Queen’s continual declaration that she would 
go away... I had always known she would not and I told him now 
that until I came at the head of a British force she never would.’ 
He therefore gave the King an ultimatum: if he did not hear 

<<<PDFPAGE 88>>>
72 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
from him by the 1oth, ‘I should consider myself to be at liberty 
to do what I pleased’. 
. 
The King gave way: Circello was called out of retirement; he 
and Cassaro together persuaded the Queen to go to Santa 
Margherita, in the southwestern part of Sicily, for the winter, 
and to announce her intention of going to Vienna in the spring. 
Negotiations went on for ten more days over the wording of 
the written promise which Bentinck now demanded from the 
King: Bentinck wanted the word ‘assurance’ to be included, 
while the King wished him to be merely ‘informed’ of the 
Queen’s decision. Bentinck won in the end; even then the 
‘assurance’ was signed, not by the King, but—according to true 
Bourbon practice—by Cassaro and Circello in his name.* 
Bentinck was exasperated by this continuous succession of crises: 
‘T have found myself in very great embarrassment about the Queen,’ 
he told Bathurst. ‘I had quite made up my mind to take her away by 
force, fully convinced that, if the British Government would not support 
me, it was better for this country and for our own that I should rather be 
sacrificed than she allowed to remain.... They cannot resist decided 
language, and it is a pity that what has been so easily and so justly done 
should have been left undone for six years. The Hereditary Prince said 
to Belmonte the other day, il n’a qu’d montrer ses dents et ils (the King and 
Queen) cederont tout de suite. I have done my best to keep up all the forms 
and have sacrificed to the desired appearance of conciliation real and 
substantial advantages. If I had been empowered at first to have said 
‘this must be’, I could have arranged in one month what has occupied 
a year, what has deprived Spain of the aid of many thousand men, and 
what has given to Sicily a much worse and more impracticable Consti- 
tution than she would otherwise have had. . . . I trust that the Government 
will not relax in anything, even the least trifle, respecting the final 
arrangement that I may make with the Queen. The way is not smooth at 
all... . There will always be abundant means with which she can put in 
practice her wicked and artful designs. She is I think now completely 
beat, if 1 
am supported.’ 
At last Bentinck could look forward to leaving for Catalonia, 
where his staff officers were steadily clamouring for him to 
come and take charge. Now that the Queen was ‘beat’ he might 
be able before leaving to settle the whole internal Sicilian 
situation and even (he began to think) to reconcile the King 
to the Constitution.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 89>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
73 
Parliament and the Constitution had, indeed, been constant 
sources of concern to Bentinck throughout this series of diplo- 
matic crises. We have seen that in his opinion delay had produced 
a constitution much more impracticable than it need have been. 
In the same letter to Bathurst he had to complain, of the very 
Parliament to which three months earlier he had given such 
high praise, that there was ‘but a very moderate proportion of 
public spirit among them’. Experience had taught him that a 
Constitution octroyée would have done better after all: ‘at first all 
would have received with thanks whatever had been proposed, 
but by delay cabal and intrigue has got ahead and the Parliament 
has been entirely for a long time past out of all control’.* How 
had this come about? 
The Parliamentary session of 1812, during which the Consti- 
tution was worked out, lasted from July 20th to 
November 4th; 
it revealed dissensions among the Patriots which, by choosing 
to adopt the English Constitution, they had only glossed over. 
Dividing lines were not always clear. There was, on institutional 
questions, 
the old split between, 
on 
the one 
hand, the 
conservative barons and their friends, led by Cassaro and the 
Archbishop of Palermo, and attached to baronial, ecclesiastical, 
sometimes to royal privileges; and on the other hand the strictly 
‘constitutional’ majority led by Belmonte and Castelnuovo. But 
these “constitutionalists’ were not always united; the new radical 
group which had emerged in the May elections to the Dema- 
niale, the Ventimiglias and Sperlingas, sometimes led them into 
measures which the Ministers disapproved, or else broke away 
altogether. More important, on the feudal question there began 
to appear a split between Belmonte and Castelnuovo, which was 
to grow in subsequent months and eventually to wreck the 
movement altogether. 
The split originated partly in personal jealousies among the 
lesser members, and partly in differences of opinion and tempera- 
ment between the two leaders themselves. Belmonte was bril- 
liant and fertile in expedients, but—as Bentinck gradually came 
to see—he was not the man to be Prime Minister except in his 
own fancy. He had little notion of Ministerial leadership in 
Parliament: ‘when he passed the doors of that House’, he told 
the Barons, ‘he forgot that he was the Minister of the Prince. 

<<<PDFPAGE 90>>>
74 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
He came there as a Sicilian Baron and his duty was to his coun- 
try.’ This attitude—aristocratic at bottom, however veneered 
over with liberal ideas—was one cause of friction with the more 
systematic Castelnuovo. Early in the session Orleans complained 
that, partly through ill-health, partly through his princely neg- 
lect of details, Belmonte was losing his grip on his followers; 
after the first few weeks he attended Parliament less and less 
often, until towards the end he scarcely turned up at all. He 
was just as nonchalant in matters of day-to-day administration: 
‘business was not his fort’, Orleans complained; ‘he would 
neither write nor read. His delight was in lounging and conver- 
sation.’ Besides, he was as usual quite unable to impose unity on 
his colleagues, and all too ready to fall back on Bentinck for 
support. Bentinck and Orleans would meet and shake their heads 
together over their friend’s shortcomings: 
his vanity, they 
agreed, blinded him to the dangers of the situation; though he 
was still supremely confident of his own ability to manage 
everyone and everything, Prince and Parliament, his followers 
were practically out of hand and ‘nobody [was] so humbugged 
by the Hereditary Prince as Belmonte himself’. 
Then it was that Bentinck began to prize Belmonte less as a 
politician, and Castelnuovo more. Castelnuovo had the virtues 
of Belmonte’s defects; but he had adopted ‘the unalterable 
system of not giving in to anyone or on any issue when he 
believed truth and reason to lie on his side’. This was shewn in 
his management of the finances: moved (as the Prince put it) 
by ‘a morality too philosophique’, he refused at one time to 
pay out the army credits, on the ground that the State’s debts 
were not yet all discharged: until that was done, ‘there were no 
credits’. On that occasion and on others he tried to resign and 
had to be dissuaded by his friends. Bentinck thought him 
‘wrong-headed’ in this: still ‘it would be a great pity to lose 
him... a man of the same character for integrity and firmness 
was not to be found—I regretted in some respects his inflexibility 
—If I could remake him, I would alter him, but as he was he 
must be taken and he was the man of all others calculated to 
establish the public credit.’* 
As the split between Castelnuovo and Belmonte became more 
obvious, Bentinck took to lecturing them and the other Ministers 

<<<PDFPAGE 91>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
75 
on the need for solidarity. They ought to realise that ‘one 
department was inseparably connected with another’. The 
Government, he complained, ‘has in fact no power and energy 
—they are afraid of the people—the Parliament is the same—they 
all want character’. Castelnuovo was too austere to be popular, 
while Belmonte “did not see the necessity of collecting round 
him a strong party—the consequence was that the Parliament 
was under no guidance and were doing what they pleased’. In 
fact the whole political system was far too fluid: ‘there must be 
two parties—those who had the places—and those who had not 
and wanted them...’. But if the idea of a strict two-party 
system was new enough in England, it was quite unthinkable in 
Sicily: Bentinck might grumble, but he could not alter the 
existing confusion.* 
In the proceedings of Parliament Bentinck seldom interfered 
directly. He did once or twice, at Belmonte’s invitation, lecture 
the more intemperate members—they of course protested that 
‘they wished to do nothing disagreeable’ to him, but little came 
of it. One member of the Demaniale was a paid British agent, 
and as ‘he was supposed to speak my sentiments’ Bentinck 
arranged that they should meet to concert his attitude to specific 
measures. But on the whole Bentinck confined himself to giving 
advice in conversation with members and Ministers; in fact the 
constitutional leaders complained that he was too reticent and 
did not interfere enough.” Only at the end of the session did he 
throw his weight into the scales: and then on a matter which, 
typically, stirred Belmonte and Orleans all the more because it 
touched their interests rather than their principles. 
At the end of October the Demaniale passed the new Civil 
List: after the usual fashion of Civil Lists it provided separately 
for each adult member of the Royal Family. But when the bill 
went to the two upper Estates some members threatened to 
amend it so as to give the whole of the Civil List to the King 
and let him look after the distribution. Cassaro and the Arch- 
bishop of Palermo, apparently, were behind this move, together 
with a boon companion of the King’s, the Prince of Pantelleria; 
and their inspiration could be traced easily enough to La 
Ficuzza. All this quickly threw Orleans into high alarm (then 
as later nothing moved Louis-Philippe like money); the Prince, 

<<<PDFPAGE 92>>>
76 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
too, faced with the prospect of being kept in leading-strings by 
his parents, became ‘very reasonable’ and talked of proroguing 
Parliament ‘on some pretext before the fatal amendment could 
be carried; his sister Marie-Amélie, for her part, was ‘very much 
montée... sure if left to the King and Queen they would get 
nothing’. Of course they all looked to Bentinck for help; and 
Belmonte automatically complained that Bentinck had not 
interfered even though he himself, by neglecting Parliament and 
allowing dissension to grow between his followers and Castel- 
nuovo’s, had given Cassaro and the Archbishop their chance. 
Nor was this all: not interest merely but principle also agitated 
Parliament. The Demaniale claimed—mistakenly, for the Eng- 
lish Constitution was not yet in force—that the other two 
Estates had no right to amend money bills, and it sent the 
Barons a message to say so; at which the Barons were furious 
and drew up a counter-remonstrance. Bentinck, visited by one 
after another of these men with a grievance, was annoyed: ‘the 
fault’, he told Belmonte, “had been that the Ministers had not 
been united. They opposed each other in the House—I could 
only support them as an administration, it being their business 
to lead the House.’ Still, if they could gain time ‘I was sure I 
could obtain a majority’. This he set about doing by means 
both informal and official, He argued with Cassaro, who 
hastened to put the blame on Pantelleria but still seemed afraid 
to offend the King; he tackled Butera, the wayward but influ- 
ential first baron of Sicily; on Belmonte’s advice he wrote a 
Note opposing the amendment, which the Prince could lay 
before Parliament (the grounds for this unwonted interference 
being that changes in the Civil List would affect the Army 
supply). Meanwhile Lady William Bentinck had canvassed 
Princess Cassaro on Marie-Amélie’s behalf. Forty-eighthours after 
the original alarm Parliament met in the evening and sat until 
3 p.m. on the following day; Butera made a long speech against 
the amendment in the Militare; the Civil List was finally carried 
according to the original draft; and so the situation was saved.* 
The chief matters for dispute in the three months’ debate on 
the new Constitution were: the powers of the legislative and 
executive branches; the freedom of the press; judicial and ad- 
ministrative reform; and, most important, whether in the back- 

<<<PDFPAGE 93>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
77 
ground or in the open, the abolition of feudal rights, in particular 
the question of entail. The one major question on which all 
were united was, as before, the independence of Sicily.* 
English Constitution or no, it became clear early in the session 
that Parliament meant to depart from it—and from Balsamo’s 
draft—over the executive and legislative powers. True, Anglo- 
mania was as strong as ever: members paid lip-service to the 
English model and used it as a justification, claiming that unless 
the executive was hemmed in on every side it would reduce 
Sicily to slavery ‘like England in the time of Henry VIII’.* But 
their motives were plain fear of the Crown; in some quarters, 
a new interest in French and Spanish constitutional doctrine; 
in others a desire to preserve the financial and administrative 
control which the Barons had exercised through the old 
Deputation. For these reasons Parliament adopted once again 
the article (vetoed out of the Bases by the Prince) which vested 
the Crown lands and revenues in the nation. This time their 
administration was left, on Castelnuovo’s advice, to the execu- 
tive; but the spirit if not the letter of parliamentary dictatorship 
prevailed, so that when the time came to vote supply, Castel- 
nuovo as a matter of course did no more than present his ac- 
counts, leaving it to Parliament to distribute taxation. In the 
same way Parliament, while it adopted the structure and pro- 
cedure of Westminster wholesale, interpreted the Commons’ 
right of arrest, trial and impeachment rather in the spirit of 
17th century than of early 19th century English practice; it 
tended to follow the Spanish model in making nearly all 
Government servants ineligible; and the radicals would have 
made Parliament appoint to all offices. In the end Ministers 
were not, as in Spain, excluded; but once again the spirit of the 
new constitution was such that they had scarcely more initiative 
or authority than any other member. 
Still departing from 
Balsamo’s draft, and against the strong advice of Castelnuovo 
and Belmonte, Parliament lowered the property qualification 
for electors and candidates, and freed the municipal councils 
almost entirely from central control. None the less the Crown 
was given a real power of veto; so that formally the executive 
was no weaker than in England. What was missing was any 
notion of Cabinet government.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 94>>>
78 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
All this made Bentinck uneasy. He had no wish to see Parlia- 
ment enthroned as the arbiter of the new constitution. In fact 
he shewed ‘a moderate spirit rather at variance with the flam- 
boyant tone of some of his despatches. When, for instance, Aci 
argued with him that the Lockian doctrine of legitimate resist- 
ance to royal authority ought to be included in the Constitution, 
he replied that ‘there was no necessity to sanction those acts 
which were acts of revolution, perhaps necessary, by law’. He 
told Anjou—one of the five Barons arrested in 1811, now a 
prominent radical—that present fear of the Crown ought not 
to influence Parliament: 
‘They were now legislating for Posterity ... though there was now 
an interest different from that of their Nation, that must cease here- 
after ...a broad line must be drawn between Executive and Parlia- 
ment ...the Executive would not have the responsibility they ought 
and the Houses of Parliament would be a scene of perpetual intrigue.’ 
But ‘I did not convince him’.* 
Bentinck’s attitude was much the same on the other two 
institutional questions which agitated Parliament, the Press law 
and the reform of the judicial and administrative system. He had 
originally approved, because of ‘the debased state of this society’, 
the restrictions placed on the freedom of the Press in Balsamo’s 
draft. But when the radical group in the Demaniale voted to 
make the Press quite free, and when, after a conflict with the 
Ecclesiastico, 
a compromise was reached freeing all but religious 
publications, he did not object: not because he approved the 
principle—he apparently did not—but because it seemed as well 
to let Parliament have its way unchecked and uncriticised in 
matters not of the first import." 
As for judicial and administrative reform, it was the occasion 
for the first serious disagreement between the constitutional 
leaders. Castelnuovo and Balsamo had devised a plan to divide 
Sicily into 23 districts, each with its own court, sheriff and other 
officials. The districts were to be drawn less arbitrarily than the 
French Departments; all the same, Castelnuovo, so far as he 
meant to impose uniformity on a country ridden with multiple 
jurisdictions, seemed to accept some of the administrative prac- 
tices of the new France even while he rejected its political 
doctrine. He also claimed—though dubiously—that his plan 

<<<PDFPAGE 95>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
79 
would strengthen the judiciary against the interference of power- 
ful individuals. Inevitably the plan ran into opposition: from 
Palermo, whose many lawyers—strong in Parliament—saw 
their livelihood threatened by the setting up of new courts 
elsewhere; from a number of other towns, which kept up the 
enduring spirit of Italian municipal rivalry and feared domi- 
nation by their neighbours. Belmonte took sides with the op- 
ponents of the plan; and Bentinck too argued against Castel- 
nuovo that it would prove cumbersome, expensive and hard 
on the poorer districts—they had better have half the magistrates 
and pay them well. In the end Parliament passed the plan in 
part; but the whole question was left unsettled, as was that of 
the new criminal and civil codes; in fact judicial reform was 
never completed or properly tackled until the Restoration 
period, when the Constitution itself had been destroyed.* 
The rock on which the Patriotic movement split beyond 
mending was the feudal question. The abolition of feudalism 
on July 2oth has long been a matter for debate. Some have held 
that it was largely a gesture and did not effectually cut down 
—was not in fact meant to cut down—the social and economic 
power of the Barons. In this view the whole movement of 
opinion among the Sicilian parliamentary classes in these years, 
and its culminating point the 1812 Constitution, came to no 
more than an attempt by the Barons to defend their position 
against the inroads of the central government, even to strengthen 
it. By converting feudal tenure into personal property—so the 
argument runs—they gave up more burdens than they did 
benefits; they exacted compensation for the loss of local privi- 
leges like tolls and monopolies; and they saw to it that the 
nobility as a class and a power in Parliament was kept intact.* 
But this seems too simple. The night of July 20th was a time of 
high excitement; Castelnuovo’s followers, and even for a time 
Belmonte’s, were swayed by the thought of the Enlightenment; 
in latter years, too, their cause had seemed to develop into a 
national one. So far as we can judge their motives many of the 
barons did at first believe they were abdicating their privileged 
position in the State. None the less there was already a conflict 
between conservatives like Cassaro and reformers like Castel- 
nuovo. As the initial fervour faded away the conflict spread; an 

<<<PDFPAGE 96>>>
80 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
* 
increasing number of barons began to take fright at what they 
had done; gradually they slid back into the conservative camp. 
Parliament, under Castelnuovo’s influence, did confirm the 
abolition of feudal privileges, this time without compensation. 
But the opposite tendency manifested itself in an article abolish- 
ing common rights on former feudal lands—a step akin in its 
effects to the contemporary English enclosures. The clash came 
when Castelnuovo’s followers proposed the abolition of entails 
(fidecommessi). Members at once recognised how important 
was this proposal. They might and did quote Blackstone at one 
another in debating it; but they seem to have been clear in their 
minds that what was at stake was the survival of the barons as 
the exclusive ruling class. On one side Castelnuovo and Balsamo 
foresaw that abolition would lead to an increase in small pro- 
perty and to the rise of a new class of middling landholders, like 
the English gentry the pillars of the Constitution: this meant 
the partial break-up of great estates. Cassaro, on the other side, 
was extremely worried: he hoped Bentinck “would not permit 
the nobility to be destroyed.’ All the same the issue was not 
quite so clear-cut. Many barons, burdened with debts and 
mortgages, might have welcomed a chance to alienate their 
lands: but they were ‘moved less by private interest . . . than by 
vanity and class considerations or prejudices’. In the end the 
majority of the Barons voted against abolition “for fear of seem- 
ing enemies to their own order and degenerate sons of their 
illustrious ancestors’—had the vote been secret, thought Castel- 
nuovo, it would have gone the other way. As the other two 
Estates voted for abolition, the question stood unresolved.* 
But politically the conflict had already had far-reaching effects. 
The split now ran not only between Castelnuovo and Cassaro, 
but between Castelnuovo and Belmonte. For Belmonte, whether 
from a desire to conciliate the Barons, or from his own aristo- 
cratic leanings, voted against abolition, as did his followers. The 
full consequences were not felt at once; but the question—which 
was, indeed, fundamental—remained a source of dissension. In 
the next few months it was to split the constitutional majority 
into “Belmontisti’ and ‘Villermosisti’ 
(so called after Castel- 
nuovo’s other title, Villermosa), and gradually to estrange the 
two leaders.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 97>>>
THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’ 
8I 
Bentinck took little part in this stage of the debate. His 
sympathies were with Castelnuovo, for he too thought the 
barons were unpopular and their privileges a burden to the 
country. It is not clear whether he already despaired of their 
political capacity—as he was later to do—and therefore, like 
Castelnuovo, wished the middle classes to come into a greater 
share of political power. But it was bad enough that the dispute 
over the feudal question should have still further split the 
Ministry.” 
‘The Barons wanted an aristocracy, and...all wanted to 
avoid paying’, said the Prince about this time. He was right, at 
any rate, about the Sicilians’ willingness to pay: only at the very 
end of the session did Parliament bring itself to vote even an 
unsatisfactory budget. The economic situation was no better 
than before: the grain shortage continued, leading here and 
there to riots;* and Castelnuovo’s patriarchal notion of political 
economy only matched the antiquated financial structure of 
Sicily—a state with no modern system of banking or tax- 
collecting and no funded debt, quite unable to bear the strain 
of a long war even with a British subsidy. To these difficulties 
were added the reluctance of Parliament, first to vote supply at 
all for fear of a dissolution, then to vote adequate supply; and 
Castelnuovo’s own reluctance—whether from delicacy or for 
fear of unpopularity—to put pressure on Parliament. The upshot 
was that the deficit remained almost as large as before.” 
This was a serious disappointment to Bentinck; and so was 
the failure of Parliament to do much for the Sicilian Army 
except keep Neapolitans out of it. “They want the most contra- 
dictory things,’ he complained; ‘they first vote that foreigners 
shall not be employed in the army, they next vote that no 
Sicilian shall be forced to serve....They then desire a large 
army and navy but will not vote any money for it.’ Still, Parlia- 
ment was over by November sth and the Constitution made. 
After several stormy months, Sicily lay for a few weeks in the 
doldrums. 
Early in December Bentinck foresaw that in about a fortnight 
the Royal Assent to the Constitution would be published. The 
next step would take him to Spain.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 98>>>
CHAPTER IV 
' 
THE KING’S RETURN: 
THE QUEEN SIDEPAR TURE 
Unhappily for Bentinck what happened in the winter of 
1812-13 was not his own departure for Spain; it was the King’s 
return to Palermo and his attempt to resume power. The 
resulting crisis lasted from December to April: if it proved to be 
the longest and fiercest yet, that was because it brought to a 
head not only Bentinck’s contention with the Royal Family 
but also the conflicts that had for some time been growing up 
among the patriotic Ministers and their followers. The ostensible 
question was whether the King or the Prince should rule; the 
real question, whether the new ‘system’, launched with British 
help and now embodied in the Constitution, should stand. 
The King’s decision to delegate his powers in January 1812 
had been an accident: Bentinck, taken by surprise, neither able 
nor willing to press the King to the point of abdication, had 
accepted it. Since then nothing had, on the face of it, prevented 
the King from putting an end to the Vicariate at any moment. 
He had not done so; all the same Bentinck had been unable to 
preserve the new ‘system’ from continual trouble and delay, 
due in part to the King’s obstruction. 
Now, at the beginning of November 1812, Bentinck held in 
his hand what looked like several strong cards. He had just 
exacted the ‘promise’ of the Queen’s departure; Parliament had 
risen, and the Constitution, which it had at length drawn up, 
seemed likely to be no longer a matter for dispute. Yet Bentinck 
was aware that the King’s means of interference were not 
exhausted; he wished before leaving for Spain to improve on 
his latest victory by reconciling the King once and for all to 
the existing state of affairs. No sooner, indeed, had he exacted 
the ‘promise’ than he hinted to Caccamo that Ferdinand ‘the 
Queen gone would make an excellent King. He had a good 
understanding and an honest heart.’ Why should he not leave 
his self-imposed retreat at La Ficuzza to come and shoot at La 
Favorita, the royal villa near Palermo? ‘I would carry the King’s 
gun for him.”* 

<<<PDFPAGE 99>>>
THE KING S$ RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
83 
The King’s own intentions, however, were not clear. There 
was certainly talk of his returning to power; the Queen con- 
tinued to agitate for it from her own retreat at Santa Margherita; 
and Bentinck foresaw that she would do all she could to evade 
the ‘promise’. But when the Archbishop suggested to the King 
that he should at any rate return to Palermo, he ‘put his hand 
upon the Archbishop’s mouth and said Tace Monsignor... . 
What I am doing is right and one day you will be of the same 
opinion.”* No less difficult was it to make out the King’s 
attitude from the behaviour of the Prince. The various crises 
of the summer and autumn, throughout which the Prince had 
been the helpless advocate of compliance, had left a coolness 
between father and son. The Prince now put on a tentative 
show of independence; when Orleans advised him to be l’homme 
des Anglais ‘si vous voulez rester sur votre throne’ he ‘made a 
face and said—Je le veux bien’. The King complained that he 
was kept in the dark; he threatened to wash his hands of the 
whole business: the ratification of the new treaty, the sanctioning 
of the Constitution—his son might attend to them alone and 
take the consequences. Yet the Prince was more dilatory than 
ever: the Constitution awaited his assent, but Bentinck—now 
an ad hoc member of the Council—was shortly to complain that 
in three months there had been three Councils on the subject. 
All the Ministers complained of the Prince’s distrust and mania 
for detail, which slowed down the course of business almost to 
a standstill. He conferred with subordinate officials without 
telling their Ministers; he sent for paper after paper until the 
departments ran out of despatch-bags, and he kept the papers 
for weeks without doing anything about them. The Ministers 
had found, on taking office, that many of their subordinates 
were hostile to the new ‘system’; but they could not induce the 
Prince to replace them: as usual, he promised much but per- 
formed little. And over one important appointment the Prince, 
as will be seen, seemed determined to thwart Bentinck and the 
constitutional leaders.* 
The only explanation Bentinck could find for these difficulties 
was that the King was still interfering and still unreconciled. 
As Orleans put it, 

<<<PDFPAGE 100>>>
84 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
‘The King was at present as it were retired into his citadel from whence 
he was ready to make a sortie whenever he pleased, waiting for the turn 
of events and encouraging by his hostile position all those who were 
unfavourable to the Constitution.’ 
How was this state of affairs to be remedied? Orleans and 
Belmonte suggested on December 17th that Bentinck should 
present the King with these alternatives: he should either resume 
power, or else give his “decided countenance’ to the Prince’s 
administration. Bentinck doubted whether the King’s ‘counte- 
nance’ would in fact turn the Prince into a satisfactory ruler; 
but it seems he was already toying with the notion of bringing 
back the King on terms that would put an end to delay and 
dissension.* 
For what moved Orleans and Bentinck to make their sugges- 
tion was the split within the Government. This was no news, 
but it had lately gone so far that the Government could scarcely 
carry on as it stood. Bentinck was losing patience: ‘although 
Belmonte was always complaining of the backwardness of the 
English ...the Ministers must be the principals... the British 
Minister could only be an auxiliary’. The Ministers, he insisted, 
must work together at all costs; if they did not, England could 
do no more, short of assuming the government; as it was ‘we 
appeared to have everything our own way and to have all the 
power in our hands while in fact we had nothing at all—We had 
our own Ministers, but they were not united together did not 
know how to manage business and had no power over the 
Prince’ .* 
Aci and Bentinck had been at odds for months; but since the 
end of Parliament Aci had come into conflict with Castelnuovo 
as well, over the Army credits which the ‘too philosophique’ 
Castelnuovo refused to pay out. This quarrel became further 
embittered in December when Castelnuovo proposed. various 
appointments designed to give him effectual control over his 
own department, among them that of Balsamo as Under- 
Secretary (Direttore). The Prince objected to Balsamo as a 
‘republican’; when Castelnuovo threatened to resign Aci urged 
the Prince to seize the opportunity of getting rid of his inflexible 
and ‘democratic’ Finance Minister. Bentinck came to the rescue 
with the usual expedient of suspending a loan—Castelnuovo’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 101>>>
THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN'S DEPARTURE 
85 
hold on the public purse-strings, he said, was a security essential 
to the British Government. But the Prince shewed unexpected 
powers of resistance: was one thing after another, he cried, to 
be extorted from him by Bentinck’s ‘couteau 4 la gorge’? At 
the New Year the matter was still unsettled. Bentinck had, 
however, decided that Aci must go: ‘His opposition to me I 
forgive—but his attempt to get rid of Villarmosa to put in his 
place a creature of his own I shall never pardon.’ He guessed 
that Aci was ‘achetable’: he did not know that for the last five 
months Aci had been conducting a secret correspondence with 
the King.* 
If personal jealousy and spite accounted for Aci’s defection, 
Cassaro’s was a symptom of deeper differences among the 
patriots. He, too, opposed Balsamo’s appointment, but he did 
so because in the Parliamentary debates Balsamo had supported 
the abolition of entail. When at the end of December the Prince 
seemed on the point of giving way to Bentinck and Castelnuovo 
over the appointment, Cassaro tried to resign, but was dissuaded 
by the Prince and by Bentinck himself. Bentinck was at pains to 
puzzle him out: ‘his prejudices against the new system I had 
seen with concern, but I respected his integrity and always 
recollected with pleasure his uprightness and firmness under the 
administration of the Queen’. Cassaro was, he thought at one 
moment, ‘an honest man in his way . . . he liked the old system 
well administered’. Yet his behaviour was disquieting: he had 
begun to complain that the Prince was a hopeless failure as a 
ruler, while he hinted that ‘the King was now as desirous of 
governing as he had been all his life averse to it’. Bentinck began 
to reconsider his estimate: Cassaro was (he decided at the end 
of December) ‘a very ambitious man... in the last adminis- 
tration he could not bear Ascoli—now Belmonte. He is violent 
and cannot command his temper. . . 
. He sees no chance of being 
Prime Minister.”* 
Here Bentinck put his finger on a part of Cassaro’s motives: 
the fact was—and Bentinck took a surprisingly long time to 
find it out—that Cassaro was the chief engineer of the King’s 
attempt to resume power. He may well have been moved by 
jealousy and thwarted ambition, as Bentinck and the Prince 
believed; and he managed for a while to throw a smoke-screen 

<<<PDFPAGE 102>>>
86 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
about his intentions. But although constitutional issues seldom 
came to the surface in the ensuing crisis, they were there all the 
same and they mattered at least as much as personal motives. 
Cassaro’s action meant at bottom that after much ambiguous 
behaviour—and perhaps real hesitation—he was seceding from 
the Patriots outright and going over to the King in opposition 
to the constitutional leaders, Belmonte and Castelnuovo. Other 
great noblemen—people like the Prince of Trabia and the former 
Lord Mayor of Palermo, San Marco—also moved closer to the 
King about this time. Some of them had, like Cassaro, defended 
baronial liberties in the past; we must suppose that in their minds 
the abolition of feudalism (and its more effective corollary, the 
abolition of entail which they feared would “democratise Sicily’) 
now outweighed the political advantages of the new Constitu- 
tion: the King seemed their last refuge.” Ferdinand, of course, 
had his own reasons for wishing to forestall the sanctioning of 
the Constitution: the loss of the Royal Domain in exchange for 
a Civil List, and—most important—the separation of Sicily 
from Naples, were measures he could never stomach. 
Such was the confused and perplexing situation when on 
January 4th the Queen produced a coup de thédtre by returning 
to the King’s side at La Ficuzza. She acted most likely on her 
own impulse—or as she put it by the will of God—though 
Bentinck disbelieved it. Cassaro at any rate had tried to dissuade 
her; he deplored her coming as likely to complicate matters 
unnecessarily by antagonising Bentinck from the start. As for 
the King, his wife’s move put him (according to Caccamo) 
‘nel inferno’: ‘Iam in the situation of Tantalus’, he said, ‘I know 
what I ought to do, I wish to do it, but I cannot do it.’ What 
in fact ensued—and Bentinck was not at once aware of it—was 
a backstage tug-of-war between the Queen and Cassaro, with 
each of them trying to make the King resume on his or her 
terms: Cassaro telling the King that ‘tutti i buoni’ desired his 
return, but that he ought first to send the Queen away again; 
she hoping by the King’s return to undo the ‘promise’, forestall 
her own expulsion and regain her influence. The King’s inability 
to make up his mind between these alternatives prolonged the 
crisis.* 
About this intestine conflict at La Ficuzza Bentinck was at 

<<<PDFPAGE 103>>>
THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
87 
first in the dark; and Cassaro, who as usual acted as go-between, 
managed to keep him there for some time. Bentinck was faced 
with two happenings, which seemed related but need not be 
equally objectionable: the breach of the ‘promise’, and the King’s 
desire to resume power. About the former there could be no 
doubt: when the King tried to explain it away—he had merely 
stated the Queen’s intention of going, and if she now changed 
her mind he could not help it—Bentinck lost no time in shewing 
‘very great anger . . . for the indecency and meanness of this at- 
tempt to declare nugatory a solemn assurance of the King 
certified by persons of such respectability as Prince Cassaro and 
Marquis Circello’.* But the King’s wish to return to power was 
another matter: Bentinck might use it as a lever to obtain the 
Queen’s removal and the fulfilment of the ‘promise’: and this 
he tried to do during the next six weeks. Besides (Bentinck began 
to think) the King’s return, if properly managed, might even be 
useful in itself as a settlement of the whole Sicilian situation. 
In the first place, the King was popular, as Bentinck tried to 
convince Orleans: 
‘I said there were four points upon which there was a very general 
sentiment in this country: 
1. Popularity of the King 
2. Hatred to the Neapolitans 
3. Do. — — Queen 
4. Dislike of the Barons. 
He did not believe the first and last. I asked him how it could be other- 
wise with the general oppression exercised by the latter and their refusal 
at all times to contribute to the public burthens. He was not convinced. 
He said it had always been the policy of the Court to destroy the Barons 
and their privileges thinking by that means more easily to govern—this 
had been the object of Caracciolo’s administration.” 
The Prince had, on the contrary, so lost whatever popularity 
he had had that the King’s return would (Bentinck thought) 
be greeted with joy. True, the Prince had latterly seemed to 
acquiesce in the truism that (as Orleans kept telling him) “when 
a sovereign for his protection received from a foreign power 
a large subsidy and a large force, that sovereign could not be 
called independent’; he appeared genuinely to desire the Queen's 
departure; and whether he liked the Constitution or not, he 

<<<PDFPAGE 104>>>
88 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
had ‘neither ability nor courage enough to attempt its destruc- 
tion’. But this very weakness was a disadvantage so long as the 
Prince remained open to his parents’ pressure. The King, on 
the other hand, would be his own master, provided his wife 
_was absent; and although Bentinck thought it would never suit 
him to resume as ‘he had been a despot all his life had never 
attended to business and could never give up his old habits and 
prejudices’, yet this legendary idleness (in which Bentinck 
plausibly but mistakenly believed) might mean that, if the King 
did resume, he would subside into a King Log and let the consti- 
tutional machine run without hindrance. Above all, Bentinck 
still thought him ‘the innocent instrument of the Queen’s will’; 
if he could be got to Palermo alone, the ‘fatal charm’ might be 
broken, and the King reconciled to the new ‘system’.* 
It took six weeks’ negotiations to undeceive Bentinck. At 
first he was prepared to act moderately; he objected to Bel- 
monte’s and Orleans’ policy of ‘frightening’ the King and his 
associates; he refused to be drawn (as the Queen hoped he 
would be) into making it a condition sine qua non that she and 
her husband should live apart. As he later pointed out to Cassaro, 
‘I must be always prepared for my defence...I was liable to be 
attacked in England... I was threatened with the publication of every- 
thing in Russia and Germany, and therefore I could let nothing pass 
without its refutation.”* 
He began with a Note (15 January) to Cassaro and Circello, 
recalling the King’s ‘parole sacrée’ and requesting that the Queen 
should go back to Santa Margherita. He had already privately 
suggested to the King, through Caccamo, three possible courses: 
he might live with the Queen at a considerable distance from 
Palermo; or he might abdicate, in which case the Queen would 
be free to go where she chose; or he might come to Palermo 
and resume power if he wished, provided the Queen fulfilled 
the ‘promise’. There was no reply for a fortnight: confusion 
reigned at La Ficuzza: the Queen refused to budge, and the King 
did his best to dodge the issue.* On the advice of Cassaro (who 
apparently hoped thus to frighten the King into action) Bentinck 
wrote a second and stronger Note (29 January) in which he 
stated that so far the British Government had considered the 

<<<PDFPAGE 105>>>
THE KING’$ RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
89 
Queen alone ‘comme ennemie des intéréts de I’ Angleterre, 
comme cause de tous les désastres de la Sicile’; but now the 
King’s breach of promise had placed him in a position hostile to 
the interests of both countries, and might lead to the most 
disastrous consequences for him and his family. Bentinck there- 
fore demanded prompt action. This Note had the effect Cassaro 
desired: the King decided on February 2nd that he would go 
to La Favorita, near Palermo, and the Queen to Castelvetrano 
in south-western Sicily. On the 6th he arrived at La Favorita: 
to Orleans he ‘spoke... with horror of the 14 months he had 
passed [at La Ficuzza] ... he was now in a paradiso’.* 
But the situation was not so rosy as the King thought. Out- 
manoeuvred by Cassaro, the Queen still refused to leave La 
Ficuzza: snow, she said, made the roads impassable; and she 
went on urging her husband to resume at once. Bentinck, on 
the other hand, refused to see the King while the ‘promise’ 
remained unfulfilled. On the roth he got a reply to his Notes 
from Cassaro and Circello: this amounted to a blank denial that 
there had ever been any promise, and a rejection of his charges. 
Orleans and Belmonte urged a strong reply; but Bentinck 
preferred to enter into conversations with Circello and Cassaro. 
The outcome was a mutual withdrawal of Notes, and a fresh 
and more conciliatory reply by Cassaro and Circello, in which 
they promised that the Queen would go to Castelvetrano as 
soon as the snow thawed.* 
Meanwhile the Prince and the Government had been carrying 
on as best they could. Councils on the Royal Assent to the 
Constitution were held in the intervals of the political crisis, and 
the Prince even seemed, for the first time, in a hurry to get the 
business over. He kept aloof from the crisis, but was obviously 
displeased with Cassaro for attempting to play Grand Vizier, 
so much so that he shewed favour to Belmonte and even to 
Castelnuovo. At the same time the conflict between Aci and 
Castelnuovo over the appointment of Balsamo had come to a 
head. Aci was now openly on the King’s side; relations between 
him and Bentinck became more and more strained until, at the 
end of one heated exchange, ‘di Aci continued to talk but I 
took my hat and walked out of the room’; the man was (Ben- 
tinck decided) ‘a miserable dirty fellow’. Aci finally resigned 

<<<PDFPAGE 106>>>
feye) 
BENTINCK AND,SICILY 
at the end of January, with a flourish: ‘surely’, he cried, ‘the 
English Minister was not to govern Sicily ...he was no in- 
triguer...he cared not what priests were made Archbishops 
or Abbots or Archangels...if he had listened to the calls of 
ambition he might have been the first man in Sicily . . . his 
influence over the King might have made him Prime Minister 
years ago.’ After a fortnight’s delay due to the Prince’s customary 
doubts and fears, Ruggiero Settimo, a friend of Castelnuovo’s, 
was appointed in Aci’s place. Thus three out of the four Ministers 
were now staunch constitutionalists; while the fourth, Cassaro, 
continued to hint that he too would presently resign, or else 
become Prime Minister if the King resumed power.” 
For the King was still thinking of resuming. Cassaro brought 
the matter up during the negotiations with Bentinck (13-18 
February) which led to a mutual withdrawal of Notes and a 
momentary détente. Bentinck realised that he could not openly 
object, nor did he as yet particularly wish to. Nevertheless, he 
told Cassaro, he had made himself responsible for the tranquillity 
of Sicily, and he must therefore demand of the King an under- 
taking to sanction the Constitution and to make no great change 
of men or measures for some time. Cassaro agreed, with the 
proviso that the King would sanction the Constitution so far 
as it conformed to the English—in fact he meant to send it to 
England for examination; this made Bentinck uneasy, for it 
implied a long delay. Cassaro also declared that the King could 
not accept the separation of Sicily from Naples, as it was quite 
contrary to the ‘English system’. The representative of the 
United Kingdom could not press this point officially; but as 
a matter of ‘private sentiment’ he strongly urged that it should be 
accepted. Bentinck, however, still doubted whether the King 
would resume, and thought that if he did, he would most likely 
find the work too much for him, and would end by abdicating 
or restoring the Vicariate. 
But these exchanges were only informal; and Bentinck was 
in two minds whether to approach the King direct. He was 
reluctant to leave the King wholly in the hands of Aci and the 
other enemies of the Ministry, who were now clustering about 
him at La Favorita; on the other hand a letter setting out 
Bentinck’s terms for resumption might seem an invitation, 

<<<PDFPAGE 107>>>
THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN'S DEPARTURE 
OI 
especially as ‘I knew he would make no difficulty about the 
terms’. Besides, Bentinck still would not see the King while the 
Queen remained at La Ficuzza. When, however, Bentinck did 
sound Cassaro officially on February 24th, Cassaro replied that 
the King meant to resume at once, whether the Queen went 
away or not; since Bentinck refused to see him, the King would 
have ‘le déplaisir de n’entendre que postérieurement de Votre 
Excellence ce quil aurait désiré savoir avant de reprendre le 
gouvernement .* 
What had happened is still not clear. One conjecture, put 
forward at the time by the Prince, was that the King had 
promised the Queen to resume power when he returned to 
Palermo on February 6th; finding himself still caught between 
the twin intransigences of the Queen and Bentinck, he had 
changed his mind. “The Queen’s answer was rage’, however, 
and now the King had given in to her; ‘the present plan as he 
believed made by di Aci was to resume and to endeavour to 
upset the Constitution by Parliamentary numbers.’ Another 
possible explanation is that the King was induced by Cassaro 
to gamble on Bentinck’s making no effective resistance, and 
was encouraged by some ‘pleasant’ news he received from 
Castelcicala on February 23rd: the contents of Castelcicala’s 
despatch are not known, but he very likely reported Castlereagh 
as saying or implying that Bentinck was not empowered to use 
force.* 
Whatever the reasons for this sudden decision, it shook the 
scales from Bentinck’s eyes. He now saw ‘the impossibility of 
placing even the least reliance on His Majesty’s word or good 
faith’; he quarrelled with Cassaro—in whom he at last detected 
the chief instigator of the King’s move—and told him that ‘if 
the King resumed I was determined to enlever the Queen’: 
‘This was a trial of strength. It was the first effort of a long and con- 
certed plan to destroy the system of liberty, to which in every part of 
its progress every impediment had hitherto been thrown, but in vain.’* 
He refused to deal with Cassaro any longer; negotiations 
would henceforth be carried on through regular channels, that 
is, through Belmonte. To him Bentinck announced that ‘it was 
necessary that I should not be compelled to retreat a step’. 

<<<PDFPAGE 108>>>
Q2 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
Bentinck’s prevailing mood was confidence: ‘in such crises 
as these I had always gained more than I had asked.’ Might he 
not cither prevent the King from resuming, or else carry out 
his threat to expel the Queen by force? Yet on second thoughts 
he decided to continue negotiations. The fact was that Bentinck’s 
position was hazardous. The Sicilians seemed useless—'they 
were all afraid and would do nothing . . 
. they were run already 
to kiss the King’s feet... on the side of the Nation and of 
liberty not a man would stir—we were now completely the 
principals.’ The recent split had disheartened as well as weakened 
his friends; and he was no more certain of support at home. 
Ministers were ‘slippery chaps’ at best; presently he heard from 
Nugent, who had just arrived from London, that 
‘it was very comical to remark the conduct of Ministers in England 
about Sicily. They were very anxious... to see what had been done next 
and who was to get the better—as if the business was entirely left as far 
as regarded them to itself’.* 
Here the King uttered one of his Neapolitan boutades, which 
so impressed Bentinck that he underlined it heavily in his journal 
and (perhaps as a hint) in his despatch to Castlereagh: 
‘But that’s what the English always do,’ the King exclaimed when 
Belmonte tried to convince him that Bentinck was following instructions; 
‘they let their Minister act as he pleases; if he succeeds they approve him; 
if not they break his neck.’* 
There was enough truth in this to make Bentinck keenly alive 
to the dangers of proconsulship in his present circumstances. 
Bentinck’s verbal threat to ‘enlever’ the Queen made the 
King put off his resumption until she should have left La Ficuzza. 
Negotiations went on. In his first Note to Belmonte (26 Febru- 
ary) Bentinck laid down his terms for the King’s return: they 
were those he had put verbally to Cassaro a week earlier, 
but included—besides guarantees of the ‘promise’, of the Consti- 
tution, and of a constitutional Ministry—an undertaking to 
summon Parliament by April. The King’s answer (1 March), 
like Cassaro’s, accepted these terms in principle but insisted on 
the pure English Constitution, and on his constitutional pre- 
rogative to choose his own Ministers. 

<<<PDFPAGE 109>>>
THE KING’S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
93 
‘His Majesty’, Bentinck commented, ‘had no difficulty in giving a 
general assent to future measures which not requiring immediate exe- 
cution might hereafter be evaded. We were now at one of the moments 
the most critical for the successful establishment of the constitution. It 
was upon the point of being sanctioned and carried into execution. I 
was deeply impressed with the King’s ill will and bad faith. To overturn 
the constitution by force he knew to be impossible—but it was easy to 
attack it by sap—to get rid of the Ministers one by one—to bring in by 
means of the Sheriffs, all in Prince Cassaro’s nomination and under his 
influence, to whom the first formation of the lists of the electors is 
entrusted under the constitution, persons attached to the old Court party. 
It became necessary to put the King’s sincerity to the test, to discountenance 
this bold and menacing behaviour—and to obtain sucha Ministry as would 
give confidence to the public, and would not be blindly subservient to 
the King’s projects.”* 
In fact, Bentinck was determined to stop the King, if he could, 
from resuming at all; the Prince he now thought ‘infinitely 
preferable’. 
Bentinck therefore raised his terms: he demanded (3 March) 
that the date of the Queen’s departure for Vienna—announced 
for the spring—should be fixed, and that Cassaro should be 
dismissed.* The King (6 March) evaded the first demand and 
refused the second. To Belmonte he remarked that the English 
‘wanted to get Sicily and that was the object of all their meas- 
ures’; at the same time he thought Bentinck had no powers to 
use force and his bluff could therefore be called: “before the 
troops went to Spain he was obliged to be quiet but now... 
he had the means’. So when Bentinck sent in a still stronger 
remonstrance (8 March) in which he warned the King that his 
hostile attitude might endanger the Alliance, the King did not 
even read it. For on the same day the Queen, her protests 
overborne at last, left La Ficuzza for Castelvetrano; on the 
evening of the 9th the King drove from La Favorita to 
the palace, hastily summoned the Prince and the Ministers, and 
—to the ‘great surprise’ of Bentinck, who had never expected 
him to take so bold a line—announced that his health was 
restored and the Vicariate at an end.” 
The King was, for the moment, exultant. Bentinck, he said, 
might do as he pleased, but he would not be his ‘Maestro di 
Scuola as he had been that of Francesco . . 
. he consigned himself 

<<<PDFPAGE 110>>>
94 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
to the hands of God’. Next day he drove in state amid cheering 
crowds to a Te Deum service at the Cathedral. On the same th 
(10 March) Bentinck got an answer to his last Note, in whic 
the King merely stood his ground. He therefore “determined 
to go personally to the King and see ifI could not frighten him’. 
Bentinck’s arrival at the Palace on the morning of the 11th 
threw the King into a panic, but (as he himself relates) he ‘made 
the Holy Sign of the Cross’ and brought himself to face Bentinck 
for the first time since August. The interview was stormy: 
Bentinck repeated his recent warnings, and stated that the 
British Government would not permit the Constitution to be 
destroyed: “The King took fire at the word Permit. Permit, per- 
mit, permit, he repeated, England has no right to interfere.’ 
When Bentinck began to hint at the past ‘treachery’, not of 
the King but of his government, the King cut the interview 
short: ‘Ni moi, ni mon gouvernement. Je ne peux pas écouter de 
pareil langage. Ecrivez-le, écrivez-le! And he left me.’ No 
sooner was the interview over than the King—‘alterata la bile’— 
had an attack of nerves and took to his bed.* 
Meanwhile Bentinck was counter-attacking on another front. 
The King had planned to stage a second popular demonstration 
in his own favour by attending yet another thanksgiving service 
that evening. The city was in a ferment: 
“Amidst the exclamations of God save the King it was said that cries 
of “Out with the English” had also been mixed. Money was universally 
stated and believed to have been spread among the populace, and all the 
partisans of the Queen were zealously engaged in exciting disorder.’ 
Bentinck therefore warned the Sheriff of Palermo that, since 
he was responsible for the tranquillity of Sicily, he would march 
British troops into the city to ‘protect’ the King. The King 
decided to go on being ill, and called off the service. Meanwhile 
‘the troops had already been in motion and the passage of some 
cannon through the town made a very good effect greater said 
someone than all my Notes for the last year’.* 
The King, though frightened, still would not yield. For his 
sins God had plagued him with this man, he exclaimed—‘ma 
poi questa tribulazione will operate to my salvation. . 
.. Under 
the cross of Jesus Christ was J. Nazarenus Rex Judaeorum—on 

<<<PDFPAGE 111>>>
THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
05 
his tomb would be written Ferdinandus Rex delle due Sicilie’. 
His attempt (12 March) at a face-saving compromise—among 
other things he wanted Bentinck to pay the Queen’s debts 
before she left—fell on deaf ears. For Bentinck, despite the 
failure of all but a few Sicilians to rally actively to his side—or 
rather in a sense because of it—was convinced that he ‘could 
not retreat’: he must now hold out for nothing less than com- 
plete surrender.* He was therefore ready to declare the alliance 
at an end if need be, and to treat the King as an enemy. Britain 
(he later explained to Castlereagh) would have been justified 
in doing so at any time by the flagrant ‘treachery’ of the Sicilian 
Government in 1810-11. But 
“Where the one party was so entirely at the mercy of the other, it was 
essential that moderation forbearance and disinterestedness should dis- 
tinguish every part of our conduct. It would have been easy—it would 
have been fortunate for all the parties concerned, had a decisive stroke at 
once... terminated and adjusted this question. The interests of Sicily 
and of England, the happiness and dignity of the King and of the Royal 
Family would have been eventually saved. The necessity and humanity 
of such a proceeding might have been evident to the nearest spectators, 
but to the distant public and to posterity the honour of Great Britain 
might have received a stain.’ 
Persuasion had been tried for a whole year, fruitlessly. 
Now 
that the Constitution, in the success of which ‘our honour, the 
interests of both countries were involved’, was imperilled by 
the ‘faithless and evil advice’ of the King’s counsellors, Bentinck 
felt justified in using force unless the King gave way—as his 
instructions had always empowered him to do in an extremity. 
This decision he embodied in a final Note (14 March): at the 
same time he sent for part of his troops from Spain, and con- 
templated deposing the King by force if necessary: 
‘The principle of the arrangement was to be that we took possession 
of the country and gave up the right to the nation. The Parliament must 
nominate to the vacant throne’ (i.e. the Prince would be ‘elected’ to 
succeed his father, rather than visibly imposed on the country by the 
British).* 
The tension was at its height: Government business had come 
to a standstill; some of the constitutionalist leaders, including 

<<<PDFPAGE 112>>>
96 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
the Orleans family, were preparing to take refuge aboard 
British ships if the King held out to the point of hostilities.* He, 
indeed, did not yield at once: still apparently unconvinced that 
Bentinck meant what he said, he drafted a reply (15 March) 
conceding nearly every point but asking for time and, where 
the Queen was concerned, for money. Belmonte, however, 
refused to sign the draft; a few hours later, at Bentinck’s insti- 
gation, all three constitutionalist Ministers resigned. The King, 
who had already thrown Cassaro to the wolves, was left without 
a single Minister. Almost abandoned in his half-empty palace 
by his relatives and courtiers, he began to lose heart. Orleans, 
whom he sent for on the 16th, found him distracted: Bentinck 
might blow him up with grapeshot, he cried—he had a pain 
in his breast and in his side—me ne vado—I am dying—Oh, 
how I wish to be quiet’. He had committed a bestialita in 
resuming; for most of his misfortunes he blamed the Queen. 
Yet, in spite of his fears, he still would not commit himself to 
making her go away, especially so long as Britain refused to 
pay for her; and he categorically refused to consider abdicating. 
Finally, faced with a 24-hour ultimatum from Bentinck, the 
King did as he had done in January 1812: he announced verbally, 
on the evening of the 17th, that he meant to restore the Vicariate 
and not to resume in future without the consent of the British 
Government. He then decamped to La Favorita.* 
At this point Bentinck could perhaps have pressed the King 
as far as abdication, and indeed Orleans urged him to do so; 
but he had no authority for such a step. Instead he went on de- 
manding the Queen’s departure; and he insisted that the Vicar’s 
new powers should specifically include all those matters—such 
as Parliament, the Constitution, foreign affairs, and appoint- 
ments—in which the King had kept interfering since his first 
delegation of powers in January 1812. The Prince agreed with 
Bentinck that sooner than accept such another delegation in 
general terms—absolute in theory, at the mercy of the King’s 
whim in fact—it would be better to let the King resume again; 
though (Bentinck added privately) ‘if he resumed, it should 
only be with the condition that he should be bound hand and 
foot’. Finally, Bentinck demanded the dismissal from their Court 
functions of three of the King’s partisans, among them Cassaro: 

<<<PDFPAGE 113>>>
THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
97 
this he did at the insistence of Belmonte, who wanted revenge. 
It was unnecessary and rather weak of Bentinck, who would 
himself have preferred forbearance.* 
The King’s remarkable powers of resistance dragged out the 
crisis for ten more days. At first he would not discuss the new 
delegation of powers at all; then he took his stand on the vague 
powers of January 1812; then (21 March), goaded by another 
ultimatum from Bentinck, he chose to delegate ‘in accordance 
with the English Constitution’, which meant nothing. Mean- 
while Bentinck had taken alarm at rumours that the King meant 
to slip away and join the Queen and her guard of Calabrian 
brigands at Castelvetrano: ‘I never should catch him again and 
he might involve us in a civil war.’ Bentinck therefore posted, on 
the night of March 21st, a troop of dragoons outside the gates 
of La Favorita: 
a number of members of Parliament spent the 
night there too to await the outcome, and ‘many of the common 
people flocked thither as to a spectacle, buying nougat and other 
trifles that were being sold there, as they commonly are at 
religious processions and similar events’.* In the morning Ben- 
tinck himself rode up, withdrew the troops, and met the King, 
who had been sitting quietly in the front garden since dawn. 
The King greeted him with an announcement that as a token of 
his loyalty he meant to go to Malta, among the English. 
Bentinck, somewhat taken aback, decided not to require—as he 
had intended to do—the King’s signature then and there to the 
full delegation of powers: if he did so he might appear to be 
driving the King into exile. Instead he asked for a verbal assent, 
which the King gave at once. There was a kind of reconciliation: 
Bentinck told the King ‘I was not that méchant homme that I 
had been represented to him—he took me by the hand’. 
In fact the King had momentarily outwitted Bentinck: he 
did not, of course, go to Malta, but he did go back on his word. 
It took another week’s hectic coming and going to secure the 
full delegation. By now the proceedings were taking a grotesque 
turn: witness a proposal by the King’s chief counsellor at this 
time, the Duke of Sangro, that the King should be allowed to 
resume on condition that he made Bentinck his Great Chancellor 
for life. Bentinck’s patience was exhausted: 

<<<PDFPAGE 114>>>
98 
BENTINCK AND,SICILY 
‘As for the King and Queen, there was no argument but force that had 
any weight with them’, he told Sangro. ‘Shew it and they were down 
to the ground—withdraw it and the next moment they were on their 
high horse.’* 
He therefore despatched a body of troops to the neighbour- 
hood of Castelvetrano—where, rumour had it, the Queen was 
hoping to raise the local population—with orders to make her 
embark, if necessary by force. By yet another ultimatum he 
finally made the King sign, on March 28th, a full delegation of 
powers to the Prince, together with an undertaking not to 
interfere in the government, and not to resume it without 
Britain’s consent. 
On the evening of the same day, by an ironic coincidence, 
despatches arrived at Palermo from Castlereagh and Castelcicala, 
which if they had come sooner would almost certainly have 
forestalled the whole crisis.* For Castlereagh had impressed it 
on Castelcicala that the British Government required the 
Queen’s departure for Vienna; furthermore, ‘the only hope of 
our cooperation’ towards the recovery of Naples‘... rested 
upon the absolute extinction of her Majesty’s authority, and 
upon the establishment of a system in Sicily which by com- 
manding the public confidence might prepare the Neapolitans 
to regard the return of the Royal Family with favour’. To 
speed the Queen on her way the British Government would 
pay her debts and give her a pension (this decision in particular, 
if known sooner, might well have shortened or averted the 
crisis). Castlereagh, in fact, had fully accepted Bentinck’s view 
that the Queen was the chief obstacle in the way of a Sicilian 
settlement; he regretted that Bentinck had been unable as yet 
to join his troops in Spain, but commended his ‘zeal, prudence 
and firmness... under the many difficulties with which you 
have had to contend’; and the same packet brought Bentinck 
the K.C.B. 
In his instructions, however, 
Castlereagh told 
Bentinck not to use force except (as laid down by Wellesley) 
in an emergency and in the face of treachery: 
‘It is of infinite importance in point of impression that the object should 
be accomplished by arrangement and not by force... as it would be 
difficult to make the world at large understand, whilst the whole military 
force of the island is in Your Lordship’s hands, that there existed an 

<<<PDFPAGE 115>>>
’ 
- 
THE KING S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
99 
adequate necessity for forcibly removing the wife of the Sovereign, 
more especially if no tumult existed, from her family and dominions.’* 
Bentinck had been aware throughout the crisis of the risks 
he was taking; he had already decided to send Lamb, his 
Secretary, home to explain the complex Sicilian situation to 
Castlereagh personally. He now doubly regretted that Castle- 
reagh’s instructions had not come sooner; for if he had not 
exactly used force, he could not very well quibble over the 
distinction between the threat and the deed. 
‘T feel that I have taken upon myself the most serious responsibility,’ 
he wrote. ‘H.R.H.’s gracious approbation can alone determine whether 
I have really consulted, as was my sincere desire, the real honour of 
Great Britain, the happiness, the liberty and the independence of Sicily. 
I anxiously await this approbation for my own comfort, but I still more 
ardently desire it for the sake of this great population who will view in 
it the irreversible confirmation of the great charter of their rights and 
liberties.”* 
Castlereagh’s reply was approval tinged with regret. In a 
private letter he hinted that 
‘in giving to our adherents the support they are entitled to claim at 
our hands, and in affording the new system the aid and countenance 
which the safety of the island requires and without which it would in 
its infancy perish, we must try so to arrange as to obviate the necessity 
of frequent acts of undisguised power’. 
Bentinck should if possible arrange for the King and Queen 
to become entirely dependent on Britain for their income, and 
so acquire a means of coercion over them less flagrant than that 
which he had been led to use.* 
It is somewhat odd that Bentinck should have used in his 
despatch the glowing phrase ‘this great population’ of those 
whom, in a private letter to Castlereagh dated three days later, 
he called ‘this very timid people’. Throughout the crisis he had 
complained that the Sicilians were not supporting him properly; 
the slightest appearance of faltering on his part (he was aware) 
would have had the worst possible effect, 
Universitas 
BIBLIOTHECA 
ym OG 
. 

<<<PDFPAGE 116>>>
I0O0 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
‘here where cowardice was carried to such an extraordinary pitch... 
they never looked forward in this country. They only considered the 
present danger but... the greatest possible evil... they never contem- 
plated at all, and that was the possible disavowal by the British Govern- 
ment of my acts.”* 
No doubt Bentinck wrote his despatches with an eye to 
publication if the Queen should decide to bring out her side of 
the story. All the same, one wonders whether he still could not 
help judging the Sicilians by a double standard—on a particular 
occasion they might prove cowards, but in the abstract they 
remained ‘this great population’. 
At all events Bentinck’s victory now seemed complete. After 
the re-establishment of the Vicariate on March 28th, and the 
simultaneous arrival of Castelcicala’s despatch announcing that 
Bentinck was fully supported by his Government, the powers 
of resistance of the King and Queen were broken. Bentinck 
could prepare to leave for Spain at last. 
The King confined himself henceforth to wrangling with his 
son over the Civil List; he refused to have anything to do with 
the settlement of his wife’s debts—‘affatto, affatto, he would 
not read a word’. In May he even had a friendly conversation 
with Bentinck, in the course of which he complained bitterly 
of the Prince—though ‘he loved him and forgave him and 
prayed God every morning illuminarlo’. Of the Sicilians ‘he 
said, to speak plainly, we are living in the midst of cannibals. 
He knew them well . . . the changes which had been made must 
end in bloodshed and anarchy’. He therefore asked for British 
protection in case of need. Bentinck agreed to it, but added 
that he too knew the Sicilians: ‘they made a great outcry... 
oe barked very loud but had no teeth—they did not dare 
ite 
The Queen made no more serious resistance, though illness 
and wrangles over her debts delayed her departure for over two 
months, and the ever-present threat of force—not force itself— 
was still needed to make her go. She sailed from Mazara on 
June 14th. Rather than ask for a French laissez-passer through 
Trieste or Fiume, she travelled to Vienna via Constantinople and 
Odessa. Delayed by winds and quarantines, she reached Vienna 
only in February 1814. Seven months later she died of a stroke.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 117>>>
THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE 
IOI 
On May 27th, three weeks before the Queen’s departure, 
Bentinck sailed to Spain, though Castlereagh had instructed 
him to remain in Sicily on account of the crisis: 
“When I reflect that the crisis to which this order has reference is past 
—that the causes of all our past embarrassments have absolutely termi- 
nated—that the Queen’s influence exists no more—that the King’s hos- 
tility is neutralised—that full and unlimited powers have been delegated 
to the Vicar General—that his administration is composed without 
exception of popular characters—that this administration appears to enjoy 
the Prince’s confidence, I am warranted in saying that the system against 
which we have been contending for the last six years, and in support of 
which the last struggle has been ineffectually made, is completely de- 
molished.’ 
The Constitution, too, was on the point of being sanctioned 
at last. It was a confident parting flourish. But then it was meant 
for official consumption.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 118>>>
CERUAE 
ERs Vv’ 
THEICONS TEBOHT TON BALDS 
Bentinck, when he sailed to Spain in May 1813, turned his back 
for a time not only on Sicily but also on Italy. It looks as though 
he was not sorry to exchange the heat and dust of Sicilian 
politics for the warlike quiet of Catalonia, where, indeed, his 
army had long stood in sore need of leadership. But Italy was 
another matter: even as he left Bentinck went on pressing for 
a change in British policy that would enable him to raise, free, 
and perhaps unify the greater part of the country. 
The liberation of Italy had been Bentinck’s chief aim at the 
beginning of his mission; Sicily was to have provided a stimulus 
to revolt and a springboard for invasion. But his reluctant 
decision to send most of his troops to Spain in June 1812 had 
scotched the plan; nothing had come of his attempts at coopera- 
tion with Italian patriots;* while the successive crises of the 
summer and autumn had taken up much of his time and had 
turned Sicilian reform into an end rather than a means. Still he 
went on urging his plans for Italian expeditions on the British 
Government, though with little hope of immediate success. For 
Ministers at home were unanimously in favour of his concen- 
trating his efforts on Catalonia; at most Bathurst and Bunbury 
held out vague hopes of action in Italy if and when Spain was 
wholly freed; and Nugent found, on one of his peripatetic visits 
to London in September, that ‘c’efit été inutile de lutter contre le 
torrent’.” The winter and spring of 1813, however, bringing 
news of the retreat from Moscow, gave new life to the Italian 
project, which now appeared at once more urgent and more 
feasible than before. Bentinck renewed his entreaties; moved 
the Prince to support them; sent Lamb home in April to state 
that the Italian patriots seemed ready to rise for ‘the expulsion 
of the French . 
. 
. and the union of all Italians in a single Nation, 
governed by a system of representation’: apart from the un- 
doubted military advantages of an expedition (Lamb was to 
argue) England ought to secure the future balance of power of 
the Continent by giving Italy her protection and so forestalling 
the ‘private ends’ of Austria and Russia.* But except for one or 

<<<PDFPAGE 119>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
103 
two converts with little influence on policy—Bunbury, Miinster, 
Pellew—neither the British Government nor its agents would 
budge;* and Bentinck’s secret negotiations with Murat, held at 
Ponza in June—in the course of which he again insisted on the 
necessity of making all Italy free and independent—came to 
nothing.” He therefore went to Spain convinced that his army 
was being frittered away there to no purpose, and a golden 
chance lost in Italy. This conviction he frequently expressed, 
and so added another difficulty to his already rather uneasy 
relations with Wellington; he also laid up another grievance in 
Ministers’ minds against the day when they should decide, 
in King Ferdinand’s words, to ‘break his neck’.* 
If Italy was a reminder of what might be, Sicily was a commit- 
ment both tangible and disquieting. Bentinck, as we have seen, 
assured his Government that there all was for the best. Perhaps 
that was what he himself wished to believe. Yet even before his 
departure he had been aware of possible danger ahead. 
The Constitution was sanctioned. But the Councils held for 
the purpose from December onward—part of the time under the 
shadow of the King’s attempt to overthrow the ‘system’—had 
perpetuated old dissensions and given rise to new ones. At first 
the Council had been divided, over such questions as the freedom 
of the press, between the conservative Cassaro, with whom the 
Prince generally sympathised, and the constitutionalists Bel- 
monte and Castelnuovo, often though not always supported by 
Bentinck. The Prince usually gave way to the latter: most of 
the institutional articles were sanctioned without serious changes. 
Bentinck was sometimes deputed to find out the ‘English prac- 
tice’; far from dictating to the Council, he was often to be found 
on the side ofcompromise; and he failed to carry the Council with 
him when, for instance, he attempted to secure a clearer sepa- 
ration of powers and a stronger Executive. 
The first serious trouble came over the confiscation of the 
Royal Domain in exchange for a Civil List, and the separation 
of Sicily from Naples. The Prince wished to veto both measures: 
he knew his father was irreducibly opposed to them, and he 
disliked them himself—as for separation, he scarcely concealed 
his belief that Sicily was a natural dependency of Naples, and 
the Sicilians ‘good for nothing’. He yielded on the Civil List, 

<<<PDFPAGE 120>>>
104 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
however, after thrusting responsibility for it on the Councillors. 
It took longer to make him accept separation. Bentinck admitted 
that England ‘did not care about it’—in fact it might be against 
her interests, since while the two countries were united she 
could always put pressure on Naples through Sicily. But the 
Sicilians, he pointed out, did seriously resent their subjection 
to Naples, and they did want independence; the two kingdoms 
had different interests—‘Naples... must always follow the great- 
est political powers of the Continent; Sicily the greatest maritime 
power —and that maritime power would certainly not help to 
thrust them together again by force. Sicily, independent, re- 
formed, properly developed, would be strong enough to stand 
on her own feet and have ‘allies, not masters.’ Besides, she 
might one day take to reunion of her own free will, especially 
if her free constitution was extended to Naples. The Prince at 
length gave way to the advice of the Council—this time unani- 
mous; but he did so with obvious distaste, and the setting up 
of separate dynasties in the two kingdoms was put off until a 
general peace.* 
No sooner had this obstacle been removed at the beginning 
of May than fresh trouble arose over the abolition of entail. 
This measure, passed in 1812 by the two lower Estates only, 
had caused the first falling out of Belmonte and Castelnuovo. 
When it had come up in Council the two had again opposed each 
other—with Bentinck supporting Castelnuovo—but at length 
all had agreed on a compromise which safeguarded the rights 
of immediate heirs. Now, however, Castelnuovo reopened the 
whole question by proposing that Parliament should be left free 
to decide it ‘according to the English Constitution’: this really 
meant that he hoped to secure outright abolition later on.* 
Belmonte and Castelnuovo now quarrelled in earnest: the one 
flippant and sarcastic, the other angry and immovable. Bentinck 
tried to make peace: 
‘He should consider himself as Prime Minister,’ he told Belmonte, 
‘and Villermosa as one of his instruments—whom on account of his 
utility he should court as a fine lady. He said he had neither time nor 
health for this operation which would occupy a man’s whole life—I said 
that I knew Villermosa was a very impracticable man but I believed him 
to have no ambition. . . 
. I had seen nothing in him inconsistent with the 

<<<PDFPAGE 121>>>
THE CONSTITUTION EAILS 
105 
most straightforward conduct—Belmonte admitted that he could not 
act without him—that if Villermosa left the Government, he should 
also. 
... I said... I did not think he had always treated Villermosa with 
proper respect.... Why did he refuse to him that great conciliation 
which he shewed to everyone else . . . their disunion would ruin every- 
thing. Belmonte said he knew it... but if they did not quarrel now 
they would do so afterwards.’ 
Belmonte, in fact, was very ready to take offence. He was 
nettled when he heard that Bentinck had called Castelnuovo 
‘the only man in Sicily... had I said this of him (Belmonte) I 
should have said justly’. At length an uneasy peace was patched 
up between the two; and Castelnuovo carried his point. But 
Belmonte’s injured vanity might be expected to make more 
trouble.* 
This dispute between the constitutionalist leaders came at the 
worst possible moment, when elections to the new House of 
Commons were about to be held. Their party, already isolated 
by the defection of Cassaro, Aci, and an increasing number of 
barons on the right, now had to face a new threat on the left 
from a ‘democratic’ movement that appeared to be forming in 
the country. Even with Castelnuovo and Belmonte united the 
Ministry would be none too strong. The two Ministers who 
had replaced Aci and Cassaro were both nobles with little 
following in the Commons. Settimo, a member of the princely 
Fitalia family, was able but young and new to politics; while 
the Prince of Carini, the new Minister of Justice, an honest man 
but so ‘perfectly unfit for the charge’ as to ‘throw ridicule upon 
the Government’, had been appointed merely for lack of a 
better. Bentinck did his best to shore up the Ministry by preaching 
union and ‘encouraging’ Carini.* But the trouble, to his mind, 
lay deeper: as he later told Orleans, 
‘The aristocracy in Sicily hangs upon a thread. I never could convince 
Belmonte that the nobles were universally despised and hated... be it 
ever recollected that my strong advice was to mix the Cabinet of Peers 
and of such respectable commoners as could have given the best support 
to the Peerage and to the Crown.”* 
But the enlightened middle class whom Bentinck and Castel- 
nuovo hoped to see taking a greater share in the government 

<<<PDFPAGE 122>>>
106 
BENTINCK AND. SICILY 
scarcely existed as yet in Sicily; most of the available commoners 
were lawyers and not ‘respectable’ enough as a group.” This 
being so, the Ministers could hardly be anything but aristocrats. 
But their need for unity was all the stronger, especially in the 
face of a coming Parliament which might ‘ride this new liberty 
horse too hard’ as Bentinck put it. Before leaving he therefore 
renewed his exhortations; he took with him as a precaution a 
private letter from Belmonte which gave warning of ‘demo- 
cratic’ perils ahead and might justify a sudden return to Sicily; 
and he urged the Prince to ‘cling fast to the British Consti- 
tution. * 
Bentinck’s fears were all too well grounded. A helpless spec- 
tator separated from the scene by the whole of the Western 
Mediterranean, he had that summer to watch the Constitution 
and its defenders speedily collapse under a double attack by 
democrats and conservatives. This attack grew naturally out of 
the previous course of the Patriotic movement; but it was helped 
to its success by weaknesses in the British and constitutional 
camp, some of them fundamental, some only contingent.* 
The split between Belmonte and Castelnuovo over the feudal 
question had shewn how unready were most of the original 
Patriots for a programme of moderate social change such as 
Castelnuovo advocated. That the split had been papered over 
only temporarily was brought out by the behaviour of the 
constitutional leaders during the elections to the new Parliament. 
Castelnuovo in particular deliberately refrained from using his 
influence to avert the obvious danger of a large number of 
‘democratic’ victories at the polls. Whether he did so, as Balsamo 
maintained, from ‘a greater reserve and delicacy than the character 
of the nation, and very likely the stubborn nature of the human 
heart, should have allowed’; or whether, as the Belmontists 
claimed, he wished to secure a majority for the abolition of 
entail, the result was the same. The Ministers and their followers 
therefore entered the fray not only divided among themselves 
but scarcely certain of a majority in Parliament.* 
Other circumstances hampered the government. The finances, 
never sound, were now in so bad a state as to be beyond the 
usual remedy of short-term British loans and advances: a speedy 
Parliamentary supply would be essential. Castelnuovo’s policy 

<<<PDFPAGE 123>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
IO}7/ 
of economic liberalism had increased food prices and with them 
popular discontent.* But a greater peril, over which the govern- 
ment had no control, was the plague, which had spread from 
the Middle East to Malta and might spread to Sicily. The 
measures taken to avert the peril made things worse politically 
by jeopardising the position of the British as the protectors of 
Sicily. 
The British, it appears, had already incurred some unpopu- 
larity by their display of force at the time of the King’s return 
and the Queen’s expulsion;* but the plague gave rise to much 
stronger grievances. Most of the traffic between Sicily and the 
rest of the Mediterranean, including the infected areas, was 
carried on by British ships. Amid the alarm caused by the 
plague, it was easy for the opposition to accuse the British of 
neglecting the quarantine regulations; it was even convenient 
for the government, if their policy was attacked, to reply ‘the 
English have obliged us to do so’. The British generals, for 
their part, were often overbearing and tactless in their protests 
against what they considered the unreasonable attitude of the 
government and the local boards of health.* Neither Lord 
Montgomerie, a British resident to whom Bentinck had en- 
trusted the mission, nor Joseph Smith, his Secretary, had the 
authority or the strength needed to control the situation: both 
were in poor health, one was new to diplomacy, and the other 
to Sicily.* Orleans, writing to Bentinck, complained of the lack 
of ‘une adresse et une circonspection qui n’est pas toujours 
congenial avec le caractére anglais’, and reported ‘the irritation 
produced by the manner in which the English Societies mount 
each other [i.e. se montent] against foreigners when there is no 
superior chief to give the Ton and to take the lead’. In Bentinck’s 
absence the British authorities did not always act in concert: 
besides, said Orleans, 
‘T think, My Lord, that generally they don’t see enough of the Sicilian 
Ministers, of the Hereditary Prince and of the heads of this government . 
. . 
this lack of communications lessens the English influence over the Sicilians, 
and... it renders impossible to adjust beforehand and privately the 
points which must afterwards become the objects of official Notes and 
public discussions.”* 

<<<PDFPAGE 124>>>
108 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
Orleans therefore clamoured for Bentinck’s return. All sum- 
mer long Bentinck was to receive letters by every boat from the 
Prince, the British authorities, and the constitutional leaders, all 
bearing the same refrain. ‘Oh My Lord, ot étes-vous donc? 
Croyez-moi, sans vous, cela n’ira jamais.”* 
There can be little doubt that had Bentinck been there he 
would have imposed greater unity on the British authorities 
and the government and prevented much needless friction. He 
might also have done something to heal the rift within the 
government, which became more apparent as Parliament met 
on July 8th in the intense summer heat and amid an explosion 
of speeches, pamphlets and petitions.* 
Already the forces opposed to the constitutional settlement 
could be discerned. In the Upper House there was now a ma- 
jority of conservative barons, in whose minds fear for their 
interests had damped the early ardour with which they had voted 
to abolish feudal rights. Their fears had lately been increased by 
the behaviour of the new municipal councils set up under the 
Constitution, which had taken to occupying baronial lands and 
escaping for the first time from baronial control. Since the defection 
of Cassaro many of the barons could be classed as King’s Friends 
—though the King himself kept studiously aloof to all appear- 
ances—and therefore as enemies of the ‘system’ they had them- 
selves helped to launch.* In the Commons, on the other hand, a 
large number of members—a potential majority if the Ministers 
failed to hold their supporters together—could be classed as 
‘democrats’ or ‘Jacobins’. The leaders of this party, Rossi and 
Vaccaro, had spent years of exile in revolutionary France; to 
the British and the constitutional leaders they seemed bent on 
setting themselves up as local Robespierres and Marats; and until 
recently Sicilian historiography has echoed that judgement, or 
at best has described them as merely factious and irresponsible. 
An attempt has lately been made to shew the democratic move- 
ment not as a rootless faction, but as the emanation of a new 
and genuine force in the country: the middling landowners of 
Eastern Sicily—of the Messina and Catania regions in particu- 
lar—then as now the most advanced part of the island socially 
and economically.” The democratic movement certainly did 
embody an attempt by Catania and Messina to shake free of the 

<<<PDFPAGE 125>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
10g 
aristocratic predominance of Palermo. Whether it was also trul 
representative of the nascent bourgeoisie may be doubted. Its 
members were mostly lawyers—that is to say, as often happened 
in the later history of Southern Italy, they formed an ‘intellectual 
bourgeoisie’, vociferous but small, largely divorced from its 
economic origins, talking and acting in a void. In 1813 they 
seldom rose above petty factiousness in their tactics, or, in their 
political aims, beyond a noisy but vague desire for equality and 
Parliamentary dictatorship; and in joining with the King’s 
Friends to overthrow the constitutionalists they seem to have 
been moved more by opportunism than by any notion of a 
lasting alliance between the monarchy and bourgeoisie against 
the ruling aristocracy. It may be argued, of course, that the 
constitutional movement was no less insignificant than the 
democratic—a ripple on the surface of that huge lake, the 
economic and social immobility of Sicily. But even a Marxist 
interpreter might admit that the constitutional movement repre- 
sented, at any rate at first, the only class strong enough to carry 
out—because it was also strong enough to frustrate—any meas- 
ure of social and economic change; and that Castelnuovo’s 
aristocratic but mildly ‘progressive’ policy along English lines 
was the utmost that Sicily might conceivably have been prepared 
for at this time. 
The constitutional leaders and the British may well be excused 
for thinking they detected in the democratic party ‘all the 
symptoms of the terrible French Revolution’.* Even Castelnuovo 
could scarcely be expected to see in this band of noisy lawyers 
the middle class on the English model which he had hoped 
might arise in Sicily. If his fears were exaggerated, one must 
remember that the French Terror was still fresh in men’s minds, 
and parliamentary criticism of any sort still new to Sicily: violent 
words therefore had a disproportionate effect. 
The weakness of the Ministry was made plain immediately 
after the opening of the Parliament, when the Commons refused 
to consider voting supply, though the end of the financial year 
was only six weeks off. No doubt they felt that “good govern- 
ment [consisted] in paying nothing’*; but they also feared that 
a dissolution might follow on the heels of a vote of supply. 
They went on to demand wholesale revision of the Constitution 

<<<PDFPAGE 126>>>
I1IO 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
and inquiries into the finances and into contested elections; they 
set up a multitude of committees to which government proposals 
were referred and never heard of again, and they refused to 
submit to any rules of procedure—'the House wants no chains’, 
cried Rossi. The Ministry might have kept some control if their 
followers had been united; but the Belmontists voted more often 
than not with the Democrats against the government; when 
Castelnuovo, Orleans and Montgomerie tried to instil some 
notion of Cabinet solidarity into Belmonte, he replied—perhaps 
with some truth—that he could not control his friends. “The 
Council never meets except in the Prince’s presence’, wrote 
Castelnuovo to Bentinck; ‘the Ministers are therefore often at 
odds over business.... Belmonte... behaves in such a way 
that if I did not know and esteem him I should say he was 
intriguing to make me leave the Ministry.” 
Both he and Belmonte felt that Parliament had fallen into a 
hopeless anarchy; the only remedy they could think of was a 
dissolution and the use of British force. Then, on July 18th and 
t9th, food riots broke out in Palermo and spread to the prisons: 
they were put down by the troops, but the Council (including 
the Prince and Montgomerie) panicked and took to unconsti- 
tutional measures: that is, they prorogued Parliament for a week 
without the proper procedure, and they set up a military com- 
mission to try the rioters. Belmonte now at last realised his 
mistake and made it up with Castelnuovo. But it was too late: 
when Parliament met again on the 27th both Houses were out 
of hand: not only did they persist in refusing supply, but they 
threatened to pass a vote of censure on the government’s 
handling of the riots. 
At this point the Ministry collapsed. Castelnuovo, as Minister 
of Finance, had borne the brunt of the Commons’ attacks: now, 
unable to obtain supply, and unwilling either to dissolve or to 
go on collecting taxes after the approaching end of the financial 
year, he resigned. The other Ministers, failing to dissuade him, 
resigned with him. ‘I foresee this egg is about to break’, the 
Prince told them; ‘I believe you had rather not have it break in 
your hands’.* Indeed they insisted on going out of office at once, 
and both they and their followers stopped attending Parliament 
altogether: so far as they were concerned, the ship of consti- 

<<<PDFPAGE 127>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
III 
tutional government was now quite adrift and beyond their 
help. 
Bentinck, hearing this news before Tarragona, felt ‘necessarily 
hurt at so bad a result to all the exertions I have made, but... 
much more disappointed for the discredit that it gives to the 
cause of freedom’. He had already warned Orleans that, with the 
Ministry hopelessly divided as it had been, ‘a new set of bold 
Patriots’ were likely to spring up and ‘put all that weak aris- 
tocracy to the rout’: if so the Prince and the British would have 
to ‘side with the strongest’. The government had lost control 
of Parliament 
‘by their own folly, their own want of energy alone, and then like the 
carter who prayed to Jupiter when his cart was in the mire, [they] 
complain of the apathy of the British Authorities, if by a timely parade 
of cannon through the Cassaro [the high street of Palermo], or by a 
nocturnal deportation of obnoxious citizens without enquiry or trial, a 
system of terror is not established’.* 
As for Parliament, Bentinck was not too alarmed by its 
alleged ‘Jacobin tendencies’, which he rather attributed to the 
inexperience of 
‘persons brought up in a country where... despotism... has estab- 
lished a rooted distrust and perhaps distaste towards all government, 
where education has been very bad, and instruction very limited, and 
where the freedom of the Press has not impressed upon the minds of the 
people that knowledge and justness of political principles and reasoning 
which discriminate the British Nation’. 
Bentinck therefore advised strongly against any recourse to 
the old despotic system of force, or even to prorogation or 
dissolution. The government, he said, should keep strictly within 
the law: Parliament should be given its head; if it should 
threaten the Constitution itself, the Prince could always use his 
power of veto. Of course Parliament might go on refusing 
supply. In that case 
‘there will and must follow a revolution, as the machine of government 
as established by the constitution will stop. But in the first place time will 
be gained by this process, during which ignorant but well-intentioned 
men may see their error; and they probably will avoid an extremity 
which will threaten their personal safety; for timidity I consider to be a 
peculiar characteristic of the Sicilians. In the second, if anything like 

<<<PDFPAGE 128>>>
Ii2 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
revolution is to take place, it had better proceed from embarrassments 
produced by the conduct of the Parliament. . 
. 
. The conduct of govern- 
ment should be marked with the utmost moderation. If in the end it is 
compelled to extraordinary measures, they should be so obviously just 
and necessary as to admit of no question. The Government has to act for 
the future as well as for the present time, and this forbearance cannot 
lead to active revolution as in France, because the whole military force 
is foreign, and in the country there are no native troops and no military 
spirit.”* 
In Palermo, meanwhile, the Prince had anticipated Bentinck’s 
advice by declining to dissolve and by appointing a new 
Ministry. He did not, indeed, bring in the successful democratic 
opposition—they frightened both him and Montgomerie too 
much. But he managed to find two officials (Marquis Ferreri 
and Duke Averna di Gualtieri), a soldier (Marshal Naselli) and 
an aristocrat (the Duke of Lucchesi Palli)—in other words, a 
parcel of nonentities—who were willing to carry on the govern- 
ment. 
To the minds of the outgoing constitutionalists—Belmonte 
and Orleans especially—the next step was simple: the new 
Ministers were to be mere puppets set up to carry through the 
dissolution they themselves had shirked; then the British would 
‘take the country in trust’, and Belmonte expected to ride back 
to power under that shield. But the British did not fall in with 
this convenient plan. After a few days’ hesitation Montgomerie 
decided, in agreement with the Prince, to give Parliament 
another chance of voting supply.* This move worked, if only 
temporarily: the threat of dissolution did what dissolution itself 
could not have done. Early in August the Commons partly 
overcame what Balsamo liked to call their ‘niggardness for the 
restoration of the desolated finances’*—at least so far as to pass, 
not indeed the whole Budget, but the Civil List and part of the 
army estimates, and to extend the financial year until November 
Ist: 
None the less Parliament was now wholly in the hands of 
the Democrats and King’s Friends, who grew still more dis- 
orderly as the summer wore on. Misunderstandings over the 
quarantine regulations culminated in a Commons motion to 
send an embassy to England to protest against the British gener- 

<<<PDFPAGE 129>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
IT3 
als’ misdeeds; while Montgomerie had again to threaten force 
and dissolution to forestall a motion in the Peers calling on the 
King to resume power. Party hatreds were still further em- 
bittered by the appearance of the first political newspapers ever 
seen in Sicily: amid the resulting uproar the Commons started 
setting up a cry for the Spanish Constitution, making forays 
into the executive and judicial powers, interfering with the 
courts, attempting to try one of their own members, and gener- 
ally giving an imitation—superficial and in little—of the French 
Convention. On September 11th Montgomerie, worn out with 
illness and worry, at last got a letter from Bentinck announcing 
his return: he therefore asked the Prince to prorogue Parliament 
for twenty days and so gain a breathing-space. The Prince 
agreed with some misgiving, but Parliament dispersed quietly 
enough on the 15th.* 
Bentinck had decided at the end of August that he would 
have to go back to Sicily and restore order. It was with con- 
siderable disgust that he gave up his military command, for 
he thought of himself as a soldier first and foremost. In the first 
revulsion of feeling he wrote to Castlereagh that such was 
‘the weakness of the Hereditary Prince, and such... the inca- 
pacity of any set of men who may be placed at the head of the 
Government; such also the silly, the interested and depraved 
character of the people’, that henceforth the British Minister 
would be unable to leave Sicily: he therefore asked to be relieved 
of the mission and so freed to follow his military calling; and 
a few days later he asked for leave in England to look after his 
Parliamentary seat and his private affairs.” This move was a 
mistake, for it later allowed Castlereagh to put an end to 
Bentinck’s mission without actually recalling him. For the 
moment, however, Castlereagh asked him to stay on, and tried 
to soothe his disappointment: ‘I know of no hands in which the 
British influence can at present be satisfactorily placed except in 
Your Lordship’s.. . .’ He felt it unnecessary to send further instruc- 
tions, merely approving ‘the generalline of policy’ which Bentinck 
had recommended to the Prince and Montgomerie. 
A month 
later Castlereagh added that, although Bentinck would be sacri- 
ficing his military career, 

<<<PDFPAGE 130>>>
II4 
BENTINCK AND, SICILY 
‘ 
.. yet Iam persuaded that as the new constitutional system of Sicily 
is in part a creation of your own... you will not be disposed to hazard 
its fate in all time to come by confiding it prematurely to other hands. 
I shall not consider the island safe till we see the Parliament acting cordially 
with the Government, of which as yet there are no visible symptoms’.* 
‘In part a creation of your own’: the words were double- 
edged; for Bentinck was shortly to find that the Sicilian Consti- 
tution had become, in English eyes, a very dubious offspring 
for him to acknowledge. The same generals and admirals who 
had first greeted it with jubilation now inveighed against the 
Sicilians as ‘miserable wretches’, ‘a degraded government and 
corrupt people’, fit only to be dealt with by martial law, like 
the Luddites at home. Bunbury talked of giving up the island 
altogether except for two or three fortresses, and leaving the 
Sicilians to stew in their own juice. Liston, remembering his 
Montesquieu, doubted ‘whether the natives of a hot climate were 
susceptible of the happiness of a free government’.* From 
London Bentinck heard that the 1813 Parliament had set nearly 
everyone against the Constitution, and that he was beginning 
to be blamed for it: 
“On est persuadé qu’en laissant faire aux Siciliens leur Constitution, 
vous n’en n’avez pas eu l’ordre positif du Ministére, mais que vous avez 
agi d’aprés vos propres lumieéres et sur la Carte blanche . 
. 
. que le Ministére 
vous avait donné... il y a méme tel Ministre qui le dit cuvertement. II 
est probable que si la confection de la Constitution avait réussi, les 
Ministres auraient dit quils l’avaient ordonnée. C’est ainsi que va le 
monde.”* 
Bentinck landed at Palermo once again on October 4th. By 
this time his spirits had risen and he was fairly confident of 
setting matters to rights by ‘some bullying and some coaxing’; 
however extravagant the recent behaviour of Parliament, he 
thought, the country at large would still look to the British for 
guidance. Next day he met the Prince and the new Ministers. 
He had come ‘to bring these gentlemen to reason’, he told them: 
‘if Sicily was not true to herself—if instead of pursuing with 
wisdom her own good and the final establishment of the Consti- 
tution her representatives chose to be governed by their own 
passion... despotism itself was preferable and as I had been 

<<<PDFPAGE 131>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
I1l§ 
the first to give it [ie. liberty] so I should be the first to take 
it away if I found it to be incompatible with the happiness of 
the Nation.’ But he wished first of all to negotiate with the Parlia- 
mentary leaders and if possible bring them to their senses—that is, 
induce them to promise, before Parliament met again, that they 
would vote the Budget at once. He therefore asked for a further 
prorogation until the 1sth: the Ministers, anxious to conciliate 
Parliament, objected, but with the Prince’s support Bentinck 
carried his point.* 
Bentinck then set about conferring both with the Parliamen- 
tary leaders and with his defeated friends the constitutionalists. 
His meeting with the latter was melancholy: he dined with 
them and toasted ‘les véritables amis de la Constitution’, but 
they were shame-faced at the mess they had made of the 
government in Bentinck’s absence. There could be no question 
of their being returned to power by British force, as the in- 
corrigible Belmonte still hoped he might be, ‘like the Vizier of 
a Sultan’. About Belmonte Bentinck was especially disillusioned: 
politically he seemed quite hopeless, “dangerous as an opponent, 
still more dangerous as a friend’; both he and Castelnuovo were 
now too unpopular to make possible Ministers. The best thing 
his friends could do, Bentinck told them, would be to form a 
compact and active opposition, 
‘the Peers protesting—the 
Commoners speaking and dividing the House upon all occasions. 
It was necessary that there should be a standard round which 
the good might rally.’ They agreed readily enough, but they 
were plainly demoralised and frightened by the turn their own 
Constitution had taken: their countrymen, they concluded, 
were by no means so civilised as they had imagined. Balsamo 
was already drafting the plan of a revised Constitution which 
would strengthen the executive and judiciary: he proposed a 
partial return to the old system, and the deletion of ‘all abstract 
maxims concerning liberty, equality and the like’; for, he said, 
‘in France the rights of man did more harm than anything else’.* 
Bentinck’s negotiations with the Parliamentary leaders did 
not go as smoothly as he had hoped. He began by telling Rossi 
and Vaccaro that while he meant to stand by the Constitution 
‘as long as possible’, he would not tolerate anarchy: if they 
agreed to vote the Budget, however, he for his part undertook 

<<<PDFPAGE 132>>>
I16 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
that they would not be dissolved, as they feared, immediately 
afterwards. If they wanted freedom they must make some sacri- 
fices for it—‘I would have them independent both of their 
enemies and of their allies and I should not use this language to 
them if Great Britain wanted to keep them in subjection.’ But 
they disbelieved him, and steadily refused to consider voting 
supply before the very end of the session, even though Bentinck 
threatened that ‘for the sake of the Sicilian Nation of which I 
was the advocate...I was determined to dictate the law to 
them and I would do so’. After several inconclusive meetings, 
Bentinck began to suspect that evil influences had been at work— 
perhaps the French, perhaps the King: the events of that summer, 
he perceived, had damaged the prestige both of the British and 
of the new ‘system’ more than he had thought. As often before, 
he regretted his early conciliatory policy: when Rossi remarked, 
perhaps sarcastically, that ‘it was unlucky England had not con- 
tinued them in their slavery for one night longer and given 
them the Constitution ready made’, Bentinck noted it as a 
‘curious and just remark’: had it been possible in the first place 
to work through the King alone (he began to think) his task 
would have been much easier. A further prorogation—which 
Bentinck obtained from the Ministry only by officially taking 
responsibility for it—failed to bring about any agreement, and 
Parliament met again on October 2oth. 
Bentinck now decided to carry the Budget in the Commons 
by force of numbers. He mustered 53 constitutionalists—my 
53'—and drove them back to the House they had abandoned 
in July; he also counted on a further (and sufficient) number of 
votes which the new Ministers assured him they could scrape 
together. But the Ministers—whether from ‘perfidy’ or impo- 
tence—failed to deliver the goods: the motion was lost by 61 
to 53. Bentinck at once went to the Prince and demanded a 
new Ministry and a dissolution. 
He was furious: ‘If I had known as much of the general 
character of the people as I did at present,’ he said, ‘I do not 
think I should ever have undertaken the business. I doubted 
whether these people were made for freemen.’ If the next 
Parliament was no better than this, ‘the sooner the country 
reverted to another form of government the better’.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 133>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
II7 
What Bentinck was demanding was in fact the suspension 
of the Constitution, for the government would shortly have 
to start collecting taxes without Parliamentary authority. Why 
did he take such a step, against his own advice earlier in the 
summer not to do so except in the last resort? 
No doubt Parliament if allowed to go on sitting would have 
kept up its practice of voting taxes a month at a time, and so 
would have been in a fair way to become a Sicilian Long 
Parliament. But the government could have carried on some- 
how, and Bentinck’s control of the army would have prevented 
anything like revolution. No doubt, too, Bentinck felt that on 
the question of the Budget he had committed himself too far 
to retreat. But even he seems to have felt the need of some other 
justification, for he told Castlereagh that what had compelled 
him to act was 
‘all the bad signs that preceded .. 
. the French Revolution. ... Agrarian 
law, universal suffrage and provisions at low prices were preached aloud 
among the people. Contempt was endeavoured to be impressed towards 
the British army. Their small effective force was contrasted with the 
numerical strength of the nation... .’ 
How true or significant this was we cannot easily tell: we 
are ill informed about what was going on in the depths of the 
country, away from the rather empty hubbub of Palermo. But 
it is difficult not to suspect that Bentinck, for all his complaints 
of the Sicilians’ unworthiness, was emotionally committed to 
making the ‘system’ work, to ‘regenerating’ Sicily; and that 
that was why he took on a responsibility greater than his mere 
duty as British Minister warranted. Though his work was now 
‘all to do over again’, he meant to save Sicily from herself by 
using present force for her future good. 
This was made plain when Bentinck turned to the task of 
forming a new Ministry. The Prince liked his present Ministers, 
who were accommodating though weak; but Bentinck would 
not have them, and quickly dropped the pretence of not himself 
suggesting who should replace them: the new Ministers were 
to be constitutionalists, and the Prince openly treated Bentinck 
as the head of the party. But it proved very difficult to find 
anyone willing to serve: Castelnuovo and Belmonte were out 

<<<PDFPAGE 134>>>
118 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
of the running, while all the others dreaded ‘the violence of the 
Parliament and the national proneness to vengeance and blood’. 
Bentinck felt hurt: 
‘I stated to them the hardship of my being deserted by everybody. . . .’ 
It would have been much easier for him to withdraw to Messina and 
allow the Constitution to collapse: ‘if I went through with it as I was 
prepared to do, I should have to undertake a great deal of responsibility 
and I was to do all this in conjunction with men whom I did not know 
and of whose principles I could not be assured.”* 
None the less it took ten days to patch up a Ministry. Of those 
who finally came in Settimo (War) at first would not serve 
without Belmonte; Villafranca 
(Foreign Affairs)—a young 
Belmontist nobleman “more respected for goodness of character 
than for abilities’**—had been one of the five barons arrested in 
1811, and his fearful wife had to be pacified before he would 
serve; Carini (Justice) was no more use than he had ever been; 
and Gaetano Bonanno (Finance), though ‘a sensible bold man’, 
was a lawyer turned Government official. 
Even then there remained the question, by what authority 
were taxes to be collected after November ist, when the Parlia- 
mentary grant lapsed? The Prince wished to issue a proclamation 
in his own name and the Ministers’; but ‘the whole of them 
were alarmed and wished to have nothing to do with it’. The 
proclamation was therefore drawn up in Bentinck’s name alone 
—without even a mention of his functions as Captain-General; 
in it he made himself responsible for the safety and tranquillity 
of the kingdom until Parliament should meet again, and an- 
nounced that he would court-martial ‘disturbers of the public 
peace, murderers, and whatever other enemies of the Consti- 
tution may oppose the policy of the Government’. On October 
30th the proclamation was published; troops marched into the 
interior to ensure order; and Parliament was dissolved. Bentinck 
was now in fact dictator of Sicily.* 
Reflecting on this turn of events, Bentinck consoled himself 
with the thought that ‘in the progress from slavery to liberty, 
more or less disorder must have taken place’: it was better that 
it should have come at a time when a salutary check might 
still bring the Sicilians to their senses. 

<<<PDFPAGE 135>>>
THE CONSTITUTION FAILS 
IIQ 
‘Sicily’, he wrote to Castlereagh, ‘can only be saved from political 
convulsions by our interference. As the Constitution takes effect and as 
the liberty of the Press and their new institutions make an impression 
upon the opinion and character of the people, it may be hoped that 
more correct sentiments of private and public honour will prevail. The 
country must rapidly increase in wealth and strength—all the obstacles 
opposed by the feudal system and a bad government to the prosperity 
of the agriculture and commerce of the country are rapidly removing— 
they are clamorous for all the advantages of freedom but nobody will 
submit to the sacrifices—nobody will pay or serve. This is shortly the 
state of the country. It may become powerful and independent if the 
constitution succeeds and the nation is true to itself—but if not, and in 
the interval of its infancy and weakness, it must be the province of Arcot 
with its Nabob, which if not governed by us, will be by our enemy. 
The management required is to make the interposition of this influence 
the general object of desire both of the Prince and of the People.’* 

<<<PDFPAGE 136>>>
CHAPTER 
tf 
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM 
‘The Vicar kept quiet, while Bentinck alone acted and laid down the 
law, running about from one department to the next, writing instructions 
himself and having them written at his will.”* 
So the King heard at the beginning of November 1813. He 
was not misinformed: Bentinck was now, as Orleans said, ‘the 
first Minister of the country’, and the secretaries of state were 
his ‘clerks’. With them he discussed measures of policy and 
government appointments; while the British generals and agents 
in other parts of Sicily acted as unofficial political representatives, 
recommending local supporters of the Constitution for the 
places and favours which Bentinck could obtain for them. 
Actually, Bentinck’s power was rather that of a monarch than 
of a Prime Minister. Great nobles called him in as arbiter of 
their family disputes; such conservative barons 
as Butera, 
Pantelleria, San Marco, Gargallo—some of whom had been 
unseated by the Patriotic victory of 1812—now sought to in- 
gratiate themselves with him; the Senates of various towns 
apostrophised him as the Moses of Sicily.* Criticism was stifled 
at the outset of his dictatorship by the arrest, trial, and im- 
prisonment of two nobles who had published violent attacks 
on him—one of them, ironically, was Anjou, one of the ‘five 
barons’ whom the Court had arbitrarily arrested in 1811.* 
According to a story current in Palermo, the Prince commented 
on this state of affairs by telling his wife one day ‘“This morning 
I had to wait a long time in Council for His Majesty’—his 
wife, astonished, answered, “What, the King?”—‘No, I was 
waiting for Lord Bentinck” —and laughing he went away’.* 
The country was outwardly quiet. From the officers he had 
sent to garrison the interior Bentinck heard that the great 
majority of the people appeared to feel nothing but gratitude 
for British protection. The Royal Family also seemed perfectly 
docile. The Prince effaced himself, called Bentinck his ‘ange 
tutelaire’, and professed the most commendable feelings; but 
Bentinck, though willing to grant that he was the ablest of his 
family—his chief defect being mere weakness—never quite 

<<<PDFPAGE 137>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
I2I 
trusted him again. The King kept ostentatiously aloof, though 
privately he posed as the only man really attached to the English 
Constitution, which Bentinck’s proclamation had infringed. He 
continued to associate with such conservatives as Cassaro, Trabia 
and the Archbishop of Palermo, and—Bentinck thought—to 
encourage them in their latent hostility to the ‘system’. To a 
hint that he should end this silent opposition the King replied 
blandly that he had not the slightest notion of what was going 
on (‘the greatest imaginable lie’). Bentinck hoped to keep him 
sweet by playing on his hopes of Naples; indeed, as will be seen, 
the swift changes then taking place on the Continent brought 
the two men closer together, and Bentinck went so far as to 
appear at an interview, to the King’s gratification, with his hair 
symbolically powdered. But this did not stop the King (as 
Bentinck was aware) from playing his own hand in his corre- 
spondence with the Sicilian envoys abroad; he was no more 
reconciled to the Constitution than he had ever been; and he 
might be expected to overthrow it as soon as British power 
was withdrawn.* 
The noisy factions of the 1813 Parliament seemed to have 
melted away. The constitutionalists themselves were now little 
more than a set of place-holders kept in power by Bentinck’s 
will. Even so, the dissensions which had begun when they 
formed a real party perpetuated themselves within the narrow 
circle of Ministry and Council. The formation of the new 
government had been a papering over of cracks, so much so 
that care had been taken to give the Belmontists and Villermo- 
sists equal representation. This balance was soon upset, however: 
Bonanno, the new Minister of Finance—who held the key post 
in the government, since as Bentinck’s right-hand man he 
controlled the local officials and dispensed patronage—had come 
in as a presumed Villermosist, but soon went over to Belmonte. 
As a result Castelnuovo and Balsamo began to complain—prob- 
ably with some justice—that he was making an unscrupulous 
use of his powers by wholesale dismissals and promotions of 
officials and by unwarranted interference in local affairs. Bel- 
monte, for his part, had no more cause for satisfaction: Bentinck, 
taught by experience, was determined not to let him be more 
than a figurehead.* These enduring differences did not matter 

<<<PDFPAGE 138>>>
122 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
much so long as Bentinck remained there to impose a semblance 
of unity; but they were enough to suggest that the constitution- 
alist rump would not long survive Bentinck’s departure. 
With Bentinck’s dictatorship established and unchallenged, 
the question might have been asked, what kind of political 
settlement would it lead to? The short answer was that Sicily’s 
pocket revolution, having followed the course of its English 
and French exemplars through constitutional monarchy and 
parliamentary anarchy, was now entering a phase equivalent, 
at any rate in the conception, to the Protectorate or the Consu- 
late. Political liberty had been tried and found wanting; so a 
kind of benevolent despotism was to take its place, with en- 
lightened but authoritarian reform as its aim. 
Here Bentinck’s attitude was ambiguous. The official opinion 
he gave in his despatches home was that the people—except for 
some of the barons, whom the abolition of feudalism had 
alienated—shewed ‘perfect unanimity’ in support of the Consti- 
tution; but that, still suffering as they were from the after-effects of 
misrule, they would be unable for some years to shield it from 
the attacks of a few mischief-makers. So, although ‘our enemies 
are a faction, our support a people’, an interval of British 
tutelage would be necessary, at the end of which Sicily would 
have been made safe for political freedom, and the Constitution 
could be restored to its full and free operation.* Bentinck’s 
personal opinion is not so clear. He seems never to have given 
up the hope that eventually the free Constitution might be made 
to work. But for the present he had few illusions. If the King 
were to abolish the Constitution tomorrow, he remarked, ‘not 
a hand would be lifted against so arbitrary an act’. The best he 
could hope for was that the international situation would keep 
Sicily “free in spite of herself and all her efforts to the contrary’. 
In conversation with members of the former opposition, he 
said that while he remained in Sicily he hoped ‘to hold up to 
Europe a whole nation united in the cause of liberty’, but in 
any case he would carry the thing through ‘bon gré mal gré’: 
‘Tt would have been much better if I had done the work in three 
months... but I did not know the nation as well before as since... 
they never reasoned upon what they saw but upon what they supposed 

<<<PDFPAGE 139>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
123 
—They were led by their imagination and not their reason—-No man 
calculated that 2 and 2 make 4—It was either 5 and 6 or 2 and 3—They 
were poets. * 
Similarly, in conversation with Sperlinga (a refractory noble 
whom he threatened to banish from Palermo), Bentinck antici- 
pated a later statesman by declaring that the Sicilians were to 
be managed only by “Bonsbons in one hand and il bastone in 
the other’. In fact, for practical and immediate purposes Bentinck 
had given up any interest in political liberty and representative 
government. He did not care who the members of the next 
Parliament might be, he said—he would make them do their 
duty in any case. If the barons, as he expected, kept up their 
hostility, ‘I was resolved’ (he told Sperlinga) ‘to abolish the 
order altogether’.* 
A distinctly anti-aristocratic tone, together with an implied 
contempt for the representative institutions he had himself 
helped to set up—these seem to account for Bentinck’s state of 
mind during his brief career as benevolent despot. A friend of 
his put it more plainly still: 
‘Tout le monde se demande, que fera-t-on pour la Sicile? Pour moi 
je demanderois, que mérite-t-elle qu’on fasse pour elle? Rien, si l’on ne 
considérait que la nonchalance et l’immoralité des nobles et des prétres, 
la scélératesse de la seconde classe de la population, celle des gens de loi 
et des agents des nobles tous compris sous le nom de Paglietti. Mais la 
populace des campagnes, les agriculteurs, les artisans de l’intérieur de l’ile 
ont quelques vertus, et ils ont besoin d’étre soulagés du pouvoir trop 
arbitraire du souverain, de la tyrannie des nobles et de la rapacité des 
PagliettiimCe fut la votre objet quand vous laissates faire une Consti- 
tution. Il semble démontré maintenant que pour étre utile 4 toutes les 
classes il ne faut laisser faire 4 aucune, mais leur faire faire par force ce 
qui leur convient.”* 
Drastic and effective reform of the administration was a need 
more essential than representative government: ‘both Parlia- 
ments’, Bentinck thought, ‘had been pursuing the shadow and 
neglecting the substance.’ His mood was far removed from the 
orthodox Whiggism usually attributed to him: in fact Balsamo 
complained that his chief defect was the unsystematic and excess- 
ively pragmatic way he dealt with particular problems. He was 

<<<PDFPAGE 140>>>
124 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
willing, for instance, to throw over the experiment in economic 
liberalism (which had caused much trouble) so far as to acquiesce 
in fixed prices for necessities. In general, too, he behaved less 
and less like a British agent, more and more like a Sicilian ruler: 
when Anglo-Sicilian disputes recurred over the quarantine regu- 
lations, he backed the Sicilian Board of Health; and in his 
despatches home he scarcely mentioned his part in domestic 
politics, merely stating that the island was perfectly quiet.* 
The need for reform was greatest in the financial and judicial 
organisation of the country, which the last two Parliaments had 
done no more than upset without definitely settling on a new 
system. Balsamo’s plan for financial reform, passed by the 1810 
Parliament, had laid a new uniform tax on all land and called 
for a thorough survey as a basis for assessment: the logical 
consequence should have been the end of the barons’ virtual 
exemption from taxation. But in November 1813 the land 
survey—the pet project of reformers, both Neapolitan and 
Sicilian, ever since the 1780’s—had still not been carried out; 
the land tax had had to be collected on the basis of voluntary 
declarations of value (riveli); as a result the barons evaded tax- 
ation more successfully than ever. Small landowners, whom 
Balsamo had meant to benefit, had actually suffered, and so 
had the Exchequer. Now, however, the new Minister Bonanno 
at last set out in earnest to prepare the essential survey. At the 
same time he overhauled the government service: no doubt he 
meant above all to exert political influence in the constituencies, 
but he achieved other things as well: a number of redundant 
offices, relics of the old regime, were swept away, and the 
Ministers gained control of their own officials—which was more 
than Castelnuovo or Belmonte had had. How far Bentinck had 
a hand in these practical reforms is not clear, though he and 
Bonanno were certainly in close touch. That they were not 
begun until Bentinck took over the government is at any rate 
significant. He certainly took an interest in financial reform, and 
he advocated a more equal distribution of landed property.* 
Judicial reform was an equally pressing problem. Bentinck had 
already complained to Castlereagh of ‘the total impotence of 
the laws, venally administered, giving no protection, and there- 
fore imposing no check upon the lively imaginations and warm 

<<<PDFPAGE 141>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
125 
passions of the people’. More murders, he reported, were prob- 
ably committed in Palermo than in the rest of Europe put to- 
gether, Sardinia and Corsica excepted. The new Constitution 
had begun to undo the old system without setting up new codes 
or carrying out Castelnuovo’s plan for the reorganisation of the 
courts. Bentinck took a great interest in this question: it was 
uppermost in his mind when at the end of November he set 
out on a month’s tour of Sicily. He was also concerned, on this 
occasion, with ensuring that the right people were elected to 
the forthcoming Parliament, but (he told the Prince) ‘my great 
object was the administration of justice—to hear what the people 
wanted’; and he returned much impressed with ‘the prepotenza 
[bullying] that generally prevailed—the result I believed of the 
feudal system and of the administration of justice being in the 
hands of the barons’. Early in 1814 he discussed judicial reorgani- 
sation with Bonanno; and throughout this period a committee 
of the Council sat to work out new codes.” But all these attempts 
at reform were cut short by the swift turn of events on the 
Continent; they bore fruit only after the Restoration, when 
Sicilian independence and the British protectorate had both 
come toanend. Abortive though they were, they mattered in that 
they shewed what might have happened in Sicily if the protect- 
orate had gone on. With Bentinck’s dictatorship the wheel had, 
besides, come full circle, for his policy was now very like that 
of the former Neapolitan Viceroys—authoritarian in manner, 
‘enlightened’ and anti-aristocratic in purpose. The difference 
was perhaps not so much that Bentinck still hoped Sicily might 
later become fit for free institutions, as that his policy was 
intended to make and keep her independent; while the Viceroys 
had been very distinctly the agents of Neapolitan centralisation. 
But all this (it quickly became clear), and indeed the future of 
the British protectorate itself, must depend on the fate of the 
Continent. Of this Bentinck was well aware; immersed though 
he was in Sicilian affairs he kept an eye on Italy, whose inde- 
pendence he still hoped for. When he set out on his tour of Sicily 
in late November he had not yet heard of the negotiations 
between Austria and Murat which were to lead to a treaty of 
alliance between those two powers, and then to an Anglo- 
Neapolitan armistice. But he had received instructions from 

<<<PDFPAGE 142>>>
126 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
Bathurst and Castlereagh to give Austria his military and diplo- 
matic cooperation in Italy, if need be to the point of recognising 
—sub spe ratiMurat’s possession of Naples, and accepting the 
principle of compensation for the Bourbons. This Bentinck did 
not like at all. Murat, he thought, by taking part in the battle of 
Leipzig on Napoleon’s side (something Castlereagh did not 
know about when he drew up his instructions) had altered 
matters and made so great a concession inadvisable. None the 
less great and critical changes were plainly about to take place. 
How then did Italy and Sicily stand ?* 
In Italy—Bentinck agreed with his Italian soldier friends at 
Palermo, the Piedmontese Sallier de la Tour and the Friulan 
Catinelli—it was ‘necessary to do something to be beforehand if 
possible with the old sovereigns and to give the people an oppor- 
tunity of asserting their rights, liberty and independence’. True, a 
small-scale landing on the Tuscan coast, which Bentinck ordered 
as an experiment late in November, proved disappointing: the 
troops—ltalian volunteers under Catinelli—met with no re- 
sponse from the local population and had to re-embark. But a 
larger force might yet do better: the setback did not stop 
speculation about the chance of creating an independent Italian 
kingdom; and Bentinck’s private Secretary James Graham was 
not alone in seeing him as a possible ‘Lord Wellington of Italy, 
only with this marked superiority—he would “draw the sword 
to create a free government’.* 
Sicily, however, was another matter. When Bentinck talked 
of raising Italy and forestalling the old sovereigns, he meant 
North and Central Italy; the Two Sicilies he reckoned as quite 
separate politically from the rest of the peninsula, and he seems 
to have assumed like everyone else that if the Allies won the 
war the Bourbons would be restored to Naples.* What would 
then become of Sicily’s independence and constitution? As early 
as November 20th Bentinck warned the constitutionalists that 
England could not be expected to go on garrisoning the island 
after a peace. He already had good reason to guess that the 
British Government would do little to safeguard Sicily from 
Neapolitan reaction. Already Castlereagh had asked Lamb 
—Bentinck’s former Secretary—‘When is all this interference 
to cease?’ Three months later, on hearing that Sicily was quiet 

<<<PDFPAGE 143>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
127 
under martial law, Castlereagh ‘smiled and said: “do you 
know, after all I am of opinion, that is the only kind of govern- 
ment for which they are fit.””’* In the circumstances—Bentinck 
told his Sicilian friends—they ought to induce the Prince to 
nominate a Sicilian Ambassador in London, for Castelcicala was 
the King’s personal agent and actually did his best to discredit 
the Sicilian government; Belmonte—he suggested—might, if he 
undertook the mission, prove ‘the saviour of the country’. But 
Belmonte, overconfident as usual, was convinced that England 
would never abandon Sicily, on which (as he thought) the 
safety of Malta depended; though the matter was discussed 
again and again, Bentinck could make no impression on him, 
and nothing was done.* Clearly, the future of Sicily—of her 
independence, of the free institutions she might eventually be 
trusted with, of the practical reforms that were being launched— 
would depend not on the Sicilians themselves, but on the course 
of British policy. 
It was in these circumstances that Bentinck, during his tour 
of Sicily in November and December 1813, brought to light 
the notorious ‘philosophic dream’ which, if carried into effect, 
would have made of the island ‘after Ireland, the brightest jewel 
in the British crown’. 
Bentinck’s tour through the towns of the East coast and the 
interior was remarkable in that, for the first time since the 
Court’s flight from Naples, someone concerned with the govern- 
ment of Sicily took the trouble to visit it extensively. Bentinck, 
who like the Royal Family had until then scarcely stirred out 
of Palermo and its environs, was much struck: ‘it was impossible 
to know the country without having seen it’, he told the Prince 
on his return. His was a quasi-royal progress; everywhere he was 
received with banquets, balls, triumphal arches, fireworks, and 
allegorical tableaux of England and Sicily embracing. He ‘ha- 
rangued’ the local councils, urging them to see that the bricconi 
of the 1813 Parliament were not re-elected; he interviewed 
place-seekers, discussed local affairs with the leading citizens, 
and returned, as has been seen, convinced of the need to strike at 
aristocratic quite as much as at royal ‘prepotenza’ in local affairs. 
Though the opposition was no doubt merely silent rather than 
reconciled, still Bentinck’s tour was to all appearances a triumph.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 144>>>
128 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
On December 3rd, travelling between Messina and Catania, 
Bentinck thought out, and, in a letter written that evening, put 
to the Prince his ‘réves d’un voyageur’. The dilemma which 
faced them both—he told the Prince—was that while Sicily was 
not yet fit to govern herself alone, still she would not let herself 
be reunited to Naples without bloodshed. He therefore proposed 
that Sicily should be governed by Britain. Such an arrangement, 
he said, would be advantageous to all parties. Sicily would 
prosper; from a burden to Naples she would turn into a friendly 
neighbour, whose dependence on a Power without continental 
ambitions would make impossible any conflict between the two 
kingdoms; and the Royal Family could be compensated either 
with additional territory on the Continent, or—more likely— 
with a British subsidy equivalent to the Sicilian Civil List, and 
with military aid.* 
Bentinck’s proposal was ill-judged; but in itself it was not 
fantastic. Since the beginning of the eighteenth century Sicily 
had passed from Spain to Savoy, from Savoy to Austria, and 
finally from Austria to the Neapolitan Bourbons. It might have 
taken one more change in its stride. The Queen had talked of 
selling it to England or of bartering it against help towards the 
recovery of Naples. The Prince secretly considered Bentinck’s 
proposal of compensation on the mainland.* As for the Sicilians, 
they wanted independence; but they wanted it chiefly because 
they disliked Neapolitan domination and could not forget their 
own former glories; they hardly thought in terms of the modern 
national state, and such a man as Belmonte was quite ready to 
see a permanent British protectorate. Of Italy “beyond the 
Garigliano’ (the frontier between Naples and the Papal States) 
they were, as Michele Amari later said, scarcely aware;* of the 
notion that Sicily might help to make up a united Italy not a 
trace is to be found in this period. So if one looks at Sicily alone, 
rather than at the international situation, Bentinck’s proposed 
settlement was at least conceivable. 
What led Bentinck to propose it? The question has exercised 
a number of historians. Balsamo attributed the ‘dream’ 
to 
‘bizzarria’, Weil to overweening personal ambition, while 
Bianco thought it a mere manoeuvre aimed at the unreconciled 
King’s Friends. None of this is very convincing. Then certain 

<<<PDFPAGE 145>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
129 
Italian writers—among them such an historian as Croce—sus- 
pected that Bentinck’s letter wasa token of some deep-laid British 
design on Sicily.” Bentinck’s own explanation—which, repent- 
ing at leisure, he sent off a few days later in reply to the Prince’s 
agitated enquiries—was this: 
‘The Sogno Filosofico ... was the offspring of my disordered brain 
alone, was brought to light for the first time in the journey from Messina 
to Catania, and has its derivation from no other source whatever.’* 
However that may be, one thing is plain: the British Govern- 
ment knew nothing about the ‘dream’ until well after it had 
been put forward, and even then the Foreign Office (though 
not Castlereagh) first heard of it from Castelcicala. It is also 
clear that the Government’s policy before and after the incident 
was quite opposed to anything like the annexation of Sicily; 
and Bentinck knew this and said so. Since the evidence was 
published Italian historians have accepted it and left it at that.* 
But, as sometimes happens, what one set of documents es- 
tablishes a fresh set of documents calls in question. The notion 
that Bentinck had a brainwave and Castlereagh dismissed it out 
of hand must now be qualified. 
The annexation of Sicily was not a new idea. In 1806-7 
Howick and Grenville had thought of establishing a permanent 
protectorate over the island; and Sir John Moore had put it 
more bluntly still. But neither Canning nor Wellesley nor 
Castlereagh had ever mentioned it or, so far as we can see, 
thought about it. Bentinck himself, until his return from Spain 
in October 1813, always assumed that Sicily was on the way to 
becoming her own mistress. Britain might keep some permanent 
influence over her, largely for reasons of geography, but that 
was all. Since his return, however, Bentinck had come much 
more openly to doubt her ability to secure her own inde- 
pendence. He himself had had to become in effect a dictator 
rather than a mere envoy. It may be that at some point in 
October or November Bentinck began to form the idea of 
making this British rule permanent; and that what he saw on 
his tour precipitated it. He had been used—as he told Castle- 
reagh—freely to discuss with the Prince all large matters of 

<<<PDFPAGE 146>>>
130 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
policy, and the Prince for his part encouraged him to do so. 
Now, all-powerful as he seemed to be, and eager to test the 
Prince’s reaction, Bentinck may have forgotten the difference 
between a passing remark in conversation and a letter, however 
private. Why did he act so hastily? When, two months later, he 
explained his act to Castlereagh, Bentinck recapitulated the 
dangers that had faced Sicily at the time of his letter: the after- 
effects of misrule; the King’s undying hostility to the ‘system’; 
the prospect of a Neapolitan reaction at a peace; and he affirmed 
his belief that 
‘Sicily, in the hands of Great Britain, would become in a very few 
years a source of wealth and strength, and after Ireland, the brightest 
jewel in the British Crown. The capacity of the country exceeds all 
belief. It is only necessary to have seen it fully to believe all the accounts 
transmitted by history of its former greatness. But I affix more importance 
to the character that Great Britain will acquire by the successful establish- 
ment of Sicilian liberty than to the value of Sicily as a British possession. 
I wish Sicily to exist as a perpetual example of the blessings of our 
friendship, in comparison to that of France; and, in the event of a new 
war, which, if Buonaparte lives, must soon recur, I would have Sicily 
become not only the model, but the instrument of Italian independence.”* 
Here Bentinck seems to have been perfectly sincere. We 
should not underrate the impact of a Sicilian tour on a mind 
formed by a classical education. As Croce points out, down to 
the latter half of the nineteenth century educated men sent up 
the parrot cry that Naples was one of the most fertile and blessed 
countries in the world because they trusted more to the lessons 
of the past than to the evidence of their own senses.* Bentinck 
could see well enough that Sicily was in a poor way. Messina, 
which he left on the morning of December 3rd, was politically 
‘the worst disposed place I have seen’; and the ‘horrible road’ 
along which he drove to Catania spoke for the long effects of 
misrule. (Bentinck had often lectured the Prince on the inestim- 
able benefits which a good road system would bring to Sicily), 
But on the way there was Taormina in its ruined magnificence, 
which he had not seen before—a reminder that Sicily had been 
great and prosperous in happier times and might become so 
once more; though now, it seemed, only through British pro- 
tection.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 147>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
131 
At all events Bentinck seems to have acted on impulse, 
without realising what strange reading his letter would make at 
Palermo. The Prince at once told his father; both of them were 
highly alarmed and thought they saw their worst suspicions 
confirmed. Both confided their fears to Castelcicala even before 
Bentinck had had time to answer the Prince’s anxious request for 
an explanation. But they wrote separately, and phrased their 
despatches so cautiously as to throw on Castelcicala the onus of 
any action he might take in London: when it came out that Castel- 
cicala had used the ‘dream’ to demand Bentinck’s recall, father 
and son accused one another of having put him up to it. For 
the moment, however, the incident was closed: Bentinck ha- 
stened to withdraw his proposal unconditionally; and he dis- 
sociated it wholly from British policy.* But the Prince, Bentinck 
noted, even while he rejected the idea of ceding Sicily to Britain, 
had dropped the remark that anyhow the proposed compen- 
sation would not be enough. This, Bentinck thought, was only 
‘the ordinary proceeding of Italian intrigue, with the view of 
making a better bargain’;* so, although he took care not to 
raise the matter again with the Prince, he continued to nurse it 
in his mind. 
But in the meantime changes were taking place in Europe 
which soon made even less likely the realisation of Bentinck’s 
dream. Only a few days after writing the notorious letter 
Bentinck heard for the first time of the negotiations then going 
on at Naples between Murat and the Austrian agent Neipperg. 
These led, on January 11th 1814, to the Austro-Neapolitan 
treaty of recognition and alliance; and, on February 3rd, to an 
Anglo-Neapolitan armistice. The treaty Bentinck thought “im- 
politic, inexpedient and unnecessary ... a sad violation of all 
public and private principle’;—the armistice he resisted as long 
as he could—that is, until he heard from Aberdeen, the new 
Ambassador to Austria, that the British Government approved 
of the negotiations. But even when he resigned himself to going 
briefly to Naples and signing the armistice he insisted on a mere 
cessation of hostilities; he would not formally recognise Murat’s 
hold on Naples. This stubbornness annoyed the Austrians and 
Murat, but—since Aberdeen had accepted the Austrian plan too 
hastily in the first place—it restored the balance of British policy; 

<<<PDFPAGE 148>>>
132 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
and it proved convenient to Castlereagh then and later. What 
the new relationship between England and Naples did not suit 
at all was Bentinck’s own plans both for Italy and for Sicily.” 
In Sicily the ‘dream’ was now obviously out of the question 
in its original form, since it did not look as though the Bourbons 
would ever get back to Naples. ‘I was however resolved to 
stick by Sicily,’ Bentinck declared; and he thought it might 
still be possible to maintain the British protectorate de facto if 
not de jure: for while Murat was at Naples the Bourbons could 
not do without the British garrison in Sicily.* Immediately after 
the signing of the armistice, therefore, Bentinck started moving 
on two fronts—the British and Sicilian—to secure the ‘system’ 
as far as he could. 
Castlereagh by this time was already on the Continent, at 
allied headquarters. To him Bentinck sent his private secretary, 
James Graham, who was to act as his personal representative 
and deliver the despatch—already quoted—in which for the 
first time Bentinck revealed and defended the ‘dream’. Graham 
saw Castlereagh at Chatillon on February 21st, had a long talk 
with him, and handed him a memorandum outlining Bentinck’s 
views on Sicily. But Graham’s account of what was said differs 
from Castlereagh’s. 
Graham began—he afterwards recorded—by explaining the 
state of Sicily as Bentinck saw it. Though the constitutional 
system could at present be kept going only by British influence, 
yet that system had for the first time led Sicily to contribute 
effectively to the Allied cause; in any case it was not meant ‘for 
their good alone, it is principally for our own’: through it Sicily 
would become a real ally not a burden. Next Graham came to 
what Bentinck privately hoped for: at most, that Sicily should 
become ‘the Queen of our Colonies’-—and here Graham reca- 
pitulated all the arguments in favour; at the very least, that the 
British garrison should remain in Sicily, and that the Neapolitan 
and Sicilian missions should be united, with the Minister at 
Naples and a good second-in-command at Palermo. In any case, 
said Graham, Bentinck 
‘will not desert the Sicilian cause in which he has embarked, and even 
should he be left there alone without any force, to encounter difficulties 

<<<PDFPAGE 149>>>
DICTATORSHIP 
AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
133 
which, he fears, he could not overcome, he will try his utmost to preserve 
a Constitution which he has reared amidst so many dangers, and while 
permitted to remain, he will not leave his post’. 
According to Graham, Castlereagh ‘treated me, I must say, 
as a friend, and I shall always be grateful for his good humour 
on this occasion....’ But when Castlereagh dealt with the 
possible consequences of the armistice he ‘spoke... like one 
who remembered that the Rod of the House of Commons was 
suspended over his head... .’ The ‘dream,’ he pointed out, was 
now quite impracticable: ‘our engagements with Murat were 
decisive’; the Bourbons would therefore have to be compensated 
elsewhere for the loss of Naples, and nothing they were likely 
to get, even if it was padded out with money, would tempt them 
to part with Sicily. But if on the other hand Murat should 
prove treacherous and the Bourbons be restored to Naples, 
then the ‘dream’ would become ‘feasible and worthy of consider- 
ation’. In any case, even if Murat stayed on in Naples Castle- 
reagh agreed entirely that the British garrison could and should 
be maintained in Sicily after the peace. Nobody would object 
except Murat, and he could be made to acquiesce. Altogether 
Castlereagh was ‘in the best possible disposition’ about Sicily; 
‘nothing could be more flattering’ than his remarks about 
Bentinck. He also seemed to think well of the proposed joint 
mission at Naples and Palermo; at all events, he said, Bentinck 
would keep the Sicilian mission.* 
Now we come to Castlereagh’s version. Just after the inter- 
view he wrote the following brief and non-committal letter to 
Bentinck: 
‘T shall not lose sight of your suggestions about Sicily, I agree with you 
that its safety would be more than precarious if left to its own defences 
alone. It is however a most difficult problem in all its parts.”* 
When a month later, the storm broke over the ‘dream’ 
incident, Castlereagh explained his former silence by saying that 
‘When Mr Graham mentioned Your Lordship’s impressions to me 
at Chatillon . 
. 
. and afterwards sent me a memorandum upon the subject, 
considering the whole, even in Your Lordship’s view, as necessarily at 
an end, in consequence of the connexion formed with Murat, I paid 

<<<PDFPAGE 150>>>
134 
BENTINCK AND, SICILY 
little attention to the point, and in the press of other business, did not 
till yesterday read Mr Graham’s paper.”* 
What really happened at Chatillon? Graham’s report is so 
full that it is hard to believe Castlereagh did not take in the 
‘dream’ or grasp the singularity of such a proposal from a 
Minister to a sovereign. A devil’s advocate might maintain that 
Castlereagh understood quite clearly what Graham had said; 
that the annexation of Sicily had been, not indeed the aim of 
British intervention, but in the air as a possible consequence, 
more or less remote; that now it was impracticable; but that 
Castlereagh kept it in mind as ‘worthy of consideration’ if 
events should take a new turn on the Continent. Castlereagh 
certainly took the “dream’, then and later, more calmly than did 
his fellow-Ministers at home. But there is another explanation, 
It is this. Graham—a romantic young man of 21, given to 
writing long rhetorical letters—may have bored Castlereagh 
with a verbose account of Bentinck’s views (Graham himself 
reported that he had ‘insisted at great length’ on one point). 
Castlereagh had a great many other matters on his mind; he 
thought the armistice had settled the fate of Naples; probably 
he did no more than half-listen to Graham, but now and then 
uttered some encouraging platitude which misled his interlocutor 
into thinking that he strongly agreed with what was being 
said. When we keep in mind Castlereagh’s whole European 
policy this seems much the likelier explanation. But some small 
doubt must persist.* 
This was not the end of the ‘dream’. Early in March Castel- 
cicala used the incident—which the Foreign Office still knew 
nothing about—to support a demand for Bentinck’s recall. He 
got a strong rebuff when it came out that he had acted without 
specific instructions from the Prince. Liverpool, however, was 
much annoyed. The proposed annexation of Sicily he thought 
inexpedient rather than immoral, but Bentinck’s act was most 
objectionable—as he might have pointed out, Drummond had 
been recalled in 1808 for a ‘private’ indiscretion on a different 
and less serious matter. Bentinck, he thought, was obviously 
finding that ‘his new constitution and the Sicilian court are never 
likely to work together’, and the ‘dream’ was ‘a device for 

<<<PDFPAGE 151>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
135 
getting out of the difficulties in which his Whig principles had 
involved both himself and us’.* 
The despatch Castlereagh wrote to Bentinck when he heard 
of this was, however, regretful in tone rather than reproachful; 
William A’Court, who was with him at the time, reported to 
Lady William Bentinck that ‘the Correspondence, which was 
considered as so important in England, is thought of no conse- 
quence here, and there does not appear to be the slightest idea 
of complying with Castelcicala’s request’. Bentinck thanked 
Castlereagh for his ‘kindness and consideration’, and that was 
the last of the business. But although Castlereagh never made 
the ‘dream’ one of his chief grievances against Bentinck another 
grain of official discontent had gone into an accumulating store.* 
In February, however, all this was yet to come. At Palermo 
Bentinck was casting about for means of securing the Sicilian 
protectorate if Castlereagh and the British Government, as he 
had reason to fear, should prove indifferent. The Prince, he 
thought, had better be induced to make an official request for 
a British garrison after the peace; but after the ‘dream’ incident 
the Ministers, and not Bentinck himself, must take the initiative. 
All he could do was to rub in Murat’s great military power. 
In spite of this neither the Prince nor the Ministers proved easy 
to manage. The Prince, though frightened at the prospect of 
having Murat for a neighbour after the war, was reluctant to 
saddle himself with a permanent British force until he was quite 
sure that there was no other way out. As for the Ministers, 
Bentinck told Belmonte, Castelnuovo and Settimo in confidence 
of the ‘dream’ and explained the present situation fully, with 
all its uncertainties and dangers. Here they were on the eve of 
great changes in Italy which threatened not to go the way they 
had hoped; if peace came swiftly England might decide to 
clear out and then where would they be? But Belmonte ‘went 
into a long harangue upon what he supposed to be the policy 
of England without attending to the real state of the question’, 
and Bentinck ‘could not fix his attention to the subject’. In his 
annoyance he begged Orleans to remind Belmonte of 
‘the necessity of their interfering with the British Government to keep 
a force in Sicily and not to let him deceive himself that England would 

<<<PDFPAGE 152>>>
RE 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
do this of her own accord or that she would not be too happy to get rid 
of Sicily and all its troubles. 
. 
.. Lord Castlereagh had said to Lamb when 
is all this interference to cease—It was needless to fancy how it should 
be—I was fully convinced of the policy of England maintaining her 
influence in Sicily, but how did the fact really stand and had England this 
interest upon the subject—No— 
Bentinck had to throw his weight into the scales after all: he 
reminded the Prince that the Constitution must be safeguarded 
as the ‘great engine of destruction’ against French despotism in 
Italy. At length, after much dickering between the Prince and the 
Ministers, the desired Note was handed to Bentinck on February 
23rd. He was agreeably surprised at its contents, for it gave as 
reasons for the need of continued British protection in peacetime 
not only the security of Sicily, but that of her independence and 
constitution as well.* 
But if the ‘engine of destruction’ was about as safe in its 
homeland as fore-thought could make it, the prospect of putting 
it to good use on the Continent was discouraging. Before the 
armistice with Murat, indeed right up to January 18th, when the 
arrival of Aberdeen’s despatch forced him to swallow the armis- 
tice, Bentinck had considered various moves which would not 
have suited either Austria or Murat in the least. On January 6th 
he had urged the King to issue a proclamation full of such 
constitutional sentiments as would rally the Neapolitans round 
the Bourbons—and perhaps not only the Neapolitans, for, said 
Bentinck, other Italians might join them and ‘I for one should be 
sorry to see Italy parcelled out among its ancient petty sover- 
eigns.. The King, however, would have no part of it, and 
Bentinck went off feeling that ‘there was only one way of treat- 
ing them all from top to bottom without any exception il 
Bastone’. Bentinck had also thought of leaving Murat and the 
Austrians to fight it out with the Viceroy Eugéne in Lombardy 
while he, on his own account, raised an insurrection against the 
French by invading first Corsica, then Tuscany and Liguria.* 
But the armistice sent all these plans up in smoke. Bentinck now 
found himself in complete agreement with the King on the 
question of Naples; in the course of their frequent and ‘lugubri- 
ous conversations’ they commiserated with one another on the 
folly of the Allies and especially Austria in backing Murat; and 

<<<PDFPAGE 153>>>
DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’ 
137 
Bentinck actually encouraged the King in his refusal to consider 
giving up his claim to Naples: true, this was one matter in which 
the King needed no encouragement." The King for his part 
declared that he put his trust in ‘God, England and Bentinck’; 
but even while he said it he nursed a nagging suspicion that 
England and Bentinck, at any rate, were at the bottom of a 
plot to strip him of his possessions.* 
But the Austro-Neapolitan treaty did not affect Naples only; 
to Bentinck’s mind, it tended ‘to confirm the slavery of Italy 
whose liberation had been my constant hope’. Murat, he 
thought, had hoodwinked the Austrians—‘the worst politicians 
in the universe’—by stealing their thunder and incidentally 
Bentinck’s too: now he would be able to present himself as 
the champion of Italian independence; the people would prob- 
ably prefer him to Austria, ‘and then we had no chance of 
dictating at all’. Bentinck regretted more than ever that the 
British Government had not chosen to intervene earlier in Italy: 
‘Tf the British protection and assistance had happened to be within 
their reach, that great floating force would certainly have ranged under 
their standard. The national energy could then have been roused, like 
Spain and Germany, in honour of national independence, and this great 
people instead of being the instrument of the ambition of one military 
tyrant or another, or as formerly the despicable slaves of a set of miserable 
petty princes, would become a powerful barrier both against Austria 
and France, and the peace and happiness of the world would receive a 
great additional security—but I fear the hour is gone by’.* 
Bentinck, preparing now for joint military operations on the 
Continent with Austria and Murat, could do no more than hope 
that Italy might yet contrive her own liberation. At one point 
he even thought of going to Bellegarde, the Austrian commander, 
and proposing that Austria should take as much of Northern 
Italy as she wanted—as far as the Adda or the Oglio—while 
Bentinck proclaimed the independence of the rest under a free 
constitution: then Britain and Austria would hold joint sway 
and Murat would be ‘reduced to nothing’. The thing to do, 
however, was (he decided) not to make plans, but to keep faith 
and ‘put ourselves in the way of Fortune’.* 
On February 28th Bentinck sailed from Palermo with his 

<<<PDFPAGE 154>>>
138 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
expeditionary force, to the tune of a proclamation by the Prince 
—addressed to the very troops who were supposed to fight side 
by side with Murat’s—in which he stated once again his claim 
to Naples. On March oth Bentinck landed at Leghorn and met 
the Neapolitan generals. On the 14th he issued a proclamation 
to the Italians at large. In it he offered them Britain’s help in 
throwing off the ‘iron yoke of Buonaparte’: the help through 
which Spain had already regained her freedom, while Sicily, 
happier still, had saved herself from the ‘universal deluge’: 
‘Through the beneficent disposition of her Sovereign, she passes from 
slavery to freedom, and hastens to resume her ancient splendour among 
the independent Nations. Holland will speedily have attained the same 
object: is then Italy to remain under the yoke? Shall Italians alone contend 
against Italians, in favour of tyrant, and for the thraldom of their country ? 
Italians, hesitate no longer;—be Italians, and let Italy in arms be convinced 
that the great Cause of the Country is in her hands.’ 
The ‘warriors of Italy’ he called upon, not indeed to join 
him, but to vindicate their own rights and to be free. “Only 
call, and we will hasten to your relief; and then Italy, by our 
united efforts, shall become what she was in her most prosperous 
periods, and what Spain now is.™* 
‘Be Italians!’ Voila le grand mot laché. But more was let loose 
besides words. 

<<<PDFPAGE 155>>>
GHA PTE 
ReViLl 
Mie ENDIOPaRHE PRO LEG TORATE 
Bentinck was away from Sicily for just over three months, until 
June 8th, 1814. Brief though it was, this period decided the 
fate of Italy: at the end of February the Viceroy Eugéne was 
still defending himself in Lombardy and the French still held 
Liguria and Piedmont; by the end of April the Allies had overrun 
not only Northern Italy but France itself. Bentinck’s acts in 
this short period were in some way the culmination of his 
Sicilian proconsulship; and the fall to which they brought him 
had decisive effects in Sicily.* 
Bentinck, we may say, shewed himself at this time strikingly 
irresponsible. Now his position in Sicily over the past two years 
had been, in the most literal sense, irresponsible: he had been 
allowed and even encouraged to go his own way with only 
the vaguest of instructions, while Ministers in England looked on 
and waited to see ‘what had been done next’. Lately he had 
become the virtual dictator of Sicily. Bentinck was neither the 
first nor the last proconsul to kick over the traces when, after 
having in effect ruled a satellite country, he was suddenly told 
to obey instructions which he disliked. 
Power went to Bentinck’s head; there can be little doubt of 
that. Besides, throughout his Sicilian mission he had never quite 
given up considering it as a prelude to greater things to come 
in Italy. Now the curtain was up, and time pressed. Italy’s 
independence—possibly her unification—was in the air. Elisa 
Bonaparte in Tuscany, Melzi in Lombardy, Caulaincourt and 
Napoleon himself, all talked of ‘cette corde 4 laquelle répondent 
tous les voeux’; so did Murat, for his own purposes; so did the 
Austrian generals, though to be sure their proclamations were 
addressed to the peoples of Italy, Bentinck’s to the people. Even 
Castlereagh, in a more general way, had a little earlier described 
the war, for Metternich’s benefit, as a “war of national inde- 
pendence’ in which ‘the people are now the only barrier’.* The 
difference between these pronouncements and Bentinck’s was 
that Bentinck meant what he said. So much did he desire Italian 
independence that he jeopardised his career in a reckless and 

<<<PDFPAGE 156>>>
I40 
BENTINCK AND,.SICILY 
haphazard attempt to bring it about, though his very disciples 
in the cause—Lamb and Graham—warned him from the start 
that he would be playing a lone hand in defiance of his govern- 
ment’s policy, which in Italy was anchored to Austria's.” Now 
Bentinck’s conduct in Sicily had not been reckless: in spite of 
certain velleities—as when, in 1812, he decided for a time to 
attempt a landing in Italy—he had not in the event over- 
stepped his instructions, wide as those were. But in 1814 
it was almost as if he had knowingly staked his position on a 
gamble against heavy odds. Such gambles, when by chance 
they succeed, often look to later historians like well-laid plans, 
and their success appears in retrospect to have been if not always 
desirable, at any rate inevitable. Bentinck’s gamble did not 
succeed. 
Both his new recklessness and his stubborn attachment to the 
Italian cause came out in his wrangle with Murat. Immediately 
after Bentinck’s landing at Leghorn the two men fell out over 
who was to occupy Tuscany. Murat wanted it to cover his line 
of communication to the North; Bentinck suspected that he 
had his eye on a good deal more. The wrangle went on for a 
whole month; as it grew Bentinck attempted more and more 
openly to throw Murat out of the coalition altogether.* Murat 
was from the start a prey to contradictory influences; there is 
little point in asking whether Bentinck had some excuse for his 
initial hostility to ‘le plus perfide des Gaules’-—a man more like 
Maria Carolina than anyone he had ever seen;* whether, too, 
this behaviour did or did not encourage Murat in his duplicity 
towards the Allies. Nor is there much point in saying that the 
alliance with Murat had already become more of an embarrass- 
ment than a help, even to Austria, by the time Bentinck came 
along; nor that the Austrian generals shared Bentinck’s distrust 
of Murat if not his pugnacity; nor even that Castlereagh himself 
shortly came to describe Murat as a ‘worthless dog’ who had 
been ‘a mere calculator’, and later found Bentinck’s stiff-necked 
attitude at this time highly convenient, since it had left a way 
open for a reversal of British policy towards Naples.* The main 
points are two: first, Bentinck kept up his hostility towards 
Murat in spite of Castlereagh’s clear and peremptory orders to 
the contrary; then he did so not only because he genuinely 

<<<PDFPAGE 157>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
I4I 
despised and distrusted Murat, but because he saw in him the 
one man who might, if unchallenged, unify Italy for his own 
evil purposes. As Graham had said, ‘military tyrants are not 
hopeful subjects for conversion into patriot Kings’. But Murat 
was on the spot; he was powerful; he was attractive; he was a 
rival all the more dangerous because, it seemed, he had a good 
chance of succeeding.* 
Bentinck himself did not trouble to conceal his hopes. His 
Italian Levy had landed at Leghorn with a banner bearing the 
device ‘Italian union—national independence’; although there 
is only tenuous evidence that Bentinck actively helped the 
Carbonari and other patriotic societies,* he certainly said and 
did enough to deserve Mier’s description of him as a ‘préneur 
enragé de constitutions’, and Ferdinand’s complaint that he was 
behaving ‘like Dr Sangrado, who wished to bleed everybody 
whether they needed it or not’.* Constitution and independence 
was Bentinck’s watchword; the making of a united Italy seems 
to have been a rather hazier ideal, which might come into being 
through some process of self-determination. This is shewn by 
the most notorious episode of Bentinck’s Italian career, his 
single-handed revival of the Genoese Republic. Bentinck’s short 
campaign up the Ligurian coast ended when he took Genoa on 
April 18th, two days after fighting had stopped in Lombardy. 
A week later he issued a proclamation restoring the Genoese 
Constitution as it had stood before France swallowed up the 
Republic, but modifying it in the spirit of the old sixteenth- 
century constitution. It was Sicily all over again, with this vital 
difference—nobody 
had questioned 
Sicily’s independence, 
whether real or formal; but Bentinck knew quite well, from 
specific instructions of Castlereagh’s, that he was not to restore 
any of the old Italian sovereigns apart from Tuscany and 
Piedmont; in fact he had reason to suspect that the Allies would 
merge Genoa with Piedmont. That, of course, was exactly what 
the Allies did in the end, to the cost of the supposed ‘vertu 
anglaise’ which—as Stendhal reported three years later—this 
‘fameux manquement de foi’ was to brand in Italy as ‘pure 
tartuferie’. From new documents it appears that by this time 
Bentinck was far gone in recklessness, for he argued that at 
Genoa ‘the most popular would be to make an arrangement 

<<<PDFPAGE 158>>>
142 
BENTINCK AND>SICILY 
as definitive as possible which it would be the more difficult 
for the Allies to upset’; while at the same time he blithely found 
a loophole in the thought that ‘it was always in the hands of 
the Allies to make whatever arrangement they pleased.” 
Bentinck’s conduct, indeed, in these first confused weeks of 
peace came to look more and more like a desperate gamble. He 
encouraged the Milanese in their hopes of independence—and 
therefore in their opposition to Austria, the Power which 
Castlereagh had time and again told him to cooperate with in 
Italy. He sent troops to Corsica on what proved to be an abortive 
repetition of Sir Gilbert Elliot’s adventure there. He wished 
success to certain Neapolitan generals when they secretly ap- 
proached him and told him they hoped to force a constitution 
on Murat.* But he was not long to be allowed a free hand in Italy. 
Already at the beginning of April Castlereagh had told him 
that, while he had ‘very properly’ attempted in the past to 
free Italy by raising an insurrection—'the only system which, 
previous to the revival of the Continent, could afford a 
prospect of shaking the power of France’-—he must not, now 
that ‘a different and better order of things’ had come about, 
give the impression of being ‘actuated by “une arriére-pensée” 
inconstistent with the arrangements understood between the 
great Powers of Europe. . . . It is not insurrection we now want 
in Italy or elsewhere—we want disciplined force, under Sove- 
reigns we can trust’.” Now, a month later, the storm broke. “We 
shall have something to unravel in Corsica, and also at Genoa’, 
wrote Castlereagh to Liverpool: Bentinck’s proclamation at 
Genoa was ‘very inconsiderate’, and his dealings with the 
Neapolitan generals shewed 
‘how intolerably prone he is to Whig revolutions everywhere. I am 
confident his mismanagement at least doubled all the natural dangers of 
Murat’s rascality; and my persuasion is, if the war had gone on much 
longer in France, we should have had a most disastrous complication in 
Italy. 
... He seems bent upon throwing all Italy loose. This might be 
well as against France, but against Austria and the King of Sardinia, with 
all the new Constitutions which now menace the world with fresh 
convulsions, it is most absurd.”* 
The ‘dream’ re-emerged from brief oblivion, and added its 
weight to that of all the other official grievances against Ben- 

<<<PDFPAGE 159>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
143 
tinck. At the same time Castlereagh recollected two convenient 
facts: in September 1813 Bentinck had asked not only for home 
leave but also for his recall from the Sicilian mission. All 
Bentinck now wanted—so he told Castlereagh through his 
aide-de-camp—was a few months’ leave, and he was in fact 
anxious to stay on in Sicily; but Castlereagh replied merely that 
‘when I have the pleasure of seeing you in England, we can 
converse on this subject’. Meanwhile William A’Court would 
take over the Palermo mission. So, although Bentinck had not 
yet been officially recalled, he was already in disgrace. When he 
sailed from Genoa to Palermo at the beginning of June he knew 
that he would shortly be going home on leave; but he had good 
reason besides to suspect that this would be his last visit to Sicily.* 
He knew, too, that the appointment of A’Court marked a 
change of measures as well as of men. Castelcicala was probably 
exaggerating when he told the King that A’Court was his candi- 
date for the Sicilian mission; but he was correct in describing 
A’Court as ‘well intentioned’ and ‘hostile to popular assemblies 
in foreign countries’. When it came to Sicily the new Minister 
—who had been Secretary at Naples between the two French in- 
vasions—often sounded more Neapolitan than the Neapolitans. 
As early as February A’Court, already chosen to be Bentinck’s 
locum tenens, had recorded that to his mind the Sicilian consti- 
tution had virtually come to an end when Bentinck had sent 
Parliament packing in October 1813; in any case it was quite 
unsuited to the Sicilians ‘in their present state of ignorance and 
profligacy’. The end of the war, he said, would mean the end of 
that British preponderance which alone could make it work. 
A’Court’s secret instructions, drawn up on March oth, did not 
go quite so far: whatever the defects of the Constitution, ‘it 
ought to be the policy of the British Government, who were the 
original promoters of it, to endeavour to support it, at least in 
its essential principles’. The excessive dependence of the Crown 
on Parliament was the ‘original error’ which the British Minister 
should use his influence to correct. 
‘The principle of liberty is admitted by the existence of the Constitu- 
tion itself and until the Sicilian Patriots shall have been trained to more 
temperate notions of liberty and popular privileges the excesses of faction 
are more to be dreaded than those of authority on the part of the Crown.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 160>>>
I44 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
With most of this Bentinck could agree; but he was aware of 
one crucial fact which the instructions did not convey: as he had 
long foretold, the British Government had lost interest in their 
protectorate over Sicily. They had acquired it almost by acci- 
dent during the war; now they prepared to cast it off with, it 
seems, the same imperial carelessness. If they weighed the pros 
and cons of the matter at all they looked not at the island itself 
but at the whole new balance of power in Europe. Sicily, 
Liverpool had said apropos of the ‘dream’, would anyhow be 
very difficult to manage through the new Constitution; but 
what mattered was that 
‘the continental states are more jealous of our obtaining power in the 
Mediterranean than in any other quarter. Circumstances have induced 
them to make no difficulty about our retaining Malta, but the idea of 
our possessing Sicily by an act, which in its most favourable light must 
be considered as a douce violence, could not fail greatly to revolt them.”* 
Merely to carry on the protectorate, without questioning 
Sicily’s independence, would no doubt have been more douce a 
violence than the original ‘dream’. But with the war over it was 
too embarrassing to be worth while: that at least seems to have 
been the reasoning which the Government followed even if they 
did not put it into words. Just how Britain would disentangle 
herself from her Sicilian commitment was not yet clear. But 
Bentinck could see that his dictatorship had been a desperate 
and, as it now turned out, a pointless remedy: in trying to 
salvage the ‘system’ he had acted independently from rather 
than in opposition to his Government, for they had given him 
neither check nor encouragement. Even now they did not so 
much reject what he had done as ignore it; in practice their new 
policy meant that they wished to let the whole matter drop. 
Even before he knew of his fall from official favour, Bentinck 
had written to Castelnuovo of his disgust at what he had found 
in Italy, and his one remaining hope that he might yet ‘rendre 
quelque petit service’ to Sicily—‘et je prie le bon Dieu avec tout 
mon cceur de la rendre heureuse’. On 8 June he landed at 
Palermo. By all accounts the heyday of his recklessness was over; 
he came back chastened and dejected. None the less he now 
embarked on a last attempt to save what could be saved of the 
constitutional system.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 161>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
I45 
The situation he found was unpromising but not hopeless. 
Even if Bentinck had returned with his powers intact he would 
have faced a difficult task. For the almost irreparable break-up 
of the Patriotic movement had only been suspended during his 
dictatorship; now, with a new Parliament and a resumption of 
constitutional government in the offing, the dissensions of 1813 
reappeared, still unhealed. The general election, held in May, 
had produced—thanks to Bonanno’s energetic and unscrupulous 
‘management’—a House of Commons irreproachably consti- 
tutionalist.* But it also raised new difficulties: for the incorrup- 
tible Castelnuovo, objecting to Bonanno’s high-handed methods, 
signified his disagreement in the usual way, by withdrawing to 
his tent and refusing to attend Council meetings. More im- 
portant, the conservatives or King’s Friends still swayed the 
Peers: a complete deadlock between the two Houses was to 
be expected.* 
. 
In such circumstances Bentinck had formerly threatened to 
abolish or at any rate coerce the Upper House; that was now 
out of the question. But the very change in the political situation 
of Sicily which made impossible such bludgeoning methods 
also offered the chance of a compromise. For the end of the war 
had raised new anxieties in the minds of some of the leading 
King’s Friends: if the King were to regain Naples—they now 
saw—not only those parts of the new Constitution which they 
disliked, but the privileges of their order and the independence 
of their country, which they really cared about, would be in 
danger. They, as the King’s intimates, may well have known 
that his disposition was anything but reassuring. True, the news 
of Louis XVIII’s Charte had come as a shock to his absolutist 
convictions. But at the end of May he was still writing to 
Castelcicala that if, as he hoped, he managed to recover Naples 
‘in Paris’ —that is, by diplomatic action—he might then ‘recover’ 
Sicily from Naples.* At all events some of these conservative 
nobles—San Marco, Trabia, Campofranco—were fearful enough 
to approach Castelnuovo and Settimo secretly in April and 
propose a coalition in defence of the constitutional principle and 
of Sicilian independence. These were essential points on which 
all could agree; apparently the two groups of men did not even 
discuss their old differences over the abolition of feudalism, 

<<<PDFPAGE 162>>>
146 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
though if they were to come together that would mean that 
the Patriotic movement would from then on relapse into a 
purely aristocratic opposition to royal power. In the present 
emergency, it seems, Castelnuovo was ready to sacrifice such 
hopes as he still had of social reform for the sake of achieving 
political unity and avoiding ‘faction’. Men not measures stood 
in the way of the proposed coalition: the conservatives wished 
to throw out the Belmontists, whom they accused of jobbery; 
Castelnuovo, though willing enough to be rid of the Belmontist 
ministers—Bonanno and Carini—still refused to act without 
Belmonte himself; and the Belmontists, of course, had no wish 
to sacrifice themselves. There the matter stood when Bentinck 
returned to Palermo.* 
He found his friends in typically contrasted moods—Castel- 
nuovo so despondent that, he said, only loyalty to Bentinck kept 
him from giving up politics altogether;* Belmonte so absurdly 
confident of British protection that he saw no danger at all. 
Bentinck told all the constitutionalist leaders plainly that he 
could no longer direct the government or prevent the King 
from resuming if he wished; all Britain would undertake was 
to protect her friends from persecution. The Ministers must 
now ‘march by themselves’. Though ‘it was no longer my 
concern’, he agreed with Castelnuovo that the proposed coalition 
was necessary if not palatable; the King’s Friends, he thought, 
‘all wished the Constitution—they wished more for place—but 
place with a Constitution they would prefer to place without 
it’. The arrangement would probably not last longer than three 
months, but that would suffice to get through the parliamentary 
session and secure the Constitution once and for all. Bentinck 
therefore entered into negotiations with San Marco and his 
friends. They made difficulties; they complained of great irregu- 
larities in the recent general election and demanded a new one. 
Bentinck admitted the irregularities, but, he said, they were to 
be expected given the present state of Sicily. The government 
must go on and make it its business in future to “discourage that 
system of prepotenza by which the country had so long been 
oppressed—from the Sovereign downwards by every agent of 
every Baron and by all the agents of every Government’. Taking 
a longer view, he told them that though the Constitution was 

<<<PDFPAGE 163>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
147 
certainly in very bad straits, yet he did not altogether despair of 
its ultimate success; what Sicily needed above all was such a 
programme of practical reform as he had tried to launch: 
‘Institutions made men good or bad. Administration of Justice had 
the most influence as well upon national character as upon the tranquillity 
and good order of society—It was this which alone could rectify the 
evils of which all complained—Before we could say that the Constitu- 
tion would not succeed we must see the effect of such new institutions 
and of time—If in the new Parliament—a good judicial system—roads 
for commerce and a modification of landed possession so as to disperse 
landed property more generally—could be settled—more would be done 
for Sicily in one session than by all its Kings together for the last two or 
three centuries. I had considered the question of the state of Sicily in all 
its bearings. If the King should return to Naples, he might if England 
chose it destroy the Constitution... but . 
. 
. 
Ireally thought that as it was 
difficult for it to go on, so it wasinfinitely more difficult for it to go back.’ 
It was not, however, in the conservative camp that the real 
difficulties arose, but among Bentinck’s own friends. Belmonte 
would not budge: he still objected to a coalition and fancied that 
the government could secure a majority in the Peers without 
one. ‘Nobody but himself thought so’, Bentinck told him; 
exasperated at this wilful blindness he complained bitterly to 
Villafranca that 
‘it was all our own fault—we had to accuse nobody but our own 
littleness—folly—and mismanagement—I knew at first that the Ministry 
could not go on—Belmonte and Villarmosa I knew would not agree... 
I was heartily disgusted and should be glad to go away. I saw no chance 
of success but by mixing the Ministry.”* 
The Belmontists’ refrain was that the King—by common 
consent the real menace to the Constitution—‘must be made 
either nul or friendly’. Bentinck’s and Castelnuovo’s solution 
was to make him ‘nul’ by detaching his supporters from him. 
This the Belmontists disliked, and they accordingly began to 
think of making the King ‘friendly’ instead. 
There were signs that such an attempt might succeed better 
than past experience suggested. For at that very moment the 
King had changed his tune. Suddenly and unexpectedly—Ben- 
tinck reported—he had become 

<<<PDFPAGE 164>>>
148 
BENTINCK AND* SICILY 
‘as anxious for the establishment of the Sicilian Constitution as any 
of its warmest patriots—not from any diminished affection for principles 
of the purest despotism, or from diminished hatred for the system or 
authors of Sicilian liberty; but he has been convinced that it is only by 
the adoption of more liberal principles that he can regain the throne of 
Naples: whether from the favourable disposition of the Allied Sovereigns 
at the approaching Congress, or from the good will of his people.” 
The King had various reasons for this change of front. He 
felt the need to compete with Murat, who had lately promised a 
Constitution. Then, should he later recover Naples, the Sicilians 
might raise fewer obstacles to reunion if they could look forward 
toa joint constitution for both kingdoms. Probably most im- 
portant, on June 20th the King heard from Orleans—who had 
gone to Paris—that the Allied Sovereigns, and especially 
Alexander, disapproved of his past conduct and thought his 
return to Naples wholly dependent on the will of the people; 
they therefore advised him to emulate Louis XVIII’s liberal 
policy. “These gentlemen are very ready to give me advice,’ the 
King grumbled, ‘but not at all disposed to follow it in their own 
case.’ Still he was, it seems, convinced for a time that he had 
better put up a front of unimpeachable constitutionalism in the 
eyes of Europe; and the best way to do so was to begin at home 
in Sicily.* 
This new attitude of the King’s may help to explain the 
peculiar way in which the Sicilian political crisis was resolved 
on June 23rd. On that date the constitutionalist leaders met at 
Bentinck’s house to decide finally whether they should form a 
coalition with the King’s Friends. There was a long and heated 
discussion which led nowhere. Then Belmonte, to everyone’s 
astonishment, proposed that instead of uniting with the King’s 
Friends they should ‘amalgamate with the King’: that is, they 
should ask him either to support the Constitution or to resume 
the government, and they should offer for the sake of unity to 
alter the make-up of the Government according to his wishes. 
Nobody knew what to say to this proposal; somehow it was 
adopted.* 
It is still hard to tell what made Belmonte and the Council 
act as they did. Belmonte may well have taken the King’s new 
professions of constitutionalism at their face value. Perhaps, too, 

<<<PDFPAGE 165>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
I49 
he wished at all costs to forestall the coalition—which would 
have left his party no more than a subordinate place—and 
fancied that he could recover, with the King’s favour, the po- 
sition of Prime Minister which Bentinck had taken away from 
him in 1813. Yet there is also evidence that nobody thought the 
King would have the energy or the desire to resume the cares 
of government: so the approach to the King may originally 
have been a gesture: if approached he would have had to come 
out into the open and, perhaps, call off the Peers’ opposition. It 
may also be that neither Belmonte not the others acted from 
motives capable of logical explanation, but that, tired of argu- 
ment and unable to break the deadlock, they simply took the 
first way out that offered. As for Bentinck, he would certainly 
have preferred a coalition, and Belmonte’s move seems to have 
irritated him even more than usual. But by now he could no 
longer impose his own solution: indeed, he most likely felt like 
washing his hands of the whole business.” 
The Prince, after he had got over his initial surprise, drew up 
a memorandum telling his father of the Council’s proposal. 
But he did not merely give him the alternative of supporting or 
resuming the government; instead he seized the opportunity 
to urge the King to resume: in this way the King would prove 
‘your adherence to those liberal ideas which, as you well know, 
are the spring that can move the Allies in your favour... your 
present conduct will be the best guarantee of what you mean 
to do at Naples’. Bentinck countenanced the Prince’s memo- 
randum, though he refused to sign it himself, since—he said— 
judging from past experience he could scarcely advise the King 
to resume. He was right. The King surprised nearly everybody 
by hastening to take his son’s advice. Before resuming, however, 
he asked Bentinck to release him from the promise he had made 
in March 1813 not to do so without British consent. Bentinck 
acquiesced; but since Circello, who acted as go-between, kept 
proclaiming that his master was now ‘furieux constitutionelliste’, 
Bentinck seized his opportunity too; he dissolved the engage- 
ment, he stated, because the King had declared that he meant 
‘to cherish the Constitution’ and to adopt the liberal conduct 
‘so strongly recommended by the advice and enforced by the 
example of the highest and most august authorities’. By this 

<<<PDFPAGE 166>>>
Iso 
BENTINCK AND, SICILY 
last act Bentinck thought to provide his Government with an 
excuse for intervening in defence of the Constitution if they 
should ever be minded to do so.” 
On 
July 4th the events of March 1813 recurred with an ironical 
difference. The King drove through Palermo amid cheering 
crowds; next day he resumed the government. At the same 
time, and once again unexpectedly, he accepted the Ministers’ 
resignations. Then—as if to shew that Bentinck’s dictatorship 
had been no more than an unconstitutional interregnum—he 
brought back to power all the men whose dismissal Bentinck 
had previously forced on the Prince: that is, Ferreri and the other 
puppet Ministers who had gone out in October 1813; and the 
Court officialh—one of them Cassaro—whom Bentinck had 
deprived of their posts in April 1813. The festivities attending 
the King’s return went on for three nights. “The people shewed 
very great satisfaction’, and already the outgoing constitution- 
alists were being hissed in the streets.* 
Bentinck, in the official despatch he wrote to Castlereagh 
just after the King’s return—his last despatch from Sicily—spoke 
of his seemingly unreserved pleasure at ‘this happy termination 
of the long and embarrassing relation which has existed for so 
many years between the two governments’. In a private letter 
of the same date he gave a curious account of his feelings: 
‘The return of the King to power, under all the circumstances, I 
consider to be one of the best pieces of good luck that ever happened 
to me; and offers a pont d’or, over which I shall be most happy to make 
my retreat from Sicilian affairs. My private feelings have long made me 
desirous of leaving a situation which has materially interfered with my 
military views.—I however determined to sacrifice every view of my 
own (and for this reason did ask you to allow me to remain in Sicily) 
as long as I thought that my presence could contribute to the happiness 
of the Sicilians—I feel no longer any obligation on this score—the Sicilian 
Government has again resumed its independence; and agreeing, as all 
seem to do, in the desire to establish the Constitution and a fixed order 
of things. I should hope it will be able to go on by itself—At any rate 
our interference is no longer a matter of necessity.’ 
This is at first sight puzzling, since in fact Bentinck saw 
clearly enough—as we know from his journal—that ‘no depend- 
ence [was] to be placed’ in the King’s professions of constitu- 

<<<PDFPAGE 167>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
Isl 
tionalism.* The likeliest explanation is that in writing to Castle- 
reagh, whom he knew to be unsympathetic, he wished to put 
as good a face as possible on his personal disappointment. But 
it may be that Bentinck was still trying not to admit his own 
misgivings, even to himself and even so late in the day as this. 
If so he was soon undeceived. Of the drastic changes made in 
the Government he complained to the King and Circello that 
they betrayed ‘too much aigreur and prevention .. 
. towards 
the actual system’ and belied the King’s promise to ‘reunite all 
parties’; but he met with the bland rejoinder that the King was 
‘the most constitutional of all’: the new Ministry was in fact 
the old and, Circello implied, the only constitutional Ministry. 
He was also depressed to find in A’Court, who had landed at 
Palermo at the end of June, a self-confessed Voltairean cynic, 
hostile to all popular assemblies, confident of Castlereagh’s 
sympathy, and armed ‘with the worst opinion (not very much 
undeserved) 
of the Sicilians and with a deep conviction 
amounting almost to an irritable determination that the Consti- 
tution cannot and shall not succeed’.* Bentinck could do no 
more. According to one report, he did once contemplate 
taking some drastic step against the King, but thought better 
of it; he got A’Court to write a rather futile statement half- 
promising to defend the ‘system’ in Bentinck’s absence; shortly 
before his departure he was seen wandering in dejection through 
the countryside near Palermo. On July 16th Bentinck sailed 
from Palermo for the last time.” 
Bentinck was allowed to keep the military command in Italy 
until April 1815, when yet another ill-timed display of consti- 
tutionalism—this time in Piedmont—brought about his sum- 
mary recall. But Liverpool already thought him ‘mad’, and 
Castlereagh was at one with Metternich in wishing to keep him 
away from the Mediterranean; he had already fallen into that 
official disfavour which kept him out of the government service 
for the next thirteen years.* Looking back on his Italian and 
Sicilian career, Bentinck was unrepentant: 
‘Like Cassandra’ (he wrote to Hamilton in January 1815) ‘I preached 
in vain. I always thought that Italy alone could have decided the war 
against Bonaparte. I was very much gratified in hearing the other day 
that Bonaparte himself had said... that the British Government had 

<<<PDFPAGE 168>>>
I§2 
BENTINCK AND, SICILY 
never seemed to know its own importance in Italy. He added that we 
were held in the greatest veneration. True it is that there is no part of 
the world where the British name is equally respected. It is love and 
admiration without alloy. They look upon us as the natural friends of 
independence... who from policy and feeling cannot but be always 
inclined to protect them from internal and external oppression. You 
can have no idea how rapidly the spirit of discontent and union is spreading 
throughout Italy. Murat cannot now in my opinion be driven out.... 
Every Italian would join him ...I confess I should be glad to see the 
attempt made as far as regards Italy, because I think its independence 
would be established and besides the interest I take in the Italian people, 
I am convinced that there can be no other effectual barrier against either 
France or Austria...I assure you it grieves me to the heart to see our 
reputation and interests so unnecessarily thrown away....It seems as 
if we were anxious and in a hurry, as if it was entirely our own act to 
sacrifice and disregard all national feeling and supposed national rights. . . . 
Pardon this political digression. . . .”* 
As for Sicily, ‘if the whole Sicilian business were published 
from one end to the other,’ he wrote, ‘I should be rather glad 
than sorry ...’. He could not rid himself of his concern with 
Sicily, and he still corresponded with the few Sicilians who had 
remained his friends. He was furious, he wrote to Castelnuovo, 
when he thought of the golden chances Sicily had missed ‘faute 
de courage, de vertu, et de patriotisme. .. 
. Je vous jure que je 
suis dégotité de votre pays. S’il n’y avait pas des hommes comme 
vous et votre digne ami Ruggiero [Settimo], et quelques autres 
en fort petit nombre, je douterais presque si la Sicile pourrait 
produire quelque chose de bon. Espérons que ceux-ci serviront 
d’exemple 4 une meilleure postérité.’* 
In truth both the protectorate and the Patriotic movement 
had run their course, though outwardly their collapse dragged 
on until December 1816. Shortly after Bentinck’s departure, 
the King dissolved the Constitutionalists Commons which 
Bonanno’s ‘management’ had got together; by another general 
election he acquired a new Parliament, virtually a replica of 
that of 1813, both in its membership and in the irresponsible 
conduct it kept up throughout the winter and spring of 1814-15. 
In effect the King gave the Sicilians rope enough to hang them- 
selves. He could not afford a drastic change while his return to 
Naples remained uncertain; and he was shrewd enough to know 

<<<PDFPAGE 169>>>
’ THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
153 
—if not wise enough to adapt himself to the fact—that, however 
suicidal the behaviour of Parliament, it would not freely consent 
to the loss of Sicily’s constitution and independence.* Meanwhile 
A’Court carried out, loyally enough, his appointed task of 
trying to have the Constitution revised along the lines of Louis 
XVIII’s Charte, and of protecting Britain’s former friends from 
the King’s vengeance. The attempt was fruitless; where even 
the best-disposed man would probably have failed, limited as 
the British Minister now was to advice and remonstrance, 
A’Court found his initial contempt for the Sicilians—‘this 
infamous race’ of whom there was ‘nothing too bad to be 
said’—speedily confirmed.* 
Sicily’s fate was in fact decided not at Palermo, but at the 
Congress of Vienna, and then—when Napoleon came back and 
Murat joined him—at Waterloo and Tolentino. In May 1815 
Ferdinand dissolved Parliament for the last time and sailed to 
Naples. There ensued the piecemeal destruction of Sicily’s 
constitution and independence, until in December 1816 Ferdi- 
nand proclaimed the union of the two kingdoms and, in the 
words of a contemporary historian, made of Sicily a ‘posthu- 
mous conquest of Napoleon’:* for almost at one stroke he swept 
away every one of her native institutions—those handed down 
from Norman and Aragonese days together with those set up 
in 1812—and put in their place the centralised French system 
which Joseph Bonaparte had already introduced at Naples in 1806. 
This counter-revolution did not spring from the King’s 
personal wishes alone: he had promised Austria not to allow in 
his dominions institutions at variance with those of Austria’s 
Italian territories.* This engagement, and its consequences, were 
quite in line with Castlereagh’s policy of giving Austria a free 
hand in Italy; but they were scarcely in line with Britain’s 
Sicilian policy over the last few years. Hence the last act had to 
wait on complicated negotiations among the British, Austrian, 
and Neapolitan Governments, the result of which was that—for 
the benefit of the British Parliament—there was inserted in the 
decrees of 1816 a reference to a Sicilian Parliament which had 
in fact ceased to exist. By this means—so A’Court maintained— 
the whole course of British intervention in Sicily was made to 
‘offer a plain, honourable, and consistent tale’.* 

<<<PDFPAGE 170>>>
154 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
The Sicilian adventure was over. Already in 1815 the British 
garrison had been withdrawn and A’Court had left Palermo 
for Naples. 
Belmonte had died in Paris in 1814; he had gone there, it 
seems, in the hope of winning Castlereagh’s support for the 
Constitution. He was mourned by the two men—Bentinck and 
Castelnuovo—whom in his life he had most often exasperated. 
As for Castelnuovo, he tried for a while longer to salvage 
something of the ‘system’ by cooperating with the King. But 
after May 1815 he withdrew into private life, steadily refusing 
to pay taxes to an unconstitutional government except under 
duress, and bequeathing, at his death in 1822, £25,000 to anyone 
who should induce the King to restore the Constitution.” 
Ruggiero Settimo, indeed, lived to see it briefly restored in 1848, 
and Sicily herself united with the rest of Italy in 1860. 
But if Britain’s Sicilian adventure was over, could it be quite 
undone? Castlereagh apparently thought it could. In June 1821, 
after Laibach, Bentinck presented a motion in the House of 
Commons calling on the Government to intervene in defence 
of Sicilian liberties. The point he—and later Sir James Mac- 
kintosh—made was that by her intervention in 1811-14 Britain 
had pledged her “good faith and national honour’ in support of 
those liberties: she ought at the very least to see that the Sicilians 
kept the liberties they had enjoyed before that intervention, 
instead of leaving them infinitely worse off than she had found 
them. Castlereagh’s reply was that in any case it was a mere 
‘oratorical flourish’ to talk of a Sicilian Constitution, old or 
new; that of 1812 was one of the most unsuitable ever devised, 
and he ridiculed its makers for having tried to ape British 
institutions—why, they had even, he believed, sent for the 
measurements of the table he was leaning upon. As for the 
union with Naples, he “felt some lurking impression’ that Sicily, 
far from feeling aggrieved, ‘would be happier in consequence... 
that union was calculated to raise her to whatever importance 
Naples might be supposed to possess’. The heart of his argument 
concerned ‘the nature of the connexion of England and Sicily’: 
“Although Government had always felt a strong esteem and affection 
for that country, yet it was not merely on that account, or to secure the 
happiness of the people, that British troops were stationed there. It was, 

<<<PDFPAGE 171>>>
THE END OF THE PROTECTORATE 
JESS 
in fact, a military occupation . . 
. with the exception of having guaranteed 
to the Sicilian people, not to form a constitution, but to protect that 
part of the dominions of the King of the Two Sicilies, this government 
had entered into no arrangements of an express nature with them. ... 
It was true that while the British troops were in the country it was found 
necessary that a strong interposition should take place on the part of the 
British power, for the purpose of impressing on the mind of the Sicilian 
Government the propriety of supporting a constitution. If this had not 
been done, the government could not have gone on, and the place would 
not have been fit for a military station. The consequence of this inter- 
position was, that the noble lord [Bentinck] was “mixed up” in a great 
variety of remonstrances [a laugh]... but he certainly never did feel 
that in resorting to those remonstrances, the noble lord was doing any- 
thing more than what was necessary for his military occupation of the 
island. He never supposed that the noble lord was entering into any 
arrangements with respect to the Sicilian constitution.’ 
Any new interference by the British Government would 
therefore be ‘unjustifiable and impracticable’. The House sup- 
ported him by 69 votes to 35.* 
Castlereagh was of course right in one sense—perhaps the 
only sense that Governments can safely understand or attend to, 
though we may wonder. Given his broad European policy 
from 1814 onward, he could not possibly have gone on main- 
taining a protectorate or shoring up a constitution that nowhere 
fitted in with that policy. To the greater end of European 
balance and peace he had to sacrifice not only Sicily’s half- 
formed aspirations, which doubtless he cared little about, but 
some small part also of Britain’s name. For if morality enters at 
all into the history of international affairs—and keep it out 
though we may at the door it flies in at the skylight—a great 
Power is surely at once unwise and wrong if it fails to ‘connect’: 
if, that is, it assumes like Castlereagh that it can interfere in the 
affairs of a small Power, alter by its weight the course of events, 
and then withdraw and discard responsibility as though nothing 
had happened. Something does happen, and something did 
happen in Sicily. No doubt the reforming movement was weak 
and weakly rooted; but it was there, and the British intervention, 
by carrying it to deceptive heights which it could probably not 
have measured by its own strength alone, made sure that the 
ensuing fall would seem all the deeper. True, ifs and ans are no 

<<<PDFPAGE 172>>>
156 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
part of history; we cannot say that if something had not gone 
wrong something else would have gone right. But if causes 
cannot here be easily disentangled—or the British intervention 
set apart from the Sicilian movement when in fact both acted 
on one another—no more can we disentangle their remoter 
effects and say that this cause mattered while that was incidental. 
The crisis of these years was an historical event; the conflicts 
that shaped it, and whose course it in turn shaped, perpetuated 
themselves, partly in the upheavals of 1848 and 1860, but still 
more in a divided and half-petrified society, and in that moral 
divorce between Sicily and the continental Power that rules it 
which has affected so much of the island’s history, even down 
to the present day. No one who knows how much there is in 
that history of bitterness and frustration can feel quite satisfied. 

<<<PDFPAGE 173>>>
7 PAPE 
NAD Gre S 

<<<PDFPAGE 174>>>
. 
APPENDIX*A 
WILLIAM DRUMMONDS MISSION TOSICI™N 
1806-1808 
While the peace negotiations of 1806 were still going on, Fox 
had reminded Holland of ‘the great importance of Sicily, which 
you, young one, very much underrate’.* After the failure of 
the negotiations, the Grenville Ministry had to decide on a 
long-term Sicilian policy. Neither Sicily nor its King could be 
abandoned to French aggression; but something had to be done 
to counteract the ‘unfortunate’ and ‘disgusting’ behaviour of 
the Court, to which the outgoing Minister, Hugh Elliot, attri- 
buted the loss of Naples.* Besides, Grenville himself considered 
that England must continue to protect Sicily and Sardinia after 
a peace, ‘and thus make of all these islands in the Mediterranean 
an important chain of stations highly useful to us both in war 
and in commerce’.* 
The new Minister, William Drummond, was accordingly 
sent out with instructions to conclude a treaty giving Britain, 
among other things, the right to garrison Messina in peacetime, 
and the commercial status of most-favoured nation. He was to 
secure Sicily’s fullest cooperation in the war: therefore, Howick 
wrote, ‘whenever you may see the common safety endangered 
by the operation of causes likely to defeat this necessary end, 
you will not fail to interfere with the whole weight of your 
authority and influence. ... Observing upon all occasions the 
respect which is due to an ancient and independent government, 
you will endeavour... to prevent any waste of the resources 
which Sicily can furnish for its own defence; whether it shall 
arise from improvident laws and privileges, or from the cor- 
ruption of the public authorities. 
... The large sacrifices which 
His Majesty has made and continues to make for the support of 
the King of the Two Sicilies gives you an undisputed right to 
interpose with your advice, even if that right were not to be 
found in the consideration which you owe to the interests of 
His Sicilian Majesty Himself.’ The resources of ‘so fertile an 
island’, wisely used, might even prove sufficient to its own 
defence: to this end Drummond was particularly to urge, though 

<<<PDFPAGE 175>>>
WILLIAM DRUMMOND’S MISSION TO SICILY 
159 
‘with proper delicacy and caution’, reforms in financial and 
military administration. As for Naples, the British Government 
could give no absolute pledge that its recovery would be made 
a condition sine qua non of a peace, but they undertook to do 
their best to secure it.* 
Drummond arrived at Palermo in December 1806 to find 
the Court in even greater turmoil than usual. The aged favourite 
Sir John Acton had been ‘wormed out’ of the government three 
months earlier by the Queen’s Franco-Neapolitan faction, who 
now held undisputed control. Acton’s and Elliot’s advice had 
been to consolidate the defence of Sicily before embarking on 
an attempt against Naples; but the Queen wished, as she said, 
‘d’entamer la chose, de faire une explosion générale’, and she 
encouraged indiscriminate risings by the masse (brigands) in 
Calabria. She was furious at the British generals’ refusal to fall 
in with her plans, though by her own admission the Sicilian 
army was in a deplorable state, and could have given little help. 
Moreover, Drummond found convincing though not conclusive 
evidence that she had been intriguing with Russia for a strong 
force to be sent to Sicily, and was even then negotiating secretly 
with France. “The reason for this detestable treachery’, he wrote, 
‘arises partly from the abhorrence of the Queen and her minions 
for everything English; and partly from the belief that France 
is stronger than England, and that sooner or later France will 
become masters of Sicily. ... We must remember the enemies 
with whom we have to contend both without and within the 
island of Sicily.’ The British Commander-in-Chief at Messina, 
Gen. Henry Fox, was a sick and elderly man, and in his disgust 
with the Court he scarcely troubled to keep up relations with 
them. Sir John Moore, his second-in-command, thought the 
inhabitants were ripe for revolt against their hated government: 
‘if we do not, as they wish, rescue them from it, they will throw 
themselves into the arms of France. By what means we are to 
do this I shall not say, but the possession of Sicily is a most im- 
portant object, whether as a military post or as a valuable colony. 
If the Court of Palermo and the present government continue... 
I doubt if we shall hold it. Were they removed and the island 
declared English we should, with the hearts of the people and 
the energy which I think they could still be brought to display 

<<<PDFPAGE 176>>>
160 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
in a cause they approved, be able to maintain it against the 
world’. To cap the crisis, the Sicilian Government rejected the 
draft treaty in language which Drummond found evasive and 
even ‘apparently hostile’. Faced with this situation, he stopped 
payment of the subsidy and wrote home for instructions. 
Howick, after consultation with other Ministers, drafted a 
reply instructing Drummond to achieve four main objects: ‘rst. 
The conclusion of the treaty according to the original projet; 
2ndly: The removal of obnoxious and suspicious persons from 
the Councils of the Court; 3rdly. The admission of Sicilians to 
places of trust and confidence, or in other words, a Sicilian 
administration; 4thly. The enlargement of the powers of the 
British Commander in Chief over the Sicilian Army.’ The 
fourth point was ‘indispensable’. As for the second, Drummond 
was if possible to obtain for himself a discretionary power to 
remove undesirable foreigners from Palermo. The Court must 
be induced to pay attention to the Sicilians’ needs ‘and even to 
their wishes’; if necessary they should be persuaded to call an 
extraordinary Parliament, for ‘without the exertions of the 
Sicilians, His Majesty [George III] was aware that his efforts to 
preserve Sicily must prove fruitless’. Drummond was allowed 
considerable latitude as to the means of carrying out his instruc- 
tions. Amicable methods were best: he might remonstrate with 
the Government, advise the King, and engage in talks with the 
Sicilian nobles—Belmonte was suggested as a likely man. If 
need be Drummond could go on withholding the subsidy: and 
if any danger immediately threatened Sicily’s independence, he 
and the British commanders were to decide on measures to 
save it. ‘Sicily’, Howick wrote, ‘must not directly or indirectly 
fall under the control of France.’* 
Howick’s draft is dated March 1807. The Ministry of All the 
Talents fell on the 25th of that month, and the instructions were 
never sent out. Canning reversed Howick’s policy completely. 
He removed from the draft treaty, as ‘unseasonable’, the clauses 
giving Britain commercial privileges and a peacetime garrison: 
in his instructions to Drummond he confined himself to saying 
that Britain had a claim on the King of Sicily’s confidence and on 
his cooperation in the war.* 
Meanwhile Drummond had anticipated his government’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 177>>>
WILLIAM DRUMMOND’S MISSION TO SICILY 
I6I 
change of policy by a change of heart of his own. He was by 
way of being a student of political philosophy; he knew the 
Court from his residence as Minister at Naples from 1801 to 
1803; and he had come to Palermo ‘most strongly prejudiced 
against the Sicilian government, and not without the intention, 
if I found my opinions confirmed by experience, of proposing 
measures which would have in fact rendered Sicily a province 
of Great Britain’. 
Now, however, he found that there was not 
one patriotic party, but any number of factions, jealous of each 
other, though ‘all united in desiring to maintain those feudal 
rights, those instruments of tyranny by which they oppressed 
the peasantry’. Corruption and superstition reigned everywhere; 
of political vision he found very little. “So many reports were 
spread concerning the fate of the island, so many fine projects 
of change were suggested, so many splendid plans of reform 
were imagined, and so many little half-developed embryos of 
revolution began to shew themselves, that neither the nobles nor 
the people seemed to know very well to what government they 
were to belong. Every man who had the leisure built his political 
system according to his own fancy, and to suit his own conve- 
nience.... The Sicilians desired to receive laws from others, rather 
than to make laws for themselves. Some wished the French, and 
some the English to govern here, for men who are not for their 
country may be for anybody.’ Only unequivocal proofs of the 
Court’s ‘treachery’ would have justified him in overthrowing 
it; but such a revolution, besides being distasteful to him, could 
only succeed with the cooperation of the Sicilian people. Any 
reform of this “Constitution seven hundred years old in every 
species of political malady’ must therefore attack feudal privilege 
as well as Court misrule; it was bound to be difficult and 
dangerous; above all it must be carried out by the Sicilians them- 
selves without foreign interference. “The seat of legislature 
should rather be a Sicilian Parliament than a British camp.” 
Drummond therefore decided to come to an understanding 
with the Court, even before he had received fresh instructions. 
He agreed to changes in the draft treaty; and he resumed pay- 
ment of the subsidy on receiving the King’s promise that the 
Queen and the French émigrés would no longer have any share 
igoven the rnment, and that all important business would be 

<<<PDFPAGE 178>>>
162 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
transacted among the King, Circello, and himself. The Queen 
seemed at first to acquiesce in this arrangement. ‘She even 
promised that if I would shew her any degree of confidence she 
would endeavour to introduce the English Constitution into 
Sicily. I will undertake to do this without Her Majesty’s assist- 
ance, which I am not particularly disposed to require.” 
Drummond’s assurances that ‘the Queen’s faction rules no 
longer, either in appearance or in reality’, met with derision 
from the staff officers at Messina, who thought the Court had 
merely hoodwinked him. Moore continued to protest that the 
Court was interested in Naples only and cared nothing for 
Sicily, and that an invasion of Italy would be useless ‘unless we 
had command of the King’s person, and unless the Queen and 
all her emissaries were removed, and we had the complete 
direction of the government. Nothing short of this would give 
confidence to the people or induce them to join us, and without 
the people it was vain to hope for permanent success in Italy.’ 
He talked of expelling the Queen to Trieste: ‘this was never 
proposed to be adopted’, he admitted, 
“... but only men- 
tioned . . . if possible to be done, it would be the surest way to 
quiet Sicily.’ Even when after a few months the King again 
eclipsed himself, and the Queen openly returned to the Council, 
Drummond went on asserting that her influence was exagger- 
ated: she herself, he said, was a mere dupe of the French party; 
the King was a firm friend of England, and would remain one 
if he was not frightened by the revolutionary chatter among 
the officers at Messina; and he, Drummond, had good hopes of 
persuading him presently to effect a gradual reform through 
Parliament, and to remove the Queen once more from the 
government. Belmonte he dismissed as a “Gallicised smatterer’, 
and he complained that the ‘speculators’ and advocates of whole- 
sale reform made his mission of persuasion difficult. After Moore 
had been recalled, partly as a result of his obstreperous conduct, 
Drummond claimed that ‘perfect union’ now prevailed among 
the Court, the commanders, and himself: he expected great 
things of the Court’s decision to raise a Sicilian militia of 40,000 
men, and declared that Sicily was at last coming out of her 
lethargy. Yet his optimism was punctured again and again by un- 
pleasant discoveries. He found that the ‘infatuated Queen... with 

<<<PDFPAGE 179>>>
WILLIAM DRUMMOND’S MISSION TO SICILY 
_163 
her usual inconsistency’ was intriguing with the Russian Minister 
for an arrangement whereby Ferdinand would be restored to 
Naples, and France would receive Sicily as compensation: he 
then had to bombard Circello with Notes until he had forced 
the government to break with Russia and hand the Minister his 
passports. His suspicions were aroused by intelligence of the 
Queen’s clandestine correspondence with the Continent; he was 
particularly annoyed by a secret proclamation of Moliterno’s, 
intended for circulation on the continent of Italy, and intercepted 
by the British officer in command at Capri, in which Moliterno 
bade the Italians rise, proclaim Ferdinand King of Italy, and 
drive out all foreigners. Drummond protested to the King and 
Circello, but their reassurances failed to convince him. Still, he 
had committed himself too far to retreat: and he continued on 
the whole to pin his hopes on the King.* 
Drummond was in a difficult position. The Court clamoured 
for an invasion of Italy, a plan he approved: but it had constantly 
to be put off during 1807 and 1808, either because the British 
garrison was depleted, or a French invasion was feared, or the 
state of the Continent made it impossible. The Court knew, 
besides, that the British Government still would not commit 
themselves to the recovery of Naples at a peace. So Drummond 
got little thanks from the Court, and little support from anyone. 
It was, one may say, Drummond’s vanity in thinking he could 
manage the Court by his own influence alone, without support, 
which led to his downfall. He had already irritated Canning by 
forcing, on his own initiative, a break between Sicily and Russia. 
A few months later he caused serious embarrassment to the 
British Government by furthering, again on his own initiative, 
and unofficially, the Court’s claim to the Regency of Spain. 
Canning recalled him at once, in September 1808.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 180>>>
* 
APPENDIX B 
DOCUMENTS CONCERNING THE ‘DREAM’ 
I 
BENTINCK TO THE HEREDITARY PRINCE, CATANIA, 
2D ECIILOAS 
‘... A présent, Monseigneur, je viens vous présenter les réves 
d’un Voyageur. J’y suis encouragé par la bonté avec laquelle 
V.A.R. a toujours écouté mes pensées, qui n’ont jamais eu autre 
mérite, que la sincérité et le désir du bien général. Depuis que 
j'ai mieux connu la Nation Sicilienne, sa situation future a été 
objet de mes sérieuses réflections, et de mes vives inquiétudes. 
L’indépendance de la Sicile, et la séparation des deux Couronnes 
a été voté par le Parlement et quoique la Nation soit divisée sur 
d’autres points, cependant elle est unanime contre toute connec- 
tion avec le Royaume de Naples; et je doute que la réunion 
puisse encore s’opérer sans une grande effusion de sang. Il est 
certain que l’entreprise deviendra de jour en jour plus difficule. 
Mais il est clair en méme temps que l’administration du 
Gouvernement de la Sicile sans l’appui d’une force indépendante 
sera presque impossible. La Nation ne peut pas étre confi¢e a 
elle méme. Il y aurait a craindre tous les causes de la Révolution 
Francaise. 
La Nation donc pour le moment ne peut pas se gouverner 
elle méme, ne veut pas étre gouvernée par les Napolitains et 
il ne conviendra pas je m’imagine 4 l’ Angleterre de continuer le 
frais de l’entretien d’une force protectrice aprés la paix générale. 
Voici donc, Monseigneur, mon réve. Laissez le soin de la 
Sicile 4 Angleterre, qui peut seule, j’ose dire, la gouverner 
avantageusement, et pour la Sicile et pour le Royaume de Naples. 
Au roi de Naples la Sicile n’a jamais été d’aucun avantage. Elle 
a été au contraire un embarras. Le Roi n’en a jamais tiré un 
soldat, et les revenues n’ont pas méme suffi pour payer les troupes 
nécessaires pour la contenir. Le Roi a perdu des hommes, et n’a 
pas gagné de l’argent. Dorénavant la dépense doit augmenter 
et V.A.R. peut bien juger si les revenues de I’'Isle peuvent étre 
augmentées dans la méme proportion. 

<<<PDFPAGE 181>>>
DOCUMENTS CONCERNING THE ‘DREAM’ 
165 
Sous le Gouvernement Anglais la Sicile seroit tranquille, et 
avec le temps deviendrait florissante. Elle pourroit étre un ami 
trés utile, et jamais dangereux, 4 Naples parce qu'il ne peut 
jamais convenir 4 l’Angleterre d’avoir des possessions continen- 
tales. 
Pour rendre un pareil arrangement de la plus haute utilité 
au Roi de Naples, mon idée seroit, 1° Ou que le Royaume de 
Naples aurait un arrondissement en Italie le quel cependant, A 
dire vrai, me parait difficile. Parce que, come la conduite de 
Buonaparte vis-a-vis du Pape est aux yeux de |’Europe un acte 
des plus injustes qu’il ait commis, ainsi les Alliés probablement 
se feront une gloire de le rétablir dans tous ses pouvoirs tant 
spirituels que temporels. 2° Ou si cela n’était pas possible, que 
le Roi et la famille Royale recevrait de l’ Angleterre une com- 
pensation annuelle égale 4 toute la liste civile, et en outre que 
Angleterre s’obligerait de tenir 4 la disposition du Roi de 
Naples une Armée calculée sur l’état militaire le plus étendu que 
la Sicile pourrait soutenir méme dans la supposition la plus 
favorable de sa position future—dites—dix mille hommes 
(10,000). 
Une pareille liaison observée avec bonne foi pourrait mener 
4 des plus grandes avantages, et en cas de nécessité, le Royaume 
de Naples pourrait avoir [assistance de toutes les forces Bri- 
tanniques de la méme maniére que I’Espagne et le Portugal 
l’ont eu derniérement. 
Voila, Monseigneur, mon réve. Je voudrais que l’exécution 
puisse commencer avec le rétablissement du Roi dans le Roy- 
aume de Naples. Je suis d’opinion que les événements méneront 
4 une paix générale, et je voudrais que Bonaparte ne fit pas 4 
méme de profiter de la surprise dans la quelle l'Europe se trouve 
par de succés si grands et si inattendus, et qu'il ne fasse pas une 
paix, avant que les intéréts de toutes les autres Puissances ayent 
été bien consideré dans un congrés général. 
Je suis de V.A.R. avec le plus profond respect le trés dévoué 
serviteur. 
W.C. BENTINCK 
NOTE. The text of Bentinck’s letter is that given by Capograssi (p. 
156) from the original in the Bourbon Archives. The copy in the Foreign 

<<<PDFPAGE 182>>>
166 
BENTINCK AND, SICILY 
Office files (FO 70/63) shews a number of variant readings. Most of 
these are insignificant and seem to have been introduced by the copyist 
(Andrew Douglas, Bentinck’s Secretary of Legation) in order to improve 
the French. It is interesting, however, that in this copy the sentence ‘Je 
voudrais que l’exécution puisse commencer avec le rétablissement du 
Roi dans le Royaume de Naples’ is omitted. In February 1814, when 
this copy was sent to Castlereagh, the armistice with Murat had already 
been signed, and such an expression of legitimist feeling might have 
seemed inappropriate. 
II 
GRAHAM'S ACCOUNT OF HIS CONVERSATION 
WiLHVCAS 
LER BAGH 
‘... We then discussed the subject of your private letter, and 
I detailed to His Lordship your plan for the permanent occu- 
pation of Sicily as a British Territory: he said in the case where 
it was built on the restoration of Ferdinand to the Crown of 
Naples, our engagements with Murat were decisive: he himself 
had no idea, neither did he desire, that those engagements should 
be violated: if however Murat still refused to cooperate and 
remained unsatisfied with the explanation Your Lordship was 
directed to give him, then, if we could recover Naples, your 
plan became feasible and worthy of consideration. 
In the case of an indemnity, he feared it was not practicable; 
for no State we could give as compensation for Naples and no 
sum of money we could offer would, he conceived, be sufficient 
temptation for the relinquishment of such an island as Sicily. 
I then insisted at great length on the extreme impolicy of 
evacuating it at a peace, and urged the Treaty with Murat as 
an imperative reason why Sicily never could be safe without 
a British garrison. 
Iam happy to say His Lordship coincided most entirely in 
your opinion; he saw no difficulty in obtaining the consent of 
the King of Sicily to the arrangement; and the Allies would 
readily allow us to act in this respect as we chose. France at any 
other moment would have been an insurmountable obstacle; 
but humbled as she was, no objection of hers would avail, and 
ina peace he would particularly guard against any compromise 
of the question. 

<<<PDFPAGE 183>>>
DOCUMENTS CONCERNING THE ‘DREAM’ 
167 
The only difficulty he foresaw was in our Treaty with Murat, 
who, precisely because he would wish for an occasion to conquer 
Sicily, would violently object to our occupation of it: but this 
might be met by an article, on which the British Government 
would insist, stipulating that Murat should consent to any 
agreement which Great Britain might conclude with the King 
of Sicily on this point. 
On the whole His Lordship entered most cordially into your 
view of this question and promised not to lose sight of it during 
the negotiations....I have no doubt, therefore, My Lord, if 
the present negotiations should happily terminate in a peace, 
that your hopes for Sicily will not be disappointed. . . .’ 
(James Graham to Bentinck, 7 March 1814, B.P.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 184>>>
APPENDIX(CG 
BENTINGRS-GONDU 
GC IVATEGENOA 
By the middle of April 1814 Bentinck’s army had reached the 
outskirts of Genoa after a short campaign up the Riviera by way 
of Sarzana and Nervi. On the 18th the Genoa garrison sur- 
rendered; two days earlier the armistice of Schiarino Rizzino 
had brought to an end the Viceroy Eugéne’s able defence of 
Lombardy against the Austrians and Murat. Paris had fallen, 
but the war in France was not yet over officially.” On April 
26th Bentinck issued a proclamation in which he declared that, 
in accordance with the wishes of the people, and with the prin- 
ciple—‘recognised by the High Allied Powers’—of restoring the 
old sovereigns, the Constitution of the Genoese Republic was 
re-established as it had stood in 1797, ‘with those modifications 
which the general wish, the public good, and the spirit of the origi- 
nal Constitution of 1576, seem to require’. The Austrian generals 
had been proclaiming the return of the old sovereigns all over 
Northern Italy; but Bentinck had been enjoined by Castlereagh 
on March 30th not to commit himself to the restoration of any 
of them except the King of Piedmont and the Grand-Duke of 
Tuscany. The result of Bentinck’s act was, of course, that Britain 
had to repudiate it and, by endorsing the annexation of Genoa to 
Piedmont, to confirm her reputation as Perfidious Albion.* 
Bentinck, when he came to justify himself, told Bathurst 
that it was all very well to settle the fate of Genoa at a peace, but 
‘Thad to provide for a state of war. My duty commanded me to ensure 
the success of the war in Italy, which the weakness of the Austrian army, 
and the treachery of Murat, might at any time bring to a conclusion the 
most unfavourable to the Allied arms... .. The fact that Genoa as a mili- 
tary place was untenable without more troops than Bentinck disposed 
of made it ‘indispensable for me to secure the tranquillity and cordial 
cooperation of the Genoese. Without these the further advance of the 
British force became hazardous and in case of reverse, the preservation 
of what I had, precarious.—No other measure as I thought but the one 
I adopted could have effected these objects. . . 
. cannot but still continue 
to think that the form of the Provisional Government was not only 
advisable but necessary.”* 

<<<PDFPAGE 185>>>
BENTINCK 
’S CONDUCT AT GENOA 
169 
Bentinck’s private campaign diary tells a different story. On 
April 22nd—he recorded—he told a deputation of Genoese 
officials that he would set up a provisional government, ‘their 
final disposition necessarily depending upon the decision of the 
high Allied Powers’. During the next three days he discussed 
the matter with some of the leading Genoese—Pareto, Serra, 
Durazzo—and found them aristocratically inclined but ‘liberal 
enough’. On April 26th, the date of the Proclamation, he wrote: 
‘Tt was a question whether in the Proclamation it should be stated 
that this arrangement was to continue until the Allies should otherwise 
order—but it was considered that the most popular would be to make 
an arrangement as definitive as possible which it would be the more 
difficult for the Allies to upset. The union with Piedmont as supposed 
likely was most of all offensive to the Genoese. With the Milanese they 
would not equally dislike to be annexed—but their original independence 
seemed the universal wish—I thought it politic for Great Britain that is 
for her interests and influence that the wishes of the people should receive 
her consideration while it was always in the hands of the Allies to 
make whatever arrangement they pleased.”* 
We may never know just what Bentinck thought he was 
doing; to judge from the muddle-headedness exhibited in this 
curious document, he scarcely knew himself. 

<<<PDFPAGE 186>>>
“~ 
, ara 
, an - is ers y 
\ tnt 
<r, 

<<<PDFPAGE 187>>>
tray Wig ae + wlew ¥ 
“A\« we 
oy 
> 
a 

<<<PDFPAGE 188>>>
172 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
PAGE 2 
. 
landlords’ agents or chief tenants. Michele Amari estimated that the Third Estate was at 
this period no larger, or very slightly larger, than the nobility: preface to N. Palmeri, 
Saggio storico-politico sulla costituzione del Regno di Sicilia (Lausanne, 1847), Xxxi. 
PAGE 3 
a constitutional conflict between Crown and Parliament. The power of the nobility may be 
judged by the fact that, numbering as they did about 2,300 out of a population of 
about 1,500,000, they held under their jurisdiction (according to the latest, and in- 
complete, survey, that of 1747-8) 282 towns and lands (feudi) as against 85 in the Royal 
Domain, and 780,688 inhabitants as against 395,967 (Palermo, then the second city 
of Italy, with 180,000 inhabitants, was not included in the survey). There was no up- 
to-date register of fiefs, duties, boundaries etc.; taxes had therefore to be assessed on 
the basis of riveli, i.e. declarations of value by the occupiers. One of the most important 
points in Caracciolo’s programme of reform was the carrying out of a thorough 
Catasto (survey) of all lands; it was also, for obvious reasons, the point over which the 
Viceroy and the barons in Parliament had their most serious clash: E. Pontieri, II 
Tramonto del Baronaggio Siciliano (Florence, 1943), 92 ff., 222 ff. (This work gives 
(pp. 195-283) the most up-to-date and elaborate account of Caracciolo’s Viceroyalty; 
cf. also B. Croce, ‘Il Marchese Caracciolo’, in Uomini e Cose della vecchia Italia (Bari, 
1927); F. De Stefano, Storia della Sicilia (Bari, 1948), 274-7; R. Romeo, II Risorgimento 
in Sicilia (Bari, 1950), 50-65.) 
those rights were still unquestioned. The Sicilian Parliament was made up of three Estates 
(Braccia), the Militare (barons), Ecclesiastico, and Demaniale (communes of the Royal 
Domain). Of the great powers it had held under the Aragonese, it had by the 18th 
century lost the legislative and judicial; but it kept those of voting donativi (i.e. taxes 
designed to supplement the revenue the Crown enjoyed of its own right from customs, 
dues, etc.; there were ordinary donativi—a variety of taxes making up a fixed revenue, 
voted as a matter of course by successive Parliaments—and extraordinary donativi pro- 
vided for emergencies) ; 
of petitioning the Crown; and of electing the Deputation of the 
Realm—a delegate body supposed to supervise the collection and administration of 
the revenue, and the enforcement of laws, during the four-year interval between 
Parliaments. Actually, until the 1780’s these powers had been accepted as merely 
formal. The Deputation was in practice nominated by the Crown, as was the Braccio 
Demaniale itself. It was never suggested that conditions should be attached to votes of 
supply. Voting in the first two Braccia was by fiefs, so that their numbers were not 
large; the Demaniale was smaller still. Voting by proxy was allowed. In 1810, the 
Militare had 277 members, the Ecclesiastico 60 to 66, the Demaniale 44: Pontieri, 
op. cit., 127-45; G. Bianco, La Sicilia durante I’ occupazione inglese (Palermo, 1902), 32-6. 
lately been pointed out. By Romeo, op. cit., 19-26. The recent works of Romeo and. 
Pontieri have thrown much light on the economic background of the patriotic 
movement. 
PAGE 4 
later and ‘unnatural’ growths. Gregorio combated the interpretation of the Norman 
Conquest according to which Roger had been no more than primus inter pares, as: 
well as the prevailing interpretation of the Aragonese capitularies Si aliquem and 
Volentes, which allowed almost unlimited alienation of, and succession to, fiefs. He 
held that fiefs were historically precarious and their enjoyment dependent on services. 
rendered to the Crown: in default of a (restricted) succession, they reverted to the 
Crown, and they could not be alienated. This contention was embodied by the Viceregal 
Government in a Pragmatic of 1788 which, however, does not seem to have had 
much effect. Gregorio also contended that Parliament was no more than the Norman. 

<<<PDFPAGE 189>>>
NOTES 
73 
generalis curia, a mere advisory body without power to legislate or bargain over supply. 
His opinions were echoed by the apologists of the Viceroy’s reforming policy: 
Pontieri, 15-27; Romeo, 49, 67, 82-3. 
a parallel could be drawn. P. Balsamo, MS. considerations on the Sicilian Constitution: 
Bentinck Papers, Nottingham University (quoted henceforth as B.P.). Balsamo’s 
Sulla istoria moderna del Regno di Sicilia. Memorie Segrete (Palermo, 1848; written 1815 
or 1816) is an invaluable source for the political history of the period, His economic 
works are also ofsome interest. In consciousimitation of Young, he made two journeys 
(1792 and 1808) through the seldom-visited centre of the island, and published his 
observations and suggestions for reform: Giornale del Viaggio fatto in Sicilia . . 
. (Palermo, 
1809). He advocated a uniform tax on all land as the basis of the national revenue; 
this was to be accompanied by the abolition of controlled prices, the lightening of 
consumption taxes, and the removal of internal trade barriers. 
PAGE § 
at present we are nothing. P. Brydone, A Tour through Sicily and Malta (1790; 1st ed. 1776), 
285. 
their ancient institutions. The ideas of the French Revolution did, however, penetrate into 
Sicily to some extent, particularly in the more economically advanced area around 
Catania, where a new class of middling landowners was rising; it was largely from 
this class that the few ‘Jacobins’ of the 1790’s and the leaders of the later ‘Democratic’ 
movement of 1813 were drawn: Romeo, 78ff., 107, 114. 
too foreign to be compatriots. ‘If [an Italian from countries other than Naples] came to 
Sicily ... he was confused with visitors from beyond the Alps, and given the name 
of foreigner, unless he had been born at Naples, in which case he did not seem worthy 
of that honourable title’: M. Amari, preface to 4th ed. of La Guerra del Vespro Siciliano 
(Florence, 1851). 
‘foreign’ pensioners and officials. Balsamo, Memorie segrete (quoted henceforth as Balsamo), 
4. “The Queen disregards Sicily as unworthy her attention, though it is the only 
territory she possesses. She never thinks of ameliorating the condition of its inhabitants 
or adopting regulations for its future improvement. Her thoughts run entirely upon 
the reconquest of Naples...’: Sir John Moore, Diary (ed. Maurice, 1904) ii, 145 
(7 Jan. 1807). The Royalist Mémoire de Marie Caroline (ed. R. M.Johnston, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1912) speaks (pp. 7, 31) of the innate enmity of the Neapolitan and Sicilian 
nations, and of the hostility of the Neapolitan Ministry to Sicilian institutions. 
devoted to the monarchy. Cf. Provenzano, ‘Storia della Rivoluzione di Sicilia del 1820’ 
(Bibl. Comunale, Palermo, MSS. Qq F 158), i, 94-6; Tognini, ‘I Siciliani agli Inglesi’ 
(Bibl. Com. Pal. MSS. Qq H 115 n. 10). Both these writers disliked the 1812 
Constitution and the British intervention; both upheld the independence of Sicily 
against Neapolitan intrusion. Tognini goes so far as to assert that in twice recon- 
quering Naples from his refuge in Sicily, King Ferdinand, like the Normans before 
him, proved that Sicily was the natural seat of government of both kingdoms. 
PAGE 6 
the Parliament of that year. Balsamo, 2-4; Pontieri, 338-50; Romeo, 65-71. Caracciolo’s 
plan for a Catasto had actually been passed under his successor Caramanico (I 786-95); 
but it was not carried out; instead it was again dropped in favour of increased supply 
under the old dispensation. 
liberal reform. Balsamo, 2-4. Cassaro, first as Secretary of State for Justice, then as 
Lieutenant-General of the Kingdom of Naples, had a share of responsibility for the 
1799 atrocities at Naples: N. Niceforo (E. Del Cerro), ‘La Sicilia e la Constituzione 
del 1812’ (in Archivio Storico Siciliano, xli), 323-4. This fact seems not to have detracted 
from Cassaro’s later standing as a leader of baronial resistance in Parliament. 

<<<PDFPAGE 190>>>
174 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
little more than a hothead. Aci’s unreliability is illustrated by the following episode. 
When in the first r810 Parliament the Barons passed a plan for financial reform 
against the Court’s wishes, Aci, though one of the opposition leaders, suddenly voted 
with the Court. ‘When he was taken to task .. 
. for breaking his word, he answered 
“You already had a majority, and my vote would have been of no use to you. Let me 
get some credit by it” ’: Balsamo, 8. 
PAGE 7 
occasional lack of judgment. Balsamo, 188; Romano, ‘Notizie intorno a Giuseppe Venti- 
miglia Principe di Belmonte’, Bibl. Com. Palermo MSS. 4 Qq D 81 f. 76. Bentinck, 
even while he still thought Belmonte ‘the main hope of this country’, ‘a very liberal, 
highly accomplished, able man’, recognised his defect: ‘He is a vain man and [a letter 
from Castlereagh congratulating him on the conclusion of the Anglo-Sicilian Treaty 
of 1812] could not well be made too complimentary—but it would be difficult to 
make it more so than he deserved’: Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 June 1812, FO 70/51; 
to Cooke, 10 Dec. 1812, FO 70/52. 
the cause he held right. Balsamo, §, 127. Carlo Cottone, Prince of Castelnuovo, was also 
known as Prince of Villa Ermosa or Villermosa. 
PAGE 8 
votre dévoué serviteur. Bentinck’s minute of conversation with Orleans, 19 Dec. 1811, 
B.P. The Queen’s hatred and jealousy of Ascoli are evident in two works written 
from her point of view, the Mémoire de Marie-Caroline and the Memorie Segrete des 
Freiherrn G.G. von Cresceri (ed. Helfert, Vienna, 1892). 
native shrewdness and common sense. J.C. Mellish, ‘La Cour de Sicile en 1809’ (ed. L. Pingaud, 
in Revue d’histoire deplomatique, 1894-5); Drummond to Howick, 
11 Mar. 1807, 
FO 70/30; to Canning, 31 May 1808, FO 70/32. ‘When he will take the trouble of 
interfering in business he generally shews a very good natural understanding’: 
Drummond to Canning, 24 July 1808, ibid. This is brought out by the King’s diplo- 
matic correspondence, printed in W. Maturi, ‘Il Congresso di Vienna e la restaurazione 
dei Borboni a Napoli’ (in Rivista Storica Italiana, Sep., Dec. 1938). His unpublished 
diary (Giornale d’ Affari) for 1812-15 exhibits a curious mixture of duplicity and 
candour, sometimes at his own expense. (The original diary was destroyed in 1943, 
together with the rest of the Bourbon papers in the Naples Archives; a complete 
transcript is in the possession of Prof. Walter Maturi, of Turin University, who has 
kindly allowed me to consult it. It will be quoted henceforth as Giornale d’ Affari.) 
a state little short of insanity. Bentinck to Wellesley, 26 Dec. 1811, FO 70/44. 
spies and dubious characters. A. Valente, G. Murat e I’Italia meridionale (Turin, 1941), pp. 
132-5, gives details—taken from the Queen’s Journal—of the vast number of persons 
she employed on all kinds of business. Among the most prominent were St. Clair 
—a young Frenchman, reputedly her lover; Moliterno—a Neapolitan adventurer, 
full of weird schemes for the conquest of Italy; and Castrone, the almost illiterate 
chief of police, who directed the Queen’s espionage system and her flotilla of privateers. 
PAGE 9 
hated the Sicilians and they her. ‘The Queen told Mr. Fagan I am not fit to govern the 
Sicilians because I hate them, and if they were honest both the King and the Hereditary 
Prince would acknowledge to have the same feeling’: Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
30 Mar. 1812, FO 70/51. [The Queen being seriously ill] ‘You cannot conceive... 
how delighted everybody seemed at the chance of her death, it was really quite 
shocking to witness the feelings of disgust, and hear the expressions of hatred against 
her in the mouth of everyone at the time’: Andrew Douglas to Bentinck (private), 
29 Sep. 1811, B.P. 

<<<PDFPAGE 191>>>
NOTES 
nS 
every reason to believe it. R. de Damas, Mémoires (ed. Rambaud, Paris, 1914), li, 227-9; 
Balsamo, 193-4; Mellish, ‘Cour de Sicile’; Croce, Uomini e Cose, ii, r91-2. Of a particu- 
larly palpable lie of the Queen’s, Bentinck wrote: ‘The assertion is notoriously 
unfounded, but it is like many others of the same nature dictated by the passion of 
the moment, and perhaps not coming exactly within the description of known 
untruth. . 
. 
. This can only be owing to temporary failure of the senses’: to Wellesley, 
25 Jan. 1812, FO 70/51. Her friend Damas wrote that ‘Elle est née pour embrouiller, 
traverser tout ce dont elle se méle, et mourra malheureuse et ayant fait autant de 
malheureux que d’ingrats, avec un cceur excellent et les meilleures intentions du 
monde’: Damas, ii, 229. The sympathetic and well-documented life by Egon Conte 
Corti, Ich, Eine Tochter Maria Theresias (Munich, 1950), only confirms this judgment. 
make my life very hard. Circello to Castelcicala, 25 Oct. 1810 (copy), FO 70/46. 
PAGE IO 
stop them from being sent out. For a detailed account of Howick’s policy, see Appendix A. 
J. Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte, 1806-1808 (Paris, 1911) noted these instruc- 
tions of Howick’s (p. 34), without realising that they meant a drastic change of policy. 
stood unresolved when he left office. Canning to Drummond, 12 June, 15 Aug., 26 Dec. 
1807, FO 70/30; to Amherst, 3 Mar., 16 Aug. 1809, Bathurst to Amherst, 4 Dec. 
1809, FO 70/36. The united command had been promised by Castelcicala, and Canning 
had used this promise to justify, against Opposition criticism in the Commons, his 
assertion that ‘most cordial good understanding and cooperation’ prevailed between 
the two governments. The Court, however, later refused to admit that any promise 
had been made: Parliamentary Debates (Commons). xii, 1123, 1140 (27, 28 Feb. 1809); 
Amherst to Canning, 10 Aug., 25 Sep. 1809, to Bathurst, 11 Dec. 1809, FO 70/36. 
the loss on the exchange. Canning to Amherst, 3 Mar. 1809, FO 70/36. A treaty of alliance 
and subsidy was ratified, after much delay, in March 1808; an additional treaty of 
May 1809 increased the subsidy from £300,000 to £400,000. 
holding the place. Canning to Drummond, 15 Aug. 1807, FO 70/30, 4 Nov. 1808, 
FO 70/32. Castlereagh, however, wrote—while an invasion of Italy was still thought 
feasible—that ‘thejealousy which has appeared on more than one occasion, with respect 
to our position in Sicily’ would make it prudent to leave some of the British troops 
in the main fortresses there, and to keep the Court’s Neapolitan troops as busy as 
possible ‘also with a view to reserve the military power of the island more completely 
in our hands’: to Gen. Henry Fox, 21 May 1807, in Sir H.E. Bunbury, Narrative of 
Certain Passages in the Great War with France (ed. Fortescue, 1927; 1st ed. 1852), 301. 
PAGE II 
recurrent friction and disappointment. See App. A for a more detailed account of Drum- 
mond’s mission. 
the 1806 peace negotiations. Bunbury, 204-17, 224-6, 233-6; the Queen to Damas, 15 Mar. 
1807, in Damas, ii, 373. 
render themselves masters of Sicily. Amherst to Wellesley, 6 Feb. 1810, FO 70/39. There 
is no evidence that the Queen knew of Howick’s plans, beyond Ambherst’s curious 
use of the word still in the sentence quoted. 
the beginning of subversion. The Queen to Damas, 24 Oct. 1809, Damas ii, 416. ‘Les 
Anglois agissent avec plus de suite [que les Frangais], leur argent, leurs principes, 
forme de gouvernement, enfin toutes les classes sont cajolées, travaillé et séduite par 
espoir d’étre membre du gouvernement . . 
. moi 
je crois bien plus que nous perdrons 
la Sicile par ce cété que par l’autre, qui n’a pas de marine. L’atrocité de le faire comme 
alliée, protecteur, fait encore le seul frein et come on voit ne me point pouvoir séduire 
et que je veille sur cella, de 14 vienne les infamies, criailleries, imoralité de toutes les 

<<<PDFPAGE 192>>>
176 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
espéces contre moi...’: to Damas, 16 Mar. 1810, Damas ii, 426 (the spelling is the 
Queen’s). 
control of the subsidy. Drummond to Canning, 26 Mar. 1808, FO 70/32; Mellish to 
Canning, 6 Feb. 1809, FO 70/33; Drummond to Canning, 9 Nov. 1807, FO 70/30; 
Mellish to Canning, 5, 23 Feb. 1809, FO 70/33; Amherst to Wellesley, 5 Feb., 21 Apr. 
1810, FO 70/39. 
either in appearance or in reality. Drummond to Howick, 11 Mar. 1807, to Canning, 
24 Oct. 1807, FO 70/30. 
PAGE 12 
furious recriminations from the Queen. Drummond to Gen. Fox, 27 Jan. 1807, Bunbury, 
297; to Canning, 27 Jan., 25 Mar., 19 Oct. 1808, FO 70/32; Mellish to Canning, 
23 Feb. 1809, FO 70/33; Amherst to Wellesley, 6 Feb., 27 Mar. 1810, FO 70/39. 
clamoured for drastic action. Moore, Diary, ii, 139; Bunbury, 250; Stuart to Amherst, 
13 Jan. 1810, FO 70/41. ‘The Court of Palermo sends no succour, takes no notice, 
laughs at Lord [Amherst]. Ferdinand IV goes a tunny-fishing; and his wife continues 
her usual pranks, and is pronounced by her own subjects, and convicted in my mind, 
of acting in concert with Murat for our expulsion.... Nought but our presence 
prevents [the Sicilians] from driving out Caroline, as a demon of discord and tyranny, 
to live by the alms of such of her relations as might afford her an asylum’: The 
Adjutant-General in Sicily (James Campbell) to Bunbury, 12 July, 19 Aug. 1810, 
in Bunbury, 317-19. 
armed with rifles, axes, and sticks. Amherst to Wellesley, 11 June, 14, 28 July, 24 Aug., 
23 Sep., 25 Oct. 1810, FO 70/39. 
PAGE 13 
salvation of this kingdom will ultimately depend. Amherst to Wellesley, 22 June, 14 July, 
25, 29 Sep., 4 Oct. 1810, FO 70/39; 1 Mar. 1811, FO 70/42; (private) 29 Sep., 5 Oct. 
1810, Add. MSS. 37,292, ff. 113-18; (secret) 19 June 1810, FO 70/39. Besides news 
of the Queen’s traffic with Naples, information came in that members of the Govern- 
ment were in correspondence with the French Consul at Tunis; and a letter was inter- 
cepted from the Queen to Lucien Bonaparte at Malta, in which she said she had a 
safe and speedy means of correspondence with Paris: Amherst to Wellesley, 5, 25 Oct. 
1810, FO 70/39. Amherst at first confined his suspicions to the Queen, Castrone and 
‘the infamous herd of spies who frequent Her Majesty’s antechambers’. The King 
and Circello, he thought, were sincerely annoyed at an intrigue over which they had 
no control. But later reports of fresh intrigues with Austria rather shook his beliefin 
the King’s protestations of loyalty: to Wellesley, 8 Feb., 
1 Mar. 1811, FO 70/42. 
prerogatives they have ever enjoyed. Amherst to Wellesley (secret) 19 June, 25 Oct. 1810, 
FO 70/39; Gazzetta Britannica, 4 Apr. 1810. 
PAGE 14. 
regular session in January 1810. The Court had had to appeal to both the British Govern- 
ment and its representatives in Sicily for advances and loans to tide them over: 
Castelcicala to Wellesley, 9 Feb. 1810, FO 70/40; The Queen to Sir John Stuart, 
27 Nov. [Dec.?] 1809, FO 70/41. Parliament had not been asked for extraordinary 
supply since 1802, when (the King being still in Sicily after his first flight) it had 
voted an extra 150,000 oz. a year on condition that a ‘permanent Royal Court’ should 
be set up in Sicily. The King then returned to Naples, but the promised Court never 
materialised: Balsamo, 2-4; Pontieri, 350. Palmeri (p. 73) interprets the stipulation 
of a permanent Court at Palermo as ‘an attempt to recover the independence of the 
kingdom’, 

<<<PDFPAGE 193>>>
NOTES 
177 
Great Britain and Sicily. Bianco, 75. 
Caracciolo proposed them in 1783. Balsamo, 4-8. The new tax system was at first to run 
concurrently with the old. Actually, it was not put into force until 1814. 
most of the resolutions failed. Balsamo, 8-9. Parliament did resolve that the Deputation 
should publish the accounts of the new financial system. Belmonte and Castelnuovo 
had wanted it to be responsible for all its accounts. 
PAGE I5 
toyed for some months with this proposal. She got Belmonte at one point to expound the 
Sicilian Constitution to the Hereditary Prince. ‘It took him 4 sittings 2 hours each 
to do that—he had found him very dim of comprehension’: Bentinck’s Journal 
(Bentinck Papers, Nottingham Uuniversity: quoted henceforthas Journal), 31 Jan.1812. 
more taxes than the Government majority. The chief, but by no means satisfactory, source 
for these transactions is Balsamo, 10-25. Mémoire de Marie-Caroline (pp. 37-8) confirms 
that the Queen considered for a while taking Cassaro and Belmonte into the Ministry 
—the latter as ‘le moyen le plus assuré de lui casser le cou’. It states, however, that the 
reshuffle as it was carried out was a victory for Ascoli’s influence over the Queen’s: if 
so, presumably the decision to sacrifice revenue to political victory was Ascoli’s too. 
Ascoli became at this time the King’s ‘private secretary’ or factotum, almost a Prime 
Minister: Amherst to Wellesley, 13 July 1810, FO 70/39. Belmonte later told Bentinck 
that the Queen had offered to make him chief Minister, but that he had refused 
unless the whole system of government was changed. Belmonte’s boasts, however, 
cannot be taken on trust: Journal, 4 Feb. 1812. Amherst seems to have taken a hand in 
the negotiations, at any rate to the extent of advising the King to recall Parliament 
and form a Sicilian administration: to Wellesley (secret) 19 June 1810, FO 70/39. 
PAGE 16 
should procure it for them. Amherst to Wellesley (private), 28 July, 19 Sep. 1810. Add. 
MSS. 37.292, ff. $1, 97. The Barons approached Amherst in July, before the second 
session of Parliament; but the defection of Cassaro and others already made their 
defeat certain. 
resigned their posts in disgust. Amherst to Wellesley (private), 16 July 1810. Add. MSS. 
37,292, f. 49; Stuart to Liverpool, 23 Oct. 1810, summary in Bunbury, 267. 
a string of acrimonious Notes. Amherst to Wellesley, 7 Feb., 1 Mar. 1811, FO 70/42. 
no more out of the British. Castelcicala persisted from August 1810 to March 1811 in an 
attempt to obtain from the British Government an additional subsidy of £130,000, 
on the grounds of expenses incurred during the invasion scare—this while Amherst’s 
and Stuart’s despatches were full of complaints that the Court had not sent one soldier 
to defend the Straits. Wellesley eventually refused this request in a curt Note of 
29 Mar. 1811. Castelcicala obtained the withdrawal of the Note, but no more: FO 70/46. 
an unconstitutional act. The Decrees are printed in Bianco, 326. The February Decrees 
bear a certain resemblance to Ship-money. The justification put forward by Ministers 
was based on an ordinance of King James of Aragon that the Crown could tax on 
its own authority when the country was threatened by an enemy (Mémoire de Marie- 
Caroline, 41). This provision had not been invoked since the War of Spanish Succession. 
In any case it clearly applied only to emergencies. Parliament had been sitting in 
August 1810 while invasion threatened; in February 1811 the imminent danger had 
been over for five months: Cesare Airoldi’s Memoir on the question, B.P. 
PAGE 17 
by constitutional means. Balsamo, 29-30; Bianco, 86. Signatories who took a large part 
in subsequent events were Belmonte, Castelnuovo, Aci, Anjou, Villafranca, Paterno, 

<<<PDFPAGE 194>>>
178 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
*» 
Fitalia. Altogether 40-odd members of the Braccio Militare signed. Cassaro expressed 
sympathy but said that as a Councillor he could not sign. 
‘ultimate resistance’ might perhaps be expected. Amherst to Wellesley, 2, 26 Mar. 1811, 
FO 70/42. It was not until July that the Court reacted to the petition by arresting 
five of the signatories. 
PAGE 18 
their choice seems less arbitrary. C.K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh (1925, 1931), 
i, 75. Perceval remarked that it would be difficult to find a substitute for Bentinck, 
even though his views were at the time of writing unacceptable to the Government: 
Memorandum of 13 Apr. 1811, Add. MSS. 37, 292, ff. 356-61. C. W. Crawley, 
‘England and the Sicilian Constitution of 1812’ (in English Historical Review, 1940), 
was the first to point out how deliberate was the whole decision to intervene. 
work hard for promotion, he said bluntly. H.M. Parker to Bentinck, . . 
. 1834, B.P. 
likeness of a squeezed lemon... Lucius Concannon to Col. McMahon, Palermo 18 June 
1812, in Letters of George IV (ed. Aspinall, Cambridge, 1938), i, 117-20. “He is ex- 
tremely popular here, shrewd, sensible and penetrating, with a total absence of 
hauteur, pomp or nonsense—perfectly at his ease himself, he seems not to imagine 
how anybody can be otherwise.’ 
PAGE 19 
he would have lost control. Sir W. Napier, Life of Sir C.J. Napier (1857), i, 96-7. 
the infliction of a positive misery. “This looks like [a] joke, but it is real truth and earnest’: 
to Charles Greville, 
7 Apr. 1813, Private Letter-Book, B.P. (Greville was Lady 
William Bentinck’s nephew). 
deceived, if anyone, himself. Bentinck, for all his outspokenness, was not given to ex- 
pressing his private feelings—not at any rate in the letters to soldiers and politicians 
that form the bulk of the evidence. Even his private Journal is mainly a record of events, 
written as a rule in a hurry, at the end of a long and arduous day. If Bentinck’s family 
correspondence was available it might throw unexpected light on his character. 
PAGE 20 
some kind of decision. There is little evidence of Wellesley’s views on Sicily, beyond a 
passage in Bentinck’s memorandum (quoted below) which suggests that he did not 
take the charges of ‘treachery’ very seriously. But it seems clear that the decision to 
intervene was his: Perceval found no need for a change of policy; and this failure to 
grasp ‘the difference between a friendly interference ... for a salutary object’ (such 
as Wellesley advocated in Spain and Sicily) ‘and the secret intrigues or open violence 
of the French’ was later given as a reason for Wellesley’s resignation: Col. Meyrick 
Shawe’s Memorandum, Wellington, Supplementary Despatches (1858-72; 
quoted 
henceforth as W.S.D.), vii, 264-5. Wellesley told Orleans in 1814 that ‘the late 
changes in Sicily were his measure... he spoke of them with vanity’: Journal, 14 
July 1814. 
annexation of Sicily to the British Empire. Debates of 27 Feb. 1809 (W. Smith), 1 May 1810 
(Wm. Lamb, Sir J. Newport), 
1 May 1811 (Whitbread, Smith): Parliamentary 
Debates (Commons) xii, 1123; xvi, 758; xix, 782. Morning Post, 14 Aug. 1810; Anti- 
gallican Monitor, 21 Apr. 1811. 
conquers to do good. G.F. Leckie, Historical Survey of the Foreign Affairs of Great Britain 
(1808); Leckie to Bentinck, 19 Mar. 1812, B.P. The anonymous papers “Some 
Account of the Present State of Sicily’ and ‘Hints for the Improvement of Sicily’ 
[1812], Castlereagh, Correspondence (ed. Londonderry, 1848-53; quoted as Castlereagh 

<<<PDFPAGE 195>>>
NOTES 
179 
Corr.), vili, 217, 224, bear a strong resemblance to Leckie’s writings. The latter paper 
contains a scheme for the complete colonisation of Sicily by England, as well as a 
vision of an emancipated and unified Italy. It ends: ‘The master of Sicily regenerated 
holds Egypt under his foot: Tunis is his tributary; and the depét of the commerce of 
belligerents, the Barbary powers, cease to have ships of war. He watches the fall of the 
Turkish empire, and stands with expanded wings to pounce upon Greece. He closes 
the Dardanelles with Lemnos, and forbids the Russians to enter the Archipelago.’ 
See C.W. Pasley, Essay on the Military Policy and Institutions of the British Empire 
(1811); J. Galt, Voyages and Travels... (1812); E. Blaquiere, Letters from the Mediterranean 
(1813); Maj.-Gen. Cockburn, A Voyage to Cadiz... (1815). Pasley amplifies Leckie’s 
thesis: the others all appeared when the British intervention had already taken place. 
little thought to commercial advantage. Amherst to Wellesley, 24 Sep. 1810, FO 70/39; 
petitions from British merchants at Palermo to the Consul and the Board of Trade 
(protesting against the 1% tax), printed in Blaquiere, u, 425-7, 431-6; petitions to 
F.O, and B.o.T. from merchants at Exeter, Leeds, Sheffield, Nottingham, FO 70/49; 
Thomas Lack (Asst. Secretary, B.o.T.) to William Hamilton, 17 Sep. 1811, Bathurst 
to Hamilton, 3 Dec. 1811, FO 70/49. The Board of Trade was reluctant to countenance 
a commercial treaty giving Britain most-favoured-nation status; whereas the mer- 
chants pressed for such a treaty, and Howick had made it an object of his abortive 
instructions to Drummond (see App. A). 
PAGE 21 
not the man to carry it out. Bentinck’s Memorandum to Wellesley, 4 Apr. 1811, Add. 
MSS. 37, 292, ff. 313-36. 
PAGE 22 
the government thought fit to give him. Perceval’s comments on Bentinck’s memorandum, 
13 Apr. 1811, Add. MSS. 37,292, ff. 356-61. (Perceval had, however, at one time 
suggested warning the Court that the subsidy might be suspended if they persisted 
in planning ‘improvident expeditions’ against Stuart’s and Amherst’s advice: to 
Wellesley, [July 1810?] Add. MSS. 37,292, f. 59). Sydenham to Bentinck [Apr. 1811] 
B.P. (where wrongly endorsed ‘July 8th’); Pellew to Bentinck, 19 Apr. 1811, B.P.; 
Wellesley to Harrowby,enclosing Bentinck’s memorandum and Perceval’s comments 
for circulation to the Cabinet, Add. MSS. 37,292, f. 354. 
provided no means of enforcing it. Wellesley to Bentinck, 30 May, 3 June 1811, FO 70/44. 
Cf. App. A for Howick’s first instructions. 
PAGE 23 
various islands off the coast of Sicily. Douglas to Wellesley, 11, 12 May, 9, 24, 26 June, 2 July 
1811, FO 70/43; Balsamo, 35-6. The reason given unofficially for the arrest of the five 
barons was that they had written to the Prince Regent begging him to take Sicily under 
his protection: Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 44; Balsamo, 31-2, seems to confirm this. 
Belmonte later told Bentinck that after his defeat in the second 1810 Parliament ‘he 
determined that in England and not in Sicily the battle was to be fought... he 
immediately began to travailler the public mind in England by pamphlets and 
gazettes and his efforts have been crowned with success’: Journal, 30 June 1812. 
Belmonte’s arrest took him by surprise, for, encouraged by a meddling British 
visitor, Lord Valentia, he thought himself already under British protection and ‘in 
possession of the habeas corpus, the grand palladium of civil liberty for all British 
subjects’: Balsamo, 36. 
PAGE 24 
happily blended and identified. Bentinck to Wellesley, 3, 23 Aug. 1811, enclosing Notes 
exchanged with Circello, FO 70/44. 

<<<PDFPAGE 196>>>
180 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
no illusions on the point. Nugent to Wellesley, 1811, ‘Copy of a paper delivered to 
Lord Wellesley... June 2nd 1811’, ‘Memorandum of a conversation with Lord 
Wellesley... 9 June 1811’, B.P.; Bentinck’s secret memorandum to Wellesley, 
July 1811, FO 70/44; Bentinck to Wellington, 14 Nov. 1811, B.P. The Archduke’s 
chief agents were Gen. Nugent—his emissary to‘ Wellesley in 1811—and the Pied- 
montese Count de la Tour, like Nugent an Austrian officer. Bentinck told La Tour 
in July ‘he must not imagine that this was taken up with very great interest athome.. 
. 
all their attention was directed to Portugal.... Nugent might have been there still, 
if my going to the Mediterranean had not made indispensable a decision’: Minute of 
conversation at Cagliari, July 1811, B.P. Cf. C.S.B. Buckland, Metternich and the 
British Government 
from 1809 to 1813 (1932), 183-4, 209-10, 231 ff., 246-57; G. Galla- 
vresi and V. Sallier de La Tour, Le Maréchal Sallier de La Tour (Turin, 1917), 225 
ff. 
PAGE 25 
other British agents in the Mediterranean. Memorandum by Bentinck, Maitland and La 
Tour, Palermo 20 Aug. 1811, in Gallavresi and la Tour, 261; Bentinck’s memorandum 
of 27 Sep., Bentinck to Hamilton, 25 Oct., Wellesley to Bentinck (secret) 21 Oct. 
1811, FO 70/44. Italian prisoners of war were to be sent from England to Sicily to be 
enrolled in the proposed Italian Levy. Austria’s consent to these plans was not thought 
necessary so long as her relations with France remained unchanged. The Archduke’s 
own position was nevertheless delicate, since he was, of course, a Hapsburg as well 
as an Italian prince (he was eventually to become notorious as Duke of Modena). 
in Sicily is not clear. 
A memorandum on the defence of Sicily, drawn up after Bentinck’s 
return and approved by him and by Henry Bunbury (Under-Secretary for War) 
considered Sicily to be probably in no immediate danger of invasion from France 
or Italy: memorandum enclosed with Liverpool to Wellesley, 12 Oct. 1811, FO 70/49. 
This might be taken as shewing that the decision to intervene was not made only 
on grounds of security, and that the Government must have accepted at least in part 
Bentinck’s thesis that Sicilian reform would mean a better chance of Italian insur- 
rection (cf. Crawley, 259 n. 3). Wellesley’s instructions, however, speak only of 
the inadequate defence of Sicily—especially the unreliability of the Court’s troops— 
and the persistence of internal disaffection. 
the withdrawal of the garrison. Wellesley to Bentinck, 7 Oct. 1811, FO 70/44. Bentinck 
had suggested that ‘to gild the pill’ the Court should be promised help in recovering 
Naples if they agreed to establish a free constitution there; but his instructions say 
nothing of this: Bentinck’s memorandum on Sicily, 29 Sep. 1811, ibid. 
already saved another Empire.... Bentinck to Wellington, at sea, 14 Nov. 1811, to 
Wellesley, 24 Oct. 1811, B.P. 
PAGE 26 
see your way clear, Letters to Bentinck from Adm. Boyles (24 Dec.), Wm. Hill, Minister 
at Cagliari (9 Oct.), Pellew (19 Aug., 15 Oct., 22, 31 Dec.), Lt.Gen. Sir Henry 
Calvert (20 July, 7 Dec.), Leckie (18 June), Amherst (13 Oct.), Maj.Gen. Frederick 
Maitland (26 July); similar letters from Lord Forbes (in command at Malta), Maj.Gen. 
Clinton, Dumouriez and Adm. Fremantle, July-Dec. 1811; all in B.P. Wellington 
to Bentinck, 24 Dec. 1811, Wellington, Despatches (ed. Gurwood, 2nd ed. 1844), 
v, 424. “The English may properly be deemed the oppressors of Sicily.... We 
wish the good will of this people and their happiness, yet with a strange inconsistency 
we enable their rulers to overwhelm them, and then we are vexed that we cannot 
prevent it.... We are fighting ourselves’: Maitland (in command at Messina) to 
Bentinck, 31 Aug. 1811, B.P. Amherst thought the British Constitution would suit 
Sicily, ‘for the genius and disposition of the Sicilians and their Constitution is very 
like our own. ... Abuses and deviations have crept in, God knows, in abundance, 

<<<PDFPAGE 197>>>
NOTES 
; 
18t 
but the seeds of reform exist in the Parliament, and only want to be brought to ma- 
turity’: to Bentinck, 13 Oct 1811, B.P. 
nothing was done. Douglas to Wellesley, 5, 26 Sep., 7 Oct. 1811, FO 70/43; the Queen 
to Serracapriola (Sicilian agent in Petersburg), 3 Sep. 1811, in Corti, op. cit., 613; 
Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 66-7; account of Ascoli-Bentinck conversations of 5, 6 Jan. 
1812, in Bentinck to Wellesley, 11 Jan. 1812, FO 70/51. 
to use force if necessary. Maitland to Liverpool, 15 Sep. 1811, FO 70/49; to Bentinck, 
15 Sep., 18, 19 Dec. 1811, 1 Feb. 1812, B.P.; Douglas to Wellesley, 12 Nov. 1811, FO 
70/43; correspondence between Douglas, Maitland, and Maj.Gen. Donkin, Nov., Dec. 
1811, PRO G.D. 7/1; F. Romeo, Mirror presented to His Sicilian Majesty (1820); 
Bianco, 104-7; Valente, 264-5; Johnston, Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 71 n. ff. It is 
virtually impossible to tell how far the Court was involved. That something was 
afoot appears from what the French General Goldemar told Maj.Gen. Donkin 
(D.Q.M.G., Messina) in February 1812: “Dans son [Bentinck’s] absence il y avait 
vraiment de beaux moments—mais, de trés beaux moments. Si nous eussions pu 
décider cette vilaine Cour 4 éclater—mais cette B .. .sse la Reine avec son machia- 
vélisme a manceuyré et manceuvré tant, que voila ce diable de Bentinck qui revient . . . 
nous aurions di faire beaucoup si cette femme se fit décidée seulement: votre armée 
était perdue et la Sicile 4 nous...’: in O. Browning, ‘Queen Caroline of Naples’ 
(E.H.R., 1887), 514. Maitland to Douglas, 7 Dec. 1811, GD 7/1. 
PAGE 27 
would not ask for such a step. Bentinck signed the following declaration: ‘Je n’ai jamais 
demandé ni directement ni indirectement l’abdication du Roi—je n’y ai jamais méme 
pensé...’: Journal, 14 Jan. 1812. 
use her as a scapegoat. Ascoli had been the first to urge the King to abdicate: Valente, 
op. cit., 122-5. He tried to shift all the blame from the King to the Queen: ‘you see 
her influence over him’ he told Bentinck, ‘if she urges him to anything, poor man, 
he begins to cry. He is weak by character . . .’. Ascoli also hinted that he was the only 
man capable of holding power without falling under the Queen’s influence: Bentinck 
to Wellesley, 11 Jan. 1812, FO 70/51. 
could but die in the contest. Ibid.; Journal, 2, 4, 10 Jan. 1812; Bentinck to Wellesley, 
26 Dec. 1811, FO 70/44. Balsamo, 42-3; Sir R. T. Wilson, Private Diary (ed. Randolph, 
1861), i, 34-5. The Queen told the British Consul that if Bentinck attempted force 
“it will be a most fatal day... blood will probably flow in torrents... if your 
Government wish to get rid of me, why do not they give me poison, or have me 
stabbed? ... and thus I am to be Prisonniére des Anglais, to be put on board a vessel, 
and sent to England, possibly massacred on the passage, or put in the Tower when I 
arrive; but I solemnly declare, I will never go there alive’, etc.: Robert Fagan to 
Bentinck, 23 Dec. 1811, FO 70/44. ‘She said there was only one way to save their 
honour, that was [for the King] to put himself at the head of his Neapolitans and 
return to Naples. The King might perish but he would die like Tippoo Saib upon the 
breach’: Journal, 13 Jan. 1812. 
five barons who were still in exile. Journal, 14 Jan.; Cesare Airoldi to Bentinck, 30 Dec. 
1811, B.P. Adm. Fremantle (in command in Sicilian waters) warned Bentinck against 
further delay: the Toulon fleet might elude the blockade (as it had done some years 
earlier) and Murat’s forces might soon attempt another landing: to Bentinck, 30 
Dec. 1811, FO 70/51. But Fremantle may have exaggerated the danger for the benefit 
of the Foreign Office. He was more violently hostile to the Court than Bentinck 
himself: see The Wynne Diaries (ed. Anne Fremantle, vol. iii, 1940), passim. 

<<<PDFPAGE 198>>>
182 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
~*~ 
PAGE 29 
because we were compelled. Bentinck to Wellesley, 26, 31 Dec. 1811, FO 70/44, 1, 11, 
25 Jan. 1812, FO 70/51; Journal, 1-20 Jan. 1812, passim; Minute of conversation 
with Orleans, 19 Dec. 1811, B.P.; Balsamo, 42 ff. The Prince’s account of his decisive 
conversation with Bentinck is printed in Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 
82 n., and 
tallies with Bentinck’s. 
Castlereagh was Foreign Secretary. ‘I do not congratulate you on the removal of Lord Wel- 
lesley... . I believe he would have given you every assistance in maturing and perfect- 
ing the reformation which you have begun in the Sicilian Government’: Amherst to 
Bentinck, 15 Mar. 1812, B.P. Sydenham sent Bentinck Wellesley’s unofficial congratu- 
lations, mingled with gibes at Castlereagh and Perceval: to Bentinck, 19 Apr. 1812, B.P. 
PAGE 30 
the preservation of the alliance. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 6 Mar., (private) 7 Mar. 1812, 
FO 70/50. In asking for proofs of the Court’s treachery, Castlereagh remarked that 
‘the universal sense which has prevailed both at home and abroad, that without some 
decisive measure on our part, the island of Sicily and with it the British Army was 
likely to be betrayed to the enemy, will in all probability shield this transaction against 
anattack’. 
rather than by force. Journal, 31 Jan. 1812. 
there is no middle way. Balsamo, 42, 53; various patriotic memoranda to Bentinck 
(anonymous, for fear of discovery by the Court), B.P. 
PAGE 31 
the same Chief and the same Government. Bentinck to Circello, 27 Jan., in Bentinck to 
Wellesley, 29 Jan. 1812, FO 70/51. 
influence, past and present, of the Queen. Journal, 27 Jan., 4 Feb., 2, 5, Mar. 1812. 
would be permanent. Journal, 28 Jan., 19, 24 Feb, 1812. Belmonte talked at first of setting 
aside the Prince and establishing a Regency: ibid., 3 Feb. 
PAGE 32 
exclusion of all others. Bentinck’s Journal abounds in instances of Belmonte’s rather 
engaging boastfulness. On one occasion he asked Bentinck, ‘where will you find such 
another man (himself) c’est une 4me de fer avec le coeur d’un Spartiate dans le milieu 
des esclaves .. . had he been in England there would have been siécles since he would 
have been Prime Minister but at his age he was nothing’: Journal, 16 Mar. 1812. 
Belmonte complained frequently of Bentinck’s excessive moderation: ‘he was always 
impatienté with my froideur ... we English had trop de loyauté’: ibid., 15 Mar. 
be indifferent to it. Journal 20, 24 Feb. ‘[The Prince] asked do you mean to dictate the 
Ministers to me? I answered by no means, I only had to require that those should be 
selected who enjoyed the public opinion’: Bentinck to Wellesley, 17 Mar., FO 70/51. 
PAGE 33 
not to be deceived on this point. Journal, 20 Mar.; Bentinck to Wellesley, 17 Mar., FO 
70/51. For the whole of the negotiations leading up to the change of administration: 
ibid.; Journal, 19 Jan.-26 Mar. 1812, passim.; Balsamo, 52-3. 
PAGE 34 
finally issued on 1 May. The Prince was, however, induced to allow the mention in the 
Despatch of a reform of abuses, and of such improvements in the laws as would 
‘lead to the happiness of 
this kingdom’: Journal, 21, 23 Feb.,25, 28 Apr. 1812; Bentinck 
to Castlereagh, 30 Mar., 6 May 1812, FO 70/51. In urging the inclusion of the word 

<<<PDFPAGE 199>>>
NOTES 
183 
‘constitution’, Bentinck wrote to the Prince as follows: ‘Il m’a paru toujours 3 
désirer que ce que l’on fait dans la Sicile soit un modéle pour I'Italie. La premiére 
proclamation que je ferais en Italie déclarerait l’assemblée d’un parlement pour 
établir les droits et la liberté du peuple, pour reformer les abus, pour éter la conscription 
etc. etc. ... Je représenterai V.A.R. comme le Prince Patriote, qui ne désire que de 
rétablir le bonheur de votre peuple sur les bases de la liberté. J’enverrai ce papier sur 
tout les cétes de I’Italie. 
.. 
. On ne peut vaincre ce terrible Despot qu’avec les armes 
de la vérité, de la liberté, et de la vertu, et en toutes occasions il est sage de mettre 
en avant, et de prouver par les faits que tels sont les principes de sa conduite’: Bentinck 
to the Prince, 25 Apr. 1812, in Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
6 May 1812, FO 70/51; 
printed in part by A. Capograssi, Gl’Inglesi in Italia... (Lord W. Bentinck) (Bari, 
1949), 92. 
the path of constitutional monarchy. Journal, 5 May 1812; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 9 July 
1812, FO 70/sr. 
one of Bentinck’s peremptory Notes. Journal, 23 May 1812. See Capograssi, op. cit., 89-91, 
for an account of the Prince’s attitude, based on his correspondence in the Naples 
Archives. This was destroyed in 1943. 
PAGE 35 
his power came from God. Journal, 
1 Aug. 1812; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 27 Aug., 
FO 70/52. 
set aside when it suited him. 
A mot of the Prince of Pantelleria’s, one of the King’s 
friends among the nobles. Belmonte remarked that ‘in speaking to the King it was 
of advantage to make use of metaphors’: Journal, 29 July 1812, 
the King’s approval. Journal, 30 Jan., 2, 12, 17, 18 Mar. 1812. 
caused the text of the Despatch to be altered. Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 118. Bentinck 
heard from Aci that the Prince had sent his father the draft of the Despatch for his 
approval: Journal, 2 May 1812. Cf. Corti, 775. 
no grounds for comfort. The King’s stock answer to what he considered Bentinck’s 
excesses was ‘I shall write down what you say and send it to England’: e.g. Journal, 
1 Aug. 1812. At the end of August 1812 despatches from Castelcicala led him to 
believe that Bentinck was fully backed up by his Government: Ferdinand’s Journal 
(Giornale d’ Affari), 20 Aug. 1812. But—as later entries in the Giornale d’ Affari 
shew—this belief did not really take root. 
an ‘ambitious and ungrateful son’. 
Journal, 27 Apr., 31 Aug. 1812; Capograssi, 87-9. 
The King filled his Journal, from the very start of the Vicariate, with complaints 
of his son’s disobedience. The Queen cared little who heard her aspersions on the 
Prince’s conduct—‘Bete qu’il est—she cursed him in all languages’: Journal, 18 Apr. 
1812. Bentinck was astonished to learn that the Prince continued to write affectionate 
letters to his mother, often twice a day, when ‘she hates him, he fears her!’: Journal 
23 Apr. 1812. He could not understand this peculiarly Mediterranean kind of family 
feeling, which could combine mutual exasperation with mutual devotion, and made 
the Prince—a man in his thirties, himself a father—as submissive as a child before 
his parents. 
PAGE 36 
dangers to which it might give rise. Journal, 20, 24 Feb., 20 Mar., 23 Apr. 1812. 
the reproach of Posterity on the other. Belmonte’s phrase: Journal, 27 Oct. 1812. ‘I stated 
my belief of the Hereditary Prince being afraid of damnation in the next world if 
he disobliged his parents . 
. 
. [Orleans] said it was not easy to know the extent to which 
the whole family was influenced by the fears of religion’: ibid., 30 June 1812. Cf. 
the Prince’s letters in Capograssi, 73, Valente, 270 n., 271 n. 

<<<PDFPAGE 200>>>
184 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
Obviously the Queen. Journal, 5 Feb., 2 Mar. 1812; Wilson, Diary, i, 55-8. ‘I think it 
quite certain that she will endeavour to persuade His Majesty to resume the Royal 
authority; but I should doubt much her succeeding against the King’s indolence and 
timidity’: Bentinck to Wellesley, 11 Feb. 1812, FO 70/51. 
no remedy for the island’s political troubles. H. M. Lackland, ‘Lord William Bentinck in 
Sicily, 1811-12’ (E.H.R., xlii, 1927), 394; ead., “The Failure of the Constitutional 
Experiment in Sicily, 1813-14’ (E.H.R., 
xli, 1926), 
210-11. The first modern 
historians to deal with this subject made the mistake of supposing that the struggle 
between Bentinck and Maria Carolina was the major theme: O. Browning, ‘Queen 
Caroline of Naples’ (E.H.R., ii, 1887); Helfert, Kénigin Karolina von Neapel (Vienna, 
1878). 
PAGE 37 
even to England. Journal, 1812, passim. Bentinck saw the Queen only twice between the 
beginning of the Vicariate and her departure from Sicily in June 1813; but he heard 
almost daily about her sayings and doings—which were mostly public property 
anyway—from the Duke and Duchess of Orleans, from Belmonte, from Cassaro, 
and from the British Consul, Robert Fagan—the only Englishman with whom the 
Queen remained on good terms. 
the prattle of a visiting Englishman. Journal, 10 June 1812. Sir Robert Wilson visited 
Sicily in May and indiscreetly encouraged the Queen’s belief that Bentinck’s acts 
were contrary to British policy: Wilson, Diary, i, 55-8; Bentinck to Bathurst (private) 
6 Dec. 1812. Hist. MSS. Comm. Bathurst MSS., 221-2. 
agents continued to infest her antechamber. StClair hinted to Orleans and Belmonte that 
the Queen would consent to a Parliament in Sicily and a Constitution for Naples 
if the King was allowed to resume: Journal, 
1 Mar. 1812. 
appealing to Austria and Russia for help. These rumours were the staple of conversation 
at Palermo—e.g. ‘reports in circulation of Guillotines ordered by the Queen... 
strange reports current in the town of the intention of the Queen to confine me and 
Lady William, Lord and Lady Montgomerie and Gen. McFarlane’: Journal, 27 Jan. 
1812. They appear in a mass of informers’ reports (particularly those of J. Badge 
and the Abate Milano, the Queen’s librarian) among the Bentinck papers. There is 
no telling whether Bentinck paid any attention to these reports, which were, like 
most of their kind, inaccurate and tendentious. 
so many years of Martyre. Journal, 12 Mar. (report of Belmonte’s interview with the 
Prince), 27, 30 Mar., 26 May, 4 June, 27, 28 July, 9, 18 Aug., 28 Sep., 8, 15, 19, 29 Oct. 
1812 (interviews with Cassaro or Caccamo). 
c’est sa mére—sa mere. Journal, 4 Sep. 1812. 
PAGE 38 
that of governing 
.... Journal, 2, 24 Mar. 1812. 
new Vespers against the English. Bentinck to Wellesley, 19 Mar. 1812, FO 70/51. Cassetti 
had been known to the British since 1810 as ‘the grand channel of intercourse with 
the enemy’: Bunbury, 320. He was undoubtedly employed by Murat to establish a 
correspondence with the Queen: J. Rambaud. ‘Il tentativo di Murat contro la Sicilia 
nel 1810’ (in Arch. Stor. Prov. Napoletane, 1911) 448-9. A Royalist writer who was 
involved in this affair admits that the Queen used Cassetti for the same purpose: 
Principe di Canosa, I Piffari di montagna (‘Dublin’, 1821), 46-53. Cassetti had been 
arrested by the Sicilian Government in November 1811, apparently as an earnest of 
their loyalty to England; but the whole business is exceedingly obscure: Douglas- 
Maitland correspondence, Noy. 1811, PRO GD/7/1; Douglas to Wellesley, 12 Nov. 
1811, FO 70/43. Cf. also Valente, 258-63 ; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 69 n.-71. The whole 

<<<PDFPAGE 201>>>
NOTES 
185 
question of the queen’s ‘treachery’ is difficult (and largely unprofitable) to disentangle. 
There is evidence that she was in correspondence with Murat and possibly with France. 
There is also evidence that at various times she thought of giving up Sicily in exchange 
for her husband’s restoration to Naples. On the other hand, there can be no doubt 
that the marriage of her granddaughter Marie-Louise (which aroused such suspicion 
among the British in Palermo) genuinely horrified her (see her letters to Ruffo, to 
the Empress Maria Ludovika, and to the Emperor Francis, 22, 23 Mar., 7 Apr. 1810, 
in Corti, 768-9, 772). But eighteen months later, after Bentinck’s first remonstrances, 
she was ready to take refuge in Vienna (as she had often thought of doing before) 
and to ask Napoleon’s leave to do so; she hinted that the Emperor should intercede 
with Napoleon to reconcile him with King Ferdinand and with herself (to the 
Emperor Francis, 30 Aug., to Ruffo, 9 Sep. 1811, in Corti, 614). At the same moment, 
however, she was thinking of calling in the Russians (see p. 26 and note). In fact she 
had no settled plan at all—only a settled desire to recover Naples—and it seems most 
likely that by this time her mind was too unstable to allow her to follow any coherent 
policy. 
a remoter part of Sicily. Journal, 4 May 1812. In his letter Bentinck, after complaining 
of the Queen’s continued opposition to the new regime, went on: ‘If to these causes 
of dissatisfaction were to be added the fact within my knowledge that Your Majesty 
has been carrying on a direct correspondence with our enemy, a fact that I hope 
will not and shall not through my means transpire, I leave to Your Majesty to judge 
whether it will not be prudent for Your Majesty to retire in time from Palermo 
before these circumstances can become the subject of further discussion and irritation’: 
Bentinck to the Queen, 16 Mar. 1812, FO 70/51. 
refusing to see them. Bentinck to Wellesley, 19 Mar., to Castlereagh, 6 May, 27 June 
1812, FO 70/51. Most of the correspondence is printed—with a few inaccuracies—in 
Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 108-20. 
PAGE 39 
the objects of Your Lordship’s attention. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 19 May 1812, FO 70/50; 
Parliamentary Debates 
(Commons), xxii, 187 (debate of 25 Mar. 1812: Castlereagh 
referred there to Bentinck’s acts up to the proclamation of the Vicariate, but his 
attitude did not change during the next few months). His despatch of 19 May, 
concerning the Queen, was delayed at the request of Castelcicala, who hoped to 
gain something from a personal interview with the Regent; but the despatch was 
sent unaltered on 14 July, with a further expression of Castlereagh’s complete ap- 
proval: to Bentinck, 14 July 1812, FO 70/50. 
PAGE 40 
must be safeguarded. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 19 May, 24 Sep., 22 Oct. 1812, FO 70/50. 
A typical example: ‘H.R.H. relies on your continuing to press these points [reforms] 
on the Royal Family of Sicily with the necessary firmness, and at the same time with 
a due attention to the dignity of their situation’: to Bentinck (private and secret) 
14 July 1812, B.P. 
a good and great nation. Bentinck to Wellesley (secret) 1 Jan. 1812, FO 70/51. 
PAGE 4I 
nearly the whole of Bentinck’s mission. This could sometimes appear an advantage: ‘I have 
had sad counteraction and most unfortunate delay has been the consequence, but 
without the pretexts that such conduct afforded, I never could have asked for or 
obtained all that I have. The enemy have completely played into my hands. With 
a little cunning and seeming acquiescence, the Queen might have flouted me from 
the beginning and prevented me from ever moving an inch’: Bentinck to Bunbury 

<<<PDFPAGE 202>>>
186 
BENTINCK AND SICILY. 
(private) 31 Aug. 1812, Hist. MSS. Comm., Bathurst MSS., 208. This, however, was 
written in a moment of optimism. 
the headquarters of the patriotic party. ‘We now stand at the head of a large party of 
Sicilians who have been accustomed to meet at the Minister’s house and with whom 
this has been the chief means of communication’: Frederick Lamb (Secretary of 
Legation at Palermo) to Castlereagh, 10 Dec. 1812, FO 70/60. 
some of which the Prince attended. Bianco, 121; Bentinck to Wellesley, 14 Mar., to Castle- 
reagh, 5 May 1812, FO 70/51; Journal, 11 May. At one of Bentinck’s entertainments, 
a masked ball attended by the Hereditary Prince and Princess, Orleans appeared as 
a ligueur, Butera’s bastard as John Bull (‘very good’), and the other nobles in equally 
appropriate costumes: Journal, 17 Jan. 1813. 
solicited his favour. Journal, 19, 22 Jan., 19 Mar., 14 Sep. 1812; Gargallo (outgoing War 
Minister) to Bentinck, 19 Jan., B. P. Ascoli, whose exile to Cagliari Bentinck had 
exacted, wrote him no fewer than five comically fulsome letters before leaving (Mar. 
isle) fe 1} 2 
riots against the government. ‘Permettez-moi... de vous demander ... s'il est possible 
que soit vrai le bruit général qui vous représente vous adressant 4 la populace en 
differens quartiers de la ville, attaquant le Gouvernment 
du Prince Héréditaire, 
disant des invectives contre ses Ministres, et voulant augmenter le mécontentement par 
rapport au pain? Est-ce possible qu’un homme de votre naissance puisse vouloir 
exciter le peuple 4 la revolte ou que vous puissiez ignorer que vous en seriez la 
premiére victime 
? Je veux me persuader que vous n’avez jamais pu tenir une conduite 
que comme votre ami je regretterais infiniment, et que, comme Ministre d’ Angleterre 
chargé de la défense et de la tranquillité de la Sicile, je ne pourrais jamais permettre’: 
Bentinck to Butera, 24 June 1812, Secret Letter-Book, B.P. 
deport the monk to Lipari. Journal, 27 Apr. 1812. “They might bring him back the next 
day if they pleased.’ 
stanzas, satires and sonnets. Journal, 20 May 1812; collection of patriotic political liter- 
ature, B.P. 
PAGE 42 
the refusal of it. Journal, 29 Mar. 1813. 
which he, Belmonte, disapproved. Journal, 12, 21, 25 Apr., 26, 29, 30 May, 12 June, 22 Sep., 
23 Oct. 1812; the Prince to Bentinck, 29 June, B.P. 
PAGE 43 
revolutionary developments. Journal, 9 May, 17 Oct. 1812. 
his and Bentinck’s protests. Ibid., 29 Mar., 27 Oct. 1812. 
the antics of the natives. Of an informal council on the grain shortage, Bentinck noted 
“Curious scene—[the Prince of] Paternd cried’. And of another conference, ‘Fardella 
and di Aci hating each other most horribly met like friends. They act well here!’: 
Journal, 26, 30 Sep. 1812. 
construe conciliation into weakness. Journal, 24 June, 13 Oct. 1812. ‘Here as in India, 
moderation is always ascribed to weakness’: to Castlereagh, 9 July, FO 70/52. 
every country she could reach. L. Blanch, ‘Luigi de’ Medici’, 163 n.; Wilson, Diary, 1, 63. 
did not dwell upon. ‘I have no doubt of being able to bring affairs to such a conclusion 
as shall be for the honour and happiness of the Royal Family, the prosperity and 
greatness of Sicily, and the advantage of Great Britain’: Bentinck to Castlereagh 
(private) 31 Mar. 1812, FO 70/51. Three months later Bentinck wrote that if he 
should lose his power of controlling the subsidy, ‘at no distant period it may be expected 

<<<PDFPAGE 203>>>
NOTES 
187 
that things will revert to their former situation, that a new set of men will be in 
power, and the ancient system of policy revived’: to Castlereagh, 28 June, ibid. 
PAGE 44 
abuses no less burdensome. Journal, 10 Jan., 2, 23 Apr., 22 Dec. 1812. Cf. Romeo, 126n. 
to bow at the Elevation. Journal, 27 Nov. 1812. 
the unwritten constitution of Britain. Webster, i, 82. The Constitution will be referred to 
as the English Constitution, since that was the phrase generally used by Bentinck 
and the Sicilians. 
PAGE 45 
the means of carrying them out. Balsamo, 53-5. Balsamo says Bentinck helped to prepare 
the draft from the beginning; but it is clear from Bentinck’s Journal that he did not 
see it until Belmonte brought it to him in two parts (12, 25 Apr. 1812). 
without the King’s consent. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 27 July 1812, FO 70/52; Journal, 
17 Mar., 19, 28 Apr., 4 June 1812. 
PAGE 46 
the Nation’s general welfare. Castelnuovo’s Memorandum ‘Raggioni per la pronta 
convocazione del Parlamento’, 3 Feb. 1812, B.P.; id., Report on Sicilian Finances 
presented to Parliament, 1812, Arch. di Stato, Palermo, Fondo Fitalia No. 19. 
he professed to dislike. Airoldi’s Memorandum to Bentinck, Dec. 1811, B. P. Airoldi 
begins with an orthodox Lockian interpretation of political institutions, but ends 
by advocating a Parliament almost as powerful as the French Convention. 
a clause abolishing feudal privileges. Journal, 23 Feb., 5, 6 June 1812. 
PAGE 47 
Sicilian or English bayonets. Journal, 10 Jan., 2, 13 Mar. 1812; Balsamo, 59-60, 63-4. 
Balsamo says the decision was Bentinck’s alone, but Bentinck’s Journal shews that 
it was Belmonte who caused him to change his mind. 
a running deficit of 40,000 ounces a month. The ounce was worth about 13s. 
other parts of the island. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 5 May 1812, FO 70/51; Bianco, 119-26; 
Alessi’s Diary (Bibl. Com. Palermo, MSS. Qq B 7), 30, 31 Mar. 1812; Journal, 
20 Apr. 1812. ‘For Palermo, show the greatest firmness and vigour against the extra- 
vagant ideas of the comon [sic] people and make them steadily understand that they 
must eat bread at the current price of corn.... Without this there never will be 
security of property and trade, and consequently it will be impossible to have a 
regular supply of corn... . Leave [it] totally to the interest and the exertions of the 
Merchants and Farmers’: Balsamo’s Memorandum, ‘Remedy for the present scarcity’, 
no date, B.P. (in English). Balsamo conceded that the government might buy corn 
and release it at times of scarcity to bring down prices. Bentinck thought the govern- 
ment should either continue to subsidise bread, or else explain clearly to the people 
what it was doing: Journal, 20 Apr. 1812. 
impossible to tell. Balsamo, 55-9; Journal, 20-25 May 1812; Mémoire de Marie Caroline, 
111; N. Niceforo (E. del Cerro), ‘La Sicilia e la costituzione del 1812’ (in Archivio 
Storico Siciliano, xli, 1916), 332-3. 
PAGE 48 
suffer with their lives’ he said. Journal, 28 Apr., 29 May 1812. 
champion of the pure English Constitution. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 June 1812, FO 70/51; 
Journal, 27 May, I, 2 June; Castelcicala to Castlereagh, 
9 Mar. 1812, FO 70/53 

<<<PDFPAGE 204>>>
188 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
(Castelcicala reminded the British Government that they did not care much for 
Parliamentary Reform at home). Webster (i, 78) says the King first suggested the 
English Constitution. This is a plausible interpretation of Bentinck’s despatches (see 
p. 49 and note), but it is contradicted by Bentinck’s Journal and by the King’s own 
Giornale d’ Affari, which Webster could not have seen. In fact the King went on 
denying his son’s right to effect any kind of reform through Parliament. Only in 
August 1812 did he start insisting on the pure English Constitution—after Parliament 
had voted the Bases of the new Constitution. The deep-laid schemes which Webster 
attributes to him were not his but the Prince’s (see p. 50). All constitutions were 
anathema to the King; if he later clung to the English it was as a pis-aller. 
the prospect for reform was bleak. Journal, 26-29 May 1812; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
30 June 1812, FO 70/51. This long despatch has been used as the chief source for the 
account which follows of the political events of June 1812. Sometimes Bentinck’s 
journal has been used to disentangle the chronology, and to fillin gaps in the despatch. 
PAGE 49 
his brother at Palermo. Journal, 29, 31 May 1812. Bentinck was aware of Aci’s part in 
fathering this proposal, but did not mention it in his despatch of 30 June—perhaps 
because Aci had already figured in earlier despatches as a wrong-headed, meddlesome 
person; instead he merely wrote that the Royal Family had become enamoured of 
the English Constitution. 
a model and a slogan. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 Mar. 1812; Capograssi, ch. v. Moliterno’s 
and the Court’s plans for expeditions to Naples had caused Amherst and Stuart 
much anxiety in 1810; the Queen and the Prince were still talking of such an expedition 
in 1812: Journal, 31 Mar. Moliterno was a peculiar character, a philosophic republican 
though a great friend of the Bourbons: ‘He called [the Queen] Cittadina Imperatrice 
—she begged him to leave the cittadina de coté and to make her imperatrice’: Journal, 
13 Mar., 11 June 1812. 
a means of getting round entails. Balsamo, $5, 63; Balsamo’s draft of Royal Assent to 
constitutional article concerning entails, Arch. Stato Palermo, Fondo Fitalia, No. 31. 
PAGE 50 
those wild politicians. Journal, 8, 16, 17 June. ‘I said how lucky it was that Cassaro’s son 
had translated this work. . .. Belmonte said c’est moi qui ai fait tout I told the Princess 
qui est pleine d’esprit to insinuate to her husband the English Constitution’: ibid., 
16 June. 
make a complete cypher of him. The Prince to Castelcicala (quoted by Capograssi, 121), 
to Caccamo, 11 June, 29 Aug. 1812 (quoted by Valente, 140-5) ; Journal, 29 May-6 June 
1812. 
PAGE $I 
the Prince and Cassaro had persuaded him. Ferdinand’s Giornale d’ Affari, early June 1812 
(this journal does not always give precise dates) ; Journal, 2, 4 June. 
now only a week off. The Queen’s comments on the proposals for a Constitution and 
expedition (6 June) and the King’s reply (7 June) are printed in full from the Bourbon 
family papers at Munich in Corti, 776-7. The Queen’s exhortations may have 
encouraged the King to draw up his questionnaire, but she disapproved of its terms 
and urged Caccamo (who, as usual, was acting with Cassaro as go-between) not to 
deliver it. The demand for a pension, she pointed out, was something they might 
consider among themselves, but not put openly to Bentinck, as it might then suggest 
to him a means of obtaining the King’s abdication: to Caccamo, 9 June, ibid., 779. 

<<<PDFPAGE 205>>>
NOTES 
189 
PAGE §2 
all sense but common sense. Journal, 4-12, 17 June; the Queen to the Prince, 15 June, 
B.P. (copy); Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 121-2. 
PAGE $3 
the most enlightened and virtuous nation. Journal, 29, 31 May, I, 3, 8, 10, 16, 18, 22 June; 
Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 June 1812, FO 70/51. It is not quite clear whether the 
plan which Bentinck praised in this despatch was Balsamo’s. Balsamo himself states 
(p. 63) that he prepared his abstract in a few days’ intensive work; but he does not 
say exactly when he prepared it, nor can we tell whether it was the same as the draft 
which Aci shewed Bentinck on June 22nd, and on which Bentinck would not then 
pronounce. Everybody seems to have gone about with draft Constitutions at this time. 
PAGE S54 
la liberté et Pindépendence. Bentinck to Liverpool, 25 Jan., to Wellington, 23 Feb. 1812, 
Liverpool to Bentinck, 4 Mar., to Wellington 5 Mar., W.S.D. vii, 289, 296, 300-2; 
Journal, 17 May; correspondence between the Archduke Francis and Bentinck, 1812, 
B.P.; Colin Mackenzie to Bentinck, Cagliari 28 June 1812, B.P.; Bentinck to the 
Archduke Francis, 26 Oct. 1812, Secret Letter-Book, B.P. 
asked for time. Journal, 31 May, I June. 
PAGE 55 
did not at first reject them. Concannon’s reports to Bentinck, 29 May, 9 June, enclosed in 
Bentinck to Castlereagh, 25 June 1812, FO 70/51; Bentinck to Bathurst (confidential), 
25 Dec. 1812, Hist. MSS. Comm. Bathurst MSS., 218; Journal, 8 June; Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, 30 June, enclosing Secret Memorandum to the Prince, 20 June, FO 70/51. 
Bentinck had previously expressed very similar ideas on an expedition to Italy in a 
Note to Circello of 27 Jan. 1812 (FO 70/51) and in conversation with the Prince: 
Journal, 20, 29 Feb. He had, however, hinted that Britain would be in a position to 
influence in the Bourbons’ favour the Neapolitans’ ‘election’ of a ruler. 
PAGE 56 
Castlereagh, it may be noted, said nothing. Wellington to Bathurst, 
14 July 1812, 
Wellington Dispatches, v, 743-5; Liverpool to Wellington, 19 Aug.,W.S.D. vii, 401; 
Mulgrave to Bathurst, ... 1812, Bathurst MSS., 223; Bathurst to Wellington, 6 Aug., 
W.S.D. vii, 374-7; Castlereagh to Bentinck (private) 26 Sep. 1812, Castlereagh Corr., 
viii, 275-6; Bentinck to Castlereagh (private and secret) 26 Oct. 1812 (draft), Bunbury 
to Bentinck (private) 11 July 1812, B. P. Bentinck described Bathurst as his friend in 
the Cabinet in a letter to Charles Greville, 7 Apr. 1813, Private Letter Book, B.P. 
PAGE 57 
wise and moderate legislation. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 June, FO 70/51; Balsamo, 63; 
Guarnieri, ‘Sulla tradizione popolare in Sicilia della garanzia data . . 
. per la costituzione 
del 1812’ (in Arch. Stor. Sic., xiv, 1899); Niceforo, xli, 347-8. 
sailed at once under Maitland. Letters to Bentinck from Pellew (20 June), Maitland (4 June), 
McFarlane (21 June), B.P.; Adm. Fremantle to Bentinck, 12 June (preferring an 
Italian to a Catalan expedition), B.P.; Journal, 28 June (“Determined upon Gen. 
Nugent’s information that the expedition should go to Spain...’), 6 Sep. 1812 
(‘I told Count Latour of my intention to have gone to Italy if the Court had consented 
to my proposals’); Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 June 1812, FO 70/s1. 
PAGE 58 
when and if Parliament met. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 9, 25 July 1812, FO 70/52; Mémoire 
de Marie-Caroline, 124-6; Journal, 27-30 June, 4-9, 13, 16, 20 July. 

<<<PDFPAGE 206>>>
190 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
* 
it is certainly weak. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 9 July, FO 70/52. 
PAGE 59 
called for 20 July. Journal, 7, 8, 23 July; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 9, 25 July, FO 70/52 
(enclosing exchange of Notes with the Prince and Belmonte). 
PAGE 60 
along the lines of the English model. Balsamo, 65-8; Journal, 21, 22 July. The Bases are 
printed in full in Capograssi, 281-5, also (together with the various motions, reso- 
lutions, etc.) in Societa Siciliana per la Storia Patria, Documenti per servire alla storia della 
Sicilia, ser. Il, vol. viii (Palermo, 1887). No record of the actual debates was kept in 
any of the Parliaments of this period. 
PAGE OI 
gratifying and proud duty this is. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 25 July 1812, FO 70/52; to 
G.F. Leckie, 26 July (autograph copy), B.P. 
PAGE 62 
beautiful island of Sicily. Amherst to Bentinck, 28 Oct. 1812. B.P. 
PAGE 63 
the control and protection of the British Government. Letters to Bentinck from Sir Edward 
Pellew (4 Feb., 6 Mar., 16, 27 Aug.), William Hamilton, Under-Secretary for 
Foreign Affairs (private and secret, 26 Feb.), Joseph Thompson, of East India House 
(27 Apr.), the Bishop of Limerick (16 Mar.); also from Gen. Oakes (Governor of 
Malta), Lt.-Gen. Colin Campbell (Governor of Gibraltar), 
Stratford Canning, 
Col. Torrens, Sir Thomas Graham, Lord Yarborough, C. Yorke (of the Admiralty), 
Feb.-Oct. 1812; all in B.P. 
PAGE 64 
a better condition of life. Lord Sheffield to Charles Abbot, 6 Nov. 1812, in Diary and 
Correspondence of Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester (1861), ii, 409; Wilson, Diary, i, 37; 
Harrowby to Bathurst, 17 Sep. 1812, in Hist. MSS. Comm. Bathurst MSS., 214; 
E. Blaquiere, Letters from the Mediterranean (1813), i, $67; letters to Bentinck from 
Amherst (15 Mar., 26 July, 28 Oct. 1812), Maitland (14 Jan., 20 Apr.), Pellew 
(6 Aug.), Leckie (12 July 1813), B.P.; Bentinck to Leckie, 26 July 1812, B.P.; Alessandro 
Turri, draft for article in Gazzetta Britannica, 1812, B.P. Leckie published an article 
in the Morning Chronicle (10 Oct. 1812) attacking the Sicilian Constitution. 
PAGE 65 
what his own policy was leading to. Liverpool to Castlereagh, 11, 17 Mar. 1814, in Webster, 
i, §26-7; Castlereagh to Bentinck, 19 May 1812, FO 70/50; to Bentinck, 26 Sep. 1812, 
Castlereagh Corr. vili, 275-6; Parliamentary Debates (Commons), xxv, 789 (12 Apr. 1813). 
PAGE 66 
Royal Assent to the Bases. Balsamo, 70; Journal, 20, 22, 27 July 1812; draft of Sperlinga’s 
motion, B.P. Cassaro was at this moment in a key position, as the man most likely 
to persuade the King to assent; Bentinck was amused to note that the other Ministers 
“called Cassaro all the time Eccellentissimo’. 
PAGE 67 
most unhappy wife. The Queen to the King, 6 Aug., in Corti, 781. I have tried to reproduce 
the breathless style of the Italian original. 

<<<PDFPAGE 207>>>
NOTES 
I9I 
conformed absolutely to the English Constitution. Journal, 27 July-6 Aug.; Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, 27 Aug., FO 70/52; Ferdinand’s Giornale d’ Affari, 30 July-3 Aug.; 
Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 134-6. The King’s note authorising the Prince to assent, 
written on Aug. 2nd, made his assent conditional on Bentinck’s guaranteeing the 
pure English Constitution, the safety of the whole Royal Family, and the Civil 
List. The Prince spent several days trying fruitlessly to obtain the guarantees from 
Bentinck or else begging his father to give him greater discretion. In the end he had 
to be content with the King’s original note. 
PAGE 68 
surrender their privileges outright. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 27 Aug., FO 70/52; Bianco, 
128-9. 
PAGE 69 
the treaty could not be undone. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 Aug., 13 Sep. 1812, FO 70/52; 
Journal, 6 Aug.-4 Sep.; Giornale d’Affari, 18 Aug.-4 Sep.; the Queen to Fagan, 
19 Aug., translation in FO 70/52; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 137-43. Castelcicala 
urged the British Government in September to guarantee the possession of Naples: 
FO 70/64. 
masters and kings if you please. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 13 Sep., FO 70/52; to Bunbury 
(private) 31 Aug. 1812, Bathurst MSS., 208. 
PAGE 70 
plotting for the King’s return to power. Bentinck to the Prince, 17 Oct., in Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, 24/26 Oct. 1812, FO 70/52; Journal, 1, 10, 18, 28 Aug., 2, 5 Sep. It 
was at the beginning of September that, the Prince being ill, the Queen was suspected 
of having poisoned him. 
her departure from Sicily altogether. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 20 Aug., 15 Sep., FO 70/52; 
Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 132. Castlereagh’ s instruction of 19 May, giving Bentinck 
full discretion concerning the Queen, was held up at Castelcicala’s request, and did 
not reach Bentinck until 20 August. 
PAGE 71 
threats and demands could therefore be discounted. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 24/26 Oct. 
FO 70/52; Journal, 15, 22, 28 Sep., 8, 11, 15, 31 Oct.; Giornale d’ Affari, 13 Sep.-10 
Oct.; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 144-59 (prints many of the documents); Castlereagh 
to Bentinck, 14 July, (private) 
5 Dec. 1812, FO 70/50. According to Orleans the 
Queen wished to drive matters to a point where she would either call Bentinck’s 
bluff or—if he did use force—appeal to Europe against him: Journal, 11 Oct. She and 
the King had indeed heard from Castelcicala at the end of August that Bentinck had 
full powers and that even the Queen’s inviolability might not be certain (Giornale 
d’ Affari, 20 Aug.; Corti, 643-4). But this warning seems not to have quite sunk in. 
The Prince, still recovering from his illness, urged his mother to give in: he ‘crawled 
to her room and the Queen... abused him very much’: Journal, 23 Oct. Cf. Capo- 
grassi, 75. 
PAGE 72 
by Cassaro and Circello in his name. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 24/26 Oct., FO 70/52; 
Journal, 8-25 Oct.; Giornale d’ Affari, 15-24 Oct.; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 160-2. 
The note given to Bentinck by Cassaro and Circello announced the Queen’s intention 
of leaving, ending with ‘The King wishes Your Excellency to be fully informed 
and assured of it by our means’.—Among the Bentinck Papers are two papers ready 
for signature by the King, one announcing his abdication, the other solemnly promising 
that the Queen would leave first La Ficuzza and then Sicily; they are endorsed by 

<<<PDFPAGE 208>>>
192 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
. 
Bentinck ‘. . . taken by me to the Ficuzza, but the King not seeing me, they were not 
made use of’. Bentinck did not tell Castlereagh of this decision to demand the King’s 
abdication if necessary. Of his ultimatum to the King he wrote merely that he had 
threatened to use ‘other means’ if the King failed to answer (the King had lately 
returned a letter of Bentinck’s unopened). 
to reconcile the King to the Constitution. Bentinck to Bathurst (confidential) 25 Oct. 1812, 
Bathurst MSS., 218; Maj.-Gen. Donkin to Bentinck, 28 Aug., 8 Sep., 7, 17 Nov. 1812, 
B.P. Bentinck’s presence in Spain was all the more necessary as the commander of 
the expedition, Maitland, had had a nervous breakdown. 
PAGE 73 
out of all control. Ibid. The 1812 Constitution has been treated in great detail by Balsamo, 
Bianco, Niceforo, Crawley (full text in Societa Siciliana per la Storia Patria, Documenti 
per servire alla storia di Sicilia, ser. Il, vol. viii). In the following pages mention will 
be made only of its general outline and of salient points. 
PAGE 74 
so humbugged by the Hereditary Prince as Belmonte himself. Journal, 30 June, 24 July, 
6 Aug., 14 Oct., 15, 27 Dec. 1812; Balsamo, 72-6, 80-1. According to Balsamo, 
Belmonte, though ‘at bottom he was good and generous and valued Castelnuovo’, 
was led by vanity, ambition and the flattery of his friends into a belief that Castelnuovo 
was a ‘democrat’, influenced by French ideas and hostile to the nobility. (Balsamo 
was, of course, Castelnuovo’s lieutenant, but he is on the whole fair to Belmonte). 
Bentinck, for his part, sometimes wondered whether Belmonte was not still somewhat 
afraid of the Royal Family and therefore reluctant to press the Prince too hard. 
Orleans certainly thought that Belmonte’s most unpleasant period of captivity at 
Favignana had sapped his nerve as well as ruined his health. If so Belmonte had every 
excuse for caution: after the 1799 atrocities at Naples, he could expect no clemency 
from the Court if British support was once withdrawn from him—his and his friends’ 
heads ‘would be the first to go’: Journal, 27 July 1812. 
calculated to establish the public credit. Balsamo, 72-6; Journal, 15 July, 28 Aug., 20, 22 Nov., 
15 Dec. 1812. 
PAGE 75 
the existing confusion. Journal, 3, 13 Oct. 
did not interfere enough. Journal, 22, 27, 29 July, 23 Aug., 2 Sep. The member in British 
pay was Tommaso Dolce; he received £200 a year: ‘Memorandum of the secret 
missions .. .’, 24 May 1813, PRO GD 7/1. Bentinck told Castlereagh nothing of his 
informal relations with members of Parliament. 
PAGE 76 
the situation was saved. Journal, 1-4 Nov.; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
7 Nov., FO 70/52. 
The King objected to the very principle of a Civil List, and this episode seems to 
have been an attempt on his part to get round it. 
PAGE 77 
the independence of Sicily. No objection was raised in Parliament to the harsh policy of 
the Ministry towards the Neapolitan refugees, many of whom were deprived of 
their posts and pensions and deported to Naples or Tunis: Niceforo, op. cit., xliv 
(1922), 113-14. 
like England in the time of Henry VIII. Anjou’s Memorandum to Bentinck, 22 July 1812, 
B.P. About this time a ‘Compendium of the English Constitution’ was published, 
including Magna Charta, the Statute de Tallagio, the Habeas Corpus Act, etc.: adver- 

<<<PDFPAGE 209>>>
NOTES 
193 
tisement in Gazzetta Britannica, 30 Sep. 1812 (‘most useful in the present circum- 
stances’). It was needed: the Demaniale tried at one time to shift onto the Peers the 
unpopular task of originating money bills, but Dolce managed to persuade them 
that this was not the English practice: Journal, 22 July. English practice was also given 
as an argument for lowering the property qualification for the franchise: Balsamo, 77. 
any notion of Cabinet government. Balsamo, 76-9, 81; correspondence in Gazzetta Britannica, 
9 Sep., 7 Oct. (on Parliamentary administration of finances); Anjou to Bentinck, 
5 Sep., B.P. (on the same question); Bianco, 141-5. If Balsamo is to be believed, 
Romeo is mistaken in saying (p. 131) that Castelnuovo wished to lower the property 
qualification: quite the contrary. 
PAGE 78 
I did not convince him. Journal, 22 July, 5 Sep. 
matters not of the first import. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 June, FO 70/51; Balsamo, 76. 
Mémoire de Marie-Caroline claims (pp. 166-7) that Bentinck advised Cassaro in Sep- 
tember to oppose the full liberty of the Press, as it was a great nuisance in England; 
but that when the subject came before the Council four months later, he argued that 
the nation’s will should not be denied. The latter part of this statement is confirmed 
by Journal, 2 Feb. 1813. 
PAGE 79 
the Constitution itself had been destroyed. Balsamo, 81-3; [Balsamo], ‘Compendiosa idea 
degli attuali magistrati di Sicilia, ed osservazioni’, B.P.; Niceforo, xliv, 99-106; 
Journal, 11 Sep. 
was kept intact. This was especially a Neapolitan view in the 19th century: Afan de 
Rivera, Pensieri sulla Sicilia (Naples, 1820), 14-18; L. Bianchini, Della storia economico- 
civile di Sicilia (Naples, 1841), i, 94-5. 
PAGE 80 
the question stood unresolved. Bianco, 140-1; Romeo, 130-1; Report of Ecclesiastico 
debate on entail, Gazzetta Britannica, 14 Nov. 1812; Journal, 17, 26 Oct.; Balsamo, 
83-5. The abolition of feudalism, coupled with that of common rights, resembled 
the proposals of 18th century Neapolitan philosophes such as Filangieri: cf. Croce, 
Storia del Regno di Napoli, 187-9. There is, however, no sign that Parliament was 
influenced by the recent example of the reforms carried out at Naples under Joseph 
Bonaparte and Murat. 
to estrange the two leaders. Balsamo, 83-5. Castelnuovo’s estate was entailed on Belmonte, 
his nephew; this naturally gave rise to malicious gossip. 
PAGE 81 
still further split theMinistry. Journal, 13 Oct., 1 Nov., 15, 16 Dec. 
leading here and there to riots. Journal, 2 Oct.; Bianco, 156-8. At Catania, the mob ‘de- 
mandait le gouvernement anglais et envoyait au Diable le gouvernement sicilien .. .’: 
Capt. Le Vaillant to Maj.-Gen. Campbell, 2 July 1812, B.P. 
the deficit remained almost as large as before. Balsamo, 87; Bianco, 127-8, 145-6; Niceforo, 
xliv, 115-19. Castelnuovo had reported a standing deficit of 777, 576 oz., or a little 
over £500,000 at 13s. to the ounce (expenditure 2,493,810 oz., revenue 1,716,234 0z.). 
After the Budget the ostensible deficit was 168,402 0z.; but of the supply voted by 
Parliament, 264,000 oz. assigned to the Army was supposed to come from old credits 
which the government had found it impossible to collect. One of the chief diffi- 
culties was that the land-tax passed by the 1810 Parliament could still be assessed 
only on the basis of declarations by the owners (riveli) in the absence of an adequate 
land register. 

<<<PDFPAGE 210>>>
194 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
* 
take him to Spain. Journal, 3 Oct.; Bentinck to Bathurst (private) 6 Dec. 1812, Bathurst 
MSS., 222. 
PAGE 82 
carry the King’s gun for him. Journal, 19, 22, 29 Oct. 1812. 
PAGE 83 
one day you will be of the same opinion. Journal, 5 Nov. According to Orleans, despatches 
received at this time from Castelcicala strengthened the Queen’s conviction that 
Bentinck had no powers to turn her out: ibid., 11, 14 Nov. Bentinck, foreseeing that 
she would not depart without a struggle, suggested that the British Government 
should offer her a pension as an inducement: to Castlereagh, 10 Dec., FO 70/52. 
to thwart Bentinck and the constitutional leaders. Ferdinand’s Giornale d’ Affari, end Oct.- 
early Nov.; Journal, 2, 20 Oct., 14 Nov. 11, 23, 27 Dec. 1812, 6, 29 Jan. 1813. The 
King and the Prince were at this time at odds over the constitutional article establishing 
a Civil List, which was due for the Royal Assent and to which the King objected 
categorically. 
PAGE 84 
delay and dissension. Journal, 17 Dec. 
no power over the Prince. Ibid., 16, 27 Dec. 
PAGE 85 
a secret correspondence with the King. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 23 Jan. 1813, FO 70/57; 
Journal, 20 Nov., 13, 15, 19-24 Dec., 9 Jan.; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 175-8; 
Balsamo, 88-90. Because the Prince refused to appoint Balsamo direttore of Finance, an 
arrangement was suggested whereby Balsamo would carry out the duties of that 
office without becoming a government servant, and would receive an abbacy as 
compensation: Bentinck therefore found himself in the odd position of officially 
demanding ecclesiastical preferment for a Sicilian priest. Even so the Prince, apparently 
at the King’s instigation, objected to the proposed arrangement.—Of Aci’s defection, 
Mémoire de M.C., states (p. 106) that ‘dés le mois d’Aout [1812]... 
il écrivit au Roi 
les lettres les plus respectueuses et rendit toujours compte a S.M. de tout ce qui avait 
rapport aux affaires du Département dont il était chargé’. 
no chance of being Prime Minister. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 15 Jan., 10 Mar. 1813, FO 
70/57; Journal, 27, 29, 31 Dec.; Mémoire de M.C., 175-8. Cassaro was concerned 
with the Balsamo appointment in his capacity of Minister for (among other things) 
Ecclesiastical Affairs. 
PAGE 86 
the King seemed their last refuge. The abolition of entail was the most controversial of 
the constitutional articles awaiting the Royal Assent; Cassaro opposed it strongly in 
Council: Journal, 16 Feb. 1813. According to Mémoire de M.C. (p. 101) Cassaro had 
entered the Ministry in March 1812 only ‘sur les instances que lui en fit faire le Roi, 
S.M. voulant avoir au moins, dans le Conseil, un homme honnéte sur la fidélité 
duquel elle pat compter’, It is true that Cassaro was from the beginning the King’s 
unofficial spokesman, and the leader of the conservative barons in Parliament; but 
there is no sign that he had, before December 1812, committed himself in any way 
to a breach with the other Patriotic Ministers. Incidentally, Mémoire de M.C. is long 
and extravagant in its praise of Cassaro: the fact has suggested to Mr Crawley and 
Prof. Valente that he might have had a hand in the writing of 
it. Yet Mémoire de M.C. 
is certainly written, if not by the Queen herself, at any rate from her point of view: 
and she had no reason to be thankful to Cassaro. But then her likes and dislikes were 

<<<PDFPAGE 211>>>
NOTES 
195 
scarcely rational or predictable. Possibly the work was written by one of her inti- 
mates (Prof. Maturi, in conversation, has suggested StClair) who also happened to 
be on good terms with Cassaro. 
prolonged the crisis. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 15 Jan., 24 Feb., 18 Mar. 1813, FO 70/57; 
Journal, 6, 9, 29 Jan. 
PAGE 87 
Prince Cassaro and Marquis Circello. Journal, 5 Jan. (conversation with Caccamo). 
the object of Caracciolo’s administration. Ibid., 16 Jan. 
PAGE 88 
reconciled to the new ‘system’. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 15 Jan., 10 Mar., FO 70/57; 
Journal, 2, 18, 28 Jan.; Balsamo, orff. Bentinck was at this time particularly annoyed 
with the Prince for his dilatoriness over the Royal Assent to the Constitution and the 
question of Balsamo’s appointment, which was still unsettled. 
without its refutation. Journal, 16 Jan., 13 Feb. 
did his best to dodge the issue. Giornale d’ Affari, 16 Jan.-2 Feb., shews the confused state 
of affairs at La Ficuzza: the Queen insisted that she would leave only at the request 
of the Prince Regent (not of the British Government) and at the command of her 
husband; the King put the onus of a decision on her. There were rumours that the 
Queen intended to enter Palermo at the head of 5,000 volunteers and overthrow the 
Government; Cassaro later claimed credit for having dissuaded the King from such 
an attempt: Fagan to Bentinck, 9 Mar. 1813, B.P.; Journal, 12 Mar. 
PAGE 89 
flow in a paradiso. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 15 Jan., 24 Feb., FO/57; Giornale d’ Affari, 
16 Jan.-6 Feb.; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 179-90 (prints many of the documents); 
Journal, 11 Feb. The Prince did not welcome his father’s return: he had had enough 
of interference, he declared—‘he would be tout ou rien’: Journal, 7 Feb. 
as soon as the snow thawed. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 24 Feb., FO 70/57; Mémoire de Marie- 
Caroline 192-6; Journal, 11 Feb. 
PAGE 90 
if the King resumed power. Journal, 2, 28 Jan., 2, 4, 9, 13, 25 Feb.; ‘Substance of conver- 
sation between di Aci and Lt.-Col. Dalrymple...’ [30 Jan.J, B.P. By Feb. 16th 
Bentinck had made up his mind that ‘Cassaro evidently wants to be Prime Minister 
and is urging the King to return because he sees he cannot have the full confidence 
of the Hereditary Prince’: Journal, 16 Feb. 
abdicating or restoring the Vicariate. Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 196; Giornale d’ Affari, 
13-18 Feb.; Journal, 13-16 Feb. Cassaro reported that the King had asked him for 
instruction in the English Constitution: ‘it was all new to him and... 
on retaking 
the Government he did not wish to commit bestialita’: Journal, 11 Feb. 
PAGE QI 
avant de reprendre le gouvernement. Bentinck to Castlereagh, to Mar., FO 70/57; Journal, 
21 Feb.; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 196-8; Giornale d’ Affari, 25 Feb. Cassaro told 
Bentinck privately that the Queen had refused to leave La Ficuzza unless the King 
resumed first: Journal, 25 Feb. 
Bentinck was not empowered to use force. Journal, 28 Feb.; Giornale d’ Affari, 23 Feb. At 
this time Castlereagh was having some difficulty in convincing Castelcicala that the 
British Government insisted on nothing less than the Queen’s departure for Vienna: 
Castlereagh to Bentinck, 9 Feb. 1813, and private letter of same date, FO 70/56. 

<<<PDFPAGE 212>>>
196 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
*. 
but in vain. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 10 Mar., FO 70/57; Journal, 26 Feb. 
PAGE 92 
left as far as regarded them to itself. Journal, 26 Feb., 2, 5 Mar.; Bentinck to Charles Greville, 
7 Apr. 1813, Private Letter-Book, B.P. 
if not they break his neck. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 20 Apr. 1813, FO 70/58; Journal, 5 Mar. 
PAGE 93 
the King’s projects. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 10 Mar., FO 70/57; Mémoire de Marie- 
Caroline, 201-6. 
Cassaro should be dismissed. Ibid. Bentinck did not break with Cassaro personally as he 
had with Aci, and they continued to meet from time to time on a friendly footing. 
He told Cassaro’s son ‘I was sorry for what had happened . 
. 
. his father appeared to 
me to have been led astray by his ambition . . . he was honest and his justification to 
himself was that he thought he could lead the King right—but he must see the diffi- 
culties with a man so prejudiced ... the Prince was infinitely preferable’: Journal, 
13 Mar. 
the Vicariate at an end. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 10, 18 Mar., FO 70/57; Giornale d’ Affari, 
8, 9 Mar.; Journal, 5, 9 Mar. What had happened, apparently, was that the Queen 
had finally persuaded herself, or had been persuaded, to let the King resume after, 
not before, her departure for Castelvetrano: she had been saying for two or three 
weeks that she would suffer any extremity so long as he resumed: Castelli, “Giornale 
Storico’, Bibl. Com. Palermo MSS. Qq H 208, pp. 25-7.—The following pages, 
dealing with the events of March oth-18th, are based mainly on Bentinck’s long 
despatch of 18 March; other sources will be referred to when they are quoted or 
when they supply information not contained in the despatch. The Notes exchanged 
are printed in Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 217-46. 
PAGE 94 
took to his bed. Journal, 10, 11 Mar.; Giornale d’ Affari, 11 Mar. During the interview, 
Bentinck, alluding to the way he had been gulled by the King’s former promises, 
said *“‘J’étais un homme simple.”’ His Majesty answered angrily, “Je suis plus simple que 
vous, je suis plus honnéte que vous’”—I made a bow—His Majesty instantly corrected 
593) 9\, 
himself by saying “‘Je suis honnéte vous pouvez l’étre aussi’”’.’: to Castlereagh, 18 Mar. 
FO 70/57. 
all my Notes for the last year. Journal, 11 Mar. 
PAGE 95 
complete surrender. Ibid. 12, 15 Mar. 
visibly imposed on the country by the British. Journal, 
15 Mar. Bentinck did not tell Castle- 
reagh of his decision to take over the government if necessary. 
PAGE 96 
the point of hostilities. Journal, 14 Mar.; Bianco, 168. 
decamped to La Favorita. Journal, 15-17 Mar. Orleans’ verbatim account of his conver- 
sations with the King (16, 17 Mar.) has been published by M.H. Weil, ‘Ferdinand IV 
et le Duc d’Orléans’, in Revue de Paris, 1 July 1898. 
PAGE 97 
would himself have preferred forbearance. Bentinck to Castlereagh (private), 23 Mar., 
FO 70/57; Journal, 18, 21, 27 Mar. The following account of the events of March 
18th-28th is based on Bentinck to Castlereagh, 4 Apr. 1813, FO 70/58, and on Journal, 

<<<PDFPAGE 213>>>
NOTES 
197 
18-28 Mar. Bentinck concealed nothing of importance from Castlereagh, and the 
King’s account in Giornale d’Affari tallies with Bentinck’s. Notes exchanged are 
printed in Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 247-60. 
religious processions and similar events. Balsamo, 101-3. 
PAGE 98 
on their high horse. Journal, 27 Mar. 
forestalled the whole crisis. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 4 Apr., FO 70/58; Mémoire de Marie- 
Caroline, 264. 
PAGE 99 
her family and dominions. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 9 Feb. 1813, and private letter of 
same date, FO 70/56; Castlereagh Corr. viii, 298-300 (wrongly dated). Bentinck had 
suggested to Castlereagh in December that the British Government should offer the 
Queen a pension as an inducement to leave Sicily (cf. note to p. 83); he had not expected 
anything to come of it, however, for the Government would have had to ask Parlia- 
ment for money to pay an annual pension, ‘which they would not like’—though 
‘it would be excellent policy no doubt’: Journal, 13 Jan. 1813. Hence Bentinck’s 
refusal, until the arrival of Castlereagh’s instructions, to consider advancing money 
to the Queen.—There was no compassion lost on the Queen in London: ‘Whatever 
you have arranged with regard to the Lady in Sicily I am convinced is the best. . . . 
If we have not sent you any precise instructions regarding her, it has been because 
we felt we could securely rest in your discretion. . . . If it is necessary for her to be 
sent out of Sicily . . 
. for my own part, I shall be very glad .. .”: Bathurst to Bentinck 
(private) 25 Dec. 1812, B.P. Castlereagh, for his part, was particularly annoyed by 
the Queen’s intrigues in Germany and Russia: cf. also Harrowby to Bathurst, 17 Sep. 
1812, Hist. MSS. Comm. Bathurst MSS., 214. 
great charter of their rights and liberties. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 4 Apr., FO 70/58. 
he had been led to use. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 19 May, (private) 23 May, FO 70/56. 
PAGE I00 
disavowal by the British Government of my acts. Bentinck to Castlereagh (private) 7 Apr., 
FO 70/58; Journal, 27 Mar. 
did not dare bite. Giornale d’ Affari, 20 Apr.; Journal, 10, 18 Apr., 24 May; Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, 27 May, FO 70/58. 
she died of a stroke. Ibid.; Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 264ff.; Journal, 15, 17, 18, 30 Apr.; 
Bianco, 171-5; C. MacFarlane, Sicily: Her Constitutions 
... (1849), 23-7 (account of 
Gen. MacFarlane’s mission to Castelvetrano). Before leaving, the Queen wrote a 
fantastic letter to the British Consul, in which she said that if Bentinck had only been 
willing to lend her a million pounds—{£ 500,000 at once and as much on her arrival 
in Vienna—‘par cette généreuse opération il me fermait par la Reconnaissance la 
bouche’ (the Sicilian Government was to have repaid the loan within ten years or 
less: it would, by the way, have amounted to two and a half years’ British subsidy): 
the Queen to Fagan, 16 Apr. 1813, in Bianco, 347-53. 
PAGE IOI 
meant for official consumption. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 14 May 1813, FO 70/58. 
PAGE I02 
cooperation with Italian patriots. See p. 54 and note. The plans made by Bentinck, the 
Archduke Francis, Nugent, and La Tour to raise an insurrection on the mainland 
had led to nothing but the formation of an Italian Levy in Sicily, largely made up 

<<<PDFPAGE 214>>>
198 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
* 
of Italian prisoners of war—and the levy had to go to Spain with the rest of the 
troops. The Archduke was by this time beginning to lose interest in the scheme: 
cf. his letters to Bentinck, 1812, passim, B.P.; and to La Tour, in G. Gallavresi and 
V. Sallier de La Tour, Le Maréchal Sallier de La Tour (Turin, 1917), 341-3, 382-90. 
The necessary communications with Joseph King at Vienna were impossibly slow, 
letters taking three months and longer to arrive: King to Bentinck, 17 Sep., 16 Nov. 
1812, B.P. A former Consul at Leghorn, just arrived at Palermo, reported ‘people of 
Italy discontented, but quite humble—would not join any invader’: Journal, 21 Oct. 
1812. 
inutile de lutter contre le torrent. Bentinck to Bunbury (private) 31 Aug. 1812, to Bathurst 
(private) 1 Sep., Bunbury to Bathurst (private) 7 Oct.: Hist. MSS Comm. Bathurst 
MSS., 207-10, 217; Bathurst to Wellington, 12 Oct., Liverpool to Wellington, 27 Oct., 
W.S.D., vii, 455-6, 462-4; Nugent to Bentinck, 15 Sep., B.P.; to La Tour, 20 Oct., 
in Gallavresi and La Tour, 343. At the end of August 1812 Bentinck had given 
countenance to a Russian proposal for a march to the Adriatic by Russian troops 
stationed in Wallachia—but only because he wished to seem cooperative; he ‘never 
thought they would come’ (they did not): Journal, 28 Aug. One of the conditions 
he suggested to the Russian representative was ‘complete liberty to the Italians to 
adopt the Constitutions and chiefs most agreeable to them’: to R/Adm. Greig, 
27 Aug., Secret Letter-Book, B.P. But a few months later he told the Prince that 
‘by not forcing himself upon the Neapolitans, he would gain many friends—the issue 
would always be the same, because the British influence if they made the conquest 
would always direct with ease the will of the people’: Journal, 22 Dec. 1812; cf. 
the same argument in Bentinck to Bathurst (secret) 24 Feb. 1813: Gallavresi and La 
Tour, 357. 
the ‘private ends’ of Austria and Russia. Bentinck to Bathurst (secret) 24 Feb.; the Hereditary 
Prince to the Prince Regent, enclosed with Belmonte to Castelcicala, 23 Feb., FO 
70/61; Bentinck to Bathurst (confidential) 7 Apr., Bathurst MSS. 230; Lamb to 
Hamilton, 25 May, FO 70/62 (‘I fear there is... enough to get me the name of a 
most troublesome fellow’).—It has been a commonplace with a number of Italian 
historians, both contemporary and modern, that the secret societies (especially the 
Carboneria) which made their appearance in the last years of the Napoleonic regime 
were subsidised with ‘British gold’ and encouraged by swarms of British agents 
throughout Italy: cf. for instance P. Colletta, Storia del Reame di Napoli (Capolago, 
1834), bk. VIII, ch. xlix; A. Luzio, La Massoneria e il Risorgimento Italiano (Bologna, 
1925), 1, 118-9, 162-6; O. Dito, Massoneria, Carboneria e altre societa segrete (Turin, 1905), 
208-9; Capograssi, op. cit., ch. xi. Such statements are generally based, if at all, on 
informers’ reports (during the Restoration period), hearsay, and inference. Capograssi 
even speaks (p, 184) of Bentinck’s ‘innumerable agents scattered throughout the 
peninsula’—whereas as late as the spring of 1813 Bentinck decided, because he had 
hitherto been unable to establish any satisfactory communication with Italy, to set 
up three intelligence agents at Malta, Vienna and Ponza for the purpose (Bentinck 
to Castlereagh, secret, 21 Mar. 1813, in M.H. Weil, Le Prince Eugene et Murat (Paris 
1902), i, 433-4); and a ‘Memorandum of the Secret Missions under Lord William 
Bentinck’ (drawn up by his secretary, 24 May 1813: PRO GD/7/1) confirms that 
these were the only agents dealing with Italy. Moreover, neither Bentinck’s des- 
patches nor his private papers supply any evidence that he was ever in direct contact 
with the secret societies before 1814. The indirect contacts he did have can be listed 
as follows: 1. The Archduke Francis and his supporters: their plans came to nothing, 
at any rate in Italy, and after 1812 little is heard of them. 2. One Alessandro Turri, 
who approached Bentinck in 1811 and apparently stayed in Sicily until 1814. He 
claimed to represent a secret society affiliated to the Freemasons; Bentinck distrusted 
him at first, though later on he employed Turri to write propaganda articles for the 

<<<PDFPAGE 215>>>
NOTES 
199 
Gazzetta Britannica and had him draft his Leghorn Proclamation in March 1814 (cf. 
page 138 and note). But otherwise Turri’s activity seems to have produced nothing 
beyond a flock of memoranda; there is no sign that Bentinck took his grandiose 
schemes for an Italian Patriotic army any more seriously than he had taken Moliterno’s 
(Turri even went into the question of what colour the proposed army’s uniforms 
should be, and sought to ingratiate himself with the Nation of Shopkeepers by 
assuring Bentinck that his scheme would not cost Britain a penny, and that she might 
later reap commercial advantages in an independent Italy). In fact it appears from 
a sarcastic comment by C. A. A’Court, Bentinck’s A.D.C. (endorsement of Turri to 
Bentinck, Leghorn, 18 Apr. 1814, B.P.) that Turri was thought something of a joke 
at H.Q. (Bentinck to Wellington, 14 Nov. 1811, B.P.; Turri’s papers, ibid.). 3. One 
Giuseppe Palumbo, who approached the British Commander at Ponza in April 1813 
on behalf of a society in the Kingdom of Naples; he was advised to put off his plans 
for insurrection, and no more is heard of him (Coffin to Bentinck, secret, 23 Apr. 
1813, FO 70/58). 4. A few individuals who gave Bentinck information on Italy, 
without claiming to represent any organisation. This is meagre evidence. Of course 
lack of evidence is not disproof: Bentinck may have had greater contact with the secret 
societies than his papers reveal; and there is no doubt that towards the end of the war 
the societies tended to look to Britain for guidance, whether they got it or not. But 
in the absence of stronger evidence it seems reasonable to surmise that Bentinck never 
had any direct or reliable contact with the Italian patriots until he himself went to 
Italy in 1814; that this situation was practically inevitable given the state of communi- 
cations between Sicily and the Continent; and that his belief in the Italians’ desire and 
capacity to rise against the French was based much less on any knowledge of what 
was actually going on in Italy than on his own hopes and intuitions. 
PAGE 103 
nor its agents would budge. Bunbury, ‘Memorandum on the present state of affairs . ..’, 
31 Dec. 1812, W.S.D., viii, 457 (where wrongly dated): Bunbury endorsed Bentinck’s 
views, including his advocacy of a united Italy, but, as he wrote to Bentinck (20 Apr. 
1813, B.P.) without success; Miinster to Nugent, 4 Mar. 1813, in Weil, Prince Eugene, 
i, 417; Pellew to Bentinck, 30 Apr., Gen. Henry Calvert to Bentinck, 19 Apr., B.P.; 
Bathurst to Bentinck, 5 June, FO 70/62 (urging him to concentrate on Spain for the 
time being). Nugent reported that Wellington would not hear of the Italian project: 
Journal, 1 Mar. 1813. 
came to nothing. The Ponza negotiations have only been mentioned, as Bentinck’s relations 
with Murat fall largely outside the scope of this study: see Webster, 1, 253; Weil, i, 60-75. 
to ‘break his neck’. Bentinck’s relations with Wellington during the summer of 1813 
can be followed in Wellington, Dispatches, vi, 564, 666, 709, 742, vii, 10; W.S.D., 
vii, 648-9, viii, 18-20. Cf. Bentinck to Col. [Torrens 
?], 22 July 1813, holog. copy, B.P. 
PAGE 104 
put off until a general peace. Journal, 31 Oct., 22 Dec. 1812, 3, I1, 16, 19-21 Feb., 9, 
18 Mar., 7, 23, 27, 28 Apr.; Bentinck, ‘Observations upon an Article in the Sicilian 
Constitution concerning the Political Relation of Sicily and Naples to each other’, 
17 Feb. 1813, Castlereagh Corr., viii, 322-5; The Prince to Castelcicala, 25 July 1813, 
in A. Capograssi, ‘L’ Unita italiana nel pensiero di Lord William Bentinck’, Rassegna 
storica del Risorgimento (Mar.-Apr. 1934), 233 n. (stating that Bentinck had supported 
Separation only because it was the unanimous desire of the country); Balsamo, 104-7; 
Bianco, 133-5. Cf. Castelnuovo’s written opinions on the Civil List and Separation, 
Arch. Stato, Palermo, Fondo Fitalia, Nos. 31, 41: he appeals above all to the authority 
of Sicily’s medieval Constitution; as for separation, he hints that Parliament might 
later be willing to extend the Sicilian monarchy to Naples. 

<<<PDFPAGE 216>>>
200 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
me 
. 
secure outright abolition later on. Journal, 16, 19 Feb., 6 May; Balsamo, 108-10. Bentinck 
still sided with Castelnuovo, but considered that it was ‘all a difference about words’: 
Journal, 6 May. 
PAGE 105 
might be expected to make more trouble. Journal, 6, 7, 10-13, 18 May. During another 
conversation between Bentinck and Belmonte, ‘I told him that I had found [Castel- 
nuovo] at Carini’s. Oh said he endeavouring I suppose to obtain his opinion... . he 
(Belmonte) never took such means. I said that neither he nor I knew what passed 
between them—Distrust!’ Ibid., 13 May. 
preaching union and ‘encouraging’ Carini. Journal, 27 Dec.; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
12 Apr. 1813, FO 70/58. The following is a sample of Bentinck’s ‘encouragement’ 
of Carini: ‘Vous avez avec tous nos compagnons une tache pénible 4 remplir. Pour 
faire bien aller cette machine il faut beaucoup de fermeté et de prudence. Votre 
nation est un peu volage—chacun pense plus 4 lui qu’a sa patrie. J/espére que cela 
changera et que le Parlement actuel donnera 4 la Nation un noble exemple de la 
sagesse et de la modération’: to Carini, 16 July 1813, Private Letter-Book, B.P. 
Bentinck also arranged for Carini to receive a letter of congratulation from Bathurst. 
to the Peerage and to the Crown. Bentinck to Orleans, 17 July 1813, Private Letter-Book, 
1 
PAGE 106 
not ‘respectable’ enough as a group. When a few months earlier Cassaro had suggested 
that a lawyer should succeed him at the Ministry of Justice, Bentinck had replied 
that lawyers were objectionable as a class, and that a nobleman would be preferable: 
Journal, 13 Feb. 1813. 
cling fast to the British Constitution. Journal, 11, 12, 25, 27 May; Bentinck to Adm. 
Hallowell, 9 May, B.P. Belmonte suggested that he should write an official Note to 
Bentinck begging him to stay in Sicily or at any rate to return as soon as possible. 
‘Itold him . . . that having been ordered to stay in Sicily my departure in disobedience 
to such an order was always a hazard but that my responsibility would be very much 
ncreased if I should receive a formal application . 
. . from the Sicilian Government.’ 
Bentinck suggested, however, that Belmonte should write him a private letter 
instead: ‘It would not tell against me and I might make it useful in respect to Lord 
Wellington ...the letter was accordingly written’: Journal, 26 May. Belmonte’s 
letter (same date) gave warning of the danger of a _fougueuse démocratie: B.P. 
some only contigent. The political history of the 1813 Parliament has already been narrated 
in exhaustive detail by Balsamo, Bianco, Niceforo, and H. M. Lackland, ‘The 
Failure of the Constitutional Experiment in Sicily, 1813-14’, in English Historical 
Review, 1926 (based chiefly on the FO records and on the Journal of Joseph Smith, 
Secretary of Legation at Palermo, in the Bentinck Papers). As little new evidence 
has since come to light I have interpreted and summarised these events rather than 
tell the story all over again, especially since Bentinck was absent at this time. 
a majority in Parliament. Balsamo, 113-14; Balsamo to Bentinck, 4 Oct. 1813, B.P. (in 
English). For the Belmontist point of view, F. Paternd-Castello, Saggio storico- 
politico sulla Sicilia (Catania, 1848, written about 1830), 61; cf. Smith to Bentinck 
(private) 17 Aug. 1813, B.P. 
PAGE 107 
with them popular discontent. The Government’s credit was so bad that ‘capitalists’ 
refused to lend to them direct, and even a loan underwritten by the British Commis- 
sary-General and launched in the spring of 1813 found no takers: Bentinck-Castelnuovo 

<<<PDFPAGE 217>>>
NOTES 
201 
correspondence, Feb.~July 1813, Arch. Stato Palermo, Fondo Fitalia, Nos. Fils USI 
154. Cf. Maj.-Gen. McFarlane to Settimo, 16 July 1813, ibid., Nos. 159-60 (on the 
wretched state of the army); Bianco, 187-9; Niceforo, xlv, 17-18; J. Badge’s reports, 
June-July, passim, B.P. (on food prices). 
the Queen’s expulsion. Cf. comments by conservative, anti-Neapolitan writers such as 
Provenzano (Bibl. Comunale Palermo MSS. Qgq. F 158, i, 94-9), Tognini (ibid. 
Qq. H 115 n. 10), Alessi (ibid. Qq. B 7). 
the local boards of health. Montgomerie to Castlereagh, 20 June, FO 70/59; to Bentinck 
(private) 14 July; McFarlane to Bentinck, 25 June; Dolce to Bentinck, 27 June: B.P.; 
Castelli, “Giornale Storico’ (Bibl. Com. Pal. Mss. Qq. H 208), 514-30 (correspondence 
between Maj.-Gen. Montresor and Messina Board of Health). ‘I am quite out of 
favour with our military commanders here... who are all for the most violent 
measures ...’: Montgomerie to Bentinck (private) 4 Sep., B.P. Bentinck tried to 
pour oil on the waters, stating that there must be wrongs on both sides: to Castelnuovo, 
17 July, in Bianco, 361-2. For the question of the plague, see Bianco, 199-202; 
Lackland, 214-15. 
the other to Sicily. Montgomerie was a soldier, Smith had been seconded from the 
British Legation at Cagliari. Both died shortly afterwards, Smith in November 1813, 
Montgomerie early in the following year. “The poor man [Montgomerie] has been 
reduced to death’s door by the anxiety and annoyance he has experienced from 
these people’: Bentinck to Adm. Hallowell, 23 Oct., B.P. 
official Notes and public discussions. Orleans to Bentinck, 12, 25 June, B.P. (Orleans’ letters 
are sometimes in French, sometimes in English). 
PAGE 108 
sans vous, cela wira jamais. Orleans to Bentinck, 20 July, B.P. Cf. letters to Bentinck 
from the Prince, Montgomerie, Smith, McFarlane, Castelnuovo, Belmonte, Balsamo, 
Dolce: ibid. 
speeches, pamphlets and petitions. For the outburst of constitutional enthusiasm and 
speculation that took place at this time, see Bianco, 184-6. A pageant held at Catania 
in August displayed ‘the Spirit of Sicily, supported by Justice and Abundance, 
presenting the text of the Constitution to Catania... the Spirit of Truth with a 
torch, putting to flight Ignorance and Interest... the divinities of Thames and 
Simeto, discussing the happy event...’. A cantata was sung ‘on the subject of the 
new Constitution, in which was inserted high and well-deserved praise of the British 
Nation, of the immortal Lord William Bentinck, and of his worthy consort’: Gazzetta 
Britannica, 11 Sept. 1813. 
the ‘system’ they had themselves helped to launch. The King professed not to know the 
cause of dissension in the ‘accursed Parliament’: Giornale d’ Affari, 8 July. 
most advanced part of the island socially and economically. R. Romeo, II Risorgimento in 
Sicilia (Bari, 1950), 
111-20, 133-8. Too little is known of the leaders of the democratic 
movement; and what there is has come down chiefly through the writings of their 
enemies—Balsamo, Palmeri, Aceto—whom later historians, perhaps for lack of other 
evidence, have followed without much question. Even M. Amari—himself a democrat 
and a republican at the time of writing—had little to say in their favour: see his 
preface to Palmeri, Saggio storico-politico (1848 ed.), xxv-xxvii. 
PAGE 109 
the terrible French Revolution. Castelnuovo to Bentinck, [about 1 Aug.] 1813, in Bianco, 
361-2. 
paying nothing. Montgomerie to Castlereagh, 18 July 1813, FO 70/59. 

<<<PDFPAGE 218>>>
202 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
PAGB IIO 
to make me leave the Ministry. Castelnuovo to Bentinck, 14 July, B.P. 
break in your hands. Balsamo, 124. See for this whole episode Bianco, 182-96; Lackland, 
21§-22. 
PAGE III 
a system of terror is not established. Bentinck to Orleans, 17 July, 8 Aug., Private Letter- 
Book B.P. 
PAGE I12 
no military spirit. Bentinck to Montgomerie, 
7 Aug., FO 70/59; similar letter to the 
Prince, 12 Aug., ibid. 
another chance of voting supply. This set Montgomerie at odds with Belmonte and Orleans, 
who taunted him with ‘that dread of responsibility which petrifies Englishmen as 
the head of Medusa did the ancients’: Orleans to Bentinck, 1 Aug., B.P. Cf. Balsamo, 
128. 
restoration of the desolated finances. Balsamo to Bentinck (in English), 13 June 1813, B.P. 
PAGE 
113 
dispersed quietly enough on the 15th. Balsamo, 128-38; Bianco, 198-208; Lackland, 223-7. 
The first political paper to appear was La Cronica, the organ of the outgoing constitu- 
tionalists; they became known as Cronici and the ruling Parliamentary faction as Anti- 
cronici. It was one of its editors, the deputy Aceto, whom the Commons attempted 
to try after he had got into a fight with an Anticronico deputy. 
his private affairs. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 31 Aug., Castlereagh Corr. ix, 44; 3 Sep. 
(private), FO 70/59. Wellington was more upset at Bentinck’s return to Sicily 
—which meant yet another change of command in Catalonia—than at his defeat at 
the pass of Ordal on 12 Sep.: Wellington to Bathurst, 7, 25, 26 Sep., Wellington 
Dispatches, vi, 746, vii, 22-5. The transactions of these years earned Bentinck Welling- 
ton’s lasting hostility, which in turn affected Bentinck’s later Indian career. 
PAGE II4 
no visible symptoms. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 16 Sep., 19 Oct. 1813, FO 70/56. Bathurst 
also urged Bentinck to stay on, as ‘your own character is so much involved in the 
wellbeing of that Government’: to Bentinck (private) 16 Sep. 1813, 1 Jan. 1814, B.P. 
the happiness of a free government. Letters to Bentinck from Pellew (18 Nov.), Campbell 
(13 Nov.), McFarlane (27 June), Montresor (31 Oct.), Robert Liston (22 Dec.), 
B.P.; Bunbury to Bathurst (private) 26 Sep., Bathurst MSS., 237. Leckie, now 
completely alienated from the Consti.ution, published two ‘letters from Trapani’ in 
the Morning Chronicle, in which he violently attacked Belmonte and Castelnuovo 
—and by implication Bentinck—and defended the King and Queen: Orleans to 
Bentinck, 26 Mar. 1814, B.P. 
ainsi que va le monde. Joinville to Bentinck, London, 30 Nov. 1813, B.P. 
PAGE II5 
Bentinck carried his point. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 30 Aug. (private), Private Letter-Book, 
B.P. (not in F.O.); 6 Oct., (private) 6 Oct., 1 Nov., FO 70/59; Journal, 5 Oct. The 
following account of the events of October 1813 is based mainly on Bentinck’s very 
long despatch of 1 Nov.; other sources will be referred to when they are quoted or 
when they give information not contained in the despatch. 
the rights of man did more harm than anything else. Journal, 5, 8, 24 Oct.; Balsamo, 143-5. 
‘I recollect what you once told me, viz. that the principle of adopting in its totality 

<<<PDFPAGE 219>>>
NOTES 
203 
the British Constitution could be carried to a dangerous length. Sicily is now for 
knowledge and morals what was England two centuries back. Too much liberty is 
for the Sicilians what would be a pistol or a stiletto in the hands of a boy or a madman’: 
Balsamo to Bentinck, 4 Oct., B.P. Balsamo’s plan for a revised Constitution (ibid., 
no date) must date from Oct. or Nov. 1813—to judge from internal evidence and 
from references to it in the letter quoted and in Balsamo’s Memorie, 155-6—though 
Bianco (pp. 183-4) dated a copy he found in the Palermo Archives July 1813. It was 
after the 1813 Parliament, not before, that the Constitutionalists began to feel the 
need of a stronger executive power. Some of the changes proposed by Balsamo are 
curious: he suggests that taxes should be divided into perpetual (‘independent from 
any parliamentary grant’), ordinary (army estimates), and extraordinary (emergencies) 
—only the latter two kinds to be voted by Parliament; and then, after this return to 
the old Sicilian Constitution, he goes on to say that ‘the Parliament must retain the 
full power of altering or changing any perpetual or ordinary tax’! 
PAGE I16 
another form of government the better. Journal, 11-21 Oct. 
PAGE 118 
of whose principles I could not be assured. Journal, 22 Oct.; Bentinck to Adm. Hallowell, 
23 Oct., B.P.; cf. Balsamo, 146-9. Bentinck concealed none of the facts from Castle- 
reagh, but one can detect in the tone of his despatch an attempt to sound more 
impartial and less committed than he actually was. 
for goodness of character than for abilities. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 12 Apr. 1813, FO 70/58. 
now in fact dictator of Sicily. Journal, 21-30 Oct.; Balsamo, 150-3; text of Bentinck’s 
proclamation in. Provenzano, i, 208. The formation of the new Ministry was a 
difficult business: Castelnuovo’s friend Airoldi refused to come in on any terms; 
while Belmonte grumbled that this was obviously going to be Castelnuovo’s Ministry 
and threatened to retire from politics—Bentinck ‘anticipated him by entering very 
angry and cursing the hour when I put my foot first in Sicily’: Journal, 25 Oct. In 
the end it was settled that Belmonte and Castelnuovo should be members of the 
Council, along with the Princes of Fitalia and Cattolica, without becoming Ministers. 
PAGE I19 
both of the Prince and of the People. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 1 Nov., (private) 19 Oct. 
1813. FO 70/59. 
PAGE 120 
having them written at his will. Ferdinand’s Giornale d’ Affari, early Nov. 1813. 
the Moses of Sicily. Journal, 12, 19, 24 Nov., 19, 20, 23 Feb.; letters to Bentinck from 
Maj.-Gen. Montresor (10, 30 Dec.) and A. Barrow (26 May, 22, 24 June 1814) 
concerning appointments to government posts, B.P.; from Butera (12 Nov. 1813), 
Princess Leonforte (whose marriage with a young British lieutenant Bentinck made 
possible by overcoming the objections of her father, Butera) (12 Jan., 13 Feb. 1814), 
from the Senates of Palermo and Augusta, the Sheriff of Syracuse, various M.P.’s 
and Peers at Catania, all in B.P. It was Bentinck and Bonanno who worked out a list 
of appointments to high government offices: the Prince to Bentinck, 25 Nov., ibid. 
had arbitrarily arrested in 1811. Bianco, 212ff. Bentinck tried to arrange a reconciliation 
with Anjou, but failed: Journal, 4, 5 Nov. The King commented: ‘I do not believe 
any man in London would dare undertake such a proceeding’: Giornale d’ Affari, 
early Noy. 
laughing he went away. Intelligence report [by Abate Milano], 27 Dec., B.P. 

<<<PDFPAGE 220>>>
204 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
PAGE 121 
as soon as British power was withdrawn. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 10, (private) 25 Nov., 
27 Dec. 1813, FO 70/59; Journal, 12, 15, 18, 19, 22 Nov., 28 Dec., 3 Jan., 20, 24 Feb.; 
Giornale d’ Affari, 11, 24 Nov. ‘I never saw the Prince more reasonable . . 
. or more 
apparently sincere—but nimium ne crede!’: Journal, 14 Feb. And Bentinck told 
Orleans that ‘I should not be surprised if the King resumed and the Queen returned’: 
ibid., 24 Jan. 
not to let him be more than a figurehead. Balsamo, 159-61, 166; Journal, 12, 13 Nov. 
Originally, the Ministry contained two Belmontists (Villafranca and Carini) and two 
Villermosists (Settimo and Bonanno); the Councillors were similarly divided, with 
Belmonte and Cattolica on one side, Castelnuovo and Fitalia on the other. Balsamo 
says that Bonanno went over to the Belmontists ‘because he did not know that 
Belmonte was in disgrace with Bentinck’! 
PAGE 122 
its full and free operation. Bentinck to Castlereagh (private) 20 Dec., FO 70/59; James 
Graham’s Memorandum to Castlereagh (expressing Bentinck’s views), 21 Feb. B.P. 
PAGE 123 
They were poets. Journal, 22 Nov., 26 Jan., 26 Feb. 
abolish the order altogether. Ibid., 26 Jan., 16 Feb. Bentinck was as usual in two minds 
about the Sicilians. Some of them were ready enough to encourage him in his inter- 
mittent contempt for them: one Padre Pazzi remarked to him that ‘Tasso had said 
of them vili in guerra—traditori in pace—St. Paul also said—all islands are bad—but 
most of all Sicily ... a nation de singes’. And Princess Paternd, one of the leading 
Constitutionalist ladies, told him ‘speaking of the Sicilians . . 
. if you were to do me 
all the good possible... serving me for years together—in a moment of humour, 
I might be capable of becoming your most violent enemy’: Journal, 2, 14 Noy. 
ce qui leur convient. Joinville to Bentinck, London 30 Nov. 1813, B.P. 
PAGE 124 
the island was perfectly quiet. Journal, 5, 22 Nov.; Balsamo, 155-6; Bentinck to Pretore 
of Palermo, 21 Feb. (draft), B.P. Balsamo complained in particular that Bentinck, 
instead of establishing a regular procedure for Council meetings, seemed to regard 
the Council as ‘a private and changeable thing, always dependent on the will and 
pleasure of the Vicar and generally of the executive power’. Balsamo may have been 
a little prejudiced, however, for Bentinck had paid no attention to the elaborate 
projects for constitutional reform which he had drawn up in October 1813. 
a more equal distribution of landed property. ‘Memoria ossiano istruzioni per l’estimo di 
tutti i beni rivelati a norma di quanto prescrisse il Parlamento del 1810’ presented to 
Bonanno, 11 May 1814, by Giovanni Corvaja (an economist, evidently a disciple 
of Adam Smith and Verri, many of whose proposals for reform echo those put 
forward in the 1780’s by the Viceroy Caracciolo and his counsellor Simonetti): 
Arch. Stato Palermo, R. Segreteria Incart. $430; Bianco, 217-19. The following is 
an illustration of Bentinck’s relations with Bonanno: ‘Tell him [Bonanno] that Messina 
is the worst disposed place I have seen and pray tell him and Carini that I am anxious 
no arrangement should be made for the appointments there until I see them. I do not 
know who Bonanno means to be Segreto of Catania, but tell him that the Cavaliere 
Paterno has great claims upon our regard. I should have written to Bonanno myself, 
if I could have explained my ideas in Italian’: Bentinck to Douglas, Syracuse 11 Dec. 
1813, PRO GD 7/t1. For Bentinck’s views on the redistribution of land, see page 147. 

<<<PDFPAGE 221>>>
- NOTES 
205 
PAGE 125 
4 committee of the Council sat to work out new codes, Bentinck to Castlereagh, 1 Nov. 1813, 
FO 70/59; Journal, 18 Nov., 27 Dec., 21 Jan.; Bianco, 217-9. 
PAGE 126 
How then did Italy and Sicily stand? Castlereagh to Bentinck, 22 July, 7 Aug. 1813, 
FO 70/56; Bathurst to Bentinck, 22 Sep., FO 70/62; Weil, Prince Eugene, iii, 231-5. 
to create a free government. Journal, 22 Nov.; Weil, iii, 141-3, 157-8, 213-19; Pellew to 
Wellington, 26 Dec., W.S.D. viii, 466; La Tour to Bentinck, 23 Feb., Graham to 
Bentinck (private) 29 Jan., B.P. 
Bourbons would be restored to Naples. “That the cause of Italian Independence ever had any 
importance in the Kingdom of Naples, I never heard—that an independent nation 
and distinct in many particulars from the rest of the Italians should wish to become 
a province is altogether contrary to reason’: Bentinck to Wm. A’Court, 1 Oct. 1815 
(draft), B.P. 
PAGE 127 
the only kind of government 
for which they are fit. Journal, 20 Nov. 1813, 12 Feb. 1814; 
Graham to Bentinck (private) 6 Mar. 1814, B.P. 
nothing was done. Journal, 15, 17, 20, 22, 25 Nov., 13 Jan. For an example of the way in 
which Castelcicala deliberately attempted to prejudice the British Government 
against the Sicilian, see W. Maturi, ‘Il Congresso di Vienna e la restaurazione dei 
Borboni a Napoli’ (in Rivista Storica Italiana, Sep., Dec. 1938), 1, 47-8. 
to all appearances a triumph. Journal, 27 Dec.; Bentinck to Douglas, 11 Dec., GD 7/1; 
to Castlereagh (private) 20 Dec., FO 70/59; fragment of Journal (on loose sheet), 
2 Dec., B.P.; Gazzetta Britannica, 22, 29 Dec., 5 Jan.; Balsamo, 157-8; Bianco, 220-1. 
PAGE 128 
with military aid. The full text of Bentinck’s proposal is given in Appendix B, from 
Capograssi, GI’ Inglesi in Italia, 156. 
proposal of compensation on the mainland. Wilson, Diary, i, 58; Bentinck to Wellesley, 
II Jan. 1812, FO 70/51; the Queen to Fagan, 16 Apr. 1813, in Bianco, 347; the Prince 
to Castelcicala, 
... Dec. 1813, in Capograssi, 163-4. Shortly before the voting of 
the Bases in July 1812, the Queen wrote to her former Minister Medici (then in 
London) that if Britain could arrange at a peace for Naples to be extended to the Po 
(the Pope being left only Rome and the Patrimony of St Peter) she could then take 
over Sicily if she wished. A fortnight later, after an agitating interview with Bentinck, 
the Queen told Medici that Sicily was as good as lost: he had better sell it, therefore, 
to Britain for £6 million. Sicily, she added, deserved no better: the Queen to Medici, 
14 July, r Aug., 3 Sep. 1812, in Corti, 636, 640, 645. 
scarcely aware. M. Amari, preface to 4th edition of La Guerra del Vespro Siciliano (Florence, 
1851), V-vii. 
PAGE 129 
some deep-laid British design on Sicily. Balsamo, 156-7; Weil, Prince Eugene, iii, 182; 
Bianco, 219-20. Croce writes that in 1848-9 Ferdinand II ‘reconquered Sicily, thus 
foiling the designs of England, who ever since Bentinck’s day had had her eye on 
the island’: Storia del Regno di Napoli (Bari, 1925), 247-8. 
from no other source whatever. Bentinck to the Prince, 14 Dec., in Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
16 Feb. 1814, FO 70/63. 
left it at that. See Capograssi, op. cit., chapter x; Romeo, 126. 

<<<PDFPAGE 222>>>
206 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
PAGE 130 
the instrument of Italian independence. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 6 Feb. 1814, Castlereagh 
Corr. ix, 238. ‘I perhaps ought to apologise for having taken upon myself to originate 
propositions of such high interest without any knowledge of the wishes of the 
British Government. But the moment offered, and there was no time for reference, 
and I considered myself as much bound by duty as prompted by inclination to put 
it in the power of the British Government to have made an arrangement which in 
my judgment would have been beneficial to all parties, but especially to Sicily and 
Great Britain—to the first by the restoration of its ancient greatness and of its long 
lost happiness—to the latter by adding to its possessions a source of infinite honour 
and strength without the ordinary disadvantages of foreign dominions’: Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, 16 Feb., FO 70/63. 
the evidence of their own senses. Croce, Storia del Regno di Napoli, 268-9. 
only through British protection. Bentinck to Douglas, Syracuse 11 Dec. 1813, GD 7/1; 
fragment of Journal (on loose sheet), 2, 3, Dec., B.P. Of Taormina Bentinck noted: 
‘The most beautiful view I ever saw—Aetna covered with snow on one side—the 
sea on another and the country immediately adjacent most bold and picturesque.’ 
He was no poet. But the sight may well have affected him. Other travellers of the 
time were all the more ready to keep in mind Sicily’s ancient glories because the 
island, it seems safe to say, was not then so backward compared to the rest of Europe 
as it became afterwards. Maj.-Gen. Cockburn, who kept comparing Sicily with 
Ireland, thought that although its poverty and squalor were appalling it was none 
the less the better off of the two: A Voyage to Cadiz... in 1810 and 1811 (1815), i, 
325-6. 
PAGE I31 
he dissociated it wholly from British policy. Giornale d’ Affari, end Dec. 1813, 27, 29 Apr. 
1814; Capograssi, 162ff. 
making a better bargain. To Castlereagh, 6 Feb., Castlereagh Corr. ix, 238. 
PAGE 132 
Bentinck’s own plans both for Italy and for Sicily. The story of these negotiations has been 
told in great detail and need not be repeated here: see Weil, Prince Eugene, iti, passim; 
Webster, 1, 151-2, 159, 253-8; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 14 Jan. 1814, FO 70/63. 
Bentinck kept up his resistance to Austrian and Neapolitan blandishments from 
December 12, when he first heard of the talks, to January 18, when Aberdeen’s 
despatch reached him: it had been delayed ‘by the negligence of the Austrian Chan- 
cellerie’: Aberdeen to Bentinck (private) 18 Feb. 1814, B.P. 
the British garrison in Sicily. Journal, 6, 9 Feb. 1814. 
PAGE 133 
keep the Sicilian mission. Graham to Bentinck, 7 Mar., (private) 8 Mar. 1814; Graham 
to Castlereagh, Chatillon 21 Feb., enclosing Memorandum of same date: all in B.P. 
Graham’s account of the conversation is given at length in Appendix B. 
a most difficult problem in all its parts. Castlereagh to Bentinck (private) Chatillon, 21 
Feb., B.P. 
PAGE 134 
did not till yesterday read Mr Graham’s paper. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 3 Apr. 1814 (no. 2), 
Castlereagh Corr., ix, 427f. 
some small doubt must persist. James Graham, whom Weil (iii, 350) absurdly describes 
as playing Eminence Grise to Bentinck’s Richelieu, had recently come to Sicily on 

<<<PDFPAGE 223>>>
NOTES 
207 
his Grand Tour and had been taken on by Bentinck as his private secretary. His letters 
(among the Bentinck Papers) shew that he was devoted to Bentinck, to whom he 
confided his unhappy love affairs in a style obviously influenced by Childe Harold. 
Ironically, this same James Graham, who at this time was full of enthusiasm for 
Italian independence and unity, was, as Home Secretary thirty years later, to be 
involved in the scandal over the opening of Mazzini’s correspondence. 
PAGE 135 
had involved both himself and us. Capograssi, 165ff.; Liverpool to Castlereagh, 11, 17 Mar. 
1814, in Webster, i, 526-7. 
an accumulating store. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 3 Apr., Castlereagh Corr., 1x, 
409ff.; 
Wm. A’Court to Lady Wm. Bentinck, Paris 30 Apr., B.P.; Bentinck to Castlereagh 
(private) 10 May, FO 70/64; C. A. A’Court to Lady Wm. Bentinck, 5 May, in 
G, Gallavresi, “La rivoluzione lombarda del 1814 e la politica inglese’ (in Arch. Stor. 
Lombardo, 1909), 130. 
PAGE 136 
her independence and constitution as well. Journal, 6, 9, 11-18 Feb.; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
26 Feb., FO 70/63; to Castelnuovo, 13 Feb., and Notes from Villafranca, in Bianco, 
374-S- 
then Tuscany and Liguria. Maturi, op. cit., 1, 36 n.; Journal, 6 Jan; Weil, iii, 371-2, 
378-9, 414-5. 
PAGE 137 
the King needed no encouragement. Circello, however, told Bentinck that the King, in 
his written refusal to give up his claim to Naples against compensation, had ‘contrived 
for himself a mode of escaping from his own declaration’. Bentinck had not noticed 
it, ‘but I daresay he has’: Journal, 23 Jan. 
a plot to strip him of his possessions. Giornale d’ Affari, Dec. 1813-Feb. 1814, passim. 
the hour is gone by. Journal, 23 Jan., 13 Feb.; Bentinck to Adm. Hallowell, 25 Jan., B.P.; 
to Castlereagh, 14 Jan., FO 70/63. 
put ourselves in the way of Fortune. Journal, 23 Jan., 14, 20 Feb. 
PAGE 138 
what Spain now is. Weil, iv, 351ff., v, 34. Bentinck’s proclamation in British and Foreign 
State Papers, ii, 316. The Prince wrote to Castelcicala—presumably for the benefit 
of the British Government—that his own proclamation to the troops had been issued 
at Bentinck’s instigation: Maturi, i, 35. Bentinck, however, recorded that the Prince 
had shewn him the draft proclamation and he had commented merely that he ‘could 
not object’ to it: Journal, 18 Feb. Of course—as Castlereagh was quick to point 
out—after the armistice it was his business to object. 
PAGE 139 
decisive effects in Sicily. Detailed accounts of these events already exist and little can now 
be added to them: see Webster, 1, 258-60, 285, and especially Weil, Prince Eugene, 
iv, v. The latter, though an almost exhaustive history of Italian events in 1813-14, is 
somewhat marred by Commandant Weil’s determination to shew Bentinck as a 
Machiavellian arch-intriguer and as the man who almost singlehanded brought 
about Murat’s downfall: see for instance op. cit., iv, 600. 
the people are now the only barrier. Weil, 1, 489, itil, i), ON, DeVohsok, AAeht, Koy), GY.KKy tak 
401 n., 647; Castlereagh to Aberdeen, 28 Sep., 15 Oct. 1813, in Webster, British 
Diplomacy 1813-1815 (1921), 99, 102. 

<<<PDFPAGE 224>>>
208 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
PAGE I40 
. 
in Italy was anchored to Austria’s. On landing at Leghorn Bentinck received letters from 
Graham which left him in no doubt that Castlereagh wanted him to cooperate with 
Murat: Graham to Bentinck, 7, 8 Mar. 1814, endorsed as received 13 Mar., B.P. 
Frederick Lamb, Bentinck’s former Secretary, now attached to the Vienna Embassy, 
wrote to him that ‘In Italy your views have never been at all adopted by the British 
Government, nor our evidence held to be worth anything—this is the real ground 
of the system which has been adopted there—if England had wished it I think Austria 
could have been induced to take another line. 
... Discard the fancy which I see you 
still have that the Italian game may be thrown into your hands, it never will, and so 
you may e’en content yourself’: Lamb to Bentinck, 19 Mar., B.P. 
to throw Murat out of the coalition altogether. Weil, iv, passim. This quarrel originated 
partly in a convention signed by Bentinck and Neipperg at Naples on 6 Feb., in 
which they agreed that the British expedition should have a base of operations in 
Tuscany: Neipperg increased the confusion by failing to inform either Murat or the 
Austrian commander Bellegarde of what he had done: Bentinck to Castlereagh, 
6 Feb., FO 70/63; Weil, iii, 515-8, iv, 165ff. 
more like Maria Carolina than anyone he had ever seen. Bentinck to Castelnuovo, 7 Apr., 
in Bianco, 371; to Castlereagh, 19 Apr., Castlereagh Corr., ix, 476. 
a reversal of British policy towards Naples. Bellegarde to the Emperor, 28 Feb., Metternich 
to Mier, 8 Mar.: Weil, iv, 271, 356 (two instances out of many of Austrian distrust 
of Murat); Castlereagh to Bathurst, 27 Apr., Hist. MSS. Comm. Bathurst MSS., 
274 (the words quoted are omitted from the letter as printed in Castlereagh Corr., 
ix, 512); Castlereagh to Liverpool, 18 Dec. 1814, W.S.D. ix, 485. 
PAGE I4I 
a good chance of succeeding. Graham to Bentinck (private) 7 Jan. 1814, Bentinck to Adm. 
Hallowell, 25 Jan., B.P. There is a little evidence that Bentinck once or twice thought 
of backing Murat as the likeliest champion of Italian independence, but it is highly 
dubious: see Maturi, i, 34; Capograssi, 213. 
other patriotic societies. See for this evidence Valente, 94-8; Capograssi, chs. xi, xii. 
Nothing is to be found among the Bentinck papers concerning the secret societies, 
beyond one anonymous and merely descriptive ‘Memoria sopra l’unione Carbonica’. 
Bentinck, however, described Alessandro Turri (an emissary of the Italian secret 
societies—cf. page 102 n.) as having drafted the proclamation which was to be issued 
at Leghorn: Journal, 18 Feb. But there is no telling whether the proclamation as 
issued was in fact identical with Turri’s draft. 
whether they needed it or not. Capograssi, 213; Ferdinand to Castelcicala, 25 May, in 
Maturi, i, 40-1. 
PAGE 142 
whatever arrangement they pleased. For a more detailed account of Bentinck’s conduct 
at Genoa see Appendix C. 
hoped to force a constitution on Murat. G. Gallavresi, ‘La Rivoluzione Lombarda del 1814 
e la politica inglese’, in Arch, Stor. Lombardo (1909); Bentinck to Castlereagh, 17 Apr., 
10, 25, May, FO 70/63; Castlereagh to Liverpool, 5 May, W.S.D. ix, 65. Bentinck 
did tell the Milanese agents who came to see him that ‘their act came too late... 
they could do nothing now... they must depend upon the Allies... it was a pity 
they had not begun this before when the British cooperation could have been given 
and the fate of Italy decided—At present I was too distant and in the impossibility 
of aiding them . . 
. the most I could do was to give them countenance, by sending to 
Milan General MacFarlane....I 
sent him accordingly with the most guarded 

<<<PDFPAGE 225>>>
_ NOTES 
209 
instructions’: Italian Campaign Diary, 26 Apr., B.P. But even this ‘guarded’ measure 
was enough to arouse great and mistaken hopes at Milan. 
Sovereigns we can trust. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 3 Apr. (no. 3), Castlereagh Corr. ix, 
427 ff. 
it is most absurd. Castlereagh to Liverpool, 
5 May, W.S.D. ix, 65 (part of the text is 
omitted in Castlereagh Corr. x, 9). 
PAGE 143 
we can converse on this subject. C. A. A’Court to Lady Wm. Bentinck, Paris 5 May, in 
Gallavresi, ‘Rivoluzione lombarda’, 130; Castlereagh to Bentinck, 7 May, Castlereagh 
Corr. x, 17. It was in this letter that Castlereagh told Bentinck that ‘It is impossible 
not to perceive a great moral change coming on in Europe... the principles of 
freedom are in full operation. The danger is, that the transition may be too sudden 
to ripen into anything likely to make the world better or happier. We have new 
constitutions launched in France, Spain, Holland and Sicily. Let us see the result 
before we encourage farther attempts. The attempts may be made, and we must 
abide the consequences; but I am sure it is better to retard than accelerate the operation 
of this most hazardous principle which is abroad. In Italy, it is now the more necessary 
to abstain, if we wish to act in concert with Austria and Sardinia. Whilst we had to 
drive the French out of Italy, we were justified in running all risks; but the present state 
of Europe requires no such expedient; and, with a view to general peace and tran- 
quillity, I should prefer seeing the Italians await the insensible influence of what is 
going on elsewhere, than hazard their own internal quiet by an effort at this moment.’ 
his last visit to Sicily. When A’Court was first appointed in January 1814, he understood 
that he was going out as, officially, Bentinck’s locum tenens, but that he would succeed 
to the mission if Bentinck gave it up: Hamilton to Castlereagh, 14 Jan., 8 Feb., 
Castlereagh Corr. ix, 159, 253; A’Court to Hamilton, 26 Jan., 8 Feb., FO 70/68. By 
May, however, it was tolerably clear that Bentinck would have to give up the mission 
whether he liked it or not. 
which alone could make it work. Castelcicala to Ferdinand (Jan. 1814?), in Capograssi, 
168-9; A’Court’s Memorandum to Hamilton, 20 Feb., FO 70/68. 
on the part of the Crown. Secret Memorandum to A’Court, 9 Mar., FO 70/65 (Bentinck’s 
copy is endorsed ‘given by H.M. Ministers at home’: B.P.). 
PAGE I44 
could not fail greatly to revolt them. Liverpool to Castlereagh, 11 Mar., in Webster, i, 526. 
what could be saved of the constitutional system. Bentinck to Castelnuovo, Leghorn, 7 Apr., 
in Bianco, 371; Balsamo, 168-9. 
PAGE 145 
irreproachably constitutionalist. Cf.a great many instances of interference by the Capitani 
Giustizieri (Sheriffs) with the Councils, lists of electors, etc., in a whole volume of 
documents concerning these transactions: Arch. Stato Palermo, Real Segreteria Incart. 
5430. These were got together to indict the Constitutionalist Government, but the 
evidence seems plausible enough. 
was to be expected. Balsamo, 162-4, 166-7. 
‘recover’ Sicily from Naples. The King to Castelcicala, 23 May, in Maturi, i, 32. 
PAGE 
146 
Bentinck returned to Palermo. Castelnuovo to Bentinck, ..., 26 Apr., in Bianco, 372-3; 
Balsamo, 172-3. San Marco and the other King’s Friends sometimes maintained as 
a theoretical proposition that Sicily could not be independent, in the sense that if 

<<<PDFPAGE 226>>>
210 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
she was not governed by Naples she must be by England; but it is clear from their 
later conversations with Bentinck that what they were afraid of was that she should 
relapse into the status of a province if the King returned to Naples: Journal, 17, 21 June. 
giving up politics altogether. On 11 June Castelnuovo, who had not yet seen Bentinck, 
wrote to his friend Settimo: ‘You must have noticed as you left me last night that 
I was bewildered rather than angry—let me tell you that ever since then, until 
40’clock this morning, I stayed up thinking over this culmination of all our troub- 
les. ...’ Finally he decided to write to Bentinck and tell him that if he, Bentinck, 
decided to countenance the present conduct of the government (i.e. of the Belmontists) 
then he would withdraw into private life rather than put up any opposition. ‘Labouring 
as my mind was under the thought that I might perhaps displease, however slightly, 
a man to whom we owe so much, and under the necessity of forcing myself not to 
trust my pen with any stronger expression, I was almost unable to put a single idea 
down on paper, and I scarcely know how I managed to write those few lines .. .’: 
Arch. Stato Palermo, Fondo Fitalia, No. 61 (where listed as 11 June 1813—but from 
internal evidence the right date is 1814). 
PAGE 147 
mixing the Ministry. Journal, 16-23 June, is the source for this account of Bentinck’s 
negotiations over the proposed coalition. Cf. Balsamo, 173 ff. 
PAGE 148 
the good will of his people. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 4 July, FO 70/64. 
to begin at home in Sicily. Ibid.; Maturi, i, 48-56. This interpretation of the King’s 
behaviour, and of the events to which it gave rise, is substantially that arrived at by 
Prof. Maturi on the basis of the diplomatic correspondence in the Bourbon Archives; 
it seems to be the correct one, though it has been controverted by Prof. Valente 
(op. cit., 283-4). 
somehow it was adopted. Journal, 23 June; Balsamo, 175-9. 
PAGE 149 
washing his hands of the whole business. Bentinck suggested to the Prince that he should 
send Belmonte to compliment Louis XVIII, as a means of getting rid of him: Journal, 
25 June. 
PAGE 150 
should ever be minded to do so. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 4 July, enclosing copy of the 
Prince’s Memorandum, FO 70/64; to La Tour, 6 July, B.P.; Journal, 24-30 July. 
Bentinck, though he refused to sign the Prince’s Memorandum, did endorse it ‘ce 
papier a été fait avec mon intelligence et accord’, 
were being hissed in the streets. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 5 July, FO 70/64; Journal, 2-7 
July; Balsamo, 180-2. 
PAGE ISI 
the King’s professions of constitutionalism. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 5 July, FO 70/64; 
(private) 5 July, B.P. (not in F.O. or Castlereagh Corr.); Journal, 5 July. 
the Constitution cannot and shall not succeed. Journal, 1, 9-12 July; Ferdinand’s Giornale 
d’Affari, 7-12 July. A’Court reported that Bentinck, ‘having brought this comedy 
to the fifth act... seems to be by no means sorry to get away before the dénouement 
actually takes place’: to Hamilton (private) 3 July, FO 70/65. That, however, was 
before the King’s resumption. 
sailed from Palermo for the last time. Balsamo, 185-6. Bianco states (p. 235) that, before 

<<<PDFPAGE 227>>>
NOTES 
211 
leaving, Bentinck suspended the subsidy in an attempt to coerce the King once more: 
but in fact he suspended it before the King’s resumption, and only to remind the 
Sicilian government of their outstanding debts to Britain: Bentinck to Villafranca, 
30 June, to Castlereagh, 4 July, FO 70/64. A’Court’s statement said that despite the 
difference of opinion between them, he would take no step ‘tending to overthrow the 
arrangements made by Lord William Bentinck’; as Bentinck seemed to think that non- 
intervention on England’s part was tantamount to active opposition to the ‘system’, 
A’Court promised to support it by every means short of violence. All this, however, 
he undertook only because Bentinck’s absence and his own tenure were still officially 
temporary; and it was subject to the Government’s instructions: A’Court’s Memo- 
randum to Bentinck, 15 July, B.P. In fact A’Court was almost certain that Bentinck 
would not return: to Hamilton (private) 3 July, FO 70/6s. 
out of the government service for the next thirteen years. Liverpool to Bathurst, 12 Sep. 
1814, Bathurst MSS., 286. In October Castlereagh asked Bathurst to stop Bentinck 
(who had spent the summer in England) from going out to Italy again: ‘the dread 
of his Whiggish and revolutionary politics in Italy would add to the alarms of 
Austria. . 
. 
. I have had an express representation from Metternich on this subject, and 
I am sure, if his Lordship’s appearance in this quarter can ever be wise or useful (of 
which I entertain considerable doubts), it can only be in the event of hostile measures 
being actually decided on, and being on the point of execution’: to Bathurst (private) 
4 Oct. 1814, ibid., 295. To which Bentinck, who was already in Paris, replied that 
he would rather resign his command than ‘sanction an imputation ... not less 
unfavourable to my honour than to my judgment. . 
. . If Florence is thought too near 
the Austrian States, I can as easily remove to Rome, and I will answer for His Holiness 
not objecting either to my religion or my politics, tout heretick et revolutionnaire as 
I may be’: Bentinck to Bathurst (private) 23 Oct., ibid., 301. (Bentinck had made a 
friend of the Pope by giving him aid and comfort while he was making his way 
from Northern Italy to Rome at the end of the war.) The occasion that precipitated 
Bentinck’s final recall was an approach which he and William Hill, the Minister at 
Turin, made to the Piedmontese Minister Vallaise, urging that the King of Piedmont 
should grant a constitution and so raise Northern Italy against Murat: Bathurst to 
Bentinck (private) 26 Apr. 1815, B.P.; cf. F. Lemmi, ‘La Restaurazione dello Stato 
Sardo nel 1814-15’, in Universita di Torino, Méiscellanee della Facolta di Lettere e 
Filosofia, ser. 2 (1938). Bentinck’s protest against his recall (to Bathurst, 18 June 
1815—see p. 168 and note) defended his conduct since 1811: by his exertions, he said, 
Sicily, which had never before contributed to the Allied cause, had been enabled to 
send 12,000 men to Spain in 1812, and a further 12,000 to Italy in 1814; his hostility 
to Murat had been justified by later events; his explanation of the Genoa episode 
appears in Appendix C. He accordingly asked either ‘to be told in what my crime 
has consisted, and to be heard in my defence’, or else to be allowed to stay in the 
government service. Bathurst’s reply (20 June 1815) was formal and non-committal 
(B.P.). Already, when the news of Bentinck’s recall had first come out, his friend 
Pellew (now Lord Exmouth), who shared all his views on Italy, had written to him: 
‘I can perceive the evil finger of Lord C... gh throughout. . . . It is possible you may 
trace the noble Lord’s disinclination towards you to causes more remote when he 
was not so popular as he is now with Canning under his thumb’: to Bentinck, 23 Apr. 
1815, B.P. Bentinck was not employed again until 1828, when he became Governor 
of Bengal. As late as 1824 his notoriety had not faded: ‘They are in the greatest fuss 
now for fear Lord William Bentinck should be appointed ... High Commissioner 
of the Ionian Islands. Metternich said all the Italian Sovereigns, and first among them 
the Emperor himself, would protest loudly against it. They have a greater horror of 
Lord William than of any other radical in Europe and last year, when Lady William 
was in Italy, they never allowed her to get a single letter from Lord William’: 

<<<PDFPAGE 228>>>
212 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
The Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot, ed. F. Bamford 
and the Duke of Wellington (1950), 
i, 288-9 (24 Feb. 1824). 
PAGE 152 
this political digression. Bentinck to Hamilton, Rome 25 Jan. 1815, FO 70/71. 
a une meilleure postérité. Bentinck to Hamilton, Florence 30 Dec. 1814, FO 67/45; to 
Castelnuovo, 29 Dec. 1814, in L. Salemi, I Trattati antinapoleonici dell’ Inghilterra con le 
Duc Sicilie (Palermo, 1937), 169. Castelnuovo replied: ‘I can never forget you, as 
I am sure my country can never forget what she owes to you. I understand that you 
have good reason to complain of her, but you must keep in mind that, as ancient 
and modern history shews, those who have done good to the peoples have been 
ill-rewarded. 
... and have reaped the gratitude of posterity alone’: to Bentinck, 
16 Jan. 1815, B.P. Cf. similar letters to Bentinck from Settimo, Spaccaforno (Cassaro’s 
son), Airoldi, Carini: B.P. 
PAGE 153 
Sicily’s constitution and independence. See the King’s very clear-headed estimate of Sicilian 
Opinion, in a letter to Medici, 30 Aug. 1814: Maturi, i, 67-8. 
speedily confirmed. A’Court to Bentinck (private) 24 July 1814, B.P. The history of 
Sicily between Bentinck’s departure in July 1814 and the King’s return to Naples 
in May 1815 
is dealt with at length by Bianco, 251 ff. He is mistaken, however, in 
stating that A’Court supported the King’s reactionary policy from the first. It is clear 
from the King’s Giornale d’ Affari that he was much annoyed at what he considered 
A’Court’s unwarranted interference on behalf of the ‘persecuted’ constitutionalists. 
Actually, that ‘persecution’ amounted to little more than the loss of places and 
official favour. 
a ‘posthumous conquest of Napoleon’. L. Blanch, ‘Luigi de’ Medici’, 166. By the decrees of 
December 1816 Ferdinand changed his title to Ferdinand I, King of the Kingdom 
of the Two Sicilies; the whole existing system of local government was abolished, 
and seven new provinces set up each under an Intendente, with new municipal councils 
to be nominated by the King. Conscription was introduced. The annual revenue 
was fixed at the 1813 level (which, however, had included the British subsidy); any 
increases would have to be ‘approved by Parliament’. Previously, the Sicilian flag, 
the separate Sicilian army, and the freedom of the Press had been abolished: Bianco, 
278-94. 
Austria’s Italian territories. Strictly speaking, the secret Austro-Neapolitan treaty applied 
to Naples only; but Austria objected as much to a constitutional system in Sicily as 
in Naples. 
a plain, honourable, and consistent tale. A’Court to Stewart, 6 Noy. 1816. The course of 
these negotiations is followed in detail by Webster, ii, 108-12. Sir Charles Webster’s 
comment is that this was “one of the most equivocal [episodes] in which Castlereagh 
took part’. 
PAGE 154 
to restore the Constitution. Romano, ‘Notizie intorno a... Belmonte’ (Bibl. Com. 
Palermo, MSS. 4 Qq D 81 f. 76); I. La Lumia, ‘Carlo Cottone Principe di Castelnuovo’, 
in Storie Siciliane, iv, 700-17; letters of Bentinck and Castelnuovo, quoted in note to 
(ab Pe 
PAGE 155 
supported him by 69 votes to 35. Parliamentary Debates, New Series, v, 1234 ff. (debate of 
21 June 1821). Among the supporters of Bentinck’s motion were Grattan, Mackintosh, 
Ricardo, Tierney, Wood, Whitbread. 

<<<PDFPAGE 229>>>
NOTES 
213 
PAGE 158 
very much underrate. G.M. Trevelyan, Lord Grey of the Reform Bill (1920), 147. 
attributed the loss of Naples. Elliot to Charles James Fox, 3, 7 June 1806, FO 70/27. 
“With an essential part of government in the hands ofa French emigrant, the N eapolitan 
Court became the centre of the intrigues of a designing set of persons, who were 
careless of the interests of Naples, and inimical to those of Great Britain’: Elliot’s 
summing-up of his mission, in Countess of Minto, Memoir of the Rt. Hon. Hugh Elliot 
(Edinburgh, 1868), 402. 
both in war and in commerce. Grenville to Fox, 22 June 1806, Hist. MSS. Comm., Fortescue 
MSS. viii, 196. 
PAGE 159 
to do their best to secure it. Howick to Drummond, 3 Oct. 1806, with projet of treaty, 
FO 70/30. 
PAGE 160 
wrote home for instructions. Bunbury, 177, 183-5; Elliot to C.J. Fox (private) 6 Aug. 1806, 
FO 70/27; Elliot to Gen. Henry Fox, 28 Aug. 1806 (private and secret) FO 70/29; 
correspondence between Gen. Fox, William A’Court, Circello, and Sir Sidney Smith, 
Sept., Oct. 1806, FO 70/29; the Queen to Damas, 26 Nov. 1806, Damas, ii, 368; 
Drummond to Howick, 11 Mar. 1807 (private) FO 70/30; to Canning, 26 Mar. 1808, 
FO 70/32 (review of his mission); to Gen. Fox, 27 Jan. 1807, Bunbury, 297; Moore, 
Diary, , 137, 139. Drummond’s first despatches to Howick are missing from the 
Foreign Office files up to 6 Feb. 1807, but their contents can be deduced from the 
despatches to Howick, Canning and Gen. Fox quoted above. 
the control of France. To Drummond, ... March 1807, FO 70/30, draft (not sent). The 
draft is unsigned: that it is Howick’s is proved by a passage from Spencer Perceval’s 
memorandum of 13 Apr. 1811: ‘The last administration had determined on this 
revolution, all our representatives civil and military, and almost all individual officers 
in our army, and all resident English have been talking the same language which led 
Lord Grey to prepare the dispatch to which I allude’: Add. MSS. 37, 292, f. 360. 
According to Lady Holland, the decision to intervene was ‘on account of Erskine’s 
extraordinary imprudence in talking . . . to be kept a secret from the Cabinet, and only 
known to a few . . . [if the British demands are not complied with], we are to declare 
we cannot defend the island, and if refused, force employed to effectuate them’: 
Elizabeth Lady Holland, Journal, ed Lord Ilchester (1908), ii, 211-2 (8 Mar. 1807). 
his cooperation in the war. Canning to Drummond, 12 June, 15 Aug., 26 Dec. 1807, 
FO 70/30. Canning did not write to Drummond until June because no despatches 
arrived from Sicily for months after those of 1m and 12 Mar. 1807 (announcing 
Drummond’s change of policy, and received at the F.O. on 14 April, ie. after 
Howick’s fall). 
PAGE I61 
a Sicilian Parliament than a British camp. Drummond to Howick, 11 Mar. 1807 (private), 
9 Apr. 1807, FO 70/30; to Canning, 24 Feb., 26 Mar., 6 July 1808, FO 70/32. 
PAGE 162 
not particularly disposed to require. Drummond to Howick, 11 Mar. 1807 (private), 6 Feb. 
1807 (private and secret), FO 70/30. 
PAGE 163 
to pin his hopes on the King. Drummond to Howick, 11 Mar. 1807, FO 70/30; Moore, 
Diary, ii, 145, 153, 163, 165 (Jan.-Apr. 1807); Moore to Gen. Fox, 25 July 1807, 

<<<PDFPAGE 230>>>
214 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
Bunbury, 305; Castlereagh to Hawkesbury, 8 Oct. 1807, Castlereagh Corr. viii, 89; 
Drummond to Howick, 9 Apr. 1807, to Canning, 24 Oct., 9 Nov. 1807, FO 70/30; 
to Canning, 12, 18, 27 Jan., 24 Feb., 25, 26, 27 Mar., 31 May, 6 July, 19 Oct. 1808, 
FO 70/32. 
* 
recalled him at once, in September 1808. Bunbury, 204-17, 224-6; Canning to Drummond, 
26 Dec. 1807, FO 70/30; to Drummond, 25 June, 5 Aug., 22 Sep. 1808, FO 70/32. 
PAGE 
168 
not yet over officially. ‘Amidst these glorious and decisive successes, I must still impress 
upon Your Lordship the necessity of leaving nothing to chance... 
it is of the last 
importance that the state of Italy should not be such as to afford [Bonaparte] an 
asylum if, under the favour of Providence, the Allies should succeed in driving him 
from France’: Castlereagh to Bentinck, Dijon, 5 Apr., Castlereagh Corr. 1x, 442. 
her reputation as Perfidious Albion. Proclamation printed in British and Foreign State Papers, 
ii, 317; Castlereagh to Bentinck, 30 Mar., Castlereagh Corr. ix, 409. ‘Je vois que 
depuis le fameux manquement de foi de la nation anglaise envers les Génois (pro- 
clamation signée Bentinck), la vertu anglaise passe ici pour de la pure tartuferie’: 
Stendhal, Rome, Naples et Florence (Paris, 1865, ist ed. 1817), 165. 
not only advisable but necessary. Bentinck to Bathurst, 18 June 1815, B.P. (fair copy; also 
several rough drafts, more bitter in tone than the final version—this was Bentinck’s 
protest against his summary recall from the Mediterranean command in April 1815). 
PAGE 169 
make whatever arrangement they pleased. Bentinck’s Italian Campaign Diary, 22-26 Apr. 
1814, B.P. Lt.-Col. Catinelli, an officer in Bentinck’s Italian Levy and one of his 
Italian patriotic friends, later explained to Bathurst that Bentinck had also been moved 
by respect for the glories of such States as Genoa and Venice, ‘dont l’origine et 
l’existence se basaient non pas sur des conquétes ou des traités de mariage mais d’une 
certaine maniére sur la création du sol habité par leurs peuples’: Catinelli’s Memo- 
randum to Bathurst and Bunbury, London, 1 Mar. 1815, B.P. (copy). Bathurst, for 
his part, pretended to believe—both for Bentinck’s benefit and for that of the House 
of Commons—that ‘you did not mean to pledge the faith of your Government to 
the final re-establishment of it, but simply as establishing that as a Provisional Govern- 
ment, until the Regent’s pleasure was made known’: to Bentinck (private) 29 Mar., 
1815, B.P. 

<<<PDFPAGE 231>>>
INDEX 
Aberdeen, Earl of, 131, 136, 206 
Aceton Gs 201, 202 
Aci, Prince of, 6, 23, 31, 32, 42, 43, 47, 60, 
78, 84-5, 89-90, 91, 105, 174, 177, 
183, 186, 194 
and army administration, 
42, 68 
proposes 
English 
Constitution 
and 
Italian expedition, 49-53, 188, 189 
A’Court, C. A., 199 
A’Court, William, 135, 143, 151, 153, 154, 
209, 210, 211, 212 
Acton, Sir John, 43, 159 
Agriculture and food supply, 41, 47, 81, 
TOT; (Ei7 5 187, 
Airoldi, Cesare, 46, 177, 203 
Alcamo, 44 
Alexander I, Tsar, 148 
Amari, Michele, 128, 172, 201 
Amherst, Lord, 20, 25, 40, 61-2, 64, 179, 
180, 182, 188 
and Sicilian Court, 11-7 
Anjou (Angid), Duke of, 23, 78, 120, 177, 
203 
Archbishop of Palermo, see Mormile 
Army, Sicilian, 74, 84, I12, I17, 159, 162, 
193, 212 
united command, 9, I0, II, 15, 21, 25, 
DA 
eT OOsnE 7.5 
disputes over reorganisation, 34, 42, 59, 
68-9, 81 
Ascoli, Duke of, 7, 26, 27, 28, 41, 85, 174, 
177 
Nusttias Els 152, 15395 LOO, 180; 2ET. 202 
Maria Carolina’s intrigues with, 12, 37, 
176 
Austro-French 
treaty 
(1809), 
12, 24 
Austro-Neapolitan treaty (1814), 125, 
126, 131, 136-7 
in Allied coalition, 136-42, 209 
Averna di Gualtieri, Duke, 112 
Balsamo, Abate Paolo, 7, 43, 106, 112, 
121, 123, 128, 192, 201, 204 
and 
constitutional 
reform, 
4, 44-8 
passim, 53, 59, 60, 77, 115, 202-3 
taxation proposals, 14, 124, 173, 203 
proposed 
appointment 
as 
Under- 
Secretary, 84-5, 89, 194 
Baronage, Sicilian, economic and fiscal 
position 
of, 2-4, 
14, 
16-17, 
124 
feudal privileges, 3-4, 45-6, 58, 60-1, 
68, 73, 79-81, 86, 104, 174 
Bathurst, Earl, 55, 72, 73, 102, 126, 168, 
189, 197, 200, 202, 211 
Bellegarde, General, 137, 208 
Belmonte, Prince of, 6-7, 9, 14-15, 17, 
23, 30, 31-2, 35, 41, 42-3, 59, 72, 85, 
86, 89, 91, 92, 96, 97, 106, I2I, 124, 
127, 128, 135, 154, 160, 162, 174, 177, 
179, 182, 183, 184, 192, 200 
and constitutional reform, 44-8, 50, 52, 
60-1, 103-5, 187 
in Parliamentary session of 1812, 66, 
73-80 passim, 188; of 1813, 105-10 
Passi LL2 wi LS, 00 L 7, TLS 2O2 OL 
1814, 145-9, 203 
Bentinck, Lady William, 76, 135, 178, 
184, 211 
Bianco, G., 128, 212 
Blackstone, Sir William, 4, 53, 80 
Blaquiere, E., 64 
Bonanno, Gaetano, 118, 146, 204 
and administrative reform, 121, 124, 203 
in election of May 1814, 
145, 
152 
Bonaparte, Elisa, 139 
Bonaparte, Joseph, 153, 193 
Bonaparte, Lucien, 176 
Brydone, P., 5 
Bunbury, Henry, 55-6, 69, 102, 103, 114, 
180 
Butera, Prince of, 41, 50, 76, 120, 203 
Caccamo, Father Salvatore, 37, 38, 68, 70, 
71, 83, 86, 88, 188, 
Cagliari, 186, 201 
Calabria, 159 
Campofranco, 145 
Canning, George, 10, 20, 129, 160, 163, 
Pit, ii} 
Capograssi, A., 198 
Capri, 163 
Caracciolo, Marquis, 3, 5, 6, 14, 45, 87, 
172, 204 
Caramanico, Prince of, 173 
Carbonari, 141, 198-9, 208 
Carini, Prince of, 105, 118, 146, 200, 204 
Cassaro, Prince of, 43, 105, 150, 173, 177, 
184 
as constitutionalist, 6, 14, 15, 28, 33, 50, 
103, 178 

<<<PDFPAGE 232>>>
216 
Court influence, 37, 38, 42, 47-8, 51, 66, 
67, 70-2, 190 
and 
feudal 
privileges, 
45-9, passim, 
58-9, 73, 79-80, 86 
support of the King, 85-93, 96, 108, 121, 
194, 195, 196 
Cassaro, Princess, 76, 188 
Cassaro’s son, see Spaccaforno 
Cassetti, Giuseppe, 38, 184 
Castelcicala, Prince of, 7-8, 127, 129, 131, 
134-5, 143, 145, 175, 177, 185, 188, 
IQI, 205 
despatches concerning Bentinck’s pow- 
ers, 68, 71, 91, 100, 183, I91, 194, 195 
Castelnuovo, Prince of, 6-7, 14, 23, 30, 
31, 33, 86, 90, 105-6, 121, 124, 135, 
144, 152, 154, 174, 177, 204, 212 
and finance, 47, 74, 77, 81, 84, 106-7, 
193 
and constitutional reform, 44-7, 50, 53, 
60, 68, 103, 104-5, 193, 199 
and feudal privileges, 46, 60, 73, 79-81, 
104 
dispute over Balsamo’s appointment, 
84-5, 89 
in Parliamentary session of 1812, 73-81 
passim; of 1813, I90-II, IIS, 117-8, 
203; of 1814, 145-9, 210 
Castelvetrano, 89, 93, 97, 98 
Castlereagh, Lord, 29-30, 
37, 40, 100, 
113-14, 126-7, 136, I150-I, 153, 175, 
185, 192, 212 
and Maria Carolina, 
39-40, 
71, 91, 
98-9, 182, 195, 197 
and Sicilian Constitution, 39, 44, 64-5, 
II4, 154-5, 185 
and 
Bentinck’s 
Italian 
policy, 
56, 
125-6, 
132, 139-43, 
I5I, 168, 208, 
209, 211 
and Bentinck’s ‘dream’, 129-35, 166-7 
Castrone, G., 174, 176 
Catalonia, 
18, $4, $7, 69, 72, 102, 202 
Catania, 37, 108-9, 130, 173, 193, 201, 204 
Catinelli, Lt.-Col., 126, 214 
Cattolica, Prince of, 203, 204 
Caulaincourt, 139 
Chatillon, 132 
Circello, Marquis of, 9, 12, 23-4, 27-8, 58, 
72, 87, 88-9, 149, 151, 162, 163, 176, 
207 
Civil List, Sicilian, 50, 60, 66, 68, 75-6, 
85, 100, 103-4, II3, 128, 192, 194 
Cockburn, Maj.-Gen., 206 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
»s 
Concannon, Lucius, 18, 54-5, 178 
Congress of Vienna, 153 
Constitution, French, 45, 46, 77 
Constitution, Sicilian, 
before 1812, 3-4, 15, 22, 34, 172-3, 177, 
182-3 
first proposals for reform, 30-I, 44-8 
English 
Constitution 
admired 
and 
adopted, 
4-5, 
15, 
25, 
44, 48-53, 
$9-62, 162, 180-1, 189, 192-3 
attitude of Royal Family, 34-5, 47-9, 
§0-2, 56-9, 65-72, 82-98 passim, 103-5, 
I2I, 145, 147-8, ISO-I, 152-3, 188, 
I9I, 195 
reception in England, 40, 63-5, 113-14, 
134-5, 143-4, 154-5 
in Parliament of 1812, 73-81; of 1813, 
108-19, 202-3 
Bentinck’s hope of saving, 122-5, 135-6, 
144-51 
Constitution, Spanish, 45, 56, 77, 113 
Corsica, 125, 136, 142 
Corunna, 18, 19 
Corvaja, Giovanni, 204 
Croce, Benedetto, 129, 130, 205 
Cronica, La, 113, 202 
Damas, R. de, 175 
Democrats, 60, 105-6, 173 
in 1813 Parliament, 
108-10, 
I12-I3, 
II5-16, 201 
Deputation of the Realm, 17, 23, 77, 172, 
177 
Dolce, Tommaso, 75, 192, 193 
Donkin, Maj.-Gen. R., 181 
Douglas, Andrew, 166 
Drummond, 
William, 
10-12, 
22, 
134, 
158-63 
Durazzo, Ippolito, 169 
Elliot, Hugh, 158, 159 
Elliot, Sir Gilbert, 142 
Erskine, Lord, 213 
Eugéne 
(de Beauharnais), 
Prince, 
136, 
139, 168 
Exmouth, Lord, see Pellew 
Fagan, Robert, 174, 181, 184, 197 
Fardella, Marshal, 186 
Ferdinand II, King of the Two Sicilies, 
205 
Ferdinand 
III, King of Sicily (IV of 
Naples and I of the Two Sicilies), 7, 

<<<PDFPAGE 233>>>
INDEX 
8, II, 12, 16, 21, 100, 108, 116, 120, 
131, I41, 174, 176, 201 
and Naples, 51-2, 56, 136-7, 145, 153, 
207 
the 
Vicariate, 
establishes, 
26-9; 
his 
view of, 34-6; attempts to end it, 
1813, 82-98; ends it, 1814, 149-51 
and 
the 
Constitution, 
48-52, 
57-8, 
65-7, 75-6, 86, 90, 92-3, 121, 145, 
I47-5I, 152-3, 188, 191, 192, 212 
and 1812 treaty, 68-9 
and the Queen’s removal, 
33, 36-8, 
51-2, 
69-72, 86-100 passim, 
161-2, 
I9I-2, 195, 196 
Ferreri, Marquis, 112, 150 
Filangieri, Gaetano, 193 
Finance and taxation, 3, 5-6, 58, 74, 172, 
176 
decrees of February 1811, 14-17, 23, 29, 
177 
tax reform, 14, 44, 124, 173, 203 
in Parliament of 1810, 14, 177; of 1812, 
75-6, 77, 81, 193; of 1813, 106-7, 
IOQ-I0, II2, 115-18 
Fitalia, Prince of, 105, 178, 203, 204 
Florence, 211 
Fox, Charles James, 158 
Fox, Gen. Henry, 159 
France, 13, 137, 139, 142, 152, 159, 160, 
163, 166 
French Revolution, 4, §, 109, 112, 113, 
ity, 
Wee, Fe 
Austro-French treaty (1809), 12, 24, 180 
Francis, Archduke, of Este, 24-5, 50, 54, 
55, 180, 198 
Francis I, Emperor of Austria, 37, 185 
Francis, Hereditary Prince, 9, 74, 81, 89, 
91, 96, 98, 110, I12, 113, 127, 134, 149 
and the Constitution, 45, 48-51, 56-7, 
65-8, 103-4, 177 
and Bentinck, 28-37, 41-4, 55-9, 82-5, 
87-8, 93, 108, 114-5, 116, 117, 118, 
T2O— 
Deel 20 nT 2O=sOumr 
20s 
6 3'5.00030, 
138, 182-3, 195, 204, 207 
and his parents, 34-7, 57-8, 66-9, 70-1, 
75-6, 100, 183, I9I, 194 
Fremantle, Admiral, 181, 189 
Gargallo, Marquis, 120, 186 
Gazzetta Britannica, 13, 64, 198-9 
Genoa, I41-2, 168-9 
George, Prince Regent, 63, 71, 179, 185, 
195 
217 
Germany, 137, 197 
Goldemar, Gen., 181 
Graham, James, 
126, 132-4, 
140, 
141, 
166-7, 206-7 
Grattan, James, 212 
Greece, 179 
Gregorio, Rosario, 4, 172-3 
Grenville, Lord, 10, 129, 158 
Greville, Charles, 178 
Grey, Earl, 9-10, I1, 22, 23, 158-60, 175, 
213 
Guilds, 
41, 47 
Hamilton, William, 63 
Harrowby, Earl of, 64 
Hill, William, 211 
Holland, Lady, 213 
Holland, Lord, 158 
Howick, Lord, see Grey 
Ionian Islands, 18, 211 
Ireland, 127, 130, 206 
Italy, independence and unification, 2, 20, 
21, 23-5, 30-I, 33, 34, 44, 49, $2, 
$3-7, 
102-3, 
125-6, 
136-42, 
I5I-2, 
162, 163, 180, 183, 189, 197-9, 205, 
208, 209, 211 
Joinville, 114, 123 
Judicial reform, 76, 78-9, 124-5, 146-7 
Laibach, Congress of, 154 
Lamb, 
Frederick, 
99, 
102, 
140 
La Tour, Sallier de, see Sallier 
Lawyers, 2, 79, 106, 109, 200 
Leckie, G. F., 20, 25, 61, 64, 178-9, 190, 
202 
Leghorn, 138, 140, 141 
Leipzig, Battle of, 126 
Leonforte, Princess, 203 
Liguria, 136, 139, 141 
Limerick, Bishop of, 63 
Lipari, 41 
Lissa, 18 
Liston, Robert, 114 
Liverpool, Earl of, 54, 55, 64, 134-5, 144, 
I§I 
Lombardy, 136, 139, I4I, 168 
Louis XVII, King, 145, 148, 153, 210 
Louis-Philippe, King, see Orleans 
Lucchesi Palli, Duke of, 112 
Luddites, 114 
L20.6 
£30; 

<<<PDFPAGE 234>>>
218 
MacFarlane,Maj.-Gen. Robert, 57, 184, 
197, 208 
Mackintosh, Sir James, 154, 212 
Madras, 18 
© 
Maida, Battle of, 10 
Maitland, Maj.-Gen. Frederick, 26, $7, 
64, 180, 192 
Malta, 97, 107, 127, 144, 176, 180, 198 
Maria Carolina, Queen, 7, 8, 29, 48, 63, 
83, 85, 140, 174 
and recovery of Naples, 9, 11, 23, 128, 
173, 185, 188, 205 
foreign intrigues, 
12-13, 
20, 22, 26, 
37-8, 
159, 
176, 
I8I, 
184-5, 
197 
and Ascoli, 26-8, 174, 177, 181 
and Bentinck, 27, 30, 31, 33, 36-9, 44, 
51-2, 69-72, 82, 86-9, 181, 185, I9I 
and the Hereditary Prince, 35, 37, 68, 
177, 183, 191 
and constitutional reform, 
45, 
$I-2, 
66-7, 162, 188 
Maria Theresa, Empress, 8 
Marie-Amélie, 
Princess 
Orleans), 76, 184 
Marie-Antoinette, Queen, 8, 67 
Marie-Louise, Empress, 12, 185 
Maturi, Walter, 174, 205, 210 
Mazara, 100 
Mazzini, Giuseppe, 207 
Medici, Luigi de’, 205 
Melzi, Count, 139 
Messina, 12, 108, 130, 158, 159, 162, 180, 
204 
Metternich, Prince von, 
139, 
I5I, 211 
Mier, Count, 141 
Milan, 142, 169, 208, 209 
Milano, Abate, 184, 203 
Ministry, Sicilian, 27-8, 31-3, 35, 42-3, 
84-5, 90, 96, 105, II0, II2, II7-18, 
I2I, 145-51, 182, 203, 204 
Moliterno, Prince of, 49, 52, 163, 174, 199 
Montesquieu, 4, 114 
Montgomerie, Lord, 107, 110, 112, 113, 
184, 201, 202 
Moore, Sir John, 12, 18, 129, 159, 162, 
173 
Mormile, Giuseppe, Archbishop of Pa- 
lermo, 58, 59, 60, 73, 75, 76, 83, 121 
Morning Chronicle, 190, 202 
Mulgrave, Lord, 55 
Miinster, Count, 103 
Murat, Joachim, 50, 54, 103, 148, 152, 
153, 181, 207 
(Duchess 
of 
BENTINCK AND SICILY 
. 
attempted invasion of Sicily (1810), 12, 
20 
intrigues with Sicilian Court, 12, 13, 
38, 176, 184 
in Allied coalition, 125, 126, 131-42, 
166-7, 
168, 
208, 
211 
Napier, Charles, 19 
Naples, 1, 23, 35, 43, 130, 153, 158, 173, 
176, 205, 212, 213 
and restoration of the Bourbons, 
5, 
10-13, 22, 29, 31, 34, 55-6, 69, 98, 
T2120, 132,0133, 
0374 DAS etsOs 
181, 185, 189, I9I, 210 
proposed separation from Sicily, 49-52, 
90, 103-4, 128, 133, 164-5, 199 
Austro-Neapolitan treaty (1814), 125, 
E30, 137, 
Anglo-Neapolitan 
armistice 
125, 131, 136, 166-7 
Neapolitan refugees, 5, 192 
Napoleon I, 13, 24, 43, 56, 126, 138, 139, 
USE) 
2535) 
18S) 
28s! 
Naselli, Marshal, 112 
Neipperg, Count, 131, 208 
Norman Conquest, 4, 5, 172 
Nugent, Gen., 57, 92, 102, 180, 197, 199 
(1814), 
Ordal, Pass of, 202 
Orleans, Louis-Philippe, Duke of, 7, 9, 
15, 17, 32, 41, 44, 55, 74, 75, 83, 84, 
87, 88, 96, 107-8, TIO, III, I12, 135, 
148, 178, 183, 184, 191, 196, 201, 202 
Palermo, 30, 41, 47, 94, 109, II0, 117, 
T50;, LOO;e172, 
9179) 
1845 Lo7meeoF 
Palmeri, N., 172, 176, 201 
Palumbo, Giuseppe, 199 
Pantelleria, Prince of, 75, 76, 120, 183 
Pareto, Agostino, 169 
Parliament, 
Sicilian, 
powers, 172 
Braccio Militare, 76, 172, 178 
Braccio Ecclesiastico, 
14, 60, 78, 172 
Braccio Demaniale, 47, 60, 66, 73, 75, 
76, 172, 193 
revenue and supply, 6, 17, 60, 68, 76, 
109-17 passim, 177, 193, 203, 212 
property qualification, 77, 193 
sessions of 1798, 6; of 1810, 6, 14, 124, 
174, 177; of 1812, 34-57 passim, 59-61, 
73-81, 190; of 1813, 108-18; of 1814, 
145-53 
composition 
and 

<<<PDFPAGE 235>>>
INDEX 
elections, 41, 47, 105, 106, 145, 146, 209 
decrees of 1816, 153 
Pasley, C. W., 179 
Paternd, Cavaliere, 204 
Paternd, Prince of, 177, 186 
Paterno, Princess, 204 
Pazzi, Padre, 204 
Pellew, Sir Edward, 22, 26, 57, 63, 64, 
103, 211 
Perceval, Spencer, 21, 22, 178, 179, 182, 
213 
Piedmont, 139, 141, ISI, 168, 211 
Pius VII, Pope, 205, 211 
Plague, 107, 124 
Pontieri, E., 172 
Ponza, 103, 198, 199 
Population, of Sicily, 172 
Portugal, 59, 180 
Press, freedom, $3, 76, 78, 103, III, 119, 
TOE) 2 
political newspapers, 113, 202 
Provenzano, 173, 201 
Ricardo, David, 212 
Roger I, Count of Sicily, 13, 172 
Rome, 205, 211 
Romeo, Rosario, 172, 193 
Rossi, 
Emanuele, 
108, 
I10, 
I15, 
116 
Russia, 12, 26, 33, 37, 55, 88, 102, 159, 163, 
179, 185, 197, 198 
St Clair, Marquis of, 174, 184, 195 
Sallier de la Tour, Count, 126, 180, 189, 
197 
San Marco, Count of, 47, 86, 120, 145, 
146, 209 
Sangro, Duke of, 98 
Sardinia, 1, 24, 125, 142, 209 
Savoy, 128 
Schiarino Rizzino, armistice of, 168 
Secret societies, Italian, 141, 198-9, 208 
Segesta, 44 
Serra, Girolamo, 169 
Settimo, Ruggiero, 
90, 105, 
118, 135, 
145, 152, 154, 204, 210 
Sheffield, Lord, 63 
Sicilian Vespers, 26, 38 
Sicily, 
British 
annexation 
of, 
early 
proposals, 9, 10, 12, 20, 159-60, 161, 
179 
Bentinck’s plan, 127-35, 164-7 
Simonetti, Saverio, 204 
Smith, Joseph, 107, 200, 201 
219 
Spaccaforno, Marquis of, 50, 52, 188, 196, 
212 
Spain, $4, 57, 68, 72, 81, 82, 95, 101, 102, 
128, 137, 138, 163, 178, 189, 192, 199 
Sperlinga, Duke of, 66, 123 
Stendhal, 141 
Stuart, Sir John, 12, 16, 20, 177, 179, 188 
Subsidy, British, 27, 81, 128, 177, 212 
treaties of 1808 and 1809, 10, 59, 175; 
British political use of, 10, II, 20, 22, 25, 
27, 29, 41, $8, 84, 87, 160, 161, 179, 
186, 211 
Switzerland, 55 
Sydenham, B., 182 
Talents, Ministry of All the, 9, 10, 22, 
160 
Tanucci, Bernardo, 43 
Taormina, 130, 206 
Taxation, see Finance and taxation 
Tierney, George, 212 
Tilsit, Peace of, 10 
Tippoo Sahib, 181 
Tognini, 173 
Tolentino, Battle of, 153 
Trabia, Prince of, 86, 121, 145 
Trade, Anglo-Sicilian disputes, 16, 20, 23 
proposed commercial treaty, 158, 160, 
179 
Treaties, Anglo-Sicilian, of 1808 and 1809, 
10, 175 
of 1812, 68-9, 174 
draft treaty of 1806-7, 158-61 
Trieste, 100, 162 
Tunis, 41, 176, 179, 192 
Turri, Alessandro, 64, 190, 198-9, 208 
Tuscany, 
126, 136, 139, 140, 141, 168, 
208 
Tyrol, 55 
Vaccaro, Giuseppe, 108, 115 
Valentia, Lord, 179 
Vallaise (Vallesa), Count of, 211 
Vienna, 37, 54, 72, 100, 185, 195, 198 
Venice, 55 
Ventimiglia, Gaetano, 66 
Villafranca, Prince of, 23, 118, 147, 177, 
204 
Villermosa, Prince of, see Castelnuovo 
Wallachia, 198 
Waterloo, Battle of, 153 
Webster, Sir Charles, 18, 178, 188, 212 

<<<PDFPAGE 236>>>
Universit as 
BIBLIQTHECA 
Citaviensis 
a 

<<<PDFPAGE 237>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 238>>>
La Bibliothéque 
* The Library 
Université d’Ottawa 
University of Ottawa 
Echéance 
Date due 

<<<PDFPAGE 239>>>
CE DG 
90868 
. 
42 
eREEB 
1956 
COO 
ROSSELLI, 
JO LCRD WILLIAM) 
ACC#H 
1077175 
| 

<<<PDFPAGE 240>>>
Femi eeSt 
‘ 
