
<<<PDFPAGE 1>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 2>>>
NAPLES AND NAPOLEON

<<<PDFPAGE 3>>>
This page intentionally left blank 

<<<PDFPAGE 4>>>
Naples and Napoleon
Southern Italy and the 
European Revolutions 
(1780–1860)
JOHN A. DAVIS
1

<<<PDFPAGE 5>>>
3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© John A. Davis, 2006
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems (P) Ltd, Chennai, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by 
Biddles Ltd, King’s Lynn, Norfolk
ISBN 0–19–820755–7
978–0–19–820755–9
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

<<<PDFPAGE 6>>>
Acknowledgements
I thank the European University Institute, the British Academy, and the John
Simon Guggenheim Foundation for fellowships that have enabled me to research
this book in Italy and France, and would like to acknowledge the support pro-
vided by the Emiliana Pasca Noether Chair in Modern Italian History at the
University of Connecticut. Sabbatical leave gave me the opportunity to start writ-
ing the book, and a generous invitation from Professor Lester Little to spend time
at the American Academy in Rome as a Resident provided an unforgettably con-
genial and stimulating environment in which to do so.
It is a pleasure to record my thanks to the countless archivists and librarians
who have offered guidance and assistance; in particular, the directors and staff of
the Archivio di Stato in Naples, the Archivio di Stato in Foggia, the Archives
Nationales in Paris, the Archives de Guerre at Vincennes, and the Public Record
Ofﬁce in London. My thanks also to Prince Murat and his family for permission to
consult and quote from the papers of Joachim and Caroline Murat. In Naples, as
well as the librarians and staff at the Biblioteca Nazionale Vittorio Emmanuele II,
I am especially grateful to the staff of the city’s wonderful Biblioteca di Storia Patria
and to its present and former directors, Professor Renata de Lorenzo and Professor
Giuseppe Galasso. My thanks also to the staff of the Istituto per la Storia del
Risorgimento in Rome, and its director, Professor Giuseppe Talamo; to Christina
Huemer, the Librarian at the AAR; to the staff and directors of the Biblioteca
Nazionale and the Biblioteca di Storia Moderna e Contemporanea in Rome, of the
Biblioteca Civica in Cosenza, and of the British Library; and to Peter Allison and
his colleagues at the University of Connecticut’s Homer Babbidge Library.
Naples has been an extraordinarily welcoming and rewarding city in which to
work. The Istituto Italiano per gli Studi Filosoﬁci, its director, Avvocato Gerardo
Marotta, and its administrator, Professor Antonio Gargano, have for many years
provided me with opportunities to teach and discuss my work with Italian students
and scholars, for which I am very grateful. I also thank Angela Catello, Gabriella
Corona, Ermelinda De Rosa and her family, Cesare and Tullia de Seta, Gennaro
and Cristina Incarnato, Paolo Macry, Giovanni and Linda Muto, Walter Palmieri,
Anna Maria Rao, Maria Gabriella Rienzo, and Giulia Rispoli and her family for
their friendship and generous hospitality over many years. It is a great sadness that I
did not ﬁnish the book in time to share it with Luigi de Rosa and Filippo Mazzonis,
two generous scholars and close friends whose presence I greatly miss.
On this side of the Atlantic, my thanks to the East Coast italianisti—Ruth Ben
Ghiat, Mary Gibson, Stephen Hughes, Alice Kelikian, David Kertzer, Silvana
Patriarca, Marta Petrusewicz, Jane and Peter Schneider, and Nadia Urbinati—and
to the members of the Columbia Italian History seminar whose comments on

<<<PDFPAGE 7>>>
different parts of this study have been very helpful. I also acknowledge the support
of my colleagues in the History Department at the University of Connecticut, and
I especially thank Fakhreddin Azimi, Joel Blatt, Richard D. Brown, Frank
Costigliola, Michael Dintenfass, Ken Gouwens, Bob Gross, Kathryn Myers, and
Sylvia Schafer for their friendship and intellectual fellowship.
Louis Bergeron, Giuseppe Galasso, Adrian Lyttelton, Alfonso Scirocco,
Pasquale Villani, and Stuart Woof at different stages and in different ways have all
helped me shape this project, and I am especially indebted to my friends Alex
Grab, John Robertson, and Desmond Ryan who generously agreed to review and
comment on an earlier draft of the book. When it came to pulling together its dif-
ferent strands and arguments, their insights proved invaluable, although it goes
without saying, of course, that I alone am responsible for everything that follows,
errors and inaccuracies included.
Elissa Papirno helped proof the ﬁnal draft and at Oxford University Press
Rupert Cousens, Eva Nyika, Charles Lauder, Mary Payne, and Zoe Washford
have taken the book through the ﬁnal stages. Mr Nicholas Hall at Christie’s, New
York, kindly helped obtain permission to reproduce the cover portrait of Caroline
Murat. Without Martha McCormick’s efﬁcient management of my ofﬁce I don’t
think I would ever have found the time to write it in the ﬁrst place. But the biggest
thanks of all I owe to my wife Elaine, to whom this book is lovingly dedicated.
Coventry, Connecticut
May Day 2006
Acknowledgements
vi

<<<PDFPAGE 8>>>
Contents
List of Maps
viii
Introduction: Naples, Napoleon, and the Origins of the Two Italies
1
PART I: ABSOLUTIST NAPLES
1. The Ancien Régime in the South
15
2. Projecting Reform
35
3. Undermining the Old Order
54
4. 1799: The Rise and Fall of the Republic
71
5. Jacobins and Patriots
94
6. The Counter-revolution
107
PART II: NAPOLEONIC NAPLES
7. Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
129
8. The Costs of Empire
143
9. The Promise of Change
161
10. A Kingdom Remodelled? The Provinces and the Capital
187
11. Disorder
209
12. A Kingdom Divided
232
PART III: RESTORATION AND REVOLUTION
13. Losing Naples
259
14. Restoration
275
15. Revolution
295
Conclusion: States of Insecurity
317
Bibliography
331
Index
363

<<<PDFPAGE 9>>>
List of Maps
Italy in 1748, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
14
Italy in 1797, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
71
Southern Italy in 1806, from R. M. Johnston, The Napoleonic Empire in 
Southern Italy, vol. i (London: Macmillan, 1904).
129
Italy in 1815, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
275
Italy in 1861, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
317

<<<PDFPAGE 10>>>
¹ ‘The southern end of the Italian peninsula was, in one sense, the strategic centre or turning point
of the great war between France and England’: Johnson (1904) i., p. viii. However, that is more true
for the period before rather than after 1806; see Mackesy (1957).
² For the ‘Napoleonic episode’ see Bergeron (1972). The principal modern biographers of Murat
are Valente (1941/65) and Tulard (1983), but the most comprehensive modern historian of the
period is Pasquale Villani (see Villani, ‘Il decennio francese’, in Galasso and Romeo (eds.) (1986),
now reprinted in Rao and Villani (1995), 179–282).
Introduction
Naples, Napoleon, and the Origins of the Two Italies
For nearly ten years, from 1806 to 1815, Naples and southern Italy formed part of
Napoleon’s continental enterprise. Although Napoleon never once set foot in
Naples, during this brief decade southern Italy was a peripheral but also an
integral part of the imperial system. Like the other territories ruled directly and
indirectly by France, the Kingdom’s function was to supply men, equipment,
and money for the emperor’s wars, raw materials for French manufactures, and
markets for French products. However, because the French never succeeded in
dislodging the former Bourbon rulers and their British allies from Sicily, the long
coastlines of the southern Italian mainland formed the empire’s most southerly
frontier and for almost ten years only the narrow Straits of Messina separated the
emperor’s troops from those of France’s principal adversary.¹
Napoleon’s Mediterranean Kingdom also had an important part to play in the
dynastic politics of empire. Its ﬁrst ruler was the emperor’s brother Joseph, until
he was moved to Madrid in 1808 to ﬁll the recently vacated Spanish throne and
succeeded by Napoleon’s brother-in-law, Joachim Murat. The tensions with Paris
that developed after Murat’s arrival in Naples would vividly expose the deep con-
tradictions on which the imperial project was founded, and in 1811 Murat came
very close to sharing the fate of Louis Bonaparte, who had been deposed as king
of Holland a year earlier. Unlike Louis, Murat survived but the tensions
remained, and in the hope of retaining his kingdom in 1814 Murat joined forces
with the emperor’s enemies. A year later Murat rallied once again to the imperial
cause after Napoleon’s ﬂight from Elba, but his defeat shortly afterwards by the
Austrians at the battle of Tolentino in May 1815 brought the ‘Napoleonic
episode’ in Italy to a ﬁnal close, although Murat’s personal denouement was still
to come.²
The history of Napoleon’s Mediterranean Kingdom illustrates many of the
broader contradictions on which the short-lived imperial enterprise was

<<<PDFPAGE 11>>>
Introduction
2
³ ‘[T]he very notion of Napoleon’s empire as a conceivable, potentially durable form of European
international politics, or as a leading one, is a contradiction in terms’: Schroeder (1994), 394.
⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 214.
⁵ On Italian insecurities, see Chabod (1962); the most thorough English account of the crisis of
the 1890s is Duggan (2002), 640–7.
founded.³ But what has attracted attention above all to the brief interlude of
French rule in southern Italy are the reforms that were undertaken. Within
months of taking control, the new French rulers set about remodelling the
Kingdom in accordance with the templates established by the revolution in
France and its aftermath. Feudalism was abolished and the monarchy was
reorganized around the system of central and local administration established by
the Constitution of Year VIII in France. The tax system was similarly brought into
line with France, and direct taxes were reorganized around a single land tax. The
debts of the previous monarchy were redeemed through the sale of the lands of
over 1,300 religious houses, the Code Napoléon was introduced and the adminis-
tration of justice reorganized. In 1810 Joachim Murat established a feudal com-
mission that visited every community in the Kingdom to resolve outstanding
litigation over former feudal rights, and at the same time divided the former
feudal and common lands amongst the inhabitants of the rural communities.
Writing shortly after the event, Pietro Colletta claimed that ‘Never has society
undergone political convulsions comparable to those experienced in the Kingdom
of Naples at the start of the nineteenth century.’⁴ Allowing for a degree of exag-
geration, it was nonetheless true that there was nothing comparable in the other
territories ruled directly or indirectly by France to the reforms that took place in
southern Italy. Yet for over a century, historians of modern Italy have argued that
the failure of those reforms to take root in the South marked the decisive moment
when the destinies of the two Italies—the North and the South—became ﬁnally
and irrevocably set on different and divergent paths. While the rest of Italy
embraced modernity and moved closer to the political and cultural models set
by the most advanced western European nations, the South turned its back and
limped into the nineteenth century still shackled to the ancien régime.
These arguments were not made at the time, however, but much later in the
closing decade of a century that had seen Italy achieve independence and nation-
hood. Yet, while the ﬁrst generation of Italian historians was hard at work celebrat-
ing Italy’s heroic struggles for independence and forging the founding myths of
the new nation, the country faced a prolonged economic and political crisis that
came close to overthrowing the fragile constitutional monarchy established barely
three decades earlier. In addition to serious and widespread internal unrest that
resulted in the military occupation of Sicily in 1893 and of the city of Milan in
1898, Italy also suffered a devastating and humiliating colonial defeat at the
battle of Adowa in 1896 that came as a heavy psychological blow to the most
ardent supporters of the new nation.⁵

<<<PDFPAGE 12>>>
It was in this context of apprehension and introspection that the ‘Southern
Problem’ forced itself on the attention of the new nation. There had been serious
unrest in the South in the years immediately after Uniﬁcation, the scale of which
the authorities attempted to minimize by dismissing the disturbances as mere acts
of brigandage. However, more troops were needed to suppress the so-called brig-
andage, and more lives were lost than in all the Italian wars of independence.⁶
Bythe 1890s, although the epicentre of popular unrest had shifted to the North,
the discontents of the South had exposed the desperate conditions of poverty
and distress that persisted there thirty years after Uniﬁcation. The evident dispar-
ities between the two Italies were an open contradiction to claims that the
Risorgimento had uniﬁed Italians, while the mass emigration that followed, as at
ﬁrst thousands and then millions of southerners abandoned their homes in search
of work and better lives across the Atlantic, raised even greater fears. Many of the
new nation’s staunchest supporters saw in the mass exodus a haemorrhage of the
nation’s life-blood that posed a mortal threat to its survival.⁷
Against these forebodings, ways had to be found to defend the Risorgimento,
reassert national unity, and absolve the new Italy of responsibility for the condi-
tions of the South. Not for the ﬁrst time history came to be written backwards,
and the creative force of the Risorgimento was salvaged by insisting that the
Southern Problem was primarily a legacy of the past. The principal architect of
this interpretation was one of the most formidable intellectual champions of the
Risorgimento, the Neapolitan philosopher and historian Benedetto Croce.
A southerner himself, and deeply proud of his southern origins, Croce was
among the ﬁrst to argue that centuries of foreign misrule and exploitation had
turned the South into ‘a paradise inhabited by devils’.⁸ It was Croce who ﬁrst
adopted and adapted the term ‘passive revolution’ to describe the South’s failure to
respond to the innovative forces of the modern era. The phrase had originally
been coined by Vincenzo Cuoco, a member of the Neapolitan Republic in 1799
who shortly afterwards became its ﬁrst historian, but it was only when Croce bor-
rowed it a century later that the ‘passive revolution’ came to encapsulate every-
thing that had made the pre-Uniﬁcation South different. For Croce, the deep
moral decay of southern society was the reason the emancipating forces unleashed
by the Enlightenment and the European revolutions had resulted in nothing more
than a ‘passive revolution’ in the South. The forces of change had evoked strongly
positive responses, but only from a progressive and isolated minority, which was
why the reform movement that had ﬂourished in Naples in the second half of the
eighteenth century failed to achieve signiﬁcant or lasting changes. However, for
Croce nothing demonstrated more dramatically or tragically the backwardness
Introduction
3
⁶ Davis (1988), 168–86; Riall (1997).
⁷ On perceptions of the South before and after Uniﬁcation see Dickie (1999) and Moe (2002).
⁸ Davis (1999), 350–7. On the origins of the ‘paradise inhabited by devils’ see Croce’s often mis-
represented essay in Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia (1956), i. 69–87.

<<<PDFPAGE 13>>>
and corruption of southern society than the fate of the short-lived Neapolitan
Republic of 1799.
The Republic had been established following the defeat of the royal army in the
winter of 1798, and after the king of Naples had unwisely yielded to pressure from
his British allies to attack the small French garrison that had occupied Rome and
set up a Republic there earlier in the year. The defeat of the Bourbon army and the
ﬂight of the king and his courtiers to Sicily on Nelson’s men-o’-war, led to a
French invasion and the declaration of a Republic in Naples in January 1799. The
Neapolitan Republic had a very short life and like its sister republics elsewhere in
Italy was left defenceless once the French Directory decided to withdraw its troops
from the Italian peninsula in April. But when the Republic fell in June, the imme-
diate agents of its destruction were Admiral Lord Nelson’s warships and the
counter-revolutionary masses that rallied enthusiastically to the banners of the
Holy Faith—the Santafede—raised by Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo.
Writing a century after the event, Croce transformed the rise and fall of the
Neapolitan Republic of 1799 into one of the founding myths of the new Italian
state. The young visionaries who had supported the Republic were portrayed as
the ﬁrst martyrs of the new Italy, although Croce also argued that their lives had
been sacriﬁced in a noble but hopeless cause. Although they had allowed them-
selves to be inﬂuenced too heavily by foreign political models, the cultural back-
wardness of the South meant that their lofty ideals could never have been realized.
In any case the true voices of the South in 1799 were not theirs, but those of the
ignorant and brutish masses who ﬂocked to the banners of the Santafede, urged on
by a fanatical clergy and a corrupt ruling class.
For Croce, the triumph of the counter-revolution in 1799 revealed why in the
South the innovative and creative forces of the revolutionary era were destined to
lead only to forms of ‘passive revolution’. When another French army invaded the
South in 1806 to place Joseph Bonaparte on the throne of Naples, the outcome
would inevitably be the same. As a good Italian nationalist, Croce again refused to
accept that reforms introduced by a foreign force of occupation could have any
constructive force. In any case it was already too late; everything creative in the
South had already been destroyed in the tragedy of the Republic. The reforms
introduced by the French were bound to fail. They were based on alien models
imposed from above and took little account of Neapolitan customs and culture.
Above all they evoked no creative responses in a society that was irretrievably
corrupted and incapable of achieving its own redemption.⁹
By demonstrating that the regeneration of the pre-Uniﬁcation South could not
come from within, but only through the emancipating force of the liberal values
and institutions of which the new Italy was the bearer, Croce brilliantly reconciled
the backwardness of the South with the creative spirit of the Risorgimento.
Once stamped with the authoritative imprimatur of the leading champion of
Introduction
4
⁹ Croce (1897), pp. vi–x; idem (1924/1967), 197–212.

<<<PDFPAGE 14>>>
Italy’s liberal Risorgimento, the ‘passive revolution’ and the backwardness the
South thereafter acquired a central place in the master narratives of the new Italy.¹⁰
The South soon found a similar place in the annals of Napoleonic Europe. The
numerous studies published shortly after the turn of the new century to mark the
centenary celebrations of France’s ﬁrst empire included a closely documented
study of Joseph Bonaparte’s reforms in Naples by the distinguished French
archivist Jacques Rambaud. In keeping with the spirit of the time, Rambaud por-
trayed Napoleon as a stern but wise schoolmaster who had brought the lessons of
modernity to a continent still locked in the black night of the ancien régime. In
this perspective, the Neapolitans inevitably ﬁgured as inattentive pupils who had
been unwilling to learn from the models set by the Grande Nation, and Rambaud
sadly concluded that there was no clearer warning of the fate that awaited those
who failed to heed the empire’s civilizing mission than the sad state of southern
Italy a century after the French had departed.¹¹
In the meantime, as the rapid industrialization of many parts of northern Italy
further accentuated the relative backwardness of the South, Croce’s optimistic
claim that the new Italy would solve the problems of the South was coming under
increasingly critical scrutiny. For socialists, in particular, the backwardness of the
South revealed not only the limits of national unity but was also the principal
obstacle to the progress of democracy in Italy.¹² Once the crisis that followed the
First World War had swept away Italy’s fragile constitutional monarchy and led to
the establishment of the Fascist dictatorship, those arguments were taken up and
developed by one of Mussolini’s most eminent victims, the communist leader
Antonio Gramsci.
Gramsci devoted his long and painful conﬁnement in Fascist jails to reworking
Croce’s liberal master narrative of the Risorgimento in Marxist terms, and in what
would later be known as the Prison Notebooks the struggles for Italian Uniﬁcation
were portrayed instead as the victory of a narrow and deeply conservative ruling
class that never fully acquired the qualities of a modern capitalist bourgeoisie.
Following the lead given by earlier socialist observers like Gaetano Salvemini,
Gramsci argued that the backwardness of the South was the rock on which the
democratic aspirations of the Risorgimento had foundered.
At this point Gramsci also invoked Vincenzo Cuoco’s ‘passive revolution’,
although unlike Croce he acknowledged that the abolition of feudalism at the
beginning of the nineteenth century had brought important changes in the South,
most notably the wholesale expropriation of the southern peasantry who lost the
Introduction
5
¹⁰ See Davis (1999), 350–7.
¹¹ ‘Educateurs sévères et peu modérés sur le prix de leurs lecons, les Français n’ont pas trouvé
l’affection de leurs élèves: c’est le sort des “professeurs d’energie”. Cependant les Français étaient la
nation la plus capable de sympathies pour Naples ...On peut déplorer pour le pays lui-meme qu’il
n’ait pas consenti à se plier avantage à la forte et nécessaire discipline, qui peuvent peut-être faire de
l’Etat de la péninsule le plus vaste et le plus peuplé, le promoteur de la fédération, sinon de l’unité ital-
ienne’: Rambaud (1911), 555–6.
¹² Villari (1961/70), Part II, 181–490.

<<<PDFPAGE 15>>>
customary rights they formerly exercised on the feudal estates and the common
lands of the rural communities. However, Gramsci insisted that the French reforms
had failed to create a new capitalist landowning class, leading instead to a ‘passive
revolution’ that both anticipated and determined Italy’s later ‘missing bourgeois
revolution’. Just as the backward and reactionary South had blocked the demo-
cratic forces of the Risorgimento, once Uniﬁcation had been achieved the backward
South and its reactionary landowners remained the principal obstacles to the polit-
ical development of the new Italian state.¹³
When Gramsci’s prison writings were published posthumously after the fall of
Mussolini’s regime they ensured that the South would hold a central place in the
debates on the historical roots of Fascism that followed. But the South was already
at the centre of Italy’s new political agendas. The southern regions had borne the
brunt of the interwar Depression and the Fascist regime’s economic and colonial
policies, and following the invasion of Sicily in 1943 had for two years been sub-
ject to military operations and Allied occupation. The damage to the economy
and the sufferings of the civilian population were as terrible as anywhere in
Europe, and lay behind the social unrest and political protests that continued well
after the end of the Second World War.
Among the political parties that founded Italy’s new democratic Republic in
1947 there was broad agreement that the need to ﬁnd a solution to the ‘Southern
Problem’ was one of the most pressing challenges for Italy’s reborn democracy.¹⁴
However, those concerns were also shared outside Italy, and as fears grew that the
discontents of the southern population might give rise to communist inﬁltration
the South ceased to be simply an Italian problem, and the Italian Mezzogiorno
was to be the theatre for the biggest internationally funded rural development
programme in post-Second World War Europe. Economists, anthropologists, and
sociologists came from all over the world, but mainly from the United States, to
test the latest development theories and turn the South into the foremost site of
pre-modernity in contemporary Europe.¹⁵
Meanwhile, the South was acquiring notoriety through other channels, ﬁrst lit-
erature and then cinema. The South was the leading protagonist in both of Italy’s
post-war international best-selling novels—Carlo Levi’s Christ Stopped at Eboli
and Tomasi di Lampedusa’s The Leopard. In both the South was portrayed as a
world that had somehow remained outside history and resisted the encroaching
forces of modernity. Through cinema and television those images reached even
wider international audiences and turned the South into a universally recogniz-
able metaphor of pre-modernity.¹⁶
Introduction
6
¹³ See especially ‘Alcuni temi della quistione meridionale’ (ed. De Felice and Parlato, 1966),
121–60, but also Fubini (ed.) (1959) and Hoare and Nowell Smith (1971).
¹⁴ Allum (1973), Tarrow (1973).
¹⁵ D’Antone (ed.) (1996).
¹⁶ While there are now a number of studies on earlier stereotyping of the South (e.g. Dickie, 1999;
Moe, 2003), much less has been written about contemporary perceptions of the South. For the South
in contemporary Italian literature, however, see Dombroski in Schneider (ed.) (1998) 261–76.

<<<PDFPAGE 16>>>
As those metaphors have become more universal they have inevitably also
moved further and further from both present and past realities, while more recent
research has begun to question many of the fundamental assumptions on which
they are premised. Quite apart from the sheer improbability that a chunk of pre-
modern Europe might miraculously survive unchanged down to the present, the
images of backwardness and immobility are of little help in explaining why the
South is still in many respects a problem today. The rural world that constituted
the ‘Southern Problem’ after the Second World War has long since vanished.
Living standards in the South today are around the national norms, while levels
of consumption are comparable to those in the wealthiest parts of Europe. Yet
levels of productivity in southern Italy also remain among the lowest in Europe,
economic and social infrastructures are poor, and organized crime, maﬁa, and
political corruption persist.¹⁷ The problems present in the South today seem,
however, to be more directly the consequence of the ways in which the southern
regions have been incorporated into the modern Italian state than that of some
vague and in any case immeasurable notion of ‘backwardness’.¹⁸
Rethinking what makes the South different today raises questions about the
past, and above all about the ideological models that have reduced Italian history
to a simple Manichean struggle between modernity and backwardness embodied
by the North and the South. That dichotomy is based on nineteenth-century
notions about state building and progress that can only appear outdated at a time
when historians are more ready to acknowledge both the inherently contradictory
forces of modernity and the persistence of the Old Order in even the most
advanced of the nineteenth-century states.¹⁹ But these dichotomies also derive
from abstract and often deeply ahistorical generalizations that ﬁt the North no
better than the South, and take little if any account of the deep economic, polit-
ical, cultural, and historical diversities that feature no less prominently in the
North than in the South. Even in geographical terms the boundaries that separate
the North from the South remain elusive.²⁰
Although outdated these dichotomies continue to colour the ways in which
Italy’s political and social histories in the age of the Risorgimento and since
areportrayed.²¹ It is the central contention of this book, however, that the neat
Introduction
7
¹⁷ See Bevilacqua (1994), Lumley and Morris (eds.) (1997), and the special issue of the JMIS
(2006, vol. 11/2) on political development since 1945. See also Allum (1973), Tarrow (1967), and
Ginsborg (2003).
¹⁸ e.g. De Rosa (2004), 129–36.
¹⁹ See for example Mayer (1981), but see also Breuilly, in Rowe (ed.) (2003), 121–53.
²⁰ On the false North–South distinctions see Bevilacqua (1994), Questione Settentrionale
(Meridiana 16, 1993) and Meriggi (1996). For a critical review of these debates in English see Davis
(1998), 205–24; Riall (1998), 32–57; Lumley and Morris (1997); Schneider (ed.) (1998).
²¹ For a recent unreconstructed Crocean view see the editor’s Introduction to Imbruglia (ed.)
(2000), 1: ‘An eighteenth century state, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was constituted, developed
and died between 1734 and 1799. It was born as a monarchy in 1734, and ended as a revolutionary
Republic in June 1799. Conquered again by the Bourbons, after a phase of anarchy, it became a sort
of Mediterranean despotism, a Catholic variant of Asian or Moslem despotic states. Its destiny—
monarchy, republic, anarchy, despotism—could well be taken from the pages of the Esprit des Lois.

<<<PDFPAGE 17>>>
contrasts between a modernizing North and a backward South are anachronisms
that have subsequently come to distort the history of the North before Uniﬁcation
no less seriously than that of the South. A reconsideration of what made the South
different before Uniﬁcation therefore calls for a more general reconsideration of
the dynamics of political change in Italy as a whole in the century before
Uniﬁcation.
This book began as a study of the brief period of Napoleonic rule at the start of
the nineteenth century that was supposedly the site of the original ‘passive revolu-
tion’. In the light of modern scholarship on the Napoleonic enterprise, however,
both the notion of the ‘passive revolution’ and that of the exceptionality of the
South in the century before Uniﬁcation become questionable. Seen in the broader
context of Napoleonic Europe, southern Italy was not the norm but an anomaly.
No comparable reforms were attempted in any of the other peripheral imperial
territories. In Poland, for example, even the political privileges of the nobility sur-
vived, and despite the abolition of feudalism the seigneurial order was not
touched in the German territories. The reasons for this seemed obvious enough to
Count Beugnot, one of the empire’s most seasoned administrators, who reported
that feudalism was so deeply embedded in the fabric of the countries that made up
the Kingdom of Westphalia that to eradicate it would take decades, perhaps even
centuries: ‘one would have to go back four or ﬁve centuries to ﬁnd similar examples
in France’.²² But even in those states that were closer to France in terms of political
and institutional organization, recent studies show that the reforming zeal of
theFrench administrators has often been exaggerated. Despite the emperor’s
obsessive insistence, attempts to implement key reforms—for example, the intro-
duction of the Code Napoléon—were generally minimalist, and very often it was
the local elites who took the initiative to rewrite imperial prescriptions to suit their
own political agendas.²³
Why, then, the attempt to make Naples a model of the empire’s modernizing
mission? Once that question is posed, the weakness of the claim that everything
was imposed from above becomes evident. There was nothing in the career pro-
ﬁles of either Joseph Bonaparte or Joachim Murat to indicate an active commit-
ment to reform. To be sure, the men Napoleon sent to advise his brother were
‘experts in the business of annexation’.²⁴ All were seasoned administrators who
were also deeply skilled in the more sinister political arts, but all but one left with
Joseph in 1808. Thereafter, Murat relied more heavily on Neapolitan adminis-
trators, but although their roles were important, their presence and collaboration
alone are not sufﬁcient to explain either the momentum of change or the very var-
ied responses to change.
Introduction
8
But it was dramatic history’. An even more extreme version of the Manichaean view of the historical
origins of the North–South divide can be found in Putnam (1994).
²² Woolf (1991), 52.
²³ Fahrmeir, in Rowe (ed.) (2003), 107–20.
²⁴ Woolf (1991), 50.

<<<PDFPAGE 18>>>
To a far greater extent than historians have been prepared to acknowledge, the
changes that took place in southern Italy after 1806 were driven and shaped from
below. In part, the scale of the French reforms reﬂected the gravity of the crisis of
the ancien régime monarchy in the South, which confronted the French invaders
with challenges that could not safely be deferred. Public ﬁnances were on the
point of collapse and the creditors of the ancien régime monarchy were threatened
with ruin. There was no cash in the government treasuries and taxes were not
being raised. Public administration and the administration of justice were in
chaos and needed to be completely reconstructed.
From the moment that the French rulers set about these tasks, however,
their initiatives were shaped by the interventions of different social groups and
interests. To explain why, it is necessary to turn back to the earlier period of
Bourbon reformism, which is where this book begins. The pursuit of dynastic
autonomy led the Kingdom’s new Bourbon rulers to copy initiatives being taken
by other Italian and European rulers in the same period. It was not the initiatives
taken to strengthen the monarchy and its resources that made the South different,
but the context in which these were attempted. As these questions carry us
backwards in time into the eighteenth century, the images of an immobile
and unchanging South begin to disintegrate and instead reveal a society, an
economy, and a political system inseparably caught up in the changes that were
everywhere beginning to undermine the fabric of the European ancien régime.
The changes taking place in the South in the half century that preceded the 
revolution in France were often experienced in particularly intense and disruptive
forms, but they differed in degree, not in kind, from those concurrently taking
place elsewhere in Italy and Europe. The same was true of the political crisis that
overwhelmed the Bourbon monarchy in the ﬁnal decade of the eighteenth cen-
tury. In every Italian state, attempts by the rulers to establish more effective forms
of centralized bureaucratic government created deep political divisions, gaining
support in some quarters but provoking powerful resistance in others. While in
some important respects distinctive, in substance the crisis in the South was
rooted in the same contradictions and tensions that caused the Habsburg rulers
of Tuscany and Lombardy to abandon reform and reverse measures already 
implemented.²⁵
In the South, those reactions were particularly polarized, but were not
essentially different, nor did the crisis of the ancient régime monarchy in the
South follow lines essentially different from those of other Italian states. In reality
the South in 1799 never quite lived up to its later notoriety as the home of the
Italian counter-revolution. The savagery of the Neapolitan Sanfedists was not
invented and quickly acquired a notoriety that haunted successive generations
Introduction
9
²⁵ For the economic forces that were transforming the European ancien régime, see Aymard
(1978). For the political repercussions in the Habsburg territories see Capra (2005), for Tuscany, see
Turi (1969/1999).

<<<PDFPAGE 19>>>
of southern liberals. But the carefully contrived retrospective reconstructions of
the fate of the Neapolitan Republic deliberately failed to acknowledge that in
1799 Italy as a whole was the theatre for a second Vendée, or that the Neapolitan
Republic was in all essential respects remarkably similar to its sister republics in
the rest of Italy.
The exceptionality of the South has been heavily overstated, but what is missing
most crucially from the imagery of the ‘passive revolution’ are the quite exceptional
forms of political mobilization taking place in many different parts of the South by
the end of the eighteenth century. These found expression in the political battles
that followed the founding of the Republic, but they can also be traced to the 
earlier campaigns against feudalism. There were many reasons for this, not least
being the monarchy’s efforts to recruit the local communities to its campaign
against feudal privilege. The actions of the royal courts, together with the presence
of the masonic lodges that with government support spread to the most remote
provincial centres in the closing decade, all contributed to generate forms of polit-
ical mobilization that had no parallels elsewhere in Italy.
As a result, local conﬂicts in the South were drawn into broader political and
juridical struggles whose vocabularies they assimilated. This would be evident in
the struggles that followed the founding of the Republic in 1799, and again dur-
ing the short period of French rule. As in the rest of Italy, French rule in the South
met with ﬁerce opposition as well as active support and collaboration. Like the
other Italian states, the South paid heavy sacriﬁces to the imperial cause in terms
not only of lives and tributes, but also of persistent danger and disorder. The
Kingdom was permanently at risk of attack and invasion, while the escalation
of brigandage was a direct consequence not only of conscription and economic
hardship but also of the massive volume of contraband goods that ﬂooded into
southern Italy as a direct result of the emperor’s Continental blockade.
Murat’s own insecurity in the imperial enterprise and the Kingdom’s vulnerable
position on the frontier of empire created important political opportunities that
the southern elites did not let pass, and in particular gave rise to demands for con-
stitutional government that found wide support in southern Italy during the ﬁnal
years of French rule. The breadth of support for the constitutional project is not
easily reconciled with the later imagery of the ‘passive revolution’, and suggests
thatthe South had embarked on a path of political development that was not so
much different but in some respects precocious in comparison with the other
Italianstates.
Those differences were also evident in 1815 when the restored Bourbon rulers
retained the administrative and institutional changes made by their French prede-
cessors more fully than any other Italian rulers. Indeed, in 1816 these were
extended to Sicily as well, which as a result lost its centuries-old autonomy as a
separate crown. The consolidation of a post-feudal bureaucratic autocracy gave
new impetus to the demands for constitutional government, which found expres-
sion in the revolutions of 1820–1 on the mainland and in Sicily.
Introduction
10

<<<PDFPAGE 20>>>
The nine months of constitutional government and freedom of speech that 
followed demonstrate how profoundly the retrospective lens of the ‘passive
revolution’ has distorted the histories of both the North and the South before
Uniﬁcation. The revolutions of 1820–1 in the South were the epilogue to the
decade of French reforms, and the debates that took place in the local and regional
assemblies and in the petitions submitted to the National Parliament focused
above all on the threats that the centralist and autocratic reorganization of the
state posed to regional and local autonomies.
Although those debates took place only in the South in 1820–1, similar develop-
ments were taking place in every other Italian state. Everywhere the post-feudal
order was founded on the expansion and extension of centralized power at the
expense of local autonomies, and especially the powers formerly exercised at local
levels by sections of the elites. Everywhere in Italy these tendencies were the prin-
cipal cause of political tension in the Restoration states, and everywhere opposition
to the new forms of centralized autocracy came as much from the old patrician
families who were the principal victims of the new forms of autocratic power as
from the elites of more recent origin.²⁶ The difference was that in the South these
changes had come earlier and more abruptly. This was partly because of the scale of
the crisis of the ancien régime monarchy and partly because of the ways in which
forms of agrarian paternalism and deference that in other parts of Italy would 
survive until much later in the century were eroded at a much earlier stage.
In March 1821 the precocious political dialogue in the South was abruptly cut
off by the Austrian invasion, which was also a reminder that political develop-
ments in pre-Uniﬁcation Italy were determined as much by realities of imperial
subordination as by the force of revolution. The South was not unique in this
respect either: all the Italian rulers, even the House of Savoy, were dependent on
direct or indirect foreign support. But again the consequences were especially
acute in the South, where the Bourbon dreams of dynastic autonomy had been
amongst the ﬁrst victims of the revolutionary wars. In 1815 the South passed from
formal imperial subjection to France and informal colonial subordination to
Great Britain to become a satellite of the Habsburg monarchy. In 1821 Habsburg
bayonets enabled the Bourbon rulers to regain their throne, but the realities of
colonial subordination caused the monarchy to make a bid for autonomy by pro-
moting the Kingdom’s economy and protecting its nascent industrial centres.
That bid ended in conﬂict with Great Britain and failure, but even though the
Bourbon bid for economic autonomy was motivated exclusively by dynastic
objectives it anticipated the policies that would be adopted by the rulers of the
Kingdom of Piedmont–Savoy two decades later.
Retrospectively, Italians wrote the history of Uniﬁcation around the idea of
thenation and nationalism, so it is easy to forget the other forces that made the
Introduction
11
²⁶ On the importance of patrician discontent as a factor in opposition to Habsburg rule in
Lombardy see Meriggi (1983, 1987), and on Tuscany see the important recent study by Thomas
Kroll (2005).

<<<PDFPAGE 21>>>
survival of independent dynastic states on the Italian peninsula increasingly difﬁ-
cult. Even the most powerful, the Kingdom of Piedmont–Sardinia, survived the
crisis by ceasing to be a regional dynastic state. The forces that brought about the
collapse of the Bourbon monarchy in the South were essentially the same as those
that undid the other Italian rulers.
The retrospective contrasts between a modernizing North and a backward
South have not only imposed differences that did not exist, but also obscured
those that did. The Napoleonic decade was a critical moment in the history of the
Italian South, as it was in the histories of the Italian peninsula and of Europe.
However, it was not the decisive turning point that subsequently came to dom-
inate the master narratives of Italian history. The political and social changes 
taking place in the South in the half century before Italian Uniﬁcation mirrored,
and in many cases even anticipated, those occurring in other parts of Italy.
Everywhere in Italy those changes brought new insecurities, even though in the
South the impact of these changes would prove to be especially disruptive.
Two ﬁnal points: throughout this Introduction and in the pages that follow the
South refers to the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, in other words the southern
mainland and Sicily. But although Sicily has a critical role in different parts of the
narrative that this book seeks to unfold, it is not treated in as much detail as the
mainland or as it deserves. The reasons for this are essentially practical. Sicily and
the mainland were different countries, with different institutions, laws, and cus-
toms. To have written as fully about Sicily as the mainland provinces would have
required extensive additional archival research that would have made a long book
even longer, but this inevitably results in imbalances of which I am very much
aware.
Secondly, anyone writing about this period must be enormously indebted to
the remarkable expansion in historical research and debate on the pre-Uniﬁcation
South in recent decades. Some of the breadth of that research will be evident from
the bibliographies that follow, without which this study could not have been
attempted. Since overwhelmingly this is the work of Italian historians, which is
not easily accessible to those who do not read Italian, it is important to remind
anglophone readers that far from travelling some distant or exotic terre incognitae
the chapters that follow move across some of the most deeply researched and
closely debated territories in modern Italian history.
Introduction
12

<<<PDFPAGE 22>>>
PART I
ABSOLUTIST NAPLES

<<<PDFPAGE 23>>>
Italy in 1748, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1997).

<<<PDFPAGE 24>>>
¹ Sir William served as the British envoy in Naples until 1799; see Constantine (2001) and
Fothergill (1969).
² Vincent (2003), 272.
1
The Ancien Régime in the South
INTRODUCTION: HOW THE EUROPEAN 
REVOLUTION CAME SOUTH
Sir William Hamilton, who from 1763 served for thirty-six years as Britain’s spe-
cial envoy to the rulers of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, liked to describe his
posting as a ‘remote and indolent corner of the world’. In the closing years of the
century, however, this remote corner of the world found itself at the centre of the
political storms that swept through Europe in the wake of the revolution in
France.¹ In part this was because the central and eastern Mediterranean had in the
intervening decades come to acquire new importance in European politics. Trade
between the Mediterranean countries and northern Europe had increased notably
in these years, but the region’s new strategic importance derived above all from the
colonial struggles between Britain and France that after the American War of
Independence had shifted to the Indian subcontinent. In the meantime, the
expansionist projects of Tsarist Russia had led to a sequence of conﬂicts with the
Ottoman Turks that culminated in the Russian annexation of the Crimea in 1783
and a major war begun in 1787 and fought by the Russians and the Austrians
against the Turks. These conﬂicts were a new cause of political uncertainty for the
whole of south-eastern Europe and for the states that bordered on the Adriatic and
the eastern Mediterranean.
Those broader connections would become apparent when Napoleon
Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt in 1798 threw southern Italy into crisis. The expedi-
tion’s aim was to cut England’s lines of communications with India, a project
that was wrecked by Nelson’s victory at the battle of the Nile on 1 August 1798.
The wider signiﬁcance of Nelson’s victory was evident not only from the
baronetcy and the acclaim won by the British admiral, but also from the hand-
some cash bounty he received from the grateful governors of the East India
Company.²
Naples and its rulers were less fortunate. After his victory, the hero of the
Nileheaded for Naples to repair his ships, recover from his wounds, and become

<<<PDFPAGE 25>>>
Absolutist Naples
16
³ See Galasso (1994).
⁴ Ibid.
⁵ Scott (ed.) (1990); Bonney (ed.) (1999).
infatuated with Sir William Hamilton’s young wife, Emma. The crisis of the
Neapolitan monarchy quickly followed. The king of Naples, Ferdinand IV, had
already been pressed into the coalition against France in 1793, and now he came
under renewed pressure from Nelson, the Hamiltons, and the queen to launch an
offensive against the French forces that had occupied Rome earlier in the year.
The campaign was a disaster. The Neapolitan army was defeated and disinte-
grated; the king ﬂed and was carried on Nelson’s ships with his courtiers to the
safety of Sicily. The mainland, in the meantime, was invaded by a French army
and in January 1799 a republican government was proclaimed in Naples. In June
the monarchy was restored, thanks to Nelson’s ships and a popular royalist insur-
rection, aided and directed by Russian and Turkish troops.
The presence of the Russian, Albanian, and Turkish troops that joined the
assault on the Republic and its French ally in 1799 was a clear sign of the broader
dimensions of the conﬂict that momentarily converged on the central
Mediterranean and the Italian peninsula. But only the particular constellation of
powers and forces was new. Like the other Italian states southern Italy was used to
living on the peripheries of empire and its destinies had always been shaped by the
shifting alignments and counter-alignments of Europe’s power politics.³
The immediate cause of the crisis of the Neapolitan monarchy in 1799 was the
renewal of war in Europe, but it was also driven by internal tensions and conﬂicts
directly linked to the attempts by the Bourbon rulers to transform their kingdom
into a viable dynastic state. Before it became an independent dynastic state in
1734, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies had for two centuries been the eastern
frontier of the Spanish empire and its ﬁrst line of defence against the Ottoman
Turks.⁴ After a brief interlude of Austrian government the Kingdom acquired its
autonomy with the accession of a cadet branch of the Spanish Bourbons. The
Kingdom’s new rulers were now faced with the same challenges that confronted
their counterparts throughout Europe. To secure their kingdom and their dyn-
astic ambitions, the new rulers needed to improve its defences and strengthen its
military forces. However, that required revenues and resources that the monarchy
did not have and could only acquire by increasing its power and authority. That in
turn meant diminishing the autonomous jurisdictions, the privileges, and
monopolies exercised by the feudal nobility, by the Church, and by the self-governing
corporations with which the ancien régime princes shared power.⁵
It was not the dynastic ambitions of the Neapolitan Bourbons that were
unusual, but the scale of the obstacles to achieving them. The Kingdom was poor
and weak. It had no effective army or navy, while the royal administration was
limited. The Kingdom consisted of the separate crowns of Naples and Sicily
that were joined only in the person of the ruler: both Kingdoms had their own
laws, customs, institutions, and constitutions, and in both Naples and Sicily the
privileged orders exercised independent jurisdictions, and enjoyed wide ﬁscal

<<<PDFPAGE 26>>>
exemptions and many important exclusive rights. The monarchy’s jurisdictions
were limited, and to make matters worse most of its revenues had been permanently
disposed of by the Spanish rulers in the previous century. During the early years of
Spanish rule the Kingdom’s ﬁnancial and administrative institutions hadbeen
extensively reorganized, but these constructive developments had been overthrown
in the ﬁnancial crisis that overwhelmed the Spanish monarchy in the seventeenth
century when the Kingdom’s principal assets and revenues were plundered to
ﬁnance Spain’s European wars and pay its creditors. The beneﬁciaries were the
privileged orders and corporations who exploited the needs and weaknesses of
theSpanish monarchy to increase their privileges, powers, and exemptions, as well
as hordes of small investors who purchased venal ofﬁces and shares in the tax farms
put up for sale.⁶
By the start of the eighteenth century, therefore, both the degree to which
power was decentralized in the South and the institutional weakness of the south-
ern monarchy were indeed exceptional in comparison with the other major Italian
principalities. Much of the Kingdom was ruled not by the royal courts, but by the
feudal courts that answered to lay and ecclesiastical feudatories or to the tribunals
that represented powerful corporate bodies like the city of Naples.
The new rulers nonetheless tried to follow the lead set by other European
princes to acquire the revenues without which neither the trappings nor the sub-
stance of dynastic autonomy could be attained. As the king’s chief minister,
Bernardo Tanucci, put it: ‘Principini, ville e casini: Principoni armate e cannoni.’⁷
The Bourbon rulers of Naples wanted big palaces, big guns, big armies, and
big ships, too. Yet none of these could be achieved without reducing the ﬁscal
exemptions, autonomous jurisdiction, and power sharing on which the whole
political ediﬁce of the ancien régime in the South was founded. That meant
conﬂict with the most powerful interests in the Kingdom: the privileged orders,
the Church, and the great self-governing corporations.
Similar dramas were being played out in absolutist states throughout Europe,
and although from state to state the balances between the different forces varied,
everywhere the Old Order resisted. As in the rest of Europe, the dynastic projects
of the Bourbon rulers were also played out against a backdrop of changes that were
undermining the economic as well as the political foundations of the European
ancien régime. Even though the origins of these changes were often distant, they
nonetheless had far-reaching consequences throughout the European peripheries,
including the Italian peninsula. One of the most tangible signs of the changes that
were the source of new wealth and a new capacity for consumption could be seen
in the growing numbers of curious foreign travellers who tramped the itineraries
The Ancien Régime in the South
17
⁶ The tax farms were known as arrendamenti, from the Spanish word arrendar (‘to yield’). See 
De Rosa (1958/2005) and Calabria (1991).
⁷ ‘Little princes need little palaces and little villas: big princes need big armies and big guns.’
Simioni (1925), 40.

<<<PDFPAGE 27>>>
of the Grand Tour. Many began to ﬁnd their way to Naples, where they might well
have been entertained by Sir William Hamilton, who even wrote to London to
express his concern over the amounts of money they spent.⁸
These wealthy travellers were living testimony of the consumer revolutions tak-
ing place by the mid-century elsewhere in Europe.⁹ They did not bring these
revolutions to Italy, but the growing numbers of foreign merchant ships beginning
to visit the Mediterranean ports revealed how economic expansion in other parts of
Europe was already giving rise to new demand for goods that the Mediterranean
economies produced in plenty, in particular grain, olive oil, silk, wool, and citrus
fruits. Especially during the years of the long European peace that preceded the 
revolutionary wars, British and French merchants and shipping were only the most
prominent among those visiting the ports of the Mediterranean and the Levant.
Exports grew at quite a modest pace, but enough to cause commodity prices to rise
and generate powerful new incentives for increasing agricultural output.¹⁰
The consequences were deeply contradictory. Except in the fertile Po valley
and the irrigated lower Milanese plain that won the admiration of the English
agronomist Arthur Young at the end of the century, in most parts of Italy farming
was geared mainly to subsistence needs and access to more distant markets was
limited.¹¹ In most cases, agricultural production could be increased only by bring-
ing more land under cultivation. But everywhere land was a scarce and inelastic
resource. In part, geography and climate were the reasons for this since much of
the Italian peninsula is dominated by the chain of the Apennine Mountains
that runs from the Alps to Sicily. Outside the Po valley, good irrigated farmland
was hard to ﬁnd, and many of the principal cereal-growing regions—such as
the Apulian plateau known as the Tavoliere or the hinterlands of central Sicily—
suffered from lack of irrigation and severely inadequate rainfall, which resulted in
thin and infertile topsoils that required extended periods of fallow and grazing
between crops.
There were also pockets of more fertile land, of course, which in the South were
often found close to the main cities—the Neapolitan Campagna Felix, the Terra di
Bari, and the area around Reggio Calabria: in Sicily, Palermo’s fabled Conca d’Oro
and the areas surrounding Messina, Catania, Siracusa, and Noto. However, over
the centuries soil erosion had also turned vast areas of previously fertile farm land
into malaria-infested and uninhabitable swamps, a problem aggravated by the
clearance of woodland from the lower upland slopes that caused thin topsoils to
be washed from the hillsides by spring rains. As demand for wheat and other cash-
crops grew, woodland clearances were already assuming a scale in many parts of
southern Italy that seriously alarmed contemporaries.¹²
Absolutist Naples
18
⁸ Acton (1965), 169.
⁹ De Seta (1996).
¹⁰ Caracciolo (1973); Chorley (1965); Romano (1951).
¹¹ See Cafagna (1962). For Arthur Young see Okey (ed.) (1915).
¹² Sereni (1961/89); Bevilacqua (1988), 337–62; Corona and Bevilacqua (1998), pp. xi–xvii,
27–62, 191–201.

<<<PDFPAGE 28>>>
The scarcity of land was also a consequence of feudalism. In eighteenth-century
Europe feudalism took many different forms. While serfdom survived only in the
East, in many parts of western Europe feudatories no longer exercised independ-
ent jurisdictions, although they did enjoy important ﬁscal and political privileges.
In Italy, the meaning of feudal titles and the scale of feudal property varied not
only from state to state, but also within states. In the Tuscan Grand Duchy it was
unknown, but remained extensive in Piedmont and Lombardy, although in both
cases the ﬁscal and political privileges of the feudatories had in most cases been
heavily curtailed.¹³
In the South by no means was all land held in feudal tenure, but feudal property
was nonetheless more extensive than in any other part of Italy or indeed western
Europe. In most parts of the Kingdom, feudal courts were responsible for the day-
to-day administration of justice and the maintenance of order. Feudal landowners
were entitled to raise levies over the local communities subject to their feudal juris-
diction. These rights and levies were countered, without being balanced, by the
numerous collective use-rights that the local communities exercised on feudal
land as well as on the extensive common lands that constituted one of the prin-
cipal resources of the rural poor. These included the right to pasture animals at
certain times of year, to fell timber for fuel and building, to glean after the harvest,
to gather chestnuts, to hunt for game in the woodlands, or to ﬁsh in the ponds and
swamps. Unlike private property, the ownership of feudal land was therefore
strictly conditional and the land remained subject to multiple uses and rights.¹⁴
As unprecedented rates of demographic expansion caused demand for land to
increase during the course of the eighteenth century, the constraints imposed by
feudal obligations and collective use-rights became more visible and vexatious,
and the title by which both were exercised began to be challenged. As these rights
became more contentious, so did all forms of property rights, giving rise not only
to growing confusion but also to conﬂict. In response to rising commodity prices
and land rents, the feudal landowners were often the ﬁrst to violate feudal regula-
tions bycreating illegal enclosures, denying the local communities their collective 
use-rights, or occupying sections of the common lands. Given the inelastic supply
of land, these actions threatened the livelihood of the rural communities, whose
survival depended on their customary and seasonal use-rights on feudal land and
access to common land. The assault on these collective rights triggered reactions
similar to those that brought market forces and the moral economies of the rural
communities into conﬂict in eighteenth-century England.¹⁵
In many parts of southern Italy these developments gave rise to conﬂicts
not only between rural communities and neighbouring lay and ecclesiastical
feudatories, but also between neighbouring villages. The situation was further
The Ancien Régime in the South
19
¹³ Villari (1961).
¹⁴ Villani (1974); Villari (1961).
¹⁵ On the ways in which rising prices and population growth caused the relative value of feudal
revenues to decline, see Aymard (1978), 1155–69, Thompson (1994).

<<<PDFPAGE 29>>>
complicated by the prevalence of transhumant grazing along most of the
Apennine chain in central and southern Italy. Every spring and autumn, millions
of sheep made their way back and forth between upland summer pastures and
winter grazing on the coastal plains. For these seasonal migrations to take place,
the ﬂocks enjoyed rights of passage across private and public land that had been
protected by law since the ﬁfteenth century. However, as enclosures spread, as
more land came under the plough and as woodland was cleared, the transit routes
were threatened, which created other potentially dangerous conﬂicts. Powerful
interests were at stake, and it was no accident that brigandage and the transhu-
mant economy were closely linked since many of the larger ﬂocks were owned by
powerful landowners who did not hesitate to employ armed retainers to defend
their property and their rights.¹⁶
Changes being felt throughout all the agrarian economies of the Italian penin-
sula, therefore, were often experienced in particularly dramatic and disruptive
form in the South. Not all parts of southern Italy and Sicily were affected in equal
ways, or indeed even at the same time. However, the fragility of the southern
economies, the delicate balances between scant resources and the needs and inter-
ests of different sections of the population, made change not only difﬁcult, but
also ensured that it could rarely be achieved gradually. As a result, the forces of
change often gave rise to conﬂicts that challenged the foundations of the agrarian
order and undermined the forms of agrarian paternalism and deference that in
other parts of Italy would survive until much later.
Unwittingly, the monarchy’s campaign against feudalism in the South served to
exacerbate these conﬂicts. Throughout Europe, more or less enlightened attempts
by the rulers to reduce feudal privileges and give more freedom to market forces
gave rise to varied forms of popular resistance, which in many cases caused these
initiatives to be abandoned. This was the case both in Austria and in Lombardy,
where in the ﬁnal decade of the eighteenth century many of Joseph II’s earlier
reforms were abandoned or even reversed. The same happened even in the prover-
bially tranquil Grand Duchy of Tuscany, where at the end of the century popular
resistance also caused many of the liberal reforms introduced by Grand Duke
Peter Leopold to be abandoned.¹⁷
In southern Italy, however, the impact of the monarchy’s campaign against
feudalism was different. Because the monarchy had no bureaucracy of its own, it
relied primarily on the royal courts and tribunals to challenge and check feudal
privileges. For that reason, the crown’s agents actively encouraged local commu-
nities to bring legal suits against powerful feudal neighbours. Ironically, these
attempts to use feudal law—as opposed to more arbitrary and absolutist 
measures—to combat feudal abuses brought the campaign against feudalism to
Absolutist Naples
20
¹⁶ See esp. Villari (1961), 14–58; Marino (1988), 255–9; Russo (2002).
¹⁷ On the Habsburg territories see Capra (2005) 218–33; on Tuscany, Cochrane (1973), Lichﬁeld
(1986), and Turi (1969/99).

<<<PDFPAGE 30>>>
the most distant towns and villages of the Kingdom and played an important part
in escalating local conﬂicts that neither the crown nor the courts had the means to
resolve.¹⁸
The monarchy’s campaign against feudalism in the South therefore also played
a critical part in undermining local systems of power and authority. The projects
and ideas of the reformers played a part in this, too, of course, and especially as
their projects began to be debated in the provinces, thanks mainly to the rapid
increase in masonic lodges, whose numbers multiplied in the last decades of the
century, often with the open support of the government.¹⁹
Well before the revolution of 1789 and the crisis of the Neapolitan monarchy,
there were clear signs that the European revolutions had found their way to the
South by many different paths. By the closing years of the century these gentle-
manly debates were taking place against a noisier background of conﬂicts in which
the voices of the rural poor could also be clearly heard. The South was not a world
locked into some timeless past, where every attempt at change met with resistance
and failure. In every aspect of political, social, economic, and social life, the pre-
vailing idiom had become change, often radical and deeply disruptive change.
Indeed, it was the deeply disruptive impact of change on the fragile foundations of
southern society that explains why the crisis of the ancien régime monarchy at the
end of the century opened the way to a broader crisis of social as well as political
institutions. The crisis that affected the Italian ancien régimes as a whole came in
the South to take forms that were also distinctive.
SEEKING SECURITY
Before they could change their Kingdom, its new rulers ﬁrst had to secure it. From
1504 to 1707 the crowns of Naples and Sicily had been possessions of the Spanish
monarchy, ruled by Spanish viceroys whose courts were respectively in Naples and
Palermo. The independent dynastic state that came into being in 1734 was a
direct consequence of the decline of Spanish power, and speciﬁcally of the War for
the Spanish Succession that followed the death of the last Spanish Habsburg
emperor, Charles II, in 1700.²⁰
The conﬂicts lasted nearly half a century and focused on Spain’s possessions in
Italy, which as well as Naples and Sicily included Milan and Sardinia. First the
Spanish were driven out of southern Italy by the Austrians, who in 1707 placed
The Ancien Régime in the South
21
¹⁸ See especially Rao (2002), 63–113, and Rao (2005), 142–67. Sicily was different: see 
Chapter 3.
¹⁹ Giarrizzo (1995), 406–20. See also Ferrone (1982/1995, 1989/2000); Chiosi (1986, 1992).
²⁰ The result was not one but three wars, which started when Louis XIV of France declared his
grandson, the Duke of Anjou, successor to the Spanish crown (the War of the Spanish Succession
(1702–14)), followed by the War of the Polish Succession (1733–8), and ﬁnally the War of the
Austrian Succession (1740–8).

<<<PDFPAGE 31>>>
aHabsburg Archduke on the throne of Naples.²¹The Austrians occupied Sicily in
1720 and held the South until the War of the Polish Succession, when Bourbons
once again regained the upper hand. In 1733 it was agreed that the son of King
Philip V of Spain, the Spanish Infante Don Carlos who had inherited from his
mother the title of Duke of Parma, should become the ruler of what would be an
independent kingdom of Naples and Sicily.²² In 1734 a Spanish army retook
Sicily and Naples; Philip V renounced his own claims in favour of Don Carlos,
who became king. The Habsburg emperor Charles VI grudgingly agreed and in
return the Bourbons acknowledged Habsburg claims to Milan, the Duchies of
Parma and Piacenza, and the Grand Duchy of Tuscany. They also pledged that the
thrones of Sicily and Naples should never revert to the Spanish monarchy.²³
The ﬁrst priority for Charles of Bourbon²⁴ was to secure the safety of his
Kingdom. Spain was too weak to offer effective protection, and for two centuries
the Kingdom had relied on Spanish armies and navies for its defence. As a result
the Kingdom had only a small army and no navy, even though its extensive coast-
line was exposed to attack by other European powers and by Barbary corsairs that
marauded on the Kingdom’s merchant shipping and ﬁshing vessels. The crum-
bling watch towers that remain to this day had been built to warn inhabitants of
the coastal settlements of impending raids, whose principal aim was to capture
prisoners to be sold as slaves in North Africa.²⁵
The new Kingdom had more powerful enemies, however. Austria remained hos-
tile, as did Great Britain. When Spain and France went to war over the Austrian
Succession in 1740, the new Austrian empress Maria Theresa worked hard to
foment opposition to the new dynasty amongst the Neapolitan and Sicilian nobles,
many of whom remained strongly pro-Austrian. But when Naples remained stub-
bornly neutral, Commodore Martin led a British naval squadron into the Bay of
Naples on 18 August 1742 and threatened to bombard the city unless the Bourbon
rulers joined the coalition against France.²⁶ The pro-Austrian revolt by the nobles
never materialized, however, and two years later at the battle of Velletri the king of
Naples got the better of an Austrian army that had been sent to depose him.²⁷
Absolutist Naples
22
²¹ In 1713 Spain lost Sicily, which under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht passed to the Duke
Victor Amadeus II of Savoy, whose family ﬁnally acquired an ardently coveted royal title. When the
Austrians occupied Sicily in 1720 the Piedmontese rulers had to make do with the less desirable
island of Sardinia, which nonetheless still carried a royal title that the rulers of the House of Savoy
kept until they became kings of Italy in 1861.
²² To win the support of Philip V of Spain, the French monarchy offered to drop its claims to the
Medici and Farnese inheritance in Italy: this was the inheritance of Philip’s wife, Elizabeth Farnese,
the last surviving descendant of the two great families that had dominated central Italy since the six-
teenth century; see Lynch (1989), 137–41.
²³ At the Peace of Vienna 1735, which was reconﬁrmed in 1738.
²⁴ Don Carlos took the titles Charles VII in Naples and Charles III in Sicily; however, he is always
referred to by the title he assumed upon becoming king of Spain in 1759: Charles III.
²⁵ See Colley (2002).
²⁶ This was the ﬁrst of four threats by the British navy to bombard Naples in the century that fol-
lowed: the threats were repeated in 1799, 1815, and 1840.
²⁷ Treaty of Fontainebleau, 25 October 1743: see Barra (no date), 4–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 32>>>
Commodore Martin’s visitation exposed the Kingdom’s extreme military and
naval vulnerability, and it was only when the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748
brought the War of the Austrian Succession to an end that the Bourbon monarchy
in the South could ﬁnally enjoy some degree of security. This enabled Charles to
turn his attention to reorganizing his Kingdom and building palaces, but his days
in Naples were numbered. Following the death of his hopelessly insane half-
brother, he inherited the throne of Spain and took his leave for Madrid in 1759.²⁸
Since his own eldest son was also mad, his second son took the title of Infante of
Spain, while the crowns of Naples and Sicily went to his eight-year-old third son,
whose own mind was far from stable. The boy-king took the titles of Ferdinand IV
of Naples and Ferdinand III of Sicily,²⁹ and until he came of age in 1767 the king-
dom was governed by a Regency Council headed by Bernardo Tanucci, the Tuscan
lawyer who served as principal minister throughout Charles’s time in Naples.³⁰
Charles’s departure to Spain occurred in the middle of the Seven Years War
(1756–63), the bloodiest and most costly of Europe’s eighteenth-century conﬂicts
that nonetheless ﬁnally caused France and Austria to become allies. That alliance
brought western Europe the relatively long period of peace that lasted until 1792
that was the background for the numerous experiments in absolutist reform and
the intellectual debates of the Enlightenment.³¹ It also saw Naples leave the diplo-
matic protection of Madrid to enter the orbit of Habsburg Vienna, a diplomatic
shift that was consummated in 1768 when Ferdinand of Naples married the 
sixteen-year-old daughter of the Austrian empress Maria Theresa, the Archduchess
Maria Carolina.³²
The Neapolitan marriage marked an important extension of Habsburg inﬂu-
ence in Italy. Maria Carolina’s bother, the emperor Joseph II, escorted her on her
nuptial journey to Naples. Another brother, Peter Leopold, was Grand Duke of
Tuscany, while her sister Maria Amalia was married to the Duke of Parma, Don
Felipe of Bourbon, who was the ﬁrst cousin of the king of Naples.³³ After giving
birth to her ﬁrst male child in 1776, the young queen exercised her right to
become a member of the Council of State and within a year had engineered
Tanucci’s downfall.
Tanucci’s fall after forty-four years in government marked the defeat of the ‘pro-
Spanish’ party in Naples, and the queen quickly set about constructing her own
party while the king spent most of his time hunting.³⁴ The young queen’s aim was
The Ancien Régime in the South
23
²⁸ Philip V died in 1746 and was succeeded by Charles’s half-brother, who ruled as Ferdinand VI
until his death in 1759 at the age of forty-six without heirs.
²⁹ He is generally known by the Neapolitan title, until the Act of Union in 1816 when he became
Ferdinand I.
³⁰ Bernardo Tanucci (1698–1793).
³¹ Schroeder (1994), 3–52.
³² Maria Carolina (1752–1814) bore Ferdinand 17 children.
³³ Another sister, Maria Cristina, was governor of the Low Countries, while in 1770 yet another
sister, Marie Antoinette, would of course marry the future Louis XVI and in 1774 become the queen
of France: Dumas (1864), i. 190.
³⁴ In 1787 Goethe commented, ‘Naples itself appears to be happy, free and lively, vast numbers
of people running about in mingled confusion, the king is out hunting, the queen is expecting

<<<PDFPAGE 33>>>
to imitate the reforms being introduced in Vienna by her brother, the emperor
Joseph II, and she needed a minister willing to assert the power of the monarchy
over the feudal nobility and the Church and build a dynastic army and navy. She
found her man in 1778 when her brother Peter Leopold sent an energetic admin-
istrator named John Acton to Naples to advise on building a navy.
Born in France but descended from an English Jacobite family, Acton had
served in the French navy before going to Tuscany to advise the Grand Duke on
naval matters. He now followed Tanucci’s footsteps from Florence to Naples,
where his task initially was to advise on naval matters. However, the queen soon
gave him the job of reorganizing the army and expanding the Kingdom’s economy
and trade. Within two years of his arrival, Acton was the queen’s favourite and by
repute also her lover. In 1779 he was appointed Secretary for the Navy and in
1780 acquired the posts of Secretary for War and Finances, making him the most
powerful minister at the Neapolitan Court.³⁵
Acton’s project for building an independent navy and reorganizing the army
gave the government’s reform programme a new sense of urgency. Anxious to
acquire British approval Acton sought the good ofﬁces of the British envoy, Sir
William Hamilton. The new relations between Naples and Vienna had made the
British less hostile to the Neapolitan government, and as commercial competition
between Britain and France increased, and as the size of France’s Mediterranean
ﬂeet grew, Britain’s interest in developing new markets in the Two Sicilies and in
gaining access to the Sicilian ports had also grown. Although Britain’s principal
trade entrepôt in the western Mediterranean was Livorno in the Grand Duchy of
Tuscany, apart from Gibraltar and the Balearic Islands Britain had no secure naval
stations in the Mediterranean and few allies capable of providing port facilities in
times of war.³⁶
The Neapolitan government was also interested in ﬁnding ways to promote its
foreign trade. New commercial treaties were negotiated with the Habsburg
Empire, the Ottoman Porte, the Bey of Tripoli, Denmark, the Dutch Republic,
Morocco, Sardinia, and Russia. Negotiations with Britain collapsed, however,
when the British refused to give up the major commercial privileges they enjoyed
under the terms of a very one-sided treaty signed with Spain in 1667.³⁷
Despite this failure, the volume of British imports—especially salt cod, and
colonial and manufactured goods—grew rapidly in the second half of the century
and faster than France’s trade with Naples, which was also expanding.³⁸ This was
a source of great alarm for the reformers who feared that the Kingdom risked
Absolutist Naples
24
achild, and so things could not be better’ (Naples, 25 February, 1787): cited in Saine and Sammons
(1989), 152.
³⁵ See entry by Nuzzo, in DBI, i. 206–10; Barra (no date), 108.
³⁶ De Divitiis and Giura (1997).
³⁷ The privileges included a ﬂat rate reduction on all landing duties and the right not to be
inspected by Neapolitan customs ofﬁcers. See Nuzzo (1971), 280–1.
³⁸ Nuzzo (1990), 457.

<<<PDFPAGE 34>>>
becoming a colonial supplier of raw materials to Britain.³⁹ These fears also fuelled
rumours that the queen and Acton were agents of British commercial interests,
and these were eagerly seized on by the remnants of the pro-Spanish faction that
had never hidden its hostility to the Austrian queen.⁴⁰ But those attacks were also
directed at the increasingly absolutist and arbitrary style of government adopted
by the queen and her favourite minister.
THE CHURCH
Perhaps the most dangerous enemy of the new dynasty was the Pope. For cen-
turies the papacy had claimed that the rulers of the Kingdom were its feudal vas-
sals, which meant that the Pope claimed the exclusive right to sanction any change
of dynasty. In symbolic recognition of their status as vassals the rulers of Naples
every year made the gift to the Pope of a white palfrey (known as the chinea) laden
with gold and precious jewels.⁴¹ However, the Pope’s power in the Kingdom was
far from symbolic, and as well as important jurisdictional rights and the revenues
attached to them Rome was the source of extensive and very lucrative ecclesiastical
patronage. For that reason it also exercised great political inﬂuence, and had many
committed supporters amongst the feudal aristocracy as well as the clergy.
In the early eighteenth century Rome’s power and patronage in the Kingdom
came under attack. The case against Rome was set out most cogently in Pietro
Giannone’s Civil History of the Kingdom of Naples, a treatise ﬁrst published in
1723 which subsequently became an obligatory point of reference for the later
Neapolitan reform movement. In his tract, Giannone depicted the history of the
South as a prolonged struggle for freedom from the papacy, which had always
been the ally of the Kingdom’s foreign invaders. He concluded that the Kingdom
would never be free of papal oppression until it was ruled by an independent 
secular prince.⁴²
Giannone’s treatise drew on a much older tradition of hostility to the papacy,
and earlier Neapolitan writers had frequently depicted Spain as the papacy’s
accomplice in suppressing Neapolitan liberties. In the seventeenth century, papal
hostility to all forms of new learning, to science and the new rationalist philo-
sophies, had encouraged the popularity of ‘libertine’, rationalist, and secularist
philosophies in southern Italy. Since the university was closely controlled by the
The Ancien Régime in the South
25
³⁹ Galanti, Breve Descrizione (1792), ii. 334–5.The surplus with France probably offset the deﬁcit
in the Kingdom’s accounts through bills discounted in England and Holland, but either way this was
clear evidence that the volume of the Kingdom’s foreign trade was increasing in the second half of the
century: see Salvemini in Imbuglia (2000), 44–69; also Chorley (1965), 13–38; Romano (1951),
92–5.
⁴⁰ Nuzzo (1990), 437–535.
⁴¹ This ceremony was one of the most colourful of the annual pageants of papal Rome: Tanucci
threatened to end it in 1767 but this did not happen until 1788 at the height of the anti-curial cam-
paign: see Rambaud (1908), 294.
⁴² Chiosi (1987), 371–467.

<<<PDFPAGE 35>>>
Spanish vice-regal authorities and supporters of papal supremacy, a strong tradi-
tion of private schools had also taken root in Naples.⁴³
In the new political circumstances following the founding of an independent
dynastic state, opposition to Rome would play an important role in creating the
intellectual background from which the Neapolitan reform movement would
emerge. However, hostility to Rome also went hand in hand with asserting the
autonomy of the new dynastic rulers, and helps explain the enthusiastic reception
for Freemasonry in southern Italy. It was the ﬁrst patron of Freemasonry in
Naples, the Prince of Sansevero, who in 1744 appealed to Charles III to follow the
example of the Elector of Prussia and declare himself a mason, create a new aris-
tocracy of the virtuous, and establish a national army.⁴⁴
The king did not respond to that appeal, but in 1741 the government had negoti-
ated a new Concordat in which Rome made important concessions, including
waiving certain tax exemptions for religious houses. The Concordat also enabled
the government to begin reducing the number of convents and religious houses in
the Kingdom considered to be excessive.⁴⁵ However, the standing of the new ruler
with the opponents of papal power was greatly enhanced in 1744 when the
Archbishop of Naples, Cardinal Spinelli, was accused of secretly plotting with
Rome to introduce the Inquisition into Naples. The charges against Spinelli
mobilized all the opponents of Rome, and the king’s decision to order an inquiry
that conﬁrmed the accusations was warmly greeted by the anti-papal faction. It
also revealed the highly divisive nature of ecclesiastical politics, however. In Rome
the royal intervention was furiously attacked and opposition to the papal curia in
Naples was attributed to the spread of ‘a Republican and British spirit’ encouraged
by the unchecked circulation of works by Giannone, Locke, and Montesquieu.⁴⁶
In Naples, however, the Pope’s protests also found many supporters, including the
Jesuits, most of the regular clergy, and S. Alfonso Maria di Liguori, the city’s most
popular and inﬂuential preacher who in his widely attended sermons regularly
denounced all those who challenged the authority of Rome as libertines and
Freemasons.⁴⁷
THE CAPITAL
The Kingdom that Charles of Bourbon inherited in 1734 was not only the oldest
monarchy on the peninsula, but also the largest.⁴⁸ At the time of Charles’s acces-
sion the population of the mainland was estimated at four million, with nearly
Absolutist Naples
26
⁴³ Chiosi (1987), 371–467.
⁴⁴ Ibid.; Ferrone (1989/2000); Giarrizzo (1995).
⁴⁵ Moricola (1994) 27–8: 22% of the 75,000 priests and clerics in the Kingdom resided in Naples.
⁴⁶ Chiosi (2000), 452–4.
⁴⁷ Ibid.
⁴⁸ Before the House of Savoy—the oldest ruling dynasty in Italy, indeed in Europe according to
their apologists—acquired their royal title in 1713, the only other Italian ruler with the title of king
was the Pope; the papa-re.

<<<PDFPAGE 36>>>
another million in Sicily. The Kingdom also contained Italy’s two largest cities.
Naples, whose population was estimated at between 350,000 and 400,000 at the
end of the eighteenth century, was still the third largest city in Europe after
London and Paris. Palermo, with around 120,000 inhabitants was much smaller,
but at the end of the century still slightly larger than Rome. The other southern
cities were both smaller and less numerous than their northern counterparts.⁴⁹
For the French traveller Charles de Brosse, Naples was the only Italian city in
the eighteenth century that had the feel of a capital, and the new Bourbon
rulers set out to make it a monument to their dynastic ambitions.⁵⁰ Naples was in
many respects the perfect theatre for such an enterprise. Set in surroundings of
extraordinary natural beauty and drama, the city was also a treasure-trove for
eighteenth-century tastes. Here the traveller could admire the spectacle of Mount
Vesuvius in eruption, visit the sites of the ancient cities of Herculaneum and
Pompeii where excavations had recently begun to yield remarkable artefacts of
antiquity, or tour the fabled Phlegrean Fields, which offered an unrivalled choice
of classical sites, mythological references, and natural wonders.
As well as some of the ﬁnest Baroque architecture in Italy, the city’s streets and
public squares were a constant pageant of folklore and festival that was outshone
only by papal Rome. Scarcely a day passed without processions to celebrate a
neighbourhood saint or patron, in which monks and friars from the many reli-
gious houses, members of the lay confraternities, the penitents, the sick, the halt,
the maimed, the lame, and the blind formed the permanent supporting cast. Nor
could the visitor miss the famous lazzaroni, most often depicted as exotic beggars
idly reclining in picaresque semi-nudity on the harbour walls.⁵¹
Even more exotic was the fabled cuccagna, an elaborately choreographed spect-
acle that was part public charity and part display of royal muniﬁcence. For days
food, ﬂour, wine, meats, and live animals—cows, calves, goats, kids, sheep, lamb,
geese, capons, and other fowl—were piled high on towers constructed in one of
the main piazze of the city. On the appointed day and hour a signal was given, the
guards stood back and the populace invaded the piazza to take whatever could
be carried. The pell-mell that ensued took place under the benevolent gaze of the
prince and his courtiers, who watched from the lofty safety of a balcony.
More often cited than seen, the cuccagna embodied the exotic and the barbaric
that caught the travellers’ fascination. But if the city’s pageantry had deep roots in
The Ancien Régime in the South
27
⁴⁹ The next largest on the mainland was Foggia with 20,000 inhabitants, followed by a number of
towns whose populations varied between 10,000 and 20,000. In Sicily, Catania and Messina were the
largest cities after Palermo, with a number of other towns of around 8,000 inhabitants: see Galasso
(1997), 42–4.
⁵⁰ Many other reactions were far less complimentary; discerning discourses in travellers’ tales are a
ﬂourishing industry: see Calaresu (1999), Moe (2002), Naddeo (2005), but the fullest critical
anthologies remain Mozzillo (1992) and Venturi (1972). See also Galasso, ‘Lo stereotipo del napole-
tano’, in idem (1994), 171–225.
⁵¹ Johann Wolfgang von Goethe noted perceptively that they were not beggars, but stevedores
whose brief work shifts were combined with long periods of enforced idleness: Naples May 28, 1787,
in Saine and Sammons (1989 ), 262–7; cf. also Boyle (1992), 458–66, 478–81.

<<<PDFPAGE 37>>>
the culture of its popular neighbourhoods, much had also been invented in the
course of the eighteenth century as the city became the principal site for parading
the glory and grandeur of the new dynasty. Once the Kingdom had been secured
from foreign enemies, Charles III set about making his capital reﬂect to the
glory of the new dynasty. The result was an unprecedented building spree
designed to rank Naples with the leading capital cities in Europe, embellished
with a dazzling array of sumptuous royal palaces, villas, hunting lodges, theatres,
and monuments in and around the capital that aimed to surpass the grandest
princes in Europe.⁵²
The greatest of these projects was the vast palace built on the principal land-
ward approaches to the city at Caserta. Designed by Luigi Vanvitelli, work begun
in 1754 and was completed within only twenty-two years.⁵³ But Caserta was only
one of the many grandiose new monuments that transformed the appearance of
Naples and its surrounding area. Work also began to enlarge the royal palace in the
centre of the Naples, while new royal residences were built at Capodimonte, at
Portici, and near the recently opened excavations at Herculaneum, all of which
were accompanied by sumptuous and elegant new villas build for wealthy
courtiers and nobles.⁵⁴ Elegant hunting lodges and follies paid tribute in addition
to the king’s passion for hunting, which was inherited as an obsession by his third
son who in 1767 would succeed him as Ferdinand IV.
These great building projects brought artists and craftsmen from all over
Europe to the city, among them the Bohemian painter Antol Raffael Mengs, who
had accompanied Charles III’s child-bride, Maria Amalia⁵⁵ from her father’s
Court in Dresden, Angelika Kauffman,⁵⁶ Philip Hackert,⁵⁷ and Wilhelm
Tischbein,⁵⁸ who ﬁrst came to Naples with Goethe and was later appointed 
director of the Accademia delle Belle Arti in 1789.⁵⁹
Among the numerous portraits commissioned to celebrate the new dynasty, the
most prominent background themes were the buried Roman cities of Pompeii
and Herculaneum, and Mount Vesuvius.⁶⁰ Excavation of the archaeological sites
Absolutist Naples
28
⁵² See especially De Seta (1981, 1992, 1999).
⁵³ Luigi Vanvitelli’s (1700–73) reputation had been made in Rome where he had been the chief
architect and supervisor of buildings at St Peter’s in the 1720s. As well as a new harbour for the papal
port of Ancona and the monumental cemetery at the shrine of the Madonna of Loreto, he also
designed the Jesuit chapel in Lisbon and the residence of the Habsburg Archduke of Milan.
⁵⁴ On the ‘ville vesuviane’ see De Seta (1981), 152–83.
⁵⁵ The daughter of the Elector of Saxony (and King of Poland) who became Charles’s child-bride
in 1737 at the age of 13.
⁵⁶ Angelika Kauffmann (1741–1807): born in Switzerland she worked in London from 1766 to
1781, then moved to Italy with her husband Antonio Zucchi.
⁵⁷ Philip Hackert (1737–1807): a Prussian landscape painter who moved from Rome to Naples
where he was appointed court painter by Ferdinand IV.
⁵⁸ Wilhelm Tischbein (1751–1829) was director of the Academy from 1789 to 1799, then
returned to Germany and became the court painter to the Duke of Oldenburg at Eutin. See Boyle
(1992), 392–3.
⁵⁹ See F. Haskell (1981), 15; Sloan, in Jenkins and Sloan (1996), 25–7; Spinosa (1981), 55–155;
Marandel (1981), 156–82.
⁶⁰ Sloan (1996), 27.

<<<PDFPAGE 38>>>
at Herculaneum had begun in the 1730s, and the fame of the Roman paintings
and designs and of the remarkable collections of papyri found in the villas of
Herculaneum and Pompeii, and other sites at Castellamare, spread across
Europe thanks to the lavishly illustrated volumes published by the royal print-
ing house in Naples in the 1750s. These were followed by colour reproductions
of paintings on the Greek and Roman vases found at the same sites in volumes
edited by mysterious Baron d’Hancarville and Sir William Hamilton.⁶¹ The
city as a result came to be closely identiﬁed with the new enthusiasm for neo-
classical art, and it also provided the English pottery-master Josiah Wedgwood
with the design for the highly successful line of Etruria ware that was directly
inspired by Hamilton’s reproductions of the classical paintings found at
Pompeii and Herculaneum.⁶²
Vesuvius was hardly less important in linking the city to contemporary fascina-
tion with the natural sciences, although few observers could resist the unscientiﬁc
temptation of linking the volcano to the character of the Neapolitans. Sir William
Hamilton was not only the volcano’s indefatigable record keeper but also its prin-
cipal publicist. He made the difﬁcult and frequently dangerous ascent to the crater
almost seventy times, generally in the company of a retinue of foreign visitors and
often immediately after major eruptions.⁶³
The city had much else to reﬂect the glory of the new dynasty and long before
the arrival of the Bourbons was famed as the ‘European capital of music’.⁶⁴ With
four conservatories the city continued to attract the leading musical talents of the
age, among them Paisiello and Cimarosa.⁶⁵ In addition to its rich tradition of
street theatres and puppet stalls, where Pulcinella and his entourage drew on an
older Neapolitan tradition of the commedia dell’arte, the city also boasted ﬁve per-
manent theatres.⁶⁶
One of Charles III’s ﬁrst initiatives was to rebuild and enlarge the San Carlo
theatre to keep an eye, so it was said, on what his nobles were doing at night.
But the broader signiﬁcance of the monarchy’s role as leader and arbiter of cultural
taste was unmistakable.⁶⁷ The new theatre was connected to the royal palace,
making it an extension of the Court. ‘Groundlings’ were admitted on occasion,
but only the nobility and wealthiest non-noble families were eligible for subscrip-
tions to the boxes, which were allocated personally by the king. The season ran
from the Christmas holidays to Lent and was where the nobility met, entertained,
The Ancien Régime in the South
29
⁶¹ And came to play an important role in establishing the neo-classical style: see Jenkins in Jenkins
and Sloan (1996), 40–60.
⁶² Ibid.
⁶³ See Constantine (2001), 195; on Baron d’Hancarville see Rousseau, in Rousseau and Porter
(1987).
⁶⁴ The ﬁrst performance of Pietro Mestasio’s Didone Abbandonata in 1724 made Naples the birth-
place of European melodrama. Handel’s opera Partenope was ﬁrst performed in 1730, while Giovanni
Pergolesi’s Serva Padrona launched the new fashion for opera buffa that would quickly be taken up in
all the courts and capitals of Europe: De Benedetto in Imbruglia (2000), 135–50.
⁶⁵ Ibid.
⁶⁶ The San Carlo, the Fiorentino, the Teatro Nuovo, the San Carlino, and the Teatro del Fondo.
⁶⁷ Croce, I Teatri (1947).

<<<PDFPAGE 39>>>
played cards, ate, drank, and conversed while following the action on stage by
means of mirrors set at the rear of the boxes.⁶⁸
The king was not the only source of artistic patronage, however, as there were
also many private patrons in the city. In the past, the great religious houses and
churches had been the principal patrons of artists and architects, but in the
eighteenth century wealthy lay patrons became more prominent. The glory of
the great palaces built by the new rulers was reﬂected in those of leading nobles
like the Duke della Torre and the Prince of Francavilla, which also housed out-
standing collections of paintings and ﬁne art. The splendid baroque family chapel
of the Prince of Sansevero with its famous masonic devices was built during the
reign of Charles III, while the ‘Vesuvian villas’ built for leading courtiers and
noblemen at Herculaneum were the ﬁnest expression of the Indian summer of the
Kingdom’s eighteenth-century cultural renaissance. Numerous private patrons
played their part in this, including Tanucci’s friend, the wealthy Tuscan banker
Bernardo Intieri, who funded the new chair in political economy at the University
of Naples—the ﬁrst not only in Italy but in Europe—created in 1754 for Antonio
Genovesi. But wealthy patrons were active in many other branches of the arts,
especially music and the theatre.⁶⁹
By contrast, the monarchy’s promotion of the arts and sciences was always
politically motivated and selective. Tanucci was no friend of the new ideas of the
Enlightenment, but he understood that the arts, sciences, and learning were
essential trappings of the modern prince.⁷⁰ He was responsible for founding the
Accademia del Disegno in 1752, which later became the Accademia delle Belle Arti
and three years later the Accademia Reale Ercolanese, which was responsible for
cataloguing the papyri and other treasures discovered during the excavations at
Herculaneum.
The complaint most frequently heard in the 1780s, however, was that royal
patronage of the arts and sciences was penny-pinching and uncertain. Whatever
funds were available were directed to prestigious regalian monuments, and even
the plans to transfer the collection of artworks that Charles inherited from his mother
Elizabeth Farnese to Naples ran into major problems. Nor was the monarchy 
willing to support wider academic and scientiﬁc projects, and despite repeated
appeals from the world of letters and learning the Royal Academy for Sciences
Absolutist Naples
30
⁶⁸ Rosselli (1984), 82–3; Sorba (2001), 93–153.
⁶⁹ Francesco Saverio de Rogati, a jurist and a music lover, was the protégé of Vito Giuseppe
Millico, who was the most acclaimed Neapolitan castrato of the time. De Rogati was director of the
Royal College of Music (later the Conservatory of San Pietro a Majella). The Prince of Campofranco
and the Lucchesi Palli family were also leading patrons of musicians and the theatre: see Di Benedetto
in Imbruglia (2000), 148–9.
⁷⁰ He banned possession of Voltaire’s Dictionary and Fénélon’s Reﬂections on the Conscience of
aKing as an offence punishable by two years imprisonment on the grounds that ‘We do not hold
it advisable to place in the hands and mouths of the common people ideas that criticise our
rulers.’See Rotondo (1984), 492; on censorship and publishing in Naples see Rao (1998) and Luise
(2001).

<<<PDFPAGE 40>>>
founded by the Austrian government in 1732 was not re-established until 1778
and even then suffered from severe lack of resources.⁷¹
Nonetheless, by the end of the century Naples had become an established station
on the European Grand Tour. That was good for business, but not good enough to
make a signiﬁcant contribution to the city’s economy. In economic terms, the great-
est impact of the monarchy’s initiatives came from the work and demand created by
its building projects, and when it came to promoting trade and manufacturing
enterprises royal interventions followed conventional mercantilist logic. Charles
III’s government established a variety of royal manufactures whose main purpose
was to provide luxury goods and apparel for use at court and to reduce the need for
imports.⁷² There were also a number of more utopian initiatives, and after the
expulsion of the Jesuits in 1767 the convents of San Giuseppe di Chiaia and of
theCarminello were converted into pauper schools under royal patronage.⁷³
The most unusual of these utopian schemes came toward the end of the
century when in 1789 the Royal Silk Works was founded at San Leucio near the
royal palace at Caserta. The aim was to improve the quality of silk fabrics by
using the most modern techniques, but what made the project remarkable were
the utopian regulations for the community of silk workers introduced three years
later and supposedly drafted by the king himself. They and their families were
provided with housing, schools, and medical services, while strict equality
between the sexes was to be observed and dowries were banned.⁷⁴
The San Leucio colony was established after the revolution in France and just
before the monarchy cut all its ties with the reform movement and was most prob-
ably inspired by the utopian colonies founded by the Jesuits in Paraguay. Similar
South American models also inspired the greatest monument to the monarchy’s
paternalism, the Royal Hospice for the Poor (Reale Albergo dei Poveri) in Naples.
This too had been started by Charles III, to match the monumental poorhouse
built earlier in the century by the Austrians in Palermo. The Neapolitan project
was designed on a massive scale by the architect Ferdinando Fuga, and consisted
of a complex of workhouses, hospitals, orphanages, and asylums for the mentally
ill. Its façade measured nearly 500 metres, making it one of the largest poorhouses
in Europe.⁷⁵
Naples already possessed an immensely rich and varied assortment of charitable
foundations, hospices, and hospitals run by religious and lay groups. The decision
The Ancien Régime in the South
31
⁷¹ Chiosi (2001), 122–3.
⁷² These included a royal craft school modelled on the Gobelins factory in Paris, an Academy for
the Design and Working of Precious Stones at S. Carlo la Mortella, a coral factory, a factory for making
crystal glass, a lace factory, and a silk works. His ﬁrst and showiest project, however, was the Royal
Porcelain Works, which was built in 1742 next to the splendid new palace at Capodimonte and mod-
elled directly on the famous Meissen factory of Charles’s father-in-law, the Elector of Saxony.
⁷³ The Carminello housed 200 orphan girls, who were taught to spin and weave hemp, and to
make lace and silk merletti. Ferdinand IV later added a dyeing shop, spinning works, and weaving
shed and turned the Carminiello into the ﬁrst royal silk factory in the kingdom.
⁷⁴ Tescione (1961), 178–89.
⁷⁵ See Guerra (1996), 153–215.

<<<PDFPAGE 41>>>
to build the new poorhouse reﬂected the growing scale of poverty in the city,
which was exacerbated by rising prices, by the closure of many monasteries, and
by the difﬁculties facing many of the city’s confraternities and mutual aid associ-
ations.⁷⁶ But the decision to build the new poorhouse was taken at a moment when
economists in Italy, as in the rest of Europe, were arguing that the indiscriminate
provision of charity by such institutions was the cause not the cure of poverty and
unemployment. The project for the Royal Poorhouse in Naples was untouched by
such considerations, however, and was inspired instead by the great missionary
churches that had been built in Mexico and other parts of Spanish America to
draw the heathen Indians to the true faith. In Fuga’s plan, the central core of the
hospice was a vast church that would perform a similar missionary function in this
teeming European metropolis.⁷⁷
Although never completed, Fuga’s vast project nonetheless effectively conveyed
the monarchy’s paternalist concern for its subject. Less intentionally, its very
scalesignalled the inability to devise effective responses to problems that many
were beginning to argue epitomized deeper inadequacies of the ancien régime: the
alarming increases in pauperism and the excessive size of a city that lacked any
means to support itself beyond revenues drawn from the provinces. In a metaphor
that gained currency in the second half of the century, Naples was a swollen head
that lived parasitically off the shrunken corpse of the provinces.
BEYOND THE CAPITAL
In some respects that image was exaggerated. As the Kingdom’s principal com-
mercial as well as political and cultural centre, the capital generated consumer
needs that supported commercial networks that extended from the farms of the
fabled Campania Felix to the towns along the Bay of Naples—Portici, Torre del
Greco, Torre Annunziata, and Castellamare di Stabia—to more distant centres
like Campobasso, Nola, Salerno, and Avellino.⁷⁸ Naples was also the hub for the
pivotal commercial axis that linked the capital with Apulia and the Adriatic coast
where the city’s grain was grown, since this could be carried by ship more easily
and at less cost than overland transport from provinces closer to the city.
Bari and the Adriatic ports were also at the centre of other commercial net-
works that connected with the Papal States, the Republic of Venice, Trieste, the
Dalmatian and Croatian ports, and the eastern Mediterranean. But it was an
increasing source of resentment in the provinces that the lion’s share of foreign
trade was monopolized by Naples. Olive oil, grain, silk, and other products from
the mainland provinces and from Sicily could only enter the export trade after
Absolutist Naples
32
⁷⁶ At the end of the century there were 146 convents and monasteries, 44 conservatories for
women, 4 hospitals and hospices, and 8 colleges and seminaries in the capital. See Moricolo (1994),
26, 73–9.
⁷⁷ Id.; Valenzi (1995); Migliorini (1992).
⁷⁸ Marin, in Clark and Lepetit (1997), 143–216, and Ringrose in ibid. 217–40.

<<<PDFPAGE 42>>>
being shipped through Naples, from where the Kingdom’s products were
exported to Livorno, Genoa, and Marseilles.⁷⁹ The capital was also the principal
point of entry for imports from France, Spain, Britain, Holland, and the German
states.⁸⁰
Despite these constraints, many provincial centres were showing unmistakable
signs of steady commercial expansion in the second half of the eighteenth century.
This was the case of towns like Bari, Molfetta, and Trani on the Adriatic coast,
which were the principal outlets for the wheat grown in Capitanata.⁸¹ Further
south, Gallipoli was the principal commercial outlet for the olive oil produced in
Apulia and northern and eastern Calabria, nearly all of which was exported
directly to Naples. Despite the decline of the silk industry, Reggio was another
prosperous commercial centre with trading networks that extended throughout
southern Calabria and with strong commercial links with both Naples and the
Sicilian towns.
In western Sicily, Palermo replicated the role of Naples, while in the east Catania
and Siracusa were both important commercial centres where revenues from the
wealthy lay and ecclesiastical properties in the rural hinterland were consumed.
These towns were also centres for smaller independent commercial networks
that stretched into the rural interior. Messina, by contrast, had not recovered from
the earthquake of 1743, and like the rest of north-eastern Sicily would be badly
damaged again by the devastating earthquake of 1783, whose epicentre was on
the mainland. The rise of Trapani, which became the second largest port in
western Sicily after Palermo, was a further sign of the impact of rising demand.⁸²
So too was the arrival of foreign merchants like the Liverpool merchants John
Woodhouse and another Englishman Benjamin Ingham, who in the closing years
of the century set up an export–import business in Marsala wine and other Sicilian
export goods. Their enterprise did not prosper until after the turn of the century,
but like the French merchants who came to buy raw silk in large quantities in the
Calabrian market towns their presence indicated how the Kingdom was already
being drawn into Europe’s rapidly expanding commercial networks.⁸³
The new rulers invested principally in Naples, but did not ignore Palermo,
which was the seat of a Royal Viceroy. Numerous public and private palaces were
built and rebuilt, new piazze and thoroughfares were created, and during the
The Ancien Régime in the South
33
⁷⁹ In the 1770s, the English traveller Henry Swinburne listed the Kingdom’s principal exports as
‘wheat, barley, legumes, Indian corn, hemp, linen, cumin, fennel, honey, wax, fruit, manna, saffron,
potash, brimstone (sulphur), nitre, pitch, sumac, skins, cattle, oranges, lemons, brandy, vinegar’. The
single most important export commodity was olive oil (especially from Bari, Otranto, Gallipoli, and
the provinces of the Abruzzi) and the soap industry of Marseilles was its principal foreign buyer.
Merchants from Lyons were also among the leading purchasers of the Kingdom’s raw silk. The prin-
cipal imports were colonial goods, especially ‘sugar, coffee, and spices, as well as ﬁne fabrics, textiles,
household goods, gun barrels, German, Austrian and Brescian ironworks and quality clothing’.
Swinburne (1783), 79–81.
⁸⁰ Chorley (1965); Romano (1951).
⁸¹ Chorley (1965), 38.
⁸² Benigno (1982).
⁸³ Trevelyan (1973); d’Angelo (1988), 47–52.

<<<PDFPAGE 43>>>
Viceroyalty of the Marchese Caracciolo in the 1780s the city’s famed Botanical
Gardens were laid out. Catania was Sicily’s second city and one of its most pros-
perous, drawing on a fertile agricultural hinterland whose bounty ﬁnanced the
splendid baroque towns that had been built in south-eastern Sicily following the
devastating earthquake of 1684.⁸⁴
On the mainland, towns like Salerno, Nola, Campobasso, Teramo, Foggia,
Bari, Lecce, Gallipoli, Potenza, Cosenza, and Reggio Calabria were also important
centres of civil and ecclesiastical administration, and here too there were signs of
cultural as well as commercial change. Amongst these was the growing number of
petitions for licences to open theatres, which greatly alarmed Tanucci, who feared
that the provincial theatres would encourage licentiousness and give rise to dis-
order.⁸⁵ Private salons where the local elites met to exchange ideas and discuss
public affairs were also becoming more active and visible in many of these 
provincial centres. So too were the masonic lodges that in the closing decades of
the century played an even greater role in bringing the debates taking place in the
capital to the most remote parts of the kingdom.⁸⁶
The emergence of these provincial voices was inseparable from economic and
commercial changes that, however uncertain, were beginning to focus attention
on the Kingdom’s political and administrative institutions. As these debates
broadened, the damaging impact of the capital’s privileges and in general of the
mass of monopolies, restrictions, controls, and levies that burdened producers in
the provinces came under increasing scrutiny. When in 1763 the Kingdom was
struck by one of the most terrible famines of the century, Naples came to embody
all the ills of the ancien régime and everything that stood in the way of the eco-
nomic and civil regeneration of what was already being described not as the
Kingdom but as the nation.
Absolutist Naples
34
⁸⁴ De Seta and Di Mauro (1980), 120.
⁸⁵ Croce (1947), 275.
⁸⁶ Giarizzo (1995); Ferrone (1989); Chiosi (2001).

<<<PDFPAGE 44>>>
¹ Venturi (1973a), 394–472.
² Ibid. 436.
2
Projecting Reform
THE GREAT FAMINE 1763–4
In 1763 and 1764 the worst famine of the century struck Italy. Mortality rates
were extremely high in all the major cities, but even worse in rural areas. Like
the earlier Lisbon earthquake of 1755, the famines played an important part in
shaping the reform movements that developed in the Italian states in the follow-
ing decades. Although the causes were natural, many were convinced that their
consequences had been needlessly exacerbated by bad institutions and harmful
regulations.¹
The effects were especially dramatic in Naples, where it had been clear from the
spring of 1763 that the coming harvest was likely to fail almost completely. But no
measures were taken, and by the summer there was serious unrest in the capital
and throughout the Kingdom. In August, the carriage carrying the young king to
hear mass in the church of San Maria del Carmine was stopped by a crowd of
women protesting against high food prices and shortages. The government feared
a major revolt in the city and to prevent this a military expedition was sent to
Apulia to seize whatever grain could be found to secure the supplies needed for the
capital.
Grain was forcibly requisitioned in the provinces to feed Naples, causing thou-
sands of starving people to head to the capital in search of food. As news spread in
the following spring that the coming harvest was expected to fail as well, as many
as forty thousand starving immigrants were estimated to have ﬂooded into the city
from the provinces. Daily processions of religious relics were staged in an attempt
to lower tensions, but there was no relief and in April plague began to spread and
carried off an estimated two to three hundred thousand souls.²
The crisis grew worse but the government was unable to intervene because
thecity’s provisioning regulations were the exclusive monopoly of the municipal
government and its tribunals in the city and in the provinces, and of the small aris-
tocratic elite who controlled them. When the noble junta proved unable to agree
on how to act, Bernardo Tanucci, who was head of the Regency government,
authorized the city merchants to purchase grain abroad. He even contemplated

<<<PDFPAGE 45>>>
transferring part of the city’s bloated population to new settlements in the
provinces, but once the danger passed he admitted that the government was
powerless against the noble oligarchy that governed the city, which he described as
‘a Hydra, a beast with many heads’.³
The famine had dramatically exposed the problems posed not only by the priv-
ileges enjoyed by the capital and the small aristocratic elite that governed the city,
but also by the whole system of regulations and monopolies that seemed to
obstruct every form of production and commercial exchange in the Kingdom. As
a result, Naples would come to epitomize the evils of the archaic and irrational
institutions on which the ancien régime was founded and in the debates that fol-
lowed a new group of writers, thinkers, and teachers began to make institutional
and political reform the premise for the Kingdom’s economic recovery and the
civil regeneration.
THE OBSTACLES TO REFORM
By the time that Charles III left for Spain in 1759, the monarchy’s attempts to
increase its authority and revenues had done little more than reveal the scale of the
obstacles that confronted it. In an attempt to overcome the jurisdictions that 
limited the monarchy’s ability to govern in 1739 Bernardo Tanucci had created an
ad hoc tribunal, the Supreme Magistracy of Commerce, with the very broad task of
promoting the Kingdom’s internal and external trade and improving the state of
‘agriculture, manufacture and commerce’. To enable it to override the jurisdictions
of all other tribunals, the Magistracy was given a number of extraordinary powers.
But when the existing tribunals refused to recognize these, the new tribunal was
powerless. Similar reactions followed when Tanucci attempted to reorganize the
administration of justice, revise the legal codes, and redeem venal ofﬁces, but with
the same results.⁴
Nor was progress made towards increasing the crown’s revenues. As a result of
the earlier crisis of the Spanish monarchy, excise duties on the production and sale
of silk, oil, tobacco, manna, soap, playing cards, and countless other goods had
been permanently lost. The revenues were raised by tax farms known as arrenda-
menti, which the Spanish viceroys had sold to private investors. The taxes continued
to be raised, but the greater part went to support hordes of holders of venal ofﬁce,
many of which were hereditary, and to pay the annual interest owed to those who
owned or had inherited shares in the arrendamenti.
By mortgaging the kingdom’s future ﬁscal revenues to its creditors, the Spanish
viceroys had turned the arrendamenti into a form of consolidated national debt in
Absolutist Naples
36
³ Venturi (1973a), 444.
⁴ These tribunals were the Camera della Sommaria, the Magistrato del Commercio, the
Sopraintendenza della Reale Azienda, and the Tribunale della Dogana di Foggia. Chiosi (1987),
371–467.

<<<PDFPAGE 46>>>
which all sections of Neapolitan society and all public foundations held shares.⁵
The arrendamenti had as a result become one of the most important ﬁnancial
institutions of the ancien régime monarchy, but could not safely be touched
unless some way was found to redeem the existing creditors. The Kingdom’s
French rulers would later do this by means of mass sales of church lands, but that
was not a conceivable option for the ancien régime rulers, who were forced to see
a large portion of the monarchy’s ﬁscal revenues go to pay the interest owed to the
holders of arrendamenti and to support a huge class of hereditary venal ofﬁce
holders.⁶
The situation was made worse by the scale of feudal exemptions and ecclesi-
astical mortmain in the Kingdom. As a partial remedy a new hearth tax was 
introduced in 1737 to increase direct revenues, which were assessed through a
new tax survey (catasto) of every town and village on the mainland. But since the
monarchy did not have the administrative means to attempt the more accurate
geometric tax surveys being adopted in the Habsburg lands, the new tax was based
on simple estimates. Because all feudal and ecclesiastical properties remained
exempt, the new levy fell almost entirely on the poor.⁷
For all forms of extraordinary expenditure the monarchy relied on the custom-
ary grants voted by the feudatories. When Charles III needed to raise funds for the
war against Austria in 1744, for example, the lay and ecclesiastical feudatories
granted him a feudal donativo, but in return he was required, as was customary, to
conﬁrm all their privileges and exemptions. By the end of the century little had
changed, and the monarchy remained dependent on the donativi and other levies
that could only be raised with the consent of the feudatories.
The crown’s ﬁscal and ﬁnancial difﬁculties were reﬂected in its administrative
weaknesses. Not only did it rule Naples and Sicily on different terms, but most of
the Kingdom was governed not by the crown but by the feudatories, the Church,
and great self-governing corporations like the cities of Naples and Palermo. As one
contemporary put it, the Kingdom was divided up into ‘as many little different
monarchies as there are Feudatories’.⁸
In this respect at least, southern Italy was more similar to countries like Poland
or Hungary on Europe’s eastern peripheries. In the other Italian states, feudal
jurisdictions remained powerful only in the Papal States, in Friuli, and in Savoy
and Sardinia. In the Grand Duchy of Tuscany feudalism in its classical form had
never taken root, while in Austrian Lombardy and in the lands of the House of
Savoy—except in the hereditary Duchy of Savoy—the privileges of the lay
andecclesiastical nobility and of the Church had been severely curtailed since
the previous century. By the early eighteenth century the House of Savoy in
Piedmont and the Habsburg rulers in Lombardy had both established effective
centralized administrations. In both cases the nobles continued to exercise 
Projecting Reform
37
⁵ De Rosa (1958/2005), pp. x–xii, 3–17.
⁶ On France see Doyle (1996).
⁷ Villani (1974), 192–5.
⁸ Rao (1984), 41.

<<<PDFPAGE 47>>>
important government functions, but they did so as agents of the crown and not
as independent sources of power and authority.⁹
In the South, however, the crown’s authority was much more limited. Even
where the royal writ did run on the mainland, royal administration was conducted
on the king’s behalf by three ancient tribunals in the capital. These tribunals com-
bined juridical and administrative roles in ways that were typical of the European
ancien régime, and their task was to oversee the administration of the royal towns
and cities (università), resolve litigation between the crown and the feudatories,
and settle controversies between local communities and their neighbouring lay or
ecclesiastical feudatories.¹⁰
The tribunals were controlled by a small but immensely powerful oligarchy of
senior magistrates known as the togati (literally ‘men of the robe’). Despite the
title, they were not the equivalent of the French noblesse de la robe since there were
no institutions on the mainland comparable to the French Parlements or Estates
General.¹¹Their power derived from the centuries of Spanish rule, when the royal
tribunals had become instruments for defending the independence and privileges
of the Neapolitan ‘nation’ against the pretensions of the Spanish monarchy, the
feudatories, and the Church. This illustrated another important distinction
between Naples and Sicily: the establishing of the Holy Ofﬁce of the Inquisition
in Sicily, but not in Naples. This was partly because the Spanish rulers considered
Naples to be ‘an indomitable and uncontrollable city’, but above all because of the
ﬁerce opposition of the togati.¹²
The togati numbered no more than seventy senior magistrates, but they made
themselves indispensable intermediaries between the Spanish monarchy and the
most powerful interest groups in the Kingdom. A self-recruiting oligarchy,
they ﬁrmly controlled public administration and their power was reinforced by
the monopoly they exercised over the technical procedures of the law, the
arcanum juris.¹³ The togati were as a result one of the most powerful and indepen-
dent corporations of the ancien régime, without whose cooperation the monarchy
could take few political or administrative initiatives.
The monarchy’s control over its own administration was severely limited in
other respects. The Kingdom’s army was small, but the feudal nobility exercised
the exclusive right of preferment to all commissions. That had major implications
for civil administration too, since following Spanish practice this was conducted
in each province by military tribunals, Udienze, presided over by governors known
as Presidi. Since these were military ofﬁces, the nobility again exercised the exclus-
ive right of preferment.
Absolutist Naples
38
⁹ On Piedmont see Ricuperati, in Merlin et al. (1994), 448–57, 648–64; on Lombardy Capra
(2005), 218–33.
¹⁰ The Camera di Santa Chiara, the Sacro Reale Consiglio, and the Camera della Sommaria. See
Villani (1974), 69–75.
¹¹ Except in Sicily, but the Sicilian Parliament was dominated by the great lay and ecclesiastical
feudatories not by the togati.
¹² Rovito (1982), 5.
¹³ Ajello (1976).

<<<PDFPAGE 48>>>
As the terrible famine of 1763–4 had shown, however, the most extreme example
of the nobility’s corporate power was the city of Naples. The city’s government
was controlled by a small and exclusive oligarchy of feudal noblemen, to which
only those whose families formed the nobilità di Piazza, the inner elite of the
Neapolitan aristocracy, were admitted. This oligarchy controlled the Tribunal of
San Lorenzo, which was responsible for ‘policing and maintaining public order
and public morality in the capital’. The municipal ofﬁcials were all noblemen,
including the Eletto del Popolo, who represented the city guilds and corporations;
the Regio Portolano, who was responsible for the use of public land and spaces; and
the Regio Giustiziere, who regulated the city’s markets and commodity prices.¹⁴
The leader of the municipal junta was appointed by the king and held the title
of Presidente dell’Annona, indicating that the most important of the Tribunal’s
responsibilities was management of the regulations that governed the provision-
ing of this vast metropolis. For this reason the Tribunal exercised a massive array of
powers and jurisdictions throughout the Kingdom, and through tribunals in the
provinces the prices at which staple necessities—primarily grain and olive oil but
also silk, wool, and other raw materials needed for the city’s many small manufac-
tures and craftsmen—were purchased by the city’s provisioning authorities (the
Annona). The authority of the city government therefore stretched to every corner
of the Kingdom, and imposed regulations and restrictions now being identiﬁed as
the principal cause of the poverty of the provinces.
REFORM AS CIVIL MISSION
In the decades after the famines the condition of the Kingdom and its institutions,
economy, trade, commerce, agriculture, and populations for the ﬁrst time began
to come under close critical scrutiny. The terms of these debates were set out most
fully in the writing and teaching of Antonio Genovesi. The son of a shoemaker,
Genovesi entered the priesthood to make a living and then turned to philosophy.
He was widely sought after as a teacher and thanks to the patronage of a wealthy
Tuscan banker, Bartolomeo Intieri, was appointed in 1754 to the ﬁrst chair in
political economy, not only at the University of Naples but in all of Europe.¹⁵
Projecting Reform
39
¹⁴ Also known as the Corpo degli Eletti, but nearly always referred to as the Corpo della Città, this
consisted of an executive (the Sedili) nominated by 5 electoral chapels (the piazze) whose members
came from a list of only 119 noble families that formed the Nobili di Piazza, an additional piazza of
‘heads of distinguished families’ made up of many lesser noble families, as well as some non-nobles
who were nominated from each of the city’s 29 administrative districts known as ottine (subdivisions
of the city’s 9 quartieri). From those nominated, the king appointed 29 capitani di ottina and 58
procuratori di ottina who collectively constituted the Piazza del Popolo from which the king again
nominated a single eletto and 10 consultori who formed the ‘governo della Piazza’. The ‘eletto del
Popolo’, along with one ‘eletto’ nominated from each of the noble piazze, constituted the Tribunal of
San Lorenzo. See Battaglini (1992), 114.
¹⁵ Antonio Genovesi (1713–69): the patrons who organized the appointment were the Chaplain
Royal, Celestino Galiani, and the wealthy Tuscan administrator and intellectual Bartolomeo Intieri.
See Pii (1984); Villari (1959); Venturi (1962), 3–32.

<<<PDFPAGE 49>>>
Genovesi’s Lectures on Commerce published after the famine in 1765 made him
the pivotal ﬁgure in the reform movement in Naples. Contrasting the economic
conditions of the Kingdom with those of Britain, France, and Spain, Genovesi
argued that economic development could not be achieved without rational insti-
tutions and laws that reﬂected just and progressive social values. Genovesi’s ideas
drew heavily on those of earlier Neapolitan writers, especially Giannone and
Giambattista Vico, and his ideas travelled freely between economics and moral
philosophy. He rejected Rousseau’s idealization of the primitive and insisted that
trade and commerce were the attributes of civilization (incivilmento) and could
ﬂourish only in societies whose institutions encouraged individual liberty.
Freedom, honest industry, and civil responsibility were the mainsprings of com-
mercial expansion and public prosperity; reform was essentially a civil and a civil-
izing mission, an ethical mission whose aim was the regeneration of the nation.
Genovesi was a pragmatist, however, who believed that reform could be
achieved by practical and empirical means and in the words of one of his most
famous students: ‘...Genovesi turned philosophy away from theological and
metaphysical abstractions to face reality.’¹⁶ He also identiﬁed those who were to
accomplish that mission:
In every civilised country to be found in Europe today the tone of society is set neither by
the populace nor by the great, but rather by the middling order, by which I mean priests,
friars, teachers of letters, magistrates and private gentlemen. A proper education such as
will form good minds and robust bodies must have its beginnings with such persons. Yet
there are still countries in Europe where these same people are still amongst the worst 
educated, and this renders those states arrogant, ignorant and impossible to reason with.¹⁷
The reformers’ ﬁrst task, therefore, was to educate the middle class and their 
second task was to educate those who governed.
For Genovesi, feudal and mercantilist institutions were the principal obstacles
to the regeneration of Neapolitan society. Feudalism was wicked because it
had created irrational and evil institutions and because the feudal mentalities of
privilege, exemption, and idleness had corrupted the nation and prevented
Neapolitans from asserting their independence. Genovesi also frequently con-
trasted the present state of the Kingdom with the prosperity it had enjoyed in
thedistant past before it was subject to foreign invasion and occupation, a long
history of exploitation that had begun when the Romans conquered the South.
The rediscovery of the peoples who had inhabited the South before the Roman
conquest—the Daunites, the Lucanians, the Irpinians, and others—gave the writ-
ings of the Neapolitan reformers a strongly nationalist cast. Following Giannone’s
claim that only an independent secular prince could restore to the South its long
lost independence, the reformers also looked to the new rulers to realize their great
project of national regeneration.
Absolutist Naples
40
¹⁶ Vincenzo Cuoco, cited in Soﬁa (1988), 145.
¹⁷ Venturi (1962), 28.

<<<PDFPAGE 50>>>
Feudalism was the great symbol of past oppression and the principal cause of
the present decay. It was feudalism that made the nation ‘inferior’ to other leading
European and Italian states and its abolition was the great task awaiting the new
prince who after centuries of foreign oppression would restore the Kingdom’s lost
independence. These were even more central themes in the writings of Gaetano
Filangieri, whose magisterial Scienza della Legislazione was written in the decade
of the American Revolution and published in the one that followed.
Filangieri insisted on the interlocking and interdependent nature of feudal
institutions, which, he argued, could only be destroyed by abolishing their jurid-
ical premises:
In the present condition of the nations of Europe everything belongs to the few. What is
needed is that everything should belong to the many.
Yet this could not be achieved merely by abolishing internal customs duties and
gabelles, nor even by abolishing particular feudal rights and feudal entails (known
as maggioraschi and ﬁdecomessi) that gave the feudatories a monopoly over land for
which the interests of younger sons were sacriﬁced. What was needed above all
was reform of the law and the magistracy, and the creation of primary schools,
technical schools, and colleges to raise the skills of the population and its moral
awareness. Progress, education, and moral values were inseparable, because with-
out the support of an informed civil society no reform could succeed.¹⁸
Filangieri was Genovesi’s intellectual heir, but the Scienza della Legislazione set
out a much broader project that would necessitate uprooting the fundamental
institutions of the ancien régime. Only then could the forces needed to give new
vitality to the nation be emancipated. But Filangieri was no less committed than
Genovesi to the need for practical action and intervention: ‘The glory of the man
of letters is to prepare information that will be of use to those who govern.’¹⁹ In
anation where education for the masses did not exist, reform could be achieved
only through the intervention of an enlightened prince. It was the philosopher’s
duty to enlighten the princes, and for that reason, albeit with great reluctance,
Filangieri was prepared to accept appointments from the monarchy.
Filangieri’s prodigious correspondence brought him into contact with leading
reform writers and thinkers in both Europe and North America, and his volumin-
ous correspondence reveals how much the intellectual and political world had
changed in the brief period since Genovesi’s ﬁrst publications. He corresponded
proliﬁcally with Benjamin Franklin on the new constitution of the United States,
and as elsewhere in Europe the American War of Independence and the founding
of the new American republic gave new strength in Naples to the belief that
progress and reason were unstoppable.²⁰
Projecting Reform
41
¹⁸ Ibid. 618–19.
¹⁹ Chiosi (1987), 66.
²⁰ In 1784 Franklin invited the Neapolitan philosopher to Virginia to observe the new political
order at ﬁrsthand: Lo Sardo (1999), 7–8, 108–24.

<<<PDFPAGE 51>>>
DISCOVERING THE NATION
By the time Filangieri died in 1788, a generation of writers inspired by Genovesi’s
call for useful knowledge were already documenting the state of the realm and its
economy. In 1770 the marquis Domenico Grimaldi, a wealthy and widely trav-
elled Calabrian landowner, drew attention to the disastrous consequences of the
regulations imposed by the arrendamenti on the production of oil and silk in
Calabria.²¹ The marquis Giuseppe Palmieri, a wealthy landowner from the Terra
di Otranto, published a detailed study of the obstacles to the production and
export of olive oil (Degli Ulivi, 1794), and the abbé Francesco Longano wrote the
ﬁrst detailed account of economic conditions in the provinces of Molise and
Capitanata, the principal sources of the capital’s wheat. From Teramo in the
mountainous Abruzzi province, Melchiorre Delﬁco denounced the damage to
agriculture caused by taxes, collective customary rights, and transhumant grazing
and argued the beneﬁts of new crops like rice.²²
The most comprehensive survey of the Kingdom was the work of Giuseppe
Maria Galanti, who between 1782 and 1785 travelled tirelessly through the main-
land provinces. The result was the Nuova Descrizione Storica e Geograﬁca delle
Sicilie, a work of extraordinary breadth and detail acclaimed throughout Europe
as a pioneering and incomparable exercise in the new science of statistics.²³
Galanti’s purpose was to document Genovesi’s premise that the disastrous con-
dition of the Kingdom was the work of man, not nature:
Men have always toiled to turn into horrible calamities the precious gifts which nature has
bestowed on them. Today we have come to understand that the noble and useful applica-
tion of power derives from imposing the rule of law to make men more virtuous, more
tranquil and more enlightened.
Better governance and better laws were the secret to moral and economic
progress, and Galanti’s conﬁdence in the restorative power of rational laws and
rational institutions was reinforced by his conviction that the natural resources
of the South were abundant and plentiful: ‘Nowhere outside this Kingdom is
there greater variety and abundance of nature and land: but everything here tends
to render the property of the industrious man uncertain and precarious and hence
oppress agriculture.’²⁴ Reform was, therefore, essentially a matter of liberating
theKingdom’s natural and human resources.
Absolutist Naples
42
²¹ Saggio sopra l’economia campestre della Calabria.
²² Venturi (1962), 1096–171. See also Chorley (1965), 141–203; Marcy (1974), 399–413;
Marino (1988), 35–8, 245–59.
²³ An enthusiastic Christian Joseph Jagemann declared from Weimar, ‘there is surely no compar-
able treatise on the constitution of any other European nation today’, and Jean-Marie Alquier would
later describe Galanti as ‘the author of one of the ﬁnest compilations of statistics that have been
achieved in Europe’. Venturi (1958), 973; Soﬁa (1988), 123. On Galanti see Villani (1989), 247–60.
²⁴ G. M. Galanti, Nuova Descrizione Storica e Geograﬁca delle Sicilie (henceforth, NDG) (1786), ii. 7.

<<<PDFPAGE 52>>>
THE CAPITAL DENOUNCED
Although Galanti’s main concern was the depressed condition of the provinces,
his starting point was the capital whose privileges he like many others now
believed were the principal cause of the poverty of the provinces.
By the closing decade of the century that swollen head was inhabited by some
550,000 souls, of whom 380,000 lived in the parishes of Naples, with a further
130,000 in the outlying casali and about 40,000 were soldiers and temporary resid-
ents.²⁵ By Galanti’s estimate some 25,000 noble families lived in the capital,²⁶
whose exclusive core was the nobiltà di piazza, the hundred or so families that con-
stituted the four noble Sedili. Galanti had little to say about their economic condi-
tion, but Henry Swinburne, an English Catholic educated in France who visited
Naples in 1776, was struck by the extravagant behaviour of the ‘grandees’ and
bythe huge numbers of their retainers and hangers-on, which was why they
were heavily indebted and rarely entertained foreigners. By English standards he
considered the marriage portions modest, and he noted that the nobles no longer
wore swords, although the dress of the middle classes had become increasingly
luxurious.²⁷
Then came the lawyers, a class Galanti scathingly dismissed as people ‘main-
tained by the litigious character of this nation’: he estimated that there were about
6,000 employed in the law courts in the capital and 26,000 in the Kingdom as a
whole. Then there were the 10,000 physicians, doctors, apothecaries, and leeches
practising in the capital and in the nearby city of Salerno, which was the seat of the
Kingdom’s ancient medical school. Galanti had little to say about the numerous
secular and regular clergy, although he did praise the parish clergy for their role in
maintaining public order and the continuous ‘brilliant festivals’ organized by the
parish churches and lay confraternities that kept the lower classes entertained and
out of mischief. ²⁸
Henry Swinburne was struck by the orderliness of the city, and commented
that despite its size there was no drunkenness, little theft, and few murders,
which led him to claim that its populace compared very favourably with
‘the mobs of London and Edinburgh’. Galanti reported that there were
fewer than 40 murders a year in the city, but expressed great alarm at the growth
in the number of beggars and vagrants. The supposed cause was that many
artisans were unable to save to provide for their old age, but Galanti echoed
Projecting Reform
43
²⁵ NDG, i. 190, 311–18.
²⁶ Of these, 1,500 were nobili di piazza, fuori piazza, feudatories, nobili viventi, and soldiers.
Another 4,500 noble families lived in the provinces.
²⁷ Swinburne also noted that ‘it does not cost a nobleman more to marry a daughter than to make
her a nun’. Entering a nunnery, he was informed, cost about 1,000 pounds sterling, but did require in
addition an annual pension and a portion of the inheritance. On the other hand, ‘servants and artiﬁ-
cers of the city give from 50 to 100 ducats with their daughters: peasants and countrymen go as far as
300 ducats’ ((1783), i. 65–9).
²⁸ NDG, i. 378.

<<<PDFPAGE 53>>>
the reformers’ conviction that the indiscriminate charity provided by the
excessive numbers of religious foundations was the main cause of indigence in
the capital.²⁹
From Galanti’s description, Naples emerges as a city full of shops, taverns, ice-
cream parlours, and above all coffee shops, crammed with clients at all times
of day and the principal meeting place for all classes: ‘even for the humblest work-
men who now regularly drink coffee in the morning since they believe it to be
beneﬁcial for the digestion’. However, the working classes also attracted the
reformers’ disdain: ‘The lower classes of the capital are a little doltish (goffo), they
do everything to live and sell their services cheaply.’³⁰
Amongst the city’s working people, domestic servants, porters, carriage drivers,
retainers, and ﬂunkeys were the largest occupational groups. At the bottom of the
social scale were the ‘mascalzoni, also known disparagingly as lazzari because of
their nudity .... Nearly all are foundlings who live in the street and congregate
especially around the Mercato district where the poorest, most undisciplined
and most rebellious sections of the populace of Naples reside’. However, Galanti
dismissed as gross exaggeration travellers’ stories that the lazzaroni formed a cor-
porate body that elected their own leader and dealt directly with the authorities.³¹
By contrast Henry Swinburne considered the large and relatively prosperous 
community of ﬁshermen and their families in the nearby Santa Lucia district to be
‘the handsomest men in Naples: they have true Grecian features and are the most
substantial and best lodged portion of the Neapolitan populace’.³²
The large number of artisans and merchants reﬂected the city’s role as the prin-
cipal centre of consumption on the mainland. They included silversmiths, silk-
makers, carriage builders and repairers, ceramic makers, and cordswainers, as well
as a growing number of foreign merchants. For Galanti, however, the expansion of
consumption was a source of great misgiving: ‘in general our workshops and man-
ufactures are inferior to those of foreigners, and especially of the English, since our
national spirit is not directed at these affairs. The king has attempted to set good
examples, but these have been little followed.’ Luxury consumption was doubly
dangerous: it encouraged the consumption of foreign goods that the Kingdom
could ill afford and promoted a culture of idleness and indulgence instead of
stimulating interest in new forms of production. The mania for foreign consumer
goods also reinforced the prejudice against manual labour that led persons of 
talent and ability to seek more socially acceptable forms of employment, with the
result that rather than engage in trade or industry, ‘our people prefer to make
money through litigation’.
If the Kingdom was not to become a commercial colony of the English or the
French, Galanti concluded, it must learn to satisfy its own needs from its own
Absolutist Naples
44
²⁹ Galanti, Breve Descrizione di Napoli e del Suo Contorno (henceforth, BDN) (1792), i. 273.
³⁰ BDN, i. 270, 383.
³¹ NDG, i. 169, 268: see Goethe’s comments above p. 27.
³² Swinburne (1783), i. 65

<<<PDFPAGE 54>>>
resources. Naples in particular should not be content to consume foreign com-
modities but must learn to develop its own industries.³³
THE PROVINCES REVEALED
However, that would never happen until the city learned to live off its resources,
rather than those it drained from the provinces:
The city of Naples enjoys the right to devour the provinces because it has the right to take
for itself their livestock and the fruits of their agriculture, just as Constantinople does from
the provinces of the Ottoman Empire.
The sad result was that Naples ‘has unhappily swallowed the entire kingdom,
making it poor, oppressed and deserted’.³⁴
The reformers’ great mission was, therefore, to reveal the causes of the impov-
erished state of the provinces because ‘in Naples more is known about the 
condition of the island of Tahiti than of our own provinces’.³⁵ Such ignorance
was not easily overcome, since the disastrous state of communications made all
forms of overland travel difﬁcult, slow, and in many seasons of the year impossible.
‘Our kingdom is a peninsula with swamps along its coasts that lie covered in 
stagnant water that the unhealthy air has made uninhabitable.’ Ancient neglect
had been aggravated by the uncontrolled clearance of woodland in more recent
times, which accelerated the processes of soil erosion and land slides that clogged
the streams and rivers of the valley bottoms, creating vast and unhealthy swamps.
Even in the fertile province of Campania, huge areas of fertile agricultural land
had been overtaken by swamps. On the mouth of the Volturno River, the ancient
port of Literno had been swallowed up by marshes that had formed around 
Vico di Partano. Swamps had also invaded the land between Salerno and Agropoli,
and the Sarno River, navigable in classical times, was no longer passable. 
The Marchesato Plain on the Ionian coast between Squillace and the river Neti
was ﬂooded, leaving Crotone as the only city to have survived.³⁶
In other parts of the Kingdom, lack of rainfall and irrigation were the main 
reasons for the population’s decline and the agricultural decay. The Terra
d’Otranto had more than two hundred miles of coast, but contained only four
thinly populated towns. Apulia was ‘a real desert’ where the land could only be
worked thanks to seasonal migrants from the Abruzzi Mountains. In the
Calabrian provinces the population was low: the Marchesato Plain was almost
uninhabited, while the province of Cosenza was empty in winter and spring when
its inhabitants left to work on the harvest on the eastern coast.³⁷
Projecting Reform
45
³³ BDN, i. 263.
³⁴ Ibid. 264; iii. 309.
³⁵ Cited in Venturi (1962), 973: for debates on luxury in Italy see Wahnbaeck (2004).
³⁶ NDG, iii. 122.
³⁷ Ibid. iii. 124–5, 195–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 55>>>
These migrations were an essential part of the agrarian economies of the
Mezzogiorno. The timing of the harvest in each province varied slightly and from
the late spring onwards huge armies of migrant labourers were on the move seek-
ing work as reapers, gleaners, olive pickers, or whatever was available. As a result,
much of the lowland population and even higher percentages of the upland and
mountain communities led nomadic lives for part of the year.
The reformers believed lack of population to be the principal cause of the
decline of agriculture in many parts of the South, but they also noted that in the
Campania, Molise, the upland regions stretching from Benevento to Avellino,
and the river Ofanto there were signs that rapid population expansion was causing
acute problems of land shortage.³⁸
These comments, together with the numerous references to the ecological 
problems caused by woodland clearances, were indications of important changes
taking place as the reformers were writing. These were also evident in the account
that Henry Swinburne gave of his travels through the mainland provinces in 1777.
Before setting out on his journey Swinburne spent some months in Napleswhere
he became acquainted with Galanti and his circle, and as a result obtained invita-
tions to visit many prominent reforming landowners and provincial intellectuals.
In contrast to the patronizing tones and exotic fantasies that dominated the
tales of most foreign travellers, Swinburne’s observations were remarkably sober.
He took care to explain Neapolitan leases, farming techniques, and customs in
terms his anglophone readers would recognize. His itinerary took him from
Naples along the principal overland route to the Adriatic provinces by way of
Avellino to Foggia and then to Manfredonia and Barletta on the coast. At Trani
the local governor supplied him with letters requiring all convents to provide him
with hospitality: ‘except for letters to private families, there is no better method to
be pursued in a tour through a country so ill-provided with Inns.’ He noted that
much wheat was exported from the Adriatic coastal towns, but added, ‘I am afraid
that industry has taken a long farewell of most of the cities of the coast.’³⁹
He still found much to admire, including many prosperous monasteries and
especially the huge Dominican house he visited in Giovinazzo. After a short pause
at Bari, the Kingdom’s principal and busiest Adriatic port, he made his way to
Francavilla where he was the guest of the Prince of Oria. He was ﬁlled with
admiration for the model agricultural estate:
At present very little remains unlet; the rents are paid as the crops are got in and sold, not at
stated days of payment. All tithes belong to the Lord of the Manor, who is the lay impropria-
tor; for the Church has only its glebe. Many gentlemen of secondary rank hold their land of
the prince as under-tenants by payment of a ﬁxed ﬁne of investiture nearly in the same manner
as our copy-holders make surrenders and hold estates by copy of court-roll. There are besides
many owners of land, not of noble degree, who pay the tenth of their crops to the Prince.⁴⁰
Absolutist Naples
46
³⁸ BDG, iii. 260: on the demani see pp. 58–9.
³⁹ Swinburne (1783), i. 181.
⁴⁰ Ibid. i. 219.

<<<PDFPAGE 56>>>
Swinburne also visited the nearby Imperiali estates belonging to the Prince of
Francavilla, where cotton had been introduced in rotation with wheat, barley, and
oats before the land was turned over to sheep-grazing for a year. The Imperiali
estates were worked in partnership—‘the proprietor tills it the ﬁrst time; the ten-
ant gives it four subsequent ploughings and furnishes seed; the expense of the 
harvest is born equally by both and the proﬁts halved between them.’
Taranto was less to his liking: ‘it is without doubt the most disgusting habita-
tion of human beings in Europe, except perhaps the Jewish ghetto in Rome’, but
here he met with another leading ﬁgure of the Neapolitan reform movement,
Monsignore Capecelatro, the Archbishop of Taranto, whom the English traveller
acknowledged to be one of his most widely informed sources. Swinburne
then resumed his journey southwards along the difﬁcult roads leading to
Calabria, following the Bradano River to Metapontum and then onwards by way
of Policoro, where he admired another huge estate that had formerly belonged to
the Jesuits.⁴¹
As he moved further south and through Calabria, however, Swinburne’s com-
ments on the landowners became less admiring:
The Barons are in general very far from considering themselves as the protectors, the polit-
ical fathers of their vassals, but encroach so much on the commons and the cultivated
grounds for the sake of extending their chase that the peasants have neither room nor
opportunity to raise sufﬁcient food for their support: they therefore ﬂy to the mendicant
and other religious orders of friars and take religious habit to procure their subsistence. The
father of a family when pressed for the payments of taxes and sinking beneath the load
ofhunger and distress va alla montagna, that is he retires to the woods where he meets
with fellow sufferers, turns smuggler and becomes by degrees an outlaw, a robber and an
assassin.⁴²
It was not only in Calabria that the rural poor seemed overwhelmed by taxation
and exclusion from the land. ‘Throughout the realm the situation of the husband-
men is truly deplorable: everything is excised and the mode of collecting is cruel
and pernicious.’⁴³ Crossing the plain of Sibari, Swinburne noted how the collapse
of the complex irrigation systems of antiquity had turned one of the greatest cities
of Magna Graecia into a malarial swamp.
After taking shelter at Capo Rizzuto to avoid a raiding party of Barbary pirates,
Swinburne reached Catanzaro, the principal administrative town of lower
Calabria whose 12,000 inhabitants ‘live by the law and the sale of corn, silk and
oil’. Leaving Catanzaro for Reggio by way of Gerace, Swinburne was fascinated by
the Albanian settlement he visited at Bora, one of the many Greek Orthodox
communities in Calabria and the Abruzzi that dated back to the ﬁfteenth century.
Projecting Reform
47
⁴¹ Before their expulsion it had supported over 5,000 sheep, 300 cattle, 400 buffalo, 400 goats,
and 200 horses and provided work for more than 200 families, but when Swinburne saw it the farms
had fallen into decay. Ibid. 236, 278.
⁴² Ibid. i. 282.
⁴³ Ibid. i. 285.

<<<PDFPAGE 57>>>
In Reggio, Swinburne was impressed by the fertility of the land around the city
and its thriving silkworm industry, although he noted that the workers were ‘less
expert than the Tuscans, who although more northerly manage to produce two or
three hatchings per year. The silk work houses are owned by wealthy families in
Reggio who furnish rooms, leaves, eggs and every necessary implement; take two
thirds of the proﬁt and leave the rest for the attendant.’ However, the industry had
a strongly subordinate structure. The eggs were not raised locally but imported
from Livorno, while the raw silk was exported without being worked, one reason,
Swinburne argued, being the unjust character of the tax system that took a ﬁxed
percentage in weight of the crop: ‘In general the proﬁts of the silk trade in this
country centre on the Barons and the Revenue Ofﬁces.’ But although the high 
levels of taxation gave rise to widespread smuggling, Swinburne reckoned that
Reggio still earned around half a million ducats a year from olive oil exports
alone.⁴⁴
Swinburne’s own interest in the Kingdom’s resources and products was
designed to satisfy the curiosity of readers in England, and was therefore another
illustration of the reasons Sir William Hamilton’s ‘remote corner’ was becoming
less distant. But Swinburne’s account provides further evidence that incentives
derived from increasing demand were causing existing constraints to be more
apparent and less easily accepted.
FEUDALISM: ‘THE CRUELLEST ENEMY OF 
CIVIL LIBERTY’
Among the reform writers a consensus was gaining ground that the Kingdom was
rich in natural resources but impoverished by evil institutions: there were too
many taxes, too many monopolies, too many idle monks and friars, too few roads,
too many consumers, too few producers, too much luxury, too much poverty, too
little knowledge or learning. But the root cause of all these evils was feudalism.
Galanti wrote:
It is feudalism that has burdened agriculture and society with the monopolies, exactions
and regulations that have impoverished the many to the advantage of the few.... Feudal
government is the cruellest enemy of civil liberty . . .and it has survived more extensively in
the Kingdom of the Sicilies than in any other part of Italy.⁴⁵
Feudalism had sapped the spirit of enterprise and industry itself so that ‘in
the course of time all land in the kingdom will ﬁnish in the hands of idle 
persons who live only from their revenues and who have destroyed all spirit of
industry’.⁴⁶
Absolutist Naples
48
⁴⁴ Swinburne (1783), i. 357–8.
⁴⁵ NDG, i. 273–4.
⁴⁶ Ibid. iii. 261–9.

<<<PDFPAGE 58>>>
How had this come about? Popes, barons, Viceroys, bad laws, tax-farms, the courts? All
these have contributed to the fact that the very nature of the soil and the people has been
changed, causing the nation’s ancient population to fall by two-thirds...Our laws,
because governed by the maxims of feudal government, have made the condition of our
agriculture wretched and have beneﬁted only a class of idle men ...All those amongst us
who have talent and some little fortune turn to the courts or to medicine as a career, or else
become notaries or priests, in such ways we seek to provide for our needs...From this
derives the life of idleness and inactivity that renders sad and consumes the inhabitants
of our small provincial towns. The rest of the nation is mainly employed in selling
goods made in foreign countries, in a variety of small artisan enterprises or else as servants
to the rich.⁴⁷
Galanti estimated that only one million of the more than four million souls 
living on the mainland were free of feudal obligations and taxes.⁴⁸ The heaviest
burdens fell on those who lived in towns and villages subject to feudal jurisdic-
tions, who in addition to the tithes paid to the feudatory and the Church also paid
taxes to the crown and to the provincial administration for poor relief, the militia,
and other services. In most parts of the Kingdom, waterways, mills, and public
bread ovens were monopolies of the feudal landowners, abbeys, or convents. The
peasant farmer was taxed ‘to grind his own corn and bake the bread for his own
family’ and in the Terra d’Otranto even sea salt and pebbles were feudal monopolies.
The consequences were clear to see: the inhabitants of feudal towns lived in
‘pitiful hovels roofed with wood and straw where a single bed shares space with the
swine and beast of burden’.⁴⁹ Although the feudatories no longer had the right to
impose capital punishment, their courts were responsible for maintaining order
and administering justice at a local level. Their orders were carried out by feudal
ofﬁcers with various titles—mastrodatti, portolani—and enforced by armed
retainers known as armigeri or sbirri.
Feudal landowners were exempt from most of the taxes paid by the rest of the
population. Galanti calculated that of the two and a half million ducats paid
annually in direct taxes, less than one quarter of a million ducats was paid by
the barons. Nor was feudal land subject to the hearth tax introduced in 1737.⁵⁰
The feudatories were supposed to pay tax to both the crown and to the local 
communities for land they held by private as opposed to feudal title,⁵¹ but they
generally avoided doing so.
As feudatories, the barons paid a direct tax called the adoa, which had ori-
ginated in the sixteenth century as a commutation of feudal services. Originally
set at 26 per cent of revenues, inﬂation had by the eighteenth century made the
returns derisory. They were also subject to a heavy inheritance tax at death, the
rate being half an estate’s estimated revenues.⁵² But the estimates were always
contested so that payment was deferred often for generations. The heaviest taxes
Projecting Reform
49
⁴⁷ Venturi (1962), 974.
⁴⁸ BDN, iii. 37.
⁴⁹ NDG, i. 279.
⁵⁰ The catasto onciario: see Villani (1968), 56–63.
⁵¹ Termed burgensatici.
⁵² The rilievo.

<<<PDFPAGE 59>>>
paid by the feudatories were the donativi that the crown was entitled to raise on
the occasion of major royal events or war. But in return, the crown was obliged to
conﬁrm the feudatories’ rights and privileges.⁵³
The reformers noted that despite the feudatories’ insistence on their exemp-
tions and privileges, feudal estates were still freely bought and sold and were
attractive to purchasers because of the various forms of patronage, ecclesiastical
beneﬁces, and social status attached to them. This blurred distinctions between
feudal and non-feudal property and was another item on the growing list of objec-
tions to feudalism. An important contribution to that debate came from the cadet
sons of noble families who were disinherited by the system of entails that had been
introduced to protect the integrity of family patrimonies from creditors.⁵⁴ Cadets
excluded from direct inheritance instead received a simple allowance (known as a
secondagenitura) to enable them to ‘live nobly or enter military service’. In the
absence of male heirs, women might inherit an estate, but to avoid this, right of
succession had been extended to the ‘fourth degree when there is descendence in
the direct male line from the original holder of the title’.⁵⁵
Some of the most outspoken opposition to feudalism came from the cadets of
noble families, of whom Gaetano Filangieri was the most famous. But this was only
one aspect of a broader crisis of identity within the feudal nobility that became
increasingly evident in the ﬁnal decades of the eighteenth century. As the debates
on feudalism developed the nobles and the clergy became divided. Some rallied to
defend feudal practice and privilege, while others denounced the narrow oligarchy
of noble families that governed the capital and monopolized senior commissions in
the army. As in the rest of Europe, the debates on the virtues and functions of a
genuine aristocracy reﬂected a deeper crisis of identity within the nobility. Very
similar divisions were apparent within the ranks of the clergy, and explain why
in 1799 many aristocrats and senior churchmen would see the Republic as an
opportunity to restore both the nobility and religion to their rightful place in society.
THE AFRICAN DESERT AND BARBAROUS TARTARY: 
THE PASTORAL ECONOMY
Feudalism was the principal but not the only enemy. Echoing ideas that had ﬁrst
been voiced by the French economists known as the Physiocrats, many Neapolitan
writers were especially outraged by the survival of what they considered to be one of
Absolutist Naples
50
⁵³ Charles III raised 5,255,000 ducats in donativi from the feudatories between 1734 and 1759,
including a donativo of 1 million ducats in 1736 to mark his accession to the throne; another million
in 1738 on the occasion of his marriage to Maria Amalia of Saxony; 500,000 ducats in 1741 on the
birth of his daughter; 700,000 ducats in 1748 on the birth of Prince Filippo. The remainder took
the form of war subsidies raised in 1742, 1744, 1746, and 1747. NDG, ii. 44, 123–4.
⁵⁴ Known as maggioraschi and ﬁdecomessi: see Villani (1968), 81–97, and Cooper, in Goody (ed.)
(1976), 192–326.
⁵⁵ NDG, i. 280.

<<<PDFPAGE 60>>>
the surest signs of the primitive state of agriculture: the extensive transhumant 
pastoral economy that subjected vast stretches of land to collective use.⁵⁶ For the
reformers the regulations that protected rights of passage and permitted promiscu-
ous grazing along the routes the sheep followed on the biennial migrations were
archaic and intolerable obstacles to the introduction of more rational and intensive
forms of rotation.
The reality was, of course, more complex. As in other parts of the Mediterranean
world, these seasonal migrations played a critical role in integrating the different
economies of southern Italy. Sheep rearing and its allied industries (textiles, leather,
and cheese production) brought together the economies of the mountain commu-
nities and those of the plains. The migrant sheep left behind the only natural enrich-
ment available on these barren and rain-starved soils, making their presence during
the winter essential to the success of the spring grain harvests on the coastal plains.
The transhumant system was closely integrated into prevailing natural condi-
tions and resources, and over time had been regulated in ways designed to recon-
cile the potentially conﬂicting interests of pasture and agriculture. Those
regulations had been institutionalized in the ﬁfteenth century during the reign of
Alfonso of Aragon, when the transhumant economy was placed under the protec-
tion of the crown. The system of regulations guaranteed seasonal rights of transit
and established three separate transit routes (known as tratturi) for the biennial
migrations. The destination for the ﬂocks that in summer grazed on the Apennine
uplands was the northern Apulian plateau, where a vast tract of land known as the
Tavoliere was reserved for winter grazing.⁵⁷
The seasonal migrations and the leasing of the pasture were administered by the
royal customs ofﬁce known as the Dogana delle Pecore della Puglia in Foggia.
When Henry Swinburne visited Foggia in 1777 he described the Dogana as ‘one
of the richest mines of wealth belonging to the Crown of Naples’ and estimated
that between revenue from leases and taxes on sales in Foggia it yielded around
400,000 ducats and provided winter grazing for over a million sheep.⁵⁸
Projecting Reform
51
⁵⁶ The most prominent members of the ‘school’ were Quesnay, Mirabeau père, P. Mercier de la
Rivière, G. F. L. Trosen, P. S. Dupont de Nemours, and N. Baudeau.The ideas of the Physiocrats were
known in Naples primarily through the writings of the abbe’ Ferdinando Galiani, who from 1759 to
1769 was secretary to the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris. A close friend of Denis Diderot and
Madame d’Epinay, he set out his copious commentaries on the writings of the French economists in
his Dialogues sur le commerce des blés, published anonymously in Naples in 1770. Galiani recognized
the broader virtues of laissez-faire principles, but he also argued that the prevailing economic condi-
tion of the Kingdom made the need for government intervention overwhelming. See L. De Rosa
(1995), 125. On Galiani see also Steegmuller (1991). Robertson (1997), 667–97, sets the Neapolitan
writers in the context of Enlightenment debates on political economy.
⁵⁷ Marino (1988).
⁵⁸ The Dogana’s revenue derived in part from leases paid by the shepherds and owners of the ﬂocks
and in part from taxes imposed at the Foggia market. Swinburne was told that the shepherds paid
13.20 ducats to graze ﬁve score sheep for the season starting in November, and were in addition
obliged to sell all their produce (milk, cheese, wool, skins) only on the market at Foggia. Swinburne
also described the vast underground deposits where the summer grain was stored, and he noted that
during the summer when all were working in the ﬁelds the town was virtually empty, while during the
winter grazing season it had more than 20,000 inhabitants: Swinburne (1783), i. 145.

<<<PDFPAGE 61>>>
The Neapolitan reformers did not share Swinburne’s enthusiasm for either
Foggia or the Dogana. For Ferdinando Galiani the Tavoliere had ‘No parallels in
civilised Europe, but only in the African desert and in Barbarous Tartary’.⁵⁹
Melchiorre Delﬁco decried what he called the ‘barbarism of the pastoral economy’
and claimed that the subjection of the Apulian plain to promiscuous grazing had
destroyed its agriculture, leaving the Kingdom’s oldest and most fertile granary
barren. To remove the threat of famine and to improve the Kingdom’s foreign
trade he pleaded for the immediate abolition of the Dogana and for the sale of the
pastures owned by the crown. Sold as copy-hold lease these would yield greater
revenues for the crown and at the same time encourage the development of more
productive forms of agriculture.⁶⁰
Nicola de Dominicis was one of the few who argued that grazing made an
essential contribution to the southern economy, and that what mattered was how
the competing interests might be reconciled and mediated.⁶¹ But his was a lone
voice. Galanti favoured the suppression of the Dogana and the sale of the crown
pastures. He acknowledged that the Dogana had been created to mediate between
the conﬂicting interests of agriculture and pasture, and between the owners of
large ﬂocks and poorer grazers. But over time the sheep runs had fallen into the
hands of a small group of graziers who now monopolized all the pasture on
theTavoliere, threatening to deprive the poorer sheep-owners of access to pasture.
The continuing high demand for pasture kept the price of leases high and
removed any incentive to release the land for agriculture.⁶²
THE CONTRADICTIONS OF CHANGE
The projects that the reformers had begun to formulate ran far beyond the abso-
lutist objective of the monarchy’s own initiatives, however, even though for a brief
period the two seemed to many to be moving in harmony. That was an illusion,
since the rulers wanted to modify feudalism while the reformers wanted to do
away with it. But the reformers’ descriptions also gave a clear picture of how agrar-
ian realities in southern Italy were changing, and with them feudalism. They
described feudalism in the South as a ‘ghost’, not because it was dead, but because
its original purposes had been destroyed. Instead of mediating between poten-
tially conﬂicting interests, feudalism had been stripped of its original elements of
reciprocity. It was increasingly seen simply as an instrument of tyranny in the
hands of feudatories who wanted to transform their feudal estates into what
would later be referred to as latifundia—large monopolistic but private properties.
The reciprocal obligations that had once been inherent in feudal landownership
were destroyed, and the collective rights on which the livelihood of most rural
communities depended were increasingly at risk.
Absolutist Naples
52
⁵⁹ F. Galiani, De Moneta, 1780—cited in Marino (1988), 245.
⁶⁰ Venturi (1962), 1171.
⁶¹ Marino (1988), 38.
⁶² NDG, ii. 295–303; Marino (1988), 257.

<<<PDFPAGE 62>>>
Yet the reformers’ critique took little account of the different interests at stake.
Against the evils of feudalism, they insisted on the creative force of the market
and like the advocates of economic liberalism elsewhere in Europe the
Neapolitan reformers showed little sympathy for the moral economies of the
rural communities.⁶³ For all their emphasis on pragmatism, the reformers’
conﬁdence in the abstract theories and the moral certitudes of the political 
economists was unshakeable.
Projecting Reform
53
⁶³ Villari (1961), 45.

<<<PDFPAGE 63>>>
3
Undermining the Old Order
INTRODUCTION
Change came to the South in many different forms. The most conspicuous
resulted from the actions and interventions of the monarchy and its agents, while
the most audible were the speculations and projects of the reformers. But the mar-
ket was also at work in its own sometimes visible, sometimes invisible, ways,
shaped and directed nonetheless by the reactions of a crowd of different agents,
each with their own interests—landowners, feudatories, clerics, priests, and also
the rural communities. For that reason, the changes taking place in southern Italy
never conformed to a neat antithesis between the narrow aims of an absolutist
monarchy and the broader projects of the reformers. The intentions of both were
complicated by more autonomous developments profoundly changing the founda-
tions of the social as well as the political order in the South.
For similar reasons, the appearances of unity given by the campaign against feud-
alism proved deceptive. At ﬁrst the campaign seemed to offer opportunities to har-
monize the interests of the princes and the philosophers in an alliance that Gaetano
Filangieri hailed with high expectations in 1783. But those hopes were founded on
profound misunderstandings. The monarchy and the reformers had quite different
objectives, while the campaign gave rise to complex and often contradictory align-
ments. On one hand, the feudatories fought to protect their rights while at the same
time disregarding the constraints imposed by feudal title to enclose their land and
deny access for those who enjoyed customary use rights. On the other, the local
communities rallied to the monarchy’s campaign against feudal abuses, in the belief
that the royal courts would remove abuses and force the feudatories to honour their
collective use-rights. As the monarchy’s war on feudal exemptions and privileges led
its agents to mobilize the rural communities to enforce feudal law custom, its inter-
ventions proved an additional source of conﬂict in a world of growing discord.
THE PRINCES AND PHILOSOPHERS
The great famine of 1763–4 had played an important part in shaping the aims of
the reform movement, but when the government’s interest in reform revived in

<<<PDFPAGE 64>>>
the 1770s it was inspired by the more narrowly deﬁned absolutist ambitions of
Maria Carolina and her minister John Acton. The broader model came from
reforms being introduced in the Habsburg territories by Emperor Joseph II that
moved to a broader attack on the Church’s remaining jurisdiction in civil affairs
and on feudal privilege.¹ In Naples even before the fall of Tanucci and in line with
the other Catholic princes the government’s anti-papal stance had hardened. In
1767, the Jesuits were expelled and the Order’s extensive properties in the
Kingdom were placed under royal administration.² After the fall of Tanucci, other
religious orders were suppressed and the government adopted a more aggressive
policy when it began to nominate leading ﬁgures in the anti-curial movement to
vacant bishoprics. Papal authority in the Kingdom was made subject to royal
authorization and the crown claimed the right of preferment to all abbeys and
beneﬁces, as well as a share of their revenues.³ The government’s initiatives were a
much weaker version of the measures adopted in Vienna, and reﬂected the decline
in the international authority of the papacy in the last quarter of the century.
While they won enthusiastic support from the predominantly anti-curial senior
secular clergy in Naples, they also provoked equally strong opposition from those
who supported the papacy’s jurisdictional claims in the Kingdom.⁴
Once Acton was established as the queen’s principal minister, many of Tanucci’s
earlier initiatives were revived and in 1782 a Supreme Council of Finance was
created. This was similar in many respects to the earlier Magistracy of Commerce,
and its task was to recommend ways to revive the Kingdom’s economy. The difference
was that the government invited leading members of the reform movement to
serve on the council, which as a result brieﬂy came to embody the alliance between
the prince and the philosophers. A year after the creation of the Supreme Council
Filangieri dedicated the third volume of his Scienza della Legislazione to the queen,
with the hope that reform would unite the ‘peaceful philosophers’ and an enlight-
ened prince in a common enterprise.
For the government, the philosophers were welcome allies. The ascendancy of
the queen and the Kingdom’s new Austrian connection had been ﬁercely opposed
by the pro-Spanish party at court, whose attacks took the form of a viciously
defamatory campaign directed above all against the queen. Like Marie Antoinette
and Catherine the Great, Maria Carolina was portrayed as a depraved harlot with
Undermining the Old Order
55
¹ In 1783 civil marriage was separated from church marriage, and in 1791 criminals’ right to seek
sanctuary in holy places was abolished. The monarchy’s civil and criminal law codes were revised, new
measures to limit feudalism were introduced, and in May 1789 an imperial edict made it lawful for
peasants to redeem certain feudal obligations and authorized the sale of feudal lands. See Beales
(2005), 156–81, 207–55.
² On instruction from the former king and with strong encouragement from the French minister
Choiseul: Chadwick (1981), 345–68.
³ Tanucci threatened to abolish the chinea in 1767 but that was not done until 1788. Rambaud
(1908), 294.
⁴ One of the most contentious nominations was that of Andrea Serrao, a leading opponent of
papal supremacy, as Bishop of Potenza: see Chiosi (1981), 267–86. On the decline of papal authority
see Chadwick (1981), 345.

<<<PDFPAGE 65>>>
insatiable sexual appetites, and these attacks came to a head in 1784 when the
Spanish minister Floridablanca called for the queen’s removal from politics on the
grounds of moral turpitude. But Madrid’s patently partisan intervention was
deﬂected by the queen’s Austrian protectors, and also served to strengthen the
alliance with the reformers.⁵
Until it was disbanded in 1792, the Supreme Council of Finance was the prin-
cipal forum for public debate on the means to improve the state of the realm.
Gaetano Filangieri, Giuseppe Palmieri, Domenico di Gennaro, the Duke of
Cantalupo, and Ferdinando Galiani were amongst the leading ﬁgures in the
reform movement who accepted the government’s invitation to serve. To carry out
its brief the Council commissioned Domenico Grimaldi, Giuseppe Palmieri, and
Giuseppe Maria Galanti to prepare reports on the state of the Kingdom’s olive oil
and silk trades.⁶ In the meantime Acton was busy with projects designed to
increase trade and commerce. In 1785 he went to study the commercial reforms
introduced by Grand Duke Peter Leopold in Tuscany. His greatest achievement,
however, was a round of commercial treaties that concluded with a trade agree-
ment signed with Russia in 1787.⁷
The practical results were disappointing, however. In 1779 the arrendamento
on tobacco had been abolished, but an attempt to reform the more powerful
arrendamanto della Seta foundered in 1780. In 1786 the monopolies exercised by
the custom houses of Naples, Salerno, and Cava were abolished, but the growing
burden of Acton’s expenditure on the army and navy meant that the government
could ill afford to forgo even small revenues.⁸ By the early 1790s the reformers
were frustrated and the government had lost interest. Its priority had always been
to reorganize the army and build a navy, aims that overrode all other concerns and
came to rely on increasingly absolutist measures.
THE ARMY AND THE NOBLES
The project for reforming the army proved to be especially divisive. It met with
strong support from the reformers, who believed that the creation of a national
army was an essential step towards national regeneration. It also found support
amongst many sections of the nobility, but absolute resistance by others. The
reform project began in 1782 when Acton created new militias, and was extended
in 1784 with the creation of an Intendenza Generale with a budget of 2.4 million
ducats whose task was to oversee the reorganization of the army and to create a
navy. Foreign generals were brought to Naples to reorganize and train the infantry
along French lines, and the nobility was deprived of its monopoly over senior 
Absolutist Naples
56
⁵ Ajello (1991), 716–33.
⁶ Chorley (1965), 16, 132; Macry (1974), 457–84.
⁷ Nuzzo (1971), 457.
⁸ The Council abolished a number of the smaller arrendamenti (on manna in 1785 and on acqua-
vite in 1786), but the means for any broader reform of the tax-farms did not exist.

<<<PDFPAGE 66>>>
military positions. Between 1768 and 1777, expenditure on the navy had run at
around 650,000 ducats per annum: in 1788 this jumped to 1,023,000 ducats,
and then between 1791 and 1794 rose again to over 1.5 million.⁹
These measures provoked ﬁerce opposition from the noble families that
enjoyed exclusive rights over commissions in the army, but were welcomed by
those that did not. The same would happen when the Nunziatella military acad-
emy government was reorganized with the aim of creating a modern ofﬁcer corps
trained in the latest branches of military science and technology and with a strong
sense of dynastic loyalty. This again divided the nobles, and found considerable
support among young noblemen who came from families that did not enjoy pri-
vileged preferments and commissions. Many of the young cadets who were trained
at the Nunziatella in the late 1780s and early 1790s would rally to the Republic at
the end of the decade.¹⁰ But the defenders of feudal privilege also mobilized to
denounce the government’s resort to absolutist measures and to the outrage of the
queen the young Principino of Canosa claimed that feudal privilege was the only
defence against royal tyranny.¹¹
DEVOLUTION
From much earlier in the century the government had been exploring ways to
change feudalism from within by means of the crown’s right to take possession of
feudal properties when the owner died without heirs. Historically the crown had
not exercised this right of devolution, but when the last Duke of Atri, Rudolfo
Acquaviva, died without an heir, the Regia Camera della Sommaria invoked
andplaced the vast Atri estates (known as the ‘State of Atri’) under crown 
administration.
The ‘State of Atri’ in the Abruzzi caught the interest of reformers who urged
the crown to take the opportunity to strip these estates of their feudal title
and sell them as private property. In nearby Teramo, both the bishop and
Melchiorre Delﬁco debated how these properties could be disposed of to create
a new class of independent, small peasant farms that would regenerate the local
economy.¹²
What followed revealed the obstacles to what might at ﬁrst sight appear a sim-
ple solution. First, the crown’s claim to the estate was contested, causing years of
delay. Then the reformers proved to be hopelessly divided in their recommenda-
tions, and when Delﬁco and Galanti ﬁnally agreed that the estate should be sold as
private property, the crown’s own lawyers rejected this. They argued that since the
estates had reverted to the crown under feudal law they could not be alienated
Undermining the Old Order
57
⁹ Simioni (1920–1), 61; Rao (1987), 623–77; idem (2000), 95–117.
¹⁰ Chiosi (2000), 118–34; Rao (ed.) (1995), 15–20; see also Barberis (1988) and Ferrone (1993)
for similar developments in Piedmont and other Italian states.
¹¹ On Canosa, see Villani (1974), 177–88.
¹² Rao (1984), 54; Incarnato (1993), 43–5.

<<<PDFPAGE 67>>>
orsold, but they could be leased as private property, a solution that Tanucci also
supported on the grounds that it would purge the estates ‘of the tyrannical oppres-
sions that resulted from the fact that the feudatories had controlled the exercise of
justice’. In other words, remove abusive practices without abolishing feudal tenure
or feudal dues. Since the crown administration was also the beneﬁciary of these
dues, however, it had little incentive to abolish them.¹³
No clear plan had been agreed for the ‘State of Atri’ when in 1792 the death
without heirs of the Prince of Riccia caused another large feudal estate to devolve
to the crown. The outcome again proved to be higher on expectations than results.
The legality of the sequestration was challenged and subsequent litigation
revealed centuries of unresolved disputes to rights and titles in all the neighbour-
ing communities. The most important part of the estate was a difesa, a term that
described any part of a feudal estate that had been enclosed and freed from
promiscuous or customary rights. But since only feudal property was subject to
‘devolution’, could the difesa also be legally sequestered?
No one knew, and the crown’s agents were never able to resolve whether the
estate was feudal property. Their investigations did reveal, however, that the previ-
ous owners had treated parts of the estate as feudal or allodial (that is to say, as pri-
vate property), depending on which category was most ﬁscally advantageous, a
practice similar to manipulating modern tax codes but without risk of audit.
The same investigations unearthed litigation that stretched back centuries over
contested claims to the various feudal or non-feudal titles under which different
parts of the estates were held, the dues and levies exacted, and the rights of usage to
which different parts of the estates were subject. What emerged from these invest-
igations was the extreme uncertainty that surrounded all titles, property, and
levies. As the crown courts tried to challenge or verify these titles, the uncertainty
and confusion increased. It also became clear that it was much easier for the crown
administrators to simply pocket the revenues of the estates under their care than
to identify the origins and legitimacy of those revenues.¹⁴
THE DEMANI
Similar situations were revealed in what was the largest reform initiative
attempted by the monarchy and the ﬁnal achievement of the alliance between the
throne and the reformers. This was the edict of 1792 that ordered the division of
all common lands on the mainland, which were to be allocated to those with title
to exercise use-rights on them.
As in much of the rest of Europe, the common lands (demani) in southern
Italy took a variety of forms: some belonged to the crown, others formed part of
feudal estates subject to seasonal public access, while others had been granted to
Absolutist Naples
58
¹³ Rao (1984), 42.
¹⁴ Ibid. 35.

<<<PDFPAGE 68>>>
local communities as the original source of revenue and to make land available for
grazing or cultivation. Over time, however, the demarcations of the demani had
frequently been lost or became contested. As pressure on land grew in the eight-
eenth century, these issues became increasingly contentious and rival claims to
ownership or use of the demani were a frequent cause of conﬂict within and
between communities throughout southern Italy.¹⁵
The reformers saw the opportunity for a fundamental reform. Since the royal
domains were not subject to feudal titles and jurisdictions, the crown could dis-
pose of them as it wished. The best place to start, they argued, would be the
crown’s extensive property on the Apulian Tavoliere that was reserved for sheep-
grazing. Sold as private property, or leased as quit-rents, this land could be con-
verted into thousands of small farms that would turn Capitanata into one of the
most productive provinces in the Kingdom. The same solution could be applied
in other regions where the crown owned extensive domain lands, such as the Sila
Forest in Calabria.¹⁶
From the crown estates it was a small step to envisage the privatization of the
common lands of the local communities, which offered the opportunity for an
even more general reform. In this case, however, the government ﬁrst had to restore
the village commons to their original state, using the courts to get rid of those who
had abusively occupied them. The commons could then be restored to local 
communities and divided amongst the inhabitants as small-holdings, or divided
amongst those holding rival claims in proportion to their rights.¹⁷
The principles on which this massive operation were to be based were simple
and rational. By settling the disputed ownership of the common lands a danger-
ous source of conﬂict would be removed, at the same time creating a new ﬁnancial
base around which local administration could be reorganized. The project
promised one of those virtuous cycles close to the hearts of reformers, but the
symmetry of their logic underestimated the enormous technical problems posed
by such a reform. The government did not have the means to resolve the huge
number of disputes over illegal occupations of common land, while many argued
that the divisions in any case would be disastrous for the pastoral economy and
would deprive the rural communities of their main source of livelihood.
The edict of 1792 proclaiming the division of the common lands throughout
the mainland was, nonetheless, the government’s single most important reform
initiative. Once again, however, it revealed that the government did not have the
means to implement such a measure, which was delegated to courts already
swamped by existing litigation. Far from resolving these disputes, the edict of
1792 was another example of how government intervention raised expectations
that it had no means of satisfying, further heightening local tensions, and making
property rights even more uncertain.¹⁸
Undermining the Old Order
59
¹⁵ Corona (1995), 23–62.
¹⁶ Ibid. 79–127.
¹⁷ Ibid. 79–94.
¹⁸ Ibid. 179–212.

<<<PDFPAGE 69>>>
ABSOLUTIST ALTERNATIVES
Sicily
The alternative to changing feudalism from within was absolutism, which was
ﬁrst experimented with in Sicily when in 1781 the government gave its Viceroy
emergency powers to challenge the autonomy of the Sicilian feudatories. Not only
was Sicily an independent crown, but the monarchy’s jurisdictions in Sicily were
even more limited than on the mainland, while the privileges of the Sicilian feuda-
tories were sanctioned by the island’s Parliament. The powers of the royal Viceroy
in Palermo were severely limited and government at all levels was largely in the
hands of the lay and ecclesiastical feudatories. When the crown had attempted to
challenge those privileges in 1773, the Sicilian nobility had responded by staging a
revolt in Palermo.
It was a sign of the monarchy’s new assertiveness, therefore, when in 1781 the
marchese Domenico Caracciolo was sent to Palermo with special powers to
reduce the inﬂuence of the Sicilian barons and the Parliament.¹⁹ Domenico
Caracciolo was a man of the Enlightenment who at the time of his appointment
was serving in the Neapolitan diplomatic mission in Paris. He had previously rep-
resented the Neapolitan government in London, enjoyed close contacts with the
Neapolitan reformers and with the intellectual salons of Paris, and was an out-
spoken champion of the anti-curial movement. When he ﬁnally reached Palermo,
Caracciolo began by abolishing the Inquisition and then introduced measures to
reduce the power of the clergy and the jurisdictions exercised by the barons. He
instructed the Sicilian courts to demand valid title from all feudal property and
revenues. He intervened to challenge baronial interference in the exercise of just-
ice and in local administration, and attempted to organize a land survey that
would serve as a basis for the introduction of a new tax. Following what had been
proposed in Naples after the famine of 1764, the Viceroy also reduced Palermo’s
right to impose provisioning regulations in the rest of Sicily, and introduced meas-
ures to encourage free trade. He even tried to promote the formation of small
peasant properties by establishing rural credit banks (monte di pietà).²⁰
As had occurred on the mainland, these measures were strongly supported
bythe progressive sections of the Sicilian nobility and clergy. But when in 1782
the Sicilian Parliament rejected Caracciolo’s proposals as an infringement of
Sicilian liberties, the monarchy’s support for its Viceroy crumbled. Even though
the government issued Pragmatic Sanctions in 1788 that ﬂatly rejected the claim
that Sicilian feudal possessions were free of all obligations to the crown,
Caracciolo received no support. When a year later the Viceroy tried to broaden
the reform programme by encouraging the sale and lease of the common lands,
he was recalled to Naples. Although he blamed the failure of his mission in part
Absolutist Naples
60
¹⁹ Marquis Domenico Caracciolo (1715–89).
²⁰ Giarizzo (1985), 193–212.

<<<PDFPAGE 70>>>
on the hostility of the Sicilian barons, Caracciolo held the government in Naples 
primarily responsible.²¹
Calabria and the Cassa Sacra
The second experiment in absolutist government took place on the mainland fol-
lowing the terrible earthquake of 1783 that devastated southern Calabria and
much of eastern Sicily. Casualties were impossible to assess and the damage to
property incalculable. The government declared a state of emergency and
despatched an expedition headed by Francesco Pignatelli of Strongoli, with the
title of Royal Vicar General, emergency powers to override all existing jurisdic-
tions, and 100,000 silver ducats. To recover the expedition’s costs, the government
decreed the suppression of all the religious houses in the devastated regions and
incorporated their assets to create a fund known as the Cassa Sacra.²²
Many Calabrian landowners sympathetic to the principles of the reform move-
ment saw the catastrophe and funds amassed by the Cassa Sacra as an opportunity
to put into practice the projects that reformers had been proposing for more than
a decade. To give an example, Domenico Grimaldi at once set to work to repair
the massive damage that had been done to his experimental farms at Seminara.
Another prominent landowner whose property suffered extensive damage was
Andrea Serrao, the Bishop of Potenza, who was the feudal owner of the town of
Castelmonardo, which was completely destroyed. Like Grimaldi, the bishop took
charge of rebuilding the town, which he renamed Filadelﬁa, a clear sign of the
principles that inspired the project.²³
The reformers conﬁdently predicted that the sale of the lands of the religious
houses would bring into being a class of sturdy peasant farmers, whose energies
and labour, they claimed, would revitalize the economy of the devastated
provinces. In reality, few if any small properties were created and the land sales
instead proved to be a bonanza for wealthy landowners, among them Bishop
Serrao, who made extensive purchases of land in Maida, Acconia, and Francavilla
from the Cassa. But few of these buyers shared the progressive ideas of the Bishop
of Potenza, while the peasants suffered a double loss. Few had the means to take
part in the land sales, while most who had been tenants of the monasteries lost
their leases when the land passed to new owners. Numerous peasant families were
driven off the land, and even the government was soon forced to admit that for the
rural poor the operations of the Cassa Sacra had been an even greater afﬂiction
than the earthquake. It was also rumoured that the Vicar General had made huge
personal proﬁts and had returned to Naples laden with plate plundered from
Calabrian convents.²⁴ To raise cash quickly the lands of the Calabrian religious
houses had been sold off at low prices to wealthy landowners, and little of the 
Undermining the Old Order
61
²¹ In Naples he succeeded the Duke of Sambuca as the chief minister, but died a year later.
²² Placanica (1970, 1985); Cingari (1978), 25–38.
²³ Chiosi (1981), 296–300.
²⁴ Cortese (1965), 79–115.

<<<PDFPAGE 71>>>
proceeds were reinvested in Calabria. What was not pillaged by General Pignatelli
went to shore up the monarchy’s rising expenses on the army and navy.
The experience of the Cassa Sacra in Calabria also indicated the difﬁculty of
applying the reformers’ neat principles to the harsh realities of the rural South.
The rural poor were unable to compete with powerful landowners without more
direct assistance and protection. They had no means to purchase even small plots
of land, and without capital or credit had no means to work it. The Cassa Sacra
would, however, prove to be only the ﬁrst of many schemes designed to beneﬁt the
rural poor that instead deprived them of the lands they had worked as tenants.
‘An Inexplicable Mystery’: The Sila Forest
The government’s involvement in Calabria after the earthquake had drawn atten-
tion to the state of lawlessness and unrest that had for some time existed in the
neighbouring region of the Sila Forest, which resulted in an ofﬁcial investigation
in 1790. This was as much a pretext as a reason for the investigation, however,
since the government’s interest in the Sila Forest related primarily to the heavy
increase in demand for timber resulting from Acton’s shipbuilding programme.
The Sila Forest was the principal source of timber on the mainland, but it was also
part of the crown’s domain that over time had been the subject of widespread 
illegal occupations. Its need for timber as prices rose therefore gave the government
new reasons for recovering property that had been illegally occupied and in
reasserting its jurisdictions.
A senior royal magistrate named Giuseppe Zurlo, who was a prominent mem-
ber of the anti-feudal movement in Naples, was sent to investigate. He quickly
discovered that the whole Sila region had been subject to systematic illegal occu-
pations at the expense not only of the crown but also of the common lands of
thelocal communities and other landowners, and his report in 1790 revealed
what one later commentator referred to ironically as the ‘inexplicable mystery of
the Sila’.²⁵
Zurlo’s report explained that the royal domain properties in the Sila Mountains
were particularly extensive and had formerly provided the crown with important
revenues. They also served to guarantee adequate common pasture for the local
communities, and to prevent illegal clearances of woodland. But over time these
common lands had been abusively taken over by a small number of wealthy
landowners who included the owners of the largest herds of sheep and livestock.
These illegal occupations, Zurlo concluded, were the principal causes of the law-
lessness that prevailed throughout the Sila region, and those principally respons-
ible were the powerful landowners who employed armed bands to protect their
animals and their pasture.
Absolutist Naples
62
²⁵ Bianchini (1839), 418–19—ironical since it was no mystery. See also Villani (1974), 222. Luigi
de’ Medici was also sent by the government to investigate the impact of the Cassa Sacra in Calabria in
1790; see Cortese (1965), 100–8.

<<<PDFPAGE 72>>>
Zurlo’s account was yet another illustration of how the erosion of public access
to land lay at the heart of the rural conﬂicts spreading to many different parts of
the South. In the case of the Sila, the usurpations of the common lands had
impoverished the rural communities. But they could not escape the struggles
between powerful landowners and graziers, leaving many villagers with no altern-
ative but to join the bands of brigands. Zurlo also noted that those responsible
for the usurpations had established powerful connections in public administra-
tion to ensure that they would be protected and their unlawful actions go unpun-
ished. The Sila was ‘an inexplicable mystery’ only because an explanation obvious
to all was one that in the absence of effective royal government was too dangerous
to be told.²⁶
Zurlo’s report offered important insights into the conﬂicts bringing lawlessness
and violence to many parts of the Mezzogiorno at the close of the century, but also
revealed that even when it was aware of what was going on the government lacked
the means to intervene.
FEUDALISM UNDER REVIEW
The government’s urgent need for resources and revenues lay behind its increas-
ingly interventionist although rarely effective actions. But similar difﬁculties faced
many landowners too, with consequences that served to accelerate changes taking
place from below. Clear evidence of this is provided by the estate records of two
major feudal landowners who were both, although for different reasons, looking
for ways to increase their estate revenues in the ﬁnal decade of the century. In both
cases this resulted in a thorough survey of the principles on which their estates
were managed and the introduction of a series of innovations.²⁷
In 1789 Antonio Maresca, the Duke of Serradicapriola, decided to make a
thorough review of the management of his estates because he had been appointed
to serve as the Neapolitan ambassador at the Court of the Russian Tsar. But no less
important than his imminent departure for St Petersburg, where he would remain
for forty years, were the heavy losses he had suffered from his investments in
various arrendamenti whose yields had plummeted in the 1780s due to the
government’s ﬁnancial difﬁculties. To restore the lost income the duke needed to
increase the revenues from his estates.
The review carried out gives a clear picture of the scale of property of a leading,
but by no means very wealthy, feudal family. The core of the family’s extensive 
feudal holdings was in the fertile north-eastern corner of Capitanata, with
otherproperties on the Piano di Sorrento and in Naples where the family owned
Undermining the Old Order
63
²⁶ Ibid. The situation in the Sila region suggests interesting parallels with the conﬂicts in the royal
forests of 18th-century England described by E. P. Thompson in Whigs and Hunters (1975).
²⁷ My thanks to M. L. Storchi for assistance in selecting these examples from the numerous
records available in the section of Archivi Privati in the ASN.

<<<PDFPAGE 73>>>
acasa nobile in the fashionable Chiaja district. Their total value was estimated at
308,203 ducats. The single largest asset, however, was the family’s holdings in
various arrendamenti, valued, in 1782, at 140,183 ducats, that provided an annual
income of 5,465 ducats.²⁸
Returns from the family’s feudal possessions were much higher, however. The
estates in Serracapriola alone averaged 3,972 ducats per year, those at Chieuti
4,255 ducats, although non-feudal revenues (burgensatici) in both towns were
much lower. Expenses, including taxes owed to the towns (for buonatenenza)
and to the crown (catasto), amounted to 1,159 ducats, leaving a net annual
income of just over 8,000 ducats (not including ‘the costs of cultivation and
improvement’).²⁹ The family also owned eight farms (massarie) between Chieuti,
Serracapriola, and the Marina di Serracapriola, whose capital value was estimated
at 31,140 ducats.³⁰
The stereotypes of the feudal landowner are not easily reconciled with the
meticulous bookkeeping maintained by the administrators of the Serradicapriola
estates, whose accounts were submitted regularly to Naples for further scrutiny by
the owners’ accountants and attorneys before being forwarded to St Petersburg.
The revenues of each estate were recorded separately, and income from feudal
rights was listed separately from leases and income from livestock and crops.
When Antonio Maresca decided to disinvest his shares in the arrendamenti³¹ in
1789, he instructed his accountants to carry out a complete survey of the revenues
from his estates and to identify alternative and more rewarding investment oppor-
tunities. This search would thereafter remain the principal theme of the duke’s
correspondence with his administrator in Naples, Francesco Roddi, whose
brother was the manager of the estates in Chieuti.
Before leaving for Russia, the duke leased the estates to his brother, the march-
ese Don Benedetto Maresca, and when in 1803 the lease came up for renewal, he
urged Roddi to demand a 30 per cent increase on the grounds that over the
previous twenty years ‘all manner of goods with no exception have at least doubled
in value, as can easily be seen from the great rise in living costs here in the Capital’.
He complained that most of the additional proﬁts from his farms had been taken
by the merchants who purchased grain in Capitanata, and he instructed Roddi to
Absolutist Naples
64
²⁸ Land, property, and mortgage loans in the Piano di Sorrento amounted to 62,031 ducats, and
loans in Naples to 26,779 ducats. The family’s casa nobile in Naples was valued at 57,500 ducats and
the difesa of Crepacuore in Capitanata at 20,479 ducats.
²⁹ ASN, Archivi Privati: Archivio Maresca di Serra di Capriola: B 167, Stato dei beni di Duca
Antonio Maresca, 1782.
³⁰ Ibid. The ﬁrst specialized in raising cattle, the second pigs, the third brood mares, the fourth
sheep and goats, the ﬁfth buffalo. They owned two other mixed farms where livestock rearing was
combined with the cultivation of wheat and forage crops. The most proﬁtable was the pig farm,
because the investment was low and the return from the lease relatively high. The least rewarding
were the brood mares, while all the other operations had an annual yield of over 15%.
³¹ The arrendamenti in the Dogana di Napoli, Farina Vecchia, Olio e Sapone, worth 68,918
ducats because they were yielding between only 2.8 and 3.2%.

<<<PDFPAGE 74>>>
organize with other landowners to sell their grain independently and cut out the
middle men. He also suggested that longer leases would give leaseholders greater
security and incentives to improve the land, which he believed would enable them
to pay higher leases.³² Roddi replied that the 30% increase was impractical and
patiently suggested that a better alternative would be to speculate on rising olive
oil prices. The speculation would be relatively safe, the risks low, and the potential
proﬁts high.³³
Although a single example, the Duke of Serradicapriola’s review of the manage-
ment and revenues of his estate was closely connected to broader structural devel-
opments: on one hand, the decline in income from the arrendamenti and, on the
other, the rapid increase in commodity prices. But debt was another powerful
incentive for maximizing revenues, as illustrated by the second example. When in
1788 Don Nicola Toccò Cantelmo Stuard, the Duke of Apice and Sicignano,
became the Duke of Montemiletto, he also inherited his father’s debts. To meet
these, he appointed a lawyer named Gaetano Celani as his ‘Vicar’ to reorganize the
administration of his feudal properties in Ajello. Two additional agents were
subsequently employed to review the management and leases of his estates at
Apice in Principato Ultra and for smaller feudal estates in the Abruzzo. In the
1790s the review was extended to the estates at Montemiletto in Principato Ultra
and to the duke’s more scattered properties in Calabria.
This was a major operation, and it was not until 1797 that Don Michele Bianco
was appointed as ‘General Agent and Procurator’ to coordinate the different
reports, in which he was assisted by the duke’s treasurer, Gaetano Colella.
Together they wrote a report that gave a clear picture of the organization and
administration of this major feudal property. It began with a detailed description
of the town of Montemiletto and ‘the Palace that is by no means undistinguished
and with all the facilities to be expected in the residence of a great Lord’ that
housed the duke’s staff. These estates consisted of seven separate feudi, overseen by
three Governors of Justice (Governadori di Giustizia).
Bianco’s ﬁrst recommendation was that the duke should take advantage of the
rising cost of timber resulting from the government’s shipbuilding programme.
He also recommended that fewer loans should be made to the peasant farmers,
because this encouraged ‘idleness’. To encourage the peasants to improve the
land, he recommended that leases be extended to eight years and argued that
the three-year leases customarily used in the region were ruinous for agriculture.
He concluded by recommending that the duke invest in planting trees and
repairing the mills, calculating that an initial investment of 23,130 ducats would
result in an increased annual income of 3,550 ducats that could be expected to
grow by a further 2,544 ducats over a ten-year period.³⁴
Undermining the Old Order
65
³² Ibid. B 126 Copia lettere, 1803–4.
³³ Ibid.
³⁴ ASN, Archivi Privati: Archivio Toccò di Montemiletto: B 123 fascio 532, Descrizione del feudo
di Montemiletto.nell’anno, 1799.

<<<PDFPAGE 75>>>
Earlier in 1798 the duke sent his ‘secretary and chaplain’ Don Fileno de Pompeis
to reorganize his estates in Calabria. Don Fileno spent a year on the estates, replaced
dishonest administrators, organized the new leases, and recovered various properties
belonging to the landowner. But the timing was not good. At the beginning of the
year the king had ﬂed to Sicily and in January the Republic was declared in Naples.
When de Pompeis arrived to conduct his visitation of a feudal property near
Amantea in March 1799, he was caught in the middle of a royalist uprising. Since it
was known that the duke was a supporter of the Republic in Naples (for which his
lands would shortly be sequestrated by the crown) his agent de Pompeis ‘was seized
by the inhabitants of that Town and shamefully arrested’.³⁵
The upheavals of 1799 meant that the planned reorganization of the
Montemiletto estates in Calabria was not carried out. In the meantime, however,
with the assistance of the commercial ﬁrm of Becchi in Florence the duke became
active in international trade. His ﬁrst ventures resulted in heavy losses, but 
undeterred he invested in trading oil and wheat from Apulia and sulphur from
Sicily. A year later his business improved, and he was working with other noblemen
who were trading on their own account, among them the Prince of Trabia in
Palermo, who exported sulphur from his own estates, and the Prince Belmonte di
Pignatelli, who acted as his agent in Rome. Montemiletto was soon corresponding
with a wide range of commercial houses in London, Hamburg, Amsterdam,
Milan, Livorno, and Venice who supplied him with information about commod-
ities in demand and market prices.³⁶
These examples indicate that the world of these great feudal landowners was far
from static. Both reveal the different pressures—debts, the crisis of public
ﬁnances, rising commodity prices, and even speculative opportunities—that were
encouraging landowners to increase their incomes and to develop new investment
strategies. Both suggest that the outcomes could be very contradictory, leading to
new forms of investment but also more effective exaction of existing revenues, and
feudal revenues in particular.³⁷ The fate that nearly overtook Don Fileno de
Pompeis in Calabria in March 1799 also indicates the reactions such initiatives
might provoke.
PROVINCIAL VOICES
The efforts of these two feudal landowners illustrate the many different ways in
which forces of change were being transmitted to the rural South. Another clear
sign of the wider impact of these changes lay in the emergence of new provincial
voices. They were predominantly those of the priests, administrators, prelates, and
Absolutist Naples
66
³⁵ ASN, Archivi Privati: Archivio Toccò di Montemiletto: B 123 fascio 532, Descrizione del feudo
di Montemiletto.nell’anno, 1799.
³⁶ Ibid. f. 191–4.
³⁷ For similar developments in Sicily see Aymard (1971–2), 67–85.

<<<PDFPAGE 76>>>
gentlemen that Genovesi had hailed as the makers of the new age, and they were
especially audible in the regions most directly exposed to new economic and com-
mercial forces where an important refrain was protest at the constraints and
restrictions to which provincial producers were subject.
After the famine of 1764, merchants and producers in the Apulian provinces
had challenged the legality of the regulations imposed by the provisioning author-
ities in Naples and by the arrendamenti. In Calabria, too, the damage done by
these regulations to the producers of olive oil and raw silk was a dominant theme
in the salons of the reform-minded gentry. But the ideas of the reformers were also
taken up in Molise where the expansion of wheat production in the second half of
the century had brought obstacles to economic growth into sharp focus. The most
obvious of these was the lack of communications, which meant that although
Campobasso was less than a hundred kilometres from Naples it was more eco-
nomical to bring grain by sea from the more distant Apulian provinces.³⁸
Campobasso was the chief administrative town in the province after Foggia³⁹
and an important administrative centre where the reform ideas found a wide audi-
ence. The group who began to meet regularly in the town included Giuseppe
Maria Galanti, the brothers Giuseppe and Biase Zurlo, Paolo Nicola Giampaolo,
Domenico di Gennaro, Vincenzo Cuoco, Alessandro Petitti, and Francesco De
Attalis. All came from the province and nearly all went on to serve as adminis-
trators in the Bourbon government in the 1780s and early 1790s. Many would
reappear in the administrations of Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat after 1806.
They all, too, had similar career proﬁles. Giuseppe Maria Galanti came from a
‘distinguished and wealthy family’ in Santa Croce di Morconei, where he had ﬁrst
acquired his hatred of feudalism from the priests who ran the local school, whom
he described as strongly committed to the anti-curial movement and outspoken
critics of the feudal order. At the age of nine Galanti moved to Naples to continue
his studies under the guidance of an uncle in clerical orders, where his ideas were
shaped by the teachings of Genovesi and Filangieri.
The brothers Giuseppe and Biase Zurlo also attended schools in Molise before
going to Naples to train as lawyers. Once qualiﬁed, they returned to Campobasso
and started their careers by pleading the cases of Molisan villages against neigh-
bouring feudatories. Vincenzo Cuoco, the future historian of the Republic of
1799 and later member of Joachim Murat’s administration, was another member
of the group whose career followed a similar path.⁴⁰
In Teramo, one of the principal towns in the northern Abruzzi, another group
was headed by Melchiorre Delﬁco and his brother Berardino and included the
abate Berardino Quartapelle, Giovanni Bernadino Thaulero, Alessi Tulli, and
Undermining the Old Order
67
³⁸ See Marin, in Clark and Lepetit (1997), 143–216, and Macry (1974), 402–22.
³⁹ Strictly speaking Molise did not exist in the eighteenth century: administratively it was part of
Capitanata and only became a separate administrative entity when the French rulers created the king-
dom’s 15 provinces in 1806.
⁴⁰ R. Lalli, Introduction to G. Zurlo, 8–15, and De Francesco (1997), 4–9.

<<<PDFPAGE 77>>>
Baron Sterlich, one of the wealthiest landowners in the province.⁴¹ In Lecce, the
marchese Giuseppe Palmieri, the Bishop of Lecce, Filippo Briganti of Gallipoli,
and the physician Giovanni Presto were founders of an agricultural society whose
purpose was to improve local agriculture, especially the production of olive 
oil, and debate ‘matters of public interest’.⁴² In Calabria, a similar group of
reform-minded gentry and churchmen met regularly in Cosenza, and before the
earthquake many visitors travelled to admire Domenico Grimaldi’s experimental
estates at Seminara near Reggio where new oil presses from Genoa and
Piedmontese organzine looms for reeling silk had been imported.⁴³
Nor were these innovations taking place only on the mainland. During the
winter in Florence after the revolution in France Arthur Young was surprised and
delighted to meet the renowned Sicilian agronomist Paolo Balsamo, who was
returning from a visit to study agriculture in England.
A professor of agriculture, in Sicily, being sent by his sovereign, and wisely sent, to England
for instruction in agriculture appears to me to be an epoch in the history of the human
mind. From that island, the most celebrated in Antiquity for fruitfulness and cultiva-
tion. . . whose practice the greatest nations considered as the most worthy of imitations: at
a period too when we were in the woods, condemned to Barbarity and hardly considered
worth the trouble of conquering. What has effected so enormous a change? Two words
explain it: we are become free and Sicily enslaved.⁴⁴
In 1792 Galanti appealed for agricultural associations to be set up in every
province of the realm. Citing Domenico Grimaldi’s experimental farms in
Calabria as a model, Galanti claimed that the need to improve agriculture was the
most pressing challenge facing the nation. Agricultural associations would enable
landowners, estate administrators, and farmers to learn how to apply the most
modern agricultural procedures of the day, and because of their importance for
the progress of the nation Galanti proposed that they be called Patriotic Societies.⁴⁵
In addition to the salons of the provincial nobility and prelates, masonic lodges
were also multiplying in the main provincial cities and towns in the 1780s, with
the government’s full support. Following the example of her brother Joseph II, the
queen made herself the patroness of freemasons throughout the Kingdom and
leading courtiers were appointed to preside over the rapidly expanding lodges,
which included a lodge for noblewomen founded by the Princess Ottaiano.⁴⁶
Absolutist Naples
68
⁴¹ Incarnato (1991), 42–9; Clemente (1981), 344–467.
⁴² Venturi (1962), 1096–7.
⁴³ Ibid. 409–28; Chorley (1965), 160–75.
⁴⁴ Arthur Young (1915), ed. T. Okey, 277.
⁴⁵ Just as well that Galanti was unaware of Arthur Young’s scathing comments after visiting the
Patriotic Society in Milan: ‘I looked about me to see a practical farmer enter the room, but I looked in
vain. A goodly company of i Marchesi, i Conti, i Cavalieri, i Abati but not one close-cropped wig or a
dirty pair of breeches to give authority to their proceedings.’ Ibid. 235. See also Villani (1989),
247–60, and De Lorenzo (1998), 1–88.
⁴⁶ H. Acton (1956), 151: the Princess Ottaiano was one of the queen’s favourites, and also the sis-
ter of Luigi de’ Medici, who was suspected as a Jacobin in the 1790s but served the monarchy after the
restoration of 1799, and became the leading minister after the restoration of 1815 and again after the
revolutions of 1820–1.

<<<PDFPAGE 78>>>
As they spread to the provinces and to Sicily in the 1780s, the lodges provided
the provincial gentry with cultural and political networks much broader than the
salons of the aristocracy, and quite different from the lay confraternities.⁴⁷ But
Galanti’s appeal for the formation of Patriotic Societies came too late. By 1794 the
government had abandoned all interest in reform, whose supporters were now
treated with suspicion and viewed as potential Jacobins. The masonic lodges and
many of those whose voices had formerly been heard most clearly from the
provinces now found themselves under arrest.
CASACALENDA
The voices of the local communities could also now be heard, although in
most cases only through the mediation of those who took up their cause against
abuses of feudal power. One especially well-documented case was the town of
Casacalenda in Molise, whose struggles were recorded in particular detail because
the town was represented by the brothers Giuseppe and Biase Zurlo.⁴⁸
Beyond the particular issues at stake, Casacalenda revealed conﬂicts being
repeated in similar forms throughout southern Italy. The petition the brothers
Zurlo made on the town’s behalf set out the origins of the litigation that the com-
munity had brought against the ‘past and present Possessors of the town of
Casacalenda in the local courts, the royal courts, and the superior courts of Lucera
and Foggia and which had over time had created a chaos of undecided litiga-
tion’.⁴⁹ The town claimed that the feudal owners of Casacalenda had ‘always been
intent on depriving the community of its property and its rights, and had for cen-
turies buried it under a mass of costly law suits’:
Royal Governors, Royal Uditori, Caporota, and Provincial Fiscal ofﬁcials, Fiscal Ofﬁcials
and magistrates from the Regia Camera, Tavolarj, Engineers, Agrarian Surveyors, Attitanti,
scribes and all the people that are necessary in these legal procedures have been frequent
visitors to the town.
When the costs of litigation bankrupted the town, the feudatory demanded
immediate settlement of everything he claimed. Unable to afford recourse to the
courts, the community appealed directly to the king. The petition showed that the
town was engaged in over 200 separate law suits with this single feudatory, many
of which dated back more than a century. If the feudatory’s claims were upheld,
the community stood to lose ‘thousands of acres of land, houses and buildings, as
well as its rights on the Feudal and Demanial lands’. The jurisdictions that
thefeudatory abusively claimed would deprive the community of its ‘civic rights,
the customary rates at which ﬁde and terraggi were paid’ and leave it subject to
Undermining the Old Order
69
⁴⁷ Giarizzo (1995), 406–20.
⁴⁸ For other examples see e.g. Corona (1995), 195–202.
⁴⁹ ASN: Min Fin f. 1627 (23 June 1802).

<<<PDFPAGE 79>>>
‘exactions in kind without proven title, deforestation of feudal land and the loss of
its common lands’.⁵⁰
This tale of long-standing abuses and exploitation reached a climax in the sec-
ond half of the century in ways that vividly reveal the convergence of forces under-
mining the fabric of agrarian order in the South. Behind the abuses denounced in
the petition can be detected the new pressures to enclose and privatize, which
threatened the lands of all the rural towns and villages. The interventions of the
royal tribunals and of lawyers like the Zurlo brothers did not bring solutions, but
they did legitimize the claims of the rural communities.
There were prices to be paid, however. In Casacalenda the struggle against the
feudatory was led by the mayor, Domenico di Gennaro, who was also closely
involved in the reform movement in Naples. When in 1794 the government
moved against a suspected pro-Jacobin conspiracy in the capital, di Gennaro was
arrested and imprisoned for two years. He had been denounced by none other than
the Duke of Sangro, the feudatory of Casacalenda who in 1799 when the Republic
was declared in Naples would take his revenge. Arming 10,000 Albanians from a
neighbouring settlement, Casacalenda was sacked and Domenico de Gennaro 
brutally put to death.⁵¹
CONCLUSION
Although the Bourbon experiments in absolutism did not attain their declared
goals, they succeeded only too well in exacerbating local conﬂicts and undermin-
ing the legitimacy of the ancien régime in the South. By bringing the war against
feudalism to the remotest corners of the mainland provinces, the crown, its
agents, and the reformers unwittingly inﬂamed conﬂicts that could not easily be
contained.
The critical role played by the monarchy in exacerbating these disputes is best
illustrated by the contrast with Sicily, where the underlying tendencies were sim-
ilar to those on the mainland. In Sicily important changes were taking place, and
here too the feudal order was also changing from within. The lay and ecclesiastical
feudatories were also increasingly dividing into reactionary and progressive fac-
tions. Although widely resisted, Caracciolo’s moves to partition the common
lands and challenge feudal titles in the 1780s marked the beginning of something
similar. But resistance by the feudatories was more effective, and it was not until
the following century that feudalism became a focus for political conﬂicts similar
to those already present on the mainland in the ﬁnal decades of the eighteenth
century. These conﬂicts were not the reason the Bourbon monarchy collapsed in
1798, but they helped shape the civil war that followed.
Absolutist Naples
70
⁵⁰ ASN: Min Fin f. 1627 (23 June 1802); ﬁde and terragi were dues paid, respectively, for pasture
and sowing of the feudal demani.
⁵¹ Martelli, in Rao (2002), 717–43.

<<<PDFPAGE 80>>>
4
1799: The Rise and Fall of 
the Republic
Italy in 1797, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1997).

<<<PDFPAGE 81>>>
NAPLES AND THE REVOLUTION IN FRANCE
The revolution in France had at ﬁrst caused little concern in Naples. Melchiorre
Delﬁco and Giuseppe Maria Galanti both believed that the events in France
would serve to revive the monarchy’s reform initiatives, and the government, for
its part, looked to proﬁt from the difﬁculties facing the French rulers. In 1790
Maria Carolina and Ferdinand IV travelled to Vienna¹ and when they returned
new restrictions were imposed on French merchant shipping, while Acton
renewed efforts to establish closer ties with Great Britain.
The situation changed following the imprisonment of Louis XVI and Marie
Antoinette in 1792. In September, Naples refused to recognize the representative
of the French Republic, Citizen Armand Mackau. Relations worsened when
theFrench government discovered that Naples had urged the Sublime Porte not
to recognize the representative of the French Republic. In retaliation Rear-Admiral
Latouche-Tréville was ordered to station a squadron of French warships off the
Bay of Naples in December 1792 on the pretext of a courtesy visit.²
The Neapolitan government was careful not to give offence, but when in
January 1793 the French vice-consul replaced the Bourbon family emblems with
the new republican insignia unknown persons smeared them with ﬁlth.³ The exe-
cutions of Louis XVI in January and of Marie Antoinette in October 1793 pushed
Naples decisively closer to France’s enemies, and in July the Kingdom secretly
entered an offensive treaty with Britain and Austria.⁴ A week after reporting that
Naples would stay out of the war in August 1793, the French consul informed
Paris that he had been wrong and was leaving Naples immediately.⁵
The treaty gave the British navy access to the Neapolitan and Sicilian ports, and
in return Naples agreed to participate in the expedition that Britain and Spain
were preparing against Toulon.⁶ But the expedition turned into a military and
diplomatic disaster that convinced the king that he had been exploited and re-
inforced the reformers’ belief that England’s aim was to make the Kingdom a colo-
nial market for their goods and manufactures. The toll in lost lives and equipment
was heavy, but even worse Naples lost its neutral status and was thrown into
deeper commercial recession.
The most serious consequence of the Toulon expedition for the allies was the
defection of Spain, which in September 1795 became France’s ally. By freeing
France from the threat of attack on its southern land borders, the Spanish alliance
enabled the Directory to embark on a major war in Europe. The principal target
was the Rhineland, but two diversionary operations were planned. General
Absolutist Naples
72
¹ For the coronation of the former Tuscan Grand Duke Peter Leopold after the death of his
brother Joseph.
² Nicolini (1939), 7–53; Barra (1997), i. 133–41.
³ AAEP: Corr Politique (Naples), 38 (1793–1805), 11, 29 Jan 1793.
⁴ Ibid.
⁵ Ibid., 24 August/ 31 August 1793: Lallement to Paris.
⁶ Niccolini (1939), 45–53; Nuzzo (972), 22–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 82>>>
Hoche was to raise an insurrection in Ireland, while another French army would
invade northern Italy in the classic move designed to force the Austrians to split
their forces on two fronts.⁷
The Directory’s plans were thrown out of kilter when the rapid and unexpected
victories of the Armée d’Italie, commanded by a 26-year-old general from Corsica,
Napoleon Bonaparte, forced the Austrians to abandon most of northern Italy. The
Piedmontese army was defeated in April, then the Austrians at Lodi (10 May), and
ﬁve days later Bonaparte entered Milan. The remaining Austrian forces regrouped in
the stronghold of Mantua, but Verona, the papal legation cities of Bologna and
Ferrara, and the Duchy of Modena all fell to the French. As the French advanced, the
Neapolitan government urgently sued for an armistice, to which Bonaparte agreed
on 5 June. In return, Naples was obliged to pay a largecash indemnity, to observe
strict neutrality, and to close its ports to British shipping.
During the winter and spring of 1796–7 Bonaparte was busy organizing the
northern Italian republics, and during the summer held court in the magniﬁcent
Mombello palace on Lake Como.⁸ His political inﬂuence grew further when in
early September he intervened against a threatened monarchist revolt in Paris.⁹
Much more controversial, however, were the terms of the peace of Campoformio
signed with Austria in October with little consultation with the government
in Paris. But Bonaparte’s most ardent Italian supporters were outraged when the
former Venetian Republic passed to Austria in return for the cession of the
southern Netherlands and Lombardy to France.¹⁰
After Campoformio, Bonaparte returned to Paris with plans to invade
England. But these were postponed in favour of a project that he had outlined to
Talleyrand, the French foreign minister, after occupying the Adriatic port of
Ancona in October 1796: ‘Let us now concentrate all our activities on the navy
and destroy England. That done, Europe is at our feet.’¹¹ That was the object of
the large French expeditionary force that sailed from Toulon in the spring of 1798,
whose undeclared destination was Egypt. The conquest of the Middle East would
place France in control of the Mediterranean and at the same time cut Britain’s
communications with its new colonial empire in India.
As it passed to the west of Sicily en route for Malta, Napoleon’s ﬂeet caused
great concern in Naples. After Austria’s defeat and Britain’s decision to withdraw
its navy from the Mediterranean, the Kingdom was without allies and in a high
state of alarm following the French occupation of Rome in February 1798, the
arrest of the Pope, and the declaration of a Republic.¹²
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
73
⁷ Woolf (1991), 162–67; Grab (2003), 154–9.
⁸ The Cisalpine Republic was proclaimed in Milan on 29 June 1797, and the creation of the
Ligurian Republic brought the port of Genoa under French control. On 14 May Bonaparte ordered
that Venice be occupied and plundered, bringing to an end the ancient Republic of St Mark.
⁹ The coup of 18 Fructidor Year V: 4 September 1797.
¹⁰ Treaty of Campoformio, 17 October 1797.
¹¹ Hardmann (1908), p. x.
¹² See Cafﬁero (2005); Tulard (1983), 48–9; Zaghi (1986), 32–88: The pretext for the French
invasion was the death of the French General Duphot, who was accidentally killed by the Pope’s

<<<PDFPAGE 83>>>
Paris continued to insist that it had no hostile intent, provided that the
Neapolitan government continued to observe the armistice. But Napoleon’s
Egyptian expedition meanwhile played into the hands of the allies and ensured
that France’s control of the Mediterranean would be short-lived. The French
occupation of Malta had outraged the Russian Tsar, Paul I, and the Knights of the
Order of St John of Jerusalem who ruled the island and were under his protection,
appealed for his assistance. Meanwhile Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt had also
brought the Ottoman sultan into the coalition against France.
Bonparte’s plan was wrecked when on 1 August Rear Admiral Horatio Nelson
destroyed the French ﬂeet in an especially bloody engagement off Aboukir Bay.
For the allies this was an ideal moment to counter-attack in Italy. A large French
force was still stranded in Palestine and the British navy once again controlled the
Mediterranean. St Petersburg and the Sublime Porte were ready, but the problem
was to get the Austrians back into combat. For this, the king of Naples was to be
the bait and in the months that followed Naples came under intense pressure to
launch an offensive against the French forces occupying Rome.
The Neapolitans were already heavily compromised since in direct violation of
the armistice with France Nelson had been permitted to provision his ships at
Messina and Syracuse en route to Egypt. The violation was even more ﬂagrant
when Nelson returned to Naples after the battle of the Nile to repair his badly dam-
aged ships and to recuperate from the serious wound he received during the
engagement. He was feted as a hero by the Neapolitan government, while Sir
William and Emma Hamilton took charge of his convalescence. So began his affair
with Lady Hamilton and the no-less-public cuckolding of Sir William. But Emma
Hamilton was already a close—it was rumoured even an intimate—conﬁdante of
the queen, and Nelson and the Hamiltons now worked in concert with Maria
Carolina and Acton to persuade the king to attack the French in Rome.
On 24 November King Ferdinand set off at the head of an army of more than
50,000 men against the small and scattered French forces in the Papal States. The
attack on Rome was to be coordinated with a naval operation in which Nelson’s
ships would land 10,000 Neapolitan troops in Livorno to cut the lines of the
retreating French armies. Russia and the Ottoman Porte would engage the French
in the Adriatic. To complete the trap, it was hoped that the Austrian emperor
would resume hostilities in northern Italy and retake Mantua.
None of this happened. Unlike Caesar who ‘came, saw and conquered’, King
Ferdinand ‘came, saw and ﬂed’.¹³ The Neapolitan army entered Rome on
29November but disintegrated when General MacDonald’s¹⁴ much smaller
Absolutist Naples
74
police while trying to control a pro-republican demonstration in December 1797. The Directory
ordered Marshal Berthier to occupy Rome and set up a republican government. Pope Pius VI ﬂed to
Tuscany, where he was arrested and taken to France and died a year later in captivity at Valence.
¹³ Simioni (1921), 185.
¹⁴ General Jacques-Etienne Joseph-Alexandre MacDonald (1765–1840).

<<<PDFPAGE 84>>>
forces regrouped and counter-attacked. As well as its equipment, the Neapolitan
army lost nearly 2,000 dead and wounded and another 10,000 prisoners.¹⁵
The headlong ﬂight was led by the king, who paused in Naples only long
enough to collect his family, closest courtiers, the crown jewels, and the cash
deposits of the public banks. On 22 December the royal family and its entourage
embarked on Nelson’s Vanguard and after weathering a terrible gale reached the
safety of Palermo. In the meantime, General Championnet,¹⁶ who had been
despatched from the Po valley with 12,000 men to reinforce MacDonald in Rome,
invaded the Kingdom. After a month of negotiation and confusion, on 21January
1799 a Republic was declared in Naples and on the following day Championnet’s
forces entered the city where they encountered ﬁerce popular resistance.
THE CRISIS OF THE MONARCHY
Defeat in 1798 was in large part a result of the ﬁnancial and political strains
caused by the preparations for war that had begun in 1793, but it had deeper
ﬁnancial and political roots. Acton’s earlier attempts to reorganize the army
and build a navy had placed massive strains on the monarchy’s ﬁnances, while
the government’s increasingly absolutist measures had alienated virtually all its
supporters.
Signs of the impending ﬁnancial crisis came with the suspension of payments
on various arrendamenti. In 1790 the crown raised a feudal donativo from the
barons, and then in 1792 called for a feudal relievo two years before it was due.¹⁷
The Toulon expedition in 1794 made the situation even more desperate and new
taxes were levied on ecclesiastical revenues and the exemptions agreed in the
Concordat of 1741 were withdrawn. More religious houses were suppressed and
their assets sold. A forced loan was imposed on the city of Naples, another on the
barons, while all churches were ordered to surrender their plate to the crown.¹⁸
The banks were authorized to issue uncovered promissory notes, causing their
value to fall by over 80 per cent, at which point the government seized their
deposits and created a new Banca Nazionale directly under its control.¹⁹
These measures struck indiscriminately at the privileged orders and pushed
through the absolutist measures that had been attempted but not implemented
in the previous decade. To make matters worse, the threat of famine returned in
1793, evoking memories of the disaster of 1764. This time there was no question
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
75
¹⁵ The Neapolitan operations were directed by the Austrian general Karl von Leiberich Mack
(1752–1823), who was later court-martialled after surrendering the the imperial army without resist-
ance at Ulm in 1805. Nelson later commented, ‘Let not General Mack be employed; for I knew him
at Naples to be a rascal, a scoundrel, and a coward.’
¹⁶ Jean-Antoine-Etienne Championnet (1761–1800).
¹⁷ Massafra (1969), 637.
¹⁸ 103,000 and 120,000 ducats, respectively; Colletta (Cortese, 1957), i. 305–8. See also Ermice
(2005), 31–4.
¹⁹ Estimated by Colletta to be worth 13 million ducats; Frigione (1941), 48.

<<<PDFPAGE 85>>>
of forcible requisitioning from the provinces because the war had already brought
foreign trade to a standstill and economic conditions in Apulia and Calabria were
disastrous.²⁰ Instead the government authorized the city to incur debts to pur-
chase grain abroad. New loans were raised and for the ﬁrst time the controls on
food prices in the capital were lifted, with the result that bread prices rose to mar-
ket levels. The arrendamenti on grain and other staple foodstuffs were suspended
to prevent prices rising too fast, but new excise duties on wine, building materials,
and luxury goods were introduced in an attempt to maintain the payments owed
to the holders of these arrendamenti.²¹
The government proved unable to prevent food prices from rising in the capital,
the payments to holders of the arrendamenti had been reduced or suspended, and it
had violated one of the most prized privileges of the nobility. Then in the spring of
1794 a major Jacobin conspiracy was discovered. More than four hundred arrests
were made in Naples alone, and all those who had associated with Latouche-
Tréville and his ofﬁcers or who were suspected of supporting the revolution came
under suspicion. The supposed leaders were executed, and others were exiled or
chose to leave the Kingdom.²² The works of Gaetano Filangieri were banned and
the government’s ﬁtful support for Galanti’s statistical inquiries was abruptly sus-
pended: in 1795 he, too, was subject to investigation on suspicion of treason.
InFebruary 1796 Mario Pagano, who had succeeded Filangieri as the leading pro-
ponent of reform, was arrested and held in prison until he was exiled two years later.²³
The police operations in 1794 revealed the existence of at least two Jacobin
clubs in Naples: the Club Romo (Republic Or Death) and the Club Lomo 
(Liberty or Death).²⁴ Among the organizers were the abate Jerocades, an inﬂuential
teacher, and his student, Carlo Lauberg, a priest who taught chemistry at the
Nunziatella Academy. This was especially alarming because Lauberg had acquired
an enthusiastic following amongst the young cadets at the military academy.
Inexile in Paris he would soon become the pivotal ﬁgure in the diaspora of the
Neapolitan ‘patriots’.²⁵
Whatever Maria Carolina’s sympathies with the reform project might once
have been, the execution of her sister Marie Antoinette had transformed the queen
into an even more committed counter-revolutionary. The government’s suspi-
cions now extended beyond the intellectuals and reformers to the propertied
classes as a whole, and in April 1795 in a letter to the marquis di Gallo the queen
told of her outrage at what she believed to be the treachery of the nobility:
the nobility is the most corrupted and evil of all classes because it wants to have a king
whohas no authority, no force, no power and no rights: a mere puppet so that they may be
Absolutist Naples
76
²⁰ Chorley (1965), 38.
²¹ De Rosa (1958), 6.
²² Rao (1992), 63–6; Battaglini (1992), 18.
²³ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), i. 313–17. On Pagano see Venturi (1962), 785–832; Galasso (1984),
69–105.
²⁴ Rao, JMIS (1999, 4/3), 360.
²⁵ Battaglini (1992), 18; Rao (1979), 91; De Lorenzo (2001), 17–37.

<<<PDFPAGE 86>>>
grand. . .they are true vipers. The worst of all classes, the pits. Their young men who study
or become soldiers are equally corrupt. The people can be trusted, but those who work for
the nobles are under their inﬂuence.²⁶
The government had already moved against the freemasons and in 1791 Luigi
de’ Medici²⁷ had reported that the ‘events in France are not unknown’ to
the members of the masonic gatherings in Cosenza and smaller Calabrian towns.
Orders were given for the closure of the masonic lodges, and in 1797 the marchese
Domenico Grimaldi was arrested and imprisoned, along with other members
ofthe Reggio lodge.²⁸ Mario Pagano, the Prince of Colonna, and the Dukes of
Cassano, Canzano, and Cantalupo as well as Luigi de’ Medici were among those
interrogated by a special Police Junta set up by Acton and the queen to investigate
all those suspected of having contacts with freemasons and Jacobins.²⁹
In 1791 the monarchy abruptly dropped its anti-curial policies and began to
repair its relations with the Church. The Cardinal Archbishop of Naples was asked
to assist in setting up popular devotional societies to counter the freemasons and
their ‘libertine’ ideas. The ﬁrst of the popular royalist clubs took the name Arcadia
Reale and was founded days before the discovery of the Jacobin conspiracy in 1794.
Enthusiasm for what another Catholic royalist, Francesco Gusto, was already 
calling ‘a counter-revolutionary crusade’ grew and similar societies were established
elsewhere in the Kingdom, especially in Salerno and the Cilento.³⁰
After 1794 the government had severed its ties with the reformers and was
already mobilizing the most reactionary forces in the Kingdom. But despite the
armistice signed by Bonaparte in June 1796 the army remained fully mobilized,
while an additional armed militia of 10,000 men was also raised in the same
year.³¹ To pay for this, an extraordinary war decima³² on all feudal and allodial
property was demanded in May 1796, which provoked angry protest from the
privileged orders. Churches, religious houses, and private families were all
required to surrender their plate and silver, the bank deposits were again looted,
and coin virtually disappeared in the capital. Total bank deposits had fallen from
an estimated 12,000,000 in 1788 to only 3,500,000 by 1796, and nearly all of
this had been appropriated by the crown.³³
The government’s increasingly despotic actions left it with few supporters,
while the ﬁnancial and military situation continued to deteriorate. It proved
impossible to raise militias in the provinces for lack of funds, and in 1796 as many
as 18,000 soldiers died of fevers in their summer encampments. The Venetian
ambassador reported that there was little enthusiasm for the war because ‘the
country is already exhausted and oppressed by so many previous burdens’.³⁴
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
77
²⁶ Weil (1902), cited in Battaglini (1992), 22.
²⁷ Luigi de’ Medici, Prince of Ottaiano (1760–1830); in 1791 de’ Medici was a government 
minister.
²⁸ Battaglini (1992), 15; Venturi (1962), 429.
²⁹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), i. 348–53.
³⁰ Chiosi (1992), 249.
³¹ Simioni (1921), 172.
³² Equivalent of the ecclesiastical tithe: 10% ad valorem.
³³ Frigione (1941), 52–3.
³⁴ Simioni (1921), 176.

<<<PDFPAGE 87>>>
By 1799 the military mobilization had become almost impossible to sustain, and
the decision to launch an offensive against the French forces in Rome was in part an
attempt to break out of the trap. But it was both unwise and unnecessary. The
Directory’s Ambassador at Naples, General Brune, had repeatedly given reassurance
that the French occupation of Rome was purely punitive and that France had no
designs on the Kingdom.³⁵ Bonaparte had opposed the occupation of Rome, which
he believed had dangerously extended the French lines of communications, and the
French representative in Naples informed Paris that there would be no military
advantages from invading Naples. But in July 1798 the newly arrived French vice-
consul, Joseph Sièyes,³⁶ reported that the French were completely shunned in
Naples, trade with France was at a standstill, and British ships were freely entering
the port of Messina contrary to the terms of the Franco–Neapolitan treaty.³⁷
The king’s hesitations were ﬁnally overcome by Nelson’s victory on the Nile in
August 1798, and he allowed himself to be persuaded that an offensive against the
French forces in Rome could not fail. Yet there were signs that the expedition had
failed before it began. In September a further levy was raised to bring the theoret-
ical strength of the army to 60,000 men. Only 25 ducats were needed to purchase
exemptions, so that the burden fell entirely on the poorest and was ﬁercely resisted
even in the frontier provinces and in the towns of Portici, Barra, and Resina near
the capital provoked open rebellion.³⁸
There were also ominous signs of insubordination in the ofﬁcer corps and hos-
tility between the old nobles and younger ofﬁcers trained at the Nunziatella.
Incapable of imposing discipline and to cover his own incompetence, General
Mack blamed the defeat on his ofﬁcers: ‘one sixth traitors, four sixths cowards,
and only what remain men of honour’. Francesco Pignatelli of Strongoli, the
Bourbon ﬁeld marshal, claimed that the offensive had been sabotaged by
commanders who secretly sympathized with the French.³⁹
THE REPUBLIC
Before abandoning Naples to its fate on 21 December, the king nominated the
deeply unpopular Marshall Pignatelli Strongoli as his Vicar General with full
powers. On 12 January 1799 Pignatelli signed an armistice with the French com-
mander Championnet, whose forces had reached Sparanise. The nearby fortress
of Capua and the city of Naples were surrendered and it was agreed that an indem-
nity of 2,500,000 ducats would be paid to the French.⁴⁰
Absolutist Naples
78
³⁵ AAEP, CC, Naples 38: buste 104, Nivose Year VI (22 January 1798).
³⁶ Joseph Sièyes (1763–99).
³⁷ AAEP, CC, Naples 38: buste 116, 7 Messidore Year VI (25 June 1798).
³⁸ Ibid.; Simioni (1921), 200.
³⁹ Gabriele Manthoné and Oronzio Massa were speciﬁcally accused of deliberately failing to pass
on orders; Simioni (1921), 200–1.
⁴⁰ Rao (1987/1995), 475. General Francesco Pignatelli had served as Vicar General in Calabria in
1783. He was the brother of Prince Pignatelli of Strongoli and two of his nephews (Ferdinando Prince

<<<PDFPAGE 88>>>
Carlo De Nicola, a Neapolitan lawyer whose meticulously maintained diary has
survived, recorded the changing reactions in the city. After the ﬂight of the king the
situation was relatively quiet, even though there was no coin to be found and paper
bills had become almost valueless. But ‘the people, Thank God, are quiet. The
urban militia has now been formed.’⁴¹The situation changed completely, however,
when the armistice and the imminent French occupation became known.
After the ﬂight of the king, the nobles formed a Deputazione del Buongoverno to
organize the defences of the city, raise a civic militia, maintain law and order, and
take charge of provisioning and the day-to-day government of the city. But the
powers of the king’s Vicar General had not been clearly deﬁned, and were now
challenged by the nobles, who claimed that in time of war or emergency they
alone had the constitutional right to govern in the absence of the king.⁴² The
Deputazione therefore appointed two nobles⁴³ to act as ‘leaders of the People’,
whose task was to arm the city’s fortresses (the Castel Nuovo, Castel dell’Ovo,
S.Elmo, and the Carmine) and win the support of the people through distributions
of ‘bread, wine, cheese, acquavite and money’.⁴⁴
Carlo Lauberg and Vincenzio Russo⁴⁵ were among the Neapolitan exiles who
accompanied Championnet on his march to Naples, and they warned him that the
aim of the nobles in the city was to establish ‘an Aristocratic Republic like that of
Venice or Genoa’. Inside the city there was also opposition to the aristocratic Eletti
from those who wanted Championnet to enter the city immediately and declare a
republic. These ‘patriots’ now looked for leadership to the Prince of Moliterno, who
as ‘Commander General of the People’ had built up a strong popular following.⁴⁶
De Nicola described how tensions in the city rose as the noble Eletti and their
opponents began to compete for popular support. On 13 January he noted,
‘There has been some violence because two parties have been formed, one for the
City the other for Pignatelli and both are believed to be armed.’ Serious rioting
began two days later and mobs began attacking those suspected of sympathizing
with the French, the ‘patriots’. De Nicola noted with alarm, ‘The popular revolt
continues and has become more dangerous than I can say. The trouble started
when ﬂyers were distributed before the armistice was signed and was then aggra-
vated by the order that no offence be given the French when they enter the city.’
Against a background of rising popular unrest, the Vicar General ﬂed the city
on 16 January. Moliterno renewed the efforts to maintain order by distributing
money and at the same time setting up gallows in the main piazze to deter looters.
On 18 January De Nicola reported that the city was quieter ‘and everywhere full
of processions of penitents organized by the religious orders. The Gerolomini
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
79
of Strongoli and his brother Mario) were condemned to death for supporting the Republic in 1799,
while two others—Francesco and Vincenzo—became generals in Murat’s army. See Colletta (Cortese,
1957), i. 390 and n. 274.
⁴¹ On De Nicola’s diary see especially De Lorenzo (2001).
⁴² Battaglini (1992), 114–15.
⁴³ Girolamo Pignatelli, Prince of Moliterno (1774–1848), and Lucio Carraciolo, Duke of
Roccoromana (1771–1836).
⁴⁴ Battaglini (1992), 132.
⁴⁵ Vincenzio Russo (1770–99).
⁴⁶ Battaglini (1992), 124.

<<<PDFPAGE 89>>>
fathers walked the streets with bare feet, the Dominicans and Conventuals were all
out in force.’⁴⁷
Moliterno was already negotiating secretly with the ‘patriots’. He then released
the political prisoners from the jails and formed a republican committee, and dur-
ing the night of 19 January the patriots took control of the S. Elmo fortress that
dominated the upper part of the city. When it became known that Moliterno was
negotiating the entry of the French troops, the mobs took to the streets. Amongst
their prime targets were noblemen suspected of being pro-French. Ascanio
Filomarino, Duke della Torre, and Clemente Filomarino were dragged from their
houses and butchered; the palaces of the Duke of Melissano and the Duke of
Solimena and the monastery of S. Gaudioso were burned down; the house of the
marquis di Rosa was attacked.
In an attempt to restore order on 20 January the sacred relics of San Gennaro
were processed and accompanied by huge crowds, but to no effect. On the follow-
ing day De Nicola simply stated, ‘Today has been a day of the worst horrors that
Icannot begin to describe.’⁴⁸
His despair was echoed by another diarist, the abbate Pietrabondo Drusco:
the anarchy had reached a state of fury and was directed entirely against the Jacobins and to
plunder. The plebs are by nature insane and when they found themselves in power it is easy
to imagine what licence followed. The lives and property of every citizen were in danger,
and in search of safety many voluntarily took refuge in the St Elmo Castle.⁴⁹
From there on 21 January the Republic was declared and on the following day
Championnet’s troops entered Naples through the Porta Capuana.⁵⁰The violence
now reached its peak, as De Nicola recorded with alarm:
The events that have taken place in the lower part of the city will not be believed and can-
not be described. Enough to say that we have seen the heart of our city become the theatre
for a violent war.
The people continued to pursue suspected Jacobins ‘as the supporters of the
French are now known’ and they fought ﬁerce battles with the French troops
around the Porta Capuana and the Largo delle Pigne.⁵¹
Even royalists were taken by surprise at the popular resistance to the French
and loyalty to the monarchy. Relaying information from the Court in Palermo,
SirWilliam Hamilton reported to Lord Grenville in London on 17 January that
‘the Neapolitan Nobility has shown no loyalty to the Bourbons, but the People
appear to be violently anti-French and loyal to their Sovereign’.⁵² The following
day he reported on Pignatelli’s ‘shameful armistice’ and stated that the ‘Lazzaroni
and populace of the city are in ferment and the Nobility are trying to calm them’.
Absolutist Naples
80
⁴⁷ Carlo De Nicola, Diario Napoletano: 6, 13, 16, 17, 18, 25, 27, 30, 31 January 1799.
⁴⁸ De Nicola, 21 January, 39.
⁴⁹ Drusco (1884), 23 (19 January).
⁵⁰ Ibid. 157; Rao (1987/1995), 475.
⁵¹ De Nicola, 22 January, 42.
⁵² PRO London FO 70, vol. 12, Hamilton to Lord Grenville, 17 January 1799.

<<<PDFPAGE 90>>>
But he also expressed privately the view that the monarchy had little support and
that there is ‘universal complaint of a total want of Justice and good governance
throughout the Kingdom of Naples and that the provinces are in the most
extreme want and misery, so that few, should it come to trial, would think such a
government worth ﬁghting for’.⁵³ When news reached Palermo of the popular
revolt against Pignatelli, Hamilton warned that ‘it will in all probability end in the
Nobility calling the French army into Naples to quell the populace and save
their persons’.⁵⁴ But by 29 January, when news had still not reached Palermo
of the entry of the French army into Naples a week earlier, Hamilton had
changed his tune: ‘The Neapolitan people have no love for the French, but if by
their means the price of bread and oil could be lowered, they would become their
friends immediately for a true Patriotic Spirit does not, I believe, exist in Italy.’⁵⁵
THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT
Within twenty-four hours of entering the city, Championnet restored order
withthe help of the patriots and San Gennaro whose blood, with some encourage-
ment from French artillery, obligingly performed a miraculous but unscheduled 
liquefaction. On 23 January Championnet formally established a provisional
republican government pending approval from Paris that never arrived. Carlo
Laubert, the most prominent of the exiles, was nominated to preside over a gov-
ernment composed of ﬁfteen members who formed six separate Committees.⁵⁶
The provisional government was dominated by the exiles, who were referred to
simply as Jacobins.⁵⁷ In Paris their contacts with Filippo Buonarroti had made
Lauberg and Giuseppe Abbonamonti suspect as ‘anarchists’ after the coup of
Thermidor, which was why they like many other Italian exiles left Paris to join the
French armies in Italy in 1796. In Italy, some of the exiles were involved in a
Jacobin-organized revolt at Oneglia in Piedmont in 1796. Giuseppe Abbonamonti,
Matteo Galdi, Saverio Massa, and Francesco Saverio Salﬁtook part in the
Cisapline Republic, but were expelled from Milan by the French authorities.
Mario Pagano and Vincenzio Russo both took part in setting up the Roman
Republic in February 1798.⁵⁸
The difﬁculties that faced the provisional government were immense. The cap-
ital had to be paciﬁed and measures to procure food supplies, restore the currency,
and revive the economy were needed. The provisional government had also to
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
81
⁵³ Ibid.
⁵⁴ Ibid.
⁵⁵ Ibid., 29 January.
⁵⁶ Executive, Legislative, Internal Affairs, War, Finance, Police and Justice.
⁵⁷ ‘Jacobin’ was initially the term used by the royalists to denounce all the supporters of the
Republic, but as divisions among the republicans grew, the moderates were referred to as ‘patriots’
and the radicals as ‘Jacobins’.
⁵⁸ Filippo Michele Buonarroti (1761–1837) was heavily implicated in the pro-Jacobin plot in
Paris in May 1796 known as the ‘Conspiracy of the Equals’. See Rao (1992), 477.

<<<PDFPAGE 91>>>
assert its authority in the provinces, which had been thrown into confusion by the
collapse of the monarchy. Throughout the frontier regions, the retreat of the royal
army, the French invasion, and the king’s appeal for a mass rising against the
invaders had created a situation of utter disorder that threatened to escalate into
civil war as towns and villages declared for and against the new government.
Tomake matters worse the provisional government also had to raise 2,500,000
ducats from the capital to pay the indemnity to the Directory and a further
15,000,000 from the provinces.⁵⁹
Championnet was inﬂexible in insisting that the indemnity be paid within two
months, but his close adviser and fellow Jacobin Marc-Antoine Jullien⁶⁰ warned
that the French demands would make it impossible to establish stable govern-
ment. The only way to prevent the currency collapsing, he argued, would be to sell
the lands of the crown and the Church.⁶¹
Another French ofﬁcial warned of the seriousness of the situation:
In Naples we arrived as Liberators. We freed the wealthy classes who are also the patriots.
We have powerful support from the ex-Nobles, the wealthy and the enlightened classes.
They have welcomed us with great enthusiasm, but it is easy to discourage them. We have
demanded from them 60 million francs. This is an exorbitant sum. Everyone knows that
Ferdinand has bankrupted Naples and robbed them even of their plate. He took huge sums
of money with him to Sicily and there is hardly any silver coin to be found. There is no way
that this town can pay 60 millions, and even to raise part of this we shall lose very many of
our supporters . . . . The populace of Naples is ignorant, highly superstitious, fanatically
loyal to Ferdinand and hostile to the French. Had they the opportunity and the means they
would not let one escape. They are terrifying because there are so many of them. If the
English come and bombard the city and make allies of the lazzaroni we will be in the great-
est of danger . . . . The French seem to have forgotten that we are in the land of the Sicilian
Vespers.⁶²
Carlo De Nicola also noted fearfully that ‘the French troops are not sufﬁciently
numerous to hold Naples in check and put down the insurrections in the king-
dom’. On 3 February he reported that a militia of 1,100 men was to be estab-
lished: ‘all the good patriots are at its head with various ranks, and the rest have
been enrolled from the former nobles and gentry’.⁶³ But the militia consisted of
only six hundred men. All were armed and mounted, but property qualiﬁcations
were set deliberately high to keep out the urban poor.⁶⁴
The militia patrolled the city in the company of French troops, searching for
arms and for those who had led the popular rising. These patrols were also respons-
ible for setting up Trees of Liberty, the symbol of the new order, in the principal
Absolutist Naples
82
⁵⁹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 20–1.
⁶⁰ Marc-Antoine Jullien (1775–1848).
⁶¹ Battaglini (1997), 240.
⁶² AAEP, CP, Naples, 126: M. David, ‘Notes sur la révolution de Naples’, 10 February 1799 (22
Piovoso an VII).
⁶³ De Nicola, 3 February 1799, i. 61.
⁶⁴ Pietro Colletta later commented, ‘few citizens were entered on the lists of the armed militia,
but many were entered on the tax registers’. Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 22.

<<<PDFPAGE 92>>>
piazze. The clergy was mobilized to celebrate the Republic with Te Deums and
processions through the city.
De Nicola continued to emphasize the hostility felt by every class of citizen to
the new government, however, which he attributed in part to the ‘impertinence’
of the French ofﬁcers and the tensions caused by the billeting of French troops.
But a wider cause of grievances came from continuing ‘taxes, the shortages of food
and the almost complete absence of coin’:
The price of food is getting higher every day, while everyone who owns any property is tor-
mented by new taxes which hurt the rest of the population, and in any case fewer and fewer
have anything to spend. Those who have no jobs or who formerly worked for the Court no
longer have clients, so that the artisans are also without work: this causes the discontent to
grow and those who formerly supported the change in government have begun to change
their tune.⁶⁵
This did not deter the government from attempting to reorganize the Kingdom
along republican lines. On 25 January the former Corpo della Città was abolished
and replaced by a municipality consisting of twenty-ﬁve members, most of whom
were selected from the old nobility. The provinces were reorganized and renamed
by a French ofﬁcial on Championnet’s staff, Jean Bassal. Measures were taken to
restore the currency and prevent the collapse of public ﬁnances: on 29 January
theNational Debt was guaranteed, but all payments from the banks, whose last
deposits had been looted by the ﬂeeing monarchy, were suspended and they were
placed under armed guard.⁶⁶
THE DIRECTORY AND THE REPUBLIC
The political affairs of the Neapolitan Republic were from the start closely con-
trolled by the government of the Directory in Paris, which on 27 February ordered
that Championnet be arrested and recalled to France for disobeying orders.
Hewas succeeded by his rival General MacDonald, who remained in command
until ordered to abandon the city early in May. In February Guillaume Charles
Faypoult was appointed political commissar, but a month later was replaced by
André Joseph Abrial.
It is unclear whether the Directory’s decision to arrest Championnet was 
motivated by his undisguised Jacobin sympathies or by the well-documented
reports that his generals were out of control and looting at will. The complaints
that led to his arrest came, however, from the Civil Commissar, Guillaume
Faypoult.⁶⁷ The two had been at loggerheads long before they reached Naples,
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
83
⁶⁵ De Nicola, 1 March 1799, 87.
⁶⁶ Frigione (1941), 54.
⁶⁷ Guillaume Faypoult (1752–1817): Neapolitan historians generally see Faypoult as the villain,
but see Godechot (1937), ii. 242–62.

<<<PDFPAGE 93>>>
and Faypoult had speciﬁcally denounced Championnet for failing to consult him
before signing the armistice and negotiating with the patriots:
He has taken control of every branch of government. He will not even speak to me. This
strange behaviour will almost certainly result in anarchy.⁶⁸
In protest at Championnet’s arrest, the provisional government sent a delegation
headed by the Prince of Moliterno to Paris to convey its dismay both at
Championnet’s dismissal and at the ‘more austere and severe’ bearing of his suc-
cessor. But this was also a pretext to protest against the obstacles that the policies of
the French government and its agents placed in the path of the new Republic.
Despite its best efforts, they argued, the provisional government’s attempts to
raise the money demanded by France had ‘yielded only small sums, and even these
are soaked in bitter and justiﬁed tears’. There was little more that could be done
given the rapidly deteriorating situation in the provinces. The Neapolitan patriots
‘deserve the most special consideration from la Grande Nation’ and in the present
circumstances ‘the Government is paralysed in all its operations by the lack of
ﬁnancial means’, which made it impossible to supply men or money to la Grande
Nation. The government’s great mission was ‘to set the people on the right path’,
but to do this the people had ﬁrst to be ‘caressed and raised up from their abject
state rather than oppressed’ and the delegation implored the Directory to waive or
defer its demands for payment of the indemnity.⁶⁹
Moliterno’s delegation was not even received in Paris since the Directory
refused to acknowledge its legitimacy on the grounds that Championnet had had
no authority to establish the provisional government in Naples. On 25 Ventoso
(12 March) the provisional government tried another tack and instructed the 
delegation’s secretary, Francesco Antonio Ciaja, to point out that the survival of
the Republic was the only way to stop the British and Russians from attacking the
south of France.⁷⁰ That appeal did not get a hearing either.
MACDONALD AND FAYPOULT
Two weeks after his arrival, Faypoult reported that only 1,000,000 ducats had
been paid towards the maintenance of the French army since January. He there-
fore demanded the immediate surrender of all the royal palaces, the estates of
the Medici and Farnese families, the lands and goods of the Order of Malta and
the Neapolitan chivalric orders, and the lands of all emigrés, which France now
claimed by right of conquest. He agreed, however, that cash indemnity could be
paid in the form of jewels and plate.⁷¹
Absolutist Naples
84
⁶⁸ AAEP, CP, Naples, 126, 9 Piovoso an VII (28 January 1799); BSPN Documenti Originali, 
ms xxxvi a 8, p. 61.
⁶⁹ BSPN Documenti Originali, ms xxxvi, pp. 8–33.
⁷⁰ Ibid. 41.
⁷¹ BSPN Documenti Originali, ms xxvi a 8, p. 43; Helfert (1885), 144.

<<<PDFPAGE 94>>>
In a separate report, MacDonald complained about the ineffectiveness of the
provisional government: ‘the most difﬁcult thing here is to make the government
effective. It is ﬂawed in every respect, makes every manner of promises and delib-
erates endlessly but never does anything. There is never any agreement. . . it has no
power, no credibility and no energy.’⁷²
The Legislative Committee set up by Championnet included Mario Pagano,
Domenico Forges Davanzati, Giuseppe Albanesi, and Giuseppe Luogoteta,
and was responsible for drawing up a constitution and drafting laws to abolish
feudalism and reform the judicial system. But it had little freedom of choice,
sincethe only constitution acceptable to Paris was the French constitution of
YearIII.⁷³
On the question of the common lands (the demani) the situation was clearer
because in 1792 the Bourbon government had already decreed they should be
divided amongst those with use-rights. But like the Bourbon government, the
provisional government lacked the means to implement such a project. Feudalism,
not unexpectedly, proved even more controversial and the Legislative Committee
immediately split into radical and moderate tendencies when Mario Pagano 
proposed that the abolition of entails should be made retroactive.⁷⁴
As news reached Naples of opposition to the Republic in the provinces,
demands that the provisional government move quickly to abolish feudalism
became more insistent. On 16 February the Monitore Napolitano appealed for ‘the
law that will be most useful for the provinces—the abolition of feudalism’.⁷⁵This,
it argued, was the surest way to end the revolts against the Republic. Two days later
the provisional government debated two proposals, one drafted by Giuseppe
Albanese and Domenico Forges Davanzati, the other a more moderate alternative
drawn up by Mario Pagano. The sticking point was the issue of compensation and
when discussion resumed on 25 February the split between radicals and moder-
ates widened. On 7 March two more proposals were again discussed,⁷⁶ and a com-
promise draft was ﬁnally submitted to MacDonald on 26 March. Two days later
the provisional government urged MacDonald to enact the law quickly:
The delay of your reply regarding approval of the law relating to the abolition of feudal
ﬁefs, which will dissipate the insurrections as the sun melts the clouds and bring the people
to actively support the revolution, has caused us the greatest concern.⁷⁷
MacDonald’s approval was postponed, however, until the arrival of the new
Commissar, André Joseph Abrial.
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
85
⁷² A de G (Vincennes), B3*** 321, MacDonald to Directory, 6 Ventoso (24 February 1799) and
1 Germile (21 March 1799).
⁷³ Rao (1995), 32–47; Galasso (1984), 69–105.
⁷⁴ Ibid.
⁷⁵ Monitore Napoletano (5), 28 Piovoso Year VII/I (16 February 1799).
⁷⁶ One by Giuseppe Cestari and supported by Carlo Laubert and Cesare Paribelli, the other by
Pagano: see Galasso (1984), 69–105.
⁷⁷ Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 154: Doc 672. 28 March 1799.

<<<PDFPAGE 95>>>
COMMISSAR ABRIAL
Abrial reached Naples on 28 March (8 Germinal) and at once reported that there
was total confusion. He blamed Championnet, who had ignored the ruling that in
all ‘occupied territories’ a Political Commissar should be in charge of public
administration. But since it was too late to undo Championnet’s errors without
alienating France’s strongest supporters, Abrial decided to create a new ﬁve-
member Executive Commission and reorganize the larger twenty-ﬁve-member
Legislative Commission. The new Executive Commission would have no powers
to issue orders without the approval of the Political Commissar, making it ‘a mere
façade’, but a useful one since ‘the People see only Neapolitans and in the division
of powers they see the image of a true Republic’.⁷⁸
Abrial admitted that he knew no one in Naples, so he turned to the patriots and
the ‘popular clubs’: ‘I asked them to recommend individuals of real capability.
Endless lists of names poured into my ofﬁce.’ After careful scrutiny, the
Commissar had created ‘a really excellent government’, two-thirds of whom had
originally been appointed by Championnet.⁷⁹
The Commissar now urged the provisional government to get rid of
Championnet’s unworkable administration, create an effective National Guard,
and rescue the currency. He also took up the proposals for the abolition of feudal-
ism that were still awaiting MacDonald’s approval.
On 9 April Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel published in the Monitore Napletano
a long commentary on the debates.⁸⁰ All were agreed, she claimed, that all forms
of personal service should be abolished and the disagreements were over the com-
pensation that should be paid for the abolition of ‘diritti reali’—land and levies
owned in feudal title. The radicals claimed that since feudalism was the result of
theft perpetrated against the nation by the different invaders of the past—‘The
Barbarians from the North’—now that the people (‘the Nation’) was free, it had
the right to reclaim what was its own.
For the moderates, Mario Pagano argued for a more pragmatic solution and
proposed excluding ‘dues such as tithes and the terratico that arise from contracts
made between noble landowners and peasant farmers’. He also argued that the
feudatories should be compensated for the loss of feudal demani: ‘To abolish
everything, or to leave everything to the barons would be equally unjust.’⁸¹
Absolutist Naples
86
⁷⁸ Battaglini (1992), 252.
⁷⁹ The new Legislative Commission included Mario Pagano, Domenico Cirillo, and Giuseppe
Maria Galanti, while Giuseppe Abamonti, Ercole d’Agnese, Giuseppe Albanesi, Ignazio Ciaja, and
Melchiorre Delﬁco (who never reached Naples) formed the Executive. Abrial also established four
ministries: the Interior (De Filippis), Justice and Police (Pigliceli), War (Manthoné), and Finance
(Macedonio). Helfert (1882), 146; Rao (1995), 51–2.
⁸⁰ Monitore Napoletano, Decadì 20 Germile Year VII/I1 (Tuesday 9 April)—this issue reported the
debate held earlier on 7 March. In the meantime Lauberg and Cestari—the main supporters of the
radical proposal—had left Naples. See Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 133.
⁸¹ Ibid.; Venturi (1962), 829; Galasso (1964), 69–105; Rao (1995), 37–47.

<<<PDFPAGE 96>>>
Fonseca Pimentel clearly sympathized with the radicals, but Giuseppe Maria
Galanti was among those to urge caution:
It has not escaped my notice that with the abolition of feudalism and feudal tithes there are
those who wish an agrarian law like that of the republics of ancient times. But history con-
stantly warns us . . . of the grave discord to which this would give rise.
Such a law, Galanti warned, would found the new Republic ‘ on civil discord, on
injustice and bad faith’.⁸²
Carlo De Nicola had also noted in his diary at the end of March that the
Legislative Committee was divided into three factions. The radicals were led by
Carlo Lauberg and included Domenico Bisceglia, Prosdocimo Rotondo, and
Cesare Paribelli. They were opposed by the ‘good republicans’, amongst whom
De Nicola included Mario Pagano, Ignazio Ciaja, and Domenico Forges
Davanzati. Only the latter had the support of the Civil Guard, he claimed, and
alone understood that it was essential to ﬁnd ways of collaborating with the
Directory. Finally there was a third group made up of aristocrats, and included
Luigi de’ Medici, the ex-Prince of Colobritano, and the ex-Prince Santangelo.
De Nicola believed that their aim was to take advantage of the divisions between
the radicals and the patriots in the ‘hope of gaining control of affairs and forming
an aristocratic government; but they are being closely watched’.⁸³
Commissar Abrial was sympathetic to the radicals, but also believed that the
provisional government had become dangerously unpopular and in early April he
expelled Lauberg. Unlike MacDonald, however, Abrial preferred the more radical
law on feudalism; the draft ﬁnally approved on 26 April still contained many com-
promises.⁸⁴ Nevertheless, the Commissar insisted that it conformed fully to ‘the
principles of French law’. The law was ﬁnally published on 27 April and abolished
all feudal dues, ‘leaving the ex-Barons with only those lands that were not subject
to the right of devolution to the crown’.⁸⁵
Carlo De Nicola was sceptical: ‘We still await the other law that will abolish the
tax on wheat and wine and reduce the tithe by one third. The Government’s idea is
to make the concessions in order to let the provinces understand the advantages of
the Revolution and so bring the revolts to an end. But they should have done this
sooner.’ ⁸⁶
THE PROVINCES
By April, however, the end had already begun. The Russian–Austrian offensive in
the north forced the Directory to withdraw its armies from Italy, while in the
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
87
⁸² Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 138–46 (Doc 669).
⁸³ Battaglini (1992), 238; De Nicola, 14 April 1799, 135.
⁸⁴ Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 132–3.
⁸⁵ Ibid.
⁸⁶ De Nicola, 27 April 1799, 150.

<<<PDFPAGE 97>>>
South the royalists had already taken control of the provinces and on 2 April
Nelson’s warships had begun to blockade the Bay of Naples.
In the provinces the ﬁrst republics had been declared well before the Republic
was established in Naples. The French armies that invaded the Kingdom in
December 1798 had ﬁrst occupied the frontier fortress of Civitella del Tronto, and
on 11 December the Abruzzo town of Teramo was the ﬁrst to set up a republican
administration. Its lead was followed by L’Aquila, which on 16 December became
the administrative centre of the new republican provincial administration.⁸⁷
Other towns in Abruzzo declared for the monarchy, however, making commun-
ication with the capital difﬁcult, problems exacerbated by the bands of royalist
irregulars that were harassing the French invaders in the frontier regions of the
Abruzzi and the Terra di Lavoro. Although the French held the major strongholds
of Gaeta, Capua, and Caserta, their communications were still exposed to attacks
by bands of royalist irregulars. One of the largest bands was based near the town of
Itri and was led by Michele Pezza, better known as Fra Diavolo. Another royalist
force led by Mammone was based nearby at Sora, from where his men could raid
the French positions and their troops as they moved along the highway that was
the principal line of communication between Naples and Rome. In Molise,
republican administrations were set up in Isernia, Venafro, Sulmona, and
Campobasso, but here too many smaller towns joined the royalists.⁸⁸
In the provinces not directly exposed to the French invasions, most of the prin-
cipal towns opted initially for the Republic. In Apulia, the Terra di Bari was a
republican stronghold by the end of January. The neighbouring towns of Trani,
Bari, Altamura, Ruvo, Corato, Grumo, Gravina, Canosa, and Spinazzola all ini-
tially declared for the Republic, as did Ascoli Satriano and Foggia in Capitanata.
Potenza, the provincial capital of Basilicata (Principato Ultra), had also declared
for the Republic, but many smaller towns remained loyal to the king.⁸⁹
The ﬁrst spate of anti-republican insurrections began in late January and
February. An important catalyst was the arrival of agents from the provisional gov-
ernment in Naples known as ‘democratisers’ who were sent to reorganize provin-
cial administration and to raise taxes. The immediate response in many towns that
had originally declared for the Republic was to raise the royal insignia and revolt.
The revolt spread and early in February Championnet dispatched General
Duhesme with 6,000 men to impose the republican order in Capitanata and Apulia.
Making Foggia his base, Duhesme joined forces with Ettore Carafa, Count of
Ruvo,⁹⁰ who had raised an army from his feudal estates in Apulia, and had laid siege
to the royalist town of Andria. When it fell an estimated 4,000 inhabitants were
massacred. Next Ruvo and Duhesme took and sacked the town of Sansevero.⁹¹
Absolutist Naples
88
⁸⁷ Republican administrations were set up in the neighbouring towns of Pescara (24 December),
Chieti (25 December), and Lanciano (1 January 1799).
⁸⁸ Battaglini (1992), 172–4.
⁸⁹ Rao (1995), 97–100.
⁹⁰ Ettore Caraffa, Count of Ruvo (1763–99): a leading feudal landowner, he was involved in the
Jacobin conspiracy in Naples in 1794 and had ﬂed to France. See Nicolini (1939), 100–20.
⁹¹ 23 February: Helfert (1885), 139, 155; Rao (1995), 99.

<<<PDFPAGE 98>>>
The Calabrian provinces were the furthest removed from the French invasions,
but also the closest to the Court and its British allies in Sicily. Even here, however,
support for the Republic was initially solid. Following the Cassa Sacra, hostility to
the former Bourbon government was strong, and in 1798 unrest and lawlessness
had forced the government to abandon attempts to introduce conscription.
In January Cosenza had been the ﬁrst major city in Upper Calabria to declare for
the Republic, and its lead was copied by the other principal towns: Castrovillari,
Paolo, S. Lucido, Amantea, and Rossano. In Lower Calabria, the royal governor,
Antonio Winspeare, ﬂed to join the Court in Sicily, and Reggio also joined the
Republic. But here too many smaller towns remained loyal to theking.⁹²
The supporters of the Republic suffered a severe blow, however, when a
joint Russian and Turkish force captured Corfu on 1 March, which left all the
republican towns along the Adriatic coast dangerously exposed to attack. Then
in April a small royalist force led by Cavalier Antoine Micheroux⁹³ landed near
Brindisi. That was the signal for defections, which spread rapidly and culminated
in the fall of Foggia, the principal republican stronghold in the east, on 23 May.
By then royalist insurrections were sweeping through other provinces that had
initially declared for the Republic. In Basilicata, Matera defected in February and
the republican administration in Potenza was also overthrown. In the Cilento, a
royalist rising at Montesano on 17 February gave the cue for revolts that spread
through the Diano, Policastro, and Lucania valleys.⁹⁴
When Cardinal Ruffo landed in Calabria on 8 February, the initial response to
his appeal for a ‘Holy Crusade’ against the foreign invader and their Neapolitan
sympathizers had been cool. But at the end of February Monteleone surrendered
to Ruffo’s forces, and from there he moved to take Catanzaro and then Cotrone.
With Lower Calabria in the hands of the royalists, the revolts spread to Upper
Calabria. On 15 March Cosenza fell and was sacked. Still moving cautiously,
Ruffo advanced northwards, taking and sacking the republican stronghold of
Altamura at the end of April. There he waited for reinforcements before advan-
cing by way of Gravina to Spinazzola, Venosa, and then Melﬁ.
On 2 June Ruffo reached Bovino, where he waited to join forces with
Micheroux. From Bovino, he made contact with the royalist forces led by
Giuseppe Pronio in the Abruzzi, while Micheroux was in communication with
the bands led by Fra Diavolo and Gaetano Mammone that controlled much of the
Terra di Lavoro. On 6 June Micheroux reported that the whole of the Terra di
Bari, Capitanata, Molise, and the Terra di Lavoro had been recaptured for the king
with the assistance of ‘four Russian frigates, 320 soldiers, 120 sailors and 20 pieces
of Russian artillery’.⁹⁵ On June 8 Ruffo entered Avellino and ﬁve days later was at
the gates of Naples.
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
89
⁹² Cingari (1957), 117, 139–40.
⁹³ Antoine Micheroux (1776–1805) was a Belgian Walloon ofﬁcer serving in the Bourbon army
who also performed diplomatic functions.
⁹⁴ Cassese (1970), 97.
⁹⁵ Maresca (1894), 287–92; on Ruffo see Cingari (1957), 191–210, 242; Helfert (1885), 182.

<<<PDFPAGE 99>>>
THE END OF THE REPUBLIC
On 30 March MacDonald announced that the royalist insurrections in the
Adriatic provinces had been crushed and that communications had ﬁnally been
reopened with Apulia. A week later he received news that General Giuseppe
Schipani, who had been sent to put down insurrections in the Cilento and
Calabria, had been defeated by royalist irregulars led by Sciarpa.⁹⁶
Naples itself was now under direct threat of attack. On 2 April, coinciding with
the Austro-Russian offensive in northern Italy a squadron of British warships
commanded by Commander Troubridge⁹⁷ had occupied the islands of Procida,
Ventotenne, Ponza, and Capri and placed the capital under blockade. On 11 April
MacDonald reported to Paris that the French position in Naples was no longer
tenable. His communications were overextended and his force of 16,000 men was
every day reduced by disease and attacks by brigands. He could no longer hold the
lines from Naples and Salerno to Rome and Ancona, as well as those from Naples
to Apulia and the Terra di Bari.
Every day there are fresh attacks and acts of brigandage, the patriots are weak, we lack local
resources, there are no supplies or forage, no silver, no corn so that we can only obtain what
we need by force of arms. Since the English squadron has taken up position off the coast
the revolts have increased, the people become more insolent and many patriots are already
leaving in fear because of the feebleness of our forces ... and because of the number of plac-
ards and incendiary proclamations that seem to presage a general rising.⁹⁸
The general ordered that grain from Apulia be sent to Rome to supply his
retreating army, even at the risk of letting Naples starve. On 22 April the French
army moved from Naples to the safety of Caserta, leaving behind a small but well-
supplied garrison in the S. Elmo fortress. MacDonald told the provisional govern-
ment that the National Guard should be mobilized. Three days later four of his
battalions were recalled to join the Armée de l’Italie in the North and MacDonald
ordered his ofﬁcers to abandon Apulia and the Abruzzi. On 1 May he informed
Paris that he was leaving Naples ‘to its own resources’ on the following day, although
his withdrawal was delayed until the 7th.⁹⁹ Abrial stayed until 28 May, and before
leaving he told the provisional government that it was now completely free to act
as it wished.¹⁰⁰
Despite the desperate military situation, on 11 May Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel
hailed the French withdrawal as the moment when the Republic was ﬁnally free.
Patriots, citizens of the Neapolitan Nation, You are now ﬁnally in control of your own des-
tiny and have the opportunity that other reborn Nations have vainly desired: this is the
moment to show your wisdom, to unite your minds, your strength and will so that you
Absolutist Naples
90
⁹⁶ Cassese (1970), 110.
⁹⁷ Thomas Troubidge (1750–1810).
⁹⁸ A de G (Vincennes), B***321, 22 Germinal (11 April 1799).
⁹⁹ A de G (Vincennes), B3*** 321, 2–18 Flóreal Year VII (21 April 1799).
¹⁰⁰ AAEP: Corr Politique (Naples), 126.

<<<PDFPAGE 100>>>
may soon proclaim your Constitution. From this moment you have the opportunity to
show the august French Nation and the whole of Europe whether or not you deserve to be
a free People.¹⁰¹
There was a renewed spate of legislative activity and renewed efforts to win
over the popolaccio. But the government’s politics took a more repressive turn after
the discovery on 5 April of a royalist conspiracy. Two brothers named Baccher
were discovered to be in communication with the Court in Palermo, but many
aristocrats were also involved in the conspiracy, among them Andrea Sanfelice, the
Duke of Calabritto, the Duke of Salandra and Sanfelice’s wife, Luisa de Molino.
It was the latter who revealed the conspiracy, making her one of the principal
targets of the later Royal Terror.
On 12 April a Committee of Public Safety (the Court of Censorship) was set up
to impose more severe police measures. A Patriotic Society modelled on the
Jacobin Club in Paris was also established with power to scrutinize and interrogate
all public ofﬁcials. Carlo De Nicola reported that this was ‘composed of many
zealous citizens who meet regularly to examine objectively all those who are
deemed unreliable and seek to have them arrested’.¹⁰² Subsequently other
Patriotic Societies were set up and similarly demanded the right to select magis-
trates and public ofﬁcials. De Nicola was outraged when the Sala Patriotica of
Santa Lucia was addressed by ‘a commoner from the Mercato district’. But he
added, ‘I think that these people must all have been bribed, because the people are
all Royalists and I know that they are just waiting for the King’s army to arrive and
meanwhile are making cartridges.’¹⁰³
Tensions between the Jacobins and the patriots were increasing and on 26 May
De Nicola reported that Mario Pagano and Domenico Cirillo had accused the
leaders of the government of imitating Robespierre’s Terror.¹⁰⁴ In an attempt to
restore conﬁdence and alleviate popular discontent on 9 May the government
abolished consumption taxes on wheat and seized the property of the monarchy
to guarantee the bank deposits.¹⁰⁵ On 14 May (25 Fiorile) a radical reform of the
judiciary and legal system was announced and on 29 May the lands and goods of
those who had accompanied the Court to Palermo were sequestered.¹⁰⁶
THE FINAL ACT
By now the enemies of the Republic were nearly at the gates and as they drew closer
to the capital in the ﬁrst week of June the outlying hamlets declared for the king.
Asliver of hope came, however, with the news that the French ﬂeet had slipped the
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
91
¹⁰¹ Monitore Napoletano, Duodì 22 Fiorile Year VII (Saturday 11 May 1799).
¹⁰² De Nicola, 18 April 1799; Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 28; Rao (1995), 53.
¹⁰³ De Nicola, 29 May, 193; see also Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1974), 115–18 and Rao (1999), 364.
¹⁰⁴ De Nicola, 26 May 1799; see also Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1974), 153.
¹⁰⁵ De Nicola, 9 May 1799, 167–8; Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 69–71.
¹⁰⁶ Rao (1999), 491.

<<<PDFPAGE 101>>>
British blockade off Brest and that Admiral Bruix was headed for the Mediterranean
with the aim of joining forces with the Spanish ﬂeet and engaging the British ﬂeet.
The same news forced Nelson to change course. On 13 June he had set sail
from Palermo to command the action in the Bay of Naples, but Lord Keith now
ordered him to take up station off the west of Sicily to await the expected Franco-
Spanish attack. Nelson ordered Captain Troubridge to join him with the ships
blockading Naples, leaving only some smaller gunboats under the command of
Captain Edward James Foote to keep up the bombardment of the republican
strongholds along the coast.
The respite was only temporary, however, and even before the return of the main
British battle squadron Foote’s small ﬂotilla had sufﬁcient ﬁre-power to enable the
royalists to take Castellamare. On 13 June, the feast day of St Anthony of Padua,
Ruffo’s forces ﬁnally reached the city gates.¹⁰⁷ A ﬁerce ﬁght for control of the Ponte
della Maddelena lasted all day, but in the early evening Ruffo’s Calabrian irregulars
and a detachment of Micheroux’s Turks forced an entry through the Porta Capuana.
The republican defenders of the Carmine fort were overcome and put to the sword,
and by midnight the royalists were in control of the lower part of the city.¹⁰⁸
The patriots, however, still held the principal forts: the Castel Nuovo, the
Castel dell’Ovo, and the S. Elmo castle. The latter not only commanded the
higher ground but was garrisoned by the small and well-equipped French force
commanded by Colonel Joseph Méjean. For as long as they held these positions
the patriots were impregnable and had most of the city under their cannon.
Ruffo and Micheroux could see no way to dislodge the patriots from the forts,
and were increasingly concerned by the anarchy that had overwhelmed the lower
parts of the city where the Sanfedisti and the people were indiscriminately slaugh-
tering suspected supporters of the Republic. With the full agreement of the com-
manders of the Russian and Turkish contingents and of Captain Foote, Ruffo and
Micheroux therefore began negotiating an armistice with the patriots. The terms
permitted the republicans and the French garrison to leave the forts under guaran-
tee of safe conduct and made available transports to take them and their families
and possessions safely to France.
The armistice was agreed, and for the English signed by Captain Foote on
behalf of Troubridge who was still with Nelson. The next act in the tragedy of the
Neapolitan Republic began on 24 June when Nelson’s ﬂagship, the Foudroyant,
weighed anchor in the Bay of Naples. Nelson immediately declared the armistice
null and void: for two days Ruffo and Micheroux protested and resisted, but
Nelson held ﬁrm. Then on the 26 June he appeared to change his mind: that after-
noon the republicans came voluntarily out of the forts and were shown full mil-
itary honours by the Russian and Turkish commanders, whose troops escorted
Absolutist Naples
92
¹⁰⁷ The royalists had little faith in the traditional protector of Naples, St Gennaro, the miraculous
liquefaction of whose blood had taken place despite the presence of the French invaders in the city.
¹⁰⁸ Helfert (1885), 143–4.

<<<PDFPAGE 102>>>
them through the mob to embark on the polacche that were to carry them and
their families to France.
On 27 June Ruffo celebrated Nelson’s agreement to the terms of the capitula-
tion with a Te Deum sung in the cathedral, but on the following day—and for rea-
sons that remain disputed to this day—Nelson ordered his ships to change
position and bring the transports under their guns.¹⁰⁹ British marines made their
way through the transports, arresting those suspected of being leading republicans
who were then made prisoners once more in the forts they had voluntarily aban-
doned on the previous day.
On 29 June, Nelson authorized the court martial of Francesco Caracciolo,¹¹⁰
a former Neapolitan naval ofﬁcer who had taken command of the Republic’s
small navy and had been captured while trying to escape. The court martial was
conducted by a panel of Neapolitan ofﬁcers but on board the Foudroyant.
Carracciolo was convicted of treason against his sovereign and without awaiting
superior orders Nelson insisted that the sentence be carried out immediately. On
the same afternoon Carracciolo was hanged from the yard-arm of the Neapolitan
warship the Minerva.
The ﬁnal and longest act of the tragedy followed when King Ferdinand left
Palermo for Naples in July. When the royal ﬂotilla reached the Bay of Naples the
king did not disembark, but while the city remained menaced by the guns of the
British and Neapolitan warships the Royal Terror began. A special Junta was con-
stituted with the power to arrest, interrogate, and judge those guilty of unlawful
rebellion against their sovereign ruler. The hangings and beheadings that began in
July would keep the public executioners and the scaffold in the Piazza del
Carmine fully employed until September of the following year.¹¹¹
1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic
93
¹⁰⁹ Whether Nelson deliberately tricked the republicans into leaving the forts, which were
impregnable, or whether he acted after receiving explicit orders from the Court in Palermo has been
debated ever since. See Guttridge (1903), pp. lix–cviii and the attached documents, and Giglioli
(1903), 306–21. The debates are reviewed in Davis, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 393–400.
¹¹⁰ Francesco Caracciolo (1752–99) was a rear admiral in the Bourbon navy who on 8 April took
command of the republican navy: Cortese (1965), 157–74.
¹¹¹ See Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 579–614: 3,818 individuals were tried, of whom
216 were executed, 492 exiled, and the remainder given lesser sentences; 107 royalists were convicted
and executed during the Republic.

<<<PDFPAGE 103>>>
5
Jacobins and Patriots
HOW THE REPUBLIC BECAME A LEGEND
In the closing years of the nineteenth century, the events of 1799 were brilliantly
transformed into one of the great founding myths of the new Italian nation. The
year 1799 came to represent a watershed, the turning point that separated Italy’s
two destinies. In the North it was during the republican experiments between
1796 and 1799 that the ﬁrst explicit proposals were made for the creation of an
independent and uniﬁed Italian state, which many hailed as the beginning of the
process that would lead to Italy’s political uniﬁcation half a century later.
The South, however, was already different. Here it was not the republicans but
the counter-revolutionary Sanfedists that triumphed. The North had taken the
path of progress and modernity, the South the path of backwardness.
The distinctions were not made by contemporaries, and indeed they ran dir-
ectly counter to one of the most striking features of this period when in exile
Italians from all over the peninsula were for the ﬁrst time discovering a sense of
common destiny, if not identity.¹ Nor is this surprising, since in most essential
respects the history and the fate of the Republic in Naples were very similar to
those of the other Italian republics. Nor was the South ever the only site of popular
counter-revolutions that were no less intense or widespread in the North after the
French invasions in 1796.
Like its sister republics in northern and central Italy, the Neapolitan Republic
was founded under the intrusive guardianship of French armies. Its actions were
subordinated to the politics of the Directory, whose principal object was extor-
tion, plunder, and pillage. Like the other Italian republics, the Neapolitan
Republic depended on the support of a small minority drawn from a cross section
of the propertied and educated classes, and like them it failed to win the support
of the masses. It fell because the Directory was forced to withdraw its troops from
Italy in April 1799, leaving all the Italian republics defenceless against the allied
counter-offensive. In its objectives, in its support, and in the reasons for its col-
lapse the Neapolitan Republic was essentially similar to the other Italian republics.
¹ The literature on the political signiﬁcance of the republic triennium is vast. In English see Woolf
(1979), 157–74, and Lyttelton (1993), 63–105; for excellent overviews of the Italian literature see
Rao (2002), 63–116 and Cafﬁero (2005), 19–58.

<<<PDFPAGE 104>>>
What did differ in the South was, however, the scale of the crisis of the monarchy
that these events revealed.
It was only later that the emphasis shifted to what had made the Neapolitan
Republic different, and certainly nothing contributed more decisively to trans-
forming the Neapolitan Republic of 1799 into myth than its tragic end.² Even at the
time this quickly assumed symbolic signiﬁcance, not least because the Neapolitan
Republic marked both the furthest geographical reach of the republican experi-
ment that had started seven years earlier in France and the beginning of its end.³
The fanaticism of the counter-revolution, and above all the cold-blooded sav-
agery of the Royal Terror in Naples whose victims included many from the most
noble families in the Kingdom, inspired genuine revulsion. In the ﬁerce political
debates in Paris that preceded the coup of 18th Brumaire (November 1799) later
in the same year, Championnet cited the fate of the Neapolitan Jacobins to
denounce the Directory for betraying the Italian republics and to warn what could
be expected in France should the ci-devant monarchy and its supporters ever 
triumph.⁴ Hearing the tales of the Neapolitan exiles who had made their way to
Paris, Maria Helen Williams was also persuaded that the royalist vengeance in
Naples matched only Robespierre’s Terror in scale and inhumanity.⁵
The comparison was questionable, but the revulsion was real. Even in
Britain, the behaviour of the king of Naples and Nelson’s apparent complicity
were the subject of an outraged denunciation when in the House of Commons in
February 1800 Charles James Fox accused the hero of the Battle of the Nile of
knowingly participating in an atrocity. A decade later in his Life of Nelson Robert
Southey described what had happened in the Bay of Naples in 1799 as:
A deplorable transaction, a stain on the memory of Nelson and upon the honour of
England. To palliate it would be vain: to justify it would be wicked. There is no alternative
for one who will not make himself a participant in guilt but to record the shameful story
with sorrow and shame.⁶
What subsequently ﬁxed the image of the Republic of 1799 most lastingly,
however, was the Historical Essay Concerning the Late Revolution in Naples by
Vincenzo Cuoco, published in Milan in 1801. Cuoco had been a member of the
provisional republican government in Naples in 1799 and had been arrested in
May but escaped and made his way to France, where like many other Italian exiles
he found himself far from welcome in the sombre political climate after
Brumaire.⁷ After Bonaparte’s victory over the Austrians at Marengo in June 1800,
Cuoco like many of his fellow countrymen moved to Milan where he wrote his
account of the Neapolitan Republic.
Cuoco acknowledged that the Republic’s fate had been sealed by the with-
drawal of MacDonald’s armies in May, but he also insisted that the republican
Jacobins and Patriots
95
² Rao (1999, 2002).
³ Vovelle (1999), 43–59.
⁴ Rao (1992), 165–82.
⁵ Rao, in Di Lorenzo (ed.) (2003), 708–39.
⁶ Southey (1813), i. 170.
⁷ Di Francesco (1997), 29–38; Rao (1992), 393–515.

<<<PDFPAGE 105>>>
government had failed to develop coherent policies or strategies. He was especially
strident in his criticism of the leaders of the Republic, most of whom he claimed
were self-serving aristocrats. They had been eager to pass laws from which they
alone would beneﬁt, such as abolishing the entails that in aristocratic families cut
off cadet sons from the line of inheritance. But when it came to the broader ques-
tion of abolishing feudalism, these aristocratic republicans had proved reluctant.
Cuoco’s other target was the exiles, whom he accused of blindly supporting the
French authorities and of imposing reforms based uncritically on French models
ill-suited to the political and cultural realities of Naples.
As a result, the provisional government had failed to win over the provinces,
raise a republican army, abolish feudalism until too late, or create democratic
institutions that might have found roots in Neapolitan society. For that reason,
Cuoco argued, the republican experiment in Naples had been a ‘passive revolu-
tion’, inspired by foreign models and guided by leaders who lacked understanding
of local conditions and failed to establish any following among the masses who
remained loyal to the monarchy and their own popular religious practice.⁸
Cuoco’s account was subsequently taken as persuasive evidence that the paths
of the two Italies had critically diverged during the years of the Jacobin Republics.
Writing a century after the event, Benedetto Croce saw in Cuoco’s ‘passive revolu-
tion’ conﬁrmation of his own conviction that there had been no possibility of
achieving progress in the pre-Uniﬁcation South. Centuries of foreign oppression,
exploitation, and misrule had corrupted and destroyed southern society. This
made the ignorant masses facile tools in the hands of a reactionary ruling
class,abetted by a corrupt and superstitious clergy. Against the forces of reaction
the small group of idealists who had tried to lead the Republic was helpless. For
Croce, what Vincenzo Cuoco had described as the ‘passive revolution’ was the
inevitable consequence of the moral and material backwardness that in 1799
made the fanatical Sanfedist counter-revolution the true voice of the South.⁹
In Croce’s master-narrative of the Risorgimento, the heroic sacriﬁce of the
Neapolitan republicans—the martyrs of 1799—became one of the most potent
founding myths of the new state. Not surprisingly, therefore, in his Marxist counter-
narrative Antonio Gramsci placed even greater but equally retrospective importance
on Cuoco’s ‘passive revolution’.¹⁰ Today, Cuoco’s essay is known primarily through
these two inﬂuential, but equally retrospective and ideological commentaries. In
both cases Cuoco’s arguments were drilled to serve the needs of two very different
ideological constructs, both of which identiﬁed 1799 as the moment when modern
Italy’s two souls parted ways. But more recent studies suggest that in the process
Cuoco’s arguments have been twisted almost beyond recognition.
Cuoco’s Essay was written and published at a moment of great political uncer-
tainty when the Italian exiles and survivors of the earlier republics like Cuoco had
Absolutist Naples
96
⁸ Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1980), 90.
⁹ Croce (1924/1967), 204–12.
¹⁰ See Introduction, pp. 4–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 106>>>
returned to Milan but were more likely to be treated as suspect ‘anarchists’ than as
friends by the French. Nonetheless, many of the exiles continued to hope that
Napoleon would support the earlier republican project, among them Francesco
Lomonaco, whose Report to Citizen Carnot was published in August 1800.
Lomonaco’s brief tract was written in the form of an open letter to the French
foreign minister, and it appealed to France to support the creation of an independ-
ent Italian republic. Its author had also participated in the Republic in Naples in
1799, and it coupled a proud defence of the Neapolitan Jacobins with a searing
attack on the Directory and the French commander in Naples, Joseph Méjean,
whose decision to surrender the impregnable S. Elmo fortress had sent the patriots
to certain death.¹¹ Lomonaco gave a detailed description of the horrors of the
Royal Terror and the counter-revolution in Naples, but clearly with the intent of
persuading France’s new government that the only way to guarantee the security
and political stability of the Italian peninsula was to create an independent and
uniﬁed Italian Republic.¹²
When Vincenzo Cuoco’s Essay appeared a year later, the political climate in
Milan had become even more threatening. A conspiracy involving a number of
Neapolitans had been discovered in the summer of 1801, many exiles had been
arrested, the masonic lodges suspected of providing refuge for ‘anarchists’ and ‘ter-
rorists’ had been closed down, and the fate of the former Cisalpine Republic was
still uncertain.¹³
In these circumstances, Cuoco needed to use great caution. He, too, was a
prominent Jacobin and like Lomonaco believed that Italy’s political development
could not take place without France’s support. But he also believed that France
must be made to understand that the Italian Republic could be built only by
Italians and, like Lomonaco, Cuoco held that the policies of the Directory had
been the main reason the republican experiment in Italy had failed. But in the pre-
sent circumstances any direct accusations against France would have been both
dangerous and counter-productive, which may explain why Cuoco chose to
blame the leaders of the Neapolitan Republic for errors that had clearly been the
responsibility of Championnet, MacDonald, Faypoult, Abrial, and Paris.¹⁴
It was France that had forced the Republic to accept the conservative French
constitution of Year III, France that had made ﬁnancial stability impossible,
France that had imposed an unworkable reorganization of provincial administra-
tion, and France that had refused to allow the Republic to raise its own army. The
greatest political error of all, Cuoco claimed, had been the failure to devise an
effective policy toward the provinces. ‘Their ﬁrst error was to fear the capital
Jacobins and Patriots
97
¹¹ Francesco Lomonaco, Rapporto al Cittadino Carnot (ed. De Francesco, 1999), 224–76.
Lomonaco (1772–1810) was a young democrat from Basilicata who had taken part in the Republic
in Naples where he published a translation of Mably’s Rights and Duties of the Citizen.
¹² De Francesco (1999), 254; Rao (1992), 429–40.
¹³ De Francesco (1999), 60–1.
¹⁴ De Francesco (1997), 1–21; for an alternative view see Tessitore (1985), 329–69, and Villani,
Introduction to Cuoco, Saggio Storico sulla rivoluzione napoletana del 1799 (1980), pp. xvii–xlix.

<<<PDFPAGE 107>>>
too much and the second was not to fear the provinces enough.’¹⁵ Yet the new
administrative system in Naples had been imposed, as Cuoco well knew, by
Championnet’s assistant, Jean Bassal, two days after the founding of the Republic.
In April, Abrial had not hesitated to describe Bassal’s project, which had thrown
all the existing administrative hierarchies into confusion, as an unworkable disas-
ter. By then, of course, it was too late.
The Directory’s insistence that Naples pay a huge indemnity had wrecked the
chances of rescuing the government from its desperate ﬁnancial state. Marc-
Antoine Jullien had argued in January that the immediate sale of beni nazionali
was the only way to avert catastrophe. But after Jullien’s arrest, Faypoult had
claimed all the crown and public lands as France’s legitimate war booty.
The Directory’s ﬁscal demands had also been the reason for the fatal decision
to send ‘democratizers’ to the provinces, the disastrous consequences were 
compounded by the imposition of republican rituals that ‘wounded everything
that the people held most sacred, their gods, their customs and even the very
names of their towns’.¹⁶
Like Lomonaco, Cuoco had two aims. First to persuade his fellow Italians of
the need to unite, and second to persuade the French of the advantages that a uni-
ﬁed Italian Republic would bring them. The great lesson of 1799 was that the
Italian republics could not stand alone, but nor could they unite without the sup-
port of the Grande Nation. The overriding need, however, was for unity between
the Italian republics, and hence for unity amongst Italians. It was this that led
Cuoco in his Essay to focus on the abyss that had been revealed between the elites
and the masses in the South.
As Giovanni Gentile noted long ago, this reveals above all Cuoco’s debt to the
ideas of another great Neapolitan thinker, Giambattista Vico. Like Vico, Cuoco
was convinced that no political revolution could succeed unless it was linked to a
broader process of social but above all cultural regeneration. As a public ofﬁcial in
the South later during the Napoleonic period, like many other former Jacobins,
Cuoco would have the opportunity to put those ideas into practice in urging the
case for educational reforms. But his emphasis on the abyss that separated
theelites from the masses in the South in 1799 was designed to illustrate a prob-
lem that existed not only throughout Italy but indeed most of Europe.¹⁷
Vincenzo Cuoco’s Essay is a remarkable analysis of the complex interactions
between politics and culture in a moment of revolutionary upheaval. But for this
the South was essentially an example, albeit one that Cuoco could describe from
direct personal experience. His purpose was to expose the obstacles facing repub-
licans throughout Europe and Italy, which in the South had taken forms speciﬁc
but not unique. How, why, and whether the South was different were questions
his Essay did not seek to address.
Absolutist Naples
98
¹⁵ Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1980), 141–5.
¹⁶ Ibid. 143.
¹⁷ See Gentile (1909), 3–83. See also Dainotto (2001).

<<<PDFPAGE 108>>>
THE REPUBLICAN MOMENT IN NAPLES
Writing about the popular movement in the French Revolution, Richard Cobb
once commented that the reasons for its failure were obvious, but overlooked the
much more interesting question of why France had a popular movement in the
ﬁrstplace. In Italy, there was no popular movement comparable to that of Paris but
Cobb’s comment can equally well be applied to the signiﬁcant minority who under
conditions of great risk and danger supported the Italian republican projects.¹⁸
Everywhere in Italy the supporters of the republics were small minorities who
never succeed in developing a popular following. Circumstances rarely allowed
their projects to be translated into reality, but nonetheless the republics did
offer the ﬁrst brief moment of freedom of speech in modern Italy and one that
would not be repeated until the revolutions of the nineteenth century.¹⁹ It was
during this brief period that it became possible to see how deeply the cultural
andpolitical developments of the previous decade both within and outside Italy
had taken root. This also explains why not only the projects but also the political
strategies employed by the Italian republicans were similar from one end of the
peninsula to the other.
An example of this was the ways in which the republican elites understood and
tried to overcome an isolation that was as much cultural as political.²⁰ In Naples,
the provisional government and its numerous committees were the principal
forum for political debates, but these were also conducted in a variety of public
places and in the numerous newspapers, journals, and broadsheets launched
after the founding of the Republic.²¹ These publications were also indicative of
the strength of a new print culture that had taken root in the last decades of the
century. Like many other Italian states, Naples had developed an important pub-
lishing industry and book trade in the eighteenth century, and despite censorship
books circulated with ease and in great numbers among the elites.²²
Of the many journals and broadsheets that came into being after the declara-
tion of the Republic, the one closest to the government was the Monitore
Napolitano, which ﬁrst appeared on 2 February 1799—‘Saturday 14 Piovoso Year
VII of Liberty, Year I of the Neapolitan Republic One & Indivisible’—with the
stirring declaration:
Finally we are free, and for us too the day has come when we too can ﬁnally pronounce the
sacred words Liberty and Equality and announce ourselves to the Mother Republic as 
worthy sons, and to the free Peoples of Italy and Europe as their worthy brothers....²³
Jacobins and Patriots
99
¹⁸ Cobb (1970), p. xiv.
¹⁹ Censorship in Napoleonic Italy was pervasive and more effective than under the ancien régime:
see Davis in Goldstein (ed.) (2000), 85–7.
²⁰ For Rome see Cafﬁero (2004), 3–140.
²¹ The most important source is a remarkable collection of documents published and edited by
Mario Battaglini and Augusto Placanica: Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1).
²² See Rao (ed.) (1998), and Luise (2001).
²³ Monitore Napolitano (1), 2 February 1799.

<<<PDFPAGE 109>>>
A government announcement stated that the Monitore would ‘give account of
all the operations of the Government’. It was edited by Eleonora Fonseca di
Pimentel²⁴ and supported by the government although also privately funded. 
It ran to thirty-ﬁve issues, the last appearing on 8 June, ﬁve days before the fall of
the Republic.²⁵ Other journals included the Veditore Repubblicano, Il Vero
Repubblicano, Il Giornale Estemporaneo, Il Corriere di Napoli e di Sicilia,²⁶ which
all offered a variety of commentaries on the government and its deliberations. But
the fullest accounts of the provisional government and in particular the debates
onthe abolition of feudalism were published in the Monitore.
The press offered unique opportunities for exchanging ideas and debating polit-
ical projects, but the supporters of the Republic well knew that print was not a
medium that enabled them to reach the masses. From the early days of the Republic
numerous attempts were made to reach the people and in February the ﬁrst Halls
of Public Education were opened, where patriotic lectures were given.²⁷
Popular republican ‘catechisms’ were also seen as an important means of 
educating the people, and the Interior Minister, Gianfrancesco Conforti, insisted
on the great inﬂuence of the theatre: ‘the theatres constitute a form of public edu-
cation of the greatest importance not only for the young but also for adults who
have been the subject of stultifying effects of long lasting despotism. . . . Here
instruction can be presented to the citizen in the guise of entertainment.’ But he
also held that censorship was necessary: ‘since the theatre can as easily portray vice
as virtue ...it should be the subject of rigorous scrutiny by the public authorities
who must ensure that the people are not moved by sentiments other than patri-
otism, virtue and sound morality.’²⁸ The government also expressed concern
thatfreedom of speech should not be a licence for sedition and warned against the
dangers of seditious meetings and forbade the formation of private societies and
associations.²⁹
Republican ritual was seen as an even more important means of communica-
tion that was deliberately grafted onto existing civil, religious, and royal rituals.
The key symbol of the new regime was the Liberty Trees set up in the major
squares and public sites in both the capital and the provincial towns. The clergy
and civil authorities participated in these rituals, just as they had in those of the
ancien régimes, singing Te Deums to consecrate the new regime and to celebrate
major public events.
The provisional government was well aware of the hardship facing the majority
of citizens at a time when commerce was at a standstill and the political crisis had
thrown thousands of public employees out of work. Much energy was devoted
Absolutist Naples
100
²⁴ Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel (1752–99) had moved from Rome to Naples. In 1794 she had
been arrested as a suspected Jacobin and again in November 1798. She was among the political pris-
oners released in January 1799 and edited the Monitore Napolitano; she was hanged on 20 August
1799.
²⁵ Quarterly subscription cost 6 carlini. See Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 83.
²⁶ Battaglini (1988).
²⁷ Rao (1999), 358–64.
²⁸ Croce (1947), 275.
²⁹ Rao (1999), 367.

<<<PDFPAGE 110>>>
to public charity and welfare, and the physician Domenico Cirillo proposed 
establishing a system ‘of Republican charity to help the great number of people
who because of the change in government have been thrown into destitution’.³⁰
The government had scant means, however, to redress the growing hardships
that faced the population of the capital. When the French army departed in April,
Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel and the Calabrian ex-monk Francesco Saverio Salﬁ
appealed for more energetic action to win over the people, especially the use of
dialect, street theatre, puppet shows, and ballads to take the message of Liberty
and Equality to the masses.³¹ But by then the city was without food or currency,
was under blockade by Nelson’s warships, and was threatened by Cardinal Ruffo’s
rapidly advancing Sanfedist army.
Popular religious sensibilities played an important part in the fall of the
Republic, but its supporters had been aware of this danger from the very start,
Championnet having been warned by Marc-Antoine Jullien as they marched
towards Naples in December 1798 that it was essential to avoid giving offence.³²
That was one reason, of course, for the repeated homage paid to the cult of San
Gennaro. Championnet attended an unscheduled performance of the miracle of
the liquefaction of the saint’s blood the day he entered the city, and MacDonald
attended the scheduled miracle in May. The report that appeared the following
day in the Monitore reﬂected the unease of the Republic’s secular supporters, but
also an acknowledgement of the ritual’s political importance:
Even San Gennaro has become a Jacobin! So let the ﬁrst Voice of the People be heard! Can
any Neapolitan not be what San Gennaro is? Long Live the REPUBLIC.³³
As in the other Italian republics, these gestures to popular folklore were sup-
ported by more measures indicating that strong religious convictions were as
much a component of Italian republicanism as anti-clericalism.³⁴ In Naples,
efforts were made from the outset to win the support of the clergy and in February
Championnet appointed Gianfrancesco Conforti to direct the Ministry of the
Interior. Formerly a leading ﬁgure in the Bourbon government’s earlier anti-curial
campaign, Conforti was widely respected among the anti-curial clergy and he now
worked closely with the pro-republican Cardinal Archbishop of Naples, Giuseppe
Maria Capece Zurlo.³⁵ They made a number of innovations designed speciﬁcally
to make the Republic more popular, including abolition of the deeply resented
fees charged by the clergy for granting marriage dispensations and measures to
shorten the time needed to train and consecrate new priests in order to recruit
clerics sympathetic to the Republic.³⁶
Jacobins and Patriots
101
³⁰ De Nicola, 10 April, 133.
³¹ Salﬁ(1821).
³² Imbruglia, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 295–324.
³³ Monitore Napoletano. Decadì 20 Fiorile Year VII/1 (Thursday 9 May 1799).
³⁴ On the Roman Republic see Cafﬁero (2005), 99–140.
³⁵ Stella, DBI, xviii. 462–4; Parente, in Scaramella (ed.) (2000), 45–106.
³⁶ See Imbruglia, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 295–324; Lomonaco, in ibid. 168–96.

<<<PDFPAGE 111>>>
In the end, it was not that the republicans did not try to appeal to popular 
religious sensibilities, but rather that those sensibilities were manipulated more
skilfully by their enemies. Prominent amongst these were those groups that had
previously been most vehement in their opposition to the monarchy’s anti-curial
and anti-papal policies: not only had they been been reconciled with the mon-
archy after 1794 but they had been charged with mobilizing against the threat of
atheist republicanism.³⁷
1799: THE REPUBLICANS
Who were the republicans in 1799? Contemporaries emphasized how many were
nobles. The diarist Carlo De Nicola divided the members of the provisional gov-
ernment into three groups: the patriots (‘the good republicans’), the Jacobins
(‘aspirant despots’), and the ‘aristocrats’.³⁸ This closely reﬂected Vincenzo Cuoco,
who singled out the aristocrats for an especially scathing attack:
The ﬁrst Republicans were all from the most distinguished families in the capital and in
the provinces: many were noblemen, all members of the wealthy gentry and full of learn-
ing, and indeed it was an excess of learning, which far outran their years and experience,
that led them to think that it was easy to do things that in fact proved to be quite impos-
sible because of the conditions in which the popolaccio lived.³⁹
Looking for a more general proﬁle of the supporters of the Republic, Benedetto
Croce cited the chant of the Neapolitans who went to the barricades to prevent
Championnet’s army from entering the city: ‘Chi tenga vino ha da esse Giacobin’
(‘Those who live well are the Jacobins’).⁴⁰
The Republic’s supporters came from the propertied and educated classes, but
they were not a homogeneous group. Taking the exiles as a statistical base, Anna
Maria Rao has shown that ‘the majority of the Neapolitan republicans came from
the families of the professional, land-owning or mercantile middle class, who had
grown up and been educated during the reform decades.’ Slightly more than half
the exiles were younger than thirty, and nearly 70% were under thirty-ﬁve.⁴¹
Attempts to press the sociological distinctions further and to associate the sup-
porters of the Republic with a rising professional and landed bourgeoisie are not
convincing, however. In part this was because the republicans represented a 
‘middle class that had grown up in the shadow of the feudal nobility’ so that the
boundaries between the two remained uncertain and confused.⁴² But most of
the leading royalists came from similar backgrounds, while a great many 
families followed a well-established and universal strategy and split both ways.
Absolutist Naples
102
³⁷ Chiosi (1992), 261–3.
³⁸ De Nicola, 22 March, 107.
³⁹ Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1980), 5–6 (Cuoco’s Preface to the 1806 edn. of the Saggio).
⁴⁰ Croce (1897), 47.
⁴¹ Rao (ed.) (2002), 516.
⁴² Ibid., but see also Petraccone (1989), 329–35.

<<<PDFPAGE 112>>>
The boundaries between the capital and the provinces were also confused, and
the generation that adopted the republican programme most readily was as often
provincial as metropolitan in origin. Vincenzo Cuoco is a good example since his
career was similar to that of many other young professionals from the provinces
who had become involved in the struggles against feudalism and the feudal
landowners before becoming supporters of the Republic.
Born in Civitacamporomano in Molise in 1772, Cuoco had moved to Naples
to study law in 1787. He had powerful connections in the capital, especially
through his uncle Nicola Vivenzio, who was Procurator Fiscal to the Camera della
Sommaria and in 1792 drafted the edict that restored the demani to the local com-
munities.⁴³ Like many other lawyers newly arrived from the provinces, Cuoco
represented his town in litigation against its powerful feudal neighbour, the Duke
of Sant-Andrea. He also served as an assistant to Giuseppe Maria Galanti, but
then found himself in a politically more radical circle of Domenico Cirillo,
Francesco Conforti, Melchiorre Delﬁco, Mario Pagano, and Vicenzio Russo.⁴⁴
Cuoco was not involved in the Jacobin clubs discovered in Naples in 1794, but
many other young men from the provinces were, including Domenico Tatà from
the Molisan town of Casalcalendo. His friend Domenico di Gennaro was the
mayor who headed the campaign against the local feudal landowner, the Duke of
Sangro, and Tatà’s arrest in Naples in 1794 led the authorities to trace a network
of connections to the salon run by the wealthy landowner Francesco Carbone and
his wife in the nearby town of Castalbottaccio. That gave the Duke of Sangro the
opportunity to denounce di Gennaro as a Jacobin, and he was duly arrested in
1795. In 1799, as we have seen, di Gennaro paid with his life.⁴⁵
Not everyone marched to the same step. The Zurlo brothers had been deeply
committed to the anti-feudal movement before 1799, but remained carefully
invisible during the revolution. Giuseppe Maria Galanti was also ﬁrmly opposed
to the Republic and feared that the law abolishing feudalism would provoke a civil
war. Yet others who had been prominent in the earlier reform movement now 
participated actively in the Republic. In Teramo, Melchiorre Delﬁco had been
arrested in December 1798, but was then elected president ﬁrst of the new repub-
lican municipality and then of the Regional Administration of the Lower Abruzzi.
In nearby Chieti, Baron Nolli, a leading landowner who had founded the town’s
Patriotic Society, was also elected president.⁴⁶
The Republic found particularly strong support among the secular clergy,
including more than thirty bishops.⁴⁷ In many cases this was simply a matter of
rendering unto Caesar what was Caesar’s and in his Easter pastoral letter in 1799
the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples, Capece Zurlo,⁴⁸ exhorted the faithful to
Jacobins and Patriots
103
⁴³ De Francesco (1997), 4–5; Corona (1995), 104–20.
⁴⁴ De Francesco (1997), 7.
⁴⁵ Martelli, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 724–43. See also Chapter 3.
⁴⁶ De Lorenzo, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 654–7 and 667–72.
⁴⁷ Miele, in Scaramella (ed.) (2000), 3–41.
⁴⁸ Chiosi, ‘Capece Zurlo’, DBI, xviii. 462–4; Parente, in Scaramella (ed.) (2000), 45–106.

<<<PDFPAGE 113>>>
‘give obedience to the government, not out fear but as a duty of conscience with all
their hearts and sincerity as is owed to the temporal power’.⁴⁹
Clerical support for the Republic also reﬂected the deeper convictions of those
who had formerly been active in the monarchy’s campaign against Rome.
Gianfrancesco Conforti, for example, was strongly committed to the Jansenist-
inspired project for a spiritual reorganization of the Italian churches whose principal
spokesman in Italy had been Scippione de’ Ricci, the Bishop of Pisa and architect of
the religious policies of Grand Duke Peter Leopold in Tuscany.⁵⁰ But when the
Bourbon government mended its quarrels with Rome in 1791, Conforti was ﬁrst
dismissed, then arrested in 1796 before being released and exiled in 1798.⁵¹
The absolutist reaction after 1794 persuaded Conforti that the republican project
offered a means to reform and reconstitute the Church along Jansenist lines. The
views of Andrea Serra, Bishop of Potenza, were similar. He too had played a leading
role in the monarchy’s campaign against Rome and in 1799 was prominent in organ-
izing support for the Republic.⁵² Domenico Forges Davanzati, Bishop of Canosa,
was a member of the provisional government, and Giuseppe Capecelatro, the Cardinal
Archbishop of Taranto, was another prominent supporter. A writer, collector of
antiquities, and a friend of Sir William Hamilton, Capecelatro was also an energetic
reformer who believed ﬁrmly that the clergy should share useful and practical know-
ledge and had reorganized the curriculum of the seminaries in his diocese.⁵³
The Republic also found ardent champions among the lesser clergy, especially
the numerous class of abbés.⁵⁴The abbé Vincenzo Troysi composed a ‘Republican
Mass’, the abbé Michelangelo Cicerone translated the Gospel of St John the
Evangelist into dialect, whereas the abbé Giuseppe Bellini ‘preached the religion
of Liberty and Equality in the piazza Nazionale’.⁵⁵ There were even some regulars
amongst its supporters, including Uombuono dell Boccacche, the former
Franciscan friar who recorded events in the Abruzzo town of Lanciano.
Municipal allegiances were more complex and expediency was often the decisive
factor. For the towns and villages in the frontier provinces that were in the line of
the invading French armies, the only way to avoid destruction was to raise the
Liberty Tree and sport the republican red cockade, although even that did not
spare them having to pay heavy cash indemnities to the French commanders who
then set up republican municipalities.
The military strength of the French was overwhelming and the royalist leader,
Antoine Micheroux, later claimed that the expected arrival of a large French army
was the reason why the leading administrative and commercial cities in Apulia
had opted for the Republic in January and February.⁵⁶ But this does not explain
Absolutist Naples
104
⁴⁹ Helfert (1885), 143–4.
⁵⁰ See Cochrane (1973). On popular resistance to Jansenist policies see also Turi (1969/1999).
⁵¹ Lomonaco, in Rao (ed.) (2002) 189–96.
⁵² Chiosi (1981), 319–41.
⁵³ See entry on Giuseppe Capecelatro (1744–1836) by Chiosi, in DBI, xviii. 448–51.
⁵⁴ In Italian abate: the title of those who had taken religious instruction without being ordained.
⁵⁵ Helfert (1885), 143–4.
⁵⁶ Maresca (1894), 515.

<<<PDFPAGE 114>>>
support for the Republic in Calabria, Molise, Basilicata, and the Salernitano,
provinces that were distant from the invading French armies. These provinces
were all untouched by the invasions, but were nonetheless caught up in the col-
lapse of the royal government after the ﬂight of the king in December.
Local considerations always predominated, but for those with power and inﬂu-
ence at a local level once the Republic had been declared in Naples in January with
the approval of the king’s Vicar General it became the legitimate government. 
As a result, many former royal ofﬁcials and provincial landowners initially rallied
to the Republic, normally with scrupulous attention to proper legal forms, and the
establishment of the new republican municipal authorities was nearly always pre-
ceded by the convocation of the town or village parlamenti, and duly solemnized
by the religious and civil authorities.
In sociological terms the alignments were very untidy. In Apulia, the Republic
was supported by many powerful feudal families, including Ettore Caraffa,
Conte di Ruvo.⁵⁷ In Calabria, the leading feudal families—the Serra Cassano, the
Gerace, the Pignatelli, the Montemiletto, the Canzano, the Auletta, the Marsico,
and the Roccaromana—were also prominently represented amongst supporters of
the Republic in Naples, although almost exclusively by cadets with no expectation
of inheritance.⁵⁸
There were very few clear patterns. In some Calabrian towns the new adminis-
trations were composed of families hostile to the local feudatories, while in others,
like Cosenza, most of the republicans were nobles.The feudal owner of the
Calabrian town of Cirò, Princess Spinelli, supported the Republic in Naples and
ordered her agents in Cirò to support the Republic against the local galantuomini,
who had joined the royalists. Prince Diego Pignatelli, marquis of Vaglio and
Monteleone, supported the Republic in Naples and instructed his agents in
Calabria to follow his lead. The agent of the Prince of Montemiletto was nearly
lynched as a Jacobin near Monteleone in March 1799, as we have seen, when it
became known locally that his master was a supporter of the Republic in Naples.
In Catanzaro, however, the republican government was headed by a former royal
ofﬁcial and was supported by both feudal and non-feudal landowners. The same
was true at Tropea, formerly a royal town where the Republic was supported by
noble and non-noble landowners alike.⁵⁹
Local issues determined local alignments and in his account of the Republic
Vincenzo Cuoco insisted on the importance of local disputes, factional struggles,
and municipal rivalries in shaping alignments for and against the Republic.
Another astute observer, Luigi Blanch, made the same point:
what determined how local factions would take a stand for or against the new order
depended on whether they were friends or enemies of the baron who owned the most land
Jacobins and Patriots
105
⁵⁷ Lucarelli (1934), 44.
⁵⁸ These were the families listed by Maria Carolina when she instructed Ruffo to conﬁscate their
lands: Helfert (1885), 120.
⁵⁹ Cingari (1957), 119, 137, 162, 165.

<<<PDFPAGE 115>>>
in the locality. If the barons supported the Republic in Naples, this gave their enemies in
the provinces the opportunity to declare for the king. Most of the provincial landowners
were enemies of the barons as a result of municipal litigation, but the barons’ staff and ser-
vants and their families were the ones who really exercised power at a local level and made
their living from doing so. They were deeply attached to the order that provided them with
all these beneﬁts and hence ﬁercely hostile to anything that threatened it.⁶⁰
Blanch’s analysis captured the complexity of the interests at stake and the 
reasons the republican experiment easily collapsed into civil war. The monarchy’s
earlier campaign against feudal privileges had seriously undermined the feudal
order, which now faced an even greater danger. At the same time, the enthusiasm
for the Republic in the provinces was also driven by expectations of greater local
autonomy. However, the reorganization of provincial administration threatened
the municipal hierarchies that played a critical role in the ancien régime organiza-
tion of provincial life, while the Republic’s attempts to assert its own authority
also ran directly counter to provincial aspirations to greater freedom. For that 
reason, the Republic became the catalyst for conﬂicts rooted in the crisis and 
collapse of the monarchy.
Absolutist Naples
106
⁶⁰ Blanch (Croce, ed., 1945), i. 44; on Luigi Blanch (1784–1872), see the entry by Cortese in
DBI, x. 771–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 116>>>
¹ See, e.g., Lumbroso (1932); Rodolico (1926); Dante (1980).
² Davis, in Davis and Ginsborg (1991), 1–25.
³ On Spanish Carlism see Blinkhorn (1975).
6
The Counter-revolution
THE MYTHS OF THE SANTAFEDE
The second great myth of 1799 is the Santafede, the fanatical popular counter-
revolution that retrospectively became inseparable from the image of the
Neapolitan Republic. In modern Italian, the term Sanfedist still refers to any form
of reactionary populism, an association that reﬂects how the memory of the
Santafede echoed Genovesi’s fear of the ‘Hottentots that stand at our gates’ and
haunted generations of liberals for years to come.
The Sanfedists had their champions, of course, the ﬁrst being the apologists
of the Bourbon monarchy. They were followed by nationalist historians in the
early twentieth century who reinvented the Sanfedists as precocious patriots, and
since then all manner of militant causes have claimed them as their own.¹ But
although the legend remained strong, the Santafede never recurred. In 1806 the
monarchy tried every means to resuscitate popular royalism, but without success.
During the revolutions of 1820–1 there was no Sanfedist reaction, and although
there were many peasant revolts in 1848 none adopted the throne and altar as its
banner. Similarly, after the collapse of the Kingdom in 1860 popular discontent
and protest in the South stubbornly refused to make royalism its cause and the
feared Sanfedist reaction never materialized.²
The reason the Santafede never became a southern Italian variant of Spanish
Carlism was quite simply that the counter-revolution of 1799 was never quite
what the later myths described.³ During the months that preceded the fall of
theRepublic, Ruffo and the royalist leaders were struggling to discipline and give
direction to highly localized insurrections. It was only in the eyes of the repub-
licans awaiting the onslaught in Naples and from the perspective of posterity
that these coalesced into a single counter-revolution, driven by a fanatical and 
single-minded desire to restore the monarchy and the Holy Faith.
A second legend would also have it that the South was the principal theatre of
popular counter-revolution in Italy. After the ﬁrst French invasions in 1796, 
however, popular insurrections took place throughout Italy: in Liguria (1797),

<<<PDFPAGE 117>>>
inthe Valtellina (1798), and throughout central Italy after the occupation of Rome
in February 1798. Following the Russo-Austrian offensive in the spring of 1799,
Italy could rightly claim to be the new Vendée, and popular insurrections in sup-
port of the legitimist rulers and the true faith occurred in Piedmont, Lombardy,
the Veneto, the central duchies and Tuscany, Umbria, the Marche, and Lazio.
Many of these risings had strong devotional and even messianic overtones. In
Lombardy, a peasant named Viora Branda dreamed that he had been summoned
by Christ to punish the inﬁdel invaders. He and his followers called themselves
the Massa Cristiana and joined the Austrians to drive the French and their sym-
pathizers out of Piedmont. Peasants in Tuscany rallied to the banners of the Virgin
Mary. To the cry of Viva Maria! they threw themselves on the retreating French
armies, hunted down and killed suspected ‘Jacobins’ who fell into their hands, and
laid waste to the Jewish ghettos in Livorno and Siena.⁴
What took place in the South bore similarities to these movements, but there
were also striking differences, not least the lack of religious motivation that
Cardinal Ruffo repeatedly lamented. The extent to which the counter-revolution
was ‘popular’ also merits closer attention and the Sanfedists were by no means
recruited only from the poorest. Most important of all, the term Santafede did not
describe a spontaneous phenomenon, but was a name chosen deliberately by
Ruffo in an attempt to impose some appearance of unity and purpose on insurrec-
tions that took many different forms: some were counter-revolutions, others were
more institutionalized, while others looked more like civil war.
ORGANIZED RESISTANCE: THE FRONTIER PROVINCES
Calabria did not become involved until later, however. The ﬁrst royalist insurrec-
tions were in the northern frontier provinces of the Terra di Lavoro, the Abruzzi,
and Molise that Rodolico later called the Italian Vendée. These were the provinces
that bore the full weight of the invading French armies, and here popular 
resistance was essentially institutionalized.
In all the frontier towns there were standing militias, known as masse. In times
of peace they were responsible for maintaining order, but in times of war they
acted as reserves to assist the regular army to defend the Kingdom’s frontiers.
The landowners in each town were required to provide mounts and muskets
forthe miliziotti, who were recruited from the wealthier peasants, although in
times of emergency, such as the autumn of 1798, the net was thrown wider. The
miliziotti were paid 3 carlini a day and the money was raised through taxes on local
communities. The masse were commanded by local landowners, who delegated
the task to professional soldiers or others who acted as capo-massa.⁵
Absolutist Naples
108
⁴ See Capra (1978), 364–70; on Piedmont and Lombardy, Ruggiero (1979), 69–70; for Umbria,
Tsoukas (1988); on Tuscany, Tognarini (ed.) (1985) and Turi (1969/1999).
⁵ Simoni (1921), 175.

<<<PDFPAGE 118>>>
After the defeat of the royal army in November 1798, the masse in the frontier
provinces formed the Kingdom’s ﬁrst line of defence. They were mobilized
whenthe king ordered a levée en masse before leaving for Sicily. As news reached
the Abruzzo town of Lanciano, the pro-republican former Franciscan monk,
Uombuono delle Boccache, recorded that ‘the enthusiasm of the people to take up
arms was incredible, inspired by the appeal of their king, by the appeals of the
royal and baronial ofﬁcers, by the regular and secular clergy, and many of the latter
by exaggerating the threatened dangers awakened in the hearts of the more cour-
ageous the desire to become leaders of the masse and the people or even generals of
a province, to the point that they showed no shame in calling themselves a sover-
eign people and the People of God.’⁶
In the neighbouring town of Teramo the royalist priest Angelo de Jacobis told
a different tale, however. When the city parlamento had been summoned in
September, the news of a general levy was greeted with dismay: ‘this threatened
every family with ruin, and especially those of the peasants, working men and
those who were heads of households’.⁷ A second appeal was made in January but
when few responded the Preside of Chieti tried to make up numbers by recruiting
prisoners from the jails who immediately rebelled and ﬂed.⁸
Even before the royal offensive began in November 1798 the French occupa-
tion of Rome earlier in the year had provoked insurrections to the north of the
Kingdom’s frontiers. When the king issued the appeal for a levée en masse in the
frontier provinces the situation quickly became very confused. The Court in
Palermo tried to maintain contact with the capi-masse, and in December, for
example, the leader of one of the largest bands of royalist irregulars in the Abruzzi,
Giuseppe Pronio, was given 200 muskets by the Bourbon General de Gambs, who
before ﬂeeing to join the king in Sicily put him under the orders of the royalist
Baron Luigi de Riseis.⁹ As the French forces advanced, communications with the
capi-masse became increasingly difﬁcult and by January the masse were operating
autonomously and supplied themselves by raiding towns and villages that had 
surrendered to the French and joined the Republic.
The capi-masse had no common career proﬁle. Some had previous military
experience, others had served as guards for the administration of local feudatories.
Most came from families of wealthy peasants, artisans, or craftsmen, a few from
the poorest sections of rural society. But the most successful already had powerful
networks of kinsmen and clients. Pronio, for example, had been a priest before
becoming an armed retainer in the service of the Duke of Vasto and had many 
followers in his native town of Introdacqua.¹⁰ Gaetano Mammone, one of two
brothers from Sora who became feared capi-masse, was by contrast a miller whose
signature was to drink the blood from the decapitated heads of his victims.
The Counter-revolution
109
⁶ Uombuono delle Boccache, ‘Saggio storico-critico della città di Lanciano’, in Coppa-Zuccari
(ed.) (1927), i. 30.
⁷ Angelo de Jacobis, ‘Cronaca degli Avveniment in Teramo 1796–1823’, in ibid. iii.
⁸ Della Boccache, in ibid. i. 47.
⁹ Maresca (1893–4), 283.
¹⁰ Helfert (1885), 137.

<<<PDFPAGE 119>>>
Among the most notorious of the capi-masse was Michele Pezza of Itri in the
Terra di Lavoro, better known by his nom de guerre, Fra Diavolo. The son of an
olive oil dealer and a small landowner in Itri, Pezza had been sentenced to death for
two murders in 1796. The sentence was commuted to service in the Royal Fusiliers,
but Pezza took to the hills rather than perform military service. When French
troops occupied Itri in 1798, they killed Pezza’s father, and Michele joined forces
with bands from neighbouring towns to take up the royalist cause. In February
1799 he was leading some 600 men who harried the French lines of communica-
tion to the north of Naples.¹¹ He maintained close contacts with the Court in
Palermo, attended a war council to plan the ﬁnal attack on Naples held in April on
board HMS Culloden off the coast near Gaeta, and was given a royal commission.¹²
MUNICIPAL RIVALRIES
As French forces penetrated more deeply into these provinces, what had begun as
institutionalized resistance became more disorganized. Communications broke
down and the actions of the bands and the troops pursuing them took the form of
reprisals and counter-reprisals from which the rural communities had no means
ofescape.
The cycles of violence intensiﬁed as conﬂicts within communities and between
neighbouring communities grew. The contrasting accounts chronicled by Angelo
de Jacobis in Teramo and Uombuomo delle Boccache in Lanciano reveal how
internal conﬂicts were inseparable from rivalries between neighbouring towns and
over municipal hierarchies.
As a French army advanced on Teramo in December 1798, a section of the
wealthier classes decided to allow the troops to enter the town unopposed, and
inreturn the French commander appointed the same men to form a republican
administration. Angelo de Jacobis was scandalized by the way the new republican
administration tried to win the support of the bassa gente of the town with three
days of feasting:
And so we came to see the common folk stuff themselves until they were bursting with macar-
oni, stew, and bread, quafﬁng wine at the tables, pausing only to jump to their feet to declaim
‘Long Live Freedom’. The king was denounced, images of the royal couple were defaced, it was
announced that taxes would be reduced and there would be equal justice for all.¹³
Although a royalist sympathizer himself, when the same bassa gente staged a roy-
alist rising shortly afterward de Jacobis had deep reservations about their motives:
What a terrible sight to see the people go berserk and tear down, break and splinter fences,
doors, balconies, iron railings, burn linen, mattresses, blankets, utensils, books, documents
Absolutist Naples
110
¹¹ Cingari (1976), 38–59.
¹² Ibid. 59.
¹³ De Jacobis, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 86 (24 January 1798).

<<<PDFPAGE 120>>>
and everything they can lay their hands on, breaking open barrels of wine and spilling
oiland corn. How many precious legal documents were destroyed, how many pieces of ﬁne
antique furniture burned, because these are the houses of lawyers and gentlemen! What an
uncontrolled mob that under the pretext of ﬁghting for the Crown seeks only to take from
the rich and for that reason calls them Jacobins!¹⁴
The royalist revolt in Teramo was short-lived and on 22 December a detach-
ment of French troops returned to the town, which, to the horror of de Jacobis,
was sacked: ‘Ill-fated families, ill-fated store-rooms: everything has been carried
off!’ The French took everything they found in the houses of the merchants and
ofthe ‘lesser gentlemen’, they sacked the bishop’s palace, and they destroyed the
church bells. They ‘shot a number of peasants’, arrested the leading royalists, and
before leaving restored the republican administration.¹⁵
When neighbouring Lanciano became the target of a royalist insurrection
in early February, the reactions of the pro-republican friar Uombuono delle
Boccacche were similar and he too claimed that the instigators of the revolt were
motivated by ‘the desire to oppress the rich under the false pretext of defending
God, the king, the state and the country’.¹⁶
Both accounts reveal the class hatreds that permeated these rural communities,
but they also show that far from being spontaneous the popular revolts were in
most cases directed by factions within the elites. As in Teramo, when the ﬁrst
French forces reached Lanciano in early January, the leading families had agreed to
surrender and had donned the ‘tricolour cockade’. General Duhesme ordered that
a new town council be elected by public vote. The nobleman ‘Citizen Felice dei
baroni Gigliani’ and a wealthy merchant, Francesco Paolo de Bucachi, were put
in charge of the new council, which immediately lowered taxes and abolished
the ‘levy imposed on every head and pair of arms that was formerly paid by the 
artisans and labourers of the city’.¹⁷
The revolt that followed was plotted by Vincenzo Giordano and his son
Fioravante, who were described as ‘strong supporters of the Crown and wealthy
public merchants’. But although wealthy, Giordano and his son did not have a
strong popular following in Lanciano, so they had to look outside. That led them
to make contact with the royalist capo-massa, Pronio, which broadened the con-
ﬂict since Pronio also needed more men. To get them, he went to villages known
to have grudges against Lanciano.
By the last day of Carnival everything was ready. Pronio and his men lay in wait
until Giordano’s followers staged a tumult, the pre-arranged signal to enter the
town. Many republicans were killed in the ﬁghting and their houses burned
down, those that remained alive were arrested, and a general parlamento was held
in piazza S. Maria la Nuova where Giordano was elected head of a new adminis-
tration that declared its loyalty to the king.
The Counter-revolution
111
¹⁴ Ibid. 77.
¹⁵ Ibid. 67–8 (22 December–6 January).
¹⁶ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 148.
¹⁷ Ibid. 62.

<<<PDFPAGE 121>>>
Within days a detachment of French cavalry reoccupied Lanciano. The royal-
ists were imprisoned, and Giordano escaped execution only because one of the
republican families pleaded for mercy. The republicans were rewarded, Lanciano
was raised to the rank of provincial administrative centre and the republican
landowner Felice Gigliani became president of the provincial government.¹⁸
The conﬂicts in Lanciano followed fault lines marked out by factional rivalries,
and similar patterns were evident in other regions. In the Val di Diano the ﬁrst
revolt against the Republic took place in Montesano and was the continuation of
much older struggles among three prominent families—the Cestari, Gerbasio,
and Abbatemarco—to win control of the town’s administration and its assets.
At the time of the fall of the monarchy, Don Nicola Cestari was a man of great
wealth and inﬂuence in the town. He enjoyed extensive contacts in Naples, but
was unpopular in Montesano because of the control that he and his family 
exercised over public administration and town lands. He became even more
unpopular in 1796 when he took responsibility for enforcing the government
conscription quotas. His rivals leveraged this discontent to have the village par-
lamento elect two popular leaders in his place. But Cestari used his political inﬂu-
ence in Naples to have the election overturned by the Corte della Sommaria.
In January 1799 Cestari declared his support for the new republican govern-
ment in Naples, and began to organize and arm a civic guard. But when he 
convened the town parlamento to approve new taxes to pay for the civic guard on
17 February, his rivals organized a popular revolt in the name of the king and Cestari
was murdered. His long-standing rival, Don Emerico Gerbasio, was declared pres-
ident of the municipality, and immediately ordered the seizure of the goods and
property of the Cestari family and also of his former ally, the Abbetemarco.¹⁹
In Potenza, in Basilicata, the royalist riot that led to the murder of Bishop
Andrea Serrao in January reﬂected similar factional struggles and Pietro Colletta
later noted that ‘none of his assassins were plebeian’. Serrao’s attempts to settle con-
tested rights on demani near Potenza and to reorganize the diocese made him the
declared enemy of a number of powerful feudal families and of the local clergy.²⁰
Similar tales unfolded elsewhere. There was initially strong support for the
Republic in the Apulian provinces, but here too municipal rivalries were the cata-
lyst of royalist revolts. As Vincenzo Cuoco later acknowledged, ‘there is nothing
more delicate in the course of a revolution than the way you change local 
government’.²¹ When Trani, the seat of the former Royal Udienza, opted for
the Republic in January, the employees of the royal tribunals, supported by 
out-of-work sailors led by a watchmaker, overthrew the new city junta and declared
for the king.²² Matera abandoned the republican cause as soon as the French raised
its rival, Altamura, to the status of the principal administrative town of Basilicata.
Absolutist Naples
112
¹⁸ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 195.
¹⁹ Cassese (ed. Cestaro and Laveglio 1970), 97.
²⁰ Chiosi (1981), 337–41.
²¹ Cuoco (ed. Villani), 153.
²² Lucarelli (1934), 53–77.

<<<PDFPAGE 122>>>
Similarly in the Abruzzi, opposition to the republican order swept through the
smaller towns and villages when Chieti was designated the provincial capital and
given responsibility for raising taxes.
Taxation was a critical issue, of course, and explains why the arrival of the
democratizers often marked the beginning of a more general revolt against the
Republic. In Lanciano Uombuono dell Boccacche simply recorded:
This tax has caused great dismay, since immediate payment in coin is demanded, and great
lamentations are to be heard especially in the smaller villages and hamlets since many
believed that when the French arrived they would not impose additional taxes, but would
instead have removed those taxes that oppress our people.²³
At Ostuni, in the Terra d’Otranto, the arrival of the democratizers sparked a
popular revolt and the massacre of the republican galantuomini. The same
occurred at Trani and at Molfetta, while at Cirò in Calabria the people simply
declared ‘We don’t want the Republic if we must pay the same taxes as before.’²⁴
Local autonomies were the central issues and the driving force of the revolt of
the provincial republics when the provisional government in Naples tried to assert
its authority. As Pietro Colletta later noted, the collapse of the monarchy had
inevitably brought much older municipal rivalries into play: ‘being governed as a
republic or a monarchy had little to do with political convictions, but was every-
where a pretext for the display of much older hatreds.’²⁵
The crisis of the monarchy gave the poorer towns and villages the opportunity
to challenge their subordination to the main provincial centres, and the ﬁrst bids
for freedom came from the outlying hamlets and villages of the major towns.
Since the latter had initially opted for the Republic, it followed that the lesser
towns were soon enthusiastic converts to the royalist cause. Therefore when Bari
declared for the Republic, its outlying casali immediately became royalist.
This was repeated in Calabria and when Monteleone, Cosenza, and Catanzaro
declared for the Republic, their casali rebelled in the name of the king. In Molise,
the Albanian settlements, which were amongst the most impoverished and 
disenfranchised in the Kingdom, were the ﬁrst to rise in the name of the king. In
Calabria, however, the Albanian communities were equally rebellious but also
staunchly republican.²⁶
Administrative hierarchies did not exhaust the sources of municipal rivalries,
nor were these conﬂicts shapeless. The southern peasants, it was said, wore thick
boots but had sharp minds,²⁷ and these apparently random conﬂicts had roots in
disputes that were inseparable from the rapid erosion of the older feudal agrarian
The Counter-revolution
113
²³ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 71.
²⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 26; Helfert (1885), 137; Cingari (1957), 300.
²⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 38.
²⁶ Cingari (1957), 123–7.
²⁷ Lucarelli (1934), 59–62; on the anti-republican insurrections see also Colapietra (1981), 6;
Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (ed.) (1970), 63–5; Ciasca (1926), 631–51; Caldora (1965), 11–60;
Genoino (1931); Fortunato (1899), 223–45. For the most comprehensive review of the literature on
the counter-revolutions see the Introduction to Rao (ed.) (1999), 9–36.

<<<PDFPAGE 123>>>
regime. The breakdown of order caused by the French invasion was often no more
than the opportunity to settle by force older grievances that the royal courts failed
to resolve, as occurred when the inhabitants of the village of Orsogna in the
Abruzzi settled long-standing disputes by wiping out the neighbouring village of
Guardagrele.²⁸
COLLECTIVE VIOLENCE
Contemporaries were nonetheless horriﬁed by the acts of violence involving whole
communities that seemed inseparable from these conﬂicts, and even if many of the
accounts were exaggerated there can be no doubt that collective violence was used
widely and even systematically. Many of the stories of cannibalism and other atrocit-
ies are probably best understood as part of an older collective folk memory, but
there were other cases where acts of collective violence seem to have been a deliber-
ate manifestation of the involvement of the whole community. In Potenza, for
example, the heads of Bishop Serrao and his followers were paraded through the
city on pikes. At Trani, when the republicans were massacred in the prisons on
Easter Monday their mutilated corpses were dragged through the streets and
according to some accounts their livers were hacked out and sold for meat. At
Montesano, Nicola Cestari’s head was paraded through the streets accompanied by
cruciﬁxes before his decapitated body was mutilated and his house pillaged and
burned.²⁹ In Lanciano, when the Giordano family regained power after the fall of
the Republic in Naples they took their ﬁnal revenge on the Carabba, who only two
months earlier had intervened to spare their lives:³⁰ Carabba and his wife were
hacked to death, and their naked and mutilated bodies were then paraded through
the streets on pikes to shouts of ‘Viva la Regina di Francia’.³¹
Less publicized amongst all this brutality were the attempts made to reconcile
opposing factions and to prevent the conﬂicts from spreading. Aside from the
intervention of the Carabba family in Lanciano to save the Giordano, another
occurred during the royalist rising in Teramo. When the insurgents seized mem-
bers of the leading families—Tulii, Thaulero, Michitelli, Nardo, and the priest
Bernardo Quartapelle—the bishop and the preside Giamberardino Delﬁco inter-
vened to secure their release.³² In Chieti, the preside even persuaded the masse to
leave the province in January to enable the French occupation to take place with
minimal upheaval.³³The leader of the ﬁrst royalist rising in Chieti, Dott. Pasquale
Tamburri, was also spared: ‘so terriﬁed was he of the prospect of punishment’ that
Absolutist Naples
114
²⁸ Colapietra (1981), 6. See also Spagnoletti, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 635–52.
²⁹ Lucarelli (1934), 72; Cassese, in Cestaro and Lavegglia (ed.) (1970), 96.
³⁰ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 173–4.
³¹ Ibid. 178.
³² On the Delﬁco family see Clemente (1988), 365–85; idem, DBI, xxxvi. 527–39; Incarnato
(1995), 3–62; and Petraccone (1989), 203–7.
³³ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 47.

<<<PDFPAGE 124>>>
he returned to the town and after explaining his behaviour was restored to good
standing by the supporters of the Republic.³⁴
In these uncertain times, mercy was not only a valuable currency of patronage
but one that might also provide useful future insurance in a time of rapidly chan-
ging political fortunes. The willingness to spare the leaders of opposing factions was
rarely extended to the bassa gente and the cafoni, however. When the French sup-
pressed the royalist rising in Teramo large numbers of ‘plebe e nobili’ were arrested;
the nobili were released on payment of three to four hundred ducats, but the
French insisted on shooting some seventeen ‘leaders of the yokels and so-called
brigands’.³⁵ None of the commentators showed any concern for the ‘peasants,
yokels and bandits’ who were the most frequent victims of the disorders, and both
Uombuono delle Boccacche and Angelo de Jacobis illustrated the fear and
loathing in which they were held by the educated classes. When it was known in
Teramo, for example, that the royalist capo-massa Sciabolone was headed for
nearby Ascoli, de Jacobis noted, ‘It is rumoured that the men of the mountains, in
other words these brigands and yokels, plan to plunder our city.’³⁶
The cycles of disorder were also fuelled by the cruel and brutal measures
employed by the French armies. Any town or village that showed signs of resist-
ance, or that did not immediately opt for the Republic and agree to pay taxes, was
liable to ‘military execution’: it was ﬁrst surrounded by troops then torched, and
the inhabitants shot down as they tried to escape.
As the royalist revolts spread, MacDonald in early March ordered his com-
manders to adopt even more severe measures. Every insurgent town or village
should be destroyed, all ‘Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Curés and
other ministers of Religion shall be held collectively responsible for any armed
garnering or revolt. As soon as these occur, no matter where or when, the ministers
of Religion of the jurisdiction where these events occur must go at once to persuade
the rebels to disperse. Any failure to do this will incur the same punishment for the
minister of Religion as for the rebels.’ The military commanders were authorized
to shoot all rebels caught with arms, all ring leaders, and any priest found amongst
the insurgents. Any village or town in which an insurrection occurred was to be
held collectively responsible. Towns loyal to the republic, on the other hand, were
to be exempted from military billeting and requisitioning provided they had paid
all taxes owed. It was forbidden to ring church bells as a sign of alarm without 
permission, and the bells of all rebel towns were to be destroyed.³⁷
The peasants who joined the royalist insurrections responded in kind, and dur-
ing the retreat from Naples MacDonald vividly described the terror this inspired
amongst his troops. In May one of his detachments had been attacked near the
papal frontier at Antrodoco ‘by a prodigious number of peasants’. After ﬁghting
The Counter-revolution
115
³⁴ Ibid. 77.
³⁵ De Jacobis, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), iii. 67–8 (22 December–6 January).
³⁶ Ibid. 90 (26 January).
³⁷ A de G (Vincennes), B3*** 321. Decree 14 Ventoso (4 March 1799).

<<<PDFPAGE 125>>>
for ten hours, the French column ﬁnally escaped, but only after losing over three
hundred men and all its equipment. MacDonald concluded, ‘It would be very dif-
ﬁcult, I can assure you, to take these troops back into that country since they have
the greatest distaste for the cruel and barbarous war in which they have been
engaged with the peasants.’³⁸
CARDINAL FABRIZIO RUFFO AND THE SANTAFEDE
Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo’s correspondence is an invaluable and curiously neglected
source for understanding the dynamics of the counter-revolutions in the South in
1799. Ruffo was far from the fanatical condottiere of popular legend, but a man of
considerable political and administrative experience who had begun his career as a
protégé of Giovanni Braschi, who as Pope Pius VI had made him Treasurer
General. This earned him a cardinal’s hat in 1791, but Ruffo fell victim to plots in
the Roman curia and returned to Naples where he was made responsible for the
royal silkworks at S. Leucio.³⁹
Acton was jealous of him and the queen disliked him, but he was appointed
Vicar General with full powers to reconquer the Kingdom on 25 January 1799
mainly because the Court feared that Messina would declare for the Republic at
the ﬁrst opportunity. While Ruffo also had powerful family connections in
Calabria, he received little support beyond promises of assistance from the English
ﬂeet in the Tyrrhenian, and from the Russian and Turkish troops that were to be
sent to the Adriatic coast.⁴⁰
Accompanied by Antonio Winspeare, the former Preside of the province, Ruffo
landed in Calabria on the estates of his brother, the Duke of Baronello, near Scilla,
but was not greeted with enthusiasm. On 9 February he reported to Acton, ‘I do
not have the men to resist the torrent that has engulfed these provinces.’ Even on
his brother’s estate he succeeded in raising only eighty volunteers, whom he
described as ‘former guards from the feudal estates and criminals—people of no
good intent or reliability’.⁴¹
The responses from the local clergy and religious houses proved more positive,
however, and with support from the Bishop of Mileto and with funds raised by
the Carthusian monastery of S. Stefano in Bosco and by the monastery of
S.Domenico di Soriano, the number of his followers began to grow rapidly by the
end of the month.⁴²
On 28 February the situation turned in Ruffo’s favour when the republican
town of Monteleone surrendered without resistance. Royalist insurrections then
quickly spread through Lower Calabria, and by the beginning of March Ruffo’s
Absolutist Naples
116
³⁸ A de G (Vincennes), B3* 322 MacDonald to Minister of War, 23 Floréal Year VII (12 May 1799).
³⁹ Piscitelli (1951), 71–148.
⁴⁰ Helfert (1885), 87–8.
⁴¹ Croce (1943), 14–15; Cingari (1978), 180–5.
⁴² Helfert (1885), 103.

<<<PDFPAGE 126>>>
following had increased to about 1,500 men, most of whom were soldiers from
disbanded units of the royal army or members of the militias of the royal courts
and administration.⁴³
Ruffo was still deeply suspicious of his followers. According to a later royalist
apologist, ‘they included priests of all ranks, many wealthy landowners as well as
workmen and peasants, some were honest and were motivated by attachment to
the King and public order but others were simply assassins and robbers driven by
the hope of plunder, vendetta and murder’.⁴⁴
In March Ruffo refused to move against the republican stronghold of Crotone,
giving the indiscipline of his followers as his reason:
Were I at the head of a regular force I would not hesitate: but with these people I cannot
take the risk because they do not understand me, they will not follow me and I run the risk
of losing everything that has so far been gained.⁴⁵
The localized nature of the conﬂicts meant that his ‘army’ could disappear as
quickly as it had been formed. It was for that reason that Ruffo decided to impose on
his followers the emblems and insignia of a royalist crusade, delaying at Mileto to
organize them into three companies under the command of regular ofﬁcers. For the
same purpose and in order to better identify his followers, Ruffo devised the insignia
of the Santafede: the white Bourbon cockade set in a cruciﬁx. The insignia was meant
to impose some semblance of religious purpose and legitimacy on men whom he
continued to mistrust and believed to be ‘of no good intent and without any perman-
ency’. But the Cardinal was neither a fanatical condottiere of the monarchy nor of the
church militant, and he told Acton that his sole purpose in adopting the religious
insignia was ‘so that the people may know that our purpose is to defend religion’.⁴⁶
Ruffo was also a pragmatist who believed that guns, supplies, and money were
more important for the success of the undertaking than religious enthusiasm:
‘religious fervour and devotion to the person of the King may yield excellent
results. But if we want to maintain the vassals of His Royal Highness in a state of
calm and loyalty to our good cause, a well-ﬁlled war chest is indispensable.’⁴⁷ At
Monteleone he had begun to raise taxes and levies. The revenues of pro-republican
absentee landowners were sequestered to pay the royalist masse, and he appointed
a wealthy landowner from Bagnara, Don Pasquale Versace, to act as Treasurer for
the expedition.⁴⁸
A month later, the fall of Cosenza and Catanzaro gave the royalists control of
the Calabrias. But Ruffo was still reluctant to move north, and his misgivings
about his followers, now some 4,000, had grown:
I still consider this to be a miracle of Providence, since those who follow me are not the
same from one place to the next, but come from the neighbourhood of the towns we wish
The Counter-revolution
117
⁴³ Ibid. 107.
⁴⁴ Sacchinelli (1836), 95.
⁴⁵ Croce (1943), 29—26 February, Mileto.
⁴⁶ Croce (1943), 55.
⁴⁷ Ibid. 2—Ruffo to Acton 25 January, Palermo.
⁴⁸ Helfert (1885), 106.

<<<PDFPAGE 127>>>
to besiege: they are perfectly free to join us or not as they choose, but thank God that so far
we have never been short of them.⁴⁹
There was still no single Armata Cristianissima, but rather a mass of localized
followings that reconstituted themselves at each new town and village that was to
be taken. Ruffo continued to deny that religious enthusiasm or devotion to the
monarchy were drawing the people to the counter-revolution, but insisted
that the root cause of what he termed the ‘anarchy’ was the neglect of religion for
which he blamed the monarchy for joining in the persecution of the Church.
In a revealing Pro-Memoria written at Maida after the fall of Catanzaro, Ruffo
argued that the disaster in Calabria was a consequence of the weakness of the
Church, which he blamed on the monarchy and speciﬁcally on the operations of
the Cassa Sacra after the earthquake of 1783. Most of the monasteries in the
region had been closed: at Maida, for example, where there had once been ﬁve,
there was now not one. As a result ‘the labourers in the Lord’s vineyard are so few
in number that these people have been deprived of proper teaching in their
Christian duties.’ But the secular clergy had suffered equally: ‘Because the church
no longer has sufﬁcient land to ﬁnance the priesthood, most parish priests do not
have any form of stipend and are so poor they must beg for their bread. In short,
the sacred cult is in a state of total abandonment.’⁵⁰
Critical of the monarchy’s anti-curial policies, as beﬁtted the holder of a cardinal’s
hat, Ruffo was also hostile to the Jansenist sympathies of the predominantly anti-
curial Calabrian prelacy. He had been a strong supporter of the devotional mysticism
promoted by the followers of S. Alfonso di Liguori, and had been one of the founders
of the anti-republican and anti-masonic societies that had been established in Naples
after 1794.⁵¹ For Ruffo, therefore, the counter-revolution was an opportunity to
reverse the gains that had been made in the previous century by the anti-curialists and
the Jansenists, and to correct the errors of the monarchy’s anti-curial campaign.⁵²
Such views, however, did not not endear him to his royal masters in Palermo.
By the end of March, Ruffo’s more immediate concern was to bring an end to
the violence spreading within the regions that had been retaken by the royalists.
But this again brought him into conﬂict with Acton and the queen. The ﬁrst
clash occurred when Maria Carolina instructed him to pre-empt the French by
abolishing feudalism: ‘and especially introduce in advance all those measures
that when they arrive the French will introduce, so that we may in this way win for
ourselves the support of the people’.⁵³
Ruffo refused, arguing this would alienate the landowners whose allegiance
he was trying to regain. When the queen demanded that he seize the estates of the
Absolutist Naples
118
⁴⁹ Croce (1943), 67—Ruffo to Acton, 14 March.
⁵⁰ Ibid. 55—Ruffo to Acton, 8 March.
⁵¹ See Chiosi (1984). On the Calabrian clergy see Cingari (1978), 93–8.
⁵² Making him the perfect counterpart of Gianfranco Conforti, who saw the Republic as the
means to achieve the Jansenist reform project.
⁵³ Helfert (1885), 16—Maria Carolina to Ruffo, 26 February.

<<<PDFPAGE 128>>>
Principe di Gerace, of the Cassano Serra, and of the Vaglio Monteleone who had
accepted ofﬁce in the ‘so-called Republic’ the cardinal again prevaricated, arguing
that it would be wiser to raise indemnities from republican towns and to invite
donations from royalist landowners: ‘I am making the barons pay only what they
can, taking their corn, silk, oil and horses when I can ﬁnd them.’ He had reduced
the taxes paid by the poorest and had halved the ‘hearth tax and the tax on labour
paid by the poor in the royalist towns, to incite jealousy between the people and
the middling classes and to lessen the burdens on the people who are truly
oppressed by taxes, yet without abolishing them altogether’.⁵⁴ A week later Ruffo
again informed Acton that his aim was ‘to moderate the taxes owed to the barons
without destroying them, to reduce the taxes paid by the poor and to try to get
trade and commerce moving again if possible’.⁵⁵
The more general reform desired by the queen, Ruffo feared, would alienate the
landowners and allow the popular movement to get completely out of control. By
contrast, his tactic was to win over the sections of the propertied and privileged
classes who had rallied to the Republic. His aim, he told Acton, was not to terror-
ize but to encourage the republicans to defect:
It is like the old medieval wars between the barons, and I ﬁnd that by dividing them with
ﬂattery and rewards, privileges and gifts one half will soon get the rest under control and
will do the task with enthusiasm. But what is the point in punishing them, indeed how is it
possible to punish them when they are so many without resorting to methods of excessive
cruelty?⁵⁶
Ruffo saw himself in the midst of two wars. One was being fought between the
barons and ceto medio, whom the Republic had divided into opposing factions, or
whose pre-existing factional alliances had regrouped along the division between
royalists and republicans. The other was the war being fought by the people, and
Ruffo agreed that they suffered intolerable burdens (soverchi aggravi). But these
burdens could not be lessened without alienating the landowners and provoking a
social war that could not be controlled.
The best way to defeat the republicans, Ruffo insisted, was to make it as easy as
possible for them to recant: ‘The Calabrians in general are loyal to the king and
many joined the rebellion through fear rather than enthusiasm.’⁵⁷ When the
republicans in Ascoli Satriano were threatened by a royalist revolt and sued for
terms, he sent a detachment of mounted troops to protect them from the insur-
gents. He was furious when he learned that Captain Troubridge’s men had mas-
sacred all the Jacobins they captured on the island of Procida, arguing that this
would only make the republicans in Naples more intransigent.⁵⁸
Ruffo’s concern about restoring order was shared by other royalist leaders. In
the Cilento, Bishop Ludovisi of Policastro had voiced his alarm at the lawlessness
The Counter-revolution
119
⁵⁴ Croce (1943), 45—Ruffo to Acton, 3 March.
⁵⁵ Ibid. 67—14 March.
⁵⁶ Ibid. 154—Ruffo to Acton, 30 April (Policoro).
⁵⁷ Ibid. 39, 45.
⁵⁸ Lucarelli (1934), 113.

<<<PDFPAGE 129>>>
that accompanied the spread of anti-republican revolts. He instructed the parish
priests to organize armed masse to keep the royalist insurgents in check. When this
failed to stop the violence, he appealed to both Troubridge and Ruffo for assist-
ance. Ruffo sent a thousand men headed by the capo-massa Nicola Gualtieri,
known as Panedigrano, to restore order in the Val di Diano and in the townships
around Potenza, which had been in the hands of royalists since the end of
March.⁵⁹
In Apulia, Antoine Micheroux also stated that it was more difﬁcult to restore
order than to defeat the republicans. As the royalist revolts spread, he told
Actonthat ‘a Robesperrian Terror rules everywhere, and the People have brought
down their legitimate governors and magistrates’.⁶⁰ Like Ruffo, he too emphas-
ized the importance of mending the divisions within the ruling classes, which he
considered to be the cause of the popular anarchy. In contrast to the massacres
and reprisals inﬂicted by the French and by Ettore Caraffa’s followers, whenever
possible Micheroux offered the republicans terms and protection. When General
Duhesme had taken Sansevero in March, he had executed six popular royalist
caporioni and conﬁscated the property of the feudatories and landowners who had
supported the monarchy. By contrast, Micheroux deliberately adopted a more
conciliatory line when he captured the republican stronghold of Foggia on
23May. The royalist prisoners in the city were released and funerals were held for
theroyalists who had been killed following the declaration of the Republic, but he
refused to take action against the republican leaders or to seize their lands.⁶¹
Neither Ruffo nor Micheroux could restrain the violence of capi-masse like the
Mammone brothers and Fra Diavolo, whose actions were condoned by the Court.
But Ruffo feared that this would wreck his own efforts to win over the republicans
by negotiation.⁶² His outcry following the massacres on the Ponte della
Maddelena after the Sanfedisti had forced their way into Naples in June expressed
his sense of impotence:
The responsibility of governing, although it would be more accurate to say trying to 
control, a people raised in total anarchy and of giving orders to twenty illiterate and insub-
ordinate leaders of irregular troops, all of whom have no interest other than plunder, 
massacre, rape and violence, is something so horrible that it quite exceeds my strength!
They have now brought to me some 1,300 Jacobins and I have nowhere safe to keep them
so they remain here with us on the bridge: some 50 have already been slaughtered and shot
before my eyes without me being able to do anything, while at least 200 more have been
dragged here wounded and naked.⁶³
Well before Ruffo agreed to the armistice that Nelson and the government later
declared null and void, the royalist leaders had been at loggerheads with the Court.
Disgraced and threatened with arrest, Ruffo left Naples in July for Rome to attend
Absolutist Naples
120
⁵⁹ Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 108–9.
⁶⁰ Lucarelli (1934) 45; Maresca (1894), 106–22.
⁶¹ Maresca (1894), 258–60.
⁶² Ibid. 289; Cingari (1978), 54–5.
⁶³ Maresca (1894), 277, Ruffo to Acton, 21 June.

<<<PDFPAGE 130>>>
the convocation that had been summoned to elect a successor to his former patron,
Pius VI. Far from rallying the masses and the landowners around the monarchy, the
counter-revolution had exacerbated older conﬂicts, although it was not until after
the fall of the Republic that the full scale of the collapse became evident.
THE RESTORATION
The Capital
For the diarist Carlo De Nicola, the end of the Republic was simply the start of
‘the third anarchy’. In Naples, this took the form ﬁrst of the popular revolt against
the ‘giacobini’ and then the Royal Terror. Two days after entering the city, Ruffo
set up a Giunta di Stato to try those accused of treason, hoping that this would
calm the popular fury directed at the patriots. But Ruffo’s judges were soon
replaced by the king’s appointees, whose arrival in Naples marked the start of a
more systematic persecution of suspected republicans.
Some 8,000 individuals were charged with treason and in Naples alone more
than a hundred executions were carried out between July 1799 and September
1800. Those who died included two women who had played different roles in the
Republic. Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel, who had edited the Monitore Napoletano,
was among the ﬁrst of those to die when she went to the scaffold on 20 August
1799. Luisa Sanfelice, who had inadvertently betrayed the royalist Baccher
conspiracy, was among the last when she was hanged on 11 September 1800.
The monarchy also settled its scores with the nobility. A royal decree dated
25April 1800 set out the bill of attainder against those who were supposed to be
the crown’s most solid pillar, its strongest ally and most glorious embellishment.
Instead, during the revolt, ‘The Sedili, known also as the Piazze of the City of
Naples, remained quite indifferent to the fate of the State and allowed their
authority to be exercised by a group of corrupted youths who lacked all sense of
duty to God and to their King and, as is now known, permitted them to attack
Our Supreme Authority.’
Hence the monarchy decreed that it must give ‘new form to the Nobility of
Naples’ and to that effect:
we do abolish in perpetuity the Piazze or Sedili of the City of Naples and we prohibit any
meeting of that body which from henceforth will be considered a felony. We do hereby also
abolish entirely the Corpo degli Eletti, otherwise known as the Tribunal of San Lorenzo, and
all the other Deputations of the City.⁶⁴
In their place a new Supremo Tribunale Conservatore della Nobiltà was created,
to which only nobles of ‘proven loyalty’ could be admitted. The capital would now
The Counter-revolution
121
⁶⁴ ASN: Min. Finance 1532: Decree 25 April 1800.

<<<PDFPAGE 131>>>
be governed by a Regio Senato, and its seat was moved to the former monastery of
Monte Oliveto. The other city deputations were also abolished and replaced by
new administrations. The members of all of these new administrations were to be
appointed by the king.⁶⁵
As Luigi Blanch later noted, the abolition of the Corpo della Cittá was the cul-
mination of the monarchy’s earlier attempts to reduce the political powers of the
nobility. The one remaining political constraint on the monarchy had been
removed and the nobles became simply a privileged administrative class.⁶⁶
The Provinces
Under the reign of terror instituted in July 1799 order was quickly restored in the
capital, but in the provinces the state of lawlessness grew worse. In April, Ruffo
had warned Acton that brigandage and vendettas were bringing chaos to the
Calabrian towns occupied by the royalists. In Apulia, Micheroux had expressed
similar concerns. Many of the capi-masse in the northern provinces refused to dis-
band after the fall of the Republic, and were operating as bandits, making raids
deep into the Papal States on the pretext of pursuing ﬂeeing republicans.
The notorious Fra Diavolo refused to obey orders to disband and was arrested
in Rome, but escaped to Palermo to plead his case to the Court, which offered him
a pension of 2,500 ducats (that was never paid). Scarpia, a former corporal in
the guard of the Royal Udienza in Salerno who became the principal royalist 
capo-massa in the Cilento, had better luck and received an estate near Polla worth
3,500 ducats a year.⁶⁷
To restore order and to punish those who had supported the Republic, the gov-
ernment sent out teams of Royal Visitors to the provinces early in 1800. Their task
initially was to bring those charged with treason to Naples for trial, to investigate
local grievances, and to report on the state of each province. In the provinces it was
widely believed that the Royal Visitors ‘have been charged to take account of
allthose subjects who during the recent emergency in the Kingdom have shown
themselves to be meritorious and to have made ﬁnancial sacriﬁces, so that they
may be compensated from the lands of those guilty of treason’.⁶⁸ But these expecta-
tions were quickly disappointed. Ruffo had already warned the government that
the leading republicans from Calabria were all cadets of the major feudal families
and so had few personal possessions.⁶⁹
The monarchy’s freedom to pursue its vendetta against the former republicans
ended abruptly when in the spring of 1800 Napoleon Bonaparte led a French
army back to northern Italy and defeated the Austrians at Marengo. Fearful
for its safety, the Neapolitan government sued for terms that proved onerous.
Absolutist Naples
122
⁶⁵ ASN: Min. Finance 1532: Decree 25 April 1800.
⁶⁶ Blanch (ed. Croce, 1945), i. 35–6.
⁶⁷ Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 114.
⁶⁸ ASN: Min. Finance 1532.
⁶⁹ Cingari (1976), 38–59.

<<<PDFPAGE 132>>>
The Kingdom was also obliged to pay heavy cash indemnities to compensate
France for the Neapolitan offensive in 1798 and the subsequent French invasion
of the Kingdom. In addition it was now to pay the upkeep of a French Army of
Observation to be stationed in the Abruzzi and at Otranto to enforce the terms of
the treaty, to return all lands seized from the republicans and the rei di stato
(traitors), to end the executions, to offer amnesty to the surviving supporters of
the republic, and to allow the exiles to return.⁷⁰
These terms were deliberately designed to humiliate the Neapolitan govern-
ment, which was no longer free to conduct its own domestic policy. But they were
also ruinous and came as the ﬁnal blow to the already catastrophic state of the
monarchy’s ﬁnance. In a desperate bid to repair the damage the government called
on Giuseppe Zurlo, the lawyer from Baranello in Molise to make a ﬁnal experi-
ment in absolutist reform.
Zurlo had risen to the ranks of the togati in 1789 and had conducted the invest-
igation into the royal domains in the Sila in 1790. In 1798, on the eve of the
Republic, he had been appointed Director of Finances (Segreteria d’Azienda),
the most senior position in the government. He had played no part in the
Republic and now in its chaotic aftermath he was given the task of conducting a
complete reform of the Kingdom’s administration.
In the circumstances the task was impossible, but Zurlo nonetheless showed
remarkable energy and commitment. The whole set of earlier reform schemes, from
proposals to abolish the Dogana di Foggia and the Tavoliere to projects to drain the
swamps on the Volturno basin and the legislation of 1792 on the division of the com-
mon lands, was dusted off, and time was even found to reconsider treatises pressing
the advantages of the cultivation of maize in place of wheat. Now that the nobility
had been defeated Zurlo also set about reorganizing local administration, creating
thenew post of the Royal Intendent to represent the government in each province.
He even planned to make government departments prepare budgets, to reform
the banks, and to establish a national debt.⁷¹ But the government had neither the
material nor the political means nor indeed the time to realize any of these projects.
The Provincial Visitations
Zurlo stripped the Royal Visitations of their original punitive functions and saw
the opportunity to use the special powers conferred on the royal agents as the
means to enact a wholesale reform of public administration in the provinces. The
Royal Visitors now became Economic Visitors, whose task was to report on what
was needed to revive the provinces. But their reports revealed above all the extent
to which government in the provinces had collapsed.
The Counter-revolution
123
⁷⁰ The armistice of Foligno (18 February 1801) was followed by the Treaty of Florence (28 March
1801), which was negotiated by Joachim Murat the future king of Naples.
⁷¹ Villani (1955), 19–78 (now in Villani 1974); Rao (1986), 1–27; De Lorenzo (1998), 35–40.

<<<PDFPAGE 133>>>
A year after the fall of the Republic, most of the South was still in a state of
anarchy. In November 1800 the Royal Visitor in Molise reported that troops were
urgently needed to ‘put an end to the lawlessness of the dissolute soldiery that
havebeen left behind by an army that has disintegrated and has been despoiled of
all its equipment and which even now has not been restored to its former state’.
There was no money or coin to be had because of the ‘seizures made by the
French, the collapse of the banks and family trusts (monti) and the gathering of
many persons in masse who, under the pretext of defending the Kingdom, have
in reality pursued their own particular vendettas and robbed any village they
might’. In the absence of regular troops, it was impossible to enforce the king’s or
acourt’s authority. Instead ‘the mass of people who were released from jail during
the recent disturbances now roam openly through the countryside. . . . They have
created a situation of perfect anarchy, greater even than that unleashed by the
ferocity of those miscreants commonly known as the Sanfedists and may well lead
to civil war.’
Taxes needed to levied on every town to raise an armed troop of Cacciatori di
Montagna, but the revenues of the charitable foundations (Pii Laicali) in most
villages had ‘scandalously been expropriated by the despot Gualantuomini’. The
guards of the former royal tribunals had been disbanded ‘so that the poor shep-
herds and farmers on the Tavoliere are every day robbed and murdered’.⁷²
In Basilicata, the town of Melﬁthat had rallied to Ruffo in 1799 was still in a
state of ‘perfect anarchy and controlled by a band of criminals led by the Cabelli
and Franchi families’.⁷³ In the Val di Diano the winning factions and commu-
nities had occupied the lands and property of their rivals, making enclosures and
clearing huge tracts of woodland and forest. In the neighbouring Cilento the relat-
ives and supporters of Don Antonio Gariglia were ‘murdering and terrorising 
anyone who attempted to give evidence against them’, and the ofﬁcial begged the
king to warn Gariglia and his followers ‘not to gather in armed and mounted
bands, not to sing provocative songs, nor to beat or threaten any person. . . and
not to ﬁre their muskets inside the towns or put up notices of proscription during
the night’.⁷⁴
In the Abruzzi ‘in most towns public administration is in the hands of persons
of no ability or honesty’ and every form of public and municipal revenue was con-
trolled by private individuals:
What is the total amount of all the taxes paid in this province? What is the yield of each 
different tax? What is the state of each revenue? What proportion should be spent within
the Province to meet ordinary and extraordinary expenses? What part should be sent to the
General Treasury in Naples? I will not be speaking insolently if I hazard to say that Your
Excellency does not know the answer to these questions, because neither does the Camera
Absolutist Naples
124
⁷² ASN: Min. Finance 1643: 16 November 1800.
⁷³ ASN: Min. Finance 1533: 26 August 1801.
⁷⁴ Ibid. 1643 n.d. 1800: see Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 115.

<<<PDFPAGE 134>>>
della Sommaria, nor do the Provincial Delegates nor even do I myself despite the fact that
Ihave made every possible inquiry here at source.⁷⁵
The resulting ‘uncertainty and chaos makes the Royal Court and its Ministers
appear ignominious ....The weak, the evil minded, the jealous and all those who
are enemies of public order and prosperity, in other words all those whom your
Excellency has succeeded in expelling from the Administration because unworthy
to be part of it, lose no opportunity to spread the word that the Provinces are being
exhausted and that all their money is being taken away to Naples.’⁷⁶
These ﬁndings were conﬁrmed by Angelo Masci, a close conﬁdant of Zurlo:
the extreme poverty of this province [L’Aquila] . . . is principally due to the fact that the
town taxes fall entirely on the Poor, which renders them incapable no matter how
much they may work to support the means of subsistence and at the same time pay also
what they must to the crown and ﬁnd money to cultivate their land, take care of their
livestock, provide pasture and conduct their trades. . . . In every town I have found a group
of intriguers who have long since usurped control over all elections and over the adminis-
trators. . . .The elections are always ‘ﬁxed’ and as soon as they are over the fraud and the
manoeuvres by which they succeed in dilapidating public funds begin again.⁷⁷
THE COLLAPSE OF THE MONARCHY
The Visitors’ reports revealed problems whose origins long predated the events of
1799 but which the monarchy was no longer in any condition to address. In 1801
the Peace of Amiens had offered the Kingdom a momentary respite, but when the
war in Europe started again another French Army of Observation returned to
Apulia in 1803. The cost was 4,000,000 ducats, nearly one-third of the govern-
ment’s normal annual revenues. The Russian and Turkish governments also sub-
mitted their accounts for military services rendered in 1799. The harvest failed in
1802, there was virtually no currency in circulation, and by 1803 the bank notes
that Zurlo had issued under guarantee two years earlier had fallen to 30 per cent of
their original value.⁷⁸
Zurlo became the scapegoat and was replaced by Luigi de’ Medici, Prince of
Ottaiano. The cadet of a noble family, the dukes of Sarno, de’ Medici had been
arrested ﬁrst as a suspected Jacobin in 1794 and then in 1799 by the French as a
suspected royalist, so his political credentials were in good order after the
Restoration. He would later prove to be an able ﬁnancier, but in 1803 there was
no room for manoeuvre. The budget deﬁcits could not be reduced, payments to
public employees were in arrears, the banks’ promissory notes remained almost
The Counter-revolution
125
⁷⁵ ASN: Min. Finance 1630.
⁷⁶ Ibid.
⁷⁷ ASN: Min. Finance 1634: Relazione di Angelo Masci a Giuseppe Zurlo, 25 December
(L’Aquila).
⁷⁸ Villani (1984), 279–304.

<<<PDFPAGE 135>>>
valueless, and the payment of interest on most of the arrendamenti had been sus-
pended. Divisions within the government were also deepening. Acton’s star had
fallen and Cardinal Ruffo was recalled in 1802.⁷⁹
The government faced imminent collapse. The only hope was that the French
would be defeated, and so when it became known that England was trying to reac-
tivate the coalition against France the Neapolitan envoy in London was instructed
in 1805 to renew the alliance. As a result, the Kingdom once again went to war
with France and was once again invaded by a French army. The Bourbon rulers
again sought safety in Palermo under the protection of the British navy, but this
time the French would retain control of the mainland for nearly ten years.
CONCLUSION
The Neapolitan Bourbons were not the only Italian rulers whose government was
thrown into crisis by the events that followed the revolution in France. The British
minister in Turin had been warning since the early 1790s that war with France
threatened to bring about the ﬁnancial collapse of the Piedmontese monarch,
while even the Habsburg rulers faced similar difﬁculties.⁸⁰
The invasions exposed strong social tensions in most of the Italian states, even
in the proverbially peaceful Grand Duchy of Tuscany, where the popular Viva
Maria! insurrections gave vent to the resentments of the urban and rural poor
against the liberal reforms of Peter Leopold. Throughout Italy, sections of the
clergy were actively mobilizing popular opposition to the atheist republican
invaders and their Italian sympathizers, and in the papal territories public order
had collapsed well before the French occupation of Rome. Nor was it easily
restored. In August 1799 a Neapolitan army occupied Rome and oversaw the
restoration of papal administration, but central Italy remained in chaos.
The upheavals in the South were part of a broader pattern of political crisis and
social protest whose immediate causes were the French invasion and the allies’
counter-offensives. Nonetheless, in the South the crisis was also a consequence of
the collapse of the monarchy, and exposed the conﬂicts and insecurities that had
been accumulating over the previous decades. By the eve of the next French occu-
pation, the feudal order was visibly disintegrating as were the fragile structures of
government and authority.
Absolutist Naples
126
⁷⁹ Blanch (ed. Croce, 1945), i. 27–9, and Villani (1984), 275–325.
⁸⁰ For example, a decade earlier Britain’s envoy in Turin, Sir John Trevor, had warned that mobil-
ization for war might bring about the ﬁnancial collapse of the Piedmontese monarchy (Trevor to Lord
Camarthen, 27 October 1784, PRO FO 67/6).

<<<PDFPAGE 136>>>
PART II
NAPOLEONIC NAPLES

<<<PDFPAGE 137>>>
This page intentionally left blank 

<<<PDFPAGE 138>>>
7
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
Southern Italy in 1806, from R. M. Johnston, The Napoleonic Empire in Southern Italy,
vol. i (London: Macmillan, 1904).

<<<PDFPAGE 139>>>
NAPOLEONIC ITALY 1800–1806
On 27 December 1805, following Napoleon’s victory at Austerlitz, a peremptory
imperial edict from the Schönbrunn Place in Vienna proclaimed that ‘the
Bourbon dynasty of Naples had ceased to reign’. The invasion of southern Italy
that followed two months later was ostensibly to punish the Neapolitan Bourbons
for treacherously allying with the emperor’s enemies while signatories to a peace
treaty with France. That treachery made the survival of the Bourbon rulers incom-
patible with the honour of the emperor’s crown, and Marshal Masséna with an
army corps of 40,000 men was sent to install the emperor’s brother, Prince Joseph,
on the throne of Naples.¹
The treachery of the Bourbon rulers was no more than a pretext for an invasion
that Napoleon had contemplated much earlier and which had a clearly deﬁned part
to play in the broader plan of empire. Well before Austerlitz, France was securely in
control of much of northern and central Italy. In January 1802 the former Cisalpine
Republic was reconstituted as the Italian Republic, which after the proclamation of
the empire was renamed the Kingdom of Italy in March 1805 under the titular vice-
regal government of the emperor’s step-son Eugène Beauharnais. Theformer papal
territories of Emilia were already part of the Kingdom, which after Austerlitz in
addition acquired Austria’s former Venetian provinces and Istria. Geographically the
Kingdom was divided in two by the Duchies of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla,
which were occupied by France and nominally ruled by the emperor’s sister
Pauline.² Piedmont had been annexed to France, and Liguria occupied while Elisa
Bonaparte and her husband Felice Baciocchi ruled the small duchies of Piombino
and Lucca.³ Out of deference to the alliance with Spain that continued to assure
France a free hand in the rest of Europe, the former Grand Duchy of Tuscany had
been turned into the ostensibly independent Kingdom of Etruria for the former
Duke of Parma, Louis of Bourbon, and his wife, the Spanish Infanta Maria Luisa.
But this was little more than a mask for French occupation and became redundant as
soon as the Spanish alliance collapsed: in 1807 Tuscany was occupied and a year later
annexed to France.⁴
Political considerations similarly deferred full French occupation of the Papal
State, since Napoleon initially hoped to win the Pope’s support to heal the danger-
ous legacy of conﬂicts over religion that France had inherited from the revolution.
The new pope Pius VII at ﬁrst seemed compliant and a concordat was agreed on
16 July 1801, but Napoleon’s repeated refusal to comply with its terms and his
occupation of Bologna and the northern papal territories caused relations with the
Napoleonic Naples
130
¹ Schroeder (1994), 264, 257–76.
² Pauline Bonaparte (1780–1825). In 1797 Pauline married General Victor Emmanuel Leclerc,
and after his death the Roman Prince Camillo Borghese became her second husband in 1803.
³ Liguria was annexed in 1805, the duchies in 1808; Zaghi (1986), 367–8; Woolf (1991), 191–3.
⁴ Louis of Bourbon, formerly the Duke of Parma, became king of Etruria but died in 1803.

<<<PDFPAGE 140>>>
papacy to deteriorate rapidly.⁵ In October 1805 French troops occupied the papal
port of Ancona and then Civitavecchia in May 1806. Two years later Rome was
occupied on the pretext that the Pope was trading with France’s enemies, and like
his predecessor Pius VII became the emperor’s prisoner.⁶
The occupation of Rome in 1808 consolidated France’s control of the main-
land Italian peninsula, which had been signiﬁcantly extended by the invasion of
southern Italy two years earlier. The intention had been to conquer Sicily as well,
but despite an easy victory over the Bourbon army on the mainland in March
1806, Napoleon’s armies never managed to cross the narrow Straits of Messina
that separated Sicily from the mainland. In 1810 a major expedition was prepared
but then abandoned, so that the long coastlines of the southern mainland
remained the most southerly frontier of Napoleon’s continental empire.
Naples was ruled ﬁrst by the emperor’s brother Joseph and then by his brother-
in-law, Joachim Murat. Napoleon often referred dismissively to his Mediterranean
Kingdom and in 1808 while trying to persuade his brother to accept the Spanish
throne he described Naples as ‘the end of the world’.⁷ But the emperor had his
own way with words, and in the same week he told Joachim Murat that Naples
was one of the most beautiful kingdoms in Europe. More revealing than these
casual comments, however, was that the invasion of Rome in 1808 wasjustiﬁed
not once but on three separate occasions by the overriding need to protect the
security of the Kingdom of Naples.⁸
There were many reasons why Naples mattered. Apart from its role as a frontier
it had a critical role to play in the attempt to exclude British trade from the
European continent. Geographically it was also the key to establishing French
domination of the Adriatic and challenging British naval supremacy in the
Mediterranean. Its ports offered opportunities to rebuild the Mediterranean ﬂeet
that Nelson destroyed at the Battle of the Nile, a need made even more pressing
bythe more recent losses at Trafalgar. Nor had Napoleon abandoned the idea of
re-launching the Egyptian enterprise that had been interrupted by Nelson’s vic-
tory in 1798. Once the European foundations of the imperial project had been
secured, southern Italy offered the jumping-off point for the conquest of the
Middle East and North Africa.
None of these more ambitious projects would be realized, but that still left the
Kingdom with a critical role to play in enforcing the blockade against British
goods and providing billets for imperial armies during the brief intermissions
between campaigning. Like France’s other colonies, Naples would provide con-
stant ﬂows of men, money, materials, and provisions needed to sustain the
empire’s wars and France’s economy. It was believed to be a land rich in fabulous
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
131
⁵ Barnaba Chiaramonti (1740–1823) was elected Pope Pius VII on 14 March 1800 at the con-
clave held under Austrian protection in Venice. Bologna and Ferrara were annexed to the Italian
Republic in 1802. The Pope attended the emperor’s coronation in Paris in December 1804, but
Napoleon still refused to make concessions.
⁶ Menozzi (1985), 169–82.
⁷ Tulard (1983), 124.
⁸ Rambaud (1908), 294.

<<<PDFPAGE 141>>>
and hitherto untapped natural resources that would offer an abundance of raw
materials for French manufactures, as well as captive markets for French exports.
It also offered a valuable source of fat pensions for the emperor’s most trusted ofﬁcers
and an endless supply of jobs for the hordes of place-seekers, adventurers, artists,
soldiers, sailors, and out-of-work administrators that all empires spawn.
Napoleon’s Mediterranean Kingdom was not remarkable in any of these
respects, but the deep contradictions on which the imperial enterprise was
founded would be very vividly exposed in the exceptionally stormy relations
between Naples and Paris, especially after the arrival of Joachim Murat in 1808.
Down to the ﬁnal days of the empire, the relations between Naples and Paris
exposed both the remarkably dysfunctional nature of the Bonaparte family enter-
prise and the extreme forms of colonial subordination on which this short-lived
imperial project was founded. That makes Naples an excellent vantage point for
understanding the broader mechanisms of the imperial enterprise, but also raises
questions about why the French rulers attempted to reorganize the southern state
at a moment of severe colonial exploitation, prolonged commercial and ﬁnancial
crisis, and constant political upheaval.
TAKING NAPLES
The opportunity for invading southern Italy came as a direct result of Britain’s
efforts to revive the coalition against France after the collapse of the Peace of
Amiens. But in the end it was Napoleon not the British who pushed the allies into
action when he crowned himself King of Italy in Milan in March 1805 and
annexed Genoa.⁹ Austria mobilized, Russia rejoined the coalition, and as before,
the allies chose Naples as their jumping-off point for an offensive in Italy. A British
force of 6,000 men sailed for the Mediterranean, where they were to be joined by
10,000 Russian and 7,000 Neapolitan troops.¹⁰
What for the Neapolitan government in 1798 had been a gamble was now an
even more desperate bid to rid the Kingdom of a ﬁnancially ruinous French army
of occupation. Despite the fact that his government had already secretly entered
an agreement with the allies, in September the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris
renewed the treaty of neutrality with France. As a result, the commander of the
French Army of Observation in Apulia withdrew his army to join the campaign
against Austria in the North. Shortly after, the Russian and British troops 
disembarked in Naples.
The allies’ expectations were raised when news of Nelson’s ﬁnal victory at
Trafalgar reached Naples in October, and then dashed in December by news of
Napoleonic Naples
132
⁹ As Paul Schroeder puts it, ‘the coalition had been planned by Britain and Russia but it was
Napoleon who brought it into being.’ Schroeder (1994), 264, 257–76.
¹⁰ Johnson (1904), i. 75. See also Flayhart (1992), 54–169.

<<<PDFPAGE 142>>>
Napoleon’s decisive victory at Austerlitz. King Ferdinand wanted to issue an
appeal for a levée en masse, but was advised by his allies that resistance was impos-
sible. Two days later the commander of the British troops in Naples, General Sir
James Craig, was instructed to withdraw to Sicily ‘with or without the permission
of His Sicilian Majesty’. The Russians did likewise.¹¹ Convinced they had been
betrayed by their allies, as in 1798 Ferdinand and Maria Carolina took refuge
in Palermo, leaving the hereditary Prince to organize the military defence of the
Kingdom in Calabria.
From his military headquarters at Fiorentino, Prince Joseph-Napoleon
Bonaparte, Grand Elector of the Empire, Lieutenant of the Emperor, and
Commander-in-Chief of the Army of Naples, issued a proclamation to the people
of the Kingdom of Naples that mimicked the timeless rhetoric of invading armies:
The French Emperor and King of Italy being desirous to spare you the Calamities of war
signed a treaty of Neutrality with your Court. . . . But despite conﬁrming this treaty, the
King of Naples has joined the Coalition. The Army that I command is marching to punish
this perﬁdy. But you, the People, have nothing to fear. Our arms are not directed against
you. Your altars and your Ministers of Religion are the same as ours. Your laws and your
property will be respected. Your Magistrates will remain in their posts. The French soldiers
will be your brothers.¹²
A week later Masséna’s Armée de Naples crossed the frontier of the Terra di
Lavoro on 9 February 1806.¹³ The commanders of the Bourbon army, General
Roger Damas and the Hereditary Princes Leopold and Francis, planned to fall
back and give battle in Calabria, where the queen’s agents were busy preparing a
second Sanfedist rising. But in January Uombuono delle Boccache noted that the
queen’s hopes for another ‘Great Neapolitan Vespers’ in the frontier provinces had
failed. Attempts to raise a leva di massa were abandoned when the government
learned that the galantuomini were opposed, while the Minister of Police, the Duke
of Ascoli, prevented the movement of spies sent by the queen ‘who were plotting
to massacre the so-called friends of the French and the families of all those who
were unwilling to rise against them’.¹⁴
Angelo de Jacobis recorded that when the people of Teramo were informed that
the king had appealed for a leva in massa ‘those charged with this duty met with no
response, because during the ﬁrst war against the French the People had been
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
133
¹¹ Johnson (1904), i. 75.
¹² BNN (Bancone 8 B 21): Napoleon used similar terms at Cairo and two decades later the French
invasion of Algeria was justiﬁed in identical language: see Burke (2002), 41–8.
¹³ General André Masséna, Duke of Rivoli, Prince of Essling and Maréchal of France
(1758–1817) served in the Armée d’Italie 1792–8, and led the occupation of Rome in 1798 but was
accused of wide-scale looting and was recalled by the Directory. In November 1799 he replaced
Championnet as commander of the Armée d’Italie. In 1805 he was again appointed commander of
the Armée d’Italie (in place of General Joubert), and in December 1805 commander of the Armée de
Naples and commanded the siege of Gaeta February to June 1806, then took over command in
Calabria. In 1807 he rejoined the Grande Armée.
¹⁴ Delle Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 565 (January 1806).

<<<PDFPAGE 143>>>
forced to make too many sacriﬁces ...only a few charitable foundations gave some
money, but not much’.¹⁵ In February another appeal for a draft was made but ‘this
really distressed the people’. The Preside withdrew and the parlamento was
reconvened and immediately voted to establish ‘a civic guard to maintain order’.¹⁶
When the ﬁrst French troops arrived in nearby Lanciano on 23 March, de Jacobis
simply noted that all those who had brought denunciations against the Jacobins in
Teramo in 1799 were immediately arrested.¹⁷
The fortresses of Capua and Caserta surrendered to Masséna’s army, but a well-
supplied garrison under the command of Prince Hesse Philippsthal continued to
hold the fortress of Gaeta.¹⁸ Taking charge of the siege, Masséna sent General
Partouneaux¹⁹ with a small force to occupy Naples, which he did on 14 February but
in circumstances very different from Championnet’s entry seven years earlier. The
Regency government surrendered the city’s forts, and organized a mounted civic
guard composed of the ‘wealthiest gentlemen together with certain magistrates and
men of letters’.²⁰ Carlo De Nicola noted with relief in his diary that thepropertied
classes had enrolled enthusiastically in the civic guard: ‘The people remain calm
sincein any case these measures have placed them in greater subjection.’ When Prince
Joseph Bonaparte entered the city he was welcomed by the civic authorities and
theclergy, while San Gennaro obliged again with another unscheduled miracle.²¹
The Ministries of Police and the Interior were among the ﬁrst to be set up. On
3 March the French authorities appointed Police Commissars in each district,
supported by Inspectors of police and a force of Gendarmes. The Commissars were
given powers to arrest suspected enemies of the state, to impose censorship, control
and inspect the mails, to issue licenses for carrying ﬁrearms, to regulate all public
meetings, markets, and fairs, and in particular to detain all ‘vagabonds, beggars and
unknown persons’.²² On 12 March the Duke of Lauranzana, who had been amongst
those charged with treason in 1799, was appointed head of the Commissariat and
given the task of purging it of former royalist magistrates and ofﬁce holders.
THE CALABRIAN REVOLT
Meanwhile Masséna had sent General Reynier²³ with 11,000 men to pursue the
retreating Bourbon army, which he caught up with on 6 March near Lagonegro
Napoleonic Naples
134
¹⁵ De Jacobis, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 215–27 (January 1806).
¹⁶ Ibid., 215–16 (8 February 1806).
¹⁷ Ibid., 233 (30 March 1806).
¹⁸ William II (1777–1847), Elector of Hesse.
¹⁹ Louis Comte Partouneaux (1770–1835) (G. Six, (1934), ii. 289).
²⁰ The members of the Regency were General Naselli, the Prince of Canosa, and a senior magis-
trate, Michelangelo Cianciulli.
²¹ De Nicola, 11 February 1806, 202.
²² Ibid. 3 March 1806, 200.
²³ General Jean-Louis Ebenezer Reynier (1771–1814), Swiss ofﬁcer who killed General Destaing
in a duel in 1802 and was sent to the Armée d’Italie in exile. Commanded the right wing of Masséna’s
army in 1806 and then the conquest of Calabria. Awarded the Legion d’Honneur in May and in July

<<<PDFPAGE 144>>>
and four days later in fog and snow attacked the Bourbon positions on the heights
of Campotenese. Abandoning their equipment, the remnants of the Bourbon
army ﬂed south towards Castrovillari and Reggio seeking to escape to Sicily.
Reynier reached Cosenza on 21 March and the new government’s ofﬁcial newspa-
per, the Monitore Napoletano, announced the collapse of the ‘comic defence of the
Calabrias’.²⁴ By early in April the conquest seemed secure, and Reynier raised
noobjection when Prince Joseph became the ﬁrst ruling Neapolitan monarch to
journey in person through the Calabrian provinces when he visited Cosenza and
Crotone at the beginning of April, before returning to Naples by way of Taranto,
Matera, and Gravina.
On 30 March Napoleon conferred the title of King of Naples and Sicily on his
brother, who on 16 April paraded through the streets of Naples accompanied by
his victorious generals.²⁵ But the triumph proved premature. In March military
commissions had been set up and colonne mobili were despatched to put down
minor revolts, but in April the Monitore Napoletano reported more serious insur-
rections in the northern provinces.²⁶
The surrender of Gaeta in July made it more difﬁcult for the British and the
Sicilians to get supplies to the royalist capi-masse operating in the North. But in
the meantime, Reynier’s advance into Calabria had dangerously strung out the
French forces, and to take advantage of this a small British force commanded by
Sir John Stuart landed in the Bay of S. Eufemia on 28 June. The aim was to draw
French troops away from Gaeta, at the same time cut Reynier’s communications
with Masséna in the North and with the rest of the French troops in Cosenza.²⁷
Caught in a trap, Reynier decided to attack the British company of more than
5,000 men drawn up in defensive positions near the village of Maida on 2 July, but
was repulsed with heavy casualties.²⁸
The victory at Maida resonated loudly because it was the allies’ ﬁrst success
against troops of the reputedly invincible Grande Armée. But Stuart was unable to
exploit the victory. Summer fevers had broken out amongst his troops and the
expedition was shipped back to Sicily.²⁹ Nonetheless, the British victory was
thesignal for a general revolt in the Calabrian provinces. Catanzaro declared for
the Bourbons and soon the entire Sila region was again in revolt. By the time that
Joseph Bonaparte left for Spain in 1808 order had only precariously been restored
and would remain uncertain throughout the period of French rule.
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
135
was defeated by Sir John Stuart at Maida. Resumed command in Calabria from Masséna 12 January
1807, retook Amantea (6 February), Crotone (10 June), and Scilla (February 1808). Replaced as mil-
itary commander in Calabria by General Maurice Mathieu 28 February 1808 and appointed
Minister of War and provisional Commander-in-Chief, Armée de Naples; rejoined the Grande Armée
in July 1808 and fought in Spain (1810) and Russia (1812).
²⁴ Monitore Napoletano, no. 7, 21 March 1806.
²⁵ Ibid., no. 17, 25 April; no. 19, 2 May; no. 21, 9 May; no. 22, 13 May; no. 23, 16 May.
²⁶ Ibid., no. 4, 11 March.
²⁷ Bunbury (1854), 233.
²⁸ Ibid., Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte (Marina di Catanzaro, 13 July 1806).
²⁹ Bunbury (1854), 230–50; Johnson (1904), i. 113–26; Mackesey (1957), 140–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 145>>>
JOSEPH BONAPARTE
It was a sign of the importance Napoleon attached to his Mediterranean Kingdom
that he should have placed his eldest brother on the throne. Born in Corsica in
1767, Joseph-Napoleon Bonaparte³⁰ had studied law at the University of Pisa,
where he became a close friend of his fellow Corsican, Antoine Christophe
Saliceti,³¹ whose commitment to the Corsican nationalist cause he shared. In 1788
Joseph returned to Ajaccio and with his younger brother Napoleon became prom-
inent in the pro-French faction led by Saliceti. The opposing faction that favoured
independence was led by the legendary Pasquale Paoli, who in 1793 opposed union
with France and placed Corsica under the protection of the British navy.³²
Paoli’s move forced the Bonaparte brothers to ﬂee to France, where thanks to
Saliceti’s patronage Joseph found lucrative employment as a commissar to the
army. In 1794 he married Julie Clary, the daughter of a wealthy Marseilles mer-
chant, and moved to Genoa where he took up trade. The defeat of the royalist
insurrections in Paris on 12 Vendémiaire (5 October 1795) marked the start of
his brother’s ascendancy and also brought Joseph to prominence. In October
1796 he commanded the expedition that brought Corsica back under French
control, and was responsible for setting up a new administration dominated by
the Bonaparte clan and its allies.
Elected to the Council of Five Hundred in Paris as a Corsican deputy in April
1797, Joseph subsequently served as the French minister at the Court of the Duke
of Parma and then as Minister Plenipotentiary to the Holy See.³³ In Rome, Joseph
was probably responsible for the pro-French demonstrations that led to the
deathof General Duphot in December, after which he returned to Paris where
government service had brought him rich rewards. In October 1798 he purchased
the sumptuous chateau of Mortefontaine, ﬁfty kilometres from Paris, which
became an important meeting place in the months leading up to the Coup of
18–19 Brumaire (November) 1799.
After Brumaire, Joseph was appointed to the Council of State and played a
leading role in negotiating an agreement with the United States and the Treaty of
Lunéville with Austria.³⁴ The concordat with the papacy was signed on 21 June
1801 in his latest and even more regal residence, the Hotel Marbeuf in the rue du
Napoleonic Naples
136
³⁰ Napoleon was born in 1769, Lucien in 1775, Elisa (Maria-Anna Eliza) in 1777, Louis in 1778,
Paoletta in 1780, Maria Annunziata (Caroline) in 1782, Jerome in 1784.
³¹ See below pp. 166–9.
³² Pasquale Paoli (1725–1807) led the Corsican revolt against Genoa in 1755 and opposed
Genoa’s cession of the island to France in 1768. Defeated by the French he went into exile in England
but after the revolution in France was elected Governor of Corsica. In 1793 he was accused of
counter-revolution but with the support of Admiral Hood drove out the French and their supporters
(including the Bonaparte family). When the French regained control of the island in 1795 Paoli again
went into exile in London where he died in 1807.
³³ March–May 1797.
³⁴ 3 October 1800; 9 February 1801.

<<<PDFPAGE 146>>>
Faubourg Saint-Honoré. He also led the negotiations with Lord Cornwallis that
resulted in the Peace of Amiens.³⁵
Relations between Joseph and his brother became strained, however, when
Napoleon took the title of Consul for Life.³⁶ Because Napoleon’s marriage with
Josephine de Beauharnais³⁷ remained childless, Joseph demanded that as head of
the family Napoleon should name him as heir, but his brother refused. Then when
in May 1803 war with England resumed, Joseph was put in charge of preparing
the invasion forces and was at Boulogne in May 1804 when the constitution of
Year XII making Napoleon hereditary emperor was approved in the Senate.
InNovember this was conﬁrmed by plebiscite and Joseph acquired the rank of
Grand Elector of the Empire and the title of his Serene Imperial Highness, Prince
Joseph-Napoleon.
A RELUCTANT KING
After his coronation in Paris on 2 December 1804, Napoleon offered Joseph the
throne of the Kingdom of Italy but he refused because this would have meant
renouncing his claims as Napoleon’s heir in France. When the crown of Naples
and Sicily became vacant a year later, Napoleon was not prepared to accept
another refusal. In a private interview in Paris on 30 January 1806, he instructed
André Miot,³⁸ whom he had appointed to serve as Joseph’s Minister of War in
Naples, to give his brother the following message:
Tell him that I am making him King of Naples and a Grand Elector of the Empire, and
that I will make no change to his situation in France: but tell him also that the slightest 
hesitation, the slightest indecision and he will lose everything....If he accepts, I shall call
him Napoleon and he will become my son. . . . It was his refusal to accept the throne of
Italy that forced me to nominate Eugène as my son. But I am determined to nominate
someone else if Joseph refuses. All feelings of affection must now give way to raison d’Etat.
I only recognise as relatives those who serve me. It is no longer the name of Bonaparte, but
only that of Napoleon that binds my family together now. It is not with the thing in my
breeches that I make sons, but with my ﬁngers. I cannot now love anyone whom I do
notesteem. Joseph must forget all the bonds of childhood and make himself worthy of
myesteem.
The emperor would make available 40,000 men led by Marshal Masséna for
the invasion, but warned Joseph to ensure that ‘Masséna be prevented from steal-
ing’ in view of the ‘shocking plundering’ for which he had been responsible in
Venice: ‘I do not fear my generals and I will not indulge them.’ The emperor also
decided to send his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti to Naples, but
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
137
³⁵ 27 March 1802.
³⁶ 2 August 1802.
³⁷ Josephine Tascher de la Pagerie (1763–1814), widow of the Vicomte de Beauharnais, had mar-
ried Napoleon on 9 March 1796.
³⁸ See below pp. 165–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 147>>>
warned that Joseph should watch him closely and not allow him to steal: ‘He is a
man of character who will prove useful, but he has only agreed to go because he
thinks he can steal another few millions even though he has already made himself
rich enough already.’
Napoleon’s understanding of empire was very clearly set out when he explained
what he expected of Naples and its rulers: ‘I desire that he will make the people of
Naples pay for everything needed by my troops and my State and that he should
not squander money fattening frippons.’ Miot was to impress on Joseph that
‘I intend to create a family of kings, or rather of Viceroys, since the king of Italy,
the king of Naples and others whom I have yet to name will form part of a federal 
system (système fédératif).’³⁹
Talleyrand, Napoleon’s Foreign Minister, offered similar but also contradictory
advice: ‘He recommended that the King follow a course of blind devotion and
count on no demonstration of tenderness.... Once on the throne of Naples, he
should not make any constitution, leave the nobility and all institutions as they
are and only give ofﬁce to Frenchmen. If he gives any to Neapolitans, he will have
to rely on local factions.’⁴⁰
When he reached Naples on 15 February, Joseph informed the emperor that he
had at once attended a mass celebrated by the Cardinal Archbishop ‘and I made
San Gennaro a very nice present’.⁴¹ He believed that public opinion was the key to
consolidating the occupation, and that this could be won over by wooing
thepropertied classes. As well, Joseph was mindful of the need to satisfy ‘the ﬁve
hundred thousand souls who make up the population of the capital’, so he low-
ered the price of oil and bread and adopted more effective measures against the
Barbary pirates whose raids threatened the livelihood of the Neapolitan ﬁshermen
and sailors.⁴²
The emperor wanted more strenuous measures: ‘Arm your forts! Disarm, 
DISARM, the Neapolitans! Believe me, you will never hold on to the country just
bywinning over public opinion, because sooner or later you will have an insurrec-
tion.’⁴³ He told Joseph that he must raise taxes as soon as possible and was 
convinced that at least 30,000,000 francs could be had at once from Naples.
‘Naples is richer than Vienna or Milan.’ To raise the money Joseph should do what
Napoleon claimed he had done himself in Cairo during the Egyptian expedition:
‘deport ﬁfteen thousand lazzaroni, surround the city with mortar batteries and
seize all lands belonging to the royal domain’.⁴⁴
The imperial decree of 30 March 1806 that made Joseph king also laid down
the terms on which he held the throne of Naples. The decree, to which the imper-
ial administration in Paris always subsequently referred to simply as the ‘constitu-
tion of 30 March 1806’, reserved to the emperor command of the French army in
Napoleonic Naples
138
³⁹ ANP: AFiv 1714d: Notes prises chez M. le Conte Miot de Melito pendant son séjour à Naples
1806–8.
⁴⁰ Ibid., Talleyrand to Miot.
⁴¹ ANP: AFiv 1714c: 16 February 1806.
⁴² Ibid. 22 February 1806.
⁴³ ANP: AFiv 1714d: 17 March 1806.
⁴⁴ Ibid., Miot Journal, 17 March 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 148>>>
Naples as well as the courts and required Naples to provide the imperial treasury
with an annual revenue of 1,000,000 francs, to be paid directly to the emperor 
‘in compensation for military expenses and for his personal distribution’.⁴⁵
Like Eugène Beauharnais in Milan, the king of Naples was required to consult
the emperor before introducing any new law or making any appointment. During
Joseph’s brief reign the legislation needed to refashion the Neapolitan monarchy
along the lines of the centralized bureaucratic autocracy that had emerged
from the revolution in France was introduced. But there were exceptions and
Joseph successfully resisted the emperor’s demands that he introduce conscription
and the Code Civil. When Joseph left Naples for Spain in May 1808 most of the
new legislation was still to be implemented and order had barely been restored
in the Calabrian provinces.
Joseph’s transfer from Naples to Madrid in the spring of 1808 was determined
by the broader reorganization of the empire after the defeat of Prussia in October
1806 and the peace with Russia concluded at Tilsit in July 1807. This left England
alone against France and meant that Napoleon was now free to pursue the project
of the Continental blockade in the attempt to destroy Britain’s trade. The peremp-
tory demand in August 1807 that the Tagus be closed to British shipping was 
simply the pretext for the French invasion of Portugal and Spain.
In Italy, the end of the alliance with Spain opened the way for France to occupy
Livorno and annex Tuscany and the Papal States while in Spain, the overthrow of
the king started the chain of events that would take Joseph Bonaparte from Naples
to Madrid. The emperor had ﬁrst informed Joseph of the project in Venice in
December 1807, but the decision was not conﬁrmed until the following May.⁴⁶
Joseph Bonaparte entered Madrid on 20 July 1808, but eleven days later he was
forced to abandon the city for safer quarters and did not return until the following
January.⁴⁷ Joachim Murat meanwhile was making his way to Naples.
JOACHIM MURAT
Joachim Murat was born in 1767 at La Bastide-Fortunière (now La Bastide-
Murat) near Cahors. The son of a provincial merchant and innkeeper, his mother
wanted him to be a priest and Murat studied brieﬂy at a seminary in Toulouse
before joining the army.⁴⁸ A forthright anti-royalist, Murat’s career began to
progress after the ﬂight of Louis XVI. He fought in Belgium and Holland and
rose through the ranks, but his strong Jacobin sympathies put him at risk after
the fall of Robespierre. It was the attempted coup of 12–13 Vedémiaire Year III 
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
139
⁴⁵ ASN, Min Esteri f. 5490 fascic 193 Champagny to di Gallo (29 March 1809); see also
Rambaud (1911), 214.
⁴⁶ ANP: AFiv 1714d: 16 December 1807, Miot.
⁴⁷ Grab (2003), 130: Joseph—known henceforth in Spain as Pepe Botella—returned to Madrid in
January 1809 and remained there until 1813.
⁴⁸ 21st Light Cavalry regiment, the Chasseurs d’Auvergne; see Tulard (1983), 7.

<<<PDFPAGE 149>>>
(5 October 1795) when the Convention in Paris was threatened by a royalist
insurrection that caused the careers of Joachim Murat and Napoleon Bonaparte to
cross. General Paul Barras turned for help to Bonaparte, but it was Murat’s action
in seizing the forty guns in the artillery depot at Sablons that provided Napoleon
with the ‘whiff of grapeshot’ needed to disperse the insurrection.⁴⁹
Murat was quickly rewarded. In February 1796 he commanded the cavalry in
the campaign in northern Italy and became part of the inner group of Bonaparte
loyalists. In April 1798 he joined the expedition to Egypt, where he distinguished
himself and survived a pistol shot that passed from one cheek to the other.⁵⁰
The Coup of 18–19 Brumaire was the next step. On 9 November 1799
Bonaparte addressed the Council of Five Hundred that had been convened in the
chateau of Saint-Cloud and proposed a change of government. But he utterly
failed to win over the deputies who began to heckle. On orders from Napoleon’s
younger brother Lucien, Murat escorted the shaken general to safety before
returning with a detachment of grenadiers to empty the chamber and announce:
‘Citizens, you are dissolved.’⁵¹
Murat’s promotions and rewards increased. He was appointed Commander-
in-Chief of the Consular Guard and on 18 January 1800 he married Bonaparte’s
youngest sister, Caroline.⁵² The Murats took up residence in the Tuilleries and
were given a large country mansion by the First Consul. Still on active service,
during the winter of 1799–1800 Murat was busy preparing for the coming 
campaign at Dijon and Chalons. On 20 April 1800 he was appointed lieutenant
general in chief of the Armée d’Italie and commander of the cavalry. He took
part in the crossing of the Alps and after pursuing the retreating Austrians entered
Milan on 2 June. He fought at Marengo (14 June), but was then ordered back to
Paris to take command of the division of grenadiers.
Murat’s next appointment was to the Army of Observation in Italy.⁵³ He occu-
pied Bologna and then Florence in January 1801, where he dictated the armistice
with the Kingdom of Naples and the more punitive terms that Napoleon imposed
in the Treaty of Florence.⁵⁴ Murat was also given the difﬁcult mission of reassuring
the Pope of the emperor’s friendly intentions. Back in Florence he oversaw the cre-
ation of the Kingdom of Etruria, before moving to Milan where he quickly fell out
with Melzi d’Eril, the Lombard patrician whom Bonaparte had nominated
President of the Italian Republic when it was founded in January 1802.
In August 1803 Murat returned to Paris, where Caroline had amassed an
impressive collection of properties, furnishings, and art works, and had taken up
residence in the opulent Hotel Thelusson in the rue de la Victoire. New honours
Napoleonic Naples
140
⁴⁹ Tulard (1983), 7–24.
⁵⁰ Ibid. 43.
⁵¹ Ibid. 48.
⁵² Maria Annunziata Bonaparte (1782–1839): the religious marriage was only celebrated two
years later, on 4 January 1802, when Louis Bonaparte married Hortense de Beauharnais.
⁵³ 20 November 1800.
⁵⁴ Tulard (1983), 61. The armistice of Foligno, 18 February 1801; Treaty of Florence, 29 May 1801.

<<<PDFPAGE 150>>>
followed and in January 1804 Murat was appointed to the lucrative post of 
military governor of Paris, which was how he came to be directly involved in the
kidnapping and execution of the Duke of Enghien in March 1804.⁵⁵ As command-
ant of the chateau of Vincennes, Murat was responsible for selecting the court
martial that would sentence the Bourbon prince. He ﬁrst prevaricated but then
complied with Napoleon’s demands, making himself both an accomplice and a
target for later royalist vengeance.⁵⁶
The royalist conspiracy provided Napoleon with the pretext for establishing
the empire, as a result of which Murat was nominated Marshal of the Empire
and Imperial Grand Admiral. In March 1805 he purchased the Elysée Palace
where he, Caroline, and their three children took up residence.⁵⁷ When the war
against Austria resumed in September 1805, Murat and his cavalry participated in
the French victories at Ulm and Austerlitz. But he was deeply slighted when the
emperor’s step-son, Eugène Beauharnais, was made Viceroy of Italy, nor was
hesatisﬁed when Napoleon made him Grand Duke of Berg.⁵⁸
The Grand Duchy secured Napoleon’s control of the Rhine, but despite Berg’s
economic and industrial importance Murat was disappointed, his ambitious and
jealous wife even more so. He made his triumphal entry into Düsseldorf on
24 March, but he spent little time in the Duchy, which was administered directly
from Paris by the French Minister of Finance, Gandin, because Napoleon claimed
that when Murat acted alone ‘he only makes a mess of things’.⁵⁹ However, Murat
did manage to secure a personal fortune reputedly worth 3,000,000 francs by
1808, and his successor, Count Jacques Claude Beugnot, claimed that he had
‘squeezed the Grand Duchy like an orange until the pips cracked’.⁶⁰
Caroline Bonaparte never visited Berg, but remained in Paris where she was
reputedly the lover ﬁrst of General Jounot and then of the dashing young Austrian
ambassador, Count Clemenz von Metternich. But both she and Murat were now
deeply involved in the rivalries that had emerged within the imperial family. They
were hostile to Josephine and the Beauharnais, and were also jealous of Louis
Bonaparte, the king of Holland, who had married Josephine’s daughter Hortense
and whose son, Napoleon Charles, the heirless Napoleon seemed inclined to
adopt.⁶¹
By September 1806 Murat was back in arms, and his cavalry fought at Jena 
(14 October) and Prenzlow (29 October 1806). En route to Russia, Napoleon’s
armies were greeted as liberating heroes in Poland, and Jean Tulard claims that the
Naples in the Imperial Enterprise
141
⁵⁵ The discovery in March 1804 of a royalist plot against the First Consul in which generals
Pichegru and Moreau were both implicated led Napoleon to order the kidnapping and execution of
the Bourbon Duke of Enghien.
⁵⁶ Tulard (1983), 70. According to Talleyrand the execution was ‘worse than a crime, it was 
a mistake’.
⁵⁷ Ibid. 73: the children were Achille, Letitia, and Lucien—Louise was born in 1805.
⁵⁸ 15 March 1806: a newly created principality that included the Duchies of Berg and Cleves,
which were ceded to France by Prussia under the terms of the Treaty of Pressburg.
⁵⁹ Tulard (1983), 65.
⁶⁰ Ibid. 63.
⁶¹ Ibid. 94.

<<<PDFPAGE 151>>>
tumultuous welcome that Murat received in Warsaw converted him to the cause
of Polish uniﬁcation and independence.⁶² But whatever hope he had of becoming
king of Poland vanished when the war with Russia ended.⁶³ Murat returned to
Paris, where Caroline was now a major ﬁgure in both the imperial court and the
city’s social and cultural life. Without leaving Paris Murat showed new interest in
the affairs of his Grand Duchy, where he was represented by an able administrator
and fellow Cahorsin, Jean-Antoine-Michel Agar.⁶⁴
Duty next took Murat to Spain where he acted as the emperor’s lieutenant
at Bayonne in February 1808. On 2 May Murat’s Polish cavalry, Egyptian
Mamelukes, and dragoons savagely crushed the popular rising in Madrid,⁶⁵ and
on the same day the emperor offered him a choice: the throne of Naples or
Portugal. Napoleon urged his brother-in-law to take the former: Naples, he said,
was ‘much better than Spain’ and would soon be reunited with Sicily. Nor need
Murat fear that his military career would suffer, since his wife Caroline ‘is quite
capable, should need arise, to be regent’.
Unknown to Murat, Napoleon had previously offered the throne of Naples to
his brother Lucien on condition that he divorce his wife, but Lucien had
refused.⁶⁶ There was no universal rejoicing in the Bonaparte camp when it was
known that Murat was be king, however, and many felt that Caroline should have
been named regent. The youngest of Napoleon’s sisters, she was also the closest to
him. Talleyrand claimed that she had ‘the head of Cromwell on the shoulders of a
beautiful woman’, while Napoleon himself later claimed that ‘She had a lot of
drive, heaps of personality and boundless ambition’.⁶⁷
Caroline also had excellent contacts at the highest level of the imperial adminis-
tration. She was a close conﬁdante of Napoleon’s much feared chief of police, Joseph
Fouché, and of the long-standing Bonaparte family patron, Antoine Christophe
Saliceti, who was already in Naples. Murat, by contrast, had few political skills and
would have to seek his own advisers since Napoleon provided none. Although
hetried to keep Caroline’s political role to a minimum, she was from the start the
more powerful of the two and in Naples would become the dominant partner.
After returning to Paris, Murat and Caroline left for Italy at the end of August.
They made their way to Naples through Turin, Reggio Emilia, Ancona, and
Rome, where the Pope did not offer to receive them. From Rome they continued
to Gaeta, then by way of Capua and Aversa to Naples, where they made their 
triumphal entry on 6 September 1808.⁶⁸
Napoleonic Naples
142
⁶² Tulard (1983), 104.
⁶³ Ibid. 108–9.
⁶⁴ See below.
⁶⁵ Tulard (1983), 123.
⁶⁶ Ibid. 124.
⁶⁷ Ibid. 159.
⁶⁸ Ibid. 137.

<<<PDFPAGE 152>>>
¹ BSPN: ms XXI B5.
² Ibid.
8
The Costs of Empire
THE TREATY OF BAYONNE
The Kingdom’s colonial status had already been made clear in the obligations
placed on Joseph Bonaparte. Like the empire’s other colonies, its function was to
satisfy the insatiable demands of the imperial treasuries and armies, enforce the
Continental blockade against British goods, supply French manufactures with
raw materials, and French producers with markets. With the accession of Joachim
Murat in 1808, however, these terms became even more onerous and were formal-
ized in the treaty that Murat signed at Bayonne on 30 March 1808.
The treaty granted Murat the throne of Naples in perpetuity with succession
through the male line only, although Caroline Bonaparte was to succeed as queen
in the event of his death. The treaty was offensive and defensive, and obliged the
king of Naples in time of war to contribute 18,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry, and
atrain of twenty-ﬁve pieces of artillery to France, the costs to be met entirely by
the Neapolitan treasury wherever they served. The Neapolitan government was
in addition required to meet the full cost of the upkeep of the French troops 
stationed in the Kingdom, and to build and supply six ships of the line, the ﬁrst
two to be delivered to France by the end of 1809. Finally, the king of Naples had
to undertake to enforce in every way ‘the blockade against England to ensure the
destruction of its trade’.¹
The secret clauses attached to the treaty placed all of the Murats’ now extensive
property in France in the emperor’s hands as a surety for their good conduct. The
inventory of their assets illustrates the rewards acquired by those who rose to high
rank in the emperor’s service and included ‘their palace in Paris, their house at
Neuilly, the Stables at Artois, the estate at La Motte’ and ‘in general all the goods
that they possess in France without exception and including all moveables, furni-
ture and furnishings in their palaces and houses, all paintings, statues and any
other artistic or decorative object whatever its nature’.²
The emperor made some concessions. He promised Murat the Farnese proper-
ties in Rome that belonged to the Neapolitan Bourbons and agreed to an annual
subsidy of half a million francs, which effectively halved the annual charge of land

<<<PDFPAGE 153>>>
rents that Naples had to pay personally to the emperor. However, all the properties
and annual rents owed to the emperor were to be paid in full to the imperial treas-
ury by January 1809. In addition, Murat was required to furnish rents to fund ‘six
Great Fiefs of the Empire’ in the Kingdom³ and to contribute to funding the
Legion d’Honneur.⁴
OPENING QUARRELS
The ﬁrst disputes with Paris focused on the chaotic state in which Joseph had left the
Kingdom’s ﬁnances. Before leaving for Spain at the end of July Joseph’s ﬁnance min-
ister, Pierre-Louis Roederer, handed over direction of ﬁnances to Prince Pignatelli.
Although he admitted to the emperor that the bank had suffered because of
the withdrawals needed to meet the cost of Joseph’s transfer to Spain, Roederer
nonetheless insisted that the ﬁnancial situation of the Kingdom was ﬂourishing.⁵
Pignatelli soon discovered that Roederer had left no accounts, and that
beforeleaving for Madrid Joseph had made generous settlements in favour of his
ministers, favourites, and mistresses.⁶ The French chargé d’affaires, D’Aubusson
de la Feuillette,⁷ later reported to Paris in scandalized terms that Joseph’s lover,
Maria Giulia Colonna, Duchess of Atri—who bore him two children—had been
given a gift of 5,000 ducats, while another woman ‘who was not even a mistress’
received 2,000 ducats. D’Aubusson estimated that in total Joseph’s largesse
amounted to as much as 11,000,000 francs.⁸
Roederer did not record what he himself had received, although he did inform
Joseph that he needed to raise a loan from the Swiss banker Falconnet because he
had no desire to arrive at the Court of the King of Spain ‘like an indebted old
courtesan’.⁹
Early in September Murat complained to Napoleon of the ‘terrible state of my
ﬁnances’. But these complaints carried little weight since Murat had left a similar
Napoleonic Naples
144
³ The creation of ‘imperial feofs’ in the satellite kingdoms was standard practice and similar
obligations were placed on the Kingdom of Italy after Austerlitz where twelve imperial duchies were
established. See Zaghi (1986), 367.
⁴ ASN, Min Esteri f. 5490 fascic.193: di Gallo to Champagny, 25 January 1809; memo sur les
dettes.
⁵ ANP: AFiv 1714a: 27 July 1808, Roederer to Napoleon.
⁶ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP3: 14 June 1808, Roederer to Joseph Bonaparte, and
ibid., 2 July 1808. Amongst the recipients were the Generals Matthieu, Saligny, Jourdan, and Reynier,
the Foreign Minister Di Gallo, and the banker Falconnet, ‘who of all the merchants in Naples has
been the most zealous in the service of Your Majesty’. Additional gifts of 3,000 ducats in annual rents
had been given to the Duke of Noia, 4,000 ducats in rents to General Dumas, another cash gift of
18,975 ducats to di Gallo, and a ﬁctitious sale of domain land valued at 50,440 ducats (but really
worth 80,000 ducats) to the Minister of Justice, Francesco Ricciardi.
⁷ D’Aubusson de la Feuillette served as chargé d’affaires from January 1808 until he was replaced
by Hue de Grosbois in 1810.
⁸ AAEP: CP, Naples 133: D’Aubusson to Champagny, 2 January 1809.
⁹ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381: 7 July, Roederer acknowledged that the emperor had given
him 55,000 livres of rent and estates worth 40,000 livres.

<<<PDFPAGE 154>>>
situation of ﬁnancial chaos in Berg.¹⁰ Pignatelli warned Murat, however, that a
month previously the emperor had suspended payment of the half-million ducats
that he had promised towards the cost of maintaining French troops in the
Kingdom, making the Kingdom’s ﬁnancial situation untenable. The principal of a
loan that Joseph’s government had raised in Holland in 1806 had been exhausted,
and Joseph’s considerable removal costs had left the treasury and the banks with-
out cash. Declaring the situation to be beyond him, Pignatelli asked to resign.¹¹
D’Aubusson conﬁrmed Murat’s description of the situation: ‘It is my duty to
say, and with the greatest regret, that a change was overdue here.’ The ﬁnancial situ-
ation was desperate, there was no proper accounting, everything was haphazard
and confused, and pay for the army and public works was all in arrears. Joseph’s
administration was ﬁlled with ‘favourites and cliques’, the Council of State ‘was
for the greater part composed of men with no vision or ability, who were opposed
to any form of innovation or liberal ideas, and especially to the establishment
of the Napoleonic Code without changes being made to it’. Murat’s description
had ‘contained nothing that is not accurate....Since Joseph had never reviewed
his troops, no-one knew who was being paid and who was not’, but the army’s pay
was at least nine months in arrears when he left for Spain.¹²
An even sharper confrontation followed when Murat announced on 15
November that he had lowered the interest paid on the Public Debt from 5 to 3%.
The French ambassador in Naples, D’Aubusson, again defended Murat,
but Napoleon was incensed. Murat, he insisted, had acted without his permission
and he denounced the reduction in interest rates as a violation of Treaty of
Bayonne that tarnished the honour of the empire.¹³
The wrangling over the Kingdom’s obligations and failure to meet them
became interminable. In the ﬁrst of many stern warnings, the Imperial Minister
for External Affairs, Count Jean-Baptiste de Champagny, informed the Marchese
di Gallo, the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris, that Murat’s failure to settle the 
outstanding arrears was considered by the emperor to be a second violation of
theTreaty of Bayonne. Champagny warned Murat that the emperor ‘wishes it to
be understood that whatever the King of Naples might consider to be the advant-
age of building roads or establishments of education, he must ﬁrst and foremost
ensure that my troops are paid and that there are no arrears’. He instructed Murat
to implement the terms of the Treaty of Bayonne at once and in full and to intro-
duce the Napoleonic Civil Code without further delay or modiﬁcation.¹⁴
In December 1808 Murat requested permission to appoint Agar, his former 
minister of ﬁnance in Berg. When the imperial administration in Paris approved,
Caroline’s secretary noted that ‘Agar’s nomination was indispensable here, even
The Costs of Empire
145
¹⁰ See Schmidt (1905), 68.
¹¹ AAEP CP, Naples 133: D’Aubusson to Champagny 24 February 1809. He described Prince
Pignatelli of Cerchiara as ‘absolument incapable et frippon’.
¹² Ibid.—1 January.
¹³ Le Brethon, vi. 410: Murat to Napoleon, 15 November 1808; D’Aubusson to Champagny.
¹⁴ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 155>>>
though we have had to wait long time. There is no-one capable of taking on this min-
istry, which is a real Augean stable. Even Agar, despite his intelligence and energy, will
have to work day and night for at least two years before he gets things in order. Itis not
an enviable task and I defy those who are against him from stirring up envy.’¹⁵
Murat again pointed out that his government ministries required 1,000,000
ducats a month and there were currently only 193,000 ducats available.¹⁶ His
protest was ignored, and when the ﬁrst payments to France under the terms of the
Treaty of Bayonne fell due (1st January 1809), Champagny formally protested
that the Neapolitan government had defaulted on its obligations. Paris now
demanded the immediate transfer of the estates required to fund the six Imperial
ﬁefs and the settlement of the arrears owed for the maintenance of French troops.
Di Gallo replied that ‘everything which his Imperial and Royal Majesty orders
will be done’. But he also argued that the demands were unreasonable. The heavy
expenses incurred during the ﬁrst six months of the reign, the payments made to
cover the arrears on pay for the army and civil administration, the cost of the mil-
itary operation to regain Capri, and preparations for an expedition to invade Sicily
had prevented Murat from meeting other obligations. He closed by warning
Champagny that malicious gossip was being spread in Paris by sympathizers of the
ci-devant monarchy who were looking to discredit the new ruler.¹⁷
In February 1809 D’Aubusson wrote to defend Murat’s achievements in
Naples. Amongst these he listed the raising of two corps of an elite praetorian
guard (the Veliti¹⁸) and the reorganization of the Provincial Militia, which had
taken over public order duties from the French regiments being withdrawn for the
campaign against Austria in northern Italy.
Reassurance came from Paris too, ﬁrst from Saliceti, who reported early in
March that he had spoken to the emperor and that all was well: ‘The Emperor is
the centre of all the dynasties that he has founded and he wishes to direct the opera-
tions of each to ensure that they work together to create the great system that will
set the destiny of the world.’¹⁹
Marshal Berthier also wrote to reassure Murat of the emperor’s favourable 
disposition: ‘This, Sire, is what you must do: Be a King amongst your subjects,
but with the Emperor be a Vice-Roy. Be a Frenchman and never a Neapolitan.
Consult his Imperial Majesty in everything: those things which may seem at this
moment harmful to your subjects are in reality to their advantage, because every-
thing that the Emperor desires forms part of the vast plan of his projects and
his ideas, while the well-being of the nations that are governed by his dynasty
depends on the success of his lofty vision: it is for us simply to follow and obey his
orders and plans without trying to understand their depth.’²⁰
Napoleonic Naples
146
¹⁵ Le Brethon, vi. 458: 24 February 1809.
¹⁶ Le Brethon, vi. 478: Murat to Napoleon, 6 January 1809.
¹⁷ ASN: Min Esteri f. 5490, fascic 193: 5 February 1809.
¹⁸ See p. 253.
¹⁹ Le Brethon, viii. 3835, 53; Saliceti to Murat from Paris, 5 March 1809.
²⁰ Ibid., 3838, 59; Berthier to Murat, 5 March 1809.

<<<PDFPAGE 156>>>
The controversy dragged on throughout Murat’s reign without resolution.
At the end of 1809 the imperial administrators calculated that the total
Neapolitan debt had risen from 5.7 to 6.5 million francs. In 1810 relations
became even more strained and in January Champagny threatened military action
and warned the new Neapolitan ambassador in Paris, the Duke of Monteleone,
that the emperor ‘considers all commitments made to him to be inviolable and he
is accustomed to make even the most powerful Princes honour their obligations.
Should the government of the Two Sicilies continue to refuse to meet its obliga-
tions, he will be forced to order his generals to take the appropriate measures to
ensure thepayment of these sums.’ On 22 January the French ambassador
D’Aubusson and the chargé d’affaires Gosbois were recalled to Paris.²¹
In April 1810 Murat made a ﬁnal appeal that the contribution of 1,200,000
francs to the Legion d’Honneur be waived, since his government was maintaining
10,000 French troops, as well as paying for 50,000 Neapolitan soldiers, the navy,
the cost of preparations for the invasion of Sicily, and the cost for the ships being
built for France at Castellamare under the terms of the Treaty of Bayonne.
Toreduce current costs, Murat again asked permission to put his army on a peace
footing and to dismiss the French employees who duplicated his own staff and
cost 1,800,000 francs a year.²² Paris refused to acknowledge any of these pleas,
and on 23 June Naples was forced to acknowledge debts of more than 9,000,000
francs.²³
TRADING DISPUTES
Paris and Naples were also in dispute over commercial matters and the enforce-
ment of the blockade. At least initially, Napoleon had been convinced that
theKingdom of Naples was a land of untold natural wealth waiting only to be
exploited. That illusion was still alive in 1809 when a report prepared by the
Council for Trade and Industry in Paris described Naples as: ‘the promised
land ...unlike Peru where you have to dig for gold in the bowels of the earth in
Naples it lies glittering on the surface’.²⁴
Those expectations were soon disappointed, but nonetheless French commer-
cial interests focused on the Kingdom’s raw materials: olive oil for the Marseilles
The Costs of Empire
147
²¹ ASN, Min Esteri f.5490 fascic. 193: Champagny to Monteleone, 10 January 1810.
²² ANP: AFiv 1714a, 8 April 1810.
²³ ANP, 31 AP 575: Extraits de la convention signée à Paris 23 juin 1810. These included an out-
standing debt of 2,519,444 francs to be settled in ‘domain lands situated near Naples’, an annual debt
of 1,280,000 francs to the Legion d’Honneur, 1,275,035 francs for the upkeep of French troops,
3 million francs for the repayment of loans from France, to be consolidated on the Public Debt; and a
further debt of 1,289,562 francs to the Kingdom of Italy for the cost of maintaining Neapolitan
troops during the campaign of 1809.
²⁴ ANP: F12 549–50.210, Mémoire sur un project de traité de commerce avec le Royaume de
Naples.

<<<PDFPAGE 157>>>
soap industry, silk yarn for the Lyons weaving industries, and wool (‘very white,
ﬁne and strong’) for the cloth industries of Aix-la-Chapelle, Rouen, Liège, and
Beauvais, as well as liquorice and cotton. But it was also believed that Naples
could offer markets for ‘the ﬁne and middle range woollens’ from Abbeville,
Elbeuf, Languedoc, Liège, and Aix-la-Chapelle, as well as for other ‘small cloths’
and for ‘tanned leather goods’.²⁵
The emperor’s irritation increased, therefore, when Murat refused to acknow-
ledge French commercial privileges and failed to enforce the Continental block-
ade. As early as December 1808 Murat was denying that he had permitted British
goods to enter his Kingdom: ‘Sire, I can only answer your accusations by saying
that I am neither a rebel, nor an ingrate, nor am I mad, and that I would indeed
deserve to be sent to the Petites Maisons (the madhouse) and every ignominy had
Ibeen capable of such actions.’²⁶
Champagny asked D’Aubusson directly whether Murat was allowing British
and colonial goods to be freely imported, but the French chargé d’affaires ﬂatly
denied that this was true. When Champagny renewed the accusation a few days
later, D’Aubusson again denied it.²⁷ M. Blanc, the French consul in Naples,
agreed that he had not seen any ‘English colonial goods’ in Naples, but added,
‘I have had cause, however, to inform His Excellency M. D’Aubusson la Feuillade
of my concerns regarding the interlope trade carried out by the English with the
ports of Trieste, Fiume and other ports in the Morea.’ He claimed that it was com-
mon knowledge that there were huge stocks of English goods in both Sicily and
Malta, many of which were being smuggled into the Kingdom. But they were
almost impossible to trace since he did not have agents in every Neapolitan port,
and in any case the goods were landed on empty beaches.²⁸
The priorities of the imperial administration were clearly set out in the instruc-
tions given to Blanc’s successor, M. Doriol. He was to ensure that ‘the Imperial laws
against trade with England are being fully observed’, to check personally the certiﬁ-
cates of origin for all goods entering the city, and to report to Paris ‘anything that
might be of interest’. While ‘the close ties between the emperor and king Murat
meant that the Neapolitan government could have no interest contrary to that of the
French government, laxities might still occur through the negligence or corruption
of the secondary authorities’, which should be reported.²⁹ Doriol needed little
encouragement and sent off a string of complaints about the failure of the ‘interme-
diary authorities to observe the Imperial decrees’, claiming that large quantities of
English contraband goods were coming into Apulia from Albania and the Morea.³⁰
The consul’s complaints raised another dispute. In 1806 Joseph’s government
had abolished all existing commercial treaties, and stated that trade relations
Napoleonic Naples
148
²⁵ ANP: F12 549–50.210, Mémoire sur un project de traité de commerce avec le Royaume de
Naples.
²⁶ Le Brethon, vi, n.3651, 442: Murat to Napoleon, 9 December 1808.
²⁷ AAEP: CP Naples, 132: 7 December 1808, 11 December 1808.
²⁸ AAEP: CC Naples, 39, 1806–11, 102: 6 December 1808.
²⁹ Ibid. 120: March 1809.
³⁰ Ibid. 135: 12 May 1809, Doriol to Champagny.

<<<PDFPAGE 158>>>
between Naples and France would be regulated by a new agreement. In 1808 Paris
had imposed a highly disadvantageous commercial treaty on the Kingdom of
Italy, and was eager to extend the same terms to Naples but Murat resisted.³¹
In July 1809, D’Aubusson cut across these exchanges with a report on the dam-
age that renewal of war with Austria had caused to Neapolitan trade:
The situation is getting worse by the day. The King tells me that he is hoping that His
Majesty will permit him to allow American ships to enter the ports so that he may trade
with them to raise some money to meet the cost of the administration, and especially to
pay the army. The Tour d’Auvergne battalion is virtually without clothing or boots.³²
In September, Murat requested the emperor’s permission to trade with American
vessels:
Sire, the commerce of my Kingdom is absolutely nil: the granaries, depots and warehouses
are ﬁlled with goods but the land is no longer cultivated and there are even some fears for
the harvest. As a result it is impossible to raise taxes. In a word...I no longer know how to
pay my troops and at the same time keep the government going.
He requested that he at least be allowed to sell olive oil to the Americans.³³
Napoleon refused Murat permission to trade with the Americans and instead
demanded that the import duties on French cloth and other manufactures in
Naples be halved. Murat was astounded: ‘If your Majesty’s intentions are put into
effect, he will with a single order have pronounced the total ruin of my Kingdom.’
Attached to Murat’s letter was a memo drafted by Agar, which argued that ‘on the
day when French manufactured goods are admitted free of duty, we shall have to
abandon all forms of manufacture in this kingdom’.³⁴ Privately Agar told Murat
that the French demands would be a ‘mortal blow’ that would leave 60,000 with-
out employment in the province of Naples alone and damage even the production
of coarse cloth used by the ‘inferior classes’.³⁵
Nonetheless, on 12 November the French chargé d’affaires ‘delivered a demand
that French cloth be allowed to enter Naples free of duty’ on the grounds that this
duty contravened traditional French privileges. He also raised new complaints
against infringements of French consular privileges, navigation rights, and the
denial of warehousing facilities to French ships.³⁶
The situation deteriorated further when in April 1810 the emperor doubled the
duties on Neapolitan cotton imported to France. Murat objected that this meas-
ure ‘can have no object other than that of destroying this new industry which
Ihave tried to establish in the kingdom’.³⁷ In October, the emperor escalated the
commercial offensive, decreeing that France enjoyed the exclusive privilege of
The Costs of Empire
149
³¹ Zaghi (1986), 132.
³² AAEP: CP Naples, 133: D’Aubusson to Champagny, 1 July 1809.
³³ ANP: AFiv 1714a, 16 September 1809.
³⁴ ANP: AFiv 1714a, 28 October 1809.
³⁵ ANP: 31AP43, Mosbourg to Murat 27 October 1809.
³⁶ AAEP: CP Naples, 133, 12 November 1809.
³⁷ ANP: AFiv 1714a, 8 April 1810.

<<<PDFPAGE 159>>>
exporting cotton and silk cloth to Naples without duties, a measure that Murat
claimed ‘will deprive my treasury of a revenue which is not borne by French trade
but by my subjects who are the consumers of these goods’.³⁸
Murat again begged the emperor to relieve him of the cost of maintaining
French troops in the Kingdom, which since 1808 had risen from 17,404 to
40,154 men: ‘this makes it quite impossible to balance the budget of my state’.³⁹
During the autumn the situation in the Kingdom had become even more grave
and a poor harvest now threatened a serious subsistence crisis in the capital. Murat
renewed his pleas for permission to trade with the Americans and pointed out that
imperial decrees requiring the destruction of all goods seized from English vessels
had caused numerous bankruptcies in Naples. He complained bitterly about the
behaviour of French agents in Naples, his principal target, although unnamed,
being Consul Doriol: ‘In the name of God, Sire, bring to an end the painful 
situation in which I ﬁnd myself, I no longer have the strength to struggle against
perﬁdy and bad faith!’⁴⁰
November brought a further disappointment. Export licences arrived from
Paris, but only for trade with Africa, the Ottoman Porte, and the Kingdom of
Italy. However, permits were not required since Naples was at peace with all these
states. By contrast, there were no permits for trade with Britain, even though
licences issued in Bordeaux now permitted trade with Britain by way of American
ships.⁴¹
The subsistence crisis facing Naples and the Kingdom was still serious in the
early months of 1811, and Murat’s government adopted a more hostile posture.
The new chargé d’affaires Hue de Grosbois reported in January that the
Neapolitan government was deliberately ﬂouting the imperial decree that gave
privileged status to French textiles.⁴² In March, Doriol reported that the govern-
ment was openly supporting the anti-French attitude of its ofﬁcers.⁴³ In April
exports of cotton seed had been banned, a measure Doriol believed was designed
to destroy attempts to cultivate cotton in France and in the Papal States and was
therefore contrary to the emperor’s plan ‘to encourage the production of colonial
products in order to break the British monopoly’.⁴⁴
In September, Doriol reported that the government had increased duties on
colonial goods brought into Naples as prizes by French corsairs. Grain exports
inships of more than 60 tons had also been banned, which Doriol claimed was an
attempt to exclude France from the carrying trade although Murat said it was to
prevent large cargoes falling into the hands of British privateers. Doriol concluded
that this measure would mean that the 8 to 10 million francs that France was 
losing each year on its trade with Naples would increase, while France ‘must in
Napoleonic Naples
150
³⁸ ANP: AFiv 1714a, Murat to Napoleon, 20 October 1810.
³⁹ Ibid., 31 October 1810.
⁴⁰ Ibid., Murat to Napoleon, 9 November 1810.
⁴¹ Ibid., 16 November 1810.
⁴² AAEP: CP Naples, Gosbois to Duke of Cadore (formerly Champagny), 2 January 1811.
⁴³ AAEP: CC Naples, 39, 312: 21 March 1811.
⁴⁴ AAEP: CP Naples, 136, 4 April 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 160>>>
addition now pay for charters while her own ships rot in the harbour’. The quar-
antine regulations were also being used to deter French shipping.⁴⁵
THE SICILIAN EXPEDITION, 1810
In 1810 another dangerous quarrel developed that did even greater damage to
Murat’s relations with the emperor. The cause was the expedition that Murat pre-
pared for the invasion of Sicily in the summer of 1810. As one of the emperor’s
most renowned commanders, it was not surprising that Murat should have been
eager to demonstrate his military prowess in his own kingdom. In October 1808
he had achieved an easy but important propaganda success by recapturing Capri
from the small British garrison that Joseph had been unable to dislodge. However,
the emperor’s new war against Austria in the spring of 1809 had revealed the 
difﬁculty of reconciling the Kingdom’s military needs with those of the empire.
The recall of the French forces had left the Kingdom dangerously exposed to
counter-attack by the British and the Sicilians, who had immediately seized the
opportunity to assemble a major expeditionary force.⁴⁶ The threatened Anglo-
Sicilian invasion never materialized, but nonetheless it convinced Murat of
theneed to dislodge the British from Sicily.
By 1810, however, Murat had other compelling reasons for wanting to get the
British and the Bourbons out of Sicily. For both Murat and Caroline Bonaparte,
Napoleon’s decision to resolve the problems posed by the absence of an heir by
divorcing Josephine and marrying an Austrian princess was a double blow. Not
only was the new marriage likely to produce the long-awaited Bonaparte heir, but
even worse, the emperor’s proposed bride, the Archduchess Marie Louise, was a
favourite granddaughter of Queen Maria Carolina of Naples. Murat and Caroline
were not alone in drawing the conclusion that this could be the prelude to an
accommodation with the Neapolitan Bourbons that might easily cost them their
throne. The danger was the greater because it was well known that Maria Carolina
was at loggerheads with her English protectors and was widely suspected to be
secretly negotiating with the emperor. For Murat, the conquest of Sicily was as
much a dynastic as a military necessity.
When Napoleon announced his plan to divorce Josephine Beauharnais at the
family conference held in Paris in December 1809, only Murat and Cambacérès
openly opposed it. But when Murat travelled to Paris for the imperial wedding in
March 1810, ﬁrst on the list of his requests to the emperor was permission to go
ahead with the invasion of Sicily. After lengthy waits and many calculated rebuffs,
he ﬁnally got what he wanted and immediately returned to Naples to start prep-
arations for the expedition.
The Costs of Empire
151
⁴⁵ AAEP: CC Naples, 39, 401, 22 October 1811; 413, 23 December 1811.
⁴⁶ BNP; Fonds Italiens 1125 (vol. 2): Rapports au Roi 1809; Cavaignac to Murat, 6 July 1809.

<<<PDFPAGE 161>>>
The emperor’s agreement was only provisional, however, and in April Colonel
Leclerc was sent to Naples on a secret mission to report on the feasibility of the
project. Leclerc’s report reached Paris in May and convinced Napoleon that
the expedition could not succeed. But he decided that it would be useful to let it 
proceed simply to force the English to divert troops from the Iberian peninsula to
defend Sicily.⁴⁷
When Murat returned to Naples he ordered his War Minister, Hector Daure, to
prepare an invasion force of 22,000 men and to requisition transports for crossing
the Straits of Messina. On 16 May Murat left Naples with the advance guard
of his army, declaring that he would be in Palermo within two months. Early in
June he established his headquarters at Scilla, above the Straits of Messina. In June
the Imperial Minister of War, Baron Clarke, informed him that 15,000 French
and 2,000 Corsican troops would be available for the expedition, command of
which would be entrusted to a French general nominated by the emperor.⁴⁸
This was a terrible blow to Murat, who was still unaware that the emperor was
using the threatened invasion simply as a diversion. In that respect, at least, it
was successful. Lord Liverpool suspended all transfers of men from Sicily to Spain
and Portugal, and in anticipation that the invasion would be supported by the
Toulon ﬂeet the British blockade of Corfu was lifted to make more ships available
to defend Sicily.⁴⁹
In Calabria, however, Murat faced growing difﬁculties in keeping the expedi-
tion force on station. By August, the War Minister, Daure, had still not prepared a
ﬁnancial estimate, pay for the army was in arrears, and the military contractors
had not been paid, nor had the owners or the crews of the transports, which fell
easy prey to English and Bourbon warships.
The operation ended in ﬁasco and more recriminations. By the end of the 
summer Murat ﬁnally realized that the emperor had no intention of allowing him
to carry out the invasion. He quarrelled with the French commander, General
Grenier, and relations between the French and Neapolitan ofﬁcers were deterior-
ating. The Toulon ﬂeet never sailed, and by September the expedition was in 
danger of falling to pieces while disease, as usual, was taking a heavy toll.
On the night of 17 September General Cavaignac crossed the Straits with
3,500 men, by night, landing at dawn near Messina. When the beach-head came
under heavy ﬁre Cavaignac’s force re-embarked and made its way back to the
Calabrian shore with the loss of 600 men and ofﬁcers captured. It was widely sus-
pected that the sortie had merely been a feint to provide Murat with an excuse for
disbanding the expedition, which he did on 1 October. The news provoked
another outburst of imperial fury, and Napoleon accused Murat of disbanding the
expedition without orders and as a result of causing Masséna to be defeated by
the British in Portugal.⁵⁰
Napoleonic Naples
152
⁴⁷ Tulard (1983), 164–6.
⁴⁸ Rambaud (1911b), 435–47; Valente (1968), 164–9.
⁴⁹ PRO, WO 1, 308. Abstract of Royal Navy Intelligence Reports (Messina, 8 June 1810).
⁵⁰ Espitalier (1912), 59–80.

<<<PDFPAGE 162>>>
IMPERIAL DISCORDS 1809–1811
The crisis between Naples and Paris was coming to a head at a moment when the
imperial project was running into problems on all sides. There were many causes:
the uncertainties raised by Napoleon’s Austrian marriage, the growing difﬁculties
in Spain, and above all the strains felt throughout the empire as a result of renewed
efforts to impose the Continental blockade.
In Italy, the empire’s position had looked solid when Murat arrived in Naples in
1808. But in the following spring the situation changed dramatically when
Austria took advantage of France’s military commitments in Spain and Portugal to
invade northern Italy. After defeating Prince Eugène at Salice, the Austrians
brieﬂy occupied Venetia. The invasion did not last long, but it caused widespread
unrest and revealed the underlying fragility of French rule in Italy. At its height the
whole of Emilia was in revolt and Bologna under siege, and the situation became
even more chaotic in central Italy when Rome was annexed to France in May and
Pope Pius VII made a prisoner.⁵¹
Napoleon’s response was the counter-offensive that concluded with the victory
at Wagram in July 1809, which quickly restored order in Italy and brought further
territorial consolidation. The Kingdom of Italy now attained its fullest territorial
reach, placing Prince Eugène in nominal command of territories that stretched
from Sessia in the west to the Isonzo river in the east, from the Brenner in the
north to Emilia-Romagna in the south.⁵²
Stability, however, was never a lasting feature of Napoleon’s imperial enterprise,
and even in these years when the French empire reached its fullest extent the internal
strains and contradictions were very visible. The single most important source of
discontent was the emperor’s determination to make the Continental blockade
effective, which provoked resistance not only in France’s imperial possessions but
also within France itself, which since 1809 was suffering from economic recession
that showed no signs of slackening.⁵³ Protests from French commercial interests
forced the emperor to compromise, and a series of decrees between July and
September 1810 introduced a system of special licences for trade with Britain.
At the same time, the Fontainbleau Decree imposed severe new penalties in an
attempt to control the massive contraband in British goods expanding through-
out the empire.⁵⁴
These contradictory measures placed new strains on the fabric of empire and
on the system of imperial alliances, and in December 1810 the Tsar withdrew
Russia from the Continental blockade. The new measures to enforce the blockade
The Costs of Empire
153
⁵¹ Zaghi (1986), 620–4.
⁵² But still cut in two from west to east by the former Duchy of Parma and Piacenza, which
had been annexed to France in 1808 following the Treaty of Schönbrunn (October 1809); Zaghi
(1986), 370.
⁵³ Bergeron (1972), 207–15.
⁵⁴ St Cloud decree of July 1810, the Trianon Decrees: Woolf (1991), 141–52.

<<<PDFPAGE 163>>>
were also resisted in the satellite and annexed territories, and cost the emperor’s
brother, Louis, his crown in 1810 when he was forced to abdicate the throne of
Holland. In Westphalia and Sweden Jerome and Bernadotte responded more 
circumspectly, but only the emperor’s step-son and Viceroy in northern Italy,
Prince Eugène, took the path of abject compliance.⁵⁵
THE CRISIS: JUNE–JULY 1811
Murat’s position had already become highly insecure because of the Sicilian
expedition and it was rumoured in October 1810 that his French generals in
Naples had been ordered to depose him.⁵⁶ It was widely expected that he would
soon share the fate of the king of Holland, and in Paris the imperial bureaucracy
seized on Murat’s weakness to press its demands with greater force.
In February 1811 Baron de Durant was sent as imperial Minister
Plenipotentiary to Naples with instructions that amounted to a bill of attainder.
His orders repeated that the Kingdom’s relations to France were ﬁxed by the ‘con-
stitution of 30 March 1806’, which recognized the Kingdom as part of the empire
and made its crown revertible to the emperor’s family. They listed the three sets of
debts outstanding to the empire.⁵⁷ All were in arrears and most had not been paid.
Nor had the Kingdom met its obligation to build two warships every year: it had
failed to implement the blockade satisfactorily or to agree to a commercial treaty
with France. The French minister was instructed to demand the immediate settle-
ment of all debts owed the emperor and the imperial treasury, the immediate
delivery of the ships, and energetic measures to enforce the blockade.⁵⁸
A month later Grosbois reported that France was no longer considered a most
favoured nation in Naples, that its envoys were treated coldly, the Code Napoléon
was held openly in contempt, and that Murat did not disassociate himself from
such attitudes.⁵⁹
Following the birth of Napoleon’s son on 20 March, Murat travelled to Paris
but returned to Naples at the end of May before the baptism and despite the
emperor’s orders that he remain in Paris. The long expected crisis then came to a
head on 14 June when Murat decreed that all French citizens in government 
service must apply for Neapolitan nationality.⁶⁰
The emperor’s response was devastating. On 6 July he decreed that all
Frenchsubjects were citizens of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, a measure that
Napoleonic Naples
154
⁵⁵ Zaghi (1986), 367–8; Bergeron (1972), 207–15; Schroeder (1994), 402–12.
⁵⁶ Notiziastorica (1848), 121–3.
⁵⁷ These included the annual payment of 500,000 francs to the emperor; the debt to the Legion
d’Honneur; and the payments owing for the maintenance of French troops in the Kingdom and for
the Neapolitan troops serving outside the Kingdom.
⁵⁸ On 17 July the emperor was informed that the Neapolitan debt to France had been recalculated
at 6,037,500 francs.
⁵⁹ AAEP: Naples CP, 136, Grosbois to Cadore, 11 March 1811.
⁶⁰ Ibid., 14 June 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 164>>>
‘humiliated Murat before the whole of Europe’.⁶¹ When the emperor learned that
Murat had ordered his senior ofﬁcers to take a new oath of loyalty, he gave orders
for General Grenier to form an Army of Observation from the French troops
already in theKingdom and take up offensive positions.⁶²
This was tantamount to a declaration of war and Naples was again an occupied
territory. Faced by the emperor’s threat of military action, Murat backed down
and agreed to withdraw his decree on French employees. Contemporary accounts
suggest he suffered a mental breakdown, threatened to shoot himself with a pistol,
and after withdrawing to the palace of Capodimonte refused to speak to any of his
ministers. He then dismissed Daure, the War Minister, for plotting against him,
and replaced him with Antonio Maghella, a former protégé of Saliceti.⁶³
Napoleon now gave the crisis a further twist when he accused Murat of stealing
the Spanish crown jewels that Charles IV of Spain had entrusted to him for 
safekeeping during the uprising at Aranjuez in 1808. Their ownership was now in
dispute between the emperor and his brother Joseph Bonaparte, but the jewels
had disappeared and Murat was held responsible.⁶⁴
This was the opportunity for Caroline Murat to exert her own power. She was
now openly recognized to be the leader of the pro-French faction at Murat’s court
and in September 1811 she travelled to Paris to intercede with Napoleon on her
husband’s behalf. But the queen’s intervention was not the only reason that Murat
escaped the fate of the king of Holland. At the height of the crisis in July 1811
Baron Durand had reported on the strength of anti-French feeling and the growth
of a nationalist awareness amongst the Neapolitans in reaction to the Emperor’s
demands.
The King in truth deludes himself with the state of his country and seems to believe that he
is strong enough to do without the co-operation of the French and rely entirely on
the Neapolitans.
But he also warned against pushing the conﬂict too far since this would beneﬁt
only the English and the Court in Palermo.⁶⁵
Durand’s warning was heeded in Paris and it was probably the danger that the
British and their Sicilian allies would be the main beneﬁciaries of the rift between
Naples and Paris that secured Murat’s throne for the time being. In any case, Paris
began to make more conciliatory overtures and Marshal Pérignon was sent to
inform Murat that the emperor had no intention of changing the status of the
Kingdom and that Murat was king because the emperor wished it so. But the
Marshal warned Murat to take full note of his duties: ‘duties that the king of
Holland had for a moment forgotten, with the result that he was immediately
removed from the ranks of rulers and his Kingdom ceased to exist’. But Murat was
also informed that the emperor had dismissed the Neapolitan ambassador in
The Costs of Empire
155
⁶¹ Cutolo (1937), 408.
⁶² Ibid. 411.
⁶³ Ibid. 414.
⁶⁴ Ibid. 417.
⁶⁵ AAEP: CP, Naples 137, Durand to Cadore, 9 July 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 165>>>
Paris, the Duke of Campochiaro, and that Naples would be represented in the
future by a mere Minister Plenipotentiary.
Murat continued vigorously to protest his treatment:
I remain deeply saddened by your suspicions. We are currently working even at night inthe
shipyards to have the ships built . . . Sir, you are making impossible demands, and while
we shall nevertheless do everything to comply with your orders you have utterly destroyed
the equilibrium of my ﬁnances.⁶⁶
1812
Paris was still unrelenting. In January 1812 the Imperial Ministry of War and the
Navy demanded a further 437,306 ducats for the maintenance of the French
Army of Observation. Murat had Agar⁶⁷ draw up a report on the contributions
made to France that openly challenged the ‘untruths’ contained in the commun-
ications from Paris.
Agar pointed out that although the government’s revenues had increased, no less
than 80 per cent of the total budget was now being devoted to military expendi-
tures. He argued that the comparisons made in Paris between Naples and France or
the Kingdom of Italy were meaningless because they took no account of differences
in populations and wealth. Huge areas of the Kingdom were uncultivated, the land
tax yielded far less than the 4 per cent of agricultural production estimated for
France, and indirect taxes were also lower per capita because consumption was less:
For the most part the inhabitants of the Kingdom of Naples live off little, that the people
have few needs and scarcely even need to dress themselves, a luxury that exists only in
the Capital, that property is less well distributed than elsewhere and that at present the
majority of the population is made up of men who make a living from casual labour, 
ﬁshing and public welfare.⁶⁸
The Kingdom of Italy had a far larger annual budget, enjoyed revenues of more
than 100,000,000 francs, and supported an army of 60,000 men: it had paid
more than 32,000,000 francs in subsidies, but had been at peace since Marengo.
The Kingdom of Naples, by contrast, had existed for only three years and had
to defend extensive coastlines with fortiﬁcations that had to be completely
rebuilt. It had raised 40,000 conscripts and amassed 8,000 muskets and 3,000
cannon. It had supplied one 74-gun ship and more than a hundred gunboats.
Ithad repaid 20,000,000 francs in debts to Holland and France, and although it
had not yet paid any direct subsidies to the imperial treasury, it had maintained
anentire French army.⁶⁹
Napoleonic Naples
156
⁶⁶ ANP: 31 AP 6, Murat to Napoleon, 21 October 1811.
⁶⁷ Now Count Mosbourg, thanks to Caroline’s intervention in Paris.
⁶⁸ ANP: 31 AP 43, Mosbourg to Murat, 1 April 1812.
⁶⁹ ANP: 31 AP 6, Murat to di Gallo, 5 February 1812.

<<<PDFPAGE 166>>>
RUSSIA
When in May 1812 Murat left Naples to join the Grande Armée for the campaign
that would ﬁnish in Moscow, Mosbourg warned him that the Kingdom did not
have the means to sustain a new war.⁷⁰ Writing from Germany, Murat argued
that Prussia and Poland had made the sacriﬁces demanded by the emperor.
Mosbourg rejected the comparison: Prussia and Poland were both occupied
countries. In any case, the resources of the Neapolitan kingdom were exhausted,
he insisted, and no further commitments could be made without recourse to a
foreign loan.
For the ﬁrst time the queen was appointed as head of a regency government
during Murat’s absence. She had given instructions for personal taxes to be raised
in advance and for the land tax to be paid monthly. Mosbourg had also increased
revenues by switching certain administrative costs from the Treasury to the
provinces, ‘which is really an increase in taxation, but will not immediately be seen
as such’.⁷¹
In November, Mosbourg reported to Murat that the budget prevision for 1813
was 73,000,000 lire (new denomination) against expected expenditures of
80,000,000 to 84,000,000 lire. Revenues for 1812 had totalled 72,000,000 lire,
less 2,000,000 in rents on state domains that had been used for personal indemni-
ties, road building, and gifts. It would be necessary, therefore, to raise a further
4,000,000 lire. Since there were no more domain lands to sell this could only be
achieved through taxes on land sales and greater efﬁciency in management.
The increase in tax revenues over the previous four years had been considerable:
from 57,000,000 lire in 1808 to 61,000,000 in 1809, and 73,000,000 in 1812.
This increase had been achieved almost entirely through the additional taxes 
paid by the provinces, which now contributed 4,000,000 lire a year more than
they had in 1808. Any attempt to increase taxes further was, in his opinion ‘polit-
ically dangerous’. The war budget for 1813 now stood at 57,000,000 lire, roughly
equivalent to total state revenues in 1808.⁷² Despite the precarious situation, the
operation to consolidate the National Debt had been successful, and the govern-
ment had also paid the ﬁfth instalment owed on the Dutch loan.⁷³
Murat did not return to Naples until January 1813. He commanded the cavalry
reserve during the advance on Moscow and was appointed Commander-in-Chief
when Napoleon left the Grande Armée on 5 December, after creating the
Principality of Ponte Corvo for ‘Prince Lucien, the son of our dearly beloved
brother the King of Naples’.⁷⁴ Then, without seeking the emperor’s permission,
Murat handed his command to Prince Eugène and returned to Naples.
The Costs of Empire
157
⁷⁰ ANP: 31 AP 43, 18 May 1812.
⁷¹ Ibid., 11 July 1811.
⁷² ANP: 31 AP 34, Mosbourg to Murat, 14 November 1812.
⁷³ Ibid., 28 October 1812.
⁷⁴ BSPN, Ms XXI B5, Quartier Imperial de Smorgoni, 5 December 1812.

<<<PDFPAGE 167>>>
On27January LeMoniteur in Paris accused Murat of deserting his post in Russia.
Murat demanded an apology, arguing that he had agreed to take his troops only as
far as the Vistula,and that he had been forced to return to Naples by ill health and
the threat of an Anglo-Sicilian invasion of his Kingdom.⁷⁵
All the issues in contention between Paris and Naples came to a head again.
On 30 January the Duke of Bassano demanded that Naples should immediately
supply 16,000 infantry, 2,500 cavalry, and twenty pieces of artillery for the
Grande Armée. The Neapolitan Minister Plenipotentiary in Paris, the Duke of
Carignano, observed that this was impossible and unlawful since Naples was
threatened by the Anglo-Bourbon forces in Sicily and could not put its own 
existence in peril by allowing further troop withdrawals. He agreed, however,
that Murat would impose another round of conscription, but he could not 
supply cavalry because ‘there are no horses left in the Kingdom’. The troops left
to defend the Kingdom and keep order were 50 per cent below estimates, and the
Kingdom needed to purchase muskets, side arms, and horses from France. The 
government had also been forced to abandon the arming of its maritime defences
for want of funds.
Attached to the memo was a report drawn up by General Tugny, the Neapolitan
War Minister, who had calculated that by December 1812 Naples had supplied
11,971 infantry, 2,050 cavalry, and 1,994 mounts to the emperor’s forces in Spain
and central Europe, and had provided a total of 19,501 men and 2,471 mounts
for the emperor’s wars since 1808. The Neapolitan government also demanded
the immediate return of the Farnese property in the ci-devant Papal States that
hadbeen ceded to Murat by the secret clauses of the Treaty of Bayonne and which
Napoleon had seized after Murat’s departure from Russia.⁷⁶
Throughout Murat’s absence in 1812 the French consul in Naples, Doriol, had
kept up his attacks on the Neapolitan government, reporting regularly to Paris
that Naples was breaking the terms of the blockade and trading with Britain. He
also argued that the government was trying to prevent French privateers from
operating off the coast for fear that their prizes might disclose the scale of the 
contraband trade.
In May 1813 Doriol escalated the charges, stating that the Neapolitan govern-
ment had knowingly issued licences to a French commercial house ‘notoriously
acknowledged to be agents of the house of Scott Burns and Co. of London....This
disregard of the rules of the Continental System, together with the infractions that
occur here daily, risks causing the collapse of the entire System.’ The trade in
British colonial goods was now open and the huge stocks that had been built up in
Malta and Sicily were hardly sufﬁcient to meet the rapidly growing demand.
Sugar, in particular, was being imported in vast quantities hidden in cargoes of salt
from Sardinia. In June, Doriol reported that Naples was trading ‘almost openly
Napoleonic Naples
158
⁷⁵ ANP: 31 AP 6, Murat to Napoleon, 13 April 1813.
⁷⁶ ASN: Min Esteri f.5545, Carignano to Bassano, 30 January 1813.

<<<PDFPAGE 168>>>
with Malta’.⁷⁷ The Neapolitan government denied the charges and formally
requested Doriol’s recall.
1813–1814: NEGOTIATING WITH THE ALLIES
Murat was trying to sell his services to the emperor on the best terms he could obtain,
but the imperial administration in Paris refused to negotiate.⁷⁸ Meanwhile Murat
had started negotiating with the Austrians as well and when news reached Naples that
the emperor had left Paris on 9 April 1813 to join the Grande Armée in Germany, the
Neapolitan government refused to send the troops demanded because ‘the tranquil-
lity of Italy requires that the King remains in command of a strong force’. There had
been a recent uprising in Naples, brigandage was again spreading ‘on a scale that
threatens to assume the form of a guerrilla war on the frontiers of the Kingdom of
Italy and the Empire’. Resistance to conscription was growing throughout Italy, and
in Naples the Provincial Legions had ﬂatly refused to join the regiments of the line. As
soon as it was known that a regiment was to be sent out of the Kingdom, the deser-
tion rates became massive.⁷⁹ Fears of internal unrest led the Neapolitan government
to step up its attempts to establish a concordat with the papacy, which it was hoped
would ‘have important consequences for the internal state of the kingdom at this
moment and most especially in the whole southern region where the Catholic
Religion and religious sentiments are especially vigorous’.⁸⁰
When in May news reached Naples of Napoleon’s victory at Lützen, the tone of
the Neapolitan diplomatic correspondence changed. In an ostentatious display
of loyalty, the foreign minister, di Gallo, informed the imperial minister of the
celebrations being organized for the emperor’s victory. But he also rejected
Bassano’s insinuation that concerns about internal unrest were an excuse for not
contributing towards the emperor’s campaign. The government was continually
discovering new evidence of the subversive plots being organized in Naples and
the English garrisons in Sicily and Ponza had been reinforced.⁸¹
Napoleon’s victories persuaded Murat to rejoin the Grande Armée in Germany,
where apart from a brief return to Naples in August, he remained until October.
There was a partial reconciliation, but after a lengthy meeting with Prince
Metternich in Dresden Napoleon still refused the peace terms offered by Austria.
As a result, when Napoleon was defeated at the Battle of the Nations at Leipzig in
October, Murat reopened negotiations with the allies. The emperor attempted to
have him arrested, but on 4 November he returned to Naples and on the 11
Neapolitan ports were opened to allied shipping.
The Costs of Empire
159
⁷⁷ AAEP: CC Naples, 40, 198, Doriol to Bassano, 21 July 1812; ibid. 360, 10 May 1813; ibid.
375, 5 June 1813.
⁷⁸ ANP: 31 AP 6, Bassano to Di Gallo, 30 January 1813.
⁷⁹ ASN: Min. Esteri f.5545, Carignano to Bassano, 1 June 1813.
⁸⁰ ASN: Min. Esteri f.5545, Di Gallo to Carignano, 26 September 1813.
⁸¹ Ibid., Di Gallo to Carignano, 17 May 1813.

<<<PDFPAGE 169>>>
CONCLUSIONS
Murat’s defection was not consummated until January 1814, when it was already
clear that the end of the empire was imminent. Murat’s main concern was to sell his
services to the allies in the hope of keeping his Kingdom, but his actions also
reﬂected the deeper contradictions on which the imperial enterprise was founded.
In this Naples was not unusual and the frictions between the emperor and his
brother-in-law illustrate Paul Schroeder’s claim that the empire had little function or
purpose beyond Napoleon’s military needs, some of which were constant (such as
the need for men, mounts, materiel, and money) but most of which were passing.⁸²
Murat came close to being a casualty of the imperial system, and on at least
three occasions he received some form of ultimatum. If he did not suffer the fate
of Louis Bonaparte it was because southern Italy was too far away to be treated like
Holland and as Baron Durand had noted, any political change was likely to bene-
ﬁt the British and their Sicilian allies. As the fortunes of the empire declined after
1811, however, the balance of power shifted and as Murat’s support grew more
important to the emperor so did his bargaining power. But by then the imperial
enterprise was rapidly heading for the rocks.
The relations between Naples and Paris reveal an unambiguous audit of
Napoleon’s empire, although things were not quite as bad as Murat’s government
made out. The massive increase in military expenditure was a devastating drain on
resources, but most of the imperial demands were never met. Nonetheless, the
prolonged state of war in the Mediterranean had also devastated trade and virtu-
ally every branch of economic activity, which was only partially compensated by
the contraband trade that Doriol rightly suspected had become the Kingdom’s
principal business.⁸³
Mosbourg’s budget ﬁgures clearly reveal the costs of empire. Between 1806 and
1812 the Kingdom’s direct ﬁscal revenues had grown by more than 50 per cent.
By 1812 80 per cent of those revenues were devoted to military expenditure,
mainly outside the Kingdom, and by 1813 the military budget alone was greater
than the total state budget in 1806. Even though Naples avoided paying much of
what the emperor demanded, it had still paid a great deal—and not in ﬁnancial
terms alone.
Napoleonic Naples
160
⁸² ‘The very notion of Napoleon’s empire as a conceivable, potentially durable form of European
international politics, or as a leading one, is a contradiction in terms.’ Schroeder (1994), 394.
⁸³ See p. 221 below.

<<<PDFPAGE 170>>>
¹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 214.
9
The Promise of Change
NAPLES: A MODEL OF THE EMPIRE’S
MODERNIZING MISSION?
The circumstances of the French occupation of southern Italy could hardly have
been less promising. The brief decade of French rule in the South took place
against a background of invasive colonial subordination, prolonged commercial
economic recession, intermittent warfare, constant political uncertainty, and
almost permanent internal unrest. Yet the changes that took place within southern
Italy in this brief span of time were remarkable. Pietro Colletta, who had served
Murat as an ofﬁcer and administrator, opened his later account of these years with
the simple statement: ‘Never has a society witnessed greater upheaval or greater
transformation in so short a space of time than the Kingdom of Naples at the
beginning of the nineteenth century.’¹
The reorganization of the monarchy began within months of the establishment
of the new regime. Feudalism was abolished, public administration was restruc-
tured along French lines, and a new ﬁscal system based on a standard land tax was
introduced. The debts of the former monarchy were liquidated and a new public
debt was established, funded by the sale of the lands expropriated from the 
religious orders and from the crown.
As well as a new system of central and local government, the Napoleonic rulers
introduced the Napoleonic Code Civil, the French commercial and criminal law
codes. They reformed the magistracy and the administration of justice; they
passed laws to promote the establishment of schools and colleges in the provinces.
They reorganized the Kingdom’s vast patrimony of charitable foundations and for
the ﬁrst time introduced military conscription. They established a Feudal
Commission that between 1809 and 1811 settled all litigation arising from the
abolition of feudalism and oversaw the division of the feudal estates between
the former owners and the local communities as well as the division of the former
common lands among the inhabitants of the rural villages.
Colletta’s claim was an exaggeration, but not a wild one, and in the broader
context of Napoleonic Italy and Napoleonic Europe the reforms that took place in

<<<PDFPAGE 171>>>
southern Italy in these years had few comparisons. Napoleon’s rulers and adminis-
trators everywhere loudly proclaimed the modernizing mission of the Grande
Nation. But the forms of government adopted in the different imperial satellites,
principalities, annexed territories, and départements réunis varied greatly and were
shaped as much by pragmatism as ideology.
To explain why southern Italy was the theatre for an exceptionally broad range
of reforms historians have looked to Napoleon’s rulers and their administrators.
But although the key ﬁgures in the government of the emperor’s Mediterranean
colony were men of wide political and administrative experience, none had the
career proﬁle of committed reformers.² More recent studies have emphasized
theimportance of the contribution made by Neapolitans, who were indeed the
architects of the most important changes that took place in these years and pro-
vided strong lines of continuity with earlier Bourbon initiatives. Of this there was
no better demonstration than Giuseppe Zurlo, the key ﬁgure in the ﬁnal season of
Bourbon reformism after 1799 and who as Joachim Murat’s Interior Minister
after 1809 implemented the same reform programme through the Feudal
Commission. Zurlo was neither a single nor an isolated example and at every
levelthe generation that had reached political maturity in the decade of Bourbon
absolutism and the Republic rallied strongly to the promise of modernity offered
by the Grande Nation.³
Recognition of the importance of the roles played by sections of the Neapolitan
elites serves to modify the crudely top-down models of political and institutional
change that dominate much of the literature, but does not go far enough. To a
much greater degree than has been acknowledged, however, the forces for the
institutional changes that took place after 1806 came from within the Kingdom
and were not imposed from above.
When Marshal Masséna installed Joseph Bonaparte on the throne of Naples in
1806 the new rulers inherited the crisis of the monarchy that Ferdinand IV had
again abandoned in his ﬂight to Sicily. Despite the ﬁne rhetoric of the new
regime’s modernizing mission, the timing and priority of its interventions were
determined by the pressing practical needs posed by the almost complete collapse
of public administration and public ﬁnances. In a second moment, however,
forces from below began to play a much greater part in shaping the outcome of
interventions that came to acquire a momentum of their own over which the 
government and its administrators had little control.
Nor is this surprising. Despite the change in regime, the central issue that
theFrench administrators inherited from the crisis of the ancien régime was the
enormously sensitive and complex balance between local and central power.
The campaign against feudalism in the eighteenth century had attempted to
Napoleonic Naples
162
² Rambaud (1911), 555–6; Valente (1965), 231–2.
³ The most detailed accounts can be found in Villani (1986/1995); De Martino (1984); 
De Lorenzo (1984 and 1997); Scirocco (1978).

<<<PDFPAGE 172>>>
replace the complex devolved power-sharing of the ancien régime with more cen-
tralized and bureaucratic forms of power. This had been a critical issue in the civil
war that followed the founding of the Republic in 1799, where it became clear
that the struggles against feudal power in the provinces were also struggles for
greater local autonomy, not greater central power; hence the collision between the
aspirations of the republican capital and the royalist provinces.
The crisis of the ancien régime monarchy had left these issues unresolved, but
the uncompromisingly centralist and autocratic administrative templates that the
French rulers sought to impose once again put them at the centre of the political
agenda. Which is why the short period of French rule cannot be considered
eitheras a clean break with the past or as a simple exercise in ‘rational’ modern
governance, as the French and their supporters like to claim. Indeed, despite
appearances the initiatives of the new government were not driven by the neatly
interlocking logic of the new regime’s promise of modernity, nor by the well-tried
administrative templates that it introduced, nor even by the remarkable zeal
shown by many of its agents. Ideology provided the models but contingent 
necessities dictated the priorities. The greatest and most pressing problems facing
the new regime were direct consequences of the collapse of the ancien régime
monarchy, which was the principal reason political and administrative change in
the South took different and distinctive forms. It was also why in 1815 there could
be no turning back in the South. But that situation also offered different social
groups opportunities to develop their own agendas and negotiate their own roles,
making the South the theatre for an experiment in constructing a post-feudal
order that was contradictory but in some respects also unique.
ESTABLISHING THE NEW ORDER
Within weeks of their arrival in Naples, Joseph’s ministers were busy gathering
information from every source to acquire a better understanding of their new
Kingdom. They received detailed reports from the former French ambassador in
Naples, read the works and descriptions of leading authorities from Gaetano
Filangieri to Francesco Maria Galanti, and consulted with those who had rallied
to the new regime.⁴
Joseph’s rapid tour of the provinces in April 1806 yielded a further crop of
reports, and on his instructions ‘statistical surveys’ were drawn up for selected
provinces, giving details of the population of the principal towns and the state
of trade and agriculture.⁵ In April, Antoine Christophe Saliceti, the Minister of
The Promise of Change
163
⁴ See especially De Martino (1984), 3–71.
⁵ See the papers and reports collected by Roederer and Miot de Melito that form the introductory
section of the papers of Joseph Bonaparte (now in the ANP, Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 2 and
ibid. 381 AP 5: Aperçu Statistique (Province de Bari, Capitanata, Molise, Terra di Lavoro, Principato
Ulteriore)).

<<<PDFPAGE 173>>>
Police, instructed the former royal governors (Presidi) to make regular reports on
the general conditions and statistics for each province.⁶
The new government set to work to refashion the ancien régime monarchy
using templates honed and tried in France. In March, the Council of State was
established and the central government was organized around ﬁve ministries. The
major juridical reforms that paved the way for the reorganization of the state
were introduced during the summer, starting with the law of 2 August 1806 that 
abolished feudalism. As in France, this was the juridical premise for everything
that followed. By ending all forms of independent and private jurisdiction the
abolition of feudalism established the absolute sovereignty of the state and opened
the way for reconstructing the Neapolitan monarchy from the foundations up.
The natural sequel was the law of 8 August that introduced the French system of
central and local administration. The Ministry of Justice was stripped of its previous
administrative functions and the Kingdom was divided into fourteen provinces and
the former royal Presiditook the title of Intendents(equivalent to the French ‘Prefect’).
Each Intendent presided over a Provincial Council. Below these a new administrative
substructure of Sotto-Intendenti assisted by District Councils was established.⁷
The new system was centralized. Every town, village, and hamlet was assigned
its place in an administrative hierarchy based on population and importance. The
municipal parlamenti that had formerly elected local ofﬁcials were abolished, and
new municipal councils were established in every town, recruited from the prop-
ertied classes and headed by a mayor (sindaco) appointed by the Intendent.⁸ On 16
September the Monitore Napoletano explained the ‘former Presidi have become
Intendents’ but these ofﬁcers were now solely responsible for overseeing local
administration, answered only to the Minister of the Interior, and no longer had
any role in the courts, which were now run exclusively by magistrates.⁹
The law also provided for the establishment of provincial and local assemblies
whose functions, like those of their counterparts in France, were purely adminis-
trative. Their task was to gather information on local conditions and to organize the
distribution of the new land tax (fondiaria). Since time was needed to draw up
the lists of qualiﬁed persons and then to nominate the members of the provincial and
district assemblies, they were to meet for the ﬁrst time in the summer of 1808.¹⁰
THE KING’S MEN
The men who were principally responsible for reorganizing the Kingdom after the
conquest were all seasoned political survivors with a range of different administrative
Napoleonic Naples
164
⁶ See below pp. 167–8, 171.
⁷ The law of 28 Pluviôse Year VIII (16 February 1800).
⁸ Those appointed to serve on the District Councils needed to have an annual income of at least
24 ducats: the qualiﬁcation doubled for communities with more than 3,000 and quadrupled for
those over 6,000. The membership of these bodies changed every four years. See Villani (1986);
Scirocco (1978).
⁹ Monitore Napoletano, 16 September 1806.
¹⁰ Scirocco (1978); De Lorenzo (1996); De Martino (1984).

<<<PDFPAGE 174>>>
experience. Joseph Bonaparte had been trained in the hard school of Corsican 
factional politics and had become a skilled diplomat and political broker, but he had
little experience as an administrator. When he ﬁrst reached Naples, he showed a 
certain amount of energy and was the ﬁrst ruler to tour his provinces. But he was
happy to delegate administrative responsibility to the men he chose—or who had
been selected by the emperor—to serve him.
This was not a bad decision and the three senior administrators sent by
Napoleon to assist his brother were certainly not lightweights. Although they
loathed one another, they were all very well equipped to act as what Stuart Woolf
terms the vectors of the administrative mentalités of the new order.¹¹Two of them,
André Francois Miot, and Antoine Christophe Saliceti, were chosen by the
emperor, the third, Pierre Louis Roederer, by Joseph.
Born at Versailles in 1762, André Francois Miot was the son of a grand commis
of the ancien régime who won preferment at an early age in the Ministry of War as
had his father and uncle. Like many high-ranking but non-noble ofﬁcials, Miot
initially supported the Revolution but was soon horriﬁed by its violence.¹² He
survived the coup of Thermidor, and in February 1795 the Directory appointed
him Minister Plenipotentiary in Tuscany. Miot was already a friend of Joseph
Bonaparte and came to know both Napoleon Bonaparte and his civil commissar,
Antoine Christophe Saliceti, in Italy in 1796. In December 1796 Napoleon sent
Miot to help Joseph impose order in Corsica, but also to replace Saliceti, which
was the origin of their subsequent enmity. Miot then served as ambassador to
Turin before joining the French diplomatic mission in Holland.
A ﬁrm supporter of the Coup of 18–19 Brumaire, Miot was well rewarded.¹³
His relations with Joseph Bonaparte grew closer and in October 1800 he was
sent again to Corsica with instructions ‘to bring the Corsicans into civilization’. In
his second mission to Corsica from March 1801 to September 1802 Miot’s task
was more simply to destroy the enemies of the Bonaparte clan, which he did
withbrutal efﬁciency. The administration and courts were purged of Bonaparte’s
opponents who were imprisoned, exiled, or executed as enemies of France.¹⁴
A proven Bonaparte loyalist, after returning to France in 1802 Miot worked on
the new Code Civil and was appointed Prefect of the left bank of the Rhine. He
was put in charge of security (haute police) during Joseph Bonaparte’s prepara-
tions for the invasion of Britain in 1805, and Napoleon chose him to be his
brother’s principal minister in Naples. Joseph made him Count of Melito, and
ﬁrst named him Minister of War then Minister of the Interior with responsibility
for reorganizing the central administration. Miot’s political and administrative
experience suited him to the task, and as a particularly fervent anti-clerical
The Promise of Change
165
¹¹ See Woolf (1991), 72–4.
¹² To avoid denunciation by the Jacobins, he took part in the brutal repression of the counter-
revolution in the Vendée in 1792 and then moved to the Foreign Ministry.
¹³ He was appointed Secretary General at the War Ministry in November 1799, then to the
Tribunat, and in September 1800 to the Council of State.
¹⁴ Renucci, Francesco Ottaviano Memorie e Storie di Corsica, cited in Poli (2003), 7–11.

<<<PDFPAGE 175>>>
hepressed for the immediate suppression of religious houses to solve the govern-
ment’s dire ﬁnancial difﬁculties.¹⁵
Of Joseph’s three senior administrators, Pierre Louis Roederer had the broadest
administrative experience.¹⁶ A close ally of Sièyes, Roederer was a ﬁrm supporter
of the Coup of 18–19 Brumaire in 1799 and of the Constitution of Year VIII
(December 1799) that established the position of First Consul. From December
1799 to September 1802 he served in the Council of State and oversaw the re-
organization of public administration into Prefectures, Sub-prefectures, and
Municipalities. With Joseph Bonaparte in March 1800 he negotiated with the
delegation from the United States, and in 1801 drafted the constitution for
Napoleon’s Italian Republic.¹⁷ It was at Joseph’s request that Roederer travelled
toNaples in February 1806, although it was not until November that Napoleon
ﬁnally agreed to a permanent transfer.
Roederer was the principal architect of the major reforms introduced in the
summer of 1806: the reorganization of central and local administration along
French lines, the introduction of a standard progressive land tax (fondiaria), aboli-
tion of the tax-farms and arrendamenti, and the redemption of the debts of the
former monarchy through sales of public land and the suppression of the remain-
ing possessioner houses and convents in the Kingdom. In 1808 he followed
Joseph Bonaparte to Spain, by which time progress had been made with the sales
of crown and Church lands, but most of the rest of Roederer’s legislation had
stillto be implemented and was already attracting strong criticism. Later in his
memoirs he expressed nothing but contempt for Naples, probably in an attempt
to distance himself from criticism raised by his successors.
Miot also left with Joseph, so that the only senior French ofﬁcial left when
Joachim Murat reached Naples was the Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti.
The only one not to write his memoirs, Saliceti was also the most powerful
but least visible of the senior French ofﬁcials in Naples and deserves some closer
attention since his career is not well known but offers important insights into the
means used to establish the French regime in Naples.
In Corsica Saliceti had been a leading opponent of Paolo Paoli and the sep-
aratists, and hence an early patron of the Bonaparte family.¹⁸ Despite his Jacobin
Napoleonic Naples
166
¹⁵ Miot de Melito, Mémoires (1880), i. Introduction; ii. 286.
¹⁶ Born in Metz in 1754, Roederer’s career began with managing the family’s glass works, but he
became actively involved in the political and public debates of the 1780s and won acclaim for a pamphlet
calling for a uniﬁed system of taxes. In 1789 he was elected to the Constituent Assembly and to the
Tax Committee in 1790. In August 1792 he was denounced by Marat, but survived thanks to
Thermidor. See Roederer (ed. Forsyth, 1989), and Roederer (ed. Margerison, 1983).
¹⁷ Napoleon had not liked Roederer’s proposals for an electoral system based on lists of notables
for each province, and when he clashed with Chaptal over education policy he was dismissed in
March 1802 and sent to the Senate. But he continued to be entrusted with important tasks, and in
1803 drafted the constitution for the Swiss Confederation.
¹⁸ Elected as a delegate to the Estates General in 1789, he became procurator general in Corsica
two years later and in September 1791 was elected to the Convention where he voted for the death of
the king.

<<<PDFPAGE 176>>>
past he survived Thermidor and by December 1795 had established close ties with
Paul Barras, the most powerful ﬁgure in the Directory, who sent him to Genoa to
establish contacts with the Italian republicans and prepare for the French invasion
of northern Italy. When the invasion began in January 1796, Saliceti acquired the
powerful and lucrative post of Civil Commissar to the Armée d’Italie and many
believed that his ability in raising money and providing supplies and equipment
was the key to Napoleon’s military successes. In Genoa he developed an extensive
network of contacts with Italian republicans and patriots that made him very
powerful.
Contemporaries described him as an imposing ﬁgure:
ﬁve foot six inches tall, thin, with abundant black hair that he often wore powdered, a
long, pallid, jaundiced and pock-marked face, somewhat anaemic, constantly plagued by
piles but with ﬁne features, a high forehead, a straight and rounded nose, pale lips but a
vigorously shaped mouth and ﬂamboyant black eyes.
He was considered incorruptible—‘inaccessible to pleasure and money’—but
highly ambitious, a committed patriot and a ‘jacobin à outrance’.¹⁹
Unlike Bonaparte, Saliceti believed that war was an instrument of revolution,
whose purpose was to liberate peoples still oppressed by tyrants. He saw the
founding of ‘sister-republics’ as a step toward the creation of a universal Republic
and believed the support of the Italian revolutionaries to be crucial for France’s
military success. In January 1796 he worked with Filippo Michele Buonarroti²⁰
and others to organize republican risings in Piedmont and with the Milanese
patriots to prepare the French entry into the city.²¹
In July 1796 Saliceti directed the French occupation of Livorno and with
Joseph Bonaparte led the expedition that recaptured Corsica from the English. He
then assumed dictatorial power, and reorganized the entire Corsican administra-
tion so that it was controlled by his own followers and the Bonaparte clan. He 
recommended a French army be maintained permanently on the island and 
organized a gendarmerie composed of local men ‘accustomed to scaling the
mountains’.²²
Saliceti was still close to Joseph, but his brother Napoleon sensed that he was
becoming too powerful. When he was replaced by André Miot, Saliceti’s relations
with Napoleon deteriorated rapidly and in January 1797 he and Commissar Garrau
were recalled to Paris. In November 1799 Saliceti openly opposed the Coup of
18–19 Brumaire and was dismissed.²³ Saliceti was only partially rehabilitated and
The Promise of Change
167
¹⁹ Godechot (1937), i. 245.
²⁰ See above p. 81.
²¹ By now Saliceti and his fellow commissar Garrau were responsible for the ‘systematic exploita-
tion of the conquered territories to the beneﬁt both of the armée d’Italie and of the Directorial
Republic that was on the verge of bankruptcy’. He conducted delicate diplomatic negotiations with
the Republic of Genoa, the Papacy, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany and organized the pro-French
revolt in Reggio at the end of 1796; Godechot (1937), i. 402–4.
²² Ibid. 480.
²³ He was appointed ambassador to Lucca and then to Genoa in 1801, and again sent to assist
Miot to repress the supposed counter-revolution in Corsica.

<<<PDFPAGE 177>>>
Napoleon was still very suspicious of him when Joseph left for Naples. But Joseph
trusted him and believed that their experience of Corsican politics made Saliceti
and Miot exceptionally well qualiﬁed for the task of organizing hisnew Kingdom,
while the fact that they detested one another would ensure that neither became
too powerful.
As Minister of Police, Saliceti quickly acquired a sinister reputation in Naples.
He took little or no part in the major legislative debates and remains a shadowy
ﬁgure in the central administrative archives. But the local archives tell a different
story and reveal that Saliceti was omnipresent in the political reconstruction of
southern Italy after the invasion. As he had done in Liguria, he built up a powerful
personal network. Thanks to his long-standing contacts with the Italian revolu-
tionaries, he already knew many of the Neapolitan exiles who now returned
in search of jobs. He placed these men in key positions, knowing that they
were dependent on him alone and had no alternative patrons. He took no notice
of jurisdictional boundaries, infuriated the magistrates by intervening in judi-
cial appointments, and interfered in every branch of the administration. Rightly
the Bourbons saw him as their most dangerous enemy and repeatedly tried to 
assassinate him: in 1808 he narrowly escaped a bomb that destroyed much of
his house.
Of the men who had accompanied Joseph Bonaparte to Naples, Saliceti was the
only one who seemed ready to settle there. He married the daughter of a
Neapolitan nobleman, the Duke of Lavello, and easily accommodated to the
new regime since he had been a conﬁdant of Caroline Bonaparte since childhood.
But that also aroused the emperor’s suspicions, which was why he was recalled
to Paris in 1809. Shortly after returning to Naples in December 1809 he died,
probably of a seizure, although poisoning was suspected and Paris demanded an
autopsy.²⁴
Joachim Murat’s arrival in Naples a year earlier coincided with a new burst of
legislative and military activity. This has often been attributed to the new rulers,
but this seems unlikely.²⁵ In imperial circles he was widely referred to simply as
‘the pillaging cavalier’ and ‘an administrator of exceptional ineptitude’.²⁶ Murat’s
skills were those of a soldier, and although he had performed some important
diplomatic missions, his record as an administrator in Berg was dismal.²⁷
Saliceti’s death left Murat with few senior French administrators he could trust,
and the choice was further complicated by his determination to keep Caroline
Bonaparte’s political role to a minimum. In this he was not very successful. His most
loyal adviser, the rather shadowy fellow Cahorsin, Jean-Antoine Agar, who had been
his former administrator in Berg, was the queen’s protégé, while he was unaware that
Napoleonic Naples
168
²⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 331–2.
²⁵ Valente’s (1941) ‘heroic’ portrait of Murat is reproduced uncritically in Tulard (1983).
²⁶ ‘Le cavalier pillard’; ‘administrateur incapable par excellence’. See Espitalier (1910), 2, 16, 
19—cited in Ermice (2005), 61.
²⁷ Schmidt (1905), 63.

<<<PDFPAGE 178>>>
his most trusted adviser, the Minster of War Hectore Daure, was also one of the
queen’s quite numerous lovers.²⁸ Among the other French ofﬁcials and ofﬁcers who
remained after Joseph’s departure, few had administrative skill or experience.
THE NEAPOLITANS
As Murat’s relations with Paris deteriorated he was widely accused of preferring
Neapolitans to Frenchmen, but of the many accusations levelled against Joachim
Murat these were among the least well founded. He did appoint Neapolitans to a
number of key positions, but because there were no Frenchmen with the necessary
skills or experience needed to implement the many reforms left unstarted by Joseph.
Neapolitans had also held many senior positions under Joseph Bonaparte, espe-
cially those requiring skills and local knowledge the French ofﬁcials lacked. After
the conquest Joseph’s Minister of Justice was Michelangelo Cianciulli, a leading
Neapolitan jurist whose brilliant career had brought him into the closed circle
of the togati at an early age. Cianciulli had held a series of senior government 
positions under the Bourbons and played no part in the Republic, but in 1801
was appointed Crown Attorney. In February 1806 he negotiated the peaceful
entry of the French troops into the Kingdom. Joseph refused to accept his resigna-
tion and appointed him Minister of Justice, enabling Cianciulli to play an active
role in the Council of State. He drafted the law abolishing feudalism and was
responsible for reorganizing the courts and the magistracy. In 1807 Joseph made
him a privy councillor, and in May 1808 Cianciulli was nominated to preside over
the Council of State until the arrival of the new king. He resigned in 1809 and was
replaced by another former togato who had also held high ofﬁce under the
Bourbon monarchy, Giuseppe Zurlo.²⁹
Joseph entrusted the equally delicate post of Minister of Ecclesiastical Affairs to
the Archbishop of Taranto, Giuseppe Capecelatro. Like Cianciulli, Monsignore
Capecelatro had had a distinguished career under the previous government.
Aman of learning and wide interests, he became Archbishop of Taranto in 1778.
A leading opponent of papal jurisdictions in the Kingdom, Capecelatro had 
studied with Genovesi at the University in Naples and was a strong believer in the
importance of practical knowledge.³⁰
The Promise of Change
169
²⁸ Born in 1771 Agar had been captured by the English in Santo Domingo but made his way back
to France in 1795 and joined Murat’s staff in 1805. In Berg he presided over the Council of State and
oversaw the sales of beni nazionali, the suppression of the religious houses, the abolition of Church
tithes, the creation of savings banks, the reorganization of the magistracy, and the introduction of the
Code Napoléon.
²⁹ Tallarico, in DBI, xxv. 167–9.
³⁰ Giuseppe Capacelatro (1744–1836). He deplored the fact that the newly published treatises on
agriculture were destined to ‘remain on the desks of men of letters and win applause that does not go
beyond a room full of university professors, while the peasants are the same as before’. He believed
that priests had a critical role in bringing new ideas and practical training to the rural poor. See Stella,
DBI, xviii. 445–51.

<<<PDFPAGE 179>>>
By chance the absentee Archbishop happened to be in his episcopal seat in
1799. He urged compliance with the republican government in Naples on the
grounds that ‘all governments are in the hand of our Lord’, and then used the same
argument to appeal for obedience to the monarchy as Cardinal Ruffo and the
Russo-Turkish ﬂeet approached the city in March. In October Capecelatro was
arrested as a suspected Jacobin and held until February 1801.
In 1806 Joseph Bonaparte appointed him to the Council of State and made
him Minister of Church Affairs. Murat persuaded him to become Minister of
the Interior in August 1808, but he resigned and was replaced a year later by
another former Bourbon minister, Giuseppe Zurlo.
Zurlo had left Naples with the court in 1806 but he and his brother returned,
apparently to prevent the sequestration of his property. The circumstances are
unclear, but he was fully committed to the principles on which the new system of
administration was based and willing to extol them as the realization of the
reforms he had attempted to introduce unsuccessfully after 1802. As Interior
Minister he played the key role in reactivating Joseph Bonaparte’s Feudal
Commission, but became a major target of the opposition. As a result of pressure
from the queen he was dismissed in 1812, but returned to ofﬁce when Murat
joined the allies in 1814.
When Zurlo became Minister of the Interior he was succeeded as Minister of
Justice by Giuseppe Ricciardi, another young lawyer from the provinces who had
made his career in Naples. Ricciardi did not participate in the Republic in 1799,
but later courageously defended some of those charged with treason. He remained
in Naples after the ﬂight of the monarchy and was appointed to the Council of
State in 1807. As Minister of Justice after 1809 he played a critical role in the reor-
ganization of the magistracy and the courts and in the introduction of the French
legal codes.³¹
FORMING A PARTY
There were many ways in which Neapolitans were incorporated into the new
regime, starting from the Council of State. Taken from the French Constitution of
Year VIII, a Council of State had been established in the Kingdom of Italy in 1805
and took the same form in Naples. A consultative body whose advice was almost
always ignored, it frequently complained that despite lengthy debates the laws
adopted were simply translations of their French originals with no concessions to
local custom or practice.³² But the Council of State was an important means both
Napoleonic Naples
170
³¹ Shortly before leaving, Roederer told him that he was ‘the only truly enlightened person I have
had the pleasure to meet in Naples’, but urged him to broaden his reading of Montesquieu and other
writers of the French Enlightenment: Roederer to Ricciardi (20 July 1808).
³² See especially De Martino (1984) and Feola (1977). The proceedings of the Consiglio di Stato
have been destroyed.

<<<PDFPAGE 180>>>
for associating leading ﬁgures from the previous regime with the new order and
for bringing in new men.³³
Much more important, in practical terms, was the presence of Neapolitans in
key intermediary roles, especially in local administration. This was Saliceti’s
domain and nearly all the key posts in local administration were held by his men.
The government’s senior representative in the newly created provinces was the
Intendent and of those appointed to this new position only three were
Frenchmen: Joseph-Pierre Briot, Joseph Charron, and Simone Collonna de Leca.
Charron was a protégé of the emperor, but Briot and Colonna were not only
Saliceti’s men but part of the Corsican connection as well.³⁴
Their careers indicate what it took to succeed in the risky world of imperial
administration. Joseph-Pierre Briot would become a major ﬁgure in the adminis-
tration in Naples, but was no admirer of Napoleon. A prominent former Jacobin,
he had escaped deportation to Guyana after opposing the Coup of 18–19
Brumaire only because his patrons included Lucien and Joseph Bonaparte as well
as the imperial minister Chaptal.³⁵ He got the chance to show his submission to
the new regime when he was sent to reorganize public administration in Elba in
1801. Good results in Elba found him a year later assisting André Miot in the task
of ‘civilizing’ Corsica. But he came to Naples with a recommendation not from
Miot, but from his patron Chaptal to Saliceti.³⁶
The importance of the Corsican connection was emphasized by the presence
of the only other French Intendent, Simone Colonna, who was another of
Saliceti’s Corsican associates. Without exception the French administrators were
also freemasons, a bond that underwrote even the Corsican connection since
Joseph Bonaparte and Saliceti had been initiated in the same Corsican lodge
in 1793.³⁷
The masonic connection played a central role in the imperial networks of
patronage, preferment, and recruitment, but was also a means for the French
administrators to identify their likely local supporters in newly conquered territories.
This was certainly the case in Naples and when in August 1806 Joseph-Pierre
Briot, for example, was appointed Intendent of Abruzzo Citeriore the leading
families in Chieti who indicated their support for the new regime were all were
freemasons. All had been prominent in the reform movement and had supported
the Republic, and many would serve the new regime in high positions. They
included the leading landowners in the province, Pietro and Romualdo de
Sterlich, and Baron Antonio Nolli, who in 1788 had founded the local Patriotic
Society. Pietro de Sterlich had been a friend of Gaetano Filangieri, and would in
The Promise of Change
171
³³ Castellano (2004), 96.
³⁴ De Martino (1984), 123–8.
³⁵ Mastroberti (1998), 105–27. Pierre Joseph Briot, a former deputy from the Doubs who had
opposed Bonaparte’s Coup of 18 Brumaire; he was appointed Chief Commissar on Elba in 1803 and
then Intendent ﬁrst of Abruzzo Cit (1 August 1806) and of Calabria Cit (7 July 1807) by Joseph
Bonaparte. Murat made him a Councillor of State.
³⁶ Ibid. 137.
³⁷ Ibid. 352.

<<<PDFPAGE 181>>>
turnserve as Intendent of the nearby province of L’Aquila and later in the
Terrad’Otranto.³⁸
As well as bringing the new regime into closer contact with its supporters,
freemasonry also brought many former Neapolitan Jacobins into the new admin-
istration. This again was primarily Saliceti’s doing, as he had done before in Genoa
and Corsica. By choosing men whose careers were jeopardized by their Jacobin
past, he created a network of ofﬁcials over whose careers he had complete control.
Hence Saliceti’s preference for Neapolitans and former Jacobins and his principal
Neapolitan protégés—Pietro Colletta, Vincenzo Cuoco, Matteo Galdi, and
Giuseppe Poerio—all ﬁtted this description: he recruited them all and they all
served at one time or another as Intendents.³⁹
Not only were these men deeply loyal to their patron, but they were also deeply
committed to the political ideals of the new regime. In addition to performing
often extraordinarily demanding administrative duties, for which they had scant
resources, they saw themselves as missionaries of the new order. In often remote
provincial postings they and their wives took initiatives that went far beyond the
immediate calls of duty, setting up elementary schools, homes for foundlings and
orphans, public charities, and colleges.⁴⁰
The sense of missionary zeal clearly resonates in the language used by Briot in a
circular announcing the visitations that he was about to make to the Abruzzi
towns in April 1807. He was coming to them, he stated, in the name of His
Majesty and his ministers ‘to bring closer to you the means to improve your lot, to
explain the new administrative order and the new laws’. His purpose was to see at
ﬁrst hand if the new laws had been understood and properly executed, but also to
ask for advice: ‘Let the poor, the wretched and the oppressed come to me, I am
their friend and protector; but let the rich and powerful come to me also, because
I owe everyone the same justice and I am the friend of all those who truly love
their sovereign.’ He ordered that there be no extravagant welcoming ceremonies,
because he did not come to burden the communities with unnecessary expenses:
‘Welcome me like a friend as I myself would welcome you in the Intendent’s
ofﬁces.’⁴¹
Loyal as they were, however, even the most committed of these ofﬁcials found
the workloads overwhelming. Before he left the Abruzzi, Briot himself had com-
plained bitterly of the impossibility of meeting the tasks assigned to his ofﬁce
without more ofﬁcers and funds. Pietro Colletta and Giuseppe Poerio repeated
the same complaints, but they were also alarmed by the lack of physical means to
Napoleonic Naples
172
³⁸ Romualdo de Sterlich had a library of more than 12,000 titles and had corresponded with all
the luminaries of the reform era. Antonio Nolli was in turn closely connected with the group of
reformers in nearby Teramo headed by Melchiorre Delﬁco (who was appointed to the Council of
State in 1806), Giuseppe de Thomasis, and the lawyer Nicola Niccolini. Mastroberti (1998), 148.
³⁹ De Martino (1984), 58–79.
⁴⁰ On Poerio see Nardella, in De Lorenzo (ed.) (2003), 663–75.
⁴¹ BNN: Ms Bancone 8B, 26; Intendenza di Abruzzo Citeriore, 8 April 1807.

<<<PDFPAGE 182>>>
reinforce the rhetorical appeals of the new order. Both reported that all attempts
to raise volunteer militias or to form units of regular mounted gendarmes had
failed repeatedly. The volunteers deserted, sold their horses or guns, or simply
went hunting. Others brought prostitutes into the barracks and turned the place
into a bordello.⁴²
THE PROMISE OF CHANGE
These problems were signs that the new regime’s modernizing mission could not
easily be accomplished, but the promise of change nonetheless took pride of place
in its rhetoric. The ﬁrst issue of the government-ﬁnanced Monitore Napoletano set
out the new government’s case as liberators and modernizers, and made the
promise of emancipation from the ancien régime the principal justiﬁcation for
theoverthrow of the Bourbon monarchy:
The Nation will in a very short time witness the emergence of a new order of things that
will implant in its midst the virtues of righteousness, watchfulness, justice, generosity, hon-
esty, disinterestedness, and the love of the common good, conjoined with the sincere and
effective desire to make the Nation great and happy in deeds, not just in words.⁴³
That message was reiterated even more forcibly by Count André Miot de
Melito in his ﬁrst report on the state of the realm delivered to the Council of State
on 4 July 1806. The Kingdom’s deplorable condition was the inevitable con-
sequence of misgovernment. Nothing demonstrated this more eloquently than
the Byzantine chaos of the ancien régime monarchy and the poverty of the
Kingdom’s inhabitants.
Despite the huge endowments of the charitable foundations, ‘the spectacle of
indigence offered by the Kingdom of Naples might lead one to think that Religion
and Philosophy have been parsimonious towards humanity’. There was no 
rational system of poor relief, nor any means for identifying paupers:
The Picture of Poverty that greets one on the streets of Naples is truly terrifying. The cries
of lamentation, the Nakedness, the Wounds and Deformities from which the eye cannot
escape render this Great City utterly disgusting.
The plight of abandoned children was especially distressing. The former govern-
ment made no provision for them,
so that these unfortunate creatures are left to die of cold and hunger or are eaten by 
animals. They are entrusted to wet-nurses for a period of ﬁve years, but there is no supervi-
sion. They are destined to become a real danger to the state if their wretched condition
does not cause them to perish at an early age.
The Promise of Change
173
⁴² Ibid.
⁴³ Monitore Napoletano, 1 April 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 183>>>
The situation was a little more encouraging when it came to public works and
the Minister acknowledged that the previous monarchy had undertaken an extensive
programme of road-building, primarily for military purposes. The roads were well
built and provided a good base for further development. The Bourbons had also
made a start at draining the extensive swampland in the area around Nola,
but the contractors of the enterprise had gone bankrupt and would need a 
subsidy of 50,000 ducats to complete the work.
Agriculture, industry, and commerce had all been damaged by the war, but they
suffered from more permanent forms of neglect. The ownership of the vast tracts
of land was contested between the crown, the barons, and the università, ‘render-
ing this most beautiful country inanimate and barren. . . . While every form of
industry and manufacture can be found in this realm, nothing has ever been
developed to any point of perfection because nothing is ever done with any degree
of continuity.’ Attempts had been made to improve the quality of woollen, cotton,
and silk products, but little had been accomplished.
The longest part of Miot’s report was dedicated to education. ‘Despite the bril-
liance of the Neapolitans, the Bourbons had used every means to prevent the
expansion of education.’ The University in Naples had been founded in the twelfth
century and offered a vast range of courses but ‘today it inspires respect only by
virtue of its ancient origin’: its chairs had once been conferred on the basis of open
competition but for some time this had been replaced by a system of interim
appointments or by substitutes appointed by the Prefect. There was no system of
secular education, so that seminaries and convents continued to be the main
providers of education. The education of girls—‘that half of the human race that
is the principal inﬂuence on the other half’—was neglected in Naples more
thananywhere else in Europe.⁴⁴
In the style of imperial envoys past and present, Miot’s report was above all an
ideological manifesto. Poverty, ignorance, an excessive number of monks and con-
vents were all the result of bad government, misguided policies, and defective
institutions. The regime’s ﬁrst task, therefore, was to establish the principles of
rational administration and bring Neapolitan institutions in line with French
models. Rational administration would be the premise for a new partnership
between citizens and the state, between public interests and private enterprise that
would bring about the Kingdom’s regeneration and end the culture of ‘idleness
and sloth’. Once done, the natural richness of the land and the natural energies
ofthe people would be released and the way to prosperity and progress would
beopen.
In this textbook statement of liberal principles, the role of government was 
limited but clearly deﬁned. Its task was to remove the obstacles to free enterprise
and private property by abolishing feudalism and by getting rid of the hordes of
monks and nuns and those who lived parasitically off public charities. To combat
Napoleonic Naples
174
⁴⁴ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381AP5: Miot’s report on public administration, 4 July 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 184>>>
the culture of sloth the government acknowledged, however, special responsibility
for promoting education, which alone could provide the people with the know-
ledge and skills to live independently. Once these conditions were met, the forces
of free enterprise and market incentives would be sufﬁcient to create a virtuous
new cycle of production and prosperity.
The healing and unifying quality of the new order was also carefully empha-
sized. Roederer explained to the Council of State how a single land tax would
unite the nation and ‘transform a Populace into a People’:
The tax on land will bind the monarchy most closely to the landowners, and the landowners
most closely to the monarchy . . . it lays the foundations of Government in the prosperity of
Agriculture.
The new land tax would be the most tangible sign that all those who owned
property are equal. By making all subject to a single tax it would ﬁnally
bring to an end the state of unspoken warfare that for so long has set the Monarchy in con-
ﬂict with the Nobility and the People. By stripping the Nobility of an immunity that has
damaged the interests of the Prince, Your Majesty may at a stroke bring peace to the
People, the Nobility and the entire Kingdom . . . so that the populace may ﬁnally become
apeople.
The proportional tax on land, Sire, will make it possible for Your Majesty to make one
strong nation out of the two nations that have hitherto confronted and weakened one
another. These two nations consist of the mighty and the lowly, who in every other
European state are linked by intermediary classes that are so ﬁnely graduated that no-one
can tell precisely the point where the mighty begin, or the middling sort end. This system
of society is the dominant feature of modern civilization: it has brought with it enlighten-
ment and a new sense of decency and honour to even the humblest social orders, and ideas
of decency and honour that have given all men a new sense of dignity and to all States a
new sense of power: in short, a new system of society that has created new nations and
amongst them one single Great Nation’.⁴⁵
The greatest beneﬁt bestowed by the new order was, course, the abolition of
feudalism and on 16 August 1806 the Corriere di Napoli carried an article
byVincenzo Cuoco, who had recently returned from Milan, celebrating the law
of2August:
For ﬁfty years the kingdom of Naples has been lacerated by a civil war which was waged as
ﬁercely in the tribunals of the Sacro Consiglio and of the Regia Camera [della Sommaria] as
in the ﬁelds of Apulia and the mountains of the Abruzzi. In our tribunals there were no
fewer than thirty thousand suits of litigation between rural communities and their barons
waiting to be heard. There were no fewer than thirty thousand persons in the kingdom
engaged either directly or indirectly in sustaining, fomenting and managing these suits.
The whole nation was divided into two rival parts, and even if the force exercised by
thegovernment prevented them killing one another, it could not stop them from hating
The Promise of Change
175
⁴⁵ Ibid., Report by Roederer, 26 July 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 185>>>
one another, denouncing one another, and when the occasion arose seizing their goods.
This long war can rightly be described as something more than a civil war because it gave
rise to permanent evils that made even times of peace cruel. All that anarchy has now
ﬁnally ended, thanks to the law of August 2nd 1806, which has been welcomed not only
by the rural communities but also by the feudatories themselves.⁴⁶
The press played an important role in promoting the modernizing projects of
the new regime, but this was no longer the free press of 1799, and the Monitore
Napoletano and the Corriere di Napoli in which Cuoco’s article appeared were
closely controlled by the government and speciﬁcally by Saliceti.⁴⁷ The govern-
ment as a result spoke with a single voice, and the grand commis of the empire 
constantly insisted that reform was simply a technical matter, a matter of reason
for which the revolution had provided the models.
Presenting his proposal for reorganizing direct taxation around a single land
tax, Roederer insisted that this would be painless and there would be no losers.
The new tax would simply distribute the ﬁscal burden more fairly, while the aboli-
tion of feudalism would turn uncertain titles into absolute private property rights
and bring vast tracts of uncultivated land into cultivation. But the greatest beneﬁt
of all would be the new spirit of enterprise that would be the principal fruit of
these changes and would transform the economy, bringing new wealth and 
prosperity. Meanwhile the government would work to promote that new spirit
primarily through measures to improve education and encourage the dissemination
of practical knowledge.
The material means needed to achieve this great transformation were already at
hand. All that was needed, Roederer argued, was to suppress the monasteries: ‘In all
these countries that have grown idle under the inﬂuence of a mild climate, the 
natural fertility of the land and the modesty of their needs, to suppress the convents
is to use the patrimony of idleness to reconstruct the patrimony of the crown.’⁴⁸
These panaceas would prove neither easy nor adequate, but when the Grande
Nation spoke the language of the Enlightenment it knew it could count on the
support of the Neapolitan supporters of reform.
FINANCIAL CHAOS
When it came to it, however, the government’s actions were determined by the
ﬁnancial chaos that was both cause and consequence of the collapse of the former
monarchy. The new government had no money and no revenues, and the whole
Napoleonic Naples
176
⁴⁶ In Cuoco (1806–15), 255.
⁴⁷ Both were edited by Tito Manzi, a Tuscan and trusted conﬁdant of both Joseph Bonaparte and
Saliceti. In 1811 they were amalgamated as the Monitore delle Sicilie. See De Francesco (1997), 94–5,
and Themelly, DBI. On Manzi, see Cortese (1965), 197–222.
⁴⁸ Roederer (1854), iv. 19: Roederer to Joseph Bonaparte, 28 June 1808.

<<<PDFPAGE 186>>>
ediﬁce of public ﬁnance threatened to collapse. Coin of all sorts had virtually disap-
peared, the banks were effectively bankrupt, and the suspension of interest payments
on the arrendamenti threatened the creditors of the old monarchy withruin.
To meet its immediate cash needs the government raised a forced loan in
Naples and on punitive terms (that Roederer hid from the emperor) negotiated an
international loan in Holland.⁴⁹ But restoring ﬁnancial order and rescuing the
creditors of the ancien régime monarchy was as much a political as a ﬁnancial
necessity, and one for which France offered uncertain guidelines. The National
Convention’s attempt to ‘republicanise the national debt’ in August 1793 had
resulted in the disaster of the assignats, and the decision to cancel two-thirds of
thedebt in 1797 had seriously undermined the credibility of the Directory.⁵⁰
Reorganization of the public debt had featured high among the measures deliv-
ered for the Italian Republic in the constitution that Napoleon set out at Lyons in
1801, but because the new satellite included a large number of separate states each
with their own separate debts, this was not a model for the Kingdom of Naples
either.⁵¹ On leaving for Naples Joseph Bonaparte had requested Roederer’s pres-
ence in Naples speciﬁcally to tackle the ﬁnancial crisis. Roederer’s experience was
theoretic rather than practical, although he was familiar with the procedures
adopted in France. But in Naples the task was complicated by the lack of clear 
ﬁgures and by the multitude of different forms that the ancien régime debts had
taken, of which the arrendamenti and venal ofﬁces were only the largest part.
In his history of the Kingdom’s ﬁnances Ludovico Bianchini later commented
that the ‘disorder and confusion’ of the royal accounts meant that the total size
of the debt could only be approximately calculated, but at the time of the French
invasion it was estimated to be around 105,000,000 ducats.⁵²
The operation to redeem the old debt and establish a new consolidated debt
began on 24 August 1806 when the government recognized all existing state cred-
itors and decreed that all those with valid titles would receive certiﬁcates (cedole)
corresponding to the full value of their credit. These certiﬁcates could be tran-
scribed directly on the new Gran Libro del Debito Pubblico, which from 1 January
1807 would pay an annual interest of 5per cent to the holder. Alternatively, the
cedole could be traded or used in part payment to purchase beni nazionali.⁵³
This was the largest single operation undertaken by the French administration
and resulted in a complete overhaul of the ﬁnances of the ancien régime. By 1815
the Kingdom’s debt had been converted, consolidated, and reduced to less than
1,000,000 ducats, which had been achieved in part through massive sales of
Church lands and the wholesale suppression of religious houses. But the creditors
of the ancien régime had also paid a heavy price, and the most recent study of this
The Promise of Change
177
⁴⁹ Rambaud (1911), 336.
⁵⁰ Ermice (2005), 48.
⁵¹ Ibid. 161, 147.
⁵² Which must be set against total annual revenues that by the end of the 1790s were around 18
million ducats—of which some 6 million went directly to the feudatories, leaving 12 million for the
government, of which 3.2 million were devoted to servicing the debt. Bianchini (1839), 404, cited in
Ermice (2005), 31.
⁵³ Ermice (2005), 46.

<<<PDFPAGE 187>>>
operation concludes that in the process of conversion about 33% of the original
debt was written off.⁵⁴ The Neapolitans could comfort themselves only in the
knowledge that the French had come off even worse, while the burden of the losses
was of course not distributed equally.
The conversion of the debt was very closely connected with the second of the
major operations carried out by the French rulers, the dissolution of the religious
houses and the sales of their lands, together with former crown property, as beni
nazionali. Even before the operation of converting the debt began, the government
had begun selling crown lands to raise cash to meet its day-to-day needs. In May
the Dogana delle Pecore, long the target of eighteenth-century reformers, was abol-
ished and the crown sheep-runs on the Apulian Tavoliere were put up for sale.⁵⁵
Those who had previously leased the crown grazing lands for farming were entitled
to purchase them as quit-rents (emphyteuts) on payment of an annual rent,
together with an entry fee equivalent to one year’s rent. The Monitore Napoletano
announced on 27 May that land on the Tavoliere would be sold in small plots ‘to
ensure that the land should not be accumulated in large estates owned by the
few’.⁵⁶The proceeds would be transferred ‘to the fund that had been established to
amortize the public debt’.⁵⁷ But there were few buyers and the measure failed.
On 1 July 1806 the Monitore Napoletano announced that the government had
decided to abolish the former ‘arrendamenti’ and accepted full responsibility for
these debts. The creditors of the arrendamenti, as well as those of the banks that
had failed and the numerous venal ofﬁces that had been abolished, were to be
incorporated into a new National Debt. All those able to show proper title would
have their credits transferred to the new Gran Libro del Debito Pubblico, on which
they were to receive interest at 5per cent. The Monitore announced on 4 July that
the capital of the state creditors would be repaid through the sale of beni nazionali.
Recognized state creditors received certiﬁcates (cedole) to the full value of their
credit, which could be in part payment for the purchase of beni nazionali, which
were to be sold free of all feudal or other encumbrances.⁵⁸
The following day the sale of lands belonging to the Royal Domain for a value
of 10,000,000 ducats was authorized, and then the assets and property of the 
religious houses.⁵⁹ Between 1806 and 1811, 1,300 monasteries, convents, and
religious houses were closed and their lands sold by auction.⁶⁰
Napoleonic Naples
178
⁵⁴ Ermice (2005), 147: ‘the loss suffered by the creditors of the state can be calculated at 
approximately 75 million ducats in capital’. The devaluation resulted from the reduction in interest
rates (from 5 to 3% in 1808) but above all from the fall in the face-value of the cedole, which traded at
around 18–20% of nominal values.
⁵⁵ Marino (1988), 257.
⁵⁶ Monitore Napoletano, 27 May 1806.
⁵⁷ BNN: Ms SQ IV L.31: Legge sul Tavoliere di Puglia (23 May 1806).
⁵⁸ Monitore Napoletano, 4 July 1806.
⁵⁹ In a single day, on 19 September, the government suppressed seven houses of the Dominicans,
four Bernabites, two Carmelites, three Conventuals, two Theatines, two Servites, one convent of
Somaschi, and two houses of the Cassino Order: the Carthusians were also expelled from the
monastery of S. Martino. De Nicola (19 September 1806), 286.
⁶⁰ De Rosa (1979), 531–51.

<<<PDFPAGE 188>>>
There were few buyers, however, even though Roederer took measures specif-
ically designed to encourage small buyers to participate. In September General
Cavaignac, the Director of the Administration of the Royal Domains, was
instructed to ensure that the estates put up for sale were divided into their
component parts, each separately valued ‘so that even the poorest classes may
become purchasers and hence increase the number of new proprietors’.⁶¹
There were still few buyers. The main cause was shortage of cash, the depressed
state of the economy, and the doubts over the government’s future since the
Calabrian provinces were still in open revolt, while the Bourbon government in
Sicily threatened reprisals against purchasers of beni nazionali. Most of the land
sold in 1806 and 1807 was bought by a small group of wealthy purchasers closely
connected to the new government. But the revenues from the sales proved inad-
equate to meet the interest payments on the debt, which in 1806 was estimated at
about 6,000,000 ducats a year.⁶²
For political reasons it was decided to give priority to private holders of shares
in the former arrendamenti. These were not the only creditors ‘but since the class
of small proprietors is the one that has the most numerous holding of arrenda-
menti and is a very large social group consisting of a great number of families that
would have no other means of subsistence were they to be deprived of this income
and would be reduced to begging’.⁶³
Payment of interest to corporate share-holders was suspended, however, with
disastrous consequences for the banks and many charitable foundations. But rev-
enues were still insufﬁcient to meet even the reduced cash payments promised to
‘pensioners, giubiliati and other creditors of the Public Treasury’, and in January
1807 Roederer ordered that payments should be made on a discretionary basis.
Amonth later the creditors were instructed to present their claims to the ofﬁces of
the Commission for the Liquidation of the Public Debt.⁶⁴
When Joachim Murat reached Naples in 1808 only a small part of the state’s
creditors had been registered on the new Debt, for which they received divi-
dends at 5% while the rest received nothing. Murat’s ﬁnance minister, Pignatelli
della Cerchiara, insisted that Roederer’s project was unworkable and that the
land sales could never yield enough to liquidate the remaining 50,000,000 of
capital debt. He recommended, therefore, that payments be made to all those
with recognized credits, but that the rate of interest be reduced from 5 to 3%.
When Murat did this without consulting Paris he provoked the wrath of
both the emperor and Joseph Bonaparte, but the French minister in Naples
agreed that Murat’s action meant that at least some creditors were now ﬁnally
The Promise of Change
179
⁶¹ BNN: Bancone 8 B29; Direzione Generale dei Demani, Circolare 22 September 1806.
⁶² See Villani (1964), 12; Ermice (2005), 30–4.
⁶³ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381AP 5 (doc II), Council of State, 1807.
⁶⁴ BNN: Bancone 8B 29; Roederer to Direzione Generale Liquidazione del Debito Pubblico.

<<<PDFPAGE 189>>>
receiving some payments even though the nominal value of shares in the new
debt had fallen heavily.⁶⁵
All the creditors of the old monarchy lost something, but the biggest losers were
the charitable foundations and the banks. It was estimated in Naples alone that
the charitable foundations lost a total of a quarter of a million ducats of annual
revenue.⁶⁶ The losses sustained by the capital’s seven private banks were similar.
In January 1807 a petition to the government claimed that the bank’s 2,000
investors, employees and their families faced utter ruin, and a commission was
appointed to investigate. It did not report until November when the government
agreed to a subsidy of only 12,000 ducats a year.⁶⁷ But the government could ﬁnd
no solution and shortly before he left Naples in May 1808 Roederer ordered the
suppression of the private banks, whose assets were assigned to the liquidation of
the public debt. The creditors of the banks lost everything, as did their employees.
Many smaller credit institutions like the rural ‘corn banks’ (monti frumentari),
established in earlier centuries to make non-usurious advances to enable peasants
to acquire seed corn, were also ruined.⁶⁸
Private investors at least retained a part of what they were owed, although
many like the Serracapriola family had already suffered heavy losses as a result of
the impact of the ﬁnancial crisis of the Bourbon monarchy on the value of the
arrendamenti in the 1790s. However, it was a sign of the regime’s political suc-
cess that investors preferred to keep their money in the public debt than use it to
purchase beni nazionali. There were many reasons for this, but the most import-
ant was that the low market value of the cedole made it unattractive for small
investors to use them for part-payment for beni nazionali, since they had to pay
the balance in cash. The devalued cedole were nonetheless bought up in large
quantities by those who made the major purchases of beni nazionali, which also
explains why the lion’s share of the sales went to a relatively small minority of
purchasers.⁶⁹
In both cases, the regime’s main gains were political. The restoration of a
ﬁnancial order and the increased investment in the state debt and in purchases of
beni nazionali strengthened its fragile political base. But the main beneﬁciaries
were the groups of senior administrators, wealthy nobles, and foreign ﬁnanciers
whose fortunes were being launched throughout Europe by the needs of
Napoleon’s satellite rulers. The biggest losers where those who had been most
dependent on what Roederer called the ‘patrimony of the idle’, the religious
houses and corporations whose assets had gone to pay off the debts of the ancien
régime.
Napoleonic Naples
180
⁶⁵ See above p. 145.
⁶⁶ Petroni (1874), ii. 170–5; Filangieri (1947), 179–80.
⁶⁷ Filangieri (1947), 179.
⁶⁸ Ibid.
⁶⁹ On investment in the debt, see Ermice (2005), 126–7, 150–60. Five per cent of the total num-
ber of buyers acquired over 60% of the beni nazionali sold in 1807 and 1808. In the later provincial
auctions, however, more land was acquired by an emerging class of middling provincial landowners;
see Villani (1964), pp. 156–7.

<<<PDFPAGE 190>>>
THE LAND TAX
The problem of the state’s ordinary revenues was addressed by means of the intro-
duction of the new land tax that Roederer promised would ‘turn a Populace into a
People’. On 24 July 1806 Roederer informed the Council of State that under the
ancien régime, of the 4,578,894 ducats paid each year in taxes on property, only
589,934 ducats were paid on feudal property. The taxes paid by the people took
the form of 102 different levies that varied from province to province, the most
general being the hearth tax (focatico). But no property surveys had ever been
drawn up, so the tax was raised in different ways in different towns and feudal
properties were exempt.
The new tax, Roederer insisted, would not add to the overall tax burden, but
would be easier and cheaper to raise and would distribute the tax burden more
fairly. He set the yield of the new fondiara at 6,000,000 ducats, admitting that on
the basis of a direct comparison with France (in terms of land and population) a
yield of 8,000,000 ducats might have been expected ‘especially since it is generally
recognized that the land here is much more fertile than in France’. But prudence
suggested that an initial yield of 6,000,000 ducats would be more reasonable, with
the expectation that this would rise to 8,000,000 within three years.⁷⁰
Because many parts of the kingdom were still subject to ‘disturbances’, the new
tax was to be introduced on the basis of the estimates used for assessing the
Bourbon decima of 1792, which ‘although not accurate, has at least the merit of
covering the entire territory without distinction of ownership and without
respecting feudal or ecclesiastical privilege’.⁷¹
Those who would gain most would be ‘the smaller proprietors and poor’.⁷²
But in March 1808, Melchiorre Delﬁco submitted a long memorandum to the
Council of State pointing out the grave defects of the new tax, which in the absence
of a reliable land survey could not be fairly distributed. Roederer ﬂatly rejected
Delﬁco’s alternative, however, because it deviated from the French model. Major
anomalies could be rectiﬁed later, but ‘raison d’etat’ dictated that there should be
no interference in the meantime.⁷³
Every comune was instructed to establish a commission to which all local
landowners must submit detailed descriptions of their property that would then
The Promise of Change
181
⁷⁰ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 3: Report by Roederer, 24 July 1808. See also Rambaud
(1911), 313–16.
⁷¹ BNN: Ms Bancone 8B 29: Ministero delle Finanze: Circolare ai Signori Intendenti, 20 June
1807. See also De Lorenzo (1984).
⁷² ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 2, Legge sui Consigli Comunali, Distrettuali e
Provinciali, 8 August 1806 (Doc 1) Council of State, June 1807, ‘Relation de M.Roederer sur la con-
tribution foncière’.
⁷³ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 5 (Doc 1), ‘Pensieri che si propongono per rimediare
agl’inconvenienti prodotti dalla Fondiaria’ per Melchiorre Delﬁco (Council of State, 15 March
1808): ‘Memorandum sur les observations de M. Delﬁco’ (by Roerderer).

<<<PDFPAGE 191>>>
be registered as the basis for the individual assessment of the fondiaria.⁷⁴ When
the provincial councils ﬁnally met in August 1808, they were unanimous in
protesting the arbitrary and unfair ways in which the new tax had been assessed
and distributed. Alarmed, the government revised the procedure to prevent the
councils from protesting in the future, but re-issued the original assessments.
ADMINISTERING JUSTICE
As well as calling for a reorganization of central and local government, the aboli-
tion of feudalism in August 1806 required a complete reorganization of the magis-
tracy and the administration of justice. The closure of the ancien régime tribunals
had caused utter confusion, but in this case the French templates were of little use
and the magistrates were in no mood to cooperate. They had been one of the most
powerful corporations of the ancien régime, and with the abolition of the tribunals
they had lost all their former power and privileges. They staunchly opposed all
attempts at reform and like the clergy their unbending hostility to civil divorce
made the introduction of the French Code Civil impossible. Napoleon would not
make concessions, so there was little room for manoeuvre. Joseph Bonaparte
played successfully for time, pleading the danger of a new Santafede if civil divorce
was imposed by force. In the meantime the administration of justice remained
suspended.
In June 1806 Miot de Melito had warned the Council of State of the urgent need
to reorganize the administration of justice immediately.⁷⁵ The Minister of Justice,
Michelangelo Cianciulli, made a start by sacking the senior judges, all of whom
were committed royalists appointed after the fall of the Republic.⁷⁶ But replacing
the ancien régime tribunals was a much more complex affair and since nothing
could be done without the assistance of the magistrates, nothing was done.
The situation was also complicated by the fact that the closure of the ancien
régime tribunals meant that their former employees, almost all of them in Naples,
were now without work and a potentially dangerous source of discontent.⁷⁷ To
remedy this the former employees were retained on full or part pay and in
December 1807 the Minister of Justice ordered that they should be given ﬁrst pri-
ority for positions in the new courts and those unable to work because of age
should be given pensions. But shortly after becoming Minister of Justice,
Giuseppe Zurlo still felt it necessary to issue another circular in May 1809 to ‘all
the subaltern ofﬁcers of the former Tribunals and Jurisdictions in Naples that
have been abolished’ to assure them that the king was deeply aware of their
difﬁcult conditions and while seeking a solution had set up a Commission of
Napoleonic Naples
182
⁷⁴ BNN: Ms Bancone 8B 25: Decree 12 August 1808.
⁷⁵ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 5 (Doc 2).
⁷⁶ BNN: Bancone 8B 28, Decreto 6 March 1806: nomina dei magistrati.
⁷⁷ As De Nicola constantly warned in his diaries.

<<<PDFPAGE 192>>>
Beneﬁcence to relieve the distress of ‘a group of persons whose indigence is before
our eyes every day’.⁷⁸
Saliceti tried to resolve the problems posed by the suspension of the tribunals
by setting up ad hoc tribunals modelled on the special military tribunals estab-
lished in 1806 to administer civil and criminal law, but the magistrates refused
to serve on them.⁷⁹ In May 1807 the ﬁrst general reform of the ancien régime
tribunals was attempted. The former Sacro Reale Collegio was renamed the High
Court of Cassation (Gran Corte di Cassazione) and divided into two sections, the
ﬁrst of which was responsible for revising laws and making proposals to the gov-
ernment. The same decree established the lesser tribunals of appeal and the new
provincial tribunals, nominated royal procurators to all the courts, and appointed
the justices of the peace, the ﬁrst rung of the judiciary, in the provinces. Again the
magistrates refused to cooperate.
The complaint raised by the provincial council in Capitanata when it met in
the late summer of 1808 gives an idea of the state of confusion that had spread to
the entire Kingdom:
Justice is in total chaos and confusion. A new Code that has not yet been issued and new
procedures that are unknown to those who must follow them have thrown the administra-
tion of Justice into chaos, and swings without direction between old and new in ways that
prevent any judgment being reached and gives rise to arbitrary decisions that offend
the liberty of the citizen. A solemn instruction to all judges to follow the new Codes of
Criminal, Civil and Procedural law is sorely needed.⁸⁰
On 20 May 1808 a new ‘organic law’ intended to establish the deﬁnitive
administration of justice in the Kingdom based on the system of tribunals set out
in the French constitution of Year VIII had been introduced. The Council of State
was designated the supreme court of justice, below which the Cassation Court was
the highest court of appeal. The High Court of Accounts (Gran Corte dei Conti)
was responsible for overseeing all public expenditure, and new high criminal
courts (Gran Corti Criminali) were established in Naples and the provinces to
replace the former feudal courts. In January 1809 a new Tribunal of Commerce
replaced the courts of the trade guilds that had been abolished in 1808.⁸¹
The magistrates would have none of Cianciulli’s proposals, however, and
their outraged protests forced his resignation a year later. He was brieﬂy
replaced in May 1809 by Giuseppe Zurlo, but he had no support either. In the
same year, after a ﬁnal unsuccessful attempt to exclude civil divorce, Murat
bowed to the emperor’s insistence and adopted the French legal codes. This was
only the start, however, since the new legal codes had ﬁrst to be translated and
The Promise of Change
183
⁷⁸ BNN: Bancone 8B 28, Circolare 10 March 1809.
⁷⁹ Nicolini (1901), pp. xl–xliii.
⁸⁰ ASF: B.1 Consigli provinciali e distrettuali. Processi verbali, Consiglio provinciale di
Capitanata 1809.
⁸¹ See Feola, in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 487–506; Abbamonte, in ibid. 506–18, and Greco in
ibid. 533–48.

<<<PDFPAGE 193>>>
the courts that would put them into practice had also to be created. That hap-
pened only after Francesco Ricciardi replaced Zurlo as Minister of Justice and
for reasons that had little to do with Murat but a great deal to do with Saliceti
and with Ricciardi.
Ricciardi, who did have wide support amongst the magistrates, had previously
refused to accept the ofﬁce of Minister of Justice on the grounds of Saliceti’s
systematic interference in judicial affairs.⁸² Once Saliceti was gone, however,
Ricciardi and his fellow jurists saw the opportunity to turn the introduction of the
new Codes and courts to their own advantage and to write a script that would give
the magistracy powerful new roles in the new post-feudal order.
EDUCATION
Amid these pressing administrative and ﬁnancial emergencies, the time and
energy devoted to education are at ﬁrst sight surprising. But that would be to mis-
take both the ideological and practical importance of education in the new
regime’s modernizing project. Not only was education a subject on which the
French and their Neapolitan supporters spoke the same language, but it also posed
pressing administrative issues since the wholesale suppression of the religious
houses had removed the existing source of popular education. Since the govern-
ment had neither the means nor the intention of taking responsibility for the
provision of education, it needed to make a strong moral case for delegating these
responsibilities to local administration.
In 1806 Miot de Melito seized on the deﬁciencies of every form of education to
denigrate the former monarchy and made popular education one of the priorities
of the new regime. Three years later Zurlo boasted of the progress that had been
made in the ﬁrst years of the new order. Primary schools for boys and girls had
been established in every comune in the Kingdom under the supervision of the
new Intendents, and six new colleges had been opened in Naples and attended
by160 pupils. Two new schools for girls had also been founded, one in Naples and
theother in Aversa under the patronage of the queen, where useful arts were
taught in addition to religion. Nine new chairs had been established at the
University of Naples.⁸³
In the same year, 1809, a commission consisting of the Archbishop of
Taranto, Melchiorre Delﬁco, the Bishop of Lettere and Gragnano, Tito Manzi,
and Vincenzo Cuoco presented a ﬁrst proposal for reorganizing public educa-
tion to the Council of State. The report was written by Cuoco and in it he set
out why public education was the premise for the regeneration of the
Neapolitan nation.
Napoleonic Naples
184
⁸² Nicolini (1901), p. xliv.
⁸³ Zurlo (1809), in Lalli (n.d.), 63–4.

<<<PDFPAGE 194>>>
Once a great kingdom, Cuoco argued, the decline of Naples was the con-
sequence of centuries of corruption, barbarism, and the neglect of education,
sothat:
the natural fertility of its soils has become a source of indolence, and the natural energies of
its people have become the cause of ferocious and destructive passion .... Only education
will enable us to retain our ancient greatness and ancient glory. Nature has bestowed on us
all the capital we need. We do not lack for industries, but we do lack the knowledge to
develop them; yet this, too, education can provide for us.
Concluding with a now familiar theme, he insisted too that education was the only
means to overcome the abyss that divided the nation into two different peoples:
‘The purpose of educating the masses is to make possible communication
between the many and the few.’⁸⁴
In a separate report, Cuoco had shown that the primary schools to which Zurlo
had referred existed only in Minister of the Interior’s fantasy. However, he recom-
mended that such schools should be established in every comune and that they
should teach writing, elementary mathematics, and morality: ‘Morality is society’s
ﬁrst need.’ Schools should be free, and teachers should be trained in the methods
of Pestalozzi, of whom Cuoco was a great admirer. He also held that schooling
should be provided for both sexes, although addressing their different needs:
‘Women are and always will be our most powerful educators. But to educate
women in the same way as men would be to upset the order of nature, just as to
educate all women in the same way would upset the order of society.’⁸⁵
Cuoco’s project and his recommendation for the creation of a Directorate of
Public Education was rejected by the Council of State, ostensibly because it
differed too much from the French model but in reality because his patron, the
Archbishop of Taranto, had been replaced as Minister of the Interior by Giuseppe
Zurlo. Zurlo was no friend of Cuoco and he promptly commissioned a new report
drafted by another former Jacobin, Matteo Galdi, and ﬁnally adopted in
December 1811.⁸⁶
Its implementation was the responsibility of the local authorities, however,
which immediately gave rise to loud protest from the local communities that were
to pay the costs of the schools and their teachers.⁸⁷ Of the new schools that
were opened most were simply classes run by the parish priest. As late as 1828
there were still only twenty-nine schools for boys in Naples, with 1,636 pupils,
and twenty-three schools for girls with 3,000 pupils.⁸⁸ The royalist observers who
at the time of the Restoration in 1815 claimed that the French regime’s great
school reform existed only on paper were probably not far wrong.⁸⁹
The Promise of Change
185
⁸⁴ ‘Rapporto al Re Murat e progetto di decreto per l’organizzazione della Pubblica Istruzione’, in
Scritti Vari (Cortese and Nicolini, 1924), ii. 3–95.
⁸⁵ Cuoco (1809), ii. 3–95. See also Gentile (1909/1964).
⁸⁶ On Galdi’s report, see Lupo (1999), 249–99.
⁸⁷ Cuoco (1809), 410–15.
⁸⁸ See Fusco and Nicodemo in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 429–41.
⁸⁹ See p. 283 below.

<<<PDFPAGE 195>>>
CONCLUSION
When Joseph Bonaparte left Naples in 1808, two years of energetic legislating and
debate had mapped out a broad set of reform projects only some of which had
been started. Feudalism had been abolished as a juridical principle, but the law of
2 August 1806 had, if anything, added to the uncertainties surrounding property
rights. The law on the division of the common lands had been declared, but the
government lacked the means to implement it. The institutions of the ancien
régime monarchy had collapsed, but were not yet replaced. When the provincial
assemblies met for the ﬁrst time in the summer of 1808 to distribute the new
land tax it became clear that it was one thing to legislate changes, another to
implement them. But by then other forces were beginning to shape and redirect
these initiatives in ways over which the government and its agents had little
control.
Napoleonic Naples
186

<<<PDFPAGE 196>>>
¹ Cuoco (1806–15), 227.
² Scirocco (1987), 102–25.
10
A Kingdom Remodelled? The Provinces 
and the Capital
CONFLICTING AGENDAS
The promise of change was premised on the idea that enlightened government
and rational administration would bring about the Kingdom’s long-awaited
regeneration. The logic was clear and even compelling. The abolition of feudalism
would free property of the constraints that had prevented the exploitation of what
were still considered to be the Kingdom’s rich natural resources. Rational govern-
ment would give rise to a new sense of unity and bring into being for the ﬁrst time
a true partnership between public and private interests:
‘What is administration properly understood’, asked Vincenzo Cuoco, ‘if not
the art of ensuring that the wealth, the talents, the moral sensibilities of private 
citizens can work together for the public good?’¹
Redressing the historic imbalances between the capital and the provinces that
had been a central theme of the reform writers of the previous decades was a 
primary mission of this project. But the difﬁculties facing such an enterprise were
huge, and certainly not made any easier by the severe economic hardships result-
ing from the prolonged interruption of Mediterranean trade. But even in more
favourable circumstances the obstacles would have been great, while the means at
the disposal of the new government were slender. It could barely fund even the
skeletal provincial administration carefully put in place by Saliceti, and local
administration continued to depend on a handful of desperately overworked
Intendents and Sub-intendents. Save only for a few prominent exceptions, the local
notables showed little enthusiasm for being co-opted to perform administrative
tasks they considered to be onerous and which carried no corresponding rights of
consultation.²
There were deeper contradictions too. Behind the rhetoric, the government
had clear but undisclosed ﬁscal objectives. The provinces were not only to bear the
full of cost of their regeneration, but were in addition to carry a larger share of
theexpenses of the state. In 1812 Mosbourg acknowledged that this had indeed

<<<PDFPAGE 197>>>
happened and that the entire increase in state revenue since 1808 had come from
the provinces, much of it in forms of deliberately disguised taxation.³ Similar ﬁs-
cal motives lay behind the creation of Zurlo’s Feudal Commission, since the divi-
sion of the former feudal estates and the common lands was designed both to
provide the local communities with a secure tax base and at the same time to
increase the numbers contributing to the new land tax.
To complicate matters further, the capital also posed problems that could not
safely be ignored. To bring greater equality and wealth to the provinces, the govern-
ment was committed to removing the city’s economic and ﬁscal privileges. But most
of these had been abolished after 1799, and those that remained proved difﬁcult to
remove. Political imperatives also were at war with economic rationale. No less than
their predecessors, the new regime needed a capital that reﬂected both their own
glory and that of the empire, while the sheer size of the city meant that any moves
that seriously prejudiced the livelihood of its citizens would be very dangerous. As it
was, the impact of the war and prolonged commercial recession on the capital had
been exacerbated by the unemployment caused by the abolition of the tribunals
ofthe ancien régime, by the crisis of the banks and the charitable foundations, and
bythe competition from French placemen for white-collar jobs. Faced by these 
dangerous realities, the government was soon forced to look for ways to restore
rather than further reduce the capital’s former privileges.
THE PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLIES
The law of 8 August 1806 provided for the establishment of local and provincial
assemblies for each of the fourteen mainland provinces.⁴ The provincial assem-
blies consisted of up to twenty members nominated by the Intendents from lists
of landowners in each province, and were to meet once a year for up to twenty
days.⁵ These assemblies had no consultative function, but they were charged with
the task of distributing the land tax quotas set for each province and reporting on
local conditions and needs.
When they ﬁrst met in August 1808, the government was taken aback by the
freedom with which the assemblies expressed their views. The most frequent sub-
ject of complaint was, not surprisingly, the new tax quotas, and even the Duke of
Canzano, Intendent of one of the most prosperous provinces in the Kingdom,
theTerra di Bari, remarked with exasperation that the allocation for his province
Napoleonic Naples
188
³ See Chapter 8.
⁴ Subdivided into 50 districts, 494 circondarj, and 1,732 comuni. ASN: Min. di Polizia, 1a F
152(2), Parlamento Nazionale 1820; Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale sulla situazione del
Ministero degli Interni, 23 October 1820, p. 7.
⁵ Each town was administered by a Decurionato, whose members were elected by the principal
property owners and then approved by the Intendent: the model was the French conseils des 
départments, arrondissements, cantons et communes of the Constitution of Year VIII. De Martino
(1984), 307.

<<<PDFPAGE 198>>>
bore no relation to either the distribution or the productivity of the land in 
individual comunes.⁶
After the new taxes, the most frequent cause of lament was the devastating 
economic and commercial impact of over a decade of warfare that had brought
overseas trade to a standstill. Everywhere the war had exacerbated existing 
problems and brought ruin to the wealthiest and the poorest provinces alike.
Themountainous frontier province of L’Aquila had ‘no Sea, no Agriculture, no
Manufactures, no Crafts, and only some small Commerce with the neighbouring
Papal State from which it receives little in return for sweat and labour except 
devastating afﬂictions and epidemics’. But as a result of the political upheavals in
the Papal State, the annual value of trade across the border had fallen from a 
million to less than 80,000 ducats a year.⁷
The Provincial Council of Basilicata, which included Potenza, Matera, and
Lagonegro, also stressed ‘the unhappy state in which this Province presently ﬁnds
itself because of the collapse of trade’ and the impossibility of meeting the quotas set
for the new land tax.⁸ This was another mountainous province ‘that generally has
the appearance of a vast expanse of naked scree, with no settlements and no wood-
land and little farm land’. It produced some grain, but not enough to meet local
needs, and a little wine. The population was healthy but scarce. There were some
primary schools, but no teachers and a provincial college was needed to train teach-
ers so that they could instruct the young in ‘morality, Logic, History, Geography,
Latin, Mathematics and some notions of experimental Physics’. There were numer-
ous small Luoghi Pii (charitable foundations) but they lacked adequate funds.⁹
Conditions in the Province of Capitanata, which included Foggia and much of
the Tavoliere together with the lands formerly subject to the Dogana delle Pecore,
were more varied. In the poorest district of Larino ‘Agriculture is in its infancy,
and since there is no School of Agriculture its most rudimentary principles are
unknown’. The government was called on to reduce taxes, provide credit, and set
up schools of agriculture and animal husbandry, or at least ensure that in each
comune there was someone ‘able to teach a farmer’s catechism and on certain days
in the year teach the inhabitants how to sow corn, plant vines, make wine and oil
and all other matters touching on the science of Agriculture’.¹⁰ But the inhab-
itants of Serracapriola and Chieuti were ‘ricchi’ and as well as good land there was
plentiful livestock.¹¹
Even in the formerly prosperous commercial province of Apulia, the news was
terrible. ‘There is a shortage of farm labourers and no one to work the land. . .prices
A Kingdom Remodelled?
189
⁶ ASN: Min. delle Finanze: f. 2864 (Fondiaria 1808/9); Intendente Terra di Bari to Min. Finanze,
6 December 1808.
⁷ Ibid.; Processi Verbali dei Consigli Generali di Provincia: 2nd Abruzzo Ulteriore (L’Aquila).
⁸ Ibid.; Consiglio Provinciale di Basilicata (Matera, Potenza, Lagnegro), 25 October 1808.
⁹ Ibid.; Consiglio Distrettuale di Lagonegro (Basilicata), 7 October 1808.
¹⁰ ASF: Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali (Busta 1), Processi Verbali, October 1808.
¹¹ ASN: Min. delle Finanze: f. 2864 (Fondiaria 1808/9); Consiglio Provinciale di Capitanata:
Busta 1, 27 September 1808.

<<<PDFPAGE 199>>>
have collapsed and all internal and external trade is at a standstill.’ The situation
had been exacerbated by brigandage ‘a Hydra that is constantly reborn in this
kingdom’. The brigand’s victims ‘are the poor and the rich alike, the master and
the servant, but the latter, to avoid the brigand’s fury, deserts the plough and ﬂees,
leaving the ﬁelds unattended’. Another formerly prosperous province, the Terra di
Bari, had also been ruined by the collapse of maritime trade. Prices had dropped
to less than half their pre-1806 average, rents had fallen, land was uncultivated,
and because of the fall in prices crops were left to rot in the ﬁelds.¹²
Many provinces took the opportunity to appeal for assistance. In Capitanata,
the problem was a plague of insects (bruchi) that destroyed wheat, fruit, and veget-
ables and brought ruin to the prosperous city of Cerignola and to the region
around Foggia and Lucera. The Provincial Council appealed for help to encourage
the peasants to plant trees to protect the soil from heavy rains, to introduce horse
breeding, and also for the land tax to be reduced. But the report concluded with
resignation that none of these things would have an effect ‘given the complete
absence of trade’.¹³
The Provincial Council for Calabria Ultra lamented ‘The unhappy state of
theProvince which has been a Theatre of War and has had to be host to an army
come to ﬁght the Enemy and maintain public order’. The council also underlined
‘the sad consequences of Brigandage which has seriously damaged the incomes
ofthe landowners, resulted in destruction that has impoverished the Province,
brought internal and external trade to a halt, and caused a heavy increase in the
cost of local administration’.¹⁴
Only in the provinces nearer the capital were conditions somewhat better. Inthe
Upper Principato, the condition of agriculture was good but there were serious
concerns about the unregulated clearing of woodland and hillsides for farming
because this caused frequent landslides that made the lower lying land unﬁt even
for pasture. There were large numbers of sheep in the province, but thewool woven
locally was coarse. The province also lacked a decent road, and there were no
bridges to cross the rivers Sebeto and Calore at Altavilla and Montemiletto.¹⁵
Although varied, the economy of the Campania, the province neighbouring
the capital, was far from ﬂourishing. It produced much silk, but it was of poor
quality because of the ‘rough traditional methods’ of throwing and reeling
the yarn. The peasants lacked training and needed to be encouraged to use
Piedmontese organzine spinning machines that would double the value of the
yarn, the best of which was spun by women from Sorrento, Piano di Sorrento, and
Massa Lubrense. The ﬁshing industry was in deep crisis because of the war,
andbecause the ﬁsh markets in Naples were controlled by ‘usurious merchants’.
Napoleonic Naples
190
¹² ASN: Min. delle Finanze: f. 2864 (Fondiaria 1808/9); Consiglio Provinciale di Terra di Bari,
Presidente Duca d’Andria, 6 December 1808.
¹³ Ibid.
¹⁴ Ibid.; Consiglio Provinciale Calabria Ulteriore, 17 October 1808.
¹⁵ Ibid.; Consiglio Provinciale di Principato Ultra (Montefusco), 8 October 1808.

<<<PDFPAGE 200>>>
Cotton was grown near Castellamare and Torre Annunziata, but its cultivation
had expanded only because there was little demand for other products.
Throughout the province demand for timber for building and for ﬁrewood had
led to extensive clearance of woodland.¹⁶
As well as providing information on economic matters, the provincial assem-
blies in 1808 were required to report on social conditions, on the state of public
health, roads, and public works, and on public welfare, orphanages, hospitals,
prisons, schools, and colleges. In some cases these questions simply aroused some
surprise. The district council of Larino in Capitanata, for example, commented
that ‘The legislation that we have had until now was a Gothic monument com-
posed of elements that generally contradicted one another.’ There were no secure
prisons in the district and criminals generally went unpunished, nor was there 
neither a home for the aged nor a shelter for abandoned children. There were no
schools, of any sort, ‘theatres are unknown’ and government needed to combat
‘the ignorance of their responsibilities and duties that is evident among all classes
of Inhabitants, and especially the bad conduct of the civic administration’. The
local population had no contact with the outside world and ‘are little better
than savages’. Their houses were
badly kept. From outside they bear only the marks of squalor and poverty, while inside
they reveal a lack of cleanliness which is born from ignorance and carelessness. Were this
the case only amongst the humblest Citizens it would be expected, but it is horrifying to
ﬁnd it also in the houses of property owners, of people who should know better. Rubbish
and ﬁlth were the principal cause of disease and epidemics, and bodies were still being
buried inside churches within the town walls. Can there be any worse state of barbarity?¹⁷
The provincial council of Capitanata complained about the neglect of
foundlings: they were sent to wet-nurse but few survived and those that did
became beggars. It underlined the need for institutions to take care of them until
they were old enough to be placed with a craftsman or farmer to learn a trade. It
also pointed out that there was no primary schooling in the province, but there
were two important colleges. In Foggia, a convent of Theatine Fathers that was
suppressed in 1797 had been taken over by the Scolopians and was attended by
400 young men, but the other college at Lucera was much smaller and very poor.
The assemblies called for measures to limit environmental damage and build
and repair roads. They complained about poor and non-existent communica-
tions, and above all about population shortage in rural areas. This, it was claimed,
was why vast tracts of land remained uncultivated, which in turn condemned the
rural populations to lives of the most inhuman poverty. But even when natural
causes were admitted, the members of the provincial councils placed the blame
squarely on the poor. The Provincial Council of Terra d’Otranto, for example,
A Kingdom Remodelled?
191
¹⁶ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (I) f. 183 (Consigli Provinciali): Consiglio Provinciale di Napoli, 1808.
¹⁷ ASF: Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali (Busta 1), Processi Verbali, October 1808.

<<<PDFPAGE 201>>>
noted that the vast areas of swampland in the province caused pestilences that
decimated the population and discouraged the poor from marrying. But they also
argued that this encouraged ‘immoral libertinism’, especially amongst young girls
who everywhere were ready to ‘yield to seduction and are easily and quickly taken
by men who will not release them until they agree to forced marriages’.¹⁸
TRADE AND MANUFACTURES
Earlier reports on the state of the Kingdom’s manufacturing industries had revealed
a similar situation, but also showed that the most advanced sectors of the economy
had suffered most heavily. The most widespread form of manufacture was textile
production, most of which was done on a domestic basis for local consumption.
But there were a number of centres where more specialized forms of woollen cloth
were produced, including Naples, Arpino, the Isola di Sora, Piedimonte d’Alife,
Ceretto, and Avellino. All had been especially badly damaged by the decline in for-
eign trade, which had removed the only incentive for improvement since ‘through-
out the Kingdom the wealthier classes use exclusively imported cloth, while the
poorer classes made their own so that markets for manufactured cloth were lim-
ited’.¹⁹The district of Arpino, once ‘an Emporium for its surrounding areas and all
the main cities in the kingdom’, was a genuine example of structural decay and after
ten years of war it had been reduced ‘to a state of total penury: the woollen industry
has collapsed because its products remain unsold, there is no capital, and the work-
ers are unemployed’.²⁰
Despite the French expectations that the South was a land of untapped
resources, the Kingdom had few other industries. There were tanneries in the cap-
ital and at S. Maria di Capua, as well as at Solofra in the Cilento and in the
Abruzzi, but the quality was described as poor and the methods of production
primitive. Soap was manufactured in Naples and in the Abruzzi, but depended on
imports of soda from abroad and was now at a standstill. There was fairly extensive
production of tobacco, which was dried and pulverized for sale as ‘erba santa’, but
it was not produced for smoking or chewing. Some coloured glass panes were pro-
duced in Naples, but only on a small scale, and to expand, the industry needed
new factories located closer to adequate supplies of timber and charcoal.
Iron ores were mined in Calabria at Stilo and at Piano d’Ardena near
Montefusco, but the output was small and the quality poor. The main constraint
was the shortage of timber, and to avoid exhausting the meagre supplies of timber
the Stilo foundries moved peripatetically from site to site. Iron was not much used
in agriculture and what was needed for making barrels for muskets and guns for
Napoleonic Naples
192
¹⁸ ASF: Consiglio Provinciale d’Otranto, 1808.
¹⁹ De Majo, in Lepre (ed.) (1985), 16.
²⁰ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II) f. 5068 (18 September 1816).

<<<PDFPAGE 202>>>
hunting was imported. The Silo foundry did produce ammunition for muskets,
but attempts to cast cannon had been unsuccessful, as had the attempts at making
steel, while the small quantity of metal blades produced was of extremely poor
quality. Gunpowder was made in the arsenal at Torre Annunziata, however, using
nitre mined in the Kingdom.²¹
In 1806, M. Riche of Parma was appointed Inspecteur des manufactures and
commissioned to survey every branch of manufacture to enable the government to
decide ‘what was needed to revive and reform each branch’.²² His report stated that
the quality of the products of the royal porcelain factory at Capodimonte was
poor, the methods of production were unsatisfactory and uneconomical, and
the prices too high. A great deal of lace was also made, especially in Naples,
but this was done almost entirely at home by women without any form of organ-
ization. The demand for these products from both the court and the Church was
considerable, but in this case, too, local production was not competitive with 
foreign patterns and styles.²³
The silk industry had been the subject of numerous government interventions
to improve the quality of silk yarn in the ﬁnal years of Bourbon rule,²⁴ and the
director of the Royal Silk Factory explained that the Bourbons had wanted the S.
Leucio factory to be a model to encourage the adoption of the Piedmontese
method for spinning silk throughout the Kingdom. The traditional methods of
throwing and twisting silk ﬁbre relied on ‘reeling done by the hands of peasants
grown rough and calloused by ploughing and digging, which damaged the ﬁbres
and halved their value’. But the new spinning techniques threatened to put domestic
spinners out of work and had provoked much popular opposition.²⁵
The reports showed that the decline of the silk industry had much older 
origins. A century earlier about two-thirds of the population of Catanzaro had
been engaged in the silk industry, but now less than 4,000 ducats were invested in
the industry in the entire province and ‘a large number of men and women remain
without work and rot in idleness and poverty’. The causes were lack of capital and
the failure to improve techniques (especially in dyeing), which had caused quality
to decline. The industry had also proved unable to respond to changing fashions
as cotton replaced silk for summer wear and damask silk cloth was less in demand
for winter clothing and furnishings.²⁶
Not only raw materials but also skilled and semi-skilled labour were in short
supply. Referring to the warships to be built under the terms of the Treaty of
Bayonne, the Foreign Minister di Gallo pointed out that there were less than 700
or 800 workers familiar with shipbuilding in the whole Kingdom and that all the
A Kingdom Remodelled?
193
²¹ Ibid., f. 5067, ‘Prospetto delle manifatture da stabilirsi nel Regno di Napoli’ (no date but
1807). On the Calabrian iron works, see also Rubino (1978).
²² Ibid., f. 5066, Min. dell’Interno to M. Riche, 29 August 1806.
²³ Ibid., Rapport de l’Inspecteur des manufactures, 29 October 1806, 2 December 1806.
²⁴ Ibid., 29 May 1805.
²⁵ Ibid., Tortora al Re, 23 May 1806.
²⁶ Ibid., ‘Memoria del abate Gregorio Araccri sull’industria della seta in Catanzaro’.

<<<PDFPAGE 203>>>
materials—the oak, iron, nails, lead, leather, canvas, and rope—needed to build a
74-gun ship had to be imported: ‘What use are shipyards without materials, and
what use are shipyards and materials without workers?’²⁷
The new government continued the earlier Bourbon practice of granting 
subsidies and monopolies to encourage industries considered to be of strategic
importance.²⁸ Murat went further and to the outrage of the imperial administration
in Paris in 1809 imitated the emperor’s protectionist policies by imposing duties on
imported foreign manufactured goods. But these measures were not enough and the
Royal Silk Factory at S. Leucio, which employed more than a thousand workers, had
by 1813 accumulated huge stockpiles of unsold silk cloth: the government tried to
dispose of these by lottery, but there were too few buyers.²⁹
In open violation of imperial regulations, Murat’s government began to adopt a
coherent strategy of import-substitution to protect and develop key industries. The
most important of these was textiles, and a number of Swiss cotton manufacturers
whose native industries had been ruined by the Continental blockade and the
emperor’s Berlin Decrees were persuaded to open factories in the Kingdom. Jacques
Egg of Elikon der Thur near Zurich set up the ﬁrst cotton factory in the ex-convent
of the Carmine in Piedimonte d’Alife in the Terra di Lavoro. Other Swiss cotton
manufacturers did the same in the Salerno region, and similar facilities were offered
to the French clothmakers Charles Lambert and Jules D’Escrivan, who opened a
woollen cloth factory on the Isola di Sora in the northern Terra di Lavoro.³⁰
The foreign textile manufacturers were provided with buildings and investment
subsidies, and were guaranteed markets through government contracts for military
or naval uniforms. But the results were not encouraging. When the government
held a ‘Solemn Exhibition of the Most Important National Manufactures 
in the Kingdom’ in Naples in August 1810, Mosbourg commented to Murat,
‘averypompous article has been published on the products of our national indus-
tries presented in the Exhibition. Sadly, one has to say that none of these is in any
wayremarkable. To hold such an Exhibition every year would be too much.’³¹
The situation improved in the years that followed, but the principal victim of
the prolonged recession, as the reports of the provincial assemblies in 1808 had
revealed, was agriculture.
NEW ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS
After decrying the economic paralysis caused by the prolonged interruption of
trade, the protests of the provincial assemblies were aimed most loudly at the
Napoleonic Naples
194
²⁷ ANP: 31 AP 27; di Gallo to Duca di Bassano, n.d.
²⁸ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5068, Winspeare to Luigi de’ Medici, 17 April 1805.
²⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5066, 31 December 1813 (S. Leucio).
³⁰ See Davis (1981), 106–29; De Matteo (1984), 3–63; Wenner (1953).
³¹ ANP: 31 AP 43: Mosbourg to Murat, 23 August 1813.

<<<PDFPAGE 204>>>
heavy new administrative costs with which the provinces were being burdened.
There was particulatly deep resentment at the costs for maintaining public order
that had previously been the responsibility of the baronial and royal courts, the
new Provincial Guards, and local gendarmerie set up in each town to replace
theprevious baronial sbirri.³²
Both had been organized by General Rader, who had previously established
similar gendarmeries in Corsica and in the Kingdom of Italy.³³ The Provincial
Legions replaced the temporary Military Commissions set up immediately after
the conquest, and were responsible ‘for maintaining public order and security, for
keeping exact lists of all vagabonds, unemployed persons, disturbers of the peace,
those guilty of riotous behaviour or carrying prohibited weapons, while watching
out for Enemies of the State, those guilty of spreading false rumours and causing
Alarm, and all those suspected of Brigandage who must be arrested’.³⁴
There was no rush to recruit, however, and in June 1806 General de Gambs
ordered every comune in Abruzzo Citra to draw up a list of ‘volunteers’, adding that
‘His Majesty wishes it known that being enrolled in the Legion will be considered a
necessary condition for all those seeking any civil or military employment.’³⁵ Still
no response, and a month later De Gambs threatened to impose conscription on
alltowns that failed to supply the required number of volunteers.³⁶
The carrying of ﬁrearms was prohibited, and each town was required to main-
tain a prison ‘with windows, iron doors and a gate with three heavy locks’. The
prison guards should be able to read and write, and if there were no former feudal
sbirri to perform this duty, army veterans could be employed. But few towns could
afford this and the instructions were soon countermanded.
There were frequent complaints, however, that the Provincial Guards and the
gendarmes were the main cause of public disorder, which was tacitly acknow-
ledged in 1812 when the commander of the Gendarmerie Reale delle Due Sicilie
reminded his ofﬁcers that the Gendarmerie existed to protect property and 
persons, that authorization from a magistrate was required before searching
houses or private property, and that the civil authorities should be present when
deserters or other delinquents were arrested. Full written reports had to be made
regularly of all arrests and other activities, and it was strictly forbidden for 
gendarmes to lend their weapons ‘to friends who want to use them for hunting’.
The general concluded by pointing out that it had been discovered that many
members of the Guard were draft-dodgers, while others ‘were accompanied
by women who are certainly not their legitimate spouses’.³⁷
A Kingdom Remodelled?
195
³² Law of 8 October 1806.
³³ Regulations stipulated that recruits should have four years service in a Regiment of the Line, be
at least 5 ft. 5 in. in height, be able to read and write, be of ‘good moral standing and have a decent
public reputation’. Pay was 136 ducats a year for an infantryman and 245 ducats for the cavalry, with
higher rates for sergeants and corporals. BNN: Ms. Bancone 8: ‘Gendarmerie Napoletana’, 24 March
1806.
³⁴ Ibid., Commissione Temporanea di Alta Polizia, Cerignola, September 1806.
³⁵ Ibid., Proclama del Gen di Divisione Daniel de Gambs, 23 June 1806 (Chieti).
³⁶ Ibid., 23 July 1806.
³⁷ Ibid., Gendarmeria Reale del Regno delle Due Sicilie, 15 May 1812.

<<<PDFPAGE 205>>>
Given the failure of voluntary service, in 1812 the government adopted a form
of conscription by ballot for the Civic Guards, an innovation that was denounced
by an outraged Vincenzo Cuoco, who considered it to be inefﬁcient, costly, and
contrary to the true principles of patriotism.³⁸
As well as local gendarmerie and the voluntary Guardia Civica, the comuni were
also expected to pay for a justice of the peace, to establish primary schools and
health clinics, and to retain the services of physicians for the poor (medici con-
dotti).³⁹ They must also implement the new regulations requiring that cemeteries
be sited outside the town walls, that drains be provided for household waste, and
that animals should not be allowed to graze or be kept in public streets, enforce the
use of new weights and measures, and ensure that no meat from animals dying of
disease was sold for human consumption.⁴⁰
These were very heavy ﬁnancial burdens especially for poor communities, and
despite the annual visitations by the Intendent or Sub-intendent they were rarely
observed. The suppression of many local charitable foundations (luoghi pii) also
left the local communities responsible for funding for poor relief. It was not until
1813 that the government began the difﬁcult task of auditing the revenues of the
provincial charitable foundations, an operation not completed until 1819.
Excluding Naples and Sicily, there were 7,224 charitable foundations in the
Kingdom with estimated annual revenues of just over 1,000,000 ducats. But
there were marked geographical disparities. Roughly half the revenues belonged
to institutions in the Terra di Lavoro, Principato Citra, and the Terra di Bari. By
contrast, there were only 213 luoghi pii in Basilicata, 283 in Primo Abruzzo Ultra,
56 in Calabria Ultra Prima, and only 21 in Calabria Ultra Seconda. Not surpris-
ingly, the poor were much better provided for in the wealthier provinces.⁴¹
PUBLIC WORKS
Better roads and more effective land reclamation projects topped the list of what
the provincial assemblies wanted from the government. These also ﬁgured high
in the government’s pronouncements and in 1810 the Interior Minister,
Giuseppe Zurlo, proudly announced that the government was planning to build
a new bridge over the Volturno River and another over the river Calore, and
Napoleonic Naples
196
³⁸ Cuoco (1806–15), ii. 184.
³⁹ Ibid. 410–15. See also Lupo (1999).
⁴⁰ BNN: Bancone 8, Piano di Polizia Municipale che si presenta per Cerignola all’Ilustrissimo
Intendente di Capitanata, Sig. Cav. Poerio (October 1806).
⁴¹ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) 152/2: Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale (October 1820), 56–7:
Terra di Lavoro, 1,418 luoghi pii with a total annual revenue of 289, 402 ducats; Principato Citra, 703
institutions with revenues of around 100,000 ducats per year; Terra di Bari, 729 institutions with
123,972 in annual revenue. By contrast, there were only 213 luoghi pii in Basilicata (total revenue
52,402 ducats per year), 283 in Primo Abruzzo Ultra (21,451 ducats), 56 in Calabria Ultra Prima
(18,325 ducats), and only 21 in Calabria Ultra Seconda (14,743 ducats).

<<<PDFPAGE 206>>>
was engaged in a major project to drain the extensive marshlands along the
Volturno River and in the region around Fondi:
Amongst the many misadventures that the negligence and ignorance of man has brought
to this most beautiful and fertile part of Italy, the most pitiful are the vast swamps that have
rendered huge areas uninhabitable and prevent any form of farming.⁴²
Responsibility for directing these projects was delegated to two new agencies, the
General Directorates of Bridges and Roads and Woodlands and Waterways.⁴³ Both
imitated French models and were examples of the interventionist administrative
mentality of the new regime. But both suffered severely inadequate funding.
Much was promised but little was done, while the provinces protested that the
funds they paid for public works were frequently put to other uses. The Provincial
Council of Capitanata, for example, complained in 1809 that the province had
raised 180,000 ducats in taxes to repair to the road that linked Apulia to Naples and
the bridge at Bovino, but the work had never been started.⁴⁴ Two years later the
same road was still blocked by a landslide, and the bridge at Bovino had still not
been repaired either. In other cases the funds never materialized. In Molise, Joseph
Bonaparte allocated beni nazionali worth 40,000 ducats to fund the building of
anew road to link Campobasso with Naples, which the Provincial Council had
agreed was the province’s greatest need. But the project was never started because
there were no buyers for the beni nazionali in question and the Provincial Council
could not accept the offer of a loan because it had no means to repay it.⁴⁵
A report drawn up in 1813 by Vincenzo Cuoco showed that little progress had
been made on the land reclamation projects started under the previous monarchy,
and that in many cases the situation had deteriorated. Major reclamation operations
had been started, for example, in the ﬂooded territory known as the Vico di
Pantanto situated on the southern bank of the Volturno River between Cunia and
Castelvolturno that had been under crown administration since before 1806,
and where the Bourbon administrator Martucci had begun a number of drainage
operations. The main problem was that there was no general plan for the area as a
whole, without which, Cuoco argued, time and money were being wasted. In other
cases the rulings of the Feudal Commission had disastrous effects on projects that
had already been started. As an example Cuoco cited the Eboli plain, which in 
technical terms was relatively easy to drain, but the whole operation had been jeop-
ardized when the Feudal Commission divided up the properties on which drainage
operations had already begun, so that the swamps were taking over again.⁴⁶
The relative neglect of the provinces was evident from the fact that the entire bud-
get for provincial public works in 1815 was a mere 55,000 ducats⁴⁷—a reﬂection of
A Kingdom Remodelled?
197
⁴² Zurlo, in Lalli (n.d.), 69.
⁴³ Direzionale Generale de Ponti e Strade and the Direzione Generale delle Acque e Boschi.
⁴⁴ ASF: Processi Verbali, Consiglio Distrettuale di Foggia 1809 (B 1).
⁴⁵ Cuoco (1806–15), ii. 202–3.
⁴⁶ Ibid.
⁴⁷ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) f.152/2: Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale 1820, 10.

<<<PDFPAGE 207>>>
the overwhelming demands of war expenditures in the ﬁnal phase of Murat’s reign.
The situation was much better in the province of Bari, but with only a few excep-
tions the French rulers invested little in the provinces and signiﬁcantly less than in
the capital, while the investments made were paid for by the provinces.
PAYING FOR PROGRESS
The impact of the administrative burdens that were transferred to the provinces
was clearly evident from the changing style of the annual reports of the provincial
and local councils. After 1810 the government no longer solicited general com-
ments, but delegated that responsibility to more narrowly selected Economic
Societies.⁴⁸ The reports of the provincial and local councils instead became mere
lists of expenses that reveal the high costs of emancipation.
The list of expenses recorded by the Provincial Council for Capitanata in 1811
began with a salary increase for the Intendent, the costs of the Intendent’s annual
visitation of the province, the cost of the households of the Intendent and of the
Sub-intendent, and the cost of the vaccination campaign against smallpox ordered
by the government. The province also contributed over 9,000 ducats to the cost of
maintaining foundlings, whose number had increased ‘either because of the critical
circumstances of the times which compromise honest girls or because of the seduc-
tions that they do not know how to resist’. It had to pay for barracks for the
Gendarmerie Reale (6,858 ducats), for the cost of collecting the statistics required
for the general census ordered by the government, and for the operations to destroy
the eggs of the insects that had devastated the region. The report concluded that the
province did not have the means to meet these expenses.⁴⁹
Starting in 1810, each comune was required to prepare a provisional budget
(stati discussi), which had to be submitted for approval to the Intendent’s ofﬁce.
The preparation and approval of these budgets were the subject of endless dis-
putes, but the resulting budgets clearly showed how new and additional taxes were
constantly being added.⁵⁰The sources of income for the comuni were, by contrast,
relatively ﬁxed, consisting of rents for land and buildings belonging to the comune
and consumption taxes. In 1815 these were calculated to amount to a total of
1,500,000 ducats for the entire Kingdom (excluding Naples and Sicily). It was
difﬁcult to contract out the collection of these taxes, and most comuni raised them
through capitation taxes, which were ‘most burdensome for the least prosperous
class of people’.⁵¹
Napoleonic Naples
198
⁴⁸ See pp. 244–6.
⁴⁹ ASF: Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali, Processi Verbali (Busta 1); Consiglio Provinciale di
Capitanata, 1811.
⁵⁰ These included an annual contribution of 500,000 ducats to the cost of provincial public
works. Then in 1812 the provinces were required to contribute an additional tax of 5% of their total
revenues to pay for the Legioni Provinciali as well as other charges. Ibid. 22, 80.
⁵¹ Ibid. 21.

<<<PDFPAGE 208>>>
The division of common lands by the Feudal Commission was designed to
address at least some of the ﬁnancial problems facing the rural communities,
but that complex and problematic operation provided few immediate and
even fewer long-term solutions. In the meantime, the ﬁnancial costs of the new
administrative system introduced by the law of 8 August 1806 were passed onto
the provinces, which by 1812 were also contributing over 4,000,000 lire a year
more to the land tax than in 1808, a situation that even the ﬁnance minister
Count Mosbourg considered to be unsustainable and politically dangerous.⁵²
THE CAPITAL
At the time of the Restoration in 1815, the Bourbon minister Donato Tommasi
judged the reorganization of the administration of Naples to be one of the best
innovations made by the French rulers. The changes meant that the government
was ﬁnally fully in control of the city, making it possible for the ﬁrst time to 
regulate building, communications, public health, and commercial activities. The
French had introduced new controls over public food markets, as well as street
lighting and the streets were being named and numbered. There were even plans
for a new cemetery to be built in a ‘magniﬁcent enclosed ground that is sufﬁ-
ciently spacious to accommodate all the city’s corpses’, although by 1815 work
had still not started because the project proved to be very costly.⁵³
The unﬁnished cemetery was in many ways a ﬁtting epitaph to the decade of
French rule in the capital. Although the French rulers set out to reorganize the city
and remove its economic privileges, almost from the start the project ran up against
political and administrative difﬁculties that proved insurmountable. In part these
derived from the disastrous state of the city’s economy, but the problems were com-
pounded by the contradictions embedded in the policies of the new regime.
When the French entered Naples in February 1806, they found a city that had
suffered the impact not only of invasion and civil war but of a prolonged commer-
cial recession that dated from Ferdinand IV’s entry into the First Coalition in
1793. In 1793–4 and again in 1801 the city was the victim of severe subsistence
crises. After 1799 it had been stripped of its former jurisdictional privileges, its
independent government had been abolished, it had lost its exemption from con-
scription, and more severe measures had been imposed to reduce the ﬂow of
migrants and vagrants from the surrounding rural areas.
In the decades following the famine of 1763/4, the city’s population had
risendramatically,⁵⁴ but after 1800 began to decline again and reached a trough
A Kingdom Remodelled?
199
⁵² ANP: 31 AP 34, Mosbourg to Murat, 14 November 1812.
⁵³ Donato Tommasi, formerly a close friend of Filangieri, was a senior Bourbon administrator
who followed the court to Palermo. In 1814 he drafted an extensive commentary on the adminis-
trative and juridical reforms introduced by the French rulers: ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi.
⁵⁴ From 300,000 to about 400,000 by the close of the century.

<<<PDFPAGE 209>>>
in1811.⁵⁵ Since there is no evidence of signiﬁcant out-migration, disease and
mortality were the most likely causes, and in 1809–10 and again in 1816–17 the
city was the victim of further serious subsistence crises and epidemics.⁵⁶ The
paralysis of trade caused severe unemployment among all occupational groups,
and the Provincial Council in 1811 reported that domestic servants and ﬁsher-
men had suffered most.⁵⁷ Between 20 and 50% of the population were estimated
to be either destitute or on the verge of destitution.⁵⁸
The relative distribution of population between the capital and the provinces
changed little, however. In 1800, Naples contained just under 10% of the entire
mainland population: in 1815 the proportions were much the same, suggesting
that the relationship between the capital and the provinces had not changed 
signiﬁcantly during the decade of French rule.⁵⁹
SECURING THE CITY
Although there was no repetition of the events of January 1799, when the French
entered Naples in February 1806 they were very mindful of the immediate past.
A special Police Commissariat was established under the Minister of the Interior
and the city was divided into twelve quartieri, each with its own Commissar of
Police and a force of gendarmes. The Commissari were given wide powers to arrest
and detain suspected enemies of the state, as well as ‘vagabonds, beggars and
unknown persons’. The police were charged with surveillance of the mails and
censorship of all publications, with granting licences to carry ﬁrearms for street
vendors, porters, stevedores, ﬁshermen, and cab drivers; public gatherings were
temporarily banned and required permission from the police, as did fairs and
markets, and anyone seeking access to the port and docks. Commissars were
appointed as police magistrates in each district with the power to impose ﬁnes to a
maximum of 12 carlini and up to eight days imprisonment for ‘crimes that
warrant corporal punishment and public disgrace’⁶⁰
The Duke of Laurenzana, who had been arrested as a traitor in 1799, was
appointed Commissioner of Police in March. The former Bourbon magistrates were
arrested and removed and replaced by ‘prominent patriots from 1799’.⁶¹ On 19 July
the voluntary Guardia Urbana became a permanent Guardia Civica in which all
‘former military ofﬁcers and gentlemen, shopkeepers, craftsmen and their sons as
well as people in His Majesty’s service’ were obliged to serve. The cost was to be met
by the city, and exemption fees for those not wishing to serve in person were set at
300 ducats: ‘From what I hear no-one has paid this’, remarked Carlo De Nicola.⁶²
Napoleonic Naples
200
⁵⁵ The ﬁgures were 1806, 378,402; 1809, 305,000/350,000; 1811, 307,173; 1814, 324,986;
1817, 326,557 (Pilati, 1978, 2).
⁵⁶ Martuscelli (1979), p. xlv.
⁵⁷ Ibid., tables I and F.
⁵⁸ Ibid., p. xlviii; Villani (1978), 163.
⁵⁹ Martuscelli (1979), p. cxi.
⁶⁰ De Nicola, 3 March 1806, 226.
⁶¹ Ibid., 28 March, 237.
⁶² Ibid., 27 March 1806, 200; 19 July, 272.

<<<PDFPAGE 210>>>
The Guardia Civica was reorganized again in 1813, and all males between the ages
of 25 and 60 ‘without exception, from public employees to shop-owners inclusive’
were obliged to serve. Citizens were divided into six categories (former volunteers,
public employees, professionals, persons of means, merchants, and shopkeepers) and
each had to supply a ﬁxed contingent of recruits. Renamed the Public Security
Guard, the new force consisted of 48 companies, each with 155 men: ‘which is to say
600 for each district in the city’. No exemptions or substitutions were permitted.⁶³
In 1808 the policing of the capital was reorganized again on Napoleon’s
instructions, and a Prefecture of Naples was created on the model of the Préfecture
de la Seine in Paris. This proved to be extremely costly and to ﬁnance it new taxes
had to be raised on licences for wine cellars, inns and taverns, playing cards, pass-
ports, ﬁshing boats, and draft animals. These were insufﬁcient, and in 1810 
‘wet-nurses, obstetricians, pharmacists, suppliers of drugs, dyers and weavers’
were all required to obtain licences, and new taxes were imposed on houses with
doors opening onto the street and on playing cards. Nonetheless, the Prefecture’s
budget was repeatedly overspent.⁶⁴
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT
A new municipal government, known as the Corpo della Città, came into being
with the law of 8 August 1806. Presided over by a member of the Council of State
it consisted of thirty decurioni, a mayor, and twelve Eletti, one for each quartiere of
the city, and all nominated by the government. Its functions were limited to 
matters of ‘urban policing’, which included the licensing of urban trades and mar-
kets, the maintenance of roads, regulation of weights and measures, distribution
of the land tax, the appointment of justices of the peace for each district, and after
1809 the organization of conscription quotas.⁶⁵
In 1806 the city’s debts were amalgamated with those of the state, and the gov-
ernment established a ﬁxed annual budget.⁶⁶ But although taxes continued to
increase, they were never sufﬁcient to cover the costs of the new administration.
Even so, the capital’s contribution to direct taxation remained relatively low in
relation to the size of its population: Naples and its province accounted for 12% of
the Kingdom’s population but contributed only 15% of the land tax, despite the
fact that wealth was concentrated disproportionately in and around the capital.
Rather surprisingly, the contributions to the capitation tax introduced in
September 1809 speciﬁcally on incomes from trade and other activities indicate
that less than 3% of the total of those registered resided in the capital.⁶⁷
A Kingdom Remodelled?
201
⁶³ Ibid., 14–20 March 1813, 618–19.
⁶⁴ Valente (1940), 263; De Martino (1984), 180–5.
⁶⁵ Cutolo (1932), 5–17.
⁶⁶ De Rosa (1959), 18.
⁶⁷ 29 September 1809; see Villani (1978), 163; the ﬁgures for the tax on trade and professions
introduced in 1811 are not available.

<<<PDFPAGE 211>>>
CHARITY AND WELFARE
The desperate situation of the city’s charitable foundations was a consequence
of increased demand caused by the prolonged economic recession and then by the
suppression of monasteries and convents in the capital. But it was above all the
devastating consequences of the suspension of the arrendamenti and the abolition
of feudal revenues that forced the government to intervene.⁶⁸
The poverty of the capital was one of the most intractable problems facing
the new rulers, but it was also one from which they sought to make political
capital. The horror that Miot de Melito expressed at the capital’s poverty in his
report on the state of the realm in 1806 was a constant refrain. In his memoirs
Pierre Louis Roederer, for example, commented, ‘In Naples, the streets are full of
the most infamous canaille and people piss everywhere even in the palaces.’⁶⁹
Similar language recurred in the report of the Provincial Council in 1808:
Every one knows the appearance of the inhabitants of this Metropolis, a mass of evil 
looking characters and prostitutes who render the streets ugly while bands of naked and dis-
ease-ridden children without parents or homes importune the citizens with their laments,
live off offal, dead animals and garbage and sleep piled on top of one another in the streets.⁷⁰
The purpose of this language was to make vagrancy, ﬁlth, and poverty bludgeons
with which to assail the indiscriminate provision of charity. Miot de Melito had been
quick to point to the proliferation of charitable institutions as the main cause of
poverty and unemployment because they encouraged a culture of sloth and idleness.
Conditions were indeed horrendous. The Albergo dei Poveri, the city’s principal
poorhouse that doubled as a prison for vagrants, was in a state of ‘veritable 
desolation’ and had been partly converted into a military barracks. The principal
hospital for the poor, the Ospedale degli Incurabili, was in a ‘terrible state’: it had
been sacked in 1799 and had then lost most of its revenues as a result of the con-
version of the arrendamenti. The principal hospice for abandoned infants, the
Ospedale dell’Annunziata, was in similar decay and the majority of foundlings
lodged there ‘perish from the cold and hunger or get eaten by wild animals’. Those
poor wretches that survived ‘are destined, if their poverty does not cause them to
perish at an early age, to become the most dangerous subjects in the State’.⁷¹
The French ambassador, D’Aubusson, was especially scandalized by the death
rate amongst the foundlings, which he blamed illogically on the widespread 
Napoleonic Naples
202
⁶⁸ The Neapolitan religious houses suppressed in 1807 included the monastery of San Martino
and the Calmaldoli houses; in January 1808 the government closed the richest nunneries (Santa
Maria dei Miracoli and San Marcellino) and in May a further 26 convents, including the largest, the
Franciscan convent of the Holy Trinity in via Toledo. Rambaud (1908), 302–4.
⁶⁹ Roederer (1854), vi. 73, 103.
⁷⁰ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (I), f. 183, Consiglio della Provincia di Napoli, 1808.
⁷¹ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 3, Miot de Melito to Joseph Bonaparte, 4 July 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 212>>>
practice among the poor of using herbs to induce miscarriages. In this manner, he
claimed, the Neapolitan lazzaroni were cheating the emperor’s armies of some
2,000 potential conscripts a year, an outrage he called on the clergy to campaign
against and on the police to act more severely in cases of suspected infanticide.⁷²
A decade later conditions were no better. Of the foundlings and orphans that
entered the Ospedale della Annunziata ‘it is painful to record that nine tenths per-
ish’. Attempts were made to establish schools for the foundlings who survived, but
these failed because of ‘the habits of idleness and abuse that they have inherited’.⁷³
Conditions in the Albergo dei Poveri were as bad. It had been built on what
was formerly a marsh, and the buildings were damp and unhealthy. The inmates
slept ‘in the least healthy part of the building, and there was no fresh water’.
The building had never been completed and had suffered serious damage in 1799,
sothat ‘on entering the Capital the visitor is greeted by the sight of a vast monu-
ment that is unﬁnished and apparently abandoned’.⁷⁴
The situation became even worse when the French government designated it as
the city’s ‘dépôt de mendicité’. The object was to cleanse the capital ‘of those
crooked, deformed and mutilated creatures that plague it, and of the vagabonds
and beggars who make it unsafe’, and over 5,000 inmates of both sexes ended up
being housed there:
this great family is composed of beggars, vagabonds, men notorious for obscene actions,
prostitutes and all the other wretches who give themselves up or are arrested on the public
highways of the capital.⁷⁵
Instruction in a range of crafts and skills was provided for the young male 
paupers, who could train to be ‘tailors, shoemakers, barbers, carpenters, wood-
turners, metal-casters, printers, makers of weapons, weavers and spinners’, but
there was only lace-making for the girls. New Bell and Lancaster school were later
introduced for the younger children, and ﬁfty of the female inmates were sent to
work in Signor Egg’s cotton-spinning factory in Piedmonte d’Alife. Many of the
young boys were sent to the army as drummers and pipers. But the attempts
to provide training for the young and ﬁnd useful work for the paupers failed
either because the funds to buy machines and materials were lacking or, more 
generally, because of the ‘force of inertia’.⁷⁶
To round off the catalogue of human suffering, conditions in the city’s prisons
were described in one government report as ‘a shame to Humanity’.To remedy
these problems that had been seriously aggravated by assault on the revenues
of the charitable foundations, the government looked primarily for administrative
A Kingdom Remodelled?
203
⁷² AAEP: CP (Naples) 132, ‘Notes sur le Royaume de Naples’ (1808).
⁷³ Ibid., 42; see also ASN: Min. dell’Interno Int (I) f. 183, Consiglio della Provincia di Napoli 1808.
Of the 1,676 foundlings that entered the Annunziata between January and December 1808, 1,311 died.
⁷⁴ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) f. 152(2), Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale sulla situazione del
Ministero degli Affari Interni (23 October 1820), 86.
⁷⁵ Ibid.
⁷⁶ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 213>>>
economies. The smaller foundations were suppressed or amalgamated with larger
surviving institutions, an operation overseen by a Central Welfare Committee
whose members included the Grand Almoner, the Cardinal Archbishop of
Naples, the President of the Corpo della Città, and four wealthy proprietors
‘renowned for their concern for the poor’.⁷⁷ Charitable commissions were set up
in each quartiere of the city, on which leading citizens and wealthy merchants were
required to serve. The Commissions received the miserable sum of 16,000 ducats
a year from the government, and their task was to raise private donations to sup-
port the families of the deserving poor and to organize soup kitchens and other
forms of relief for the poor in times of special hardship.⁷⁸
Unemployment continued to rise, however, and new taxes had to be intro-
duced to support the charitable institutions. When the city was faced with a major
subsistence crisis in 1810 the government created a further Council of Hospices
and introduced another consumption tax that was expected to raise 100,000
ducats a year. But it did not, and by then the crisis had reached deep into the capil-
lary networks of pawn shops, soup kitchens, hospices, conservatories, hospitals,
madhouses, and poorhouses on which the majority of urban poor depended for
survival. Some were shut down or put to other use. Many of the conservatories
that offered shelter for poor women who were permanently or temporarily single
were amalgamated or suppressed, ‘which caused their numbers to decrease, and
while this has beneﬁted two or three institutions it has ruined the rest, whose
inmates are forced to beg on the streets to survive’.⁷⁹
The institutions that provided ‘home help’ for the deserving poor were particu-
larly hard hit. The Monte della Misericordia, which had formerly provided alms
and food for poor families in their own homes, was, for example, converted into a
barracks for French troops. These losses were compounded by the plunder of
theassets of the lay confraternities, another traditional source of support for the
independent urban poor.⁸⁰
The larger institutions weathered the storm, in part because of mergers with
smaller foundations but also because of their important role in the urban eco-
nomy. These institutions were major providers of work and a major source of
demand for victuals, clothing, linen, bedding, beds, furniture, clerical materials,
ﬁrewood, and so forth. Although their ability to provide for the poor was
reduced, they continued to offer employment for the armies of administrators,
lawyers, accountants, estate managers, architects, builders, decorators, plasteres,
gatekeepers, gardeners, porters, cooks, cleaners, laundry-women, and workmen.
Not only did the charitable foundations play a crucial role in the urban eco-
nomy, but without the support of those who administered the city’s charitable
foundations Naples would almost certainly have been impossible to govern. 
Napoleonic Naples
204
⁷⁷ Landi (1977), ii. 806–7.
⁷⁸ Ibid. 51.
⁷⁹ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) f. 152(2), Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale sulla situazione del
Ministero degli Affari Interni (23 October 1820).
⁸⁰ Ibid. 52–4.

<<<PDFPAGE 214>>>
As a result, while the government seized whatever revenues it could lay its hands
on, there was no serious attempt to undermine the corporate structures around
which the charities and the life of the city more generally were organized.
1809–10: FEARS OF FAMINE
The French rulers had other reasons for dropping their original projects for 
reorganizing the city, which were especially evident when in 1810 the city was
again threatened by famine. The crisis, which came while Murat was preparing the
invasion of Sicily that never took place, came with advanced warning when poor
harvests in the summer of 1809 raised fears about the capital’s food supplies,
just at a moment when Napoleon’s campaign against Austria had brought the
Kingdom’s trade to a complete standstill.
The threatened subsistence crisis in the capital offered the government the 
pretext for permanently abandoning the liberal economic measures that had been
adopted by Joseph Bonaparte. New protectionist measures directed even against
French imports followed, while Joseph’s attempts to liberalize trade between
the capital and the provinces were replaced by new regulations designed to 
protect consumers in the metropolis.
In Naples, the situation became more threatening when an outbreak of typhoid
fever began in the autumn of 1809. As the winter progressed, predictions for the
coming harvest became more dire, and in February 1810 the government 
suspended the free movement of grain and began negotiating with the leading
merchants to purchase grain from abroad. The merchants claimed that the risks
were too high and refused. Murat begged the emperor for permission to purchase
grain from American ships, but this was refused. He then offered the merchants
more attractive terms, which they accepted.⁸¹
The crisis led to the adoption of new regulations for provisioning the capital
that became permanent and were designed to ensure once again that the urban
consumer would be guaranteed the lowest food prices available. Free trade in 
cereals was permitted only when the provincial Intendents gave assurance that
prospects for the forthcoming harvest were good; otherwise, grain exports were
prohibited while imports were freely permitted.⁸²
Once again, the capital and the urban consumer were protected at the expense
of the provincial grain producers, who were denied access to more lucrative export
markets. Free trade was brieﬂy restored after the Restoration, but then abandoned
again in favour of the regulations introduced in 1811, which became a major
source of conﬂict between the Restoration government and the southern
A Kingdom Remodelled?
205
⁸¹ AAEP: CC (Naples) 39, 391; ANP: AFiv 1714a, 31 October 1810.
⁸² See the detailed description by the French Consul General, Doriol: AAEP: CC (Naples) 39,
390–4, 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 215>>>
landowners. But these problems again revealed why more balanced relations
between the capital and the provinces were not easily achieved.
PUBLIC WORKS
For reasons of political expediency and dynastic representation, the capital also con-
tinued to absorb the greater part of the government’s expenditure on public works.
The most ambitious urban development project attempted in these years was the cre-
ation of a new public space in the centre of the city and in front of the royal palace, for
which the convents of S. Spirito and S. Francesco da Paola had been demolished.⁸³
New roads were built to connect the capital with the neighbouring settlements of
Posillipo and Ottajano. A fund of 240,000 ducats was set up for another road that
would link Naples with Calabria, and another 70,000 ducats in 1812 for a road from
Naples to Civitella del Tronto on the frontier with the Papal States in the Abruzzi.
New administrative bodies were created to prepare and oversee these projects, but
lack of funds or regular budgets meant that few were started and none completed.⁸⁴
Nonetheless Carlo de Nicola was outraged:
The Kingdom is exhausted, the government has turned thirty thousand families into beg-
gars, and yet it still thinks it a good idea to construct a new road that will link the Royal
Palace directly with the park of Capodimonte.⁸⁵
Even though few of the projects initiated by the French rulers had been completed
by the time of the Restoration, Naples remained the principal beneﬁciary of the new
regime’s interest in urban development. In the provinces Bari also underwent extens-
ive rebuilding, but the capital was the main focus of the government’s attention and
the French rulers were no less determined than their predecessors that their capital
should reﬂect both the glory of the empire and their own dynastic ambitions.⁸⁶
SEEKING ACCOMMODATION
Just as the government’s attempts to reduce the city’s economic privileges were
quickly abandoned, so too were its efforts to replace earlier corporate bodies and
regulations with new forms of bureaucratic administration. The nobility’s corporate
monopoly over municipal government had been abolished by the Bourbons, and
this was never restored. When they ﬁrst took control of the city the French quickly
abolished the guilds and confraternities as part of a more general attempt to deregu-
late the urban economy.
Napoleonic Naples
206
⁸³ Now Piazza Plebiscito: building of the monumental church of S. Francesco da Paola was started
after 1815 to celebrate the Restoration of the Bourbon dynasty.
⁸⁴ The Consiglio di Pubblici Lavori and the Consiglio di Edilizio.
⁸⁵ De Nicola, 20 September 1808, 374.
⁸⁶ De Seta (1981), 211–25.

<<<PDFPAGE 216>>>
In Naples, as in every other major Italian city, the independent municipal 
tribunals, together with the craft guilds, the lay confraternities, the major convents,
the parishes, and the religious orders, continued to dominate and effectively 
govern most aspects of the public and private lives of the city and its inhabitants.⁸⁷
This was normal and of all the Italian cities, only in Habsburg Milan had serious
measures been taken by the end of the eighteenth century to dismantle corporate
controls and institutions.⁸⁸ But that was the model that the French rulers followed
and in August 1806 the government decreed that ‘all exemptions from taxes and
duties’ previously enjoyed by the guilds and corporations of the capital were 
abolished, as were the guilds and lay confraternities.
Forty-ﬁve trade guilds and lay confraternities, each with its own patron church
or chapel, were abolished and their assets transferred to the state. Writing later in
the century, the Marchese Ceva Grimaldi claimed that the abolition of the corpora-
tions had resulted in the massive expropriation of the craftsmen of the capital,
who were left with a single dowry bank (monte di maritaggi) to provide for the
needs of daughters of working people.⁸⁹
Although stripped of their resources, the guilds and the confraternities contin-
ued to function with the government’s tacit approval.⁹⁰ When the Consuls of the
Wool Guild protested vigorously about the loss of their commercial privileges,
M.Riche, the Inspector General of Manufactures, supported them and claimed
under the new laws they would have to pay 4,000 ducats a year in taxes to bring
raw wool into the city, which would make them uncompetitive with provincial
manufacturers. Given the importance of the woollen industry as a source of
employment in the city, M. Riche urged that the tax exemptions be restored. The
Consuls of the Guilds continued to represent the interests of their members, and
in 1808 M. Riche complained that their refusal to cooperate made it impossible to
obtain information about the state of manufactures in the city.⁹¹
The fate of the guilds and the lay confraternities illustrates the more general
impact of French rule on the city. Their assets were seized by the government, but
the corporations survived albeit without the means to perform their previous
functions. To have done away with them altogether would have been extremely
difﬁcult, however, since the government did not have the means to create bureau-
cratic alternatives. The guilds and confraternities also proved to be indispensable
allies when it came to governing the city, since they formed an integral part of
thenetworks of patronage around which municipal politics hinged.
This was unintentionally acknowledged by the French ambassador, D’Aubusson,
who in July 1808 reported that policing the city depended on mobilizing powerful
factions. He believed that Joseph’s decision to make the Duke of Laurenzana Police
Commissioner had enabled a powerful faction of the old Neapolitan nobility
A Kingdom Remodelled?
207
⁸⁷ Astarita (2005).
⁸⁸ Ibid.; Fallon (1997).
⁸⁹ Ceva Grimaldi (1845), 57–8.
⁹⁰ However, all the documents relating to the guilds and confraternities were destroyed; see
Abbamonte, in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 505–16.
⁹¹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5066.

<<<PDFPAGE 217>>>
headed by the powerful Duke of Cassano to retain effective control of the city.
Saliceti had tried to challenge this by building his own rival networks that included
representatives of the guilds, the confraternities, and inﬂuential community leaders,
the capo-rioni popolari.⁹² But the French ambassador also complained that Saliceti’s
agents were notoriously corrupt: ‘In every known part of the world it is the general
rule that the lower ranks of Police agents are always recruited from the most vile, the
most immoral and the most venal sections of humanity.’⁹³
Carlo De Nicola conﬁrmed that Saliceti’s police had strong popular roots in the
city, and played on popular hostility to the middle classes. Anyone who refused
to adopt the popular ‘Brutus’ hair-style ‘without powder and cut short’ was at risk
of random arrest and questioning:
The lower sorts who are always the enemies of the patriots wear their hair short for comfort
and certainly can’t afford to get it curled. The gentry and artists prefer to powder their hair
and wear it in a short pigtail as in the olden days, but now they are in danger of being
stopped by the police and having their hair forcibly cut off.⁹⁴
CONCLUSION
Saliceti had understood the importance of tapping into the networks of power that
were the principal forces of cohesion in this teeming metropolis. For political as well
as economic reasons, therefore, although the city’s older corporate bodies lost many
of their assets and resources they not only survived but retained at least a part of their
former power. This was a clear sign of the limits of the modernizing mission of the
new rulers, and the consequences were evident when the Corpo della Città reported
in 1809 that it was unable to set the conscription quotas for the capital because it
had no reliable information on the inhabitants of the capital, where they lived, their
ages, or their occupations. That plea may have been self-serving, but in 1811 a simi-
lar lack of information and administrative machinery made it impossible to include
the capital in the census that had been planned for the whole Kingdom.⁹⁵
The capital’s complex corporate structures resisted the bureaucratic ambitions
of the French innovations, while the initial determination to change the capital
gave way to measures designed to ensure that the city remained tranquil under
conditions that were becoming increasingly threatening with each passing year.
That in turn undermined the efforts to redress imbalances between the capital
and the provinces, while the attempts to reorganize provincial administration
were also running into increasing difﬁculty. But in both the capital and the
provinces, the government’s difﬁculties were creating opportunities for powerful
interest groups to carve out their own positions in the post-feudal order.
Napoleonic Naples
208
⁹² De Nicola, May 1806, 249.
⁹³ AAEP: CP (Naples), 132, 20 July 1808.
⁹⁴ De Nicola, 4 July 1807, 351.
⁹⁵ Cutolo (1932), 15.

<<<PDFPAGE 218>>>
¹ Monitore Napoletano, no. 4, 11 March 1806.
11
Disorder
INTRODUCTION
The most central promise of the imperial enterprise was order, but disorder
was its most constant companion in southern Italy. In part this was a direct con-
sequence of the Kingdom’s role as a frontier of empire, but disorder was also rooted
in conﬂicts that the collapse of the ancien régime monarchy had left unresolved.
Although the most visible agents of disorder were drawn most frequently from the
poorest sections of Neapolitan society, behind them were frequently found more
powerful opponents of the new order.
RESISTANCE: 1806
The most widespread form of disorder was brigandage, a term used by the 
authorities repeatedly and deliberately to confuse a range of very different phe-
nomena. Most of what was initially described as brigandage were forms of semi-
institutionalized armed resistance to the occupation, and even though there
was no replay of the levée en masse of 1799, by early April 1806 the Monitore
Napoletano carried reports of the activities of royalist capi-masse and anti-government
insurrections in the northern provinces and even close to the capital. On 11 March
martial law was declared in the affected areas, military commissions were set up,
and colonne mobili were dispatched to put down the revolts.¹
The reports of the French military commanders underlined the highly 
decentralized nature of ancien régime law enforcement. In early April, the French
commander in the Terra di Lavoro—‘the largest province in the Kingdom and the
most important for us to control, because our principal lines of communication
run through it’—reported that responsibility for policing this entire province was
shared between no less than 22 royal and 140 feudal governors. The latter relied
on small baronial militias that were disorganized and ineffective, although he also
noted that the inhabitants of the mountain regions ‘had a great propensity to

<<<PDFPAGE 219>>>
Brigandage’ and that the people strongly supported the Bourbon monarchy
because they feared that the convents would be suppressed.²
All forms of resistance were simply labelled as brigandage. The royal governor
of Matera, the marchese Rodio, had orders to raise an insurrection to block the
French advance, but for Saliceti’s agents he was ‘the celebrated Calabrian named
Rodio, who in 1799 had won notoriety as a Brigand and for which he was given
the title of marchese and the rank of General by the Court’. His attempts to organ-
ize resistance explained why the ‘seeds of brigandage’ had been sown throughout
the Province of L’Aquila (Abruzzo) before the French entered the Kingdom. His
followers were ‘Capo-Briganti and conspirators’ who had been involved in the
events of 1799 and came ‘for the greater part from the class of malefactors and
from the lowliest Plebs. Like Rodio, they had been rewarded for their misdeeds by
the former monarchy.’
Rodio’s attempts to raise a royalist militia met with little success, however, and
after various adventures he was captured in April and taken to Naples to be tried
by a military commission. The commission hesitated to pass judgment because he
had been captured wearing the uniform of a royal ofﬁcer, but Saliceti had Masséna
replace those who opposed conviction on the pretext that Rodio had bribed 
members of the tribunal: on 27 April Rodio was duly shot as a brigand.³
Another famous Sanfedist leader, Colonel Michele Pezza, alias Fra Diavolo, had
better claims to be treated as a brigand, although he too had a royal commission
when he was landed with men and supplies at Gaeta. He then stole a horse and
two dozen mules from the village of Lauro where neither the ‘feudal militia’ nor
the local ‘Proprietors and Galantuomini’ tried to oppose him. His chevauchée
proved short-lived, but nonetheless it alarmed Saliceti, who feared it was the sign
for a major rising in the capital, where he suspected that the Duke of Cassano and
the brother of the Cardinal Archbishop were agents of the Court in Sicily.⁴
The conspiracy never materialized, but the situation became more dangerous
in May when the British captured the islands of Capri and Ponza, where the
Prince of Canosa set up headquarters to direct royalist plots on the nearby main-
land. Numerous armed bands were now operating in the Terra di Lavoro and
neighbouring provinces, but they were small and their followers quickly deserted.
When Gaeta surrendered to Masséna on 18 July, the royalist leaders in the north
lost their principal source of supplies, but their operations soon revived following
the news that Reynier’s army had been defeated by the English in Calabria.
In September Canosa arranged for Michele Pezza to land again at Gaeta
with some 300 criminals released from the jail on Ponza. Pezza raised a large
following in the San Germano valley, and when he entered the town of Sora
Napoleonic Naples
210
² A de G: C(5*) 32 Lettres de Gen. Girardon, Armée de Naples: 6 April 1806, Girardon to Min.
Guerre, Capua.
³ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4 (doc 4), Correspondance de C Saliceti: Saliceti to
Joseph Bonaparte, 27 April 1806.
⁴ Ibid., 29 April 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 220>>>
he ordered that the goods of all those unwilling to support him be seized. He
had over 400 men with him, among them spies placed by Saliceti who reported
that Pezza’s supplies were coming from the Papal States and that his men ‘were
organised like Regular Troops and like the former masse take the name of Corpo
Volante’.
Without Gaeta it was difﬁcult for the royalist bands to survive, however, and as
winter approached Pezza was forced to take to the mountains. In October the
Intendent of Lucera reported that he had moved into Molise and was trying to
raise fresh support but ‘The People up to now have not rallied to him. No town or
village is currently under his control.’ Every town had been ordered to prepare its
defences and Campobasso supplied 300 men for the Civil Guard and 150 more
came from Bojano.⁵ Pezza then tried to join the insurrections in Calabria, but he was
captured at Baronessa near Salerno in November and immediately shot. By the end
of the winter the government had regained control of the northern provinces.⁶
THE CALABRIAN REVOLT
In the meantime the Calabrian provinces had risen in revolt following Sir John
Stuart’s victory at Maida on 2 July 1806. When General Reynier’s troops pursued
the defeated Bourbon army into Calabria in March 1806, the situation had 
initially been quiet. Reynier reported on 5 March that the royalists’ appeal for
a levée en masse had fallen on deaf ears: ‘The inhabitants remained peacefully in
their villages as we advanced from Eboli towards Lagonegro. They even seem con-
tent to see my troops.’ Reynier proceeded by way of Cosenza to Monteleone,
where his army met a warm welcome: ‘The inhabitants of the villages all along
our route have come in crowds to watch us pass, which is an excellent sign of the
conﬁdence they have in us.’ The general felt sufﬁciently relaxed to report on
the conditions of the country:
This is a magniﬁcent land, but it has been depopulated by the recent earthquakes and
above all by a detestable system of government. We see many ﬁelds which have been
leftuncultivated and allowed to ﬁll with water and become unhealthy.... The towns and
villages have been only partially rebuilt and we are surrounded by the most impoverished
and wretched-looking peasants in the midst of one of the most beautiful and fertile 
landscapes imaginable.
On the 20 March his troops entered Reggio, where they were again warmly
greeted by the people and the clergy. Reynier was eager to press across the Straits
because his troops ‘would have preferred a winter campaign in Germany to this
little campaign in Calabria, and they cannot bear the idea of returning home by
Disorder
211
⁵ Ibid., Intendente of Lucera to Saliceti, 21 October 1806.
⁶ Ibid., Saliceti to Joseph Bonaparte, 1 November 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 221>>>
the same route that they have taken to arrive here’. But he did not have the
means to attempt a crossing and his provisioning problems had become acute.⁷
He reported again, however, that the Bourbon monarchy’s attempts to ‘enlist the
leaders of the popular masse that had taken part in that sort of Crusade led by
Cardinal Ruffo’ had completely failed.
The ﬁrst cases of resistance were isolated and were provoked by military for-
aging. But when a more concerted revolt began after the battle of Maida, Reynier’s
assessment quickly changed. Now he was surrounded on all sides by ‘brigands led
by English ofﬁcers and by former leaders of the Royalist masse. A true war of the
poor against the rich has been waged from the moment that the events of war
caused the reins of government to slacken. These Peasants live and breathe only
Brigandage and assassination.... There are no atrocities or crimes that they have
not committed.’⁸
On 31 July the Calabrian provinces were declared to be in state of war. Masséna
was sent with 15,000 men to reopen the road from Naples to Calabria.⁹ But while
Reynier waited for Masséna’s army to arrive the insurrections gained force and,
tomake matters worse, the coastal fort of Amantea fell into royalist hands.
THE SILA
As in 1799, the epicentre of the royalist insurrections in Calabria was the villages
and townships of the Sila Mountains. Geographically these communities lay on
the principal transit routes through the Sila Mountains that linked the Tyrrhenian
and Ionian coasts, giving them great strategic importance for the royalists. There
was also clear evidence of advanced preparation, and in many villages the retreat-
ing Bourbon army had planted royalists agents with precise instructions on ‘how
to raise and lead the masses and organize them into small rapid commando units
(corpicciuoli volanti), how to disrupt the progress of an enemy army by attacking
its supply trains and drawing its forces into ambushes in deep gorges and danger-
ous passes in the mountains’. Certain individuals had been assigned ranks
and uniforms, and each had been instructed to identify individuals who would be
‘prepared to take up arms’.¹⁰
The ﬁrst revolts took place in Longobucco, which was recognized as the centre
for the extensive networks of shepherds who worked in the region and whose tight
kinship bonds made them particularly powerful and widely feared:
All the shepherds in this province come from this town. Their babes are raised with the
sheep, weaned exposed to the cold and the open air, and grow up accustomed to live off
Napoleonic Naples
212
⁷ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4 (doc 4), Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 26 March 1806.
⁸ Ibid., Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 3 August 1806.
⁹ Ibid., C(5) 1, Correspondence de Joseph Bonaparte, Joseph Bonaparte to Napoleon, 31 July
1806, 9 August 1806.
¹⁰ BNP: Fonds Italiens, 1127, Brigantage dans la Calabre Citeriore.

<<<PDFPAGE 222>>>
a bare diet of the dry bread they carry with them. The cold climate in which they live
makes them more robust and renders them capable of confronting any endeavour without
fatigue. Longobucco is the sole producer of a type of woollen cloth that is worn by these
people and that in all seasons protects them from the wet and the cold. Accustomed to such
ways of living, they are prepared to accept any undertaking, no matter how dangerous.
Along with these ‘humble Plebs’, Longobucco had produced many dis-
tinguished men of letters:
But it is nonetheless true that the cultured and wealthy are few in contrast to the uncouth
multitude. What has to be noted is that these people are almost all related to one another
and share the same ideas, so that a single bold spirit can move them as a single body.
They are also skilled in the use of ﬁrearms because they hunt game in the surrounding
woodlands.
The ﬁrst revolt came on 9 June when ‘twelve uncouth young ﬁeld hands who
owned no land raised the Bourbon standard in the public square’. Their leader was
a young shepherd Antonio Sansoro, better known as Coreme. But the move failed
and the insurgents ﬂed to the mountains until they received news of Reynier’s
defeat at Maida on 2 July, which ‘reawakened the sedition that had been crushed
by the end of June’. Two days after Reynier’s defeat a revolt broke out in Pentone,
one of the casali of Catanzaro, ‘a miserable hamlet of the vilest people who earn
their living making charcoal, which they sell in Catanzaro, also the residence of
many notorious brigand leaders because the town is close to the Sila and in a place
that is not easy for the troops to reach’.¹¹
As had happened in 1799, the rebellion immediately spread to the other casali
of Cosenza, at which point Coreme and the twelve original rebels from
Longobucco returned from the hills carrying British standards and insisting
that every household do the same. Coreme was the undisputed leader and
declared that he had been given the rank of Captain by the royalist Capo-masse
Panedigrano and was a defender ‘of the Christian Faith and Religion’. He
recruited a band of ﬁfty followers who all adopted the red cockade of the
Bourbons: ‘Behold once more the Santafede!’¹²
As the insurrections spread those who had organized them became more 
visible. They included Seraﬁno Visciglia, the identikit of a feudal ofﬁcial who
was more royalist than his master, who worked on the estates of the Duke of
Corigliano where he was overseer of a factory that processed the valuable crop of
liquorice roots:
For this reason he used to receive from the Duke’s administration advances of large sums of
money to enable him to recruit workers from the casali of Cosenza to work in that Factory,
in all some three hundred individuals. This gave Visciglia great inﬂuence over the masse of
which he was the acknowledged leader; but he was supported by his numerous sons
and relatives, all brazen and lawless people who were all employed in the same factory and
Disorder
213
¹¹ Ibid. 1125.
¹² Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 223>>>
provided him with a band of loyal junior ofﬁcers. All the others were employed in the
numerous industries that existed on the feudal estates of the Duke of Corigliano, number-
ing no less than ﬁve or six hundred men and women who all shared Visceglia’s views. They
caused it to be rumoured (because this had no truth) that the Duke was greatly attached to
the former Dynasty and was one of the principal promoters of the return of the Bourbon
family.¹³
Visciglia did not make his move until the insurrections spread from
Longobucco to the neighbouring towns of S. Giovanni in Fiore and Bocchigliero
where the leader was ‘Filippo Barberio, who belonged to one of the wealthiest
families in that place’. When other wealthy families tried to stop the revolt, one of
Visciglia’s associates Tommaso Rizzuti—a leader of the royalist revolt in
Bochigliero in 1799 ‘who had tried then to destroy the leading families of that
town’—appealed for help to Coreme, who brought his men from Longobucco.
When they reached Bochigliero, Coreme’s shepherds burned down the houses of
the ‘patriots’, whom they ﬁrst shot and decapitated before looting their property,
although ‘their women were allowed to enter the convent of Santa Chiara, but
with only one dress and the rest of their property was conﬁscated’.¹⁴
The disturbances next spread to Acri, where there had been no violence in 1799
‘because of the true harmony that existed amongst the persons of intelligence
and their followers’. But after Maida, the priest Antonino Rosa Cozza had set
himself up as a royalist leader with the support of his brother and contacted 
royalist sympathizers in other towns. In this case, their target was the neighbour-
ing Greek orthodox communities, whose animals they immediately seized. Paying
other bands to stay away from the district, Cozza’s followers took control over
the outlying villages, which they accused of being Jacobin sympathizers and
demanded ransoms.
By now the bands were looting and ransoming villages at will. The activities of
Cozza’s men attracted the attention of other more powerful bands, and on 10
August the brigand known as Francatrippa entered the town with seventy-ﬁve
armed men. He demanded a gift of 8,000 ducats and ordered that the houses
belonging to the Capalbo family, ‘with whom he had a long-standing vendetta’, be
burned down. Francatrippa’s supporters were said to come mainly from the outlying
villages and hamlets and ‘with this encouragement the most infamous section of the
people came to worship Francatrippa and called for a general sack of the town’.¹⁵
Similar events took place in other towns. On 13 August, the bandit
Panedigrano occupied Bisignano and demanded cash ransoms from all the sur-
rounding towns. Two days later Francatrippa returned to Acri, where his men
murdered the members of the Fusari, Capalbo, and Padula families before moving
on to S. Soﬁa where the Greek Orthodox bishop D. Francesco Bugliari was 
brutally murdered, together with his brother and four other leading citizens.¹⁶
Napoleonic Naples
214
¹³ BNP: Fonds Italiens, 1127.
¹⁴ Ibid.
¹⁵ Ibid.: Memoria sopra le fatali evvenimenti del comune di Acri.
¹⁶ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 224>>>
Five citizens from Acri managed to reach Cosenza and beg Reynier and
Masséna for help. They dispatched a small column that liberated Acri early in
September and drove the brigands into the Sila Mountains, but the French 
commander was unable to control his own men who in their turn sacked Acri
again and on their return sold large quantities of the silk they had seized from the
brigands in Bisignano.
Meanwhile, Coreme made his summer headquarters at Longobucco:
There he appointed Captains and showed preference in giving promotions to those he
most trusted, which is to say his less fortunate brothers and cousins and his most faithful
friends.
He took the rank of General and ‘exercised a vast jurisdiction: indeed what might
be called an imperium mero e misto which extended throughout the neighbouring
villages. These were ruled by his Captains.’ Coreme was the source of all authority:
‘He governed all things, gave dispensations for marriages and divorces, conferred
ecclesiastical beneﬁces and ﬁlled vacant parishes. Behold a shepherd raised to
beking!’
When in August Coreme’s men joined the assault on Acri they were surprised
by Reynier’s troops, but Coreme and his principal followers managed to escape to
Sicily: ‘so that only the innocent were left to be punished’.¹⁷
The allies still held Amantea, on the coast, but by September the operations of
the brigand bands were more limited and the landowners were complying
withReynier’s instructions to establish Civic Guards. Many of the smaller bands
were still at large and there were ‘frequent kidnappings, damage to property
andambushes. The brigands had prevented the harvest from being brought in,
and now interrupted trafﬁc, burned down barns and sometimes grain and dried
goods, cut down fruit-bearing trees, destroyed vines, slaughtered cattle and other
livestock not only to have something to eat but to damage and destroy. They also
carried off many women to use at their pleasure, and then murdered them so that
they could not reveal their hiding places.’
In the meantime the authorities had deployed a range of measures to destroy
the bands. General Pignatelli and Colonel Manhès ‘gave orders that no-one
should take with them into the ﬁelds or pastures where the ﬂocks were grazed
more food than was needed for a single day’ in an attempt to starve the brigands
out. Reprisals were taken against the relatives of wanted brigands, while amnesties
were offered to brigands who gave themselves up voluntarily. Those who surren-
dered were in theory not to be punished but ‘since it could not be tolerated that
they should be permitted to live within the felicity of a peaceful society, they were
quickly got rid of in different ways’.¹⁸
Senior ofﬁcials were also speculating on the underlying causes of the disorders.
For the Intendent of Upper Calabria the answer was that ‘the Hearts of the
Disorder
215
¹⁷ Ibid.
¹⁸ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 225>>>
Calabrians are governed by two things: vendetta and theft’, but he also claimed
that the principal vendettas went back to 1799, and were directed against those
whom the Bourbons had placed in ofﬁce. These conﬂicts were especially violent in
the casali of Cosenza, where the Bourbons had never dared call for a levée en masse
because ‘It is of no interest to these people whether the present or the former king
rules: who rules is a matter of no importance for them, although the ruler that
allows them freedom to murder and rob will always be their choice.’
There was great discontent above all because of the heavy taxes paid by the poor,
especially the poll-tax (testatico), which the people had hoped the French would abol-
ish. But English and Sicilian agents were the principal instigators of the insurrection.
They provided supplies for the former leaders of the popular masse, and in this were
aided and abetted by the priests and friars ‘of whom there are very large numbers in
this Province and who were frequently the principal organisers of the revolts’.
The Intendent recommended that taxes should be waived for three years, but
he also argued that the measures taken so far had beneﬁted only the poorest:
‘thevery people who in the recent fatal events in this Province far from suffering
losses have greatly bettered their situation, since they are the ones who have given
themselves over to brigandage and hence to theft and Robberies’. The true victims
were not the poor but ‘the class of landowners who bear the principal burden of
both the old and new taxes’. Amnesties, he argued, did not work. ‘These People
cannot be controlled or ruled with tenderness.’¹⁹
Reynier also understood that in most cases his men arrived only after the 
brigands had already departed a village, ‘leaving only peaceful folks and those who
support us, who are generally the rich: if we rob and burn, we ruin the people
who are our own supporters’.²⁰ In his view the best way to end the disturbances
was to force the landowners to establish permanent Civic Guard units. ‘Wherever
they have felt themselves to be sufﬁciently supported by French troops, they have
served us very well.’ But the landowners feared the people:
This hatred, which was deliberately stirred up by the former government...is the prin-
cipal source of the spirit of insurrection and Brigandage which can only be destroyed
by bringing the people under a severe yoke that will force them to submit, so that they may
discover how much they have to gain from the new order of things.
But Reynier also insisted that to destroy brigandage it was necessary ﬁrst to
destroy ‘the vices of the former system of government’ and he urged the govern-
ment to abolish feudalism and set up a new administration as soon as possible.²¹
Winter approached and control over Lower Calabria was still tenuous. Coreme
had returned to the Sila Mountains, and on the western coast the capo-massa
DeMichele had put up posters calling for an ‘independent democratic Republic’.
Napoleonic Naples
216
¹⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), 2243 (Calabria Citra), Intendent Palumbo to Min. dell’Interno,
22 September 1806.
²⁰ A de G: C(5*) 31*, Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, Cassano, 9 August 1806.
²¹ Ibid., Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 19 October 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 226>>>
Smaller bands were led by ‘the murderer Necco’, who was operating in the area
between Scalea and Diamante.
These enemies of the Social Order, although deeply divided amongst themselves, are
absolutely united in their desire to destroy all the families of the leading Proprietors and to
enrich themselves on the spoils. They show no regard for sex or age. Young children are
slaughtered at their mothers’ breasts, husbands in the arms of their wives, octogenarians
are hacked to pieces, virgins raped and massacred . . .and every time we shoot or hang a
pair of the villains by way of reprisal, the brigands massacre another ten or twenty inno-
cents. . . .The truth is we hold Cosenza, but only a few other towns.... The rest of the
province is completely infested with brigands and prey to massacres and arson.
No taxes had been collected in the province, and half of the 2,000 French
troops in Cosenza were sick with fever in the military hospital, where conditions
were indescribable. Disease was rapidly spreading through the rest of the French
army as well. But the Intendent concluded that the brigands had no interest in
supporting either the old or the new government: ‘their sole ambition is to mas-
sacre the wealthy and enrich themselves with their possessions’.²²
A report to the Interior Minister, Miot de Melito, written in mid-November,
revealed a different side of the situation, however, and placed the blame squarely
on the fact that the ‘public authorities are totally corrupt’. Since Calabria had
been declared in a state of war, the military could do as it wished and the civil
authorities did the same. There was no control over military requisitioning, the
burden of which fell on the ‘few towns that support the Government’. Everything
the military needed they took ‘in such a way that the Right of Property is
completely ignored.... The Military Commanders behave like so many Sultans
who demand, or more accurately exact, huge sums of money...’ Because of the
requisitions there was a desperate shortage of animals, and work in the ﬁelds had
almost ceased. The inhabitants of the casali never approached the town for fear of
being robbed.
The report went on to argue that so-called patriots had at ﬁrst been treated with
contempt because they were demoralized, but now they needed to be watched
carefully. Many were genuine in their support for the government:
but since Private interest is everything in these venal towns, many of them are loyal only for
their own purposes and so that they can use the arm of the military Government to
revenge.... Many Individuals who have laid down their arms and taken advantage of the
Amnesty have then been robbed and imprisoned by the Ofﬁcers of the Provincial Guards
either for personal reasons or through thirst for gain, all of which produces serious unrest and
foments the brigandage that everyone seems determined to perpetuate.... The confusion
that reigns everywhere is almost impossible to describe, and the only spirit that prevails is that
of extortion and robbery on one hand, discontent and difﬁdence on the other.²³
Disorder
217
²² ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), 2243, Intendent of Calabria Citeriore to Miot de Melito,
11 October 1806.
²³ Ibid., Ilarbelli (Segretario della Provincia) to Miot, 16 November 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 227>>>
By now the winter snows were forcing the brigands out of the mountains
towards the coastal forts at Amantea, Belmonte, Fiumefreddo, and Belvedere held
by the royalists. Here, in the words of General MacDonald, ‘a handful of miser-
able wretches are withstanding the most battle-hardened troops in Europe and
have repulsed their attacks with vigour’. But after a lengthy siege, Amantea fell in
February 1807 and the garrison of ‘brigands’ was taken prisoner.²⁴ The remaining
royalist strongholds fell in quick succession and by the end of April Reynier could
report to Joseph that the insurrection in Lower Calabria was over.²⁵
His conclusion proved premature, however, and unrest in the Calabrian
provinces continued throughout 1807, although the support from Sicily was less
effective than in the previous year. The British had refused to participate in any
further landings after Sir John Stuart’s expedition, while the French occupations
of the Ionian islands after the peace with Russia in July 1807 helped secure the
Adriatic coast. Combined with Napoleon’s alliance with Turkey the British started
to fear for the safety of Sicily, whose defences they began to repair.²⁶
In January 1808, Saliceti again reported that order had been restored in every
province. But with the spring came fresh disturbances in other provinces, the
main cause being news of the war in Spain and the French occupation of Rome.
Saliceti’s greatest concern was for the frontier districts of the Abruzzi, Apulia,
Basilicata, and the Cilento, but there were also now reports of small bands of brig-
ands in Molise and in Upper Calabria.²⁷ Larger bands of brigands were reported
to be moving undisturbed through Apulia and Capitanata, threatening to destroy
crops and carry off livestock if they were not paid large ransoms. A band of sixty to
seventy men led by Vincenzo Pisani, ‘known as the Monk of Torremaggiore’,
entered the province from northern Apulia and Pisani had the audacity to
demand that the mayor of Uruni provide his men with food and fodder. ‘From the
narrative of these events Your Excellency will understand that these are deeds that
cannot be ignored: The Bands are acting with such boldness that the Government
must intervene at once.’²⁸
Saliceti was equally concerned to ﬁnd ways of making the paciﬁcation of
the Calabrian provinces permanent, and he acknowledged that more needed to
be done to restore conﬁdence amongst those who had been caught up in the 
brigand wars:
the towns of Lower Calabria have been divided into Parties of winners and losers, and this
has caused a great number of Families to go to Messina. In some towns the Emigration has
been so great that there is almost no-one left. Bagnara, for example, is like Pompeii: a ghost
Napoleonic Naples
218
²⁴ ANP: 211AP 1, Journal historique des opérations du Siège de l’Amantea, 10 February 1807,
General MacDonald.
²⁵ A de G: C(5*) 31*: Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 21 April 1807.
²⁶ Bunbury (1854), 274–313.
²⁷ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4: Correspondance de C. Saliceti: Saliceti to Joseph
Bonaparte, 13 July 1808.
²⁸ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (IIa), f. 5079: Antonio Nelli, Intendente di Capitanata a Miot de
Melito, 18 April–22 May 1807.

<<<PDFPAGE 228>>>
town (una solitudine fabbricata). The number of Families that have emigrated amount to
no fewer than six hundred. Since they own much land, I was asked... whether they should
be sequestered. But my answer was NO! I am convinced that the greater part of these
Emigrants harbour no hostile intent, and whole families rarely emigrate unless driven to
do so through fear.²⁹
CONSCRIPTION
Murat’s decision to double the conscription quotas in 1809 was not a principal
cause of brigandage, but it certainly created many new recruits for the brigand
bands. Except in the frontier provinces, there had previously been no conscription
in the Kingdom until 1802 when the Bourbons attempted a more general draft,
but without success. Despite intense pressure from the emperor, Joseph
Bonaparte had deferred introducing the more extensive French model of con-
scription because he knew that he did not have the means to enforce it.
Experience showed that conscription could be successfully enforced only with
the support of local elites, and once that was achieved conscription became a rela-
tively routine, albeit deeply resented, operation.³⁰ This was the case in Lombardy
and in Tuscany, but where the French could not count on the active cooperation
of local elites conscription proved almost impossible to enforce. The most extreme
case was the Papal State, where attempts to impose conscription in Rome in April
1810 caused rioting in the streets. About a third of those liable to be drafted ﬂed,
and the Castel S. Angelo was mobbed by the mothers and sweethearts of the con-
scripts demanding their release. General de Tournon brushed aside their protests
with the comment that ‘it was often a soldier’s duty to make pretty girls and loving
mammas weep’, but as soon as they were escorted out of the city almost all of the
conscripts escaped and joined the bands of brigands proliferating in central Italy.
Despite the military commissions and the regular executions of ‘refractories’ by
ﬁring squad in the Piazza del Popolo, resistance to conscription in Rome was a
principal cause of the brigandage that spread throughout the former papal
provinces in 1810 and 1811.³¹ ‘We keep arresting them and shooting them, but
the real brigands always get away.’³² But as law and order in central Italy collapsed, 
brigand bands moved with increasing freedom across the northern frontiers of the
Kingdom of Naples and raided deep into Apulia, Capitanata, and Basilicata.
In Naples, Joseph Bonaparte ﬁrst introduced a form of voluntary conscription
in 1807. The conscripts were to be chosen by lottery, and exemptions were 
available to those willing to pay. But this did not work and in 1808 the quotas
were extended for the ﬁrst time to the capital and the Calabrian provinces.³³
Disorder
219
²⁹ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4: Correspondance de C. Saliceti: 13 July 1808.
³⁰ See especially Antonielli (1983) and Filippini (1980a, b). On France see Forrest (1987).
³¹ Madelin (1906), 303–14, 455.
³² Ibid. 466.
³³ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1126 (January 1808).

<<<PDFPAGE 229>>>
The system still proved workable only in the frontier provinces where the older
levée en masse was familiar. But it was not applied in the Terra di Lavoro or in
Basilicata and virtually no attempt was made to enforce it in Calabria or in Naples.
Even so, Sir John Stuart informed Lord Castelreagh that conscription was the
main cause of ‘the frequent risings in the Calabrian provinces that are causing
growing alarm amongst the French authorities’.³⁴
The Kingdom’s conscription quotas were met by sending convicts or captured
brigands to the military depots.³⁵ Then against the background of the campaign
against Austria and eager to ingratiate himself with the emperor, Murat doubled
the conscription quota in March 1809. In every province internment camps for
draft-evaders (Depots de Refractaires) were set up, but the civil and the military
authorities reported that the rates of desertion were enormous.³⁶ In the Calabrian
provinces conscription simply provoked a mass exodus of men of military age,
many of whom ﬂed to Sicily:
in Sicigliano, Aprigliano, S.Giovanni in Fiore the population has demonstrated its refusal
to submit to the law so that not one young man of military age is to be seen in any of these
towns.³⁷
To meet the emperor’s unrelenting demands more criminals and captured brig-
ands were drafted and marched north. Most escaped in transit and went to the
hills to join other bands of brigands, while many that made the journey were sent
back as unﬁt to serve in the Grande Armée.
ILLICIT PROFITS
One reason for the persistence of brigandage was of course that it was very prof-
itable. The brigands’ principal business was demanding cash ransoms, pillaging,
and looting, of which they were not necessarily the principal beneﬁciaries.
But brigandage also gave rise to many ancillary industries, not least the system
of amnesties that sustained simple protection rackets of which the brigands—but
not only the brigands—were the principal targets. Copied or forged certiﬁcates of
amnesty were freely bought and sold, and large proﬁts were made. Anyone
accused of being a brigand or associating with brigands stood to lose not only his
or her life, but the property and possessions of their families as well. Genuine
brigands could easily obtain fake amnesty certiﬁcates, while completely innocent
people could be the target of a fake denunciation. The best guarantee was a
powerful patron, which put patronage at a premium.
Napoleonic Naples
220
³⁴ PRO: WO 1, 306 (Sicily 1808) General Sir John Stuart to Castlereagh, Messina, 25 May 1808.
³⁵ Cortese (1926), 320.
³⁶ Le Brethon vii. 48; Murat to Reynier, 1 March 1809; Caldora (1960), 407.
³⁷ A de G: C(5*) 42; Rapports au Roi, Naples, 17 April 1810.

<<<PDFPAGE 230>>>
While brigandage could take the form of challenging existing networks of
power, brigands were more likely to be part of those networks. The mountains and
the upland pastures were where the brigands ruled, but these were also where
powerful landowners grazed their ﬂocks and maintained their own armed guards
to protect their livestock and the pasture. The bands that survived the longest were
likely to be those with the most powerful patrons, who could also protect them in
other ways. The trade in fake amnesties was only one example, and while many
of those involved were corrupt ofﬁcials powerful patrons were also prominent
players. In 1809 Pierre Joseph Briot, the Intendent of Lower Calabria, accused
one of the wealthiest landowners in the province, Alfonso Baracco, of making
large proﬁts from supplying amnesties to wanted criminals and notorious bandits.
The brigands’ need for protection enabled the powerful to take their cut from
the lucrative trafﬁc in stolen goods and livestock, and in particular to share in the
rich proﬁts offered by the trade in smuggled British colonial goods and manufac-
tures. The proximity of Sicily and Malta made southern Italy the closest and 
easiest point of entry for banned British goods in southern Europe, and thanks to
the emperor’s efforts to enforce the Continental blockade the value of this illicit
trade continued to rise. Not only many Calabrian landowners, but also senior
French civil and military ofﬁcials were deeply and proﬁtably involved. In 1810 the
Intendent Briot accused the senior French commander in Calabria, General
Cavaignac, of being the principal protector of the contraband trade in the
province.³⁸ Cavaignac responded by levelling the same accusation against Briot,
but there is clear evidence of the involvement of other French ofﬁcers at the most
senior level down to the end of Murat’s Kingdom.³⁹
These were not small enterprises. The inventory of British manufactured and
colonial goods entering Sicily and Malta after 1806 was roughly equivalent to the
legitimate British trade that had formerly entered Italy through the ports of
Naples, Livorno, and Genoa. Much of that inventory now found its way across
the Straits of Messina. From there, the goods were moved throughout the
Kingdom, then across the frontier into the Papal States and from there to the
Kingdom of Italy.⁴⁰ When the British recaptured the Ionian islands in 1810,
the Adriatic provinces became a second front for the contraband trade and
British goods from Malta to Corfu quickly found their way onto the unguarded
beaches of the Gargano peninsula.⁴¹
Since southern Italy had been invaded in 1806 mainly in order to extend the
blockade on British trade, it was more than ironical that many of those French
ofﬁcers who been had sent to rot in a far-ﬂung outpost of empire should instead
grow rich by subverting a central pillar of the imperial project.
Disorder
221
³⁸ Heuron (1960), 125–37.
³⁹ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125 (add.), Rapports au Roi, 18 October 1809.
⁴⁰ Heuron (1960), 125–37; D’Angelo (1988), 47–115; idem (1990), 125–37; Melita (1999),
113–72.
⁴¹ A de G: C(5*) 33; Rapports au Roi, Capitanata, 17 May 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 231>>>
BRIGAND PROFILES
The brigands had faces; however, the ways in which these were carefully recorded
by authorities raise many questions about those doing the recording. Most often
the descriptions simply retailed set stereotypes, depicting the bandits as inhuman
enemies of the modernizing mission of the new order, a subhuman race of atav-
istic barbarians and monsters that threatened the essence of civilization. This was
clearly the intention of the ofﬁcial who in 1812 concluded a report on the bandits
captured and executed in Calabria by the gendarmerie since 1810 by stating that
their crimes were too heinous to record, but then did so in graphic detail:
Men ﬂayed alive, mutilated, killed by beating with sticks or stones, torn apart by mastiffs,
burned alive and their members eaten, made to die slowly while being turned by knives, as
their ﬂesh is stripped from their bodies and the blood from their wounds drunk in bowls:
hung upside down from the branches of trees while slivers of cane are forced under their
nails and made to suffocate with smoke from ﬁres lit under the trees... these were their
daily amusements.⁴²
The thumbnail sketches found in these military reports nonetheless reveal
many who resembled Eric Hobsbawm’s ‘social bandits’:⁴³ poor men—but also
women—who became involved in a quarrel with a neighbour over property, 
animals, or women, committed a crime and took to the hills where they joined or
formed their own band of followers and then lived off raiding and ransoming
landowners and towns in territories that could stretch from Calabria to Apulia,
the Abruzzi, and over the frontiers onto the plains of Lazio.
Pietro Perugino of Pantelandotto, known as Auriello, for example, ‘lived in
utter poverty until 1807’ when he killed a neighbour and took to the hills. He
formed a small but violent band, which did not stray far from his native village but
continued to operate until he was captured and killed by the Legionari in 1811. At
the age of 14, the future brigand Giacomo Randelli was already ‘guilty of many
crimes’. He joined the army in 1798, was jailed for crimes of violence in 1799,
then escaped in 1806, and became a brigand but was captured and killed.
Giovan-Battista Mancino from Castelpoto was a miller who became leader of a
band in 1806, but then surrendered and was amnestied. Carmine Carrattelli from
Solotia, know as the ‘Carter’, was a carpenter ‘but was always a trouble-maker’. He
escaped while serving a ﬁfteen-year jail sentence in 1799, was recaptured, and
escaped again in 1806 when he became a brigand until he too was captured
and executed in 1811. Achille Santoro, from the village of Liuni, was a black-
smith who formed a band with two fellow villagers. He surrendered during
anamnesty in 1807 and killed his former associates, but was shot while trying to
escape. Francesco Quartucci was another blacksmith whose band included his son
Napoleonic Naples
222
⁴² BNP: Fonds italiens, 1124. Report on brigands killed and captured in Calabria Ultra between
November 1806 and 31 March 1811 (8 June 1812).
⁴³ See Hobsbawm (1959).

<<<PDFPAGE 232>>>
Tommaso ‘and other miscreants’. When his son was captured, Quartucci surren-
dered and was shot. The same fate befell Andrea Cucchiarella of Fregene L’Abate,
who ‘until 1807 lived by honest labour’ but then raised an armed band. In
October 1810 he and his followers gave themselves up but they too were shot,
because ‘they had not surrendered in the proper manner’.
Some of the brigands came from a little further up the social order. Francesco
Curcio, known as Orlandino, owned a herd of cattle (massaro di bovi). Vincenzo
Luca, known as Zampogna, was a well-to-do farmer who took to the hills of
the Marchesato after killing his father in a brawl. He became infamous for his 
robberies and violence; his trademark was to rape the daughters of the landowners
he held to ransom.⁴⁴
Other descriptions seem to have been more fanciful, as in the case of Giuseppe
Rotella, who was ambushed and killed in October 1809. Known simply as ‘The
Hangman’ (Il Boja), Rotella’s ‘custom was to cut off the nose and ears of his 
victims and give them to his dogs to eat’. His base was the town of Firotello: ‘and
even today nearly all of his fellow villagers have an ear or nose missing’.
WEBS OF COMPLICITY
These descriptions make it clear that the war against the brigands was also an 
exercise in propaganda. Like the contemporary term ‘terrorist’, ‘brigandage’ and
‘banditry’ were interchangeable labels whose purpose was to place those deemed
responsible for criminal actions beyond the protection of the law. This had been
the case since medieval times, and a ‘bandit’ was a person deemed guilty by public
acclaim, who was then ‘banned’ and hence placed ‘outside’ the protection of
thelaw. Brigandage and banditry were terms that linguistically obscured the
boundaries of the legitimate and the illegitimate, and it was no accident that they
should have acquired a new notoriety at a time when the state was seeking to
acquire new powers. If in many different parts of Europe in the eighteenth
century brigandage became a problem, it was not because it was new or even
more visible but because the demarcations between public and private power
were changing.
In its origins, brigandage was archetypally a frontier phenomenon, something
that occurred primarily on the boundaries of rival jurisdictions. But as rulers
looked to extend the power of the state, all forms of public disorder became pre-
texts for the state to intervene in places that had formerly been subject to private
jurisdiction. It is in that context that brigandage in southern Italy takes its wider
signiﬁcance as both a social and a political phenomenon.⁴⁵
Disorder
223
⁴⁴ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1124. Note essenziali sulle vite dei più famosi capi briganti delle Calabrie:
travail fait par l’Adjutant Générale Fanelli.
⁴⁵ See also Davis (1989), 71–90.

<<<PDFPAGE 233>>>
In this respect, too, the French military occupation in 1806 can be seen as a
continuation by other and more forcible means of earlier Bourbon initiatives.
Both looked to widen the boundaries of the power of the state by reducing the 
formal and informal private jurisdictions that had previously existed. This was a
very delicate process, not least because those localized systems of power had
already been undermined by the forces beginning to reshape the agrarian fabric
ofthe South.
Calabria was not unique in any of these respects, and brigandage was never
solely a Calabrian phenomenon. But in the Calabrian provinces all these elements
were also present in extreme form. The region was distant from the centres of
administrative power, and also on the frontier of empire and hence directly
exposed to the disruptions caused by the war, the presence of a foreign force of
occupation, and a massive trade in contraband goods.
As in many other parts of the Kingdom, the attempts by the French to assert the
authority of the state in Calabria came at a moment when local demarcations of
power were also shifting. The complex webs of interests that were inseparable
from the transhumant economies of this mountainous region made change espe-
cially complex and contentious but did not preclude challenges to the established
order. For those who wanted to assert their place in the new order, the adminis-
trative innovations of the new regime, and particularly the abolition of feudalism
and the division of the common lands, offered opportunities that could not easily
be overlooked. Response and reactions were, as a result, contradictory and at least
outwardly confused.
As in the previous century, the conﬂicts focused around competition for scarce
resources—pasture, woodland, and water—with consequences that had already
been clearly set out in Giuseppe Zurlo’s earlier investigation into the causes of 
lawlessness in the Sila forests in the 1790s. But as that report pointed out, the
poor were foot soldiers in wars being waged by powerful landowners intent on
asserting and protecting their rights over common pasture and public woodland.
Brigandage was both a means for pursuing local conﬂicts and a cover for those
responsible.⁴⁶
Gradually the French ofﬁcials became aware of the pervasive webs of complicity
that enveloped the violence. General Cavaignac repeatedly complained that the
deep factional conﬂicts in the Calabrian towns ‘paralyse any attempt to move
against the Brigands’.⁴⁷ He also reported that in the district around Monteleone
all the most dangerous bandits were protected by powerful landowners:
in general the same individuals support all the brigand leaders and their followers, which is
why military force is only a secondary means for destroying the bandits who are protected
by the leading citizens who also have the means to help them evade with ease our attempts
to catch them.
Napoleonic Naples
224
⁴⁶ See Bianchini (1838), viii. 418–19.
⁴⁷ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125 (add.), Rapports au Roi, 13 August 1809.

<<<PDFPAGE 234>>>
In 1812 the commander of the Calabrian gendarmerie reached a similar con-
clusion: ‘The supporters of the brigands form two principal categories, one being
motivated by their evil disposition and self-esteem but the other includes many
amongst the class of the leading landowners, yet their names are always veiled in
mystery because there is never sufﬁcient proof for them to be named.’⁴⁸
PURSUING THE POWERFUL
This was true in other provinces too and in Principato Citra the authorities were
also convinced that powerful landowners were unwilling to act against the bandits
because they were actively protecting them.⁴⁹ What gave General Manhès,⁵⁰ who
in 1810 was given the task of destroying brigandage once and for all, a notoriety
that rivalled that of the brigands was that he made their powerful protectors his
principal target. The measures Manhès employed were neither new nor exceptional,
although he applied them more systematically and was prepared to confront the
brigands’ powerful patrons, which made him a political target as well.
Manhès had acquired experience in counter-insurgency before he came to
Naples, and while serving as Murat’s aide-de-camp in 1802 had become a close
friend of Saliceti in Liguria. He accompanied Murat to Naples where Saliceti rec-
ommended that he be put in command of operations against the brigands in
Abruzzo in 1808, where with the aid of powerful local landowner Baron Nolli
he persuaded the most powerful brigand leaders to accept commissions in the
provincial Guard.⁵¹ Manhès also brieﬂy served in Calabria in 1809, but like Briot
he fell out with Cavaignac, who tried to get him recalled, probably because he also
knew of Cavaignac’s involvement in the contraband trade.
The Sicilian expedition in 1810 and the presence of a large military force had
provoked numerous new revolts in Calabria, which was why Murat ordered
Manhès to use whatever measures were needed to restore order. A fellow ofﬁcer
claimed that Manhès understood that the brigands could not be beaten by
‘colonnes mobiles’ alone and that to defeat them it was necessary to recruit ‘the
citizens themselves’.⁵²The methods were not new, but Manhès took them to their
Disorder
225
⁴⁸ Ibid., 1125 (vol. ii), Rapporto sul Brigantaggio in Calabria 1809–1812 (Gendarmeria Reale,
24 February 1812).
⁴⁹ A de G: C(5*) 42: Rapports journaliers au Roi (1810), Cavaignac to Min. War, 2 May 1810,
3 May 1810.
⁵⁰ Charles Antoine Manhès (1777–1852). Born in Aurillac (Cantal), Manhès served as an artillery
ofﬁcer in the Army of the Rhine, then in the Army of Italy, and was wounded at the battle of Novi in
1799. He fought at Austerlitz and in April 1807 he was appointed aide-de-camp to Murat in Berg,
and followed him to Spain, then to Naples. He was promoted to colonel in November 1808,
maréchal du camp in September 1809, then to Lieutenant General in March 1811, and he later
received the title of Count. He married the daughter of Principe Pignatelli di Cerchiara and settled in
Naples after the Restoration. See De Gxx (1817); Cutolo (1937), 410.
⁵¹ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 33.
⁵² De Rivarol (1817), 52.

<<<PDFPAGE 235>>>
logical extreme and anticipating more modern counter-insurgency tactics made
the rural communities hostages for the actions of the brigands.
The campaign against the brigands that followed was accompanied by levels of
brutality that made contemporaries recoil in horror. As winter approached,
Manhès starved the brigands into abandoning their mountain hideouts. Writing
much later, Pietro Colletta described how Manhès
waited for the harvest to end and for the leaves to drop, then in each comune he published
alist of bandits and made the villages responsible for catching them.
The Calabrian provinces were placed under curfew,⁵³ the churches were closed,
and the priests were removed so that no one could take communion, be baptized,
married, or buried until the brigands were caught.⁵⁴ On threat of summary 
execution, no peasant or labourer was to take food into the ﬁelds or leave animals
unattended. Secret communications even between husband and wife were 
prohibited on pain of death, shepherds were forbidden to move with their ﬂocks
without permission, agricultural work in the ﬁelds outside the villages was 
suspended, and soldiers were billeted in every town, village, and hamlet until the
bandits surrendered.⁵⁵
The aim was to starve the brigands into submission, and it succeeded. As winter
approached:
the brigands were forced to live off acorns and wild berries, and had to retreat to remote
caves to survive one more day. But the skies, as if weary to witness all this mischief, played
their part in bringing about their destruction and hurled down so much snow that even the
most hardened of these assassins gave up all hope. Every day brought news of new arrests,
killings and surrenders.⁵⁶
Manhès also mounted a carefully prepared propaganda war, deliberately build-
ing up the notoriety of the brigand leaders he most wanted to capture. He con-
stantly reminded his assistant, Colonel Ianelli, of the need to concentrate his
resources on capturing and killing the capo-brigante Benincasa: ‘Benincasa must
fall under your guns, show me what you can do!’ In February 1811 Benincasa was
still eluding Ianelli, and Manhès sent reinforcements. Barely a fortnight later the
General congratulated Ianelli for killing another wanted brigand, Parafante, and
capturing twenty-ﬁve of his followers, and from Cosenza he ordered Ianelli to
send him the heads of the slaughtered brigands, as well as Parafante’s ‘women’ who
had been captured and were subsequently hanged in Cosenza. But he repeated,
‘Benincasa in our hands, that will be the crowning glory!’ Then on 17 March he
Napoleonic Naples
226
⁵³ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1124, Note essenziali sulle vite dei più famosi capi briganti delle Calabrie:
travail fait par l’Adjutant Générale Ianelli.
⁵⁴ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 66.
⁵⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 342. In 1810 Colletta was serving as Intendent in Monteleone
under Manhès’s direct command.
⁵⁶ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1127, Memoria sopra li fatali avvenimenti del comune di Acri, p. 32.

<<<PDFPAGE 236>>>
ﬁnally received the ‘the happy news of the death of the notorious Beinincasa’ at the
hands of Ianelli’s men.⁵⁷
Manhès claimed to have killed or executed 900 brigands in Calabria during the
winter of 1810–11.⁵⁸ The report drawn up by the Reale Gendarmeria a year later
stated that between November 1806 and March 1811, ‘the day on which this
province was ﬁnally freed of these monsters’, 5,421 bandits had surrendered or
been captured, killed, or executed in the province of Lower Calabria alone. The
largest numbers of brigands and their supporters were from the districts of
Monteleone, Catanzaro, Reggio, and Gerace.⁵⁹
In January 1811, Manhès’s special powers were extended to the sprawling
province of Basilicata.⁶⁰ As they had done in Calabria, Manhès and his ofﬁcers
identiﬁed individual brigand leaders and then used bribes and brought pressure
on their protectors to bring about their betrayal and capture. Amnesties and par-
dons were offered freely to ordinary deserters and draft evaders who surrendered
voluntarily.
As summer approached Manhès also recruited the assistance of the bands of
reapers who travelled in large convoys as they moved from province to province to
work on the harvest. The emergency regulations that banned all movement in the
countryside threatened the livelihood of these migrant labourers, but in return for
being allowed to go about their normal business they provided the authorities
with valuable information on the movements of the brigands. On many occasions
the caravans of migrant reapers attacked and captured or killed bandits to col-
lect the ransom money. Their victims included ‘the ferocious Big Glass Eye’, who
was hacked to pieces by the scythes of a band of reapers near Ascoli, and Cesare
Rosello of Pescopagano, who was killed in June by reapers near the village of
Calitri.⁶¹
As in Calabria, Manhès was merciless with anyone who provided help for the
brigands. In May, he hanged four peasants suspected of taking food to the bandit
Taccone: ‘This example of severity was necessary to cause fear among those
who might be tempted to copy them.’ He was no less effective in targeting the
wealthier protectors of the brigands and the strategy worked as it had in Calabria.
By early summer, the principal brigand leaders in Basilicata were in his hands.
Those captured rather than killed were sent to the Military Commission in
Matera, where their trials became the occasion for public display. To celebrate the
capture of the bandit Quagliarello, in June Manhès ordered that the other cap-
tured bandits were to be taken to Matera where they were to be hanged one a day
Disorder
227
⁵⁷ BNN: Bancone 8 B 17 Copia delle lettere originali del Sig. Tenente Generale Manhès; 19
December 1810; 24 December 1810; 4 February 1811; 17 February 1811; 21 February 1811; 17
March 1811.
⁵⁸ A de G: C(5*) 43, Rapports journaliers au Roi, 7 January 1811.
⁵⁹ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125. Brigands killed and captured in Calabria Ultra (June 1812).
⁶⁰ Basilicata stretched from Capitanata and Apulia in the east and north to the Lower Principato
and Upper Calabria in the west and south.
⁶¹ A de G: C(5*) 33, Basilicata, 14 May 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 237>>>
throughout the period of the fair. He also organized a great festa in Potenza during
which dowry portions were distributed to ‘four girls from poor families’.⁶²
For the single district of Lagonegro, the ofﬁcial ﬁgures recorded 366 brigands
killed, captured, or condemned to death between June and October 1811 alone,
including one woman, Olivia Laurenzana: ‘This woman dressed like a man and
fully armed followed her lover the Brigand leader known as Francesco Vacca di
Guardarella’, who had committed endless crimes and was killed by the Civic
Guard.⁶³ In June 1811 Manhès reported that the provinces were now tranquil.
But this proved to be only a temporary lull, and the following year the disorders
revived and continued until after Murat’s reign.
Manhès liked to present himself as the ‘champion of the poor, your true protector
and defender’,⁶⁴ but his tactics were effective mainly because he was prepared
to expose the powerful ﬁgures behind the brigands. In the spring of 1811, for
example, he threatened to arrest the leading landowners in the Silan town of Acri
unless the brigand leader Francesco Fridizza was found. It was then revealed that
the wives of Fridizza and his lieutenant were living openly in nearby Longobucco.
They were arrested and when questioned the women revealed the hiding places
of their men. Fridizza surrendered and was killed, then his body and those of
theother slain brigands were ‘exposed in irons in the public square until the ﬂesh
was consumed’.⁶⁵
One of Manhès’s principal targets in Basilicata in the spring of 1811 was the
capo-brigante known as Taccone. Taccone’s base was the town of Laurenzana
where he had many supporters, including the guardiano of the Palazzo Baronale
and the agent of the Duke of Belgioioso. Another accomplice was ‘Signor Don
Domenico Asselda, a wealthy galantuomo and the commander of the Legion in
that town. Asselda was a friend of Taccone, who had done him many services, for
which reason he had never persecuted him and indeed they were often seen
together.’ Two of Taccone’s fellow brigands, Sacrola and Pecori, were friends of the
commander of the Legionari in the town of Sicigliano, who supplied them with
lists of landowners who willingly agreed to pay to avoid damage to their property.
Although he was one of the most wanted brigands in Basilicata, Taccone’s wife
lived openly in Laurenzana, where Taccone also attended the baptism of their
infant son. His accomplice, Domenico Asselda was responsible for murdering the
mayor of the neighbouring town of Abriola, who had imprisoned a brother of one
of the bandits. Taccone and his men moved to Calabria, where they raised money
from many towns and burned down those that refused to pay, but they received
supplies from many landowners. As well as sending ammunition, Domenico
Asselda recruited men to join the Taccone’s band and paid them 5 carlini a day.
Asselda also agreed to have the arch-priest of Abriola murdered because he had
Napoleonic Naples
228
⁶² A de G: C(5*) 33, Basilicata, 5 June 1811.
⁶³ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125, Répression, vol. ii.
⁶⁴ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 72.
⁶⁵ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1127, Memoria sopra li fatali avvenimenti nel comune di Acri.

<<<PDFPAGE 238>>>
forced Taccone’s lover, Rosa di Stefano, to enter a convent on the grounds that
Taccone was already married.⁶⁶
Taccone was captured alive in June 1811, and there was great alarm when
Manhès travelled to Potenza to interrogate him before he went to the gallows
because it was widely feared that he would reveal his network of protectors.⁶⁷
Reporting the killing of the brigand Giuseppe Russo of Montepane, ‘a tyrant with
no soul’; who was held responsible for more than a hundred murders in the area
around Catanzaro, in February 1811, Manhès noted that Russo had been found
while hiding in the house of a wealthy landowner: ‘this infamous protector of so
cruel a man escaped but we are pursuing him and have demolished his house’.⁶⁸
In December 1810 he told Ianelli that he was unable to join in the pursuit of
the bandit Benincasa because he had to pay an important visit to a certain ‘Signor
Barracco’.⁶⁹ This was Don Alfonso Barracco, a wealthy landowner who was one
of the largest purchasers of beni nazionali in Lower Calabria and would emerge
from the French period as the epitome of the new latifundist with suitable noble
titles to match.⁷⁰
Barracco had purchased huge tracts of land in the Sila forest where he had
extensive interests in sheep grazing. His property had been attacked in 1806, but
he later received substantial compensation for supporting the French. In 1809
theIntendent Briot had accused Barracco of trading pardons and amnesties with
known brigands, and he informed Manhès that Barracco was almost certainly the
leading protector of the brigands operating in the region.⁷¹
Hence the General decided to visit Signor Barracco on his estates in December
1810. During the meeting, the General informed Don Alfonso that he was 
suspected of being an enemy of the state and that without immediate proof of his
loyalty his previous good services would count for nothing. Two events followed
that may, or may not, have been connected. The remaining bandits in the Sila
region were captured and killed by Manhès’s men within the next two months,
while Barracco (in return?) received a military safe-conduct from Manhès in 1811
and a further cash compensation of 200,000 ducats—a very large sum—from the
government. As a token of his esteem, Don Alfonso presented General Manhès
with two white stallions bred on his estates.⁷²
Manhès’s willingness to identify and challenge the brigands’ supporters made
him widely feared, but also made him powerful enemies and it is hardly surprising
that he became a target of defamation. The tactics he used were part of the
armoury of counter-insurgency methods employed by the military that had been
reﬁned during the campaigns against the Breton chouans and were not essentially
different from those used by other commanders in Italy.
Disorder
229
⁶⁶ Ibid. 1124.
⁶⁷ A de G: C(5*) 33 Manhès: Rapports généraux au Roi, Calabria Citra, 25 May 1811.
⁶⁸ Ibid., C(5*) 43: Rapports journaliers au Roi (1811): Manhès to Murat, 15 February 1811.
⁶⁹ BNN: Bancone 8 B: Copia lettere del Signor Tenente General Manhès, 19 December 1810.
⁷⁰ On the Baracco family, see Petrusewicz (1978), 339–44.
⁷¹ Ibid. See also Caldora (1960), 424.
⁷² Caldora (1960), 424; Petrusewicz (1978), 344.

<<<PDFPAGE 239>>>
Nonetheless, Manhès was repeatedly singled out for his barbarity. De Nicola
noted in April 1811 that he had heard it said in Naples that in the region around
Potenza alone, Manhès had executed 600 brigands in the space of barely two
months.⁷³ In July, the envoy of the Kingdom of Italy in Naples, Tassoni d’Estense,
also referred to Manhès with revulsion:
I must confess that my heart and pen ﬂee from describing the excesses of cruelty that he has
used and which outdo the worst crimes committed by the Brigands.... He has violated
young girls, has allowed his soldiers to enter the jails to have their vile way with women
unjustly condemned to death, has caused fathers to kill their own sons, in short he has shed
rivers of blood in which that of the guilty has been mixed with the innocent.⁷⁴
The episode that most fully epitomized the brutality of Manhès’s repression
was later recounted by Colletta, who claimed that Manhès’s men had executed
eleven young girls from the village of Stilo after it was discovered that they were
carrying loaves of bread in a basket as they went to the ﬁelds to glean corn.⁷⁵
Whether or not these stories are true, they indicate that Manhès had made
powerful enemies in his pursuit of the brigands’ protectors. There were many 
reasons why he was politically exposed. His patron, Saliceti, had died in 1809,
while his closeness to Murat and his rapid promotion made the other senior
French generals jealous, especially Cavaignac whose own murky operations were
in danger of being exposed by Murat’s unduly energetic aide-de-camp. It was no
coincidence, however, that the campaign against Manhès reached its height in
summer of 1811 at the moment when the crisis between Naples and Paris came to
a head and the pro-French and mainly French party at Court led by the queen
took power. As one of the very few French ofﬁcers who remained loyal to the king,
Manhès was an obvious target.
CONCLUSION
Behind these cruel and seemingly pointless chronicles of random violence and
barbarity can be glimpsed the impact of Napoleon’s enterprise on the civilian popu-
lations of Europe. The horrors of war that Goya captured in Spain were repeated
on a Continental canvas, and it was the misfortune of the rural communities of
southern Italy that the war came to them in at least two different forms. They were
caught between the contending forces: the emperor’s enemies in Sicily were con-
stantly engaged in provoking and inciting disorder, while the ever-growing ﬂows
of contraband placed further strains on the fragile sinews of authority. In Calabria
these external disasters were imposed on a region where social tensions were
Napoleonic Naples
230
⁷³ De Nicola, 28 April 1811, 559.
⁷⁴ Cited in Cutolo (1937), Tassoni Estensi, 15 July 1811, 410.
⁷⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 342.

<<<PDFPAGE 240>>>
already inﬂamed, and where powerful landowners were able to turn the prevailing
lawlessness to their own advantage.
Brigandage was not, as some contemporaries claimed, the last gasp of feudalism—
an attempt by the former feudal landowners to preserve the independence that
had formerly been enforced by their retainers and their feudal mastrodatti. Many
of the brigands had formerly served the feudatories as armed retainers, but their
masters were as likely to be private landowners, new families like the Barracco
and the Quintieri who were amassing vast estates in these troubled times and
whosaw theopportunities to impose their own order irrespective of the rules of
either the feudal past or the bureaucratic present.⁷⁶ The disorders were inseparable
fromthe emergence of new elites, who were staking out their property claims and
at thesame time renegotiating their place in the new order. When Manhès tried to
call their game, the reactions revealed the reach of the interests he had threatened
but not destroyed.
All these things made the scale of disorder in Calabria particularly intense, but
not unique. The northern frontier provinces were similarly exposed to incursions
from brigand bands from the Papal States that penetrated deep into Capitanata
and Apulia with impunity. Once the British regained control of the Ionian islands,
the Adriatic provinces were similarly at risk. But the scale of banditry in provinces
like Basilicata and the Principato Ultra, which were not close to the frontiers, also
shows that conﬂicts rooted in the transformation of the agrarian order were being
felt in most parts of the South, just as the campaigns against the brigands revealed
that the face of authority was everywhere insecure.
The webs of complicity that gradually became visible behind the faces of the
common brigands showed how more powerful ﬁgures were taking the opportunities
presented by the prevailing disorders to stake out their own interests and secure
their own claims. As a result the vast new estates were acquired by means that were
facilitated rather than impeded by the prevailing conditions of disorder.
Disorder
231
⁷⁶ Montroni (1996), 31–3.

<<<PDFPAGE 241>>>
12
A Kingdom Divided
THE POLITICS OF DIVISION
The emperor’s wars posed major obstacles to administrative reorganization in
southern Italy, while the prolonged interruption of trade severely damaged the
Kingdom’s fragile economies. But these difﬁculties were also aggravated by
Murat’s insecurity within the imperial enterprise. The confrontation with
Napoleon in the summer of 1811 proved to be especially damaging, and although
unlike Louis Bonaparte Murat survived, the encounter left his position in
both the politics of empire and the emperor’s own dynastic plans uncertain.¹
The constant tensions with Paris undermined Murat’s attempts to give his
regime a more secure political base, and his very public humiliation by the
emperor in the summer of 1811 enabled the pro-French faction led by the queen
to take control of the government. All those close to Murat—Giuseppe Zurlo and
Antonio Maghella—lost their jobs while others like Manhès came under ﬁerce
attack. As Murat’s position weakened, the incentives for turning to his Neapolitan
supporters to create an independent political base increased, but this in turn 
provided the Neapolitan elites with important opportunities to reshape the polit-
ical agenda to ﬁt their own interests.²
Murat’s confrontation with the emperor revealed deeper divisions within his
own government that dated from his arrival in Naples. Saliceti had played a 
critical role in containing those divisions, but after his death in 1809 things
quickly fell apart. Murat’s main concern was to prevent Caroline Bonaparte from
exercising independent power, which with the exception of Agar made him wary
of the Frenchmen who had her conﬁdence.³ But this proved far from easy and his
choice of Antonio Maghella to succeed Saliceti as Minister of Police in 1809 was
particularly maladroit. A protégé of the former minister with whom he had then
publicly quarrelled, Maghella was widely suspected of poisoning his former master
and Murat was soon forced to transfer most of his powers to his trusted follower
¹ On the chronic political uncertainty of the imperial enterprise see, e.g., Schroeder (1994), 394.
² On the concept and realities of Napoleonic ‘state-building’ see especially Breuilly in Rowe (ed.)
(2003), 121–52.
³ Saliceti’s recall to Paris in 1809 was allegedly the result of his attempts to strengthen the power of
Caroline Murat at the king’s expense. See Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 331–2.

<<<PDFPAGE 242>>>
Hector Daure, the Minister of War. The result was that Daure and Maghella
became mortal enemies, and at the height of the crisis with Paris in June 1811
it was Maghella who informed Murat that both Daure and General Vanguyon
were the queen’s lovers.⁴
Maghella’s attempt to discredit the queen led to his downfall, but Murat’s
efforts to exclude Caroline Bonaparte from power also failed. The emperor’s
favourite sister had strongly resented the purely ceremonial role assigned to her,
and had made it known that she wanted to be a ruler in her own right like 
her sister Elisa Baciocchi, the Grand Duchess of Tuscany.⁵ In this she had her
brother’s support and the crisis with Paris in 1811 enabled Caroline Bonaparte
not only to emerge as the undisputed leader of the pro-French faction at Court
but also to mediate between Murat and the emperor and hence establish her
own independent role in the government in Naples. She was now Murat’s equal
and henceforth in his absence would rule as regent.
Murat survived, but the French party led by the queen was now in control. This
increased the power of General Cavaignac, the Director General of Domains, whom
Tassoni Estense described as the embodiment of the corruption and proﬁteering
that now became the most distinctive feature of the French administration. But all
the leading ministers, ofﬁcers, and ofﬁcials, Neapolitans included, had received
rich bounties, mainly in beni nazionali either as gifts or sold at prices far below
market values.⁶
Only three senior Neapolitans administrators survived the crisis, among
them the Prince of Serra Gerace, the director of the Cassa di Ammortizzazione del
Debito Pubblico, and an able ﬁnancier who, as well as his wife, had made great 
personal fortunes.⁷ Francesco Antonio Ricciardi, the Minister of Justice and a
forthright critic of Giuseppe Zurlo, also survived,⁸ as did the Neapolitan
Talleyrand, the marchese di Gallo, who retained his role as Foreign Minister.
Di Gallo had also amassed a large fortune, and although he was not a major force
in domestic affairs, Tassoni claimed that he was the government’s indispensable
A Kingdom Divided
233
⁴ The main source for the political divisions in Murat’s court was Giulio Tassoni Estense, who
served as the diplomatic representative of the Kingdom of Italy at the Neapolitan Court from 1809 to
December 1811, when Napoleon ordered his expulsion for participating in a duel fought between the
Russian chargé d’affaires and a French diplomat following a dispute at a New Year’s Eve party. Ibid.
407; also Weil (1912).
⁵ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 121.
⁶ Cavaignac never presented proper accounts and ‘had enriched himself exorbitantly and his
rapacity is proverbial’. Cutolo (1937), 401.
⁷ Tassoni claimed that Serra Gerace had made huge personal proﬁts and was one of the largest pur-
chasers of beni nazionali. He also claimed that Serra Gerace’s wife had received licences to export
goods from her vast estates in Calabria in direct violation of the Continental blockade, a charge
repeated in the Tommasi papers (see Chapter 14). For the lists of investors in the public debt see
Ermice (2005), 150–60 and 173–260, where the Serra Gerace family appears with the Tocco,
Muscettola, Spinelli, and Zunica as the largest private shareholders in the public debt, along with
many foreign investors and speculators.
⁸ Tassoni described Francesco Antonio Ricciardi, Conte dei Calmaldoli (1758–1842), as arrogant
and concerned only ‘to leave his family with a big patrimony’ but claimed that no one could accuse
him of venality; Cutolo (1937), 401.

<<<PDFPAGE 243>>>
intermediary with both the imperial administration in Paris and the Bourbon
court in Palermo.⁹
Of Murat’s inner group of advisers only Agar, who had always enjoyed the
queen’s conﬁdence, remained.¹⁰ The most prominent victim of the crisis, how-
ever, was the former Bourbon minister, Giuseppe Zurlo, Murat’s Neapolitan
Minister of the Interior. Arrogant and aloof, Zurlo was hated by both the French
and the Neapolitans, but the immediate reason for his fall was the Feudal
Commission, which both Agar and the queen believed Zurlo had turned into
aninstrument of personal vendetta to ruin the old nobility that had seriously 
jeopardized the regime’s security and reputation.
THE FEUDAL COMMISSION
Caroline Bonaparte’s intervention had Agar’s support and reﬂected a broader
concern that Murat had allowed Zurlo to alienate the great landowners who were
considered the new regime’s most powerful allies. Between February and August
1806 Joseph Bonaparte had assured his brother that ‘The seigneurs and the
wealthy landowners [who] were the enemies of the former Court and are friends
of the new order . . . for that reason I should avoid causing them offence by 
making too many changes with respect to either property or the persons in my
employ.’¹¹
As in the other Napoleonic states, the new regime’s initiatives were gauged
speciﬁcally to win the support of the landowners, who were among the principal
beneﬁciaries of the partial rescue of the creditors of the ancien régime and of
the sales of the beni nazionali. For the same reason, Joseph Bonaparte had been
unwilling to seize the lands of those who had followed the Bourbons to Palermo,
while the law of 2 August abolishing feudalism bent over backwards not to harm
the interests of the landed classes.¹²
As in the rest of the empire, the law deprived the ex-feudatories of their political
powers, ﬁscal privileges, and some feudal revenues but left them with almost
everything else. All rights or monopolies not feudal in origin were converted to
private property or rents. Rivers and waterways became public property, but not
the ‘mills, mill wheels, olive presses, tanning works, paper-making shops, mineral
and dye-works, workshops for beating copper and similar constructions’ that sim-
ply became the private property of the former barons. Similarly ‘all rents or taxes
and other payments for the use of land whether in cash or in kind remain as they
Napoleonic Naples
234
⁹ See Croce, ‘Il marchese Caraccciolo’ (di Gallo’s uncle), in Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia
(1956), 82–111.
¹⁰ Jean Antoine Agar, Conte de Mosbourg (1771–1844); Tassoni thought he was out of his depth,
relied uncritically on French models, and had little knowledge or experience of matters ﬁnancial or
commercial; Cutolo (1937), 401.
¹¹ ANP: AFiv 1714c; 22 February, 31 July, 8 August 1806.
¹² Villani (1964), 44–7; Ermice (2005), 126–9.

<<<PDFPAGE 244>>>
are, and are to be paid as due and to be considered private property’. One of the
most controversial sections of the new law stipulated that:
[T]he demani that formed part of the abolished feudal estates will remain the property of
their former owners. The local population will retain their common use rights on these
same estates and all other rights that they are entitled to until such time as the demani shall
be the subject of a new law that will lay down the terms for their division....In the mean-
time, it is expressly forbidden that any changes or innovations be made.¹³
However, the law of August 1806 demonstrated that it was one thing to abolish
feudalism where it no longer existed, but something quite different in Naples
where it was a pervasive and deeply contentious reality. The most critical weakness
of the new law was that it failed to take account of the questionable legality of
most of what was claimed by feudal title. This made the legitimacy of all property
rights—feudal or otherwise—uncertain and contentious, and was the issue that
had bedevilled every earlier attempt at reform. Had the law of August 1806 been
implemented it would have converted feudal property and rights into private
property and rents without recognizing the claims of the local communities.
Effectively, the disputes between the local communities and neighbouring lay and
ecclesiastical feudatories that for half a century had brought conﬂict and tension
to the rural South would have been settled exclusively in favour of the latter.
It soon became clear that the new law was likely to provoke serious unrest,
because of both the expectations raised and what was actually promised. The 
government was faced with the questions that had confronted all previous
attempts at reform and had overwhelmed the courts of the ancien régime: they had
to ﬁnd the means to distinguish feudal from non-feudal rents, rights, and property,
and to determine the legitimacy of all these highly contentious titles and claims.
Unsure how to proceed but alarmed by the growing unrest, in January 1807 the
government suspended those sections of the law relating to the compensation of
feudal exactions and the division of the demani. But the way forward was unclear.
The ancien régime tribunals had been abolished, but the new legal codes had not
yet been introduced. In November 1807 the government therefore created a
Feudal Commission to review the contentious sections of the law of August 1806,
but when Joseph left for Spain in 1808 no progress had been made.¹⁴
By the time of Murat’s arrival the issue could not safely be deferred much
longer, while the meetings of the provincial assemblies in the summer of 1808
revealed additional ﬁscal imperatives for settling outstanding disputes over rights
on both former feudal estates and the common lands. The disastrous state of local
ﬁnances that became evident when the provincial assemblies met demonstrated
that the reorganization of local administration could not progress without a more
general reorganization of local ﬁnances, which in turn could not be done without
A Kingdom Divided
235
¹³ Law on feudalism, 2 August 1806.
¹⁴ Its members were Davide Winspeare, Luigi Dragonetti, Giuseppe Raffaeli, Domenico
Franchini, and Vincenzo Cuoco.

<<<PDFPAGE 245>>>
resolving the controversies over ownership of the common lands of the local
communities and their use-rights on former feudal estates.
Giuseppe Zurlo now proposed that Joseph Bonaparte’s Feudal Commission be
given a new brief to enable it to carry out both the deﬁnitive division of the former
feudal estates and also the division of the former common lands. For Murat the
political advantages of the project were clear. At very little cost it would enable
thegovernment to claim that it had realized its most ambitious modernizing
promise, while the reform could also be expected to bring signiﬁcant but less
strongly advertised increases in tax yields for both local government and the state.
In many respects Zurlo also seemed ideally well qualiﬁed to carry the operation
through. He had been the architect of the Bourbon decree of 1792 ordering the
division of the common lands, while his former absolutist training well equipped
him as a Napoleonic administrator.¹⁵ He had complete conﬁdence both in abso-
lutist measures and in a reform project that many critics believed to be too abstract
to accommodate the widely varying circumstances of the South and in any case
probably impossible to implement.¹⁶
These were not criticisms to which Zurlo paid much attention, although to the
irritation of the French party at court he did openly acknowledge the defects of
Joseph Bonaparte’s law on feudalism:
although a centuries-old experience had exposed the true nature of the evils of feudalism,
[the law of 2 August] not only failed to deﬁne what it was abolishing and what it was 
preserving, but. . .left all these rights subject to exactly the same state of litigation and 
dispute that had existed before the law was introduced.¹⁷
In the past the state had been weak and unable to prevent powerful landowners
from usurping lands that rightfully belonged to the local communities: ‘the village
commons were in the hands of the barons....Most of the land held in feudal title
was leased on the most onerous terms ...all forms of industry were reserved exclu-
sively to the barons and it was this that brought devastation to our agriculture.’¹⁸
Zurlo claimed that although Joseph had recognized the problem, he feared
that any attempt to rewrite this fundamental law would be dangerous. The new
government was prepared to act more decisively, however, and in this sense the
Feudal Commission also played a part in the attempt to present Murat as a
moreeffective and active ruler.
The premise for the new operation was the decrees of 6 December 1808 that
made it legal to enclose all private property, which was freed from former rights of
open pasture and other collective and customary use-rights. That decree struck at
the use-rights on which the economies of the rural communities throughout the
South depended, and was followed by a second decree ordering the division of
allformer feudal and public common lands between the former feudatories and
Napoleonic Naples
236
¹⁵ On the edict of 1792 see Corona (1995), 105–19; see also ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte
381AP2; Council of State, Report of the Demani, June 1806.
¹⁶ See Aliberti (1987), 35–6.
¹⁷ Zurlo, in Lalli (ed.) (n.d.), 38.
¹⁸ Ibid. 59.

<<<PDFPAGE 246>>>
the local communities in proportion to the rights formerly exercised. Then on
24February 1809 Murat reactivated the Feudal Commission to implement these
decrees, empowering it to settle all disputes relating to former feudal rights, and to
apportion former feudal estates between the owners and those claiming use-
rights. Those decisions would be made and carried out by a Commission for
Reallocation (Commissione dei Repartitori), which would divide the lands 
allocated to the local communities amongst the inhabitants in the form of quit-
rent small holdings.¹⁹
In October 1809 the membership of the Commission was again revised and its
ﬁve commissioners then set off to travel the length and breadth of the Kingdom to
hear and settle outstanding litigation and oversee the division of both the former
feudal estates and the common lands.²⁰ There were to be no appeals against their
judgments and the entire operation was to be completed within a year. This was
actually achieved and the Feudal Commission was indeed disbanded in August
1810, although the division of the common lands was extended to December
1811, after which its functions were taken over by the ordinary courts and the
regional Intendents’ councils.²¹
Murat’s government moved energetically to gain maximum publicity for an
operation hailed as the ultimate demonstration of the beneﬁts that imperial rule
had brought to southern Italy. Davide Winspeare was commissioned to write a
History of the Abuses of Feudalism, the ﬁrst and only volume of which was pub-
lished by the government in 1811. This was a self-seeking work that larded a
defence of the Feudal Commission with an anecdotal history of feudalism selected
at random from the litanies of feudal abuses made familiar by the reform writers of
the previous century, including such Gothic horrors as the jus prima noctis.²² But
Winspeare’s main concern was to point out that this operation was not directed
against the landowners, and indeed had their full support. The lay feudatories had
long since converted feudal rents and personal services to money rents. Feudalism
had survived, Winspeare argued, only because of the Church which was the prin-
cipal owner of feudal property in the Kingdom and was deaf to modern principles.
This rather clumsy piece of propaganda closed by praising the altruism shown by
the Neapolitan feudatories who had fully supported the law of August 1806
because they, like the government, considered feudalism an anachronism:
The present day owners of feudal estates are quite different from their predecessors in their
culture and behaviour. Inspired by a new sense of public duty, they can no longer tolerate
these hateful feudal rights, although they remain determined to preserve and protect all
their revenues. As a result, they often condemn those very rights which in practice they
continue to exact.²³
A Kingdom Divided
237
¹⁹ Trifone (1909), 181–98; La Volpe (1930), ii. 125.
²⁰ Davide Winspeare was President with ﬁve commissioners: Paolo Nicola Giampaolo, Giuseppe
de Thomasis, Giuseppe Poerio, Girolamo Dumas, and Biase Zurlo.
²¹ Trifone (1909), 318.
²² A feudatory’s claim to sleep with his vassals’ brides on their wedding night.
²³ Winspeare (1811), 86–9.

<<<PDFPAGE 247>>>
The same message was repeated in Zurlo’s Report on the State of the Realm in
1811. The Feudal Commission and the division of the demani had ﬁnally brought
to an end:
centuries-long litigation which almost from the time of the foundation of the monarchy
has fuelled the spirit of rivalry between the rural populations and the barons. As a result of
the two operations carried out by the Feudal Commission the property of the former
feudatories has been guaranteed; the rights they exercised on the common demani have
been separated from those of the local communities and the different forms of servitù and
other abusive rights exercised on public and private land have been suppressed.²⁴
Both Winspeare and Zurlo had got it wrong, however. The Feudal
Commission began operating just as Manhès had been sent to repress the massive
resurgence of brigandage in Calabria that then spread to other provinces. Far from
strengthening support for the regime, the actions of the commissioners outraged
the nobles who claimed that they had been despoiled of property owned for 
centuries. Those complaints led to Zurlo’s dismissal, which necessarily also under-
mined the successful implementation of the reforms.
Even those closest to Zurlo acknowledged that the government did not have
the practical means to enforce the Commission’s rulings. Early in 1811 Angelo
Masci,²⁵ the Intendent of Lower Calabria, reported that powerful landowners had
easily subverted the rulings of the Feudal Commission when these threatened
their interests:
The torpor and inaction that Your Excellency has had cause to remark on in this
province . . .does not derive from ignorance but from the most horrible intrigues. The
Barons, the landowners and the owners of the biggest herds of sheep have all joined forces
to subvert the excellent measures taken to bring about the division of the common lands,
and the means that they have used to this end are all the more damaging because they have
also succeeded in deceiving the people so that they too agree in opposing them.²⁶
Four months later Masci returned to the same subject:
The people in this province are so deeply accustomed to subservience that if the public
authorities are not constantly vigilant in checking the overbearing behaviour of the power-
ful there is no-one who has the courage to raise his head to assert the rights which the
Law confers on him. It is therefore extremely probable that notwithstanding the rulings
[of the Feudal Commission] previously referred to, if the authorities in each locality do
not constantly remain alert to ensure that they are observed, the former abuses will imme-
diately return.²⁷
Napoleonic Naples
238
²⁴ The Neapolitan Commission, he argued, had faithfully followed the French laws of 25 August
1792, which had also been applied by imperial decree to Piedmont, Genoa, Tuscany, Parma, and
Rome; Zurlo, in Lalli (ed.) (n.d.), 78.
²⁵ Masci had been one of the Economic Visitors in 1801–3, and was one of Zurlo’s conﬁdants.
²⁶ ASN: Carte Winspeare, Affari Demaniali f. 74: Masci to Zurlo, 2 February 1811.
²⁷ Ibid., Masci to Zurlo, 13 June 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 248>>>
From the Terra d’Otranto, the Intendent Domenico Acclavio wrote in almost
identical terms about the failure of the ordinary courts to enforce the decrees of
the Commission:
I have lacked neither energy nor zeal in preventing similar abuses, but if the ordinary
Courts continue to allow these laws to be neglected I seriously doubt that all my vigilance
will be sufﬁcient to prevent the accumulation of precedents in the Province that will enable
feudalism to be reborn from its ashes. The vast number of small landowners are totally
without the means to enter into litigation and hence may easily fall again under the former
yoke.²⁸
Acclavio’s predictions proved accurate and in most parts of southern Italy the
rural poor lost either immediately or within a short space of time the access to
thecommon lands on which the livelihood of the rural communities depended.
Instead of ending the expropriation of the lands and assets of the local communities
as was intended, the reform if anything accelerated the speed at which they were
coming under private control, a process that would be the major cause of social
unrest in the rural South in the decades that followed.
The reason, Vincenzo Cuoco argued, was that the criteria on which the rulings
of the Feudal Commission were based were deeply ﬂawed. Cuoco was no friend of
Zurlo, and in his report as Intendent of the province of Molise in 1812 he
denounced the devastating impact of the Commission’s rulings:
The common lands belonging to the local communities that were already cultivated made
up a about a third of the agricultural land in the Kingdom. Those who worked them were
not Barons, nor were they over-mighty: they were drawn from that rank of citizens who
have the most to offer the State because they are the most industrious. As the emperors
Valentiniano, Teodoso and Arcadio well understood, these are the citizens who are best
able to bring together private interest and the public good. But to these same people,
whonumber a full quarter of the population of this Kingdom, we now say: Leave the lands
that you have hitherto legitimately owned and cultivated and that are still steeped in the
sweat of your fathers.
The expectation that the common lands would be ‘converted into private 
property and emancipated from feudal exactions or collective use-rights in return
for a simple quit-rent, thereby protecting both agriculture and industry’ had
proved to be ‘vain dreams’:
The land has passed from the hands of those who cultivated it to those who lack the means
to cultivate it. The land has changed hands, but the capital needed to cultivate the land has
not. So what will happen? The result will be disaster, because it is a disaster to own land
that cannot be cultivated when the owner must at the same time pay both rents to the local
community and taxes to the State. . . . The obligation to pay is inescapable; the ability to
plough and sow the land is uncertain; hence the land becomes a source of anguish.²⁹
A Kingdom Divided
239
²⁸ Ibid., f. 81, Acclavio to Zurlo, 4 February 1811.
²⁹ Cuoco (1806–15), 199–200.

<<<PDFPAGE 249>>>
The division of the commons would, he warned, inevitably give rise to innu-
merable new lawsuits and even where small farms had been established they were
unlikely to survive. The new tenant farmers were burdened by the entry taxes, by
the cost of equipment and seed, and also by the land tax to which they were
obliged to contribute in addition to local taxes. As their debts accumulated, they
were rarely able to survive the ﬁrst bad harvest or fall in prices, at which time
theirland was easily absorbed by the wealthier landowners.³⁰
Cuoco’s predictions proved right on both counts. Without a very broad and
general plan the work of the Feudal Commission could never have been com-
pleted. But the very short time in which it was required to issue its rulings resulted
in judgments that were arbitrary and inconsistent that gave rise to protest and 
litigation that in some cases remained unresolved until over a century later.³¹
In the meantime, without access to credit, tax concessions, or loans to buy 
equipment and crops few of the small farms that came into being as a result of the
division of the commons and the former feudal estates lasted for long, and most
were quickly incorporated into the properties of the wealthier landowners. As
Cuoco and others also warned, the division of the common lands and the ending
of older regulations also dramatically accelerated woodland clearances and exacer-
bated the damage to the fragile infrastructures of the southern economies in ways
that had already caused alarm amongst the economists of the previous century.³²
MAGISTRATES AND THE RULE OF LAW
Vincenzo Cuoco was not the only supporter of the regime who denounced the
operations of the Feudal Commission. The Minister of Justice, Francesco
Ricciardi, also detested Zurlo and denounced the Feudal Commission as an insti-
tution which he described as a throwback to the absolutist tribunals of the ancien
régime and a ﬂagrant violation of the rule of law on which the new regime claimed
to be premised. But Ricciardi’s denunciation of the juridical premises of the
Feudal Commission—and also of the special powers conferred on Manhès—also
revealed the ways in which the magistrates were beginning to establish new 
publicroles.
As we have seen, when Joseph Bonaparte left for Spain in 1808 the reorganiza-
tion of the administration of justice was completely stalled.³³ But the situation
changed rapidly in the years that followed and by 1811 the magistrates had
emerged as one of the most powerful professional groups in the new state. This
was the result of initiatives taken by the magistrates themselves, however, who
Napoleonic Naples
240
³⁰ Giuseppe Palmieri had given the same warning in the 1790s; Tocci (1971), 68–9.
³¹ Trifone (1909), 490.
³² See D’Elia (ed.) (1993), 3–80, 150–66, and Palmieri (ed.) (1993), pp. xviii–xxiv, 5–33, 71–7.
³³ See Chapter 9, p. 182–4.

<<<PDFPAGE 250>>>
after Murat’s arrival dropped their earlier resistance and began not only to cooperate
but also to acquire new public roles and power.
The shift in attitude coincided with Ricciardi’s appointment as Minister of
Justice in 1809 and Murat’s decision, under further and now inﬂexible pressure
from Paris, to introduce the Code Napoléon. But Murat’s decision to give way to
the emperor’s demands in itself meant little, since as in the other imperial territ-
ories the French legal codes had ﬁrst to be translated while the new tribunals that
were to apply the new laws had yet to be created. Murat probably expected
that the whole awkward process would be swamped in legalistic technicalities
andthe pettyfogging that followed, as was the case in much of the rest of Europe.³⁴
In Naples something quite different happened. When Murat appointed
Ricciardi to head the commission set up to oversee the introduction of the French
law codes in 1809, the Neapolitan men of law quickly came to understand that
the new codes and the reorganization of the administration of justice provided an
important opportunity to reclaim powerful positions in public life.³⁵ The Code
Civil and the new administration of justice did not enable the togati of the ancien
régime to reinvent themselves. It was a feature of the new legal codes and especially
the French laws of legal procedure that magistrates now became representatives
of the state with often no more than token guarantees of tenure. But under
Ricciardi’s leadership the magistrates and judges carved out important new public
roles in the post-feudal state.³⁶
Ricciardi was strongly committed to establishing the autonomy of the magis-
tracy, and he also clearly understood that the new legal codes and tribunals 
offered the magistrates a powerful role in the new state. He began by vigorously
asserting the autonomy of the new courts and he acted decisively to ensure that
the magistrates were under the exclusive control of his Ministry. The new controls
that the state exercised over judges under Napoleonic law gave the minister the
means to impose tight corporate discipline on the magistrates, and to insist that
they were answerable only to his Ministry. At the same time, Ricciardi vigorously
promoted the Justice Ministry’s unique function as the principal guardian of
the law, which in practice meant the right to monitor all other branches of gov-
ernment to ensure that they did not exceed their jurisdictions.
Ricciardi had refused to accept ofﬁce while Saliceti was alive, speciﬁcally on
the grounds that the former Minister of Police had systematically violated juris-
dictional boundaries. As Minister of Justice he set about dismantling the police
state created by Saliceti, starting with the dismissal of the magistrates appointed
by the former Minister of Police. A commission was set up to investigate those
who had been appointed simply because they had been anti-royalist in 1799 and
A Kingdom Divided
241
³⁴ On Germany see, e.g., Farhmeir in Rowe (ed.) (2003), 107–20.
³⁵ Nicolini (1901), p. xl; in addition to the civil code, the French criminal law code and the codes
of civil and criminal procedures had also to be translated and adopted.
³⁶ See especially Castellano (2004), 7–17.

<<<PDFPAGE 251>>>
those who were improperly qualiﬁed were dismissed. Every magistrate was subject
to close and routine surveillance, and all were required to submit regular reports
detailing conditions in the provinces and localities where they were in service and
to report on the behaviour of all civil ofﬁcials.
Once the autonomy of his ministry was secure, Ricciardi began reorganizing
the courts. He was strongly opposed to every form of special court outside his
jurisdiction, including the military tribunals established in 1809. For that reason
he vehemently opposed the special powers conferred on Manhès in 1810 and
he challenged military intervention in judicial affairs wherever this occurred.
But above all he denounced Zurlo’s Feudal Commission as an atavistic return to
the absolutist juntas of the previous century, which violated both the integrity
of the administration of justice and the rule of law.³⁷
These initiatives met with enthusiastic support from many of those like Giuseppe
Poerio and Vincenzo Cuoco who had formerly been close to Saliceti and who 
supported the aims of the new regime but not its methods.³⁸ But in the process of
reorganization the magistrates also acquired a distinctive sense of their own corpor-
ate identity, accompanied by a very explicit sense of national identity as well.
The French legal codes were not simply translated, for example, but adopted
and appropriated. This was not difﬁcult since they were written in the language
and principles of the Enlightenment with which the Neapolitan lawyers who had
come of age in the years of Bourbon reformism, the debates on feudalism, and the
revolution and the Republic of 1799 were deeply familiar.³⁹ But they also now
received a strong nationalist imprint, as was illustrated in the inaugural address
delivered by Nicola Nicolini when he was appointed Royal Procurator General at
the Criminal Court at S. Maria Capua Vetere in 1809.
Nicolini claimed that the new codes of criminal law and criminal procedure
that had been imported from France were entirely Neapolitan in inspiration.
Alltheir essential principles had been anticipated in the reforms championed in
Naples in the eighteenth century by Gaetano Filangieri, Charles III, Tanucci, and
Ferdinand IV. The new norms of procedure in criminal cases were identical to the
royal decrees of 1735 and 1738 regarding the interrogation of accused persons.
Tanucci had established new rules of conduct for all lawyers and magistrates, and
the use of torture had been abolished in 1789. For Nicolini, the law of 1774 that
required judges to give written justiﬁcation of their sentences was the basis for the
reform of criminal and civil law procedures that culminated in the law of 1808.
The ground has, therefore, been well prepared and the road has been made ready by the
studies of our most distinguished native jurists, so that our minds have for many years been
Napoleonic Naples
242
³⁷ Nicolini (1901), p. xlii; see also Zurlo (1809), 53.
³⁸ Castellano (2004), 87–99. On Poerio, see ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, B5, where
Poerio was described as Saliceti’s protégé, ‘the most eloquent speaker in the Council of State and a
dangerous man to have as an opponent’.
³⁹ See Rao (1984), Ajello (1976), and Cammissa in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 519–24.

<<<PDFPAGE 252>>>
educated in ways to prepare them to receive the new legislation. These do not come to us as
the beginning of a new civilization, but enable us to move forward with the civilization we
already enjoy, ﬁnally rid of the difﬁculties posed by the presence of too many contradictory
laws that were confused by the unclear guidance of obscure authorities.
The real innovation was that the new procedures and laws were now ‘set forth in
the light of day by simple, coherent and fecund principles, made certain by reli-
able forms of interpretation, and in addition made intelligible and popular thanks
to the adoption of the universal language of Italian’.⁴⁰
This was an exceptionally clear statement of the new sense of identity and
indeed autonomy that the magistrates had acquired as a result of the crisis of the
ancien régime monarchy. As Murat’s relations with Paris deteriorated, the lawyers’
autonomy grew as did their control over the administration of justice. New meas-
ures were introduced to formalize entry into the profession, to regulate university
courses, and to establish a general register of attorneys.⁴¹ At the same time
Ricciardi and a close group of supporters set out new guidelines for magistrates
and made numerous revisions of the French codes to bring them into line with
Neapolitan custom and procedure.⁴²
In some cases new laws were circumvented, the most obvious being partible
inheritance, and as in most of the rest of Europe Neapolitans simply drew up their
wills in ways that indirectly retained the system of primogeniture.⁴³ In others
this was not possible and the consequences were far-reaching, especially the 
abolition of feudal entails that after the Restoration was considered throughout
Italy to be the single greatest blow to the wealth of the old nobility.⁴⁴
In Naples, as in the rest of Italy, civil divorce remained a major sticking point. It
was opposed not only by the clergy and the magistrates, but also more generally by
the propertied classes who were concerned by the implications for inheritance and
marriage strategies.⁴⁵ Although divorce ﬁnally did become law, it was ignored. By
1815 only three petitions had been ﬁled in Naples: the ﬁrst divorce was granted on
17 June 1810, and the second and last were granted in 1814. In the provinces
there were more petitions but no divorces were granted. In June 1815 the 
abolition of civil divorces was the ﬁrst legislative act of the restored monarchy.⁴⁶
The reorganization of the state offered the Neapolitan jurists the opportunity
to acquire powerful new public positions. Their power was no longer that of the
former togati, but the jurists and judges of the new administrative monarchy
weremuch more numerous than their eighteenth-century forebears. They ﬁlled
A Kingdom Divided
243
⁴⁰ Nicolini (1850), 13.
⁴¹ Castellano (2004), 201–3.
⁴² Nicolini (1901), p. xlvii. The commission for revising the French codes included Giuseppe
Poerio, Davide Winspeare, Nicola Nicolini, Michele Agresti, Tito Manzi, Giustino Fortunato, and
Nicola Libetta.
⁴³ For example, by allowing women a lifetime interest in an inherited estate but excluding them
from a share in the assets.
⁴⁴ Davis (1988), 114–15.
⁴⁵ On marriage strategies see esp. Macry (1988), 153–8.
⁴⁶ Croce (1942); see also Volpe, in Di Leo (1995), 153–8, and Parente (1990).

<<<PDFPAGE 253>>>
the high ofﬁces of state and claimed to be both the guardians of the law and the
overseers of all those who stood in authority. The creation of new provincial 
tribunals and the new ofﬁce of Justice of Peace increased career opportunities,
while there were openings for commercial lawyers both in Naples and in the
provinces.
By no means were all the magistrates new men, however. Of the 137 new mag-
istrates appointed between 1808 and 1815, nearly 50 per cent had begun their
careers in the service of the former monarchy.⁴⁷ But the men of law had been
transformed into a professional corps with a strong sense of its own identity and
interests, while the numbers of students who studied law at the University in
Naples was an indication of the growing importance of the profession in the post-
feudal state. It was also an illustration, however, of the chronic imbalance between
supply and demand for professional employment that would play a major part in
undermining the Restoration autocracies in Italy as in the rest of Europe.
CO-OPTING THE NOTABLES
The magistrates navigated the transition from the ancien régime with considerable
skill to carve out powerful new positions in the post-feudal order, but the govern-
ment’s efforts to integrate the elites more actively into the new regime met with
more mixed results. In every province there were prominent families that rallied
openly to the new regime, but broader responses amongst the landowners were
disappointing. Above all they showed little desire to shoulder the heavy adminis-
trative burdens delegated to the provincial and local assemblies, and even less to
serve in the provincial militias.⁴⁸
The government had been taken aback by the freedom of the criticisms voiced
in the provincial assemblies in 1808, and in order to narrow participation estab-
lished what were called Economic Societies. Unlike the provincial assemblies that
reported to the Ministry of the Interior though the Intendents, the Economic
Societies reported instead to a committee of experts and agronomists nominated
by the king from the members of the Istituto Reale d’Incorragiamento in Naples,
a body that had no executive or advisory powers.⁴⁹
The new associations were dominated by technical experts and senior govern-
ment administrators. When the Reale Società Economica di Capitanata ﬁrst met
in Foggia in July 1810, for example, its president, Giuseppe Rosati, was described
as ‘A Naturalist of outstanding merit, as his many publications will attest’. The
other twelve members included ‘a former monk who taught in the religious
Napoleonic Naples
244
⁴⁷ See Castellano (2004), 244.
⁴⁸ Scirocco (1978), 102–25; De Lorenzo (2201), 289–314.
⁴⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5068, 6 February 1810, 6 October 1810; see also De Lorenzo
(1998).

<<<PDFPAGE 254>>>
schools, and is a professor of physics and mathematics in the college at Foggia,
a very able man’. There was also ‘a wealthy and zealous landowner who knows a
great deal about farming’ and another ‘enlightened landowner’. Senior govern-
ment administrators served as corresponding members, including the Duke della
Torre, the former Administrator of the Tavoliere, and ‘a man learned in physics
who is a member of the Accademia di Arcadi and of the Accademia dei Georgoﬁli in
Florence’;⁵⁰ the Administrator of the local depot of gunpowder and saltpetre
(‘well trained in chemistry’) and also M. Briot, ‘who currently resides at Cosenza
where he is the Intendent of Lower Calabria, but owns property in France and
combines great theoretical knowledge with proven administrative skills’.⁵¹
Capitanata’s Economic Society revealed the narrow cross section of government
ofﬁcials and notables that constituted the political foundation of the new regime.
The tasks delegated to the Economic Societies carefully focused on highly tech-
nical debate of long-term and general issues. The Economic Association for Apulia,
for example, in 1810 wrote a detailed survey of the three principal branches of
agriculture in the province, and on other occasions reports were frequently deleg-
ated to a single expert.⁵² While all these reports contained a wealth of important
information and recommendations, their only audience was the committee set
upby the Reale Istituto d’Incoraggiamento in Naples, which had no powers other
than to listen.
The census conducted at considerable expense in 1811 met a similar fate, and
served mainly to reveal that the regime lacked the means to complete such a 
survey. The language and repetition evident in the returns indicate that in most
cases they were compiled by a single ofﬁcial working in the Intendent’s ofﬁce
and on the basis of what information is unclear since few of the local councils
completed their inquiries. As in France, these returns are of interest mainly for
what they reveal of the values and preconceptions of the administrators. Like
the reports of the provincial assemblies in 1808, a dominant concern was rural
underpopulation, which was invariably cited as the principal cause of the back-
wardness of agriculture; as in 1808 this was a pretext for moralizing and often
highly prurient denunciations of the immorality of the rural poor. Low fertility
rates were blamed on promiscuity, intemperance, and masturbation. Infant
mortality was a result of primitive birthing practices, ignorance, and neglect.
Even disease was an afﬂiction that the poor brought on themselves through lack
of education, lack of concern for simple hygiene and cleanliness, slovenly habits,
poorly built and badly maintained housing, ignorance, and indifference.⁵³ These
reports illustrate values shared more widely among the propertied and educated
classes, but they were written by lonely ofﬁcials in understaffed and ill-equipped
A Kingdom Divided
245
⁵⁰ The ﬁrst agricultural association in Italy founded in 1753 by Ubaldino Montelatici.
⁵¹ ASF: Reale Società Economiche, F.1, Foggia, July 1810.
⁵² Ibid. See also Cuoco (1806–15), 188–90.
⁵³ For the French provincial census returns, which were very similar in their ideological and
anthropological assumptions, see esp. Bourguet (1976), 802–23.

<<<PDFPAGE 255>>>
ofﬁces that reveal the bureaucratic fantasies but not the administrative realities
of the new order.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES
Public employees were, nonetheless, an occupation group amongst which the new
regime looked to develop strong political ties. However, the most immediate
impact of the legislation introduced after 1806 was to put the employees of the
ancien régime tribunals and the feudal administrations out of work. It was
expected that this unemployment would be temporary and would soon be offset
by the new careers and opportunities for preferment that would result from
the reorganization of public administration.
Once the former royal and feudal employees had been reabsorbed, however, the
net gains were quite small. Those employed in the new courts were primarily
the former employees of the ancien régime tribunals. The same occurred in the
new provincial and local administrations, which were staffed primarily by 
formerfeudal ofﬁcers, just as the militias and gendarmeries were recruited from
the former feudal sbirri.⁵⁴
When in 1811 Tassoni Estense referred to Giuseppe Zurlo as the spokesman of
the ceto medio, he meant speciﬁcally the public administrators whom he described
as ‘a very strong party that is deeply attached to the present government and its
ministers’. But he went on to admit that the number of public employees and
administrators was too small to constitute a viable political base for the new
monarchy. There were major political complications, too, above all the competing
claims and preference enjoyed by French nationals. Tassoni Estense claimed that
‘some sixteen thousand French employees’ were reported to have been given jobs,
but added that he had no idea whether the ﬁgure was accurate ‘since the truth in
these matters is shrouded in partiality and polemic’. The ﬁgure is certainly wildly
exaggerated, as was the smaller number quoted by Murat in February 1811 when
he warned Napoleon of the political dangers posed by the horde of French place-
men in the Kingdom:
I cannot hide from Your Majesty that although I have nearly ten thousand men in my 
service, they are all Frenchmen, Romans, Tuscans or from other parts of Italy, while the
Neapolitans are without jobs, they are dying of hunger and need the bread that is being
eaten by the foreigners. Sire, Charles III had to contend with a major revolt in Naples for
the same reason and I must fear the same outcome.⁵⁵
Despite the inﬂated numbers, Murat saw sufﬁcient political capital in winning
the support of the Neapolitans to take the decision in June 1811 to require all
Frenchmen to obtain Neapolitan nationality or leave the Kingdom. That move
Napoleonic Naples
246
⁵⁴ See, for example, BNP: Fonds Italiens 1126, Rapports au Roi (September 1808).
⁵⁵ ANP: 31 AP6: 18 January 1811.

<<<PDFPAGE 256>>>
precipitated the crisis with the emperor, and Napoleon’s humiliating response
severely undermined attempts further to establish a signiﬁcant political base
among the public employees. But this was never completely abandoned and
whenMurat defected to the allies in 1814 he immediately reintroduced the law
requiring all public ofﬁcials to have or to acquire Neapolitan nationality.⁵⁶
THE POWER OF REPRESENTATION
Despite the weakness of the new regime’s political base, like its absolutist 
predecessors it placed great store on the powers of representation. It looked to
impress the masses with displays of regalian splendour and paternalist muniﬁ-
cence, while adopting more cultured proﬁles to woo the propertied and educated
classes. Both Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat patronized the arts and the sci-
ences, with special emphasis on useful scientiﬁc knowledge. In Naples a botanical
garden was opened, somewhat incongruously in the grounds of the Albergo dei
Poveri, as well as the astronomical observatory at Capodimonte, and in 1813 the
city’s ﬁrst zoo. The excavations at Pompeii and Herculaneum, the archaeological
museum, and the city’s music conservatories were also meticulously reorganized
along French lines.⁵⁷
Caroline Bonaparte played the role of art patron with enthusiasm. She founded
a new musical academy and brought Davide’s brilliant young pupil, Jean-
Auguste-Dominique Ingres, to Naples.⁵⁸ The emperor’s most popular Italian
artist, Antonio Canova, also received numerous commissions that included an
equestrian statue of Joachim Murat.⁵⁹ The San Carlo opera house once again
became an important setting for the royal display, which acquired a new and more
daring dimension when Murat persuaded the famous Milanese impresario
Domenico Barbaja to take over the contract for the theatre. As he had done in
Milan, Barbaja opened gaming rooms and ballrooms in the theatre to help subsid-
ize rapidly escalating production costs.⁶⁰ Reactions were divided and many were
scandalized, but the new San Carlo served to underline the modernity of the new
regime and its willingness to enter the marketplace. The theatre also continued
to offer the most visible and frequent venue in which the royal family appeared
surrounded by the Court, the high ofﬁcers of state, the nobility, the prelates and
clergy, uniformed army ofﬁcers, and public ofﬁcials and their families: the new
post-feudal order in microcosm.⁶¹
A Kingdom Divided
247
⁵⁶ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 432–5.
⁵⁷ Torinni (1994), 44–9.
⁵⁸ Jean-August-Dominique Ingres (1780–1867). See Tinterow and Conisbee (1999) and Vigne
(1997), 39–82.
⁵⁹ This did not arrive until after the fall of Murat’s government and the face had to be changed to
ﬁt the likeness of Ferdinand IV; on Canova and the empire, see Valente (1965), 329–30 and also
Johns (1998), 93–120.
⁶⁰ Rosselli (1984), 95–8; Davis (2005), 579.
⁶¹ Sorba (2001).

<<<PDFPAGE 257>>>
The new rulers also maintained the populist traditions of the past, staging 
public galas and banquets for the Neapolitan poor, which were paid for not by the
government, but by its wealthy supporters. In December 1810, for example, a lav-
ish gala and banquet was organized as a beneﬁt for the families of sailors and ﬁsh-
ermen who had been killed during the Sicilian expedition. The feast was paid for
by the leading merchants of the city, and the families of the ﬁshermen were offered
‘a bowl of macaroni with ragù and a quarter piece of kid’, followed by a ball in the
piazza and free entry for all to the San Carlo theatre. The high spot of the evening
was the lottery, from which ﬁfty dowries of twenty-ﬁve ducats each were distrib-
uted to the orphans of the drowned sailors.
The increasingly morose diarist Carlo De Nicola recorded that the response
was sullen: as soon as the food was displayed the people seized it and took it away,
along with the table linen and anything else they could carry off. No one returned
for the dancing or the theatre.⁶² The government organized many similar events
to distract attention from high food prices, and De Nicola gloomily recorded in
February 1811 that two major balls were held each week organized at huge per-
sonal expense by government ministers. Prince Pignatelli was believed to have
paid 14,000 ducats for a single public reception at his palace.
‘This is an insult to a Nation that is overwhelmed with taxes and impoverished,
and it is a terrible sight to see one man drunk and another dying of hunger on the
same street.’ On 24 February the government held ‘a popular festa at the expense
of the city, but at the king’s request’, for which the entire square facing the royal
palace was turned into a model village with fountains running with wine and bags
of ﬂour piled into great towers and then distributed to the poor.⁶³
Tassoni Estense believed that the new political order had little popular support,
however. Murat, he claimed, was personally popular because of his swashbuckling
style and also because there were fewer executions than under Joseph Bonaparte.
His government had also resumed the payment of pensions to veterans, widows,
and orphans that Joseph had suspended. But beneath it all he was convinced that
the people as a whole were still attached to the former monarchy, and it was only
the memory of the terrible events of 1799 and the terror they inspired among the
propertied classes that discouraged open opposition to the French government.⁶⁴
THE MASONIC CONNECTION
Following the example set by the absolutist rulers in the late eighteenth century,
Murat’s regime in Naples—like its counterparts throughout the empire—looked
on freemasonry as a means for strengthening bonds with the propertied and 
educated classes. When the French reached Naples in 1806 they quickly reopened
Napoleonic Naples
248
⁶² De Nicola, 10 December 1810.
⁶³ Ibid., 9 February 1811, 547.
⁶⁴ Ibid. Also Tassoni to Testi, 25 July 1809, in Cutolo (1937), 391.

<<<PDFPAGE 258>>>
the lodges that had been shut down more than a decade before, and closed the
popular royalist associations that had ﬂourished in the meantime.
As we have seen, the masonic networks in Naples and the provinces enabled the
new regime to quickly identify potential allies and supporters and freemasonry
played an important but scarcely acknowledged role in the establishment of the
new regime. As Murat’s relations with Paris deteriorated, however, his government
showed even greater interest in strengthening and expanding both the numbers
and the membership of the lodges.
These efforts reached a high point right at the height of the confrontation
between Paris and Naples in June 1811 when the royal family presided over a
major public gathering in Naples of masons from all over the Kingdom. More
than 200 masons attended the ceremony, after which food was distributed to the
poor and Daure, the War Minister, claimed that the rally had been ‘remarkable for
the unequivocal signs of good relations and perfect harmony between Neapolitans
and Frenchmen were exhibited’.⁶⁵
A report prepared later for the Bourbon government claimed that by then masonic
associations were ‘very numerous in every part of the kingdom’. Their members came
from ‘every social class, except for the humblest members of the Nation, but the
nobility and public employees took part in large numbers, and all their proceedings
were closely followed by the Police. The king was the Grand Master, his Ministers
the Grand Ofﬁcers while all the Leaders of the provincial lodges were landowners
andpublic ofﬁcials. Rather than something to be feared as a state within the State, the
lodges were closely amalgamated to and controlled by the Government.’⁶⁶
That observation proved unduly optimistic, however, and as political opposi-
tion to Murat’s government grew the masonic lodges provided the constitutional
movement with a means to organize and disseminate its programme. When
Murat’s government in 1812 moved to outlaw its political opponents, the
masonic lodges became the model for the secret societies that took up the demand
for political reform and constitutional government.
THE CHURCH
The Church was the institution that from the very beginning the new regime had
feared most, yet despite repeated attempts to establish a dialogue the alliance with
sections of the clergy that had been realized in 1799 was never renewed. At the
time of the French conquest, the clergy constituted the largest occupation and
corporate group in the Kingdom, where it was estimated that they numbered
around 100,000, of which about half were regulars.⁶⁷
A Kingdom Divided
249
⁶⁵ A de G: C(5*) 33: Correspondance et Police, 22 June 1811.
⁶⁶ ASN: Archivi Privati; Archivio Tommasi B V: Memorandum 6, ‘La Polizia Generale del Regno’.
⁶⁷ There were 21 archbishops, 110 bishops, and 53 abbots in the Kingdom (not including Sicily);
Rambaud (1908), 296.

<<<PDFPAGE 259>>>
From the start, the French rulers were obsessed by the notoriety of the
Santafede, and Miot de Melito later argued that fear of another counter-revolution
had been the main reason that his proposals for suppressing the monasteries and
convents had been the most contentious issue at the ﬁrst meetings of the Council
of Ministers in 1806. In fact the feared Santafedist reaction never materialized,
but in both the capital and the provinces the closures of the religious houses
were deeply unpopular, especially when they affected the mendicant orders,
and even Napoleon had been shocked by what he considered to be the unneces-
sary scale of the closures.⁶⁸ They also caused the Kingdom to be ﬂooded with 
dispossessed monks, nuns, and friars who, according to Tassoni Estense, in 
1811 were still ‘numerous, discontented, utterly without resources and for
some time also without means, since for some months their pensions have not
been paid’.⁶⁹
Although the secular clergy were not greatly moved by the fate of their regular
brothers and sisters, they also were a source of major problems for the new regime.
Not least of these was the Pope’s decision in 1806 to invoke the papacy’s claims to
feudal sovereignty over the Kingdom and the refusal to acknowledge Joseph
Bonaparte as the legitimate ruler. Pius VII’s action infuriated the emperor and
contributed to the decision to occupy Rome two years later. In the Kingdom it
caused a very awkward political crisis, since many bishops refused to swear the
oath of loyalty to the new king, including the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples.⁷⁰
Far from resolving the problem, the French annexation of Rome in 1809 and
the imprisonment of Pope Pius VII gave rise to new anxieties in Naples, and in
March 1810 the Council of State discussed the urgent need for a new concordat
with the papacy.
The case for a new concordat was put exclusively in terms of public order and
the fear of a recurrence of 1799:
The brutal and atrocious events of that year had a fatal effect because those most guilty
were not punished, and instead the most evil deeds were rewarded, applauded and 
honoured as virtues. . . . Many ministers of the altar were converted into armed brigands,
while their most worthy brothers were exposed to the gravest dangers when, animated
by the spirit of peace, they tried to calm the people by whom they were hunted down,
imprisoned, viliﬁed and mistreated.
The spirit of ferocity had survived and was still bringing new disorders to the
Kingdom: ‘If we delay further in repairing this damage their insubordination will
get worse and become a true Pandora’s box so that the People will once more
return to a state of barbarity.’
Napoleonic Naples
250
⁶⁸ Rambaud (1908), 302.
⁶⁹ Tassoni, in Cutolo (1937), 392.
⁷⁰ See Rambaud (1908), 294–307: The Archbishop of Naples, Cardinal Ruffo of Scilla, was the
brother of Fabrizio Ruffo of Bagnara—the former supported the French in 1799 but refused the oath
to Joseph Bonaparte in 1806; his brother led the counter-revolution in 1799, but took the oath to
Joseph in 1806.

<<<PDFPAGE 260>>>
The government had, therefore, to take energetic measures to establish proper
education for every class of citizen, but for that to happen the Church needed
serious reforms:
morality is the foundation of all education . . . But what morality can there be without
sanctions? And what sanctions can substitute for the force of Religion? If morality is
reduced simply to be taught as a scientiﬁc discipline, what will happen to the most numer-
ous Class of the People? No matter how many schools, grammar schools and colleges 
Your Majesty may build, these will never bring instruction to the most numerous classes of
the Nation.
The remedy was to repair the damage done to the Church. This must start from
the many cathedrals in the Kingdom that were without bishops. ‘Abandoned for
years to temporary vicars, they have been taken over by vagabonds and useless
Priests: there is no discipline and without this the Body of the Church is like a man
whose nerves have been cut.’ Even where there was an incumbent, many of the bish-
ops were aged. The need for clergy was greater than ever. ‘It is true that amongst the
secular clergy there are still today many learned and virtuous priests who are worthy
of their positions, but the majority of them are of more than mature age and if steps
are not taken soon they will have lost the energy to do good.’
The Kingdom’s legislation, courts, and military had been reorganized along the
lines of ‘the ﬁrst Empire in the World’, and it was time to follow the example of
Napoleon’s Concordat with Pius VII ‘that had brought peace once again to France’.⁷¹
Acting on that advice, the government proposed reducing the number of bish-
oprics, the reorganization of seminaries and the suppression of small dioceses which
attract only ‘unsuitable teachers’. Bishops and archbishops would be nominated by
the king, and the Supreme Pontiff’s canonical authority would be delegated to the
Archbishop of Naples. The bishops would undertake a complete reform of all
theparishes in their diocese to make them ‘ﬁt to meet the needs of thePeople’, which
would be done under the supervision and control of the Government.⁷²
The papal authorities in Paris never replied and the reforms were never imple-
mented. Nonetheless, the concerns expressed gave an unusually candid assess-
ment of the weakness of the regime’s popular support and the disastrous condition
of the clergy.
THE ARMY
The army was the single largest source of public employment in the Kingdom, and
was the institution to which Murat in particular looked to create an independent base
for his dynastic Kingdom. But in practice this proved both difﬁcult and dangerous.
A Kingdom Divided
251
⁷¹ ASN: Min. degli Affari Esteri, f. 5691—memorandum attached to letter re Concordat from
Di Gallo to Duca di Campochiaro, 30 March 1810.
⁷² Rambaud (1908), 296.

<<<PDFPAGE 261>>>
Like all the imperial regimes, the style of Murat’s government was overwhelm-
ingly militaristic and this at least in theory offered important opportunities for
bonding with the younger male sections of the local elites.⁷³ In some respects this
was successful, and it was amongst the military that Murat found some of his most
enthusiastic Neapolitan admirers. But the relationship was deeply contradictory,
since Murat’s attempts to create a dynastic army were viewed with the deepest sus-
picion by theemperor.
This again illustrates how the Kingdom’s uncertain and contradictory status in
the imperial enterprise undermined Murat’s efforts to give his regime more per-
manent political roots. In this case, the contradictions were increased by that fact
there were two armies in Naples: a French army of conquest, which the Kingdom
maintained when the emperor did not need its services, and the remnants of
thedefeated Bourbon army. Neither Joseph nor Murat ever held command over
the French forces in their Kingdom, while for the Neapolitan army Napoleon
had only contempt: ‘The Neapolitan army is nothing, has never been anything
and could never become anything.’⁷⁴
Despite the disasters of 1798–9, however, the Bourbon army in 1801 could
still muster 28,000 infantry and 5,000 horse.⁷⁵ That left it heavily outnumbered
by the 40,000 men who crossed the Neapolitan frontier with Masséna in
February 1806, and after the second defeat in 1806 very little was left while
the Bourbon navy was in Sicily with the Bourbons.⁷⁶ Thereafter the task of
rebuilding the Neapolitan army was made even more difﬁcult by the Kingdom’s
obligations to both the French army of occupation and to France. The ﬁrst
Neapolitan contingent sent to join the Grande Armée in July 1807 was made up of
convicts and pardoned brigands. They served in the capture of Barcelona and in
the siege of Girona, and when Joseph Bonaparte moved to Madrid in 1808
he took with him two more Neapolitan infantry regiments and the elite
Guardia Reale.
After Murat’s arrival the situation was even more onerous. Under the terms of
the Treaty of Bayonne, Naples was obliged to supply the Grande Armée with
16,000 infantry, 2,500 light cavalry, and twenty pieces of ﬁeld artillery.⁷⁷ As a ﬁrst
instalment, 2,000 infantry and 400 cavalry were sent to Spain in 1808, but
almost all were convicts and a thousand were rejected by Napoleon as unﬁt for 
service.⁷⁸ By 1810, one and a half divisions of Neapolitans were serving in Spain,
and in 1812 and 1813 a similar force was sent to Germany, Russia, and Poland.
In all some 9,000 Neapolitans served in Spain, and a further 13,000 in Germany
and Russia, much less than the emperor had demanded but few returned.⁷⁹
Napoleonic Naples
252
⁷³ On the pervasive militarism of the court of Eugène Beauharnais in Milan, see Zaghi (1986),
539–58.
⁷⁴ Cortese (1926), 320.
⁷⁵ 59 infantry battalions, 36 cavalry squadrons, and 2 regiments of artillery; Blanch, in Croce (ed.)
(1945), 22–3.
⁷⁶ Rambaud (1911), 247.
⁷⁷ Cortese (1926), 220–1; Valente (1965), 308–11; Rao (1996), 255–98.
⁷⁸ Cortese (1926), 220–1.
⁷⁹ Ibid. 318.

<<<PDFPAGE 262>>>
On top of this the Kingdom had to pay for the French army of occupation
which when Murat reached Naples in 1808 had received no pay for nine months:
Joseph had not held any reviews and his generals had freely plundered the military
coffers.⁸⁰ However, the departure of the regular French troops for the campaign
against Austria in the spring of 1809 gave Murat an excuse for establishing
a National Guard to maintain order. He also planned to recruit 20,000 men into
what were now called the Select Volunteers (Corpi di Volontari Scelti), but this met
with stubborn resistance from the landowners who considered it to be ‘a form of
conscription’.⁸¹
When Murat decided to create a new elite corps of Veliti to replace the Royal
Guards that Joseph had taken to Spain, the emperor again became suspicious. The
new corps was to consist of 4,000 cadets and ofﬁcers, who were to form an elite
body-guard recruited exclusively from the nobility and the wealthiest landowners.
In 1809 a major rally was held in Naples to celebrate the founding of this 
praetorian guard, but Napoleon’s suspicions only grew when he learned that
Murat had also created a new military Order of the Two Sicilies.⁸²
Those suspicions were fed by Murat’s French generals and contributed to
Napoleon’s decision to humiliate his brother-in-law whom he stripped of com-
mand of the Sicilian expedition in 1810.⁸³ Orders were then given that the French
and Neapolitan armies should be completely separated: in no circumstances were
Neapolitan ofﬁcers to command French troops, no French subject was to serve in
the Neapolitan army without the emperor’s authorization, and French military
commissars were to be sent to Naples to ensure that convicts were not sent as 
conscripts for the Grande Armée.⁸⁴
The command structure of the force assembled for the invasion of Sicily clearly
demonstrated the subordinate positions assigned to the Neapolitan ofﬁcers: all the
divisional commanders were French,⁸⁵ and only two battalion commanders were
Neapolitans.⁸⁶ The emperor’s intervention also greatly increased the hostility that
already existed between the small number of Neapolitan career ofﬁcers and
their French counterparts. Murat’s attempts to reconstruct the Neapolitan army
were warmly welcomed, therefore, not only by serving ofﬁcers but also by the
landed classes more generally. Like Joseph he supported the military academy at
the Nunziatella, and founded a new corps of military engineers (Genio Militare)
and a School of Military Engineering that offered important opportunities for
training civil as well as military engineers.⁸⁷ This greatly consolidated the army’s
function as the principal provider of training for a wide range of professions, from
A Kingdom Divided
253
⁸⁰ AAEP (Paris) CP: D’Aubusson to De Champagny, 22 January 1809.
⁸¹ Le Brethon, viii. Murat to Napoleon, 13 February 1809 (no. 3793).
⁸² Cortese (1926), 312.
⁸³ Rambaud (1911b), 695–709.
⁸⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 337–40; Le Brethon, vi. Napoleon to Murat, 2 October 1808,
360; see also Cutolo (1937), 395–6.
⁸⁵ Partouneaux, Lammarque, Dery, and Cavaignac.
⁸⁶ Amato and Tenandi: Colletta (1848), 134; and Espitalier (1912), 78–80.
⁸⁷ See Russo (1967) and Cortese (1965), 197–273.

<<<PDFPAGE 263>>>
physicians and chemists to veterinary surgeons and engineers, and it was hardly
surprisingly that the military became the preferred career for the sons of the 
post-feudal landowners. But, as in the rest of Europe, the gap between expectations
and openings was enormous.
By 1815 Murat’s army had grown once more, on paper at least, to 17,000 men
and ofﬁcers. But it soon became clear that the emperor’s wrath was not the only
danger that Murat ran into in attempting to create a dynastic army. As relations
with Paris deteriorated, Murat looked to create closer ties with his generals, all of
whom held commissions in the Grande Armée, but these were valid only while on
active service in the imperial campaigns outside the Kingdom.⁸⁸ Murat offered
these men an alternative and better career, and they provided Murat with the
means to rebuild his army after 1811. The generals supported Murat’s own 
dynastic ambitions, but not without conditions and both freemasonry and support
for the constitutional movement gained strength in Murat’s army. By 1814
Joachim Murat had joined the long list of soldier-kings at risk of becoming 
prisoners of their generals, a danger that derived in part from Murat’s own 
dynastic ambitions but which also reﬂected the deeper political inadequacies of
the narrowly autocratic formula established in the wake of the collapse of the
ancien régime monarchy.
CONCLUSION
This did not make the South different, however, and in its essential contours
theKingdom of Naples was in most respects similar to the other imperial satellite
Kingdoms. The new regime was premised on a bureaucratic model of the state,
in which the military and public employees were to be additional elements of
political cohesion in a system that depended on the support of the great landowners
and remained uncompromisingly autocratic.
The obstacles that undermined Murat’s attempts to build political alliances
derived most obviously from the Kingdom’s colonial subordination and the
uncertainty of his own place in imperial politics. But these were not the only ones.
The new bureaucratic institutions were too weak to function effectively as an
alternative source of political patronage. By 1815 the total judicial hierarchy,
including the humble justices of the peace, consisted of no more than 800 to 900
judges and magistrates. The entire body of central administrators was made up of
ﬁfteen provincial Intendents, thirty-eight Sub-intendents, and eight ministers of
state with twenty-four employees apiece. On paper the army employed 17,000
men, but only a small number were ofﬁcers or had permanent commissions.⁸⁹
Napoleonic Naples
254
⁸⁸ Andrea Pignatelli di Cerchiara, Vincenzo Pignatelli di Strongoli, Francesco Pignatelli,
Florestano and Guglielmo Pepe, Luigi Blanch, Pietro Colletta, Michele Carrascosa; see Cortese
(1926), 312.
⁸⁹ Castellano (2004), 244.

<<<PDFPAGE 264>>>
Underlying the weakness of the new bureaucratic structures was, of course, also
the material difﬁculty of maintaining these structures at a moment of dire eco-
nomic crisis and in contexts of overwhelming poverty. Not surprisingly when the
revolutions came to the South in 1820 the most widespread complaints focused
on the ﬁscal burdens that were the most tangible legacies of administrative
change. But this was a vicious circle since despite increased tax burdens the 
revenues were not sufﬁcient to make the new bureaucracies either efﬁcient or
effective.
For similar reasons the regime raised expectations of professional employment
that could not be realized, and when it came to the army this was especially 
dangerous. It was no small irony of the Napoleonic episode in the South that
Murat’s strongest political supporters were also the foremost in demanding
constitutional government and an end to subordination to the Grande Nation and
its emperor. But if Murat’s generals who supported the demand for a constitution
in 1814 were the regime’s most powerful opponents, behind them could be heard
the voices of the propertied classes and the local notables more generally who saw
in constitutional government the best way to protect the needs and interests of 
the provinces against the pretensions of a rigidly autocratic and bureaucratic 
government.
Naples was by no means the only case where these developments proved highly
contradictory. Everywhere in Italy French autocracy and bureaucratic centraliza-
tion met with resistance from the elites, but only in the South did that take the
form of demands for constitutional government. In part that was a consequence
of the weakness and isolation of Murat’s regime within the empire, which gave
the opposition in his own Kingdom greater freedom to organize and articulate its
demands. But the constitutional project also gave expression to forms of political
mobilization that as yet had no parallels elsewhere in Italy.
A Kingdom Divided
255

<<<PDFPAGE 265>>>
This page intentionally left blank 

<<<PDFPAGE 266>>>
PART III
RESTORATION AND
REVOLUTION

<<<PDFPAGE 267>>>
This page intentionally left blank 

<<<PDFPAGE 268>>>
¹ ANP: 31 AP 6: Murat to Napoleon, 13 November 1813.
² Joseph Fouché (1759–1820), a protégé of Barras who became Napoleon’s chief of police and in
1808 was made Duke of Otranto. Disgraced and dismissed in 1810, he was appointed Governor of
the Illyrian Provinces three years later, and then acted as mediator with Prince Metternich. See
Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 406–7.
13
Losing Naples
‘ON TOP OF THE VOLCANOES’: NAPOLEON 
AND MURAT, 1814–15
The ﬁnal chapter in the saga of Napoleonic Naples began in January 1814 when
Joachim Murat defected to the allies. A year later he again rallied to Napoleon
after the ﬂight from Elba, but in May that venture ended deﬁnitively in military
defeat on the battleﬁeld at Tolentino. The ﬁnale came ﬁve months later when on
the morning of 13 October 1815 Murat was executed by a ﬁring squad against the
perimeter wall of a small hill-top fortress at Pizzo on the Calabrian coast.
After Napoleon’s victories at Lützen and Bautzen in May 1813, Murat rejoined
the emperor’s armies in Germany where, apart from a brief return to Naples in
August, he remained until October. There was a partial reconciliation, but
Napoleon still refused the peace terms offered by Austria and after the emperor was
defeated at Leipzig in October Murat reopened negotiations with the allies.
Napoleon tried to have him arrested, but on 4 November Murat returned to
Naples and on 11 November opened the Neapolitan ports to allied shipping. Two
days later he informed the emperor that the situation in his Kingdom had changed
completely during his absence. Revolutionary placards were circulating in Calabria
and a revolt was imminent: ‘Sire, we are not only close to the volcanoes, but right
on top of them.’¹
Napoleon then sent his former Minister of Police, Joseph Fouché, to persuade
Murat to honour his obligations to the empire.² Fouché reached Naples in
December 1813 and reported that Murat was likely to join the offensive that the
Austrian General Nugent was about to launch against Prince Eugène in northern
Italy. But he clearly stated his belief that the emperor’s actions had forced Murat
into the allied camp. The emperor had repeatedly and publicly humiliated his
brother-in-law, deprived him of his military command in his own Kingdom, and
forced him to send troops to Germany even when his own Kingdom was under

<<<PDFPAGE 269>>>
threat of attack by the English. While the emperor threatened and bullied, the
allies offered rewards and guarantees. The most fundamental problem, Fouché
insisted, was that the Kingdom of Naples was exhausted and needed peace. If he
took up the cause of the empire, Murat risked facing a revolt: ‘Peace is what is
needed here and it is what everyone wants.’
Fouché also commented on the growth of Italian nationalism and the hostility
he had found towards France everywhere in Italy:
Here, as everywhere in Italy now, the word independence has acquired a magic force. It is a
banner around which many different interests converge, of course, but all people want some
form of local government. Everyone here complains that they have to go to Paris for every
petty request. The government in Paris is distant and represents heavy costs for which there
are no visible compensations. Conscription, taxes, vexations, privations, and sacriﬁces,
that—say the Romans—is what being governed by France means for us.³
It was Murat’s turn on 16 December to explain why he had refused to obey the
emperor’s order to take his army north to the Po.
Italy is seething with agitation, the events in Spain and Germany have ﬁlled every head
with ideas of independence, an Italian League, the Reuniﬁcation of Italy and freedom from
the foreign yoke—these are the words that have mobilised nearly everyone . . . the most
numerous classes have everything to gain from disorder and want revolution, while
the propertied classes hope by all means to avoid this. The latter want to preserve the
monarchy, but the others are using secret societies like the Carbonari to propagate repub-
lican ideas, and the English urge them on with promises of money and support.
Murat pointed out that his was the only army left in Italy and everyone
lookedto him for a lead. In these circumstances, to rally to the empire would be to
sacriﬁce ‘not only my troops, but the very existence of my Kingdom’. Public 
opinion was ﬂatly opposed, and so he must try to ﬁnd ways of overcoming that
opposition: ‘I must ﬂatter them . . . I will make vague references to independence
and territorial expansion.’ But all Italy wanted was peace.
Then Murat made his bargaining pitch. He could not hide his dismay that the
emperor had spoken in favour of allowing the English to retain Sicily and of
the Austrians’ intention to ‘re-establish the Pope and the little princes in Italy.
What will be the outcome of such an organisation, or rather disorganization? That
Austria will be free to intervene when it chooses, in which case France will have to
oppose it and Italy will continue to be a battle ﬁeld between the two empires?’
Murat closed with the reminder that while they were campaigning together in
Germany he had personally conﬁded in the emperor that the best political solu-
tion would be to divide Italy into two kingdoms, one in the North and the other
in the South whose frontiers would be the Po River. The English, he claimed, were
prepared to support this, and he could not ﬁght in the emperor’s cause for less.⁴
Restoration and Revolution
260
³ Fouché to Napoleon, 27 December 1813; cited in Weil (1902), iii. 296.
⁴ ANP: 31 AP 6: Murat to Napoleon, 16 December 1813.

<<<PDFPAGE 270>>>
Although biographers have tried to recruit him as an Italian nationalist, Murat’s
correspondence reveals a self-seeking opportunist who was bargaining with
both the allies and the emperor for the best deal. His somewhat unrealistic hope
was that the collapse of French rule in northern Italy would enable him to realize
the Bourbon dream of a southern kingdom stretching northwards through central
Italy and to the Po River.⁵
The emperor never replied and when the Austrian offensive against Prince
Eugène began in December 1813, the political and military situation in Italy
was transformed. The strength of Prince Eugène’s army and of the Austrians’
was relatively equal, leaving a clear opportunity for Murat.⁶ On 3 January 1814
the king of Naples wrote to tell Napoleon that ‘the most painful day of my life’ had
arrived. He had received no reply from Paris, but had been offered terms by
Austria and an armistice by the English. Naples was crying out for peace. He could
not take the side of the empire and found himself with no alternative but ‘to enter
into relations that are in appearance contrary to your interests’.⁷
Murat was being economical with the truth and this was part of a more fully
formed project. In December 1813 he had warned the Grand Duchess of Tuscany,
Elisa Bacciochi, that a Neapolitan force would occupy the Tuscan fortresses, 
asking for her cooperation and warning her not to acknowledge further orders
from Prince Eugène.⁸ Elisa Bacciochi wrote to Napoleon for advice:
The Tuscans do not like the Neapolitans, but I cannot permit that they take up arms
against them. The ideas of independence had spread so widely in Italy in the last
twomonths and hopes of change are so high . . . that much as the Tuscans may hate to be
subject to the Neapolitans they will submit so long as they ﬁnish up being ruled by a prince
of their own.⁹
On 11 January 1814 Murat signed a treaty with the Austrians, and three weeks
later entered Bologna at the head of a Neapolitan army.¹⁰ Popular revolts had been
staged in the papal territories to justify the Neapolitan occupation, and the
Neapolitan commanders now openly adopted the rhetoric of Italian nationalism.
In February, Giuseppe (now Baron) Poerio proclaimed in Bologna that the King
of the Two Siclies was the provisional ruler of the Roman States, Tuscany, and
the‘Southern Italic Departments’ under the terms of the treaty with the allies. The
provisional government guaranteed the protection of all ‘Ministers of Religion, all
public buildings, all persons and private property’. It also proclaimed freedom of
trade, promised that there would be no new taxes, and concluded with a call to
action: ‘Political Independence, the ﬁrst right of all Nations, is yours to seize.’¹¹
Losing Naples
261
⁵ See Valente (1965), 331–79, and Tulard (1983), 185–202.
⁶ Bianchini (1839), 531–2.
⁷ ANP: 31 AP 6: Murat to Napoleon, 3 January 1814.
⁸ Weil (1902), iii. 250: Murat to Elisa Bacciochi, 15 December 1813.
⁹ Ibid., Elisa Bacciocchi to Napoleon, 5 January 1814.
¹⁰ Ibid. 442.
¹¹ BSPN: XXI B5 ‘Proclama del Barone Poerio ai popoli de’Dipartimenti Italici Meridionali’,
9 February 1914.

<<<PDFPAGE 271>>>
The political situation in Italy changed again following Napoleon’s abdication
on 6 April 1814. Louis XVIII returned to France, Victor Emmanuel I to
Piedmont, Grand Duke Ferdinand III to Tuscany, and Pope Pius VII was rein-
stated in Rome. On 16 April Prince Eugène sued for an armistice and the
Austrians occupied Lombardy.¹²
Murat still held the papal Marche, but the allies now had little use for him, and
he was not even mentioned in the Peace signed in Paris on 30 May 1814.¹³ The
Treaty between Naples and Vienna guaranteed the Kingdom of Naples to Murat
and his heirs, but the British governor of Sicily, Lord William Bentinck, had
speciﬁcally refused to guarantee that Murat would retain Naples and for that rea-
son had agreed only to an armistice.¹⁴ In March Bentinck led an expedition to
Tuscany and tensions were heightened when he refused to allow the Neapolitans
to enter Livorno but then appealed to the Italians to follow the example of the
Spanish and rise up against the French oppressor.¹⁵
For Bentinck Murat was ‘the most treacherous of all the Gauls’ and his 
suspicions were not misplaced. Murat had been careful to keep his own lines of
communication with Napoleon open, despite the latter’s fury on hearing of his
brother-in-law’s treachery:
You are a brave soldier on the battle ﬁeld, but off it you have no courage and no integrity.
I hope that you are not one of those who think that the lion is dead and that you can piss on
him. That would be a serious mistake. The king’s title has completely turned your head—
but if you want to keep it, behave yourself and stay loyal.¹⁶
Murat reassured Napoleon by claiming that he was playing a double game, that
his alliance with the Austrians and British was a feint to gain time, and that his
army ‘will never ﬁght against France’.¹⁷
Murat did well to keep his options open, because when the allies ﬁnally met in
Vienna in November 1814 to discuss the Peace his position looked hopeless.
Thedecision to restore the Bourbon rulers in France and Spain had destroyed his
hopes of retaining Naples, while his continuing refusal to evacuate papal territory
despite the Pope’s return to Rome outraged the allies who held him responsible for
the collapse of law and order in Central Italy.
The British government had been irritated in equal measure by both Murat and
Bentinck, and their appeals to Italian nationalism in particular had infuriated
Lord Castlereagh:
how intolerably prone he [Bentinck] is to Whig Revolutions everywhere. I am conﬁdent
his mismanagement at least doubled all the natural dangers of Murat’s rascality; and my
Restoration and Revolution
262
¹² Grab (2003), 202.
¹³ Johnson (1904), i. 256–327.
¹⁴ BSPN: Ms. XXI B5: Min. Plenipotente du Roi de Naples (Duca di Campochiaro) à Castelreagh,
29 December 1814; Comte Metternich à Comte Mier, 28 October 1813. The armistice was signed
on 3 February 1814.
¹⁵ Rosselli (1956), 133–41; See also ANP: 31 AP 43, Mosbourg to Murat, 20 March, 8 and 23
August 1814.
¹⁶ BSPN: Ms. XXI B5: Napoleon to Murat, February 1814.
¹⁷ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 272>>>
persuasion is, if the war had gone on much longer in France, we should have had the most
disastrous complication in Italy . . . . He seems bent upon throwing all Italy loose. This
might be well against France, but against Austria and the King of Sardinia, with all the new
Constitutions which now menace the world with fresh convulsions, it is most absurd.¹⁸
Castlereagh’s comments accurately reﬂect the principles guiding the resettlement
of Europe after Napoleon’s defeat, and they were repeated in similar terms by the
French foreign minister. In December Talleyrand informed Castlereagh that the
Bourbon king Ferdinand IV had the only legitimate claim to the Kingdom of
Naples, which if denied would fatally compromise the principle of legitimate
monarchy.¹⁹
The great and ﬁnal objective to which Europe is moving, and the only one that France can
support, is to bring the Revolution to an end and establish a lasting peace. The ‘principle of
Monarchy’ must triumph totally over the ‘principles of the Revolution’. For that reason the
legitimist dynasties must be restored, the king of Saxony in Saxony, the king of Naples in
Naples.²⁰
There was no space left for the dynastic ambitions of Joachim Murat, and in
January 1815 Prince Metternich formally complained that the presence of
Neapolitan troops in Central Italy went ‘beyond what is needed’. But Murat still
refused to withdraw, even though the Neapolitans were by now faced by popular
revolts throughout central Italy and Tuscany. Then came the news that in
February Napoleon had escaped from Elba and had reached Lyons, which led
Murat to gamble on Napoleon’s success. On 17 March he left Naples to rejoin
the Neapolitan forces in Central Italy, taking with him his foreign minister, the
Marquis di Gallo, Giuseppe Zurlo, the Minister of the Interior, and his ﬁnance
minister Count Mosbourg; however, Mosbourg told the king that the Treasury
had no means to support his campaign and asked to resign.²¹
Murat’s chief of staff was the French General Millet de Villeneuf, and the three
divisions of his army were commanded by Generals Carrascosa, Ambrisio, and
Lecchi, with three other recently formed divisions commanded by Generals
Livron, Pignatelli, and Prince Pignatelli Cerchiara. From Rimini Murat issued an
appeal (dated retrospectively to 30 March) that called for a national Italian rising
against the Austrian invaders:
The hour has come when destiny will be accomplished. Even Providence itself calls
you to liberty. Let a single cry be heard from the Alps to Sicily, the cry of Italian
Independence.²²
Murat’s appeal had little effect. On 11 April he warned Caroline that the
English considered his declaration against Austria to be a breach of the armistice
and that they were preparing to attack Naples. Shortly afterwards he wrote 
Losing Naples
263
¹⁸ Castlereagh to Liverpool, 5 May 1814: quoted in Rosselli (1956), 142.
¹⁹ BSPN: Ms. XXI B5, Talleyrand to Castlereagh, 15 December 1814.
²⁰ Ibid., 26 December 1814.
²¹ ANP: 31 AP 43: Mosbourg to Murat, March 1815.
²² Ibid., Decret de Rimini, 30 March 1815.

<<<PDFPAGE 273>>>
complaining that the Italians had failed to support him, that he was short of arms
and money, that he was alone and hopelessly outnumbered against the Austrian
forces. He had no alternative but to retreat under the pretence of changing 
positions.²³
Murat’s forces took Modena, but an offensive against Ferrara failed and popular
opposition forced the Neapolitans to abandon Bologna and fall back on Ancona.
The army was demoralized and for Murat’s generals the enterprise was doomed.
‘The war was considered to be lost even before it started’, Luigi Blanch later
recalled. The long series of campaigns in Spain, Germany, Russia, and the Tyrol
and then in Italy had decimated the Neapolitan ofﬁcer corps. The army had been
brutalized by the campaigns against the brigands in Calabria, and corruption was
widespread.²⁴ Most serious of all, the army was disintegrating. The Observateur
Autrichien commented on the extraordinarily high rates of desertion from even its
most seasoned units: ‘Desertion from these units is unparalleled, even though
they include some brigades of Royal Guards. The artillery train is small and
mediocre.’²⁵
The end came when Murat’s forces were routed by the Austrians near Tolentino
on 3 May. Revolts against both the French and the Neapolitans spread through
central Italy, and were especially violent in Livorno where the mob attacked the
Jewish ghetto ‘to vent their fury on those unfortunates, accusing them of being
pro-French and supporters of the Neapolitans’.²⁶
Bentinck declared war on Naples and on 13 May Caroline Bonaparte surren-
dered the Neapolitan ﬂeet. On 20 May representatives of King Ferdinand IV
signed the Treaty of Casalanza with the Austrians, which restored the Bourbons to
the throne of Naples. Two days later Caroline Bonaparte, her children, and their
possessions were transported under safe conduct to Trieste on a British warship.
Murat spent two weeks in hiding before boarding a French ship at Baia that 
carried him to France.²⁷
In Marseilles he immediately became a target of the White Terror for his part in
the execution of the Duke of Enghien. He ﬂed to Corsica and from there set sail
with a small group of followers in October to raise a revolt against the Bourbons
and regain his Kingdom. He and his followers were blown off course and beached
near Pizzo in Calabria, where they were immediately captured. Acting on instruc-
tions received by the new system of semaphore telegraphy from Naples, on the
morning of 13 October the commander of the Pizzo garrison presided over
Murat’s execution by ﬁring squad, bringing the episode napoléonniene in southern
Italy to a ﬁnal end.²⁸
Restoration and Revolution
264
²³ ANP: 31 AP 43: Murat to Caroline Bonaparte, 1815.
²⁴ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), i. 308.
²⁵ BSPN: Observateur Autrichien, 27 April 1815.
²⁶ Ibid., 7 May 1815.
²⁷ The detailed account of Murat’s escape is in Weil (1915), v. 178–202. In Austria Caroline
Bonaparte adopted the title of Duchess of Lipona (an anagram of Napoli).
²⁸ Bianchini (1839), vii. 534.

<<<PDFPAGE 274>>>
THE SECRET SOCIETIES
Even before Murat’s defeat, opposition to his government in Naples had
increased. When Murat was in Germany in October 1813, Mosbourg had written
to inform him that the situation in the Kingdom was alarming. Armed robbers
who had attempted to steal the cash deposits of the city of Naples had tried to give
their conspiracy ‘the appearance of a revolutionary project linked to the Society
of Charcoal-burners that your Majesty has long since banned, but which we
have continued to tolerate’. The plot proved to have wide ramiﬁcations. One of
the leaders, Capobianco, ﬂed to join a band of brigands in Calabria, where he was
captured by Manhès and executed in Cosenza. The queen had issued an edict 
banning the Carbonarist lodges and the military commissions were investigating
other suspects.
The history of the secret societies has been deliberately buried in layers of 
mystery and myth-making, but it seems reasonably certain that they were off-
shoots from the masonic lodges that Murat’s government had promoted until
1813.²⁹ Their earlier origins are more open to speculation. One interpretation
claimed that the Carbonarist³⁰ lodges started in the Swiss Tugendbund, where
they had recruited Neapolitan exiles after 1799 and French ofﬁcers opposed
to the Bonapartist regime in France. They observed strict secrecy and were sup-
posedly imported into Naples in 1806 by a Swiss regiment in Masséna’s army 
stationed at Capua.³¹
Others claimed that the Carbonarist societies had been founded by anti-
Bonapartist ofﬁcers after the battle of Jena, and had been brought to southern
Italy by the ubiquitous Mr Broadbent, who was described as ‘an English Quaker
who came to Sicily to trade with the Americans’.³²
Whatever the origin, the ﬁrst Carbonarist lodge established in Naples in 1810
was organized on the model of the existing masonic lodges and followed the Scottish
rite.³³ The ﬁrst provincial Carbonarist lodge was founded in Basilicata in 1811 and
its aim was ‘to bring Light to the ignorant and make men better able to understand
and exercise their Rights’. Lodges spread from there to other parts of Basilicata,
Abruzzo, and Calabria, and there was also competition from societies of other polit-
ical persuasions and origins, with names like ‘Veri Amici, Filantropi, Amici della
Felicità dell’Uomo, but the Carbonari had the widest following’.³⁴
Losing Naples
265
²⁹ Johnson (1904), ii. 29–34; see also Roberts (1974), 289–307.
³⁰ The name comes from the corporation of charcoal burners (Charboniers) in the Swiss Jura.
³¹ Caldora (1960), 620; Godechot (1976), 266–9; Johnson (1904), ii. 29–34.
³² The same Mr Broadbent (described variously as English and American) negotiated sales of
American wheat with Murat’s government. See d’Angelo (1990), 112.
³³ ASN: Archivio Tommasi, B XI, Memorandum segreto di Domenico Bocchini sulle origini della
setta dei’Carbonari.
³⁴ BSPN: Ms. Varia XXII a.6: Saggio storico delle società denominate Carboneria, Vera Amicizia e
Colonia, istituite nel Regno di Napoli sotto il governo dell’occupazione militare.

<<<PDFPAGE 275>>>
The Carbonari are a Sect that has split off from the Freemasons and taken another name. It
is more simple, has fewer ranks, is less expensive to join, less exclusive and accepts people
from the lowest social orders and tolerates all religions although in Naples it is almost
exclusively Catholic . . . it has many followers in the Kingdom.³⁵
By 1815 the Carbonarist lodges were estimated to have no fewer than 30,000
members, but this was pure guesswork. The Bourbon minister Donato Tommasi
believed that both the police commissioner Saliceti and his successor Maghella had
deliberately fostered these societies in which they planted informers to keep an eye
on public opinion. Maghella was certainly a strong supporter of Freemasonry,³⁶
and Tommasi believed that Daure’s successor as Minister of Police, the Duke of
Campochiaro, had also seen the lodges as a valuable means for keeping an eye on 
opponents of the regime. For this reason he had given the Carbonari semi-ofﬁcial
recognition and from their members had selected for key positions ‘persons who
are strongly committed to maintaining public order...and in this way the govern-
ment believes it can keep an eye on the discontented’.
Tommasi’s interpretation would square with the fact that the ﬁrst Carbonarist
lodge in Calabria was almost certainly founded in 1813 by the Intendent Pierre-
Joseph Briot, a member of the Council of State, but also an opponent of
Bonapartism with longstanding Jacobin and Masonic credentials.³⁷
In May 1813 Murat’s government changed course and the Carbonarist lodges
were outlawed, but repression only increased their number and political frag-
mentation.³⁸ Some of their members now rallied to the government and re-entered
the ofﬁcial masonic lodges, but others opted for clandestinity and adopted the
programme of constitutional reform. While many still looked to Murat to achieve
constitutional reform, others turned to the Bourbon monarchy that in 1812 had
granted a constitution in Sicily. In anticipation of a Bourbon Restoration older
ultra-Catholic royalists secret societies were also being re-established, the most
important being the Trinitarj, which the Carbonari referred to as the Calderai.
Support came from the ever-active Principino of Canosa, who was still directing
the Bourbon espionage operations on the mainland.³⁹
At ﬁrst the government tried to maintain the distinctions between membership
of the masonic lodges and the secret societies by banning the second but not
the ﬁrst. But this proved impossible, and in October 1813 the Intendents were
instructed to ban meetings of any form of secret society. Public employees
were prohibited from joining secret societies or attending their meetings, and were
obliged to inform the authorities if they had knowledge of any such gatherings.⁴⁰
Pietro Colletta commented that measures taken against the secret societies were
similar to those employed against the brigands: ‘but while the brigands included
Restoration and Revolution
266
³⁵ ASN: Archivio Tommasi, B. 5, Memorandum sulla Polizia Generale.
³⁶ A de G: C(5*) 42, Rapports au Roi: Min. Police to M. D’Azzia, Commissaire de Police,
Cosenza, 28 May 1810.
³⁷ On Briot, see Chapter 9, p. 171 n. 35.
³⁸ A de G: C(5*) 42.
³⁹ ASN: Archivio Tommasi, B XI, Memorandum segreto.
⁴⁰ ASN: Min. dell’Interno, f. 213: Circolare agli Intendenti, 2 October 1813.

<<<PDFPAGE 276>>>
the worst elements of society, the Carbonari were the best’.⁴¹The ﬁrst insurrection
associated with the Carbonari took place in Calabria in September 1813, a clear
sign that the political solutions that Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat had
attempted to establish in the Kingdom were beginning to unravel as demand grew
for Murat to concede a constitution.
CONSTITUTIONAL MODELS: SPAIN AND SICILY, 1812
The demand for constitutional government derived most directly from the Treaty
of Bayonne, which stated that a National Parliament would be established in the
Kingdom. Similar parliaments were proposed for France and for the Kingdom of
Italy, but for Miot de Melito they were all ‘an example of the emperor’s growing
preference for reviving feudal institutions and of the aversion, about which
he made no secret, for anything that might offer the citizen liberty or political
independence’.
The clause in the Treaty that promised the establishment of a parliament had
supposedly been drafted by Joseph Bonaparte, but the imperial chancellery is its
more likely place of origin. The parliament was to consist of a single Chamber
divided into ﬁve ‘orders’: the clergy, nobility, landowners, ‘savants’, and mer-
chants. Members of each section were nominated by the ruler, and while each
order was numerically equal, their votes were not. Members of the ﬁrst three 
sections had ﬁxed tenure, but not the other two. Miot de Melito considered that
this was an accurate ‘indication of the political principles the emperor had adopted
and was if anything even worse than its Italian and French counterparts’.⁴²
Murat never honoured the requirement to establish a parliament, but by 1812
there were two alternative models of constitutional government, one from Spain
and one from Sicily. The emperor also had devised a parliament for Spain at
Bayonne, but this had been rejected, and in March 1812 an Extraordinary
General Cortes convened near Cadiz under the protection of the British navy 
promulgated a constitution that caught the attention of Napoleon’s opponents in
Europe as well as liberal revolutionaries in Latin America.
The Constitution of Cadiz was an anti-Napoleonic document that was both lib-
eral and nationalist: it proclaimed the sovereignty of the Spanish Nation and made
a clear association between ‘Nation’ and ‘Liberty’.⁴³ It guaranteed the freedom of
the press, the freedom from arbitrary arrest, and the right of property. It established
the basis for ‘moderate monarchy’ through the creation of a unicameral Cortes
elected by indirect male suffrage (only servants; the insane and criminals were
excluded from voting). For deputies, there were minimum property requirements,
but the king could not veto bills passed by the Cortes more than three times,
Losing Naples
267
⁴¹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 396.
⁴² Miot de Melito (1888), iii. 339.
⁴³ Herr, in Woloch (1996), 86–7.

<<<PDFPAGE 277>>>
andhis ministers were responsible to it. Municipal ofﬁces were made elective, and
annually renewable.⁴⁴
When the Spanish king, Fernando VII, returned to Spain after Wellington’s
victory at Vittoria (21 June 1813), the Cortes had abolished all forms of seigneur-
ial jurisdiction and ﬁscal exemptions and recommended the abolition of the
Inquisition. The anger this provoked among the reactionary forces within the
Church and the military enabled the king to bring the short season of constitu-
tional government in Spain to an end in May 1814 when both the constitution
and the Cortes were proclaimed illegal.⁴⁵
Nonetheless, the Spanish constitution attracted wide attention and news of
it was relayed to Naples by the many Neapolitan ofﬁcers who had served in the
emperor’s campaigns on the peninsula. The text was known only at second-hand
and by hearsay, but it quickly won broad support within Murat’s army, the
masonic lodges, and the secret societies in Naples.
The other constitutional model was even closer at hand. This was the constitu-
tion that in 1812 the British authorities in Sicily forced on the exiled Bourbon
ruler Ferdinand IV. Since 1806 Sicily had been under the protection of British
forces, and by 1812 relations between the British and the Bourbon rulers had
deteriorated to breaking point. Demands for a constitution had come mainly
from a section of the Sicilian aristocracy, however, and were closely bound up with
the struggles between the Bourbon monarchy and the Sicilian nobility that went
back to the eighteenth century.⁴⁶
The central issue was still the privileges and independence of the Sicilian 
aristocracy, whose institutional foundation was the Sicilian Parliament.⁴⁷ The
defenders of aristocratic privilege had defeated the monarchy in the 1780s, but
the conﬂict had left a residue of political bitterness and division that revived
immediately when in 1799 the Bourbon rulers and their court arrived in Palermo
under the protection of the British navy. They were accompanied by hordes
of Neapolitan refugees, ofﬁcials, place-seekers, and ministers, all of whom the
Sicilian treasury was called on to support as well as to raise taxes to ﬁnance
thereconquest of the mainland.⁴⁸
When the Bourbon monarchy returned in similar circumstances in 1806, the
struggles resumed, but with a new twist. In 1799 Maria Carolina had looked to Sir
William Hamilton, Lady Hamilton, and Lord Nelson as her saviours, but in 1806
she blamed the English for abandoning the mainland and for the loss of half her
Kingdom. The British government, for its part, was infuriated by the attitude of
the Court in Palermo, and refused to commit itself to the restoration of the
Bourbon monarchy in Naples. Maria Carolina in turn became convinced that the
British planned to occupy Sicily and make it an English colony.⁴⁹
Restoration and Revolution
268
⁴⁴ Herr, in Woloch (1996), 88.
⁴⁵ Ibid. 91–2.
⁴⁶ See Chapter 3 above.
⁴⁷ Giarizzo (1985).
⁴⁸ See esp. John Rosselli’s (1956) study of Lord William Bentinck in Sicily. For British politics in
Sicily after 1806, see Romeo (1950), 140–2.
⁴⁹ Rosselli (1956), 10.

<<<PDFPAGE 278>>>
In fact, William Drummond, the British envoy at Palermo in 1806, did seriously
consider ‘measures that would have made Sicily a province of Great Britain’.⁵⁰ But
the Foreign Ofﬁce would have none of that, and once the Peace of Tilsit consoli-
dated France’s control of the Italian peninsula, the British government showed little
further interest in Sicily or Italy. Drummond’s successor, Lord Amherst, attempted
to negotiate with the Neapolitan Court without success, while the two successive
British military commanders⁵¹ were convinced that the queen was having treason-
able conversations with Murat’s government with the aim oftrading Sicily for
Naples. Their suspicions were increased by Napoleon’s marriage to Marie Louise of
Austria in 1810 and when the Bourbon Court refused to contribute to the defence
of Messina against Murat’s threatened invasion thatyear, Amherst too was con-
vinced that ‘jealousy of the designs of Great Britain predominates in the Queen’s
mind over the hatred she may entertain for Bonaparte’.⁵²
The political crisis began in January 1810 when the Sicilian Parliament refused
to grant taxes for the defence of the realm and the opposition called for the dismissal
of the king’s Neapolitan ministers and their replacement by Sicilians. Although
these demands were supported by the king’s son-in-law, Louis Philippe, Duke of
Orléans,⁵³ the Court refused to consider them. To break the dead-lock, the
Sicilian reform party turned to Lord Amherst, but he had had enough and
resigned in July, followed in October by Sir John Stuart.⁵⁴
These resignations brought the seriousness of the situation in Sicily home
tothe Foreign Ofﬁce, and the Marquis of Wellesley nominated a senior British
administrator and former Governor of Madras, Lord William Bentinck, to 
represent the British government in Naples. The new governor was given clear
instructions. He was to inform their Sicilian Majesties that their misgovernment
was the principal cause of the unrest on the island that threatened to jeopardize
the safety of British soldiers. If their Sicilian Majesties wished to continue this
misrule, Britain could not commit itself to working to ensure their restoration to
Naples after the fall of the French usurper.
Bentinck was strongly inﬂuenced by the writings of G. F. Leckie, a fervent
advocate of Britain’s imperial mission, and he was convinced of the need to 
confront Bonapartist tyranny with the virtues of constitutional government. He
ﬁrmly believed that once a constitutional government was established in Sicily,
the island would become an ideological base from which the allies could appeal
to the Italians to rise up against their French oppressors.⁵⁵
When Bentinck arrived in Sicily in the summer of 1811 he assumed dictatorial
powers, demanded that the queen leave Palermo and that the king delegate his
powers to the Hereditary Prince Francis.⁵⁶ On 16 January 1812 British troops
were transferred from Messina to Palermo, forcing the reluctant king to appoint
his son Francis Vicar General.
Losing Naples
269
⁵⁰ Ibid.
⁵¹ Sir John Moore and, from 1808 to 1811, Sir John Stuart.
⁵² Ibid. 12.
⁵³ The future king Louis Philippe of France.
⁵⁴ Rosselli (1956), 16–17.
⁵⁵ Ibid. 20–1.
⁵⁶ Ibid. 27–9.

<<<PDFPAGE 279>>>
In July, the Sicilian Parliament proposed ﬁfteen fundamental articles (known as
the ‘Bases’) modelled on the British constitution. The new constitution separated
Sicily from Naples and established the separation of powers between king
andParliament, with the latter retaining the sole power to raise taxes and legislate.
The Parliament was to meet annually. All feudal dues, jurisdictions, and privileges
were abolished, although abolished feudal monopolies and other dues were 
subject to compensation.⁵⁷
Like the king of Spain, Ferdinand IV soon found ways to subvert the constitution,
which he abolished before returning to Naples in 1815. But in the meantime the new
constitutional regime in Sicily heightened expectations that a Bourbon Restoration
would bring constitutional monarchy to the mainland. However, the nationalist
andliberal tones of the Spanish constitution made it more popular amongst the
Neapolitan advocates of reform, and it was the one most widely endorsed by the
secret societies on the mainland. In Sicily, by contrast, the British constitution had
a wide following, because it guaranteed Sicily’s autonomy from Naples.
LOSING NAPLES
When Murat’s army marched north in January 1814 to join the allies in Central
Italy, few troops were left to maintain order in the Kingdom. Attempts to reorgan-
ize the provincial militias in the previous year had failed, and the Minister of
Policeauthorized the Intendents to offer pardons to brigand leaders willing to
serve in the anti-brigand militias.⁵⁸ But in January as Murat’s army marched
north, hundreds of deserters swarmed back towards Naples. In February, General
Manhès, who had been left in command of the capital, attempted to close the
Neapolitan frontiers and set up military commissions to pursue brigands, desert-
ers, and escaped conscripts.
Before leaving, Murat had issued a circular to explain that he had put himself at
the head of his troops ‘not in the service of foreign interests but to obtain the salva-
tion of the Kingdom’. All public functionaries were instructed to assist the king in
his bid to ensure the independence and tranquillity of the Kingdom.⁵⁹
Murat’s decision to join the allies in 1814 was widely supported by the
Neapolitan elites, especially by his generals who saw the alliance as the only means
of escaping subordination to France. But it was also an opportunity to press
demands for a constitution. On three occasions during the campaign of 1814 (at
Reggio Emilia, at Borgo San Donnino, and at Ancona) Generals Michele
Filangieri, Michele Carrascosa, Pietro Colletta, and Florestano Pepe formally
requested that the king grant a constitution. Murat’s refusal on each occasion cost
him the support of his only remaining political allies.⁶⁰
Restoration and Revolution
270
⁵⁷ Rosselli (1956), 60.
⁵⁸ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 421.
⁵⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno, f. 213—22 January 1814.
⁶⁰ Weil (1909–10), v. 49–50, 524.

<<<PDFPAGE 280>>>
The generals’ demands revealed the dangers of making the army an instrument
of dynastic politics. But by now the constitutional movement had spread more
widely, and when the government was faced by the ﬁrst serious threat of insurrec-
tion in March 1814, the army showed its sympathy with the rebels.
In December 1813, the Sub-intendent of Sulmona claimed to have discovered
a conspiracy for a royalist rising in the village of Pacentro, whose leader, a shoe-
maker named Cercone, was captured and guillotined in L’Aquila on 3 December.
The priest who ofﬁciated at his execution warned the people ‘to live good and
upright lives, to observe the law and their lawful rulers and to heed the example of
Cercone’. But in January anonymous posters appeared in Sulmona announcing
the imminent arrival of Ferdinand IV with an army.⁶¹
In March, a more serious uprising started near Teramo. The ﬁrst protesters
declared for ‘Ferdinand IV, the Constitutional King’, but revolts in the neigh-
bouring villages of Penne and Città San Angelo took explicitly republican tones.
The government was convinced that the revolts had been organized by the
Carbonarist societies and on 4 April Zurlo issued a decree condemning the
Carbonari as enemies of the state.⁶²
General Florestano Pepe was ordered to return from Central Italy to put down
the revolt in Abruzzo. But as Pepe approached Teramo he was met by a delegation
of the insurgents who had the support of inﬂuential notables in the Teramo
region. There was also a strong Carbonarist connection. At this point Florestano
Pepe declared his own sympathies with the insurgents: in his report to Murat he
stated that ‘the great landowners generally wish to ensure that things are resolved
for the best: they have agreed to lay down their arms and they will do everything in
their power to ensure that the Carbonarists and their followers will do the same’.⁶³
Two envoys sent by the queen had in the meantime reached Teramo: the coun-
cillor of State, Baron Antonio Nolli, and Cavaliere Delﬁco. Both were major
landowners in the Abruzzi and prominent members of the administration. They
allowed General Pepe, whose sympathies with the insurgents were now more or
less public, to withdraw, came to terms with the local notables, and then had the
French general Montigny invoke the emergency measures to ﬁnd some scapegoats
amongst the lesser insurgents.⁶⁴
Florestano Pepe’s sympathies for the Carbonarists and the demands for a con-
stitution were widely supported in the army, and in May Murat returned to
Naples to investigate the situation. The political climate in the capital was tense.
In April, De Nicola recorded, ‘Things go badly here: every day there is some new
alarm and the people give signs of an excitement that rouses fear.’ The following
day he noted reports of popular demonstrations in support of the Bourbons, while
Losing Naples
271
⁶¹ BSPN: 30 Corr, XIVB. 2 (Documenti 1799–1815) Testimonianza di R. Battaglino, contadino,
al Sig. A. Siciliano, Sotto Intendente di Sulmona, 28 January 1814.
⁶² Zurlo was reinstated as Minister of the Interior when Murat joined the allies.
⁶³ Pepe (1896), i. 149.
⁶⁴ Ibid. See also Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 421–3 (especially Cortese’s notes).

<<<PDFPAGE 281>>>
the arrival of the ﬁrst consignment of oranges from Sicily in the port had been
greeted with cries of ‘Long live the Big Nose, our one and only King.’⁶⁵ On 23 April
there were disturbances in the Mercato district and rumours were sweeping the
city that Murat had agreed to grant a constitution.
Murat introduced measures designed to make his government more popular by
reducing taxes, making more changes to the legal codes, and temporarily suspend-
ing conscription. But the government also sent out demands for the immediate
settlement of all tax arrears.⁶⁶ De Nicola reported that police activity had greatly
increased: ‘Everywhere they are throwing the so-called Carbonari into jail, and
this includes people of all ranks.’⁶⁷ In July, the ﬁrst execution by guillotine took
place in Naples and two days later De Nicola remarked ‘I hear the prisons are full
of gentlemen who have been arrested by the Police.’⁶⁸
The treasury was exhausted and the army could only be kept on a war footing
by looting and plundering in the territories where it was quartered, which was
now provoking serious popular resistance. In Naples, Murat now reintroduced
the requirement that all French employees obtain Neapolitan nationality that in
1811 had almost led to war with France but in September conscription was
reintroduced on terms even more onerous than before.⁶⁹
De Nicola reported that Naples was full of rumours about the intentions of
the Congress of Vienna, and was divided into pro-Murat and pro-Bourbon 
parties. The government was again receiving disturbing reports of the revival
of brigandage in many of the provinces and in mid-October issued a circular
to the Intendents expressing the king’s dismay at the ‘general lack of energy in
repressing disorder’ on the part of local ofﬁcials who had fallen ‘into a sort of
torpor’.⁷⁰
THE TRANSITION OF POWER: 1815
Despite the growing unrest and political opposition, the transition of power in
southern Italy in 1815 proved remarkably peaceful. Luigi Blanch, who had served
as one of Murat’s staff ofﬁcers in the campaign of 1815, later posed the question:
‘Why was there not the slightest disorder in the Kingdom? The established
authorities were everywhere respected, the French ofﬁcials went unmolested in
their persons and property, indeed the change took place as though this was 
happening in some cold and gentle country like Holland.’⁷¹
Restoration and Revolution
272
⁶⁵ De Nicola (1899–1905), 20 April, 21 April, 711. (‘Nasone’ was the popular nickname for
Ferdinand IV.)
⁶⁶ ASN: Min. dell’Interno Appendice I, f. 213: Circolari agli Intendenti, 16 May, 21 May,
25 May, 28 May 1814.
⁶⁷ De Nicola (1899–1905), ii. 3 July 1814, 741.
⁶⁸ Ibid., 28 July, 30 July 1814, 743.
⁶⁹ Ibid., 3 September 1814.
⁷⁰ Ibid., 19 October 1814. ASN: Min. dell’Interno Appendice I, f. 213, Min. Interno agli Signori
Intendenti del Regno.
⁷¹ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945) i. 382.

<<<PDFPAGE 282>>>
Blanch suggested three reasons for this. First, the propertied classes were 
determined to prevent any recurrence of popular violence. Second were the secret
societies: ‘The sect of the Carbonari placed the people in close communication
with the upper classes and as a result removed that hatred and war to the death
that in 1799 had been waged against any who were not of the people.’⁷² Finally,
both the Austrians and the Bourbons deliberately avoided anything that might
foment civil war or civil disorder. Even the Court of Palermo ‘had avoided exciting
passions and had not employed men associated with the horrors of the past’.
Blanch also thought that Napoleon’s seemingly miraculous recovery after the
escape from Elba served to restrain any desire for vendetta or vengeance for fear
that the emperor might again return to Italy to punish any ‘momentary excess’.⁷³
Blanch’s emphasis on the measures taken to maintain order were supported by
De Nicola’s account of events in the capital. When Murat left Naples on 17 March
1815 to join the army, he had appointed Manhès as military command, with
Maghella responsible for maintaining public order: ‘The Police are very active’,
De Nicola noted: the civic guard was mobilized and the soldiers began to mount
regular patrols.⁷⁴
On 17 April the civic guard reserves were called up and public employees who
failed to appear for duty were threatened with immediate dismissal. Long lists of
political suspects were compiled by Manhès and Maghella, and included many
‘noblemen and gentlemen’. News was circulated of the enthusiastic reactions to
Murat’s appeals for ‘Italian Independence’ in the North, but De Nicola claimed
that ‘the word that circulated in the city is that Joachim had not found the support
he hoped for and that the Italians understood full well that under the banner of
Italian Independence they would become provinces of the Kingdom of Naples.’⁷⁵
On 20 April the government raised another forced loan from the wealthier cit-
izens, followed on the 27th by a new wave of arrests. On 1 May the city was full of
contradictory rumours and alarms. The following day the Interior Minister
Giuseppe Zurlo returned from Murat’s headquarters and was believed to have
brought with him a constitution. De Nicola recorded on 4 May that ‘The Internal
Security Guards patrol day and night.... Twenty or thirty thousand men serve in
the guard.’ The Intendent of the city, Michele Filangieri, announced publicly that
when the Austrian advance guard reached Capua he would personally hand overthe
keys of the city, ‘not wishing that the city should be exposed to military violence’.⁷⁶
Rumours circulated the next day that a Council of War had refused to allow the
queen to take refuge in the fortress of Gaeta ‘because this might have caused a
Revolution’.⁷⁷ On 9 May General MacDonald marched the remaining French
troops from Naples to Gaeta, and on the following day the commanders of
theInternal Security Guard established procedures for surrendering the city to the
Losing Naples
273
⁷² Ibid.
⁷³ Ibid.
⁷⁴ De Nicola (1899–1905), ii. 17 March 1815, 784.
⁷⁵ Ibid., 12, 15, 16 April, 800.
⁷⁶ Ibid., 1, 2, 3, 4 May 1815, 809–10.
⁷⁷ Ibid., 4 May 1815, 811.

<<<PDFPAGE 283>>>
Austrians. Signals would be given by rounds of cannon ﬁre. At the ﬁrst round
‘allthe so-called lazzaroni must get off the streets. At the second, all citizens
required to maintain order must report for duty. At the third no one may circulate
in the city and the guards have orders to shoot anyone who does.’⁷⁸
A squadron of English frigates entered the Bay of Naples on 12 May and threat-
ened to shell the city unless it surrendered within forty-eight hours. On the 17th
news arrived of Murat’s capitulation to Bentinck and groups of unemployed
sailors staged a hostile demonstration outside the house of the Interior Minister,
Zurlo. The mayor, Michele Fliangieri, arranged for 500 selected Austrian troops
to reinforce the Internal Security Guard and when it became known on the
20th that Murat had ﬂed, the political prisoners were released from the jails.
The common prisoners, who had been without food for three days, rioted but
the police quickly surrounded the jails with artillery, ﬁred on the demonstrators,
and seized the ringleaders who were summarily executed.
After destroying their papers, Maghella and Zurlo were permitted to leave the
city under safe conduct. Early in the morning of 21 May Austrian troops entered
the city: ‘It is two o’clock in the morning and the only sound is of patrols of
cavalry and the Civic Guards. It must be said that we are very much obliged to
the Guard and to the many distinguished gentlemen, heads of families, public
servants, and tradesmen who have worked day and night. While we sleep soundly
they watch over our security.’⁷⁹
Later that day, Ferdinand IV entered the city escorted by the Internal Security
Guard. The Austrians imposed tight discipline on their troops, but De Nicola soon
noted that ‘the Civic Guard has greatly abused the People and indulged in ven-
dettas’. Most of those in the civic guard were ‘committed Patriots who took out their
fury on the People whom they kill, wound and beat without any reason causing
much discontent’. But the supporters of the monarchy were also angered that the
employees of the previous government were to keep their jobs. ‘The supporters of
the Bourbons are angry because they feel they have been ignored and slighted.’⁸⁰
The transition of power took place less dramatically in the provinces, but again
without major upheaval. On 29 April Manhès ordered the propertied classes in
each province to form companies of armed and mounted men in every capoluogo
to reinforce the provincial and civic guards and help maintain order. A month
later, on 24 May, the Intendents were ordered to announce the restoration of ‘Our
August Sovereign, Ferdinand IV’. All public ofﬁcials were ordered to return to
their posts and the local authorities were instructed to take whatever measures
were required to maintain public order. ‘His Majesty places his absolute trust in
the zeal and ﬁrmness of the Internal Security Guards, the Provincial Legions and
all honest Citizens.’⁸¹
Restoration and Revolution
274
⁷⁸ De Nicola (1899–1905), ii. 9, 10 May 1815, 813.
⁷⁹ Ibid., 20 May 1815, 830.
⁸⁰ Ibid., iii. 21, 22, 24, 29 May 1815, 2–11.
⁸¹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno Appendice I, f. 213: Circolare, 24 May 1815.

<<<PDFPAGE 284>>>
14
The Restoration
Italy in 1815, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1997).

<<<PDFPAGE 285>>>
AMBIGUOUS LEGACIES
Nowhere in Italy was the Restoration greeted with higher expectations than in
Naples. When Murat’s regime collapsed there were high hopes that the Bourbons
would extend the Sicilian constitution to the mainland, but as soon as King
Ferdinand left Palermo he abolished the Sicilian constitution and in Naples
appointed the reactionary Principino of Canosa as Minister of Police. Metternich,
Caroline Bonaparte’s former lover and now the Austrian Chancellor, had antici-
pated these moves, however, and Canosa was forced to resign.
There was therefore no repetition of the purges of 1799, and the restoration
of the Bourbon monarchy in 1815 made no attempt to reinstate the ancien régime
in the South. In part this was Austria’s doing and the Treaty of Casalanza by
which the European powers restored Ferdinand IV to his throne obliged the
Neapolitan government to issue a general amnesty for those who had held ofﬁce
during what was now termed ‘the recent sad military occupation’ and to conﬁrm
the commissions of all who had served in Murat’s army.¹ On 19 July the govern-
ment’s ofﬁcial bulletin, the Giornale delle Delle Due Sicilie, announced that the
state was to be reorganized on the basis of ‘criteria very different from those of
themonstrous system consecrated to the principles of the French Revolution’.²
However, except for the law on civil divorce, the juridical and administrative
changes introduced by the French rulers were preserved. Commissions were set up
to investigate the principal innovations of the French period—speciﬁcally the 
rulings of the Feudal Commission, the sales of beni nazionali, the new central and
provincial administration, and the new legal codes. The legge organica of 12
December conﬁrmed the structures of central and provincial administration
and in January 1817 the central administration was reorganized around eight
ministries of state.³
The only major change was the abolition of the French Council of State, which
was stripped of its judicial powers and became simply an extension of the council
of ministers.⁴ The French system of provincial and local administration was
retained with minor adjustments, the Intendencies and Sub-intendencies were
preserved, as were the Provincial and District Councils. As before, they exercised
no consultative rights and all appointments, including membership of the muni-
cipal councils, were by nomination by the government. No attempts were made,
however, to oust those appointed during the French period.⁵
Ninety possessioner houses and four nunneries were reopened, but the new
government did not try to restore the suppressed monasteries. It did move quickly
Restoration and Revolution
276
¹ Romeo (1963), 511–14; Scirocco (1986), 647–50. On Canosa see Postigliola, in DBI, xviii.
458–9.
² Addeo (1984), 836.
³ Laws of 4 January and 10 June; Scirocco (1986), 647.
⁴ Ibid. See also Feola, in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 487–92, 494–9.
⁵ Laws of 6 January, 10 June, 1 May, 12 December 1816; Scirocco (1986), 647–50.

<<<PDFPAGE 286>>>
to mend relations with Rome, however, and the concordat reached with the
papacy in 1818 was negotiated personally by Luigi de’ Medici and Francesco
Ricciardi. Although widely seen by liberals as a betrayal of the monarchy’s
anti-curial policies of the previous century, the Concordat of 1818 followed terms
very similar to those unsuccessfully proposed by Murat’s government. The central
concern was to strengthen the discipline exercised by the bishops. In 1818, 43 of
the Kingdom’s 131 bishoprics were vacant, and over the next ﬁfteen years ﬁfty of
thesmaller diocese were abolished. New measures were taken to strengthen the
authority of the bishops and to improve the quality and behaviour of the clergy.⁶
The Concordat of 1818 enabled the Restoration government to succeed where
Murat’s government had failed in making the secular clergy into an arm of the
bureaucratic state, but liberals were especially angered that the clergy regained
adominant hold over primary and secondary schooling, and effective control over
the university and censorship.⁷
Nonetheless, the institutional and political reforms made during the period of
French rule were retained more fully in the South in 1815 than in any of the other
Italian states, consolidating a form of government described by contemporaries as
an ‘administrative monarchy’. Not only were the innovations of the French
period retained on the mainland, but they were now extended to Sicily as well.
On 11 December 1816, the formerly independent crowns of Naples and Sicily
were uniﬁed and Palermo became simply the residence of a Royal Lieutenant
General. In the words of Luigi Blanch, Sicily was now ‘a posthumous conquest of
Napoleon’.⁸
In all the Restoration states the continuities with the Napoleonic past were con-
siderable, but in almost every other Italian state the French model of a centralized
bureaucratic state met with ﬁrm opposition. The legitimist apologists of the
Restoration were advocates of absolutism, but also of a corporatist vision of 
society in which religion and paternalist values were seen as the key defences
against the ideas and innovations believed to have been the principal cause
of the Revolution and disasters that had followed. For the champions of the 
legitimist rulers the rapid collapse of Napoleon’s empire was in itself a clear
demonstration of the weakness of a political system based solely on bureaucracy
and the army.
The Napoleonic model of centralized bureaucratic autocracy was now
denounced not only by legitimist conservatives like Joseph de Maistre, but also
liberals like Jean Charles Léonard Simonde de Sismondi, who saw the Napoleonic
state as an instrument of tyranny that threatened to deprive civil society of all
affective autonomy.⁹ These debates reﬂected the different ways in which the
Restoration
277
⁶ See Rocchina, in Di Leo (1995), 162.
⁷ On Restoration censorship in Naples, see Davis, in Goldstein (ed.) (2000), 81–124.
⁸ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), ii. 14–15; see also Rosselli (1956), 153. It was Blanch who coined
the term ‘administrative monarchy’.
⁹ On Sismondi, see Lyttelton, in Teich and Porter (eds.) (1993), 63–105, and Pazzagli (2003).

<<<PDFPAGE 287>>>
¹⁰ For Lombardy, see Meriggi (1963) and Rath (1967); for the Papal State, Reinerman
(1979/1989) and Hughes (1994); for Rome, Boutry, in Ciucci (ed.) (2000).
¹¹ See especially Soldani’s preface to Kroll (2005), pp. xiii–xxv, and the chapters by Contini,
Coppini, Greco, Porciani, in Fasano Guarini, Petralia, and Pezzino (eds.) (2004).
Italian elites had responded to and adapted French models. Even in the most 
reactionary states, there was no attempt to reverse the closure of the monasteries or
the land sales, or the new organization of public ﬁnances. But except in the Duchy
of Parma, which the Congress of Vienna granted to the former empress Marie
Louise of Austria, the ideological reaction against French rule was uncompromis-
ing, as were the purges of all those who had held ofﬁce or given support to the
Napoleonic administrations.
The Habsburg territories reverted to Habsburg administrative practice and
custom, and the other Italian rulers followed suit. In Piedmont, the House of
Savoy abolished all legislation that had been introduced since 1770, an attempt to
restore the ancien régime not imitated even in papal Rome.¹⁰ But it was not only in
the states that were most fully committed to the ideological propositions of the
Restoration that the reactions against French rule went deep. Indeed, one of
the most explicit political debates took place in Tuscany where the restored
Grand Duke acknowledged that the sovereign’s power was rooted in a hierarchal
ordering of society best safeguarded by the principles of religion and paternalism.
In practice that meant recognizing the right of the Church and the landowners to
govern at a local level, albeit under the surveillance of the Grand Duke. It is hardly
surprising, therefore, that Sismondi’s celebration of the medieval Tuscan city
states as models of local autonomy and a historical alternative to Napoleonic 
centralism and tyranny should have been avidly read and applauded in the
Grand Duchy.¹¹
Reactions in the South were different, and here there was much broader 
support in principle for the new ‘administrative monarchy’. The reason was that
the leading ideologists of the Restoration acknowledged that in the South the
paternalist foundations on which the Tuscan, the Piedmontese, and the Habsburg
rulers looked to rebuild the post-feudal state no longer existed. In the South
the state had, therefore, a larger role to play in reshaping society, a view also
sharedby the reformers who continued to look on the state as the critical agent of
change in the South. However, the trust that they had formerly placed in the
enlightened prince had by now been undermined by the experience of the revolu-
tionary years and of Napoleonic autocracy and imperialism. The advocates of
reform still looked to the state as the necessary agent of change, but they also saw in
the constitutional project the means to impose checks and balances that would
modify the rigidly centralizing assumptions on which the reforms of the late 
eighteenth century and of the Napoleonic period were premised. By extending
greater political autonomy at the provincial and local level, the constitutional pro-
ject looked to restore the political role of the post-feudal notables. But the danger, as
Restoration and Revolution
278

<<<PDFPAGE 288>>>
many also recognized, was that those same local autonomies were also opportunities
for resurrecting the monopolist power formerly exercised by the feudatories.
In many respects, the South was confronted by problems that would come to face
other parts of Italy only much later. The crisis of older forms of paternalism and def-
erence in the rural South was not unique, but when compared with much of central
and northern Italy those processes had been precocious and peculiarly disruptive.
But while this had created incentives for developing new forms of bureaucratic
power earlier than in other Italian states, this was not easily achieved. The poverty of
the southern economies made the bureaucratic project difﬁcult to achieve, while
moves to tighten bureaucratic centralization provoked powerful local resistance.
When in 1816 the Congress of Vienna decided to unify the formerly independent
crowns of Naples and Sicily, those tensions were further heightened.
None of these developments were unique to the South, however, and in all the
Italian states the Congress of Vienna took the opportunity to amalgamate, annex,
and integrate formerly independent states, territories, and towns. The aim was to
strengthen the Italian principalities, but the process of incorporation and admin-
istrative centralization was everywhere the most serious cause of political unrest
in the Italian Restoration regimes. Without constant external support, these inter-
nal tensions proved difﬁcult to contain, and the problems were exacerbated
when the defence of local autonomies found a broader and more compelling 
platform in the nationalist projects that gained force in the 1840s.
REFLECTING ON THE REVOLUTION
The terms of the Restoration settlement in Naples in 1815 were dictated by
Vienna, but they also closely followed the recommendations of two men who
would play a central role in the politics of the Restoration government, Luigi de’
Medici and Donato Tommasi. After the Restoration they served respectively
as Ministers of Finance and Justice, but from much earlier they had already been
following and studying the change taking place on the mainland from Palermo.
When Napoleon’s Continental project began to fall apart, they had carefully
begun to plot the course that the Restoration should take.
De’ Medici and Tommasi had both begun their careers in the ﬁnal decades of
enlightened absolutism, both were disciples of Gaetano Filangieri, and both had
been directly involved in the ﬁnal Bourbon reform initiatives after 1801. Their
politics and outlook were very similar to those of Giuseppe Zurlo, and like Zurlo
they had followed the Court to Palermo in 1806. Unlike Zurlo they had remained
in Sicily, where they had been caught in the bitter struggles among the queen, the
British, and the Sicilian barons.
De’ Medici and Tommasi were both deeply hostile to the constitutional experi-
ment in Sicily and like the eighteenth-century reformers they considered the
Sicilian Parliament to be a bastion of the reactionary feudal nobility that was
Restoration
279

<<<PDFPAGE 289>>>
the principal enemy of progress. Like Zurlo and Ricciardi in Naples, both
Tommasi and de’ Medici believed that enlightened autocracy offered the safest
and most rational form of progressive government. Although they considered the
French regime on the mainland to be little better than a military dictatorship,
theystill found it far preferable to what the English had tried to impose on Sicily.
Both men saw the Restoration as an opportunity to create a new alliance
between throne and altar, but they were agreed that this must be done without
alienating those who had rallied to the French regime. It was no accident that
among the documents collected in Palermo by Tommasi was an original copy of
the ‘Kings Orders given from the Road of Naples’ to Cardinal Ruffo in July 1799,
which had authorized the White Terror. This was precisely the precedent to be
avoided, and both men agreed that the political divisions that had lacerated the
nation between 1799 and 1806 had fatally weakened the monarchy and were
the reason ‘why the Government that succeeded that of His Majesty King
Ferdinand won the applause of the Neapolitan Nation’.¹²
The two Bourbon ministers accepted the underlying soundness of the changes
made by the French rulers, and indeed the central refrain in the memoranda 
prepared in Palermo, and later repeated in the politics of the Restoration, was that
the French innovations had simply realized the reforms that had originally been
proposed by the Bourbon rulers in the previous century. This was a formula
that enabled the Bourbon ministers to accept the new administrative system in
principle, while rejecting the ways and the means by which these changes had
been implemented by the French.
For example, while it was acknowledged that the new Interior Ministry was
sound in principle, it was also claimed that it typiﬁed the failure of the French rulers
to carry through their reforms. The Ministry was above all an example of:
the mania to create everything in a single moment and on a scale that is quite dispropor-
tionate to existing resources, with the result that great quantities of money have been 
consumed, yet everything remains chronically short of funds so that very few objectives
have been achieved. Decrees that have never been enforced and things that have been
demolished but never rebuilt are rightly the targets of public criticism.... The publication
of a new decree and the announcement of a new project served primarily to ﬁll the page of
some report that would appear in France to boast of the improvements made in this State,
in contrast to the views of the Nation that cried out against the money wasted to ﬂatter the
self-image of the Court and its vainglorious ruler.
Allowing for the strong ideological stances taken in these reports, they did
nonetheless pinpoint key weaknesses in the administrative innovations on the
mainland. The reports prepared in Palermo conﬁrmed, for example, that jurisdic-
tional boundaries between the new central ministries of state remained uncertain
Restoration and Revolution
280
¹² ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi B IV, ‘Istruzioni del Re per il Suo Luogotenente e
Capitano Generale al Cardinale Ruffo, date dalla Rada di Napoli’, 24 July 1799.

<<<PDFPAGE 290>>>
and that they had often been given powers they had no means to enforce. The
Interior Ministry, for example, was also responsible for the promotion of trade,
but since the Kingdom had no colonies its trade consisted almost entirely in the
export of agricultural products. What agriculture needed ﬁrst and foremost was
roads, but ‘in nine years not one new road has been built and those that exist are
still in a terrible state’. The new Administration of Bridges and Roads was hailed as
the institutional solution adopted by the whole of Europe, yet had so far produced
little: ‘Roads are needed and will be built, but for that we do not need to maintain
this extensive General Staff of costly and useless employees.’
Changes in the administration of justice were judged more positively and it was
acknowledged that this had created a clearly organized hierarchy that worked
from the lowest rung, the local Justice of the Peace, upwards through the provin-
cial courts, the four Appeal Courts, and ﬁnally reaching the Cassation Court in
Naples. The lower and higher criminal courts that had been created in each
province were also cited approvingly, as was the ofﬁce of the Procurators Royal
who acted on the crown’s behalf in criminal and civil cases, and were responsible
for ensuring that the courts followed proper procedure and interpreted the law
correctly.¹³ The new provincial tribunals were also praised for making access to
the courts easier for citizens, while increasing the opportunities for young lawyers
and judges to receive training and experience.¹⁴
The standardization of the Kingdom’s legal codes was also welcomed, although
the report insisted that the new laws needed a ﬁrmer Neapolitan imprint: ‘The
Revolution that has brought so many evils, has also brought us this advantage’,
but ‘opportune reforms’ were needed so that once ‘refashioned by the paternal
care of His Majesty the King’ the new codes could properly be described not as
Napoleonic but as Neapolitan.
CHURCH AND CLERGY
The conditions of the Church and the clergy were a matter of special concern.
But although the alliance between throne and altar was to be the foundation of
the Restoration order, the approach was essentially pragmatic and there was no
suggestion that the changes made by the French should be undone. In part this
was because the observers in Palermo shared the hostility of the eighteenth-century
reformers toward the regular clergy and papal jurisdiction in the Kingdom. They
noted that with the exception of the mendicant orders, virtually all the religious
houses had been suppressed, save only the monasteries of Monte Cassino and
Cava dei Tirreni, which had been allowed to survive because of the important
libraries and documents they possessed. Other monasteries had been stripped of
Restoration
281
¹³ The reference was to the ofﬁce of the Public Minister.
¹⁴ ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VII: Sul Ministero di Culto e Giustizia.

<<<PDFPAGE 291>>>
their furnishings and books to deck out royal palaces and the new Royal Library in
Naples. But they went on to argue that ‘even if there were the means to restore
everything to what it had once been, after nine years, it is no longer clear whether
this would be a good or a bad thing’. Many young monks would resist attempts to
make them return to the cloister, and those who now received public stipends
considered that they had beneﬁted from the changes. They were also a valuable
supply of teachers for schools, colleges, and seminaries, and of administrators for
charities and hospitals.
The heaviest losses, it was claimed, were felt less by individuals than by families
‘who used to dedicate one of their members to this State and can no longer make
use of this resource’. That loss was partially compensated by the increase in the
sizeof the army, but the report also took the opportunity to raise a more general
concern on that score: the army was an expense that the government could not
sustain and so must somehow seek to reduce without creating discontent.
The wider moral impact of the suppression of the monasteries was a matter
of greater concern, however, and especially for Naples ‘where the need for the
inﬂuence of religion is especially necessary, since it is essential to have a means to
check the imaginations of a people who become volcanic and dangerous when left
to their own devices’. The suppression of the monasteries had seriously reduced
the provision of education and instruction for the poor. The new schools created
by the French were ‘inactive, lacking teachers and without funds’. As a result 
primary education was completely neglected. The founding of new colleges ‘only
affects the higher forms of learning’ since they would not increase the supply
of new teachers for the poor. Nor could the teacher shortage be resolved by the 
secular clergy since they had other functions. Only the ‘idle life of the cloister 
ﬁtted people for this form of public teaching which brought learning to the poor.
There had always been a monk willing to teach the alphabet, some grammar
and the Catechism, but the secular clergy have no time for this. . . . What poor
Father who works for a living and what Neapolitan mother has the skills? As a
result Your Majesty has many subjects and citizens who are ignorant of why they
exist and of what they owe to their Creator, to Society and to their Sovereign.’
The writers of the memorandum also warned that it would be dangerous and
inadvisable to attempt to restore the property of the religious orders, arguing that
it was preferable that the clergy be paid by the state since this reduced the power
and inﬂuence of the Court of Rome. But new measures were needed to improve
the behaviour of the regular clergy, who too often caused scandal and were a threat
topublic order.
When it came to the secular clergy, the observers in Palermo shared the con-
cerns that had led Murat’s government to seek a new concordat. Many bishoprics,
canonries, and abbacies had suffered heavily from the loss of feudal revenues and
the division of the feudal demani. Although many bishops now received stipends
from the government, some as much as 1,400 ducats a year, most of the bishoprics
in the Kingdom remained vacant. Parish priests had been assigned good stipends
Restoration and Revolution
282

<<<PDFPAGE 292>>>
by the state, but these were rarely paid. A thorough reorganization of the secular
hierarchies was urgently needed to make the authority of the bishops more 
effective and—by implication—to make the secular clergy a more effective and
disciplined branch of public administration.¹⁵
WELFARE AND EDUCATION
The reports were especially scathing when it came to the shortcomings of the
French government’s initiatives to promote welfare and education. Endless
decrees, it was claimed, had been issued establishing primary and secondary
schools, colleges, grammar schools, universities, libraries, and printing works, but
all were in a state of total confusion and abandon. The University was in disorder,
and was avoided by both students and professors. There were no great advocates
practising in Naples, nor physicians, mathematicians, classical scholars, or literary
ﬁgures of renown. Manufacturing had received some encouragement, but
remained in its infancy and needed help to grow stronger.
They also underlined the irreparable damage done to the charitable institutions
that had been one of the Kingdom’s greatest resources.
There is a decree prohibiting begging, yet the streets of the capital are full of the most 
public displays of suffering and have become a Kingdom of unfortunate creatures whose
plight must wrench the heart-strings of any sensitive person.
The inmates of the hospices often went without food, yet despite the French
reforms the number of those employed by the charitable foundations was 
excessive and they were grossly overpaid: ‘the principal beneﬁciaries of the
charities are still those who run them’.
The astronomical observatory and the botanical gardens were cited as examples
of useful innovations, likewise the standardization of weights and measures using
the metric system, although it was to be deplored that this had been accompanied
by barbarously Italianized French names. It was agreed too that the French rulers
had also introduced sound new regulations on public hygiene and town planning.
The siting of food and livestock markets was now subject to public control, and
towns were required to build cemeteries outside inhabited urban spaces, to ensure
that night-soil and refuse were regularly disposed off, and to issue permissions for
all public and private construction. But the means to oversee and enforce these
regulations were wanting.
Too often ancien régime regulatory bodies had been abolished without being
replaced. The Protomedicato that had, for example, formerly regulated medical
practitioners and apothecaries had been abolished, but since it was not replaced by
any new body ‘the unlicensed trade in drugs means that a handful of unscrupulous
Restoration
283
¹⁵ ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VII: Sul Ministero di Culto e Giustizia.

<<<PDFPAGE 293>>>
people who know more about alchemy than chemistry now produce medicines
for the sick’ and the regulations on who could practice medicine had been relaxed
‘to the point that even an out of work notary could set up as a physician’.¹⁶
THE FEUDAL COMMISSION
The Feudal Commission was the principal target on which the commentators
inPalermo focused their scorn. They acknowledged and welcomed without 
reservation the abolition of feudalism, which was again described as the realization
of the most fundamental reform pursued by the previous Bourbon monarchy. But
the Feudal Commission itself was held up as an example of the arbitrary and
despotic nature of French rule:
The Minister of the Interior and the Procurator General Winspeare, on the pretext of 
revolutionary ideas embellished by philanthropic references to the beneﬁts of a general and
equal distribution of land, have committed one of the greatest injustices. The abuses of
feudal privilege were an offence to the Sovereign and to public law, but the seizure of land
in an attempt to carry through an Agrarian Law has been the most unjust, the most 
anti-monarchical, and the most damaging action to the interests of the State.
The operation was carried out by corrupt judges who in a single day issued 270
judgements without appeal and without due process in response to a simple
appeal by the mayor or the representative of a comune. In this fashion 270 people
were deprived of property they had owned for centuries.
The nobility has been ruined, and how many of the great landowners have been left with-
out brood-mares or ewes from which to breed? What forests, what pastures have been left
to sustain the pastoral economy after the division of the common lands carried out by the
Minister of the Interior? To destroy the big estates so that every citizen may have a part in
the belief that this will cause industry to increase is a chimera in which only someone who
does not know the Neapolitans could indulge.
If there is no-one to pay the farm workers, if there is no-one to make loans, all industry
will perish, there will be no-one left to pay the taxes, and if there is no vast Army to absorb
the resources of the State and feed at least part of those left without work, the number of
criminals will grow as will the scale of public poverty.
It would have been much better to have undertaken major land reclamation 
projects ‘that would help clothe the naked instead of a remedy that simply strips
naked those that are already clothed’.¹⁷
Despite their heavy ideological charge, these criticisms were similar to those
levelled against the operations of the Feudal Commission in Naples by Francesco
Ricciardi and Vincenzo Cuoco.
Restoration and Revolution
284
¹⁶ ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VIII: Ministero dell’Interno.
¹⁷ Ibid., Memorandum V: L’Amminstrazione Civile.

<<<PDFPAGE 294>>>
THE QUESTION OF COST
Not surprisingly there were also many signiﬁcant silences in the reports drawn up
in Palermo. There was no mention, for example, of the reorganization of public
ﬁnances, of the conversion of the debts of the ancien régime monarchy, or of
the consolidation of a new National Debt that had fundamentally changed the
structure of public ﬁnances. Nor was there any reference to the reorganization
of direct taxation following the introduction of the fondiaria. Nor was much
said about the small but important initiatives taken by Murat’s government to
build up native industries and reduce dependence on imports in key sectors like
textiles.
These silences were in part due to the fact that there was no disagreement over
the utility of these innovations, while it was also agreed that the new system of
administration had immeasurably strengthened the government’s control over the
provinces and local government. There was praise for the new municipal govern-
ment in Naples and for the new provincial administrations, especially for the
Provincial Councils, ‘where the Intendent takes executive decisions subject to
conﬁrmation by the Council of State’ on all local affairs and on all questions relat-
ing to the ﬁscal obligations of individuals, towns, and local administrations.¹⁸
The reports did draw attention, however, to the heavy costs of these new forms of
bureaucratic administration, and questioned how these could be sustained given
theKingdom’s slender economic resources. Despite heavy increases in taxation, the
Kingdom’s ﬁscal revenues were insufﬁcient to support the new administrative 
structures, let alone the many other new projects that the French rulers had 
proposed. No one doubted the need for investments in road-building and land
reclamation projects, it was argued, but no one had shown how such endeavours
could be funded from existing resources. As a result, the French had left in their train
a long series of projects either never started or else soon abandoned.
In this the Bourbon ministers were not wide of the mark, and the project of
administrative reorganization begun by the French rulers in many critical respects
outran the resources of the southern economy. Nor is this surprising, since even in
much wealthier regions like Lombardy the costs of the new forms of central and
local administration were the main reason for the heavy tax increases that made
French rule very unpopular in the closing years of the empire.¹⁹ In the South, the
depressed state of the economy made the additional ﬁscal burdens imposed to
support the new bureaucracies even more difﬁcult to sustain, while the problems
were seriously aggravated by the tendency to pass additional tax burdens on to the
provinces. These new costs would be of the principal targets of protest during
therevolutions of 1820–1 in Sicily and on the mainland.²⁰
Restoration
285
¹⁸ Ibid.
¹⁹ Zaghi (1991), 519—see also Antonielli (1983) and Grab (1997).
²⁰ Spagnoletti (1985), 953–1019.

<<<PDFPAGE 295>>>
PUBLIC ORDER AND PRIVATE ORDER
The reports prepared for Tommasi and de’ Medici in Palermo revealed a sensitive
understanding of the material difﬁculty of sustaining a modern bureaucratic state
in an impoverished Kingdom. But they also acknowledged the difﬁculties that
the seemingly irreversible breakdown of informal systems of power in many parts
of the South posed for the construction of a post-feudal order. Factionalism, 
political and party rivalries, and public order in general were, therefore, a major
source of concern, but while it was recognized that the French had strengthened
the apparatus of policing it was also acknowledged that this could not offer 
effective solutions.
Before the Revolution, it was argued, the Governor of the Vicaria tribunal
andprison in Naples had exercised all the powers needed to keep the peace and
punish wrongdoers.²¹ But in a modern state, what the French called Alta
Polizia—essentially the policing of ideas—had become a necessity.
Because of the infection caused by new principles, because men of letters began to challenge
errors and prejudices only to replace them with inappropriate philosophies that gave rise to
strange fruits in a Nation that still lacks education, and because the trade with foreigners
that is necessary for the nation’s prosperity also became a source of highly dangerous 
contagion, new forms of policing that are vigilant, impartial but truly patriotic have become
necessary and indispensable.
The threat to the modern state no longer came from common criminals, but
from individuals with political motives, which left the government with no 
alternative but to police ideas and behaviour. In a modern state, therefore, the
police were indispensable ‘to protect the State from rebellion, to maintain order
and to encourage a spirit of reconciliation in Society’.
But how to do this without exacerbating political divisions? The choice of a
Chief of Police was obviously of critical importance, and it was recommended that
only persons from a distinguished family with property should be chosen for such
a position, since such individuals were less ‘likely to be associated with Parties’.
The example to be avoided at all costs was that of Antoine Christophe Saliceti,
whose time as Minister of Police had been ‘a terrible epoch in the history of the
kingdom. Despotism, terror, immorality, unlimited ambition and a Chaos of
Horrors formed the code by which he lived.’
The pervasiveness of factional and party divisions in the South indicated deeper
problems, however, that called for other measures. In political terms, these divi-
sions made it advisable to continue the politics of ralliement and amalgame
adopted by the French rulers. The last of Murat’s police chiefs, the Duke of
Campochiaro, had included both former Jacobins and former Sanfedists in his
Restoration and Revolution
286
²¹ On the Vicaria and policing in Naples at the end of the ancien régime see Alessi (1993).

<<<PDFPAGE 296>>>
administration, for example, and had relaxed the formerly rigid ‘surveillance of
political opinions’ in an attempt to overcome the factionalism encouraged by his
predecessors.²² That approach had worked best in the provinces, it was argued,
where the Intendents were generally honest and loyal and were less affected by
political ambitions than their French counterparts in the capital. The Intendents
provided regular reports on the state of public opinion, which were carefully cross-
referenced with reports from ‘honest men from the same Province’. With the
change of regime it would be necessary to ensure that there was no ‘falling off in
either principle or practice’.²³
A benign and watchful state could give the lead, but the roots of factionalism lay in
the fractured structures of local power, of which the most alarming symptom was the
ubiquity of the secret societies. For the observers in Palermo this posed a simple but
critical question: were the secret societies a means for overcoming the crisis of the
paternalist order in the South, or were they simply the instruments of factionalism
and division? The writers of the reports were unable to answer that question, but they
concluded with a warning that the diffusion of the secret societies was now so great
that any attempt to destroy them would bevery dangerous.²⁴
These reports show that contemporaries had a clear understanding of the
broader changes taking place. The monarchy’s principal advisers welcomed
theend of the feudal order and saw the Restoration as the opportunity to build
anew post-feudal order and a new political consensus. But on what terms?
Monarchies in the Bonaparte style are military dictatorships, made up of the Sovereign and
the Plebs with no intermediaries. They lead either to despotism or revolution. The return of
his Majesty King Ferdinand IV to the throne of Naples will reﬂect the ideas of this century.
It will not establish a new form of military government, but rather a paternal government
that is the fruit not of maxims but of experience and founded in a true understanding of the
character of the Nation that He governs. But there is only one true intermediary between
the ruler and the Nation: ‘There is no Monarchy without Nobility, and there is no Nobility
without hereditary Property, which is the indispensable foundation of the whole Ediﬁce.’²⁵
That meant repairing the organic and paternalist social bonds that had been
shattered by the Revolution and by Napoleonic bureaucracy. But in the political
andeconomic circumstances of the Restoration, it was far from clear how such a
project could be realized.
NAPLES, VIENNA, AND LONDON
Not least of the difﬁculties facing the restored Italian rulers in 1815 was the 
subordinate and dependent role assigned them by the European peacemakers.
Restoration
287
²² Maghella and Daure.
²³ ASN: Archivi Privati: Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VI, ‘Sulla Polizia generale del Regno’.
²⁴ Ibid.
²⁵ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 297>>>
When it came to Italy, the overriding concern of the Vienna settlement was to 
prevent any revival of French territorial ambitions on the peninsula. For that 
reason, the European powers entrusted the Italian states to the protection of the
Habsburg monarchy, and although Austria ruled directly only in the newly
formed Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia, from the formidable redoubts of the
Quadrilateral fortresses in the central Po valley its armies could be dispatched
speedily to any part of the peninsula. Military might, moreover, was reinforced by
networks of kinship that made every Italian ruler either a cousin or a client of
the Austrian imperial family. For the ﬁrst time in modern history, the Italian states
were dominated by a single foreign power, a situation that left the Italian rulers 
little room for political or diplomatic manoeuvre.²⁶
In the South, the terms of the Restoration reﬂected the Bourbon dynasty’s
greatly reduced importance in European politics. Despite lip-service to the princi-
ples of dynastic legitimacy, Ferdinand IV had been restored to the throne of
Naples in 1815 only because it suited the political interests of the allies, who
only a year before had been prepared to consider the claims of Joachim Murat.
In Naples, the terms of the Treaty of Casalanza were considered to be so humiliating
that the Neapolitan envoy, the Duke of Serracapriola, had refused to sign them.
The Bourbons ﬁnally lost the territorial claims that had inspired Murat’s
adventures in central Italy in 1814 and 1815 and were conﬁned to the boundaries
set bythe ‘Holy See and the salt sea’.²⁷ The Tuscan Presidi were lost without com-
pensation, the Papacy’s claim to suzerainty over the Kingdom was not challenged,
and the Neapolitan claims to the territories of Pontecorvo and Benevento were
not acknowledged.²⁸
Austria’s support for the dynasty’s restoration came at a high price. Following
Napoleon’s example, the Austrians stationed an army of occupation in the
Kingdom, which remained there until 1818 at the Neapolitan government’s
expense. In addition, Naples was required to pay the full costs of Austria’s military
operations in 1814 and 1815.²⁹ But the English had demanded their quittance
too. Finally in possession of a secure base in Malta, Britain was now the undis-
puted naval power in the Mediterranean, whose strategic importance for commu-
nication with its colonial empire in India and the Orient became a permanent
concern of successive British governments. Britain’s aim was to prevent any 
political unrest in Italy that other powers, namely France, might try to exploit.
Restoration and Revolution
288
²⁶ France managed to regain a foothold when it sent an army to defend the Pope against an insur-
rection in 1831 and occupied Ancona. However, the situation changed completely when in 1849 the
French Republic sent another army to destroy the Roman Republic and restore Pope Pius IX: this
army remained in Rome until 1870 and enabled the emperor Louis Napoleon to become a major
player in the politics of Italian uniﬁcation.
²⁷ The Holy See being the Papal State; see Astarita (2005).
²⁸ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), ii. 14–15. See also Romeo (1963), 65–96; Cingari (1966);
Scirocco (1986).
²⁹ Between 1815 and 1825 the debt rose to 100 million ducats, ﬁve times the Kingdom’s annual
revenues. See Ostuni (1992), 329–32.

<<<PDFPAGE 298>>>
For that reason, Britain was willing for Austria to act as gendarme of the Italian
states, even though in British eyes Austria’s hostility to liberalism and its commit-
ment to legitimist autocracy at home and abroad was a major cause of Italy’s
political unrests. But despite the growing sympathy on the part of English public
opinion for the cause of Italian independence, down to 1859 British governments
remained unswerving in their support for the political status quo in Italy.³⁰
When it came to Naples and the Bourbon monarchy, British attitudes were par-
ticularly mixed. The ten years of joint rule in Sicily had left few happy memories,
while at the same time strengthening British convictions that poverty and 
discontent in Italy in general, and in the South in particular, were the inevitable
consequences of despotism and misrule. On that subject successive British 
governments continued to make their feelings known, although to avoid compro-
mising relations between London and Vienna they made do with lecturing the
Neapolitan rulers and the Pope on how to run their states.
British support for the Bourbon restoration in Naples had come at a high price,
however. During the Napoleonic wars, Britain’s trade with southern Italy had
grown mainly thanks to the trafﬁc in British contraband goods stocked in Sicily
and Malta. A number of British commercial ventures had ﬂourished in Sicily,
including the enterprise of James Woodhouse and Benjamin Ingham, two
Englishmen who had begun exporting dessert wines from Marsala before the
Revolution. These became very popular ﬁrst with the British navy and then after
the war were in high demand in British drawing rooms. From this proﬁtable busi-
ness, Woodhouse and Ingham branched out into other ﬁelds, including theexport
trade in citrus fruits and in sulphur, for which industrial demand was increasing.³¹
Britain’s compensation came, therefore, in the form of commercial privileges
and there was no clearer demonstration of the Bourbon Kingdom’s continuing
colonial status after the Restoration than the humiliating commercial privileges
demanded by its allies. The treaties signed in September 1816 conceded 10 per cent
on all customs duties on goods loaded on and off any British, French, or Spanish
vessel. Since Neapolitan ships did not enjoy the same privilege, the Kingdom’s
commercial interests were ruthlessly subordinated to those of its principal
commercial partners. By the 1830s most of the Kingdom’s foreign trade, exports
as well as imports, was carried on foreign and mainly on British merchant
vessels.³² These commercial privileges were the ones that both Joseph Bonaparte
and Joachim Murat had refused to grant even to Napoleon. As Vincenzo Cuoco
andothers had warned two decades earlier, in the rapidly evolving new world of
international economic competition, southern Italy’s political and diplomatic
insecurity made it especially vulnerable to the risk of colonial subordination to its
powerful foreign commercial partners, especially Great Britain.³³
Restoration
289
³⁰ Mack Smith (1954/1985), 31–6.
³¹ Trevelyan (1973); D’Angelo (1988, 1990). On British merchants in Naples, see also 
Dawes (1991).
³² Pontieri (1965), 318–36.
³³ Cuoco (Villani, ed., 1980), 58–9.

<<<PDFPAGE 299>>>
The crisis at the close of the eighteenth century had irreversibly compromised
the autonomy to which the eighteenth-century rulers of Naples had aspired. In
1815 the Restoration freed the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies from colonial subor-
dination to Napoleonic France only to make it a political satellite of the Habsburg
Empire and part of Britain’s new informal commercial empire. But in this respect
too the Bourbon Kingdom in the South again differed little from the other Italian
states, and down to 1848 even the two Italian princes who enjoyed the greatest
degrees of diplomatic autonomy—the House of Savoy and the Pope—both chose
to make Austria their protector.
There were also important differences. Unlike the Bourbon Kingdom in the
South, the diplomatic and territorial integrity of both the papacy and the House
of Savoy was guaranteed by the European Powers. After 1815, as before, it was
a premise of European diplomacy that the Piedmontese territories formed a 
necessary buffer between France and Austria, which meant that in 1848 and
1849, and again in 1859 the Piedmontese monarchy could go to war with Austria
in the knowledge that military defeat would not jeopardize the existence of the
Piedmontese state. Similarly, for so long as the papacy had powerful international
supporters the survival of the Pope’s temporal powers in Central Italy were guar-
anteed, no matter what the strength of local opposition. This was why after 1860
Rome would remain outside the new Italian Kingdom, until the defeat of the
emperor Louis Napoleon in September 1870 by the Prussians at the battle of
Sedan removed the Pope’s last international protector.³⁴ The rulers of the
Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies enjoyed no comparable diplomatic 
security, however. Apart from the alliance with Austria the monarchy had few
friends but many powerful adversaries, a situation that would cause the Bourbon
government in the South to follow strategies that were signiﬁcantly different from
those of their fellow Italian rulers.
THE ECONOMICS OF RESTORATION
The political and diplomatic challenges facing the restored monarchy in 1815
were compounded by the economic and ﬁnancial problems facing the Kingdom.
From the ﬁrst days of the Restoration the government was faced by a crippling
ﬁnancial crisis, while the commercial recession that had dragged on since the start
of the revolutionary wars not only continued, but in some respects deepened.
As well as the massive costs of Murat’s ﬁnal campaigns and the undisclosed but
lavish personal bribes the Bourbons paid to Prince Metternich and Talleyrand to
secure their throne, the Neapolitan rulers had to repay the costs of Austrian mili-
tary occupation in 1815, a large cash indemnity to Prince Eugène, and the cost of
Restoration and Revolution
290
³⁴ According to Bismarck Italy’s Uniﬁcation was the result of three S’s: the battles of San Martino,
Sadowa, and Sedan.

<<<PDFPAGE 300>>>
maintaining the Austrian army, which remained in the Kingdom for two years (at
a cost of 4,200,000 ducats). To pay for these ‘extraordinary expenditures’,
between 1815 and 1820 the government had to ﬁnd some 23,000,000 ducats in
excess of its annual revenues.³⁵
The high price of the Kingdom’s fragile independence came on top of the heavy
ﬁnancial and ﬁscal strains imposed by the empire and Murat’s wars. The Finance
Minister, Luigi de’ Medici, made deep cuts in government spending that were
damaging especially for those whose fortunes had risen under Murat. Public
employees were dismissed, others were placed on part or supplementary time,
salaries were cut and paid in heavy arrears. Reductions in the army budget and in
commissions were another major cause of discontent, as was the government’s
decision to disband many of the technical agencies created by Murat, including
the Directorate of Ponti e Strade and the Scuola di’Ingegneria. Heavy cuts in the
budget for public works were a further blow to the depressed provincial
economies and resulted in often irreparable damage once more to numerous land
reclamation projects that had been started or restarted.
The government’s ﬁnancial problems were severely aggravated by the commer-
cial recession that followed the war. Throughout Europe prices fell, and just as
Vincenzo Cuoco and Luigi Blanch had predicted the cause was the grain from
Egypt, the Morea, and the Black Sea that for the ﬁrst time began to reach
European markets. Not for the last time, the Mediterranean economies were the
principal victims of these early examples of globalization. In this case the impact
was made more severe by Luigi de’ Medici’s decision to remove restrictions on the
import of foreign grain, which caused prices to fall even more heavily. To
makematters worse, there was an outbreak of what was believed to be the plague
on the mainland in 1816, while a year later the poorest harvests in living memory
brought more disease and starvation. The government lacked the means to inter-
vene, but although conditions in the provinces became even more precarious,
de’ Medici nonetheless followed Mosbourg’s strategy and continued to load them
with additional ﬁscal burdens.
THE POLITICS OF RESTORATION
Austria’s determination in 1815 to prevent Ferdinand of Naples repeating the
political errors of 1799 did not imply sympathy with political change. Quite the
opposite. Austria was vehemently opposed to the Sicilian constitution of 1812
and under the terms of a secret Treaty of Friendship between Vienna and Naples
signed on 12 June 1815 the king of Naples agreed not to make any changes that
were not ‘compatible with the political institutions of the Habsburg monarchy’.
Restoration
291
³⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 18–21 (see Cortese’s notes); Scirocco (1986), 647–52. See also
Ostuni (1992), 64–9 and Bianchini (1839), 536.

<<<PDFPAGE 301>>>
This was the pretext for abolishing the Sicilian constitution, and ensured that the
expectations of constitutional government would not be realized. If this provided
the supporters of the revolutions of 1820 on the mainland and in Sicily with their
principal demands, the Treaty of 1815 also provided Austria with the pretext
for military intervention to overthrow the constitution granted by Ferdinand
IV—after 1816 Ferdinand I of the new Kingdom of the Two Sicilies—in July
1820 and which his son had taken a solemn vow to uphold.³⁶
There was little space for public debate in Restoration Naples, although the
restored dynasty followed the models of representation set by their French prede-
cessors. As it had been in the decade of French rule, the San Carlo opera house in
Naples played a critical role in deﬁning the national and modern attributes of
the monarchy and was the site where the royal family was most frequently seen
in a carefully choreographed setting. Domenico Barbaja’s services were retained
andthe San Carlo theatre was the most modern and lavish in Italy, the scene
of Rossini’s early triumphs and another reﬂection of both the glory and the
modernity of the new monarchy. When the opera house was burned down in
1816, Stendhal recognized that the decision to rebuild it immediately was guided
by political not artistic considerations and in his view did more than anything else
to consolidate the monarchy’s popularity.³⁷
The indefatigable diarist Carlo de Nicola repeatedly noted how warmly the
restored monarchy was welcomed in the popular districts of the capital, although
the cycles of bread and circuses maintained by the French rulers were never
restored to their former lavishness. Outside the capital things were different. In
Palermo, for example, the decayed state of the San Carlino theatre contrasted with
the glories of the San Carlo in Naples and became an important symbol of the
city’s loss of status following the Act of Union in 1816.³⁸
The union of the two crowns had been a direct response to the humiliations
suffered by the monarchy during the long exile in Palermo, but had been imposed
by Austria and endorsed by the European powers. The resentments over the loss of
autonomy gave rise in Sicily to the most serious political challenges to the restored
monarchy and marked the latest, although not yet the ﬁnal chapter in the strug-
gles with the Sicilian grandees. But the Act of Union also revived older divisions
within Sicily and at least initially was widely supported by those opposed to the 
reactionary autonomist pretensions of the nobility and to the dominant role in
Sicilian politics that Palermo sought to retain. Messina and Catania in particular
looked to gain greater independence from the union with Naples and to challenge
their subordination to Palermo.
Although the Act of Union abolished feudalism in Sicily, no Feudal Commission
was created to adjudicate contested rights and in most cases the former feudal estates
Restoration and Revolution
292
³⁶ Scirocco (1990), 9–105; idem (1986), 643–82.
³⁷ Stendhal, Rome, Naples et Florence, cited in Di Lernia (1988), 160; on the social and political
role of the theatre in Restoration Italy see Sorba (2001), 93–154.
³⁸ Davis (2005), 578–80.

<<<PDFPAGE 302>>>
and the feudal and village demani passed directly to the ex-feudal landowners and
the galantuomini without compensation to the rural communities. Although by the
time of the revolutions in 1820 the process had barely begun, by challenging numer-
ous jealously preserved privileges uniﬁcation had created a groundswell of powerful
discontents that quickly involved Sicily in the political events that began when the
monarchy conceded a constitution in Naples on 7 July 1820.³⁹
Despite the apparently peaceful transition of power in 1815, serious problems
had also developed in the mainland provinces. Brigandage not only revived, but
began to assume unprecedented proportions. In part this was a direct conse-
quence of the breakdown of order in central Italy, where the French withdrawal
had been followed by Murat’s invasion and occupation of papal territories in
1814. The restoration of Pope Pius VII in May 1814 had made little difference,
while Murat’s military operations in 1815 left a further residue of popular revolts,
deserters, and armed bands who moved freely across the frontiers into the north-
ern provinces of Terra di Lavoro, the Abruzzo, and Molise, even raiding deep into
Basilicata, Capitanata, and Apulia. Although no longer promoted by the English
or the royalists, brigandage was still also endemic in the Calabrian provinces,
where smuggling continued to provide abundant work for the brigands.⁴⁰
The situation was aggravated by the government’s decision in 1815 to disband
Murat’s Provincial Legions, which it mistrusted, and to abolish the military
commissions on the grounds that those whom the French had called bandits were
in reality Bourbon loyalists. That proved to be completely false, and within a year
the military commissions and the Provincial Militias were reinstated. But the
landowners refused to serve and instead sent substitutes so that the anti-brigand
militias consisted mainly of amnestied bandits and other delinquents who proved
more energetic in pursuing their own criminal activities than bandits.⁴¹
Once again the military authorities published lists of wanted outlaws, sold
amnesties, and recruited bandits who surrendered voluntarily to hunt those who
did not. As in the past, however, these measures fuelled rather than checked the
lawlessness, which by 1817 had reached particularly alarming proportions in
Capitanata and Apulia. The scale of the disorders can be glimpsed from the corre-
spondence of the Neapolitan ambassador in St Petersburg, the Duke of Serracapriola,
who in 1817 appointed a new administrator to run his estate in Capitanata. The
new agent made the journey from Naples but when he reached the Duke’s property
in Chieuti he discovered that the estates had for some time been taken over by the
kinsmen of a former administrator. In fear for his life, the Duke’s new agent turned
on his heel and hurried back to the safety of the capital.⁴²
Restoration
293
³⁹ Romeo (1950), 148–54, 163–9. See also Romano (1952), Renda (1968), and De Francesco
(1992).
⁴⁰ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 108–17; Blanch (Croce, ed., 1945), ii. 190–5.
⁴¹ Lucarelli (1942), 50–64.
⁴² ASN: AP Maresca di Serracapriola B 131, 132, 137. There has been a long history of disputes,
between the feudatories and the ‘naturali’ of Chieuti.

<<<PDFPAGE 303>>>
In an attempt to restore order in Apulia, in 1817 the government commissioned
an Irish general, Richard Church, to do what Manhès had done for Murat. When
Church arrived in Bari, he reported that the province was in state of civil war, and
he warned the government that the brigands were in close communication with the
Carbonarist lodges. In December, he occupied Lecce, rounded up all suspect
Carbonari, and set up military tribunals to try and execute all suspected brigands.⁴³
But the measures were not successful, and the government instead tried making
deals with brigand leaders. They included a secret pact with one of the most notori-
ous bands operating in Apulia led by Gaetano Meomartino (known as Vardarelli)
and Ciro Annichiarico, who secretly agreed to accept government pay for turning
in their opponents. But the military used the agreement as a lure to ambush and kill
the leaders in Foggia,⁴⁴ an event recorded by the English traveller Henry Keppel
Craven who arrived just in time to witness the shootout.⁴⁵
When the Austrian army ﬁnally withdrew in 1817 the situation became even
worse, and in the following year the reintroduction of conscription provided the
bands with a fresh supply of recruits. But while these disorders reﬂected the des-
perate state of economic conditions, they were also inseparable from the conﬂicts
that surrounded the divisions of the former common lands and feudal estates
throughout the Kingdom. In many cases, the issues left unresolved by the Feudal
Commission and the French reforms were settled by force. Nor was it a coinci-
dence that brigandage intensiﬁed in Sicily as well precisely at the moment when
feudalism was abolished on the island.⁴⁶
As had been the case during the years of French rule, brigandage offered powerful
landowners with opportunities to rebuild local networks of power and autonomy.
Like the French before them, the Bourbon government now looked to the secret
societies as means to combat these networks. But although Luigi Blanch had argued
that the secret societies had acted as a critical force for order during the Restoration,
in the years that followed they became the principal vehicles for promoting and dis-
seminating the constitutional programme in southern Italy and in Sicily.⁴⁷ Even
their enemies, who deliberately exaggerated their power and inﬂuence, paid the
compliment of imitating them. During his brief tenure in the Ministry of Police at
the start of the Restoration, the Prince of Canosa had busily promoted numerous
royalist secret societies and he was a staunch advocate of popular royalist militias.
Fearing that his measures would lead to civil war, the Austrians insisted that
Canosa be removed. As brigandage escalated and as the secret societies grew in num-
ber both in the mainland provinces and in Sicily, the South became a theatre for dis-
order on a scale not seen since 1799. But when the revolutions began in June 1820,
on the mainland at least they took place under conditions of remarkable tranquillity.
Restoration and Revolution
294
⁴³ Lucarelli (1942), 124: Palumbo (1911), 265.
⁴⁴ Themelly (1979), 62 n. 42.
⁴⁵ Keppel Craven (1824), 111–15.
⁴⁶ Fiume, in Davis and Ginsborg (ed.) (1991/2002), 70–91.
⁴⁷ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), ii. 190–5.

<<<PDFPAGE 304>>>
15
Revolution
1820: AN UNUSUAL REVOLUTION
The revolutions in Naples and Sicily in 1820–1 were the most direct and explicit
response to the changes that had taken place in southern Italy during the years of
Napoleonic rule, which after the Restoration had been exported to Sicily as well.
They must rank, however, amongst the more unusual political happenings in
nineteenth-century Europe. The revolutions took place almost without blood-
shed and in less than a week a revolt that started as a protest in an army barracks in
Nola in July 1820 led to the concession of a constitution and inspired a separate
revolution in Sicily.
On the mainland, the revolution took place with little upheaval or violence.
Supporters divided into rival conservative, moderate, and radical camps, but
never quite came to blows, and the popular violence and peasant jacqueries that
had come to be thought of as standard accompaniments of political upheaval in
southern Italy were strikingly absent. The situation was different in Sicily, but
mainly because the revolution there had different objectives, speciﬁcally the Act of
Union of 1816. When Palermo refused to acknowledge the constitutional govern-
ment in Naples, it set a collision course not only with Naples but also with the
other major Sicilian towns that refused to follow its lead.
Nonetheless, the nine months of constitutional government from July 1820 to
March 1821 were the ﬁrst moment of freedom of speech in southern Italy since the
time of the Republic of 1799. In Sicily, the debates focused primarily on the island’s
autonomy and the political terms of the Restoration. On the mainland, however,
the revolution was an opportunity for a searching review of the political and admin-
istrative changes that had been introduced during the years of French domination
and preserved after the Restoration. These debates revealed how the political events
of the previous decades had given rise to new forms of political awareness in many
different parts of the South. In this the secret societies had played an important role.
The masses by and large remained silent, but membership of the secret societies
nonetheless reached well beyond narrow conﬁnes of the patrician elites. Like the
masonic lodges before them, the secret societies were responsible not only for
spreading awareness of the constitutional programme but also for actively planning
the revolutions and maintaining control once they had occurred.

<<<PDFPAGE 305>>>
After the event, the royalists would mock the absurdity of the political debates
that took place in the South in 1820, and a new generation of democrats would
follow Mazzini in dismissing the secret societies as a Gothic anachronism. Yet the
debates in 1820 articulated a clear understanding of the political issues posed by
the attempts to build a post-feudal order in the South, while also revealing power-
ful new national and local identities. These debates had no parallel elsewhere in
Italy. The debates in the National Parliament and in the provincial Deputations
focused on the political and administrative models on which the post-feudal
monarchy in the South had been constructed. They exposed how the French
bureaucratic models exceeded the Kingdom’s narrow economic resources and
showed why the project of reorganizing the southern state could not be achieved
without the cooperation of the elites. They also demonstrated how the crisis of the
old agrarian order had complicated the transition to more bureaucratized forms of
power, creating opportunities for new political monopolies to replace or replicate
those formerly exercised by powerful feudatories. But the increase in centralized
state power had also given rise to forms of ‘arbitrary government’ that were a fre-
quent target of protest in 1820, as was the domination of local government by
powerful factions. Although the remodelling of the southern monarchy had not
resolved the political problems posed by the crisis of the old order in the South, it
had nonetheless inspired forms of political awareness that in other parts of Italy
would develop only later.
TAKEN BY SURPRISE
When the revolution came in July 1820, the senior diplomatic representatives in
Naples were taken by surprise. The Austrian minister, Prince Jablonski, claimed
that a revolution seemed more likely to occur on the moon than in Naples.¹ Prince
Metternich, who had been lavishly entertained in Naples in the previous year dur-
ing an ofﬁcial visit by the Austrian Emperor, Francis I, expressed surprise and con-
tempt in equal measure:
A people that is still half barbarous, ignorant, superstitious without limit, ardent and pas-
sionate like Africans, that knows neither how to read nor to write and whose ﬁnal word is
the stiletto, offers a ﬁne example for the application of constitutional principles!
The outcome, he predicted, would be ‘torrents of blood’.²The British ambassador
William A’Court was astonished that a kingdom ‘in the highest degree ﬂourishing
and happy, under the mildest of governments and by no means offended by the
weight of taxation, [should] crumble before a handful of insurgents that half a bat-
talion of good soldiers would have crushed in an instant’.³
Restoration and Revolution
296
¹ Cited in Acton (1956), 675.
² Metternich, cited in Addeo (1989), 357–8.
³ Acton (1956), 675. See Curato (1958), i. 250–1.

<<<PDFPAGE 306>>>
THE CARBONARI
Mr A’Court was misinformed in every particular. The government had been 
warned of the imminent danger of a revolution for some time. For at least
two years it was feared that the Carbonari were trying to organize a revolution,
which they were, and the revolt that began in Nola in July 1820 was one of the
few nineteenth-century political revolutions that had been planned in some
detail.
In 1816 the government had tried to ban the Carbonarist lodges, but the royal-
ist general Vito Nunziante reported that there were more than 50,000 Carbonari
in Calabria alone and advised against a frontal assault. The estimate was a wild
exaggeration, but two former Muratist generals, Guglielmo Pepe and Pietro
Colletta, gave exactly the same advice two years later when they were sent to reor-
ganize the militias in Capitanata and Basilicata. They too warned against any
frontal attack, recommending instead the tactics of inﬁltration employed by
Murat’s government.⁴ De’ Medici agreed and even the king reputedly exclaimed
that ‘Everyone else seems to be in the Carbonari, so I should join too!’⁵
The lead in planning the revolution was taken by two men, Rosario Macchiaroli,
a surgeon who also worked in the ofﬁce of the provincial Intendent in Salerno,
and Pietro Serra. Former Jacobins, both were members of the Carbonarist lodge in
Salerno. In 1817 they convened a secret meeting of Carbonarist leaders from dif-
ferent provinces in the suitably cloak-and-dagger venue of the ruins of Pompeii,
where Macchiaroli and Serra proposed that they adopt a single national pro-
gramme. According to Luigi Minichini, a Carbonarist priest who would later play
a leading part in the early phases of the revolution, a Carbonarist Diet was then
held in Salerno in January 1818 where Macchiaroli’s programme was endorsed by
the representatives of lodges from all over the Kingdom. The representatives
agreed to take the Spanish constitution of 1812 as the basis for the Carbonarist
constitution and to coordinate revolts that would occur simultaneously in
Salerno, Naples, Foggia, and Bari.⁶
Beyond its general principles, familiarity with the Spanish constitution of 1812
was hazy and relied heavily on the ways in which its contents were conveyed by
Serra and above all Macchiaroli. The general belief in any case was that it would be
both democratic and federalist within the general frame of a constitutional
monarchy, would guarantee universal suffrage, place the army and the magistracy
under the control of elected assemblies, guarantee freedom of speech and religion,
and emancipate women from their exclusion from civil life and education,
although without giving them the vote.
Revolution
297
⁴ See esp. Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), pp. ix–xv; Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 124–40;
Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945).
⁵ Moscati (1971), 36.
⁶ See Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), pp. xiv, 60.

<<<PDFPAGE 307>>>
The constitution’s principal aim, however, was to ‘imprint a national identity on
the people’ and turn then into active citizens. For that reason, great emphasis was
placed on creating autonomous and democratic local and provincial government. For
his own province, Macchiaroli proposed the creation of a self-governing federal
‘Republic of Eastern Lucania’ that would include the existing provinces of Principato
Citeriore and Basicilata. These self-governing provincial federations, or ‘Supreme
Magistracies’, were to be based on directly elected municipal assemblies that would in
turn collectively constitute the nation that would take the form of a constitutional
monarchy. Machiaroli also ﬁrmly insisted on the sanctity of private property.⁷
Alarmed by reports of seditious meetings, in 1818 the government sent
General Nunziante to Salerno to make a show of force. Arrests were made, fol-
lowed by some unsuccessful revolts. But none found wider support until 1820,
when Minichini persuaded two young subalterns named Michele Morelli and
Giuseppe Salvati, whose cavalry regiment was stationed in Nola, to lead what was
in effect a mutiny.⁸
The protest in Nola triggered a sympathetic response in other regiments,
reﬂecting deep discontent among the junior ofﬁcers in particular. The reasons for
this were partly de’ Medici’s economies, which had damaged promotion prospects
especially for younger ofﬁcers. But there was a deeper underswell of these griev-
ances that originated from the ways in which Murat’s army had been integrated
with the royalist army after 1815.
Under the terms of the Treaty of Casalanza (which had been negotiated on
Murat’s behalf by Generals Colletta and Carrascosa), the king had sworn to main-
tain the commissions and ranks of all those serving in Murat’s army. In practice,
however, the Muratist ofﬁcers were marginalized. As Luigi Blanch put it,
‘Ferdinand’s army had gown old on the streets of Palermo’, while the ofﬁcers
appointed by Murat were generally young. For those who had not already risen to
high rank like the Pepe brothers, Pietro Colletta, Luigi Blanch, and Michele
Carrascosa, career prospects after 1815 were dismal. The ofﬁcer corps was oversized
and the royalists received preference, with the result that the junior ofﬁcers who
had looked for promotion and glory under Joachim Murat now found their careers
blocked by the geriatric staff that the king had brought back from Palermo.⁹
The Carbonarist lodges found many recruits among these discontented ofﬁcers
who now looked to Murat’s former generals for a lead. In 1814 and 1815 Michele
Carrascosa, the brothers Guglielmo and Florestano Pepe, and Pietro Colletta had
taken the lead in demanding that Murat grant a constitution. Once they
had accepted commissions in the royal army in 1815, however, their enthusiasm
for constitutions seems to have diminished notably. Nonetheless, they were the
leaders to whom the junior ofﬁcers now turned and they could not easily remain
uninvolved.
Restoration and Revolution
298
⁷ See Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), pp. xxvi–xxix.
⁸ Ibid.
⁹ Saverese (1941), 72.

<<<PDFPAGE 308>>>
How exactly Murat’s former generals planned to respond is not clear, but it
seems likely that Generals Pietro Colletta and Guglielmo Pepe had begun prepar-
ing for a revolution they believed to be inevitable but not necessarily desirable. In
the two areas where the two generals were given the task of reorganizing the
provincial militias in 1818, respectively the Salernitano and Basilicata, and Irpinia
and Capitanata, there were also high numbers of Carbonarist lodges. From what
happened in 1820 it seems that Colletta and Pepe deliberately put men closely
connected to the Carbonari in command of the militias, making them in effect an
embryonic National Guard.¹⁰ The epicentres of revolts that started the revolution
in July 1820 were precisely the towns where Colletta and Pepe had been active two
years earlier—Salerno, Nola, Avellino, and Foggia.¹¹
It seems likely that Pepe and Colletta believed that the Carbonari could be
recruited to control a revolt that was unavoidable. But not all the Muratist gen-
erals reacted in the same way. Michele Carrascosa and Luigi Blanch had both been
enthusiastic constitutionalists before 1815, but saw no future in a revolution that
had little internal coherence and no external support. That was also the view of
theformer Muratist ministers Giuseppe Zurlo and Francesco Ricciardi, who had
agreed to serve in the Provisional Constitutional Government in July 1820 only
with the greatest reluctance.¹²
THE REVOLUTIONS
When Lieutenant Morelli launched his appeal for a constitution at Nola on 2 July
his protest was immediately taken up by the Carbonarist lodges in the area around
Avellino. The military commander of Avellino, Colonel De Concilii, also joined
the protestors, which threw the government in Naples into a state of indecision.
After long debate General Carrascosa was ordered to march to Avellino to negoti-
ate with the insurgents and bring the insurrection to an end.
Pietro Colletta later claimed that Morelli’s advance ‘was not a march but a 
triumph’. Morelli had been joined by 200 Carbonari raised by the priest Luigi
Minichini, and when on 3 July he advanced towards Avellino the Royal Samnite
Regiment stationed in the city joined the mutiny. By the time he entered
Avellino, Morelli had more than a thousand armed men. Nonetheless, he acted
throughout with scrupulous legality, placed himself under the orders of Colonel
De Concilii, and issued certiﬁcates to the mayors of the towns through which his
followers passed to guarantee their good behaviour and pay for any damage they
caused.¹³
Revolution
299
¹⁰ Themelly, in Minichini (ed.) (1979), p. xxxi.
¹¹ On Colletta, see Scirocco, DBI, xxvii. 27–34; on Pepe see Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 
p. xiv.
¹² Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 147–51.
¹³ Colletta (1848), 6.

<<<PDFPAGE 309>>>
Amongst its many claims to originality, ‘the revolution travelled by post, or
rather by telegraph’. Indeed, in his enthusiasm to use the new system of sema-
phore telegraphy Colonel De Concilii unwittingly spread news of what had
occurred in Avellino to the capital and the Apulian provinces.¹⁴ As support for the
revolt spread, General Carrascosa began to fear that his own troops were about to
join the insurgents and began to play for time, ‘sticking as resolutely to his pen as
his sword stuck to its scabbard’.¹⁵
Generals Campane and Nunziante were sent from Naples to reinforce
Carrascosa, but when they received news on 3 July that Foggia, the chief town in
Capitanata, had declared for the constitution and that the revolution was spreading
rapidly in neighbouring provinces they turned round and headed back to Naples.
This was the cue for Salerno to declare for the constitution, and its lead was then
followed by the principal towns in Terra di Lavoro, Basilicata, and Calabria.¹⁶
On 5 July noisy demonstrations were held in the capital, led by armed citizens
supported by Carbonarist ofﬁcers and NCOs from the Royal Regiment of
Dragoons and the Royal Naples Battalion. The decisive turn came when
Guglielmo Pepe, who had risen to the rank of Field Marshal, left Naples at night
and joined the rebels in Avellino. The insurrection spread to other regiments and
on 6 July the king announced that a constitution would be introduced within
eight days. Then on the pretext of ill-health, he delegated full powers to his son,
Francis, Duke of Calabria.¹⁷
In Naples, the decision to defer the constitution aroused fears of treachery. The
Carbonari suspected the Court’s motives, and many believed that General Pepe
had joined the rebels to prevent rather than promote a revolution. As rumours
spread, the city rang with ‘the shouts of the Internal Security Guard that were
matched by those of the students who, inﬂamed by love of their country and by
the sacred rights of the citizen, marched through the streets and in loud voices
demanded the Constitution of Spain’.¹⁸
On 6 July a provisional governing junta was set up that included Generals
Carrascosa and Colletta, Giuseppe Zurlo, and Francesco Ricciardi. But these
appointments only heightened fears that a counter-revolution was being pre-
pared, and the situation risked getting out of control. On 7 July the Duke of
Calabria (now the prince regent) proclaimed the concession of a constitution that
would be ‘the same as the one adopted by His Majesty the King of Spain in 1812
and sanctioned by His Catholic Majesty in March of this year, except for those
modiﬁcations which the Nation’s representatives when constitutionally convened
may deem it appropriate to propose to adapt it to the particular circumstances of
this Kingdom’.¹⁹
Restoration and Revolution
300
¹⁴ Colletta (1848), 12. It is also claimed that Murat’s execution in October 1815 was the ﬁrst to be
authorized by semaphore telegraphy.
¹⁵ Cited in Johnson (1904), ii. 81–2; see ‘Michele Carrascosa’, in DBI (V. Sperber).
¹⁶ Colletta (1848), 10–12.
¹⁷ Ibid. 13.
¹⁸ Ibid. 14.
¹⁹ Cited in Corciulo (2000), 39–49.

<<<PDFPAGE 310>>>
On 9 July, a Sunday, thousands of armed Carbonari from the neighbouring
towns and provinces poured into Naples. After marching through the streets, the
Carbonari were addressed by the prince regent who, like the rest of his family, was
dressed in the colours of the constitution to which he now solemnly swore alle-
giance. The procession was followed by a rally in the Campo di Marte, but in the
days that followed General Pepe took measures to ensure that the Carbonarists
dispersed and returned to their homes.²⁰
SICILY
When the news of events on the mainland reached Palermo on 6 July the ruling
classes were uncertain how to react. Some radicals and democrats favoured the
Spanish constitution adopted in Naples, but the more conservative forces lined up
in support of the Sicilian constitution of 1812 since this would have restored the
island’s autonomy and Palermo’s privileged status as capital. On 11 July, however,
Messina followed Naples in declaring for the Spanish constitution and was fol-
lowed by Catania, Siracusa, Modica in eastern Sicily, and by Caltanisetta,
Agrigento, and Trapani in the West.
Palermo was isolated, but popular agitation intensiﬁed and came to a crescendo
during the feast of Santa Rosalia on 15 July. The Bourbon Lieutenant Governor,
General Naselli, tried to restore order but two days later was forced to abandon the
city. A supposedly popular government dominated by a group of conservative aristo-
crats headed by the Archbishop of Palermo, Cardinal Gravina, set up a new muni-
cipal junta which declared the constitution of 1812 and Sicily’s independence from
Naples. It also began to prepare military measures against the Sicilian towns that
supported the provisional government in Naples and the Spanish constitution.²¹
In August the provisional government in Naples sent General Florestano Pepe
with an army to Palermo, but Pepe refused to use force and early in October 
recommended that Sicily have a separate constitution and a separate parliament.
But Palermo’s separatist programme met with strong opposition in many other
Sicilian towns and in September the government sent the leader of the revolt at
Nola, Luigi Minichini, to rally support for the constitution and the National
Parliament. He was hailed as ‘the Liberator of the Fatherland’, and in both
Messina and Catania mass public rallies were held in his honour and to celebrate
the opening of the National Parliament in Naples.
When news reached Messina on 10 October that Florestano Pepe had 
‘capitulated’ to Palermo, there was a tremendous outcry. The leaders of the city
government told Minichini that the terms agreed with Palermo would bring ruin
to their city. The civil and religious authorities proclaimed their support for the
Revolution
301
²⁰ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 275.
²¹ Renda (1968); Romeo (1950); Romano (1952).

<<<PDFPAGE 311>>>
constitution and the city’s commitment to a single parliament. Five days later
Minichini was greeted by a similar public gathering in Catania, where more than
3,000 citizens were estimated to have greeted him. Here too the authorities
denounced Palermo and declared their loyalty to the constitution and the
National Parliament.²²
When the National Parliament in Naples ﬁnally met in October, it rejected the
terms offered by Pepe and sent General Pietro Colletta to renegotiate. Like Pepe,
Colletta tried to avoid a confrontation and agreed that Sicily should have a sep-
arate parliament. These terms were again rejected by the National Parliament in
Naples, and after Colletta’s withdrawal in January 1821 an open rift between
Naples and Palermo seemed unavoidable.
THE REVOLUTION ON THE MAINLAND
On the mainland, the revolt spread quickly but proved more cohesive and less dis-
orderly. News of the protests in Nola and Avelllino arrived in Foggia not by the
new system of semaphore telegraphy but with the mail coach from Naples a day
later on 3 July. When it was known that General Pepe had joined the ‘military
revolution’, the commander of the Royal Regiment of Cavalry in Foggia, Colonel
Giovanni Russo, declared his own support.²³ He set up a volunteer Public
Security Guard to maintain order, which—according to an account drawn up
after the Bourbon restoration in September 1821—was the signal for the leading
Carbonarists of Foggia to take control.
As well as Colonel Russo, they included Colonel marchese de Rosa and the
priest Don Francesco Paolo Iacuzio, described in the later Bourbon police docu-
ment as ‘President of the Tribe of Sectarians of the District of Foggia, together
with his cousin Carmelo Jacuzio, the military surgeon Don Vincenzo del Musico,
Don Paolo Vitale, Don Luigi Pavone and others’. They had all been ‘especially
energetic in preparing materials for the Revolution, such as proclamations, tri-
colour banners and the like’. They ordered the printer Pasquale Russo to prepare
their proclamations. He in turn asked the Intendent for advice: ‘but in the fog of
events this ofﬁcial knew not what advice to give, except to close the print works
and hide the type-face, but the Printer thought it better to yield to the Danger and
do what he had been asked’.²⁴
People were pouring into Foggia from the surrounding towns and settlements.
On 4 July, Colonel Russo left to join the insurgents in Avellino, after ﬁrst establish-
ing an armed militia of patrioti under the command of Major Pisa. That evening
Restoration and Revolution
302
²² Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 318.
²³ Pepe’s defection was on 5 July, so the report was inaccurate.
²⁴ ASF: Intendenza, Governo, Prefettura: Atti di Polizia (Part 1): f. 2495—Inchiesta sugli evveni-
menti successi nella provincia nel luglio 1820.

<<<PDFPAGE 312>>>
the soldiers, the gendarmeria and the Carbonarists paraded fully armed in the
Piazza della Porta Reale and unfurled the tricolour ﬂag to the sound of tamburri.
The priest Jacuzi made a short speech that was greeted with wild applause ‘and
everyone repeated his ﬁnal words: Viva la Costituzione! Viva il Re!’ This was fol-
lowed by a Carbonarist rally, during which an appeal was made to all the ‘members
of the secret societies’ in the province to take up arms and make their way to Foggia.
The next day, a delegation was sent to the Intendent who was found in his ofﬁce
‘much perplexed as to his fate’. He explained that as an ofﬁcer of the crown he
could not be associated with any party. Nonetheless, he was persuaded to don a
tricolour sash and show himself to the people from the balcony, and he was then
forced to go to the house of the priest Jacuzio ‘where he was met by a picket of
armed Carbonari and other leaders of the revolt’.
On 5 July groups of armed Carbonari arrived from San Severo and San
Nicandro, accompanied by the provincial Sub-intendent, Don Gaetano Rodinò,
who had ‘plotted the downfall of the Intendent’. The still-confused Intendent had
taken refuge in the house of Marchese Don Tommaso Antonio Celentano, but
Rodinò sent his ‘thugs’ who ‘abused and threatened’ him and he was spared injury
only by the determined intervention of his servants.
Rodinò had in the meantime taken over the Intendent’s residence, from where
the Supreme Magistracy of the United Provinces of Daunia was proclaimed, under
the presidency of Don Francesco Paolo Casiti of Lucera, of Rodinò himself, and of
Colonel Russo. They began printing the decrees and laws and organized the
administrative duties formerly performed by the Intendent into four ministries.
Once that was accomplished, the military detachments and the provincial militia
set out for Naples.
Everything, it seems, had been carefully prepared in advance. The two key ﬁg-
ures in the insurrection in Foggia, Russo and Rodinó, had been appointed by
Colletta in 1818. The declaration of the Supreme Magistracy of Daunia echoed the
Republic of Eastern Lucania proclaimed in Salerno by Machiaroli, and both were
models of the autonomous federal self-government advocated by the Carbonari.
According to the Bourbon ofﬁcial who later drew up the report, however: ‘the
absolute legislative and executive powers that the Supreme Magistracy had indepen-
dently abrogated for itself gave rise to general disgust’. A delegation was sent to Naples
to protest the abuse of power by Rodinò’s followers and the prince regent ordered
Russo to return to Foggia with the power of interim Intendent to suppress the
Magistracy and take control of the administration. But the Magistracy remained in
existence and continued to have some inﬂuence. Russo subsequently returned to
Naples where he was elected as Foggia’s representative in the National Parliament and
was replaced in Foggia by the Duke of Montejasi. The anonymous royalist report
concluded: ‘No other event of note occurred in the Province during the period of the
Constitution...except for the expulsion of the Missionary Fathers of Deliceto.’²⁵
Revolution
303
²⁵ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 313>>>
AN ORDERLY REVOLUTION
Pietro Colletta wrote later in exile that the concession of the constitution on 7 July
meant that ‘a revolution that began without a conspiracy and without a plan and
had no single leader was completed in ﬁve days. In those ﬁve days not a single
crime was committed: the lives, property and the rights of all citizens were reli-
giously respected, and the established authorities all remained at their posts.’²⁶
Despite a degree of exaggeration, it was true that the political events of July and
August were remarkably orderly on the mainland. This was partly because of the
king’s decision to grant the constitution almost immediately after the protest at
Nola, for which there was little alternative once Guglielmo Pepe’s decision to join
the rebels faced the government with the threat of a general mutiny. But the
solemn public oaths to uphold the constitution taken by the prince regent had
conferred full legitimacy on the constitutional regime established almost without
a revolution. Even an ofﬁcial like the Intendent of Capitanata who was ‘perplexed
as to his fate’ now had no alternative but to support the constitutional municipal-
ities that apparently had the full approval of the monarchy.
The government’s decision to adopt the radical Spanish constitution of 1812 is
less easy to explain. It was in some respects a remarkably democratic although
extremely complex and confused document whose content was not known in
detail in Naples.²⁷ However, the key provisions were for an elected National
Parliament and elected local and provincial governments, in both cases giving
votes to all males over the age of 21 whether or not they were literate.
From the monarchy’s point of view the constitution had the imprimatur of a
Bourbon monarch, the king of Spain, and was certainly preferable to the detested
constitution that the English had established in Sicily in 1812, although this was
the one the Sicilian separatists adopted. Although democratic in its elective
processes, the Spanish constitution did not threaten the unity of the monarchy.
The king was in any case playing for time, since the terms of the secret Treaty
of Friendship of June 1815 obliged Austria to intervene if the constitutional
regime remained in force. Not only was the constitution not recognized by
any of the major powers, but England and France even placed a ﬂeet at the
disposal of the king should he need it. Having publicly and freely sworn allegiance
to the constitution, however, neither the king nor the prince regent could easily
overthrow it without clear justiﬁcation. What they needed, therefore, was a
pretext.
This was also well understood by the constitution’s supporters, who repre-
sented a broad cross section of the propertied and educated classes. The revolt had
begun in the army, but had never taken the form of a military pronunciamento nor
Restoration and Revolution
304
²⁶ Colletta (1848), 14.
²⁷ Venturi (1952), 203–22; Spini (1960).

<<<PDFPAGE 314>>>
had there had never been any suggestion that the army could or should take
power. Nor indeed had the July protestors seen themselves as rebels. Their slogan
was ‘Viva Dio, Re, Costituzione—Long Live God, the King and the Constitution’
and Luigi Minichini, who had organized the revolt and was the link between the
soldiers and the Carbonari, emphasized the legality of their cause and its respect
for the established order by carefully giving pride of place to the efﬁgy of
StTheobald, whom the Carbonari had adopted as their patron.²⁸
Its supporters also knew that the government was working to rally those regi-
ments that had not supported the constitution, and that once the monarchy was
conﬁdent that the army would obey the least sign of public disorder or violence
would be sufﬁcient pretext for intervention. For that reason in both Foggia and
Naples the constitution’s supporters went to great lengths to avoid any form of
public disorder. In Naples, the prince regent’s announcement on 9 July that the
members of the provisional constitutional government would include Zurlo,
Ricciardi, and Tommasi—all of whom were now deeply unpopular—caused great
outcry in the capital, and the houses of the new ministers were threatened by hos-
tile crowds. However, the Carbonari had already established a General Assembly
in opposition to the provisional government, which now intervened to restore
order in the city.
The same occurred when the National Parliament was inaugurated on 1
October. The General Assembly of the Carbonari declared itself to be the true
voice of the constitutional movement, but although it closely monitored the activ-
ities of the Parliament—above all through the extremely lively periodical press
and broadsheets that proliferated following the abolition of censorship and the
declaration of the freedom of the press—the General Assembly continued to
assume responsibility for maintaining order in the capital.²⁹
Luigi Blanch later claimed that as in 1815, the Carbonarist lodges enabled
thelocal elites to control a broad cross section of provincial society. The claim is
difﬁcult to prove or disprove, since the clandestine nature of the lodges means that
information about their membership is vague. In many places artisans and trades-
men were certainly well represented, but contemporary estimates also greatly
exaggerated the size of membership. In Foggia, the group that initially took con-
trol of the town was quite small in number and the report drawn up later by the
Bourbon police admitted that initially there had probably been no more than ﬁfty
Carbonari in the town. Except for the ‘Great Masters of the Order’ little was
known about them, although by the end of the revolution their number was 
presumed to have risen to ‘a thousand or ﬁfteen hundred by common belief’.
However, a list compiled by the police two years later, which included not only
the Carbonari but all those suspected of ‘sympathy with liberalism or the secret
societies’, included only seventy-four names, nearly all of whom were landowners
Revolution
305
²⁸ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 177.
²⁹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 196–201 (especially Cortese’s notes).

<<<PDFPAGE 315>>>
(only a few were described as ‘small’ or ‘very small’ landowners), lawyers, priests,
or doctors.³⁰
The often outlandish contemporary estimates notwithstanding, membership
of the lodges seems to have been relatively small, which probably explains their
ability to retain control over events. When peasants in the Val di Lucania in the
Cilento tried to occupy contested demani in December, for example, the local
Carbonarist lodges voluntarily closed and invited the militias to restore order. In
other towns, collective and peaceful symbolic occupations were staged in the pres-
ence of the local authorities to protest the privatization of former demani or
refusals to permit the exercise of use-rights generally believed to be illegal.³¹
THE NEW ORDER UNDER SCRUTINY
The elections for the National Parliament were based on male suffrage and were
held in August in every town and village on the mainland and in Sicily. Despite
the South’s notorious reputation for political violence, the elections took place
with little disorder.
The number of delegates was small in relation to the population, and the social
and professional backgrounds of those elected to the National Parliament were
certainly much narrower than those of the Carbonarist lodges. The seventy-two
delegates elected for the mainland constituencies were all provincial notables.³²
The absence of the aristocracy reﬂected a clear reluctance to be associated openly
with a constitutional government that few considered likely to last.³³
The Parliament met on 1 October and ﬁrst had to deal with the defection of
Palermo, then review and revise the Spanish constitution in line with Neapolitan
custom and conditions. It then called on the two senior representatives of Murat’s
government who were now members of the provisional government—Giuseppe
Zurlo and Francesco Ricciardi—to assess the changes in public administration that
had been introduced during the decade of French rule.
Ricciardi addressed the Parliament on 16 October and staunchly defended the
soundness of the new administration of justice and the legal codes. He conceded
that there were some minor problems, in particular that there were too many cir-
cuits without a judge and many judges were too old to be effective or else did not
understand the new codes or procedures. He also admitted that there was a severe
shortage of qualiﬁed individuals to act as Justices of the Peace, and that since
the workload was enormous and the pay miserable all too often people unsuited to
Restoration and Revolution
306
³⁰ ASF: f. 2495; Elenco delle Vendite de’ Carbonari in Foggia (1821).
³¹ Lepre (1968), 143–65.
³² Scirocco (1986), 661. According to Fontanarosa (1910), 32, they included 1 cardinal, 9 priests,
24 landowners, 8 ‘professors of science’, 11 magistrates, 2 government employees, 9 doctors, 5 sol-
diers, and 3 merchants. Only 6 were noblemen, although 5 of the 24 Sicilian delegates were nobles.
³³ There was a much higher percentage of nobles among the Sicilian representatives.

<<<PDFPAGE 316>>>
the function took it on.³⁴ In response to complaints from the provinces, Ricciardi
also admitted in a later session that the powers of the circuit judges were too wide,
that their number needed to be increased, and that more provincial civil appeal
courts were needed.³⁵
On 23 October it was Zurlo’s turn to report on the Ministry of the Interior. This
was mainly an exercise in self-congratulation and an unbending defence of the
reforms that he had been responsible for introducing during the years of French
rule. He again insisted that these reforms were no more than the continuation of
the innovations begun earlier by the Bourbon rulers, which would have resulted in
a ‘complete reform in line with the true interests of the Nation had the French
Revolution not interrupted the direction in which we were already headed’.
However, the reforms were introduced by the French on exactly the same
terms, with immediate and dramatic effects: ‘As a result of this Reform the
Kingdom has changed its appearance in every respect. Public opinion has taken
shape, a common interest has been reborn, everyone seeks to promote the general
good, and all take an interest in the activities and progress of the Government.’
Zurlo admitted that the burden of expenses and taxes faced by the local admin-
istrations should be reduced, and calculated that the total taxes raised from the
local communities had increased. He admitted that the increase had been paid
disproportionately by the poorest and that local government was still plagued by
mismanagement and dishonesty. But otherwise he saw no case for changing an
administrative system that had transformed a ‘kingdom into a Nation’.³⁶
He was prepared to concede that the French had made some errors, however.
They had been mistaken in stripping the Kingdom’s charitable institutions, hos-
pitals, orphanages, and conservatories of their assets, although he ﬁrmly rejected
the idea that poverty could be solved through alms: ‘It is more useful to create
means for employing the poor than to encourage inertia and the disinclination to
work.’ What was needed was better management of the charities’ remaining
assets, although he acknowledged that the register of the revenues of the opere pie
that had been started in 1813 was still incomplete.³⁷
He also noted approvingly the government’s actions to reduce the number of
beggars and vagabonds. He had ﬁrst proposed creating Depositi di Mendicità in
1802, although they were not operational in Naples until 1817. In the six months
that followed, 1,294 beggars had been arrested, and 4,046 more between May
1818 and August 1819. Over a thousand beggars were being held in the Royal
Hospice for the Poor in Naples, and similar provision was being made in the
Revolution
307
³⁴ ASN: Min Polizia Ia Ripartimento, f. 152 (1) Rapporto al Parliamento Nazionale sulla riforma
della Magistratura, 16 October 1820.
³⁵ Ibid., f. 94: Rapporto e progetto di legge sul riordinamento del potere guidiziario November
1820.
³⁶ Ibid., from 1,472,819 ducats in 1815, to 1,760,789 ducats in 1818.
³⁷ The accounts of opere pie that had been examined by 1819 indicated that there were 7,224 of
these institutions in the mainland provinces, whose collective annual revenues amounted to
1,081,435 ducats; see pp. 196, 202–5.

<<<PDFPAGE 317>>>
provinces where male foundlings were held until they reached the age of seven,
when they were sent to the army, ‘which relieves the provinces of the responsibility
for providing the same number of conscripts, to the great beneﬁt of agriculture’.
Yet despite the intervention of the government, most provinces still had no homes
for abandoned children, and the legislation forbidding burials in churches and
requiring that cemeteries be built outside the inhabited areas had been ignored.
Zurlo also admitted that expenditure on public works had imposed heavy bur-
dens on local ﬁnances, although he claimed that these were offset by the new roads
in the Terra di Bari that would increase trade and prosperity. As he had done many
times during the French period, Zurlo recited the government’s achievements,
with the curious conclusion that the theatre was the surest indicator of the capital’s
ﬂourishing commercial and cultural condition:
Theatres are both the indication of, and the means to achieve progress (incivilmento), and
not as once use to be thought merely a source of innocent entertainment for the idle and
the curious. In any great city theatres are a moral and a political necessity that distracts the
multitude from more dangerous meetings, and in Naples they have for some time made
the metropolis celebrated and have played an important role in attracting the valued pres-
ence of foreign visitors.³⁸
PROVINCIAL PROTESTS
Zurlo’s conﬁdence in the system that he had played a major part in creating was
not reﬂected in the petitions submitted to the Parliament from the Provincial
Deputations. These set out the discontents of every section of provincial society,
and taken together presented a remarkably full and critical commentary on the
impact of the changes introduced during the years of French rule.
The most frequent protest, of course, was against the land tax, but hardly less
frequent were protests at the disproportionate increases in provincial and local
taxes. The petitions depicted the familiar story of the chaos of local administra-
tion, the inability of most communities to meet the costs of local administration,
the devastating effect of brigandage and public disorder, the damage caused by the
military and the militias, and—not least—the continuing rivalries over adminis-
trative status and privileges.
These concerns were clearly set out by the Deputation for the Terra d’Otranto.
It acknowledged that the old system of municipal government elected by open
parliaments needed reform, but bitterly attacked the system that had replaced it:
‘civic freedom has been replaced by ministerial supervision which like the iron law
of the Roman patria potestà will of necessity degenerate into tyranny; our towns
Restoration and Revolution
308
³⁸ ASN: Min Polizia Io Ripartimento, Busta 152 (2): G. Zurlo, ‘Rapporto al Parlamento
Nazionale sulla Situazione del Minstero degli Affari Interni’, 23 October 1820.

<<<PDFPAGE 318>>>
are trapped between the voracious impertinence of their administrators and the
oppression of those in power’.³⁹
In response, the Parliament moved to reduce the land tax quotas and to transfer
many of the costs charged to local administrations back to the Treasury. On 16
February 1821 it voted to establish elected provincial and local government, a
measure immediately vetoed by the provisional government.
IDENTITIES
National and regional identity also assumed great importance in the debates in the
National Parliament. A committee was set up to recommend a suitable name for
the new constitutional Kingdom, on the grounds that:
The lack of a name that accurately conveys what the different Peoples who inhabit the
kingdom have in common is of little matter in a form of Government in which a single ﬁg-
ure rules, but when a Nation regains its rights and wants everyone to feel part of it, then it
is important to ﬁnd a name that is both inclusive and distinctive.
The ‘Kingdom of the Two Sicilies’ and its more recent form, the ‘United
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies’, were rejected out of hand as political and geograph-
ical misnomers. If the Kingdom of Sicily made sense, the Kingdom of Naples
made none: was France the Kingdom of Paris? Since the Kingdom covered more
than two-thirds of ‘the entire land area of Italy’ a more appropriate title would be
‘The Kingdom of Italy’. But since such a name would cause ‘diplomatic disputes’,
the committee instead proposed the ‘Kingdom of Southern Italy’.
It also recommended that the names of the provinces be changed since most of
them had originally been imposed by the Romans when they had conquered the
South, were colonial in origin, and had ‘assumed that everything revolved around
and was subordinate to Naples’. To reﬂect their true identities the provinces
should wherever possible return to their pre-Roman names: for example, Sannium
instead of Molise; Daunia instead of Capitanata; Lucania in place of Basilicata.
Where pre-Roman names did not exist, the names should be topographical.⁴⁰
National identity also ﬁgured prominently in the report that Luigi Blanch
made to the Parliament after he had been sent to investigate the political situation
in the other Italian states in the summer of 1820. In his report Blanch repeatedly
emphasized the cohesiveness of the South as a nation and the lack of unity in the
other Italian states.
He claimed that the Papal States were in a state of turmoil and paralyzed by
internal divisions because the restored papal government faced ﬁerce opposition
in all the territories that had formerly been part of Napoleon’s Kingdom of
Revolution
309
³⁹ Ibid., Min Polizia I Ripartimento, f. 71: Rapporto della Deputazione Provinciale di Terra
d’Otranto, 10 November 1820.
⁴⁰ Atti del Parlamento dell Due Sicilie 1820–1, ii. 62–4.

<<<PDFPAGE 319>>>
Italy: the Marche, the Duchy of Urbino and the Legations. The Duchies of
Modena and Parma and the Tuscan Grand Duchy he dismissed as mere Austrian
satellites, and he claimed that the Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia held together
only because of the presence an Austrian army of 60,000 men. He acknowledged
that Piedmont was ‘the only Italian State that has an independent government and
a well organized army’, but it lacked internal unity because it was composed of
Genovese, Sardinians, and Savoyards, all of whom wanted to be what they had
formerly been: ‘the Genoese want their Republic, the people of Savoy want to be
French and the Sardinians want to be left with their old laws.’⁴¹
Luigi Blanch’s insistence on the relative cultural homogeneity of the southern
Kingdom revealed other important cultural legacies of the political upheavals
in the South in the previous decades. A rediscovered sense of southern national
identity could be traced back to the writers of the previous century, and in 1820
this was not seen to be incompatible either with the equally strong sense of
Sicilian separateness or with the demands of the provinces for greater autonomy.
Indeed, the strong federalist tone of the Carbonarist programme explicitly
assumed that the two could be reconciled. Whether that was practical is beside the
point since the downfall of the revolution was already being plotted from outside
and for quite different reasons.
THE REVOLUTION BETRAYED
Even at the time, the nine months of constitutional government and in Naples
and Sicily between July 1820 and March 1821 had an aura of the unreal that was
ﬁrst broken as the threat of conﬂict between Naples and Palermo grew. For one
group within the provisional government, this offered the opportunity for a pre-
emptive strike against the constitution to avert the threat of another Austrian
invasion that many considered inevitable.
The principal advocates of this strategy were Giuseppe Zurlo and Michele
Carrascosa, who began sounding out the regiments traditionally loyal to the king.
But they were opposed by Guglielmo Pepe and Giuseppe Poerio, both of whom
feared that an attack on the Parliament would precipitate civil war.⁴² That view
was shared by Pasquale Borrelli, the Director of the Commission for Public Safety,
who feared that a coup against the Parliament would give the ultra-royalists the
pretext they were waiting for to incite another Sanfedist counter-revolution.⁴³
Others argued that the best hope was for a negotiated settlement brokered by
Britain and France. This had been the true purpose of Luigi Blanch’s diplomatic
mission which took him to Rome, Turin, Switzerland, Baden, Württemberg, and
Restoration and Revolution
310
⁴¹ Ibid., iii, Rapporto a S.E. Il Ministro degli Affari Esteri, 17–21.
⁴² Savarese (1941), 91–2.
⁴³ On Borrelli see Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 292.

<<<PDFPAGE 320>>>
Paris to test the reactions of other Italian and European governments, but he had
found no foreign support for the constitutional government in either Naples or
Spain.⁴⁴
In early October Metternich cut short these speculations when he summoned
the representatives of the European powers to Troppau to discuss the situation in
Naples and Spain. On 19 November the governments of Russia, Prussia, and
Austria issued a joint Protocol authorizing Austria to intervene, if necessary by
force, to restore order in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Metternich then invited
King Ferdinand of Naples to attend a conference to be held in January at Laybach
(Lubjana) to seek a negotiated settlement.⁴⁵
This was a trap to which the king of Naples was a willing accomplice. If the
king did not attend, Austria had a pretext for invading the Kingdom to ‘liberate’
him: if he did, Austria could still claim legitimate cause for invading the Kingdom
to restore the king to the title and powers conferred on him by the Congress
of Vienna.
On 7 December the prince regent published a letter in Naples in which
the king announced his decision to attend the conference in Laybach in order to
make ‘necessary and wise adjustments to the constitution’. This news caused the
Carbonari to mobilize a massive demonstration in Naples and the piazze of
the capital rang with cries of ‘the Spanish Constitution or Death’. Zurlo and
Carrascosa believed that the time had now come for a coup, which Carrascosa
enthusiastically described as ‘another 9 Thermidor to destroy the anarchists’.⁴⁶
On 8 December, Zurlo presented to Parliament the king’s request to leave the
Kingdom, and two days of heated debates followed. But plans for a coup were
abandoned when Carrascosa reported that the army still could not be relied upon.
The moderates Poerio and Borelli then proposed that the Parliament permit the
king to travel to Laybach ‘to defend the Constitution’ and after a ﬁerce debate this
ﬁctional hope was carried and Ferdinand left for Trieste on a British warship.⁴⁷
The trap was now sprung. On 4 February, Marshal Frimont crossed the Po at
the head of an Austrian army corps whose mission was to restore order in the
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. On 13 February the Neapolitan Parliament met and
amid great enthusiasm declared war against Austria to free the king who was a
‘prisoner of the Sovereigns’.
THE LAST CALL
As the Austrian army drew closer, the Parliament published a last deﬁant state-
ment on 2 March. It was addressed simply to ‘The People of the Two Sicilies’ and
set out what had been accomplished since October.
Revolution
311
⁴⁴ See the entry on Luigi Blanch in DBI (x. 771–6) by Cortese.
⁴⁵ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), p. li.
⁴⁶ Ibid.
⁴⁷ Savarese (1941), 93–6.

<<<PDFPAGE 321>>>
The Parliament had worked ‘to make our systems more free, to make local
administration less arbitrary and to establish a National Guard capable of guaran-
teeing our Independence. We have tried to relieve you of the heavy ﬁscal burdens
you are asked to bear, to promote trade, agriculture and industry and to ﬁnd ways
of providing public education that has a practical not an illusory foundation in
line with the requirements of true wisdom and true philosophy.’
The Parliament had approved the Spanish constitution, removing only the
‘dangerous provision’ that in Spain permitted female succession to the throne. The
constitution had established trial by jury, religious toleration, and freedom of the
press. Every comune was to have an elected local magistrate. Provincial administra-
tion was reorganized: the Intendents’ Councils were abolished and their powers
transferred to elected Provincial Deputations, while every comune was run by an
elected government. Delegates were to receive stipends to avoid the Provincial
Deputation being dominated by ‘the wealthiest citizens of the province and those
who live in the provincial capitals’.
The Parliament had relieved municipal administrations of ‘many expenses that
were not related to local administration and which were calculated to amount to
800,000 ducats a year’. These expenses were the consequence of ‘arbitrary minis-
terial power’ that had caused the local communities to carry the burden of the cost
of maintaining local circuit judges, the upkeep of prisons, prisoners, and warders,
the upkeep of troops stationed in each province, and of the Austrian army down
to 1817, as well as stipends for the parish priest and his assistant. The Treasury
would now pay all of these costs, while additional obligations to supply and billet
the army were abolished.
The Parliament had also renewed the struggle against feudalism, which it
claimed was dead only in theory: ‘It would take an army of administrators, as well
as a complete moral and political revolution of the people, to destroy the Hydra of
the barons.’ The Parliament had introduced new laws to abolish entails that had
survived despite previous legislation. It had abolished feudalism in Sicily, as well as
the tithes collected by the Church, and had also banned ‘gambling which threatens
to ruin our citizens and the innocent and inexpert manners of our youth’.⁴⁸
The declaration on 2 March was supposed to rally support to the rapidly disinte-
grating revolution. The appeals that ‘the courageous ofﬁcers of the companies of
the National Militias disbanded after the Restoration’ reform their battalions to
defend the Nation from the advancing foreign invader were hardly realistic, how-
ever, and the National Guard to which it referred had not yet been created. Nor did
the proposals to reduce the land tax, the ﬁnancial burdens on local communities,
and the tithes paid to the Church take any account of the desperate state of public
ﬁnances. By September 1820, Luigi de’ Medici’s carefully balanced budget had
been hopelessly compromised and every government department faced huge
Restoration and Revolution
312
⁴⁸ ASN: Min. Polizia Iº Ripartimento: Il Parlamento Nazionale ai Popoli del Regno delle Due
Sicilie, a Napoli, 2 March 1821.

<<<PDFPAGE 322>>>
deﬁcits. By March of the following year the situation was even worse, not least
because the nine months of the constitutional government had been a prolonged
tax holiday.
Many of the measures adopted by the Parliament had made mortal enemies.
The Cardinal Archbishop of Naples led the attack on religious toleration and free-
dom of the press, both of which were guaranteed by the constitution. If these free-
doms were to come about, the Cardinal warned, ‘There will be nothing to restrain
the insolent Libertine. Married women will no longer be respected, honest virgins
will no longer blush with shame, the innocent child will lose all sense of modesty
and everything will be in disarray and combustion. A pestilent plague of infamous
books worthy of the city of Pentapolis will contaminate the public squares and
private houses of our beloved Naples and infect every mind and every heart
throughout the Kingdom.’⁴⁹
In fact, virtually all of the Parliament’s liberal measures had been vetoed by the pro-
visional government. Giuseppe Zurlo made no secret of his contempt for constitu-
tions and parliaments which, like de’ Medici and Tommasi, he considered to be a
throwback to the corporate bodies of the ancien régime that had blocked the reform
initiatives of an enlightened prince. Parliaments, he believed, served only to breed
‘parties’, faction, self-interest, and disunity. The monarchy was the only guarantee of
the unity of the nation, and for that reason Zurlo remained opposed to any decentral-
ization of the French administrative reforms and opposed every attempt to introduce
elected provincial and municipal assemblies. Francesco Ricciardi was even more 
contemptuous of the constitution, which he considered to be ‘madness’.⁵⁰
THE THIRD RESTORATION
When it came to repulsing the invasion, the Parliament’s rallying cries were of lit-
tle avail and the revolution that had never happened now simply disintegrated.
Initially there had been great patriotic enthusiasm for the war, and in Naples the
theatres staged patriotic plays, while patriotic hymns and songs were heard
throughout the city. Even the son of the prince regent volunteered to enlist to
defend the constitution and for days the capital was full of popular patriotic
demonstrations and parades.
These demonstrations did not translate into action, however. Some of the
Carbonari advocated a national uprising against the foreign invader, but even
the fearless Luigi Minichini acknowledged that such a rebellion was impractical.
The army was paralysed by divisions between supporters of the constitution
and the monarchy, between moderates and radicals, and the inﬂuence of the
Carbonari amongst many of the ofﬁcers and NCOs was causing the chains of
command to break down everywhere.
Revolution
313
⁴⁹ Addeo (1989), 174.
⁵⁰ Savarese (1941), 91–2.

<<<PDFPAGE 323>>>
Divisions amongst the military commanders made planned response to the
Austrian advance impossible. Guglielmo Pepe, the senior commander, favoured
an offensive, but it was widely suspected that his real aim was simply to draw the
radical elements of the Carbonari away from Naples to reduce the risk of civil war.
Meanwhile Carrascosa, supported by Blanch, favoured a defensive strategy, and
refused to move his troops, leaving Pepe without reserves or supplies. The
Carbonari refused to accept orders and many regiments suddenly rediscovered
their loyalty to the crown. Pepe, Colletta, and Carrascosa all reported massive
desertions, indiscipline, and mutinies and Luigi Blanch described the situation as
one of ‘mass desertion’.⁵¹
On 7 March, without the government’s authorization or knowledge, Pepe
attacked the Austrians near Rieti and his army fell apart. The Austrians crossed the
frontier in the Abruzzi Mountains and when the king called on the Neapolitan
army to lay down its arms and welcome the Austrian ally the garrison at Capua
raised the royal standard and on 23 March yet another Austrian army entered
Naples.
This was King Ferdinand’s third restoration, all three achieved thanks to for-
eign military assistance: in 1799, from the British navy with Russian and Turkish
ground forces; in 1815 and 1821 from the Austrians, with naval assistance from
Great Britain. The Austrian army would again stay on at the Kingdom’s expense,
this time until 1827.
If the revolution of 1820 had been the epilogue to the decade of French rule
and innovation, the restoration of 1821 was the opportunity for the political
purges and vendettas that had been avoided in 1815. This time there was no pre-
tence of compromise and the king, who remained in Florence, made his views
clear: ‘The only expedient is a severe military government for at least a year that
will use terror and overwhelming force, and I would happily order this and forgo
returning to my Kingdom where my life is constantly in danger.’⁵²
The aged Marchese Circelli headed a provisional government and in May Prince
Canosa resumed the Police Ministry. Only those of less exalted social standing like
Lieutenants Morelli and Salvati paid with their lives. Guglielmo Pepe and Luigi
Minichini both wisely sailed for Barcelona before the Austrians reached Naples.
Pietro Colletta, Giuseppe Poerio, Luigi Blanch, and Michele Carrascosa were
amongst those exiled, and the last was condemned to death in absentia in 1823.
They continued their feuds in exile. Carrascosa and Pepe fought a duel in London
in 1823, but the weapons were more often pens rather than sabres, and it was
primarily in their memoirs, histories, and biographies that the survivors of 1820–1
refought the battles of the French decade and revolutions.
For accepting ofﬁce under the constitution (even though this had had the
fullendorsement of the crown) de’ Medici, Ricciardi, and Tommasi were also
exiled, while systematic purges of all those who had supported the constitutional
Restoration and Revolution
314
⁵¹ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), p. lvii.
⁵² Cingari (1966), 22.

<<<PDFPAGE 324>>>
government or had been members of the Carbonarist lodges now began. All 
public employees and teachers came under scrutiny, and most of the students at
the University in Naples were rusticated. An extensive purge of the magistracy
resulted in the dismissal of judges and law ofﬁcers of every grade, both in the cap-
ital and in the provinces. All those suspected of supporting the revolution were
banned from practising their professions and kept under police surveillance,
which put many more lawyers out of work. The clergy came under no less close
scrutiny, and when the bishops were ordered to investigate the conduct of those in
their diocese they seized the invitation with relish. The parish churches through-
out the Kingdom were reorganized along lines suggested by the Bishop of
Pozzuoli, and in general the power of the bishops was greatly increased. A number
of bishops also appealed to the government to recall the Jesuits.⁵³
To the applause of the clergy, censorship was reintroduced. Canosa’s police
seized and destroyed the papers of the National Parliament, and a royal decree of 7
May made the possession of ‘emblems, papers, books or other devices belonging
to the Secret Societies’ an offence punishable by exile for ten years or more. The
same decree banned all ‘the poisonous texts that had dealt with matters that are
contrary to religion, morality and the principles of governance’. A decree of 2 June
1821 obliged printers to submit copies of all printed material to the Junta of
Examination, which had been established to compile an index of all books to be
destroyed. Every library was to supply the police with a copy of its catalogues.
A decree of 4 December 1821 required that all printed matter be submitted to the
police for authorization, including theatre tickets and invitations to private gath-
erings. Any printed document of more than ten pages was to be submitted to the
Junta for Public Education, which was empowered to raid private houses, hand
over any prohibited books to be burned by the public hangman, and imprison
anyone found in possession of such material.⁵⁴
The Minister of Police acknowledged with gratitude that the reforms of the
French rulers had made it possible for the government to enforce censorship more
effectively than in the previous century, and he warned against the misguided
sense of ‘indulgence’ that had caused Italy’s recent disasters:
It was because of that indulgence that the fanaticism of innovation was spread by books.
These were the source of the poison that was present in the guise of reform, regeneration,
progress and freedom. It was in this way that the spirit of revolution brought desolation to
our people, undid morality and destroyed religion. Everyone knows that there never has
been, nor ever will be, any open attempt to subvert a legitimate government by force,
unless this has been prepared carefully over time . . . an aim that has always been, and
always will be, the purpose of books and printed writings, as to which there can be no
shadow of a doubt since we all have before us the tearful memories of what has befallen us
in the recent past.⁵⁵
Revolution
315
⁵³ Rocchina (De Leo, 1995), 161–5.
⁵⁴ Addeo (1984), 185.
⁵⁵ ASN: Ministero di Polizia, Min. Interno Iº Ripartimemto, Diversi 1824–5: f. 2912. Revisione
dei libri, opuscoli, fogli volanti e periodici di attribuzione alla polizia.

<<<PDFPAGE 325>>>
The most severe purges were reserved for the army, however. All those who had
supported the constitution or been members of the Carbonari were dismissed or
imprisoned. Every ofﬁcer was required to give a full account of his political activities
since 1793, and nearly all of those appointed during the French occupation were
dismissed. Fourteen infantry and ﬁve cavalry regiments were disbanded and
replaced by three new infantry regiments composed entirely of foreigners.
Conscription was abolished, to general acclaim, and three regiments of Swiss volun-
teers were recruited to act as the Royal Guard and to garrison the city of Naples.⁵⁶
Despite the orderliness of the revolution, its collapse threw every branch of
central and provincial administration into confusion. While the Austrian troops
effectively repressed brigandage and disorder on the mainland, Sicily was in open
revolt. To defuse one of the most persistent demands of the revolution,
Metternich had forced the king at Laybach to introduce a dual consultative body
known as the Consulta—one for the mainland and one for Sicily. But once
Ferdinand was back in control of the Kingdom these commitments were ignored
and the Consulta existed only on paper.
The restored government could not ignore the disastrous state of the Kingdom’s
ﬁnances, however. De’ Medici’s careful work of ﬁnancial stabilization had been
shattered, and after the Austrian invasion the ﬁnancial situation became disastrous.
To meet its current account deﬁcits and to repay the costs of the Austrian occupa-
tion and of maintaining the Austrian army that remained in the Kingdom, Vienna
helped the Neapolitan government raise loans from the Rothschild Bank, which
in turn acquired a large share of the Kingdom’s public debt. But that was only a
stop-gap. No one in the government set up by Ferdinand I in 1821 had the expert-
ise or ability to address the ﬁnancial situation that deepened as the market value of
the government’s paper collapsed. In response to appeals from Vienna, in
December 1822 Luigi de’ Medici was recalled from exile.⁵⁷
Until his death in 1830, de’ Medici remained in control of the Kingdom’s
ﬁnances and its commercial policies. Ferdinand I died in 1825 after a reign that
with interruptions had lasted ﬁfty-eight years. He was succeeded by his son, the
former Duke of Calabria who took the title of Francis I. Despite his ﬂirtation with
the constitution in 1820, Francis I continued the repressive and reactionary pol-
icies of the last years of his father’s reign until his death in 1830. The Austrian
army withdrew in 1827, but an attempted uprising in the Cilento resulted in new
measures of repression. Only with the accession of Ferdinand II in 1830 did
the political climate of the Kingdom begin to change, and for the ﬁrst time
some of the exiles of 1821 were permitted to return. But hopes that the new
king would take up the cause of constitutional government and reform were to be
disappointed.
Restoration and Revolution
316
⁵⁶ Pieri (1962), 58–9.
⁵⁷ Ostuni (1992), 329–32; Cingari (1966), 144.

<<<PDFPAGE 326>>>
Conclusion: States of Insecurity
Italy in 1861, from G. Holmes (ed.), The Oxford Illustrated History of Italy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1997).

<<<PDFPAGE 327>>>
The revolutions of 1820 and 1821 have generally been seen as part of the
sequence of southern ‘failures’ that conﬁrmed the impossibility of achieving
change in the South.¹ But that is to wrench these events out of context and to
ascribe to them goals they did not have. Indeed, it is not really clear whether ‘revolu-
tion’ is the appropriate term for what happened in 1820–1. The main protagon-
ists went out of their way to insist on the legitimacy of their protests and to
maintain order, while the monarchy’s speedy concession of the constitution made
everything that followed legitimate except for the king’s violation of the sacred
oath to uphold the constitution. Nor did internal events have anything to do with
the outcomes because the fate of the short-lived constitutional experiment was
a foregone conclusion and the Austrian invasion in March 1821 simply another
reminder of the degree to which Italian politics in the early nineteenth century
were shaped by external forces.
The revolutions of 1820–1 were also the epilogue to the years of French rule,
and if the political protests heard as much in the provinces as in the capitals were
directed against the terms of the Restoration of 1815 their main targets were the
innovations dating from the Napoleonic decade. In Sicily, where those changes
derived from the more recent Act of Union of 1816, the debates were complicated
by the emergence of a powerful separatist movement that brought Palermo into
conﬂict not only with Naples, but also with many of the other Sicilian towns and
cities. In Sicily this resulted in a great deal of violence, but on the mainland the
debates took place in a surprisingly orderly environment and demonstrated how
far removed the historical experience of the South was from the later imagery of
the ‘passive revolution’.
The nine months of constitutional government were the ﬁrst moments of free-
dom of speech in the South since the Republic of 1799, and they offered the
opportunity for a searching critique of the legacies of Napoleonic rule that had
been preserved and extended after the Restoration. The debates and the different
political projects proposed revealed how the upheavals of the previous decades
had given rise to forms of political awareness that as yet had no parallels elsewhere
in Italy. By contrast, the insurrections that took place a year later in Piedmont
found little support outside the army, while the conspiracy discovered by the
Austrians in Milan in 1821 was also a narrow patrician affair. In the South,
the protests had a much wider reach and they brought more sharply into
focus the centralizing logic that had driven the attempts to refashion the southern
state from the absolutist reforms of the ancien régime monarchy to the Republic of
1799, the French occupation between 1806 and 1815, and ﬁnally the legitimist
Restoration of 1815.
The debates that took place on the mainland and in Sicily in 1820 exposed the
contradictions that surrounded the attempts to create a bureaucratic state in
the South. In part, the obstacles were political, and the revolutions revealed how
Conclusion
318
¹ See Croce (1967), 220.

<<<PDFPAGE 328>>>
the attempts to shift the balance of power away from the peripheries toward the
centre had given rise to an awareness of local and regional identities that was new
and was accompanied by political demands incompatible with autocracy. The
prevailing demands in 1820 were not for a return to the ancien régime, and feudal-
ism was repeatedly identiﬁed with the monopolistic exercise of power at a local
level. Indeed, the new political institutions were criticized above all for not going
far enough in destroying the vestiges of feudalism, while broader political parti-
cipation at a local level was repeatedly invoked as the best means to ensure that
local government did not fall into the hands of powerful individuals or factions.²
The revolutions also underscored the material obstacles to the establishment of
an effective bureaucratic state in the South, and by 1820 it was evident that the
costs of sustaining even the rudimentary new forms of bureaucratic administration
exceeded the Kingdom’s slender human and material resources. But this was not
unusual; indeed it was a problem that faced much wealthier states too, and even in
Italy’s most prosperous regions the new administrative bureaucracies imposed ﬁscal
burdens that were not easily sustained. In Lombardy, for example, heavy increases
in local taxation were one of the main causes of popular unrest and protest in the
closing years of French rule. The high cost of maintaining many of the administrat-
ive innovations made during the years of French rule was as important as ideolo-
gical prejudice in encouraging the Restoration rulers throughout Italy to reduce the
levels of bureaucratic administration and the numbers of administrators. But
because they seriously reduced opportunities for public employment, those
economies would prove a major cause of political disaffection among the career
hungry and underemployed Italian professional and middle classes.³
The situation in the South was different, but again only by degree. The political
debates of 1820 illustrated how the innovations of the previous decades had left
southern Italy caught uneasily between an older agrarian order that had been seri-
ously destabilized and newer forms of bureaucratic power that were in large part
still to be created. The crisis of the ancien régime monarchy and the administrative
reforms of the French decade had embarked the South on a path of political devel-
opment that was both precocious and precarious. In most of the states of northern
and central Italy, government bureaucracies were developing slowly and in part-
nership with relatively resilient forms of agrarian paternalism. In the South, by
contrast, the parallel but closely interconnected crisis of the ancien régime mon-
archy and the agrarian order had made the transition to a bureaucratic organization
of the state much more problematic and dangerous. The crisis of the old agrarian
order had also given rise to social conﬂicts not easily contained, making the bal-
ance between the centralizing efforts of the state and the centrifugal reactions of
the provinces even more uncertain.
Conclusion
319
² Cf. Giarrizzo (1983), 21–33.
³ See Lyttelton (ed. Davis, 1979) 104–34. For Lombardy see Antonelli (1997), 193–219, and
Meriggi (1983, 1987). For Tuscany, see Kroll (2005).

<<<PDFPAGE 329>>>
As had been clearly revealed in the protests in 1820, the weakness of the
new bureaucracies left them vulnerable at a local level to inﬁltration and domina-
tion by powerful individuals or factions. That danger had been foreseen by
the eighteenth-century reformers, and was one of the reasons they had seen the
enlightened absolutist ruler as the ideal instrument of reform. By 1820 conﬁdence
in the ruler had been weakened: hence the insistence that constitutional govern-
ment was the solution. Now the answer seemed to lie in a federalist reorganization
of the state that would guarantee greater regional autonomy. This was an alternative
way of addressing the problems posed by the prevalence of factionalism and the
monopolistic exercise of power at a local level, which were features of the post-
feudal order in the South, but not necessarily an effective alternative.⁴
The transition from the ancien régime to the post-feudal order in the South had
proved particularly difﬁcult and painful, but it must be emphasized that the most
fundamental problems facing southern society were the consequence of change
and not its absence. Similar challenges faced all European states and societies in
these years, and if the impact of change in the South was especially traumatic the
reason was that an agrarian order that in much of the rest of Italy would remain
intact until after Italy’s Uniﬁcation had been deeply compromised almost a cen-
tury earlier. It was not until the 1850s, for example, that the conservative
Lombard Catholic Stefano Jacini adopted a distinction ﬁrst made in France to
bemoan the dangers posed for the survival of the face-to-face paternalist rural
order—the ‘real Italy’—that he believed still survived in much of northern Italy
by the expansion of an impersonal and distant bureaucratic state—the ‘legal
Italy’.⁵ In parts of the Veneto the state would remain remote and almost unknown
until well into the twentieth century.⁶
In the South, the state had sought to acquire greater power in the localities from
much earlier, but with ambiguous and contradictory results. These were evident in
1820–1, and became even more so in the decades that followed. After the revolu-
tions the Bourbon rulers set their faces ﬁrmly against any form of political dialogue,
and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies followed the reactionary models set by the
other Italian rulers. For reasons of economy as well as ideology, the bureaucratic
project was put on hold and the provincial voices that had played an increasingly
important political role since the end of the eighteenth century were again silenced.
The project of bureaucratic centralization was maintained, but became increas-
ingly dependent on narrow groups of professional administrators and nobles whose
loyalty to the dynasty was beyond reproach.
Conclusion
320
⁴ On factionalism, see especially Pezzino (1992) and Fiume (1984) and in Davis and Ginsborg
(eds.) (1991), 70–91.
⁵ Jacini (1857). In an important recent study of local government in Sicily after Uniﬁcation Lucy
Riall argues that the South had experienced a different process of state formation (Riall (1997), 228).
But although problematic the process of state formation in the South was essentially the same as in
other parts of Italy, the difference being that the changes came earlier. See also Sabetti (1984), 3–18.
⁶ See, e.g., Lanaro (1984) and Fumian (1990).

<<<PDFPAGE 330>>>
As in the other Italian states, the reactionary turn in the South after 1821 nar-
rowed the monarchy’s political base, and left the Church and the army to take up
the slack. Even the rulers’ closest advisers were well aware of the dangers this posed,
and in the climate of growing apprehension before the revolutions of 1848 the
king’s principal adviser, the marchese Ceva Grimaldi, warned Ferdinand II that:
Luigi de’ Medici described our government very well when he called it a monarchy ‘à la
Napoléon’. . . . Without any effective support from the Aristocracy or the Church, its
only real foundation is in the Army and the Public Ofﬁcials. But public employees are gen-
erally happy to watch revolutions take place from the window, so long as someone goes on
paying their wages.⁷
That description could have been applied to every other Italian state in the
same period, but the reassertion of reactionary absolutism after 1821 had trig-
gered a particularly vicious cycle in the South. When loyalty to the regime became
the sole criterion for public service, corruption grew as did new forms of mono-
polistic controls over public administration. In the absence of alternative forms of
economic activity, the resources of local government became the focus for ﬁerce
struggles between competing local factions.⁸ These tendencies had all been pre-
sent earlier but they now became more intense, as did social tensions. In part these
were the result of the depressed state of the economy, which showed no sign of
recovery until the 1830s. But they were also rooted more speciﬁcally in popular
resentment at the ways in which the abolition of feudalism, the division of the
common lands, and the disappearance of customary use-rights had deprived the
rural communities of their scarce but only assets.
Similar tensions were evident in other parts of Italy in the same period.
Everywhere the steady advance of new forms of farming, together with new meas-
ures designed to reduce promiscuous grazing and collective land use, threatened
the economies of the rural poor.⁹ The situation in the South was therefore only a
variant, albeit often a more extreme one, on patterns of development at work on a
wider scale on the Italian peninsula and in other parts of Europe. As elsewhere, the
Bourbon monarchy’s attempts to mediate between the conﬂicting forces of
the market and the threats these posed to the security of rural communities
proved ineffective. As in the previous century, the government’s interventions
were more likely to inﬂame than resolve local conﬂicts, in ways that did little for
the poor but angered the landowners. There was little space for compromise, and
these disputes served mainly to expose the government’s inability to impose its
will against powerful local interests.¹⁰
Conclusion
321
⁷ ASN: Archivio Borbone f. 607, Parte II inc 823: C. Ceva Grimaldi a Ferdinando II, 10 August
1843.
⁸ Pezzino (1992), 9–23; Davis (1981), 296–329. On corruption and the state in Latin America
see also Macfarlane, in Little and Posada-Carbó (eds.) (1996), 40–63.
⁹ See Grossi (1981), 121–71.
¹⁰ See especially Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 191–266.

<<<PDFPAGE 331>>>
As in the rest of Italy, the divisions of the former feudal estates and the sales of
Church and crown lands in the South had resulted in a redistribution of land prim-
arily among those who already owned property. Many of the old feudal families
suffered heavy losses, in some cases because of the loss of signiﬁcant incomes from
feudal levies, but above all because of the abolition of feudal entails and primogen-
iture that resulted in the rapid dispersion of noble patrimonies. This was the main
cause of the breakup of many older noble estates, although in some parts of the
Kingdom this was offset by the formation of vast new estates known as latifundia.¹¹
Latifundia had existed in southern Italy—and in other parts of Italy as well—
from much earlier. As the name indicates, the institution was Roman in origin
although it had been an important instrument of Spanish colonial settlement in the
New World and in southern Italy. However, latifundist estates also existed in
central Italy—notably in Lazio and the arid plain around Rome—and in different
form in the Veneto as well.¹² But the latifondo was particularly well suited to the
natural conditions that prevailed in many parts of central and southern Italy,
where the vast size of these estates made possible economies of scale that helped to
offset the limits posed by poor soils, inadequate rainfall, and slight and fragile
natural resources.
The land sales of the French period and the difﬁculties facing many of the old
feudal families provided the opportunities for the creation of new latifundist
properties in the early nineteenth century, and it was not by chance these developed
especially in areas where the purchase of the government’s new administrative
apparatus was most weak. On the mainland, they were especially prominent
in Calabria, where a number of new families—the Barracco, the Campagna, and
the Quintieri—pushed their way into the agrarian hierarchy, buying land from
the crown, but above all by acquiring the debts of the great feudatories.¹³
The new estates were not simply a continuation of earlier feudalism, and their
economic management was often geared to exploiting new commercial opportun-
ities while at the same time offering protection against the unpredictable swings of
the market—the single greatest problem facing producers in marginal economies
subject to the unpredictable yet potentially devastating swings in external demand.
Yet the underlying logic of these enterprises was monopolistic: over huge areas the
essential means of production—land, labour, livestock, water, pasture, and credit—
came under the monopolist control of the latifondo and its masters, giving these
estates the character of a state within a state. The power of the landowners was
absolute and when challenged was imposed by force. But that was rarely necessary
because the system depended less on coercion than on the monopolies exercised by
the great landowners and their agents who controlled not only the land but above
Conclusion
322
¹¹ Montroni (1996), pp. vii–ix, 31–4.
¹² On the Veneto, see Lanaro (1984) and Fumian (1984).
¹³ Montroni (1996), 37–4; Petrusewicz (1996), 33–59. On the Quintieri see Rienzo (2004),
20–5.

<<<PDFPAGE 332>>>
all the resources needed to work the land, and especially credit. It was this that made
the economic, social, and cultural lives of the communities who lived and worked
on the great estates dependent in every respect on the owners of the estates.¹⁴
Such relations of dependence were not unusual in nineteenth-century Italy and
indeed throughout Europe debt was most commonly what tied the post-feudal rural
poor to the land and the interests of the landowners.¹⁵ But there were clear signs that
in the South the landowners were adopting new measures to reimpose hierarchies of
rural dependence that had been threatened by the crisis of the old agrarian order.
Before 1860 new latifundia were located primarily in those regions of the main-
land where brigandage had previously proved most difﬁcult to eradicate. But as
early as the 1830s Bourbon ofﬁcials noted similar developments in western Sicily.
Here, too, the abolition of feudalism had provided powerful Sicilian landowners
with opportunities to engross and privatize lands that had previously been subject
to collective use. From the reports of Bourbon ofﬁcials, it is also possible to ident-
ify what would only later come to be known as maﬁa, a system of power relations
in which estate bailiffs and their armed retainers acted as powerful intermediaries
who oversaw the management of the estates and their labour force on behalf of
generally absentee landowners. They were responsible for enforcing monopolies
over scant resources—water and pasture in particular—but they also engaged in a
range of illicit commercial activities, especially the trade in rustled livestock and
meat, while maintaining order on the estates and enforcing local codes of discip-
line and deference.¹⁶
Neither maﬁa nor the reconstruction of the latifundist estates on the mainland
were legacies from the feudal past. Both are better understood as responses to the
challenges posed by change and the incursion of unpredictable and uncertain
market forces in the fragile agrarian economies of the South. One consequence
was to accentuate the differences within the South. In Sicily the slowly expanding
commercial economies of Messina and Catania in eastern Sicily and even of the
citrus growing Conca d’Oro near Palermo contrasted with the maﬁa-dominated
estates of the arid interior. On the mainland, the relatively closed Calabrian
latifundia contrasted with the more open commercial world of Bari and the
Adriatic ports.¹⁷
Conclusion
323
¹⁴ The reporter for the 1882 parliamentary inquiry on the state of agriculture who visited the
Quintieri estates in Calabria commented, ‘The fable of Midas who turned to gold everything he
touched, that telling allusion to the torments of avarice and the power of saving, is still a reality here in
distant Calabria due to the absence of any awareness of the needs and costs of more reﬁned forms of
civilization.’ Virtually every landowner in the province, he noted, was indebted to the Quintieri fam-
ily; see Atti della Giunta per l’Inchiesta Agraria (1882) vol. ix, p. xvi, cited in Davis (1979), 75. For
similar but also contrasting descriptions of the 19th-century latifondo, cf. Lupo (1990), and
Petrusewicz (1996).
¹⁵ See, e.g., Malatesta (1988), 111–25.
¹⁶ See the report by the Bourbon Procurator General, Pietro Cala-Ulloa, in 1838, in Pontieri
(1965), 239–77, cited in Fiume (1984) and Davis (1988), 84–7.
¹⁷ Benigno (1982, 2001); Cancila (1991); D’Angelo (1988); Salvemini (1995); Massafra (1981,
1995).

<<<PDFPAGE 333>>>
In fact, there were many points of contact between these two apparently con-
trasting worlds. Since the most advanced sectors of southern agriculture were
those most heavily engaged in export activities, they were also the most heavily
exposed to the unpredictable swings of international markets. As a result wise
investors sought safer and more protected opportunities, and the continuing pref-
erences for investment in land, in loans secured by mortgages on land, or in con-
tracts for public works were clear indications of the high risks involved in other
commercial activities.¹⁸
The poverty of internal markets made the most advanced sectors of the south-
ern economies dependent on export markets whose uncertainty was the main
obstacle to economic growth. These problems faced all the Italian economies,
which were reduced to marginal and subordinate roles in a new world of unprece-
dentedly competitive markets. But the impact on the fragile economies of the
South was especially disruptive and gave rise to conditions of chronic uncertainty
and insecurity.
Insecurity would become an increasingly central feature of the lives of many
southerners, and it was also reﬂected in the Kingdom’s dynastic and diplomatic
vulnerability. The central aim of Bourbon dynastic strategies in the eighteenth
century had been to give substance to the Kingdom’s theoretic autonomy. Murat
shared similar illusions, but in the crisis that followed the revolution in France those
dreams of autonomy had been lost for ever. The Kingdom ﬁrst became a satellite of
its British ally and then a colony partitioned between Britain and France.
After 1815, the Bourbon monarchy’s claims to autonomy were no more than a
mask while the events of 1820 would brutally reveal its internal and external
weaknesses. The situation that faced the Bourbon rulers after their third
Restoration by a foreign army in the space of twenty-two years was desperate, and
the obligation to meet both the military costs of the Restoration and the mainten-
ance of an Austrian army of invasion for an indeterminate period threatened
ﬁnancial collapse. To avert this, the Rothschild Bank in 1821 at the request of
the Austrian government agreed to open its ﬁrst Italian agency in Naples, and
with de’ Medici’s assistance proceeded to take over the Neapolitan debt, which
was ﬂoated on the European security markets.¹⁹
Financial disaster was averted, and de’ Medici knew that opening the public
debt to foreign investors gave the monarchy a degree of security. But this also
meant that interest payments on the debt drew capital away from the Kingdom,
while the concession of management of the Kingdom’s debt to a leading interna-
tional bank was a dangerous further step toward economic dependency. To 
break out of the threatened poverty trap, Luigi de’ Medici embarked on a high-risk
Conclusion
324
¹⁸ Davis (1981), 296–340. Lupo (1990) shows how the expansion of the Sicilian latifondo was
linked to persistent market uncertainties. See also Sabetti (1984), 93–4. Macry (1997), Marmo
(1994), Caglioti (1994) also stress the constant precariousness of Neapolitan society.
¹⁹ Cingari (1966), 140–76; Ostuni (1993), 329–32.

<<<PDFPAGE 334>>>
economic strategy when in 1823 the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies adopted one of
the highest protectionist regimes in Europe.
The tariffs targeted imported manufactured goods, looking to import substitu-
tion as a means to promote the development of national industries, especially tex-
tiles, shipbuilding, and engineering. The strategy was a continuation by other
means of less coherent policies followed by the eighteenth-century Bourbons, and
above all of Murat’s earlier efforts to reduce colonial subordination to France.
Indeed, most of the numerous community of foreign merchants and textile mas-
ters that had settled in the Kingdom had ﬁrst arrived during the years of French
rule and at Murat’s invitation.²⁰
As those earlier initiatives had made clear, the threats of commercial and colo-
nial dependence were the most serious challenges to the Kingdom’s autonomy.
De’ Medici now combined these earlier experiments at import substitution with
a more ambitious attempt to reverse the Kingdom’s commercial and political
subordination. The key aim was to expand the merchant ﬂeet, but this was linked
with measures designed to equip the Kingdom with a modern navy and a reorgan-
ized army. The naval shipyards in Naples would build the ﬁrst steamships in
Italy, and were also designed to produce modern artillery for the army as well as
Italy’s ﬁrst railway. Dynastic loyalty became the test for all those who sought
commissions in the army, while regiments of foreign mercenaries were recruited
to provide greater internal security and protect the monarchy against a repetition
of the mutinies of 1820.
By the early 1830s Naples as a result had the largest industrial base of all the
pre-Uniﬁcation Italian states. The largest shipyards and engineering works in Italy
were in Naples, while numerous cotton and wool textile factories had been estab-
lished in the Apennine foothills where water-power was abundant.²¹ Two decades
before their counterparts in Piedmont–Savoy the Bourbon rulers in the South had
embarked on a programme of economic development and military reorganiza-
tion. But the strategy proved impossible to sustain. It brought the Kingdom into
conﬂict ﬁrst with its most powerful commercial partner, Great Britain, and then
with the most powerful economic interests in the Kingdom, the landowners.
Both reactions revealed the obstacles facing the survival of small dynastic states
in an age of growing international economic competition and political rivalry.
The policies adopted by the Bourbon rulers in Naples met with a fate very similar
to that visited on the Egyptian ruler Mehemet Ali in the same period, and for sim-
ilar reasons. The Bourbon government’s protectionist measures immediately
became the target of punitive reprisals against the Kingdom’s prime exports, in
particular olive oil, by the British and resulted in a prolonged commercial war that
dragged on until June 1840 when the two countries nearly came to war.
Conclusion
325
²⁰ Cingari (1966), 140–76; Davis (1981); Dawes (1991), 226–37.
²¹ On the Neapolitan shipbuilding industry, see De Rosa (1968); on the textile industry De
Matteo (1984) and Davis (1981), 108–32.

<<<PDFPAGE 335>>>
The immediate cause was the decision by the Neapolitan government to grant a
monopoly over the export of sulphur from Sicily to a French company in 1839.
The ‘Affair of the Sicilian Brimstones’ caused a furore in England, since the com-
mercial treaty with Naples in 1816 had given British shipping a virtual monopoly
over the Kingdom’s carrying trade. On the pretext that British commercial inter-
ests had been unfairly damaged, in June 1840 Lord Palmerston dispatched a
squadron of British gunboats to the Bay of Naples. Under threat of bombardment
the Neapolitan government was forced to climb down, agreeing under duress to
pay heavy indemnities for losses suffered by British merchants that later turned
out to be ﬁctitious, and also to abandon its protectionist tariffs.²²
This was the fourth time in just over a century that the British navy had threat-
ened to bombard Naples and although the ‘Affair of the Sicilian Brimstones’ has
hardly earned a footnote in the history of the imperialism of free trade and British
gunboat diplomacy it starkly revealed the obstacles to the survival of an independ-
ent dynastic state in southern Italy. The situation was further complicated by the
fact that de’ Medici’s bid to develop a modern industrial sector and promote a
national shipbuilding industry had aroused ﬁerce opposition from the southern
landowners as well. The government’s protectionist measures had caused the price
of imported goods to rise, cut southern agricultural producers off from access to
foreign markets, and made the Kingdom’s most valuable agricultural exports the
principal target of British reprisals. The landowners’ discontents also focused
on the government’s decision to maintain control on grain exports introduced
by the French rulers in 1810, which permitted exports only after the needs of the
domestic market had been met. These measures were designed to prevent popular
unrest by ensuring plentiful supplies of cheap bread, but they were especially
damaging for those engaged in the export trades. The landowners’ discontents did
not take overtly political form, but they did give rise to growing demands for the
government to adopt more liberal economic measures and contributed to a more
general disaffection with Bourbon rule.²³
The difﬁculty of maintaining some degree of dynastic independence in a
rapidly changing world faced the Bourbons rulers in the South with challenges
that were not unique, and similar problems faced all the other Italian rulers
although in most cases these were disguised by Austrian protection. But this was
not why the Kingdom collapsed in 1860, and when the Bourbons lost their
throne it was because Austria’s defeat in 1859 sealed the fate of all the Italian
rulers, except for the Pope and the House of Savoy.
This is not to deny that powerful political tensions had developed within the
Bourbon Kingdom, but these did not differ signiﬁcantly from those facing the
other Italian rulers. Indeed, after the outbreak of the revolutions in 1848
Ferdinand II of Naples was the ﬁrst Italian ruler to restore order without outside
Conclusion
326
²² Davis (1982), 5–24.
²³ Ibid.

<<<PDFPAGE 336>>>
help. The monarchy did not repeat the mistakes of 1820, in large part because in
1848 both the army and the Swiss guards remained loyal to the monarchy. As a
result, the insurrections in the southern provinces were quickly put down, as were
the revolutions in Sicily.
In 1849 the royalist counter-revolution prevailed in southern Italy, as it did in
every other Italian state with the single exception of Piedmont. But the most ser-
ious outcome of the revolutions of 1848–9 was that the monarchy’s success in
crushing the revolutions earned Ferdinand II the epithet of ‘King Bomba’ in the
European liberal press. William Gladstone’s ringing denunciation of the Bourbon
dynasty as the ‘negation of God set up as a system of government’ on account of
the mistreatment of the liberals held as political prisoners after the revolutions
made that reputation stick and made the Neapolitan Bourbons the pariahs of lib-
eral Europe.²⁴
When in 1854 the war in the Crimea revealed how deeply the revolutions of
1848 had weakened the Habsburg monarchy, the Bourbon monarchy in the
South became even more dangerously isolated. The Neapolitan government could
hardly have misjudged things more badly, however, when it made overtures for an
alliance with St Petersburg, a move that was bound to make Britain even more
hostile. It was not by chance that in May 1860 Garibaldi’s volunteers chose to land
at Marsala, a port dominated by British merchants that was also protected by two
British men-o’-war.²⁵
After 1849, the political conditions in the southern Kingdom were as bleak and
reactionary as in any of the other Italian states, except in Piedmont, the only
Italian state in which constitutional government had survived. Had the
Neapolitan Bourbons followed the lead of the House of Savoy and played the
nationalist card things might have turned out differently. But the question has
only to be asked to reveal why this was never an option. The most compelling
obstacle was the dynasty’s continuing dependence on the protection of Austria
and the support of the Pope. But even had foresight made that gamble worth tak-
ing, any concessions to liberal demands would have reopened the issues of
regional and Sicilian autonomy that had dominated the agenda of the revolutions
in the South in 1848.
There was no obvious exit strategy from the endgame facing the Neapolitan
Bourbons after 1850. But with the exception of Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont,
the other Italian rulers found themselves in similar situations which is why none
of them survived. Not even the centrifugal forces that were the immediate cause of
Conclusion
327
²⁴ See Moe (2002), 131–9. However, it is less widely known that Gladstone’s intervention was by
no means unpartisan. In 1839 he had been the spokesman in the House of Commons for the British
merchants interested in the Sicilian sulphur trade, whereas earlier he had written a more positive
account of Bourbon rule in Naples!—see Foot (ed.) Gladstone Diaries, ii (October–November 1838),
484–502.
²⁵ Mack Smith (1954/1985), 23–36; Martucci (1999), 165–8. On relations with Russia, see
Giura (1967).

<<<PDFPAGE 337>>>
the downfall of the Neapolitan Bourbons in 1860 when Sicily made its third and
ﬁnally successful bid for autonomy were peculiar to the South. During the revolu-
tions of 1848 similar demands for regional or municipal autonomy had been
the principal cause of political unrest in all the Italian states. In Piedmont, the
Genoese revolt against Turin was put down in 1849 no less bloodily than the
Bourbon assaults on Messina and Palermo. Almost identical struggles were played
out in the Veneto when the cities of the Venetian Terraferma took the opportunity
to break free from subordination to Venice, in Tuscany when Livorno made its bid
for freedom from Florence, and in the Papal States where virtually every city
rebelled against Rome.²⁶
The tensions between the capital and the provinces and between Sicily and the
mainland that in 1860 overwhelmed the Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies
were only one example, therefore, of internal tensions that faced every Italian ruler
and contributed in no small part to the collapse of the pre-Uniﬁcation Italian
states. In each case, moves toward greater centralization and the incorporation of
previously independent states, cities, and territories were the principal causes of
political unrest. Resentments at lost regional and municipal autonomy had domi-
nated the course of the revolutions in 1848–9, and Italy’s political Uniﬁcation
would succeed at least in part because it proved better able to accommodate these
deeply felt local and municipal identities.
Nor can it be assumed that social and economic conditions in the South were
signiﬁcantly worse than in the rest of Italy at the time of Uniﬁcation. Down to the
end of the century poverty was the common condition of most Italians and at
the time of Uniﬁcation there was little to choose between the poorest regions
in the South and those of the North and Centre.²⁷ There were also a number of
relatively advanced commercial regions in the South, even though these did not
beneﬁt to the same degree from the commercial boom of the 1850s that brought
important changes to the more developed commercial centres in the North—
especially in Piedmont and Lombardy. But in 1860 the economic differences
between the North and the South were still much less than they would be forty years
later, and before the new Italian state dismantled the protective barriers that had
enabled the southern textile, engineering, and shipbuilding industries to develop.
The numbers engaged in ‘industry’—although the term is very misleading—were
actually higher in the South than anywhere else in Italy in 1860.²⁸
There were also important structural differences, although these would not
become evident until later. Even in those parts of the South where commercial
agriculture was most developed—the Terra di Bari, the regions closest to the 
Conclusion
328
²⁶ On the Veneto in English see Ginsborg (1979) and more recently Laven (2002). For Tuscany
see especially Lo Romer (1987) and Kroll (2005). On Rome see Carnavale and Caracciolo (1978).
²⁷ Bolton King and Thomas Okey in their survey of Italy in 1902 believed that the country’s
poverty was its most distinctive feature amongst the western European industrialized states.
²⁸ De Rosa (2004), 3–19.

<<<PDFPAGE 338>>>
capital and around Reggio Calabria on the mainland, Messina, Catania, Palermo’s
Conca d’Ora, Marsala, Trapani, and a number of other western Sicilian ports—
the resources and infrastructures that would turn the lower Po valley into the
principal motor of Italy’s economic growth in the years after Uniﬁcation were
lacking. The South had no cash crop comparable to the silk of Lombardy and
Piedmont—Italy’s ‘white coal’—that would remain its principal export commod-
ity down to the Great War and the main source of the commercial wealth and
capital investment in both agriculture and industry in the North.²⁹ The fact that
the southern Kingdom’s foreign trade was the lowest of all the Italian states in per
capita terms at the time of Uniﬁcation was another indicator of underlying eco-
nomic weakness, although the ﬁgures are to some extent distorted by the fact that
this was most populous of the Italian states.³⁰ A more telling sign came perhaps
from the decision of the Rothschild Bank in the 1850s to close down its ofﬁces in
Naples, on the grounds that apart from government stock the Kingdom no longer
offered attractive commercial or industrial investment opportunities.³¹
The reasons for the Kingdom’s collapse in 1860 were military, diplomatic, and
political, therefore, although after the event this came to be seen as the con-
sequence of backwardness and of decades, even centuries of misrule, oppression,
and corruption. That was an oversimpliﬁcation that nonetheless fed the parallel
myth that economic liberalism was the best remedy for the ills of the South. But
this was to disregard the lessons that had been painfully learned at the beginning
of the century. Both the laissez-faire principles that had guided the enlightened
reformers of the eighteenth century and the conﬁdent belief of the French rulers
that rational governance was all that was needed to unlock the natural wealth of
the South had proved inadequate solutions to the problems posed by rapid change
in the Mezzogiorno. These problems had little to do with immobility, but every-
thing to do with the extreme fragility of the Kingdom’s economic foundations
when exposed to new forces of change.
The Bourbon monarchy had neither the vision nor the means to address these
problems and its own desperate attempts to survive added new contradictions
and conﬂicts. But once the Kingdom ceased to exist, the myths of an immobile and
unchanging South were invoked to justify panaceas that had already been tried and
found wanting. When these failed again, the blame was laid on the backwardness
of the South. It would be more accurate to say, however, that the South embodied
in extreme form conditions common to most of Italy—poverty, low levels of con-
sumption, a marginal and subordinate position on international markets.
It was by no means only in the South that the new state failed to address those
problems, but in the South the consequences of that failure would prove especially
damaging. As in many of Europe’s peripheral regions, the challenges posed by
thenew era of industrialization and international commercial markets threw the
Conclusion
329
²⁹ Cafagna (1994), 17–49.
³⁰ Graziani (1960), 1–89.
³¹ ‘Les opérations semblent y avoir étés suspendues pendant longtemps’: Gilles (1965), ii. 49.

<<<PDFPAGE 339>>>
economic fabric and existing social hierarchies of many parts of the South into
confusion, creating conditions not only of conﬂict but also of uncertainty and
insecurity. If these changes created new opportunities, the prevailing conditions
of insecurity also encouraged the development of forms of monopolist exploita-
tion that would become the most pathological features of the Southern Problem.
It was no coincidence that these developments should have become increasingly
visible in the years that followed the great agricultural crisis of the 1880s, whose
devastating impact on the fragile economies of Spain, Greece, the Balkans, and
southern Italy has frequently been underestimated.³² The mass emigrations of the
following decade revealed the deep structural impact of the crisis, which struck
themost proﬁtable and advanced sectors of the southern economies most heavily,
creating new incentives to monopolize the scant resources that remained.³³
The crisis of the 1880s exposed the underlying fragility of the southern
economies and the responses that followed were typical of impoverished economies
in times of insecurity and uncertainty. A direct consequence was the extension of
monopolist powers from the economy to politics in ways charted by observers from
Gaetano Salvemini to Antonio Gramsci. But this was not the story of a death fore-
told, not was it the consequence of some supposed deﬁcit of social capital.³⁴ The
vulnerabilities of the South had been evident from much earlier, and the short
period of Napoleonic rule at the beginning of the century had dramatically
revealed why change tended to be both abrupt and disruptive. The Napoleonic
decade had also exposed the South’s vulnerability to political and economic subor-
dination, even though against every intention of empire the Neapolitans in those
years had acquired important autonomies. But in the changed political and eco-
nomic conditions after Uniﬁcation the South would become the prisoner of its
insecurities, such that when the oldest and largest of the Italy’s pre-Uniﬁcation
states ceased to be a kingdom it became a problem: the Southern Problem.
Conclusion
330
³² See Morilla Critz, Olmstead, Rhode (1999), 316–25. The devastating impact of international
competition in markets where Mediterranean producers were previously well represented merits
comparison with the earlier post-Napoleonic recession caused by the arrival of Egyptian and Russian
grain on European markets.
³³ For an important analysis of the links between insecurity and the rise of maﬁa in the 20th cen-
tury, for example see Gambetta (1993), 75–98.
³⁴ The term is from Putnam (1993).

<<<PDFPAGE 340>>>
Bibliography
PRIMARY SOURCES
Archives
Paris
Archives des Affaires Etrangères (AAEP)
Correspondance politique (CP) (Naples), vols. 126–38 (1789–1812)
Correspondance consulaire (CC) (Naples), vols. 38–41 (1793–1811)
Mémoires et Documents (Naples), vols. 1–6
Archives Nationales, Paris (ANP)
AFiv 1714a
Secrétaire d’état imperial
AFiv 1714b
Joseph Bonaparte
AFiv 1714c
Correspondence de Joseph Bonaparte–Napoléon
AFiv 1714d
Papiers André Miot
F(12)
Commerce et industries, ff. 549–50, 625–9, 2192
F(2)
Cottons napolitains, ff. 625–9
ANP: Archives Privées
29 AP
Papiers Roederer
31AP 5–43
Archive Murat
33AP
Papiers Berthier
211AP
Papiers de Jean Louis Ebenezer Reynier
381 AP
Fonds Joseph Bonaparte
Archives de la Guerre (Chateau de Vincennes) (A de G)
C(5) 1–18
Correspondences de Joseph Bonaparte
C(5*) 31–2
Reynier
C(5*) 33–44
Correspondance et Police
B(3*)
Armée d’Italie 1799, ff. 221–331–322 (MacDonald) 325 (Cham-
pionnet)
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris (BNP)
Fonds Italiens 1124–7
London
Public Record Ofﬁce (PRO)
WO 1–280, 304, 306, 308, 315
FO 67 (Sardinia 1783–4)
FO 70 (Naples and Sicily) 4, 12, 13, 33, 38
FO 165

<<<PDFPAGE 341>>>
Naples
Archivio di Stato di Napoli (ASN)
Archivio Ministero dell’Interno (I Inventario), f. 183
Archivio Ministero dell’Interno (II Inventario), ff. 2206, 2243, 5066, 5067, 5068, 5079
(brigantaggio)
Archivio Ministero dell’Interno Appendice1, ff. 150, 213
Archivio Ministero dell’Interno Appendice II, f. 585 (Commissar Paolo Giampaolo)
Archivio Ministero dell’Interno Carte Winspeare, Affari Demaniali, ff. 74–89
Archivio Ministero di Polizia (1a Parte), ff. 94, 152, Rei di Stato, 265–349
Archivio Ministero dell’Interno, Catasti Onciari, ff. 4658, 5921–2, 5986, 7122
Archivio Ministero delle Finanze 1627–1649 (Carte Zurlo), ff. 2366, 2529, 2717, 2724,
2735, 2737, 2745, 2790, 2864, 2802, 2812, 4959
Archivio Ministero degli Affari Esteri, ff. 5512–45, 5600 (Marchese di Gallo), 5521,
5534 (consular correspondence), 5691 (correspondence with Paris), 5732, 5602
(di Gallo)
Commissione per la Liquidazione del Debito Pubblico, ff. 3527, 5589, 5595, 4959,
4242, 4512
Bollettino delle Sentenze della Commissione Feudale (1808–59), 71 vols.
Bolletino delle Ordinanze de’Commissari Ripartitori (1858–67), 24 vols.
Rei di Stato, ff. 265, 276, 323–4
Archivi Privati
Archivio Tommasi, B V–XI
Archivio Maresca di Serracapriola, B 16–22, 29–32, 38–9, 40–2, 46–51, 130–3, 167,
176, 217–19
Archivio Serra Gerace, B60–175
Archivio Di Toccò di Montemiletto, B 59, 87–9, 102, 123, 126, 130, 135, 157, 
190–4, 198
Biblioteca Nazionale V. Emanuele II, Naples (Sezione Manoscritti) (BNN)
Sezione Ms: Bancone 8B: ff. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33
Mss Cuoco XX
Mss rari: SQ IV L 31
Ms varie: xxii a.6
Biblioteca Storia Patria, Naples (BSPN)
Mss XXVI A.8 Documenti originali: 24, 33, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 61, 74, 79, 94, 96,
117, 195
Mss C2 fasc 3: Notamento dei monasteri soppressi 1806–9
Mss XXI B 5 (Codice diplomatico: dominazione francese)
Documenti 1799–1815. Mss: 3 Corrispondenza XIV, Busta 2
SD. X. c.17 (1–64), Min. Interno 1806–15
Ms varia XXXIII 6 Saggio storico delle società denominate Carboneria ecc
Archivio di Stato di Foggia (ASF)
Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali; Processi Verbali, Buste 1–2
Intendenze di Capitanata: Carte Varie: Busta 5; Fascic.1 (Reale Società Economiche);
ff. 332, 346
Atti di Polizia: ff. 355, 396
Bibliography
332

<<<PDFPAGE 342>>>
Edited Collections of Original Documents
Atti del Parlamento delle Due Sicilie, 1820–1, ed. Alberti Annibale, 2 vols. (Rome–Bologna:
Accademia dei Lincei, 1931).
Bonaparte, Joseph. Mémoires et correspondence politique et militaire du Roi Joseph, ed.
A. Du Casse, 10 vols. (Paris, 1853–4).
Bonaparte, Napoleon. Correspondance de Napoléon Ier, 32 vols. (Paris, 1858).
Di Gallo, Marzillio Mastrilli. ‘Memorie del Duca di Gallo’: ASPN a xiii. Fii (1888),
207–382.
Jullien, Marc-Antoine. Segretario Generale della Repubblica Napoletana. Lettere e documenti
ed. Mario Battaglini (Naples: Vivarium, 1998).
La Riconquista del Regno di Napoli nel 1799. Lettere del Cardinale Ruffo, del Re, della Regina
e del Ministro Acton, ed. B. Croce (Bari: Laterza, 1943).
La Repubblica Napoletana. Diari, memorie, racconti, ed. Mario Battaglini, 2 vols. (Naples:
Istituto Italiano per gli Studi Filosoﬁci, 2000).
Leggi, Atti, Proclami ed altri documenti della Repubblica Napoletana 1798–1799, ed.
M. Battaglini and A. Placanica (Cava dei Tirreni: Di Mauro Editore, 2000–1).
L’invasione francese negli Abruzzi 1798–1810, ed. Luigi Coppa-Zuccari, 4 vols. (L’Aquila,
1927).
Murat, Joachim. Lettres et documents pour servire à l’histoire de Joachim Murat 1767–1815,
vols. vi–viii, ed. Paul Le Brethon (Paris: Plon-Nourrit, 1911–14).
Il Parlamento Nazionale Napoletano per gli anni 1820 e 1821, ed. V. Fontanarosa (Rome:
Biblioteca di Storia del Risorgimento, 1910).
U. S. Consular Correspondence: Naples, vol. i (December 1796–October 1832).
Published Sources and Memoires
Anon. Notizia storica del conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (Naples: Giovanni Ranucci,
1846).
Arrighi, G. M. Saggio storico per servire di studio alle rivoluzioni politiche e civili del Regno di
Napoli (Naples, 1809).
Beyle, Henri (Stendhal). Rome, Naples et Florence en 1817 (Paris, 1817).
Bianchini, Ludovico. Della storia della ﬁnanze del Regno di Napoli, 3 vols. (Naples,
1859) (republished as Storia delle Finanze del Regno delle Due Sicilie (Naples, 
1971).
Blanch, Luigi. Scritti Storici, ed. B. Croce, 3 vols. (Bari: Laterza, 1945).
Bunbury, Sir Henry. Narratives of some passages in the great war with France 1799 to 1810
(London 1854).
Calà Ulloa, Pietro. Il Regno di Ferdinando II (Naples: ESI, 1967).
Capasso, Bartolomeo. Sulla circoscrizione civile ed ecclesiastica e sulla popolazione della città
di Napoli (Naples, 1882).
Ceva Grimaldi, G. Del Lavoro degli Artigiani (Naples, 1845).
——. Memorie storiche di Napoli dal Tempo della sua Fondazione (Naples, 1857).
Colletta, Pietro. Cenno storico intorno alla rivoluzione napoletana del 1820 (Napoli,
1848).
——. Storia del Reame di Napoli, ed. Nino Cortese (Naples, 1957), 3 vols. (Original
edn.: Storia del Reame di Napoli dal 1734 al 1825, ed. G. Capponi (Firenze, 1834),
3 vols.)
Bibliography
333

<<<PDFPAGE 343>>>
Courier, Paul Louis. Mémoires, correspondances et opuscules inédits, 2 vols. (Paris, 1828).
Craven, Richard Keppel. Sketch of the late Revolution at Naples by an eye-witness (London,
1820).
Cronache segreti dela polizia toscana, ed. G. Marcotti (Florence, 1898).
Cuoco, Vincenzo. Scritti Vari, ed. N. Cortese and F. Niccolini, Parte Prima (Periodo
milanese, 1801–6); Parte Seconda (Periodo napoletano 1806–15) (Bari: Laterza,
1924).
——. Saggio storico sulla rivoluzione napoletana del 1799, ed. Pasquale Villani (Bari:
Laterza, 1980).
——. Saggio Storico sulla Rivoluzione di Napoli, ed. Fulvio Tessitore (Naples: Itinerario,
1988).
——. Saggio Storico sulla rivoluzione di Napoli, ed. Antonino De Francesco,
(Manduria–Bari–Rome: Lacaita, 1998).
De Gxx. Notice historique sur M. le Lieutenant Géneral Charles Antoine, Comte Manhès
(Paris, 1817).
De Nicola, Carlo. Diario Napoletano 1798–1825 (ASPN 1899–1905), 3 vols. (Naples,
1906). Partially rpt. as Diario Napoletano: Dicembre 1798–Dicembre 1800, ed. R. Riccis
(Milano, 1963); full rpt. and Introduction: Diario Napoletano 1798–1825, 3 vols., ed.
R. De Lorenzo (Naples: Luigi Regina Editore, 1999).
De Rivarol, Auguste. Notice historique sur la Calabre pendant les dernières revolutions de
Naples (Paris, 1817).
Drusco, abate Pietrabonda. Anarchia popolare a Napoli del 21 dicembre 1796 al 23 gennaio
1799, ed. M. Arcella (Naples, 1884).
Dumas, Alexandre. I Borboni di Napoli, 10 vols. (Naples, 1862–4).
Duret de Tavel. Séjour d’un ofﬁcier français en Calabre (Paris, 1820).
Filangieri Raveschieri, Teresa. Storia della Carità a Napoli (Naples, 1878).
Galanti, Giuseppe Maria. Nuova Descrizione Storica e Geograﬁca delle Sicilie, 4 vols.
(Naples, 1786).
——. Breve Descrizione di Napoli e del Suo Contorno (Naples, 1792).
——. Memorie del mio tempo (1805), ed. A. Placanica (Cava dei Tirreni: Di Mauro
Editore, 1996).
——. Testamento Forense, 2 vols. (Venice, 1806; rpt. Naples, Istituto per gli Studi
Filosoﬁci, 1977).
——. Descrizione del Molise, ed. Francesco Barra (Cava dei Tirreni: Di Mauro Editore,
1993).
——. Scritti sulla Calabria, ed. A. Placanica (Cava dei Tirreni: Di Mauro Editore, 1993).
Gladstone, W. E. The Gladstone Diaries, ed. M. R. D. Foot (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1968), ii.
Helfert, Freiher von. Fabrizio Ruffo: Rivoluzione e controrivoluzione di Napoli dal novembre
1798 all’agosto 1799 (Florence, 1885).
Hüffer, Hermann. La Repubblica napoletana dell’anno 1799, ed. Renata De Lorenzo
(Naples: Liguori Editore, 1999).
Jacini, Stefano. La proprietà fondiaria e le popolazioni agricole in Lombardia (Milan,
1857).
Lomonaco, Francesco. Rapporto al Cittadino Carnot, ed. Antonino De Francesco
(Bari–Rome–Manduria: Lacaita, 1999)
Lumbroso, A. Gioacchino Murat e le aspirazioni unitarie italiane del 1815 (Rome, 1899).
Bibliography
334

<<<PDFPAGE 344>>>
Manzoni, Alessandro. Dell’Indipendenza dell’Italia, ed. Fausto Ghisalberti (Milan,
1947).
Maria Carolina. Carteggio di Maria Carolina con Lady Emma Hamilton(Naples: Pironti, 1999).
Masci, Angelo. Esame politico legale dei dritti e delle prerogative dei Baroni del Regno di
Napoli (Naples, 1792).
Metternich, Clemens Wenzel Lothar, Furst von. Memoirs of Prince Metternich 1773–1835,
ed. Prince Richard Metternich (New York: Fostig, 1973).
Micheroux, Antonio. ‘Il cavaliere Antonio Micheroux nella reazione napoletana del 1799’,
ed. R. Maresca, ASPN 18–19 (1893–4), 494–526; 106–248, 652–90.
Minichini, Luigi. Luglio 1820. Cronaca di una rivoluzione, ed. Mario Themelly (Rome:
Bulzoni Editore, 1979).
Miot de Melito. Mémoires, ed. Fleischmann, 3 vols. (Paris, 1858).
Monnier, Marc. Histoire du brigandage dans l’Italie méridionale (Paris, 1862).
Murat, Caroline. My Memoirs (London, 1910).
Nicolini, Nicola. Del passaggio dall’antica alla nuova legislazione nel Regno delle Due Sicilie
(Discorso di Nicola Nicolini, 7 January 1809 ) (Naples, 1850).
Nisco, N. Storia del Reame di Napoli (Naples, 1888).
Pepe, Gabriele. Memorie (Paris, 1847).
Pepe, Guglielmo. Memoirs of General Pepe, 3 vols. (London, 1896).
Petroni, Giulio. De’ Banchi di Napoli, 2 vols. (Naples, 1871).
Pignatelli, Francesco. Memorie di un generale della Repubblica e dell’Impero: Francesco
Pignatelli, Principe di Strongoli, ed. Nino Cortese, 2 vols. (Bari: Laterza, 1927).
Roederer, Pierre-Louis. Oeuvres du comte P-L Roederer, ed. A. M. Roederer, 8 vols. (Paris,
1854).
——. Political Thought and Practice during the French Revolution, ed. K. Margerison
(Philadelphia: Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 73, Part I, 1983),
pp. vii–162.
——. The Spirit of the Revolution of 1789, trans. and ed. M. Forsyth (Aldershot: Scolar
Press, 1989).
Sacchinelli, Domenico. Memorie storiche sulla vita del Cardinale Ruffo (Naples, 1836).
Salﬁ, Francesco Saverio. L’Italie au Dix-neuvième siècle (Paris, 1821).
Savarese, G. Tra Rivoluzione e Reazione. Ricordi di Giusepe Zurlo 1759–1828, ed.
A. Romano (Turin: Einaudi, 1941).
Southey, Robert. Life of Nelson, 2 vols. (John Murray: London 1813).
Swinburne, Henry. Travels in the Two Sicilies, 2 vols. (London, 1783–5).
Winspeare, Davide. Storia degli Abusi Feudali (Naples, 1811).
Young, Arthur. Travels in France and Italy, ed. T. Okey (London, 1915).
Zurlo, Giuseppe. Rapporto sullo Stato del Reame di Napoli, ed. Renato Lalli (Isernia,
no date).
Newspapers
Monitore Napoletano, 2 February 1799–8 June 1799 (Naples) (available on
http:www.repubblicanapoletana.it)
Monitore Napoletano, 1806–15 (Naples)
Monitore delle Due Sicilie (Naples)
Corriere di Napoli (Naples)
Bibliography
335

<<<PDFPAGE 345>>>
Reference Works
BER
Bibliograﬁa dell’età del Risorgimento 1970–2001, 4 vols. (Florence: Leo Olschki,
2003).
DBGAF Dictionnaire Biographique des Genéraux et Amiraux français, ed. G. Six, 2 vols.
(Paris, 1934).
DBF
Dictionnaire de Biographie Française (Paris, 1932).
DBI
Dizionario Biograﬁco degli Italiani (Rome: Istituto dell’Enciclopedia Italiana).
SECONDARY SOURCES
‘Abrial, André-Joseph, 1750–1828’. Dictionnaire de Biographie Française (Paris, 1932).
Abbamonte, O. ‘I tribunali di commercio’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.), Il Mezzogiorno pre-
unitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Edizioni Dedalo, 1988), 507–18.
Acton, H. The Bourbons of Naples 1734–1825 (London: Methuen, 1956).
——. The Last Bourbons of Naples (1825–1861) (London: Methuen 1962).
Addeo, G. ‘La libertà della stampa nel nonimestre costituzionale a Napoli’. Parte I, ASPN,
107 (1989), 337–80; Parte II, ASPN, 110 (1992), 193–274.
‘Agar, Jean-Antoine-Michel, Comte de Mosbourg, 1771–1844’. Dictionnaire de
Biographie Française (Paris, 1932).
Ajello, Raffaele. Arcana Juris. Diritto e politica nel Settecento italiano (Naples: Jovene, 1976).
——. ‘I ﬁlosoﬁe la regina. Il governo delle Due Sicilie da Tanucci a Caracciolo
(1776–1786)’. RSI, 103(2) (1991), 399–452; 103(3) (1991), 657–740.
Alessi, G. Giustizia e politizia. Il controllo di un capitale, Napoli 1779–1803 (Naples:
Jovine, 1993).
Aliberti, Giovanni. ‘Economia e società da Carlo III ai Napoleonidi (1734–1806)’, in
Storia di Napoli (Naples, 1969), viii. 77–164.
——. Lo stato post-feudale. Un secolo di potere pubblico nel Mezzogiorno d’Italia 1806–1910
(Naples: Guida, 1993).
——. Potere società locale nel Mezzogiorno dell’800 (Bari–Rome: Laterza, 1987).
Allum, P. A. Politics and Society in Post-war Naples (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1973).
Antonielli, Livio. I Prefetti dell’Italia Napoleonica (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1983).
——. ‘Il primo arruolamento nella Gendarmeria italica: le cause di un insuccesso’, in
Giovanni Luigi Fontana and Antonio Lazarini (eds.), Veneto e Lombardia tra rivoluzione
giacobina ed età napoleonica. Economia, territorio, istituzioni (Rome: Cairiplo-Laterza,
1992), 504–38.
——. ‘L’amministrazione nell’Italia rivoluzionaria e napoleonica. I tre momenti di un
grande progetto’, in L’Italia nell’età Napoleonica, Atti del LXVII Congresso di Storia del
Risorgimento Italiano (Milan, 2–5 ottobre 1996) (Rome: Istituto per la storia del
Risorgimento Italiano, 1997), 193–219.
Astarita, Tommaso. Between the Salt Sea and the Holy Water: A History of Southern Italy
(New York: Norton, 2005).
Atteridge, A. Hilliard. Joachim Murat. Marshal of France and King of Naples (New York:
Brentano, 1911).
Atti del Convegno sul tema: Napoleone e l’Italia, 2 vols. (Rome: Accademia Nazionale dei
Lincei, a ccclxx, 1973).
Bibliography
336

<<<PDFPAGE 346>>>
Aymard, Maurice. ‘L’abolition del la feodalité en Sicilie: le sens d’une réforme’. Annuario
dell’Istituto Storico per l’Età Moderna e Contemporanea (Rome, 1971–2), 67–85.
——.‘Une famille de l’aristocratie sicilienne au XVI et XVIIe siècles: les ducs de
Terranova. Un bel exemple d’ascension seigneuriale’. Revue Historique, 19 (1972),
187–252.
——. ‘La transizione dal feudalismo al capitalismo’, in Ruggiero Romano and Corrado
Vivanti (eds.), Storia d’Italia, Annali I (Turin: Einaudi, 1978), 1131–82.
Barberis, Walter. Le armi del Principe. La tradizione militare sabauda (Turin: Einaudi, 1988).
Barra, Francesco. Il brigantaggio del Decennio francese (1806–1815). Studi e ricerche, 2 vols.
(Salerno: Plectica, 2003).
——. Il Mezzogiorno e le potenze europee nell’età moderna (Milan: Elio Sellino Editore, no
date), i.
Bartoccini, F. ‘Maria Annunziata Carolina Bonaparte (1782–1839)’. DBI.
Battaglini, Mario (ed.). I giornali giacobini (Rome: Borzi, 1988).
——. La Repubblica napoletana. Origini, nascita, struttura (Rome: Bonacco Editore 
1992).
Beales, D. E. D. Joseph II (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
——. Property and Plunder: European Catholic Monasteries in the Age of Revolution
1680–1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003a).
——.Enlightenment and Reform in Eighteenth-Century Europe (London: I. B. Tauris, 2003b).
Benigno, Francesco. Il Porto di Trapani nel Settecento. Rotte, trafﬁci, esportazioni
1674–1800 (Trapani: Gervasi–Modica, 1982).
——. Ultra Phara. Famiglie, commercio e territori nel Meridione moderno (Rome:
Meridiana, 2001).
Bercé, Yves-Marie (ed.). La ﬁn de l’Europe napoléonienne. 1814—la vacance de pouvoir
(Paris: Henri Veyrier, 1990).
Bergeron, Louis. L’Episode Napoléonien. Aspects interieurs 1799–1815 (Paris: Editions du
Seuil, 1972).
Bevilacqua, Piero. ‘Acque e boniﬁche nella prima metà dell’Ottocento’, in Angelo Massafra
(ed.), Il Mezzogiorno preunitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Edizioni Dedalo,
1988), 337–60.
—— (ed.). Storia dell’agricoltura italiana in età contemporanea, iii: Mercati ed istituzioni
(Venice: Marsilio Editore, 1991).
——. Breve Storia dell’Italia Meridionale dall’Ottocento a oggi (Rome: Donzelli, 1993).
——. ‘La storia economica e l’economia’, in Pierluigi Ciocca and Gianni Toniolo (eds.),
Storia Economica d’Italia (Rome–Bari: Laterza Editore, 1998), i. 159–96.
——, and Gabriella Corona (eds.). Ambiente e risorse nel Mezzogiorno contemporaneo
(Rome: Donzelli, 2002).
Biagianti, Ivo. ‘Riforme ecclesiastiche e pratica religiosa dall’assolutismo illuminato all’età
napoleonica’, in L’Italia giacobina e napoleonica. Storia della società italiana (Milan: Teti
Editore, 1985), xiii.
Bibliograﬁa dell’età del Risorgimento 1970–2001, 3 vols. (Florence: Leo Olschki Editore,
2003).
Black, Jeremy. Italy and the Grand Tour (London and New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 2003).
Blinkhorn, Martin. Carlism and Crisis in Spain 1931–1939 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1975).
Bibliography
337

<<<PDFPAGE 347>>>
Bonney, Richard (ed.). The Rise of the Fiscal State in Europe c. 1200–1815 (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1999).
Botti, Gabriella, Laura Guidi, and Lucia Valenzi. Povertà e beneﬁcenza tra Rivoluzione
e Restaurazione (Naples: Morano Editore, 1990).
Bourguet, Marie-Noëlle. ‘Race et folklore. L’image ofﬁcielle de la France en 1800’. Annales
ESC no. 4 (1976), 802–23.
Boutry, Philippe. ‘La Restaurazione 1814–1848’, in Giorgio Ciucci (ed.), Roma Moderna
(Rome–Bari: Laterza, 2000).
Boyle, Nicholas. Goethe. The Poet and the Age, i: The Poetry of Desire (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1992).
Breuilly, John. ‘Napoleonic Germany and State-Formation’, in Michael Rowe (ed.),
Collaboration and Resistance in Napoleonic Europe: State Formation in an Age of Upheaval
(c. 1800–1815) (London: Palgrave, 2003), 121–53.
Broers, Michael. Europe under Napoelon 1799–1815 (London: Arnold, 1995).
——. Politics and Religion in Napoleonic Italy: The War against God 1801–1814 (London:
Routledge, 2002).
——.‘Centre and Periphery in Napoleonic Italy: The Nature of French Rule in the
départments réunis’, in Michael Rowe (ed.), Collaboration, Resistance in Napoleonic Europe:
State Formation in an Age of Upheaval (c. 1800–1815) (London: Palgrave, 2003), 55–73.
——. The Napoleonic Empire in Italy 1796–1814 (London: Palgrave, 2005).
Burke, Edmund. ‘The terror and religion in Brittany and Algeria’, in Gregory Blue, Martin
Bunton, and Ralph Croizier (eds.), Colonialism in the Modern World (New York: Sharpe,
2002), 41–8.
Cafagna, Luciano. Il Nord nella Storia d’Italia (Bari: Laterza, 1962).
——. Dualismo e sviluppo nella storia d’Italia (Venice: Marsilio, 1989).
——. Nord e Sud. Non fare a pezzi l’unità italiana (Venice: Marsilio, 1994).
——.‘The industrial revolution in Italy 1830–1914’, in Carlo Cipolla (ed.), The Fontana
Economic History of Europe (London, 1973), iv. 279–325.
Cafﬁero, Marina. La Repubblica nella città del papa. Roma 1798. (Rome: Donzelli, 2005).
Caglioti, Daniela Luigia. Il Guadagno Difﬁcile. Commercianti napoletani nella seconda metà
dell’Ottocento (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1984).
Calabria, Anthony. The Cost of Empire: The Finances of the Kingdom of Naples in the Time of
Spanish Rule (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
Calaresu, Melissa. ‘Images of Ancient Rome in Late Eighteenth-Century Neapolitan
Historiography’. Journal of History of Ideas (1997), 641–61.
——. ‘Looking at Virgil’s tomb: the end of the Grand Tour and the Cosmopolitan Ideal in
Europe’, in J. Elsner and J. P. Rubies (eds.), Voyages and Visions: Towards a Cultural
History of Travel (London: Reaktion Books, 1999), 138–60.
Caldora, Umberto. Calabria Napoleonica (1806–1815) (Napoli, 1960).
——. ‘Per la storia della spedizione sanfedista del Ruffo nel 1799’. Calabria Nobilisssima,
19 (49/50) (1965), 11–60.
——. ‘La statistica murattiana del Regno di Napoli. Le relazioni sulla Calabria’, ed.
Vincenzo Cappelli (Rende, 1995).
Cammisa, F. ‘La giurisdizione delle Grandi Corti Criminali’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.),
Il Mezzogiorno preunitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Baris: Edizioni Dedalo,
1988), 519–24.
Cancila, Oreste. L’economia della Sicilia. Aspetti storici (Palermo: Il Saggiatore, 1991).
Bibliography
338

<<<PDFPAGE 348>>>
Capra, Carlo. ‘L’età napoleonica’, in G. Levi, U. Levra, and N. Tranfaglia (eds.), Storia
d’Italia (Florence, 1978), 364–70.
—— (ed.). L’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica in Italia 1796–1815 (Turin: Loescher
Editore, 1978).
——. ‘Nobili, notabili, elites: dal modello francese al caso italiano’. Quaderni Storici,
37 (1979), 12–42.
——. ‘Habsburg Italy in the Age of Reform’. JMIS, 10(2) (2005), 218–33.
Caracciolo, Alberto. ‘La storia economica’, in Ruggiero Romano and Corrado Vivanti
(eds.), Storia d’Italia, iii: Dal primo settecento all’Unità, (Turin: Einaudi, 1973),
512–687.
Carnavale, M. and A. Caracciolo. Lo Stato Pontiﬁcio da Martino V al Pio IX, in G.Galasso
(ed.), Storia d’Italia (Turin: UTET, 1978), xiv.
Cassani, C. ‘Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel (1752–1799)’, in DBI, xlviii. 595–600.
Cassese, Leopoldo (ed.). La statistica del Regno di Napoli: La relazione sulla Provincia di
Salerno (Salerno, 1955).
——. Scritti di Storia meridionale, ed. A. Cestaro and P. Laveglia (Salerno: Laveglia, 1970).
Castellano, Carolina. Il Mestiere del giudice. Magistrati e sistema giuridico tra i francesi e i
Borboni (1799–1848) ( Bologna: Il Mulino, 2004).
Cestaro, Antonio. Aspetti della questione demaniale nel Mezzogiorno (Brescia, 1963).
——. ‘La revoluzione nelle provincie di Basilicata e Salernitano’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.),
Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 757–76.
Chabod, Federico. Storia della politica estera italiana dal 1870 al 1896 (Bari: Laterza,
1962). Translated as Italian Foreign Policy: The Statecraft of the Founders, trans. William
McCuaig (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996).
Chadwick, Owen. The Popes and the European Revolution (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981).
Chaney, Edward. The Evolution of the Grand Tour: Anglo-Italian Cultural Relations since the
Renaissance (London/Portland, Ore.: Frank Cass, 1998).
—— and Ritchie, N. (eds.). Oxford, China and Italy: Writings in Honour of Sir Harold
Acton on his Eightieth Birthday (Thames and Hudson, 1984).
Chiosi, Elvira.Andrea Serrao. Apologia e crisi del regalismo nel settecento napoletano (Naples:
Jovene, 1981).
——. ‘Il Regno dal 1734 al 1799’, in Giuseppe Galasso and Rosario Romeo (eds.), Storia
del Mezzogiorno, iv: Il Regno dagli Angioini ai Borboni (Rome: Edizioni del Sole, 1986),
Part II, 371–467.
——. Lo Spirito del Secolo. Politica e religione a Napoli nell’età dell’illuminismo (Naples:
Giannini, 1992).
——. ‘Intellectuals and Academies’, in Girolamo Imbruglia (ed.), Naples in the Eighteenth
Century. The Birth and the Death of a Nation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000), 118–34.
——. ‘Massoneria e politica’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e
Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 217–37.
——.‘Giuseppe Maria Capece Zurlo (1711–1801)’. DBI, xviii. 462–4.
Chorley, Patrick. Oil, Silk and Enlightenment: Economic Problems in Eighteenth-Century
Naples (Naples: Istituto per gli Studi Storici, 1965).
Ciasca, Raffaele. ‘Per la storia delle classi sociali nelle provincie meridionali durante la prima
metà del secolo XIX’, in Studi storici in onore di Michelangelo Schipa (Naples, 1926),
631–51.
Bibliography
339

<<<PDFPAGE 349>>>
Cingari, Gaetano. Mezzogiorno e Risorgimento. La Restaurazione a Napoli dal 1821 al 1830
(Bari: Laterza, 1966).
——. Brigantaggio, proprietari e contadini nel Sud (1799–1900) (Reggio Calabria, 1976).
——. Giacobini e sanfedisti in Calabria nel 1799 (Messina, 1957/Reggio Calabria, 1978).
——. Mezzogiorno e Giustino Fortunato (Florence, no date).
Ciocca, Pierluigi, and Gianni Toniolo (eds.). Storia Economica d’Italia, 2 vols.
(Rome–Bari: Laterza Editore, 1998).
Ciucci, Giorgio (ed.). Roma Moderna (Bari: Laterza Editore, 2000).
Civile, Giuseppe. Il comune rustico. Storia sociale di un paese del Mezzogiorno nell’800
(Bologna, 1990).
——, S. De Majo, G. Montroni, R. Pilati, M. Storchi, and M.-A. Visceglia. Studi sulla
società meridionale (Naples: Guida, 1978).
Clark, Peter, and Bernard Lepetit (eds.). Capital Cities and Their Hinterlands in Early
Modern Europe (Aldershot: Scolar Press, 1997).
Clemente, V. ‘Melchiore Delﬁco (1744–1835)’, in DBI, xxxvi. 527–39.
——. Rinascenza teramana e riformismo napoletano (1777–1798) (Rome: Edizione di
Storia e Letteratura, 1981).
Cobb, Richard. The Police and the People: French Popular Protest 1789–1820 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1970).
Cochrane, Eric W. Florence in the Forgotten Centuries, 1527–1800; a History of Florence
and the Florentines in the Age of the Grand Dukes (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1973).
Cohen, Jon, and Giovanni Federico. The Growth of the Italian Economy 1820–1960
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Colapietra, Raffaele. ‘Le insorgenze di massa nell’Abruzzo in età moderna’. Storia e Politica,
1 (1981), 1–48.
——. Per una rilettura socio-antropologica dell’Abruzzo giacobino e sanfedista (Naples: La
Città del Sole, 1995).
Colley, Linda. Britons: Forging the Nation 1701–1837 (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 1992).
——. Captives (London: Pantheon, 2002).
Collins, Jeffrey. Papacy and Politics in Eighteenth-Century Rome. Pius VI and the Arts
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
Conolly, Owen. Napoleon’s Satellite Kingdoms (Ontario: Free Press, 1965).
Constantine, David. Fields of Fire: A Life of Sir William Hamilton (London: Wiedenfeld
and Nicolson, 2001).
Cooper, J. P. ‘Patterns of Inheritance and Settlement by Great Landowners from the
Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Centuries’, in Jack Goody, Joan Thirsk, and E. P. Thompson
(eds.), Family and Inheritance: Rural society in Western Europe 1200–1800 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1976), 192–326.
Coppini, Paolo Romano. Il Granducato di Toscana. Dagli anni francesi all’Unità, in
Giuseppe Galasso (ed.), Storia d’Italia (Turin: UTET, 1993), xiii.
Corciulo, M. S. ‘Aspetti politici e istituzionali della rivoluzione napoletana del 1820–1’,
in Bollettino del diciannovesimo secolo (Naples: aV, 2000), n.6, 39–49.
Corona, Gabriella. Demani ed individualismo agrario nel Regno di Napoli (1780–1806)
(Naples: ESI, 1995).
Cortese, Nino ‘Luigi Blanch (1784–1872)’, DBI, x. 771–6.
Bibliography
340

<<<PDFPAGE 350>>>
——. ‘L’esercito napoletano nelle guerre napoleoniche’. ASPN (1926), 164–339.
——.‘Il governo napoletano e la rivoluzione siciliana del 1820–1’. Archivio Storico
Messinese, 35 (Messina: Ofﬁcine graﬁche messinese, 1934), 191–214.
——.La prima rivoluzione separatista siciliana, 1820–1821 (Naples: Libreria Scientiﬁca
Editrice, 1957).
——.‘Il Murat e la carboneria napoletana nella prima metà del 1814’, in Studi in onore di
Gioacchino Volpe (Florence, 1958), i. 211–20.
——. Il Mezzogiorno e il Risorgimento italiano (Naples: Libreria Scientiﬁca Editrice, 1965).
Criscuolo, Vittorio. ‘L’esperienza della Repubblica napoletana nel quadro del triennio
1796–9’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples:
Vivarium, 2002), 279–94.
Croce, Benedetto. Studi Storici sulla Rivoluzione napoletana del 1799, 2nd edn. (Roma, 1897).
——. Storia del Regno di Napoli (Bari: Laterza, 1924/1943/1967).
——. ‘Il divorzio nelle provincie napoletane’, in Aneddoti di varia letteratura (Bari: Laterza,
1942), iii. 67–85.
——. La Riconquista del Regno di Napoli nel 1799 (Bari: Laterza, 1943).
——.I teatri di Napoli dal Rinascimento alla ﬁne del secolo decimottavo (Bari: Laterza, 1947).
——. Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia (Scritti di storia lettereraria e politica xx) (Bari:
Laterza, 1956), i.
Curato, F. ‘La situazione interna delle Due Sicilie nel 1817 secondo i dispacci degli inviati
francesi ed inglesi a Napoli’, in Studi in Onore di G. Volpe (Florence, 1958), i. 227–60.
Cutolo, A. Il Decurionato di Napoli (Naples, 1932).
——. ‘Il Regno di Napoli ai tempi di Gioacchino Murat. Dalle lettere di un diplomatico
contemporaneo’ ASPN, (2nd series) 22 (1937), xxvi. 380–407.
Dainotto, Roberto. ‘ “Tramonto” and “Risorgimento”: Gentile’s Dialectics and the
Prophesy of Nationhood’, in A. Ascoli and K. Henneberg (eds.) Making and Remaking
Italy (Oxford: Berg, 2001).
D’Alessio, C. ‘Matteo Galdi (1764–1821)’, in DBI, li. 374–7.
D’Angelo, Michela. Mercanti inglesi in Sicilia. Rapporti commerciali tra la Sicilia e la Gran
Bretagna nel periodo del blocco continentale (Milan: Giuffré, 1988).
——. Mercanti inglesi a Malta 1800–1825 (Milan: Franco Angeli, 1990).
Dante, Umberto. Insorgenza ed Anarchia: Il Regno di Napoli e l’Invasione Francese (Salerno:
Cooperativa universitaria editrice, 1980).
D’Antone, Leandra (ed.). Radici storiche ed esperienze dell’intervento straordinario nel
Mezzogiorno (Naples: Bibliopolis, 1996).
Davis, John A. (ed.) Gramsci and Italy’s Passive Revolution (London: Croom Helm, 1979).
——. Merchants, Monopolists and Contractors. A Study of Economic Activity and Society in
Bourbon Naples (1815–1860) (New York: Arno Press, 1979).
——. ‘The South, the Risorgimento and the Origins of the “Southern Problem”’ in idem
(ed.) Gramsci and Italy’s Passive Revolution (London: Croom Helm, 1979), 67–103.
——. ‘Palmerston and the Sicilian Sulphur Crisis of 1848. An episode in the imperialism
of free trade’, in Risorgimento (Brussels) (1982) (1/2), 5–24.
——.‘Naples during the French Decennio: A Problem Unresolved?’, in Villes et Territoire
pendant la période napoléonienne (France et Italie) Collection de l’Ecole Française de Rome
(96) (Rome, 1987), 327–54.
——. Conﬂict and Control. Law and Order in Nineteenth Century Italy (London:
Macmillan, 1988).
Bibliography
341

<<<PDFPAGE 351>>>
Davis, John A.‘England, the Mediterranean and the Italian States’, in L’Italia alla Vigilia dela
Rivoluzione Franecese (Atti del LIV Congresso di Storia del Risorgimento taliano, Milan,
1988) (Rome: Istituto per la Storia del Risorgimento Italiano, 1990), 91–114.
——. ‘The political role of the Neapolitan army in the decennio francese’, in Anna Maria
Rao (ed.), Esercito e società nell’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica (Naples: Morano Editore,
1990) 151–72.
——. ‘La ﬁn du royaume de Murat à Naples’, in Yves-Marie Bercé (ed.), La ﬁn de l’Europe
napoléonienne. 1814—la vacance de pouvoir (Paris: Henri Veyrier, 1990), 219–34.
——. ‘The Napoleonic era in southern Italy: An ambiguous legacy’. Proceedings of the
British Academy (Lectures and Memoirs), 80 (1991), 133–48.
——.‘1799: The Santafede and the crisis of the Ancien Regime in southern Italy’, in John A.
Davis and Paul Ginsborg (eds.), Society and Politics in the Age of the Risorgimento: Essays in
Honour of Denis Mack Smith (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1991/2002), 1–25.
——. ‘Remapping Italy’s Path to the Twentieth Century’. JMH, 66 (June 1994), 291–320.
——. ‘The Mezzogiorno and Modernization: Changing Contours of Public and Private
during the French decennio’, in Paolo Macry and Angelo Massafra (eds.), Fra Storia e
Storiograﬁa. Scritti in Onore di Pasquale Villani (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1994).
——. ‘Changing Perspectives on Italy’s Southern Problem’, in Carl Levy (ed.), Italian
Regionalism in Context (London: Berg, 1996), 53–68.
——. ‘Great Britain and Italy in the Napoleonic era’, in L’Italia nell’età Napoleonica. Atti
del LXVII Congresso di Storia del Risorgimento Italiano (Milano, 2–5 ottobre 1996)
(Rome: Istituto per la storia del Risorgimento Italiano, 1997), 385–400.
——. ‘Casting off the “Southern Problem”: Or the peculiarities of the South
Reconsidered’, in Jane Schnieder (ed.), Italy’s Southern Question. Orientalism in One
Country (Oxford/New York: Berg, 1998), 205–24.
——. ‘Rivolte popolari e controrivoluzione nel Mezzogiorno continentale’, in Anna Maria
Rao (ed.), Folle controrivoluzionarie. Le insorgenze popolari nell’Italia rivoluzionaria e
napoleonica (Rome: Carocci, 1999), 349–68.
——. ‘The Neapolitan Revolution of 1799: Between History and Myth’. JMIS, 4(3) (Fall
1999), 350–7.
——. ‘L’Inghilterra, Nelson e la Repubblica napoletana del 1799’, in Anna Maria Rao
(ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples:Vivarium, 2002), 393–430.
——. ‘Italy’, in Robert J. Goldstein (ed.), The War for the Public Mind. Political Censorship
in Nineteenth Century Europe (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2000), 81–124.
—— (ed.). Italy in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
——. ‘The Many Faces of Modernity: French Rule in Southern Italy 1806–1815’, in
Michael Rowe (ed.), Collaboration and Resistance in Napoleonic Europe. State Formation
in an Age of Upheaval c. 1800–1815 (London: Palgrave, 2003), 74–89.
——.‘Opera and Absolutism in Restoration Italy, 1815–1860’. Journal of Interdisciplinary
History, 36 (4) (Spring 2006), 569–94.
——, and Paul Ginsborg (eds.). Society and Politics in the Age of the Risorgimento: Essays in
Honour of Denis Mack Smith (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991/2002).
Dawes, Barbara. British Merchants in Naples 1820–80 (Naples: ESI, 1991).
De Divitiis, Gigliola Pagano. Mercanti inglesi nell’Italia del seicento (Venice: Marsilio, 1990).
——, and Vincenzo Giura. L’Italia del secondo settecento nelle relazioni segrete di William
Hamilton, Horace Mann e John Murray (Naples: ESI, 1997).
De Felice, Renzo. Il triennio giacobino in Italia (1796–1799). Note e ricerche (Rome:
Bonaccci Editore, 1990).
Bibliography
342

<<<PDFPAGE 352>>>
De Francesco, Antonino. La guerra in Sicilia. Il distretto di Caltagiorne nella rivoluzione del
1820–1 (Catania: Bonnano Editore, 1992).
——. ‘Ideologie e movimenti politici’, in Giovanni Sabbattucci and Vittorio Vidotto
(eds.), Storia d’Italia 1. Le premesse dell’unità. Dalla ﬁne del Settecento al 1861
(Bari–Rome: Editori Laterza, 1994), 229–335.
——. Rivoluzione e costituzioni. Saggi sul democratismo politico nell’Italia napoleonica
1796–1821 (Naples: ESI, 1996).
——.Vincenzo Cuoco, Una vita politica (Bari: Laterza, 1997).
—— (ed.). Francesco Lomonaco. Rapporto al cittadino Carnot (Manduria–Bari–Rome:
Pietro Lacaita Editore, 1999).
——. ‘How Not to Finish a Revolution’, in Girolamo Imbruglia (ed.), Naples in the
Eighteenth Century. The Birth and the Death of a Nation (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000), 167–82.
D’Elia, Costanza (ed.). Il Mezzogiorno agli Inizi dell’Ottocento (Bari–Rome: Editori
Laterza, 1992).
——. Stato padre, stato demiurgo. I lavori pubblici nel Mezzogiorno (1815–1860) (Bari:
Edipuglia, 1996).
Delille, Gérard. Famille et proprieté dans le Royaume de Naples, XVe–XIXe siècle (Rome:
Ecole Française de Rome, 1984).
——.‘Migrations internes et mobilité sociale dans le Royaume de Naples (XVe-XIXe)’, in
Paolo Macry and Angelo Massafra (eds.), Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa. Scritti in Onore di
Pasquale Villani (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1994).
De Lorenzo, Renata. Proprietà fondiaria e ﬁsco nel Mezzogiorno: la riforma della tassazione
nel decennio francese (1806–1815) (Salerno: Centro Studi per il Cilento e il Vallo di
Diano, 1984).
——. ‘L’amministrazione centrale e periferica nel Regno di Napoli’ L’Italia nell’età
Napoleonica. Atti del LXVII Congresso di Storia del Risorgimento Italiano (Milano,
2–5 ottobre 1996) (Rome: Istituto per la storia del Risorgimento Italiano, 1997),
145–92.
——. Società economiche e istruzione agraria nell’Ottocento meridionale (Milan: Franco
Angeli, 1998).
——. Un regno in bilico. Uomini, eventi e luoghi nel Mezzogiorno preunitario (Rome:
Carocci, 2001).
——. ‘I giacobini abruzzesi da uomini di conﬁne a uomini di frontiera’, in Anna Maria
Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 654–711.
—— (ed.). Risorgimento, democrazia, Mezzogiorno d’Italia. Studi in onore di Alfonso
Scirocco (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2003).
De Majo, S. ‘Manifattura, industria e protezionismo statale nel decennio’, in Aurelio Lepre
(ed.), Studi sul Regno di Napoli nel Decennio francese (Liguori Editore, 1985), 13–33.
Demarco, Domenico (ed.). La Statistica Murattiano del Regno di Napoli nel 1808, 4 vols.
(Rome: Fonti e Ricerche di Storia Economica, Accademia dei Lincei, 1988).
De Martino, A. La nascita delle intendenze. Problemi dell’amministrazione periferica nel
Regno di Napoli (1806–1815) (Naples: Jovene, 1984).
De Matia, F., and F. De Negri. ‘Il Corpo di Ponti e Strade dal decennio francese alla
riforma del 1826’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.) Il Mezzogiorno Pre-Unitario. Economia,
società e istituzioni (Bari: Dedalo, 1988), 449–68.
De Matteo, Luigi Politica doganale e industrializzazione nel Mezzogiorno (1845–1849)
(Naples: Pironti Editore, 1982).
Bibliography
343

<<<PDFPAGE 353>>>
De Matteo, Governo, credito e industria laniera nel Mezzogiorno. Da Murat alla crisi post-
unitaria (Naples: Istituto italiano per gli Studi Filosoﬁci, 1984).
De Rosa, Luigi. ‘Un caso di conversione di rendita pubblica nel secolo XVIII’, in Studi in
onore di Riccardo Filangieri (Naples, 1958).
——. Studi sugli arrendamenti del Regno di Napoli. Aspetti della distribuzione della ricchezza
mobiliare nel Mezzogiorno continentale (1649–1806) (Napoli, 1958; new edn., Naples:
Istituto per gli Studi Filosoﬁci, 2005).
——.‘Il debito pubblico della città di Napoli e le riforme di Giuseppe Bonaparte 1806–7’.
Bollettino dell’Archivio Storico del Banco di Napoli, f.111 (Naples: Banco di Napoli,
1959), 6–20.
——. Iniziativa e capitale straniero nell’industria metalmeccanica del Mezzogiorno
(1800–1904) (Naples: Giannini, 1968).
——. La rivoluzione industriale in Italia e il Mezzogiorno (Bari: Laterza, 1974).
——. ‘Property rights, institutional change and economic growth in southern Italy in the
XVIIIth and XIXth centuries’. Journal of European Economic History, 8 (3) (Winter
1979), 531–51.
——. Economisti Meridionali (Naples: Istituto per gli Studi Filosoﬁci, 1995).
——. La provincia subordinata. Saggio sulla questione meridionale (Rome–Bari: Editori
Laterza, 2004).
De Seta, Cesare. Architettura, ambiente e società a Napoli nel ’700 (Turin: Einaudi, 1981a).
——. Napoli (Rome–Bari: Editore Laterza, 1981b).
—— (ed.). L’Italia nello specchio del Grand Tour, in Ruggiero Romano and Corrado
Vivanti (eds.), Storia d’Italia: Annali, v: Il Paesaggio (Turin, 1982), 227–53.
——. L’Italia del Grand Tour da Montaigne a Goethe (Milan: Electra, 1996).
——.Vedutisti e viaggiatori in Italia tra settecento e ottocento (Turin: Bolati Boringhieri, 1999).
—— and L. Di Mauro. Palermo, in C. De Seta (ed.), Le Città nella storia d’Italia (Bari:
Laterza, 1980).
Di Benedetto, Renato. ‘Music and Enlightenment’, in Girolamo Imbruglia (ed.), Naples
in the Eighteenth Century. The Birth and the Death of a Nation (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000), 135–53.
Di Ciommo, Enrica. La Nazione Possible. Mezzogiorno e Questione Meridionale nel 1848
(Milan: Franco Angeli, 1993).
Di Leo, A. (ed.). Riformismo e rivoluzione: il Mezzogiorno tra due Restaurazioni (Naples:
ESI, 1995).
—— Il Modello napoleonico e l’amministrazione pubblica nel Mezzogiorno: La Basilicata, in
idem (ed.), Riformismo e rivoluzione: il Mezzogiorno tra due Restaurazioni (Naples:
ESI, 1995).
Di Lernia, Luciana. ‘La visita a San Carlo del viaggiatore straniero’, in Il Teatro del Re: Il
San Carlo da Napoli a l’Europa (Naples: ESI, 1988), 159–71.
Di Rienzo, Eugenio. Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris (1789–1848): Una biograﬁa politica
(Naples: Guida, 1999).
Dickie, John. Darkest Italy. The Notion and Stereotype of the Mezzogiorno 1860–1900
(London: Macmillan, 1999).
Dito, Oreste. La campagna muratiana dell’Indipendenza d’Italia (Milan–Rome–Naples:
Biblioteca storica del Risorgimento italiano, 1911).
Dombroski, Robert S. ‘Re-writing Sicily. Post-modern Perspectives’, in Jane Schneider (ed.),
Italy’s Southern Question. Orientalism in One Country (Oxford: Berg, 1998), 261–76.
Bibliography
344

<<<PDFPAGE 354>>>
Doyle, W. The Old European Order 1660–1800 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978).
——.Venality. The Sale of Ofﬁce in Eighteenth Century France(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996).
Duggan, Christopher. Francesco Crispi. From Nation to Nationalism (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002).
Dwyer, Philip (ed.). Napoleon and Europe (London: Longman, 2001).
Ebner, P. Storia di un feudo del Mezzogiorno (Rome, 1973).
Emsley, Clive. Napoleonic Europe (London: Longman, 1993).
Ermice, Maria Cristina. Le origini del Gran Libro del debito pubblico e l’emergere di nuovo
gruppi sociali (1806–1815) (Naples: Arte Tipograﬁca Editrice, 2005).
Espitalier, Albert. Napoléon et le roi Murat 1808–1815. D’après de nouveaux documents
(Paris, 1910); English trans., Napoleon and King Murat (London, 1912).
Fahrmeir, Andreas. ‘Centralisation versus particularism in the Third Germany’, in Michael
Rowe (ed.), Collaboration, Resistance in Napoleonic Europe. State Formation in an Age of
Upheaval (c. 1800–1815) (London: Palgrave, 2003), 107–20.
Fallon, Olivier. La ville des destinés croisés. Recherches sur la societé milanaise du xixième siècle
(1811–1860) (Rome: Ecole Française de Rome, 1997).
Fasano Guarini, E., G. Petralia, and P. Pezzino (eds.). Storia della Toscana. Parte II: Dal
Settecento a Oggi (Rome–Bari: Laterza, 2004).
Feola, Raffaele. ‘Donato Tommasi tra illumunisimo e restaurazione. Aspetti e problemi
della riforma della legislazione nelle Due Sicilie’. ASPN, 3rd series, 10 (1971), 9–114.
——. Dall’Illuminismo alla Restaurazione. Donato Tommasi e la legislazione delle Sicilie
(Naples: Jovine, 1977).
——. ‘La giurisdizione nel nuovo equilibrio dei poteri’, and ‘L’amministrazione con-
tenziosa’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.), Il Mezzogiorno preunitario. Economia, società e isti-
tuzioni (Bari: Edizioni Dedalo, 1988), 487–506.
——. ‘I riformatori meridionali e il modello giuseppino’, in A. Di Leo (ed.), Riformismo e
Rivoluzione: il Mezzogiorno tra due Restaurazioni (Naples: ESI, 1995), 10–15.
Ferrone, Vincenzo. I profeti dell’illuminismo (Rome–Bari: Editori Laterza, 1989/2000).
Filangieri, Riccardo. I banchi di Napoli dalle origini alla costruzione del Banco delle Due
Sicilie (1539–1808) (Naples, 1947).
Filippini, J. P. ‘Difesa dell’impero o difesa della società? Le misure di “Haute Police” nella
Toscana napoleonica’, in Rivista Italiana di Studi Napoleonici, 17 (1980); 20–45.
——. ‘Ralliement et opposition des notables toscanes à l’empire francaise’. Annuario
dell’Istituto Italiano per la Storia Moderna e Contemporanea, 23–4 (1971–2), 332–54.
Fiume, Giovanna. Le bande armate in Sicilia (1819–1849). Violenza ed organizzazione
del potere (Palermo: Annali della Facoltà di Lettere e Filosoﬁa, Università di Palermo,
1984).
——. ‘Bandits, Violence and the Organization of Power in Sicily in the Early Nineteenth
Century’, in John A. Davis and Paul Ginsborg (eds.), Society and Politics in the Age of the
Risorgimento: Essays in Honour of Denis Mack Smith (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1991/2002), 70–91.
Fiumian, Carlo. La città del lavoro. Un’utopia agroindustriale nel Veneto contemporaneo
(Venice: Marsilio Editore, 1990).
Flayhart, William H. Counter-point to Trafalgar. The Anglo-Russian Invasion of Naples
1805–6 (Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1992).
Forges Davanzati, Domenico. Giovanni Andrea Serra. Vescovo di Potenza e la lotta dello
Stato contro la Chiesa in Napoli nella seconda metà del Settecento (Naples: Lacaita, 1999).
Bibliography
345

<<<PDFPAGE 355>>>
Forrest, Alan I. Conscripts and Deserters: The Army and French Society during the Revolution
and Empire (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989).
Fortunato, Giustino. ‘Il 1799 in Basilicata.’ ASPN, 24 (1899), 223–45.
Fothergill, Brian. Sir William Hamilton. Envoy Extraordinary (London: Faber and Faber,
1969).
Frigione, M. ‘I banchi di Napoli e la loro fusione in Banco delle Due Sicilie sotto
Giacchino Murat’. ASPN, 27 (1941), 37–98.
Fugier, A. Napoléon et l’Italie (Paris, 1947).
Fusco, F., and R. Nicodemo. ‘Scuola primaria in Basilicata e Napoli’, in Angelo Massafra
(ed.), Il Mezzogiorno Pre-Unitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Dedalo 1988),
429–41.
Galasso, Giuseppe. ‘La legge feudale napoletana del 1799’. Rivista Storica Italiana (1964),
507–29.
——. Mezzogiorno medievale e moderno (Turin: Einaudi, 1965).
——. Potere e istituzioni nella storia d’Italia (Turin: Einaudi, 1974).
——. Il Mezzogiorno nella storia d’Italia (Florence: Le Monnier, 1977).
——. Il Mezzogiorno d’Italia. Lineamenti di storia meridionale e due momenti di storia
regionale (Florence: Le Monnier, 1984).
——.‘I giacobini meridionali’. RSI, 46 (1) (Jan. 1984), 69–105.
——. Intervista su Napoli (Rome–Bari: Laterza, 1987).
——. La Filosoﬁa in succorso de’governi. La cultura napoletana del settecento (Naples: Guida,
1989).
——. Alla Periferia dell’Impero. Il Regno di Napoli nel periodo spagnuolo (secoli XVI–XVIII)
(Turin: Einaudi, 1994).
——. L’Altra Europa. Per un’antropologia storica del Mezzogiorno d’Italia (Lecce: Argo,
1997).
——. Napoli capitale: identità politica ed identità cittadina. Studi e ricerche 1266–1860
(Naples: Electra, 1998).
——. ‘Stato nazionale e democrazia latina: il modello italiano’, in Pierluigi Ciocca and
Gianni Toniolo (eds.), Storia Economica d’Italia (Rome–Bari: Laterza Editore, 1998), i.
328–95.
——. Il Mezzogiorno. Da ‘Questione’ a ‘Problema Aperto’ (Manduria–Bari–Rome: Lacaita,
2005).
—— and Rosario Romeo (eds.), Storia del Mezzogiorno, iv: Il Regno dagli Angioini ai
Borboni (Rome: Edizioni del Sole, 1986).
Gallo, Francesca Fausta. Dai gigli alle coccarde. Il conﬂitto politico in Abruzzo (1770–1815)
(Rome: Carocci, 2002).
Gambetta, Diego. The Sicilian Maﬁa. The Business of Private Protection (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993).
Gangemi, Maurizio. ‘Uomini e boschi nel Regno durante l’ultima dominazione borbon-
ica’. Rassegna degli Archivi dello Stato, 44 (3) (Rome, Istituto Poligraﬁco e Zecca dello
Stato, 1985), 477–95.
——.‘Progetto illuministico e realtà ottocentesca: le società economiche calabresi’, in M.
Augello and M. Guidi (ed.), Associazionismo economico e diffusione dell’economia politica
nell’Italia dell’Ottocento, i. (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2000), 369–93.
Genoino, A. Francesi e realisti nel Salernitano nel 1799 (Cava dei Tirreni, 1931).
——. Studi e Ricerche sul 1799, ed. Franceso Barra (Cava dei Tirreni: Avagliano, 1999).
Bibliography
346

<<<PDFPAGE 356>>>
Gentile, Giovanni. I profeti del Risorgimento italiano, in Opere Complete (Florence: Sansoni,
1944).
——. ‘Il Pensiero politico e pedagogico di Vincenzo Cuoco’, in Vincenzo Cuoco, Studi e
Appunti (1909), in Gentile Opere (Florence: Sansoni, 1927), xxii. 3–83; rpt. as Vincenzo
Cuoco: studi e appunti (Florence: Sansoni, 1964).
Giarrizzo, Giuseppe. Un comune rurale nella Sicilia etnea. Biancavilla 1810–1860
(Catania, 1963).
——. ‘Borghesia e provincia nel Mezzogiorno durante la Restaurazione’, in Atti del 3
Convegno di Studi sul Risorgimento in Puglia: L’età della Restaurazione 1815–31 (Bari,
1983), 231–3.
——. ‘Sicilia e Napoli nel’700’, in I Borboni di Napoli e I Borboni di Spagna (Naples:
Guida, 1985), 193–214.
——. Mezzogiorno senza meridionalismo. La Sicilia, lo sviluppo, il potere (Venice: Marsilio,
1992).
——. Massoneria e Illuminismo nell’Europa del Settecento (Venice: Marsilio, 1995).
Giglioli, Constance H. D. Naples in 1799. An Account of the Revolution of 1799 and of the Rise
and Fall of the Parthenopean Republic (New York: Dutton; London: John Murray, 1903).
Gilles, B. Histoire de la Maison Rothschild, 2 vols. (Geneva: Droz, 1965).
Ginsborg, Paul. Daniel Manin and the Venetian revolution of 1848–49 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1979).
——.Italy and its Discontents: Family, Civil Society, State 1980–2001 (London: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003).
Gioachino Murat, protagonista nella storia di Napoli (Naples: Elio de Rosa editore, 1994).
Giura, Vincenzo. Russia. Stati Uniti e Regno di Napoli (Naples, 1967).
Godechot Jacques. Les Commissaires aux Armées sous le Directoire, 2 vols. (Paris: Editions
Fustoer, 1937).
——. The Counter-Revolution. Doctrine and Action 1789–1804, trans. S. Attanasio
(New York: Fertig, 1971).
——. ‘Saliceti, ministre du Royaume de Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte et Murat’, in Studi
in Memoria di Nino Cortese (Rome, 1976), 255–73.
Goody, Jack, Joan Thirsk, and E. P. Thompson. Family and Inheritance. Rural Society in
Western Europe 1200–1800 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976).
Grab, A. ‘La politica ﬁnanziaria nella Repubblica e nel Regno d’Italia sotto Napoleone
(1802–1814)’, in L’Italia nell’età Napoleonica. Atti del LXVII Congresso di Storia del
Risorgimento Italiano (Milano, 2–5 ottobre 1996) (Rome: Istituto per la storia del
Risorgimento Italiano, 1997), 37–114.
——. ‘From the French Revolution to Napoleon’, in John A. Davis (ed.), Italy in the
Nineteenth Century (Oxford University Press, 2000), 25–50.
——. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (London: Palgrave, 2003).
Gramsci, Antonio. Sul Risorgimento, ed. Elsa Fubini (Rome: Editore Riuniti, 1959).
——. ‘Alcuni temi della quistione meridionale’, in Franco de Felice and Valentino Parlato
(eds.), La Questione Meridionale (Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1966), 131–60.
Graziani, Augusto. ‘Il commercio estero del Regno del Due Sicilie’. Archivio economico
del’Uniﬁcazione italiana, ser. 1, 10 (1960), 1–89.
Greco, G. ‘Istituzioni e procedure delle Grandi Corti Criminali’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.),
Il Mezzogiorno preunitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Edizioni Dedalo, 1988),
533–48.
Bibliography
347

<<<PDFPAGE 357>>>
Gross, Hans. Roma nel Settecento (Rome–Bari: Laterza, 1990).
Grossi, Paolo. An Alternative to Private Property. Collective property in the juridical conscious-
ness of the nineteenth century (Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, 1977).
Guerci, Luciano. Le monarchie assolute. Parte II, Permanenze e mutamenti nell’Europa del
Settecento (1986: UTET, Turin).
——.‘Catechismi repubblicani a Napoli nel 1799’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.), Napoli
1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 431–68.
Guerra, A., E. Molteni, and P. Nicolasi. Il trionfo della miseria. Gli alberghi dei poveri di
Genova, Palermo, Napoli (Naples: Electra, 1996).
Gutteridge, H. C. Nelson and the Neapolitan Jacobins. Documents Relating to the
Suppression of the Jacobin Revolution in Naples June 1799, Navy Record Society 25
(London, 1903).
Hanlon, Gregory. The Twilight of the Military Tradition: Italian aristocrats and European
conﬂicts 1560–1800 (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1998).
Hardmann, W. A History of Malta during the Period of the French and British Occupations
1798–1815 (London: Holland Rose, 1908).
Haskell, Francis. Patrons and Painters: A Study in the Relations between Italian Art and
Society in the Age of the Baroque (London: Chatto and Windus, 1963).
——. ‘Art Patronage and Collecting in Naples during the Eighteenth Century’, in The
Golden Age of Naples: Art and Civilization under the Bourbons 1734–1805 (Detroit
Institute of Arts with the Art Institute of Chicago, 1981), 15–22.
Herr, R. ‘The Constitution of 1812 and the Spanish Road to Parliamentary Monarchy’, in
Isser Woloch (ed.), Revolution and Meaning of Freedom in the Nineteenth Century
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1996), 65–99.
Heuron, Marc. ‘Le contrebande en Calabre durant la période napoléonienne’, in Atti del 2
Congresso Storica Calabrese (1960) (Naples, 1961), 125–37.
Hoare, Q., and G. Nowell Smith (eds.). Selections from the Prison Notebooks (London:
Lawrence and Wishart, 1971).
Hobsbawm, E. J. Primitive Rebels. Studies in Archaic Forms of Social Movements in the
Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1959).
——. Bandits (New York: Norton, 1969/2000).
Hughes, S. C. Crime, Disorder and the Risorgimento. The Politics of Policing in Bologna
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Imbruglia, Girolamo (ed.). Naples in the Eighteenth Century. The Birth and the Death of a
Nation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
——. ‘Vita religiosa e lotta politica a Napoli nei mesi della rivoluzione’, in Anna Maria
Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 295–324.
Incarnato, Gennaro. Le illusioni del progresso nella società napoletana di ﬁne Settecento. Parte
Prima, La crisi aristocratica. Parte Seconda, Tra rigori modernizzatori e aspettative di assis-
tenza (Naples: Loffredo editore, 1991–3).
——. ‘ “Brava gente” alla prova. La borghesia di Pisciotta ed i suoi tormenti nei primi anni
del decennio francese (1806–1809)’, in Renata de Lorenzo (ed.), Risorgimento,
democrazia, Mezzogiorno d’Italia. Studi in onore di Alfonso Scirocco (Milan: Franco
Angeli, 2003), 663–75.
——. Borghesia “Brava Gente”. Pisciotta e i suoi tormenti nel primi anni del decennio francese
(1806–1809) (Naples: Controcorrente, 2004).
Bibliography
348

<<<PDFPAGE 358>>>
Jenkins, Ian. ‘“Contemporary Minds”: William Hamilton’s affair with antiquity’, in Ian
Jenkins and Kim Sloan (eds.), Vases and Volcanoes: Sir William Hamilton and His
Collection (London: British Museum Press, 1996), 40–64.
——, and Kim Sloan. Vases and Volcanoes: Sir William Hamilton and His Collection
(London: British Museum Press, 1996).
Johns, Christopher M. S. Antonio Canova and the politics of patronage in revolutionary and
Napoleonic Europe (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1998).
Johnson, R. M. The Napoleonic Empire in Southern Italy and the Rise of the Secret Societies, 2
vols. (London: Macmillan, 1904).
King, Bolton, and Thomas Okey. Italy Today (London: J. Nisbet, 1901).
Kroll, Thomas. La Rivolta del Patriziato. Il liberalismo della nobilità nella Toscana del
Risorgimento (Florence: Leo S. Olschki, 2005).
Landi, G. Istituzioni di diritto pubblico del Regno delle Due Sicilie 1815–61, 2 vols. (Milan:
Giuffré, 1977).
La Sorsa, M. La Carboneria in Terra di Bari (Rome: Bollettino di Statistica Amministrativa,
1919).
Lauria, F. Demani e feudi nell’Italia meridionale (Napoli, 1924).
Laven, David. ‘The age of the Restoration’, in John A. Davis (ed.), Italy in the Nineteenth
Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 51–65.
——. Venice and the Venetia under the Habsburgs 1815–1848 (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2002).
La Volpe, G. ‘Gioacchino Murat, re di Napoli. Amministrazione e riforme economiche
(1808–1815)’. NRS (1930), 539–57; Part 2, 124–41.
Leoni, Francesco. Storia della controrivoluzione in Italia 1789–1854 (Naples, 1975).
Lepre, Aurelio. La Rivoluzione Napoletana del 1820–1821 (Rome, 1967).
—— (ed.). Studi sul Regno di Napoli nel Decennio francese (Naples: Liguori Editore, 1985).
Levy, Carl (ed.). Italian Regionalism in Context (London: Berg, 1996).
Librandi, Rita. ‘La communicazione con le Plebe’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799.
Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 493–513.
Lisanti, Nicola, Tommaso, Russo, and Rosa Maria Salvia. Il feudo, la coccarda e l’inten-
denza. La Basilicata dal 1789 al 1821 (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2000).
Lisio, Pasquale Alberto (ed.). Francesco Saverio Salﬁ. Un calabrese per l’Europa (Naples:
Società Editrice Napoletana, 1981).
L’Italia giacobina e napoleonica. Storia della societa italiana, xiii (Milan: Teti Editore, 1985).
L’Italia nell’età Napoleonica. Atti del LXVII Congresso di Storia del Risorgimento Italiano
(Milano, 2–5 ottobre 1996) (Rome: Istituto per la storia del Risorgimento Italiano, 1997).
Litchﬁeld, R. B. Emergence of a Bureaucracy. The Florentine Patricians 1530–1780
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986).
Lomonaco, Fabrizio. ‘L’anti-curialismo di Gianfranco Conforti dalle riforme alla rivo-
luzione’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.) Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples:
Vivarium, 2002), 167–200.
Lo Romer, David G. Merchants and reform in Livorno 1814–1868 (Berkeley, Calif.:
University of California Press, 1987).
Lo Sardo, Eugenio. Napoli e Londra nel XVIII secolo. Le relazioni economiche (Naples:
Jovene, 1991).
——. Il mondo nuovo e le virtù civili. L’espistolario di Gaetano Filangieri 1772–1788
(Naples: Federiciana Editore, 1999).
Bibliography
349

<<<PDFPAGE 359>>>
Lucarelli, Antonio. La Puglia nel Risorgimento, 4 vols. (Bari, 1931–53), La rivoluzione del
1799 (Bari, 1934) ii.; rpt. Pietro Laciata Editore (Manduria–Bari: Rome, 1998).
Luise, Flavia. Librai ed editori a Napoli nel XVIII secolo (Naples: Liguori Editore, 2001).
Lumbroso, G. I moti popolari contro i francesi alla ﬁne del secolo XVIII (1796–1800)
(Florence: Le Monnier, 1932).
Lumley, Robert, and Jonathan Morris (eds.) The New History of the Italian South: The
Mezzogiorno Revisited (Devon: Exeter University Press, 1997).
Lupo, Maurizio. ‘Reorganization of public education in the Kingdom of Naples during
the French period’. JMIS 4/3 (Fall 1999), 229–49.
Lupo, Salvatore. Il giardino degli aranci. Il mondo degli agrumi nella storia d’Italia (Venice:
Marsilio, 1990).
——. Storia della Maﬁa dalle origini ai nostril giorni (Rome: Donzelli, 1993).
Lynch, John. Bourbon Spain 1700–1808 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1989).
Lyttelton, Adrian. ‘Landlords, peasants and the limits of liberalism’, in Davis (ed.) (1979)
104–34.
——. ‘The National Question in Italy’, in Mikulas Teich and Roy Porter (eds.), The
National Question in Europe in Historical Context (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1993), 63–105.
McFarlane, Anthony. ‘Political Corruption and Reform in Bourbon Spanish America’, in
W. Little and E. Posada-Carbó (eds.), Political Corruption in Europe and Latin America
(London: Macmillan, 1996), 40–63.
Mack Smith, Denis. Cavour and Garibaldi: A Study in Political Conﬂict (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1954/1985).
——.Victor Emanuel, Cavour and the Risorgimento (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971).
Mackesy, Piers. The war in the Mediterranean 1803–1810 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1957).
Macry, Paolo. Mercato e società nel Regno di Napoli: commercio del grano e politica economica
del Settcento (Naples: Guida, 1974).
——. Ottocento. Famiglia, elites e patrimoni a Napoli (Turin: Einaudi, 1988).
——. ‘Studi recenti sul Mezzogiorno ottocentesco’, in Paolo Macry and Angelo Massafra
(eds.), Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa. Scritti in Onore di Pasquale Villani (Bologna: Il Mulino,
1994), 151–62.
——. Giocare la Vita: storia del lotto a Napoli tra Sette ed Ottocento (Rome: Donzelli, 1997).
——. (ed.). Quando Crolla lo Stato. Studi sull’Italia Preunitaria (Naples: Liguori Editori,
2003).
——. and Angelo Massafra (eds.). Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa. Scritti in Onore di Pasquale
Villani (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1994).
Madelin, Louis. La Rome de Napoléon. La domination française à Rome de 1809 à 1814
(Paris, 1906).
Maiorini, Maria Grazia. ‘The capital and the provinces’, in Girolamo Imbruglia (ed.),
Naples in the Eighteenth Century: The Birth and the Death of a Nation (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000), 4–21.
Malatesta, Maria. I signori della terra. L’organizzazione degli interessi agrari padani
1860–1914 (Milan, 1988).
Marandel, J. P. ‘Foreign ﬁgure painters in Naples’, in The Golden Age of Naples: Art and
Civilization under the Bourbons 1734–1805 (Detroit Institute of Arts with the Art
Institute of Chicago, 1981), 156–82.
Bibliography
350

<<<PDFPAGE 360>>>
Marin Brigitte. ‘Naples: Capital of the Enlightenment’, in Peter Clark and Bernard Lepetit
(eds.), Capital cities and their hinterlands in early modern Europe (Aldershot: Scolar Press,
1997), 143–216.
——.‘Town and country in the Kingdom of Naples 1500–1800’, in S. K. Epstein (ed.),
Town and Country in Europe 1300–1800 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2001), 316–30.
Marino, John. Pastoral Economics in the Kingdom of Naples (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1988).
Marmo, Marcella. ‘Tra carceri e i mercati. Spazi e modelli storici del fenomeno camorrista’,
in Paolo Macry and Pasquale Villani (eds.), La Campania (Storia d’Italia. Le Regioni
dall’Unità a Oggi) (Turin: Einaudi, 1990), 691–726.
Martelli, S. ‘Riformatori e giacobini molisani tra provincia e capitale’, in Anna Maria Rao
(ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 717–43.
Martucci, Roberto. L’invenzione dell’Italia unita 1855–1864 (Milan: Sansoni, 1999).
Martuscelli, S. La Popolazione del Regno di Napoli nella Statistica del Re Murat (Naples, 1979).
Masi, G. Strutture e società nella Puglia barese del secondo settecento (Matera, 1966).
Massafra, Angelo. ‘Fisco e baroni nel Regno di Napoli alla ﬁne del secolo XVIII’, in Studi
in Onore di G. Pepe (Bari, 1969), 624–75.
——. ‘Giurisdizione feudale e rendita fondiaria nel settecento napoletano’. Quaderni
Storici (1972), n.19, 187–252.
——(ed.). Problemi di storia delle campagne meridionali nell’età moderna e contemporanea
(Bari: Dedalo Libri, 1981).
——(ed.). Produzione, mercato e classi sociali nella Capitanata moderna e contemporanea
(Foggia, 1985).
——(ed.). Il Mezzogiorno preunitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Edizioni
Dedalo, 1988).
——.‘Una stagione degli studi sulla feudalità nel Regno di Napoli’, in Paolo Macry and
Angelo Massafra (eds.), Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa. Scritti in Onore di Pasquale Villani
(Bologna: Il Mulino, 1994), 103–30.
Mastroberti, Francesco. Pierre Joseph Briot. Un giacobino tra amministrazione e politica
(1771–1827) (Naples: Jovene, 1998).
Matarazzo, Pasquale. Catechismi repubblicani. Napoli 1799 (Naples: Vivarium, 1999).
Mayer, Arno J. The Persistence of the Old Regime. Europe to the Great War (New York:
Pantheon, 1981).
Melita, Maria Carla. ‘Il Regno di Napoli e le violazioni del Blocco Continentale’, in Storia
Economica, anno II (1) (1999), 113–72.
Menozzi, Daniele. ‘La chiesa e la rivoluzione francese’, in L’Italia giacobina e napoleonica.
Storia della società italiana (Milan: Teti Editore, 1985) xiii.
Meriggi Marco. Amministrazione e classi sociali nel Lombardo-Veneto 1814–1848 (Bologna:
Il Mulino, 1983).
——. Il Regno Lombardo-Veneto (Turin: Einaudi, 1987).
——. ‘Società, istituzioni e ceti dirigenti’, in Giovanni Sabbattucci and Vittorio Vidotto
(eds.), Storia d’Italia 1. Le premesse dell’unità. Dalla ﬁne del Settecento al 1861
(Rome–Bari: Editori Laterza, 1994), 119–28.
——. Breve Storia dell’Italia Settentrionale dal’Ottocento a oggi (Rome: Donzelli, 1996).
Merlin, P., C. Rosso, G. Symcox, and G. Ricuperati. Il Piemonte Sabaudo. Stato e territori
in’età moderna, in Giuseppe Galasso (ed.), Storia d’Italia (Turin: UTET, 1994) viii.
Bibliography
351

<<<PDFPAGE 361>>>
Miele, M. ‘La scelta del episcopato meridionale’, in P. Scaramella (ed.) Il Cittadino Ecclesiastico.
Il Clero nella Repubblica Napoletana del 1799 (Naples: Vivarium, 2000), 3–41.
Miglione, Marino Rodinò di. Storia ﬁnanziaria del Comune di Napoli nel secolo XIX
(Naples: Luigi Pierro Editore, 1908).
Migliorini, Luigi Mascilli. Il sistema delle Arti. Corporazioni annonarie e di mestiere a
Napoli nel Settecento (Naples: Guida, 1992).
——. ‘Brotherhoods and Guilds in Naples in the Eighteenth Century: Religious Devotion
and the Protection of Crafts’, in Alberto Guenzi, Paola Massa, and Fausto Piola Caselli
(eds.), Guilds, Markets and Work Regulations in Italy (16th–19th Centuries) (Aldershot:
Ashgate, 1998), 395–408.
——. Napoleone (Rome: Salerno Editrice, 2002).
Mineccia, Francesco. ‘L’agricoltura italiana nella seconda metà del settecento’, in L’Italia
giacobina e napoleonica. Storia della società italiana (Milan: Trti Editore, 1985) xiii.
Miot, André Francois (1762–1841). See http://www.acccademiacorsa.org.
Moe, Nelson. The View from Vesuvius. Italian Culture and the Southern Question (Berkeley,
Calif.: University of California Press, 2002).
Montroni, Giovanni. Gli uomini del re. La nobiltà napoletana nell’Ottcento (Rome:
Donzelli, 1996).
——(ed.). Agricoltura e commercio nel Mezzogiorno tra ’700 e ’800 (Naples: Liquori
Editore, 1996).
——. ‘The Court: Power Relations and Forms of Social Life’, in Girolamo Imbruglia (ed.),
Naples in the Eighteenth Century. The Birth and the Death of a Nation (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000), 22–43.
Moricola, Giuseppe. L’industria della carità. L’albergo dei poveri nell’economia e nella società
napoletana tra ’700 e ’800 (Naples: Liguori Editore, 1994).
Morilla Critz, José, Alan L. Olmstead, and Paul W. Rhode. ‘“Horn of Plenty”: The
Globalization of Mediterranean Horticulture and the Economic Development of
Southern Europe 1880–1930’. Journal of Economic History, 59 (2) (June 1999), 316–52.
Moscati, Ruggiero. ‘Su la rivoluzione napoletana del 1820–1’, in Scritti in onore di
Leopoldo Cassese (Naples, 1971), ii. 29–37.
——. Passaggio a Mezzogiorno:Napoli e il Sud nell’immaginario barocco e illuminista europeo
(Milan: Leonardo, 1993).
Mozzillo, Atanasio. Viaggiatori stranieri nel Sud (Milano: Edizioni di Comunità, 1964).
——. Cronache della Calabria in Guerra 1806–1811, 3 vols. (Naples: ESI, 1972).
——. Frontiera del Grand Tour. Viaggi e viaggiatori nel Mezzogiorno borbonico (Naples:
Liguori Editore, 1992).
Murdock, Richard K. ‘Un rapporto sull’ economia napoletana presentato a Napoleone da
un mercante francese nel 1801’. ASPN, 12 (1973), 281–90.
Nada, N. ‘Il Regno di Napoli nell’età della Restaurazione secondo un giudizio di Tito
Manzi’. RSI, 57(4) (1961), 626–45.
Naddeo, Barbara Ann. ‘Cultural capitals and cosmopolitanism in eighteenth century Italy:
the historiography and Italy on the Grand Tour’. JMIS, 10(2) (June 2005), 183–99.
Nardella, Tommaso. ‘Giuseppe Poerio primo intendente di Capitanata e del Contrado di
Molise’, in Renata de Lorenzo (ed.), Risorgimento, democrazia, Mezzogiorno d’Italia.
Studi in onore di Alfonso Scirocco (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2003), 663–75.
Nardi, Carla. Napoleone a Rome. La politica della consulta romana (Ecole Française de
Rome, 1989).
Bibliography
352

<<<PDFPAGE 362>>>
Nicolini, Fausto. Nicola Nicolini e gli studi giuridici nella prima metà del secolo XIX (Naples,
1901).
Nicolini, Nicola. ‘La spedizione punitiva del Latouche-Tréville (16 dicembre 1792) ed
altri saggi’, in G. Gentile and M. Menghini (eds.), Studi e documenti di storia del
Risorgimento (Florence: Le Monnier, 1939).
Notario, Paolo, and Narcisco Nada. Il Piedmonte Sabaudo. Dal Periodo Napoleonico al
Risorgimento, vol. viii, part II, of Giuseppe Galasso (ed.), Storia d’Italia(Turin: UTET, 1993).
Nuzzo, Giuseppe. ‘John Acton (1736–1811), ‘ in DBI, i. 206–10.
——.‘Il mancato trattato di commercio tra l’Inghilterra e Napoli nella seconda metà del
Settecento’, in Scritti in Memoria di Leopoldo Cassese (Naples, 1971), i. 280–318.
——. La monarchia delle Due Sicilie tra Ancien Regime e Rivoluzione (Naples: Bevison,
1972).
——. ‘L’ascesa di Giovanni Acton al governo dello stato’. ASPN, 19 (1990), 437–535.
Occupants et Occupés 1792–1815 (Brussels: Centre d’Histoire Economique et Sociale,
1969).
Ostuni, Nicola. Finanze ed economia nel Regno delle Due Sicilie (Naples: Liquori Editore,
1992).
Ouvrand, R. ‘Briot, Pierre-Joseph (1771–1827)’ http://www.carboneria.it.
Pagden, Anthony. ‘Francesco Maria Pagano’s Republic of Virtues. Naples 1799’, in
B. Fontana (ed.), The Invention of the Modern Republic (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994), 140–52.
Palmieri, Walter (ed.). Il Mezzogiorno agli inizi della Restaurazione (Rome–Bari: Editori
Laterza, 1993).
——. ‘La tutela del territorio; il bosco e il parlamento napoletano del 1820–1’. Storia
Urbana, 80 (1997), 35–61.
Parente, G. ‘Il Cardinale Giuseppe Maria Capece Zurlo, Arcivescovo di Napoli
(1781–1801)’, in P. Scaramella (ed.), Il Cittadino Ecclesiastico. Il Clero nella Repubblica
Napoletana del 1799 (Naples: Vivarium, 2000), 45–106.
Parente, L. ‘Dibattito sul divorzio. Una battaglia politica nel Mezzogiorno napoleonico’.
Studi Beneventani (Benevento, 1990).
Pazzagli, Carlo. L’agricoltura toscana nella prima metà dell’800 (Florence: Leo Olschki,
1973).
——. Sismondi e la Toscana del suo tempo (1795–1838) (Siena: Protagon Editori Toscani,
2003).
Pedio, Tommaso. Giacobini e sanfedisti in Italia meridionale: Terra di Bari e Terra d’Otranto
nelle Cronache del 1799, 2 vols. (Bari: Adriatica Editrice, 1974).
Pepe, L. ‘Ignazio Ciaia (1766–1799)’. DBI, xxv. 100.
Pescosolido, Guido. ‘L’economia e la vita materiale’, in Giovanni Sabbattucci and Vittorio
Vidotto (eds.), Storia d’Italia 1. Le premesse dell’unità. Dalla ﬁne del Settecento al 1861
(Rome–Bari: Editori Laterza, 1994), 5–118.
Petraccone, Claudia. Napoli nel 1799. Rivoluzione e Proprietà (Naples: Morano Editore,
1989).
Petrusewicz, Marta. ‘Signori e briganti. Repressione del brigantaggio nel periodo francese in
Calabria: Caso Baracco’, in Studi in onore di Umberto Caldora (Cosenza, 1978), 333–46.
——. ‘Agronomia, innovatori agrari nelle periferie europee nell’Ottocento’, in Piero
Bevilacqua (ed.), Storia dell’agricoltura italiana in età contemporanea (Venice: Marsilio
Editore, 1991), iii. 255–344.
Bibliography
353

<<<PDFPAGE 363>>>
Petrusewicz, Marta. Latifundium. Moral economy and material life in a European periphery
(Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 1996).
——. ‘Before the Southern Question: “Native” Ideas on Backwardness and Remedies in
the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies 1815–1849’, in Jane Schneider (ed.), Italy’s Southern
Question. Orientalism in One Country (Oxford: Berg, 1998), 27–49.
Pezzino, Paolo. Il paradiso abitato dai diavoli. Società, elites, istituzioni nel Mezzogiorno con-
temporaneo (Milan: Franco Angeli, 1992).
——. Storia militare del Risorgimento: Guerra e insurrezioni (Turin: Einaudi, 1962).
Piero, Pieri. ‘Il Regno di Napoli dal luglio 1799 al marzo 1806’ ASPN, 51 (1926), 7–309.
Pii, Eluggero. Antonio Genovesi. Dalla Politica Economica alla ‘Politica Civile’ (Florence:
Leo Olschki, 1984).
Pilati, Renata. ‘La popolazione di Napoli dal 1770 al 1820’, in G. Civile, S. de Majo,
G. Montroni, R. Pilati, M. Storchi, and M.-A. Visceglia (eds.), Studi sulla società
meridionale (Naples: Guida, 1978), 1–46.
——. ‘Delitti e ordine pubblico durante il decennio francese: gli atti della gran corte crim-
inale di Napoli’. ASPN, 11 (1984), 389–419.
Piscitelli, Enzo. ‘Fabrizio Ruffo e la riforma dello stato pontiﬁcio’. Società Romana di Storia
Patria, 74 (Rome, 1951), 71–148.
Placanica, A. Cassa Sacra e beni della Chiesa nella Calabria del Settecento (Naples: Biblioteca
degli Annali di storia economica e sociale, 1970).
——. Uomini e strutture economiche in Calabria nei secoli xvi–xviii, 2 vols. (Catanzaro:
Editore Meridionali Riuniti, 1974).
——. Alle origini dell’egemonia borghese in Calabria. La privatizzazione delle terre ecclesi-
astiche 1784–1815 (Salerno–Catanzaro: Società Editoriale Meridionale, 1979).
——. Il ﬁlosofo e la catastrophe: un terremoto del Settcento (Turin: Einaudi, 1985).
Platania, M. ‘Instabilità sociale e delinquenza’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.), Il Mezzogiorno
Pre-Unitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Dedalo, 1988), 1069–86.
Pocock, Tom. A Thirst for glory. The Life of Admiral Sir Sidney Smith (London: Pimlico, 1998).
Poletta, Luciana. ‘Il neoclassicismo’, in L’Italia giacobina e napoleonica. Storia della societa
italiana (Milan: Teti Editore, 1985), xiii.
Poli, Jean Pierre. ‘Portrait d’André François Miot’, in Accademia Corsica (January 2003),
1–18. Available at: http://www.accademiacorsica.org.
Pontieri, Ernesto. Il riformismo borbonico nella Sicilia del Sette e del’Ottocento, 2nd edn.
(Naples, 1965).
Postigliola, A. ‘Antonio Capece Minutolo, Prince of Canosa (1768–1838)’ in DBI, xviii.
451–8.
Puca, A. ‘La Calabria nel decennio francese’, in Augusto Placanica (ed.), Storia della
Calabria (Roma–Reggio, 1992), 411–44.
Putnam, Robert D. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993).
Rambaud, Jacques. ‘L’église de Naples sous la domination napoléonienne’. Revue d’histoire
ecclésiastique, 9 (1908), 294–312.
——. Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte (1806–1808) (Paris: Plon, 1911).
——.‘Il tentativo di Murat contro la Sicilia nel 1810’. ASPN, 36 (1911b), f. iii, 454–50;
f. iv, 695–709.
Rao, Anna Maria. L’Amaro della Feudalità. La devoluzione di Arnone e la questione feudale a
Napoli alla ﬁne del ‘700’ (Naples: Guida Editore, 1984a).
Bibliography
354

<<<PDFPAGE 364>>>
——. ‘Galanti, Simonetti e la riforma della giustizia nel Regno di Napoli (1795)’ ASPN,
102 (1984b), 281–341.
——.‘La Repubblica napoletana del 1799’; ‘La Prima Restaurazione borbonica’, in
Giuseppe Galasso and Rosario Romeo (eds.), Storia del Mezzogiorno. Il Regno dagli
Angioini ai Borboni. (Rome: Edizioni del Sole, 1986), iv. Now rpt. in Anna Maria Rao
and Pasquale Villani (eds.), Napoli 1799–1815. Dalla Repubblica alla Monarchia
amministrativa (Naples: Edizioni del Sole, 1995).
——.‘Esercito e società a Napoli nelle riforme della seconda metà del settecento’. Studi
Storici, 28 (1987), 623–77.
——. ‘Il problema della violenza popolare in Italia nell’età rivoluzionaria’, in Rivoluzione
francese. La forza delle idee e la forza delle cose (Milan, 1990), 247–66.
—— (ed.). Esercito e società nell’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica (Naples, Morano Editore,
1990).
——.‘Antiche storie e autentiche scritture. Prova di nobilità a Napoli nel Settecento’, in
M. A. Visceglia (ed.), Signori, Patrizi, Cavalieri nell’età moderna (Rome–Bari: Laterza,
1992), 279–88.
——. Esuli. L’emigrazione politica italiana in Francia (1792–1802) (Naples: Guida, 1992).
——. ‘Mezzogiorno e rivoluzione: trent’anni di storiograﬁa’. Studi Storici, 37 (1996),
981–1041.
——. ‘Le strutture militari nel Regno di Napoli durante il decennio francese’, in L’Italia
dell’età napoleonica. Atti del LVIII Congresso di storia del Risorgimento italiano (Milan,
1996) (Rome: Istituto per la Storia del Risorgimento, 1997), 255–98.
—— (ed.). Editoria e Cultura a Napoli nel XVIII secolo (Naples: Liguori Editore, 1998).
—— (ed.). Folle controrivoluzionarie. Le insorgenze popolari nell’Italia rivoluzionaria e
napoleonica (Rome: Carocci, 1999).
——.‘Popular Societies and the Neapolitan Republic of 1799’. JMIS, 4/3 (1999), 350–69.
——. ‘The Feudal Question, Judicial Systems and the Enlightenment’, in Girolamo
Imbruglia (ed.), Naples in the Eighteenth Century: The Birth and the Death of a Nation
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 95–117.
——. ‘Enlightenment and Reform’, in John Marino (ed.), Early Modern Italy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002), 229–52.
——(ed.). Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002).
——. ‘Tra civiltà e barbarie: storie inglesi della Repubblica napoletana del 1799’, in Renata
de Lorenzo (ed.), Risorgimento, democrazia, Mezzogiorno d’Italia. Studi in onore di
Alfonso Scirocco (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2003), 708–39.
——. ‘Enlightenment and Reform; An Overview of Culture and Politics in
Enlightenment Italy’. JMIS 10(2) (June 2005), 142–67.
Rath, R. J. The Provisional Austrian Government in Lombardy-Venetia 1814–21 (Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1967).
Reinerman, Alan. Austria and the Papacy in the Age of Metternich, 2 vols. (Washington, DC:
Catholic University Press, 1979/1989).
Renda, F. Il movimento contadino nella società siciliana (Palermo, 1956).
——. Risorgimento e classi popolari in Sicilia 1820–1 (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1968).
Riall, Lucy. Sicily and the Uniﬁcation of Italy. Liberal Policy and Local Power 1859–66
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997).
——. ‘Garibaldi and the South’, in John A. Davis (ed.), Italy in the Nineteenth Century
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 132–53.
Bibliography
355

<<<PDFPAGE 365>>>
Ricchioni, Vincenzo (ed.). La statistica del reame di Napoli del 1811: le relazioni sulla Puglia
(Trani, 1942).
Rienzo, Maria, Gabriella. Banchieri ed imprenditori nel Mezzogiorno. La Banca di Calabria
(1910–39) (Rome: Donzelli, 2004).
Ringrose, David. ‘Capital cities and their hinterland: Europe and the Colonial
Dimension’, in Peter Clark and Bernard Lepetit (eds.), Capital Cities and Their
Hinterlands in Early Modern Europe (Aldershot: Scolar Press 1996), 217–40.
Roberts, J. M. The Mythology of the Secret Societies (London: Paladin, 1974).
Robertson, John. ‘The Enlightenment above National Context: Political Economy in
Eighteenth Century Scotland and Naples’. Historical Journal 40 (1997), 667–97.
Rocchina, Maria Abbondanza. ‘Il clero’, in A. Di Leo (ed.), Riformismo e rivoluzione: il
Mezzogiorno tra due Restaurazioni (Naples: ESI, 1995), 161–5.
Rodolico N. Il Popolo agli inzi del Risorgimento nell’Italia Meridionale 1799–1801
(Florence: Le Monnier, 1926).
Romani, George T. The Neapolitan Revolution of 1820–21 (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern
University Press, 1950).
Romano, Ruggiero. Le commerce du royaume de Naples avec la France et les pays de
l’Adriatique au XVIIIe siècle (Paris: A. Colin, 1951).
——. Prezzi, salari e servizi a Napoli nel secolo XVIII (1734–1806) (Milan: Banca
Commerciale, 1965).
Romano, S. Momenti del Risorgimento in Sicilia (Messina: G di Anna, 1952).
Romeo, Rosario. Il Risorgimento in Sicilia (Bari: Laterza, 1950).
——. Mezzogiorno e Sicilia nel Risorgimento (Naples: ESI, 1963).
——. Momenti e problemi della Restaurazione nel Regno delle Due Sicilie (now in Romeo,
1963).
Ross, Michael. The Reluctant King. Joseph Bonaparte King of the Two Sicilies and Spain
(London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1976).
Rosselli, John. Lord William Bentinck and the British Occupation of Sicily 1811–1814
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1956).
——. The Opera Industry in Italy from Cimarosa to Verdi: The Role of the Impresario
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
——. ‘Artisti e impresari’, in Il Teatro di San Carlo (Naples: Giuda, 1987).
——.‘Opera production 1780–1880’, in Lorenzo Bianconi and Giorgio Pestelli (eds.),
Opera Production and its Resources (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 81–164.
Rossi, Lauro. Mazzini e la rivoluzione napoletana del 1799. Ricerche sull’Italia giacobina
(Manduria–Bari–Rome: Pietro Laciata Editore, 1995).
Rotondo, A. ‘La censura ecclesiastica e la cultura’, in Ruggiero Romano and Corrado
Vivanti (eds.) Storia d’Italia (Turin: Einaudi, 1984), v., part 2, 1479–503.
Rousseau, G. ‘The sources of Priapus: Anti-clericalism, Homosocial Desire and Richard
Payne Knight’, in G. Rousseau and R. Porter (eds.), Sexual Underworld of the
Enlightenment (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1987), 101–42.
Rovito, Pier Luigi. Respubblica dei togati. Giuristi e società nella Napoli del seicento, i:
Le garanzie giruridiche (Naples, 1982).
Rowe, Michael. From Reich to State. The Rhineland in the Revolutionary Age 1780–1830
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
——(ed.). Collaboration and Resistance in Napoleonic Europe State Formation in an Age of
Upheaval (c. 1800–1815) (London: Palgrave, 2003).
Bibliography
356

<<<PDFPAGE 366>>>
Rubino, Gregorio. Archaeologia industriale e Mezzogiorno (Naples, 1978).
Ruggiero, M. Briganti del Piemonte napoleonico (Turin, 1979), 69–70.
Russo, G. La Scuola d’Ingegneria in Napoli 1811–1857 (Naples: ESI, 1967).
Russo, Saverio (ed.). La Capitanata nel 1799 (Foggia: Claudio Genezii Editore, 2000).
——. Tra Abruzzo e Puglia. La transumanza dopo la Dogana (Milan: Franco Angeli, 2002).
Sabbattucci, Giovanni, and Vittorio Vidotto (eds.). Storia d’Italia 1. Le premesse dell’unità.
Dalla ﬁne del Settecento al 1861 (Rome–Bari: Editori Laterza, 1994).
Sabetti, Filippo. Political Authority in a Sicilian Village (Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 1984).
Saine T. P., J. L. Sammons. Johan Wolfgang von Goethe’s Italian Journey (New York:
Suhrkamp Publishers, 1989).
Salvemini, Biagio. ‘Note sul concetto dell’Ottocento meridionale’. Società e Storia, 26
(1984), 917–45.
——. L’innovazione precaria. Spazi, mercati e società nel Mezzogiorno tra Sette e Ottocento
(Rome, 1995).
——.‘The Arrogance of the Market: The Economy of the Kingdom between the
Mediterranean and Europe’, in Girolamo Imbruglia (ed.), Naples in the Eighteenth Century.
The Birth and the Death of a Nation(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 44–69.
——, and Maria Antonietta Visceglie. ‘Fiere e mercati. Circuiti commerciali nel
Mezzogiorno’, in P. Bevilacqua (ed.) Storia dell’agricoltura italiana in età contemporanea,
iii: Mercati ed istituzioni (Venice: Marsilio Editore, 1991), 55–122.
Savarese, G. Tra Rivoluzioni e Reazione. Ricordi di Giuseppe Zurlo 1759–1828, ed.
A. Romano (Turin: Einaudi, 1941).
Scaramella, Pierroberto (ed.) Il Cittadino Ecclesiastico. Il Clero nella Repubblica Napoletana
del 1799 (Naples: Vivarium, 2000).
Schipa, Michelangelo. ‘Cause ed importanza della rivoluzione napoletana del 1820’.
ASPN, ns anno vi, xlv (1920), 110–27.
——. Il Regno di Napoli al tempo di Carlo di Borbone, 2 vols. (Milan, 1926); rpt. (Cosenza:
Editori Brenner, 1994).
Schmidt, C. Le Grand Duché de Berg (1806–1813). Etude sur la domination française en
Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier (Paris, 1905).
Schneider, Jane (ed.). Italy’s Southern Question. Orientalism in One Country (Oxford: Berg,
1998).
——, and Peter Schneider. Culture and Political Economy in Western Sicily (New York:
Academic Press, 1976).
Schroeder, Paul W. The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1994).
Scirocco, Alfonso. ‘Il problema dell’autonomia locale nel Mezzogiorno durante la
rivoluzione del 1820–1’, in AAVV Studi in Memoria di Nino Cortese (Rome: Istituto
per la Storia del Risorgimento Italiano, 1976), 485–528.
——. ‘I corpi rappresentativi nel Mezzogiorno dal decennio alla Restaurazione: il personale
dei consigli provinciali’. Quaderni Storici, 37 (1978), 102–25.
——. Dalla Seconda Restaurazione alla Fine del Regno, in Giuseppe Galasso and Rosario
Romeo (eds.), Storia del Mezzogiorno, iv: Il Regno dagli Angioini ai Borboni (Rome:
Edizioni del Sole, 1986), 643–789.
——.‘Il brigantaggio meridionale nel Decennio e la repressione di Manhès’, in A. Motta
(ed.), Della Capitana e del Mezzogiorno (Manduria, 1987), 153–64.
Bibliography
357

<<<PDFPAGE 367>>>
Scirocco, Alfonso. L’Italia del Risorgimento 1800–1860 (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1990).
——.‘Collegi e licei nel Mezzogiorno 1806–1860’, in Il Risorgimento, 8 (Milano:
Tipograﬁa Editrice CENS, 1996), 7–21.
——.‘Pietro Collettta (1775–1831)’, in DBI, xxvii. 27–34.
Scott, H. M. (ed.). Enlightenment Absolutism: Reform and Reformers in Late Eighteenth
Century Europe (Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 1990).
Sereni, Emilio. Storia del Paesaggio Italiano (Bari: Laterza, 1961/1989; published in
English as History of the Italian Agricultural Landscape, trans. R. Burr Litchﬁeld
(Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
Simioni, A. ‘L’esercito napoletano dalla minorità di Ferdinando IV alla Repubblica del
1799’. ASPN (1920), 88–125; 295–321; (1921), 171–205; 295–321.
——. Le Origini del Risorgimento Politico dell’Italia Meridionale (Palermo, 1925; new edn.,
Naples: Società Storia Patria, 1995).
Sloan, Kim. ‘“Observations on the Kingdom of Naples”: Sir William Hamilton’s Diplomatic
Career’, in Ian Jenkins and Kim Sloan (eds.), Vases and Volcanoes: Sir William Hamilton
and His Collection (London: British Museum Press, 1996).
Soﬁa, Francesca. ‘Una scienza per l’Amministrazione. Statistica e pubblici apparati tra età
rivoluzionaria e Restaurazione’, in Quaderni di Clio (Rome: Carucci, 1988), i.
Sorba, Carlotta. I Teatri. L’Italia del melodrama nell’età del Risorgimento (Bologna: Il
Mulino, 2001).
Spagnoletti, Angelantonio. ‘Il controllo degli Intendenti nelle amministrazioni locali nel
Regno di Napoli’, in L’Amministrazione nella Storia Moderna (Istituto per la Scienza
dell’Amministrazione Pubblica, Archivio n.s 3) (Milano: Giuffrè, 1985), i. 953–99.
——.‘Centri e periferie nell stato napoletano del primo Ottocento’, in Angelo Massafra (ed.),
Il Mezzogiorno Pre-Unitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari; Dedalo 1988), 379–410.
——. Storia del Regno delle Due Sicilie (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1997).
——. ‘Monarchia e republicanismo in Puglia’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799.
Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 638–52.
Sperber, V. ‘Michele Carrascosa (1770–1852)’, in DBI, xx. 714–16.
Spini, Giorgio. Miti e realtà della Spagna nelle rivoluzioni italiane 1820/1 (Rome, 1960).
Spinosa, N. ‘Neapolitan painting under Charles and Ferdinand Bourbon: continuity and
crisis within tradition’ in The Golden Age of Naples: Art and Civilization under the
Bourbons 1734–1805 (Detroit Institute of Arts with the Art Institute of Chicago, 198I),
55–155.
Steegmuller, Francis. A Woman, a Man and Two Kingdoms. The Story of Madame D’Epinay
and the Abbé Galiani (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991).
Stella, P. ‘Giuseppe Capecelatro (1744–1836)’, in DBI, xviii. 448–51.
Storchi, M. R. ‘Grani, prezzi e mercati nel Regno di Napoli (1806–1852)’, in Angelo
Massafra (ed.), Il Mezzogiorno Pre-Unitario. Economia, società e istituzioni (Bari: Dedalo,
1988), 133–48.
Talamo, Giuseppe. Napoli agli inizi dell’800. Il Regno di Giuseppe Bonaparte 1806–1808.
(Rome, 1971).
——.‘Napoli da Giuseppe Bonaparte a Ferdinand II’, in Storia di Napoli (Cava dei
Tirreni: ESI, 1972), viii.
Tallarico, M. A. ‘Michelangelo Cianciulli, 1743–1819’. DBI, xxv. 167–9.
Tarrow, Sydney. Peasant Communism in Southern Italy (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 1967).
Bibliography
358

<<<PDFPAGE 368>>>
Tescione, G. San Leucio e l’Arte della Seta nel Mezzogiorno d’Italia (Naples, 1961).
Tessitore, Fulvio. ‘Vincenzo Cuoco e le origini del liberalismo “moderato”’, in L’Italia gia-
cobina e napoleonica. Storia della società italiana (Milano: Teti Editore, 1985), xiii.
329–69.
The Golden Age of Naples: Art and Civilization under the Bourbons 1734–1805 (Detroit
Institute of Arts with the Art Institute of Chicago, 1981).
Themelly, Mario. ‘Vincenzo Cuoco (1770–1825)’, in DBI, xxxi. 388–402.
Thompson, E. P. Whigs and Hunters: The Origins of the Black Act (New York: Pantheon,
1975).
——. ‘The moral economy of the English crowd in the 18th century’, in Customs in
Common. Studies in Traditional Culture (New York: The New Press, 1993).
Tinterow, G., and P. Conisbee (eds.). Portraits by Ingres: Image of an Epoch (New York:
Metropolitan Museum, 1999).
Tocci, U. Terra e riforma nel Mezzogiorno moderno (Bologna, 1971).
Tognarini, I. ‘La rivoluzione francese e la crisi del riformismo italiano’, in L’Italia giacobina
e napoleonica. Storia della società italiana (Milan: Teti Editore, 1985), xiii.
—— (ed.). La Toscana nell’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica (Naples, 1985).
Torrini, M. ‘Le arti e le scienze. L’orto botanico, l’osservatorio, i musei’, in Gioacchino
Murat (Naples: Elio De Rosa, 1994), 44–9.
Trevelyan, R. Princes under the Volcano ( New York: William Morrow, 1973).
Trifone, R. Feudi e demani; eversione della feudalità nelle provincie napoletane (Milan,
1909).
Tsoukas, C. M. I ‘torbimenti’ del Trasimeno del 1799 (Milan: Franco Angeli, 1988).
Tulard, Jean. Murat ou l’éveil des nations (Paris: Hachette, 1983).
Turi, Gabriele. Viva Maria. Riforme, rivoluzione e insorgenze in Toscana (1790–1799)
(Florence: Leo Olschki, 1969; Bologna: Il Mulino, 1999).
Ungari, Paolo. L’età del Codice Civile: lotte per la codiﬁcazione e scuole di giurisprudenza nel
Risorgimento (Naples: ESI, 1967).
——.Storia del diritto della famiglia in Italia (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1974).
Valente, Angela. Gioacchino Murat e l’Italia Meridionale (Turin: Einaudi, 1941/1965).
Valenzi, Lucia. Poveri, ospizi e potere a Napoli (XVII–XIX secoli) (Milan: Franco, 1995).
Venturi, Franco. ‘La circolazione delle idee’. Rassegna Storica del Risorgimento, 41 (1954),
203–22.
—— (ed.). Illuministi Italiani, v: Riformatori napoletani (Milan–Naples: Ricciardi, 
1962).
—— Italy and the Enlightenment: Studies in a Cosmopolitan Century, ed. S. J. Woolf
(Longman: London, 1972).
——. ‘1764: Napoli nell’anno della fame’. RSI, 81 (1973a), 394–472.
——. ‘L’Italia fuori d’Italia’, in R. Romano and C. Vivanti (eds.), Storia d’Italia (Turin:
Einaudi, 1973b), iii. 985–1481.
Vigne, Georges. ‘Ingres e la Corte di Napoli’, in Civiltà dell’Ottocento. Cultura e società
(Naples: Electra, 1997), 39–82.
Villani, Pasquale. La vendita dei beni dello stato nel Regno di Napoli 1806–1815 (Bologna:
Il Mulino, 1964).
——. ‘Giuseppe Zurlo e la crisi dell’antico regime nel Regno di Napoli’, in Annuario
dell’Istitito italiano per l’età contemporanea e moderna (Rome, 1965), vii. 17–78; rpt. in
Villani (ed.) (1974).
Bibliography
359

<<<PDFPAGE 369>>>
Villani, Pasquale. Feudalità, riforme, capitalismo agrario (Bari: Laterza, 1967).
——. ‘Il Regno di Napoli nel decennio francese’, in Studi in onore di G. Pepe (Bari, 1969),
689–702.
——.‘Qualche aspetto dell’economia italiana nell’età napoleonica’. Annuario dell Istituto
per l’età moderna e contemporanea, 23–4 (1971–2), 19–61.
——(ed.). Economia e classi sociali nella Puglia moderna (Naples, 1974).
——. Mezzogiorno tra riforme e rivoluzione (Bari: Laterza, 1974).
——. Introduzione a V. Cuoco, Saggio Storico sulla rivoluzione napoletana del 1799 (Bari:
Laterza, 1980).
——. Italia Napoleonica (Naples: Guida Editore, 1978).
——. ‘Le imposte dirette e la distribuzione del reddito nel Regno di Napoli e nella
Calabria Napoleonica’, in idem, Italia Napoleonica (Naples: Guida Editore, 1978).
——. Il decennio francese’, in Giuseppe Galasso Rosario Romeo (eds.), Storia del
Mezzogiorno, iv: Il Regno dagli Angioini ai Borboni. (Rome: Edizioni del Sole, 1986):
rpt. in Anna Maria Rao and Pasquale Villani (eds.), Napoli 1799–1815. Dalla
Repubblica alla Monarchia amministrativa (Naples: Edizioni del Sole, 1995),
179–282.
——. Società rurale e ceti dirigenti (XVII–XX secolo) (Naples: Morano Edirore, 1989).
——.‘Bilancio storiograﬁco’ L’Italia nell’età Napoleonica. Atti del LXVII Congresso di
Storia del Risorgimento Italiano, Milano, 1996 (Rome: Istituto per la storia del
Risorgimento Italiano, 1997), 19–36.
——. ‘Il 1799 nella storia d’Italia’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.), Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e
Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 841–53.
——. Rivoluzione e diplomazia. Agenti francesi in Italia (1792–1798) (Naples: Vivarium,
2002).
——. ‘Ludovico Bianchini’ (1770–1823)’, in DBI, x. 208–12.
——.‘Gianfrancesso Conforti (1743–1799)’ in DBI, xxvii. 793–803.
Villari, Lucio. Il pensiero economico di Antonio Genovesi (Florence: Le Monnier, 1959)
Villari, Rosario. ‘Per la storia rurale del Mezzogiorno nel secolo XVII’. Movimento Operaio
6 (4) (1954), 513–38.
——(ed.). Il Sud nella storia d’Italia: antologia della questione meridionale, 2 vols. (Bari:
Laterza, 1961).
——. Mezzogiorno e contadini nell’età moderna (Bari: Laterza, 1961).
Volpe, F. ‘Aspetti di vita socio-religiosa’, in A. Di Leo (ed.), Riformismo e rivoluzione: il
Mezzogiorno tra due Restaurazioni (Naples: ESI, 1995), 147–58.
Vovelle, Michel. Il Triennio rivoluzionario italiano visto dalla Francia (Naples: Guida,
1999).
——. ‘La rivoluzione francese e la rivoluzione napoletana’, in Anna Maria Rao (ed.),
Napoli 1799. Fra Storia e Storiograﬁa (Naples: Vivarium, 2002), 855–84.
——. Les républiques-soeurs sous le regard de la Grande Nation 1795–1803 (Paris:
L’Hamattan, 2000).
Wahnbaeck, Till. Luxury and Happiness. Political Economy in the Italian Enlightenment
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
Weil M. H. Le prince Eugène et Murat, 5 vols. (Paris: A. Fontemoign, 1902).
——. Joachim Murat, roi de Naples: la dernière année de règne (mai 1814-mai 1815), 2 vols.
(Paris: A. Fontemoign 1909–10).
——. Antoine Maghella (Paris: A. Fontemoign, 1912).
Bibliography
360

<<<PDFPAGE 370>>>
Woloch, I. The New Regime. Transformations of the French Civil Order 1789–1820s
(New York: Norton, 1994).
—— (ed.). Revolution and Meaning of Freedom in the Nineteenth Century (Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 1996).
Woolf, Stuart J. A History of Italy 1700–1860: The Social Constraints of Political Change
(London: Methuen, 1979).
——. The Poor in Western Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries (London: Methuen, 1986).
——. Napoleon’s Integration of Europe (London: Routledge, 1991).
Zaghi, Carlo. L’Italia napoleonica dalla Cisalpina al Regno, in Giuseppe Galasso (ed.),
Storia d’Italia (Turin: UTET, 1986/1991), xviii. 1.
Zazo, A. ‘Giuseppe Poerio e il brigantaggio in Molise’. Samnium, 24(4) (1951), 152–77.
Zilli, Illaria (ed.). Risorse umane e Mezzogiorno. Istruzione, recupero e formazione tra ’700 e
’800 (Naples: ESI, 1999).
Bibliography
361

<<<PDFPAGE 371>>>
This page intentionally left blank 

<<<PDFPAGE 372>>>
Index
A’Court, Mr William 296–7
Abandoned children (foundlings) 44, 172–3,
191, 198, 202–3, 308
Abrial, André Joseph (1750–1828) 85–90,
97–8, 336
Abruzzo (province of) 33, 45, 47, 88, 90, 104,
109–10, 113, 123, 171–2, 189, 195–6,
210, 225, 265, 271, 293
Absolutism 54–6, 60–5, 70, 162, 277, 
279, 321
Acri 214–15, 218
Acton, John (1736–1811) 24–5, 55–6, 62, 72,
74, 75–7, 116, 122, 126
Adoa (feudal tax) 49
Adowa, Battle of (1 March 1896) 2
Agar, Jean-Antoine-Michel, count Mosbourg
(1771–1844) 142, 145–6, 149, 156–60,
168, 187, 194, 199, 232, 234, 236, 263,
265, 291
Agriculture 36, 39, 42, 45–6, 48–52, 68, 163,
174, 189–94, 236, 239, 245, 281, 308,
324–9
Aix-la-Chapelle 148; Treaty of (18 October,
1748) 23
Ajaccio 136
Albanesi, Giuseppe (1759–99) 85–6
Albania 148; Albanian settlements 47, 70,
113; Albanian troops 16
Albergo dei Poveri (Royal Poor House, Naples)
31–2, 202–3, 247
Altamura 88, 112
Amiens, Peace of (27 March 1802) 125, 137
Amnesties, trade in 215–16, 220–1, 227, 
229, 293
Ancona 28, 73, 90, 131, 142, 264, 270, 288
Andria 88
Anti-clericalism 101
Anti-curialism 25, 55, 60, 67, 77, 101–2,
118, 277
Apulia 18, 32–3, 35, 45, 51–2, 59, 66–7, 76,
88–9, 90, 105, 112, 120, 122, 125, 132,
148, 175, 178, 189, 197, 222, 231, 245,
293–4, 300
Aranjuez uprising (March 1808) 155
Armies
Bourbon army 16, 22, 24–6, 38, 50, 56–7,
62, 75, 77–8, 96, 108, 117, 124, 126, 131,
133, 212, 252
French Armée d’Italie (1796–9) 84, 90,
101–4
Sanfedist army 101, 117
French armies of observation in Naples: 123,
125, 132, 140
French Armée d’Italie (1800–14) 123, 125,
132, 140
Murat’s army 155–6, 203, 251–4, 260–4,
265, 268, 270–3, 276–7, 282
Grande Armée 134 n 13, 135, 157–9, 220,
252–4
Austrian army of occupation (1815) 288,
291, 294, 312, 314, 316
Bourbon army and the revolutions of
1820–1 288, 291, 294, 312, 314, 316
Bourbon army after 1821 325, 327,
Armigeri (armed feudal retainers) 49
Arrendamenti (Spanish excise duties and tax
farms) 17, 36–7, 42, 56 n 8, 63–5, 67,
75–6, 126, 166, 177–80, 202
Ascoli, Duke of (Minister of Police) 133
Assemblies, provincial 11, 164, 186, 188–94,
196, 235–6, 244–5, 297–8, 313
Atri (feudal) State of 57–8
Atri, Duchess of (Maria Giulia Colonna) 144
Austerlitz, Battle of (2 December 1805) 130,
133, 141
Austria (see Habsburg monarchy) 1, 11, 15, 16,
20–5, 31–2, 37, 55–6, 72–5, 87, 95, 108,
122, 130, 132, 136, 140–1, 146, 149,
151, 153, 159, 205, 220, 253, 259–65,
269, 273–4, 276–8, 288–304, 310–18,
324, 326, 327
Austrian marriage, Napoleon’s 151, 269
Avellino 89, 299
Baccher brothers (royalist conspiracy 1799)
91, 121
Baciocchi, Felice (1762–1841), husband of
Elisa Bonaparte 130
Bagnara 117, 218, 250 n 70
Balsamo, Paolo, Sicilian agronomist
(1764–1818) 68
Banks(see also Rothschild Bank) 60, 75, 77, 84,
91, 123–5, 144–5, 177–80, 188, 207,
316, 324–6, 329
Barbaja, Domenico (1778–1841) 247, 292
Barbary corsairs 22, 47, 138
Bari 32, 33, 34, 46, 88, 113, 192, 198, 
206, 297
Bari, Terra di 18, 88, 90, 188, 190, 197, 308,
324, 328

<<<PDFPAGE 373>>>
Barracco, (Calabrian landowners) 229, 231
Barras, General Paul (1755–1829) 140, 167,
259 n 2
Basilicata 88–9, 105, 112, 124, 189, 196,
128–9, 220, 227–8, 231, 266, 293, 297,
299, 300, 309
Bassal, Jean (1752–1803) 83
Bassano, Duke of 158–9
Bayonne, Treaty of (30 March 1808) 143–7,
158, 194, 252, 267
Beauharnais, Josephine Tascher de la Pagerie
(1763–1814) 137, 141, 151
Beauharnais, Prince Eugène (1781–1826)
(Vice-Roy of Italy 1805–14) 130, 
137–8, 141, 153–4, 157, 252 n 73, 259,
261–2, 290
Beggars 27, 43, 134, 191, 203, 308, 203
Beni nazionali 98, 177–8, 197, 229, 233–4, 276
Bentinck, Lord William (1774–1839) 262–4,
269, 274
Berg, Grand Duchy of 141, 142, 145, 168,
Bernadotte, Jean-Baptiste (1763–184) 154
Berthier, Marshal Lois Alexandre (1753–1815)
146
Beugnot, count Jacques-Claude (1761–1835)
141
Bianchini, Ludovico (1803–71) 177
Blanch, Luigi (1784–1872) 105–6, 122, 264,
272–3, 277, 291, 294, 298, 299, 305,
309–11, 314
Bologna 73, 130, 140, 153, 261
Bonaparte, Charles Louis (1808–73), Emperor
Napoleon III (1852–70) 288 n 26
Bonaparte, Charles Napoleon (son of 
Louis Bonaparte and Hortense
Beauharnais) 141
Bonaparte, Elisa (1777–1820) 130, 233, 261,
264
Bonaparte, Jerome (1784–1860) 154
Bonaparte, Joseph (1768–1844) 1, 4–8, 67,
130–9, 143–5, 151, 155, 162, 166–70,
177, 179, 182, 186, 197, 205, 218–20,
234–6, 240, 247, 250, 252–3, 267, 289
Bonaparte, Louis (1778–1846), King of
Holland (1806–10) 141, 154, 155, 160
Bonaparte, Lucien (1775–1840) 140, 142
Bonaparte, Maria Annunziata (Caroline)
(1782–1839) queen of Naples (1808–15)
136 n 30, 140–5, 151, 155, 168–9,
232–4, 263–4, 276
Bonaparte, Napoleon (1769–1821: emperor
1804–1814: king of Italy 1805–1814))
1–2, 5, 15, 73–4, 97, 122, 130–44,
145–60, 162, 165–71, 177, 182, 201,
205, 218, 230, 232, 236, 246–7,
250–3, 255, 259–64, 267, 269, 273, 277,
289, 321
Bonaparte, Pauline (1780–1825) 130
Borrelli, Pasquale 310
Branda, Viora 108
Brigands 3, 10, 20, 63, 90, 115, 122, 159, 190,
195, 209–31, 238, 250, 252, 264–6, 270,
272, 293–4, 308, 316, 323
Briot, Pierre- Joseph (1771–1827) 171–2, 225,
229, 245, 266
Brune, General 78
Buonarroti, Filippo Michele (1761–1837) 81
Bureaucratic centralization 9–11, 20, 139,
154, 163, 206–8, 231, 246, 254–5,
277–9, 285–7, 296, 318–20
Cadets (noble) 50
Cairo 138
Calabria (province of) 33, 42, 45, 47, 59,
61–6, 67–8, 76–7, 89–90, 101, 105, 113,
116–20, 122, 133, 179, 190, 192, 196,
206, 210, 229–31, 238, 245, 259, 264–7,
293, 300, 322–3
Calabrian brigandage 224–5, 238, 293
Calabrian revolt (1806–8) 134–5, 211–19,
225–7
Cambacères Jean-Jacques (1753–1824) 151
Campoformio, Treaty of (17 October 1797) 73
Campobasso 32, 34, 67, 88, 197, 211
Canosa, Antonio Capece Minutolo, Principino
di (1768–1838) 266, 276
Canova, Antonio (1757–1822) 247
Cantalupo, Duke of 56
Capece Zurlo, Giuseppe Maria, Cardinal
Archbishop of Naples (1782–1801) 101,
103
Capecelatro, Giuseppe (1744–1836),
Archbishop of Taranto 47, 104, 169,
184–5
Capi-masse 209–11, 213
Capitanata (province of) 33, 42–4, 59, 63, 
67 n 39, 88–9, 183, 189, 190–1, 197–8,
218–19, 231, 244–5, 293, 297, 299–300,
304, 309
Capo Rizzuto 47
Capri 90, 146, 151, 180, 210
Capua 78, 88, 92, 134, 142, 265, 273, 314
Caracciolo Marchese Domenico (1715–89)
34, 60–1, 70
Caracciolo, Admiral Francesco (1752–99) 93
Caraffa, Ettore Duke of Ruvo (1763–99) 88,
105, 120
Carbonari – (see also secret societies) 260,
265–7, 271–3, 294, 297–306, 310–16
Carlism, Spanish 107
Carrascosa, Michele 254 n 88, 263, 270,
288–300, 310, 314
Casacalenda 69–70
Casalanza, Treaty of (20 May 1815) 264
Index
364

<<<PDFPAGE 374>>>
Caserta 88, 90, 134; Royal Palace 28
Cassa Sacra 61–2, 89, 118
Cassano, Duke of 208, 210
Castellamare 29, 32, 92, 146, 191
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart Lord (1769–1822)
262–3
Castrovillari 89, 134
Catania 18, 33–4, 292, 301, 302, 323, 329
Catanzaro 47, 89, 105, 113, 117–8, 135, 193,
213, 227, 229
Catherine the Great (1729–96) Empress of
Russia (1762–96) 55
Cavaignac, General Jean-Baptiste (1763–1829)
152, 179, 221–5, 230, 233
Cemeteries 196, 199, 283, 308
Censorship 91, 99, 100, 134, 200, 277, 
305, 315
Cestari, Don Nicola 112, 114, 134
Ceva Grimaldi, Marchese Giuseppe
(1776–1862) 207, 321
Champagny, Count Jean-Baptiste de
(1756–1834) Imperial Minister for
External Affairs 145–8
Championnet, General Jean-Antoine-Etienne
(1761–1800) 75, 78–86, 95, 97–8,
101–2, 134
Charities (Luoghi pii) 124, 173
Charles III (1716–88), Duke of Parma
1731–5), king of Naples and Sicily
(1734–59), king of Spain (1759–88)
22–3, 26–32, 36–9
Charles IV (1748–1819) king of Spain 155
Chieti 113, 114
Chinea 25, 55 n 3
Church lands, sales of 37, 166, 177–8, 237
Church 17, 25–6, 37–8, 49, 55, 77, 82, 104,
117–18, 193, 237, 249–51, 281, 315, 321
Church, General Richard (1784–1873) 294
Ciaja, Francesco Antonio 84
Cianciulli, Michelangelo (1734–1819) 169,
182–3
Cilento 77, 89, 90, 119, 122, 124,192, 218,
306, 316
Cirillo Domenico (1739–99) 91, 103
Ciró Calabria 105, 113
Cisalpine Republic (Milan, June 1797) 73, 81,
98, 130
Civic Guards 79, 112, 134, 196, 200–1,
215–16, 228, 273–4
Civitavecchia 131
Clarke, Baron (Imperial War Minister) 152
Clary, Julie (1771–1845) (wife of Joseph
Bonaparte) 136
Clergy 4, 25, 50, 60, 112, 134, 182, 203, 212,
243, 247, 249–51, 267, 277, 281–2, 315;
regular 26, 43, 55, 109, 249–50, 277,
281–2; secular 26, 43, 55, 83, 100–1,
103–4, 109, 249–51, 277, 281–2;
republican clergy 83; counter-revolutionary
clergy 96, 100–1, 103–4, 116, 126
Cockades 104, 111, 117, 214
Code civil – see also Code Napoléon 139, 145,
162, 165, 182, 241
Code Napoléon 2, 9, 154, 169, 241
Colletta, Pietro (1775–1831) 2, 112–3, 161,
172, 226, 230, 270, 297, 304, 314
Colonial goods (British) 33 n 70, 148–51, 158,
221
Commercial treaties 24, 56, 148–51, 154, 326
Common lands (see also demani) 2, 6, 19,
57–63, 70, 85–6, 123, 161, 186, 199,
224, 235–40, 284, 294, 321
Concordats Neapolitan (1741) 26, 75; French
(16 July 1801) 130, 136; Murat’s
proposals 159, 250–1; Neapolitan (1818)
277, 282
Conforti, Gianfrancesco (1743–99) 100–4
Confraternities 27, 32, 43, 69, 204, 206–8
Congress of Vienna (September 1814–June
1815) 272; of Troppau
(October–December 1820) 311; of
Laybach (Ljubjana) (January 1821) 311
Conscription 10, 89, 112, 139, 158–9, 161,
195–6, 199, 201, 208, 219–20, 260, 272,
294, 316
Constitutional government, demand for 10,
249, 254–5, 266, 270–4, 278–80, 290–8,
327
Constitutions:
American (1776) 41
French Year III 97; Year VIII 2, 166, 170,
183; Year XII 137
Neapolitan Republic (1799) 85, 91, 97
Italian Republic (1802) 177
Sicilian (1812) 266, 268–70
Spanish (Cadiz, 1812) 267–8
Naples(1820–1) 295–301, 304–5, 310–13,
318–20
Sicilian (1820–1) 295, 301–2
Continental Blockade 10, 131, 138,143,
147–51, 153, 158, 194, 221
Contraband 10, 148–52, 158–9, 221–5, 230,
289
Corfu 89, 152, 221
Corpo degli Eletti (Naples municipal govern-
ment) 39 n 14, 79, 83, 121–2, 201
Corriere di Napoli 100, 175–6
Corsica 73, 136–7, 152, 165–6, 171–2,
195, 264
Cosenza 34, 45, 68, 77, 89, 105, 113,
117, 135, 211, 213, 215–17, 226, 
245, 265
Cotton 47, 148–51, 174, 191, 193–4,
203, 325
Index
365

<<<PDFPAGE 375>>>
Council of State (in Naples) 24, 136, 145, 164,
166, 169–70, 173, 175, 181–2, 183–5,
201, 250, 266, 276, 285
Coups (French): 12–13 Vendémiaire Year IV (5
October 1795) 136, 139; Fructidor Year V
(4 September 1797) 73; 18–19 Brumaire
(9 November 1799) 95, 136–40, 165–6,
168, 171
Craig, General Sir James (1749–1812) 133
Crimean War (1854–6) 327
Croce, Benedetto (historian) (1866–1952)
3–6, 96, 102
Crotone 45, 117, 135
Cuccagna 27
Culloden HMS 110
Cuoco, Vincenzo (1771–1823) 3–6, 67, 95–8,
102, 103, 112, 172, 175–6, 184–5, 187,
196–7, 239, 240, 242, 284, 289, 291
‘democratisers’ (1799) 88
D’Aubusson de la Feuillette (French envoy in
Naples, 1808–1810) 144–9, 201, 207
D’Eril, Francesco Melzi (1753–1816) 140
Daunites 40, 57
Daure, Hector (Minister of War) 152, 155,
169, 233, 249, 266.
De Dominicis, Nicola 52
De Gambs General 109
De Jacobis, Angelo 109–11, 115, 133–4
De’Medici, Luigi, (1759–1830). 62 n25, 77,
87, 125–6, 277–81, 286, 291, 197–8,
312–3, 316, 321, 324–6
De Nicola, Carlo (Neapolitan diarist) 79–83,
87, 91, 102, 121, 134, 200, 206, 208, 230,
248, 271–4, 292
De Pompeis, Don Fileno 65–6
Debt, Neapolitan National 36, 65, 83, 123,
145, 147 157, 161, 166, 176–180, 285,
316, 324
decima 58–9, 66, 77, 85–6, 103, 112, 235,
238, 282, 293, 306
Delﬁco, Berardino (1739–1814) 67
Delﬁco, Melchiorre (1744–1835) 42, 67, 72,
103, 177, 271
Delle Boccacche, Uombuono 104, 109, 111,
113, 115, 133
demani 57–9, 86, 112
Départements réunis 162
Devolution (of feudal estates to the Crown)
57–8, 87
Di Gallo, Marquis Don Marzio (1753–1833)
76, 145–7, 159, 193
Di Gennaro, Domenico 70, 103
Diano Valley (Val di Diano) 89, 112, 120, 124
difesa (enclosed part of a feudal estate) 58
Directory, French (1796–9) 4, 72–3, 78, 81–7,
94–8, 165, 167, 177, 233, 263
Divorce, civil 182–3, 243, 276
Dogana delle pecore della Puglia 36 n 4, 51–2,
123, 178, 189
donativo (feudal levy) 37, 50 n 53, 75
Doriol, M 148, 150, 158–60
Duhesme, General Count Guillaume Philibert
(1766–1815) 88–9, 111, 120
Duphot, General Mathurin-Léonard
(1769–1797) 73 n 12, 136
Durand, Baron 155–60
Earthquakes 33–5, 61–2, 68, 118, 212
Eboli 6, 197, 211
Economic Societies 198, 244–5
Edinburgh 43
Education and schools 26, 31, 41, 67, 161,
172, 184–5, 189, 191, 196, 203, 245,
251, 282–3
Egypt 15, 73–4, 131, 138, 140, 142, 291, 325,
330 n 32
Enghien, Louis-Antoine-Henri de Bourbon,
Duke of (1772–1804) 141, 264
England/Great Britain 1, 4, 11–15, 18, 19,
22–5, 33, 40, 44, 48, 63, 68, 72–5, 78,
84, 89–90, 95, 126, 132–9, 143–4, 148,
150–2, 155, 158, 160, 165, 167, 210,
212, 216, 218, 260–3, 268–70, 279–80,
288–90, 293, 304, 310, 314, 324–7
Enlightenment 3, 23, 30, 51 n 57, 60, 176, 242
Entails, feudal (maggioraschi and ﬁdecomessi)
41, 50, 85, 96, 243, 312, 322
exiles, Neapolitan 79, 81, 95–7, 102, 123, 168,
265, 317
Falconnet, M Swiss banker 144
Famine 34, 35–6, 39, 52, 54, 60, 67, 75, 199,
205–6, 291
Farnese inheritance 22 n 22, 30, 84, 143–4,
158
Farnese, Elizabeth, mother of Charles III
(1692–1766) 30
Faypoult, Guillaume Charles (1752–1817)
83–4, 97
Ferdinand IV (Bourbon) (1751–1825): ruled as
Ferdinand IV of Naples and Ferdinand III
of Sicily (1759–1816) then as Ferdinand I,
King of the Two Sicilies (1816–25) 16,
23, 28, 72, 162, 199, 242, 263–4, 268,
270–1, 274, 276, 287–8, 292
Ferdinand II (Bourbon) (1810–59) King of the
Two Sicilies (1830–59) 316, 317, 321,
326–7
Ferdinand III, (Habsburg-Lorraine),
(1769–1824) Grand Duke of Tuscany
(1790–1801: 1814–24) 262
Ferdinand VII (Bourbon) (1784–1833) king of
Spain (1808–33) 268
Index
366

<<<PDFPAGE 376>>>
Feudal Commission 2, 161–2, 170, 188, 197,
199, 234–240, 242, 276, 284, 294
Feudalism 2, 5, 8, 10, 19–21, 37, 40–1, 48–50,
52–3, 54, 57, 60, 63, 67, 70–1 85–7,
96–100, 103, 118, 161–4, 169, 174–6,
182, 186–7, 216, 224, 231, 235–9, 243,
284, 293–4, 312, 319, 321–3
Fidecomessi (feudal entails) 41, 50 n 54, 85
Filangieri, Gaetano (1752–1788) 41–2, 50, 54,
56, 67, 76, 163, 189 n 57, 242, 279
Filangieri, Michele 270
Filomarino, Clemente(1759–99) 80
Filomarino, Don Ascanio Duke della Torre
(1751–99) 80
Financial reforms 16–17, 36–9, 54–6, 125–6,
176–181, 285–6, 290–1, 306–9, 312,
316, 324–6
ﬂooding, 18, 45, 123, 197–8
Florence 140
Florence, Treaty of (29 May 1801) 140
Foggia 27n49, 34, 46, 51–2, 67, 69, 88–9, 120,
123, 189–91, 244–5, 294, 297–300, 302–5
Fondiaria (land tax) 164, 181–2, 186
Foote, Captain Edward James (1768–1831) 92
Forges Davanzati, Domenico, Bishop of Canosa
(1742–1810) 85, 104
Fouché, Joseph (1759–1820) 259–60
Foudroyant,  HMS 92–3
Fox, Charles James (1749–1806) 95
France 15, 18, 22, 24, 37, 44, 72–5
France’s imperial project 232, 254–5, 259–64
Francis I (Bourbon) (1771–1830) King of the
Two Sicilies (1825–30) 316
Francis II (Bourbon) (1835–94) King of the
Two Sicilies (1859–60) 326
Franklin, Benjamin (1706–90) 41
freemasonry 10, 26, 34, 171–2, 248–9, 254,
265–6
French law codes (in Naples) 161, 183, 235
Frimont, Marshal Johann Maria Philipp, Count
of Palotta and Prince of
Antrodoco(1759–1831) 311
Fuga, Francesco architect (1699–1781) 31–2
Gaeta 88, 110, 134–5, 142, 210–11, 273
Galanti, Giuseppe Maria (1743–1806) 42–6,
48–50, 52–57, 67–9, 72, 76, 87, 103, 163
Galdi, Matteo (1765–1821) 81, 172, 185
Galiani, Celestino (1681–1753) 39
Galiani, Ferdinando (1728–87) 52, 56
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807–82) 327
General Directorate of Bridges and Roads 197
General Directorate of Woodlands and
Waterways 197
Genoa, 33, 68, 73 n 8, 79, 132, 136, 172, 221
Genovesi, Antonio (1712–69) 30, 39–42, 67,
107, 169
Gerace, Don Francesco Maria, Prince of
(1781–1858) 119, 233
Gerace 47, 227
Germany 8, 33, 157, 159, 211, 252, 259–60,
264–5
Giannone, Pietro (1676–1748) 25–6, 40
Giordano, Vincenzo 111–12
Giornale delle Due Sicilie (1815–60) 276
Gladstone, William E. (1809–93) 327
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749–1832)
23 n34, 27 n45, 28
Gramsci, Antonio (1891–1937) 5–6, 40, 96,
330
Grand Tour 18, 31
Grande Nation, La 5, 84, 98, 162, 176, 255
Gravina 88–9, 135, 301
Greek orthodox communities 47, 214
Grenville, William Wyndham Lord
(1759–1834) 80
Grimaldi, Marchese Domenico (1735–1805)
42, 56, 61, 68, 77
Grosbois, Hue de (French chargé d’affaires in
Naples 1809–10) 149–50, 154
Guardagrele 114
Guilds and corporations 39, 183, 206–8
Herculaneum 27–30, 247
Hackert, Philip, (1737–1807) 28
Hesse Philppsthal, Elector William II
(1777–1847) 134
Holland 1, 33, 139, 145, 154, 156, 160, 165,
177, 272
Habsburg monarchy 9, 11, 15, 21–2, 23–4, 37,
55, 72–5, 126, 207, 278, 288, 290–2, 327
Hamilton, Sir William (1730–1803) 15, 16,
18, 24, 29, 48, 74–5, 80–104, 268
Hamilton, Lady Emma (née Lyons)
(1765–1815) 16, 74–5, 80, 268
Imperial feofs 144
Industry and manufactures 33, 40, 44, 46, 48,
99, 147–8, 149, 174, 192–4, 207, 236,
284, 312, 326, 328–9
Ingham, Benjamin (English merchant in Sicily)
33, 289
Ingres, Jean-August-Dominique (1780–1867) 247
Inquisition, Holy Ofﬁce of the 26, 38, 60, 268
Intendents 164, 172, 184, 187–8, 205, 237,
244, 254, 266, 270, 272, 274, 287, 312
Intieri, Bartolomeo (1678–1757) 30, 39
Irpinia (province of) 40, 299
Italian Republic (Milan, January 1802-March
1805) 96–7, 130, 140
Jacini, Stefano (1827–91) 320
Jacobins 69, 77, 80–1, 91, 94–106, 108, 111,
119–20, 134, 172, 286, 297
Index
367

<<<PDFPAGE 377>>>
Jansenism 104, 118
Jena, Battle of (14 October 1806) 141
Jesuits 26, 31, 47, 55, 315
Jews, in Taranto 47; in Siena and Livorno
(1799) 108; in Livorno (1815) 264
Joseph II, Austrian emperor (1741–90): Holy
Roman Emperor 1765–90) 21, 24, 55, 68
Jullien, Marc-Antoine (1775–1848) 82, 98,
101
Kingdom of Etruria (Tuscany) (1801–7) 130,
140
Kingdom of Italy ( 1805–14) 130, 132, 149,
170
Kingdom of Naples (1734–1816) 2, 22,
25–81, 131, 133, 140, 147, 156, 161,
173, 175, 177, 219, 254, 260, 262–3,
273, 309
Kingdom of Sicily (1734–1816) 12, 16, 21,
22–3, 37–8, 60–1, 70, 89, 131, 133, 135,
137, 142, 146, 179, 262, 268–70, 277–9,
280, 289, 292–3
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (1816–60) 7 n 21,
12, 15–6, 24, 147, 154, 212, 233, 290,
292, 309, 311, 320, 325, 328
Knights of St John of Jerusalem, Order of (see
also Malta) 74, 84
L’Aquila, province of 88, 125, 172, 189, 210,
271
Lagonegro 189, 211, 228: battle of (6 March
1806) 134–5
Lampedusa, Giuseppe Tomasi di
(1896–1957) 6
Lanciano 104, 109, 110–14, 134
Land reclamation 196–7, 284–5, 291
Latifundist estates (latifundia, latifondo) 52,
229, 322–3
Lauberg, Carlo (1752–1834) 76, 79, 81, 
87
Laurenzana, Don Onorato, (1770–1857)
Duke of 134, 207
Laurenzana 228
Law courts, 17, 21, 35–9, 43, 70, 112, 124,
175, 182–4, 188, 207, 235, 240–6, 281,
294
Lawyers (see also togati) 43, 57, 67, 70, 103,
111, 204, 242–4, 281, 306, 31538, 240–4
Lazzaroni 27, 44, 80, 82, 138, 203, 274
Lecce 34, 68, 294
Légion d’Honneur (Neapolitan contributions to)
144, 147
Leipzig, Battle of the Nations (October 1813)
159, 259
Leopold of Bourbon, Hereditary Prince (son of
Ferdinand IV) 133
levée en masse109, 133, 209, 211, 216, 220
Levi, Carlo (1902–75) 6
Liberty Trees 82, 100, 104
Liguori, S. Alfonso Maria di (1694–1787) 26,
118
Liguria 73 n 8, 108, 130, 168, 225
Livorno 24, 33, 48, 74, 108, 139, 167, 221,
262, 264, 328
Local administration 2, 59–60, 123, 164, 166,
171, 184, 187, 190, 194–6, 235, 246,
276, 285, 307–9, 312, 327
Locke, John (1632–1704) 26
Lodi (Battle of 10 May 1796) 73
Lombardy (province of) 9, 19–20, 37, 73, 108,
219, 262, 283, 319, 328–9
Lombardy-Venetia, Kingdom of (1814–69)
288, 310
Lomonaco, Francesco (1772–1810) 97, 98
London 18, 27, 43, 60, 66, 80, 126, 158,
287–9, 314
Longobucco 212–15, 228
Louis of Bourbon, Duke of Parma (and King of
Etruria 1801–3) 130
Louis XVI, king of France (1754–93) 72, 139
Louis XVIII (1755–1824), king of France
(1814–24) 262
Louis Philippe (1773–1850) Duke of Orleans,
king of France (1830–48)
Lucania 40, 89, 98, 269, 303, 306, 309
Lucca and Piombino, Duchy of 130, 168 n 23
Lunéville, Treaty of (9 February 1801) 136
Luogotera, Giuseppe 85
Lützen, Battle of (May 1813) 159
MacDonald, General Jacques-Etienne-
Alexandre (1765–1840) 74–5, 83–8, 90,
95, 97, 101, 115–16, 218, 273
Macchiaroli, Rosario 297–8
Mack, General Karl von Leiberich (1752–1823)
74–5
Mackau, Citizen Armand Louis 72
Madrid 1, 23, 56, 139, 142, 144, 252
Maﬁa 7, 323
maggioraschi (see also feudal entails, 
ﬁdecomessi) 41, 85, 88–9
Maghella, Antonio (1766–1850) 155, 232–3,
266, 273–4
Magistrates, (see also lawyers, togati) 38, 40,
69, 91, 120, 133–4, 164, 168, 182–4,
200, 240–4, 254, 306 n 32
Maida 61 118; Battle of dates 135, 211–13
Malaria 47
Malta 73–4, 148, 158–9, 221, 288–9
Mamelukes 142
Mammone, Gaetano (capo-massa) 109, 120
Manhès, Charles Antoine (1777–1852) 215,
225–31, 238, 240, 265, 270, 273–4, 294
Manthoné, Gabriele (1764–99) 78n39, 86n79
Index
368

<<<PDFPAGE 378>>>
Mantua 73, 74
Marchesato Plain 45
Marengo, battle of (14 June 1800) 95, 122, 140
Maria Amalia of Saxony, wife of Charles III
(1724–60) 28
Maria Carolina of Austria, (1752–1814) Queen
of Naples (1768–1806) 23, 55, 72, 74,
76, 118–19, 133, 151, 268–9
Maria Luisa of Spain, (1751–1819) Duchess of
Parma 130
Maria Theresa (1717–80) Austrian Archduchess
and Queen of Hungary (1740–80) 22–3
Marie Antoinette of Austria (1755–93) Queen
of France (1774–92) 55, 72, 76
Marie Louise (1791–1847) Archduchess of
Austria (m. Napoleon Bonaparte 1810)
151, 269, 278
Marsala 32, 289, 327
Martin, Commodore (1696–1756) 22–3
Masci, Angelo 125, 238
Massa, Oronzio (1766–99)
masse (irregular troops) 108–10, 114, 120,
122, 124, 133, 135, 211–15
Masséna, General André (1758–1817) 130,
133–5, 137, 152, 162, 210–12, 252, 265
mastrodatti (feudal ofﬁce) 49
Matera 89, 112, 134, 189, 210, 227
Mehemet Ali, (1769–1849) 325
Méjean, Captain Joseph 92, 97
Mengs, Antol Raffael (1728–79) 28
Messina 18, 33, 74, 116, 131, 152, 218, 269,
292, 301, 322, 328–9
Messina, Straits of 1, 152, 221
Metternich, count Clemenz von (1773–1859)
141, 159, 263, 276, 290, 297, 311, 316
Micheroux, Antoine (1776–1805) 89, 92, 104,
120, 122, 335
migrant labourers 46, 227
Milan 2, 18, 21–2, 66, 73, 81, 95, 132, 138–9,
140, 167, 175, 207, 248, 318
Military Commissions 135, 195, 209, 219,
265, 270, 293
Militias 57, 77–8, 82, 108, 117, 146, 173, 209,
244, 246, 270, 293–4, 297, 306, 308, 312
miliziotti 108
Minerva (Sicilian warship) 93
Minichini, Luigi 298–9, 301–2, 305, 313–14
Ministry of Police (Naples) 77, 91, 133–4,
163–4, 168, 200–3, 207–8, 232, 241,
249, 266–7, 270, 272–4, 276, 286–7,
294, 314–15
Ministry of the Interior (Naples) 134, 164
Miot, André Francois, count of Melito
(1762–1841) 137–8, 165–8, 171, 173–4,
182, 184, 202, 217, 250, 267, 335
Modena, Duchy of 73, 130, 310
Molfetta 33, 113
Molise, province of 42, 46, 67 n 39, 69, 88–9,
103, 105, 108, 113, 123–4, 197, 211,
218, 239, 293, 309
Monitore Napoletano (1799) 85, 86, 91,
99–101, 121
Monitore Napoletano (1806–15) 135, 164, 173,
176, 178, 209
Monteleone 89, 105, 113, 116–17, 211, 227
Montesquieu, Charles Luis de Secondat, Baron
de (1689–1755) 26
Morea 148
Morelli, Michele (1790–1822) 298, 314
Murat, Joachim (1767–1815) 1–2, 8, 10, 67,
123 n 70, 131–2, 139–42, 143–60, 162,
168–70, 180, 183–4, 194, 198, 205,
219–20, 225, 228, 230–1, 231, 237, 241,
243, 246–9, 251–5, 259–75, 277,
285–94, 297–8, 300 n 14, 324–5
Naples (city of) 26–32, 35–6, 43–5, 76–83,
90–3, 99–102, 121–2, 132–4, 142,
173–4, 182, 199–208, 247–8, 273–4,
282, 283–4, 292, 300–1, 311–13
National identities 309–10
nationalism (Italian) 11, 260–1, 279, 327
nationality, obligatory for French citizens in
Naples 154, 272
navies
Neapolitan 16, 22, 24, 56–7, 62, 75, 93,
147, 252, 267–8, 289, 325
British 72, 74, 78, 90–3, 116, 126, 136,
152, 267, 274, 289, 314, 326
French 73, 131, 156
Nelson, Rear Admiral Horatio (1758–1805) 4,
15–16, 74–5, 78, 88, 92–5, 101 120, 131,
132, 268
Nile, Battle of (1 August 1798) 15, 74, 131
Nobles 22, 28–30, 37–9, 43, 50, 56–8,
77–80, 82, 102, 105, 121–2, 181, 238,
306, 320
Nola 32, 34, 174, 190, 295–9, 302, 304
Nolli, Baron Antonio (1754–1830) 103, 171,
172 n 38, 225, 271
Nugent, Austrian General 259
Nunziante, General Vito (1765–1836)
297–8, 300
Nunziatella, military academy 57, 76, 253
Olive oil 18, 32–3, 36, 39, 42, 47–8, 56, 65,
66–8, 81, 110–11, 119, 138, 147, 149,
189, 325
Oneglia 81
Orsogna 114
Ostuni 113
Otranto 123
Otranto, Terra di 42, 45, 49, 113, 172, 191,
239, 308
Index
369

<<<PDFPAGE 379>>>
Ottajano, Princess 68
Ottoman empire 15, 16, 24, 45, 74, 89, 92,
116, 125, 150, 170, 218, 314
‘Passive revolution’ 3–5, 10–11, 95–8
‘Patriots’ 76, 79–84, 90–107, 121, 167, 200,
208, 214, 217, 274
Pagano, Mario (1748–99) 76–7, 81, 85–7, 91,
103
Palermo 18, 21, 27, 31, 33, 37, 60–1, 66, 75,
80–1, 81, 91, 93, 109–10, 118, 122, 126,
133, 152–5, 234, 268–9, 273, 276,
279–80, 283, 285, 292, 301–2, 306, 310,
323, 328–9
Palmieri, Domenico (1758–1811) 42, 56, 68,
240 n 30
Paoli, Pasquale, Corsican separatist leader
(1725–1807) 136, 166
Papacy 25–6, 49, 55, 102, 131, 136, 159, 250,
260, 277, 288, 290, 309, 328
Papal State 33, 37, 74, 122, 130–1, 139, 150,
158, 189, 206, 211, 219, 221, 231, 288,
290, 309, 328
Paris 1, 2, 60, 72–4, 78, 81–5, 90–1, 95, 99,
132, 136–7, 140–2, 144–60, 168–9, 181,
194, 207, 230–1, 233–4, 241, 243, 249,
251, 154, 260–2, 308, 311
Parlamenti (village assemblies) 109, 111–2,
134, 164
Parlamento (Sicilian) 60, 268–70, 289, 301–2
Parlamento Nazionale (1820–1) 11, 267, 296,
301–13, 315
Parlements (French) 38
Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla, Duchy of
22–3, 130, 136, 238 n 24, 278, 310
Partouneaux, General Louis (1770–1835) 134,
254 n 85
Patriotic societies 68–9, 91, 171
Pepe, General Florestano (1778–1851) 271,
298, 301–2
Pepe, General Guglielmo (1783–1855) 254 n
88, 297, 298–302, 304, 310, 314
Peter Leopold, (1747–90) Grand Duke of
Tuscany (1765–90), Holy Roman
Emperor 1790–2) 20, 23, 24, 56, 72 n 1,
104, 126
Pezza, Michele (Fra Diavolo) (1771–1806) 88,
89, 110, 120, 122, 210–11
Philip V, king of Spain (1683–1746) 22
Physiocrats 50
Piedmont 19, 37, 68, 81, 108, 130, 167, 190,
193, 238 n 24, 262, 278, 290, 318, 328–9
Piedmont-Savoy, Kingdom of 11, 12, 19, 37,
73, 126, 130, 262, 278, 290, 310, 
325, 327
Pignatelli di Cerchiara, Prince Andrea 144–5,
179, 225, 263
Pignatelli, Girolamo, Prince of Moliterno
(1774–1848) 79–80, 84
Pignatelli di Strongoli, Prince Ferdinando
(1769–99) 78 n 40
Pignatelli di Strongoli, Prince Francesco
(1775–1853) 61–2, 78–81
Pignatelli di Strongoli, Mario(1773–99) 78 n 40
Pignatelli di Strongoli, Marshal Francesco
87 n 40, 255 n 88
Pignatelli di Strongoli, General Vincenzo
(1777–1837) 78 n 40
Pignatelli, Prince Diego, marquis of Vaglio and
Monteleone 105
Pimental, Eleonora Fonseca di (1752–99)
86–7, 90–1, 100, 101, 121
Pizzo Calabro 259, 264
Plague 36, 291
Po River 18, 75, 260–1, 288, 311, 329
Poerio, Giuseppe (1775–1843) 172, 261
Poland 8, 28 n 55, 37, 141–2, 157, 252
Pompeii 27–9, 218, 247, 298
Ponza 90, 159, 210
Pope Pius VI, Giovanni Braschi (1717–99)
73, 121
Pope Pius VII, Barnaba Chiaromonti
(1740–1823) 130–1, 142, 153, 251, 262,
293
Population: 26–7, Naples 43–7, 46, 163, 181,
199–200, 202; population increase 19;
population decline 45–6, 49, 189,
191–2, 245
portolani (feudal ofﬁce) 49
Portugal 139, 142, 152–3
Potenza 34, 88–9, 112, 114, 120, 189, 228–30
Poverty 3, 32, 39, 43, 48, 173–4, 191–3, 202–3,
255, 279, 284, 289, 307, 324–5, 328–9
Pragmatic Sanctions, Sicilian (1788) 60
Privateering 150, 158
Procida 90, 119, 210
Pronio, Giuseppe (royalist capo-massa) 89,
109, 111–12
Protectionism 194, 205, 325–6
Public employees 246–7, 266
Public works 174, 196–8
Quintieri (Calabrian landowners) 231
Reform movement (in Naples) 1, 2, 10, 12, 16,
18, 20, 21, 22–4, 32–3, 35–70
Reggio Calabria 18, 33–4, 47–8, 210–11, 227,
329
Reggio Emilia 142, 270
Relievo (tax on feudal nobility) 75
Religion, popular 96, 100–4, 108, 117–8, 159
Religious houses 2, 26, 28, 30, 44, 61–2, 75,
77, 116, 118, 161, 166, 177–80, 184,
202 n 68, 207, 250, 282–3
Index
370

<<<PDFPAGE 380>>>
Religious orders 31, 47, 55, 79–80, 245–6,
282–3
Republican press (Naples 1799) 100
Republican priests (Naples) 104
Republicans 81 n 57, 87, 92–6, 99, 102,
111–14, 119–23, 167
Republican programmes in Italy (1796–9)
94–5, 99–102
Republics, Italian (1796–9) 94–101
Restorations (Bourbon): in 1799 121–6; in
1815 276–9, 287–94; in 1821 311–16
Revolution, French (1789) 41, 72–5; in Naples
and Sicily (1820–1) 10–11, 107,
295–316
Reynier, General Jean-Louis Ebenezer
(1771–1814) 134–5, 210–15, 218
Ricciardi, Francesco Antonio, (1758–1842)
144 n 6, 170, 184, 233, 240–3, 277, 280,
284, 299–300, 305–8, 313–14
Rodio, Marchese (royalist ofﬁcial) 210
Roederer, Pierre Louis (1754–1835) 144,
165–6, 175–80, 202
Roman Republic (February 1798-August 1799)
73, 81
Rome 4, 16, 25–6, 27, 47, 73–5, 78, 88, 90,
104, 108, 120, 122, 126, 131, 136,
142–3, 153, 218–19, 250, 262, 277–8,
288 n 26, 299, 311, 322, 328
Rothschild Bank 316, 324, 329
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712–78) 40
Royal Visitations (1799–1802) 122–3
Royalists 16, 66, 77, 81 n 57, 88–93, 95,
102–21, 125, 134–5, 140–1, 163, 182,
185, 209–14, 218, 249, 266, 271, 293–4,
296–8, 303, 310, 327
Ruffo, Cardinale Fabrizio (1744–1827) 4, 89,
92–3, 101, 107–8, 116–126, 170, 212,
250 n 70, 280
Russia 15–16, 24, 56, 63, 74, 84, 87, 89, 90,
92, 116, 126, 132–3, 139, 141–2, 153,
218, 252, 264, 311, 314, 327
Russian campaign (1812) 157–8
Russo, Vincenzo (1770–99) 79, 81, 103
‘Southern Problem’, The 3, 6–7, 329–30
Sala Patriottica (1799) 91
Salerno 32, 34, 43, 45, 56, 77, 90, 122, 194,
297–300
Salﬁ, Francesco Saverio (1759–1832) 81, 101
Saliceti, Antoine Christophe (1757–1809)
136–8, 142, 146, 155, 163, 165–9,
171–2, 176, 183–4, 187, 208, 210–11,
218, 225, 230–2, 241–2, 266, 286
Salvati, Giuseppe (1789–1822) 298
Salvemini, Gaetano (1873–1957) 5, 330
San Carlino theatre (Plaermo) 292
San Carlo theatre 29, 247–8, 292
San Gennaro 80–1, 92, 101, 134, 138
San Leucio, royal silk manufacture 31, 116,
193–4
Sanfedists 92, 94, 96, 101, 107–128, 210, 286
Santafede (1799) 4, 9, 96, 107–28, 182, 213,
250, 310
Sanfelice, Luisa de Molino (1764–1800) 91,
121
Sangro, Duke of 70, 103
Sansevero 88
Sansevero, Prince of 26, 30
Sansoro, Antonio (Coreme) 213, 216
Sardinia (island of) 37
Sardinia, Kingdom of – see Piedmont-Savoy,
Kingdom of
Savoy, duchy of 37, 310
Savoy, House of 11, 278, 290, 322, 327
Sbirri (armed feudal retainers) 49, 195, 246
Schipani, General Giuseppe (1739–99) 90
Schönbrunn Palace (Vienna) 130
Sciarpa (royalist capo-massa) 90, 122
Scilla 116, 152
Secondagenitura (allowance for cadet sons) 50
Secret societies (see also Carbonari and
freemasons) 249, 260, 265–7, 270–3,
287, 294–8, 303, 305, 315
Sedan, Battle of (1 September 1870) 290
sedili 39n 14, 43, 121
Serra, Gennaro, Duke of Cassano (1772–99)
Serra Cassano (family) 77, 119
Serracapriola, Antonio Maresca Duke of 63–6
Serrao, Andrea, Bishop of Potenza (1731–99)
55 n 4, 61, 112
Sicilian expedition (1810) 151–3
Sicily 1, 2, 4, 6, 10, 12, 16, 18, 20–4, 32–4,
37–8, 60–1, 66, 68–9, 70, 72, 73, 82, 89,
92, 109, 131–3, 135, 137, 142, 146–8,
151–3, 158–9, 162, 179, 196, 205, 215,
218, 220–1, 230, 252–3, 260, 262, 265,
267–70, 272, 279–80, 289, 292–302,
306, 310, 312, 316, 318, 323, 326–8
Sièyes, Joseph (1763–99) 78
Sila forest 59, 62–3, 123, 135, 212–19, 228–9
Silk production 18, 31, 32–3, 36, 39, 42, 44,
47, 48, 56, 67–8, 116, 119, 148, 150, 174,
190, 193–4, 215, 329
Sismondi, Jean Charles Léonard Simonde de
(1773–1842) 277–8
Sommaria, Royal Court of the 57
Southey, Robert (1774–1843) 95
Spain 1, 17, 22–4, 33, 36, 40, 73, 130, 135,
139, 142, 144–5, 152–3, 155, 158, 166,
218, 230, 235, 240, 252–3, 264, 267–8,
270, 300, 304, 311, 312, 330
Spanish crown jewels 155
Spinelli, Cardinal Giuseppe (1694–1760) 26
St Anthony of Padua 92
Index
371

<<<PDFPAGE 381>>>
St Petersburg 63, 64, 74, 293, 327
Sterlich, Baron Pietro 68, 171
Sterlich, Romulado 68, 171–2
Stilo 192, 230
Stuart, Sir John (1759–1815) 135
Sublime Porte – see Ottoman empire
Supreme Council of Finances (1782–1792) 55
Supreme Magistracy of Commerce (1739–46)
36, 55
Sweden 154
Swinburne, Henry (1743–1803) 33 n 79, 43,
44, 46–8, 51–2
Taccone (capo-brigante) 228–9
Tagus 139
Talleyrand- Périgord, Charles Maurice de
(1754–1838) 138, 142
Tanucci, Bernardo (1693–1793) 17, 23, 24,
30, 34, 35–6, 55, 58, 242
Taranto 47, 135
Tavoliere di Puglia 51–2, 59, 123, 124, 178,
189, 245
Tax farms- see arrendamenti
Taxes 36, 42, 48–50, 52, 64, 75, 83, 89, 91, 108,
110, 111, 112, 113, 115, 117, 119, 124–6,
138, 149, 156, 157, 181–90, 197–8, 201,
204, 207, 216–17, 234, 239–40, 248,
260–1, 268–70, 272, 284, 307–8
Teramo 57, 109, 110–11, 114, 133, 271–2
Terra di Lavoro (province of) 88–9, 108, 110,
133, 194, 196, 209–10, 220, 293, 300
Tilsit, Treaty of (July 1807) 139, 269
Tischbein, William (1751–1829) 8
Toccò Cantelmo Stuart, Don Nicola, Duke of
Apice and Prince of Montemiletto 65–6,
105
Togati 38, 123, 169, 243, 291
Tolentino, Battle of (3 May 1815) 2, 259, 264
Tommasi, Donato (1761–1831) 199, 266,
279–86, 305, 313–4
Toulon expedition (1794) 72
Trade and commerce 32–3, 39, 44, 147–151,
160, 192–4, 289–90, 290–1
Trafalgar, Battle of (21 October 1805) 131
Trani 33, 46, 88, 112, 113, 114
transhumant grazing 20, 42, 51, 224.
Trapani 33, 301, 329
Trieste 2, 148, 264, 311
Troubridge, Commander Thomas (1750–1810)
90, 92, 119
Tsar Paul I (1754–1801) 74
Turin 126, 142, 165, 310, 328
Turkish troops 92–3
Tuscany, Grand Duchy of 9, 11, 19, 37, 56,
104, 108, 126, 130, 139, 165, 219, 233,
261, 233, 261–3, 278, 328
Tyrol 264
Udienze (regional tribunals) 38, 112
Ulm, Battle of (20 October 1805) 141
United States of America 41, 136, 149
Università (towns) 38
University (Naples) 25, 30, 39, 169, 174, 184,
243, 277, 283, 315
Use rights, customary (usi civici) 19, 54, 58,
85, 235–9, 306, 321
‘Viva Maria’! 108, 126
Vanvitelli, Luigi (1700–73) 28
Vardarelli (Gaetano Meomartino) 294
Velletri, Battle of (1744) 22
Vendée (insurrections) 10, 108, 165 n 12
Veneto 108, 320, 322, 328
Venice, Republic of 32, 73, 137, 138, 139
Ventotenne 90
Verona 73
Vesuvius, Mount 8, 9, 27
Vico di Partano 45
Victor Emmanuel I (1759–1824), king of
Piedmont-Savoy (1802–21) 262
Victor Emmanuel II (1820–78) king of
Piedmont-Savoy (1849–60) 327
Vienna 23–4, 55–7, 130, 138, 262, 287–92,
316
Vitoria, Battle of (21 June 1813) 268
Volturno river 45, 123, 196–7
Wagram, Battle of (5–6 July 1809) 153
Wedgwood, Josiah (1730–92) 29
Westphalia, Kingdom of 8, 154
Williams, Maria Helen 95
Winspeare, Antonio 89, 116
Winspeare, Davide 235n 14, 237–8, 243 n
42, 284, 335
Woodhouse, James (English merchant in Sicily)
33, 289
woodland clearances 18, 46, 240
Young, Arthur (1741–1820) 18, 68, 68 n 45
Zurlo, Giuseppe (1757–1828) 62–3, 67,
69–70, 103, 123–5, 162, 169–70, 182–5,
188, 196, 224, 232–40, 242, 246, 263,
271, 273–4, 279, 280, 299–300, 310–11,
313
Zurlo, Biase (1775–1835) 67, 69–70, 103
Index
372
