
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make iion-coninieicial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from autoiiiaied querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Mainrain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from countiy to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at http: //books .google . com/ 



HISTORY 



THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES 

1734-1825. 



BY GENERAL PIETRO GOLLETTA. 



TBAHSLATED FBOM THB ITALIAM 

BY S. HORNER. 

WITH A SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER 

1825-1856. 



VOL. I. 



EDINBURGH: T. CONSTABLE AND CO. 

HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO., LONDON. 

IIDCCCLVIII. 



KniXRUKOii : T. coaaTJBi^ i-riiitkr t<> krii hajbstv. 



CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 



BOOK I. 
REiaiT OF CHARLES OF BOURBON.— 1734-1759, 

CHAPTER I. 

rtoi 
Introduction to the reign ot Cliarles of Bourbon — Roigiiing House b—^' ice regal 
fioveramtfnt until 1700 — CWtinuation of the Viceregal GoTemment under 
Philip T. — Conspiracy of the Mocchia — Philip v. viaita Naples in tlio year 
1702 — War with the Empire — Viceregal Oovcmmcnt onder Charles vi. — 
Peace of Utrecht — Peace of Roatadt — War in Sicily — Treaty of London 
accepted by Philip v. — Aato-da-fi in Sicily — Expedition against Naples by 
Charles of Bonrbon — Stat* of Naples on the arrival of Ohnrles of Bourbon, 1-28 

CHAPTER U. 

Conquest of the Sicilies by the Infant Charles of Bourbon — MoTcments of the 
Spanish army in Italy — Preparations for defence by the Imperial Viceroy — 
Advance of the Spaniards— Charles of Bourbon makes his public entry into 
Naples — Rattle of Bitonto — Final Conquest of the kinf;ilom — Expedition 
Againflt Sicily — ChnrlcH visitB Sicily — His Coronntinn, , 20-SO 

CHAPTER III. 

The reign of Cliarles from the Conquest to the victory of Velletri — licfonns in 
the kingdom — Marriage of Charles — The Ordcra of St. Januariua and St. 
Gennaro — Dispntei with tho Pope — Investiture of (^harlea in tlie kingdom 
of the Two Sicilies — Concordat — Renewed war in Italy — Cliarles prejMiTes 
for war — Feats of arms in the camp at Vcllctri — Charles surprised br the 
enemy — The Gennnn army retires— Charles returns to Naples, . 61-Sl 



IV COHTBNTB. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Continuation and end of the reigu of Cliarica — Public works — Discovery of Her- 
culancuni nml I'orapeii — MeneureB of Cbarleg deserving of both cenaure anil 
praise — Popular risings ngainst thn introduction of the In<]nisition — Conlinn- 
ance of the war of Italy — Death of Philip v. — Peace of Aix-ln-Cbapellc — 
Attempts of Charles to subvert the feadal system — The third Estate — Death 
of Ferdinand vu — Charles succeeds to the throne of Spain — C'harlee provides 
for the Bn'-ccKsion in the kingdom of Xaplcs — His departure, . 82-in'2 



BOOK n. 

KEIGN OF FERDINAND IV.— 17.19-179". 

CHAPTER I. 

Minority of the king — ^Title and investiture of the new king — Tlio Jurisdiction of 

. the Church — Educalion of the king — Famine in the kingdom, . 103-112 

CHAPTER II. 

Tlic king attains his majority, and assumes tho government — State of Kurojie, 
and its relations with Nnples — Expulsion of the Jesui Is— Disputes with the 
Pope — Marriage of the king — Reconciliation with the Pope — Fresh disputes 
with Rome — Abolition of the Chinea — National education — Defects in the 
administration — Coral fisheries — Colonics — Poverty of the Exchequer — Fcn- 
daliam — Reforms in the law tribunals — Tlie ofBce of Syndic restored — Itad 
hiWB — Commerce — State of the army, . , . - . 113-141 

CHAPTER III. 

Continuation of the reign of Ferdinand — Birth of a Prince— Tanucci deprived of 
power — Concordat wiib Rome commenced and interrupted — Sir John Acton 
— Earthquakes in Calabria — Journey of the King and Queen of Naples — 
Death of remarkable persons — Piiblic works — Colony of San Leucio — Mar- 
rioges in the royal family, ...... 142-164 

CHAPTER IV. 

The Revolution in Franco, and its first effects in tho kingdom of Naples — First 
movements in France — Tho Assembly of Notables — The Statos-gvneral — 
The Bast ile taken — Progress of the Revolution — The Royal Family returns to 
Fans — Wise laws of the National Asscmhlj' — Effects of the French Revolu- 
tion on Naples— State of Naples at the end of the year 1790 — Fears for the 
future, ......... H1.VI83 



COKTEHTS. V 

BOOK IIL 

UEIGN OF FERDINAND IV.— 179l-17'.t9. 

CHAPTER I. 

rAua 
Prcpualiunt fur war and defence — Return of the aovereigna of Naples — Internal 
measuren — Continuation of the 1101017 "^ France — Punecution of the liberals 
in Naples — Execution of Louis xvl — Resolution of the BoTereigns of Naples 
fur the defence of Ital^ — French fleet at NaplcH — Reconciliation with France 
— Suepicions and [lersecution — Origin of the Lazzaroni — ('onfe deration with 
En^and, ......... 183-2U1 

CHAPTER II. 

War with France — Peace — Violation of treaties — Indictments fur treason, 1793- 
1798 — Expedition to Toulon — Subsidies and levy of troops — Robbery of tin- 
National Banks— Disputes between Naples and Sweden — Memorable erup- 
tion of Vesuvins — Gondom nations fur treason — Plots of Acton against tlio 
Chevalier Medici — Attempted rerolution in Palcrmo^Honourablc conduct 
of the Neapolitau troops in Italy — Encsmpmcnta along the frontiers of the 
kingdom — Peace of Paris — Marriage of Prince Francis, heir to the throne — 
The Prince of Patenii corned into slavery — Assassination of General Du- 
phot at Rome — A republic established at Home — Trials for treason — The 
battle of Aboukir — Nelson arrives in Naples, .... 202-247 

CHAPTER III. 
Disastnius wnr with the French Republic — Insurrections in the kingdom— FII{;1 it 
of the king — Victor)' and triumph of the ann« of France, 1798, 1799 — Prepa- 
rations of the French on the frontiers of Rome — Irruption of the Neapolitan 
army into the Roman States — The King of Naples enters Rome in triumph 
— Disasters of the army— Flight of the king from Rome— Retreat of llie 
army — Enterprise of the French against Naples— The king's proclamation — 
The Commander of Goeta surrcudors that fortress — Assault and defence of 
Capna — Risings in Naples — Flightof the king — Mistakes of the Regent— Truce 
with the French, and worse disorders in the city — Seizure of the Castle of 
Sant' Elrao — Anarchy — Attack on the city — Victory of the French, . 24B-28>t 

BOOK IV. 
THE PAUTHESlii'EAN REPUBLIC. ^T as t-ABV to Jonb 1799. 

CHAPTER L 

LftWB for the ot^nization of the Republic — Speeches and celebration of the event 
— Moral condition of the i^ople — Regulations for the new government and 
various laws — Finances — War-tax — General discontent — State of the pr<i- 
vinces — Proposal for a Neapolitan Constitution by Mario Pngano — Departure 
of General Championnet — Tuscanyttccupiedby the French, . 289-310 



VI COHTBHTfl. 



CHAFfER II. 



InBUrrectioiis of tlie BourboDJiits in the pro vioces— Attempts against the Kepub- 
lie by the King of Sicilj- and tlie Englisli — Betrcat of the French — Risings 
in the Abruzzi ; in tho Terro di Lavoro ; in the Principality of Salcmo ; in the 
BitNilicata — DiHturbancua in Puglia; in Calabria — Cardinal Buflb in Calo- 
bria— Sack of Cotrnne — StipuIalionB of Cutansaro^Misfortunea of the geo- 
logist Dnlomieu — MasMcro of tho French at Agosta — Military pxpcdition of 
tlm French into tho provinces — Schtpani defeated — Conquest of Sanscverino 
— Destruction of Andria; of Trani— SjuhniisBion of l^lglia to the French— 
I'ropresa of Cardinal RufTo — New Constitution of the Neapolitan Republic — 
Destruction of Altnniura by tho Cardinal — The French at Caserta — Revolt 
of Lettere, Castellamare, and GragnaDO — The French abandon Naples — Tlit- 
fall of the Repubhc, after the retreat of the French nmiy — Measures of tho 
Republican tiovcmment — Capture of Procida and Ischia — Congpirucy of 
Balier — The army of the Holy Faith advances to attack Naples — Measures 
of public safety — ^Defcat of Schipani — Defence of Vigiiena — Death of Luigi 
Serio — Tlie Republicans take refage iu the castles — Capitulation of the fort 
(if Castellamare— OlTcrs of Peace of tho Cardinal to the Directory — Truce — 
Consultations — Peace— Capitulation of the castles — Violation of tho treaty 
by the king — Surrender of 8ant' Elmo, Capua, and Gaeta — End of the 
Republic, 311 sen 

BOOK V. 

REKJN OF FERDINAND IV.— 1799-1806. 
CHAPTER I. 

King Ferdinand of Bourbon resumes the thnine — Massacres in the city— r.aily 
Hamilton and Lord Nelson — Death of Admiral Caracciolo — Royal decrees — 
The Junta ofiStatc — Trials and executions — Rewardx bestowed on the king's 
jidherents— (trdinnncca for the army 3l57-3!t2 

CHAPTER n. 

Kiitcrprises of the Neapolitan Government — Expedition against Home — GenentI 
Bourcard succeeded by General Saselli — Return of Bonaparte from Eyypt — 
Canliuat Huffo at the conclave at Venice— Discovery of Vaccinatinn — A 
general pardon— Tlie Order of St. Fenlinaud instituted — I*vy of men and 
burses — IVeparations of Bonaparte for tho war of Italy — Buttle of Man-ngo 
— ArmiHtice of Alessandria — Election of Pins vu. — Cession of Malta to Eng- 
land — Birth of Ferdinand, heir to the throne of the Two Sicilies— War be- 
tween Naples and France— Peoce of I.uneville— Treaty of Florence, . 393-430 

CHAPTER HI. 

Peace of Amiens — Renewed hostilities with France — Double marriage with the 
House of Spain — I'on Giusvpfi' Zurlo — State of the finances — England 



OOHTBNTS. VII 

breaks lUe Treaty of Aiuienit — War — Bonaparte Kmperur — lntri(;ueB of the 
•Teauitfi — Enrlkqunke in the county of MoHm. — BonRparto crowned King of 
Itiily — The camp at Boulogne — Maritime war — Btittle of Trafalgar — Bonn- 
pArte {iniparea to invndo Naples — Treaty uf neutrality between Naples and 
France — Treaty of Naples witli the enemies of Fmnce — Arrival of Russian 
uid Knglisb troops in Naples, AtHiU'i 

OHAlTKlt IV. 

Final events of this i>erio(I, IBOS, 1806 — The French cunquests in Uerninny — 
Buttle of AiiBterI)lz~-Peiicc of Preabur^ — Advance uf the French against 
N&pleii— Joseph Bonaparte and General Massona approach the kingdom- 
Departure of the king fur tSicily followed by the queen — the Ttegeiils send 
cnTO\H to Prime Joacph — The French army enter Naples, 4J>4-lfiU 



BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE 



GENERAL PIETRO COLLETTA. 



PtETHO CoLLETTA waa boTR in Naples on the 23d Januai? 1 775. 
He early showed a predilection for the study of mathematics, but 
applied himself diligently to Latin, for the sole purpose, it is be- 
lieved, of reading Tacitus, whose writings he afterwards used as a 
model for composition and style. His natural inclinations, how- 
ever, led him to prefer a life of activity to one of study and con- 
templation, and he entered the army as an officer of artillery in 
1796. 

He distinguished himself in the war against tho French in 1798, 
and had then an opportunity of observing the superiority of the 
enemy, and the great want of discipline in the Neapolitan troops. 
After the entrance of the French into Naples, Colletta hoped for 
improvements in his country, but while admiring the liberal form 
of government now introduced, he learnt to despise the boasts of 
demagogues, and of shallow philosophers. He was, however, in- 
volved in the ruin of the Republic, and was shut up in prison with 
some of the most illustrious men of the age, whom he saw, one by 
one, taken out, only to be led to the scaffold. His own life was 
saved by the exertions of one of his relations, who, by bribery and 
a false attestation respecting his identity, obtained his liberation. 



BIOUBAPHIOAL ETOTIOK OP 



Having' been dismissed the ariuv, ColleLta now entered upon tlio 
profession of a civil engineer, and assisted to drain the Marshes of 
Ofanto, at tho time when Fra Diavolo occupied the province in tlie 
name of the king. In 1806, the French again invaded Naples, 
when Collctta, already distinguished among tho frioiida of order 
and reform, aided hj his voice and example in forming tho guard 
of citizens, to which Naples is indebted for having been frequently 
saved from the fury of the mob. King Joseph restored him to his 
rank, and he attmcted the notice of the Minister Saliccti by his 
conduct during tho harassing war whieh followed. The minister 
recommended him to King Joachim, as capable of greater things. 
Collotta was aceordingly intrusted to explore the island of Capri, 
then garrisoned by the English under Sir Hudson Ixiwe, and to 
discover the best place for landing the troops intended for its con- 
nuest. The success of the expedition justified the recommendation 
of Saliceti, and Collotta was next sent as Intendente or civil gover- 
nor to Calabria Ultra, st that time agitated by civil war, instigated 
from Sicily. 

CoUetta resided two years in the capital city of Mouteleone, 
where he had amplo opportunity tf» collect materials for his future 
History. He accompanied Joachim on hia attempted enterpriso 
against Sicily, and in 1SI2 returned to Naples as superintendent 
of roads and bridges, and with the rank of goncnil. In 1813, he 
was appointed to tho chief command of the military engineers, and 
in 181 4, lie was made councillor of state. 

In L8I5, he gained fresh laurels when fighting the Austriaua on 
the Panaro, and after following Joachim through this disastrous 
campaign, he was employed by him to negoliatu thi.- treaty of 
Casalanza. Despairing for Naples, he now thought of abandoning 
Ilia countr}', and hoped to serve her cause better in foreign lands, 
but though under suspicion as a Muratint, his rank was confirmed 
by Fcniinand, and he was ttpjHiinlcd lothe command of a division 
at Salenio. Tlie Minister Medici courted his friendship, but Col- 
lctta predicted another revolution in the kingdom, which Medici 



OEKEKAL nKTRO OOLLBTTA. 



» 



refused to believe, or to use measures to prercnt, and an alienatinn 
subsequently,' took plaee between these two men. 

When the Rovolution of Itt^O broke out, Ferdinaml sent forCol- 
Ictta, and restored liirn to the command of the engineers. Soon 
afterwards lio was sent to Sicily with the authority of royal lieu- 
tenant, to suppretw tlie revolt there; and where, by his own con- 
rusftiuo, he was merciless to the revolutionary |>arly. After two 
months he returned to Naples just as the fortunes of the constitu- 
tioiialtsts were nearest their ubb. Collctta succeeded Paris! iis 
minister of war ; he entered on office on the Sfiih February 1821, 
and on the 23d March the Geroiaus Irnd possession of Naples, and 
were followed by Ring Fei-dinand, accompanied by Canosa. Fint 
among the victims reserved for vengeance was C'olletta ; he was 
arrested and thrown into the Castle of Saut' Elmo. Here he had 
to endure the insults and menaces of Catiusa for three months ; 
until the Austrian policy saw fit to put some curb on the violence 
of the Neapolitan government, when Colletta, with four nf the 
most illustrious members of Parliament and officers were removed 
from their dungeons, and without any form of trial, hurried on 
board a German vessel bound for Trieste. Colletta was finally 
conveyed to nniiin in Moravia, at the foot of that Spielbeig whiclt 
has been made a living tomb for so many Italian |)atriota. Tlio 
sight of this fortress, the severity of the climate, and the unceasing 
longing for his Iiomc, aggravated his sufferings. His health at 
last began to decliuL', and the physicians fearing for his life, he 
was allowed after two years to reside in Florence, where he arrived 
in March 1823. 

In his dreary exile in Moravia, he conceived the first idea of his 

Hiitory, which he commenced writing in Florence, and this work 

occupied the remaining eight years of his life. His first literary 

ir bad been a military narrative of the last war of Joachim, 

»hich he wrote in 1815, In 1820, soon ufter the outbreak of the 

'Tcvolution, ho published two short pamphlets, wliich excited some 

attention at the time. Wliile in Florence he formed a close inti- 



XU BIOOBAFHICAt NOTICE OF QENBBAL FIETBO COLLETTA. 

macy with two of the moat celehrated authors in Italj, and fre- 
quently consulted them on his History. He lived a life of the 
strictest retirement and economy, seeking in Leghorn a more genial 
climate iu the winter ; ho died at Florence on the 11th Novcmher 
1831, and was huried in a little chapel on the road between that 
city and Pisa. 

The Translator of this history has added footnotes where they 
were felt to be needed for the explanation of the text ; and for 
many of these, begs to acknowledge the valuable assistance of 
friends, as well as in the compilation of the Supplementary Chap- 
ters. 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



BOOK K 

UEICTK OF CnAHLES OF B-OURUaCL 



ft 



CHAPTER r. 

niTRODUCTION TO TUB BBIGN 09 CIMM.S8 OP HOTJRBdy. 

Tub rircr Tronto, the Lin, iha petty atroam of Sau Magno 
near Portella, the vbaiii of tlie Apennines, wlicnce these rivers 
lake their risiv «iul the shores of the Heditetraneaa skirting the 
Tftrhoneao, the louian, and the Adriatic Seas, from the Lake of 
Fondi to tlie mouth of the Tronto, arc the houiidArtes of that land, 
which, lA the eleventh century, obeyed tlie Greek Empire, and 
iho Lombard lords- of Capua, HAJctoo, and Bcnevcnto. By the 
valour of the Norman Robert Guiscards Lliese detached sove* 
rcigntics were united and transmitted entire to hi^t nephew Roger, 
vho had already made himself king of Sicily, which ho had con- 
quered from tho Saracens and Greeks (IISO). The kingdom 
passed from him to William the Had, William the Oowl, Tancrcd, 
and, for a short lime, to William ui. When the second William 
lost all hopes of an hoir, he united tho lost survivot of tho blood 
of Roger, the Princess Conslauce, in marriage with the Emperor 
Henry of the houae of Swabia, who, upon tlie death of Taocrcd, 
succeeded to the crown of Sicily and I^iglio. 

Thus, in tho year II 89, tho kingdom passed from the Norman 
race, dislioguished for their warlike virtues, to the Swabian. 

VOL- I. ^// A 




s 



HISTORY OP THE KISODOM OP NAPLES. 



IM. 



To Ilcnn* succeeded the great ting, Freileric it., and to him, 
for a short period, Coiimd, followed by lifaiifrcd, auoihcr but ille- 
gitimate son. The Popes of Rome, who pretended to the euprc- 
niacy of the world, and more eapcclnlly to that of the Sicilica, after 
having given much disquiet to the princca of the Norman dynasty, 
turned their sncrcd weapons and warriors against tho Sn-abian. 
Always defeated, although tlicy fought in an ago of ignorance, 
but from the very iguoranco of their contemporaries, incapable of 
boing either crushed or annihilated, the pontiffs 1*036 from their 
losses Hioro enraged and lio,*tile llian before. 

After three preceding Popes had vainly tempted thoanibilion 
of Henry iii. of Englftiid, Clement iv. instigated Charles of Anjou, 
the brother of Ijouia of France, and a celebrated warrior, to take 
up arms against Manfred ; and, urged on by the restless desires of 
his wife,* Charles arrived with an army prepared fortius enter- 
prise. Ho waa crowned king of the Sicilies in Rome (1266), and, 
entering tlio kingdom, attacked Manfred, who was encamped near 
Bcnovonto. Tho valour of the Swabian was nut proof against the 
fortunes of Franco, nnd the infamous treachery of his subjects in 
Puglia. Manfred perished in the battle, and Charles was already 
happy in the possession of his throne, when Conradin, the son of 
Connid, advanced to attack him (1268). The youth, having con- 
quered tho Guclphic cities of Italy, nnd having been victorious at 
Tagliacozzo, where tho hostile armies met, was rejoicing in tho 
carap over his success, and his hopes for the future, when the king 
scut against him a fresh legion, which ho had kept in reserve. 
Defeated and forced to fly, Conradin was next betrayed and made 
prisoner by the fortunate Charles ; iitul, a year later, by the inhu- 
manity of tho king, or Ihe cruel advico of tho pontift', this last 
representative of tho house of Swabia was beheaded ; the raco of 
Anjou was thus established in the kingdom of the Sicilies. 

Six kings nnd two queens of this dynasty ruled over the king- 
dom for a period of 175 years, during which time it v^as a prey to 
foreign and domestic wars. The Swabiau momirchs, Manfred and 
CoDradiu, perished by order of the kings of the house of Anjou ; 
and Andrew and Joanna i. of tbeir own race likewise died violent 



' BMtric«, Ibiitth dtu^litcr of Riivmond 
Bvitsgcr, Igat Count ot PivveDcc> itliMe 



three elJcr •iHtini bul niuricd t1i« rotc. 
nipu at France, G«n&«uy, und Englimd. 



IML 



CHiUlLES OP BOURBON. 



3 



3ealli8. King Charles of Durawio, discovered in conspiracies against 
the two queens of Hungary,! ^^3 murdcrcrl, and Ladislaus died 
from poison. During this period, 8000 French, the tyrants of 
Sicily, were massacred at the Vespers of John of Procida ; the 
barons of the kingdom wcro constanily divided among themselves, 
aud, througli tho agency of the princes of tlio Houso of Aiijou, 
ftfose the schism in Ihc Church, by which two and even three con- 
temporaneous Popes divided the spoils of the Apostolic Sec, and 
the consciences of Christendom. But while in the recesses of 
their palace these kings concealed crimes of tho utmost enormity, 
when upon their ihrouus thuy disjilayed tho grealest veneration for" 
the Church; tliey built and oudowed churches and monasteries, 
gave dominion to the Pope«, and granted privileges to ccclesiastice. 
Charles r. and I^adisUus wer« valiant in war, and Robert governed 
wisely, thougli the virtues of all three were tarnished by the vices 
inherent in their blood ; the remaining sovereigns of this dynasty 
were scourges to the kingdom. 

In the year 1441, after R*Sn<?, tho last of the House of Anjou, had 
fled, Alphonso i. of Arragon estnbtished thedominion of the Arrago- 
nesc princes, which terminated in 1501, with the tiight of Freilcria 
Fivohings of thatdynaatysuoceeded one another in lesHthan sixty 
years, four of whom, Ferdinand i.. Alphonso n., Ferdinand 11., 
and Frederic, filled the throne in t}ic short apace of three years, 
including the interruption caused by the conquest and dominion 
of Charles viti. Wars were frequent during the reign of this proud 
and cruel race of Arragon ; the most noble and iufluoutial famiUes 
in tho kingdom were crusheil ; tho exchequer impoverished ; and 
the e)>iri( of party kindled among the barons, These dissensions, 
and tho general weakness, caused the State to sink from a power- 
ful kingdom to an insigni^cant province of a distant empire. I 
shall brioAy describe the miAones which ensued, but let the reader 
remember that in little more than three centuries and a half, four 
dynaatics had succeeded one another, giving twenty-two sovereigns 
to Naples, without including the transitory reigns of liOUis King 
of Hungary, of Pope Innocent iv., of James of Arragon, and of 



■ EKulMh, «id«ir et the httt kiag, 
Ijvuif l!ie Grwi, and her ilauKlilcr. Muj-, 
cotlj chill] Aod bciroM to ibe crown uf 



llnngar^r. CharltrK of I>unusto rvnted Ki« 
cUim uD Ibat of luit vife. H**}\ iliDghtiT 
of Suphen, of tbc rKc of Arpwl. 



HIBTOBY OF THE KIKODOX OF NArr.BS. 



ua 



Clmrles viii. ; that for short intervflls of p«ice, tlic people haA 
eiidurod long years of war ; that amidat suffering, civilisation had 
advancetl, and chnt, during these vicisstludcs, the peculiar defect 
rcmaTkod m the Noapolilnn cliaracter was politicnl inconstancy, or 
rftther hatred of tiic existing government, and a pcrpeliml craving 
after a new State, at once the cause and the result of their unhappy 
condition. 

When Frederic, the Ibst of the Arrapirese princes, attacked 
by the King of Prance, and betrayed by his uncle, the King of 
Spain, waft obliged to fty from Italy, the two- siKcossful monarchs, 
while diviiKng the kingdom thoy had usurped, contended, by their 
lieutenants and armies, for ihe right of sole possession, tionsalvo, 
thegreat captain, contiupred ; tho whole klugdom fell to Fenlinand 
the Cnthulic, and was dlieiice for ward governed by his viceroya 
a» a province. This was the commence men t of that viccr^sl 
goTernmcnt, which afllltcted the nation for a period of 230 years. 
The first viceroy was Gon&alvo. 

All the politicat institulronf) of the country underwent a cliange. 
The old n:iagistracie» lost authority aind inttuence before a neir 
tribunal' called the Collateral CounciV;^ (he importance of the 
ministers of State diminished, and the officials in the palace re- 
tained nothing bat the name ; the nrmy was disband^, and the 
navy became subordinate to the navy and commerce of Spain^ while 
tlie viceroy, who levied ihe taxes for the supply of the finances, 
resided within Ifle kingdom, and the king, who dispensed tho meney 
and other advantages, resided abroad. The feudal lords were 
humbled now that they were deprived of their anns, and the nobles 
were degraded by being associated witli new prinoea and dukes, 
whoee titles had been purchased. Although, by the temis of the 
peace, the adherente of the House of Anjou had their possessions 
restored to them, they only received a small part, and after con- 
siderable delays ; and tho adherents of the Swabian and Arrago- 
nese princes were entirely despoiled. Ghibelinea and Guelphs 
were alike persecuted, and, while the pride of Uemc revived, cvcry- 
tliing cl&o dfegeneratcA 



^ Cbiuiglio SaBntmAj w board, paitl; 
OMipo»«d of Spam(tr(}«,u onc«lb« biglieat 
ItgillftliTv IhkIjt, Ibe court grjuvlkt in tli« 



bit resort, iumI il» IidmI nf iheeiMutin go- 
verniueni. — Ilolif and tAe /to/ioit T$ta»dt, 
W. Spalding, tdI. ii. p. 367. 



irot. 



CHARLES OF BOUSBO}?. 



Thus ekpsod Ivro centuries of proviiivi»l servitude, more or less 
mUerable, until t)io accession of Pliili[i v.' aud Cliarles ri.' to the 
tlirones of Spuiii and of tlio Empire. During this period, sovcu 
kings or the Uouse of Spain, from Ferdinand the Catholic to 
Charles it, had ruled with despotic power; and thirty Roman 
Pontiffs, from Alexander vi. to Clement xi., hud, in various wajs, 
persecuted both the princes and people. Numeroua viceroys had 
BUflcecdcd one another ; some good, some intlifferatit, aud others 
bad. The dominion of the House of Hpauisli-Austria ended by 
the death of Charles u., in the year 1700, at which period Pietro 
Oiannono concludes his histor?)', — a historian who has boon highly 
praised, but whose merits exceed his reputation. Though I no 
more presume to compare my work with that of this exalted but 
unhappy genius, than to rccommond myself to the public by the 
similarity of our niisfurtuncs, X propose (in order to connect my 
history with his) to give a more detailed account of the events 
relating to the viceregal goveriinieut from 1700 to -1734, when 
Charles of Bourbou began his roigu ; aud hoping that my readers 
are already well acquainted with the works of Gianuoue, it will 
be enough if I at times merely allude to those jiarts of early liis- 
tory necessary for the comprehension of tlie facts I may have to 
describe. 

Towards the end of the year 1700, Philip v. ascended the 
throne of Spain ; and, by the wUl of the deceased king, Charles ii., 
snococdcd to all the dominions appcrtaiuing to tliai Crovrn. But 
the Emperor Ijcopold disputing the right of Philip to the throne, 
armies were prepared to decide this great contest. When Medina- 
ccpli, the viceroy of Naples, proclaimed Philip v., the people listened 
with indiiTereuce ; while the nobles, who were attached to Austria, 
and opposed to tho House of France, lamented his aceeasion, be- 
cause he was one of that family, and Duke of Anjou ; but their 
hopes were revived by the war in Lombardy, where the imperial 
arms were successful, and by the fame of the captain, Priuoe 



■ riitlip T^ gnuKlMn uf Louii sir. of 
Ftkocc, •Mnod mo of liouia Dsupliin ot 
KnBce, And o( Mvia Aaae of Bftvuis, 
born IfM, collatl to llw Crown of Sjub, 
1700, hj ibu will tff Cborlcs ii.. King or 
8|wiD, ^bt> died witlwat jmuo. 



' ChkriM vj., woond Min uf tbo Iilntperar 
Ij«opold, was dcalinod Xiy liin l»Ui«r for 
iho tlimnc nf Spftiii, wbicli lyiUiE siv, r>f 
YnnuM liju) raulveJ kUouIO ba OLxupk-J 
l/jr tua gnu<lMia. He Wruae tmpttw lu 
1711. 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



in. 



Eugene, whose deeds were the Ulk of Italy. T)ie Neapolitan 
nobles, accordingly, sent Don Giuseppe Capcco, as secret envoy to 
Leopold, and nftcr promisinjif the emperor to raise the people in his 
favour, he obuinod from him the following conditions: That he 
should send immediate aid in arms, change the State from a pro- 
vince to an independent kingdom, and give them the Archduke 
Charh's for their king ; maintain the privileges conceded by for- 
mer princes; institute a senate ronipoaod solely of Neapolitans, 
to advise him iu the affairs of the kingdom ; preserve tbo ancient 
rights of the nobility, and grant new titles and land* to the con- 
spirators. Capece then returned to Naples to render an account 
of the suceess of his mission, and concert the plan for this difficult 
enterprise. 

Don Oirolamo Capece and Signor Bassinet arrived from Rorao 
at the ea-mo time, each feigning some good reason for his ap- 
pearance, as well as Don Jacopo Ganilacorta, Prince of Macchia, 
from Barcelona. Capece had been a colonel in the army of the 
emperor, Sassinet secretary of the imperial embassy to the Pope, 
and Oambacorta was a young man, bold, eloq^uent, poor, and ambi- 
tious. Endowed with all the qualities which best tittcd him for a 
conspirator, ho was chosen leader, and the conspiracy received from 
htm the name of Macchia (1701), It was the middle of September, 
when, after calculating time and action, ilioy fixed on the I6th day 
of October (o oommcncc operations. Tliclr design was to kill tho 
viceroy; to gain possession of the fortresses of the city ; to proclaim 
Prince Charles, son of the Emperor Leopold, king; to overpower 
the small body of Spanish troops wlio were reposing carelessly on 
their posts ; and to rule tlie State until the arrival of the armed 
succour promised by the emperor. The couspirators included in 
their numbers almost the whole nobility of the kingdom, who shared 
tho anxieties and dangers of the enterprise. 

But fresh inciJents arrived to prevent further delay. Upon the 
information of the Duke de Uxeda, minister of Philip v. at Naples, 
the viceroy intercepted letters written by Cardhial Grimani, the 
emperor's ambassador at Rome, to one of tho conspirators, which 
revealed the existence of a conspiracy, though leaving tbe con- 
necting links and its actual condition obscure. Suspicious, there- 
fore, of everything around him, Medinacoeli kept a strict watch 



i:vL 



CUABLES OF BOURBON. 



witliin his jwUr-e, altorecl his Iia1>!t3 of life, collected the few 
troops he hail n-ith liini, and placed spies U]>oii the nobles and 
people; ho then instituted the " Giunta dcgl' IiiconHdenti,''' *■ 
tribunal with the power to puiiisli, and cuiEed Father Viglicna of 
the Tlicatiiio Ordcr,^ to bo imprisoned, upon which Father Torres, 
a Jc&uit, fled ; the ministers of the Gavcminent and tho con- 
apirntora were cqtiatlir alaiTiied. 

At length, either confident of their strength, or hurried on by 
their evil desttuy, the couspirators linfitened their prcparfitiou^, 
and rose in an insurroctwn ou the 23il September. Unable to fulfil 
their intention of killing the viceroy (whutte dt>ath had been con- 
certed with his coaclimaa and two othor of hia mcuiaU), because 
he did not drive out as usual in his carriage, they invested Castel 
Nuoro, and found tlic gates closed and guarded ; thus tho first 
hopes of the conspirarj failed. ISut after these irrevocable stepn 
had hcon taken, thoy were obliged to proceed, led on by pre- 
sent necessity, and trusting to the irresi-itible foreo of a lawless 
mob. Kaising the standard of the emperor, they proclaimed the 
new king, and increased the tumult, while overthrowing the images 
of Philip, and setting up those of Charles. Tliey harangued the 
people in the public squares, promising them abundance, and, in 
coaforniity with tho despotic uaaj^^cs of that period, impunity, 
favours, and privileges lu the midst of this cxcitcmeut, these 
noble conspirators, cither hoping to iacrcaso their influence, or 
from youthful arrogance, assumed the new titles of princes and 
dukes, for winch they bad stipulated with the Emperor. 

Doctor Haverio Pausuti, a proud nian, but learned and elo<|Uent, 
one of tlie con^^pirators, and choseti iu the conspiracy EfvUo^ of the 
people, ascended an elevated part of the ilercato,' xvbich was 
densely crowded by a populace easily moved by any novelty, and 



' Drgt Incomjldemli, ■*»ni of caniiArnr^ 
\ trihuBitl iippoililcd ta trj nufMcUd [iar> 

* TAMfiM Onler. 80 aOvd fnim ifaa 
town of Chioti, or T«U (Latin, TfaetUe), In 
Almuxo CStiK, wbcrp Ar(;tibi»lMi|i PwUo 
CknUla, aftrrwonl* IV1I iv., ww the firal 
tspcriorof iKh Onlcr. lie foiiin<li:il h in 
wKJnactlni witli GMtxnool'VKtaizii, since 



cnniinixctl, wlio dim] at \npl(« [1547), rnxtA 
V1I1U i« uue ufllic (lalruii «ttlnlii of the city. 
fX\\y •rC'D't to St. JuiD&riuii. 

' ElMc. In evei7 conumnd IIib tut- 
psrvra annualtjT elcoled k Sjndic, and Xsm 
offictrra callcil EUtli, lo Miliniuiiler titc 
fwUic funds of iKa (livtricl. 

' Tilt grcAl narkct-pUcc oftlia city. 



ITISTOKY OP THE KINGDOM OP NAPLK8. 



17V1. 



made a sign to tlicm to Uetcn. He then informed them that he 
was their new Eletto, reminded them of the evils of tliu Sjiauiah 
rule, exaggeratod (ho hopes to be entertained of the government 
of the emperor, maguilicd the forces of the conspiracv, promised 
gifts and rewards, uud entreated tUe people to join the noUe&. 
Ab ho concluded his oration, a working>inau, from amidst his 
ftudienee, grej with age, spoke, in a loud voice, as follows : — 

" You Kletto, and ye people, hearken to me ; it is now many 
years ago, since we, led by Masaniello, the man of the people, 
aimed a blow at the bad government of the Spaniards: the nobles 
then ranged themselves against 'ua, or stood aloof, and frequently 
harangued us (as the new Elctto lias just done), to lead us hack 
to servitude, wliich they called peace. I, then a boy, followed the 
people, and witnessed the deceptions practised by the great lords, 
the treachery of the Government, and the deaths of my relatives 
and frtcnda A« an old man, grown wise with years, I now address 
you, and propose, that in this conspiracy of nobles, the people 
should abandon them, as, in tlio conspiracy of Ma-sanicllo, lio was 
abandoned by the nobles. You hear the names they have already 
assumed, of l*rince of Piombino, Frince of Salerno, and Count of 
Nola; and you may expect as many more unheard-of titles, but 
all of which will prove new tyrannies for u» ; I shall now quit 
this place, and let all who boUevu my words follow me." The 
square was immediately emptied, and the first speaker retired in 
confusion. 

The conspirators, however, were reinforced by many of the lowest 
of the populace, and by the peasantry, not from any attachment to 
the cause, bui from tltc love of plunder. In the midst of the con- 
fusion they went about ransacking houses, and murdering those 
belonging to citl»er party without dlstinotion. On witnessing these 
atrociiie.s, several of thu nuhles, though themselves ettlicr conspl- 
ratorSj or accrct partisans, sought refuge in the castles garrisoned 
by the Spanish soldiers; some fled from the turbulent city, and 
others barricaded their houses, and filled thorn with armed retain- 
BTB. The unrestrained license of the populace, and the want of 
foresight on the part of the loaders, Imd so diminished the forces 
of the enterprise, that the Prince of Macchia issued an edict 
threatening the plunderers with the punishment of death, as well 



im 



CRARLSS OF BO0BDO5. 



9 



as those nobles who should delay a day lending their aid to the 
])artj of King Charles. This edict, by driving some to desperation, 
and appearing to others too violent a measure, served doubly to 
prejudice the iuLerests of the conspinicy. 

The viceroy, ihcreforo, perceiving the iudiQ'erence of tlie people, 
the want of union among the nobles, and that the conspirators were 
few, and haJ taken alarm, ordered, on the third day, that the crews 
of galley-slaves, on board the Spanish vessels anchored in the har- 
bour, should be landed ; after they had been formed into a band 
of soldiers, they were sent from Castcl Nuovo ap^ainst the rebels, 
vho were encamped behind barricades in diA'ercnt quarters of tiie 
city. Meanwhile, in order to support the attack and add to tho 
panic, the castles kept up a continual thunder of artillery. The 
tower of Santa Chiara, which had been taken possession of by the 
conspirators to hoist the standard of Austria, to reconnoitre tlio 
city from its summit, and to ring a double peal, was suddenly 
stormed, and the other posts were attacked and taken. The de- 
fenders were dispersed ; Maccliia and others fled ; Sossinct and 
Baugru were taken prisoners ; Ihc standard of Ctmrlca was lowered 
and insulted, and the tnmges and colours of Philip rcstorcil. Ko- 
thing remained of this attempt at rebellion, but its reeolloeliou, 
the mischief it had caused, and the reflection on dangers overcome. 

Immediately afterwards, Medinacojli was recalled, and the Duke 
of Ascalon came as viceroy, from Sicily. Don Carlos di Sangro, 
a colonel in the service of the Emperor, was beheaded in tho 
square of Castel N'uovo, and several of the conspirators shared his 
fat«; others were barbarously murdered in their dungeons; Sassinct, 
although secretary to the Embassy, was sent prisoner to France; 
many besides languished in chains, and the property of all was 
eonfiaoated to the exchequer. An increase of rigour, of punish- 
ments and tortures for all manner of crimes, and towards all claaaea 
of the citizens, tiow aUrnicil tho people, who became oxaapcratad 
against tho Govcnimcnt, and repented not having joined tho con- 
spiracy of tho nobles. 

When King l*hillp was informed of this conspiracy, he coolly 
calculated the extent of the danger, and rcmcmbcriDg that the 
issue of the wars in Italy and Spain wm yet doubtful, resolved, 
by a display of liberality and clemency, to diaiwl the odium occa- 



10 



HISTOBT OF THE KINGDOM OV SAPLRS. 



lT«r. 



tione<1 by rebellion, and its consequent pitnialiment-i. With ihifi 
intention he crubarkcd at Barcelonii, and reached Naples in June 
1702, where he was welcomed with the joyous reception an op- 
pressed people arc ever ready to bestow on him to whom they look 
for relief. They did not, however, obtain what they most desired, to 
retain their liing in Xnples, for a higher destiny called biui to Spain; 
but be amply rewarded their demonstrations of attachment by 
nbolisliiiijj many taxes, remitting Buveral milHona of duciita* owing 
to the exchequer, ^inting an anmeaty for past political ofTcnocs, 
and eonferrlng titles on those nobles who bad supported bis claims, 
while his manners were kind and affable towards all his subjects. 
The clergy, bnrons, and cletti assembled to vote a donation of three 
hundred tbuu>iand tlucats to the kiii^'', as a token of the uuiver&al 
feeling of gratitude, and the erecliou of an eqiiealrian statue iu 
bronzo to liie bonuur, iu the largest square of the eity. liul lite 
advance of the Austrian army in Lombardy obliged Piiilip to leave 
Naples, after two months" agreeable hojoum, to assume the com- 
mand of the French armies, which were opposed to Eugene of 
Savoy. He left Asonlon regent. 

In the year 170.j, tlie Emperor Leopold died, and waa suc- 
ceeded by his eldest son Joseph. No relaxation in the fierceness 
of the wars in Germany and Italy followed ; Ascnion therefore 
aent soldiers, ships, and money to the aid of iSpaiii, and harassed 
the overburdened poopic for levies of men and money. The attach- 
ment to Pliilip declined, a cliangi3 to be attributed to the oppresaivc 
conduct of his rcpreseuLativcB. Such wa^i the state of affairs in 
1707, when Prince Eugene, having defeated the French troops in 
liombardy, sent five thousand infantry and throo thousand German 
caralry, under the command of Count Dnun, by the way of Tivoli 
and PaloBtrina to Naples. Tho viceroy, Ascalon, having only a 
small force with him, appealed lo the people, but found them un- 
willing to comply, partly from an aversion to war, and partly from 
their inclinations always leading them to favour a new govern- 
ment Only Don Tommaw d'Aquino, Prince of Castlgliono, and 
Don Niccolo PIgnatelli, Duke of Dl^accla, with a few thousand 
armed followers, encamped behind tho Gariglintio, but on the ap- 
proach of Daun they returned to Naples. Capua and Aversa 

* Tlie NopotiUii (iuc«t i* abuut tliren tbillingt atiJ rouriwiau. 



1707. 



CHARLES OP nOCRBON. 



11 



yielded to the conqueror, and Uic Duke of Asculon repaired to 
QaeU. The vanguard of the Ocmiatis, led bj the Uuurtt of Mnr- 
tiniU, wlio had been ajipointed vicero/ by the emperor, was pre- 
parinj^ to marcli to Naples as au enemy, when messengers of peace 
met them, and offered tliem (he keys of the city ; and thus, before 
being conquered, she voluntarily submitted to a new ruler. The 
entrance of the imperial troops wns triumphant, the people greeted 
the victor witlt shouts of applause, and, vehement aa usual in 
their demonstrations of joy, they overthrew the statue of Philip t., 
which had ao lately been erected ; broke it in pieces, and threw the 
fragments into the sea. A few days later, the thmc castles of the 
city surrendered, and the garrison of Castel Nuovo, officers and 
sohlicrs, Spaniard» and XcapoUtnnn, without a sentiment of shame 
nt their own iucoiiHtaney, passed into the service of the now 
jirincc. 

The Prince of Castigliono, cither because his hopes wore notyot 
extinguiahed, or, more to hu honour, becauso lie refused to aban- 
don his colours in timea of misfortune, repaired to Puglia with a 
ihouaaud ImruG ; but finding the pass of Avcllino occupied by the 
enemy, turned off by Siilcruo. A more numerous body of Licnium 
cavalry foltoived In pursuit of him ; be was abandoned by his men, 
and, with the fow who remained of his Ihousaud soldiers, was cap- 
tured. The effect of this example spread throughout the kingdom. 
The inhabitants of the Abruzzt, whom the Duke of Atri was vainly 
exciting to war, submitted to General V'eUeel, and soon afterwards 
the fortress of Pescara surrendered. Gaeta alone, reinforced by 
the galleys of the Duke of Tursi, made a show of resistance for a 
considerable time. 

The iicge, which was directed by Count Daun, was hard prc3ae<l, 
and before the end of September a breach was opened, which the 
assailants mounted, and tho besieged fled in disorder behind an 
embankment thrown up some days previously, to replace the mined 
walla; the weakness of the place, the alarm of tho defenders, and 
tho impetuosity of the attack, with tho good fortune of tho Ger- 
mans, carried them beyond the moat and the trench, and they 
entered the panic-Btricken city, where they massacred nod plun- 
dered the inhabitants. Ascalon, with a few others. Look refuge in 
the little tower of Orlando, but surrendered the followiug day on 



12 



BISTORT OP THE KINQDOU OP KAPLB8. 



mt 



the sole condition of their lives being spnred, and thus entered 
Naples as prisoners. Arauii^ the most distinguislied of those cnp- 
turod, besides the viceroy, were the Duke of Bisaccia, and the 
Prince of Cellainare, who had both eliortl^- before huld places of 
authont,r, and boon among tlie highest in the kingdom ; valiant 
in war, and of noble blood, ihey had been favourites of fortune, 
until now when fallen into adversity tliey were prisoners in the 
hands of a foreigfn barbarian. TIio people pursued this unhappj? 
I>and of captives, and insulted Ascalon, while reminding him of 
the cruelties he had perpetrated after the conspiracy of Maechia ; 
in a still more inhuman and cowardly spirit, they turned their in- 
sults against those two Neaiwlitan nobles, who alone, or with only 
a few adherents, had in miRfortunu maintnincd the fidelity they, 
had sworn to Philip. Tlio govurnmeiit of the emperor was estab- 
lished in the kingdom, but the Count of MarCinitz being recalled 
into Germany, Count Daun remained aa viceroy. 

Uis first care was to recover poHseaaion of the fortresses, 
called the Prcaidii of Tuscany,' which were guarded by Spanish 
soldiers. Santo Stcfano and Orbitetio surrendered to General 
Vetzeel, who was sent thither with a largo body of troops; Porto 
LoDgone next yielded after u stouter resistance i aud lastly, Por- 
t^rcole, in 1712. Paun, having been suniuionod to the war in 
Lonibardy, was succeeded in the viccroyalty by the Venetian, Cai^ 
dinal Vinconzo Grimani. 

The war in Naples was at an end ; but the occupation of Comae- 
chio by the imperial soldiers, the intimation from the emperor to 
the Duke of Parma no longer to consider himself a feudatory of 
the Pope but of the empire ; and, lastly, the prohibition to the 
kingdom of the Sicilies to pay the customary tribute to the jvon- 
tiff, — induced Clement xi. to raise twenty thousand men-at-arroa, 
placing them under the command of Count Ferdinand Marsili, a 
Bologncso, wlio encanipcil in the territory around Bologna, Ferrara, 



cancluilcl K'twtH-n I'liilip ii. of S|)«in uiiil 
Cuamo I., Duke uf tlimiuou, in l&A?, Fliilip 
agfwfld to co(J« thv Stnk' of Sioiina to tlii; 
IrtUer Sinniniiili. in liia Hinlor/, cijiititiiip* 
lhu»:^" I'hilijtjw: rf.»cr¥& linilrfoifi it la 
BMnuvtiie e«iiagTiole let porti de celta 



repiiblii^u^, NAvoir; OrbiUlIn, IMrto Enjole, 
T'-liimonc, Monle Argcntero et PorW Sad 
Suifuno, c«U« inllie pruviiice a ronB£cU«- 
Inni ce 1)0*011 It itnmcn'' I't-Ut de« Piuidii." 
MisMOKUi, ffiHoira dtt £ipub. ttaiitH'ua, 
vol. x»i p. 164. 



inx 



CnABLES OF BOGRBOK. 



IS 



Hnd Comacchia Upon this, I)aun left Lombardy, and advanced 
to meet tlie5o troops, wliilc otiier forces were collected in Naples 
to be scnl against Roma Ttie Emperor Joseph did not wish to 
quarrel willi the Pope, but intended by this menacing attitude to 
oblige him to rccogniiie luti brot>lior Cliarlss as sovereign of Spain. 
Daun, tlicrefore, while approacliing Uie encampments, proposed 
terms to tJie pontiff, who, hy \m bold and unflinching replies, 
evinced hi» dotermtnatiorf to trust to the decision of war ; a novel 
spectacle f when the leader of succeuful armies natd for peace, 
and ft Pope invoked an appool to arms .' 

After this obstinate repulse-, tha (>?miaB troops advanced, and, 
without much apposition, gnined posseMton of Bondeao and Cento, 
surrounded Ferrara nad Forte Urbano ; captured some of the 
Pope's soldiors, and pat the rest to Biglit, who sought shelter in 
Imola and Faenm. After thcw disaatora, fearing worse which 
threatened him by t'fce'armj sent from Naples, Clement yielded ; 
and, no longer entreated, himself begged for terms of peace, and 
accepted those offered him, both avowed and secret, thus satisfying 
all the desires of the conqueror. The peace was realj so far as it 
depended on written auts, and tho general belief; but it was only 
a truce or stnttagem^ in the eyes of the pontiifi', who waited his 
opportunity to break thraugh tlio terms, whiclh not having been 
ratiBod by Ida eouseieuce, were to him only a lai# of force, to last 
no longer than the necessity which dictated them. 

Upon the death of Cardinal Gnmani m Naples (I7l0), Count 
Cliarica Barromeo, a Milanese, come as viceroy in his stead. 
Tlio following year the Emperor Joseph died, and was succeeded 
by his brother Cimrlcs, the third of that name in the disputed 
kingdom of Spain, and the sixth in Germany and Naples. The 
war called the War of Succession lasted two years longer, when the 
Peace of tJtrecht camo to rejoice the hearts of tho aRtictcd people 
(1713). That part of tho treaty which concerned us, was the 
maintenance of the kingdom of Naples to Charles ti., and tho 
cession of Sicily to Victor Amedeua, DuUo of Savoy.^ But it is 



* ViL'tor Amnlc^utt ti., Ilnk« of Saroj, 
ban 106A, rnKm^-d Annr, lUighter ti 
Fliilip Duke of OrleaoB, brolber dT Louis 
iiT. or Fnooe. Tbvagh the ooiutn of 



Pnnc« KagvDi?, tin nitiimnnilpil ihf tKiofM 
efi|«Mii taliim during iliewnr. HiRHrOond 
dnDgbtrr, Ukric Loudv, married 1icr eonnn 
Phili'i) V. of 8p<uo, wlm, fli ibn Pc«ee of 



u 



UI8T0BY OF TUB KINGDOM OF NAPLB3. 



ITU. 



importAQt for the liistory of tlie future deatinica of those two Iciiig- 
doms to Icnrn, that the Crown of Spain was confirmed to Pliilip t. 
Soon after tho conclusion of the Peace of Utrecht, King Victor 
Aracdcus went to F*nlernio to enter upon the possession of Kib 
kingdom, nnd to cnjor the homage of his aubjects and the ncur 
title of Ving. He arrived in October, was joj-fuUy welcomed by 
the people, and received the htngdom from tho hands of the Mar- 
quis do IxM Balbasca, viceroy for Philip v. ; he was crownotl, with 
his consort, in the ensuing Uccombcr, and returned to Piedmont, 
leaving the island garrisoned by his troops, and obedient to tho 
ruLo of the viceroy, Ilanibnl Mallei, a uatLve of Miraiidola. 

But as the Kmperor Charles vi. Iiad not been invited to -join 
the Peace of Utrecht, aud ihcrcforo the war in Spain, Itulj, and 
Flanders continued during ibu whole of ihcyoar 171^, a now Irvaly 
of peace became necessary, which was concluded at Rastndl in I7l4: 
hy tills the Emperor retained Flanders, the States of Milan, Sar- 
dinia, the kingdom of Naples, and the Prcsidii of Tuscany. CouDt 
Daun returned as Ticcroy to Napica 

The traiiquillity of Europe appeared secure, as the ambition of 
the more powerful iiovcrcigns had been fiatisfied, and the hopes of 
weaker princes annihilated, when, three years later, in 1717, a 
powerful Spanish dcct took possession of Sardinia, without any 
motive for war, chnllcugo, or quarrel. When tho firet wir-priso had 
subsided, fresh armies wore prepared in Gernmnyand France; but 
the aamo Spnnish fleet suddenly attacking Sicily, seized on Pa- 
lermo, from whence the viceroy of Amcdoua fled ; they atormod 
Catania, and blockaded Meesiim, Trapani, ami Mclazzo ; theso 
attacks were conducted by the Marquis do Loydo, a Fletuing by 
birth, and general of Phtlip T. 

Tho wproteiitatives yf the Ocmiau Empire, of Piedmont, Franco, 
and England, met in London in 1716, to consult lu wliAt maniter 
they should oppose the perfidy and grasping ambition of Spain. 
By conditions, at that time kept secret, it was agieecl to attack tho 
Spanish armies and navies in various parts at onco ; a Urge num> 
her of English vessels with imperial soldiers on board, anchored off 



Ctmht, coded ]>» claim to Siciljr to him 
^alb»^ia.hlr. In 172(1, Lc «Aa (ti^pritoJ of 
Sictif aaA netWcd the Uliuid of HanliiiiA, 



aiwuniing^ tb* title of Kini; or SanliiiiK. 
Ho nUiilicateil in EnruLir tif lii* van CharlM 
Kmaniicl in. 17U0, aud died 17^2. 



ITSk 



CIIAttLES OP BOUUDOH. 



Iff 



llio Port of Mossina, and 10,000 Noapolitans ftnd Germaus en- 
camped HI l{4?ggio, destined to deliver tlie citadel of Messina, ami 
tlie Fort of San Snlvatoic, wliich wore closely besieged by the 
intrfpid Lcyde. The English Adniiml Uyng gained two victories 
ill succt^iisioii over the ripnuish Admiral CaBlagiiedo, and shipa 
were oRptunMl, cthci-s »unk, and only a few escaped or were dift- 
jwrscd. The city of Messina, though in the posscsaion of the Spa- 
niards, was invested; tlie Spanish camp& were tnenaecd ; but the 
Fleming, though both besieged and besieging, nnd though obliged 
to provide for attack as well as for defence, stormed the two for- 
tresses, and in the presence of ttic conqueror liyiig, and of the 
Eni|jcrur's eauip, boldly raised the standard of Spain upon thcso 
castles. Luaviug the city well provided, Uo then hastened to press 
tho siege of Mctazsa 

A frcsli supply of sliipsaud troops of the enemies of Sjjaiu arrived 
in Sicily (1720). They gained possession of Palermo, raised the 
aiego of Molazzo, and rcco\'ered Messina. The inhabitants, who 
Itftd sided with Lcydc while successful, now changed with fortune, 
and joined ihe emperor; ovcrytliing boded ill for Spain. Tlie 
Spanish general, fearing the worst, prepared to abandon the island; 
Spain, harassed by war in other quarters, and unequal to copo 
with 80 many powerful enemies, consented to the secret terms of 
the hostile lenguu, and accepted in compensation for the Berious 
losses she had to suffer at the present moment, a trifling advantage 
for the future By this peace, Sicily was given to the emperor, 
King Amed<:us receiving a poor compcnsatian in f^anliiiin, and 
Ihe succession to the Duchies of Parmn, Pincenza, and Tuscany 
was assigned to Philip T. ; the ]irinces who were the actual rulers 
of tlicsv countries, besides the Pope, who pretended to the domi- 
nion of Parma, and King Aroedeus, were discontented with the 
terms, but, from their poverty, could only vent their displeasure in 
lamentations and protests. General Leyde embarki^ for Spain 
with his soldiers, accompanied by 5U0 of the islanders, who volun- 
tarily expatriated themselves, fearing the anger and vengeance of 
the conqueror, for having remained faithful to the Spanish interest. 
Such is the miserable fate of all who meddle in the quarrels of 
kings, well deserved if they do not act in the support of political 
principles, but from motives of ambition or the lore of gain. 



1« 



BISTORT OF THE KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



ma. 



The two Sicilies were uoitcd under the empire of Clmrles TI., 
who appointed the Duku of Montelcone viceroy' in the island, and 
Count Gallos in Naples, in tliu place of Count Daun who was 
recalled. CanHuul Scrulumbacli succeeded at the death of Oallas. 
Clement Xi. diod iti the ^'car 1721, and Innocent Xlil. waa elected; 
the new Pope, perceiving that the fortune and power of Philip v. 
were on the decline, did nut hesitate to concede, as demanded, the 
investiture of tlie two kingdoms to. Charles tl Benedict xhl 
aucceeded Innocent in the year 1724 

Nothing remarkable occurred in Naples during the ten fol- 
lowing years, from J-720 to l"30t cjicopb onrtJiquakes, volcanic 
eruptions, floods, lutdj ether dcsbructivc phenomena. But, in the 
year I724', so horrible an act was perpetrated in the neighbouring 
island of Sicily, mid occasioned such a sensation throughout the 
kingdom, that I feci it a duty to relate what occurred ; and the 
more so, that I may oonfirm. the Neapolitansi in (heir juat detesta- 
tion of the Incjuisitioot now thai hy the allianca of the priesthood 
with an absolute government, superstition, hypocrisy, and a false 
veneration for antiquity, aro driving thcni back towards times and 
manners they abhor; and when they see this tremendous Office, 
called holy, revired- in not a few places in Italy, — as yet exercised 
with silent discretion, though (shoutd fortune prove favourable) 
ready to be turned to aa sanguinaty and cruel a purjvoso as iu tho 
dark ages of universal ignorance. 

Brother Romualdo, a lay member of the Augustine Order, and 
Sister Gertrude, attached to the order of St. Benedict, were an-aigned 
before the tribunal of the Holy Office in the year 1699. The 
former was accused of Quietigm,'' Molinism.^ and heresy ; the 
latter of pride, vanity, tetnerity, mid hypocrisy. Both were 
insane: for the friar, while uttering many things contrary to the 
dogmas or practices of Christianity, ilcclared he had been thus 
Uught by angels, tlie messengers of God, with whom he had 
spoken ; and that he was himself a prophet, and infallible ; and 
Gertrude maintained she had held intercourse in the spirit and in 



' Qaitiitm- The ijodritiii of « vxK tt 
('luixtMn*, wbd iBiight niAii'* cfairf d»tj 
wtti iho c>inUiu|)luttuii aekI Idvc of Uoil. 

■ Maiinitm. The doctnne ^QiiJclinii, 



u it WM Qret taugkt hy t. Spatiiali pri<-«t, 
filidioe] Uolinns, in tlio KvcnUfi&lli t^^ti- 
larr. lie Oicd ItiSiJ. 



1721. 



ClIAULES OK BOUBbON. 



17 



the body with God, that she was pure and holy, and mmle other de- 
clarations, equally itiilicativcofa disturbud reason. The inquisitors 
and theologians attached to the lloly Office, had frequent disputes 
with these unhappy Ipcin^, wlio. like ivH insane pt-rsous, obstinately 
adhered to their opiuious, and repealed their ravings and heresies. 
Shut up in prison, the woman for twcuty-five years, and the friar 
for eighteen (ho passed the remaining seven in penance in tlie 
raonftstcry of San Doraenico), they endured the severe.'it torments, 
torture, the scoui^o, hunger and thintt, until at last the lons;cd-for 
hour of execution arrived. The inquisitors had condemned both 
10 death by aentencea confirmed by the Bishop of Albarucin, resi- 
dent at Vienna, and by the Grand Inquisitor of Spain ; obedient 
10 whom, the devout Emperor Charles vt. ordered the act to be 
executed with the solemnity of an auto-da-f^. In the sentence of 
condemnation, the virtues, gentleness, and clemency of the Holy 
Tribunal were set Forth, and their humanity and mercy hold up in 
contrast with the malignant spirit, impiety, and contumacy of the 
two culprits. The necessity of maintaining the di!>ciptiDe of the 
most sacred Catholic religion was furtlier insisted on, in order to 
etTace the scandal and vindicate the indignation of Christendom. 

On the 6tli April of that year, I72+, in tlie square of San 
Erasmo, the largest in the city of Palermo, preparations were made 
for the execution. A high cross was elevated in the centre, 
painted white, and enclosed on cither aide by a pile, each about 
ten broccia ^ in height, covered by a wooden scaffolding like a stage, 
which was reached by steps ; a stake was driven into the floor 
above each pile ; altars were erected, in different parts of the 
square, and richly decorated galleries were arrangC'd in the form 
of an amphitheatre, facing the cross. In the midst of them rose 
A more elevated building of larger dimensions, very elaborately 
omameiitcd with velvet, gilt ribbons, and the emblems of religion. 
This was intended for the inquisitors; the remaining galleries 
were for the viceroy, the archbistiop, and the senate; for the 
nobles, olei^, magistrates and ladies ; while the peoplo stood 
below. At tbo first dawn of day ttie bells sounded to penance ; the 
processions then commenced, composed of friars, piiosts, and con- 
fnitemilics, who, passing tbrough all the streets of the city, walked 

' Brania, iwarlj tiro fe*L 
TQI. I. B 



18 



niSTORT OP THE EiNODOH OF NAPLES. 



17SI. 



round llio crofs, and ranged tlicmselves in tho places assigaed 
tlicm. Tlio square was orowded from davbruak, and the galleries 
were fiUcd with sjiectatun, who arrived in parties, or singly, and all 
attired in gala dresses, to witness thesacriiicc; tlie space below was 
likewise tilled with the people, waiting the arrival of the victims. 

It wa« alroad^v past two in the afternoon, and tables laden with 
provisions, filled the galleries, changing the scene prepared for 
gloom into one of festivity. In the mid.st of thi.i gaiety, the first 
who arrived was tlie unhappy Gertrude, bound upon a car, in a 
dark dress, lier hair dishevelled, and-a tall paper cap on her head, 
on which her name waa inscribed, with paintings representing tlie 
flames of hell. The car, drawn by black oxen, and preceded by 
n long procession of friars, waa escorted by a convoy of princes and 
dukes, mounted on superb horses ; and followed by the three father 
inquisitors riding white mules. On the arrival of tho cortege, tho 
prisoner waa consigned to other Dominican friars and theologians 
for the last pretended forms of conversion; another cortege theu 
appeared, resembling the first, conveying Uiother Itomualdo ; and 
the inquisitors took their soats in the magnificent tribune pre- 
pored for them. 

These formalities being etiJcd, theobslinacy of the culprits was 
proclaimed in a loud voice, and their sentences read in Latin ; 
the woman was the first to ascend the scaffold ; and the two 
friars who acted aa executioners, bound her to the stake, and set 
fire to her liair, which had been previously anointed with resi- 
nous ointments, that the flames might continue burning round her 
heail ; after setting fire to her clothes, which were also impreg- 
nated with resin, they left her. The unhappy woman, now alone 
upon the scaffold, whilst groaning with pain, and the flames burn- 
ing around and beneath her, fell along with the cover of the pile on 
which she was standing; and having disappeared bodily, the spec* 
tators wore still made aware of her existence by her shrieks ; while 
flames and smoke concealed the insulted cross of CliHst. Brother 
Homualdo perished on the other pile, in the same manner, after 
having witnessed tho torments of his companion. Among the 
spectators nii^'ht be remarked a dingy, melancholy group of 
twenty-six prisoners of the Holy Office, who had been forced to 
witness the ceremony ; they alone, among the crowd, wept over 



17». 



CHABLES OF BOUllBU^T. 



10 



llie scone, — for the remainder, cither from cowarJico, igiiomnce, a 
false idea of religion, or abject superstition, applauded the in- 
famous sacrifloo. Tho three inquisitors wore Spanialt monks. I 
refrain from naming those who volunteered their assistance, that I 
may uot disgrace their descendants, who liave, wc may trust, im- 
proved since the days of their fathers ; but they are registered in 
other page:;, for public virtue rarely, and Btill more rarely public 
vice, can remain hiddciL Antonio Mougitore* describes this scene 
in a tliicic volume, and both by his words and opinions shows him- 
self a devout partisan of the Uoly Office. PiHiscd as he has been 
for his other works, and, above all, for the Dibiiotlteca tSiciliana, 
he is a glaring instance how the mild character of a student in 
the pursuit of literature, can he perverted by the errors of his 
times, and by the want of toleration peculiar to hia position as a 
canon of the cathedral 

In tho year 1730, there wore 'indications of a renewal of 
hostilities ; for France, Spain, and Kngland, incited by the secret 
intrigues of Hanover, were preparing armies and Beets, and the 
Emperor Charles vi., warned of their designs, sent a frrsh supply 
of soldiers to reinforce llie States of Milan and the Siciiioa. That 
same year, when, by the death of Benedict xut., Clement xii 
ascended the Papal thi-one, tho celebrated king, Victor Amedeus 
resigned his kingdom to his son Charles Kmanuel, and retired into 
private life in the castle of Ciiambery. Some years previously, a 
greater monarch, Philip v., Itacl reliuqukhed hk kingdom, to pass 
his life in devout exercises (as he professed) in the castle of Sau Ilde- 
foQSO ; but after eight mouths, upon the death of hts sou Louis, 
he resumed tlie crown, and governed as feebly and with as much 
duplicity OS before. Amedeus Hkcwtso soon grow weary of his 
retirement at Cbambtfry, and wished to resume the govcrnmenc, 
but he was opposed in his project by the king, his son, who soon 
afterwards sent him a prisoner to the castle of Hivoli, and thence 
to that of Moncaliori, where he died miserably in confinement, 
denied tlic sight of his friends, and even of his wife and son. 



' Anbinin Mungilon\ bora kt PakniM, 
1663; becnUiittdtbflprieMbiMd. wMnude 
ft CMOu vf iIm Mtlimlnil, And bwftme otio 
rf Um jadgw «r (ho ili<fct>ep. anJ councillor 



of thaHiJv Offic«. lid diA.) 1713. Hit 
life TU devoUd to anliqaafimi nwarcb, 
ftud bo piiUiiiiiil nftii.v' works. 



20 



HISTOltr OP TUB KINGDOM OP NAPLBSL 



in. 



After two years' nrppnrations (1732-3.^), the Infant of Spain, 
Don Cliarlefl, arrived in Italy to ahow himself to his future subjecU, 
the people of Tuacaoy, Parnin, and Piaccnsa. A ningulor cere- 
mony tool* place in the royal palace of Spain at Iiis departure ; 
the day lie was to leave, King Pliilip and his Queen Elizabeth 
received liim seated upon their thrones, in tho presence of the 
whole Court ; and tlie Infant Don Charles, as was tho custom of 
his family, knelt down before his father, in toVen of filinl respect, 
while Pliilip, making the sign of a large cross over hig son's he«d, 
raised him to his feet, girded on a sword, richly adorned with gold 
and gems, and addressed htm in these words : " This is the sword 
which Louis iiv., my grandfather, placed at my side, when he sent 
mc to conquer these realms of Spain ; mny it bring thee entire 
success, without the calnmity of a long war." Kissing him on the 
check, he then dismiasoil hitn. Soon after the departure of Domj 
Charles, five large French armies, conducted by the old Marshal 
ViUara, descended hy as many route* into Italy, and renewing the 
war in I^mbardy, met with signal success. Upon this a power- 
ful fleet of Spanisli ships weighed anchor from the ports of Leghorn 
and Loiigonc, and an army collected in the States of Parma and 
Tuscany, cither nominally or actually under the direction of the 
Infant, with the Count di Montemar as his adviser, approached 
Naples in a mcuaclog attitude. I will defer tho account of this 
enterprise, which was the commencement of iho new State, to a 
future chapter It is here sufficient to mention, that before the end 
of the firat half of the year 173a, all the country and inhabitants 
of the Two Sicilica had fiuhmittcd to Kiiig Charles of Bourbon. 

In the events of past history to which I have hitherto re- 
ferred, 1 have only described the governments of Naples and Sicily 
as they were bandied from dynasty to dynasty, by wars and con- 
quests ; were 1 to pause here, the reader would be presented with 
nothing but scones of violence on the part of the great, and of en- 
durance in the people ; but the growth of civilisation amidst such 
frequent changes of government, or rather the condition of the 
laws, tribunals, finances, and administration, as well aa tho state 
of the army and church, and the tenure of fiefs, are matters of 
greater imporlauce. It is indeed imjiossible to give their his- 
tory from beginning to end, which would exceed the limits of this 



1734. 



CHARLES 0? BOURBON. 



81 



■work, and the ability of the writer, but I may here state what 
they were in the year H-'H, when Charles of Bourbon ascended 
the throne of the Sicilies. 

Witli tiie fall of the Roman empire fell its laws, and titsy vfim 
followed by tlie written lawn of the Lombards. When Ihla people 
were vanquiahod by the Normans, their laws acquired greater 
authority, because retained by an enemy and conqueror. Though 
at first scattered, they were subsequoutiy collected in one volume; 
but whosoever may chance to read the copy preserved in the 
arcliivcs of tho Trinita duHa Cava, must not expect to find a 
tuettiodical arrangement of legislative matter, since the division into 
codes is an invention of moJoru science. The laws of Home con- 
tinued valid with tho clergy, but, though preserved by the learned 
for their wistlom and traditional worlli, were not in force under 
the secular government, where the king gave his commands, the 
judges pronounced Bontcnce, and the claims of the cititens were 
decided according to the book of the Ijombard laws. 

Though the authority of this last-mcniioncd code declined, after 
the Pandects of Justininn had been read and commented on in 
tho schools of Itnly, it was still in use, and was increased by the 
addition of the Norman laws : Roger added thirty-nine, William l 
twenty-one, William ii. three, all under the namo of Conatitutiona. 
Wlicn the kingdom passed to the house of Hu-ahia, Frederic, dcair- 
oua that his laws, united with those of the Normans, should be 
promulgated, collected ihem in one book, called after him, " Tho 
Constitutions of Frederic ii/' The compilation of written laws 
was afterwards increased by chapters added by the race of Anjou, 
and by the PraffmcUic Sanctivus^ of the Arnigoncse aovoreigus, and, 
when the kingilom became a Spanish, and afterwards a GcmtaQ 
province, many laws under the designation of Prafjmatic Sanclions, 
were issued by the kings of Spain, the emperors of Germany, and 
by their viceroys. Amid.H all these changes of government and 
legislation, several cities continued to govern themselves by usage. 

Wlicn Charles of Bourbon, therefore, began his reign, there were 
eleven modes of legislation in existence, by all of which the king- 



* ftiymatic Smittioiu. SolomnDccrreRi 
ft term wed in •rvi-rat d«eiea baoou* in 
kulofj, but alwA^i applied «b«DU itoport- 



ant quntion vu (kcidi:!] bj Ute ddyotic 
Ti-rdict of (he soYemgn. 



£2 



HISTOKY OF THE KISODOH OF KAPLBS. 



i:u 



dom was governed ; some were the decree* of princes, otliera 
ancient laws wliicli had »ot yet been revoked, and others again 
the authority of usage. They were the ancient Roman law, tho 
Lombard, the Nornmn, the Swahian, that of Anjou, the Arragonefte, 
the Spanish Austrian, the Gcrmau Austrian, the Feudal, the Ec- 
clesiastical, by which the vaat number of peraona, and extensive 
property attached to the Church were govcruod ; and the Greek, 
consintin;; in usages practised iit Naples, Amalli, Gaeta, and other 
cities which had at one time been ruled by officials appointed 
by tho cniporors of the Eaet ; besides other uaages in Bari, and 
placca w]iic)L traced their origin to Lombard grants. These nu- 
merous modes of legislation neutralized one another, and the rights 
of the citizen, as -u-cll as the decisions of the magiatraLcs, were 
neither in accordance with rules nor any fixed law. 

Tho magistracies of the kingdom consisted of one judge in every 
community, one tribunal in every province, three in the cities, one 
council called the Culiutcral Couucil, to assist the viceroy, and 
another callod >thc Italian or Supreme Council,' which resided with 
the king in Sjiaiii,-who& tho Spanish monarchs ruled in Naples, 
and in G*ruiany when tho Gennaiis reigned. As the forms of 
procedure established under Joanna ii. were too meagre for their 
purpose, any deficiency was supplied by usage, or still more fre- 
quently by the arbitrary will of the viceroy ; and as the power of 
the magistrates was not clearly defined, any doubt respecting their 
com|)etency was decided by the command of the Sovereign. Thus 
mailers appertaining to the Judicature became involved in those 
of tho administration; right and power, the magistrate and the 
government, were often confounded. In short, the i^jnoranco of 
an ago in which subjecta believed themselves the la^^ful servants 
of their superiors, and rulers did not esteem it an injustice to arro- 
gate to themselves supreme power, produced an excess of servility 
ou the one side, and despotism on the other: this system was dis- 
played in its greatest deformity in the way in which trials were 



^ SaprtmeCouneilofltai^. The Afliiin 
9r thi! IiaIIkii pTantircii wm ilircclvO '\»y « 
StiprcnioCoiincnresiiiinKftiMiutHd.tbougb 
inclmliug, lii-iid0iiSimiiiarJ*.MPV<:riihiativi.-a 
urilaly. Under (liu Elu&nl ilood ibr- fnur 



ivRklcDl Vicoroys of Na)»ltf9, Mitan, Sicily, 
aitd S*niriii4i, wUo wnrv itiTiiHAb)}- Spnniili 
nal]«a. — Ilal4/ ami tht Italian ttUimU- 
W. Sjialiiing, vol- ii, p. 3iS7. 



ITU 



CHARI'KS OF BOURBON. 



£3 



conducteil, nnd in tho decisions of the Judges. The disorders here 
enumerated created a confused and corrupt court of law. Any 
one from tlie lowest of the people, bv awuming the law^-cr'a gown^ 
oould call liinisclf an advucate, and was admitted to plead in 
defence of the rights or porsous of the citizens; and as neither 
study, oxamiiialiou, practice, nor diplomas were requisite for the 
exercise of this lucrative profession, the importunate ewann of 
lawyers multiplied daily. 

I must now turn to the finances, one of the most important 
branches of government, and which modem science endeavours 
to place under such regulations, and to guide by auch philosophical 
maxims, as to enable it to maintain the power of the slate, and. 
the prosperity of civilized life; hut in the times of which I write, 
it was usual to employ indiscriniitiate violence, setting aside 
order, moderation, and justice ; wliicli, while ruining private indi- 
viduals, was no benefit to society. All property was taxed, as 
well as articles of congumplion, and ever^'thing which indicated 
wealih, even dress, food, and the neccsaaries of life without limit 
or reason, the only object conaidored being, how to raise tho largest 
sum. Under the Xonnnns and •Swubians, atid <luring tlie least 
oppresAJvo reigns, of William tho Good, of -Frederic ii., and Man- 
fred, the barons, clergy, and chief persona in every city, met in 
F^ltamcnt, and fixed the sum to be paid into the exchetjuer; hut 
this exercise of political rights became less frequent under the 
Houses of Aujou and Arrsgon, and ceased entirely under the sordid 
rule of the viceroys, wlio had reason to fear a-isemblies of men, 
and interchange of thought; or if tho rulers sometimes confided 
the task of proposing new taxes to the municipal corporations 
(S^ffC),^ it was only a stratagem to avoid the danger and obloquy 
of the hatc*l law. After every imaginable tax had been imposed, 
and yet neither their rapacity satiated, nor the necessities of the 



' Scfffii, the muDirifial corTtorfttiffn tn 
Mch«f Ui« prinripAl lomift. TtiHc &Fgjri, 
Sedili, or Plucv;, were of rxt reuie onihiuttv, 
ud "'ere roodellGil od councils o( ihv Munv 
wrt in lliB lurlmpfiilis. Evcrr city hwE 
aevvnl, all of wlvicb (»c«t>l one iu NApIn, 
and IB m few oilier plac^) were eoaipAKd 
exeliMvaly of nolk ncmUin. uid UcU 



parity of pfttridon bluoJ indtspHiaAUe in 
a iit]« of adiuuiiun. We OiMMver ftppli- 
cation* by the CiMwn to Ui<> Heyyi aa «arly 
Ml 1449, lud llivra i» a-o nrcord at t]»ir 
liaiiDg rcfuwtl Ui votv any Ux aaboJ ibeiu. 
—Itaty amd tlte Italian l*ian44 W. 
SpnUing, 



SUte ptovidod for, tliey resorted to extJ-eme meaEUroi, (HsBipatiug 
the property of the Crown, selling titloa of nol^ility And offices, 
converting the mosl eminent cicies into fiefs, mortj^ging' the future 
revenues of the exchequer, or altcnftting them in a manner called, 
by a Spanish term, Arrcndamenti.' 

The administration of the communal laud and revenues was 
not bettor provided for than tliai of the finances ; by the consti- 
tutions of Frederic ii., and tlicrcforc from a very early period, 
thoy had been confided to a syndic and two cletii, chosen by the 
people itL so general a Parliament, that none were excluded from 
voting, except women, cliildrL-n, the debtors of tlie community, and 
those rendered infamous by a judicial sentence, or by their Uvea. 
They met on a certain day in summer in the public square, and 
the choice wus dctemiined by acclamation, as it was seldom neccft- 
sary to count the names in order to ascertain who was elected. 
This franchise liaving no parallel in the other iustttutions of the 
country, and being in advance of the political education of the 
people, was a source of license anil tumuUa. Only two forms of ad- 
ministration were recognised ; that of the municipality and that of 
the Sovereign ; the numberless relations of municipality to mu- 
nicipality, to circles, districts, and provinces, were neglected, or 
provided for by pMuUar arbitrary rules. The administration of the 
kingdom, in which the supreme will of the Sovereign was neither 
led, regulated, nor controlled, by any code, wanted that necessary 
guidance of law which is ilio sure rojid to political freedom. Public 
works were few, and tho money which under a well-regulated 
government would Iiavc been cxpondeil for the common benefit, 
was turned to the profit of the exclicqucr; tho only new buildings 
were convents, churches, and other religious edifices, or monuments 
of regiil splendour. The arts, therefore, were few and unimportant, 
and there was only one road in the kingdom, that to Kume. The 
commerce carried ou by sea wiih foreign nations was insiguificant, 
and there was no traffic by land ; the rivers overflowed their beds, 
the Woods were grown into wild forests, agricuUure was lu a pri- 
mitive condition, the flocks and herds wandered over the country, 
and the population was wretched and decreasing. 

' Arrendamenti, tlie iiiirclHue n»<]« b;* |>rirat<i individu^ of the right of Millect- 
Ing ihu puUk n:vctiu«. 



ITMi 



CUARLKS OP DOURBOX. 



25 



I 



I 



Bjr a strange aberration in tlie history of tlic hiimaD intel* 
lect, letters and the sciences revived tn the midst of all this 
political mifterr ; not, indeed, from any care on the part of the 
Government, for in this, as in all tliat woa beneficial, the rulers 
were indolent, or opposed to progress, but by a fortuitous, or rather 
providential circumstance, the birth of several men of great genius 
about the same time. PamcnicoAutiKio,^ PielroGiaiinone.'Gaetano 
Argento,* Giovan Vinccnzo Graviim,* Nicola Capasso,* Niccolb 
Ctrillo,'' and more than it would be poasilito to name, were born 
towards the end of tlic seventeenth, and lived in the first half of 
the eighteenth eenlury ; a light to their own and succeeding ages. 
At this period tluumhcd Giovan Battiata Vico/ a man-el of learn- 
ing, hut whose fame was posthumous, because while admired by 
all, he was not fully comprehenJed by any ; as years piisa on, he 
is better understood and more honoured, a proof that the obscurity 
in which he wrapt his moaning was either intentional, or that hia 
works must wait their full development for other times, and a 
eourse of study more in harmony with his theories. 

The militaiy institutions were even worse than the civil. No 

qwtaliomi wliiili <Iowti to lijm wctt coft- 
fltdeiod to be resolved, or I o be ioMhiblc ; 
vlio liM carried llw inTtMlgatians of s cri- 
ikiam tli<! lUMt [Dire|tid iuto tlM-UMBU 
bv nil oBtiqnil; rwprcU<J ; wSio ttimf bcol 
liiniiclf bcloTK MUiiliahed [>r«jtidic« ; who 
boa ftccgi»]iti>hc>l Ihfi tloiiMc rulrrpri»a (if 
deatrejing uid roconatrncling DDJTcraal 
hiMoT^; who liM tTvnIcd u|>aii nil (ke 
wchntm without Lwiiig pr«ci«p|y tuqii^inteJ 
with tuty ono, and vtliu W|iwBlIiei] la cAch 
of them aoRis TecuKd UNrhing; iIm in«B 
wbo liu almi>at diviscd «11 the dlscoivriM 
of Ibe uincternth ccnliiy; wbo, ■|(peTtali>- 
ing to ftn a^ »iid acouni rjr wbcnlu 1 boti ^ht 
woa ii<:Ti.-r fWe, araarnl to igniirv tliat the 
aajring uf nverrlliini; to rvot^bodjr waa to 
ezpoao bimaoir In l<c comprrl^i-niicil t>j no- 
Ifudr; the man whoac gvoiuH r«>cnt]a ifcc 
michif intfllwla uf Ptutu and An»i«tle, 
dcacrrec to la fullowe^l atap Yy »U'p in the 
do*«lii]>m«Dt uf hia ([lorioiia intcUigenoe, 
aui9 in the viciantndca of tiio Innf; nnd uo- 
\i*\>fy hl«."'(j LTDDov's TjQK* o/ifankiiui, 
C 



*- l/omttu^a AhUm, ulebratcd for hia 
uqDuauiiM vtUi orimal tugukgu, bia- 
toty, tad munlmiattca ; lorn U lIa|rk^ 
l«;d, Uied 1717. 

* Pl^lro OwniKM*, tiifi historian of 
Napka; bant 1070, died UIO. 

* Outtwo Arf«mlo, « CaUliriiU) lawyer 
aad mogiatru* of gmat iGomin^ ud & 
I»bvn(*riilenry ncD. Tbolnvaduftiian- 
naii«. 

* Oiovan Pmomio Gmvhui, a critic, 
monlitt. ud poot; boru 16^, ilinii 1718. 

* ifieala Oapa—o, a poet, who wrote ta 
tlie Xnpulilan dialect; born 1671, died 
11*6. 

* yiteok (SnBo, a Iwrnvd phyiridao, 
Fellow of tbo Royal Sot-iaty of Loiidon 
wh^n Nnwlou nan rnkiilL-iit ; horn 1671, 
died ]7M. 

' Oiovat liatti4ta Vie«, « jttriat, fkiW 
aofiiKt, hiatorian. and ar{lic; \f<ni Iti64, 
&m&n**: "llie&uiiiwliohuaaBlii'ipalcd 
hy ■ rvutury ibo momm-nta of niad to- 
wanljt oiailFni acieuoca, wbu liaa laiscd <ip 
VOL. I. 




26 



BISTORT OF THE KINGDOM OF XAPLES. 



ITU 



meaD9 were too lawless to be made uso of in ilie levy of sol- 
diers. Briber; and corruption were not spared ; a selection wan 
made from condemned criminAU and other priaoneni ; Tagabondd 
were soizod, and the vaasals of feudal lords forcwl to serve at 
the arbitrary bidding of the borons ; the only fair means by which 
to recruit an army, namely, selection by lot, was not employed. 
The worst characters of the city were thus chosen to fill the most 
honourable profession the citizen can hold, and were sent (o dis- 
tant wars in Italy, or still more frequently into Spain, where, in 
the Sjraniah uniform, under a foreign standard, they fought for a 
name and glory not their own. Whilo Neapolitans were engaged 
iu a perpetual and inglorious war, Naples was sunk in the torpor 
of sluggish servitude ; there was no system of militia within tlio 
country, which was guarded by foreign soldiers, at a time when 
the natives were obliged to submit to a foreign discipline in the 
land of the stranger ; the arts of war learut abroad, were useleu 
at home, and the blood and sweat of our countrymen »h©d HO 
glory on us : Thus military discipline, military habits, excrcitos, 
tradition, fame, and sentiment were M-anting, and the name of 
aoldicr, so honoured in other lands, was in Naples associated with 
the idea of suffering, and was held in abhorrence. 

Feudalism itself had lost the sense of honour. Its decline 
under the rule of the viceroys, was not caused by laws, nor by 
any intention to debase itfl power, but by its own corruption, and 
the depravity of the rulertt. Tlio barons, no longer warriors, 
and neither the props nor the antagonists of thrones, had become 
careless of those deeds which excite admiration in a generous 
nobility; they were Inzy and domineering within their castles, 
where they revelled iu the tyranny ihcy exercised oi-er degenerate 
vassals. The avaricious viceroys nieuulime sold fiefs, titles, and 
high offices, and raised the lowest people to the baronage pro- 
vided they were rich, thus degrading the feudal dignity. On the 
arrival of King Charles of Bourbon, therefore, the feudal land- 
holders, though powerful in the eye of the law, were in themselves 
base, corrupt, hated and feared ; not feared for their greatness, but 
for their crimes. 

Wo have yet to spe&k of the Church. Whoever would desire 
to give a true and detailed account of the lives and actions of the 



1734 



0UABLE8 OP BOUBDON. 



27 



Popes, must includo tbo political histoiy of nil Italv ; for that of 
the Poutificatc is cloaely interwoven with wars, treaties, revolu- 
tions, changes of government, and with the arrest anil even retro- 
grade movement of civilisation. In t)ie kingilom of Naples alone, 
the intrigues uf the Popes firet impeded and then extinguished 
all tlie political advantages coaferred hy the Swabian race ; the 
Popes rendered the evils inflicted by the race of Anjou twofold, 
and nourished the civil wars under the Arragonese monarchs. 
Nioolas in. conspired in the Sicilian Vespers ; Innocent Ttu. 
planned the rebellion and the baronial war against Ferdinand and 
Alphonso ; Alexander vi. did not disdain to conspire with Baja- 
zet, the Turkish sultan, to disturb the peace of the Christian king- 
dom of the Sicilies, and during the long course of the viceregal 
government, the Popes kiudlcd discord now among the rulers, and 
now among Ihclr subjects, whichever best served to advance the 
monstrous pretensions of the Chureh. 

It is a decree of nature, or rather of Divine Providence, that 
those who prepare evil for others, fall into the snare them- 
selves ; and the worst of these popes were likewise the most 
miserable and unfortunate. The Pa^Kicj- suffered great adversities 
during this period ; hardly had it recovered from the divisions and 
scandal of the schism, when tlie doctrines of Luther, and the Re- 
formation followed, with the unhappy wars and imprisonment of 
Clement nt, the refusal of the kings of Christendom to accept 
all the acts of the Council of Trent, or the bull of Co-na Domini ; 
the revival of the so-called monarchy of Sicily ; the revolutions of 
Naples caused by the Inquisition ; the dismissal of the nuncios, 
and the abolition of the Court of Nunciature ; in short, the open 
revolt of tlie civil power, and of public opinion, against the domi- 
nation of the Cliurcli. 

The pontifical pride would have boon sttU further humbled, hod 
it not been supported in its decline by now orders of monks, and 
by its enormous wealth. As there is no census belonging to this 
period, many facts, important to history, remain unknown. It 
vrotild be necessary to learn the exact number of ecclesiastics, and 
the amount of their possessions, in order to estimate the iufluence of 
the priesthood over the people ; but the most diligent research and 
long study have proved insufficient for this purpose, because the 



2d 



UISTOUY OP TilR KINGDOM OP NAPLBa 



ITU 



writers of that time, if devoted to the Churcli, Aslinmcd of her ill- 
gotlen wealth, gave a faUe statement, and tliose wlio were her 
enemies endeavoured to increase the scandal bj eiaggernting tho 
truth. Between theae rontradictor; reports, I will offer the most 
probahlo conjecture. In the kingdom of Naplca alone, the eccleai- 
ostics iiumhored about ono hundred and twelve thousand ; namelj, 
a arohbisliopa, 116 bishops, 66,500 prieata, 31,800 friars, and 
23,600 nuns. Thcrerorc in a state containing four millions of 
inhabitants, the ecclesiastics were in proportion to the population 
twcnt}^ -eight to every thousand ; an excess which was injurious to 
morals, becauso they were under tho vow of celibacy, and to in- 
dustry and national wealth, as the/ were all idle. The city of 
Naples alone maintained 16,200. 

The most cautious writers reckon the possessions of the Church 
at two-thirds of the property of the country, exclusive of the royal 
domains ; while others (who, however, nmintatn that they are 
better informed) affirm that four parts out of five were enjoyed by 
the Church ; but both statements are exaggerated. 

At the time of the arrival of King Charles of Bourbon, the 
Apostolic Sec claimed supremacy over kings and kingdoms, as 
arrogantly as in the times of Gregory vii., hut as its moral influence 
had dtmini«heil, this was only supported by the number of ocele- 
aiastics, and by their inordinate wealth. 

Briefly to recapitulate the matter contained in this chapter: 
Tlie temporal power of the Church was as strong as ever; reli- 
gious faitii as great, or greater tlian fonnerly, but faith in the 
ministers of religion and the pontiff ircakcned ; tho feudal sys* 
tera entire, but tho feudal lords contemptible in the eyes of the 
people ; there was no army, and the civil administration was firan- 
dulcnt and full of errors ; the finances were exhausted, poor at tb« 
present moment, and with the prospect of becoming still poorer; 
the codes of law were confused, and the tribunaU filled by a vast 
asMmhlflgc of intriguing and corrupt lawyers; though the Kea- 
politana were the slaves of many prejudices, they wcro opposed tA 
tho fallen government and desirous of better. Therefore necessity, 
the opinions and desires of the people, a new dynasty, and the 
interesls of the new king, as well the geniiLs of the age, all invited 
reforms. 



ira*. 



CHABLB3 OP BOUBBON. 



CnAPTER IL 



COXQDEST OF THE SICtLFSS RY TRB INFANT CHARLLI OP BOUBnON. 



Orarlks, a son of the prosperoua and arrogant House of Spain, 
waa born to Philip v, by Elizabeth Farncxe, in an age of warn 
and eonqtieats, in the jear 1716. The eldest ehiM hy the accent! 
marriage, he was without a kingdom. His haughty mother, 
who could ill brook the lesser appanage of her sons, and who. by 
lier superior intellect, ruled the slate and the king, who was fear- 
less in disasters, yet knew how to bend before adversity, succocdcil 
by bold wars and wise treaties, in obtaining; for Chartc8 the dueal 
crowns of Tuscany and Parma. In 1733, ber hopes were re- 
Awakeued/ and she caused armies and fleets to be prepared to 
conquer the Sicilies. The youthful Charles was enjoying^ the 
pleasures of sovereignty in Parma, when he received iiitiraattou by 
official letters from Philip, and by private lettoi-a from the queen, 
of new schemes, and of new and powerful agents to in&ure their 
success. Spain, France, and the King of Sardinia were leagued 
together against the Empire ; a numerous French army, under the 
direction of Berwick waa crossing iheltliine ; French and Sardinian 
troops, under Villars, were descending into Lombardy ; Spanish 
infantry was disembarking In Genoa, and cavalry and horses were 
on their way to Antibes ; while a powerful and numerous fleet 
roled the seas of Italy. The Spanish forces were to be under the 
direction of the Count dl Montemar, but, for theIionr>uranddi;;^l(y 
of the name, were placed under the supreme command of the Infant 



* Bjr Uw mmr in Banptt for the nwoe*- 

don u> Uie PoiMh ihmoa, eoal««bH] hj 
Aaguiu, ElMtAT of Bttxaay, aaa of Aaciu- 
tns n. KiB^ of PoUnd, wLwm cUimi wen 
«ii|)|)Orteil by Uw CuurU of Vnn&a uiil 
St. Pvtonlnir^, and SUnialoui [»i-aini>ki 
I'dlalijw uf PcM^ es-kiiig of PoUnd, uid 



father of Hari« Ixxnnski, qnorti (tf I.nui« 
XV. of FruM, coiinii to Philip of Spun. 
EliMlxHh iMsed M ibiN pnrtoxt to inT»de 
the Auatriaa daniaionm, and obuin Nnplra 
fif tor too Chorlaa.— Sc« Toc-iiwuill^, 
Siynt <J0 lAfuit XT., Tol- i. p- ST& 



30 



BISTOSV or THE CiyODOM OF NAFLES. 



AM 



Don Cliarles. Tlie aim of thi» enterprise was to vanquisli tlie 
imperial troops beyond the Rliine ; to drive tliem out of Lombard^, 
and to conquer the Sicilies ; " which, when raised to the rank of 
an independent Icingdom," wrote the mother to her son, " shall 
1>c thine. Qo, then, and conquer, for the fairest crown of Italy 
awaita thee." 

Charles was at an age (neventeen years) when a man is moat 
easily excited by harmless ambiiioa The son of a king inclined' 
for war, and of a queen insatiable in her thirst for power and 
greatness, e^r for a more extensive empire than the Duchies of J 
'Tuscany and Parma, and abetted in this enterprise, though 
covertly, by Pope Clement xii., he entertained no doubt of his 
right to the Sicilies, which he claimed by the ancient dominion of 
former kings of Spain, as well as by the mure recent dominion of 
his father ; aud be commiserated the Sicilian people, of whoso 
sufferings under the imperial government, oxaggeratod statements 
were circulated in the palace of Philip ; therefore, right, retigiun, 
humanity, aud his own interests alike urged him to this ent<rpriBeL 
The excellent dispositions with which he had boon bom, had been 
hlimteJ by the contagion of a court; but kind-hearted by nature, 
and possessed of an understanding above his years, ho was just 
and charitable to his subjects, temperate, though aspiring ; affable 
in his manners, with an agreeable countenance, roLust and toll in 
person, and fond of manly exercises and the art of war. 

Whilst the Sponifth troops were collecting in the neighbour- 
hood of Sienna and Arczzo, and the Spanish fleet was trans- 
porting soldiers, horses, and artillery, tho Infant assembled a 
council of his most illustrious gcncraUat Parma, to determine the, 
plan of the expedition to Naples. After appointing a regoDcy, 
aud promulgating ordinances for the good government of his statoa^ ' 
he departed, followed by the prayers of his people, and amidst all 
manner of rejoicings. Once more at rioreucc, he visited Qian 
Qastone, the last aud declining Grand Duke of tho House of Medici, 
passed through Sienna and Areazo, and arrived in Perugia, in 
March 1734, reviewed all the troops under his command. Sixteen 
thousand infantr}- and five thousand cavalry fron^ tlic kingdoms of 
Spain, Italy, and France were there assembled under Moutemar; and 
among the most distinguished officers were the Duke of Berwick, 



1734. 



CBABLBfl OF BOURBON. 



ai 



of tbe blood of tbo BrltUh kingti, tlic Count Ac Marsillnc, a Frcncli- 
TDAO, many gmndeiis of Spain, and the Duke of Kboli ; the Prince 
Canicciolo Torvlla and Don Niccolo di Sangro, Neapolitans. The 
Infant Cbarles was seated during this rcvlenr, and Hurrounded hy 
a numerous court, n-splendcnt in rich dnuses and banners. The 
Count di Santo Stefano, fonnerly preceptor, and now the adriser 
of the Infant, was present, as well as the Prince Corsiui, nephew 
of the Pope, the Count de Cliarny of the blood-royal, and at lea«t 
a bundret^l dukes and barons ; among them, attired in the simple 
fashion, and with tho modest demeanour of a Tuscan, was Ber- 
nardo Tanucci, tho year before an advocate in PLsa, and pro- 
fessor of law, who had found favour with Charles, by his high 
attainments in liis science,* and had been appointed auditor of the 
Spanish army, and councillor in tho civil affairs of the kingdom. 
The eminence he afterwards attained leads me to add further, that 
he was bom of poor parents, in the year 1 6d8, in Stia, a small town 
of the Casentino ; he was by nature endowed with talents, which 
wcro improved by study, and was a man of liberal views for his 
limes, when to oppose the pretensions of the Papacy was con- 
Bidercd liberty. Such was Tanucci, in Pisa, and in duo time 1 
will relate wliat he became in Naples when raised by Cbarles to 
the position of prime minister. 

After the review at Perugia, the army sent on towards Naples, 
was well received in the Pontifical States, and was maintained with 
honour. They were met by the Pope's legates, some of whom 
remained with the camp, whilst others were detained near tho 
person of Clinrles. But, although the court of Home was inclined 
to wish success to Spain, yet, remembering the mutability of fate, 
she concealed her favourable disposition from the ministers of the 
Emperor. Montcmar, fearing lest tho imperial squadrons should 
come up unexpectedly behind his columns, strengthened Iiis rear 
by a strong body of troops, and proceeded in such an order that he 
could turn the greater part of his forces to any fronL 



' TMiiiccintract«lthflnfltiwofCh»rf<w 
tn iIk C>llt)«in^ niaiiiiflr. A mylAunnt 1h» 
Spniub arm; comiDiilnl k arime, ud 
HWgbt rcfugA in • chorcli, but vm UTOted 
by orl*r of the king. TIm) Tmkui clergy 
iaktftRil,<JaJaii>KiRUDUDilj'orUi«ctiarcti, 



whrR THnnct'i, tlipD s pmteaaar U Vim, 
■appcirtMl ihe loyid anlliurilv, and (Imimmi- 
rLrated Iht «buiic of r<-cl(^»ia*lii:al imiaii- 
nillM^ Mperislly in criminAl tiuM — i/r- 
moirea Sunti dt* Covn Je CJUiIh. 



ss 



RISTOItT OP TUB KINGDOM OP XArLBA 



im. 



Wtien the report reached Naples, that a Spanish amij was 
advancing against tho kingdom, tho people were agitated b; 
new hopes, and the imperial tninistcrs by their fears, while pre- 
parations were made for the reception of the enemy. Giulio Via- 
conti was viceroy, and Count Fmncis Traun commanded the forces, 
and as tliey were unable to conceal the danger, they thought l^ at 
once declaring it to weaken its effect. The viceroy issued an edict 
proclaiming war; and, summoning tho Elctti of the people to meet 
him in the palace, he ocq^uainted them with the hopes, means, and 
intentions of the enemy, as well as his own; he assured them 
that the fortrcsBes were well supplied, the garrisons strong, troop* 
were expected from Sicily, and in still greater numbers from Ger- 
many, an army of twenty thousand imperialists, conducted by the 
valiant Marshal Mercy, was in the rear of the Spanish army, and 
he trusted to the people's attachment to tho Emperor, and to the 
Divine aid in a ju^t cause; he proceeded to entreat the Eletti to 
co-operate with the government, by increasing tho store of provi- 
sions, by maintaining tho fidelity of the commonalty, and by pay- 
ing the promised donation of six hundred thousand ducats into tho 
exchequer. The replies of the Elctti were humhlo yet coniident, 
and as is usual with the representatives of a discontented pcopU 
in the midst of present dangers, promised succour at some distanti 
tinia 

Tlie viceroy convoked another council of war; Count Traun and 
General Caraffa, a Keapolitan iu the pay of tho Emperor, were of 
opposite opinions. Traun proposed to distribute the troops in tlie 
fortresses ; thus force the enemy to several sieges, and by opposing 
detached portions of tho anny to lam iu ditl'erent places, pro- 
tract the war, until the arrival of aid from Qennany. Caraffa ad- 
vocated a bolder course ; to diminish the garrisons of Pescara,, 
Capua, Gaeta, and Sant' Elmo, to evacuate and demolish th« 
remaining fortresses and castles, to form a sufficient amiy to with- 
stand the enemy, and to await the arrivnl of succour, while skir- 
mishing in tho open field ; thus avoiding any decisive action, 
unless military reasons could he assigned to prove victory ccrtun. 
The opinion of Traun prevailed. The fortresses and castles wero 
well garrisoned, a strong camp was formed in the pa.ss of Saa 
Hignano, protected by entrenchments and batterieSj while nicssen' 



17M. 



CHARLES or BOl'ltBON. 



gera were sent to entreat tlio Emperor to hasten lila succours. 
Twenty-five thousand Germans were dispersed throughout the 
Two Sicilies, to oppose the united axmj of Charles, which was 
inferior iu numbers, and without the aid of strong places or forti- 
fied iKwitioiis. 

At the sanio time, the viceroy sent envoys into the provtncea to 
raise troops, to collect treasure and provisions, and by arming 
every city and village, provide for the defence of the kingdom. 
These envoys were selected fiwm the htghe«t nobility. The civic 
guard likewise was organireJ in the metropolis, and the chief cities 
of the kingdom. A regiment of Neapolitans was raised, composed 
of volunteers, and of men levied at the care and expense of the 
Duke di Montcleonc-Pignatelli ; finally, by enlisting as soldiers 
men who had been conlined in the prisons, or fugitives guilty of 
crimes, arms were placed in the hands of every Neapolitan subject, 
good or bad. 

Tyrants have the presumption to expect their 8ul>joct3 will serve 
them as slaves, yet defend them as heroes, forgetful tliat by the 
eternal law of nature, sooner or later, cither in their own persons, 
or in those of their descendants, they will pay for the cruelties they 
have practised against the people, at iho price of their kingdom 
or their blood. 

All that Visconti had hitherto ordered, though ill-judged and 
inadequate, had not exceeded the limits of law, but worse fol- 
lowed. Some of Iho nobles who had spoken iu uouncil with 
freedom for the good of the State, were, by his onler, without trial 
or examination, sent into continemeut in Qermany. Much of the 
private money which had been deposited in the banks, or paid into 
court, was confiscated to tlie exchequer, and the city was forced 
by throats to disburse a hundred and lifly thousand ducats. In 
the midst of so much violence practisetl toward the people, the 
deference shown to ecclesiastics incurred the more odium ; when 
asked to tend their assistance to Government, some gave but little, 
while others wholly refused, yet they were neither forced to pay 
nor reprimanded. The vicCM^ucen, who was in infirm health, de- 
parted with her family to seek shelter in liomc. The aroliives of 
the monarchy were sent for safety to Gaota and Terracina, and the 
viceroy himself made secret prepftrationa to quit the city. 




BISTORT OP THE KINGDOM OF KAPLES. 



mi. 



The Spanish army proceeding onwanls, traTcncd the Statoi 
of Rome, without attempting to enter the city, as the Infant 
had been roq^uestod by the Pontiff to avoid all collision with the 
amboasadors of the Emperor; and passing along by the road of 
Valmontone and Frosinonc, they had nearly reached the frontiers 
of the kingdom. Before their arrival, however, more Bpaniah 
troops had landed on the territory of Naples. Count Clavico, tfao 
admiral of the Spanish fleet, having weighed anchor from the porta 
of Longonc and liCghom, arrived with a powerful aniiunient before 
the islands of Procida and Xschia, which immediately surrendered ; 
for, these islands being incapable of defence, the garriBoaa had 
shortly before been withdrawn, by a wise precaution of the GiHJ 
rcmment. The ialandcra welcomed the conquerors, and twor»' 
fealty to theLifanl: whilst Spanish shipa, cruising and fighting 
along the shores bordering the city, roused the hope* or feara of 
those within, according to the side they had embraced. 

The Neapolitan)!, bcg;inning to hold communication with the 
officers on board the^ic ships, a great number of the edicts of 
Philip v. and Charles were dispersed throughout the city. Philip 
announced that ho had resolved upon this expedition, for the 
aakc of the people, oppressed by the harsh government and 
exactions of the Germans ; he reminded them of the joyful wel- 
come they had formerly given him,andhcexpresscd his confidence 
(in spite of contradictory appearances, and the nceeaslty they were 
under to control their feelings), that his subjects nero still faith- 
ful; but if cluingod, he was ready to pardon their misdemeanours 
and treason. He promised to confirm the piivilegcs of the city and 
of the kingdom, and even to increase them ; to abolish the bur- 
dens imposed by the German government, to dimiuish others, and 
to rule the State as a father; and ho hoped in return, to receive 
from his peoplo tho obedience and love of children. CKarlee swore 
to fulfil the promises made by Philip, and added, that the ecdeai* 
astical discipline should continue under the same good regulations 
they had hitherto pretwrved, and that no tribunal should be added 
10 those already in existence. Thu* the fear of the abhorred inqui- 
sition ranifthcd, and the interest of the large class of lawyers was 
seeorod. The edict of Philip was dated from the Pardo, the 7th 
February, that of his son from Civita Castcllana, the 14-th March. 



173L 



CnAftLBS OP BOITBBOK. 



M 



Tlie Spaniah army having passed tlic frontiora at Liri without 
oppoaitioD, halted one day at Aquino, and three at San Gcnuano. 
^c Germans having resolved upon thetr plan of operations, waited 
the approach of the enemy in the fortresses and castles, increasing 
their stores of arms and provisions, and tlie strength of their 
garrisons. Count Traun with ftre thousand soldiers, held the 
entrcnchmcnta nf Mignano; and the viceroy, while ilrainiiig the 
country for fresh supplies of money, awaited coming events in A 
state of liamssing suspense. An occurrence which shortly followed, 
in the night of the 30th March, accelerated the good fortune of 
the Spauisli army and the defeat of their opponents. Some moun- 
taineers of Sesto (a small village), well acquainted with the forests 
which rise above Mignano, offered to conduct the Dukoof Eboli at 
the head of four thousand Spaniards, secure and unobserved, to 
the flank and rear of the German lines. The offer being accepted, 
rewards promised, and punishments threatened, the Spaniards 
reached the place, and sent intelligence to the Count di Montemar, 
in order that at the hour predetermined, the attack on the enemy's 
camp in the front, flank, and rear, should commence. The cannon 
of MontenuLf was to give the signal for the Duke of Eboli to 
advance ; but a videtle of Germans, having discovered the party, 
» speedy messenger was sent to Traun, informing him of the poai- 
tton of tlio enemy, and exaggerating thotr numbora, Tlie German 
general, who had beliovod these mountains inaccessible, having by 
fresh scouts ascertained tho truth of the report, broko up his 
oompj spiked tlio heavy artillery, burnt the carnages, and in tho 
night withdrew his troops into the fortress of Capua, abandoning 
iu tho hurry of his flight the rest of his cannon, baggage and 
materiel, which became tho spoil of the Duko of Kboli, who, at 
daybreak, perceiving the entrenchments deserted, descouded 
tho hill, and sent the joyful intelligence to the commander-in' 
chief 

When the affair of Uignano was reported in Naples, with alt 
the exaggerations added by fame and party spirit, the insolent 
populace gained courage ; and as the Spanish fleet always con- 
tinued in sight of the city, the decks covered with soldiers and 
banncn, tho viceroy perceived the danger of further delay, and 
deported at sunset on the 3d April, with his Germans and 



9S 



HI3T0RT OF THE KINQDOM OP ITAPLBS. 



17U. 



MziUsrics. They escaped like fugitirev, without the customarr 
honours or prucliLDintions, through the least populous parts of the 
i»tj, in the direction of Avellino, and from thence to Pug^ Tbe 
magistrates and the militia took cUa^ of tbe cltjr, which was lefl 
without a head or meaus of defence. 

After having been six days upon the road, the Infaat ar* 
rired at Maddaloni ; thus alowly advancing, on purpose to allow 
time to spread reports of the g:ood diioiplinc of his armr, and the 
liberality of the new prince. Queen Elizabeth F^mcse, enriched 
by the treasures lately arrived from Mexico, had given part to the 
Infant for the conquest of Naples, and he distributed them in a 
manificent spirit and with a lavi^ hand among the people : be paid 
for his provisions, bestowed gifts and alms, and, aa was customary at 
that time, frequently di-sircd money to be tlirown in handfuls amidst 
the multitude. Entering the city of Haddaloni, he was met by a 
numerous body of Neapolitan nobles, who came to offer their ser- 
vicea aa a guard of honour ; the Kietli of Maples uext followed, 
deputed to present him with the keys of the city, wish him suo- 
ecss, and promise fidelity and obedience : they concluded their 
haran^o by asking tlie confirmation of the privileges of the city. 
Cliarlea replied in Spanish, and confirmed their privileges in bis 
own name, and in that of hia father, the King of Spain ; he spent 
the rest of that day in the presence of his people, shooting the 
pigeons which had built their nests in the towers of the ducal 
palace ; and for many consecutive days he was engaged in the 
cbase, as he had likewise been at AUfi aud San Gcnuano: for 
neither the anxieties of war, nor the cares of goverumout, could 
ever divert him from his favourite passion, which as he grew old, 
hardened the heart of this good prince, often cast a blemish on 
his virtues, and oven sometimes exposed hts life to danger. 

The following day, the lOtb April, he removed his quarters 
from Maddaloni to Avcrao, and held a council to consider tbe 
•ligencies of war and of the kingdom. He appointed the Count 
di Charay his lieutenant, to restore order in the cities and in the 
prorinccs ; commanded that the tribunals, suspended during the 
agitations of war, should resume their functions, and sent Count 
Maratllac with six thousand coldicrs to occupy the city, land the 
•lege artillery, and lay siogo to Baja and thrco of the forts; aa 



IT3L 



CHAKLES OF BOURBON. 



a? 



the fourth (II Camiinp), vaa without a garrison, and stood with 
open gntes. Other ugimdrons vrere encamped on the plains of 
BeOBa, to hinder the gnrrisona of Capua and Qacta from commtini- 
cating Trith the provinces, or maliiiig sorties in search of ]irovisions. 
Laatly, the main body of the army waa sent towards Puglia, 
to attack ibo viceroy, who having united his troops with those 
of General Caraffa and Prinra Pig-natulH, and with others arrived 
from Sicily and Trieste, was scouring the provinces witli eight 
thousand soldi^s. fiut the Duke of £bo)i, who conitnauded the 
Spaniards, was advancing slowly, watting the assault of the castles 
within the city, and these obstacles removed, to have more troops 
at bis disposal, in case of need. 

After a short siege, a breach being opened, the fort of Baja 
surrendered on tbo 2."{d of April ; the castle of Sunt' Elmo yielded 
on the 25tb, and the Castollo dell' Uovo on the 2d May. The 
Nuovo held out rather longer (only because the assailants changed 
the plan of the siege in the midst of their operations, and invested 
it by another side), but on the Glh May it opened its gates. TIic 
garrisons of the four castles were all taken prisoners. The Spanish 
army only lost a few in killed and wounded, and was amply com- 
pensated for this loss by the abundant supply of provisions and 
artillery found there, which last they immediately transferred to 
the siege of tlie larger fortresses. At t}io time these castles were 
built (useful in their generation), they were adapted to the weapons 
of the period, and to the science of war as it was then commonly 
understood. They are now only a waste of men and of provisions, 
citadels to be turned against the people, and a protection and 
cnconragemcnt to tyrants. When, in some future age, the rulers 
of Naples, protected by law, justice, and order, do not fear rebel- 
lion, it will be the wisdom of iho government to enlarge the 
small castle of Sant' Elmo, so as to enable it to receive a strong gar- 
rison of 3000 soldiers, and demolish the three remaining castlci 
of the city, leaving only the battortca for the defence of the 
harbour. 

The metropolis being now delivered from every vestige of the 
past government, the Infant went there in regal state on the 
10th May, amidst oitmordiuary rejoicings of the people, for their 
hopes in the new sovereign were great, aud their jo*y was increaaed 



S8 



HISTORY OF THE EINODOU OF NAPLES. 



tm 



by til© gold and silver coin which the twaatirer scattered pro- 
fusely in the streets of the city. Charles made his entry in the 
morning by tho Capuan gate, but being desirous of Rnt returning 
thanks to God for his successes, he descended in the suburban 
church of San Francesco, ntid remained in that monastery until 
four in tho afternoon, when ho entered tho city, mounted upon a 
charger, and attired in a rich dress, adorned with magnificent 
jewels ; hia Brst care was to visit the cathedral, to receive the 
sacerdotal benediction from the hands of Cardinal PIgnatelli, 
to join with devotion in the sacred ceremonies, and to adorn the 
statue of St. Januarius with a costly chain of rubies and dia- 
monds. Having completed this sacred rite, he continued his way 
to the palace, and, paesiug before the dungeons of the Vicana* and 
of San Giacomo, lie received the Iceys, in achnowledgnient of his 
sovereignty, and commanded the doors to be thrown open, and 
the prisoners set free — an act of magnanimous folly. The city 
was gay with rejoicings ; tho troops lining the streets, or placed 
as sentinels round the palace, belonged to the civic guard, and 
fireworks and illuminations lasted throughout the night. 

But the feBtivitics within the city did not put an end to the fear 
of war, which was still mging in Lombanly. The neighbouring 
and rich island of Sicily continued to pay tribute to the Emperor; 
au imperial army occupied Puglia, and the largest forircssca of 
the kingdom were gunrdcd by numerous garrisons, led by cele- 
brated captains, who defended the standard and dominion of the 
Empire. Tho viceroy was expocttug large reinforcements, and 
it was said that already 6000 Croats were on tlie eve of arriv- 
ing at Uanfredonia, while tho people, who now sidod with the 
Bourbons, would undoubtedly change with fortune. Tho state of 
the kingdom appeared favourable for Charles, but was not secure. 
Count Montemar, therefore, having visited Capua and Gaeta, and 
pressed their blockade, marched with fresh troops towards Puglia, 
and, joining the Duke of Eboli, formed an army of 1 2,000 soldiers, 



' Tke Vtearia,oaca xiic rvtidcocrof llic 
yoraui lungB; cwiloJiu vnriaua cuiirt« 
ot Juittce, the ftrrfairci of tlie kin^Jom, 
dowiHsU,avUwidAlicUvrtlieMt«nii;us 



of llii> hoiiM oTAiyoa.nni] l!i« CoDtlttQiions 
of Frmlcric n. Tlic tltingcooi Icluw, »tiU 
in DW, arc dcKritwd br nert>\ *uiton m 
Ivalliauioe ubxnJvd vCmuer^ and vioa. 



mL 



0HAB1.E3 OP DOU&DON. 



39 



infiinlry and cavaliy, supporfcd bjr a lai^c fleet, wliicli sailed clooe 
in to shore, accclemtiog or slackening their epced, and regulating 
tlioir moTcments by those of tlie anny on land. Tlie Infant, 
meantime, employed the arts of peace to advance bis cause ; he 
iBBued au edict, fiuuimoniug all the barons of the kiugdom to 
swear allegiance to the new government, within a gi\*en time, and 
threatening defaulters with imnishmeiit. The following day, the 
I5ih June of the year 1734, he published the decree of Philip v., 
who thereby ceded his ancient and newly-recovered rights to the 
Sicilies, now united into one independent kingdom, to his son 
Charles, bora of his happy nuptials with Elizabeth Farncse. The 
new king caused himself to be proclaimed, Charles, by the grace 
of God, King of the two Sicilies and Jerusalem, Infant of Spain, 
Duke of Pamia, Piacenna, and Castro, and Hereditary Grand 
Prince of Tuscany. Ho designed the royal arms, by annexing to 
the national arms of the two Sicilies three golden lilies for the house 
of Spain, six azure for that of Tuscany, and six red balls for that 
of Medici. Thecivio festivities and the festivals of the Church were 
renewed, and the king added another to the popular games, in the 
Goooagna,! a vast macliine, intended to represent the Garden of 
the Hc8]>crides, covered with rich gifts, i«hich, as all were allowed 
to enter, while (he access was made intricate and the prixe difficult 
to reach, was meant to tempt the cupidity, or call forth the dex- 
terity of the people. Charles, from the roof of tlie palace, was, 
with youthful ardour, enjoying the sight of the amusing incidents 
of the game, when part of the machinery, which was ill constructed, 
and laden with people, suddenly fell in on one side, dragging down 
all upon it, and crushing those beneath by its weight. Many were 
killed, some hundreds wounded, and tlie square was soon emptied 
of spectators. The king issued a decree, forbidding similar gamea 
in futurCL 

The first act of the sovereign power was to create Bernardo 
Tanucci Minister of Justica On the arrival of the Spanish army 
in Puglia, the viceroy, alarmed, and really incapable of conduct- 
ing a war, went on board ship and departed, taking with him 
Qeucral Caroffa, accused by Cuunt Traun, and summoned by the 
Emp«ror to Vienna to be reprimanded and punished — an unworthy 

I (^ungmt, m tall pole from Iba lop of wliicb prim an Mnpended. 




40 



HISTORY OP THK KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



im. 



return for good advice offered and rejected. Prince Bclmonte re- 
mained at tlic head of tho Qcrnians, who vrcro SOOO soldiers, ad- 
venturers rather than regular troops, from various countries, 
epeakiug different tonguca, and most of them new to discipline and 
war. Ijelmonte having stationed his troops in the Basilicata and 
Puglia, took up his ovru quarters in Basi, not from militai^ reasons, 
but for his pentoual convenience, since there were no strong works 
attached to the walls of that cit^. On the first appearance of the 
enemy he accordingly^ quitted it, leaving a small garrison, and 
encamped his army at Ditonto, a stronger city, from its defences 
being in better condition, and from its ha^ng a fortified castle, 
and long lines of ditches and walls extending into the country, 
which, though originally meant for agricultural purposes, were not 
tJio less useful in defence. He placed 1500 soldiers in the city, 
who were unfit for field warfare, and ranged the rest of his troops 
behiikd the walls and ditches, posting his cavalry to the right of 
tho army, and converting two monasteries, which lay at tho 
extremity of his line, close upon hia wings, into castles. Tliis 
done, ho waited the attack of tho enemy. 

The Spaniard also turned the head of bis columns from Ban in 
tho direction of Ditonto, having more numerous forces, all accus- 
tomed to war, liit) cavalry, double the number of the enemy, and 
on abundant supply of artillery. Arrived in sightof tho Germans, 
he pitched his camp, mid the next morning, tho SCth Muy 1734, 
he caused his men to deploy, extending bis lines beyond the 
enemy's front, and opposing infantry to infantry, and horse to 
horse ; tlie rest of his cavalry, of which he had a supcrabuudance, 
were ordei-ed to scour the country to the right, and be prepared 
for any emergency, lie made a trial of the Ocrmans, by attack- 
ing them with a small body of hia men ; but, meeting with ro- 
sistance, he retreated in disorder, hoping that the enemy, gaining 
courage, would quit their defences in pursuit, but, as Bclmonto 
was not deceived by these feints, Montemar trusted for victory to 
open battle, and, Advancing liis infantry, aiul urging on his horse, 
he commenced iiriiig, sounding tho drums and trumpets to the 
charge. At this sight the German cavalry were seized with panic, 
and, after some little hesitation, broke up in disordered flight to- 
wards Bari, all, except Coloucl Villaui with his 200 hussars, who. 



im. 



CHARLES OF BOUttBOX. 



41 



I 



retreating, but in onlor, took the road of the Abruzzi, and found 
shelter in Puscara. The departuro of the cavalry, so unexpected 
and 80 rapid, that it luid the appearance of desertion rather than 
flight, di&concorted the rest of the troops, and, finally. General 
Belmonte and Prince StronguU (another general in the pay of thu 
Emperor) abandoned the camp, and followed the fugitivea. Tlie 
victory of Montemar was clear and decisive, for though the battle 
lasted tvro more hour« by single combats, which were both useless 
and inglorious, it was only because none remained in the imperial 
camp to give the order to surrender. The two monasteries were 
taken by storm ; that same day the city and castle of Bitonto 
yielded, and on the next their example was followed by Bari. A 
thousand Qermans had been ki11c<l or wounde^l, and the remainder 
made prisoner*. Tlio conqueror obtjiincd in booty their arms, 
artillery, and baggage, while twenty-throe standards graced his 
trophy. The Spanish army lost 300, killed and wounded ; the price 
of a kingdom and of the glory of Montemar, gained lega by his own 
deserts than by the errors of the euemy. 

The uews of the battle of Bitouto caused the surrender of all 

the castles in Puglia without a struggle, except those of Brindisi 

and Leece. A large body of Spaniards wore sent to the AbruuL 

Montemar, with the rest of the troops, returned to Naples ; three 

thousand five hundred German prisoners passe<l into the pay of 

Charles ; and fresh succours in men, ships, and arms, arnvcd from 

Spain and Tuscany. Tlie commencement of his reign seemed daily 

more happy, and the festivities within the city were renewed. 

B When Montemar arrived, he went to the palace, where Charles, 

^ as was customary, was scate<l at tabic in public Tlie king. 

with a radiant countenance, ba<lc the conqueror welcome, and 

Montemar bowed respectfully in reply. fTliarles then asked him in 

Spanish (wliich he always spoke when at a loss what to say), 

" What news do you bring, Montemar T' " That your enemies 

have been obliged to yield before your arms ; that all, killed or 

prisoDer^ do honour to your victory ; that your troops fought with 

equal valour, but that the Walloons were most envied." Those 

around, who bad been surprised at the unmeaning question of the 

_ king, admired the noble answer of the Count The following day, 

I Charles bestowed upon him rewards, honours, the title of duke, 

■ VOL. L D 



» 



At 



H1ST0RT OP THE KINODOU OP NArLES. 



17M. 



aod the jwnnanent command of Castcl Noovo. Tie ancrvardt 
caused a solid pyramid to be erected on the field of Bttonto, on 
which waa inscribed tho success of the battle, under what kin; it 
had been fought, by whoso arms achieved, and tho name of the 
commander ; a monumeatj if we may credit history, rather to pride 
than merit. 

AH the cflstlea of tho kingdom yielded in auccosaion to the 
Spanish arms ; and tho small German garrisons passed into tho 
service of Charles. Tho island of Lipari, menaced by Spanish 
ships, gladly accepted the n«w government. The Uige fortresses 
of Pcscara, Cnpuo, and Qaeta, alone continued to hold out ; but 
on the 29th July, Pcsc&ra capitulated. The fortifications, although 
constructed according to tho rules of modem science, wore defectiro 
in lines and reliofs, as well as wanting in outworks ; yet, such as 
they were, they stood a long siege, nor did General Torres lower 
the imperial standard until a breach had been opened wide enough 
to allow him and his garrison to pass out, — an honour which he 
obtained in reward for valour, a virtue admired by all, but espe* 
cially by enemies in war. Nothing elae worthy of note occurred 
during this siege. 

Almost at the same time, on the 6th August, the fortress 
of Gaeta surrendered. According to ancient tradition, the first 
walls of this city were built by tho Trojans, and ^neas gave it the 
name of his nurse, who was buried there. It increased so rapidly 
in popnlation and wealth, that it could not be contained within the 
original walls, and was therefore enclosed by a wider eireuiL 
Alphonso of Arragou erected a castle, and Charles v. remarking 
the strength of the place, and theslzeof the harbour, which afforded 
a secure shelter for ships of commerce and war, caused the city to 
be surrouuded with fortified walls ; and in succeeding times every 
new king wished to add fresh works and his name ; so that, in 
178*, when it was besieged by the SiMiniarda, it was little loss in 
circiimference than it is now. It i.i situated on a promontory at 
llie extremity of an isthmus in the Tyrrhenean Sea. Tlie promon* 
tory slopes on three sides into the sea, and on the land aide deacends 
by a steep and abrupt declivity, which, widening into a plain be- 
tween the two shores of the isthmus, at last forms the valleys which 
lie between the mountains of Castellona and d'ltri. On tho 



I7». 



0HAHLE8 OF BOUJtDON. 



43 



Bammit of this protnoniorv ia a vory ancient tower, called tb« 
Towor of Orlando. The wails of the fortress follow ihe iuctiuatiou 
of tho ground, and are tliereforo built in zigzugs or stops, until 
thcj touch (he further shores on either side, forming bastions, 
curtains, and salieul and re-entering angles, so as to bo CAi>ahle of 
defence at every point. Modern science has been employed there, 
but with a deviation from ordinary rules, which were inadmissible, 
owing to the impediments pre8enle<l by the nature of the ground. 
Though these works are imperfect, they are not to be despised, as 
they require considerable skill cither to defend or attack. On the 
laud side, a second wall encloses the first, and is protected by two 
moats, two covered ways, and several places of arms. It is vul- 
nerable in two points only : in the so-called citadel (the Castle of 
Alphonso), and in tlio Bastion of the Breacli, thus named from its 
disasters. The outer wall (at least as much of it as remains] is 
cut in the hard calcareous rock. 

At the time when the blockade of tho fortress was changed into 
a siege, it coutaiiied a thousand Gormans and fivo hundred Neapo* 
litaos of the battalion raised by the Duke dt Monteleone ; there 
were scarcely any artillerymen, and the Neapolitans, therefore, 
from their noted dexterity, were trained to manage tho cannon : 
there was abundance of amxs, artillery, ammunition, and provisions. 
On the other side, tlie Duke di LiriA directed the attack with six- 
teen thousand Spaniards, provided plentifully with arms and 
mat^'riel The trenches for the siege were, therefore, in a short 
lime opened, and the besiegers, approaching the wall by covered 
ways, raised several batteries of cannon and mortars, by which to 
make a breach in the citadel, and silence the iire of the cannon 
from the fortreaa The ajiproaches were in progress, when tho 
Duke Monlemar arrived to hasten tho termination of tho siege, 
and enjoy the fruits of victory ; and a little later he was followed 
by King Charles, induced by the samo motives, and ambitious of 
military fame. After his arrival the firing became more brisk, 
and A breach began to appear, the shells carrying dcstnictiou and 
terror into tho city. The Count of Tattemlnich, the governor of 
the fortress, in a council of his ofBeers, proposed to surrender, but 
was opposed by his subordinates : the comniander of a fortre^n 
ia in a miserable and humiliating position when any of the 



44 



niSTORY OF THE KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



im. 



Iieaieg^ are more unwilling than himself to demand terms of 
accoromodatioD. But dissentient opinions and dlitcord. added to the 
tottering state of tlie defences, at length induced tlie necessity of 
yielding to the enemr, and surrendering the fortress entire. Ottly 
ft fcTT had been killed oa cither side, and nothing had been per- 
formed worthy of record. The fortress of Capua, though closely 
blockaded, now alone in the whole kiugdoni still hoisted tho stand- 
ard of the Emperor, Tho Germans were commanded by Count 
Traun, the Spaniards by Count Marsillac ; the generals were ]>er> 
sonal friends ; they had been both companions in arms, and foct 
in other wars ; one had been prisoner to tho other ; they had beea 
buffeted by fortune in various ways, but had always secretly 
maintained their friendship. 

The present good fortune of Charles was increased by tho 
victories of the French and Sardinians in Lombanly, and by the 
rare constancy of tho European powers In their league against 
Austria. Tlio Ocrman army in Italy was almost totally destroyed' 
by the battle of Parma ; Prince Eugene, with his small force, was 
not sufficient to confront tho powerful armies of Berwick and 
d'Asfeld on the Rhine ; England and Holland maintained their 
neutrality. Tho Gennanic body rendered little assistance to tho 
Empire, and could not bo relied on, and Itusain, although friendly, 
terminated all her views and the aim of tho war itself in Poland. 
King Charles feeling himself now secure and powerful, while pre- 
paring an enler])rise against Sicily, turned his attention to the 
affairs of tho kingdom. Ho received tho oath of the eletti of tlie 
city, confimicd the oaths of the barons by edicts and religious core- . 
monies, and formed his ministry, council, and court, of those most 
distinguished by name, birth, or wealth. lie appointed the 
magistrates, gracioualy received the envoys of the Emperor, who 
had been sent by the viceroy into the provinces, and despatched 
thither envoys of his own ; men likewise of uoble birth and station. 
Uc pardoned many delinquencies, and consulted ihe Se^i upon 
the burdens to be removed. As a king he naturally favourod 
the nobility ; and as no third state had yet arisen, and the people 
were at that time composed of nobles and ploUoians, the favour 
shown the former proved beneficial to all ; for the barons, either 
from gratitude for the advantages they enjoyed, or because they 



mi. 



CHAKLES OP BOURBOK. 



45 



were dazzled by tlic splendour of the palace, or because tbeir am- 
bition was llattereii, came to reside in tbo city, and tbus relieved. 
their vassals from tbeir presence, and learned tbe customs and 
forms of modem civilisation. Out suspicion and violence came to 
sully tbe beneficent acta of Charles. A few partisans of tbe 
Emperor still remained in tbo city, men such as arc generated 
under any government, weak, contemptible, desiring the victory 
of tbeir party, and deceiving their own hopes, more than those of 
otherB, by spreading false reports of war and politics. Long mocked 
by fortune, and diminishing in numbers and audacity, tbey were 
growing disheartened by despair and their own insignificance, 
when tho car of tho rulers having become more accessible, and 
their pride increased by success, several juntas were formed, one 
in tlic city, atLd others in the provinces, called d'Inconfidenza, 
intended to punish by secret trials and arbitrary verdicts all the 
enemies of the tbruue ; thus designating a small body of unhappy 
men, and couvortiug disappointed hopes or vain aspiratioiiti into 
eomity and state treason. Among many others, Bernardo Tanucci 
was judge in the junta of Naples, an ofRce unworthy bis station or 
name ; but the first steps of ambition arc blindfold. 

The Segg'i of the city had been invited to meet in council, to 
propose tho abolition of some of tbe imposts. Grateful to Charles, 
and ambitious of his favour, tbey requested bim to continue the 
present taxes, though acknowledging that their burden was already 
intolerable : and further to accept from his people a million of 
ducats, which they offered him as a donation. Thus was the 
national property defrauded, to gratify tho passions and interests 
of a body of men, who but imperfectly represented the whole king- 
dom ; for the king, in order to supply what was needed for the 
approaching expedition to Sicily, while returning thanks to the 
council, confirmed the taxes, and accepted tbo giA. Soon afterwards 
these same Scggt imposed fresh burdens on the nation, llic too 
frequent repetition of simikr acts, either by the senators, or iliu 
king's councillors, or the ministers, produced a desire on the part 
of the people to obtain some effectual means of putting a slop to 
these proceedings in future. 

I am anxious to call the attention of the reader to this fact, that 
a» my work advances, I may prove to him how convulsions in 



«6 



BISTORT OF THB KINGDOM OF NjIPLBS. 



wjciety always proceed from remote causeft, grow up unoWrr* 
and only manifest thcmselvea wUen they are irrelrievable. Should 
life and strength be granted mc for the completionof mydeugn, this 
history will further prove, that the subsequent opinions, wishes, 
acta, and revolutions of the Neapolitan people, were the necessaqL 
consequcncca of the changes they underwent at this period. fl 
Tlio enterprise to Sicily was deteniiined on, and the prepa- 
rations completed. Tlio Manjuia Rubbi was the Emperor's vice- 
roy in that islaTid, and as tlie plan of campaign was the same 
in both kingdoms, — to light the enemy behind walls, the Prince 
of Lobkowitz conducted tlie defence of the citadel and forts of 
Me«s)na, the Marquis Orsini of Rome the fortress of Syracaae; 
and General Carrera that of Trikpani ; a small body of Germans 
garrisoned the castle of Palermo, and the rest of the fortresses of 
the island. The people, thougli acknowledging the Emperor, were 
favourable to Charles, partly from their usual love of novelty, and 
partly from that ancient and well-founded hatred of the Germans, 
common to all Italians. The 8[>anish army of 14,000 men, well 
supplied with artiltery and other materiel, both for the field and 
for sieges, was rea<Iy to move, and a vast number of ships were 
ordered to cniiso along the ahores of the island. The Duke Monte- 
mar was appointed general-in-chief and viceroy for Charles, and 
the Count di Marsillac and the Marquis di Graxia Rcale, generals 
under him. They hoped to find the people friendly, and that for^ 
tune would prove propitioua The fleet weighed anchor from the 
ports of Naples and Dnja on the 23d of August ]7Si. When half 
way acroi<8 they parted company; Monlemar turned his prows to- 
wards Palermo, and Marsillac towards Mcsaina. When the fleet of 
S)Mun waa discovered from Palermo, the viceroy embarked for 
Malta, the Germaas shut thcrasclves up in the castle, and the 
people, unrestrained by loyalty or their fears, rose in tumult. The 
peaoe&ble inhabitants ran to arms for the security of the city, 
while the municipality sent deputies to Monlemar, messengers of 
submission and welcome. Preceded by the edicts of Charles, he 
landed on the 29th in the Port of S61anto, and entered Palermo 
the following day in triumph. The same happened at Mcesina, 
where, aa soon as the Spanish ships came in sight, the Prince of 
Lofokowit£ caused two of the castles to bo evacuated, in order to 



I7». 



CHARLES OF DOUBIIOK. 



47 



increase the forco in the citulel, and in the caatle of Conzagl^ 
which were all ho proposed to defend. The city, delivered from 
the (xcrman garrison, yielded it«clf voluntArity to Spain. The 
principal fortresses were soon an:cnrards besieged or blockaded ; 
the other forts yielded to menaces, or made only a feeble reeist- 
anco ; and all the island submitted to tho force of arms, or to 
edicts. Upon the publication of the news of the irreparable losses 
sustained by the Empire in Naples, Lombardy, and Germany, the 
Biciltans submitted to a fate which was inevitable, and the 
dominion of Charles was immediately and universally established. 

Whilst tho war still continued in Sicily, the fortress of Capua 
fell. The Spaniards, though threatening an assault, continued 
the blockade, certain that provisions must soon fail in so 
numerous a garrison. Count Trauu made several sorties into 
tho country, killed many of tho enemy, took many prisoners, and 
destroyed part of tho lines of circumrallation ; but not being 
able to obtain food, bis condition became daily worse, and bis 
valour, however estimable on the field, was useless behind walia 
Therefore, on the 24th Koventber, Capua yielded on honourable 
conditions. The Spanish commissioner found abundant anus, 
urtillery, and powder in the fortress, but the magazines of provi- 
sions exhausted, and tho hospitals full. The military reputation 
of Count TrAun was therefore increased by these losses. The 
garrison, consisting of 5100 soldiers, was conveyed to the ports of 
the Adriatic, and thence to Trieste ; but on leaving the fortress, 
and on the road, more than 2000 Germans passed over to Cliarles, 
for there are no troops in Europe more ready than these to change 
masters ; a proof of servitude at home, and the consequence of 
raising soldiers by compulsion, and in an arbitrary manucr, rather 
than by conscription or loL 

The Duke Hontemnr, called to tho war of Lombardy, departed 
from Sicily, leaving in his place tho Harquis di Grazia Kealc. The 
citadel of Mcseina soon afterwards fell ; the fort of Gonzoga had 
already surrendered, as well as the fortresses of Syracuse and 
Tr&pani. Nothing remarkable either for skill or valour occurred 
during these sieges ; but two incidents of the siege of Syracuse 
prove the simplicity of the timea When at its height, the general 
of the fortress wisjicd for a day's truce to repair his trenches and 



«e 



HISTOBT OF TUI KINODOX OF NAPLES. 



OTB. 



refresh liis soldiem ; he accordingly sent a message to the Spaniard 
in thcso words : " Geiienil Orstni, admiring the skill and perfection 
of the Spaniard in the conduct of sieges, aahft his consent that he may 
inspect bis works as a lc&&on to himself; and should he j^rant ttiis 
request, he further proposes that hostilities be suspended for the few 
hours in which the general will be absent from the fortress." These 
words BO flattered the pride of the Spaniard, tliat he forgot prudence, 
aad ft tnico being agreed upon, Orsini cume, Buvr, and praised his 
labours. He was afterwards entertained hy the hostile genera], 
and, amidst complitnenis and amusements, protracted his slay until 
night. The firing i-econimenced, and continued during the follow- 
ing days, when a shell from the Spanish camp hapi>eQed to lodge 
in the room whore General Orsini was at dinner ; at the prospect of 
such imminent death, he made a secret row to the holy patroness 
of the city, that if he should escape this danger he would surrender 
the fortrcRS ; the (thcll did not explode, and the fortress was sur- 
rendered. The war ended at Tiftpaiil Aa the e-astles of the Pre- 
sidti of Tuscany ha^l yielded to the arms of Spain, the conquest 
of the two kingdoms was completed in tho beginning of July 1735. 
In thcso ware, many Nonpolitans and Sicilians had followed the 
standard of the Emporor, while others hod followed that of Cbarleo, 
and thus foughc as enemies. It is one of the miseries of an 
enslaved nation to be divided in intercsls and aim. 

Before the war in Sicily had ended, Charles set out for that 
island, and traversing the Principato Ultra, Puglia, part of the 
Basilicata and Calabria, distributed with royal munificence the 
riches of America sent hita by his mother. While waiting for 
the surrender of tho citadel of Messina, he spent more than two 
months and a half travelling through tho kingdom, devoting much 
time to the chose, for which amusement the woods were prepared 
at a great expense. When hunting one day in tho neighbourhood 
of Rosamo, he was overtaken by a violent storm of rain, and 
sought refuge in a poor hut, where he found a young woman who 
had just given hirth (o an infant ; he desired tho child should bear 
the name of Charles, and promised to stand godfather^ presenting 
the mother with a hundred doubloons of gold, and assigning twenty- 
6ve ducats monthly for the maintenance of the child, until, at tho 
age of seven, he should be brought to the palace. 



I'm, 



CHi^BLBS OP BOUBBOK. 



49 



From the sliorcs of Falmi, Cliarlos emtarked in a splenJId rcuel 
for Messina. Prince liufl'o, ulio, with Woiiial pride, had been Ain- 
liitious of receiving liim on his fief in Scilla, disappointed in that 
hope, prepared for him a new kind of escort. Countless barks, 
decorated witli the signs of vcjoiuing and pence, went out to meet 
the king, and, ranged in a semicircle, accompanied him on bis 
way ; five of the richest gondolas were filled by the most beauti- 
ful women of that city, celebrated for beauty, gaily attired, some 
pulling lightly at tho oarK, some guiding tbo holm, while othcra 
sounded instruments of music, and sang in cadences, verses ex- 
pressive of joy and predicting the universal hnppincas. These 
sirens, intended to imitate the ancient fnblc, did nut, however, 
succeed in captivating Ciiarles, who, though young, was uf a sober 
and austere character. Thus escorted, he reached Messina, where 
other festivities awaited him. 

Two months later, he proceeded to Palermo by sea, as tho pro- 
posal of a land journey was frustrated by the rugged nature of the 
country, which iras wild and almost uninhabited. After a magni- 
ficent entry into the city, Charles, on the last day of May, con- 
voked the three Jiraeci or classes composing the Parliament (the 
barons, ecclesiastics, and all belonging to the royal domains), as 
well as such as were distinguished by their nublu birth or high 
office, to meet him tn tho eallicdral. After dovoully performing 
the sacred ceremonies, lie asccmlcil the throne, and in a loud voice 
(while resting his hand firmly upon the books of the gospel) swore 
to maintain the rights of the people, those of the Parliament, and 
the privileges uf the city. Having thus fulfilled his obligations 
as king, he called upon those present to swear obedience and feuttv 
to his government All took the oath, aod the saurcd compact 
between tho subjects and their sovereign was thus completed before 
God and the people. At the conclusion of the ceremony, prepara- 
tions were made in the same church for the anointing and corona- 
tion of Charles to take plncc three days later. This was performed 
in tho same manner as the coronation of the preceding eighteen 
kings, who had been crowned in that temple ; but in this instance 
with greater magnificence, and a more ostentatious display of 
wealth. Tlie rrown weighed nineteen ounces (fivo in gems and 
fourteen in gold and silver), and cost one million four hundred and 
VOL. X. X 



50 HISTOBT OV THE KINQDOK OF NAPLES. 1735. 

forty thousand ducats. Charles caused a great number of medals 
to be struck (the gold weighing one ounce, and the silver in half 
pieces), bearing the motto i^aiMto Coronationis Amio, which the 
treasurers scattered in handfuls among the people, along the road 
between the church and the palace. This took place on the 3d June 
1735. Four more days were dedicated to public rejoicings, and 
on the fifth, the king set sail for Naples, in a richly decorated ship 
followed by numerous vessels, and landed on the 12th, amidst the 
joyous acclamations of the Neapolitans, and feastings which lasted 
so long that the people themselves were satiated : after which 
Charles returned to the cares of state. 



ms. 



CUMlhVS OK BOURBON. 



«J 



CHAPTER III. 

THB BRIGS OP CHARLES PBOM TRB COSijUHST TO TUB TICTORy 
OP VKLLSTBL 



IT is impo&siblo to present tho reader with a consecutive nam* 
tive of the event* as they occurred during the reign of Charles 
in the order of time, cause, and effect, becnuse hia laws, some- 
timea proceeding from his dosira for tho public M-i'lfare, still more 
frequently dependent on tho convenience or will of his parents, 
or on tho example of Spain, sprang from different causes, and 
therefore wanted unity and stability of puqiosa During the whole 
of this period, everything m the Slate was ruled by a variety of 
pragmatic sanctionB or decrees, without any connectiug link, or 
any aim beyond that of providing for particular exigeuciea, and 
governing with despotic power. I shall tlierefore be obliged to 
give a summary of his reforms, in order that, while describing the 
condition of the subjects and their civil goveroment, it may appear 
how far they were indebted to the political science and wisdom of 
their rulers. 

As the chief disorders of the State were owing to defects in the 
codes and tribuiiaU, the tirst act of Charles should havu been tho 
composition of a now code, to rid the Neapolitan Jurisprudence of 
tho incumbranco of eleven modes of IcgiRtation ; but by passinj^ 
Bepanitc laws, he only added a twelfth, better adapted indeed to 
the circumstances of the people, but as imperfect and incomplete 
as tho former. lie dared not destroy established error : feudalism, 
a feudal nobility, tho pretensions of the clergy, and tlie jirivileges 
of the cities, were obstacles which he fenced round by measures 
for the mitigation or restraint of public wrongs, but which superior 
wisdom or courage would have removed. Tlie spirit of our age, 
indeed, in which wc are accustomed to behold the subversion of 



oi 



HISTOItY OP THB KINGDOM OP NAPLB. 



empires, nnd piodigica performed in tlie cauRC of civil libert?, 
measuring the ]iaat wilh tlic magnitude of the pre^tent, m&jr call 
that feeble, which wob great in a preceding century ; as posterity, 
in like manner, when readinj;: our liUtoiy, and fecliug how easy it 
would be for them to succeed where the effurls of this age prove 
vain, will accu8« us of apatlty and timidity, whose political error is 
rather, having demandwl too much and ventured too far. 

The civil junsprudt;noc uadcrwcnt no change. Alterations were 
made in the criminal lavs, but, dictated for special occaaion.'t, and 
in a spirit of indi8:nfltion roused by the frcfi«ency or barbarity of 
crimes, a due propurtion bctweten the act and its punishment iras 
not prcservtil, fo that an rquitnble and judicious acale of penalties 
was wanting. Trials for civil causes were slightly improved, but 
the discussion was always confused, and it was necessary for the 
solution of doubtful points to refer to the authority of the Sove- 
reign ; while all the arbitrary nets of the Viceregal G'ovemmcnt, 
the ajtpoiiilnjents of "Miniiitri Aggiunti"' (Judges cjttmordinary), 
and " rinieilii legali"' Qfigsii remedies), were continued. Tho 
Supreme Couiiuil of Italy was abolished ; tho " Collegio Collaterute' 
was converted into a Council of Stale, while the other tribunals 
remained as before, because the King had promised they should 
not be changed. The M'sicm of trial for criminal ofFcnceii was in 
no way improved ; while the inquisitorial system, the Scrivani," 
liiriurc. paid proofs,* arbitrary sentences, and the interference of 
the jirince, still continued. 

Tlicso defects, to which I ahalt again have occasion to refer, 
<«u»ed the number and ntrociiy of crimes during the reign of 
Charles. In the city of Naples alone, the judicial census numbered 
thirty thousand thieves. Homicides, inroads of banditti, and vio- 
lent acts of robbery, were frequent in the provinces ; and there 



' MimMri Jlggtuali, Extra joclgc* np- 
|NiJolcil \iy th» to^-crtign. 

* Jtimedii Ujfoti. Fcrma nr MoJea df 
trial Drdvml Vy tlio Kiv«rrjgn. 

* Serinani. Sttbunliiialc ufficiiUa In Ibe 
cnorta of Inw, fumcH}' Pin|<la}L-d (t>r lli« 
j>ur]iMe of ivirn-t iDtjuirT, auil ■rhu tljFn-l>v 
iocunvd general odfuiti. Serivtmi *rt now 



onknown in Naplvv, hkI tW naata iteclf ■ 
Dnarly foniullrii. 

* Pmil J'rvo/i. 1'fae prw'f* Imaglil. far- 
ward in a trial witit a1! [mi for hy tlic 
poTcrnnimt whieli cwricd on llir prMcrii- 
llcii. T|]« more lb« prunfii, tlicrcfort^ Uiv 
Biore ilie ^T^'mmont hud l'> ]jk;, and tls 
nor* Mvtrv wuj iId Gual iculciict fTo- 
iioiuic«d «n tbc HCCUkod pcnoti. 



nx. 



CHARLES OF DOUBBOy. 



53 



were no mjiny cftses of poisonlug In Uie city, tKat the king in- 
stituted a Court of Ma^tatracy called the C^tunbt de' Veleni 
(Junta, of Poisons), to discover and puiiLsIt tlic doliiiquents. Tliis 
crime was especially prevalent among women, from its lieinjj easy 
to tlie weak, while the strong arc more tempted to deeds of open 
violence. 

While sitch was the state of the codes of Inw within the hinjf- 
dom, Cileries, by meftM» of treaties abroad, secured lite interests 
of commerce. Ho made puace with the Ottoman empire, by 
the terms of which, and hy the reputation of hia power, hiwtilities 
ceased with the natives of Barbary ; and concluded new trentica 
of commerce and navigation with Sweden, Denmark, and Hol- 
land, while renewing the old with Spain, France, and England. 
He appointed as many consuls as there were openings for our 
oommcrce, collecting in one legislative code the regulations for the 
consulate, or the laws which defined the |>owcr and rights of the 
consuls over Neapolitans, and llieir obligations and claims in 
respect to foreign nations. Ite instituted a tribunal of commerce, 
composed of eight judges ; three of whom were magistrates, three 

'Iwrons well acquainted with commercial matters, and two mer- 
chants ; with a president, chosen from the tirsc of the nobility. 
This tribunal reviewed in appeal the sentences of the consuls, 
decided important commercial questions, and, because its decisions 
were final, was called Supreme. The laws passed fur cases of 
bankruptcy were so stringent, that tlioy might ho called tyran- 

'nical, Itad they not rather been a proof of iho moustrous frauds, 
and the corruption of the mercantile class. Another tribunal, 
under the name of " DcputaEionc di SanitJl" (Sanitary Commia* 
aion), guarded against contagion, superintended the LtuxuroUi, 
and provided, by as wise laws as the medical science of that time 
admitted, against all dangers to which the public health might bo 
exposed. Had these logishitivo enactments, wliich now exist in a 
variety of iiwtruclioDs and prngmatic sanctions, been niethodically 
Tcgistcrcd in one book, we should Itave had a full and complete 

rcommercial code, and might havo boasted of having been, by half 
a century, in advance of the other utatcs of Europe. Charles also 
founded a naval college, in which the build of ships was pre- 
scribed on an improved plan, a body of pilots waa formed, and 



94 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OF .NAPLES. 



173L 



artificers and ftailnra educated. As anotlier source of commerce 
and industry, he invited the Jews into liis dominions, who had 
been tolerated there tii early ages, but, persecuted by an ignorant 
people, had bwn fiiiall.v banished by a dceroo of Charles v. Tlio 
edict of Cliarlvs of iJourbon was both humano and an cxauple 
vroriliy to ho followed, lie granted them security of person and 
property, liberty of conscience, commcrcitit freedom, the rights of 
oitiaens, and a fixed place of ahodo in tlie city ; not as au instdt, 
as in other Chriatinii kingdoms, hut to aflbrd them a more com- 
modious and independent habitation. They arrived in groat num- 
bers, and with great wealth; thia Uiatory will hereafter relate 
their fate and end. 

The effect of these laws was immediate ; foreign vessels crowded 
our ports, and our marketa were filled with foreign goods ; but from 
the errors of our homo administration, the Neapolitan flag wa 
not nfieu seen on foreign seas. Our merchandise consisted in th»- 
fruits of the soil, which wcro locked up in the public magazines, 
and wore rotting in cellars ; every wind, every meteor, occasioned 
the fear of a scarcity in some produce, and hindered the export of 
com, oil, and wine, the only articles in which wo abound. It there- 
fore became necessary to support our commerce by money, and the 
government pcrcetTing this necessity, and believing in the fallacies 
of " the mercantile system,"' decided that foreign trade was inju- 
rious, and that in order to counteract this evil, they must burden^ 
merchandise entering the country with exorbitant duties, which 
were registered in certain statutes, called the tariffa of the customs. 
They were ignorant that such taxes are really paid by the con- 
sumers ; but ihcy soon found that the prico of articles rose, that 
provisions became dearer, that the value of production diminished, 
industry declined, and wealth decreased. 

In the midst of these cares, Charles, in the year 1738, united 
himself in marriage with Amalia Watburga, the daughter of Fre- 
deric Augustus, King of Poland, a youTi;jprincos« wlio had not yet 
completed her fifteenth year, modest, simple, aud devout. Ke- 



ihis Bjinrai WM, that " wenJtli coa«istedia 
tbo pncioB* iiin()il« ; l)i*t kIihI ia gninod 
in tniU lij oii« eitlioQ miut be loal bjr *n- 



oLhcr; uidtliatoiir^roiitolJetlianoeiTing 
iwtum* fnr rtir ex])uit< shonM be lo get 
miJDK; ini>l«iul of u»n;hniidiw — R^e Art. 
C'ommavt, Hotyehitfdia Britauiiica. 



);38. 



CHARLES OP BOCBDOV. 



» 



with Iionoura in licr passage through Gormaiiy, and vrith 
in the courts of Italy, she reached I*ortena upon our froa- 
tierA, whero the king awaited her beneath a magnificent pavilion, 
and in the initial of a splendour which was new t-o her. They were 
alike happy in each other's youili, in a prosperous kingdom, in 
their piety, in the sacred tie which united them, and in tlie inno- 
cent enjoyment of the pleasures with which they wore surrounded, 
rilled with awe and delight, tlie princess knelt before tin; king, 
who hastened to raise and embmce her, calling her his wife and 
hU quecu. They reached the city on the 22d June, but iIcferFcd 
the ceremony of their entrance uutil the 2d July. That day Ciiarles 
founded the Order of Su Januarius, which lias for its insignia the 
Cross, the points terminating in lilies, and in the centre the image 
of the saint in his episcop-il robes, with the Gospel, the instru- 
inents of his martyrdom, and the motto, /» aanguins f<»du9. The 
Cross is suspended by a red ribbon. The king is the grand-master, 
and there are sixty knights, chosen for noble descent or high 
atatioii. The statutes of the order are as follows : — To maintain 
their faith in the Christian Catholic religion'; to preserve inviolate 
their fidelity to the king ; to hear roa?s every day ; to communi- 
cate on the day of their inauguration, as well ns on the festival of 
the saint ; to cause a solemn mass to be celebrated upon the death 
of a knight, recite the service for the dead, and take theeoiiimunion; 
to frequent the chapel of the saint, and neither send nor accept a 
challongo for a duel ; to which, at a later period, Benedict xiv. 
added a full absolution for every knight, and a perpetual remission 
of sins on the days tn which the saint performed his miracle, namely, 
three times in every year ; plenary indulgences upon visiting three 
churches or nltara ; and some dispensation from the discipline of 
futing : statutes and concessions more worthy a congregation of 
monks than an order of kuighlhood. 

The king, who wa3 pious both in thought and deed, at this time 
favoured the Church, as much from his natural inclinations »a from 
motives of policy ; his ecclesiastical reforms, therefore, are more to 
his honour, and more surprising than any of his other works: for 
it was no disbelieving king, nor one whose conscience was un- 
troubled by scruples, who humbled the pontifical pride ; but the 
Infant Don Charles, who, in the ohurch of Bari, attired in the 



HrSTOBV OF THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



cflnoaical robes, officiated among the canotis in the choir, and irbo, 
clothe<l in humUe sackcloth, washed the fcot of the poor in the 
Church de' Pollegrini ; who performed masses to ohlaiD iadul- 
gencca j who every year composed and modelled, with his own 
hands, the group of figures and the cottage wlacU represented the 
nativity of Christ, and who believed in the eauctitj of two living 
men, tho Jesuit Father Vepe, and a Dominican, Father ilocoo, 
cunning and ambitious friars. 

I have already related how Pope Clemeut xii. temporized be- 
tween the Spaniards and the Germans, and as long as fortune 
was undecided, was prejiared to support her favourite. In the 
year l73->, on the solemn day of St. Peter, Charles, who wi 
already secure in the posscsision of the Two Sicilies (all the forw* 
tresses having been taken, the standard of tho emperor toni 
down, and his own coronation prepared in the metropolitan city of 
Palermo), sent the Duke inform Cesarini, ambassador to the pontilf^ 
with the offering of the " Chinea,"' and a sum of seven thousand I 
ducata in gold, the tribute of the kings of Naples. That samodaT, 
the Prince of Santa Croce, the ambassador of the emperor, pre- 
sented a similar offering to the Pope. These rival pledges of 
submisfiion were only strntngema on tlio part of both monarchs, 
each desirous tliereby to obtain his sutFrago, hb a proof of their 
Tight to the disputed kingdom ; but the war in Italy still raged, 
and tho result was doubtful. The oiferiug of the Infant waa new, 
that of the emperor habitual. Tho first could not bo received 
without a manifestation in favour of the donor, while silence was 
all that was required by the latter: liis tribute was therefore 
accepted, which was an offence to Cliailca 

Shortly afVerwatds, a tumult broke out in Home against the 
Spanish and Neapolitan officers, who had been sent thither to raise, 
men for the anny, and who, having incurred the public displea- 
sure, were threatened, attacked, beaten, and forced to hide from 
tlio infuriated populace. Tlio riot spread to Vclletri, uhero other 
recruiting ofliccni and soldiers from Naples were quartered. The 
excitement at length reached such a height in hoth cities, that in 
Ifsme five of the gates were closed, and tho rest protected by 
doubling the city guard ; while in Vclletri tlic town was fortified, 
' A while htnc pnwcnlvd as Mtct of bomng« bj tlio kingiiof Naples to Ifac Puf«*. 



tm 



CHASLBS OP BODKBON. 



«7 



ihe sireoh barricaded, tlio ciiy guard armed, and placed under the 
oommaiid of sixteen officere^ and overytliiiig jircpared for conflict. 
As soon 08 Charles waa iiiformod of what luid happened, ho recalled 
his ambassadors from Rome, and dismissed the Pope's legato from 
Naples. The Spanish ambassador left Ilomc, and the nuDcio, who 
had shortly before departed for Hpain, was informal that he would 
not be receired within that kingdom ; he therefore remained at 
Ba/onue. All appearances wero warlike. Meantime, the soldiers 
who had been driven from Velletn ruLurued, and having assaulted 
And gained possession of the feebly guarded city, killed several of 
the inhabitants, threw a larger number into prison, disanned the 
rest, and imposed a tribute of forty thousand scudL They next 
proceeded to Oatia, ranitaclccd the shops there, and sot fire to the 
huts of the wretched salt manufacturers ; then suddenly falling 
upon Palestrina, only consented to abstain from sacking the town 
on receiving a sum of sixteen thousand scudi. They would have 
proceeded to worse excesses, had not Charles, less from a desire 
to put a stop to this license, than from a detcrniinalion to com- 
mence hostilities against Rome on a larger scale, ordorod his 
troops to abandon tlic Papal territory, and bring with thorn the 
prisoners and arms taken at Vcllotri. 

The Pope appealed to the sovereigns of France and Austria ; 
but the first returned evasive answers, while the latter, after re- 
miudiug him of his want of faith towards the Empire, oiTured, 
itovertheleas, to send a large army to the defence of tlie ApostuUc 
See. Clement refused the utfer, and condescending to humiliate 
himself to the act of supplicatiou. softened the rage of Charles ; 
the prisoners taken at Volletri, and throe Trasteverine Romans, the 
leaders of the riot (who had been sent to Naples at the rcqnost of 
the Govemmont), after a long imprisonment and a public acknow- 
ledgment of repentance, were pardoned and set at liberty, but 
their arms retained. The wrath of the king waa rather smothored 
than extinguished. 

The Minister Tanucei, and several Neapolitans of equal eminence, 
now considered the hour propitioua to revive the claims of the 
State and of the king. The Abato Genovosi,' who, although ox- 

* AhaU OmoBtti, nM of the nuwt it*. Sn)«mo in the kingiloni nf NuiJes t TIX, 
luigoiikud philuni^ra of Italy, born dcu- dicJ lTtf9. 



58 



HISTORY OP THE KINQDOU Or HAPLSS. 



tm. 



tremcly younff, was nlrca<ly distin (fished for learning niul genius, 
after having published a. sUlemcnt of the amount of wealth uon- 
sumcd by individuals forming tlio Church, who were by tboir vows 
devoted to poverty, proposed reforms which were at once favour- 
able to religion, just, and generous ; other reforms wore likewise 
suggested, and even the city sent up petitions to the king, entreat- 
ing him to impose the common taxes upon properly and peraons 
appertaining to the Churcli, and to fonvcrt the gold and silver, 
which was superfluous in the worship of our holy and humble reli- 
gion, into money. Moved by such prayers and arguments, Charles 
sent Monsignor Galliani, a man of high character, and with en- 
larged views fur the times, as his ambassador to Home, who laid 
the (tcmandt) and pretensions of the king bcforo the pontiff, vis. : 
To bo empowered to nonitnatc candidates for the bishoprics and 
betieHcca of his kingdom ; and, together with the potentates of 
Ohristeiidom, to have the right of one vote in the conclave ; to 
reduce the number of convents of wouks and nuns ; to impose 
some restriction upon the acquisition, and to grant some fran- 
cliises io tlie possessors of property in mortmain ; to put an cud 
to the jurisdictioi) of the nuncios, and to aboli-<>h the Court of 
Nunctatura 

Tlio Po]>e, perplexed and annoyed at these demands, convoked 
a college of carillnals, who rcjcc^ted them all, as contrary to the 
ancient rights of the Uoly Sea The ambassador was not however 
to be silenced ; but increasing in bis pretensions, demanded the fuU 
fdmeul of the decree of Uonorius n. in favour of Roger, by right of 
Charles as successor of Hogor, and Clement as successor of Uono- 
rius. lie reminded the Pope of other concessions made by former 
pontifis to former kings of the Sicilies. The eloquence of Galliani 
was meanwhile seconded by the power of the Bourbons, by tho 
fortune of C'liarlcs, by the weakness and age of Clement, and by 
his anxiety to advance the interests of his nephew Corsini, who wat 
at tho Court of Naples, eager to be appointed viceroy of Sicily, and 
perhaps cherishing still higher hopes. Por these considerations, 
Clement promised King Clinrlcs the investiture of the conquered 
kingdoms, and granted the cardinal's hat to Don Loui», tho Infant 
of Spain. The wrath of tho two kings was appeased. Monsignor 
Oonzaga, the nuncio, who bad been detained at Bayonnc, was ac* 



tra. 



CHABL^ OP BOCBBON. 



5» 



cepted, and proceeded to Madrid ; and the 16th May of that year, 
1 738, waa named for the investiture of CharleR. 

On the day fixed, Cardinal Troiano Acquaviva, the ftmbasnador 
of the king*, occompaiued by a suite compoacd of tho feudal 
iorda of Naples and Spain, went to tbo Quirinal, where the pontiff 
in high state, surrounded hy cardinala, archbishops, and bishops, 
confomiatily with ancient usage, caused the Bull of Inveatitnre to 
be read, by which he proclaimed the king, Cliarlcs vit., ho being 
tbo seventh king of Naples of tliat name. But whether from 
motivea of policy, or from caprice, Charles refused to adopt tho 
cipher, and continued to designate himself in his edicts and treaties 
as before his investiture. As soon as these disputes with the 
[lonLifi'hiid been amicably settled, Mousiguor Sinionctti, who bad 
retired to Nola, returned as nuncio into the city ; the ambassadors 
from Vienna remonstrated with the pontiff upon what had taken 
place, who, however, wisely refused tolendanearto tbeircoraplainla, 
as he saw fortune inclining towards the other side ; and, desirous 
of diverting the king from the claims he had made through Qal- 
liani, which endangered tho power as well as the wealth of tho 
papacy, ho granted as a gift to Charles, tho Bull of the Crusade,' 
by wliicb tho obligation of fasting could bo commuted for money. 

Tbo mutual compliments which had passed during the confer- 
ence, having been in time forgotten, Charles, while declaring that 
former treaties and ancient usages were no longer expedient for 
his Bubjoctfi, proposed a new concordat to the Pope, which Clement 
was about to concede, when ho died in 1739, and was succeeded 
in the pontificate by Cardinal Lambcrtini, Benedict xiv. The 
affiiir was therefore suspended, until at last, after repeated do- 
mauds on tho part of Charles, the Pope named aa his legate Car- 
dinal Gonsaga, and tho king, Cardinal Acquaviva, with Monsignor 
Oalliani, archbishop of Tbessalonica, as bcforo ; they met on tho 
2d June 174t, and concluded tho terms of the concordat, which 
wu aooD afterwards ratified by both princes, and became law and 
rule of stale and conscienca Between baronial rights and the 



> BhU of Oo OnuaJe. Firat gr»iil6d 
Id «Miii vaniora lo n-coDqnor the Oolf 
IaihI ; MXt to fm Clirutun ca|>tiv«9 from 
tlu SarsocM, wul Uatljr for tlw t«l« of in- 



dulgcncta wliich, gnuii'^l by iIm Pope lo 
tfa« King of NsfloB, becaow » fbriilu »»tirc0 

of KVCUIM, 



60 



HISTORY OF rrUK KINGDOM OF KAPLER. 



no. 



immiiniiiM of tbe Churcli, evorytliing: in tlio kingdom of Naple* 
was thrown into disorder. How Charles disposed of the firat 
I shall relate in its proper place, as the second was the prin- 
eipal motive for the concordat. Ttirce kindfi of immunity had 
been hithorto tolemted ; royal, local, and personal. Thii royal 
immuniticis consisted tn the exemption of the Church from contri- 
buting its Bharo to the common taxes ; other properties which wore , 
by their nature secular, were confuundcd with tlic ecclesiastical, 
and many privileges and favouns were enjoyed by the lands and 
houses uf the servants aud persons attached to the Church ; so 
that the wcaltli, cupidity, number, aud audacity of the clergy, 
both secular and regular, caused the impoverished and declining 
state of the finances, which were only supported by a i>art of the 
land and by a minority of the citixcns. As long as the war lasted, 
the support of the barons, or more frequently the gifts of the 
ijuccn of Spain, bcaidca forced subsidies and similar expedients, 
concealed the poverty of the exchctiucr ; but no sooner had the 
doubts and anxieties of the war of conquest ceased, than the State 
languished, and even the burdens irajMscd under the viceregal 
government could not suffice for its maintenance ; tho less so, 
as to other expenses were now added that of ii numerous and 
splendid court, and the increased number of wants caused by tho 
progress of civitiKation. 

Tho localimmunitics consisted in the right of asylum. Every 
church, every chapel, the convents, their vegetable and flower 
gardens, the houses, shops, and bakers' ovens, which liad a wall 
in coniuiou with or were adjoining to the church, and the houses of 
the priests, all funiislicd an asylum to criminals ; so that, among 
so many places for aheUcr, upun the comuiission of a crime, au 
asylum was sure to bo at Uaud, protected by the bishops or 
clt^rgy, and by the furious zeal of the mob, who defended these 
mockerica, as if they had formed a part of religion. An e^ual' 
injury was done to justice by personal imniunities ; for added to-' 
the excessive nuntber of the clergy themselves, were the armed 
retainers of the bishopst, the lowest characters employed in the 
ecclesiastical tribunals, tithe collectors, the servants of tho priests, 
ihose inhabiting the same houses, and oven, at one time, their 
coDcubines. 



1741. 



CIIAIU.ES OF DOURUOir. 



SI 



Tlie court nf Ronio, in oonsidonitioii of Its fnondHlilp forCliarlcB, 
and tlaiiking it prudent to keep on good tcmia witli a iioigliljour- 
ing and prosperous monnrcli, agreed to a modification of all tlieso 
iniinunitics. 'Vhe ancient possessions of the Cliurcli from tlint time 
fart}) vrcre to be subject to taxatiuu to ttie amount of onc-batf paid 
bT the lait^, and all later acquisitions were to pay the wliole. 
The census of the state was to sepamte the lay property, which 
had been either intentionally or by mistake confouude^l with the 
patrimony of the clergy. The number of franchises was reduced, 
and the permanent exemptions granted to privileged persons, re- 
voked. Tlic right of asylum was limited to the churches, and 
even then only in the case of slight and trivial offences. Tlie 
ecclesiastical state liaving been defined, and pei'sonal immnnities 
reduced, the right of epincopal jurisdiction was circumscribed, tho 
secular jurisdiction proportion ably extended, and in order to limit 
the nuiiilfer of priests, tho difficulties of ordination, and the dis- 
cipline of the clergy were increased. A tribunal was formed, called 
Misto (mi xed), because composed of both ecclesiastical and lay judges, 
to decide those disputes which might arise from the Concordat 

The hopes of tho philosophers and liberals were partly fulfilled, 
partly disappointed. In the terms of the treaty, or even in the 
conferences, no nllusion had been made to the right of investiture, 
the " Chinea," the donatives, the benefices upon the ecclesiastical 
patrimony, the bishoprics to be retluccd, the number of priests and 
friars to be diminished; the abolition of asylums, as well as of 
ecclesiastical tribunals and immunities; or, in short, to any of the 
greatest interests of the monarchy. The Neapolitan negotiators 
did not want coumge, hut had no hope of success. Tlie people, 
and King Charles himself, tho very individuals who would have 
proofed by con>plete emancipation, ignorant or superstitious, did 
not even desire such a change. 

The Concordat gave an impulse and beginning to greater re- 
forms ; the Ooverument, while interpreting, extending, and some- 
times exceeding the terms agreed to, organized the lay jurisdic- 
tion, limited the ordination of priests to ten in cveT7 thousand 
souls, refused to allow the Papal Bulls to take effect when not 
accepted by the king ; forbade new acquisitions to the Churcli, and 
proclaimed episcopal censures powerless, if incurred by the subjects 



62 



HISTOBV OF TUE KINQDOM OV KAPLF-S. 



mt 



in obedience to tlio kwa, or to the command of the prince. All, or 
nearly all disputes were decided in favour of the laity, and every 
act of license on the part of the clergy was punished. Tvro friara,,] 
high in the order to which they belonged, opposed the judge of 
the place where they resiUtxl, in a case of asylum. Cliarles having 
caused tho fugitives to bo taken forcibly from the church, turned 
Loth friars ignominioualy out of the province. A pious family of 
the Abruzzi, in fultilmcnt of a vow, built a church to the patrou 
saint of tho city; but as a law of Charles forbade the fouudatiou 
of uew churches without tho royal permission, he commanded that 
this should cither be applied to secular purposes or pulled down ; 
the religious zeal of this family not allowing the alteration of 
the design of tho edifice, it was demolished as a public example. 
He refused to grant a license for the foundation of new colleges 
for the Jesuits, and, to punish the persistency and pride of the 
order, he prohibited them new acquisitions by law, while remind- 
ing them of their vow of poverty. Similar measuree were con- 
stantly introduced, and therefore it must be said to the honour of 
Charles, that in his relations with the Church, he first by treaties 
or laws removed tho impediments to civil freedom, and afterwards 
passed acts which smoothed the way to further progress. 

In order that full advantage might be derived from ihose 
terras of the Concordat which related to the royal immunities, 
it was necessary to ascertain precisely what were the posscssiona, 
of the Church, and likewise those of the £efs, of commuuities, 
of secular institutions for charitable purposes, or of public endow- 
ments. Tlic science of statistica, now so exact, was then unlinown, 
but something of the kind (which necessarily arises, although im- 
perfect, in the commencement of cvciy commonwealth) suggest*^ 
itself to rulers as soon as they ccaac to aim at governing despoti- 
cally or by secret and arbitrary means, and rule justly, and with 
a conscientious desire for the good of the people 8uch was the 
spirit in which King Charles and hia minister TanuccI govortied. 
Ignorant as they were of political science and principles, tho good 
cflects of their government were (ho result of a wise instinct and 
philanthropy, while the evil may be attributed to tho errors of tho 
times, and their limited means of information. Charles was igno- 
rant, Tanucei little less so ; but though neither of them was ca])abld 



i;iL 



CHAULKS OF BOl/RBOK. 



of anticipating political claims, thcj introdnoed improvements 
into establislieU institutions, bestowed beaefiU, and made new 
regulations ovor^-wliere : wore such kings or ministers now at tlie 
head of affairs, the; would render the naltona of Europe virtuous 
and happj. 

The whole science of admini»tration was at that time supposed 
to be comprehended in the census ; they, therefore, organized the 
sfstoni, and included many subjccta which belong to general 
statisticaL Depending solely on voluntary returns, the Gorcm- 
ment was deceived by the fraudulent, while the simple and honest 
revealed the whole trutli. The sincerity shown hy the highest 
and lowest onlers in tlie State, was as surprising aa the contra- 
dictions and falsehoods of the lawyers, clergy, and barons. The 
rapid progress of the work was impeded by the privileges of 
some cities, which were maintninud by the edicts of Philip v. and 
Charles himself, by the feudal lands subject to tbcir own laws, and 
by such of the immunities of the Church as had been recognised 
in tho Concordat ; but the resolution and perseverance of the 
Gorernmeut cnable<l the census to be completed, and, however 
imperfect, it tripled the public revenue, relieved some of the most 
wretched of the citizens of a part of their turdenA, expo$e<t many 
past frauds, and prevented their repetition in future. The ad- 
rantagcs would have been still greater had Tanucci or Charles 
understood the principles of finance; but they maintained the 
capitation tax, thus taxing life itself. Every exchange of property 
was alike burdened with imposts, and many incomes, when de- 
rived from a double source, had to pay a double tnx into tlic ex- 
chequer ; many others escaped all taxation ; and, while the artisan 
and tradesman were taxed, lliose following the professions called 
noble, the physician, the advocate, and judge, contrived by cunning 
and intrigue to obtain exemption. Again the arrendamenti (a 
kind of indirect Ux) interfered with private industry; for ex- 
ample, that of tobacco, by preventing the free cultivation of the 
plant, and thus destroying one of the b<;st products of our soil for 
a small finRncial gain. But it is not surprising if the finance* 
in 1740 were ill regulated, when even in our days, in the m««t 
civilized states of Europe, they are nowhere, in all respects, con- 
dacted in strict accordance with scientific rules, nor for the 



6* 



HISTOKT aF TnS KINGDOM OP KdPLSa. 



IML 



gener&l advantage. la tbo meAutime, Uie concordat, tlie census, 
tlie wisdotu of Cliarles, aud llio ])ariiimoii,v of Tunucoi, produced 
contentment in tlie people, and 611ed the exchequer, so that there ie> 
mained a nurplus Wyond what was required to tnpplj tlie wants of 
the country, ftnd enough for titc erection of nia^nificoiit monuments. 

But, as if it were ordained tliat the prosperity ofa kingdom should 
he only shortlived or interrupted, a fresh war broke out, and brought 
with it nev perils and greater dcmand.s on the public purse. As early 
as the year 1 737, Gian Gastone, Grand Duke of Tuscany, the last of 
the House of Mcdiei, had theA, and with him ended that degeneraie 
race. Philip v. and Charles king of Naples called themselves heirs 
to tho throne of Tuacany, — an empty title, which was not disputed 
by rival sovereigns ; but tliree years later, in 1 740, upon the death 
of tlie Emperor Cliarles vi., the slumbering ambition of Philip r. 
for thu States of Milan, Parma, and Piaccnea, was once again 
aMrakencd. Uis consort Elizabeth, insatiable in her thirst for 
empire, and eager lo bestow a throne upon lier second son, Don 
Philip, used her influence etill further to excite the king. Philip 
was crafty, cruel, superstitious, and indolent ; in hia government, 
he was fickle, timid, and suspicious ; but eager to carry on war by 
the agency of others. Therefore, to join tho league of the enemies 
of Maria Theresa Queen of Hungary, and daughter of the deceased 
Kmperor Cliarles vi., to prepare armies and send them into Italy, 
to command his sou the King of Kaples to despatch as large a 
i-einforccnicnt as he could spare from his dominions to join the 
•Spanish troops, to equip and send forth a numerous fleet, to issue 
edicts, and raise the cry of war in Italy and Europe, were projects 
oonccivctl in a day, and speedily executed. 

Twelve thousand Neapolitans, under the Duke di Castropignnno, 
were sent to Pesaro to join the Spanish nrniies under the Duke di 
Moiitemar, who assumed the supreme command, while a disorderly 
anuy of Germans and Savoyards assembled in Lombardy, and, led 
by the Count di Lobkowitz, advanced to meet the enemy. Tlieir 
forces were equal, but fortune undecided ; the Germans, however, 
advanced boldly to the attack, while the Spaniards paused at 
Castelfranco; and as the Duke of Modena^ had inclined to the 

* FruiieiB III, nf Kktf, Dubc nf Mc-lrnn, marHcil, 1 737, die JAugliU-rol I'll!!!)' Dukt 
tli« pairoB of Utimturi and TinWcll ofOriirniix. Ucd 1780. 



lUL 



CU.iKLE3 OP BOCEDON. 



65 



side of Bpftin, T^obkowitz took possession of IiU cliicf citj, occupied 
Reggio, seized od Miraiidola, and reduced Se^to and Monte Alfonso, 
SO that little remained of the ducliy. Meantime, Montemar, tinitd 
and slow, offered no assistance to his unfortunate allj, but, almost 
in tlio presence of the enemy, and able to count liis blows, lie con- 
tinued a passive spectator of his dcvastatioua Finally, he began 
to retreat before Lobkowlt/. 

At that time an English fleet, commanded by Commodore 
Uartiu, entered the Bay of Naples, and omitting the customary 
salutations in a friendly port, sent a messenger on shore, who 
addressed one of Ciiarlcs's ministers m these words: — "Great 
Britain, tlie eoufudoratc of Austria, and the enemy of Spain, pro- 
poses neutrality in the wars of Italy to the governmeul of the 
Sicilies. If the king accede to ttiis proposition, let him recall the 
Neapolitan troops in the army of Montemar ; i f lie refuse, he must 
proporc for instant war ; for, at the first signal, the fleet now 
cruising in the bay will bombard tho city. Tiic king m-HI be per- 
mitted two hours to make his choice ;" and, in orderto miirk the ex- 
act time, the ambassador drew out bis watch and named the hour. 

The city was destitute of the means of defence ; there were 
neither en trench menu nor a garrison. The port, the docks, and 
the palace were unfortified and unguarded, and the people terri- 
fied. There was ucillier time for action nor thought ; the court 
was unmtlitary, the ministers timid, and the council hastily sum- 
moned by the king in consternation; the offer of neutrality was 
therefore accepted, and by despatches, which tho insolent herald 
insisted on rcadijij^, the Bukc di Castropignauo was commaodod 
to return with the army into the kingdom. Otlicr letters were 
secretly written to Montemar to apprise him of the unhappy 
events in Naples, and despatches and ambassadon sent with the 
information to the courts of France and Spain, and to the Infant 
Don Philip, who was fighting in Lombardy, against tho armies 
of Savoy and Germany. The day on which the neutrality was 
agreed upon, the English fleet disappeared ; Cliarles, though late, 
provided for the defence of the city, fortified the port, formed on- 
trcnchments and haiteries around the bay, and supplied them 
with cannon and soldiers^ Heflecting on the insult he had sus- 
tained, and aware that the ambition of all the princes of Kurope 

VOL. L f 



.06 



HISTORT or TUB EIKQDOM OF NAPLES. 



I»L 



centred m Ital,r, that the result of tUo wnr was iloubtful, promiseai 
VAciUatiug, and the oalli of no kiug to bo trusted, Charles toped 
to secure his crown and the tranquillity of hia kingdom by ap- 
plying his private wealtli, and the increased revenue of the ex- 
chequer, to the purchase of arms, and by enlisting the affections 
and interests of the people in his cause. He ordered many ships 
to be repaired and more huilt; he established manufjiC lories of 
cannon, muskets, and instruments of war ; he raised a new army' 
by conscrlpttoD in the provinces, confiding the highest posts to 
native officers, and collected arms and ammunition. Thus pre- 
pared, and while waiching Iho events in Italy, ho ruh>d Oie Slat« 
with moderation and juatioc. The Duke di Montcmar^ his army 
diminished by the loss of the Neapolitan auxiliaries, bceamo stil 
moru cautious io his movumvuts, and hastened his retreat, up<Hl' 
which his sovereign, taxing him with the disasters of the campaign, 
recalled him and kept him in disgrace, at a distance of twenty, 
leagues from the pnlace nnd city. The Count di Oages, an officer' 
of higher reputation and greater daring, was sent as genersl to tW 
Spaniards; he infuseil freali courage into his soldiers, and led 
them to meet the enemy. Tliey were engaged in sevend encoun- 
ters, in which he was sometimes victorious, sometimes defeated ; 
but, finally, was obliged, from his inferiority of numbers, to with- 
draw his troops into the Neapolit-nn territory, behind the Tronto. 
The successful Lobkowitz cncampe<l on the opposite bank, andi 
menaced the foe by a display of hia forces, as well as by the edicts 
of his queen. 

Reasoning like an ambitious woman, I^Hria T1]crosa felt Mcure 
of the conquest of the kingdom, because the king was new, his 
small army unaccustomed to war, and tlic I<IcapolitBn3 inclined for 
change ; whilst, on lier side, she had a great and victorious army, 
a successful captain, and numerous emissaries distributed among 
the people. The sanguine eipcctalions of the queen and of the 
woman were encouragetl by her ambassadors at llie Court of llome, 
and by a band of Neapolitans, who were voluntary exiles, or had 
been banished under Iho government of Charles, — poor, and, 
as was natural under their circumstflnces, sanguine and ready 
to promise ample succours and conspiracies to be raised in her 
filTottri those men, prompted by the desire to return, aud by the 



i;u. 



CHABLSSOPBOintBOK. 



67 



liope of vengeance, instigated the queea to inako war against their 
native land. Maria Theresa, Queen of Hungary and Empress of 
the Romans, addresseil the people of the Sicilies by an edict, in 
which alic promised to relieve them from the hnrdena of taTation, 
to conflrm their ancient privileges, to confer others, to banish the 
avaricious and hated race of the Ucbrewa, to throw open the 
prisims, to grant pardon, nnd bestow premiums and rewards on 
virtue, to increaao tho annoiia,' and to lower the price of food ; 
she concluded by vaunting the attachment of tho people to the 
imperial house, and by holding out temptations to the ambition of 
the great, and to the inconstancy of tho lower orders, and pretended 
to have secret connexions in the country, hoping thus to encourage 
her own adherents, ajid to rouse the suspicions of the Government. 
As soon as the king was iufurmed of tlie»e transactions, he c^uni- 
moned a congress to meet in Ixis palace, and reminded thcia of the 
natural alliance with Spain, as well as of the neutrality agreed 
upon with England ; that his own desires and the condition of the 
country inclined him to peace, but that the present necessity urged 
him towards war ; of the danger of moving tlio army, and the 
danger of inaction ; of the impovcrishetl stuto of the exchequer, 
but the certain evil of having to maintain two foreign arniics, and 
to see the ]>rovinuea laid wasto for encampments and battles ; of 
tho loyalty of the people, but the inconstancy of human nature 
and of fortune ; and after enumerating these and other facts, and 
weighing them one against tho other, he asked their advice. 
Unanimity of votes is rarely met with in a numerous assembly, 
and still more rarely ia a cowardly or baeo Mintimeut witliout its 
advocate or supporter. War was less fatal titan peace ; to remain 
inactive, waiting the turn of events, was certain subjection either 
to Spain or to tho Empire ; yet the congress hesitated from some 
far-fetched religious scruple respecting the observance of the neu- 
trality ; and the good King Charles, citticr from a love of peace, 
or trusting" to time and fortune, was wasting the days in irresolu- 
tion and uncertainty, when letters arrived from his iiarcnts, Philip 
and £liaabetli, reproaching him with his hesitation and delay, 
enumerating the dangers Iicforo him, setting up as an example 
the intrepid conduct of the Infant Philip in the obstinate wars 

' Annana, pnblir itonlMaMi. 



&i 



BISTORT OP THE KIKGDOH OF XAPLES. 



va. 



in Lombftrdy, anil, while reminding him of the great actions per- 
formed by his house, inciting him to take up anas &ud enter lh« 
field. 

The doubts of Cliarles being thus removed, he refused to listen 
any longer to the timid counsels of the Duke Moniallegre, a worthy 
courtier, who, though poasessod of an excellcDt nnderstanding. and 
Vr-cll acquainted with all matters appertaining to civil government, 
liad an avcrHtoii fur war, for which ho had no capacity. He was & 
good adviser in [H>aceful times, but the worst when the kingdom was 
iu dani^er. The king collcolcd hid troops, ami promulgated an edict 
to ihia effect ; — " The neutrality promised to England was contrary 
to the interests of my house, to the nficction 1 owe my family, to 
the good of my people, and to my duty and dignity as a king; 
and I only gave my cousciit in order to avoid for my beloved, and 
at that time, defcneeloss city, the lombardmeut aud injuries 
threatened by an Etighdh fleet, whiuh had unexpectedly entered 
the bay with hofetile intentions. But however hard the couditioni, 
and however obtained, I obiierved them, because the word of a 
king had been given ; 1 recalled my anny fighting upon the banks 
of the Po, aud expoited the armies of my father to danger by tbo 
loss of these auxiliaries. Tlie pons were closed to Spanish ships, 
commerce was impeded, aid refused, and, on the other side, eveiy- 
thing concetled to the flag of England. As a rewanl for so many 
injuries, and for ho much suffering, as a recompense for such 
fidelity, a powerful ffcrrnan army, supjiortod by English ships, is 
on the eve of fording the Tronto, under the pretence of pursuing 
a small body of Spanish troops, but in reality to carry war into 
the Slates of Naples, and, if successful, to drive the king from his 
throne. The neutrality is thus broken, anil broki^n by them ; I, 
supported by the furcei> of my kingdom, conscious of the rectitude 
of our cause, and trusting to receive the aid for which I pray to 
God, will go forth to confound their iniquitous designs," 

The king proposed to lead twenty thousand soldiers in person 
into the AbruKzi ; to unite them with those of Spain ; and mean- 
time to constitute a regency for the government of the kingdom, 
and place his young wife and her newly-bom infant in Gaels. 
When the edicts were published and preparations known, the 
alarm and grief of the people were extreme, and whilst the muUi- 



1713. 



CHAALGfl OP BOU&DOir. 



69 



tude stood a mclanclioly crowd in the square below, five of the 
Eletti petitioned Charles not to let the roval palace be deserted 
b; all of the name of Bourbon, but to trust the queen and the 
infant to the care of the people, more faithful fjuardians than 
the walls of Gacta. But while thanlcing them, Charles refused to 
alter his dctci-mination, dcclaringthat in an unwalled citv, the fear 
alone of an attack from an encniv, and ihc very zeal of the guards 
and the citizens, were danf^rous for a woman in the condition of 
the queen. Ho placed entire oonfidcnco in the fidelity of his 
people, so much so, that lie would that day free all those guilty 
or unhappy persons who were detained in prison on auspicion, the 
tisana of the very Germans whom he was going forth to meet in 
ttlo. Tyrants, when exiH>5cd to danger, imprison even innocent 
persons ; hut Charles liberated the guilty. When these magnani- 
mous acts were made known, they excited so much love and zeal 
in the people, that the nation apitearcd more like a family than a 
state. The nobles, after eipressiug their scorn at the edict of the 
emprcsA-qucen, because she had dared to tempt tlieir fidelity, 
renewed their oaths to Cliarlcs, both in writing and by their depu- 
ties ; and the representatives of the city, while offering tlie king 
three hundred thousand ducats for the expenses of the campaign, 
promised to supply the armies with as many provisions as they 
sliouhl require, bo long as the war might laat, while the populace, 
ftSBombled in groups or tn crowds in tlic streets, shouted augunca 
of 8UCCC3S and honour. Amidst theao happy predictions the royal 
family took tlieir departure — the queen with her infant for Gaeta, 
the king for the Abruzzi, wliere he was to join his troops. 

Before ho could reach the Spanish army, the German general 
Bntun, with a strong detachment of infantry and cavalry, passed 
the Tronto, and occupied the extreme confines of the Abruzzi, 
where the ho«tile anuies were daily brought into collision, with- 
out coming to any serious engagement, as Braun was waiting 
for the army of Lobkowitz, and the Count di Gages for that of 
Charles. About this time occurred a sinjvular feat of arms ; a 
Neapolitan soldier, in a regiment of dragoons in the service of 
l^tain, left alone by his comrades who had fled, fell into the midst 
of the enemy, con.HiBting of a small body of Uungarian horse ; jwr- 
ooiving his disadvantage if he reniaiucd ou horseback, ho dia- 



70 



HISTORT 0? THE KINODOH OF KAPLEa. 



IMl 



moanted, and drawing his weapon, which wm a Sc/thian swortl 
(according to the rule of his regiment), he fought with go much 
valour and success, that he killed jtercn of tiro enemr, and wounded 
othen, while the rest fled, aud he remained victor ia the field ; ho 
gmthorcd up the spoils of the vanquished, and, bathed in his own 
blood and that of the enemy, returned to the Spanish camp, whero^ 
laying the arms of the »cven hn had slain at the feet of the Count 
di Gages, he was highly coinmeiidod hy the troops, and was pre- 
sented hy the Count widi two hundred gold pieces, which the brave 
soldier divided among bis comrades, reserving nothing for himself 
but the gloty of the enterprise. 

Lobkowitz and Charles advanced towards the Tronto hy oppo* 
site roads. Upon their arrival each reviewed his troops. Lob- 
kowilz, already distinguished by liis actions lu Buheuiiu,' was at 
the head of tweuty thousand infantry, and six thousand cavalry ; 
they were followed by hordes of Transylvanians, Illyrians, and 
Croats, who had left their native forests at tho bidding of the 
queen, and who, in the guise of soldiers, were tliievcs and ruf- 
fians ; there were besides other bauds, composed of fugitives, 
deserters, and robbers, who, fighting in indeiwndent corps as light 
troops, were called Free Companies ; the army was oompleted by 
two thousand Hungarian cavalry, volunteers and bold spirits, who 
spread themselves over tho country as marauders, infesting tho 
roads, seizing on food, arms, and men, and exploring tho ground 
for the camps and marclies. The Uemrnn army therefore was at 
least thirty-five thousand strong, but fame, or the prudence of tho 
leaders exaggerated their numbers and strength. Charles assumed 
the supremo command of both Spaniards ijud Neapolitans, The 
Hrst was composed of eleven regiments of infantry, tliree squadrons 
of cavalry, five hundred tight horse, and three hunUre<l mounted 
guards of the Duke of Modeua, who, a fugitive from his own domi- 
nions, and fiiithful to the cause of Spain, had taken service under 
the Count di Cages. These guards were principally llungarians, 
who had most of them deserted to the Spanish service, and who, 
therefore, either from their misfortunes or misconduct, were re- 
duced to tho desperate alternative of victory or death. The 
Spanish army, of twenty thousand soldiers, was completed by a 
> Againit the frenth MuCclial du SoIU I»l«. 



ITA 



CHARLES OF BODBBON. 



71 



regiment of Cfltftlan infantry, lightly Amtcd and clothed, 6t for nm- 
buBcnde, quick in their movemcats, and who despised death and the 
enemy. The Count di Gages, an old soldier, though weary of war, 
led these trooi)s. Tlic Neapolitans numbered twenty-two rrgtnients 
of infantry, five squndrons of cavalry (in all nineteen thousnud 
soldiers), under the conduct of the Duke di Ca&tropignano ; fivo 
of these 1-cginicnta wcro now ; all the remainder trained to war 
either in Italy under MoDteiimr and the Infant Philip, or in the 
8i^e« of the fortreues of the Two Sicilies, or in Africa, at Oniu, 
where Lhcy had hecu engaged, with the furovioua Moorish tribes. 

Both Bides were well supplied with artillery. That of Charlea 
tM placed under the direction of Count Gaxola from Piacenza, 
'distinguished for his mathematical learning and talcitU ; and while 
a large English fleet obeyed Lobkowitz, the king bad his own navy 
aK hi8 disposal. The Bourbon array was really the most numerous, 
though the Germans were reported to be superior ; these last were 
encamped in two lines along the left bank of tlie Tronto, and had 
Bent forwnnl, as I have before stated, a handful of bold cavalry 
and infantry, led by Qenoral Braun, and scattered in various diroc- 
tiooa in advance of their lines, upon the right bank of the river. 
Hero the Spanish troops were stationed in the first line, and the 
Neapolitans in reserve in the second. Tlie king hud taken up his 
quarters at Caetel di Sangro. The winter season was on the 
decline. Lobkowitz waited iii expectation of disturbances within 
tlie kingdom, and Charles hoped for such advantages as might 
ensue from time, scarcity of provisions, sickness, and discord in the 
eaeniy's camp. The armies remained, therefore, as in a time of 
repose. 

But Iiobkowitz, urged on by the persuasions of Count Thun, the 
imperial ambaa&ador in Rome (a bishop full of warlike ordour, 
and at the head of the unhappy conspiracies in the kingdom), and 
forced to act by the commands of his iiuecn, put an end to the 
idelay, and prepared for attack. The entrance by the Ahruzzi was 
' difficult, -bocauae the roads were broken up, the mountains covered 
with snow, the country poor, and the army had to march in the 
E&ce of the enemy. Preferring the roads by Ceperano and Valiuon- 
tonc, meuiorable in past conquests of Naples, he recalled Braun, 
and abaudouiog the region of the Tronto, started iu the direction 



72 



HISTORY OP TUB KINGDOM OV KAPtE». 



no. 



of Rome. ChaHca was informed of this movement beforehand by 
lotten from Cardinal Acquaviva, bis legate at the Apostolic Sec ; 
craftj and liberal it) his bribes, the cardinal had learned the de- 
signs of the imperialists through a man attacbe<l to the houaohotd 
of Count Thiin, who bctra/cd Lho secrets of his master. As soon 
aa the German army had dopartcd, that of the king began to movet, 
the Jlrst leaving b^ various roods through Umbria, and the second 
by Cclano and Venafro. The aspect of war was cliangod, for the 
Germans appeared to bo retreating, which inspinxl their oppoueuts 
with so much courage, that, in their exultation, they tumuUuousIy 
called upon Charles to lead them to battle. The armies proceeding 
according to the intention of their generals, Count Lohkowiti: made 
an ostentatious and almost triumphant entry into Rome, where he 
wfta received by the Pope and the people, as the successful parly 
in Italy, and na already the invincible conqueror of the neighbour- 
ing kingdoms of the Two Sifiliea: for the grand and ferocious 
aspect of his Gcnnan followers, their barbarous dress, and their 
harsh language, appeared the signs and promiso of victory. But 
their hsidcr was not so confi{Ient of success, and proceeding slowly 
and with enulton, allowed Charles to rcoeh the frontiers, who oon- 
dnetcd Ins troops into the Papa! territory, refusing to listen to tbo 
pusillaniniuus warnings of conscience, and to the demands and 
entreativ'ts of tlie pontiff. Some skirmishing took place Uotween 
the bauds of IlungarianH and the Bourbou troops, who wero seve- 
rally engaged in exploring the country, but they seldom came to 
actual fighting. 

The king, with a great part of his army, was upon the road of 
Vftlmontonc, when he learned from his vidcttcs the approach of 
the enemy. Uis troops were not yet disposed in order of battle; 
his artiltery had not arrived ; the roada were heavy from recent 
rain, and the ground impmcticahle ; but the necessity of the 
movement made all things poKsibto, and a suDicient fnjnt being 
prepared to keep the Germans at hay, a messenger was sent to 
hasten forwai-d the remaining troops and the artillery. Just then, 
A violent storm arose, obliging part of them to halt, and Charles 
immediately changing his order of march, brought the rest back 
in disorder to VcUetri ; satitilied with pitching Itis camp in a 
strong position, be lefl the dotenuiuatiua of his further move- 



17«. 



CHARLES OP BOUBBON. 



78 



nwnU on the following; da7, to be regulated nt^cording to cireuro- 
Itftncea and to the situation of the Gcrmnua. Early next morning 
he aent his scouts round, collected his troopa in good order, and 
having learnt ihc approach of the enem,v, prepared himself and hia 
men for combat Tlio tir»t German am\s appeared above the crest 
of the hills, and others succeeded, until tlio whole host was spread 
out in line ; but Lobkowitz, from his elevated position, surveying 
iho numbers of the enemy, and noting the rugged nature of the 
ground, considered that his cavalry, which formed the main force 
of hia army, could not operate among these valleys, and felt his 
courage fail ; he therefore placed his men in camp, fortifying his 
position by artillery, breastworks, and entrenchments. Tlie king 
followed his eiample. The ground which, shortly before, had been 
destined for a battle-field, was now covered with encampments ; 
the war waa carried on with as much deliberation as before ; Lob- 
kowitz again trusting to disturbances in the kingdom, and Charles 
to the effects of time. 

The city of Vellctri ia situated at the summit of a hill, from 
which the ground descends in steep doclivitica, where the olive 
and vino arc cultivated. A tittle torrent rushes along ihc throe 
ravines which form the valley ; and the banks which run towards 
the north and west, rising always more abruptly by successive 
rocks and hills, terminate in Monte Artemisio, four miles or more 
distant from Vellotri. The rl^ht wing of the camp of Charled rested 
on this mountain, hi? left inclined towards the Porta Komaaa, 
the central gate of the city ; the front of the camp was guarded 
rather than fortified ; a little behind, upon the hill of the Cappuc- 
cini, a park of artillery was planted, and several squadrons were 
encamped there, to be used as adjuncts or supports for the first 
front Tlicse were succeeded by smaller encampments, either as 
guards over some particular spot, or as forming a convenient station 
for tho soldiers ; and the disposition of the troops was such as to 
enable the whole army to get under arms upon a given signal, on 
the shortest possible notice. A fountain, which usually played la 
the principal si]uare, and was both an ornament to the town and a 
luxury to the inhabitants, had ceased, as the enemy had destroyed 
the canals, and turned off the stream. The camp was therefore ill 
supplied with water, which could only be obtained, after toil and a 

TOL L 



74 



illSrnBY OP THE KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



rrui 



conflict witli the cnemr, from a ^mall well, excavated in the bottom 
of lUe valluy, «t three miles' distanco from the city. But provisions 
abounded, as Charles was amply supplied by tho aflcction of his 
subjects. 

The enemy, encamped on the opposite side, overlooked tho army 
of tho king, and were able to reckoti his forces and means of defence, 
while they thcmsulves were concealed by the undulating nature of 
tho grouuJ thoy occupied. Thoy had plenty of water, but there was 
a scarcity of provisions, although supplied from Romo and other 
cities. Lobkowitz could not avail liimself of his superior position, 
becauite, to attack the enemy, be must have carried his troops into 
the valleys below, wliich were commanded by greater numbers than 
his own. Advancing, therefore, as in a siege, he harassed them 
by a close fire of musketry and cannon ; and baring driven a 
Spanish regiment from an eminence on which it was cncampetl, nt 
five hundred paces from the city, he fortiiicd ii\o 8i>ot by entrench- 
ments, and placed a guard there. Continual and sudden attacks 
by day and night allowed our soldiers no rest. Lobkowitz hoped 
that the king, sucuig liis men thus pressed, and obliged to suffer 
attacks which they wore unable to rotum, would raiso his camp, 
and ho nnticipatcil with exultation all the disasters which tho 
enemy would suffer while in retreat, wiih a trlumpliant anny close 
upon their rear, 

Charles was likewise aware of these dangers, and h.astily assem- 
bled a council, when the Count di Gages proposed a maniruvre, 
which ho executed as boldly as it was cunccivod. lie marched 
silently at night, with four thousand soldiers, and by descried 
paths, so as to reach Monte Artomiaio at dawn. It was guarded 
by a thousand men ; but cither from wine, drowsiness, or the 
negligence naturally arising from a long state of security, they 
were reiwsing without their arms, when they wui-o suddenly dis- 
covered and overpowered by tho oneniy. The commander was 
taken in bis tent, and another superior officer, who was awake 
and on the alert, resisted, but was overcome by numbers ; rendered 
powerless from his wounds, he was captured, and soon afterwards 
dietl ; only a few escaped in tlic confusion to acquaint Lobkowitz 
with their disaster. The whole German camp rose in arms, but 
already more troops in the camp of Charles were on the move ; 



\74t. 



CHARLES 07 BOCRBON. 



75 



and GagfMj desccnc^ing from Monto Artemiaio, gnined possessioa of 
Monte Spino, took more pridoncra, and seized on the artillery aud 
provisiona. Such terror and confusion prevailed in tlie imperial 
I4!anip, wliore there woa as much want of wisdom in the leaders a» 
there was insubordination in the men, that thej fled, by whole 
companiea, helter akeltcr towards Rome. As soon as the tidings 
of the panic rcachod Homo, the gates were closed, as it was fully 
believed that both armies, the conquered and. the conqueror, ircre 
oloso at band 

As the sole object the Count di Gages liad in view was to gain 
Arteuiisio, which lie had now taken and fi^rttticd, lie left it under 
the protection of a strong g^irrisou, and returned, satistied and 
elated with the success of liics enterprise, proud of his prisoners, 
and rich with booty. In that age, more was etfectud by military 
f;;cniu3 than science ; projects on a large scale were rare in the 
leaders of armios, except with those few, privileged by nature, 
to whom knowledge is instinct. If Gages had lived in these days, 
by only obeying ordinary rules, he must have caused the first 
I squadron to succeed the second, which liad lieen held as a re* 
[scrro in caac of defeat, or a roinforccnicnt in f^uccess : at a con- 
certed signal, Charles's whole army would have attacked the Ger- 
man camp in front, Gages would have descended from tho hills, 
and, assaulting the enemy's posts in tho rear, would liavu put them 
to flight, and driven them back, ouo upon the other, and liave 
thus cuded tho war. But as the course of victory was arrested 
bAlf-wny, Lobkowitz had leisure to chock the panic, to slop the 
ftigitives, to recover Monte Spino, and to re-form his troops. By 
Jiaving lost Monte Artcmisio, all tho positions of the Germans 
led toward.*! the right wing of tbo camp, which movement occa- 
sioned an affair of greater importance- 

Botb armies having returned to their visual state of inaction, 
the Germans began to sicken from the foreign climate, to mutinj 
for want of pay, and, owing to the rabble of which the aniiy was 
composed, to dcaort in vast numbers, so that their forces sensibly 
diminished. Count Lobkowitx was mortified by the disaster of 
f Artemiaio, by the injury his reputation bad suslained with his own 
' soldiers and throughout Italy, and by his boasts having been put to 
ehame by recent evunta. But just at tliis time he received assur- 



76 



HI3T0BT OF THE KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



im 



anoee from BisKop Thun, tlint the Icin^lom vraa ripe for roliellion^ 
and oiiiy waited the support of a small mi)itai7 force; while the 
cmprcsa, from Vienna, sent liim liauglity and imperious commands 
to advance. Lobkowitz therefore wrote to the English admiral to 
threaten Gaeta, to cruise along the shores, and excite the people 
to revolt ; while lie himself used tlie unjustifiable means of de- 
sp&tchiug a aniaU but daring body of troops into the Abruzzi, to 
ftpread the report of victory, to encoui-ago the rebels, to devastate 
the land, and to massacre all who remained faithful to Charle*. 
He hoped that as soon as the king should hear of these movements 
in the kingdom, lie would hasten thither with a large pari of his 
army, and thus weaken the eamp at Vellctri ; but these hopes 
were fnistrntcd by the attachment of Charles's subjects, which 
continued unabated, and even incroAScd. 

Jvobkowil:; miulo another attempt The left wing of iho camp 
of Charles was weak, for owing to the distance from the enemy, 
and never liaving been disturbed by any attack or alarm dur- 
ing this cunpaign, the guards were almost as negligent as in a 
time of peace, and altliough tlie imperialistti had aifpronclied that 
quarter after the battle of Arleiuisio, the posts were not itlrengtU- 
ened nor their vigilance awakened. A report arose, as often hap- 
pens in war, of which neither the author nor origin could be traced, 
that tlie Germana meant to surprise the left wing of the camp ; but 
it, was not believed. Lohkowitz meantime, on the 8th August 
1 7 -It'll, summoned the principal and the boldest of his officers to 
meet him in council, and addressed them thus: — "It is vain to 
hope for disturbances in the kingdom of Charlos, or for discourage- 
ment, desertion, or a scarcity in his camp. Wo have before us a 
strong and successful army, while the numbers of our soldiers aro 
diminishing by death, sickness, and ilighL Delay is against us. 
Nothing remains, but either a successful assault or a disgraceful 
return ioto Lorabardy. Certain of your choice, I lay my scheme 
before you. The enemy leaves his left wing exposed ; the ground, 
weak by nature, is not fortified by art, only a few are left to guard 
it, and these having been long xmdisturbed, lie down at night, 
careless, and in a state of intoxication. There arc several roads 
orer the declivity, beside the valley which lead to this point, and 
I have an equal number of guides in readiness, not bribed to assist 



ITU. 



CHABLES OF BOUKBON. 



77 



as, but frieiHlIy to our cause. Tliere is &n easy ingress hy an old 
ruined wall, which once passed, we have a road open couducling 
to the city, to the cticampmonts, and to the quarters of tlio king. 
A column of our best troops shall follow the guidas in silence hy 
night, and entering through the ruined wall, shall stab the guards 
tn their sleep, and, noisolcssl; proceeding to the citj, kill the sol- 
diers and citizens. Wlien the feiiliitelsand fugitives hare wakened 
the enemy's host, our men shall rush on, uttering loud cries, burn- 
ing, destroying, and striking terror on all sides, without allowing 
time for rcfleution to tlioso attacked. A more select baud shall 
enter the house occupied by the kiug, and take him priaoncr ; the 
rest shall go into the camps and the opeu country, killing and 
pursuing the encDiy. liarger bodies of our troops shall meantime 
attack the right of the enemy's lines, and the remnant hold them- 
selves ready in case of need, or to assist at the victory. If the 
euterpriae should succeed, we shall in one night end the labours 
of the war; if it fail, we shall return to our cutrenchTiicuta ; and 
ahall the following day be as wo aro now, prepared for action or 
council I have revolved this well, eager for revenge from the day 
of our defeat at Artcmisio, and I now lay it before you to decide." 
All signified their approbation ; sonic, because they were brave 
men, and others wishing to appear sa Each had hi.4 part as< 
signed liim. GenoraU Novati and Braun wero chosen to attack 
the loft of tho camp, with six tliousand soldiers ; General Lobko- 
witz to attack the right with nine thousand ; the senior general 
in the camp was ordered to keep the remaining troops under amis 
and prepared, and the signals and paaswords were settled. The 
night of the lOtli and 11th August arrived, iu whicli the fate of 
the kingdom was to be decided, and Novati and Lobkowitz de- 
parted, with their columns ready for immediate action ; the punish- 
ment of death was threatened to any who should shout, speak, or 
make any clatter with his arms ; the rest of the army was on 
the watch. Novati reache<l his destination, entered the camp of 
VcUetri, killed and overpowered all he met, and proceeded unob- 
served. An Irish regiment in the service of Spain, encamped a 
little in the rear of tho main body, wa.s surprised, and in part cut 
otT; but those who remained alive, woke up and defended them- 
selves ; the noise of the fight, and tho fugitives, gave warning to 



78 HlSTOaT OF THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. in*. 

the camps, and the Germans then hearing the drums and trumpets 
of the enemy sounding to arms, proclaimed their presence by loud 
shouts, and in obedience to orders, broke open, burned, and de- 
stroyed one of the gates (that called the Neapolitan), and rushed 
out of the city. The first dawn of day hardly illuminated the 
sky. 

Charles, who was sleeping in the Casa Ginetti, was awakened hy 
his guards, and hastily throwing on his clothes, and girding his 
sword, passed through the gardens of the house, and escaped to the 
camp at the Cappuceini. The Duke of Modena, the ambassador of 
France, and the Count Mariani (on horseback as he rose from a 
sickbed), with the Duke of Atri, fled from their burning houses 
without waiting to dress. All was confusion during that first 
hour. The inhabitants, with tears, entreated the conquerors for 
pity, but were barbarously murdered and plundered. Many of our 
soldiers fired at the enemy from the windows and roofs, others 
assembled in the squares of the city, and fought hand to hand ; 
others opened themselves a way by their weapons ; but many par- 
ticulars of the combat, and many a disaster or instance of courage, 
are left unrecorded. Niccolo Sanseverino, brother of the Prince of 
Bisignano, was among the first slain in fight ; Colonel Macdonald, 
distinguished in former wars, tall in person, and mounted on 
horseback, halted in the centre of the large square of the city, and 
raising his arm and sword, called to the soldiers who were flying 
in all directions, to unite and follow him. While he was yet 
speaking, a ball from a German musket put an end to his life, his 
command, and example. Many of the superior officers and cap- 
tains died bravely ; and finally, the city, wholly deserted by us, 
fell into the hands of the enemy. 

Lobkowitz, apprised by signals and by the noise of battle, of 
the successful assault made by Novati, had attacked and gained 
possession of Monte Artemisio ; proceeding to the second and third 
encampment, he next put them to flight, for fortune favoured the 
Germans. But Charles, hastily collecting his soldiers at Monte 
Cappuceini, passed them in review, and addressed each file in 
these words : " Remember your duty to your king and your wonted 
valour, and that if you are true to honour and duty, we shall yet 
conquer." He sent the Count di Gages against Lobkowitz ; placed 



tm. 



CUARLKS OF BOUBBOX. 



79 



the Duke (li Castropi^nano in opposition to Novatt, &m\ licid the 
rest of the troops in reserve. Gages being superior in luimbera 
to the cnomy, kept him in Jig'ht npon the raounUuna; Ostro- 
pi^ano advanced towards Vellotri, hut did not encounter tho 
German columns as he expected, hccanao, tempted by avariecand 
licetue, Ihej were dispersed throughout tlio city. The courage of 
the Bourbouist army revived ; the legion Cantpano, which had 
been juat raised by conscription and was uuder the comniaud of 

}age», was antong the most eager to seek vcugeauce and glory ; 

Jastropignano, wlio was slowly advancing, was urged on by the 
'Icing, who supplied him with fresh forcea, and who that day merited 
all the praUc duo to a skitful and bravo captain. Our columns 
conquered as they proceeded; the ground of jVrtcmisio was re- 
covered, and Castropignano entered tho city. Tho consterna- 
tion wo had just before experienced was now felt hy the enemy, 
who in tlieir turn were thrown into disorder; fortune had 
changed sides, and the conquered became the conquerors. Among 
tlic Germans, the Duke Andrcaasi, who commanded a strong and 
numerous squadron, was seriously wounded ; General Korati was 
taken prisouer whilst seizing papers and money iu tho quarters of 
the Duke of Modcna ; 2000 Germans were killed ; General iiraun, 
who was with the reserve outside tho city, seeing tho discomfiiure, 
and having learnt from tho fugitives the capture of Novati, and 
tba slaughter and total defeat of his comi-ades, did not await the 
enemy, but took slielter behind his former entrenchments. Lob- 
kowitz likewise, abandoning his soldiers, banners, and artillery, 
returned to tho camp, and if the uncertainty of the roads, or want 
of decision had not slackene<l the march of tho Count Ui Gages, 
and if the conquerors had entered the valley with the fugitives, 
ibut little of Lobkowitz's army would have been left, and his hopes 
L«r success during the remainder of the war would have been anni- 
(jhilated. 

The enemy was already drawn up behind his works, and many 
of hia regiments had not yet been engaged, while all the soldiers 
of Charles were exhausted, both with defence and attaok, with the 
storm of the morning, the suspense of the day, and even with tho 
^fatigues of victory. The hour of nine had just struck, and they 
hod beou Oghting sinoe daybreak ; although each army had re- 



80 



HISTORY 0? THE EI^fODOU OF XAPLES. 



17M, 



turned to tlie camp thej had quitted, the Bourbonists had reaUy^ 
conquered. Tlie king, however, ordered a retreat to be aoundt 
and commanded the troops of the first front to resuDie their foi 
mer position, vhile he computed the amount of injuries suatAincd,' 
and advantages gained ; 3000 of the Bourbonist aoldicre, and nearly 
as many of the Qertnans, Iiad been killed or woundod, and the loss 
in standards and artillery on cither side was equal, but the victory 
was assigned to Charles. Upon the ensuing day, therefore, he 
returned thanks to the army, commending the valour of the Spa* 
iilards, which he pronounced equal to their ancestors', and of tho 
Neapolitans who liad rivalled those experienced in war. He dis- 
tributed honours and money among them; and applying to liis 
Bubjecls for fresh soldiers, horses, clothing, and money, be obtainod 
even more than ho asked. Ho recalled tho Duko dl X^avQllo with 
his troops from the Abruzzi, as the Germans had been already 
driven from that proviacc ; and was informed that more Spam^ 
regiments had landed at the port of GacU, which, favoured by 
wind and fortune, had passed the English fleet uni>ercuived, and 
had arrived in a few days from Barcelona. Meanwhile, having 
been taught a lesson by past dangers, Charles forti6ed the defences 
of tho left wiug as well as every other part of his camp, so that 
after tho battle, ho gained iu the strength of his arnty, as well as 
in reputation. 

Tho strength, courage, and ^me of Lobkowitz suffered pro- 
portionably; after his last unhappy attempt, his officers became ID- 
subordinate, as is usual in times ofadversily ; tho distress increased 
in liis army, the horses died, the men were sick or mutinous, tho 
autumn season was approaching, and tho disastrous and alternat- 
ing fortunes of the war in Lombardy caused all hope of succour to 
disappear; yet he did not venture to retreat, lest he should seem 
to bo impelled by fear, and waited for unprecedented favours from 
time and chance. However, in tho first night of November, after 
having assumed an appearance of permanent occupation during 
the day, and tliat very night lighted fires, stationed sentinels and 
patrols, and given tho password, lobkowitz rapidly drew olf hie 
army in siloncoand good order in tho direction of the Tiber, which 
ho crossed by two bridges, that of the Hilvio and another hastily 
constructed of boats. The next moruing the king, pcrccinng tho 



WL 



CHARLES OF BODBBOV. 



81 



enemy had fled, pursued him, but fear being aWays swifler than 
hope, the Bourbonist» only rcachftd the river when the Gomuina 
were already on the opposite bank, and were breaking down the 
ibridges with so much zeal and skill, that the work of destruction 
iras completed under the eyes of the hostile army. Lobkowits 
continued his retreat. CliarleH lialted at Rome to do homage to 
the Pontiff, and to behold tho greatneas of the holy city ; hero ho 
divided his army into two diTieions; one under Gagos, intended 
to Lani&s the ticrmana, the other to return with him into the 
kingdonL Tho iiomons testified their approbation of Cliarlea 
by honours more justly his due tbau those with which they had 
before greeted Lobkowiiz. 

Tlie king having left Rome, met hia beloved queen upon the 
confines of his kingdom, and remained one day at Gaeta; after 
which they entered Naples, where the unaffected joy and mutual 
affection between the king and his subjects glowed in their hearts 
and was exhibited in their countenances. The former was con- 
acions of having well fulfilled hia part as a military leader and 
king, while the people felt that they had porformod their duties 
as citizens and subjceta ; in which sentiment, unknown alike 
(o sIatos and tyrants, resides Iho happiness of empire, and mokes 
even obcdtenco less irksome. On this occasion all display of 
festivities was forbidden by tho king, as the spectacle of the 
happiness of a whole hingdoni, saved less by the power of its 
anuies than by the attachment of its people, was fe&tival enough. 



82 H18T0BT OF THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES, 1746-a. 



CHAPTER IV. 

CONTINUATION AND END OP THE BEIQN OF OHARLES. 

Aftbb the affair of Velletii, and the conclusion of the war 
in Lombardj, the bouse of Bourbon appeared to Charles and to 
the world secure in the kingdom of the Sicilies. The king, re- 
turning to the cares of peace, wished to indulge his natural taste 
for grandeur in the construction of public monuments ; he had 
commenced, and otod finished several, amidst the uncertainties of 
fortune, and the embarrassments of the exchequer ; he added 
others in his days of prosperity, and had more still in contempla- 
tion, when he was called to the throne of Spain. The most re- 
markable were the Mole, the Strada Marinella, the Strada Mergel- 
lina, and, between the two, the building called the Immacolata. 
The whole length of that shore, often broken in upon by the sea, 
and which had been occupied by a dirty, unhealthy, and miserable 
population, was transformed into a beautiful road and promenade, 
the delight of the inhabitants, and an ornament to the city. 

The Icing and queen, when on their way to Castellamare in a 
gondola, and when returning by land, were attracted by a passing 
view of the charming country in the vicinity of Portici, and Charles 
having learned that the air was salubrious, that there was plenty 
of game twice in the year (quails abounding in that locality), and 
that the sea in the neighbourhood was full of fish, commanded a 
villa to be built there. Upon one of the courtiers reminding him 
that that part of the country lay too near Vesuvius, he replied, 
" God, the Immaculate Virgin, and St Januarius, will protect us." 
The architect, Canovari, made and executed the design. 

Almost at the same time the king planned the erection of an- 
other villa upon a height near the city called Capo-di-Monte, for 
no other reason than because he heard that the small birds called 



tr4Stf. 



CHARLES OF DOUlfBOff. 



saySdit^ abound in iliat place during t1io montli of August 
[any of the works of thia monarch owed their origin to his in- 
onlinate passion for tho chaao ; had hia object been nobler, Buch 
as the promotion of the arts, the protection of tho frontier!*, or 
OODituerec, tlicsc enormous oxi>enseii would have been more wortliy 
of a good prince, aud have been more tliaukfullj acquiesced in by 
tlie people. Tho architect, Medrano, desiguod tho palace of 
Capo-di-MoQte ; but when half tiuiahed, it was discovered that tho 
edifice rested upon extensive grottos, which had been excavated 
in former times to quarry tufo and other stones, and consequently 
immense subterraneous works were necessary to prevent the build- 
ing falling. The money which was thus buried was three times 
the sum expended upon that above ground. The king became 
tired of the affair ; there was no carriage-road leading to the place, 
the idea of opening one was neglected, and the palace itself left 
iucomp]ct& Viewed from the city, it ap[)earcd an ancient monu- 
ment, OS the half-Snished works looked Itkc a ruin ; but tho time 
arrived when this incomplete edifice pleased the fancy of other 
kings. 

Charles wished for a new theatre, as the city was only pro- 
vided with few, and those of a low description. To add wouder 
to magnilicence, he ordered that it should be the largest in Eumpe, 
and built in the ahorteat possible timft The design was again ob- 
tAiaed from Medrano, and the care of its execution couBded to one 
Angelo Carasale, a man of low origin, who had risen to fame by 
bis genius in arcliitccturc, and by his bold and stupendous works. 
He selected the site near the palace, pulled down a great many 
houses, and added a vast extent of ground, so that when the back 
of the stage was kid open, wonderful reprcsontAtiona of battles, 
chariots, and horses might bo seen in the di&tanca Ho com- 
menced his work in Marcli, and finished it in October 1737, and 
on the 4th November, the name-day of Charles, the first scenic 
representation was given. Hie interior of tho theotre was covered 
with glass mirrors, and the rctlecliou of a multitude of candles 
produced such a £ood of light as to realize the fable of Olympus, 
A vast and richly decorated compartment was assigned for the 
royal family, and as Charles entered tlio theatre, astonished at so 

* StceajMd, fig-peckwg. 



M 



UISTOSr OF THE KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



great and beautiful a woric, he applauded the architect, nrl 
people gave the king the honour aa the originator of all this 
splendour. fl 

In the midst of the univcPMl delight, Cliarlca sent for CaraBsle, 
and, publicly comniciidiiig liim for hia work, ho leaned his liand 
upon his shoulder aa a sign of his protection and favour. Carosale, 
though not a modest man, respectfully thanked the king by word 
and action. When this was ended, Charles remarked that as tho 
wall of the theatre adjoined that of the palace, it would have beeo 
more convenient for tlie royal family to have passed from one 
building to the other by a private passage ; tho architect east 
down his eyes, and tho king, adding " Wc will think about it," 
diamissod him. When the representation was over, he found 
Oaraaale waiting for bim, with a request that he would return to 
tho palace by the passage ho had commanded. In three hours' 
time Caras&lo had succeeded, by pulling down great walls, erecting 
scaffolding of beams and lathes, and concealing the rudeness of tho 
work by carpets and tapestry, and with the assistance of drapery, 
mirrors, and lights, to make a passage both beautiful and sccnio— 
in ita effect ; this sight was almost more like enchantment anilf 
more splendid than the finit presented to the king. 

The theatre, which had received the name of San Carloj^ 
tlie genius and good fortune of Carasalc, were, for many dayiH 
tho topic of discourse in the palace and the city. But the envied 
architect was now summoned to give in his accounts, and not^ 
satisfying the auditors, was threatened with imprisonment. UM 
went to court, and had an interview with tho king, when he 
reminded him of his royal favours, of the applause of the people, 
of the beauty of hia work, appealed to his poverty as a proof of 
his honesty, and left the fjalace happy, as he thought ho per- 
ceived some trace of pily in tho countenance of tho king; but, 
he was mistaken ; for tho inquiries of the tribunal were 
newed, and soon afterwards Carasale, conveyed to tho fortress 
Sant' Elmo, was shut up in prison, where he was supported during 
the first montlia by the hard earnings of his family, and had after- 
words to eat the bitter broad of captivity. Ho continued several 
years in prison, where ho died ; his sons were furgutlcn in obscu- 
rity and poverty, and nothing would now remain of ilie name of 



but 
iu^ 




cask 



CHARLES OF BODRBOy. 



85 



Carasale, if tbe excellence and tlie wonders of his worlc had not 
preserved the memory of the unhappy artificer. 

Cliarles ordered the construction of scvoral roads and a £ne 
hridgc across the Voltumo rear Venafro, which works, although 
only intended to indulge his passion for the chase, and therefore 
c&lled Sirada di Caecia, -were nevertheless of some benefit to the 
surrounding villagr'« and towns. Meanwhile, the roads which would 
have been most useful to the kingdom were wanting. To pass 
through Calabria (even on horseback) was difficult and dangor- 
oQS, and the Abruzzt little less so. The Strada di Puglia, which 
had been finished as far as Buviuo, a royal huntiug tscat, was not 
continued through the throe other provinces ; there were neither 
provincial nor municipal roads, which was as much owing to the 
absence of royal highways as to frauds and errors in the interior 
administrations. All that was beautiful, great, and magnificent 
in the worha of Cliarlos were confined to the neighbourhood of the 
metropolis. 

Ho improved the buildings of the regii studii,* and raised from 
its foundations (after the deaigna of the architect Fuga) the royal 
house of refuge for the dcstitnlo, which was opened for the recep- 
tion of all the poor in the kingdom. Charles did not sec this 
work completed, but already thousands of the poor of both sexea 
were collecting within its walla ; youths who had fallen into vice 
or misery, and vagrants, who were employed in many useful and 
newly-invented arts. In succeeding books I will describe how the 
discipline of the place was improved, and how the building was 
completed, but the first and greatest merit was due to Charles. 

Desirous of emulating the splendour of his ancestors, in the 
palaces of Versailles and of San Ildofonso, and to build a magni- 
ficent palace on a more secure foundation than that near Vesuvius, 
and less exposed to the attacks of a powerful oncniy nt sea, he chose 
ibr this purpose theplainofCasert&,at fourteen miles' distance from 
the city. An ancient town of tlio same name, Casa-Ertn, founded 
hy the LonibartlB, was still in existence on a nciglibounng moun- 
ts, whore, amidst voat ruins wcro a few buildings containing a 
a scanty population, who preferred the rubbish whicli remaiued of 
their Bnoieat home^ to the convenience and grandeur of the new 



86 



HISTOKY OP THE KIKODOJI OP NAPLES. 



1745-60. 



city. As the most eminent architects wero dead or had grown 
old, Carasalo in a dungeon, and no other in the kingdom equal to 
thera ill invention, Charles sent to Rome for Luigi Vanviielli, % 
Neapolitan, who was distinpiishod hy his other works, and the 
first architect in Italy. Tlic palaco was founded upon an an.!a of 
415,939 square Parts feet, at an elevation of 106 feet ; magnificent 
columns, niaRsive arches, colossal statues, and marhle carvings, 
adorned the face of the cditicc, while on the summit of the front 
tjnipaDum was seen the oiiuestrian statue of Charles iu bronze. 

The interior of this palace coulaios precious marbles, statues, 
and pictures hy the most celebrated sculptors and painters of that 
age ; inlaid wood*, works in stucco, crystals, frescoes, and pave- 
ments of marhle and mosaic, besides rare stones; so that, in short, 
this building alone represents the genius of all the arts of tlie 
time. It is surrounded on three sides hy squares or enclosures, 
and facing the fourth, stretches an extensive garden, nobly adorned 
with obclislcH, stfitues, marble steps, and copious fountains oma- 
mentcil with figurca; a stream falling suddenly from a height, aud 
then more gradually until it spreads out into a lako, from whence 
it is dispersed in ri^niletB, is seen descending from the opposite hill, 
which is laid out as an English garden, and combines a truly regal 
splendour in art, with the advantages of a nitld climate, a fruitful 
soil, and a perpetual siiriug. 

The water thus collected, is brought from Moute Tabumo, by an 
aqueduct twenty-seven miles long, crossing the mountains Tifatine 
and three wide valleys, and flowing in canals cut in the rocks, or 
carried over high nnd massive bridges. That over the valley of 
Mftddaloni, 1618 feet long, and supported upon piers thirty-two 
feet in thickness, is huilt in three tiers of arches, rising to an ele- 
vation ori7S feet; and if the iti.scription on the stones, aud the 
memory of man did not tell a different tale, this work, from its 
grandeur and bold conception, might be attributed to the Koraan 
period. The waters of Casertji, after irrigating tho land, and 
embellishing the gardens and the palace, flow under ground, until 
thoy join the waters of Carmignano, and reach Naples, where thoy 
afford a copious supply for that laigc city. 

Among the most successful of Charles's labours, were the excava- 
tions made at Ilcrculaneum and PompeiL As 1 am about to describo 



CHARLES OF BOURBOS. 



S7 



cities destroyed bv tlic neigliWuring volcano, I will first mention 
the two greatest eruptions which took ]ilflcc during this rcign, and 
the toftgnanimous aid afforded the sufferers by the king. The 
first eruption occurred in the year 1738 ; the disasters it occasioned 
were produced by the quantity of ashes cast forth from the moun- 
tain, which rose to tho clouds in the form of a pine-treo ; borne 
along by the wind, they fell in distant villages, and hctweon the 
rain and their own properties were courortod into solid inasses of 
stone, and thus changed vast tracls of fertile country into a desert 
The cities which were most injured were the Due Torn, 8amo, 
Palnia. Ottaiauo, Xola, AvL-Uinu, and Ariano. Tho second eruption, 
in tho year 1 THO, was more terrific, owing to earthquakes and other 
destructive phenomena, when towns, villages, and rich and cidti- 
vatcd lands were covered with lava. The king, in both instances, 
remitted or diminished the tributes upon tho Inndx which had 
been injured, and assisted and sent presents to the sufferers. At 
tho time of the eniption of 1738, the dispute between the king 
and the Pope concerning the riglit of jurisdiction, being still in 
agitation, the friars and priests wliispercil in the ears of the people, 
tliat this sconrge was sent by God, to the ministers of Charles, 
lat they might desist from troubling the Church and the clergy ; 
'but when the vulcano ceased their fears vanished, and the contests 
with the Pope continued. 

The origin of Ucrculuneum is fabulous, that of Poropcii ob* 
scure; both were flourishing cities of the Campania iu the reign 
of Titus Vespasian, when, by a tremendous eruption (described by 
the younger Pliny), Hcrculaneum was covered with lava,' and 
Pompeii overwhelmed in nshes and stones vomited by the mountain, 
and afterwards buried under the materials carried down by the 
paters in torrents. The manner of their destruction, therefore, 
hras different, but both cities were in one day involved in a common 
rain. The memory of the place passed away with tho generation 
then living, and the site of these superb buildings was sought in 

* " It t> s niflULe to tuppoM', u liaa but parii*!!; cumuliilalcJ b; Uic Rgcnry 

UtJ h^ raMy irrit«ta, tliat [Hercik- oT «*l«r, vtiieli it often poBred «M in 

aBBim] WM OTCrvhclmed bj- n alreatn or Irtk* •|*"*'"<i*'" dorikg Tolcanic cniptioni." 

Ia«A. Tko nibcuncfl wilk wludi it \m —'Kuniiui H. J3v'KnL'Kr, U.A. $«v Ar- 

TOMiwl id va\y ■ kiniJ of vuK&nii; tuff Itcl* " UerciilaBwuiii," Sniilh'« Wefiunary 

Rinii),^ of KKcumtUatBd uuiil and acboa, ^ Grrtk and Soman Gtoytttplijf. 



S8 



niSTOBT OP THE KIKODOSI OF NAPLES. 



Tain. Thus, from tlic year 79 m the ClirUtian era, until 1738, the 
citT of llcrculaneuin remained uuknown, and that of Pompeii uutil 
1750. 

The discorory v&s accidental ; It happened that in digging wells 
or ditches, some higlily-finished and sculptured marbles were ex- 
tracted, and soon afterwards were discovered subterranean vaults, 
tl^eu called caverns, but subsequently found to be forums, temples, 
and theatres, which led to the suspicion that the buried cities 
lay in these localities. The king claimed the ruins ns public pro- 
perty ; and, causing excavations to be made, drew forth such trea- 
sures in antiquities, that the Musco Borbonico is now one of tbe 
first in Europe. Among the rarities of Herculancum arc tho rolled 
papyri, in which wero inscribed the learning of (rrcece, carbonized 
by the volcano ; but science has discovered the means by which these 
volumes can be unrolled and laid flat, so as to enable any part of 
the writing to be read. Only a small portion of this first city was 
disinterred, as it was covered by massive basalt,' and by tbe beau- 
tiful city of Resina, which living city must have been destroyed, 
to bring that to light which was already dead. Pompeii, covered 
with vegetable earths and stones, was eitensively excavated, and 
precious articles of antiquity were extracted. Charles, who was 
often present at the work, once discovered a globe of an oval form 
(begrimed with gravel and ashes), hard as stone and heavier than 
the substance of which it appeared to be composed. lie himself 
laboured several days to open it, and drew forth coins of various 
metals, and at last, almost in tho centre of tho globe, a gold ring 
ornamented with masks, which, io reward himself for his perseve- 
rance, he placed upon his own finger. It docs not lie within the 
province of this history to enter into a description of the wonders 
of these two cities ; but it may bo seen by other writers how much 
they have contributed to the improvement of the arts, and to the 
knowledge of the ancients. 

The antiquities were arranged in several rooms of the new palace 
at Fortici, and at tho same time a tlcrculaneum academy was 
instituted to illustrate them by philosophy and history. Other 
academies arose during the reign of this king. The university 
*' degli atudii" was improved, by lectures en useful subjects being 

' Sco note, prooediug page. 



i7^&-sa. 



CUAKLE3 OF BOUitBOX. 



Added to the quantity of forensic and theological matter with 
which the teAching there was eucumbcretL The colleges obtaiued 
several advanlagen ; but the seminaries continued utidor the same 
discipline as before, because the bishops rejected oil secular autho- 
rity, and hated any reform in that wliich was old. But in spite of 
what Charica did to promote science or literature, education was 
not general. Eminent men, however, sprung up in the midst of 
the {wpular ignorance. 

I must not omit to mention other measures by Charles which, 
whether deserving of praiao or censure, ought not to bo passed over 
in silence : ha threatened and inHictcd severe punishments on all 
who in^inged the statutes for tho royal ohasu ; he introduced lot- 
teries into his kingdom, an invention of avarice and despotism ; 
he used means to coudne the plague within certain quarters iu 
Messina, and finally to extirpate it ; lie was tho first to license 
public gambling, with cards or dice, for a profit to the exchequer 
of forty thousand ducats ftunnallj, but afterwards abolished the 
practice. At tho in.stigation of the courts of France and Rome, 
he censored aud proscribed the Society of the Freemasons ; but 
none of his subjects underwent puni&hment, because a wise and 
just government is suflicient in itself to interdict, prevent, dissolve, 
and throw discreiUt upon secret societies. The Jews wore banisheit, 
— that very sect who, seven years bofore, had come to Naples upon 
tho invitation of Ciiarles, and trusting to hia promises: but the 
Neapolitan peoplo could with difhculty bo persuaded to tolcrato 
ihcm ; the Jesuit Father Pope encouraged tho prejudice arising 
from popular ignorance, and petitioned the king, to whom he had 
fre« access, to drive the descendants of tliose who had ciucitied 
Christ from his Christian kingdom ; and another friar, of (ho order 
of St. Francis, revered by the queen for bis sauclity, having told 
her, in tho assured tone of a prophet, that she would never Jiave a 
male heir as long as the Hebrew race remained in tho kingdom, 
they were expelled. Tho degrade*! condition of tliis nation is dig- 
nified by the struggles and congcnncy with whicli tliey have main- 
tained their faith, a virtue acknowledged by all mankind ; while 
the intolerance of the Cliristiun has no apology ; it has not even 
tho semblanco of a virtue ; it is a remnant and sign of ancient 
barbarism, and ia the more contemptible in us, because we pro- 

TOL. I. H 



!)0 



nrSTOBT OF THE KINQDOM OF NAPL^fl. 



sume to call ourselves the most civilized tuition upon earth. The 
populace of Naples rejoiced in the banishment of Ihe Jews. 

The same populace, some months before, had risen in revolt, 
hccauge they suspected ttiAt the ilctcstcd trihunal of the Inquisi- 
tion was to be secretly introduced among thorn. Tlic power of tbo 
Pope had been revived by the varying fortunes and dubious result 
of the wftTB in Italy, and from the eagerness of contending sove- 
reigns to obtain his friendship. In one year ho canonixed five 
saints, founded a new monastic order, t cherici acaUi (tlio bare- 
footed friars), and invited Cardinal Spinclli, archbishop of Naples, 
to introduce iho tribunal of the Holy Office unobserved into tho 
kingdom. Tliis pontifi' was Benedict xiT., one of the mlbt highly 
esteemed among the popca The archbishop appointed councillors 
and notaries, ordered tho seal which was to bo used on trials, pre- 
pared dungcons,and incarcerated several persons for mattor^of faith, 
forcing two of them to pass through the ceremony of abjuration. 
Emboldened by the success of these first steps, by the silence of the 
people, by the approbation of the pontifl", and by tho noted piety of 
Charles, he caused the words Santo UJi^io (holy office) tobo inscribed 
upon A stone, and inserted it over the entrance of his dwelling. 

The abhorrence in which the Neapolitans bold this name, is well 
known by our history, wbtch records the civil wars it has occasioned, 
the emhas»ics tbnt were sent to distant kings, and the exemption 
we obtained or bargained for, although at tho cost of subnilssioa 
and tribute; and, wonderful to say, a credulous, supcr^itJous, 
ignorant people rose in rebellion at the bare suspicion of the In- 
quisition, refused tt> recognise it, and even menaced the authority 
of tho king, and besieged and coiiquerud a troop of soldiers in 
their own quarters. Those wore not tho acta of tlic lowest of Iho 
populace, impelled, as they are wont, by blind fuiy or by a love of 
turbulence, nor of the upper classes alone, actuated by superior 
intelligence and a desire for freedom, but of every class and condi- 
tion — the luxurious dwellers in the city, and the simple inhabitants 
of the country, all unanimous and rcsolvcrl, as if moved by one com- 
mon instinct ; and now tlic very people who demanded the banish- 
ment of tho Hebrew race, who admitted and even endowed the 
new order of tho cherici scaUi, and paid n high prico to purchase 
tlio bones and relics of iivc new saints, when they saw the inscrip- 



CIIABLES OP BOt'RBOX. 



91 



tiSB' over the archbishop's palace, first Tnurmured, then hecame 
eidted, threatened the two cardinals witli death, and would have 
broken out into worse oxceaaea, had not tho king (informed by the 
Eletto of the people of the real cause of the disturbance, and 
reminded of ancient and recent laws, compacts, and oaths which 
were thus violated), issued an edict, censuring the proceeding of 
the archbishop, and ordered the iitscription to bo taken down, and 
broken to pieces: abulislicd sccrecjr iu the ecclesiastical junudic- 
tioR, aitd restored it to its primary condition, of public trial under 
the laws. Cardinal Landi, who was scut hy the Pope to petition 
the king to mitigate the severity of his edict, could obtain nothing, 
And, threatened by the people, hastened his return. The Arch- 
bishop Spinelli waa obliged, from the public odium, to resign his 
episcopal seat and quit the city. The edict uf Charles was in* 
scribed m marble, and solemnly inserted in the wall of San Lorenso, 
tlio Town Hall, and the people who witnessed the cercntony, satis- 
fied and triumphant, presented the king, amidst shouts and accla- 
mations, with thirty thousand ducats. 

The war meantime continued in Lombardy ; from the time of the 
conclusion of the aifair at Velletri, a considerable force from Xaples 
accompanied the Spanish army. The contending parties n\et with 
alternate auccess and defeat during the whole of 174o, but the fol- 
lowing year proved adverse to the Bourbons, who, surrounded and 
driven back, retreated towards Genoa, a rich and friendly city. 
The Magra, swollen by violent raina, retarded the formation of a 
bridge, and when completed, destroyed and carried it away. The 
fmemy was advancing, and the liourbonists hemmed in between 
thein and the river, redoubled their cftbrts in the emergency, and 
suooeeded in fastening another bridge, which they were passing in 
liaato, when tho Germans arrived, and intercepted and massacred 
the hut files. Our soldiers at length, while still defending thcm- 
BelvcB, reached tho opposite bank, and the hopes and desires of the 
two annies being then reversed, tho Spaniards wished to break 
down tho bridge, the Germans to preserve it, iu order to cross to 
the other side. In tho mid&t of the fight, and when the chances 
seemed equal, a Xeapolitan sergeant, of gigantic stature and 
strength, with four of his men, advanced boldly upon the bridge, 
and in the face of the enemy, and while exposed to their fire, 



92 



HISTOBT or THE KINGOOU Ot NAPLES. 



broke it down with hatchets ; but as ther pcrfortocd their work 
hastily, and the bridge gave way sooner than they expected, the 
five remained on the side nearest the enemy, and their capture 
or death appeared certain. Tlio sergeant, tliruwing his tool and] 
weapons acroM to his friends, plunged into the river ; the re-^ 
maioing four followed his example, and all, swimming to their 
own camp, returned unscathed and covered with glory. TJio 
soldiers rDceived a large reward, and their leader was promoted 
by Charles to the rank of captain. When Uoratio. a soldier of the 
Kepublic, displayed similar valour, lita name was handed down to 
posterity ; but that of our generous champion has been omitted by 
the modem histflriographcrs of monarchy. 

The retreat of the Bourhoiitsts continuing with the succeasee of 
their adversaries, Genoa, abandoned by the former, was taken po9- 
seasion of by the latter, and a still worse fate was impending over 
her, when the desperate courage of her citizens changed the aspect 
of the wars in Italy, I regret that it is not ray task to relate bbo 
wonderful feats performed by tho Genoese peo])!o againRt the dis- 
ciplined troo|ts of Germany, for ti seldom falls to tho share of the 
historians of Italy to tell of the triumph of the oppressed over their 
tyrants ; tho usual theme of their sad story being the misery of iho 
coqijuered, and the success of the oppressors. Hut it was not thua 
with the city of Genoa in the year 1746, when, after all manner of 
insults and indignities had been endured, and the ferocity, avarice, 
and arrogance of the Germans was still uui^aiiatcd, it hapifued that 
by a trivial cause, a stone thrown by the hand of a child, first tho 
rabble, neit the people, and lastly the senate, rose to vengeance 
and battle ; they fought with so much anlour and success, that tliey 
drove General Bolta (who unhappily was an Italian), with many 
tliousnod Germans from the city, vanquished and in consternation. 
Genoa closed her gates, and her citizens armed themselves; the 
reaourocs possessed by a rich and strongly fortified city were want- 
ing to the Gormans ; they were alarmed by the numbers of their 
ciiemica, and changed the plan of ilicir campaign. France, Spain, 
and the King of Naples sent ambassadors, soldiers, and money to 
the heroic city, whoso inhabitants organized numerous bodies of 
Iroopa for tlicir own defence, and the assistance of tlietr allies. 
Everything augured well for tho Bourbons in the ensuing year. 



I7«-Ga: 



CHARLKS OF BOUBBOX. 



93 



But the unexpected dc&th of Philip v., and the intentions of 
his successor, Ferdinand vi., being yet unknown, kept nit minds 
and proparatioua in suspense. Tliu new king of Spain, however, 
although desirous of peace, declared tliat he vrouhl continue the 
undertaking commenced by his fathor, sent fresh troops into Italv, 
oon6nncd the war, and wrote letters full of affection to Charles. 
Tlie queen, Wis stepmother, losing nothing cither in wealth or 
dignity, resigned her power, and retired into private llfu in a castle 
at some distance from the palace. 

Tlie war continued with alternate euccesses for two more yoan, 
so that the people had to enduio death and many »utferiugs for 
seven years, without ever arriving at such an extremity as might 
lead to a voluntary or obligatory peace. TIic hostile parties en- 
countered one another in perpetual battles, for at the time of wliich 
I write, the science wo now call strategy was unknown ; by which 
an army is enabled to move, while avoiding the attacks and obser- 
rations of the enemy, to reach a certain point, determitied on for 
military reasons, and to suUdue fortreasoa or cities without a con- 
flict, and preserve their own bases or lines, or occupy the linos or 
bases of the enemy. If the great captains of past ages, and the 
contemporaneous Prince Eugene of Savoy, happened to act in ac- 
cordance willi scientific rules, it was owing to uativc genius, and 
not to knowledge. Fn^dcrick ii. of Prussia was the first to extend 
the practice, which was perfected and reduced to rule by Bonaparte, 
commented on by Ooncral Jomini and the Austrian Archduke, and 
has become the principle and ain; of instruction in schools ; but 
to apply these rules on the field, argues a superior order of military 
genius. By strategy, battles become more rare, fortrcAsoa less im- 
portant, and wara of sliorter duration. 

But other causes brought tlie war to a conclusion in 1748 : the 
rulers weary of its continuance, the armies diminished in numbers, 
the 6nance8 exhausted, and even, I may add, the miserable condl- 
tioit of tlie people, if this fact ever enters into the consideration 
of royal councils, or the computations of politicians. Ualf a million 
of men had been taken for the war, bcvcu thousand mercantile 
reaaehi had been plundered, luilf Germany and half Italy, vitli a 
great part of Flanders, had been trampled dovrn or spoiled by the 
ioldicry, and iuuumcmble furtressea had been socked and cilice 



H 



HiSTOBT or THE KIKGDOU OP NAPLES. 



dcttTDjed. The hoslilo kings desired ft ces^tion of war, and a con- 
giWfl of minUti^rs acconliuglir met al Aix-la<Clia|>clle, where tlioy 
concluded the preHmiDaries on the Itith of October of that jear, 
which, having- been ratified by the belligerent sovereigns, laid the 
foundations of a dur.ible peace. I sliall only refer to those 
heads which affected the permanent state of Italy. All returned 
to their condition prior to the war; the King of Sardinia, in 
accordance with the treaty of Vormazin, was to possess Vigevano 
and part of tlio Pavesc, with the county of Anghiera; the Duke 
of Hodena vma restored to his States in Italy, and received the 
value of the fiefs ho had lost in Hungary ; Don Philip, Infant of 
Spain, the second son of Philip v. by Elizabeth Fameac, had the 
duchies of Pumia, Piacenza, and Uuaatalla, but on eoudition of 
their reverting to tlie present owners if Don Pliilip should die 
without issue, und if tlio King of Naples should succeed to tho 
throne of Spain. The llepublic of Genoa was to continue un- 
changed, and no allusion having been made to the Sicilies, the 
right of King Charles was confinned. In the history of this longi 
and sanguinary war, two facts alone are immortalized, and these < 
are not battles won, nor the valour or success of the leaders, but 
instances of patriotic virtue in the people ; namely, the loyalty of 
the Neapolitans and their cflbrts to supjwrt their king, and the 
wonderful enthusiasm shown by the Genoese in putting down tho 
tyranny of a barbarous and foreign soldiery. 

No slight fears were still entertained in Italy, lest tho dominion 
of Tuscany, disputed by the Kmperor Pnmcis and the King of 
Naples, should lead to future wars ; but this evil was averted by 
the proposal of a double marriage, which would at some future 
lime make a daughter of tho Uuuso of Austria ijuecn of the Two 
Sicilies, and a princess of Naples Grand Duchess of Tuscany ; 
mere suggestions at titat time, which were afterwards realized. An- 
other dispute arose concerning the island of Malta, but which was 
specd.ily settled. After tho loss of Rhodes, Charles v. had bestowed 
Malta on the Knights of Uhodes, in (icf to tho kingdom of the Two 
Sicilies, to whose king they were to send a falcon annually as a 
tribute from the Order; and when vacancies occun-ed in llio epis- 
copal chair, thy knights were to propose three candidates, one of 
whom was to bo selected by tlio king. These public acknow> 



CUaELES of fiOCBBON. 



95 



ledgments of rassalage had fallou into disuse for moro titan two 
centuries, when Charles wialieU to revive them ; but opposed by 
the Grand-Master of the Order, he caused the trade with Malta to 
be interrupted, and their benefices in the Two Sicilies to be seques- 
trated. ThcGrand'Mastcr invoked the authority and intervention 
of the Pope, who wrote letters of remonstrance to the king, upon 
which Charles consented to the renewal of commerce, and tho 
UberatioQ of the benefices, besides otlier acts of conciliation, but 
retained and substantiated for himself and his successors their 
ancient claims upon the island. 

The people of Europe were reassured by these pacific mea- 
sures, and the king now gave his attention more exclusiTely 
to national reforms. Ho desired, and his minister Tanucci 
Uid a scheme, for tlio supprosniou of feudal iiretunsions ; by the 
pragmatic sanction of 1738, Charles had deprived tho barons of 
many of their privileges, which he liowevcr restored to them in 
]7i4, asa recompense for thoir services during that year's cam- 
paign. The warmth of gratitude which led to so imprudent a con- 
cession, cooled down in time, but until the peace of Aix-la-C1ia]>cHe 
he did not venture to risk offending the moat powerfiil body in the 
State ; besides, the baronial revenues, however unjust or of foretga 
origin, were so closely interwoven with the habits of the country, 
that, totally to abolish them, would have appeared an injustice 
even to those who would have profited by the change ; thcreforo 
tho king and Tanucci, without touching the iutcrcats of the barons, 
their lands, revenues, rights, or profits, diminished their authority, 
and by abolishing many jurisdictions, by subjecting the sentences 
of the barunial judges to appeal, by diminishing the number of 
anuod retainers, and Uying down rules for their punishment, they 
weakened the power of the viero e miato^ jurisdiction, tho principal 
instrument of the tyranny of the barons. Soon afterwards, sundry 
personal oUtgationa were abolished, and it was from that time 
established by law, that the power of criminal jurisdiction was 
nOTcr again to be conceded on the occasion of any new or renewed 
investitures of fiefa. By another law it was decreed that the rights 
of the community over feudal lands wero inalienable by time. 
This produced law-suits, and as tho Judges resided in tho city 

I Jfierv t miito. AbauluU; anO unJvEned, at tlw trignor'MlJurudtctiuo oT the bwOM. 



96 



UISTORT OF THB KISODOM OF KAPLES. 



under the eye of the king, far from tlie power of the barons, and 
in an ago of franchises, they rarely if ever gave sentence against 
the Commons. To these acts of juslice Charles added arts of 
policy ; he iiivilod the great harons to his court, where, by flatter- 
ing Ihcir tastes for luxury and vatiities, he retained tliem near his 
person ; and when they came to reside in the city, the lesser 
barons, from ambition, followed their cxampla The fiefs were thus 
relieved from the presence of their feudal lords, and their armed 
retainers, once necessary for their protection and the maintenanco 
of their power, became a burden aikd incumbrance, and were there- 
ibrc diminished, allowing tlio provinces to breatho again. The 
population of the metropolis, already large, was incrcusod ; the 
families of the great nobles were impoverished by their extrava- 
gant luxury, and by the neglect of their own estates, which, though 
evils, were not commensurate to the good arising from the depres- 
sion of fcudnli&m. The s«nlimcuta of the puoplu underwent a 
change ; the barons were not as much revered as formerly, and 
feudalism being loss sanctioned by law, the way was gradually 
opeued for etill greater reforms. The structure of the system was 
immense, yet it fell, in the year 1810, by the efforts of succeediug 
kings, though the merit of having struck the first blow is due to 
Charles. 

This was a liappy time for both king and subjccta ; the viceregal 
opprc3.Mon5 were forgotten, those of the barons alleviated, and pcaco 
was secure. The palace i-ejoicLHl in a numerous progeny, provi- 
sions were abundant, and harmony existed between the people and 
their rulers. A small body of learned men, attached to their 
country and anxious for reform, were included in tho Qovcnmicnt, 
in order to assist Charles in the promotion of universal freedom: ami 
tho transition of the moiiarcliy from feudal to absolute power waa 
looked upon as a necessary stago in tho life of nations: therefore 
tho study of the king, tho interests of the puojile, and tho hopes 
of the reformers aimed at one goal, towards which they all hafitenod. 
Tho clergy and barons alone had separate interests, but tho former, 
while champing the bit in .secret, waited their opportunity, while 
the latter, from folly and empty pride, were delighted with the 
titles and decorations of nobility which the king lavislily dispensed. 

But his labours, like those of other kings in tlie past con- 



CHABLE3 OP BOUBBOX. 



97 



tury, created a new claas in society, wliicli, gallicring' up the 
spoils of those wliicli ha«l been depressed, acquired their rights or 
their possessions, and was called the Third Estate — a name still 
earlier adopted iti France, where, from their hohling- a place }tB- 
tween the higliest tioblcs and the populace, they in reality consti- 
tuted the people— that most powerful element in the contposition of 
all nations, and who liavu brought about those ruvolutions in our 
era, which have laid the foundation for the constitutions of king* 
doing. Before tlicse rcfomta, the barons and priests enjoyed wealth, 
authority, and jurisdiction, with theadminlsiration of the communal 
properly as well as of justice, and retained all the branchea of power 
in their own hands. The lowest orders had to bear the burdens 
of the State, and to obey. After the reforms, the great nobles, 
who were collected in the fily and the palace, having obtained tho 
highest position it appeared to them fortune could confer, and 
bein;> desirous to maintain that eminence, centred their hopes in 
titles, honours, and tlie atmosphere of a court, gloried in a life of 
haughty indolence, nnd despised nil active ambition ; white the 
people, whoat one time had been without thought, nnd only desir- 
ous of ease, and had never aspired to share in the government of 
the State, saw the possibility of rising to influence. The great, 
who had fallen from their position through misfortunes, or been 
induced, from the love of gain, or by an active disposition, to 
abandon the indolent life of their order, and those men who had 
risen by their industry or talents from the populace, contributed 
to swell the numbers of tho Third Estate. Always energetic and 
increasing, this class possessed the truo elements of political 
strength, numbers, and movement; and thus by the nature of so- 
ciety tho Third Estate arose, and became the associate and instru- 
ment of monarchy in its transition from feudal to absolute power. 
Tho Third Estate being thus powerful, it is important to inquire 
what and who were the individuals in Naples who gatliored up the 
baronial and ecclesiastical spoils ; for the character and interests 
of the men of wliom it was composed became gradually identified 
with the character and interests of the government The reader 
must be here reminded that the wealth of the two orders had only 
been lightly touched by the exchequer, and that the reforms of 
Cliarlca had been confinc<l to the right of jurisdiction ; the nutliority 

TOL I. t 



98 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOU OF NAPLES. 



]7i£-«. 



and credit of tlie ccclceiasttcol tribunals hftd l>€eu diminished ; 
llic right of as^-lutu wa^ almost entirely aboli»lied ; many criminal 
or civil cases wliich had Iain within the ecclesiastical jurisdiction 
had been handed over to the secular courts ; disputed eases in fiefs 
or feudal lawsuits were now tried by magistrates appointed by the 
king ; and the authority of the royal provincial courts, as well as 
tlic tribunals of the nobles, vraa diminished. All that these cli 
had lost in power hail turned to tlio advantage of the courts of com-l 
inon law ; and, as the lower onloi'swcrc admitted into them with- 
out difficulty, the Third Katate was corapoaed chiefly of lawyers. 
Offices, authority, and profit fell into their hnnda ; the king chose 
hia councillors and ministers from the law tribunals ; llic forensic 
art became political science, and amidst the vicissitudes of the king- 
dom, the acts of the Government took their character and aspect 
from lawyers. 

Lawyers are timid in danger, abject in adversity, and ready to 
applaud the ruling powers; confident In their own cleverness and 
ingenuity, they arc in the habit of defending the most absurd opi- 
nions, and, though rivals among themselves in their profession, 
and often opposed to ono another, they arc always friends. The 
character of their eloquence is in itself an evil ; the defendant 
does not keep to the pleadings, but (he aim of his oration is to 
persuade the judges, to convince or touch Ihoni by an appeal to 
their feelings, to attract the audience to the aide of the spcakor, 
and to gain the votes of the majority ; if he succeed, though only 
for the moment, it is enough ; his words are forgotten as soon oa 
spoken, nothing i-emains but hia fye and the boast of victory, and 
the more unjust the cause, the greater his glory; thus it hap- 
pens that advocates are not ashamed to employ exaggerations or 
even falsehoods, which are evanescent as their breath ; that the pure 
and almplo logic of jurisprudence is changed into popular and 
seductive harangues, and the forum into a tribune — evils suffi- 
ciently dangerous in their effects for the ends of justice and pub- 
lic morals, but ruinous and pestilential when introduced bto 
jiolitics, and employed in revolutions of the State, when reason and 
truth are most needed to check the violence of the lower orders, 
and to moderate party zeal; in place of which intrigue, falsehood, 
and licouso prevail, and hence the origin of much public evil. 



\T» 0. 



CHARLES OF BOUBBON. 



99 



If tlie reforms of Clmrles liad extended further, tliey would 
have included, besides the Church nnd tho fiefa, thii army, com- 
merce, and the division of property, in which ease (he Third Kstatc 
would have comprehended niititary men, merchants, and Inuded 
proprietors, aad thus have changed tlio whole condition of the kin{j- 
dom. But these refonus emanated from Tanucci, iiiflueiiced in- 
deed by nohle motives, but limited in tlicir aim to the destruction 
of the feudal system, and the power of tho papacy. Narrow in 
his Tiews, and wholly a lawyer, he neglected the army, believing 
it to he a useless burden on tlic State in times of pence, and 
trnsting the safety of his master's crown to his relations with 
Spain and France, and to the new connexions he was forming 
with the Hoiifie of Austria, and with I he princea of Italy ; while, 
ignorant of piditical economy and of Iho ihcorioa of Jliiance and 
administration, a foreigner and covetous of power, ho was natur- 
ally more attached to the king than to the State. lie owed his 
reputation to his resistance to tlie pontiHs, to the shock he had 
given the feudal system, to the punty of his life, his couciliatory 
manners, and, abovo all, to tho loiig peace the kingdom enjoyed 
under his admiuiitration — a virtue which throws a kindly veil 
over the faults of rulers. 

Tlie vices of the Third Estate were transferred to the Govern- 
ment, and imparted to the people a character not their own : from 
hence sprang despotic laws, counterfeit treaties, hollow promiaoa, 
and a certain jnrgon of arguments or words, substituted for the 
immutable nuixims of duty and justice; for lawyers assume that 
Buch a treaty is null because made by necessity, such an oath is of 
no effect becautto not consented to by conscience ; that compacts 
agreed to with subjects arc not to be kept, because a king cannot 
treat wiih his vassals; they call tho occupation of a country a 
conquest, and that which is in reality the lawful obcdienco of the 
people, rebellion, besides many other subversions of truth and 
justice, which liavc been listened to and tolerated in our days. 

To return to the history of Charles. Tho king and Ids sub- 
jects wore equally enjoying tho blessings of i>cace, when their 
hopes of increasing prosperity were interrupted by the death of 
Ferdinand vr. King of Spain, who, dying without issue, left the 
throne vacant for Charles of Naples. Uardly was tho event 



100 



JU8T0BV or THE KISODOU Of NAPLES, 



loiown, before tlic Spnnish ministcra proclfiimcd ChaTles, and go- 
veroed in bis name. Spec*ly niesacngera bnvicg advised the king 
of what bad taken place, be appointed his notber, Queen Eliza- 
beth, regent of Spain. She was living in retirement in a castle of 
lier own, but liad noither resigned ber tnstc for royally, nor hw 
anibtiious hopes of glory and command. When by the succession 
to tbia kingdom, it became necessary for Charles to provide imme- 
diately fur that of Nupk'9, and to transniit the sovereignty to an- 
other, be was agitated by contending feelings ; for IhougU blessed 
with a numerous family, six sons and two daughters, and bis 
wife, the delight of his palace, still young, his tirst-born (already 
twelve years of age) was inform in botly, deficient in mind, and 
incapable of conducting the affairs, or even of entering into the 
enjoyments of life ; and his cure was despaired of The resolution 
of the father, therefore, wavered between breaking through the 
natural order of sncecision, and publishing the imbecility of his 
son to the world, or making over tlio greater crown and its succes- 
sion to A man of weak intellect, and in dculiniug hoallh. Ttie 
claims of the State prevailed. He convoked a mooting of the 
barons, magiatratos, ministers, and ambassadors of foreign courts, 
besides the most learned physiciaiiR. who were ordered to examine 
Prince Philip before witnesses. The imbecility of the unhappy 
Infant was described and authenticated in a ducumeut which the 
king, almost in tejin*. commanded to be read to the Aasemhly. 

Philip being excluded, the second aon, Charles Antony, was 
named to succeed to the throne of Spain, and the third, Ferdinand, 
to that of the Sicilies ; he was in robu.st health, intelligent, and 
had passed his eighth year; the king had already determined upon 
the regency to bo appointed for the government of the kingdom ; 
and on the fitli of October of that year 1759, surrounded by his 
wife and children, and tii the presence of the ambassadors and 
ministers, and of the future regents, the Eletti of the city, and the 
principal barons, bo caused a deed to be read, by which he pro- 
claimed that, — Having been called by Providence to the throne of 
Spain and of the Indies, he renounced the crown of Naples in 
favour of one of his sons, as, in acconlance with the terms of the 
European treaties, the two niouarchies must remain separate and 
tndopendcut. lie dustined Iiia second sou Charles (Philip, bia 



iTsa 



CHARLES or BOUABON. 



101 



I 
I 



elUcKt, being incapable of reigiiing) to aucoeed him in Spain, nnd 
his third mu, Ferdinand, in the kingdom of the Sicilies. Ue 
released ihc hist from all obligations to himself, ,viotded to him 
his rights to (he throne, and coiiitnaudod the people to obc^ him 
as their king. Ue gave the youthful king a council of regency, 
until he should attain his majoritj, which he tixed at the comple- 
tion of his sixteenth year. The succonsion to tho throne of the 
Sicilies was to descend by the eldest male line, and alt coniingen- 
eiea were provided for and rules laid down for the future. In the 
event of failure of heirs in the male line direct as well as collateral, 
the female was to succeed according to the order of ago; but 
should the female lino fail, the crown was Co revert to the king of 
Spain, to be by him ceded as a free and indcpi'iident kingdom to 
hit< second son : Charles further pmycd that God would prosper 
the people, and trusted that the provisions of this act would be 
permanout, and that his Inbours as a king might be rewarded by 
a prolonged peace. ILiviiig thus spukeu, he turned to his son 
Ferdinand, and gave him his blessing, exhorted him to love his 
subjects, to continue faitliful to his religion, to do justly and show 
mercy; and unsheathing his swnrd (the same wliich Louis xiv. 
gave to Philip v. and he to Charles), and placing it in the hand of 
the new king, he addressed him for the first time wttti the title of 
Majesty, saying, " Keep it for the defence of tliy religion and of 
thy subjects :" and concluded by making the same sign over Fer- 
dinand, as has been aln-ady recorileil Philip made over him, The 
foreigners present acknowlcdgutl the new king, and the subjects 
took their oath of allegiance. Charles then appointed the r^ency, 
gave them his instructions, and repeating his prayers for the ge- 
neral proHpeiity, loft tlie room, followed by the praise* and bless- 
ings of all present. 

That same day ho prepared for his departure, lie registered 
the accounts of his kingdom, and loft injunctions and precepts to 
his •on, which though not indeed remarkable for their ingenuity, 
were prudent and benevolent He took nothing with him belong- 
ing to the crown of Naples, ordering that the jewels, treasure*, 
»Hid paraphernalia of royalty should be noted down, and consigned 
'to the ministers of the new king, and even included the ring 
which ho woro on hia finger, and which ho had found amidst the 



103 



HISTOKV OP THE KISGDOM OP NAPLES. 



na. 



excavations of Pompeii; it is of no value citltcr for mntprinl or 
worbnmtisliip, but, leff. hy liim as tlic property of ilic Slate, is now 
shown in the museum, less as n rem ark able relic of antiquity, than 
as a proof of tbe coiisoientiougiicss of Cliiirlcs. He nppoitited a 
preceptor for tiio yoiin^ king;, and recommericled (bo Infant Pbilip, 
whom lie left in iJic pslncc in Naples, to his cnro. lie distributed 
titlcR, lionours, nnd presents, as the rewards of fidelity or services j, 
and that same day Ifufore sunset, he, with his wife, two daug1it«ra, 
and four sous, went on board a ship bulougiug to the Spanish 
flett, wliieh consisted of sixteen men of war and a number of 
frijfates. Tlioy Imd f|uittcd tlie ports of Fcrrd aiul Cadiz, and 
had arrived in Naples about tbe end of September, for the service 
of (ho l<in)j ; llio Court of Spain was at that time tlic moat punc- 
tilioua in Europa 

All the inhnbitanta of tlio city witnessed the departure of 
Charlea The houses, in our mild climate, are not covered with 
pointed roofs or leads, but with flut terraces, from whence the 
beautiful fitiorcH wlticli enclose the hny can ho i^ecn, ami those who 
could not reach the raole or the harbonr, looked down from them 
with grief and heavy forebodings at their monarch, hardly more 
to be envied than they. The recollection of his virtues, his muni* 
fieence, and the buildings he had founded (which might be seen 
from the city), with the number and silence of the spectators, were 
at once the cause and tlie evidence of their well-founded and 
universal regret ; and although the laws, tribunals, the character 
and name of the government continued the same, the people did 
not ccaso to lament his absence, and their sorrow appeared almost 
to presage the calamities awaiting them under future rcigna. 



BOOK II. 

REIGN OF FERDIJfAUD IV. 
i7sa-i7»a 



CHAPTER I. 



MINORITY or tUE KIKO. 



ToVABDS tho end of 1759, Fertiiaai»i of Bourbon, who had not 
fet completed hts eiglith year, being king, the regents were Do- 
monico Cattaiieo, Prince of San KJcaudm; Giuseppe Pappacoda, 
Prince of Ccntoia ; Pictro Uologtia, Prince of CamporoaJe ; Michele 
K^gio, President of Malta luid Admiral of the Fleet; Domcnico 
Sangro, Commander-ln-Ciiief of the Army ; Jacopo ililano, Prince 
of Arduro ; Lclto Canifla, Captain of the Guards; and liernardo 
Tanuccl. The kiug bore the titles of Ferdlaand iv. King of tlie 
Two Siciliea and Jerusalem,' Infant of Spain, Duke of Parma, 
Piacenxa, and Castro, and liercditary Grand Duke of Tuscany. 
The regents, trained to submission under the viceregal govern- 
ment, and inured to servitude in the court, were now in the 
decline of ngc, and Tanucci alone amongst them all, undertook 
the burden of affairs, and was considered the head of tho regency ; 
thia did not, however, rouse the jealousy of the others, for, inex- 
pcrioncod and witlmul tlio ambition to rule, they were ready to 
obey him. who, both by nature, and because his power was undis- 
puted, behaved towards them with courtesy and rcsjMJct. The 
king's tutor was the Prince Sau Kicandro, who, though respect- 

' The title of Kiag of J^rmuilciu was liuQtincn, llii^ilAughtcrof Jotiii.iIeKJ^ndFd 

eOMtded to the Enparer Frodcrit ii,,"l)cn ftom Bal>lwin ticulu- king of Joraulein, 

he wa GTwntd by Bontfriiu ui. Kiiig of mad the title bu ever bldco beea raUiti«>l 

Oh SicQiva. Ue oliUin«(i il in HgUt uf b; tho king* of tho Sidlien. 



IM 



HISTORY or THE KIN6D0U OP NAPLES. 



able in conduct, was if^nomnt of science or letters, and while onljr 
desirous of indulging his pupil, he was persuaded by Tanucci not 
to cultivate the intellect of the young Print^e too highly, and that 
mediocrity of mind was most eligililo, in the sovereign of a petty 
slate, for the enjoyment of the pleasures of authority. 

To the gctiuiiio grief of the palace and city which succeeded the 
departure of Cliarlcs, followed rcjoiciuga at the accession of Fer- 
dinand, who, after remitting the punishments for sundry crimes, 
liberated many prisoners, gave assuiuuce of pardon to worse crimi- 
nals, and then, with pump and regal ccrcmouies, assisted in the 
cathedral at the liymus of thanksgiving, which were suug in the 
Chapel of at. Januarius. The regents next commanded that the 
barons, maglstrales^ and deputies from the communes should pre- 
sent themselves on stated days at the palace, tlicre to acknow- 
ledge the new king, and to take the oath of fidelity and obedience. 
All hastened to obey, and trusting to the memory of his father, to 
the councils of the good minister, and to the prospect of a long 
peace, they anticipated a mild and happy reign. The king, fol- 
lowing the example nf lits prcdecea.iora, demanded the investiture 
of his kingdom from the Pope, n'hioh, being granted, he, on the 
4th February 1 7G0, signed and swore, in the presence of the legate, 
Cardinal Orsini, the oath called " Of homage and vassalage to the 
most high PoatifT," promising thereby not to promote his own elec- 
tion as Emperor of the Romans,' or King of Germany, or sovereign 
of Lombardy or Tuscany ; and in the event of his election to the 
same, to refuse his assent. 

The regents governed in obedience to the precepts left them 
by Charles, as well as by fresh instrucrions which an-ive<l from 
Spain, and were communicated to Tanucci in the form of sugges- 
tions, and sometimes even of eomnianda. This private correspond- 
ence facilitated the doiigiis of the minister, by rendering his 
colleagues atitl more amenable to his judgment in certain under- 
talcings, disapproved of by their consciences ; these were, emancipa- 
tion from the jurisiliction of itome, and the enfranchisement of the 



1 Tliii ooodition WHS fini impoant Ii> 
doiBint ir. KD (%atU* nf Aiijiiti, whon 
ke grut«d htm Ihe i^^-eEttlIlrG of llm VUig- 
Uom of ihi Sioilie*, luulor Uic tflligntioD 



to Tonounco all pivteit*i<jii> lo tb« empire 
fur him and his a\\wrHor%/— Set Vac> 
couvcLu, ToL L p. ait. 



vvn. 



FEHDINAITD IV. 



105 



government from priestly doraiufttion while Rubjectinjf the eccle- 
siastics of the kingilom to the secular government ; which claims 
of the 8tftte appeared sinful to the vulgar mtnda of the r^cntj ; 
but one kind of servility yiehling before another, the real or sup- 
poaed commanilB of Chariot prevailed over the silent warnings of 
conscionca TIiub, Tanucci contrived by despatches, ordinances, 
and decisions of the regency, bo to change the face of ntfaira, and 
to create so many new relations and wants in society, that when 
the king attained his majority and assumed the rcitis of goveru- 
meot, lie could not undo the work already done, without producing 
miachicfaud disorder everywhere. Ferdinand was, tliorofore, forced 
to continue and proceed onwards in a path which yt&s irrevocable ; 
and thus, while presenting the reader with a summary of all that was 
effected in matters of jurisdiction during the thirty years deaeribed 
in this book, I shall only recoi-d the wisdom of one man, Tanucci. 

As first in importance. I shall mention the pragmatic Ranctions 
issued by the regents and the king, upon qtiestions relating to the 
tribunals of Rome, by which tlie ministers of tlie Crown disposed 
of the property and land of deceased bishops, ahboift, and incnm- 
bonts, and applied the revenues of vacant sees to secular purposes. 

Several monasteries were suppressed ; two in Calabria, which 
bad been receptacles for worthless chnroctei's; one in rhe Bnsili- 
cata; four in Puglia; three in the Abruzzi ; and twenty-eight in 
Sicily: all for ditTcreut reasons, by an excrcine of the sovereign 
power. The property of those nionHsteries reverted to the com- 
moDwealth. 

The ecclesiastical tithes were first reduced, next disputed, and 
lastly abolished. 

Subsequently, when obstacles had been removed, and the mtnda 
of the people had been prepared for still greater reforms, acquisitions 
in mortmain were interdicted, monaBteries, churches, charitable 
foundations, the property of confraternities, seminaries, and col- 
leges, were declared to be in manwi morta, dead in law ; and under 
the head of acquiaitions were comprehended all kinds of new 
property, additions to houses or monasteries, the foundationa of 
new churches or chapels, the palrimony* of priests, and the dowry 



IsDIcr tbe pricttliow] witbcut I)«vuig « l.'e^ 



mill cslmt of Und aMigBwl Uiu ; a\A if 
hii f>niU5 «F«r« loo poor to ^rv tlio n-<|iiinMl 



ICG 



ntfiTORY OP THE EIKQDOU OP NAPLES. 



mo. 



of nuns, if ilxQj exceoded tho limits fixod bj law, as well as alnu 
given for feasts, for processions, and masses. This wise lavr for- 
bade notariei^ to indite wills by whicb new acquisitions oould pass 
into the hands of such persons, prevented exchanges of property/ 
and made emphr/teusit, long leases, and leases renewed to tho same 
leasees equal to censt i* so that, while the mainmort eontinuod to 
receive the payment for tbo land, he lost the right of actual 
possession. 

These measures, which were too enlightened for the times, were 
opposed by the ignorance of tho people, and evaded by the cun- 
ning of tho clofffy. A devout lady in her will named " her *ouf ' 
heir to her property : Giovan Battista Latilli of Bitonto, dying sud- 
denly, the bishop and parish priest together mado tho will "/or 
the 8oui" tying up a. large portion of the inheritance for tlio colo- 
bratioi) of masses; the Bisho]) of Bisceglia ma<lo a similar will 
" /or the soul" of Francesco PascuUo, killed ; and the vicar of the 
dioccso in Pisticcc mado one "/or ihe eotU" of the priest Lisanti, 
who had died intestate AU these wills were revoked by order of 
ihe government ; the bishops were censured, and wills in which 
property was bequeathed to the soul and /or the soul were prohi- 
bited by law. The natural heirs suceoeded to their iuliorilance. 
and in the case of Pascullo, who had uo heirs, tho community of 
BiscogUa inherited his property. 

By these meaQS the secular government contrived to dimi- 
nish the inordinate wealth of the Churcli, while by other laws, the 
pretensions of the pontiffs, which they claimed as rights, were 
lessoned. The lay jurisdiction was enlarged, nnd the ecclesiastical 
proportionaUy restricted, ;ind an advocate for the Crown appointed 
to watch over the rights of the sovereign was added to the *' misto" 
tribunal, and to the delegate of the royal provincial court ; both 
which magistracies have been referred to in the preceding book. 

Tho number of priests was diminished; the ten for every 



pntrimotiy, it war »oiii^(iiiii>* inlr.snrrif) liy 
It friend, tim* Btcurinn the Cliiireli trotn 
boiug bnnlcnvd bjr a poor jmoatticmd. 

' Exehmps cf fTopertjf.—\l wm nnt 

^■ntuuftl for vccIcnIiuiUckI ytv^exXj to ie 

nscliuigod tvr nA^itaa^ lud, if coavaoMBt, 



« <>ivt.— Tbe A*^» hj wLiirti luid i 
KDtcd ntnukined in the hnadfl cf ihc mmi* 
panun u limg aa (li« rtnt «u |>niil, white 
eraph^uilj. or knd held b jiot em- 
phi/tnaieo, wu onginKll; m\y ntainvd 
Tot a x«na of jroarv, uid upon ocrtain cou- 
ditiuiM. 



MBi 



PREDIKABD IV. 



107 



tliousanti Bouls, allowed by Clmrlcs, became tlie law of the SUte ; 
after .1 time tho saccnlotal frinrs were tiichidcd in tlie ten, and 
Anally the ten woro reduced to five: 

PricMa or deacons witlrout a patrimony were not allowed to be 
ordained, nor coutd ibeir pntriniony be increased or fixed at an 
amount to injure the family. 

Ou\y gons were forbidden to enter tlio priesthood, and wlicn 
tliere was ono priest already in the family, a aecund was not 
permitted. 

If any bull or charter of tho pontiff, whether recent, old, or of 
distant date, had not received the royal assent, it was declared of 
no effect ; " nor couid usage, sufferance, nor the negliffen<x of 
former monarcfis suffice," such are tho words of the edict, " to 
mate them lauiful." The royal assent was thus defined : " The 
royal will, inalienable, which can never set limits to its own powers, 
nor surpass them ;" and in other edicts, " The cortceesions relating 
to ecclesiastical mattes made or consented t-o by the king, fnay he 
diuolwd at the pleasure of the same king, or by tfie kings, his succes- 
tors. Tfte willa of founders maif be suppressed or chanrjed at the 
good pleasure of the king. EcdeeuMtios are to depend itpon the king, 
and the magistrates appointed by him ; and there i$ no dignity 
upon earUt which has the right or power to derogate from what is 
here setfvrtli." 

After tlieso laws had been applied in ninny cases, and repeated 
in the acts of the government, they gradually camo to guido tho 
practice and opinions of the luagiBlratcs in their judicial decisions, 
and to be re3pecte<l by the people. It was now forbidden to appeal 
to Rome without the royal permission ; the provisions made bj 
the Roman chancery for the incumbents of benefices were annnllcd 
by the king ; the g:raiits of tho pontiffs upon episcopal revenues 
were stoppctl ; the Pope was forbidden to unite, separate, or change 
tho boundaries of dioceses ; the mlea of tlie Koman chancery were 
abolished ; and no nuncio was accepted wlio had not been approved 
of by the king, Miirriago was defined as by its nature a civil con- 
tract, and the religious ceremony an accessory ; lawsuits connected 
with marriage were placed within lay competency, or if tried by 
tho bishopt*, through a power delegated to them by the king. This 
was ealabliahed In practice in the case of the Duke di Maddaloni^' 



lOS 



HISTORY OP THB KINGDOM OP NArLES. 



who wishecl to dissolve liis marriage by an article of tlio Council of 
Trent, wliicli provifled for siicli rases. T)ic name, rank, and wcaltli 
of both parties made this the moat famous suit of those limps, and 
the nuncio waa therefore anxious to bring it before the tribunal of 
the nunciature; but the king having appointed tbo magistrate b^ 
whom t)ie case woe to he decided, confirmed the law by which 
marriage was to bo considered a civil cuntract, 

Tlic power of the Neapolitan bishops was incrca8e<l bj these 
means, at the expense of llomo, although tbo episcopal authority 
%vithin the country was restricted and humbled. Bishops were 
proliibitcd 6^m meddling with public instruction, or jtrintittg any- 
thing not subject to the common censorship, and approved by the 
king. Episcopal ceusure^t, as well as trials for moral offences, and 
the ixjwcr of incarceration, were forbidden. Personal immunities 
were next abolished, begging for religious purposes prohibite*!, eccle- 
siastical fees subjected to a larifF, charitable institution* released 
from loans to bishops, and certain episcopal extortions, whose claims 
were so ancient that their origin was forgotten, wore for ever 
revoked ; — the decree was thus worded : " The bishop cannot pre' 
scribe laws as supreme." 

I must here remind tlie reader, that when, in 1746, the Pope 
and Cartlinnl Spinolli attempted to introduce the tribunal of the 
Holy Office, and the people rose in rebellion, quiet was not restored 
nntilovery trace of the detested tribunal had disappearixl, and until 
(aa a security for the future) four of the people were elected with 
the name and charge of deputies to guard agaiust the introduction 
of the Holy OfHce. These persons, after the deiMrturo of Charles, 
domandoil from the king his succe&sor, the ounlirmation of the 
privileges granted by his predecessor, to the prayers, tribute, or 
violence of the people. The regents, anxious to satisfy tlieir 
just demands, reproduced the edicts of Charles, which were con- 
firmed and sworn to by his successor ; and shortly before the klug 
attained his majerity, when enjoining the mngistrates to watch 
over the rights of the sovereignty, in onler to prevent the revival 
of those evil practices of the Court of Homo which had with diffi- 
culty been extirpated by the wisdom of the two Bourbon kings, 
the regents imposed an obligation on the royal chamber of Santa 
Chinra, and on the delegate of the royal court of Judicature, as well 



iTca. 



FBIU>]KA3fDlT. 



109 



118 the advocate for Uic Crown, to instruct tlic ruler and hit subjects 
by Dieans of popular works, ia the true doctrines of the Chri&tian 
religion, to reconcile the Government with the priesthood, and the 
decisions of the magistrates with the consciences of the people. 

While the regents were thus engaged, the Prince of San 
Nicnndro attended to the health and studies of the king, who, 
blcMcd from his birth with a robust constitution, and his time 
devoted to athletic exercises, acquired daily more muscular power, 
and delighted iu feats of strength, in which he was encouraged by 
his preceptor, who was proud of this proof of his physical dovolop- 
ment The game-lawa were revived, as well as punishments, 
ineiuding flogging for trespassers ; the woods were filled with wild 
animals, the uumbcr of keepers were increased, and as Ferdinand 
surpassed even Clmrlcs in hia ininioderntc passion for the chase, 
ucw forests were added to the old. Tlie king was twelve years 
of age. Exercise aud pleasure consumed many hours of the day, 
and diverted his mind from studies. His masters were men of the 
greatest celebrity and learning, but sometimes time, sometimes th« 
will was wanting, and his instruction was entirely neglected or 
seldom attended to. The king was seen growing up in bodily 
strength and mental ignorance, to the future peril of the State. 

As a child he disliked, and as a man he was ashamed, to con- 
verse with men of learning, lie loved to display his skill, or boast 
of Iiis experience in brining down awans or stags, in hitting 
birds flying, or breaking-in horses ; of his sagacity as a fisherman, 
and how he was first in the race — acconipliahmcnls befitting 
man in a savage state, but admired by the common people who 
bad been trained in the manners of Spain. As years progressed, 
the rude tastes of the king likewise increased, and having become 
I the absolute sovereign of a wealthy monarchy wlien he hud hardly 
reached man's estate (being only sixteen years old), he wasted 
his time in pleasures, and in domineering over youths like him- 
self, ignorant, and fond of athletic sports Skill in these exercises, 
strength, a dissipated life, and other vulgar tastes, became objects 
of unbition among his subjects, and more especially among the 
nobles, the companions of the king, or admired by him in his 
court. lie was so partial to those barbarous amusements, that a 
long life and roign of varied fortunes could not suffice to banish 



110 



HISTORY OF THE KIN'QDOM OF NAPLES. 



IWfil 



them. Tie was already a liusliand an(3 fatlier when at Portici, after 
inetructriig a body of soldiers, lie called Liparotti, in tlie use of 
arms, lie set up a booth in tho camp, and himself attired in tho 
dre*a, and with all the npparntus of a sutler, assumed that calling, 
selling food and wine at s. low price, whilst the courtiers, and some- 
times his queen, noted the part of the attendants end the hosteu. , 
Once on n. time when |)laying at ball, ho happenctl to notice 
atnong tho spectators a loan liungr}*-Iooking man, his hair 
powdered, and attired in tho black and fthining' drc&s of an abate. 
The kinj,' determined to amuse himself at hia expense, by making 
him ridtculoua ; lie whif^pcred in the car of one of his courtiers, 
who was seen to leave the place and return with a blanket, which 
four of the etoutcst of those who had been engaged in tlio ganio 
(the king being one of them), held out bv the corner*. Tbo abate 
was suddenly seized by the servants, or creatures of Ferdinand, 
and hurried into the arena of tlie game, forced into the blanket, 
and tossed several times in the air, falling back again in awkward 
attitudes amidst the laughter and shouts of the king and the 
rabble, who antieipfited a succession of slniilar low and barbarous 
diveraions. This abate liappening to beSignor Mazringln, a noble 
Florentine, the Court of Tuscany complained to the Courts of 
Naples and Spain ; hut, as tlie claims of a private individual could 
not disturb the harmony existing between princes, it was left for 
history to revenge Maiizinghi. Escaping from the inhoapitablo 
city, and ashami'd tu return to liis country, he remained a few 
mouths at Homo, where he died of melancholy. 

Several times every year, after fishing in tho lakes of Patria nud 
of Fusiiro, tlm king ttoM the fish, asauming tho manners and dress 
of a fishmonger, and bargaining as eagerly as any, Kuither sick- 
ness nor dcn-ith in his family, nor unsuccessful wars, nor the calami- 
ties of his kingdom, nor tlie loss of a crown, could turn him from the 
pleasures of the chase nor from vulgar amusements. These exer- 
cises, and the fatigue which followed, idleness, much eating, and 
prolonged sleep, billing all llic liours of the day, consumed the time 
which should havo been devoted to the cultivation of his mind, or 
the government of the State. He never opened a book from a love 
of Btudy, or read a paper from interest in public affairs ; and, as 
the regents ruled the kingdom during his minority, so hia minis- 



17W-83, 



?ERDINAND IV, 



111 



tew or his wife ruled it when ho became iudcpcndent. Aa he 
found it te<llou8 to subscribe his name to the acts of the goTem- 
meut, he ordered them to be signed in his presence and impressed 
with his Bignot, which lie jealously guarded. Impatient under 
over}' exertion of miiiJ, the coniicilH of Htale dittgusted Iiim, and 
he therefore rarely summoned, and quickly diaaolvcd them, for- 
bidding iokatands, to avoid the delay caused by writing. I give 
these particulurs, as they may account for many succeeding events 
which would otherwise appear incredible. 

In the year l76y, an expected scarcity in com induced the rulers 
and the citizens to till the public iiud private storcliousus with all 
expedition. The remedy proved in it8eIfaneviI,bccau8eLy layingup 
so much grain in reserve, a superfluity was provided for the future, 
while the present wants of the people were neglected. Tliis con- 
firmed the scarcity in the eommenccmont of the year 1764, and 
made it general. The anxiety and complaints of the ]>copIe, the 
mistakes of the Government, tlie rapacity of the merchants, with 
the profits wliich fell to the few, nlways the case in cveiy public 
calamity, produced greater evils and dangers ; tlie (loor were seen 
dying of want, it waa said that the magazines and bakers' ovens 
were empty, aud innumerable thefts, crimes, and robberies followed. 
The regents, by fixing a low price upon corn in every town or city, 
ruined the markets, and by maintaining that the scarcity was not 
real, but produced by monopolists, excited disturbances, and they 
caused tlie murder uf certain usurers by designating them by their 
names. Hoyal commissaries, with troops of armed followers, were 
sent into the provinces to discover the deposits of wheat, to sell it in 
tlie market:^, and to punish (the edict ran thus) "the usurers, the 
eixemiee oftfie poof." The Marquis Pallanti, the chief commissary, 
who waa intrusted with supreme power, wishing to make a display 
of rigorous justice, caused gallows to bo erected in tlie villages, 
where he shortly arrived, followed by a numerous and disreputable 
suite of bailiffs aud hangmen. No dcjio-iit was discovered, because 
all the magazinos of corn had been already rifled by the j)eo])Ie, 
and no one was punished because the monopoly was imaginaiy. 
These measures only served to prove the inefficiency of the Govern- 
ment, and to increase the despair, and the disorders among the 
people. It is unknown liow many died of hunger, or wore killed 



112 



HISTORY 07 TUS KIXG1X)H OF KAPLES. 



I7H-«. 



iu tlic tuuiulU, for )u both cases t1it> coinputattou was clLlicr aog- 
Iccitnl, ur tho govvrunieut from prudcuce concealed the Dumbera. 
At Wn^'th the news of the famine in Naples reaching foreign mar- 
ketB, many ships laden with com sjicedily arrived, and thus the 
scarcity ceased. A fresh pragmatic sanction dissolved the contracts 
entered into for the famine, reducing articles, the cost of whicli 
Itad been formerly regulnted by the will and interests of the com- 
munity, to a low price, and prescribing certain conditions, while 
oilier decrees remitted the punishments for crimes, 8uch as thefla, 
robberies, and homicides, occasioned by the scarcity. All maxims 
of State policy and of justice woro violated. 

The regents failed to Icam a lesson even from the cvcnta just 
described ; on the contrary, tliey becatnc more timid, increased the 
proviisious iu the public slorehuuttes during the subsequent years, 
forbado the export of the native product;) of the kingdom, and 
made tlie distress twofold. As the citizens, therefore, left the 
country in vast numbers, it became necessary for the Govern- 
ment, in April 17GG, to rtACrain and limit their emigration by 
laws and penalties. 



S7W 



FERDINAND JV. 



113 



CUAPTEK II. 



TH8 KLSa ATTAIMg niS HAJOEITT, AMD AIJittlMBd TUB OJVEIlNMnyT. 



On tho 12th Januarjr 1767, Kiu^ yerdinand ended his mino- 
rity ; tho event passed over in silence, for tlie day was neither 
celebrated by any act of tho Government, coremooy in the palace, 
nor rt'joieiiiga in the city ; the ragonta became counGitlors and 
miiiiatcrs, and in subsianco as well na appearance tho Govennnent 
was unchanged. As the reader is sufficiently acquainted with the 
tntcriiiil state of tbc kingdom, it now bcL-miies important to give 
a brief sketch of relations abroad. The powers of tlio North, 
who, to maiutaiu the political balance of that time, did not find it 
necessary to cxtt.*ud their covetous and ambitions designs as fur 
as Naples, continued faithful to the commercial treaties concluded 
with Charles. The connexion with Spain and France was one of 
friendship ratlicr than alliance, for the convention ogrecd to be- 
tween these two kingdoms, called the Family Compact, had like- 
wise been accepted (with the secret connivance of the King of 
S|Miin) by tho Ijuurbons of Sicily and Parma. The House of 
Austria was engaged in negotiating a new tic of rclationshijt with 
the King of Naples. The Seven Years' War hod cuded in 1763 ; 
Gcrmnny was in repose, and Italy at peace. Dun i'hilip, Duke of 
Parma, was dead, and his death was soon folluwod by thnt of the 
old Queen Elizabeth Farncso ; both of whom hud instigated wars 
for the gratification of tlieir ambition. Pope Clement xiil was 
engaged In a contest witli Naples, but asi he was destitute of secular 
arms, his spiritual weapons inspired no fear. 

TIic first act of tho king, upon attaining his majority, was the 
expulsion of tho Jesuits, As Ferdinand himself some time 
later recalled the exiled Order, while other aovereigos convened 
their hostility into favours, it is important to know the reason of 

VOL. L K 



114 



HISTOST OP THE KINODOH OF NAPLES. 



rm. 



this enmity, Rs well as of the reconciliation wliicli followed. It 
is well known by other liistorios how, In the year IfiW), under tho 
pontificalc of PauI iti., the ConipAny of Jesus was instituted to 
teach and convert, professing vows of jioverty, chastity, and obe- 
dience ; how they were dispersed in various parts of the world, aiid 
in royal palaces ; how from being poor, they became opulent, how 
from llie lowest places they tilled tho highest, from humble they 
hecame arabitious, and how many a dispute was raised or put an 
end to through their means. 

In the year 1758, Joseph i. King of Portugal, returning after 
a night's orgies from the city to the palace, received a slight wound 
from a musket-hall; upon inquiry being made into the authora 
and origin of this accident, it was discovered that scvoral of the 
nobles and of the Jesuits had conspired to kill the king, in order 
to chancre (heir master, the court, and the ministers. Some of 
tho nobles wore tried and executed; and two Jesuit friars, re- 
nowned for sanctity, perished in prison, at tho command, it was 
said, of the Marquis di Pombal, the atl-powcrful minister of Joseph ; 
another Jesuit, by name Malugrida, accused before the tribunal of 
the Holy OfHcc, and declared to have seduced the people, ended hi& 
life at the stake in the city of Lisbon ; and tho rest of tho Order 
were all in one day embarked, and landed on the shore at Civita 
Vccchia in tlio States of the Pope. This was the firet banishment 
of the Jesuits; the second came from France, where Louis xv., 
urged on by intrigues in his court, by the persuasions of Pompa- 
dour,* and the decrees of his parliaments, eipcUcd the Company of 
Jesus in 17fii ; and three years later, Charles ni.' exiled them from 
Spain, commaniling his son and nephew, the sovereigns of KaplcB 
and Parma, to imitate his example. 

In the middle of tlic night of the 3d November 1767, all the 
houses of the Jesuits in the Neapolitan kingdom (monasteries or 
collies) were surrounded by the officers of the king and by gen- 
darmes ; the doors were forced open or thrown donn, every cell 
taken possession of and guarded ; the friars, their servants and 



■ UmUim do PMnpAdoDT vu JmpUcftbU 
in licr koU^orih* Jentiu, lincc Uic Jesuit 
Pntber Socy iitfuacd lo roconcile liur with 
Heaven until abu rofurmed bei life. 



* By tliA mIvim of tiU mtniiiter, Contit 
d'An&Ja, and wi'.liuut apprising ihn Pupn 
nf hi* inicntiou. 



17c;. 



FBRDIKAyD IV. 



IIS 



pupila, werocolloctoclin a room of each builJiiij, and Uiolr furniture 
sequestrated, leaving no man anything tut his clothes ; tliis douc, 
ther were escorted ia a UoJj to the nearest port or strand, and 
embarked on board a ship, wliich inimediately weiglied anchor : 
not even the aged or infirm were permitted to remain, departing 
so suddenly that all the Jeanita from the city were sailing past 
Termciiia before the liglit of the 4Lh November had dawned. 

This precipitation and rigour was cither in consequence of the 
example of iladrid, or it was intended, by thus taking tlie people 
by surprise, and under the concealment of night, to hide from thetn 
a sight BO aSbcting and impiouH. The edicts issued on the fol- 
lowing day ran as follows: — "We, the king making use of the 
supreme and independent power n-hlch we acknowledge immedi* 
ately from Qod, and which by his omnipotence is inseparably 
united to our soveruigu right, given us for the government and 
|;uidance of our eulijeuts, do hereby will and command that tho 
■aid Company of Je.sua be for ever dissolved and perpetually exiled 
from our kingdoms of the Sicilies." 

Other ordinances followed to assure the people that the property 
of the Jesuits, although confiscated, would be applied to works of 
charity, and for the general benefit ; that the se]f-impo»ed duties 
of these friars, their alms, obligations, and muritorioua works would 
be continued, that their places wouhl bo supplied in the services 
of tho Church, and that after their schools had been reoi^anized, 
the public instruction given there would be both more liberal and 
erudite. 

The amount of wojdth confiscated to the exchequer was un- 
known, because studiously concealed by the Quveniiuent ; but the 
friara liaving perliajis beartl, and indubitably suspected their ira- 
}>ending misfortune, had already carried ofif miiny articles, valuable 
either for the material of which they were compose^l, or for the 
excellence of their workmanship. The expulsion of the Jesuits was 
variously re;jarded ; it was lamented by the weak and hypocritical, 
while the wise approved the measure, the masses showed no interest 
in the subject ; and the remaining friars and priests rejoiced, from 
their natural jealousy and envy of the profi]ierity and power of 
the Order. The minister Tanucci was triumphant, and tho king 
indifferent ; but tho mind of the youthful sovereign was thus 



116 



HISTOBT OP THE KINGDOM OF SAPLES. 



Utt. 



training LoMlv to oppose tlio claims of llio Cliurtli, and to draw 
a distinction in his conscicuce between tliat wliitlt belonged to 
Cbristiau humility, and what was due to his royal dignity. 

For many cousecutive months the promises which Imd been 
given were faithfully perfctrnicd ; and after tlie Government had 
proved its sinecrity by its acts, another edict appeared, wliicli I must 
here transcribe to the honour of the king : — " After the just and 
necessary expulsion from our dominions of the Company which 
calla itself of Jesus, we, by our paternal care, and by llic sovereign 
power which wo derive directly frum God (taking upon oursclros to 
explain and niter the intentions of those vlio, in leaving their pro* 
perty to the said Company, mean to devoto it through the works 
which this Society professed to perform, to the spiritual welfare of 
their countrymcu), liave founded public schools and colleges fur the 
gratuitous educatiuii of poor youths in piety and iu the knowledge of 
letters ; likewi&e hospitals fur the malntenauce of the male and 
female orphans belonging to the lower classes, and for iheir instruo* 
tion in various trades ; as well as asylums for poor invalids or able- 
bodied vagrants, who, taken from a life of idleness, in which con- 
dition they were a burden and pernicious to the State, are now ren- 
dered useful by learning the arts required in our social condition. 
The community is relieved from the annual loans to the exiled Com- 
pany for the maintenance of schools ; the people in the provinces 
are benefited by the division of vast tracts of land into emalli 
forms ; honest but necessitous pei'soiis aro assisted by a fixed sum 
given daily in alms, and many other works of public utility have 
been perfonnod, or are to be completed, when the first claims 
(those of Diviue worship and the exercises of religion) have been 
provided for. By this use made of the properly of the exiled Com- 
pany, the demands ofpublic charity have been abundantly satisfied ; 
and with regard to the sanctuary, seeing the time is now arrived to 
apply the warning which Moses, inspired by God, delivered to the 
Hebrew people, to bring no more gifts to the altar, we, consulting 
the interests of our subjects, arid their secure enjoyment of their 
property, do, by this edict, resolve and deelare all the entails or be- 
quests falling to tlie exiled Jesuits, but not yet in their posscssiou, 
to be cancelled ; it being our royal will that the property compre- 
hended in the entails or bequests, shall reumiti at the free disposal 



1769. 



FERDINAND IT. 



117 



of tlio last lay proprietor, after whom it may be claimed by tlic 
Jesuits. " Fehdimakd Khx." 

" N^rua, 28ih July I7G9." 

In the midst of these transactioiis, letters from tbo Popo, in 
tho form of briefs, were circulatiug throughout Europe, atlacking 
the Dulic of Parma' for having, after ibe example of other sove- 
reigns, cjcpoHcd the Company of Jesus. Clement xni., by threat- 
ening tlie sovereign of a potty state, and a minor, whose anger ho 
did not fear, with nnathcmns and censures, tried the efficacy of his 
spiritual weapons, before striking a blow at more powerful sove- 
reigns. The brief began by declaring that the state of Parma was 
a ticf of tlie Church, and tliat acts hostile to the Company of 
Jesus were adverse to the riglits and authority of the papaoy, and 
were made in contempt of the warnings, inilulj^crico, and clemency 
of the most high pontiff; it concluded in these words : — " As it 
is Dulurious and iadi&putablc (by the llull of Caina Domini), that 
the authors or participators in the publication uf the above-meu- 
tioned deeds, have incurred the ecclesiastical censures, so these 
same cannot rt'ccive absolution from any excepting ourselves and 
our successors." 

The duchy of Parma was governed during the prince's minority 
by the minister Guillaumo de Tiilot, a Frenchman; without 
making any change in the admin ifttr.ition, he appealed to the 
kings of Spain, France, Naples, and Portugal, against the Pope, 
who had offended all Catholic sovereigns in the person of the sove- 
reign of Parma. The King of Portugal, practised in controversy, 
expressed Ids disapprobation of the brief; tlic King of Spain refuted 
it, by reproducing the disputes and protests against the Bill of 
CiPna Domini ; Louis, King f)f France, ordered his troops to occupy 
iho states of Avignou and the Venaiasin, possessed by the Pope ; 



' Phtnliittnd, Dukeof Pajnu, wmu^'Don 
PliUi[V ami gnDiUnn gf I'liilip r. King or 
8|)aii), *»(] (JuMn Kliutbtlh FamcBi^, wu 
scvcDtecD yvM* at kii,e. Bern t7&l, lie 
MKwcedvxl Mk GicbiT in die ilocliiet of Vu- 
maim] PI>n>ntuitTi 17^,atiili-ipoll«il lli« 
J««inlsiiilT0a. H« nurmil Marie Ainalip, 
ArcUticlMM of AnitrU, ilaugliirr ol iho 



Etni^Tor Fr»nci« t. By a wrret uticle of 
the Treaty ofLnnoTitli-, IROI, it wnRctipa- 
Intcd that bo clivuM lUCCMil to llio gnnd 
diLcbj DfTaKftB)-; but die jtnwJ Juke re- 
fadng tn ruuienl, Ike arrnngrmrnt waf ii»t 
mado jmblic, %tu\ the Duke of Pnmuk d»<>il 
in 1602. 



118 



HISTORY OF rUE EINOUOM OP 



and in Naples, tlie royal chamber of Santa Chiara, and tlie delo- 
gato of the ro^val jurisdiction, determined to support the claims 
of tho Bovcrci^ty, and while pointing out the fallocjr of the pre- 
tL'nsion& of llome, potitioneJ tlic king' to provide for tlio mainten- 
ance of liia own riglits and those of the State ; the king, in his turn, 
after expressing his disapprobation of the brief, and forbidding its 
publication within his realms, conimaiuled Benevento' and Ponte- 
corvo to return to tlieir ancient allegiance to the Itings of the 
Sicilici While taking possession of these states, and acting at 
their Icgitiniale and licreditnrv sovereign, he confirmed the citi- 
zens in tlieir present franchises, renewed those formerly granted 
them by past kings from the days of Kogor, and promised them 
more as a reward for fidcliiy. The people of lliefie provinces tonk 
the oaih to the new goveniment. ready to abandnn the ohl, partly 
from their usual fickleness, and partly because generous minds 
revolt from sulmiission lo priestly rule, even when it brings with 
it ease and quiet Upon this, the Pope conjured tlie Empress 
Maria Theresa to use her authority to bring peace to n^ligion, lo 
the Church, and to monnrclis ; but she, feigning modesty and in- 
ability, declined the office, interdicted the Bull of Coeua Domini 
in her own dominions in Italy, and commanded that the copies 
already introduced shouU bo burnt. Such were the repulses which 
the papacy brought upon itself in the year 176^, by its insntialilo 
thirst for power. 

King Ferdinand having attaincH tho age of manhood, entered 
into a treaty of marriage with Msrifl Josephine, archduchess of 
Austria, daughter of the Emperor Francis i. Tlic marringc having 
been settled, and the gifts interchanged, tho day of departure for 
the young bride waa fixed, and the feativnls, which were to greet 
her on her journey, prepared, when she fell ill and died ; and the 
gnia dresses and rejoicings ihrongliout the empire, and in tho 
imperial house, were changed into nn)urniug. Another princess, 
Maria Cnroiiuc, sister of the deceased, was chosen for the wife of 
Ferdinand ; and in April 1768^ she left Vietuia for Naples. Ku- 



> Jitmevatla. BMlooreil hy Ute Nonuau 
oomitiarun on tlie |ii>[k-k Tut llie inroliUirn 
of iSiglia oiiil CaliiliHA. ']1i« jiriucH nt 
IkacvGiiM n.iDutiic4 rcudatdrica of i)i« 



|K>|>i.-a imlU 1077, wfauu Loiidulphus ibe 
l»M prince <liml, «di] ItunfVnnUi rcimunci) 
tiuilor tbc tliract ilouiiniuii of tlir pupot. 



1701. 



FERDINAND IT. 



119 



ceived witli honoura bv all the princes of Italy, and more ospecialW 
in Florence, where rci^ncd her brother Piclro Leopoldo, sha arrived 
at Portolla on the I2tli of May, and was there met by her bride- 
groom. The palace of Ca»erta first received ihem, and from thence 
they proceeded privately to Naples on the 19th of the same month, 
and on the 22d made their public entry in rc^ral state. The {^t£ft 
and rojoicinf;:8 in the city and the palace lasted several months ; 
the king delighting in such amusements, the queen encouraging 
them from vanity, the courtiers from adulation, and the populace 
from their tove of pageantry, and the profit it brought to thorn. 

A princess of the House of Austria, quocn of the largest 
dominions in Italy, and wife of an indolent monarch, Caroline 
changed the whole policy of the government, which had hitherto 
been subservient to the will of Charles, King of Spain. The 
young iiuoeu was the better able to aucceod, as she was ad- 
mitted into the councils of state, which, though neither in accord- 
ance with the laws nor usages of the monarchy, had been stipuliited 
for in the marriage articles. The minister Tanucci, who derived 
liis power from the Court of Madrid, was disliked by tho queen, 
who was equally distasteful to him, and he lamented when too late 
that he had adriscd or encouraged the ignorance of the king. AI- 
lliough Caroline had not yet completed her sixteenth year, her 
understanding was mature ; and, beautiful and clever, she appeared 
a harbinger of prosperity to the kingdom, and attracted the eyes, 
whtlerousing the hopes of the poojile. Her brother, Pietro Lcopohio, 
grand duke of Tuscany, had followed her to Naples for her mar- 
riage ; and the year after arrived her other brother, the Emperor 
Joseph, both of whom, while converding with the most learned 
men in the kingdom, expatiated on their projects for the reforma- 
tion of their states, according to the dictates of the ago and of a 
wise policy. Thus the whole progeny of Maria Theresa appeared 
to us a family of philosophers in high places, sent by God to re- 
generate the human race. 

Upon the death of Clement xirr. in that year, 1769, Brother 
Lorenzo Ganganelli ascended the papal throne, under the name of 
Clement .iiv. Having learned a lesson from the vexations en- 
dured by his pretlecessor, better understanding tho spirit of tho 
times, and being desirous of peace, he proposed terms of accom- 



120 



UlSTOBT OP TSB KINGD031 OF NAPLES. 



modation to Uid offended nionnrclia. Appeased l>y liifi urTjanity 
and proffered pledges of fricndahip, tlicy accepted tiio mincios, 
sent ambassadors t« his court, and restored to him the dominions 
which had hccn occupied by their troops. Wliile maintaining the 
promises he had given, the pontiff reflected that the discord which 
was liardlj extinguished proceeded from, or was aggravated by, tlie 
nfTair of tho Company of .Tesus, and, yiehling to the eonttnucd en- 
treatiea of the princes, he published a brief, in w]nch he confinned 
their banishment. The brief was couched in tho ambig^uous kn- 
guagc of Jiome, nnd so as ahnost to appear ns if, to avoid a worse 
evil, the pope hud consented to yield before the superior power of 
the princes ;' but they, who were both proud and jealous of their 
prerogatives, yet in awe of the priest for conscience' sake, in (heir 
turn dissembled, and appeared not to perceive Jiia duplicity. 
Clement was enjoying the fruits of this peace, when he was 
seized by an illness of which he died, after great suffering. Tlie 
circumstances of his disease and of his death, or certain anti- 
dotes he had taken, confirmed the rnraonr that he had died of 
poison, administered by the friars of tho Order in revenge for the 
brief which deprived tlicse robbers of their privilegea, nnd tho ex- 
pectation of recovering their former wealth. If the rumour was 
false, the suspicion van not improbable. 

Pius VI., Cardinal Hraschi, becamo Popa As the King of 
Naples, through his ministers, had opposed his election, the two 
sovereigns, both from political and personal motives, were doubly 
hostile to one nuotlior. The arch i episcopal see of Naples falling 
vacant, tlie king, although the riglit was claimed by tho pouliff, 
appointed a successor, and commanded the new archbisliop, in Ids 
jmstoral letters, to omit tho solemn words, *' By the grace of tho 
apostolic see," in order to prevent the bare supposition of the pope 
having had any share in his appointment. For three past centu- 
ries at least, the archbishops of Naples had obtained the cardinal's 
purple, but Pius vi. refused it to the new archbishop. Upon this, 
the king wrote to irvfomi him that his refusal was only a fresh in- 
ducement for him to accomplish a design ho had long meditated, 



I C» liraf e>t tidigi do tnwiiiro i no 
point flilrir la compiifrnic. II e*t teuntr- 
^nable Is iitic tupiiresiiioD set prgnoncf*', 



non pour lei torU, jua!> h cansc Jim acou- 
Batious poil^ ciintm •llu. — Toc«pwvill«», 
Hitfnv de Loui* X V., vol. ii. p. 853. 



i;TS-6a 



FEBDIKAND IV. 



121 



to found n new ccclesiastioal order in his Ictngdom, eminent in rank 
aiid wenitli, and likcwiB« decorated with tho purple; one which, 
in reality as well as in appearance, sliould vie iu ningiiiiioeuco with 
the college of cardinals. Tins threat was intended as an insult 
to the hierarchy ; but, nevertheless, tliough the archbishop did not 
receive the hat, neither did the king found the order. Soon after- 
wards, Ferdinand nominated Fmnccsco Rorrao to tho bishopric of 
Potcnza ; he was the learned author of many works in favour of 
lay jorisdictions, and ao noted a, Jansentst, that the Pope refused 
to consecrate him ; and neither advice, mcnaco-i, nor cntrontiea 
could move him frain this detenni nation, until the king at In^t 
informed liim ho would cause the new bishops to bo consecrated 
in eaeh provinco by throe of the existing bishops, accordinjr to tho 
rules prescribed by the holy and early discipliim of the Cliurch. 

Iu the year 1776, a trifling accident gave rise to an affair 
of importance. It was customary for the kijigs of Naples (as has 
been already mentioned in the counse of this history) to prejient 
tho Pope annually with the ciiinea (a white horse richly capari- 
soned) and seven thousand ducats in gold. Tliiit imposing cere- 
mony took place on tho 29th June, the day of St. Peter, when the 
ambassador presented the offerings in the name of the king to 
the pontiff, who received them in the portico of the Basilica of tho 
Vatican, pronouncing thcfle words: " This is the offering due to 
the popo for the donation of the absolute dominion of tbe.king- 
dom of the Two Sicilies." That year, while Prince Colonna, grand 
constable of the kingdom and ambassador from the king, was 
riding to the Basilica, a dispute for precedence arose between tho 
servants of tho Spanish amiNUisador and those of tbe governor of 
liome.causinga pressure in tho crowd, nndadtslurbaucc, which was 
however, quickly suppressed. After tho ceremony was over, tho 
ambassador wrote to the king, informing him of what had occurred, 
and Ferdinand, through a dcspatcli of his minister, replied as 
follows : — 

" The disputes which have arisen on the occftsion of the pre- 
sentation of tho chinta have afflicted the devout soul of the 
king, as, considering the place, tbe time, and the circumstances, 
they might have occasioned serious consequences to disturb 
the harmony existing between the two sovereigns and the two 

TOI^ I. L 



122 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLK8. 



177ft-S3. 



rtates. Am this eaample has proved how an act of pure devotion, 
aucl) as the offering of the chinea, may be a source of Bcandal and 
discord, he has deliberated and resolved thnt the ccrcnionj shall 
cease for the future, and that in place of this act of dcvotioa^ 
towanla the holy ap03tlc3, he shall, through his representatives oi 
miinsLors, perform whatever clao raay be pleasing to tliem. Ex- 
ample, reason, reflection, prudence, huirianitv, aiul conscience, 
concur to move the royal iniml to thtit detc mi i nation, the form of 
this act boinj^ solely dcpciulont upon tho sovereign will, upon his 
pious inclinntious and religious humility. These sentiments of filial 
reverenoo towards the supreme head of the Church may bo com- 
municated to the Court of Home. Dated Naples, S9th July 1776." 
The Popo domandwl tho revocation of this dci-d, but, unable 
to succeed, protested against it ; and aUhough tho humiliating 
tribute ceased from that day, ho continued at every succeeding 
feaat of St. Peter to complain and protest against the conduct 
of the government of Naples. A few years later, the king 
privately offered him seven thousand ducats of gold without the 
ehinea or tho ceremony, as the gift of a prince devoted to the 
Church ; but the Pope refused its acceptance, declaring his rights 
more solemnly thau ever, and the disobedience (as he called it) of 
the Court of Naplea 

The uL-ws spread everywhere of tho good laws passed by 
Joseph nnd Leopold for tho benefit of their people ; they were 
approved of by tlie aavana, were highly commended by the 
Queen of Napleei, tlie sister of these princes, even excited a 
certain desire for glory in ttie indolent temper of the king, and 
thus smoothed the progress of the minister Tanucci, and of other 
noble men of that time, in the difljcult path which leads towards 
pulitical frewlotn, Pahnieri' and Caricciolo,*'' De Gennaro^ and 
GalUani,* be^tides other men of great leaniiug, holding llie jioai- 



bom At ticncxi 17&S; be advoL-KUil tlic 
syMtttn i>r political rv^hnx iiitnxl)i«vd liy 
J<>M|>1iii.; <1kJ m-M. 

' ffe*-4«»«to. a IwiroeJ pliilocopbcr, bi>m 
st Pkriii of m N4>ii]>nli(ai> ffunily, l/'21; 
intiMii Ihe or<lur of Bl. Pliili|i Nun ; «-»■ 
rMwired vitli tiunoura hy Driivdict \iv. 



nni Clement xm. : obtoinadtL pPtiiiMi ritim 
111" Kii>rir*-« M»ria 'llirrcM, du-fl IH03, 

*l>t (teuanrn, a><i--H.nI(>i1 jurifconivlt ; 
apfjuiDlcd » niapstralr hy CiU'rlo, wlio 
iM;iifid«>1 to hilt) iLu uuik of T^uriiig Ibt 
lecifllativc vodet iiiloouM; Uira 17UI,dle(I 
17C1. 

• Gaflicmi, a wrflw on [tolttioil ecwnomy. 



im-83. 



FEBDINAKD IT. 



1S3 



tions of ministerB or magistrates, hail, by their autliority and 
example, diffused Uie knowledge of political science ; whilst the 
minds of rulcn and subjects were alike preparing to receive sound 
reforms tlirough the writings of Filangieri,' Pagano,^ Galanti,' and 
Couforti,' and by lectures which had been recently delivered by 
fAntonio Genovese, a prodigy of genius aud virtue, and a man of 
vast erudition, though in poor circumstances. Academics, meet- 
ings, aud even conversation, exercised their influcnue in the same 
direction ; for the good of tho State was the theme of cvoiy one's 
study, and the applause of society surrounded whoever could speak 
best on this subject. 

The banishment of tho Jesuits had roused a spirit of rivalry, and 
afforded tho means for the organization of a system of nutioual 
education, as the Govemnicut fult itself pledged to surpass tlie 
good works supposed to have been accomplished by the exiled 
company. Every community paid salaries to masters in read- 
ing, writing, and arithmetic ; a college of nobles was instituted in 
every province, where twelve lectures were delivered, two on 
theology, and the rest on science or literature ; the same was 
introduced in the principal cities of the kingdom, and, though 
fewer, in tho smaller cities likewise The instruction was public, 
and tho professors wore chosen by public examination. The 
bishops, who had (ho sole direction of the seminaries, under the 
authority of the king, had neither voice nor power of interference 
in tho secular schools; and when, trusting to the piety of tlie 
prince or to ancient customs, they had tho audacity to meddle, they 
met with severe repulse aud censure. Upon a bishop ouve de- 
uouncing certain maatei-s for not observing the rules of the Catholic 
faith, he was answered, tliat the sole condition required from 
teachers in the public schools w.is, that they should be Chnsitians ; 
and upon the request of another bishop, that some professorships 



' FSAMffitri, ftn Author wlio oontribnloi) 
Urgvljr to ilui progmu of political adencc 
ud JuriMjiniileBce : bom nl NkpIm 1763 ; 
IdM St tin Bg? of Ihirt.v-ili, 178S. 

■ Anoiw, B ccMnlMd jariMonsnll, and 
fiiend of I^utgieri ; bom 1746, ilM on 



» GaJiniti, a wriltr on juritprailmct' 
Wn 1743, (liod ISUti. 

* C^N^irft, prorcuorof Iinkmt in tbo vni- 
Tvnity of Naplei ; ho ww in ucrod orcten. 
bat WMi emptuiyiMJ \iy Taiiucci to wrili.- in 
drfeiiM uf llie ri^'litn of llie ('mmi kgtiinrl 
the prctcn>i<m« of Rome ; bvfti 17 4J. I»r A\t*\ 
aotbaftc^fToltl, I7U». 



IS4 



HISTORY OF THE JUXODOM OF NAPtES. 



ino-ML 



ill his diocese sliouM be suppressed, which, in violalion of iho 
papal bull, ha.<\ be«n Blled up without his pcrnii&aiou, the king 
doclflTcd the pemtiiijiion of tlic bishop to be unncccssar^r, that it 
was an offence to ask it, and the bull which was quoted in support 
of this bold demand was for ever annulled. 

The University (degti studii) founded by Fredoric II., altei 
(often for the worse) by the kings his successors, and which hs 
almost ceased to exist during t)ic long period of the viceroys, had 
been revived brCbarlos, and was now brought to perfection by Ferdi- 
nand, who collected there all the intellect of the age. The salaries 
of the professors were raised as well as their hopes fur the future 
of tho university ; useless profcssorshipa were aboUsUod, while 
seven new wore added, which I &hall hero specify, to prove Low 
the ideas of tho time already leaned toward u&eful institutions. 
They were Italian, elocution, tho aii. of criticism as applied to tho 
history of the kingdom, agriculture, architecture, gcodnx'^ia, natural 
history, and mechanics. An extensive building called the Salvo- 
tore, formerly the monastery of the Jesuits, supplied rooms for tho 
university ; it contained besides the academics of painting, sculp- 
ture, and architecture, the Farnesc and Palatine libraries, the 
Hcrcnlnncum and Farncse museuins, a museum of natural Iiistory, 
A botanic garden, a chemical laljoratory, an astronomical observa- 
tory, end a theatre of anatomy ; all of which were cither whollyj 
new, or improvements upon the old. The Famese library and 
museum formed part of tho wealth whicli King Charles brought 
with him to Najiles, and (o obtain which ho had robbed tho 
of Parma. 

The statutes of the academy of science and literature were 
altered and reformed; for the trivial details and fonnalities of 
pBBt times were abandoned, and only looking to the question of 
public utility, it was laid down as a rule, that the sciences should 
he applied to tho service of the arts, trade, and medicine, and to 
tho discovery of new truths ; while the study of letters was to be 
employed to clear up obscuritioa in tlm history of the country, to 
advancD general knowledge, and teach the art of self-government, 
lint it is a fact worthy of note, that by law the major-domo at 
Court was president of the academy, and that tho honorary members 
were chosen by the stipreme arbityament of the king (such are tho 



177S-S3. 



FERDINAND lY. 



lU 



words of {he statute), and frimi the highest nohility ; so impossible 
•vsA it to euiaiiciiialo any social iiiKlitutiuu wliutsotivor from the 
royal avliitratiou, and from tlie jiowur of Iho nobles. Tho Hfrcu- 
laneum acailcinj was revived. It was tegun by Charles in 1755, 
but afterwards fell into neglect ; so that only four academicians, 
who happened to reach old ago, remained, out of seventeen. I will 
postpone the account of the military acadcTnies to their proper 
pUcc, and only mention here, that they wore founded at this time. 

In these various schools or academics the moat learned men of 
the kingdom were collected as masters or fellows; other institutions 
of a like nature sprang up, and all of them as they became known 
were held in high consideration throughout Italy, and were an 
honour to their country and tho aga As the limits of my work will 
not allow mo to record all the illustrious names they produced, 1 
shall only mention those who played a prominent part in history. 
Among the nobles were IlaimondodiSan^ro, I'rinccof Bansovcrino, 
Fraacfsco Spinelli, Prince of Scal&a, and Paolo Doria, Prince of An- 
gri ; among the magistrates, the Marquis Vargos Macciucca, Q iuseppo 
AuiTilio dc Geunaro, Pasquale Cirillo, and Biiigio Troise ; among 
tho ecclesiastics, besides Galliani and Genovese, the Padre della 
Torre, one of the three brothers Martini, the Padre C&rcani, and 
the Archhii*hop Rossi; and liisily, among the ladies, Faustina 
Pignatelli. Ginscppa Barhapiccola, Kleonora Pimcntel, and, above 
all, Mariangiola ArdinghellL Those classes in which tho studies 
had been formerly least assiduous, were at that time the most 
zealously attended. 

Many valuable works wore published, two of (he moat celchratod 
bein^. / Sngrfi PoUiid, by Mario Pagano, and La Scienta tMla 
Legialazione, by Gaotano Filangicri. Tho constitution of society 
was there explained, the rights of subjects and the prince dcBued, 
and it was hoped that the end of despotic rule and blind obedience 
was near at hand. The rhutoricul }<tyle of thcsu works, although 
unsuitable to the gravity of the subject, was attractive to the roul- 
titudo, and therefore beneficial, because the arguments were ad- 
dressed to tho buQVring aud tho hopeful. The authors were com- 
mended by all, and received reward* from tlie government ; Pagano 
obtained a professorship in the university degli ntudii, and Filan- 
gicri was raised to a high magisterial place in tho finances, and 



126 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



lT7«-83. 



received a pension, wliich relieved tlie honourable poverty of his 
family. 

I have thns given a hasty Bkctch of the projects for the regene- 
ration of tho state, conceived by men of genius in Naples. But 
otic fact roust be noticed, which is as niucli to bo lamented as true, 
that while the Hrst germs of puliticiU virtue in our Kge, and in that 
of our fathers, sprang up in the soil of Naples, merit has always been 
treated tltereafi a crime, and fame as infamy ; and this injuBti<«has 
been more frcquontlythcuetofUicirown countrymen than of foreign 
enemies. In no distant days from those of which 1 write, we shall 
find what was the miserable end of these very men, ordered by the 
government and approved by the people : for tho noble ideiis nn J 
wise laws here dcscrib&d did not emanate from the king, tior were 
they understood by the multitude (neither of them being capable of 
coiaprehendingsohigh a degree of civilisation); but were conceived 
by a small band of philoflopUers, and only appreciated by tho few; 
the vulgar, as usual, dialikinj^ anything which savoured of in- 
novations, which the government, a few years later, punished a§ 
Climes. 

Less wisdom was displayed in the manngcracnt of other parts 
of the State economy : Naples, which had preceded Tuscany 
in throwing ofT tho yoke of the Cliurch, saw herself aurjiasHcd by 
Piciro I^:o[Kddo in adrnini«trative atatutoa Altlitiugh the muni- 
cipalities were left free to settle their own alfairs, and aflcr an 
oxaminatiou into their accounts, the unfaithful discharge of their 
duty was puniidied, and though the adiniiiietrator, syndic, and 
auditors, were elected by the people in Parliament, nevertheless, 
these privileges were of little advantage, owing to disorders 
arising from the frnnchise itself, and even from tho vaiiety of 
minds and interests of the individuaU who acted as administrators, 
and of the municipal officers, some of whom made their living out 
of the duties, some out of (he customs, and others by the capita- 
tion tax. In one place, the money was devoted to tho erection of 
public works, in another to charitable institutions; here the out- 
lay was too niggardly, there it exceeded what was reiiuirad ; that 
wliicti was approved one year was disapproved the next, and 
the projects of one set of men were overturned by another; una- 
nimity and perseverance were wanting in the adminiatration, and, 



1770-831 



FERDINAND IV. 



127 



Elierefon?, noUiing great or ntalilo was effected. Tlio ling orifo 
lont the communo of PescoLaiizii the mone^v by which to purchase 
their freedom from the avaricioue baron Pietro Kiirico Piccolbmini, 
the ^raiit for the loan being thus worded: " To enable them to 
withdraw from the servitude uf the baroiiiul yoke:" but this 
solitary act, proceeding from a momentary inipulso, was tlie sign, 
not the substance of prosperity. 

The arts of life continued under the control of the guilds and 
ccnauls ; internal traffic was hajnpercd by the contributions for the 
anuoM^ (public storehouses), and for tho assise,^ hy the bfironial 
privileges, by tlic franchise* and immunities which rcnminod to 
the clergy, and above all, by the continual interference of the 
govcrameut in private enterprise or interests. The cultivation of 
tobacco was again freed from duty, but at the cost of burdens 
being laid upon other articles, such a« wine, salt, pepper, paper, 
and books. The manufaoturo of eilk, which had increased during 
the reign of Charles, excited the cupidity of bis ituccessor, and by 
being included among the arrendamenti^ for the exchequer, suf- 
fered from the conditions iusepaiTible from a stnte of thraldom ; 
£rst followed a diminished product, then the extirpation of the 
mulberry trees, and, lastly, the dct-Une of the national manufactures 
of silk and silken etulfs. Any mariner who carried on a contra- 
band trade iu sillc was punislied by death, and the slightest viola- 
tion of the law by flogging. 

The rich coral trarte likewiac Buffered. Torre del Greco, a beau- 
tiful city upon the aea-sliore, at the foot of Vc<(uvius, contains a 

I population of twelve thousand inhabitants, most of them mariners 
or raiTchonts ; because the land being covered with lava, or threat- 
ened by the neighbouring volcano, only affords a scanty and inse- 

|Curo support in itie liuubnndinan. Until the aixtcenih centur}' these 
mariners were in the habit of coral Bshing in the seas of Corsica 
and Sardinia, but in I7H0, venturing out still farther, they cruised 
along the coasts of Africa, well armed, and prepared for war ; and 
tuck possession of a little uniuhabited rock which lay about 



* JHmnu Rvety dwlrlcl wu obliged 
to BUppI}' llw pillic ftlarpli>7U>«< Tor lh« 
raiaing /ear, twibra imtig iK:Tcaitt«d lu*ell 
ur «sport oom. 



■ Anite, A tax impoacd by tb* t^aSn- 
to mcol coiuiimiuvl (•xpviiMK, 
' Amtulatm-uti. Sv* |uge?4. 



1S8 



UISTOBT OP THE KIKGDOM CF NAPLES. 



twenty-four miles dislAiil from the island of GMita, and fort;r-llii 
from tho coast of Barbary. They called it Summo, after the sea- 
man who first set foot there ; and finding tho shore rich with corals, 
bnilt huts for fihellcr, and threw up defences upon the wood-covered 
Toclc. Tiicy proceeded no farther during the two succeeding years, 
when, gaining courage, thoy attempted cxpeilitions to more distant 
shores, and, facing the dangers of war and slavery fi-oni the tribes of 
Africa, were successful in their fishorioa hoyond Capo Negro, Cape 
Rosa, and Cape Bona. By this good fortune tlio trado incroaBetl 
su much, ttiat six hundred largo barks, carrying moro than four 
hundred men, and of & size to resist tempests at sea, departed 
every April, and returned before the winter had Bet Iil Tho city 
having thus grown in wealth, splendid edifices arose, for the inha- 
bitants were iudiffereut to tho daugenj which threatened them 
from tlic neighbouring mountain, and, if tho city happened to bo 
destroyed by earthquakes, or to disappear under a stream of lava, 
another moro highly ornamented and more beautiful than tlie 
former was built up in less than a year, and upon the same site, 
from tho attachment tho people bore to the soil, and from th^ 
sacrod feeling to home, I 

Tho jntereata which sprung up from this coral fishery were so 
many, so vast, and so new, that the code did not contain laws 
sufficient to regulate the way in %vhich it was to be conducted, and 
secure the ends of justice. On occasions small meetings were held, 
to consider aomo case of private interest, and wero immediately 
dissolved, as tho idea of acting for the common honcIlL had not 
entered tho minds of the people, and one coral fisherman would 
often grow rieli at tho expense of his neighbour. Such mal- 
practices where affairs of great moment were concerned, induced 
tho foniiation of a larger society, which was, however, still only 
composed of volunteers, and, being witlioutiiiithority to control the 
public, could not supply all that was uopded. Tho Govoramont 
then stepped in to their assistance, aud by means of laws, ordi- 
nances, and conferring tho name of Company on the society, suc- 
ceeded in regulating the departure and return of the vessels, the 
fisheries, the aale of tho coml, the magistrates, officers, tribunals, 
and Judicial scntenccsL So many were tlio laws thus dictated, that 
tho book containing them was called '* The Coral Code." The 



l7r»-83. 



PERDIKAND IV. 



1S» 



company hnd Us own Imimcr, a tower botwcon two brandies o( 
coral upnii an azure sliieltl, surmounted liy three golden liHea. As 
long as tlic society tiiid boon independent, althougli constantly 
engaged ill disputes, and committing acts of injustice, the trade 
prospered ; but when formed into a company with a code of lavrB, 
and wlicn strife and injustice were at au end, their wealth declined ; 
fur the society had been urged on by au iudcfatig'aUo zoal in (he 
pursuit of private gain, while the company acted with slow deli- 
benition for the common benefit. The coral fishery continues to 
this day, but has ceased to prosper. 

A good law was passed, by which waste land brought into 
cultivation was not obliged to pay the predial^ taxes for twenty 
years ; and if planted with olives, for forty. By other laws the 
uninhabited islands of Ustica and Ventotenc were colonized, and 
subsequently those of Treroiti and Lnnipaduso. The colonista of 
the two first, who were taken from poor but respectable families, 
were g^autcd land and provisions for a certain time, besides instru- 
ments for agriculture and fishing. These colonics prospered, while 
the inhabitants of ihc other islands, wIucK were colonized from the 
thieves and vagabonds of the kingdom, scut thereby the hnsly man- 
date of magistmtes appointed by the king, soon died ofi' The Qo- 
vernmcnt then sent fresh colonists to 8U]>ply their place, but in too 
great itumbore, causing a decline in morals and industry. This same 
soUcitudo for tho public welfare, induced the Government to divide 
the city into twelve rione^ and in each to establish a magistrate or 
guardian, who was empowered to imprison accused persons, for a 
short time, and more frequently to send them to confinement in the 
penal colonics. As long as these arbitrary sentences were only 
applied in tho case of the lowest and moat disreputable characters, 
the kingdom was relieved from many fiagitious persons, and the 
city rejoiced in an improved state of things; but it was not long 
before respectable cilixens were sent to these islands without trial 
or proof against them, and only on suspicion of trenson, condemned 
by the license usual to unbridled power, and simply because they 
were displeasing to despotism ; the city and kingdom were again 
plunged in grief and alarm. 

I Pre-iUtt, cniuintiiq; of funnw. TIte {iredijl tilli« vera tltliM paiJ on oorti, gniaib 
wood, ttd. See Jiiaekttone, vol. U. p. 24. ' JlioM. A ward, ot district. 



130 



inSTORT OF THE EIKODOU OF KAPLRS. 



1776 ttS. 



A cemetery waa wnlled in upon tlio epot called PicliiodJ, and 
afterwards Santa Maria do Piaulo ; it contained as niaoy vaults 
&& tliercj wore days in the year ; but tlie bodies of tlio poor alouo 
were consigned to burial there, for the upper classes despising the 
place, interred their dead in the churches of the cicy. The archi- 
tect Fuga designed the cemetery, which was completed in a single 
year, from money given in charity. 

The moat useful institution of the time was that for the royal 
archives, which was first conceived by Ferdinand of Arragon as 
early as 1477 ; Charles v, followed up the idea in In.'JS, and Philip 
III. in 1609 ; hut the iiicuiistancy of princes, or unioward circum- 
atances, prevented the execution of their design, until the reign of 
Ferdinand of Rouihon, who completed the work in 17H6, By 
ordering that deeds productive of claims of mortgage should bo 
preser\'cd in the archives and registered ; that property should bo 
cleared, mortgages made certain, and the sale of inscribed jituperty 
facilitated, creditors were secure of their rigiits, and debtors con- 
strained to be responsible fur prounsod payment. The system of 
mortgage which has been deservedly prai«ed in the "Code Napo- 
I^n" was, at least, in great part, laid down thirty yeai-s before in 
the royal archives of Ferdinand, though less extensive and ex- 
plicit, and of no pecuniary advantage to tt>e State ; whereas the 
French code is comprehensive, strictly defined, and profitable to 
the exchequer. 15y the archives containing the patrimony of every 
family, fniuds are prevented, and litigation diminished ; the 
measure, therefore, was opposed by tlic lawyers, who were already 
infiucntial in the reign of Clmrles, and hail become t^t ill more bo 
under his successor. Whether as mitiistera of the Crown, magis- 
trates, or heads and ofticials cm))loyed in the archive itself, thcBO 
men disturbed the oficcta of this wise law, which was, however, 
maintained iu force by the unceasing cares of the Government ; 
and they thus deprived society of an essential benefit, by debts 
and claims returning to the old state of et^nfusion. 

8till more serious errors were eomuiitted in iho conduct of the 
finances. During tlie roigu of Charles, the treasure of Spain, the 
profits arising from Ihij conquest, and afterwards from the peace, 
together with the parsimony of the rulers and the contentment of 
the people (released from the painful servitude they had endured 



ITTO-ra. 



PeRIIlNAND IV. 



I3t 



in the provinces), was helping to remove, or at least conceal, tlie 
poverty of tlio exchequer. The Concordat with Kotnc of 1741, 
produced some contribution to thu taxes from the ccclesinstical 
property, and tliocensuB of the years immediately following, proved 
the existence of many towns which were now subjected to taxation, 
but which had formerly been exempt, because held aa fiefs or belong- 
ing to the Oiurch. The wealth aecuniulate<l during the reign of 
Charles, was consumed under his successor. Tlie exchequer drew 
its supplies from throe souixes, donations, direct taxes, and indirect 
taxes. The system of donations had in former times been abused, 
bccAUsc the easieat mode of raising money under a temporary 
government, but was rarely employed by Charles, and only twice 
during tlio reign of Ferdinand. 

The direct taxes, aasessed by the community, were paid accord- 
ing to the number of hearths in a district (a/iwjco or fire signifying 
a family), some communities originally feudal, or at that time be- 
longing to the Church, and others, privileged by grants from former 
kinga, enjoyed entire or partial exc-mptiou from the common bur- 
dens. Tlie allotment among the rate-paying communities was not 
according to the extent or fertility of the land, the skill or industry 
of the inhabitants, their success in commerce, or (to use a modern 
expression) to their real value, but according to a certain rule of 
population, laid down in 1 7<17, which was ratlior nominiil than real. 
By these errors, cities adjoining one another, might often he found, 
one rich in land and manufactures, and with superabundant wealth, 
the otiier poor in everything, yet the last pnying more taxes than 
the first. 

The method by which tlie taxes were levied was not less falla- 
vious; they were divided under three heads; the capitation tax, 
that on manufactured goods, and the land tax. Eccles last tea, 
barons, and those reputed noble, as doctors of pliilosophy, notaries, 
and all who subsisted without exercising a tmde, swelled the re- 
spectable class of nobles, nud were exempted from the two first ; for 
these taxes relating to the number of heads, and to hand labour, 
were supposed to refer solely to the existence and toil of the poor. 
With regard to property, the feudal lands (sometimes wholly and 
sometimes in part) being free from taxation, — besides those belong- 
ing to the king, or the exchequer, the uhurcli lands, the patrimony 



132 



HISTORY OP THE EINaDOM 07 KAPLGS. 



1776 83. 



of tlie clergj', lliy property attactiod to eominaries, the lands of tbo 
parochial cl«-gy mid llio ho»pital», — a small number of unfortu- 
uaU} landowners Luro the whole burden of the direct tax&s, which 
auioimted to 2,8iy,500 ducats annually, which was increased by 
another 290,000 ducats under the pretence of constructing new 
roads. 

The indirect taxes included all which the subtle invention of 
the fanners of the public revenue had been able to devise for the 
benefit of the exchequer In every age and for every people. Skill, 
industry, provisions, recreations, vice and gambling, were all made 
profitable to the exchequer. They woro called (as I have before 
Btated) from the Spanish term, Arrendaiiienti ; and were for the 
moat part sold, or pawned for new debts, or given in security for 
old i in wliich case tbo purchnscra or crcditora were charged to 
levy ibo taxos, and even pormiUod to punish evasions according 
to tite severe rules of the Government. They, therefore, exercised 
strict vigilance, stimulated by all the zeal of private avarice, and 
armed with the authority of public functionaries. Tho Ar'rvnda^ 
menti thus yielded twice as much to the purchaser as to the ex- 
chequer, while the rate-payer had to pay three times the real 
amount of tlie taxes. 

The king aboli^ihed several arrendammii, that called del minuto 
(the excise), another levied upon the Capitano dclla Grascia, the 
chief magistrate of the markets,' those upon tobacco, manna, 
brandy, saffron, tho tolls levied on foot-passengers, and in certain 
provinces, tho duty upon silk ; but in order not to deprive tho 
treasury of sources of revenue, nor fail in the ohligationR entered 
into with tho purchaacrs, now taxes, less oppressive to tho peoplo 
and more profitable to tho finances, were laid on, and others in- 
creased. The following anecdote is characteristic of the times: 
Tho Government having become aware of the injury caused to tho 
State by the arrendamenti, desired to buy hack souio of them ; 
and when the assignees (such was tho name giveu to the proprie- 
tors) refused their consent, the king decreed that the case fthould 
be laid before the law tribunals, and submitted to a fair and open 



*Cimfmfrgulniteti/lh€Mar1utM. Onpi> mre vull gupplicj. 
tano (li^lU (irucifk, n Tnn^»lnit« rtiargoi] ftlMliihnd. 
la lupcriHUDd the law^ela, and soe Uwy 



Tbo office i* now 



FEEDHfAND IT. 



138 



trUL The question under considerntion was, whether the exchequer 
might, upon equitable terms, redeem the arrendantenti, which had 
been transferred to other hands, and thus be enabled to cliange 
or reform the public finances, as the necessities of the State 
required. Among the judges was one Ferdinand Ambroaio, a 
cunning and avaricious man, who, when the sentence was about to 
be pronounced, finding that his colleagues meant to support the 
claims of tlic Government, entreated fiilcnco, and drawing fcirth a 
largo crucifix from the folds of his gown, and assuming tho tone 
and attitude of a misaionary, addressed his audience in these 
words : — " li^mcmbcr, gentlemen, wc must die ; that the soul alone 
is immortal ; that this God (]Kpiutiug to the crucilix) will punish 
us for having preferred ambition lo justice ; therefore I vote for 
the assignees." Ilis vote, however, being uiijusL, was not seconded, 
and it was besides known that a relative of the pious orator was 
fcmong those oppo-sed to the Government ; the arrendamento of 

It therefore was redeemed. In spite of the disordered slate of 
the internal administration, it contributed annually 14,*00,000 
ducats to the revenue ; yet the barons, although they possessed 
more than half the land of the kingdom, paid only 268,000 ducata 
out of thia large sum. 

Feudalii^Di, which had been only Blightly depressed during tho 
reign of Charles, daily gained in material advantages under Ferdi- 
nand, aaaisted by the labours of tho lawyers, who, wbtle tliey wore 
eager to diminish the extent and power of tho feudal jurisdictions, 
in order to add them to tliosc of the law, were equally anxious to 
increase the wealth of tho feudal proprietors, that tbcy might 
share in it themselves. They found a powerful support in tho 
Goveniment, whieh was as desirous as they were to put an end 
to the -mero e mtsto Jurisdiction, nn well as in the king, who, by 
habits, attachments, and the instinct of royalty, favoured the 
l>aron3. Many pragmatic sanctions or charters of this period, 
tlierefore, are in existence, intended to repress the haronial juris- 
diction, while, beside thcni, are other; maintaining their privileges 
and diminishing their taxes. Tho heaviest duties imposed u|ioa 
the barons for the Adoa and the Hilevio,^ as they were termed, 



^ vtdbo. A comppDution pAtd In- iW 
TnuUl lonb to iIm king in liiru of iniKur}- 



iitirvducud vUeUy m lliu OltetutL century 



134 



UlSTORT OF THE KLVODOM OF NAPLES. 



in«-«3. 



were boven per cent, ou llioir revenues, wliereas tlie most favoured 
citizeua Itad to paj twenty- per t-ent, moat of them tbirty, some 
forty or fiftv, while others had to pay even sixty ; the feudal 
tithes, forced labour, and all the abuses called rights, continued ; 
ift that feudal districts couhl he distingaiithcd at &ni sight hy the 
poverty of the houses, the squalid appearance of the inhabitants, 
and the want of those comfort^ and embellishments usually found 
in cities; there were none of ihe signs of civilisation, nuillier an 
eicliangc, court of law, nor theatre, while the marks of tyranny 
and bondage wore many ; castles, spacious dungeons, monasteries, 
or the dwellings of extinct bishoprics, with a few other large 
and fortified palaces of tlie nobles, were scattered here and thero 
amidst huaps of ruins and cottagL's. The eminent historian, 
Qiuseppo Maria Galunti, hardly ventured to statu thu almost in- 
credible fact, that iu the fief of San Oeutiaro di Palma, ata distance 
of only fifteen miles (five leagues) from Naples, visited by him in 
irsy, the only persons inhabiting bouses were the agents of the 
baron, and that the people, 1 0,000 human beings, were seeking shel- 
ter from the inclemency of the season like beasts, under hurdles or 
straw-ricks, and in cavoa. Such was the condition of the fiefa, and 
yet in a kingdom numbering 2765 cities, town^, or inhabited 
places, all but fifty were, in 1734, under feudal dominion, and all 
but 2<H) in 1789. Happily the feudal lords, improved by living in 
a more civiliKed age, were then ashamed oF the worst abuses of 
their power. 

Tlie above-mentioned laws, relating to the economy of the State, 
wore all that oeeurred worthy of note during thirty years. The ad- 
ministration and the Hnanucs continued barbarous and servile as iu 
the time of Charles, for we did not profit by the examples sot us by 
other kingdoms, or oven by our neiyhbour Tuscany, the native land 
of Tanucci, and where Pit-lro Leopoldo had prochiimed the enfran- 
chisement of property, the division of land, the abolition of predial 
servitude, and (liis true glory) commercial freedom. Kvcry thing, how- 
ever, relating to trials, mtigistratcs, and judicial matters, was better 



uiuUr FfirHinanil llie Oalliulit ; H had I o- 
euiDF ao cnminon in NAi^lcfl, dut a rrgnlAr 
K|^ll7, 7n{lt.<(l tliu Ceifolarit, vr«t rormcd, 
it) wlikh the Atloa eavti TcviIaI lonl w&t 



Ijalinil to pny, wtut entered, and furmod iiurt 
of the public ttvrnuc. — BUtno, Hxt- fine 
put] un tructtcdiiig tu & prapcrl/ hj llio 
iJoAlh of the ibriuvr ^repridur. 



FERDINAND IV. 



ISff 



provided for in Nnples. The jurisdiction of the barons, and the 
number of ihcir armed retainers, was limited bj new eiiactmeuts, 
and the power of the Crown and tho commons increased in propor- 
tion, but with Ihem likewise the nuthoriiy of the courts of law, 
wliere the utmont effrontery was displayed in dishonest dealings, 
dangcroua to the State. Several ordinances were passed intended 
to curb (heir vices, by obliging lawyers lo undergo » prescribed 
course of study, examination, and discipline; their rapacity was 
checked by a tariff, and their perfidy by threats of punishment, in 
which they wt-ro stigmatized as cavillers and ignorant and un- 
manuered persons. Nevcillicless their old habits prevailed, and 
the profession of the law was swelled by men of every conditioo in 
life, the lawyer's gown being worn ovtn by the lowest of tlio people. 
Marriages were wisely rcgulaletl by new laws, which, while 
strengthening the paternal authority, and making promises and 
vows invalid, even though taken before the priest or at the altar, 
put an end to female artifice, elopements, and unequal alliances, to 
to the advantage of morals and domestic peace. A more im- 
portant statute regulated the forms of Judicial sentences. As 
the magistrates in our countr}* hold a position among the first or 
the most influential orders of the State, persona occupying that 
ofRcc, ivhilo delivering sentence, despising the usual forms and 
simple modo of explanation, assumed a style of authority am) 
command ; by which assumption of dignity, some of the judges 
concealed their ignomncc, others their love of power, whilst all 
approved a practice by which their decitiions were uothiug more 
uor less than intiuiatiousof their supreme will and despotic power. 
But as men degraded by servitude Hud it more troublesome to tbink 
than ty obey, the people submitted quietly, until, under the better 
government of the two Bourbons, and by the general progress of 
intelligence, their minds were directed to the subject, when they 
could no longer tolerate this state of matters, declaring, that under 
the pretence of brevity, the judges masked injustice, venality, and 
ambition. A new law waa passed to soothe the apprehensions of 
the people, by which the magistrates were instructed to state the 
reasons for their decisions, and, if a law were wanting in the cotle, 
to demand it of the king, and, wherever a doubt existed, to refer 
to hiui for explanation. 



136 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOU 07 NAPLES. 



l?J«-«. 



Tlic magistrates rebelled against this di?crco, declaring that their 
dignttjr was olfended, as wuU as thetr iiide|)endcncc as judges. 
Under the first feeling of excitement, they propofod to refuse 
obedience, t<i oppose the nioasure, and resign their offices ; but re- 
flecting afterwardt), that b; reclamations and intrigues, they niiglit 
obtain the repeal of the obnoxious law, they reserved extreme 
measures for an extreme case, and resolved to prove their rightji 
by dcnionstriition. The immense body of lawyers, either from 
ignorance, adulation, or a love of controversy, took the side of the 
judges, and increased the outcry. 

The Supreme Council, or the first court of magistraturc, was 
divided into four sessions called Ruote; and whcticrer, from the 
iniiwrtanco or doubtful nature of a case, all met together, m mucli 
wisdom was supposed to be collected ia the congress, that their 
decisions had the force of law. In the present instance, the coun- 
cil, in a congregation of tlic four Huote, drew up, for the informo- 
liou of the prince, a hold i^taiemcut of the errors and niiBcliicvous 
tendencies of the uew statute, wliich they afterwanls published. 
The wisdom of the decree was, however, supported by men of the 
greatest learning. It was now that Gactano Filangieri, who had 
not yet completed his twenty-second year, appeared for the first 
time before the public, in a work entitled, Jlijlesstoni polittche «u 
la tfggfi (Id 10 di Setternbre del I?"* (Reflections upon the politi- 
cal consequences of the law of the 23d September 177+). in which 
he proved that, as the liberty of the citizen and the power of the 
monarchy resided in nn exact execution of the laws, the arbitrary 
decisions of the magistmtcs were both tyranny towards the people, 
and rchcllion towards the sovereign, The work was well received, 
and proved aharbingcrof futuroglorytothoyoungauthor. The king 
replied to the council by an edict, in which ho declared, "Equity 
required of the magistrate tlint justice should be plaiu spoken, and 
not, as tho supreme council pretended, concealed uudcr au oracular 
veil ; that it belonged to (he sovereign to create new laws, or to 
explain the obscure moaning of the o]<1, and to the judges to cxe> 
cute them ; that tho decisions of learned doctors, and the clauses 
added by commentators, were intended for tho study of the judges, 
and were not the laws- which were contained in the Pragmatic 
Sanctions." 



PERDI.VASl) IV. 



137 



The edict proceeded to reject tlie exceptions proposed, and to 
censure any delay in the fulfilinrnt of the doerce, concluding 
nearly in these words: "In consideration of human frailty and 
the usages of the supremo council, the king pardons the so]>hi8ni6 
invented and put forth in their publication ; and ho hupeH that by 
thoir obedience the magistrates nmy arrest aud diiuLriii Ihe hand 
of justice, inseparable from majesty." The law tribunals were 
silenced by the menacing style of this edict ; and tlie lerrilied 
lawyers declared themselves convinced. None of the ni agist ratt-a 
nwtgned their offices, nor did they resort to any of the extreme 
measures by which, when first discomfited, they proposed to save 
their dignity ; and from that day forth they announced the reasona 
for their judicial sentoncea, and public justice was more fairly ad- 
luinieterod. 

By an ancient prnf^mntic sanction of the Arrng^nese princes, 
the office of syndic had been intmducoti into tlie kingdom, to exa- 
mine into the administration of the public money, and the conduct 
of the magistrates. This office was tilled in the meti'0[)olis by the 
eletii of the market-place ; in other citiei; or towns by citizens 
clioscti by the people in parliament. The examination of the public 
officers before the syndic lasted forty day* in every year ; twenty 
were assigned to receive the accusations, and twenty for the dis- 
euuioD, during which time the officer on trial was deprived of his 
employment and authority. Every man, even, from the loweat of 
the populace, was allowed to accuse him of injustice, or of justice 
refused. If no chaise could be substAntiatcd against him, he rc- 
ceive<l letters-patent approving liis conduct ; if considered guilty, 
atrial w;ui opened for liis condemnation. The1<ings who succeeded 
those of the house of Arragon, allowed these ordinances to fall into 
disuse ; but they wcro subsc<)uently revived by Charles of Bourbon, 
and added to by Ferdinand, but without any advantJigc being 
obtained, since the other parts of the govcninicnt, and the habitx 
of the people, were nut on a par with this institution ; and the fear 
lest the accused should shortly regain his authority, often closed 
the lij>s of the injured against a dishonest judge; while private 
revenge would as often bring a just judge into trouble, only be- 
cause he had been instrumental in punishing tho^e In power. 
TI]e trials for crinuual oiletices continued the same as during 

VOL I. K 



I3B 



niSTOBT 0? TBS K1KG[>0M OF KAPUES. 



17»-8S. 



t&e reign of Charles : courtB of secret iuquiry, Scrivani, employed 
for this purpose ; tUo accused subjected to torture and other 
sufferings; tlie judges using no criterlou but their own arbitra- 
nieul, and even the power of objecting to them, which had been 
formerly permitted, now revoked by a new law. The trial by 
Truglio^ was continued, and oven increased in frequency, and in a 
worse form, because the wislios of the accused persons were not 
conaulted, nor their consent made necessary. By a barbftmus law, 
the class of thieves called Saccolari (pickpoclccta) were punished 
by torture, uponproo/e which only amounted to svspidoji^ produced 
by secret inquiry, nUhoutjh incomplnie, and Ike accused unheard awl 
undefended. A Biill harsher law jtrescribed tho resiicct to be paid 
to the royal palaces, in which were included nil tho king's houses, 
the villns, country or hunting seats, with the porticos, court:), and 
ofEces of these same buildings, even when not inhabited by the 
king ; and capital punishment was decreed to whumsoover should 
brandish a weapon within these precincts. By another law, the 
Society of Freemasons, as they were termed in the edict, were 
punished, and were placed on an equ.il footing with those guilty 
of high treason, and therefore rendered amenable to the tribunal 
of State, to ho tried ad modum belli; and the punishment, though 
not stated, was, by tho nature of the crime as defined, death. 
Shortly afterwards, a new law classed all other secret societies with 
that of tho Fn.'eniaHoiifl, as dangerous to the tranquillity of the 
Stato, and to tho authority of the sovercij^n. To read tho works 
of Voltaire snbjoetcd the reader to a penalty of ihreo years in tho 
galleya, and the Qassette of Florence to six months' imprisonment. 
Flogging, which had been less frequently used before trial, became 
a more common mode uf putiishment. 

A new wjurl of niagistrnles was instituted, under tho name of 
Udicnsa Gcnerale di Qucrra o Casa Xteale (general tribunal of war 
and the royal household), for cases of criminal and civil law, in 
which military men and those privileged to appear only before 
speeial tribunals, were im])licated ; and tlius the powers of niilitaiy 
jurisdiction were eitendetl and became permanent A general 
was placed at the head, and four magistrates acted as judges. Tho 

' TVmJ hg TVu^io. A mode nf trliil 1i/ ilfmnttl in iv Wly, iviiliouC may M^parau 
which tba pfiMnan wen jodj^d and con- oxominAiiou. 



177S-S3. 



PBRDINAND IV. 



1^ 



forms were brief, and the sentonccs without appeal. The jurisdic- 
tion extending; from ])oniuus to places, aiiutlmr decrco established 
tlmt all crimus or disputes arising between the inhabitants of cer- 
tain houses, or in certain streets of the chy, should be laid before 
the L'dienza Generale di Guerra. The territory thus privllegetl 
in Naples alone, included a full twentieth part of tho cit^, and 
contained not less than thirty thousand inliabilants. The prece- 
dent was followed throughout the Itin^jdom ; and every fortress, 
castle, or military edifice, included a certain district and number 
of inhabitants in the vicinity not amenable to the civil jurisdiction. 
These encroachments on tlie civil judicature rapidly increased, and 
it waa next decreed that no tribunal could try misdeeds or inter- 
fere in the affairs of officials under tho Secretary of State, as the 
king alono could decide the merits of tho case. This despotic law 
was proposed by the Marquis Tanucci, to favour one of his subor- 
dinates in a civil suit. 

AjiiidH so many political errors, the amount and enormity of 
criuiu increased. A proclamation of tho king agaiiist malefactors 
ran thus : — ** Robberies upon tho highway and in tho country aro 
80 frequent, as well as assassinations, rapine, and other heinous 
offences, that security of traffic is at an end, and the harvests are 
interrupted." MagislratcR and soldiers were commanded to arrest 
or put to death the disturbers of the public peace ; and merchants 
and travellers were advised to perform their journeys ormed and 
in caravans. Brigadier SelayLos was sent with gendarmes into 
the provinces, with absolute puwer for the extennination of male- 
factors ; while these last were moaiitimo invited to submit, and 
promised oblivion of the post and pardon, — a clemency which did 
not procecfl from humanity on the part of the Government, nor 
was accepted because those guilty of crime repented their mis- 
deeds, but was a holluw and tem]iomry pacilication, to which neces- 
sity obliged both the Goveninient and tlic oliendent to subniiL 
Tho remission of crime and punishment on tho occasions of any 
happy event in the palace, such as a marriage or birth, helped to 
demoralize the people ; they were so frefiu>-ut, that nineteen may be 
reckoned in the thirty years recounted in this book; so that tho Nea- 
politans may be said to have moved in a perpetual round of crimes, 
barbarous punishments, and impunity, followed by wotso crimes. 



140 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OF KAPLES. 



177«-«3L 



The enactments for the rofjiiilation of commerce were ad- 
mirable ; and af^er Ferdiiiami had aUdeil new statutes to the 
statutes of his father, he ordered that they should bo registered in 
a book, eDtUlod, The Commercial Code. This work, completed by 
the laboars of Michele lorio, atul jmblished in four volumes, but. 
not authorized by the king, and forgotten during tlie ag'itntioTie at 
home and abroad which immediately followed, remains a document' 
of good intentions, or is used ns a guide in commercial transactions. 
The admiralty court was instituted to decide specially in commer- 
cial cases, and in all relating to mercantile and naval nft'aira, under 
the control of the supreme trihuniil of commerce appointed by 
Charles. Tho punishments instituted against fraudulent baiilt- 
niptcieti were n-vivod, and wore bo severe, (hat I read with horror 
iu iho pragmatic sanctions of the day, one which ordereii the muti- 
lation of tho offender. 

A duke of a high family, and among the leaders in the court 
cii'cle, happening to owe for a bill of exchange, endeavoured, under 
th« shadow of his uame, to shelter himsL^f from payment, and the 
punishments coiiscquont on failure ; but, accused before the king, 
lie was obliged to submit to tho common rule, Ferdinand declaring, 
that neither oxallod rank, nor purity of blood, nor the dignified 
]Ktsition of a magistrate, should save the debtor who had incurred 
an obligation upon letters of exchanpfc. By another law, the ex- 
change was founded, and it was detcimitied thnt the bills with 
foreign nations should be mode directly from Naples, and not, ns 
heretofore, through the intonnodiate cities of Rome, Leghorn, 
Genoa, and Venice. After these rules had been laid down for tho 
regulation of commerce, tho king proceeded to confirm former 
treaties of navigation, and to enact now: first, with the govern - 
meat of Tripoli, in August 1785, on equal terms for the merchants, 
but more honourable for the king than the barbarians, who acknow- 
ledged his superior dignity and power, — it was reserv'ed to a more 
unhappy period for the Neapolitan monarchy to fall so low as to 
bow before the people of Tripoli ; secondly, with Sardinia, iu Juno 
I 7HG ; thirdly, with tho Itepublic of Genoa, iu tlio same year and 
month; fourthly, with Russia, in May 1787, with whom he Jiot 
only stipulated for commercial advantages, but in case of war, for 
reciprocal neutrality, according to the laws of natious. 



im-a. 



KERDIKAND IT. 



141 



In CTCTV part of the administration, gctod atjitiilcs niiglil l>o 
found side by aiJc with bad ; but ihc firat were more numerous 
than the lost : the army alone, by the natural decay of every- 
thing wliich is neglected, degeneratc<l from year to year. Tlic pos- 
slbtlity of war waa forgottoti, as the last ended in 1 74-1', and men. 
hail since enjoyed peace, until it Imil become a second nature. 
Under the bright and voluptuous skiea of Naples, and with a fniit- 
ful soil, ilic inhabitniUs were like the climate ; the king whs 
addicted to pleasures, while his ministers were only eager in 
their endeavours to promote civil institutions and case ; the body 
of lawyers were hostile to everything warlike ; and the queen her- 
self^ though covetous of fame and power, was negligent of the 
army, because at that time useless fur the purposes of ambition ; 
the rcgimenis formed by Cliarles were already enfeebled by age, 
the walls of the fortresses lay in ruins, and the arsenals were 
empty; military science, arts, order, and habits, therefore, were 
alike foi^otten. 

The king, when a child, had fonned a battalion wbich he bati 
named the Liparotti ; and whom, as a boyiab amusement, he hnd 
trained in the use of arms, lie afterwards founded (be military 
college for cadets, but under regulations compiled by officers who 
were neither learned in tlioir profession nor experienced in war. 
He next raised 14,000 militia by conaeription in tlie kingdom of 
Naples alone, from the most abject clflsscs of society; to prove 
which, it is sufficient to mention, that banms, nobles, doctors, men 
holding any property, and those exercising professions or trades 
were cxcmptett from serving, whilst the most degraded of the 
citizens were accepted, and with reason, as the niilitar}' formed 
the lowest order in the stale. Criuiiuulii, and those guilty of the 
most infamous deeds, were oficueondcmued to milttanr service; and 
still more freriucntly, galley-slaves and men taken from the pnsous 
were converted into soldiers. Sucli was the military condition of 
the country in the year 1780, when, owing to events which I shall 
shortly relate, an army was raised. 



142 



UlSTOBr OF THE KIXQDOM OP NAPLES. 



imt-»j. 



CHAPTER III. 



COKTISCATIOS OP THB RBIOH OP FEROinAHP. 



TnB qucou having given birch to a priaco, claimed, as had 
been stipulated in her marhage-con tract, admission and a vote in 
the councils ofBlatc The kiugotrercd no opposition to her dc«ra, 
but the niinisLor Tanucci, vrhu Feured lier talents and arrognnoc, 
aft well as that of her family, first secretly placed obstacles iu 
her waj, and titcu openly attempted to frustrate her designs. She 
conquered, and the minister was dismissed. No kin^f banished 
from his Iciiigdotn could more bitterly lament and complain of his 
loss, than Tanucci, at being forced to resign the ministerial office; 
the neglect of those he thought his friends, the disrespect shown 
him by his inferiors, his deserted rooms, the change of scene upon 
the fall of his power, all the display of those vices which are in- 
herent in human nature, were by Iiim attributed to the surprising 
corruption of the time ; and to cacapu the hated sight of man, be 
retired into the country, where he ended his daya Minister to 
the king of Nn]ilcs from 1 7^14, he was dismiasci) from oftii'O in the 
Bar 1777, and after ruling the stntc with princely power fur forty- 
three years, he died in 1783, iu comparative poverty, and without 
children, leaving an aged wife and a fair reputation. 

The fall of Tniiucci coniiruiod the opinion of the power of the 
queen, both in the minds of the people, and in the councils of 
slute. Iu the bloom of youth, only tvrenly-live years of age, blessed 
with many chtldrcu, beautirul, proud by nature, and still more proud 
from tlie greatness of her family, sho found it essy to rule lior hus- 
band, who ivas wholly absorbed in sensual plcasui'es. Slie changed 
all the foreign relations, broke otV their connexions with Spain, 
and leaned more towards England than FrAnee. Tlio Marquis 
dclla Sambuca, a favourite at the Court of Vienna, when ambassa- 



mff-83. 



FERDINAND IV. 



14« 



Uor there, was, tHrougli her means, ftppointetl minister in pWo of 
TuQucci. On liis aiTival in Naples, he supported lier in her laud- 
able schemes for tho welfare of tho people ; as, following- tho ex- 
ample of her brothers, she was desirous of gaining the approbation 
of the savans, and, therefore, proposed to introduce reforms into tho 
kingdom. Thus, having become tlic centre on whom rested the 
hopes of the great, t)ie ambitious, nnd the pntriotic, she felt con- 
scious of ber power, nnd was elated hy her success. 

This change of poltci?, which made tho litngdom more inde- 
pendent, at tho same time rousod the priilo of tho Govcnimcnt ; 
and, no longer dwelling under the shadow of foreign potentates, 
it became necessary for the king to provide for tlie snfet.v of his 
dominions. Kuling over a kingdom coveted bj many, and abound- 
ing in wealth, yet with a diminiiilied army and navy, he was exposed 
to danger iu the tirst war ; tho long line of coast was unprotected, 
and commorce, which was now so widely spread, depended on the 
vueiUating faith of treaties, and on the hollow promises of the 
people of Barbary. Both .ships and soldiers were wanting, but 
as no native Neapolitan could be found thoroughly versed in 
military matters, the king sought a general for the army among 
the Austrians, and looked elsewhere for an a<lmiral, who should 
neither be a Spaniard nor a Frenchman; all these suhjecls were 
discussed by men of high consideration and tflloiits in the private 
coteries of the queen ; some of whom were admitted there Ibr the 
support they gave her secret wishes in tho royal councils, or for 
proposing them as their own^ and others because they circulated, 
or gave the authority of their names, to the acts and edicts of the 
Government. On one occasion, the Prince of Caramanico, the in- 
timate friend and reputed favourite of the queen, proposed that 
Sir John Acton, an Englishman by birth, at tliat time in the ser- 
vice of Tuscany, should be appointed admiral of tlio Neapolitan 
fleet : He had bocu covered with glory in a late enterprise against 
Algiers, and was said to bo well versed In nautical mutters, as well 
as in milltury science ; besides being a man of bold and energetic 
character. Tho Marquis della Sambuca seconded the proposal, 
hecauRC eager to increase his fortune rapidly, and aware that his 
favour with both sovereigns was on the decline, ho was ready to 
flatter the views of those in power. As the opinion of Cnramanicj 



IM 



HISTORY OP THK KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



irra-si. 



met with no opposition, and received the consent of tlie queen, 
and soon afterwards of the king, the cavaliere Gatti wns sent to 
Florence to obtain the pernii&sion of the Grand Duke Leopold tol 
engage the services of the new admiral. Acton was thus brought 
to Naples in 1779, and was well received by the queen and king, 
praised by the great, and appointed head of the mariiie department. 

From causes nbovc slated, the ^nances of the State were deoHn- 
ing ; the fonnor taxes were insufficient to mcot the increaeeil ex* 
pendituro of the palace, xvbilc to add new, besides appearing too 
hcai'y an impot*ition in times of peace, would have been more than 
the people could have home. As tlie Marquia CaiiLcctolo, ambas- 
sador to France, was reputed au autliorilj in the wience of 
political economy-, he was appointed miuister In place of Sam- 
buca, and it wad thought that he would restore the adniiiiUtra- 
tion of the interior without the irksome retrenchment which had 
been tiraidlj hinted at in the councils of statc' ; in tliia confidence, 
the extravagance of the king, the prodinality of the queen, the 
luxury of the palace, and the cmbarrassmenls of the exchequer, 
were in no way diminished. But the Marquis CatJicciolo, though 
a scholar and philoaopber in his day, was now enfeebled iu courage 
and intellect by the advance of age ; and, while he perceived the 
errors in the administmtion, he felt, froui the shortness of life 
and bis failing strength, his own inability to np|>[y a remedy ; the 
favour enjoyed by Caramanioo, and the rising power of Acton, 
excited neither his jealousy nor anger, for he only wished to enjoy 
in repose, past honours and present ease. The weakness of tho 
minister, as usual iu a dcHjjotic govemmeiit, infected all members 
of tho State, and opened an easy way to tiie realization of Actou'a 
hopes. 

When the Court of Rome saw Naples governed by a minister too 
feeble to dispute her power, she proposed a oew Concordat ; aud 
tJie offer being accepted, sent Monsignor Caleppi to advanco 
her bold and extravagant claims. But though twenty-two points 
were conceded, a controversy arose touching the Court of Nuncia- 
ture and the election of bishops. The Pope aimed at a separate 
jurisdiction for the nuncios, bcaides ai-med retainers, and dun- 
geons at their disposal; and proposed that the prelates, though 
named by the king, should be recognised at Rome as worthy and 



ITTB-fSk 



FERDINAND IV. 



]^ 



accepiabie by the rf«CMi'on, o?* at l«is.t by the spiritual apj'^obattcn of 
ike pontiff — one ofmany formulas bj which tlic tyranny of the Popca 
had been exercised for centuries ; and it was therefore rejected. 
The diepute waH tlragged on to so weary a length, tliat the congress 
waa broken up, and C^lcpjii, the nuncio and the amljassador, 
dismissed tlic kin^om. Tho last glory of the Mint«ter Tanucei 
iiad Leon tho abolition of the Chinea ; tho last of Cartcciolo 
was lits ruslBtuiiee to the Court of Home in the instance just 
mentioued. Such were the bold strugLdcs for freedom and such 
the geuiii8 of tho ago. WliiUt these disputOB were still pending, 
it was remembered to the houour of tho niiniatcr, that wtieu 
viceroy of Sicily, he had banislied tho Uoly Office, and liad approved 
the conduct of the citizens of Palermo, who, when prevented de- 
stroying^ the palace of the Inquisition, had broken tho marble 
statue of 8t. Dominiek in pieces, and scattered the fragments; 
burnt the archives, and, throwing open the doors of the dungeons, 
had led forth in triumph the unhappy victims confined there. 
In the midst of those transactions tho inoftt daring and iin|ilac- 
able spirits were the old, the grcy-hcadcd, and thoec bent 
with the weight of years, who, remembering tho auta-da-ff 
of t72-l-, had excited the frenzy of the young by repestiog the 
story of tho sutferingB of Gertrude and Brotlicr Romualdo, re- 
curded in the first book of this history. Thus, praised by tho world, 
aud full of years, died the Minister Carricciola 

Fortune proved propitious to the ambitious schemes of Sir John 
Acton. He was Minister of Marine during the lifetime of Caiio- 
ciolo, and, gaining the favour of the queen, while accommodating 
hia views to the genius of the age and the spirit of the government, 
became popular at Court. He was soon afterwards appointed to the 
Ministry of War, and, at the death of Can\cciolo, was intruste*! with 
that of forei{,'n aHaiis. Crafty by nature, and accustomed to deal 
with the itiuwions of men, he feared a rival in Oammanico, who had 
not yet wholly forfeited the royal favour, and that by hia vicinity 
to the palace, the associations and memories of the past might be 
maintained ; be, therefore, contrived to have him sent as ambasfiador, 
first to Loudon and then to Paris, and, finally, apjHjluted viceroy of 
Sicily. Fearing public opinion, however, aud anxious to obtain 
tho sufTrage of tlic people, Acton courted tho men who were most 

VOL. L X 



HISTORY OP THE KIXGDOH OF NAPLES. 



wteemod m llie kingdom, oxpi-csscd himself averse to foiidal pri- 
vileges, blamed tlio indolent lives of tlie nobles, and introduced 
normal schoola, estaUlslitng tliem in all parts of the country ; he 
furthered the interests of cominerco by restoring the porta of Miseno, 
Urindisi, and Baia, M- designing monv highwnys and roads through 
the provinces, and by proclaiming religious toleration in Urindisi 
and Messina. The circumstance of his being a foreigner did not 
deprive him of the resjwct of the Neapolitans, loo much nccustomeil 
10 this infliction ; and the absence of persons fitted for the offieo 
of minister, or ambitious of that honour, saved him from enemies 
ufany importance, and removed obstacles from his path. While 
avoiding the responsibility of the public purse, he yet feared that 
»yme oue minister, deriving importance from the prescut emergency, 
should supersede hitn in power and favour ; aud, therefore, he caused 
ilie office of Minister of Finance to be abolished, and confided the 
management of these affairs to a council, because by thus dividing 
the merit and the praiae due to success among thirteen council- 
lors, no one individual could attain celebrity. The remaining 
offices of government, those of Justice, Divine worship, and the head 
of tlic administrations, were given to lawyers ; Carlo de Maroo. 
Ferdinando Corradini, and Paverio Simonotti, bore the title of 
niiiiiatcrs, but were in fact all subordinate to Sir John Acton, who, 
by his office, by court favour, and by the 8er\'ility of those who 
surrounded him, was considered, and was in reality, the prime and 
sole minister, as powerful as the king, but moi'c respected aud 
feared than Ferdinand, who was thoughtlessly degrading his royal 
dignity by plunging into the most sensual pleaeurcs. 

Sir John Acton was created « tield-iiiarsha], and from that day 
assumed the title of general, which he kept until his death; he 
was next made lieutenant-genenil, aftciwarJs captain -general, and, 
decorated with all the ordci-a of chivalry in the kingdom ; he re- 
ceived several foreign distinctions, and, among others, was made an 
English nobleman for his sen-ices rendered to England as minister 
of Naples,' and acquired unbounded wealth. Endowed by nature 
with a robust constitution, and fine person, there was uo gift of 
fortune which ho need have coveted, yet ho was often melancholy 

' Hb brvaiL[> n bnronet in 1791 \iy ritir- liiR couKin [in lliv tliirO drjin^p), HU Buli 
(■wiling lo the tuuilj' lEtlc un the itaib of ard Actoo, of AldenlKun IIoll, S1trop«bir«>. 



ir7fi-«a 



FBRDIXAND IV. 



147 



(ft8 I have been told by one of liis family), and was apt to indulge 
in imaginary grief. 

He undertook to form a navy nnd army. As only a sufficient num- 
ber of vessels were needed to defend the coast, and overawe the 
petty sovereigns of Barbary, too smal) a navy or too largo was, for 
opposite reaaona, cqiinlly prejudicial to the country ; but to saliafy 
the queen and the vanity of the minister, a great many ships of 
the line were built, besidca frigates and other vessels which, 
while far exceeding what was necessary for the protection of 
commerce, carried oil' Bcamen better qualified for trading ves- 
sels: besides which the cxch<.>quer was drained by this useless 
oxpeuBti, aud uew roadoiis fur alliances and hostilities with foreign 
nations arose, into which we were prematurely forced, by our 
recently acquired power at sea. Our land forcoa beiug nominally 
thirty thousand, but in reality fourteen thousand soldiers, the 
first idea of the minister was to recompose the regiments, so that 
the army should be again complete. For this end a utw law was 
passed by which tho commons were obliged to furnish a consider- 
able body of infantry, and the barons cavalry and horses. This 
contingent included voluntocre, debtors, vagabonds, and men taken 
from the prisons and galloyn. Baron Snlia, from the Grisous, wae 
invited to train the new levies, and Colonel Poracrcul, a French- 
man, well known in his native country for his talents and aorvioca, 
to form the coqis of artillery. Many foreign officers nnd seijeanta, 
either invited or brouglit thither by Kalis and Pomereul, joined 
their ranks ; among thyin was serjeant Pierro Augereau, destined 
some years later, when general of tho French Republic, marshal 
of the empire, and Duke of Castiglione, to fill many a page in hi.t- 
tory ; and lieutenant Jean Baptiste Kbl»*, afierwanla first general 
of artillery in Franco, who shared in many victories, and died in 
battle in ISI2; bappy in not living to behold a change of 
BtaudanL 

This levy was looked upon with dislike by the degenerate populace 
of Naples, while the discipline, habits, and orders in a foreign lan- 
guage were equally adverse to the feelings of the soldiers, and still 
more so to their superior officers, who concealed their ambition for 
command, under zeal for the honour of their country ; a foolish pride, 
since they had none of tlie habits of military life, and were sunk 



148 



HISTORY OF TUB KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



1778-68. 



in the corruptions of an idle city. The discontent at lengtli beeai 
60 loud, thai llio govcnimcnt, fcann^; a dangerous mutiny, dii 
miftsod Salia and the rest of the foreign uftic(>rs, with the exception] 
of Pomcrcul, who, hciiig only employed for a small part of the army, 
and acting with ofKceni wlio Moru le&s iguoraiit tliau tho others, 
had not excited the opposition and enmity of the multitude. The 
consequcuce was, that while thft artillery improved, the rest of tho 
army degenerated. About this time commenced the hatred the 
people bore Acton and the queen, while their attachment to the liing 
increased, as it was believed (as was really the case) that he was 
avemc to these innovationa, although tliey were issued in his name, 
out of compliance to the will of hia wife and minister. 

Fame havinf^ spread the news of (he increased power of the 
kingdom, tho Bourbons of France and Spain desired to form a 
closer alliance with the king of tho Sicilies; but the disposition 
and views of tho Court having undergono a change, tlicy met with 
eold replicB, and, finally, ropulsea. Upon this, Charles iii., writing 
to his son, as a king, father, and benefactor, advised him to dis- 
miss his ilt-ohosen favourite, Sir Jehu Aetou. from the ministry 
and froiu his kingdom : his advice was not listened to; and soon 
afterwards when he offered to allow two Neapolitan men-of-war, 
and as many merchant vessels as the king pleased to send, to join 
tho Spanish flotilla bound for Amcriea, this offer (in many respects 
so advantageous) was rejected. Wood for ship-building was refused 
to France, although it liiul boon sold to her from the earliest period 
at a high price, and nbounde<I in the forests of Calabria. All man- 
ner of incivility was displayed towards thoao sove^t^igns who were 
allied in blood, whilo every courtesy was shown towards tho 
mouarchs of Austria and Hnglaud. Louis xv. was, therefore, ill- 
disposed towards the Court of Najilus, and Louis xvi., after all 
hoi>e of a fricudly uuderstanding had failed, was converted into on 
etmny : ovon Charles iii. died displeased with hU son. 

Tho order of thno has brought me to the year 17S3. when 
a violent earthquake overthrew many cities, and altered the snr- 
faco of a vast extent of land in Calabria and Sicily, causing the 
death of men and cattle, and a universal panic throughout botl 
ktngrloraa. On Wednesday, the 5th February, about an hour pMt^ 
mid-day, the land of that pai-t of Calabria wluch lies between the 



ma. 



FEIlDINAyD IT. 



U9 



riTcri QaIIico and M^tramo, from Mounts Jeio, Bagra, Caulone, and 
the shore, and from betwixt theso rivers to the Tyrrhenean sea, was 
convulsed. This district is called the Piana, because the counlrv 
nt the foot of the last of the Apennines stretches out into a plain, 
twenty-eight Italian niilea in Icn^h, and eighteen in breadth. The 
carth(|iiake lasted & hundred seconds : it was felt as far ns Otranto, 
Palermo, Lipari, and the other jfiolinn islands ; only slightly in 
Puglia and the Terra di Lavoro, and neither affected the city of 
Naples nor the AbruKzi. A hundred and nine cities and villages 
with a iwpulation of 166,000 inhabitants corered the Piana : and 
in less than two minutes all these buildings fell, causing the 
deaths of 1J2.U00 human beings of every ago, men and wotuon, 
more of whom were wealthy and of noble birth than poor or 
plebeian: for no human power could avert this 8n<Iden destruction. 
Tlio soil of the Piana, composed of granite rock wherever (he 
spurs of the mountains arc prolonged, or of various earths brought 
down by the waters which descend from the Apennines, varies 
from ploco to place, in consistency, power of rcsiBtanco, weight, 
and form. Wliatever, therefore, may have been the origin of tho 
earthquake, whcdior volcanic, as stated by some authorities, or 
electric, according to others, the movement was in every direction ; 
vertical, oscillatory, horizontal, rotatory, and vibrating ; and it was 
observed that the causes of destruction were often ditlVrcnt and pro- 
duced opiKtsitc results. Ono half of u city or of a house sunk 
while tho other was upraised ; trees wore swallowed by the earth to 
their very topmost branches, beside otlier trees which had been lorn 
up by the roots and capsixed ; ft mountain burst and foil to tlic right 
and left of ita former itiie. while the summit disappeared, and was lost 
in tho bottom of a newly-formed valley ; some of the hills were seen 
to become valleys, while the sides of others became rugged and steep; 
the buildings upon them moving with tho land, generally falling 
in ruins, but sometimes remaining uninjured, and tho inhabitants 
not even disturbed in their sleep. Tho fissures in the grouml in 
many jilacca formed laigo gulfs, and aoon afterwards mounds were 
thrown up; the waters, either gathered in hollow basins, or 
escaping from their beds, changed their course and condition ; 
rivers met and formed a lake, or expanded into marshes, or 
disappeared altogether, and burst out anew as rivers flowing 



150 



HISTOHY OF THE KINGDOM OF XAPLKS. 



ins. 



between new banks and laying the moat fertile fields bare nndj 
sterile. Nothing retained its ancient form. Every trace of towni 
cities, and roads had vanished, so that the inhabitants wandered 
about in a state of stuiiofactiou as in a remote and desert re^on : 
80 many works of man and nature, the labour of centuries, bo- 
sides rivers or rocks, perhaps as ancient as the world, had been 
changed in a single moment. The Plana was thus the centre of 
the firat earthquake, but from the change in the whole surface of 
the ground here described, sometimes villages at a distance were 
more injured than those close at hand. 

At midnight of the same day there was a second shock, as 
^nolent, but not so destructive aa the first ; for the ])eople, warned 
of the danger, and already houseless, and without the means of 
shelter, were standing in the open air, stunned and desponding. 
The nnblc cities of Mcs&ina and Keggio, however, and all that part 
of Sicily called the Valdentone, euffercd more from this second 
shock than from tho iirsL Messina in that year, 17S3, had not yet 
fully recovered from the damage caused by thy earth(|uakeof 1744, 
so that tho present earthtiuake, hy shaking buildings and land which 
had already been injured, overthrew everything, and thus new 
ruins were hcipeJ upon the old. Tho shocks continued, until the 
laud itself was subverted, and men and things which had beon 
engulfed days before, were often again uncovered. The high 
chain of the Apennines, and the great mountains upon which are 
situated Nicoti'ra and Montoleonc, resisted for a considcral>Ic lime, 
and though emcks might bo seen in some of the buildings, they 
wore neither thrown down nor moved from their original sites, an<l 
tho earth beneath them had not yet been convulsed. But on the 
2Sth doy of March of that same year, in tho second hour of the 
night, there was heard a hollow rumbling noise, loud nnd pro- 
longed ; and soon aftc-rwardc. a great movement uf the earth was 
felt, in tho spaco lying betweou the Capes Vaticano, Silvero, StUo, 
andColonna, at least 1200 square miles, which u-as only the centre 
of the shock, for the concussion reached the moat distant ocntincs 
of Calabria Oitra, and was perceptible throughout the kingdom 
and in Sicily. It lasted ninety seconds, and caused the deaths of 
upwards of two thousand human beings. Seventeen cities xvere 
entirely destroyecl in the same manner as tho hundred and nine 



xm. 



FEBDISASD IV. 



lAI 



cities of the Piana ; twenty-one, besides, were partly laid in ruins 
and partly injured ; more Omn a hundre<l small villa^s ivere suli- 
mct|^ed or tottering; and that which was standing upright one 
day, was the ncit thvoim down ; the shocka continued with the 
aanie violcuoc and destructive force for scveD months, until August 
of that year, a time which sucmed like eternity, because measured 
by seeonda. 

Whirlwinds, tompcsta, volcanic fires and conflagrations, rain, 
Mtnd, and thunder, accompanied tho Qarih(|uakes ; all the powers 
of nature were shaken : iL socmod as if her bonds were 
loosened, and that the Jiour had arrived for tho comnioncemcnt of 
Ibu new era. In the night of the 5th rehruary, whilst the earth 
Was still convulsed, a meteor hurst and swept away tho highest 
part of several buildings; a bolUtower in Messina had Ibe top 
carried off, an ancient tower in Kadicoua was cut across above the 
base, and a heap of rubbish (so massive as to contain part of thu 
staircase) remains still in the place where it wa^ throwo, and 
is pointed out as a curiosity to the stranger. Many roofs and cur- 
uiccs, instead of falling upon the ruins of tho buildings to which 
they bebngcd, were canied away by the whirlwinds, and fell in 
distant places. Meantime the sea between ChaTybdis and ScylU, 
and along the coast, near Roggio and Messina, waa raised several 
braccia,* invaded tlie sliorea, and in retreating to its own bed, swept 
away with it men and cattle. Tims perished about two thousjuid 
persona in Seylla alone, all of whom bad fled to the sandy beach, or 
had taken refuge in boats to escape the dangers of the land, The 
priuco of Seylla, who waa amongst them, disappeared in a moment, 
and neither tho efforts of his servants and relatives, nor the pr^t- 
miso of ample rewards, could lead to the discovery of tho bwly, 
which the.v wished to honour with a tomb. Etna and Stromboli 
emitted a larger (juantity of lava and inflamed matter than usual,' 
hut this calamity did not excite much attention at the tinke, from 
being far the least disaster. Vesuvius remained quiet Conflagra- 
tions, worse tliau any fire fn>w the volcano, were the couscquence 

' Mnrr tlitin tuenty fi:-:l. Sw Lyell's r«|Hiar Inwards tho (■.-giuDin^, nad Stuin 

JVintifjles <if Otology, p- 419. '■oU limsntii iIib r-Iimn uX lli>- rnii)niiiti«iia 

* Th* gtvct cralor of Gina In b,uJ lu — lull's PrincipUa »f Oeuloyy, p. 484. 
Iia*« glveii out a oQniMikmblc ijuuitiljr uT 



152 



HISTORY OF TUB KINODOH OP NAPLK8. 



wa. 



of tlic cartliqunlcG ; for in tlio fall of iho houses, ttie boaran came in 
oonliict witi) titu burning atovcs, anrt ibo flames, fanned bj tito 
wind, spreail bo vast a tire around, that it appeared to issue 
from tlie boaom of the earth, which gave riao to false stories 
and l.hc belief in suUterratipan beat. This was cotitinflcd by 
the loud noise and niiublitig sound liku tliuiider vrhich was 
sometimes lieard preceding and suinetimes accompauyiuif the 
alioclis, but more froquentlj aloue and very terrific The sky 
was cloudy yet serene, rain falling, the weather variable, and there 
was no sign of the approaching earthqualio ; the indications ob- 
scnrod one day were missing on the morrow, and others wore 
discovered, until it wfts found tliat the conh shook under cvciy 
aspect of the heavens. A new calamity appeared ; a thick cloud, 
which dimmeit tho light of day, and increased the intense dark- 
ness of niglit, Yvhioli v/a% pungent to the eyes, D|>presKivc to the 
breath, fetid and motionless, hung upon the atmcspboro of Calabria 
for more than twenty days, and was followed by melancholy, 
disease, and shortness of breath, felt by man and beast. 

I must now turn to a Btiii more tragical part of the history; 
tlie misery endured hy the inhabitants of this region. All who 
were within their houses on tho Plana, at the first carlliriuako 
of the 5lh Februnry, perished, with tho exception of those who 
remained half alive under the casual shelter of beams, or other 
parts of buildings, which happenetl to fall in an arch over them ; 
they were fortunale, if disinterred while still living, but ihcir fate 
was drcailfiil when left to die there of starvation. Those who 
chanced to be in the open nir were saved, though not even all of 
them; for some were carried down in tho gulfs whicli opened 
lioncath their feet, others swept otT by the waves of tho sea as 
they returned, and othi-ra struck by materials blown along with 
violence by tho whirlwind; but more miscraldc than any, were 
tlioee who remained spoctators of the ruin of their houses, under- 
neath which lay buried a wife, a father, or children. As some 
yran later I couvei-sod with eye-witnesses of this catastrophe, and 
with men and women who had been dug out of tliu ruins, I am able, 
as far as relates to the feelings and character then cxhibitc<l, to 
delineate the moral efloets of iho earthquake of Calabria ; a more 
difficult task than the description of its physical aspects. 



vrta. 



FERDISAND IV. 



153 



The firat shorlt vra.s preceded by no sign on earth, or in the 
hoavons, to vxcite cither alarm or suspicion; but at the move- 
ment and the sight of the destruction of cvcrj'thjng around 
them, all were seized with panic, so that, losing their renson, 
And even the instinct of self-preservation, thov remained stunned 
and motlonlofn. As their senses returned, the first sensation of 
thosi? who had esfraped was joy at tlicir good fortune ; but the joy 
was Heeling, for it was immediately succeeded by the overwhelm- 
ing thought of the loss of their families, the destnictiou of their 
homes, and, amidst the various fljrnis of death with which they 
WL-nj flurroundi'd, the fear that their last iiionient was at hand. 
They were still more agouixcd by the recollection that thctr rela- 
tions might be alive beneaih tho ruins, and by perceiving (he 
iniposaibility of helping them, they could only hope (n fearful 
consolation 1} that they were dead. How many fathers am) hus- 
bnnds could be seen wandering amidst the rubbish which covered 
those they loved, unable to raise tliese piles of masonry, and vainly 
calling to passers-by for assistance, until at last, in despair, they sat 
weeping day and night over the stones. In this mortal abandon- 
ment ihcy turned to religion, and vowed offerings to the Deily 
and a future life of contrition and penance; Wednesday, in every 
week, was to be held sacred, and the fith February in evciy year ; 
on which days they hoped to appease the wratli of God by solf- 
inflictod torture and solemn festivals in the church. 

But the niofit dreadful fiite (worse than can either bo pictured 
or conceived) was tliat of those wlio remained alive beneath the 
rubbish, waiting for aid with eager and doubtful hope; they blamcnl 
the tardiness of their friends and those they loved beet in lifo, 
accused them of avarice and ingratitude ; and when, overcome by 
hunger and misery, they lost their senses and memory, and fainted, 
tho last si-ntiments they breathed were those of indignaliuu at 
their relatives, and hntred of tho human race. Many were disin- 
terrctl by the affectionate caR* of kindred, and a few more by the 
earthquake itself, which, while disgorging the first ruins, restored 
them to the light of day. When all the bodies were uncovered, it 
was found thai a fourth ]«irt of these unhappy beings would have 
been saved nlivc, if assistance had not been delayed, and that the 
men had died while struggling to disengage themselves from the 



154 



niSTOBV OP TEIB KINODOU OP NAPLES. 



irsi. 



rubbish, whilst the women had covered thetr fiicea with thoir hands 
in despair, or were tearing their hair. Tliero wero likewiso 
mothers, iudiffurerit to their own sufToriags, while protecting their 
childrf^ii by making an arch of their own bodies over them, or hold- 
ing their arms extended towards tlieir beloved ones, although unable 
to roach them through the rubbish, and many proofs were hero 

Lgiven of the masculine courage and strong affections of women. 

'An infant at the breast, which aftcrwardu expired, was disin- 
terred iu a d^-ing state on the third day ; a woman with child, who 
had remained thirty hours beneath the ftlones and been rescued 
by the tenderness of her husband, gave birth to a healthy infant 
some days later, and the child survived a long time ; when the 
mother was aakcd what was the subject of her thoughts beneath 
the ruins, she replied, " I was waiting." A girl of eleven years of 
Age was dug out on the sixth day, and survived ; another of six- 
teen, Eloisa Rasili, remained buried eleven days, holding a boy in 
her arms who expired on the fourth, ho that his body when 
taken out, was corrupt and putrid; but abe Imd not been able 
to rid herself of the cor|)se, because they wore both inclosed by 
tbe rubbish, and she counted the days by the dim light which 
penetrated even to this tomb. 

The tenacity of life in the case of certain animals was still more 
remarkable; two mules continued to live uudera heap of ruins, ono 
twenty-two days, and the other twcnty-thrco ; oven a turkey sur- 
vived twenty-two days, and two pigs remained tbirty-two days 
alive underground. Both beasts and men, when brought again 
into the light of day, exhibited a dull apathy and indifference to 
food, but an unquenchable thirat, and were nearly blind ; the usual 
efTocts of a prolonged fast Of the human beings saved, some 
recovered their health and spirits, while others continued suffering 
and melancholy: this diftereuee was attributed to the dilTor- 
cncc of time when succour reached them ; whether beforo or after 
they had lost hopa The servant girl Baaili, though handsome, 
and well provided for in the house of her maater, sought after and 
admired for her adventures, never relaxed into n smile during the 

.remainder of her life: in short, all who had been roscued, when 
ksked their thoughts while they were beneath the ground, answered 
by relating their histories as I have given thorn, but each con- 



iTn. 



FfiRDlNAND IV. 



155 



eluded by saying ; " TIius far I remember, and then I fell asleep." 
None of them lived long; the unliappy Baaili died youDg, before 
sbe had completed her twenty-fifth yeiir, and neither wished to 
marry nor to take the veil ; she liked to be alone, and to sic under 
a tree, frotn whence she could neither see the cily nor houses, and 
turned away her oycs at the approach of a child 

A long iuton'at indeed had elapsed before aid had reached the 
sufferers, but not owing to the indifference of tiieir reiations, or 
of the people ; for, in the earthquake of Calabria, as in other 
events, good preponderated over evil, and while a few men showed 
themiiclves atrociously wicked, others displayed heroic virtue. In 
one instance, a wealthy man caused excavations to be made in the 
rubbish of his house, until lie had found and recovered his money 
and other valuables ; he then stopped the search, although hf> left 
his uncle, brother, and wife, perhaps still alive, beneath the ruins. 
Again, there were tM*o brothers who had been disputing the pos- 
session of a large inheritance, and, as will happen between near 
relations, wore at variance with one another and enemies. Andrea 
fell with the house; Vincenzo inlierited the disputed property; 
but anxious and uneasy for the fate of his brother, ho never rested 
until he had unhuricd him, and was fortunate enough to take him 
out alive. But hardly had the magistrates resumed their func- 
tiuus when Andrea, deaf to all proposals of acuomniodatiou, had 
the ingratitude to renew the lawsuit, and lost it. Were I to relate 
all the instances of kindness and savage cruelty, of gratitude and 
ingratitude which occurred, I should fill many pages, merely to 
prove the truth of the old adage, that man is the best and worst of 
created beings. The cause of the delay in disinterring those buried 
beneath the ruins, was, that terror and the care of self-preservation 
absorbctl every other thought and affection during the first days ; 
deprived of their homes in the most severe month of winter, ex- 
posed to violent rain, storms, and wind, their cellars destroyed, 
their stores of com wasted, and tho pcojile of the neighbourhood 
afraid to bring victuals to a place whom death was so constant and 
near, all their labour and money was devoted to the conslructiou 
of rudu huts, and the purehasc of food for the support of life: the 
thought of their relations was faint and svcoud:U'y. 

llabit made these trials supportable ; tho rudest huts were 



us 



UISTOKY OF TUB KIKODOM 0? KAPLE3. 



irei 



improved, and even emljolHslunl ; the iiihabitants of di^itnnt vil- 
U^3, attractcU by the love of gain, broiig^ht food and artirlca of 
couveniencc and luiury, and, when their sufl'crings and afflictions 
were abated, they retunictl to the enjoymenta of life, to love and 
marriage. Sricicty wasi-o-organiwd, but not ini])rove<l ; during the 
first days, tho general feeling of terror had absorbed all other pna- 
sions, such as hatred, cupidity, and revenge, and there being no 
teni])tntion to crime, that vicious population wore for the moment 
peaceable and devout, except that when they saw the great with 
Iheir heads bowed in iifiliction, thev kept repeating with a mali- 
cious pleasure, wliich niigliL be excused in the vn&suls of proud and 
haughty barons, " Ah I now rich and poor are all equal" Tho 
inhabitants of the baronial towns, ment.iU and low ruflians, who 
h&d bitcly been releajod from prison (as in the (rrviblc commo- 
tions of the 5tli February, a feeling of humanity had caused the 
prison doors lo bo thrown opon), now began tho work of plunder 
amidst the ruins, robbing the huis wliich were lea.st Btrongly 
guanjed, and committing munler and every iniquiiy: yet lliose very 
men were cjirning largo aums by ihoir labour, in buihling cottages or 
digging in tlio ruina, or by going to a disianco to purchase food. 
Many families who had been in easy circumstances were impover- 
ished, and many more acquired great wealth, rcrsonal projicrtj 
was for the most part destroyed, wliilu in the new direction taken 
by tho waters, the earllt having been carried away in some places, 
and accumulated in others, rendered the moat fertile lands bar- 
ren ; and distant kinsmen of deceased families suddenly received 
unhoped-for accessions. By the land belonging to one pei-son being 
superposed upon that of another, and by other cases of disputed 
property, for which there was no precedent in the Code, nor guide 
for the decision of the judges, numborloss changes occurred, and 
property was divided and subdivided ; and as suits at law had been 
destroyetl with the arcluvcs, and papers and documents with Iho 
hoasea, the claims of private indiviiUials were lost or confounded. 
Tlie rights of projiorty wore thcrefi)rc as much convulsed aa the 
earth itself, and these cliaiigea of fortune being so rapid and unex- 
pected, helped to degenerate tho morals of the people. 

The Jirst tidings reached Naples so speedily, that from its very 
suddenness, and because truths which crcued the commou belief 



17B3L 



PSKDINAND IV. 



157 



look like fietion, it wae not credited. Flying niTnoure, biwides 
mossengem and letters, informed the Govcniment llmt the disaster 
wa£ only too true, and immediately ob miicli as Iiuuuid weakncag 
could supply against tlic irru^lKtible Tur-c of cnluru, was sent to the 
assislunce of tlie sutlVrens. Ctotht's, food, inoney, [iliysiciatis, arti- 
ficers, nnd arcliitecta, followed by k-arned avadc-niicians, archieolo- 
gists, and i)aiulcrs, nil hastened to Calabria ; and, before any, tho 
representative of tlio principality, field-marsbal Francesco Pijfua- 
teJli. A junta of magifltratcs was placed at the head of the admi- 
nistration ; and tho public rcvcuuc, and those of the Church, wore 
collected and preserved in chests said to he consecrated ; order 
vras maintained in the State, the taxra, of which tlie cccIcBiastical 
property paid half, as agreed to by the Concordat of 1741, were 
proportioned to tlic dintresscd state of Calabria, while an extraor- 
dinary tax of 1,200,000 ducats was imposed on the remaining ten 
provineea of the kincdom, for tlio aid of the two whieli liad beon 
ruined ; and thus the aiHictcd population gradually recovered from 
their loascs.* 

In the summer, the stench from the dead bodii'S fsontc of which 
only had been burnt, and those too late), that from the slaguant 
watero, with unhealthy meteors, pcuury, distress, and bodily suffer- 
ing, produced an epidemic dii^order, which spread throughout the 
two Calabrias, and added dead to the dead, and alTliction to the 
affliction of the people. Tlmfl the year passed miserably away, 
and it was not until the commencement of the year I78t, when 
the land had regained its consistency, when the epidemic was 
spent, wlien the calamity was forgotten, or men had become re- 
signed to misfortune, that they were able to look hack and coolly 



> LoTxpia U nouvollc <lu Caul bcule- 
Vftnemiiit iIc U OtUbrvKminlkNniilrK, Ip 
ra Bl AUKMtot pnrliT UO do K» loiianlm 
U. rtfTDuU'Ili. iivrc une Mmme conaiilrrnlJe 
poar acc^mrir )o« liakitKiis. Si Em bnircB 
Am ni uuNKiit etc txk-uiff nrtc Qtlf-lll^, 
kiMnn OoliiWi* n'rul (icri d«puia IVpnqiH* 
(111 tmiiiblinmnit liu tirre, aim* U lucgc'i't! 
Aiilricliii'mii' VTinlaiit aETMMir inr 1« ccur 
de F»riin.-u><l rim|>ri-Hioii<lc oettvnoavvlle, 
twiiA da liU iH.'r>uaJer <(u« le rfcil i\i/H 
tiitt tnigM i vt «til gnui4 suio d'vndw- 



tnn«r Pignalolli annt mu d^rl. Pigna- 
li-IH ii'«I<'cuU p'l* Ia ilixi'ioif.' partici itiw 
onlm ([(I'll nifuU n^ue ilu rui. U gnnlu 
UIii' buiitii- niiiilirdc 1*1)1)^1 ijiii lui rCslAit, 
et remit )(• Kiirpitu au roi en t'oHumnl (!»« 
In Cttliibre ^-tnit ^■iJ Iwn (Ul. l^gnnlt-lli Ml 
dcvpiiii I'olijat iIb I'rxH'rutian (intilii|tic : l« 
ni )DHlriiit >)()i>i([iic foit tur\l tie KftBoAl^- 
trMC tt dc wt pFTtidic dcvittt fuTwui : n&u 
1a prc^cliuu do la rrin« it ntivv I'igiuitclli- 
II brille encfw A In ctuir.^JUfiuoirra Se- 
crtU dt» Cimrt lU PltaUe. Pub. 1793. 



]58 



HISTORY OP THE 



)F KAPLE8. 



mt 



ealoulate t1i«r losses. In the coui-so of tea moullis, two hundred 
cities and villages liad been de&trojred, and GO.OOO Calabrese had 
perished \jy all manner of deaths, while it was impossible to com- 
pute the amount of damage, which might well he said to be in- 
cftlculablo. There were the usual number of births, many and 
strange marriages ; crimes were frequent and atrocioos, and afflic- 
tion and mouming everywhere. 

In the Hrat days of the year 1784, the Emperor Joseph it. 
came to Naples under a private name. Refusing the honours 
duo to his rank, and Lho reception prepared for him in the palaee, 
he ashed for a guide and Instructor to point out all that was ro- 
markabio in the city. The queen sent bim Luigi Scrio, a learned 
man and scholar, of agreeable mauucrs and conversation. Joseph 
wished to visit the scenes of tho recent devastations in Calabria, 
but was deterred by the difficulties of access, the winter season, 
and the want of good roads. X(c, for the second time, con- 
versed with those Neapolitans who bore the highest reputation 
for learning and patriotifim, whose acquaintance he had made on 
his former visit. Ho again spoke witli them of his bold and 
philosophical projects for the government of the empire, and, 
nt his departure, left behind him » character for virtue and 
philanthropy. 

Anxious to imitate his example, and that of Leopold Grand 
Duke of Tuscany, the Queen of Naples persuaded the king to 
make a tour in Italy ; but the pride of tlie Bourbons not permitting 
them to assume private names, or to rest contented with a small 
retinue of civilians, they travelled with nil the pomp of royalty. 
On the 80th April 17^5, thty unibarkud on a vessel richly fitted 
up, followed by twelve men of war, and sailed for Leghorn, avoid- 
ing the States of llome, in order to mark their displeasure towards 
the pontiff", at that time their enemy. Arrived in the harbour, 
they were visited by the princes of Tuscany, with whom they pro- 
ceeded to Piaa and Florence. The old custom of holding a tourna- 
ment on the bridge was revived in Piaa, though, by omitting the 
warlike reality of a fiercer age, it was reduced to a theatrical show. 
Other lioTiours and diversions awaited them at Florence. It is 
said that the Grand Duke Leopold, full of the reforms he had in- 
troduced in his State of Tuscany, asked the king how much and 



iTaau 



FEEDINAND IT. 



U9 



what ho had done for las kiagdoiu ; to which Fonlinaiid replied, 
" Nothing," ThcQ, after a moruout's ptiuse, ho added, " Many Tus- 
ean& Wg for employment in my kingdom ; how many NenpolUans 
ask the ftamo of your highncsa in Tuscany?" But before the 
Duke could answer, the qusen pnidently interrupted the converea- 
tion.' Tlic sovereigns proceeded from Florence to Milan, thence 
to Turin and Genoa, where they embarked upon the same fleet, 
iucrcaaed by Engliali, Dutch, itnd Maltese vessels, which, together 
witli the ships of the kin^ (twenty-three men-of-war of all sizes), 
conveyed thera aa far as the port of Naples They had travcllwl 
four months with so much splendour and profusion, which waa 
reported and exaggerated a few years later in Germany, that Fer- 
dinand acquired the name of the (iohlen King. The city of Naples 
held great rejoicings ou the retura of the sovereigns, which was 
celebrated as If tliey had achieved a national victory. The journey 
cost the treasury more than a million of ducals, enough to havo 
healed the recent wounds inflicted by the earthquake. 

The end of the year 178S left the palace in mourning. Two of 
the princes, Januarius aged nine years, and Charles six months, 
were seized with small-pox just when a messenger arrived to 
announce the death of Charles iii., king of Spain, which had taken 
place on the 14tli December of that year. Although he was suc- 
ceeded by Cliarles iv., brother of our king, the royal family lost 
the support of the wisdom and name of the deceased monarch. A 
few days afterwards the Infant Januarius died, and was followed 
to the gravo by the younger Infant Prince Charles : and at iho 
funeral rites, which were celcbrntcd in the royal chapel, tho effigies, 
and the names of thu fa(her and two sous of llie king, were cx- 
liibited. This accumulation of misfortunes would have caused 



) Tiitn GimImm-, Iho laiit Urand Valke nf 
IW Ilniicc o( Mt^lici. ilir4 1737. t'mlcr 
Iii* mill] £i>v«TnTi)t<ni, tlio attnchmeDt of 
tike TUcMt Is tbr Huimo uf JroJii-i, itUluh 
lud becB kiiifr ilonaiiiit. revived. Afu-r 
tUo «4r Wt«-M" Iho Hnimeii of I Iiipobtii); 
uiiil Bi«rl>oli, ttio puvrtis of Kunjm- Jc- 
i-tHeA un be«lowiui; Tus'.-.tnj' mi PnuicU 
Uukp of Lomine, t)i« liiiMbjiiid nf Maria 
'Hmtoi*, frotn wHani it ^ubmI to her •Moml 



•on, LcopuLI. Hiiiiy Tmiaiiia left tbc 
coiitilnr oil iW iUhiIi nf liinn QastoiM'. 
tI(itT> iliATi 3u,*ill0 fimiilics aeltlL-il in Napira 
ttnd Sidly, wlwre th<'}- rcmuLtl a sinjiir; 
tiKixl i>r niiiqn rhiiiii^ ihMiiiuilvM, aiiil, frfiRi 
thru ouji-riur rdiicatiou U> lltHl cf liir 
NcnjoliiAiix, ititniv ntjiid f>MUinc«, hmt 
filk'd pLscn of indaen» siiil profit.— 8m 
Mimmn» SeenU itt Covm •It tJtoK^ 
n>Li.|>.»0:i. 



160 



HISTOBV OP THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



178S. 



flncUoai Mirov in a private family ; but tlie palace was eoiuoI«d 
by eight living cliildrcQ ; the qucon was pro^ant, and Uieio mii- 
fortunca bcfel a royn.1 house, in whom the affections of blood are 
weakened by thu habits of life, and tlie diversions of a court. 

That same year, 17M8, diod. uiiivei«aUy lamented, Gaetano 
Filangicri, at the age of thirty-six, leaving his imninria! worlt, en- 
titled, Scienza deila Legislasione (the Scioncc of Lcgisktion). in- 
complete. Uis loss was bitterly deplored by hia friends, aa well 
as by the philosophers of the iige ; but a time of great misery was 
at hand (tlien not far distant), when men a» distinguished as 
Filangicri for leaniinij and virtue were doomed, to perish upon llio 
Boaffold, or under tortures ; and thaso who had mourned him, wero 
tlien consoled with the thouglit, that his premature death had 
anticipated an age of tyranny. 

The hing Kitd gained nothing by his visit to other states; 
for, as he neither cared for conatitutiona nor biws, nor the growth 
nor decay of empires, and had seen no land whoRo beauties 
were comparable wiih his own Naples, he returned to his king- 
dom more in love with it than ever, and moi% than ever despising 
every other. This sentiment or pivjudicej whicli he Bliarctl with 
his subjects, is confounded with iho idea of patriotism in the 
minils of the moat civilized as well as the most harbsrous people. 
But whatever his motivca might be, Ferdinand felt that ho owed 
sonio monument of regal granduur to the demands of the age ; iho 
palaces and buildings wliicb be bad fuiiBliud at a heavy expense were 
b^an by hia father, aud. the glory belonged to Charles ; tbe two 
theatres of the Fondo and of San Ferdinando, built in his reign, did 
him little honour, compared with the m.ignilicciit theatre of Sau 
Carlos, which owed its origin to his predecessor; and the other 
building of the Graniti, na it was called, at the bridge of Ibe Mad- 
dalcna, was rather censured (ban praised; the good laws of his reign, 
and the power of the secular jurisdiction maintained Against that 
of the Pope, did not originate with him, hut was begun before his 
time, and redounded to the honour of biaconueilbjrsand ministers. 
He, therefore, determined to repeat hia experiment which had been 
so highly applauded, by establishing a colony, like those in the 
desert islands off Sicily, and proposed to found one still better 
adapted for the promotion of arts and manufactures, in a place not 



urn. 



FERDISANI} IV. 



161 



far remote fmm tlie palaoe of Cnsorta. Ho sQlootod for its site the 
rising ground called San Lcueio, whore he built a number of houses 
for the colonists, and others of larger dimcnKious, for the ninnufau- 
ture of silk, besides an hoispital, a church, and a small villa for liis 
ovta residence. He i)rovidod, at a groat expenay, forei^ artifi- 
cers, nctr mauhiner^v, and iuj^^euious works ; and, vhou this was 
completed, ho collected thirty-one families, who came there upon 
liis invitAtion or thoir free choice, and foniiod a population of 2 1 1 
souK IIo next corapoaed Ktatutes for the regulation of the manu- 
foctutie, and for the adminiiitration of the rising society, and added 
a code of laws, of which I will here give a few extracts, as this 
was the true glory of the king, and a document of the spirit of 
the a^, and as it gave no small impulse to the [>olitical opinions 
of the day. A royal edict was i&auod in the year 1789 in those 
words: — 

"In the magnificent palace of Caserta, begun by my august 
father, and continued by mc, I did not find that silence and soli- 
tude couduciro to meditation and repose of mind, but another city 
ill the midst uf the country, wlucli rivallc<l tlio capital in luxury 
and uiaguiticcnco ; nnJ, while stiokuig a place of retirement, I fixed 
un the mount San Lcucio as best adapted to my purpose ; from 
whence the colony arose." 

After having explained his intentions, and related what he had 
already accomplished, ho dictated the laws, and urged the duties 
incumbent on the inhabitants, towards God, towards the State, in 
the colony, and in their families. The ordinances which follon' 
arc worthy of record : — 

" Merit aluno shall confer cUstinciion among the colonists of 
8au Lcucio ; there shall ho perfect otjualiiy in drees, and all luxury 
is strictly forbidden. 

" Mnrriag^e shall be cclohrated ns a religions as well as a civil 
rite ; tho choice of the young people hhall be free, nor shall the 
parents ho allowed iv interfere ; and as the'spirit and soul of th« 
society of San Lcucio is t.'(|ualiLy among the coloui»ts, douries arv 
abolished. I, the king, wdl bwtow the house with the implements 
of trade, and all necessary assistance to every new household. 

" I hereby will and command, in order to avoid those legal con- 
tests which are the u&ual sequel of the act, llutt noao among you 

VOL I. O 



162 



HISTOBY OF THE EIMODOU OF NAPLES. 



I7S8. 



make & will Natural justice alone must guide you in your bthari- 
our towards your rclativciL Male and female children shall succeed, 
in equal shares to the Iicritagc of their parents ; tlic parents shall 
suceoetl to the children, end, after them, the collateral relations, 
only in the first degree ; failing them, the wife in the usufruct ; 
if there should be no heirs (and none can inherit except those 
above nicntioiicil) the properly of the dcfutict shall go to the Itlontc/ 
and to the fund for orphans 

"Funeral obsequies shall be simple, devout, without any dis- 
tinction, and shall be conducted by the parish at the expeuse of 
the family. It is forbidden to wear black, except for parents, for 
a husband or wife, and then not loii{,aT than two mouths, when 
the s>ign of mourning may be worn ou the ami. 

" IiiocuUtion for small-pox i* coiunianded, which the magistrntes 
»hall enforce, without permitting the authority or tenderness of 
parents to interfere 

" All boys and girls sliall learn in the normal schools, readin|f, 
writing;, arithmetic, and their several duties ; and shall be taught 
their trudu in other schools. The magistrates shall he responsible 
to U3 for the fulfilment of this law. 

"Tlie£c magi titrates, caUcJ 'seniori.'Kliall tie elected in a solemn 
aaBcmlily of the citizens, composed of the lirads of families, by 
aecrot ballot, and by a majority of votes. They shall settle dia- 
puLes among the citizens, and pronounce judgment ; and their deoi- 
eiuns on matters ajipertuining to the nianufacturo carried on in 
the colony, sliall be without appeal ; they bhall be onipouered to 
punish all petty delinquencies in the way of correction ; they shall 
watch over the execution of the laws and statutes. TIic office of 
'seniore' uliall last one year. 

" The citizens of San Loucio irt all cases involving interests ho- 
ycaid the competence of the 'acniori,' or for misdemeanours, shall 
be amenable to the common magistrates and laws of the kingdom. 
A citizen delivered up ns guilty to the ordinary irihunalp, shall be 
first privately stripped of the dress of the colonistfi, and then, until^ 
he shall be declared innocent, he shall be deprived of the right 
and benefits of a coIoniaL 



* .Vimit: A IniiiIe u1icn? monrj ii Irat 
Mil ii|>oii intaniA. bvo J'tiritU, UuiaUtcd 



l>j t1»Hi^it Honmmble W. E.OlkdBtOlM, 
nJ. i p. 143. 



17N; 



FERDINAND IV. 



ir,3 



" On feast clays, after the celebration of the Aay, aud after de- 
livering up the work of the jiast week, t]iose capable of bearing; 
artiift shall p;o through their nnlicarj exercises ; and as .vour 6r»t 
dutj is to your couutrr, you must give your blooJ and labour in 
its defence and honour, 

" These are the laws which I present to you, citizens and colo- 
nists of San Irf'ucio. Obscn*e them, and you will be happy." 

By such good laws, the culony prospered and grew rich. At its 
commencement it numbered ^H colonists, and now, aftora lajisc 
of forty years, tlicrc are 823. Their manufactures arc excellent ; 
tbo operatives were happy uutil the p(.-stiluncc of political opinions 
and buspioion [>enutruti.-d this receptacle uf industry and peace. 
But when the code appeared it was the wonder of thu world, aud 
delighted [lie people of Naple?, who, although they knew that thete 
ideas did not proceed directly from the king, hoped to see the prin- 
eiplea of government in the colfiny spread throughout the kingdom. 

Two of the king's daughters, Maria Theresa and Luigia 
Amalift, had reached a marriageable age; and his son and heir, 
Francis, was twelve years old, when it was prupoaed to form new 
connexions for the family by their three nuptials. Even the 
shadow of Spaniali authority in the Court of Naples had disap- 
peared by the death of Charles in., and the Bourbons of Fraufo 
were held in little estimation. The queen, therefore, liberate*! 
from foreign inlluunee, and all-powerful over her husband, deter- 
mined by the niarringes of her three childrun to etreugthcu tin.- 
Loud witii ouu ally ; and, therefore, to unite the two prince&aes lu 
two Austrian ai-clulukes (Piancia and Ferdinand), and the Arcli- 
ducheas Maria Clementina, of the same family, to Prince Francis 
of Xaplca But the uittimcly death of Joseph ii. intervened in 
February 17S0. 

To him succeeded the Grand Duke Lcopohl, whose eldest son 
Francis remained at Vienna, the hope of the empire; and Iuk 
soond, Fenlinand, came aa grand duke to Tuscany. The future 
destiny uf the royal brides being thus improved, the preparations 
for the maniagcs were hastened; and that year, 1790, the king 
aud queen of Naples accompanied their daughters to Vicuna, 
vhuro both nuptials took place, and where the prelimluarios of tlie 
third were settled ; the betrothed pair being yet too young to 



164 HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. IrtO. 

many, the queen was satisfied with having drawn the tie to her 
family closer. Splendid f&tos were given in the imperial palace ; 
besides which the Emperor Leopold went to Hungary to be 
crowned king, escorted for the ceremony by Ferdinand and Caro- 
line of Naples, whom the Hungarians, after having honoured their 
own king, addressed in Latin, praising the reforms they had 
already introduced for the benefit of their people, and mentioning 
San Lcucio by name. So far does the good or evil fame of princes 
extend i 



iim 



FERDINAND IV. 



165 



CHAPTER IT, 

THB RBVOLCTION IK PaAKCE AHO ITS FIBST BPPECTa IN THE 
KINODOH OP MAPLES. 



Tub revolution begun in France was already, in tlie year 1790, 
rdifitarbing tlie peace of the sovereigns and people of Kuropo, and 
effected so entire a change in the tone of Ihc government, in Naples, 
that it hardljr appeared the king and his ministure were the same. 
I liare, for this reason, divided the proceedings of the reign of 
Ferdinand iv. down to the year I 799, inlo two hooks : and as it 
would to impossible to oomprelieiid the political changes of Naploa 
, Apart from those of France, I shail give an account of what tliero 
took place (although well kno^vn through other books), but in tlie 
hope that it will not be unacceptable to the reader of the present 
^day, and useful to the future. 

The disorders in the interior administration of Franco, which 
hail commenced during the reign of Louis xit., and had increased 
under the kings his successors, reached their climax in tho reign 
of Louis svi. When, in the year 1786, it became necessary, in 
order to aave the country from imminent ruin, to retrench tho 
expenses, to abolish or restrict privileges, and iticrease (hu taxes, 
these measures mot with obstacles in the habits aud luxury of the 
palace, in the audacity of the clergy and nobles, aud in the feara 
of tho people. The miuistcrA were daily changed, and, as is usually 
the ease where there are disorders in the State, every change 
itscd the confidcnco and hopes of the people, and restored the 
■■finances, but only for a time, and to fall again with the fall of the 
minister. The king summoned a council of notables, consisting 
of seven princes or merahera of the blood-roynl, five ministers, 
twelve councillors of state, thirty-nine nobles, eleven ccclesinatics, 
and sovcnty-aix magistrates and ofhcials ; in all, one hundred and 



L66 



lIISTORy OP THE KINGDOM OF NAPtES- 



im^i 



fifr.v memboro. Tliry met in Versailles in the Leginning^ of the 
year 17S7; I-,onis opened the meeting by decluring' it to be hi« 
intention in this asf<embly to follow the example of other French 
kings, and ttiat hia object was to increase the revenues of the 
State, and to render them secure and unembarrassed, to disfran- 
chise eommerce, and relieve the distress of his subjects ; he there- 
fore asked the advice and assistance of the notables. 'Hie Garde 
des Sceaux ^pokc next, pronouncing' a eulogy un the hin^ ; and 
was followed by the comptroller of the eichequer, Charles Aleion- 
dcr Calonne, who, iu a haughty toue, endeavoured to impress u]K]n 
liis audionce, the services and Inbout's of Louies, the miserable t>tato 
of the interior administration in 17H3, its pronperity in 17«7, and 
his own merits; prooeedinjj to repl}' to the public accusnlions, 
he charged Terray and Nccltcr, his predecessors in office, with fal«e- 
Iiood, and concluded by proposing extroordinnrr taxes to be levied 
upon ecclesiastical and feudal property. His speeeli and arrogant 
manner displeased, were unsiiitc<l to the times, and only increased 
the difficulties of the king And tlic government. His proposal there* 
fore met with the oppos^ition its anchor deserved, and such wns the 
outcry raised against Calonne, that the king was obliged, from pru- 
dence, to dismiss him, and he cliose, as his successor, the bislmp of 
Toulouse, a violent speaker in the assembly of notabk's, but aecep- 
tahlc to his colleagues: when seconding tbo wishes of the king, 
the assembly i)roposed new tuxes on the jnoperty of the clei^ and 
nobles, and revoked many privileges ; after registering these de- 
crees, they dissolved tliemselvcs. 

WhiUt the assembly of notables and the court of Versailles wore 
thus ngitjited, the saeans and friends of innovation in France were 
discussing the same political topics with popular freedom, and 
rousing the people to demand more extensive reforms than those 
offered by the king. When these offers, therefore, were (in aecord- 
aoce will] usage) sent up to the parliament of K-iris, the members, 
ambitious of the applause of the nation, refused to ratify- them. 
One young deputy denounced the cxtravaganco of the palace, and 
another spoke upon the necessity of convoking the States- General ; 
as this measure promised to be of great utility, as well from the 
IHiwcrs delegateil to that body, as from its being in accordance 
with the universal deairo exjjrcssed by the nation, the resolution 



FERDINAND IV. 



167 



was gladly heard and scbnndcd. The convocation of tlie SUtei- 
Geiienil, wliiL-h was tlio commencement of the French licvolution, 
watt first deuiiindeO hy the portiamcnt of Taris. 

The ktug was indignant al this propoi^al, and summoning t)io 
parlinnient to Versailles iu a special meeting (called in the Con- 
stitutions of France a Bed of Justice), cauaid the acta which liad 
been rejected in Paris, to be ratified. But the Parliament, on re- 
covering their liberty, protested against the violence to which thoy 
lind hi>en suhjoctcd, and the Icing, as a punishment and example, 
banished tbeni to Troves. The other parliaments of France pro- 
claimeil to the people the acts of tlie parliament of Paris, and as 
none of the eiiiets or laws hnd heen registered, they could not take 
effect, and imnieasurahly inorcaaed the diflicultioa of the exchequer. 
The king at length, obliged to fei;;fn a reconciliation, declared the 
parliament penitent and suppliant, and recalled the members to 
Paris, in order lo re-assemble them on the 20th September. 

Upon this day, with ill-timed assumption of [wwer, laying aside 
the proper and usual forms of tiddreisA, he read a decree, which 
imposed a loan of four hundred and forty millions, and promised 
the convocation of the Statts-General fit tho end of five years. 
Silence and conatcmation prevailed throughout the assembly, and 
the Duke of Orhans asked, with submis-iive gestures, whether this 
were a bed of justice or a free congress ? To which the king re- 
plied, ^ It is a royal session ! " After the first speaker, other and 
bolder tongiics were unloosed ; and Orleans and the deputies being 
exilfd froni the aascntbly and from the city, the new law was ro- 
gtstcred by decree. It was next resolved in Iho royal councils to 
destroy the c:»u8o snd germs of disobedience in the pnrliamonts, 
by restricting the judicial authority, Rs well as by uiidennining 
the political |iower of this assembly. The king, tliereforc, created 
a now court, cnlled the Cuur Plenih-e, composed of peers, jirelates, 
and the chic-f» of the army ; but beforv publishing the edict, lie 
awaited the arrival of the military at the seat of parliament, and 
until the agents of the roval authority should be prepared for the 
seizure and punishment of the contumacious. 

These intrigues were discovered to the parliament of Paris by 
means of spies and by bribes to those intrusted with the secret. 
They thcrcuiton tliwarLcd the edict by a public manifesto, setting 



168 



Biaronv op thb kikodom of Naples. 



1791. 



forth ttic institutious of France, tlio rights of tbc people aud of the 
jmirliaments, and the obligations of the kiug. Uunaciug voicvs 
were heard, while more alarming disturhances agitated the pro- 
vinces, where the discontent was unrestrained by fear, and where 
the people were neither duped by the artifices, nor corrupted by 
the gifts of the court In the midst of all this, the new taxes were 
refused, the loan failed, the expenses were increased, the adminis- 
tratioiia were disorganized, and the trcaanry empty. As evasions 
were no longer of any use, tlio king, fonxid on by hartJ necessity, 
in the middle of tlic year 1788, coiivokod the Slates- Gen era! for 
the first of May of the ensuing year, and recalled Noi-kcr to ihc ad- 
ministration. So great an event in prospect soothed present irrito- 
tiou, every faelion placud it!) liopes in that great as.senibly, and the 
king himself trusted to their support for his duspotiu power. 

The days which intervened between the convocation of the Stalea- 
General and its meeting, were passed on either side in solicitude 
and active endeavours to promote the interests of their i>arty; but 
the labours of the savatia were most successful. Wliile discussing 
political (jucations, they ciplaincd what constiiutea the people, 
and what the monarchy ; in whom the sovereign power resides ; 
what were the clergy, the nobility, and the third estate in the 
nation ; the jniliciul authority of the magistrates, and the prin- 
ciples of taxation ; in what consists the citizen, his duties and 
rights, and how far the dignity of man ought to ho conaidcri'd, in 
the end aimed at by the laws and the acts of rulers. Hy these 
lessons France learned tu know and to aim at the ntt-ainment of 
that form of government best ada]ited to her circumstances. The 
idea of freedom did not then jkiss the boundaries of monarchy ; 
for the very men who one year later became the warm advocates 
of a republic, at that time terminated their arguments and hopes 
in a representative cbambor, anil in otlier forms which neither 
encroached on the prerogative nor the dignity of the sovereign. 

The States-General recalled difficult but honourable periods. 
Out of fifteen aaaomblica enumerated in history, beginning with 
the year 1302, umWr Philippe lo Bel, until 1604, under I*ouis 
XIII., one alone, that of IfHK), had been turbulent and ineffi- 
cient. The remaining tliinccn at one lime aujiportcd the king in 
hia contests with the pontiff, at another reconciled dissensions 



inm, 



PBRDIKAND IV. 



]6d 



within tlie rajnl family', sometimes furnished an army to rcpol a 
(oTMiga enemy, and frtiquently supplied money to the iropovcrislied 
exchequer ; but amidst the iafinito variety of impulses by which 
Buch crowded assemblies are moved, the peaeo of the kingtium Iiod 
never been disturbed. Tlie king was encouraged by these exam- 
ples, and besides hoped to introduce such persons into tho States- 
General Aft would support the prerogatives of despotism. 

The deputies assembled at Versailles on the day fixeil, but were 
divided among themselves; for the nobility and clergy now per- 
ceiving the it^jury they would ausUiin by the fall of absolute power, 
and repenting their show of resistance in the asaembly of notables 
and in the parliaments, approached the throne, although timid 
and mistrustful, but resolved to support their own rights (as they 
called their privileges) against the attacks and presumption of the 
Third Estate, who arrived elated, strong in their numbers, and 
supported by tho arguments of philosophy. While this want of 
liarmony subsisted, it was impossible to reduce tho tliree assemblies 
into one ; and, tinally, the name of Third Estate being considered 
inappropriate,' they were called tho chamber of commons, and 
afterwards the National Assembly. The instructions of their con- 
stituents were first read, by which it appeared that the electors 
desired the government of France should continue monarchical; 
the crown hereditary in the male line ; and that the person of the 
king should bo sacred and inviolate ; that the king should remain 
the depository of tho executive power ; tho ogonta of bis authority 
•le ; the laws only valid when mode by the nation, and 
confirmed by tho king ; the consent of the nation necessary for 
taxation, and that property as well as the liberty o{ the citizen 
should be held sacred ; while all agreed in proposing that the pre- 
sent States-General should give the kingdom a code of laws, and 
that tiieir future convocations should be fixed at certain periods 
and guaranteed. 

Tlicsc were the instructions and demands of the French people 
in the year 1789, a document alike honourable to the age and 



> Bovauw, tbongb ori^nall; eomp OMi l 

mat of Idlen. niercliamU^ and Uw^fira, 

^■BHc of tbe DOtit* Ulcdwiae proanred tluar 

awn ikcltoo oa dapaliat to Uii* cbamWr, 

VOL. I. 



tbo profKMl for Iha union of tbo tbmt iat« 
one tihunber had bees r^cct«i] hy ibr im> 
first 



170 



niSTOBY OF TIIR KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



lygoL 



nation. The necessity of a reform in the Blate was appArent 
to all except the king, the nobles, and clorjrv, who wero hlindetl 
by the fiiscirations of deHpotisni. On the 20ih Juno, the royalj 
guanlii stopped the Xaiinnal A^cmbly when about to cuter thclr^ 
hall of meeting ; and after vain rcinonatrances, the mcmbera were 
obliged to aeek shelter in a large building used fur the game 
of tcnnJB,' and there ittaudiug during titu whole day (the old and 
infirm iiicludeil), they declared iboiuselves permanent until thoy 
should have given a perpetual statute to France. This resolution 
was eealod by au oath. The Assembly itself, the place of meeting, 
the declaration, and the oath, were the beginning of the Ilcvolu- 
tion, which was now inevitable. The nerve and soul of these more- 
raents was Gabricio Onorato Hicchctii, Count of Mirabcau, of 
Italian origin, a noble, but deputy to the Third Eatate from Pro- 
vence, and celebnvted for hisehuiuenceand forliia political schemes; 
he was a paesionato lover and champion of liberty, but only of that 
liberty which the wants and habits of Franco demanded. His 
views were shared by oilier men of grcnt abilities ; but while their 
honours were eclipsed by deeds of greater renown which followed, 
Mirabcau alone among the men of his time still holds an exalted 
iwsition, and is held u]i a» a spectacle to future guncnitioua. 

The meeting of the ^Uih Juno alarmed the king and the court. 
The king sent a messenger to announce his intention to address 
the Three Estates together, in a generil assembly, on the day, 
after tho morrow; and the next day, having summoned strongi 
detachments of infantry and cavalry, be encamped them in a hos-j 
tile attitude around Versailles and Pari^. On the day Sxed, ho 
repaired to llio Congress amhlst the loud cheers of the people, and 
addressing tho members in a haughty tone, revoked the decrees, 
and oven tho name of tho National Assembly, and commanded tlte 



' TTie Tinrt Rt«t hnd •olcd thcinnilrtii 
tltc Kikiioaal AtsejuMj on the ITtli Jnii^ in 
their *iiig1<' cltanilwr; ihn^ dccknxl ibe 
tKxMiuu Il'vr-i] ill tL« kini;datii I7 IUokoI 
niMnii, iiiilE ; bill allowKl iU coiiliDiiancu 
until tlir MTparaliun of llie nunulilj. Tho 
kliij; rriolnil tn K"ld * «illing <in ihc 33d 
■IiiiiD, to hftranp)« ih« 8l«tM in tha hall at 
tlte Commoai, wlitcb, od M^-oont of iU liw, 



wHanioRtL-oiKiMii'.'ibt ruTliic parpoae. Work>| 
inrn Kcre lu'cnnliiigiv m-iit iW re to Crcct • I 
throne, and iha rnjid aitling procLiimcd in ' 
lb« MKcta cif Vcmiltca, but no inttnutios 
wjtti Mnt otlbvr to Ibc Atwiubly 01 Uw 
prcatilitnt, who, on nrririn); «l llieir tiwn 
dour, wen tiiicvmnoniaiiiil/ ri!|>LiI>«d. — Stm 
Saiyihf, J-eebttx* <m the Fnnek Itef^>tw 
Han. 



IW. 



FERDINAyD \Y. 



in 



union of tlic three cliambcr* in one. It wag observed that he 
dcflaivd : — " No mcasupo of the St ales- General sliould take effect 
without the royal approbation. That no king: l">tl ever done as 
much ns he for the benefit of his people ; that he alooc understood 
liow to act for the good of the French, and (if abandoned by others) 
lie atone would complete the work coniniunctKl, since he was the 
real and sole reprcBcntativo of his people." In the inldsl of thia 
oration, the Garde dea Sceaux road a paper aloud in which the 
words, " Lo lloi le veut, Ic Koi I'ordonne," were frequently heard, 
wich oilier plirascii e<|ually at variance with the temper of tlie titiie«. 
The kiug, then declaring that all tlio demands of that asaouibly 
had been complied with, departed, followed by the applause as well 
as by tho persons of tlio members of the first and second Estates, 
and by tho ailenco of the third, who remained in the hall for 
deliberation ; when diiimiascd they resisted, and in the midst of 
this confusion and hurry of time, they decreed tho persons of the 
representatives of the people inviolate. 

Suspicions and uneasiness continued to increase. The king, 
tired of tho lukewarm counsels of Nccker, scut him into exile; 
additional soldiers wore collected round Versailles; the loyalty 
of the guards was stimulated by military bari(|«{;ts in the palace, 
and the queen fomented the spirit of irritation; the stores of 
com for that year, already scanty, were still further exhausted ; 
and popular commotions disturbed the whole of FraiiCft Yet 
both the Assunibly and tho king desired peace ; but peace to 
one party was new laws aiid a free govemoiont, and to the other, 
submission and the wonted docility of tho people; and thus from 
a mutual di.'8ire for tranquillity arose discord. Hardly was it 
known that Neckcr had been di!«misi;cd, when the minds of men 
being already prepared for Sf>mc great event, all Paris was in a 
slate of excitement, as he was believed to bo the support of the 
finances, the barrier oppancd to the extreme measures of despotism, 
and the mediator between the A.i3embly and the Court Tho 
populace rose in a tumult, and liore the marble bust of the dis- 
graced minister in triumph through the city, voctfcmting praises 
in bis honour, and menaces against the monarch. Thu Swiss 
guards, unable to tolerate this sight, rushed ufmn the crowd with 
their weapons, broke the bust, and interrupted, the triumphal pro* 



172 



HISTOftY OF THE KINGDOM OV KaPLES. 



mo. 



cession ; a triumph as undeserved as Iiis exile, for Neelicr waa 
only a well-in ten tioned man with fuir abilities, vain, and unequal 
to the exigencies of tlie times, and owed hit) reputation and niis- 
fortunes to the pi'eseat emergeac,Y : thrice honourablv invited iuto 
France, and ihrice banished, his fall v.-as each time lamented, and 
his last dismissal was an act of imprudence on the part of the king. 

The three chambers, until tliat time at variance, were recon- 
ciled by their fears, ao that tlicy conjointly sent to petition the 
king to remove the camp from the two cities, and to arm the civic 
guard for the defence of tlie state. He replied, that the coudltion 
of Paris obliged him, instead of removing the Iroops, to draw them 
nrnrcr, and increase their numbers; that to nrm t)io civic guard 
would at that moment be dangerous ; tliat he knew how to repress 
popular tumults, and that he alone wns able to judge of ttic urgency 
of the case. These bold words would not linve emanated from so 
timid a cliaracler as Louis, had not he, prompted by llie instincts 
natural to royalty, by deference to the will of his beloved and 
haughty queen, and by evil counsellors, been long inwardly re- 
solved to cru.sh the spirit of innovation by the force of his army, 
as soon as affairs reached such a climax as to justify the extremity 
of turning his arms against hia own subjects ; and meanwhile 
the dissensions in the chamber, popular tumults and civil com- 
motions, were smoothing the way for the accomplishment of his 
L'vil design. 

But in Paris, the civie guard assembled in a di»orderlj 
manner, elected as their commander-in-chief the Marquis de la 
Fayette, who was distinguished for tho glory he hod won in 
Amciica, fighting in tho name of that same liberty for which 
Fmuco was now sighing. Suddenly there arose a cry in the city, 
" To the Bastile !" The most daring among the people, supplied 
with weapons stolen from the depots of arms and from the Xlulel 
dca Invalides, and their numbers augmented by deserters from the 
_acighbouring camps, rushed with heedless fury to attach a fortress 
efended by high wftlls, plenty of ami-i, and a faithful gan-ison, and 
commanded by the Marquis de Launay, a staunch royalist, who 
despised the people and theories of political liberty. Vast multi- 
tudes presented themactvcs before the gates of tlic castle, loudly 
demanding its surrender by cries and by their messengers, and 



PERDnrA^D TV. 



I7S 



upon a refu3ftl, their rage, excitementj numbers, and preparntions 
for nti assault, increased. 

It was a fearful day which saw, on one side, fifty thousand 
soldiers led by six gonemU witli a hundred cannon, stationed in 
eight camps, around Paris anil Vfrsntlle.s, other troops (|uarterc<t 
wiihin both cities, and with an armed fortress in their possos- 
ston ; and nil these instruments of dcstnictiou ready to act at a 
word from an offended king: and on the other, armed rufBans, 
deserters from the army, tlie people, and vast numbers of the 
lowest of tho populace. Fierce encounters were apprehended 
between tho contending' parties, and that the victory would decide 
the destinies of France. Tho king meanwhile, either terrified by 
the aspect of afiairs, or from irresolution, only drew the camps 
nearer the city, upon which the citizens hastily closetl tho gates, 
fortified the walls, tore up the pavement, and prepared for defence. 
The civic guard of a hundred and fifty thousand men, armed in 
various ways, waited their orders from the civil authority, who 
sustained his official dignity with marvellous serenity. 

But tho rnbblo collected around tho Bastilo went about wiih 
eager rage, seeking an entrance and attempting to force their way 
through tho gates and over liic walls, while burling menaces 
•gainst the garrison. The governor, tared of this clamour, and 
feeling secure in the fortress against the ctlbrts of an undisciplined 
mob, while certain of aid from the neighbouring camp, ordered his 
men to fire upon the people, when some fell deud and others 
Wounded. Tlio crowds retreated, but rage soon succeeded terror, 
and so numerous were the enemy surrounding the fortress, that 
after they had pas-ied ihc first circuit of walls, and the people were 
standing beneath the f>econd, the governor, who had hiilierto been 
deaf to terms, hoisted the flag of peace, and the fortress was 
surrendered t6 the citizens on condition of sparing the lives of 
tho garrison. But a raging popultico keep no terms; the unhappy 
I^aunay leaving the waits was murdered, and his head, fixed on a 
lancii, was paradwl. amidst horrible rejoicings, through the city. 
Many acts, both hemic and terrible, followed; the instrunicnls of 
torture were drawn forth to public view, and seven unliappy beings 
carac into the light of day, ono of whom had lost his reason and 
ras sinking from extreme old age, an inhabitant of tho Basttle 



174 



niSTORT OP THB KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



VM 



from time immemorial, witli none to recognUe him, nnil Iiis name 
and country unknown ; niiotlier, who liad been confined thirty 
yeflFB, mill five who had been jiliiccd there during ihe reign of 
T^uis XVI Thtit same day (the IHli July 178!*), the people 
began to demolish the walls, and the Nfttionitl As&cmbly dcci 
that (he Bnstile should di^^ppi-ar. 'J'liu spot so iafiinious for act 
of tyranny, wns then culled " Pluce do la Liberty" 

Tlie rc'voluliou advanced by rapid stride* ; having been already 
declared in tho acts and onths of the Assembly, it was made irre- 
vocable by the seizure of tho Bastde, and by tho "blood of the 
citizens. This la8t deed had rouned the minds of all mon, and 
while the court was overwhelmed with terror, the populace licoanie 
arrojjant, tho confidence of the people rose, and the world wondered 
what was next to follow, Tho king next day went to the Assera- 
hly without guanlsor escort, acconipjinicd only by his brothers, and 
remained st»ndirig, while he infoniUHl llin iiieinbers he imd come 
to consult theui on afiaira of the utmost imporiaiico to the state, 
and atill more painful to his feelings; lie alluded to the disorders 
in tlio city. He, the head of the nation, asked tho National Assem- 
bly for tho means of restoring public order and tranrjuillity ; he 
was aware of the malicious rumours cum-nt Bgaint>t liini, but he 
trusted for tlu-ir rofuialiou to the universal belief in his rectilude. 
Alwnys one with the nation, and confiding in the represenlalives 
of tho people, and tn their loyalty, he had withdrawn tho soldiers 
frora Vcrsaillea and Paris. 

After the Assembly had applauded these worda, and testified 
their respect for the king, and their joy at this announcement, Louia 
was i>ctitione<l to choose ministerit better adapted to ihc times, and 
to show himself to the people of Paris. He granted or promised 
all tlioj asked, and dopaned on foot, accompanied by the Three 
KHtaten a« an cacort as far as the palace, where tho qut'cn, holding, 
the dauphin hy the hand, was waiting his return; m that it ap- 
peared as if the wliole family of the king was united to tho poopio 
in tlio bonds of concord for the happiness of France. Tiio ministry 
was changed, and Neeker returned; many of the court retired 
either by command or from the waminj^'s of their oonscieuces; the 
king went tho next day to Paris in a procession composod of 
civilians, eacoitod by the civic guard, with the Naliouul Assunibly 



ITW. 



PERDIXAND IV. 



173 



in his train ; ho wns met hy the oinc magistrates, and was acoora- 
panicd by a vast asscmhiagc of the people, who cheered liini on hia 
way. The hopes of nil being confirmed in tho speevhes whicli 
followed, the tremendous spectacle of tlic taking of tho Haatilc 
wa5, by a freak of fortune, strangtily contrasted in a single day 
with ti triumphant peaca 

This flattering; appcnrance of harmony lasted two months or 
more. Tho chaniburti made good laws whicli the king promised 
to ratify ; the clergy and nobles resigneil their ancient privileges ; 
patriotic donations relieved the poor and assisted the Iroaeury; and 
tho welcome title of " Restorer of the national liberty" was be- 
stowed upon the king. Whilst tho good elements of the stale were 
thus Htrcngtheniiijr, misdeeds were proportionably fewer. I3iic 
under an outer rind of prosperity, two germs of opposite tendoncies 
were secretly fructifying — republicanism and absolutism. Since 
the curb of law liad been first loosened and then broken, time- 
honourcit authorities fnllen, and tliat of the king declinhig, while 
tho path by which to rcnch the summit of fortune and amhtttoa 
hod been made easy, many bad or bold spirits proposed to insti- 
tuLe a more comprehensive forrn of government tn the shape of a 
rupublia On the other side, the habits and fascinations of despot- 
ism, which princes and the great can never learn to forget, sug- 
gested schemes of tyranny, Tho crimes or ili^orders of the people 
were the moans by which the first hoped for the attainment of 
their end ; and those of the second, secret plots and connivance 
within the palace. Sundry indications betrayed the real intentions 
of both pnrciesL 

On the first and second of October the lloyal Guards gave a 
banquet tn the regiments qnartcrcnl at Vcntnilles, and when in- 
toxicated, they wero heard to give cheers for the king and tho 
royal family, accompanied by insults and menaces directed against 
tho National Assembly and the most distinguished deputies, who 
were mentioned by mime. The king appeared amongst them on 
his return from tho chase ; and soon afterwards the queen and the 
dauphin ; upon wliich the acclamations, auguries of success, abusive 
language, nnd hilarity increased. The ({ueen did not forget this 
ban(^uct when in tbo court circles, but rewarded those oHioers who 
had been most vehement m their language and ardout in their 



176 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OP KAPLEa 



mo. 



offers of service wllli gifts and words of praise, while ihe ladies of 
her court dispensed amongst them white cockades, the badge of the 
royalist party. The guards prevented all aeeeas to the palaco to 
those who wore the tricolour (the national colours), and some of 
the cililens adorned with ribbon of tho three colours, were beaten 
and murderod by the body-gunrd, on the road botweoii Versailles 
and Paris. Meantime the National AasemMy, unsuspicious of 
what wa^ going forward, sent up laws to the king, praying for his 
approbation; hut Ixtuis, who had resumed the tono of an absolute 
monarch, answered that this was not a time to conftrm such acts. 
The tidinga of these events spread throughout France, and were 
exaggerated by fame and by tlie malice of party spirit. 

The Kepublicaus accordingly gained courage. On tho morning 
of tho 5th October, a number of women (upwards of four thousand) 
of llio lowest description, uttering loud cries and lamentations, 
and protending they were rendered desperate by hunger, re- 
paired to the H6tel de Ville to demand bread, and thence with the 
cries and gestures of mad women, proceeded to ransack houses, 
and commit robberies in the citr, and on the road to Versailles. 
Armed with pikes and clubs, and led by some of the people who 
had made themselves notorious at tho Basltle, they made all other 
women they fell in with, join their ranks, cither voluntajily, or by 
compulsion. Tlie civic guards having quelled the tumults in tho 
city, part of them followed the women, suspicious of these new 
kind of troops, and of the uncertain humours of a female army. 
On a sudden, tho soldiers stationed in Paris asked leave to accom- 
pany them, and as they could not be deterred either by tho autho- 
rity or the advice of their commander-in-chief, twenty thousand 
bearing the name of the army of Paris, and followed by Ia Pay- 
ette, started for Versailles, They came up with the women when 
it was nearly midnight, and whilst these dispersed themselves 
separately or in groups over the city, the soldiers encamped in the 
squares. 

3Iany disputes arose during the night, and many more the 
following day. Tho women sent deputations to tho Assembly 
and the king, to whom they related all their wants and wishes, 
mingled with entreaties and menaces, tcarg and rage ; the answers 
were kind and consotatoTy, and returning to their companions, 



ino. 



FERDtNAMD IV. 



m 



t*hey gave an account of all tliej bad »aid or heard ; and wrangled 
and brawled among tliemselves, until, weary witli the fatigue of 
their new vocation, and with the rain which fell in torrents, they 
sought shelter for the night in the churches and under the por- 
ticos of the llouse of Aascmblv. A band of ruffians, however (five 
hundred or more), who had followed the women to Versailles, pre- 
pared for tumults, or ready to create them, took no repose ; but one 
after the otlier entering the gardens and courts of the jialace, 
which wero negligently guarded, they seized and murdered Iho sen- 
tinclfi. and gained poaseasion of the royal mansion. The family^ 
consisting of the king, the queen, tlie princess Elizabeth, and two 
children, awakened by the noise of amis and by their servant^ 
Hfd to the most secret recesses of the palace; and nieantimc tliese 
burdened wretches, with their weapons bared, reached in their 
search the room where the queen had shortly before been sleeping ; 
finding the bed empty, but yet warm, they pierced it in several 
jdftcea with daggers or pikes. It providentially happened that they 
were unacquainted with the interior arrangement of the palace, 
and therefore couhl not reach the place where the unhappy family 
lay concealed, terrified and weeping in silonrc, lest the sound of 
their cries should betray tlicm : many of the king's guards and of 
the servants were killed. But the civic guard of Versailles and 
the army of Paris now liasteued to their aid, and at the first dawn 
of day the deputies of the Assembly, and those citizens who were 
friends of Justice meeting together, a guard was placed around the 
palace, and the sanguiuary ruffians of the night disappeared. 

This horrible night, never effaced from the mind of the king, 
and uerer forgiven, was tho chief causo of the slnughter of his 
family. The rcpublicaus desired that tho king should proceed to 
Paris, where their party was strongest, and went about shouting 
with the rabble — " The king to Paris !" The Assembly did not 
interfere, 08 they hoped for greater security in the metropolis, and 
I^a Fayette consented, because lie couhl there guard the king 
better, serve the cause of monarchy in hia person, and present him 
as an obstacle to both factions. The king made submissive by the 
alarm of the past night, but alwuva declaring bis wishes identical 
witJi those of his people, resolved to proceed that very day with 
his family to Paris. The National Assembly were to follow. 



178 



atSTOBT or THE EIHODOM OP BAPLBa 



IfMi 



As soon as the news was marie known, lils dcpftrture and re- 
ception were prepared. The ruffians who had quitted Paria two 
da^fl heFore, now returned triunipliant, carrying two heads fixed 
on the points of lances, which bore witnca* to the dcatha of two of 
the body-jfuard, who, faithful to tlie king, had been killed Sghting 
in the interior of the palace ; this burbaroua proccsaion, however, 
only excited pity and redpect for the suflerers, and waa a diegraco 
to those who triiimplied. The baLtnlions of women foHowrd, hut 
having laid aiiide the delicacy and modesty of their sex, they ap- 
peared tmiiafonncfl into furies anil nionalcTs; aftcrtlicm, the troops 
led by La Faytilto inarched in order, and suocetnling the&o multi- 
tudes came the carriages of the kin?, the queen, and the royal fnroily ; 
who, although they answered with smiles to the joyful ehouts of 
the people, tktill boro ou their brows the inipreiMi of gloom aud 
suspicion, with the fatigoio aud terror of the preceding night. 
The whole conduct of t!>e govcmmeut underwent an immediate 
change ; the king confimted the new Isws passed by the Assembly, 
and confided the care of the city to the municipal magistrates, and 
the protection of the kingdom, and even of the jinlacc, to tlie 
national guards. Tho ministers were retained aa a form of the 
monarchy ; the municipalities, the electors, and the As.<)emhly ruled 
the state ; the king was to all appoaraiicc a prisoner, hut called 
himself free, in order to conciliate both fantiona, wlio desired at 
once to find in him the suhinission of a. captive that ]io might not 
opjMJse the new statutes, and the power of a king to legitimise 
them. Louis now began to despair of a restoration to power by hia 
own strength, or by tlie help of hts party, and therefore turned his 
thoughts aud endeavours to gniu the assiiitance uf foreign poten- 
tates, hoping to escape from France, in order to retuni thither 
with Pruwiians and Germaiia. But t!te time aud opjiorlunity had 
not yet arrived for the great struggle. 

Meanwhile France, set free from the restraints of ordinary rule, 
was governed according to chance, and to the abilities of thoso who 
happened to be in authority in each separate place. The first 
violence of tlie people was directed against the castles and hnronial 
reaidoHCi'S, where, excited by their hatred of feudiil rccollectioni 
and burning aud p1un<leringin the name of liberty, ihoy committed' 
every kind of atrocity. Obscure men, in the hope of rising to |K)wer, 



1790. 



FERDINAND IV. 



179 



met tojtelher in Becret conspiracies ; and the nobles, flying from the 
unlitippy land, sought refuge in fort^i^n countries ; the words orts- 
tocrai and eneffj^y became synonymous. The court nobility mig;mtcd 
to Coblentz, and the provincial nobility to I'icdmont, where, under 
tlic Count d'Artois, the brother of the king, tbcy opposed (he Re- 
volution by plots and arms, nil which only helped to sniootli the 
way lo the Kepublic. Amidst ao many discordant or perverse 
designs, tho Asseniljly alone continued to discuss political theories, 
(Mid proposed to rest the monarchy thoy »till advocated upon 
rational fuundations. They declared the equality of man, made 
the laws equal, and property and person secure, while clearing the 
path of equity, and preventing or punishing injustice. To tho king 
they left honour, woilth, dominion, and the happy privilege of 
granting pardon ; the clergy were no longer to be enriched by 
superstition, but paid by the State, and the Church, thus rendered 
powerless for evil, was increased in dignity. These, and other 
wisoami beneficent lawis, wen! mntureil in the Kntional Assembly. 

Suoh wa3 Fnincc towards the end of the year 1 790, but variouBly 
reported in tlie world, and conveying a diifcrent impression, 
according to the chatiicter of the listeners; kings, courtiers, and 
ministers were alarmed; the clergy were incensed ; wliiUt the hearts 
of philosophers and iniioviitors rejoicud. The Rovercigns of Naples 
heurd the news wilh the greater horror and indignatiou, as they 
were related to the Bourbons of Franco, and the two queens wof« 
Kisters. They were at that lime in the palace of Vienna, where iho 
Emperor Ijeopold, who was already roused to anger by the rebel- 
lions in Belgium, coniniunicHtcd to them bi<i designs ; for, though 
inclined to promote the welfare of hi* subject*, he desired it shonid 
bo accepted as a gratuiiousconccssion on tho part of the sovereign, 
and, therefore, be had prepared an army to march to the aid of 
King liouis as soon an he should succeed in making his escape 
across the fmuiirrs of Fmncc. 

But unanimity was wanting among the kings of Europe, for 
while the theories of tho Fn^nch Ilcvolution were applicable to 
every people, the policy und character of the ruling powers essen- 
tially diflered. England rejoiced in the troubles of her rival ; 
Spain was hui^'uiHliing under a feeble nnd pusillanimous monarch ; 
Prussia wa« lurgaiuiug with the empire about the price of a larger 



180 



HISTOUT OF THE KIKQDOM OF KAPLSS. 



IIHI 



sbare of Poland ; Russia wne cn^ged in a war witli tlie Turks ; 
and Italy, iu au ini])ovtrisli(.'d condition, was preparing eiidloss cala- 
mities for h«rfietf bjr vain liojws and aspirations. Piedmont^ ia- 
deed, agitated hy the coinmotious of a country so near as France, 
and perceiving that tho iuliabilants of aoine districts in a remote 
part of Savoy were inclined to rebel, increased and organiwd her 
army, and Naples, bnming with the same pauions as her qucen, 
made ready for war and veng;oanca 

Tlio time was, however, unpropitious, for the military force of 
the State Iiad dc{*cncrated. The census numbered 4,800,000 
Neapolitans, but none among them were disposed for war either by 
nature or Iiabila The barons had forgotten the use of arms, and, 
only attached to the htn^ from their lo^'c of pleasure and grandeur^ 
were ao enervated that tliey turned away from every generous ox- 
erlion. The clergy wore opposed to the government, nud indiffer- 
ent to the troubles of the king, though hostile to the iCevolution 
in Franco, and almrin}^ the cuuimon dangers. The resolution of 
the law courts wavered, from the uuceriaiu results of coming 
events ; the lawyers secretly supporting the government, but ap- 
pearing to submit on compulsion, in order to obtain present ad- 
vantages, without future risk. Philosophers, patriots, and those 
who looked to improvcmeitts in the State, admired the theories of 
the llevolution, but, accustomed to see useful reforms emanate 
from the monarch, deprecated the violence which would svibvert the 
moiiarcliy. The niasa of the people were attached to the king, 
and only knew aa much of the Revolution in France aa was com- 
timnieaied to them by tlio great nobles in tticirdistrii^t, aiul by 
the priests in the eoofcssionals and pulpits, and therefore believed 
the French to be impious, cruel incendiaries, murderers, and the 
opprottsors of the people. 

Tho Neapolitan army consisted of 24,000 infantry and cavalry, 
half foreigners and half natives, ill composed, and worse disci]i1incd; 
and (here were no means of incresisiiig their numbers, except by 
the usual routine of forced levies made by the twofold despotism 
of royalty and feudalism ; nor could they be trained, nor taught 
obedience, because they had none to instnict them, and were with- 
out military ardour. T)te long peace, the abject spirit of their 
rulers, and the poverty of ihc exchequer, had, as I hare already 



mo. 



PKRDISAND ly. 



181 



atated, caused tlie neglect of (he numbers anil efficionc^r of tbo 
troops. The artillerv, by the care of Pomereul, was tlie beat- 
onlered part of the army, but U was only in its commencement ; 
there was an insufHcicncy both of arsenals and depots of arms; 
the administration was corrupt ; the fortresses in decay ; and the 
traditions, or recollections of the past, and even military habits, 
were forgotten. The navy, however, though composed of only 
three men-of-war, several frigates, bcssidea other smaller vessels — 
in all, thirty ships, wna under the direction and mnnagcmont of 
officers, who were some of tlicm good, and othcre firat-rato, and 
was supplied with expert and daring seamen. 

The itinauces, whicii for ten years hud been in an impoverished 
condition, had been still further dmiueil by expenses caused by tho 
earlhtjuake in Calabria^ the two costly jourueys uf the sovereigns, 
and three marriages in the royal family ; they, therefore, could 
hardly meet the cx|>enses of the State in a time of peace, still less 
provide for the exigencies of war; nor was there any prospect of 
improvement, as the existing taxes, which scarcely affected the 
ricli, bore heavily upon the poor; and, while the former by their 
privileges and power were secure from the imposition of new, the 
latter were eqnnlly safe, from their inability to pay. Art there- 
fore had ceased to flourish, industry was diminished, commerce lan- 
guished, and agriculture, although favoured by the climate, remained 
in a primitive state owing to the ignorance of the times, and was 
starved by the bad regulations of the Guvcrnment ; thus all the 
sources of public wealth were dried up or impoverished. 

Sicily, who acknowledged and yielded her products to the same 
king, and constituted not less than a fourth part of the kingdom, 
■was of little service either in providing men or treasure, as she 
refused to furnish soldiers, and the money raised by taxes within 
the island was wasted amidst the disorders of the finance and the 
Court. 

Such were the men and such the state of affiiirs over which 
ruled Ferdinand iv., weak in courage and intellect, ignorant of 
government, fond of luxury and amusement, indifferent to glory 
and his kingdom, and therefore inclined to a lifo of indolence and 
pleasure. The queen, who governed rather than the king, was a 
prey to her various passions. Xlie daughter of Maria Theresa, and 



182 HISTORY OF THB KINQDOU OF NAPLES. 17» 

educated in the Austrian palace during a period of anxious soli- 
citude caused by long wars, the sister of Antoinette, Queen of 
France, and of the two Emperors, Joseph and Ijeopold, she was 
ambitious of glory, eager to emulate their renown, vindictive and 
proud, and possessed of more than woman's daring. She was sup- 
ported by General Acton, the all-powerful minister, a stranger to 
the country, as well as to the feelings of the Neapolitans, and who 
was ignorant and cunning, and well skilled in those arts which 
lead to fortune^ The rest of the ministers or councillors tacitly 
obeyed his wishes, and thus the kingdom was abandoned through 
the midst of the approaching storms to the guidance of a weak 
king ; of a queen, blinded by the vehemence of her passions ; and 
of Acton, corrupted by selfish avarica 



BOOK III. 
REIGN OF FEKDINAND IT. 

t7»l-17W. 



CHAPTER I. 

PBBPAKATIOHS FOR WAR AND DEFSFCS. 
L79I-1703. 

■WnEH the sovereigns of Naples left Vienna id tho year 1791, 
the; hoped to form a confederation in Italy for war against France; 
but on. findingf that other princes, though equally alarmcil, vrcrc not 
equally irate, they rcacrvod tho necessary explanation of their 
sclienie, until the times were mature, and were the more willing 
to submit to this altoniativc, as tliey were aware how much Austria 
dcprceatcd a league of the armed forces of Italy. They therefore 
proceeded to Ilorac where the Pontiff awaited them. Piua vi. was 
liaodAomc in person, and possessed agreeable manners, but was aa 
fond of ornament, and as vain as a woman. The king and queen 
of Naples in their first juuni(;y iu 1785, when their quarrel with 
Komo was at Its height, had avoided the Pontifical States, and had 
even omitted those outward signs of courlesy usual between 
princes. But the revolution in France, and tbe common danger, 
had mitigated their wrath, and they had, through their represen- 
tatives, agreed to conditions of amity, by which the gift of tho 
Cbineo, and the accompanying cercmon}' were for ever abolished; 
the kings of tho Two Sicilies ceased to be called vassals of the 
Holy See, and a large donative was to be concealed by them upon 
their coronation, as a pious offering to the huly ai>ofitles; tlic 
Pope was empowered to nominate the subjects of the king to 
oeclcsiastical benefices ; to appoint the bishops out of three condi- 



184 



HISTORT OP THR KINGDOM OP NAPLBS. 



im. 



dates proposed bj tlio king, to grant dispensations in the case of 
impediments in matrimony, and to confirm the dispensations 
akeady granted hy bialiopa 

Tliiti having been agreed upon, the monarchs of Naples ap- 
proached the douiiniona of the Pontiff as friends, and with the 
respect duo to bis office; while his Holiness prepared to receive 
them with honours and favour. Arrived on the '^Oth April, thej 
proceeded that same day to the Churcli of St. Peter, and thence 
by a private entrance to the apartments of Fiua, where, the king 
enjoining silence on the guards and pontifical menials, entered 
the palace unexpectedly, and penetrated to the room where Pius 
was reposing upon an arm-chair, attired in his magnificent sacer- 
dotal robes. This confidence, proeecding from such haughty 
princes, so gratified the Pope, that past grievances were forgotten, 
and from that time forth he became their sincere friend. The 
festivities lasted many days, and rich presents were interchanged. 
The two princoftsca of France, Adelaide and Victoria, the annts of 
king Louis, were in Rome, having fled from the revolutions of 
their native land, and, by their narrative of the sufferings endured 
by their family, still further incensed the wrath of the king and 
queen, 

Full of indignation, they arrived at Naples, where they were 
received amidst as sumptuous festivities as the impoverished state 
of the exche<iuer would admit. Tlie coujitenances of the king 
aitd queen were auatore, and portentous of approaching severi- 
ties, while the spectators, both those who disliked and those who 
were inclined to favour the new doctrines of France, saw no real 
sign of pleasure in these celebrations. The rejoicings were, there- 
fore, confined to the populace, with whom the anticipation of 
evil docs not often disturb present amusements. After some days 
had clapsetl, consultations on matters of state were held in the 
palace ; and although tho councillors were many, their decision 
wa« mianirnous, and agreed with what hail been predetermined 
by tho queen: war with France and a strict survcillaneo of their 
Neapolitan subjects. The ministers divided the care for the exe- 
cution of these projects. Additional shipa of war were collected, 
and the arsenals supplied witti wood, cables, and various metuls 
procured both at home and abroad ; cannons were cast, gim car- 



ML 



FKftUiXAND iV. 



iHS 



in-inutACturdtl, bolides ammuaition wagg\>iis and camp cqui- 
tho jiniDuiios wore iiicreaawl, and imw arms forgod day 
and ni^lit. Tlie Qremea were orgaiiizod into luiliCary compauius. 
^lUid employed to tuaiiufwctnro powdt-r and rockets; uniforms, har- 
nesses, and s)ioi>« arriircd from all i»irts of tho kingdom ; large 
bodies of infantry were r^is^td liv conscription upon titc feudal pro* 
priotors, and many voluntt^crB offered their Borvices for tlic levy 
en Tnaaae. Even vagabonds were admitted into the array, and 
jjiiaoners wero taken from the dnngeons and galleys, and converted 
into soldicra; freeU corps of Swiss nnd Dalmatians accepted tho 
pay of Kaplea, bceides foreigners of rank, such as the princea of 
Uesso Philipstadt, of Wiirtomberg, nnd Haxony, all three nf 
royal blood ; priests, friars, and misaioriarica preached from their 
pulpits, and instilled in the confesjaionals, hatred against l^rancu. 
Thus every art, every faculty of the mind or labour of men's liandK, 
as well as tb«ir i>ersons, were alike made subservient to this pro- 
ject of ivar, an objet-t us repugnant to the feelings as foreign to 
the habits of the N'e;i|)olitan people. 

Tho government next provided by open aa well a* secret mea- 
BUrea for the intenial security of the kingdom. The police nppointc<l 
a eommissary in evt>rj' rione of the city as inspector and judge, 
with fcubordinate officers nnd men ; and over all, was placed the 
Che\'alier Lulgi de Medict, with the ancient title of Hogent of the 
Vicaria : lie wa-s a young man of a designing yet bold character, 
and ambitious of plnc-o and power. Other agents were appointed 
aa secret spiua over the actions and thoughts of the subjects; some 
in public places and others in private houKeA Tlio (jncen conducted 
these affairs herself, and held conferences with the spies at midnight 
in a saloon of the pnlaoc called " Oscura" (tho dark). This degrad- 
ing othce was dignified by the name of loyally, and was not dis- 
dained by nrngistrutctf, priests, and nobles, among which last was 
for the first time suspecled, Fabrizio Ruffo, prinee of Castelcicala : 
possesscil of an independent fortune, lie was not tempted to evil 
deeds by want, and the path of ambition was open before him ; but 
it van supposed that his nainral depravity induced him to prefer 
this vocation. The clergy, after tho disasters which had befallen 
the Clmrch in France, hoped to recoi-cr their lost power, by 
becoming props and companions of despotism. The king nomi- 

TUL. L 9 



186 



HISTORY OP THK KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



im. 



nat«d men full of anlour and ze&\ to sixty-two bishoprics which 
liappencil lo fall vacant; he rcKtorod the naliounl education to the 
care of ecclesiastics, and gave tokens to priests and monks of the 
sincerity of his friendship. Philosophers and men of learning 
wcro more than any doss of men exposed to the displeasure of 
the Goverument, and to the machinations of spies, from tlie crro- 
noouB opinion entertained that the French Revolution was the 
work of philosophy and of books, rather than of necessity and the 
spij'it of the age ; a mischievous notion, which, as long as it con- 
tinued, and even to the present day, has entailed serious calami- 
tics on the mo»t estimable men, and has deprived the Government 
and the priesthood of the powerful aid of geuiui In Sicily the 
works of Filangieri were forbidden and were burnt ; Pagano, 
Cirillo,' DMfIco,' and Conforti were looked upon witli suspicion 
and watcliod; tho reforms In the stale ceased entirely, and those 
already effected were repented of; foreign books and neirspapcra 
were prohibited; the coteries of tho queen were at an cud; the 
meetings of men of letters forbidden ; and n slielter was even 
reruGcd to French refugees, thougli hustile to tbc Revolution, 
because they raised a scandal and caused disquiet by their 
accounts of what was passing in Franco. The whole ap]K-aranco 
of the city was changed, and universal gloom eucceeded the colni- 
neu of repose. 

Public matters having been thus disposed of, the Government 
waited coming events in Europe. England, Holland, and Prussia, 
demanded from Austria the cessation of the war in the Kast, and 
peace was promised ; while Russia and the Porte, when likewise 
f)etitioned, allowed their animosity to subside. The Emperor' 
Leopold, who was most violent against Fmucc, proceeded to Italy. 

pruitenn-. &i;. to 1806, lie sut iii ilie Coan- 
t-il of Sljitc in Niipl<-<f, un.lor JoMiph lloni' 
I>artc, aril) coiupom-J ujunt of the lulttitiiik. 
trHlJvc,finimi^)jtl, iLnJ jujiriiirvlttvi* jilnnnM 
al ihM time. MmC of his tiro iraa, howmr, 
eiwat in ivllrviuciit and tiludy, nnJ he ton- 
tiiiuwl in favour with lh« (Ipvrminciil nmlcr 
botii lljc Uourbuii BDi] Fivikch itiiif.'v. lie 
relirtril loTenuni) in I83it. Btid wuh vinitrH 
litem by King Fnincia before hia dealh, 
wliivh otwumnl in Lin uumty-MOOiid jmr. 



' Cintlo, m ocl«bniU'il botuniKt mhI pliy- 
4irinn, profuiaor of butntij nL llie uoiTcmity 
in NaplM, uid aftrnrania profcMuir ur lue- 
ttidnt; bcra JTM, diml ai llic scaffdil 

» J/riawrv IHJjk*, Wd 1744 et T«- 

ian>a,dicdlSlt5; llii:]>ti{iiluf AiituniaGmo 
Ti-w in phi'tMOipliy Auil jtulitii-al ocmioniy, 
be wnio on tlie intj^nAlic* of the miliua, 
•n ilw evlli L- viting is li!i antin prorinw, 
an ibi Tavglivrt of J'ugHa, ou RoaiaD Jurii 



vm. 



FKRDINAiiD IV. 



l^7 



from wlienco, after a secret conference witli the ambassadors of 
Louis, he wrote to tlic Icing on the 20tli H&y, to be jrrcparcd for 
the invasion of France ; wliioli would bo entered from Flandora by 
thirty-five tKoueanil Germans, from Alsace by fifieeii thousand, by 
as many Swiss ou the road through Lyons, by more than as many 
Piedmonlese through Daupliine, and by twenty thousand Spauiardp 
from the Pyrenees. Prussia would act as the ally of Austria, and 
England remain neutral. A manifesto was prepared by the Bour- 
bons of Naples, Spain, and Parma, and signed by the members t>{ 
the royal family of France who had escaped, intended to dcmou- 
Btrate the justice of the war. King Louia was to remain passive, 
awaiting those movements, and ready to assist them, cither secretly 
or openly, by the forces at his disposal. But Louis, fearing lest an 
invasion should render the partisans of liberty furious, determined 
on a measure of greater precaution ; to escape from Paris, seek 
shelter at Montmedy, where General Bouilk- had collected the most 
loyal of the troops, and from thence, his person bciug in safety, 
Attack Franc© by foreign armies, supported by his own tri>ops, the 
refugees and liis adherents, whom he believed more numerous and 
strong than they really were. Tlic route, the time, and the signals 
for flight being concerted, ihe king left the palace in disguise, 
accompanied by the queen, the Princess Elizabeth, and the royal 
children, led by the hand of Madame de Tourzcl, who, under the 
assumed name of Madame KortT, pretended to bo travelling with 
her children, and that the queen and princess were her female 
attendants, the king her servant, and three of the body-guard 
iu disguise, her couriers or menials. At the same time, the king's 
brother, with his wife, fled by another route, and s]Mjedy mesaen- 

fgers wore sent to foreign sovereigns to inform them of their 0ight. 
The following moniing, the de]>arturo of the king was known in 
Paris, and the Assembly, pretending ihut he had been carried olF 
by the enemies of France, decreed that he should be detained ; 
but rejoicing to see theraselvea delivered from thotr greatest ob- 
stacle, they desired his escape- Providence, however, ordained a 
better destiny for Franco ; for foreign and native troops, the weak- 
icas inherent in a new State, the division of parties, and despotism, 

'vould have probably succeeded in destroying, in a short time, the 
marvellous laboura of the past two years, and the hopes of the ccn- 



J88 



illSTOBV OP TUB KINGDOM OP NAFNES. 



TTH. 



turj, and Bultjootod llie people of Franw onee neiain to a tyranny. 
The injuries infiiotetl by revolutions arc delusive, becrtuso ini- 
iTicnsc at the inomenl; but they are not so great as they appear, 
as, tlioui^h violent, they are temporary. 

The Qitecn and King of Naples wore rejoicing in the eiDcnpe of 
the myal family of France, wlien thoy learned by other lellers, 
that they hail been discovered ut VnreHiics, and reconducted as 
prisoners to Paris, where they were guard«^-d by soldiers. The Bove- 
reigns, leagued together for the invasion of France, did not however 
resign their hopes ; the Emperor LeojKild, the King of Prussia, the 
Eloetor of Saxony, and tlie Count d'Artois, mot nt Pilnitz, and 
published an edict in the name of the two first, which ran thus : — 
"Socinl order being completrly subverted in France, the monarchy 
iusuherl nnd the king a prisoner, it beronies impn'raiiveon aove- 
rcigiis to restore the peace of tliat kingdom and the liberty of the 
prince ; numerous corps of Prussian nnd Austrian troops are col- 
lected in an amiy, and they invite other kings of the earth to join 
in the enterprise, to secure the safety of their own kingdoms, and 
vindicate the dignity of the crown." Uuslavus iii., king of Sweden, 
buiTiing with indignation, and covetuus of glory, declared hiniBelf 
ready and eager to accept the challenge, and ini]>atient of delay. 
The new statute for France had been eompleledin September 175)1, 
and the king, now set at liberty, went to the Assembly, greeted by 
the uliontx of the populace ns in timettof prosperity ; the potters he 
received by the atatntc restored him to his roval state, after the 
ignominy of being detained prisoner ; trusting to time, therefore, 
for better things, as well as to the fickle temper of the French 
people, nnd to a new assembly, he stopped the niovenicnta of the 
foreign armies. Just as the repuhlienn parly were increasing so 
rapidl}' as to alarm even the most ardent rricnds of freedom in the 
constituent assembly, the Coimi de Mirabenu died in tlic vigour of 
bis age and intclleet. With views as favourable to liberty as were 
compatible with tlie limes, he had peri-oivcd the violence of the 
Jacobins, and united himself witli the king to oppose the jiroject 
of a republic, unsuitable to a people long inured to servitude, and 
who had neither the vigour of a young nation, nor the wisdom of 
mature civilisation. But Mimlieau, who understood human nature 
well, and comprehended the spirit of the age, and who desired all 



mi. 



PBUDINAND IV. 



1S9 



r.poBBiblo liberly for Franno, M-as now dead ; and t!ie aTiibitimi of tlic 
people for power awakened by two ycais of rcvolutitm, ami which 
the Legislative Assembly was unable to contain, vented itself in 
clubs, and pnnri]).'tlly in tliat of the Jacobins, wlicrc all luaiinrr of 
})o!itieal questiojis were discussed : uIe<'lions, division by |»rovinf.*c3, 
tlio oltici> of ]in'sident, buKidus utbvr olliuea, llie tribune, dcci- 
eion by vote, piiMicily. JJotliing but the autli'.Tity of law was 
wanting to impart to these meetings the force of a rvpresonlative 
kSRcmbly ; but ihoy compensated for this dofect by tbeir numbers, 
violence, and tlio approbation of llie pcoplu. The Jacobins voted 
for a popular forrti of government, and ilic other chibs were not 
far bchind-hniid in theJrwishes; while the l^egislailvc Aascmblj, 
a king who had been ao often vanquished, and n new .statute 
which had not yet Iwen esUblislud, wore but fecblo barriers to 
the accoinpliHhmeiit of their desires. 

In reply to tlio circulars of Louis, containing \m cnniient to the 
now statute of France, the king of Naples declared he would sus- 
pend Jits belief until the king was free, and the rest of the Euro- 
pean monnrehs answered in (he same tenor, thou<;h varied tn ox- 
prefision according to their dilTerviit interests and policy. The king 
of Piedmont alouo, terrified by so near a contlftgration, and hia 
foolish expectation of conquering France already turned to fear, 
proposed an Italian league to the princes of Itiily, to prevent the 
entrance of French soldiers and revolutionary doctrinea All 
accctled, except Venice and the Imperial States of Lomljardy, as 
the House of Austria was more afraid of a united Italy than of 
revolutionized France. This prevented the proposal taking ofTect, 
and each separate Italian state trusted for safety to its own wisdom, 
or rathrr to chance. Meantime, the Emperor Loo|K)Id, who by 
nature waa averse to war, and linil only taken up amis in the firwt 
burst of indignation, being in reality more inclineil than any king, 
or rather alone among kings, iu his dciiiro to promote the welfare 
of his people, sent back to ihetr former quarters the army he had 
assembled. The Empi'css of llus&ia, at peace with the Ottouian 
Porte, Imd no iuteution to oommenco another war. Prussia was 
silenced ; Spain supine like her monan-h, and England at peace ; 
therefore the rage of the Queen of Naples, and the warlike im- 
pulses of King Gueta^Tis, were powerless against France. The 



ido 



HIOTOHV OP THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



im. 



French people Tiiiglit perhaps Imvc been able to cope with repub- 
licau opiniotis, and have established a BClttctI government, had 
they not been disturbed hy two political factions, more fierce ev«i 
than Jacobinism, — ilie refugees and the clergy. The former (vhom 
I shall call eniigrarit«, adopting the name while relating tbo events 
of French historv) were assembled in great numbers and in warlike 
array on the two frontier of the Khinc and of Piedmont, and 
threatened the safety of the kingdum. The tnujohty composed of 
noblea, not true citizens of Franca nor faithful servants of the 
king, and neither warriors nor brave men, but thirsting for pri- 
vilege and favour. Lad fled from the new order of civil equality, 
aud, under the ill-assumed name of loyalty, sighed for the return 
of a prodigal and despotic monarchy. The first emigration took 
the country by surprise, and was tolerated ; but when their nuni- 
bera increased so as to form two armies supplied with arms and 
money, led by skilful officers and princes of the blood-royal, the 
legislative assembly became alarmed and indignant, and invited 
them to return home. The property of the contumacious waa 
taxed, and they were threatened with personal punishment ; but 
invitations and threats proved fruitless, and they continued hover- 
ing on the frontiers, ready to commence a confliigration, which they 
hoped would spread throughout France. They misrepresented the 
most patriotic intentions, e^tcited foreign potentates tu war, and 
endangered the life of the king, whose name tliey used as an 
honourable pretext to cover their infamous practices. The clergy 
were divided between those who objected to take the oath lo the 
statute, and tho.ie who accepted it ; the majority belonged to tlie 
first, and were the most untainted of their order. The cliurcU 
lands were first sequestrated, then confiscated. Two briefs from 
liome and the Pope's effigy were burnt in mockery, and priests 
were insulted and injured ; while they, on their side, went about 
rousing the consciences of believers, and urging them to arm. 
Ixiuis adhered to the emigrants because ho was a king, and to the 
priests bccaunc he was dcvouL 

Such was the state of Europe in the year 1791. In tho begin- 
ning of the ensuing year, the Kmperor I^opold died, and was suc- 
ceeded by bis son Francis. In the same month died Guslavus iii., 
king of Sweden, murdered by his nobles ; but as the authors of 



FKBDIlfASD IV. 



tills conspiracy wero undiscovorcd, tho act woa imputod to the 
Jacobins. Tlio death of Leopold v/aa lamented, wliiic suspicion 
followed that of Gustavus; and the world waa reminded of the 
French club, the propaganda, and the legiun of tyraiit-slajers, as 
well as of a saying' iti tiiu Assembly, " To tlio king wbu shall send 
us war, we shall send liberty ;" with other actions or words por- 
tending de»truL-Lioii to princes. The police in Napte», therefore, 
increased their vigilance ; and in order to improve the Bystem of 
espionage, the names of the streets end numbers of the houses 
were inscribed in marble tablets, at all times a useful regulation 
in a large city. Ten thousand condemned persons, and twelve 
thousand prisoners in the dungeons of Naples and CostcUainnre, 
causing some alarm, a great number were removed to the penal 
islands of Lampedusa and Tr^miti. The new regent of tlic V'icaria 
made a profit out of the cast-off clothes and deposits of money left 
by those condemned to tho galleys, whose guilt was proved upon 
tho information of spies, the inquisitorial researches of the scrivant, 
and the sentence of the regent himself. At first, only the lowest 
of ttie populace, men of infamous character, or felons, suQ'ered this 
punishmcut ; until tlie people, having become accustomed to the 
sight, aud submissive to the exercise of despotic power, had learned 
to tolerate it with patience, when the police did not fear to use 
equal license in tlie punisliment of innocent persons. Real crime 
was the consequence of suspicion wliere offences did not exist. 
Tliose very Neapolitans, admirers of the French theories, who had 
Leon shortly before consulted for their wisdom on the reforms in 
the State, were now watched and suspected, and therefore met in 
•ecret to discuss the events in France ; not, indeed, from any hope 
of nearer immediate bcnelfit, but as an exercise of reason, and to 
enjoy an ideal bliss in tho future ; but for this innocent amuse- 
moiit they were obliged to use tlio duplicity and mystery of crime. 
l>clighted with the French statute of 1791, and with the declara- 
tion of the rights of man, besides all the philosophical senliments 
which adorned that charter wliere the universal desire for equality 
Iwfore the laws is distinctly laid down, they ordered a. printer, in 
whom they could confide, to prepare upwards of two thousand 
copies, with fresh types, at a great expense. They did uot, liow> 
ever, proceed further, for fear succeeding boldness, they only dis- 



192 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OF XAPLKS. 



ITtr 



Iributed a few copies I^t night in the streets of the city ; while iti a 
spirit of youthful tlpfmnce, thoy <lri>])prd two in the apartmeiils of 
the (lueen ; but the greater number were coiicea1e<l in sacks of 
flour, and tlirown into the sea amonj!; the rooks of CI)iaUmoiie. 
Two youngs nobles, attired as porters, took the sacks on their backs 
just after sunset (to avoid daylight and tlie niyht watch), (ind 
passing ihrougli tho most ]iopiiIous parts of tlie city, onrried them 
out of Naples, and depoftited tlii-m in the ]il!icc doi*ii,iiated. Thoy 
were npplaudcil by their cotnradcA as if tlu'y hud saved the Hepub- 
lio ; but, mennwiiile, their audacity, and tho printing of these 
jMipcrfi, iiKiicttsed ihc rage ami suspicion of the lulera Such wore 
tho fir&t sparks of that ciril confljtgratiou which has never sinoo 
been extinguished. 

Tho affairs of France bocomiug worse through the evil agency 
of tho emigrant*, clergy, und Jaobitis, pylilica! parties, the posi- 
tiou of the king a-nd tho people became more deB[n'rHte. Men of 
groat energy had arisen in the midst of these civil convulsions, but 
discord had Icm asunder the olemcnt« of ftrce in the State. 
Dumonriex, exhausted by opposition, re&ignod the office of mini- 
ster, by Ati act of easy but ignoble rirtuc. La Fayette, a soldier 
of liberty and a French chevalier, was stopped midway in liia career, 
when, after the tumults of the 2t)th June, he came to Paris, in- 
tending to save the nionarcliy ; while Bailly, Condorcct, and other 
virtuous men, continued in tho track of the iloctrinaircs, then 
feebly suppiirtoil. Pothion and many others capable of musing, 
were impatent to direct the mgc of tho people. The king was 
patient rntlier than intrepid, possessed of passive virtues, high- 
niiuded but indo]i>nt; and the queeu thoughtless and petulant, wu 
agitated by the desire for vengeance. Law, the throne, the people, 
religion, words once revered as sjicred, had not wholly lost their 
ancient prestige, but the man was wanting who could tit them to 
the temiicr of the times ; for Uirabeau was dend, and Qouaparto 
had not yet appeared upon tlie stage. Hence arose calamiliea 
and errors. Tiie Iting, suspicious of jioifton, ate in private with liis 
family stich simple food as he could trust, and for many months 
endured the greatest hnrdsliips. Meantime ho sent secretly (o the 
camps of the emigrants, and to the sovereigns of Austria and 
Prussia, to solicit the aid of their armies for his liberation. War 



ins. 



PECDINAND IV. 



193 



waa tlien declared againat France. The Pruasfan and AuBtrinn 
armies approaclicd ; and the queen, measuring the road t)ic.v liad 
to traverse, foretold tlie dn^ of their arrival in Paris with ill- 
concealed joy. 

Changoa and perils in the city and the royal palace were con- 
stantly occurring, and of various kinds, followed by lassitude and 
waste of time and thought La Fayette repeated his ofl'cr to save 
the king by flight ; and Marshal Luckner, a foreignor in Lhc French 
service, came to Paris on the part of the enemy, to secure his 
escape. But the royal family were obstinate ; the queen declared 
ahe preferred death to the f^liame of living under an obligation to 
the constitutionalist. La Fayette ; and the king yielding to her 
desire, rudely rejected the proffered kindness^ Their pride, per- 
haps, saved the life, and certainly the reputation, of the general ; 
for such were the circumstances of the time, that France or t!ie 
monarchy must have fallen. Amidst these conflicting passions, 
the edict of tlio Prussian Brunswick appeared, which, while pro- 
testing against the moderate tone of the manifesto formerly issued 
by the sovereigns, designated all France as a faction, and aascrtcd 
that the king alono had the wisdom to devise, and the lawful povrer 
to concede reforms in the State ; he abrogated all the acts of 
the three |)ast years, and insisted, as if secure of victory, that 
the revolutionary armies should be disbanded, the assemblies and 
clubs dissolved ; that the Austrians and Prussians should bo re- 
ceived as friends, and he called on the adherents of the king to join 
them, and his enemies to fly, or sue for pardon. Meanwhile, nume- 
rous troops of emigrants, the Inst in the field though the first in 
their expressions of indignation, and the instigators of a civil and 
■anguinary war, were following in the rear of the German columns. 
This edict, which, tliough the terms of his demand had. been ex- 
ceeded, was nevertheless grateful to the king, wlio saw the perils 
threatening his dynasty, drove the people to desperation. Some 
dreaded the royal vengeance, others despaired of forgiveness, otiiera 
again mourned the fate of their country, and all were thrown into 
alarm and excitement. Some again, more discerning and hold 
spirits, rested their hope of safety in reducing all passions into 
one, and guiding the popular impulses in one direction, and there- 
fore hold up as a ral lying-point their common hatred of the king, 

vou I. a 



m 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



iTn. 



It is unnecc^anry, in a liistory of Naples, to give an nccount of all 
iliftt passed in Fmiicc ; anJ it is tliercfore here sufiicieiit to remind'' 
tb« reader, tliat on the IQtU August 1792, the king was attacked in 
liifl palaoo, wliich was taken and burned by battalions of the people; 
tliat with hia wife, children, and sister, he escaped in haste to the 
Legislative Assembly, where they remained in concealment in a 
miserable room, from whence they heard the decree read, which 
declared Louis fallen from his throivc. The world beheld in wonder 
the palace of the kings of France besieged and taken, not by ene- 
mies in war, but by subjects, who, rising in a transport of fury, 
and in the name of liberty, burned the escutcheons and effigies of a 
raco of powerful and venerated kings. Amidst the eonilagration 
Louis escaped, followed by the queen, with the little dauphin in her 
arms, while the I*rincoas EliKabeth carried his young and tender 
daughter ; they were without an escort, and their heads bowed with 
sorrow, or from their anxiety to hide their tears. The roynl family 
were convoyed prisoners to the Luxembourg, and thence to tlio Tem- 
ple, and the State being without a fixed govcromeut was ruled by 
factions. General La Fayette, declared an enemy of his country for 
having resisted the first impulses of unbridled liberty, was refused 
obedience by the tn>opR, and escaped into Belgium, where he wait 
thrown into prison by the Austrians. Others who had supported 
the first ideas of the Revolution fell under suspicion, and, menaced 
with death, fled their country ; for to them had succeeded Danton, 
Marat, Robespierre, and other such jnaniaca, who in civil commo- 
tions spring from the dregs of the people. DuniouricE returned to 
favour, hccauflo the enemy of tho people's onomy, La Fayette ; ho 
was placed at the head of the French army, which numbered a 
hundred and twenty thousand soldiers distributed along the fron- 
tiers, but who, with their confidence In their leaders weakened, 
were insulordiuate and istubboni, and wore opposed to a hundred 
and thirty-two thousand Germans. Fortune smiled on the Ger- 
man arms. The fortress of Longwy, and soon afterwards Verdun, 
fell into their bauds. The Austrian army laid siege to tho for- 
tresses in the north ; while sixty thousand Prussians, and crowds 
of emigrantR, were marching upon Paris. Amidst the agitatioa 
caused by the approach of the enemy, and the fears and suspicions 
of tho pcoplcj many and dreadful were the atrocities perpetrated in 



irso. 



rBRDlNlXD IV. 



]93 



France. Tho unhappy family of the Bourbons confined in tho 
Temple witnessed part of the slaughter ; they liearti the dying 
groaud of those mnssncrcd in the adjoining pHsons, nnd their last 
ray of hope waa foreign succour. But Brunswiclc was heavy nnd 
slow in his movcmenta, h\& king impatient, tho emigrants faUe 
to their proiniaes, anil the alHetl sovereigna differed iu policy om! 
views ; the result was, discord and inaction in the Gcnnan camp ; 
while iu tho French camp, the genius of Dumouriez, the youthful 
ardour of his troops, and the cheering influence of liberty, coiupon- 
aateU for defective numberi and want of success. The Prussians, 
however, reached Chalons ; hut there, dislieartened by disease, by 
their defeat at the batUo of Valmy, and by the inclement season, 
they relieved France from their presence. The rest of tli© Austrian 
and Pni&sian troops, engaged on various parts of the frontier, has- 
tened their retreat Fnmcis and Frederic- William, with altered 
plans, returned to Vienna and Berlin. Tlic first league against 
Franco was dissolved, and the progi'eAs of the Revolution »ecui'ed. 
The last hope of the unhappy family had fallen. The JacobJne, 
now all-powerful, prepared for the trial of Louis. Ancient respect 
for tlicir kings, the virtues of the present Mivercign, and his calm 
demeanour, which appeared liko a sereuo conscience, pleaded in 
his favour. His actions, and the name of king, were his accu»ei-a. 
Disorder reigned iu the discu&siou, legal justice waa sot aside, and 
the lunk of the accused forgotten ; such was the climax to which 
matters had amvcd, that the king's life or death hung on tho 
question, *'WIiich would be ntost advantageous to France?" It 
vaa decided by the majority of a single vote that his death would 
be of greatest service, and Louis lost his life on a scaffold. The 
deaths of the queen and that of the Princess Elizabeth followed, 
both nfthctn condemned by the iniquitous sentences of a ferocious 
tribunal. Hie dauphin perished from want in the dungeon, and 
his sister waa exchanged as a random for some French prieoncrs in 
Germany. Upon the arrival of these dreadful news, the Court of 
Naples forbade every public or private celebration of tho Carnival j 
and after many days spent iu grief, the royal family went iu 
mouraiug to the cathedral, to weep and pray for the dead ; even 
the king followed the chase less frequently, and in private. Franoe, 
meantime, was organized as a republic, but the sovereigns of 



lite 



HISTORY OF THE KlKODOli OF NAPLKS. 



ins. 



Naples refused to aclcnowlcdgc tlic citizen Malcau, who came thither 
fts amhaMftdor, and even interfered to prevent the Ottoman Court 
from accepting the citizen ScTnonviUe in a Bimilar c&pacitj. 

Furtfier, the king communityited a note to the goveniinents of 
Sardinia and Vuiiico to this eflect : — " Wliatevcr niav be tlio for- 
turoB of tlio Germans on the Rhine, it is important for I ta]y to 
fomi an armed barrier upon the Alps, to prevent tlie French, if 
conquered, turning upon us in desperation or revenge ; or, if suc- 
cessful, attacking' us from the love of conquest, and disturbiug tbe 
peace of the Italian QovcrumontK. If the Hicilieii, Sardinia, and 
Vetiico, wei-e to fomi a league for mutual defence, the most high 
pontiff would concur in the holj enlerprise, and lesser potentates, 
whose states arc intennodiale, voluntarily or on compuUioti, will 
follow the move ; thus a force will be assembled capable of defend- 
ing Italy, and giving licr weight and authority in the wars and 
congresiica of Europe. Tliis note ia intended to propose and form 
a confcdemtion, in wltich the hing of the Sicilies, the last exposed 
to danger, offers himself as the iirst in tlie struggle, and reminds 
every Italian prince, tliat the liope of escaping singly has ever 
been the ruin ofltaly." This wise and coumgeoua proposal hadboon 
accepted by the king of Sardinia, though refused by the Senate 
of Venice, when the king of the Sicilies suddenly withdrew ; for, 
iu Iho iuCei'val, a large French fleet, with sails spread and colours 
flying, had anchored in tlie Bay of Naples. The Government, in- 
formed that several men-of-war belonging to the Republic were 
sailing in the Tyrrhcncan Sea, had already repaired the ancient 
strand batteries, constructed new, and provided the port more 
amply with arras and men. Meantime Admiral La Touche led 
his fleet of fourteen men-of-war into the Bay of Naples as into & 
friendly or unarmod port; lie dropped the anchors of the laigcr 
vessel within half a gun-shot from the Castel doll' Uovo, and 
anchored the other vessels drawn up in line of battle across iho 
port. An immense crowd were assembled to witness the spectacle, 
and the Neapolitan soldiers and fleet were on the eve of an eugage- 
ment, when (lie king sent to the admiral to demand the cause of 
his arrival, and of these demonstrations, and tu remind him of 
the ancient treaty by which only stz men-of-war were permitted 
to enter the port^ La Touche replied by sending a messenger of 



im. 



rRBDIKAND IV. 



W7 



high ranlf (as lie was lionourcd in Ins passage lif continual salutes 
from the floci), who, in writing and by word of mouth, asked tho 
reason tlic king had refused to receive their ambassaJor, and why 
he had acted as the enemy of France witit the Sultan ? lie further 
demaudfd reparatiou for these ofTences, or war. 

The king called a council, and although the preparations for re- 
sistance were superior to the force of the enemy, and would have 
obliged La Touche either to make his escape, or submit to de- 
feat, the queen, declaring the kingtlom to bo full of Jacobins, 
entreatod for peace, and was seconded by the terrified members 
of the Council. The king accordingly granted their requeat^ and 
imme<liatcly by word and letters signified his acceptation of the 
minister Makau, htA disapprohaiiun of the practices which had 
been carried on with the Porte, recalled tho Neapolitan anihaasador 
at that Court to receive punishment, sc^nt an ambassador to Paris, 
promised neuLralily in the wnrs of Europe, and consented to a 
reconciliation with France. That day the fir&t act of cowardice 
was committed, suggested by gromidlcM fears. La Touche imme- 
diately weighed anchor, but, overtaken by a tempest, he again 
sought shelter in the Uay of Naples, where he asked leave to re- 
store his battered ships, to renew his supply of water, to take in 
fresh provisions, and to manceuvro in the port — requests which 
might be expected from an ally, but were displeasing to the Govern- 
ment of Naples, though they could not be refused. Many of the 
Neapolitan youth, enthusiastic for tho new doctrines, held com- 
munications with tho oflScers of the fleet, with Maknu and La 
Touche ; and, aa at that time it was tho policy of tho French 
Government to incite tho people to liberty, and thus associate 
them in their dangers and struggles, the admiral infianied their 
youthful minds still more, and advised tbcm to hold secret meet- 
ings. It happened that, at a supper given on tliis occasion, amidst 
the intoxication of hopes and wishes, tho Neapolitans hung at 
their breasts a little red cap. at that time tho symbol of the Jaco- 
bins in France. The Government of Naples was informed of these 
offences, but delayed punishment until tho departure of their un- 
welcome guests. They hurried on tho repair of their vessels, sup- 
plied them with provisions, and ordered the purest water of the 
Carmignano to be sent to the fleet, and conveyed as far as the end 
of the mole. 



193 



HISTORV OF THB KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



Z7II&. 



Thu Frcncli wciglicd auclior, and tlio rage which had beeti pent 
up, now bui-st fortl) in present acts of vengeaace, and piepArationt 
formore. Many ofthosewholiad hold intercourse with the French, 
and others accused of trca«on^ were scixod in the night and con- 
veyed to prison ; their fate was kept secret, so that ic was com- 
monly reported, and believed by their relatives and friends, that 
they had been, murdered in the lowest dungeons of ihe fortresses, 
or sent into distant cJi^tles in the island of Sicily; it was only 
aftcrwnrds known that they Imd been placed in solitary confine- 
ment in the subterranean dungcona of Sant' Klmo, living on 
prison faro, sleeping on the bare ground, each in a separate 
cell. They were all of them nobles or men of learning, nocus- 
tomcd to the luxuries usual in their stjition, or to the tran- 
quillity of a life of study. These ferocious orders were executed 
with moat ferocioua zeal by inhuman men, whose name^ will 
appear in the course of this history. The (\uccn, suspecting 
that the French amhassador might have a list of the num- 
bers and names of the supposed conspirators, caui^cd his papers 
to be stolen by one Luigi C'ustodc, who was in her pay in the 
house of Makau. Accused of this theft, and brought to trial, 
he was acquitted by the judges, and rewarded by tiie Court. 
Neither names nor proofs of a conspiracy were found among the 
papore, and nothing was produced liut a note of the failure of tho 
promised neutrality on the part of the Neapolitan Government. 
The king ncvcrthele-ss instituted a tribunal for the trial of persona 
accused of treason, called tho Junta of State, and composed ot 
seven judges and a procurator- fiscal, Busilio Palmieri, notorious 
for his rigorous dealings ; the judges were the Chevalierde Medici, 
the Marquis Vanni, and the president of the court, Giaqututo, 
wlio all of them afterwards Attained celebrity for the iniquitous 
deeds they sanctioned or committed. The prisons were incrcaaed 
in number, the Junta and the police secretly arranged the proofe/ 
and tho wliole cit** was in terror. 

Tlie queen now meditated a greater and more generous revenge 
on France, by a declaration of war. The measures already taken 

' /^Vo'iJWrt, (ir I'rwiH a U-mi irliiib li,»ii nil given in wnliiiR ; »»ftjtliinp, in hhart, 
no En^iili equivAlcnt, as it JnclndM Uio exwpl iht find Kntcnee. 
[nqnirj>, acciunticai, iliBreuDi-, nnil tiU'iuluigi, 



K93. 



FERDINAND ir. 



109 



Lad iucreasod tlie recruits for the army to tLirt;>six tliousand, 
and the fleet nunibercil a Imndred and two vessels of various 
dimensions, carrying six Imndred and eighteen cannon, and manned 
hy crews of ciglit tliousand six hundred seamen. The labour at 
the armories and arscnnls was unceasing ; the new levies were 
oontioucd and CTen facilitated by the famine, which was little less 
sevci-e in 1793 than it had been in 1764, nor vrere the measures of 
prevention in any way improved. Timo and exijerience fail to 
teach rulora the wisdom of devising other means to obtain their 
imds besides those of force and authority ; private advantago and 
free trade can alone extinguish monopolies, bring pieiUy into the 
moikcts, and tmnqiiillizti the minds of the people, who, when ex- 
cited by their fuar^, lay waste the land, empty the granaries, and 
reduce thenijelvea from abutidauce to dt;atituliou. Amidst the diffi- 
culties in procuring provisions, the most wretched of the populace 
enlisted in the army, most of them from the metropolis, where living 
is expensive, owing to luxury and vice. A new legion wa;i therefore 
raised in Naples, called theSfOutooneers, from the weapon, the spon- 
loon,' carried by the soldiers, and intended for use in inaccessible 
places, either where the ground was covered with wood, or behind 
embankments, or when the men were formed in squares, against 
horse, or for a charge, as with tho bayonet ; the scarcity of muskets 
and the ignorance of military leaders suggeatedtheusoof this weapon, 
so ill suited to modem warfare. The spontoonecrs were either raised 
by eonaeription, or were volunteers enlisted by decree from among 
the LozzaronL The term Lazjdiro- was Orst introduced under the 
Spanish viceroys, when the Government was rapacious, when the 
feudal lords had resigned the u&o of anns, when their vassals were 
averse to war, and the inhabitants of the city degraded by domes- 
tic serx'itude, whon soldiers were scarce, or removed to a distance, 
artisans or workmen still fewer, and when there were no agricul- 
turists, and an immense population sought subsistence by crime. 
Among these vast numbers of degraded human beings, many lived 
like cattle, half clothed and houseless, sicepiug in cellars during 
the winter, and, from the mild cHmatc, in the o]>cn air in sum- 



* J^Nftwn. A abivt pike, awd ia m* 
c!eut irarfan. 



' LmaaAro, or Lan*ron«, ■ Spanitli wonl, 
■igniiywg ft iniui hi dcMitutiom «tt'l mgn, 
or slep*r. 



soo 



HlSTOIiy or TUB KiNODOM OP NAPLKS. 



ins. 



mer. They were called Lazz&ri or Lflzzaroni, an epitliet talcon 
from tlic language of their haughty rulers, who, having caused our 
miscrj, turned it into dcriaion, and immortalized it by a nam'C. 
No man waa born a Lazz^ro ; the Lazzhro who turned to any art 
or trade lost the name, uiid vrhasoever liveil the animal life I have 
described becamo one Tlicy were only to bo found in the metro- 
polis, and hero, though numerous, thc^* were not included in tho 
census with the rest of the population, as their savage and vagrant 
life prevented the possibility of taking any account of them. They 
were supposed to be about thirty thou»and, poor, ini]>udent, greedy, 
iiiBatiablu in plunder, and ready to join in any rioL Tho victroy, in 
his edicts, was accustomed to call the Laxzaroui by the honourable 
name of people ; he listened to their complaints, and the demands 
laid before bini by their oratois, who wore deputed to spealt with 
him in tlic palace. They were permitted on a feast-day in every 
year to elect their chief by acclamfltion in the niarkct-placc ; with 
this chief the viceroy held conferences, at one time pretending a 
desire to settle with him about the tribvile levied on goods brought 
to Tniirket, at another ]iledging the LaKznroni to support the autho- 
rity of the Govenmient. The celobnued Tommnso Anicllo was' 
chief of the I-azzaroni when, in the year lfi+7, tho ci(y broke 
into open rebellion. By disciplining several thousand of these low 
fellows, the legion of the spontoonecrs added to the security of 
the public peace, while increasing the numbers of the army. 

Having thus placed tho kingdom in a state of preparation for 
war, the king next proposed to form an alliance with England, 
already the enemy of France ; and on the 20th July of that year, 
1793, €nt«^rccl into a secret compact (as the treaty of neutrality 
just concluded M*ith La Touche still continued), by which the King 
of Naples was to send four men of war, four frigates, and four 
lesacr vcsBcls, with six thousand soldiers, to join aJi equal num- 
ber of vessels and soldiers from England, in the Mediterranean, 
and thus together form a fleet superior to that of the enemy, 
secure (he dominion of the sea, and protect the commerce of iho 
Two Sicilies. The powers leagued in war with QrcaL Britain con- 
sented to this treaty, and Naples found itcraclf included in the 
vast and interminable iluropcan confederations against France. 
In tho midst of all these naval forces, light skiffs from liarbary 



ITBlL FERDINAND IV. 201 

boldly navigating our seas, devastated our shores, seized on barks, 
and did much injury to commerce ; tbe captains of merchant ves- 
sels aaked leave to carry arms, but the Government, who sav in 
every association a club of robeli, were afraid to provide them 
with the means of defence, and refused this advantageous oiFer. 
The Tunisians therefore continued their depredations, even iu 
the vicinity of Procida. 



202 



HISTORY OF TUE KINODOU 07 >'Al'Li:3. 



tm. 



CUAPTER IL 



■WAE Willi FBA^ICE — PEACE— VIOLATIOS 0! TRRATIES — IXDICTUIEHTS 

POR TttEASOS- 



1703— 179a. 

Tnc league with England was hardly concluded, before action 
commenced. Toulon, a French citjr and fortress, with arsenals, 
wcll-fillcd mngajiiiics, twenty men-of-war at anchor in tlie port, 
timber and materials for the construction of an many more, a largo 
supply of heavy artillery, and plenty of nrms, treasure, and men, 
waa surrendered by treachery to the English, whose 6eet was 
cruizing along the great roadstead. This occuiTcd on the 24lh 
August of the yoar 179.1 ; and immediately Spaniards, Sardinians, 
and Neapolitans, with the contingent in men and ships promised 
by the treaty, hastened to assist in the spoil The citizen M&kau, 
as the representative of a powerful enemy, was ordered to quit 
Naples; ho saw the fleet weigh auuhor for Toulou, without a de- 
claration of war or challengo seat to tho Republic, and, indignant 
at the sight, started for France. Ue was accompanied by two 
ladies, of the name of Basville, who excited the commiftcration and 
desire for revenge in the French people, by their grief for tho loss 
of a father and husband, Ugo Basville, of whom they had been 
cruelly deprived by the hands of the people of Home. jUoanwhile, 
tho Neapolitan forcea set sail for Toulon, under the conduct of 
Marahal Fortiguen-a, and of General de Qanihs and PignatoUi ; 
arrived at their ilcslination, they wcro placeil under the Spanish 
general, O'Harn, conimandcr-in-cluef during that campaign. The 
soldiers of tho Republic hnstened thither from all parte of France, 
while, on the other side, the stores and works of the fortress wcra 
increased. The allied troops sen'cd In rotation, and the Noapoll* 



FKUUIIIANU IV. 



203 



tane, who wero not behind tbo rest, Itad the good fortune to dis- 
tiiigiiish themselves upon Mont Faraon, and in tho defutico of 
Malbousquette. Thoy had occupied the city four moatbs, yet, 
altbougli there were perjjetual skirmishings, tlie siege appearoit 
hardly commenced iu guud earnest, when, on the 1 7th December, 
tho batteries vrure unmasked from circumvallation to circumvalla- 
tion, and tlie attack began ; the firing was most brisk and obstinate 
at the fort called Le Cairo, which was protected by breastwork* 
and cannon, and the English, who believed it impregnable, called 
it the second Gibraltar. But Napoleon Bonaparte, who waa then 
making his first essay in arnisoslietitenant-coloncland commander 
of the artillery in the siege, had so arranged tho attacks that eight 
thnutiand shells fell in rapid Kucccsslon witliin tho area of the fort, 
and tho worka were destroyed or levelled to tho ground by the shot 
from thirty twenty-poundera. In leas than two days, or rather in 
tho night of the IHth and 19th December, their boasted Gibraltar 
was taken, and the artillery wiiich guarded it from the French, 
^3ras turned against tlic allies. 

Aa the fort of ho Cairo projects into tho sea, so as to skirt tho 
lesser roadstead of Toulon, wiih a considerable part of the larger 
rjoadstead, and the canal which lies between the two, the allies 
'were forced to remove their shipping from these waters, and to 
•withdraw the soldiers into the city, in order not to expose them to 
certain capture. The English Admiral llood hoisted the signal of 
retreat, the land troops took to flight, and the exterior forts of 
Malbousquette, Lo Faraon, La Vnlleltc, and La Malguc, which had 
been taken by the Republicans without a struggle, added to the 
danger and confusion, by iiring on the city. The English hlen* up 
Fort PoniJ by mines, but time and means were wanting for the 
destruction of tho other forta, or the city ; the great magaaina 
for the manufacture of ponder caught lire, and thirteen Tcssels 
of tho Republic were burned in the port ; it was night, and it 
rained heavily. In the midst of this scene of desolation tha 
soldiers embarked (some of them being drowned in tho hurry of 
departure), accompanied by such of the inhabitants of Toulon who, 
as psrtisans of England, or enemies of the Republic, were impli- 
cated in the plot by which the place had been betrayed lo tlie 
allies. Horses, arms, tents, field-piecea, and some of the troops 



20 ( 



ntSTOBY or TBE KINODOU OF XAPLES. 



ihh. 



who had been dHatorT- in their moTements, or were incapacitated 
from wounds, fell a prey to the arms of the UepubHc A violent 
tempest arose from the sonth, which caught the ships in the road- 
Rteads, nnd the fleet only escaped the peril to which it was exposed, 
by the skill of the officers; while scattered in all directions, they 
wore driven about for many days aa chance directed, and sought 
shelter iit difierent portR, distant from one another, and without 
the means of communication. Much time was loat collecting the 
men, implements, and baggage of the four nations, and meanwhile 
Naples was afHictcd more even than the case warranted, as is 
Usual where there is an indistinct report of some disaster having 
At last, on llio 2d February 1794, the lookod-for sails 
iired, and it was then ascertained that two hundred Neapoli- 
tans were missing, dead, or wounded, and four hundred, with all 
the horses, had been taken prisoners; besides the loss of provi- 
sions, tents, arms, and standnrds, which had cost the treasury 
untold sums. Among the natives of Toulon who arrived at Naples, 
was General Count Maudet, who, when in command at Toulon, 
bad voluntarily yielded the fortress committed to his charge, to 
the enemies of his country. These events raised the roputAtion of 
tbo Republic, while a name was mentioned for the first time, 
though without attracting much notice, which was soon after* 
wards destined to fill the world. 

Those who arrived from Toulon, while relating or exaggerating 
facts, whether true or fiiUo, produced an alarming impression of 
the French power and of tlie war. The goveniiuent stopped the 
gay celebrations of tlio carnival, and ordered prayers to be oflfered 
up in the churches, while, true to their promises and hopes of 
vengeance, they raised new conscripts and civic guards in the 
city, and encamped twenty battalions of infantry and thirteen 
squadrons of cavalry, with a train of artillery in the plain of Sc^sa, 
destined to assist the German armies in Lombardy. The people 
admired the piety of their sovereigns, and the soldiers their nets 
of seeming courage. The king, the queen, and the minister, 
General Acton, were often at the camp, exciting the men by their 
words, and promising Ihem large rewards for valour, whilst the 
manoeuvres of the shipping, and sham sea-fights, wero wit- 
neaaed in the Bay of Naples. England proposing to attack 



17B1. 



FliUniNANU IV. 



20S 



Corsica, fislied and received from ua sliips, arms, and soldiers, niul 
although tho enterprise proved a failure, the attempt was highly 
spoken of. TbfPD regiments of cavalry with two tliousand horse 
set out for Lonihardy, under the Prince di Cuti!i, a choice which 
met with gtiucral a]>[jrobaliou, hccause lie was a native Neapolitan, 
whereas former expeditions, all of which had been unsuccessful, 
had been commanded by foreigners. We possessed a hundred and 
forty gunboats or bom bh etches, forty larger vessel, forty-two 
thousand trocp<t of the line, and a militia composed of stilt greater 
numbers, while there was an abundant supply of stores. But 
8uch,va8t efforts, and continuing for so long a period, exceeded the 
means at the disposal of the ports and the allowance for the navy, 
as well as heing disproportioncd to the political condilion of the 
kingdom ; and helped to emharraaa the exchequer, proving detri- 
mental to arts and indu&try, and reducing whole familioa to penury. 
It appeared a miracle how so many eipenacs could bo sustained, 
but it was explained by the assistance said to be affoi'ded from the 
privy purse, which necessity and the roscntmeut of tho king had 
unclasped. lu order toconfirni the rumour, the queen assured thoso 
iu whom slie placed her confidence, and who publicly repeated Iier 
words, that she had sold or pawned her jewels, and that on gala 
days in the palace she appeared adorned by their counterfeits. 

These talcs were still circulating among the people, when tho 
government by a new decree demanded subsidies or donations, 
which, OS they were to be applied for tlie benefit of (he nation, 
were called patriotic; every community and congregation, and 
many private individual^ gavo largely, and their names were 
recorded to their honour, and to excite emulation in others. A 
lax of ten per cent (and therefore called a tithe) was imposed by 
another decree upon the predial revenues, but with the exclusioa 
of farmers on the royal domains, exchequer landa, and fiefs ; tho 
lauds of the Church were subjected to the tax, and ae, by the 
Concordat of 1741, the clergy only paid one-half upon the taxes 
which existed prior to that date, the last of their immunities was 
now abolished, and they were placed on a level with the Com- 
mons ; though, to render this less obnoxious, the taxes levied 
upon ecclesiastics were called a loan, and inscribed in a separate 
book. By other decrees, a large amount of the church pro- 



20G 



BIBTOBT OF THE KINGDOM OF KAl'LES. 



17N. 



perty was wM for tlie Wnefit of tlic exchequer, and other property 
called allodium,' was set up for sale. One hundred antl three 
thousand ducats monthly were iniposed on the city of Naples 
alone, and a hundred and twenty thousand on the barons. After 
which the king issued an edict, declaring, " Whatever else ahall 
be needed for the defence of the kingdom and the maintenanee of 
traiHiulIlity, shall be supplied from the a.<u)i^''nments or surplua 
revenue of my-house." The new taxes were burdensome, but as 
the object was great, the expense uecessan*, and the promises of 
the king liberal, no murmurs were heard ; and they only ser\'ed 
to strengthen the huLreU against the French as the cau^ of these 
exactions. That same year, another royal decree commanded that 
churches, monasteries, and charitable institutions, aliould resign 
all their consecrated plate to the royal mint, except so much a& 
was necessary for the performance of the divine ordinances ; and 
that the citizens likewise should deliver over their plate, except 
the small quantity needed for use ; to receive in return hank cer- 
tificates, payable in a few years. Buried treasure was declared 
confiscated, and a fourth jiart awarded to the discoverer. This 
decree was called sumptuary, a word often applied to lawK which 
increase tho wealth of the treasury by imposing economy on the 
subject Money was however given with liberality, the donors 
submitting to the decree in silenca 

Hut this tacit acquiescence was converted into loud remon- 
strances when tUo people became aware that the government was 
robbing the national banks; the name given to seveu Caitteade 
Credit, which had become poi^sessed of a capital of thirteen millions 
of ducats, by endowments, bequests, and commercial enterprise; 
public offices, private individuals, and the royal family themselves 
were in the habit of placing their money in those banks, which 
they believed secure, because guarded and guaranteed. A paper 
called a promissory note certified tho deposit ; the presentation of 
the notes produced immediate payment, and they circulated like 
cash, while far from losing in discount,, they were at a premium 
when the eommorco of tho kingdom was most flaurishing, from the 



* In th« Uw of RngXuid Kt hAVfl not 
pm^tcrly allodintn, wUicb u the uuia \fy 
wliicli il)« TquJUu abtiMd Oitlitiguitli Rich 



esbktea t4 tlie anbject u vo not lintd^-n of 
an/ nupcrior, — B)ack(toiiD'« Coirnnenlaria 
pn t^ Lwct vf £ti4fUiiHl, *vl. U. p. 60. 



ITH. 



PEKDINASD ir. 



207 



convenience find sAfetv of ca-rrying Urge eums in the oompanora 
Binall piece of paper. Money paid into court or in cttaaooty was 

KpUced in the banks ; bequests were paid in banlt paper; much of 
the money of the kinj^om. almost all belonging: to the city, and 
at least twenty-four millions, the property of private individuals, 
was deposited in their coffers. But state necessity, the instincts of 
despotism, the case with which the money could be obtained, while 
the tliefl could bo concealed by fabricating fresh paper, and the hope 
of replacing the missing sum before it could be discovered ; finally^ 
the belief entertained by all absolute monareha that the property 

iRB well as lives of their subjects belongs to them, were reasons 
enough for extending a rapacious hand towards these deposits. 
The spoliation went on quietly for some tiiuo ; the paper, sup- 
ported by credit, already exceeded the coin by many millions; 
and the paper currency suffered no depreciation iu commerce, be- 
cause the real state of matters was unsuspected. But on the dis- 
covery of the fraud, the depositors hastened eagerly and in crowds 
to claim parmont, the coffers were quickly drained, and aa 
cash payments were refused, confidence in the good faith of the 
banks was destroyed. Great as was the injury inflicted from the 
extensive relations of the banks, it was equalled by the clamour 
ami panic which followed : " These arc the treasures of the king." 
they exclaimed, " unburicd for our sakca ; these are the jewels of 
the queen, pawned or sold! those are the fruits of the economy 
and self-denial exhibited by the royal family for the defence and 
peace of the kingdom! their hypocritical talk of poverty and 
ostentatious display of generosity, all to enable them to carry on 
an infamous InifBc mth our substance ! The new taxes already 
exceed the increased expenditure ; and the king, the queen, and 
the minister Acton are enriching themselves by every turn of for- 
tune !" With the usual inconsistency of the maR.*ea, they contra- 
dicted their preconceived notions, and passed from one extreme 
to another. 

The Government, eager to devise a remedy, amalgamated the 
seven banks of the metropolis into one, under the name of the 
ffational Bank ; they established small branch banks, and to 
guard against the extravagant rate of interest demanded by usur- 
ers, they degraded and punished many officers who had been 



sus 



HI8T0RY OP THE KINGDOM 0? KAPLE8. 



KM. 



cniplo,vcd in the baiikit, for real or supposed frauds. Affairs, bow- 
evur, did not uiend, and finding that llieir certificates were refused 
iu commerce, tlie Government ordered that botl» the old and new 
notes should be accepted in private transactions, at their nomi&al 
value, thus inflicting an injury on the rights of alL Bills of ox- 
cliangc now for the first time were marked "fuori banco," to indi- 
cate that they bore an equal value in cash species, a custom which 
still prevails, though the origin is forgotten. Tho stato of the 
bank becoming yvane and worse, the notes circulated at a dis- 
count which increased to 85 per cent. Fifty millions of ducats 
had been purloined in hard cash, and the capitals of the seven 
banks having been thus destroyed, thirty-seven millions of tbo 
property belonging to private individuals had been abstracted, 
without apology or shame, as chance or circumstance* rendered it 
ounvenienl. 

The financial lawscontimiedwithoutalteration froml791 tol799: 
Cut two administrative laws were passed, which, had they been 
executed, might have proved beneficial ; by the first, ovcry com- 
munity was obliged to draw up a map or table indicative of their 
lands and produce ; ond by the other, the rental of the communal 
domains was fixed upon conditiuna advantageous to the tenants, 
and favouring those who were in jjoor circumstances. Nothing 
waa done to advance legislation, commerce, science, or art, or to 
improve tho economy of the state ; for, instead of attending to the 
govenimentor guidance of the kingdom, the rulerawerc only eager 
to maintain their absolute power and prepare for war. Tlius, 
wliile their despotism increased, the laws werc neglected. 

Altbougii hardly wurtliy of record, I must licre mention a con- 
test which aroiic, but soon terminated between the kings of Naples 
and Sweden, as it is alluded to in every history of this period. 
After the death of Gustavus iii., the king his successor ruled over 
Sweden in the interests of the party who had nmnlered his bro- 
ther ; new conspiracies were therefore plotted, and the new king's 
life placed in periL Baron d'Amifcldt, the Neapolitan ambassador, 
was among the conspirators, and his guilt being proved, the king 
of Sweden in courteous tenns demanded him of the king of the 
Siciliea. The asaassination of Gustavus, apnuco inclined for war, 
and the bitter enemy of France, had been lamented by the royal 



17W. 



PERDISAND IT. 



S09 



house of Nflploa, wlio, holding all concerned in liis death Jaco- 
bins and supporters of the kings opposed to them, now aflbrdcd 
Baron d'Annfeldt facilities to escape into Austria. The king of 
Sweden indignantly appealed to the Courts of Europe in a mani- 
festo of his righU, which he declared his determination to maintain. 
Tlie king of Naples, neither intimidatcil nor abaahed, answered hjr 
another manifesto. This scandalous contest was continued by the 
ministers of the respective conrti>, until the Swedish sovereign de* 
mandod reparation or war. But the first w&s not complied with, the 
latter never commenced ; and the whole aSair was in time forgotten. 

To the calamities of war, famirte, scarcity, and turmoil, was added 
another disaster in the year 1 79+, more terrible, because one no 
precaution could avert. In t1io night of the 12th June, a violent 
earthquake shook the city, and a hollow and deep rumbling noise 
indicated an approaching eruption of Vcsuviua The inhabitants 
of the cities and towns at the foot of the mountain fled from their 
houses, watting in (ho 0[>en air for the dawn of day, wliieli broke 
calmly; but at the summit of the volcano, a dense black cloud 
obscured tlie azure and glow of tbo sky, and, as the morning ad- 
vanced, the noise increa5c{l, as well as the darkness and terror. 
Thus passed three daya On the night preocding tbc fourth, the 
loth and iCch June, there came a report as from a hundred pieces 
of ordnance, and a fiery column was seen to rise from the side of 
the mountain, divide, and fall by its own weight, circulating round 
the declivity ; vivid and long flashes of lightning issuing from the 
volcano vanished in the sky, and balls of fire were hurled to great 
distances, the rumbling sound bursting out in tones of thunder. 
Flame rose above d&xae, for the crater of the volcano continue<l 
iiQchanged, and two streams of lava were formed, which first ad- 
vanced rapidly and tb^n moved slowly towards Resina and Torre 
dei Urcco. The population of these cities, 32,000 pcrsoos, stood 
gazing at the sccno in grief and wonder. The town of Resina 
covers the site of the ancient Herculaneum, and Torro del Greco 
was originally buitt where the nwuutain meets the sea. Half was 
covered by a prior eruption, which had brought down so much 
matter as to form a promontory upon the ruins of the city. New 
houses had been built on that elevation, and the two cities, the 
high and the low, communicated by steep streets, formed in steps, 

VOL. I. S 



210 



IIISTORT 0? THE KINGDOM OP XAin.KB. 



ITIL 



(Hia pnrt boing nt lenst eighty (rocrm above the other. The erup- 
tion of l79i completed the wgrk of destruction, leaving only the 
to]>3 of a few buildings visible iu the upper towu to mark the 
CHlamily, and entirely covering the lower city, overwhubniug alt 
alike, high and low, and even the towerg of the churches. Many 
of the fields around Rcslna, and a few of the buildings nearest the 
mountain were consumed; the lava only ceasing to flow after it 
had rc.ichcd the further extremity of the town. The first stream 
which buried Torre del Greco entered the sea, drove back the 
waters, and left in their plnce a mass of basalt of sufficient magni- 
tude to form a niolo and i-oadatcad, where small vessels could seek 
Rheltor from tcrapcata. The two streams, bending with the fall or 
cuH'ature of the land, Bometimus mot, and sometimes again divided 
into lesser rivulets ; a convent containing three persons was sur- 
rounded, flight bc'canio impogsiblo, and tlioy all purished from 
BufTocation caused by the intense heat, Tlie road followed by the 
greater stream of lava was four miles in length, a distance which 
it traversed in throo hoiira; the inaterials ejected by the mountain 
appearing greater than its whole dimcnsiona 

TIius the night passed awar. The morning hour strueic, but 
the light of day had not dawnetl, for tt was concealed by the thick 
and black shower of ashes wliicli poured down like rain for many 
miles around the city. Tho appearance of continual niglit sjiread 
gloom throughout the metropolis, and, as is commonly the case, 
all turned for consolation to the resources of religion. Men and 
women of every ago or condition with bare feet, dishevelled hair 
and ropes round their necks, as a sign of contrition, walked in 
processions from the city to the bridge of the Madduleua, where 
the image of Su Januarius is worshipped, which had been set up 
in remembrance of a supposed miracle during some former erup- 
tion, and is represented as commanding the volcano to ceaso. 
Wlicn tho processions arrived on the spot, that composed of the 
upper classes uttered thcusunl prayers in a low voice, while tho 
common people shouted a hymn, composed for the occasion in iho 
Neapolitan dialect. Mcantimo the Cardinal Archhishop of Naples, 
followed by all the cloi'gy in their sacerdotal robes, bearing tho 
golden statue of the saint, and the phial containing his blood, 
•topped at the bridge, and turning the sacred image towards the 



mi. 



FKRDIKAKD IV. 



2U 



mountaiu, invoVed tho mercy of God in psAlms. Tlio calamiile* 
of nature, however, coDtinucd unabated. As the ashes, which 
were now heaped on the roofs and terraces of the houses, threat- 
ened to crush them by their weight, tho inutiieipal magistrates 
ordered that they should be removed, and, urged on by tlieir 
fears, more even than by commands, the people immediately act 
to work to clear them from tltoir houses into the streets below. 
Night atole on unperccived, and was only veeoi^iised by the sound 
of the bells which wcro rung as usual ; after some hours the dark- 
ness became so intense, that tiie city, which was not then lighted 
by tamps, was like a cIubo room, and the citizens, who did not ven- 
ture to enter their houses, from tho fear of earthquakes, stood 
bewailing themselves in the streets or squares, and waiting tho 
last abyss of misery. The following day, the third since the dark- 
ness commenced, it sensibly dimiiiisbod, though the light of day 
could still be only feebly diatinguished, the sun appearing as at 
its rising, pale and dim ; the shower of ashes was leas copious, 
and the fire and thunder from the volcano ceased. This apparent 
security, the fatigues they had undergone, and the consequent 
lassitude, induced tho inhabitants to return to their houses ; but 
in the middle of the night they were awakened and terrified by a 
fresh earthquake ; and whilst the ground still trembled beneath 
them, they huard a crash, as of the fall of man^ houses, and each 
city feared its neighbour lay in ruins. 

At daybreak tho truth was discovered; for the mountain was 
seen deprived of its summit, which had been swallowed up in tho 
vortex of the volcano, causing the earthquake and noise ; Mount 
Vesuvius had before towered above Xfount Somma, but they had 
now changed their relative positions, and the latter soared highest. 
The truncated mountain romainLsl of a conical form. The height 
was three thousand metres (metre == 39■■^71 English inches, about 
nine thousand two hundred Neapolitan palmi), tho base elliptical, 
and five miles in circumferenco ; tho greatest thickness of iho 
laiTi, eleven metres {forty palmt) ; the land covered for five hundred 
mogffia,^ with liquid fire, and the mole which projected Lwenty-fivo 
metres into the sea, was a fourth part of a mile in width, and rose 
six metres above the waves. Thirty-three men, and four thousand 

* ifogjfia. Rotbor lou tluui u EaglUb acn. 



SIS 



HISTOBY OF TBE KiKODOM Of KArLES. 



UM. 



two hundrod animals Iiad perislicd. Tlio government could only 
express their com mUe ration, a^ tlie straitened condition of tlio 
exclief|uer forbade all pccuninry as-sistance- A new citj was shortly' 
seen to rise from the soil which was yet warm ; Jiotiftes were built 
on tlio ruinii of former liouscs, streets upon streets, and churdicd 
upon churches ; so strong is the attachment to home, which, could 
such a sentiment bo blamed, might, in the midst of this desotattoOt 
have been sti^attzed as stnbhorn tniatnation. 

In these days of universal mourning, (he king, with his family 
and General Acton, cMaped the danger and gloom by visitin;;; the 
camp at Scasa. Tlic theatres, law-courts, and tribunals were closed, 
while the Junta of State alone, it appears, amidst this scene of woe, 
rcfuitcd to suspend ttieir cruel oBicu ; many of their acts being 
found in the nrehives, dated during this period. Their iirBt deed 
wjis the execution of Tfmmaso Aniato, who had foic«d bis way 
to the sanctaary in the Cliurcb del Carmine upon a feast day, and 
while strupgling with a friar who endeavoured to stop bim, uttered 
loud and horrible imprecations against God and the king: be was 
•eizcd by the people, who delivered him to theguards of tlie adjoin- 
ing eastle, and, accused of blasphemy and treason, he was condemned 
to die on (he gallows. The king ordered prayers in the churchen 
to appease tho wrath of God which bad been excited by this pro- 
fanation of tbo tcmplo and priesta. The remains of Toramaso 
Amato were not permitted Christian burial, and bis name was 
pronounced with horror. But letters from Messina, his luittve place, 
written by the governor of that city, Oeneral Daii&ro, informed 
his judge*, tliat Tommaso Amato was subject to periodical fits of 
insanity, and bad some time since escaped from a madhouse. 
The prosidpnt of the court, Cito, and the judge, Potent, suspected 
as much while engaged in the procJ>s, and had proposed be should 
ho placed under restraint as insane ; but tbo other judges were 
desirous of punishing a man wliom the people believed guilty, and 
to confirm the sentenco of the rabble, which denounced him as the 
enemy of God and tbo king. The Junta, after thus rousing the 
ferocity of the people by the sight of hlood, prepared what was 
oallod the Gran Causa do ret di Stato (the grand trial for political 
offenders). The government, alarmed by the rocent evcnls in Franc© 
and Italy, enjoined severity on the judges. Hobcspicrre was at 



im 



PKifDINANTl IV. 



S13 



tlip Iionrl of afliiirs In France, wiicro the raost atrocious doctrines 
reigned triuraphnnt, wliile the French armies ruled abroad ; in Pied- 
rnoiit, a conspimc}' against the king had been dUcoverod, and bcca 
sticccedcil by tumults : the gcmis of liberty wcro springing' up in 
Bulogtia, and su^]>(;cted conspiracies in Xaplcs had become real, 
owing to bad harvesU, always dangerous to tranquillity, to tlio 
poverty of the people, to the resentment of tliose who had been nn- 
justly pemccnted, and to Huch causes as usually conduce to the 
growth of dissatisfaction. The Junta of State commenced the trials ; 
their proceedings were inquisitorial, the proofs given in writing, se- 
cret accusations or denunciations accepted as evidence, and even paid 
Bpies received as witncssos ; in which capacity scrvanis, children, 
and the nearest rolativen were allowed to appear. The procfcs, drawn 
up in secret, was hamlcd to tho advocates for the prisoner, who 
were appointed by the king; the defences were produced in writ- 

jing, the accused wa.s not permitted to i^peak, and the scutenco was 
pronounced witlicluscd doors; the aflirmations of persons employed 
as inquisitors were admitted as equal to a formal examination into 
the case, and though the judges were not forbidden to consult their 
law-books, this WAS found incompatible with the short time allowed 
for the trial, which was ad haras ; the acrivano was employed as 
inquisitor; and the magistrate who pronounced sentence was 
selected from among those who hore the worat character, such aa 
Vanni, in the time of which I write, and suhaequcnLly, Fiore, Qui- 

^dobaldi, and Spcciale. TKc judges wcro unequal in number, in 
irder to deprive the prisoner of the benefit of equal votes, runisli- 

[ZDents of tlio most severe description wore prescribed, death by 
the gallows, and exile ; tho sentences wero without appeal, and 
to be immediately executed ; and the victim to bo held infamous ; 
an order which was, however, never obeyed. 

Tho proems for political offences having been completed, tho pro- 
curator-fiscal declared the proofs against certain of tbe prisoners 
undoubted, and prepared the prosecution of the remainder as well 
as of those who had escaped, some of whom lay concealed, or were 
fortunate enough to be at liberty tliougii implicated, or were in 

.the cniphjymont of government; " for," ho addetl, " he hold cer- 
tain proofs against twenty thousand persons, and 6fty thousand 
more were under suspicion." Ailcr this opinion had been delivered, 



214 



HISTOKT OF TUB KINOrWM OF NAl'I.ES, 



MM. 



tlie king onlerod the Junta of State to lr,v the guilty persons law- 
fully iDcIictud by the prui:urnlor-tiscal ad modam belli ad koras ; 
thu tribunal then continued ^rilliout intermission to seutcnce those 
accused, froni the IGlh September when it first met, until its dia- 
solution on tlie 3d October, alleivjug ihemsL-lvira no repose, except 
for the neccsiiftric* of life. The minutes for the pTOcfes against 
fihy. persons filloil one hundred and twenty-four volumes. The 
procurator-fiscal demanded punishment for thirty, who were first to 
be put to the torture, to discover their accomplices ; judgment was 
held suspended over nineteen, but they were to be imprisoned 
with the thirty above mentioned ; t)ie last of the fifty was not 
namott Thif^ man, by name Pictro di Falco, the leader of the plot, 
had betrayed his associates, and revealed the names of the mem- 
bei-s of the secret societies ; ho was nevertheless condemned to ba 
confined for life in the island of Trumiti. The tribunal proceeded 
to condemn lliruu to death, three to the galleys, twunty to coufine- 
nient, and thirteen to lesser punishments; ten were liberated. 
Among those imprisoned was the Duke d'Accadia, and the king 
maintaining the privileges of his order, caused two nobles to assist at 
the trial, under the name of peera, a last mark of respect to the 
law. The conspiracy was not even named in the sentence by which 
the conspirators suffered, as the judges were ashamed thus severely 
to punish the secret meetings of youths burning with patriotism, 
inexperienced in the world, witJiout wealth, fume, influence, or the 
audacity which alone could have enabled them to introduce inno- 
vations in the State, and holding crime in abhorrence, as well as the 
class of men who give the lirtit impetus to rcvulutiens. Tliey had 
only been guilty of vows, declarations, and hopes. For tlii« con- 
spiracy three died, many guflTurcd aovero pen/ilties, and all wero 
nieuacotl ; while public morals were deteriorated, and party spirit 
and enmities created, followed by acts of tyranny on the part of the 
government, and insnbordinalion on the part of the subjects, — and 
in the cour<>c of time, by violent and inextinguishable hatred and 
thimt for vengeance. 

Those condemned to die were Vincenzo Vitalinno, twenty-two 
years of age ; Emanucle di Deo, twenty ; and Vincenzo Galliani, 
only nineteen; all of gentle birth, well known in the schools as j-oung 
men of talent, but unknown to tho world. After they had been 



DM 



rBBDi>'AND tV. 



£15 



conilcmiied, the ixuccn sent for Giuseppe Deo, the futhor of Emanufrlo, 
mill bade him go to liis sou with a promise of life and full parJon, 
if he would reveal the conspiracy and the uanics of the conspir- 
ators. The old man found Einauucle iu the chapel receiving the 
last consolations of religion ; and left alone with him (as tliequecn 
had (lirecte<l), embraced hi» son in tretnhliug, and delivered his 
message, urging on him the promised reward. He expatiated oa 
his own grief, on that of his mother, and on the disgrace lo hia 
fumily, and proposed after Emanuelc had recovered his liberty, to 
retire with liim to sotnc dtatant country, niid retuni in less troubled 
times. Emnnuelc listened without uttering a word, and bis father 
supposing he was about to yield, threw himself at his feet, and. 
bursting into tears, entreated him iu broken accents to have 
pity upon him. The youth, however, hastily raised liim from tho 

>und, and after kissing his Itanda and face, replied : — " My 
father, the tyrant iu whose name you come, not satisfied with hav- 
ing thus nfflieted us, liopcs to add iufainy to our grief, by now offer- 
ing me a dtagmcefiil life at the price of a thousand honourable lives ; 
sufier me to die ; liberty demands much blood, hut the first bhed 
u the purest. Wliat is the existence you propose for your sou and 
for yourself? Where could we hide our ignominy ? I should hai-e 
to fiy all I prize most — my country and my kindred; and you would 
blush for your honoured name. Calm your grief, soothe the grief 
of my mother, and both of you seek comfort in the recollection 
that I die innocent, and in a righteous cau&c. Let us bear present 
and temporary suffering, and the time will come when my name 
will bo immortalized in history, and when you will boast tlnit 
your son died for his couutry." The noble spirit, lofty words, 
and transceudenl courage of the youth, buruiiig with the love of 
true glory, deprived liis father of the power of answering, Hud 
almost a»banied of being surpassed in virtue by a mere boy, he 
covered his face with hia hands, and, overcome with emotion and 
feelings of admiration, rushed from the dreadful spot 

The following d(iy the three youths were led to execution ; they 
made no dying speeches, which, though having the appearance of 
courago, are often used merely to distract thought in ati hour of 
misery ; but met death with a serenity of mind unknown to their 
tyrants, who boHcveil that fifty thousand Jacobins were assembled 



216 



UISTORV OP THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



I7M. 



in the city ready lo rUc and rescue lltcir comrades, mid put tlic 
Iieads of the govcniiueiic and their adherent* iu duath. Tlie 
scaffold, therefore, was erected in the square called Bel Cu&tello, 
under the guns of the fortress; llie place was surrounded by sol- 
diers, artillery' planted at the openings of the streets, and numerous 
bodies of troops advanced nearer the city ; the people were likewise 
informed by a proclamation, that the cannon of the castlo should 
be discharged nt the slightest movement on their part. Police 
officers in disguise as well as in uniform, and swarms of spies, 
mingled with the crowd : but after all those measures of safety 
had been taken, the royal family remained at the palace of Cascrta, 
in a state of more breathiess anxiety than the three youths who 
died resigned to their fate. Heal terror was produced in the city 
by these outward signs, and tlio si^uare would have been empty, 
had not scenes of horror been as attractive to the rabble as a 
festival. After Galliani and Deo had been executed, and the lliird 
was ascending tbe scaffold, a slight movement in the crowd, the 
origin of which was unknown, spreading through the spcctaiors, 
whose fears had been excited by the preparations menacing them 
from the overhanging bastions, caused such a panic, that some of 
the people were woundod in the luirry of flight, many were robbed, 
and tho square emptied, so that the cJLccutioncrs fiuislied tlieir 
task without witncssce. 

Natural phenomena rendered tlie year l79i still more gloomy; 
several men wore killed by ttiundcrbulta ; one fell lu a church, and 
another in tlio port of Naples, where tt split the masts and 
destroyed the rigging of a new vessel just ready equipped for 
the war ; and a sailor was burnt to ashes. &[any and fearful 
shipwrecks occurred on our shores, epidemics of a serere nature 
prevailed, and many eminent men died in tho metropolis, so that 
at the conclusion cf a year to which the credulous attached a 
superstitious idea, better times were expected. But in tlio com- 
mencement of tho following year, news arrived of the death of the 
Princo of Cararaanico, Viceroy of Sicily, accompanied by rumours 
and talcs respecting his end, suck as were calculated to spread a 
panic throughout both kingdoms. The reader must here be 
reminded, that it was the Prince of Caramanico who first proposed 
to the quceu to invito Acton from Tuscany ; that Acton on his 



I 



vm. 



FEltDlNAfiD ir. 



*I7 



arrival Iiad found favour at Court, ami, jealous of Iits l)«Defactoi', 
bad availcil liinisclf of liis new influence to roniovu the prince to a 
distance from the {lalace. Caranianico Lhoreforc was suppoood to 
liavc died of [miAoii, eiihor bv the connivance of his rival, or taken 
to save himself the mortification, and lo deprive his enemy of ihe 
triumph, of seeing him led prisoner to the fortress of Gaeta under 
uti accusation of treasuii, of which lie had received intimation by 
luc-ascugers in whtiiii ho could coniide ; and hv had dctcrmiuud lo 
avoid the disgrace aud danger hy death. Several occurrences 
in the prince's household, the precautions which had hceu used, 
his sudden death, supposed marks of poison, the circunistancca 
of the times, his high position, and the power of an unscrupulous 
enemy, strengthened, the belief in these storica. The odium in 
which the minister and the queen were held was bcrcaacd, and 
began to bo displayed towards the king (whose indolence was not 
sufficient excuse fur tiio crimes perpetratetl in hi.s name), and tales 
to the prejudice of atl three were circulated among the people, 
which were derogatory to the royal dignity, and excited a spirit 
of hatred against those iu power. After the lamented death of 
the viceroy, all hoped fur the disgrace of the mLuistcr, and that ho 
M-Quld be replaced by ihe Chevalier dc Medici, a nobleman of 
high family, and who was already on the road to political great- 
ncAit ; judging by his rapid career through the offices he hod 
already held, he was jironouiiccd worthy of still higher advance- 
ment, which was the more eagerly demanded in the present perils 
of the slate. This reputation which, when proceeding from the 
people, is always a recommendation, increased the ambition of the 
youth, attracted the notice of the queen, and excited the jealousy 
of the ministora, which was the greater since thoy knew that no 
odiur man in the Court of Naples could rise, or even aspire to an 
elevation equal to themselves ; and therefore they bad only to set 
aside this one rival, to secure their own permaueitce in office 

They were aware that the sure way to accomplish his ruin was to 
accuse him of treason, and only wanted time to weave the web uf 
calumny. Among those condemned by the Junta was one Annlbalo 
Giordano, a professor in malhematica, and man of great talents 
though low moral character ; he was in the habit of frequenting the 
house of Medici, where he was received as a friend. Whether 

TOL. I. T 



218 



iriSTOBV OF THE KINGDOM Of NAPLES. 



iru. 



prompted by othcre, or induceil by the baseness of liia owii nature, 
he accused the Chcvaliei'Mcdiciasan ucconiplicoln the conspiracy. 
The minister, Acton, kept tlio letter containing the accumUlon, 
promiscHl to conceal Iho name of the accuser, and giving him a 
reward, charged him to keep the matter secret ; he then proceeded 
to collect other evidence, with the namos of the accusers uudcr- 
Eigned, or even without names, hut under a promise to reveal 
Ihom, when the regent was de[)rived of his terrific power. The 
evidence liaving been collected, Iho minister sent to rc<iuest a pri- 
vate interview with the king and queen, when he addressed them 
as follows; — • 

" In the present evil times, replete with dtfBcultiM, loyalty U 
often confounded with treachery, the true with the false ; where 
accusations arc dishcHcvctl, the State may ho exposed to danger, 
and where believed, the royal peace of mind is disturbed, and 
perhaps the honest and just are suspected. In cases of minor im* 
portaiicc, therefore, armed with the authority granted me by your 
MajVaties, I have acted on my own responsibility ; and thus, all 
scvei'c measures arc attributed to me, and clemency to tlic king. 
But thoro arc more serious cases, where the authority of a minister 
is not sufficient, and I dare not bo alone reaponaibia I have," Iio 
continued, pointing to the papers in his hand, " long refrainctl from 
mentioning an alTair of great importance, but silence would now 
bo guilt on my part. Annibale Q-iordano, who was among the 
Brst accused of treason, has had the courage, in a paper signed with 
his name, to accuse the regent of the Vicaria, the Chevalier de 
Jfedici, as an accomplice in the conspiracy." Wonder appeared ia 
the countenance of the king, and indignation in that of the queen, 
but without appearing to notice the effect of hia words, he con- 
tinued : " The enormity of the crime weakcus our belief in tho 
accusation ; a young man raised to one of the first po3ition9 in 
the State, with still liigher distinctions before him, born of a noble 
family, treated with favour by \iU sovereigns, and with respect by 
tho ministers (by one of whom he is even beloved), how is it 
possible that ho should stake so roany present advantages for a 
visionary hope in tho future ? Tlic accusation might be considered 
a calumny and invention of an enemy, had not tho regulations so 
wisely laid down by your Majesty for the public safety, prevented 



1T9K. 



FKRDINAND IV. 



Sl» 



the omission of a single truth, and discororecl other facta and 
fresh proofs against the regent : he was present at the meeting of 
the club of Jacobins at Fosilippo, for the purpose of conspiracj, 
thoujjh under the pretence of a snppcr; he conferred with Ia 
Toueho ; by his means, the arrest of the Jacobins who went on 
board the French vessel was stopped ; winch at the time, though 
aware of the failure, I attributed to accident, or an ill-concerted 
plan, rather than to criminal intention. Other prooftt of hi» guilt 
stand registered in these pages, nud among them are calumnies 
against his sovereigns. Mauy noblemen, instigated by bis advice 
and example, arc among the conspirators, such as the Colonna, 
Cariiccioli, Pignatelli, Serva, and CaratTa, with others distinguished 
by their bictli, rank, and wealth. Tliey are indeed younger mem- 
bers of those families, not the heads ; but the conspirators though 
mere youths are protected by their seniors, who, from natural 
affection, defend their children, and thus abet the enterprise. 
It is my duty to lay these matters before your Majosttcs, and 
waiting your decision, remind you that to balance the conduct of 
wicked and ungrateful men, you have the obedience of your army, 
the loyalty of your people, and the devotion of numbora." 

The queen did not venture to speak before the king had spoken ; 
and Ferdinand only asked the minister what he proposed, to which 
Acton replied: — " I know that it is the duty of tho minister to 
suggest the remedy white exposing the evil ; hut after long reflec- 
tion, I have not been able to solve tho doubts which fill my mind, 
and I hoped for command and advice from your Majesties. Cle- 
moncy aud rigour are equally dangerous. A few months ago, the 
conspirators were men from the middle rank of life, they are now 
the highest in the Stale. Where will this insanity end, if not 
suppressed by terror J Yet severity will offend many influential 
persons. The times indeed arc changed, but the pride of tho b.aro- 
nial wars survives in the memory of the people, who still relate 
histories of the injuries inflicted by the Arragoncse kings and the 
slrugglea of tho barons. Tho barons of to-day aro not varriorB, 
but they are supported by the paasion for liberty, too widely spread 
among the XKiOplc. In tho midst of these doubts a tliought has 
occurred to me, which might answer our purpose, though not 
strictly accordant with tho rules of justice, aud which I will here 



sso 



BISTORT OF THE KINGDOM OP KAPLE8. 



I7K. 



hy beforo your Majesties. The Chevalier de Medici is ambitious ; 
tlio impatience of vouth cannot endure the suapcnse and tedium 
of expectatioa. If your Majesty would raise him to the cabinet, 
his guilty wish to clinnge the government of the State would cease, 
and lie would himeelf at once crush the conspiracy, all whose ma* 
chinationa arc well known to him." Before Acton could finish his 
insidious sugfrestions, the queen intemipting him, esclaimcd, — 
" Thus to disgrace the crown ! Are we sunk so low as to offer pre- 
miums to conspirators ? W)io would not henceforth conspire a^inst 
the Crown if, wlien successful and discovered, ho is to be rewarded i 
Sire," she added, turning to Iho king, " let the Chevalier de Me- 
dici, whatever his birth and influence, and the nobles of whatever 
name or wealth, share the common fate, and bo brought before the 
tribunal of state ; one high example is worth a thousand obscure 
name&" The king ujwn thia broke up the conference, and ordered 
that the day after the morrow the ministers of the Crowti, General 
Pignateili, conimnnder-in-cliief of the army, Cardinal Fabrizio 
Buffo, the Duke di Gravina, and the Prince of Higliano, shoidd 
meet in council in the palace of Caserta. 

The next day the queen declared that she had been acquainted 
with the plots revealed by the minister, but had concealed them 
from the king, not to disturb his repose, and waiting until the 
proofs were matured. AH this was a mere boast and falsehood, 
as the plots wero invented by Acton himself to ruin Medici, and 
hod been kept by him a profound secret to prevent any vindication. 
Even royal personages, when they meddle in matters of police, are 
contaminated witli a desiro for viiin glory; the crafty English- 
man seized the advantage presented him by this falsehood, and 
privately informed a majority of the council that the queen bad 
discovered new conspiracies, that a speech of his ou the previous 
day, in which he had recommended mercy, had been ill received 
by the sovereigns, and that it would therefore be wiser to recommend 
acvority ; he premise*! to mention no names, but begged for sccresy, 
which was promised in return, and received thanks for his confi- 
dencG. The council met in Caserta, where the king infonned them 
he wished their ailvice in a matter of tlio utmost importance, con- 
cluding liis short address iu these words: " Forget your private 
arffecttons, your tics of class and kindred ; and be guided only by 



rSllDlNASD IV. 



221 



one consideration, the sufety of my crown. General Acton will 
explain the case." Acton accordingly stated tlic nfTair in a studied 
uid insidious speech, after which the Iting naked the opinion of 
tho&c present, wlio only added accusations to the accusations 
already made by the minister; a^ undur a tyrant, adulation or 
cowardice often prcvcttta good advice in times of greatest need. 
It was resolved that Mediei, with as many as were accused, noble 
or plebeian, should undergo their trial. The Junta of State, who 
had been in such haste to punish, that in the case of Tonimaso 
Araato they could not wait for letters from Messina, aud who had 
been oo merciless towards three almost beardless youths, were not 
thought either sufHciontly expeditious or sufHciently austere to ait 
in judgment in the case now before them. Their partiality was 
feared towards the Chevalier dc Medici, who had hiniadf been one 
of them, anduQtil that time had shown himself unrelenting toward* 
those very conspirators who were now said to be his associatesL 
The Junta was therefore dissolved, and recomposed of men of 
harsher chnractcr. Vanni and Giaquiuto were retained ; hut ia 
place of Cito, roroinari, Bisogni, and I'otenzn, were appointed the 
magistrate Giuseppe Uuidobaldi, f abrizio KulTo, Prince of Castelci- 
calo, and others, already notorious. Castclcicala was at that time 
ambassador in Loudon, but returned home, overjoyed at his new 
office and the opportunity it afforded him of proving his fidelity to 
his sovereigns, and his indignation against rebels to God and the 
throne. The queen was delighted at his appointment, since & 
princely inquisitor of state justified her former declaration, that 
she would destroy the old prejudice which attached infamy to spies, 
who were in reality the best citizens, because faithful to the throne, 
and guardians of the law. Vanni was accordingly created a moi^ 
quia, and the order of Conatantino decorated the lowest and most 
infamous of informers, whilo offices of state wcro bestowed, oa 
those alone who were designated meritonous persons. 

The innate loquacity of the queen, to whom wu arc indebted 
for a knowledge of the private conversations of Acton, the king, 
and herself, mvealed what had taken place at the council at Oa- 
scrta to the Marchioness Samniarco, one of her 1adie», her con- 
fidante and companion ; whom she informed that her brother, the 
Clicvaticr dc Medici, was a Jacobin, that if aided by fortune be 



S28 



HISTOltr OP THIS KINGDOM OP IfAPLKS. 



IW. 



would prove a second Uobospicrrc, nnd that lie Imd been conspir- 
ing against tlie throne. Warned of liia danger, Medici went to tlio 
palooo, and iliough denied access to tho queen, had an interview 
with tlio kiug, who, however, vouchsafed no reply to Iiis argu- 
ments and outreaties, but the following day deposed him from his 
office, and shut him up in the fortress of Gaeta. One of theCoIonna 
family, a son of the Prince di Stigliano, the Duke di Canzano, the 
Count di Ruvo, one of the Scrra of Casaano, Carikcciolo, Riarl, and 
others, distingmahed by their ancestors or their high rank, were at 
the same time conducted to prison ; they belonged to the 5rat 
order of barons, were related to (lie most ancient nobility of the 
kingdom, and their families hod been held by the people in venera- 
tion and awe from the onrlieBt period. To explain this bold pro- 
ceeding on the part of the Govcrnmcut, it must be remembered that 
the sovereigns of Naples, roused to the utmost indignation by the 
tnaultfi offered to monarchy, and by sympathy with their unhappy 
relatives, had been lirst furious again&t the French, but despairing 
of being able to execute vengeance against a powerful and distant 
nation, turned their rngo upon such persons wichin their own king- 
dom who represented the opinions of France. All were called Jaco- 
bins who were enamoured with the chtinns of liberty, who spoke in 
praise of republics, who read foreign newspapers, or who imitated 
French fashions in their dress; from Jacobins, by degrees, they were 
stigmaiized as conspirators desirous of the downfall of the throne, 
the destruction of the altars, and the death of kings and priests. 
The mere expression of abstract opinions as well as cxtenial ap- 
pearances in every-day life, were considered evidence of guilt, and 
obtained the importance attached to tho greatest cHmea. Upon 
thcarrtval of Admiral La Touehc, somefowNeapotitanshad indeed 
met secretly to confer with the French, and had translated into 
Italiau, uud printed, the constitution of 1791 ; but after their 
meetiugs had been suppressed by the severities of the Clovcnunent, 
the word liberty was rarely heard, and the news of the day wagj 
only spoken in whispers, the people expressing their joy in th«' 
successes of France, and their hopes, in a low voice to one another, 
and then sejiarating. No conspiracy existed, nor project for a 
change, nnd these phantasms were raised by the police, the Junta 
of Stato, the ministers and tho qncen, with her numerous band of 



FERDINAND IV. 



223 



qties. The aUsenco of proof, &ad tbo belief tliat tlio silence of llie 
McusoJ proccedud from secrocjr and fidelity to their party, ren* 
dcr«d their rulers more savage, and they multiplied the tonnoots 
of the priaoncrs, while filling the prisons with mcD such as Pagano, 
Ciaja, Monticclli, Bisceglia, Bishop Forges, and othcra, respected 
for learning and virtue : they laid snares for innocence, while pro- 
mising offices and gifts to whoever should reveal treasonable crimes ; 
they corrupted family life by setting brother against brother, son 
against father ; and they depraved the morals of the people by dis- 
solving the obligations of tho servant, the tutor, the dieut, and the 
confessor, thus disorganising aocioty. 

Unhappily, the success of the government in a case at Palermo, 
liclpod to aggravate this state of suspicion and misery The people 
there, aufforing from starvation owing to Iho bad harvests of that 
year, drained by new taxes, discontented with the government of 
the Archbishop Lopez, who had succeeded in the island upon the 
death of Caramanico, rose in tumults which could have been easily 
prevented or suppressed. A lawyer of the name of Blasi, with a few 
others, met secretly to consult if it wore poisible lo turn the des- 
pcrato state of the people to account, by exciting them to a revo- 
lution ; betrayed and thrown into prison, Blasi was executed, after 
liaving been first put to the torture in the public square, according 
to ancient usage: others were sent to the galleys, and others into 
exile ; the people wore in consternation ; and whilo their tyrants 
wore still farther exasperated, ondurnnco, but not calm, succeeded 
this attempt. While the details of tho supposed conspiracy were yet 
unknown in Naples, the king and rjueeu believing thoy wore sur- 
rounded by treachery and death, dismissed their ancient body- 
guard, and chose others, changed their attendants, altered the 
routuio of the palace, ordered their food to be tested, and concealed 
their sleeping apartments from the common mentals ; their alarm 
increased daily, and they deprived others of the peace of mind 
they could not obtain for thomselves. In the midst of these scenes 
of agitation, terror, and rigour, they published an edict by which 
crimes of treason were pardoned, and rewards offered to all guilty 
persons, who should reveal the conspiracy, its leaders, or aasociatca. 
In consequence of this edict, three refugee nobles gave information 
upon matters which were both unimportant and false ; but I refrain 



224 



HISTORY OF THE KIHODOU OF NAPLES. 



ITM. 



from monltoning their namoB, as tliey aftorwanls washwl out the 
stain with their blood ; one (Jj'ing in war, and the other two, 
who were brotliera, on the scaffold. 

So much shame and misery at home, was in some degree 
compensated for hy the news of the conduct of the regiments of 
Neapolitan cavalry, serving with the Germans in the war in Loni- 
bardy, where they displayed at least equal discipline and valour; 
and of our sliips whleli, having joined the English in the Gulf of 
Genoa, had fallen in with the French Qeet which had left Toulon, 
with tho intention of camming the war into the coasts of Romagua, 
where they were to land the suldienj on board. The fleets were 
oijuah but wo had superior skill and fortune on our side, and tho 
French, after losing two men-of-war and a brlgautine, returne<l into 
port shattered and beaten. Admiral Ilotham, who commanded 
tho Anglo-Neapolitan fleet, highly commended the conduct of our 
men, and especially noted the intix'pidity and sis ill displayed by 
Francesco Carftcciulo, the captain of a frigate, for whom Providence 
destined at no distant time a glorious life and unhappy end. 
Within the kingdom, the communes furni-ihed the aoldiera de- 
manded of them, and the barons sent cavalry and horses ; the 
public taxes were paid, and the peoplo horo, without murmurs, tho 
increasing loss upon bank paper. At the very time when this 
unhappy nation was thus giving so many proofs of patriotism, tho 
people were treated as rebels by their king, and miiligned by the 
world ; yet they bore tho burdens of tho war, and ndiilo suffering 
the penalties and infamy duo to felons, mado eveiy exertion de< 
manded of thorn by loyalty. Dunng this period, and until the year 
1 795, France was governed in the form of a republic, but in reality 
a few men tyrannized over ths people as slaves, and slavery and 
tyranny seemed to flow alike from the pure .sources of liberty. Tlio 
despotism of Rnbeapierrc arose under iho Convention, wliich, while 
causing the death of eighteen hundred Frenchmen beneath the axe^ 
established a free goven)ment ; after his death and the cessation 
of the guillotine, tho power pissed into iho hands of five cnl led 
tho Directory, and these atrocities having been put an end to, tho 
government of Franco wore a less terrific aspect to foreign nations, 
but became moro obnoxious to royal pcrsonagoa, because better 
underst<>od by the people. 



ITM. 



PBRDIKAND IV. 



iio 



Genpra! Bonaparte, wlio Iiad first attracted puliUe notice at 
Toulon, now ncquired celebrity in tlic parties at Paris, and attained 
the rank of captain while fighting in Italf. Onljr just passed his 
tweiity-fiflh year, ho was treated with derision by tlio veteran 
capt.'iiiiB of the Houses of Austria ami Savoy ; hut in a short timo 
their contempt was chaii^d into wotidcr and terror. The allied 
armies were dispersed in the battles of Montenotte, Millessimo, 
Dcgo, and Jfondovi, and the Piedmontese were forced to choose 
between suhmission or conqncfit, while the Austrians retired into 
the Lombard States, and all the princes of Italy were in conster- 
nation ; the weak negotiated for peace, and the strong or presump- 
tuous increased their defences and the number of their soldiers. 
Venice alone, remembering her former greatnesii, and believing that 
in tho midst of the sea she was inaccesaiUe to French battalions, 
her Alliance courted hy France as well as by the hostile powers, 
signified her intention of maintaining an armed neutrality, but to 
refrain from attacking tho dominions of others, while defending 
her own. Naples, al the extremity of the peninsula, with a strong 
frontier, a large population, and tho island of Sicily which served 
as a citadel to the kingdom and Italy, ruled the Mediterranean sea 
by hor own forces, and by those of the Confederation. Tier king, of 
a rash and impetuous temper, and wlio until that time had been 
obliged to sufier insult without the means of revenge, defied the 
enemy by sending more cavalry into Lombardy, and proclaiming 
war in edicts couched iu the following style : — " Tho French, the 
murderers of their king, who forsake their temples, who maasacro 
and cxpi'l their priests, destroy tlieir best and greatest citizens, 
spoil the Chur^ih of her possessions, and subrcrt all law and justice, 
unsatiatcd with crime, abandon their native hind in hordes, and 
bring with them a like scourge to tho nations they conquer, or to 
those who are credulous enough to receive them as friends. 13ut 
the kings and people already wait in amis, dctormiued on tbcir 
destruction, and following this example of justice and courage, we 
will trust ill the Divine aid and our own weapons. Let prayers 
be offered up in all tho churches, and let all devout Neapolitans go 
to their orisons, and invoke God for tho repose of the kingdom, 
listen to the exhortations of their priests, and follow the councils 
preached from the pulpits, and enjoined in the confessionals." 



S26 



HISTORY OP Tilt KINQDOH OF NAPLHS. 



nw. 



" A conscription is opcnwl in every commane, and nil 7c wlio are 
capable of bearing nmis, hasten to enrol yoiiraclves ns soldiers. 
Remember ttiat it is for tlie defence of your country, tlio llirono, 
liberty, t)io moat Iioly Cliristian religion, your vrivc8> children, and 
property ; for nil you prize in life, your inatitutiona and laws. I 
will myself share in your prayers and exertions, for I would sooner 
die than relinquish our independence or abandon our righteous 
cause." 

In an address to bishops, curates, confessors, and missionariei, 
he ordered: "For thu apace of three days, prayers and penance 
are to bo performed iu the churches of the two kingdoms, to in- 
voke the Almighty for the repose of my dominions. You will 
from the altars and confessionals remind the people of their duties 
as Christians and suhjocts ; which arc to maintain a pure heart 
towards God, and a hand armed in the defence of religion and the 
throne. You will point out the horrors of the present stale of 
France; the fallacies of that tyninny which is called liberty, the 
license of the French troops, and the danj,'cr« to which all are ex- 
posed. You will excite the zeal of the people by processions and 
88crcd ceremonies. You will warn them that the revolutionary 
spirit is intent upon the subversion of every order of society, and 
begins with signing the death-warrant of the two first, the Church 
and the throne." 

Finally, by another edict addressed to the ministers of the crown, 
it was declared that political necessity, as well as the will of the 
sovereign, called upon all men capabln of bearing arms to enrol 
thomsclvca in the army. As a further incentive, besides obedience 
to the royal commands, and the usual rewards and immnnities, an 
increase of pay was promised to volunteers, as well as the privilege 
of exemption from trial by the ordinary tribunals,' for themselves 
And their families ; and to those who displayed valour during the 
war, excm])tion from the fiscal taxes for the space of ten years. 
Still greater temptations were held out to all harons or nobles 
vho should join the standani, or enlist a &trong corps from 
among their vassals. The edicts wore circulated throughout the 
provinces, while the metropolis set an example of obedience. The 
three days' sacred service commenced in the cathedral, and in the 

• See p. IM. 



FEItDIfijLND IV. 



22: 



Chopcl of St. Jaimariua ; tholting witli Vts family, the gr«At nobles 
oftlie court, tlio mngistralcs ami rninialers, were in constant at- 
tendance ; and were fotluwcd bv the lowest orders, and hy the 
people, Ko that llie immense tcmplo could hardly contain the crowd 
of «roraltippcrs. The ivamc took place in t}ie provinces, and per- 
haps never did more fervent and sincere prayers ascend to heaven 
tliaii in those days, which was a sufficient proof of the prevailing 
panic The sermons which were chiefly preached by mission- 
aries and friars woro full of «eal. They painted the French natiou 
in the most hideous colours, stirring up the people against them, 
and not only granting absolution, but encouraging deeds of the 
utmost ferocity, while imparting an air of sanctity to a war of ei- 
termiufttion, and recalling as works of merit, the savage dewls of 
a barbarous age. Their tone was still more unchristian in the con- 
fessionals, wlicre, without the restraint of publleity, they stirred 
up a spirit of hatred in the hearts of the ignorant and unpolislicd 
people ; and thus sowed the seed which afterwards jirodnccd a 
harvest of slaughter. Soldiers hastened from all parts of the king- 
dom tn join the army, and with a readiness worthy of republicans, 
rather than with the appcarauco of Ltiud submission to authority. 
WHien the numbers were complete, thirty thousand men were on - 
camped in the open country, or placed as a guard on the frontiers 
and to menace the enemy. All were alike occupied with devising 
schemes for (he defence of the kingdom ; but as we had little 
eiperience in military matters, there was great divergence in 
opinions and projects. The chief direction of the war was shared 
among ninny leaders ; some undertook the care of one line of 
frontier, some of another ; labour and expense were thus vastly 
increased, and numberless experiments were made upon as many 
points. There was no general phin of operations in this war. The 
leaders wore guided by historr not principles ; the enemy waa 
feared on the shores of the Liri, rather than in the mountains of 
the Abruzzi, and the camps and fortifications were dispoBcd so as 
to prutect that part of the country which lay nearest thai river. It 
is, however, needless to dwell on (hcso mistakes, as the loss of the 
kingdom may be attributed to other causes. The army was com- 
posed of numerous detachments of soldiers, collected together in 
close quarters, with little science to direct them, without military 



223 



HISTOBY OF THS EIMODOM OF XAPLES. 



ine. 



habits, and with tlic comiaissariai, tlio officers, and generals, new to 
their task. This inexperience proJuced toaiiy cviU, the most serious 
of which WS8 a contagious disorder wliich became permanent in the 
cani]ta. Tlioiigh placcii n1 jjreat distances from one another, ou 
the Garijjliano ami Tronto, the soldiers in each of the camps were 
seized irilh violent fevers, which occasioned death sometimes on 
the seventh day, but more frequently on the fifth. Those within 
reach of the contagion, and even those at a distance, woic infected, 
if they were residing in the camps or quarters of the soldiers. The 
disease itself as well as tlic remedies were unknown, and every 
attempt at cure proved equally useless ; the fever appeared 
incurable. Thougli the old hospitals were insu^Tlcient, new wero 
not built, the sick were therefore confounded with the healthy, 
and thu discasu sprending everywhere, tea thousand soldiers 
periohcd, and tlie zeal of the people, thus unjustly remunerated 
by fate, begnu to cool. 

At the same time with the proclamation of war, another royal 
lict appeared, decreeing all worthy of death who shouM at the 
Kpproach of tho enemy receive or send lettcra or messages from, or 
to him, or in any way assist him, or excite rebellion. Any asscni- 
binge of persons, exceeding nine, was liable to the punishment for 
treason, while other severe measures and precautions wero employed, 
as if the enemy hnd boon at the galea. The trials were to bo con- 
ducted ad horas ; the means of procuring evidence was facilitated, 
as the affirmations of three persons were considered enough, al- 
though tho witnesses might be informers, or accomplices wlio had 
been induced to make these revelations, for the benefit of [xinlon. 
Tlie magistrates were left to decide according to their conecieuccA 
The tribunal was the Junta, and their sentcuces, which wero with- 
out appe:\l, were to be executed that same day. The immediate 
cause of this edict was the successes of General Bonaparte in 
Italy, the dissolution of tlio confederation between Austria and 
Piedmont, the armistice and eonscqiieiit truce between France and 
the King of Sardinia, the capture of Milan, and other cities, with 
nil the marvels performed by that yoniig soldier ; and tho disasters 
of General Boaulieu, who. besides his German troops, ctinimandcd 
four regiments of Neapolitan cavalry. Beaulicu wius suddenly 
attacked and defeated on the Mineio, and forced to withdraw liia 



F£ltDINAl<D IV. 



SSA 



anny Into ihe passes of the Tjrol ; but even this last rofiigc would 
have been dented him by the conquerors, if the Neapolitan 
cavalry, thea mnking their first essay in arms, had not fought with 
a vnLour equal to veteran troops ; botli oflieers and men died 
honourably ; General CutC», wounded ou the iield, was taken 
prisoner, and the Priuco di Moliterno, captain of a division, re- 
oeiTod a cut from a scimitar across the face, and lost an eye. Tho 
fame of the conduct of our soldiers, caused the French to suspend 
their projected invasion of the kingdom, as tliey cxpecte^l to lind 
the frontiers valiantly defended ; and, in order to deprive tho 
enemy of his most powerful ally, Bonaparte offered an armistice 
to the King of Naples. Ferdinand, whose hopes had been con- 
verted into fears, accepted the proposal, and after the terms had 
been settled at Brescia, recalled his regiments from Lombardy, 
and his ships from the Anglo-SiciHaa fleets, making an ostenta- 
tious parade of neutrality; while his fears and hatred were in reality 
increased, by the news that the cities of Italy occupied by the 
French, were oipiniziii^ tlicmselves into republics, and that this 
danger was advancing with us rapid strides as the conquest ; 
General Bonaparte had meantime traversed Lower Italy as far as 
Leghorn with a legion, which, though weak in numbei-s, was strong 
by the name and successes of their leader. 

But no sooner did the news arrive tlmt Marshal Wumiser was 
descending into Italy with a fresh army, and that the French 
genera) was collecting his scattered troops, to withdraw them (as 
it was said) to a distance, than the king of Naples, with the hope 
of \*cngcancc revived, and forgetful of the recent armistice, sent 
more soldiers to tho frontier, occupied Pontccorvo, a city subject 
to tho Pope, and pre{>arcd for hostilities. Tliuugti the pontiff was 
himself, by a recent treaty, on amicablo terms with France, he 
prejjared for war, and concerted a plan of opemtions with Austria 
and Naples. It is no wonder if in our days public faith — the great 
link which binds society together — be torn asunder and despised by 
the mass of mankind, when the example was iirst set them by 
tJieir rulers, who for this purpose employed the irresistible force 
of despotic power, and the prestige attache<l to their position. 
Ferdinand of Naples and Pius ri. only wailed for a favourable 
opportunity to discover their intentions, which appeared to present 



990 



HISTORY 0? THR EINOOOM OF NAPLES. 



17«. 



itself when they heard the French had been forced to raise tho 
siege of MnDtua so hastily that they had not had time to carry off 
or destroy the heavy artillery in the trenches. Cacault, the 
French iniiiister at Home, perceiving warlike preparations, asked 
tho ponLiff the motives for this armament ; receiving tardy and 
evasive answers, accompaiiiod with renewed proteatations of amity 
and peace, lie proceeded to Naples, where the government, heing 
either less cautious in their language, or yielding to tlie impulses of 
their hatred, informed him that the o<:eupaLion ofPontccorvo was in 
consequence of an agreement witU tiie sovereign of the place ; and 
further, that if tho status of the Pope were invaded by his enemies, 
the Neapolitans v^'ore resolved to enter his dominions by th« 
opposite frontier, but that until then they would continue faith- 
ful to the armistice. Cacault informed the French government 
and the genera! of Italy, of the evaiive answers of tho Pope, the 
insolent replies of the king of Naples, and of t!ic treachery of 
both. They were just prepared to move, when news reached them 
that Bonaparte, taking advantage of the errors of Wunnser, had 
first attacked one-half of the imperial army and then the other, 
defeating them in three battles; after wluch he had returned to 
tho sic^ of MantuiL, vi-herc he found a great number of tho guns 
he had left in the entrenchments ; for his victory had been so 
unexpected that the garrison, like their besiegers, had not had 
time to carry off or destroy tho artillery and works. TIio enemies 
of France trembled, uud tlic mure false ur insolent they bad shown 
themselves, the more cowardly and cringing they now became^ 
The Court of Home made fresh protestations of amity ; hut tlie 
French invaded the liCgalione, and only conceded a suspension of 
arms to the Holy See under heavy conditions. The King of the 
Sicilies petitioned that tho armistice of Brescia should form the 
basis of a permanent treaty, and sent tho Prince di Belmonto, 
ambassador to Bonaparte and the Directory, who accordingly, oa 
the 11th October, obtained peace at Paris on tho following con- 
ditions : — 

" Naples, separating from her allies, shall remain neutral: she 
shall forbid moro than four vessels belonging to the potentates 
engaged in the war, entering her porta : sho shall lilieruto all 
Frenchmen accused of treason, and incarcerated within licr domi- 



msi 



PEED1NAN1> IV. 



S31 



nions : she shall try to discover, and shall punish those who stolo 
tliu pupcra of Makau, when aniha&sador of Prance : she shall 
lUow Frenchmen freedom in religious TForshlp: she ehatE grant 
such privileges in commerce as shall impart to Franco in the ports 
of the Two Sicilies, bencfita equal to tlioae enjoyed by the most 
favoured Sags: she shall recognise the Batavian Ucpublic, and 
■hall consider her a party in (he present treaty of peace." 

Secret coudlLiuns were added, to the effeet (hat " the king 
should pay eight luillions of francs (two millions of ducats) to tho 
French Republic, and that the French sliould not advance beyond 
the fortress of Ancona until they had concluded a truce witli tho 
Pontiff, nor second any revolutionary movement in the southern 
regions of Italy." 

This last condition, and the omission of all mention of Neapoli- 
tan prisoners accused of treason, coat our treasury a million of 
francs in gifts and bribery, and thus the cunning of our tyrants, 
and the greediness of a free government, obliged us to ]iiiy the 
price of our own miscriea The Directory was so highly incensed 
against Naples, that this peace would not have been ratified, had 
not Bonaparte persuaded tliem to bear with insult, until Austria 
had been contjuerod and forced to submit. " At this nionicut," 
he argued, " wo want the power to express our resentment, but 
the day will surely arrive when present and future offencoa will 
be puni.shed ; for the hatred of the barbarians against France will 
never cease uutil the old system be restored upon tho ruins of the 
now." Meantime the Republic prospered. Tho army of Pied- 
mont had been conquered ; three Austrian armies defeated ; Man- 
tua was yielding; peace concluded with Sardinia, Prussia, and 
Spain ; Russia silenced by the death of the Empress Catharine, 
and by tho pacific disposition of her successor ; several of the 
states of Italy had been forme<l into Republics and alliwi to 
France, and the Italian princes were either tributaries or neutral. 
Such was the state of affairs at the end of tho year 1 790. 

As tho peace, like tho preceding armistice, had been a stratagem 
on the side of tho Neapolitan government to gain time, or to await 
a more favourable moment for war, fresh battalions were added to 
the army, fortifications on tho frontiers, and tribute demanded 
for the cxdicqucr. The measures for public safety were unceas- 



232 



HISTOnT OF THE K1>-GD0M OF XAPLES. 



ITM. 



ihQ, and the couatry was l^ui-deuwl with the expense of two war 
establishmeuts, one for abroad and the other for dtfeiice at 
home, while exposed to danger on both sides. One last hope 
revived tho spirits of the people- — the news, that after tlio fall of 
Mantua, the disasters of the Austrian armies, and the armistice, 
peace conferences had been opened at Leohen, and that the Mar- 
quis del G&Ho, ambassador at Vienna from the Neapolitan Court, 
was appointed to repreBont tlio empire. Ho was of middle age, 
shrewd, with an injjenunus countenance, and had fouml favour 
with tho emperor, whoj witli the permission of the King of }fa]iies, 
had sent hira to treat with Bonaparte at Leobcn. We considered It 
an honour that a Nt?Dpolltan should have been selected to conduct 
the most important afTuir iu Europe, while it made us confident tliat 
our interests would not be betrayed or neglected. Tlio war having 
been suspended, the communication between Italy and Germany 
was re-opened ; and the sovereigns of Vienna and Naples, relieved 
from anxietv, were wholly occupied with the journey of the Arch- 
duchess Clementina, who was on her w.iy to marry Prince Francis, 
a union which had been settled seven years before, but not then 
celebrated, on account of the extreme youth of both parties. Tho 
Archduchess was convoyed to Trieste, where a Neapolitan vessel 
awaited her ; her future husband met her at Manfrcdonia, and the 
religious ceremony was performed at Foggia. The prince waa 
accompanied by his royal parents, with an immense suite of 
■barons and persons of distinction, and the nuptials having been 
celebrated iu June, they returned to Naples in July, where they 
were received amidst the honours due to the heir of the crowa The 
king bestowed rewards and gifts on all sides ; Geueral Aclou was 
appointed commander-in-chief, which left nothing more for bis 
master to bestow, or for him to receive ; forty-four vacancies iu 
episcopal sees were filled up, all of which had been long in abey- 
ance, that the government might enjoy their revenues; aud 
offices, titles, and military and civic decorations were dispensed. 
The bride, a lovely young princess, who had hardly passed her 
fifteenth year, had a melancholy cast of countenance, which was 
the more remarkable, and excited the greater pity in the midst of 
the general rejoicings. Tho king bestowed the title of Marquis on 
many of tho inhabitants of Foggia> in reward for a surprising 



in& 



FERDlJiiiND ir. 



ass 



diflplay of magnificence" during the festivities Rt the royal nupti&Is, 
but this circumstance converted the simple habits of a pastoral 
or agncultural population to the luxurious habits of great mer- 
chants and the indolence of nobles, an indolenco the more exces- 
sive, from the change having been ao sudden. Thus an ill-judged 
roward, hy an accession of djg^ntty, hastened the decline of Itie city, 
and rapidlj produced that wliich is commonly the slov result of 
vices consequent on great wealth. 

That year the Prince of rntemo was earned into slavery by a 
Tunisian pirate. He was a rich noble, proud of his wealth, and 
was on his way to Naples from Palermo, his native place, expect- 
ing office near tlio person of the king; ho took his passage in a 
Greek ship, because the vessels of the Ottoman Porte were secure 
from pirates, and there were with him on board several other 
gentlemen, and a merchant in gold and jewels. The cupidity of 
the Greek was excited by so much wealth, and he accordingly 
made a secret bargain with the pirates cruising in the seas of 
Sicily; they attackod the ship when at a short distance from the 
harbour, and tlic acoundrcls, laden with booty, and elated by their 
success, carried off tho passengers into slavery. The prince, from 
his prison among tho barbarians, wrote a letter of complaint to tho 
king, who ordered his ambassador with tho Sultan to demand 
vengeance on the pirates, and still greater and more merited 
punishment on the perBdtous Greek. He wrote in affectionate 
terms to Patcrno, promising him his royal mediation with the 
Turkish government, assuming a paternal care of his family, and 
exhorting him to hoar his slavery with Christian fortitude. The 
reclamations at the Porte produced protestations of friendship and 
zeal on tho part of the Sultan ; but the guilty parly escaped 
punishment, and Uio money (two hundred thousand ducA(s) which 
liad been stolen, was not restored, nor tho Prince set at liberty 
until a ransom had been paid of a million of piastres, a sum which 
diminished, without consuming, his wealth. 

Tlicrc was now no war in Italy, except between the French 
and the Pope, who had a large army in readiness under the com- 
mand of the German, General Colli. Camps were formed and 
military works con.<>tructed on the frontier; Pius then wrote to 
the Emperor, declaring his intention to renew hostilities, and 

VOL. I. V 



234 



HISTORY OF THE KIITODOM OF NAPLES. 



flfler givinji; an inventory of his forcoR, tlius concluded : — " If these 
do not sufSce, T will add that of God, by declaring this to be a war 
of religion." The courier was intercepted, and the letter fell intofl 
the hands of Bonaparte, who published it, and sending informa- 
tion to the Directory, ordered his troops to advance hy an edict, 
containing Ihcsc words: *' Tlic Pope refuses to fulfil the tcrma of 
the armistice, und is slow and unwilling to conclude peace ; ho 
niises more sohlicrs, arms the people for a crusade, and seeks tho 
nllianca of the llousc of Austria, thus breaking, violating, and 
trampling upon tlie treaty «hlcb ho has sworn to ohsorvc. Tlie 
soldiers of the Republic will enter the Roman territory, will de- 
fend the cause of religion, the people, and justice, and woo to hit 
who dares to oppose them ! " The Directory meantime wrctc to 
Bonaparte, that " the Roman religion being irreconcilable with^ 
Republican liberty, was the motive for hostility and the support 
of the enemies of France ; ho was therefore to destroy (ho centroj 
of Roman unity, and without rousing the fanaticism of the people,] 
render the priestly govcnimont odious and despicable, so that thci 
may be ashamed to obey such rulers, and that the Pope and car*] 
dinala may seek an nsylum and partisans out of Italy." KutJ 
Bonapartti considered that tins was not the time, nor wero th< 
dostiuies of Rome ripe, to obey this command. 

Qis Frcncli troops, with Italians from tho new republics, repulsed 
Ihe Papnl troops with great case, and occupied the three Legations, 
part of tlic Srarchcs, Perugia, and Foligno. Bonaparte baltedM 
at Ancona, where he was less engaged in plana for the war, tlmnlfl 
in organizing tbe governments of tho new States ; the Prince di 
Bolmonto, arrived from Naples as ambassador, informed hini of 
tho desire of his king, that the armistice between the Popoand 
tho Republic should form ihc basis of the pence. Bonaparte, 
enumerating tbe insults offered to France, declared tins to bo 
impossible, and the prince, from inadvertence or malice, incautiously 
showed bim the instructions of his government, where tho general 
read these words : — " Tho king is so deeply concerned for the stnto 
of aOfairs in Rome, that he intends to advance his army to scoondfl 
him in his friendly mediation." To which Bonaparte replied : 

" Three months ago, I refrained from humbling the pontifical 

pride, because I believed it possible that, &t a time when 



im. 



FEKDJNAKD lY, 



iSS 



important wars woulJ have prevented my answering his cliallenge, 
the King of Naples might hfivc joined the confctlerAcy against 
FraDc«; but now, without diminishing the arroica cncnniped as a 
precaution agfiinat Austria, thirty thousand French wlio have been 
relieve*] from tho siego of Miintiia, nnil forty thousand just arrived 
from France, arc free to act and eager for war. IF the King of 
Naples should raise the standard of defiance, tell him I accept his 
cliallcnge." After thus speaking, he replied in ntorc courteous 
language to the note, saying : " That great as were the offunces of 
the Poutitf. the modcmtiou of tho Rupuhllu n-as etitl greater ; h« 
was therefore willing to treat for peace ; and after depriving Rome 
of her secular arms, and trusting to the common sense of the ago 
to destroy the efficacy of her spiritual weapons, he would bchnppy 
to acquiesce in tho wishes of (he sovereigns of Spain and Naples." 
Peace with Jiomc was soon afterwards concluded at Tolentino ; 
by wliich tlie Pontiff, obliged to resign a million in money, with 
horses, arms, and trcasuroii of art and letters, tho dominion of tho 
Legations, and the fortress of Ancona, was diasotisfled and impo- 
verished, and fult himself outraged. The States which Iiad been 
delivered over to France obtained permission to organize therasolvos 
peaceably into republics, while the adjoining States obtained tho 
same end by violence. In Rome herself, the citizens, though 
destitute of the virtue of their ancestors, remembered tho days of 
their past glory, and several times rose in rebellion ; but the mal- 
contents being few, the leaders wcro no sooner captured, than tho 
rest dispcrs&I, and the attempt always proved a miserable failura 
Tho common people sided with the Pontiff, not fn^m attachment, 
but from blind impulse, and in the hope of dishonest gain and 
impunity. In tho month of December it happened that some of 
the patriots (as tlioso were called who held republican opinions), 
pursued by the police, sought an asylum in the house occupied by 
the French embassy, whither tliey were followed by their pursuers 
and by some of the rabble. The place, usage, the privilege of pro- 
tecting the oppressed, with the French name and honour, were 
sufficient inducements for all belonging to the embassy to shield 
the fugitives ; but neither these considerations, nor the presence 
of persons of distinction, could obtain mercy from the as.siilaut3, 
who murdered General Duphot a distinguished ollicer, and oven 



256 



HISTORV OP THE KlNQDaU OP NAPLES. 



tTircfltened the person of the ambassador, Joseph Bonftpart^ 
brother of the conqueror of Itftly. The city wm in an npronr, nud 
BO attempt was made to suppress the violence of the people, uiM 
to discover or punish the nsaassina of Duphot The day passed in 
thia manner, and though the I'rench ambassador appealed by letters 
to the minister, he was neither reasKured nor promised rcdrc&s by 
tho government. Tlio arms of France were accordingly taken 
down, tho French left Home, and the state of war was resumed. 
The Roman government, alarmed by this hostile attitude, senfl 
messengers to the French representative, and wrote to foroig-™ 
potentates, addressing the neighbouring sovereign of tho Sicilies 
with fen-ent and urgent entreaties for support. Nothing, hoi 
ever, could appoaso the wrath of the Directory, and of the Frent 
and Italian people ; the death of Bnavillo was remembered, wil 
tho inlrignea of the ValicJin, tho frequent breach of treatice, and 
foilurc of promiBOs ; and it was decided, that it was necessary to 
Bweep from Italy the source of corruption for so many centuries. 
Vengeanco was immediate ; for on the 2Mth December, Duphot 
perifilied, and on the 25th January, the French troops, by a con^ 
maud from Paris, moved from Ancoua upon Rome. ^ 

General Derthier headed the expedition, as Bonaparte, after 
the conclusion of the peace of Cnmpoforniio, went to France i<^ 
celebrate his triumph ; but unlike that of the emperors of old (fofl 
the French Republic had not tho wisdom to revive the august 
ceremony of the triimiph), it was confined to public laudation and— 
welcome. The President of tlve Directory called him the man seofl 
by Providence ; in every meeting, in every society, and amidst the 
multitude, the words inscribed on a banner presented to him bj_ 
the Rcpublio were quoted : *' lie has defeated Gvc armice, tt^M 
umphed in eighteen great battles, and sixty-seven conibat.s ; he 
has taken a hundred and 6Dy thoubuud prisoners; tscnt horn' 
A hundred and seventy standards, besides one thousand one hu 
dred and 6fty cannon to the arsenals, two hundred millions to t 
exchequer, fifly men-of-war to our ports, and treasures of arta 
and literature to our galleries and librftrics. lie has concluded 
nine treaties advantageous to the Republic ; and he has given 
liberty to eighteen diiferent States." 

Bonaparte was, however, more intent on commencing anoth 



vm. 



FE11D1NAND IT. 



237 



war, and on earning fresh laurels, tlian on the pleasure of a trmmpli. 
By the peace of Campoforniio, the frontiers of France had been 
extended, a better defence had been provided on the Alps and the 
Rhine, the Ctaalpino Republic had sprung into existence, and the 
foundations had been laid for other re]iuhlics. Venice was annihi- 
lated ; and the cession of her dominions to the empire, had removed 
the di(fi<rully occasioned by the disparity of territory pro<luced by 
the new fronlicra ; the fate of the Venetians indeed was most un- 
happy, but deserved by a degenerate people. The king of the Sicilies 
acknowledged the Cisal])iue Republic, and by granting to Franee 
her natural boundaries, and to Austria, although cunquerud, a better 
line of frontier in Italy, and more extensive dominions, with a 
greater number of subjects, the peace promised to be permanent ; 
while tlio only injured parties were some of the princes of the 
Germanic body, who wore incapable of carrying on a war, and the 
Venetian Republic, which, already degraded, now ceased to exist. 
The representatives on both sides were rewarded by their govern- 
ments, and were praised by the world, and the Mnrr|ui3 del Gnllo, 
who had supported the claims of the empire, returned to Naples, 
rich in gifts and fame. 

But l^uro[Hi was nut yet destined to enjoy peace, which was 
already disturbed by the events of Borne. General Ik-i-thier refus- 
ing to listen to the ambassadors of the Pope, and to the deputies 
from the courts of Vienna, Naples, and Spain, made his hostile 
intentions plain. Tlie expiring power of Rome then called on the 
people to prepare for defence, appealing to their superstition by 
processions, prayers, and a jubilee ; and by the discovery of Car- 
dinal Caleppi, that the images of the Virgin, in answer to the tears 
of the priests, shed real tears from the canvas or wood on which 
they were painted. Whilst these processions and miracles were 
CMKUpying the people, an edict of licrthier reached the city, an- 
nouncing the near approach of his army to punish the assassins of 
Ouphot and Basvillc ; but at the same time ready to prciti^ct the 
people and their rights i^'id promising to maintain didciplinc among 
his troops. Fear and hojw, in various degrees, according to the 
views of the different parties, agltatetl the city. Soon after the 
appearance of the edict, the glistening of anns and the tricolor 
standard was seen above the hills of Rome ; a signal for the liberals 



238 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OP KAPLB8. 



to atlsomblo Lumultuously in tho Campo Vaccino, proclaim freedom, 
and raise the tree wliioK was llie cmUcm of liberty. AmbaitsadorA 
from tlie yd unborn Republic wtrc (Icspatchcd to meet Berthicr, 
and await his nrrival nt the galea of Rome, to invite him to enter 
the city, and establish the new order of things upon tho sovereign 
rights of the pco|)lo and the coni[iiCRt He made a aolemn entry 
into the city with arms and music, amtdsL the shouts nf the popu- 
lace, and decreed that the tyrannical government of tho priests 
had ceased, that the Republic of Rome was restored by the de- 
scendants of Urennus, ulio now gave liberty on the Ca]iitol to tho 
descendants of Camillus; adding dignity to his discourse acdf 
solemnity to the act, by introducing tho names of Bnitws, Cato, 
and others, who revived the memory of the past. Tliis was on tho 
liith Februflry 1798. In the midst of this excitement Pope Pius 
VI., shut up in the Vatican, and deprived of his government, pas- 
sive and silent, would have served as a model of calmness and 
philosophical resignation, had not the necessity which produced 
his patience subtracted from his claim to merit. He neither pre- 
tended to govern, nor left the city, but remaineil in Rome, an 
oUstnclu in tlio path of the Republic, and a scandal to the Catholic 
Church. Wlicn General Ccrvoni was sent to request him, in his _ 
character of Pope, to rccngnise the new state, his answer was pre-fl 
pared, as follows : " Tho sovcix-ignty comes to me from GotL I am 
not pcnnittod to resign it; and at the age uf eighty, I neither 
regard the safety of my person nor sufferings." As force was re- 
quired to drive him from his throne, the Vatican was invested, the 
pontitical guard were disarmed, tho attendants diami-iscd, a seal, 
set on the apartments ; and finally, the Pope was ordered to depart! 
within two days. He obeyed, and on the 20th of that month h 
left Rome with a small retinue for Tuscany. 

To conclude hh history : he took up his abode at Sienna, unti 
alarmed by earthquakes ho left that city for tlie Carihusiaii nionns- 
tcry at Florence; driven thence by the jealousies and autliorita- 
tivo commsnds of tho French Republic, he proceeded to Parma, 
thence to Tortuna, Turin, and Rrian<;on. TIius was the Most High 
Pontiff, enferblcd by extreme ohl age, infirm, and harassed in 
mind, carried prisoner from city to city ; departing before dawii,; 
and arriving in the night to coQcoal him from the eyes of the do- 



I 



ITM. 



FERDINAND IT. 



23» 



vout Nor was he permitted to remain in peace at Bnangon, but 
WAS convcjrcd to tlio fortress of Valence; and from tlience it was 
proposed to take him to Dijon, but ho was at length set free by 
dentil, which carried him off on the 29th Augnst 1799. Hia 
remains were laid in an obscure grave, where they continued until 
bjr a consular decree, signed by Bonaparte, it was proclaimed 
:thAt: " Crtusidoriiig that tlie body of Fius vi. has been six months 
'without honourable burial; tliat although that pontiff while ho 
lived was an enemy of the Ilepublic, yet that he may be excused 
on the plea of old age, perfidious councils, and unhappy circura- 
Btances ; and tlmt it is worthy of France to testify her respect 
towards a niau who held the first position on earth ; the Consuht 
decree that the mortal remains of Pius VL n\ay receive a burial 
befitting a pontiff, and tli^t a monun\ent be erected worthy of his 
name and dignity." The decree was executed, and the ashes were 
carrie<l to Kome and placed in the Church of St. Peter, during the 
pontificate of his successor. 

After the departure of Pius vi., those wlio had formerly been in 
authority, the rnrdinals, prelates, and persons of highest distinc- 
tion, fled from Kome. A great many came to Naples to excite 
I commiseration for the priesthood and hatred against Prnuce. 
French banners, troops, and trees of liberty lined the frontiers 
'•long the Abruzzi and the Liri ; while robberies and violence were 
• everywhere perpetrated, impoverishing the inhabitants, and a real 
tyranny reigned under the name of a Republic. Those who eoutd 
anticipate the futnrc benefits to arise from a free government, were 
willing totolorato for a time the license of a state of conquest, but 
those who formed their judgment by passing occurrences, and lived 
only for the present, hated and feared tho new order of things. 
This nearer view of liberty rather served as a check than an in- 
centive to tho Neapolitans to follow the example. General Uolait 
came as a messenger from Berthier, to demand of our Government 
the expulsion of tho cniigrants, the dismissal of tho English am* 
bassador, the banishment of General Acton, and a free passage 
through the Neapolitan territory, for those troops destined to gar- 
rison Benevento and Pontocorvo. lie added a demand that the 
king, now a vassal of the Roman Republic, as formerly of the 
Church, should present the accustomed tribute annually, and 



240 



HISTORY OP TUK KINGDOM OF NAE'LES. 



ITOft. 



should pay down on the instant & huadr&d nnd forty tliougnnd 
ducats, the debt lio owed Oie treasury of tlio CliurcU at Rome. 
Though tins was all that the ambassador alluded to, the king 
know that his estate of the Faraesina hn<] been sequestra toil, as 
the territory of an enemy; and, justly in<ligTiant, be replied that 
the two governments would settle their affairs through tbcir repn 
scntatives, ordered the cities of Henevento and Pontecorvo to bi 
occupied by large detachments of bis troops, and strengthened th»i 
frontier lines. Disputes, aequeslraiion of property, and suspicio 
followed ; both parties were on their guard, and all was prcpar 
for bostiiities. 

Amidst tbis excitement, tidings reached Sicily (Imt the fleets, 
formerly Venetian, but now French, which liad sailed from Corfu, 
was cruising in the Sea of Syracuse, and a few days Inter, that 
numberless Freucb vessel* of war and trauupyi t, laden with sol- 
diers and liorses, were nearing the ports of the island. It was 
Doxt rumoured they had sailed away, and that the Order of thd 
Knights of Jerusalem had been driven from Malta, and that inland 
luid been seized by the French ; after which, the fleet bad imme- 
diately sailed for some new destination ; that Bonaparte had 
embarked on boanl the ship I/Orient, that his design was unknown, 
but that the preparations were on a gigantic scale. Upon this in- 
formation, the government of Naples, more alarmed for Sicily than 
for the rest of ibe kingdom, caused the ancient fortresses to ho re- 
paired, erected new batteries along the coast, increased the defences 
of the ports, garrisoned the island with twenty thousand soldiers 
and forty thousand militia, concerted signals for arming, and settled 
tbo places where to form encampments. As a further security, 
tbey contracted new but secret alliances with Austria, Russia, 
England, and the Porte. The four allies were all actuated by one 
motive, the desire for vengeance, though the pretext alleged, was 
the re-C8tabli aliment of peace in Europe. Austria pledged herself 
to furnisli sixty thousand soldiers to be quartered in the Tyrol and 
in her Italian provinces, so long as the war bIiouUI last ; tbe king 
promised to maintain thirty thousand on his fronticra, and both 
engaged to increase the numbers of their troops, if needed ; four 
Neapolitan Frigates were to cruise in tbe Adriatic, ready for ser- 
vice. This treaty was concluded at Vienna on the 19th May 1798, 



I 

I 
1 



17IH. 



FBKDIXAND IV. 



241 



hy t1ie minister Tlmgul for Austria, and tho Duke di CaniimcliUro 
for Naples. 

The Emperor of Uussia, Paul L, magnaQimousIj granted a fleot 
frtH! of expeusu fur the prulecliou of Siclljr, bct^ides l>attaliuiis of 
suldivrs, two buiidrod Cossacks, and a corresponding park of ileld 
at liUery, to be placed uuder the supreme ooaiuiaiid of the King of 
Naples in Ualy. TIio alliance for a term of eiglit year*, wa» eou- 
cluded at St. Petersburg on the 2dth N'ovembcr, by the Marquia 
of Serra Capriola on our aide, and by Bczborodko, Kotschoubey, 
and Kostpochin, for Kussia The Krapcror was attached to Serra 
Capriola, who had won his favour hy his prudonco and ostiinahla 
qualities. By the leag^io with England, negotiated in London on 
the 1st December, between the Marquis del Gallo and Sir William 
llamiltou, it was agreed tliaL GrcKt liritaiu should retain a larger 
fleet than that of the cneuiy in the Mediterranean ; and that Naples 
should supply four men-of-war, four frigates, and four lesser vettsols, 
and dhouKl when needed funiiitti three thousand seamen to the 
English armament iu the Jlcditorroneao. Finally, the ancient 
protestations of amity with the Ottoman Porto were renewed; 
the Sultan promising to Btrnd ten Litousand Albanians, when re- 
quested hy the king. 

The anxieties caused by the vicinity of a great war^ caused 
no cosMtion in tlio unhappy trials ; and the very successes of the 
enemy made the Government more inveterate iu their suspicions, 
while the police authorities saw a conspirator iu every youth, 
and a sign of conspiracy in every fashion of dress. The hair 
arranged iu a peculiar manner, uncurled locks, tlie beard al- 
lowed to grow, trowsers worn to the feet, certain ribbons, colours, 
or appendages, were severely punished as crimes, entailing impri- 
Bonmciit and perBccutlon, oa for treason. The dungeons were 
therefore full of victims, whole families in mourning, nnd the 
people in a state of alarm. This panic was increased hy the mys- 
tery luaiutnined respecting tho crimes and their punishmenis; 
Some of tho prisoners had been heard, hut others were left with- 
out examination, while none were allowed legal defence. 

A new law decreed that the iafamy attached to crime, or the 
punishment for treason, was uot to extend to the family of the 
accused, hut to be confined to the guilty person. Although it was 

VOL. L X 



24S 



HISTORY OP THE K1NCD0U OP NAPLES. 



forbidden to defL-nd or plead their caus9 ftnywhere, but citpceialli 
in tlie palace, two ladies, the roolbere of two of the piisoiiers, 
the Puchcss of Cassano and the Princess Colonna, the 6ral 
of great age, the other just •p&st her youth, and both of thetff 
mirrors of ancient \'irtuc, overwhelmed by their sorrow, went ia 
mourning to the queen, and together entreated her in brolc^J 
accents to this effect: "Your Majeity may as a mother feel foP 
our grief, the mothers of unfortunate children who hnvo now boon 
languishing four yeara in dungeons, and wo hardly know whether 
they are alivo. Their fRmtlies wear mourning, and whether parents, 
sisters or kindred, wu take no repose, nor has a smile been seen on 
our lips siaco that first fatal night. Have pity on us, and restore 
ua our children and our peace of mind, and God will reward you for 
this mercy, by the happinew of j-our own children." " Were they 
guilty ?" askod the queen. Eager to reply, botli ladies excbiimt 
■' Their innocence is proved by the silence of the inquisitors, 
tho tender age of our sons, by the purity of their lives, their pit 
towards God, their obedience to us, and that no ntain or fault., not 
even tho trifling errors which may bo pardoned in inexjwricnce^ 
youths, can bo laid to their charge." They could add no more, 
overcome by their grief, took leave. The queen was more movei 
by the heart-rending looks and nobto cliuractcr of these ladies than 
by their words ; and though not disposed to pardon the accused 
if guilty, began to believe in their innocence. Inflexible towards 
crime, she had no desire to pcraccute the innocent, differing in 
this respect from her agents, who derived their power and iH 
fluence from the general misery. Ferdinand and Caroline sincerely 
believed those who had been arrested were traitora, and could not 
at this period be charged with injustice, though a few months lat^l 
when they were no longer deceived but had Iholr eyes opened^ 
wliile putti:ig their subjects to tho torture, innocent and guilt; 
alike, they wero actuated by the spirit of party and an insatta 
thirst for power. 

But in 179S, their minds and hearts were as yet less ha: 
and the king having been informed of the words of these t 
ladies, ordered the Junta of State to expedite the proems of tho 
accused of treason, who had now been languishing in the prisons 
four years; "by which justice had been suspended, an example 
productive of serious mischief, and perhaps occasioning unmeri 



icecL 

iven 




febdikjind it. 



S4a 



suffering to our unUappy subjecta." Tlio style of these coroniftntls 
breathings pity vas so uc>w and uuexpcclcd tliat they alarmed tliQ 
Junta, for all alike tremble under a despotic government, those 

kWho cxercifie, as woU as those who are forced to suffer oppression. 
The two clitef inquisitors, Caatelcicala and Vanni, accordingly met 
in consultatioD. Nothing had been proved in tho proc^», and fear* 
ing tlie anger of the sovereigns, the popular outcry, and the vcngo* 
anco of the acajsed, tliey agreed to shield iheingclves by resorting 
to violent and desperate measures. When, on the following day, 
they met in court, tlio king's mcasagc was read aloud to all, and 
they were desired to expedite their report, when Vanni observed : 
" The proc&s, which are at least equal in number to the accused^ 
arc now completed as far as the inquisitor is concerned ; but t;> he 
wholly &at isfiictory, the proof by torture is still wanting, which 
wise legislators have enjoined a« indispensable in crimes of treason, 
and even where there h an abundance of other proofs. Tltis 
mode of extracting evidence is therefore in accordance wiili law, 
and is the more necessary in the present conjuncture, because we 
havo to deal with criminals resolved on denying the truth or 
maintaining silence, as a promise of secresy common to all seals the 
lips of these wretches, but the force of justice and torture will 
unloose their tongues, kept silent by an unrighteous oath. I, 
armed with the authority granted me by my king, as inquisitor 
and procurator- fiscal, demand that tho principal criminals, the 
Chevalier Luigi de' Medici, the Duke di Canzano, the Abate Teo- 
doro Monticelli, and Michcle Sciaronne, shall be put to the trial of 
torture after the severest manner prescribed by law, under the for- 
mula Utrqueri acriter adhibitis quatuor fanicuiis ; after which act, 
the proceeding having been completed, I shall ask in the name of 
my king for such farther examinations as I shall consider necessary 
to establish the integrity of tlio evidence. Do not, gentlemen, 
front any weak scruple, hesitate to put erimin&la to llie torture, 

^vhom you yourselves will shortly condemn to a greater aud still 
lore merited suffering, when we cease to discuss the proe&s, aud 
treat of the final sentence." Starling from his seat, Vanni turned hia 
sallow and stony features, with eyes which glared like those of a 
wild beast, round upon the assembly, and added : " It is now two 
months since I have slept, toss from the labour of these proems, than 



244 



HISTORY OF THE KIKGDOM OF NAl'LES. 



from anxiety for the dangers incurred by my sovereign, and yet yi 
gentlemen, can feel pity for such perfidious wretches, who, if aided 
by fortune and not overtaken by justice, would have subverted all 
held moat sacred ; therefore, repeating: my proposal, that the prin- 
cipal criminals should he put to the torture, I ex hort you to act with 
justice nnd loyalty towards the king, ami with that courage which 
is the noblest attribute in Judges called upon to save a kingdotn." 
The magiatratc, MazjEocchi, president of thejunto, replied toVanni: 
" Tlio words, mjf sovereign, are ever on your lips, and under a 
pretence of seal, you conceal violence and pride; from henceforth 
it were better to say our suveroi^fu ;" thou turning to the judges, ho 
asked their vote on the motion of Vauni, wliich wats unanimously 
rejected, as barbarous and useless, since the inquisitors had so 
often silked the proofs ; and the crimes and criminals were already 
clearly estahlishcd. One voice alone, that of the Prince di 
Caatclcicnia, was raised in a menacing tone, while supporting tH 
arguments of the inciuisitor, and adding his own, he declared 
demand for torture to he just and necessary, and denounced 
decision of llio judgeJi &» weak and criminal; he tried to roiiae 
their coneciencea and fears by declaring that the king would taM 
vengeance on them, and he employed all the arts of ftcdnctimi 
which he himself has porliaps now forgotten, hut which, recorded 
in history, will hand his name down front age to age with merited 
infamy. CastclcicaU dewred the torture of Medici in the hope that 
ho would die under it from shame and misery, or that if he sur- 
vived he would be rendered incapable of continuing iu office, if for 
no other reason, from the disgraceful nature of his punishment But 
the majority of the judges wore firm in their vote, and the Junta 
replied to the royal message, that the proclis were completed 
according to law, and were as ample as the ingenuity and skill 
of the inqutsitora could deviea Nothing was now wanting but tho 
final trial, as tliis Junta had only been appoitUed for the jmrpose 
of inquiry. The king accordingly framed another Junta, in wliich 
Vanni was again appointed procuralor-fiscnl. The proems which 
had been declared complete, and which were now sent up for dia- 
cussion, included the cases of twenty-eight accused porisons, among 
whom were the names of men of high birth, such as Medici, Cau- 
Eano, Di Gcnnaro, Colonna, Caasano; and of others distinguished 



tm. 



FERDISANO IT. 



S4B 



learning-, Mario Pajnno, Ignazio Ciaja, Domenico Bisceglie, and 
loro Monticelli. The procurator- tiscal began with stating the 

I accusations, the nature of the crimes, and tho proofs which had 

I been collected ; he proceeded to expatiate upon them, and taking 
the part against the occuaed, passed over in silence all that 

fniglit have be«n said in their favour, and demanded death for five, 
to be preceded by torturt% "without mercy, aa upon dead bodies," 
both to increase their punishment, and to cxtmct from them tho 
names of aooorapliccs or abettors. For reasons already stated, but 
which he now repeated witii greater vehemence, he proposed only^ 
torture to be applied to Medici and three others pointed out hy 
the Junta of inquirf. For ntueteen more, prolonged imprison- 
ment and further examination, in tlie hope of extracting more 
ample proofs b» confeijsions under torture and from time. The 

tftdvocatea pleaded tho canse of tho accused, and although they 
were men appointed by the king, and devotedly attached to tho 
monarchy, they were interrupted by a ton-ent of abuse from Vanni, 
but courageously supported the side of the aoeused. The judges 
gave a just sentence, acquitting the prisoners, and restoring thcra 
to liberty. Such a general outcry of sympathy was raised by the 
appearance of these twenty-eight persons leaving their penal dun- 
geons, by the proof of the injustice of their imprisoumout, by the 
death of some of the unhappy victims, and by the account of 
their sutferings, that the Government, in order to exculpate them- 
■elves, joined (heir voice of indignation to that of the people, and 
pointing to Vanni aa the autlior of the false accusations, deposed 
him from his office, banished him from the city, and overwhelmed 
him with cveTT mark of disgrace. The Prince di Castelcicala, liia 

^Msociatti in guilt, escaped by throwing all the blame un his un- 
fortunate friend Oenoral Acton pretended to retire from tho 
burdens of State, and another set of men and other forms were 
introduced in the Cabinet ; but tho policy of the government waa 
unaltered. Tho dungeons were relieved of a few prisoners, but 
were replenished with more, and bad men continued to be retained 
in the pay of the government, as neither the system of spies, policy 
nor informers were abolished, nor even their numbers diminished ; 
Castelcicftla was minister of justice, and large stijiends and conso- 
latory promises were secretly sent to Vanni. 



216 



UISTORV OP THE KIKQDOJI OP NAPLES. 



In (he midst of tliese unluppy occurrences iii the city, i 
arrived tliat tlic FrcncTi fleet had reached Egypt, anj tliat Bona- 
parte liad landed with forty thousand soldiers, and was on his 
way to Alexandria. Tlie aim of this enterprise heing thus disco- 
vered, the fears of the Neapolitan government were relieved bj 
seeing the danger removed from Sicily ; and thoy wolcoined and 
spread a report invented by malice, that tliia was a stratagem of 
tho Directory to rid the Hepubtic of an ambitious and powerful 
man, by sending him to a country where lie must eitlier lose bis 
reputation or his lifu by the uumbci' of the enemy, and a pestiferous 
and invincible climate. A few days later arrivetl tidings of tho 
battle of Ahoultir, in which by a bold manceuvre the English ad- 
miral Nelson, had seized and burnt the ships of France, which had 
anchored in the roadstead after the disembarkation of the troops 
and unwisely deemed themselves secure from attack. Several 
ships of the line escaped to Malta, and a few of the transport ships 
sought refuge in the Sicilian roadsteads of Trapani and Girgenti, 
where the inhabitants, unfaithful to tho treaty, pitiless towards 
tho misfortunes of the French, and deaf to the claims of hospita- 
lity, received them as enemies, refused them shelter, plundered tho 
miserable remnant of those who had been defeated, murdered some 
of tho seamen, and drove the rest from Ihciir coasts. In Naples, 
menuwhitu. the particulars of the battle were joyfully announceil. 
Soon aftertrards an English fleet, the same which bad conquered 
at Aboukir, increased by the captured ships which without a fla^ 
followed in the wake of their proud conquerors, was scon making 
sail towards our coasts. Immediately the king, the queen, and 
the English ambassador with his wife, went out a long way to meet- 
the victor, in ships dccoralod as for a festival, and wont on l>oard 
his vessel to do him honour. The king presented him with a 
rich sword, and loaded him with so many words of commenda- 
tion, that hu could not have said more had the victory been that 
of his own fleet, for tho salvation of tho kingdom ; tho queen pre- 
sented him with costly gifts, and among them a jewel, with tho 
motto, "To the hero of Aboukir;** the ambassador, Sir William 
Hamilton, thanked him in the name of England, and his beautiful 
lady expressed her decp-fcU admiration. All Naples hastened to 
tho palace, and the city was in a tumult of joy. In tho evening 




17BS. FBEDINAKD IV. 247 

tho great theatre was illuminated, as was usual on occasions of 
national or royal rejoicings. When the king and queen entered, 
accompanied hy Nelson, the people received them with loud cheers, 
mingling the sounds of their names and deeds. The queen, the 
ladies of the court, and the nobility, wore ribbons or jewelled 
girdles, with the inscription, " liong live Nelson." Meantime the 
victorious ships and the captured vessels dropped their anchors in 
the port, contrary to the terms of the treaty ; and the ambassador 
of France, Garat, who had been a spectator of all which had taken 
place, and of the contempt with which the conditions of peace 
between the two governments had been treated, then thought it 
time to make a well-grounded complaint to the ministers of Naples, 
but was answered that the English ships had been thus received 
only because Admiral Nelson had threatened to bombard the city, 
if anchorage had been refused ; and no apology nor explanation 
followed for the public demonstrations of joy at tho success of 
the enemy. 



2+8 



HISTOBY OF THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



am. 



CHAPTER III. 



ntskstnovs war with the fuesch REPUBtrc— issvrrrctiobb i» tb» 

KIBOBOM— PLIQHT OF TUB KINO — VICTOET AS» TRIUMPH OF TH«, 
AKHS OF FRAKOB. 

1798—1799. 

A NEW confederation agftmst France liaving- been formed i 
£uropo, and tmmodiate war rcsolvctl on, the Npftpolitan govern- 
ment threw offal! disguise. The kings of Knglanil, Austrio, Kus- 
sia, and tlio Sicilies, finding the French troops wero diminished JttM 
Italy to increase the anny of the Hliine, or sent into Egypt, and^ 
that Bonaparte was removed to a distance, collected fresh armies 
and prepared for greater operations. Qeiiiian^' agreed to send 
sixty thousand men to Lomliardy, with Itussian troop* in theii 
rear, and Naples promised forty thousand, whilst the English fleel 
was to cruise in tlio seas of Italy. Great Britain was to aupply 
the allies with money, arraii, and clotliing, and the armies only— 
waited until the severest montlia of winter had passed. ^ 

In September 1798 a fresh levy of forty thousand conacripta 
had been raised in Naples, but in such haste, that, setting asidoj 
law and jusliee, citizens were taken from the communes, auc 
aons from, their families, at tlic arbitrary bidding of the minister 
or to satisfy the e:tigcncy of the liour. lu a single day, the S< 
September, every commune, without receiving previous intlraa 
tion, and without Inquiring into their capabiHtie-s wa."! obliged to 
furnish eight men in every thousand souls ; the consequence of 
which arbitrary treatment was an inanity of matpracttccs and 
blunders followed by groat disdatisfaotion and complaints. The 
conscripts, remembering the injustice to which they had been sub- 
jected, considered themselves the victims of superior force, and not 
bound to the ormy by duty, by their oatha, or by law, 



ing 



PEBDINAND IV. 



S49 



continued to Mm from the fear of punUhment. The new lor^ 
added to the old sirfdsM% raised tlio numbers of tlicarmv to seventy- 
five tliouiiatid ; more than enough to fulfil the terms of the alliance, 
though fulling short of what was expected. These numerous troops 
were in want of a. leader, when General Mack arrived from Austria. 
He was celebrated in the wars of Germany, where although always 
defeate<I he had acquired a reputation for military science and valour. 
Received with honour by the king, the court, and the army, lie 
reviewed the troops in separate detachments, while neglecting the 
frontiers, as be was less intent on defence than conquest, llccon- 
8ultc<l General Furisi on the plan of the campaign, General de 
Qanibs on the state of the infantry, the princes of Saxouy and 
Philipstadt on tbo cavalry, and General Fuuseca on the artillery. 
He spoke Utile, but his words were echoed from mouth to mouth, 
fts the reitponsea of an oraclo ; and he told the king, who impHcitly 
believed him, that he possessed an army ready prepared for war. 

The (]ueeu, who was restlessly impatient, proposed at once to 
invade the Homan territory, and she was supported in thia view 
by the English, because, resolved on war, they feared the Congress 
already convoked to meet at Rastadt, might lead to peace : since 
September, therefore, Uaron Aucrweck, n gcnllenian in the confi- 
dence of Pitt, had been in Naples ; though only an ob3curo traveller, 
he poue»ed great influence, as the friend of Rcpnin, minister of 
Prussia,' and of Metternich of Austria; he was amotig the first 
to sow discord in the conferences at Rastadt, and had the car of 
the king and queen of Xap!cs. Ferdinand, whose eager desire 
for repose had cooled, since rage and fear had led him in some 
degree to abandon his life of sensual indulgence, railed a council 
to decide upon war or peace, and if war, the time and nicana. 
Opinions differed ; the Marquis del Gallo, the Minister dc Marco, 
the Qenurala PignatclH, Colli, and Pariai were for peace ; but the 
influence of the queen, and the opinions of Acton, Mack, and Cas- 
telcieala, carried the day, and instant war was decided on, to be 
conducted by General Mack, but not declared until the troops had 
begun to move. Tlie army was divided into three camps ; iwcnty- 



' Sipnim. Primn Xicolai Wautl««ilM-.li 

Rppnin wM i>o4 Ptomhi taiimtfr, Usl 

rSuMian rngent (ran tin Bmpenr Faul 



fti Itctlin — &M Sohlooer, Oetdiichu thr 
xruucn Jakrimtidert, nl. t1. p. 163. 



&fiO 



H!3T0HY OF TUK KINGDOM OF SAPLKS- 



ITK). 



two Ihousond aoUicrs were ordered to stand prepareil at San Ger- 
mano; sixteen tliousand in the Abruzzi, and ciglit thousand in thM 
plain of Sessa ; while six thousand mora romiiincd in quarters at 
Qacta ; and transport ships wcro made rcadj to sail for Leglioru, 
General Mack took tiic command of the first onmp, General Miuho^ 
roux was appointed to the second, and General Danias to the third, 
Tvhile General Naselli was placed at the head of iho expedition to 
sail from Gacta. Fifty -two thousand soldiors wore ready at a signal 
to burst into tho Uoiuau States, but their commander-in-chief wm^ 
a foreigner and strange to thenj ; his generals were cither likcwis^| 
foreigners or ignorant of war, the officers inexperienced and tho 
now conscripts dissatisfied ; while tho old soldiers were in a stil 
worse condition, from hnbtts engendered hy defective diseiplii 
and a life of idleness and license: they Iiad no military habits; 
the rules by whicli soldiers are dispensed in their quarters, tl 
means to prondc sticlter against tho inclomcncy of the weather, 
to secure as much reposo as possible, to prepare food, or, in shurt| 
the whole art of living under any cireunistances, so neeetiiiar^' t( 
support the strength of the men, was neither ptactisc-d nor uudei 
stood. The couimissariat departnieut was so badly conducted, 
that it increased the disorder ; the distribution of food was uncer- 
tain, and the quantity brought to the camps was not commensu- 
rate to the demand ; so thai abundance was often found whcro 
the consumers »xrc few, while there was a scarcity in the ndjoinin^^ 
quarters: a secret poison was stealing through tho army in ih^M 
shape of mutual distruHt between tho subordinaies and their chiefs. 
The soldiers stationed in tho AbruMii were divided in three cainpa 
upon tho Trouto, the Aquila, and at Tagliacozzo. The troops in tU 
camp of Sau Gerniano were constantly exercised; and although th 
ground in autumn was soft and muddy, from tho heavy nun 
attacks and defences were carried on as iu war. The king h 
taken up his quarters in this camp, prepared to maa-K with t 
ormy ; and the queen, attired in a riding-habit, constantly dro 
along the lines in a chariot and four, accompanied by the am 
srtdors from friendly sovereigns, and other foroigneraof distinctio 
the barons of the kingdom, and Lady Hamilton, who, under pr 
tcncc of escorting her Majesty, displayed her own beauty in &U i 
magnificence to tho camp, and paraded her conquest over t 



tho 
tillg 

tk^ 

L'V, 

I 



»& 



FERDINAND IV. 



S51 



victor of Aljoukir, who, seated beside her in tlie same cnrriage, 
appeared fascinated and submistiivo to Iter cliarms. Nor were t1io 
troops ill tbo quarters at Sessa and in tbo fortress at Gacta allowed 
to remain idle ; but thougb contiiiualljr at exercise, time trns 
wanting' to train tbem into good soldiers. It was fouud that 
men wbose bauds had been inured, to the rude labour of the piek- 
Axe, raised by conscription in Sopteniber, and forced to join in 
October, were yet unsTcilled in the use of arms, when sent into 
active scn-ice in November. 

When the French saw tbe preparations of the King of Naples, 
thoy disposed their troops along the frontier, so as to form a 
Hue of defence, their centre bein^ at Tcrni, tbeir eittrorae right 
at Tcrracina, and their extreme left at Fermo ; the left wing was 
strengthened for resistance, while the right was only to be employed 
as a corps of ohaervation, and was therefore formed less for defotice 
than retreat ; their principal duty being to inaintuin their furces 
togclher, and secure the rixids leadiug into Lonibardy ; after 
which they were ordered to wait tbe turn of events. 

War being thus certain, although not yet declared, the French 
ambassador asked the reason of these preparations on the part 
of the Neapolitan Government, who, still dissembling, replied 
that tbe troops wero placed on the Neapolitan fionticn becauso 

itbc frontiers on the Roman side were occupied by French soldiers, 
and that tbe camps were formed to train the new levies, but that 
Naples continued to desire peace nitli the Ucpublia A few days 
later, on the 22d December, appeared a royal manifesto, in which, 
after alluding to the convulsions in France, the political changes 
in Italy, the vicinity of the fuca to monarchy and peace, the seizure 
of Malta (a Bcf of tbe King of Sicily), the flight of tbo PontitT, 
and the dangers to religion, declared, that for these numeroua 
and cogent reasons, the king meant lo lead an army into tho 
Roman Statea, in order to restore their lawful sovereign to tbe 
people, tbe head of the Church to tlie Holy See, and peace to tho 
inhabitants of tho Sieiliea T\m van not n war against a European 

[potentate, and the king, therefore, exhorted foreign armieit not to 
oppose the Neapolitan troops, which only intended to advanco as 
far as was necessary to effect their object, iu restoring peace 
to that part of Italy. Ho conjured the Roman people to show 



252 



HiaTORT OF THE KIXODOM OF NAPLES. 



iliemselvea friendly towards the Neapolitans, to be readj to rise 
at his bidding, and rely on hia clemency ; and lie promised to 
receive tlie wandorors from the right path with paternal indul- 
gence, provided they voluntarily submitted thcmsclTCS to justice 
and the laws. 

Besides tliis manifesto, lettci's from the ministers of the CroMTi 
were sent privately to the other cahinets of Italy, and to all who 
wero exposed to danger from the hostility of the French, and the 
war. One of these letters, addressed by the Prince Bclraonto 
PignatcUi to the Cheralicr Priocca, tninister of the king of Pied- 
mont, was intercepted and published ; it contained, among other 
important niRtters, these words : "We are aware that in the cabi- 
net of the hiug your muster, there are many prudent, not to say 
timid ministers, who shrink with horror from the words perjury and 
auassination, as if the recent treaty of alliance between France 
and Sardinia were a political act worthy of rcspeet. Was it not 
dictated by the superior force of the conqueror? Was it not 
accepted only because you were obliged to yield to necessity? 
Treaties such a-t those, arc insults to the fallen from those in 
power ; and by violating them, you only aeixo the first oppor- 
tunity presented by fortune to regain your former position. How 
can you, in the preaenoe of your king, a prisoner in his capital, 
surrounded by hostile bayonets, call it perjury to break proinisea 
wrung from you by necessity, aud diisapproved of by your con- 
sciences ; and is it aesasstuatiou to exterminate your tyrants? 
Are there no lawful means by which the weak may resist the 
force by which they are oppressed V And a few linos farther on : 
'* The Fi-ench battalions trusting in the peace, careless and 
secure, are scattered throughout Piedmont. House the patriotism 
of the people to entliuaiasm and fory ; let every Picdmonteao 
aspire to the honour of trampling down an enemy of his oountrj. 
These partial maasacres will be of more advantage to Piedmoni 
than successful battles ; nor will the justice of posterity stigmatiea 
with the hi[leous name of treachery, the energetic deed of a whole 
people, who march over the corpses of their oppressors to the 
recoverj' of tboir liberty. 

" Our brave Neapolitans, conducted by the valiant General 
Haek, will be the first to sound the tocsin against the euomios ofi 



vm. 



TERDIVAND IV. 



2SS 



tliroMB and tlie people. Ther will perliaps have aliend^- begun to 
moTft when thia despatch reaches you." 

Such were the atrocious purposes revealed in tticse despatches ; 
ami the manifesto of war having been already published, the 
Neapolitan troops, raising their camps, poured into the Slates of 
Rome. General Micheroux with ten. thousand men forded the 
.ilTronto, and driving a small Fronch j^iri-ijHin from the city of 
.AscoH, advanced by the Strada Emilia upon Fcnuo; Colonel San- 
filippo with four thousand men left the camp of Atiuila to occupy 
Ricti, and approached Tcnii ; Colonel Giustiui, with a. regiment of 
infantry and a &mnll body of liurse, descended frgm TagliacozEo to 
Tiroli, and scoured the Sabiuc country ; whilo General Mack, 
accompanied by the Icing and tweuty-two thousand soldicm, lufl 
San Qeruiftno and marched by the difficult roads of Ceperano and. 
Fro«inone upon Ilome, towards which General Damas was con- 
ducting eight thousand men from the camp of Scssa by the Via 
Fontina. That same day several ships, having: six tliousand sol- 
diers on board umler the command of General Nasclti, set sail 
from Qaota for Leghorn. The order of march described, proves 
that tho army of Naples did not advance in line, and bad no 
centre of operations; the troops of Sautilippu and Uiustini were 
too weak to allow the right and left wings lo contmuiiicate. The 
I corps under Micberoux, though an insufficient force, was to attack 
tho French left, wliich was the strongest of the three divisions of 
their army, and the main force of the Neapolitans, thirty thousand 
men, was proceeding to the attack of the right wing of the 
enemy, which was weakly formed, and had orders to retreat. 
Mack proposed ixt defeat the extremities of the French lines, to 
throw them into disorder, and drivo one corps back upon another, 
thus create confusion in tho centre and put thetii to the rout, 
whilst tho legion of General Nosclli, uniting with tho Tuscan 
insurgents, would attack the flank of tho French army in its flight 
towanls Perugia. The conformation of the frontier, the extended 
line of tUo French army, their base of opcnitiona in Lombardy, 
and the number of our forces being almost three limes that of the 
enemy, invited us rather to break their centre, and prevent them 
reoeiving succour by attacking their camp upon its flank, and if 
favoured by fortune, cut off their retreat into Lotnbardy. To cflect 



254 



HISTORY OF THE KINODOH OF NAPLES. 



this, the army ahoultl havo been divided into three corjis, — Iwerity- 
&ix thoii=innd men ai Aquiln to attack Ricti and Torn!, twelve 
ttiousrtnd upon the Stroda Kmilia to engage the led wing of tho 
French, and eight thousand in the Pontine mnrslics lo press upon 
the small divisions of the enemy's right wing, whilst the legion of 
Tuscany, without an ciiomy to contend with, and the people on 
their side, could have traversed the country as far as Perugia, and 
been prepared to assist if required in tho various chances of war. 
The inexperienced and raw troops of Naples could only thus, hy 
strategical shill and ihe weight of their numhers, liavc been 
enabled to subdue the disciplined and successful army of Franco. 
The finril result of the war would have eventually depended on the 
risings prepared in Piedmont, and on the arrival of the GcmuiDa 
in Italy. 

Reason and science would hnvo adviaed tins course ; hut now 
let ua turn to facts. The corps of Mack and Danjas, thirty 
thousand men, marching in parallel lines, without encountering 
tlic enemy, who was liaalily retreating, arrived on the 2.9th No- 
vember in Rome, where the king made his entry in state, and look 
up his abode in hts own palace, the Famesina. The French, after 
leaving a small garrison in the castle of St. Atigelo, had departed, 
and with them tho leaders and friends of the Republic ; a. few, 
rashly trusting to the royal promises of mercy, lingered behind, 
and were that sanio day ttirown into prison or put to death ; two 
brnthers of tho name of Corona, Ncapolitftn« anrl liberals, who had 
remained, confiding too much in their king, wore by liis commaml 
seized and executed. The rabble let loose pillaged the houses in 
the name of religion and loyalty to tho jiontiR" murdered tho 
citizens, drowned several Jews in the Tiber, luid were guilty of 
many crimes, to tho disgrace of tho conqueror, who at length 
appointed the Princes Borgliese and GabrieUi, and (he Marquises 
Massimi and Ricci, to form a junta of safety, which though too 
late checked the excesses of tho mob. All signs of the lato 
Republic disappeared ; the cross rose where the tree of liberty 
had stood, and the enildcms and arms of the Pontiff with those of 
the King of tho Sicilies, were raised on the towers and public 
edifices. Messengers were sent to Naples with tlio news of tho 
victory, and to order solemn prayers and thanksgivings in (he 



3Ma 



?EBDI>*AN» IV. 



255 



clmrches; and despatclies were written to llie Pope containing 
■words as follow* ; " Your Holiness will Icara by this letter, that 
aided by tlie Divine grace and by the niiracnlous interposition of 
St. Jannariufi, wc have with our amiy tliis day triumphantly 
entered the sacred city of Rome, ao lately profaneil by impioua 
men, who have fled terrified by the appearance of tlic Cross and 
by my arms: your Holiness may therefore resume the auprcmo 
and paternal power, whicli 1 will Bliield with my army. Leave 
then your too modcat abode in the Caiihusiau mouustery, and 
Uke our Lady of I^retlo borne upon the wings of the cherubim, 
Isioend into the Vatican and purify it with your holy presence. 
All is prepared for your reception ; and your Holiness may cele- 
brate Divine service on the day of our Saviour's birth." A third 
despatch in the name of tho king, was written by his minister 
Prince Bclmonto Pignatelli to the ministers of the king of Sar- 
dinia, to inform them, among other matters, — " Tliut the NeapoH- 
'tans, led by General Mack, had been the iirst to toll tho knoll of 
the French, and to apprise Europe from the summit of the Capitol, 
that the hour of tlio sovereigns is now arrived. Unhappy Pied- 
montese, shake off your chains, break them in pieces, and cruah 
your oppressors ; answer to the invitation of the king of Xaples." 
These gasconades will give some idea of the blind rage and vanity 
of the king and his minister. 

White these despatches were yet on their way, the enemy was 
obtaining ancccsses in the Abruzzi. General Michei-oux, his 
forvcs somewhat diminished by diaaaters and sickness, arrived in 
the vicinity of Fenno with nine thousand soldiers, and found tho 
French troops under the command of Generals llounier, Rusca, 
and Casabianca, prepared for their reception, and ranged in order 
of battle; the fight ooinmencing. the result was neither doubtful 
Dor slow, for as the numbers were e<)ual, the French superior in 
the use of arms, and the Neapolitans badly officered and mistrust- 
ful of their leaders, these last took to flight, leaving a few dead 
upon the field, and many prisoners, besides gtms and standards. 
The remnant nf the column sought shelter in the mountains of the 
Abruzzi, whnro a small dctjichnient of tho enemy sufficed to keep 
iheni at bay, the larger number of the French having already 
departed to rcinforec tho centre and right wing of their lino. 



236 



BISTORT OF TOE KIXODOM OP KaPLBS. 



tm. 



Towards litis centre CoIodoI Sanfilippo was advaDcing:, after kaviug 
obtaiiieil possession of Ilieti without opposition ; he was proceed- 
ing along the defile of Tern!, (guarded hy General Lemoine with a 
small detachment, when the ariival of General Dutrcssc to the aid 
of tho French with half a brigade, coruistinf^ of two thousand four 
hundred men, made tho forces equal on cither eide, and tho ftilo 
of Baiitilippo, like that of Miuheroux, proved disastrous. Colonel 
GiusLini was stopped at Vicovaro hy General Kellcrmau, and 
applied for assistance to tho troops of Sanfilippo, but learning that 
their leader was a prisoner, that his men had lied, and that lUeti 
was again in the hands of the Freuoli, he hastcnod along tho 
hanks of the Tiber, and thctice to Tivolt. 

Tlie French anuy which had all thin time engaged the Neapoli- 
tans with equal numbers, and, as was to be expected, always con- 
qucred, had thus secured the safety of their left wing; and no 
longer obliged to communicate by circuitous routes, but pi-oceod- 
ing by the direct road, they re-formed their riglit in Civita Cas- 
tcllana, and in the adjoining mountains, where they took up a, 
strong position, from the nature of tho ground and tho fortifica-' 
tiona. They were seven thousand men with two thousand volun- 
teers, all ready to conquer, or if necessary to die, and commanded 
by General Macdonald, already distinguished in the wars of Ger- 
many and Italy. Bchiud them at gome distance, and with tha 
rugged mountains of the A]>enninos between him and Ihem, 
hovered the commander-in-chief, General Championnet, who hav- 
ing left General Duhesmc with six thousand soldiers to conquer 
in the Abrujszi, advanced with another eight thousand to the aid 
of Macdonald. A small equadron was placed in tho city of 
Perugia as a videlte, to watch the movomcnts of the legion landed 
at Leghoni, and the expected risings of the pcopla But neither 
the Xeapolitan soldiers, nor the efforts of the English, nor th«1 
hatred of the jKoplc, availed against the French in Tuscany. On 
the 2l>th September, the ilects of Kaplcs and England, coufident 
in their number% arrived at Leghorn, and asked pcrnituioa to 
laud their soldiers and cannon. Tho Tuscan government, at that 
time at peace with France, submitted to superior force, or pre- 
tended to do so, and issued a nmnifcato, by which they declared, 
that they suffered the disembarkation of the soldiers, not fi-oi 



im. 



FERDINAND IV. 



m 



any contempt of the noiitrality, but from inability to offer any re- 
Biataucc, and further, tliat they intended to maintain tlieir inde- 
pondciice, and commit their rights to Justice and to God. By anotlier 
edict, tliey increased the nmty, raised a militia, provide<l for the 
security of the aubjccLs, and then waited the termination of the war 
in Uouic. General Naselli remained statiouary, n-aiting, as he liad 
been ordcreil, the commands of Mack, who, incapuble of carrying 
out strategical combinations on an extended scale, and perplexed 
by the rapidity of his own success, forgot that legion of at least six 
thousand soldiers, who weve idling their time at Leghorn. Mack 
and the king were for the first time enjoying the pleasures of a 
triumph in Rome ; and as if the war were ended, they allowed five 
days to elapse without talcing any steps against Macdonald; 
only demnnding the surrender of ihc castle of St. Angelo, and 
Bonding threatening messages to the garrison. Tlio words of the 
challenge sent by Lieutenant liourcard to Lieutenant- Colonel 
Walter, commanding iu the fort, aro worthy of remembrance: 
" Tho French soldiers invalided in the hospitals of Rome shall bo 
retained as hostages, and every cannonade from the castle shall 
coat the life of one of tlicm in reprisal, or he shall be consignod to 
the just fury of the people." A copy of this challenge, signed by 

^Mack, was sent to General Championnet, and published by him 
to the French army, increased tho barbarities incident to war. 
The castle refusing to surrender, both sides commenced firing, hut 
only random shots; and on the 3d December tho army of Naph'S 
withdrew from Rome. Six thousand soldiers remained to guard 
the king, and as the troops of Colonel Giustini had rejoined the 
army, tweaty-Bve thousand men advanced against Civita Cas- 
tollaua. 

They were formed into five corps. Any leader but Mack 
(taught a lesson, if by nothing else, by the events of tliis cam- 

, paign) would have summoned the legion of Naselli from Tuscany 
to advance upon Perugia, would have conducted the main body of 
his army along the left bank of the Tiber, and encamped at Tcmi, 
where he might have engaged the small detachment of Macdonald 
with three times their number, before Championnet could have 
descended from tho Apennines. But in place of this, the head- 
strong commandcr'in-chicf of tho ilL-fated Neapolitans sent a hand- 

TOI. L I 



us 



HISTORY OF THE KISODOM OF NAPLES. 



irw- 



ful of soldiers along the Tiber, and divided tlie remainiDg twenty-j 
two thousand in four corps, which after a few stirmishea encami 
at Calvi, Monte-Buono, Otricoli, and Regnano ; and for five day« 
oontiiiucd inactive in these positions, or attacked the cncmj's 
camp in separate detachments. What Mack hoped thcrcbj to 
efFect remains a myBtery. IJut the French general, who waa at 
Bret prepared to act on tho defensive, altered hia plan, and attacked 
our camps one after the other. All were defeated and flod beforo 
him, as he assaulted carh sc|»iratnty with equal or euporior forces, 
and greater skill and (*ood fortune. The Snt to fall was Otricoli, 
the next Calvi, and the laet Monte-Buono. General Mack had 
diniinialied tho camp at Regnano, bj withdrawing the greatevj 
numbcruf the troops to uiiiLu them with thoisu who were re-ascend- 1 
ing tlie right bank of the Tiber, intending to establish them at 
Cantalupi. This ideawss the only scheme worthy of praise during 
the canipnlgn ; but hearing on the road of the diKastcra which bad 
befallen hin troops, he ordered the general to retreat upon Rome. 
This was the l.'Hh December, and the Neapolitans had during tho 
eight preceding days been weakened by severe engagements, nil 
of which had redounded to the honour of the French amis, and 
with a loss to us of a thousand men killed, ntno hundred wounded, 
ton thousand prisoners, thirty (rnnuou, nine standards, bcsidea 
horses, muskets, and an immense quantity of materiel. At Otricoli 
alone they had been successful for a few hours, as tfacy had snr- 
prised the French giirrison of two hundred men, killed the larger 
number and taken the rei«t prisoners ; either by the barbarity of 
the inhabitants or by chance the hospital taught fire, and tlio 
sick perished in the flames, giving rise to a report that the fero- 
cious challenge sent by General Bourcard was not a mere menace 
but a reality. This false talc was believed by the French, and added 
ferocity to the crimes inherent in war. The retreat of Mack com- 
moncod that same day. The Xcapolitans, ajwuys defeated, always 
unfortunate, and led byforoignent, with many French generals and 
colonels in their ranks, most of whom wore emigranta eager to 
eecspo the dangers of a prison, and thoroforo hastening the retreat 
auspectod they were betrayed, and like all armies credulous of evil,' 
called their leaders Jacobins, and became disorderly ; from that 
moment subordination decreased or was nt an end. To these evils 



PEBDINAVD lY. 



Sod 



were added eciircity of provisions, the ignonmce and frauds of the 
commtssariat, tlie loss oF cotivovs, and magazines abandoned or 
plundered by tho licentious and mutinous soldiery. 

Wlien these news rcacliwl Uome, tlie people citlier sincerely in 
favour of a repulilic, or from prudence, siiowod thenifiolx'os inclined 
for the French. King Perdiuaud, theruforu, a coward at heart, and 
who from the 7th had taken up his (juartera at Allmno, became 
alarmed, and on the evening of the lOtli fled in the direction of 
Naples. He told the Duke d'Ascoli, who was in attendance upon 
him, that the Jacobins nimed at his life, and had sworn to kill all 
king^, and assured him that it would be an honour for a subject to 
expose his own life to save that of his sorcrciga ; he then persuaded 
him to change dresses with him, and assume his deportment, so that 
during the journey he might paaa for the king, and he liimsclf for 
his attendant. The courtier was delightetl, and attired in the 
royal ganncnts, sat on tho right in the carriage, whilst the king, 
taught by his fears, showed him the utmost respect, and paid him 
the homage of a subject, Ferdinand arrived in this humiliating 
disguise at Caserta, on the evening of the lUh. Meantime the 
Neapolitan troops reached Rome, and ha.stily passed through tho 
city, pursued by the French ; so hot was the pursuit, that as the 
vanquished passed out at one gate the conquerors entered by 
another. Qcncral Championnct hod joined Macdonatd, and whilst 
they were arriving in such force at Rome, they heard that the 
legion of seven thousand Keajiolitans, under General Damas, who 
had been forgotten by Mack or abandoned in his precipitate flight, 
were liaotening their march to nrrivo before tho French, but had 
failed. Dnmas, by a herald, demanded a free passage for his 
troops, which, if refused, he declared ho would obtain by force, but 
received for answer, that when he laid down his arms and yielded 
himself prisoner, the Freucli would consent to treat with hini, and 
their representatives would arrange the terms of the truce. Cliam- 
piounet wished for delay, to allow the arrival of more troops in the 
city, as his numbers wcro still few and fatigued. General Damaa, 
who had already determined to change his route, equally desired 
delay, to prepare his soldiers for a difficidt retreat, in the fiico of a 
successful army, double his numbers ; the hours passed as if by 
agreement, whilst both annies were pre|iaring for the contest. 



S60 



UISTORT OF TUK KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



WB«. 



At an opportune moment Damas cantiously but boldly took 
the mail for Orbitclto, a dUtant forti-cs.fl, at that time belong- 
ing to the King of Naples. He was pursued by tbe Frencli, 
eager for the prey of wliich they had thouc;ht themselves aecnre, 
when it escaped from tlieir hands ; having oronakcn the rear at 
Storta, ihc; attacked the NcnpolitAns, but night coming on Damaa 
continued his niarcli, and Iho French reposed, leaving both their 
dead and n'onnded on the field. The foUoiring dny, another bo<1y 
of French arrived from Borghetto, under General Kellerniau, hoping 
to intercept the Neapolitans, and came up witli them at Tosca- 
nella, where man> on cither side perished in the fight, and General 
Damas had liis cheek wounded by a grape-shot. Tlie legion conti- 
nuing on their iray reached Orbitello, but found the fortress with- 
out stores or victuals ; and the terms they obtained from tho 
enemy, and by which they were enabled to depart unconditionally, 
were less due to tho strength of the walls, than a reward for tho 
valour displayed by the soldiers nnd tlieirleader. About tho aanio 
time, the legion of General NascUi sailed from Leghorn on board 
Kiiglish vessels, and thus every possibility of carr,ving on an offen- 
sive war being at an end, Mack turned his cares to the defence of 
tho kingdom. 

He was now, however, conscious of his error in having afler 
tlic manner of the barbarians made an iucursion into the country 
without a baao of operations, eager for coatiuest and secure of 
success, while neglecting the restoration of the fortresRca, mili- 
tsry works within the kingdom, and all tho artificial means sug- 
gested by science and expenence. Even during the adversities ho 
had sustained in the lioinan States, he had neglected the tiefcnces 
of the Neapolitan kingdom ; and careless amidst disaster, tho hour 
arrived when it became necessary to protect tho country, and 
found the fortresses unprepared, the frontiers exposed, and tho 
strongholds iinperft^ctly provisioned and garrisoned. He waited 
till ho could rca&scmblc the fngitivcd, and with the legions of; 
Damns and Nasulh. which had returned entire, and other squadrons i 
which had not yet been engaged, together with the large remnant 
of bis discomfited troops, he could form a fresh army, more nume- 
rous than that which General Championnet was preparing against 
us. After rc-cstabltshing the Republic in Rome, and punishing 



HML 



FEBDIKASD tT. 



261 



some acts of treacliery, Clmmpionuet ordered a religious ceremony 
to bo performed nt tlie reatomlion of tlio ruined sepulchres of 
Duphot and Basvtlle, tipon wliicli occasion he pronounced a eulo- 
gium on the conduct of his troops; and after allowing (hem a 
hricf interval of repose from their fatigues, he prepared his army 
for an invasion of the Neapolitan kingdom. He bad Iwentj-fivc 

.thousand soldiers at his disposal, divided into two corps ; one in 
the Abruxzi. composed of eight thousand men, with General 
Duhcanio at their head ; the other of sovontccn thousand, coni- 

.jnaudetl by Rev and Maedonald, lined the lower frontier of the 
Garigliano ; Championnct himself accompanied the legion of Jlao- 
donald. He wns well supplied with artillery and provisions, besides 
having the advHiitngo iu possessing officers superior to our^ iu 
genius and military science. Thu Fruiicti weru only duflcieut in 
numbern, but their valour and good fortmio, and the discouragement 
and failures of their opponents, compensated for this defect. Every- 
thing having been arranged, Championnct started on his expedition, 
though at a b.iuinlous moment ; from the risings in Piedtitont, tho 
breahing up of the conferences at Rastadt, the armamcnta of Austria, 
and the smnllness of tho KcpublJcan force in Lombardy ; but for- 
tune made amends for what was wanting in prudence. 

On (he 20th December, the whole French amty started in the 
direction of Naples. General Duhesnie entering the Abrutzi, 
threatened the fort of Civilella, situated upon the summit of 
an eminence upon the Tronto; inaccessible on two side«> it 
was fortified on the remaining two, and being provided with a 

iBufficicnt garrison, ten great cannon, ample stores of ammunition, 
&nd provisions from the adjoining city, was prepared to stand a 
long siege, even had the enemy had artillery and means equal to 

»auch an enterprisa But the French could only hope to succeed 
by tlireata and iho terror of their name, as it was impossiUo to 
convey hea\7 brass cannon up such a height, over precipitous 

tground, where there was no carriage road, and hardly a path. 

r^ho commander of the furt was welt aware of ihetr difficulties, but 
panic-struck, oud with tho example before him of many acts of 
cowardice allowed to go unpunished, he demanded terms of the 
enemy, and after only eighteen hours' investment, surrendered 
himself with the wliolc garrison prisoners of war. He was a 



S62 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



ITCL 



Spaniard of tlic name of Giovanni Lacombe, lieutenant -colonel in 
the pay of tlic Kinjr of Nftplea. After gaining poaacssion of Civi- 
tella, General Duheame adTanccd further into the Abnizzi, and 
repulsed or dispersed numerous bands of nmicd peasantry ; he a^i 
length reached the river F^cscarn^ which though at first oontosted^] 
was soon abnndoncil, and was immediately Tordcd by Ihc Frcncl 
Duhcsrac making a display of his soldiers and artillery, which onljr^ 
consisted of field guns, demanded the surrender of the fortress, 
bearing the eamc name as the river. Tlie commander, anxious Co 
prove his intrepidity, led the herald round the for till cations, and 
pointing to the arms, the garrison, and well-filled magazines, said: 
" A fortress so well supplied and provisioned does not surrender." 
After receiving tliis message, the enemy redoubled Ids hostile 
demonstrations, upon which the commander, changing his defiant 
tone, raised the standard of peace, and yielded the fortress unin- 
jured and entiro to the conqueror, with sixty great brass and ten 
iron pieces, four mortars, besides other arms, powder, clothing, 
and provisiona, and one thousand nine hundred soldiers prisoners. 
The commander was Colonel Pricord, also a foreigner, who owed, 
his elevated position to the unhappy state of the country, and to 
the contempt in which we were held by our rulers. 

Whilst Duliesmc was thus engaged, General Mouuier was 
traversing tho rugged path which leads across tho mountains of 
T^ramo to Civlta di Pcnna; and General Rusca, by a still more 
ditlicnlt road, was on his way to Aquila and Torre di Passcri. 
They feared, no danger from a retreating foe ; but General 
Lemoine, upon his arrival at Popoli, found a strong corpa of 
Neapolitan sohliera prepared for his reception, and an engagement 
ensuing, the French General Point was killed, and victory vu< 
yet doubtful, when, our evil destiny prevailing, a cry of treachery 
was raised along tho NoajKilitnn HncSj and the soldiers quitting 
the field in the most critical moment of the battle, ilud in disorder 
by Iscmia. and Bojano to Ucncvcnto. The French wcra thua 
advancing in the Abruzzi, and mcantimo part of their right wing, 
under Ooneral Rey, was crossing the Pontine Marshes, and tho 
rest, under General Mncdonald, marching by Frosinonc and Cepe* 
rano, without encountering any opposition. The King of Naples 
did not suppose it possible that the enemy, already occupied in 



im. 



FEHDtNASTD IV. 



S63 



PiedmoTit, titxA metiRecd in Lombardy, would venture to advance 
vith so small a force ; but on hearing of bis losses in the Abruzzi, 
he immediatelv proclaimed a war of cxterminatioD. The procla- 
mation was (Intetl Rome, tlio Kth December, but was in reality 
written later nt Cfkscrta, and ran as follows: " Whilst I am in tbc 
act of restoring; the Holy Church in the capital of tlic Christian 
world, the French, with whom I have done my utmost to live at 
peace, threaten lo pcuetmLe into the Abruzzi. I am therefore 
hastcuiug thilhor witli a powerful army to annihilate ibcm; but 
meantime let the people lake up arms, succour the cause of 

'religion, and defend their king and father, fighting- for his life, 
but which ho is resdy to sacrifice to preserve the altars And pro- 
perty of his subjccla, their liberty, and the honour of ihcir women. 
Remember your ancient valour. Whoever shall refuse to join the 
standard and the lovy en viasse, will be punished as a rebel 
towards us, and as an enemy of the Church and 8tata" 

This edict acted like the voice of God. Tlic people flew to 

'arms; priests, friars, the most intlucntial persons in the cities or 
Tillage«, placed themselves at tbeir head, and led them out to 
war ; and where there was no one of superior station, the boldest 
spirits took the lead. Shamed by this sight, the soldici-s w]jo had 
fled joined as volunteers, and the numbers, small al first, soon 
increased, until they became vast multitudca Excited by one 

jBnother, and by the hope of booty, they began their work. They 
bad no orders but to fight, no aim but destruction ; they followed, 
but did not ol>ey their leader, and were influenced by his example 
rather than comnianila Their first dcpd» were stained by atrocious 
cruelty, in the massacre of stragglors and sick or wounded French 
soldiers, besides the commission of acts of treachery ; setting asido 
all claims of humanity, hoiipitality, or the rules of war. En- 
couraged by their iirst succeiMcs. they soon afterwards seized on 
the city of T^Jramo ; they uoxl gained possession of the fortified 

,bHdge across the Tronto, and loosening the pontoons of which tt 
constructoil, hindered the passage of the rest of the troops; 
whilst in Terra di Lavoro, hordes of volunteers collected at Scsso, 
scoured the region of the Garigliano, burned the wooden bridge, 
and gained possession of almost all the park of artillery ranged 
upon the banks, which had been placed there in reserve by the 



Ui 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OF NArLKS, 



1708. 



French ; carrying off tlio light pieces, thoy licstroyed the remain- 
der, nnd after putting the French soldiers to death who had been 
left to guard thetn, abandoned tlmt part of the country. The 
communication between the ri^dit win^, and three columns of the 
lefl wing, was cut oiT by the Neapolitans, who placed vidcttea 
along the road, and muitlered th^ moasengers, and straggling 
parties of the enemy. 

The French were astonished, and we ourselves no less so, at 
Ihi.t sudden change in the Neapolitan poopto. Without an army, 
without a king, without Macic, combatants seemed to spring from 
the earth, and the same French army, which legions of soldiers 
had not been able to conquer, had their numbers dlniinidhed, and 
were disheartened in the presence of an almost invisible foe. A 
fact which excites the wonder of cotemporarics, must ap]>car in- 
credible to posterity, and it is therefore the more necessary for the 
Iiiatorian to investigate the reason why the Neapolitans, wlio shortly 
before Itad displayed so much cowardice, now reappeared on the 
same field against tlie same enemy, daunlloss and resolute. Tho 
prowess of nu individual may proceed from strengtli, dexterity, 
ftuporsiition, fatalism, the passion for conquest, or from necessity ; 
but the prowess of a nation or an army must arise from confidence 
in those acting with them, or in their leaders. Personal prowess 
is a gift of nature, that of armies the result of discipline ; the first 
springs up spontaneously, the last demands time, military institu- 
tioiirt, and example: therefore, while valour is not an inherent 
quality in every race, every army may become valiant. This ia 
acknowledged by all who liavo studied men and human nature; it 
is therufore not to bu wondered at if the Neapolitans, who arc 
physically robust and well developed, and most of them moun- 
taineers wearing coarse woollen garments, and subsisting on scanty 
fare, attached to, and jealous of their wives, devout towards the 
Church, and loyal (at the time of which I write) to the king, when 
tempted by rewards and the hope of booty, should be ready to 
unite and fight for the maintenance of the institutions of their 
country and for their altars ; tho more so, as they were free to 
return to their homes, might attack the enemy after their own 
fashion, and were allowed to retain what they earned by their 
prowess. But In tho regular warfare in which they had lately 



ITK 



rEBDIXAND IV. 



S«3 



b«n cngftgcdj many of them were new conscripts wlio disliked a 
soldier's life, nnd their discontent U'as shared in hy their comrades, 
since even in the lowest grndcs of the army all were Awarc of 
the i^^nomiipc of their leaders, and suBpictoua of tlicir good fHitli : 
tliey were badly officered, badly fed, in a miserable condition, and 
were always the losing parly ; and they had no respect for the pro- 
fesaion of a soldier, nor possessed any ono quality necesaar)' for 
an army. This alscuco of all military virtue was tho cousequeucc 
of errors in former governments, as well as in the present ; yet 
although the people were not to blame, an obloquy was attached 
to their name, which even tli© faithful records of history will pro- 
babty never succeed in efiacing. Nations have something of fatal- 
ism in their existence, and tlio doom of the Neapolitans is, I 
apprehend, to be unfairly judged of by the world. 

The left wing of iho French, entangled in the Abruzzi, proccedeil 
slowly ; tho right hastened on towards the Oarigliatio ; General Key 
demanded the sarrendor of the fortress of Goeta from thogovonior, 
Manihal Tsehiudy, ft native Swiss, who had entered the Neapolitan 
service by tlio infamous system of tniffic which Swilzerhmd carried 
on with her citizens ; ho had risen to the high rank he fiUcd by Lis 
family connexions, by the slow course of years, and by favour. A 
foreigner without a military edaeation, and deaf to the call of 
military honour, ho summoned a heterogeneous council, where lie 
listened to tho opinion of the bishop, who called himself a minister 
of peace, and of the municipal magistrates, who were only eager to 
avoid the dangers of a aiege ; whereujion the surrender was de- 
cided. Whilst, this base and timid council was preparing for a 
betrayal of trust, the French general sent a shot from a six-pounder 
into tho city (not having any larger piece of artillery than a howit- 
zer with him), and at that signal of war, they hastened tlicir deli- 
berations, and raised the Sag of surrender, while the governor eent 
a herald to demand peace upon advantageous terms : but General 
Rey, now aware of their cowardice, replied, '* Either surrender at 
discretion, or expect tho utmost rigour of war." Upon which, 
•M>Ofl soldiers in a strong fortress, furnished with seventy brass 
cannon, twelve mortars, 20,000 muskets, and jirovisions for n year, 
pontoons, ships in the port, and an immenflc f^upply of mati-ricl te 
stflnd a siege, swrrcnderod at discrcUon. The prisoners were eon- 

roL L t 



s 



HISTORY OP TUK KINODOU OF NAl'LES. 



17M. 



'vejcd io the Castle of St. An^elo, witli llio excoption of llie un- 
blu3liiii*j marshal, wlio pra.ywl for indulgence for Iiiiiiftolf and sixty 
of lii.4 onicers, and, in reward for having; assistod in tlic Burrcnder, 
tliey obtai nod a disgraeeful esempt ion, and were permitted to depart 
free, after having sworn never again to serve against the French. 

The treasonable surrender of Civitella, Poscara, and Qaeta, 
roused a hope of equal aueceas before the fortress of Capua ; oven 
though General Mack was re-organizing the armj^ behind the river 
Voltumo, and strengthening the fortifications and defences by a 
vast camp entrenched upon the side facing Rome, which he guarded 
by GOOO aoldiern. General Macdonald therefore advanced to re- 
connoitre the fortress, and prepared to conquer us as cowanU. It 
wna midday, when, attacking the camp with three columns, he 
threw tlio troop» into disorder, and some of them fl.ving to the 
galea of the fortress, threatened to beat them down if they did not 
open to receive them. liut from a battery of the camp, where tho 
gunners stood firm before the menaces of the enemy, and refused 
to follow the bad example of their comrades, there opened a dis- 
charge of gra])G-Bhot from six camions within a short range of tho 
enemy, and which was so well directed as to strike down many in 
the columns of cavalry which were advancing proudly to thechargo, 
while other volleys were fired from the boAtious, causing the attack- 
ing columns suddenly to retreat: the soldiers in the camp recover- 
ing their courage, the battle was restored. Tho gimners in this 
battery were native Neapolitans, and their comnianding officer 
was likewise a young Neapolitan, who was making his first essay 
in anns in this campaign. lie was promoted by General Mack 
from a lieutenant to a captain, oa a reward for his success, rather 
than his valour ; for neither the French horse, nor tho infantry 
could have entered tho camp, whiuh was protected by tho works, 
the ditch, and the trees, which had been thrown across, as well as 
by the cannon and the garrison. The French, returning to the 
assault, attempted to pass the river at Gaiaxzo. which was guarded 
by a regiment of cavalry under the Duke di Roccaromana. After 
auflfering severe Iomcs during the whole day, they were repulsed, 
and perceiving they could not accomplish their end by surprisca^ 
they changed their plan, and prepared to take the fortress by tho 
slower method of siege. They had lost 400 men in the attacks on 



11% 



FERDINAND IV. 



2fi7 



Capua and at Caiazzo, half of them killed and wounded, ud 
TOO taken pnsoner^ General Matthieu hod his arm sliattered by 
a grape-shot, General Boi-igerard was killeJ, and Colonel Darnaud 
waA among tlic prisoners ; while on our side, only 100 had fallen ; 
among the wounded was Colonel Roccaroniana. 

Generals Duhcsmc and Lomoinc arrived at this juncture from 
tlio Abruxzi, and described the fatigues they had utulcrgonc, the 
obKtaclcs tlicy had encountered, the fords they had crossed, tho 
perfidy of the inhabitants, and the number and barbarous murders 
committed upon tJie French. General Duheemo hiniself bore twu 
recent wounds on his body, and while naming those guilty of the 
worst cruelties, mentioned Pronio and Rodio; to which General 
Championnet, wlien relating the history of the iniurrections and 
the acts perpetrated hy the inhabitants of the Terra di Lavoro, 
added names already notorious for deeds of atrocity, Fra Diavolo 
and Mammone.^ The French generals, assembled in council in 
the city of Venafro, heciimc aware timt tliey were exposed to a 
new and horrible kind of warfare ; they were now convinced that 
(he cowardice shown by the commanders of the fortresses which 
hud surrendered proceeded from au accident of fortune, and that 
the army had no means of e&capo but in keeping together, and in 
rapid stroke* which might strike terror and weaken the strvugtli 
and courage of the people. "Let our first aim, then," concluded 
(he French commander-in-chief, "be to gain possession of Capua 
&» soon as possible, and let the troops, arms, and siege artillery be 
this very day encamped around the fortress." 

The Ikiurbonists were elated at the news of this movement of the 
enemy, for since the Abruzzi had been relieved by the prowess of its 
inhabitants, they concluded that tho army of France was uititing, 
not from any further warlike intention, or from caution, but to retire 
into the States of Rome. A comparison was now drawn between 
the successes which had been achieved by undisciplined masses 
uml the losses sustained by tho immense army of Mack ; the sus- 
picion of treachery was thus con6rmcd in the minds of the people ; 
and the more so, asnpon the advance of the French, the seventies 
of llio police had bec-n increased, and frcjih imprisonments and 
punishracnta were spoken of; many of the officers were seixod in 

■ Pronio, SoJio, Fra IHaotla, Mtl Hamautme, *11 »f l<^ leaden b( buidiui. 



£68 



HISTORY OP THE CmODOM 0? XAPLES. 



1708. 



the camp, nnd comUictod to the fartresses, anti Oie minister of war 
himself. Marshal ArioU, was shut up in a fortress. These occur- 
rences caused divinjons among the people, weakened iheir re- 
liatanco to tho enemy, and generated civil discord followed bj' 
lumHoric-ia disasters, inseparable from that unhappy state. Thia 
fn» the liittcreat fniit of the obstinate folly of the Government, in 
wg^i flings and punishing onspiracieo which did not exist, but vhich 
'were invented liy a small lunnbcr of ambitiouR bad men, wcro fos- 
tered in Iho haujflilr bosom of the queen, and were aitenrards 
sprcmi and believed among the people. These pernicious false 
hoods were delrimental to tho dignity of the monarchy, the influ-f 
ence of the great, and the authonty of the magistrates. They 
oau«ed soldiers to disobey their officers, and subordinates thetr 
superiors, and the contumacious, when reminded of their duties 
and the laws, answeroti by tho word, traitor. Thus all orders of 
•ociety, which had up -to this time been respected, were under- 
mined, and the ck«s which was strongest by their numbers and 
daring, namely, the lowest of the populace, held tho sway ; this 
was especially i]xe case in the metropolis, where the rabble arc 
most numerous, wlicro the cla-ss of I^:tnroni arc audacious, nnd 
where the greatest booty can bo obtained with greatest eaao. 
discipline was at an end. and authority Iicld in eontcmpt, the' 
troops of the line dispersed themselves • those who had fled before 
(he enemy refused to return to their standards, while the valour 
displayed by tho partisans of the king wivs wasted in marvellous 
but fruitless achievements. Meanwhile, the court and the minia- 
tors lived & life of suftponse and anxiety ; a great and .prosperous 
crown was tottering on the head of Ferdinand ; dangers and r*- 
morso agitated tho soul of the queen ; General Mack wavered 
between his ho|M?a in his new schemes and the ruin of his fortunes ; 
Acton and Castclcicala trembled as might he expected from their 
cowardly natures and guilty lives ; while those who had advised 
war, the Inquisitor of Rtatc and tho satellites of despotism aban- 
doned themselves to desperate projects. Thus, as by a Divine 
retribution, those bad men wore tormented by tho oonaciousnesKl 
of their evil deserts, and the fear of approaching and certain 
vengeance. To fiy, was the desire of all. though not avowed, be- 
cause an act of cowardice and only to bo resorted to at the last 



IIH 



PERDISAHD IV. 



2C9 



extremity. The French army, fitopped by a single forlrcss and 
river, and by the armed bands of the people, did not advance ; the 
risings within the city were all in favour of the king, and many 
vows of fidclily were offered up for the throne and church. Not 
a single proviiico nor city had yielded to the French, whose 
dominion did not extend beyond the ground covered by their aroiy ; 
and the uncX[>octed disasters which had bcfHUon the enemy, ron- 
tltrred the BourboDB and their adherents eeuuro in tlio i'liuuipaii, 
Puglio, and Calabria. There waa not even on excuse for tligbt, 
but conscitfucc makes bad men cowards. 

There were others also in fear : the most uotcd Jacobins 
whose names were inscribed in the books of tlio police, the 
officeni accused of ti-casoo, uud the possessors of wealth, tn what- 
ever fonu, ."iince tlicy chiefly attracted the eyes of the insurrec- 
tionary mob. The Jacobins, experienced iu contriving secret 
meetings, consulted on the means of escape^ and how it would be 
possible to aid the fortunes of Kmri'^c, and tlie downfai of the 
king of Naplea. These wcro tho tirut real conspiractCH which, if 
criminal in their design for ilio overthrow of the Govcmnicnt, 
wore produced by necessity, as the conspirators, who led miserable 
and insecure lives, obliged to conceal iJiemselvcs duriug Uie day 
and stealing from their houses by nights, could only thus hope for 
life and liberty. They sent envoys to tlie French urniy, to inform 
General Cbampionuet of the etatv of the city and pulacc, and urge 
him to complete the enterprise ho had commenced, promising him 
powerful Bup|>ort from their faction. The {Kilice having learned or 
suspected llieue proceedings, increased the dangers and alomi of 
both parties. liut the terror in the king's bouscliold was already 
almost past endurance, when a deed of atrocity hastened their 
deliberations and octiona. Antonio Fcrrctti, a courier employed 
by the ministers, and a faithful servant to whom the king was 
attached, was on his way with a royal desjiati^ to Admiml 
Kelson, when, taken by the ])Coplo for a Hpy of the French, 
ho was seized upon ilio sea-shore, and whUe a thousand voicee 
shouted, '* Death to the Jacobins !" was stabbed by as many 
blows; while yet alive, they dmggeil hiin through the streets, 
and finally threw him into a common scwcr, where he expired. 
Whilst those barbarous wretches were dragging kim along half 



270 



BISTORT OF THE Ki:caD01l OF NAPLES. 



17ML 



dead, they pflusod beneath the windows of tTie palace, and hi 
tlie audacitj to call upon the king to come out and behol 
the lojftlty of his people, in the torments of the traitor. Thof 
refused to depart or he pacified, until the tumult became snch, 
from their increasing numbers and disorder, that to prevent fur- 
ther excesses, tho king made liiH appearance, and rcco^lacd the 
unhappy Ferrctti, wlio fixed his djrin^ eyes upon him, as if to 
implore pity ; Itinjj «s ho was, Ferdinand, however, had no power 
to release him from his tormentors, but, terrified at tho sight, and 
trembling for Iiis own lifcj he determined on flight. Some declared 
the murder wns premeditated, to ]>roducethis result, and others, in 
order to hide certain plots with Aiiatria, known to Ferrottl 

Tlie king having dclcrmined on Ids departure, hastened the 
preparations, wliich were made secretly, as for flight ; hut conceal- 
ment was ufiolea.4, for it wan noon known that the royal family and| 
the ministers were niodiLiting tlieir escape, and that the base* 
Rfttcllites of despotism were prepnrinif other means for their own 
flight or concealment While the last hope of resisting the enemy 
or reorganizing the array and government were vanishing before 
these signs of fear, a bold and faithful councillor, whose name has 
not been rcconled, remonstrated with the king, upon the error and 
mischief of his flight ; but all ho could obtain was a promise, that 
tho fact should be concealed from tho pcoplo, in order not to damp 
the warlike ardour of the provinces, or the hatred of the French. 
lictters and mcstscngers were accordingly despatched, to assure them 
that tho king was preparing to anniliilato the enemy who, aided 
by treachery, and vcuturicig into the heart of the kingdom, in the 
midst of fortresses and a population Iti amis, would find tho 
punishment he deserved for his temerity. The credulous people 
trusted implicitly in these words, and redoubled their ardour an( 
endeavours to oppose the French. Suddenly, on the morning 
the 21 st December, a number of ships which had weighed anchor 
in Ihe night from the port, were seen navigating tho bny, and 
upon the largest vessel (whicli wns Knglisli) the king and the royal 
family were embarked, as could be perceive<l by her flag. At tho 
same time, an edict, called an ^rvi«y (Intelligenoo), wasplacanlod oiIj 
tho walls of tho city, proclaiming that tho king had left for Sicily,' 
and had appointed tho commander-in-chief, Prince Francesco 



179S. 



FERDINJ^ND IT. 



271 



Pignatelli, regent j but tliat lie intended shortly to return with « 
powerful army. 

A« soon as the king had departed, the secret history of his flight 
was divulged; as well as the intrigues of the courtiers who had 
surmounted the final delays, and the advice of such inSucntiol 
persons as Sir William Hamilton, Nelson, and Lady Ilnmilton. 
It waa reported that Ferdinand had carried off the jcwela and 
treasure of the crown, as well as the most valunhlo of the antiqui- 
ties, and works of art in the museums, besides all that remaiacd 
in bai' or coin, in the mint .ind Lanka ; in siiort, a booty of twenty 
niilHons of ducats, belonging to the State treasure, leaving tho 
unhappy nation engaged in a foreign and domestic war, without 
law or guidance, destitute and insecure. Whatever may be the ties 
which bind a king to his people, whether a human compact or a 
Divine ordinance, and whether the government be free or <Ie5pctic, 
it was a heinous crime in a monarch thus treacherously to aban- 
ilon the Slate, which even the ciigencies of the time and circum- 
stances cannot excuse. 

The ships were detained three days in the bay by contrary 
winds, and during that time the municipality, the magistrates, the 
Larons, and the people sent deputies to the king, promising if he 
would return (o use every effort against the enemy, and secure 
him the victory by their numbers and determtnatiou. The Arch- 
bishop of Naples presented the addresses to the king, and others 
those to the ministers. But Ferdinand declared his resolution to 
he irrevocable, and the ministers repeated the same in less cour- 
teous terms^ The loyal feelings of the people were changed by 
this conduct; the magistrates retired from public office, cither 
from indignation or to secure their own safety ; those who loved 
quiei, waited coming events in fear and trembling ; the hopes of 
the innovators were rising, while the rabble was the only i>Arly 
actively engaged, and were daily committing worse esrcssea. 
The royal ships meanwhile disappeared, as well as other vessels 
having on board many evil-disposed persons, the timid, and tho 
ambitious, and those whose flagitious lives made them dread dan- 
ger ; a few days later news arrived that the fugitives liad been 
overtaken by a violent tempest, that some had sought shelter in 
Calabria, others in Sardinia and Corsica, that many of tlic sltips 



272 



HISTORY OF TUB KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



nM. 



were arattercd, while tlio vessel containing the king, which waa 
commanded hy Admiral NcUon, had had her masts and yards split, 
und could hardly keep the sea. The royal family themselves 
bolicved their final destruction near, and wheu the quceu viaa told 
that the Inftinl Don Albert luid died, she au&wured, " We shall 
uU sliortly rejoin my son :" whilst the Iting, praying with a loud 
voice, and [)roraiaing large gifts to St. Jaituariusund St. Francis, cast 
indignant glances at the minister aud his consort ; thus reproacli-i 
ing them witli the nets of his past government, which had been 
tlid cau-io of his fiight and misfortune. In the midst of the tcni- 
peat, to the astonishment of all, a Neapolitan man-of-war, com- 
manded, hy Admiral Cariicciolo, was seen steering senirely on her 
course ; hut although Can'iceioto could have s.-uled jmst them, he 
kept vrithin & short diatnnco of the king's ship, to encourage, and 
if necessary to assist his soveroigna; icscemcd'aa if, while other 
vessels obeyed the winds, that of Car^ciolo, as sho sailed freely 
and proudly through the wavos, commanded them. This fact was] 
observed and admired by tlio king, which provoked the envy of j 
Nelson. The Eut^lish ship, though tempc«t'to»l, came in sight of 
Palermo on the 25th December. The sea in that vicinity is very 
dangerous, and the entrance to the harbour difficult. When tho 
peril to whirh the Hbattered vessel was exposed was descried from 
the city, and it was made known that the king was on boartl, 
Giovanni Pansen, the captain of a frigate, braved the waves upon 
a small boat, and reached the ship, wlicre ho offered himsdf as a 
skilful pilot in these seas Admiral Nelson willingly yielded tho 
command to him, and either owing to lus skill or to good fortune, 
he readied tho port in a few hours, and anchored in smooth water 
at the Batichclba. Carikcciolo arrived in tho same moorings, and 
having landed the pa.sscngcrs from his unscathed vessel, dixippcil 
her anchors. The oHicers uf tlio Neapolitan navy gained mueli 
glory from this alfair. 

The Regent Pignatolli, when notifying tho extent of his military 
power to General Mack-, and tltat for the government of tho country 
to the Eletti of the city, recommended tho defences of tho kingdom 
to tho firat, and requested the advice of the last. Uad either tho 
king or the regent been equal to this emergency, they might either 
have succeeded in expelling the French, or have concluded peace. 



ntt. 



FERDINAND IV. 



or pi-olongo<l tho war, until bv tbe inovemoiiU of tlio armies of 
Austria or Ru»«iit, the ouuin>' would bitvc Wen obliged to withdraw 
from southera Italy, aud hasten to the aid of his armies in Lom- 
bar*ly. Damas had brought seven thouiyind soldicra with him ; 
Xaicllt u'iis nt the head of another six thou^nd ; and fifteen thou- 
sand or more were encamped around Capua, who, though relaxed in 
discipline and insubordinate, might (aa often happens whero krige 
nuniLera arc congregated) by a gesture or word have been enaily 
restored to oliedicnce. The Abruzzi, tlie provinco of Uolisc, and 
the Terra di Lavoro, were swarming with iJourboniats, the rest of 
the provinces were in arms, nnd the populous city of Naples was 
rising for tho king. Had all thcso means been organized and 
made to net in concert, and had the moral inQucncu of tradition, 
legitimacy, and (he sacred idea attached to the institutions of t]icir 
country been uiado use of, an army mig}it have been created threo 
times greater than t)ial of Iweuly-four thouiand French, supported 
by only a few hundred volunteers, inexperienced in revolutions 
and war. But General Pignatelli, born of a race of ignorant 
nobles, and educated amidst the servilities of a palace, had ucithep 
the abilities nor courage lo save the kingdom and the crown. Tho 
worst result of devpolism itt, lliat while training its votaries to 
obedience, none are found eapabic of command. 

After continuing for a short time to act with the regent, tho 
Eletii of the city began to suspect hiiu of evil intentions, either in 
obedience to secret orders from the sovereigns, or from privattt 
motives ; aud they consequently summoned other Eletti from tlie 
Sedili,^ knights, and burgesses, aud raised a large and faithful body 
of militia. After cousujiiug qu tho state of public affairs, they 
determined, in tlie first instance, to diminish the power of tho 
regent ; but after referring to the grants of Frederic ii., King 
LadisUus II., Philip irt., and to subsequent edicts and compacts, 
agreed to by Philip v. and Charles iil, they declared they could 
not be governed by a viceroy ; and that after the departure of tho 
king, the royal power was transferred to the Eletti, aa tho repre- 
sentatives of the city and of the kingdom. 

Tho regent refused to submit, and botli parties growing exas- 
perated, Uio municipality sent him a message, requiring him to 

> 8Dt Koto, p. 33. 



274 



HI8T0HT OF THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



resign hU unlawful power. The disputed anthority was made 
manifest by the piiUication of edicts from cither side, contradicl- 
ing one another in words and substance ; for white the Ktettt en- 
deavoured to repress the tumults, tlio regent laboured to excite 
them, and while tlie respcctablo clashes of the community adhered 
to the former, the dissolute find lower orders ndhcrcd to the latter. 
On the 38ih December, in tlio midst of this agitation, n thiek smoke 
was seen rising from the shore at Posilippo, followed by flame ; and 
it was rumoured that hy the orders of the recent, but in obedience 
to liighcr commnnils, a hundred and twenty bomb-ketches and gun- 
boats, dmwn up for shelter in llie grottoe* of that rocky shore, 
had been »et on fire; sonic days later, several ships of the line^ 
which had returned from Sicily, presented a still more melancholy 
spectacle ; for, in broad daylight. Count Tlium, a German in the 
service of Naples, gave the word of command from the dock of ft 
Portuguese frigate, to set fire to two Neapolitan men-of-war, and 
three frigates anchored in the Bay. The flames at midday assumed 
a lurid dingy colour, and Appeared to rise from the sea, stealing up 
the ships' sides, and running along the masts, the tanxnl rigging 
and sails, so that the vessels seemed outlined by ^re, and soon 
afterwards fell in nshos and diiaippeared. The pcnple gazed at the 
scene in gloomy silence and consternation, until rousing themselves 
from their stupor, they asked one another the reason for this de- 
struction i why the Neniiolltnn iind English sailurs could not have 
conveyed the ships to Sicily; whctluT it was true that the port, 
the arsenals, and magazines coulaining the public stores, were to bo 
burnt; and whclhor the quecu inleudcd, now that she had fled, 
to leave the people nothing but their eyes to behold the public 
misery and to weep ? Then suddenly ceasing these idle murmurs, 
they Imstcncd to iho Town-liall, and demanded that the public 
buildings should be placed in their li.mds ; but they were pacified 
by seeing numerous bands of the militia already guarding the city. 
The Elelti, who had been as much excited as the people, at the un- 
patriotic spirit shown by these ineetulijiry acts, and fearing greater 
destruction, had met for consultation : »ome proposed at onco to 
ot^anizo themselves int.o a republic ; otliers to pay down a sum of 
money to purchase peace; others to seek a new king of the Bourbon 
race from Spain; and some, whose mouthpiece was the Prince of 



PEHDINANl) IV. 



275 



CanoM (wTiosc name I mention here that tlio render may leacn to 
kno\r him from t}io commencement of liis career), to compose an 
aristocmtio government, since democracy vras undeBirablc, and 
monarchy had ceased in Naples by the flijjht and spoliation of 
the king. The dnys were thiia wasted in a variety of projects, none 
of ihem adapted to the exigency of the times. 

Whilst til is was passing in tho city, the French army were de- 
femling tliomsL-lves from the Bourbouista, w]io were continually 
atlaeking their wcakoist points, or tlmt part of ihuir force furtlicst 
removed from tlie main body ; wliilc they retaliated by sacking 
and buMiing iho cily of Iscrnia, as a puniblimont for opposing Iho 
passage of General Duhesme, and then prepared for the siege of 
Capua. General Mack meantime hastened the repairs of this for- 
tress, and increaacd the numbers of tlic garrison. Rut the regent, 
who had already commenced secret negotiations for peace with 
C'lianipionnct, now demanded a prolonged tnicc, the terms of which 
were arranged id the village of Sparanisi ; tho Duke del Gesso and 
the Prince di Migliano acting for Naples, and General Arcatnhal 
for France. It was there agreed on the 1 2th January 1 799, that tho 
truce should last two mouths ; " that the fortress of Capua should 
be yielded to the French ou the following day, with her stores and 
arms complete ; that the line of the French camp should be formed 
in the territory lying between the moulha of the Uegti I^agni and 
the Ofanto, behind the right bank of the first-mentioned river, 
and the left of the last, and occupy the cities of Accrra, Arienzo, 
Arpnia, Bencrento, and Ariano; that the Neapolitan soldiers in 
Romagna should be recalled, and Naples pay two millions and a 
lialf of ducats, the first half on the 15th, the second half on the 
25ih of that month." This truce was more to be deprecated than 
an unsiicccssful war, for though we had been obliged to lay down 
our arms and submit to peace on hard conditions, some advantages 
might have accrued to the king and kingdom ; but this suspension 
of hostilities, by cooling and nftenvards extinguishing the ardour 
of the people (our strongest defence at that time), by yielding to 
tho enemy the only fortress which served to protect the metropolia, 
as well as a vast and rich extent of territory in the heart of tho 
country, besides granting him security and facilities to await fresh 
reinforcements from LoroUardy, made our fall certain, and was 



276 



ILISTOBY OF THE KINGDOM UF NAPLBS. 



xm. 



unmiscd evil And tolnl ruin, wiiltout compen»ition or hope for tha'l 
future. Tlie truce having been conctuilL-d, ttie Frvncit on llie fol-f^ 
lowing dav occupied llie forlross of Cnjiua, and having jio^tcd their 
catups on tilt) banks of the Lngui, took possession of tlw turrilory 
Assigned ihem as far as Ofaoto, a river whicli fulls into the Adrian 
tic. Tlie Neapolitan soKliers, who were dniljr diminlsKing from 
desertion, were encamped on tlio opposite bank of the Ia^i, more 
as a demonstration than for defence; the people, hoih in the 
metropolis and in tlie provinces, disapproved the terms of the 
truce ; and thus, while the war with the foreigner terminated, dis- 
sensions amon^ ourselves increased. On ihc ovoning of the ]4ih 
January, ilm F.runcli com niisai oners came lo Naples to receive the 
^moncj which liad been promised, but which vcm not forlhroming, 
nor even possible to procure, since nil tlio State treasure, bcsidoftl 
all belonging to the municipality in coin or in plate from the 
churchei), banks, and mint, had been cnrncd oft' by the king in his 
.flight. The lower orders rose in a tuiuuU at thc&igiit of the commis- 
sioners ; and the riot lasted all night, causing more alarm than mia-j 
chief, for theregont secretly connived at the dupjirturc of the French 
from the city, and the civic guard suppressed the insurrection. 

The following inorning, however, matters were worse than ever. 
Some of the soldiers, either voluntarily or by compulsion, yielded 
their arms to the rabble, who attacked and disarmed the cine 
guards, and disbnndcd thai useful body. Strong in numbers and 
arms, and clalu<l by their first success, they r|in to the ships which 
had arrival in the night, with six thousand troops on board. 
The soldiers heaiinte<l, but their leader, Genenil Nnselli, pusillani- 
mously gave way, and distributed arms to the people, while hia. 
men, who were as ready to assist in a tumult as averse to warj 
joined the insurgents. Thus the stream soon swelled into a 
torrent, and the rabble hastened in vast multitudes to demand 
the castk'd from the regent. Terrified, perplexed, and his flight 
prepared, Pignatelli ordered the castles to bo given up' to ihe 
people, whom he called iho enemies of the Fiencb and loyal sub- 
jects of the king. The prisons and galleys were next thrown open, 
and many thousand ruffians joined the mob. The serious 
of affairs roused the coumgc of the magistrates, and they sent k' 
deputation to the regent led by tho Prince di Picdimontc, who ad- 



inSL 



PBRDINAND IV. 



277 



dresBedlum as ToIIowb: — "Tlic municipal rouncil rommand you, 
I9 QB, to resign tlio powers of the regency to tliem ; to restore any 
■ of tlic Stats treasure you may hnvo iuyour posseBslon, and to issue 
an edict ordering that full and entire obedience gliall be paid to 
the TDUuicipality." The rcg'ent replied, lie would tako tlic matter 
into cousideratiou ; but, in the night, witliout giving nny answer 
to ttie^o intinKitions, or leaving any provision for the government, 
fle<l from N&ples. Some believed tliat lie acted tliui^ in obedience 
to instructions left him by the quoen, othei-s that bis flight pro- 
ceeded from cowardice, or liis usual proneness to blunder, or from 
an intention to overwhelm bia enemy, Qcncrul Acton, in his ruin. 
Uo proceeded to Sioily, where he was ilic unhappy narrator of his 
own shame, and was there shut up in a foiiress. 

The people, finding they bad forty tliousand armed men at their 
command, took po-s^csnion of the castles ; and the restraints of law 
and foar being nmiovcd, believed themselves invincible. They 
called tlic gcnemis traitors and Jacobins, and appointed Colonels 
Moiitemo and Uoccnrornana tlicir leadens ; both of whom bad 
proved their loyalty, one l>y tho loss of an cyo in the war in Lom- 
bardy, and tho other, by recent wounds in tho engagement at 
Caiazzo ; they were lilccwise both nobles, bold horsemen, and 
(what the populace prize atill htglicr) tall and handsome in person. 
Thoy accepted office, because they did not wish to risk a refusal, 
and because they hoped by assuming the aulbority conferred on 
tbcm by thceo maniacs to bo ennblcil to curb their fury. Tho 
municipality (the only magistracy wliich continued in the discbnt^o 
of tliinr duties) consented to this choice, and tlic terrified city sig- 
nified their approbation. A gang composed of tlic lowest of the 
populace, went in search of Mack, but not finding him at Oosorio, 
whcTti they 8U]ipo»ud him to be, suddenly changed their minds and 
rctunie<l. The general, who lay concealed during the night in a 
small house in Cairano, left at daybreak on the following morning, 
disguised in the uniform of a German general, and presented bim- 
lelf to General Cliampionnet at Caserta, who received him with 
magnanimity, and gave permission for bis free passage to Ger* 
many; he was, however, detained at Milan, and conveyed prisoner 
to Paris. This history sufficiently proves what was the amount of 
his skill and capacity, which is still niorc evident in the narrative 



278 



UtSTOKY OF THE KIXGDOU OP KAFLES. 



ifn. 



of tho affair at Ulm, id 1805, wliich belongs to tbe history of 
Europe. The conimanii of the army was transferred to Guucral 
Salandra, but merely as a tiiattur of fonii, for (he grealtT part of 
tlio army vvas diinsolvotl, and thosu wlio rouiaiued, refused to obey 
ordors. The now coDimander, when on liis way to form iho en- 
campments, was soon afterwards wounded by some of the rabblo, 
and with him General Parisi. Otlicr officers were Hkcwiso 
voundcd or killed, the trendies and quarters deserted, disciplino 
at an end, and each thought only of his own safety. No force 
remained but the rabble, and no authority was acknowledged, 
except that uncertain power wliich had been confided to RoccanK^ 
niana and Moliterno. 

As there was no longer a Neapolitan army facing the French 
encampments, and the only show of resistance was now and then 
the appearance of an armed civilian, it was expected that the 
miouy (the truce having been broken by the non-payment of the 
stipulated price) would advance agaiiist tlie city ; and many and 
exaggerated rumours caused stilt further cxcituniciit in the mob. 
Tlie municipal senate now relieved from the presence of the regent, 
consulted with the Prince di Moliterno, and divided with him the 
cares of tlie State. They issued an edict, commanding to prepare 
for an attack against the Frenclt, which was to commence as soon 
as necessary ; to maintain order in the interior, and above all, 
public tranquillity ; to restore the anna to the depots, that they 
might be distributed with greater discrimination to the dcrcnders 
of their country and their king, and concluded in these words : 
"Those who disobey thcao laws, are enemies and rebels to the 
authority of the people, and will be proceeded against by imme- 
diate trial and execution." The gallows were erected in tho 
squares of the city, and Moliterno was confirmed in his office as 
General of the people. The senate, by decree, provided fur the 
administration of the finances, justice, and all tho departments of 
Government, tlireatening defaulters with immediate and terrible 
punishments to satisfy the just indignation of the people. Mean- 
while, in order to divert the rabble from plunder, they proclaimed 
the fisheries and hunting grounds in the waters and woods of the 
royal doniaina, free to all. They then selected deputies to send to 
General C'hampionnet, to inform him of the change of government, 



KKBDI^AUD IV. 



S7d 



and to iirgo upon liim tho mutual benefit which would cnsuo from 
a peace, wliicli, while glorious and advantageous for Frnncc, need 
not entail misery nor degradation on the NcnpoHtau people ; since, 
now that they had hy tlieir own arms, and by their own sutferings, 
redeemed thu fuultis of their govcrumeut uud uriii;, lhe,v wore 
deserving of sonie consideration. 

Tlicso measures for the attainment of peace moderated tho ex- 
citement of the people ; many of the weapons which had been 
seised were restored to Castcl Xuovo, ft great number of the rioters 
Btttrted for the royal lakes and forests, and the tumult and uproar 
subsided. But ihose who had always advocated liberty, and those 
lately converted by the new hopes which had been held out, were 
secretly intriguing with the French, and offering them powerful aid 
in the prosecution of the war, the success of which, they asserted, 
would amply reward the Republic by tho acquisition of wealth and 
glory; they entreated them to refuse the tempting offers of peace, 
and exaggerated their own influence and uumUeni, while speaking 
disparagingly of their opponents : they furthei: assured them, that 
the provinces would at once return lo tranquillity, when they 
heard that the capital was tahen, and that the people had vindi- 
cated their right to freedom. Such was the state of affairs, when, 
in the mtddlo of the night, messengers from the city arrived at the 
camp, consisting of tweuty-four of the most violent of the popular 
leaders, among whom was Canosa, a prince by birth, an aristocrat 
by principle, and a plebeian by nature ; at their liead was tlie 
genoral of the people, Molitcrao. Confident in their own strength, 
inexperienced in the difficulties of war, and the uncertain temper 
of numbers, they addressed General Chanipiunuut in a tumultuous 
manner, all speaking together; some assuring him, that while (he 
Neapolitan army had only been conquerod because betrayed, the 
people were neither betrayed nor conquered ; others praying for 
peace, and others, in tho name of the countless millions who were 
opposed to the small French army, defying him to war. After 
they had thus vented their feelings, in mingled threats and en- 
treaties, Molitemo spoke thus in a studied speech : — 

" General, by the flight of tho king and his regent, tho go%'em- 
ment of the kingdom devolves on the t>cnate of tho city ; therefore 
in treating with you in their name, we shall conclude a lawful and 



£80 



HI8T0BY OP TUB KINGDOM OP NAPLKS. 



irsa 



permanent ad. Tliis," he eontiniied, presenting a pnper, "con- 
tnins tlic powers of the deputies here present. You, General, wlio, 
afltcr dcfenting a numerous army, have advanced as a eonqucror 
from the fields of Pernio to the shores of the Lagai, naturally deem 
the i>]iace of ten miles which divides you from the city, short ; but 
you will perceive tliat tlie distance is greater nnd perhaps inter- 
minable, when you remember that you are surrounded by a fierce 
and armed population ; that 60.000 citiTcns, with fortresses and 
ships, nil animated by rcli^ous wal and the desire for indepen- 
dence, arc defending a city of 500,000 armed inhabitants; that 
the people in the provinces aro opposing you with greater numbers 
nnd nctirity, and that if it were ]>ossible to conquer, it would 
imposftlblo to maintain your conquefit. Kveryibing, tbcrefot 
counsels you to make pcaec. Wc offer you the money we cngagcdf 
to pay in the armistice, and as much more (provided your request 
be moderate) na you may demand, besides provisions, enrringes, 
horses, and all the means necessary for your return, and we engngc 
lo keep the road free from enomiee. You have by successful battles 
during the vnr, obtained arms, standards, nud prisoners. You 
have taken four fortresses, Usa by the power of your arras than 
the fame of your name ; we now offer you peace and treasure asi 
to a con<|ueror. You will therefore derive all the advantages 
nttondiniy glory and suceess. Remember, General, that our num- 
bers are sufficient, nay, mrtre than sufficient to resist your amir, 
and that if you, for the sake of peace, refrain from entering tli© 
city, the world will admire your magnanimity; while, if you are 
prcTcnted entering by the resistance of the people, you will fall 
ingloriously." 

The general spoko thus in reply r— "You address the French 
array as a conqueror might address the conijuercd. The tnico ia 
at an end, because you liave failed in your engagements. Wo shall 
to-TOorrow advance against the city." Thus saying lie dismissed^i 
them. Several Neapolitans who were in the camp serving as 
volunteers or guides to the French, spoke with the deputation, 
using the seductive phraseology of liberty, but only received 
bold and determined answers; both siden, inflamed witli party 
rage, threatened the other with extermination. The dcputiea 
repeated the angry words of the conference to the Senate, which, 



im. 



FSBDINAJID IV. 



28 1 



unfortunately for the hopes of peace, passed from moutli (o 
mouth ill Iho city. Priesla and friars who adhered to the fall- 
ing government, perceiving, that since the Bourbons had fled, 
and the regent had been driven away, the Municipal Senate were 
dictating laws without the sanction of the king, went among the 
rabble, rousing their ancient loyalty, and reminding them of the 
wordBof the queen: — "The people aione remain faithful, for all the 
educated classes of the kingdom are Jacobins." They f^prtjftd sus- 
picions against Molitemo, Huccaromana, the Elctti, and tJio iioblea; 
and they urged the people to rise, to plunder the houses, and to 
commit other cxccases. The rago whicji had been spent was thus 
reawakened, and the mob that night upsetting the gallows, and 
refusing to acknowledge the authority of Roccaroniaiia nnd Moli- 
torno, elected as thuir leaders two of themselves, one named II 
^"ggio. a small flour-merchant, and tlie other called II Paxzo, iho 
servant of a vintner, who had obtained tliia nickname for his youth- 
ful excesses, both of them men of bold and dissolute chai-actcrs. 

The first dawn of the 15th January 1799 discovered new dangers 
which soon proved themselves too real ; a numerous band of liiz- 
zaroni went out to meet, the French, wliilst others dismantled the 
caatles, and seized the artillery in the arsenals ; others, ^gttll more 
ferocious, went about the city, robbing and murdering the inhabi- 
tant* When the rioters were in full operation, the siinie frinw 
and priests who had roused tlieir passions on the previous days, 
clothed themselves in the sacred veatmenta, and stilt further excited 
tho people iu tho squares and churches, by what they called Iho 
Word of God. Tliey so far succeeded in their endeavours, that a 
servant of the noble house of. Filomarino denounced his masters 
in tho market-place, and led the Lkizaront to their palace, where 
they seized tho Duke dclla Torre and his brother Filomariuo in their 
own rooms, and laid ihem in irons ; the former celebrated for his 
poetic genius, the laiter for his mathematical learning ; the house, 
which was richly fumished, was first pillageil, and then burned ; 
many books, rare prints, and articles of value were destroyed, 
bceides a museum of natural history, iho fruits of long yearn of 
labour. Wliilsi t)ic building was still burning, tho two unhappy 
prisoners were dragged to tho new quay, and there made to ascend 
a pile, where they were burned alive, amidst the rejoicings of a 

TOt. L 2 A 



SS2 



UISTOBY OF THE KIKQIWM OF NAPLES. 



i 



barbarous and ferocious populace. Other massacres followed. The 
municipal council broke up in terror ; all respectable porsoDS sought 
slicHcr in tlieir houses ^^'^ no voice waa heard but that of tho mob, 
no command but theirs. The Cardinal Archbishop, hoping to i 
flucnce them in some degree, by that faith in whose name t 
liuzaront were acting, ordered a solemn procession, and in 
middle of the night carrying the statue and pbiala contaitiing* t 
blood of St. Jamiariua, paaaed along tlio most crowded streoi 
.-singing encrcd hymns from place to place, preaching justioo & 
mercj. Wliilst this ceromony was proceeding, a tall man wm 
Boen to forco a wnv for himself amidst the throng, and reach the 
sanctuary ; he was cluthod in a dark-coloured dress, his hair wna 
dishevellud, his feet bare, and ho bc»ro about him all the signs of 
penance. This man was tlie Princo di Molilorno, wlic askin 
permission of the Archbishop to address the people, and havi 
doclared hiv name and rank, and tho just cause he had to w 
mourning in the unlrersal calamity, exhorted the people to go 
and repose, in order to enable them to sustain the fatigues of waB 
on the following day ; which would certainly be the last, if aff 
would consent to swear by these saered phials to exterminate tho 
French or to dia Ho then, in a loud voice, took the oath, whitS 
was responded to by a thousand voices. His speech and attiraP 
combined with the religious ceremony, had tho desired effect, and, 
togcilier with the general cxhausiion, succeeded in inducing the 
people to retire to their homes, and allow the city a brief interval 
of tranquillity. 

The republicans alono did not sleep, for imminent danger y«fl 
hung over ttiem. They had promised General Champiounet ^ 
gain possession of the castle of Saul' Elmo, and had attempted 
it the night before, but without success ; some of the oonspimtors 
had failed at tho plane of meeting, the password bad been wnntins^ 
and the garrison waking to arm», they barely saved themselves hi 
flight Tho fortress was commanded by Nicolo Caiiicciolo, who wag 
in favour with tho people, because he happened to be the brother of 
the Duke di ICoccaromnnn, and was garrisoned by a hundred and 
thirty TjiiKzaroni, led by Luijji Brandi, one of themselves, and a man 
of desperate character. Cai-iLcciolo was in tho conspiracy of tho 
republicans. lie proposed that at daybreak on the 2Uth, a handful 



1TS9. 



PRBDI!fAND IV. 



fi83 



of ttic conspimtora should present themselves uncxpcctcdlj and 
unnrmefl at thu coallc, ns a reinforcemeiit for the garrison ; nrrired 
there, the )>and prelonled they liad hcon sent tliither hy the 
people ; for all claesca of society, priests, friars, nobles, and magia- 
tratea were that day to Bght the French, from the castloa, tlie 
walls, or in the £cld ; and thejr assigned as a reason for appearing 
without arms, that the,y were sure of tindino' weapons in the nrroonry 
of the fort, and had therefore rc^^igncd theirs to the people, who 
needed them. Thid [^lausiUecJcidanutiousatiaGod their audience, 
and the small and unarmed band not exciting nnv suspiuiou, 
they were received amidst warlike acclamations, and were trium* 
phantly provided with arms. A few hours later the governor of 
the cftsllc, reminding the garrison of the atteitipt the Jacobins had 
made the previous night, commanded numerous patrols to malco 
the round of the walls, and appointed Braudi to lead them ; they 
accordingly left the caatle; then giving onloM to double the sentries, 
he placed a conspirator beside cvoi-y man of the ]ieo|)Lu. Braiuli was 
recalled, alone from the patrol to confer on matters of importances 
but hardly had he airived when the gates were closed and Ijarrcd 
behind him, and he was conducted in silence to a deep dungeon. 
The garrison of Liizzaront being thus deprived of their leader, it 
only rc<iuired a few hartly spirits to overcome the rest ; at a con- 
certed signal, each conspirator who was standing sentry, placed his 
weapon at the breast of his comrade, whilst the others attacked 
the Liizzaroni who, ia perfect security and unarmed, were dispersed 
throughout the castle The boldness of the attempt, and the sur- 
prise succeeded, and in one short hour a hundred and thirty of the 
people were either excluded from the ca.stlu or thrown into the 
dungcona, by only thirty-one of the re])ublican party, while other 
republicans, at a given signal, luutcned to their assisLance ; from 
that raomcnt, without spilling a drop of blood, the castio was con- 
quered for the French. The Lfizzaroni who bad been expelled, or 
sent out with Braudi as a patrol, told of the insults they had suf- 
fered, hut their tulo was not believed, because the royal standard 
still floated on the stronghold ; and because slow credence is lent 
to unn-elcome truths. Infonuatiou was sent to General Cliam- 
pionnet of this success. 

The day before the aflair of Sant' Elmo, an armed multitude loft 



2Hi 



ItlSTOBY OF THE KIKODOK OP NAPLES. 



ITOli 



the city and attnckotl Oic Frencli post at Ponto Rotto ; gninii 
posscssiou of il, thev proceeded onwards and forded the river I*agmj|l 
but oricouiilering a stronger detachment of (he enemy, were beaten 
and forced to return. Tlic French army ihat same day, the 19lh 
January, raised their camps and approached nearer the city, be- 
tween the Santo and Averso, to await the arrival ofthohalf brigfadc 
which had left Benevento under Colonel Brousaior. While making 
his way along the defile of Caudine, known by the name of the 
Forks, in oommeraoration of the disasters and dUgraeo which befcl 
the RntiinnB there, ho perceived on the opposite hanks and woodyj 
declivities, a considerable number of armed men, and was reminded^ 
of the fato of tlio two consuls ; but more fortunate than they, or be- 
cause the present inlialitants of the Trincipati are less expert than 
the Sanmites, ho contrived to overcome them by strategy. Feign- 
ing an attack and flight, ho soducod the incautious defenders from 
their strong postlions into the plain, where they were easily put 
to tlio rout, as will always be the case where undisciplined num- 
bers are opposed to a regular army. Four hundred French, how- 
ever, fell dead or wounded, and many more perished on the other 
side ; the legion of Broiissier having sumiounted the defile, joined 
the main army, and were proceeding along, almost incautiously, 
when they met, fought, and defeated a body of LiUzaroni ; boC 
these, wheeling alwut, like experienced troops, made a march be- 
hind Vesuvius, and surprised and gained posscssioQ of tho quar- 
ters of Geneml Duhesmo. 

Tho united Frencli army consisted of twenty -two thousand mon, 
who were disposed in four columns, one of whicli, under General 
Dufresse, was acnt in tho direction of Capodimonte; another, 
uuder General Duhcame, towards the Capuan gate; the third, 
under General Kellerman, towards tho bastion of the Caruiino, 
while tho fourth, under General Broussier, was held in re8er>-e. 
Naples, unprovided with bastions or walls, or oven fortified gates, 
relied for defence on her immense population, on the close build 
of the houses, and on the fanaticism of hor people with their hatred 
of tho Frencli. It was tho 2Ist of January, when Genera! Du- 
lieame, in advance of the rest, his vanguard led by General Mou- 
nier, repulsed largo bodies of the LJlzzaroni, took some of their 
cannon, and entered by the Capuan gat^ encamping in the square 



ma. 



PR«DINANU IV. 



S65 



of the same name. Suddenly, circle witliin circle, from Jiousea 
prt'jwred by lo()|iliolc3 in the wnlls, and covered wnys, a thousand 
muskcta wore discharged at the French, who full killed or wounded. 
Gcneml Mounicr himself received a mortal wound, the boldest fell 
hy llic hand of an invisible foe, aud neither skill uor valour could 
avail anything ; they thorefyro abandoned the fatal spot, and 
withdrew their forces, Kellemian having vanijuished those guard- 
ing the bridge of the Maddalena, pitched his camp on the right 
bank of the Seveto; and General Dufrcssc, without encountering 

kany opposition, toolt up his quarters in Capodimonte. The LiUt- 
-saroni yloricd in having retaken the Piazza C'apuana 

But their triumph did not last long ; for Duhesme returned to 
the attack, and having taken a bntterj' of twelve cannon which 
Jifid been plnccd before thegate, proceeded alowly across the square, 
setting fire to the buildings round. It was already night ; the fUmcs, 
the extent of the fircR, and the prospect before them, terrified the 

'Lllzzaroni, who Imstcued to seek refuge in the heart of the city. 
On the following day, Qcncral Chawpionuei, unwilling to expose 
Ins own army to so much probablo loss, and so noble a city to 
dustruction, lioped to conquer Naples by threats and expostula- 
tion. He accordingly ranged his soldiers, artillery, and standards 
along the heights, and exhorted the enemy to capitulate. But his 
herald was stopped on ihe way, attacked by the Lhxzaroni, and 
obliged to fly ; another messenger, in disguise, reached his desti- 
nation, but finding neither leaders, orders, nor magistrates, the 
senate dissolved, Moliterno aud Roecaromana fled, and nothing 
left but the rabble and utter confusion, ho returned to the camp to 
report how matters stood. General Duhcsmc had meantime sent an 
advanced guard of a few men to the open space called Dellc Pigne, 
and as the liizzsroni attacked them from the Palace of Solimona, 
a handful of soldiers made a sudden rusli, reached tlie edifice, set 
it on lire, and then returned to the camp. Thus passed the 2l8t 
January, aud little of interest occurred on the following day. 

But in the night the French general prepared a final assault to 
take place on the 2Sd, and sent intimation of his intentions to the 
officers tn command of the columns, and to the allies in Sant' Elmo ; 
he then organized the movement and position of the troops, order- 
ing, in the event of the hoped-for victory, that strict discipline 



HISTORY OP tut KISGDOM OP KAi'LES. 



Bhould be niaintuincd among tlio soldicra, and lu case of ilefcai, 
providing for tlio rctivat ;tnd aafetji of the arui^. Ojioratiooa com- 
menced at dnybreak. At the general assault the liiuaroui ile- 
funded thcmisclres in life streets, Lut, without discipline or leader, 
they fought as chance directed, and w iih desperate courage, uatil 
the cannon from Sant' Elmo began firing on the market-place, And 
Jtillcd several of their number ; all then turning towards thcca^itlo 
behold the French standard, and discoveriHl they had been be- 
trayed. Motitcmo and Koccaromanu had already taken refuge in 
the fort, and republicnn-t di^t;;uiscd as lAKzaront mingled with the 
crowd, and endeavoured first to stop the slaughter aiul pillap;e, aud 
llum to persuade the betrayed people to submit to the French joka 
If ouly viewed in tlio light of a deception practised on the people, 
their conduct would deservu ecntture, but wiicn it is TemcmbcFed 
that their object was to put a &top to the exccsj>es and fury of a 
lawless mob, they deserve praise for huuiauity. God aud hiistory 
will decide if those who first kindled the war, aud then deserted 
it, who excited the people to arms, and then abandoned their ad- 
herents, the state, the chief eommand, and the reins of govern- 
ment, were not alone guilty of all the criraca pci-petrated at that 
time. They could act coolly, and were under no compuUion, while 
those who remained were prompted by the instinct of self-preser- 
Tation, by patriotism, ami still muro frequently by necessity. Tho 
dregs of the people hurried to the spoil of the palace, but were 
diiipcrscd by two discluiixes of cannon from Sant' Elmo, and aban- 
doned it when half sacked. The French mcauwhilQ proeoedod 
onwards. General Kusca, by an assault, gaiued possession of the bas- 
tion of the Canuine, Castel ^uovo surrendered to Uencrol Kcllcr- 
man, and Qeneral Dufresse abandoning Capodimonte for Sant' Qmo, 
descended into tho city in order of battle. But Qeneral Champion- 
net, who, in the midst of all his hostile preparations, had uot relin- 
quished his noble desire for peace, went to the camp of Duhesme^ 
and raising the flag of peace, invited the people by signs to a( 
proaeh, and by gestures and words persuaded thorn that, now thai 
the French were masters of the castles, it was folly to prosecute 
the war, and worse than folly, unjuat ; since they had come 
bring the people peace, abundance, and a better govcrnmeot^ ai 
would swear to respecl Uieir persons and property, te reverence 



IM. 



FEUDIKA^D ir. 



M7 



tlie Chiircli and religion, and pay Oie devotion duo to the most 
Mes9cd St. JanimriuA. TKo gcncrftl spoko Italian fluently, and 
wnft therefore understood and applauded by his audience, amoog 
Tfhom wfl3 Micliele il Pazzo, the chosen leader of the liizKironi, 
who, requesting* Championnet to place a guard of honour around 
St. JanuariuB, immediately obtained leave for two companies of 
grenadiers to march to the Cathedral ; aa they passed along the 
streets, the tfoopsshouted, " All reverence to Ht Januarius !" while 
tho Neapolitan lAzzai-oni, who ran by their side, responded with 
the cry of " Long live the French !" Never did fame fly more 
swiftly ; the event was told fro[n one end of tlio city to tho other, 
and the friendly words of tho FK-neli jfeueral were repeated, whilst 
the banner of tlie three colours, floated from tho caatlea, and 
Proneh bands of mu«ic inviit-d alt to rejoice. The heavens were 
unclouded, as is usually the case in Naples during tho month of 
January. Arms fell froni (he hands of the populace, who, like 
tame or untnincd caltle, are ready to acquiesce in servitude or 
freedom, the aport of fortune, and leas inclined for action than c[i- 
duraiicc.^a fit material for despotism. Tho noise of war had 
ccaacd, those who had fled in Icrror came out of tlieir hiding- 
places, and Oeiieral Cliampiouuet made a magnificent entry into 
Naples, preceded by an edict, which ran as follows : — 

" Neapolitans, bo free; if you know how to enjoy tho gift of 
freedom, the French Republic will be amply rewarded in your hap- 
piness for her dead and for tlic war. If any among you still prefer 
the government which has ceased to exist, let them disencumber 
this free soil of their presence ; let them fly from us who are 
citizens, and let slaves go among slaves. The French army will 
tako the name of the army of Naples, as a pledge and solemn vow 
to maintain your rights, and to use those arms to advance your 
JihcrtiesL Wo French will respect the national worship, and the 
icred rights of property and person. Your magistrates will, by 
their patcnial administration, provide for the tranquillity and hap- 
piness of the citizens ; let the terrors of ignorance disappear, let 
the fury of fanaticism he dispellcU, and may you be as solicitous 
to servo us, as the perfidy of your fallen government was to in- 
jure us." 

The rejoicingi continued : the icpubllcaoa, who embraced one 



288 HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM 0? NAPLES. MS. 

another in the streets, called to remcmhrance those who had suf- 
fered in the cause, and with tears of emotion and pleasure blessed 
the memories of Yitaliano, Galliani, and De Deo, while bands of 
patriots hastened to the houses of their relatives, to condole with 
thcra on their past sufferings. Amidst all these festive scenes, the 
eyes and thoughts of men were attracted towards the melancholy 
spectacle of the dead bodies of tliose who had fallen on either side, 
and which yet encumbered the streets ; at least a thousand French 
lay there, and threo thousand or more Neapolitans. After night- 
fall, the darkness was dispelled by an infinity of lamps, which 
illuminated the city, while Mount Vesuvius, which had been tran- 
quil for many years, sent forth a placid and brilliant flame, like a 
celestial omen of happiness. The omen, however, proved fallacious, 
for a far different destiny lay concealed in the bosom of time. 



BOOK IV. 
THE PARTIIESOPEAN REPCBLia 

autVAXS TD JOSB 1709. 



CHAPTER I. 

UWS FOB THE OEOANIZATIOX OF THE BEPOBUa 

WuEti GciiGi-al Cliampionnct entered Naples, the rejoicings of 
the people were overcast by the rememhranco of the recent strife, 
and hy the sight of the unburied dead i but by orders of the 
city niagibtrates tbia melaucholy spectaclu was removed during the 
silence of niglit, and preparations made fwr the festival of (he 
morrow. The grief for those who had fallen ceased, because sol- 
diers only lament their comrades in the hour of clanger, and the 
Lazzaroni neither sorrow for their dead, nor wear mourning. At 
daybreak, many of the youth of the city, inflamed with a passion 
for liberty, invited the people to listen to harangues on the advan- 
tages of a republic, and declaimed with all the eloquence tlicy 
could muster on the rewards, the duties, and virtues of the citizen. 
They proceeded to cnunicraio tho faults and acts of injustice of 
the fugitive king, reminded their audience of tho treasure he had 
carried off, uf the ships which bad been burned by his orders, 
leaving their shores without defence, exposed to enemies and 
pirates; and of the war ku had jirovokcd, and then Ued to avoid ; 
of his having roused the people to arm and then deserted tliem, 
leaving no directions for their conduct in future, and abandoning 
his subjects to the sword of foreign enemies and to domestic strife. 
These facts, fresh in tho recollections of all, strengthened the 
arguments of the orators and gave fire to their eloquence in the 
cause of liberty — a word which warms the heart of every man, a 

VOL. L S B 



290 



niSTORT OP THB KISODOM OF KAPLEa 



vn. 



wcllspring of joy, nnJ an instinct of nature. Tlie happiness of the 
people therefore was universal, openly aclcnowlet^ged, nud unalloyod. 

General Clmnipionnet meantime issued an etlict in the name 
uid by tho auibority of tlic French Republic, in which he declared, 
that, dcsiroua to use the rights of conquest for the benefit of the 
people, he proposed to organize the State of Naples into an inde- 
pendent rcpiihlic; that a body of citizens should be formed to 
frame the new statute, and to rule with the forms of a free govern- 
ment J and that by tlic nulhoriry ho dericcrl from his rank and the 
auccesa of his arms, ho had taken upon himself to apjioint the 
persons of whom tliia Assembly was to bo composed, who would 
meet thnt same dny in San Lorenzo.' and would receive their 
powers from his lips. Tliis Provisional Ciovrmment was to consist 
of twcnty-livo members, who were classified in department* called 
committees, assuming the nantos of, the central committee, the 
committee for the interior, for war, for finance, for justice and 
police, and for legislation. General Chanipionnet then proceeded 
in military array, nnd escorlwl by a vast crowd of admiring people 
to San Lorenxo, a building associated in their minds with honourable 
memories of the past -, and there in the great hall, where the Pro- 
visional Government was already assembled, he ascended a placo 
of honour, and spoke as follows : — 

" Citizens, tho conduct of the affairs of the Nc«]>oIitan Republic 
18 for the pirsent confided to you. Tho permanent government will 
be elected hy the people; you yourselves being constituent and con- 
stituted, may diminish the embarrassments which new kwa must 
entail by goveniing according to the principles which you shall pre 
poao for the new statute. 1 have, therefore, temporarily confided tc 
you the charge of legislators or regents for the public benefit. You 
have unlimited powers and equal responsibility. Remember that 
npon you depends whether a great benefit or a great evil be con- 
ferred upon your country ; wliich will accrue to your honour or 
dishonour. / have indeed selected you, but you were pointed out 
to mc by fame: and may the exccllcnco of your performance 
justify the choice of the people by whom you are said to b© 
endowed with exalted genius and pure hearts, and to be ardentlj 
and sincerely attached to your country. 

■ San Larauu. Tlio Town BftH, 



17». 



TUB FABTHBNOPEAN HEPUBUC. 



191 



" Wliilo organiKing tTio Repulilic of Naples, let tlie constitution 
as rtiist'Iy rcacmlilo that of the French Republic, aa the wants and 
habits of jour country will i>ermit. Franco is tho mother of the 
new republics, ami of the new cm of civilisation, and during your 
ndniinistmtion continue to bo our friends, colleagues, and com- 
pnnions, and in all things be united with France. I)o not hope for 
proeperity ecpnmtcd from her ; remember lier sighs will be your 
sorrows, and that uhen she totters you fall. 

" The French army, which has taken the name of the Neapolitan 
amiy, as a ploilge lo protect yrrnr freedom, will support your rights, 
will (lid your Liboiirs, and will fight /bf you and with you; and wliile 
defending your cause, wc ask no other reward than yourafTectiOD." 

Tlic hall was filled with people, and this eloquent discourse was 
followed by applause, and good wishes for the orator, as well as for 
the prosperity of tlio Kepuldics of France and Naples, while tears 
of emotion and pleasure were aeon in many eyes. When silence 
was restored, Carlo Laubcrt, a Neapolitan, a raomber of the Pro- 
visional Government, but formerly an ecclesiastic of the order of 
tho Seolbpi,' who had escaped as a liberal to France, and had 
returned with the army, answered in these words: — 

" CitiJien Oeneml, our liberty is indeed a gift of Franco, but tho 
army and its leader have been the instruments by whom the 
benefit has been obtained. With less valour, less discretion, or 
Iass virtue, you could not have conquered an army of externnna- 
tion, ditipereed a people stung to fury, or seized on the strongholds, 
and overcome the obstacles of the road and the winter season. 
Let us therefore return thanks to the French Republic, thanks to 
the army, and thanks to you, General, who have come like a mes- 
senger of liberty and pcaca 

" In this land, within our boBoms, first ttprung up the desiro for a 
better government, the first aspirations for liberty, and the wamicat 
prayers for the prosperity of France ; in this land and from our 
bosoms was shed the first blood to tyranny ; here were the heaviest 
chains, tho longest sufferings, tho fiercest torments. Wc liad thus 
proved ourselves worthy of liberty, tut had it not been for tlie errors 
committed by our tyrants, and the Divine scourge which pursues all 

' Sttliipi. iS:ii(ibi%', Scbooli of Cluml^;~u)OT^rroiuiilc<ll>>- Joto^ibof C«Ia«aiisi<i;, 
furtliB pnrpoiM of education. 



BISTOBT OP TUE KIKGDOU OP KAPLBS. 



ITSa. 



wlioso consciences aro troubled by the sinfulness of tlielr Uvea, wo 
should yet have been under the yoke of Acton, of the queen, 
of Castclcicala, and all the satellites of despotisuL Their crimes 
alone would not have suffice*! (for the people's endurance is great) 
had they not added error to crime, and had not we been sup- 
ported by arms, and aided by retributive justice. 

" You, General, have given us the Republic, that fonn of govem- 
mcnt most befitting men ; our task will be to preserve it ; but wo 
entreat you to consider it as a tender new-born child, which will 
need help and counsel ; it is your work, give it then your advice 
and support. IT you perceive that wo aro not equal te so high 
an ofTlco as that you have imposed on us, we will restore it into 
your liands ; for in the face of such an undertaking and such hopes, 
the thought of eclf must disappear, and we can only desire to pro- 
mote the wellbeing of our country. I swear to dedicate myself 
to this work, and the provisional government selected by you will 
in your presence register this oath before God and the people." 
The voices of the twenty-four remaining members all instant!/ 
repeated the words, " I swear" 

General Chanipionnct left the Assembly with the same state in 
which ho had entered, and followed by still greater applause. 
Marie Pagano, another member of the government, then turning 
to the people, thus addressed them : — 

" Yes, citizens, we aro free ; let us enjoy our freedom, hut let 
us not forget that it rests upon the support of arms, upon the 
payment of the taxes, and upon our virtue ; and that in a republic^ 
it is only by excelling in virtue that our arms will find repose, and 
our taxes be diminished. The constitution and laws of the Govern- 
ment will be directed towards these three ends. As speech is free, 
do you aid our endeavours by your suggestions, and we will accept 
your advice with gratitude, and will follow it, if good. 

" But listen to me, all you who are animated with a desire for 
liberty, which T perceive in the joy sparkling in your eyes; 
listen to the warnings of one grown grey, less from age than from 
cares for his country, and his sufferings in prison ; hasten to 
arm, and when armed, be obedient to command. Republics are 
adorned by every virtue, but the noblest virtues arc to be found 
within the camp ; wisdom, eloquence, and genius enable States to 



xm. 



THE PABTUENOPEAN REPDBLIO. 



293 



progroM, but the valour of the soldier alone can prwon'o them. 
The- ropuUics of car)^ natioiia (for eoclcty commeuced as republics) 
were rude, ignorant, and barbarous ; but tliej lasted because war- 
like : the republics of a corrupt era of civilisation sooii fell ; for 
ftUhough thej abounded in good laws, statutes, and orators, and 
all the supports and incitements to virtue, the profession of arms 
was in that generation suffered to decline 

" Therefore the hopes of liberty depend more on you than oa 
us. No sooner ia the Provisional Government acl<nowledged to be 

^4 lawful and constituted authority than wo turn to the fulfilment 
>f our duties; let those who are so full of ardour in tiic cause 
instantly hasten to fulfil theirs i let them inscribe their nnmes on 

:the standard of liberty, which they will recognise iu the trl- 
alor." 

The Assembly broke up, aud scenes of conviviality in private 
families followed (hese public demons tratious of joy. General 
Cbaupionnet,'who had taken up his residence in the former abode 
of royalty, now called the National Palace, entertained the chief 
officers of the army, nnd the highest personages in the government 
and the city ; several members of the Government also gavo 

. banquets, but the rejoicings wore greatest in those familiea who 
had suffered most under tho tyranny; while even the lowest of 
the populace fdced one another, and good wishes for the liepublio 
resounded on every side ; the relatives of tliose wlio had beeu 
executed for treason were alone niUsini; iu these banquets and 
festive scones; and tho mora distant the event tho more the dead 
were lamented and extolled. 

That same day edicts were circulated througliout the provinces, 

^proclaiming what had taken place, and transmitting directions for 
(he conduct of the government. Orders were issued that until 
fresh commands arrived, the country was to be ruled as before, 
dy with such modifications as would enable it to harmonize with 
the general forma of a Republic, and tliat the authorities, magis- 
trates, and officials, should continue tho same. All fears having 
subsided, and the war being at an end, tho provinces were eager 
to emulate the metropolis, and every town and village showed 
signs of rejoicings. Tho next day the trees of liberty (at that 
time the emblems of a republican govcmaieuL) were raised iu the 



fi»'i 



UlSTOBV OF TQS KIXODOU OF SAVLBS, 



171.0. 



tqnnres or Naples, accompanied bj ceremonies wliidi had ratl>cr 
tlie cliaractcr of bacclianalian orgies tlian civic solemnities, iviih 
impa&sioncd orations, frantic dancca, vowa, and the eclchration of 
nuptials, as in a consecrated temple. Finnllv, Genrrnl Cham- 
pionnet, accompanied hy the ottier geiieniln ai\d oflici-rs of his 
army, went in solemn staio to the cathedral to retuin thniiha Tor 
the termination of Iho war, to adore the rcUcs of 8i. JaiiuariuSf 
and to invoke the hlcssing of God on the new State. Tliu church 
and chapel were prepared for the sacred rite, and an immense 
concourse of people stood cxpccttint, c&gerl^ watching the phiuls 
to draw auguries for good or for evil. But the miraclo waa com- 
pleted in a sliorler time than it had ever been before, aud the 
General presented the&anctuar; with a mitre riclilj decorated with 
gold and gems; the officers appeared to be 611cd with dcvolion, 
ta if believing in the mystery, and the populace were satisfit-d that 
tliis change of government was the will of God. 

The fete being at an end, and the excitement: of novelty sub- 
siding, the minda of men recovered their natural rqiiilibrium, and 
all were intent on what was to follow, in order thcreliy to deter- 
mine their ambitious schemes or conduct In order fully to 
comprehend tho facts I am about to relate, it is nccei'sary to give 
a sketch of the state of tho Neapolitan people, snch ns it was 
befuro and during this period. Political liberty was only the 
study of a few learned men derived from tnoilern books, and built 
upon French theories ; therefore as unloundt;d as tho genius 
of revolution, and as little a]>plicablo lo the stale of society as 
the dreams of ideal philosophy. Tho failings inherent in tiumaa 
nature, tho errors and even those virtues which by a naiuml 
course often degenerate into vices, such as ambition and heroi.<iin, 
both necessary for republics, but which by their vi-ry naturaJ 
are apt to overstep their boundaries, and become dangerous to 
the State, lu short all those necessary accompaniments of man 
in hia present condition, were overlooked or ignored in the! 
abstract doctrines; and a certain ideal of politiciil liberty was 
created, only too far removed from reality. 8iill greater ignor- 
ance was displayed in practice. No national parliament nor 
convocations of the people was composed for tlic conduct of 
aflairs of State ; institutions which may bo traced to the earliest 



I7SQ. 



TUK FABTlIENOrEAN BEPITBLIC. 



Sd5 



periods of out liistory, Ijiit wliicli Iiad been neglected even by Iho 
virtuous kings of tim Uouiic of Swiibla. The rigltts of property 
were fttUl violated by the Government, and were subject to 
feudal burdens and church tithes, and were nt the caprioe of any 
power vbich happened to be uppermost ; the person of the vassal 
was at the disposal of the lords and biirons, and nion were liable 
to the abiiao of the trial by iiic]uisitioii, wuro in the power of 
informers and spies, and mt<,'lit bu carried oQ* a^ soldicri in the 
arbitrary levies fur the army, besides eufTciiiig all tltc oppressions 
of a state of feudalism; neither arts, trade, nor industry were 
free, and ail independent action was bRni|>urcd. The only vestige 
of frcodom remained iu the popular pftrlianieuts for the clectioa 
of ofScers fur the municipality ; a liberty unpioduL-tivo of good, 
because standing alone and surrounded by servile institutions. 

The comprehension of liberty, and what was worse, even of 
equality before llio laws, waa therefore wanting. Liberty is tho 
otT^priug of nature, and tlicreforc despotism is forced to use 
repented efforts and extinguish nil indepcndcnc thought befuro the 
sentiment can bo obliterated from the human brcasL Equality, 
on the otlier hand, springs from civiUsatiua and long-c&tublislicd 
rights; for that the weak should be equal with the strong, the 
poor with the rich, or the powerless with the powerful, arc not 
natural ideas. Amidst the rude tribes uf auliquity men were free 
but not equal ; and a ghinco at the liistory of the Neapolitan 
people (not at the remote ntid now forgotten Greek republics, but 
at tho more recent although still ancient history of seven ccnluries, 
during which time tlio manners of the jieuple were fornud) will 
satisfy the reader that tlicre does not exist any practical evidence 
nor indication of political equjility in the instiiutioiks of lUo 
country, but on the contrary, monarchy, a pricstliood, feudalism, 
immimitics, privilqres, domestic servitude, vassalage, and nunibor- 
less other social anomaliea Political equality in ihe year 1 799, 
therefore, was neither demanded as a right, nor so much as 
dreamed of by the people ; the lowest of the populace alone pre- 
tending to understand by the term, an equal dirisioa of wealth 
and property. 

Fur this reason the great principles of tho French Ucvolution, 
liberty and equality, were neither valueU nor coaipreheudcd in 



29« 



niSTOBY OP THB KIKODOH OF NAPLR8. 



vm. 



our country ; wliicK ilifforence alone Iwtween tlie revolutions m 
Franco and Naples, was sufficient to suggest a diHereat form of 
government ; but there were otliere no less important The re- 
voltuion was made Jy France, hut /or Naplca. The transition 
from the extreme of a despotic monarchy to that of a republic, 
had been the work of three years in France, and of one day in 
Naples. The political necessities of France were manifested by 
risings in the people ; such nccessiliea were unlcnown or die) not 
exiet in Naples ; the labour and sncceas of those enterprises satis- 
fied the demands of France, while in Naples it was first necessary 
to show the people what they were in want of, and to awaken 
them to desires, in order afterwanls to have the merit of satisfying 
them. The King of Franco was dead, the supporters of monarchy 
there likewise dead or in exile; while the King of Naples was 
reigning in the neighbouring island of Sicily, and all the adherents 
of the past were still amongst ua The barons were opposed to tho 
new order of things ; those nobles M-ho wore partisans of the 
Republic were tho sons and not the heads of families, and could 
hardly rouae the retainers on their fiefs, while the priests were In 
terror of a persecution like that suffered by the French clergy ; 
monks feared the pillage of their monaateriea, and lawyere the 
repeat of that compilation of codes on which thoy depended for 
the exercise of their vocation and tho acquisition of fortunes ; and 
ilnally, we did not possess any of those qualities upon which liberty 
depends, and in which France abounded, niililary virtues and poli- 
tical ambitioiL The Hcvulution with us had not even the pretence 
of legality, bccauso it did not emanate from a Parliament, States- 
General, nor from any other assembly nor constituted authority, 
not even from a unanimous movement on the part of the people, 
but was the result of a conquest which was not yet completed, and 
of a state of thing;s which alienated the timid and lovers of ordor 
from the new government. 

Though it was at first proposed that the details of the Gorern- 
ment should difl'er from those of France, they proved to be idcn* 
tioal ; a fact to be cither attributed to the necessities of the lime, 
or to the intoxication caused by tho successes of the French, or, as I 
believe, to the preponderance of men of genius and erudition in 
the members of the Government, without any ono possessing tho 



un 



TUE rAUTUENOrEAK REPUBLia 



m 



ipacity to conduct a revolutionary movement, or the kind of 
tnowle<lge required to rule a new State. These men had long 
been tho friends of liberty, and had moat of tbcm suffcretl im- 
prisonment in the State dungeons ; they were now called patriots, 
a. name adopted from the French to avoid thai of Jacobin, which had 
been disgraced by the evil deeds of Robespierre. The first act of 
the Government was to send deputies to the French Republic, to 
express their gratitude for the benefits conferred on them, and to 
remain as ambassadors of friendship and alliance. The Prince 
d'Atigri, who held a high j'osition from his family and wealth, was 
suk'ctc'd to fill this office, witli the Prince di Moliteruo, also a noble- 
man, whu had a still higher claim from his unsullied reputation, 
his having earned some fame in arms, having opposed the clubs, 
and been an upright leader of the people in the late war against the 
French ; and because, without turning traitor, he had abandoned his 
post when it became impossible to restrain the popuUce. lie was, 
however, suspected by the new Government, who, while honouring 
him with the office of ambassador, sent him into exile. The Duke 
di Roccaromana was too much addicted to pleasure, and too fcohio 
a cliaractcr to aepire to govern, and was therefore overlooked iu 
the beginning of the Republic. Thus the first acts of the Govern- 
ment betrayed symptoms of jealousy, characteristic of all free 
guverumeuts, a sLimulun to virtue in great States, but producing 
discord in small ; for in the one case it supports, in the other it is 
destructive of liberty. 

A decree was next passed, by which the country was divided 
into departments and cantons, abolishing tlie division of provinces, 
and changing their names for others more ancient and of honoured 
memory. Thus the rivers, mountains, forests, and the boundaries 
of nature, frequently became the centres of departments or cantons, 
and sometimes of districts ; and by an exclinnge of names, a moun- 
tain was sometimes mistaken for a city, and was made the capital 
of a canton ; the territory belonging to one community was divided 
into two cantons; some rivers were named twice, and certain 
towns wholly omitted ; in short, there were so many blunders, 
rthat everything remained as before, and the only effect of the law 
was to bring the legislators into discredit. 

A wise law abolished entails, a measure which had already beea 



£98 



niSTORY OF THK KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



UBIL 



rccoiDTnondcd in the works of FilangicH, Pagano, and otbcrlcam( 
men, and which was as productive uf good results as was possiblo^ 
under exisliug circunislnnccs. Many commumlies were at law 
witti Ihe barons, many more wero gtriving lo break through iho 
restraints of vassala^je ; and both parties, with others exciteU by 
their exnntpio, invaded the feudal domains with lawless violeficfl^'i 
divided them anionfj- the citizens, and revenged their own wroi 
And those of their fort-fathi r* by revolutionary excesses. Thea«i' 
acts were not wholly displeasing to the Government, who declared 
feudalism ahoH^lied, put nn end to the baronial jurisdiction, dis- 
inissird armc<l rclJiiners, forliade pcrannal service, reniilted tithes 
and loans, with nil tlio piiymcrits which liad been oxactcd under 
the title of rights, nud prximisod a new law which eliould scttld| 
the claims of the conimuiis as well as those of the former borons, 
without rctnliutiug pust injuries inflicted by Itie feudal landholders. 
The Govcriiinont wns prepared to fulfil this promise, hut, entangled, 
iit the web of reciprooal cliiitiis, and only guided by an abstraol 
idea of justice, thoy met with obstacles on every side, now in the 
right of possession, and now in titles; therefore the law, aflor 
lonfT discussion, was never promulgntcd. Of all the members of 
the Government, be who most steadfast I j'suppor ted the claitnt of 
the barons was Mario Pa^^auo. — opposed to them in all liis theoriea, 
A pliilosojihical writer, a timid counsellor, and who would liavo 
Tnudc an ndmirAblo lepsbitor in an aire nil y-nrndc Hopublic, but 
iiicdpiiblc, ns were Mkoivisc hta twenty-four coadjutors in the Go- 
vernment, of fc)uinliii|» a new Republic. 

Another iudicalion of the popular hatred towards the past waa 
di8|>Iiiyed in the case of the royal hunting-grounds. Wlien the 
chase WAS niiidf free to the citizens tbey destroyed the gamo, 
efTitced the bounJurics, aiid, without regard to cinims of property, 
ctitdowii the wood, reduced Die land to cultivation, and divided it, 
like a conquci-ed territory. Ujion this, tho Qovemmcnt declared 
the royal chase nnlioiml pioporty, and dismissed the rangers. 
Eilifts were tisued promising the suppression of convents, tho 
reduction of bishoprics, and the sequestration of the enormous 
■wealth of the Church ; bcni^fita wbich were not understood as such 
by the people, ns was proved during the riots, by the invariabl* 
respect maintained, and even increased, towards the Clmrch and 



insi 



THB PABTUBNOPBAX BKPOBLIC. 



S99 



clergy. The abolition of titles ofnoljility, the demolition of the 
escutcheons and olligieB of former kings, tho term National g'iven to 
everylltiug which had hceii Ko/al, and the nanio tjmtit bestovrcd 
on King Ferdinand, were ihe subject ofother laws which eillier pro- 
ceeded from hatred of the past, or wore in imitation of France. 

Other branches of the administration were likewise provided for. 
TIic finances, which were already disordered, had been rendered 
worse by the late commotions, while the urgency of the times 
added to tho causes of uneasiness : the principal cares of the Go- 
vernment were therefore directed towards this subject. By a law 
for which the people were totally unprepared, tho deficit in tho 
banhs was declared a national debt, and, with the best intentions, 
pnynicnl was promised, which was neither in accordance with 
justice nor financial rules, as there was not money suflicicnt in tho 
country to replace fiuch enormous losses, and, by the tranHpcr of 
bnult paper, the actual owners of tlio certificates were not the cro- 
dilors in the bankruptcy. By another law, the ratepayers were 
ordered immediately to discharge their debt to the exchequer for 
the taxes due to the late Govcnimcnt, as well as to pay the current 
tnxcs. The Government taxes were to continue unaltered, until a 
better arrangement should be made by the new statute. 

Meantime tho duty upon fish was abolished, greatly to the satis- 
faction of the fishermen in tho metropolis, who immediately became 
friendly to the Republic. But tlio abolition of the duties upon 
com. as well as the capitation tax (erroneously believed communal), 
was attended with a very opposite result throughout the kingdom ; 
for the Government taxes being paid by them, to maiulain these 
last and yet aboli^ tho means by which they wore oblaiaod, 
created a confusion, and was impossible in practice. The rate- 
payers, supported by the new law, refused their accustomed pay- 
ments ; while the tax-gatherers, supported by another law, urged 
their demands, and complaints and d!«tputcs arose in tho com- 
munities. 

In the midst of this scene of disorganization and of pecuniary 
diffi'^ultics, a command was issued by General Championnet, which, 
while remitting the sum stipulated for in the truce, imposed a war- 
tax of two millions and a half of ducats on the city, and of fifteen 
millions upon tho provinces ; a sum in itself exorbitant, and, in 



300 



HISTORY OF THE CINODOM OP IfAPLXS. 



im. 



the actual condition of the country, impossible to raise within the 
lime, which waa fixed at two months. The Government, however, 
obliged to yield to necessity, considered how they could best dis- 
tribute the bunlen ; nnd unable to find any precedent iD th< 
past history of the ^nances, from the absence of statistical stata^l 
mcnts, they laid taxes on departments, communes, and persons, 
83 they judged best: their dccislona being influenced by party 
spirit, tliosc provinces whicli had been moat linn in their adlicrcncC 
to the kins', i^^'ell as all who had continued most faithful to their 
oaths, were heaviest taxed. In order to facilitate pavment, gold 
and silver plat4f, acconling to weight, was accepted in lieu of 
money, as well as jewellery, at a valuation, and the feeling of the 
people towards the Ilcpublic was proved by families sacrificing th© 
lost remains of tbeir wealth, brides tearing off iheir ornaments, 
and mothers depriving their infants of the precious stones tbej 
wore as amulets, and of sacred oniaments, to whicli thoy attached' 
a superstitious value. But a spirit of discontent was raised by the 
heavy amount of the tax, by the way in which it was exacted, and 
by the injustice of the demand itself. 

Five of the Government were doputod to represent the general 
dissatisfaction to Cliampionnet ; Giuseppe Abbamonti was chosen 
spokesman. He appealed to his feelings of compassion and jus- 
tice, and entreated the gt.'ueral to revoke his order, which at that 
time was impossible tu execute, but which would bo easy to obey, 
wlien tbe power and authority of the Republic had been established. 
He was eiidcavouriiig to render these truths more palatable by 
arguments, praise, and flattery, when the general, interrupting 
him, quoted the barbarous words of a barbarian progenitor: *' V«b 
victis esse" (woe to the conquered !) Among the five was Gene- 
ral Manthoii(!, n retired captain of arlilleTy, a man both men- 
tally and physically strong, a patriot, and one who despised 
foreigners. Diacanling diplomatic forms, and assuming for the 
moment the office of spokeMiian, ho addressed Championnot in 
these words : — " Citixcn General, you appear to have forgotten that 
neither have we been conquered, nor arc you a conqueror ; that you 
have not entered this city by battles and victories, but by our aid 
and consent ; that we guvo you tlio castles, and betrayed your 
enemies for the sake of our country ; that your weak battalioDfl 



ink 



THE PARTHBNOPEAN HEPUBLEC. 



!01 



were not ikbl^ to conquer Uiifi vast city ; nor would ihcy have suc- 
coedcd in retaining it, had we separated ouraclvcs from you. To 
prove the truth of my assertion, leave these walls, and then return 
if you can ; you nmy then lawfully impose war-taxes, assume tlio 
authoritative tone of a conqueror, and, if such is your pleasure, 
use the unrighteous words of Brcutuis, which will then better be- 
come you." The general dismissed the deputation, with an assur- 
ance that he would reconsider the matter ; hut from that hour ho 
lecame suspicious of the Neapolitans, and the Rcpuhlican party 
tc^n to dislike the French. 

The general on the morrow confirmed the taica, and ordered 
the people to be disarmed. To bestow freedom on men and then 
deprive them of their arms, is a mere moeliery of liberty. Tlio 
organization of the civic guard was permitted ; hut, nt tlie samo 
time, it was ordered that they should be chosen only from tho 
most distinguished and loyal pntriota ; and such stringent laws 
were passed by tho Government, that while many were inscribed 
as ratepayers, few of tho citizens wore included in the armed 
militia. No more than four companies were raised in the metro- 
polis, and the number selected was only six hundred. The asaeu- 
ments were very heavy, and unsupported by an armed force, or 
tho attachment to a free government, they wore only viewed in 
the light of a greedy financial measure. The caution or suspicions 
of the French general, and tho theories inculcated by Neopolitan 
theorists, caused the neglect of a regular army. " All free men 
arc soldiers in a republic," asserted these theorists ; " mercenary 
armies are the instruments of tyranny. Rome, when she was really 
free, raised her champions at the time of war ; soldiers are not 
wanted iu republici>,"with other eloquence of the tribune, containing 
hypothetical ideas of virtue. Numbers of Dalmatians were begging 
in the streets, who had formerly been in the Bcrvice of Ferdinand, 
and were now abandoned in a foreign land. Gangs composed of 
men, who had once been the armed retainers of the bamns, of the 
royal provincial courts and of the bishops, wiili many soldiers who 
had hitherto lived on their pay, wandered over the provinces, and 
subsisted by crime. It would have been easy to have fomted a 
new army of twonty-five thousand men, and thus to have rid the 
country of tho danger incurred by twenty-five thousand ncccs- 



302 



BISTORT OP TIIK KIK6D0M OP NAPLES. 



ins. 



Bitoua persons and robbers. But the Republic disdained to owe 
its protection to foreign and mercenary troops, and waited until 
tlic day of battle to stamp on the ground and sec armed warriors 
atart up at their bidding, 

A fttill greater evil was impending in tho sliapc of faratDo. Tbo 
hn nests of the previous year had been scanty; foreign and do- 
mestic war had consumed an immense quantity of grain. Sicily 
refused to send her rich products, and tho ships which lefl the 
ports of Puglia and Calabria for Naples were pillaged by Sicilian 
and English vcMcls. The price of bread rose, which was felt tlic 
more severely by the lower orders from the loss of their accustomed 
gains. A great many domestic servants had been dismissed, thcro 
was a pause in all indualry, and evil agents wore at work, who ex- 
pected to dorivo advantages for themselves from tho desperation 
of tlie people. But the rulers were not alarmed ; they confided in 
tho zeal of such of their supportcra as possessed full granaries, 
in the compensation offered by the blessings of a free govemmont, 
in the resignation of tho peoi)lo, and the glory of suffering for their 
country. As ihoy thomselvts excelled in these virtues, and were 
little experienced in tho evil sido of liuman nature, they beltevcd 
them to be universal, and therefore thought it was only necessary 
to convince the people of the excellence of the existing fornt of 
government, to aUay all dissatisfaction. They accordingly sent 
forth Bwarms of patriots to harangue and pcrsu.idc tliem of this 
fact. It was cuough to provoke grief and indignation to hear 
beardless orators holding forth in the empty market-place on tho 
benefit of the rcpuMic, and in a stylo of eloquence not their 
own, but bon-owed from tho French, and wliich had no effect on 
their vulgar auditors, filled with opposite ideas, and yet ihcso 
youths presuming that they could silonco the complaints and de- 
mands of the people. 

The wisest and most rational of all these orators was Michcle il 
Pazzo, the former leader of the people in the tumults of the city, 
wlio hud acted as peacemaker on the orrtval of Championnet, and 
who, when aOairs had changed, had been raised tu the rank of a 
French colonel, and was often sent on missions to tho people. Ha 
harangued them in the vulgar dialect, the only language he could 
speak, standing on a height whence ho might bo seen abcvc the 



IMBk 



THE PARTHEKOPEAS BEPUBLIO. 



303 



beads of his audience, and epolce wUliout jircpnmllon, allowing 
tliem to argue witli him, and reply. He once reninrked, "Bread 
is dear, because the lyrant ordora the aliips bringing us corn from 
Bnrbftrj to bo pillaged. IIow ought we to act f Ilatc litm, main- 
tain the war against him, and rather nil of us die than sec him our 
king again; and earn our daily bread by labour during tlils 
■earcity rather than give him the sntisfiiclion of heartng tliat wo 
suffer." At another time he addressed thopcojjlo in these words:— 

"The present Government is not a rcpuLliu; the republic is 
making; hut when made, we idiota shall kuow it, either bj* our 
enjoyment or suffering. Those who are wiso know when the sea- 
sons change ; wc know if we are hot or cold ; the t^vrnnt made us 
endure war, hunger, pestilence, and oartliquakcK; if they tell us 
we shall bo happy under a republic, let us give them time to 
prove it. 

" Ho who is in liaete sows his 6elds with radislies, and eats 
roots; ho who would eat bread sows com and waits a year; so it 
is with the republic ; those things which arc to last want time and 
trouble ; lot us wait." 

When asked by one of the people what was the meaning of the 
^wonl cltisen, he answered, " I do nnt know, but it must be a good 
lame, because the CapeMioni (a term by which the lower orders 
designated the heads of the State) have adopted it for tliemselvcs. 
By catling every ono citizen the great lords arc no longer your 
excellence, nor are wc l^zzarotii ; that name makes all men 
equal" 

la answer to another question : — " What does the word equality 
mean i" " That this," pointing to himself, may either be a Uiz- 
■aro or a colonoL The great lords were colonels before their birth ; 
I am one by equality: men were once bom great, now they bo- 
come sa" 

I pause hero, not to dwell too long on this subject, but I have 
heard many more sayings of this low-born man containing (he same 
common sense, and 1 only regret being forced to weaken his most 
pithy remarks by not being able to give them in the lively and 
concise words of tho vulgar dialect. 

Hany priests and friars addressed tho people on the subject of 
tho Government, and, deducing tho doctrine of political equality 



30» 



H18T0BY OF THE KINQDOU OF NAPI*ES. 



1789. 



from the gospel, translated the words of Jesus Clirist intolhoKca- 
polttau dinlcct, thus strengthening and exciting tlioir hatred of the 
king, their Bttachmcnt to a free Govenimcnt, and their obedience 
to existing authorities. They explained the flight of Ferdinand, 
and the arrival of foreigners witit the change of government, as 
fulfilments of tlie prophecies ; aud together with the prophecies 
they mingled the croM, equality, liberty, and the liepubUc; thus, 
while exhibiting themselves in their sacerdotal robes, and speaking 
& language which was supcrstitiously believed in, they insinuated 
views favourable to the new State. But there were other eeclesiastics 
who were inspiring opposite ideas in the confessionals, and foolish 
youths counteracting the labours of wiser men by their doctrines, 
that no rcstniint was to be placed on a man's conscience, and by 
preaching that belief and the choice of religious worshij) were free ; 
that there were neither Divine rewards for virtue nor punishments 
for crime, and that no future existed for man more than for 
brutes. 

The attention of the rulers, which had in the first instance been 
confined to tlie metropolis, now extended to the provinces; but 
following the same course, they sent commiBsaries to the doi>art- 
menta, and others to the cantons, armed with as much authority as 
was needed for the enforcement of the laws, and empowering thorn 
in urgent cases to act on their own responsibility for the mainteu* 
ance of public trflnquiltity. They were accompanied by many 
persons who, under the name of Bemocrattziatori, without any 
particular office or stipend assigned them, were charged to per- 
Buadt! or compel the cities and towns of the provinces to adopt 
republican forms; and provided with letters-patent from the 
Govenimcnt, thoy stirred up the populace with real or protended 
zeal, in the expectation of being rcwardetl by public oflicca and 
profit It is easy to conceive how uawcleomc were these commla- 
earics and Democratissuiori to the inhabitants of the provinces, 
who are a rude and simple but shrewd pojiulation, totally indif- 
ferent to the charms of a liberty tlioy had never experienced, wlio 
despised empty declamations, and who had never looked beyond 
the abolition of feudalism, the division of feudal lauds, a diminu- 
tion of the taxes, and an improvement in the administration, and 
justice. These demands did not escape the orators of the republic. 



urn 



THE PAHTIIEKOPBAN RErUBLlC. 



SOS 



bat they apolte of them casually, promhcd tlicm nt some future 
time, and mixed thorn up uitli the sulijcct of religions reforms, 
liberty of con^iencc, a proposal for civil nmrriagc», the non-obscnr- 
aucc of wills, ftnd numberless other |)iv|iasi(ioni^ suj^geeting a lax 
morality, repulsive to the hnl>its and feelings of tlic rude pcuaantry. 
The chief aim of thc&e Imraiiguca was to enforce the jHiytncnt of 
tliu government taxes, and to remind the people of the Assistance 
and support which citizens owed to their nowly-acijuired freedom. 
Proceeding from speech to action, the Comniissaiies began to 
investigate the acts and opinions of the magistrates, who, being 
old, and chosen from the partisans of the past government, 
did not sati&fy the extreme ideas of youtlis who were vehement 
partisana of liberty ; and tlicy were thcroforc supplanted by new 
men. Many of the respectable inhabitants of the provinces who 
had been dissatisfied with the past government from the tyranny 
exercised over them, and from the B]>oliaLion of public and privato 
property, favoured and supported the new order of ihinga; but 
they stopped midway when they perceived that the St.itc was not 
governed on established principles, but by theories from which 
they anticipated daugvr and ruin. 

There was another voice which had not yet made itaeirheard. but 
was not long siloot, that of public occusationa. Kiccolu Palomba, 
anxious Co accuse Prosdocino Rotondo, one of the twenty-five mem- 
bers of the Government, collected a large meeting of patriots, and 
after stating bis crimes and the proofs against him, and urging the 
utility of bringing the matter before the public, asked the assistance 
of those present against so influential a man, since in tlicso timet 
all real iwwcr resided in the sovereign people. Tho motion was ap- 
proved, the accusations read, and a promise was given to support this 
bold resolution. As there was neither precedent nor forms for sneU 
a procetlurc, Llic accuser presented lumself before the Provisional 
Government, accompanied by & number of his clients, and read the 
libel aloud ; his audience all retaining their seats as legislators, 
and tho accused forming one of the august congress. Astonished 
at this proceeding, they doubted whether the accusation should bo 
admitted, but it was listened to at the request of the accused him- 
self. TIic libel treated of misdemeanours long past, or rather 
which had never been committed. Ilotondo bore an imsullied 
VOL. L So 



506 



HISTORY or THE KINGDOM OP KAPLE3. 



eb«T&cter, wlulo th&t of Palomba, except in his altacTiment to tlio 
B«public, was tarnished hy suspicion an<l misdeeds ; but his fac- 
tious supporters believing this act to be a proof of freedom, 
thousand voices Trcre raised in praise of the plaintiff, and the plan^ 
of attack was concerted with him in secret meetings, whilst (ho 
ftOOUBcd demanded an open trial. Tlie Government considered the 
prosecution of this iniquitous trial a scandal, and bj its example 
endangering the unimpcachahlo authority of the rcprcsonlAtives of 
the State ; they therefore resorted to the weak expedient of sus- 
pending the proceedings ; they conferred on Palomba a high oflScc 
which he liad coveted, sending him commissary into one of the 
departments, and hoped that the turpitude of their acU would be 
passed over iu silence. A month from that time, when the form 
and persons of the Provisional Government had boon changed, 
and Prosdocino Rolondo had returned to the condition of a pri%'at« 
citizen, he availed himself of his privilege ag a free man, to de- 
mand the renewal of the trial before tho ordinary magistrates, by 
whom ho was acquitted. Rotondo magnanimously refrained from 
bringing a charge of libel againat his accusers, and there was not 
found a single guardian of tho laws who had the courage to act 
for him. 

These facts show the manner in which public employments were 
given away, the power of secret aoeieties, and the weakness of tho 
Government. A thousand similar accusations were at once brought 
forward, and neither a fair reputation, tho probity of a man's past 
life, nor the purity of his present conduct, could check the ambition 
or arrogance of unprincipled men. A tribunal was instituted called 
the Censorship, to receive accusations, to examine into them, to 
expedite trials, and to provide facilities for tho accusation of the 
prosecutor, as well as tho necessary defence for the accuacd. Popu- 
lar societies sprang into existence at tins time, some of them 
secret, and others open, whose members prepared the accusations. 
Tlie most noted of those wliich were public, were the Patriotic 
Society and tlie Popular Society, which, following the example of 
French Clubs, held public and private meetings under a president, 
with a tribune, a programme of the subjects under discussion, and 
a book to record their dccisioim. The great political questions of 
the day, tho new constitutions for the State, the laws, ordinances, 



ITVQ. 



THB PAltTHRKOFEAK BEPUBLIC. 



307 



ihe war, offices, ofRcialn, ami tlio jniblic and privalo lives of Iha 
citizens, were there cxaminoil into with the freedoni or rather 
license of the tribune; and thoir decisions were cither sent up to 
the Qovenimcnt in the form of ti message or advice, or were carried 
before the tribuntLl of the Ceu5orshi[> an an accusatiuu, or were 
referred to the people in order to excite a tumult. No man could 
rest secure, confiding in tlie purity of his intentions, no voice of 
calumny was to be despised ; every enemy had the poiver to injure, 
and merit of whatever kind was dangerous ; changes were i>erpc- 
tuallj occurring in the offices of state, while bitter hntreda and 
faction were actively at work. Calumnies and accusatlona became 
loud, and were not silenced until the fall of the Republic, for the 
spirit of faction (a symptom of infirmity in the ruling power) must 
destroy a Govornmcnt, if not itself destroyed. 

Whilst the most diiUcult problems relating to the new statute 
were under discussion in the Patriotic Society, and oven French 
liberty see:ned too lirait(.>d for us, the Constitution of the Neapoli- 
tan Republic appeared, drawn up for the Legislative Committee by 
Mario Pagano. It was identical with the French Constitution of 
1793, with only a few slight modifications ; but we regret to read 
there the abolition of the communal parliaments, which, though 
turbulent and useless under a despotic government, are, in a repub- 
lic, the most fitting means by which to carry on the elections and 
administrations, tJie pivots on wlitch every free government moves. 
The judicial power was rendered too weak, and the adiuinintrntive 
was not left wholly independent, while the project of a body of 
Kpbora met with general approbation, because intended to support 
the sovereignty of tho people. The ConsCilution was built upon 
two priuciples ; first, to produce a balance of abstract powers, with- 
out toomuchintcrfercuce with the balance of existing forces, or that 
which forms the real strength of a free state, namely, tho habits, 
opinions, and peculiar characteristics of the i>eopIe; and secondly, 
jealously to guard against the encroachments of the executive power 
and of influential citizens. The Neapolitan Kcpublic was not 
allowed time to try the experiment, whether any code of laws 
could hinder tho downfall of a free slate which bears within itself 
the germs of its own ruin; but one year later, these very laws, 
jealous as they were, could not save the mother Uepublic from her 



308 



aiBTOBT OF THE KL>'GDOU OF KAFLES. 



171D. 



fall; fortunate at least in falling; into tlie faanda of ono who u-as 
Emperor fifteen years, and who preserved for her a large sliare of 
her libertie», while unhappy Naplcd vas swallowed op in a whirl- 
pool of despotism. 

The Provisional Government wore engaged in the discussion of 
the st^itutc for the constitution, and were finding some consolation 
amidst present troubles in their hopes for Iho future, when, to in- 
crease their embarrasamenta, a certain FavpwiiU, » Frenrh cora- 
Tnisaarv, arrived in KaplcsL Ho hrouglit a decree from his Republic, 
which, niaintaintng the riglita of conquest, ratified the war-lax, 
and declared the treasure of the Crown of Naples, the palaces or 
rojal residences, the woods of the royul c)iase, the endowtiicnts of 
the orders of Malta and CeiistanLine, the wealth of the mouas- 
tories, the allodial fiefs, the banks, the porcelain mauufuctorv, and 
the antiquities buried boucttth the ruins of Pompeii and IJercu- 
lanciim, to bo the appanage of France. Championnet, alarmed 
at the general dijuatisfaclion caused by this measure, and fore- 
seeing danger on the horizon, and who was besides not at licarl 
a bad man, stopped Faypoult in the execution of ilie decree, which 
he annulled by an edict; but the commissary insisting, a dispute 
arose, and the strongest conquered. FaypouU was dismissed and 
took his departure. The Neapolitans were so much delighted at 
this event, tliat while their hatred against the French bccamo 
twofold, they began to conceive a liking for Championnet, and to 
find excuses for liis past severities on the plea, of neces^iiy. Tho 
populace quoted his acta of devotion, and his rich gifts to 8t 
Jftnunrius, and an idea^ tho origin of vrliieh is unknown, cir- 
culated among them. In the baptismal registers of the Cliureh 
of St. Anna, was found tho name of Giovanni Championn^ win 
parents wore not those of the general, and the date of whoso birth 
even was different ; hut in spite of these discrepancies, Cham- 
pionnet was believed to bo a Neapolitan, although lie really came 
from Valence in UanphiiK?. 

The people were (lieroforc grieved when they read in the French 
OazeiU a decree of the Directory to this efl'ect: — "Seeing thai 
Qonoral Cliampionnct has employed force and authority to pro-, 
vent the fulfilment of the powers confided by us to the civil com-' 
niLssaTy, FaypouU, and that he has thus placed himself in open 



1799. 



THE PARTHEKOPBAN UlifUBLlO. 



309 



^ snn 



rebellion agamsl the Government, the citizen Chnmpionnct, 
gcMiiral of division, formerly coninmnder of the arin_v of Naples, 
sliall be put under arrest, aud brought before a court- niurtial to 
answer for his offence." 

The general immediately departed, and the command of the 
army was assumed by Macdonald. Championnet was tried in 
Franco, acquitted, and restored to his command in the nrmy with 
increased honours, but soon afterwards died in poverty at Antibes, 
ami, if reports .speak true, of poison administered by others or by 
himself The Neapolitan* sympathised with his misfortunes, and 
lamented him the more as Macdonald came accompanied by that 
same Faypoult, an insolent, hard-tempered, inflexible mau, who 

lighted to revenge himself for the joy the people had expressed 
at his dismissal, and the altaehnieut they bore his enemy. 

About tbia time news arrived that the Frcneh had occupied the 
Slates of Tuscany, and that the Grniid Duko Ferdinand iir., with 
his family, had departed. The French Directory, insatiable in 
conquest, after invading the States of Lucca, had demanded from 
the Tuscan Gyvernmeut the reason for their hostility luauifested 
by the rcccptiou of tlie Neapolitan troops, the encuiies of France, 
and hy affording an asylum to the Popo, Pius vr. The Grand Duke 
rrplied that he had not acted thus in a spirit of hostility, uur iu 
'lAtred against the Itepuhlio, but that he had been obliged to yield 
from necessity, he being the weaker power, which had been his 
motive for tolerating the reception of the Neapolitan troops in ihe 
port of Leghorn, which had been menaced by a strong fleet of 
Sicilians and English ; and that with regard to the Pontilf, there 
WHS no taw forbidding htm to afford a shoUcr to Pius, and that it 
was tho duty of every Christian prince to concede a refuge to tlie 
head of Christendom in his old age and misfortunes. Although 
these excuses were plausible and pruisowurthy, and although 
the disasters of tho French arms had already commenced on the 
Adigo, which made it advisable to unito rather than divide the 
armies of the Republic, yet such was the inordinate tbint for 
conquest of the Directory and of General Scherer, the commander- 
in-chief in Italy, that a French legion, under General Gaulhier, 
was sent against Florence, which, arriving beneath the walls, 
demanded by a hciald the surrender of the city. Ferdinand iii. 



310 



HISTOBY OF THE KINOUOU OP NAPLES. 



17B». 



resigned himself to tlio necessity of tlic hour, and, in reply, 
published t!ic following edict : — 
" To my people, — 

" French soldiers have nrrived in Tuscany ; we shall consider 
it a proof of the loyalty und attachment uf our subjects if thoy 
obey the conimands of those in authority, mBiiitain the public 
peace, respect the French, and take every moans to avoid giving 
offence to the new rulers. Such conduct will iucreeee (if it ia 
capable of increase) our affection to our people." 

The French then entered Florence ; the Grand Duke departed 
on the following- day, the 27th March, and the peace of the city 
waa not disturbed. This success increased the dominion of the 
Republic as well as their adherents, and the Goveniment of 
Napica rejoiced. It was their last cause of rejoicing, as from that 
time forth every day brought tidings of disaster. 



UIKI; 



THE FAGTHENOPEAN BEPUBLia 



811 



CHAPTER II. 

ISSCRBECTIOHS OV THE BOtJRBONlSTP IS mit PHOVISCKS — ATTEMPTS 

AGAINST TRS REPFBLIC BY THK KIKO OF SICILT AND THK BHGLISH 

nZTREAT OF THB VKSSCH. 



VtavTS the consternation of the Bourbonistg, causeil by llio dis- 
astrous war, the coniiucst, and the new Govemment Imd subBiticd, 
the provintici, finding tliat the mucli-talked-of but inviaiblo French 
bntlflUons made no attcn)i>t to repress tlioir first acts of resistance, 
broke out into open rebellion, and armaments wero formed in vari- 
ous ]]arlB of the kingdom. 'X'ho majoritjr of the people were 
ojipoaed to the new order of things, wliich were onlv supported bj 
» few young men, who possessed little influence ; while ibe pru- 
dent were silent, )efl3 from any dislike to the llepublic, or attach- 
ment to the past government, than from an anticipation of im- 
pending evils and dangers. In the cities through which the 
French army had passed, the injuries they had caused were not 
imputed to the necessities of war and conqueat, but to a want of 
discipline in the soldiers, and of forbcaranec in their chiefs; and 
those cities which had yet been unviwtod by the French, were in 
fear of a simitar infliction. The diBsatigfaclion was universal. 
The Dalmatians, the baronial retainers, the troops of the royal 
provincial courts, and all who were accustomed to depend for a 
livelihood on their pay, fonucd themselves in bands, and made in- 
roads into the couutry, with the aim or pretext of sen'iug tlieir 
king , but, meantiaie, enriching themselves by booty and plunder. 
In the Abruzzi, where the Bourbonists had for a time suspended, 
but never laid down their arms, they brandiahcd them again moro 
fiercely than ever, led on by their chiefa Pronio and Rodia Pronio 
in early life had been an ecclesiastic, but prompted by his evil 
passions, he had enrolled himself as a retainer iu the baronial 



SIS 



HISTOUY 07 T13& KiyG1>0M OF NAPLES. 



vm 



squadrons of tlie MarqnU del Vaslo ; Imvitig been guilty of homi- 
ciile, and sent to the galloja, he escaped by his strength and flgility, 
niul turned to infesting the roads; enlUting on the Bourbonist 
side, lie fought with success ngainst Duhesme, when, chosen leader 
by his eontr.ides, Uc gniried fume, security, and wealth. Rodio 
WHS by birth a j^ciitleniiin ; he viu&a claBslcal scholar and doctor of 
laws, but crnftyHtul ambitious; and, foreseeing the di^sters which 
threatened the Kepublic, ho tlirew liimself on the royalist side, 
nnd was wclcometl hy the rabble as the Brbt example of a nmn of 
gentle birth, and unstained by crime, who bad euibraecd that 
jjarty, wbieU unt:l llien bud been supported by men of the lowest 
duserijitiuti ; Xludio wus therefore proclaimed their chief. Tho 
city ofTcrarao.andseverMl other towns, relumed to their allegiance 
to tlic )<ing ; the French meanwhile retained tho fortresses of Pes- 
cara, Aquila, andCivitelbi, and scoured ihc country round in search 
of provisions, restored tlie trees of liberty where they were cut 
down, reanimated their adherents, and punished their opponcntSL 
The rest of the inhabitants of the three provinces were divided 
among themselves, nnd, adopting the views of the strongest party, 
were sometimes for the king, sometimes fur the Republic ; but, as 
jealuusicsand disputes bet»cen the municipalities had at all time 
kept neighbouring districts at variance, so now their choice waft"] 
often determined by the contrary choice of their neighbour, and 
became a greater exciicmcut to olTeQues, quarrels, injuries, and 
bloodshed. 

lu llio Terra di Lavoro, many villages on the borders wore 
dotnineered over by Miolu-lo Pezza, a native of Itri, born of low 
parents, a niutdcrcr and thief, on whose bead the Government had 
for sorao years past set a price, but by frequent good fortune, or 
cunning, be had come off victor in every encounter, and escaped 
all dangers, hy which he obtained from the peasantry (who have 
a proverb signifying that devils and friars are crafty nnd invulner- 
able) tho name of Fra Diavolo, which he retained as a proof of hu 
prowess throuf^hout the civil wars, and up to the time of hia death ; 
bo was bold, fearless, and shrank from no crime ; placing hini^lf 
nt the head of a numerous band, ho lay in ambuscade amidst tlie 
rocks and woods of hia native country, from whence he could see 
an enemy at a distance without being seen, and thcnoc prepared. 



IM. 



TBfi PlltTHENOPBAN KKPUDLIC. 



S13 



liU nltacks oil Klragglera from the French, or on tliosc raarcliing 
in small detach ments, putting all to deatli without nicrcy. liaug- 
ing throughout tho oounLrj from Portella to the Garigliano, ho 
murtlcred the French couriers, and whoever might possibly bo the 
boaror of letttjrs or messugcs, and interrupted tho road botwecu 
Naples and Rome. 

lu the same province, but in another part of the country, called 
the distcict of Sora, Gactano Mammono, a miller, carried on tho 
vnr at tho head of a Urge band of followcra ; hin fierce character, 
tho reverse of everything human, was nearer that of a wild beast; 
and, while relating his deeds, I shrink with disgust from (he 
stories tolil of this horrible monster. Thirsting for blood, he 
dmnk it with pleasure oven from hiti own veins, and revelled in 
that of otliers. When at table he liked to have a human head 
placed before him, which had been freshly cut off, and was yet 
bleeding ; and he quafrcd blood or liquors from a akull, whicli he 
would frequently change. Had not nil these facta been conBrtned 
by Viueenzo Coco, highly esteemed both as a man and author, a 
councillor of statu, uud honest mngistralo, wlio relates them from 
the testimony of an accredited witness, I could not have believed 
or repeated stories so revolting. During the civil wars, Mammono 
put to death at least WO French or Neapolitans with his own 
hand, causinifhis prisoners to be dragged from their dungeons, that, 
whilst at table with the chiefs of his band, ho might slaughter 
tliem for the amusement of his guests. Yet King Ferdinand and 
Queen Caroline wrote to this man, or rather beast, " My general 
and my friend." 

To return to tlio state of the country. Numbers were in arms 
in the province of Salerno, and the difficult and intricate deflte 
of Campostrino wns occupied by Bourbonists, who only yielded it 
after an engagement with a strong column of regular troops. 
Prom theiioe the Bourbonists scoured the country in the vicinity 
of tho towus of Cileuto, the mouutaimt of Lagouegro, and even of 
tlie capital of tho province ; the road to Calabria was thus filled 
by Bourbonists, and closed against all besides. The city of 
Capaccio, and the towns of Sicignano, Castelluccio, Polla, and Sala, 
raised the royal standanl, and threatened all who adhered to the 
Kepuhlic. The Bishop Torrusio, after rousing the city of CapacctO 

VOL. L S D 



ai4 



BISTORT OF TUB KINGDOM OF NAPLBS. 



to rebel, made use of temporal as well as spirituAl weapons ; whilst 
in the otiifr lown* of tlie same province, the royalist leader was 
Ohoranlo Curci, Burnamed Sciai-pn, who had once been a captain 
of nrmrd retnineT-s in the royal provincial courts, and when dis- 
Tnisard from ilint office, had offered his services to the Republic, 
but liad been rejected, ami insulted by being called a satellile of 
despotism. 

A still more snnguinary war was afflicting the Basilicala, as the 
people there fought witli blind fury, not coring whether they were 
governed by a moiiarciiy or republic, but only using eitlier pretext 
to wreak their vengeance for old offences. The combatants were 
numerous on botl) sides, and, formed into largo bands, were> daily 
engnged in contests And in continual slaughter. Two incidents 
wortliy of record occurred in the midst of the«e domestic calami- 
tics. The inhabitants of the little city of Picamo, who had with 
heartfelt rejoicings celebrated" the change of government, when 
nttaelicd by the Bourbonists, barricaded their gates, and aided by 
the strength of tlie place scvernl times repulsed the invaders. They 
continued to liolcl out, unlil the fortunes of tlie Kepublic declining 
everywhere, tliey were beaieged by immense numbers, and the 
citizens Wi-rc obliged to fight from their walls. After a time, their 
supply of lend was eximiistcd ; a consultation as to the remedy to 
be adopted was held in an assembly of the people, and it was re- 
solved, first, to melt down the pipes of the church organs, next the 
lead of the windowa, and laslty the domestic utensils, and those 
used in plmrniacy, by which means lead became as plentiful as 
powder. The priests excited the people to fight, by prayers in the 
churches, and public squares ; those who were too old, or too 
young, agisted ns far as ihoir strength would allow, and the 
women took corn passionate care of the wounde^l, while some of 
them disguised as men fought by the sides of their husbands or 
brothers, deceiving the enemy less by their change of dress than 
by their courage. So mucli valour ohtiuned its reward, for the city 
did not succumb until the ftill of the province and of the State. 

In Pdteiirn, not far from Picamo, and a largo city, now the 
capital of the province, Francesco Scrao had been bishop ; he was 
the same lionournbly mentioned in the second book of this his* 
tory, at at one time persecuted by the Holy See for Jansenism, but 



ITIiL 



THB PARTHENOPBAN R&PUDLIC. 



316 



■upporied bj Uic Iting, Some years later, vrhca Ferdinand had 
cliiiiigcii }tis policy, 1)C grew woary of tlio bishop, vrlio was accused 
of being a friend of rcpubiicaiiiam and a favourer of the Froncli. 
Wlicn the riots tlicreforo first broko out, ho was attiicki'd in the 
episcopal paUcc, where, discovered in tho act of prayer before the 
cross, he was dragged through the streets and murdered ; his head 
was cut otr, placed on the i>oint of a lancc, and carried through tho 
city. Tho murderers were few m numb<;r, only seveuteuo, and 
none of them belonging to tho lower ordera A wealthy citizen of 
Potenza, Nicolo Addono, of fierce disposition, a devout eou of 
the Church, and attached to the Itepxillic (though secretly, as 
he feared to endanger his riches in the uncertain state of public 
matters), swore to revenge this atrociouo deed ; and not daring to do 
so openly, he resorted to atralAgom. Feigning himself a Bourbon- 
iat, and that he rejoiced in the death of the bishop, he invited his 
murderers to a banquet, and after a sumptuous repast, and immo- 
derate iudulgence in wine, ho put them all to death by the sword ; 
and most of them by his own hand, assisted by his followers, who 
either joining in tho banquet, or concealed in tho house, waited his 
signal for the onslaught. This horrible act roused the indignation 
oven of the partisans of the Republic, and Addono being warned, 
fled from Potenza, and after remaining long concealed in Ibe woods, 
look refuge in France. Many years afterwards he was pardoned 
for his crimes by a decree of the new king, Joseph Bonaparte, and 
returned to the kingdom. He haa since been seen playing the 
part of false witness in trials for treason, and thus injuring honest 
citizens, to assist the cause of the Bourbons. lie has, however, 
esctiped all punishment, and still lives in the enjoyment of his 
hoiirds of ill-gotten wealth. 

Four Corsicans, of the names of Cesare, Boccheciampe, Corbara, 
and Colonna, excited au insurrection against the Kcpublic in 
Puglia. Cesare had been a livery servant in Corsica, Bocchociampo 
was nn old artillery soldier who liad deserted, and Colonna and 
Corbara were mere vagrants subsisting by evil ways. The crimes 
of all four had obliged them to fly from Corsica, and they bad left 
Nil pies Horn fear of the French; tliey were now in the ports of 
Puglia, seeking the means of ombarkatiou for Sicily or Corfu. 
Arrived at Mouteiasi, they bappcuod to lodge with an innkeeper 



S16 



HISTORY OF THE KINQDOit OF NAPLES. 



tm. 



of the nivmo of G)runda> who had a talent for iutriguo, and 
they plottcil together hovr to raiso the people in favour of the 
Bourbons. It was isettlod tliat Corbara eliould persoitate Prince 
Francis, the heir to the throne ; Coloima, tlie Lord Tligh Con- 
•taUle, hig equerry; l^cchecianipe, the brother of the King of 
Spain, and Cewtre, the 1!)ukc of Saxonj. Girunda was to act 
in the coiiapiracy, as avant-couricr, bear witne^a to their [iden- 
tity, and trumpet this fraud upon the people. The real Prince 
Francis liad shortly before visited Piiglia, but Girunda trusted to 
the credulity of the weak, and to the profits those niunmieries held 
out to roguea Their parta were arranged in the night, and 
Girunda went before daybreak to announce tlte arrival of tfao 
princes in a mysterious manner, that this city might be the first 
to join them. Ilia story was believed ; and an immense crowd, 
composed of the tower onJens, hastcued to the little inn where the&e 
great paoplo were lodging, and eagerly offered their services as 
aoldiera or attendants. Culonna descended into the street, and, in 
the name of the prince thanking all present for their zeal, dia- 
missed them. Girunda had meantime procured a carriage, and as 
they entered it, the three Corsicans feigned great respect towards 
Prince Francis, who, graciously saluting those around, and saying, 
" I throw nwaclf into the arms of my people," ordered the carriago 
door to he shut, and departed for iJrindisi. 

The talent for adventure so largely developed in the Corsicans, 
enabled them to assume the liauj^hly air, the magnanimity, 
and lofty demeanour of rnyal personages ; they departed before 
dawn and arrived at their next halting-plaeo as night fell in, 
while Girunda (ravelled some miles in ndvanco to find lodgings, 
and prepare the people fur their reception. The prcBcnco of 
the princes was therefore confirmed by a thousand voices, each 
declaring he had seen them, and adding, as usual in niarveltoiis 
stories, facts which, however absurd, wore believed. Their 
success exceeded their lio|ies ; an armed populace followed the 
carriage, surrounded the house where the impostors Io<lged, and 
tearing down the emblems of ihe tic-public, restored the royal 
dominion. The pretended Prince Francis revoked some of the 
magistracies, created new, emptied the treasuries, and imposed 
heavy taxes on the families of rebels ; he was more submisaivcly 



1799. 



TUB PAHTUEXOrEAN KEPUBLiC. 



Sir 



obeyoti tlinn tlie real prince, bccauiic more mipuilont, and supported 
by tbe people, ready to execute liia ordora. The Archbishop of 
Otranlo, who had long kno\™ Prince Francis, who liad been with 
him the year before in the same city, where lie hud assisted at 
ceremonies in the church and tho palace, now became a partieiim- 
tor in the fraud, by conBnuiiig in writing that this was the real 
prince, and only as much altered in appearance as might bo ex- 
pected after a year of so much anxiety about the war, and th« 
affairs of the kingdom. 

The impostors turned hack towards T^ranto, where, on their 
arriral, they found a vessel approaching the shore, which was 
conveying: the o'd Princesses of France, fugitives from Naples to 
Sicily. These daring fellows were not, however, to be daunted ; 
Corbara sent a message to the princesses, informing tlicni of this 
wonderful fact of popular credulity, and went in rpgnl state, and 
with the ense of manner of a relation to visit the ladies ; who, 
although possessed of their fiill share of the pride inherent in the 
royal Bourbon race, were yet so eager to assist the cause of the 
king, that they received this low-bom man as a nephew, and gave 
him the title of Uigliness, while lavishing on him every mark of 
respect and affection. The people being thus confirmed iu their 
belief, numbers assembled in arms for the royal cause ; even those 
who were incredulous or convinced of the im|>osture, followed where 
fortune seemed to lend, and the three provinces of I'uglia rose iu 
rebellion. Corbara was now desirous to place his itl-gotten wealth 
in security, and proclaimed that he purposed to go to Corfu, taking 
with him the constable Colonn a, and to return with a large Russian 
army ; and further, that he left as his lieutenant and generals in 
the kingdom, the brother of tho King of Spain, and the Duko of 
Saxony. He was hardly out of the gulf when he was captured by 
pirates, and lost his riches and his life. Colonna, though hec&caped 
deatli, was heard of no more. Boccheciainpo was slain while de- 
fending the castle of Briudisi against a French vessel \ but mean- 
time Ccsare, the fortunate leader of a numerous band of followers, 
gained possession of Trani, Andria, and Martina, large and strongly 
fortified cities, without meeting with any opposition, whilst the 
smaller cities and the greater part of Puglia were vanq^uished. by 
the sound of his name, and submitted to tlte king. 



SIS 



HISTORY OP THE KIHQDOU OP NAPLES. 



1»0L 



Tlie slate of Calabm has yet to be described Altliougli more 
adlioreiiU of tlie RepxibUc were to be found among tlie Calnbrese 
than elsewhere (perhaps owing to the desire to revcng'e the suf- 
ferings they had endured under the most oppressive form of 
feudalism, or because thcv retained in their rude habit* and 
manners the virtues of a primitive and free state of society), 
jet a considerable number of tlic inhabitants adhered to tbe 
king; the proportion of republicans to that of their opponents in 
the whole state, may indeed bo computed as only ten in a thou- 
sand. The Calahrian Bourlionists sent both written and verbal mes- 
sages to the hing ill the adjoining ii^land of Sicily, informing him 
of theeondition of those provinces, and entreating him to send even 
a small body of soldiers, and a sufficient supply of amiB, with autho- 
ritative persons, laws, and proclamations, tu promote the zeal of 
llie people which had already been roused, to succour bis kii>gdom, 
and tlius take pity on his faithful subjects, exposed to the venge- 
ance of foreign and domestic foes. Other messengers from Naples 
and Puglia confirme<l the tidings of the popular insurrections, 
and the ease with which the French might be expelled, and the 
rebels subdued. But tbe Iting persisting in his idea of trcftchery, 
refused to believe these accounts, which he thought some fresh 
artifice, and confided solely in the armies of bis allies ; thus de- 
reiring himself as to the injury he was inflicting on his own cause. 
Tbe queen and Acton justified the faults of their government, 
imputing them to tho treason of the Kubject», and Mai-k endea- 
voured in a long defence to shield his own errors behind those of 
the army ; the deserters from tho camp also found an excui^c for 
their delinquencies on the same plea, and Captain-general Tigna- 
telU accused the Elelti of the city, the Scdili, and the greater 
part of the nobility with being traitors; nothing therefore was 
heard in the palace hut tho words treason aul traitors, aud menaces 
of future punishment and vengeance. 

On the arrival of the old princesses of France at Palermo, they 
related the scenes they liad witne9sc<l at TRiranto, and declared the 
popular risings in Puglia real and extensive ; this story was con- 
firmed by English officers sent in ships to explore our coasts, and 
a council was accordingly held, in wliich it was decided to support 
the movement Among all the councillors, Cardinal Ruffo was the 



IMfc 



THE PABTHEKOPEAN BBPUBLIO. 



31!) 



most eager for war, tlje kiug tliereforo ordercil him to visit llie 
fief« belonging to his family in Calubrin, there to boc with hisowu 
eyea and ascertain the condition of the provinces, and, according to 
circiim-otaiicea, to advance into th« kin;^(lom or return to Sicily; 
his rank, name, and dignity, might be of use in the cnierprise, nud 
would shield him from the malice of his enemies. He readily 
complied, and departed provided with only a few followers, and 
8till less money, but with unlimited powers, besides large promises 
of assistance. Fabrizio Kuflo, cnifiy by ualnre. though ignomnt 
alike of literature and science, wiis born uf a nublu huLunpriticiple«l 
race, and having led au irregular life in Ins youth, had become 
still more corrupt in his old age ; poor, yet with extravagant tastes, 
lie had whilo young chosen the easy path to the prcUcy, ntid hav- 
ing iiigmtiated hiniaelf with I't^pe i'ius n., he vns appoiiiled to a 
high office in tho apostolic chamber, which ho rutuiiied until, by 
hia too large and euddeit acqui»ition of wealth, he toiiit hid oQice 
and the pope'a favour ; be tben returned a rich man to hi^ native 
country, leaving behind him in Route many influential friends, 
whom, in a con'upt city, he had found it easy to gain by gifts, and 
the allurements of fortune. Ue asked and obtained from the King 
of Xaples, the so[>crintcndence of the royal palace of Giscrta^ but 
aftcrwardt) rotuniing into tho good graces of Pius, lie was mndo a 
canlinal, and went up to Ronto. where ho continued to reside until 
1798, but upon the outbreak of revolutions there, hesougbtslicUer 
in Naples, and soon aftcrwnrds followeil llic king to Palermo, 

lie reached the shores of Calabria in Pebruary I iB^, and having 
first communicated with the servants and retainers of his house, 
he landed at Bagnara, preceded by tho cross nnd all tbe insignia 
of his dignity ; he was received with reverence by the clergy and 
notabilities of the place, and with frantic expressions of joy by tlie 
people. As soon as the intelligence of bis arrival and intrntiuns 
had spread, numbers of the populace from the adjoining districts 
hastened thither, led by gentlemen, priests, or friars, who, when 
they saw one decorated with the purple place himiiQlf at tlioir 
head, did not disdain to join in that disorderly and tumultuary war- 
fare. Colonel Winapcarc, who formerly commanded the garrison 
ofCatanzaro, the auditor Angela Fiorc, tho Canon S[insiaiii, tho 
Priest Kinaldt, and with them many soldiers who had deserted or 



3S0 



HlSTORr OP THE KINODOU OP NAPLES. 



ITBBL 



boon tlismiBsed, ami malofaciors wlio had just before been mroaling 
tho country as banditti, besides criminals let loose from tho 
dungcona during the tumults, offered tliemselves to fight for the 
king; ntid the Cardinal, after this first success, published thoJ 
decree which appointed him lieutenant or roj^^eut of the kingdom.' 
Ho left Bagnara escorted by a uiimerous but discreditable assem* 
blago of followers, with wlioso support, and without any figltling, 
but only by the rumour of their apjiroach, lie subjugated all the 
cities and towns ns far a« Mileto. Tlic atmng city of Moiitcleon^ 
reputed to be republican, was summoned to surrender and4 
threatened with ex termination, but the citirxns saved their lives 
by offering money, horses, provisions, and arms. At Mileto the 
oanliual nnsombled as many of the bis1io|>R and other ecclt-slastic&J 
of rank ns lie could collect, with magiKtriites who liad formorl] 
been employed under tlic king, aoldicrs, and officials, as well Aa| 
such ritiz(?ns ns were influential by their names or wealth ; and 
after laying before tlicm the nature of the chaT^e he had accepted, 
he urged the just and sacred cause of the throne and of relig:ion ; 
and then called ujinn all to join him who wc-ro Inyal to their 
king and devout towards God ; wooring as a sign and acknowledg- 
ment thereof the white cross on their arm and the red cockade of 
the Bourbons on their hats. They were promised in recompense, 
bc«idc8 rewards in heaven, an exemption from the government 
taxes for sii years to come, and the profits arising from the war, 
or levied upon tho property of rebels, which was from that day 
forth forfeited to the royal exchequer, besides llie tribute to bo 
imposed upon the cities and towns of all who ehould oppose them ; 
further, he enjoined them to cut down the nccui-sod trees of liberty, 
and set up crosses in their fitead. Tho army was to bo called Iho 
army of the Iloly Faith, in order by this nanio to indicate the 
sacred object of the war. A solemn procession was then formed 
to the church, and the Cardinal, after pronouncing a loud blessing 
on their arms, continued on his way without oucountcring any 
opposition, and always trlumphaut, by Hontcleone, Maida, and 
Cutro, towards Cotrone. Cotrone, with weak walls and a small 
citadel on the Ionian Sea, was only defended by its citizens and 
thirty-two French, who tumpcat-toat on their way from Egypt had 
sought shelter there ; but however high the courage of the garri- 



IMi 



TUB PABTHBNOrEAN KBFt'BUC. 



321 



son, tlicy were sliorl of ftmis, aniTnunilion, and provisioiifl, and 
Were attaoked hy many (tiousniid Bourbonista ; after tlic first 
alteni])ta at resistance, therefore, they demanded conditions of 
Burrendcr ; tbese vere refused by tlie Cardinal, who, not liaving 
Biifficient money to satisfy llie greedy multitudes wlio surrounded 
liiin, and unable to suiiply tlicir deniaudB by tlie small gains made 
ou t))C road, lind promised theiu llie sack of the city. After a few 
hours of unequal combat between a small and discomfited band, 
and a vast multitude cnger to obtain a ricli and certain prey, 
Colroiie WHS taken with the slaug'htcr of her citizens, armed and 
unarmed, and given up to pillaije, license, and wanton barbarity 
of every kind. The rioting lasted two days, and on the following 
morning a magnificent altar witJi a cross in the centre was erected 
iu the camp ; after mass had been celebrated by a warrior priest 
of the Holy Faith, the Cardinal richly attired in purjdo, pro- 
nounced A eulogiuni on the deeds of the two past days, absolved the 
crimes couiniitted in the bent of tlie ^gtit, and with liia arm raised 
ou high, made the sign of the cross and bte&scd the troojw; he 
then placed a gunisoti iu the citadel, and abandoning the i^cat- 
tered remnant of the inhnbitanta (the miserable remaiiis of (he 
Tnasaacre), without a leader and with notliing hut the recollection 
of the tcrmr and disasters they had suffered, he departed for 
Catftnzaro, another city on the side of the French. 

Arrived in sight of this place he inundated the country ronnd 
with his troops, and sent a message demanding its surrender. 
But Catanxaro, perched upon an eminence, encircled by strong' 
waJla, and containing a population of sixteen thousand inhabitants, 
provided wttli arms, ami prepared (after the fate of Cotrone) for 
the last oitreniitics rather than submission, re])lied — that she had 
not rebelled, but had yielded to the power of the French arms, as 
she was now ready to yield to the greater power of the Iloiy 
Faith ; that she was willing to return lo the dominion of the 
King, but on condition that her citizens should be s^Kirerl, and 
that no inquiry should be made into their opinions or acts in 
favour of the Republic ; that the troops of the Holy Faitli should 
abstain from entering the city, and that the Royalist magistrates 
should only be admitted within their walls, under the escort of the 
civic guard ; this was iu case peace were accepted ; but if war, 



S22 



HISTORT OP THR KINODOU OP NAPLKft. 



UN. 



tliej infonnod tlie CnrdJnnl that sixteen thousand armcil men 
were readjr to jrerish licfore tliu wallr:, mtticr ttmu cudurc ihe 
sulTtiriDga and indignities wliicli li»d been iuilicted on Cotrona 
At these words Ruffu, perceiving thut victory was neither certain 
nor easy, feigned modenitioii, and declftring iliat the disorders at 
Cotrouo had bet^n owing to ihe obstinate reaialance of the city 
Jiavin;f excited the nr.lour of hia troop*, lie conacnled that if 
CaLmzaro wouUl ri\!&c the Bourbon standanl, and return to her 
allegiance to the Icing, he would consent to yield obedience to her 
Jaws and magistnttca ; tluit a civic guard composed of royalists 
elioiild be the only forre dcni:uided by tlie royal authorities ; that 
neither the opinions of the cilizons n'»r thoir acta in favour of the 
llcpublic should be inqiiiroil into, nnd tlnit the Bourboniat trooj 
aJiouhi not enter tlic city : Ciitnnzaro, ou her side, waa to pay' 
twelve thou&and ducats towards the expenses of ihc war. The 
peace thus concUided wns nmlulaitied, atid as all this port of 
C&labriu hud returiR-d to the kiug^ tliu Cdrdiuul proceeded towards, 
Co»eiixa. 

Such was the internal condition of the country at the end of 
February, whiUt Sicilian and En^lj^h sliips were cruiitiug along 
the coasts, stirring up the people to revolt, aitacliing the maritim* 
cities which were faithful to the new Government, nnd aonding on 
shore armed men, weapons, and the edicts of King Ferdinand, as 
well as newspapers containing f^cts adverse to the interests of 
Franco. The liunslnnsand Turks about (his time gained possi^ssion 
of several of the Ionian Ishinds, aiul were besieging Corfu ; and it 
was currently reparlod that when lliey had completed this enter- 
prise they would turn to Italy. Nelson had quitted Sicily and 
wassailing about the Mediterranean, while nmny of the Roman 
cities borduriiig on our frontier wcro fighting for the restora- 
tion of their former Goveninient; risings hud commenced at 
Arezxo, a city of Tuscany, and a powerful Austrinn amiy was col- 
lected upon the Adigt', only wailing fur tliu signal to commence 
war. It was known that the army of the king in Sicily was 
increased by eigliteen thousaml fresh soldiers, that General 
Stuart witli three thousand English was garrisoning the city of 
Messina, that the ardent friends of monarchy were foronng them- 
selves in bands to enter the States of Naples, and to increase tlid 



SK 



THE rAETHENOPRAN RBFtJBLIC. 



S23 



atrcnj^th nnd cnurago of the army of the Holy Faith, wliile tlio 
sovereign ami his people wore alike aniiimted n'itli savage fury 
against tlie French, as may be proved by two facts which occurred 
about ihis time. 

In the course of this year's campaign a ship hoisting a ueutral 
flag, was conveying fifty-seveu invalids from Egypt to Franco, 
paniong whom were Qi'iierals Dunias and Manscteur, the tiaturalist 
Cordier, and other celebrated persona, the moat remarkable being 
the learned and distinguished geologist Dolomieu. The ship 
linving beon hhattered by a tempest, sought shelter at TAraulo, 
trusting to her flag, and the peace which was not yet known in 
E^ypt to havo been intcrruptcil. But this confidence was sooa 
rdispellcd; for llio Corsiean Bocchcciampc, who held possession of 
flVanto, caused the ship to be detained, and the French, iticluding 
Polomieu, n-ero barhnrously shut up in a horrible dungeon, from 
uhencc they were only removed as prisonci-s to Messina ; but 
parly spirit rnging there with great violence, they were thrown 
into still worse dungeons ; Dolomieu, who had been near death in 
a hitc illness, was demanded by the French Govcmmeni from tho 
King of Sii'ily. and this request was repeated by the Royal Society 
of London, by the King of Denmark, twice by the King of Spaiu, 
and by the voice of all ihe philosophers of Europe, alike horrified 
at his treatment ; but he was not released until after the Frt-nch had 
obtained fresh victories, when, in the twentieth month of his 
imprisonment, he was included 'in the conditions of peace with 
Naples, but carried with him so severe a malady, that he soon 
afterwards died, before completing his fifty-first year. 

Another ship which had sailed from Kgypt, in company with 
that whir'h was conveying Dolomieu, was caught in the same tem- 
pest, and soui^ht shelter in (he port of Agosta, intending to pro- 
ceed to France with ihe forty-cjght persons she had on board, 
soldiers, officers, and commissariat ofilccrs, all suQcring from blind* 
Jiess, occasioned by a disease engendered in the climate of Africa. 
But iteitlier their unhnppy state, nor the respect wlitch the honour- 
able scars upon the brows of these warriors might have inspired, 
nor iho thou'^hl that lliey had been driven to seek shelter from the 
Tfiolence of the waves, that ilieir vessel was shivered to pieces, and 
that they had trusted to the faith of treaties, could restrain tho 



3S4 



HISTORY OP THB KISODOM OP XATLRS. 



»BB. 



ferocity of tlio people of Agostn, wlio in ftrmcd bands ntlnrlced tli6< 
sliip from smalt boats, and inhuman!}* murdered tlipso blind and 
Itrl])les3 men. Tlie royalist ma^istmtes did not attempt lo iiiCer- 
fero or stop tlie massacre, and after the rcstomtion of pcjice with 
Fnincc, tlie king refused to punish the murderers, ailegring ia 
excuse that in popular tumults the guilt}' were confounded with 
the innocent, and therefore tlio former must escape the proofs of 
their guilt and their cotibetjuenl punishintmt. 

Such and many more meUucliuly facts readied the ears of tha 
provisional government, and at lengtli roused them from their 
apathy ; for desirous of peace, they had hitherto refused to l>clieve 
in the necessity of war and punishment. Incredulous of the first 
news, but when forced to believe, confiding in (he powerful fasci- 
nations of liberty, they felt aMUved that, without resorting to 
force, the turbulence of the people would shortly subside ; that 
they were impatient only from ignorance, but that as soon as they 
were convinced of the advanlagca of iho new State they would 
indubitably repent tliotr violence, and tram)uillity would ho 
restored : and they trusted more to tho efficatfy of harangues^ 
explanations, and the clofjuenco of their emissaries, than to aol-J 
diers and artillery. The increasing danger, hoivever, at last some- 
what &hook their confidence, and they appealed to the Frencli 
couimander-in-chief, requesting him to aid the Republic in repel- 
ling the attempts of the ox-king, bupportod iudt-ed only by the 
dregs of the populace, but neverlhclcas alarming from their num- 
bera and ferocity. Tins request was granted, and two squadrons of 
French and Neapolitans were aent, one to Piiglia and iho other to 
Calabria ; for the risings in the Abrum had met with little aud 
fluctuating Buccess, and the insui^enta were kept in check by the 
French posts along the line of operation belwecn tho Roman States 
And Naples, and hy the fortresses of Civitclla and I'cscara. Tlio 
provincea of Avetlino and Salerno were subdued by tho columns 
on their way to Puglia and Calabriii. Tho Bufiilicnta occupied 
by thcso same columns, was soon rcstori'd to tranquillity, and 
the only enemies, therefore, yot to be defeated were Uuffo sad 
Do Cosaro. 

The larger of the two columns and the best troops were iient to 
Puglia, in order as soon as possible to recover thoAu provinces which 



\T». 



THE PARTHE-SOI'EAN REPUBLIC. 



S25 



arc the granaries of the nation, nml IiacI been prevented Bending 
pmvisioiia to tlie faiiiidliet] capital, by tho interference of tho 
Bourboniats by latul, and of tlic ICngli^li by sea. General Dubcsma 
was cboscii to comnmnd that corps, wbich numbered aix tbousnnd 
French, and more tljan a thousand Neapolitans, under Kttore 
Cnraffa, Count di Uuto. This nobleman was of the high lineage 
of tho Uukcs d'Andria, the eldest son and lieir uf his family: a 
lil^erul fruni bis yout)i upwards, he bad su^ered impriaoumeut in 
Sant' Elmo in iTyti, but Ii.id escaped with the officer who guarded 
him. Uo bad relumed to his country in the army of Championnet, 
and devoted to arms, and ready to cnjfago in cnicrpriscs of darin^^ 
be despised danger, with cvcr^'lhing, human or Divine, vice or 
virtue, which stood in the way of his schemes; he was therefore 
a powerful instrument in revohitionary times. The other corps des- 
tined for Calabria, of one tlioumand two Iiundred Neapolitans, which 
was expected to be reinforced on the way by tho patriots flying 
beforo Cardinal Uuffo, was led by Giuscppo Kchipani, a native 
Calabresc, and soldier: a lieutenant wlicn dismissed the army, ho 
was an able oflicer tliough Ignorant of science, and had been raised 
to the high position of general under tho Republic, in reward for the 
zeuLoud valour be had di^plHyed as a member of the patriotic socie- 
ties. Tbo first Corps, after subjugating Puglia, was ordered to pro- 
ceed to Calabria, while tbo second was only required to keep tho 
army of the Holy Faith in check; the first, therefore, was ftcstined 
for coiiqut-st, tlic second for defence. The despatches of the Govcni- 
mcnt breathed the mild spirit of the rulers, who trusted to effect 
more by a display of their forces, by the moderation of the chiefs, 
by the discipline of the sohliers, and by their own magnanimity 
in granting pardon, than by the uso of anns ; this spirit rendered 
them ineapablo of protecting tho interests of an embr^'o Re- 
public, and was & consequence of enervation produced by long 
servitude. 

Schipani, when traversing Salerno and Eboli, passed near Cam- 
pagna, Albanclla, Controue, Postiglioue, and Cnpaccia, alt friendly 
cities or towns, aud first came iu sight of the Bourbouist standard 
flying from tho bell-tower of Caatclluceia, a tittle village on tho 
summit of a hill, reached by mountain path.s, Although his ol>* 
ject was Calabria and Cardinal RutTo, this sight so fired his indig- 



326 



UISTORT OP TUE ElKdDOU OF KAPLE3. 



dSJL 



nation, that ho turnoci out of Iiia roiul to attack tlio robel Tillage, 
selecting tlio most difficult of the three ascents, as if in Jcfinncc of 
all iuipcdiraents. The BourbonUt* from above perceiving ihey 
were attacked by regular troops, wiih Jirtilltry carried on niulea, 
were «eixed witli a panie, and after holding a tumultiinry council 
in the church resolved to surrender. But it hnppencd that Cup- 
tain Sciarpa was present, who accused tliem of cowarditw, and 
proposed, if it were necessary to yield the place, at least to inaUt 
on the following conditions ; tliat their relurn to (lie empire of the 
Republic sliould be voluntary, mid that arinecl men sliouid not enter 
their village an conquerors. Setarpa himself was chargctl to cany 
out this resolution, and he accordingly sent to ScliipHiii dcinniid- 
ing peace, and in order to vaunt thu strength of the place, and at 
the same time to assist liis own fortunes in a new line, he fnimed 
hifl message in the following terms; — '* The inhiibitancs of Castel- 
luccla were desirous of defending their vJIUge to the lust, but 
Caplaia Sciarpa not being disinclined lon-ard the Kepublic, anti 
ready to prove his loyalty, if employed iu the amiy of the State, 
has persuaded them to surrender." lie then proceeded to propo«o 
conditions. Tlie enemy listened with impatience, and replied that 
he had come to Castelluccia for war and not for peace ; to punish, 
not to reward ; and that the rebels must surrender at discretion, 
or be prepared for the last extremities ; words conveying tlio 
most atrocious moaning, and as impolitic as barbarous iu a eiTil 
war. 

Wiilo reporting to the people who were Blill collected in tho 
church what had passed between him and the enemy, Sciarpft 
added — " Now you sec the effects of your cowardice and your pre- 
cipitate resolution of sun-cnder. There are only two courses left 
for mo ; if you summon up your courage, I wilt lead you to battle 
and victory ; if you yield yourselves to a proud and cruel con- 
queror, and with yourselves your cffectB and your women, 1 shall 
retire with my possessions by anothiT road which I deem eecuro, 
and will fight on more advantageous ground, aud with a braver 
people." They answered in one voice, deniaiKling war. and liardly 
had the priest ni.ide the sign of tho cross from the altar over their 
arms, and pronounced his UcHsing on their resolution, thxn all 
went forth, to meet the enemy ; Sciarpa directing their movements. 



THB PARTHEKOPEAN HEPUBLtO. 



327 



and instructing them Irow (o figlit Meantime tlie rcpublicnn 
troops liaJ aiTtved cxlinusted at the first houses of the tiUage, and 
had to stand a. lirtsk fii'e of musketry from invisible enemies, which 
did not however stop their progress : following tltcir General, who, 
aword in hand, cicitcd thcra hy his example and voice, they 
reached thcentrjince to the town, where they «erc met by a sharp 
fire, and some fell dend, others wounded, without the appearance 
of an enemy. Aacoumge proved unavailing, the spirit of the men 
b^an to flag, and their leader soumling a retreat, wna preparing 
to withdraw them, when the enemy w]io lay in anibuacadc, rushed 
from behind the walls, and following the fugitives down the slope, 
killed some, captured oIIk-tf, and dealt witli savage cruelty upon 
the prisoners and wounded: Sdiiitaiil withdrew his troops iiito 
Sulunio. and tho event increased the courage and fatno of 8ciarpiL 
The fortunes of the corps sent to Piiglia were very different from 
that just described ; the utronyly forlitied and hostile cities of 
Troia, Ditccra, and Bovino, surrendered at ontc, and the French 
were gladly welcomed into Foggia, n friendly city. Tliey revived 
the courage of Baitetta and Manfrcdonta, who ndhercd to the Re- 
public, and prepared lo attack Snnsevcrlno, a populous city, which 
had heen reinforced hy the arrival of the inhahitants of Gftrgano, 
all reiwlved on victory or death. The city hail no walls nor had 
it been fortified by its defenders, who trusted to their desperate 
valour and to their numbers, eonsiiiting of twelve thousand men 
capable of bearing arms. Tliey proposed to ensconco the bravest 
among them, on a kind of phitform covered with olives and vines, 
close to the town, where tliey might lie in aiubnscadu and pursue 
the cueray ; when as usual enticed by love of plunder and lireiiso 
they should enter llie city separately, in search of booty. When 
at Bovino, General Dtihesme had punished all rebt-Is with death 
who had been guilty of tlicft, and even tni-huled the French sol- 
diers ; and lie now set up a placard, stating ihese acts of discipline, 
in lieu of threats or promises to the inhabitants of Sunsevcrina 
They, on their side, put several repuLticans to di^alh, both respect- 
able citizens and priests, only because they entreated for peace ; 
they then informed the General of these cniol acts, calling them 
acta of ilisciplino, afler his example or in moclicry uf bis proebiraa- 
tion. Kouaed to indignation, Duhesmc advanced against Sanso- 



328 



H18T0aY OF TUB KINODOU OF NAPLES. 



use. 



verino on the 25th February. Having Icamt tlie desiyna of the 
Bourbonists by strategy or Lv spies, ho sent a Btranjj doucliment 
of troops to skirt tho k'ft of the hill, to tlialodgo them from tho 
oliveH, ami in the event of victory (which ho believed certain) to 
cut off their dight. Tho liourbonists guessing the intentions of 
the enemy, and having sufticicMitly strenglbcned their tirst front 
with cannons dragged thither by main foa-e, and ly a numerous 
body of light cavalry who scoured the plain, like Kumidiaus, 
rushed out from the wood, and fighting valiantly, forced the 
French »quadron to retire. 

Another squadron hastened lo their nsaixtanco, whilst Dultcsme 
assaulted the city by meoua with which the defenders were unac- 
quainted, and having dispersed their cavalry which, though not 
strong, had harassed hia troops, he seized their batteries, sur- 
rounded and gained poiiseeaion of the hill of olives, after which ho 
sounded his trumpets to victory and indiscriminate slaughter. In 
the midRt of thin discomfiture of the Bouvhonists, the first squad- 
ron elfcctcd the movement assigned them, and thus the flight of 
tho Bourbonists being cut off, and the battle at an end, the mas- 
sacre commenced, in which tliu French were the more unsparing, 
as they had to revenge the deaths of three huudred of their com- 
rades, at least as many wounded, besides tho executions In tho 
town, and the insolent replies which had been sent to their oflerft.i 
of peace. Three thousand of the inhabitants of .Sanseverino werft 
lying dead upon the field, and the havoc was still continuing, whett 
the women with diahcvcllcd hair, their dresses torn and soiled, and 
carrying their infanta in their arras, presented themsclrcs to the 
conqueror, praying that he would stop the slaughter, or consum- 
mato the punishment deserved by rebels on the wives and chil- 
dren of the few men who remained alive. So moving a spectacle 
excited the compassion of the French, who rclaxod their sovcniy, 
and reassured the conquered city. 

The e]cani]ilo of Sanaevcrino, which damped the courage of many 
small towns in Tugliat only served to confirm the cities of Audria 
and Tnini in tlieir resolution to resist. Tliey were reinforced by 
numbers who tiad Hod from the fight, and by whom they were en- 
couraged ID tho belief that Sanseverino had fallen by treachery i 
an invention not unusual with fugitives, and which meota wiUi too 



I7». 



THE PAKTU2N0PEAN KKPDBUC. 



3S9 



nad/ credence. Qeneral Buliesme hnving incrcaied 1)i» force bj 
•igfat tltousand French from tlio Abruzzi, prepared to Advance upoa 
Andria ; while at that very moment cnvovs and hostiic^es from the 
three provinces of Puglia, arrivctl in his camp. In Naplca, mcnn- 
wliile, the command of (he army had been changed from Cliam- 
pionnet to Mncilonalil, and the aim and plan oftliat cnnipai<;n had 
been altered*, the troops wereall recalled, except a linmlful who were 
left in Foggio, and one battalion at Ariano, another at AvcDino, 
and a regiment at Nola. Tlio Turks and Hussians were besieg-ing 
Corfu, when these news reached the army, and the Bhipa of both 
flags coming within ai^ht on Iho Ionian nnd Adriatic Seas, thu hopes 
of Trani and Andria rose, and Llio other cities or towns which had 
surrendered at the rumour of the approach of the French, now, at 
the rumour of success in an opposite quarter, turned Bourbonisls ; 
the hostages lihewisc took their departure, or escaped, and thus 
regained their liberty. Sanacvcrino alone, although burning for 
vengeance, deprived of the youngest and bravest of her men, all 
Iicr remaining inhabitantn mourning for those killed in battle, aTid 
every house and inch of ground bearing the marks of recent 
slaughter, was obliged to submit, though bewailing her unhappy 
fate. 

Matters had now reached an extremity, when it became neces- 
sary cither to resign Puglia as lost ground, or to reconquer it. A 
fresh squadron of French having been collected at Ccrigiiola, aa 
numerous as the first, and placed under thu command of General 
Broussier, joined the Neapolitan legion of Ettore Caraffa, and 
directed their march upon Andria. Andrta contained a largo 
population, and was surrounded by walls with three gales ; after 
the unhappy fate of Sanscvcrino, sho increased her defences, by 
repairing ber walls in several places, where they had fallen in 
ruins, by raising new fortifications, and barricatling two of her 
gates, digging a wide ditch, and by throwing up a litgh trench 
before each. The city was defended by ten thousand nourboniata, 
aided by the iulmbitants, wbo numbered seventeen titousnnd. 
Priests and friars used the powerful incentives of religion to ex- 
cite tho people; and, raising a crucifix of colossal sizo upon a 
large altar iu the public square, they asserted that, during the 
celebration of mass, they heard the holy imago declare that no 
VOL I. 2 b 



390 



HISTORY OP THE KINODOM OF NAPLES. 



UML 



power on earth was stifTicient to obtain ponsossion of a city defended 
by the chenibim of paradise, and that a. numerous bnnd of soldiers 
and pcoplo would shortly arrive to the aid of the itihabitanta of 
Andria. These promises were written out in large characters, and 
placed in the hand of the crucified image, there to be read by tUo 
people. As it chanced, the day before the appearance of tho 
French, a battalion of Bourboiiista arrived, brought Ihiclier in 
transport ships from Bitoiito, and tiding reached Andria that 
Euglisli, Ru&sian, and Turkish soldiers were expected in a fuvr 
days; the predictions, therefore, were confirmed, and the people, 
secure of victorr, rejoiced, and had no fear of the approaching 
combat. 

The enemy around Andria divided his forces into three 
columns (as many as there were gates), and attacked, or feigned 
attacks ngainst the city on the best military principles, while the 
defendern kept the assailants nt a distance by a disctiarge of cannon 
and musketry from their rriniparts. General BroussitT gave the 
signal, and amidst martial sounds and tho roar of artillery, tho 
Republicans advanced at a charge, and placing the scaling bidders 
against tlie wall, began to mount them ; but as many were killed 
and more wounded of the bravest and most distinguisbed of 
their men by the volleys of musketry, stones, and nibbish thrown 
from above by the defenders, a ictrt-at was sounded, and, derided 
and insulted by their opponents, the attacking party returned to 
the camp. Lnchily for the Frtnch, just at that moment the gate 
tovards Tmni was burst open by the explosion of a shell, and 
BroUBsier, with a cbosen band of his men, happening to be stationed 
nearil, Ibey rushed in ; but as he peneti»tcd into the city, he 
found the battle raging fiercer within, as eveiy bouse was converted 
into a cnatic ; and attliougb the second column came up through 
the same gate in support of the first, Broussier was liesiiating 
whether to proceed or retire beyond the walls, when he saw Ettoro 
Carafi'ii advancing lo meet him with bis troops of Neapolitans and 
Froneb. They had been stationed opposite tho gate called Barra, 
but unable to succeed in battering it down, and hearing of the 
peril to which Broussier was exposed, they liad attacked tho walls 
by scaling ladders, and alike indiflfcrent to the loss of their com- 
rades and to their own wounds, bad made their way into the city. 



ITSBl 



THE PARTHENOPEAN BEPLBLIC, 



831 



During tliis assault, Colonel Berger, when seriously wounfled oa 
the ladder, caused luma^lf to he assisted to mount; and Ettoro 
Caraffa waa seen with a long ladder on his shoulder, and a Xeapo- 
litan pennon and a naked sword in his liand, surveying the height 
of the walls, and seeking a place the ladder could roach ; having 
found it, he ascended the first, andentereil the city alone. Though 
the whole force was now in Andria the battle was not ended, for 
such was the valour of the Bourboui^ta, that ten men within a 
weak building sustained tlic attacks of whole battalions of French 
for many hours, and others gave proofs of uo ordiuary courage. 
The city of Andria at last succumbed. It had once been a fief, 
and afterwards the rich possession of Ettore CanLflTs, by whom it 
had ju8t boeu stormed ; yet in tho council of war he proposed that 
it should be burnt to the ground, — a marvellous instance of self- 
denial or thirst for vengeance, Tliis sentence was confinned by 
his oomntdes, and llie coniniandcr-in-chicf ordered its execution, 
wliicli was followed by a vast destruction of property, and by misery 
which would be too painful to describe. 

Tlic rage of either party was yat far from satiated. A stitl 
greater number of Bourbonists were collected in the city of Trani; 
and the army of Brou&sicr proceeded thither, tliough with dimi- 
nished numbers, for at least iivo hundred brave soldiers had beeu 
killed or wounded at Andria. Traiii wasaatrouger city, protected 
by massive walls and bastions, and with a large supply of cauuon, 
vessel* equipped for war, better disciplined iroops, a citadel, and 
the plan of defence prepared. Broussier advanced in three divi- 
sions, and having invested the city in tlic night, raised several 
batteries, and by three attacks, two of which were feigned, but the 
last, led by himself, real, endeavoured to etfect a breacli ; but the 
defendcra discovered his designs, and fnistmted his attacks. The 
conibnt was carried on from both sides, those within the walla 
being vigilant and active, thoso without watching tho accidents of 
the day, with a caution which will bo appreciated by all acquainted 
with the rules of war ; for though we may often gain our end by 
valour, yet wo more frequently secure the victory by taking 
advantage of the errors of our opponents, and seizing opportu- 
nities presented by fortune. In this instance the city was in fact 
taken by an accident, for U happened tliat upon the sea-sborc thcr« 



332 



HISTORT or THE KI>"ODOH OF NAPLES. 



laj a littlo fort, almost coDCcaled bj tocVs and walls, and tliat <inj 
loft imperfcctl^v garrisoned by the least available of the citizenSL 
This fact was discovered by a soldier on tbe wdo of tlie French, 
who hoped to reach It by walking through the sea or by 8witnrain{[. 
If aving informed some of his comrades of his intention, and lioping 
by the smallnesa of their number to obtain the greater glorr, 
they advanced to the assault The water was breast high, but 
carrying their arms above their hcnd9, they reached tlie roeka, 
elarabcrcd over the niins of the old wall, and arrived at tho top of 
the ramparts, without being seen by tho guards, who, however^ 
paid for their carclesencas with their lives. One of their comradcn, 
whom they Imd left as a videttc in the camp, informed tlie com- 
mander-in-chief of their success, and, at a given signal, a largo 
detachment of troops was sent thither and entered the fort ; but 
instead of having lo make their way by a dillicult access througb: 
tho sea and over rocks, they scaled Uie walla without oppositioo. 
As soon as the Bourbonista beard of the danger to which they were 
exposed, they hastened in crowds to attempt the recovery of tho 
lost castle, but the skill and valour of tho French repelled all 
their attacka 

The defenders were diverted from their vigilance on the other 
fronts of attack by the battle which was thus raging on the const; 
and General Broussier commanded a second attack on tho walls, 
which proved succressful; for although he loi^i many killed or 
wounded, ho forced a way into the city, where the battle hecamo 
still more sanguinary and terrible, but occasioning most loss lo tho 
French, who wcro fired at from the bouses, and from behind tho 
barricades or trenches, almost without seeing an enemy. They 
therefore determiued to get to the tops of tho houses, which in 
Puglia have flat roofs, and to pass from one to tho oilier by break- 
ing through the walls, or making bridges of the beams and other 
timber. The aspect of the bottle was now changed ; the defender* 
who had been secure within their houses, surprised by tho enemy, 
descended from the roofs, and as the forti&cations and heavy artiU 
lery of tlie citadel were now rendered useless, and the guards be- 
hind the ramparts killeil, a now kind of warfare commenced, which 
disheartened the people, and disconcerted the whole scheme for 
their defence. After the destruction of tho means they had pro- 



THB PAnTHEKOrs^ EEPUBLIC. 



sss 



parcel for rcsistnnce, even their reBoIulion to Ggtil totlio last failed 
nviLti tliu inipotfaibiLity of success. Tbuir anus dropped from llietr 
bands, aud Tmni was in tlio possession of the enemy ; less as a 
puninlinu'iit tliau as a second example, tlie city was in tlie fury 
of tlie moment reduced to a. heap of corpses and rutns. Ettore 
Oarnffa, valiant in war but cruel in council, and wlio bad Ulcen 
tlte little fort on tlic sea, and afterward* assisted to gain possession 
of the city, supported the vote by which Trani was ordered to be 
bumed. 

Leaving the unhappy city to its fate, tlie army proceeded to Bari, 
Cfglia, Mnriiiia, and other cities or towns where they reanimated 
their friend.t, .tubducd ihcir enemies, and imposed heavy taxes on all ; 
for bcsith's having to satisfy the rapacity of foreign troops, Carafik 
had to proviilc for his own necessities, as he had no means left but 
those of war by which to maintain his soldiers : himself a native of 
Puglia, ho rcphcd to tlio depuiies of those eouiinuues who appealed 
to him for thu removal or diminution of the tribute unjustly im- 
posed on faithful and friendly cities, by citing as an example the 
necessary ri;.'Our which had been employed towards his own city of 
Andria which had been burned at his desire, and that he himself 
was ready to resign his family possessions, his high name, bis re- 
pose, and his very existence for his country. Tlio French column in 
Puglia repeatedly disi^rsed and defeated the Bourbonists in open 
fight, owing to want of shill tn their leader Do Ccsarc, who was a 
coward al heart, and profoundly ig:uorant, for ho had been trained 
in domestic servitude, which is unfavourable to the growth of mili- 
tary courage, and even destroys its germ where bestowed by nature. 
Ths adiiereiits of the king were discouraged by Uie number of 
disasters aud deaths, aud the rule of the HvpuUio was once moro 
fi'nred and its «ymbols respected in Puglin. But Duhesmo, as well 
as BroU9>ier, was recalled, as both wei'e implicated by Faypoull in 
his cha^ against Championnet ; and Generals Olivier and Sarra- 
zin wore sent to command the troops, with orders not to advance 
into the more distant provinces, and to keep their soldiers prepared 
at the fiml intimation for a retreat upon Kaples. 

General JlliK-donahl suspected titnl they would not be able to 
maintain their footing in Lower Italy, as the French army in the 
north were meeting wicb one disaster afier another. The Austrians 



331 



HISTOET or THE KiyODOM OP KAPLRS. 



naa. 



had begun tliolr marcli, and llio Itua»iaiis were following. Thftj 
bnttlo of Magnano, wliich was long contested, allliougli occaetou-l 
ing much loss to the Germans, Itad forcwl the French (o quit tho 
Adige, encamp Ijeliind the Mincio, and llience fall back on tJie 
Oglio. MantuR was invested, Milan threatened, and the army of 
Rchcrer wliich had been reduced to 30,000 men, had to face 45,000 
Germans, as well as 40,000 Russians who were advancing behind 
them. The French armies in Piedmont, Tuscnny, and Najdes were 
at a distance from Lnmliardy, and engagi-d in an inglorious war- 
fare against tho people of thcRc countries. 8uch was the state of 
affairs in Ilaly, when the Turks and Russians, having taken Corfn 
find the Ionian iitlaiids, as well as the i&tati<ls wliich had once be- 
longed to Venice, despatched forty ships of the line containing 
32,000 soldiers to tho coasts of Italy, and the Italians who bated 
the French, because they were foreigners and innovators, and for 
their dcpre<3atioJig, supported their enemies, and liopoJ for greater 
freedom at tho hands of tlie Turks, and the soldiers of llic north. 

The stale of the interior was even worse ; for in the provinces 
beyond PugHa, the Bourbonist party was increasing in nunibers 
and daring. Prouio and Kodio had recovered for the king almost 
every city and town of llie Abruzzi ; and while avoiding encount- 
ers with the French, and leaving them unmolested and masters of 
the flehl, ivherovor they encamped they ]K!rsuaded the people to 
return to their former attachment to their povercign. MainmonSj 
occupied Sora, San Gcmiano, and all the country watered by th( 
Liri ; Sciarpa had gained po3i<ession of Cilento, and menaced the 
gates of Salerno, while Cardinal KufFo, proceeding along the south 
of Calabria, attacked the cities of Corigliano and Kossano, and, 
dividing his chief band, sent Licastro against Coscnza, and Ala; 
against Paola, the only cities of that province which continued 
their adherence to the Ropultlic. Paola fell, and the liberals there 
repaired to Cosenzn, while Cassano and Ilossano obtained miitcrablt 
conditions at a high price. Coscnza alone continued to resist' 
One Do Chiaro, who had been chosen leader, because an ardent 
liberal, commanded tho troo])s there ; he had 3000 Calabrcse under 
him, and though the city was unpr<jvidcd with walls, it was pro- 
tected in one plaec by trenches, in nnotlier by houses and fortified 
mounds, and, in its largest circumference, by the river Crati, by the 



ins. 



THE rAllTUBNOPEAS RErDHIJC. 



335 



two brandies of wliidi ii was almoat surrounded. Tlicra was nn 
abundance of nrms nnd provisions, and tlic iiilinbitanls were not 
wanting in resolution. But when their liopes were at tlic liigliest, 
the Bourbonists entered without oppositiou at the place wliere Do 
Cliiaro with his largest force was ^Lalioued, nnd after having by 
his exjimple and words seduced as many of his own ineti as ho 
could, ho led the enemy treacherously to the other posts, and thus 
tho city was tahen in a few hours. Some of those who continued 
faithful fled across the river, and by the valour of their arms held 
out until nighi ; others by pursuing wild mountain paths reached 
the shore and embarked ; others trusting to former friends wero 
betrayed, while some hy a happy chance effected their escape. 

The cardinal (hia numbers increased by the numerous liordes of 
Do Chiaro) wisely turned to Puglia, where ho hojwd the news of 
his arrivnl would reanimate the spirit of the royalists, which had 
been discouraged by recent events ; though ignorant of the art of 
war, he uiidenstood that of exciting civil turntoits, and conducted 
the difficult enterprise with skill. As his army was composed of 
A set of ruffians, robbers, and desperate characters, he permitted 
cruelty, rapine, and other crimes, in order to insure success. 
Jlony of the bishops and clergy, of high rank from distant part* 
of the country, secretly concerted revolutionary plana with him, 
vhilo ho stimulated their zeal if lax, and checked it where prema- 
ture. He alwaysaddressed them in the conciliatory but equivocal 
language of an ccclesinsiic, and contrived to spread tidings of tho 
I near approach of his troops in Puglia ; the courage of the royalists 
'therefore reviving, the pretended Duke of Haxotiy again took the 
£old ill the southern towns of I'uranio and Lecco. 

The Cardinal adranced slowly in Calabria, so as to allow time to 
•pread the news of the decline of tho Republic ; he rciluced to 
obedience the cxtcn.sive region of the Dasilicata, which is washed 
by the Ionian Sen, and abounds in corn and cattle, men and 
cities. General Mncdonald meantime recalled the French troops 
from Puglia, but their march was conducted with so much skill, 
ias rather to ap|>o«r a military stratagem than a retreat ; but the 
Corsican Dc Cosare no sooner heard that the land wrs cleared of 
the enemy, than he advanced cautiously to take possession. Just 
then tho envoys of our Kepublic returned from fmuce, where they 



UI3T0BY or TBE KINCDOU Of NAPLES. 



am. 



lj«d been seat to obtain a formal recognitmn of tho NeapoIiUu 
Government, and to coin.lu<le a Icajjuo of amity, and llicy brought 
back tidings tliat tl>e Directory had, under various pretexts, re- 
fused our requests, llius betraying tlicir intention of nbaDdoutng 
the country to its unhappy fate— a country which had suffered 
from its attachment to France since 179^. which had by her been 
ehangcd into a Kcpuhlio, had paid licr LriUute, been impoverished 
for hor 8a](0, and wliich she was now about to deliver into the 
handa of former tyrants — the usual fate of a people who commit 
ihcir deatiiiica to the keeping of foreigners! Along with the 
envoya, came tho French Conmiiseioner Abriul to iustituLe a bettor 
organization of the Xoap<j1i(au Republic ; for, among the excuses 
put forvcurd by tbo Direct'iry, waa the imperfect form of govern- 
racnt bestowed ufton us by Chninpiounet. Abnal was reputed an 
honest man, a friend of liberty, and thorou^ldy versed in the 
subject of tho people's riglits and niodvrn tluorios of government, 
and bis residence in Naples only aetTcd to increase his already 
high reputation. 

Uc took the Government of Franco as a model for that of 
Naples, and confided ihc legislative power to twenty-five citixens, 
and the executive to five, assisted by four niinisicrs. He himself 
selected the ])ersons who wore Co (ill tlieitc thntc othees, and while 
rclainiiij? many of tho former government, he added new, and 
eliQngod them frequently witli otbera. Among the new was tho 
})liygtcian Domcnico Cirilio, who, on receiving iutimatiou of his 
appointment, answered, "The dmiger is great, hut the Jionour still 
greater; I am willing to dedicate my poor tuleuls, my small 
means and my lifu, to the Republic." Tlie new Goverumeut im- 
mediately entered upon oflice with ronstitulional forms either bor- 
rowed front France or such as those now in power judged best ; tho 
constitution proposed by Mario Pagnno, although long discuMed, 
had not yet been agreed upon, and was therefore handed over for 
examination to the second Legislative Congrrss, which, being re- 
lieved from tlie responsibility of conducting the a (fairs of Stalo^ 
were now wholly occupied with the important study of new laws, 
codes, syntems of aduiinistralton, Hnaneo, feudaliBm, the army, 
public worship, and national education; after which their atten- 
tion was directed to the erection of magniticeut uionumeats in 



iTBB. 



THE PARTUBNOPKAN RBPDBLIO. 



S3> 



lour of the Republic For this end they invUod arcliiteeU to 
eS&ipcte in a. design for the construction of a Pantheon, where the 
snmes of Deo, Vitalinno, and Galliani, were to be inscribed in 

[legible characters ; they decreed a monument to Torquato Tasso 

'ill his birthplace at Sorrento, and that, where the ashes of Virgil 
repose, a tomb should bo raised in marble on the spot, wortliy of 
bis name. 

Whilst the representatives of the UepubHc were planning schemes 
of future greatness. Cardinal Rnffb was engaged with the siege of 
Altamura, a large city in PugUa, strong both from its position 

^8nd fortifications, and still stronger by the valour of its inhabitants. 
But the Cardinal, joined by the Coraican, and emboldened by his 
first taste of success, pitched his camp in sight of the walls, and 
began the attfick. The Bourbonists, though more undisciplined 
than ever, )\iul gained in military experience, and were increased 
by the number of veteran aoldicrs and others sent theni from Sicily, 
or who hnd joined as volunteers ; they were well provided with 
innon, material of war, field artillery, and gunners, and wcro 

'superior in everything to their opponents, except in valour. The 
attacks continued fruitless for many days, and were attendcU with 
nuich loss, which increased the rage of the aasailants, and the 
courage of the citizens, who witnc^ed from their walls the religious 
rites performed by the Cardinal in the camp. lie had erected an 
altar beyond the range of the enemy's fire, and caused masa to be 
celebrated every morning, while, attired in his purple robes, lie 
pronounced a panegyric on those who had fallen the previous day, 
prayed for their intwccssion as if they had been saints, and pro- 
nounced a blessing, making the sign of the cross over the arms 
which were that day to be used againat a city in rebellion against 
Ood and the king. 

Keligioiu ceremonies wcro likewise taking place within the city. 
Tlie people there were adoring the cross in their churches, where 

.thoy were excited to Cglil by the words and symbols of liberty. 
Provisions wero scarce, stores of ammunition still more scarce ; 
and if the liberality of the ricli, and the economy of the citizens, 
relieved them from one kind of privation, tlie necessity of keeping 
up a rapid and continuous 6re increased their dread of the second, 
Ignorant of the art of fusing the church bells, the citizens melted 

TOL. L 2 F 



338 



HISTORY or THB K1N0D0H OP NAPLES. 



17m 



down all the metal off their houses for projectiles ; and as they 
were unaWc to aim correctly with stones hlowo from the gunit, 
they made use of copper money, and thus the roar of the artillery 
did not cease until their powder was exhausted ; the enemy then 
adranced their batteries close to the wall, and a breach being 
opened, proposed to tlie inhabitants that they should surrender at 
discretion. This waa refused, bcciiuse (if the nature of the Cardi- 
nal had not that dny suddenly changed) they Itnew that he only 
intended to spare the lives of tlio asfailants, and none of those of 
the citizens; that they would thus be destroyed without risk to 
their destroyers, and that death would be the harder to bear when 
deprived of their arms and the means of resistanec. The citizens 
of Atlamura, therefore, defended the breach with their swords, and 
with beams of wood and stones, killincf many of the enemy ; but 
when they pereeived the city was taken, all who were able, men 
and women, left hy the gate where the enemy wero fewest, and 
flying and defending themselves to the last, made their escape. 
The fate of tliose who remaineil was horrible, for the conquerors 
showed no mercy ; they killed women, old men, and children, and 
committed every olrocity. Neither Andria nor Tniui, nor perhaps 
{if history spenk true) Alesia nor Sagunturo, could comjiare with 
the destruction and slaughter which took place at Altamura. This 
infernal scene lasted three days, and on tho fourth, the Cardinal, 
after absolving the army of their sins, gave them his blessing, and 
proceedetl to Gravina, which he also sacked. 

The bands of Pronio, Sciarpa, and Mammone, with other ad- 
venturers, who wero dally tuniing with the wheel of fortune, ad- 
vanced more slowly, but with not less success. Never were the 
temptations to selfish ambition stronger, nor oaths less respected. 
Tlie Cnnlinal gladly welcomed the traitors, commended their 
treachery, and promised higher rewards for greater achievements, 
should these even involve a crime, thus still further corrupting 
the already corrupt morals of the proplo. The rrjuiblican cities in 
Ihc Ilasilieata, though valianlly defending themselves, finally sur- 
rendered to gcjarpa, on condition that the lives of the citizens 
should be spared, but consenting to resign their liberty, and sub- 
mit (o the Bourbons. The provinces of Abruzzo, with the ex- 
ception of Pescara and a few towns garrisoned by the French, 



17D9. 



TBB rASTtreXOrBAN KEPI'DLIC 



339 



Gftlabria, mid Puglia. liad aovr all wlioU/ rctunied to tlicir alle- 
gikiKSe to tlie kiii;j, aud the Republic was confitieJ to a few mile* 
round Niiples. Genuial Macdonald was petitioned to send liis 
soldiers against tlio rebeU, but he replied that military reasons 
obliged him to decline. Tlie republicans, though nncasy, were 
not yet alarrocd, when the General pretending that residence in 
a luxurioua city was causing a decline in military discipline, an- 
nounced bis intention of encamping bis sobticm at Caserta, con- 
cealing the fact tlmt lie had received nova of the disasters in Italy, 
and that Schcrer bad been several times dofL^alcd by the united 
Austriana and KiiKsianx ; that the battle of Cassano had been lost 
by Morcau, and Milan taken by the enemy who had crossed the 
Po, and occupied Modcna and lU^ggio ; and that tlic Italian people, 
either from ignorance or Lccuuso irritated at the French spoliation, 
bad joined the adversarice of France. The activity of the Bour- 
boniats divulged thtrse disasU-rs, and discovered tbe deceptions 
practised by the French general, who, routed by attacks on all 
sides, proclaimed in an edict: — 

" That every town or city in rebellion against the licpublie 
shall be burnt and levelled to the ground. 

" Cnrdinals, bishops, abbi^, curates, and all ministers of Divine 
worship, shall be held re8|ionsible for acts of rebellion in the ]ilaces 
where they reside, and shall be liable to the punishment of death. 

"Every rebel aliall be liable to the punishment of deatli, and 
every accomplice, whether lay or spiritual, shall be treated as a 
rebel. 

" None are permitted to ring a double peal, and, wheresoeTOr 
heard, the ceclesiastic of that place shall bo punished by dcatli. 

" Whoever sliatl spread news adverse to the French, or to the 
Parthenopeau Republic, eball be declared a rebel aud suffer death. 

" Tbe loM of life sliall be accompanied with loss of property." 

The army of Macdonald was in camp at Cascrta, when 500 
soldiers of the King of Sicily, and a considerable body of English, 
landed from Anglo-Sioilian vesactB on the shores of Castcllamare. 
These soldiers, aided by the Bourbonists and the batteries from 
the sliipft, took possession of the city and the little castle which 
protects the port Having mastered tbe place, they put many of 
their opponents to death, and the garrison of the fort, although 



340 



HISTOBT OP THE KINODOM OF NAPhESu 



inUL 



Frencli, Rurrendered on terms. When the pcaaantiy of llie small 
Wlln^s round Lottcrc, Gragnono, And tLe rude ]>opu1ation of the 
neigliboiiring- mountains, Icamt wlint. Iiad occurred, tliey Iiaatened 
to the spot. The loautiful city of Castellamarc was pvcn up to 
pillage and every disorder. At the same time, an English regiment, 
accompanied hy a considerable force of Bourhonials, landed near 
Sfllemo, took that city, and roused Vietri, Uava, Citaro, rogaDi, 
and Noccra, to revolt in favour of the king ; after putting a num- 
ber of tlie inhabitants to dcatli, find colleeting mut-h plunder, they 
formed the nibble (who had liasteucd thither from all parts in search 
of booty, rather than from s.ay interest in the war) into hands of 
soldiers. Wlien this intelligence readied the French camp, though 
unable to teirify them, it roused their indignation at tlio insult 
offered their name and valour. 

On the 28th April, General Mncdonald with a large detachment 
of troops, and General Vatriii with another not less strong, ad- 
vanced to the encounter of the enemy. Macdonatd came up vith 
them on tlie banks of the Siirno, fortified by entrenchments and 
artillpry ; but on finding tlicniselvcs attaclted they fled, abandon- 
ing their cannon and a few of their men, who had been disabled. 
The conqueror next subdued the towns of Lettero and Qragnano, 
and descended on Caslcllamare, where the English and Siciliana, 
and many of the Bourhonists, were escaping in crowds in the 
ships. A fleet of the Republic, which had left the port of Naples 
in the night, attacked them valiantly, and altltough the wind was 
unfavourable and drove them beneath the bows of the hoeitilo 
frigates, they prevented the escape of many, who falling into tho 
hands of the conqueror, were killed or detained prisoners. The 
fruits of this victory to the French were threo royal standards, 
seventeen cannon, tifty Sicilian soldiers, and as many Bourbonists; 
besides having satiated their revenge for the insults offered to the 
famo of their arms. In the middle of the night, when the Anglo- 
i^icilian vessels were far out at sea, though still within sight of 
tho city, the town of Gragnnno and several houses were set on 
tiro. Tliia destruction of property was disgraceful both to those 
who gave the order, and to those who executed their command, 
because it was uscleea for the war, and proceeded from a savage 
thirst for vengeance. 



ins. 



THE PARTHEXOPEAS RBPUBUC. 



341 



General Vatrm, with still greater iuhumanttj, put three 
tbouftaud of ihti enemy to doatli, sparing none of tUo prisoners 
except those who belonged to tho regular army, and a few Bour- 
Ijoniits, whom he reserved only to hand over to the tribunals, in 
order that they might be made a tremendous example. He sent 
triumphantly to Naples fifteen cannon taken in battle, with three 
Btnndnrds, one of King George of Enjijlaud, and two of King 
Ferdinand of Sicily, and with a long file of Sicilian, English, 
and Neapolitan prisoners. The rebel cities, though they had now 
returned to their allegiance to the Republic, had to pay heavy 
fines to the conqueror. 

But the day had arrived when tho Parthenopcan Republic was 
to be abandoned to her own resources ; General Slacdonald came 
to Naples from Caserta, and addressed the Provisional Govenimcnt 
assembled to receive him, to this effect : — a State which is pro- 
tected by foreign anna cannot be wliolly free, and tho Ne;ipoIitan 
finances are unable to maintain tho French anuy ; nor does Naples 
need their assistance, provided tho fricnd» of liberty will volun- 
toer to attaclt the disorderly bands of the Uoly Faitli ; he there- 
fore expressed his determination, after leaving strong garrisons 
in Sant' Elmo, Capua, and Qacta, to depart with the rest of his 
army, to disperse (as he hoped) the enemies of the Republic who 
had descended into Italy, and who trusted for success less to their 
own weapons than to discord among the Italian people, and to 
their long habits of Bcrvitudc. Wishing the Parthenopcan Re- 
public all prosperity, ho would inform his Government liow worthy 
the Neapolitans had proved themselves of liberty ; and that the 
people and the populace were not to bo confounded, since these 
last alone were iigliting for servitude under the banner of their 
tyrants ; but that even they might be easily induced to change, 
like all who are oidy covetous of booty and plunder. After the 
members of the Government had replied with friendly and con- 
gratulatory addresses, he took his leave and retunied to the camp. 
Incredible as it may apj>ear, the Republicans rejoiced at the pro- 
posed departure of tho French, for, simple and straightforward 
themselves, it appeared lo them impossible for human nature to 
have any averaion to freedom ; and they believed that the lata 
rebellions had been caused hv the excesses, exactions, and in- 



342 



HISTORY OP THE KIXODOM OP NAPLES. 



ir». 



solcncc of tlio cooqucrors ; tliey tlicrcfore Ml assured i)iat on 
proclaiming tlieir dejiarture, tlit; liortlcs of wlioni the army of ilio 
Hoi/ Foitli was compoeud iroulU ilivsporso of llicmsn^lres, niiJ that 
the roiuuant of that partj would Hj disconifiteil to Stcilv. This 
gave rise to a report that the Prince di Leporano, a brigadier in 
the Royalist army serviDg under the Cardinal, had deserted that 
banner, and had gone over to the Republic; that he bad taken 
hia chief prijioncr, and further, that Sciarpo, Fm Diavolo, and 
Pronio, were lefk alone with a few followers ; besides other false 
rumours. 

Meantime, on the 7th of Maj, the camp at Caserta was raised, 
and the French army set out in two il i visions ; one-half Jed by 
Macdunnid, taking the road of Fondi and Ti-rracina, and carrying 
with them the great ]iarl{ of artillery and the baggage ; and the 
other, under Vatrin, marching by Sangemiano and Ceperano. At 
the same time, (rcncral Coutard, who was commanding in iho 
Abriizzi, collected his squodrocs, and marcbeil by the short cat road 
through Tuscany, confiding the fortrosses of Uivilella and Pescara 
to Ettore Caraffa, who, returning with the French from PugliOj 
had. proceeded with his followers to the Abruzzt. Maodonald and 
Coulard met with no op]>03ition. Vatrin having taken Sangennaiio 
in figlit, n-Hchud Isola, a small town of the district of Sora, but 
was there obliged to halt. Isola is situated at the junction of two 
rivers, large tributaries of the Garigliano, by which it is surrAunded, 
and could only be reached by bridges which the Bourboniat!) had 
broken down ; as the city was thus protected by the rivers, and 
girt about by an ancient wall, the inlinbitants felt secure and wcro 
full of courage. Votrin sent to demand a paasage, which, ho said, 
tf denied he would use force to etfect; but the defenders, cither 
despising or refusing to acknowledge the rub's by which a herald ia 
held sacred, dismissed him by a discharge of musketry. There was 
no ford in either river, a heavy rain was falling, the French were 
in want of provisions, and to conquer had therefore become an act 
of necessity. The legion of Vatrin was marching along the Icfl 
bank of one river, while the legion of Olivier marched along the 
right of the other in search of a ford ; but not finding one. they 
constructed a bridge of fascines and gabions, with other timber, 
which was, however, too weak and narrow, and but ill adapted to 



IKN. 



TUK PARTHBNOPEAK REPUBLia 



sa 



bear tlie wotglit of gun-carrisgcs and tTie rapid murcli of many 
soldiers acioM it; ihercfore, while half the legion were piiasing 
over the bridge, they with their hands and ropes assisted the 
other half, who were swimming ; and the whole amiy thus crossing 
the stream, reached tho walU. The besieged were not however 
alarmed. 

By the help of some old ruins, and by demolishing the walls of 
sotiie of the housctt, the French penetrated into that end of the 
town which U again divided hjr the river, aud at the H|iot where 
tho bridge had been broken, a fresh obetnelc was presciiicd to tho 
conqueror. But fortune was on their side, the besieged had uot 
destroyed the piles, and the beams yet reinaJned near the banks ; 
the bridge waa therefore restored iu a few hours ; but the Bour- 
boniats noiv fiudiug their hopes at an cud, as well as their nieana 
of defence, made their escape with only a aiuall loss, proud of their 
defence and the number of deaths ihev had occasioned the enemy. 
Tlic French vented their rage on tho unfortunate townspeople, and 
finding a large quantil^r of wine in the cellars, drank until they 
were intoxicated, when, excited to madne^, tho massacre, pillage, 
and license, waa prolonged throughout the night, 'llic ruin fell in 
torrents, and tho town was still burning when the ann rose upon a 
heap of corpses, ashes, and mire, wliero there had once been 
houses and churchca. 



344 



HISTOBY OF THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES- 



}J». 



CHAPTER III. 

the fall 07 tbs republic aftrr tub retreat of trk 
fre:(ch aauy. 



Hardly had tlic French army crowed the frontier, when the 
Republican Government proclaimed their newly acquired inde- 
pendence, and abolishing the taxes for the war, diminishiag former 
imposts, and enunterating the political advantages in prwipect, 
they enjoined and entreated the pyopic touoise from aflliciing tliu 
country by internal strife, to return to peaceful labours, and to 
enjoy the blessings destined for them by Heaven. Fenring, however, 
that the result of this proclamation might not fully answer their 
expectatiouEi, they prepared vt'ith all diligence for the exigencies 
of>rar. TUu troops which had bueu hitherto divided into several 
columns wiri-u collected in legions; frusli soldiera were levied by 
conscription ; General lioccaromana was commanded to raise a 
regiment of cavalry ; the number of troops under Schipant was 
increased, and two fresh legions were formed, the command being 
given to Generals Spano and Wirtx. Spano wa^i a Calabrcso, who 
had long served, though in the lowest ranks of the army ; and 
Wirtz, a Swiss who hnd formerly been a colonel in the pay of the 
Icing; but upon Ferdinand's departure, absolved from his oaths 
and obligations, he had enrolletl himself among the friends of 
liberty under the banners of the Republic. The Directory next 
appointed Gabriel Mnnthonfe commimder-in-chiof of the army ; the 
same who had been first one of the Provisional Government, aud 
afterwards minister of war: he was an experienced ofHeer and 
ftkilful duuUist, with a wann heart, courageous temper, aud pos- 
sessed of nalurul eloquouce, buL was not remarkable for intel- 
lectual endo^v:nent3. ^Vlion proposing in the legislative council a 
decree, by which all mothera who had lost lUcir sous in the cause 



SM 



THE PAKTHENOPEAK BErUQLlC. 



345 



of freedom, should be assigned a large pension wilh other honoiin, 
he concluded his speech in these words: " Citizen Icgislntors, I 
trust that my mother may likewise have to demand of j-ou the 
fulfilment of this generous decree." He indeed fell a wicrifice 
in the cause of freedom, but unhappily hin mother recotvcd only 
tears of eompassiou, and none of the rewards assi^cd her by tho 
laws. 

Another troop was formed under tho name of the Legion 
Calabra, wlio, without a uniform or common quarters, or even 
being organized into a regiment, joined only wiien called out, and 
fought under a black banner rith the inscription, " To conquer, 
revenge, and die." They weru three thousand men, most of them 
Calaljrese, personally hostile to Cardinal Ruffo, by whom they had 
been conquered and forced to fly their country ; so that they 
bore with them the remembrance of past injuries and wounds, to 
stimulate (licm to vengeance. As a review of the republican 
array was proposed, ll>e troops wore drawn up several lines deep, 
along the magnificent Strnda di Toledo, and around the tree of 
liberty in the Pinzza Nazionale, where, amidst a vast concourse of 
spectators, the members of the Ouvcmment, the generals, and the 
commander-in-chief, Manthoh^ arrived, followed by the artillcnr 
and the royal siandardi; which had been captured in tho ongRgc- 
monts at Castcllamarc and Salerno ; a number of portraits of the 
royal family were also borne along, which the unsparing police had 
seized in the city and provinces, ns proofs of guilt. The proces- 
sion was closed by a couvoy of two files of prisoners, soldiers and 
royalists, who believing they vrero in that day and in that place 
to suffer deatli as a punishtueul and example, walked in fear and 
trembling, fiesido the tree a pile was burning intended to con- 
sume the standards and effigies. 

Tho commander-in-chief atldreasod the army, while a member 
of the Qovcrnmcut addressed tho people ; the royal effigies were 
then ordered to the flames ; but the republicans snatching them 
from the hands of the executioner, dragged them in the mire, and 
'tearing them to rags, scattered them to the winds. The minister 
of finance next exhibited a large bundle of bank paper, tn Iho 
value of 1,600,000 ducats, winch, amidst the great poverty of the 
State, had been redeemed in a few short months by the economy 



346 



HISTOBY or THE KINGDOM or NAPLia. 



UllL 



of the republican gorcrnmcnt, Jtnd li>d hy as nincli diminislicd 
tlie national tlebt ; as tlic b(-Bt mcftM of getting rid of them, these 
pftl>crs were likewise tlirown upon that pile, prepared to revenge 
the wrongs of the country, and were there coosumod Ijistljr, the 
prisoners were called before the tree, and the minister of justice 
read the decree of the Directory, in which thej were said to have 
been misled rather than guilty, and therefore thoM who had been 
soldiers were offered permission to enter the service of the Repub- 
lic, whilo the Bourbonists were pardoned and set at liberty. Their 
chains were then struck off, and sudden joy succeeding despair, 
they ran almost frantic with delight among tke people, shoaling 
the praises of the Kepublic, and their wishes for its ]>rosperity ; 
while, to increatie ihuir happiness, the bystandcra relieved Iheir 
poverty, and cxhortin] them to undt.-ccive tlieir misguided feUow- 
citlzens respecting the power and magnanimity of the Govemnieot. 
TKus ended the ceremony ; but the feaatings continued the greater 
part of lh<> day, the people dancing round the tree, singing hymna 
in praifio of liberty, and concluding marriages and other contracts, 
as in a consecrated temple. 

These demonstrations of joy were but short-lived ; for the fol- 
lowing day a large fleet of the enemy entered the Lay, and as they 
were suspected of an intention to attack the city by exciting 
tumults among the jHipulaco, the Government issued onlers to arm 
the few vessels belonging to the Kepublic, repair the {lort battcrica, 
and construct new as speedily as possible. Mo sooner was tho 
danger and ihcso orders known than tho citixons volniitccred thair 
auistanoe ; and even ladies, distingui.shcd for noblo birth and re- 
fined manners, were m*cn labouring with hands uoaccustoined to 
such hard work, carrying stones and earth for many days : the 
port being thus secured, tho ooeniy luniod in the direction of the 
islands of Procida and Iscliia, where they landed their soldiera, 
killed or captured the officials or adherent* of the Republic, and 
rc-e«tabli«he(l the royal government, ap|>ointing ningiBtratcs to 
punish the rcbela Cruel condemnations followed, and it was then 
that tho name of the Judge S|)ccialc was first mentioned, which 
aftrrwards acquired a terrific notoriety. 

The inhabiinnts of the islands arrived as fugitives in the metro- 
polis, begging for aid ; nnd the republican government, with more 



UBBL 



TUB PARTHKNOPEAN BBPUBLIi;. 



S47 



gcncroaUi^ than prudence, determined witli a few ahips and a small 
body of soldiers, to attack an enemy of much greater numerical 
force; Adiairal Cai^ceiolo was then in Naple», having returned 
thither with Iho pcruiiasiou of the King of Sicily : distinguished 
for his success iu naval engagements, and for his patnotiani, he 
held the supreme command of the Neapolitan navy, and was now 
ordered to recover Procida and Ischia. The republicans, though 
only tlirco against ten, left the port of Naples in full spirit for the 
cnterprifto; and fighting valiantly throughout the wliole Jay, caused 
much loss and damage to the enemy, and siifrercd no less thcm- 
Belvca. They might have effected more, but aa they were on the 
point of landing at Procida, the wind, which had beeu all along 
advene, blew a storm towanls evening, and obliged the littlo ves- 
acls of the Ripublic to return into port, neither aa oonquerors nor 
conquered ; though highly commended for the courage and skill 
they Itad displayed. 

Meantime tbe royalist parly had been secretly at worh in Naple*. 
and little dieheartened by the rejoicings and manifestations in 
favour of their opponents, were concerting alarming plots against 
the Ucpuhlic A vender of crystal had enlisted a numerous body 
of Lazzaroni on tlie royalist side, who, indifferent to the success of 
either pany, swore to support the throne, bribed by a promJac of 
rewards and booty. Another leader called Tanfhno, headed a 
numerous band of conspirators, and laid a scheme with the king 
and queen of Sicily, with Cardinal Uiiffo, and with other chiefs of 
the royalist bands, to carry on a civil war within the country ; 
money was given him to distribute among his followers, and ho 
collected arms to raise a disturbance ; ho then prepared hi.s plau 
of action, and aasigneil each conspirator the part ho waa to play. 
The (|ueeu when writing of this man called him a faithful servant 
and subject, a friend dear to her and to the throne. The reader 
must bo here reminded that the men on wliom the sovereigns of 
. Sicily lavished words of friendship and affcctiuu, wore of the lowest 
description, who had sprung from tlio very dregs of the populace, 
and who were sullied by crimes or their consequent punishment: 
Fra Diavolo, Jlammone, Pronio, Sciarpa, and Guarriglia. But the 
most formidable of all the conspiracies was that of Uaker. He was 
a Swiss who had long been resident tn Naples, and was related to 



348 



HISTOHY OP THE KINODOH OP NArLES. 



families devoted to the Rourbon CAU»e, to wliich he was also 
attached by motives of private ambition. Ho contrived to com- 
municate by secret moawiges with the enemy 'a shipji, and it waa 
agreed that on a Feast-dnj, when the peoplo were plunged in care- 
less amusement, llie Sicilian and Englisb Acct was to throw shells 
into Naples, and thus induce the soldiers to hurry back to the 
castles and port batteries, and leave the city defenceless ; when it 
would be easy to excite a tumult, evorylhiug being already pre- 
pared, and time the success or the undcrtukin;^ would be secured. 
In the midst of the turmoil they prepared to put to death all who 
were rebels to tho king, to burn thetr houses, and thus, with iho 
power in their hands, obtain the meansof gratifying their revenge 
Evorythitig being so far arranged, tho conspirators wont about 
the city marking llic doors and walls of the houses in various wayii, 
to signify who were to be spared and who destroyed, according as 
had hccn inlquitously determined in their meeting; but as persons 
belonging to either party frequently resided under the same roof, 
or wore of tho same family, papers were secretly distributed, the 
owner of which was to be tM?cure from attack. One of thcso papers 
M-fts presented hy Captain Baker, the brother oi the chief conspira- 
tor, to one Luigia Snnfolicc, a young woman to whom ho was 
attached, and when giving her the paper, he explained its purpose, 
and thus betrayed the impending danger. This act was the more 
generous on his part, as tho woninn he loved did not return his 
aSectioii ; she accepted the paper witli thanks, though not Tor hur- 
solf, but to bestow it on another, an officer in the army, an ardent 
partisan oftlie Republic, and who she could have no doubt would 
be one of the victims on the conspirators' list. Tliis young man^ 
oftlie name of Perri, revealed all he had learnt from her of the 
plot to the Government, showed the paper, and gave the names of 
ihose conecrrcd in the discovery, proud that he and the woman he 
loved should thus be the means of saving their country. Luigia 
Sanfelico was called up for examination, and questioned respect- 
ing the facts; ashamed of the discovery of the feelings which had 
prompted her to this act, and of having denounced the plot, as well 
as of the information she had given, and dreading the punishment 
w'liich might possibly ensue, she, however, hoped by an ingenuous 
confession to plead for pity with her judges; she, thereforOi re- 



THB PARTHBNOP£^X REpaBLIC. 



349 



vcalcd all she Itncw, except the name of him who had given her 
the paper, protecting with Diast-uUiie iletcrrai nation rather to die 
than prove hereclf bo tiugrateful as Lo injure the kind friend wlio 
hod wished to iiave her life. ^Vliat she had already' told, however, 
M'ith the handwriting ami marks on the paper, was Bufticieut lo k-ad 
to the discovery of the leaders, who were thrown into prison, their 
ftrms aod the rest of their papers seized, and thus the clue to the 
whole con<q>irflC7 was obtained, and the plot crushed : Luigia San- 
fclicc waa dreading public condemnation, when she heard herself 
called the saviour of the Kepuhlic, and the mother of her eouutry. 

When the danger the city had incurred was known, the alarm 
was increased by discovering marks or signs upon the doors of 
houses and on walls, whicli, whether real or accidental, were all 
supposed to signify the maaaacre of those within. Numbers were 
found on the public buildings, ou the National Bank, and on tho 
Episcopal Palace. Tho archbitihup of that time, Cardinal Zurlo, 
was an old rival of Cardinal Ruffo, and cuvioua of the success, 
while afraid of the power of his enemy, he pointed to him as the 
chief causo of the mi.'tfortunes of the Slate, declaring, that instead 
of being a pillar of religion and of tho Church, as he vaunted him- 
self in his Pastoral Letters, he was rather a calamity and a dis- 
grace to both ; he therefore passed an anathema upon him ; while 
Cardinal Kuflb in his turn excommunicated Cardinal Zurlo, call- 
ing him an enemy of God, tlie Church, the pope, and the king. 
The clergy were divided in opinions and sentiments; but while 
the religious and virtuous adhered to Zurlo, all tho evU-disposed 
were on tho side of UufTo. 

But by tho abuse of temporal weapons, public opinion bad 
alreatly lost its power, and all the provinces submitted to the king; 
the luetropoIiB, and a uniall circuit around, alone obeyed tho exist- 
ing govvrnmcnt. Ettorc CarafTa, with a little band of rcpublieans, 
after several conflicts outside of Pescara, having amply provisdoned 
that fortress, retired within its walls ; tlio French remained passive 
in Sant' Elmo, Capua, and Gaeta; the troops of the Itepublic wero 
few ; tho bands of the Holy Faith countless ; for besides loyalty 
to tho king, they were influenced by motives of ambition, the ad- 
vantages to be gained on tho winning side, the impunity granted 
to past crimes, and the pardon to all deserters from the rcpublicnn 



sso 



IIISTOUY OP THE KINODOM OP KAPLBS. 



UML 



party. About a tliousand Turks and Russiaos landed at IVanto, 
lud by Mar&hnl Count Hiuhcroux, and liaring joined Catxlinal 
Ruffo, placed thcmsclveH under lits orders. They soixcd and im- 
j>i>)K.-d a iiiie on the city of ii'oggia, and aftcru-ards on Ariano and 
Avelliuo, and showed IhemBelves Wfuro the little town of Cardi- 
nale, and at Nolu, Meantime Pronto, who ou tho coufiut^s of 
the Abruxzi had onioUetl some of the fugitives from Rome and 
AreziEo, scoured the country until within sight of Capua ; Salerno, 
Cava, and the cities lately conquered by tho French, were restored 
by Sciarpa to th«<ir allegiance to the Icing, and he then, with bia 
main force, took up his quarters at Nocera- Fra Diavolo and 
Mnmmono united their hands in the districts of Scssa and Teano, 
and waited ttie word of command lo proceed. Tlio Republic, re- 
duced to a weak condition, was at once thercforo attacked by 
Neapolitans, Sicilians, English, Romans, Tiiscana, Rusaiann, Por- 
tuguese, Dalmatians, and Turks, while hostile and powerful flfCLa 
were cruisinj,' in tlio Mediternmcan. The French fleet conaisiod of 
twenty-five mon of war, the Spanish seventy, the Knglish forty- 
seven in three divisions, the Russian four, the Portugnuse five, 
t}tc Turks throe, the Sicilians two ; besidctt frigates, cutters, and 
brigs innumerable, sailing under the abovo-meutionod flag*, Thua 
the French and Spaniards together only formed a combined 6oet 
of seventy veaseU, their adversaries upwards of ninety ; while iu 
Naples they wore still expecting the arrival of the fleet of Fraace 
and Spain, wliich had been promised by the French Directory. 

In order to enable the friendly fleet to enter tho port securely, 
and be of use to the Republic, it was nccoaaary to make a diversion, 
or repulse the Bonrboniat troops which were arriving in numbers to 
press the siege of the city. A council of war was held ; General Ma- 
tera, a Neapolitan wlio had fled to France in 1795, had returned to 
liis country a chef-<le-batail]on, and had since been appointwl a g(K^ 
neral of the Jlepublic, a brave ofticor, but somewhat lax in his niorala, 
and caay in hi.s conscience, proposed to collect our soldiers, who had 
been sent out in detachments, into ono army, and to increase their 
numbers by the thousand French, who had been left to garriMiL| 
the fortresses, and who had been promised to him by their leader 
Meg&an, on condition of paying as their price tho sura of half a 
million of ducats. The !<([uadrons of the Republic being thus strong 



I7WL 



THE TARTRBKOPEAN RBPIBLIC. 



SSI 



in narobcrs and skill, he offered to tend them to attacli and destroy 
^the lai^cst band of Canlinal RufTo ; if fortime sliould prove propi- 
tious to throw the Cardinal into prison, and then turn to tlicattnck 
of the band)4of Pronio, Sciarpa, and Manimonc, whom he cxjH^ctol 
would lay down their arms at tlic first rumour of his achievcnicnta, 
before coming to blows, lie further proposed that the partisans of 
the Republic should shut themselves up in the castles, and goiard 
them, wliile the city should be abaiulout'd to the strife of factions, 
until the republican army, having conquered the country round, 
should return in triumph to punish the rebels. Tlie poverty of the 
treasury was no obstaclo to bis acheme, " For," the General declared, 
" if the government will make me master of the lives and property 
of twelve wealthy persons, whom I shall point out by name, I 
promise within two days to place in the treasury the half million 
rapaciously demanded by Mcgtan, besides another three hundred 
thousand ducata for the expenses of the war. Citizens of the 
Directory," he concluded, " citizen ministers and generals, tho 
deaths of somo few individuals, conaiderablo loss in property, and 
nifluy acts of political necessity, which weak minds call injustice, 
will accompany or be the consequence of my scheme, but tlic 
Kepublic will conquer; whereas, should the Republic fall, all will 
alike suffer from a iteries of acts of injustico, and from the loissca 
and numberless deaths which must eu&u«." 

This speech shocked his humane audience ; to abandon thectty, 
families, and citizens to the violence and rapine of the Bourbonihts, 
purposely to excite crimes in order afterwards to punish them, 
and without regard to law or justice to exact money by torture 
from innocent persons, were crimes of such enormity, that thoy 
were as revolting to the feelings as to the upright judgment of the 
men who now ruled the State, and pointed to a line of conduct 
opposed to all their previous professions. They were therefore 
unanimous in supporting tho motion of the minister Manthonb, 
who, inpxperienced in revolutions, and measuring the courage of 
his parly by his own generous and noble spirit, declared that ten 
republicans were able to cope witli a thousand of the enemy, and 
that they did not want tho assistance of the French, since Suhi- 
pani could be opposed to Sciarpa, Bassetti to Mammonc and 
Fm Diarolo, Spau(^ to De Cesare, and he himself to Ruffo ; while 



352 



BISTORT OF THE KIKGDOM OP NAPLES. 



inp. 



General Wirtz could remain in tlie c'liy, witli part of the regular 
troops, the whole of the miUtta, &d<1 the Calabrose legion might be 
held in reserve. It was therefore resolved that Spanfi and Schipaiii 
sliould start the followiug day. 

Schipani reached La Cava, and encamped there, whilo SpanJ 
after having hec-n routed in the woods and deBles of Moutcfort< 
and Cardinftle, returned to the city with diminished numbei 
and in disordered flight, a sight and etamplc fatal to the cause. 
A few day* later Schipani wns attacked on the flanks of his littlo 
army, which was feebly supported, anil being without a rear- 
guard, and having no hope of succour, he encamped on the bank 
of the Sama General Bassotti, who about that time left the city, 
kept the road clear of oncmica as far as Capua. Along with the 
troops of General Manthon^ in Naploa, were others raisod Irregu- 
larly by conscription, all of whom looked forward to the arrival of 
the legion of cavalry which General Koccaromana was levying ia 
the name, and at the expense of the Republic. But these hopoal 
vanished and were converted into bitter disappointment, when the 
duke, perceiving the approaching fall of the Uepublic, oflered him- 
self with liis troops to Cardinal Ruffo, and fought ou the side of the 
Bourbonisl8 until the termination of the war. 

The city was in a deplorable condition ; provisions were scarce^ 
the treasurj- empty, and even the wounded were without necessai 
a8««tance. But two ladies, formerly known m the Duchesses of ■ 
Cassano and Popoli, but now bearing the more honourable title of 
mothers of their country, went from housetohousccollecting clothes, 
food, and money for the soldiers and the poor lauguifihing in the 
hospitals ; their words and example had the desired efleet, they wore 
joined by other benevolent ladies, and the destitution was rclicve<l. 
But tho Stale was declining. Cardinal Ruffo took uphia quarters 
at Nola, and his myrmidons wore encamped as fur as Scbcto, while 
the followers of FniDinvolo and Seiarpa made their appearance at) 
Capodicbina. It was impossible to count them, for, composed of vag. 
rants and volunteers, they passed from one troop to another, roaming 
over tho country' in a disorderly manner. The numbera besieging^ 
the city appeared not less than forty thousand. Schipani wao 
attacked and conquered ontlicSanio,aud proeeeded toGmnalclIo, 
a little fort near Portici. Bassctti returned defeated and wounded 



IMl 



Tllli rARTHENOPEAK REPUBLIC. 



353 



to Nnplcs ; Matitlioii^, M'ith threo thousand soldiers, hnd bftrdly 
renclied Barra, when, after a short conflict, overcome Lv suf)crior 
numbers wUu lirud at him from the roofs of the houses, lie hftd to 
reti-eat with tho loss of many of his men. The people were begin- 
ning to mutiny wiihin the city, when mewiongcrs from Castellft- 
mare brought news thftt tho aracna] had been treacherously set on 
fire, but it was afterwards proved that although the crime had 
been attempted, the flames liad instantly been extinguished by the 
zeal of the guards, assisted by tlie wind, wliich blew from a favour- 
able quarter. During the night seditious cries vrere licard in 
the city, and alarming reports wore circulated of preparations for 
masHacre and destruction. 

Tiio Qovernment issued a proclamation, ordering thai at tho flrst 
discliargo of catinon from Ca»tol-Nuavo, the soldtcra were to rottro 
to their quarters, the militia to hasten to their posts, the patriotic 
leadcni lo eulcr the cai>tk'!t, and the citizens their liouses ; tliat at 
the second disehargo, numerous patroU were to go tho rounds of 
the city, to enforce obedience to these orders, and, at the third, 
tho patroU were to fire at the contumacious; their having being 
met with in the street was to furnish sufficient proof of their guilt, 
and the safety of the Kcpublic was considered reason enough to jus- 
tify the act. Three more discharges from the cannon were to follow, 
but instead of being Bred at long intervals aa tho flret, they were 
to succeed one another rapidly as an announticmcnt that nit were 
at liberty to roturn to their several employments. The next day 
these orders wero executed, and the effect answered the expecta- 
tion of the Government. The alarm was great, the streets were de- 
serted ; while glooin spread over tho face of the city, which looked 
like u vast empty tomb. 

That same day, the 11 lb June, an attack wtis made by Russian 
and Sicilian troops of tho line, on the fort of GrauatcUo, which was 
guarded by Schipani's soldiers; who were little less than a tlioueand 
mcD, supported by gunboats, the iirc from which was directed by 
Admiral Car&cciolo with surprising boldness and skill. Though the 
general was wounded, and his numbers diminished, he yet main- 
tained his position, and the hostile army encamped before the fort. 
Matters remained thus during tlie night, in wliicli both parties were 
preparing for attack and dofencc. Oeneral Schiiutni having deter- 

VOL. T. 2 a 



394 



HISTORY OF THE KtSODOM OF NAPLES. 



ino 



rained to retire within the city, sent At daybreak a numerous 
detachment of DalmatiftnB to the rear of the Bourbonists, vho, if 
surprised and routed, he hoped would afford him an opportunity to 
leave his encampment, attack and drivu them back as far as the 
parish of Portici, and oocure for himself a safe retraat upon Naples. 
But suddenly tlio Datmalians, cither seized with a panic, or seduced 
by the enemy during ihc7fi/Ue, deserted tlicir standard, joined the 
Russians, and surrounded the little bund of iicpubllcans who had 
been thus betrnrod ; many were killed or wounded ou botli sidcs^ 
and the remain'ter of Schipaui's troops taken prisoners. 

But the Cardinal was slowly advancing, in order by the sight of 
so wealthy u city, still further to excite the appetite for plunder 
in his troopK, to whom be had promised license and pillage ; and 
also to await the fcaat-dar of St. Anthony, which was near, as the 
miracles of the blood, which had been practised in favour of Cham- 
pionnct, Macdonald, and the Neapolitan Directory, bad somewhat 
weakened the faith of the populace in St. Januarius, and the Car- 
dinal therefore found it necessary to appeal to their superstition 
through another saint. On the first dawn of the I3th June, an 
altar was raiseil in tho camp, and mass was celebrated. After 
invoking S(. Anthony, tho patron saint of the day, all the hordes 
forming tlio army of tho Holy Faith were ordered to advance 
against the city ; and the Cardinal himself, on horseback, decorate<I 
witli his purple, nnd sword in hand, in the centre of tho largest 
detachment of his troops, prepared to cross the little stream of tho 
Scbeto, over the bridge of the MaJdsluua. The Republicans, per- 
ceiving his intention, advanced to the oncouiitcr ; three disoharges 
of cannon from Castel-Nuovo liaving first given the signal to clear 
tho streets of the city, as a precaution against internal foes, 

GcnernI Bassctti, with a handful of soldiers, hastened to the 
height of Oapodichina, more as a menace to the right wing of the 
iramenae multitudes who were approaching through the fertile 
gardens of tho Barra, than with any intention of attncking them. 
General Wirt^ with as many as ho could collect, advanced to the 
bridge, planted a large bat tcry of cannon there, and lined tho right 
bank of tho river with soldiers and artillery ; tlio catttlcs of tho 
city remained closed, with their bridges raised. The Legion Cala- 
bra, formed in two dinsious, held the lesser coast batteries of 



in*. 



TUB PAaTHENOPEAN REPUBLIC 



355 



^Vigliena close to tlic Granili ; and parties pfttrolled the city to 
srevent plots within, anti to be cmp]o,votl, if needed, as a last and 

l^osperate resource of falliug liberty. The old invalided partisans 
of the Republic guarded tho castles, tlie young and robust accom- 
panied the aoldtors, or formuil in irregular cnm|)anic», fought oa 
volunteers, or single-handed, wherever their zeal called them, or as 
they were thrown by chanca The Russians attacked Vigliena, 
but frora the stout resistance they encountered, were obliged to ro- 
trcat, and batter the walls by ii continuous discliargouf cannon; this 
attempt having succeeded, the Rustsians, Turks, aud Bourlionists 
rushed into the fort, and fouglit liand to hand ; but, impeded and 
presso'l on by their own numbers, they suffered frora the blows of 
friends as vre\\ as foes. Many of the Calabiese legionaries were 
slain, tho rest who were wounded, appearo^d indifferent to life; 
among r-hem was the priest Toscani of Cosenza, tho head of the 
garrison, who dragging himself along with difficulty, as he had been 
stabbed in several places, approached the powder ningn^iino, and 
invoking God and liberty, act fire to tho powder, wliicli instantane- 
ously blew up with a terrible explosion and noise, and as many as 
were within the walls perishoJ, buried under the niins, or thrown 
into the air, or struck by falling stones, foes and friends thus hor- 
rilily mingled in one common death. TheCardiual quailed before 

itliis proof of desperate courage, while it emboldened the ropubli* 
cans, who swore to imitate so great an example. 

Under such auspices Wirtz reached the bridge, Rassetti the hill» 
and Admiral Cariicciolo came out of the port with armed launches: 
the Cardinal advanced with his followers, and the fight recom- 
mencing, many fell on both sides ; the victory appeared doubtful, 
immense numbers crowding one bank, while the other was defended 
by indefatigable courage and greater skill Among the volunteers 
and irregular troops, was the advocate Luigi Serio, a learned and 
eloquent man, who had once (as I havo mentioned in a preceding 

.book) been the guide and friend of the Emperor Joseph Ji. ; but 
Opposed to tho Bourbon king after his tyrannical conduct, was 
now resolved rather to die than submit to servitude. Ho had 
three nephews residing with him, timid and effeminate youths, to 
whom he said, when they heard the firing of the troops in retreat, 
" Let us go out and light the enemy:" they reminded him of his 



356 



HISTORY OF TUB KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



!:». 



Ago, tliat he wns nearlv blind, that thoy were all ufiaocwtomod to 
fight, besides being unprovided with arms, and tlicy entreated him 
not to expose himself and his family, to certain and useless destnio- 
tiou ; but their uncle replie^l : " The minister of war lia^s sciH nio 
four muskets, and two hundred charges of powder. It will be easy 
to talce aim, whon cloao to the enemy ; do jou follow me ; if we 
do not fear death, we shall at least taatc the sweets of venjrM»nce 
before wc die." They all obeyed, and the old man prevented by 
his dauntless nature ami hiti misfortune from pcrceiYiii'^^ the dan- 
ger, advanced against the enemy, using both his weapon ond his 
voice ; he fell upon the banks of the Sebeto, leaving a name 
which he had rendered hononrablc in life by the efluHions of his 
rauso, and in his death by his blood. Sufficient search was not 
made for his body, which was never fonud, and therefore remained 
without a tomb. 

The day was declining, but victory on the bank of the little stream 
was yet undecided, when General Wirtz was struch to the ground by 
aelioll, leaving his men without a leader, an incident which dumped 
the courage of the whole amiy. On seeing him carried otf tho 
field, mortally wounded, the troops first wavertnltlieu, seized with 
panic, fled in confunion into the city. Tlie Courbonists followed, 
joined by the Tjaiutaroni, who, regardless of the prohibitions of an 
expiring authority, left their houses, and attacked the troops of 
Bnsaetti ; but Bassctli learning the death of Wirtz, the loss of tho 
bridge, and that the army had fled, opened a way for himself 
amidst tho pressure of the people, ami retired intfl Castel-Nuovo. 
Hiiher tho five composing the Directory, the ministers, and several 
of the legialativc senate had repaired, and were carrying an tho 
government, while the rest of the officials or partisans of the Re- 
public had dispersed wherever they thought themselves safest, to 
the castles, to tho houses, or to places of concealment ; while somo 
remained in the streets, formed into armed bands. Many wIk 
sought refugo in Sant'Elnio wore harshly repuUed by Meghan, an< 
ranged themselves beneath the walls, or in the large monastery of 
San Martino. CarAcciolo continued the fight from tho sea during 
many nights until the enemy rotrcfited from the shore, when ho 
returned into port. Whilst the battle was still raging, the two 
brothers Baker, and three other piisoncrs, who had alreatly becu 



naii 



THE PAKTUEKOl'EAN R£[-UBLIC. 



3S7 



condemned by llie revolutmnarj tribunals, were privately shot uiiiler 

an srcAde of the staircase of Castcl-Nuovo ; this execution wiis 

an act of cruelty, as the last hour of (he ^vcinmcnt had struck, 

L^tid as it was neither required for the purj>ofle of security nor 

{for example. FortUDatcly there was no timo to prosecute the 

Itrials of the other coiispirators who had joinetl Baker. In the city, 

[meantinie, unprotected m it was by walls or fortifications, the 

republicans fled, and being already full of their enemies, cries of 

long Hvo tho king resounded ; the soldiers, however, and as many 

of ihc army of the Holy Faith as could be reslraine^l, were not 

permitted to enter, and wero dctulned hy thu Cardinal, nut from 

any feeling of compassion toward his native place, tut lest the 

darkness shouhl favour plots wliich they supposed pfwsillo the 

enemy might have prepared it^in^t them. Joyful shouts and 

ilbimiiiations, intended to flatter the rising power, and prudent 

rather than sincere, celebrated the king's restoration ; hut niesn- 

' time a disc-hai^c of cannon from the castles, and a desperate sally 

of the republicans, intcrniptcd the festivities, and many who were 

participating in them were slain. The night of the 13th Jane 

,'1799 wan dark indeed for both parLica 

On tho following morning, the fort of the Carmine was attacked 
I and taken by the Kussiana ; both ths republicans and tbeirsoldiers 
' were killed, and, as the Bourbon standard was hoisted on the 
tower, the guns of the fort were now turned against Castel-Nuoro 
and the trenches of the mole, while, at the iMtmu time, volleys wero 
fired as a sign of triumph. Tlio Cardinal took up his quarters at 
iGraniti, and encamped the troops of the Hoe belonging to tho 
Holy Faith on an elevation commanding tho city, and the multi- 
tude claimed the promised spoil of Naples ; but I shall postpone 
to another chapter the description of the pillage, atrocities, and 
murders which followed. On their side, the republicans laboured 
that first day to fortify those fronts of Castel-Nuovo which were 
< exposed to attack, and to barricade some of the streets of the city, 
and thus formed a little re])ublicaniohg themselves, composed of the 
[castles MuoTo, dell' Uovo, and Sant' Elmo, tho palace, the stronghold 
fof PiKKofalcone, and the last inhabited end of the Chlnja. The 
batteries continued to play during tho subsequent days ; hut some 
of the republican party deserting to the king, the commander of 



358 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



»Ml 



the ciutle of Baia invited the Sicilians to tako poBsessioa of it, and 
two officers who had cscapeU from Gaatel-Nuovo, were sceu assistiug 
to throw up trenches against the very fort they had sworn to defend. 
Dfliuquonts of this class were, however, few and obscure, and I 
refrain from mentioning their names, hccauae they were more their 
own cnomieA than the Ropuhlic*&, and hi'-^^ause amidst the changes 
of government which have since occurred, great and successful 
treason has so entirely thrown leaser offences into the shade. Faitb, 
oaths, the (Iutie3 of the citizen, are now usod as a game of skill, 
and encourajjcd as such by ilespots who turn to their advantage 
all the perfidy produced by a corrupt state of society ; and thus, 
were we to examine the growth of pohticnl vice or political virtue 
since 1739 to this day, the result wouhl prove dtflgraccful to the 
NeaiwliUn people, so rapidly have public morale degenerated from 
month to montk 

The little fort of Castcllamarc, though attacked by batteries ou 
land, and by Sicilian and English !>hips from the sea, refused to 
yield, uutil conditions were granted, by which the garrison were 
permitted to go free to France, carr^'ing with them as much of 
their moveable property as they pleased, and leaving their posses- 
sions and famille!) within the kingdom secure from molestation. 
Tlte English Vice-Admiral Foole signed this treaty for the king, 
upnn which the garrison were conveyed, in ships which were :u 
readiness, to Maracillos. Serious risks were incurred during the 
siege of the city, by the blunders of the Hourbonists as well as of 
their enemies, for one of the red-hot balls fired from the castle of 
the Carmine against Castel-Niiovo, fell on a small chamber in the 
curtain, and ignited some wood, whioli being dry, and covered with 
oil, burnt rapidly. Th is occun'cd close to tho bastion of the shore, in 
the middle of which was a magazine full of powder and rocketa. 
As long as the flames ascended directly upwards, the Rre could 
not be communicated below by s])arks or heat, but such was the 
alarm and excitement, that the garrison threatoued to force open 
the gates of the caistte and escape, and all who tried to soothe their 
excited imaginations were either supi>osed to be indifferent to their 
own lives, or so inhuman as to be willing to sicrifice those of their 
men. TheactofToscanant Viglicna, which up to that timchodbcen 
cited as an example of heroism, was now Calked of as an instance of 



ir». 



THC rABTUENOFEAX KErUDMC. 



369 



tavago ferocity. All tlierefore, whetKer ready to hear reason or the 
reverse, put their hand to the work, eager to provcut the fire reaching 
the powder magazine ; and although at some diatance from the well, 
they contrived, by a chain of men to keep up a continuous jel of 
water, until the flames were cxiinguislied. Hut iu the midet of the 
confusion, the enemy seeing the smoke from the castle, and observ- 
ing the fire from the cannon slackcnod, approached hy the Via del 
Porlo, ami throwing grcnadoa at tho gate of the rocks set it on 
fire ; having effected an opening into the castle, they would have 
entered had their courage or skill been greater ; hut the besieged 
hastened to remedy tht; disaster and barriciided the ingress. 

That nfght the republicans rcKolvLHl to take advantage of tho 
darkness, to make a sally from the castles ot tho UovoandNuovoby 
Ban Martino, and destroy the battery of cannon raised on the Chiajn. 
Tlie French no longer afforded them assistnuce, for Megiiau had 
already begun to negotiate with the Cardinal for the price of his 
treachery, and the republicans, suspecting his conduct, concealed 
from him their intended movements and hopc-a As midnight 
struck (tho hour fixed for the salty) they started in three divisions, 
and unsparingly put to death all the soldiers of tho Holy Faith 
they fell in with; for had they made any prisoners they would 
have endangered tlicir secret, and risked tho lives of their little 
band. They proceeded with so much caution, that they wore mis- 
taken by tltuir own watches for the enemy, and attacked hy them ; 
but the mifistake was soon discovered, and all joined in lamenting 
tho loss of one of their comrades, swearing to rovongo his death 
upon the enemy. Continuing ou their way, they surprised and 
killed those set to guard the battery, and after spiking their can- 
non and burning the carriages, returned uninjured to the fortress 
planning other sallies, and resolved only to die .tword in hand The 
noise of tlkcir fcet^ and the erics and shouts announcing the 
slaughter of tho Bourbonists, reached the Russian camp, the campa 
of the Holy Faith, and tho (|nartera of tho Cardinal; unccriaiif 
whence the sound proceeded, they heat to arms, and kept the troops 
prepared until daybreak, when the pusillanimous Cardinal pro- 
posed to withdraw them to a distance of several miles. 

Uc was troubled by reflections of a still more serious natura 
Xo one else wa« aware that tho French and Spanish fleet wore 



360 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OP XAPLBS. 



upon tlic Mctlitorraiican sea; and although their escmj Imd still 
larger lluula cruUitig there, it wix» doubtful whether tbej would 
full \u with one another, And if they met wlio would be tho victor. 
Mnii^- of the cities still sighed after the Kepublic, and even several 
of the rovalist cities had been irritated bj the cruelties perpetrated 
hy the foUoivers of the Holy Failh. The promise of rewards IuhI 
notyet been all fullilled.nnd the myrmidons of the Cardinal were fast 
dimiiiiiihiiig in numbers, for many now satia(t;d with pluuder were 
dosiroua of enjoying their lives in idleness and security. Ue liad 
besides a brave and desperate foe facing him, and the Caidtnal feared 
for his own personal safety and that of his hostages (one of whom 
tras his own brother) detained in Castcl-N'uovo. In the anxious 
watches of that oight he decided to send envoys to the Directory 
to treat for peace, aud when daylight returned, after making a more 
exact coniputaiion of lliose killed, and the loss occasioned by the 
late sally, with tlic flight and the panic in his camp, he tistenod to 
the advice of the leaders of the troops and the royalist ma^i^tratos, 
who were all inclined for pcaeo ; he then-fore scat a message to 
Meghan with proposals fur an accomraoilatioD, on such Icnns as 
might bo oxpoctcd undor the circumstances, beBtting tho royal 
dignity, and a conquered people. The envoys of iiuflfo, accom- 
panied by a messenger from Meghan, referred the proposals to tbe 
Kepubhcan Directory. 

There tho uneasiness was still greater, and with more reason, 
hut tlic oiler of peaco allayed their fears ; some attributing it to 
desertions or mutiny in tbc camps of tlie Holy Faith, others to 
the French victories in Italy, aud the greater number to the ap- 
proach of tbe conquering fleet of Franco and Spain. Tho Direo- 
tory accordingly replied, that it was contrary to the rules of a freo 
government to consent to. or reject propositions withoul a prcviout 
consultation, and lliat they would tliereforc take tho matter iutu 
consideration. Meantime au armistice of three days was granted 
'at the request of Mcg^an'8 doputy ; but before the dejMirture of the 
envoys, the minister Hanthon^ informed the Bourbontsts, that if 
the Cardinal could not keep his followers under restraint during 
the truce, be would put a stop to their cruelty, rapine, and the 
iniquitous proposal of sacking the city, by attacking them from the 
fort. Left to themselves, the Directory consulted how to act, and 



THE PABTHCNOPEAX RBPOBLIC. 



361 



beginning to doubt tlic supposed weakueiut of llic enemy, iticlinod 
accept terms ; M»Qthon& aloue among tlicm all, advocated ex- 
I'trcmc tliongli gf>nerouM measures, more consonant witli Iiis own 
fearless nature tban suited to tlic actual condition of the Kc- 
publia Oronzo Massa, a general of artillery, was summoned to at- 
tend the council, and being asked his opinion as to llic stato of the 
castle, liR answered honestly, " Wo only continue niafltera of these 
walla because our enemies are composed of raw soldicrti, and an 
undisciplined mob, witli a priest at their head. The sea, the port, 
the ducks are in the hands of the enemy ; the gate near the port 
has been burnt, and the eulrance tlioro impossible to prevent; the 
palace cannot be defended by artillery; the curtain on the side 
of the eucmy is in ruins ; in short, if matters were reversed, and I 
were ordered to attaclf the casilo, I could take it in tn-o hours." 
The president then aslccd him, if he would accept peace i to which 
he replied, " 1 would accept it, on conditions honourable to the 
Government, and which would guarantee the accurity of the State." 
The time allowed for the truce was drawing near its close, and 
the i'Veiich and Spanish dect was not yet in sight ; the republican 
forces were diminishing by desertions, and the resolution of the 
L-Oovcnimcut wavered. On the scuoud uiglit the battery on the 
iChiaja which had been destroyed, was reconstructed, and a new 
■one erected on the Via del Porto; but upon complaints and 
menaces from the Directory the works were suspended, and the 
Cardinal assured them, that should the hoped-for peace not be 
concluded the fallowing day, he would give orders for the demo- 
lition of the embankments recently thrown up, which wcro not by 
]]is command, but were to bo attributed to the zeal of his soldiers. 
The rcpublicaus met again in council, and examined the grounds 
of tlieir hope to prolgng the siege until the arrival of foreign aid, to 
.conquer in the open field, or to force a way through the enemy and 
[join the French in Capua ; finding all iliese propositions unten- 
able, perceiving death near, and victory impossible, and anxious 
to preserve tlicir own livea and those of thou.sand3 more, for a 
time more propitious for lIic Republic, ihoy drew up conditions 
of peace, and selected for their negotiator General Ma&sn, who had 
advocated pacific views in the Congress. Oronzo Uassa was of a 
noble family, and hod in his youth entered the army as an artillery 

VOL, U 2 H 



362 HISTORY 0? THE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 178a. 

officer, but had retired from the service in the year 1796, when 
the Government became tyrannical ; he had since offered Himself 
as a soldier under the Republic, and had been promoted to the 
rank oF general He was eloquent, raagnanimous, and brave. It 
was with some unwillingness he accepted the charge now impeded 
on him, and happening to meet me in the courtyard of the fort as 
he was leaving the house occupied by the Directory, and infonning 
me on what mission he was sent, he added, " The conditions pro- 
posed by the Directory are moderate, but the enemy, proud of the 
ease with which he has been able to obtain them, will not concede 
life or liberty to the chiefs of the Republic ; X am convinced that 
at least twenty of the citizens will be required to sacrifice them- 
selves for the safety of the rest, but it will be an honour to the 
Directory, and to their representative, if we sign a treaty by which 
wo shall preserve many lives at the price of our own." 

The negotiator met in the house occupied by the Cardinal, and 
as the Directory refused to trust King Ferdinand and his Lieu- 
tenant alone, it became necessary to add the loaders of the 
Muscovite and Turkish forces, the admiral of the English fleet, 
and the French Commander Meg&an. The demands of the re- 
publicans appeared too bold to the Cardinal, but the pride of the 
purple gave way before the arguments of General Massa, who spoke 
confidently though without insolence, while declaring his resolu- 
tion, " to treat the hostages according to ancient usage, demolish 
and bum the houses in the city, and repeat the heroic act 
committed at Vigliena in every castle and building." The Car- 
dinal, whispering to those around him that he would incur the 
reproaches of the king if his Majesty should find the city of Naples 
in ruins, proposed to Massa to efface from the treaty all sugges- 
tions or words derogatory to the royal dignity, in which case he 
would condescend to acquiesce in the terms offered. General 
Massa insisting everything should continue in the present form, 
peace was finally concluded on the following conditions : — 

1. The castles Nuovo and Dell' Uovo, with their arms and am- 
munition, sliall be delivered to the commissaries of his Majesty the 
King of the Two Sicilies, and of his allies, England, Russia, and 
the Ottoman Porta 

S. The republican garrisons in both castles bIiaI] march out 



i;». 



THE PABTHBNOPEAK REPL^BLIC. 



3(»3 



witli the honours of war, ami shall he respoctod and guArantced 
in their persons and property, moveable and immoveable. 

3. Thej may cIiooko whether to embark upon neutral vessda 
for Toulon, or to remain in tho kingdom, secure from al! molesta- 
tion for themselves or their faiiiilica. Tho roprescntatives of the 
king shall provide the moans of transport 

4. These conditions and these terms shall include tho persons of 
both sexes in the fortress, and the republican priisonei's captured 
by the royalist or allied troops in tho course of tho war, as well as 
all in the camp at San Marline. 

5. The republican garrisons shall not quit the castloa until the 
vessels by wliich they choose to depart are ready to sail. 

6. Tlie archbishop of Salerno, Count Michcroux, Count Dillon, 
and the Bishop of Avellino, shall remain ns hostages in the fort of 
Sant' Elmo until certain tidings shall reach Naples of tho arrival 
of tho vessels al Toulon which shall have convoyed the republican 
garrisons. The royalist prisoners and the hostages at present 
detained in tho fort shall be set at liberty after the signature of 
the present capitulation. 

The names of Iluffb and Michoroui for the King of Naples, of 

Foote for England, of Baillio for Kussia, and of * for tho 

Porto followed, as well as those of Massa and Mcg^n on the part 
of the llcpuhlie. 

During the succeeding days the ships were made ready. Ettoro 
CarafTa, Count di Ruvu, was invited by a letter from the Cardinal 
to yield the fortresses of CivitoUa and Pcscara on the same condi- 
tions OS those accepted for the castles of Naples ; and in an edict 
issued in his capacity of regent for the king, RuQb proclaimed the 
war at an end, that fuclious or parlies had ceased to exist, and 
that all the citizens alihe were the subjecla of the same prince, and 
friends and bi-oihers ; that the king was ready to pardon the crime 
of rebellion, and cvcu iu his paternal goodness to bid his oucmics 
welcome; and further, ordering that jjersccutions, robberies, fight- 
ing, slaughter, and armaments were tu cease within tho kingdom. 
In epilo of tliis proclamation, however, many who disliked or sus- 
pected the sincerity of the Bourbon government, asked and obtained 



' llie nttiDO i« vrwiling in ihi: orij^inal 
dooument. Curia BotU p^ta ICerudy for 



Rus«ii, nnd [totiiiMi fur llu- l'«rt« {"Sot* hj 
Uta Bditoroftlte Italian «diiii» of CoUetta.) 



364 



HISTOKT OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



I'm. 



permission to embark likewlso ou board tbo iiliips which wore now 
ready to sail. Of those wbo had Mongod to the camp of San 
Martino not many remained in the city, the rest went to France, 
and the two garrisons, marching out of the castles with the stipu- 
lated honours, were divided between the few who preferred remain- 
ing and those who ilctermincd to depart. Tliey now only wnitetl 
for the wind, which it was hopml would m the cour»o of tho iiiglit 
prove propitious. 

Aa day broke the eeft was seen studded with white sails, and it 
was supposed tliat the French and Spanish llect had arrived. The 
rcpublicaas who tiad drently embarked broke forth in general 
lamculatiou and mutual reproaches, while tbo reputation of Man- 
thond rose, who had all along blamed the surrender of the castles, 
and had declartKl, however low their fortunes might be sunk, tliat 
it was an net of cowardice to yield themselves slaves to the enemy, 
and thus almost resign the liberty to die. But these ships proved 
to be the fleet of NeUon, which had arrived in the hay before sun- 
rise. A wind had sprung up in the night favouniblo for France, 
but though tlie vessels were ready they did not set sail: on the 
follDwing morning it was perceived that their position in the port 
waa cliangod. and that they wore steered beueath the cannon of the 
Castol doU' Uovo, thoir sails taken down, and their anchors drop- 
ped ; guards were next placed over the passengers, and the ships 
converted into priRous ; thoso who had Just embarked weit; lost iu 
wonder and alarm, and demanded an e^tplanation from Admiral 
Nelson ; but the conqueror of Aboukir was not ashamed to break 
the terms of the capitulation, while publtrthing an edict of King 
Ferdinand to the effect, that " kings do not treat irith subjects ; 
that the acta of llie royal lieutenant had been an abuse of his 
powers, and were therefore null tiud void, and that it was the in- 
tention of Ferdinand to exorcise his full and royal authority in 
dealing with the rebels." After this proclamation, royal couiniis- 
saries went on hoard the ships to remove those who were marked 
OS victims feighty-four in number), and chaining them two and 
two, led them in broad day-light through the most populous 
parts of the city (a mournful and di.^graceful spectacle), to the 
prisons of thoso very costlos whieh they had just hofore garrisoned, 
and which were now occupied by the Kngliah. The rc&t of those who 



I 
i 

I 
I 



I 



im. 



THE PARTHKSOPEAN REPUBLIC. 



S(t5 



liail embarked, and wlio happened from the obscurity of their names 
and deeds, to escape exciting tlte desire of vengeance in tlie haughty 
com^ucrors, or because this iliisire v/oa satisHed by their exile, con- 
tinued their voyage to Mnrsciiia'*. The Count di Iluvo, who had 
yielded the fortresses of I'escara and CivitcUa, and who, with 
several belonging t^i tliusu garrisons, had arrived in Naples, with 
the intention of viubarking, according to the conditions of sur- 
render, was seized and barbarously conveyed to the dungeons. 
After these examples of inhumanity and injustice, the Bourbouista, 
the Lazzaroni, and the followei-a of the Uoly Faith, already 
impatient for plunder, and indlgnfint at the Cardinal's treaties and 
edicts of peace, were let loose, and returned to their former deeds 
of atroeitr, wliich had only been suspended ; while RulTo, afraid of 
these ruffians, and of incurring the anger of tho king, cither 8Ui>- 
jKirtcd them or remained passive. 

Sant' Elmo, Capua, and Oactu, surrendered one after the other 
on pretence of siege. The leader of the frencli legion, Meghan, 
commanding in Sant' E!mo, had some days previous bargained for 
the surrender of the castle, and a story is told, which has not been 
contradicted, that the niggardly offers of Ruffo not satisfying bts 
rapacity, he turned for better terms to the Kiiglish, but, rejected 
by them, ho concluded with the first, and agreed- — 

To surrender the castlo to his Sicilian Majesty and his allies; 
that the garrison should yield tliemeielves prisoners, but be permit- 
ted to icturn to France on condition not to servo until the exchange 
of prisoners ; that they were to leave the fort with the honours 
of war; and that the Neapolitan subjects were to be consigned to 
the allies, and not to the representatives of the king. 

Tho following day the castle was yielded, and tho garrison 
marched out, when the commissaries of the Bourbon police were 
permitted to in&])ect the French lines an<l select all who were 
Neapolitan subjects, whom they threw into chains, Mcgi^an himself 
pointing out any who happened to escape tlic vigilance of these 
miscreants. Matcm and Belpulsi, who, ulthough natives of Sicily, 
were French officers, and wt-ariitg the unifonn of Prance, were 
handed over to the police of Naples. The representative* of 
foreign potentates who were present, did not interfere, though tho 
terras of the surrender by which these unfortunate men were placed 



366 HISTORY OF THE EINQDOH OF NAPLES. iRA. 

under the protection of the alliea were thus broken. The afiair 
was disgraceful to all concerned in it 

The fortresses of Capua and Gaeta soon afterwards surrendered 
on the same conditions ae those granted at Sant'Elmo, but without 
a repetition of the infamous transaction just related, as either 
there were none of the ill-fated subjects of the King of the Two 
Sicilies among the French in these fortresses, or they were con- 
cealed. The French embarked, and the Bourbon standard now 
floated from all the castles. Cardinal Buffo, as lieutenant of the 
king, governed the kingdom, and was obeyed by the cities, townsj 
and magistrates. Nothing remained of the Republic, but the 
memory of what it had been, to increase the sufferings of the 
friends of liberty, and the terror inspired by their tyrant 



BOOK V. 
REIGN OF FEUDINAND IV. 

ITDU-ISlW. 
CHAPTER I. 



KITSQ rKHDIHAXD OF BOUUBON RfiSUJIES THE TIIEOHe. 

Tub Republic was now fallen nnd tho war of nnnios at an end, 
but a more barbarous and licentious war was carried on witbln tliu 
city. TUo coiitiuerora eagerly pursued tbe cotiquorod, and all who 
irero Qot soIdici-« of tho Uoly Faith, or who did not belong to the 
low populace, wherever met, were murdered. The re9|>eotable 
citizens Bod or concealed tkemselvea ; brawls produced by revenge 
or the thirst for gain, cries and lamentations were heard in the 
strceta, which were either wholly deserted or filled with a turbulent 
rabblo ; the tribunals were closed, and the city was sunk in gloom 
and oonstcmatioti, as if just taken by stonn. After tho fiercer 
passions had been satiated with blood, the pillage began, and on 
pretence that Jacobins lay concealed within tbe houses, the mob 
refused to t[uit any closed dour ; but hanlly was it opened to them, 
than tho> sacked tho pluL'o. Laxzaroai, eurvauis, eucnkies, or 
treacherous friends, pointed out to the people those houses which, 
they said, belonged to rebels, ami immediately there followed a 
scene of violence, robbery, or murder, as chanco directed. Drag- 
ging their prisoners naked and bound through the streets, they 
stahhod tliem with tliuir weapons, and insulted them by cowardly 
blows, and by throwing mire in their faces ; persons of every age, 
and of both sexes, venerable magistrates, and nohlc-minded women 
who had lately been called tho mothers of their country, were thus 
tortured ; all the perils of the war, tho iusoluuoo of the royalist 
gangs, tho lost hours of despair for tho Uepublic, with tho terrur 



S68 



HISTORY OF TllE KIXODOM OP KAPLBS. 



17W. 



fuflTcred durinff the past daya, appeared tolerable, compared with 
the present calamities. Cardinal Huffo and other chiefs of the 
army of the Holj Faith, and even those wlio had influence with tlie 
populnco, although thoy had bcoii able to kindlo thoir fury, had no 
power to enforce moderation after victory. 

If, while describing these terrible disasters in Kaples, I may be 
detected uaing the wonUor oxprcssiuns of C'onioHua Tacitus, oa he 
represented the slate and aspect of Rome aCloT the murder of 
Yitclliua, I confess that I have purposely invited this comparison ; 
because it is a proof that however times or places or political con- 
stitutions may differ, the nature of the populace never varies ; hut, 
when unchained, it is ever an indomitable monster: and because 
I am desirous to remind my reader of the criminal conduct of all 
persons who remove tho rcstraintn of law and fear. More criminal 
than any were Canlinal Ruffo, and the English admiral, Lord Nelson. 
Wtien the hero of Aboukir arrived from Kg}'pt, he was captivated 
by the charms of Lady Hamilton. Horname was originally Emma 
Lyon, the dauKliLor of a poor woman, and her father unknown, 
while she hcreelf was in so low a condition of life, that whether 
born in Wales or England, la uncertain. 8hc grow up extremely 
beautiful, but without friends, poor, and a vagmnt ; her morale Imd 
heen corrupted before she attained ber sixtecath year, wlicu her 
beauty attracted the notice of several artists, and Uomoey the 
painter represeoied her in various mythological and historical 
chajracters. Cliaries GrevUle, of the noble family of Warwick, fia- 
cinated with the beauty of the woman under these celestial or 
iftbulous chamcters, fell in lovo with her; and when sunk from a 
high position and fortune, sent Fmma to his uncle, Sir William 
Hamilton in Naples, to ask for assistance in money, and for his 
leave to marry her ; the uncle paid his nephew's debts, but refused 
his lusl request; and, in 179), married her himself under the name of 
Miss Harte; when Emnut Lyon, now the ambassadress, forgetting her 
origin and early cnnwr, af^i^umcd a new deportment, and sustained her 
present position, as if she had been accustomed to it from her birth. 

When Lord Nelson became madly fascinated by her channs, tho 
artful Queen of Naples (who until tlien bad treated Lady Hamilton 
with tlie di&dain of a queen towards au advcnturc&s) changed hor 
haughty lone, and seebg the use she might make of her at some 



IMi 



FERDINAND IV. 



369 



future time, atlaclicd lier to licracif by the Btrong fetlere of vanity ; 
in the palace, iii the theairo, and in public promcnmles, Kmma was 
always beside the queen ; and often in tlio privacy of the palace, 
they dined and alepL together. At the flight of the Bourbons from 
Naples, Lady Hamilton embarked on the same ship, and watched 
with anxious Boltcitudc over the littlo l^rinco Albert who was ill. 
and who hrvnthed liis last in her arms. Their flight, their misfor- 
tunes, and a coninmu asylum in Sicily, increased the attachoaent 
between these two women. 

When Queen Caroline read in Palermo of the capitulation of the 
ca.stle3, and saw licr hopes of vengeance vanishing, she entreated 
Emma, not as a queen, but as a friend, to go in pursuit of the 
ftdmiml, who was sailings towards Naples; to be iho bearer of 
letters to him from herself and the kin-;, and to persuade him to 
revoke the infamous treaty, which was an insult to all the princes 
of the earth, by making them stoop before rebellious subjects. 
After iuspiring her with her own feelings, she added : ''To you, 
my lady, wo sliall owe the dignity of the crowrr; use all despatch, 
and may the winds and fortune befriend you :" she then dismissed 
her with enihraccs. Li\dy riamilton spt sail in a corvette, and 
reached Nelson just as he was entering the Bay of Naples. The 
royal letters contained entreaties, as well as arguments proving 
Iho oilence which had been oflcreil the dignity of thrones; and 
expressed the happiness of the hinj^' and rjucen, that the fate of 
the monarchy now lay in the admiral's hands: after which the 
queen added, "I have time for no more; l^ady Hamilton, our 
deputy and friend, will explain our wishes, and convey to you tlie 
thanks sent by your Caroline." Iii this letter was enclosed a 
decree of the king, which ran thus : — 

"We do not capitulate with rebellious subjects; therefore the 
terms of the capitulation of the castles arc annulled ; all the ad- 
herents of the so-called Kepublic arc, though in diflcrcnt degrees, 
I guilty of high treason. Tliey are to be tried hy a Junta of State, 
vrhoarc to jmnish the principal otfontlcrs with death, the lesser 
with imprisonment or exile, and all with confiscation. The king 
reserves the full cxphination of bis intentions, as well as the man- 
ner in which they are to bo executed, to another duerec" 

Tlie fatal beauty reached Nelson's vessel, who was delighted at 



S70 



UlSTOHY OP TUB KINGDOM OV HAPLBS. 



17». 



ber unoxpoctod vmt ; but wlion she p^oscnt{^d him with the papers, 
a seu&c of justice and gnod faith mode him shrink with horror from 
tho office imposed upon him, and which he refused to accept ; vao- 
quishcd, however, hy the allurcaiciita of X^dy UamUion, tJiat man 
of untarnished honour, ao distinguiahed in war, was not ashamed 
to jield himself a ba«e instrument to perjuror and t^-ranny. The 
ship which liad brought Ladv Hamilton returned, bearing the glad 
tidings to tho queen, while Emma, the rccom])ensc of his shamo. 
remained with NeUoii ; tlicy were together when he arrived in tho 
port, and when, by publishttig the king's decree, he accomplished 
that act of perfidy recorded in the preceding book. 

Tho murder and pilla^ within tho city meantime continaod and 
even increased, in order to justify these deeds, a report was cir- 
culated that the republican party had determined to put thirty 
thousand of tho pupnlacu to death, and Ititd for this end prepared 
snares in which they wcm to bo strangled: rutHaus accordingly 
went from house to house pretending to seek for the instruments 
of a massacre, in the reality of which they did not believe; but 
wherever by evil chance they found a hempen cord or rope, tht 
rilled and bunded the house, and murdered the inhabitaQts. A^i it 
was impossible for the dungeons and cells of tho fortresses to con- 
tain all the prisoneni, Uioy were distributed among the vast and 
unhealthy clmmbers of tho tiranili, and in tho Island of Procido, 
to be tried by the tribunals which had been established thcro for 
cases of high treason ; first of many, perished Generals Schiponi 
and 3puu\ next Fasquale IJattistessa, a gentleman, the futhur of 
a numerous family, and a sinuuro but moderate liberal. lie was 
hung on the gallows, and when hanging by the rope was thought 
dead, but when they were in the act of burying him, was dis- 
covered to bo still alive ; the hangman accordingly, by tho orilors 
of the wretch Hpccialc, cut his throat in the church, and he was 
then thrown into the grave. 

Admiral CaiiicLMolo, betrayed by a servant, and arrested where 
ho lay concealed in a remote aayhim, was demanded from Canliual 
Ilulfo by Admiral Nelson ; it was supposed with tho intention of 
saving a brave officer, who had so often been his comrade in th© 
periU of war and by sea. Remembering the jealousy which tho 
8e.-tmanBfaip of Car&ociolo had at times excited in Kelson, all 



m. 



FBRDHTAKD IV. 



371 



praised the magnnnimity of the conqueror. But he, who was 
destined to more shame hy his ill fortune or bliud passion, onl; 
desired to have hta rival iu his hanJa in order to satiate his Ven- 
ice upon him ; and that very day he called a court-martial of 

'NcftpolitAn officers in his own vesaicl, over whom he appointed 
Count Thum to preside, as highest in rank. This court having 
first listened to the accusations, and then heard the accused, 
thought it just to grant his request, that the documents and proofa 

\oT his innocence should be examined ; hut when Lord Nelson vaa 
informed of the fact, ho wrote the words : " Further delays are 
unnecessary ;" upon which that subservient tribunal condemned 
the unhappy Carticciolo to peqictual imprisonment ; but when 
Kelson learnt the sentence frum the President Thurn, lio replied 
** Death," and the woixl death was subtstituted for iniprisuumunt. 
This iniquitous court-martial bi-oke up at two in the afternoon, and 
that same hour, Francesco Carkcciolo, aNeapolitAn noble, the admiral 

' of the Sect, an able officer, successful in war, distinguished for the 
honours he had gained, and deserving the gratitude of bis country 
and his king by thirty-five years' service, a respected and simple- 
minded citizen, after having Leon betrayed by a servont, betrayed 
by his companion in anna, Lord Nelson, and betrayed by the 
officers, hit! judges, whom he had so often honoured in war, was 

i bound iu chains, conducted upon the Neapolitan frigate Minerva, 
a ship also renowned for the battles ho bad won in her, and hung 
at the yard-ami, thus ending: his days like a common malefactor. 
Tbe body was left exposed to the acorn of some and the pity of 
othci's until night, when, after having a weight suspended to the 
feet, it was thrown into the sea. 

Tho evil passions of the populace were incrcasnl to ferocity after 
witnessing this cruel example, and more deaths and dcstniction 
followed ; nothing was safe or sacred ; old age, childhood, tho 
weakness of women, the sanctity of temples and altars eould noi 

, afford protection from men thirsting for blood and booty. The 
only hope lay in the arrival of the king, promised by his delegates, 
and at last, on the 30th June, the longed-for sails appeared, and 

.fpreod joy throughout the city. As Ferdinand proposed remain- 

'ing on board, the royal ship was soon surrounded by boats convey- 
ing those ambitious of notice, or eager for rewards or office ; but 



372 



HISTOnV 0? TRB KINGDOM OF KAPLER. 



17W. 



amidst so inan,v glad ntul deliglit&d faces, were here and there seen 
an innoccDt but unliappj fajnilT, cominff to petition for the pardon 
of a prisoner condemned for treason. But the king soon grew wearied 
of this concourse of people, forbade the approach of any boat, and 
occupied himself with the re-organization of the State, tatting &■ 
his ndvisere General Aclon, whom lie had brought with him from 
•Sicily, aixl Admiral Nelson ; and guided hy the suggestions sent 
him by the queen, and by the dictates of his own passions. 

The first decree related to his repudiation of the terms of capi- 
tulation ; the second to the ap]>ointnictit of a Junta to punish the 
rebels, reserving for future ordiuaacea, the declaration what was 
to be considered treason, the mode of punishment, and form of 
trial. From the time of the suniendcr of the castles, a Junta of 
State hnd been instituted by Cardinal RufFo, and had already, in 
a short time, condemned to death several of the republicana But 
the ferocity of the king was increased by victory, and while cou- 
firming tliu appoinlnient^ oi' tho judges, Antonio la Kossa, a man 
who was notorious for his dealings with the police, and Angcio 
Fioi{^, already mentioned among the foUowcrs of the Cardinal, he 
substituted several new Judges for tlie old, men of the most malig- 
nant churaeters, among whom were Giuseppe Guidubaldi, already 
known in the Junta of 17!*6, who had fli.d the country, but 
had returned home with swarms of scrivani and spies; and threo 
Sicilian magistrates, Felice Damiani, Gaotano 5^nibuti, and Vin- 
ecnzo Spcciale, who had been appointed judges in the trials at 
Frocida. A third decree pardoned the oiVciiccs of the Lazzaroui 
in sacking tlio royal palace, and added, that it was expected 
the king's subjects would follow this example, and forget their own 
injuries during the spoil of the city. Ijy another decree, soreit 
very ivL*althy monasteries of the order of St. Uencdict, and of tho 
Carthusians were suppressed, and their property confiscated to the 
exchequer. These monks hail not incurred the royal displeasure 
by taking any part in tho revolution, but owed tlieir fall to tUcir 
great wealth and the rapacity of tho king, who put do restraint 
upon his inclinationa or actions. 

By a fifth and la^t decree of tliab day, the Scdili were annulled, 
and iho anr;ient ri^dits or |)rivilcgca attached to these institutions 
abolished. In order to appreciate the importance of this measure. 



trv. 



FERDISAND IV. 



373 



I will here add a brief sketch of (he origin and growth of these 
bodies. Wlicn Naples was a Greek city, it was usual for those in 
easy circumstances, the rich, nobles, aiitl warriors, to meet for 
recreation under ccrtaiti porches, afterwunlK called Seggi, 8e<lili 
(scats), or Piazzo, and which were open to all ; but though there 
waa no rule prohibiting any one entering them, the reserve of 
manners belonging to that age, diifcring widely from the presump- 
tion of the present, and there being no third estate, which caused 
an immense separation between the highest and the lowest, none 
of the populace aspired to admission. There were four, as many 
as there were quarters in the city, and afterwards six ; as the city 
increased in size, other and inferior Scggi arose, dependent on the 
■first six ; so that they at length numbered twenty-nine ; but these 
were afterwards Amalgamated, and reduced to ^ve, called by the 
namea of the districts to whioli they belonged ; the Capuan, Mon- 
tagna, Nido, Porto, and Portanuova- The other cities of Greek 
origin withiii tlie kingdom had likewise porclios or Se^i ; but 
when political power and privileges were accorded to those of 
Naples alone, the remainder continued to retain theirs only as a 
title of nobility and honour ; Cliarlcs i. of Anjou granted loavo (o 
five Seggi to represent the capital together with the whole king- 
dom ; to elect among themselves the officei's of tlio Neapolitan 
municipality, to administer the revenues of the city, to confer the 
right of citixensbipon t^uch slraiigerts as were worthy of tho honour, 
'rand to pronounce judgment in certain cases. Thus these social 
meetings for pleasure and idle amuscmcDt wore converted into 
meetings of corporate bodies bclougiug to the State, who met with 
closed doors, and who Imd the power of adding dignity to wealth 
and rank. Noble families of a late creation, or old families whose 
greatness had been forgotten, asked admwsion into one uf the five 
. S^gi, OS a register and proof of their nobility. Tho people, jealous 
' of the overweening power of the nobles, asked and obtained for 
themaelvca one Seggio called Del Popolo, which had equal privi- 
leges, except in titles of nobility, with the other five. From that 
time forth, a Syndic and six Eletti, one for each Seggio, compoeod 
the municipality of Naples, with a council of twcuty-uiuc, chosen 
from these same bodies, and commemorating by their number, the 
lirst twcnty-niuc Scggfi of the city. 



S74 



H1ST0HY or THE KINGDOM OP NAPLRS. 



inu. 



FerdinjMid iv., tlicrefore, by the decree of 1799, ignoring the 
oaths taken bj* the kings liis preOecesMin}, bjr bis fallicr and him- 
Bv\f, abolished the uiuiiicipal coqraration of the Dictrojiolls ; that 
body which ropresvuted Ibe kingdom and the nobles, and by which 
the induence of old families had bccu sustaiaed. From that time 
forward there was no political authorit.v in the State, except tliat 
emanating from the throne ; all iho subjects were reduced to a ser- 
vile condition, and the system of govcrrtroent simplified, by being 
placed under one despotic head. The pretext used for this act of 
violence was the riglit of conqucBt, — the king maintaining that he 
had reconquered his kingdom ; hut this pretext also garc a title 
of legality to the French conquest, and conferred on equal right on 
the conqueror to organize the Stale into a Republic, making it the 
duty of Iho conqucrcU to yield obedience^ and therefore exonerating 
them from all blame : yet whtio thus proving the injustice and ille- 
gality of punishing an innocent people, the king himself, in tho 
preamble to a law on treason, declared that ho had never lost his 
kingdom, that although residing in Sicily, he had always boon oa 
the throne of Naples, and that he therefore considered every act of 
his subjects, if coutraiy to their duties towards him, treasonable, 
and if an attack against his royal authority, rebellious. As the two 
decrees bore the same date, he thus on the same day proclaimed 
himself a conqueror, yet conquered ; a fugitive, yet always preaont ; 
and a private individual, yet the possessor of the kingdom. 

Tho rules for the guidance of the Junta of State were drawn up 
in harmony with these principles, and all were declared guilty of 
high treason, who, armed against the people, had assisted the 
French to enter the city or the kingdom ; those whu took the castle 
of Sant' Ehno out of tho hands of tho Lazzaroni, and those who had 
held secret communications with tho enemy after tho annisticc of 
Licutennnt-Gcneral Pignatelli ; and tho punishment of death waa 
awarded to a31 who had first accepted the office of magtslrates under 
the Republic, tho memhera of the government, the delegates of the 
people, ministers, generals, judges of the high court of militarj- 
eommission. or judges of the revolutionary tribunal : the puuiah- 
ment of death was likewise awarded to thosewho had fought against 
tho king's troops, led by Cardinal Ruffo, and those who hadasaistcd 
*t the elevation of the Tree of Liberty in the Piazza doUo Spirito 



ITV. 



FBBDINAND IV. 



»n 



Saato, where the atalue of Oiarlcs Jii. had been dcmolislicd ; and 
who, JD the square before the palncu, had dejstrojrcd or been present 
at the destruction of the royal effigies, and of the Gourboiiist and 
Kiiglisli staiidardis ; and to whosoever had written or spoken worda 
in disparagement of the sacred persona of the Icing, tli© queen, or 
the roya] family, as well as all wlio had shown themselves disloyal 
in order to promote the Republic, or injure the monarchy. 

Forty thousand Kcapolitnns (taking the lowest computation) 
were thus threatened with death, arul a still greater number with 
exile — a punishment re8cr\'c<l for all who had iiistjribed their naraef 
in clubs, tlie meiubcrs of the municipal bodies, and those who hat' 
enlisted in the army, but who had not been engaged in the war 
even the city guard, which had been raised by conscription, with 
out their own consent, but who bad been compelled to serve by 
the magistrates and the laws, were included among the guilty; 
the Iting declaring their imprisonment just, and bis pftrdon neces- 
sary for their liberation. The Junta of Slate in the city, and the 
royal commissaries, under the name of visitors in the provinces, 
were ordered to punish the guilty, it being the intention ofOteking 
to purge the kinffdom o/tke enemies of the throne and of the altar. 
Tlic visitors were the Chevalier Fcrrante, the Marquis Valva, tlie 
13ishop Lodovici, and the magistrates Crescenzo de Marco, Vinconao 
Marrauo, and Vinceiizo luria Every visitor was given an assistant 
judgo in the trials, and each separate tribunal was tlms presided 
over by two judges, and prououucod on the life, liberty, and pro- 
perty of numbers. 

The scale of crimes and punishments was fixed by a decree, 
called in law !ietro<itiiva (retrograde), because the acts were inno- 
cent until declared an offence ; and the magistrates liaving been 
selected at the king's pleasure, it only remained to prescribe the 
foims of procedure ; as the existing codes did not provide such as 
would secure sufficient secrecy and brevity, the ancient laws of the 
rebellious barons of Sicily' were adopted, which ran as follows: — 
an inquisitorial p^oc^s, to be instituted upon accusations or denun- 
ciations ; informers and spies to be considercHl valid as witnesses ; 
witnesses to bo heard privately, and ])Ut to the torture, at the 
pleasure of the inquisitors; the accused only to reply to the que* 

' I A«a enacted at diflereal pcrioils against Ibc rcWIltoiu Ivom of Sicilr. 



978 



H16T0BY OP THE KIKODOM OF NAPLES. 



I7W. 



tioafi or tlie juilgo ; all his attempts at justidcatjon to be stopped, 
ami torture to be applied if uccesgary ; no defence allowed ; a magis- 
trate appointed by the Iciug to go througli the forms rather than 
plead as ndvocate for the prisoner ; any wish expressed by the 
accused to be confronted with the witnesses ; his rejection of proofH, 
doeumonta, or witnesses brought forward in his justtBcation, with all 
guarniitccs of his innocence to be refused. The decision to be left 
to the consciences of the judges; the sentence to be brief without 
comments, without thcdelny of explanations, and at the discretion 
of tho judges ; their sentence without appeal, to be eoniposod, read, 
ftnd executed the finmo day. Brief us were these forms, the king 
desired etilt further to aecelorats the punishments; he therefore 
instituted another Junta, composed of generals; besides, as tlte 
occasion <lemanded, temporary tribunals in the cities, or in the 
provinces, and militair comniisaions, which at beat of drum, and 
ad horas et ad tttodunL heUi, were to expedite the proems and con- 
demnation. 

Such were the harsh lawa dictated by the king. On the third 
day sSKcv his ai-rival off Naplos, ho saw from afar a figure which 
the wares were driving towanla his ve-'^Afl ; looking at it flxe<11^, 
he perceived tt was a human corp&c more than half out of the 
water, M'ith the face raised, ami die hair dishevelled and dripping, 
approaching hint nipidly, and with a nicnu.cing a5ptict ; when he 
could see it better, the kicjj; recognised the numerable remains, and 
oxclaimcd, "Can'kcciolo !" Turning away in horror, he asked with 
confusion, "What does this dead man want?" and amidet the 
gdnenil eonatemation and silence, the chaplain replied, " lie would 
aak Christian burial." "Let him have it," answered the king, who 
then retired to his apartment for solitary re6cctiou. Tho corpse 
was picked up, and buried in ihc Httic cluirch of Santa Maria la 
Catena, in Santa Lucia. On inquiring the reaaon for this extraor- 
dinary phenomenon, it wna found that the body, swelled by the 
water, could not be kept at the bottom even by fifty-two EDglisli 
pounds' weight, weighed out by Captain Thomas llardy, coramaiider 
of the vessel on wliich the king had embarked with KeUou, and 
who himself was a witness of these facts, and related them to me. 
It had ri»cn in the water, and lifted half above the waves by its 
equilibrium, a wind off shore had sent it out to sea. It soomed 



ina 



FBKUINAND IV. 



ST7 



as if intended hy destiny to awalzcn terror and remorse in tlte 
king; but though credulous and superstitious, he did not alter liiii 
waja. 

Ilia t/rannical laws, and the atrocious acts which Totlowed, roused 
onco again the passions of tlie lower orders, and on the tith July, 
in the square in front of the palice, they set tire to a pile, threw 
fiii*e living men into the flames, and after roasting them, devoured 
their flosh. The king was at that time in tlie harbour, and Acton 
with him ; there were two fleets in the bay, the Cardinal in thi; 
cily, wliero the Ruiwian troops were quartcreil, and the cflptaJns of 
tho Holy Faitli were parading tlio streets, or perhaps preacut at 
the scona This enormity sti-uch all with horror, and was the last 
act perpetrated by the populace ; but worse was in store, thougli 
under the guise of law. For just at that time, the list of pro- 
scriptions arrived from Palermo, which )iad been there compiled 
by the queen, after consulting old rcgis^ters, and upon information 
received from spies employed during and since the Republic ; 
influenced also by her private hatred and that of her adviser, the 
Frinee di Castelcicala ; the king acconliiigly ordered the tribunals 
to commence tho trtiLla. 

Thirty thousand Neapolitans wcro undergoing imprisonment in 
the oity alone ; and as the old prisons were not sufGeienCly spacious 
to contain so many persons, the subterranean vaults of the cnatlos, 
and other unhealthy cells were used for this cruel purpose ; to add 
to their suflcrings, they were denied the usual conveniences of 
life, a bed, chair, light, and eating or drinkbg utenaiU ; for the 
prisoners were reported to be desperate and fearless men, ready to 
resort to any extremity ; therefore all articles in iron, glass, melal, 
and ropes, were forbidden them ; their food was inspected, and 
their persons searched. Men of harsh dispositions were appointed 
their jailors, of whom tho most savage was one iJuecce, nn officer 
in the army, an old man, and the father of a numerous family ; 
happily for Italy, he was a foreigner, and native of Snitzcrland. 
He, more than any, augmoutedthusevcrity of the torments caused 
by their chains, by hunger, thirst, and blows, reviving tho prac- 
tices, and vying with the cruelties which had been exercised 
during the baronial and monastic period. Next in ferocity, after 
Duecce, came Colonel dc Gambs, governor of the prisons of Capua. 

VOL. L S I 



878 



niSTOBT OP THE KINaOOH OP NAPLES. 



m*. 



and Scipione Lamarra, a general of tlio army, besides many 
other obscure persons, whoso names deserve to be cffacoU froni 
history. 

Dut the uncertain state of awaits in Italy afibrJetl a faint gleam 
of hope to the prisoners, while they kept tlie king and bis miiii»- 
ters in constant alarm ; for Frcuuh troops were still in Konio and 
Tuscany, Genoa was occupied by a strong garrisoa composed of 
numerous legions, and 5trouger still in their leader. General Mas- 
scna; Piedmont whs overrun by Lecourbe ; Macdonald, with m 
numerous army, was on the eve of joining General Morcan ; and, 
judging from the condition of the armies in the field, fortune, 
though inclining towards the side of kings, was yet uudoeidcd, 
and ready, when she pleased, to change. Two lists of names were 
therefore presented to the Tribuiuds of State; one containing thoae 
to be condemned to di>ath, and tlieother, those whose sentence was 
not to be completed until the royal pleasure had Wen signitled ; 
this last was the list of those who had capitulated. Oaly in two 
cases, Tengcnnec outM-cighed prudential motives, nnd this order was 
set aside. The llrat was that of General Massa, ilic author uf the 
capitulation, who was hung on the gulluws, and with hittt Eleonora 
Pimciitel,' a noble-minded woman, who as a poctees ranks ainon^ 
the iincsl geniuses of Italy, but who held liberal opinions, and was 
the authoress of the Momtore KapoUtano, and an eloquent speaker 
in the tnKxine of the clubs nnd of the people. 

Tiio Juntas having been informed of the will of the queen and 
of (he king, commenced their iniquitous office; first anrl niOBt 
eager for the work was the Junta of Slate, which met tii the mo- 
nastery of Monte Olivctn. where this fi.igitious tribunal held their 
sittings by night, either to prove their indcfatigiUjle seal, or to add 
to the horror and terrors of the scene. In order to prevent any 
stagufttion in their actn of tyranny, they resolved to record the 
sentences every Thursday, publi»ti them the following day, and 
execute them on the Saturday. Those who had capitulated alone 



' Pavna KtmHfire Foarftn PimmOi — 
Vtm iuae KapolitaiM, qvi »mt d'nbord 
^itingu^ pu-dM pii£*aiw aKnuiMea at b' 
2«uicuaca, ct ()ui ti'irril i-n*iiilo livtvo fc ilea 
totilM nritlea, sijU iniiMrtoutcB font le 
bin puUio. £Ue a cga]iM6e one lim 



■iir iin pn>jc1 du bunqac utianale, riH \\ y 
B de> vaa li^ pnft>Rik>. qui (Hmrmii tn- 
t^roaxT 1m lianiae* In plni tnitniila tUns 

tUi (hurt dt flhiltf, Tol. i. p. 17. 



ino. 



FKBOINAND IV. 



87f 



obtained from the king a commutation of pxmishmcnl, and in ploee 
of dcalli, wero condemned to perpetual imprisonment in the sub- 
tcrrnnean {lungcons of Banta Catcrinn, in ihc island of Favignnna. 
TliiK island, in tlie seas of Siciiy, the JE^um. of tlic latins, and at 
tliat time a prison notorious tlirougli the dcercca of the Romnii 
tjrranta, risen from the sea to a great hci<<;ht in the form of a cone, 
on whose summit a castle has been built. Within the castle there 
is a descent by slejis out the whole depth of tbejnck, until they 
reach aii artificial grotto, which well deserves its name of the 
Fosaa, or Pit. Uere the sun's rays never penetrate, and the cold 
is piercing, while only a dim light pervades the dense moisture 
which hangs in the atmosphere ; it is inhabited by noxious ani- 
mals, while man, however young and robust, soon dies there. This 
waa the apartment a!)signe<l to nine of the prisoners, among whom 
the most noted were the Prince of Torclla, who was an invalid and 
in advanced life, the Marquis Corlcto, of the house of liiari, the 
advocate Poerio,^ and the cavalicro Abbumouti. 

I must now enter upou the most tragical part of my history ; for 
after the French had been defcited in the battles of the Trebbia 
and of Kovi, the Sicilian Qovernment foreseeing the complete 
triumph of the old over the new, overstepped the barriers which 
had been prescribed by policy (for they had none in conscience), 
and resolved not to mitigate any of the punishments. From that 
moment all the Kentcnccs of death were confinned, and tlmsc who 
had capitulated had nuthing left them but the prolongation of their 
Utos during the few days in which they were confined in the ter- 
rible cell for the condemned. OrouKo Massa and Eleonora PimcnLel 
having been executed, Gabriel Jlanthont was the next to follow. 
On being questioned by Spocialc what ho )iad done to senre the 
Republic, be answerwl, "Great things, but not sufficient, since wo 
ended by capitulating." ....*" What do you plead in your defence i" 
asked the judge; "That I was among those who capitulated." 
" That in not cnougli." . ..." I liavo no other for one who despises 
the faith of trontiea." Ho went calmly to his deatk 

Manthon^ was followed by Nicola Fiano, who, happening to be 
Tortunatc in liia prDc^s, was not found guilty of death ; for savage 
as were the laws, they failed in discovering mutter for his condera- 
■ Tlic Adooeaie l*&vio. Tba fiuW of Uie ex-niaislCT Culo PMrio. 



sso 



HISTORY OP THE KIKODOM OP KArLES. 



I TIB. 



nation, but bU denth had been ordered by commands sent from 
Sicil/, and in tbia dilemma tbo Junta resorted to pcrfidj. Tbo 
jud^Q sent for the prisoner from bis dungeon, and, as be entered, 
exclaimed, "Is it thou?'' then ordering bis chains lo be struck 
ofl', tbey were left alone. " Ah ! Fiaiio," ho continued, " in what 
a condition do 1 bt-hold tbeo once agfain 7 We who shared together 
the pleasures of youtli, little thought the time ■would Arrive wbeu 
I should be the judge and thou the delinquent But the fates bavo 
ordered, that, happily for nic, the life of my friend ia pkced in my 
bands. Let mc for a moment forget ray office and thou thy misciy ; 
let us he as friend to friend, and concert tlio means by trbich to 
save tbee. I will prompt thee when to assent and when to be 
silent, 60 that thou mayost gain credit and contidcnco for sincerity." 
Fiano was astonished and moved to tears at this proof of fricnd- 
sbip j Spccialc, who was the judge, embraced him, and the prisoner 
re|)eated whatever he dictated, while the $crivano noted down his 
words, whicli had a directly contrary eU'ect to that promised, for 
the Iniitor made him deny what he had previously affirmed in liis 
proc&s, and confess an aocjuaintanco willi matters of which lie 
really bad no knowledge. The unhappy man was thus condemned 
to death upon his own words. In bis youth he had been the boou 
companion of the villain by whom he was now betrayed. 

Fraticeaoo Conforti, a learned man, a bold writer against the 
pretensions) of Rome, and a legislator under the Republic, wna 
menaced with death. Uis works had been lost, but ho was roquentcd 
by Spccialc to rewrite them, and w;ks told that his past and present 
services would stand him in great stead. He tvas given a better 
prison and left in eutitudo, when he toiled day and night ou a work 
in vindication of the secular government against the saconlotal ; 
having completed hi-i labour he presented it to hia judge, who tlion 
opened his trial, and a few days afterwards rewarded bim with death. 

Instances such as these, and despair of life, urged the prisoners 
to extremities; one of tlietn, a man named Velaaco, of gigautic 
strength and stature, was replying by evasive answers to tlte i^ties- 
tioiis of the Judge Specialo, when timt inhuman wretch threatened 
him, that to punish bis lies, ho would have him strangled ibc next 
day on the gallows. Velasco answered, "You will not;" and be- 
fore the words were out of iiis uiouth, seized liis enemy, and dragged 



1790. 



FEBDINAKD IT. 



881 



liim to tho window, hoping, that wliile grasping; him In a close 
embrace, they would both fall together. Tlic acrivano attempted 
to interfere, And the creatures of the police who were In attend- 
ance, hastening thither at the cries for help, Velfwco threw himself 
out alone. 

Tlie Count <li Huvo, wlion reviled by the Judge Sambuti, inter- 
rupted liis insults, by saying, " If wo were both free, you would 
be moro cautious in your language ; these clinins make you bold ;" 
and he shook his fiat 'm his face ; the coward turned pale, and 
commanded (hat the prisoner should be removed ; but hardly had 
ho left the room before Sambuti wrote down his sentence, by which 
that slrottg man was tho following day conducted to execution. 
As a noble, ho was permitted to die by the aie, and he requested 
to be allowed to lie on his back, that he might watch with scom 
the descent of that instrument which cowards fear. 

Some of the prisoners in the deep dungeons of Castcl-Kaovo 
attempted to escape, aidod by a noble woman who was herself at 
liberty within the city ; for in those times of affliction, when danger 
and fear prevented men going abroad, women undertook the charge 
of bringing aid to the persecuted. Treated with contumely in tho 
chambers of tho ministcns driven from the gates of Lho prisons, 
insulted in their misfortunes by the ecrivani aud judges, they bore 
all patiently, and modestly but without quailing, returned the 
following day to the same chambers aud the same gates. If any 
of the prisotieni escaped the death which had been already resolved 
on, or if any had their puniahmonta mitigated, they owed all to 
the perseverance and charity of these women. One of them, after 
much labour and many attempts, succeeded in introducing 6lc:s, 
iron, and ropes, with other instruments into the dungeon. The 
mathematician Annibalc Gionlano,' who has been already men- 
tioned iu the Third liook of this history, contrived the means of 
escape. The re»t were employed to saw through the bars of the 
window, and to arrange the umchinery for thoir deseent to tho 
sea below, near the harbour, where a boat was ready to receive 
them. Tlio work was just complete<1, and the prisoners wore 
rejoicing in the hope of liberty; tliey were nineteen in number 
and men of extraordinary merit, as among them were Cirillo, 
' Amtttlalt Gwrditno Kbo tctrayt^ tl)« Miiii«t«r Mdlict Sec af^r, |i $17. 



S8S 



lirSTORT OP THE KINGDOM OP SAPLES. 



inv. 



Pagano, BnfB/ uud others ; wlicu, in (he middle of the nigrht, the 
g&tee were unlocked, and Duccce enteretl the dangcon with a 
judge of tlie police, bAillfTti, constables, and others; the two fii-st 
went sLrftight to the spot whore the instruments were buried in a 
hole, and to the bars of the window, the way by which the in- 
tended escape was to liavc been made. Tlicy did not appear like 
men in doubt, but went straight to their object without hesita- 
tion ; for two of the prisoners, Annibolc Giordano, grown old in 
treachery, and Francesco Baasetti, a general of the Ilepublio, 
had betrayed what was prepared to the commander of the fort, on 
a promise of their own lives buing spared. Bcvcntwu persons in 
coni^uiltience perished by an iguoniiuious death, while these two 
prolonged llicir infamous lives ; Bassetti's was short, tliat of Gior- 
dano long and prosperous. 

The trials proceeded. The Judge Guidobaldi had to examine liis 
friend Niccolo Fioretitino, a learned mathematician, jurist, and 
man of science; an ardent, hut at the same time cautious advocate 
for liberty, who had avoided public office, and liail only endeavoured 
to iuritrnct. the people hy liin words and virtuous example. Quido- 
baldi addi-esaed him tlius: — " I^t there ho few words between ns ; 
what were you during the Uepublic ?" " Nothing." answered Fio- 
ruutino ; " 1 was guided by the law.s. or by uuccssily, the supreme 
law." Quidobaldi rejitied that tlio tribuuals, not tl)o accused, were 
appointed to jndge of tho guilt or innocence of their actions, and 
then addressed liim in a speech composed of a snuttcring of law, 
mingled with insulls and protestations of old friendship, wlnlo 
always repeating the words, justice, faith, and the goodness of ilie 
king. The prisoner, who was a man of warm and hasty temper, 
lost pftiiencc, ami burst forth: "The king, not we, occasioucd the 
war with the French ; tho king and his general, Mack, caused our 
defeat ; tho king fled, leavin)^ the kingdom in poverty and dis- 
order; it was by his means the enemy conquered and im]>ofled 
their will on the vanquished people; we obeyed them, as our 
fathers obeyed the will of King Charles of Bourbou, for the obe- 



' I'scqunJc D«IB, « celolirntwi Grork 
•obolnr, liurii 1749, in CninliriM. In 1773 
■l^iiilcil lu till' (iliair of li«(iii Aii'l (irprb 
in Xaplu, ami muAe I JlrnriAD of the Royul 



Libnrj. In I78T, Iklnmlxr or llie U«feu- 
Innr-tiii Ai-AdcRi v, and nttplfiyed to (]eci[^M' 
Urcek papyri 



IT10. 



PSBDINAND IV. 



383 



dicnco of the conquered is lawful, liccausc an act of necessity ; and 
now fou, the delegate of that same King, jrou $])eak to ua of laws, 
justice, and faith. What arc your laws i laws delivered after the 
act ; what is youv justice ? a secret procivt, no defence, and arbi- 
trary sentences ; and what your faith i ihc terms ofthe capitulation 
for the castles, which have all been broken. Shame on you for 
profaning words revered by the whole eivilizcd world, and uning them 
10 serve the puqiose of tlio moat infaimiua of tyrannies! Say nithcr 
tliat the princes want blood ; do not give yoursotvcs the trouble of 
trials and condcmnncions, but read the lists of those proscribed, 
and put them to death at once ; this vengeance would be more 
rapid, and more confonnable with the tyrant's digutly. Piually, 
since you [irolcst a frietidsliip for me, I exhort you to relinquish 
your present oiBce of executioner rather tbim judge; and remember, 
that if the universal justice, which despite deeds such as jours 
still revolves around this earth, docs not punish your crimes in your 
lifetime, your detested name will disgrace your children, and your 
memory will bo cursed for ages to come." The vehemence of the 
orator prevented tlie possibility of inlciTUption, and when he had 
ended, he was lianded over to the police, who savagely drawing 
the ropes and chains tighter, produced as many wuunds in liis flesh 
as there were l<uots; but, on his return to tho dungeon, lie related 
to U8 what had passed^ and added (a sad but true foreboding), " that 
he would soon repeat his words to our dead comrades." 

Mario Pa^ano only said that he belicvod every attempt at de- 
fence useless, that life had become burdensome to him from Ihc 
unceasing wickedness of man, and the tyranny of gOTcrnments, 
and tliat ho hoped for peace after death. 

When Doraenico Cirlllo was aakeil his age, ho replied, " Hizty ;" 
his profession ? " A physician during the king's n-ign ; a delegate 
of the people during the Kepublic." Irritated by this boast, the 
Judge Spcciale then asked in mockery ; " And what are you In my 
presence ?"...." In thy preeenco, cuwurd, I am a hero," He was 
condemned to die. His high reputation, and having frequently 
attended the royal family in a medical capacity, caused liis execu* 
tion to be postponed; and during this interval, Hamilton and 
Nelson sent to inform hini in his prison, that if be would nak the 
king's pardon it would be granted ; but he answered with dignity 



9M 



HI^rORT or THK EIXODOM OF VAPLSL 



tlut he hkd bit Uie fruit of aD the kbocos of ki« mmd in tKe Mck 
of hi* boDM, tad the efaanas of doBettie life with the hopeof ood- 
thwhig hi* mme, by the tov of hit nieoe ; that be had no fortlMr 
•ttraetioas to Itlie; and thmt haptng fat peaee after death, he woold 
do nothing to cwape it He aaiend npon the gaSkms, together 
with Kario Pa^BO^ IgBaaio Ci^a, aod VinecBao Rnaa So tnath 
wtadom, ao moeh learning, and ao mneh bonovr were thna loat to 
Italj IB one dajr. The popuUoe looked on in awe-ttmck ailenee ; 
it was rnmonrrKl (hat if the death of Cirillo had not beeii hastened, 
the king would hare pardoned him, bot this iklse r^wrt aooa died 
awaj, and obtained no credit 

It woutd Ite a l«dious and melandiolT t&sk to dcieribe inatance 
after iBalaocc of the proceedings of the t/ranu, and of the miaary 
of their vietiniB. I aball therefore only mention tho»e which were 
moat cruel and notoriouft. Aboat three hundred of the first men 
in the kingdom perished, without reckoning those who had been 
killed in flglil or during the riots; of this nnbappjr number, were 
Carafia, Uiorio, Colonna, Carftcciolo, fire of the PignatcUis (of 
Vaglio, Str6ngoli and Uorsleo), and at least twenty mon: metnbera 
of illustrious families; beside whom were seen men distinguished 
in letters or science, such as Cirillo, Fagano, Couforti, Husso, Ci&ja, 
FiorcDtiiio, BafB, Falconieri, Logotcta, De FUippIs, Albauese, Ba^ui, 
Neri, and many more; as well as men renowned for other reasons, 
such as Oenerab Fedcrict, Massa, MantKon^, Bishop Samo, Bishop 
Natalc, and the Prelate Troise ; besides Elconora Fimentcl, a 
woman of unblemished character, and the unhappy girl Luij^ia 
Sanfellce, Ho other city or kingdom in the world, as rich u-ith 
men of genius, has been equally impoverished by the losa of so 
many and of so high an order. Tho cases of the noble youths 
Serm and liiorio, who n-ero beheaded, were still more pitied by 
gcntio hearts, neither of them having completed his twenUeth year, 
white one of tho naineofGunzano had hardly attained his sixtecaih. 
An almost incredible fact is recorded uf tbis last : an only son of a 
wealthy and patrician family, and tho future hope of their house, 
he died by the executioner; and his father, the Marquis Genzano, 
either (torn a base nature, servility, or ambition, was so unnatural 
A monster, that a few weeks after llio death of his son, he invited 
tho Judges of the Junta to a samptuous banquet. 

I 



179*. 



PERDIKAND IV. 



985 



Another miserable spectacle was, the destitution of whole fami- 
lies, wiiose property had been sequestrated or confiscated hy iho 
Exchequer, or whose houses wore empty, from having been rifled 
when the town was sacked; tlie credit of others hnd been exhausied 
by their inability to pay, mid (he aid received from relations 
and friends had been consumed in prison, or by the rnpacity of the 
scrivnni and jnilges, dun'np; the trials. It was forbidden by law to 
speak to the prisoners, or inquire into the accusations, or to have 
access to the magistrates ; but all were venal, and even mercy 
and justice had tlieir price. Theruforc to this day, fjitnilios who 
were originally in easy circuiuatances, cau with difiicuUy (irocure 
the necessaries of life, and oflou have to beg for food. The pro- 
perty of the rebels was administered by men of cruel and obdurate 
characters, who, in the embarrassed state of the tiensury, confis- 
cated whole revenues, sold the Und, and neglected to 5iup]>ort tho 

families of the pnsoncrs. The ngcd Princess dcIU (I have 

been requested for the present to conceal \wr name), lived in 
poverty, on the charity of a servant. 

TIio trial of Saiifelice, who )ind been tho cause of the discovery 
of Baker's conspiracy, commenced. Fcni had been killed in tho 
war, or had fled to Franco, and the relatives of the murdered 
Jiaker called for vengeance both in the iribnuals of State and iu 
tlie palace ; for all the blood wliich had bevu shed for the monarchy 
uouUl not satisfy their fury, and tlicy demanded moro for the 
family. The unhappy woman was thrown into a liorrible dungeon, 
itnd by tho laws wliich condeniued all to death who had committed. 
any act to favour the Kepublic, she was sentenced to die, and 
would have been immediately executed, had she not confessed her- 
self with child. Tho execution was therefore suspended, but the 
king wrote from Palermo, reproaching the Junta wiih thi.<> delay, 
and ordering the woman to be seat to Sicily. On her arrival in 
I'niermo she was shut up in a dungeon to wait the day of her 
child's birth, which wns to be tlio la^st for the mother. 

Another trial which caused much excitement, was that of tho 
naval officers. Admiral Cai^cciolo was dead, but one death was not 
enough to a]ipea8c the rage ulii^'h had been excited by the fatal 
engagements off I'rocida und Castcllaniare, and the athiir at the 
bridge of tho iladdalona. The quocu accordingly wrote from 

VOL. I. 2 k 



HISTORY or THE KINODOM OF KAI'LRS. 



inn. 



PAlcrniD, ordcrinj; the Junto to select four of thoso most implicated, 
nnd have then) executed ; to condeuni ihc rest to uiluor puQi^h- 
mcnt£, and to complete their proo^e, which had been too long' de- 
Ujcd, causing mudi injury ns a precedent, und greatly lamented 
br all the loyal Kcrvants oftliu king. This iiiii|uitoua Junta, after 
due duliberatioD, sclcctcil their victims, among whom was Captain 
Sancaprb, detained in the prisons of San Stefano, an island oS* 
Qaeta, The day oftiial bait been Hxed, but the winds delayed the 
arrival of the ship at the inland, and its return with the prisoner ; 
but the queen's orders were not therefore to he disoboyed. nor the 
sentence deft-rrcil; the judges, therefore, substituted for the fortu- 
nate SancHpr&, Cai)tftin Liiigl Lagranalftis, who had, by a former 
sentence, been condemned to banishment ^'or was this the ontr 
instance of slavish subserviency. Plavio Pirelli, a woilhy ma^s- 
trate, who was in prison, after having been acquitted and liheratod 
hy the Junta, was condemned, by letters of ihc king, to perpetual 
imprisonment at Ariuna Michel Angelo Novi, condemned to 
banishment hy the Junta, wait, by a commnnd, sent from Palermo, 
ahut up in prison for life ; tiregorio Mnncini, sentenced to fifteen 
years' banishment, had taken Uavo of ]iis wife and children, and 
was on board the ship rc.idy lo sail, when he was detained by fnsh 
orders from the king*, and the next day perished ou the gallows. 

Hardly liad the " case of the navy," as it was called, been 
concluded, before that of tho city commenced. Serious charges 
were brought against the nobles ; disobedience to tlic king's lieu- 
tenant ; usurpation of authority ; the creation of a new goveru- 
ment upon tho fall of the niotiHrchy and of the House of Bourbon ; 
the people prevented defending the oily; assistance rendered to 
the enemy ; all which criracs were concentrated in one. Tlie Junta. 
of State was again the tribunal employed for this trial, willi tho 
addition of some extra judges chosen by the king from magistrates 
of high rank and from his ministers; the mode of proceduro was 
to be identical with the last, though the punishments were to be 
difforoiit. The whole order of nobles irernUed for their lives j for 
though the accused were not above twenty persons, numbers who 
were coniie^ted with them by blood, took alarm. They could pro- 
duce in their defence the nncient privileges of their order; but 
these had boen shaken by the events of tlie period. TJie triul 



ITSB. 



FERDINAND iV. 



SS7 



only occupied a fow days j some were act at liberty, many were 
punished with imprisonment, or con^iiemciit iu the islands near 
Sicily; nnd one nlonu was condeuiued to death — Ihu I)ukc di 
Monteleono, well known, in Europe and America, who posse&icd 
riches beyond the liniilsofa private fortune, a husband and father, 
and respected for the qualities of his heart and head, lie would 
have perished by the hands of tlie executioner, had not letters 
from Pope Plus vr., addressed to the king, be^ed and obtained as 
a favour, that the »cntcnce of death should be commiUcd to perpe- 
tual imprisonment in the island of Favi^nana. The condemned 
went to their several ptaccs of punts)imi?nt, and among them the 
young Prince of Canosa, declared guilty, because ho liad proposed 
to change the monarchy into an oligarchy ; three of the eight 
ju(lgo» hail sculeiiocd him to death, but the others, moro lenient, 
panloucd his having ventured to move the measure, and con- 
demned him to only five years' imprisonment 

The Junta of gencraU, presided over by Lieutoaant-Qeneral do 
Gambs, the Council of the Subitanei (die improvised), and the 
Visit-ora to the provinces, rivalled (he Junta of State iu the 
rigour of their sentences, but could not equal it; not bccauise 
their ideas of jURticc were leaa stern, but because the principal 
delinquents had been handed over to t1ic first Junta, of well-lried 
perfidy. Along with the trials for capital offences, trials of leas 
importance were hurried through, condemning to imprisoDment, 
confinement within certain limits, and in many cases to exile; 
among the exiles were seen the old, the sick, the iniirm, boys or 
children, who had not passed their twelfth year, natroas and 
maiilens; all which innocent poraona were punished on various 
pretexts; some for having altered the fasliiou of their Jiair, ur 
allowed their beards to grow ; some for having been prcaont at « 
Republican ceremony, and the women for having begged alms for 
the wounded and sick. Amidst this uurustrainud licence iu 
punishment, there was not wanting the iDccntivc of private hatred 
or rapacity, which, under pretence of reasons of State, sent au 
enemy, creditor, or rival into exile ; many were betrayed or 
watched by servants, tutors, friends, relations, a brother, or a wife. 
The morals of the people, already lax, owing to the political con- 
dition of the kingdom in past ages, aud to recent events, sunk to 



HrSTOBY OF THE KIKODOH OP XAPLB8. 



17» 



the lowest ebb of degradation in tbc jear 1799, bjr ao manr 
examples of virtue punished and vice rewarded. 

Whilst the ^ood were penieeuted bj the tyrant, the bod were pro- 
moted and loaded with ^fts and docorationa, called honours, though 
converted to a shameful usa The king gave Cardinal itufib the 
Abbey of Santa Sofia in benc6ce, with an income of nine thousand 
ducat« ill perpetuity for his family, besidoa other lands vrhtch 
yielded a net revenue of fif^y thousand ducats and the otHce of lieu- 
tenant of the kingdom, with an annual salary of twenty-four thou- 
sand ducats ; a now kind of largesse, and only possible trhcre the 
wishes of the king are laws to the State. Tlio gifts were accom- 
panied by letters exprewive of the royal atlachmcnt, and gmtitude 
for the recovery of the kingdom. Other letters from the Emperor 
of all the Russiai, Paul l, assured the Cardinal that he was 
the admiration of all good men, for his brilliant campaign in 
('aUbria, and creating him a Knight of the Orders of Sl Andrew 
and 8l. Aletander. The rank of colonel was bestowed on a 
retired cjiptain. a brother of the Cardiunl, with an annual pen- 
sion of three liiouBnnd ducats; while ccclcsiasticnl bcnc^fs and 
grifla. Innils, and public ofliees were bestowed on the bishops of 
Capaccio and Policastro. Tlie Chevalier Micheroux obtaioetl the 
rank of marshal and a splendid diplomatic apgwiutment, besides 
rich stipends ; De Cesaro. tho Uvery servant in Corsica, and the 
pretended Duke of Saxony in PugUa, was made a general ; Pronio, 
Fra Diavolo, Mammoiie. and .Sciarpa, with all the leaders of the 
royalist bands, were named colonels, and most of them ma^io 
barons, and decorated with the order of Constantino, besides being 
onrichoil with lands and i>cnaiona. 

Tho royal gratitude extended to the officers of the Turkish and 
Russian forces, where it was expressed by doubling their pay and 
by large gifts. The greatest rewards were reserved for Sir Wil- 
liam ILamilton, wtiile the queen bestowed all pains to prove the 
gmtitude of the Bourbons towards Emma. A niagni6ccnt ban- 
iiuet in honour of I*ord Nelson was ordered in on apartment of 
tho piJaco in Palermo, which woa iitted up as a temple of glory, 
where, as the Admiml entered, ho was met by the royal fatuily, 
and crowned with Inurel by the baud of the Princo of Salerno. 
At the same nioraout, tlio king presented him with a rich sword. 



I 
I 

I 
I 



iim. 



KKIJDINANU IV. 



389 



nnd a diploma croating him Duko of Brotitc, with no animal pen- 
sion of six thousand ounces.' liroutc Is a little village at tlio foot 
of Etna near C'Ataoia, and was suluciud fur the fable connected 
with its name.' Tlic sculptors in Homo ofTcrod, at tlicirown es- 
pouse, to erect a Column with ro»trums for the Duke of Brontu. 
Tliwe rewards and honours were all deserved by liie conqueror of 
Aboukir, and, perhaps, scarcely equalled his merits; but the 
Nelson of Naples was utiwortliy of them ; the royal family and 
people who had only lavished eacomiuras on tlie hero of Effyi>t, 
now dedicated immortal monuments to tlic munlerer of Car&cciolo, 
to the degraded lover of Lady Hamilton, to him wlio had violated 
the public faith, and whose arm had been all-powerful in the sup- 
purl of tyranny. It is to such baseuosa that Italy may trace the 
chief cause of her miseries. 

Still greater reeompenaes were conferred upon the formatiou of 
a new array. The old army had been dissolved, the llcpuUlicaus 
were proscribed or held in detestation, and the royalist bands were 
diftorderly, composed of many ofticers and few or no soldiers. The 
CardiLiiil, in the beginning of the war wishing to avoid incurring 
the displeiisure of his followers, allowed each to assume llio mili- 
tary rank or position he fancied. The leaders therefore took 
the rank of colonel, not chooiting higher, because there was neither 
time nor workmen in the provinces of sufGoient skill to embroider 
the uniform of a general; nevertheless some, such as Pronio, 
Mnmmonc, and llodio, assumed ilio title ; whiUt one of the name 
of Carbonc, who had only been a private in the old army, and a 
fiuarter-m aster, Nunzlante, took iho rank of colnuels. Another 
soldier, of the imnio of Pastore, with more nii«lesty called himself 
A major. All the brothers of Fra Diavolo, men who bad only been 
common labourers, appeared as captains ; and there were innumer- 
able colonels, majors, aud officers of all grades, as each assumed tlio 
rauk he pleased, or accepted that given bim by chance. To the 
mere wearing a uuifortu succeeded the ambition for command. 
Fools, uiiBttcd for the noble profession of arms by their low birth aud 
habits, now aimed at serving in the now army in tlicir self-created 
rank. Amidst this conflict of interest and claims, it required skiU 

' X Sicilian ounce, twelve fravi:*, eighty (viiiune*. or ten sSilltngi na) vi)^Iilp«nc«. 
> Bronte, lliantlvr, one of llw Cyclvftn. 



HIBTOItY OP THE Kf.'IGDOM OF NAPLES. 



im. 



ful Dianagciucnt to ro-form tlie arniy, and a couDctl was held on 
the subject, whoro, though Cardinal RutTo gave a (rae ptcturo of 
the ruffiang who had composed hU band of followers, tlie king- 
dictated ordinances and de^iMitclies to tins effect: — 

" As the campaign of 1 798 was lost liy the treachery of many 
officers in the army, wc will, that all rebels, both those ^rho failed 
in their duty, and those who accepted militaiy or civil employment 
under the Kepubtie, shall be excluded from tlie army. 

" Whoever served under that unlawful {rorernmcnt aliall be 
reputed guilty of hig;h treason, more guiltj if taken in acraSi worse 
still if dglitiiig a(|nin!4t our Htnndanl, and guilty of death, if urged 
on hy perfidy and obstinacy, they havo been wounded. 

" Hut willing to indulge our natural clemency, and to allow 
aonictliing for the iiiadvertcnrics of youth, besides oftering some 
inducement to repentance, wc will that those ofEcers shall be recom- 
mended to our royal favour, wlio, tempted by i>orerty, ser^'ed tho 
rebels from ncccMsity, yet refused to fight against our standard, or 
who at its sight deserted, or who, evincing still greater fidelity or 
repentance, joined tho royalist troops, and turned against our 
enemies ; and we will that those who held the supremo command 
of any fort under tho Republic, yet surrendered it into the hands 
of our soIdicrB or our allies, be readmitted into the royal service. 

" And after having thus provided for the officers of the old army, 
we command that in the new, those who fought for the cause of 
the throne shall stand first ; pardoning the otTences of their pre- 
vious lives and actions, which in themselves may perhaps bf 
deserving of censure, but which were conimitletl in the rc-cnnqu< 
of the kingdom ; for wc shall only esteem and regard in them the 
services renilercd to tiur cause. Tlie leaders of the royalist hands 
shall thoroforo be colonels, and all shall bo officers (down to en- 
signs) who fought with distinction in the.'^c bands ; that rewards 
may bo npportionetl to merit, wc declare tliow; deserving who were 
iJie tii>t lo take up arms in a conununity, who roused the citizens 
to fight, and who led forth numerous bands, or performed any 
remarkable feat in arms ; and we declare those still more deserv- 
ing who cou6p)red against the enemy, and caused hlni greater 
injury by o]ieu or secret means." 
To these ordinances succeeded i^gulations for the levy of sol- 



imL 



FEItUtNA>'D IV. 



;t9l 



diers ; when it wits found necessary to form many battalions of 
frce companies, or volunteers, because the warriors of the Holy 
Faith refused to return to the hnrd lahour of the pickaxe, or coa- 
dosceml to the discipline of regular troopft. 

By the abovc-niciitioned royal ordinances, some of the Bourbon- 
iat juntas were commissioned to scrutinize the actions of the offi- 
cers of the former army, and as to the rigour of this measure was 
added the harish character of the jud^s, few escaped death, impri- 
aonnient, or exile. After one court-martial had cruelly condemned 
General Fcdenci to death, for having served under the liepuhlie, 
another court-martial ordered the execution of M.ijor Eloutrio Uug- 
gcri, because two recent wounds were discovered upon his body; 
many and shameful fal>:choods followed, in the endeavour to preserve 
life Some asserted they had fled from battle ; others purchased 
a false ccrtitieate from the leaders of the Holy Faith, for havin({ 
deserted the banners of the Kcpublic ; some got their names in- 
Rcribed in (he littts of conspimtoni with Gaiter, Tanfani, or Cristal- 
loro, paying a hi^'h ]iriec to stigmatize their own names with a 
treachery of which they were innocent ; while others concealed 
the scars of honourable wounds. Forged letters and documpnts, 
lying and suborned witnesses, and ]»orversionB of truth, were con- 
stant ; all idea» of honour were reversed, and thus the strongest 
bond whicli unites an army was severed. The Juntas were chiefly 
guided in their sentences by the single fact, whether the officer 
under examination had or had not scrveil the Republic ; including 
all as traitors who had been employed by that government, and 
those it had neglected, faithful ; and as the former government 
had only enlisted the services of brave men, and had passed over 
cowards, virtue was thus punished, and pusillanimity rewarded. 

Soon afterwards an inquiry was instituted into the conduct of 
the genprala who had served in the army of Mack, as well as into 
that of the commanders of the fortresses which had surrendered ; 
Gaota, Peacnra, and Civitclla. General Micheroux, who had been 
defeated at Fermo, and had retreated, leaving the frontier exposed, 
was acquitted and commended ; Generals Meeh and Sassonia left 
Sicily laden with gifts ; Bourcard, De Qambs, and NaselU were re- 
stored to their former rank; Lieutenant-Colonel Lacombe, the pusil- 
lanimous governor of CivitelU, was pardoned, and soon aO:erwards 



nn 



niSTORT OF THE KTSGDOM OP XAl^LKS. 



promoted to ft colonolcy ; Colonel Prichard liod the sanio good* 
fortune, and was advanced to a brigadier, and Marslial TscLiudy 
CMitiuued to enjoy liia salar^v in idtciicas, as well ua the authuritj 
belonging to liis rAiik. Yet t.hesc men had been the Rnt and sole 
eausQ of the sucoeits of the French invasion, and had not ontr 
failed in n\ilitary skill and courage, but had broken their oatlis 
to guard those fortrcBses from the enemy ; and their fennt, how- 
ever ju&tified, did not excuse their guilt. ILad tliey been Neai>o- 
litans^ and brave and upright men, with years of meritorious ser- 
vice, thej would have been at once executed; but they wei 
foreignei-a, beiuling under yeara of servitude, degraded by a court 
life, and were not therefore suspected of treason, a word believed 
or invented, to excuse all the mistakes and violence of despotism. 
The rest of th« state was reorganized a» well an tlie army, and 
all the aei3 of the Government breathed a malignant spirit of 
vengeance. Veteran officers were afraid to serve, new nspirant« 
were audacious in their demands, while those who liad fought 
under the Canlinal were not all desirouu of a place in tbc army ; 
many wishing rather for appointments in the civil sen'ico, irherc 
tbt'v could live at their ease. De Chiaro, formerly a leader in the 
republican army, who bad yielded himself with his troops and the 
oity of L'osenKa, into the arms of Uuflb, was sent as govenior of the 
province to the very city whicli liad witnessed bis treacbenr* ; and 
numben> of the old uOiciaU were turned out lu be replaced by those 
who had conspired with Baker, Tanfano, and Cristallonh The 
Stale waa remodelled, and although based on acts of injustice, it 
WHS better adapted than formerly to the condition of the people, 
and their rulers; thus enabling the Government to rise stronger 
than ever from its ruins ; it owed its strength, however, to the sul 
version of nncient statutes, and to the elevation of men and thingall 
belonging to the modem school ; in consequence of which a state 
of excitement and suspense continued, as in a time of conquest, 
which could not cease until the new era had been established, 
which reriuircd time, or much prudence and moderntiou on tho 
part of the Government. 



insL 



FEBDINAKD IV. 



3$3 



CHAPTER II. 



WABUKE EHTEBPaiSEtl OF TUE 2)EAP0UTA.N QOVEftllSlEKT. 



The king, upon lus restoration, oxcccdcd all Itia former tyrannv ; 
RD assertion wUich I make with some reluctance, lest my reailers 
and posterity, rather than my cotcnipumnes (n'l)o have themselves 
witriesaod wjiut 1 describe), may suapeet that I write in a spirit of 
rancour, inSueuced by my own unhappy exile and my pre8«ut 
misfortunes. All the events related In tlie preceding cha]>ter, 
occurred under the eyes of Ferdinand himself, who was on hoard 
au English veaiol in the hay of Naples, whence he sailed on the 
4th August for Palermo. Before his departure he issued a pro- 
clamation to the effect, that by the aid of God, of his allies and his 
people, he had vanquished a strong and treacherouK enemy ; that 
ho ]iad oomo to Naples fur the purpose of rewarding Iho deserving, 
and punishing rebels from wtioni he never intended to accept 
terms of capitulation ; but while justice forbade any interference 
with the course of punishment, his royal inclinations prompted 
him to continue the rewards of merit ; he hud therefore ordered 
the State trialii to proceed, and that the fullest inquiry should be 
made into services reudercd by communities or individuals. Dur- 
ing his temporary absence from hts fuitliful city of Naplea, lie 
coh^ded the safety and trancj^uilltiy of the kinjjdom to the reiu- 
Btated authorities, to the magiKtrates, army, but, above all, to the 
tried fidelity of his subjects, which he bade them maintain un- 
ciiangcd, and add to the honours they had already won ; as he, 
t>n liis aide, would comstautly keep their interests in mind, and 

'dispense rewards and emoluments among ihcm with a gcnoroua 

rliand. 

Tlic English vosaol under the command of Nelson, set sail with 



304 



HISTORY OP THE KINODOM OP NAPLES. 



ITOT. 



a favouralie wind, and convoyed Ferdinand back to Palermo, 
wlicrc ho was welcomed amidst rejoicings greater than had ever 
been before witJle&!^cd, and almost as if he liad been a victorious 
king who had just escaped the perils or war, and was bringing 
peace along with hiru. But time only was wanting to conveit the 
fulaonve rejoicings of tliat people into lamentation*, produced by 
the same man and the same inhuman conduct, in which they were 
now so madly rejoicing. Wliere resistance ia weak or irapOMiblo, 
the gcncr.i1 dissatisfaction may he manifested by the universal 
gloom and the desertion of ihc place wlicro the despot is expected 
to arrive. This silent expression of disapprobation would prove the 
sincerity of the people, and be consistent with their dignity ; but, 
though easy and safe, so much virtue is not to be found in this 
oficminatc and corrupt nge. Ferdinand was therefore applauded 
by the Sicilians in the yciir 1799, for tyranny exercised over the 
Neapolitans, and by llio Neapolitans in 1 S 1 6, for restoring servi- 
tude in Sicily; he thus learnt with bow much case he could sub* 
jugate these two infatuated races.' 

But neither the rewards nor promises of the king, nor the tardy 
attempt at restmint by the Cardinal, could stop the vioIon<« of the 
Bourbonisl* iu the city ; the state of license fluctuated with the pas- 
sions of the populace, and when these were satiated, sometimes 
relaxed for a while to be resumed with greater \-ioIenco thon ever 
upon the slightest occasion, or when the evil passions of the multi- 
tude were excited. The necessity of a foreign war came opportunely 
to remove lUc rabble to a distance from the kingdom, and to send 
them off to Rome, where the king proposed to expel the French, 
while his Christian wnrriora hoped to plunder the city and return 
with fresh booty. They set out led by KodiJ, who called himsolf 
in Ills eiiicts, " Genentl of the army of the Holy Fnith, and Doctor 
of Laws ;" he was neoompanicd by a few troops of the line, and 
by several squadrons of cavalry, under the command of OenernI 
Roccaromaua ; Sciarpa, Pronio, Nunzianto, Salonione, and Fra Dia- 
volo, con<lut;tcfl their followers, an undisciplined multitude, aver- 
aging twelve thousand men, though their numbers varied, somo- 



' Fur an »cconnt of U10 vaiuu of thv nn- 
tSgoniMi Kittling lf«twec<ii tko Sioiljitut 



and NoKpoliUm, aee RnuUcriu— Jltorf/j^j- 
m«nli tbdiatti. 



mi. 



FERDINAND IV. 



395 



times increoseil by those Romans wlio joined tliem, ami sometimes 
diminished by descrtionn from tlie camp. Afior a few triiliiig en- 
counters, thoy took up tlioir quarters at Albano and Frnscflti, 
ravaf,nng the jilain beneath in the direction of Komo, where the 
people liad risen in revolt; as that vast city was only garrisoned by 
a few French, and tlio Christian banners displaying the cross, woro 
waving within sight of llieir walls: besides wliich, Geueral liodid 
was L-arrying on iiiLrigues witliin the city, by means of one Giuseppe 
Clary, a Roman, who had joined hiscampi The dangers of the gar- 
rison iDcreascd from Lour to hour, exposed as thoy were to attacks 
without and williiii the city; General Gamier accordingly, in the 
night of the l&th August, having prepared his squadrons for the at- 
tack of the B(.<urboni5t campj and placed guards on the eiiy, left tho 
gates at the first dawn of day. With the superior military skill of 
a veteran soldier, united with French ardour, he contrived to make 
hia troops, who fought with twice the valour of the enemy, appear 
double their number. The fir^t posts of the Bourbouists fled aa soon 
OS he came in sight, and the second followed this example; tho 
fugitives spread the alarm and disorder, and the whole Christian 
host, unable to cope with an uneniy in the iietd, liastvuud in con- 
fusion towards tho frontiers of Najdes ; while Qarnier, having 
placed a small body of troops at Albauo and Frascati, returned to 
Home amidat the plaudits of the expiring Republic. 

The German troops liad meanwliile gained possession by capi- 
tulation of the little stronghold of Civita Castellana, and the 
English squadrons were closely beleaguering Civita Vccchia, while 
fresh and disciplined troops, who had arrived from Naples with 
General Bourcard, pressed hard the siege of Rome, and obliged 
Gamier to treat for its surrender, as well as for that of the castles 
in the Roman States, garrisoned by the French. The treaty was 
signed on tho :27lh September ; the following were the most im- 
iwrtant conditions : — 

" The French are not (o ho treated as prisoners of war, but are 
at liberty to return to their country, and their adherents may 
follow them, or rciuatn in Rome with security to their persons and 
property. The acts of tho Republic to be pardoned and sunk 
ill oblivion; Rome to be consigned to the Neapolitan troops 
of tho Hue, Civita Vocchia to tbc English ; the Roman territory to 



896 



1II8T0BV or THE KINQDOM OP SAFLES. 



i;8». 



be evacuated by the French on the 4th of October, the soldiers to 
retire with the honours of war." 

Thu lerniB of this capitulation «ero maintained on both sides, 
and General Gamier addrewetl the Roman people in these words: 
— " The incoDBtant fortune of war has forced me to accept terms 
from the enemy ; in the treaty you will find new proofs of repub- 
lican loyalty, and yon will pei-ccivc lliat 1 have had your interests, 
Homiina, as much at lieart ns those of the yrench ; which is only 
just, since wc have a common cause in good or evil fortune. The 
acts of the Uoman Republic nro jwrdoncd and foiYOlten ; your 
persons are safe, your posseRsiuns secure ; if any of you choose to 
follow tlto French Hag, you shall receive all that is due to tho 
unfortunate; those who remain, contldiug in the faith of treaties, 
will be safe. Bo resigned to your new destiny, and obey those 
now in power." Ijourcnrd proclaimed by an edict, hia intention 
to maintain the terms of the uajiituktion, that tlic acts of tlit- 
Uepullie sliould \to forgotten, and only new oETeuues punished, but 
thoiMj with severity. Their arms were laid down and delivered, 
tho companies n( tlnf civic guard disbanded, and all signs of tiiu 
Hepublic effaced. 

Oil the yoth September the French troops left Rome, and tlio 
Neapolitans entered. The first were followed by a number of 
Homau fugitives, and the second by the multitudes of the Holy 
Faith. The trees of liberty had been cut down in the niyht, and 
numberless sacerdotal dcWcca which had been concealed, now 
appeared in the liglit of day. The standnni of Naples was hoisted 
upon the castle of Sant' An^eto, and ninm ilic public buildings; 
and the royal seal was atHxed to the duijinl gates of the V^atioan 
and (jniriual : there was no sign that the dominion of tlic Pope 
would be rcatured. One tree of liberty alone remained standing 
iu tho Piuzxa del Vaticano, which General llourcard proposed to 
cut down in a pulliu ceremonial, and wh(.>n cut dovi-n and burnt, 
to scatter its ashes to thu winds. But the ft-stival was converted 
into a riot, fur while acts eiL^^uificant of hatred and vengeance were 
sanctioned by the chief authority, the same passions were awakened 
in the populace, who, carrying the marble bust of Brulus through 
the city, wounded many of tho partisans of the Republic, pUiudered 
their houses, and i"obl>cd in the streets, until, at the conelusiou of 



inn 



nRDISAVD IV. 



397 



the coromony for the tree, the troopa wliich h&A been drawn up 
before the Vatican, were sent in patrols through the city to 
rcatoro order. 

Bourcanl was soon ftfterwanls wicceede*! in the eonimand by 
General Dieo^ Nnselli, Prince of Anignna, wlio nrrivcii Crom Naples 
in October, with the office and title of military and civil comnian- 
der-in-chiof of tho Roman Statca ; tidinjja rcnched Konic at timt 
very time of the death of I'iua vi., and the pontifical dmir being 
vacant, all looked aniiously for the flrat orders of Arngona, vrho 
now possessed the chief and solo authority. They came with a 
terrific sound ; for by the edict published on the 9th of that month, 
he proclninicd his powers to have beeu coutided to liim by the 
Kinrr of Naples, the conquci-or of Rome ; and that he was sent by 
him to orgnnize the Slate, to efface every vestige or remembrance 
of the detested Republic, and to purge the desolating plague of 
democracy from that part of Italy. Fear transpired through those 
threats, as the Neapolitan troops, as well as those of the Germans, 
Rusflians, Turks, and English, were spoken of in exHggemtetJ 
terms, and said to bo on their vray to put down the rebels. Ara- 
gona himself trembled, but, though alarmed, the power was his, 
and those lie ruled over had more real cause for fear. 

By other edicts he ordered all strangers to quit Rome imnio- 
dintely, and threatened with death those who refused obedience 
or deiayetl their depnrture, as well as any Romaus who should 
lend them their aid. Without cxamiuatiou or trial, he sent tivu 
notaries into exile who had drawn up the deed by whicli Pius vi. 
had been deposed from his temporal throne ; and banished others, 
only because they had been seen acting as ofliciaU or had been a<lhe> 
rents of the Republic ; and. therefore, their proaonco gave offence 
and was a subject for scandal : he filled the liungcons with respect- 
able citircns, among whom Count Torriglionc di Fano is espccinlly 
mentioned, a man of the puroat moral character and of high merit. 
Aragona (as is usual with men of violent tempers), increasing in 
'severity, condemned such men as Zaccaleoni and Do Matteis, 
virtuous citizens, and (ho last conauhi of the lioman Republic, In 
be mounted on asses and paraded round the city, surrounded by 
police and followed by the heedless rabble; and in like manner 
were condemned ihirty-fivc per^us, all noted for the good they 



398 



HISTOKY 0¥ TUB KIXGDOM OF NAPLES. 



ITH. 



had (lone tlie Slalo. Ho conAscated the propertj of fugitives, of 
Gondemned pereous, and of tho absent, as well as of all those who 
had undergone summary punishments. In txlicts relating to penal- 
ties and punishments, their limit was to be left " tu kis arbiirntwn :" 
Bcd to give permanence to his acta, he organized the police, increased 
the number of police odiviiiU aiul spies, and created a tribunal of 
Btatti, by which the trials wore carried on according to the rules laid 
dowu for tho Junta of Naples. After witnessing so mnny acts of 
injustice on tlie part of the Governmcnl, the populace and soldier/, 
whose violence liad hitherto only been feebly repressed, cast aside 
all restraint ; every person who was supiHwed to be a partisan of 
the Republic was insulted in various ways by the drcg» of the 
people, as well as by tlie followers of the Holy Faith, and (if tho 
truth must bo confessed) even by some of the Neapolitan army, 
urho rifled houses and shops, profaned the sanctity of the do- 
mestic hearth, and insulu»l, wounded, and killed all who resisted 
their villany. 

Whilst this miscrablo stflto of things altll continued, whicli 
Arngona called a restoratitju of order, ho reniodelhHl the laws 
relating to the ordinary tribunals of justice, to the finances, and 
administration, oil in the name of the King of Naples, entirely 
ignoring the I'npiu'y, and imitating the statutes and forma used in 
the Neapolitan kingdom ; he even commanded the people to obey 
no other rule than that which proceeded from his Sicilian Majesty. 
Uo crentod a tribunal, under the title of licggenza di Giusliaia 
(commission of justice), for civil causes, and auollier, lleggeuza di 
Potizia (commission of police), for criminal, which two commia- 
sions united under one head, were in imitation of the sreat court 
of the V'icaria of Naples. A new tribunal called the Camerale, 
was appointed to try civil causes appertaining to the community 
and to the administration of public property, and was copied from 
the Camera Sommaria (Audit CHGce) ; nntl a Consiglio Kotale,' 
supreme tribuiml of appeal in venlicts on criminal or civil causes^ 
attached to the Commission of Justice and Police, and for consul- 
tation in cases whoi'c the roynl pardon was to be ashed, or on go- 
vernmental commissions, represented the Uojal Chamber of Santa 

■ Oon^fftio Rouie, court of dvil c«iu«t, «iil]cJ Rvlalc. Icckusg tlie 'yiAgtt ut in « 



) 



IT99. 



FERDINAND IV. 



899 



Cliiara;' special tribunftls for commerce, ngnculture, anil tlic art*, 
were iustituleci as at Naples ; and to voiiiplcto tlic resemblance, a 
junta of state reigned iti Romi'> witli terriilc and absolute power. 
Ttic codes of law which Iind at all times been confuBttd and indis- 
liuct, had degenerated still more during the political commotions, by 
new laws and decrees, which oiity hampered tlio judgments and 
couacienees of the judges ; they wero tnado still worse by addi- 
tional crdiuancos of Anigoua, adopted from the legislative code of 
Naples. 

Ue ulso attempted to remedy the finances. The fall of the Papal 
Govorument, which bad been supplanted by that of the Republic ; 
the French armies long stationed iii Rome, the anival of the 
hordes of which the armies hostile to France were composed, a 
long foreign and domeatic war in a small and barren territory, 
with two successive years of bad harvest, and, what was worse, an 
uncertain future, causing consumption and stngmttion in all the 
sources of wealth, bad reduced tha Roman Elates to poverty and 
misery: but General Naaelli Aragoiia had various expedients by 
vhich to iill the coffers of the Treasury ; he issued a. new law 
revoking the sales, leases, rents and alienations of the State pro- 
perty under the Heman Republic, and by otlier ordinances seques- 
trated the possessions and coiifiscaled all tho land belonging to 
republicans, even including that of men who bad boon arrested 
though not yet condemned : he revived former taxes, im]iosed 
l&ew, and among ihem one upon land; lie also wisely iucluded 
I ecclesiastics among the rale-payers, and annulled their immunities, 
iBucli as the exemption of cbureb patrimonies, abbeys, monasteries, 
'convents, hcupitals, charitable institutions, and privileged persons 
of all kinds, as well as property acquired on doubtful titles. 

These acts, opposed to the spirit of the Roman hierarchy, and 
appearing like the establish men t of a permanent dominion for 
llio King of the Sicilies, together with the despotic rule of the 
^Oerroaii Oencnil Froclick in the marches, raised a suspicion that 
Ubeao successful conquerors meant to retain possession of the con- 
quered regions, and Lo barter for tliem in the sale of nations, 
wbicb was believed near and certain : For the disasters of the 
French armies vontiuueU to lucreaso during tbo wbolc of 1799: 
■ Boral CliftraberafSKalKCIiian — ■ cmnl of nppfdt 



400 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



inoi 



Macdouald had been defeated at the Trebbia, Joubertat Novi, and 
Lecourbe in Piedmont ; tlic fortre^se^s hod fallen, Oenoa was 
tottering, Italjf reconquered bj her fomicr kings, Franco menaced 
upon the banks of the Var and on the mountains of Savoy ; the 
Dircctory of the Great Kepublic powerless, and the nation di*- 
heartened and weakened from internal feuds. Perceiving that 
such was tlie slat*; of affairs, the sovereigns of Europe, no longer 
fearing the restoration of the fortunes of France, ventured on 
higher aftpiratioua and hopca. 

They little forc&aw what deatinios General Bonaparte was bring- 
ing with him from the Enst, where, hearing of the extremities to 
M-hich Franco was rcduc'ed, and perceiving that the war in Kgjpt 
was liuiguiishiiiij', victory doubtful, and if gained, wuuld be of no 
advaiitago to the Itcpnblic, he left Guncnd Klcber iu eonimand. 
and crossing the sea in a frigate, braving all the dangers with 
w'hich lie was surrounded, but favotii'etl by winil and fortune, 
landed at Fr^jus, and proceeded in triumph to Paris, where he 
appeared like a meteor, and as if pveteraatu rally arriving at so 
momentous a conjuncture, amidst the agitation of particii, and 
when all were perplexed by projects, hopes, and fears ; he alone 
stood calm, weighing the events, and inwardly resolved to change 
the disordered state of the Kepublic to a firmer government, and 
under tlia name of Consul, now conferred on him, waa in realitv 
Dictator. 

Hia return from Egypt was displeasing to the sovereigns of 
Europe, as all feared the name of Bonaparte, and that he might 
support Franco in her decline ; but none had yet formed the 
ix'motcst conception how strong a prop this single man would 
prove. They were, on tlie other hand, pleased to see the fall of 
the licpulilic, as it appeared to prove that a single head was the 
form of govenimeiit necessary to the existing stato of society, and 
because they little suspected that a snUlier of fortune could make 
himself a king; they were waiting, therefore, until he had placed 
fetters on the wild excesses of the French people, and until the 
mad ambition of their Icntlors had hecome exhausted, so as to 
enable the royalists within the country, the refugees abroad, and 
the king's army, aided by foreign powers, to conduct Louis xvin. 
with more ease lo tlio throne of France. Their hopes were en- 



UM 



FEKDINAND IV, 



401 



coumgod bj t1ie belief that Bonaparte was incUned to smootli the 
way for them, and would liimscif rest contented with such recom- 
penses 03 kioga have in their power to boslow — rank, titles, 
ritlies, and servitude. Mcnntinte the lovers of liberty sighed over 
the rallcn Republic, ami calling Bona]uirLe dictator, Cicsar, and 
u^uqter, whetted the daggers of BrutuK, and, in every newspaper 
from Franco, hoped to rend that the tyrant had fuUen. 

lietwcen thcso two parties, ioRpired by hope and indignation, 
was n small number of sound tinnkers, who luokoJ upon the Con- 
sul as the saviour of the ago ; for Franco had never been a republic 
except in outward fonus, but had been governed despotically by 
leaders, to whom the people had ^rvilely submitted; the former 
had ruled like kings, and the latter either obeyed like vassals, or 
refused obedience as rebels: an instantaneous transition ivom 
absolutism to the freest form of government was impossible, 
because the masses accustomed to despotism had no idea of 
government except in the shape of a tyranny. Aware of this, 
lionaparto united himself to the people, and made ilioir views his 
own, wliile accin;,' as their Consul ; and fri'ni that day forth nrose 
a rational contidcuco that all the possible aims of the French lio- 
volutiou would be fulfilled; for if Franco had hitherto been able 
to resist attacks at homo and abtxiad, she was less indebted for 
3ier success to the strength of her own Government, than to the 
^chances of war. to a few men of genius, and to the Srst ardour in 
the cause of liberty, which had already cooled down by disastotA 
And bad government, 

HThiUt the Consul was organizing the different parts of the 
•tato in France, and preparing treaties, which were however 
^rtjectcd by foreign potcntnies, and raising new armies and frc^h 
iBoldtcrs, the disasters attending the Franch Ung in Italy still con- 
tinued; and the Conclave, a!uctiiblcd in Venice, was considering 
the choice of a new Pontitrwhn, at all events, should bo opjwscd 
to France. Cardinal Rutfo arrived there with instructions from 
, Uic King of the Two Sicilies ; and full of ambiiious views fur lum- 
Laelf, he resigned the reins of government in Naples into the bands 
lot the Prince of Cosscro, a Sicilian, appointed by the king viceroy 
of the kingdom ; Cosaero had magnificent tastes, yet was prudent, 
and as huraane as the times admitted. Many indeed were the 

VOL I. 3 L 



402 



BiSTORY OF THE KlKdDOM Of NAPLES. 



rsB. 



calls apon his composuon, for not a day passed vithoui men. 
until thcD rcvd'iMl for their wisdom or vtriue, seen hanging on 
the gibbot, or bohcatlcd in tho hlood- stained market-place Kxu- 
cutiijtis had become so frequent, that the rcUgiouB ceremonies 
usually attending them were obliged to be omitted, and thv 
Judge Guidobaldi, to relieve the roval finnuces, made a fresh 
agreement with the executioner to pay him a moiithty snlary 
for his cruel office, iu&tead of, as before, a sum for each person 
executed. 

Thus tlie year 1799 closed with the loss of many valuable lives, 
for Italy and for tlie world, when inoculation from the cow, as a pro- 
tection agftiiisi sniall-pox, came to restore the population, by pre- 
serving numbers from death. The remedy was undoubted, liecnuso 
it had long been pniotised by tho people of the E)ast, in Georgia 
and CircflKsia, celebrated Tor tho extirpation of (he natural siuall- 
pox by vaccination, and thus preserving tho beauty of the GeoT;gian 
and Circassian women. In Europe, where an immense number of 
children nnnually died, an attcm|vt was made to save them by ino- 
culating them in a good season, and under favourable circum stances, 
with a mild fonn of small-pox fi-om the human subject ; and as 
this was found beneficial to a certain extent, the idea led gradually 
to a still greater discovery. At a meeting of physicians in Paris 
in I7i5, the subject of vaccination was discu&sed, but no result 
followed, until in the year 1799, an English physician, Jenner, 
revived the idea in London, where lie tried it on several children, 
and published the effect, adding on account of early experiments, 
and explaining the present process, thus converting the mere con- 
jecture of a remedy into a fact. The reputation and glory Jenner 
acquired from this discovery, excited tlie envy of the medical 
school of France ; as tliey bonstcd (appealing to tho above-men- 
tioned academical discussions) ilmt they were his precursors : but 
the honour remained witli the Englishman ; for a discovery in art 
or science consists iu one certain fact deduced from many vague and 
obscure facts by which it has been preceded; and which only proves 
that that particular science or art has reached a stuge which allows 
of further progress, and the invention follows as a necessary 
consequence. Whoever, therefore, by bis own sagacity or his good 
fortune can give tangible proof of the value of experiments, is 



IWO. 



PBRDINAKD IV. 



4i)3 



deservedly considered the inventor, whatever may have Ijeen Die 
reaearclies, and fruitl&ss labours of liia ])recursoni. 

Tlie views of Jeniicr spread ttiroughout Kurope, in spito of lilnd- 
raiiccs from the war, from parental afTcctioii, which ahnink from 
being first in the experiment, and (iucrcdiblo aa it may appear^ 
from religion. Several physicians wrote against vaccination, ser- 
mons were preached against it frum the )ml])it, denouncing it as 
sinfu!, and both ductarud the proof of its pcruialiLMit oAiuac-y wiut 
etill wauling, and that the einall-pox mi^dit possibly roluru at a 
more advanced and danjfei-ons period of Hfc ; or even tliiit some 
other disease might be generated by the repression of a naiurxl 
complaint In the year IhUO, in the midst of those disputes, Dr 
Marshall, an Englishman, arrived in Ka])les to introduce the 
celebrated remedy, and Naples, always ready for any novelty, 
trusted to Ills assurancesL King Ferdinand instituted offices and 
appointed medical officens for llio puriwso of vaccination, ordered 
it in the hospilnlts and charitable asylums, in his favourite colonj 
of 8anto Leueio, and even, like n. magnanimous monarch, in Ida 
own family ; he spread it lliroughout Sicily and Malta, and bestowed 
praises and favours on Marshall, whom ho dismissed laden with 
gifts and honuuni. But tmlh, reason, expeneuce, authority, and 
the natural love of offspring, have not yet, after ihiily years, suf- 
ficed to overcome the prejudice of many fathers and mothers, 
who are averse to vaccination, because false religion whi6i»ers it 
is a sin. 

In the beginning of the year 1800, the felicity of the kings of 
Italy and Germany was overclouded, as France, under the empire 
of Bonaparte, confiding in his great name and genius, had recovered 
her courage and strength. A new army was forming hy conscrip- 
tion in Dijon, in M-hich neither men nor a)ins were wanting; the 
banks of the Var wero again free, the advance of the Piedmon- 
toae and Russian soldiers was stopiied in Savoy, the standards of 
the Republic reappeared in Switzeiland and along the Uhino, and 
Kurope beheld that powerful nrm raised once again, and held aloft in 
suspense, only waiting the ojiportunity to strike. The guvernraont 
of Naples, which had been tlie most cruel, wa* the moat alormod. 
and with vengeance yet unsated, and concealed rAge, pullislietl 
on the name-day of the king, the 20tli May IHUO, an edict ealle^l 



401 BISTORT OF THE EINGDOU OF NAPLES. 1600. 

a general pardon, bj which declaring it was now time to pause, the 
punishments for past political offences were remitted, adding, that 
the king wishing his subjects to be as his children, and like 
brothers towards one another, suspended and cancelled the State 
trials ; forbade further accusations, denunciations, and inquisitorial 
inquiries by the magistrates ; and pardoned and cancelled all cases 
of high treason ; but as prudence obliged the government to set 
limits to mercy, fugitives, condemned persons, many now in prison, 
and those in the dungeons of the police, confined there from care 
for the public welfare, were to be excluded. None of those par- 
doned were to be restored to the offices they had forfeited, as they 
owed their liberty to the clemency of the prince, and not to 
justice. 

This edict appeared to put an end to the persecutions, and men 
began to look back and calculate their past sufferings. The Gro- 
venimont had purposely refrained from making any computation 
of the numbers who had fallen in the civil wars, and in those law- 
less times in which every city or town had suffered more or less. 
Three thousand had left the country, four thousand had been 
exiled, several hundreds condemned to imprisonment, and many 
more to death, a hundred and ten of whom were from the metro* 
polis alone. After the proclamation of the pardon some thousands 
still remained in the dungeons, and in peril of their lives, though 
upwards of seven thousand were set at liberty. The choice of the 
Duke d'Ascalon for the head of the police, was a greater boon to 
the nation ; he was new to office, but as his mind was as noble as 
his lineage, the public were not disappointed in their hope that 
the deserving would be treated with justice, and that severity 
would be shown towards the populace who were still turbulent, and 
had not forgotten their gains in 1799, which they had already 
squandered in vice and dissipation. The Regent (for the ancient 
title was revived) punished the Lazzaroni alone by flogging, a 
degrading punishment, which, without increasing the shame of 
that degraded class, was dangerous because arbitrary, and was 
unjust, as it made a distinction between the citizens. 

As the tranquillity of the kingdom was restored, though only in 
part, the king, who was desirous of obtaining the suffrage of poste- 
rity rather by silent marble than by the history of his reign and 






FERDINAND IV. 



405 



Iftws, commissioned tlio distingTiished sculptor, Antonio Canova> 
to maJcc his statue of colossal size in the attire of a warrior. Qe 
institutcil att Order of knigliihood and merit, called after liimself 
San Fcrdinaiido, ami intended as a mark of distinction for his aub- 
Ject« or foroigiiers who hoA boon noted for their iidelity during the 
intestine wars of tlie previous year. Tlio cross nf silver and gold 
terminates at the four points m fieura-de-lis, and has in llio centre 
tlic effigy of tho eaint, in the dress of the King of Castile ; tho 
motto, Fiflei et Merito ; the ribbon blue, bordered with red. The 
king is the grand master, next to him the grand crosses, which 
do not exceed twenty-four, while tlio uumbcr of uummauders and 
knights of the smuU cross are left to tho king's pleasure. The 
statutes are the same as in the Order of St. Januarius, with a few 
a<ldcd to denote a recompense for services in war. By another 
decree about three months later, r.he king caused two medals, Id 
gold find silrer, to be struck for tho new Order, to bestow on the 
lower grades of the army and navy, and a pension was granted with 
tho mc<lnls, which, though alvrays considerable, varied in amount. 
All tho royal fnmilv, as well as tho greatest sovorergns in Europe, 
aud the highest personages of tho realm, were created knights of 
the grand cross, but the Order was disgraced by those on whom the 
inferior docomtions were conferred ; as it was seen on tho breasts 
of men, the infamy of whose lives could not be forgotten, by their 
fjiaving appeared in arms for the Holy Faith. 

The state of su8|)enso and alarm arising from the affairs of 
France, continued daily to increaae, until it was decided in the 
royal oouncil to raise a powerful army by conscription, although 
the finances were embarraMcd, and not suflictont to supply the 
present demands of the State. I^argo bodies of Xcapulitan troops 
iji&d to he sup)>orted, and the numerous garrison iu Homo had to 
Ibo maintained by the money of Naples, since Home herself was 
Ucatitute ; the Neapolitans, assisted by the F.nglish. sustained the 
bloekotlc of Malta, and Bupplie<l provisions to the Russian troops, 
who arrived in great numbers, to await its termination. Meaii- 
'linie, in tho midst of dangere to which the kingdom of Naples it- 
self was exposed, tho king's advisers snggesled that another array 
should he mised, and that the {leoplc, who (as they nfHrined) wcro 
indebted to his M»j<'sty for countless bcnelits, and whose duty it 



4tiS 



HISTORY UF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



IfM 



wa« to provide for tlie common defence, should give their aid to 
the finnDces. An order was therefore issued, to raise »ixt>' now 
reg^iments, forty-four of infantry and six of cavnliy, in all G7,22S 
moil, and 9792 horsps, with 176 cannon. The men were to be 
drawn from the remains of former levies, and a froali levy of ten 
soldiers in every thousand soiila ; ilie horses were to be furni»ht.Hl by 
lot ; the hinde<) proprieiors to ])ri>vi(le trappings and fodder, while 
the communes were to be at the oxpcnxu of military accoutrements 
and nrms for tho infantry, tciits audmal(-ricl for the field, cumioii, 
military stores, and tn furnish one month's pay. Tlic men were, 
in times of ponce, to ho quartered over the country, and in case of 
wnr to bo scut wherever re<juired; tlie term of scn'ice was fixed 
at five ywir* Tlie officers were to ho seU-cEcd from thosw who had 
distiuguished themselves ruoat in tbo army of the Holy Faith ; 
while tho conscripts were uyt to he amenable to the ordinarj' tri- 
bunals cither in criminal or civil suits ; and to Ic rewarded by 
promotion and the usual rank in tho army, conferred according to 
service and merit 

Tliis levy was a. heavy burden on the citizens, and aa it was 
impossible to satisfy tho demands made by the law, diftappoint&U 
hopes caused robbery and injustice in town and country ; the only 
benefit tho Goveniment derived from the measure was, that a 
report spread tlirung'huut Italy, that Naples possessed a new .*ind 
airong army, led ijy ln;r kinp,', the greatest oneniy of France. Dut 
this report could not prevent ihc nsscmhlage of troops in Sijou, 
wlicre wonders were performed. While mentioning tho moat pro- 
minent fn.cls, I shall refer the reader, desirous of learning more, to 
tlie accounts given hy Qenerals Dumas and Jomini ; where it will 
be perceived tliit all the marvels related of the armies of antiquity 
have he^n exceeded by the present, and that our auccstors cnn 
only hoaitt a superior political constitution ; while eveo in this, 
shiuiKl fortune not prove obdurate, they will ero long be equalled, 
if nut surpassed. 

Wlien the First Consul was infftrmed how the Gerntau troops 
were disposed in Italy, he employed skilful engineers to explore 
the chain of the Alps, and determined to load his army hy the 
four valleys of St. Gothard, the two St. Bernards, and Mont Cenia ; 
he hnpetl to arrive unexpectedly, and break the centre of the 



laui 



tBKDINAND IV. 



407 



enemy's line, whose urmj vas divided iu various corps sta- 
tioned in Lombardy, upon the mountains above Oouoa, and aloug 
the Var, leaving their uoiitro fe«bly guarded. Secrecy was uecos- 
sary, and Bonaparte dissembled with great skill ; causing the con- 
scripts 10 reach Dijon slowly and in small detachments, while 
troops of veterans were n» unostentatiously assembled in the other 
cities of France ; the amiy of Dijon was therefore thought a false 
report, and was ridiculed aa such by General Melas, the cora- 
nmndcr-in-chicf of the Germaus in Italy, and by the infatuated 
courts of Europe. But on the 17th May of the year 1800, the 
larger force, led by Uerthier, uiukr the direction of Bonaparte, 
began to move, and in a short time jisccnded from the plain below 
to tho Burnmit of Mont St. BernanI, where only snow and sky were 
visible, and where tho clouds formed a dense screen beneath 
their feet. I need not relate how horses, carriages, and artillery 
wore traiiaportcd over these preoijuces, and (he hardships they 
underwent ; it is enough to state, that whatever human wisdom 
could devise or genius invent, whatever fortitude could endure, or 
necessity demand, were performed by that army ; the guna wore 
dismounted and carried in pieces ; the cannon dragged up upon 
carriages of a new construction, and the soldiers, laden with 
seventy French pounds' weight in arma, provisions, and amniuiti* 
tion, formed a cliain of men, and walked up the sleep ascent, 
drawing after them enormous burdens; they performed the descent 
under circumstances proscnting still greater dlHicultlcs; thecaii- 
nona were flxod in grooves hollowed out of trees, and sent down 
rapidly, their fall regulated by other weights; the men themsolvea 
could hardly keep their footing amidst tlicsc eternal snows, until 
at length, it occurred to one soldier to sit on tho ice and slide 
down the slopes of the mountain, which was no sooner [wrccived 
by the First Consul, than ho imitated him; and his example, which 
bad almost the effect of a command, was followed by tlie whole 
ai-my, who thus in two days crossed those towering heights. 

The three other armies crossed by other mountaiiis nnd valleys, 
with equal labour and success: General Moncey by St. Gothard, 
Chabran by the Little St, Bernard, and Tliureau by Mont Ccnis; 
and thus sixty thouAand soldiem, with horses, arms, and appurt^.-- 
nanccs, descended like four torrcutH into Italy. The larger army, 



403 



HISTORY OP THE KIXODOU OP NAPl.Bi^ 



as soon as it had driven the German garrisons from tlio city of 
Aosta and from Chatillou, lialtcd at Furt Biird, whioli ia built upon » 
maaaive rock, in tho oarroweet part of tho valluy, amidst luirc and 
inaccessible crags, rising on all sides ; a small but fortiiiL-d city is 
»ituat«d nenr it, and tlie river Dora Hova Id tlie deep abjrss below ; 
its form is an ellipse, and it is liantlj tliree hundred metres ia cir- 
cumference, while a tower detached from the fort tucreases its 
means of defence The walb were furnished with twcuty-two 
cannon, and guarded by three hundred and eighty soldiers, under 
a German commander. Captain Bemkoff ; a narrow road, fonning 
the glacis, crossed the town. The French demanded a free poa- 
sago from tho governor of the fort, which was refused ; but trhen 
menaced, tho gallant soldier replied, if tho enemy's columns were 
meant to intimidate him, he was prepared to i-cccive them, and if 
they commenced an attack they would be repulsed. The s«tn« 
demand, menace, and clialtengc were repeated on the following 
day witli the same result ; but meantime the French were in want 
of provisions, and had not the means to procure them ; the newa 
of tho onterpriiK) hud got abroad, and the army, the whole schcmo 
and the good fortune whicli had attended it, seemed doomed (o 
perish at the foot of a little castle. 

Necessity made them Attempt an opening by another mountain 
(the Alborcdo), which they had to ascend by steps, difficult for infan- 
try and horse, and impossible for artillery. The French gained poa- 
ttuionof the city hy scaling the walls, and in the hen t of battle as- 
saulted tho castle; they renewed their attack in the night, the safety 
of the army allowing no tiino to count the dcnd or wounded, but 
were repulsed with greater loss. To the honour of Captain Bernkoff, 
they now despaired of success, and tho idea occurred to tticm of 
drawing the cannon through the streets of the city uiidor the fire of 
the castle. Thus, afler eonsiOcrablc loss of men and time, and aflcr 
leaving a large body of troops to]>ro8ecute the siege of t lie fort, that 
army and tlie remaining three reached the plains of Italy. But 
although they encamped as had been pre-detcrnitned, between Susa 
and Belliuzotia, they wore not so disposed as to encounter the enemy 
to ndvautage, for valleys, although descending frytu one eonmian 
range of mountains, naturally grow wider as they diverge from 
Ihoir origin ; while the army, being divided into four columns, tho 



im. 



FERDISAyD FT. 



rapidity and difficulty of llicir inarcli, and the object of this cam- 
paign, gave it the character of an invasirm, wiih the advantflgea 
and disadvantages attendant upon that kind of warfare. There 
could therefore he do base of operations, as the chain of the Alps 
could not form a base, and the lines were neces'^arily divergent, 
provisions left tn chance, and retreat diflienlt; hut, on tho other 
hand, the French made i;apid conquests, and were able to surprise 
the enemy and throw hitn into disorder. Tho peculiar cliaracter 
of this campaign, until after the battle of Marengo, accounts for 
the uncertain and hazardous movements of Mdas and Bonaparte, 
and excuses many acts in the hostile genuraU, which would have 
been open to censure hud they not been occasioned by unavoid- 
able circumstaucos. 

It was therefore fortunate for tho Fi-encli that General Melas did 
not believe the report of the army of Dijon, and was occupied 
round Genoa, and on the shores of the Var, whilst magazines full 
of stores were falling into the hands of the enemy, as well as the 
fortrctis of Pnvia, with a large supply of arms, provisions, and 
clothing ; as there was, however, no garrison there, tho French had 
not even tlioglory of a contest. But after the capture of Milan many 
rumours and facts it was impossible to doubt, at length eouviiiccd 
Melas that the First Consul was really with a largo army !u Italy ; 
and, abandoning the Var, he summoned General Ott and Ins 
troops from Genoa, and collected as many men, horses, and cannon 
as he was able. The fortress of Genoa yielded in a few days ; and 
the French garrison, joining the legions which General Buchet was 
commanding in Bauphint^, made a formidable army of twenty thou< 
sand sohlicrs. At tlie same time, the French from Upper Italy, 
continuing their course of invasion, crossed ihc Po, and General 
Murat gained possession of Piaccnza; the communtcatinn between 
the Germans of Upper and Lower Italy was interrupted, and their 
entire force was parted in two divisions, that before Alessandria, 
and that before Mantua. The four anuies were thus strangely 
situated ; the two larger in tho centre, while those on the Hanlts and 
roar were inferior in numbers, though still considerable. Eighty 
thousand soldiers obeyed Bonaparte, and a hundred and six thou- 
sand, without counting the Gcnnans in Ancona and Tuscany, were 
led by Melas, to whom delay was as necessary as immediate battle 

roL. 1. 2 m 



410 



niSTOBT OF TnK KINODOK OF KAPLRS. 



hm. 



was to Bonnparte ; but the foriner, aware of tlio necessity of forc- 
ing a way fur himself as well as for the army of Maiitun, and trust- 
ing to the separation of tho French lines, to his superior numbers, 
and to the recuilectiott his troops bore of recent victories over the 
Kcpublicaii ariuiuft, collected thirty-one thousand soldiers around 
Alessandria, of which tweuly-threo thousaud were iulautry, aud 
eight thousand cavalry, with a largo 8U])p)y of ordnance ; he then 
occupied Ihe ground in front of tl>e Dormida, and strcngtlieoed 
the village of Marengo, which from its elevated position commanda 
a view over the vast plain ; tho only ground iu that part of Italy 
which was not intersected by canals, and where the cavalry, in 
which the Germans were strongest, could move freely. 

Matters stood thus on the 12th June ; the rapid movomentfl on 
cither sido, perplexed all tho information obtained by spica, pri- 
soners, and dcscrtors, and made the position of both armies uncer- 
tain. Bonapai-te, on the following day, attacked Uarengo ; and as 
the Qcrmaiis abandoned it, possibly as a feint, he, being uncertain 
uf the intentions of Melas, placed several of his legions at a dis- 
tauce, others still further off, aud encamped behind Marengo, with 
)5,500 infantr)- and 3700 cavalry. But the greatest captain of the 
day was nearly taken hy surprise, wheu, on the dawn of the 1 4th. be 
saw heavy columns of the Germans defiling across the IS^rmida by 
three bridges, lie could have avoided battle by a retreat, but it woulJ 
have been at the sncriBcc of his reputation, and by yichling to the 
enemy, what he moat desired, a 5*66 passage into Upper Italy. 
Konapnrlo therefore resolved to accept tho challenge, to recall the 
detached legions with oil speed, and to trust meantime to the 
valour of ihoae ho Itad with him, and to his own skiil and good 
fortune. He ranged his small body of troops in lines, which, though 
neccei<ary in the i>resi-nt emergency, will hardly be credited by 
those learned in military ecienco, since not in accordance with any 
rulofl of war ; passing along the files of soldiers Lc inspired them 
wit!) a dcRire for frciih glory, by rcmuiding them of their past deeds, 
nud concluded in tltesc words, " And we shall succeed, if time be 
allowed ua for victory." 

Melas was well aware that his hopes must depend on rapid con- 
quest ; but altliough his amiy was crossing the river by three 
bridges, they had only one exit frotn the camp, and three hours 



1900. 



FEBDIKAKD IV. 



41] 



thercford ytexe coiiBumvd in leaving- It. Tlioy attacked Marengo 
Willi twice tl.e uuiubere of iLy Freiicli, aud would have gained the 
position, had not fresh troops hastened to the assistance of the 
cncnij ; Ijut the auailanls bi^in.Gf likewise reinforced, the French 
\verc obliged at middaj to abandon Marcni|;o, and renew the battle 
in other parts of the plain. As it would be irrclcvimt lo the 
present history to onter into a minute account of the advance, re- 
treat, success, or defeat of each separate troop of cavalry and 
infantry, I will only mention, that at ono iu the afternoon the 
French army, abandoning the field, retreated to the rising ground, 
and that the eucniT, in close and triumphant pursuit, made tbcir 
retreat slow and sanguinary. All the French corps were engaged, 
with the exception of the Consular Guards of eight hundred infan- 
try, and three hundred aud sixty cavalry, which wore held in 
reserve^ Bonaparte sent tho first into the plain, where, formed in 
square, they stood tlie charge of the enemy's home aud foot, and 
the raking fire of his artillery, giving time for their own men to 
rc-forin ; and so immovable was this phalanx, that because resem- 
bling a wall rather than a square comjiosed of men, they obtained 
tho honourablo designation of the granite castle. 

RocaUed from the plain with diminished numbers, but un- 
shaken courage, they were sent to tight on a new iield ; but the 
German army, attacking tho French on all sides, threw them 
into disorder, confounded all their plans of operation, and forced 
them to fight in detached groups : the Uei-man» had won the battle, 
and nothing now remained but to overcome the last desperate 
efforts of %*alour. Melas, therefore, after forming his men in 
columns, left Liculcnants-GencnU Ott and Zach fo reap the fruits 
of the day, and proceeded to Alcss-indria to write the bulletins 
which wen) to publish to the world tho result of tlic battle, and to 
delcrmine the plana for the next day a work. U was about three 
in tho aflcmooQ, and tho battio still raged, for the First Consul, 
although he could perceive his losses from his quarters at Son 
Giuliano, did not recall the remainder of his nnny nor sound a 
retreat, wishing the disorder to continue : ho had just received 
information that General Desaix would arrive immediately to bis 
aid, with nine thousand soldiers, and Uonaparte therefore sent to 
announce these news to his men, assure them of victory, and order 



(IS 



mSTOBT OF TOE KIWCDOH OF ICAPI-K. 



IMNL 



tliom to conlinuo (hair reeiBtanec, an order which was fiutlifullj 
obeyed by his battered troops. 

At four that aflemoun Desaix arrived, aud the First Consul 
|>as6iiig aloug the lines, thus addressed his soldiers : " We hare 
iiow fallen back far enough ; it is time to advance ; we may then, 
as U our custom, repose for the night on the field of victory." TI»o 
lai^est number of tlie French were at San Giuliano, where Dcsaix 
arrived, and whither General Zach, confident in victory, was ad- 
vancing with five thousand troops, bnt he was met by the French 
array in good order, as if sprung from the earth; it waa im- 
possible for the German to avoid the encounter, or rwoive any 
xuccour, both parties having becti scattered over the tield for tho 
last two hours without order, connexion, or any oue leader, and 
abandoned to the guidance of nniuy luadei^nnd chance; but though 
thus onibarrasi^ed lie fought on with Germim valour. Desaix waa 
killed ; the French General Kullcrman, with a thousand horse, has- 
tened to attack Zach, and thi-ee limes breaking his lines, he killed, 
defeated, and captured tlic remainder of his troops, and their 
lender, lie next proceeded with Murat and Boudct (who bad 
taken the place of Desaix), to attack the other corps, but at the 
first sight of this unexpected detachment of the enemy, they fled 
towards Marengo, and theFranch, who just before could with diffi- 
cutty maintain tho limited space of p:roimd to which their disastcra 
had reduced them, now broke into the plain, and killed aud pur- 
sued those who had been too secure of conquest. 

The fugitives hiistcned to Marengo and Pcdrabona, to allow 
time for the vau uf their bealuu LroopEs to cross tho B6niiida, and 
after fighting till dark, as many as were able pa«sed over the 
stream, and pil«lied their camp hcncath the walls of Alessandria. 
8cvcn thousand Germans had fallen killed or wounded in the 
battle, and an equal number of French. The Germans lost thre© 
thousand more, tfiken prisoners, besides twenty-five cannon, with 
other arms and standards ; several generals, and a great number 
of inferior oQicers wero connteil among tlu^ killed and wounded on 
either aido; hut the death of Dciuiix was that most lamented by 
tho troops and by France. Great valour had been dispUyed by 
b(»th armies ; the First Consul was nuL liimself engaged ; the Ger- 
mans were in the morning slow in their movements, aud fihowed 



I 
I 

I 

i 



laooi 



PBSDINAKD IT. 



413 



less scientific knowlcJ^o than tlic Frencli in tlie nrrflnjement of 
tlieir troops; tlic wliole of the Gorman army Im»l been at ont« 
engaged wJtTiout a reserve ; none of their nttaclcs were decisive, 
and though ossisted hy fortuuo, no bold atroko was attempted ; 
while, on the other hnnJ, the obstinate determination of the Fln^t 
Consul, the nrriviil of General Des»ix at the moment of greatest 
need, cliance, and destiny, were tlie causes of the French victory. 

Niglit, the kind dispenser of rest, passed gloomily in the camp of 
theGermans.bnt most gloomily with their commander; nor did th« 
French indulpfe in repose, because anxious tore-form their diminish- 
cd troops, and croM the Borniida in the morning. Mclas, though ac- 
customed to defeat, was now perplexed amidst conflicting thoughts; 
lie had before him a strong and victorious army ; in his rear at 
Aqui, the army of Snchct, and only a small and discomfited army 
at his disposal; hts best goncrnla had been killed, disabled, or 
taken prisoners, and in a council of war which lie convoked, he 
received more reproaches than condolence for the niiKfortunes of 
liis old age ; ho therefyro inwardly resolved to treat with the enemy 
for a free passage for the army of Upper Italy, to collect sixty 
thousaiul soldiers on the banks of the Mincio, where ho would he 
supported in the rear by the Imperial States, and to begpn a fresh 
war under better auspices. Ho frequently oiclalmed amidst hia 
perplexity, either in wonder at what bad oceurrod, or as a conso- 
lation to himself, " Tlic battle was ours ; but that is the man of 
destiny." He was mortified by the recollection that lie had boasted 
of victory, and blushed with shame at having tnscnd off freeh raes- 
sengerA, to announce his sad reverses. Uis Qrst despatches con- 
tained these words : " Afler a long and sanguinary battle on the 
plains of Harengo, the arras of His Majesty the Kmpcror have 
completely beaten the French army conducted into Italy and com- 
manded by General Bonaparte ; the details of the battle will b« 
given in another despatch, as well aa the fruits of victory which 
Lieu tcnanta-G en oral Ott and Zach are gathering on the field. 
Dated Alessandria, Hth Juno 1800 — Evening." 

His neit despatch ran thus : — " Towards the decline of day the 
enemy were reinforced hy a frw^h army, and fighting on the field 
of Marengo the greater part of the ni^ht, have beaten our army, 
the conquerors of the preceding day. Encamped beneath the 



414 



HISTORY OF THE KINODOK OF XAPLES. 



trallH of tliis forlrcss, wo are now colIccliDg the laieerable remnant 
of t)ie lust bnttlv, and arc coneuUiug ou ibo best ooureo to jmr^ue 
uuder present circumstances, and the success of the enemy. Dated 
Alessandria, midnight, 14tli-ir»th June." 

At daybreak the French columns, which were already formed, 
attacked the camp guarding the three bridges of the U^irmida, and 
would have gaineil posM^saion of them, bad not Melatt Bcut a mea- 
»Gnger to Bonaparte to treat for terms ; as tlto Frcnvh army like- 
wise needed repose and re-orgnnizalion. The Firat Consul sent 
General Berthicr as his ncffotiator to Alessandria, who, without 
wasting time in discussion, agreed with Mclas upon an armistice, 
until tho arrival of answers from Vienna to the propositions of 
peace, which the First Consul otfcred the Kmpcror Francis. 

During tlic amiistice tlie Imperialists were to occupy the countiy 
between the A(incio, Fossamacstra, and (he Po, aud to rctaiu 
Ancona and Tuscany. 

Tho French were to occupy the territory bounded by the Chicsa, 
the Oglio, and the Po. 

The village of the Chiesa ou the Mincio to bo free from ioldicrs 
of either jiarty. 

Tiie castles of Tortona, Milan, Turin, Pizzighettone, Arona, 
Piaccnza, tVva, Savona, and Urbino ; and tho fortresses of Uoni, 
.Vlessandria, and Genoa, to be delivered to the Fnmch between 
tho IGth and 2Jih of June. Of tho arttllcrr contained within 
these forts, only that which was Austrian was to be restored to 
the Imperialists. 

Tlie German troops to march out in three columns, without 
molestation, between the 16th and 2()th June, by I'iaccnza a]id 
Mantua, and retire behind the Mincio; tho garrisons of the sur- 
rendered fortresses to join tliem in the shortest possible time aud 
by the shortest rood. 

No oilixen to be molested for his political opinions by either th« 
French or Germans. 

Tills treaty was maintained. The garrisons of the fortrcsaea 
marched out, murmuring reproaches against their officers, and 
ashamed to open (heir gates to the enemy without a blow : the 
l>artisanB of Austria dcrlarcd they had been betmyeJ, and tamenc> 
ed their misfortunes, but thor hod not even the consolation of 



1»X 



rBBDINA>rD IV. 



415 



exciting the compassion or admiration of tlie world, becAuso tliey 
were looked u])on as base and self-intereatod. Genoa, wliicli had 
tieen abnndone<l byMasscna on the 5th, niiAed the standard of the* 
Republic once ng.im on the 2kh June, and the following day an 
Eng-lish fleet, conveying eight thoustind soldiers, intended to garri- 
son tha fortress, arrived there; but bj being a few hoitre loo late, 
England missed tlio opporlutiily of t,'ainin^ iKiagession of one of (he 
strongest hnlwarks of Italy ; and the First Cunsvil reaped all the 
benefits of his victory, and received the onresscs of fortune after the 
wonderful battle of Marengo. T)ic Castle of Ijiird hud capitulated 
Irora the 1st June to Oeneral Cliabran, and the road by the valley 
of Aosta baving been opened for the besieging troops to advance, 
they hastened to increase the army of Italy. Tlie castle was still 
sopplicd with arms and provisionR, tlie garrison was entire, and 
the walls uninjured ; Captain Bcmkopf, therefore, whose condact 
had been praisod during the first days of the siogo, was blamed 
for its termination. Uonaparte having thus established new lines 
for the anny, and protected the sacrctl territory (as he called it) of 
France, from every danger, having reconquered the greater pan 
of Italy in one day, restored the Ligiirian and Cisalpine Ilcpubliea, 
now triumphant, and the favourite of fortune, rx^turncd to France, 
there to perform still more wonderful feats ; but as tliey do not 
belong to the province of this history, we shall return to the 
events of Nnplcs, 

When, towards the end of May, Queen Caroline bclievetl thai 
the fate of Italy was decided, and the detested government of 
France near its fall, she mnde a journey to Leghorn, with the 
intention, after the surrender of Genoa, of proceeding to Ger- 
many, there to persuade the Emperor to bestow new dominions in 
Italy on the sovereigns of Naples, as a recompense for the war 
they had sustained, and their conquest of the States of Kome. 
Arrived in Leghorn, and after celebrating ihc fall of Genoa by 
religious observances, she was detained by the unexpected tidings 
of war in Italy. A few days later, at five in the evening of the 
J 6th June, she received the first tnossngo of Mclas, announcinti 
the victory of Marengo; and having ortlered hymns of thanks- 
giving to be sung in the church, she awaited the second despatch, 
commaDding that at whatever hour of the uight it should arrive, 



416 



HISTOHT OP THE KIKODOM OF SIAPLE3. 



1^00 



silo should be roused from her sleep. At mitlaight the messen- 
ger renched Leghorn ; the Queen w&b awakened, and as she 
opened tlie despatch, exclaimed : " Let us read the end of the pre- 
sumptuous armj of Bonaparte." But atruclc with dUmaj on 
learning the defeat of Mclas, she read it once more, as if incredu- 
lous of the fact ; and ns she became convinced of the reality of 
tlie sad ttdinga, her »lg)it failed her, and she sank fainting in the 
arms of the ladjr who had awakened her. Recovering her HonecA, 
she once more glanced over the fatal leltcr and fvll ill. Ttie next 
news she heard was the convention of Alcasandria, that the Qer- 
mans liad evacuated ttie fortresses, and the success of Bonaparte ; 
and though hardly convalescent, she proceeded to Ancuna, and 
tliouco to Trieste and Vienna; for her ambition for a more ex- 
tended dominion was now converted into fear of losing the king- 
dom they still possessed. 

In the Conclave at Venice, which lasted three months and a 
half. Cardinal Chiararaontc was elected Pontiff, and assumed the 
name of Pius vii. Entreated by the people of Rome to return to 
the Vatican, he declared that he would consent when the sove- 
reigns of Nnples and Austria liad resigned the ^ovcrtiment of tho 
Konmn States to the Papal representatives; but these two poten- 
tates hoped in the chaos of governments then existing in Italy, to 
retain this territory and the power in their own hands, in order to 
barter for their restoration during the Peace Congresses ; they 
tbercforc opposed his demand, and the King of the Sicilies himself, 
devoted as lie had ahrays professed himself to be to the Church, 
defended tbu scaudulous contest, whilu declaring tliat tliese pro- 
vinces had ijot been conquered froni the Pope, but from the 
French. But ho at length yielded for conscience' sake or from 
policy, and the Emperor of Austria followed his example ; the 
Pope consenting that the States should bo garrisoned by the 
troops of both Crowns, but that the government should be loft 
independent. He retunied to Kome in July, where revoking tho 
statutes and laws of Bourcard and Aragona, ho re-established tbo 
former government, remitted the punislimcnt for crimes committed 
during the revolution, threw open tho prisons, and commenced 
his reign in n tndy j>npal spirit, humble and discreet. 

Just then, in the midst of so many reverses, one fortunate event 



nBDUKAHD ]T. 



*17 



occurred — the surrender of Hnlta to the English and Neapolitan 
arms. King FtTdinnini, the constant enemy of France, hat! main- 
tained two tliounand eoMicm there with two Bhi]>s of tho line, 
besides other vessels of war and transiiort during tlic aicgc, and 
his land and sea forces rivalled tho English in valour and skill. 
Tlic fortress, after a siege of two years, and wonderful efforts on tho 
part of the garrison, capitulated on the 5th September of tliat 
year, 1800, from want of jirovisious ; but only to the English, 
although the Noapohtans had been a parly in the vt&t; and 
although in a treaty of alliance of the year 1 "98, between England 
and Russia, it had been agreed thai wlicn the island waa recon- 
quered from the French, it was to he delivered to its lawful 
owners, the Order of the Knights of Malta, of whom Paul i. of 
Russia had been named grandmaster: but the successes of Eng- 
land concealed her want of lionour and good faith. Among the 
Neapolitan troops were rechoned three hundred privates wlio had 
once been officers, but who were sent to Malta to expiate the 
oQ'eaco of having enrolled themselves under the hanuera of tha 
Partheoopean Republic; but although they fought vnliantly, and 
could exhibit the proofs of their valour in their wounds, and in 
certificates from their superior officers, they were continued in tho 
ranks ta a degradation ; for their present scrriccs could not atono 
for their past fiiulta 

The palace was at this time rejoiced by the birth of a prince and 
heir to the throne to Maria Clementina and Francis, who received 
the nameof his grandfather Ferdinand. The princess,aflor tho birth 

I of the child, expecting, as uf«unl in the royal family, a visit from the 
king, prepared an act of cliarity for the oceasioa There is a cus- 
tom religiously observed in the family of the kings of Naples, that 
Oa tho Joyful occasion of a birth, three favours arc conceded at the 
request of the princess. Maria Clementina, in order better to 
secure the success of her pcittioD, and prove how earnest wfl» her 
desire, united the three in one; the forgiveness of tho uuhappy 
Sanfelice, who, a few days before, had given birth to an infant, 
and was now waiting in her dungeon until her strength was suffi- 
ciently restored to allow the voyage from Palermo to Naples, 

'where the final sentence was to he executed. A paper containing 
her petition and the prayers of the princess, was attached to tho 



itA 



niSTOBT OF THE KEKODOM OF NAPLES. 



im 



svraddlingf clothes of the infant, in such a way thnt the king could 
not failtoobseireit ; and, accordingtj, when hearrivodonavisit (o 
his diiughter-in-latr, anil smiiing, took the child in his amis, prai»- 
ing his lieauty and robust apiiearauco, he saw Iho piiper, and asked 
its meaning-: " It Is a favour," »aid his daughter-in-low, '* which 
I ask ; only on© favonr, instead of three, so much do I desire to 
more the kind licart of your Majcflly." Tlio king still smiling, 
inquired, " For whom do you ask ?" " For the unhappy Smfelioe." 
. . . She would hare continu<?d, but her words were out short by 
the frowns of the king, who looking at her sternly, and in his rag^ 
almost throwing the infant on his mother's bed, left the room 
without saying a word, and did not return for several days^ Tho 
severity of his manner, and the contempt with which her petition 
had been treated, with pity for the hard case of the prisoner, 
drew sorrowful but imprudent tears from the eyes of tho princeu.^ 
The petition wan romenibercd by tho king, and the unlmppy San- 
folice, before sho had recovered her health, was sent to Naples, 
and although, by the pardon of the 30th May, tho execution! 
were ftupponed to be at an end, she was beheaded in thnt market- 
pl&ec, become so infamonn from the Kcencs witnessed there. The 
people were touched by the hard fate of one so young nnd beau- 
tiful, distinguished for the lovelineas of her person and her misfor- 
tunes, whose face was now marked with lines of grief and suffering, 
and wlio had only been guilty of having loved and been holoved, 
and of having saved tho city from fire and slaughlnr. 

But events, whether of joy or sorrow, were soon forgotten, am 
all eyes were fixed on tlie Powers of tho North and of the Eaal." 
Bonaparte from the fleld of Marengo, elato and flushed with vio- 
tory, tho conqueror in one day of twelve strongholds and of halT 
Italy, wrote to tho Em]>eror Francis, proposing a permanent peace 
on the same advantageous conditions to Austria as tho treaty of 
Cnnipofftrmifi ; the two despatches of Melas, with the convention 
of Alessandria, and the oflfors of the First Consul, reached Vienna 
almost at the same moment, causing constomalion in tho citj, 
and cmbarra?imcnt and eonsnltations in the palace. The Emperor 
inclined for peace, but was opposed by Thugut his minister, k 
man of low extraotion, who had risen by his genius and character 
to the first office in the State; an enemy of tho French, haiod by 



1800. 



FEBDJKAND IV. 



419 



the highest pcrsonajjcn in tlie palace and city, but obeyed n.nd nll- 
powcrfuL lie was accondcd in his desire for war by the English 
atnbiisaador, Lord Minto, and by the eager impetuosity of the Queen 
of Naplos, who had arrived at Vicuna in an evil hour ; for slie was a 
liangerous nitviRcrin important inattt-ra of State. Lord Minto gave 
assurances of aid promiiwd by the recent treaty of the 12th June, 
aud Queen Cnrotine offered an army of Neapolitans to join the 
Germauii in the Slates of Uoinc and Tuscatty, and attack the 
French army iu tbo rear; while both roiuiudod the Euiperor, ttiat 
at all events, Melos was encamped upon the banks of the Mincio 
with .lixty thouj^and soldiers, and had still possession of the for- 
tresses of Mantua and Peschiera. Lord Minto hope<l by this 
advice to secure powerful allies for England, and the Queen was 
iiiatigntcd by Iicr oUl and im]>laoablo hatred of Bonaparte, in good 
or evil fortune. War was there-fore resolved on. 

But the Kmperor of Austria wrote an autograph letter to the 
First Consul, expressing himself neither decidedly in favour of 
war nor peace, but ad'iiiig, "Trust in all to my ambassador, 
Count St .lulien, for I will ratify whatever ho may decida" The 
Count arrived iu Paris, and six days after commenced his negotia- 
tions with the French tniuister Talleyrand, and concluded the pro- 
Itminaries of peace, upon the basis of that of Campoforniio. The 
First Consul and France were satisfied, and General Duroc was sent 
on an embassy to Vienna ; he was, however, detained on the con- 
linea of the empire, the preliminaries of peace were annulled by 
the emperor, and Count Si. Julien was recalled and banished to 
Transylvania, either because lie had exceeded hia powers as am- 
bassador, or from a breach of promi-io in hira who sent him. 
JJonapartc declared chat he himself, France, and public faith had 
been betrayed, and proclaimed war in Italy and Germany on the 
lOlh September. The armies which were already In the lield com- 
menced operations, more troops were added, and a fresh army was 
sent to Switzt-rland, whilst anns and provisions were provided, and, 
by the boundless might of his power, Ijonaparte roused all the 
region between the Po and the Rhine. The Uousc of Anstria 
bceamc alarmed, and informing the First Consul that she had been 
only prevented forming a .'leparatc treaty with him, by her ties with 
Kngland, proposed neweonfercnees to conclude a peace on a wider 



480 



HlSTOnr OF THE EINODOU OP NAPLES. 



basis between the three powers. Bonapnrfc, cither from his expe- 
rience of the chances of fortune, or, after so long a period of rovolo- 
tton, and sanguin&rr domestic and forci^ conflicta, feeliog faoi 
much Fmnco needed repose, or, that he wished to appear as iii'^ 
clined for peace as invincible in war, was desirous to avoid further 
battles, and therefore accepted the offer, and concluded an armift> 
tice at lloheulindeii, while tho Austrina, English, and French am- 
bassadors met in the citj of Luneville. The dokj was important 
to Austria, by enabling her to collect her troops, and by giving time 
for her people to recover from the panic caused by the recent dia- 
com6ture at Marengo ; it was advantageous to England, by weaken- 
ing tho Frencli army now blockaded In Egypt, and was injurious 
to France, wlio at that time had the advantage in numbers and 
reputation, and whoso interests thercforo demanded immediata 
war or peace. TIio negotiators of Luneville therefore were influ- 
enced by opposite motives : the French hurried on the transactions, 
while their opponents were dilatory ; and the conferences wore 
finally stopped and broken off: but Austria, anxious to prolong 
tliem, futgneJ as a reason for her delays, the obstinacy of Thugiit. 
who was accordingly dismiwed from oflGce, and then, in the hope of 
dragging matters on until the winter, she repeated her protesta- 
tions of a desire for pence. Nevcrthclcsa, Bonaparte procl»imc<l 
war in Germany on the 8th October, and In Italy on the 3d Sep- 
tember; tliift campaign, therefore, was cfillcd the '* Guerre d'tlivor." 

The First Consul having determined on hts plans of operation, 
gave immciliatc orders to Gcnoral Moreau, who commanded tho 
army of the Rhine, to General Bnmo, who commanded in Italy, 
and to General Macdonnld, for the passage of the Alps by the diffi- 
cult pass of the Spliigen. On tlie other side, the Austrian Emperor 
re-organized and increased his arraies, chose General Bellegarde as 
commi»nder-in-chieC in Italy, and visited the encampments on tlio 
Inn, routing the spirit of the soldiers, and demanding aid and 
alliance from tho oourta of Germany. 

Hostilities having been proclaimed, the occupation of neutral 
territory began, as usual in war ; iu Italy, the German General 
Sommariva, who was Governor of Anconn, overran the country as 
far as Ferrara, and almost to the gates of Bologna ; while Bona- 
parte ordered the occupation of Tuscany. The Grand Duke 



IMX 



FERDINAND IV. 



481 



Fordmaiid iii. was at Vienna, luid had confided tko cliargc of all 
military matters to Sommarivaj who, taking advantage of tho 
Bttaclmient borne tlio Prince by his subjects, niado use of his 
name, wliicli enabled him to raiito immediately a body of regular 
troops, under tl]<i command of tlic Tuscan Qcueral Spannocchi, as 
well as arnied bands of cilizens under various leaders, to carry oa 
R popnUr war. Those liaii<ls, harassing the enemy, but also de- 
stroying their own towns and cities, fortiBcd themselves in tho 
mountain country near ArczKO. The Germans, dispersed in Ancona, 
Ferrara, and Florence, were in alt more than fifteen thonsand sol- 
diera. Spannocchi had twelve thouijnnd Tuscans in his pay ; a 
numerous legion of Neapolitane was ready to move tn the Abrnzzi ; 
General Damas, with a stronger legion, waa encamped in tlic States 
«f Home, bands of free companies were scattered throughout tliA 
country, and it would therefore have been easy to have formed at 
once an army of forty tliouoand mon upon the Apennines, on the 
flank and rear of the French lines ; but dllatoriaess or stupidity, 
or chance, delayed these niovemcnta, an<l gave tlio French General 
Supont ail opportunity of advancing into Tuscany with three 
legions. Tho first of those, commanded by himself, after escaping 
the attacks of iIlo popular bands of Arezzo and tho Statesof Ilome 
around Lugo and Faenza, and after ropuUing Geucnil Spannocchi 
near Barbcrino, entered Florence on tho Idth October ; the second 
legion gained possession of Leghorn, and enriched the Uepublio 

fVith her spoil ; the third under Muunier subdued the inhabitants 
of Arczzo, and took tho city and castle by storm, after as fierce a 
struggle as during a civil war. These conflicts terminated iu a few 
days by the entire subjugation of Tuscany, whilst tho English, 

[dormana, and Neapolitans, who had excited the war, secure them- 
elves, looked on from a distance at the overthrow of their allies. 

lUiollis succeeded Dupont in the command, and General Somma- 
riva collected bia Germans around Ancona. 

The armies in Italy beyond the Po were disposed for greater 
operations. General Bruno oncaniped seventy thousand soldiers 
prepared for battle, between that river and tho Lake d'ldro ; as 
many, or nearly as many Germans, were encamped between tlic 
Fo and the Lago di Ganla, formed in lines, which, besides being 
protected by the nature of the ground, were supplied with treudies 



iS2 



UI8T0RT or THE KIKGDOM OF KAPLBS. 



IML 



und redoubts hy the bulwarks of MantU!i, Ptischtcra and Lognano, 
and had a numerous floct on tiic Lago di Onrda. General Mac- 
donald n-aa leading eiglitv thousand French by the mountains or 
the T^rol, a no le&s difficult passage than the marvellous descent 
of lionnparte into Italy, already deacriU'd. The hostile armies 
nrere bo'th rca<ly for action, but Bruue was waiting for ]Jacdouald 
to reach the plain, and Bcllegardo for the advance of the Neapu- 
litan army into the States of Rome and Tuacany. The French cut 
short the delay, for having; Icamcd the victory obtained by their 
fellow-soldiers on tbo Rhine, they became eager, from a gallant 
apirit of rivflliy and impatience for glory, to imitate their example. 
Brune, therefore, on the 'Jtoth December, ordered the troops to 
cross the Mincio at Molino, and, at tho village of Pouolo gave 
battle to the enemy, which raged with much bloodshed, from oiirly 
morning until midnight. The Fix*rich conquered by singular 
good fortune, for their commander- in- chief tras at a diiitancc, and 
his lieutenants (it was ^itid) sought less their own glorj, than thai, 
of their general ; the result, therefore, did great houour to all con-j 
cerned in the battle 

Tho following day, at another place called Moiuanbano, Brum 
himself, aided by a dense fog which concealed his movements,' 
crossed the river by two bridges with a large army, and in a fresh 
battle, less doubtful than the fint, and less fiercely contested, 
came off conqueror. The Gemmn army advanced to the Adige, 
and crossed : meanwhile, Macdonnld bad scaled the mountains of 
the Grisons, and crossing the rivera at their sources, defeated tho 
right wing of the Gcnnana ; Mantua and Pcschiera were now 
isolated, and despaired of succour, and the lilockado of the di 
and siege of the last mentioned fortress commencod. The goo( 
fortune attending the French arms thus continuing, the Adi^ 
could not stop them, and the Qcmian General I^audon only escaped 
capture, by feigning an armistice to thv lioatilu general, which two 
day.4 later (almost as if his falsehood had been a presage of truth) 
was concluded at Trevigo. 

By this armistice, tho imperialists yielded all Italy, except Man- 
tua, to the French, but the First Consul was dissatisfied with this 
exception, and declared that the tcmiiuntion of the war must be 
tho surrender of the last remains of the German victories ; Mantua 



PBRDI5AND IV. 



taa 



was accordingly given over to tlie French, by a. froali coinlition at 
LuDcvillc. The war was suspcudcd until the conclustoQ of tho 
peace in the city of Luocvillc, nad tlius tlio Guerre cl'lliverin 
Italy lasted only twenty days ; ia wliich lime, and in the face of 
a powerful euemy, two great riveru had Wen crossed, tho whole 
declivity of tho Rhctiau Alps pissed by Four lc<,^tous through buows 
and over precipices, two battles, ami at least twelve smaller actions 
gained, nine thousand Germans killed or wounded, twelve thousand 
captured, artillery and standards taken, several forta gained, and 
tho German army reduced to such stmits that what (cad not 
been lost in war was yielded by trenty ; alt which prodigies had 
been accomplished by strategy, by the genius of the commanders, 
and the valour of the troops. Qencnil Bnnio acquired the greatest 
nanic,aUliough he had performed least, while Macdonald gained less 
celebrity, though ho merited more, for his labours and ingenuity ; 
but his conquest had been over nature rather than armies. If one 
80 insignilicant may be permitted to quefttioutho conduct of Bona- 
parte, I would ask what advantage he obtained by arresting tlic 
army of the Rliinc in the moment of greatest success, and why he 
did not allow them to gather the fruits of this campaign ; and fur- 
ther, w1iy he insisted on the passage of the Spliigen, attended with 
so much suflering and loss. It is unly nnothcr proof how evil pas- 
sions will sometimes blind the intellect and judgment of men of 
the most exalted genius: for the army which General Moraiu waR 
[conducting in Germany in tliat same Guerre d'Uiver, after march- 
ing ninety leagues in fifteen days, crossing three great rivers, and 
taking 20,000 priM>ners, killing and wounding I (i.OOO of tho enemy, 
and capturing loO cannon, 40U great chests of treasure, and 6000 
gun carriages, was on the direct road for Vienna, at only Uiirty 
leagues' distance ; and had they pursued their march, might havo 
'made their own terms of peace bcnoalh the wall of the imperial 
capital, without another battle or more loss; but Bonaparte eon* 
eluded an annis^tica at Stcyer on the 24th December, and thus 
arrested the course of their march, and tho glory of Moreait 

This arraiatico and that of Treviso had hardty restored tranquil- 
lity, when it was rumoured that tliu King of Naples had prepared 
three legions agatust tho small body of French quartered in Tus- 
cany. For a long time past, the rulers of that unhappy kingdom, 



424 



HISTORY OP THE EISaDOM OP SkViJBS. 



urn. 



who appeared to liave lost their powers of jadgmont by mufortunca 
or by their evil con&cicncos, had always taken up arms, when a wise 
policy would liave advised laying them down. They had, indeed, 
on this occasion commenced thotr movements on the 1 4th January, 
heroro learning the armistice of Trcvi&o, but they wora aware of 
tlmt at Steycr, and of the disasters of BcUcgarde in Italy. With 
whatever motive, General Damns left Home with ten thousand 
men, and advanced against Sienna, supported by the bunds of 
the people who had risen again iu the vkiuily of Are£zo. Jdiollis, 
who v-na bold atid rapid in his movomeuts, evacuated Lcg*l 
horn, abandoned Florence, and advanced in columns to encounter 
Danias, wlio, after having expelled a handful of French from 
Sienna, had pitched his camp in Monte Rcggioni ; and was there 
met by tlje enemy's advanced guard. The troops engaged wore un- 
equal, as the French wore only half the Nenpolitans ; but these last 
were composed chiefly of warriora of the Holy Faith, led by ofRccra 
who had served under the same onsign, and all of them totally in- 
cxporicnced in llie field : tliey wore, therefore, dislicartencd before 
the commencement of the battle, by the fame of the French vic- 
tories in Uermany and Italy. The cotilllct was short ; the Neapo- 
litans passed tbiouj^h Sienna in thdr flight, but General Danias 
with some troops of horse, and batteries of cannon placed to advan- 
tage, kept Uie French back, collected the fugitives, and withdrewj 
them into tlie Roman territory. The Tuscan General .Spannocclii,' 
who was supported by a few battalions of the people of Arczzo, now 
retired, and Ihc bands dispersed. General Sommariva had shown 
himself upon the heights, but retired into Ancona ; and Miollia, 
having thrown a strong gnrrison into Sienna, returned to hia quar- 
ters in Florence and Leghorn. 

These tardy acts of aggression on the part of Naples, unwise in, 
tlieiii selves, and useless to Auiitria and Kngland, excited the wrath 
of the First Consul, M'ho »cnt General Alurat to the confines of 
Rome, with the legions which had been lield in ^eser^'e in Milan 
during the Gucne d'Hiver, and with others which, after the armis- 
tice of Luneville, had been recalled from the army of BrunQ.| 
Murat wrote to the Pope in friendly and deferential terms, assui 
ing him that his army would respect the Papal States, and that 
he had only come to punish the foolish and implacable hostility of 



iisga. 



FEBDINAND IV. 



4SJ 



the K'mg of Naples. The style of Franco was altered ; thougU 
republican in eomo of its forma, it wa» monarchical in spirit, and 
in tho acts of the First Consul and hia lieutenants. The Pope 
answered this friendly despatch graciously; while In Naples, the 
luinisters became alarmed, and tlie panic was shared by the king 
in Ills palace at Palermo. It was stilt further increased when the 
news of the peace at Luncvillo was confinucd, in which the sove- 
reigns of the Sicilies were wholly omitted ; an oblivion and neglect 
deserved by a monarch who bad not shown either diaerction or 
valour in the war, bnt only acted by the impulses of a blind mge 
which rather threw discredit on the cause, than assisted the allied 
MvereipiSw 

By the treaty of Ijunevillc, all Europe, with the eiception of 
England, laid down their nrnis ; the Alps, the Pyrenees, the ocean, 
and tho Rhine were to form the boundaries of France ; anil 
the confines of Austria in Italy wcra to include all the ter- 
ritory from the Adige to Istrin and Dalmatia, as far as tho mouths 
of the Cattaro ; the Uatavian, Cisalpine, and LigurJan republics 
wore acknowledged by the Eiripcror of Austria ; the grand duchy 
of Tuscany was resigned by Ferdinand iiL to the Duke of Parma, 
who had been dispossesaed of his estates, in order to unite them 
to the Cisalpine Republic ; opinions, acts, or political offencea of 
the past were to bo paiYloneil, and all were to be secure in their 
posiessions and free in their persons. 

The world rejoiced in that peace wbieh was only lamented by 
the Tuscans, who with justice mourned tho loss of their good 
Prince Ferdinand iii., and by iho House of Naples and her a<lhe' 
rents, ^^ho bewailed the treaty with bitter but wcU-mcnted teiirs. 
Fortune, however, camo to the aid of lliesc last ; Queen Caroline 
wrote to the sovereign of Uussio, Paul i., antl sent ambassadors to 
him frum Vienna, explaining the dangers to which the roynl 
fiimily of Naples were exposed, and asking his assi&tanee, though 
not by arms, but by the influence of his name, by which he could 
prevent the First Consul (and a word would sutficej crushing the 
throne of Kaplcs. The Czar, daltered with the honour of being 
requested to shield nn unfortunate monarch, wrote to Bonapnrte 
recommending Ferdinand to bis favour, and sent Count Lawacheff 
to plead his catiEe. Tha ambaBBador had an interview with the 

VOL. I. 'Zv 



4te 



nisTOuy OF the kikodom op navles. 



queen at Vienna, and was flllod with respect and ndmiration for 
her, as she was as groat and dignified in tier misfortunes as she 
wns vulgar or worse than Tulgar in. days of |iroBp*rity ; lie 
iiaaleued theroforo to Paris, a* bcr warm advocate, and succeeded 
in pentuuding Itonaparlo to send orders to Murat, to treat for 
peace with Naples. 

General Dainaa waa etill in Rome with the Ncapolitau troops, 
when Murat addrcs&cd him from Jfoligno as follows :— 

" The esteem which the Emperor of Russia entertains for tho 
King of Naples, has induced the First Consul to for^i^l all tha 
injuries the king has inflicted on the French nation. His >Iajcsty 
has continued in arras, helieving himself atronger than (ho rest 
of the princes of Europe, who have sought the safety of their 
thrones in peace. Let him be undccciTcd. General of the Nea- 
politan army, quit the States of the Pope, and the Castle of Sant' 
Angela The Fint Consul has forbidden mc to treat with you until 
you return within the boundaries of the kingdom; your king is 
not protected by your arms, nor your display of military forces, 
but by the high esteem which tho First Consul bears the Emporor 
of Russia, mill if the KIhj; uf Naples desires to merit the continu- 
oLion of these favours, ho roust forbid the entrance of Kngli&lt ships 
into tbeporU of the Two Sicilie«, and put an embargo upon (seques- 
trate) those vessels now in his ports a& a return for the injustice 
of England towards the Danes, Swedes, and Russians, Lot Ibo 
ambassodcirs of Russia, at your court, a£&urc me of the fulfilment 
of the preliminaries, wliich I propose; and 1 will tltcn stop tho 
march of our army, and conclude a fair armistice with you, which 
shall be the herald of peace on equal lenns." 

After rcadin^i: this despatch, and receiving other letters from the 
Russian ambas&ador Lawacheff, Bamas sent General Uicheroux, 
as ambassador to Foligno, less, indce<l, to treat, than to submit 
It was there rciwlved, " That the solicitude of the Emperor of 
Russia for the House of Naples, and the moderation and gene- 
rosity of tho government of France having caused tho march of 
tho French troops to l*e arrested, and opened the way for peace, 
Naplea and Praticc were to conclude an armistice for one mouth ; 
pledging themselves on cither side, not to commit any hostile aot 
without giving warning ion days previous." The conditions were 



FBRDISAXD fT. 



427 



a» follows ; — " That the Nenpolitan soldiers quit tlie dciminiona of 
the Pope within six days ; that the French occupy Tcrni, and tli« 
region along the Ncra to the mouths of the Tiher ; that the porta 
of the Two Sicilies be elosed to English and Turks, and that the 
ahip3 of both nations should quit theni orio day aA.or the ratifica- 
tion of tliK prcjicnt arniifiticc ; that French vessels of war and com- 
mercQ should enjoy all the privileges of the most favoured flags m 
these ports ; that tho French uiio liad been captured on tlioir 
way from KgA'pt (especially Doloniicu) should Le restored to 
liberty, as well as tho rest of tho Frcucli prisoners ; that all the 
trilunalft of state bo abolishm), and that the Wng promise, as noon 
as peace should be concluded, to accept the recommendations of 
the French Govertimeiit in favour of those persona who had been 
imprisoned or exiled for their opinionsu" 

The Congress for the armistice liavitig been dissolved, another 
met at Florence to settle the terms of the peaeo; Colonel Micho- 
roux acting for tho kin^, aud the citizen Alquier for the Ucpublic. 
It was there agreed : — ■ 

" The peace shall be permanent 

" The ports of the Two Sicilies to bo oloaod against English and 
Turkish vessels, until these two nations shall have made peace 
with France, and until tho termination of llio maritime questions 
between Kngland atid the kingdoms of tho North. 

" These same ports to be opened to Uussians, to the Slates com- 
prehended in the maritime neutndily. and to the Republic of 
France and her allies; should the King of Naples, by these con- 
ditions, fear attacks from the ships expelled from his porta, the 
French Republic, as well as the Kmperor of Kussia, will allbrd 
him succour in arms sufficient to secure the safety of the domi- 
nions of tho Two Sieilioe. 

" The king to resign to the French Republic, Porto Ijonj^one. 
and all he possesses in the island of Klba, as well as his dominions 
called tho Presidii of Tuscany, and the PrincijMiHty of Piom- 
binoi 

" Tlie French to forgot pnsl injuries, but th« king to pledge 
himself to pay within three months, 500,04>0 francs (120,000 Nea- 
politan ducats) as a compensation to those French agents or citi- 
sens who have suffered most for the cause of the Keapolitans. 



♦?8 



HISTOBT OF THB KlKaDOK OP K&FLBS. 



" The kitinr's suhjiHita, wliotlier baniahed, forcei! to fly, or &hut u| 
in dungeons, or in concealment tor political opinions, to be restored' 
to their country, to tlieir fruudoin, ftod to the enjoyincut of their 
property. 

"The iQonamcnts of the fino arU seized by the Neapolitaa. 
Commissioners in Homo to be restored to the RepuLUc." 

Ami Btmlly, " The pcaco to indudc the Batavian, Cisalpine, 
and Li-^rian ll^ipublics." 

Secret coTiditioQs were added. 

'■ Tiiat during the war of France with the Porte and Oroal 
Britain, 4O0O French should be stationed in t}ie Abruzxi. fromi 
the Tronto to t)ie Sangro, and I2,00U in the provinces, from Tronto 
as far as Bradano. 

** The king to supply all the flour necessary for the garrisonii, 
and 500,000 franoft per month towards their pay/' 

These terms of peace wore hard for Naples — but still peace. The 
Marquis del Gallo, who had been favourably regarded by Bonaparlo 
since tltc ncg;otiation3 ofCampofomiio, was sent to petition him for 
some mitigation, but he could obtain nothing, except a promise to 
adhere faithfully to the treaty, and prevent rebelliona in the king's 
dominions. The French general, Soult, therefore, who vas de8ttnc<l 
to occupy the territory from the Tronto to tho Bradano, received 
ordoi'sfrom the First Consul to oiaiii tain strict discipline in his army, 
not to excite tumults, to keep down factions, and to inform the peopli 
that the Kc'public was the sincere friend of their king. " I desire," 
added Bonaparto, " thai General Soult, with his aide-de-camp, 
officers, and soldiers of the liepuhlic, shall attend mass on fcsti^ 
days, accompanied by martial music, and that they shall be on^ 
familiar tenns with the priests arkd officials of the court." Such 
was the change of style which had taken place since the coui- 
nienccmcnt of the liepuhlic ; a change fur tho wono in the opinion 
of those who were impatient for freedom, but for the better in the 
opinion of others wliosc wishes lay wiihin the bounds of possibility. 
The prison-doors within the kingilom wvrc now unhanvd, tliose in 
concealment came ^rth, the frontiers were opened to tlic exiles, 
and all the conditions of the treaty having been fulfilled, tho 
bleascd aspect of peace roappeare<L 

Oonorol Murat, tlien, cither by the command of the Firit Consul, 



1»L 



fEnniKAKt 



420 



who suspectc"! the Italiaa exiles (as some had beon discoreied 
concerned in tlio conspiracies of Ceracclii, and of tlic infernal ma- 
chine), or of his own aecoi-d, adi'iscd the Uoman and Xoiqwlitan 
refuffces to return home, in an edict to this effect : — 

" Murst, Commander-in-Chief, to the Neapolitan and Iloman 
refugees. 

*' You who have so long pined at a distance from your native 
land, retuni to hor. TuRcany, that country so generous to you in 
your misfortunes, can hanlly Bustaiu the French army, and now 
that you arc free to rclum home, you cannot demand further 
assistance from her, and I cannot force her to supply it. 

" Keturn to your country, after which you are sighing ; it ia so 
Kweet to behold one's native land again ! Do not fear unjust 
persecutions. France, as you havo trusted her, has stipulated, in 
tlie treaties with your Oovcrnmeiit for the security of your pcraoni 
and your property. The proLectioti of the great nation is no dela- 
tion ; rest in safety beneath her shadow. 

" Neapolitans and Komnus, banish fear, and for your own sakcs, 
and for the sake of your country, panlon those wlio have injured 
you, and abandon your srliomes fraught with dangers. I.<eani lijr 
our example tlic cost of a revolution ; believe tliat by its naiurc it 
must produce the same misfortunes in every land and every age ; 
nor hope that Heaven will ahrays send a mighty genius at the 
propitious moment, to drag you from bcuealh the weight of your 
own ruins, and determine a linppier fortune for the State. 

" Our history teaches those to whom authority is confided, to 
govern with equity, in order to ward off the tremendous wrath of 
the people; and it teaches the ])0Ople to respect those to whom 
authority is confided, to avoid plunging themselves into a political 
chaos, and into the terrors of anarchy." 

Tliis humane and wise advice has met w*ith severe censors ; but 
those who read cotempomry histories will nttt fail to obwrve in 
them the universal failing which can always be indulged with im- 
punity, to speak ill of the fallen ; while it is a proof of no com- 
mon courage in the cause of truth to bliino those iu {rawer. 

When the King of Naples van informed of the treaty of Florence, 
he ordered that the conditions of peace should be rcgistea-d, and 
then prepared for the reception of the French irooi)s in the Abruzzi 



430 



HrSTORT OP THE KIXnOOM OF NAPriES. 



VU^ 



ftn(] in Puij'lia. IIo coram^imlccl everything to be provided for the 
niaiutonance of these unwelcome garrisons, procluimod by a frcsli 
pardon the liberation of the prieoncrd, and the return of the exik-s, 
and abolislied the tribunals for treason. All this was accompanied 
with an absurd ostentation of royal clemency, for the terms of the 
armistice and the peace were passing from month to mouth among 
the common people, who could not be deceived by the report that 
the reason of these favours was the arrival in Naples of Prince 
Francis, and the Princens Clementina. The refugees, nieantimc, 
returned in crowdn. and demanded the restitution of their pro- 
perty, which bad been sequestrated to the exchequer, part of it 
hati been sold, and part was under the ndminist ration of the Mar- 
(^uisof Montngnnno, a bard-tcinpered, unjuijl man, who, by eudleas 
excuses, delayed for years the promised rostoratioa to some of 
diem, and at last returned them their property diminished ia 
extent and value. 



vm. 



FERDINAND IT. 



«31 



CHAPTER III. 



TUB PEACE OF AMIBHS — BEnBWKD IIOSTILITISS WITH FRANCB. 

lent— 180& 

WniLST these events wero passing in Italy, llie Emperor of 
Russia, Paul I., had been strangle<l in liis palace, and hy "bis (lcAt)i 
the maritime alliance of the north a^ainxt England van dissolved. 
It bad been concluded a little while before, under ihc name of the 
Quadmple ADiance, becnuse composed of Kussin, Prussia, Sweden, 
and Denmark. The aucccaaor of Paul, Alexander i., did not wish 
for war in the commencement of his reign, and showed himself as 
hostile to Bonaparto as his father had been favourable ; he prc- 
aen'ed the amicablo relations with the House of Naples unaltered, 
and gave assurances to this effect, both bv letters and embassies. 

The maritime war of the north waa thus ended, and fresh 
treaties of peace formed between France and Spitiu, and bclwcea 
Russia and Portugal. The French anny in Egypt, after several 
more battles, and the cruel death of Klfeber, being feebly com- 
manded by his successor General Jtcnou, close pressed by the 
English and Turkish amis, suffering from a scarcity of provisions 
and despairing of succour, capitulated, and returned to Kurope; 
leaving that part of the world in peace. The First Consul pro- 
posed a Concordat to the Pope, and the offer was accepted. Bona- 
parte, by this act, reconciled hiinf^clf with the consciences of the 
Catliolic world, and, what he valued more, mitigatcil the hostile 
feeling of a vast number of the French pcopla The Pope restored 
the altars ID France, and the inHuenco and authority of the pon- 
tifical ofBcc to tho believing or superstitious. The conference was 
thus made easy, in which Home appeared bumble and yielding, 
and France almost absolute; Bonaparte proving himself an adept 
in politics, and the Pope \a cunning. 



4«B 



HIBTOBY or TUB KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



IBOL 



Tuscany liad been yiolded by tlio peace of Luncville to the Duke 
of PamifL, vfhOf having assumed tlio name of Louis r,, King of 
Etruria, arrived in Florence. The island of Klba, the Prcsidii of 
Tuscany, and the Principality of Piombino, whlL-li, by the treaties 
of Luneville and Florence, had boL^n resi^ncj by Naples, passed to 
France ; but Kugtaod prevented her taking possession, by foment- 
ing the Ji«coiitc>iils of the inhabitanla of Elba, and strengthening' 
tlio defences of Porto Ferraio, while exciting the people by gifia 
in money and arms. Tlie islnmlers were inclined for peace, but, 
faithful, and devotedly attnchcd lo the good Prince Ferdinand III., 
they revoltod against their now rulers, while five hundred Tuscan 
soldiers, under the command of Colonel Fisson, defended the for- 
tress of Porto Fermio ; he was a native of Lorraine, upwards of 
seventy years old, and hrave both from a vigorous constitution and 
the habits of a miliuiry Ufa Thesfl troops, aided by a handful of 
English (four hundred men), uniler Colonel Airey, and by tho 
insurrection in tho island, where a popular war v.-ti» carrictl on, 
sustained a siege of thirteen moiillis' duration by sea and land, 
against the best disciplined and most sucoes-sful troops of the agti 
Nor did they yield, until Ferdinand ill. liimself, trliosc stantlartl 
they were defending, sent them orders to surrender. Fisson, to 
avoid, not the disgrace, but the moriiiication of yielding the 
fortress, left It in charge of the citixens, while lie with his soldJon 
»et sail for Tuscany. Tho municipnl gnanls opened the gates to 
the French, and the garriwin, diminished only by a few, who had 
fallen in fight, returned free and honourx^d lo their native hind, 
where Fisson prescn'ed (and though dead, giill preserves) his high 
reputation. Ttiere was now no war in Kinope eiccpt with Eng- 
land, but the meeting of Frcncli and English ambassadors at 
Amiens to diseuss (he terms of pe/ico, eamc to rejoice all licarta. 

Thus happily ended thr.'yrar IKOI, when tlie Infant Ferdinand, 
grandson of the king, died at Naples, and was scon followed bjr 
his unhappy mother C!ementina,ft young princess, who had hardly 
passed her twentieth ye»r, unfortunate as a bride and as a wife ; 
fur as a bride, dttnined in Austria on account of (he war, she had 
arrived during the armistice, amidst hostile and successful armies, 
wliilti her nupliids were saddened hy being forced to escape with 
the royal family from the kingdom, surrounded by persons with 



FBRDIXAND IV. 



whom she Imd no coDgciiinlity, niiJ uovr deprived of lier son, slio 
liaJ been long sinking uii«ier a »Iow anil liugerJiig disease, yet pi^e- 
serving Ker senses and reason entire. Her death was lamented by 
the people, and threw the palace into mourning. 

Before the end of that 3'car, the Astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi, 
from the observatory of Palermo, discovered and added to the 
solar system a new star, which ho called Ceres Kerdiiiandoa, in 
allusion to the plenteous harvests of Sicily, and in compliment to 
the king. 

The conferences of peace still continued at Amicna, oud the 
preliminaries woro settled, embracing the four (]UArter8 of the 
world; but I will only mention that part which concerned us: — 
The evacuation by the French of the States of Naples and of 
Rome, and by the English of every post occupied by them in the 
Mediterranean; the rccoguition of the Republiu of the Seven 
Islands ; the restitution of the iie^land of Malta to the Order of 
Jerusalem, which was to remain independent, a neutral territory 
in future wars, and, as the Order was without troops, to be gar- 
risoned by 2000 soldiers of the King of Naples, The evacuation 
of the places named to bo at fixed periods, and according to their 
distance. The treaty to include the Ottoman Porlc. Both parties, 
as well as the potentates interested in ihc peace of Amiens, rati- 
fied these terms immediately, and war seemed at an end through- 
out Eurojie. 

Bonaparte, too intent on settling the internal affairs of France 
to undertake bolder flights to increase his dominions, was desir- 
ous of peace; and therefore anxious to fulfil the preliminaries 
agreed upon at Amiens, he withdrew the French soldiers from the 
territor)' of Rome and Naples. This relief from the burden of their 
maintenance and from their tyranny, was welcomed both by the 
people and tlte sovereigns of these states; and General Murat, 
anxious to obtain credit for a popular measure, came to Rome 
to pay his respects to the Pope, and in return to be honoured by 
him ; he then proceeded to Naples, where his reception and the 
ft^tes for the occasion were still more splendid, because the benefit 
conferred had been greater, the Court more magnificent, and the 
kingdom lai^er. The people admired him fur his fine person, the 
foreign and graceful fashion of his dress, and his fame as a soldier. 

Tou r. 2 o 



49« 



UlSTOBV OF TUE KINGDOM OP NAPLES. 



1««. 



lie was received with lionour by Prince Fmncis (who was acting 
as Regent), and by the Royal Family, wliile tlie ministers of the 
Crown welcomed him in eomjiliance with the forms of court 
etiquette, and bccauao tlicy rejoice*! in tlie Peace: at his di'|mr- 
ture the Regent, in the name of tho King, presented him with a 
Kword ; tlie House of Bourbon then little dreaming what destinies 
lay concealed in tlie sword of Murat 

The Russian troops left the kingdom at the same time; they 
had arrived by small detachments in the year 1709, to attack the 
Parthciiopean Kcpublic ; liad been augmented during the war 
against the Ionian Islands, and had since remained stationary, 
waitiug- tlio turn of events, and to be guided by circumstances. 
They were therefore now, after the conclusion of the peaco of 
Amiens, recalled to Ruusia. Tliua, tbe world beJng at ]>e«oe, and 
the kingdom delivered from foreign troops, King Ferdinand 
returned to Naples from Sicily, and was received amidst rejoic- 
ings which were for the most part sincere, and not mere obedience 
to orders, as lie was looked upon with ndmiration after las many 
reverses of fortune, and was supposed to have displayed that 
royal greatness which cannot bo subdued. Two months later the 
Queen arrived from Vienna, but although the Crown had been 
really prcaer\-ed ehietiy tlirough hor means, she waa lesa welcomed, 
from the remembrance of the past, and her bad reputation. The 
Koyal Family being thus reunited and happy, a double marriage 
was agreed upon with the House of Spain, by the union of Prince 
Francis of NaplvB, now a widower, with Isabella Infanta of Spain, 
and Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias, with Marie Antoiuetto, Prin- 
cess of Naplea A Spanish fleet arrived as a convoy to the Princess, 
and joined tlic Neapolitan fleet which was to take Prince Francis 
to Uarcelonn to receive tlie Princess Isabella; they sailed together, 
that of Naples returning with the bridal pair on tlic 19th October 
1802. The rejoicings for the Peace, and for the return of the 
Prince, and the royal marriages, kept up continual fcaatings in 
the palni^e and the city. 

Meantime the Finit Consul was tirgani»:ing the different parts of 
the State. He waa appointed Consul for life in France, xvith the 
power of naming his succeaaor, and President of the Cisalpine 
Ucpublics in Italy. Having already reducod thcso republics to 



iwa 



FKRUINAND IV^. 



436 



his rule, and tlicn ilcspoticnUy exchanged the UKagea oF a freo 
government for those of passive obedience, he obliged the people 
to submit to new fornis, but framed with a regard for justice and 
for the publiu benefit. Uo restored tlie altara, provided fur the 
priests, established schools, passed measures for the fiiiuucos, 
administration, and commerce, opened new roads, cut canals, and 
began and finished that immortal work, his Code of Laws, thus 
completing from its commencoment the entire woi'lc of instituting 
a new form of civil government, France was satisfied; for the 
nation now enjoyed material advantages, and not as before, only 
images of ideal felicity never to he attnineiL The republican 
party, which was few and powcrlegs, murmured; the adherents of 
tlio old dynasty, who were still fewer, and beneath contempt, 
declared the royal mantle had been usurped; but the world be- 
held in lionaparte the head and climax of the Ilcvolution. 
Foreign sovereigns rejoiced over the prostration of the Kepublio, 
and, little drcaruiug of the future, maintained that these events 
proved that tlie government of one sole luler was a necessary con- 
dition of humanity ; laying aside none of iheir ancient pride, how- 
ever, they soon turned the hatred they had home the Republic into 
rago against Bonaparte, which proved fatal to the peaccof the world. 
The Knglisb refused to restore the island of Malta, and this 
refusal, without pleading any excuse, was a proof that they con- 
templated renewing hostilities. But in Naples at least the people 
and their sovereign enjoyed the blessing of peace, and it was 
hoped tliat they had learnt a lesson from the admonitions of mis- 
fortune. But on the 11 ill January 18U3, from causes M-ith which 
I am unacquainted, although I have sought for them in t)ic records 
and memoirs of cotemporary writers, appeared a royal proclama- 
tion to tliis elTecl : " Past sufferings not having sulhced to call tlie 
evil-disposed to ropeiitauec, revolutionary hopes hare revived, and 
new niachiualions and conspiracies are hatched at home as well as 
abroad by those Neapolitans who have refused to rtturn, despising 
the gracious invitation of the king, the mild voice of pardon, and 
the attractions of their native land. Necessity and justice, there- 
fore, alike call on the sovereign to limit his royal clemency, 
and by punishing the guilty, restore our peaceful subjects to their 
longed for security." The king, accordingly, commanded the 



HieroiT or the kiscdojt or taplis. 



i« 



JunU. of Stale (tbc Mroe tribtmal wliidi wu uid to lure 
drwolred After tb« peace of Florenco) lo expedite the tride and 
•entencei ; after which, the papcrB in iu orchiTe* were ordered to 
he burnt u * Bign of oblivion of the pest, the oSce to ccMe^ and 
another tribunal to be composed for the trial of treaaonaUe oAeooea 
bjr martial law. The trials quietly proceeded, the Junta was oot 
diiMlvcd, but a great collection of tha proc^ was burnt, not in 
reality to nffacc the rcmeinhrancc of the deeds there recorded, nor 
of the indignation ihey had excited, but to destroy the proofs of 
iniquitous verdicts Posterity would have read to tliem a tale of 
barbarous cruelty towanls youths, wlio had been put lo death or 
banished for cutting their hair or letting their beards grow ; towards 
Dtheni, punished furassistiDgat or beiugpresentduring the celebra- 
tion of the feast* of liberty, of coDdcmnatlons ordered, or sentences 
changed at (Im pleasure of the sovereigns; and, in short, of all the 
horron of despotisni and the passive endurance of servitude. But 
though the fire has coiiAumed the archives, their annals and the 
ineniot7 of man will still preserve tbcro. 

The severe edicts of the king ro-awakened the spirit of party 
which had only been partially repressed, and excited the police to 
fresh acta of violence. Spice, infomicrs, and accusers re-nppearcd 
in crowds upon the gloomy arena of the city. Semcntini, Profes- 
sor of Physics, while lecturing one day on electricity, promised his 
pupils the day after the morrow to show them the experiment of 
an electric battery. It happened that a youth ambitious of ad- 
vancement wiu) prcRcnt in the school, and hoping to obtain merit 
M-ith the Ouverniiicnt, foUuwcd by cmj^loymcut, ho gave infornia- 
tioo that his master intended to demonstrate how the Castle of 
Sant' Elmo could be talcen by chemicnl means alone. Tlie stupid 
magistrate In-Iicvcd him, and the school was entei"ed by the police 
in the middle of the experiments ; the pupils with their master 
were thrown into prison, and the electric battery was seized and 
indicted as a proof of felony. Ignorance or malice caused the 
proote to be commenced, and the prisoners were not released until 
five montliH later, when the French garrison were already returning 
to tbo city. Among those arrested was a boy of the name of 
L'ianeiulli, who had hardly completed his twelfth year, and with 
him his tutor. 



an. 



PBRDINAND IV. 



437 



Heantime, numerous bunds of assassins, who had formerly been 
warriors of iho Holy Faith, nn<l wore now destitute and unem- 
ployed, wont about armed in tlio jirovincea ; they were joined by 
ftbout two hundred nioro who hsd cscapod from tho iluiigoons of 
Aquila, and commenced the vocation of highway robbery, plun- 
dering country liouses, and villagei whieh were not suRicicntly 
protected. Slroug coliiniiis of suldicrs pursued in their steps, who 
added auoUier burden and exi>\.>iiso to the government at a time 
when the treasury wag nearly empty; for after the spoliation of 
the banks, the inipoaitions of tlio French army, and the ravages of 
tlie year 1799, an army had to he supported in Home, the expedi- 
tion to Tuscany, a« well as the siege of Malta to be provide*! for. 
and the money ]>aid wlilch had been stipulated for at the peace of 
Florence : provisions lia.d likewiBC to ho supplied for the French gar- 
rison in PugHa, the rapacity of foreign diplomatists to be Bati3fic<l, 
the dowry provided for the marriage of the Princess, and throe 
establishments and three courts maintained for the royal family ; 
one in Naples for Prince Francis, another in Sicily for iho king, and 
a third in Vienna for tlio quucu. But, nevertheless, tho finances 
were enabled for a considerable time to resist all this pressure by 
the ossistiuice of ruinous loans, and by tho resources of tho minister 
Don Qiuseppe Zurlo, who, indifTerent to laws or justice, and ihu 
real advantage of the exchequer or the State, warded off present 
danger, like a desperate man amidst tcmpeats, only eager to escape 
shipwreck. Uecontractod dehtswith the mcrehantsofihccity.with 
the collectors of the taxes, with the savings' banks, with the officem 
in the civil service, with the army, and even with the royal purse 
and at one time robbed the post of more than 12,000 ducats 
which belonged to private and needy citizens. For a time he 
silenood tho creditors with promises and compensations by giving 
away public offices or promoting thuir interests in various ways; 
but at last his credit melted away with thi^ir confldcnco and ]ia- 
tionce, and comphiints arose on all sides ; the ruin of the treasury 
involved the ruin of the minister. 

TIio king, always prone to anger, dismissed htm in disgrace ; he 
intended to retire to his native place, a small town of Molise, for 
he was himself in puverty, as ho had uot ilrawn his salary for many 
months^ and while holding tho high position of minister, was in- 



458 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF ITAPUn. 



IMX 



dcbtcd for his maintenance to a acftnty allowance from his rrieodi. 
On the way to his retirement he was recalled to Naplca, where 
he was conHnod in the tluiigcons of Coatcl-N'uovo; but soon after* 
wards, an inquiry having been mode by his creditors into liis admi- 
nistration of the public money, his conduct was found to have been 
honest thougli irregular ; the disordered state of tlie finances had 
been partly owing to the royal commands, and partly had been 
impossible to prevent; the niiuislor, therefore, was only so far 
culpable that ho had retained olTicc when succe^ was impossible. 
He, therefore, was awarded a pension of 3000 ducats annually 
from the liing, and hia character was cleared ; but lie ia charged 
with incapacity in an office which required cxaot calculation, method, 
and a strict adherence to laws and regulations. The office wjw 
abolished, and & council of tiiianco again formed; the king-a'jv- 
pointod the Chevalier de' Medici vice-president, he who had shortly 
before boeti aUernating between court favour itnd dis;^race; but 
now his rival, General Acton, grown old, surfeited with fortune, 
tired of cabal, a liusband and father, no longer ofl'crcd an impedi- 
mcDt to the adrance of Medici, who, since he had lost the prestige 
of wonder and novelty, had become like other men ; while the 
queen, in mature age, oppressed with the anxieties of a throne, or 
dedicated to the serious cares of government, had ceased to value 
the arts and studied efforts of the courtiers to please hor. Nothing 
is a greater proof of human littleness than the scene presented hj 
a court wliere violent passions are excited, and execrable crimes 
committed for the very object which in a short time, under a 
change of circumsiauoca, calls forth ridicule and shame. 

By the new measures passed in the Council of finance, the trea- 
eary was saved from bankruptcy. It must liowever be remembered, 
that by the return of the royal family, the three courts were now 
united in one, and the larger expenses were already provided for, 
the Iceser diminished, the taxes increased, and credit restored. 
The economical capacity of Medici was for the Urst time called- 
forth, and it was then conjectured what aflertrards proved true 
that he was a better banker than financier, or rather, that ho was 
more fitted to spend than create woalt)i. In ordertoliciuidatotlie 
debt to the banks, the property of the Stale was first assigned for 
payment, next that of the Ciiuroh, end lastly, tlio endowments of 



1-*1. 



FEKUINAND IV. 



4») 



tho banlta theniaelvea. Tlie property of the Crown, and the ainjile 
allowauRc; for the royal household roiuainod untouched, Jiiiil thus 
thoac who robbed the )janks were not called upoa to subscribe 
anything for their restoration. 

Hardly bad the Peace and the measures of internal policy begun 
to revive tho hope of an improvement in tho coudiitan of the 
couutry. before it was rumoured that England, who bad from the 
first been backward in fulfilling her engagementa at the peace of 
Amiens, had broken them altogether by retaining the island of 
Malta, and had proclaimed war again witli France. The First 
Conaul, that invincible captain, now at the head of a people never 
averse to war, accepted the challenge, and both sides prepared, 
armies and plans of campaign. Aireah amiy was stationed on tlie 
coa(!t at Boulngne, threatening England with an invamon, whicli 
would have been difficult and would have cost tnueh blood, but 
was no feint on the part of Uonaparte, nor iniposaibic to achieve. 
The troops which hud evacuated Puglia returned, exposing tlie 
kingdom to renewed expctifics and dangers. Tlie Onicr of Iktaltu, 
who had assisted the English in the siege of that island, and whose 
hope of dominion had risen with the Treaty of Amiens, but who 
were now undeceived, sought another asylum, and obtained it from 
the King of Naples, in Catania, a city of Sicily. The Grand Master 
Tommosi, elected by the Pontiff, celebrated the restoration of 
their aovcrcignty with reliiiioua rites at Messina, in the presence 
of a large number of bailiffs and knights of tho order, and after 
appointing the various ofiioera, restored ibo form of government as 
of old, but without their former power and territory. A splendid 
fleet, and a convoy by land, conducted tho knights to their new 
residence in Catania, where they hoped to remain; but greater 
hopes and greater disappointments were in store for tbem, as the 
Order was destined to die a naturul death from changes tu the 
constitutions of kingdoms, and from tho general growth of civili- 
sation, although it seemed to perish by war and violence. 

The hostilities between France and England broke forth, as in 
private enmities, in base and nefarious acts. Tho English Govern- 
ment were not ashamed to conspire for tho death of Bonajiartc, 
witha handful of French refugees, nor did Morcau, a distinguislicd 
French general, hesitate to consonl to tho iniquitous proceedings 



440 



UISTOHY OP THE KIKCDOU OP NAPLES. 



IWL 



of Uie conspirators, whilst tlio Duke d'Engliien, of the blood-rojal, 
residing at £ttoiikcim, near the Rhine, prepared to enter FraDce 
in anus. iJut the jilotft were discovered, and some of the guilty 
condeiiuied to death, others to exile, among whom was Moreau« 
while tlie young d'Engliien, lliinlcing himself secure on neutral 
territory, was surprised in the night by a strong body of French 
gen3-d'Arme.s conducted to France, and there executed by the 
Iniquitous verdict of a court-martial. The power of the First 
Consul was increased, but with a stain on bis reputation ; for 
neither his genius, nor the ingenuity of others in his defence, can 
justify thai evil deed, whicli will always form a hateful accom- 
paniment to tlic great actions of his life. Other nanica aro mcu* 
tloncd as implicated in the same deed of infamy, which is even 
clinrgcd to General Murat, then governor of I'aris ; but time, which 
deal's up all doubtful points, in this uistance centres Uie guilt in 
the First Consul, and in those who were the executioners of his 
will, but wbusc iiisiguificaiit names disiipjiear from history, leaving 
liim, the prominent actor, alone upon the hideous scene. 

Bonaparte, who turned all public events, whether evil or good, 
to hU own advantnge, argued from the dangers with whieh he bail 
been menaced, the necessity of consolidating his power by maki ng- 
it & part of the constitution of the State ; therefore, at his private 
request, the Senate publicly demanded that he should be mado 
Emperor, and he was elected by the unnnimou!! vote of the French 
people. The Republic was thus changed into a monarchy, and 
without tho limits acknowledged Jiecessary by the age ; for the 
new crown was to bo hcrcdilnry and abaulutc, and almost equal 
(iu its promise if not iu its fruits) with that vvhich the people had 
buried beneath a heap uf ruius, but which was now resuscitated 
and obeyed by that saitici fickle and vglntilc nation, who thus iu 
the cycle of a few years passed through as luaujp vissicitudes aa 
other uatious undergo in centuries. Pope Pius vu. was inviteil to 
assist at the coronation of the new emperor in Paris, and went 
llitther in stale beiitting his rank and the dignity of the cere- 
mony. Wliile blamed by tJiose who could not perceive the wis- 
dom of this measui-e, the pope was commended by all who compre- 
hended the policy of Home ■ fur ihe consecration, and legal con- 
firmation of the Empii-o by the Church, recalled times when the 



IWi 



FBBDINAND IT. 



441 



papal power waa at its height, and diniinislicd the sovereign power 
of the people and the imlepuiideiit right of llie elected prince The 
aot was therufuru uiirortunnti} fur lionapnrbc, and the Unt rctrogrado 
movcniont towards that past which was to prove his ruin. The 
people, however, applauded, for they were glad to secure so strong 
a supiKjrt ill their new state, which bad until then been nienaticd 
ftiid duuliiitiig. Foreign potvnlatcs, nevertheless, refusud to ac- 
knowledge the title aud logiliiaacy of the eiuperor. 

These evcuts in Franco strougtlieued tlie idea tliat if the cen- 
tury just ended had heen destructive of the old, the new century 
was to a-bui1d the vuIqb. Kings themselves, anxious to luaVc all 
the reparation In their power for the aid tlicy had lent in tho 
work, cndcaviiured to revive the institution of the Company of 
JoHus, which had many luemhers and followera in every part of 
Kuropa Towards the conclusion of tho nineteenth century, seve- 
ral devout poraons had mot together in Rome, in the oratory of the 
C'aravita ; and whilo observing tho rules of St Ignatius, called 
themselves tiie Company of the Faith of Jcsusl One of their 
uieiubers, Niccoli Faccanari, a Tyrulese, young and enterprising, 
followed Pope Pius vi., then a prisoner, to Sienna, obtained his 
sanction for theSocioty of theCaravita,and was by him empowered 
lo procee<l to Dillinghcn, in Germany, there to concert with an- 
other Society of the Heart of Jesus, the means to spread them- 
selves throughout Europe, awaken the consciences of men to the 
rules of Loyola, and smooth the way for the return of the Jesuits. 
He departed on hi$ mission, and obtaining access to the Archduch- 
ess Marianne of Austria, a pious and zealous princess, with her aid 
fouiuled a convent of nuns, with the rules of St. Ignatius, called 
the Delight of Jesus. By degrees they enlarged the sphere of 
their intrigues, and spreading their opinions, gained over so many 
devout peraons, that they were able to establish throo colleges in 
tho pope's dominions, two in Venice, three in France, one in Gor- 
niany, and one in Kngland, with many convents of the Delight of 
Jvsu!). lie proceeded to liome in tho suite of tbo Archduchess 
Marianne, aud by an abuse of the ecclesiastical law was made a 
priest, and appointed superior of the oratory of the C'aravita, and 
of the monastery of the Heart of Jesus in Dilliitghen, and bccaint.^ 
the founder of colleges and convents ; and as ho bad assumed 



442 



mSTORV OF THE KESGDOil UF NAPLES. 



ISM. 



t1io religious liabit of the Ccitipan; of Jesus, was held ia reverouce 
and in the odour of sanctity. 

But the Kmperor of the French reco^ised the germ of Jesuitism 
under these new furms, and forbade the three colleges in tlie em- 
pire. Paccanari broke out into disorderly conduct iu liorue, and 
his delinquencies having heen proved against htra, lie was accused 
of sacrilege before the In()uisition, and was punished by fourteen 
years' imprisonnient ; the archduchess returned to her dominions 
ashamed of her follj, and the societies of both sexes being re- 
pressed, nothing remained hut their recollection to serve as a warn- 
ing that the time for founding such institutions anew is past. The 
Jesuit Angclini was more prudent than Pnocanari. He arrived 
fruni Russia, and luimbly petitioned for an interview with the 
pope, to speak with liim concerning the restoration of the Company 
of Jesus, but only in those kingdoms whore it was desired by the 
sovereign ; Pius vii. accordingly, on the 30th July llO*, answered 
by a pontifical brief in these words: " Wishing to second the 
desire of llis majesty Purdiitand iv., King of the Two Sicilies, and 
to assist the improvement of moraU, by the progress of national 
education, we, extending to that kingdom the brief issued in ISOl 
for Russia, place alt the colleges and schools established in the Two 
Sicilies, under the Company of Jesus, and the rule of .St. Igna- 
tius." After this Brief, several colleges sprung up in both Naples 
and Sicily, which, from their unassuming appearance, passed almost 
unobserved. 

Although the Council of Finance was restoring the pubEo tttm^ 
8ury hy credit, tho revenue was not suiBoient for the demaadi 
upon it ; they thereforo proposed, and tho king signified his appro- 
bation of a new tax upon nil orders of the State ; declared a 
million, but believeil three, though impossible to calculate with 
any precision from tho disordered state of statistics, and the con* 
fusion which reigned in the system of tinancc; it was further 
promised only to be tonii»orar}-, but bocaiuu permanent. By two 
other laws, the duties upon the export of silk, and that upon 
metnls in har or in coin was abolished, but theso wise laws were of 
small advantage, because the time tliey lasted was too short to 
bear fruit. They were the only measures during these six years 
of Ferdinand's reign, which concerned the public interest, amidst 



ISU. 



PBROIKAND IV. 



443 



countless decrees passed to ^atifv- revenge or to maintain the 
passive obedience of the suLject, and accurc the despotic power of 
the sovereign. 

The Neapolitans were suffering from this tjranny, when, as if to 
increase their misery, the land waa shalten by an cariliquake, 
hardly le&ft terrible than that described in the socond Booh of this 
Hi&tory. Thedayofthcdisasterwas the 2Gth .Tuly.at eleven minutes 
past two in the morning. Tlie centre of the movement was Froso- 
loue, a mountain of tlic Apennines, between the Terra di lAvoro 
and tlie county of Mulise. The ground was convuUfd from I&er- 
nia to lelzia, a distance of forty miles iu lengtli, and fifteen miles 
in breadth, from Munlerodoni to Cerreto ; tlierefore six hundred 
square miles, one side of the square being formed by the long chain of 
the Monti del Matese. Sixty-one cities or towns were scattered over 
this space, shcltcringupwardsof forty thousand inhahitantsi, and out 
of alt this number, two cities alone, San Giovanni in GaldoandCas- 
tropigiiano remained standing, though both were at the foot of the 
Monti del Matosc ; the number of persons who perislied amounted 
to six thousand, all killed In different ways, and as terrible as in the 
Calabrian earthquakes. The movements varied, and proceeded less 
from the inclination of the ground, than the nature of the soil on 
which the buildings stood. The city of Isemia, which was a mile 
long, and only the width of a single street, fell one half, namely, 
the whole side fucing the east, leaving the rest entire; the ground 
cracked like net-work, and in some places the fissures were so 
wide that the land was submerged, and flames burst forth, while 
the top of Monte Fro'*olone shone almost like a fiery meteor. The 
inhabitants of that uuhappy region liad felt an extrnordtnaiy laa- 
situde in the morning of the S6ih, and their sense of smell and 
their breathing bad been annoyed by a stench like Bulplmr. They 
remarked at four in the aftcmoun that the sky was overcast, and 
that the clouds flew rapidly past, as if driren by a furious hurri- 
cane, whilst not a breath of air was stirring below ; but at sunset 
a fierce north wind arose, succeeded by the ehock of the earth- 
quake, and a terrible rumbling nois& The first shook was eliglit, 
and unnoticed by many, but three others followed one another in 
tlte sltort space of twenty socouds, always increasing in violence 
and producing the ruin and damage described. The county of 



4U 



HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OP SAPLES. 



IfOL 



Moliso bftd its talcs of woader as well as Calabria ; and as Eloisa 
Basili survived eleven days under the rubljisli, Marianna de' Fran- 
cescHi, a beautiful voting lady, in the district of the Guardia llcg-^ia, 
who had hardly completed Iter twentieth year, lay huricd ten tlnya 
and eight hours; but whereas Basili continued melancholy the 
rest of her days, and died early, this lady recovered her health 
and spirits, and liveU long in ihe enjoymonb of a husband and 
children. 

That earthquake was felt in the most remote parts of the king- 
dom, and L-roiuiiiig the sea, in tlio i^laiula of Procida and Isckia ; 
Naples received a severe shock, so tliat several houses fell, many 
werecracliod, and none or few uninjured. The Qoveniment did no- 
thing for the relief of the sufl'orers, either from want of will orowing 
to the inipovcnts)ie(.l state of the exchequer. The shocks continued, 
but without further mischief, unlit the end of March, and erup- 
tions from Vesuvius accompanied the carth<)uake. It was evideut 
tliat thoy proceeded from electricity, which affected the soil whero- 
ever, as in Molise, there were the remains or materials of extinct 
volcanoa Tlic 2Cth July was the day comsccr-tted to Sl Anna, 
and the people therefore beliovcd it to be a miracle of the aaint 
which prevented the city of Naples from falling entirely in ruins. 

About this time l*iu3 vii. returned to Uorae, and soon after- 
wards Bonaparte came to Italy to place the Lombard crown on his 
own head, and to change the Cisalpine Republic into tho kingdom 
of Italy. Solemn ceremonioa followed at Milan, where all tho 
kings friendly to France, and the Italian princes (liowevor morti- 
fied at this new liingdoni, and at tlio name which alarmed ihcni 
for tlie loss of llicii- dominions) sent arobassadors to express their 
pleasure at tho event. The Neiipolitan representative at Paris, 
tho Marquis del Qallo, was in atCeiulance on the emperor at Milan, 
but the Prince dl Cardito was sent as ambassador extraordiDanr 
from Naples, and delivered his message and congratulations to 
Bonaparte in the court circlo. As it chanced, a few days before, 
Bonaparte had intercepted Icttcm. and received notice of intrigues 
carrying on between England ami the Queen of tho Sicilies against 
France ; therefore regardlesa of the -solemnity of tho occasion, ho 
replied to the ambassador of Naples in a manner oflTensive to the 
dignity of all present, as well as to his own as an emperor and 



IfiM. 



FKRDINJ^ND IV. 



44>5 



Iting : " Tell your queen tlial I am aware of her Intrigues against 
France, aiiJ tliat she will be cursed by Iicr own soup, because as a 
puniahmetil for her breach of promise, I will not leave her or her 
iiouac ns much land aa will cover their tombs." His haughty 
worda and stem demeanour terrified all present, and Cardito was 
struck dumb ; but the emperor, reKumitig his wonted courtesy and 
charm of manner, restored calm to the assembly. 

The prcfinratioiis for war'n'erc in earnest Knglnnd menaced by 
tlie camp at Boulogne, and alnmicd by the dangers of invasion, 
yet confident, like a great nation, in her own strength, waited 
ready for the encouuter with this celebrated capt*in and liis 
army ; prepared to meet them, though uncertain of victory. Wil- 
liam Pitt had returned to oflice, and, well acquainted with tho 
poverty of European potentates, and the avarice of their cabinets, 
ho considered how he might carry on a warofexterniinatiDn against 
France with the money uf England and the blood of tho foreigner ; 
this scheme was readily acquiesced in by the absolute govemmenla 
of Europe, aa under a despotism, the lives of subjects have no gua- 
rantee, and are only considered as forming part of the power and 
resources oftboStata fiy mcansofsubsidicafroin England, which 
equalled and even exceeded the expenses of tho war, Austrin, Russia, 
and Sweden, Joined in an alliance against Franco, whilst Russia 
was making licr own bargain as in a market; Naples caught 
eagerly at tlic proposal, and in a less covetous spirit than the rest, 
becauso her hatred was more intense. The Emperor of the French 
received information of the projected war, by intercepted Icttors 
and by spies, but feigning ignoratice, he hoped to break the league 
aud still compass Ids descent upon England ; buta-d, revenge, and 
glory, equal to the greatness of the danger, goaded on his haughty 
spirit, nnibitious of accomplishing single-banded all the enter- 
prises which have conferred renown and honour on tlie greatest 
captains of antiquity. 

Tlio allied aovercigtis hoped to commence with an army of 
Swedes, Russians, and English, in the States of Hanover ; thence 
to proceed to Holland, and carry on the war upon tho ancient 
boundaries of Franco ; to enter Bax'aria with an Austrian and 
Russian army, and advancing, gain possession of tho cnlranccs to 
the Black Forest ; to enter Italy with an Austrian army by the 



4«6 



HISTOET OP THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 



I«Ot. 



States of Milau, whilst an army of KeipoltUnB, Russians, aod 
EngUsh, were to advance by Tuscany and Genoa into Piedmont 
and upon tlic Var. This army and the Swedish eontingt^nt were 
to act on the offensive : tho army of the centre, in Bavaria, was to 
remain on the defensive, to give time for the Uussians to arrive in 
Germany, and to form a second line to the Gerniana. The moat 
distinguislied jjencraU of these Itingdoina, with tho King of Swe<len, 
the Emperor of Austria, tho Emperor of Kussia, and the Arch- 
dukes Ferdinand, Cliarlcs, and John, were to assist in the conflict, 
some to fight, and others to animate the combatants by their 
presence. Among tlie leaders, General Mack was loudest in bta 
assurances that lie would defend Biiviiria until tlio arrival of the 
Russian forces. In the beginning of September, the armies were 
all to move contenipomitcously, as had been stipulated for by 
England, as an imperative condition, before granting her subsidies ; 
for the preparations of Bonaparte against her were to be com- 
pleted that niontli, the season most favourable for cresting the 
Channel in small boata 

Upon the shores of the Channel, three hundred leagues distant 
from Bavaria, was assembled tho largest force France possessed, 
80 tliat the Allies thought to conquer a line of unprotected country. 
But that mighty chief had already forcHcen the danger and pro- 
videil tho remedy, by so disposing his own forces and thoao of bis 
aHica (a few petty Pn'ncca of Germany), aa to nrrive suddenly upon 
the lihinc, and proceed thence to the district where the enemy 
was eipccting an easy conquest. lie resigned the enterprise 
against England, and seeking a compensation in glory aud revenge 
elsewhere, withdrew his troops from the shores of the ocean, and, 
early in September, sent numerous squadrons to the dilfercnt 
places he had selected. 

Me himself hastened to Paris to raise fresh troops and prepare 
other movements, and as he departed, promised victory. Hos- 
tilities were not yet declared, but at that very time, the 3d 
September 1805, the Emperor Francis, in. an address to the 
armies, announced his warlike intentions; and on the 7th of the 
same month the army, led by General Mack, though under the 
nominal command of the Archduke Ferdinand, passed the confines 
of Bavaria, crossing the Salz at Burghauscn, and driving tho 



tw. 



FKKDINAND tV. 



i*7 



B&varlau army and Icing before tliem into Franconla. But the 
allies of Austria — tlie Russians, Engli-ili, Swedes, and Neapolitans, 
still delayeti ; Austria liad entered the field alone; for when in 
misfortune, she has ever been remarkable for the constancy of her 
sovereign and the loyalty of her subjects; she therefore justly 
boasts of groat success in war and politics, and that all the ob- 
stinacy of the English and vain-glory of the Russians is not worth 
lialf so mueh as her tenacity of purpose. 

The liostilo troo])fl were marcUini,' by many roa<l» lo join one 
another ; in Holland, in Italy, upon tho Danube, and on the sea ; 
while, on tho other hand, four large Hcets had been equipped for 
the liopcd-for descent upon Eiiglanit — tlirec French, at Toulon, 
Kochefort, and Brest, and one by lier ally, Spain, at Cadiz ; they 
were only waiting for favourable winds to join compntiy, and for 
the or<lcr to go forth and conquer, or engage tlie EnglisU fleet, 
which was ci-uising; in the Cliannel and along tho coast of France. 
The admiral of the French was Villencuvo ; of the Spaniards, 
Gravina, a Sicilian in the service of Charles iv. ; and of the 
English, Nelson. The French fleet consisted of eighty ships of the 
lice, and a great many frigates and smaller vessels ; and the 
euemy had almost an equal number. Bonaparte, when lie was 
planning tlio cntcrpriao against England, had given instructions 
to tho Beets to leave the ports, and as a stratagem to deceive the 
enemy, sail for the Antilles, where they were to succour the 
French possessions there exposed to danger, and to seizo or 
destroy those of England ; he hoped to draw away many of tho 
^enemy's ships in pursuit, and thus whelhcr conquering or con- 
f'quered iu a distant battle, keep tlio const clear for his 150,000 
(loldiers to land in Great Britain. Tlicse instructions and com- 
mands were obeyed by Villeneuve, who accordingly lefl Toulon 
with twelve ships of the line and otlicr vessels, and was joined by 
four Spanish ships; and on the ]lth April of that year, tho 
Admiral with fourteen men-of-war, six frigates, and four brigs, 
sailed for the Antilles. He arrived there without falling in with 
the cnomy ; for Nelson, uncertain of the movements of Villeneuve, 
tras cruising about the Mediterranean, and afterwartls in the wide 
^Dccan, and along the coasts of Kuropc, and only turned his prows 
towards the Antilles a month later than the French Admiral, who 



44Si 



HISTORY OP TUB KINGDOM OP XAPLE8, 



UOK 



mcanwliilo had captured several shipa, Btrengthcneil liirasolf by 
additional vcsbcIs of war, and improved liis own coiidilioii, while 
weakening that of the enemy. Although he had performed Icsa 
than bis means and expoctations would have justified, he was 
returning triiimpliant to Kurope, with his prows itirned in tlie direc- 
tion of Uocliefori ; but on the 2:!d July he met and was altaelictl 
in the midet of the ocean by the English Admiral Caldcr, who 
bad with bira fifteen men of war: either from wnnt of concert 
in tbo Trench ships, or the superior skill of the Eugllsh, Ville- 
neuve, though stronger by five men-of-war, wae beaten, and had 
to seek sbdter with the shattered vessels which remained to Inni 
in the ports of Ferrol, from whence ho proceeded to Cadiz. TJie 
enterprise again.tt EngUnd bad meantime been unexpectedly 
abandoned, and the importance of a battle at sea diminished ; but 
the reputation of Villciicux'o had suffered. Ifc had forty-six ships 
at his command between men-of-war and smaller vessels ; and 
believing Admiral Nelson, who lay before Cadiz, to be greatly 
inferior, he thought it would be an easy task to conquer him, and 
that a victory over the greatest man of England, and of the age, 
would restore his name, after the disasters suflercd on the oceati 
and in Eg}'pt. He accordingly left the port in high spirits on the 
I9tb October, and Nelson and Villcnctivc sailed parallel with one 
another for two days, each eagerly watching their opportunity, aa 
well aa the movements of the enemy, to commence the attack. 
On the day of the 21st they met in the waters of Trafalgar, where 
a bloody battle ensued, which was remarkable for the equal gal- 
lantry and valour displayed on both sides. 

The English with forty ships vnnquiehed a more |>owcrful 
enemy by their bold manoeuvros ; Villeneuve ])ropo&cd to give 
battle in parallel lines, but Nelson advancing in column, broke the 
French order of battle at two points, and with all his ships, 
engaging only part of the enemy's forces at a time, the dlsadvan- 
toge of his inferior numbers disappeared. Parallel lines by land 
or by sea belong to the infancy of military science ; they may be 
useful when a commander has the largest force and space for 
manoeuvring, and even advantageous If he bas to advance towards 
the enemy ; but thus to await his approach is dangerous. The 
French lost the day from imperfect science; but so far as martial 



im. 



FliUDlNAND IV. 



449 



courage, iliscipHne, pationco, and desperation could avail, they 
performed tliat day all tliat could be expected from men. Tito 
Redoutablo lost 5^2 dead and wounded, out of a crew of 640 
men. The Ai'liille cauglit fire, and while huruinj; continued the 
fight ; the punip9 were leaking aud all means of safvl.v lost, the 
batteries one behind tlie other on fire, the masts and yards burn- 
ing;, the explosion of the povdcr- magazine inevitable, and three of 
the enemy's ships were seen retreating, when the defenders of the 
Achillc, perceiving the dreadful fate before thorn, endeavoured to 
save their lives by swimming, while some clung to pieces of wood 
thrown into ibe sea. A noble sight now prcHonted itself, for the 
Knglidh went out In little boatH round tbc burning ship to as.sisc 
and pick up those who were escaping, risking their own lives to 
save the French, who were no longer enemies but fellow-creatures 
in dialress. Thua a few escaped, and the rest were blown up with 
the ve&sel when the powder eijiloded. 

The Spanish Admiral Gravina fought with a prowess equal to 
that of the most celebrated heroes of antiquity, and allbough 
mortally wounded, remained u|>on the deck of liis vessel, giving 
his orders in the midst of the danger. Although dying, he wft« 
happier than Villenouve, wlio was on the flag-ship the Buccntaur^ 
with her masts broken, her sails torn, nnd rudder lost, immovable 
and disabled, for her artillery was destroyed or overturned, a few 
of his men yet alive, but many more lying dead or wounded, 
though ho bimselfwas unscathed. In bis misery ho tried to procure 
a pinnace to carry hiro to some other ship still engaged in the 
fight ; but the pinnaces belonging to his vessel had been destroyed 
in the battle, and to bis unspeakable agony, he found himself 
abandoned as certain prey, uuable to fight or die, except by his 
own hand, — au act unworthy of a commander in battle. The 
Bucentaur was captured with sixteen other vessels, and the Ad- 
miral made prisoner, with as many as were upon these shipa Nor 
was the victory unmixed joy for the English, forihcy had seen two 
thousand of their brave comrades killed and their ahips shattered ; 
while of the vessels they bad taken, two alone were in a uonditiou 
to be towed into port. But far beyond all ihcso losses, was the 
death of Admiral Nelson, the greatest naval captain of tbc age, 
from his superior skill, courage, and success: he was killed in 
VOL. 1. 2 p 



460 



BISTOKT 0? THE KIKODOM OF XAPLES. 



I»& 



the flag-ahip tlie Victory, by a baU from a swivel, happy because 
victory was at that moment certain. Qravina died of his vounds 
in the Port of Cadiz, and Villcncuvc, on his return from his im- 
priftonmctit in England, vhcn landing' in Franco, put an end to his 
own life, urged to this deed by shame at his successive defcatSu 
Such was the tragical batlte of Trafalgar, fought in an unhappy 
hour, and linving no inJIucnco on the war. 

The death of Kelson invites mo to complete the history of Lotly 
Hamilton. After her return to England from the embassy to 
Naples in tha year 1800, she resided in a country house coninio- 
dioDsly situated for the studies of 8ir William Hamilton, and in 
the company of Admiral Nelson, vrhu had rutired for a season to 
repose from his labours and wouuds. Lady Elamiltou at that time 
^'ave birth to a child, who was called after Nelson. During his 
absence, when summoned to the command of the great Acet, at a 
time when England was exposed to danger, Ilamilton died, leav- 
ing his widow rich in money and land, and Kelson presented her 
with a beautiful villa, with extensive pleasure-grounds, where she 
lived, watching over her little giri. Unt on his death, lefl alone, 
and exposed to terrible reverses of fortune (as her right to iho 
property was disputed by tlio heirs of .Sir William Hamilton and 
Nelson), despised and disliked, she could not endure the change; 
and removed with her wealth to Holland, accompanied by her 
child. But her extravagant love of luxury and pleasure continu- 
ing as unrestrained as ever, she wasted her ill-gotleu riolies, and 
died in a poor lodging near Calais in the year lUl-i. Uor daugh- 
ter lived in ubKcurity an object of pity; and the groat roan's guilty 
passion for Lady Hamilton would have been foi^otteu in the his- 
tories of Aboukir and of Trafalgar, had it not been associated with 
the unhappy fate and undying memories of Cirillo, Pagano, and 
thousands more. 

The battle of Trafalgar was celebrated by the Government of 
Nai)les, as the enemy of France, and animated the spirits of all 
hostile to Bonaparte, who were in no way discouraged by his bold 
declaration, tliat he would ho in Vienna in u month from that 
time; for they had learnt the approach of the Russians, and 
believed tlicm lo be invinoiblc. The fate of the armies could be as 
Utile conjectured as known, and Austria therefore entreated the 



INK. 



f ERDIKAND IV. 



4S1 



allied Boveroign* to hiisten tlieir movements ; while the Kniporor 
of the Fa-imh on his side mado read^- for defence and ntUck, nml 
wrote urgent iustnictions to St. Cyr, commander' in-chief of the 
iroops quartered in the kingdom of Naples, the principal heads of 
Mfhich were as follows: — 

" A now war in Germany is preparing new fatigue* and new 
glories for Fmnca The Kingr of Naples, our ally W treaties, but 
our enemy by his omi perversity, will a,ttack yoo in Puglia ; nor 
will he go forth to the contiict alone, but with English and Uu«- 
siano already prepared in Sicily and Corfu, General, dispose your 
forces for war; tliG fatal blow will vibrate through Germany, and 
from thence the fate of Europe will be decided." 

After entering into an explanation of liis grand conception for 
the conquest of Ravarta, and for taking tlio metropolis of the 
Austrian empire, he continued : — 

■''B« prepared either to seize on tho kingdom of Naples before 
the English and Husainn armies arrive, or to defend yourself from 
llieir forces when allacked, In the first case, you will wait for the 
order to move ; in the second, you will act according to your own 
discretion. I still hope to keep peace with tho King of Naples, 
ilint I may not have a distant war and enemies in Italy, to %ht 
boiU in ilaiik and rear. 

" But if you should l>e the first to commence war, odvAnoc upon 
Naples, expel the existing government, and disband the Neapoli- 
tan army ; form battalions of all the volunteers and partisiuift of the 
French, who, from the tyranny they have bad to endure, must be 
many and nrdrnt ; and tlispose these forocs so as to stop the di«- 
cnibarkation of English or Russians, or if disembarked, to defeat 
them. 

" You will demolish the fortresses as they fall in your hands, 
and prepare mines under the caatlca of the city. 

" Tou will provision the fortress of Fcscara to stand a long siege, 
and you will give the command to General Regnier. 

" This fortress, important if you 6od it necessary to invade the 
kingdom, will become of still greater moment if you have to with- 
stand au army of English, Russians, and Neapolitans superior to 
your own. 

" You will then contest the ground inch by inch, to prevent tbe 



452 



HISTORY OF TlIE KI5GD0M Of NAPLES. 



encmjr arriring in the rear of our army of Italy, Ijefore the certain 
defeat of tho Austrian arras in Qermany have caused the rocal of 
Prince Cliarica from tho Adige and Mincia 

" The part assigned you, if you have to act on the ofleasive, is 
to conquer the kingdoni and keep it ; if attacked, to binder tlie 
enemy on his march towards tho Po." 

Upon the receipt of the«o despatches, General St Cyr disiK^sed 
his anuy to act either way, and waited the commands of the em- 
peror, and the course of evenla An order however arrived, to 
withdraw the French troops from the kingdom, as the King of 
Naples had confirmed the truce of amity, Uy a new treaty con- 
cluded at Paris between the miniatcr Talleyrand for Prance, and 
the Marquis del Gallo for Naples, on the 21st September 1805. 
By this treaty, the king engaged to keep neutral during the pre- 
sent war, nnd to maintain his rights aa a neutral State with all hioj 
forces by land and by Eca ; to prevent the lauding of soldiers 
the entrance ofships hostile to France into his ports ; and promised 
and pledged liimsclf not to confide the command of the Neapolitan 
anny or of any fortress to a foreigner: and on his part, the empe- 
ror of tho French engaged to rcliore the kingdom, within thirty 
days, from tho army of Si. Cyr. 

The ratification followed on tho 9th October, and General Su 
Cyr that same day left the kingdom hy the sliortest road, eager to 
unite Ills battalions wiili tliosc of the array of Italy, already en- 
gaged upon the Adige. The Neapolitans rejoiced in the neutrality 
which preserved ihcni from a war, and rolioved them from French 
garrisons, and the bunten of their maintenance. Tlicy were, there- 
fore, praising the wisdom of the king, when they heard that by the 
Treaty of Vienna (the Duke dl Canipocliiaro acting for Naples^, he 
had joined the league of Austria, Russia, and England, against 
France, and had ratified the treaty on the tiGlh October ; seven- 
teen days after his ratifiaation of the act of neutrality. Thus the 
King of Naples had pledged himself at the same time to peace in 
Paris, and to war in Vienna ; yet these acts of turpitude and mean* 
noss were called political wisdom and prudence ! 

Seen afterwards, on the 1 9th November, a number of sails were 
Been nean'ng the Bay, and eleven thousand Russians, two thousand 
Montcnegnns, and a small body of six thousand Englisli, landed 



FERDINAND IV. 



49$ 



io Naples. The Icing, aricr bidding these troopB welcome, placed 
hta own tarvay under the command of the Kusntan General Lascey, 
who, inexperiencetl in war, yet full of arrogance, boasted that vic- 
tory was certain ; and in the presence of the Court, when receiving 
a rich swonl from the hand of tlio king in token of supreme com- 
mand, he brandished it atiift, declaring, that ho would nut lay it 
down, until ho had hurled the bascCoraican from his usuqied throne; 
for wliich boast he was secretly ridiculed by thoso around, includ- 
ing the king. The councils of war began ; by theTrcaty of Vienna, 
the king was pledged to furnish forty thousand soldiers ; but as he 
liad ouly twelve thousand infantry, and two thousand cavalry in 
readiness, lie ordered a fresh levy of men and horses. The French 
ambassador in Naples, Alquier, was scoffed at as a representative of 
|>eaco, while the witness of real hostility. After offering advice to 
which the ministers of the crown refused (o listen, followed by 
menaces which were despised, he took down the amis of France, and 
having asked and obtained his dismiual, left Naples. It was agreed, 
in the councils of war, that a column of Russians and Ncnpolitans 
should be sent to the Marches and the Legations, and wait ihcro 
until another column of English, crossing the States of Komc and 
Tuscany, should unite with the first on the banks of the Vo ; from 
whence General L»scey could either advance into Piedmont, and 
support the party of the king there, whose adherents were already 
in revolt, or engage the rear of Ma^Mma's army. Time was press- 
ing, for, as is usual with allied armies, the English and Russlana 
arrived Inter (ban they bad promised. Naples, therefore, without 
delay raised a levy of soldiers by conscription. Meantime, Bona- 
parte was defeating tho Austrian armies in Germany, and Mas- 
sena iu Italy was carrj-ing on tho war with a courage worthy of 
hia name, while Priuco Charles, contiidoriiig tho disasters of the 
umpire, and the necessity of keeping the road for retreat open, 
ehaugcd, his plan of operations from the offensive, assumed the 
defensive, and withdrew his camps. Losccy, and the Knglish 
General Oreig, tboreforc, quitting their agreeable sojourn iu the 
polace, encamped, tho first in the Abruzzi and at San Germano, and 
the second at Sessa and Itri. The city and the kingdom was thus 
prei>ared for war, unwelcome to all, as it had so often been the 
precursor of disgrace and ruio. 



U4 



HISTORY OP TQB KtXGDOH OP KaPLES. 



IMS. 



CHAPTER IV. 



PIVAL EVBHTS OF TUIS PBRIOD. 

Tub worOa of tlic Kmperor Napoleon, that the ^te of tlic whole 
of that year's camjiai^'ii UupciiJvd auluij,* on ilie result uf tlic war in 
Gtirmaiiy, were vcrifiwl. WliilaL Mack, In proud security, guarded 
tlic Black Forest, tlic French K-g'lons were advancing with sueli 
order and exact calculation of time and distance, tliut in l)ic lirst 
daya of Oclotcr, tUey found tlicmselvea in the positions Napolcou 
liftd delennined; for, avoiding pre-occupied poets, and shajiinyj 
their course between ilic Tyrol and the German anny, ho raujjoc 
Ill's troops in order of battle on the left wing of the enemy's lines, 
and thus secured the viclork' heforc bcjjinning the attaclj. It is a 
(liffieult operation to turn tlie front of an army at iis flank ; but 
had the Gcmian general been any other than Jlnck, and acquainted 
with the nri of war, he might have executed tlie manoeuvre, and 
presented himself entire to the enemy ; but as he had for manjr 
days p;ist refused to rely on the information received of the French 
movements, he was now taken by surprise, and in Iiis porpleiity», 
altered t!io position of his troops, threw them into disorder, and 
separated tlicm ; the whole French army, therefore, aa it ap- 
proached, encountered detached bodies uf the tierninns., unable to 
retire at the right moment, or to aid one anollier, bccAUsc in this 
change, Mack had neglected every principle of science. On the 
6th October, the figliting coinraeiiced, and lasted five days; in 
whicli time, the French were always victorious ; not, indeed, from 
greater valour, but from superiority of numbers, and by opposing 
their troops in close order to the divided forces of tlic enetny. The 
fortresa of Meniminghen succumbed in one day ; whole legions laid 
ilowu their anus ; artillery, ammunition, and well-filled niagazinea 



FEEDINAyD IV. 



455 



foil into tho hands of the eaoiu^ ; and thougli a considerable bodj 
of aoldiers liad been coHecleU in the fortress and vicinitj of Clra, 
under Mack atid the Archduke Ferdinand, tlicjr now found them- 
selves almost surrounded by the French. Such was the unhappy 
dilemma to which tho name and valour of the Germans was re- 
duced by the incapacity of one man. 

By successive engagements, the moat sanguinary of which was 
that of Elchingen, Marshals Hoult and Marmont, and Prince Miirnt, 
occupied the spproaches to Ulm, and closed up all access to the 
fortress. Tlio Archduke Ferdinand, fearing tho disgrace of being 
surrouuded and sent prisoner to France, loft tlic place secretly ; 
and, with four squadrons of horse, riding by deserted roads, he 
endeavoured to elude or surprise the French posts ; and succeeded, 
by rapid marches and bold rencounters, in ejecting his escape with 
a few fuUowers into liuhcmin. General Mack, in Ulm, was await- 
ing the attacks of the eneiiiy, when a herald of peace arrived, 
urging him to avoid a useless and desporato struggle. This was 
succeeded by n parley, in which the Geminn commander, as un- 
skilful in his management of treaties as in war, surrendered the 
fortress, with himself, his garrison, and the army encamped around, 
ns well as twenty-eight thousand infantr)*, ten thousand horse, 
sixty cannon, forty standards, and well-stored nmgn»inoa. By 
another capitulation, tho cor|iB of Gencml Yenicck, which had 
been defeated and surrounded by the legions of Prince Murnt, laid 
down their arms; and by a third capitulation, a conaideniblo 
number of gun carriages, under a convoy of infanti-y and cavalry, 
likewise yielded to the arms of Murat. Of all the emperor's licu- 
iL-uanta, Murat was the chief favourite of fortune : and thus, in the 
brief iater\'al of ono fortnight (for this reason called tbc War of 
Fifteen Bays), a German army of a hundred thousand soldiers bad 
been conqucrod, and sixty thousand prisoners tAkcn, among whom 
were twenty-nine generals, the commander-in-chief, and two thou- 
sand officers, while some thousands had been killed or wounded ; 
many had dispersed, and fifteen thousand bad retreated to Vienna 
in detachments, or singly, to join the Kussians, who had already 
appeared in Momvia. Tho rejoicingfl in iho French camp wero 
great ; tho emperor sent the Senate of France an account of (ho 
wonders which had been performed, and besides an army of pri- 



450 



niaxORT OF THE KINGDOM OP KAHLES. 



IK& 



soncrs, added eighty staudards, two hundred caunon, and the camp 
o(iui|uige, to grace tlicir triumph. As this great victory bad only 
cost France two thousand soldiers, and, tlierefore, there were few 
to tnourii, the satiefnction appcired general, and the la&t hopes of 
freedom were gradualty vanishing. 

Mack returned to Vienna, whore he was sentenced to imprison- 
mcnt for life, and ended his days in a fortress in Bohemia. Tliough 
he was the same general who had commanded the Neapolitan 
army in 1798, even hi» final acts and the disgrace he Bustained at 
Ulm cannot serve to exonerate the NcapoUtAns from hlame in the 
eyes of the world for tlic unhappy result of liis earlier campaign ; 
so far has the fame of their disasters covered the infamy of their 
leader. 

The war in Italy was only second in importance: Marshal 
Maasemi conducted it for the French, Prince Charles for the Ger- 
mans ; tut the fate of both was couuectod with, and was depen- 
dent on, that of tlie war in Germany. For, if lionaparto lind been 
conquered or detained on the Uhhie, Prince Charles might perhaps 
have reconquered Italy ; hut ns chance determined otherwise, and 
the Kmperor of the French, the conqueror on the Danube and the 
Inn, was on his road to Vienna, the Austrian general had only the 
disagreeable duly left him of delaying the advance of the enemy, and 
healing a retreat. Such waa ihe task assigned the greater captAia 
of the Honao of Aufitria, who, for liis merits and liigli reputation, 
ranks among the first in Europe. At Ihe temiiiiatton of a long 
suspension of arms on the tSth October IHO/i, Marshal Masaena 
crossed the Adigc with a large amiy, and waited the progress of 
Bonaparte until the 2.yth, when he gave battle between San 
Michele and San Martino, and conquered. The battle of CaUlivio 
followed next, in which the French were succeuiful, but 80 san- 
guinary was the engngcment, that a truce was agreed upon to bury 
their dead. A Gorman legion under Qeneral Ilillinger was at- 
tacked, conquered and surrounded by (he enemy, and forced to lay 
down their arms. The city of Viccnza, which had been fortiRed 
by the Gennans, was taken by the Frcncli, and afforded a triumph 
in prisoners, arms, and standards, besides the acquisition of abun- 
dant stores. After an engagement at San Pietro in Gru, the 
French crossed the Brenta ; on the following day, the 6th Kovcm- 



bor, lliey pawed over tlic Piave, and some days later tho TagHa- 
menlo, without meeting with nny opposition. Tricsto having been 
taken, the Prince de Itohan waa cut off in the Tyrol, and trying to 
force a pas&iige througti the French was totally defeated, and being 
gurruunded by greater numbers, yielded Iiimseif prisoner with six 
ibousaud foot and a thousand horse ; the city of Layhach opened 
ita gates to the conqueror, and here the war of Italy terminated ; 
for the army of Massena, niider the name of the eighth corps- 
d'amide, formed the extreme right of the great army, and the 
army of Prince Charles was amalgamated with the German troop« 
around Vienna. The Frcn^rh had had constant good fortune in 
every encounter. They had taken fifteen thousand prUouen, 
arms, and standards, and revelled in all the pride of victory ; they 
had, indeed, fouglit valiantly, but neither valour nor ability wore 
wanting on the side of their opponents, whose career had been 
cliecked by the disasters of another and a diainnt war. 

Bonaparte liaving conquered Uavnrin, and already learnt the 
arrival uf the Kussiaus in Moravia, drew up his plan for the pro- 
secution of the campaign ; he collected his legions in Munneo, and 
senL them in various directions upon a new base, whence, later on, 
by moving them in eonveigcnt lines, all nitght puinl in the direc- 
tion of Vienna. He roused the spirits of his soldiers by reviews, 
where the word liberty, which had been a magic word for iho 
French during fifteen past years, was already superseded by the 
words glory, couutiy, and Bonaparte. The irooi>s of Wurtora- 
borg and Baden joined the French, and fresh troops arrived from 
France ; eighty thousand soldiers, therefore, set out for Bavaria, 
The remains of the Austrian army hastened their retreat, and the 
rearguard wore often captureil or beaten ; but on the 28th Octo- 
ber, the first column of Kus»ians arrivetl in Austria, on the hanks 
of the lun ; they consisted of a few battalions and stjinidrons, led 
by their commander-in-chief, Kutusow, distinguished in the wars 
of Russia, an injolont braggart, who, certain of victui*y, despised 
the French, aud still mure the Germans, and who, either on priu- 
cipla or by his nattro arrogance, boasted of this to his subop- 
di Dales. 

Believing the line of the Tun weak, ho encamped behind the 
Ens, and although increased by a secottd column, ho quitted tlio 

TOL. I. 2 4 



45S 



UlSTOUr OPTIIK KINGDOM OF NAPLKS. 



IMH. 



camp to wait tlio approach of ilio enemy on tlie heights of Am- 
stetten, which commanded and formed one of the defences of the 
city of Vienna. Attacked and defeated at Amstcttcn, he aban- 
doned the field, and crossing the Danube, left Vienna an easy 
prey to the coDqueror. The Emperor francts, therefore, quitted 
tlie metropolis witii his family, wisely puhUshing an edict, in which 
he exhorted his people not to attempt a rcsiatanco which would 
l>o useless, and only entail destruction on thcm&clves (from which 
they wore warned by the example of other kingdoms), but to sub- 
mit to the conqueror, while maintaining their attachment to their 
country, to their independence, and to the sovereign given them 
by God. Those who only study the constitutions of Austria, and 
judge of her by her treatment of the countncs she has conquered, 
would conclude that her subjects arc unhappy and discontented ; 
hut all who, by a residence in Austria- Proper, arc enabled to form 
a truer conception of the character of the sovereign, and the char- 
acter of the people, will perceive the patcmal attachment shown 
by the former, and the filial reliance placed in him by the latter ; 
that the police, though in too great numbers, nrc just ; the criminal 
code, though barbarous, is yet fair ; the punishments, though 
severe, arc well adapted to the sluggish nature of the people, no* 
to mention the pains taken by the magistrates to promote their 
happiness, poverty relieved, competency everywhere, and life full 
of enjoyment, whJIo nunieroua municipal inatitiilions form the 
foundation of future political liberty ; they will then cease to won- 
der at seeing a people, blessed in so many relations of life, ready 
to volunteer their services nt the voice of their emperor, who in- 
vites them as a father. To this feeling of sympathy between the 
subjects and the prince, may be attributed the wonderful fact, how 
in ])ast times the people bore the burden of such great armies, and 
60 many ditastcrs, and liow at tlio present moment harmony be- 
tween tho subjects and their rulers exists in Austria alone through- 
out all Jiuropc' For an absolute Qovcmment, when that of a 



* Tbia EUh'Dunt concvraii)^ Aiulna in 
|iU4, iJniost KTioJa Hkv a laltn 1u iboio 
ncqtwinled witli Awirim in 1858, wad 
would cmtTCj »n etroneviu iitifimuon Ut 
nil uaiwqiiAinl«d «ritb tbt pcliticAl oondi' 
lioD et tke ampin. G«Dcnl CoUetU ^vm 



iho oitiuatu wUicli A Ton-ijincr n:«i<Ivnt in 
VKiiaa)>cfiJra L84S«nwlil ualantllj tonu 
The c«|uliil wu lli« poUod diilil U Aok- 
Inan despoiUin, when mioae, m'tth i\m ci< 
eeptinn of Um TynA (infiucnr^ hy iq 
Btcai hment to tli« Itomm Calbalie CluiKii), 






FEBPINJ^ND IV. 



459 



father or of a princo who is n philanthropic refonner, may, as 
long as the necessity for passive obcdicucc continues, produce a 
state of things tolerable and even happy, whereas to ho nndor 
the despotic rule of a foreign sovereign, ia the last depth of misery 
to which a people can be reduced. 

The French entered Vienna on the 18th November, and. in 
consequence of the edict of the Eiripnror Francis, were received 
almost like frienda; the Viennese troops retained the posts within 
the city, and even guarded the quartcra where the hostile Emperor 
was lodged. That same day, the Prcnch van-guard crossed the 
Danube, and, on the following, the whole army proceeded townrda 
Oltniitz, vrhero the Austrian and Russian army were united ami 
strong. The Emperor Alexander paawd along Iho files of soldierK. 
reminding them of the easy triumph the people of the North might 
achiovo over aolJiers, enervated by nature and habits, fighting in 
svintcr under an inclement sty ; and General Kutusow, in a morw 
arrogant tone, anticipated little glory, since the enemy would fly 
at the first sight of the standards of Kussia. Sisty-fivc thousand 
Muscovites, and eighteen thousand Germans, wore ready to com- 
mence tlie attack, and on the 28th November Ihoy quitted Olmtitx 
to meet the French. Bonaparte, however, ordered his troops to 
fall back, as he cipectod tho arrival of more legions, and was seek- 
ing more advanlagooua ground for battle. The French arrived on 
the field of Austerlitz on the Ist December, and there halted as 
Dight drew near ; the two armies prepared fur battle on the follow- 
ing day. The deld was well adapted for tho manoeuvres uf tnrgc 



tho Enipt^ror Franda wa« p'>|iuUtT : 1i» to- 
ev-|>tiuii in Huni^nr at (bat tici« ha*in|; 

I been HiDply tbe «ITcct of conipAMian, antl 

p-tiw hereditary loyaltj at the ii««plo. The 
TimiuM, cmsiMued of n arixod population 
of Bobenuui*, Fltsnlnsm Italians, Engliali, 
Iriab, Spuiftnla^ and Ovrmaca, linvo no 
i^irit of patrioiism, but look tu tlii-ir «otp- 

^nign H their chitt; atid the Kniparor 
ela UuA piAd etTti to secure Oust ap. 

' prohatinn 1)y thmring all obuoii^xiN moik- 
nre* on till miolaleni, an4 courting Ibo 
loweat poopl* bj vulgar julrafl, aptutkiug 
thair dialect, and proreoing a oinlcnipi tut 



tcamini;. All alated by Geueml Culklia 
renjifii-tiiift llic* iiulit*, criminaJ cntio, Btc, in 
full of vrnm, lliu cm In baingumiaf tb«ioag( 
enlighli'Di'il, anil tha palice om oT tha neat 
nnjiift in Hnropc; and thi ovonla of IS-ifl, 
with ilio prvwnt ODbappy atau of tfic 
Auatrinn dDminiona, auIBcicatlv proro iba 
impolicy aawcll U itijctalicc if this palemd 
•jalem of govern tnc lit : th* practirnl mean- 
ing of wliicU iw, ta kiyp Iho masd rif ikr 
p«Dplo Inlcllecnially L-bililivn, in cuitr to 
ennllo ilia fijw to enjoy power. — An tx~ 



460 



HisTony OF THK ktsodom of xaples. 



uoi 



bodies of troops ; there was level ground for the cavalry, with 
heights rising one behind the other, 58 if formed for militanr evo- 
lutions, iind tnkcs, woods, nnil broken ground, all avaihible for (he 
coriijueror. In the centre of the Russian lino, n point of observa- 
tion, called the hill of Pratzcn. sloping down tcirarde the plain 
on the right, and united ivith the hnikcn grouml on the loft, was 
occupied hy tlic Uussiana during the night, when numerous Urea 
allowed that Inr^e bodies of troops were bivouacking thcra But 
in the morning, the troops liaving' been ordered to move without 
calculating the right uiomeut, the height was left unprotected, and 
almost without soldiers, whilst the Rus^iaa coluniiiB ou tho led 
wing were yet entangled in the intricate ground above described. 
TlioftC of the right wing niuaiiwbile were ranged in order of batllo 
in the plain. Bonaparte perceiving the enemy's error, ordered 
three legions t'O a«lrancc in doublc-quicic time, and conimandcd that 
the Austrian and Russian troops sliould be attacked along their 
whole line, and turning to those near him, remarked that tho 
battle though hnrdly commenced was already won ; thu weak posi-j 
tifin of tho enemy at PratJien being thus completely broken, both! 
wings wore routed in flank and front. Tlio larger corps of the 
RuBsians, that o[i the left formed in coliinin, were prevented from 
deploying by the building^', lakes, and other Dbstncle& 'J'hey, 
therefore, remained a mark for slaughter, exposed to the fire of 
the French artillery, and the greater their discipline and valour, 
tho more wore killed ; but at la»t, impelk-d by tliu natum! instinct 
of self-]) reservation, t1iL-y quitted their position, and each sought 
safety in flight. The lakes were both frozen over, but ihc ice was 
not strong enough to bear the wciglit of horses or men ; despair 
or nccc&sity, however, induced several to attempt a passage, but, 
obliged lo remain on the ice, they were captured or killed. Tho 
annihilation of the left wing weakened the right and centre, and 
threw them into confusion, while the certainty of victory doubled 
the courage aud (strength of those on the other siilc ; the battle 
would have ended sooner had the valour of the Russians allowed 
tho enemy to obtain so easy a triumph ; the contest, therefore, 
losteil tho whole day. Tho Russian drums at length bent a re- 
treat, and the advanced posts of the allied army were driven bacli 
several miles in tho rear of tiieir first encampment, while the 



MBB> 



FERDI.VASD IV. 



461 



I 



French army reposed from their successes on the field wliero they 
had conquered. By the generosity of Bonaparte, the Russian 
army was permitted to return home ; and the envoys of the 
Emperors of Austria and France having met at Prcabui^ to settle 
the terms, the following conditions wore agreed to on the 26th 
December ISO.'S, whicii I hero metition, because itnjiortant to our 
Uislory : — " Peace. That tlio Venetian States, possessed by 
Austria by the treaties of Campoformio and Luncvillo, bo added 
to the kingdom of Italy ; that the kingdoms of Bavnria and Wiir- 
Comherg, and the Duchy of Baden, he increased by Austrian cities 
and territory, as a recompouBe for the coufederatiou witli France; 
that the kiug:don] and the Kiog of Italy, and of the new States of 
Piombino and Lucca, be ackn6wledge<l by the Emperor of Austria," 

Nothing was stipulated for the allies of Austria ; the army of 
Alexander was to return to Russia by the road dictated by the 
conqueror. The hostilities with Great Britain to continue as be- 
fore, and Naples to be abandoned to her fate ; in au evil hour for 
her, since the wrath of Bonaparte was great against the House of 
Bourbon, as was proved by a bulletin (as ho cillcd hia obscr^'aiions 
on tho war), in which ho mentioned : " Having sent Su Cyr witb 
ft powerfid army to punish the treachery of the Queen of Naples, 
and to hurl from her tlironc a woman wtio, with the most hanlened 
effrontery, had so often been guilty of profaning all thai man holds 
most sacred ; that the iuterccssious once used by a foreign poten- 
tate would Jiuw ho of no avail, for the dignity of France could not 
suffer aufh perfidy to go unpunished, even if she had to commence 
a new war which w«s to last thirty years ; that the Bourbons of 
Naples had therefore ceased to reign, and their fall was occasioned 
by the last act of treachery on the part of the queen, who might 
go to Ijondon and swell the number of conspirators there." 

It is with nstonishmcnt that we survey tho rapid courao of 
events just related ; how oti the !7th October the fortress of Ulm 
fell into the hands of tho French, and the largest anny of Ger- 
many yielded thcmselvea prisoners ; and how on the 26th of that 
same month, the King of Naples ratified tho league with tlie House 
of Austria, which was already conquered; how, on the 13tli No- 
vember, the French occujued Vienna, the metropolis of the empire, 
the new levies of Auetriaua and Russians being unable to defend 

2()2 



463 



HISTOBY OF TUB EiKODOU OF KAPI.E3. 



it ; and how, soven days later, tlic King of Naples received the 
English and Muscovite floets in his ports, thas publisbia^ his hos- 
tility to Franco, and making his broken faith irrevocable ; and 
how the Peace of Prcsburg following imnieil lately, Neapolitan 
Eroopa, in further proof of hostility, continued ujion the frontiere 
of the kingdom, rciuly with tlio English to make an ineuraion into 
the States of Italy. All these acts of folly were produced by tlie 
blind haired towards France entertained by tlio sovereigns of 
Naples, the pliant servility of their ministers, and the uoiverML 
ignorance which prevailed throughout the country. 

The arniy of fit Oyr, destined to conquer Naples, was thirty-two 
thousand strong, and was joiued on the road by other troops, 
placed under Marshal Massena as conimauder-in-cliicC Thoy 
marched in three columns, that of the centre, consisting of fifteen 
thousand nolcliors, the left of twelve thousand, and the third columtkj 
of ten thousand IcaliAUs, all approaching the kingdom by Ion) 
day's marches. Joseph Bonaparte, brother of Napoleon, accom- 
panied the army, with the titles of prince of the empire and lieu- 
tenant of the Emperor of tlio French ; and tlius vengeance, con- 
quest, and a new sovt-reiijn, were rapidly advancing towards Naples. 
The Russian and English generals, on hearing the tidings, which 
succeeded one another, of the seizure of Vienna, the battle of Aus- 
terlitz, the Pence of I'rcsburg, and the npproach of tlic French 
anuy to the kingdom, met in council in the eity of Teano, there 
to deliberate whether to defend or abandon Naples, Laseey and 
Greig were Inclined for this last proposal ; Andres, a Russii 
general, reminded them of the eouditioiiA of the alliance, the cod-' 
fidcncc placed in them by the King of Naples, the certain loss of 
his throne if abandoned In these difficulties, and the cowardic 
and disgrace of flying before an enemy who was yet unseen, with' 
the discredit which would he att-ached to the names of the sove- 
reigns of Russia and England ahmild they turn their backs on a 
prince in his greatest need, who bad been prtrttundcd into the 
alliance rather than Joined it of bis om'd freewill ; and using other 
equully generous arguments, he endeavoured to persuade tlicm to 
remain iu Naples, if not to conquer to fight ; aiid If not to save the 
kingdom for the Bourbons, to pay ttie debt of frieuiiship. Bui 
tho opinion of the two commanders- in- chief prevailing, Andres 



IHK. 



FERDINAND IV. 



463 



added : " ITistorj will record tliat I sat among you, but tliat I voted 
agftingt yoii." 

Lasecy wrote to General Damas, who, as second in command, was 
lit the hcftd of the Ncaiioliian furces, tliat not being able to defend 
the whole line of frontier with so amall an array, he proposed to 
encamp on the ground between Gravina and Matera. A few days 
later, the Uuaaian ambassador informed the Neapolitan Guvem- 
mcnt, that as tlic iMiiscovite troops must (|uit the kiii<,Mum of 
Naples, they hoped (adding insult to breach of faith) to restore 
the neutrality between France and the Two Sicilies. The English 
and Hussiuus therefore departed uiiscathccl, abandoning the en- 
campiuenta on the frontiers, burning the bridges of boats on the 
Garigliano, and marching in the order and with the haste of a 
retreat. They embarked in the ports of Puglin, the Russians for 
Corfu, the Enjiliah for Sicily. The Eiigliah urmy, liowcver, re- 
turning to the frontiers, endeavoured under the cloak of friend- 
ship to gain possession of the fortress of Gaeta ; hut the general 
who commanded there, the Prince of Hesao PliiUpsladt, repulsed 
them first by nicssa};ca and despatches, and finally by amis. 

When tho Royal Family of Naples perceived the pro&peet before 
them, and the dangers with which they were surrounded, that Ihcy 
had been omitted in the treaties of peace, slighted by the repre- 
sentatives of the kings their allies, and left alone with the recol- 
lections of their past transgix'saions, ihey tR-mblcd for their per- 
sonal safety. A council was called,, where tho king expressed him* 
eolf resigQed to his ill fortune, and declared Ids sole escape to be 
Sicily, and that his holies for his kingdom rested in the future. 
Prince Francis, timid and inexperienced, remained silcut. The 
pusillanimous advisers of the king, although inwardly resolved to 
abandon their unhappy sovereign, supported hU opinion, because 
safe and giving least trouble. But the queen, always courageous 
in adversity, reminded them of the prodigies of ^'liHi, and that the 
champions of that time were yot alive ; that treason within the 
kingdom hod expired with the traitors ; that tho army was on tho 
frontier nnd well oi^nized, and fresh levies just raised: she 
therefore declared it was still possible to conquer, and easy to de- 
fend themselves; resistance was at least certain glory, while it 
was a disgrace to abandon tho throne as fugitives. She proposed 



m 



HISTORY OF THE KINOOOM OF NAPLES. 



U08. 



to divide the caro of tho dercnce of the Vin^dom betvccn Prince 
Francia in t1io Abruasi, Prince Tieopold in Calnbria, herself in the 
Terra di Lavoro and the metropolis, and the king in Stcdy. This 
proposal reconciled convicting opinionti, a^ it allovrcd Iho timid a 
safe asjlum in Palermo, and the ambitious a wide 6eld for agita- 
tion, and was tlicrufaro approved. She did not reflect that the 
tiiuoD had changed since t799 ; that ivhcn n people's attachment 
has teeu abused, it dios of ilself ; that the rewards for loyally had 
been confounded with reuards for crimes and infamy; and that 
the term Holy Faith was now a term of reproach and outrage. But 
as the real sentiments of tlie people seldom reach the ears of 
princes, the queen, believing in a renewal of the popular prodigies, 
summoned the most notorious leaders of that party lo her presence, 
Fm Diavolo, Scinrpa, Nunziante, and Itodio, and with a fascination 
of which she was fully mistress, desired them to collect their fol- 
lowers, and to send them into the provinces. 

Matters were proceeding thus in the palace, when Marshal 
Ma.*i9ona reached Spoleto, and onlerod a manifesto (called the order 
of the day) lo bo rc;ul to the aoldicrs, setting forth his intentions 
to conquer the kingdom of Naples, by whomsoever defended, and 
after the customary cnjoinders respecting honour, glory, and dis- 
cipline, he recommended them to respect the people and the laws. 
A proclamation of Prlnco Joseph, from Forrentino, was couched 
in these wonla: "Neapolitans, your king has broken faith and 
treaties, and, in order to show Europe what is due to public faith, 
the Emperor Napoleon, as just as he is powerful, will inflict a 
punishment erjual to the offence. You did not share in Ins per- 
fidy, and you shall not share his punishment The French soldiera 
will be to you like brothers." 

He likewise addressed the soldiers thus: "We will fight the 
Husslans and English ; we will putiii^h the Court which has invited 
them, in contempt of the most solemn oaths and stipulations ; but 
we will respect the people. If the allies of the king do not await 
our arrival, if the Neapolitans do not desire to participate in the 
guilt of a court which has always bclrnycd their interests, the sole 
glory left ua will bo lo maintain our disciplina" 

These proclamations were read by all ; Cardinal Fabrizio Ku9b, 
formerly leader of the Holy Faith, was sent to Prince Joseph, but 



ISOS. 



FKBDINAMD IV. 



t65 



was ill received, and proceeded to Paris ; the Court of Naples, 
however, fearing lest tlie name of tlie amlMssador niij^hi prejudice 
Utfl reception of the ombnssy^ sent the Duke di Santa Tcodora, a 
now name, and ono belongiDg to no party. Ife was accepted, but 
wUcn )tc dctiiarctl that the king had only broken the neutrality 
with Franco, becauae forced to do so by the Kussians and Englisli 
(a groRs and palpahlv faluehood), the Frt-nch Emperor broke up the 
ConforcMicu, tolling,' him he might remain or depart a^ he ple&BCii, 
but that he forbade him to speak with hira again of terms. Santa. 
Tecdora rctumcU to Kaples and related what he had seen and 
heftnl : he was then urd^reU to remain near the person of Joseph. 
and wait hi* op|K>rtunity to propose peace. The French columns 
continued to advance, and had Rlmost rcachet! the fronliere of the 
kingdom ; no hope, therefore, ruinaincd but in (he people. 

A little chapel, dedicated to St, Anna, stood Ui the city, near the 
sea, upon the shores of the Chiaja ; it had long been ncglecte<l and 
ehut up, and looked like a dcM-rtcd hut rather than a temple ; but 
in consequence of the cartliquake of that year, it had risen to W 
much sanctity in the populor eaiimation, that the devout enlarged 
the walla, covered them with offerings, and went thcro in crowds 
OD feast days, to pray and sing hymna To this chapel, accordingly, 
the queen with (he royal Hmiily repaired on an appointed day, in 
a procession on foot, and altireil in mourning with other signs of 
penance and grief, and bearing in their hands rich gifts for the 
aanctuary ; nn immense concourse of people followed, but the object 
aimed at failed : for the queen, remembering tho valour displayed 
by the populace in 1799, had hoped to excite them to a similar war, 
but she obsiM-ved, that at the cry of " Long live the king .' May the 
French perish !" which was shouted by persons hired for the pur- 
pose, Ihcro followed silence, except where some devout spectators 
ejaculated prvycr? to St Anna. About this time (he commi^snrtea 
returned, wlio had been sent into the provinces to excite riainge, 
and reported that their hopes bad been disappointed, that the 
populace were indifferent (o the troubles of the palace, and tho 
landed proprietors were only arming thenifclvea to prevent the 
recurrence of the disorders of 171J9. Brigadier Uodio, who had 
been the most Uvish in his promises, was the most siuccre nnd 
caniest In his endeai'oun to undeceive the king and queen. Fra 



466 



HISTORY OP THE KINGDOM OP NArLKS. 



IMB. 



Diavolo, however, oolloctod a bond of two Uundrod ruffians, ami 
with them wasted, ravaged, and pluadercd along the banks of tho 
Ooriglianoi. 

The Uouse of Buurbon was struck down by an inevitable blow ; 
and the sovercigus, reduced to the necessity of flight, \v(i the 
kingdom, and escaped for their lives into Sicily, Irustiug to 
change* in time and fortune. The king immediately departed 
for Palermo, on the 23d January 1806, leaving his eldest son, 
Francis, regent of the kingdom ; the soldiers, meantime, were 
withdrawn from the rronticni, and encamped around Naples ; tho 
troops of volunteers were disbanded, and all tho country, as far as 
Capua, left ungnnrdod, the fortresses alone retaining their garri- 
soiia Sliortly afterwards the queen, at tho approach of tho enemy, 
perceiving tho coldness of the people, despaired of being able to 
defend the kingdom, except in Calabria, where sho trusted for 
defence to the rugged nature of tlio country and the warlike cha- 
racter of tho inhabitants; she therefore sent the regular troops 
(Ifi.OOO mon) under General Damns- to the defiles of Campotaneso, 
and on the llth rebrunry she, with lier eliildren, and as many of 
tho ministers as remained, witli the most distinguished of her 
adlicrcnts, departed upon a ship of the line, whilst tho two priuccs 
Francis aud Leopold hastened by land to join the army of Calabria ; 
and passing through it, took up their quarters at Coseuxo, from 
whence they roused the people to arms, by commands and en- 
trealles. 

The Regent published two proclamations before his departure ; 
one setting forth the perfidy of the enemy ; his obstinate refusal 
of terms, and his manifest intention of gaining possession of the 
country ; whicb was (lie affirmed) tl»e more perfidious, as the 
Court of Naples had always been amenable to terms, loyal, ond 
disposed for conciliation and peace ; and further, that although the 
people were willing to sustain tlic claims of the throne by amis, 
iho mild temper of the king would not permit him to allow his 
subjects to defy the rage and vengeance of a barbarous enemy ; 
therefore he commanded that the inhftbilanls of that part of tho 
kingdom whence the soldiers hnd been withdrawn, should yield to 
their fate, and that, while chcnshing in their hearts a constant 
attachment to tho king (the master given them by Qml), they 



UDS. 



FERllIKAND IT. 



467 



FiliouUI wait their liberation by the arms of Bourbon, whicli, power- 
ful and resolute under his command, and thai of liia brother 
Prinne Leopold, would destroy the Froocli troops in Calabria ; ftnd 
tbat he would tbon return to the capital, and resume the govern- 
ment of his belovod subjects. 

These words, intended to deceive, only produced ridicule. Tlie 
eecoud proclamation appointed Don Diego Naaclli Aragona lieu- 
tenant, and tlie Prince of Canosa (a worthy man, the father of the 
prince who bears a very opposite character) with tlic mngialrftte 
Michel Augclo Cianciulli to a council of regency. 

The conquest was now certain, but sevoml days had yet to inter- 
vene, for though tho new king wan secure of bis hingdoni, the State 
was Btill ruled by the authority of the old. The ra|)acioua mob let 
loose upon the city, and wiihout the rcatraints of law, cither be- 
caufto none existed, or that it was defied by them, sure of pardon 
from the conqueror in the midst of the rejoicings for the conqifpst, 
or from policy, and because the guilt and the guilty arc alike lost 
in numbcrv, meimced and terrified all houest cllizens, w-htlst 
the regents, fveblo old men, inexperienced in llie art of governing 
the people in times of danger, afraid of iho old king, and nfniid of 
the new, stood looking on at what was passing before them, jwr- 
plexed how to act. The partisans of the French met in secret to 
provide for their own safety and the tranquillily of the city, but 
without order or a leader, and differing in their sentiments and 
Tiews, they wasted the hours fraught with dangers, which were 
flying rapidly by. All this produced excitement, conateniation, 
and fear, but hope and joy predominated. It was a fortunate cir- 
cumstance that the Bourbon leaders had fled, as well as that ihe 
populace were disputing among themselves, uncertain in their 
movcmentt!, and not knowing how to commence an outbreak, 
lliua wasting time and opportunity. 

The council of regency sent the Marquis Malaspina and the 
Duke di Cnmpochiaro, ambassadors to Trince Joseph, to inform 
htm of the authority conBdcd to them by the royal edict, and to 
propose an annistice for two months ; but received in reply that 
the surrender of the fortresses M-as an absolute condition of peace, 
as well as that tlio gates of the city should be thrown open; and 
threatening, if compliance were delayed, to make them, the regents, 



m 



nrSTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF KAPLEA 



tSOfl. 



mpODMble for evor^ drop of Froncli or Neapolitan blood spill in 
80 foolish and useless a war. Tinie aud their fcan were urgoDt; 
tlie French army was approaching the walls of Capua; and the 
ambassadors, therefore, agreed to the comiitioiia by which alono 
public tranquillity could be restored, and pereon and property 
guaranteed ; the surrender of all tKe fortresses and castles in the 
kingdom, free ingrusa into the metropolis, and submission to the 
conqueror. Tlic alarm of o foreign war having ceased, the dangci-s 
from within the city increased from the approach of |^c French, 
aud a rumour of trcaehery wliich had got abruad. The prisoners 
in the prisons mutinied, attempted to hrcnk their chains and burst 
the gates; and t)ic Lazzaroni, with otlient already notorious in the 
sack of the city In 1 799, coUccteit in groups in the most frequented 
squares. Thus ended the 12th February, and many indications 
threatened that the coming dawn would probably risQ on the spoil 
and massacre of Uiu city. Thnt uight, however, in a meeting of 
the i>arti!>aus of Franco, one of them, a man of resolulo character, 
tliub addressed his comraJefi : — 

" Our oivu life or death, with the peace of the city, rests in 
our hands. The council of regency is an empty form of govcm- 
iLCut, witliout influence or power; the tribunals are closed, the 
police, warned by their evil consciences, arc in concealment; 
there is neither king, laws, magistrates, order, nor public force ; 
society is thus dissolved ; every citizen must provide for his own 
safety; he who happens to be first in nmis lo-morrow will conquer. 
I propose that we keep awake and armed, and before the dawn of 
day, tlmt we lia^itcii tu the houses of our nasocinles, unite them, 
ami, proceeding onwards, luld to our numhora nnd strength. The 
Fiamca Motlina will bo our place of meeting ; from thence wc can 
divide in patrols, niarch through the city, collect the well-disposed, 
disperse Llie bad, and put down those who refuse to submit. If, 
at tlic first ray of sunshine a Iiundi-cd of us are found together, the 
city and victory arc ours; but if twenty, or even etill fewer Laz- 
zaroni get before us, calling out to sack the citr and begin fight- 
ing, we shall Imve to endure war, robbery, and massacre." This 
hold proposal met with approbation ; but some few who were strict 
observers of law suggested, with a show of plausibility, that Ihey 
ought to inform the regents of these dangers, aud obtain a decree 



im. FBRDINAND IV. 469 

or pormisaion to arm the respectable inhabitants ; at the same 
time offering themselves to be the bearers of the message ; but the 
first speaker replied : " You may go and harangue the regents, I 
go to rouse my comrades, and as I do not expect any success from 
your mission, I shall be the first to-morrow ready armed for the 
preservation of the city." 

The council of regency, terrified by the menaces of the populace, as 
well as by the bold language of the partisans of the French, granted 
all they asked, issuing an edict which was printed and posted up 
during the night ; by it tliey exhorted the citizens to remain quiet, 
and the gentlemen of every rione were empowered to arm and patrol 
the city, as a public force to defend the citizens. Thus, on the morn- 
ing of the 13th February, some thousands of the most respectable 
citizens were in arms, marching In detachments through the streets 
and squares ; whilst the Laazaroni in wonder and rage, accused the 
tardiness of their chio&. The partisans of France were now armed, 
the very men who had been a short time before the partisans of the 
Republic, and had suffered imprisonment and exila Tiie recollec- 
tion of their sufferings was still fresh, as well as their grief for tlie 
slaughter of 1 799 ; many of the most ferocious of their persecutors, 
and all the judges of tlie Junta were within the city, and a power- 
ful and friendly army at hand. The temptation was strong to 
revenge their wrongs, while vengeance could be accomplished with 
so much ease, to which they were urged by their just grievances, 
by an instinct natural to man, and certain impunity. But the vir- 
tue of the patriot forbade revenge, a guard was set ou the houses 
of those who had been their persecutors, and the fears gene- 
rated by the evil consciences of these bad men were tranquillized 
by the words and actions of those they had injured. The utility 
of a national guard in the midst of political convulsions was thus 
tested, and it was re-formed during the civil commotions which 
afterwards ensued ; they saved the city three times, and after 
the horrors of 1799 the provinces followed the example of the 
metropolis. 

This state of things lasted only two days, for at midday on the 
I4th February, the first French squadrons reached the city gates. 
How many passions contended for mastery in the breasts of the 

VOL. I. 2 b 



470 HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES. 1S06. 

people ! how many intereats were at stake ! some fled, othen 
concealed themselves, and others again, went out to meet the 
conqueror. Suspicion, hope, and ambition by turns agitated the 
hearts of the N^eapolitans. 



BHD OF VOL L 



KIHNttLltdll : T. (VIKHTAM.K, PHINTKK TO HKK HAJKXIT. 



3& 



