
<<<PDFPAGE 1>>>
saat 
lasea 
se 
eettts 

<<<PDFPAGE 2>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 3>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 4>>>
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 
https://archive.org/details/sicilyinsecureba0000greg 

<<<PDFPAGE 5>>>
SICILY 
The Insecure Base 

<<<PDFPAGE 6>>>
ii 
Ht 
rH 
jf 
U 
y 

<<<PDFPAGE 7>>>
SICILY 
The Insecure Base 
A History of the British Occupation 
of Sicily, 1806—1815 
Desmond Gregory 
sit 
d’oO 
ae 
the 
a 
: 
9 
sy BIBLIOTHEQUES 
Ri 
Esc 
EU 
ye 
Nve 
é 
ow 
Psity of 
Rutherford @ Madison @ Teaneck 
Fairleigh Dickinson University Press 
London and Toronto: Associated University Presses 

<<<PDFPAGE 8>>>
Ae D/ISIY, 
© 1988 by Assn 
niversity Presses, Inc. 
iB. ee 
Associated University Presses 
440 Forsgate Drive 
S é 
g re) 
Cranbury, NJ 08512 
D 
Ww 
ys 
? 
3 
Associated University Presses 
eae 
25 Sicilian Avenue 
London WCIA 2QH, England 
Associated University Presses 
2133 Royal Windsor Drive 
Unit 1 
Mississauga, Ontario 
Canada L5J 1K5 
The paper used in this publication meets the requirements 
of the American National Standard for Permanence of Paper 
for Printed Library Materials Z39.48-1984. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Gregory, Desmond, 1916— 
Sicily : the insecure base. 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
1. Sicily—History—1806-1815. 
2. Sicily—Foreign 
relations—Great Britain. 
3. Great Britain—Foreign 
eee 
» relations—Sicily. 
I. Title. 
“DG868. 42.G74 
1988 
945'.808 
86-46244 
ISBN 0-8386-3306-4 (alk. paper) 
Printed in the United States of America 

<<<PDFPAGE 9>>>
Contents 
Preface 
Acknowledgments 
Introduction 
1 Getting a Foothold 
2 
Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
3 Problems of Defense in the Early Years of Occupation 
4 The Court, William Drummond, and the British 
) 
10 
ll 
Generals 
Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion 
Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo 
Lord William Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage 
One 
Lord William Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage 
Two 
Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814 
Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples 
The Dénouement 
Appendix A: The Economic Implications of the British 
Occupation of Sicily 
Appendix B: Attempts Made from Sicily to Rescue 
Pope Pius VII 
Notes 
t 
Bibliography 
Index 
104 
109 
121 
129 
137 
141 
147 
165 
Wi 

<<<PDFPAGE 10>>>
“Always operate from firm bases.” 
—Field Marshal Lord Montgomery 

<<<PDFPAGE 11>>>
Preface 
I 
n writing this short history of the British occupation of Sicily during the 
war against Napoleon, I lay no claim to originality. My debt to the two 
perceptive books by Dr. John Rosselli on Lord William Bentinck and to Dr. 
Piers Mackesy’s masterly history of the war in the Mediterranean from 1803 
to 1810 are, I need hardly add, enormous. I am also much indebted to the 
writings of Antonio Capograssi, Denis Mack Smith, Jacques Rambaud, 
Charles Auriol, R. M. Johnston, Angela Valente, and Harold Acton, though 
I have naturally had recourse to those primary sources available in this 
country. 
But my aim has been to try to synthesize the findings and conclusions of 
others, in works in English, French, and Italian, and to attempt to answer 
these questions—what were the British doing in Sicily, and did they on the 
whole succeed in achieving what they set out to do there? 

<<<PDFPAGE 12>>>
el 
= 
SS 
- 
7 
“aoe jae 
a 
== 
: 
a 
7 
~ 
” 
~ 
: 
7 
= 
> — 
- 
zs 
ay 
q 
Poy 
= 
a 
, 
tees 
% 
6 
er & 
a 
i 
- 
— 
So) 
ae 
oe 
~~, 
> 
4 
so 
CE 
—_ 
so 
— 
oF 
he ee) 
Tie 
~ € ye 
»69 So 
aap ieee 
6-0. 
24864 
| 
ss@7. 
SS ote 
> 
7 
‘onGis @irite ve 
= 
_ 
s.” 
se 
Hy 

<<<PDFPAGE 13>>>
Acknowledgments 
M’ thanks are due to the Department of Manuscripts at Nottingham 
University and to the trustees of the Duke of Portland for permission 
to include material from the journals of Lord William Bentinck and of Joseph 
Smith, and from the correspondence of Robert Fagan. I must also thank the 
Department of Manuscripts at the British Library for permission to quote 
from the Collingwood, Annesley, Hudson Lowe, Bunbury, Wellesley, Wind- 
ham, Liverpool, Heytesbury, Fagan, and Pasley manuscripts and from the 
papers of Sir Alexander Ball. My thanks are also due to the National Library 
of Scotland for allowing me to see a Lynedoch manuscript and to the 
National Maritime Museum at Greenwich for permission to inspect letters 
from Captain Ball to Nelson. Any transcripts of Crown copyright records 
appear by permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. 
I also wish to thank Mrs. Joan Streatfield for permission to include quota- 
tions from the unpublished letters of Lady Dalrymple, Dr. John Rosselli for 
his guidance on several points, and Professor Francesco Brancato for some 
helpful suggestions on reading matter. 
Finally I must thank Mr. Anthony Seymour for his help in recommending 
sources and for having made useful recommendations after kindly reading the 
first draft of this book. 

<<<PDFPAGE 14>>>
~ 
7 
a 
— 
= 
, 
| 
oa 
=~, 
os 
v7 
TAO Ths @ magisawedhe be gaaeeals(T eb 
‘aml 
owe 
teats) ts ot) ee 
, 7 
a: 
A ret 
ee TO —— 
(iY 
pansy « 1 
oa t R sal Saad 
Aik: 
BQ!) 
reel Oy GH 
eit Qa ne 
Se 
TD 
aay 
77 
= 
ave) (eer, 
= 
.E 
tm ASB ERG 
—— 
<e 
Gi: 
ojpowks 
GS 
= 
(° b\w “robert ec e6 a ee 
110 22a e 
iro .® 
46 j=) me 
; 
Orn 
Sees OH,» Pia 
peated oe a 
or) ene caiaas 9. 
Sy bal 
es 
a,c 
a 
Fae! Se he ne 
@ 
® 
VA 
WR 
Gi 
aye all sel 
a 
» 
as 
vijeee> ft 
Fran 
A een) Mh 
if 
—— 
: 
‘ 
oo 
ns 
nn ha 
ih 
ietexaVvn TS 
05 
; wil 
ccsees aaa 
a 
vei ji 
A’ qed tes Rutten. 
srrgealan ee 
oh 
‘ahead salts 
‘ 
al 
, 
—— 
ff 
if 

<<<PDFPAGE 15>>>
Introduction 
J esate the whole of the period from 1793 to 1815 when Britain was 
at war almost continuously with the French republic and Napoleon’s 
empire, she contrived to maintain one faithful ally—though one faithful 
sometimes only in name, and usually more from need than sentiment— 
Ferdinand, king of Naples and Sicily. 
Those two kingdoms, with their long coastlines and their harbors both on 
the Adriatic and on the Tyrrhenian seas, required the help of a maritime 
power to preserve their independence from France. But they also needed a 
military power of the stature of Russia or Austria. Britain could provide them 
with naval protection, but never with troops in sufficient numbers to with- 
stand the might of the armies of France, and if Russia or Austria or both 
failed to come to their assistance or made a separate peace with France, all 
that Britain was able to do was to carry the court to the safety of Sicily and 
thereafter safeguard that island by covering it with a naval squadron and 
stationing a garrison there. 
The value of the Neapolitan-Sicilian alliance to the British fleet was consid- 
erable—the kingdoms’ ports supplied the fleet with winter bases, fresh water 
and food, and during the war of the first coalition, Naples contributed 
battleships and small craft. Economically, the alliance was important in 
weakening Napoleon’s stranglehold on British trade with the continent of 
Europe, and militarily, it provided a base for the launching of offensive 
operations in both eastern and western Mediterranean. 
What King Ferdinand wanted from his ally Britain was a guarantee that his 
mainland kingdom (Naples), lost to France in 1806, would be recovered and 
returned to his rule at the earliest possible opportunity, and at the latest in a 
general peace settlement. This Britain was unable to give, although she was 
willing to guarantee him Sicily. This failure on the part of Great Britain, 
suspicions (fully justified) that Britain intended to ignore the claims of King 
Ferdinand to the sovereignty of Malta, and suspicions (that were in fact not 
justified, though the reason for them was understandable) that Britain in- 
tended to take over Sicily and turn it into a permanent protectorate, all put a 
strain on the alliance. The utter dependence of the court at Palermo on 
British support from 1806 onward was humiliating for the king and queen, 
who came to detest, if not Great Britain, at least most of its soldiers and 
diplomats. Britain, for her part, as the war continued, became increasingly 
11 

<<<PDFPAGE 16>>>
2 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
uneasy about the loyalty of the court at Palermo, and finally came to exercise a 
virtual dictatorship over Sicily. In the end it was an Austrian army that 
brought the king back to his capital after the final defeat of Napoleon and 
enabled him to free himself from his ten-year-old yoke of dependence on 
Britain. Throughout that period Britain alone prevented the French from 
taking Sicily, as she had already for a brief time done in the early months of 
1799. Britain in her turn gained enormously from being able to use the 
island in her battle to keep the Mediterranean from turning into a Gallic sea, 
but she was in the end to find that Sicily became almost more of a liability 
than an asset, as it involved her in political obligations she found it difficult to 
discharge. 

<<<PDFPAGE 17>>>
SICILY 
The Insecure Base 

<<<PDFPAGE 18>>>
= 
— 
= 
= 
=~ 
~ 
— 
“19: “7@ COnaree 
Oe 
fy 
oir Pay 
a 
ho wy eal 
ae 
i> 
Vo. 
ule, 
a a ae 
r> we: cap egal 

<<<PDFPAGE 19>>>
1 
Getting a Foothold 
bw the greater part of the war she fought with revolutionary and 
Napoleonic France, Britain contrived to maintain a fleet in being in the 
Mediterranean, supplies for which were largely drawn from the ports of the 
Neapolitan kingdom, with which was included the kingdom of Sicily. In 
1793 and 1798 Britain concluded treaties with Naples, entered into a secret 
agreement with the government of Naples in 1803, and signed further 
treaties with that government in Sicily in 1808, 1809, and 1812, all of which 
conceded to Britain the use of the harbors of the two kingdoms and from 
1806, by necessity, those which were situated in Sicily only. The British 
preoccupation with Sicily, as indeed with nearby Malta, arose not only from 
her concern to keep her naval squadrons provisioned, but also from her 
realization of Napoleon’s concern to extend his rule beyond Italy to the 
Levant. It requires no very deep grasp of strategy to see, from the briefest 
glance at a map, Sicily’s importance to any naval power that sought to 
dominate the Mediterranean. When in the spring of 1793 Pitt decided, once 
France had declared war, to send a strong fleet to the Mediterranean, he 
hoped that the Italian states would join in opposing the general threat the 
French revolutionary government posed. Naples, which had the most to 
offer so far as naval help was concerned, was hesitant to commit herself until 
a British fleet had appeared, having been earlier forced by a French one into 
declaring an unwilling neutrality. However, by the middle of July, a treaty of 
alliance with Britain was signed, and ships, troops, and sailors were promised 
in return for British naval protection. Neapolitan troops and ships cooper- 
ated in the siege of Toulon and only a serious revolt in Naples, led by 
sympathizers with the Jacobin cause, prevented serious help being given to 
the British in their, assault on Corsica. However, by 1795 four Neapolitan 
ships-of-the-line were successfully serving with the British fleet and, a year 
later, a squadron of gunboats; and when Napoleon seized Leghorn, the main 
supply base for Admiral Jervis, the ports of Naples gave vital assistance in 
providing all that the admiral required. 
When the decision was'made by Pitt at the end of 1796 to withdraw the 
fleet from the Mediterranean and the Austrian forces in northern Italy were 
driven out by Napoleon’s army, Naples hastened to make peace with the 
15 

<<<PDFPAGE 20>>>
iv 
AN 
or 
28 
| 
2pumepy 
VEN 
or 
ors 
fed 
Be: 
~~ 
“a 
OW 
awd 
we 
7 
‘ 
Ww 
eee 
is 
Gigt-90g1 
WadV 
NVANVUUSALIGAW 
FHL 
ook 
oo 
S211 
Ut 
95 
WYSIy, 
CZ 
i 
< 
VNOTZ>uyd 
87 
0 
2 
pe 
~~ 
XS) 

<<<PDFPAGE 21>>>
Getting a Foothold 
NW 
French and agreed to revert to her neutral status, though she was still allowed 
to admit to her ports, on the mainland and Sicily, British ships. 
By 1798, however, the court of Naples grew so alarmed at the renewed 
threat of French aggression that it made appeals to Austria and Britain to 
come to its help if it were attacked and begged the British government to 
allow some warships to protect its coast. General Berthier in Rome, where 
the French army was now established, was making demands on the king of 
Naples that seemed a prelude to occupation, while naval preparations by the 
French in Toulon, Genoa, and Civita Vecchia were seen to presage an attack 
on Sicily.* The British government at this time was trying to rebuild the 
allied front that had broken down in the past three years, and, as Grenville the 
secretary of state wrote on 16 January 1798, Europe could be saved from 
French domination only by the union of the four Great Powers. 
Austria expressed her willingness to assist in defending Naples from attack, 
but she pressed Britain to dispatch, at once, a fleet to the Mediterranean. 
Grenville, who had persuaded Pitt that this was the right course to adopt, 
informed Naples that a squadron under Nelson was shortly to arrive in the 
Mediterranean. But it was essential that all the king’s ports be free to admit 
this naval force and allow it to buy what supplies it needed; and indeed if this 
request was not met, the fleet would be ordered to leave at once.# 
When Nelson’s squadron arrived off Naples on 24 June 1798 the attitude 
of the Naples government to granting these terms remained equivocal. It was 
divided into two factions, that of the foreign minister de Gallo, which did not 
wish to antagonize France, and that of Acton, who favored Britain. But in 
any case it was most unwilling to commit itself to a course of action that 
might give rise to a French attack until it was sure of Austrian support. The 
treaty that Austria had signed with Naples on 20 May 1798 was purely 
defensive in its terms, and not until 16 July was there added to it a clause that 
provided for Austrian military help, should Naples find herself under attack 
for opening her ports to the British fleet.* 
Nelson’s plea for the help of frigates was understandably turned down, and 
his request for the opening of ports to the whole of his fleet was also refused, 
albeit only officially—the terms of neutrality only allowing three to four 
warships at any one time to be given entrance to a neutral port. Unofficially, 
however, Nelson did obtain the agreement he sought, and Acton secretly 
signed, for the king‘ a letter instructing the governors of ports to permit free 
access to Nelson’s fleet, see that it was supplied with provisions, and allow its 
sick and wounded ashore. Even so, this private letter was not dispatched to 
the governors at once, and Nelson later complained that the governor of 
Syracuse was ignorant of these terms. However, his fleet was fully provi- 
sioned when he called at Syracuse on 20 July in pursuit of the French fleet 
bound for Eygpt, and had it not been, he would have been forced to return to 
Gibraltar for food and water. The government at Naples had of course been 

<<<PDFPAGE 22>>>
18 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
The Straits of Messina with HMS Foudroyant, painted by Pocock, engraved by 
Hall. (Courtesy of the National Maritime Museum, London.) 
waiting for the ratification of the Austrian treaty, with its vital clause affecting 
the ports, and Hamilton had to explain this to Nelson when he wrote to 
assure him that all was now well.© 
In any event, Nelson’s crushing victory at Aboukir Bay a few weeks later 
swung Naples firmly behind the British—her government already alarmed at 
the French occupation of the island of Malta. The welcome Nelson received 
from the court on returning to Naples was quite ecstatic and convinced, as he 
wrote, he had saved Sicily “in spite of Neapolitan councils,” he urged the 
king and queen to attack and drive the French out of Italy. Sir William 
Hamilton, the British minister, also favored this rash course of action, while 
the queen hoped to force Austria’s hand into making a full-scale offensive 
alliance, afraid that the emperor might otherwise come to terms with Napo- 
leon and abandon the cause of the smaller powers.” The decision that was 
made proved disastrous for Naples. Her army, which had advanced to 
capture Rome, was totally routed by the French, its incompetent Austrian 
commander Mack escaping south as best he could, its officers deserting, and 
its troops dispersing. Grenville, too late, had counselled caution, convinced 
that Naples should not risk going to war until sure of Austrian military 
support. Austria was extremely angry, having made clear five days before the 
advance on Rome was actually begun that she very strongly disapproved of 
Naples taking aggressive action. She also blamed the British government for 
trying to involve her in a war for which she was insufficiently prepared.8 
Utterly dismayed at what had happened, the king, the queen, and the royal 
family took refuge on board Nelson’s flagship Vanguard and, during the 
fourth week in December, sailed into temporary exile in Sicily. The people of 
Naples had begged the king to stay and fight it out with the French, but he 

<<<PDFPAGE 23>>>
Getting a Foothold 
19 
was unwilling to take the risk. Nelson also took away to Palermo two 
Neapolitan ships-of-the-line, but the rest of that navy having no crews were 
burned in the bay, on Nelson’s orders, so that they should not fall into 
French hands—three ships-of-the-line, a frigate, a corvette, together with 
some smaller vessels.? The kingdom of Naples, though not of Sicily, thus 
passed under the control of the French, and it was not long before they had 
set up a so-called Parthenopean republic, constructed on the best revolution- 
ary model and with the active cooperation of members of the Neapolitan 
nobility. 
The welcome the king received in Palermo from his subjects in Sicily was 
warm enough, though the latter detested the Neapolitans. “Down with the 
cowardly and treacherous Neapolitans” was a cry that echoed in the streets, 
and one that much offended the queen. But clearly concessions had to be 
made to the real strength of popular feeling (one with which Nelson was 
much in sympathy, writing that he thought a proud people had every right to 
be consulted in matters concerning their own defense). In consequence the 
king agreed to two Sicilian noblemen (Prince Trabia and Prince Cassaro) 
being given ministerial posts, though neither proved to be capable. But if the 
Sicilians loathed the Neapolitans, they detested the French as much, if not 
more. French émigrés who had fled from Naples on board British ships were 
refused admission and had to be sent away to Trieste; while a shipload of sick 
and wounded French soldiers, brought away from the army of Egypt and put 
ashore at the port of Augusta, were mostly murdered in cold blood by the 
fanatical local inhabitants.!° 
Meanwhile the second coalition, financed by Britain, was taking shape, and 
a month before the king left Naples his government signed a treaty with 
Russia. The latter was much concerned to prevent any further expansion of 
the power of France in the eastern Mediterranean—an expansion that threat- 
ened the Turkish Empire—and also concerned to prevent the British from 
dominating the Mediterranean. The Russians looked at the fate of Malta and 
of the Ionian islands (both of which Napoleon had seized) and for this reason 
they could not endure a French occupation of the kingdom of Naples or a 
French threat to the kingdom of Sicily. Seen from the point of view of Naples 
(or rather Palermo, for the time being), a Russian offer of military support, 
which neither Austria nor Britain could make, seemed to have many advan- 
tages; in fact the 155000 troops that the queen had fondly imagined landing 
from Russian transports to liberate Naples were a figment of her imagination. 
The only force the Russians provided was a small force of 600 marines from a 
warship anchored off Manfredonia."? 
Nelson was personally very hostile to the presence of Russian ships in the 
area, though the British government welcomed it and reproved him later for 
taking this stance. Nelson thought the Russians had their eyes on Malta, and 
when Admiral Ushakov, who had arrived with his fleet off Palermo on 1 

<<<PDFPAGE 24>>>
20 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
September 1799, agreed to assist in the bay of Naples, Nelson at once 
dispatched Troubridge’s squadron to seize Ponza, Ischia, and Procida, en- 
force a blockade of the port of Naples, and finally land a force of marines and 
contingents of sailors from British warships to carry the war to the Roman 
states. But by that time Admiral Ushakov’s fleet had been recalled to the 
Black Sea ports. 
!2 
Whatever the reasons (and the major one was his notorious attachment to 
Lady Hamilton), Nelson retained his ships off Sicily through 1799 to 1800, 
telling Ball, besieging Valletta, that he considered Sicily to be under Britain’s 
special protection. His attention had already been drawn to the vulnerability 
of Messina, which he rightly saw as the key to Sicily. If the French were to 
march into Lower Calabria, they had only to cross a strip of water measuring 
at its narrowest point only a mile and a half across. Much depended on the 
strength of the fortress and the loyalty of the Messina garrison, and the queen 
had learnt that Danero, its commander, was neither competent nor even 
loyal, though this information was certainly false. What was true, and what 
worried Danero, was the feebleness of the garrison, made up as it was of 
deserters, criminals, vagabonds, and conscripted Calabresi. Nelson told 
Troubridge to inspect the defenses and, if need be, land 300 marines, but he 
changed his mind on the queen’s intervention. Instead he transported 500 
picked troops from the royal army at Palermo and put them into Messina 
citadel, but this he considered a temporary measure.!3 He had in the middle 
of February written to General Sir Charles Stuart, commanding the British 
troops in Minorca (a place whose surrender he had recently taken), making it 
clear that a British force was badly needed in Sicily if the island was not to fall 
to the French. “What a state we are in here,” Nelson had written, “with the 
enemy at the door and no troops” [to depend on]. The 4,000 Neapolitan 
troops were totally untrustworthy, while a force of 13,000 Sicilians was still 
in the process of being raised. Although Messina was a strong fortress, able to 
withstand a long siege, treachery would probably yield it without ever a shot 
being fired. Only 1,000 British troops would suffice to make the island secure 
and Stuart must surely see the need for them.14 Hamilton wrote in the same 
vein to his old friend Colonel Graham, then commanding a regiment in 
Minorca, and to Grenville, the foreign secretary in London. The Sicilians, he 
thought, might hate the French, but there were enough causes for discontent 
in towns like Catania, Milazzo, and Trapani (exploited no doubt by Jacobin 
agents) to have already provoked disturbances; while the garrison at Messina 
was so distrusted, it was being replaced by troops from Palermo. If action 
was not soon forthcoming to draw the French off in some other direction, 
the royal family would again be forced to take refuge on board HMS 
Vanguard, Nelson’s flagship that had earlier borne them to safety in Sicily.15 
Graham responded sympathetically. Were Sicily to fall, he told Hamilton, not 
only Malta but also Egypt would remain firmly in enemy hands. Though 

<<<PDFPAGE 25>>>
Oe 
ee 
pee Dine 
hep fe Ff fairer oth Bor Hajestyps : Mea bc hn 
gant 
View of the city and port of Messina. (Courtesy of the British Library, London.) 
DAEs 
Bay of Palermo looking toward Monte Pellegrino. (Courtesy of the British Mu- 
seum, London.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 26>>>
DD; 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
View of the port of Palermo, engraved by R. and D. Havell. (Courtesy of the 
British Library, London.) 
Stuart had no large force to dispose of, Graham was sure that it needed only a 
small detachment to “do the trick.”!© 
Stuart required no further urging. By the end of March he had crossed to 
Sicily and installed two weak regiments in Messina citadel, to the obvious 
delight of Nelson and Hamilton and of Ferdinand and his queen, who 
ordered the governor and troops at Messina henceforth to take their orders 
from Stuart. Stuart was able to dismiss the garrison of hated Neapolitan 
troops and to supplement his British force by enlisting 2,000 Sicilian re- 
cruits. In May, Colonel Graham was sent from Minorca to take over com- 
mand of this force. He was even offered a seat on the council of the 
governing body of Messina, but he had to decline because the duties pre- 
scribed to him were purely military. Graham and the two British regiments 
remained in Messina until December, by which time the danger had long 
receded, and they were then sent to Malta to join Captain Ball and assist him 
in the siege of Valletta.17 
There had been an attempt by the queen and Nelson, backed by Sir 
William Hamilton, when Graham first arrived at Palermo to assume com- 
mand of Messina garrison, to persuade him to take the British troops there to 
help in the reconquest of Naples, Calabria being by that time free of any 
likely threat from the French. Graham replied he would have to see what 

<<<PDFPAGE 27>>>
Getting a Foothold 
23 
troops he could spare when he got to Messina, and on arriving there he made 
it clear that the British must all remain in the citadel. In this he received the 
full support of the officer commanding the troops in Minorca, General Sir 
James St. Clair Erskine. Later attempts were made that year, this time by 
Nelson, not the court, to get Graham to send his troops to help in the long 
drawn-out siege of Valletta. Nelson visited Erskine personally to try to get 
him to let the troops go, but again he met with no success. It was only when 
Erskine was replaced by Fox that orders arrived to let Graham depart, 
together with his Messina garrison. 
18 
Stuart, when writing to Henry Dundas, the secretary of state for war, 
insisted that it had not simply been the urgent requests from Nelson and 
others that had prompted him to take the action he had, but a realization that 
possession of Sicily could help the cause of the allies in Italy by keeping 
French forces pinned down in Naples, and help also in the capture of Malta. 
It could also, he added, be a useful base for future offensive operations, either 
in Egypt or Italy.!? Stuart was right, and once Britain took Malta, Sicily 
became of great importance as a major source of supply for that island, which 
needed its cattle, grain, timber and wine, although the cattle and grain were 
not always forthcoming. And as the war with Napoleon continued into the 
nineteenth century and Britain and France became involved in a struggle of 
economic attrition, Sicily became like Malta an entrepdt for smuggling goods 
into Napoleonic Europe. Because Neapolitan customs officials were corrupt, 
almost without exception, communications between Sicily and the mainland 
were never broken throughout the war. The ports of Sicily, moreover, 
remained vital to the British fleet in its task of watching the French in 
Toulon, as well as for keeping open the trade routes from west to east in the 
Mediterranean.?° 
Apart from the naval and military protection afforded King Ferdinand by 
the treaty with Britain, which was signed in December 1798, an ex gratia 
payment of £100,000 was made by the British government in March to help 
him recover Calabria and Naples.?! Thus financed, his patriot army under the 
command of Cardinal Ruffo succeeded in overrunning Calabria and, by mid- 
June, had retaken Naples. And when news of Russian victories against their 
armies in the north arrived, the French had already withdrawn from the city. 
On the overthrow of the Parthenopian Republic, which had owed its 
existence to French mhilitary power, Ferdinand, with the assistance of Nelson 
whose services were rewarded with the duchy of Bronte and the very active 
support of the queen, took a terrible revenge on his disloyal subjects—one 
that was not forgotten in Naples and was to cast a lingering shadow over all 
later attempts the court was to make, when it was once more in exile in Sicily, 
to enlist the active support of those who had been its subjects on the 
mainland of Italy. 
The British government was most anxious that the king himself should 

<<<PDFPAGE 28>>>
24 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
return to Naples at the earliest possible opportunity, since it looked on the 
state of disorder there with a sense of continuing and growing disquiet. But 
the king was not eager to return, at any rate immediately, afraid of possible 
threats to his life and the lives of the royal family. While he had been exacting 
vengeance on his Neapolitan subjects, he had never set foot on the soil of 
Naples, preferring to address his orders from the safety of the cabin of 
Nelson’s flagship. 
Troubridge had written in a letter to Nelson of the appalling state of 
corruption, oppression, and economic stagnation he had encountered in the 
kingdom of Naples, and of the need for an act of oblivion in regard to the 
thousands who were being held for trial. And Sir Arthur Paget, the young 
British minister who succeeded Hamilton at Palermo but who had called in 
at Naples en route, made the same kind of report to Grenville. In pressing the 
court for the king’s swift return and pressing the need for reform of the 
government, Paget made himself very unpopular. The queen called him “the 
detested Paget” and complained in a letter she wrote to de Gallo of Paget’s 
hard and abrupt manner—“1t 1s clear that Paget wants us to feel all the weight 
of his country’s power.” Acton greeted Paget’s suggestion that the amnesty 
granted by the king on 31 May 1800 would have much more effect if the 
king in person were to supervise its enactment with what Paget described as a 
“degree of ill-humour.” Acton told Paget the king had a right to be free of all 
outside interference in running his kingdoms? internal affairs, and that he 
must be free to choose how long he spent in either Naples or Sicily. Paget 
thought that the queen’s opposition to the speedy return of the king arose 
more from pique than from principle, stemming, he believed, from the 
“effect of their own humiliating and dependent position.” “The queen has 
been taught to believe that I was sent here to dictate, to use haughty language 
upon the subject, at which idea . 
. 
. she was violently irritated.”22 
Paget was convinced, as he told Grenville, that nothing good or useful 
could be done in Sicily without some sort of direct intervention, and “the 
more I reflect upon it the more despondent I feel.” As Harold Acton 
remarked, in his book on the subject of the Bourbons of Naples, this sounds 
like the voice of Lord William Bentinck speaking fourteen years before his 
cime:+3 
Napoleon’s victory at Marengo and Russia’s defection from the allied cause 
meant that Naples was once again threatened by invasion from a French 
army. The king begged Britain to send him troops, but Paget had to tell 
Ferdinand that only Austria could help him. The British government was in 
no position to send more than 15,000 men, and such numbers would be of 
little avail against the armies France could command. Any assistance Britain 
could give would have to be purely maritime.2# When four months later at 
Lunéville Austria made a separate peace without any reference to her allies, 
the British government advised Ferdinand to make the best terms he could 

<<<PDFPAGE 29>>>
Getting a Foothold 
25 
Sir ‘Arthior Paget by Count LOrsays “Gbvedey of the National Portrait Gallery, 
London.) 
with France, disregarding any engagement he might previously have made 
with Britain. If by such terms he was forced to exclude British ships from his 
kingdoms’ harbors, this would be regarded by Britain as an act of necessity, 
not hostility. 25 With this advice, and in view of the fact that the French were 
preparing to land in Sicily where there was no longer a British garrison, the 
king, who was totally unprepared to put up resistance in the island,?¢ 
hastened to make a separate peace. 
In March 1801 King Ferdinand signed the Treaty of Florence with Napo- 
leon by which he was permitted to recover his kingdom, shorn only of its 
Elban and Tuscan adjuncts; provided he maintained a strict neutrality and 
agreed to accept, feed, and pay for a French army of occupation, until a 
general peace should be signed. Not until then did he return to Naples. Sicily 
however remained exposed, and only the news that Addington’s ministry had 

<<<PDFPAGE 30>>>
26 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
finally signed the Treaty of Amiens prevented the French from seizing Mes- 
sina.?7 
By the Treaty of Amiens Britain agreed to leave Malta within three months 
and to hand it back to the Knights of St. John. But before leaving she was 
naturally anxious to ensure that the island remain friendly and capable of 
defending itself. To this end she persuaded Ferdinand to dispatch 2,000 of 
his troops to Malta, secretly agreeing to pay their cost to the tune of 
£50,000. Naples claimed sovereignty over Malta—a claim dating back to the 
sixteenth century—and King Ferdinand had been bitterly offended at the way 
by which in August 1800, after the French in Valletta had surrendered to the 
British, General Pigot had not allowed the hoisting of the Neapolitan flag 
beside that of the Knights of St. John. Ferdinand had also taken it ill when in 
January 1801 Malta had been declared a British protectorate without his 
even being consulted.?8 Now that it was to be handed back under the Treaty 
of Amiens, it was important to both Britain and Naples that it should not 
again fall prey to the French. Paget tried to impress on Ferdinand that the 
independence of Sicily could not be preserved if Malta was lost, and that as 
long as Malta was friendly or neutral, the island of Sicily could be de- 
fended.?? When it rapidly became apparent that, in view of Napoleons’ 
provocative actions, Britain intended to keep hold of Malta, whatever might 
have been said in the treaty, Napoleon made approaches to Ferdinand for a 
military alliance and the joint seizure of Malta. These approaches were 
tactfully rejected on the grounds that his kingdoms were too exhausted to 
take part in fresh hostilities, and that war with Britain (repugnant in any case, 
since that country had been a faithful ally) would only result in Naples being 
blockaded and her population reduced to starvation.2° 
When in May 1803 Britain renewed the war with Napoleon, the latter sent 
an army once again to occupy the coasts of Apulia and Abruzzi within the 
confines of the kingdom of Naples. Not unnaturally this resulted in renewed 
tension between Naples and Napoleon, the former tacitly supporting Britain, 
bitterly resenting the French occupation, yet desperately anxious to maintain 
its neutrality. Sir John Acton, the British-born minister who still carried the 
most weight with the king and who really directed royal policy, made secret 
approaches to the British, very soon after war broke out. He urged them to 
occupy Messina and other ports in Sicily, if the French army of occupation 
showed signs of moving out of its bases. “We shall protest against the 
measure to save appearances,” he told A’Court, the British chargé d’affaires in 
Naples, and if the French then attacked Sicily, Neapolitan forces would help 
to defend it.+! A°’Court thought the French were still so dispersed that no 
immediate danger threatened, but he said he would inform Admiral Bicker- 
ton and the British governor of Malta (Ball) if the French started to concen- 
trate, so that appropriate action could be taken.32 
Nelson, who was bringing out the new minister, Hugh Elliot, to the court 

<<<PDFPAGE 31>>>
Getting a Foothold 
27 
of Naples, had orders from Addington to act vigorously if the French tried to 
attack Sicily and to take good care of the royal family whom George II 
considered to be “the most faithful allies he ever had.” Colonel Villettes, the 
officer who commanded the British garrison in Malta, had also received 
orders from London to provide as many as 2,000 troops (if he could spare 
them) to seize Messina, should Nelson decide it was necessary. Nelson, while 
fully appreciating the reservations of the king and queen, who had no wish to 
risk having to flee through premature action by the British in Sicily, urged 
Acton to take no risks. “Though Naples be lost, Sicily is secure; but if Sicily is 
lost so is Naples.”33 Nelson also impressed on Elliot the necessity for speedy 
action, if it looked as if Sicily would be attacked: “In a small degree we risk it 
every day, in hopes of preserving the kingdom of Naples.” The danger, as he 
saw it, was that the enemy could ferry over some thousands of men in a very 
short time, if they had the boats. And no navy in Europe could stop them, 
with the current running at seven knots.34 
The trouble was, as Nelson realized, the very real fears of the king and 
queen that they might provoke Napoleon, who, deeply suspicious of the 
court of Naples, was shortly to demand and procure the dismissal of Acton 
on account of that statesman’s notorious Anglophilism, the dismissal of the 
émigré French Count Damas (in command of the Neapolitan army) and even 
to demand, though unsuccessfully, the removal of Elliot from his post as 
minister. The queen was genuinely frightened that Nelson and Elliot be- 
tween them might involve Naples again in a war. She wrote in September 
1803, “It will be a real miracle of St. Januarius if, caught between Nelson and 
Elliot, we are not dragged into some adventure which will reduce us to the 
situation of the king of Sardinia,” [now a puppet of the French republic]. 
And again in May of the following year she complained to her correspondent 
de Gallo, “The English accuse us of being pro-French and the French pro- 
English—all we want is to be neutral and get rid of French troops.”#° 
Yet Elliot had already become a spokesman for the queen’s more cautious 
approach and he impressed the need for it on Nelson and Ball: “We are 
steering between Scylla and Charybdis, it is as dangerous to do too much as 
too little.”3° Ball, in Malta, when writing to Elliot, acknowledged the force 
of the latter’s argument, that it was unwise to risk losing Naples by taking 
overhasty action in Sicily. Yet he remained extremely suspicious of the pro- 
French elements in the Naples cabinet, and he was worried that the Sicilians 
themselves, discontented with rule from Naples, would if not assisted by 
Britain turn to the French out of desperation.37 For this reason he had 
ordered Villettes to have a force of 1,200 ready to move on Messina in an 
emergency.?8 
: 
Certainly Ball had extreme views about the future of Sicily and its rela- 
tionship to Great Britain—views he shared with his correspondents Wiliam 
Miles, an agent of Pitt, Francis Leckie, the English consul at Syracuse and a 

<<<PDFPAGE 32>>>
28 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
gentleman farmer in that area, and Granville Penn, the under secretary at the 
Colonial Office in London. He had, he wrote to Penn, told Nelson and Elliot 
that if Sicily should fall to the French, they would draw more wealth and 
resources from it than from the whole of Italy. Whereas, he went on, “a good 
proclamation and fifteen hundred troops would lay all Sicily at our feet—we 
must declare Messina an English port. We could then protect Sicilian trade 
from the Barbary states and turn all the inhabitants in our favour.” Miles had 
already told Ball that the Sicilian people as a whole would favor an annexa- 
tion by Britain, that the men of property said so privately, even if they dared 
not say so publicly, while “the lower and industrious class to a man would 
fight for our cause.”3? 
In August 1804 Ball was suggesting that since the king derived few 
advantages from the possession of Sicily, he might, rather than run the risk of 
having it taken over by France, be ready to accept compensation in the form 
of an annual pension from Britain, while the latter took over the island 
herself.4° There is no reason to believe that these views were ever shared by 
any British cabinet, but when four years later they were first aired in the 
columns of the British press (although then Leckie, and not Ball, was 
responsible for their publication), they caused not unnaturally some alarm 
and also suspicion at the court of Palermo—suspicion that was to be deep- 
ened further by subsequent British publications and finally by the disclosure 
of the private views of Lord William Bentinck. 
The difference of opinion between Elliot and the heads of the British 
armed services about taking action over Sicily was resolved in the end by a 
compromise, which took the form of a secret agreement between Britain and 
the court at Naples. Messina and Syracuse were to be garrisoned by the 2,000 
Neapolitan troops sent to Malta in 1802 and returned to Sicily in July 1803; 
Messina’s citadel was to be repaired; gunboats were to patrol the straits; the 
people of Calabria were to be armed; and the king’s forces in Sicily were to be 
put on a footing for war. To meet the expenses incurred by all this, the British 
government promised Naples £170,000 and thereafter an annual subsidy of 
£150,000, which if Naples was involved in hostilities could be increased to 
£300,000. And to make sure it got value for its money, it sent an experienced 
British officer, nominated by Ball and Villettes, to report on the progress of 
the fortifications. This officer, Colonel Layard, stayed in Messina for nearly 
two years, keeping in touch with Elliot and Ball, and was ready to give them 
early warning of any hostile movements from Italy.4! 
Meanwhile it was agreed that Nelson should keep a warship in the Bay of 
Naples ready to take off the royal family, if the French started to advance on 
the capital; and a year later Villettes was instructed to send 2,000 of his 
troops to Messina if Elliot should deem it necessary. 
The eventual enforced resignation of Acton meant in effect that the queen 
was once more in control of foreign policy. It was she who, against the king’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 33>>>
Getting a Foothold 
29 
wish, was to turn to Russia and also to Britain for help in getting the French 
expelled, and to get the czar to dispatch to Corfu 10,000 troops for use in 
Italy. The court of Naples in 1805 was playing a dangerous double game. On 
the one hand, through its envoy in Paris, it had signed a treaty of neutrality 
with France, which the king in Naples then ratified, and that got the French 
army withdrawn from its territory. Yet at the moment of that ratification it 
signed a military alliance with Russia and invited a Russian army to land, 
supported by a very much smaller British one. This was to be an act of bad 
faith that Napoleon was never to forgive, and it was to cause him to proclaim 
the end of Bourbon rule in Naples. 
The ever-present threat by Napoleon, once he crowned himself king of 
Italy, to take over the kingdom of Naples had been a source of continuing 
anxiety not only to Britain but also to Russia, now firmly based in the Ionian 
islands with 11,000 troops and a large naval force and ready to resist any 
French threat to Turkey. Russia had throughout 1804 been urging Britain to 
send troops to Calabria, while Britain in turn had been pressing Russia for a 
force of 15,000 men to join with her in a joint expedition to free all of Italy 
from the French.4? But the signing of any sort of agreement had been 
inhibited by several factors: the British inability to provide a force of more 
than 5,000 at a time when their own shores were faced with invasion, and 
Pitt’s recent policy decision to commit no large force to the Mediterranean; 
the Russians’ dislike of committing themselves until Austria had shown her 
hand; and above all the Russians’ suspicions that the British were only 
concerned with Sicily, where British troops would be little use in helping the 
allied cause on the mainland. Back in the summer of 1803, the Russian 
chargé d’affaires in Naples had warned Acton against British ambitions,*? 
and eighteen months later the queen had shown Elliot letters received from 
her envoy in Petersburg urging her to distrust the British. It seemed to the 
czar they were interested only in embroiling Europe in a general war, from 
which they would shortly seek to escape, retaining Sicily as a British posses- 
sion. The czar, it was said, was most unwilling for the keys of Sicily to be 
given to Britain.44 These Russian suspicions were not justified, but it does 
seem from what Harrowby, the then-foreign secretary, wrote to Elliot on 5 
November 1804 that the cabinet was very interested in developing Sicily’s 
military potential as a source of manpower for future operations conducted in 
the Mediterranean.! Harrowby envisaged that if the king was forced to take 
refuge in Sicily, a considerable proportion of his army could then be enlisted 
in British pay. This force, commanded by British officers, could become a 
very efficient army, and though initially at the service of the king, it could 
later be made available to serve elsewhere in the Mediterranean.*9 
By the spring of 1805, however, the difficulties with Russia had been 
overcome, even if Russia’s suspicions remained in the minds of her diplomats 
if not of her soldiers. On 11 April 1805 an Anglo-Russian treaty was signed 

<<<PDFPAGE 34>>>
30 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
providing for the protection of Naples and for the expulsion of the French 
from Italy. Meanwhile a force of 5,000 men under General Craig was sent 
out from England, destined initially for Malta, but ultimately for Italy. Craig 
had orders to place himself at the disposal of the Russian commander, and 
British transports were to convey Russian troops from Corfu to Naples. But 
the principal object of Craig’s expedition, as was made clear in his secret 
instructions, was the safeguarding of the island of Sicily. On no account, his 
orders ran, were the French to be allowed on the island, and if they did 
succeed in landing, they must be expelled without delay. If French action 
should compel the king once more to seek asylum in Sicily, or if under 
extreme French pressure, he were to close his ports to the British, then Craig 
must at once take hold of Sicily. Over this decision he was accorded complete 
freedom to act on his own, although he was told that if circumstances 
permitted, he should work with Nelson, Elliot, and Ball.4° 
At the same time a British officer, Lt. Colonel Smith, was dispatched to 
Sicily to report to Malta and then to London on the current state of Sicilian 
defenses; and to help him prepare his eventual report, he was sent copies of 
the recommendations made by Charles Stuart six years earlier. The con- 
clusions to which Smith finally arrived were not very different from those of 
Stuart. The Sicilians, he found, were discontented and heartily disliked the 
French, but even so they might not resist if a force of 10,000 Frenchmen 
landed. The regular Neapolitan troops, dispersed throughout the island, 
were unreliable, especially the officers, while the principal military comman- 
ders were either useless or objects of ridicule. General Bourcard, a Swiss 
officer, had been two years in command in Sicily, yet he had never once 
stirred out of Palermo and knew nothing of the island’s resources. 
Guillichini, in command at Messina, was an ex-naval captain from Tuscany, 
ignorant of military matters and obviously a person quite unsuited to com- 
mand the island’s principal fortress. 
All the fortresses, apart from Messina, were wholly lacking in artillery, 
were generally of inferior construction, and were in a very poor state of 
repair. Palermo itself was indefensible. Syracuse suffered from a lack of guns 
and also lacked an adequate water supply. Messina alone was in good 
condition and with a garrison of 3,000 British soldiers could hold out, Smith 
thought, indefinitely. As for the island generally, he agreed with the verdict of 
General Stuart that it could only be defended by the local inhabitants. All this 
Smith reported to the court before returning home to England, and he 
thought the king and queen welcomed the idea of Sicily having a British 
garrison.*7 
The landing of an Anglo-Russian force consisting of 13,000 Russian and 
7,000 British troops under the command of General Maurice de Lacy, an 
aged but Anglophile Russian officer, in the bay of Naples in September 1805 
and its hasty withdrawal a few months later, without ever having fired a shot, 

<<<PDFPAGE 35>>>
General Sir James Henry Craig, attributed to Berczy. (Courtesy of McCord 
Museum, McGill University, Montreal.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 36>>>
ouesseg ade 
SAW Ul BIC 
ae 
AMIS 
\e evasnbny 
19U26415 © 
emesiueyes 
© 
Biueje> 
eo 
(euug) 
e 
ep eubuew ‘se 
: 
yueAo!6o14seD 
OUurIz>xAI2ISED © 
weu33 
aw 
PeuII0oeL 
ebzzn>14 
@OZZE|IW 
av, 

<<<PDFPAGE 37>>>
Getting a Foothold 
33 
do not need recounting once again. It would never have landed in the first 
place had Napoleon not ordered General St. Cyr’s withdrawal to meet the 
imminent Austrian threat, and he fully intended that St. Cyr should return 
once Austria had been defeated. Napoleon’s victories at Ulm and Austerlitz 
made the presence of the Anglo-Russian force in the kingdom of Naples 
anachronistic. Even with the help of Neapolitan forces, most of whom were 
completely untrained, it was quite inadequate to defend Naples against the 
forces the French could muster. General de Lacy received an order to with- 
draw his army at once to Corfu, while Craig had already made the decision 
that to carry out his original instructions he must reembark and retire to 
Sicily. Yet while there remained the slightest hope in the minds of the queen 
and her advisers of negotiating with Napoleon, the court remained extremely 
anxious to prevent the British from landing in Sicily. Serious differences 
arose between Elliot and Craig over this question, Elliot supporting the court 
in its efforts over forty days to treat with Napoleon. Offers were made on 
behalf of the queen involving Ferdinand abdicating in favor of his eldest son 
and (though this was not known to Elliot) closing the ports to British ships. 
It was believed that Spain and Russia would lend the negotiations support, 
and Tatischeff, the Russian envoy in Naples, who was certainly no friend of 
the British, hinted to Neapolitan ministers that Britain intended to take over 
Sicily.48 Initially the queen had desired the British force to remain near 
Naples to back her diplomacy by a show of force, but when Craig made clear 
he was leaving anyway, she had wanted the British to go to Malta. Writing to 
Damas, she fulminated at what she regarded as British cowardice: “The smell 
of gunpowder sickens the feeble organs of General Craig. . 
. 
. I am entirely 
disanglomanised.”4? 
Craig in fact went to Messina not Malta, although he took care not to land 
his force until invited by the king to do so. Elliot, who remained ingenuously 
satisfied that the queen’s negotiations had some chance of success, told Craig 
that an uninvited landing would be treated by the court as a hostile act. Craig 
understandably showed irritation, sure that Elliot was being deceived. As 
Nelson had noted two years earlier, the court at Naples had not found it 
difficult to hoodwink this British minister.°° 
Writing to Castelreagh on 1] February, Craig told him his original inten- 
tion had been to make for the port of Augusta, much more capacious than 
that of Messina, but had decided the risk of leaving the latter open to the 
French was one it was too great to take. They might slip across 5,000 troops 
before the British were aware they had done so, and since Collingwood and 
the British fleet had had to leave the Mediterranean, there was no squadron at 
hand to deter them. Now that the French were established in Venice and in 
Venice’s ports in the Adriatic, Sicily appeared to be all the more vital to 
British interests in the Mediterranean. The court and Elliot had seemed to 

<<<PDFPAGE 38>>>
34 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
think he intended to land without permission, but in the existing circum- 
stances he saw no necessity to do so.°! 
In early February the disagreement between Craig and Elliot was brought 
to an end by the steady advance of the French army, and the “existing 
circumstances” mentioned by Craig were a reference to the king’s decision to 
leave Naples and take refuge in Sicily. Napoleon had never had the least 
intention of yielding to the requests of the queen. “The dynasty of Naples has 
ceased to reign,” he had publicly pronounced at Pressburg, and his brother 
Joseph was to seize the kingdom. On 9 February the king sailed for Palermo, 
followed shortly by the queen and her entourage, and once in Sicily, on 
Acton’s prompting, he visited Messina and allowed Craig to land.®? In the 
third week in February British troops took over Messina. They were not to 
leave it for another nine years. 
Julian Corbett describes these events as “the last stroke of the Trafalgar 
campaign,” by which the British were able to avert the full consequences of 
Ulm and Austerlitz.°? And there is no doubt that if the British had not been 
able to command the straits from their firm base in Messina citadel, having 
first removed all boats from the mainland as well as the coastal artillery, the 
French, pursuing the routed elements of the Neapolitan army of Damas, 
could have crossed with ease into Sicily and so gone on to threaten Malta and 
the whole command of the Mediterranean. 

<<<PDFPAGE 39>>>
2 
Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
S 
icily was different from mainland Italy. This difference arose partly be- 
cause the island lay so close to the coast of north Africa, and after its 
conquest by the Arabs retained a very strong African connection that lasted 
into the sixteenth century; and partly because it became and remained, for a 
period of over four hundred years, a kingdom annexed to the throne of Spain 
and was administered separately from other Spanish possessions in Italy. 
When Ferdinand IV of Naples became King Ferdinand III of Sicily, succeed- 
ing his father Charles III, there were few ties of affinity between the Neapoli- 
tans and the Sicilians. The African and the Spanish connections had bred in 
the people of Sicily a complacent sense of isolation from what went on in the 
rest of Europe. 
The period of the African connection had been one of great prosperity and 
vigor, intellectual as well as material, and the Arab influence on Sicily’s 
culture persisted throughout the reign of the Normans and of the Suabian, 
Frederick II. The exotic flavor of the court at Palermo, where Arab and 
Byzantine influence intermingled, made it entirely different from any other 
court to be found in Europe.? 
The Aragonese and then the Spanish connections (once the thrones of 
Aragon and Castile were united), which began at the end of the thirteenth 
century (when Peter of Aragon was called in to replace the detested An- 
gevin), resulted in Sicily becoming still more distinct from neighboring Italy. 
Sicily welcomed Spanish rule, and in spite of periodic revolts, was for long 
considered a loyal province; most Sicilians looked on themselves as closer to 
Spaniards than to Italians.* But this meant that Sicily was also cut off from 
that flowering of Italian culture that began in the age of Giotto and Dante 
and blossomed into the Italian Renaissance. Its isolation was further in- 
creased by the introduction there of the Spanish Inquisition.® This last was 
responsible, needless to say, for effectively strangling free enquiry, so that all 
the rebirth of learning and science that illuminated so much of Europe in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had little effect on the island of Sicily. 
There were other respects in which Sicily’s distinctness from Italian life was 
made manifest. The island boasted of having a parliament that dated back to 
the early Middle Ages and that at the end of the eighteenth century was still 
possessed of its liberties. That this fossilized relic of past history, surrounded 
35 

<<<PDFPAGE 40>>>
36 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
as it was by both myth and romance, was now merely a bastion of privilege 
and had been largely responsible for keeping Sicily poor and backward does 
not alter the fact that it was extraordinary and indeed very nearly unique. In 
the whole of Europe—outside of Sicily, only England and Corsica could 
boast of parliaments that had remained intact.© Also in contrast to other 
countries, at the end of the eighteenth century when the European aristocra- 
cies had lost much of their power (and were trying desperately to regain it) 
and most if not all of their feudal privileges, the nobles in Sicily had hung on 
to theirs. Henry Swinburne—an English traveller to the island—remarked in 
1785 how the Sicilian baronage were more independent of royal authority 
than were the barons in the kingdom of Naples, and exercised more control 
of their vassals. In Sicily, the lord of the manor seemed to operate without 
restraint: 
He appoints to every place of jurisdiction and trust; civil and criminal law 
are both distributed by his creatures ... in general the barons have 
disposal of everything within their manor.” 
While a Frenchman visiting Sicily in 1778 could write: 
The Sicilians, remote from their king, whom they know only by his 
representative, are accustomed to consider him as a pensioner whom they 
defraud of his due; while they pride themselves in granting free gifts, and 
from time to time make experiments of disobedience, with the sole view of 
performing an act that may assist their freedom. 
The Sicilians have had so many sovereigns that they are accustomed to 
like none of them, and to give the preference only to him, with whom they 
can make the best conditions.® 
He also commented on what he described as their “insular and republican 
character.” Even the Catholic Church in Sicily was remote and cut off from 
the continent. Subjection to Rome was minimal in matters ecclesiastical and 
all holders of senior church appointments were nominated to their posts by 
the crown. The king of Sicily in his own person was apostolic delegate, and 
the court of monarchia, which enjoyed supreme jurisdiction in church affairs, 
was presided over by a judge who was a royal appointee.? 
Sicily in 1806 was, as it had remained for centuries, “a traditionalist and 
static society” (to use the words of Professor Mack Smith), and all attempts 
by its foreign rulers during the eighteenth century to change it to conform 
with modern ideas in keeping with the Enlightenment had in every case 
encountered failure. What the British found, when they came to the island, 
was a country that for historical reasons was so backward it was a century 
behind the most advanced of the western states. Nelson in the summer of 
1803 described Sicily’s condition as “almost as bad as a civilised country’s can 

<<<PDFPAGE 41>>>
Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
Buh 
be,” with a population so discontented it would welcome even the hated 
French, if that meant any change for the better.!° He was merely echoing Sir 
Arthur Paget, who had told Grenville in 1800 that the state of the island was 
so wretched and corrupt that “nothing useful can be effective but by the 
introduction and direct influence of foreigners.” There were several others 
who shared this opinion. Colonel Bunbury, on General Craig’s staff, re- 
marked on the welcome the British received when they first landed in 1806; 
he noted that if a few of the merchants had appeared at first to favor the 
French, this was out of no love for the latter but because “they longed for 
better laws” and some “relief from capricious tyranny.” And the French they 
reckoned were more likely to stay, while the British would only be “birds of 
passage.”!1 
The Abbate Balsamo, who was Nelson’s contemporary and an expert 
agronomist among other things, saw the difference between the Sicilian 
laborer and his counterparts in Western Europe as similar to that between the 
Sicilians and the savage tribes of Africa or America.!? The plight of the 
peasant was hard indeed. He lived in a state of extreme poverty, seeing the 
profits from agriculture passing into the hands of a tiny minority—the 
income of the richest prince (Butera) equalled one-tenth of the national 
revenue, or so it was reckoned in 1810. He was often forced to live in the 
open, no matter how inclement the weather, or to return to his village late at 
night, since his place of work was so far from his home. The peasant was ill- 
clothed, ill-housed, very close to starvation, burdened by all sorts of dues and 
taxes, ignorant of modern methods of farming, short of capital and clinging 
desperately and obstinately to outdated customs. The Scots landowner Gould 
Francis Leckie, who at the end of the eighteenth century had farmed land 
round Syracuse, had endeavored to introduce new farming methods, but 
according to the traveller John Galt, who visited Sicily in 1810, few had 
followed his example.'% 
Though once the granary of the Roman Empire, Sicily by the start of the 
nineteenth century could scarcely produce enough to feed itself. Only a third 
of the land was cultivated and this so badly that it produced no more than a 
third of what it might have. The main reasons for the shortage of corn lay in 
the increased population, which by 1800 was half as much again what it had 
been in 1700, and in a shift in the population from the country areas to the 
towns.!4 But the inefficiency of the system by which the corn was marketed, 
as well as the unwillingness of cultivators and landlords to undertake agri- 
cultural improvements that would have ensured increased production and 
have maintained an export trade, was also a major contributory factor. The 
growing of greater quantities of cereal was not encouraged by government 
taxes on the export of corn and the consumption of flour. And the strict 
control of export licences benefited only the merchants of corn who “played 
the market” and manipulated prices. Peter Brydone, in his tour through 

<<<PDFPAGE 42>>>
38 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Sicily made in 1770, remarked how the duties on the export of wheat that he 
described as “exorbitant” had served to make corn a drug on the market and 
had been responsible for the ruin of farmers.1° Of the sum total of Sicily’s 
harvest, a third was bought by the government at a price it fixed for its own 
convenience, and the rest was sold to monopolist corporations. The latter, 
not the market, controlled the price, and price controls led inevitably to a 
black market and to the bribery of officials. 1© 
There were other reasons for the decline of the grain trade and for a falling 
off in production. The kind of hard grain that was grown in Sicily could not 
compete with the cheaper-priced soft grain that was able to be grown in 
milder climates. The discontinuance of granting long leases led to the re- 
moval of any incentive to improve the land or to use modern methods. Land 
was overcropped and exhausted, while the profits accruing to the landlords 
were not invested in agriculture but frittered away in conspicuous consump- 
tion by absentee landlords who lived in Palermo. Lack of roads and the high 
cost of transport also discouraged would-be improvers of the backward state 
of Sicilian farming, while the onset of the French revolutionary wars had 
dislocated all maritime trade.!7 
The plight of Sicilian agriculture had been made worse in recent times by a 
drought that had lasted for the past six years, and at the time that the British 
arrived, the appalling prospect of famine was looming. It seemed to the 
English ironical that in neighboring and barren Malta the markets were well 
supplied with corn, due to good management by the Governor Ball, while in 
Sicily there was starvation: “a glaring proof (Hugh Elliot wrote) of the . 
. 
. 
incapacity of this government,”!8 though the reasons were more complex 
than Elliot realized. 
There was very little manufacturing, although linen was made at Cal- 
tanisetta and silk was woven in Messina and Catania; and there was very little 
internal trade, not only because of the mountainous country, but also because 
roads and bridges were lacking and because there were so many local tolls. 
Even in the middle of the nineteenth century it cost more to carry goods to 
Palermo from the interior of the island than it did to transport them from 
Sicily to places as far off as Paris or London. The external trade of Sicily was 
closely linked to the mainland of Italy and to central and northern Europe. 
The war therefore was initially to have a harmful effect on this trade, and the 
loss of markets in France and Switzerland had serious results for silk produc- 
tion in the provinces of Messina and Catania.19 
Another feature of Sicily’s backwardness was its wholly corrupt judicial 
system, with a complexity of different laws seemingly designed to produce 
the maximum confusion. Because of delays in the dispensing of justice, 
people no longer looked to the courts but preferred the protection of a 
powerful noble. Judges were ignorant or subject to court pressure, torture 

<<<PDFPAGE 43>>>
Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
39 
was used to extract confessions, and orders could be obtained from the king 
for proscriptions, confiscations, and arbitrary arrests (much in the manner of 
lettres de cachet during the ancien régime in France) to satisfy some private 
vendetta or enrich the magistrate involved.?° 
The vast majority of Sicilians in a population of a million and a half were 
either peasants or poor townspeople; Palermo’s population numbered 
200,000 and absorbed most of the wealth of the country. There was much 
jealousy of the capital on the part of towns like Catania and Messina, and 
Palermo’s claims to jurisdictions were challenged by its principal rival, Mes- 
sina. There was practically no middle class, but numerous clergy and a few 
thousand nobles. In what was still in many ways a feudal society, the Sicilian 
nobility controlled the island, some of its members being extremely rich. In 
fact, as a class, the nobility were far more wealthy than was the crown, 
holding in towns and lands in the island three times as much as the king. 
Even so, the greater part of the noble families was heavily in debt. It was said 
that it was almost as difficult to find a nobleman out of debt as it was to find 
one who was well-informed, and though the revenues of a few families were 
nominally very great, these were the families that were most in debt. This 
explains why the nobles as a class were eager, when a new constitution was 
drafted, as it was in 1812, to be rid of their feudal obligations to the crown, 
while insisting on being paid compensation for the extinction of their feudal 
rights over the peasants. They possessed the means to oppress the poor 
through the exaction of these feudal rights and enjoyed all sorts of privileges 
and jurisdictions in both town and country. Under the reforming viceroy 
Caracciolo, toward the end of the eighteenth century, enlightened reforms 
had been set in train to restrict the nobles’ privileges, put an end to monopo- 
lies, and help the peasants to get credit more easily. But the peasants were 
unwilling to change their ways, and the abolition of villeinage merely created 
landless laborers.2! In any case, the French Revolution brought all en- 
lightened reforms to a halt. Drummond, the British minister at Palermo, 
writing in the spring of 1807, compared the state of Sicily to that of England 
under the Plantagenets, even if the nobles did not keep private armies.?? In 
the view of the Scotsman Francis Leckie, the nobles as a class were “ignorant 
beyond belief” and were very largely responsible for the “abject wretchedness 
of the people.””4 
The Sicilian parliament, which was summoned to meet only once in four 
years, consisted of three bracci or estates of the realm: militare or noble, 
ecclesiastico or clerical, and demaniale or communes of the royal domain. Its 
powers were limited to granting donativi (the name implying gifts not taxes) 
to supplement the ordinary income of the crown, present petitions for redress 
of grievances, and elect a body of royal nominees whose task was to collect 
the taxes and administer the laws between sessions of parliament. In the 

<<<PDFPAGE 44>>>
40 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
braccio of peers, a nobleman had as many votes as he had feudal estates, and 
Prince Butera with his nine towns, over which he exercised jurisdiction, was 
therefore entitled to no less than nine votes in the Sicilian parliament. 
The fiscal system was quite inequitable, with its burdens falling not on 
luxuries but on articles of daily consumption. There was no register of land 
and taxes on property were based on self-assessments, while the nobles 
resisted strenuously any attempts to survey their lands.24 The king had been 
forced by his need for money to sell annuities secured on the customs to 
monopolistic corporations, yet his court, while in Sicily, made no attempt to 
live in any way economically. Neapolitan and French émigrés either occupied 
the posts at court or drew state pensions at Sicilian expense—they were a host 
of parasites, some far from reputable, and a cause of much bitterness among 
native Sicilians.*° The king foolishly, though perhaps understandably, in 
order to uphold his independence tried to maintain an army and navy as well 
as diplomatic representation at all the principal courts of Europe, something 
that the slender royal revenues, even when bolstered by British subsidies, 
found it extremely hard to finance. 
King Ferdinand, in whose person was united sovereignty over the two 
kingdoms of Naples and of Sicily, spent very little of his time at court, 
preferring the retired life of a country gentleman with sporting tastes. He had 
a passion for shooting and fishing, and showed little interest in the business 
of government, which he was glad to leave to the queen. Although lacking in 
formal education, he was neither a dolt nor a simpleton, possessing a certain 
native shrewdness that he used in his dealings with the British. He was 
moody, extremely obstinate, and had fixed ideas about his royal prerogatives 
that were similar to those of the queen. His common touch and earthy 
bonhomie commended him to the Naples lazzaroni who had nicknamed him 
“Nasone” for obvious reasons, but underneath he remained a despot, and a 
vindictive one at that.2© One Frenchman has described him as being popu- 
lacier plutot que populaire (common rather than popular), though when he 
first arrived in Palermo the people welcomed him very warmly. Only when 
they came to realize that he looked on Sicily merely as a place for furnishing 
him with the means by which he could pay his court and recover Naples did 
their attitude toward him change. For on one subject he was singleminded— 
the recovery of his Neapolitan throne. As he was to write in 1814: “I will 
never renounce what God has given me and my father left me and which in 
justice belongs to me and also to my successors, nor ever agree to accept 
compensation.”*7 Even then it was the queen and ministers rather than the 
king himself who attracted unpopularity. 
The queen of Naples, Maria-Carolina, has been portrayed so often in print 
that her character must be familiar to most people. A strange, contradictory, 
and pathetic person, she was a compound of restless energy, passion, charm, 
and utter ruthlessness, swayed by every momentary occurrence or the most 

<<<PDFPAGE 45>>>
Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
4] 
casual and idle rumor. Robert Fagan, British consul general in Palermo and a 
man to whom she unburdened herself, described her as “either exhilarated to 
excess or engulfed in a chaos of imaginary and gigantic evils.”28 
She had all the pride of her Hapsburg mother, the formidable Empress 
Maria-Theresa, and the political amorality of her wretched sister, the French 
Queen Marie-Antoinette. General Moore, first deputy and then commander 
of the British force in Sicily in 1807, decided in the end that she was not 
really wicked, but only badly guided by those about her. It was her misfor- 
tune, in his opinion, to feel that she must meddle in public affairs for which 
she had no capacity.2? Admiral Collingwood, who commanded the fleet in 
the Mediterranean from 1805 to 1810 and had some dealings with the 
queen, shared Moore’s views to a large extent. “She would be thought a deep 
politician, yet all her schemes miscarry. She broods over what is impracticable 
with her little means, and frets herself continually that others are not as dim- 
sighted as herself.”3° She chose to be surrounded by a network of spies and 
employed agents all over Italy, as well as maintaining in her pay chiefs of the 
partisans or masse (often no more than brigand bands) in the mountains of 
Calabria and the Abruzzi. It was estimated that she spent a million and a half 
ducats in maintaining this system of spies and informers, many of whom 
proved double agents in the pay of Saliceti, the chief of police in Naples. But 
all her intrigues in Naples, Rome, Tuscany, and Genoa, London, St. Pe- 
tersburg, and Vienna in the end had very little effect. She did exercise some 
influence, though not as much as was once thought, in Sicily, over the king 
and her sons. By 1806 she had really become in many ways a tragic figure, 
worn out by personal misfortune, childbearing, and miscarriages, which had 
driven her to take opium daily. She loathed Sicily and its inhabitants, talked 
sometimes of selling the island, and longed only to return to Naples, the 
recovery of which was her main preoccupation. In the winter of 1798 she had 
described Palermo as being “poverty-striken, and peopled by rogues, where 
the price of everything is exorbitant and the climate depressing,” and she 
never altered this initial opinion. Of the Sicilians themselves she wrote, “the 
priests are completely corrupted, the people savage, the nobles of doubtful 
loyalty. 
. 
. 
. I ought not to govern Sicilians I hate them and, if they were as 
honest as I am, the King and the Hereditary Prince would say the same, for 
they think the same.” She in turn was detested in Sicily and was so unpopular 
that, when her son the hereditary prince was seriously ill (possibly from food 
poisoning), it was widely rumored that the queen had poisoned him in order 
to recover her influence.3! She, who had been devoted to the British in the 
days of Nelson and Emma Hamilton, was now convinced that they were only 
concerned to keep Sicily for themselves and had no real interest in recovering 
Naples. The only Englishmen she liked were those who were ready to flatter 
her and forward her schemes for campaigns on the mainland for the recovery 
of the kingdom of Naples—Admirals Nelson and Sidney Smith and, for a 

<<<PDFPAGE 46>>>
42 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
time, General John Stuart; she liked the British ministers at Palermo, Sir 
William Hamilton, William Drummond and, for a few years, Hugh Elliot, 
and the consul general, Robert Fagan. She hated Hamilton’s successor Paget, 
the two generals, Fox and Moore, and particularly Lord William Bentinck, 
who was to be responsible for her enforced exile from Sicily, so that she was 
later led to declare that when she saw an Englishman she felt the guillotine on 
her neck. Even though she intensely disliked the French, seeing them always 
as the murderers of her sister and oppressors of all monarchies, she was quite 
prepared to intrigue with them, if only to get rid of the British. She loathed 
the ideas of the French Revolution and had no love for the Bonapartes, 
though the personality of Napoleon had an awful fascination for her. She 
told her confidant the Marquis de Gallo that she considered Napoleon “the 
greatest man of the century” and that for him, as a person, she had “a really 
deep respect.” She said she hoped his schemes would fail, but wished him 
personal glory and good fortune, so long as they were not “at our expense.”3 
She was quite unscrupulous in her methods, and Joseph Bonaparte believed 
not only that had she placed a price on his head, but that she had tried to have 
a plague-ridden ship driven onto the coast of Naples. In the end she became 
the scapegoat for everything that went wrong in Sicily, although it is not 
difficult to understand the desire of the British to see the last of her. 
Her remaining children (only six remained of the seventeen to whom she 
had given birth) were married into Europe’s royal families—her daughters to 
the Hapsburg Emperor Francis, the Spanish Prince of Asturias, the brother 
of the king of Sardinia (in 1807), and the duke of Orleans (in 1809), while 
her eldest son, the hereditary prince, found a second wife in the Spanish 
Infanta. The hereditary prince and her youngest son Leopold (who was 
completely dominated by his mother) and her two then-unmarried daughters 
(Maria-Amelia and Maria-Christine) all accompanied the court to Sicily. 
(Both the empress of Austria and the princess of Asturias were dead before 
the end of 1807.) 
Francis, the hereditary prince, was at the age of thirty-five still largely 
under parental influence. Interested like his father almost solely in country 
pursuits, he found himself after 1810 compelled to play a political role. 
Though he seemed to go along with the British when appointed by his father 
as vicar general, he had little real sympathy with their views on Sicily and 
remained a Neapolitan at heart. 
As to ministers and court officials, the man who wielded the greatest 
influence when the British first became concerned with Sicily was the Anglo- 
phile Sir John Acton, a former favorite of the queen, although he had lost her 
favor completely. His eventual retirement was due, however, as much to old 
age and growing incapacity as to the jealousy of the queen. For many years he 
had been the real directing hand in Naples. He was not, in the opinion of 
William Drummond who briefly succeeded Paget as envoy, a very profound 

<<<PDFPAGE 47>>>
Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
43 
politician, and one who was happy to wait on events, but nevertheless the 
only man who in Drummond’s words could hold the helm “of a crazy vessel, 
in very stormy times.”33 Forced in May 1804 to withdraw to Palermo by 
pressure from Napoleon, he continued to advise the king from Sicily and be 
sent diplomatic correspondence. When the royal family were once again 
forced to leave Naples and flee to Palermo, Acton regained for a short time 
his former dominant position, since his rival at court, the Count Damas, was 
blamed for the rout of the army of Naples. His sudden return to power, 
however, lasted a matter of less than four months, and he finally retired in 
June 1806, having become a sort of Polonius.## 
The man chosen to take his place, the Marquis Circello, was not a strong 
character. The British first thought that he was on their side, but they soon 
realized he was no match for the queen and was incapable of influencing royal 
policy. The court adopted measures without his knowledge, and his sense of 
loyalty toward the crown forced him to accept them without any protest. 
William Drummond thought little of his abilities—“no minister of foreign 
affairs was more foreign to those affairs than he”; while Lord William 
Bentinck, a few years later, contrived to have him removed from office for 
having “entirely despotic” principles.° 
The queen surrounded herself at Palermo with a group of advisers who 
were wholly non-Sicilian: Tatischeff, the Russian minister until 1808, Ka- 
unitz, the Austrian minister until 1810, Roger Count de Damas, the French 
émigré (though he left Sicily in 1806), Corsicans who were anti- Bonapartist, 
and Neapolitans like Circello, and Medici, the minister of finance, perhaps 
her most able and loyal servant (despite his dubious prior career as a sus- 
pected Jacobin), Prince Moliterno (of whom more later), and the young and 
romantic Prince Canosa, the so-called “Don Quixote of reaction,” whom she 
dispatched to the island of Ponza to try and raise a rebellion in Naples. 
She was also surrounded by humbler men, some of them near-criminals, 
the most notorious among whom were Colonel Carbone and Marquis Cas- 
trone.3 The only others who counted for something in a court dominated by 
Neapolitans and French were the Duke of Ascoli, an agent of the king, and 
the Marquis Saint Clair, the queen’s secretary and (so gossip had it) her secret 
lover. 
Ascoli was the king’s private secretary and had considerable influence with 
him, partly because he was a good sportsman and shared the king’s mania for 
shooting and fishing. Ascoli did not like Sicilians any more than he liked the 
British. He was in turn disliked by the queen, who was jealous of anyone 
who challenged her influence. Ascoli had been head of the police in Naples, 
where he gained an unsavory reputation for brutality and the abuse of power. 
In Sicily he supported the king in his role as unchallenged sovereign and 
urged him in 1811-12 to resist the demands being made on him by the 
British for constitutional and administrative reform, to the extent even of 

<<<PDFPAGE 48>>>
44 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
abdicating and seeking refuge at some foreign court. He favored taking 
extreme measures, even if this meant civil war or playing the game Napoleon 
wanted, rather than yielding to British pressure, though the king did not 
accept his advice. The British eventually forced him to leave and go into exile 
in Sardinia, but for a time he was virtual viceroy.37 
Castrone was another undesirable character, the protégé and confidant of 
the queen. He was the chief of police in Palermo and controlled the network 
of spies and agents with whom the queen surrounded herself, maintaining 
her contacts with mainland Italy and particularly with the kingdom of 
Naples. Together with the queen he ran a lucrative business in privateering 
and piracy, the profits from which went to maintain this whole system of 
informers and agents.3® While Castrone operated from Palermo, Carbone 
based himself on Messina, was instrumental in organizing flying columns of 
the Calabrian masse from 1806 to 1809, and collaborated with the English 
commanders. But he acted also as a spy on the English and reported all he 
heard back to the court, even though his truthfulness was profoundly sus- 
pect. He was appointed by the British to be head of their military secret 
service and was so well regarded by senior officers that in 1815 he was 
awarded a pension for life by the British government, on the recommenda- 
tion of Lord William Bentinck.3? 
The Marquis Saint Clair, an ex-French guards officer, possessed good looks 
but no real talent. Alquier, the French minister in Naples, had described him 
as less than a mediocrity. Though he was hated by the British as the 
representative of the pro-French faction, he hardly deserved the execration. 
Appointed tutor to Prince Leopold, he was merely the lap dog of the queen, 
and the senior posts he filled in the army gave him status but no effective 
power. He was honest and loyal to his mistress, and accompanied her when 
she went into exile.4° 
Another favorite of the queen was the colorful condottiere Prince Mo- 
literno, a dashing type of professional soldier, adventurous, physically brave, 
but lacking any political sense. The queen, who was herself a romantic, fell in 
easily with his wild schemes for the reconquest of the kingdom of Naples, 
and at one time of the whole of Italy. Even when the king was forced to 
concede the overall command of all forces in Sicily to a British officer, Lord 
William Bentinck, the court still attempted, unsuccessfully, to appoint Mo- 
literno to a similar post. His military activities, as well as those he carried out 
as a double agent in correspondence with the French, made him yet another 
of those at court who aroused in the British the deepest suspicions of 
treachery or at least bad faith.4! 
Relations between the British in Sicily and the court at Palermo grew 
increasingly strained during the first five years of occupation, and eventually 
ended in the British government agreeing to active interference—something 
that most British cabinet ministers had studied studiously to avoid. 

<<<PDFPAGE 49>>>
3 
Problems of Defense in the Early Years of 
Occupation 
Glaser 1806 and 1807 the prospect of the invasion of Sicily by a 
French army was a very real one. Napoleon did not cease to impress on 
his brother, now seated on the throne of Naples, the importance of taking 
Sicily. He could not tolerate that on Italy’s doorstep there should remain 
(and in English hands) a smugglers’ base, a refuge for deserters, a standing 
threat to the stability of his empire in Naples and elsewhere in Italy, and what 
he described as “an impassable barrier” to communications with the Levant. 
Only after the Treaty of Tilsit, signed in July 1807, which secured him Corfu 
and the Adriatic, did Napoleon lose interest in capturing the island. Sicily in 
theory remained desirable, if only to safeguard his base in Corfu, but from 
this point on he regarded it as of only secondary importance. Once he became 
committed to his plan for absorbing Spain and Portugal, Sicily was seen by 
him merely as a trap where British forces could be kept immobile that might 
otherwise oppose him in the peninsula. 
But in 1806 he could not wait to have news of the capture of Sicily. “I 
would rather,” he told Joseph, “a ten years war than leave your kingdom 
incomplete and Sicily an unsettled question.”! Both he and Joseph had 
counted on making a quick dash across the straits of Messina in the wake of 
the routed army of Damas, and they had only been frustrated in this by 
Craig, who had taken away all the boats available as well as the guns from the 
coastal batteries. Joseph then insisted that he needed an army of no less than 
25,000 men if ever a crossing was to succeed, a figure Napoleon considered 
ridiculous. According to the latter, a force of 10,000 or at the most 15,000 
was all that could reasonably be required. Joseph had, so Napoleon told him, 
15,000 more troops than he needed, and if he still could not take Sicily, not 
to mention the fortress of Gaeta whose garrison under the Prince of Hesse 
still held out against the French, then he would never be able to do so, even if 
given 100,000 men.? 
Bonapartist plans for Sicily suffered a setback in July, when General 
Stuart’s army landed in Calabria and won an impressive victory at Maida. But 
with Stuart’s withdrawal shortly after and the fall of Gaeta in the autumn, 
preparations for the capture of the island were resumed. Nothing could be 
45 

<<<PDFPAGE 50>>>
46 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
done immediately, for the masse insurrection had to be crushed and the 
country cleared of brigand bands, but this was achieved by the spring of 
1807. Even then, there still remained the British-held fortresses of Scilla and 
Reggio. These places the British had garrisoned at the time of their with- 
drawal following Maida, and their capture remained a precondition for any 
successful invasion of Sicily. Napoleon continued to pester Joseph 
throughout the summer and autumn of 1807 for their immediate reduction, 
finally issuing him a personal order to take them. By March 1808 they had 
both fallen and Sicily was once again faced with the prospect of invasion.? 
When General Craig had arrived in Sicily in February 1806 he had found 
the island largely defenseless. On its long coastline, with its multiplicity of 
roadsteads, small bays, and open beaches, an enemy force could land very 
easily; and its main harbors, save for Messina, were lacking in the necessary 
means to defend them—artillery, stores, and also men. Colonel Smith had 
made this apparent in his report of the previous October when he stated that 
the island as a whole could only be defended by its inhabitants. The regular 
forces at the king’s disposal were supposed to number 9,000 or thereabouts, 
but their effective strength, it transpired, was not much more than a third of 
this figure, and they were for the most part in very poor shape. As to the 
militia, it proved nonexistent for all practical purposes, a force without either 
clothes or pay or any sort of organization. Meanwhile Sicily remained depen- 
dent on Malta for guns and ammunition.* Apart from the northeastern strip 
of the island occupied by the forces of Craig, its safety, as Elliot impressed on 
Collingwood, was wholly in the hands of the British navy, and the extent of 
the latter’s protection would sway the loyalty of the Sicilians. Collingwood 
did in fact provide a substantial squadron to guard Sicily and keep watch on 
the enemy-held ports in the Tyrrenhian and Adriatic—four ships-of-the-line, 
eight frigates, and three sloops—while a sizeable flotilla of gunboats and 
galleys, including Neapolitan gunboats, was based on Messina to cover the 
straits. The formation of the Sicilian flotilla was a most important contribu- 
tion to the effective defense of Sicily, since it was small craft that were needed 
in the narrow waters that separated Sicily from Calabria. It was manned by 
Sicilian volunteers who were only too willing to serve in vessels that flew the 
British flag, not the Neapolitan one.© What remained of the Neapolitan navy 
was of very little immediate assistance, apart from the gunboats already 
mentioned—one ship-of-the-line and some frigates and sloops, but so ne- 
glected through lack of money they were little better than useless hulks. 
Later, though not until 1809, these ships were repaired at British expense in 
the naval dockyards at Gibraltar and Malta. 
Lack of money in the next few years, despite a large subsidy paid by the 
British, continued to keep the king’s regular army in a wretched state of 
inefficiency. It was badly trained and, in General Moore’s view, did not 
possess a serviceable musket. Recruitment was a difficult problem because of 

<<<PDFPAGE 51>>>
Problems of Defense in the Early Years of Occupation 
47 
the inadequate rewards that were offered. The queen tried to enlist the masse 
and form them into regular units, but these people resented discipline. 
Criminals and Italian deserters from the French army were accepted as 
recruits, and the king ordered all means short of force, though he dared not 
use conscription, to encourage enlistment. General Fox found the Neapolitan 
troops totally undependable and despised by the masse and the people of 
Sicily. He regretted that the more reliable Sicilians were not kept apart from 
the Neapolitans, but the court “by the fatality that attends almost all their 
measures” made no attempt to separate them, and they lost all pride and 
esprit de corps.” 
After the disaster at Mileto at the end of May 1807, when 6,000 men 
under the Prince of Hesse met with humiliating defeat, a rather more serious 
attempt was made to organize the royal army. The king and queen, with 
some reluctance, allowed its inspection by British generals, who were not 
impressed by what they found. Not only was the discipline poor—the officers 
discontented, the soldiers unpaid, pawning or selling their arms or desert- 
ing—but the higher command was unimpressive. Even Count Damas, favor- 
ite of the queen and certainly no lover of the British, was more damning in 
his verdict on the latter than any British general: “Hesse is a loyal and brave 
man, but very far from intelligent. Bourcard does not want to leave his 
beloved Sicily; baron Acton [brother of Sir John] is merely another edition of 
Hesse, while Cattolica is a fool. That is all I can say. In fact we have 
nobody.”8 
In 1806 attempts were made to raise a genuine force of militia, the court 
issuing an edict in May to enroll a force of 24,000. Yet a year later Colonel 
Bunbury, quartermaster general and chief of staff, reckoned that there was 
not a single militiaman in the whole of the district the British occupied. In 
1808 Cattolica brought forward a plan to enlist 40,000 Sicilians, raised and 
commanded by local landowners, but this was opposed by the queen and the 
Neapolitans. The British command had no faith in the scheme and disap- 
proved of it anyway as discouraging regular enlistment. There was already 
jealousy between the regulars and the volunteers over the question of rank 
and command, and there was no provision for unified control, let alone 
overall command by the British. In June 1809 there were reckoned to be a 
maximum of 1,500 militiamen in the whole of the island, outside Palermo, 
who were trained dnd equipped for general service. And the corps at Palermo 
the British considered to be fit for little save ceremonial occasions. The court 
did agree to the British embodying two battalions of Sicilian militia, but 
nothing ever came of this. At Augusta not a man turned up, and at Milazzo 
the 380 who did appear were of such poor quality (having been crimped or 
dragooned into joining) that they had to be instantly discharged.? 
All this meant that Sicily’s defenses continued to rest on the British alone, 
apart from any help from the peasants whom the court out of fear refused to 

<<<PDFPAGE 52>>>
48 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
arm. Initially Craig had had to strip Malta in order to raise the strength of his 
force, but on his return soon after to England (giving up his command on 
grounds of ill-health) he persuaded the British ministers to reinforce the 
Sicily garrison. Guns and gun-carriages arrived, as well as two battalions of 
infantry, and General John Stuart, who succeeded Craig, was able to recruit 
500 Sicilians, paid and clothed by the British government and officered 
largely not by Sicilians (to Colonel Bunbury’s relief) but by members of the 
Corsican corps or by foreign regiments. By the early summer of 1806 Stuart 
had a force of 7,500 holding a defense line in northeast Sicily, which 
stretched from Milazzo in the north through Faro and Messina as far south as 
Taormina. The king then allowed him to extend his command further south 
to Cape Passaro to include the ports of Augusta and Syracuse, which, on the 
insistence of Collingwood, were to be garrisoned by British troops.!° Even 
so, the island enjoyed a security that was only relative. Moore, writing in 
1807, took a typically pessimistic view of the prospects of defending it 
successfully. He thought it required 12,000 more troops, to include cavalry 
and artillery, in addition to the existing garrison, which then amounted to 
14,000. More brigs, cutters, and small craft were needed, while the fortresses 
that were far too numerous but because they existed had to be manned were 
(save for ammunition) completely lacking in the means to resist an attack for 
long.14 
The glaring defect in these Sicilian defenses did not however prevent the 
island from being used for offensive purposes during the summer of 1806. 
The driving force behind the offensive was the British Admiral Sidney Smith, 
recently appointed commander of the fleet in the central Mediterranean. 
Pushing, vain, and irresponsible, the admiral arrived with a great reputation. 
Everyone had heard of his exploits, for he had a great gift for self-publiciza- 
tion: his daring raids on the French coast, his dramatic escape from the 
Temple prison, his triumphant relief of St. Jean d’Acre. A spoilt child of 
fortune, brave, dashing, seductive, he was (in the words of Jacques Ram- 
baud) “only too ready to lend an ear to the flattery of an Italian court and 
become the champion of a distraught queen.”!? The latter, delighted to 
discover what she fondly imagined was another Nelson, played on Smith’s 
obvious vanity, and decided, as she said, “to work on his feelings.”!3 On 
pleas from her, he took stores and ammunition to the garrison of besieged 
Gaeta, though without consulting anyone else. This infuriated Elliot, who 
prided himself that he alone could approach Acton and so the court.14 
Smith raided the Calabrian coast, capturing guns and inciting revolt. He 
took Capri, got Stuart to garrison it, and then persuaded him to cooperate in 
a scheme to conquer the whole of Calabria. In fact the object of the expedi- 
tion, which Stuart led with 5,000 troops who were landed in the Gulf of St. 
Euphemia, was to force the French from the toe of Italy, destroy their supply 
dumps, guns, and magazines, and so pre-empt an invasion of Sicily. In this 

<<<PDFPAGE 53>>>
Admiral Sir William Sidney Smith, engraved by W. Say. (Courtesy of the British 
Museum, London.) 
- 

<<<PDFPAGE 54>>>
Major-General Sir John Stuart, engraved by A. Cardon. (Courtesy of the British 
Museum, London.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 55>>>
Problems of Defense in the Early Years of Occupation 
51 
Stuart was entirely successful, though his victory at Maida in July owed more 
to the action of his subordinates than to brilliance of leadership on his part. 
The French lost nearly 4,000 men and at Crotone, to which the British sent 
two regiments round by sea, they lost all their guns and warlike stores, 
accumulated for use against Sicily, as well as their army’s sick and wounded 
that General Régnier had left behind. 
Wisely refusing to pursue the French army with the limited force at his 
command and wisely refusing to commit a force of 1,000 men to reinforce 
Gaeta (a fortress that was on the point of falling), Stuart contented himself 
with capturing the strongpoints of Reggio and Scilla, the two places the 
French must hold before embarking on an invasion of Sicily. It should be 
remembered that in doing all this he had acted entirely without instructions, 
his only orders from London being to safeguard Sicily against attack.!° 
During the course of these operations, Sidney Smith had obtained from 
Ferdinand a commission to act as the viceroy of Calabria, with command of 
all the king’s forces there, and this not unnaturally had annoyed Stuart. The 
latter through Elliot and Acton made strong representations to the court and 
as a result Smith had to step down and accept Stuart as commander-in- 
chief.!° But he did succeed in involving Stuart in schemes, which were really 
those of the queen, for raising the Calabrian masse. Stuart was unwisely 
persuaded to issue an inflammatory proclamation inciting the Calabrians to 
rise, an action that the ministry in London found a source of some embarrass- 
ment. Stuart, though acclaimed for his victory and rewarded by being made a 
Knight Commander of the Bath, was all the same rebuked (although mildly) 
for the indiscretion of his proclamation. The government, he was told, could 
not guarantee indefinite protection for the people of Calabria, and in taking 
his action he should first have obtained the approval of the British Minister 
Elliot.!7 Stuart shortly afterward resigned out of pique at being passed over 
for command and was replaced by General Henry Fox, the younger brother 
of the statesman, while General John Moore was sent out to act as Fox’s 
deputy and second-in-command. Henry Fox was a sick man and known by 
the ministers to be such, so his reliance on John Moore, where decisions or 
actions were required, was something that was accepted in London. 
Meanwhile Sidney Smith, in the words of Bunbury, “always panting for 
distinction 
. 
. 
. restlessly active”!8 and bursting with enthusiasm, spread his 
ships and small craft along the coast as far north as the bay of Naples, 
scattering his proclamations to revolt. Moore blamed him, perhaps unfairly, 
for concentrating on these activities rather than trying to relieve Gaeta, and 
for taking credit for capturing towns that had either already been abandoned 
or must have fallen to the-British army as it fell back on Scilla and Reggio. 
Smith kept pressing Elliot and Fox for more money and more men, urging 
that these were all that were needed to drive the French out from the 
kingdom of Naples. Moore, who was the real driving force behind the less 

<<<PDFPAGE 56>>>
VEN ices TY 
ENOL 
® GENOA 
pov 
ITALY, SICILY 
she oS nace 
and surrounds 
Viareggio. = 
1806-1815 
and PROCIDAD 
fa) 
Maidae 
Mileto’e 
TD FD 
PALEROON 
pater 
sai 
i 
WS 
Scale in Miles 
100 

<<<PDFPAGE 57>>>
Problems of Defense in the Early Years of Occupation 
DS 
decisive and ailing Fox, had to point out that it was not the intention of the 
British command to tie up its forces in Calabria, more so since the French 
had been reinforced. The Calabrians anyway were hopelessly divided, with 
property owners siding with the French and the masse intent on rapine and 
murder. The main object of the British forces must remain the defense of 
Sicily, and the navy’s small craft ought to be used not in conducting futile 
raids but in intercepting the coastal traffic. 
Moore was sent by Fox to investigate what Sidney Smith was really doing, 
and, having landed at various points, he came to the conclusion Smith’s ideas 
were absurd. Moore found the people frightened and disheartened, ready to 
hoist, as danger dictated, either the Bourbon or republican flag and occupied 
only in plundering or satisfying some private vengeance. He thought it not 
only an act of cruelty but one unbecoming to the British name to encourage 
this kind of hopeless insurrection unless the British intended to stay. On 
behalf of Fox he therefore told Smith to abstain from any further promises of 
British assistance to chiefs of the masse; Fox alone must now be responsible 
for help afforded to the Calabrians.!? Smith however remained firm in his 
conviction of the rightness of his strategy and that Sicily “could not be 
defended militarily or maintained politically without Calabria as a téte du pont 
and as a magazine and mart.”?° 
Elliot, who was sensitive on questions affecting protocol and his position 
as minister, wrote home privately to complain of Sidney Smith’s irregular 
behavior: his direct communications with the queen, his importunate re- 
quests for funds, and his misapplication of those funds, granted for the 
purpose of obtaining intelligence.?1 Smith eventually received from the 
Admiralty a mild reproof (though he described it as “most mortifying”) 
,?7 
but he nevertheless remained the queen’s ally in her plans for the reconquest 
of Naples until his posting away the following January. There is no doubt 
that Sidney Smith had found in Stuart a ready collaborator, and the latter’s 
departure meant that the army was no longer prepared to indulge Smith’s 
schemes. Henry Fox wrote home to his brother that Calabria had become for 
Stuart “in a degree his hobby horse” and that he had “in the vagabond massi 
[sic]” a confidence he thought no one else had. Stuart was, in Fox’s opinion, 
not without his share of vanity and he had more confidence in the court than 
Fox had, because Stuart had been misled by its flattery and failed to realize 
how much it was despised.?% 
After defeating the Prussians at Jena in October 1806, Napoleon had 
advanced into Poland but had then been checked and had retired onto 
Warsaw. Russian ministers in foreign courts gave out that the French had 
been defeated, and the court at Palermo, and the queen especially, were only 
too ready to believe this story. In consequence the queen, through Circello, 
pressed hard for another expedition to be dispatched to mainland Italy, 
suggesting that this was desirable, if only for political reasons. If a general 

<<<PDFPAGE 58>>>
OL 
ee seeiansiomenieeit 
Calabrian brigand. Early nineteenth-century print. ( aut of Mrs. Das Streat- 
field.) 
ssiseontconnnetnnnnton seins nna 
aras oC apete 
» 
Ses 
San SK 
eoraeces 
Sao scam aoms 

<<<PDFPAGE 59>>>
Problems of Defense in the Early Years of Occupation 
55 
Lieutenant-General Henry Edward Fox, engraved by C. Turner. (Courtesy of the 
British Museum, London.) 
peace were concluded, she argued, it might well be on the basis of uti 
possidetis, and of course if the French defeated the Prussians, the British could 
always withdraw to Sicily.?4 But quite apart from the fact that Britain had 
never guaranteed the recovery of Naples, Circello’s proposal was unaccepta- 
ble. As General Fdx explained to his brother, such an expedition was bound 
to call down a superior army of the French, who had ample reserves in the 
north of Italy. Moreover there were few on the mainland who genuinely 
supported the Bourbon cause, and most Calabrians gave their support only 
to the party that appeared the strongest and that promised them the max- 
imum personal gain. To send a force to Italy now would divide the army in 
Sicily, weaken the defenses of that island, and prevent a decisive blow being 
struck when the opportunity eventually offered. He regarded the plan to send 

<<<PDFPAGE 60>>>
56 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Hesse to Naples with an army of 8,000 royal troops to cooperate with a 
British army (even supposing a force of that size could be raised at that time 
in Sicily) as both “chimerical and absurd.” Masséna, he reckoned, was far too 
experienced to make the mistake of Régnier at Maida, and anyway he was so 
strongly positioned, he could choose freely which force to attack.?° 
Two months earlier, Admiral Collingwood had already voiced very similar 
views. Writing to Elliot in July, he had expressed considerable skepticism 
about the wisdom of capturing Capri, an island without either a port or a 
roadstead, which could hardly be reckoned to be of much use in preventing 
the passage of coastal traffic. As for an expedition to Naples, he regarded it as 
“the vainest dream that ever entered the imagination of a woman”: 
When they [the Bourbons] 
possessed it, with all the resources of the 
country at their command, with 
the (professed at least) loyalty of an armed 
people, and the army of the allies at their head, it was abandoned as 
untenable; and now that the country is disarmed ... and the enemy 
possessing every place of strength, on what foundation can the hope of 
success be built?? 
Even the fall of Gaeta fortress Collingwood considered no bad thing, all 
attempts to support its resistance having taken ships from more useful tasks, 
exhausted Sicily of war stores, and reduced British strength in guns and men. 
Drummond, who had returned to Sicily in February 1807 to take up once 
again the post he had relinquished in 1803—Fox, since Elliot’s departure, 
having filled in both as minister at Palermo and military commander—was 
also convinced, at least initially, that the time was not ripe for invading Italy, 
and took offense at Circello’s attitude.?” But the queen was not to be put off 
so easily, even if it meant an expedition consisting only of Neapolitans, and 
Fox discovered that without any notice the royal troops in the British area 
had been withdrawn from his command.?8 

<<<PDFPAGE 61>>>
(Courtesy of the National 
Howard. 
Hlingwood, by H 
Admiral Lord Cuthbert Co 
) 
London 
t Gallery, 
oD 
Portra 

<<<PDFPAGE 62>>>
4 
The Court, William Drummond, and the British 
Generals 
deep distrust obtaining between the court at Palermo and the British 
A government, further exacerbated as it was to be by the strained relations 
that soon developed between Drummond and the British generals, became 
apparent in 1806. Negotiations for peace with Napoleon had been con- 
ducted by Charles James Fox, foreign secretary in the Ministry of All the 
Talents, during the months of June and July, and fears were expressed by 
Acton and Circello that the British saw Sicily as expendable; they wanted to 
force the king to exchange it for territory in, perhaps, the Balearics.! It was 
true that the Russian plenipotentiary had agreed to accept such terms from 
the French, but the czar had refused to ratify them, and Britain never agreed 
to them. Drummond was instructed to refute vigorously allegations made in 
Palermo that Britain had neglected Ferdinand’s interests, and to emphasize 
instead that it was her perseverance in standing up for the king’s right to 
choose that had been one of the principal reasons for the failure of peace 
negotiations. Whitbread, while speaking in the House of Commons in 
January 1807, made clear that Fox could only have proceeded on the basis of 
uti posstdetis, and had made the retention of Sicily the sine qua non of any 
peace settlement. Howick, speaking in the same debate, referred to the 
impossibility of Britain ever surrendering Sicily without first obtaining Ferdi- 
nand’s consent, adding with a patriotic flourish that “it would have broken 
the hearts of those brave men who fought for it in the plains of Maida, if it 
could have been given up on any other conditions.” In any case the death of 
Charles Fox, which occurred in September 1806, had ended the peace 
negotiations; but as even he had allowed the garrison to be increased to 
13,000 by the end of July 1806, there was really no question of Britain 
deciding to leave Sicily in any hurry. Sicily (in the words of Professor 
Holland Rose) “was the chief cause of the prolongation of the war, as Malta 
had been of its inception.” 
Instead, the ministry decided to bind the court more closely to her British 
ally by offering it a treaty of alliance. This treaty provided for Sicily’s ports to 
be kept open to British ships, and for Sicily to supply provisions for British 
crews and British troops as well as for the island of Malta. In return, Britain 
agreed to protect the ports of Messina and Augusta, to maintain at least 
58 

<<<PDFPAGE 63>>>
The Court, Drummond, and the Generals 
59 
10,000 troops stationed on the island at her own expense, and to pay a 
subsidy of £300,000 annually, backdated to September 1805. Further provi- 
sions were suggested to the court, but these were most unfavorably received. 
They involved the British guaranteeing to keep 5,000 troops in Sicily in 
peacetime, giving Syracuse, Milazzo, and Augusta the same free-port status 
Messina enjoyed, and granting to British merchants in Sicily the position of 
most-favored nationals.* The court was understandably afraid that the British 
had ideas about annexing Sicily, while Messina was bitterly opposed to 
sharing her privileges with other ports. The hostile manner in which the draft 
treaty embodying these last clauses was rejected by the court caused a 
temporary rift with the British government. Drummond decided to suspend 
the subsidy and wrote back to London for instructions. These instructions, 
drafted in March 1807, were never in fact dispatched to him because of the 
fall of the ministry and its replacement by one led by Portland. They would 
have entailed Britain playing a significant role in governing Sicily, the sort of 
role that she was eventually compelled to adopt in 1811. They would have 
entailed the continued suspension of the subsidy Britain paid to the court and 
ultimately the use of force, were the court not to accept measures designed to 
render it less unpopular, and were aimed at removing what seemed a real 
danger of a discontented people or a disloyal court betraying Sicily to the 
enemy. Strangers obnoxious to Sicilians were to be removed from the royal 
council, Sicilian noblemen were henceforth to be admitted to positions of 
trust, there was to be a unified command under the senior British officer, and 
no post of military importance was to be given to a non-Sicilian, or indeed to 
anybody not approved by the British commander. It was also proposed that 
the British minister should have the power to remove from their posts any 
foreigners suspected of treachery.* 
When Canning took over the Foreign Office, he decided these instructions 
should not be sent and that all that could reasonably be required of the king 
was his confidence and cooperation. But by this time, Drummond, having 
been persuaded that the court’s attitude had radically changed, had already 
renewed the payment of the subsidy. The treaty, without the offending 
clauses, was signed on 23 March 1807, though because of changes in the 
international scene brought about by the Treaty of Tilsit in July, its ratifica- 
tion by the British sovereign was postponed for another fourteen months. 
Drummond had éonvinced himself that because the queen had agreed to 
withdraw from the royal council and Saint Clair had been removed from his 
post, the policy of the court had changed, and that he (Drummond), Cir- 
cello, and the king would henceforth control the conduct of affairs. In 
believing this he was certainly naive, and the generals made it clear that they 
thought so. 
Meanwhile the British government had decided during the winter of 1806 
to send a naval force to Constantinople to support Russia and to frighten the 

<<<PDFPAGE 64>>>
60 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Porte, who, it was thought, was about to yield to French pressure and side 
with Napoleon. Though Britain now possessed in Sicily an army of 20,000 
men, it was felt that because of the court’s dubious loyalty, no substantial 
force could be spared from the island to lend support to the naval squadron— 
a deprivation that had fatal consequences since it resulted in the total failure 
of Duckworth’s expedition to the Dardanelles. Instead it was decided to send 
from Messina a force to seize Alexandria, in order to forestall a possible move 
by Napoleon to recover Egypt.® 
Accordingly 6,000 men, commanded by Brigadier General Fraser, were 
dispatched to capture Alexandria from the Mamelukes, which they did on 20 
March 1807. Fraser was not an experienced commander, and Fox would 
have preferred to send Moore, but decided he could not spare him from 
Sicily. Fraser, in trying to extend his position to include control of the Nile 
delta, suffered two serious military reverses involving the loss of a third of his 
force, and Fox had to send from. Sicily 2,000 reinforcements to make good 
this loss. When the ministry in London was told by Fox that it would require 
16,000 troops, including cavalry, to defend Egypt, it decided Sicily took 
priority. The possession of Alexandria, wrote Windham, had always been 
subordinate to the security of Sicily, and to “the more important object” of 
acting against the French in Italy.” The British troops in Egypt were with- 
drawn, though not until September 1807. 
Meanwhile General Fox had been under strong pressure both from Drum- 
mond, now a spokesman for the court, and from the Russian ambassador 
Tatischeff, to send another army to Italy to relieve the pressure on Britain’s 
allies. Such an expedition would, it was argued, cause a diversion in favor of 
the Russians, who felt threatened in Dalmatia by French forces in Friuli, and 
would meet with little opposition in Naples, which kingdom the French had 
denuded of troops. Now that the army of Napoleon had received a serious 
setback in Poland, the time was ripe, so it was argued, for an assault on Italy.8 
General Fox rejected these arguments. He had already made clear to Drum- 
mond his objections to such an enterprise, drawing attention to the large 
proportion of his army that was now committed to Egypt, to the possibility 
of having to send another force to the Dardanelles, and to the lack of 
dependability of the Neapolitan troops of the king. He doubted the accuracy 
of the information about the strength of French troops in Naples, and the 
French in any case could always draw on a large strategic reserve in the north. 
Anyway of what use was a plan whose secret was bound to be betrayed by the 
queen and her entourage, he asked?? Rebuffed, the court acted on its own, 
and dispatched Hesse’s army to defeat at Mileto. 
The reactions of Fox and Moore to the latter were, predictably, “I told you 
so.” Moore wrote privately to Fox: “Thus has ended Circello’s and the 
Queen’s expedition in the only manner it could reasonably be expected to 
end.” He was sorry that a brave man like Hesse had been employed on what 

<<<PDFPAGE 65>>>
The Court, Drummond, and the Generals 
61 
he called “so bad a corvée,” but “Fools, I believe, never learn—so that we 
cannot hope that those who direct the Sicilian government will profit by this 
check.” And Fox could not resist telling Drummond that the Neapolitan 
cavalry had behaved even worse than their infantry. As for the masse, perhaps 
even the queen would now acknowledge their uselessness—they had not fired 
a shot in the whole campaign, and their vengeance had as usual been directed 
against their defenseless countrymen. 
!° 
Two months later, Fox received from Castlereagh instructions drafted on 
21 May ordering him to prepare to land in Calabria or some other part of 
Italy. This might, in Castlereagh’s opinion, lead on to the conquest of Naples 
and even its permanent occupation, but at worst it would furnish a useful 
diversion and perhaps destroy a French corps as well.!! It was clear that 
Castlereagh, who had been prompted by Drummond, did not realize the size 
of Ferdinand’s army, fondly imagining that it and half the British force (the 
proportion he instructed Fox to hold in readiness) amounted to 20,000 men. 
Fox had to point out his error to him, at the same time emphasizing the poor 
fighting quality of the Neapolitans, as revealed so recently at Mileto. If he 
did, he wrote, take an army to Italy, he would have to leave behind 2,000 
men to secure the fortresses of Messina and Syracuse, and that would give 
him a strength of 8,000 (half the army being still in Egypt) to confront a 
French army of 20,000. He remained without any cavalry and, even if joined 
by the king’s forces, he would still be outnumbered by the French. 1? 
Over plans for yet another expedition (Mileto took place at the end of 
May) and over attitudes toward the court, the disagreement between Drum- 
mond and the generals came to a head in July 1807 when Fox went home and 
the outspoken Moore took over the post of British commander. Ever since he 
had changed his mind over the attitude of the court, Drummond had tried to 
persuade the generals that the French party no longer controlled it, and that 
since the king’s power was limited by noble and corporate privileges, many 
abuses existing in Sicily were outside the power of the king to remedy. He 
was sure the queen’s influence was now minimal, and protested that he 
(Drummond) had been unfairly stigmatized for “weakness, imbecility and 
lack of steadiness.”!3 Fox in his turn had represented to Drummond that the 
recent appointment of the king’s eldest son to be inspector general of the 
royal army and of Saint Clair to be one of his aides certainly did not 
correspond with any loss of power by the queen. As to the barons, Fox was 
unsure whether giving them more power would not be preferable to what he 
characteristically described as “the miserable weak government of the reign- 
ing family.”!4 
Drummond continued to believe that the way to better Sicily’s lot was by a 
reform of the constitution, initiated by the king, and that he (Drummond) 
could use his influence to bring such a reform about. He certainly did not 
want such a change effected by a military coup, a course the generals were 

<<<PDFPAGE 66>>>
by Sir T. Lawrence. (Courtesy of the Na- 
Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore, 
tional Portrait 
) 
Gallery, London 

<<<PDFPAGE 67>>>
The Court, Drummond, and the Generals 
63 
known to favor. “I would desire for many reasons that the seat of legislature 
should rather be a Sicilian parliament than a British camp.”!§ The generals 
favored stopping the subsidies until British demands were met for radical 
reform of Sicilian institutions, but such a recourse, in Drummond’s view, 
would never produce the results desired. He thought the king and queen far 
too proud to yield to menaces of that sort, and meanwhile the royal army 
would fall to pieces through lack of pay.!° 
In March Drummond had visited Messina to try to present his case in 
person, but the generals had given him a chilly reception. Moore had talked a 
little wildly about dispatching the queen to Trieste, and Drummond had 
come to the conclusion that he understood little of Sicilian affairs.!7 Moore 
for his part despised Drummond, whom he thought “the weakest and silliest 
of men,” a “false, unprincipled, mean fellow ... who at first bred all the 
mischief with the queen and who still, as far as he is able, will endeavour to 
foment it.” Moore was certainly not renowned for his tolerance of civilians 
and politicians, and his strictures concerning Drummond recall curious 
echoes of his condemnation twelve years earlier of Sir Gilbert Elliot’s conduct 
in Corsica. Sir Arthur Paget, the diplomat and former minister at Palermo, 
who passed through Sicily in July and who listened to both sides in the 
dispute, concluded that they were irreconcilable. 18 
The navy also was drawn in to the quarrel. Captain Thornborough com- 
manding the squadron, entrusted with the defense of Sicily, was approached 
by the court to convoy to Italy a royal expeditionary force. In private talks he 
had had with Drummond, the latter had appeared to agree with him that 
such an action would only divide his squadron and subject it to unacceptable 
risk. Yet when Thornborough met the queen in the presence of Drummond, 
the latter totally unexpectedly turned round and spoke in support of her case. 
“This sudden change 
. 
. 
. has astonished me,” wrote Thornborough, “at 
present I know not how to act with such a man. 
. 
. 
. [I] am convinced he 
would wish to throw all the blame on the Army and Navy.”!? Drummond 
was certainly devious, and his lack of frankness in dealing with Canning over 
the question of the Spanish regency and Ferdinand’s claim to it for one of his 
sons was a year later to lead to his recall. 
The person, attitude, and influence of the queen remained at the center of 
the dispute. She herself put her views to Paget during his stay in Sicily. She 
complained that it;almost seemed that the British looked on Sicily as a 
conquered country. The generals complained that the court did not recruit, 
yet how, she asked, could it hope to do so, when the British offered higher 
rates of pay. The court had 6,000 regular troops ready to embark at an 
instant, yet the generals treated her plans with contempt and refused to 
expend British blood in removing a tyrant from the throne of Naples. Those 
who accused the court of betrayal were, she said, nothing but a crowd of 
malcontents who had taken refuge at Messina and got the generals to listen to 

<<<PDFPAGE 68>>>
Se 
. 
Admiral Sir Edward Thornborough, by S. Lane. (Courtesy of the National Mar- 
ttime Museum, London.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 69>>>
The Court, Drummond, and the Generals 
65 
them.?° It was difficult to argue rationally with her. She had in the winter of 
1807/8 been involved in one of her many intrigues, this time with the 
Russian ambassador, with the idea of a Russian garrison being sent to Sicily 
to replace the British. Tatischeff, anxious to discredit Britain, had according 
to Drummond been spreading rumors that he was able to mediate between 
the court and Napoleon, to the end that the king should recover Naples, 
provided the British got out of Sicily. At Drummond’s peremptory request, 
which earned him a rebuke from Canning, Tatischeff was ordered to leave 
Palermo, but the incident did little to better relations between the Sicilian 
court and the British.?! 
Russia, of course, since the Treaty of Tilsit, when Czar Alexander joined 
hands with Napoleon, had become an enemy of Britain. It was therefore, in 
British eyes, disgraceful that the queen should be seeking the help of the 
Russians. There had already been an incident in January, when Circello had 
been under pressure from Drummond to order the seizure of a Russian 
frigate that had earlier arrived in Palermo harbor, before war was declared 
between Britain and Russia. Thornborough, acting on Admiralty instruc- 
tions, had wanted to attack the frigate, but the Sicilian government had at 
first demurred. It was finally induced by Drummond to declare a state of war 
with Russia, and the frigate’s captain agreed to surrender to the Sicilians, 
though not to the British, thus defusing an awkward situation that had 
touched the quick of Sicilian pride.?2 
The Sicilian court was particularly sensitive about attacks on its loyalty to 
Britain and on its general competence, including those made in the British 
press. Castelcicala, the minister in London, was so incensed at an article 
published in February 1808 in the pages of the Whig Morning Chronicle that 
he persuaded the British government to start proceedings against Perry, the 
proprietor. The matter was eventually settled, though not until after more 
than a year, by Perry making an abject apology. The paper, he said, was 
merely anxious to draw the British public’s attention to the danger to which 
British troops were exposed in the current Sicilian situation, and he had no 
wish to interfere in the way an independent state was governed, much less to 
try to sow dissension between the Sicilian king and his subjects.*° But six 
months later there was more trouble, when Leckie’s “Historical Survey” was 
published and brought to Castelcicala’s attention. In it Leckie did not mince 
his words. He described the Sicilian government as exhibiting “all the 
weakness and degeneracy” associated with the Byzantine Empire “in its last 
stages of degradation,” and he urged the ministers to undertake the much- 
needed reforms in Sicily, since by propping up an unpopular regime the 
British themselves incurred popular hatred. He attacked the attitude of the 
queen who clearly had no love for the British, the duplicity of the Palermo 
court, and the pro-French sympathies of at least one minister, and demanded 
that Britain interfere in Sicily’s internal affairs for “pressing motives of self- 

<<<PDFPAGE 70>>>
66 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
defence.” Castelcicala wrote to Canning, describing the survey as grossly 
insulting—an appalling libel on the king, the queen, and the whole Sicilian 
government, and again asked for the author to be prosecuted and punished 
with the full vigor of the law.?4 And matters had been made no easier, in 
trying to establish relations of trust between the British and Sicilian govern- 
ments, by an episode concerning Spain, which involved the Sicilian royal 
family. 
pee as the news had reached Palermo that Ferdinand VII of Spain, 
nephew of Ferdinand II of Sicily, had been forced by Napoleon to abdicate, 
that the Spanish royal family were now prisoners in France, and that a revolt 
had broken out by the Spanish people against French occupation, great 
excitement prevailed at Palermo. By the will of Charles III, the father of the 
Sicilian king and of the unpopular Charles IV of Spain (who had recently 
yielded his throne to his son), if the male line of Charles IV should fail, 
Ferdinand the Sicilian king would become heir to the throne of Spain. 
Drummond took up the cause of the king (Ferdinand III of Sicily), 
sponsored his claim to the Spanish regency, and managed to persuade the 
queen that it had the support of the British government. (Needless to say, 
King Ferdinand of Sicily was not himself greatly interested, and Drummond 
felt he had cause to complain that the king did not go to Spain in person.)?° 
Yet Drummond was acting on his own initiative, not only without authority 
but directly against Canning’s stated wishes. This was to have unfortunate 
consequences, not just for Anglo-Sicilian relations but also for Drummond 
personally. 
Writing on 31 May 1808 and a week later on 7 June, Drummond told 
Canning he was sure that if the Spanish monarch, as well as his sons, were 
excluded from the throne of Spain, then Britain must wish to see on that 
throne someone who was her friend and ally. He thought the prospects for 
old Spain were gloomy, but that Prince Leopold could be sent to England 
and helped to a throne in Spanish America. At this stage, he assured Can- 
ning, he had breathed no word to the king or his court that he was thinking 
along these lines, but wanted to learn what the ministry thought.?° Yet, 
without waiting for a reply, Drummond committed himself at once (and by 
implication the British government) to sponsoring a Sicilian regency in 
Spain. Having toyed first with the idea of sending the hereditary prince to 
Spain, while Leopold went via England to America to claim the regency on 
behalf of his father, he got the court to agree that Leopold, in the company of 
various advisers, would be sent to Gibraltar to sound out the Spanish. To this 
end Drummond had already advanced £10,000 of British money toward the 
expenses of the voyage and the cost of Leopold’s stay in Gibraltar.27 
Drummond’s letter of 31 May and his second one of 7 June crossed with a 
dispatch to him from Canning. This warned him not to encourage the court 
to make any claim to the Spanish regency—a claim for which the backing of 

<<<PDFPAGE 71>>>
The Court, Drummond, and the Generals 
67 
Britain had already been canvassed by Castelcicala.28 And when Canning 
learnt of Drummond’s views and his assurance that he had not yet communi- 
cated them to the court, he instructed Drummond on no account to lend 
support to any such claim. The question of choosing a regent for Spain must 
be a matter for the Spanish Cortes, and any attempt by the court of Sicily to 
claim the regency without being invited was bound to arouse a hostile 
response. The last thing the British government wanted was to offend the 
Spanish patriots.?? 
But things had now gone too far for Drummond to see how he could 
retract his support, and Circello had been given his written assurances that 
what he was doing was backed by his government. The queen had agreed 
that Leopold should leave for Spain as soon as possible in the company of her 
favorite Saint Clair, the Duke of Orleans, Prince Cassaro, the Duke of Ascoli 
and Tommasi, a legal adviser of the government. The whole party was to be 
conveyed by the British warship Thunderer, which Ball in Malta had agreed 
to supply, without having been shown the passenger list. The T/underer duly 
sailed in September and arrived at Gibraltar, only to find that the party was 
not permitted to land. Prince Leopold was kept three days on board until he 
agreed to return to Palermo and abandon any attempt to make contact with 
the Spanish Junta and the patriot party.°° 
Canning had naturally been outraged when he discovered what Drum- 
mond had done, disregarding his clear instructions. The British government 
had been placed in a quite invidious position. It must either approve Drum- 
mond’s actions and so appear to be interfering in Spain’s strictly internal 
concerns, or disown the whole Sicilian démarche and thus risk causing 
offense at Palermo. It decided to take the latter course, and Drummond was 
told that he was recalled.? 
Drummond comes somewhat discreditably out of the whole wretched, 
botched affair. He tried to excuse himself to Canning by making out, quite 
untruthfully, that Circello had been the moving force in having Leopold sent 
to Spain, and that he, Drummond, had merely connived, and then only in his 
private capacity. His excuse for the failure to tell Captain Ball that the 
Thunderer was to carry a royal prince was a thoroughly unconvincing one; 
over the sending of the Marquis Saint Clair, he attempted to shift all the 
blame on the queen—“another proof of her dirty cunning which fools have 
mistaken for sense and acuteness”—though he certainly knew that Saint Clair 
was going. 
The situation was not improved by a protest, lodged soon after by Cas- 
telcicala at the action the British took at Gibraltar. When he tried to argue 
that Leopold’s party should have received the same hospitality that British 
forces had received in Sicily, Canning became extremely angry. “Tt can hardly 
be necessary to you to point out the inaptitude of this illustration.” British 
troops, he added, had been invited to Sicily, and then in order to safeguard 

<<<PDFPAGE 72>>>
68 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
the island, while Leopold’s presence at Gibraltar was scarcely required for 
defense of that fortress. Nor had his reason for coming there been to look for 
safety and British protection. It was all very well to take a “high tone” about 
the right of the king of Sicily to the regency of Spain being “clear and 
incontrovertible” and to assert that such a claim was the only way to avoid 
civil war, but the evidence for this was not forthcoming, nor was there any 
for the claim by the king to devolve the regency onto his son. If the united 
voice of Spain had called for Ferdinand II or Leopold, that indeed would 
alter the case, but the facts proclaimed that this was not so. The court at 
Palermo, Canning went on, must have been aware that Drummond had 
acted without any precise instructions, and had he not connived personally at 
the action taken by the Sicilian court, the British government would be 
entitled to take grave offense at what had been done. The arrival of a prince 
of Sicily aboard a British vessel before a British fortress was liable to the 
gravest misconstruction, and the king was advised to stand very clear of any 
suspicion that he had condoned it.?% 
What Canning was saying in so many words was that it had all been the 
fault of the queen. And this was underlined in a secret letter he sent the same 
day to Castelcicala in which he protested in the strongest terms about the 
inclusion of the Marquis Saint Clair in the party that had accompanied 
Leopold. Saint Clair he described, without actually naming him, as someone 
whom the British government had been trying over the past two or three 
years to have removed from positions of trust and had only refrained from 
pressing its case out of a sense of delicacy. Hence the government had been 
amazed to discover that this man had been sent to visit a British fortress in 
company with Prince Leopold—“a Frenchman and one whose near connec- 
tions are notoriously established at the throne of Bonaparte.” He must, wrote 
Canning, be sent home at once, and on no account would he be allowed to 
pass through Gibraltar into Spain.34 
The upshot of the whole affair had been to further injure Sicilian pride, or 
at least the pride of the royal family, and to make the British yet more 
suspicious of the loyalty of the court at Palermo. 
Moore, once he had assumed command, obtained two interviews with the 
queen, at one of which the king was present, in which Moore did his best to 
persuade her that he had the court’s best interests at heart and wanted 
sincerely to do all in his power to regain for it the kingdom of Naples. If it 
had not been possible to agree on the feasibility of plans, this was for very 
good military reasons. As he told Paget, the king and queen thought that 
because the French had recently sent some troops to Corfu from Naples, the 
whole of that kingdom now lay open, and that it only needed a force to land 
for the country to fall like a ripe fruit. It would, he commented, be time 
enough to land at Naples when the French had gone—“the kingdom will not 
run away.” The largest force that could be raised in Sicily, 8,000 British and 

<<<PDFPAGE 73>>>
The Court, Drummond, and the Generals 
69 
7,000 Neapolitans—the latter ill-paid, ill-led and disaffected—would not be 
under a unified command, could certainly never beat the French, and would 
not impress the local people. As for it acting as a diversion, it would do 
nothing to distract Napoleon, who “knows that the fate of Italy will be 
decided on the Vistula.”35 
Moore, with good reason, was very doubtful if he had succeeded in 
convincing the queen. He felt that she so detested the British, he seriously 
wondered if her real aim was not to get the British out of Sicily and to see 
their army destroyed on the mainland. The king, it is true, did eventually 
permit him to inspect the royal armed forces, whose condition he found 
indifferent—about equal to that of the London Volunteers but with “far less 
discipline and without their zeal and personal bravery”; but he was not 
granted a unified command, the king insisting that the time for this would be 
when a joint force had landed in Italy.3° 
Moore was convinced there was no remedy for an unsatisfactory situation 
until the role of British diplomat in Sicily was merged with that of military 
commander, as it had once been very briefly when General Fox had filled 
both parts; for, as things were, the British army had no influence whatever at 
court. The queen, he was sure, was guilty of treachery, and surrounded 
herself with foreign émigrés who were certainly no friends to Britain. The 
only way to maintain Sicily was to take over its government, for if it were left 
to the king and queen “they will lose themselves, the island and us.” If the 
French were to land, the island would be gone, the royal troops probably 
would desert and the local inhabitants, losing confidence, would offer the 
enemy no resistance. All the British army could hope to do would be to shut 
itself up in its fortresses and await relief from the British navy. It would 
clearly therefore be prudent to retain enough transports to take away the 
army.37 Moore had decided to make Castrogiovanni (today and in ancient 
times called Enna), set on a well-nigh impregnable hill in the center of the 
island, his pivot of resistance, leaving only enough men to garrison the 
principal ports. 
This very pessimistic analysis, and Moore’s call for 12,000 more troops, 
decided the cabinet to recall him. The Treaty of Tilsit had left Britain on her 
own again and had put paid to any hopes of using Sicily as a base for offense, 
so Moore and 8,000 of his best troops were ordered back to protect the home 
shores and to act as a mobile strategic reserve outside the Mediterranean. The 
cabinet had been put in a position in which it must either accept Moore’s 
views or recall him and replace him by someone else. It chose the latter, for 
reasons that Castlereagh made clear in a letter he wrote to Hawkesbury: 
Unless we are Berea to act up to his principles of setting 
the govern- 
ment aside, which I certainly am not ... I should not 
despair of his 
obedience, if of his conversion, to any system we might lay down for him, 

<<<PDFPAGE 74>>>
70 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
but unfortunately the Sicilian government know the extent of his opinions, 
which deprive him of all influence, and make him a less effective instru- 
ment for enforcing any measures of authority short of the extreme one of 
subversion.38 
Bunbury found it incredible that at the moment when Sicily seemed to be 
threatened with the greatest danger, Moore and so many excellent troops 
should be removed to another theater, leaving behind to guard the island a 
force of only 9,000 men. Russia was now an ally of France, and Marmont 
had in the Adriatic area a disposable force of 40,000 that could be trans- 
ported by French ships at Venice and by Russian warships at Corfu and 
Trieste. And at Toulon and at Genoa there were French troops as well as the 
ships to carry them, while their fleet could easily be joined by a Spanish one 
from Cartagena. Ministers in London had taken a risk, one that was nearly to 
lose them Sicily, and as soon as Castlereagh realized that the French had 
taken over Corfu and that the threat to Sicily was real, he decided to reinforce 
the latter.3? 
Moore’s replacement in Sicily was the same John Stuart who had been 
there before, prior to the arrival of Henry Fox, the victor of Maida and friend 
of the court. Perhaps to ingratiate himself with the ministers, he had told 
them that he considered that Sicily could be held with a garrison of only 
10,000, given sufficient naval support. Fox and Moore, on the other hand, 
insisted it needed 26,000. Castlereagh decided to compromise, increased the 
garrison to 16,000 by the early months of 1808 and, ignoring the possibility 
of it having to be evacuated, ordered home the available transports.*° 

<<<PDFPAGE 75>>>
5 
Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion 
ties fear of a French invasion of Sicily continued to preoccupy Stuart 
throughout the course of 1808. During the winter of 1807/8 the threat 
of a French assault was a real one, for Napoleon, seeing Sicily denuded, albeit 
temporarily, by Moore’s departure together with 8,000 of the best British 
troops, ordered the capture of Reggio and Scilla and preparations for full- 
scale invasion. ! 
French success in capturing these two strongpoints was due to the British 
navy’s inability to keep station in the winter storms and intercept convoys of 
small craft carrying munitions from Naples to Pizzo. British reverses were 
also the result of the French success in capturing (perhaps through treachery) 
in the straits of Messina four gunboats, armed with twenty-four-pounders— 
guns that the French found extremely useful in reducing Scilla’s fortifications. 
Sherbrooke, the general in temporary command of the British forces at 
Messina, ordered the withdrawal of the Scilla garrison after a siege of seven 
weeks, not having sufficient forces to make a diversion to relieve the fortress. 
Scilla fell on 23 February 1808, but by then Napoleon had changed his plans. 
Originally, he had ordered Ganteaume, commanding the Rochefort and 
Toulon squadrons, to sail to Naples, embark 9,000 men there, and then land 
them around Messina at the same time that Régnier was to put across a 
further 9,000 from Reggio and Scilla. But he now felt that Russia’s threat to 
the Turkish Empire in the Mediterranean had become of far-more-pressing 
importance than the need to deprive the British of Sicily. He decided 
therefore to reinforce Corfu with the object of staking out a claim to the 
Turkish provinces in Albania and Greece. He instructed Joseph, who at that 
moment was busy preparing to enter Sicily, to regard Corfu as of greater 
importance: “Sicily’s fate is known and sealed, Corfu’s is quite unknown and 
hangs in the balance . 
. 
. in the present state of Europe the greatest misfor- 
tune that could befall me would be the loss of Corfu.”* And Ganteaume was 
not to call at Naples, but instead to make directly for Corfu. When part of his 
fleet under Admiral Cosmao became detached in the course of a storm and 
put into the port of Taranto, Cosmao sent to Joseph for instructions, but 
Joseph, though longing to invade Sicily, did not dare disobey his brother, 
and Cosmao was therefore dispatched at once to rejoin Ganteaume’s fleet at 
Corfu. Napoleon, now having learnt that the British had been reinforced in 
71 

<<<PDFPAGE 76>>>
HDD 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Sicily and that a powerful British fleet had arrived in the Mediterranean, and 
having no wish for Ganteaume’s ships to become engaged with a superior 
force, ordered them to return to Toulon. It is true that Joseph still had a force 
ready amounting to nearly 8,000 men, though of these 3,000 made up the 
garrison holding down Lower Calabria; but without the munitions and 
transports promised that would have arrived with Ganteaume’s fleet, he felt 
that he could take on the British with any reasonable chance of success. When 
Napoleon’s interest soon after shifted to the theaters of Spain and Portugal, 
Joseph was recalled in July to take over the Spanish throne.* 
During the summer of 1808 Stuart continued to act offensively against the 
Neapolitan coast and kept up pressure on the enemy ports, although he 
decided to terminate the raids by Calabrian refugees that were organized by 
the Marquis Carbone. These raids, he had been assured by General Sher- 
brooke, were merely pillaging expeditions that could only result in bringing 
discredit on the British army in Sicily. 
In September he was able to report a most successful combined operation 
against the small harbor of Diamante. A detachment of British troops had 
been landed and with the help of two British sloops had captured thirty-eight 
enemy vessels, including two large Neapolitan gunboats.° During the re- 
mainder of that month he continued to make hostile demonstrations with 
troop transports, as if planning a landing, but eventually he had to call these 
off for lack of an adequate naval escort.”7 But in any case he was now 
confronted with a far more resourceful and daring opponent than Joseph 
Bonaparte had ever been, and he himself was forced onto the defensive. 
For Joseph’s successor in the kingdom of Naples, the daring, ambitious 
Joachim Murat, was quite determined to undertake the conquest of Sicily as 
soon as he could. As a preliminary, he captured Capri during October 1808, 
describing this success to Napoleon as a good augury for the seizure of 
Sicily. Although the British had not intended to surrender the island so 
easily—in fact the relief force arrived too late (having been driven back by a 
storm) and the many desertions from the Corsican regiment, once the deed of 
surrender had been signed, had proved, to say the least, somewhat discon- 
certing—they did not regard its loss as serious. The cost of defending it had 
been excessive and it had served very little purpose except as a base for the 
queen’s spies and agents.? The loss did however alarm the court, who, 
through Drummond, complained to Collingwood about the lack of naval 
protection. Collingwood was impatient with such complaints. He told 
Mulgrave that no important point on the coast of Sicily would be left 
undefended and his ships were constantly on station to watch the approaches 
to the island. The court, he thought, seemed to imagine that when those 
ships were out of sight, the defense of Sicily had been abandoned, and yet 
when they were seen in port, the enemy had been left to do as he pleased. “It 
would,” he commented feelingly, “require a squadron in every port to 

<<<PDFPAGE 77>>>
Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion 
73 
remove all their apprehensions.” However, to calm the fears of the court, and 
particularly those of the queen, who still apprehended a British betrayal, he 
detailed Admiral Martin with three ships-of-the-line to base himself on 
Palermo harbor.!° 
Throughout October and November Murat continued to prepare for 
invasion, assuring Napoleon that all he required was 6,000 troops and naval 
support; and he argued that the time was now ripe, since the strength of the 
British army in Sicily had been reduced to a mere 4,000 [sec]. Clearly, Murat 
had swallowed whole the disinformation put out by Napoleon to alarm the 
government in London and deflect its attention from Portugal to Sicily. He 
had ordered false reports to be placed in various Dutch newspapers about the 
strength of the British in Sicily, a landing by 30,000 French, and the exodus 
of the king from the island. But by March it must have dawned even on 
Murat that Sicily’s invasion had been postponed indefinitely, orders having 
reached him to send troops northward to meet the threat presented by 
Austria.!1 
Meanwhile there had been various pressures on the British to use their 
forces in Sicily to support a national Italian uprising of the kind that had just 
been witnessed in Spain. A Neapolitan called Biancamano had recently got in 
touch with Drummond, making out that he was the spokesman for the chiefs 
of all the parties in Naples. He alleged that these chiefs were in league with 
others throughout the whole length of Italy, and that they looked to the 
British in Sicily to give them material support.'? The government in 
London, being apprised of this, instructed Stuart to use his discretion. But 
any help that he might give must be used not for some attempt at the 
temporary recovery of Naples but for a purpose “likely to lead to important 
and extensive combinations,” or in other words to a major effort to liberate 
Italy from the French.!? A month later he received instructions that were a 
little more positive. He was urged to explore the possibilities of giving 
assistance to the Italians, and for this purpose he was allowed to retain the 
transports he had been told to send home. He was warned however that any 
help given must be dependent on the success achieved by the patriot armies 
of Spain.!4 
Through Lowe, when commanding the Capri garrison, Stuart had made 
various inquiries as to how far the local inhabitants would support the arrival 
of an army of 10,600. He contemplated the possibility of a landing at some 
point along the coast between Terracina and the Gulf of Spezia, since any 
landing in the kindgom of Naples would have little appeal to other Italians. 
Colonel Bunbury, corresponding with Lowe, pressed for a landing where the 
French were weak, and that meant the Roman states or Tuscany. They had 
32,000 men, it was true, but scattered over so extensive an area, sickly, and 
locked up in garrisons, they would not be able to concentrate them to meet a 
threat posed far from Naples. But he did admit to serious doubts about the 

<<<PDFPAGE 78>>>
74 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
whole subject of Italian resistance. “I fear there are no leaders,” he wrote, 
“nor any one common or durable bond, which could ensure to us the united 
and continued aid of the Tuscans, Romans, Neapolitans and Piedmontese.”!5 
Collingwood was also very skeptical about there existing a spirit of pa- 
triotism on which to build a war of resistance. “There is no stuff to work on 
there—the people are licentious, the nobles are unprincipled. It is a superior 
army alone that can effect a change or maintain it.” The Italian people, in his 
view, did not possess “the Spanish spirit.” 
!¢ 
Stuart by now had become distrustful of Biancamano and his claims, 
especially since he seemed to be linked with slippery characters like Prince 
Moliterno, the condottiere who kept in with both sides. He told Castlereagh 
that he did not doubt that many in Italy were discontented, but he had yet to 
hear of a cohesive party, a concerted plan of operations, or any measures 
generally agreed upon. Much depended on the future actions of the Span- 
iards and the Austrians, for his force of 9,000 (all he could spare) would 
never free Italy on its own. In the kingdom of Naples the upper classes would 
be slow to desert their French masters by whom they had been courted and 
rewarded, and the people as a whole still had bitter memories of the royal 
vengeance in 1799. An amnesty guaranteed by Britain would be “an indis- 
pensable prelude” to any attempt to recover Naples. And he tried to convince 
the king and queen that he could not undertake any move to the continent 
until he received unequivocal proof that the Italian peoples were organized 
for war.17 
Murat, through his agents, was well aware of the British involvement with 
potential rebels and he kept Napoleon informed accordingly, as also did 
Eugene, the viceroy of Italy. He knew of the British correspondence with 
patriot leaders in Bologna and Venice in regard to placing Italy under one 
constitutional sovereign, and of 12,000 who had pledged themselves to take 
up arms in the Roman states, but he sensibly and realistically attached little 
importance to all this and assured Napoleon that a general uprising 
throughout Italy was an impossibility.18 
Castlereagh, as soon as he realized that Italy was no duplicate of Spain, 
decided that troops in Sicily could be better employed in Catalonia. In 
October, therefore, he instructed Stuart to prepare to dispatch a force to 
Spain, without realizing the damaging effect that this would have on morale 
at the court. The latter was already sufficiently alarmed by the recent loss of 
Capri to Murat, the movement of troops into Lower Calabria, and the 
seeming absence of naval support, to which reference has already been made. 
Stuart delayed acting on Castlereagh’s instructions, if only because it seemed 
useless to send a force of less than 7,000 to Spain, and that would leave in 
Sicily fewer than the minimum of 10,000 troops guaranteed by the treaty of 
alliance. The king made it clear he would never agree to such a reduction in 
British strength, since he thought it was bound to appear to Murat an open 

<<<PDFPAGE 79>>>
Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion 
15 
invitation for him to invade.!9 Stuart’s arguments persuaded Castlereagh, 
who received his dispatches in May 1809. By that time Austria had reentered 
the war, and Castlereagh, in writing to Stuart to approve his not sending 
forces to Spain, expressed the hope he would now begin to make himself 
useful in Italy.2° 
The vague wording of Castlereagh’s dispatch exemplified the cabinet’s lack 
of a plan for cooperation with the Austrian armies. The Austrians themselves 
had since the spring been trying through the offices of Count Sallier de la 
Tour to coordinate plans with the British command and with the courts at 
Palermo and Cagliari for joint operations in northern Italy. La Tour, who 
was a Piedmontese subject serving as an officer in the Austrian army, had 
arrived in Palermo on 31 March. He had instructions from the Austrian 
government to obtain the support of the king and the British—the latter 
providing, it was hoped, if not troops, then transports and naval escort. The 
Archduke John, who was to command the Austrian army in the north of 
Italy, impressed on La Tour the need for speed—his own campaign against 
the French was due to start on 9 April—and what he wanted was for forces 
from Sicily, and if possible from Sardinia also, to join his own army in the 
Lombard plain or in the valley of the Po.?? 
The queen, as might have been expected, was a great enthusiast for the 
plan, and she even got the king to agree to Stuart being given the supreme 
command. Stuart agreed, in principle only, to taking some action in Italy, but 
would not commit himself to details until he knew more of the Austrian 
movements and until he had received instructions from London. The rele- 
vant instructions (if such they can be called) did not reach him until July. In 
any case he felt incapable of doing more than causing a diversion with the 
limited number of troops he had, even if the French had withdrawn their 
main army and the mass of Italians were “ripe for revolt.”?7 Collingwood, on 
the other hand, was a firm supporter of the Austrian case. He sent three 
frigates to reinforce Martin and urged Stuart to take advantage of the dearth 
of French forces along the coasts. If Austria were to fail now, and the fate of 
Italy depended on her, he would not wish Britain to be responsible, and he 
could not see how the allied cause could be helped by the temporary posses- 
sion of Naples or of some island in its bay.?° 
Stuart finally agreed with the court to make a double landing in the south 
of Italy, 15,000 troops going to Calabria, and another 2,000 to Naples itself, 
in the hope of achieving a coup de main there. But when he learned of the 
Austrian defeats that had taken place in Bavaria, he suspended all prepara- 
tions for sailing—this despite violent protests by the queen, who refused to 
believe that Vienna had fallen. The troops had been embarked on 26 May, 
but Stuart told La Tour that they could not leave until the situation in the 
north was clarified. The queen meanwhile bombarded La Tour with messages 
urging immediate action and with plans for 3,000 Sardinians to join with the 

<<<PDFPAGE 80>>>
76 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
British in the seizure of Genoa.?* Stuart’s hesitancy is understandable, given 
the memories of his government’s displeasure at his raising of the masse in 
1806, his instructions not to intervene in Italy unless there was a plan for a 
general liberation, and the fact that he had not yet received permission to 
withhold his troops from Spain. He was also in fear of a mutiny among the 
officers of his army, many of whom were highly critical of his competence to 
lead them in action and therefore thoroughly disapproved of the whole idea 
of the expedition.?5 
At last, feeling he must do something with an army of 16,000 lying idle, 
and convincing himself that the Austrian reverses were not as severe as 
French reports made out, he decided to capture the island of Ischia and to use 
it as a base for further operations. This was a course that the court approved, 
though Collingwood considered it a waste of effort.2© The expedition on 
board included a large contingent of the court entourage, including Prince 
Leopold, Circello, Tommasi, Saint Clair, Ascoli, and General Nunziante, and 
they insisted on making landfalls at Policastro and Sapri en route in anticipa- 
tion of picking up numerous recruits for the expedition. These landings 
proved a complete farce and showed only too clearly that the local people 
were not at all ready to welcome the Bourbons. By the time the convoy 
arrived off Ischia, Stuart had lost all confidence in the successful outcome of 
his enterprise and would probably have returned to Sicily at once had the 
Ischia garrison not surrendered so easily.27 
Landing at Ischia on 25 June, Stuart was soon in control of the island and 
of its neighbor Procida, but instead of assaulting Naples forthwith, he wasted 
time in prolonged discussions about the nature of the new administration, 
the court having sent along Prince Leopold, who suddenly proclaimed 
himself viceroy. Murat had taken immediate steps to strengthen the defenses 
of his capital, and Stuart realized too late that the moment for attacking it had 
passed.?8 
In the south, a force of 3,000 men under General Mackenzie had tried and 
failed to capture the little fortress of Scilla, having been incorrectly informed 
that the French had withdrawn from Lower Calabria. When they did with- 
draw, shortly after, they blew up the fort and all the brass cannon assembled 
there for the assault on Sicily, something that drew down on the general 
responsible the wrath of both Murat and Napoleon, the possession of Scilla 
being considered by the latter as indispensable for an invasion of Sicily.2? 
Stuart, under pressure from Bunbury and Collingwood to land troops in 
the Roman states, was on the point of dispatching 4,000 to capture the port 
of Civita Vecchia when two new factors changed his mind. One was the news 
in the Moniteur that the Austrians had been defeated at Wagram, the other a 
warning from Collingwood about the state of the French fleet in Toulon. 
France had now got in the Mediterranean the largest fleet she had ever 
mustered since the signing of the peace of Amiens, and this fleet was now 

<<<PDFPAGE 81>>>
Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion 
77 
lying in Toulon’s outer harbor as if awaiting orders to sail. Collingwood 
warned that he was unable to guarantee the protection of Ischia, or indeed of 
Palermo itself, for if the French fleet got out from Toulon, it might well be in 
the Bay of Naples before he knew that it had sailed, were the weather to favor 
the enemy. In view of all this, Stuart decided he must, if ignominiously, retire 
forthwith to Sicily, abandoning the captured islands that Collingwood had 
never considered worth taking.3° 
Back in Sicily, the Count La Tour continued to press for a joint expedition 
to land on the northwest coast of Italy, and in this he received the support of 
the court (disgusted at Stuart’s withdrawal from Ischia) and the British 
ministers in Palermo and Cagliari. But, wisely, Stuart remained hesitant. It 
may be, as La Tour suggested, that Stuart possessed only physical courage 
and was frightened of making any decision for which he could be held 
personally responsible; but given the decisive defeat of the Austrians, a 
landing in the north would have courted disaster and exposed Sicily to 
immediate invasion.?! 
La Tour then propounded a new plan. It involved 6,000 Austrian troops 
being sent to Sicily to join the king, as a bait to tempt him back into Italy. 
The idea had great appeal to the queen, since it seemed a way of ridding the 
court of its utter dependence on the British, and with 4,000 troops the 
Sardinians were offering, there could soon be a force of 10,000 in Sicily 
completely under the control of the court. The whole thing was a fantasy, 
based on Vienna’s erroneous conception that the allied forces in Sicily were 
made up of 5,000 British auxiliaries under the direct command of the king, 
and a royal army of 15,000. In any case the La Tour mission and schemes for 
sending armies to Italy were brought to a very speedy conclusion when the 
Austrians signed the Peace of Vienna.?? 
What Stuart was persuaded to do, at the thrice-repeated request of Col- 
lingwood, was to send a small force of 1,700 to capture the southern Ionian 
islands. Now that the French looked on the point of moving into Illyria, 
Collingwood was persuaded it was important to prevent them from getting a 
hold on Greece and threatening the existence of the Turkish Empire. Posses- 
sion of the islands, he hoped, would act as an effective check to the French 
and would simultaneously afford Sicily correspondingly greater security. 
During the first week in October British forces from Sicily captured the 
islands of Zante, Ithaca, Cephalonia, and Cerigo, and shortly after, Santa 
Maura. Stuart was then pressed by his subordinates to authorize an assault on 
Corfu, but because of his instructions from London he had no choice but to 
resist this pressure.33 Wellesley, the secretary of state, positively forbade an 
attack on Corfu since far too many troops would be needed not only to 
capture the fortress but to hold it. The policy of the British government was 
to act defensively in the Mediterranean while the struggle being waged in 
Spain and Portugal was employing so much of the British army. The gar- 

<<<PDFPAGE 82>>>
78 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
risons in the Ionian islands were to be reduced to 1,300, the balance being 
brought back to Sicily. And if Sicily were ever threatened, still more of the 
garrisons were to be recalled. The security of Sicily and Malta, as Liverpool 
emphasized to Stuart, was the primary object in that theater, and the five 
southern Ionian islands were considered to be of only secondary impor- 
tance.3+ 
Thus at the start of 1810, a year during which Sicily was again under threat 
of French invasion, Stuart was left in command of a force of 16,000 with 
which to defend it, and was under increasing pressure from London to send 
to Spain as much as a third of it. 

<<<PDFPAGE 83>>>
6 
Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo 
ie the root of the differences between the court and the British representa- 
tives in Sicily, either military or civil (for Amherst, who in March 1809 
had replaced Drummond as minister, shared the views of the generals about 
the court), lay three apparently unanswerable question: how to obtain 
stricter control of the way in which Britain’s subsidy was spent, how to get a 
unified command of all troops on the island, both royal and British, and how 
to procure the court’s support in the effort to mobilize the island’s defenses. 
On each of these three important matters, and of course the three were 
interlinked, all attempts to secure agreement or to establish any measure of 
confidence continued to meet with total failure, and in consequence bred 
increasing frustration. 
The growing financial difficulties of the court led the British government 
to offer it an increase of £100,000 in the amount of the annual subsidy, in 
return for which it was suggested that certain important concessions be 
made. The first of these was the introduction of a unified command on the 
island. If this were done the problem of accounting could be solvied simply 
and painlessly. British senior officers at Messina had long been pressing for 
the right of supervising the way in which the subsidy was spent—ostensibly 
on military objects, but in reality on pensions for émigrés and for financing 
the queen’s network of spies." 
What Canning wished to make clear to the court was that his government 
had no desire to interfere in Sicily’s internal affairs, though neither could it 
commit itself to the restoration of the kingdom of Naples.” The court, while 
welcoming the first assurance, remained completely adamant over the ques- 
tion of a unified command. This was awkward for the ministry in London. It 
had earlier secured from Castelcicala, Sicilian minister to the Court of St. 
James, a pledge that if Sicily were invaded, all forces there would come under 
British command. This pledge had been used by ministers to satisfy a 
querulous House of Commons who were doubtful about the value obtained 
from the annual subsidy paid to Sicily. Now the court made out that 
Castelcicala had acted without authority, that the king had become the 
commander-in-chief (an expedient to be rid of a difficult question, since his 
health would prevent him from taking the field) and that to surrender 
command of his forces would be a blow to his royal dignity. The queen saw it 
79 

<<<PDFPAGE 84>>>
Admiral Sir George Martin, by Sir T. Lawrence. (Courtesy of the National 
Maritime Museum, London.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 85>>>
William Pitt, Lord Amherst, engraved by C. Turner. (Courtesy of the British 
Museum, London.) 
| 

<<<PDFPAGE 86>>>
82 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
as an absolute necessity for the king and his sons to be seen to command if 
they were not to lose “face” in Sicily and indeed throughout the whole of 
Europe.* The queen got her way and the treaty was signed and duly ratified 
in 1810 without the government in London mentioning the court’s con- 
tinued intransigence. “We are still,’ Amherst wrote to Stuart, “in the same 
uncertainty . 
. 
. left to ourselves to remedy as best we can the want of unity of 
plan and employment of the military resources of Sicily.”4 
Stuart by now had become disillusioned with a court whose darling he had 
once been. The operations he had undertaken in the Bay of Naples in June 
and July had opened his eyes to the court’s duplicity. He complained to 
Castlereagh of the way he had been deceived over the role of Prince Leopold, 
who had accompanied him to Ischia in what was nominally a military role. 
Yet once Ischia had been taken, the prince had revealed himself unexpectedly 
as the king’s representative on the island, a step that Stuart considered to be 
both “premature and injudicious,” in view of the suspicions of many Neapoli- 
tans in regard to the king and his future intentions. Stuart also complained 
bitterly of the actions of the Marquis di Schiara, appointed by the king as 
civil governor in Reggio and the surrounding area. Despite the king’s solemn 
amnesty, backed by assurances from the British commanders, Schiara had 
behaved in such a way as to alienate all the local people, and although Circello 
tried to make out that Schiara had acted without authority, Stuart was 
convinced he had been the recipient of secret instructions from the queen. 
While the latter was considered the source of authority by ministers and all 
those in government, “Revenge, Passion and Asperity” would rule, and there 
seemed to Stuart to be little advantage in any military agreement with the 
court.® 
It was only the strongest opposition on his part and on that of Rear 
Admiral Martin, now in command of the naval force that was protecting 
Sicily, that prevented the court in February 1810 from once more trying to 
raise the masse by sending a force under Prince Moliterno into Calabria with 
3,000 muskets. The fact that this madcap scheme of the queen had been 
planned without consulting the British, though it entailed the employment 
and escort of British transports for 4,000 men, caused the British comman- 
ders no small irritation, and it also caused Amherst to lodge a protest against 
such “separate and secret undertakings.”© Stuart by now had become con- 
vinced that only intervention by Britain could save Sicily from disaster, 
ironically the same conclusion that Moore had reached three years before. He 
informed Bunbury there were no alternatives but to take over Sicily or to 
abandon it altogether, and he told Amherst that Britain must dictate to the 
court “its measures as well as its policy.”7 
Amherst had come to agree with him. Writing to Wellesley, the foreign 
secretary, he called on the ministry at home to intervene in Sicilian affairs. 
Outlining his reasons for doing so, he drew attention to the preparations 

<<<PDFPAGE 87>>>
Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo 
83 
being made by the French to invade Sicily, the inadequacy of Sicilian de- 
fenses, the deplorable state of the royal army, and the fact there was no 
unified command. He also drew attention to the civil unrest, the widespread 
contempt for the court and its government, and the acceptance by most 
Sicilians of the absolute need for foreign intervention, no matter from what 
quarter it came. Britain, by supporting the court, was reproached for per- 
petuating current abuses, and Sicilians queried the value of an alliance with a 
country pledged to such nonintervention. Intervention now by Britain 
would be welcomed by everyone on the island, save only the queen and her 
entourage, a group whose hostile attitudes endangered the lives of the British 
garrison. 
In practical terms what he was suggesting was the introduction of Sicilians 
to the cabinet® (at present made up of four Neapolitans), the summoning of a 
parliament, the exclusion of the queen from public affairs, and the granting to 
Britain of a unified command; that, or at least the right to control all 
expenditures on the royal forces, whose condition was such they might well 
desert the moment the French set foot on the island. Force, he thought, 
should be used if necessary to ensure these measures were carried through— 
measures imperative in the face of invasion, but also to prevent the island 
from remaining merely a “backward and lukewarm ally.”? 
The discontent of the British commanders (greater even than that of 
Amherst) at the court’s lack of cooperation in making preparations against an 
invasion is apparent in letters written by Campbell, the adjutant general, to 
his fellow officers. “The court makes no effort, sends no succour, takes no 
notice. Ferdinando the fourth goes a’tunny fishing, and his wife continues 
her usual pranks . 
. 
. convicted in my mind of acting in concert with Murat 
for our expulsion. 
. 
. 
. We must soon hear of some decision by the govern- 
ment to abandon Sicily or strongly reinforce and effectively maintain [it].” 
For as things were, the court presented nothing but “a tissue of folly and 
inconsistency.”!° 
The invasion crisis of the summer came on the heels of a political one, 
resulting from the court’s financial difficulties and the parliament's refusal to 
grant it any money. The last time the king had asked for a donative had been 
back in 1802, and since that date he and his court had had to seek refuge on 
the island. The way in which they had used Sicily for their own, not Sicilian, 
purposes, the gross extravagances of the queen, the awarding of senior posts 
to foreigners, and the maintenance of a substantial army merely in order to 
recover Naples, caused steadily mounting dissatisfaction. A body of discon- 
tented nobles whose motivations were various and who were led by the vain 
and ambitious Prince Belmonte together with his uncle, the idealistic Prince 
of Castelnuovo, sponsored a plan for a more rational tax system, designed by 
Balsamo, an enlightened economist. This plan envisaged abolishing do- 
natives and substituting a tax on land and a moderate tax on general con- 

<<<PDFPAGE 88>>>
84 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
sumption. The plan was approved by parliament but rejected out of hand by 
the court, who, under the pretense of negotiating a scheme for amending the 
Sicilian constitution, succeeded in dividing the barons and winning over a 
part of them, headed by the loyal and upright Cassaro. The recalcitrant 
barons led by Belmonte then decided to turn to the British and made an 
appeal for help to Amherst, who, though sympathetic, had no instructions.!! 
Amherst, knowing he was quite shortly retiring from his post in Palermo, 
recommended that his successor be empowered to intervene in the govern- 
ment (in ways he had already sketched out in his dispatch of a month before). 
The barons, he wrote home, want a constitution modelled to some extent on 
the British, and they believe that the king’s opposition to it can be overcome 
only by Britain’s interference. Sicily, he stressed once again, was a country 
that was ripe for resistance, and the prospect of becoming a province of 
England was not unwelcome to most of its people. Tactful support by the 
British government of the kind of constitution the barons envisaged could 
have the effect of influencing the court. But in any case some change was 
needed. There must not be a repetition of what had recently occurred when 
the court, confronted by a French invasion, had clearly appeared to side with 
the enemy. 
}2 
For several months there had been no doubt that the enemy was seriously 
preparing an assault. Murat, who to the end of his career remained a victim of 
self-deception, had persuaded himself from intelligence reports that the bulk 
of the Sicilians were on his side. The British army and the court at Palermo 
were both, he was told, detested heartily and in any case were at odds with 
each other. He told Napoleon that he was sure he could count on the support 
of Prince Moliterno, who, together with his fellow officers, was awaiting his 
arrival with some impatience.!3 By the end of July Murat had concentrated 
500 boats in the little ports immediately facing Sicily, dismantled his forts to 
arm these boats, and erected batteries at points where transports could be 
assembled and troops embarked. Finally he arrived in person in the neigh- 
bourhood of Reggio, publicly pledging that in twenty-five days he would be 
dating his letters from Palermo. Yet in the face of all this the court had 
maintained an attitude of indifference, conduct that Amherst had stigmatized 
as “tardy, temporising and even suspicious.” After much delay, it did finally 
order the enrollment of 8,000 men, though not until the end of July. But in 
any case there was no real prospect of the order being carried out, since 
everyone knew the court had not the means to pay even the troops it already 
had. The court also ordered sixteen gunboats in Palermo harbor to join the 
British, but then reduced the pay of their crews, thus offering them, it 
seemed, an incentive to desert; and the crews were only prevented from 
doing so by the British agreeing to make good their pay.!* There is also 
evidence that agents of the queen issued secret instructions to the gunboats 

<<<PDFPAGE 89>>>
Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo 
85 
not to resist an attack by the French and that the latter received from her 
assurances that their own vessels would not be fired on.15 
Meanwhile attempts to persuade the court to agree to a unified command 
continued to meet with a negative response.!© There was a suggestion that 
the Duke of Orleans, the Anglophile son-in-law of the king, should visit 
Messina to consult with Stuart, but the latter made it clear that he considered 
this pointless until the question of command was resolved. Finally Stuart did 
accept that Bourcard should be allowed to come and help coordinate the 
movements and positioning of the British and the Sicilian forces; yet almost 
on the eve of Murat’s invasion, the plans agreed upon were cancelled by the 
court.'” Efforts had been made to get the king to issue a public proclamation, 
denying that the interests of Sicily were in any way different from those of 
Britain, and to encourage the Sicilian people to join in resisting the invader, 
but no action had been forthcoming. Only in July could the king be induced 
to order his troops and his general in Messina to cooperate with the British 
forces, and to deny Murat’s claim that the people of Sicily looked to him 
(Murat) as their deliverer and savior. Even then the order in question did not 
carry the king’s signature nor those of any of his ministers, nor was it ever 
officially proclaimed or given widespread circulation. Mellish, the chargé 
daffaires in Palermo, had had to use the strongest language to get the order 
issued at all and to persuade the king to send to Milazzo a regiment of royal 
cavalry.18 
As the court had done nothing on its own to counter the stream of 
propaganda put out by the government in Naples, Stuart had organized his 
own with the newspaper Gazzetta Britannica, written and published in 
Messina and edited by a Sicilian priest. From March onward it described the 
horrors the people might expect once the French landed, and it led its readers 
to anticipate a Sicilian Vespers in reverse. Stuart relied on local support (as 
things turned out, with justification), and issued his own proclamation to the 
people, as the court had so signally failed to appeal to them.'? 
To resist the invasion, Admiral Martin disposed of a force of three sail-of- 
the-line, five frigates, nine brigs and nearly 120 gunboats, which harassed 
Murat’s invasion preparations and captured and destroyed a great many of his 
vessels. In one action alone on 21 July this force successfully intercepted a 
convoy carrying important stores, and out of a total of fifty boats captured 
thirty-seven and sank the rest. Even so Martin remained very conscious of the 
limitations within which he operated, and he emphasized to his superior, 
Cotton, the impossibility of interdicting the enemy’s coastal communica- 
tions.?° 
Stuart himself had under command a force of 16,000 troops, almost half of 
whom were foreign, which included a disposable reserve of between 8,000 
and 9,000 men. Since April he had resisted the orders that were sent to him 

<<<PDFPAGE 90>>>
86 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
by Castlereagh to send away four battalions to Spain, exercising, understand- 
ably, the ultimate discretion he had been given.*! He had much improved the 
coastal defenses in the area most exposed to attack, built a military road from 
Messina to Faro, and constructed batteries along the coast, suitably protected 
by fascines and sandbags. The local peasants had given their labor voluntarily 
to dig entrenchments, and the well-to-do had offered their horses, till forbid- 
den to do so by the governor of Messina.?* Whether this would have been 
sufficient to withstand an assault by 25,000 well-led, well-equipped and 
experienced troops (15,000 of whom were French), it is impossible to guess. 
Everything really hinged on the question of whether Murat would be able for 
long enough to maintain his line of communications in face of the threat 
from the British squadron, for his own tiny naval squadron had been largely 
destroyed on 3 May by a British frigate. And of course his ability to do so 
depended entirely on the weather. 
When the invasion eventually took place on the night of 17/18 September, 
it very soon developed into a fiasco. Thirty-five hundred Neapolitan troops 
under Brigadier General Cavaignac landed on the coast south of Messina, 
but, when attacked by a British force, retired swiftly and took to their boats, 
leaving behind 1,200 men (or according to French sources, just under 800), 
together with their brigade commander. In this encounter the British suf- 
fered the loss of only three or four men. The local peasants, most of whom 
had firearms, had also joined in the defense and surprised Stuart agreeably by 
their hostile attitude to the invaders. The major attack planned on the Faro 
mainly by French troops never took place—Murat giving as his excuse a 
sudden drop in the favorable wind. Whether their commander, General 
Grenier, who was in communication with Paris and directly responsible to 
the minister of war there, had been given an order not to embark cannot be 
proved by the documents. What is certain is he had been told by Napoleon to 
take no risks and to be sure of success. 
Jacques Rambaud, in an interesting article about this abortive enterprise, 
has shown that it was not only Napoleon and Grenier who were hesitant, but 
also the other French generals commanding the divisions of Murat’s assault 
force, especially Partonneaux, who knew the area, and Lamarque, who had 
earlier proved his enterprise in his bold assault on the cliffs of Anacapri. It 
was Murat’s awareness of his generals’ reservations that had almost certainly 
prompted him to launch Cavaignac across the straits, in order to convince the 
others that the operation was feasible.23 
Napoleon, we know, was primarily interested in making the British believe 
in the invasion in order to distract their attention from Portugal, Spain, and 
the Ionian islands. He was therefore furious with Murat when the latter, 
realizing his project had failed, withdrew most of his forces from Calabria, 
including all his gunboats and transports, Murat was unable to afford the 
expense of keeping his troops mobilized for invasion. He also feared running 

<<<PDFPAGE 91>>>
Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo 
87 
the risk of sickness in an area known to be plagued by malaria during the 
months of July and August. But to save face, he announced publicly that the 
point of the exercise had been achieved. Napoleon told him he ought to have 
kept his army concentrated, to deceive the British, and that he was imme- 
diately to resume a threatening posture in regard to Sicily.24 When Stuart 
reacted as Napoleon desired and for fear of weakening Sicily’s defenses 
refused to send more troops to Spain, he was overruled by Liverpool and 
resigned his appointment in disgust.25.The court meanwhile declined to 
order any public celebration of the island’s deliverance.?° 
Sicily continued to remain vulnerable. The foreign troops under British 
command were of a very mixed quality, and two regiments were singled out 
as being especially unsatisfactory. The British forces covered only the area 
from Milazzo to Faro and then south to Cape Passaro and, apart from 
Trapani where they had a small garrison, the rest of the island was very 
exposed, guarded by an army of 9,000 virtually useless royal troops. As for 
protection by the British navy, this was entirely dependent on the weather. 
The ships could not operate off Calabria in the teeth of a strong northeasterly 
wind and might always be inhibited by currents or periodic calms (as Nelson 
had stressed earlier). On 18 September 1810 the fleet had not been able to 
prevent the bulk of Cavaignac’s invading force from returning safely to 
Reggio, nor to stop Murat’s fleet of 600 ships from making its retreat to the 
north, unscathed, save by volleys from coastal batteries. It is true that a 
fortnight afterward a flotilla of 110 of these boats was successfully inter- 
cepted off the coast of Calabria and that thirty-six of them were destroyed, 
but the bulk of Murat’s invasion armada contrived to return to Naples 
intact:27 
Nevertheless the ministry in London was not inclined to be pessimistic, no 
doubt influenced in their views by the conclusions of a military report 
submitted early in 1811. This report considered that the British garrison, 
amounting to 15,000 troops, could repel any attack from the east. And if the 
French were to land in the west, conveyed by a strong naval force from 
Toulon that might always evade the British fleet, it would still be months 
before they could drag their heavy siege guns across the mountains to reduce 
the fortresses of Messina and Milazzo. By which time, it was safely reckoned, 
the navy would haye come to evacuate the army.?® In refusing to strengthen 
Sicily further at the expense of Spain and Portugal, the ministers took a 
calculated risk, but one that proved in the end to be justified. 

<<<PDFPAGE 92>>>
7 
Lord William Bentinck and British Intervention, 
Stage One 
s the constitutional crisis worsened in the early months of 1811, so did 
A relations between the court and British officials, civil and military. The 
refusal of the Sicilian parliament to grant the king the money he had asked for 
led him to try to raise taxes by decree—a patent violation of the constitution. 
The royal edicts of 14 February imposed a tax of 1 percent on all sales, 
including those made by British merchants, and confiscated properties be- 
longing to the church and to various charitable communities, which were 
then ordered to be sold by public lottery. 
When the British merchants protested strongly that the sales tax was 
contrary to the treaty signed with Britain by Spain in 1667 and renewed by 
the Palermo court as recently as 1809, they received the cursory reply they 
should either comply or leave the island. The court was irritated not only by 
this protest but by the appeal being made to London by Prince Belmonte and 
other barons, calling for the repeal of the royal decrees and the summoning of 
a parliament. Protests on behalf of British subjects arrested and detained in 
Sicily and on behalf of the captain and owners of a ship flying the British flag, 
captured by three of Castrone’s privateers, were all rejected out of hand, and 
the British Consul General, Robert Fagan, when he tried to remonstrate with 
Circello, was accorded a less than polite reception. He was then suspended 
from all his functions on the grounds that he was interfering with the normal 
judicial processes.! Meanwhile five leaders of the dissident barons, including 
Belmonte and Castelnuovo, were arrested and deported to the smaller is- 
lands. 
All the tension this generated was made worse by the growing suspicion 
that the queen was involved in treachery. As early as March 1810, Amherst 
had drawn London’s attention to the queen’s change of attitude toward 
Napoleon, after she had learned of the latter’s intended marriage to her 
granddaughter, Princess Marie-Louise. There was evidence that the queen 
was corresponding with the government in Paris through Vienna, with the 
French consulate in Tunis, and with Lucien Bonaparte, a prisoner in Malta. 
In February 1811, reports reached Amherst that the queen had made a secret 
agreement by which the king was to get back Naples, while an Austrian 
88 

<<<PDFPAGE 93>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
89 
prince was to rule in Sicily with the support of German troops. Though 
Circello, on behalf of the court, made a solemn denial of these rumors and 
assured Amherst that the king still remained staunchly loyal to the British 
alliance, Amherst professed himself dissatisfied, until the king conceded a 
unified command.” 
Meanwhile the government in London had at last followed Moore’s ad- 
vice, given to it by him four years earlier, namely to combine the offices in 
Sicily of diplomat and military commander as they had once been under 
General Fox. On 25 February 1811 Lord William Bentinck was appointed to 
this post—envoy extraordinary, minister plenipotentiary, and commander- 
in-chief of the British forces. Bentinck was a man of wide experience in both 
the military and administrative fields, having seen active service in Spain, 
Italy, and the Netherlands, and from 1803 to 1807 he had governed the 
province of Madras. Described by his most recent biographer as possessing 
something of the energy and forthrightness of a great Victorian public 
servant, cool in action and very determined, a Whig idealist but not doc- 
trinaire, he was to fill for the next four years the unenviable and exacting role 
of a British proconsul in Sicily,* which 1s what the ministry had decided that 
it wanted. His plain speaking as a straightforward soldier, as well as his 
somewhat charmless manner disguising what was a strong natural reserve, 
did not endear him to the court, and the queen who resented particularly his 
dictatorial attitude and actions described him as being a wild beast, a boorish 
sergeant, someone who having been sent to Sicily merely “in order to bow 
and scrape” had the temerity to give laws to the country.° While the king, 
completely unaccustomed to hear such blunt language used to a sovereign, 
thought of Bentinck as an instrument of God, sent to punish him for all his 
sins.© 
The British government had long been under pressure to intervene more 
in Sicilian affairs—pressures exerted by members of Parliament, a section of 
the popular press, the publications of Francis Leckie (the Scotsman who had 
farmed near Syracuse), British merchants who did business in Sicily, and also 
by a very influential book by the army captain Charles W. Pasley. Indeed the 
ministers had had some difficulty in persuading the irate Castelcicala that they 
were anxious to give such protection “to the honour and dignity of an ally” as 
the law allowed against offensive publications. A letter published in the 
Morning Post on 14 August 1810, which suggested that Sicily could only be 
saved by Britain annexing it and pensioning the king, caused the institution 
of legal proceedings, though a month later these were dropped. And a report 
in the Morning Chronicle on 2 May 1811 
reporting the speech of a member of 
Parliament, in which he had said of Sicily that “a more profligate government 
or a more oppressed people did not exist or had not existed,” called forth 
further protests from Castelcicala and renewed demands that the editor of the 
newspaper be prosecuted.” Captain Pasley’s “Military Policy and Institutions 

<<<PDFPAGE 94>>>
Lord William Cavendish Bentinck, painted by Sir T. Lawrence and engraved by 
R. J. Lane. (Courtesy of the British Museum, London.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 95>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
ot 
of the British Empire” was published in November 1810 and ran through 
four editions in two years. It was read and admired by many army officers, 
including Generals Wellington and Beresford, and it was favorably com- 
mented on in the Quarterly Review of May 1811.8 
Pasley’s thesis was that Sicily had not fulfilled the terms of the treaty under 
which it received a substantial subsidy, and instead of providing an efficient 
army, it absorbed 15,000 of the best British troops. “As long as we hold 
Sicily . 
. 
. without applying its revenues and resources to our own purposes, 
in return for the protection we afford it, it can only be compared to a 
millstone round our necks.” He argued that Sicily was potentially an incom- 
parable asset to Great Britain, and militarily of far more value than all the 
West Indies put together, yet the British government seemed to regard it as 
nothing more than an appendage of Malta. Britain should have conquered it 
in 1805, instead of earning unpopularity by propping up an incompetent 
monarchy. Pasley therefore proposed that a Britain general should be put in 
command of all troops in Sicily, and that commissariat and postal services 
should be placed forthwith under British direction.? 
This may have made uncomfortable reading for the Perceval ministry in 
London, but in the end it was the resignations of both Amherst and Stuart 
coming together, that forced the government to rethink its policy.' 
Bentinck was commissioned by Wellesley to produce a memorandum of 
his views, based on a reading of the relevant dispatches, before being given 
his instructions. His conclusions, which did not please all the cabinet, were 
that if Britain were to keep Sicily, she could not delay her intervention. 
Britain, he submitted, must control the subsidy, take command of all troops 
in the island, appoint Sicilians to the government, and ensure the reform of 
outstanding abuses. These measures would appeal to the people and might 
have a great effect on Italy. If the Sicilian court refused to accept them, then 
the minister should withdraw to Messina. The great and pressing evil in Sicily 
demanded a “speedy and decisive remedy,” and unless he was given extraordi- 
nary powers he felt he could not perform the task or cope with all the “deceit, 
low cunning and intrigues of that miserable court.”?* 
The Prime Minister, Perceval, was not impressed by this reasoning. He 
pointed out that for the past five years every military authority had said the 
same thing, namely that the security of Sicily depended on effecting these 
reforms. Yet Sicily was still defended. The revolution envisaged by Bentinck 
would overthrow the royal prerogative and also noble and corporate priv- 
ileges, and he was not convinced that the changes proposed would necessarily 
result in the promised gains. He did not believe in the queen’s treachery and 
thought her jealousy of Britain understandable, and he did not feel that the 
use of violence was justified in the circumstances. Bentinck must be urged to 
accept the post, provided the views he submitted to the court were the British 
government’s and not his own.'? 

<<<PDFPAGE 96>>>
92 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
It was for this reason that Bentinck’s instructions specified that he must 
reassure the court. Britain, he must tell it, had no intention of interfering in 
its internal affairs or of trying to effect a revolution in the Sicilian constitu- 
tion. Nevertheless the king and queen must be informed that Britain, being 
as anxious as they were to see them restored to the kingdom of Naples and 
equally anxious to use Sicily’s resources in order to achieve this end, felt that 
the people must first be appeased. This could be done only by granting a 
share in the government to Sicilians, by paying heed to Sicily’s parliament, 
and by redressing popular grievances. If the court was not willing to do these 
things and so was faced by a revolution, it could not expect from its British 
ally any military or other assistance. 
Bentinck’s arrival in Sicily was awaited with both anxiety and hope, 
according to Douglas, the secretary of legation, who told Wellesley that most 
Sicilians would now “be satisfied with nothing less than the British flag flying 
all over Sicily,” and a “total eradication of the abominable system.”!4 When 
he did arrive on 18 July, only two days had elapsed after the arrest of the five 
barons—something he thought not coincidental, for having learnt of his 
reputation the court was afraid he might enlist the support of these noble 
dissidents. He stayed in Sicily five weeks only, at the end of which he 
returned to England to report and to ask for wider powers. He had, during 
his very brief stay, encountered a completely negative attitude on the part of 
the king and queen and their ministers, who denied there was any sort of 
crisis and therefore the need for any measures to meet one. He was told that 
the levy of 1 percent had been entirely constitutional, the barons’ protest had 
been illegal and disapproved of by parliament, the stories of popular discon- 
tent were entirely without foundation, and the barons who had lodged the 
protest were in no way representative. Although he considered it unlikely 
there would be a serious revolt with the opposition leaders removed, spies 
and informers everywhere, and the royal army disliking the people, Bentinck 
was convinced of the need for change—a change that could only be effected 
by controlling the British subsidy and by employing forcible language.!5 
Before he left Sicily for England, Bentinck had appointed General Freder- 
ick Maitland to act in his absence as his deputy, and Maitland soon convinced 
himself that the Sicilian government had joined hands with the enemy. 
Maitland wrote to Wellesley in some anxiety: 
We are in such a state as our enemy would wish—we believe the Sicilian 
government to be plotting and combining for our ruin, and whether from 
consciousness of their intrigues with Bonaparte or from apprehension that 
we will bring about a change of government, from a despotic one, which it 
now is, to a mixed one—certain it is, they distrust and fear us as much as 
we do them.!° 
And when Bentinck returned to the island in the late autumn of 1811, 
Maitland had just unearthed a plot that seemed to involve the court in 

<<<PDFPAGE 97>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
93 
treachery. It entailed the suborning of German troops (part of the garrison of 
Messina), the seizure of the Faro fort, and an invitation to the French in 
Calabria to cross over without opposition. Sixteen people in all were arrested, 
including the colonel of the Sicilian flotilla, the principal judge, and an army 
captain. And a soldier of the Calabrian corps (who was arrested by a British 
patrol) was tried summarily by court martial and executed without further 
ado. The bishop of Oppido was also arrested, although by royal command 
and at Maitland’s request. 
In regard to the earlier “conspiracies,” revealed in the letters sent from 
Calabria that had been seized by the British authorities and had seemed to 
implicate the queen, the king had been anxious to demonstrate his con- 
tinuing loyalty to the alliance. The incriminating letters, so Circello pointed 
out, were clearly intended by whomever sent them (the agents of Murat in 
Calabria) to fall into the hands of the British, and so were designed to sow 
suspicion between Britain and Sicily. In November therefore the king had 
ordered the printing of a special dispatch to be given the widest distribution 
in which he condemned all such attempts to stir up discord between the 
allies. And in order to discourage future messengers, armed with such letters 
and carrying false papers, he decreed that any such persons caught were to be 
hanged within twenty-four hours of their having been found guilty of the 
offence. The British commander, Sir Frederick Maitland, was asked to assist 
in smuggling copies of this dispatch to Calabria, which Maitland of course 
agreed to do.!7 
But then had come the revelations of a “real” conspiracy at Messina. The 
king took violent offense at what seemed to be the high handed manner in 
which Maitland had handled the business. He could not, so Circello pro- 
tested, allow his subjects to be put on trial by the representative of another 
power, and he therefore ordered a special court, to include two British 
officers, to be set up to try the accused. He also took very great exception to a 
proclamation that Maitland had issued appealing for the support of Sicilians 
for the British forces protecting Sicily—a proclamation that had been made 
without the permission of the king, and one in which no mention was made 
of any alliance between Britain and Sicily. And the king took further grave 
exception to the promise, publicly made by Maitland, to pardon all those 
who might turn “king’s evidence.” Pardon was, it was pointed out, the 
prerogative of the king alone.!8 
By this time Bentinck had returned to Sicily and he had to apologize to the 
king for the tactlessness of his deputy. The need for speed in taking action in 
what seemed desperate circumstances had led Maitland, he feared, to forget 
due forms. But what Bentinck refused to accept was the kind of tribunal the 
king envisaged for trying the men accused of treason. The persons arrested 
had been detected in the very center of the British camp and at the headquar- 
ters of the commander-in-chief, and he therefore insisted that the court to try 
them must be appointed by him alone. It should be composed in equal parts 
>) 

<<<PDFPAGE 98>>>
94 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
of British and Sicilian officers and he himself must appoint its president. He 
also asked for authority to arrest and punish summarily anyone found inside 
the British defenses who either aided the enemy or was in correspondence 
with him. To the latter request the king demurred on the grounds that the 
matter was no longer urgent, but he did accede to other demands about the 
appointment of a “council of war” and the way in which it was to be 
composed. 19 
The most important figure in the plot, Captain Rossaroll, an infantry 
officer and chief of the royal police in Messina, was tried by an Anglo-Sicilian 
court, sentenced to death and subsequently hanged.?° Though Rossaroll did 
not reveal at his trial he had been acting on behalf of the queen, Bentinck had 
evidence enough to prove that her advisers were deeply involved. Another of 
her agents, Captain Cassetti, had earlier been arrested in Palermo and the 
letters he carried seemed to show on whose behalf he must have been acting 
in the contacts he had established with Murat.?! The threat to publish the 
relevant documents was one Bentinck used against the court, and the fact that 
the king refused to examine them showed he knew that they were not 
forgeries. But he told Orleans that although the queen had committed many 
indiscretions, he could not believe she would go so far as to correspond with 
the enemy.?7 
These plots were only the culmination of intrigues that had been detected a 
year before, revealing the queen to be rather more of an inveterate schemer 
than a serious danger. Castlereagh told Castelcicala that although he was 
convinced of her treachery, which meant that she could not stay in Sicily, he 
thought she had acted in a moment of passion and not with any premedita- 
tion. Bentinck himself never believed that the queen really meant to give the 
French Sicily, and he thought that only her love of intrigue, her love for 
Naples, and her Anglophobia had led her to compromise herself.23 
It seems that the initial reactions in both London and Messina to events in 
Sicily during 1811 had been overdone. One shrewd observer in Messina, the 
wife of a senior British officer and clearly a woman of some intelligence, 
wrote home of the alarmist reports then being circulated in England about 
the state of unrest in Sicily and the spy scare that for several months had 
caused a flurry in military circles: 
Each party speaks boastfully and threatens much—but in each there is so 
little spirit and real energy and so little genuine patriotism or 
power of 
pursuing consistently for any length of time one steady undeviating 
course—that small indeed is the reliance to be placed in anything said or 
projected by either party—a Sicilian talks loud and long, sometimes even 
well—but he has rarely the resolution or courage necessary for action.24 
That was in August 1811. Five months later, she wrote on the same theme: 
So far from the people of the island being in a state of insurrection, as has 
been asserted in many of your newspapers—the total apathy with which 

<<<PDFPAGE 99>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
95 
they regard the changes now making in their 
government is astonishing 
even to us, who have had for so long an acquaintance with their want of 
sense and good feeling in any matters savouring of patriotism.?5 
In regard to the trials in Messina to investigate allegations of treachery, she 
described how the mountain of the council of war, of which her husband had 
been a member, had labored long to produce its mouse. (It had sat for seven 
weeks and examined an enormous volume of written evidence.) The pris- 
oners accused of selling the island had, the court found, merely offered to 
trade some trifling details to the French in Calabria about British strengths 
and dispositions, only in order to obtain facilities for promoting a trade in 
contraband.7° 
Bentinck had returned from England armed with the power to withhold 
the subsidy if the court refused to accept his demands. These were: the 
immediate appointment of Sicilians to positions of influence, the conceding 
of a unified command, the recall of the five exiled barons, and the removal of 
anti-British advisers.2” He proceeded at once to use this power, though it did 
not yield instantaneous results. His interviews with the king and queen and 
Marquis Circello all proved fruitless, so he sent for a regiment from Malta 
and ordered his troops at Milazzo and Trapani to embark on transports and 
sail for Palermo. As he wrote to General Oakes, the civil commissioner in 
Malta, “this uncertainty will never be determined until force, or the ap- 
pearance of force, shall produce the necessity of a decision.” It was a policy 
that Robert Fagan had urged on him the previous September (“every point 
will be obtained in four hours . 
. 
. Good God, what ridiculous and ill-judged 
delicacy has directed our conduct till the present”).?8 And indeed there were 
many others, generals, admirals and diplomats, who had acquaintance with 
Sicily and the political position there, who had written him letters of encour- 
agement, urging him to take a very firm line. 
In a stormy interview with the queen, Bentinck found himself accused of 
trying to dethrone the king, whose only course, so the queen declared, was to 
lead his army into Italy and die in the breach, like Tippoo Sultan.?? She 
ridiculed the whole idea of choosing Sicilians as ministers—people “who 
could neither read nor write”—yet there was little she could do.?° She was 
however almost certainly responsible for encouraging an officer called Melito 
to try to stir up the mob in the capital, and Bentinck now decided to make 
that city the future headquarters of the British garrison." 
The king offered to abdicate (a course that Bentinck himself favored) and 
was only dissuaded by the queen. But in the face of the military threat, he did 
agree to appoint his eldest son, the hereditary prince, as vicar general (a 
course that the queen had also opposed), although he refused to delegate any 
control over foreign affairs. He also agreed to a unified command, with 
Bentinck henceforth as captain general, and to recalling the five barons 
without any conditions attached.? 
Yet despite his apparent victory, Bentinck discovered that little was hap- 

<<<PDFPAGE 100>>>
96 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
pening, and he began to regret his precipitancy in resuming the payment of 
the British subsidy. The court was expert at procrastination, and the heredi- 
tary prince was no exception, being far more under the influence of his 
parents than Bentinck had either supposed or hoped. The prince tried to have 
the former ministers, including Circello, retained as councillors, a course to 
which Bentinck strongly objected, given their unprogressive views and gen- 
eral unpopularity. And the prince also took the view that to summon 
parliament at this time, when popular opinion was so inflamed, would merely 
be courting revolution, despite Bentinck’s attempt to impress on him that 
nothing less than a parliament could solve the country’s financial problems 
and introduce much-needed reforms. The king, who together with the queen 
really governed the hereditary prince, was convinced that Bentinck had 
exceeded his powers, and he therefore counted on Bentinck’s recall before a 
parliament could be summoned and a new constitution introduced. For that 
reason he advised the prince to delay in effecting any change.#4 
A new ministry was eventually formed of four members of the Sicilian 
nobility: Belmonte, Castelnuovo, Cassaro, and Aci, though not until March 
1812, and even then it failed to gain the hereditary prince’s confidence. 
Parliament did not meet until May and no progress whatsoever was made 
toward adopting a new constitution. There were still too many anti-British 
advisers who surrounded the king and queen, even if the worst had been 
removed (Ascoli exiled to Sardinia,3+ Castrone shut up in Castellamare, and 
Medici allowed to go to England in order to plead the cause of the queen 
there). Bentinck was certain that the queen was the real cause of all the delay. 
She was responsible, according to Belmonte, for spreading rumors that the 
latter was trying to get rid of the hereditary prince and set up a regency under 
Orleans. Orleans was the intimate of Belmonte and also the trusted friend of 
Bentinck, whom, through his link with the royal family, he was able to keep 
very well informed of what was being thought and done at court. Orleans 
told the hereditary prince that he was wrong to suspect him of wanting his 
place; that if he wanted that he would not try so hard to reconcile him to the 
British command. But the rumor, once started, was hard to scotch, and 
Bentinck thought it was one of the reasons for the unpopularity of the 
British.35 
Bentinck tried without any success to persuade the queen to leave Sicily, 
letting her know he was well acquainted with her agents dealings with the 
enemy. She grew by turns angry and tearful at the harshness of Bentinck’s 
inflexibility, his attempt to get rid of her “as if she were nothing but a 
common prostitute,” and his refusal to pay her debts, and she resolutely 
declined to move.#° The court had been banking on Bentinck’s support for 
an expedition to Italy and had therefore professed to approve of the idea of 
Sicily having a new constitution, having been convinced by Moliterno of the 
magical importance of that word as the key that would unlock the kingdom 

<<<PDFPAGE 101>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
97 
of Naples. Moliterno himself liked to pose as the leader of an Italian resist- 
ance movement, obtaining the queen’s support by suggesting she herself 
might eventually become the ruler of all Italy. But Bentinck made clear he 
would not allow any Italian expedition until Sicily was given the free consti- 
tution he wished her to have. And when British troops in Sicily were ordered 
to Spain and not Italy, the court lost interest in the constitution.37 
Bentinck’s frustration reached breaking point when he found himself 
obstructed in measures for reforming the royal army in Sicily, whose con- 
dition he considered such that “no officer could lead it to the field with any 
confidence of victory.” The hereditary prince refused to allow him to issue 
orders except through the minister, on the grounds that he had no authority 
from the king and that Bentinck had already agreed to Sicily being governed 
by Sicilian ministers. The minister in question was Aci, a man who, Bentinck 
came to think, had “more vanity than patriotism,” was certainly incompetent, 
and deeply resented having to share the credit for army reform with anyone. 
Bentinck therefore decided he had once again to step in and withhold the 
subsidy.38 The Sicilian reaction was immediate. Parliament, though it had 
been elected in the spring, had not been summoned till 8 July, and since then 
it had done nothing at all. It now met on 20 July and passed all the 
fundamental articles (or Bases) of the constitution in one all-night sitting.9? 
The constitution approved by the parliament provided for a bicameral 
legislature with the exclusive power of making laws, and one to which 
government ministers and public officials were now responsible. Parliament 
was to meet at least once a year, though the king had the right to prorogue 
and dissolve it, as well as the right to veto laws. The king was given a civil list, 
while the Commons controlled all public expenditure. The judiciary were 
independent; there was trial by jury and the right of habeas corpus, and 
relative freedom of the press. But only the literate had the right to vote and 
the right to sit in parliament (which meant about 15,000 men out of a 
population of a million-and-a-half). The guilds and all religious bodies were 
to lose all their privileges, while feudal rights and entail were abolished, with 
certain provisions made for compensation. Sicily was declared independent, 
the king was forbidden to leave the island without the consent of parliament, 
and a provision was made, if he went back to Naples, for his eldest son to 
remain as viceroy.*° 
The modelling of'the constitution on the English prototype was deliberate, 
because in Sicily (outside Catania) there was more sympathy for English 
ideas of the politically enlightened kind than for those of Rousseau and the 
French Revolution, and Balsamo, who drafted the constitution, was well 
versed in English common law as well as in the writings of Blackstone. It was 
not originally Bentinck’s intention that the constitution should be so mod- 
elled, although he had been given complete discretion by Castlereagh to 
make recommendations. And he had at first opposed the idea of copying the 

<<<PDFPAGE 102>>>
98 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
English constitution, since he rightly thought it unsuited to Sicily. He had 
told Belmonte that because the English constitution was such that no one 
understood it or was able even to define it, to adopt it as a model was inviting 
ridicule. Later however he changed his mind, but only because no alternative 
plan seemed to present fewer difficulties.41 The king believed that the English 
constitution safeguarded the royal prerogative; the queen, who derived her 
knowledge from Medici, concluded that it was largely nonexistent, while 
what did exist was largely negative.4? But if Bentinck did not beget the 
constitution, he was certainly an active midwife at its birth. The Italian 
historian Capograssi thinks that without Bentinck’s enthusiasm it could 
never have seen the light of day. But clearly this enthusiasm got the better of 
his sober judgment and led him to imagine that Sicily, because it had for so 
many centuries boasted of having a constitution, must have had the necessary 
experience to assimilate a new one on the English model.#3 
The king was at first most unwilling to sanction the resolutions of the 
parliament, and adopted his usual delaying tactics. When pressed by Ben- 
tinck, he became very angry, exclaiming “Never, never, never” would he 
assent to the constitution. An English constitution, yes, but this was neither 
English nor Sicilian. But the threat of withholding the subsidy proved in the 
end to be decisive, because it was obvious that without it the army would not 
be paid or fed. The king therefore signified his agreement to the prince, 
although he insisted that he approved only of those articles that conformed 
with the English constitution.4+ He even talked of sending it to England, to 
be scrutinized and reported on, but in his heart he could never bring himself 
to approve of any new constitution. He later told Bentinck that he was afraid 
that the changes it brought could only end in bloodshed, revolution, and 
anarchy. “We are living with cannibals,” he said, and fearing for his life and 
property and for those of his family, he wanted a warship standing by to carry 
them off to some safe haven.45 
The hereditary prince was also, at heart, no enthusiast for the constitution, 
and he filled the role allotted to him out of fear rather than genuine convic- 
tion. He was fond of repeating the Latin tag Nescit regnare qui nescit simulare 
(He knows not how to reign who knows not how to feign), and Bentinck 
was amazed that such a “blockhead” should be so adept at dissimulation. In 
his private correspondence with Castelcicala, the prince complained of being 
bullied by Bentinck (of whom he was obviously afraid), as well as reviled by 
his father and mother, the queen calling him a villain and the king accusing 
him of ambition. Belmonte thought his character was “like that of a woman, 
subject very much to change,” while Bentinck told the Duke of Orleans that 
it was only fear or force that would ever induce the prince to act. Bentinck 
thought he was terrified of being damned for disobliging his parents, “always 
seeing Hell on one side and the reproach of posterity on the other.” Not 
possessing a strong character, the prince tried merely to keep afloat, refrain- 

<<<PDFPAGE 103>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
99 
ing from compromising himself in the hope of preserving the dynasty. When 
he gave his approval to the constitution, he gave it in a qualified form, and he 
excepted from his approval articles relating to the civil list, the right of 
parliament to control expenditures, and compensation for the loss of civil 
rights.*° 
Much (too much) of Bentinck’s time was given up to getting rid of the 
queen, to whose presence in Sicily, it can now be seen, he attached an 
exaggerated importance. The king liked to shelter behind the queen, making 
out that it was she, not he, who was really the cause of any obstructions. The 
king, in his attitude to the queen’s removal, was, according to Belmonte, a 
cunning “old Fox,” pretending he could not get his wife to leave in order to 
make the British use force and thereby enhance his own prestige.47 In 
October 1812 Bentinck at last after considerable difficulty persuaded the king 
to induce the queen to go away to Santa Margherita (a town in the southwest 
of the island and far enough from the king and Prince), the king meanwhile 
living at La Ficuzza, a shooting lodge thirty miles from Palermo. The queen 
arranged that the following spring she would leave the island altogether, 
having been promised by the Habsburg emperor that she would be welcome 
to come to Vienna (although in fact the emperor did not want her there but 
found it impossible to refuse her). Yet two months later she was pleading her 
debts and her poverty as reasons for staying.*8 Castlereagh supported Ben- 
tinck in his efforts to exclude the queen from government and engineer her 
departure from Sicily, having been considerably impressed by the documents 
that Bentinck had sent him. He made clear to Castelcicala that Britain could 
no longer tolerate someone who stood in the way of change, misled foreign 
powers like Austria and Russia about Britain’s future intentions for Sicily, 
and engaged in treasonable correspondences. He did however in writing to 
Bentinck stress his desire to save the queen’s face by avoiding the use of any 
force, and to make her leaving Sicily appear to have been done by arrange- 
ment only.4? But when in April 1813 this dispatch arrived in Sicily, events 
had overtaken it and induced Bentinck to use forcible methods. 
Bentinck was angry when he found that the queen, in breach of the 
previous agreement, had returned to Ficuzza to be once more with the king; 
and still more angry when the king denied he had made any promise in regard 
to the queen, asserting that the written undertaking, signed on his behalf by 
Cassaro and Circellé, had merely been an expression of his wishes.°° Bentinck 
was already most dissatisfied with the influence that the duke of Ascoli 
(though in exile) continued to have on the king through his aide-de-camp 
Colonel Frilli, who acted as the king’s secretary, and through Lonzelot, 
comptroller of the royal household. And to compound matters, the king (he 
found) was consulting Cassaro and other barons who, disliking the idea of 
abolishing entail, had split the ministry and turned to the crown. Although 
parliament had since November completed its work on the constitution, the 

<<<PDFPAGE 104>>>
100 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Royal shooting lodge, La Ficuzza. (Photo by M. Woolley.) 
king had, to Bentinck’s annoyance, so far made no move to give it his 
sanction.>1 
Bentinck was also increasingly frustrated at what he regarded as the weak- 
ness of the ministry—the lack of mutual confidence shown between ministers 
and the hereditary prince, disunion among ministers themselves, and the lack 
of cabinet government as that was understood in England. Bentinck said that 
all he could give was support to the administration—it was for ministers to 
lead the House. Belmonte in whom hitherto Bentinck had reposed such 
confidence now seemed “blinded by his own vanity,” could not apply himself 
to business, and was quite hopeless as a prime minister. Without assuming 
the government himself, Bentinck found it difficult to take a firmer line, as 
Orleans was urging him to do. “We appeared to have everything our own 
way and to have all the power . 
. 
. while in fact we have nothing. 
. 
. .°52 
Bentinck through Belmonte now approached the king, requesting that he 
sanction the constitution, call a new parliament as soon as possible, and order 
the queen away from Ficuzza. Although the queen was induced to go to 
Castelvetrano in the south of the island, the king on 9 March 1813 arrived 
unexpectedly in Palermo and announcd that he was resuming power, without 
informing either Bentinck or the prince. Acclaimed vociferously in the 
streets, he seemed to be returning in triumph, an event that was celebrated 

<<<PDFPAGE 105>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
101 
shortly after by a solemn Te Deum being sung in the cathedral. But two days 
later he had to endure a stormy interview with Bentinck during which the 
latter told him plainly that he would not permit him to destroy the constitu- 
tion. The king was furious at what he regarded as Bentinck’s arrogant and 
threatening tone. He kept repeating the word “permit” with ever increasing 
irritation, arguing that Britain had no right to meddle in Sicily’s internal 
affairs.53 
For the next fortnight Bentinck endeavored to treat with the king through 
intermediaries (as the king refused to see him personally)—the king’s con- 
fessor, Prince Belmonte, the hereditary prince, and the duke of Orleans. 
Relations became increasingly strained, with Belmonte and all the ministers 
resigning, the king still adamant in his refusal to let Bentinck treat him (in his 
own words) as if Bentinck was his schoolmaster, and Bentinck widely re- 
ported as saying he would have the king and queen taken to London while he 
set up a regency in the island.5* Both the king and queen still clung to the 
hope that Bentinck was unsupported in London. Castelcicala had recently 
assured them that the ministers in Britain left their officials overseas without 
any definite instructions—if they succeeded, the ministers took the credit, 
while if they failed, they broke their neck. Since the mail between England 
and Sicily could take from two to three months to arrive, it was easy enough 
to insinuate that Britain’s representative had exceeded his instructions. It was 
a ploy that Paoli had used eighteen years earlier in Corsica when he had 
successfully undermined the morale of the British viceroy. But Bentinck was 
made of sterner stuff than the strangely self-doubting Gilbert Elliot, and 
Castlereagh was more punctual in answering dispatches than the ever-dila- 
tory Duke of Portland. 
After a week Bentinck’s patience was exhausted and he finally decided on 
the use of force. When he heard that the king was about to attend another 
thanksgiving service in the capital, and fearing a popular disturbance would 
follow, he ordered his troops and guns onto the streets, and threatened the 
king with the end of the alliance. At one stage he even contemplated forcing 
the king to abdicate in favor of the hereditary prince and then making the 
king his prisoner, but he realized his instructions did not allow for this.>° 
There was of course no attempt at resistance. The king agreed to delegate all 
his powers to the hereditary prince and accepted that the queen must be 
ordered to leave. Ih return, his civil list was confirmed and the queen was 
assured financial solvency. Even then, in order to get the king to put this 
agreement in writing, Bentinck had to post fifty dragoons on the road out of 
the palace at Colli in case the king should try to escape and raise a civil war in 
the countryside. What the king now put his signature to was a promise not 
only to restore the Vicariate but also not to resume his powers until permit- 
ted by Bentinck to do so.57 Before finally signing the agreement, the king had 
made yet one final effort to slip out of the political noose by offering to make 

<<<PDFPAGE 106>>>
102 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Bentinck his prime minister or “Grand Chancellor.” Not unnaturally this 
offer was refused, Bentinck replying that he could not see how any foreigner 
could hold such a post.°8 
The king thus put firmly on one side, it only remained to deal with the 
queen and those advisers of the court who were known to be unfriendly to 
the constitution. The hereditary prince, at Bentinck’s request, relieved of 
their posts the king’s recent supporters, the barons Cassaro, Cuto, and Aci, 
agreed to deprive of all influence Tommasi, Hesse, and Circello, and ordered 
out of Sicily foreigners like Frilli and Moliterno.5? To the queen, who was 
still at Castelvetrano, Bentinck sent Macfarlane, a tactful general, with orders 
to ensure she left Sicily and to make arrangements for her departure. To make 
certain that the queen complied and did not attempt to raise the people, 
Bentinck dispatched three battalions of infantry, together with a squadron of 
cavalry. There was no physical resistance, but a great many protests and 
delays (some of them caused by the queen’s ill-health) until she finally 
departed from Mazzara on 14 June 1813. She sailed aboard a British warship, 
escorted by two more, travelled to Vienna via Constantinople, and died there 
in September 1814 shortly after her arrival. Financially she had been gener- 
ously treated, the British government paying her debts, redeeming her per- 
sonal jewels from pawn, and granting her a respectable allowance. Whether 
she had really been worth so much trouble and all this expense is perhaps 
debatable. What is certain is that her removal was not a solution to the 
island’s problems or to those of the British in Sicily.6° 
Bentinck now appeared to have triumphed, though he regretted that the 
relevant dispatches had arrived too late to make his coup needless. For what 
the dispatches did was make clear what the queen had been trying to cast a 
doubt on (thus bringing on a political crisis), namely that Bentinck had the 
support of the British ministers in London. But now he felt certain that the 
matter was resolved, the queen’s influence was finally extinguished (“the 
cause of all our past embarrassments”), the king was neutralized, the prince 
had full powers, and the ministry enjoyed his confidence. It was one in whose 
work he now played a full part, attending the council regularly and meeting 
ministers at his house or theirs to discuss tactics and policies, and the shaping 
of the new constitution. So involved had Bentinck become in bestowing a 
constitution on Sicily that he gave the matter priority over all other consid- 
erations, including the question urged by the British ministers of his taking 
over the command in Spain. It seemed to the egregious Sir Robert Wilson 
(disliked by Bentinck for his interference in the politics of the court at 
Palermo), who was staying in Sicily at this time, that the British were 
“preparing for a crusade, with the British code of laws on the points of our 
bayonets.”61 
Bentinck felt that he could now boast that the old system against which the 
British had been contending for the past six years had at last been “com- 

<<<PDFPAGE 107>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
103 
pletely demolished.”©? But there is a certain irony about this boast. Only 
eight months before he had told Bunbury, “We are now masters and kings if 
you please,”°? while seven months later he was to find himself forced to 
assume the role of dictator. 
Castlereagh was not entirely pleased when he learnt from Bentinck what 
had happened in March. “We must,” he wrote back, “so try to arrange as to 
obviate the necessity of frequent acts of undisguised power.” Withholding 
the subsidy, he thought, should be a sufficient curb on the king, and stronger 
measures ought not to be necessary.°* It was certainly true that financial 
embarrassment continued to force the king and the prince to lean heavily on 
the British. The king complained of being burdened by debt, which he would 
not allow parliament to shoulder, fearing that the latter might at some time 
call him publicly to account. Bentinck, who the previous November had 
intervened to prevent parliament voting as much as a fifth of its revenue to 
meet the needs of the royal family, now had to lend the king and the prince 
enough money to tide them over.©> But he thought that the situation in 
Sicily was sufficiently stable for him to leave it to take command in eastern 
Spain, where his army had in the past few months suffered from unsatisfac- 
tory leadership. Accordingly he sailed from the island on 27 May 1813, 
delegating to Lord Montgomerie his plenary powers as minister. Neither 
Belmonte nor Orleans had wanted Bentinck to go away, but the latter felt it 
his only chance for what he termed “recovering his troops,” by which he 
meant, presumably, being able to retain a lien on them for a future Italian 
expedition.©® Even so, he took the precaution of taking with him a private 
letter in which Belmonte had given him warning of democratic perils ahead, 
so that he could, if the occasion demanded, justify a sudden return to Sicily.°” 

<<<PDFPAGE 108>>>
8 
Lord William Bentinck and British Intervention, 
Stage Two 
uring the absence of Bentinck in Spain, things went badly wrong in 
D Sicily, indeed so wrong that government, through lack of funds, was 
brought completely to a standstill, and parliament refused to grant money 
until its radical demands were met. Why things went wrong is a matter for 
debate. The Abbate Balsamo took the view that the troubles were really 
entirely due to the absence of Bentinck’s guiding hand in a political scene that 
was highly volatile.! Bentinck’s biographer, Dr. Rosselli, does not go as far as 
this, but he does consider that Bentinck’s presence would have prevented 
much of the friction—friction between Sicilians and British and between the 
various political factions.? Another historian, Dr. Lackland, thinks that much 
of the trouble stemmed from the recent departure of the queen, fear and 
dislike for whom had for so long bound together the parliamentarians. But 
she does concede that with Bentinck there things would not have reached the 
pitch they did, even though he could not have prevented a radical movement 
from emerging.* 
There is one factor that stands out in the turbulent scene of the summer 
months and that is the degree to which popular feeling was now directed 
against the British, something that struck Bentinck forcibly when he even- 
tually returned to the island.* It was they who had backed the constitution, 
and its enemies were not slow to associate all current troubles with the British 
presence. The British were really an obvious scapegoat for every fresh ill that 
affected the island, whether it was the threat of plague, the high prices of 
food in the towns, or the use of troops and martial law to restore order in the 
capital. A very serious outbreak of plague that affected Malta in 1813 had 
resulted in the Sicilian government imposing strict quarantine regulations 
and interpreting them in such a way that trade with the outside world was 
stopped. The British merchants were furious that licenses were being refused 
them to allow the landing of goods and passengers even from plague- 
free England and Spain, while attempts to get a relaxation of the total 
prohibition against ships from Malta calling at any Sicilian port gave rise to 
public accusations of officials’ disregarding public safety. The British army 
too was incensed at the government’s lack of cooperation in even the simplest 
104 

<<<PDFPAGE 109>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage Two 
105 
matters of routine, its refusal to allow troops to land and even to permit the 
landing of some cavalry horses dispatched from Egypt. The question of the 
horses became so sensitive that it gave rise to a debate in parliament. The 
horses were landed in defiance of the rules, on express orders from General 
Macfarlane, but eventually they were sent off to Spain, after Lord 
Montgomerie intervened. Marching the horses across the island would, he 
realized, have meant using force.® 
Force did have to be used in Palermo when on 18 and 19 July 1813 riots 
and disorders occurred in the capital. Provoked initially by the shortages of 
food and the profiteering accompanying them, they were naturally exploited 
by all those people who were eager to discredit the ministry. Indeed the food 
crisis had been induced by the removal of price controls—a policy adopted by 
Castelnuovo, minister of finance and a disciple of free trade—and Bentinck 
was forced a few months later to reintroduce a “law of the maximum.” British 
troops and artillery had to be used to restore order and the ringleaders of the 
revolt were executed.°® 
But all this was merely the background to a major constitutional crisis. A 
split had occurred in the ranks of the ministry and its supporters in parlia- 
ment, brought about by differences over abolishing feudal rights and entail. 
It was an ideological argument that divided Belmonte from his uncle Cas- 
telnuovo, though strong personal and material considerations also entered 
into it, causing Belmonte to turn his coat in order to side with the demo- 
crats.” There had emerged in the parliament a radical democratic party led by 
men influenced by France and the ideas of the French Revolution. Chief 
among these was a lawyer Rossi (the so-called “Mirabeau of Sicily”) and an 
ex-shopkeeper called Gaspare Vaccaro, president of the Board of Health (a 
body the British found highly obstructive). The latter was so plausible that he 
made quite an impression on Bentinck, who later described him favorably as 
being both “able and educated.”§ Both Vaccaro and Rossi, had spent some 
time living in revolutionary France, and Rossi had no love for the English, 
having once been imprisoned by Nelson. These two and their followers (men 
from the Sicily outside Palermo who were jealous of the capital and all that it 
represented) stood for the destruction of noble privileges and for a fairer 
distribution of wealth—cheaper food, agrarian reform, the breaking up of 
great estates, more church property to be sold, and an equitable system of 
taxation. They were certainly not the red revolutionaries of the extreme 
Jacobin kind, though their radicalism so alarmed the British that Macfarlane 
did not consider it safe to dispatch any reinforcements to Spain. Their tactic 
in the parliament was the classic one of steadily refusing to vote any taxes, and 
referring everything to committees on which they were always well repre- 
sented, until their first demand was met—the amalgamation of the houses of 
parliament.? 
At the end of July 1813 the ministry resigned, demoralized by Belmonte’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 110>>>
106 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
opportunism and frightened of a probable vote of censure for having intro- 
duced martial law. Montgomerie managed to get the prince to appoint a 
phantom ministry in order to maintain the semblance of government, and he 
toyed with the idea of a dissolution, which Orleans favored but the prince did 
not.!° Bentinck had written to dissuade Montgomerie not only from dissoly- 
ing parliament, but also from using violence against men like Rossi. Neither 
the press nor parliament in Britain would tolerate arresting men merely on 
account of their opinions, and in any event he did not think a revolution in 
Sicily likely, the people in general being far too timid. If there was to be a 
revolution, it was better that it should come from the actions of the parlia- 
ment than from any unconstitutional acts of the crown.1!! 
Montgomerie accepted Bentinck’s advice. Nevertheless he persuaded the 
prince to veto two resolutions of parliament that he regarded as dangerous: 
an attempt to get control of the army by using it to enforce the quarantine, 
and sending a deputation to London to complain of the conduct of British 
generals. At one stage he went so far as to threaten the parliament with 
instant dissolution if it still refused to vote supplies, it now having adopted 
the ruse of voting enough for a few months only, with the aim (or so 
Montgomerie thought) of perpetuating its existence and becoming a kind of 
Sicilian Long Parliament. When in the face of Montgomerie’s threat it did 
vote taxes for a year ahead, it still did not vote the ways and means by which 
those taxes could be raised, so Montgomerie got the prince to prorogue it 
until Bentinck returned at the start of October. 
+2 
Bentinck left Spain reluctantly and to Wellington’s extreme displeasure, 
and only because of the urgent pleas of the hereditary prince, the duke of 
Orleans, Generals Montgomerie and Macfarlane, and a number of Sicilian 
constitutionalists.!2 He was, it was clear, the only man who could resolve the 
crisis in Sicily. Montgomerie and his secretary Joseph Smith had been 
suffering from the effects of ill-health (they both died before the year was 
out), and neither had the experience to deal with the complex political 
situation that had developed since Bentinck left, Montgomerie being no 
diplomatist and Smith being new to Sicily.14 
Bentinck landed once more in Sicily on 3 October 1813. At once he set 
about trying to find a solution through the parliament, addressing its mem- 
bers personally and lobbying them in a final endeavor to get the financial 
measures adopted. When this failed, he had to resort to getting the prince to 
dissolve the parliament having appointed a new ministry whose members 
Bentinck picked himself.!5 But this ministry, for all its compliance, did not have 
the required courage to proclaim a state of emergency, which Bentinck now 
reckoned to be essential, if only because attacks on property had brought in a 
new and alarming element. So Bentinck himself proclaimed the emergency, 
assuming full responsibility for maintaining order in the island. He ordered 
his troops to march into the interior, where apparently they were 

<<<PDFPAGE 111>>>
Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage Two 
107 
well received, and he threatened with trial by a military court anyone who 
disturbed the peace. He had become, like Oliver Cromwell, a military dic- 
tator malgré lui.1© 
This patent admission of failure to find a political solution of a liberal kind, 
toward which his principles propelled him, underlined his now deep disillu- 
sion with Sicilians as political animals. The hereditary prince he now re- 
garded as weaker than the weakest of his subjects; Belmonte as more 
dangerous as a friend than an enemy; the nobles as lacking in education, 
courage, and the knowledge of public affairs; and the people as wanting the 
advantages of liberty without being prepared to serve or to pay for them.!7 
Bentinck seemed at last to have been converted to the views of the consul 
general Fagan. The latter for months had been counselling him to use the 
methods of a dictator with this people who failed to show any respect for 
familiarity or kindly treatment—“too long accustomed to the rod of iron not 
to get wild when you give them a certain liberty.”!8 Yet really Bentinck had 
known it all along. Writing in his journal in June 1812 he had referred to the 
Sicilians as “bullies, only to be managed by fear; they take advantage of the 
least concessions and always construe conciliation into weakness.”!? “Vanity 
was the great defect of the country” he had again confided to his journal, and 
he “doubted whether [they] were made for freedom.” It was a pity, he came 
to think, that the court had not paid attention to him when he first arrived in 
Sicily, for it would have been easier for the British to act through one single 
authority (the king) than through a Sicilian parliament.?° 
The nobles who at the beginning led the movement for the constitution 
were now for the most part content to destroy it, frightened of the prospect 
of universal suffrage and of the nationalization of private land. They had 
imagined they were going to return to their positions in the Middle Ages, 
free of the kind of royal restrictions imposed at the end of the eighteenth 
century by the king’s reforming viceroys. When they realized that what they 
had opened was in fact a Pandora’s box of change, they saw the time had 
come to backtrack. As Joseph Smith succinctly expressed it, “Rather than 
yield to the people they would yield to the crown again.”?? In these circum- 
stances Bentinck had felt he had no alternative but to intervene. “Sicily can 
only be saved from political convulsions by our interference 
. 
. 
. if we don’t 
direct, the enemy will.” 
As Luisa Giardina has pointed out in her article on Bentinck and his 
Sicilian journal, Bentinck had not initially been someone intent on the use of 
force or convinced that he must direct the Sicilians. Rather it had been 
Belmonte who had pressed him continually to be more ruthless and chided 
him for being too moderate and goodnatured. But Belmonte, as Bentinck 
came to realize, was largely interested in using the British to get rid of his 
enemies for him, and he had even tried in Bentinck’s absence to induce Smith 
and Montgomerie to arrest 560 of his opponents. Little wonder that Ben- 

<<<PDFPAGE 112>>>
108 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
tinck became so disillusioned with his Sicilians who reacted only, as he 
expressed it, to the strong man who was content to offer them “bonbons in 
the one hand and the stick in the other.”?% 
Yet blanket condemnations of a whole people seldom succeed in carrying 
conviction. Here they seem rather to be a reflection on Bentinck himself and 
on his attempt to impose a constitution on Sicily (“in part a creation of your 
own” as Castlereagh had written to him)?* through a small section of the 
aristocracy, in which he had placed an unjustified faith. The people by whom 
he had been “let down” were not the mass of Sicilians nor the majority of the 
literate, for they had not even been consulted. It had been a mistake to allow 
the old parliament to act as a constituent assembly, because by its traditional 
composition it could represent only minority interests. As Enzo Sciacca has 
pointed out,?° the radicals of the Demaniale and later those in the House of 
Commons were absent from the constitutional debates and the making of the 
constitution of 1812. He suggests (as Giovanni Aceto did earlier writing in 
1827) that had the Sicilian radicals taken part in a proper constituent assem- 
bly, possibly much of the disequilibrium of the new order would have been 
avoided, and perhaps the constitutional experiment initiated by Bentinck 
might not have failed. This is certainly a large supposition. But when Ben- 
tinck got the prince to dissolve the parliament in October, the democrats in it 
whom he accused of endeavoring to usurp the functions of both executive 
and judiciary were not the extremists they have been painted by the constitu- 
tionalist historians. Not even the most extreme of them ever tried to force the 
hand of the prince over the selection of his ministers. Sciacca thinks it a pity 
that some were not chosen to hold ministerial posts (an idea Castelnuovo had 
earlier toyed with), for if they had been they could have done a good deal to 
calm the troubled waters.?© Of course the radicals were anti-British, because 
they saw in British intervention the propping up of the dominant aristocracy 
and a captive monarchy, maintained through British subsidies. To them the 
continued British presence was the greatest obstacle existing to the kind of 
constitution they wished for Sicily. 

<<<PDFPAGE 113>>>
2 
Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 
1812-1814 
Qe the threat of French invasion seemed for the moment to have 
receded from Sicily, the ministry in London was naturally anxious to 
use its garrison for offensive operations. It was simply playing Napoleon’s 
game to leave so large a force immobile while the war was being fought in 
Spain and Portugal. Liverpool expressed the hope to Bentinck, writing in 
June 1811, that it should be possible to reduce the garrison to the minimum 
figure of the 10,000 men stipulated in the treaty of alliance. Could not the 
Sicilians themselves contribute more to their own defense? For this purpose 
the British government were dispatching immediately to Sicily 14,000 stands 
of arms to help equip the Sicilian forces.! 
The deficiencies of the royal army have been referred to more than once. 
Bentinck told Circello in August 1811] that he had grave doubts about its 
effectiveness, consisting as it did of Neapolitans, anxious only to return to 
their homes, and foreigners and deserters from the French, many of whom 
were extremely disaffected. This army was not only ineffectual, a grave 
burden on the royal finances, but also a serious political danger. In the past 
year it had grown by as many as 5,000 men, augmented by a stream of 
French deserters and prisoners of war from Catalonia, until it now numbered 
19,000. At the instigation of the queen, it might, Bentinck thought, ally itself 
with the French. The remedy he recommended and caused the hereditary 
prince to adopt was to cut its numbers by about 5,000. As he told the prince, 
a few thousand less would make no difference to recovering Naples. The 
whole of its non-Neapolitan element was accordingly discharged in May 
1812, the Germans being recruited by the British army, the Italians formed 
into a corps of their own augmented by 2,000 prisoners of war that the 
British government shipped out from England. And later in the year the king 
agreed to reduce the number of his royal guards from 1,600 to 700 (half of 
whom were to be Sicilian)? 
Yet, despite all these economies, Bentinck still had to lend the prince 
money in June 1812 and in the following January to keep the royal army in 
existence; otherwise it would have dissolved for lack of clothing, pay, and 
food. The appalling state of the royal army was brought home forcibly to 
109 

<<<PDFPAGE 114>>>
110 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Bentinck when, prior to their embarkation for Spain, Sicilian regiments were 
marched into Palermo to be reviewed by him and Macfarlane. “Many were 
without shoes, none had great-coats, and the whole looked as if they had 
been half-starved.”? The cloth needed to’ provide them with uniforms Ben- 
tinck had to have sent out from England. It was this same financial exigency 
that had forced the British to assume the responsibility for the royal flotilla. 
In return for thus propping up the monarchy and guaranteeing once again 
the sovereignty of Sicily to the royal family, Britain obtained an important 
asset in the shape of a sizeable Sicilian contingent, available for service 
outside Sicily, although within the bounds of the Mediterranean. By a treaty 
agreed to in September 1812, the signing of which the king was constrained 
to delegate to the hereditary prince, a division of 7,300 Sicilians was put at 
the service of the British commander. Its cost was deducted from the British 
subsidy and its recruitment, clothing, and equipment were to be Britain’s 
responsibility. The troops that during the next eighteen months were to be 
sent to fight in Spain consisted in part of these Sicilians and the recently 
formed Italian Levy. This levy had had its origins in what had been called the 
“Calabrian Free Corps,” formed by Stuart with the king’s permission in the 
early months of 1809, when 1,500 Calabrians, fleeing from Masséna’s extir- 
patory drive to eliminate the last traces of the masse, crossed over to Sicily. 
Rather than allow them to be recruited into the ranks of the royal army (seen 
now only as an instrument for forwarding the intrigues of the queen), Stuart 
took them into British pay, and appointed a British officer, Colonel Sir John 
Dalrymple, to inspect and train them. Its strength had soon risen to 500, 
divided into seven companies, and it was well reported on by Stuart. Initially 
bound only to serve within the territory of the kingdom of Naples, it was 
agreed in 1810 it could serve throughout the Mediterranean, and 300 of this 
corps were then dispatched as reinforcements to the island of Zante.5 But the 
aim of Bentinck was to form a force that would one day land on the mainland 
of Italy, the vanguard of a great national army to liberate that country from 
its foreign rulers. 
The objects for which the Sicilian garrison could be used for offensive 
operations was the subject of discussion both in England and Spain. Since the 
outbreak of war in the latter country there had been Spanish and English 
voices urging an expedition from Sicily to help the Spanish in Catalonia, and 
this was a policy that found favor with Wellington, the British commander- 
in-chief in Spain, and also with Lord Liverpool, first when he was secretary 
for war and subsequently when he was prime minister. Italy was the other 
possible objective. Wellesley, the foreign secretary until he was replaced by 
Castlereagh in March 1812, had shown an interest in this theater, as did 
Bunbury, now under secretary for war and William Hamilton, foreign under 
secretary. But in holding these views, they were largely alone, and Bentinck, 
who was an enthusiast for the idea of Italian liberation, was very hesitant at 

<<<PDFPAGE 115>>>
Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814 
Pe 
first about the timing of such an operation. Castlereagh, like most of his 
ministerial colleagues, shared the views enunciated in a memorandum edited 
by Huskisson in 1809, namely, not to excite any country to take up arms 
against the enemy, but to give it every possible help once it had been aroused 
to resistance. By April 1813 most ministers in London had lost faith in a 
rising in Italy.° 
In a dispatch of June 1811 Liverpool had outlined the uses to which 
Bentinck might put his troops and mentioned certain desirable objectives, 
while leaving Bentinck the ultimate discretion over the choice he made of 
these. If the occasion presented itself, Corfu should be seized, though at 
limited cost; a force should be sent to protect Minorca, if it looked like being 
threatened from Toulon; troops could be sent to Catalonia, provided Sicily 
was not in danger. What Bentinck was instructed vot to do was to waste his 
efforts recovering Naples. Its capture depended on French fortunes in the- 
aters remote from southern Italy and, as Moore had written earlier, it was not 
likely to “run away.”” 
Four months later Bentinck was told to coordinate his plans for forming an 
army in Italy with the Archduke Francis, a member of the house of Austria- 
Este with claims to the throne of Modena. But this was merely contingency 
planning, and Wellesley in writing to Bentinck emphasized that there was no 
intention of encouraging the Italians to revolt or of becoming involved in a 
project that might be risky or premature. The island of Sardinia, it was 
envisaged, might form the base for future operations, and the sum of 
£50,000 was made available to equip the Sardinians, while a further £50,000 
was to be given to the Archduke Francis.* This was the fruit of a project of 
Bentinck, suggested by him to Wellesley in June and put into his head by 
Metternich’s agent, Colonel Nugent, an Austrian officer (though in fact an 
Irishman by birth). Bentinck had thought the projected uprising was well 
worth backing at so little cost, and on his return from five weeks in Sicily had 
waxed even more enthusiastic. He had even proposed that he should send to 
Sardinia two or three British regiments from Sicily to serve for the immediate 
defense of that island and encourage that kingdom to raise and pay a new 
army for Italian operations. Failing the acceptance of this proposal, he 
suggested taking into British pay as many troops of the king of Sardinia as 
the sum of £10,000 would furnish. The king of Sardinia however demurred, 
fearing a loss of his independence and possibly also French reprisals.” 
The lack of any reliable evidence of a national Italian resistance movement 
had forced Bentinck to agree reluctantly that the time was not ripe for 
intervention. The claims made by Prince Moliterno to be the leader of such a 
resistance struck him as being completely absurd. Looking however to plans 
for the future, Bentinck submitted that Corsica and Elba would form suitable 
bases for invading northern Italy, and only if these were ruled out as objec- 
tives would he think of sending his troops to Spain.!° The mention of 

<<<PDFPAGE 116>>>
WI 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Corsica and Elba was harking back more than fifteen years to the days of the 
Anglo-Corsican kingdom, memories of which ill-fated episode were still fresh 
in the minds of ministers; and as Admiral Pellew pointed out, both islands 
would need a permanent garrison. So Bentinck was very firmly told that any 
attempt to take these two islands would be a total waste of resources, and as 
there was so little evidence of any popular movement in Italy, surplus troops 
could best be employed in support of the Spanish in Catalonia. They could 
always be recalled to Sicily and made available for Italy, if prospects there 
became more inviting. 
!1 
A month before this dispatch was penned, Bentinck at the request of the 
navy, which had been pressing for it since the previous summer, had sent a 
small force of 600 men to occupy Lissa in the Adriatic, an island of greater 
strategic importance than any of the southern Ionian islands. It was to serve 
as a depot for trade, as a port for the Adriatic squadron, and as a means of 
maintaining links with both the Italian and Balkan shores.!? But any attempt 
to seize Corfu, as mentioned by Liverpool in his earlier dispatch, was never 
seriously considered by Bentinck, its very powerful fortifications being de- 
fended by a garrison of 13,000. Britain did not possess in Sicily the resources 
for military operations, at least on any extended scale, in both eastern and 
western Mediterranean. 
One way however in which some of Bentinck’s forces, once part of the 
Sicilian garrison and now stationed in the Adriatic, could he thought be 
more usefully employed than sitting in the Ionian islands was in helping a 
Montenegrin revolt. On information received from Lissa (information that 
later proved false) that there was a rising in Montenegro against the occupy- 
ing French, Bentinck on 8 June 1812 authorized Admiral Fremantle, the 
naval commander in the Adriatic, to go to the help of these “freedom- 
fighters,” taking whatever force he thought fit from the garrison on the 
Ionian islands. He told Fremantle that it was his policy (indeed it was that of 
the British cabinet) not to encourage any partial rising in Italy or the 
Adriatic, but to wait until “a general effort can be made by all nations 
engaged in the same cause.” But nevertheless, since it now appeared that a 
revolt had in fact broken out and that war between France and Russia was 
certain—a war that might very well touch off a major rising in Italy—he 
thought it right to assist the Montenegrins. 13 
Fremantle collected at once 1,200 troops from the Zante garrison, em- 
barked 400 on his own warships and took them to the island of Lissa, and left 
the remainder to follow on in troop transports as soon as they could. By the 
middle of July he was getting ready to escort his little force across to 
Montenegro, when he learnt that no rising had taken place. The French were, 
it seemed, in complete control. Naturally, when Bentinck learned of this, he 
cancelled his orders for the expedition and the troops were returned to their 
billets in Zante, and his political agents brought back to Palermo.14 

<<<PDFPAGE 117>>>
Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814 
113 
Over the question of Catalonia, Bentinck forestalled Liverpool by sending 
his brother to Portugal to coordinate plans with Wellington, and it was 
agreed that Bentinck should find a force of 10,000 from Sicily to arrive in 
Spain by the end of June. Even so, the final decision to choose Spain and not 
Italy had been left to Bentinck’s sole discretion, though the tone of Liver- 
pool’s dispatch made it clear that he hoped he would opt for Spain. In the 
event, Bentinck hesitated, thought he would go to Italy after all, and infuri- 
ated Wellington, who was counting on the force arriving from Sicily as part 
of his overall plan of campaign. Liverpool tried to blame Bentinck for 
disobeying “clear” instructions (“as positive as any which can be given to a 
commander so circumstanced”).!5 Bathurst however supported Bentinck. 
He told Wellington that Bentinck’s instructions were in the last resort con- 
ditional, and that though he thought his decision wrong, there was no doubt 
that Bentinck had acted properly.!© By that time Bentinck had changed his 
plans, and his troops were sent to Spain after all, though not the 10,000 
Wellington had been promised.+7 
What had led to all these changes during the month of June 1812 had been 
reports from Nugent and from allied agents in Italy that its people (especially 
in the Roman states) were on the point of rising up. This was clearly wishful 
thinking and depended, as Bentinck himself admitted, on whether the Rus- 
sians entered the war. He justified his decision to switch from the Spanish to 
the Italian plan by arguing that the force he could spare for Spain was too 
small on its own to make any impact, while his 14—18,000 troops would 
outnumber any army the French could bring against him in Italy, now that so 
many of their men had been sent north for the Russian campaign. And any 
success achieved in Italy would benefit the cause of the allies in Spain. His 
force moreover would include 5,000 Neapolitan troops, thus removing a 
danger from Sicily while easing the path of royal acceptance of Sicily’s recent 
constitution.!8 But this was no sensible military reason for undertaking the 
operation. What appeared uppermost in his mind was the risk of losing an 
opportunity (perhaps one that might never recur) of leading a war of national 
liberation. Bentinck’s arguments were not convincing, and Wellington, who 
had his own good reasons for wanting a force in eastern Spain, was certainly 
right when he wrote to Bathurst that the French would never allow an army 
of 15,000 Anglo-Neapolitans to remain for long on Italian soil.’ 
Within a matter ‘of less than three weeks, Bentinck had changed his mind 
again. The news of a Franco-Austrian treaty and of a letter to the prince 
regent sent by the Habsburg emperor that urged him to send his army to 
Spain rather than into Italy (where Austrian troops at Napoleon’s behest 
might well be called on to fight the British) had caused Bentinck to have 
second thoughts. Maitland with 7,000 men would go to eastern Spain after 
all, although Bentinck confessed he had little faith in their being able to 
achieve very much there.?° As matters turned out, the late arrival of the force 

<<<PDFPAGE 118>>>
114 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
from Sicily on 31 July and numbering 3,000 less than promised was not the 
setback it might have been for the fortunes of Wellington’s campaign. Suchet, 
the general commanding the French in Valencia and Catalonia, had been so 
alarmed at the rumored arrival at any time in June or July of a great army 
from Sicily that he did exactly what Wellington wanted and sent no help to 
Soult or Joseph, with whose forces Wellington was engaged.?! 
The force from Sicily was never one that Wellington could depend on 
unreservedly, so its usefulness to him was limited. Bathurst made plain that 
the Sicilian situation must take priority over all others so far as Maitland’s 
troops were concerned, and that Wellington must let them go if Sicily was 
ever threatened.?? This is precisely the situation that occurred in the spring of 
1813 when Sicily’s political situation forced Bentinck to act against the court. 
The 44th Regiment, destined for Spain, had to be diverted to Sicily from 
Malta, and General Murray, then the commander of the Sicilian forces in 
Spain, was required to send back 2,000 troops.?? All this not unnaturally was 
unwelcome news to the ministers in London, who had recently been pressing 
Bentinck to send more of his men in the opposite direction. Spain in their 
view was the only theater in which Britain could afford to exert herself?4 (a 
point that had to be made clear to the Russians, who tried to involve 
Bentinck and his government in financing a force of 40,000 men to be sent 
from Moldavia to the Adriatic to cooperate in an Italian campaign).?5 If 
Sicily was not a liability it was scarcely the asset the cabinet hoped for. 
Nevertheless during 1813, as Bentinck was later at pains to point out in 
trying to justify constitutional change as the means by which Sicily had been 
made stable, there were dispatched from Sicily to Spain 13,500 troops, 2,500 
of whom were Sicilian soldiers, the remainder British, Italian, and German.2¢ 
Bentinck himself had left Sicily for Spain on 27 May 1813, only to be forced 
to return in October to restore the political situation. With the remainder of 
his army he now planned to invade Italy. 
Already in January 1813 Bentinck was outlining to Bathurst his scheme to 
use the Italian Levy as the cadre for constructing an Italian army. He wrote in 
almost glowing terms of the military qualities of its two corps—something 
perhaps difficult to understand, considering the poor record for desertion 
one Italian regiment earned in Spain,27 though doubtless it would have 
shown more spirit had it been fighting in Italy. Ponza, the island in the Bay of 
Naples his forces had captured in February, was to become, he hoped, the 
springboard and funnel for an Italian invasion. Twelve-hundred troops were 
earmarked for it, leaving behind in Sicily just sufficient men to garrison 
Palermo and the fortresses of Milazzo and Messina. The situation, he told 
Bathurst, was more favorable than it had been in 1812, and though he 
realized that Spain was important, Spain alone could not defeat Napoleon. 
To do this, the greater part of the peoples of Europe must be brought into 
the field and that meant involving Italy (“Italy is that instrument—Italy is 

<<<PDFPAGE 119>>>
Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814 
115 
ripe for it”). There the British could act as principals, not as auxiliaries, as 
they were in Spain; and he painted himself a rosy picture of his army from 
Sicily taking Naples and then recruiting as it went along, heading for the 
north of Italy with its numbers swollen to 40,000.28 
Again he mentioned the political reasons for getting his army across to 
Italy. The Neapolitan troops in Sicily were a continuing source of anxiety, the 
Sicilian parliament was unwilling to pay them, and their officers were ready 
to desert. Had the passage to Naples been less difficult, many he was sure 
would long since have joined Murat. They were such a threat to security that 
while they remained in Sicily British troops would have to be left behind to 
ensure the safety of that island. It was for this reason that he had to tell 
Bathurst, writing in May 1813, he could not comply with the latter’s request 
to send back two regiments to Spain.?? To further influence the British 
cabinet in favor of his Italian strategy, Bentinck sent home his secretary, 
Lamb, to present his views in more detail to Castlereagh. In a long and 
persuasive memorandum Lamb presented at the end of May, designed for the 
eyes of Lord Castlereagh, it was argued that only by the opening up of a third 
front, this time in Italy, could Napoleon be decisively defeated. Napoleon 
had drained Italy of troops in order to support his campaigns elsewhere, and 
all the intelligence reports received showed that Italians would rise to a man 
before a French army could cross the Alps. To be forced to fight a campaign 
in Italy would put an enormous, perhaps an intolerable, strain on Napoleon’s 
available resources. The British corps now at Alicante could never hope to 
achieve very much, because it was tied to its transports for supplies. “Every 
article, even the straw for the whole of the horses for the army during the 
entire winter has been sent from Sicily at a great expense and with a very 
considerable quantity of shipping.” Italy, on the other hand, could supply all 
an army might require. And if revolts broke out in Italy as a result of allied 
successes and a British army was not then sent there to take advantage of the 
situation, Austria and Russia would benefit; yet it was important to the 
future of the continent and to England that Italian affairs should be taken out 
of the reach of these powers and placed firmly under English protection. 
Bentinck, so the memorandum went on, thought that the hereditary prince 
would not offer very much opposition to undertaking this enterprise, based 
as it was “upon liberal principles which appear to be necessary for its 
suiccess.1 90 
It does not seem to have occurred to Bentinck that the introduction of 
political arguments (and ones that might not appeal to Castlereagh) into 
what was primarily a military proposition could do any thing other than to 
weaken his case. 
When Bentinck wrote to Bathurst in February he sent Wellington a copy 
of his letter. Sensing the danger to his plans of any withdrawal of Bentinck’s 
army, then deployed in eastern Spain, Wellington wrote forcefully to 

<<<PDFPAGE 120>>>
116 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Bathurst of the hopelessness of an undertaking involving sending the army to 
Italy. Unless the government were prepared to arm, clothe, and equip an 
Italian army on the scale it had done in Spain and Portugal, and in addition 
put into the field a force of 30-40,000, the whole scheme was foredoomed to 
failure. His anxiety was unnecessary since there was no chance of the ministry 
ever agreeing to such a scheme. As Bathurst wrote privately to Bentinck, 
“among our rulers . 
. 
. there is no belief of any character or energy among the 
Italians.”3! The bulk of the army of Sicily therefore continued to serve in 
Spain. 
What Bentinck was now contemplating was a much more limited enter- 
prise, to keep Murat’s army guessing, but also to rid Sicily of the disaffected 
Neapolitan troops. General Macfarlane, understandably, was not happy 
about the project of launching an immediate attack on Calabria, viewing the 
matter, as Bentinck did not, from a purely military standpoint. Landing 
troops in the kingdom of Naples, unless the operation succeeded, would do 
nothing to solve Sicilian problems and Macfarlane had little hope of success 
with only two British battalions available out of a total strength of 12,000. 
Bentinck was not deflected from his plan so easily. He argued that the loss of 
the Neapolitan troops would cause the Sicilians to make greater efforts in 
providing for their own defense and would also save them a lot of money. He 
had long deplored the attitude of the native Sicilians toward military service 
and their refusal to accept conscription, agreeing with what Belmonte had 
said to him about their desiring contradictions—no foreigners in their army, 
yet no Sicilian to be forced to serve in it; a large army to defend their island, 
yet no taxes to pay for it. It was quite sufficient to his mind that there was a 
chance of the plan succeeding.3? Fortunately for the reputation of both the 
British forces and Bentinck, the expedition did not take place, at least not for 
another eight months, and then it was sent to another part of Italy and in 
quite altered circumstances. The renewed fear of a French invasion (the 
combined threat from the Toulon fleet and 20,000 of Murat’s troops), 
followed by the political crisis that resulted in Bentinck’s return from Spain, 
meant that no expedition to Naples from Sicily would take place that year. As 
for the invasion threat, it proved to be nothing but a piece of bluff. When 
Bentinck cited it as a reason for his not returning two battalions to Spain, 
Wellington commented somewhat tartly that in his opinion the island of 
Sicily was “in no danger whatsoever,” an opinion that Admiral Pellew 
endorsed. Wellington and Pellew proved to be right, but it did not alter 
Bentinck’s decision.33 
What was attempted in December, however, on a very much less ambitious 
scale, was the dispatch of an Italian regiment to seize Leghorn by a coup de 
main. It was made on the initiative of Colonel Catinelli, the commander of 
the Third Italian Regiment, and Bentinck initially had misgivings about its 
chances of success, preferring it to go only to Ponza and there to make a more 

<<<PDFPAGE 121>>>
Admiral Sir Edward:Pellew, Ist Viscount Exmouth, by W. Owen. (Courtesy of 
the National Maritime Museum, London.) 

<<<PDFPAGE 122>>>
118 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
detailed reconnaissance. However he soon convinced himself that he must 
not let slip any occasion for rallying the Italian people and giving them the 
opportunity “to assert their rights, liberty and independence.” He hoped that 
another Catalonia would be created in Tuscany and that its population would 
hasten to join the standard of a national revolt. It all very quickly came to 
nothing. After capturing Viareggio and Lucca and beating off an attack from 
Pisa, the expedition failed in its aim of forcing the port of Leghorn to 
surrender. Bentinck blamed the lack of Congreve rockets, though bad 
weather also played a part in curtailing the operation.*4 In any case too much 
was expected of a force consisting of 1,000 men only. It is true that forty- 
seven years later Garibaldi with a more famous “Thousand” achieved spec- 
tacular success in Sicily, but the circumstances in Tuscany in 1813 were rather 
different. It seems that where his political principles and Italian liberation 
were concerned, Bentinck remained an incurable romantic. 
Shortly after this minor fiasco, another expedition was planned—this time 
for a force of 5,000 men to take possession of Bastia, Bentinck having learnt 
from the navy of an Italian regiment there asking the British to take it away. 
Were this enterprise to succeed, Bastia, it was planned, was to act as a base for 
the invasion of the north of Italy and the rest of the army of Sicily was to be 
sent there as soon as possible.*5 The scheme was never carried out for, with 
the news of Murat’s defection and his undertaking to join the allies, Bentinck 
was told to sign an armistice. This he did on 3 February 1813 on the basis of 
military cooperation to drive the French out of Italy. 
The armistice was the culmination of negotiations going back nine 
months. Murat, once he had given up command of the Grand Army in 
Poland, had fallen from favor with Napoleon with whom his relations had 
long been strained. Murat was now anxious to secure his throne, to enlarge 
his kingdom at the Pope’s expense, to aim perhaps for the throne of Italy and 
to displace Britain in the role of liberator. Once the British had captured 
Ponza, their contacts with Naples became quite easy, and these resulted in 
Bentinck calling there en route for Spain in June 1813 in an endeavor to 
persuade Murat to relinquish his claim to the throne of Naples. Murat had no 
intention of doing so, as became clear once Bentinck reached Ponza, though 
Bentinck hoped for a temporary accord by which both Murat and Ferdinand 
would recognize each others’ claims and pledge themselves that they would 
not contest them until the question of compensation was settled. Though he 
did get the hereditary prince to accept “with considerable disinclination” the 
principle of compensation, Bentinck could not carry Murat with him. The 
latter continued to pin his hopes on the allies offering him the crown, and he 
was buoyed up by the recent news of Napoleon’s victories at Liitzen and 
Bautzen. Bentinck remained completely opposed to offering the crown to 
Murat, convinced (as was Castlereagh) that once he was sure of it, he would 

<<<PDFPAGE 123>>>
Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814 
119 
cease to exert himself for the allies. Seeing that the cause of Napoleon was 
lost, it would not be very long (Bentinck thought) before Murat renewed the 
negotiations.?° 
Six months later this proved to be the case. Approaches were made on 
Murat’s behalf through General Manhés, commanding in Calabria, and the 
Neapolitan secretary of legation at the court of Vienna, the Chevalier 
Schinina; but Bentinck refused to make any concessions. Napoleon’s decisive 
defeat at Leipzig made Murat’s position uncomfortable, and he could not 
take his army northward without exposing his kingdom in Naples. Bentinck 
could therefore see no reason to prejudice the claims of Ferdinand, and he so 
informed the hereditary prince.3”7 Meanwhile he was being pressed by Aus- 
tria and by Lord Aberdeen, British envoy at Vienna, to sign an armistice with 
Murat in order to get the latter’s help in driving the French from Italy. 
Bentinck tried his best to delay conforming with this desire for a ceasefire 
with Murat. He sent Colonel Graham, his aide-de-camp, to make contact 
with allied headquarters and to try to convince them that the army in Sicily 
remained a valuable bargaining counter in getting Murat to give up his 
throne.38 His attempt failed, for the Austrians were to cut the ground from 
under his feet by the treaty of military alliance that they signed with Murat in 
January. Bentinck complained in vain to Castlereagh, condemning the treaty 
as “impolitic, inexpedient and unnecessary.” It meant, he wrote, the aban- 
donment of a great opportunity for Britain to champion the cause of Italian 
nationalism, and the showering of undeserved rewards on a man whose life 
had been one of crime. He tried to postpone the evil day by telling the 
Austrian representatives that he had no instructions on the matter,?? but this 
would not answer for very long. On 18 January Bentinck received a dispatch 
sent to him from Lord Aberdeen and forwarded to him by Count Neipperg, 
the Austrian envoy at the court of Naples. This made clear that Aberdeen had 
agreed to Austria’s approach to Murat and was anxious that Bentinck should 
also conclude a similar convention as soon as possible. While Castlereagh 
himself on 22 January sent clear instructions to Bentinck from Bale that 
authorized him to conclude an armistice. Bentinck therefore left Palermo on 
30 January 1814, and four days later he signed the armistice with the man he 
both despised and detested. Even so, he did not sign on behalf of the king in 
Sicily, who refused fo acknowledge Murat’s claims, and Bentinck himself also 
declined to acknowledge those claims in any way.*° 
On 28 February 1814 Bentinck sailed with an army from Sicily made up of 
6,000 British troops and the remainder Italian soldiers, leaving behind to 
guard the island only 4,500 men. A further contingent of 3,000 troops under 
the command of General Macfarlane (almost all of them Sicilian) joined him 
at Leghorn in early April.41 Bentinck disembarked at Leghorn on 7 March 
1814 and a week later issued a proclamation in the name of the hereditary 

<<<PDFPAGE 124>>>
120 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
prince calling on the people of Italy to rise and assert their rights and 
liberties. He was not alone in doing this, for Murat had already done so and 
Nugent and the Austrians were to do the same.*? 
Bentinck had been ordered by Castlereagh to cooperate closely with the 
Neapolitans who were now in occupation of Rome, Emilia, and Tuscany, 
and he had been told that their “active assistance” was “indispensable” to 
allied success. But Bentinck could not tolerate Murat, nor was he willing to 
share with him the honor and glory of freeing Italy. He therefore demanded 
that Murat’s army should forthwith evacuate Tuscany, which Bentinck made 
out he required as a base for his planned assault on Genoa. And when he 
found he could not get his way, he adopted a threatening attitude, talked of 
expelling the Neapolitans, marching on Naples, and then proclaiming Ferdi- 
nand IV as its rightful sovereign. Reprimanded by Castlereagh and told he 
was under Austrian orders and must in future work beside Murat, he ac- 
cepted Austrian mediation and agreed to withdraw from Tuscany.*3 
Genoa surrendered to Bentinck’s army on 18 April 1814 and Bentinck, 
again disobeying orders, proclaimed the Republic of Genoa restored. But by 
this time Napoleon had already abdicated—his decision to do so having been 
caused not by allied successes in Italy but by other events to the north of the 
Alps. A few weeks later Bentinck again gave encouragement to the council of 
Milan in their endeavor to get accepted the concept of a free and united Italy. 
Again Castlereagh intervened, telling him that he must abstain from inter- 
ference in Italian affairs, since the future of Italy (and of course Sicily) must 
be decided in another place.44 
It is somewhat ironical to reflect that when at last the occasion arrived for 
using the army of Sicily that Britain had paid and maintained so long for a 
major campaign in Italy, the effort proved to be largely wasted. Bentinck was 
far more interested in championing the cause of Italian nationalism than in 
working closely with his country’s allies, one of whom was his béte noire, 
Murat. Reprimanded by Castlereagh for acting against the government's 
wishes (“It is not an insurrection we want in Italy . 
. 
. we want disciplined 
force under sovereigns we can trust”),45 he was sent on leave and gradually 
replaced as British minister at Palermo, returning first briefly to the island, 
which he finally left on 16 July. The military command in the Mediterranean 
he kept until April of the following year. 

<<<PDFPAGE 125>>>
10 
Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples 
A’ the end of the great war with Napoleon finally began to draw in sight, 
the whole question of Sicily’s future and its possible annexation by 
Britain was raised again (somewhat unexpectedly) in the shape of what was 
called “Bentinck’s Dream.” This solution to Sicily’s problems was put for- 
ward quite sincerely, in the interests of the island as much as of Britain, by the 
man who was now the dictator of Sicily. Its disclosure caused a temporary 
sensation both at the court and in Downing Street, and this reaction led 
Bentinck’s enemies to hope it might lead to his immediate recall. 
The whole question of Sicily’s future and its relationship to Britain—the 
country that for the past eight years had protected it from the grasp of 
Napoleon—was certainly not a novel one when it was raised in December 
1813. Howick and Grenville in 1806/7 had contemplated making Sicily a 
British protectorate in peacetime. Moore had certainly believed it necessary 
for the duration of the war to assume the government of Sicily, though there 
is no evidence that he ever thought it would be wise to retain it in peacetime. ! 
And the persuasive propagandist Charles Pasley in his Essay on Military Policy 
had deplored the fact that Britain had failed to annex Sicily from the begin- 
ning. Leckie, another active propagandist, the writer of articles in the Morn- 
ing Chronicle and a series of open letters and pamphlets published in 1806/7, 
as well as (almost certainly) the paper Hints for the improvement of Sicily, which 
was addressed to Lord Castlereagh, wrote in this last: 
The master of Sicily regenerated holds Egypt under his foot; Tunis is his 
tributary; and the depot of the commerce of belligerents, the ee 
Powers, cease to have ships of war. He watches the fall of the Turkis 
empire, and stands with expanded wings to aes upon Greece. He 
closes the Dardanelles with Lemnos, and forbids the Russians to enter the 
archipelago. 
This visionary talk of British dominance in the Mediterranean, in war and 
peace, had been used earlier by apologists for making Corsica a British 
possession, and the same sort of arguments were to be used a year later by 
Richard Church and General Oswald to try to persuade British ministers to 
take over the Ionian islands. It says much for the hardheadedness and 
pragmatic approach of British statesmen, notably Pitt and Castlereagh, that 
121 

<<<PDFPAGE 126>>>
122) 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
such arguments carried little weight. Pitt cared nothing for Corsica, save as a 
useful base for the fleet, and he later offered it to the Russians. Castlereagh 
saw in Sicily a military station and nothing more, serving a purely wartime 
purpose; and if he accepted an Ionian protectorate it was only to stop the 
allies from quarrelling and to help to safeguard the Turkish Empire. He was 
concerned as was William Pitt, and rightly so, with the winning of the war, 
and then with constructing a durable peace—a peace based on the hard, 
inescapable, and (to liberals) often most unpalatable facts of international 
politics, the need to retain reliable allies and the continued support of the 
other Great Powers. 
Bentinck’s dream of annexing Sicily with the willing compliance of the 
Sicilians sprang from a tour he had made of the island during November 
1813, the purpose of which had been to find out what reforms in the 
administration of justice the mass of the people really wanted, but also to 
impress on local councillors the need to elect sensible men when the next 
parliament was summoned. During the tour he had experienced the typical 
warm welcome that southern peoples, many of whom were simple peasants, 
liked to extend to the man in power, from whom they hoped to obtain 
concessions—freedom from burdensome taxes and tolls, injustices righted, 
and corruption purged.? It was just the sort of spontaneous reception that 
had warmed the heart of Sir Gilbert Elliot, when, as the newly appointed 
Viceroy, he had made his progress through Corsica. It put the idea into 
Bentinck’s head (he had never before shown signs of favoring it) that the 
people of Sicily would surely welcome being annexed to the British Empire. 
The Constitution of 1812 provided for an independent Sicily. If the kingdom 
of Sicily was to be united once again with the kingdom of Naples, it would, 
he felt sure, mean the spilling of blood. Yet Sicily, it was painfully clear, could 
not exist independently, any more than Corsica could, and, as had been 
shown by recent events, it was quite unable to govern itself. Sicily in the 
hands of Naples would remain as it had been in the past a source of 
embarrassment to the latter. Under the benevolent rule of Britain it could 
become both content and prosperous, and pose no threat to its neighbor 
Naples. The king of course would be compensated, probably in the form of 
money, and Britain would provide 10,000 troops to guarantee his possession 
of Naples.4 
All this was outlined in a letter from Bentinck, sent to the hereditary prince 
on 3 December 1813, though a few days later he wrote again to explain his 
proposal was not really serious, but a “dreamchild of his whimsical brain.”® It 
was not however seen as such by a worried and apprehensive prince, who had 
for years heard his mother declaiming against the sinister designs of the 
British. Having taken possession unilaterally of Malta and six Ionian islands, 
it now seemed that they wanted Sicily too. The suggestions that Bentinck had 
put forward seemed to his Neapolitan mind, accustomed to the indirect 

<<<PDFPAGE 127>>>
Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples 
123 
approach, to be only a form of kite-flying, coming as they did from Britain’s 
minister and the commander-in-chief of her army. He therefore replied in a 
guarded manner. Sicily, he wrote, was sacred property that the king his father 
was unable to renounce, and he could not think that Britain would wish to 
deprive her ally of the kind of refuge that Sicily had provided in times of 
adversity. In any case, the compensation Bentinck had mentioned seemed 
quite inadequate—thereby hinting that if more were offered, the scheme 
envisaged might yet be considered.® 
Bentinck replied that the plan he had outlined was something that was 
entirely his own—the government in London knew nothing about it. But he 
did add that Sicily must always require some maritime protection, and 
Britain being likely for many years to remain the world’s preponderant 
seapower, she was the obvious country to provide it.” 
The prince consulted Medici, who in turn took counsel with Castelcicala, 
and the two in conjunction with the king (though apparently without the 
prince’s knowledge) plotted to get rid of Bentinck by raising the matter with 
Downing Street. It seemed an excellent method by which, if Bentinck had 
acted without instructions, the minister could be disgraced and his immedi- 
ate recall procured. But both Bathurst and Castlereagh, though not un- 
naturally surprised at learning of the relevant correspondence, were not 
prepared to be used in this manner. Castelcicala, despite being assured that 
the ministers had never heard of the scheme put forward in Bentinck’s letter 
to the prince, a copy of which the ambassador had sent them, asked for 
Bentinck to be removed. It appeared, he wrote, that Bentinck’s “dream” was 
no dream but rather an “avowed intention”—not to give Sicily liberty but to 
annex it to Great Britain. And furthermore, if Bentinck was not recalled, the 
case of his master the king of Sicily must be submitted to the king of Spain. If 
the king of Sicily was to be reduced to the status of a mere pensioner, he 
preferred that he should receive his pension from the court of his brother 
rather than from Britain. Castelcicala therefore asked for a passport to be 
issued to his messenger who was to take this request to Madrid.® 
The reply he received was chilly in tone. The British government, Bathurst 
wrote, had already made clear it had been no party to an idea “thrown out” 
by Bentinck in what had been clearly a confidential letter. If Castelcicala had 
received authority to request the recall of Lord William Bentinck, he was 
asked to supply thé date on which the hereditary prince had sent such 
instructions. Castelcicala’s bluff was called and his earlier boast that he had 
given to Bentinck “a blow that will have broken his neck for good” was 
shown up for the bombast it was.? 
All this took place in the first half of March. In early February (after 
signing the armistice) Bentinck had written a long letter to Castlereagh, 
setting out his case for the “dream.” At the coming peace, so he told 
Castlereagh, Sicily would be faced with two alternatives. Either it would be 

<<<PDFPAGE 128>>>
124 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
rejoined to Naples and see its liberty crushed by the crown (“it is not easy to 
conceive the terror universally felt at the unforgiving nature of their Ma- 
jesties”), or its independence would be upheld—in which case it would fall 
the victim of a combination of self-seeking barons, the king, and a licentious 
people quite unable to govern themselves. If on the other hand Sicily were to 
be placed under British protection, the island could become “after Ireland, 
the brightest jewel in the British crown.” With Murat secure on the throne of 
Naples, Sicily would need more than ever the protection afforded by British 
troops. A garrison of 5,000 men (the figure mentioned in 1806 when a draft 
treaty had been proposed by Howick) could be kept in Sicily in peacetime, 
while Sicily could as at present provide a contingent at the disposal of Britain. 
He thought that both the king and the prince would be glad to be rid of 
Sicily, provided they were offered attractive terms, and the queen had fre- 
quently said the same. He was only sorry he had made the suggestion 
without first obtaining cabinet approval, but the moment had seemed to him 
propitious and there had been no time to refer the matter to Castlereagh and 
the ministry.1° In addition to writing, he had also dispatched his secretary 
James Graham to Chatillon to interview Castlereagh personally, and this 
James Graham did on 21 February 1814. Graham, being both “young and 
romantic” (to use the words of Dr. Rosselli), convinced himself that Castle- 
reagh sympathized with Bentinck’s “dream,” and reported him saying that if 
Murat proved treacherous and the Bourbons were to be restored to Naples, 
the British might keep Sicily; even if Murat stayed in Naples, the British 
would still need their army in Sicily after the signing of a peace. This however 
was not the impression Castlereagh retained of the interview, or perhaps did 
not wish to retain of it, once the matter was raised by Castelcicala. He entirely 
disowned the views on the subject attributed to him by James Graham. As 
Rosselli charitably comments, his mind was then occupied by greater issues, 
and he may not have given to what Graham said the close attention Graham 
thought he had.!! 
It was not until 3 April that Castlereagh finally wrote to Bentinck, sending 
him a mild reprimand. Dissociating the ministry entirely from the proposals 
of the “dream,” Castlereagh emphasized the danger of making such un- 
authorized speculations, especially when one had to deal with “characters so 
suspicious and intriguing.”!? The last word upon the matter had really rested 
with Liverpool, the prime minister, who had written to Castlereagh in 
March: 
Because Bentinck finds his constitution and the Sicilian court never likely 
to work together, he sees no way out save the annexing of Sicily. If there 
were no other objections, it would be very difficult to manage the island 
with such a constitution, but you know other Powers are more jealous of 
our obtaining Bovis in the Mediterranean than in any other quarter. 
Circumstances 
have made it necessary for them to accept our retaining 

<<<PDFPAGE 129>>>
Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples 
125 
Malta, but the idea of our possessing Sicily by an act which in its most 
favourable hight must be considered douce violence could not fail greatly to 
revolt them. 14 
It was just such jealousy that the British had encountered twenty years 
previously in relation to Corsica and that was, in regard to the Ionian islands, 
to concede them a protectorate only, instead of the sovereignty that Bathurst 
had wanted. 
Meanwhile events in Sicily were moving toward an unhappy conclusion so 
far as Bentinck and his friends were concerned. When he had toured the 
island in December, he had told local councillors that it was their duty to 
elect to parliament honest and enlightened representatives, and when the 
elections were held in June 1814, a lower House had been elected that was 
predominantly “constitutional”’—a result obtained, almost certainly, by in- 
timidation and corruption. But although the ministry now enjoyed the 
support of one House, it lost that of the other, because the nobles now 
turned to the king rather than submit to more losses of privilege. A political 
impasse had been reached, and although Bentinck counselled a coalition, the 
nobles made it clear that they would not accept one, the Belmontists being 
quite determined not to work together with the Castelnuovists.!* Finally the 
hereditary prince, at the request of Belmonte and others, asked the king to 
resume his powers as the only way of resolving the crisis. Belmonte’s remark- 
able volte face in thus turning to his enemy the king was caused by his 
thinking he could only benefit personally from such a move. He thought the 
king would be duly flattered but did not believe he would ever accept or that 
the British would ever leave—in both of which respects he proved wrong. 
Bentinck refused to allow his name to be used by the prince in approaching 
the king and he refused to sign a written memorandum requesting the king 
to take over the reins, since he doubted the king’s sincerity. But the king 
eventually expressed publicly his determination to forget the past, to reunite 
the political parties, and to complete the Sicilian constitution, on condition 
that he be released from the pledge he had given to Bentinck in March 1813 
not to resume his powers again without the permission of the British minis- 
ter. Bentinck released him from this bond, as there seemed to be little 
alternative, and the king therefore reassumed power on 5 July 1814."° 
The king’s sincerity was rightly in doubt. His attitude was currently being 
influenced by a wish to please the allied sovereigns, in whose hands it lay, at 
the Congress of Vienna, to return him to his kingdom in Naples. Both the 
Czar and the Austrian emperor, through the channel of the Duke of Orleans, 
had impressed on Ferdinand the need to adopt a more liberal attitude toward 
his subjects, if his claims were to be considered favorably. The restored 
Bourbon king of France, Louis XVIII, who had also found it necessary to 
accept a constitution in order to recover his throne, strongly advised him to 
do the same. There was however an additional reason for Ferdinand to show 

<<<PDFPAGE 130>>>
126 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
a liberal face, and that was the fear of what Murat might do, the latter having 
proclaimed his intention of granting a constitution to Naples.1° 
British public opinion favored the return of Ferdinand to Naples, as 
Castlereagh told the Austrian ambassador, if only because he had lost his 
kingdom through having allied himself with Britain; it was a matter of 
national honor and dignity to see him restored. Metternich shared the view 
of Castlereagh about putting Ferdinand back on his throne. He told the 
Sicilian minister in Vienna in confidence that he did not intend that Murat 
should keep the throne of Naples and that Ferdinand must have his kingdom 
back, with Sicily, but not with a constitution. The Austrian emperor's 
invitation to Ferdinand to behave more liberally in future clearly therefore 
did not extend to his governing his kingdom with a constitution.!7 
Bentinck’s reaction to Ferdinand’s new posture may at first appear puz- 
zling. Before leaving Sicily for good on 18 July 1814 (his position there as 
minister having been assumed by William A’Court), he penned a dispatch to 
Castlereagh in which he seemed to show satisfaction at the way events had 
turned out recently—surely the exact opposite of what he for so long had 
hoped and worked for, and of sentiments expressed in his journal as recently 
as a week before (“I never could think it desirable that the king should 
conduct the government” and “How could one suppose that a man who had 
governed ill for fifty years could all of a sudden change?”).!8 But now, 
writing on 5 July, he congratulated Castlereagh on what he described as a 
happy ending to a long and embarrassing relationship between two allied 
governments, and he dwelt on the king’s “sincere desire” to support the 
Sicilian constitution and to be reconciled to his political foes.!9 Yet clearly 
Bentinck did not believe this; he was either seeking to deceive Castlereagh or 
was putting the best face he could on the matter. He had tried in vain to get 
the barons to work together for a compromise and now was disgusted at the 
outcome. He told his friends he would be glad to go away—“I owed nothing 
to the country which I despised.”2° As A’Court (whom Bentinck thought 
“clever” and “honorable,” though he held very different political views) 
wrote privately to William Hamilton, “Having brought the comedy to the 
fifth act, he [Bentinck] seems to be by no means sorry to get away before the 
dénouement actually takes place.” He [A’Court] was grateful that the king had 
resumed power before he took over and that “it was Lord William and not I 
who did it, otherwise I should have been reproached.”?1! 
Not surprisingly, the king now chose to employ as his ministers men who 
had been no friends to the party Bentinck had supported, indeed the very 
ones he had got rid of in the purge of March 1813. The British government 
had given assurances that there was to be no victimization, but not feeling at 
all confident about that promise being fulfilled, the duke of Orleans and 
Prince Belmonte both decided to seek safety in exile—in Paris, where they 
hoped, though vainly, to persuade Castlereagh to adopt a more liberal stance 

<<<PDFPAGE 131>>>
Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples 
127 
toward Sicily.?* Yet the king was still unable to get a new parliament to vote 
him taxes (elected in August, its composition was much more democratic 
than the previous one), so for twelve months he had to subsist on taxes raised 
unconstitutionally and what remained of the British subsidy. Bentinck, when 
he had returned from Italy, had threatened to stop the subsidy altogether 
until the sums he had lent the prince were repaid, but realizing the embarrass- 
ment this would cause, decided the payments might continue if parliament 
made some reasonable arrangement.?? It was here that Castlereagh inter- 
vened. According to the treaty of alliance, the subsidy was supposed to stop 
with the war, but withholding it for even six months would not liquidate the 
debts owed to Britain. Such was the state of the country’s finances that the 
king might have to dismiss his army, and if this happened the bulk of the 
troops would almost certainly desert to Murat. A’Court was accordingly 
instructed that the British government would continue to pay one half of the 
subsidy agreed upon, until the Congress of Vienna ended or 1 March next, 
whichever was soonest.?4 
This windfall of the half subsidy put new confidence into the ministry in 
their confrontation with parliament, but it disheartened the supporters of the 
constitution who regarded its payment as tacit approval of the king’s uncon- 
stitutional measures. Even so, the Sicilian government was not preserved 
from bankruptcy. By the middle of March 1815 (the Congress of Vienna 
being still in session), the Sicilian army was about to dissolve. Without pay 
for the past six months, its officers were reduced to begging and even to 
robbery by night. The Sicilian government had tried for too long to keep up 
a style it could not afford, maintaining not only an expensive court, expensive 
embassies abroad, a host of civil servants, not to mention pensioners, but also 
an army far larger than it needed.?5 It had remained solvent only because 
Bentinck had succeeded in slimming the army and in lending the government 
money. Now that the subsidy was cut by half and further loans were no 
longer forthcoming (and were indeed due to be repaid), the harshness of 
fiscal reality must be faced. 
All this time the British garrison still remained in Sicily. Orders had been 
issued in August for its immediate withdrawal, but the king had asked for it 
to stay. He was careful to avoid giving any hint that he needed it for internal 
security, but made out that it might be required for a possible future 
offensive against Murat. Castlereagh agreed to this request because the 
Congress was still deliberating and no decision had yet been reached about 
the future of Naples or Murat; but he used the occasion to point out to the 
king how unfounded all past suspicions had been of the British wanting to 
take over Sicily.?° 
The escape of Napoleon from Elba in February and the beginning of the 
Hundred Days provided Sicily with a temporary respite in weathering its 
financial crisis. It also relieved Metternich of the problem posed by Murat’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 132>>>
128 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
claims to be recognized on the throne of Naples. On 15 March Murat once 
again took up arms against the Austrians, and a month later Bentinck 
declared that the armistice with Murat was at an end. On 17 May the king, 
having failed to get the parliament to grant him money to take his army 
across to Naples, finally dissolved it and named a commission for the task of 
reforming the constitution. Britain now stepped in to fill the gap, Castlereagh 
agreeing to renew the subsidy, provided it was used exclusively for offensive 
operations in Italy and that command of the expedition was entrusted to a 
British officer.?7 
Accordingly, a mixed force (half of it Sicilian) set sail from Sicily in the 
middle of May under the command of General Macfarlane. When it arrived 
in the Bay of Naples it found its presence largely superfluous, as an Austrian 
army occupied the town and the British fleet lay anchored in the bay.?® A 
fortnight later the king himself arrived back in his capital, having left behind 
the hereditary prince to act as lieutenant general of the island. The death of 
the queen the previous September had made his return considerably easier, 
since memories of her vindictiveness in 1799 were still very much alive. 
Needless to say, the king had not sought permission from parliament to leave 
Sicily, as by the terms of the constitution he was in strictness bound to do. 
The last chapter of Britain’s occupation and protection of Sicily was about to 
begin. 

<<<PDFPAGE 133>>>
11 
The Dénouement 
Wwe the conclusion of the Hundred Days, the award by the Congress of 
Vienna of the kingdom of Naples to king Ferdinand, and the igno- 
minious end of Murat, there was no longer any need for the presence of 
British troops in Sicily, and the last contingent left its shores on 9 October 
1815. But there still remained the vexing question of how Britain was to 
extract herself with honor from Sicily’s internal situation. She had for a 
period of almost three years committed herself to the support of the constitu- 
tional party in Sicily (it had come to be called “the British party”) and had 
shouldered a moral obligation that could not lightly be cast off. Indeed any 
attempt to do so would stain Britain’s name internationally, as well as cause 
an uproar at Westminster. Yet the king, who was now restored to Naples, was 
notoriously opposed to the constitution, had found it quite unworkable, and 
since June 1815 had tied his hands by a new treaty with Austria, a treaty that 
enabled him at last to be free of his long dependence on Britain. In return for 
a guarantee by Austria of military support for his dominions, he had pledged 
himself politically not to tolerate any institutions that were at variance with 
those permitted in Austria’s Italian possessions. In other words, no responsi- 
ble government. Now Austria was an ally of Britain; her support in uphold- 
ing the Peace of Vienna was paramount in Castlereagh’s eyes, and no scruples 
about the constitution could be allowed to stand in the way of establishing 
his principal goal, an enduring international settlement. 
During the war, Castlereagh had been willing to go along with Bentinck’s 
policy and permit him to work his political experiment. As he frankly 
admitted in May 1814, “I found the whole line of politics with respect of 
Sicily so completely chalked out that nothing was left for me to do but to let 
things take their cburse and to remain a spectator of the experiment which 
was to be made and to give it a fair trial.”! But once the end of the war was in 
sight, he decided that Bentinck must be replaced in his civilian capacity by the 
more conservative William A’Court, then envoy extraordinary to the Barbary 
States and a man known to have little sympathy with popular assemblies in 
foreign countries. A’Court had presented for Castlereagh’s eyes a memoran- 
dum of his views on the Sicilian situation based on his reading of the 
correspondence, and this had clearly impressed the foreign secretary. He was, 
A’Court wrote, quite convinced that, despite Bentinck’s hopes for a new 
129 

<<<PDFPAGE 134>>>
C. M. Eddis. (Courtesy of the National 
by 
é 
am A’Court, Lord He 
Gallery of Ireland.) 
Willi 

<<<PDFPAGE 135>>>
The Dénouement 
131 
parliament due to be summoned in the spring, matters could not go on as 
they were. “It is possible that the presence of his Lordship with the sword in 
one hand and the purse in the other, may influence and control the factious 
spirit of the assembly”; but once the British army was removed from Sicily, 
either there would be a revolution carried out by the democrats, or the nobles 
and those who supported the king would combine with the mob and the 
royal troops to put the king back in his old position and do away with the 
constitution. Bentinck himself, A’Court pointed out, had in a private letter to 
Liverpool admitted that only British interference could save Sicily from 
internal convulsion. Yet the jealousy of Britain’s allies would never permit her 
army to stay there, while intervention privately by the British minister in 
Palermo would merely compete with private intrigues by the ministers of 
other powers, and France for instance could scarcely desire a better field for 
activity than “that provided by an ignorant, profligate and . 
. 
. venal House 
of Parliament.” A’Court had already made up his mind that a free constitu- 
tion was not something in any way suited to the people of Sicily.” 
A month later he was duly appointed to act as deputy for Bentinck as 
British minister at Palermo, during the latter’s absence in Italy, in charge of 
military operations. And in his instructions from Castlereagh he was told that 
his most immediate task was to get the constitution modified. The original 
error, as Castlereagh saw it, had been making the king dependent on parlia- 
ment in a country where the spirit of jealousy and faction was unfortunately 
all too prevalent. What A’Court had to attempt to do was to ensure that only 
men of property were represented in parliament, and that the crown was no 
longer dependent on parliament for its normal expenses.? 
In a revealing interview Castlereagh gave to A’Court in May before the 
latter left for Sicily, Castlereagh told him, in reply to his question about what 
action he should take should the king resume power and the queen return, 
that the time for direct interference was past and that there could now be no 
warrant for behaving as Britain had done in the course of the war. As to 
Sicily’s constitution, Castlereagh disclaimed all responsibility for it. Its suc- 
cess had been as great as might have been expected, but he thought nothing 
could save it now. “God knows,” he went on, “it was never any principle of 
mine that we should meddle with the constitutions of other nations,” but 
even had he wanted to, he would have been completely cured of any inclina- 
tion to do so by what he had seen to happen in Sicily. He thought it would 
meet the same fate as the constitutions then forming in Europe, and the best 
thing that could happen was for Sicily’s government to revert to its original 
form.* 
A’Court’s appointment had been canvassed for months by Castelcicala and 
the king, some time before the affair of the “dream.” They had even tried to 
get A’Court accredited solely to the king, until informed by Castlereagh that 
the hereditary prince was the head of the state.° But there was no question 

<<<PDFPAGE 136>>>
eZ 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
but that A’Court would be far more acceptable to the king and prince than 
the constitutional dictator Bentinck. 
A’Court did not take very long after arriving in Sicily to reaffirm his earlier 
view that the Constitution of 1812 had been a profound mistake for the 
island. The Sicilian people, he told Castlereagh, were quite unfitted to be 
entrusted with any sort of political power, and a strong monarchical govern- 
ment was the only one that was suitable for them. This view, in fact, is not all 
that different from the one Bentinck had been forced to adopt in his mo- 
ments of greatest disillusion.© “If I had known,” the latter had written, “as 
much of the general character of the people as I did at present, I do not think 
I should ever have undertaken the business. I doubted whether these people 
were made for freedom.”” All would have been well, A’Court thought, if 
those who had drafted the constitution had contented themselves with lim- 
ited aims—the improving of the administration, the abolition of feudal 
rights, establishing equality before the law, and the introduction of fairer 
taxation. But the great mistake, to his mind, had been to create deliberative 
assemblies endowed with legislative power; for this meant Britain had been 
forced to take sides and now found it difficult suddenly to withdraw. He felt 
it acutely embarrassing to have, in the name of British honor as well as of 
sheer humanity, to give support to individuals with whose principles he so 
disagreed. He painted a very gloomy picture of a bankrupt island whose old 
institutions had now become discredited, and whose new ones were not yet 
functioning. The best friends Britain possessed in Sicily were making haste to 
abandon the island, and they were not willing to return unless it became 
controlled by Britain. Thus it was that the British cabinet would have to 
make a crucial decision, either to support what Britain had created or to 
renounce British influence there altogether. It was extremely unfortunate, he 
thought, that Britain had ever interfered over the matter of a constitution: 
“We have done either too much or too little. 
. 
. 
. we satisfied ourselves with 
the shadow, when we should have seized the substance,” and by this he meant 
forcing the king to abdicate (something that Bentinck had always wanted). 
For the king was now the principal difficulty, determined to ditch the 
constitution yet so untrustworthy and vindictive that he would, if permitted 
a free hand, soon establish a tyranny. Were it not for him, it would be quite 
easy for Britain to withdraw her support and “let the constitution sink into a 
form more adapted to the manners, vices and prejudices of this ignorant and 
profligate people.” The only course that now seemed open was to get the 
king to agree to accept a constitution of some sort, before he eventually 
returned to Naples.? 
But the whole affair of the constitution took on a completely new complex- 
ion with the terms of the treaty the king signed in June 1815 with Austria. 
Metternich proposed to A’Court that Britain should join with Austria to 
disown the Sicilian constitution, as they had already jointly disowned the 

<<<PDFPAGE 137>>>
The Dénouement 
133 
Republic of Genoa, revived by Bentinck. This however was considered 
impracticable, since the two cases were quite unlike. Castlereagh made clear 
to A’Court, writing in September 1816, that any concert between Austria 
and Britain would embarrass rather than help the king, might be wrongly 
construed in Europe, and would moreover make the two countries responsi- 
ble for whatever was done. While it was right to advise the king, A’Court 
must not commit the British government. The best course would be to let the 
king carry out his projected scheme (or subterfuge) for modifying the consti- 
tution, while letting him know, privately, that Britain would tolerate neither 
the extinction of any of Sicily’s ancient rights nor the persecution of any of 
those who had lent their support to British authority.!° This course was 
accordingly adopted, and A’Court wrote triumphantly on 5 November that 
the new, modified constitution on which his private advice had been taken 
(without committing his government) would ensure that nothing was done 
in Sicily that could be considered reactionary. He therefore congratulated 
Castlereagh on being now totally released “from all responsibility arising 
from the past.”!! The king was delighted and had awarded A’Court the 
highest decoration he had the power to confer (the Grand Cross of the Order 
of St Ferdinand), even though British protocol forbade A’Court from accept- 
ing it.!? But from the Sicilian constitutionalists the latter earned the nick- 
name of “William the Bad,” in contradistinction to Lord William Bentinck, 
who of course was referred to as “William the Good.”!$ 
On 8 December 1816 the king declared the kingdom of Naples and the 
kingdom of Sicily to be one. The new constitution he promulgated effectively 
robbed the Sicilian parliament of any power to legislate or prevent the king 
from raising revenue, save for extraordinary purposes. Though the privileges 
granted by the crown were confirmed, freedom of the press was now abol- 
ished and a measure of conscription introduced. 
!* There was nothing left of 
the constitution over whose birth Bentinck had presided. 
The policy in regard to Sicily that he had pursued during these two years 
Castlereagh defended vigorously in the House of Commons in 1821, when 
rejecting a motion put forward by Bentinck for a fresh intervention in Sicilian 
affairs. Castlereagh said that although the government felt strong affection 
and esteem for Sicily, it was not on that account or to secure its people’s 
happiness that British troops had been stationed there—in fact it had been a 
military occupation. Britain’s guarantee had not been to form a constitution, 
but to protect the dominions of its king. True, it had been necessary to 
intervene to impress on the mind of the Sicilian government the need for a 
modern constitution. Moreover if this had not been done, the government of 
the island could not have’ continued and the place would have been quite 
unfitted for its use as a British military base. It was never felt that Lord 
William Bentinck was entering into any arrangements with respect to the 
Sicilian constitution. 
!® 

<<<PDFPAGE 138>>>
134 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Yet Bentinck clearly had believed that he was entering into an arrange- 
ment. How far then was he justified in suggesting that Britain’s name and 
honor had been smirched by Castlereagh’s realpolitik? As Professor Mack 
Smith has pointed out, the king, though he was later blamed for destroying a 
liberal experiment, had been supported in so doing by a large proportion of 
the people of Sicily and had only dissolved the Sicilian parliament for the last 
time in 1815, after the failure of four parliaments to vote the necessary 
taxes.1© Charles Macfarlane, who was in Sicily only six months after the 
British troops left, heard many complaints of pecuniary loss now that the 
freespending forces had gone, but heard no regrets for a constitution that 
people described as a kind of “madness.”!7 Earlier the king had told Ben- 
tinck, “The Sicilians are not Englishmen, the habits of this country are not 
the habits of yours. 
. 
. 
. You fancy that Sicilians can govern themselves like 
Englishmen. They cannot do it. Give them this constitution and you yourself 
will soon have cause to repent it.”!8 Ferdinand’s words had proved pro- 
phetic. 
Since, then, the maintenance of the constitution (the creation of an en- 
lightened few) rested quiet clearly on British bayonets, to describe the 
withdrawal of such questionable support as being in some way “dis- 
honorable” seems to stretch the meaning of the word too far. Nor could any 
such withdrawal be described as unreasonable. As Charles Macfarlane em- 
phasized, writing a generation after the event, “Fond as they are of liberty, 
and prone to believe . 
. 
. that constitutions like our own are a panacea and fit 
for all countries and all peoples, the English would not have relished paying, 
for an indefinite number of years, an army of 10,000 men for the sole 
purpose of protecting a political experiment in Sicily.”!9 And an experiment, 
he could have added had he not made the point already, to which most 
Sicilians had proved indifferent. In any case, to keep troops on the island for 
that avowed purpose was bound to incur not only the anger of Austria but 
the risk of an open breach with that country.2° No considerations of “honor” 
could have warranted taking such a risk. 
Certainly it would have been dishonorable to permit the king to victimize 
those who had loyally supported the British, but Ferdinand here remained 
true to his pledge where higher officers were concerned. Settimo, who had 
been the minister for war, was even offered membership of the chancellery 
responsible for Sicilian affairs, though perhaps understandably he declined it. 
Belmonte had died earlier in Paris. Castelnuovo and other nobles associated 
with the 1812 Constitution, chose to retire into private life, a sort of 
immigration intérieure, in which they were allowed to remain undisturbed. 
Nor was it any longer true that native Sicilians were kept out of office in favor 
of Neapolitans. Indeed the latter complained of being swamped by a host of 
job-hungry Sicilians who had followed the king when he returned from 
Palermo.*! Giovanni Aceto in his history refers to the number of individuals 

<<<PDFPAGE 139>>>
The Dénouement 
135 
(none of whom he identifies by name), magistrates, and other officials who 
through their political affiliations were deprived of their posts after 1815, 
denied promotion, or persecuted.?? It could unfortunately well have been so, 
more especially in a country like Sicily where mutual jealousies could be so 
intense, but it would have been impracticable, indeed impossible, for the 
British government to have intervened in any such cases unless its official 
attention had been drawn to some specific cause of complaint. 
Castlereagh had acquiesced in the constitution so long as it served its 
immediate purpose—keeping the island of Sicily quiet, so as to let the allied 
troops there be made available for service elsewhere. But it could have no 
relevance in peacetime to the foreign policy of Lord Liverpool’s government. 
Yet even in wartime it had not been the entire success various ministries had 
hoped for. As has been shown in earlier chapters, Bentinck was twice com- 
pelled to recall a proportion of his army from Spain in order to cope with 
internal unrest, was forced to delay his own departure there, and once in 
Spain had had to return because of Sicily’s turbulence. 
If the question finally has to be asked whether, viewing the war as a whole, 
the military and financial investment Britain made in Sicily had been worth- 
while, the answer must be a qualified yes; though undoubtedly the highest 
hopes entertained for it were never fulfilled. As a forward base from which to 
launch effective attacks on the enemy, whether in Egypt, the Dardanelles, 
Italy, the Adriatic, or Spain, there were few successes of which it could boast, 
the dramatic anticlimax of Maida being the one that deserves to be best 
remembered. At times there had been maintained in the island upward of 
15,000 troops, yet never enough to intervene effectively or for very long in a 
continental enterprise that in any case if it were to succeed needed the help of 
Austria or Russia. In Spain there were some results to show, but internal 
troubles in Sicily and Bentinck’s preoccupation with Italy had prevented their 
being more convincing, just as the danger from the court and its followers 
had earlier prevented more than a portion of the troops available from being 
used in Italy or being dispatched to the Dardanelles. At all times there had 
remained present the threat of invasion by the French, even if after 1810 that 
threat was never a very real one. And if the British cabinet did not take that 
threat very seriously after Murat’s halfhearted, aborted thrust, the court and 
the generals and admirals did, and the king insisted that the minimum force 
of 10,000 effective British troops, guaranteed by treaty, be maintained on the 
island as long as the war with Napoleon lasted. 
Yet looked at purely defensively, the occupation had been well worth the 
trouble. Without it, Malta would have been at risk—indeed Sir Alexander 
Ball once wrote to Castlereagh of “the disaster which must necessarily accrue 
to the inhabitants of Malta, should the French possess themselves of Si- 
cily.”23 And with Malta at risk, so also would be British command of the 
Mediterranean as well as Britain’s commercial interests in the Levant and 

<<<PDFPAGE 140>>>
136 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
North Africa. The British navy would not only have lost its harbors at 
Augusta and Syracuse, but also the fresh food and water that the island was 
able to provide. Without Sicily, its arduous role in the Mediterranean would 
have been hard to fill. Sicily was never a firm base, but all the same it was one 
Britain needed to sustain her effort in the war with Napoleon. 
Of the legacy of British rule in Sicily, Louis Simond, a Frenchman, wrote 
in 1828: 
The English, it must be acknowledged, have left here no honourable 
monument of a 
power paramount to sovereignty . 
. 
. the roads, the pris- 
ons, the ECan the corrupt and barbarous administration of justice, 
remained in just as wretched a state as before they interfered. It is true they 
saved the island from French dominion; from the violence and plunder 
which attended it at De and in Calabria; they kept strict discipline; 
they paid honestly and liberally for all they had; but they did not mix 
cordially with the people; they continued meddling, teaching, ruling, with 
a ee hand and a supercilious pride, till all classes were tired out; and yet 
all classes regret them, simply because they saved them from Naples for a 
while.?4 
Apart from the fact that the British did do something to improve the 
appalling roads in Sicily, certainly in the northeast tip of the island, this rather 
superficial judgment really misses the important point. As has been stressed 
so often in this book, the ministry in London was extremely loath to interfere 
in Sicily’s internal affairs, and when eventually it was constrained to do so, its 
representative, Lord Wiliam Bentinck, spent his time trying to get the 
Sicilians to effect the needed reforms themselves. His lack of success in 
persuading them to work a system of parliamentary government induced 
them in the end to turn back to their king, who personified Neapolitan 
domination. 

<<<PDFPAGE 141>>>
Appendix A 
The Economic Implications of the British 
Occupation of Sicily 
less presence of British troops in Sicily together with the payment of a 
British subsidy brought to the island an influx of capital and a vast 
increase of its purchasing power. The demand of the armed forces for meat 
meant that the price of cattle almost doubled, as did that of wool and corn. 
The wages of agricultural laborers did not keep pace with this inflation, and it 
was therefore the merchants and farmers and the landowners with their 
increased rents who benefited from this situation. The attempt by the Sicilian 
government to introduce a free trade in corn led in the summer of 1813 to 
such a huge increase in its price that serious riots broke out in Palermo, and 
not long after Lord William Bentinck was forced to reimpose price controls. 
When however the war ended and British troops were finally withdrawn, 
there was inevitably a collapse of prices and an end to the period of pros- 
perity for those classes who had benefited by the British presence. ! 
The interdiction of trade to Europe caused a wartime flowering of local 
industry—silk manufacture in Palermo, the manufacture of wool, hemp, and 
linen in new factories at Girgenti, and of linen at Caltanisetta. Hats, fur- 
niture, even harpsichords to rival the best products of France and Spain (if 
one witness is to be believed) were all being produced in Sicily during the 
wartime period, while new sulphur and asphalt mines were being successfully 
exploited.” 
The contraband trade with the continent was very largely in the hands of 
the British, for whom Sicily became a vast entrepét for British manufactures 
and for colonial goods. Britain’s minister at Palermo was authorized by the 
British government to issue licenses for this trade to any vessels other than 
French, though in regard to the trade to Calabria there were difficulties with 
British cruisers who tended to stop any vessels crossing, purely on grounds of 
security; and on one occasion in 1808 the merchants of Leeds complained to 
the ministry that legitimate trade was being hampered through orders issued 
by the Admiralty. 
When during the outbreak of plague in Malta in the summer and autumn 
of 1813 the Sicilians imposed a rigorous quarantine, British merchants in 
Sicily found that their trade was badly hit. In consequence, Bentinck felt 
compelled to authorize a full-scale trade between Sicily and the Neapolitan 
137 

<<<PDFPAGE 142>>>
138 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
ports. Permission was given at the end of December for the export to Naples 
of Sicilian produce as well as British and colonial produce and of course 
British manufactures, while imports were no longer confined to iron, flour, 
and rice as hitherto, but could now include all the produce of Naples, only 
excluding French manufactures.* 
By the treaty of alliance of 1808 the ports of Sicily were thrown open to 
the merchant ships of British subjects, and merchants were not required to 
pay duties on food or military stores imported for the use of British troops. 
Nevertheless some of these duties did continue to be levied, on the pretext 
that the royal right to collect them had been farmed out to private bodies. 
These commercial privileges granted the British were deeply resented by 
Sicilians, and once the war ended in 1814, although British troops still 
remained on the island until October 1815, there were complaints from 
British merchants that their privileges were being ignored and that delays 
continued to be imposed on the import of British goods. As A’Court wrote 
indignantly to one official: “It would seem that nothing could be more 
acceptable at the present moment than anything which may wear the ap- 
pearance of hostility to the British interests.”> 
There were many British merchants in Sicily, most of them living in 
Palermo and Messina, though the firms of Woodhouse and Ingham were 
most closely linked with the port of Marsala where they virtually controlled 
the trade in wine and had kept Nelson’s fleet supplied with it.© How many 
English merchants there were, how much capital they had, in what sectors of 
trade they operated, and what was the extent of their profits are questions 
about which it is not yet possible to be precise. The petition of the merchants 
resident in Sicily made to the Council of Trade and Plantations on 27 May 
1811 was signed by twenty-eight merchant firms or individuals trading on 
their own.” These British merchants had protested against the tax on mone- 
tary transactions imposed by the king in 1811, though this was removed after 
Bentinck’s arrival. They also protested that there existed no Anglo-Sicilian 
commercial treaty. It will be recalled that in 1806 the Ministry of All the 
Talents initially suggested that a clause be added to the subsidy treaty then 
being negotiated by which British merchants in Sicily should be given the 
position of most-favored nationals, but that fierce Sicilian opposition had 
caused the suggestion to be withdrawn. Two years later, Mellish impressed 
on Canning the need for some such commercial agreement, since British 
merchants in Sicily were in the position of those least favored, their goods 
being required to pay 36 percent more than the goods of other nations.8 
Canning apparently took no action, because three years later Wellesley at the 
Foreign Office raised the matter again with the Board of Trade. Bathurst, 
then in charge of that department, replied that there were difficulties. Britain 
could not ask for commercial advantages simply because she was paying a 
subsidy (one she was bound by treaty to do). Sicily would seek reciprocity 

<<<PDFPAGE 143>>>
Appendix A 
139 
and that meant reducing the duty on wine—not just Sicilian wine, but the 
wines of all wine-producing countries (other, of course, than the enemy 
France)—and this the Treasury could not afford.? Only a month later, 
however, the Board of Trade did produce a projet for an Anglo-Sicilian 
commercial treaty that was designed to be included in the wider treaty of 
1812.!° This however proved unnecessary since by the end of 1811 
the main 
merchants’ grievances had been removed. New instructions had been issued 
by the court in regard to the seizure of British ships and to improving the 
conduct of the prize court; steps had been taken to adjust the assessment of 
the value of British goods entering the country to keep pace with the 
lowering of prices, and an assurance had been given to London that in future 
British goods might be freely transshipped without the payment of any 
duty.!! There is no doubt that British manufactures, despite the court’s 
grudging attitude, enjoyed a wartime boom in Sicily, and one witness who 
was resident in Palermo through 1811 and 1812 writes of English cloth 
being universally worn, and every kind of household necessity being not only 
“on the English model” but “generally procured in England.”!? And certainly 
the British community could not complain of underrepresentation where 
consular services were concerned, since by 1812 there were functioning in 
Sicily no less than thirty vice-consuls and consuls.1* Not however until 1816 
was a trade treaty finally signed between Britain and the Two Sicilies. This 
gave the subjects of both countries the status of most-favored nationals and 
remitted 10 percent of the duty paid on British imported goods in return for 
Britain abandoning the right of exemption from customs search. 
14 
Sicilian merchants for their part benefited from British naval protection 
against French privateers and Barbary pirates. When the British navy arrived 
off Sicily at the end of the eighteenth century, a constant state of war 
obtained between the island and the Barbary states, and Sicilian trade was 
either confined to vessels plying a coastal traffic or to those of some other 
country whose flag the Barbary states respected. It was the British who, 
through the good offices of Admiral Fremantle in 1812 (acting on behalf of 
Lord William Beninck), concluded a treaty with the bey of Tunis. Four 
hundred-odd Sicilian subjects being held in slavery were cheaply ransomed, a 
truce was made between Sicily and Tunis to last as long as Britain was Sicily’s 
ally and permission was given for boats from Sicily to fish coral along the 
North African coast.!5 The economic benefits accruing from nearly ten years 
of close relations between Britain and Sicily were not the perquisite of one 
side only. And one major contribution to the Sicilian economy that the 
British occupation of Sicily made was to the island’s merchant marine. Before 
1806 Sicilian exports were carried to Europe in the foreign craft of France, 
Genoa, and Ragusa. The Sicilian merchant marine consisted largely of a few 
small vessels, principally engaged in a coastal trade, creeping from port to 
port in the kingdom, terrified of Barbary pirates but also ignorant of naviga- 

<<<PDFPAGE 144>>>
140 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
tion. The masters of Sicilian craft seldom ventured out to sea or went beyond 
the Straits of Gibraltar. But during the British occupation, the ship repairs to 
the British squadron were carried out by Sicilian shipwrights and as a result 
there was created a considerable body of these skilled workmen. After the 
occupation ended, they began to build much larger vessels for the trade 
between Sicily and Naples than had been in use hitherto, and so laid the 
foundation for what became a very flourishing merchant fleet.!© 

<<<PDFPAGE 145>>>
Appendix B 
Attempts Made from Sicily to Rescue 
Pope Pius VII 
Nee February 1808, when French troops were quartered in Rome be- 
cause the Pope had refused to join an offensive alliance against Great 
Britain, Pius VII was a virtual prisoner there—forced to dismiss his secre- 
taries and to dissolve his personal guard. It was in these circumstances that 
Cardinal Gabrielli, pro-papal secretary of state until he was expelled by the 
French, concocted a plot with a Scottish prelate to get the British to rescue 
the pope and convey him safely to Sicily.! The Scottish prelate was Cardinal 
Erskine, the same cardinal who thirteen years earlier had endeavored to get 
the British government to recognize the papal court and to resume diplo- 
matic relations with it in return for the then pope, Pius VI, accepting the 
Anglo-Corsican kingdom and being willing to sign a concordat with it. This 
time Erskine was more successful in obtaining a hearing at Westminster, and 
the government there sent instructions to Drummond, their minister at the 
court at Palermo, and to Admiral Collingwood, then commanding the Brit- 
ish fleet in the Mediterranean, to set on foot a rescue operation.” 
In mid-July 1808 Collingwood was ordered by the Admiralty to station a 
frigate off the Roman coast in order to receive on board the pope and any 
cardinals who might wish to accompany him, after first getting in touch with 
Drummond to coordinate plans for the operation.* Meanwhile Drummond 
had heard from Canning that Collingwood had been so instructed. But 
Drummond had already discovered that the queen, entirely without his 
knowledge or indeed that of the king and Circello, had been involved in a 
plot of her own to rescue the pope and bring him to Sicily—perhaps at the 
prompting of that strange character the Irish-born painter Rogert Fagan. 
The latter had lived for a long time in Rome, where he had acted as the 
British agent. He knew the pope personally and had only recently been 
expelled from Rome on the express order of Napoleon. On arrival in Palermo 
he quickly succeeded in becoming a confidant of the queen. In June 1809 he 
was to become the British consul-general in Sicily. The queen had dispatched 
a Sicilian frigate with Fagan on board to the Roman coast with an invitation 
to the pope to come and seek refuge in Palermo. Needless to say, the 
operation, like everything else the queen undertook, had not been thought 
out sufficiently well. Fagan was told the pope would not leave unless he 
141 

<<<PDFPAGE 146>>>
142 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
received an invitation, written out in the king’s own hand that, it was said, 
the pope would recognize. After three weeks Fagan returned, only to find 
himself out of favor both with the queen for having failed and with Drum- 
mond, who was extremely incensed that Fagan had not consulted him. And 
what was particularly galling was that surprise had now been lost. All Italy, in 
Drummond’s view, must now know of the attempt, and this had made it 
doubly difficult to make another with hope of success.# 
Collingwood had ordered the frigate Alceste under the command of Cap- 
tain Maxwell to undertake the rescue task, but he wanted Drummond to find 
for him at least two reliable men to act as agents in contacting the pope. 
Drummond decided that no Sicilian would ever agree to accept such a role 
unless he knew that the king was behind him, and so he decided he must 
confide in the king and in Circello, whom he swore to secrecy, for on no 
account was the queen to be told. It was they who eventually procured four 
Catholic priests to sail on the frigate. Drummond writes of only three—a 
Jesuit and two monks or friars—while Maxwell, who must here be relied on, 
mentions four, though he called them all Jesuits (a term that he, as a good 
Protestant, was ready no doubt to apply indiscriminately). In addition there 
travelled on board the Alceste a Roman guide and a young nobleman, Count 
Canizzaro, a friend of Drummond and thought by him a suitable person to 
keep His Holiness company.° 
The Alceste set sail on 26 August and after first calling at the island of Ponza 
to pick up a pilot who knew the area made for the coast at Fiumicino where 
one of the friars and the guide disembarked. The friar managed to reach 
Rome safely, had an interview with Cardinal Pacca, the papal secretary of 
state, and found the latter surprised and pleased to learn that an English ship 
had arrived. Although he looked like a Sicilian brigand, the friar’s credentials 
were believed, even though he failed to carry on him the important letter 
written (as requested) in the king’s own hand, unsigned and unaddressed, 
lamenting “the gradual decay of his friend’s health” and inviting him “to try a 
change of air at his villa which was accounted very healthy.”¢ 
No direct answer was apparently forthcoming, but the friar was told to go 
back to the coast and wait there for the next three nights for a messenger with 
the pope’s reply. 
Maxwell then arranged to have waiting on shore every night his first 
lieutenant, to receive the expected messenger. No one arrived on the first two 
nights and the third night it blew a gale, so that no boat could approach the 
shore. Whether the messenger did arrive on the crucial third night is not 
known, but once the weather again permitted, a Party was sent ashore each 
night to await the envoy who never came. Finally Captain Maxwell decided 
he must send someone again to Rome to find out what was happening. But 
here he found himself frustrated, since all the priests were too frightened to 
go and asked only to return to Palermo. Maxwell sent them back on a small 

<<<PDFPAGE 147>>>
Appendix B 
143 
ship (the Acorn) together with the young Count Canizzaro—the only one to 
show any courage—with a message to Drummond to inform him of events. 
Within a week Canizzaro was back, carrying with him on board the Acorn a 
Roman colonel by the name of Vanni who was nominated to go to Rome. 
Vanni set off but never returned, and Drummond learnt later from news- 
papers that he had been arrested and shot as a spy. Maxwell of course knew 
nothing of this and waited a further month off the Tiber, hoping to see the 
colonel return. The weather continued to worsen steadily and on only 
thirteen nights was it possible to put a boatload of men ashore. One night 
one of the launches was swamped and four of the sailors taken prisoner. 
Maxwell arranged an exchange of prisoners with the officer commanding 
Fiumicino fort, but when the time came to carry out this exchange the 
Neapolitan broke his word, and the first lieutenant of the Alceste and the party 
of men accompanying him ashore under flag of truce were marched off to the 
north. 
How long Maxwell continued to remain at his fruitless task we do not 
know. Collingwood, on receiving his dispatch, must have decided to order 
him back. Maxwell had written on 15 October of rapid currents and frequent 
gales, rendering “this service rather arduous.” One cannot envisage Colling- 
wood being prepared to run the risk of losing a frigate by continuing what 
was clearly a failed operation.” 
The version of the story as recounted in his memoirs by Cardinal Pacca, the 
pope’s pro-secretary of state, tells us a slightly different tale. According to 
him, the Franciscan friar whose disguise made him look like a vagabond or 
bandit did not carry any letter to authenticate either him or his mission. He 
had, he admitted, been too frightened to do so—thinking (correctly) that 
were he arrested and the king’s letter found on his person, he would certainly 
be shot as a spy—the fate that awaited Colonel Vanni (who did carry a letter) 
a few weeks later. The friar referred Pacca to Cardinal Erskine, whom the 
friar had apparently seen already. Erskine’s reaction, when tackled by Pacca 
about the plan as revealed by the friar was to say the least equivocal. He 
disclaimed all personal responsibility, said he had been told of it by Gabrielli, 
but, having then heard no more of it, had assumed the idea to have been 
abandoned. As Pacca notes, it would appear that Erskine had now become 
alarmed and was trying to dissociate himself entirely from a plot initiated by 
himself. 
When, the following day, Pacca saw the pope, the latter agreed that he 
knew of the plot, formulated by Gabrielli, but that he had never had the least 
intention of leaving Rome of his own free will. His reasons being, as Pacca 
adds, not merely the fear of provoking schism but his refusal to give Napo- 
leon a pretext for annexing the Roman states to France by allowing himself to 
become a guest in a country controlled by France’s enemies. Nor would he 
agree to contemplate flight merely in order to secure his person. 

<<<PDFPAGE 148>>>
144 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
In view of all this, why then did Pacca send the friar off with the idea that 
further contact would be made at the coast during the course of the next 
three nights, if he were already so sure that the pope had effectively vetoed 
the scheme from the start?® 
It must be very frankly stated that the clergy do not emerge from these 
incidents with any very great measure of credit. Why, it may be asked, did 
Gabrielli allow the scheme to go ahead, if he knew that the pope was 
completely opposed to it? Even to the extent of encouraging Fagan (it was 
presumably he who saw Fagan) to try again, but this time bearing a letter? 
And why did he not inform his successor as pro-secretary of state of what he 
had done? And if he were hurried out of the kingdom before he had had time 
to inform Pacca, why had Erskine said nothing to Pacca? And again, if Pacca 
was so convinced that the pope had made up his mind for good (and Pius was 
not a man to be shaken, once he had formed his own opinion), why did he 
allow the Franciscan friar to think there was still a chance of some change in 
the papal attitude toward escape? 
The result of what one can only call muddle, or perhaps even moral 
cowardice, in refusing to tell unpleasant truths, interwoven with clerical 
intrigue, was that the lives of all those on board the British frigate were 
needlessly risked, the life of the brave Colonel Vanni was forfeit, and the 
British were made for no good reason to hazard one of their valuable ships. 
The second attempt to rescue the pope was made in the summer of 1810 
when a ship was again dispatched from Sicily, though this time it was a 
Spanish operation, with the British ship acting as auxiliary only. There had 
been no orders sent out from England to instruct Amherst how he was to act, 
and he and Admiral Martin were content to rely on Canning’s dispatch of 
June 1808 as an indication of British policy. It is true that there was now a 
new administration, but Perceval’s ministry expressed no views, though it 
would doubtless have been delighted if the operation had been successful. 
This time the initiative had come from the pope’s almoner, acting (or so he 
wrote) on the pope’s instructions, and taking the form of letters to Sicily 
addressed to a Sicilian prelate and to the Spanish minister in Palermo. These 
letters, which arrived in Holy Week and whose contents at first appeared 
innocuous, were found to contain a hidden message. This message was 
written in invisible ink and asked the letter’s recipients to help rescue the 
pope and with the assistance of the British navy to arrange for his passage to 
and asylum in Malta. Given the known views of the pope, that he certainly 
had not become (as some think) Napoleon’s bitter enemy, but rather that he 
clung to the hope that the latter would become a latter-day Charlemagne and 
emerge in the end as the Church’s defender, it seems unlikely to say the least 
that he would have instructed his almoner to make the appeal set out in these 
letters.” In view of the independent behavior of Cardinals Erskine and 

<<<PDFPAGE 149>>>
Appendix B 
145 
Gabrielli during the summer of 1808 in formulating a plot to which they 
knew the pope was completely opposed, one may perhaps be allowed to 
doubt the truth of the papal almoner’s statement that his letters were written 
on the pope’s instructions. 
Padre Gil, the Spanish minister, told Amherst he would like His Holiness 
to be taken if possible to Alicante. The latter was a secure resort and the 
presence of the pope in Spain would have an incalculable effect on the 
national struggle the Spanish were waging. The Spanish had a corvette they 
could send, but they would welcome the presence of a British warship to 
accompany it to Genoese waters, since it had been learned that the coast near 
Savona was strictly guarded by French privateers. Amherst then approached 
Admiral Martin, who expressed his willingness to detach a brig (the Eclair) to 
perform the task. 
The two warships set sail in June, the Spanish warship having aboard 
someone who knew both the pope and Savona, and when they reached the 
Maddalena Islands, this person was sent on ahead of the rest to meet the pope 
and discover from him when the corvette had best appear. He was at the 
same time to offer the pope a choice of places to which he could go—first 
Alicante, second Minorca, and only Palermo as a last resort.!° 
Neither Amherst nor Admiral Cotton (now in command in the Mediterra- 
nean) ever had very much faith in the scheme, given the close watch main- 
tained on the coast. And Cotton later wrote of its failure as one that had been 
“foreseen and expected.”!! The person sent from the Maddalena Islands did 
not succeed in reaching the pope until it was too late to take any action, for 
the long delay had led the Spanish with British agreement to abandon the 
plan. They had thought that although they might succeed in making a 
landing near Savona, they would never be able to get away; and an unsuc- 
cessful attempt of this sort could only endanger the life of the pope. 
Amherst was convinced that lack of security had contributed largely to the 
failure of the mission. There was great reason to believe, he wrote, that the 
secret of the expedition had been divulged even before the two warships had 
set sail from Palermo roadstead.1? And the same had been true in 1808 
when, before the Alceste had sailed for the Tiber, its mission was being 
discussed in Malta.13 The court at Palermo was of course notorious for the 
presence of spies there and for careless talk. 
A further attempt in 1811 to involve the British government in an attempt 
to free the pope was made by Queen Maria-Carolina through a Livornese 
banker called Gaspar Cifenti, but that plan very rapidly came to nothing. 
Napoleon’s police got to know of the plot and Cifenti paid for it with his 
life +* 
Whether the British in 1812 had any intention of trying again to take the 
pope away from Savona it is not possible to say. There is no documentary 

<<<PDFPAGE 150>>>
146 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
evidence of it in the British Admiralty or Foreign Office files. But Napoleon 
certainly thought they had and that it was too dangerous to allow the pope to 
remain at Savona any longer, even though in the previous year its garrison 
had been reinforced. It was for this reason that Pius VII was removed to the 
safety of Fontainebleau. 
!® 

<<<PDFPAGE 151>>>
Notes 
Abbreviations 
ADM 
Admiralty documents at the Public Record Office, Kew 
Add. MS 
Additional manuscript at the Department of Manuscripts, British Li- 
brary, London 
CO 
Colonial Office documents at the Public Record Office, Kew 
Dalrymple Letterbook of Lady Dalrymple, in private hands at Broadoak, Dorset 
FO 
Foreign Office documents at the Public Record Office, Kew 
PwJd 
Portland Manuscripts at the Department of Manuscripts, University of 
Nottingham 
WO 
War Office documents at the Public Record Office, Kew 
Chapter 1. Getting a Foothold 
1. Sir A. W. Ward and G. P. Gooch, eds., Cambridge History of British Foreign 
Policy 1783-1919, 3 vols. (Cambridge: 1922), 1: 238, 239n.3; C. H. D. Giglioli, 
Naples in 1799 (London: Methuen, 1903), 48; J. Russell, Nelson and the Hamiltons 
(London: Blond, 1969), 18; Hamilton to Grenville, no. 35, 9 October 1796, no. 39, 
22 November 1796, FO 70/9. 
2. Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 
1:579-80; A. B. Rodger, The War 
of the Second Coalition 1798-1801 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964), 76; Hamilton to 
St. Vincent 15 April 1798 copy FO 70/11; Grenville to Hamilton, no. 2, 20 April 
1798, no. 3, 5 June drafts 1798 FO 70/11. 
3. Grenville to Eden, no. 1, 16 January 1798, FO 7/51. 
4. Eden to Grenville, no. 28, 16 April 1798, FO 7/51; Grenville to Hamilton, no. 
2, 20 April 1798, FO 70/11; Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1: 578-80. 
5. Ibid., 287; Russell, Nelson, 27; Hamilton to Grenville, no. 14, 5 June 1798, 
FO 70/11. 
6. Russell, Nelson, 28, 34-35; Hamilton to Grenville, no. 15, 18 June 1798, no. 
18, 4 August 1798, no. 22, 21 August 1798, FO 70/11; Cambridge History of British 
Foreign Policy, 1:82, 582-3. 
7. Russell, Nelson, 38,51; H. Acton, The Bourbons of Naples 1734-1825 (London: 
Methuen, 1956), 306, 309; Rodger, Second Coalition, 77. 
8. Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1 : 288-89, 584. 
9. Russell, Nelson’ 56; Acton, Bourbons, 316-22. 
10. Russell, Nelson, 63; Acton, Bourbons, 339-40. 
11. N. E. Saul, Russia and the Mediterranean 1787-1807 (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1920), 75, 108-12. 
12. Ibid., 118-26. 
13. Giglioli, Naples, 171-73; Acton, Bourbons, 345; H. Nelson, Dispatches and 
Letters, ed. Sir Nicholes H. Nicolas, 7 vols. (London: H. Colbourn, 1845-46), 
3: 268. 
14. Nelson to Stuart, 16 February 1799, copy FO 70/26. 
15. Hamilton to Graham, 16 February 1799, copy FO 70/26; Hamilton to 
147 

<<<PDFPAGE 152>>>
148 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Grenville, no. 8, 7 February 1799, no. 9, 13 February 1799, no. 14, 17 February 
1799, FO 70/12. 
16. V. Wortley, Stuart, A Prime Minister to his son: correspondence of 3rd Earl of Bute 
with Sir Charles Stuart (London: John Murray, 1925), 304. 
17. Stuart to Dundas, 13 April 1799, FO 70/26; A. M. Delaroye, Life of Thomas 
Graham, Lord Lynedoch (London: Richardson; Marchant Singer, 1880), 164, 165, 
167,173: 
18. Lynedoch MS, 3598 ff, 193-94, National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh. 
The statement Nelson made to Hamilton, in a letter of 13 October, that Dundas had 
earlier authorized the posting of Graham and his force to Valletta, but that he 
(Nelson) had kept back the order, is, on the evidence, completely untrue. One can 
only speculate on the reasons why Nelson told a deliberate falsehood. Presumably it 
was for the consumption of the court, who might have resented losing the troops. 
Nelson to Hamilton, 13 October 1799, Nelson ¢ Hamilton Papers, ed. Morrison A. 
(London: privately published, 1894), vol. 2, no. 430). 
19. Stuart to Dundas, 13 April 1799, FO 70/26. 
20. P. Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean 1803-1810 (London: Longmans, 
1957), 8-9; J. Holland Rose, Select Dispatches relating to the Formation of the 3rd 
Coalition against France 
1804-5 (London: Historical Society of Great Britain, 1904, 
4446. 
21. Grenville to Hamilton, no. 1, 25 March 1799, draft FO 70/12. 
22. Giglioli, Naples, 382-83; Acton, Bourbons, 428, 430; Rt. Hon. Sir A. B. Paget, 
ed, The Paget Papers, 2 vols. (London: W. Heinemann, 1886), 1: 190-2, 207-12, 
238-42; M—H Weil, Correspondance inédite de Marie—Caroline avec le marquis de Gallo 
(Paris 1911) no. 344, 152; Grenville to Paget, 17 January 1800, additional instruc- 
tions, draft FO 70/14; Paget to Grenville, 12 May 1800, FO 70/14. 
23. Acton, Bourbons, 430. Paget was recalled in 1803, the court having earlier 
made a request that he be replaced by another minister. When five years later Canning 
attempted to reappoint Paget to the post, the court’s protest was so insistent that the 
whole idea was quietly dropped. FO 70/34 ff 77, 98. 
24. Paget to Grenville, no. 7, 4 July 1800, no. 10, 17 August 1800, FO70/14; 
Grenville to Paget, 10 October 1800, draft FO 70/14. 
25. Grenville to Paget, no. 1, 28 February 1801, draft FO70/15. 
26. Paget to Grenville, no. 6, 27 March 1801, FO70/15. 
27. Drummond to Hawkesbury, no. 13, April 1802, FO70/17. 
28. Paget to Grenville, no. 1, 15 January 1801, FO70/15; Paget Papers 265-66; 
Hawkesbury to Drummond, no. 2, 30 March 1802, draft FO 70/1 7; Drummond to 
Hawkesbury, no. 14, 19 April 1802, no. 24, 25 August, 1802, no. 25, 25 August 
1802, private 10 September 1802, FO 70/18. 
29. Drummond to Hawkesbury, no. 18, 3 March 1803, FO70/19. 
30. A’Court to Hawkesbury, no. 7, 20 April 1803, FO 70/20. 
31. A’Court to Hawkesbury, no. 14, 5 June 1803, FO 70/20. 
32. A’Court to Hawkesbury, no. 15?, 11 June 1803, FO 70/20. 
33. Nelson, Despatches, 5:97—-99. 
34. Ibid., 96-97. 
35. Weil, Correspondance, no. 466, 463, no. 512, 588. 
36. Acton, Bourbons, 476. 
37. Add. MS 37268 ff 49-50 
38. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 26-27. 
39. D. Sultana, Samuel Taylor Coleridge in Malta and Italy (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1969), 195-96; W. A. Miles, Correspondence of W.A. Miles in the French Revolution 
1789-1817, 2 vols. (London: Longmans 1890), 2:335; Add MS 37268 f 
50. 

<<<PDFPAGE 153>>>
Notes 
149 
40. Sultana, Coleridge, 195-96. 
41. C. Auriol, La France, ’Angleterre et Naples de 1803 a 1806 2 vols. (Paris, 1904), 
1:488—93; Elliot to Nelson, 22 June 1803, 7 July 1803, copies FO70/21; Drum- 
mond to Canning, no. 20, 21 July 1808, FO 70/32 f 264; Hobart to Ball, 16 May 
1803, 11 November 1803 draft; Ball to Hobart, no. 22, 26 July 1803, CO 158/7 fF 
253, 295; Elliot to Ball, 10 July 1805, extract CO 158/8 f 98; Hawkesbury to Elliot, 
11 November 1803, secret and confidential draft, FO 70/21. 
42. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 54; Rose, Select Dispatches, 44-46, 60-61. 
43. Auriol, La France, 1:368-71; Mackesy, War in the Mediterannean, 58, 400. 
44. Elliot to Harrowby, 20 January 1805, most secret and enclos 27 March 1805; 
most secret and confidential, FO 70/24. 
45. Harrowby to Elliot, no. 5, 5 November 1804, most secret draft, FO 70/23. 
46. WO 6/56 ff 1-84 
47. Mulgrave to Smith, 20 March 1805, FO 70/26; Smith to Craig, 17 August 
1805, FO 70/26; Smith to Mulgrave, 24 October 1805, FO 70/26. 
48. Countess of Minto Elliot-Murray-Knymound, Memoir of Rt Hon Hugh Elliot 
(London, 1868), 388-91; Elliot to Craig, 28 February 1806, extract FO70/27. 
49. Acton, Bourbons, 524. 
50. Nelson, Despatches, 5:249; Add. MS 20176 ff 40-43. 
51. Craig to Castlereagh, no. 24, 11 February 1806, WO 1/281 ff 81-95. 
52. Craig to Castlereagh, no. 28, 16 February 1806, WO 1/281 ff 273-74. 
53. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 92-93. 
Chapter 2. Sicily as the British Found It in 1806 
1. D. Mack Smith, A History of Sicily: Mediaeval Sicily (London: Chatto and 
Windus, 1968), xii, 7-11. 
2. Ibid., xvi. 
3. Ibid., 26. 
4. Ibid., 115-21. 
5. Ibid., 74, 103. 
6. Mack Smith, A History of Sicily: Modern Sicily (London: Chatto and Windus, 
1968), 264. 
7. H. Swinburne, Travels in the Two Sicilies, 2 vols. (London 1785), 2:212. 
8. D. V. Denon, Travels in Sicily and Malta (trans) (London: Robinson, 1789), 
14445. 
9. Mack Smith, Mediaeval Sicily, 16; Bentinck to Hippisley, extract, 13 January 
1813, FO 70/62. 
10. Nelson, Despatches, 5: 106-8. 
11. Acton, Bourbons, 430-31. Lt. Gen. Sir H. Bunbury, Narrative of Military 
Transactions in the Mediterranean 1805-1810 (London: privately printed, 1851), 36— 
i 
12. FE. Renda, La Sicilia nel 1812 (Caltanisetta 1963), 41. 
13. J. Galt, Voyages and Travels in 1809, 1810, and 1811 (London, 1812), 103; G. 
Bianco La Sicilia durante Voccupazione inglese 1806-1815 (Palermo, 1902), 48-50. 
14. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 272-74. 
15. Ibid.; P. Brydone A Tour through Sicily and Malta (London: Strahan and 
Cadell, 1774, 1809 edition), 323. 
16. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 274. 
17. Ibid., 276-80. 
. 
18. Elliot to Ball, extract, 12 March 1806, CO 158/12 f 203; J. C. Mellish, La 

<<<PDFPAGE 154>>>
150 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Cour de Sicile en 1809 par un diplomate anglais. Observations of Joseph Charles Mellsh in 
Revue Historique diplomatique ed. Pingaud L. (Paris, 1894), 282; Robert Stewart, 
Viscount Castlereagh, The Correspondence, Despatches and other papers of Viscount 
Castlereagh 12 vols. (London, 1850-53), 8:217—24. 
19. Renda, La Sicilia nel 1812, 15. In 1855 the British consul at Palermo described 
Sicily’s internal communications as a major obstacle to trade: “Palermo and Messina, 
150 miles apart, have a pathless track between them 90 miles long. Palermo and 
Girgenti are connected only in part by a carriage road, and Girgenti and Marsala are 
separated by 80 miles of trackless waste.” (Goodwin, Accounts & Papers), 9, 16, 
(1857) 553, R. Romeo, I/ Risorgimento in Sicilia (Bari: Istituto Italiana per gli studi 
storici, 1950), 187; Galt, Voyages, 21-39, 41-42, 86, 96. 
20. Bianco La Sicilia durante Voccupazione, 29-30. 
21. J. Rosselli, Lord William Bentinck and the British Occupation of Sicily 1811— 
1814 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1956), 2, 3, 172; D. Mack Smith, 
Modern Sicily, 316-31; C. Macfarlane, Sicily and Her Constitutions (London, 1849). 
22. Drummond to Howick, 11 March 1807, private FO 70/30. 
23. Sultana, Coleridge, 206. 
24. Rosselli, Bentinck, 29-30. 
25. Bianco La Sicilia durante Poccupazione, 28-29. 
26. Colonel Bunbury thought him a faux bonhomme—no match for his queen in 
talent and courage, but quite her equal in falsehood and treachery. (Bunbury, Sir H. 
Military Transactions in the Mediterranean (London: privately printed, 1851), 35-39. 
27. Bianco, 23-24; J. Rambaud Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte 1806-1808 (Paris, 
1911), 36-38. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 335; Mellish, Observations, 128-32; 
Rosselli, Bentinck 8; A. Valente, Gioacchimo Murat e VItalia meridionale (Turin edition, 
1965, first published 1941), 85. 
28. Bentinck to Fagan, 11 June 1812, PwJd 2158 (Portland Manuscripts at 
University of Nottingham Library) 
29. Sir J. F. Maurice, ed., Diary of Sir John Moore, 2 vols. (London: Edward 
Arnold, 1904), 191-92. 
30. G. L. N. Collingwood, Selection from the public and private correspondence of Vice 
Admiral Lord Collingwood interspersed with memoirs of his life 4th ed. (London: James 
Ridgway, 1829), 498-500. 
31. Bianco, La Sicilia durante Woccupazione, 23-25; R. M. Johnston, The Napo- 
leonic Empire in Southern Italy 2 vols. (London: Macmillan, 1904) 1:47, 164; 
Bentinck’s Journal, 28 February 1812, 24 September 1812 PwJd 6254, 6256, 
Portland Papers at Nottingham University; Mellish, Observations, 124-25; Rosselli, 
Bentinck, 8, 9, 175; Acton, Bourbons, 431; G. EF. Leckie, An Historical Survey of the 
Foreign Affaurs of Great Britain (London 1808), 98; Rambaud, Naples, 45—46; J. P. 
Garnier Murat roi de Naples (Paris, 1959), 113-19, 123. 
32. Bianco, La Siclila durante Voccupazione 23; Weil, Correspondance de Marie- 
Caroline, no. 445, p. 365; Rosselli, Bentinck, 9; Rambaud, Naples, 45. 
33. Drummond to Hawkesbury, no. 31, 19 October 1802, FO 70/18. 
34. Auriol, La France, 1:327-28, 667-73; Rambaud, Naples, 41; Johnston, Napo- 
leontc Empire, 49; Elliot to Hawkesbury, no. 28, 15 June 1804, FO 70/22. 
35. Elliot to C. J. Fox, no. 17, 7 June 1806, FO 70/27; Mellish, Observations, 285— 
88; Bentinck Journal, 30 January 1812, 2 March 1812 PwJd 6254. 
36. Garnier, Murat, 117-18. 
37. Bianco, La Sicilia durante Voccupazione, 26; A. Capograssi Gli Inglesi in Italia 
durante le campagne napoleoniche (Lord William Bentinck) (Bari: Biblioteca di Cultura 
Moderna, 1949), 29; Valente, G. Murat, 85-87. 

<<<PDFPAGE 155>>>
Notes 
151 
38. Rambaud, Naples, 44. 
39. Valente, G. Murat, 78, 79; Carbone to Bunbury, 22 June 1815, FO 70/73; 
Goulburn to Morier, 7 October 1815, copy FO 70/73. 
40. Auriol, La France 1:401—6; Rambaud, Naples, 42n.2. 
41. Capograssi, Gl Inglesi, 112-21. 
Chapter 3. Problems of Defense 
1. Jacques Rambaud, “II tentativo di Murat contra la Sicilia nel 1810,” Archivo 
storico di Provincie Napoletane societa di storia patria (Naples, 1911), 435-36; 
Johnston, Napoleonic Empire, 1: 118. 
2. A. du Casse, Mémoire et Correspondance politique et militaire du rot Joseph, 4 vols. 
(Paris, 1853-54) 2:46, 62, 92, 123, 255, 286. 
3. Ibid., 3: 167, 318, 388; 4:56. 
4. Lt. Gen. H. Bunbury, Narrative of Some Passages in the Great War with France 
(London: Richard Bentley, 1854), 255; Stuart to Windham, 26 May 1806, WO 
1/281 f 341. 
5. Elliot to Collingwood, 2 March 1806, FO 70/27. 
6. Elliot to Mulgrave, 9 April 1806, FO 70/27; Barrow to Hamilton, 21 De- 
cember 1809, FO 70/38. According to Bunbury, the sailors exclaimed “Viva il re 
Giorgio, ma per il re Ferdinando no! no!” Lt. Gen. Sir Henry Bunbury, Military 
Transactions, 42. 
7. H. Fox to C. J. Fox, 25 August 1806, private FO 70/29. 
8. Rambaud, Naples, 60. 
9. Bunbury, Narrative The Great War, 228-9. 
10. Collingwood to Sidney Smith, 28 March 1806, copy ADM 1/412; Elliot to 
Collingwood, 29 April 1806, ADM 1/412. 
11. Moore to Castlereagh, 23 August 1807, private 2 October 1807, WO 1/305 ff 
177,377. 
12. Rambaud, Naples, 47-48. 
13. Minto, Memoir, 398. 
14. Elliot to H. Fox, 31 July 1806, FO 70/27; Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 
15. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 128-43; Maurice, Diary, 123. 
16. H. Fox to C. J. Fox, 6 August 1806, very private FO 70/29. 
17. Windham to Stuart, no. 6, 15 September 1806, WO 6/56 f 99; Historical 
Manuscripts Commission, British Library, Dropmore Papers (manuscripts of JaB: 
Fortescue, Esq. at Dropmore, 1892-1927), 8: 313. 
18. Bunbury, Narrative, The Great War, 232. 
19. Moore, Diary, 126-28. 
20. Add. MS 37852 f 187. 
21. Elliot to C. J. Fox, 6 August 1806, private FO 70/27. 
22. Add. MS 37847 f 111; Add. MS 37852 f 151. 
23. H. Fox to C. J. Fox, 25 August 1806, private FO 70/29; Bunbury, Military 
Transactions in the Mediterranean, 86. 
24. Add. MS 37050 f 
48. 
25. H. Fox to C. J. Fox, 12 September 1806, 9 October 1806, secret and 
confidential FO 70/29. 
p 
26. Collingwood, Correspondence, 240-41. 
27. Add. MS 37050 f 53. 
28. Fox to Howick, no. 5, 22 November 1806, FO 70/29. 

<<<PDFPAGE 156>>>
152 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Chapter 4. The Court, William Drummond, and the British Generals 
1. Rambaud, Naples, 4445. 
2. Ibid.; Howick to Castelcicala, 16 December 1806, FO 70/28; William Cob- 
bett, Parliamentary Debates from the Year 1803, 41 vols. (London: Hansard), 1812— 
20), 8 (1806-7) : 320, 359; Cambridge History of Foreign Policy, 1: 355. 
3. Howick to Drummond, 3 October 1806, draft FO 70/30; Drummond to 
Howick, 11 March 1807, FO 70/30; Canning to Drummond, no. 3, 16 June 1807, 
no. 4, 15 August 1807, drafts FO 70/30, no. 4, 25 June 1808, draft FO 70/32 f 12. 
4. Rosselli, Bentinck, 160-61; Howick to Drummond, March 1807, draft FO 
70/30; Drummond to Canning, no. 9, 26 March 1808, FO 70/32 f 185. 
5. Rosselli, Bentinck, 213; Drummond to Howick, no. 6, 11 March 1807, 11 
March 1807, private FO 70/30; Canning to Drummond, no. 3, 16 June 1807, no. 4, 
15 August 1807, no. 6, 26 December 1807, drafts FO 70/30. 
6. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 182-84; Windham to Fox, November 
1806, most secret draft, WO 1/281. 
7. Fox to Windham, 14 May 1807, WO 1/304 f 339; Windham to Fox, June 
1807, draft WO 1/304 f 371. 
8. Add. MS 37050 f 140. 
9. Ibid., ff 146-56; Fox to Windham, 5 April 1807, WO 1/304 f 177. 
10. Add. MS 37050 ff 169, 176. 
11. Castlereagh to Fox, 21 May 1807, draft WO 6/56 f 128. 
12. Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 314, 445; Add. MS 37050 f 160; Fox to 
Castlereagh, 2 July 1807, secret and confid WO 1/305 f 83. 
13. Add. MS 37050 ff 81, 133; Drummond to Howick, 11 March 1807, 9 April 
1807, FO 70/30. 
14. Add. MS 37050 ff 75, 103. 
15. Drummond to Canning, 24 February 1808, FO 70/32 f 124. 
16. Drummond to Canning, no. 14, 27 April 1808, FO 70/32 f 206. 
17. Drummond to Howick, 11 March 1807, private FO 70/30. 
18. Paget papers, The diplomatic and other correspondence of the Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur 
Paget ed Sir Augustus Paget 2 vols. (London, 1896), 2: 338; Moore, Diary, 162-66, 
182. 
19. Thornborough to Moore, 27 August 1807, WO 1/305 f 271. 
20. Paget, Papers, 302-5. 
21. Drummond to Canning, nos. 4, 5, 8, 27 January 1808, 24 February 1808, 25 
March 1808, FO 70/32 ff 120, 124, 181; Canning to Drummond, no. 7, 26 
December 1807, draft, no. 7, 25 June 1808, no. 9, 3 August 1808, secret, no. 10, 22 
September 1808, FO 70/32 ff 14, 30, 41; Add. MS 20190 f 18. 
22. Collingwood to Pole, no. 1, 6 January 1808, ADM 1/414; Thornborough to 
Pole, nos. 7 and 8, 29 February 1808, ADM 1/414; Drummond to Canning, no. 8, 
25 March 1808, FO 70/32. 
23. Castelcicala to Canning, 12 February 1808, FO 70/34 f 28; Perry to Cas- 
telcicala, 17 May 1809, copy FO 70/37 f 50; Castelcicala to Perry, 22 May 1809, copy 
FO 70/37 £54; Gibbs to Canning, 17 June 1809, private FO 70/38 f 79. 
24. Castelcicala to Canning, 22 August 1808, FO 70/35; G.F. Leckie, An Histor- 
ical Survey of the Foreign Affairs of Great Britain (London, 1808), 9, 83-7, 98, 106. 
25. Drummond to Canning, no. 16, 6 July 1808, FO 70/32 f 232. 
26. Drummond to Canning, 31 May 1808 separate, 7 June 1808 separate, FO 
70/32 ff 210, 212. 
27. Drummond to Canning, no. 21, 24 July 1808, FO 70/32 f 275. 
28. Canning to Drummond, no. 5, 25 June 1808, draft FO 70/32 f 14. 

<<<PDFPAGE 157>>>
Notes 
W533 
29. Canning to Drummond, no. 9, 5 August 1808, secret draft, FO 70/32 f 30. 
30. Drummond to Canning, 7 July 1808 separate, no. 21, 24 July 1808, no. 31, 
20 October 1808, FO 70/32 ff 236, 275, 324; Drummond to Circello, 12 July 1808, 
copy FO 70/32 f 260. 
31. Canning to Drummond, no. 10, 22 September 1808, 2 March 1809, FO 
70/32 ff 41, 64. 
32. Drummond to Canning, 27 August 1808 separate, no. 25, 27 September 
1808, FO 70/32 ff 294, 303. 
33. Castelcicala to Canning, 5, 9 September 1808, FO 70/35 ff 54, 65; Canning to 
Castelcicala, 20 September 1808, draft FO 70/35 f 81. 
34. Canning to Castelcicala, 20 September 1808, secret draft, FO 70/35 f 93. 
35. Moore to Castlereagh, 13, 27 July, private, 10 August 1807, WO 1/305 ff 
103, 127, 145. 
36. Moore, Diary, 188-90. 
37. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 222; Moore to Castlereagh, 13 July 1807 
private, 10, 23 August 1807, 18 September 1807, secret, 2 October 1807, WO 1/305 
ft 103,145,077, 21:3) 377. 
38. Castlereagh, Correspondence, 8: 89-91. 
39. Bunbury, Narrative of Transactions in the Mediterranean, 130-145; Mackesy, 
War in the Mediterranean, 264. 
40. Add. MS 19426 f 6; Castlereagh to Stuart, 7 February 1808, drafts WO 1/306 
£9. 
Chapter 5. Threats of Invasion 
1. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 234-40; Casse, Mémoire et Correspon- 
dance, 4:56. 
2. Sherbrooke to Castlereagh, 8 January 1808, 8, 23 February 1808 and en- 
closure WO 1/306 ff 1-38; Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 332; Sir John William 
Fortescue, A History of the British Army, 13 vols. (London: Macmillan, 1910-30), 
6: 108-9. 
3. Casse, Mémoire et correspondance, 4:135. 
4. Ibid., 168—70, 217-20; Rambaud, Naples, 186-87. 
5. Stuart to Castlereagh, 25 May 1808, WO 1/306 f 139. 
6. Stuart to Castlereagh, 20 September 1808, WO 1/306 f 431. 
7. Stuart to Castlereagh, 22 September 1808, WO 1/306 f 441. 
8. Marshal Joachim King of Naples Murat, Lettres et Documents pour servir a 
histoire de Joachim Murat, publiés par le prince Murat, 10 vols. (Paris, 1908-13), 
6: 3506. 
9. Mellish to Canning, no. 1, 5 November 1808, FO 70/33 f 12. Collingwood 
was scathing about its value. “The only advantage that could be derived from it was 
the probability of getting intelligence of what was doing at Naples, and I have never 
yet found the accounts received from thence were true.” In the present instance, he 
went on, the preparations of the numerous flotilla that had brought the invading 
troops from Naples seems to have been entirely unknown to the officer commanding 
the Capri garrison until it actually appeared. Collingwood to Pole, 14 November 
1808, ADM 1/414 no 260. 
10. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 292; Drummond to Canning, no. 28, 18 
October 1808, FO 70/32 f 316 Collingwood, Correspondence, 500-502. 
11. Murat, Lettres, 6: 3536, 3570, 3788, 3828; Napoleon I, Correspondance publiée 
par ordre de VEmpereur Napoleon III, 32 vols. (Paris, 1858-70), 18: 14493. 
12. Drummond to Canning, no. 10, 27 March 1808, FO 70/32 f 189. 

<<<PDFPAGE 158>>>
154 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
13. Canning to Drummond, no. 6, 25 June 1808, secret draft, FO 70/32 f 20. 
14. Castlereagh to Stuart, June 1808, 6 July 1808, drafts WO 1/306 ff 191, 199. 
15. Add. MS 20190 ff 115, 118, 120. 
16. Collingwood, 437, 450. 
17. Add. MS 20190 f 141; Stuart to Castlereagh, 26 August 1808, 3, 6 October 
1808, 14 December 1808 WO 1/306 ff 379; Murat, Lettres, 6: 3775. 
18. Murat, Lettres, 6:3591, 3795. 
19. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 288, Canning to Drummond, no. 14, 4 
November 1808, draft FO 70/32 f 57; Mellish to Canning, no. 13, 31 December 
1808, FO 70/33 f 46; Stuart to Castlereagh, 26 December 1808, 15 February 1809, 
WO 1/306 f 637, WO 1/307 f 
25. 
20. Castlereagh to Stuart, 24 May 1809, WO 6/56 f 165. 
21. V. Gallavresi and V. Sallier de la Tour Marquis de Cordon Le Maréchal Salher 
de la Tour (Turin, 1917), 70-83; Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 311. 
22. Gallavresi, Le Maréchal, 91-92; Stuart to Castlereagh, 27 April 1809, WO 
W307 14121 
23. Gallavresi, Le Maréchal, 102—5; Collingwood, Correspondence, 529-30. 
24. Gallavresi, Le Maréchal, 107-18; Stuart to Castlereagh, 24 May 1809, WO 
1/307 f 161. 
25. Mackesy, War in the Mediterranean, 327-30; Bunbury, Military Transactions 
in the Mediterranean, 164-65. 
26. Stuart to Castlereagh, 9 June 1809, WO 1/307 f 165; Bunbury, Narrative the 
Great War, 316. 
27. Valente, G. Murat, 133-34. 
28. Gallavresi, Le Maréchal, 139-41. 
29. Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 375; Murat, Lettres, 7:4409. 
30. Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 378-81; Gallavresi, Le Maréchal, 139-41; 
Collingwood, Correspondence, 529-30. 
31. Gallavresi, Le Maréchal, 160. 
32. Ibid., 165-68, 182; Amherst to Canning, 24 September 1809, FO 70/36 f 
164. 
33. Collingwood, Correspondence, 530-39, 54446; Collingwood to Stuart, 15 
July 1809, 2 August 1809, 1 September 1809, Stuart to Castlereagh, 26 September 
1809, WO 33/12. 
34. Add. MS 38245 f 295; Liverpool to Stuart, 29 November 1809, 30 December 
1809, WO 33/12. 
Chapter 6. Growing Impatience with the Court 
1. Canning to Amherst, no 1, 3 March 1809, no. 10, 16 August 1809, drafts FO 
70/36 ff 1, 34; Amherst to Wellesley, 5 February 1810, FO 70/39 f 31. 
2. Canning to Amherst, no. 1, 3 March 1809, draft FO 70/36 f 1. 
3. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 51, 24 August 1810, FO 70/39 f 175; Rosselli, 
Bentinck, 175, citing Cobbett, Parliamentary Debates, 
11: 1140. 
4. Amherst to Canning, no. 2, 13 May 1809, FO 70/36 f 72; Amherst to Stuart, 
17 April 1810, WO 1/308 f 213. 
5. Stuart to Castlereagh, 9 July 1809, private WO 1/307 f 239. 
6. Amherst to Wellesley, 6 February 1810, FO 70/39 f 37; Stuart to Liverpool, 6 
February 1810, WO 1/308 f 
9. 
7. Rosselli, Bentinck, 12; Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 378; Stuart to 
Amherst, 13 January 1810, copy WO 1/308 f 21. 

<<<PDFPAGE 159>>>
Notes 
15 
8. Drummond had had the poorest opinion of Sicilian nobles as potential minis- 
ters. He told Fox in April 1807 that he had made some attempt to get Prince 
Belmonte included in the cabinet and went on, “But who is there in the country, with 
the exception of Belmonte (of whom I could not think favourably, from the many 
reports I have heard) who could have been brought into the Government? Pantelleria 
is Our avowed enemy, Cassaro is governed by Brissac, General Acton is hated by the 
whole country; Butera is shallow and without principles; Sambuca is too old; Trabea 
is a buffoon; Tommasi is a man of low birth, with great knowledge is capable of 
playing any game, and therefore, if he could be useful, he might be dangerous.” 
Drummond to Fox, 28 April 1807, Bunbury, Military Transactions, 117-18 and n. 
9. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 39, 11 June 1810, no. 40, 19 June 1810, secret, FO 
70/39 ff 98, 102. 
10. Rosselli, Bentinck, 176; Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 397; Add. MS 
20190 f 329. 
11. P. Balsamo Sulla historia moderna del Regno di Sicilia. Memorie Segrete (Paler- 
mo, 1848), 6-7, 29-36. 
12; Add MS 37292 fF'51, 97. 
13. Rambaud, “II tentativo di Murat,” 439-40. 
14. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 39, 11 June 1810, no. 45, 14 July 1810, no. 49, 28 
July 1810, FO 70/39 ff 98, 143, 167; Stuart to Liverpool, 25 June 1810, WO 1/308 f 
463. 
15. Salemi, I trattati anti-napoleonic dell’inghilterra con le due Sicile (Palermo, 
1937), 33'0.3, 85, 
16. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 49, 28 July 1810, no. 51, 24 August 1810, FO 
70/39 ff 167, 175. 
17. Stuart to Liverpool, 18 April 1810, WO 1/308 f 141; Amherst to Wellesley, 
no. 41, 22 June 1810, no. 45, 14 July 1810, no. 57, 23 September 1810, FO 70/39 ff 
132, 143, 240. 
18. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 41, 22 June 1810, no. 45, 14 July 1810, FO/70/39 ff 
132, 143; Bunbury, Narrative the Great War, 399. 
19. Salemi, I trattati, 84; Stuart to Amherst, 22 July 1810, copy WO 1/309 f 107. 
20. Johnston, Napoleonic Empire, 239; Fortescue, History of the British Army, 
7: 316-9; Reade to Stuart, 11 June 1810, copy WO 1/308 f 385; Stuart to Liverpool, 
29 July 1810, WO 1/309 f 87; Fagan to Baker, 30 July 1810, copy FO 70/41; Martin 
to Cotton, 14 August 1810, copy (enclosed with no. 355 Cotton to Croker 12 
September 1810) ADM 1/417. 
21. Castlereagh to Stuart, no. 3, 18 April 1810, no. 9, 1 May 1810, no. 11, 3 July 
1810, no. 13, 7 September 1810, drafts WO 6/60 ff 59, 83, 99, 115. 
22. Fortescue, History of the British Army, 7: 316-19; Add. MS 19424 f 19. 
23. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 58, 25 September 1810, FO 70/39 f 246; A. 
Espitallier Napoléon et le roi Murat 1808-1815 (Paris, 1910), 64-65, 77, 82; Ram- 
baud, “II tentativo di Murat,” 444-46, 705; Johnston, Napoleonic Empire, 239, 
Valente, G. Murat, 158-67; Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 42. 
24. Espitallier, Napoleon et Murat, 82; Rambaud, “Il tentativo di Murat” 703-8; 
Napoleon I, Correspondance, 17042, 18265. 
25. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 66, 25 October 1810, FO 70/39 f 335; Stuart to 
Liverpool, 15, 16 October 1810, WO 1/309 ff 235, 281; Mackesy, War in the 
Mediterranean, 374; Fortescue, History of the British Army, 7: 320-22. 
26. Salemi, I trattati, 84. 
27. Add. MS 37292 f 313; Ayscough to Martin, 7 October 1810, (enclosed with 
no. 432 Cotton to Croker 20 November 1810) ADM 1/418. 
28. Memorandum on Sicily, n.d. 1811, FO 70/49. 

<<<PDFPAGE 160>>>
156 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Chapter 7. Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One 
1. Balsamo, Memorie, 6-7, 29-36; Salemi, I Trattati, 96-97; Douglas to Welles- 
ley, no. 13, 14 June 1811, FO 70/43; Castelcicala to Wellesley, 5 September 1811, 
FO 70/47. 
2. Salemi, I Trattati, 87-88; Amherst to Wellesley, no. 71, 8 February 1811, no. 
80, 28 March 1811, FO 70/42. 
3. Wellesley to Amherst, no. 1, 25 February 1811, draft FO 70/42. 
4. Rosselli, Bentinck, 18-19. 
5. Salemi, J Trattat1, 106; Bentinck’s Journal, 15 June 1812, PwJd 6255. 
6. R. M. Johnston, Mémoire de Marte-Caroline Harvard Historical Studies, vol. 
16. (Massachusetts, 1912), 223 n; Valente, G. Murat, 216. 
7. Castelcicala to Wellesley, 17 August 1810, FO 70/40 f 114; Morning Post, 14 
August 1810; Castelcicala to Wellesley, 2 May 1811, FO 70/46. 
8. Add. MS 41766 ff 134, 136, 143. 
9. C. W. Pasley, Essay on the Multtary Policy and Institutions of the British Empire 
(London, 1810), 64-66, 88-90. 
10. Rosselli, Bentinck, 20, 178. 
11. Add. MS 37292 f 313. 
12. Ibid., f 356. 
13. Wellesley to Bentinck, no. 1, 20 May 1811, draft FO 70/44. 
14. Douglas to Wellesley, 22 June 1811, private FO 70/43. 
15. Bentinck to Wellesley, nos. 2, 3, 23 August 1811, FO 70/44. 
16. Maitland to Wellesley, no. 1, 21 September 1811, FO 70/45. 
17. Circello to Maitland, 25, 27 November 1811, copies FO 70/53; Maitland to 
Circello, 1 December 1811, copy FO 70/53. 
18. Circello to Bentinck, 11 December 1811, copy FO 70/53. 
19. Bentinck to Circello, 12 December 1811, copy FO 70/53; Circello to Ben- 
tinck, 19 December 1811, copy FO 70/53. 
20. It is possible that he was “framed” by Carbone in order to protect those in high 
places. Angela Valente takes the view that he was almost certainly made a scapegoat. 
Valente, G. Murat, 214. 
21. Maitland to Liverpool, no. 5, 15 September 1811, no. 8, 5 October 1811, no. 
15, 15 November 1811, WO 1/310 ff 247, 309, 367; Maitland to Wellesley, nos. 1, 
6, 21 September 1811, 24 October 1811, FO 70/45; Maitland to Circello, 3 De- 
cember 1811, copy FO 70/53; Salemi, I Trattati, 110; Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 49, 67— 
68; Johnston, Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 67-73, 75 n.2; Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 
22, 19 March 1812, FO 70/51; Bentinck Journal, 5 May 1813, PwJd 6257. 
22. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 68. The Queen, it must be said, in her correspondence 
with Serra Capriola in Petersburg and with Castelcicala in London throughout the 
course of 1811 always denied she had ever had any correspondence with Napoleon, 
“whom no one hates more than I do,” she wrote. If Napoleon were to make her an 
offer, she would, she went on, refuse to accept it, “since I consider him to be the 
greatest traitor and the greatest scoundrel.” (E. Corti, Ich eine Tochter Maria Theresa 
(Munich, 1950), 608-9. 
23. Capograssi, Gi Inglesi, 68; Castlereagh to Bentinck, no. 4, 9 February 1813, 
FO 70/56; Bentinck Journal, 26 October 1812, PwJd 6256. 
24. Lady Dalrymple, Letterbook, 31 August 1811, f 72. 
25. Ibid., 24 January 1812, f 87. 
26. Ibid., 6 February 1812, f 88. 
27. Wellesley to Bentinck, no. 12, 17 October 1812, secret draft FO 70/44. 
28. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 12, 11 January 1812, FO 70/51; Bentinck to Oakes, 

<<<PDFPAGE 161>>>
Notes 
WSs7/ 
27 December 1811, CO 158/13; Oakes to Bentinck, 15 December 1811, copy CO 
158/13; J. Rosselli Lord William Bentinck. The Making of a Liberal Imperialist 1774- 
1839 (London: Chatto & Windus for Sussex University Press, 1974), 110-11; 
Bentinck 25; Fagan to Bentinck, 29 September 1811, PwJd 2075. 
29. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 12, 11 January 1812, FO 70/51. 
30. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 80. 
31. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 23, 17 March 1812, FO 70/51. 
32. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 13, 11 January 1812, no 14, 25 January 1812, FO 
70/51; Bentinck’s Journal, 17 January 1812, PwJd 6254. 
os Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 23, 17 March 1812, no. 25, 21 March 1812, FO 
70/51. 
34. Bentinck’s Journal, 2 June 1812, PwJd 6255. Ascoli had been urging the king 
to take measures to embarrass the British by demobilizing 8,000 troops, stopping the 
pay of serving soldiers, and reducing the salaries of higher officials by as much as 20 
percent, on the grounds that the British had withheld the subsidy. He also advised 
introducing new laws to stop the British contraband trade. Valente, G. Murat, 87. 
35. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 32, 6 May 1812, secret and confidential, FO 70/51; 
Bentinck’s Journal, 18 March 1812, 5 January 1813, 26 October 1813, 7 November 
1813, PwJd 6254, 6257, 6258; Rosselli, Bentinck, 31, 36. 
36. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 22, 19 March 1812, FO 70/51; Bentinck’s Journal, 
21 June 1812, PwJd 6255. 
37. Bentinck to Wellesley, no. 
16, 29 January 1812, FO 70/51; Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, no. 27, 30 March 1812, secret, no. 37, 30 June 1812, and enclosed FO 
70/51. 
38. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 39, 9 July 1812, and enclosed FO 70/52. 
39. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 45, 25 July 1812, FO 70/52. 
40. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 45, 25 July 1812, FO 70/52; Capograssi, Gl 
Inglest, 57-63. 
41. Rosselli, Bentinck, 4-5; Bentinck’s Journal, 8 June 1812, PwJd 6255; Bentinck 
to Castlereagh, no. 37, 30 June 1812, FO 70/51. 
42. Capograssi, Gli Inglest, 54-55. 
43. Ibid. 
44. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 57, 13 September 1812, FO 70/52; Bentinck’s 
Journal, 1 August 1812, PwJd 6255. 
45. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no 40, 27 May 1813, FO 70/58; Bentinck’s Journal, 
13 February 1813, PwJd 6256. 
46. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 88-94; Bentinck’s Journal, 27 March 1812, 19 May 
1812, 7, 22 July 1812, 22 October 1812, PwJd 6254, 6255, 6256. 
47. Bentinck’s Journal, 24 January 1813, PwJd 6257. 
48. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 63, 24 October 1812, secret, no. 65, 26 October 
1812, no. 74, 9 December 1812, FO 70/52; Bentinck’s Journal, 29 June 1812, PwJd 
6255; Rosselli, Bentinck, 72. 
49. Castlereagh to Bentinck, no. 3, 9 February 1813, secret draft, FO 70/56. 
50. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 3, 18 January 1813, secret and confidential, FO 
70/57; Bentinck’s Journal, 17 October 1812, PwJd 6257. 
51. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 3, 18 January 1813, secret and confidential, FO 
70/57; Rosselli, Bentinck, 84-86. 
52. Bentinck’s Journal, 28 October 1812, 2 November 1812, 16, 27 December 
1812, PwJd 6256, 6257. 
53. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 15, 10 March 1813, no. 16, 18 March 1813, FO 
70/57; Johnston, Mémoire de Marie-Caroline, 216, 218 n.1, 223 n. 
54. Ibid., 225, n.1, 239-40; N. Niceforo, La Sicilia e la Costituzione ai 1812, 

<<<PDFPAGE 162>>>
158 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Archivio storico Siciliano, (Palermo, 1922) ch. 4, 146-49; Capograssi, Gli Inglest, 
87; Bentinck’s Journal, 10 March 1813, PwJd 6257. 
55. Bentinck’s Journal, 5 March 1813, PwJd 6257. 
56. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 
16, 18 March 1813, FO 70/57; Bentinck’s 
Journal, 16 March 1813, PwJd 6257; Rosselli, Bentinck, 95; Capograssi, Gli Inglest, 
83-84. H.M.S. Edinburgh, a 74-gun battleship, was also anchored in such a position 
that her broadside commanded the gate of San Felice and the whole of Palermo’s 
main waterfront. Dalrymple, Letterbook, 24 March 1813, 111. 
57. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 18, 4 April 1813, FO 70/58; Bentinck’s Journal, 
21 March 1813, PwJd 6257. 
58. Bentinck’s Journal, 27 March 1813, PwJd 6257. 
59. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 18, 4 April 1813, FO 70/58. 
60. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 19, 7 April 1813, FO 70/58; Salemi, I trattati, 
125-26. 
61. C. W. Crawley, “The Sicilian Constitution of 1812,” English Historical Renew 
(1940): 266, citing private diary of Sir Robert Wilson, 48. 
62. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 30, 14 May 1813, FO 70/58. 
63. Historical Manuscripts Commission. Bathurst Earl. The Manuscripts of the 
7th Earl Bathurst. (London: Her majesty’s stationery office, 1903), 208. 
64. Castlereagh to Bentinck, no. 11?, 23 May 1813, FO 70/56. 
65. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 68, 7 November 1812, FO 70/52, nos. 40, 41, 27 
May 1813, FO 70/58. 
66. Bentinck’s Journal, 26 May 1813, PwJd 6258. 
67. Rosselli, Bentinck, 106. 
Chapter 8. Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage Two 
1. Balsamo, Memorie, 108. 
2. Rosselli, Bentinck, 108. 
3. H. M. Lackland, “The Failure of the Constitutional Experiment in Sicily,” 
English Historical Review (1926): 222. 
4. Lady Dalrymple described how her carriage was surrounded in Palermo by a 
hostile crowd uttering cries “not loud but deep” of “maladetti Inglesi, Bestie, Pagani” 
[accursed English, brutes, infidels]. Dalrymple, Letterbook, 23 July 1813, 125. 
5. Montgomerie to Castlereagh, no. 4, 20 June 1813, no. 20, 11 August 1813, 
FO 70/59; Macfarlane to Bathurst, no. 2, 20 June 1813, no. 3, 12 July 1813, WO 
1/314 f 241, 249; Macfarlane to Hereditary Prince, 12 July 1813, WO 1/314 f 273; 
Murray to Bathurst, 28 August 1813, WO 1/314 f 335; Murray to Bentinck, 14, 25 
August 1813, copies WO 1/314 ff 339, 343; Lackland, “Constitutional Experiment,” 
214. 
6. Lackland, “Constitutional Experiment,” 221; Montgomerie to Castlereagh, 
no. 15, 22 July 1813, FO 70/59; Rosselli, Liberal Impertalist, 246. 
7. Lackland, “Constitutional Experiment,” 214, 219. 
8. Bentinck’s Journal, 11 October 1813, PwJd 6258. 
9. Lackland, 
“Constitutional 
Experiment,” 
213; 
Rosselli, Bentinck, 
109; 
Montgomerie to Castlereagh, no. 11, 18 July 1813, FO 70/59; Bentinck to Cas- 
tlereagh, 27 August 1813, secret, FO 70/59. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 348-49. 
10. Montgomerie to Castlereagh, no. 20, 11 August 1813, no. 21, 26 August 
1813, FO 70/59; Lackland, Constitutional Experiment, 224. 
11. Bentinck to Montgomerie, 7 August 1813, copy FO 70/59. 

<<<PDFPAGE 163>>>
Notes 
159 
12. Montgomerie to Castlereagh, no. 21, 26 August 1813, nos. 22, 23, 6 Sep- 
tember 1813, FO 70/59; Smith’s Journal, 15 June 1813, PwJd 6259. 
13. Bentinck to Bathurst, 30 August 1813, secret, WO 1/314 f 51; Rosselli, 
Bentinck, 108, 113. 
14. Roselli, Bentinck, 107-8. In the words of Lady Dalrymple: “So great is his 
[Bentinck’s] personal influence with the Sicilians, and so well grounded their opinion 
of his indomitable firmness and probity, that most sanguine hopes are entertained of 
his being able very soon to restore all things to tranquillity and order.” Dalrymple, 13 
September 1813, Letterbook, 127. 
15. Rosselli, Bentinck, 116; Lackland, “Constitutional Experiment,” 227-30. 
16. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 45, 5? November 1813, no. 49, 10 November 
1813, FO 70/59; Rosselli Bentinck, 116-20. 
17. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 19 October 1813, private FO 70/59; Rosselli, Liberal 
Imperialist, 162. 
18. Fagan to Bentinck, 5 September 1813, PwJd 2263a, October 1813, PwJd 
2267; Bentinck to Hamilton, 25 January 1815, private FO 70/71. 
19. Bentinck’s Journal, 24 June 1812, PwJd 6255. 
20. Bentinck’s Journal, 3, 14 October 1812, 21 October 1813, PwJd 6256, 6258. 
21. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 348-49; Lackland, “Constitutional Experiment,” 
212, citing Smith’s Journal, 21 June 1813. 
22. Bentinck to Castlereagh, 19 October 1813, FO 70/59. 
23. L. Giardina, “Lord Bentinck e il suo Sicilian Journal 1812-1814,” Archivio 
storico per la Sicilia orientale (Catania, 1975) anno 71 fasc II-III 380-82; Bentinck’s 
Journal, 29 May 1812, 16 March 1813, PwJd 6255, 6257; Smith’s Journal, 30 June 
1813, PwJd 6259. 
24. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 19 October 1813, draft FO 70/56. 
25. E. Sciacca, Riflessi del Constituzionalismo europaneo in Sicilia 1812-1815 (Cata- 
nia: Studi risorgimentali, 1966), 129-30. 
26. Ibid., 184-85, citing Lackland, 223; G. Aceto, De la Sicile et de ses rapports avec 
Angleterre a Pépoque de la constitution de 1812 (Paris, London, 1827), 153. 
Chapter 9. Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations 
1. Douglas to Wellesley, no 8, 31 May 1811, FO 70/43; Liverpool to Bentinck, 
24 June 1811, draft WO 6/61 f 17. 
2. Bentinck to Liverpool, no. 2, August 1811, WO 1/310 f 183; 25 January 
1812, secret, no. 15, 20 May 1812, WO 1/311 ff 9, 315; Douglas to Wellesley, no. 
16, 24 June 1811, secret FO 70/43; Hamilton to Bunbury, 6 January 1812, draft FO 
70/55; Bentinck Journal, 2 March 1812, PwJd 6254. 
3. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 37, 30 June 1812, FO 70/51; no. 44, 14 July 
1812, no. 58, 13 September 1812, FO 70/52; no. 7, 23 January 1813, FO 70/57; 
Bentinck to Liverpool, no 15, 20 May 1812, WO 1/311 £319; Bentinck to Bathurst, 
2 November 1812, copy FO 70/62; E. Blaquiére, Letters from the Mediterranean, 2 
vols. (London: Henry Colbourn, 1813), 1: 422. 
4. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 53, 13 September 1812, FO 70/52; Castlereagh 
to Bentinck, no. 21, 22 October 1812, draft FO 70/50. 
5. Stuart to Castlereagh, 4 February 1804, 25 September 1809, WO 1/307 felts: 
273; Stuart to Liverpool, 11 February 1810, WO 1/308 f 103; Bentinck to Bathurst, 
4 October 1812, secret WO 1/312 f 367; Lady Dalrymple, Letterbook, privately 
held, 21 December 1808, f 18. Carbone made out that the numbers recruited fell far 

<<<PDFPAGE 164>>>
160 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
short of the figure expected and that the British had been anticipating as many as 
7,000 enlistments. Like all statements by Carbone, it must be regarded with suspi- 
cion. Valente, G. Murat, 116. 
6. J. Rosselli, “Il Progetto italiano di Lord William Bentinck, 1811-1815,” 
Rivista storica italiana (Naples, 1967), 366—70, 377. 
; 
7. Liverpool to Bentinck, 4 June 1811, draft WO 6/61 f 1; Rosselli, I/ Progetto 
italiano, 367, 371; Bentinck to Wellesley, 2 June 1811, Add. MS 37293 f 35. 
8. Memorandum for Bentinck, September 1811, FO 70/44; Wellesley to Ben- 
tinck, no. 17, 21 October 1811, secret draft, FO 70/44; Liverpool to Bentinck, 12 
October 1811, draft WO 6/61 f 81. 
9. Hill to Castlereagh, 29 March 1812, secret, FO 67/43; Bentinck to Liverpool, 
no. 11, 15 March 1812, and enclosed WO 1/311. 
10. Bentinck to Liverpool, 25 January 1812, WO 1/311 £9. 
11. Liverpool to Bentinck, 4 March 1812, draft WO 1/61 f 149; Pellew to Croker, 
no. 175, 15 April 1813, ADM 1/422. 
12. Stuart to Liverpool, 29 February 1811, WO 1/310 f 23; Bentinck to Liver- 
pool, no. 7, 10 February 1812, WO 1/311 f 67; Cotton to Croker, no. 724, 18 June 
1811, ADM 1/419. 
13. A. Parry, Admirals Fremantle (London: Chatto and Windus, 1971), 101-2; 
Pellew to Croker, 22 June 1812, and enclosed ADM 1/423, no. 230 A. 
14. Parry, Fremantle, 102-09. 
15. Duke of Wellington, Dispatches, compiled by Lieut. Col. Gurwood, 13 vols. 2d 
ed. (London: John Murray, 1844-47, 5: 743-45; Duke of Wellington, Supplemen- 
tary Dispatches, ed his son, Duke of Wellington, 15 vols. (London, 1858-72), 7:401; 
Sir Charles Oman, A History of the Peninsular War, 7 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1900-30), 5: 342-43. 
16. Wellington, Supplementary Dispatches, 7: 374-77. 
17. Bentinck to Liverpool, no. 22, 29 June 1812, WO 1/311 £ 437. 
18. Fagan to Bentinck, 2, 20 May 1812, PwJd 2139, 2149: Bentinck to Liverpool, 
9 June 1812, secret, WO 1/311 f 355; Bentinck to Castlereagh, 25 June 1812, secret, 
FO 70/51. 
19. Wellington, Dispatches, 5: 743. 
20. Bentinck to Liverpool, no. 22, 29 June 1812, WO 1/311 f 437. 
21. Oman, Peninsular War, 5:347, 566. 
22. Wellington, Supplementary Dispatches, 7:374—77. 
23. Bentinck to Bathurst, no. 19, 15 March 1813, WO 1/313 f 231. 
24. Bathurst to Bentinck, no. 29, 13 October 1812, draft WO 6/61 £ 253. 
25. Bentinck Journal, 18, 28 August 1812, 4 September 1812, PwJd 6256. 
26. Bentinck to Hereditary Prince, 30 June 1814, copy FO 70/64. 
27. Bentinck to Bathurst, no. 8, 23 January 1813, WO 1/313 f 91; Sir William 
Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula, 7 vols. (London, 1836), 6:616; Halliwell 
to Pellew, no 649, 11 February 1813, ADM 1/425. 
28. Bentinck to Macfarlane, 24 May 1813, secret copy, WO 1/313 £395; Bentinck 
to Bathurst, 24 February 1813, secret and separate, WO 1/313 f 157; Laurie to 
Pellew, 16 February 1813, extract enclosed with no 93, ADM 1/425; Napier to 
Laurie, 27 February 1813, copy enclosed with no 115, ADM 1/425. 
29. Bentinck to Bathurst, no. 31, 20 May 1813, WO 1/313 f 353. 
30. Lamb to Hamilton, 25 May 1813, FO 70/62. 
31. Wellington, Dispatches, 10: 383-84; Rosselli, “Il Progetto italiano,” 394. 
32. Macfarlane to Bentinck, 25 May 1813, copy WO 1/313 f 403; Bentinck to 
Macfarlane, 27 May 1813, copy WO 1/313 f 407; Bentinck’s Journal, 3 October 
1812, PwJd 6256; 22 December 1812, PwJd 6257. 

<<<PDFPAGE 165>>>
Notes 
161 
33. Bentinck to Pellew, 18 June 1813, copy WO 1/314 f 1; Pellew to Bentinck, 18 
June 1813, copy WO 1/314 f 15; Napier, History, 7:692. 
34. Annual Register 1814 (London: Rivington, 1815), 148-52; Bentinck to 
Bathurst, no. 46, 27 December 1813, and enclosed WO 1/313 f 46; Bentinck’s 
Journal, 16, 22 November 1813, PwJd 6258; Rowley to Pellew, 15 December 1813, 
enclosed with no 53, ADM 1/428. 
35. Bentinck to Bathurst, 8, 14 January 1814, secret, WO 1/315 ff 1, 9. 
36. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 125-33; Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 32, 20 May 
1813, secret, 10 June 1813, secret, FO 70/58; Castlereagh to Bentinck, 7 August 
1813, draft FO 70/56. 
37. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 50, 26 December 1813, FO 70/59. 
38. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 52, 4 January 1814, FO 70/63. 
39. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 1, 14 January 1814, FO 70/63. 
40. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 4, 6 February 1814, FO 70/63; R. M. Johnston, 
“Lord William Bentinck and Murat,” English Historical Review (1904): 273-74. 
41. Douglas to Castlereagh, no. 5, 1 April 1814, FO 70/73. 
42. R. J. Rath, The Fall of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy (1814) (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1941), 51-54. 
43. Ibid., 56-59. 
44. Ibid., 159-70. 
45. Rosselli, Bentinck, 138, 141, 151, 209; Castlereagh, Correspondence, 9: 427. 
Chapter 10. Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples 
1. Rosselli, Bentinck, 129, 213, citing Historical Manuscripts Commission, 
Dropmore, 8: 196; Pasley, Essay on the Military Policy and Institutions of the British 
Empire (London, 1810), 168-71. 
2. Castlereagh, Correspondence, 8 : 224-32; Rosselli, Bentinck, 11. 
3. Ibid., 127; Bentinck’s Journal, 18 November 1813, PwJd 6258. 
4. Rosselli, Bentinck 128; Lackland, “Constitutional Experiment,” 232; Ca- 
pograssi, Gli Inglest, 157-59. 
5. Capograssi, Gli Inglest, 162. 
6. Ibid., 163. 
7. Ibid., 164. 
8. Castelcicala to Castlereagh, 6, 9, 13 March 1814, FO 70/67; Bathurst to 
Castelcicala, 
8 March 1814, draft FO 70/67. 
9. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 165-67, 300; Bathurst to Castelcicala, 14 March 1814, 
draft FO 70/67; Castelcicala to Castlereagh, 15 March 1814, FO 70/67; Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, 10 May 1814, private FO 70/64 f 106. 
10. Castlereagh, Correspondence, 9: 238. 
ll. Rosselli, Bentinck, 132-33. 
12., Ibid.,°429- 
~, 
13. Capograssi, Gi Inglesi, 173 n.28, citing Sir C. Webster, The Foreign Policy of 
Castlereagh 1813-1822, 2 vols. (London: G. Bell, 1934), 1:526. 
14. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no 34, 4 July 1814, FO 70/64 £ 142; Lackland, 
“Constitutional Experiment,” 233; Acton Bourbons, 621. 
15. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 34, 4 July 1814, FO 70/64 f 142; Lackland, 
“Constitutional Experiment,” 234-35, citing Bentinck’s Journal, 16, 22 June 1814. 
16. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 34, 4 July 1814, FO 70/64 £ 142; Rosselli, 
Bentinck, 148. 
17. W. Maturi, II congresso di Vienna e la Restaurazione dei Borboni a Napoli Rivista 
storica italiana (Naples, 1958) 3: fasc IV 14-21. 

<<<PDFPAGE 166>>>
162 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
18. Bentinck’s Journal, 27, 29 June 1814, PwJd 6260. 
19. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 36, 5 July 1814, FO 70/64 f 172. 
20. Rosselli, Liberal Imperialist, 167; Bentinck’s Journal, 22 June 1814, PwJd 
6260. 
21. A’Court to Hamilton, 3 July 1814, private FO 70/65 f 31; Bentinck’s Journal, 
1 July 1814, PwJd 6260. 
22. Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 4, 4 July 1814, FO 70/64 f 142; Lackland, 
“Constitutional Experiment,” 235, n. 3, citing Michel Palmieri di Micciche Pensées et 
souvenirs historiques et contemporains (Paris, 1830) 1:21. 
23. Bentinck to Villafranca, 30 June 1814, copy FO 70/64 f 139; Bentinck to 
Castlereagh, no. 35, 4 July 1814, FO 70/64 f 165. 
24. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 3, 16 July 1814, FO 70/65 f 37; Castlereagh to 
A’Court, no. 6, 7 September 1814, FO 70/65 f 15. 
25. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 7, 4 March 1815, FO 70/69 f 68. 
26. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 16, 21 September 1814, FO 70/65; Castlereagh to 
A’Court, no. 8, 14 October 1814, draft FO 70/65 f 23. 
27. Castlereagh to A’Court, nos. 7, 8, 9, 7 June 1815, drafts FO 70/69 ff 12, 14. 
28. Macfarlane to Bathurst, no. 11, 24 May 1815, WO 1/285 f 93. 
Chapter 11. The Dénouement 
- Rosselli, Liberal Impertalist, 150, citing Add. MS 41515 f 62. 
Memorandum by A’Court, February 1814, FO 70/68. 
. Castlereagh to A’Court, 14 March 1814, draft FO 70/65 ff 1, 3. 
. Memorandum by A’Court cited above in note 2. 
. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 168-69. 
A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 4, 23 July 1814, FO 70/65 f 39. 
. Rosselli, Liberal Imperialist, 162. 
8. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 4, 23 July 1814, no. 10, 17 August 1814, FO 
70/65 ff 39, 87. 
9. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 9, 6 August 1814, FO 70/65 f 80. 
10. A’Court to Castlereagh, 22 August 1816, remarks on Prince Metternich’s 
dispatch, FO 70/75; Castlereagh to A’Court, nos. 10, 11, 6 September 1816, drafts 
FO 70/75. 
11. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 35, 5 November 1816, FO 70/75. 
12. A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 14, 15 July 1815, FO 70/70. 
13. Capograssi, Gli Inglesi, 241. 
14. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 352-53; A’Court to Castlereagh, no. 35, 5 No- 
vember 1816, FO 70/75. 
15. Rosselli, Bentinck, 154-55, citing Parliamentary Debates, 25 vols. (London: 
Hangard, 1820-30), 5: 1234 ff. 
16. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 352. 
17. Macfarlane, Sicily, 33. 
18. Macfarlane, Sicily, 44. Very similar words were used by the king in a letter he 
wrote to Castelcicala in August 1814: “I am more than ever convinced that the new 
constitution is unsuited to the great differences that exist between Sicilians and 
English in character, inclination, habits, public spirit, education and customs.” Val- 
ente, G. Murat, 82 n. 3. 
19. Ibid., 31. 
20. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 353. 
21. Macfarlane, Sicily, 35. 

<<<PDFPAGE 167>>>
Notes 
163 
22. G. Aceto, De la Sicile et de ses rapports avec Angleterre a Vépoque de la constitution 
de 1812 (Paris, London, 1827), 177. 
23. Ball to Castlereagh, 30 November 1807, CO 158/13 f 459. 
24. L. Simond, A Tour in Italy and Sicily (London, 1828), 535, cited by R. 
Trevelyan in Princes under the Volcano (London: Chatto and Windus, 1972), 24. 
Appendix A. Economic Implications 
1. E. Loncao, II lavoro e le classi rurali in Sicilia durante e dopo il Feudalismo 
(Palermo 1800), 85-86; L. Bianchini, Della Storia Economico-civile di Sicilia 2 vols. 
(Naples, 1841) 2: 239; Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 338-39; Galt, Voyages, 40. 
2. V. Titone, La Costituztone del 1812 e Poccupazione inglese della Sicilia (Bologna, 
1936), 116; Galt, Voyages, 21; Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 338-39. 
3. Fawkener to Hammond, 5 November 1808, FO 70/35 f 141. 
4. Graham to Fagan, 25 October 1813, FO 70/73. 
5. Add. MS 4156 ff 74, 102, 171, 189, 205, 232; Bentinck to Castlereagh, no. 
43, 30 October 1813, no. 45, 5 November 1813, FO 70/59. 
6. Ingham’s commercial interests were diverse and by 1815 included banking. He 
made his business headquarters at Palermo while maintaining his baglio at Marsala. 
Raleigh Trevelyan, Princes under the Volcano (London: Macmillan, 1972), 6, 15, 24. 
7. R. Lentini, “Note su un operatore commerciale in Sicilia, Abraham Gibbs 
(1799-1902),” Nuovi Quaderni del Meridione (1976): 387. 
8. Mellish to Canning, no. 2, 6 November 1808, FO 70/33 f 15. 
9. Bathurst to Hamilton, 3 December 1811, FO 70/49. 
10. Chetwynd to Hamilton, 17 January 1812, and enclosed FO 70/55. 
11. Judith B. Williams British Commercial Policy and Trade Expanston 1750-1850 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972), 212-13, citing Fagan to Hamilton, 28 September 
1811, 19 November 1811, FO 70/45, and Castelcicala to Liverpool, 24 February 
1812, FO 70/53. 
12. W. H. Thompson, Sicily and its Inhabitants. Observations made in 1809 and 
1810 (London, 1813). 
13. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 338-39. 
14. W. R. Rawson, “On the Sulphur Trade of Sicily and the Commercial relations 
between that country and Great Britain,” 5 vols., Journal of the Statistical Society of 
London, 1839 2:450—-56. Petition of 5 merchants copy 1811 FO 70/43. 
15. Mack Smith, Modern Sicily, 338-39; Bentinck Journal, 11 May 1812, PwJd 
6255; Parry, Fremantle, 98-99; Thompson, Sicily, 27; Bey of Tunis to Prince Regent, 
June 1813, enclosed with no 258, ADM 1/426; Bentinck to Liverpool, no. 14, 20 
July 1812, and enclosed WO 1/311 £299. 
16. Consul Goodwin, Supplement to the commercial report on Sicily, 23 November 
1835, FO 70/143. 
Appendix B. Attempts to Rescue Pope Pius VII 
1. E. Y. Hales, The Revolution and the Papacy 1769-1846 (London: Eyre and 
Spottiswoods, 1960), 188. 
. 
2. Collingwood to Pole, no 160, 13 July 1808, ADM 1/414; Canning to Drum- 
mond, June 1808, FO 70/32; Drummond to Canning, no. 24, 29 August 1808, 
secret, FO 70/32 f 299. 
3. Collingwood to Pole, no 160, 13 July 1808, ADM 1/414. 
4. Drummond to Canning, no. 24, 29 August 1808, secret FO 70/32 f 299; R. 

<<<PDFPAGE 168>>>
164 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Trevelyan, “Robert Fagan, an Irish Bohemian in Italy,” Apollo Magazine (October 
1972): 298-302. 
5. Drummond to Canning no. 24, 29 August 1808 secret FO 70/32 f 299. 
6. Ibid. 
7. Maxwell to Collingwood, 15 October 1808, ADM 1/414 (enclosed with no 
242); Drummond to Canning, no. 29, 19 October 1808, FO 70/32 f 318. 
8. Hales, Revolution and Papacy, 188; B. Cardinal Pacca, Notes on the ministry of 
Cardinal B. Pacca, (trans.) (Dublin: J. Cumming, 1843), 42-50. 
9. I am indebted to the late Mr. E. E. Y. Hales for this information. 
10. Amherst to Wellesley, no. 36, 6 May 1810, FO 70/39 f 86; Mayol de Lupé, La 
captivité de Pie VII (Paris, 1912), 345, 356, 404, passim. 
11. Cotton to Croker, no 317, 26 July 1810 ADM 1/417; Amherst to Wellesley, 
no. 42, 5 July 1810, FO 70/39 f 135. 
12. Ibid. 
13. Drummond to Canning, no. 24, 29 August 1808, secret, FO 70/32 f 299. 
14. Mayol de Lupé, La captivité, 422. 
15, Ibid:, 597 n.3: 

<<<PDFPAGE 169>>>
Bibliography 
Original Sources 
Manuscripts 
Public Record Office, Kew 
Foreign Office 
Naples and Sicily FO 70/11—75 
Sardinia 
FO 67/43 
War Office 
WO 1/303-315 
WO 1/280, 281, 285 
WO 6/56, 57, 60, 61 
Admiralty 
ADM 1/412-428 
Colonial Office Malta CO 158/7, 8, 11-13, 15, 18, 21, 22 
British Library (Department of Manuscripts) 
Add. MSS. 14273-14279 (Collingwood) 
19424 (Annesley) 
20176, 20190 (Hudson Lowe) 
36730 ( 
37050 (Bunbury) 
37268 (Letters of Sir Alexander Ball) 
37292 (Wellesley) 
37847, 37852 (Windham) 
38245 (Liverpool) 
41514, 41516 (Heytesbury) 
41766 (Pasley) 
Nottingham University Library 
Portland Manuscripts PwJd 6254-6258, 6260 Sicilian Journal of Lord William 
Bentinck 
PwJd 6259 Journal of Joseph Smith 
PwJd 2072-2294 Correspondence of Robert Fagan with 
Lord William Bentinck and with Queen Maria 
Carolina 
Private Letters of Lady Dalrymple, Broadoak, Bridport 
Printed Sources 
Bathurst, Earl. The Manuscripts of the 7th Earl Bathurst. Historical Manuscripts 
Commission. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1913. 
Casse, Pierre Emmanuel Albert du. Mémoire et correspondance politique et militaire du 
roi Joseph. 4 vols. Paris, 1853-54. 
. Supplément a la correspondance de Napoleon I’. Paris, 1887. 
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart Viscount. The Correspondence, Despatches, and other Pa- 
pers of Viscount Castlereagh. 12 vols. London, 1850-53. 
165 

<<<PDFPAGE 170>>>
166 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Cobbett, William. Parliamentary Debates from the year 1803. 41 vols. London: Han- 
sard, 1812-20. Vols. 12, 16, 19, 22, 25. 
Collingwood, George Lewes 
Newnham. Selection from the public and private correspon- 
dence of Vice Admiral Lord Collingwood interspersed with memoirs of Mis life. 4th ed. 
London: James Ridgway, 1829. 
Cresceri, Giancomo von. Memorte Segrete des Freiherrn Giangiacomo von Cresceri. 
Edited by Freiherrn von Helfert. Wien, 1892. 
Damas, Count Roger de. Mémoires. Edited by Jacques Rambaud. Paris, 1913. 
Dropmore Papers. The manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Esq. at Dropmore. Historical 
Manuscripts Commission, (1892-1927). British Library. Vol. 8. 
Mayol de Lupé, Count. La Captivité de Pie VIT. Paris, 1912. 
Moore, Sir John. Diary of Sir John Moore. Edited by Sir John Frederick Maurice. 2 
vols. London: Edward Arnold, 1904. 
Morrison, Alfred. The Collection of Autograph Letters and Historical Documents formed 
by A. Morrison. Nelson and Hamilton Papers. Vol. 2. Privately printed 1893, 1894. 
Murat, Marshal Joachim King of Naples. Lettres et Documents pour servir a Vhistoire de 
Joachim Murat. Publiés par le prince de Murat. 8 vols. Paris, 1908-13. Vols. 6-8. 
Napoleon I. Correspondance publiés par Vordre de ’Empereur Napoléon III. 32 vols. 
Paris, 1858-70. 
Nelson, Horatio. The Despatches and Letters of Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson. Edited by Sir 
Nicholas Harris Nicolas. 7 vols. London: H. Colbourn, 1844-1848. Vols. 5—7. 
Paget, Sir Arthur. The Diplomatic and other correspondence of the Rt Hon Sir Arthur 
Paget. Edited by Sir Augustus Paget. 2 vols. London: Heinemann, 1896. 
Parliamentary Debates. New series. 25 vols. London: Hansard, 1820-30. 
Picard, Ernest. Unpublished correspondence of Napoleon I preserved in the War Archives. 
London: E. Picard, 1913. 
Rose, John Holland. Select Dispatches relating to the formation of the 3rd Coalition 
against France 1804-1805. London: Historical Society of Great Britain, 1904. 
Stuart, John, 3rd Earl of Bute. A Prime Minister to his son: Correspondence of the 3rd 
Earl of Bute and of Lt General the Hon. Sir Charles Stuart. Edited by Mrs. E. Stuart 
Wortley. London: John Murray, 1925. 
The Wellesley Papers. The Life and Correspondence of Richard Colley Wellesley 1760-1842. 
Edited by L. S. Benjamin. 2 vols. London: Herbert Jenkins, 1914. 
Wellington, The Duke of. Dispatches. Compiled by Lt. Col. Gurwood. 13 vols. 2d ed. 
London: John Murray, 1844-47. Vol. 5. 
. Supplementary Dispatches. Edited by his son, the Duke of Wellington. 15 vols. 
London 1858-72. Vol. 7. 
Windham William. The Life and Correspondence of the Rt. Hon. William Windham 
1750-1810. Edited by L. S$. Benjamin. 2 vols. London: Herbert Jenkins, 1913. 
Secondary Sources 
Aceto, Giovanni. De la Sicile et de ses rapports avec PAngleterre a Vépoque de la 
constitution de 1812, Paris, London, 1827. 
Acton, Harold. The Bourbons of Naples. London: Methuen, 1956. 
Adair, Rt. Hon. Sir Robert. Historical Memoir of a Mission to the Court of Vienna in 
1806. London: Longman, 1884. 

<<<PDFPAGE 171>>>
Bibliography 
167 
Anonymous. Sicily and England A Sketch. Events in Sicily in 1812 and 1848. London: 
James Ridgway, 1849. 
Auriol, Charles. La France, PAngleterre et Naples de 1803 a 1806. 2 vols. Paris, 1904. 
pakene: Paolo. Sulla historia moderna del Regno di Sicilia. Memorie segrete. Palermo, 
48. 
Bianchini, Cav. Ludovico. Della storia economico-civile di Sicilia. 2 vols. Naples, 1841. 
Bianco, Giuseppe. La Sicilia durante Voccupazione inglese 1806-1815. Palermo, 1902. 
Blaquiére, Edward. Letters from the Mediterranean. 2 vols. London: Henry Colbourn, 
Vol. 1. 
Borch, M. J.. Lettres sur la Sicile et sur Vile de Malte. 2 vols. Turin, 1782. 
Browning, Oscar. “Hugh Elliot at Naples,” English Historical Review (1889): 209-27. 
. “Queen Caroline of Naples.” English Historical Review (1877): 490-572. 
Brydone, Patrick. A Tour through Sicily and Malta. 2 vols. London: W. Straham and 
D. Cadell, 1773. 
Buckland, Charles Stephen. Metternich and the British Government. London: Mac- 
millan, 1932. 
Bunbury, Lieutenant General Sir Henry. Narrative of some Passages in the Great War 
with France from 1799-1815. London: Richard Bentley, 1854. 
. Narrative of Military Transactions in the Mediterranean 1805-1810. London: 
privately printed, 1885. 
Butterfield, H. The Peace Tactics of 
Napoleon 1806-1808. Cambridge: University Press, 
1929. 
Caldora, Umberto. Calabria napoleonica. 
1806-1815. Naples: Collana, 1960. 
Capograssi, Antonio. Gli Inglesi in Italia durante le campagne napoleontche (Lord 
William Bentinck). Bari: Biblioteca di cultura moderna, 1949. 
Cockburn, G. Voyage to Cadiz and Gibraltar etc in 1810, 1811. London, 1815. 
Colletta, Pietro. History of the Kingdom of Naples 1734-1825. Translated by S. Horner. 
2 vols. Edinburgh: T. Constable, 1858. 
Coquelle, P. Napoleon and England 1803-1813. Translated by Gordon D. Knox. 
London: George Bell and Sons, 1904. 
Corti, Conte Egon. Ich eine Tochter Maria Theresas. Munich, 1950. 
Crawley Charles W. “The Sicilian Constitution of 1812.” English Historical Reviews 
(1940): 251-74. 
Delavoye, Alexander M. Life of Thomas Graham Lord Lynedoch. London: Richardson, 
Marchant Singer, 1880. 
Denon, Dominique V. Travels in Sicily and Malta. London: Robinson, 1790. 
Driault, J. Edouard. Napoléon en Italie (1800-1812). Paris, 1906. 
Espitallier, Albert. Napoléon et le roi Murat 1808-1815. Paris, 1910. 
Fortescue, Sir John William. A History of the British Army. 13 vols. London: Mac- 
millan, 1910-1930. Vols. 6-9. 
Gallavresi, Giuseppe, et Sallier de la Tour, Victor Amédée. Le Maréchal Sallier de la 
Tour. Biblioteca di storia Italia recente. Turin, 1917. 
Galt, John. Voyages and Travels in 1809, 1810 and 1811. London, 1812. 
Garnier, Jean-Paul. Murat roi de Naples. Paris, 1959. 
Giardina, Lisetta. “Lord Bentinck e¢ il suo Sicilian Journal 1812-1814.” Archivio 

<<<PDFPAGE 172>>>
168 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
storico per la Sicilia Orientale. Catania: Istituto Universitario, 1975. Anno 71 fasc 
II-III, 359-435. 
Giarizzo, Giuseppe. “Riflessioni sulla fazione dominante e su la condotta del nuovo 
ministero in Sicilia (1814).” Archivio storico per la Sicilia Orientale. Catania 
Istituto Universitario, 1971. Anno 67 fasc II-III, 261—331. 
Gigholi, C. H. D. Naples in 1799. London: Methuen, 1903. 
Hoare, Sir Richard C. A Classical Tour through Italy and Sicily. 2 vols. London, 1819. 
Johnston, Robert Matteson. “Lord William Bentinck and Murat.” English Historical 
Remew (1904): 263-80. 
. The Napoleonic Empire in Southern Italy. 2 vols. London: Macmillan, 1904. 
Woleels 
, ed. Mémoire de Marie-Caroline Harvard Historical Studies, vol 16. Mas- 
sachusetts, 1912. 
Lackland, H. M. “The Failure of the Constitutional Experiment in Sicily.” English 
Historical Remew (1926): 210-35. 
La Lumia, Isidora. Carlo Cottone Principe di Castelnuovo. Storie Siciliane 4 vols. 
Palermo, 1883. Vol. 4. 
Leckie, Gould Francis. An Historical Survey of the Foreign Affairs of Great Britain. 
London, 1808. 
Loncao, Enrico. I/ lavoro e le classi rurali in Sicilia durante e dopo il Feudalismo. Palermo, 
1900. 
Lord Walter, 
Frewen. England and France in the Mediterranean 1660-1830. London: 
Sampson Low, 1901. 
Macfarlane, Charles. Sicily and her Constitutions. London, 1849. 
Mack Smith, Denis. Modern Sicily after 1713. London: Chatto and Windus, 1968. 
Mackesy, Piers. The War in the Mediterranean 1803-1810. London: Longmans, 
1957. 
Maturi, Walter. “Il Congresso di Vienna e la restaurazione dei Borboni a Napoli.” 
Rivista storica italiana. Naples, 1958. Vol 3, fasc iv. 
. Il Principe di Canosa. Studi e document: di storia del Rusorgimento. Firenze, 
1944. 
Mellish, Joseph Charles. “La Cour de Sicile en 1809 par un diplomate anglais, 
observations of Joseph Charles Mellish,” edited by L. Pingaud. Revue historique 
aiplomatique (1894):281—-88; (1895):124-32. 
Miles, William A. Correspondence of W.A. Miles on the French Revolution 1789-1817. 2 
vols. London: Longmans, 1890. Vol. 2. 
me Winston Francis. The British in the Mediterranean. London: Hutchinson, 
1953; 
Mozzillo, Anastasio. “La Sicilia nel giudizio dei viaggiatori inglesi.” Nuovi Quaderni 
del Meridione (1978):51-68. 
Napier, Sir William F. P. History of the War in the Peninsula and the South of France. 7 
vols. London, 1836. Vol. 5. 
Neu, Irene D. “An English Businessman in Sicily 1806-1861.” The Business History 
Review no. 4 (Winter 1957): 365-75. 
Niceforo, N. “La Sicilia e la costituzione del 1812” Archivo storico siciliano (1922): 70— 
ow 

<<<PDFPAGE 173>>>
Bibliography 
169 
Oman, Sir Charles. A History of the Peninsular War. 7 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1900-30). Vol. 5. 
. Studies in the Napoleonic Wars. London: Methuen, 1929. 
Pacca, Bartolomeo Cardinal. Notes on the ministry of Cardinal B. Pacca. Translated 
from the Italian. Dublin: J. Cumming, 1843. 
Palmeri, Niccolo. Saggio storico e politico sulla costituzione del regno di Sicilia infino al 
1816. Edited at Lausanne, 1847. 
Parry, Anne. Admirals Fremantle. London: Chatto and Windus, 1971. 
Pasley, Sir Charles W. Essay on the Military Policy and Institutions of the British Empire. 
London, 1810. 
Pontieri, Ernesto. Il riformismo borbonico nella Sicilia del sette e del ottocento. saggi 
storici. Rome, 1945. 
Rambaud, Jacques. Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte 1806-1808. Paris, 1911. 
. “Il tentativo di Murat contra la Sicilia nel 1810.” Archivo storico di Provincie 
Napoletane societa di storia patria (1911): 434-50, 695-709. 
Rath, R. J. The Fall of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy. New York: Columbia Univer- 
sity Press, 1942. 
Renda, Francesco. La Sicilia nel 1812. Caltanisetta, Rome, 1953. 
Rodger, A. B. The War of the Second Coalition. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964. 
Romeo, Rosario. I/ Risorgimento in Sicilia. Bari: Istituto Italiano per gli studi storica, 
1950. 
Rosselli, John. Lord William Bentinck and the British Occupation of Sicily 1811-1814. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1956. 
. Lord William Bentinck. The Making of a Liberal Imperialist 1774-1839. 
London: Chatto & Windus for Sussex University Press, 1974. 
. “Il Progetto italiano di Lord William Bentinck 1811-1815.” Rivista storia 
italiana (Naples, 1967): 355-404. 
Russell, J. Nelson and the Hamiltons. London: Blond, 1969. 
Salemi, Leonardo. I trattati anti-napoleonici dell’Inghilterra con le due Sicilte. Palermo: 
Istituto Nazionale Fascista di Cultura, sezione di Palermo, 1937. 
Saul, N. E. Russia and the Mediterranean. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1970. 
Sciacca, Enzo. Riflessi del costituzionalismo europaneo in Sicilia 1812-1815. Catania: 
Studi risorgimentali, 1966. 
Shupp, P. F. European Powers and the Eastern Question 1806-1807. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1931. 
Sultana, D. Coleridge in Malta and Italy. Oxford: Blackwell, 1969. 
Swinburne, Henry. Travels in the Two Sicilies 
1777-80. 2 vols. London, 1795. 
Tarle, E. Le Blocus Continental et le Royaume d’Italie. Paris, 1928. 
Thompson, W. H. Sicily and its inhabitants. Observations made in the years 
1809 and 
1810. London, 1813. 
Titone, Virgilio. La Costituzione del 1812 e Voccupazione inglese della Sicilia. Bologna, 
1936. 
: 
Travelyan, Raleigh. Princes under the Volcano. London: Macmillan, 1972. 
. “Robert Fagan, an Irish Bohemian in Italy.” Apollo Magazine (1972): 298— 
309. 

<<<PDFPAGE 174>>>
170 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Tuzet, Héléne. Voyageurs frangais en Sicile au temps du Romantisme. Etudes de lit- 
térature étrangére et comparée. Paris, 1947. 
Valente, A. G. Murat e VItalia meridionale. Turin: Einaudi, 1965 ed. First published 
Milan, 1941. 
Webster, Sir Charles. The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh 1813-1822. 2 vols. London: G. 
Bell, 1934. Vol. 1. 
Weil, Maurice H. Ferdinand IV 
et le Duc d’Orleans. Paris: Revue de Paris, 1898. 
. Le Prince Eugene et Murat. 5 vols. Paris, 1902. Vols. 1, 3. 
, ed. Correspondance de Maria Carolina avec de Gallo. Paris, 1911. 
Williams, Hugh N. The Life and Letters of Admiral Sir Charles Napier. London: 
Hutchinson, 1917. 
Wilson, Sir Robert Thomas. Private Diary. Edited by H. Randolph. 2 vols. London, 
1861. 

<<<PDFPAGE 175>>>
Index 
Aberdeen, George Hamilton-Gordon, 
fourth earl (British envoy at Vienna): 
presses Bentinck to sign armistice, 119 
Aci, Giuseppe Reggio, prince of: be- 
comes minister, 96; his differences 
with Bentinck, 97; dismissed, 102; in- 
competence of, 97 
A’Court, William (later baronet and first 
baron Heytesbury, secretary of lega- 
tion at Naples 1801, envoy extraordi- 
nary at Palermo and Naples 1814— 
22): advises King Ferdinand on con- 
stitution, 133; appointed deputy min- 
ister, 131; decorated by King Ferdi- 
nand, 133; his interview with Castle- 
reagh 1814, 131; nicknamed by Si- 
cilians, 133; his political sympathies, 
129; protests on behalf of British mer- 
chants, 138; replaces Bentinck as min- 
ister, 126; his views on Sicilian consti- 
tution and British intervention, 130— 
32 
Acton, Sir John (minister at the court of 
Naples and Palermo), 24, 28, 58; his 
ability, 42-43; his Anglophile policy, 
26; his influence on king, 26; recovers 
influence 1806, 43; removed to Sicily, 
43: his retirement, 
42; urged by 
Nelson not to risk Sicily, 27 
Addington, Henry (later first viscount 
Sidmouth, prime minister 1801-4): 
orders Nelson to protect Sicily, 27 
Alexandria: captured by British 1807, 60 
Amherst, William Pitt, second baron and 
first earl (minister at court of Palermo 
1809-11): deplores lack of guidance 
from London, 82; favors British inter- 
vention in Sicily, 82-84; involved in 
attempt to rescue Pope Pius VII, 144— 
45; protests at queen’s “secret under- 
takings,” 82; replaces Drummond as 
minister, 79; requests unified com- 
mand in Sicily, 89; resigns, 91; sus- 
pects court of treachery, 78, 84, 88 
Amiens, Treaty of, 1802, 26 
Ascoli, Troiano Morulli, duke of: accom- 
panies Prince Leopold to Gibraltar, 
67; accompanies Prince Leopold to Is- 
chia, 76; as agent of King Ferdinand, 
43-44; his character, 43; exiled, 96; 
his influence at court, 43, 99; his rela- 
tions with British, 43-44 
Augusta, port of, 19, 33, 48, 59, 136 
Austria, 11, 99; Bentinck seeks to fore- 
stall in Italy, 115; causes French to 
withdraw troops from south Italy, 73; 
conquers Naples 1815, 128; defeated 
in 1796, 15; defeated in 1805, 33; 
disapproves 
Neapolitan 
aggression 
1798, 18; invites King Ferdinand to 
behave more 
liberally, 124; makes 
peace at Lunéville 1801, 24; proposes 
Britain disown Sicilian constitution 
1815, 
132; 
reenters 
war 
against 
France 1809, 75; seeks British as- 
sistance in Italy 1809, 75-77; signs 
treaties with King Ferdinand, 17, 129, 
132; treats with Murat 1814, 119; 
willingness to defend Naples 1798, 
17. See also Francis II; Metternich, 
Clemens Wenzel Lothar, prince of 
Austria-Este, Francis, Archduke, 111 
Ball, Captain (later Rear Adm.), Sir Alex- 
ander (governor of Malta), 20, 22, 26, 
30; advocates British annexation of Si- 
cily, 28; his management of Malta grain 
supply, 38; prepares to send troops to 
Messina, 27; stresses importance of Si- 
cily to Malta, 135; supplies Thunderer 
to take Prince Leopold to Gibraltar, 
67 
Balsamo, Abbate, 37; attributes troubles 
in 1813 to Bentinck’s absence, 104; 
171 

<<<PDFPAGE 176>>>
172 
designs reformed tax system, 83; drafts 
constitution 1812, 97 
Bathurst, Henry, third earl (president of 
Board of Trade 1807-9, secretary of 
state for foreign affairs 1809, secretary 
of war and colonies 1812-27), 114, 
115, 116; calls Castelcicala’s 
bluff, 
123; gives Sicily priority, 114; rejects 
idea of trade treaty with Sicily, 138— 
39; supports Bentinck against Liver- 
pool, 113; tells Bentinck that ministry 
opposes Italian expedition, 116 
Belmonte-Pignatelli, Antonio Francesco, 
prince of: appeals to British 1811, 88; 
his arrest and deportation, 88; asks for 
king to resume powers, 125; becomes 
minister, 96; his character, 100; his 
death, 134; his differences with Cas- 
telnuovo, 105, 125; dislikes Bentinck 
leaving Sicily 1813, 103; goes into ex- 
ile, 126; his lack of ability as minister, 
100; loses confidence of Bentinck, 
100, 107; as political turncoat, 105, 
125; released from prison, 95; his res- 
ignation, 101; his self-interest para- 
mount, 107; sponsors reformed tax 
system, 83; tells Bentinck Sicilians de- 
sire contradictions, 116; urges Ben- 
tinck to be more ruthless, 107 
Bentinck, 
Lieutenant 
General, 
Lord 
William Cavendish: 
advises Mont- 
gomerie to be cautious, 106; advo- 
cates coalition in Sicilian government, 
125; appointed commander-in-chief 
and minister plenipotentiary, 44, 89; 
his attitude to new Sicilian constitu- 
tion of 1812, 97-98, 108, 132-33; 
authorizes Sicilian trade with Naples, 
137-38; becomes military dictator, 
103, 106—7; as captain general in Si- 
cily, 95; his: career, 
89) 120: his 
character, 89; concludes treaty with 
Tunis, 139; confides in Orleans, 96; 
declares end of armistice with Murat, 
128; disillusion with Sicilians, 100, 
107-8, 126, 132; doubts king’s sin- 
cerity, 125; “Dream,” 28, 120-25; 
favors British intervention in Sicilian 
affairs, 24, 91-92, 95, 107, 131, 132; 
finances king and hereditary prince, 
103, 109, 127; his first arrival in Si- 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
cily, 92; forces queen to leave Sicily, 
102-3; given option to send troops to 
Spain or Italy, 111, 113; handicapped 
over operations in Spain by Sicily, 
135; his handling of evidence of plots 
and treachery, 93—95; hesitates to con- 
clude armistice with Murat, 119; im- 
pressed by British unpopularity 1813, 
104; instructions to, 1811, 92; in- 
volvement 
in Sicilian government, 
102; justifies constitutional change in 
military terms, 114; lack of success in 
persuading Sicilians to work own re- 
forms, 100, 136; leaves Sicily to com- 
mand in Spain 1813, 103; his memo- 
randum 
on 
Sicily 1811, 
91; and 
military occupation of Palermo, 95; 
negotiates with Murat at Ponza, 119; 
nicknamed by Sicilians, 133; his opin- 
ion of queen’s alleged treachery, 94; 
opposes offering crown of Naples to 
Murat, 118-19; plans to intervene in 
Montenegro, 112; plans to send expe- 
dition to Calabria, 1813, 116; plans to 
use Italian Levy, 110, 114, 116-17; 
and proclamation to Italian people to 
rise, 120; projects cooperation with 
Sardinia and Austria in Italy 1811, 
111; his quarrel with Murat in Italy, 
120; and reform of royal army, 97; 
refuses to send back troops to Spain, 
115-16; reimposes price control, 105, 
137; rejects offer to become “Grand 
Chancellor,” 102; his relations with 
hereditary prince, 96; his relations 
with King Ferdinand, 95, 101; his re- 
lations with Queen Maria-Carolina, 
42, 95, 96, 99, 102-3; releases king 
from pledge 1814, 125; his reluctance 
to cooperate with Murat, 119-20; re- 
placed as minister, 120; reprimanded 
by Castlereagh, 103, 120; resumes 
payment of subsidy, 96; returns from 
Spain to Sicily 1813, 106; Russia tries 
to secure his cooperation in Adriatic, 
114; sends army to Spain, 113; sends 
force to Leghorn, 116-17; sends force 
to Lissa, 112; sends Lamb to Cas- 
tlereagh with memorandum, 
115; 
signs armistice with Murat, 118; takes 
army to Italy 1814, 119-20; uses force 

<<<PDFPAGE 177>>>
Index 
against Sicilian court, 95, 101; his 
views on military expedition to liberate 
Italy, 110-11, 114-18, 120; his views 
on usefulness of army from Sicily in 
Spain, 113, 115; withholds subsidy, 
9597598 
Biancamano, Francescantonio: claims to 
represent Italian patriot leaders, 73; 
distrusted by Stuart, 74 
Bonaparte, 
Joseph 
(king of Naples 
1806-8): becomes king of Naples, 34; 
prepares invasion of Sicily 1808, 71— 
72; pressed by Napoleon to take Sicily, 
45; recalled to take over throne of 
Spain, 72; regards Queen Maria-Car- 
olina as unscrupulous, 42 
Bonaparte, Napoleon (first consul, then 
emperor of the French): abdicates, 
120; anger at abandonment of Scilla, 
76; appoints brother Joseph king of 
Naples, 34; attempts to involve Naples 
in seizure of Malta, 26; his attitude 
toward Murat’s plans to invade Sicily, 
86-87; his concern at Russian threat 
to Turkey, 71; his defeat at Leipzig 
prejudices Murat, 119; demands dis- 
missal of Acton, Elliot, and Damas, 
27; directs publication of disinforma- 
tion about Sicily, 73; escapes from 
Elba, 127; expels Austria from north 
Italy 1796, 15; loses interest in taking 
Sicily, 72; orders withdrawal of St. 
Cyr from Neapolitan kingdom, 33; 
plans invasion of Sicily 1808, 71; pro- 
claims end of Bourbon rule in Naples, 
34; reinforces Corfu, 71; seeks to bluff 
British over his plans for Sicily, 87; 
threatens Naples, 29; urges Joseph to 
take Sicily, 45; his victory at Jena, 53; 
his victory at Marengo, 24; his victo- 
ries at Ulm and Austerlitz, 34; his vic- 
tory at Wagram, 76;; wants to use Si- 
cily as trap for British forces, 109 
Bourcard, Gen. Emanuel de (commander 
of Neapolitan army in Sicily): crit- 
icized, 30, 47; sent to coordinate de- 
fense with Stuart, 1810, 85 | 
British merchants in Sicily: angry at re- 
strictions on trade, 104; benefit from 
trade with Sicily, 138-39; complain 
British navy interferes with trade, 137; 
7s 
grievances of, removed, 138-39; press 
for British intervention in Sicilian gov- 
ernment, 
89; protest 
at privileges 
being ignored, 138; protest at taxa- 
tion, 88, 138; suffer from quarantine 
regulations, 
137-38; 
unfavorable 
position of, relative to other nationals, 
138 
British press: attacks of, on Sicilian gov- 
ernment, 65, 89 
Brydone, Peter, 37 
Bunbury, Colonel (later Lt. Gen.), Sir 
Henry Edward (quartermaster-general 
then chief of staff to commander-in- 
chief Sicily 1805-8, under secretary of 
state for war 1809-16), 103; com- 
ments on Sicilian welcome of British 
1806, 37; comments on strength of 
Sicilian militia, 47; deplores decision 
to recall Moore and troops from Sicily, 
70; dubious of quality of Italian resist- 
ance, 74; favors British intervention in 
Italy, 110; supports idea of landing 
army on coast of central Italy, 110 
Butera-Branciforte, 
Ercole 
Michele, 
prince of, 37, 40 
Calabrian Free Corps: formation and in- 
corporation into Italian Levy, 110; 
soldier of, is executed for treachery, 93 
Campbell, Lieutenant Colonel (later Lt. 
Gen.), Sir James (adjutant general to 
British forces in Sicily): criticizes Si- 
cilian court, 83 
Canizzaro, Count: his role in attempt to 
rescue Pope Pius VII, 142-43 
Canning, George (secretary of state for 
foreign affairs 1807—9): authorizes at- 
tempt to rescue Pope Pius VII, 141; 
decides not to send Howick’s instruc- 
tions on Sicily, 59; defends British re- 
fusal to let Prince Leopold land at 
Gibraltar, 67-68; discourages Sicilian 
claim to Spanish regency, 66; rebukes 
Drummond, 65; recalls Drummond, 
67; unwilling to interfere in Sicilian 
internal affairs, 59, 79 
Canosa, 
Antonio 
Capace 
Miunutolo, 
prince of, 43 
Capri, island of: capture criticized by 
Collingwood, 56; captured by Murat, 

<<<PDFPAGE 178>>>
174 
72; captured by Sidney Smith, 48; loss 
of, affects Sicilian morale, 74; value of, 
to British, 72 
Caracciolo, marquis of (viceroy of Sicily 
1781-86), 39 
Carbone, Colonel 
(adviser of Queen 
Maria-Carolina), 43; organizes masse, 
44: and raids on Calabrian coast, 72; 
his relations with British commanders, 
44 
Cassaro, Don Francesco Statello, prince 
of, 19; accompanies Prince Leopold to 
Gibraltar, 67; becomes minister, 96; 
dismissed, 102; divides ministry, 99; 
signs undertaking regarding queen, 
99; supports court against would-be 
reformers, 84 
Cassetti, Capt. Giuseppe: implicated in 
plots, 94 
Castelcicala, Fabrizio Ruffo, prince of, 
94, 99; canvasses 
appointment of 
A’Court as minister, 131; corresponds 
with hereditary prince, 98; his pledge 
on unified command, 79; plots to have 
Bentinck recalled, 123; protests at arti- 
cles in British press, 65-66; protests at 
refusal of British to let Prince Leopold 
land at Gibraltar, 67—68; and regency 
of Spain for King Ferdinand, 66-67; 
tells court Bentinck lacks ministerial 
support, 101 
Castelnuovo, Carlo Cottone, prince of, 
and duke of Villa Ermosa: appointed 
minister, 96; his arrest and exile, 88; 
his differences with Belmonte, 105, 
125; favors free trade, 105; released 
from captivity, 95; his retirement, 
134; his views on making democrats 
ministers, 108 
Castlereagh. See Stewart, Robert, Vis- 
count Castlereagh 
Castrone, Giuseppe, marquis of (chief of 
police in Palermo), 88; adviser of 
queen, 43-44; imprisoned, 96 
Catania: radical ideas flourish in, 97; ri- 
valry with Messina, 39 
Catinelli, Lt. Col. Carlo (commander of 
3rd Italian regiment): leads expedition 
to Tuscany 1813, 116, 118 
Cattolica, Prince: derided by Damas, 47; 
plans to enlist Sicilian army, 47 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Cavaignac, Gen. Jean-Baptiste: 
lands 
force south of Messina 1810, 86-87 
Circello, Tommasu di Somma, marquis 
of, 67, 89; his ability, 43; accompanies 
Prince Leopold to Ischia, 76; deprived 
of influence, 102; fears British may 
abandon Sicily 1806, 58; involved in 
attempt to rescue Pope Pius VII, 142; 
presses British commanders to invade 
Italy, 54-56; his relations with British, 
43; remains minister under hereditary 
prince, 96; his role in claiming Spanish 
regency for King Ferdinand, 67; signs 
undertaking relating to queen, 99 
Collingwood, Adm. 
Cuthbert, 
Lord 
(commander-in-chief British fleet in 
the Mediterranean 
1805-10): 
ap- 
proves abandonment of Gaeta, 56; at- 
tempts to rescue Pope Pius VII, 141— 
44; critical of capture of Capri, 56; 
critical of expedition to bay of Naples, 
56, 75, 76, 77; forced to leave Medi- 
terranean 1805, 33; impatient with 
complaints of lack of naval protection 
for Sicily, 72-73; 
his opinion of 
Queen Maria-Carolina, 41; persuades 
Stuart to seize Ionian Islands, 77; pro- 
vides squadron to guard Sicily, 46, 73; 
sceptical of Italian resistance, 74; urges 
Stuart to aid Austria in Italy, 75; 
warns Stuart of danger from French 
fleet 1809, 76-77 
Congress of Vienna 1814-15, 125, 127, 
129 
Constitution of 1812: approved by Si- 
cilian parliament, 97; associated with 
British rule, 104; attitude of court to- 
ward, 97-99; commission set up to 
modify, 
128; 
disapproved 
of by 
A’Court, 130-32; modelled on En- 
glish constitution, 96-97; provides for 
independent Sicily, 122; supplanted 
by new constitution 1816, 133; terms 
of, 97; unregretted in Sicily, 134; 
viewed by Bentinck, 97-98, 
108; 
viewed by Castlereagh, 131; viewed by 
King Ferdinand, 96-98, 128-29, 132 
Corfu, island of: French take over, 70; 
reinforced by Ganteaume 1808, 71; 
Russians send troops from, to Naples 
1805, 29; seizure authorized by Liver- 

<<<PDFPAGE 179>>>
Index 
pool, 111; value placed on, by Napo- 
leon, 71; Wellesley forbids attack on 
1810, 77 
Corsica, island of, 121; Bentinck con- 
templates use of, as base for invading 
Italy, 111-12, 118 
Cotton, Admiral, Sir Charles, 85, 145 
Craig, General, Sir James Henry, 45; de- 
fends Sicily 1806, 46-48; his dif- 
ferences with Elliot, 33; frustrates 
French hopes of crossing straits of 
Messina, 45; instructions to, 30; lands 
army near Naples, 32—33; persuades 
ministry to reinforce Sicily, 48; reem- 
barks army, 33; resigns command, 48 
Cuto, Prince, 102 
Dalrymple, Colonel, 
Sir John: com- 
mands Calabrian Free Corps, 110; his 
wife’s comments on plots and alleged 
treachery, 94-95 
Damas, Roger, Count (commander of 
army in kingdom of Naples 1805-6), 
33; defeated by French, 34, 43, 45; his 
dismissal demanded by Napoleon, 27; 
favorite of Queen Maria-Carolina, 43; 
leaves Sicily, 43; his opinion of officers 
in royal army in Sicily, 47 
Danero, General (commander of Mes- 
sina garrison 1799), 20 
Drummond, Sir William (British minis- 
ter at Palermo 1807-9): appointed 
minister, 56; believes he can influence 
king to effect reform, 59, 61; con- 
tacted by Biancamano, 73; criticized, 
61, 63; defends British policy over 
peace 
negotiations, 
58; 
his 
de- 
viousness, 63; disapproves plan to in- 
vade Italy, 56; gets Tatischeff re- 
moved, 65; involved in attempt to 
rescue Pope Pius VII, 141-42; liked 
by queen, 42; persuades King Ferdi- 
nand to declare war on Russia, 65; 
recalled, 67; renews payment of sub- 
sidy, 59; strained relations with British 
generals, 58, 59, 60-61, 63; supports 
claim of King Ferdinand to Spanish 
regency, 66-68; suspends ‘subsidy to 
Sicilian court, 59; urges Fox to invade 
Italy 1807, 60; his views on ability of 
Acton, 43; his views on Circello, 43; 
175 
his views on state of Sicily in 1807, 39; 
voices court’s complaints about lack of 
naval protection, 72 
Duckworth, Admiral, Sir John Thomas: 
commands expedition to Constantino- 
ple, 60 
Egypt: British expedition to, in 1807, 60 
Elba, island of: Bentinck contemplates 
ee of, as base for invading Italy, 111— 
Elliot, Hugh (British minister to court of 
Naples and Palermo 1803-7), 30; 
complains of actions of Sidney Smith, 
48, 53; criticizes Sicilian government, 
38; his differences with British army 
and navy commanders, 28, 33-34; 
disapproved by Napoleon, 27; sent as 
minister to Naples, 26; as spokesman 
for views of queen, 27, 33, 42; stresses 
importance of navy in Sicily’s defenses, 
46; urged by Nelson not to take risks 
over Sicily, 27 
Erskine, Cardinal, 141, 143-44 
Erskine, Lieutenant General, Sir James 
Sta Claine23 
Fagan, Robert: as agent for British in 
Rome until expelled, 141; appoint- 
ment of, as consul-general in Palermo, 
141; his attempt to rescue Pope Pius 
VII, 141-42, 144; as confidant of 
Queen Maria-Carolina, 41-42, 141; 
suspended from functions, 88; urges 
Bentinck to use force, 95; his views on 
queen, 41 
Faro, 86, 87; plot to seize fort at, 93 
Ferdinand IV (king of Naples) (Ferdi- 
nand III, king of Sicily): adopts new 
constitution 1816, 133; advises his 
son to procrastinate, 96; allows British 
generals to inspect royal army, 47; am- 
nesty to Calabrians abused, 82; ap- 
points commission to revise constitu- 
tion, 128; assumes command of royal 
army, 79; attempts to resume power, 
100-101; his attitude toward 1812 
constitution, 96-98, 128-29, 132, 
awarded Kingdom of Naples by Con- 

<<<PDFPAGE 180>>>
176 
gress of Vienna, 129; convasses ap- 
pointment of A’Court 
as minister, 
131; his character and tastes, 40, 99; 
his claim to regency of Spain, 66—68; 
his claim to sovereignty of Malta, 11, 
26; condemns those seeking to divide 
allies, 93; delegates power to heredi- 
tary prince, 95, 101, 110; his deter- 
mination to recover throne of Naples, 
11, 40, 119; his financial dependence 
on British,)11; 23,.79, 1037109, 127; 
gives hostile reception to draft treaty 
1807, 59; grants unified command of 
armed forces, 95; his handling of al- 
leged plots 1811, 93-94; 
honors 
pledge not to victimize Sicilians, 134— 
35; his inability to manage royal fi- 
nances, 40, 83; invited to behave more 
liberally 1814, 125—26; involved in at- 
tempt to rescue Pope Pius VII, 142— 
46; leaves Naples for Sicily, 18, 34; his 
loyalty to British alliance, 11, 26, 89, 
93; offended by Maitland over han- 
dling of plots, 93; his offer to abdicate, 
95; opposes reduction of British gar- 
rison, 74-75; plots to have Bentinck 
recalled, 123; promises not to resume 
powers 
without 
permission, 
101; 
punishes Neapolitan rebels 1799, 23; 
raises taxes by decree, 88; refuses to 
grant unified command, 85; rejects 
French offer of military alliance 1802, 
26; his relations with Bentinck, 89, 
95, 101; his relations with Queen 
Maria-Carolina, 99; his reluctance to 
help British defend Sicily 1810, 84— 
85; his reluctance to return to Naples 
1800, 24; requests British army stay in 
Sicily 1814, 127; his resumption of 
power 1814, 125; returns to Naples, 
1815, 128; sends troops to Malta 
1802, 26; sensitive to attacks in British 
press, 65; signs treaty of Florence 
1801, 25; signs treaty with Austria 
1815, 129, 132; his sincerity doubted, 
125, 132; surrenders to Bentinck’s de- 
mands, 95, 101; suspicious of British 
intentions, 11, 28, 59; unifies king- 
doms of Naples and Sicily, 133; his 
views on Sicilians, 98, 134; welcomed 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
to Sicily 1798, 19; welcomes Charles 
Stuart to Sicily 1799, 22. See also Na- 
ples, kingdom of 
Ficuzza (royal shooting lodge), 99 
Florence, treaty of, 1801, 25 
Fox, Charles James (secretary of state for 
foreign affairs 1806): conducts peace 
negotiations, 58 
Fox, Gen. Henry Edward (commander- 
in-chief of British forces in Mediterra- 
nean 1806—7), 23; appointed to com- 
mand in Mediterranean, 51; his con- 
tempt for royal family of Sicily, 61; 
critical of Gen. John Stuart, 53; de- 
plores futility of Hesse’s expedition 
1807, 61; his differences with Drum- 
mond, 58-59, 60-61; his dual role as 
minister and commander, 56, 89; his 
limitations, 51; his opinion of Nea- 
politan troops, 47; ordered to prepare 
landing in Calabria, 61; refuses to send 
army to Italy, 55-56, 60, 61; his re- 
liance on Moore, 51; sends Moore to 
investigate Sidney Smith’s activities, 
53; specifies force needed to hold 
Egypt, 60; his views on size of gar- 
rison needed to hold Sicily, 23 
France: conquest of Naples by, 11, 34; 
naval preparations of, for attack on Si- 
cily, 17; and threats to Messina 1801, 
26; and threats to Naples 1798, 17; 
tries to bluff over threat to invade Si- 
cily 1813, 116; withdraws troops from 
Naples 1799, 23; withdraws troops 
from southern Italy 1809, 75. See also 
Bonaparte, Joseph; Bonaparte, Napo- 
leon; Murat, Joachim 
Francis (hereditary prince of Naples and 
Sicily): accepts principle of compensa- 
tion for Naples 1813, 118; appointed 
inspector general of royal army in Si- 
cily, 61; asks king to resume power, 
125; becomes vicar general, 42, 95; his 
character, 42, 98-99: distrusts his 
ministers, 96; his fear of Bentinck, 98; 
his financial dependence on Bentinck, 
103, 109, 127; influenced by his par- 
ents, 42, 96; his lack of enthusiasm for 
new constitution, 98; as lieutenant 
general of Sicily, 128; his obstructive 

<<<PDFPAGE 181>>>
Index 
tactics, 97; his procrastination, 96, 98; 
his reaction to Bentinck’s “Dream,” 
122-23 
Francis II (emperor of Austria): his at- 
titude to queen coming to Vienna, 99; 
marries daughter of Queen Maria-Car- 
olina, 42; urges King Ferdinand to 
adopt more liberal attitude 1814, 124; 
urges prince regent to send army to 
Spain not Italy, 113 
Fraser, Maj. Gen. Alexander Mackenzie: 
commands expedition to Egypt, 60 
Fremantle, Adm. Thomas F., 112, 139 
Frilli, Colonel, 99, 102 
Gabrielli, Cardinal: concerned in plan to 
rescue Pope Pius VI, 141, 143, 145 
Gaeta, fortress of: holds out against 
French, 45; refusal of Stuart to rein- 
force, 51; surrenders to French, 45 
Ganteaume, Adm. Honoré: his fleet’s in- 
cursion into Mediterranean 1808, 71 
Gazzetta Britannica (Messina), 85 
Graham, Lt. Col. James (aide-de-camp to 
Lord William Bentinck): sent to allied 
headquarters 1813, 119; sent to inter- 
view Castlereagh 1814, 124 
Graham, Lieutenant Colonel (later Brig. 
Gen.), Sir Thomas: commands Mes- 
sina garrison 1799, 22, 23; his views 
on British garrisoning Sicily, 20, 22 
Great Britain: advises Naples to make 
peace, 24-25; attitude of, toward Si- 
cilian constitution, 133; benefits eco- 
nomically from alliance with King Fer- 
dinand, 11; claim of, to Malta, 26; 
cooperates with Russia in Italy 1805, 
29-30, 32; dependence of, on ports of 
Naples and Sicily, 11, 12; determina- 
tion of, to deny Sicily to France, 12; 
disowns schemes to annex Sicily, 121— 
25, 127; finances second coalition, 19; 
gives priority to peninsula over Sicily, 
77-78, 87, 109-12, 114; gives pri- 
ority to Sicily and Malta over Ionian 
Islands, 78; gives priority, to Sicily 
over Egypt, 60; guarantees Sicily to 
King Ferdinand, 11, 133; inability of, 
to support Naples with land force 
WY, 
1801, 24; insists on no victimization 
of Sicilians 1814, 126, 135; interest 
of, in developing Sicily’s military po- 
tential, 29; military action of, in Medi- 
terranean 1809-10, 77; occupies Mes- 
sina 1806, 34; pays subsidies to King 
Ferdinand, 11, 23, 79, 103, 109, 127; 
persuades King Ferdinand to send 
troops to Malta 1802, 26; policy of, 
regarding support for Italian resist- 
ance, 73, 111-12, 116; proposes new 
treaty with Sicily 1807, 58-59; public 
opinion of, favors restoration of King 
Ferdinand to Naples, 126; reluctance 
of, to interfere in Sicily, 44, 79, 89, 
92; renews war 
1803, 26; retains 
Malta, 26; sends army to Egypt, 60; 
sends fleet to Dardanelles, 59-60; 
signs treaty of Amiens 1802, 26; sup- 
ports Ferdinand’s claim to Sicily in 
peace negotiations 
1806, 58; sus- 
pected of intention to annex Sicily, 29, 
122-23; suspicious of loyalty of Si- 
cilian court, 12, 68; and treaties signed 
with King Ferdinand, 11, 15, 23, 26, 
28, 110; urges return of king to Na- 
ples 1800, 24; value of Sicily to, 135; 
withdraws army from Egypt, 60; with- 
holds guarantee of Naples to Ferdi- 
nand, 
11, 
79. 
See 
also 
Canning, 
George; Stewart, Robert, Viscount 
Castlereagh; 
Fox, 
Charles 
James; 
Grey, Charles, second earl Howick; 
Jenkinson, Robert Banks, second earl 
Liverpool; Pitt, William, the Younger; 
Wellesley, Richard Colley, marquis of 
Grenier, General: his role in frustrating 
invasion of Sicily 1810, 86 
Grenville, William Wyndham (secretary 
of state for foreign affairs 1791-1801, 
prime minister 1806-7), 24; appeal 
to, to garrison Messina 1799, 20; en- 
visages Sicily becoming British protec- 
torate, 121; persuades Pitt to send 
fleet to Mediterranean, 17 
Grey, Charles, second earl Howick: pro- 
poses new treaty with Sicily 1807, 58— 
5921, 124 
Guillichini, 
General 
(commander 
of 
Messina garrison), 30 

<<<PDFPAGE 182>>>
178 
Hamilton, Sir William (British minister 
at court of Naples and Palermo 1764- 
1800): liked by queen, 42; reassures 
Nelson about opening of ports to Brit- 
ish fleet, 18; urges British to defend 
Messina 1799, 20; urges British to 
reconquer Naples, 22; urges Neapoli- 
tan court to attack French in Italy 
1798, 18 
Harrowby. See Ryder, Dudley, first earl, 
second baron Harrowby 
Hereditary prince. See Francis 
Hesse, Luigi (prince of Hesse-Philipp- 
stadt): his ability and courage, 47; 
commands garrison at Gaeta, 45; de- 
feated at Mileto, 47, 60; deprived of 
influence at court, 102 
Howick. See Grey, Charles, second earl 
Howick 
Ionian Islands, 86, 121, 125; assault on, 
by Stuart’s forces 1809-10, 77—78; as 
base for Russian army and navy, 29; 
Calabrian Free Corps sent to, 110; 
troops from, allotted to Montenegrin 
expedition, 112 
Ischia, island of, 20; abandoned by Brit- 
ish, 77; surrenders to British, 76 
Italian Levy: Bentinck’s plans to use, 
114; expedition of, to Tuscany, 116— 
17; formation of, 109; morale of, 114; 
sent to Spain, 110 
Italian resistance: Biancamano and lead- 
ers of, 73; British ministers lack faith 
in, 111, 116; strength of, depreciated 
by British, 73-74; strength of, de- 
preciated by Murat, 74 
Jenkinson, Robert Banks, second earl 
Liverpool (secretary of state for for- 
eign affairs 1801-4, secretary for war 
1809-12, prime minister 1812-27): 
considers Ionian Islands of secondary 
importance to Sicily and Malta, 78; 
disapproves Bentinck’s “Dream,” 124— 
25; favors sending troops from Sicily 
to Catalonia, 110; gives Bentinck op- 
tion of sending army to Spain or Italy, 
111; overrules Stuart over not sending 
troops to Spain, 87; wants to reduce 
British garrison in Sicily, 109 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Lacey, Gen. Maurice de: commands 
Russian army in Italy 1805, 30 
Lamb, Frederick 
(secretary 
to Lord 
William Bentinck), 115 
Layard, Colonel, 28 
Leckie, Gould Francis (British consul at 
Syracuse): farms in Sicily, 27—28, 37; 
publishes Historical Survey, 65; urges 
British intervention in Sicily, 28, 65— 
66, 89, 121; views on Sicilian nobles, 
39 
Leopold, Prince (youngest son of King 
Ferdinand 
and Queen 
Maria-Car- 
olina): proclaimed viceroy at Ischia, 
76, 82; sent to Gibraltar to claim 
Spanish regency, 66-68. 
Lissa, island of: occupied by British force 
from Sicily, 112 
Liverpool. See Jenkinson, Robert Banks, 
second earl Liverpool 
Louis XVIII (king of France 1814~24): 
advises King Ferdinand to adopt more 
liberal attitude, 125 
Lowe, Lieutenant Colonel 
(later Lt. 
Gen.): commands British garrison at 
Capri, 73 
Macfarlane, General: defies quarantine 
regulations, 105; ensures queen’s de- 
parture from Sicily, 102; implores 
Bentinck to return to Sicily 1813, 106; 
joins Bentinck’s army in Italy 1814, 
119; resists Bentinck’s plan for attack 
on Calabria, 116; reviews royal army 
with Bentinck, 110; takes contingent 
to Naples 1815, 128 
Macfarlane, Charles, 134 
Maida, battle of, 45, 51, 135 
Maitland, General, Sir Frederick: 
his 
handling of plots and suspected treach- 
ery, 92—94; sent with army from Sicily 
to Spain, 113-14 
Malta, island of: Britain gets Naples to 
send troops to, in 1802, 26; claim of 
king of Naples to sovereignty of, 11, 
26; dependence of, on Sicily, 23, 135; 
markets well supplied with corn, 38; 
Napoleon’s plan to seize, in 1802, 26; 
Neapolitan troops leave, 28; plague in, 
affects Sicily, 104, 137; siege of, 20—- 

<<<PDFPAGE 183>>>
Index 
23; supplies Sicily with guns and 
troops, 46, 48 
Manhés, Gen. Charles-Antoine, Count, 
119 
Maria-Carolina (queen of Naples and Si- 
cily): advisers of, 43; agrees to leave 
Sicily, 34, 99; agrees to Stuart having 
overall command 1809, 75; allies Na- 
ples with Russia, 29; her anger at Brit- 
ish withdrawal from Naples 1805, 33; 
and anger at British withdrawal from 
bay of Naples 1809, 77; her attempts 
to treat with Napoleon 1805, 33; her 
attempt to enlist masse, 47; her attitude 
toward British, 33, 41-42, 73; her at- 
titude toward constitution of 1812, 
98; her attitude toward hereditary 
prince, 41; character of, 40-41; chil- 
dren of, 42; complains of lack of naval 
protection, 72—73; controls foreign 
policy, 28-29; death of, 102, 128; her 
devotion to Saint Clair, 43-44; her 
dislike of Paget, 24, 42; her dislike of 
Sicily and Sicilians, 19, 41, 124; dis- 
suades king from abdicating, 95; em- 
ploys agents and spies, 41; evidence of 
treachery of, 84-85, 88-89, 93-95; 
extravagance of, 83; favorites of, 43; 
favors La Tours plan 1809, 75-77; 
fears British will provoke Napoleon, 
27; hopes for Russian support 1799, 
19; insists on king commanding royal 
army, 81-82; 
intrigues with Tat- 
ischeff, 43, 65; leaves Sicily, 102; mis- 
uses British subsidy, 79; opposes ap- 
pointment 
of vicar 
general, 
95; 
opposes return of king to Naples 
1800, 24; organizes attempt to rescue 
Pope Pius VII, 141-142, 145; plans 
to send Moliterno to Calabria, 82; and 
political intrigues, 96; puts views on 
British generals to Paget, 63; her read- 
iness to dispose of Sicily, 124; her rela- 
tions with Bentinck, 89, 96; her reluc- 
tance to leave Sicily, 96, 99, 102; 
sends Leopold to Spain, 67; sensitive 
to attacks in British press, 65; spreads 
rumors about Belmonte, 96; supports 
Hesse’s expedition 1807, 53-57; sup- 
ports punishment of rebels 1799, 23; 
suspected of giving secret instructions 
79 
to Schiara, 82; suspected of influenc- 
ing delays in reform, 96; urges attack 
by British to reconquer Naples, 54— 
55, 63; urges attack on French in Italy 
1798, 18 
Martin, Admiral, Sir George: detailed to 
protect Sicily 1808, 73; given more 
frigates for offense 1809, 75; harasses 
Murat’s preparations for invasion, 85; 
opposes queen’s plan to send Mo- 
literno to Calabria 1810, 82; his role 
in attempt to rescue Pope Pius VII, 
144-45 
Masse: 
contempt 
of, for Neapolitan 
troops, 47; crushed by French 1807, 
46; encouraged by Stuart 1806, 51; 
lack of discipline of, 47; organized by 
Carbone, 44; 
plan of queen to raise 
1810, 82; Sidney Smith ordered to 
stop 
making 
promises 
to, 
53; 
uselessness of, 61 
Masséna, Marshal André, 56, 110 
Maxwell, Captain: attempts rescue of 
Pope Pius VII, 142-43 
Medici, Luigi, Cavaliere di (minister of 
finance at court of Palermo): goes to 
England, 96; plots to get Bentinck re- 
called, 123; his views on English con- 
stitution, 98 
Mellish, Joseph Charles (British chargé 
d’affaires at Palermo 1810): presses 
King Ferdinand to help defend Sicily, 
85; urges need for commercial treaty 
with Sicily, 138 
Messina: contingency plans for British to 
seize, 1803-5, 26; defense of, 1810, 
86-87; and garrison’s loyalty, 20; oc- 
cupied by British, 22, 34; plot to sub- 
orn garrison of, 93-95; proposed sta- 
tus of, in treaty proposals 1807, 59; 
and rivalry with Catania, 39; strength 
of fortress of, 20, 22, 28, 30; under 
threat from French 1801, 26 
Metternich, Clemens Wenzel Lothar, 
prince of (chancellor and foreign min- 
ister of Austria): favors restoration of 
Naples to Ferdinand without a consti- 
tution, 126; proposes to Britain that 
Sicilian 
constitution 
be disowned, 
132-33 
Milazzo, 59, 87 

<<<PDFPAGE 184>>>
180 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
Mileto: Hesse’s army defeated at, 47, 60 
Minorca, island of, 20, 22, 23 
Moliterno, Don Girolamo 
Pignatelli, 
prince of: banished from Sicily, 102; 
his character and ability, 44, 74; dis- 
trusted by British, 44, 74; plan of 
queen to send to Calabria, 82; poses as 
leader of Italian resistance, 97; his rela- 
tions with queen, 43; supposed to sup- 
port Murat, 84 
Montenegro: abortive plan to send Brit- 
ish troops to, 112 
Montgomerie, Gen. Archibald, Lord: 
deputes for Bentinck, 103; his han- 
dling of political and constitutional 
crisis in Sicily, 106; implores Bentinck 
to return to Sicily, 106; intervenes 
over observing quarantine regulations 
by army, 105 
Moore, Lieutenant General, Sir John, 
89; allowed to inspect royal troops, 
69; appointed second in command to 
Fox, 51; attempts to win over the 
queen, 68—69; criticizes Drummond, 
63; criticizes Sidney Smith, 51, 53; 
driving force behind Fox, 52-53; his 
opinion of queen, 41, 42, 69; opposes 
expedition to recover Naples, 59-60, 
68-69; orders Sidney Smith to desist 
from encouraging masse, 53; his pessi- 
mism about defending Sicily, 48, 69; 
posted from Sicily, 69-70, 71; recom- 
mends Britain take over government 
of Sicily, 69, 121; refused unified com- 
mand, 69; his verdict on Hesse’s de- 
feat, 60-61; his views on royal army, 
46-47, 69 
Morning Chronicle: article in, attacking 
Sicilian 
government, 
65; 
reports 
speech critical of Sicilian government, 
89 
Morning Post: letter in, suggesting Brit- 
ain annex Sicily, 89 
Murat, Joachim (king of Naples 1808— 
14): abandons invasion of Sicily, 86— 
87; announces intention to grant Na- 
ples a constitution, 126; attacks Aus- 
tria 1815, 128; captures Capri, 72; his 
character and ability, 72; his claim to 
throne of Naples, 118, 124, 126, 128; 
his death, 129; makes approaches for 
armistice, 119; negotiates with Ben- 
tinck at Ponza, 118; plans invasion of 
Sicily, 72—73, 84-86; sceptical of Ital- 
ian resistance, 74; sides with allies, 
118; signs armistice, 118—19; strength- 
ens defenses of Naples 1809, 76 
Murray, General, Sir John: commands 
Sicilian forces in Spain, 114; sends 
back 2,000 troops from Spain to Si- 
cily, 114 
Naples, kingdom of: alliance of, with 
Great Brita ll 
oon One 
onal 
liance of, with Russia 1798, 19; al- 
lance of, with Russia 1805, 29; ap- 
peals to Britain for help, 17; assists 
Britain 1794-96, 15; becomes Par- 
thenopian Republic, 19; defeated by 
French, 
18; double-crosses 
France 
1805, 29; makes peace 
1796, 15; 
makes peace 1801, 25; opens ports to 
British fleet, 17-18; reconquered by 
Ruffo, 23; reinforces Messina 1803, 
28; sends troops to Malta 1802, 26. 
See also Ferdinand IV; Maria-Carolina; 
Sicily, kingdom of 
Neapolitans: 
as 
disloyal 
subjects, 
punished 1799, 23; retain bitter mem- 
ories of 1799, 74; unpopularity of, in 
Sicily, 19; untrustworthy as troops in 
Sicily, 46-47, 69, 87 
Neipperg, Adam Albrecht, Count (Aus- 
trian envoy at court of Naples), 119 
Nelson, Adm. Horatio, Lord, 30; arrives 
off Naples 1798, 17; complains of 
governor of Syracuse, 17; considers 
Elliot gullible, 33; gets British troops 
sent to Messina 1799, 20; his hostility 
to Russian 
fleet in Mediterranean, 
19; imprisons Rossi, 105; keeps war- 
ship in bay of Naples, 28; ordered to 
protect Sicily 1803, 27; orders burn- 
ing of Neapolitan fleet 1798, 19: 
punishes Neapolitan rebels, 23; his re- 
lations with Sicilian court, 41; retains 
fleet off Sicily, 20; sends Troubridge 
to bay of Naples, 20; his sympathy 
with Sicilian aspirations, 19; takes 
Neapolitan court to Sicily, 18-19; 
urges attack by Naples on French 
1798, 18; urges dispatch of Messina 

<<<PDFPAGE 185>>>
Index 
181 
garrison to Naples and Malta, urges 
Procida, island of: captured then aban- 
risks not be taken over Sicily, 27; his 
views on backwardness of Sicily, 36— 
doned by British 1809, 76-77 
37; welcomed at Naples 1798, 18 
Reggio di Calabria: captured by French 
Nugent, Colonel, 111, 113 
1808, 46, 70; garrisoned by British 
1806, 46, 48 
Orleans, Louis-Philippe, duke of, 85, 
Régnier, General: defeated at Maida, 51, 
101, 125; accompanies Prince Leo- 
56; his role in plan to invade Sicily, 71 
pold to Gibraltar, 67; accused of aim- 
_Rossaroll, Capt. Andrea, 94 
ing at regency of Sicily, 96; dislikes | 
Rossi, Emmanuele: 
radical programme 
Bentinck 
leaving 
Sicily, 
103; 
his 
friendship with Bentinck, 96; goes 
of, 105; tactics of, in Sicilian parlia- 
ment, 106 
into exile, 126; implores Bentinck to 
Royal army in Sicily: attempts to im- 
return 
to Sicily 1813, 
106; urges 
firmness on Bentinck, 100 
Pacca, Cardinal: his role in attempted 
rescue of Pope Pius VI, 142-44 
Paget, Sir Arthur (minister at court of 
Naples and Palermo 1800-1803): ar- 
prove, 
97; British equipment 
for, 
109-10; constitutes political danger in 
Sicily, 115-16; discipline and quality 
of, 46-47, 69, 87, 97, 109-10, 115, 
127; numbers of, reduced, 109, 127; 
size of, 87, 109; starving without pay, 
WAY 
gues interdependence of Malta and Si- 
 Ruffo, Fabrizio, Cardinal, 23 
cily, 26; fails as mediator between 
Russia: alliance of, with France 1807, 
Drummond and British generals, 63; 
favors British intervention in Sicily 
1800, 37; unpopular with queen, 24, 
42; urges King Ferdinand to return to 
Naples 1800, 24; his views on Sicily’s 
condition, 37 
Pasley, Captain (later General): influence 
of his “Military Policy,” 89, 91, 121 
Pellew, Admiral, Sir Edward, first vis- 
count Exmouth, 116 
Perceval, Spencer (prime minister 1809— 
12): critical of Bentinck’s memoran- 
dum on Sicily 1811, 91 
Perry (proprietor of Morning Chronicle): 
apologizes for attack on Sicilian gov- 
ernment, 65 
Pitt, William, the Younger (prime minis- 
ter 1783-1801, 1804-6): decides to 
70; alliance of, with Naples, 19, 29; 
cooperation of, with British in Naples 
1805, 29-30, 32; czar of, urges king 
to adopt more liberal attitude 1814, 
124; fears French attack on Turkey, 
19; fleet of, arrives off Palermo 1799, 
19; help of, sought by queen to medi- 
ate with Napoleon, 65; lands force at 
Manfredonia 1799, 19; leaves second 
coalition, 24; campaign of, in 1812 
draws French troops from Italy, 113; 
negotiates peace terms affecting Sicily 
1806, 58; seeks Bentinck’s support in 
Adriatic, 114; suspicious of British in- 
tentions, 29, 33, 99; threat posed to 
Sicily to warships of, 70; urges British 
to invade Italy, 60; war declared on, 
by Sicily, 65 
send fleet to Mediterranean, 15; his 
Ryder, Dudley, first earl, second baron 
realism as statesm 
121-22; with- 
draws fleet from Mediterranean, 15 
Pius VII (pope 1800-1823): attempt to 
rescue, 141-46 
Harrowby (secretary of state for for- 
eign affairs 1804): envisages Sicily as 
source of military manpower, 29 
Ponza, island of, 20, 142; captured by 
Saint Clair, Charles, marquis of: accom- 
British 1813, 114; prince of Canosa 
sent to, 43; projected use of, as base 
for operations against Italy, 117; scene 
of Bentinck’s negotiations with Murat, 
118-19 
panies Prince Leopold to Gibraltar, 
67-68; accompanies Prince Leopold 
to Ischia, 76; appointed aide to heredi- 
tary prince, 61; his character and abil- 
ity, 44; disliked and distrusted by Brit- 

<<<PDFPAGE 186>>>
182 
ish, 44, 68; loses post at court, 59; his 
relations with Queen Maria-Carolina, 
43-44 
St. Cyr, General, 33 
Saliceti, Antoine Christophe (chief of 
police in Naples), 41 
Sardinia-Piedmont, kingdom of: pro- 
jected role of, in campaign of 1809 in 
Italy, 75, 77; role of, in projected cam- 
paign 1811 in Italy, 111 
Schiara, marquis of: actions of, while 
civil governor of Reggio 1809, 82 
Scilla, fortress of: captured by French 
1808, 46, 70; French garrison with- 
drawn from 1809, 76; garrisoned by 
British, 46, 48 
Sherbrooke, Major General, Sir John: 
disapproves raids organized by Car- 
bone, 72; withdraws garrison from 
Scillanal 
Sicilian flotilla: augmented 1810, 84; 
colonel of, arrested, 93; crews of, 46, 
84-85; formation of, 46; successful 
actions of, 85 
Sicilian militia: attempt by British to em- 
body, 47; condition of, 46; strength 
of, 46-47 
Sicilian people, 39; assist British defend 
Sicily, 86; their desire for British inter- 
vention 
in administration, 
82, 92; 
their discontent with rule by Naples, 
30, 37; their discontent with govern- 
ment of Palermo, 83; their dislike of 
French, 19, 30, 37; their dislike of 
Neapolitans, 19; enlist in British army, 
110; their liking for British, 86; nobles 
of, 36, 39-40, 107-8; Oppose con- 
scription, 47, 116; peasants of, 37, 39; 
views of A’Court and Bentinck on, 
132; welcome King Ferdinand 1798, 
19. See also Sicily, kingdom of 
Sicily, kingdom of: agriculture of, 37— 
38; backwardness of, 36-37; as base 
for British 
contraband 
trade, 
23; 
Catholic Church in, 36; as cause of pro- 
longing war, 58; civil unrest in, 83; 
commerce of, 36, 137-39; constitu- 
tion of, 39, 97-99, 128-32; declares 
war on Russia, 65; defense of, against 
invasion, 30, 34, 46—48; distinct from 
Italy, 35; émigrés in, 40; extravagance 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
of court of, 40; government of, at- 
tacked in British press, 65; importance 
of, to British fleet, 11, 17, 23, 33, 58; 
inability of, to exist independently, 
122; industry of, 38, 137; judiciary of, 
38-39; merchant marine of, 140; no- 
bility of, 36, 39-40, 107-8; parlia- 
ment of, 35-36, 39-40; power of 
crown in, 36; proposals for treaty with 
Britain rejected, 58-59; taxation in, 
40; and treaties of alliance, 52, 89, 
110; vulnerability of, to attack, 11, 70, 
87. See also Constitution of 1812; Fer- 
dinand IV; Royal army in Sicily; Si- 
cilian flotilla; Sicilian militia; Sicilian 
people 
Smith, Lieutenant Colonel: report of, on 
Sicily’s defenses, 30, 46 
Smith, Joseph (secretary to British minis- 
ter in Sicily 1813), 106—7 
Smith, Admiral, Sir William Sidney: ap- 
pointed to command in central Medi- 
terranean, 48; and capture of Capri, 
48; his character, 48; his cooperation 
with Stuart in operation in Italy 1806, 
48, 53; criticized by Elliot, 48, 53; 
criticized by Moore, 53; criticized by 
Stuart, 51; justifies policy in Calabria, 
53; and raids on Calabrian ports, 48, 
51; his relations with Queen Maria- 
Carolina, 41; and relief of Gaeta, 48; 
reproved by Admiralty, 53; viceroy of 
Calabria, 51 
Spain: army from Sicily sent to, 110, 
113-15; Bentinck hesitates to send 
army to, 113; Bentinck leaves Sicily to 
take command in, 103; quits to return 
to Sicily, 106; Bentinck refuses to send 
back from 
Sicily troops 
to, 115; 
Joseph Bonaparte sent to, 72; British 
ministerial policy of, toward reinforc- 
ing from Sicily, 74-75, 87, 110, 112; 
clam by King Ferdinand to regency 
of, 66-68; Napoleon’s interest shifts 
from Sicily to, 72; resistance move- 
ment in, 74; Stuart fails to send troops 
to, 74-75, 87; troops sent back from, 
to Sicily, 114; Wellington’s campaigns 
in, 114-16 
Stewart, Robert, Viscount Castlereagh 
(secretary of war and colonies 1807-9, 

<<<PDFPAGE 187>>>
Index 
secretary of state for foreign affairs 
1812-22), 101, 108; agrees to British 
army remaining in Sicily 1814-15, 
127-28; agrees to continue payments 
to Sicilian court 1814-15, 127-28; 
his attitude to granting Sicily a consti- 
tution, 131, 133, 135; believes queen 
is involved in treachery, 94; counter- 
mands order to send troops to Spain 
1809, 75; decides queen must leave 
Sicily, 94, 99; disapproves Austrian 
proposal to disavow Sicilian constitu- 
tion, 133; favors modification of Si- 
cilian constitution, 131, 133; forbids 
use of force in Sicily, 103; hopes 
Stuart will assist Austria in Italy 1809, 
75; instructs Bentinck to conclude ar- 
mistice with Murat, 119; opposes use 
of force against queen, 99; orders inva- 
sion of Calabria 1807, 61; his reaction 
to Bentinck’s “Dream,” 123-25; his 
realism over value of Sicily to Britain, 
121—22; recommends recall of Moore 
from Sicily, 69-70; reinforces Sicily 
1808, 70; reprimands Bentinck for 
conduct in Italy 1814, 120; repudiates 
commitment to Sicilian constitution, 
129; his view on encouraging resist- 
ance movements 
in Europe, 
111; 
wants to divert troops from Sicily to 
Spain, 74, 85-86 
Stuart, Lieutenant General, The Hon. Sir 
Charles: commands in Minorca, 20; 
sends troops to Sicily 1799, 22; his 
views on importance of Sicily to Brit- 
ain, 23 
Stuart, Major General, Sir John: his at- 
titude to Sicilian court, 42, 82; cap- 
tures Ischia and Procida, 76; cooper- 
ates 
with 
Sidney Smith, 
48, 51; 
coordinates defense plans with royal 
army, 85; declines tq send troops to 
Spain, 85-87; forms Calabrian Free 
Corps 1809, 110; instructed on how 
to assist Italians, 73; objects to Sidney 
Smith’s appointment as viceroy, 51; 
and offensive operations against Cal- 
abrian coast, 72; originates Gazetta 
Britannica, 85; plans to invade Italy 
1809, 75; and preparations to defend 
Sicily, 48, 85-87; pressed to send 
183 
troops to Spain, 74, 85-86; proclama- 
tion to masse 1806, 51, 76; his procla- 
mation to Sicilian people, 85; recruits 
Sicilians into British army, 48; refuses 
to reinforce Gaeta, 51; reluctant to in- 
vade Italy 1808-9, 74-77; replaces 
Moore as commander in Sicily, 70; 
resigns command 1806, 51; resigns 
command 1810, 87, 91; retires from 
bay of Naples 1809, 77; revises at- 
titude to British intervention in Si- 
cilian affairs, 82; sends force to Ionian 
Islands, 77—78; succeeds Craig as 
commander, 48; victory at Maida, 45, 
51; his views on Italian resistance, 74 
Syracuse, port of, 136; garrisoned by 
British troops, 48; status as free port 
proposed, 59; used by Nelson 1798, 
17 
Tatischeff, Count (Russian ambassador 
to court of Naples and Sicily), 33; or- 
dered to leave Palermo, 65; urges Brit- 
ish to invade Italy 1807, 60 
Thornborough, Captain (later Admiral), 
Sir Edward: criticizes Drummond, 63; 
wants to attack Russian frigate at Pal- 
ermo, 65 
Tilsit, treaty of, 1807, 45, 65; its effect 
on British in Sicily, 69 
Tommasi: accompanies Prince Leopold 
to Gibraltar, 67; accompanies Prince 
Leopold to Ischia, 76; deprived of in- 
fluence at court, 102 
Tour, Sallier de la, Count: tries to coor- 
dinate Austrian and British plans for 
campaign in Italy 1809, 75-77 
Trabia, Prince, 19 
Troubridge, Rear Admiral, Sir Edward 
Thomas, 20, 24 
Ushakov, Admiral, 19-20 
Vaccaro, Gaspare: radical programme of, 
105 
Valletta. See Malta, island of 
Vanni, Colonel: his role in attempt to 
rescue Pope Pius VII, 143-44 
Villettes, Lt. Col. William (commander 
of British garrison in Malta): ordered 

<<<PDFPAGE 188>>>
184 
SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE 
to be ready to send troops to Messina, 
ley, first duke of: his anger at Ben- 
27, 28 
tinck’s change of plan regarding send- 
ing troops to Spain, 113; convinced of 
uselessness of British expedition to 
Wellesley, Richard Colley, marquis of 
Italy, 115-16; disapproves Bentinck 
(secretary of state for foreign affairs 
leaving Spain, 106; favors dispatch of 
1809-12), 92—93; commissions mem- 
troops from Sicily to Spain, 110; re- 
orandum on Sicily by Bentinck, 91; 
fuses to believe Sicily is in danger, 
favors British intervention in Italy, 
116; unable to depend on Sicilian con- 
110-11; forbids attack on Corfu, 77 
tingent in Spain, 114 
Wellington, Field Marshal, Arthur Welles- 
Wilson, Sir Robert, 102 

<<<PDFPAGE 189>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 190>>>
Bibliothéques 
Libraries 
Université d’Ottawa 
University of Ottawa 
Echéance 
Date Due 

<<<PDFPAGE 191>>>

<<<PDFPAGE 192>>>
Bi 
