THE    NAPOLEONIC    EMPIRE 


The 

Napoleonic  Empire 

In  Southern  Italy 

and  the 

Rise  of  the  Secret  Societies 


BY 


R.    M.  JOHNSTON 

AUTHOR    OF    'the    ROMAN    THEOCRACY    AND    THE    REPUBLIC,    1846-1849 
'  NAPOLEON  :    A    SHORT    BIOGRAPHY  ' 


VOLUME  II  /  / 


^{ 


a'' 


^ 


ILontron 

MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,   Limited 

NEW    YORK  :     THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 
1904 


^41:  rights  reserved 


CONTENTS 

PART   II 

THE    RISE    OF    THE    SECRET    SOCIETIES 

CHAPTER   I 

The  Restoration 

PAGE 

Bourbon  restoration — Austro-Sicilian  alliance — Convention  of  Casa  Lanza — 
Ferdinand's  proclamations — He  arrives  at  Naples  —  Moderate  conduct — 
Ferdinand's  marriage — New  conditions — Liberalism  and  Napoleon — Naples 
and  France — Lazzaroni  and  middle  class — Napoleonic  sjstemjn Jt^LapIes — 
Constitutional  legislation — Zurlo — Nationalization — Results  of  French  rule 
— Constitutionalism — The  allies — Congress  of  Vienna — Austro-Neapolitan 
secret  treaty — Holy  Alliance — Bourbon  accessions — Secret  societies  .        3 

CHAPTER   II 

Origin  and  Rites  of  the  Carbonari 

Secret  associations  in  history — Religious  societies — Influence  in  political  move- 
ments— Political  thought  and  symbolism — Antiquity  of  symbolism — Its 
varying  forms — Reproduction  worship — Philosophical  symbolism — Political 
symbolism — Soladitates,  early  Christians,  Eleusinian  mysteries — Mafia — 
Vendicosi,  Beati  Paoli — Templars — Reformation,  Albigenses,  Cathari, 
Paulicians,  Patarini,  Waldenses — Maestri  Perfetti — Jacques  Bonhomme — 
Cathari  in  Naples  —  Adombrados — Rosicrucians  —  Alchemysts,  Rosen- 
kreutz,  Difrer — Doctrine  of  political  equality — Doctrines  of  Luther  and 
Rousseau — Trade  guilds  —  Conciarotti,  Neapolitan  fraternities,  Vehm- 
gericht — Compagnonage,  Chauffeurs,  Charbonnerie — ^Masonic  legends — 
Ancient  guilds  of  Masons — Florentine  Lodge  of  the  Trowel — Masonry  alT 

V 


vi  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


PAGE 


Naples  —  French  Masonry  —  Amis  reunis — Illumines  —  Charbonnerie — 
Marquis  de  Champagne — Philadelphes — Other  army  associations — Repub- 
licanism during  the  Empire  —  Lecchi  —  Societies  at  Naples  —  Origin  of 
Carbonari — Lodge  at  Capua  —  Murat  and  the  secret  societies — Hereditary 
Prince  joins  Carbonari — Polypus  of  societies — Doctrines  of  Carbonari — 
Initiation  of  apprentices — Discourse  of  orator — St.  Theobald — Symbols 
interpreted  —  Passwords  and  signs  —  Statutes  of  Repubblica  Lucana  — 
Asssassination — Initiation  of  master — Origin  of  ceremony — Conclusion — 
Political  cowardice 19 


CHAPTER   III 
Internal  Affairs 

Papal  action  against  Carbonari  —  Zuccari's  arrest  —  Maghella's  —  Carbonaro 
intrigue — Increase  in  membership — Sanfedism — Calderari — Canosa — Arms 
the  Calderari  —  Policy  of  Government — Carbonari  decorated  —  Position 
of  Muratists — Bentinck  at  Naples — French  at  Naples — Medici — Other 
Ministers  —  Finance — Amnesty  —  Confiscations — Austrian  policy — Jablo- 
nowsky — Nugent  and  Neapolitan  army — Sicilian  constitution — Ferdinand  I. 
of  Two  Sicilies — Marriage  of  Duchesse  de  Berri — U.S.  claims  reparation — 
Disorders  in  Puglia — Secret  societies — Relations  with  the  Papacy — Con- 
cordat— Factions  at  Court — The  fedelon'i — Reconstruction  of  the  San  Carlo 
— Ferdinand  cuts  his  queue — Death  of  Charles  IV. — State  of  the  kingdom     45 


CHAPTER   IV 

The  Revolution  of   1820 

Failure  of  harvests — Taxation — Landed  proprietors  and  Constitutionalism — 
Army  dissatisfaction — Visit  of  Francis  and  Metternich — Pepe's  plot — 
Camp  of  Sessa — Metternich's  apprehensions — Congress  of  Aix — Secret 
societies — Kotzebue's  murder — Russian  policy  —  Spanish  revolution — 
Spain  and  Naples — Position  of  the  Carbonari — Pepe  at  Avellino — Pro- 
paganda at  Salerno  —  Minichini — Carbonaro  numbers — Ferdinand  takes 
oath  to  Spanish  Constitution — Consequent  agitation — Plot  of  De  Conciliis — 
Borbone  Cavalleria — Rising  at  Nola — Insurgents  reach  Monteforte — News 
at  Naples — Carascosa  takes  command — His  proceedings — De  Conciliis 
takes  lead  at  Avellino  —  Carascosa  negotiates  —  Nunziante's  efforts  — 
Advises  Constitution — Desertion — Pepe  leaves  Naples — Carbonaro  deputa- 
tion to  Ferdinand — Constitution  granted — New  ministry — Carbonaro  pro- 
clamation —  Demand  for  Spanish  Constitution  —  Granted — Alarm  at 
Naples — Entry  of  Carbonari — Pepe  sees  Ferdinand — Orderly  behaviour  of 
Carbonari — Pepe  commander-in-chief — His  position  —  Minichini  —  Real 


CONTENTS  vii 

PAGE 

causes  of  revolution — Zurlo  and  the  Ministry — Carbonaro  hostility — 
Great  extension  of  Carbonari — Ferdinand  swears  constitution — Lazzaroni 
hold  aloof — Ferdinand's  policy — Plot  against  King — Freedom  of  the  Press — 
Rossetti — Attacks  on  Zurlo — Troja  and  the  Minerva — Borrelli  maintains 
order— Mutiny  of  Farnese  regiment — Guardia  di  sicure%%a — Elections  and 
their  results  —  Inauguration  of  Parliament  —  Constitutional  amendment 
promised 69 


CHAPTER   V 

The  Fall  of  the  Carbonari 

Vendita  della  Pace — Carbonaro  demands — Disorder — Parties  in  Parliament — 
Analogy  with  Convention — Carbonari  dominate  Assembly — Parliamentary 
eloquence — Borrelli  and  Poerio — Legislative  trivialities — Ferdinand's  alarm 
— Pepe's  position  —  Carascosa — Plot  to  take  Palace  —  British  assistance — 
Ships  arrive — Campochiaro  asks  for  their  withdrawal — Metternich's  views 
— Unrest  at  Milan — Cariati's  mission  to  Vienna — Czar  declares  for  inter- 
vention— Metternich's  note  to  German  states — Austrian  armaments — 
Campochiaro  demands  explanation — Metternich  declines  to  receive  Gallo 
— Ferdinand  denounces  his  compulsion — Congress  of  Troppau — Alarm  of 
liberals — Russian  policy — Intervention  and  political  theories — Ferdinand 
invited  to  Laybach — Position  of  Great  Britain — Of  France — Her  mediation 
attempted — Laybach  proposal  before  Parliament  —  Answer  —  Permission 
obtained  for  journey- — Ferdinand  embarks — Parting  letter  to  Calabria — 
Resignation  of  Ministry — Zurlo — New  Ministry — Church  in  Sicily — F. 
Pepe's  expedition — Bad  state  of  army — Pepe  and  Carascosa — Finances — 
Feeling  at  New  Year — The  Duke  of  Calabria — Constitution  finished — 
Parliament  adjourned — Ferdinand  at  Laybach — Decisions  of  Congress — 
Received  at  Naples — Communicated  to  Parliament — Excitement — Assassi- 
nation of  Giampietro — Rossetti — Reaction — Duke  of  Calabria's  position — 
Military  measures — Guards  reviewed — Pepe  in  the  Abruzzi — His  forces — 
Austrian  advance  —  Fight  at  Rieti — Carascosa's  army  disbands — Last 
sittings  of  Parliament — Capua  surrendered — Fate  of  Silvati  and  Morelli — 
Escape  of  leaders — Revolution  in  Piedmont — Entry  of  Austrians  into 
Naples.         ............  103 


APPENDIX   A 
The  Miracle  of  San  Gennaro  .         .         .         .         .         .141 

APPENDIX   B 
Table  of  Measures  and  Moneys  .         .         .         .         -143 


viii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


APPENDIX   C 


PAGE 


I.  House  of  Bourbon  ;  II.  House  of  Bonaparte  ;  III.  The 

Hapsburg,  Bonaparte,  Bourbon  Alliances      .  .  •    H4 


APPENDIX   D 
Mary  Caroline's  Memoirs.  .  .  .  .  .         .   146 

APPENDIX   E 

Castlereagh's  Falsified  Dispatches     .         .         .  .  .146 

APPENDIX   F 

Ferdinand's  Proclamation,  1st  of  May   181 5       .         .         .150 

APPENDIX   G 

Treaty  of  the  Holy  Alliance  .         .         .         .         .         .152 

APPENDIX   H 
Carbonaro  Discourse 153 

APPENDIX    I 

Ferdinand's  Invitation  to  Laybach      .         .  .         .         -155 

APPENDIX   K 

Bibliography  for  the  Political  History  of  the  Kingdom  of 

Naples,  1805-1821 157 


INDEX 


223 


MAP 

Europe  after  the  Fall  of  Napoleon  .  .      To  face  page  i 


IX 


^PARTS 


^  ^ERXI^  R        U        S 


A  U   S    T   R    I  A  r^' 


PART   II 
THE  RISE  OF  THE  SECRET  SOCIETIES 


VOL.  II 


CHAPTER   I 


THE    RESTORATION 


Bourbon  restoration — Austro-Sicilian  alliance — Convention  of  Casa 
Lanza — Ferdinand's  proclamations — He  arrives  at  Naples — 
Moderate  conduct — Ferdinand's  marriage — New  conditions — 
Liberalism  and  Napoleon — Naples  and  France — Lazzaroni 
and  middle  class  —  Napoleonic  system  in  Naples  —  Constitu- 
tional legislation — Zurlo — Nationalization — Results  of  French 
rule — Constitutionalism — The  allies — Congress  of  Vienna — 
Austro- Neapolitan  secret  treaty  —  Holy  Alliance  —  Bourbon 
accessions — Secret  societies. 

The  Bourbon  restoration  of  1815  took  place  under 
circumstances  very  different  from  that  of  1799.  The 
sudden  disappearance  of  Napoleon  from  the  scene  dis- 
closed two  great  powers  in  European  politics:  public 
opinion  on  the  one  hand  ;  on  the  other  the  settled 
policy  of  a  school  of  statesmen  whose  doctrines  were 
those  of  benevolent  autocracy.  It  was  under  the 
restraining  influence  of  these  two  forces  that  Ferdinand 
returned  to  Naples. 

The  weightiest  external  pressure  on  the  Sicilian 
Court  was  that  of  Austria  as  represented  by  Prince 
Metternich.  During  the  sessions  of  the  Congress  of 
Vienna,  Ferdinand's  agents,  RufFo  and  Serracapriola, 
constantly  urged  his  claims  on  the  representatives  of 

3 


4  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  ii 

the  Powers.  Metternich's  influence  alone  had  long 
prevented  their  success.  But  on  the  rupture  of  rela- 
tions between  Austria  and  Naples,  a  month  before  the 
battle  of  Tolentino,  the  Austrian  Minister  had  com- 
pletely changed  his  attitude  and  adopted  a  position  that 
could  not  but  satisfy  Ferdinand.  The  Austrian  cam- 
paign against  Naples  was  frankly  declared  to  be  one 
of  annihilation  and  annexation,  exactly  as  that  of 
Napoleon  had  been  in  1806.  From  the  day  on 
which  diplomatic  relations  were  broken  off  the  kingly 
title  was  dropped,  and  the  occupant  of  the  throne 
of  Naples  became  known  to  Austrian  statesmen 
as  Marshal  Murat  once  more.  Metternich  at  once 
turned  to  Ruffo  and  to  Prince  Leopold  of  Sicily, 
then  present  in  Naples,  and  offered  them  a  treaty  of 
alliance,  which  was  quickly  agreed  ;  it  was  signed  on 
the  20th  of  April.  This  treaty  provided  for  the 
restoration  of  the  Bourbon  dynasty  to  the  throne, 
and  by  its  terms  30,000  Sicilian  troops  were  to  be 
employed  in  the  enterprise,  and  all  expenses  borne  by 
the  re-established  Government.  But  what  was  of  even 
greater  interest  in  this  treaty  was  that  it  contained 
stipulations  that  went  beyond  the  military  necessities 
of  the  case,  and  clearly  revealed  the  spirit  of  the  new 
era  just  dawning  on  Europe. 

The  Austrian  Government  expressly  required  that 
on  the  reinstatement  of  Ferdinand  there  should  be  no 
political  persecution,  that  all  sales  of  State  property 
made  by  the  late  Government  should  be  confirmed, 
that  the  obligations  of  the  public  debt  and  all  pensions 
should  be  met,  and  that  all  titles  of  honour  con- 
ferred by  Joseph  and  Joachim  should  be  recognised. 
The  terms  of  this  treaty  were  practically  embodied 
by  Bianchi   and   Neipperg    in  the  military  convention 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  5 

which  they  signed  with  Carascosa  and  Colletta  on  the 
20th  of  May.  The  additional  articles  of  that  con- 
vention provided,  among  other  things  :  that  there 
should  be  a  political  amnesty,  that  all  sales  of  public 
property  were  to  hold  good,  that  the  public  debt 
should  be  met,  and  that  all  native-born  soldiers  willing 
to  swear  allegiance  to  Ferdinand  were  to  retain  their 
rank,  honours,  and  pensions. 

These  guarantees  to  the  Neapolitan  nation  were 
confirmed,  repeated,  and  amplified  by  Ferdinand  from 
Palermo.  No  sooner  was  it  known  that  the  outbreak 
of  hostilities  between  Naples  and  Austria  once  more 
gave  hope  of  driving  the  intruding  king  from  the 
throne,  than  proclamations  were  hurriedly  issued 
announcing  to  the  credulous  Ferdinand's  unalterable 
benevolence  of  heart,  to  the  wise  his  feverish  anxiety  to 
reascend  his  throne.  "  I  promise,  in  the  most  solemn 
manner,  and  on  my  sacred  word,"  he  declared,  "  a 
most  complete,  most  extensive,  and  most  general 
amnesty,  and  eternal  forgiveness.  .  .  ."  Such  assur- 
ances, and  others  covering  the  clauses  of  the  Austrian 
treaty,  were  repeated  at  various  dates  through  May  ; 
towards  the  end  of  the  month,  when  Murat's  fall  was 
clearly  approaching,  Ferdinand  made  preparations  for 
returning  to  Naples.^ 

On  the  last  day  of  the  month  Ferdinand  set  sail. 
At    sea    his    ship    passed    the    Tremendous   conveying 

■^  There  seems  no  real  ground  for  believing  that  one  of  these  proclamations 
specifically  promised  a  constitution.  The  origin  of  the  statement,  copied  by  so  many 
modern  writers,  including  Cantu,  is  to  be  found  in  Pepe's  pamphlet  published  after 
his  banishment  in  1821  j  that  is,  six  years  after  the  event.  No  vi^riter  before  Pepe 
refers  to  it  ;  the  Austrian  and  British  representatives  and  statesmen  were  apparently 
unaware  of  it  5  there  is  no  trace  of  it  to  be  found  in  the  Bulletino  delle  leggi.  Sclopis 
pronounces  Pepe's  statement  an  invention  ;  but  Pepe  was  in  reality  only  placing  in 
print  what  he  had  heard  Borrelli  proclaim  in  the  Carbonaro  Parliament  in  his 
speech  of  the  8th  of  December  1820  j  see  Appendix  F. 


6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Caroline  Murat  to  Trieste,  and  was  greeted  with  a 
salute.  On  the  6th  of  June  he  arrived  at  Portici,  and 
was  once  more  in  sight  of  his  beloved  Naples. 

The  firmness  of  Caroline,  the  efforts  of  the  police 
and  civic  guards,  the  rapid  march  of  Neipperg*s 
cavalry,  had  fortunately  prevented  disorder  in  the 
capital.  Prince  Leopold  had  shown  affability  and  tact. 
When  speaking  of  Caroline  Murat  he  did  not  omit 
her  title  of  Queen,  and  he  treated  the  generals  of  the 
Neapolitan  army  with  the  utmost  courtesy.  Ferdinand 
followed  a  similar  line  of  conduct.  On  the  9th  of 
June  he  made  his  State  entry  into  the  capital,  a  some- 
what tame  and  uninspiring  ceremony  after  the  displays 
of  the  preceding  reign  ;  and  by  his  reception  of  the 
generals,  civil  administrators  and  nobles,  who  had  but 
lately  gathered  round  the  throne  of  Joachim,  he  in- 
stantly set  at  rest  the  last  surviving  fear  that  the 
Bourbon  restoration  would  be  marked  by  reaction, 
excess,  and  reprisals. 

To  many  this  moderation  appeared  due  to  the 
absence  from  Ferdinand's  side  of  Queen  Mary 
Caroline.  That  Princess  was  now  dead,  how  greatly 
to  the  relief  of  the  people  of  Naples  it  is  impossible 
to  describe,  how  greatly  to  that  of  Ferdinand  himself 
appeared  clearly  enough  from  the  fact  that  he  allowed 
less  than  two  months  to  elapse  before  filling  Mary 
Caroline's  vacant  place.  He  married,  morganatically, 
the  Princess  Partanna,  better  known  as  the  Duchess  of 
Floridia,  a  handsome,  pleasure-loving  woman,  with  no 
inclination  for  politics. 

To  those  who  were  able  to  view  facts  with  a  closer 
perception  than  the  majority,  it  was  evident  that  what 
was  now  happening  in  Naples  was  in  part  the  result 
of  a  profound  change  that  had  taken  place  in  Europe. 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  7 

While  the  eye  of  observers  had  been  fascinated  with 
the  movements  of  mighty  hosts  of  armed  men,  the 
national  elements  which  the  action  of  those  hosts  were 
fusing  had  escaped  observation.  The  tremendous 
national  feeling  of  democratic  patriotism  which  the 
Revolution  had  evoked  in  France,  was  now  loudly 
re-echoing  in  central  and  southern  Europe.  France 
for  the  moment  was  crushed,  her  neighbours  were 
triumphant,  and  triumphant  largely  by  means  of 
national  armies.  Nationalism  and  patriotism  were 
necessarily  coincident  with  the  individual  citizen's 
sentiment  of  forming  an  essential  part  of  the  com- 
munity, of  having  consequently  essential  rights  in  the 
adjustment  of  the  affairs  of  that  community.  **  The 
reaction  of  1813,"  wrote  that  very  acute  observer 
Gentz,  "  which  has  suspended  but  not  terminated  the 
revolutionary  movement  in  France,  has  aroused  it  in 
the  other  States." 

Only  the  surprising  rapidity  of  Napoleon's  fall  and 
the  utter  exhaustion  of  France  had  made  possible  the 
return  of  the  Bourbons.  No  sooner  were  they  back 
than  the  liberalism  which  Napoleon  had  bribed,  cajoled, 
and  disciplined  into  imperialism  reasserted  itself;  for 
his  return  to  the  throne  in  1 8 1 5  was  partly  a  military 
mutiny,  partly  a  liberal  revolution,  and  his  acts 
showed  that  he  thus  understood  it.  The  French 
nation  was  beginning  to  manifest  signs  of  having 
learned  political  wisdom,  and  the  Hundred  Days 
had  revealed  the  existence  of  a  party,  small  but  in- 
fluential and  well  defined,  of  moderate  and  progressive 
constitutionalists. 

Naples  had,  after  a  fashion,  followed  in  the  footsteps 
of  France.  But  she  was  far  less  advanced  in  political 
development,  and  the  Neapolitan  copies  of  the  French 


8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

institutions  were  essentially  alien.  The  soil  was  not 
prepared  and  not  suitable  for  the  institutions  that 
the  French  Republic  planted  in  Italy  in  1799.  The 
Parthenopean  Republic  was  the  faint,  far-off  echo 
of  the  formidable  national  upheaval  of  France.  The 
revolt  was  the  work  of  the  best  part  of  the  intelligence 
of  the  State  centred  in  a  group  of  professional  and 
educated  men,  whose  advancement  was  perpetually- 
barred  by  the  decrees  of  a  caste  government.  With 
the  true  Italian  facility  for  assimilation  and  imitation, 
they  absorbed  the  doctrines  of  the  marvellous  Republic, 
une  et  indivisible^  that  had  flashed  such  streams  of  hope 
into  the  hearts  of  the  unfortunate  and  oppressed 
humanity  of  Europe. 

But  at  Naples  republican  propaganda  had  followed 
precisely  the  reverse  course  to  that  which  it  had 
pursued  in  France.  There  the  middle-class  Jacobins 
had  for  a  time  directed  a  movement  of  which  the  real 
momentum  proceeded  from  below  them.  At  Naples 
the  lower  class,  or  the  people,  did  not  participate  in, 
and  in  fact  largely  helped  to  crush  the  Republic.  The 
Neapolitan  peasantry  represented  the  same  political 
factor  that  the  peasantry  of  the  western  provinces  did 
in  France.  Nationalism  was  unknown  to  them,  the 
Church  held  their  undivided  devotion,  and  occasionally 
even  their  Baron  associated  his  interests,  avocations, 
prejudices,  and  fears  with  theirs,  and  thus  became  their 
natural  leader.  The  lazzaroni  resembled  the  provincial 
masses  in  their  lack  of  national  feeling  and  in  their 
susceptibility  to  priest  guidance.  Their  only  constant 
political  sentiment  was  one  of  inveterate  enmity  to  the 
middle  class  of  Naples,  to  the  owners  of  money  close  at 
their  elbow.  Whatever  line  of  policy  the  middle  class 
of  Naples  might  follow  it  could  be  inferred  with  reason- 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  9 

able  certainty  that  the  lazzaroni  would  take  an  opposite 
view.  To  play  off  the  one  class  against  the  other  was 
traditionally  the  Bourbon  policy,  and  as  the  middle 
professional  class  and  some  part  of  the  aristocracy 
of  the  city  of  Naples  was  necessarily  in  favour  of 
enlightenment  and  progress,  it  followed  that  the 
king  and  the  lazzaroni  made  common  cause  against 
such  things. 

Later,  when  Ferdinand  was  driven  from  his  kingdom, 
and  his  sceptre  fell  into  the  keeping  of  a  Bona- 
parte, Naples  tasted  once  more  of  the  fruits  of  French 
political  evolution.  As  in  France,  so  in  Naples,  the 
system  of  civil  administration  framed  by  Napoleon 
was  applied  by  the  high  ruling  power  of  the  State. 
But  it  was  impossible  that  the  conditions  of  Naples 
could  immediately  be  unified  with  those  of  France. 
The  country  was  far  less  politically  advanced,  it  was 
for  some  time  in  a  state  of  war,  the  commanding  energy 
of  Napoleon  was  not  so  immediately  near  its  object. 
Following  the  centralizing  or  imperial  bent  of  his 
mind,  Napoleon  could  admit  of  no  variation  from  the 
universal  system  that  was  to  brigade  states  and  kingdoms 
together  just  as  the  conscription  law  brigaded  the  rich 
man  with  the  poor,  the  Catholic  with  the  Atheist  and  the 
Jew.  In  Naples  the  civil,  and  commercial,  and  criminal 
codes  of  the  new  Justinian  must  be  the  law.  In  Naples 
military,  judicial,  administrative  hierarchies  must  spread 
their  ramifications  from  the  exalted  functionaries  sup- 
porting the  throne  down  to  every  hamlet  of  the 
kingdom,  seizing  every  and  each  individual  in  their 
machinery,  watching  his  every  action,  appropriating  his 
service  to  the  State,  showing  him,  however  lowly  born, 
a  long  vista  of  promotions,  of  rewards,  of  honours,  if 
his  capacities  were  equal  to  serving  the  State  and  his 


10  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

own  interests.  Something  of  the  process  whereby  the 
institutions  of  Naples  were  revolutionized  under  Joseph 
and  Joachim  has  been  related  in  former  chapters,  and 
need  not  be  returned  to  here  ;  but  some  of  the  broader 
aspects  deserve  closer  examination. 

The  Napoleonic  codes  of  law,  though  of  French 
origin,  were  less  alien  to  the  people  of  southern  Italy 
than  the  Napoleonic  system  of  administration.  For 
not  only  were  the  codes  based  on  the  Roman  law  and, 
in  that  sense,  Italian  in  spirit,  but  they  cleared  away  a 
judicial  chaos  that  had  grown  nearly  past  all  use.  But 
in  the  field  of  administration  the  partial  attempt  made 
to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  Bayonne  constitu- 
tional statute  in  1809  and  18 10  had  for  a  moment 
suggested  the  possibility  of  the  construction  of  a 
political  fabric  less  in  accord  with  French  than  with 
Italian  traditions. 

The  system  of  administration  introduced  had  taken 
as  its  lowest  or  primary  unit  the  Universita.  But  the 
little  walled  villages  and  towns,  governed  by  their 
syndic  and  decurionato^  were  the  direct  inheritors  of 
the  traditions  that  had  been  factors  in  the  creation 
of  the  mediaeval  republics  and  that  drew  their  origin 
from  the  Latin  municipium.  An  administrative  system 
working  downwards,  and  making  of  the  syndics  with 
their  subordinates  the  lowest  rungs  of  the  ladder  of  the 
bureaucratic  hierarchy,  would  tend  towards  the  central- 
ization that  was  Napoleon's  chief  end  of  government.^ 
But  if,  taking   the  Universita,  perhaps  the  strongest 

^  A  discussion  of  the  defects  of  the  centralizing  system  appears  unnecessary  here. 
The  American  or  English  reader  hardly  requires  much  persuasion  on  this  point.  It 
would  be  in  any  case  a  somewhat  ungrateful  task  to  follow  Taine  on  ground  he  has 
so  thoroughly  explored.  His  paradoxical  conclusion  may  be  recalled  that  all  that 
centralization  had  accomplished  for  France  has  been  to  improve  the  dramatic, 
conversational,  and  culinary  arts  !   (Taine,  Voyage  en  Italie^  i.  loi). 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  ii 

and  most  living  of  all  Neapolitan  political  organisms, 
as  a  starting-point,  Italian  intellects  had  had  the 
opportunity  to  build  upwards,  what  a  different  result 
might  have  been  attained.  From  the  Universita  to  the 
district,  from  the  district  to  the  province,  from  the 
province  to  the  State,  from  the  State  to  the  Italian 
confederation, — there  was  an  ideal  directly  in  touch 
with  tradition,  directly  in  touch  with  the  best  spirit 
of  Italian  politics.  And  it  is  precisely  that  spirit 
that  may  be  traced  in  the  work  of  that  small  group 
of  able  Neapolitan  jurists  and  administrators  who  sup- 
ported Joachim,  in  such  men  as  Zurlo  and  Ricciardi, 
Dragonetti  and  Winspeare.  The  legislation  of  1809 
and  1 8 10,  although  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  terms 
of  the  constitutional  statute  of  Bay onne,  appears  to  have 
been  an  attempt  on  their  part  to  add  to  the  Universita 
a  higher  provincial  organization  capable  of  being  de- 
veloped by  men  used  to  the  practical  autonomy  of 
the  Universita  into  a  body  for  local  self-government. 
That  represented  wise  and  constructive  legislation  on 
an  Italian  and  not  on  a  French  basis. 

How  the  public  apathy  and  the  political  timidity 
of  the  provinces  defeated  the  liberal  tendencies  of  the 
government  has  already  been  related.  Yet  some 
measure  of  interest  in  public  affairs  had  been  created  : 
the  manner  in  which  that  interest,  acted  on  by  the 
timidity  just  alluded  to,  found  expression,  will  appear 
presently. 

The  tendencies  just  discussed  were  not,  however, 
those  that  appeared  on  the  surface  of  things.  The 
chief  outward  result  of  the  French  rule  at  Naples  was  p 
undoubtedly  the  formation  of  what  might  be  described 
as  the  appearances  of  nationalism.  The  great  factor 
in  this  transformation  had  been  military.     The  constant 


12  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

wars  and  the  raising  of  a  large  army  had  opened  up 
the  country.  Men  had  moved  from  one  province  to 
another,  had  fought  under  the  same  flag,  had  found 
comrades  in  men  of  other  districts.  The  Abruzzeze 
and  the  Calabrese,  the  Pugliese  and  the  Napoletano,  had 
marched  through  France  and  Spain,  through  Germany 
and  Austria,  side  by  side,  companions  at  the  bivouac 
and  on  the  battlefield.  In  May  1815  Desvernois  had 
over  23,000  civic  guards  of  Calabria  in  camp  together 
at  one  time  ;  and  the  100,000  men  that  made  up 
the  total  of  the  Neapolitan  armed  forces  in  that  year 
were  a  truly  national  army.  They  represented  i  in 
50  of  the  population.  In  the  army,  as  in  other 
branches  of  the  service  of  the  State,  promotion  had 
been  opened  freely  to  all,  and  many  men  of  the  middle 
and  some  of  the  lower  class  had  risen  high,  i 

On  the  results  of  the  French  rule  at  Naples  three 
soldiers,  one  a  Dutchman,  the  other  two  Neapolitans, 
expressed  the  following  .  opinions.  De  Dedem,  who 
was  personally  hostile  to  Murat,  declared  that  he  was 
the  first  King  of  Naples  who  had  tried  to  improve 
the  kingdom.  Colletta  was  of  opinion  that  religious 
sentiment  and  morality  had  been  weakened  under  the 
French  rule,  and  that  the  feeling  towards  royalty  had 
changed  ;  there  was  no  longer  so  much  loyalty,  but  fear 
and  calculation  of  interest.  Pepe  declared  :  "  We  had 
made  more  progress  on  this  side  of  the  Strait  within 
the  space  of  ten  years,  than  our  ancestors  had  done 
in  three  centuries."  ^ 

If  this  was  the  case  in  that  remote,  most  un- 
enlightened corner  of  the  Continent,  how  much  more 
progress  had  been  accomplished  by  the  people  of  more 
advanced  countries  !     So  true  was  the  saying  of  Gentz 

1  Pepe,  Menti.  ii.  115. 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  13 

just  quoted,  so  general  the  movement  towards  liberal 
methods  of  government,  that  those  who  attacked  the 
French  Empire  had  constantly  appealed  to  national 
sentiments ;  and  Napoleon's  defeat  in  Spain  exactly- 
coincided  with  the  formation  of  a  constitutional  govern- 
ment. No  sooner  had  the  Empire  fallen  than  a  strong 
liberal  movement  developed  in  Germany.  Prussia  was 
agitated  by  the  demand  for  popular  representation ;  in 
Baden,  Wurtemberg,  and  Bavaria  constitutions  were 
established  in  the  course  of  a  few  years. 

The  popular  and  national  movement  was  one  great 
factor  in  Europe,  but  alongside  of  it  was  another. 
The  anti- Napoleonic  wars  had  concentrated  in  the 
hands  of  a  group  of  sovereigns  and  statesmen  vast 
military  armaments,  the  prestige  of  victory,  and  the 
strong  support  of  the  mercantile,  productive,  and 
wealthy  classes  of  the  Continent.  These  monarchs 
and  statesmen  had  been  taught  at  the  school  of 
adversity.  For  many  years  they  had  suffered  humilia- 
tion and  defeat,  and  they  had  recognised  in  some  of 
the  agencies  turned  against  them  by  Napoleon  new 
political  forces  that  might  be  employed  without  danger 
to  their  throne.  From  the  standpoint  of  1780  their 
views  were  progressive,  from  that  of  1 8 1 5  they  were 
retrograde.  Theirs  was  the  power  and  theirs  was 
the  divine  right,  yet  they  were  prepared  to  admit  that 
the  interests  of  the  people  were  a  matter  for  proper 
consideration  ;  they  saw  that  the  prosperity  of  a  country 
made  the  strength  of  its  government.  They  recog- 
nized the  utility  of  employing  the  best  intellects  in  their 
service,  and  that  equality  before  the  law  was  a  necessary 
concession.  But  from  such  a  point  of  view  to  that 
of  the  constitutional  and  nationalist  parties  in  France, 
Germany,  and  Italy  there  was  a  wide  gulf. 


14  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

The  monarchical  conception  of  territorial  division 
was  still  a  purely  proprietary  one,  as  was  shown  in  the 
deliberations  and  decisions  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna. 
There  was  no  attempt  made  to  disguise  the  fact  that 
spoliation  was  considered  the  legitimate  reward  of 
victory,  and  spoliation  nearly  invariably  took  the  form 
of  parcelling  out  to  the  victors  territory  of  which  the 
size  was  computed  by  the  number  of  souls.  Thus 
Joachim  had  stipulated  for  an  increase  of  400,000  souls 
in  return  for  his  co-operation  in  18 14.  This  system 
of  politics  aroused  the  bitter  denunciations  of  the  small 
liberal  group  that  already  represented  the  growing 
conscience  of  Europe.^ 

Of  all  the  statesmen  assembled  at  the  Congress  the 
foremost  in  ability  was  Prince  Metternich,  and  he 
showed  from  the  first  a  decided  intention  of  opposing 
the  constitutional  movement.  Even  before  Waterloo 
had  sealed  the  fate  of  the  Empire  he  had  entered 
into  a  secret  compact  with  Ferdinand  binding  him 
not  to  concede  liberal  reforms.  The  clause  was  as 
follows : — 

As  the  engagements  entered  into  by  the  present  treaty  by 
their  Majesties  to  insure  the  internal  peace  of  Italy  impose  on 
them  the  duty  of  preserving  their  respective  states  and  subjects 
from  new  reactions  and  from  the  danger  of  imprudent  inno- 
vations that  might  renew  them,  it  is  understood  between  the 
high  contracting   parties   that   H.M.   the  King  of  the  Two 

1  As,  for  instance,  by  B6ranger  : 

Des  potentats,  dans  vos  cit^s  en  flammes, 
Osent  du  bout  de  leur  sceptre  insolent 
Marquer,  compter  et  recompter  les  ames 
Que  leur  adjuge  un  triomphe  sanglant. 
Faible  troupeaux,  vous  passez  sans  defense, 
D'un  joug  pesant  sous  un  joug  inhumain. 
Peuples,  formez  une  sainte  alliance 
Et  donnez  vous  la  main. 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  15 

Sicilies,  in  re-establishing  the  government  of  his  kingdom,  will 
admit  no  change  that  could  not  be  brought  into  Hne  either 
with  the  ancient  monarchical  institutions  or  with  the  principles 
adopted  by  H.  Imp.  and  Apost.  M.  for  the  internal  administra- 
tion of  his  Italian  provinces. 

But  the  most  remarkable  manifestation  of  the  policy 
that  was  to  dominate  the  affairs  of  the  Continent  for 
the  following  third  of  a  century  was  that  most  extra- 
ordinary of  the  diplomatic  documents  of  modern 
European  history,  the  treaty  of  the  Holy  Alliance. 
This  famous  treaty  was  signed  on  the  26  th  of  Sep- 
tember 1 8 15. 

As  the  keen  eye  of  the  trained  observer  may  detect 
on  an  ancient  parchment  the  faint  trace  or  faded  colour 
of  an  earlier  writing  concealed  under  a  newer  and  more 
obvious  imprint,  so  beneath  the  mystical  and  religious 
phraseology  in  which  the  Holy  Alliance  was  ratified 
the  student  of  history  may  trace  many  curiously  faded 
and  distorted  characters  of  a  more  remote  age.  The 
influence  of  Jean  Jacques  Rousseau,  of  Freemasonry,  of 
the  Martinists,  and  of  German  Illuminism,  may  all  be 
easily  detected,  and  so  curious  and  suggestive  was  its 
language  that  Swedenborgian  enthusiasts  even  managed 
to  read  into  it  a  renunciation  of  the  Athanasian  Creed  ! 
The  monarchs  inscribed  in  it  their  reasoned  version 
of  the  humanitarian  paeans  that  had  resounded  at  the 
eventful  birth  of  the  French  Republic.  The  phraseo- 
logy was  a  little  changed,  the  sincerity  was  of  a  some- 
what less  combustible  quality,  the  presiding  goddess  was 
no  longer  Liberty  but  Madame  de  Kriidener.  It  was 
diplomacy's  day  of  youthful  romance. 

That  the  Czar  Alexander,  following  the  advice  of  his 
mystical  politico-religious  guide  Madame  de  Kriidener, 
believed  implicitly  in  every  sentiment  of  benevolence, 


i6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

religion,  and  duty  enounced  in  the  treaty  is  probable  ; 
that  Metternich  clearly  grasped  its  utility  for  his  poli- 
tical purposes  is  certain.  From  the  point  of  view  of 
that  statesman  it  was  probably  not  very  material  that  the 
alliance  was  expressed  to  be  made  in  the  name  of  the 
"  very  holy  and  indivisible  Trinity  "  ;  that  the  mutual 
policy  of  the  signatory  princes  was  declared  to  be  based 
"  on  the  sublime  truths  taught  by  the  eternal  religion 
of  God  our  Saviour"  ;  that,  "  conformably  to  the  words 
of  Holy  Scripture,  whereby  all  men  are  ordered  to  be 
brothers,  the  three  signing  monarchs  shall  be  tied  in  the 
bonds  of  true  and  indissoluble  fraternity  '*  ;  that  in 
these  monarchs  were  concentrated  "  all  the  treasures 
of  love,  of  knowledge,  and  of  infinite  Wisdom,  that  is 
of  God,  our  divine  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  the  Almighty 
Word,  the  Word  of  Life  ; '' — the  declaration  of  the 
rights  of  man  had  been  supplanted  by  the  declaration 
of  the  rights  of  kings.  These  utterances  might  be  of 
deep  import  to  the  Czar  Alexander,  to  the  Emperor 
Francis,  to  King  Frederick  William,  and  to  Madame 
de  Kriidener  ;  also  to  some  part  of  the  general  public, 
especially  among  the  mystics  of  Germany.  But  to 
Metternich  what  was  of  greater  importance  was  the  prac- 
tical line  of  policy  embodied  in  the  treaty,  and  that  was  not 
difficult  to  recognise.  The  monarchs  bound  themselves 
to  afford  one  another  "  assistance,  help,  and  succour  "  ; 
declared  that  their  power  was  of  divine  origin,  and  their 
wisdom  that  of  the  Deity.  These  provisions  were 
nothing  less  than  a  charter  of  European  police  for  the 
benefit  of  the  established  sovereignties  of  Europe.  The 
adhesion  of  the  other  Powers  was  invited  to  this  treaty, 
and  it  is  matter  for  reflection  that  only  Great  Britain, 
the  Pope,  and  the  Sultan  could  find  reasons,  though  not 
identical,  for  withholding  their  concurrence. 


CHAP.  I  THE  RESTORATION  17 

Among  the  earliest  accessions  to  the  treaty  of  the 
Holy  Alliance  were  those  of  the  Bourbon  sovereigns, 
and  thus  Naples  was  soon  tied  by  a  double  treaty  to 
a  system  of  political  immobility.  The  national  and 
liberal  movement  evoked  by  the  destruction  of  the 
feudal  organism,  and  its  replacing  by  a  modern  con- 
ception of  State  entity,  had  provoked  political  thought, 
had  raised  a  tide  of  political  hope  and  ambition.  But 
the  monarchs  of  Europe  had  leagued  together  to  deny 
popular  rights,  to  aid  one  another  in  suppressing  them. 
So  at  Naples,  as  elsewhere,  the  people,  weary  with  the 
long  effort  of  the  cycle  of  wars  brought  in  by  the 
French  Revolution,  unprovided  with  leaders,  unaccus- 
tomed to  guide  themselves,  fell  for  the  moment  into 
the  quiet  path  of  rest  and  submission. 

It  was,  however,  to  be  but  for  a  moment.  Under 
the  surface  a  stream  of  ideas  circulated.  Within  the 
large  circle  of  the  secret  societies  the  germ  of  revolution 
was  swelling.  The  British  Ambassador  wrote  to  his 
Court  immediately  after  the  execution  of  Joachim 
Murat :  "  An  immense  number  of  secret  societies, 
known  by  the  denomination  of  Carbonari,  exist  all 
over  the  kingdom  .  .  .  and  may  at  any  time  be  made 
the  instruments  of  revolution."  ^  The  Carbonari  have 
been  more  than  once  mentioned  in  these  pages  ;  an 
examination  of  their  antecedents  and  constitution  can 
no  longer  be  deferred. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Soc.  Patria,  D' Ambrosia  MS.;  see  vol.  i.  p.  349. 
Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily^  70  ;  a  Court's  dispatches. 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Nov.  9,  1815,  For.  Off.  Sicily.,  70. 
VOL.  II  C 


1 8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Printed  Books 

Angeberg,  D',  Trait/s :  Atti  relati'vi  air  inter'vento ;  Bignon,  Les 
cabinets  et  les  peuples }  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-15  j  CantIt,  Cronistoria  ; 
Castlereagh,  Dispatches;  Colletta,  Storia ,-  De  Dedem,  Mems. ;  Des- 
VERNois,  Mems. ;  Helfert,  Murat ;  Metternich,  Mems. ;  Neumann, 
Recueil ;  Palmieri,  Saggio  storico ;  Palmieri,  Sowvenirs ;  Pepe,  Mems. ; 
Pepe,  Relation;  Sassenay,  Guet-apens. 


CHAPTER   II 

ORIGIN    AND    RITES    OF    THE    CARBONARI 

Secret  associations  in  history — Religious  societies — Influence  in 
political  movements  —  Political  thought  and  symbolism  — 
Antiquity  of  symbolism — Its  varying  forms — Reproduction 
wrorship^ — Philosophical  symbolism  —  Political  symbolism  — 
Soladitates,  early  Christians,  Eleusinian  mysteries — Mafia — 
Vendicosi,  Beati  Paoli — Templars — Reformation,  Albigenses, 
Cathari,  Paulicians,  Patarini,  Waldenses — Maestri  Perfetti — 
Jacques  Bonhomme — Cathari  in  Naples — Adombrados — Rosi- 
.crucians— Alchemysts,  Rosenkreutz,  Diirer — Doctrine  of  poli- 
tical equality — Doctrines  of  Luther  and  Rousseau — Trade  guilds 
— Conciarotti,  Neapolitan  fraternities,  Vehmgericht — Compa- 
gnonage,  Chauffeurs,  Charbonnerie — Masonic  legends — Ancient 
guilds  of  Masons — Florentine  Lodge  of  the  Trowel — Masonry 
at  Naples  —  French  Masonry  —  Amis  reunis  —  Illumines  — 
Charbonnerie — Marquis  de  Champagne — Philadelphes — Other 
army  associations — Republicanism  during  the  Empire — Lecchi 
. — Societies  at  Naples — Origin  of  Carbonari — Lodge  at  Capua 
—  Murat  and  the  secret  societies — Hereditary  Prince  joins 
Carbonari — -Polypus  of  societies — Doctrines  of  Carbonari — 
Initiation  of  apprentices — Discourse  of  orator — St.  Theobald — 
Symbols  interpreted — Passwords  and  signs — Statutes  of  Repub- 
blica  Lucana — Assassination — Initiation  of  master — Origin  of 
ceremony — Conclusion — Political  cowardice. 

As  a  rule,  movements  against  an  irksome  tyranny  of 
government,  whether  embracing  few  or  many  indi- 
viduals, have  of  necessity  taken  the  form  of  an  associa- 
tion, and  ai-med  ^vt  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  secrecy. 

19 


20  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Secret  associations  are  therefore  more  frequently  met 
with  in  those  ages  in  which  tyrannical  forms  of  govern-  \J 
ment  predominate.  Nearly  all  successful  political  con- 
spiracies recorded  in  history  may  in  a  way  be  said  to 
have  been  the  work  of  secret  associations,  and  generally 
of  associations  formed  for  a  particular  purpose,  and 
dissolved  on  its  accomplishment.  But  alongside  of 
these  ephemeral  associations  have  been  others,  some 
having  chiefly  a  religious  or  mystical  purpose,  others 
closely  connected  with  the  application  of  the  principle 
of  mutual  help.  The  origin  of  the  latter  class  may  be 
said  to  be  as  ancient  as  that  of  the  former,  for  both 
are  of  immemorial  antiquity. 

From  this  very  antiquity  of  many  secret  societies 
has  arisen  a  somewhat  inaccurate  view  as  to  the  con- 
tinuity of  their  specific  aims  and  actions.  More  than 
one  writer  has  represented  the  Freemasons,  the  Illuminati> 
or  the  Carbonari,  as  long-applied  forces  that  have  helped 
to  produce  certain  political  movements  by  a  persistent  ^ 
pursuit  of  their  secret  doctrines.  The  truth  is,  how- 
ever, that  these  societies  were  never  more  than  the  con- 
venient vehicle  of  a  movement,  not  to  be  mistaken  for  '^ 
the  movement  itself ;  and  if  the  outward  form  of  the 
society  remained  unchanged  for  long  periods  it  did  not 
follow  that  the  political  thought  that  sheltered  behind 
it  had  not  in  the  same  space  of  time  gone  through  far- 
reaching  modifications. 

To  understand  the  political  thought  that  was  con- 
cealed behind  the  mystic  rites  of  the  Carbonari,  it  is 
idle  to  explore  their  traditional  mediaeval  origin,  for  the 
political  facts  of  the  period  at  which  they  flourished 
will  be  a  perfectly  suflicient  guide  to  the  opinions  of 
their  society.  On  the  other  hand,  to  understand  the 
forms,  the  symbolism,  and  the  mysticism  that  enveloped 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  21 

their  political  thought,  it  will  be  necessary  to  glance 
back  for  a  period  of  some  centuries  at  the  long  chain  of 
the  secret  associations,  at  the  long  train  of  speculation 
that  links  modern  Italy  with  the  earliest  Mediterranean 
and  central  European  civilization. 

When  considering  the  national  characteristics  of  the 
Neapolitan  people  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  work 
stress  was  laid  on  the  remote  antiquity  of  many 
traditional  modes  of  thought  among  them.  In  con- 
sidering the  external  forms  taken  by  the  Society  of  the 
Carbonari  the  connection  of  the  traditions  of  modern 
Naples  with  those  of  ancient  days  must  be  similarly 
emphasized. 

The  ever-present  curiosity  of  man  to  fathom  the 
unknown  agencies  that  surround  him  has  immemorially 
been  fed  by  the  presentation  to  him  of  more  or  less 
plausible  or  arbitrary  explanations  of  the  mysteries  of 
nature.  Such  explanations  when  widely  accepted,  or 
mercilessly  enforced,  might  attain  to  the  dignity  of  a 
religious  system,  and  by  long-continued  tradition  and 
the  custom  of  ages  become  a  considerable  factor  in  the 
affairs  of  the  world. 

The  greatest  of  the  natural  mysteries  is  perhaps  that 
of  the  reproduction  of  species  ;  it  is  also  one  of  the  most 
obvious  and  the  most  interesting  to  man  in  his  least 
civilized  state.  This  mystery  was  among  those  that 
received  the  earliest  attentions  of  speculative  intellect, 
and  the  primitive  religious  systems  of  India  and  of  the 
Mediterranean  played  on  the  curious  ignorance  of  their 
devotees  by  furnishing  them  with  ceremonies,  festivals, 
and  symbols  expressive  of  the  miracle  of  generation 
and  the  continuity  of  the  race.  Symbolism  was  the 
only  thinkable  means  whereby  what  was  admittedly  a 
mystery  could  be  represented  for  purposes  of  worship. 


•' 


22  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

The  most  remarkable,  most  generally  found,  and  most 
direct  example  of  this  symbolic  interpretation  of  the 
unknown  agencies  was  that  which  called  man's  reverence 
to  the  eternal  fecundity  of  nature.  It  will  serve  to 
show  the  persistence  of  symbolism  if  the  fact  be  noted 
that  though  phallic  symbols  are  among  the  earliest  we 
have  any  knowledge  of,  yet  they  survive  to  the  present 
day.  In  an  earlier  chapter  it  was  mentioned  that  the 
Neapolitan  women  until  recent  times  were  accustomed 
to  wear  about  their  necks,  when  expecting  childbirth, 
small  bags  containing  so-called  relics  of  St.  Come, 
— in  reality,  small  Priapi.  Another  instance  may  be 
found  in  many  of  the  lamps  lighting  an  image  of  the 
Virgin  placed  at  the  head  of  beds  in  Italy  to  the 
present  day  ;  whether  by  coincidence  or  survival, 
these  lamps  may  occasionally  be  seen  taking  the 
old  familiar  columnar  form,  and  doubtless  represent 
the  god  that  presided  over  the  Roman  conjugal 
couch. 

Most  crude,  most  simple,  most  direct  was  this  repre- 
sentation of  a  mysterious  agency  ;  but  as  civilization 
grew,  as  the  intellect  of  Greece,  of  Rome,  of  Europe 
advanced,  symbolism  became  less  direct,  more  com- 
plicated, more  diffused.  Even  philosophy  could  not 
resist  its  charm,  and  its  convenience  ;  the  Neoplatonists 
in  one  age,  the  Neapolitan  Vico  in  another,  demon- 
strated that  philosophy  no  less  than  religion  could  be 
allied  with  symbolism, — showed,  in  fact,  that  philo- 
sophies and  religions  might  perish,  but  symbolism  yet 
survive.  A  period  in  which  the  natural  processes  of 
nature  were  the  chief  subject  of  symbolic  representation 
was  followed  by  others  in  which  the  abstract  theories  of 
philosophy,  or  the  artificial  doctrines  of  religion,  were 
similarly   treated.      When   we   come   to  consider   the 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  23 

symbolism  prevailing  in  southern  Italy  during  the  early 
part  of  the  nineteenth  century  we  shall  find  it  devoted  / 
to  the  purpose  of  cloaking  from  the  curious  and  of 
expounding  to  the  initiated  the  political  doctrines 
launched  on  the  world  by  the  action  of  the  French 
Revolution. 

Alongside  of  the  religious  and  philosophical  sym- 
bolism of  Italy,  of  which  the  ancient  descent  and  per- 
sistence have  been  sufficiently  suggested,  a  far-reaching 
chain  of  secret  associations  having  mutual  help,  political, 
or  merely  criminal,  objects,  may  be  traced  back  for  y 
many  centuries.  For  the  present  purpose  it  will  be 
better  not  to  carry  this  survey  back  beyond  the  Middle 
Ages,  though  in  the  trade  guilds  and  other  associations 
of  the  Roman  Empire,  in  the  secret  assemblies  of  the 
early  Christians,  in  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  and  in 
other  sources,  might  be  traced  influences  that  helped 
to  give  its  outward  form  to  the  society  of  the 
Carbonari. 

In  Sicily  we  find  that  the  modern  society  of  the 
Mafia,  an  illegal  and  criminal  association,  has  a  direct 
ancestry  that  may  be  traced  for  nearly  a  thousand 
years.  In  the  twelfth  century  a  secret  association  arose 
in  the  island  known  as  the  Vendicosi,  their  name 
suggesting  that  they  may  have  been  akin  in  their  object 
to  the  German  Vehmgericht.  The  Vendicosi  were 
followed  by  the  Beati  Paoli,  whose  traces  may  be  found 
as  late  as  the  eighteenth  century.  To  the  south  of 
Sicily,  in  the  island  of  Malta,  secret  association  and 
symbolism  flourished.  The  Knights  of  St.  John 
derived  many  of  their  secret  rites  and  mysteries  from 
the  East,  and  there  may  be  traced  some  similarity 
of  organization  and  teaching  between  them  and  the 
Assassins  with  whom  the  Crusades  had  brought  them 


24  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

into  contact.  The  symbolism  in  vogue  among  the 
Knights  of  Malta  made  its  influence  felt  at  Naples.^ 

The  Templars  were  unquestionably  unorthodox  in 
matters  of  faith,  and  their  secret  practices  were  doubt- 
less, to  a  certain  extent,  intended  to  veil  this  unortho- 
doxy.  They  did  not  stand  alone  in  that  respect. 
Dissent  from  the  Roman  doctrines  and  the  Roman 
authority  was  as  wide-spread  in  the  centuries  that  pre- 
ceded the  Reformation  as  in  that  in  which  the  Pro- 
testants secured  their  independence,  although  not  so 
successfully  proclaimed.  In  the  unorthodox  societies  of 
the  Middle  Ages  such  as  those  of  the  Albigenses,  the 
Cathari,  the  Paulicians,  the  Patarini,  the  Waldenses 
and  others,  dissenters  from  Roman  authority  just  as  the 
^  early  Christians  had  been,  may  be  traced  many  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  secret  societies  of  a  later  day. 

Comparing  the  Perfecti  of  the  Cathari  and  the  secret 
society  of  the  Maestri  Perfetti  of  a  later  day,  we  may 
be  entitled  to  claim,  at  all  events,  a  traditional  reminis- 
cence, which  is  strengthened  when  we  find  occurring 
in  the  rites  of  initiation  of  the  latter  a  political  senti- 
ment and  a  quaint  and  picturesque  phrase  used  by  the 
Albigenses  in  a  similar  way  some  600  years  before. 
In  a  speech  made  to  the  candidate  for  initiation  to  the 

^  A  similarity  between  one  of  the  Carbonaro  rites  of  initiation  and  one  of  the 
Templars  will  be  noted  in  due  course.  The  Cimarufa,  the  favourite  charm  of  the 
Neapolitans,  is  probably  a  perverted  form  of  a  Templar  symbol ;  it  is  generally  a 
small  silver  ornament  representing  a  key,  a  crescent  moon  enclosing  a  man's  face,  and 
several  clusters  of  leaves  of  rue.  Many  varieties  of  this  ornament  are  to  be  found, 
among  which  not  a  few  in  which  instead  of  leaves  of  rue  four  feet  appear.  In  its 
early  Neapolitan  form  it  doubtless  was  connected  with  the  worship  of  Diana,  a 
favourite  goddess  of  those  parts  ;  but  an  emblem  often  met  with  at  Malta  has  a 
similar  form  and  can  be  closely  associated  with  the  secret  practices  for  which  the 
Templars  were  condemned, — the  worship  of  Baphomet  in  the  guise  of  a  bearded 
head  with  four  feet.  The  accusation  against  the  Templars  says  :  Dictum  caput  habet 
quattuor  pedes  duos  ante  ex  parte  faciei,  et  duos  retro, — precisely  this  arrangement  has 
been  noted  in  one  Maltese  specimen,  but  the  variations  between  this  and  the  typical 
Neapolitan  Cimaruta  are  endless. 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  25 

Maestri  Perfetti  the  wrongs  suffered  by  the  people 
of  Italy  were  recited,  and  the  following  sentence  was 
used  :  *.  .  .  dopo  aver  ruinato  T  edificio  delle  Romane 
leggi  fino  al  punto  di  stabilire  le  infame  prove  del- 
r  acqua  e  dell'  fuoco^  il  vergognoso  diritto  di  cuissage,  e 
fino  a  distinguerli  colF  obbrobriosa  frase  di  Jacques  le 
bonhomme  qui  pleure  et  qui  paie.  .   .  /  ^ 

The  Albigenses  not  only  employed  the  expression 
Bonhomme  or  Bonshomme^  but  made  use  of  a  system 
of  secret  signs  or  passwords.  The  Cathari,  who  were 
closely  allied  to  them  in  doctrine  and  method,  em- 
ployed practices  even  now  not  unknown.  Their  initia- 
tion ceremonies  opened  with  the  reading  of  the  first 
eighteen  verses  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  "  In  the 
beginning  was  the  Word  .  .  ^ — which  is  still  practised 
in  some  forms  of  modern  masonry  ;  and  it  may  further 
be  noted  that  the  Cathari,  though  strongest  in  northern 
Italy,  obtained  a  considerable  following  in  Naples  and 
Calabria. 

A  somewhat  similar  sect,  the  adomhrados  of  Spain, 
followed  the  teaching  of  Lully  of  Majorca.^  They 
may  serve  as  a  convenient  connecting  link  with  the 
Rosicrucians  and  lUuminati  of  France  and  Germany. 
The  Rosicrucians  had  two  periods  of  existence,  one  at 
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  other 
towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth.     In  the  first  their 

^  From  a  manuscript  copy  of  the  rites  of  the  Maestri  Perfetti  in  Brit.  Foreign 
Off.,  Sicily,  92,  .  .  .  "after  having  destroyed  the  edifice  of  the  Roman  law  to 
the  point  of  establishing  the  infamous  trials  by  water  and  by  fire,  the  shameful 
right  of  cuissage,  and  finally  in  marking  him  by  the  opprobrious  phrase  of 
Jacques  le  bonhomme  who  weeps  and  who  pays.  ..."  A  note  on  the  margin  of 
this  MS.  gives  the  date  of  the  society  as  1811,  but  it  does  not  appear  possible 
that  it  should  be  placed  any  earlier  than  18 16,  while  1820  is  a  far  more  probable 
date. 

^  Not  Raymond  Lully  the  alchemist.  The  Spanish  adomhrados,  or  illuminati, 
were  mystics,  and  approached  the  Molinists  in  doctrine.  Loyola  was  suspected  of 
holding  their  views.     They  were  stamped  out  by  the  Inquisition. 


26  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

society  was  closely  allied  to  the  wave  of  thought  in 
which  alchemy  played  a  prominent  part,  and  in  which 
symbolism  was  more  than  ever  before  employed  to 
interpret  mysteries  too  obscure  for  comprehension 
without  its  aid.-^  German  symbolism  found  its  extreme 
expressions  in  the  alchemysts  in  one  direction  and  in 
Albrecht  Diirer  in  another.  In  the  Chymische  Hochzeit 
of  Christian  Rosenkreutz,  a  curious  and  important  work, 
may  be  traced  a  distinct  descent  of  thought  from  the 
doctrines  so  unmercifully  suppressed  in  Provence  by 
the  Roman  Church  when  it  destroyed  the  Albigenses. 
For  the  doctrine  of  political  equality  that  was  to  be  the 
great  means  of  propaganda  of  the  French  Revolution 
and  the  inspiring  spring  of  many  of  the  secret  societies 
of  a  later  period  is  here  clearly  enunciated. 

The  seventeenth-century  Rosicrucians  were  deeply  im- 
bued with  Lutheranism,  and  even  among  the  alchemysts 
there  appears  to  have  been  little  disposition  to  free 
thought.  They  made  of  the  cross  their  chief  symbol  :  ^ 
with  the  rose  placed  at  the  intersection  of  the  arms  it 
was  held  to  represent  Christ  raised  for  the  volatization 
of  the  four  elements.  It  will  serve  to  illustrate  the 
principle  that  the  same  symbols  might  conceal  opposite 
modes  of  thought  within  a  short  series  of  years  if  the 
change  between  the  Rosicrucians  of  the  seventeenth 
and  those  of  the  eighteenth  century  be  noted.  For  it 
cannot  be  too  often  repeated  that  the  secret  societies 
must  not  be  thought  of  as  carrying  out  a  policy  long 
since  mysteriously  evolved  and  transmitted,  but  rather 
as  proving  a  convenient  vessel  for  the  safe  harbouring 
of  the  advanced  ideas  of  the  day. 

1  "  An  alchcmyst,  on  the  contrary,  shall  reduce  divinity  to  the  maxims  of  his 
laboratory  j  explain  morality  by  sal  sulphur  and  mercury  and  allegorize  the  Scripture 
itself  and  the  sacred  mysteries  thereof  into  the  philosopher's  stone.  .  .  ."  (Locke, 
Conduct  of  the  Understanding.) 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  27 

The  Rosicrucians  of  1600  were  Lutherans  in  ideal, 
those  of  1780  were  followers  of  Rousseau.  But  when 
we  reach  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  we  find 
Freemasonry  in  its  full  vigour,  and  the  movement  of 
which  the  masonic  societies  were  the  most  conspicuous 
representatives  must  now  receive  attention. 

From  the  soladitates  and  collegia  of  the  Romans  may 
be  traced  the  friendly  societies  and  guilds  of  mediaeval 
Italy.  In  Sicily  trade  guilds  had  long  been  established 
and  were  powerful  institutions  towards  the  close  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  At  Palermo  they  more  than  onge 
exercised  decisive  influence  in  municipal  affairs  under 
the  guidance  of  their  consuls^  as  they  named  their  presid- 
ing officers.  None  of  these  guilds  was  more  powerful 
than  that  of  the  tanners  or  conciarottiy  which  was 
eventually  dissolved,  as  a  political  measure,  by  Lord 
William  Bentinck.^  In  Naples  there  were  similar  asso- 
ciations, but  none  so  popular  as  the  burying  fraternities 
whose  masked  processions  may  even  now  be  seen  con- 
veying their  deceased  members  to  their  last  resting- 
place. 

Such  associations  and  trade  guilds  were  not  con- 
fined to  Italy.  In  the  forests  of  north-eastern  France 
and  southern  Germany,  on  either  side  of  the  country 
where  the  Vehmgericht  held  sway  in  the  thirteenth 
century,  the  charcoal  burners  and  wood  hewers  had 
long  pursued  guild  methods.  Of  this  species  of  trade 
guild,  generically  known  as  compagnonage^  there  were 
many  forms  and  offshoots  ;  some,  as  the  Chauffeurs, 
were  purely  criminal ;  others,  as  the  Charbonnerie  of  the 
Jura  mountains,  closely  akin  to  the  Kohlenbrenner  of 

^  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs. — It  is  curious  to  find  Lanciani  stating  that  the  tanners 
were  the  "most  powerful  and  most  troublesome  of  Roman  trade  guilds." — New 
Tales  of  Old  Rome,  296. 


28  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

the  Black  Forest,  probably  represented  a  genuine  work- 
men's society  for  mutual  help.  The  Charbonnerie  of 
the  Jura  was  still  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the  French 
Revolution,  and  it  was  at  this  period  that  it  suffered 
a  transformation  similar  to  that  which  had  overtaken 
the  ancient  guild  of  the  working  masons  about  one 
hundred  years  earlier. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  in  the  fabulous  and 
highly  impressive  origins  oi  the  masonic  mystery 
officially  propounded  to  the  devout,  the  dispassionate 
inquirer  will  discover  nothing  more  novel  than  typical 
myths,  of  which  examples  are  familiar.  The  legends  of 
Solomon,  of  Hiram,  and  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  or  the 
even  less  remote  starting-point  proposed  by  Ramsay, 
may  safely  be  left  outside  the  scope  of  historical  inves- 
tigation, and  relegated  to  the  convivial  discussions  of 
the  brethren.  There  can  be  little  question,  however, 
that  modern  masonry  adopted  many  of  the  secret  rites 
and  the  system  of  grips  and  passwords  employed  by  the 
mediaeval  guild  of  the  working  masons.  The  antiquity 
of  that  guild  is  undoubted,  and  in  the  frequent  journey- 
ings  of  masons,  as  building  operations  called  them  to  this 
or  that  other  town  or  province,  may  be  seen  at  once  the 
reason  for  their  society  of  mutual  help  and  recognition, 
together  with  that  for  their  wide  diffusion.  But  the  new 
masonry  was  the  association  of  a  different  class  of  men,  and 
never  assumed  the  characteristic  aspect  of  a  trade  guild  ; 
it  lost  all  the  features  of  the  older  society,  save  only  its  ^7 
rites  and  symbolism.  The  period  of  change  from  the 
old  to  the  new  masonry  is  generally  accepted  as  about 
the  year  1 700  ;  the  transition  may  have  been  marked 
by  a  lodge  formed  by  a  club  of  architects  and  builders 
in  London  during  the  reign  of  James  II.  At  Florence 
there  was  a  lodge  of  masons,  or  of  the  Trowel,  in  the 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  29 

sixteenth  century  ;  this  was  still  in  existence  under  the 
same  name,  but  presumably  in  a  modified  form,  in  the 
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

Nowhere  in  Italy  did  the  new  masonry  flourish  more  y 
vigorously  than  at  Naples.  Lodges  were  numerous 
before  1720  ;  later,  however,  they  were  put  down.  In 
accordance  with  the  bulls  against  masonry  issued  by 
Clement  XII.  and  Benedict  XIV.,  Charles  III.  and  Ferdi- 
nand suppressed  the  lodges.  But  after  Ferdinand^s 
marriage  to  Mary  Caroline  in  1766  freemasonry  re- 
vived, and  for  a  short  space  flourished  exceedingly. 
It  is  even  said  that  a  female  lodge,  that  of  the 
Giardiniere^  was  instituted,  to  which  the  Queen  herself 
was  affiliated. 

Before  the  Revolution  broke  out  French  masonry 
was  in  powerful  hands ;  the  most  ambitious  of  politicians,  ^ 
the  most  deft  of  adventurers,  the  most  wealthy  and  most 
speculative  of  bankers  met  in  its  ranks.  As  members 
of  the  lodge  of  the  Amis  ReumSy  Lauzun  and  Mirabeau, 
Orleans  and  Panchaud,  Claviere  and  Talleyrand,  met 
on  common  ground.  Its  ramifications  were  international, 
for  the  French  adept  was  welcomed  with  open  arms  in 
the  lodges  of  Germany  and  Italy,  even  occasionally  of 
insular  England.  Rosicrucians  and  Illuminati  were  little 
more  than  masons  with  extreme  views  on  ritual,  politics, 
or  rehgion,  and  the  confusion  and  variability  of  rites 
only  extended  the  scope  of  the  operations  of  the  secret 
brotherhood,  and  brought  them  into  easier  relations 
with  other  societies.  It  was  thus  by  masonry  that  the  / 
Charbonnerie  became  revivified,  and  converted  into  an  ^ 
active  agent. 

During  the  early  days  of  the  French  Revolution, 
when   that   great   movement  was  drawing   a  mass  of 


30  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

middle  and   lower   class  men    into    the  ranks  of  the 
national  army,  the  Freemasonry  and  Charbonnerie  of 

/  north-eastern  France  seem  to  have  come  together 
and  thrown  off  new  associations.  A  high  masonic 
adept,  the  Marquis  de  Champagne,  appears  to  have 
derived  from  the  traditions  of  these  societies  and  of 
Weisshaupt's  Illuminism  the  Philadelphes,  a  military 
and  republican  organization.  Much  of  the  history  of 
the  Philadelphes  is  supported  by  evidence  of  the  most 
doubtful  kind,  and  here  nothing  more  will  be  advanced 
concerning  them  save  that  several  well-known  officers 
of  the  French  army  are  said  to  have  been  connected 

^'  with  the  society.  General  Mallet,  who  for  a  few  hours 
in  1 8 1 2  seriously  threatened  the  overturn  of  the  Empire, 
was  a  member,  and  Moreau  may  have  had  relations 
with  them. 

The  importance  of  the  Philadelphes  has  doubtless 
been  much  exaggerated  ;  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
for  some  years,  especially  between  1800  and  1804,  a 
considerable  amount  of  secret  intriguing  went  on  in  the 
French  army,  and  that  from  the  forms  of  masonry  and 
other  societies,  such  as  that  of  the  Charbonniers,  various 
lodges  and  associations  were  constituted.  The  Ban- 
douliers,  the  Freres  Bleus,  the  Miquelets,  the  Barbets, 
the  Freres  et  Amis,  all  in  different  ways  originated 
from  the  same  causes  and  gave  the  Government  much 
trouble. 

The  opinions  which  these  societies  served  to  cloak 
were  mainly  republican.  Bonaparte's  policy  of  Cassar- 
ism  and  reconciliation  with  Rome  aroused  their  resent- 
ment and  prompted  their  revenge.  This  feeling  probably 
culminated  about  the  time  of  Moreau's  arrest  and  of 
Napoleon's  assumption  of  the  Imperial  dignity,  for 
with  a  large  part  of  the  army  the  Empire  did  not 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  31 

win  immediate  favour,^  and  the  dissatisfaction  that 
needed  vent  could  find  it  only  under  cover  of  secrecy. 
Wherever  the  French  army  and  civil  administrators 
went,  and  especially  in  Italy,  masonic  and  other  lodges 
sprang  up.^  In  Naples  the  same  process  took  place, 
and  no  sooner  were  the  French  in  possession  than  we 
find  General  Lecchi  acting  as  Grand  Master  of  a  lodge 
of  masons.^ 

Between  the  years  1806  and  18 10  various  secret 
societies  flourished  in  different  parts  of  the  kingdom  of  */ 
Naples  whose  exact  nature  it  is  not  possible  to  seize 
very  clearly.  They  were  mostly,  but  not  entirely, 
masonic,  and  the  membership  of  some  was  purely 
Neapolitan,  of  others  purely  French,  and  of  a  few  mixed. 
Masonic  lodges  were  especially  numerous  in  Calabria, 
notably  at  Reggio,  Cosenza,  Catanzaro,  Nicastro, 
Monteleone,  and  Cotrone  ;  they  were  frequently  con- 
nected with  the  local  organization  of  civic  guards. 

But  alongside  of  masonry  were  other  influences. 
Thus  emissaries  visited  Sir  John  Stuart,  when  he  was 
threatening  Naples  from  Ischia  in  1809,  who  repre- 
sented themselves  as  belonging  to  a  secret  organization 
of  Patriotti  having  ramifications  all  over  Italy.  These 
emissaries  may  have  been  Cassetti  and  Bianchemani, 
who,  as  Canosa  asserts,  were  members  of  a  secret 
association  of  nationalist  aims,  of  which  Saliceti  was 
head.  Similar  organizations,  all  probably  more  or  less 
influenced  by  the  masonic  movement,  existed  as  early 

^  See  Segur's  account  of  how  Mouton  tried  to  prevent  his  grenadiers  from 
cheering  for  the  Emperor  [Menu.  ii.  284),  or  Courier's  witty  description  of  how  the 
news  of  the  proclamation  of  the  Empire  was  received  at  the  mess  of  his  regiment 
{Menu.  i.  61). 

2  As  examples :  a  lodge  of  freemasons  founded  at  Salamartca  by  Colonel  Lacuee 
and  joined  by  the  inhabitants  (Thiebault,  Mems.)  ;  a  lodge  of  Philadelphes  founded 
at  Geneva  by  Buonarotti  (Guillon,  196). 

3  There  is  apparently  a  mistake  in  the  date  given  by  Gould  (vi,  299). 


32  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

as  1806,  and  an  English  resident  at  Catania,  writing  in 
July  of  that  year,  makes  this  remarkable  statement : — 

/      There  exists  in  Upper  Italy  a  society  of  men  consisting  of 
I  the  principal  nobility,  whose  political  views  are  directed  to  this 
/grand  object.     This  society  has  existed  for  several  years,  and 
^    )  many  who   adopted    the    dress   and   language   of  republicans 
/  secretly  held  the  following  doctrine  :  That  Italy  ought  to  be 
/     under  one  head  ;  and  that  she  should  adopt,  as  far  as  circum- 
stances would  permit,  a  limited  constitution  of  monarchy.  .  .  .^ 

Assuming  this  statement  to  represent  some  real  fact, 
the  channel  for  conveying  such  ideas  from  Lombardy  to 
Naples  was  ready  found  in  Lecchi  and  other  officers  of 
the  Italian  legion. 

The  question  now  arises  :  When  and  where  did  the 
society  of  the  Carbonari  come  into  existence  ?  There  is 
no  direct  evidence  on  which  an  exact  answer  can  be 
based  ;  at  the  best  we  have  probabilities  and  surmise. 
The  most  weighty  opinion  yet  expressed  is  that  of 
Baron  Helfert,  who,  taking  Capobianco  as  representa- 
tive of  the  first  Carbonaro  lodge,  deduces,  from  the 
fact  of  his  living  near  the  forest  of  Sila,  the  theory 
that  the  rites  of  the  society  of  which  he  was  head  were 
derived  from  those  of  the  charcoal  burners  who  dwelt 
in  that  forest.  That  opinion  is  up  to  a  certain  point 
plausible,  but  when  we  come  to  examine  the  ritual  of 
the  Carbonari  it  will  hardly  appear  probable.  A  more 
plausible  conjecture  appears  to  be  this  : — 

In  the  army  of  invasion  was  a  regiment  of  Swiss, 
from  French  Switzerland,  that  is  from  a  part  of 
Switzerland  that  borders  on  the  Jura.  This  regiment 
was  for  some  time  in  garrison  at  Capua,  and  several 
authorities  give  Capua  as  a  place  where  one  of  the  early 

1  Leckie,  31. 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  33 

lodges  of  Carbonari  flourished.  A  regiment  drawn 
from  the  Jura,  and  in  the  French  service,  might  well 
have  brought  with  it  the  traditions  of  the  old  Char- 
bonnerie  in  its  new  masonic  guise,  and  as  we  shall  find 
in  the  ritual  of  the  Italian  Carbonari  a  strong  resem- 
blance to  that  of  the  old  charcoal-burners*  guild  of^ 
north  -  eastern  France  the  presumption  is  thereby 
correspondingly  strengthened  that  it  drew  its  origin 
from  that  source.  It  appears,  therefore,  reasonably 
probable  to  advance  that  the  Carbonari  came  into  exist-  ^ 
ence  about  the  year  1808,  and  that  they  derived  their 
most  characteristic  rites  from  the  secret  societies  of  the  /. 
French  army.  By  reason  of  some  superiority  in  organ- 
ization or  in  ritual  picturesqueness,  they  rapidly  spread 
and  gained  importance.  They  soon  became  entirely 
Italian  in  composition,  pursued  an  Italian  policy,  and 
added  ancient  symbolism  and  methods  to  those  which 
the  invaders  had  taught  them. 

Freemasons  were  generally  admitted  into  the  secret 
associations  without  much  difficulty,  and  in  the  various 
societies  among  which  membership  was  all  but  inter- 
changeable the  Carbonari  made  greatest  progress. 
Following  the  policy  adopted  by  Napoleon  towards 
masonry,  the  Neapolitan  Government  officially  recog- 
nised the  lodges,  and  Maghella,  with  many  function- 
aries and  police  agents,  were  initiated.  In  addition  to 
Maghella,  Daure,  at  one  time  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
and  Pasquale  Borrelli  were  among  its  most  prominent 
official  supporters.  The  Carbonari,  like  the  masons  and 
every  other  secret  society,  were  constantly  undergoing  ^/ 
changes  ;  and  among  them  was  a  movement  similar 
to  that  which  had  taken  place  in  masonry,  whereby 
the  central  lodges  attempted  to  obtain  a  governing 
control,  which  the  provincial  lodges  vigorously  opposed. 

VOL.  II  D 


34  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

The  Government  was  less  successful  in  directing  the 
Carbonari  than  the  masons.  Joachim  was  for  a  time 
Grand  Master  of  the  masonic  lodges.  But  a  large  body 
of  masons  broke  off  from  the  guidance  of  the  Grand 
Lodge  Giuseppina  and  attempted  to  regain  independ- 
ence of  action  ;  it  was  probably  among  them  that  the 
Carbonari  gained  many  of  their  best  recruits. 

It  must  not,  however,  be  inferred  from  what  has  just 
been  stated  that  the  Carbonari  moved  in  a  direction 
consistently  hostile  to  the  government  of  King  Joachim. 
By  1 8 13   they  had  acquired  a  very  large  membership 

J  that  included  all  shades  of  political  opinion, — royalist 
and  republican,  Muratist  and  Bourbonist ;  and  owing 
to  their  growing  importance  and  to  the  difficulty  the 
Government  found  in  obtaining  control  of  them,  Queen 
Caroline,  acting  under  the  advice  of  Maghella,  attempted 
to  suppress  the  lodges.  It  was  about  this  time  that  a 
dissenting  party  broke  off  from  the  Carbonari  and 
formed  the  new  society  of  the  Calderari,  with  which  we 
shall  soon  be  concerned. 

The  main  facts  of  the  history  of  the  Carbonari  during 
the  last  two  years  of  the  reign  of  Joachim  have  already 
been  outlined.  Before  coming  to  their  organization, 
doctrines,  and  ritual,  but  a  few  more  facts  need  be 
noticed.  The  revolt  in  the  Abruzzi  in  18 14  brought 
to  a  head  the  hostility  between  the  Carbonari  and  the 
Government,  and  from  that  time  till  Murat's  fall  the 

'  main  stream  of  the  society  appears  to  have  been  Bour- 
bonist in  sentiment,  with  hopes  fostered  from  Sicily, 
perhaps  partly  through  the  agency  of  Bentinck,  that 
the  return  of  Ferdinand  would  be  marked  by  the  grant 
of  a  constitution.  The  Hereditary  Prince  in  fact  appears 
to  have  been  affiliated,  and  to  have  reached  some  rank 
in  the  society. 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  35 

The  events  of  18 14-15,  and  notably  the  throwing 
out  of  employment  of  so  many  capable  military  and 
civil  officials  by  the  destruction  of  the  French  Empire, 
had  among  other  results  that  of  filling  the  ranks  of  the 
secret  societies.  A  polypus  of  secret  dissatisfaction,  of 
political  aspiration,  of  personal  ambitions,  formed  under 
varying  shapes  and  under  the  cloak  of  mysterious 
associations.  The  Protettori  Repubblicani,  the  Adelfi, 
the  Spilla  Nera,  the  Fortezza,  the  Speranza,  the  Fratelli, 
the  Siberia,  the  Progresso,  the  Edenisti,  Scamiciati, 
Egizj,  Dormenti,  Filantropici,  Eremiti,  Fedeli,  Filadelfi, 
sprang  into  existence  in  various  parts  of  Italy,-^  Their 
forms  varied  greatly  :  in  the  ex-kingdom  of  Italy,  now 
an  Austrian  province,  the  Carbonaro  lodges  assumed  a 
far  more  Gallicized  character  than  at  Naples.^ 

The  doctrines,  ritual,  and  organization  of  the  Car-  / 
bonari  were  at  no  period  quite  uniform.  There  was 
always  great  variation,  not  only  from  year  to  year  but 
even  from  lodge  to  lodge,  so  that  the  account  here 
presented  of  these  matters  must  be  taken  only  in  a 
general  or  average  sense.  This  account  is  intended  to 
give  an  approximate  idea  of  what  the  society  stood 
for  during  the  period  1815-1821  in  southern  Italy; 
but  the  material  of  which  it  is  constructed  is  unfor- 
tunately of  a  very  piecemeal  character,  and  it  may 
happen  occasionally  that  consecutive  paragraphs  will 
refer  to  ritual  of  the  time  of  King  Joachim  and  of  that  of 
the  Carbonaro  Revolution.  No  other  course  appeared 
possible  if  a  general  impression  was  to  be  conveyed  to 

^  Other  societies  of  purely  criminal  intent  could  be  cited,  as  the  Bucatori,  Fusci- 
acca  Rossa,  and  others. 

"^  II  Carbonaro  istruito — see  Bibliography.  This  is  referred  to  by  several  contem- 
poraries as  a  printed  book.  The  only  copy  that  has  come  under  observation  is  in 
manuscript  form  {Biblioteca  Na%ionale,  Naples)  —  Cantu  places  the  origin  of  the 
Hetaira  as  early  as  the  close  of  the  Empire  j  this  appears  very  questionable. 


36  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

the  reader,  nor  is  it  thought  that  this  general  impres- 
sion will  be  very  wide  of  the  historical  truth. 

Among  the  Neapolitan  Carbonari  there  were,  during 
the  early  years,  but  two  classes  of  members, — appren- 
tices and  masters.^  The  aspirant  for  initiation  attended 
a  general  meeting  of  the  lodge  or  bar  ace  a.  This  was 
generally  held  in  a  barn  at  night,  and  was  known  as 
a  vendita.  The  candidate  was  led  blindfold  to  the 
door  of  the  barn,  and  his  conductor,  knocking,  called 
out  :  *'  A  pagan  knocks  at  the  door."  ^  The  answer  to 
this  was  the  sound  of  the  blow  of  an  axe  within.  A 
voice  then  questioned  :  "  Who  is  the  rash  being  who 
dares  trouble  our  sacred  labours .?  '*  To  this  the  con- 
ductor replied  :  "  It  is  a  man  whom  I  have  found 
wandering  in  the  forest." 

After  several  more  questions  the  neophyte,  still  blind- 
fold, was  introduced,  and  various  rites  having  been  per- 
formed, his  eyes  were  unveiled,  whereupon,  looking  to  the 
right  and  left,  he  perceived  some  such  sight  as  this  : — 

At  either  hand,  ranged  on  benches,  sat  two  lines  of 
the  Buoni  Cugini,  or  good  cousins,  for  so  the  Carbonari 
styled  one  another.  Those  on  the  neophyte's  right  sat 
covered,  indicating  their  higher  rank  in  the  order  ;  and 
among  the  tall  hats,  knee  breeches,  and  close  pantaloons 
they  wore,  might  occasionally  be  seen  military  boots,  or 
even  some  frayed  old  uniform  and  plumed  shako  remi- 
niscent of  the  days  of  King  Joachim.     At  the  top  end 

1  Costituzione  della  Repub.  Lucana,  53.  After  the  success  of  the  Carbonari  more 
complicated  ritual  was  introduced.  Witt  gives  seven  grades  j  the  first  three  were 
unimportant,  at  the  fourth  an  oath  against  all  monarchs,  and  especially  the  Bourbons, 
was  administered,  etc.  No  such  system  had  any  long  continuance  or  appreciable 
influence. 

^  The  term  "  pagan  "  was  much  used  by  the  Carbonari,  and  recalls  the  similar 
use  of  the  Roman  soldiers  when  speaking  of  non-military  persons.  See  Boissier, 
Tacite,  37. 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  37 

of  the  barn  sat  three  principal  officers,  each  with  a  large 
log  or  tree-trunk  resting  on  the  tiled  floor  in  front  of 
him,  serving  as  a  table.  Behind  the  central  figure,  that 
of  the  Grand  Master,  a  picture  was  suspended  on  the 
wall  of  the  barn,  representing  St.  Theobald,  patron  saint 
of  the  Order.  The  three  officials  were  carefully  dressed, 
and  wore  various  insignia.  On  the  tree-trunks  before 
them  were  placed  several  objects,  of  which  the  signifi- 
cance was  soon  explained  to  the  neophyte.  Behind 
him  and  to  his  right  sat  three  masters  of  ceremony, 
two  of  them  provided  with  tree-trunks  similar  to  those 
already  described,  and  holding  axes  or  hatchets  in  their 
hands.  The  officials  on  either  side  of  the  Grand  Master 
were  the  Orator  and  the  Secretary.  A  few  candles 
feebly  illuminated  the  scene,  and  the  dim  light  served 
to  render  more  impressive  the  silence  with  which  the 
candidate's  arrival  was  greeted. 

The  Orator  generally  opened  the  proceedings  with  a 
discourse,  and  the  nature  of  this  generally  varied  with 
the  intelligence  and  trustworthiness  of  the  new  member. 
As  a  rule,  the  discourse  did  not  descend  to  particulars, 
but  confined  itself  to  abstractions  as  harmless  as  they 
were  high-sounding,  to  the  putting  forward  of  that  class 
of  opinions  that  form  the  small  change  of  the  professional 
politician,  that  "  are  suited  to  vulgar  capacities  and 
adapted  to  the  end  of  those  that  govern,"  as  Locke 
tersely  puts  it.  A  typical  example  of  such  a  discourse 
ran  as  follows  :  — 

Hear  me,  dear  and  good  Cousins : 

Nature  when  she  created  man  meant  him  to  be  free.  It  is, 
therefore,  the  duty  of  every  man  to  keep  himself  so,  and  to 
fulfil  the  engagement  she  has  imposed  on  him  by  diffusing 
liberty  among  his  brethren,  by  communicating  his  pleasures  to 
them,  by  partaking  in  their  pains  and  labours,  and  by  considering 


> 


38  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

himself  on  an  equality  with  all  his  fellow-creatures,  so  that  he 
may  exalt  himself  to  the  most  sublime  heights  of  virtue. 

Unfortunately,  the  flattering  hopes  of  seeing  such  virtue 
become  universal  have  been  deceived.  The  tender  name  of 
brother  has  been  renounced,  and  man  has  treated  his  fellow- 
man  as  an  enemy.  At  first  the  strong  usurped  the  rights  of  the 
weak.  Afterwards  violence  was  superseded  by  cunning.  Hence 
arose  intrigue,  hatred,  treason,  imposture,  superstition  :  man 
became  the  vile  slave  of  his  infamous  passions.  Yet  Reason, 
sovereign  of  the  human  mind,  enlightened  some  sager  individuals 
as  to  the  real  nature  of  things.  She  preserved  them  from 
the  general  corruption  ;  and  they  endeavoured  to  bring  back 
their  wandering  fellow-mortals  to  the  neglected  paths  of  virtue. 
But,  deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason,  they  rejected  her  precepts.  It 
was  then  that,  still  indefatigable,  these  benevolent  sages  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  secret  societies,  which,  assiduously  labouring 
to  give  a  better  education  to  mankind,  might  be  the  means  of 
exciting  them  to  virtue  ;  and  these  societies  are  those  of  the 
Carbonari.^ 

In  addition  to  the  discourse,  the  most  important  part 
of  the  rites  consisted  of  the  oath  and  of  the  explanation 
of  the  symbolism  of  the  Carbonari. 

The  oath  administered  to  the  candidates  for  the 
rank  of  apprentice  was  very  general  in  its  terms  ;  it  pro- 
/  vided  for  secrecy,  obedience,  and  mutual  help.  It  was 
administered  to  the  kneeling  candidate  by  the  Grand 
Master,  who,  holding  a  piece  of  wood  in  his  left  hand,^ 
and  in  his  right  an  outstretched  axe,  said  :  "  To  the 
great  Saint  Theobald  our  Protector,  In  the  name  and 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Vendita  of  .  .  .  and  in  virtue 
of  the  power  conferred  on  me  in  this  respectable  Vendita, 
I  make,  name,  and  create  you  an  apprentice  Carbonaro." 

The  picture  of  St.  Theobald  was  then  explained  to 
the  new  apprentice.  The  fact  that  this  saint  was  the 
patron  of  the  Carbonari  makes  their  connection  with  the 

^  Bertholdi,  28.  ^  As  in  the  Mithraic  initiation. 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI 


39 


Charbonnerie  of  the  Jura  more  apparent ;  for  St. 
Theobald  was  a  saint  in  much  repute  through  north- 
eastern France,  having  many  followers  at  Auxerre, 
Provins,  Metz,  Langre,  Toul,  Treves,  and  other  towns  ; 
and  not  only  was  he  patron  of  the  Charbonnerie  of  the 
Jura,  but  also  of  the  Kohlenbrenner  of  the  Black  Forest. 
In  his  picture  St.  Theobald  was  generally  represented 
as  seated  by  a  tree-trunk  in  a  forest  outside  the  door 
of  a  charcoal-burner's  hut.  Legends  were  related  to 
the  new  apprentice  as  to  the  origin  of  the  society,  of 
which  the  variations  were  probably  infinite.  The  period 
of  King  Philip  of  Macedon  was  sometimes  taken  as  a 
starting-point ;  but  there  seems  to  have  been  a  general 
consensus  in  all  the  lodges  that  King  Francis  the  First 
of  France  had  been  the  earliest  protector  of  the  society. 
His  health  was  always  given  at  festivals,  and  the 
official  period  of  existence  of  the  Carbonari  was  invari- 
ably dated  back  to  his  reign. 

The  trunk  of  the  tree  was  explained  to  represent  the 
surface  of  the  earth  on  which  the  Good  Cousins  were 
dispersed.  Its  verdant  foliage  indicated  that,  as  our 
first  parents  covered  their  shame  with  leaves,  so  the 
Good  Cousins  ought  to  conceal  the  faults  of  their 
fellow-men,  and  particularly  those  of  the  society.  After 
interpreting  the  meaning  of  a  white  cloth,  water,  and 
salt,  the  novice's  attention  was  called  to  a  crown  of 
thorns  and  a  cross.  The  crown,  he  was  told,  signified 
that  he  must  be  cautious  and  quiet  in  all  his  move- 
ments, to  avoid  the  pain  of  being  wounded.  The 
cross  typified  the  labours,  persecution,  and  death  of 
those  who  aspire  to  virtue.  Earth,  a  ladder,  and  a 
bundle  of  sticks  received  due  notice,  after  which  the 
three  colours  of  the  society  were  expounded  :  black,  or 
charcoal,  for  faith ;  blue,  or  smoke,  for  hope ;  and  red,  or 


40  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

fire,  for  chanty.  A  small  piece  of  wood  attached  to  a 
ribbon  of  those  three  colours  was  the  apprentice's  badge  ; 
the  wood  stood  for  the  pole  of  the  charcoal-burner's  hut. 

The  apprentice  was  able  after  his  noviciate  to  rise 
to  the  higher  mysteries  of  the  Carbonari,  according  to 
the  intelligence  he  displayed  and  the  zeal  with  which 
he  carried  out  the  orders  of  his  superiors.  He  was 
instructed  how  one  Carbonaro  might  make  himselt 
known  to  another  in  a  variety  of  ways  ;  ^  passwords 
and  sacred  signs  were  imparted  to  him,  the  dread  signifi- 
cance of  the  daggers  and  axes  that  embellished  the  oaths 
of  the  lodge,  and  the  virtue  of  the  Christian  faith  that 
made  of  the  cross  the  most  important  of  the  symbols. 

The  statutes  of  the  Carbonari  found  their  highest, 
or  perhaps  one  should  say  their  most  complicated,  ex- 
pression in  those  of  the  lodges  of  Principato  Ultra  and 
Calabria  that  respectively  acknowledged  the  leadership 
of  the  central  lodges  of  Salerno  and  of  Potenza.  A 
pamphlet  bearing  no  indication,  but  probably  printed  at 
the  latter  city  in  July  or  August  1820,  set  forth  what 
was  entitled  the  "  Costituzione  del  Popolo  Carbonaro 
della  Repubblica  Lucana  Orientale."  This  was  a 
violently  republican  pronouncement,  the  title-page 
being  inscribed  with  the  following  ferocious  lines  from 
Monti's  Ode  to  Liberty  : — 

Ma  tua  pianta  radici  non  pone 
Che  su  pezzi  d'  infrante  corone, 
Ne  si  pesche  di  fresche  rugglade 
Ma  di  sangue,  di  membra  di  re.^ 

^  Arch.Nap.cxWx.W.^jii'  Processo  Salerni.  There  was  a  special  way  of  handling 
wine-glasses  by  means  of  which  Good  Cousins  could  recognise  one  another.  The  grip 
or  touch -sign  of  the  master  rank  was  made  with  the  middle  finger  on  the 
right  thumb  of  the  person  addressed  j  it  may  be  represented  by  the  following  signs  : 

e 

^  Thy  plant  shall  stretch  no  root — but  in  fragments  of  shattered  crowns, — nor 
draw  fresh  dew — but  from  the  blood,  the  limbs  of  kings. 


CHAP.  II        RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  41 

This  constitution  or  statute  formed  of  the  Carbonaro 
community   a  state  within  the  State.     It  provided   a  /^ 

complete  code  of  morality,  and  inculcated  every  maxim  ^^ 
of  honour  and  virtue.  All  disputes  between  Carbonari 
were  to  be  referred  to  the  vendita  before  being  taken  to 
a  civil  tribunal,  and  so  complete  was  the  invasion  of  the 
State's  privilege  of  justice  that  a  clause  specified  the 
French  civil  code  as  that  by  which  the  decisions  of  the 
vendita  were  to  be  guided.  The  rules  of  virtue  the 
Carbonari  were  called  on  to  practise  were  strict, — nearly 
incredibly  so  for  their  age  and  country.  Gambling, 
frequenting  wine-shops,  dissoluteness,  breaches  of  con- 
jugal fidelity,  were  all  matters  that  entailed  trial  before 
a  jury  of  the  Good  Gousins,  and  possibly  expulsion. 
Such  juries  may  be  suspected  to  have  been  either  very 
busy  or  very  kind. 

The  code  of  the  **  Popolo  Carbonaro  della  Repubblica 
Lucana"  represented  the  extreme  reached  by  Carbonarism  ^ 
morally  and  politically  ;  it  was  doubtless  carefully  re- 
vised for  purposes  of  publication.  This  and  reasons  of 
prudence  forbad  the  statement  of  the  extreme  penalty 
inflicted  by  the  Carbonari  ;  but  the  traditions  of  the 
vendetta  and  brigandage  would  in  themselves  be  suffi- 
cient proof  that  the  affairs  of  a  haracca  could  not  be 
carried  on  with  any  degree  of  smoothness  without  an 
occasional  resort  to  assassination.  Whether  carried  out 
in  the  name  of  Carbonaro  morality  or  of  private  interest 
or  revenge,  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  haracca 
made  any  attempt  to  stamp  out  perhaps  the  most 
generally  honoured  of  the  traditions  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples — that  of  homicide. 

The  apprentice  whom  every  test  had  proved  faithful, 
and  whose  ability  or  influence  happened  to  recommend 
him,  might  be  admitted  to  the  rank  of  Master.     In  this 


42  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

higher  grade  there  was  some  possibility  that  he  might 
find  opportunity  for  learning  what  was  the  real  object 
of  the  society  he  belonged  to.  The  ceremonies  for 
admission  to  this  rank  were  most  complicated  ;  one 
of  them  will  be  shortly  described,  after  which  more 
general  considerations  must  engage  us. 

The  Grand  Masters  present  first  saluted  three  times 
God,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Universe,  and  St. 
Theobald  ;  then  the  President,  putting  on  a  special  robe, 
assumed  the  character  of  Pontius  Pilate  ;  others  assumed 
those  of  Caiaphas,  Herod,  and  such  personages.  On 
the  candidate  being  introduced,  the  President  said  to 
him :  *'  Good  Cousin,  your  trials  as  a  novice  are  not 
sufficient  to  raise  you  to  an  equality  with  us ;  you 
must  undergo  more  important  trials ;  reflect  upon 
it  and  tell  us  your  intention."  On  the  candidate 
expressing  his  readiness  for  any  ordeal  that  might  be 
appointed,  the  President  added  :  "  Conduct  him  to 
the  Olives."  He  was  then  led  outside,  made  to  kneel, 
and  prayed  in  the  following  words  : — 

"  If  the  pains  I  am  about  to  suffer  can  be  useful 
to  mankind,  I  do  not  ask  to  be  delivered  from  them. 
Thy  will  be  done  and  not  mine." 

The  ceremony  then  proceeded  on  lines  which  the 
reader  can  follow  from  the  Gospel  account  of  the  trial 
and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  cup  of  bitterness 
was  drained  ;  the  candidate  was  bound  and  brought 
before  Herod  ;  to  his  question  he  answered  :  ''I  am 
the  Son  of  God  "  ;  he  was  finally  crowned  with  thorns, 
and  in  this  guise  called  on  to  take  the  Master's  oath, 
whereby  he  swore  before  the  Grand  Master  of  the 
Universe  and  on  the  avenging  steel  to  do  very  much 
the  same  things  he  had  sworn  as  an  apprentice. 

One  may  advance  without  much  hesitation  that  the 


CHAP.  II         RITES  OF  THE  CARBONARI  43 

ceremony  just  described, — and  contemporary  authorities 
furnish  many  others  like  it,  even  the  scene  of  the 
crucifixion  being  represented, — was  chiefly  of  Neapolitan 
origin.-^  It  was  in  reality  only  an  adaptation  for  the 
purposes  of  the  society  of  the  sacred  dramas  dear  to 
the  heart  of  the  people.  Once  before  we  have  caught 
a  glimpse  of  the  hold  Christian  symbolism  had  on  the 
popular  imagination  when  we  saw  the  whole  popula- 
tion of  a  sacked  Calabrian  village  greet  King  Joseph, 
kneeling  in  the  ashes  of  their  houses,  their  heads 
crowned  with  thorns.  The  dramatic,  tangible  repre- 
sentation of  their  objective  was  no  less  evident  in  the 
secret  societies  of  Italy  than  in  her  religion  or  art,  and 
in  this  she  merely  revealed  the  antiquity  and  continuity 
of  her  race  and  of  her  traditions. 

In  the  Carbonari  the  past  was  completely  interwoven  / 
with  the  present.  Mighty  symbols,  great  names,  lofty 
ideals,  jumbled  together  religions  and  philosophies,  the 
symbols  of  Alexandria  with  the  creed  of  the  Jacobin 
Club,  the  ritual  of  charcoal-burners  and  of  Knights 
Templars.  But  the  imposing  structure  was  only  an 
imposture,  a  fleeting  bubble  woven  of  that  most  evanes- 
cent of  textures,  political  cowardice.  Mysticism  and 
symbolism,  passwords  and  ceremonies,  doctrines  and 
decrees,  might  gather  their  attendant  train  of  expounders 
and  believers,  might  make  the  uninitiated  tremble,  or  a 
throne  shake,  yet  the  fact  remained  that  what  all  stood 
for  was  fear.  The  men  who  declined  in  hundreds  to 
sit  on  King  Joachim's  provincial  councils,  to  register  by 
a  cringing  vote,  but  by  daylight,  the  decrees  of  his 
prefects,  were  prepared  to  meet  in  a  barn  by  night  under 
cover  of  secrecy,  to  wear  gaudy  insignia,  deliver  empty 

^  Such   ceremonies   suggest   a  reminiscence   of  religious    rites   of  the   first   few 
centuries  of  the  Christian  era. 


44  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

speeches,  and  perform  schoolboy  rituals.  The  long 
political  blight  of  the  centuries,  the  curse  of  feudalism, 
the  rottenness  of  ignorance  and  superstition,  had  eaten 
out  nearly  every  vestige  of  political  and  self-respecting 
spirit.  Political  thought  had  been  aroused  under  the 
rule  of  the  French  kings,  but  the  people  of  Naples  had 
yet  to  learn  that  political  freedom  cannot  exist  without 
moral  courage. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  cxlvi.  ii.  471 1  :  Processo  Salerni. 
BiBL.  Naz.,  Church,  Secret  Report ;  see  ante. 

BiBL.  Naz.,  //  Carbonaro  istruito.  This  is  said  to  exist  in  printed  form  ; 
it  deals  with  northern  Italy. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily^  92  ;  MS.  of  the  Sublimi  Maestri  Perfetti. 

Printed  Books 

Bertholdi,  Mems.  ;  Blunt,  Vestiges  of  Ancient  Manners ;  Campanella, 
Influen-za  massonica ;  Canosa,  Piffari  di  Montagna ;  CANTiy,  Cronistoria ; 
Carascosa,  Mems.;  Collett a,  Storia ;  Costituzione  della  Repub.  Lucana ; 
Frost,  Sec.  Societies;  Gould,  Hist,  of  freemasonry ;  Guillon,  Complots 
milit. ;  Heckethorne,  Sec.  Societies;  Helfert,  Murat;  Helfert, 
Ursprung  Carbonari ;  Inaugurazione  del  G.'.  O.'.  ;  Johnston,  Mirabeau, 
Amer.  Hist.  Re^v.  vi.  ;  Leckie,  Hist.  Surrey ;  Londonderry,  Peninsular 
War;  M ADELi^ ^  Fouch/;  MoT^^iER,  Infuence  attribu/e ;  Mvkatori,  Script. 
Ital.  Anon.  Monach.  Cassinensis  Chron. ;  Napoleon,  Corr.  xiii.  j  Nodier, 
Sociitissec;  Orloff,  Mems.;  Palmieri,  Storia  costituz.;  Pamphleteer,  xxiv. ; 
Pasquier,  Mems.;  Pepe,  Mems.;  Radowsky,  Cosi  Memor. ;  Robison, 
Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy;  Rosenkreutz,  Chymische  Hochzeit;  Savary,  Mems.  ; 
Torelli,  Brenje  idea ;  Ulloa,  Intorno  alia  Storia;  Waite,  Rosicrucians ; 
Witt,  Mimoires  secrets. 


CHAPTER  III 


INTERNAL    AFFAIRS 


Papal  action  against  Carbonari — Zuccari's  arrest — Maghella's — 
Carbonaro  intrigue — Increase  in  membership — Sanfedism — 
Calderari — Canosa — Arms  the  Calderari — Policy  of  Govern- 
ment— Carbonari  decorated — Position  of  Muratists — Bentinck 
at  Naples — French  at  Naples — Medici — Other  Ministers — 
Finance— Amnesty — Confiscations — Austrian  policy — Jablo- 
nowsky — Nugent  and  Neapolitan  army — Sicilian  constitution 
— Ferdinand  I.  of  Two  Sicilies — Marriage  of  Duchesse  de 
Berri — U.S.  claims  reparation — Disorders  in  Puglia — Secret 
societies — Relations  with  the  Papacy — Concordat — Factions 
at  Court — The  fedeloni — Reconstruction  of  the  San  Carlo — 
Ferdinand  cuts  his  queue — Death  of  Charles  IV. — State  of 
the  kingdom. 

From  the  time  of  the  Statute  of  Bayonne  and  the 
accession  of  Joachim  there  had  been,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  a  well-defined  movement  towards  constitu- 
tionalism and  Italian  nationalism.  That  movement  was 
nearly  entirely  confined  to  masonic  and  other  secret 
society  circles,  and  had  culminated,  though  in  feeble 
enough  fashion,  at  the  period  of  Joachim's  campaigns  in 
1 8 14  and  18 15.  The  restored  governments  were  well 
aware  of  the  nature  of  that  movement,  and  were  not 
slow  in  showing  what  attitude  they  intended  to  adopt 
in  regard  to  it. 

No  sooner  had  Pius  VII.   returned  to  his  capital 

45 


46  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

than  he  issued  a  motu  propria  confirming  the  bulls  of 
Clement  XII.  and  Benedict  XIV.  against  freemasonry, 
and  extending  their  operation  to  the  Carbonari  (Aug. 
1 8 14).  When  Nugent,  a  few  days  before  the  battle  of 
Tolentino,  occupied  Rome,  one  of  his  first  cares  was  to 
arrest  the  Neapolitan  consul  and  political  agent  Cavaliere 
Zuccari,  whose  connection  with  the  secret  societies  and 
agitation  of  the  capital  had  wellnigh  brought  him- into 

J  open  hostility  with  the  Papal  Government.  At  Naples 
Bianchi  had  likewise  arrested  Maghella  and  sent  him 
as  a  prisoner  to  Vienna.^  No  sooner  was  Ferdinand 
back  on  the  throne,  in  fact,  than  the  momentary  rap- 
prochement between  the  Bourbons  and  the  Carbonari 
vanished  into  air  as  thin  as  the  blue  smoke  of  the  char- 
coal-burner's fire.  The  King  forgot  in  a  very  few  days 
that  the  Carbonari  had  generally  turned  against  Joachim, 
and  his  unconcealed  hostility  quickly  resulted  in  re- 
ducing the  membership  and  enthusiasm  of  the  lodges. 
Ferdinand's  hostility  may  have  been  heightened  by  the 
fact  that  at  the  time  of  Murat's  attempt  at  Pizzo 
treasonable  correspondence  was  intercepted  between  the 
Intendente  of  Basilicata  and  some  Carbonaro  lodges,  and 
the  Government  may  well  have  feared  that  had  Joachim 
landed  a  few  months  later,  and  at  some  better-chosen 
spot,  he  might  have  found  the  Good  Cousins  ready  to 
rise  for  him. 

In  the  large  and  somewhat  indiscriminate  increase 

that  had  taken  place  in  the  membership  of  the  Carbonari 

/     the  professional  and  liberal  class  had  gradually  become 

V  outnumbered  by  the  lower  classes.  Whereas  at  first  the 
old  Jacobin  party  took  the  lead,  later  priest  influence 
began   to  predominate  and   the   ideals  which,  arrayed 

^  According  to  another  account,  Maghella  succeeded  in  reaching  northern  Italy 
before  he  was  arrested. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  47 

under  the  banners  of  the  Santa  Fede,  had  triumphed 
over  the  republic  of  1 799.  Sanfedism  and  the  Sanfedisti 
were  no  new  thing  in  Naples  ;  without  being  a  concrete 
association  like  that  of  the  Carbonari,  they  were  a  loose 
kind  of  militant  religious  organisation  held  together  by- 
clerical  authority  and  tradition.  The  society  of  the 
Santa  Fede  is  said  to  have  played  a  part  so  early  as  the 
time  of  the  destruction  of  the  Albigenses,  having  been 
founded  by  Cardinal  Beltramo  in  the  reign  of  Pope 
Honorius  III.  Local  organizations  in  support  of  the  *^ 
Holy  Faith  were  generally  under  the  guidance  of  a 
village  priest,  and  when  many  of  the  villages  came  into 
the  Carbonaro  movement  it  was  inevitable  that  the 
local  lodge  should  fall  under  priestly  influence.  This 
was  proved  as  early  as  18 14,  when  the  leaders  of  the 
Carbonari  were  coquetting  with  Joachim,  with  the 
result  that  many  of  the  lodges  fell  away  and  formed 
new  associations  of  a  clearly  Bourbonist  and  Catholic 
character,  such  as  the  Trinitarii. 

Among  these  dissident  societies,  however,  the  best- 
known  was  that  of  the  Calderari.  Their  name  was 
probably  derived  from  that  of  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant of  the  trade  guilds  of  Palermo,  the  braziers,  or  ^ 
Calderai.  The  secret  organization  of  these  societies 
had  been  made  use  of  by  Queen  Mary  Caroline  in  her 
numerous  plots  for  ridding  Sicily  of  the  British,  with 
the  result  that  Bentinck  had  arranged  for  their  sup- 
pression as  trade  guilds.  But  in  the  constant  stream  of 
intrigue  and  communication  flowing  between  Sicily  and 
Naples  the  name  of  Calderari  appears  to  have  survived 
and  been  transplanted,  and  became  prominently  associ- 
ated with  that  of  the  Prince  of  Canosa. 

On  his  return  from  the  island  of  Ponza  in  1809, 
this  most  inveterate  of  all  the  plotters  of  his  day  had 


48  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

fallen  into  disgrace  with  Mary  Caroline  and  remained 
unemployed  for  several  years.  After  her  fall  he  once 
more  came  into  favour,  or  employment,  and  at  the 
time  of  Murat*s  descent  at  Pizzo  was  sent  on  a  special 
mission  to  Calabria  ;  he  was,  however,  recalled  on  the 
receipt  of  the  news  that  Murat  had  been  duly  executed. 
A  few  months  later,  on  the  27th  of  January  18 16,  he 
was  made  Minister  of  Police.  The  appointment,  not 
without  reason,  caused  great  excitement. 

Canosa's  predecessor,  Medici,  had  paid  but  slight 
attention  to  the  secret  societies  ;  but  under  Canosa 
there  was  a  complete  change.  He  was  now  in  his 
element  once  more,  and  as  the  first  measure  of  his 
administration  he  quickly  formed  the  existing  Sanfedist 
societies  into  one  great  organization  of  the  Calderari  ; 
this  he  intended  to  use  for  a  counterpoise  or  contrapeso, 
^,  /   as  he  called  it,  to  the  Carbonari. 

The  new  society  was  frankly  declared  to  aim 
at  the  extermination  of  all  Carbonari,  freemasons, 
Muratists,  and  liberals,  and  thus  revived  once  more 
the  bitter  political  vendettas  of  the  past  twenty  years. 
Canosa  was  not  the  man  to  stay  his  hand  before 
striking  an  enemy ;  no  sooner  had  he  formed!  his 
anti-liberal  society  than  he  proceeded  to  arm  it  by 
distributing  20,000  government  muskets  among  its 
members.  But  this  step  proved  more  than  even  a 
Bourbon  government  could  stand.  From  all  sides 
remonstrances  poured  in.  The  representatives  of  the 
Powers  supported  the  rational  section  of  Ferdinand's 
Ministers,  and  *'  the  King  himself,  with  great  good 
sense,  set  his  face  against  this  society."  ^  Canosa  was 
promptly  dismissed,  and  the  Carbonari,  for  a  moment 
threatened   with   destruction,   now  took  courage   once 

1  Church,  Mems.  28. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  49 

more.  From  this  time  on  they  continued  quietly  in 
existence,  the  sparks  of  liberalism  still  smouldering, 
until  an  event  occurred  in  the  year  1820  that  suddenly 
brought  them  to  the  front.  But  before  we  reach  this 
event  several  other  matters  must  be  reviewed  that 
belong  to  the  intervening  years. 

The  machine  of  government  found  in  operation  by 
Ferdinand  on  his  return  was  so  infinitely  superior  to 
that  in  use  formerly  that  there  was  never  any  serious 
thought  of  reverting  back  to  the  old  system  of  adminis- 
tration. The  King's  engagements  to  Austria,  the  labour 
of  elaborating  a  new  system,  the  perfect  adaptability  of 
Joachim's  institutions  to  the  essential  requirements  of 
arbitrary  personal  government,  all  made  change  un- 
desirable. It  was  decreed  immediately  on  Ferdinand's 
return  that  the  existing  laws  and  officials  would  be 
retained,  that  the  public  debt  and  sales  of  State  property 
would  be  recognised,  and  that  there  would  be  no  resti- 
tution to  the  nobility  returning  with  the  King  from  Sicily 
of  such  confiscated  property  as  had  been  legally  sold. 
So  slight  indeed  were  the  apparent  changes  that  an 
English  traveller  was  able  to  record  that  in  the  Royal 
Palace  the  only  notable  alteration  was  the  hanging  of  a 
crucifix  over  the  King's  bed,  a  fashion  that  had  not 
obtained  under  the  French  kings. 

Ferdinand,  under  pressure  of  Austrian  advice, 
adhered  commendably  to  a  policy  of  conciliation,  and 
at  first  even  prominent  Carbonaro  leaders  were  made 
the  recipients  of  the  royal  favour.  Such  noted  sup- 
porters of  the  late  government  as  Gallo,  Carignano, 
S.  Teodoro  and  Campochiaro  were  received  at  Court, 
though  coolly,  and  it  was  reported  that  Ferdinand 
viewed  with  least  favour  of  all  those  of  the  Muratists 

VOL.  II  E 


50  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

who  had  not  presented  themselves  and  had  fled  like  Zurlo. 
Even  those  Sicilians  who  had  supported  Bentinck  and 
thus  won  official  station  were  generally  left  undisturbed 
now  that  Ferdinand  was  able  once  more  to  direct  his  own 
afl^airs.  But  whatever  forgiveness  might  be  shown  by 
the  restored  King  to  the  Sicilian  supporters  of  the  British 
statesman,  for  Bentinck  himself  there  was  none.  A  deep 
hatred  still  rankled  in  the  heart  of  Ferdinand  for  the 
many  humiliations  he  had  endured,  and  an  opportunity 
soon  arose  to  make  it  manifest  to  the  world. 

Bentinck  had  finished  the  very  difficult  work  Great 
Britain  had  entrusted  to  him  in  the  Mediterranean,  not 
without  unfortunate  incidents,  yet  also  not  without 
painfully  attained  advantages  for  his  country.  This 
mission  terminated,  he  was  now  on  the  point  of  return- 
ing to  England,  and,  on  sailing  from  Genoa,  he  decided 
to  pay  a  flying  visit  to  Naples.  No  sooner  was  this 
project  of  Bentinck  known  than  Circello,  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  communicated  to  a  Court,  the  British 
Minister,  that  the  King  would  not  give  his  consent  to 
Bentinck's  appearance  in  his  dominions.  The  official 
reason  put  forward  was  that  Lord  William  was  a  promi- 
nent supporter  of  the  Carbonari,  and  that  his  presence 
was  undesirable  in  view  of  the  unsettled  state  of  public 
opinion.  In  vain  a  Court  tried  to  dissuade  Bentinck 
from  his  purpose  ;  the  latter's  tact  once  more  proved 
less  conspicuous  than  his  determination,  and  he  accord- 
ingly arrived  in  the  bay  of  Naples  an  unbidden  and 
unwelcome  guest,  a  Court  was,  on  the  whole,  more 
inclined  to  side  with  Ferdinand  than  with  his  former 
chief,  and  partly  as  a  result  of  this,  the  King  was  enabled 
publicly  to  insult  the  man  from  whom  he  had  himself 
received  such  humiliation,  by  issuing  strict  orders  that 
he  was  not  to  be  permitted  to  leave  his  ship  and  come 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  51 

to  land.  As  a  consequence  of  this  step,  scarcely  a  soul 
went  out  to  visit  Bentinck.  The  British  Minister  declined 
to  help  him,  and  as  he  could  not  land  by  force,  he  was 
obliged  ingloriously  to  set  sail  again  for  England,  where 
the  Ministry  received  his  complaints  with  but  slight 
sympathy.-^ 

This,  however,  was  but  an  isolated  example  of  the 
resentment  which  Ferdinand  felt  at  heart.  The  general 
moderation  shown  by  the  Government  was  so  great  that 
many  of  the  French  officers  and  officials  who  had  fol- 
lowed Joachim's  fortune  when  he  turned  against  France 
preferred  to  remain  in  the  kingdom  rather  than  face  a 
doubtful  reception  or  start  a  new  fortune  in  returning 
to  their  fatherland.  Many  had  married  into  Neapolitan 
families  and  had  thus  become  closely  attached  to  their 
new  homes.^ 

The  principal  agent  of  this  moderation  was  the  most 
considerable  man  among  the  King's  Ministers,  Cavaliere 
De  Medici.  He  was  a  descendant  of  the  Florentine 
ducal  house  of  Medici,  but  being  in  poor  circumstances, 
had  embraced  the  law  as  a  profession.  He  had  joined 
the  Republican  party  in  1799,  though  apparently  in 
somewhat  half-hearted  fashion.  A  little  later  he  obtained 
Government  employment,  and  through  various  vicissi- 
tudes he  had  now  made  himself  indispensable  by 
showing  abilities  far  greater  than  those  of  any  of  his 
colleagues.  He  was  a  capable  administrator,  his  word 
could  be  accepted,  and,  compared  with  the  men  who 
surrounded  him,  he  was  honest.     Of  the  other  Ministers 

^  a  Court's  dispatches,  Fcr.  Off.  Sicily,  70. 

2  The  French  officers  who  served  in  the  Neapolitan  army  in  the  campaign  of 
1815  received  no  notice  of  Murat's  flight,  were  given  no  opportunity  of  making 
their  escape,  and  were  not  provided  for  in  the  military  convention  of  Casa  Lanza. 
Bianchi  treated  them  all  as  prisoners  and  sent  them  to  Vienna,  which,  as  Austria 
and  France  were  at  war,  was  perfectly  proper. 


52  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

little  can  be  said  but  that  they  were  typical  of  many 
that  preceded  them.  To  follow  closely  the  frequent 
changes  that  took  place  in  the  composition,  but  not 
in  the  methods,  of  the  Ministry  will  not  be  necessary. 
On  Ferdinand's  return  foreign  affairs  were  intrusted 
to  Circello,  as  old  as  he  was  ignorant  ;  the  army  and 
navy  to  St.  Clair,  perhaps  because  of  the  perfect  dis- 
cipline he  had  shown  while  in  the  service  of  the 
Queen  ;  other  posts  to  Tommasi,  Parisi,  and  Naselli. 
Medici  took  for  his  part  finance  and  police,  and  really 
directed  the  affairs  of  the  State. 

Whatever  has  been  said  in  praise  of  Medici  must 
be  understood  in  a  relative  sense.  Compared  with 
his  colleagues  he  was  eminent ;  compared  with  his 
predecessors  Roederer  or  Mosbourg  he  was  far  from 
being  a  good  financier.  In  the  five  years  during  which 
he  directed  the  finances  of  the  kingdom  the  debt  rose 
from  about  800,000  ducats  to  nearly  twice  that  amount. 
There  were  indeed  special  causes  that  increased  the 
financial  burdens  of  the  State.  The  Congress  of  Vienna 
had  made  provision  for  Prince  Eugene  Beauharnais,  and 
this  was  made  to  fall  partly  on  the  Two  Sicilies,  Fer- 
dinand being  called  on  to  find  5,000,000  francs  for  the 
Prince.  Again,  the  war  expenses  of  Austria  for  the 
campaign  of  18 15,  which  Ferdinand  had  agreed  to  meet, 
had  been  considerably  augmented  by  the  continued 
presence  of  a  corps  of  imperial  troops  in  Naples,  so 
that  in  18 17  a  sum  of  5,000,000  scudi  was  due  to  the 
Austrian  Government.^ 


1  In  respect  of  maintaining  a  part  of  the  army  at  others'  expense,  Austria  faith- 
fully adopted  the  system  of  Napoleon.  For  the  year  1817  the  estimated  cost  of  the 
Austrian  troops  in  Naples  figured,  in  a  very  badly  drawn  up  budget,  at  3,500,000 
ducats. — Brit.  State  Paps.  1816-1817,  891.  A  Neapolitan  authority,  however,  makes 
the  sum  1,600,000  j  it  may  be  that  the  one  represents  the  nominal,  the  other  the 
real  expenditure. — M.L.R.  127. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  53 

The  restoration  had  in  other  ways  embarrassed  the 
royal  finances.  Without  following  the  somewhat  ex- 
aggerated figures  of  such  writers  as  Del  Re,  M.L.R.,  and 
Colletta,  it  is  certain  that  at  the  time  of  the  Congress 
much  money  was  distributed  at  Vienna  by  Ferdinand 
in  diplomatic  refreshers.  From  two  millions  to  nine 
millions  of  ducats  are  the  figures  given  by  contem- 
porary authorities  under  this  head  ;  whatever  the  total, 
it  was  probably  large,  and  Talleyrand  secured  a  fair 
share  of  it  over  the  settlement  of  his  claim  to  the 
revenues  of  Benevento. 

Not  only  in  the  matter  of  finance,  but  in  other  direc- 
tions the  new  Government  met  with  embarrassments. 
The  return  of  the  King  to  his  capital  had  been  some- 
what injudiciously  commemorated  by  a  general  release 
from  prison  of  all  evil-doers  sentenced  for  a  term  of 
three  years  or  less,  and  this,  together  with  the  disband- 
ment  of  Murat's  army,  had  been  the  source  of  much  dis- 
order. Special  military  juntas  soon  became  necessary  in 
many  districts,  superseding  the  ordinary  magistrates  and 
procedure.  Special  tribunals  were  also  appointed  in 
several  cases  where  the  returned  feudal  lord  attempted 
to  reassert  the  rights  abolished  by  the  Feudal  Commis- 
sion. It  was  in  this  respect  perhaps  that  the  methods 
of  the  Government  gave  rise  to  most  friction.  The  case 
was,  indeed,  a  hard  one  to  deal  with,  and  it  is  not 
difficult  to  imagine  that  Ferdinand  found  it  no  easy 
matter  to  resist  the  importunities  of  those  few  loyal 
noblemen  who  had  faithfully  followed  his  fortunes  in 
the  darkest  hour,  and  who  now  asked  that  they  as  well 
as  he  should  be  reinstated  in  their  former  possessions. 
Soon  a  disinclination  to  acknowledge  the  validity  of 
the  grants  made  by  Joseph  and  Joachim  became 
apparent,  forced  interpretations  were  made  use  of  to 


54  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  n 

transfer  back  some  of  their  property  to  the  former 
proprietors,  and  these  steps  met  with  encouragement 
in  high  quarters.  The  Austrian  Minister,  Prince 
Jablonowsky,  supported  Ferdinand  in  his  policy,  but 
both  he  and  the  King  were  sharply  pulled  up  by  a 
dispatch  from  Metternich,  in  which  he  admirably  stated 
his  strong  objections  to  the  course  taken  : — 

The  sequestration  of  the  grants  made  by  Joseph  and 
Joachim  (he  wrote)  is  a  dangerous  measure  certain  to  excite 
the  fear  of  purchasers  of  State  property.  It  is  in  any  case 
contrary  to  the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  of  the  29th  of  April. 
It  constitutes  an  infraction  of  the  principle  embodied  in  Clause 
II.  of  the  treaty  ;  it  is  an  attack  on  the  right  of  property  ;  lastly, 
it  is  opening  the  door  to  persecution  and  revenge  j  for  to  draw 
a  line  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible.^ 

The  voice  of  Metternich  was  nearly  as  powerful 
and  well  obeyed  at  Naples  as  at  Vienna,  and  his 
admonition  appears  to  have  had  a  salutary  effect. 
The  influence  of  Austria  was  paramount  at  Naples, 
though  her  representative,  Jablonowsky,  was  far  below 
the  average  of  Austrian  diplomatic  ability.  He  attached 
himself  to  the  entourage  of  the  Duchess  of  Floridia,  but 
his  efforts  were  generally  ill  judged,  and  he  required 
constant  guidance  from  Metternich. 

Austria  was  too  well  assured  of  Ferdinand's  political 
principles  to  desire  to  take  up  any  other  position  than 
that  which  existing  treaties  and  her  military  preponder- 
ance in  Italy  gave  her.  Jablonowsky  was  restrained 
from  intervening  in  the  domestic  affairs  of  the  kingdom, 
and,  indeed,  had  been  officially  reproved  for  not  having 
assumed  a  purely  neutral  position  in  the  question  of  the 
fate  of  Murat.  Yet  Metternich  considered  the  presence 
of  Austrian  troops  at  Naples  necessary  to  prevent  all  pos- 

1  Metternich  to  Jablonowsky,  30th  August  1815,  Helfert,  Murat,  84. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  55 

sibiiity  of  dangerous  reactions.  Ferdinand  also  entirely- 
approved  of  their  presence,  and  had  shown  his  gratitude 
and  appreciation  of  their  services  by  creating  Bianchi 
Duke  of  Casa  Lanza,  and  by  granting  him  an  annuity 
of  9000  ducats.  The  Austrian  garrison  was  retained, 
therefore,  until  the  year  18 17,  and  when  it  was  with- 
drawn Nugent  remained  behind  as  commander-in-chief 
of  the  Neapolitan  army,  much  to  the  disgust  of  the 
native  officers. 

After  Tolentino  there  had  been  no  resistance  offered 
by  any  portion  of  the  Neapolitan  army  save  at  Gaeta, 
where  General  Begani  bravely  and  honourably  kept 
Joachim*s  flag  flying  until  the  news  of  Waterloo 
reached  him.  Then  he  surrendered.  Of  Murat's 
army  there  was  little  left  but  the  officers,  and  for 
these  the  convention  of  Casa  Lanza  had  stipulated 
that  they  should  retain  their  rank  and  honours  on 
swearing  allegiance  to  Ferdinand.  There  were  also 
the  officers  of  the  Sicilian  army  to  be  taken  into 
account,  and  between  them  and  their  former  enemies 
much  hostility  was  displayed.  Ferdinand  not  un- 
naturally showed  more  confidence  in  the  Sicilians  than 
in  the  Neapolitans,  and  in  various  ways  distinguished 
them,  thus  making  this  feeling  more  acute. 

Among  the  first  army  measures  of  the  new  Govern- 
ment was  a  decree,  that  was  received  with  great 
approbation,  abolishing  the  detested  conscription.  But 
later,  at  the  time  of  the  departure  of  the  Austrian 
corps  of  occupation,  it  was  considered  advisable  to 
increase  the  native  forces  of  the  kingdom,  and  a  levy  of 
twenty-one  regiments  of  provincial  militia  was  instituted. 
These  regiments  immediately  became  active  centres  of  / 
the  Carbonari.  After  the  war  a  great  part  of  the 
Muratist  army  was  sent    to   Salerno   to   be  reformed, 


56  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

but  its  disorder  was  so  great  and  the  confidence  of 
the  King  in  the  generals  so  slight  that  it  became 
necessary  to  place  in  supreme  command,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  Count  Nugent.  Something  of  the 
soldierly  qualities  of  this  officer  has  already  been 
noted  in  connection  with  the  campaigns  of  1814  and 
1815  ;  it  remains  to  be  said  that  he  possessed  other 
qualifications,  of  manners  and  tact,  that  eminently  fitted 
him  for  the  post  he  was  called  to.  One  of  the 
Neapolitan  generals  placed  under  his  orders  wrote  of 
him  that  he  was  an  "  able  officer,  exceedingly  courteous 
in  his  manners,  and  generally  well  disposed."-^ 

The  first  period  of  the  Bourbon  restoration,  the 
period  between  the  years  1815  and  1820  that  we  are 
now  viewing,  was  not  full  of  stirring  incidents.  It  was 
one  of  peaceful  reaction,  so  far  as  superficial  appear- 
ances went,  of  gentle  sinking  back  into  the  easy-going 
and  unprogressive  routine  of  pre -Napoleonic  days. 
There  is  little  of  moment  to  relate,  nothing  to  excite, 
nothing  to  hold,  the  imagination.  All  that  the 
historian  can  do  is  to  attempt  to  seize,  one  after  the 
other,  the  detached  threads,  each  one  of  which  appears 
trifling,  yet  each  one  of  which  is  essential  to  the 
making  up  of  the  great  chain  of  events  that  resulted  in 
the  liberal  revolution  of  1820.  One  of  these  threads 
that  we  must  now  pick  up  will  take  us  back  to  Sicily 
and  to  the  period  in  which  Joachim  was  still  King  of 
Naples. 

One  of  the  most  notable  matters  that  arose  out  of 
Bentinck's  rule  over  Sicily  was  the  adoption  for  that 
island  of  a  constitutional  and  parliamentary  form  of 
government  closely  modelled  on  that  of  England. 
The    ancient    Sicilian    Parliament    had    indeed    vested 

1  Pepe,  Mems.  ii.  139. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  57 

in  it  the  power  of  voting  money ;  by  the  reformed 
constitution  it  acquired  that  of  legislating  as  well. 
Sicilian  constitutionalism,  however,  was  a  very  artificial 
movement,  convenient  for  Bentinck,  and  doubtless  well 
intended  by  him,  but  far  beyond  the  political  range  of 
the  islanders.  From  the  year  18 14,  when  the  hold  of 
Great  Britain  on  the  island  began  to  relax,  Bentinck's 
constitution  rapidly  fell  into  desuetude.  In  the  winter 
of  1814-1815  the  real  power  of  the  Government  was 
fast  being  restored  to  the  hands  of  Ferdinand.  In 
February  1 8 1 5  the  cessation  of  the  British  subsidy  had 
made  him  poorer  but  more  free,  and  after  the  Parlia- 
ment's session  of  that  year  came  to  an  end,  the  King 
openly  treated  the  Constitution  as  non-existent.  His 
embarkation  for  Naples  in  May,  without  asking  for 
the  Parliament's  consent,  was  a  flagrant  violation  of  a 
clause  of  the  Constitution,  and  this  was  soon  followed 
by  others. 

The  mere  fact  that  Sicily  under  Ferdinand  had  a 
Constitution,  and  that  Naples  under  Joachim  had  not, 
proved  of  great  serv^ice  as  a  means  of  Bourbon 
propaganda,  and  when  the  two  kingdoms  were  once 
more  united  under  the  same  government,  the  question 
at  once  presented  itself :  Would  constitutionalism  ex- 
tend to  Naples,  or  despotism  to  Sicily  ?  The  engage- 
ment contracted  by  Ferdinand  with  Austria,  his  natural 
bent,  and  the  course  he  had  already  taken,  showed 
clearly  what  the  sequel  would  be.  Nor  was  the 
British  Government  so  determined  to  uphold  its  work 
in  Sicily  as  to  resist  the  arguments  of  Metternich  in 
support  of  the  gradual  steps  whereby  that  work  was 
finally  put  aside.  The  final  change  was  not  effected 
until  December  1816  ;  then  Ferdinand,  third  of  the 
name    as  King   of  Sicily,   fourth   as   King   of  Naples, 


58  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

issued  a  decree  whereby  he  assumed  the  style  of 
Ferdinand  I.  of  the  Two  Sicilies.  Other  decrees 
followed  unifying  the  political  conditions  of  the  two 
kingdoms,  and,  by  a  curious  turn  of  fortune,  driving 
from  Sicily  British  constitutionalism  to  make  way  for 
what  were  in  reality  Napoleonic  institutions. 

But  the  fact  that  Sicily  had  enjoyed  a  constitutional 
government,  that  Ferdinand  had  for  a  period  acquiesced 
in  and  ruled  according  to  constitutional  forms,  was  of 
the  utmost  importance.  It  prepared  the  minds  of 
many  of  his  subjects  for  the  renewal  of  such  conditions ; 
it  appeared  to  show  even  to  the  most  loyal  among  them 
that  there  was  no  necessary  incompatibility  between 
the  Bourbons  and  constitutionalism.  It  was  not  long 
before  Ferdinand  was  warned  that  Naples  was  not 
entirely  prepared  to  acquiesce  in  a  retrograde  policy 
and  in  a  return  to  the  past. 

The  premonitory  symptoms  of  the  approaching  storm 
came  from  the  usually  dormant  provinces  of  the 
Adriatic.  The  outbreak  of  disorder  that  had  marked 
the  Bourbon  restoration  was  largely  caused  by  the 
number  of  disbanded  soldiers  who  had,  after  Tolen- 
tino,  returned  to  their  normal  vocation  of  brigandage. 
From  many  parts  of  the  provinces  reports  came  to  the 
Ministry  of  the  Interior  of  a  rising  tide  of  robbery  and 
violence.  Nowhere  did  this  attain  greater  intensity 
and  assume  a  better  defined  form  than  in  the  province 
of  Puglia.  The  disorder  was  many-sided,  and  every 
sort  of  malefactor  flourished,  from  the  mere  common- 
place assassin  committing  a  wayside  crime  for  motives 
of  greed  or  revenge,  to  such  accomplished  and  preten- 
tious criminals  as  the  priest  Annichiarico.  Between 
these  extremes  the  gradations  were  numerous  ;  in  them 
a  middle  station  may  be  said  to  have  been  occupied 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  59 

by  the  Vardarelli  brothers,  whose  exploits  have  been 
more  vaunted  than  they  deserved. 

The  head  of  this  famous  association,  Gaetano 
Vardarelli,  was  a  Carbonaro ;  he  viewed  assassination  as 
an  unpleasant  necessity  to  be  avoided,  if  possible,  and 
only  occasionally  indulged  in  ;  by  his  skill  and  courage 
he  achieved  great  reputation.  In  September  18 16  he 
actually  defeated  a  considerable  body  of  Government 
troops  in  the  mountain  passes  near  Avellino  ;  later 
he  rendered  the  neighbourhood  of  Salerno  unsafe. 
Finally  the  Government,  in  despair  of  catching  him, 
came  to  a  composition  whereby  Vardarelli,  his  brothers, 
and  his  followers  were  engaged  for  a  considerable 
honorarium  to  enter  the  service  of  the  State.  Having 
as  a  result  of  this  pact  succeeded  in  getting  a  little 
closer  to  these  brigands  than  had  hitherto  been  the 
case,  the  Government  took  an  early  opportunity  of 
trapping  its  new  officials,  and  the  five  brothers,  with 
many  of  their  followers,  were  treacherously  shot  down. 

The  scene  of  the  Vardarellis'  exploits  was  the  pro- 
vince of  Principato.  But  Puglia  was  in  an  even  worse 
condition,  for  there  a  widely  extended  movement 
threatened  the  very  existence  of  the  Government,  and  it 
became  necessary  to  send  to  that  quarter  an  officer  of 
energy  and  ability  capable  of  dealing  with  the  most 
serious  difficulties.  For  this  task  Ferdinand's  Ministers 
judiciously  selected  an  Englishman,  General  Church. 
He  had  served  for  some  years  in  southern  Italy,  under 
Stuart  at  Maida,  with  the  Corsican  Rangers  under  Lowe 
when  Lamarque  took  Capri,  on  Bianchi's  staff  at 
Tolentino,  and  since  as  a  Major-General  in  the  Neapoli- 
tan service.  He  understood  the  Neapolitans  perfectly, 
and  fully  redeemed  the  trust  Ferdinand  reposed  in  him 
when  he  gave  him  full  power  to  make  any  use  of  the 


6o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

royal  authority  he  might  find  necessary  for   restoring 
order  in  Puglia. 

Brigandage  and  crime  had,  in  this  province,  invaded 
and  taken  possession  of  the  secret  societies.  Two  large 
associations  already  existed  in  Puglia  before  Murat's 
fall,  the  Filadelfi  and  the  Patriotti  Europei,  The  latter 
were  formed  in  the  year  1814,  the  former  perhaps  a 
little  later.  Both  of  these  societies  had  a  military 
organization  ;  their  rites  had  been  introduced  from 
northern  Italy,  and  there  was  said  to  be  an  affiliation 
connecting  them  with  a  society  known  as  the  Grande 
Repubblica  Europea,  whose  headquarters  were  at  Paris. 
Canosa's  vigorous  propaganda  in  favour  of  the  Calderari 
alarmed  these  societies,  and  they  appear  to  have  decided 
to  extend  their  numbers  as  a  means  of  retaining  their 
influence.  All  sorts  and  conditions  of  men  were 
admitted,  and  with  disastrous  effects. 

Towards  the  end  of  1 8 1 6  the  Patriotti  Europei  and 
the  Filadelfi  embarked  on  a  policy  of  levying  contribu- 
tions of  money  from  the  inhabitants  of  southern  Puglia, 
enforcing  their  demands  by  terrorism.  Fear  induced 
many  new  members  to  join,  and  in  the  early  part 
of  1 8 17  they  numbered  30,000  or  40,000.  It  was  at 
about  this  time  (October  18 17)  that  a  new  society,  the 
Decisi,  was  formed  by  Giro  Annichiarico,  and,  outstrip- 
ping the  other  two  societies  in  violence,  quickly  took 
the  lead  in  the  movement. 

Annichiarico  was  a  priest,  a  leader  of  the  masse  in 
1799  ;  iniprisoned  four  years  for  murder  at  Lecce,  he 
had  on  his  release  taken  to  a  career  of  crime.  When 
asked  on  his  trial  how  many  lives  he  had  taken,  he 
characteristically  answered  :  *'  E  chi  lo  lo  sa  ?  Saranno 
tra  sessanta  e  settanta."  ^     He  had  been  a  member  of  the 

^  "Who  can  tell?     Some  sixty  or  seventy." — Bertholdi,  121. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  6i 

Patriotti  Europe!  since  1815,  but  on  his  forming  the 
Decisi  two  years  later  his  unrivalled  experience  of 
seventeen  years  of  crime  at  once  attracted  a  large  and 
congenial  following  ;  in  January  1 8 1 8  he  had  no  less 
than  20,000  followers. 

The  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Decisi  may  be  best 
described  as  perverted  Carbonarism  of  a  crudely  criminal 
variety.  Among  their  chief  and  most  prominent  officials 
they  suggestively  included  a  Registrar  of  deaths  and  a 
Director  of  funeral  ceremonies.  Their  diplomas  were 
profusely  ornamented  with  skulls  and  crossbones,  and 
displayed  at  the  four  corners  the  appropriate  and 
lugubrious  words  :  Tristezza^  —  Morte^  —  Terrore^  — 
Lutto}  The  diploma  called  on  all  members  of  "  philan- 
thropic "  societies  on  the  face  of  the  earth  to  give  assist- 
ance to  the  bearer,  who  was  described  as  one  anxious  to 
conquer  liberty  or  death. 

The  foregoing  facts  as  to  the  Decisi  will  doubtless 
suffice  to  enlighten  the  reader  as  to  their  character. 
The  society  was  indeed,  as  Church  reported  to  the 
Government,  frightful  and  unparalleled  ;  its  crimes 
were  appalling.  The  danger  it  threatened  was  the 
greater  as  political  doctrines  and  ambitions  were  loosely 
bound  up  in  the  movement,  and  at  the  same  time 
a  famine,  that  frequent  precursor  of  revolution,  was 
causing  much  suffering  in  Puglia.  Through  the  whole 
province,  in  the  cities  of  Taranto,  Otranto,  Brindisi, 
Bari,  and  Lecce,  the  terrorism  and  control  of  the 
societies  was  complete.  At  dusk  peaceful  inhabitants 
securely  closed  up  their  houses,  and  while  the  brother- 
hoods held  their  meetings  they  were  protected  by 
armed  guards  who  patrolled  the  streets.  Fortunate 
it  was  that  among  them  were  no  men  fitted  to  act  as 

1  Sorrow,  death,  terror,  mourning. 


62  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

leaders,  to  organize  revolution,  and  to  lift  the  whole 
movement  from  a  plane  of  criminal  to  one  of  political 
disorder. 

In  the  town  of  Lecce,  where  the  mercurial  tempera- 
ment of  the  inhabitants  and  the  general  revolutionary 
mania  were  at  their  worst,  there  were  not  less  than 
twenty-five  assassinations  a  week.  Every  month  the  list 
of  homicides  grew  to  more  terrible  proportions,  and, 
encouraged  by  impunity,  other  crimes  became  equally 
prevalent.  Troops  of  men  masked  and  disguised  in 
Pulcinella  costume  wandered  through  the  country  in 
broad  daylight,  thieving,  destroying,  outraging  women. 
The  Governor  of  Lecce  was  fired  at  point-blank  as  he 
left  the  theatre  one  evening.  Not  only  was  money 
extorted,  but  persons  were  compelled  under  threats  to 
sign  contracts  assigning  away  land  and  property.  The 
clergy  took  a  large  share  in  the  disorders,  and  when 
the  Bishopric  of  Lecce  became  vacant,  two  good  and 
honourable  ecclesiastics  of  the  province  to  whom  it  was 
offered  declined  to  accept  such  a  responsibility. 

When  Church  arrived  in  Puglia  matters  were  coming 
to  a  crisis.  Annichiarico,  aflihated  to  every  society 
and  head  of  the  most  dangerous  of  them,  was  beginning 
to  assume  a  political  role,  and  was  openly  tending  to 
republicanism  and  revolt.  To  capture  him  was  the 
first  necessity  of  the  situation  ;  but  to  accomplish  this 
was  a  task  of  immense  difficulty  because  of  his  desperate 
following  and  resourcefulness. 

In  his  task  of  striking  down  the  head  of  the 
anarchy  of  Puglia,  Church  fortunately  commanded  the 
services  of  a  small  body  of  police  and  military  recruited 
from  outside  Naples,  and  largely  from  Germany ; 
without  their  efficient  support  he  could  not  have  suc- 
ceeded.    He   quickly  got   to    work,    and   at  first   the 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  63 

Decisi  attempted  to  meet  him  in  open  warfare.  Several 
regular  engagements  were  fought  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Francavilla,  in  which  the  band  of  brigands  was  broken 
up.  Annichiarico  was  soon  reduced  to  a  few  personal 
followers  and  became  a  hunted  outlaw.  At  Jast,  on  the 
8th  of  February  181 8,  after  a  single-handed  defence  of 
some  hours  in  a  stone  barn,  Ciro  Annichiarico  was  cap- 
tured. He  was  immediately  conveyed  to  Francavilla, 
tried  by  court-martial,  and  condemned  to  death.  On 
his  way  to  the  public  square  where  the  execution  was 
to  take  place,  through  a  throng  of  spectators,  and 
surrounded  by  a  large  body  of  troops,  he  continu- 
ally turned  to  the  onlookers,  gesticulating  wildly, 
desperately  repeating  all  the  secret  society  signs  in  his 
knowledge,  but  all  in  vain.  If  there  were  Patriotti 
Europei,  or  Filadelfi,  or  Decisi  present,  they  did  not 
respond  to  the  mute  appeals  of  their  chief.  The 
power  of  the  secret  society  spells  was  for  the  moment 
broken. 

Annichiarico's  execution  was  vigorously  followed  up. 
By  the  end  of  July,  Church  had  caused  some  sixty  heads 
to  be  exposed  in  various  places  in  the  province,  and  was 
able  to  report  to  the  Government  that  the  reign  of  the 
secret  societies  in  Puglia  was  over.  He  now  asked  the 
Ministry  to  proclaim  an  amnesty  as  the  best  means  of 
securing  a  complete  pacification.  This  was  accordingly 
done  on  the  20th  of  September  18 18. 

Church  had  undoubtedly  restored  order  in  Puglia, 
had  destroyed  the  Decisi,  the  Filadelfi,  and  the  Patriotti 
Europei,  but  there  was  one  thing  he  could  not  accom- 
plish, he  could  not  change  the  character  of  the  people. 
Conditions  were  infinitely  better,  but  the  ingrained  pro- 
pensity remained,  and  less  than  two  years  later,  under 
a  new  set  of  conditions,  Puglia  once  more  fell  into  the 


64  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

hands  of  a  secret  society,  though  not  under  the  rule 
of  the  ruffians  of  the  Decisi.  But  before  we  come  to 
that  new  set  of  conditions  certain  minor  events  that 
mark  this  period  of  the  reign  of  Ferdinand  must  be 
chronicled  in  their  due  order. 

Among  the  Napoleonic  improvements  in  methods  of 
administration  that  the  government  of  King  Ferdinand 
had  eagerly  adopted  was  that  ruling  the  relations  of 
State  and  Church.  The  suppression  of  the  monastic 
orders,  the  confiscation  of  their  property  and  its  con- 
version to  the  purposes  of  the  State,  the  subordination 
of  priests  and  bishops  to  the  civil  power,  the  abolition 
of  clerical  privileges  and  ecclesiastical  courts,  were  too 
conformable  to  the  necessities  of  a  centralized  system  of 
government  to  be  lightly  abandoned.  The  Papal  Court 
attempted  in  vain  to  reassert  its  ancient  rights.  Cardinal 
Consalvi,  Secretary  of  State,  began,  as  is  usual  in  such 
negotiations,  by  asking  for  more  than  he  expected  to 
get,  and  called  on  the  Neapolitan  Government  to  resume 
payment  of  the  chinea.  This  was  an  annual  gift  of  a 
richly  harnessed  white  horse  and  seven  thousand  ducats 
that  the  Pope  received  as  a  token  of  feudal  superiority, 
and  that  had  been  discontinued  in  1776.  The  Papal 
Government  not  only  failed  to  obtain  the  resumption 
of  the  chinea^  but,  after  protracted  negotiations  between 
Consalvi  and  Medici,  had  to  rest  satisfied  with  a  treaty 
that  left  the  Papacy  in  a  very  different  position  from 
that  which  it  occupied  before  the  Revolution. 

This  concordat  was  on  the  general  lines  of  Napoleonic 
policy.  It  restored,  however,  a  few  privileges  to  the 
Church  :  it  enacted  that  the  Catholic  Faith  should  be 
the  sole  recognised  religion  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Two  Sicilies  ;  that  all  confiscated  and  unalienated  ecclesi- 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  65 

astical  property  should  be  restored ;  that  the  suppressed 
Orders  should  as  far  as  possible  be  reinstated  ;  that 
ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  should  be  exercised  in  matters 
matrimonial  and  over  clerics  in  matters  canonical ;  that 
printed  matter  found  contrary  to  religion  or  morals  by 
the  Church  should  be  suppressed  by  the  Government. 

This  concordat  was  far  from  satisfying  the  aspirations 
of  the  clerical  party,  and  they  were  for  a  time  inclined 
to  join  forces  with  a  Court  faction  that  hoped  for  the 
early  succession  of  the  Duke  of  Calabria  to  the  throne. 
Many  members  of  the  aristocracy  who  had  followed  the 
fortunes  of  Ferdinand  during  the  French  occupation 
were  dissatisfied  at  not  being  reinstated  in  their  family 
estates,  and  a  severe  illness  of  the  aged  King  in  the 
course  of  1 8 1 8  raised  their  expectations  high.  The  posi- 
tion of  the  Hereditary  Prince  was  the  more  important 
in  the  State  in  that  he  had  for  some  years  exercised  the 
regency  during  Bentinck's  rule  in  Sicily.  The  marriage 
of  his  daughter.  Princess  Carolina  Ferdinanda,  with  the 
Due  de  Berry  in  18 16,  also  served  to  strengthen  his  in- 
fluence. But  the  King's  illness  passed  off,  and  although 
there  was  considerable  ill-feeling  between  the  Duchess  of 
Calabria  and  the  Duchess  of  Floridia,  these  bickerings 
did  not  portend  anything  of  very  great  significance. 
For  the  unanimous  judgment  of  contemporaries  appears 
to  have  been  that  the  two  really  momentous  events  of 
the  period  were  the  burning  of  the  San  Carlo  Theatre 
and  the  disappearance  of  King  Ferdinand's  queue. 
The  historian's  clear  duty  is  to  follow  the  chief  currents 
of  thought  of  the  age  he  deals  with,  even  should  they, 
as  in  the  present  case,  lead  him  to  the  footlights  and  to 
the  barber's  shop  ;  we  must  therefore  approach  these 
matters  with  due  inquisitiveness. 

The  opera  house  of  San  Carlo  adjoined  the  Royal 

VOL.   II  F 


66  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Palace,  as  it  still  does  ;  it  had  been  erected  by  Charles 
III.  in  1737,  was  one  of  the  finest  in  Europe,  the 
pride  and  social  centre  of  Naples.  Shortly  after  Ferdi- 
nand's return  it  was  destroyed  by  fire.  Early  in  18 16 
the  rebuilding  was  begun,  and  was  carried  through  in 
less  than  a  year.  The  new  San  Carlo  was  completed 
in  January  1 8 1 7,  and  in  its  rebuilt  form  was  the  largest 
and  most  handsome  opera  house  in  Italy.  On  the  13th 
of  the  same  month  a  gala  performance  was  attended  by 
the  King,  who  was  received  with  a  great  outburst  of 
enthusiasm.  Henri  Beyle  was  then  travelling  in  Naples  ; 
he  was  present,  and  noted  : — 

This  theatre,  rebuilt  in  three  hundred  days,  is  a  great 
political  stroke  {est  un  coup  d^etat).  It  has  won  the  loyalty 
of  the  people  more  than  the  best  of  laws  would  have.  Naples 
is  raving  with  patriotism.^ 

It  was  a  far  more  easy  matter  for  Ferdinand  to  order 
the  reconstruction  of  the  San  Carlo  than  to  permit  the 
cutting  of  his  hair.  The  great  political  significance 
attaching  to  the  queue  has  received  proper  attention  in 
the  early  pages  of  this  work.  Even  after  the  fall  of 
the  Empire  tonsorial  fashions  retained  some  measure 
of  importance,  and  if  le  Fere  la  Violette  was  the  name 
under  which  the  old  soldiers  generally  spoke  of  the 
proscribed  dweller  at  Saint  Helena,  he  was  also  frequently 
alluded  to  as  le  'petit  t07tdu.  Yet  fashion  is  the  most 
powerful  enemy  of  prejudice,  and  the  Duchess  of 
Floridia  conquered  political  bias.  One  day  Ferdinand 
astonished  the  Court  and  the  city  by  making  his  appear- 
ance shorn  of  his  queue.  This  revolutionary  step 
caused  the  greatest  ferment,  but  when  it  was  realized 
that  Ferdinand  hunted,  and  joked,  and  ate  macaroni, 
and  talked  good  Neapolitan,  just  as  he  formerly  had, 

^  Beyle,  Romcy  Naples,  et  Florence,  60. 


CHAP.  Ill  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS  67 

and  showed  no  further  symptoms  of  Jacobinism  or 
insanity,  alarm  changed  to  imitation,  and  the  fedeloni^ 
who  still  clung  to  the  ancient  fashion,  made  haste  to 
follow  their  master's  example.  In  a  few  days  queues 
had  disappeared  from  Naples,  never,  let  us  hope,  to 
return. 

Ferdinand  was  indeed  the  same  ;  he  had  not  changed. 
Early  in  January  his  brother,  the  ex-King  of  Spain, 
Charles  IV.,  then  visiting  him  at  Naples,  died.  The 
King  sent  the  Hereditary  Prince  to  attend  the  obsequies, 
while  he  himself  displayed  his  grief  by  enjoying  a  good 
day's  hunting. 

It  appeared  as  though  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  might  go  on  after  this  fashion  for  an  indefinite 
period.  When  the  year  1 820  opened  there  had  not  been 
since  the  restoration  one  capital  condemnation  for  political 
opinions.  So  serene  was  the  political  horizon  that  when 
in  January  the  Countess  of  Lipona  applied  to  Metternich 
for  permission  to  leave  Trieste  and  to  visit  Rome, 
Ferdinand,  on  being  consulted,  replied  to  the  Austrian 
Government's  query  that  he  had  not  the  least  objection 
to  offer.  A  little  later  the  British  Minister  wrote  in 
the  following  strain  on  the  state  of  affairs  in  the 
kingdom  to  the  British  Foreign  Secretary,  Lord 
Castlereagh  : — 

The  quiet  and  prosperous  state  of  these  kingdoms  affords 
but  few  subjects  worthy  of  being  brought  under  your  Lord- 
ship's notice.^ 

But  two  weeks  later  a  Court  slightly  qualified  this 
opinion,  and,  adverting  to  the  old  liberals  and  Muratists, 
he  wrote  : — 

The  more  moderate  men  of  this  party  are  ready  enough  to 

^  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  March  13,  1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily^  90. 


68  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

admit  the  prosperous  state  of  the  country,  the  wisdom  and 
liberality  of  the  views  by  which  this  Government  is  directed, 
and  that  the  degree  of  liberty  they  at  present  enjoy  is  infinitely 
greater  than  any  remembered  in  these  kingdoms  ;  but  they  ask, 
and  with  some  plausibility,  by  what  institutions  these  advantages 
are  secured,  and  whether  all  does  not  depend  upon  the  personal 
character  of  the  sovereign,  or  even  the  continuance  in  office  of 
one  highly  gifted  and  distinguished  Minister.^ 

In  the  sentiment  thus  described,  and  in  other  causes 
that  must  now  be  examined,  lay  the  germs  of  one  of 
the  most  complete  and  extraordinary  revolutions  of 
modern  European  history. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch.  di  Stato,  Interna^  z^  Indent.  5079  :  disorder  in  the  provinces, 
the  Vardarelli,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  cxlvi.  34,765  :  Ferdinand's  return  from  Sicily. 
BiBL.  Naz.,  Church  Secret  Report^  and  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs^  see  ante. 
Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicilyy  70,  90  :  a  Court's  dispatches. 

Printed  Books 

Beauchamp,  Catastrophe  de  Murat  ^  Beyle,  Rome,  Naples,  et  Florence  ^ 
Bertholdi,  M^wj.  ;  BiA^CHi,  Diplom.  Europ.  ;  Blaqvieke,  Letters ;  British 
State  Papers,  18 14-18 15  and  1816-1817,-  Cacciatore,  Esame ;  Gangs  a, 
Piffari ;  Carascosa,  Mems.  ;  Carte segrete  di  Polizia  ;  Castler  each,  Corr.  ; 
Ceva  Grimaldi,  Itinerario ;  Church,  Mems.;  Colletta,  Mems.,-  Colpo 
d*  occhio;  Crescieri,  Memorie;  Del  Re,  Descriz.Jisica;  Gv alterio,  Riforme ; 
Helfert,  Murat;  M.L.R.,  Saggio  Politico;  Martens,  Nowveau  Recueil ; 
Metternich,  Mejns. ;  Morgan,  Italy ;  Orloff,  Mems.;  Palmieri,  Sou- 
njenirs ;  Palmieri,  Storia  Costituz. ;  Pamphleteer,  xxiv.  j  Pepe,  Mems.; 
Quintavalle,  Notizia  Storica ;  Sassenay,  Guet  Apens ;  Serristori, 
Statistica  delle  Due  Sicilie ;  Tonelli,  Brenje  Idea;  Fita politica  di  Medici. 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  March  31,  1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  90. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE    REVOLUTION    OF    1 820 

Failure  of  harvests  —  Taxation  —  Landed  proprietors  and  Con- 
stitutionalism—  Army  dissatisfaction  —  Visit  of  Francis  and 
Metternich  —  Pepe's  plot  —  Camp  of  Sessa  —  Metternich's 
apprehensions — Congress  of  Aix — Secret  societies — Kotzebue's 
murder  —  Russian  policy — Spanish  revolution  —  Spain  and 
Naples — Position  of  the  Carbonari — Pepe  at  Avellino — Pro- 
paganda at  Salerno  —  Minichini  —  Carbonaro  numbers  — 
Ferdinand  takes  oath  to  Spanish  Constitution  —  Consequent 
agitation — Plot  of  De  Conciliis — Borbone  Cavalleria — Rising 
at  Nola — Insurgents  reach  Monteforte  —  News  at  Naples  — 
Carascosa  takes  command  —  His  proceedings  —  De  Conciliis 
takes  lead  at  Avellino  —  Carascosa  negotiates  —  Nunziante's 
efforts — Advises  Constitution — Desertion — Pepe  leaves  Naples 
— Carbonaro  deputation  to  Ferdinand — Constitution  granted 
—New  ministry  —  Carbonaro  proclamation  —  Demand  for 
Spanish  Constitution — Granted — Alarm  at  Naples — Entry  of 
Carbonari — Pepe  sees  Ferdinand — Orderly  behaviour  of  Car- 
bonari— Pepe  commander-in-chief — His  position — Minichini — 
Real  causes  of  revolution — Zurlo  and  the  Ministry — Carbonaro 
hostility — Great  extension  of  Carbonari  —  Ferdinand  swears 
constitution — Lazzaroni  hold  aloof — Ferdinand's  policy — Plot 
against  King — Freedom  of  the  Press  —  Rossetti  —  Attacks  on 
Zurlo — Troja  and  the  Minerva — Borrelli  maintains  order — 
Mutiny  of  Farnese  regiment — Guardia  di  sicurezza — Elections 
and  their  results — Inauguration  of  Parliament — Constitutional 
amendment  promised. 

There    is   no   cause   of  political   dissatisfaction    more 
active    than    material    discomfort,    nor   of   revolution 

69 


70  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

than  scarcity  of  food.  These  factors  were  to  be 
found  existing  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples  in  the  year 
1820.  The  harvest  of  18 16  had  been  a  bad  one, 
and  unfortunately  was  followed  by  others  equally  bad 
for  three  successive  years.  The  price  of  grain  rose  to 
ten  ducats  per  100  lbs.,  and  famine,  mortality,  and 
pestilence  ensued. 

The  distress  among  the  farming  and  landholding 
classes,  especially  in  that  new  and  most  important  one 
of  the  small  peasant  proprietors,  was  aggravated  by  the 
fact  that  the  fondiaria  bore  disproportionately  heavily 
under  these  circumstances.  On  the  return  of  Ferdinand 
this  consolidated  property  tax  had  been  fixed  for  forty 
years  at  a  low  valuation,  in  the  hope  that  the  small 
landowners  might  thereby  be  encouraged  to  effect 
improvements  on  their  property.  But  Medici's  policy, 
which  might  under  favourable  circumstances  have 
proved  successful,  had  not  made  provision  for  a  series 
of  bad  harvests.  Unfortunately,  such  a  policy  once 
embarked  on  could  hardly  be  departed  from.  In 
any  event,  a  remission  of  taxation  would  have  been 
a  difficult  matter  to  compass,  and  one  that  there  was 
but  little  inclination  for  in  high  quarters,  as  there  were 
few  officials  who  did  not  increase  their  private  revenue 
out  of  that  of  the  State. 

Among  landed  proprietors  the  desire  for  a  con- 
stitutional form  of  government  was  widespread,  but 
it  may  be  suspected  that  any  other  political  panacea 
involving  agricultural  prosperity  would  have  equally 
well  satisfied  their  reforming  aspirations.  Akin  to  this 
current  of  opinion  was  another  that  was  perhaps  better 
founded  and  denoted  real  political  progress.  This  was 
a  sentiment  in  favour  of  decentralized  autonomy  for 
both  Universita  and  Provinces.     This  may  be  traced 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  71 

in  the  curiously  decentralized  organization  of  the 
Carbonari^  themselves,  and  in  some  of  the  pamphlets  of 
the  period,  especially  in  the  notable  Voti  dei  Calahresi} 
As  a  partial  sop  to  liberal  aspirations,  Medici,  who 
from  the  first  declined  to  take  the  symptoms  of 
agitation  very  seriously,  decreed  that  the  Provincial 
Councils  should  send  sixty  elected  members  to  the 
Court  of  Chancery,  the  successor  of  Murat's  Council 
of  State. 

The  most  dangerous  seat  of  dissatisfaction,  however, 
was  not  so  much  the  class  of  landed  proprietors  as  the 
army.  On  the  surface  it  appeared  orderly,  well  fed, 
well  clothed,  duly  paid,  and  both  Ferdinand  and  Count 
Nugent  were  firmly  convinced  that  it  could  be  abso- 
lutely relied  on.  But  there  were  causes  at  work  that 
they  did  not  make  sufficient  allowance  for.  The  glut 
of  officers  and  consequent  lack  of  promotion  had  had 
a  demoralizing  effect,  especially  among  the  lieutenants 
and  sergeants,  for  whom  the  career  of  arms,  so  full  of 
reward  and  promise  but  a  few  years  before,  was  now 
one  of  mere  drudgery  and  stagnation.  The  lower 
ranks  were  full  of  a  class  of  men  readily  susceptible 
to  disaffection  and  by  temperament  rebellious  to 
discipline.  The  higher  posts  were  still  occupied  by 
those  generals  who  had,  while  in  the  service  of  Joachim, 
intrigued  with  Bentinck  and  threatened  to  march  on 
Naples. 

One  of  these  generals,  Guglielmo  Pepe,  has  recorded, 
but  how  truly  it  is  difficult  to  say,  that  in  18 19,  when 
the  Emperor  of  Austria  and  Prince  Metternich  visited 
Naples,  he  formed  a  plot  for  their  abduction.  Pepe 
was  to  command  a  review  of  5000  men  at  Avellino  in 
honour  of  the  Austrian  Emperor.     The  soldiers  were 

1  B.  Z.,  Voti  dei  Calabreiu 


72  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

all  members  of  the  provincial  militia,  of  which  each 
battalion  was  now  duly  equipped  with  a  Carbonaro 
lodge.  It  was  through  this  organization  that  Pepe 
intended  to  act,  his  design  being  to  hold  his  captives 
to  ransom  at  the  price  of  a  constitution  for  the  kingdom 
of  Naples.-^ 

This  nebulous  scheme  of  Pepe  may  have  had  no 
other  existence  than  in  the  author's  imagination  ;  at 
all  events  it  came  to  nothing  ;  but  a  year  later  an 
incident  of  the  same  character  had  more  tangible  con- 
sequences. In  the  month  of  April  1820  the  King 
decided  to  review  a  force  of  12,000  men  of  the  regular 
army  collected  in  camp  at  Sessa.  Ferdinand's  stay  in 
the  camp  and  the  review  passed  off  satisfactorily.  The 
troops  showed  to  advantage  ;  well-concerted  "  Vivas  " 
were  shouted  with  due  vocal  effort  ;  professions  of 
loyalty  and  military  pomp  veiled  dangers  that  were 
not  superficial.  Beneath  this  screen  of  devotion  a  plot 
was  hatched  to  seize  the  King's  person,  but  was  foiled 
through  a  warning  given  to  the  Duke  of  Ascoli,  a 
natural  son  of  Ferdinand,  by  one  of  the  generals. 
More  lasting  in  its  effect,  though  less  immediate  in  its 
danger,  was  the  propaganda  that  the  assembling  of  so 
large  a  body  of  troops  from  various  parts  of  the 
kingdom  enabled  the  Carbonari  to  make.  This  pro- 
paganda was  of  the  utmost  consequence  in  the  events 
that  shortly  followed. 

The  confidence  of  Ferdinand,  of  a  Court,  of  Medici, 
of  Nugent,  in  the  stability  of  the  Neapolitan  govern- 
ment was  not  shared  by  the  ablest  of  European  states- 
men, Prince  Metternich.  The  full  significance  of  the 
movement  that  had  driven  Louis  XVIII.  from  France 
in   1 8 14  had   not  escaped  him,  and  he  had  probably 

1  Pepe,  Mems.  ii.  182  j  this  extraordinary  story  is  entirely  unconfirmed. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  73 

grasped  more  correctly  than  any  other  of  the  statesmen 
of  Europe  the  fact  that  liberalism  rather  than  Napo- 
leonism  was  to  be  feared.  While  Pozzo  di  Borgo  and 
other  diplomats  still  gave  undivided  attention  to  the 
prisoner  of  St.  Helena  and  the  dangers  of  a  Bonapartist 
reaction,  Metternich  with  keen,  prophetic  insight 
narrowly  watched  the  agitations  of  liberalism.  A  con- 
gress was  called  together  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  in  1 8 1 8  for 
the  specific  purpose  of  arranging  the  withdrawal  of  the 
army  of  the  Allied  Powers  still  in  occupation  of  parts 
of  France  ;  there  the  general  state  of  European  affairs 
was  discussed,  the  growing  power  of  liberalism  was 
recognised,  the  influence  of  Metternich  was  strengthened, 
and  the  policy  of  the  Holy  Alliance  showed  its  first 
signs  of  coming  into  militant  collision  with  the  political 
aspirations  of  the  Continent. 

^  Metternich  was  already  anxious  about  the  progress 
of  the  secret  societies.  In  the  Papal  States  the  Guelfs 
and  the  Carbonari  had  shown  much  activity,  especially 
on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Apennines.  At  Macerata 
a  considerable  conspiracy  aiming  at  revolution  was  dis- 
covered only  just  in  time  to  avert  an  open  insurrection. 
In  northern  Italy,  where  the  interest  of  Austria  was 
more  immediate,  the  movement  was  equally  pronounced. 
It  appeared  more  threatening  from  the  support  of  a 
literary  and  intellectual  circle  that  took  an  international 
character  from  its  connection  with  such  distinguished 
travellers  as  Lord  Byron,  Madame  de  Stael,  Brougham, 
Hobhouse,  and  others,  j  In  France  a  new  Charbonnerie 
had  been  formed,  introduced  from  Italy,  and  liberal 
agitation  was  throbbing  through  every  vein  of  the 
peninsula  and  central  Europe,  from  Naples  to  Rome, 
from  Rome  to  Milan,  to  Turin,  to  Paris,  from  Paris 
to  the  heart  of  Germany.    ( 


74  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Shortly  after  the  Congress  of  Aix  a  dramatic  in- 
cident startled  the  statesmen  of  the  Holy  Alliance. 
The  German  publicist  Kotzebue,  a  talented  but  mer- 
cenary writer  whose  services  had  been  employed  in 
defence  of  the  cause  of  autocracy,  was  assassinated  by 
a  student  of  the  University  of  Jena  named  Sand  (Mar. 
23,  18 19).  Kotzebue  had  attacked  the  Burschen- 
schaft,  a  patriotic  association  of  students  of  which  Sand 
was  a  member,  as  a  hotbed  of  revolutionary  ideas,  and 
this  violent  stroke  of  retribution  created  nothing  less 
than  a  sensation  throughout  Europe. 

Although  the  Czar  Alexander  had  employed  Kotzebue 
and  was  shocked  by  his  assassination,  he  had  by  no 
means  yet  abandoned  the  liberalizing  tendencies  he  had 
once  so  plainly  shown.  This  was  most  plainly  revealed 
in  Italy,  where  Russian  agents  and  diplomats  went  so 
far  as  to  affect  an  anti-Austrian  policy,  and  one  favour- 
able to  Italian  national  aspirations.  This  attitude  was 
partly  a  result  of  the  ill -disguised  hostility  that  had 
long  continued  between  the  two  great  empires  of  the 
north-east,  and  that  had  only  been  suppressed  by  the 
paramount  fear  of  Napoleon.  That  hostility  had  been 
on  the  point  of  breaking  out  into  flame  at  the  Congress 
of  Vienna,  and  ever  since  that  time  the  personal  anti- 
pathy of  Pozzo  di  Borgo  and  Metternich  had  not 
served  to  make  the  relations  of  the  two  empires  more 
cordial.  Just  as  Murat's  incursion  into  northern  Italy 
would  have  proved  of  service  to  the  Czar  had  war 
broken  out  while  Napoleon  was  still  at  Elba,  so  now 
the  threat  of  an  Italian  liberal  insurrection  might  prove 
a  convenient  means  of  pressure  to  use  against  Austria. 
On  hearing  of  Kotzebue's  assassination,  Metternich 
wrote  to  Gentz  :  "  While  in  Germany  Russian  agents 
propter  obscurationem  are  murdered,  in  Italy  the  Russian 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  75 

agents  preside  over  the  clubs  of  the  Carbonari.  This 
abomination  will  soon  be  checked  "  ;  ^  and  in  the  same 
month  to  another  correspondent :  "I  assure  you  that 
the  world  was  in  perfect  health  in  1789,  in  comparison 
with  what  it  is  now."  ^ 

The  assassination  of  Kotzebue  was  the  premoni- 
tory warning  of  the  storm  that  was  about  to  sweep 
over  southern  Europe.  On  the  ist  of  January  1820  a 
military  revolt  broke  out  in  Spain  that  resulted  in  the 
re-establishment  of  the  constitution  which  the  Giunta 
of  1 8 12  had  adopted.  This  proved  the  beginning  of 
a  liberal  revolt  which,  had  it  extended  to  France,  as 
it  so  nearly  did,  might  have  firmly  established  more 
advanced  forms  of  government  in  the  whole  of  south- 
western Europe. 

The  Spanish  movement,  like  NapoIeon*s  descent 
from  Elba  five  years  before,  immediately  brought  the 
north-eastern  Powers  into  harmony ;  Russia  forgot 
her  animosities  and  threw  herself  into  the  arms  of 
Metternich.^  It  also  exercised  great  and  immediate 
influence  on  the  affairs  of  Naples. 

Between  Spain  and  Naples  there  was  much  sym- 
pathy and  communication.  For  a  considerable  period 
the  two  kingdoms  had  formed  part  of  one  great  mon- 
archy ;  Ferdinand's  father  had  passed  from  the  throne 
of  Naples  to  that  of  Spain,  his  nephew  now  held  its 
crown,  he  himself  was  an  Infant,  and  it  was  possible 
that  family  necessities  and  arrangements  might  once 
more  unite  the  two  thrones.  In  Naples  many  families 
were  Spanish  ;  grandees  like  the  Duke  of  Infantado 
were    numerous    among    the    influential    landowners  ; 

^  Metternich,  Mem:,  iii.  261,  Ap.  9,  1819.  ^  Ibid.  iii.  224. 

3  Nesselrode's  circular  note  of  January  j  cf.  also  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Ap.  6, 
1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  90. 


76  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE        part  ii 

Spanish  customs  and  traditions  still  recalled  the  days 
of  Don  Pedro  of  Toledo  and  the  Viceroys.  The 
Neapolitan  soldiers  fighting  under  Napoleon's  colours 
in  Spain  had  more  than  once  shown  that  their  sym- 
pathies were  far  more  with  their  Spanish  enemies  than 
with  their  French  comrades,  and  now  they  rapidly  and 
not  unnaturally  became  infected  with  the  example  set 
by  Riego  and  his  mutinous  followers.  The  regimental 
lodges  quickly  absorbed  the  Spanish  seed  of  sedition. 
At  the  close  of  1819  it  appears  probable  that  the 
Carbonari  had,  on  the  whole,  lost  in  numbers  and 
influence;  but  in  the  early  months  of  1820  their 
membership  increased  once  more,  and  taking  heart 
from  Riego's  example,  they  made  great  efforts  to  secure 
control  of  the  army. 

Much  of  the  hold  that  the  Carbonari  had  on  the 
army  was  attributable  to  that  restless  spirit  Guglielmo 
Pepe.  Since  the  close  of  the  year  18 18  he  had  been 
military  governor  of  Principato,  with  headquarters  at 
Avellino.  This  was  the  district  in  which  the  Vardar- 
elli  had  flourished,  and  brigandage  had  not  come  to  an 
end  with  them.  So  bold  were  the  brigands,  or  so 
spiritless  the  troops,  that  no  less  than  1000  men  were 
employed  to  escort  the  mails  through  the  pass  of 
Monteforte,  while  at  the  time  when  Pepe  took  up  his 
command  some  2000  warrants  of  arrest  remained 
unexecuted. 

To  control  the  disorder  Pepe  adopted  the  system 
constantly  used  under  the  French  rule,  that  of  utilizing 
the  provincial  militia.  He  called  up  some  10,000  of 
these  from  the  landowning  class  ;  he  appointed  as  their 
commander  an  active  Carbonaro,  the  Marchese  De  Rosa ; 
he  took  care  that  every  officer  should  be  affiliated,  and 
while    for   the    moment   employing    them    against   the 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  -]-] 

brigands,  foresaw  their  political  utility  "  when  the  time 
should  come  to  act."  ^ 

Alongside  of  the  propaganda  thus  carried  on  through 
the  militia  was  that  in  the  towns.  At  Potenza,  one  of 
the  most  active  centres,  public  functionaries,  landowners, 
workmen,  and  priests  formed  the  local  vendita,  the 
latter  taking  a  specially  prominent  part.  At  the  time 
of  the  Macerata  conspiracy  in  the  Papal  States  there 
had  been  considerable  excitement  among  the  Carbonari 
of  Salerno.  The  vendita  of  that  city  had  by  the 
energy  of  its  members  virtually  assumed  leadership  of 
many  less  important  provincial  lodges.  The  Grand 
Master,  Macchiaroli,  together  with  Gagliardi,  General 
Arcovito,  and  others,  plotted  a  const]tutjonaJ_rising^ 
which  the  failure  of  the  Roman  Carbonari  caused 
to  be  deferred.  Salerno  continued  to  be  the  most 
active  centre  of  conspiracy  in  the  provinces,  and  was 
known  to  be  so  in  official  circles  before  the  revolution 
broke  out. 

At  Salerno  a  priest  named  Guida  was  among  the 
most  prominent  leaders.  At  Benevento  no  less  than 
thirty  priests  were  numbered  among  the  Good  Cousins, 
and  at  the  little  town  of  Nola,  equidistant  from  Naples, 
Salerno,  and  Avellino,  another,  named  Minichini,  held 
the  position  of  Grand  Master.  Minichini  was  a  man 
of  some  ability,  a  great  traveller,  with  relations  in 
liberal  quarters  all  over  the  world,  and  was  destined 
soon  to  play  a  conspicuous  part. 

The  statistics  of  the  Carbonaro  propaganda  are  very 
difficult  to  establish.  At  the  beginning  of  1820  there 
may  have  been  between  50,000  and  100,000  enrolled 

^  Pepe,  Mems.  ii,  passim.  It  is  impossible  to  check  Pepe's  account  j  there  is 
undoubtedly  a  good  deal  of  exaggeration  in  his  statements  as  to  the  importance  of 
the  role  he  played. 


78  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

members.  From  March  to  July  1820  the  increase  was 
very  great,  though  600,000,  the  figure  generally  accepted 
just  before  the  revolution,  would  appear  far  too  large 
even  for  the  end  of  July  when  the  society  was  trium- 
phant ;  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  Carbonari 
numbered  600,000  at  the  end  of  June,  but  it  may  be 
that  they  numbered  300,000  or  more  by  the  end  of 
July.^ 

The  sensation  produced  in  Naples  by  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  Constitution  in  Spain  was  very  great.  This 
was  heightened  by  a  curious  consequence  which  it 
entailed.  Ferdinand,  so  as  to  preserve  intact  his  rights 
as  an  Infant  of  Spain  and  his  reversion  to  the  crown  of 
his  nephew  Ferdinand  VII.,  took  an  oath  to  maintain 
the  new-made  Constitution.  With  an  impressionable 
and  imitative  people  like  that  of  Naples  this  served  to 
create  widespread  expectation.  Anonymous  letters  now 
began  to  pour  in  on  the  King  and  Ministers,  calling 
on  them  to  grant  a  constitution,  and  the  Carbonari  of 
Salerno  repeatedly  urged  Pepe  to  lead  a  movement 
with  that  object. 

Faced  by  this  threatening  situation,  the  Government 
at  first  showed  some  signs  of  vigour,  and  a  number  of 
the  secret  society  men  were  arrested.  Pepe  showed 
more  prudence  than  inclination  to  play  the  part  of 
Riego,  but  another  officer.  Colonel  De  Conciliis,  chief 
of  staff  of  the  3rd  division  under  Carascosa  and  a 
prominent  Carbonaro,  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  a 
military  plot.  The  conspirators  decided  to  raise  the 
standard  of  revolt  on  the  29th  of  May,  but  before 
making    his    final    dispositions    De    Conciliis   had    an 

1  600,000  represents  about  two-thirds  of  the  adult  male  population.  See  Cantu, 
Cronistorja,  ii.  1 50  j  Colletta,  Amico  della  Costituzione,  quot.  by  Bertholdi,  op.  cit.  83  ; 
Nunziante's  estimate,  ibU.  69  j  Carascosa,  Mems.  23  j  Pepe,  Mems.  ii.  27,  29  j 
a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Aug.  24,  1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  90. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  79 

interview  with  his  commander.  He  appears  to  have 
based  his  hopes  on  the  fact  that  a  successful  revolu- 
tion would  be  undisturbed  by  foreign  intervention,  but 
on  Carascosa  strongly  insisting  that  such  intervention 
was  inevitable  and  dissuading  him  from  the  enterprise, 
De  Conciliis  seems  to  have  lost  heart  and  adjourned 
the  rising. 

It  was  from  neither  Avellino  nor  Salerno  that  the 
revolution  was  to  spring,  it  was  by  neither  General 
Pepe  nor  Colonel  De  Conciliis  that  it  was  to  be 
originated ;  an  obscure  town  was  to  give  it  birth,  an 
obscure  priest  was  to  guide  its  first  steps.  Towards 
the  end  of  June  the  Government,  notwithstanding 
its  extraordinary  supineness  and  ignorance,  effected  a 
number  of  arrests  at  Salerno,  and  this  caused  alarm  to 
some  officers  of  the  regiment  of  B  or  bone  Cavalleria 
stationed  at  Nola.  This  regiment  was  one  of  the  worst 
disciplined  in  the  army.  Its  colonel  was  a  Sicilian 
nobleman  who  appeared  more  at  Court  than  in  bar- 
racks. The  men  were  not  even  wholly  in  uniform  and 
were  ignorant  of  all  manoeuvring.  The  junior  officers 
paid  little  attention  to  drill  but  spent  most  of  their 
time  in  the  town,  and  had  come  wholly  under  the 
influence  of  Minichini,  Grand  Master  of  the  Carbonaro 
vendita  of  Nola.  At  the  end  of  June  the  state  of  the 
regiment  was  so  bad  that  a  new  colonel,  the  Duke  of 
Lavrieno,  was  appointed  to  tighten  its  relaxed  discipline. 
This  hastened  the  explosion. 

Morelli  and  Silvati,  two  lieutenants  of  Borbone 
Cavalleria,  concerted  measures  with  Minichini,  and  at 
midnight  on  the  ist  of  July  the  latter,  followed  by 
some  twenty  armed  Carbonari,  proceeded  to  the 
barracks  of  the  regiment.  Morelli  and  Silvati  ordered 
their  men  to  muster  in  the  courtyard,   Minichini  was 


8o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

supplied  with  a  horse,  and  the  party  made  their 
way  out,  and  took  the  road  to  Avellino.  They 
numbered  in  all  127  cavalrymen  and  20  civilians.  The 
sergeants  and  troopers  who  had  been  persuaded  into 
following  Silvati  and  Morelli  were  only  a  part  of 
the  regiment  ;  many  of  them,  in  fact,  were  not  aware 
of  the  nature  of  the  demonstration  in  which  they  were 
taking  part.  In  the  early  morning,  when  their  departure 
became  known,  a  loyal  officer  of  the  regiment.  Captain 
Carriero,  rode  after  the  deserters  and  caught  them  up 
on  the  Avellino  road.  Morelli,  fearing  lest  his  men 
might  be  turned  away  by  Carriero,  rode  back  and  greeted 
him  with  the  shout  of  "  Viva  la  Costituzione."  This 
was  echoed  from  the  ranks,  whence  a  banner  was 
displayed  showing  the  red,  black,  and  blue  of  the 
Carbonari.  Carriero  thereupon  determined  to  turn 
back  to  Nola,  and  the  Duke  of  Lavrieno  immediately 
dispatched  him  thence  with  the  news  to  Naples. 

From  Nola  to  Avellino  is  but  thirteen  miles,  and 
between  them  lies  the  lofty  pass  of  Monteforte. 
Avellino  shut  its  gates  to  Minichini  and  his  little  party, 
so  they  decided  to  take  up  their  position  at  the  top 
of  the  pass  between  Mercogliano  and  Monteforte,  near 
the  spot  where  Fra  Diavolo  had  been  captured  fifteen 
years  earlier,  and  where  more  recently  the  Vardarelli 
had  committed  many  of  their  exploits.  Thence  they 
sent  a  message  to  De  Conciliis  urging  him  to  join 
them.  That  night  the  insurgents  numbered  350  men  ; 
they  had  already  begun  to  cut  abatis  and  build  in- 
trenchments  ;  their  position  was  strong,  and  so  lofty 
that  from  it  the  eye  could  range  from  the  Adriatic  to 
the  Mediterranean. 

Meanwhile  Carriero  had  spurred  on  his  errand  to 
Naples,  and  by  10  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  2nd 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  81 

of  July  the  Ministry  was  aware  of  what  had  occurred  at 
Nola  in  the  night.  Delay  ensued,  as  it  so  happened 
that  the  King  had  just  gone  on  board  ship  to  meet  the 
Hereditary  Prince,  who  was  arriving  from  Palermo  ; 
but  at  twelve  a  council  was  called,  to  which  several  of 
the  generals  then  in  Naples  were  summoned,  among 
them  Nugent,  D'  Ambrosio,  Filangieri,  and  Carascosa. 
While  Ferdinand,  in  high  spirits,  was  greeting  the 
Duke  of  Calabria  in  the  bay,  at  Naples  hesitation 
prevailed.  At  first  it  was  decided  to  send  Pepe  to 
repress  the  trouble,  but  later  in  the  day,  owing 
to  the  King's  well-founded  suspicions  of  this  general, 
Carascosa  was  appointed  instead,  and  Pepe  was  ordered 
to  Calabria.^ 

Instead  of  acting  at  once  before  the  movement  had 
acquired  momentum,  Carascosa  appears  to  have  allowed 
the  afternoon  of  the  2nd  to  slip  away  without  doing 
anything.  As  he  could  dispose  of  a  body  of  the  Royal 
Guards,  not  numerous  but  fairly  good  troops,  and  as 
Monteforte  was  less  than  twenty -five  miles  from 
Naples,  he  might  have  done  much  towards  suppressing 
the  rebellion  that  very  evening.  As  it  was,  it  became 
necessary  on  the  following  morning  for  Nugent  to  give 
him  specific  orders  to  march  on  Avellino,  as  he  showed 
little  inclination  to  leave  Naples. 

Carascosa  accordingly,  on  the  3rd  of  July,  got 
various  detachments  in  motion  and  rode  out  with 
his  staff  and  an  escort  towards  the  mountains.  He 
found  the  road  deserted,  the  insurgents  having  blocked 
all  traffic  at  Monteforte,  and  so  he  turned  back  from 
the  foot  of  the  pass  and  rode  back  as  far  as  Nola. 

^  Arch.  Nap.  cxlvi.  9,  4749,  Nugent  MS.  5   Carascosa,  Mems.  38-40.      Caras- 
cosa's  statement  as  to   Pepe's  appointment  is  contradicted   by  the  official  dispatch 
here  referred  to. — Pepe,  Relation,  Pamphleteer^  xxiii.  345  ;  see  al<=o  Craven,  430. 
VOL.  II  G 


82  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

There  he  spent  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  and  evening 
in  writing  no  less  than  five  reports  to  Nugent,  which, 
as  he  had  seen  nothing,  would  appear  to  demonstrate 
his  resourcefulness  if  not  his  intrepidity.  Although  he 
had  ready  at  hand  600  men  of  the  infantry  of  the 
Guard,  largely  foreigners,  with  two  field-pieces,  and 
might  with  energy  have  had  a  much  larger  force 
assembled  before  Monteforte  by  noon,  yet  he  stuck  as 
resolutely  to  his  pen  as  his  sword  did  to  its  scabbard. 

The  insurgents  employed  the  same  day  to  better 
advantage.  On  the  2nd,  as  we  have  seen,  Avellino 
refused  to  open  its  gates  to  them.  De  Filippi,  com- 
mander of  the  local  body  of  militia,  called  his  men  out 
for  active  service.  At  first  he  appears  to  have  looked 
on  the  followers  of  Minichini  with  misgiving.  But  he, 
his  officers,  and  his  men  were  Carbonari,  and  on  the 
3rd,  seeing  Minichini's  numbers  gradually  increasing 
and  no  attempt  made  by  the  Government  to  repress  the 
revolt,  he  ordered  the  gates  of  Avellino  to  be  thrown 
open,  and  the  Good  Cousins  all  fraternized  to  shouts  of 
'*  Viva  la  Costituzione  !  "  Later  in  the  same  day  De 
Conciliis  arrived  at  Avellino,  declared  for  the  rebellion, 
and  assumed  military  command.  Word  was  at  once 
sent  out  to  every  neighbouring  village  and  town,  and 
from  this  moment  the  strength  of  the  insurgents  was 
quickly  increased  by  detachments  of  Carbonari  militia- 
men marching  in  from  various  parts  of  Principato, 
Basilicata,  and  all  the  country  lying  behind  Avellino. 

On  the  4th  of  July  Carascosa,  sagely  judging  that 
the  situation  was  increasing  in  gravity,  decided  to  have 
recourse  to  bribery,  decided  to  add  to  the  terrors  of 
the  soldier  the  wiles  of  the  statesman.  He  accordingly 
secured  the  services  of  the  police  magistrate  of  Bajano, 
a  village  midway  between  Nola  and  Monteforte,  and 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  83 

sent  him  on  a  mission  to  the  insurgent  camp.  This 
magistrate,  Bianchi  by  name,  was  empowered  to  offer 
ten  passports  for  the  leaders  and  a  sum  of  8000 
ducats  in  gold,  in  return  for  which  they  were  to 
abandon  the  rebellion.  While  Carascosa  made  show  of 
manoeuvring  the  reinforcements  that  had  now  reached 
him  in  the  open  country  between  Naples  and  Nola, 
Bianchi  proceeded  to  Avellino,  where  he  held  a  conference 
with  De  Conciliis  and  Morelli.  What  passed  at  this 
interview  is  uncertain,  but  it  appears  that  Carascosa 
must  have  informed  the  Government  that  the  8000 
ducats  in  gold  would  be  required,  for  they  were  duly 
sent  to  him.  Whether  they  ever  reached  Avellino,  or 
went  no  further  than  Bianchi's  office  at  Bajano,  or  even 
than  Carascosa's  headquarters  at  Nola,  remains  to  this 
day  unknown  to  history.^ 

General  Nunziante,  in  command  at  Salerno,  had 
been  making  from  that  point  efforts  more  zealous  but 
no  more  successful  than  those  of  Carascosa.  He  had 
with  him  none  but  native  troops,  and  they  proved  quite 
unequal  to  the  emergency.  He  had,  however,  pushed 
them  forward  towards  Avellino  on  the  3rd  of  July  and 
issued  a  proclamation  promising  a  full  amnesty  to  all 
save  fourteen  leaders.  On  the  following  day  he  carried 
his  headquarters  as  far  as  S.  Severino,  within  a  few 
miles  of  Avellino,  but  could  get  no  further.  His  troops 
would  not  fight,  the  villages  were  all  hostile,  and  a 
considerable  force  was  now  in  his  front.     He  accordingly 


^  It  may,  however,  be  added  that  Carascosa's  accounts  do  not  bear  close 
investigation. — Arch.  Nap.  cxlvi.  9,  4750.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  Caras- 
cosa was  in  treasonable  correspondence  with  the  leaders,  though  he  was  afterwards 
convicted  of  high  treason.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  incompetence,  pusillanimity, 
or  anxiety  to  stand  well  with  both  sides  was  the  most  important  factor  in  his  action. 
The  decision  in  favour  of  Major  Lombardi  to  a  certain  extent  covers  Carascosa  as 
well. — Deciiione  nella  Causa  di  Monteforte^  18. 


84  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

wrote  a  dispatch  to  the  King  in  which,  with  courageous 
bluntness,  he  declared  that  the  whole  people  were 
clamouring  for  a  Constitution,  that  to  press  his  soldiers 
to  engage  would  end  only  in  augmenting  the  forces  of 
the  rebels,  that  a  constitution  should  in  his  opinion  be 
given,  and  that  delay  would  be  fatal. 

Nunziante,  whose  fidelity  not  even  Ferdinand  could 
doubt,  had  told  the  King  the  bare  truth.  -  Notwithstand- 
ing the  conferment  of  extraordinary  viceregal  powers 
on  Carascosa  and  Nunziante,  these  generals  were  now 
powerless  to  avert  the  success  of  the  insurgent  cause. 
On  the  5  th  of  July  deserters  became  numerous  in  their 
commands,  especially  in  that  of  Nunziante.  From 
Nocera  a  whole  regiment  of  his  cavalry  marched  off  to 
Avellino  to  join  the  insurgents.  One  of  Carascosa's 
regiments  on  the  same  day  was  abandoned  by  all  its 
superior  officers  and  left  in  command  of  a  captain. 

That  same  night  the  infection  reached  Naples  itself. 
Pepe,  fearing  arrest,  or  merely  following  the  general 
movement,  rode  out  of  the  capital  followed  by  a  few 
officers  and  by  a  detachment  of  the  regiment  Regina 
Cavalleriuy  obeying  a  written  order  of  General 
Napoletano.  He  arrived  at  Monteforte  in  the  early 
hours  of  the  6th  of  July  with  seventy  dragoons  and  half 
a  company  of  infantry,  and  the  insurrection  was  now 
provided  with  a  leader  of  high  military  rank. 

Pepe's  action  was  soon  known,  and  greatly  added  to 
the  agitation  that  had  for  some  days  reigned  at  Naples. 
Although  the  official  journal  informed  the  public  that 
the  deserters  would  promptly  be  arrested  and  punished, 
the  numerous  Carbonaro  lodges  were  well  informed  of 
all  that  was  taking  place,  and  in  the  early  hours  of  the 
morning,  while  Pepe  was  nearing  Monteforte,  they  took 
a  decisive  step  in  his  support.     A  deputation  of  Carbonari 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  85 

boldly  presented  itself  at  the  Royal  Palace.  It  was 
immediately  received  by  the  Duke  of  Ascoli,  and  was  in 
truth  headed  by  his  son-in-law,  the  Duke  of  Picoletti. 
This  deputation  insisted  strongly  on  the  necessity  for 
proclaiming  the  Constitution  without  loss  of  time  ;  to 
this  view  the  Duke  of  Ascoli  assented.  The  Ministers 
were  all  at  the  Palace ;  they  agreed  with  the  Duke  of 
Ascoli,  and  urged  Ferdinand  to  bow  to  the  inevitable. 
The  result  of  this  pressure  appeared  a  few  hours  later 
when  the  following  proclamation  was  posted  on  the 
walls  of  Naples  : — 

To  THE  Nation  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies 

The  general  wish  of  the  nation  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  having  been  expressed  in  favour  of  having  a  Constitu- 
tional Government,  we  consent  of  our  full  free  will  and 
promise  to  publish  its  bases  within  eight  days.  Until  such 
time  as  the  Constitution  is  published,  the  old  laws  will  remain 
in  vigour. 

Having  thus  satisfied  the  public  desire,  we  order  that  the 
soldiers  do  return  to  their  regiments,  and  every  man  to  his 
ordinary  occupation.  Ferdinand. 

Naples,  ^a/y  6,  1820. 

At  the  same  time  that  this  proclamation  was  issued, 
a  special  council  was  called,  to  which  several  of  the  best 
administrators  and  most  prominent  liberals  of  King 
Joachim's  time  were  summoned, — Zurlo,  Gallo,  Delfico, 
Winspeare.  This  portended  a  complete  change  of  govern- 
ment, which  was  soon  announced.  The  new  Ministry  was 
composed  of  Count  Zurlo,  Count  Ricciardi,  the  Duke 
of  Campochiaro,  General  Carascosa,  and  Cavaliere 
Macedonio,  and,  to  make  the  revolution  even  more 
complete,  Ferdinand  announced  that  the  Hereditary 
Prince  was  appointed  Regent.     The  concessions  of  the 


86  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

King  caused  the  greatest  joy,  and  that  night  the  city 
spontaneously  illuminated.  The  news  of  what  was 
happening  at  Naples  reached  Monteforte  and  the  camps 
of  Carascosa  and  Nunziante  with  great  rapidity,  and 
resulted  in  equally  enthusiastic  demonstrations  and 
cheers  for  the  King,  God,  and  the  Constitution. 

Even  before  Pepe  joined  them  the  Carbonaro 
leaders  at  Avellino  had  shown  themselves  capable  of 
conducting  the  Constitutional  movement.  They  issued 
on  the  4th  a  proclamation  in  which  their  demands  were 
stated,  not  without  reason  and  moderation.  In  this 
manifesto  they  asked  for  the  immediate  proclamation  of 
a  constitution,  that  the  existing  laws  should  remain  in 
force  until  a  Parliament  could  be  convened,  that  all 
officials  should  retain  their  posts  on  taking  an  oath  to 
observe  the  Constitution,  that  there  should  be  no  per- 
secution for  political  offences,  and  that  the  obligations 
of  the  State  should  remain  inviolable.^  It  was  doubtless 
this  proclamation,  the  contents  of  which  were  known  in 
the  capital  on  the  5th,  that  had  dictated  Pepe's  flight, 
the  action  of  the  Carbonaro  deputation  to  the  Palace, 
and  the  edicts  with  which  the  King  had  practically 
embodied  every  demand  of  the  insurgents. 

Yet  Ferdinand's  ready  compliance  and  his  appoint- 
ment of  the  Hereditary  Prince  as  Regent  recalled  too 
emphatically  the  King's  time-serving  and  insincere  policy 
when  Bentinck  ruled  Sicily.  A  rising  tide  of  success 
was  with  the  Carbonari ;  they  felt  the  King's  weakness, 
their  suspicions  were  aroused  by  his  steps.  Pepe,  who 
had  now  assumed  command,  with  Minichini,  Napoletano, 
De  Conciliis,  De  Filippi,  and  the  other  Carbonaro 
leaders,  discussed  the  royal  edicts,  found  them  unsatis- 
factory,  and   declared    that   an    immediate   grant  of  a 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  July  5,  1820  (enclosure),  For.  Off.  Sicily,  90. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  87 

constitution  was  necessary,  that  this  constitution  should 
be  the  Spanish  one  of  18 12,  to  which  the  King  had 
already  sworn  observance  as  an  Infant  of  Spain,  and 
that  Pepe  should  retain  supreme  military  command 
until  a  national  parliament  could  be  assembled.  These 
demands  were  promptly  embodied  in  a  letter  which 
Pepe  sent  in  to  be  presented  to  the  Hereditary  Prince. 
The  nature  of  the  Carbonaro  requirements  became 
known  throughout  Naples  during  the  night  of  the  6  th, 
and  it  was  widely  feared  that  they  presaged  a  stormy 
day  to  follow. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  a  crowd  rapidly  assembled 
in  front  of  the  Royal  Palace  bent  on  the  due  accom- 
plishment of  the  Carbonaro  programme.  Loud  shouts 
were  raised  for  the  Spanish  Constitution,  and  soon 
proved  effective.  An  edict  was  posted  at  the  palace 
gates  that  announced  the  immediate  coming  into  effect 
of  the  Spanish  Constitution,  but  instead  of  being  signed 
by  Ferdinand  it  appeared  in  the  name  of  the  Hereditary 
Prince.  On  this  becoming  known  the  uproar  was 
renewed,  and  gradually  increased  in  volume. 

While  Ferdinand  resisted  the  entreaties  of  his  coun- 
cillors, the  passions  of  the  crowd  rose  to  fever  heat ; 
they  became  a  "  howling  mob,"  and  the  Prince,  falling 
at  his  father's  knees,  finally  extorted  his  reluctant 
signature. 

This  concession  was  now  inevitable,  for  the  time 
had  long  since  passed  when  the  Government  might  yet 
hope  to  control  the  rising.  Yet  a  fact  noted  by  the 
British  Minister  may  serve  to  emphasize  the  weak- 
ness of  Ferdinand  and  his  advisers,  for  he  reported  to 
his  government  that  "  of  all  the  grave  counsellors 
who  advised  the  Prince  to  accept  the  Spanish  Constitu- 
tion .  .  .  there  was  not  one  who  had  ever  read  it." 


88  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

The  kingdom  of  Naples  being  now  happily  endowed 
with  a  constitution  that  nobody  knew  anything  about, 
universal  joy  prevailed  and  the  mob  dispersed.  The 
civic  guards  turned  out  in  large  numbers  to  patrol  the 
streets  and  preserve  order,  and  matters  took  a  far  more 
reassuring  aspect,  until  later  in  the  day  it  suddenly 
became  known  that  Pepe  had  informed  the  Hereditary 
Prince  that  the  Carbonari  intended  marching  in  from 
Monteforte  to  Naples.  The  Carbonari  were  no  longer 
putting  forward  demands  but  issuing  orders,  and  so 
the  Hereditary  Prince  understood  the  matter.  He 
answered  that  the  entry  might  take  place  on  the  9th, 
but  that  it  should  be  limited  to  2000  men,  and  that 
the  royal  colours  should  be  displayed  with  those  of  the 
Carbonari. 

As  this  new  development  became  known,  alarm  once 
more  spread  through  the  city.  The  army  was  partly 
in  open  revolt  and  wholly  demoralized,  while  rumours 
of  the  most  exaggerated  description  magnified  the  public 
danger.  It  was  reported  that  the  insurgents  were  largely 
made  up  of  peasantry  that  would  repeat  the  scenes 
enacted  by  RuiFo's  Calabrese  in  1799.  Houses  were 
barricaded,  and  the  Foreign  Ministers  took  measures 
for  their  personal  protection.  Nugent,  who  was  now 
helpless,  sought  refuge  with  Sir  William  a  Court,  the 
British  Minister. 

On  the  8th  of  July  the  Carbonari,  numbering  some 
20,000  men,  descended  from  Monteforte  into  the 
plain.  On  the  morning  of  the  9th  they  marched 
into  Naples  by  the  Avellino  road,  which  ran  into  the 
Toledo  at  the  Accademia,  now  the  Museo  Nazionale. 
All  Naples  was  in  the  streets,  and  witnessed  perhaps 
the  strangest  procession  recorded  in  its  annals.  It  was 
not  2000  men  who  entered  the  city  as  the  Hereditary 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  89 

Prince  had  specified,  but  in  all  some  14,000,  of  whom 
about  one-half  wore  various  regular  and  militia  uniforms. 
Every  window  of  the  long,  narrow  Toledo  was  crowded 
with  spectators,  and,  as  if  by  enchantment,  the  red, 
black,  and  blue  colours  of  the  Carbonari,  unknown  a 
week  before,  were  now  the  universal  decorations.  Many 
other  strange  emblems  and  symbols  were  displayed  and 
framed  with  waving  handkerchiefs. 

The  procession  was  headed  by  Morelli,  Silvati,  and 
the  troopers  of  Borbone  Cavalleria  ;  the  originators  of 
the  revolution  were  already  known  by  no  other  name 
than  that  of  the  Sacred  Squadron.  Behind  them  came 
military  bands,  and  then  Pepe,  followed  by  a  number  of 
officers  ;  after  them  several  bodies  of  troops  belonging 
to  the  regular  army.  But  most  remarkable  of  all  was 
the  appearance  of  Minichini,  who  headed  the  next  part 
of  the  procession.  He  rode  a  white  horse  and  was 
fully  armed  ;  his  clerical  dress  was  profusely  adorned 
with  sashes  and  emblems,  symbols  of  the  highest  grades 
of  the  Carbonari ;  his  square,  determined,  but  ill- 
favoured  face  wore  a  smile  of  triumph.  Behind  him 
marched  the  Good  Cousins  of  Principato  and  Basilicata 
attired  in  their  provincial  garb  and  peaked  hats,  and 
wearing  their  badges  and  colours. 

Preserving  a  remarkable  order,  this  great  column  of 
men  slowly  made  its  way  down  the  whole  length  of  the 
Toledo  and  arrived  at  the  Royal  Palace.  Here  the 
crowd  was  greater  than  ever.  Ferdinand,  unwilling  to 
participate  in  the  events  of  the  day,  had  retired  to  an 
inner  part  of  the  Palace,  and  declined  to  leave  his  bed  ; 
but  the  Hereditary  Prince,  together  with  the  Duchess 
of  Calabria  and  some  of  their  attendants,  took  up  their 
position  on  the  central  balcony  over  the  principal 
entrance  to  the  Palace.    On  the  arrival  of  the  procession 


90  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

the  royal  party,  whether  as  a  matter  of  enthusiasm  or  of 
prudence,  displayed  their  handkerchiefs,  and  the  Duchess 
went  so  far  in  her  zeal  for  the  popular  cause  that  she 
ostentatiously  attached  a  red,  black,  and  blue  cockade  to 
her  husband*s  coat,  to  the  great  gratification  of  the  mob. 

At  the  Palace  Pepe  dismounted,  and,  followed  by 
General  Napoletano,  Colonel  De  Conciliis,  Minichini, 
and  Morelli,  presented  himself  before  the  Hereditary 
Prince.  He  fervently  protested  his  loyalty  to  the 
throne  and  that  of  his  followers.  He  had  only  joined 
the  insurgents  after  the  revolution  was  accomplished, 
he  declared,  and  for  the  purpose  of  turning  it  to  the 
King's  advantage.  As  to  the  position  of  Commander- 
in-Chief  which  he  had  assumed,  he  was  more  anxious  to 
relinquish  than  to  retain  it,  and  had  already  pledged 
himself  that,  on  the  assembling  of  the  Parliament,  he 
would  resign  his  functions. 

To  this  harangue  of  the  general  the  Duke  of  Calabria 
replied  by  thanking  him  for  his  great  services  to  the 
State,  by  confirming  the  position  of  Commander-in-Chief 
he  had  assumed,  and  by  declaring  that  for  himself  he 
would  defend  the  Constitution  to  the  last  drop  of  his 
blood.  Pepe  now  demanded  to  see  the  King,  and  was 
conducted  alone  to  the  bed-chamber.  Ferdinand  was 
in  a  fever  "  produced  by  terror,"  as  Pepe  afterwards 
affirmed  ;  at  the  foot  of  his  bed  stood  the  Duchess  of 
Floridia.  The  King  extended  his  hand  for  Pepe  to 
kiss,  which  ceremony  duly  accomplished,  the  general 
said  :  ''  Now  your  Majesty  reigns  over  the  hearts  of 
all."  To  this  Ferdinand  replied  :  "I  hope.  General, 
you  will  conduct  yourself  honourably."  Pepe  then 
repeated  the  speech  with  which  he  had  previously  met 
the  Hereditary  Prince,  and  shortly  afterwards  retired.'^ 

1  Pepe,  Mems.  ii.  252-257. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  91 

The  rest  of  the  day  passed  in  perfect  quiet,  and  the 
British  Minister,  who  was  far  from  favourable  to  the 
Constitutional  movement,  was  able  to  record :  "  .  .  .  not 
a  handkerchief  has  been  stolen,  not  a  knife  drawn  in 
anger  from  the  first  to  the  last."  The  revolution  was 
complete,  and  not  a  drop  of  blood  had  been  spilt.^ 

Pepe  was  now  by  royal  decree  Commander-in-Chiet 
of  the  army,  as  he  was  by  public  acclamation  and  the 
accidents  of  politics  leader  of  the  Carbonari.  His 
sudden  elevation  had  a  double  effect.  The  jealousy 
long  felt  against  the  foreign  officers,  and  especially 
Nugent,  was  allayed  by  the  promotion  of  a  Neapolitan 
to  the  position  so  long  held  by  a  foreigner.  But  for  this 
old  jealousy  a  new  one  was  quickly  substituted,  as  Pepe 
was  junior  in  rank  to  many  other  native  officers  who  at 
once  resented  his  being  placed  over  their  heads.  He 
attempted  to  conciliate  them,  spoke  to  them  with 
moderation,  and  reiterated  what  he  had  already  solemnly 
declared,  that  on  the  assembly  of  the  Parliament  he 
would  resign  his  position. 

At  the  same  time  Pepe  was  inclined  to  take  to  him- 
self the  whole  credit  for  the  success  of  the  movement 
of  which  circumstances  had  made  him  the  head.  He 
posed  as  the  regenerator  of  his  country.  He  made 
considerable  show  of  disinterestedness  by  refusing  a 
special  grant  of  money  offered  him  by  the  Government, 
though  more  than  one  of  his  contemporaries  doubted 
whether  his  action  was  wholly  prompted  by  public 
considerations. 

Towards  Minichini,  whom  many  viewed  as  the 
real  leader  of  the  revolution,  Pepe  displayed  the 
greatest  hostility  and  jealousy,  and  it  is  clear  that  his 
memoirs  cannot  be  accepted  as  an  accurate  account  of 

^  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  July  20,  1820,  For.  Off,  Sicily^  90. 


92  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         parti 

the  part  he  played.  To  Minichini,  if  to  any  one,  was 
clearly  ascribable  the  inception  of  a  movement  that  was 
helped  in  varying  degrees  by  the  late  assistance  of  Pepe 
and  Napoletano,  by  the  incompetence  or  sympathy  of 
Carascosa,  by  the  cowardice  of  the  Government,  and 
by  the  indiscipline  of  the  army.  The  official  verdict 
that  the  revolution  was  the  result  of  a  plot  of  which 
Carascosa,  Pepe,  and  Napoletano  were  the  leaders 
cannot  be  accepted,  for  many  causes  of  the  outbreak 
are  to  be  traced  in  the  earliest  chapters  of  this  work, 
and  when  the  real  share  in  the  proceedings  at  Monte- 
forte  of  these  three  generals  is  considered,  it  can  only 
be  concluded  that  their  action  may  have  influenced  but 
did  not  determine  the  course  of  the  revolution.^ 

There  were  two  tasks  of  supreme  importance  that 
faced  the  newly  constituted  liberal  ministry  ;  one  was 
the  preservation  of  order,  the  other  the  convoking 
of  Parliament  under  the  provisions  of  the  Spanish 
Constitution. 

The  appointment  of  Zurlo  and  his  colleagues  to  the 
places  held  by  Medici  and  the  Sicilian  ministry  lent  to 
the  revolution  a  Muratist  complexion.  This  made  it 
improbable  that  it  could  gain  the  King's  confidence  or 
work  harmoniously  with  him.  This  impression  was 
heightened  by  the  fact  that  a  Giunta  of  government  or 
advisory  council  was  created  and  was  filled  with  men 
who  had  served  under  the  French  kings.  The  choice 
of  Zurlo  had  certainly  been,  in  one  way,  the  best 
Ferdinand  could  make  under  the  circumstances,  for 
although  he  represented  all  that  the  King  detested,  yet 
he  was  the  most  capable  administrator  and  man  of 
government   in   the   kingdom,  and  although  a  liberal, 

^  Decisione  nella  Causa  di  Monteforte,  20. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  93 

he  was  far  from  inclined  for  radical  or  revolutionary 
measures.  If,  under  Joachim,  Zurlo  had  been  in 
favour  of  constitutionalism,  now  that  constitutionalism 
had  placed  him  in  power  he  was  most  anxious  by  every 
means  possible  to  restrain  and  moderate  its  action. 
Ricciardi,  Zurlo's  ablest  supporter,  even  proposed  to  his 
colleagues  the  immediate  suppression  of  the  Carbonaro 
lodges,  a  not  unstatesmanlike  proposal,  though  probably 
impossible  of  execution. 

At  the  outset  everything  appeared  to  facilitate  the 
action  of  Zurlo's  ministry  :  the  Carbonari  looked  on  it 
as  likely  to  support  liberal  measures  ;  the  King  as  likely 
to  maintain  order  and  repress  excesses.  Its  action  was 
further  facilitated  by  the  fact  that  the  Treasury  held  a 
large  reserve  in  gold.  Yet  it  was  not  long  before  it 
was  discovered  that  its  position  was  fundamentally  weak. 

Between  the  Carbonari  and  Zurlo's  ministry  there 
could  be  no  real  harmony.  It  was  the  secret  conven- 
ticles that  had  made  the  revolution,  and  having  attained 
power  they  had  no  intention  of  relinquishing  it  even  in 
favour  of  the  few  capable  and  liberal  administrators 
and  statesmen  of  the  kingdom.  The  Good  Cousins 
were  now  supreme.  Before  the  6th  of  July  they  had 
existed  in  secret ;  a  few  days  later  they  appeared  to  be 
nearly  the  whole  nation.  Instructions  were  issued  to 
enrol  as  many  new  members  as  possible  ;  new  lodges 
sprang  into  existence  like  mushrooms  after  rain  ;  in 
the  city  of  Naples  there  were  soon  340  ;  on  a  man-of- 
war  at  Capri  there  were  no  less  than  three  ;  in  every 
regiment,  in  every  tribunal,  a  vendita  was  formed  ;  in 
western  Lucania  were  182;  female  lodges  sprang  up, 
and  a  vendita  was  formed  among  the  prisoners  at  the 
Castle  of  S.  Elmo  in  which  the  Governor  was  solemnly 
enrolled  as  an  apprentice. 


94  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

The  vendita  of  Salerno,  having  failed  to  take  the 
lead  in  the  revolution,  now  endeavoured  to  regain  it 
by  heading  a  movement  for  organizing  the  Carbonari 
into  the  dominant  political  body  of  the  State.  It  aimed 
at  attracting  the  whole  population  to  the  lodges  and  at 
substituting  Carbonaro  administration  and  justice  for 
that  of  the  central  authority,  thus  in  fact  creating  a 
Carbonaro  state.  The  Eastern  Lucanian  Republic  too, 
one  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  provincial  organiza- 
tions, appeared  to  threaten  the  establishment  of  an 
autonomous  provincial  Carbonaro  republic.  This  fear 
was  allayed  by  a  curious  pronouncement  made  at 
Potenza  on  the  20th  of  July  1820,  whereby  the  word 
republic  was  explained  away  and  a  declaration  of 
conformity  made. 

This  extraordinary  ideal  of  substituting  the  codes, 
ethics,  methods,  and  administration  of  the  Carbonari 
for  those  of  the  State  did  not  prosper  ;  yet  for  a  while 
Naples  took  on  every  external  appearance  of  being  one 
great  Carbonaro  brotherhood.  Few  appeared  in  the 
streets  unadorned  with  the  red,  blue,  and  black  ribbon, 
while  the  mysterious  grips  and  passwords,  the  suggest- 
ive rhetoric  and  catch-phrases  of  the  society  became 
bound  up  in  the  daily  life  of  the  people. 

Perhaps  the  most  truly  beneficial  effect  of  the  new 
state  of  affairs  was  that  public  opinion  suddenly  found 
free  vent  and  a  means  of  expression.  Results  soon 
followed.  So  loud  was  the  demand  that  Ferdinand 
should  solemnly  ratify  the  change  that  had  been  accom- 
plished that  he  consented  to  take  a  solemn  oath  in 
honour  of  the  new  constitution.  Accordingly  on  the 
1 3th  of  July  General  Pepe  and  a  select  audience  accom- 
panied the  King  to  the  chapel  of  the  Palace.  After  a 
short  service,  "  the  King  raised  his  face  towards  heaven, 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  95 

and   fixing  his  eyes  on  the  cross,  added  these  words: 
'  Omnipotent  God,  who  with  Thine  infinite  powers  canst 
read  the  soul  of  man  and  the  future,  do  Thou,  if  I  speak 
falsely,  or  intend  to  break  my  oath,  in  this  moment 
direct  the  thunders  of  Thy  vengeance  on  my  head/  "  ^ 
He  then,  with  tears,  turned  to  Pepe,  who  stood  watch- 
fully close  by  his  side,  and  said  :   *'  Believe  me.  General, 
I  have  now  sworn  from  the  very  bottom  of  my  heart/'  ^ 
The  King  was  now  apparently  irrevocably  committed 
to  the  popular  cause,  and  gave  no  sign  to  encourage 
that  section  of  the  community  which  alone  had  refused 
to  join  the  Carbonari.     The  lazzaroni  and    fishermen 
of  Naples  were  still,  as  ever,  in  opposition  to  the  middle 
class  and  liberalism,  bound  by  an  unalterable  sympathy 
to  Ferdinand  and  Bourbonism.     But  Ferdinand  was  far 
too   timid  of  danger,   the   Hereditary   Prince   far  too 
pliable  and  weak,  to  make  an  appeal  to  civil  faction. 
The    King    had   decided   to    yield   whatever    was   de- 
manded of  him,  as  he  had  in  Sicily  some  years  before. 
But  in  his  heart  there  could  be  no  change.     He  viewed 
every  attack  on  the  rights  his  birth  had  given  him  as  a 
crime  ;   every  concession  extorted,  every  oath  sworn, 
was  subject  to  the  mental  reservation  that  it  was  an 
affair  of  necessity,  and  would  last  only  so  long  as  that 
necessity  remained  present. 

An  extreme  wing  of  the  Carbonari  realized  how 
valueless  were  the  King's  concessions.  They  felt  that 
between  themselves  and  Ferdinand,  however  amicable 
appearances  might  be  for  the  moment,  there  must  neces- 
sarily be  a  life-and-death  struggle.  If  so,  it  was  better, 
they  thought,  to  make  away  with  the  King  at  once. 
A  plot  was  consequently  formed  to  force  an  entrance 
into  the  Palace  and  to  remove  Ferdinand,  keeping  him 

1  CoUetta,  Storia^  ii.  35.  ^  pgpe,  Mems.  ii.  265. 


96  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

as  a  prisoner  and  hostage.  This  plot  was  discovered. 
Military  preparations  were  made  to  protect  the  Palace, 
3000  sandbags  were  filled  and  placed  in  position,  a 
number  of  arrests  were  made,  and  the  conspiracy  came 
to  nothing.  Yet  unimportant  and  few  as  were  the 
Carbonari  involved  in  this  affair,  exaggerated  as  doubt- 
less were  the  miUtary  precautions  taken,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  fear  of  personal  violence  felt  by 
the  King  on  this  occasion  went  far  to  confirm  his 
ineradicable  hatred  of  the  movement  in  which  he  was 
involuntarily  participating. 

The  most  notable  of  the  early  measures  adopted  by 
the  Ministry  and  Provisional  Giunta  was  the  declara- 
tion of  the  freedom  of  the  press.  The  decree  was 
issued  on  the  26th  of  July.  Its  immediate  result  was 
the  appearance  of  a  great  number  of  newspapers,  pam- 
phlets, broadsides,  and  posters.^  The  effect  of  this 
new-born  liberty,  a  concession  as  great,  if  not  greater, 
than  that  of  the  Constitution,  was  on  the  whole  aston- 
ishingly good,  one  of  the  most  creditable  things  in 
Neapolitan  history.  Several  of  the  newspapers  that 
made  their  appearance  were  of  considerable  merit. 
The  Minerva  Napolitana^  conducted  by  Carlo  Troja, 
achieved  a  by  no  means  unmerited  reputation,  and 
among  others  the  Vigilante^  Voce  del  Secolo^  Echo, 
Censore,  and  Bihlioteca  Costituzionale  all  deserve  an 
honourable  mention.  On  the  whole,  these  newspapers 
were  remarkable  for  their  moderation.  Yet,  as  in  all 
revolutions,  there  was  an  extreme  group,  of  which  the 
chief  organ  was  the  Giornale  degli  Amici  della  Patria, 
of  which  De  Ritis  was  the  editor  and  Gabriele  Rossetti 
the  most  conspicuous  contributor.  Unfortunately  for 
his  talent  and  reputation  his    lyricism  soon  turned  to 

1  See  Sections  II.  and  IV.  of  the  Bibliography,  Appendix  K. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  97 

the  melodramatic,  and  the  melodramatic  to  violence. 
It  was  from  this  quarter  that  Zurlo  and  his  colleagues 
had  to  meet  with  the  strongest  attacks.  The  opposi- 
tion to  this  statesman  was  a  matter  of  political  vendetta, 
and  was  due  to  his  having  advocated  the  repression  of 
the -Carbonari  in  the  year  18 13.  He  was  now  accord- 
ingly attacked,  not  only  in  pamphlets,  but  in  a  com- 
plaint that  was  actually  sent  to  the  King  by  the  vendita 
of  Salerno. 

The  Minerva  from  the  very  beginning  advocated  a 
moderate  and  reasonable  course.  No  sooner  had  the 
text  of  the  Spanish  Constitution  been  procured  and 
published  than  those  who  were  in  a  position  to  judge 
recognised  its  many  defects  and  its  inapplicability  to 
Naples.  The  essential  features  of  that  Constitution 
may  be  briefly  stated  as  follows  : — 

It  provided  for  one  assembly  only,  elected  by 
universal  suiFrage,  having  legislative  functions,  the 
right  of  approving  treaties,  of  appointing  judges,  and 
of  voting  taxation.  The  King's  veto  could  be  over- 
ridden by  an  affirmative  vote  of  the  Parliament  given 
for  the  third  time  in  three  successive  years.  The 
general  tendency  of  the  Constitution  may  be  said  to 
have  been  to  place  a  large  part  of  the  executive  power 
in  the  hands  of  the  Parliament,  to  decrease  corre- 
spondingly the  royal  prerogatives,  and,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  an  Upper  House,  to  make  probable  the 
recurrence  of  direct  conflicts  between  King  and  Parlia- 
ment. 

Troja,  after  attacking  the  Provisional  Giunta,  turned 
his  attention  to  the  Constitution,  which  he  declared 
required  modification.  This  provoked  an  angry  outcry 
from  the  extremists,  who,  tied  to  a  catchword,  could 
see  no  salvation  save  in  the  Spanish  Constitution  pure 

VOL.  II  H 


98  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

and  simple.  In  the  single  chamber  that  Constitution 
provided  for,  in  the  permanent  representation  and  over- 
riding vote  that  destroyed  the  royal  veto,  they  saw  the 
only  possible  guarantees  of  constitutional  freedom,  and 
so  they  turned  against  the  moderates  with  fury. 

Fortunately  the  press  was  free,  and  these  polemics 
found  an  easy  vent  in  paper  and  printer's  ink,  so  that 
the  peace  of  the  city  was  not  disturbed  by  them. 
The  head  of  police  under  the  new  government  was 
an  old  Muratist  functionary,  Pasquale  Borrelli  ;  he 
carried  out  his  duties  with  equal  zeal,  tact,  and  success. 
He  was  a  liberal,  though  not  affiliated  with  the  secret 
societies,  he  was  well  liked  by  the  revolutionists  though 
a  firm  and  capable  administrator.  Strong  in  the  support 
of  the  Alta  Vendita  of  Naples  and  in  the  confidence  of 
the  civic  guard,  Borrelli  met  the  exigencies  of  the 
situation  with  indefatigable  resource  and  good-humour. 
An  eye-witness  has  left  an  amusing  account  of  how  he 
received  the  innumerable  deputations  from  patriotic 
societies  that  waited  on  him  with  the  most  incongruous 
petitions  and  demands.  To  the  "  Sons  of  Epami- 
nondas,"  the  **  Friends  of  Aristides,"  the  "  Heraclida^," 
the  *'  Society  of  the  Blood  of  Christ,'*  he  presented  an 
equally  firm  but  amiable  front.  He  quenched  their  ex- 
travagant demands  with  floods  of  appropriate  eloquence, 
and  found  his  way  with  wonderful  precision  to  the 
innate  docility  that  is  so  strangely  allied  to  impetuosity 
in  the  Neapolitan  character.^ 

One  of  the  favourite  police  methods  of  those  days 
was  much  facilitated  by  the  extraordinary  extension 
taken  by  the  Carbonari  and  the  wide  opening  of  the 
doors  of  the  lodges.  Borrelli's  secret  agents  were 
quickly. introduced  into  the  lodges,  and  soon  possessed 

*   Bibl.  Nax.  Difcsa  at  Borrelli  i   Radowsky,  151,  158. 


CHAP.  IV         THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  99 

their  every  secret.  But  those  secrets  were  rarely  worth 
having,  for  the  Carbonari  could  no  longer  be  called  a 
secret  society.  Their  statutes,  their  rites,  their  doc- 
trines, their  aspirations,  their  membership,  all  was  now 
public  and  in  print.  Their  victory  had  rendered 
secrecy  both  unnecessary  and  intolerable. 

The  only  serious  disturbance  of  order  that  took 
place  in  the  early  weeks  of  the  Revolution  was  not 
attributable  to  any  fault  of  Borrelli,  but  to  the  anarchical 
state  into  which  the  discipline  of  the  army  had  been 
thrown.  The  Farnese  regiment  of  infantry  was  placed 
under  orders  for  garrison  duty  at  Gaeta,  a  station  that 
the  soldiers  strongly  disliked.  Three  hundred  of  the 
men  accordingly  deserted  with  their  arms.  They  were 
promptly  pursued  and  attacked  by  detachments  of  the 
Guard,  who  demonstrated  that  had  they  been  employed 
on  the  3rd  or  4th  of  July  there  would  have  been  a  quick 
end  made  of  the  Carbonaro  revolution.  There  was  a 
regular  engagement  beyond  the  Maddalena  bridge,  in 
which  some  sixty  of  the  Farnese  deserters  were  shot 
down.  General  Rosaroll,  Governor  of  Capua,  flogged 
seventeen  more  to  death.  The  rest  went  to  prison,  but 
were  soon  released  by  the  Hereditary  Prince. 

The  mutiny  of  the  Farnese  regiment  had  created 
some  excitement  at  Naples,  and  the  central  Carbonaro 
association,  the  Maggistratura  Provisoria  as  it  was  now 
called,  issued  a  proclamation  calling  on  all  Good 
Cousins  to  assist  the  authorities.^  The  civic  guard  of 
Naples,  or  guardia  di  sicurezza^  a  corps  made  up  of 
the  middle  or  trading  class,  had  joined  the  Carbonari 
in  a  body.  They  were  now  supplied  with  a  new  uni- 
form, green  and  maroon,  very  splendid  in  all  respects, 

1  Proclamation  of  July  20.     The  names  appended  to  it  are  :   S,  Preziosi,  Gius  de 
Jorio,  Feb.  de  Floria,  Modestino  Bianchi,  Crescenzo  Gallo,  and  Gaetano  Ricciardelli. 


100  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  ii 

of  which  the  most  striking  features  were  a  very 
tall  feather  surmounting  the  shako,  and  a  portentous 
skull  and  crossbones  adorning  the  cartridge  box.  This 
Carbonaro  guard,  as  it  was  soon  called,  supported  the 
efforts  of  Borrelli.  Pepe  made  service  in  it  com- 
pulsory, and  relates  that  he  once  found  the  aged  Duke 
of  Bovino,  musket  in  hand,  solemnly  mounting  guard 
decorated  with  the  ribbon  of  the  exalted  order  of  San 
Gennaro.  If  an  old  print  may  be  trusted,  its  patrols 
were  generally  commanded  and  led  by  a  police  officer. 

In  the  meanwhile  preparations  for  the  elections  had 
been  rapidly  pushed  forward.  In  the  provinces  all  was 
enthusiasm.  There  was  little  opposition  to  the  national 
cause,  though  here  and  there  a  priest  ventured  to  run 
counter  to  the  current.^  In  the  first  week  of  September 
the  elections  took  place.  The  result  was  considered 
satisfactory,  even  by  the  opponents  of  the  revolution. 
Of  the  seventy-two  deputies  elected,  exactly  one-third 
were  landowners,  another  third  were  lawyers  and 
officials,  and  among  the  rest  were  ten  clerics  and  five 
soldiers.  Curiously  enough,  only  seventeen  members 
in  all  were  Carbonari ;  among  the  prominent  names 
were  to  be  noted  those  of  Delfico  and  Colletti,  who  had 
sat  in  the  Republican  Assembly  of  1799,  ^^  Bausan, 
Cardinal  Ferrao,  Poerio,  Begani,  and  Borrelli. 

On  the  I  St  of  October  the  formal  inauguration  of 
the  labours  of  this  Assembly  took  place  with  much 
religious  pomp  and  swearing  of  oaths  at  the  Church 
of  the  Spirito  Santo.  The  crowd  outside  was  large, 
their  cheers  faint  ;  the  assemblage  inside  was  unusually 
undemonstrative  and  silent,  as  Ferdinand,  in  full  state, 
swore  the  usual  facile  oaths,  displayed  the  usual  facile 
emotions.     The  King's  path  was  strewed  with  flowers. 

^  As  at  Bisceglic  j  Le  trame  de  preti. 


CHAP.  IV        THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1820  loi 

Pepe  played  a  part  second  only  to  that  of  the  King, 
and  with  much  circumstance  laid  down  the  command 
of  the  army.  There  were  speeches  as  eloquent  as  they 
were  empty,  notably  a  mystic,  symbolico  -  political 
address  by  Grand  Master  Galdi,  president  of  the 
Assembly,  and  to  close  the  day  a  heavy  rainfall,  which 
the  lazzaroni  interpreted  as  an  unmistakable  portent  of 
the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty. 

It  was  only  after  great  difficulty  that  Ferdinand  had 
agreed  to  grace  this  ceremony,  and  after  Carascosa  had 
solemnly  pledged  himself  to  obtain  a  modification  in 
the  Constitution  whereby  there  should  be  an  Upper 
House  added  to  that  whose  labours  had  just  opened. 
Yet  the  Constitution  inaugurated  by  the  King  had  been 
so  uncompromisingly  Spanish  that  even  the  hour  of 
convocation  had  been  fixed  *'  alle  ore  dieci  di  Spagna," 
ten  o'clock,  Spanish  time. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  cxlvi.  7,  4785  :  De  Filippi's  defence  ;  9,  4749, — 
10,  4733, — 10,  4736  :  events  of  the  first  week  of  July,  particularly  concern- 
ing Carascosa,  Nunziante,  and  Nugent. 

BiBL.  Naz.,  Difesa  di  Borrelli :  details  of  his  tenure  of  the  police  depart- 
ment. 

Brit,  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  '90  :  a  Court's  dispatches  (numerous  and 
detailed),  also  MS.  of  the  Sublimi  Maestri  Perfetti :  91,  continuation  of 
a  Court. 

Brit.  Mus.  i  3  i  6  1.  (print  catal.),  a  few  miscellaneous  matters. 

Printed  Books 

Amico  della  Costituzione  j  Atti  relati<vi  all'  inter^ento ;  B.  Z.,  Foti  dei 
Calahresi ;  Bertholdi,  Mems.  ;  Beyle,  Rome,  Naples  et  Florence  ;  Bignon, 
Les  Cabinets  et  les  peuples  ;  Borrelli,  Appendice ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1820- 
1821  ;  Cacciatore,  Esame ;  Cantu,  Cronistoria ;  Carascosa,  Mems.; 
Carrano,  rita  di  G.  Pepe ;  Carte  segrete  della  polizia ;  Castlereagh, 
Corr.}     CoLLETTA,     Storia  i     Colpo    d"  occhio ;    Craven,    Tour    through 


102  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Naples  ,•  Decisione  nella  Causa  di  Monteforte  ,•  Diario  del  Parlamento ; 
Giornale  Costituz. ;  Giornale  del  regno;  Gualterio,  Ultimi  ri'volgimenti ; 
Mazza,  Memorie ;  Metternich,  Mems. ;  Miner'va  Napol. ;  Orloff, 
Mems. ;  Pepe,  Mems. ;  Pepe,  Relation,  Pamphleteer,  xxiii. ;  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli,  Cenni  dei  fatti ;  Radowsky,  Cost  memorab. ;  Ravaschieri, 
Filangieri ;  Rtfflessioni  suite  finance;  Riviello,  Cronaca  Potentina ; 
RossELLi,  A.  S.  A.  R.  II  Principe  Ereditario  ;  Salvo,  Dernih'e  re'volution  ; 
Salotollo,  Rapporto  ;  Trame  de  preti ;  Witt,  Mems.  Secrets. 


CHAPTER   V 

THE    FALL    OF    THE    CARBONARI 

Vendita  della  Pace  —  Carbonaro  demands  —  Disorder  —  Parties  in 
Parliament — Analogy~with  Convention — Carbonari  dominate 
Assembly — Parliamentary  eloquence — Borrelli  and  Poerio — 
Legislative  trivialities — Ferdinand's  alarm — Pepe's  position — 
Carascosa  —  Plot  to  take  Palace — British  assistance  —  Ships 
arrive — Campochiaro  asks  for  their  withdrawal — Metternich's 
views  —  Unrest  at  Milan — Cariati's  mission  to  Vienna  — 
Czar  declares  for  intervention — Metternich's  note  to  German 
states — Austrian  armaments — Campochiaro  demands  explana- 
tion —  Metternich  declines  to  receive  Gallo  —  Ferdinand 
denounces  his  compulsion — Congress  of  Troppau — Alarm  of 
liberals — Russian  policy — Intervention  and  political  theories — 
Ferdinand  invited  to  Laybach — Position  of  Great  Britain — 
Of  France — Her  mediation  attempted — Laybach  proposal 
before  Parliament — Answer — Permission  obtained  for  journey 
— Ferdinand  embarks — Parting  letter  to  Calabria — Resignation 
of  Ministry — Zurlo — New  Ministry  —  Church  in  Sicily — 
F.  Pepe's  expedition — Bad  state  of  army — Pepe  and  Carascosa — 
Finances — Feeling  at  New  Year — The  Duke  of  Calabria — 
Constitution  finished — Parliament  adjourned — Ferdinand  at 
Laybach — Decisions  of  Congress — Received  at  Naples — Com- 
municated to  Parliament  —  Excitement  —  Assassination  ot 
Giampietro — Rossetti — Reaction — Duke  of  Calabria's  posi- 
tion— Military  measures — Guards  reviewed — Pepe  in  the 
Abruzzi — His  forces — Austrian  advance — Fight  at  Rieti — 
Carascosa's  army  disbands  —  Last  sittings  of  Parliament  — 
Capua  surrendered — Fate  of  Silvati  and  Morelli — Escape 
of  leaders — Revolution  in  Piedmont — Entry  of  Austrians  into 
Naples. 

103 


/ 


/ 


104  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

The  Carbonari  had,  as  we  have  seen,  split  into  two 
factions,  of  which  the  more  important  might  be 
described  as  moderate  ;  yet  even  that  moderate  faction 
was  far  removed  in  its  aims  and  in  its  political  ideals 
from  the  conservative  ideas  of  the  Muratists.  The 
central  lodge  of  Naples,  the  Vendita  della  Pace^  presided 
over  by  Giuliano,  had  been  recognised  as  a  governing 
body  by  the  Vendite  of  the  provinces,  and  soon  assumed 
paramount  influence.  Its  qualification  for  political 
leadership  may  be  judged  from  the  following  incident. 

About  the  end  of  October  the  Vendita,  under  the 
thin  disguise  of  "  una  Societa  di  persone  affezionate  alia 
Patria,"  published  a  pamphlet  in  which  it  was  argued 
that  the  position  of  the  Hereditary  Prince  as  Regent  was 
unconstitutional,  that  the  King  should  resume  govern- 
ing, that  the  civic  guards  should  replace"  the  Royal 
Guard  in  the  charge  of  the  Palace,  that  military  precau- 
tions should  be  taken,  and  that  a  body  of  convicts 
should  be  armed.  The  suggestion  that  the  King's 
person  should  thus  be  handed  over  to  the  custody  of 
an  organization  controlled  by  the  Carbonari  virtually 
meant  making  him  a  political  prisoner.  The  proposal 
to  condone  or  reward  crime  by  drafting  criminals  into 
the  army  was  equally  extravagant  and  impolitic.  The 
latter  proposal  was  especially  ill-timed,  for  the  revolu- 
tion, that  had  been  marked  by  such  good  order  at  its 
inception,  was  now  showing  a  marked  tendency  towards 
disorder.  So  great  was  the  dislocation  of  authority,  so 
potent  the  secret  protection  afforded  by  the  societies 
to  their  members,  that  robbery,  housebreaking,  and 
violence  increased  and  reached  an  alarming  point  in 
October  and  November.  Ricciardi  issued  a  report  on 
the  subject,  and  proposed  exceptional  measures.  He  was 
supported  by  the  best  element  among  the  Carbonari; 


CHAP.  V     THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         105 

the  Salerno  Vendita  drew  up  a  strongly  worded  appeal 
to  the  lodges  of  the  Western  Lucanian  Republic  urging 
them  to  help  the  Government  maintain  order,  and  by 
the  middle  of  December  there  was  a  decided  diminution 
of  crime. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  national  Parliament  had  begun 
its  labours,  and  quickly  showed  that  among  its  members 
were  to  be  found  three  parties.  Of  these  the  largest 
may  be  described  as  uncertain  in  its  aims  and  actions, 
yielding  alternately  to  the  influence  of  the  two  parties 
on  either  side  of  it,  the  moderates  on  the  one  hand, 
the  extremists  on  the  other.  The  moderates  were  weak 
in  numbers  but  strong  in  talent.  They  commanded  in 
Borrelli,  Delfico,  Poerio,  Nicolai,  and  Dragonetti  the 
best  intelligence  of  the  Assembly.  Their  policy  was  one 
of  constitutional  reform, — the  policy  that  Troja  so  ably 
supported  in  the  Minerva  Napolitana.  Opposed  to 
them  was  the  Carbonaro  party,  whose  steps  and  votes 
were  controlled  by  the  secret  decisions  of  the  Alta 
Vendita,  and  whose  influence  in  the  Assembly  was 
commensurate  with  the  loudly  expressed  approval  or 
disapproval  of  the  mob  of  Good  Cousins  who  daily  and 
exclusively  packed  the  galleries  of  the  chamber.  The 
Carbonaro  methods,  in  fact,  were  those  of  the  Jacobin 
Club. 

To  follow  the  course  of  the  debates  of  the 
Neapolitan  Parliament  would  be  to  distort  the  pro- 
portions of  the  work  here  undertaken,  and  to  relate 
much  that  was  trivial  in  its  effects.  A  few  of  the  more 
momentous  sessions  will  be  dwelt  on  in  due  course, 
but  all  that  now  need  be  said  was  that  the  domination 
of  the  Carbonaro  minority  over  the  Parliament  was 
carried  to  such  a  point  as  nearly  to  neutralize  the 
undoubtedly  good  elements  of  the  Assembly.    Even  the 


io6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

debates  of  the  Committees,  to  which  the  public  had  no 
access,  often  ended  by  the  threatening  demand  of  a  Car- 
bonaro  member  for  publicity,  while  anonymous  letters 
were  frequently  and  threats  of  assassination  occa- 
sionally resorted  to.  These  conditions  only  served  to 
accentuate  what  would  even  under  normal  circumstances 
have  been  the  dominant  note  of  the  Parliament,  decla- 
mation, empty  generalizations,  sentimental  frothiness. 
Appeals  to  the  Deity,  to  the  great  Architect  of  the 
Universe,  to  the  sacredness  of  oaths,  vows  of  admira- 
tion and  eternal  love  for  an  adorable  sovereign,  formed 
an  ornate  but  insecure  basis  for  the  discussion  of 
vital  problems  of  constitutionalism  and  politics.  One 
member  with  self-complacent  assurance  remarked  to 
Pepe  one  day,  ''  My  discourse  to-morrow  will  pro- 
duce a  revolution  in  Europe."  ^  It  was  not  the  reign 
of  liberty  that  had  dawned  on  Naples,  but  that  of 
rhetoric. 

Borrelli  and  Poerio,  as  debaters,  rose  above  the 
average  of  the  Assembly,  though  neither  of  them  ever 
attained  the  level  of  statesmen.  Neither  could  quite 
free  himself  from  the  narrowing  trammels  of  a  lawyer *s 
education  ;  yet  for  their  eloquence,  moderation,  and 
public  spirit  they  have  deservedly  won  an  honourable 
inscription  on  the  roll  of  Italian  patriots.  To  emit  a 
reasoned  and  temperate  opinion  in  the  face  of  howling 
and  inimical  galleries  was  a  feat  that  the  tact,  courage, 
and  eloquence  of  Borrelli  more  than  once  accomplished  ; 
Poerio  rivalized  with  him  ;  and  the  two  when  acting 
together,  as  they  often  did,  more  than  once  dominated 
both  the  Parliament  and  the  Carbonari. 

From  the  day  on  which  the  Assembly  first  met,  the 
Carbonaro   section   showed   its   blind    determination  to 

*   Pepe,  Mems.  iii.  94. 


CHAP.  V     THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         107 

cling  to  the  Spanish  Constitution  unmodified  and  at 
all  costs.  The  earliest  question  that  came  up  for 
discussion  showed  their  feeling  on  this  point,  for 
on  a  debate  as  to  whether  the  Assembly  should  be 
known  as  a  Parliament  or  a  Cortes,  they  contended  at 
great  length,  though  unsuccessfully,  for  the  Spanish 
denomination. 

Trivialities  of  a  similar  character  took  up  a  great 
share  of  the  attention  of  the  Parliament  and  offered 
excellent  opportunities  for  the  display  of  the  forensic 
and  rhetorical  talent  of  its  members.  There  was  a 
passion  for  modification  and  novelty  ;  the  names  of  the 
provinces  were  all  changed ;  a  long  debate  turned  on 
whether  the  kingdom  should  be  known  as  the  Regno 
d'  Italia  or  the  Regno  d'  Italia  Meridionale,  the  latter 
finally  being  adopted  ;  a  heated  discussion  as  to  whether 
God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the 
legislator  as  well  as  the  author  of  the  Universe  was 
resolved  in  favour  of  the  Deity  by  a  narrow  majority  ; 
a  protracted  discussion  as  to  whether  the  assembly  was 
constituted  or  constituent  consumed  many  hours.  This 
last  debate  excited  the  fears  of  Ferdinand.  So  many 
incidents  that  had  taken  place  recalled  those  of  the 
French  Revolution  that  this  new  step,  suggestive  of 
the  famous  Assembly  that  had  preceded  the  one  that 
had  decreed  the  execution  of  the  French  monarchs,  his 
cousin  and  his  sister-in-law,  filled  him  with  terror. 

Other  circumstances  tended  still  further  to  alarm 
the  King.  Pepe  alone  among  the  best-known 'generals 
had  thrown  in  his  lot  unreservedly  with  the  Carbonari. 
The  Parliament  therefore,  a  fortnight  after  his  resigna- 
tion of  the  command  of  the  army,  was  prevailed  on  to 
appoint  him  inspector-general  of  the  militia  and  of  the 
guardia  di  sicurezza  of  Naples.     This  was  virtually  a 


io8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

reappointment  to  the  chief  command  ;  it  also  tended 
to  accentuate  the  rivalry  between  Pepe  and  Carascosa, 
now  acting  as  Minister  of  War,  and  so  to  complete  the 
disorganization  of  the  army. 

Carascosa  tried  a  trimming  course.  He  attempted 
to  satisfy  both  the  King  and  the  Carbonari,  and 
failed  with  both.  His  promise  to  Ferdinand  that 
the  Constitution  should  be  modified  so  as  to  provide 
for  an  Upper  House  could  not  be  redeemed,  and 
placed  him  badly,  while  the  attacks  made  by  the 
extremists  in  Parliament  on  the  King's  power  of  veto 
made  him  anxious  for  an  opportunity  to  free  himself 
from  the  trammels  in  which  he  was  being  bound.  That 
opportunity  could  only  be  found  in  foreign  aid. 

The  plot  to  attack  the  Royal  Palace  had  given 
Ferdinand  an  excellent  excuse  for  demanding  foreign 
assistance  ;  it  may  possibly  have  had  no  other  signifi- 
cance. Be  that  as  it  may,  the  King  immediately  availed 
himself  of  such  an  excellent  pretext.  Towards  the  end 
of  August  secret  negotiations  were  opened,  and  as  a 
result  of  an  interview  between  the  Duchess  of  Floridia 
and  Sir  William  a  Court  the  latter  requested  his 
Government  to  dispatch  ships  to  Naples  for  the  protec- 
tion of  the  King.  To  this  request  Lord  Castlereagh 
assented,  but  with  the  strict  proviso  that  the  British 
ships  were  to  be  used  only  for  the  safeguard  of  the 
King's  person,  and  with  a  strict  injunction  that  their 
captains  were  *' .  .  .  not  to  interfere  in  any  political 
transaction  further  than  may  be  necessary  for  the 
above  purposes."  Corresponding  instructions  were 
sent  to  a  Court.^ 

Accordingly,  on   the   6th   of  October,   two   British 

^  a    Court    to    Castlereagh,    Aug.    26,    1820,    For.    Off.    Sicily,    905    Orders    to 
Admiralty,  Sept.  13,  1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  92. 


CHAP.  V     THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         109 

frigates,  the  Active  and  the  Liffey^  appeared  at  Naples, 
their  arrival  eliciting  warm  expressions  of  gratitude 
from  Ferdinand.  But  that  which  was  likely  to  gratify 
Ferdinand  was  certain  to  arouse  the  anger  of  the  Car- 
bonari. Protests  against  the  presence  of  the  British 
ships  reached  the  Ministry  from  all  quarters,  and  Cam- 
pochiaro,  promptly  bowing  to  the  storm,  addressed  a 
note  to  a  Court  requesting  the  withdrawal  of  the  ships. 
This  was  merely  an  official  demonstration,  however,  for 
unofficially  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  held  very 
different  language.  He  "...  observed  to  me  the  day 
before  yesterday,  .  .  ."  wrote  a  Court,  "  for  Heaven's 
sake  take  no  heed  of  the  notes  I  am  obliged  to  write  to 
you  about  your  squadron.  If  it  leave  the  bay  we  are 
all  lost."  1 

If  this  was  the  attitude  towards  Neapolitan  con- 
stitutionalism of  Great  Britain,  of  the  Power  that  eight  / 
years  before  had  compelled  Ferdinand  to  accept  a  con- 
stitution for  Sicily,  it  will  readily  be  imagined  that  that 
of  Austria  was  far  removed  from  approval.  Metternich's 
views  had  become  gloomier  and  gloomier.  The  assas- 
sination of  the  Due  de  Berry,  and  a  personal  loss,  that 
of  his  two  daughters,  in  the  early  part  of  1820,  had 
made  his  mood  even  darker.  For  the  Neapolitan 
revolution  he  could  find  nothing  but  fierce  reprobation. 
At  first  its  bloodless  and  moderate  nature  embarrassed 
him.  "  The  high  character  of  the  Carbonari,  the  party 
which  has  led  all  the  others,  is  the  anxiety,''  he  wrote.^ 
This  anxiety  had  been  quickly  allayed  by  the  march  of 
events.  The  Neapolitan  movement  had  stirred  the 
whole  of  the  Italian  peninsula.  In  orderly,  well- 
administered  Milan  constitution  and  insurrection  were  in 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Dec.  6,  1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  91. 
"^  Metternich,  Mems.  iii.  385,  389. 


no  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

every  one*s  mouth.     In  the  Papal  States  the  Carbonari 
were  once  more  becoming  active. 

Immediately  on  the  King's  acceptance  of  the  Con- 
stitution, Campochiaro  notified  the  Neapolitan  diplo- 
matic agents  abroad  of  the  fact,  and  this  he  followed  up 
by  sending  Prince  Cariati  on  a  special  mission  to  Vienna. 
There  the  Neapolitan  envoy  met  with  an  uncom- 
promisingly hostile  reception.  Metternich  refused  to 
accept  his  credentials  or  grant  him  an  audience,  and 
Prince  Ruffo,  the  resident  Minister,  as  well  as  Prince 
Castelciccala  in  Paris,  declined  to  take  the  oath  to  the 
Constitution.  On  the  failure  of  Cariati's  mission, 
instructions  to  open  negotiations  were  sent  to  RufFo, 
but,  taking  his  cue  from  Metternich,  he  declined  to  act 
with  the  new  government.  Not  discouraged  by  these 
rebuffs,  another  effort  was  made.  The  Duke  of  Serra- 
capriola  was  sent  to  Vienna,  bearing  an  autograph 
letter  from  Ferdinand  to  the  Emperor  Francis,  and 
an  announcement  that  Ruffo  would  be  superseded  as 
Minister  by  the  Duke  di  Gallo  ;  the  result  was  no  better, 
as  the  Emperor  declined  to  reply  to  Ferdinand's  letter. 

The  explanation  of  the  Austrian  attitude  was  fur- 
nished to  the  Neapolitan  public  when  the  Duke  of 
Campochiaro,  in  making  a  statement  to  the  Parliament 
as  to  the  kingdom's  foreign  relations,  stated  that  the 
Czar  Alexander  had  declared  to  Prince  Cimitile,  whom 
he  refused  to  receive  as  Minister,  that  the  affairs  of  / 
Naples  required  the  intervention  of  the  '*  chefs  de 
I'ordre  Europeen."^  It  was  plain,  indeed,  that  the 
whole  weight  of  Europe  was  against  Naples,  for  only 
Spain,  Switzerland,  Sweden,  and  Holland  recognised 
the  new  Government,  and  it  was  clear  that  the  Holy 
Alliance  was  preparing  to  act. 

1   Brit.  State  Paper s,  1820-1 821,  1144;  Diario  del  Parlamento. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  iii 

Metternich*s  first  active  step  was  not  long  delayed. 
Less  than  three  weeks  from  the  proclamation  of  the 
Constitution  at  Naples,  on  the  25  th  of  July,  he  addressed 
a  circular  note  to  the  States  of  the  German  Empire.  In 
this  he  lamented  the  revolution,  which  he  said  constituted 
a  danger  to  Europe,  he  offered  Austria's  protection  to 
the  Italian  princes,  and  invited  the  Powers  to  concert 
measures  for  the  protection  of  their  imperilled  interests. 
At  the  same  time  diplomatic  overtures  were  made  to 
secure  the  free  passage  of  Austrian  troops  through 
Papal  territory,  extended  powers  were  given  to  the 
Archduke  Ranier,  Viceroy  of  the  Lombard -Venetian 
provinces,  and  reinforcements  of  50,000  men  were 
placed  under  orders  for  Italy. 

The  preparations  of  Metternich,  and  the  eagerness 
with  which  he  pressed  Cardinal  Consalvi  for  military 
facilities  which  the  Pope  appeared  in  no  hurry  to  grant, 
caused  much  anxiety  at  Naples.  The  general  feeling 
among  cool  and  competent  judges  was  that  under  the 
existing  circumstances  effective  military  opposition  to 
the  Austrians  was  impossible,  and  diplomacy  alone 
appeared  of  any  avail  to  avert  the  threatened  interven- 
tion. On  the  I  St  of  October,  accordingly,  Campochiaro 
addressed  a  lengthy  note  to  the  Austrian  Government. 
In  this  he  attempted  to  justify  the  Neapolitan  position  ; 
he  argued  that  the  secret  article  of  the  treaty  of  1815^ 
whereby  Ferdinand  had  pledged  himself  to  resist  the 
introduction  of  liberal  institutions  was  only  intended  to 
cover  the  period  of  restoration  and  had  now  lost  its 
application.  He  finished  by  demanding  categorical 
explanations  as  to  the  Austrian  armaments.  This  was 
mere  diplomatic  trifling,  and  it  will  not  be  doing  the 
Duke   of   Campochiaro   an  injustice    to    say   that   the 

1  See  ante^  p.  14. 


112  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

sincerity  of  this  demand  was  no  greater  than  that  of  the 
one  he  had  made  of  Sir  William  a  Court  for  the  with- 
drawal of  the  British  vessels  from  the  Bay  of  Naples. 

Campochiaro's  note  was  not  received,  nor  was  his  new 
envoy.  In  pursuance  of  the  announcement  made 
by  the  Duke  of  Serracapriola,  Gallo  had  left  Naples 
for  Vienna  to  supersede  RufFo  late  in  August.  On 
arriving  at  Klagenfurt  in  the  Austrian  Tyrol,  however, 
his  journey  was  arrested  by  an  order  from  Vienna, 
Metternich  declaring  that  he  could  hold  no  com- 
munication with  the  representative  of  a  revolutionary 
government. 

Ferdinand  was  now  doubly  alarmed  ;  not  only  had 
his  own  subjects  turned  against  him,  but  the  absolute 
silence  maintained  by  the  Austrian  Emperor,  and  the 
increasing  hostihty  of  his  Minister,  caused  him  nearly 
equal  apprehension.  He  now  secretly  sent  the  trusted 
Circello  to  see  the  Foreign  Ministers  accredited  to 
Naples.  His  mission  was  formally  to  declare, — what 
they  already  well  knew, — that  Ferdinand's  every  act 
was  the  result  of  compulsion,  and  that  it  was  his  firm 
intention  not  to  abdicate  his  crown. 

There  was  no  real  cause  for  the  King's  alarm  as  far 
as  the  Powers  were  concerned.  The  monarchs  of  the 
Holy  Alliance  were  well  aware  that  Ferdinand  had  no 
sympathy  with  his  revolted  subjects,  and  that  he  looked 
to  Europe  for  assistance.  Although  Metternich's  first 
thought  had  been  immediately  to  intervene  by  force  of 
arms,  he  had  soon  found  an  expectant  course  more  advis- 
able. The  Czar,  while  at  Vienna,  used  his  influence  to 
restrain  Austrian  action,  and  with  France  in  a  threaten- 
ing state  of  anti-Bourbon  agitation  it  was  thought  best 
to  proceed  with  deliberation.  A  congress  was  decided 
on,  and  was  fixed  to  take  place  at  Troppau  in  Austrian 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI 


113 


Silesia.  There,  in  October,  the  Emperor  Francis,  the 
Czar  Alexander,  and  King  Frederick  William  met ; 
and  there  also  was  gathered  a  notable  assemblage  of 
statesmen  and  royal  personages,  including  for  Russia, 
Capo  d'Istria,  Nesselrode,  Golowkin,  Alopaiis,  and  the 
Grand  Duke  Nicholas ;  for  Prussia,  Hardenberg, 
BernstorfF,  and  the  Crown  Prince  of  Prussia ;  for 
Austria,  Metternich,  Mercy,  Zichy,  and  Gentz  ;  for 
Great  Britain  and  France,  Stewart  and  de  La  Fer- 
ronays. 

The  assembly  of  the  Congress  of  Troppau  alarmed 
the  liberal  party  in  the  Latin  countries.  Its  object  was 
clear  :  the  constitutional  movement,  already  successful 
in  Spain,  Portugal,  and  southern  Italy,  was  to  be 
permitted  to  extend  no  further,  and  was  to  be  stamped 
out  by  force  of  arms.  There  was  good  ground  for  the 
alarm  of  the  liberals ;  the  circumstances  were  now 
favourable  for  the  assertion  of  Metternich's  absolute 
leadership,  so  long  disputed  by  the  Czar  and  his 
Ministers.  The  leadership  of  the  Holy  Alliance  and  its 
policy  was  in  fact  seized  by  the  Austrian  statesman  at 
Troppau  ;  it  was  to  be  retained  by  him  for  more  than 
a  quarter  of  a  century. 

The  Czar  had  at  his  side  two  counsellors  repre- 
senting opposite  policies  :  Capo  d'Istria,  opposed  to 
Metternich  and  Austria,  anxious  that  Russia  should 
play  a  direct  part  at  Naples  ;  Nesselrode,  hand  in  glove 
with  Metternich,  advocating  a  cordial  agreement  with 
Austria,  a  policy  of  liberal  repression,  and  the  abstention 
of  Russia  from  interference  in  the  affairs  of  the  Italian 
peninsula.  Had  there  been  no  fear  of  the  liberal  move- 
ment spreading  to  the  northern  states  it  is  probable  that 
Capo  d'Istria  would  have  won  ;  as  it  was,  the  Czar's 
fears  were  played  on,  and  he  finally  accepted  Nesselrode's 

VOL.   II  I 


114  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

views.      From    that    moment   Metternich   became   the 
dominant  figure  in  European  politics. 

The  decisions  of  the  Congress  of  Troppau  were  osten- 
sibly founded  on  principles  of  international  order  and 
morality  ;  they  were  in  reality  guided  by  the  action  of 
a  present  emergency  on  personal  interests.  The  so- 
called  principles  were  variously  defended  or  denounced 
by  the  diplomats  and  by  the  liberal  pamphleteers.  The 
former  appealed  to  the  beneficent  action  of  the  monarchs 
who  had  quenched  the  fires  of  the  Revolution,  restored 
and  enforced  European  peace  and  order.  Their  benevo- 
lence, their  right,  and  their  might,  directly  derived  from 
the  Divinity,  must  be  employed  in  maintaining  that 
peace  on  the  basis  agreed  to  by  every  European  Power, 
and  embodied  in  the  treaties  of  1814-1815,  with  their 
subsequent  modifications.  The  events  at  Naples,  con- 
stituting a  direct  breach  of  one  of  these  treaties,  and 
also  threatening  to  rekindle  the  revolutionary  outbreak 
which  it  had  cost  so  much  blood  and  treasure  to  extin- 
guish, imposed  the  duty  on  the  monarchs  of  the  Holy 
Alliance  to  intervene  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  pre- 
existing order  of  things. 

In  reply  to  such  arguments  the  liberal  pamphleteers 
invoked  theories  of  international  law  not  more  nebulous 
than  the  theological  basis  of  their  adversaries,  but  unfor- 
tunately commanding  the  support  of  far  fewer  bayonets. 
"  A  dwarf  is  as  much  a  man  as  a  giant  ;  a  small 
republic  is  no  less  a  sovereign  state  than  the  mightiest 
kingdom.**  So  wrote  Vattel  as  early  as  the  eighteenth 
century.  His  line  of  thought  was  followed  by  such 
publicists  as  Bignon,  Constant,  and  Vatout.  Every 
sovereign  state,  they  argued,  has  external  obligations 
that  it  may  be  called  on  to  carry  out,  but  its  internal 
affairs  concern  itself  alone.     If  the  contentions  of  the 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  115 

Holy  Alliance  were  admitted,  then  the  action  of  a  whole 
people  would  be  restricted  to  its  own  limits,  while  that 
of  a  few  monarchs  would  override  every  frontier. 

The  real  basis  of  the  decisions  of  the  Congress  of 
Troppau  was  not,  however,  theoretical,  but  eminently 
practical.  It  was  decided  that  before  military  move- 
ments took  place,  Ferdinand  should  be  got  away  from 
the  hands  of  his  subjects,  and  that  he  should  then  be 
set  up  as  a  mediator  between  the  Powers  and  the  Con- 
stitutional Government.  This  decision  was  arrived  at 
about  the  middle  of  November,  and  resulted  in  an 
invitation  being  sent  to  Ferdinand  asking  him  to  join 
the  deUberations  of  the  Congress.  To  facilitate  this  the 
Congress  itself  was  now  adjourned,  to  meet  again  at 
Laybach  in  southern  Austria  a  few  weeks  later.  The 
invitation  to  the  King  of  Naples  took  the  form  of 
identic  letters  from  Francis,  Alexander,  and  Frederick 
William  inviting  Ferdinand  to  join  them  at  Laybach 
for  the  sole  purpose  of  executing  engagements  of  which 
the  principles  had  been  proclaimed  in  181 4,  1815,  and 
1 8 18,  and  so  for  securing  the  happiness  of  his  subjects.^ 
This  step  meant  the  success  of  the  Austrian  policy,  and 
Metternich  now  declared  :  **  We  have  arrived  at  the  end 
of  the  first  act  of  the  play.  .  .  .  The  King  of  Naples 
may  come  or  he  may  stay  at  home  ;  measures  must  be 
taken  to  suit  both  cases." 

In  the  Congress  of  Troppau  a  preponderating  role 
had  been  played  by  the  three  great  Powers  of  north- 
eastern Europe — Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia  ;  that 
played  by  Great  Britain  and  France  had  been  necessarily 
more  modest.  The  British  Cabinet  took  up  the  follow- 
ing position,  as  embodied  in  the  instructions  sent  by 
Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Stewart.     An  alliance  against 

^  The  text  of  this  document  is  given  in  Appendix  F. 


ii6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

Naples  must  be  declined,  for  it  could  not  be  laid  before 
Parliament  in  its  present  temper  ;  therefore  the  inter- 
vening Powers  must  be  left  to  act  for  themselves  ;  but 
Austria  should  be  asked  for  assurances  that  an  increase 
of  her  influence  in  the  Peninsula  was  not  contemplated, 
in  return  for  which  Great  Britain  would  lend  a  moral 
support  to  her  action,  perhaps  even  going  to  the  extent 
of  breaking  off  diplomatic  relations  with  the  NeapoHtan 
Government.^ 

France,  under  a  less  autocratic  regime  than  the  other 
Continental  Powers,  and  with  a  liberal  party  daily  gain- 
ing in  strength,  indorsed  the  Holy  AlUance  policy  in 
hesitating  fashion,  and  attempted  to  settle  the  Neapoli- 
tan question  by  a  compromise.  A  group  of  public 
men,  among  whom  Marshal  Suchet,  Minister  of  War, 
de  Rayneval,  Under  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs, 
General  Belliard,  and  Daure  were  conspicuous,  put 
forward  the  idea  of  a  French  mediation.  The  condi- 
tion of  this  mediation  was  that  the  Constitution  of 
Naples  should  be  amended  and  approximated  to  that 
of  France.  There  was  to  be  a  House  of  Peers,  the 
Parliament  was  not  to  sit  continuously,  the  Council  of 
State  was  to  be  appointed  by  the  King,  the  royal  Veto 
was  to  be  full,  the  initiative  of  legislation  was  to  be  in 
the  Crown,  and  also  the  right  of  dissolving  Parliament.^ 
On  these  conditions  France  might  mediate  ;  and  Nar- 
bonne,  the  French  Minister,  declared  to  Pepe  that  in 
any  event,  provided  the  royal  family  was  not  harmed, 
France  would  not  intervene  forcibly. 

This  proposal  of  a  French  mediation  was  laid  before 
the   Parliament  by  Campochiaro  on  the  4th  and  6th 

^  Castlereagh  to  Stewart,  Sept.  16,  1820,  Castlereagh,  Corr.  xii.  311. 
'  De   Brancia    to  Campochiaro,  Nov.   20,    1820,   For.  Off.  Sicily^  91  ;    D.   .  .  . 
Precis  hist.  41  ;   Pepe,  Mems.  ii.  314  j  Bignon,  Congres  de  Tropfau,  191. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         117 

of  December,  but  was  uncompromisingly  rejected,  the 
Assembly  flatly  declining  to  amend  the  Constitution 
along  the  lines  proposed.  On  that  same  day,  the  6th, 
Ferdinand  received  the  letters  summoning  him  to  the 
Congress  at  Laybach,  and  the  scene  completely  changed. 

Ferdinand  was  thrown  into  a  state  of  great  agitation 
by  the  receipt  of  the  invitation  of  the  monarchs  of  the 
Holy  Alliance.  He  immediately  sent  for  the  Foreign 
Ministers,  declared  to  them  his  readiness  to  proceed  to 
Laybach,  and,  somewhat  inconsequently,  "  his  conviction 
.  .  .  that  a  constitution  was  become  necessary  for  the 
country."  -^  The  King  then  drew  up,  with  the  advice  of 
several  of  the  foreign  representatives,  a  declaration  that 
he  proposed  to  make  to  Parliament  to  explain  his  con- 
templated action.  The  Ministry  arranged  to  put  this 
forward  on  the  following  day,  and  to  make  every 
endeavour  beforehand  to  win  over  votes. 

Accordingly,  on  the  7th  of  December,  the  Ministers 
proceeded  in  a  body  to  Parliament,  and  there  read  an 
address  from  the  King.  Its  matter  may  be  abbreviated 
into  the  following  words  : — 

Faithful  deputies  of  my  Parliament  —  The  Sovereigns  of 
Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia  invite  me  to  confer  at  Laybach  as 
a  mediator  between  you  and  them.  I  am  determined  to  sacri- 
fice my  every  inclination  to  perform  a  duty  that  may  avert  the 
curse  of  war  from  my  subjects.  I  shall  do  all  to  secure  for  you  a 
wise  and  liberal  Constitution  founded  on  the  following  bases  : — 

Liberty  of  the  subject. 

No  privileged  classes. 

Taxation  and  legislation  to  be  voted  by  representatives  of 
the  people. 

Independence  of  the  judges. 

Liberty,  but  not  abuse,  of  the  press. 

Responsibility  of  Ministers. 

1  a  Court  to  Stewart,  Dec.  7,  i8zo,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  91. 


ii8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

There  shall  be  no  persecution  for  political  opinion.  I  ask 
that  four  deputies  be  chosen  to  accompany  me.  On  departing 
I  shall  leave  my  well-beloved  son,  the  Duke  of  Calabria,  as 
Regent.^ 

This  message  was  read  by  Campochiaro,  and  was 
listened  to  in  deep  silence  but  with  every  sign  of 
agitation.  The  Assembly  immediately  appointed  a 
committee,  presided  by  Borrelli,  to  consider  what  reply 
should  be  made. 

The  constitutional  essentials  outlined  in  the  King's 
message  were  too  near  the  spirit  of  the  French  pro- 
posals, submitted  by  Campochiaro  the  day  before,  to 
please.  The  Carbonari  pronounced  unreservedly  against 
permitting  the  King's  departure,  Pepe  going  so  far  as 
to  urge  that  Ferdinand  should  be  forcibly  removed 
from  the  Palace  and  detained  at  Caserta.  The  Alta 
Vendita  declared  its  sittings  continuous,  and  many  of 
the  Good  Cousins  thought  it  necessary  to  appear  in 
arms. 

On  the  8  th  Borrelli  delivered  to  the  Parliament  the 
unanimous  and  unfavourable  decision  of  the  committee 
appointed  to  consider  the  King's  message.  Both  he 
and  Poerio  defended  this  report  at  length,  and  made 
speeches  on  the  occasion  that  have  attracted  more  notice 
than  they  deserve.  The  Assembly  accepted  its  com- 
mittee's report,  and  voted  an  address  whereby  it  declared 
that  it  declined  to  accede  to  that  part  of  the  King's 
message  that  was  against  the  Constitution,  and  further 
that  it  declined  to  approve  the  King's  departure  unless 
for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  Spanish  Constitution. 

Of  all  the  courses  open  to  it  the  Parliament  had 
adopted,  unanimously,  the  worst  one.  For  if  Ferdinand 
was  to  be  permitted  to  go  to  Laybach,  then  surely  it 

*   Diar'io  del  Par /amen  to,  251. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         119 

was  wiser  to  place  him  on  his  honour  by  giving  him  a 
free  hand.  But  if  his  honour  was  not  to  be  trusted, 
then  surely  it  was  better  to  decide  that  he  was  not  to 
go  to  Laybach  under  any  conditions.  But  the  terms 
of  the  Parliament's  declaration  left  the  King  a  loophole, 
a  poor  one  and  a  humiliating  one,  but  neither  so  poor 
nor  so  humiliating  as  not  to  be  welcomed  by  Ferdi- 
nand. The  Parliament  had  said  by  implication  that  if 
the  King  wished  to  proceed  to  Laybach  to  defend  the 
Spanish  Constitution  it  would  approve  of  the  journey. 
So  all  that  Ferdinand  had  to  say  was  that  his  message 
to  Parliament  had  no  other  signification  than  that  he 
intended  to  maintain  the  Spanish  Constitution.  This 
was  not  true  in  fact,  it  was  not  true  in  spirit,  it  was 
in  every  respect  at  the  antipodes  of  the  truth  ;  yet 
Ferdinand  did  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  it  was  true, 
and  after  several  days  spent  in  conference  and  under- 
hand intrigue  the  Parliament  decided  to  accept  the 
King's  amended  statement  as  to  his  position  and  to 
sanction  his  journey.  What  course  the  discussions  on 
this  subject  took  is  discreetly  left  to  the  reader's  imagi- 
nation by  the  official  Diario  del  Parlamento,  The  only 
one  of  the  arguments  put  forward  for  permitting  the 
King's  departure  rescued  from  oblivion  is  this  :  that 
thereby  the  presence  of  the  British  and  French  fleets 
in  the  Bay  of  Naples  would  be  rendered  superfluous. 
By  this  and  other  specious  artifices  of  rhetoric  was  the 
inherent  weakness  of  the  Neapolitan  Parliament  veiled 
from  its  own  eyes. 

On  the  loth  of  December  Ferdinand  requested  Sir 
William  a  Court  to  place  a  British  ship  at  his  disposal 
to  convey  him  to  Leghorn.  On  the  13th  he  embarked 
on  H.M.S.  Le  Vengeur^  still  displaying  at  his  buttonhole 
the  Carbonaro  colours — black  for  the  charcoal,  red  for 


120  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

the  fire,  blue  for  the  smoke  !  On  the  1 4th  the  ship 
put  in  to  Baia  owing  to  a  slight  accident,  and  sailing 
again  three  days  later,  conveyed  Ferdinand  gladly  away 
from  the  detested  atmosphere  of  Constitutionalism.  The 
day  before  leaving,  the  King  addressed  a  letter  to  the 
Hereditary  Prince.  In  this  he  declared  that  he  went 
to  Laybach  to  defend  the  Spanish  Constitution,  and  that 
the  Prince  would  earn  his  approval  by  supporting  it ; 
it  was  ostentatiously  shown  to  all  who  came  within  the 
Court  circle.^ 

The  conciliatory  spirit  shown  by  the  Parliament  to 
the  King  was  visited  on  the  Ministry.  The  position 
of  Zurlo  and  his  colleagues  had  been  one  of  extreme 
difficulty  from  the  beginning.  The  members  of  the 
Ministry  were  by  no  means  at  one  in  their  views. 
Campochiaro  was  absolutely  at  the  command  of  the 
Court  ;  Carascosa  nearly  equally  so  ;  Zurlo  possessed 
neither  the  confidence  of  the  sovereign  nor  that  of  the 
people ;  his  colleagues  cared  more  for  their  own  interests 
than  for  those  of  the  State.  Of  real  power  Zurlo  had 
scarcely  a  vestige  ;  is  it  to  be  wondered  that  he  failed 
where  none  but  a  dictator  or  a  demagogue  might  hope 
to  succeed  ?  Zurlo  was  the  special  butt  of  attacks  of 
the  most  scurrilous  and  contemptible  character.  He 
met  them  with  dignity  and  contempt,  and  declined  even 
to  read  the  libels  circulated  about  him.^ 

On  the  20th  of  November  the  Ministry  was  formally 
accused  in  Parliament  of  having  violated  the  Constitu- 
tion, and  notwithstanding  the  flimsiness  of  the  accusation 
and  Zurlo's  conclusive  answer,  he  and  his  colleagues 
faced  the  Assembly  for  the  last  time  when  presenting 
the  King^s  message  concerning  his  journey  to  Laybach, 

^  Ferdinand  to  Duke  of  Calabria,  Dec.  12,  1820,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  93. 
*  Zurlo,  Rapporto  iopra  i  libelU,  passim. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  121 

and  immediately  afterwards  resigned  their  functions.-^ 
This  was  the  end  of  Zurlo's  public  life,  the  inglorious 
termination  of  a  remarkable  and  honourable  career. 
He  dealt  little  in  eloquence,  but  was  satisfied  to  accom- 
plish much  hard  and  honest  work,  and  thus  sank  in  the 
esteem  of  the  vulgar.  Yet  it  is  difficult  to  find  any  one 
among  those  who  played  their  parts  in  the  early  days 
of  the  regeneration  of  Italy  who  deserves  to  be  placed 
above  him.  Honest  among  thieves,  hard  working  in  a 
land  of  ease,  moderate  in  the  midst  of  exaggeration, 
silent  in  the  home  of  sonorous  eloquence,  sagacious 
though  surrounded  by  folly,  he  had  many  of  the  qualities 
of  a  statesman,  all  those  of  an  honourable  man.  He 
did  not  proclaim  his  own  merits,  and  his  name  has  long 
been  forgotten  ;  it  is  the  historian's  reward  to  redress 
the  injustice  and  to  inscribe  Giuseppe  Zurlo  in  the 
foremost  place  among  the  patriots  and  statesmen  of 
southern  Italy. 

A  new  Ministry  now  had  to  be  constituted  to  take 
the  place  of  that  which  had  just  come  to  an  end.  It 
was  destined  to  play  no  very  important  part,  and  it  will 
suffice  to  record  that  the  Duke  di  Gallo  took  Foreign 
Affairs,  and  that  among  its  other  members  were  General 
Parisi,  the  Duke  of  Carignano  and  Troise.  The  public 
at  once  recognised  its  complete  incapacity  to  deal  with 
the  threatening  circumstances  that  menaced  the  State. 
Among  these  circumstances  none  was  more  evident  or 
more  pressing  than  the  military  danger  ;  and  in  this  re- 
spect, as  in  so  many  others,  the  Carbonari  had  shown  little 
political  instinct.  The  only  part  of  the  army  that  might 
prove  of  some  use  in  the  field  had  been  neutralized  owing 
to  a  series  of  events  that  does  not  directly  concern  this  his- 
tory, and  of  which  only  the  bare  outline  need  be  recalled. 

^  Diario  del  Parlamento^  193  et  seq.  j  Minerva  Napol.  ii.  272. 


122  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

General  Church,  whose  excellent  work  in  repressing 
the  outrages  of  the  Decisi  in  Puglia  had  won  the  con- 
fidence of  the  Government,  had  been  appointed  to  the 
military  command  of  Sicily,  where  there  was  much 
insubordination  and  agitation  among  the  troops.  He 
left  Naples  to  take  up  his  duties  on  the  2nd  of  July, 
only  a  few  hours  before  the  revolt  of  Borbone  Cavalleria 
at  Nola.  The  troops  at  Palermo,  undisciplined  and 
infected  with  Carbonarism,  only  wanted  a  pretext  to 
rid  themselves  of  a  commander  from  whom  a  rigorous 
enforcement  of  discipline  was  to  be  expected.  That 
pretext  immediately  followed  the  arrival  of  Church  in 
the  form  of  the  news  of  the  proclamation  of  the  Con- 
stitution. Rioting  broke  out,  and  the  soldiers  turned 
against  their  commander.  Church  bravely  attempted 
to  restore  order,  and  after  uselessly  risking  his  life, 
succeeded  in  making  his  escape  to  Naples.  There  he 
was  imprisoned  in  the  Castel  del  Uovo,  for  no  apparent 
reason  other  than  the  jealousy  of  Carascosa  and  Pepe  ; 
the  energetic  representations  of  Sir  William  a  Court 
finally  resulted  in  his  liberation. 

The  riots  at  Palermo  were  quickly  turned  to  profit 
by  the  old  trade  guilds  led  by  the  Conciarotti.  The 
Sicilians,  always  rebellious  from  their  union  with  Naples, 
now  sought  to  obtain  autonomy.  The  Neapolitan 
Parliament,  after  sending  Minichini  on  a  fruitless 
mission  of  conciliation,  decided  that  Palermo  must  be 
reduced  to  order  by  force  of  arms.  The  only  really 
capable  native-born  ofiicer.  General  Florestano  Pepe, 
was  placed  in  command  of  the  expedition.  He  was 
given  sixteen  battalions,  some  9000  men,  that  included 
all  the  best-disciplined  troops  of  the  army.  After 
varying  successes  Florestano  Pepe  succeeded  in  obtain- 
ing the  capitulation  of  Palermo  on  the  5th  of  October. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         123 

The  terms  of  this  capitulation  not  being  thought 
satisfactory  by  the  Parliament,  Pepe  was  recalled  and 
Colletta  sent  to  replace  him  ;  but  it  was  not  found 
possible  under  the  existing  circumstances  to  reduce  the 
strength  of  the  army  of  occupation. 

The  troops  sent  to  Sicily  were  all  first  and  second 
battalions  specially  strengthened  for  active  service. 
Only  the  third  or  depot  battalions  remained  at  Naples  ; 
they  were  made  up  of  all  the  recruits  not  deemed  fit  to 
stand  the  strain  of  campaigning.  There  was  therefore 
a  material  difficulty  of  the  first  order  in  the  way  of 
preparing  to  resist  intervention.  Yet  from  the  earliest 
weeks  of  the  revolution  its  leaders  had  seen  the  neces- 
sity for  military  preparations.  They  were,  however, 
contented  with  a  show  of  numbers ;  efficiency  was 
neglected  as  an  unimportant  detail.  Promiscuous  pro- 
motions of  zealous  Carbonari  were  made,  with  disastrous 
and  demoralizing  effects.  Vendite  were  formed  in  every 
regiment  in  which  privates  and  officers  met  on  equal 
terms.  A  colonel  might  be  admitted  as  an  apprentice 
at  a  vendita  presided  over  by  a  drummer,  and  of  dis- 
cipline there  was  an  end. 

The  desertion  of  Borbone  Cavalleria  and  of  the 
Farnese  regiment  had  been  followed  by  an  epidemic  of 
desertion  through  the  whole  army.  Many  superior 
officers  were  disgusted  with  the  change  of  government. 
Towards  the  end  of  November  Colonel  Zimmerman, 
chief  of  staff  in  Principato  Ultra,  was  arrested  for 
conspiracy  against  the  Government.  About  the  same 
time  a  Colonel  Ansalone  met  the  same  fate,  while  at 
Naples  the  police  were  closely  watching  Don  Pietro 
Capaccio,  suspected  of  organizing  a  royalist  plot.  At 
the  head  of  the  army,  and  at  daggers  drawn,  were  Pepe 
and  Carascosa.     Their  enmity  had  led  Carascosa  more 


124  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

than  once  to  threaten  resignation,  and  the  hatred  of 
Pepe  and  the  Carbonari  had  much  to  do  with  his  fall 
and  Zurlo's.  After  that  date  Pepe  was  the  undisputed 
master  of  the  army,  most  of  the  other  generals  standing 
aloof  in  disgust.  He  signalized  the  fact,  his  own  lack 
of  capacity,  and  the  advent  of  the  new  year,  by  causing 
the  promiscuous  promotion  of  every  officer  employed 
on  the  general  staff. 

Confusion  was  not  in  the  army  alone.  The  finances, 
which  Medici  had  left  in  a  tolerably  sound  condition, 
were  rapidly  falling  into  disarray.  The  first  four 
months  of  the  constitutional  regime  had  been  marked 
by  a  wasteful  expenditure  that  had  cost  Naples  a  sum 
equal  to  the  revenue  of  two  years,  and  when  extra 
taxation  was  imposed  to  increase  the  army  the  taxpayers 
resisted  collection. 

For  every  reason  the  new  year  did  not  open  very 
brightly  for  the  people  of  Naples.  There  was  still  a 
widespread  desire  to  obtain  constitutional  institutions  of 
some  sort ;  but  great  dissatisfaction  had  arisen  against 
the  Carbonari.  The  new  class  of  small  freeholders, 
the  work  of  the  French  conquest,  had  made  the  back- 
bone of  the  movement.  That  class  "  already  occupied 
a  principal  part  of  all  the  real  property  of  the  kingdom," 
and  now  it  was  turning  in  disgust  from  a  movement 
that  could  have  no  consistence  without  its  support.^ 

The  clergy,  too,  were  now  abandoning  the  Carbonaro 
cause,  and  a  general  feeling  of  misgiving  arose  when, 
following  Zurlo's  retirement,  an  exodus  set  in.  Zurlo 
himself,  Medici,  the  Duke  di  Sangro,  and  many  other 
persons  of  influence  left  the  city. 

The  absence  of  Ferdinand  and  the  assumption  of  the 
government  by  the  Hereditary  Prince  could  deceive  no 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Jan.  i,  1821,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  9 


cHAP.v     THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  125 

one  as  to  the  true  state  of  affairs.  The  Duke  of 
Calabria  could  inspire  no  confidence,  though  more  than 
once  in  his  life  he  had  been  unjustly  suspected  of 
liberalism.  Bentinck  had  found  him  as  docile  a  tool 
and  pupil  as  had  Ferdinand,  as  had  Mary  Caroline. 
His  qualities,  such  as  they  were,  were  purely  negative, 
and  it  was  in  this  respect  only  that  he  might  be  thought 
a  better  man  than  his  father.  In  private  conversation 
he  displayed  intelligence,  in  public  affairs  pusillanimity. 
After  Ferdinand's  departure  he  protested  to  a  Court 
with  tears  in  his  eyes  against  the  cruel  position  forced 
on  him  by  the  King,  and  declared  that  his  chief  reliance 
was  in  the  continued  presence  of  the  British  ships  in  the 
bay.  The  Duke  of  Calabria's  policy  was  one  of  pure 
and  unabashed  time-serving.  With  the  Parliament  he 
diligently  kept  up  the  semblance  of  cordial  relations. 

The  Carbonaro  legislators,  whose  term  of  office  was 
now  drawing  to  its  close,  continued  busy  with  legislative 
and  constitutional  questions.  The  Regent  affixed  his 
signature  to  all  their  enactments,  with  one  sole  ex- 
ception,— a  bill  for  legalizing  the  marriage  of  priests. 
On  the  31st  of  January,  the  Parliament  having  brought 
to  an  end  its  deliberations  on  the  Constitution,  it  was 
ratified  by  the  signature  of  the  Hereditary  Prince.  The 
modifications  made  were  not  of  an  important  nature, 
and  need  not  be  recorded.  Public  rejoicings  greeted 
its  promulgation,  and  the  official  journal  solemnly  pro- 
nounced its  eulogy  and  declared  it  to  be  an  "  immortal 
work  of  Providence."^  The  Parliament,  having  now 
accomplished  the  great  labour  for  which  it  had  been 
convened,  was  prorogued  till  March,  but  in  view  of  the 
increasing  difficulties  of  the  situation  the  greater  part 
of  the  deputies  decided  to  remain  in  the  capital  ready 

1  GiornaU  Costituz.  Jan.  31,  1 821. 


126  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

to  resume  their  duties  at  the  first  emergency.  That 
emergency  was  not  long  coming. 

It  was  only  just  before  the  Parliament's  sessions 
were  suspended  that  any  official  news  was  communicated 
to  it  concerning  the  King's  journey  to  Laybach.  That 
news  when  it  did  come  did  not  serve  to  enlighten 
its  hearers  to  any  appreciable  extent.  For  all  that 
Ferdinand  had  to  inform  his  faithful  deputies  was  that 
he  had  met  the  Czar,  and  that  the  setters  he  had  taken 
with  him  were  far  superior  to  those  of  the  Autocrat  of 
all  the  Russias.  This  was  satisfactory,  as  far  as  it  went, 
yet  hardly  served  to  lift  the  cloud  of  political  uncertainty 
that  was  fast  closing  down  on  the  Neapolitan  frontier. 
But  facts  of  more  importance  were  already  being 
whispered  about  in  Court  and  diplomatic  circles.  It 
was  known  that  on  his  arrival  at  Florence  Ferdinand 
had  made  declarations  showing  that  he  had  no  intention 
of  observing  the  oaths  he  had  sworn,  his  cynicism 
exciting  the  indignation  even  of  diplomats  of  such 
long  experience  of  the  Sicilian  Court  as  a  Court  and 
Stackelberg. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  at 
Laybach  he  found  there  assembled  the  same  monarchs 
and  statesmen  as  had  met  shortly  before  at  Troppau, 
except  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  had  returned  to  Berlin. 
The  presence  of  Ferdinand  was  most  favourable  to  the 
development  of  Metternich's  policy,  for  the  Austrian 
statesman  was  anxious  to  find  some  show  of  right  on 
which  to  base  the  approaching  intervention.  The 
course  of  events  at  Naples,  the  advent  of  the  King,  his 
perfect  readiness  to  acquiesce  in  any  course  that  would 
secure  his  throne  free  from  the  trammels  of  a  constitu- 
tion, gave  Metternich  precisely  the  cards  he  was  most 
anxious  to  have.     With  these  cards  in  hand  he  defeated 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         127 

the  last  efforts  of  Capo  d'Istria,  and  by  the  25th  of 
January  obtained  the  decision  of  the  Congress  in 
favour  of  sending  an  Austrian  army  to  Naples  to  put 
down  the  new  Government.  From  this  decision  the 
British  Cabinet  formally,  if  not  very  sincerely,  dis- 
sociated itself.^  France  took  up  a  somewhat  similar 
attitude. 

On  the  28  th  of  January  the  policy  of  intervention 
entered  on  an  active  stage.  Ferdinand  wrote  a  letter 
to  the  Hereditary  Prince  in  which  he  announced  the 
decision  that  had  been  come  to  by  the  Congress.  He 
declared  that  he  had  done  his  utmost  to  protect  the 
interests  of  his  subjects,  but  that  the  Powers  were 
determined  to  employ  force,  and  that  the  only  possible 
course  was  submission.  This  letter  was  received  at 
Naples  on  the  9th  of  February.  On  the  same  day  the 
Ministers  of  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia  formally'' 
announced  to  the  Hereditary  Prince  in  identic  terms 
that  the  Powers  had  resolved  to  occupy  Naples  by 
force  of  arms.  The  Duke  of  Calabria  also  received  a 
private  letter  from  his  father  in  which  he  was  instructed 
to  dismiss  the  Ministry  and  to  call  proved  royal 
partisans  to  office.  This  he  resolved  to  keep  secret, 
and  instead  of  acting  on  it  he  decided  to  summon  the 
Parliament  to  reassemble.^ 

On  the  13th  of  February  the  Hereditary  Prince 
proceeded  in  person  to  open  the  new  session  of 
Parliament.  His  reception  was  good.  He  made  no 
declaration  of  poHcy,  but  confined  himself  to  laying 
the  correspondence  from  Laybach  before  the  Assembly, 
declaring  that  for  himself  his  intention  was  firmly  to 

^  Castlereagh's  Circular,  Jan.   19,   1821,  Brit.  State  Papers^   1820-1821,  1160; 
Greville,  Mems.  i.  66. 

2  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Feb.  22,  182 1,  For,  Off,  Sicily,  93. 


128  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

abide  by  the  Constitution.  A  committee  was  at  once 
appointed  to  consider  the  correspondence  submitted  by 
the  Regent,  and  on  the  15  th  Borrelli  carried  a  declara- 
tion that  the  Parliament  declined  to  accept  the  proposals 
of  the  King  and  the  Powers,  that  from  this  correspond- 
ence it  must  be  inferred  that  the  King  had  lost  all 
liberty  of  action,  that  the  Hereditary  Prince  should 
continue  Regent,  and  that  every  measure  should  be 
taken  to  insure  the  safety  of  the  State. 

The  visit  of  the  Prince  to  the  Parliament  on  the 
13th  had  been  rendered  imposing  by  a  large  display 
of  military  strength.  A  wave  of  patriotism  now  took 
possession  of  Naples,  and  the  flame  lighted  by  the 
Carbonari  gave  one  last  convulsive  flicker.  For  some 
days  the  greatest  enthusiasm  was  shown  for  the  national 
cause  ;  cockades  of  red,  black,  and  blue  were  every- 
where displayed  ;  and  at  the  S.  Carlo  the  performances 
of  a  popular  opera,  Amor  di  patria^  gave  rise  to  dis- 
orderly scenes. 

Unfortunately  the  patriotic  ferment  culminated  in 
crime.  Manfredi,  captain  in  the  guardia  di  sicurezza 
and  Grand  Master  of  the  Carbonaro  vendita  of  the 
Filadelfici,  followed  by  some  thirty  supporters,  pro- 
ceeded to  the  house  occupied  by  the  ex-Commissary  of 
Police,  Giampietro,  at  the  end  of  the  Riviera  di  Chiaja, 
close  under  the  hill  of  Posilipo.  Giampietro  had  been 
an  active  agent  against  the  secret  societies  before  the 
change  of  government  ;  the  Carbonari  had  now  come 
to  claim  their  revenge.  They  forced  their  way  into  the 
house,  told  Giampietro  that  they  arrested  him  under 
legal  warrant,  tore  him  from  his  wife  and  servants,  and 
marched  him  away.  In  the  Mergellina,  but  a  few  paces 
from  his  home,  the  Carbonari  began  stabbing  their 
victim,  and  soon  left  him  dead  in  the  street.     To  the 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         129 

corpse  they  affixed  a  piece  of  paper,  on  which  was  traced 
the  suggestive  number  i.^ 

What  is  remarkable  is  not  so  much  that  this  crime 
took  place,  but  that  it  was  the  only  one  of  its  kind. 
The  conditions  all  favoured  disorder  ;  police  restriction 
was  infinitely  relaxed,  secret  protection  was  all-power- 
ful, popular  imagination  was  overheated,  nerves  were 
overstrung.  Men  of  literary  ability  like  Rossetti, 
victims  of  a  passion  for  emphatic  verbiage,  appealed  to 
and  inflamed  every  unbalanced  judgment.  The  famous 
improvisatore,  who  but  a  few  months  before  adulated 
Ferdinand  as  the  most  adorable  of  monarchs,  now 
reminded  him  in  impassioned  verse  that  assassins  had 
rid  the  earth  of  Kotzebue  and  the  Due  de  Berry : — 

Traditor  !  da  quel  momento 
Che  infrangesti  il  giuramento 
Cento  stili,  o  traditore, 
Tendon  avidi  al  tuo  cor.2 

The  excitement  was  too  great  to  last.  In  a  week 
the  fever  heat  gave  way  to  fear  and  dejection,  and  when 
a  few  days  later  the  Parliament  called  for  volunteers 
to  defend  the  State,  only  two  individuals  were  to  be 
found  in  all  Naples  to  inscribe  their  names  on  the 
register.^ 

Nothing  could  now  serve  to  animate  the  rank  and 
file  of  the  Carbonari.  Only  Pepe  and  the  leaders  who 
were  hopelessly  compromised  continued  to  show  a  bold 
front  and  to  nerve  themselves  for  the  coming  struggle. 
Military  measures  were  hurriedly  submitted  to  Parlia- 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  Feb.   13,   1821,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  93  j  Decisione  emessa 
della  G.  C.  Speciale,  passim.     Colletta's  account  is  pure  fiction. 

^  Traitor!  from  the  moment  —  in   which  thou   brokest   thy  oath  —  a  hundred 
daggers,  O  traitor, — point  eagerly  to  thy  heart. 

3  Radowsky,  164  j  CoUctta,  Stor.  ii.  403. 
VOL.   II  K 


130  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

ment.  That  body,  with  its  usual  ready  care  for  the 
necessities  of  the  State,  accordingly  decreed  that  public 
prayers  should  be  offered  to  God  for  three  days  so  as 
to  enlist  His  support  for  the  national  cause  ;  it  further 
ordered  that  certain  French  liberal  pamphlets  should  be 
translated  into  Italian  at  the  public  expense,  and  also, 
in  a  lucid  interval,  that  muskets  should  be  bought. 

The  Hereditary  Prince  as  Regent  was  Commander- 
in-Chief  of  the  army.  He  foresaw  a  speedy  collapse, 
and  told  Sir  William  a  Court  that  in  the  meanwhile  his 
intention  was  to  maintain  a  constitutional  position  and 
to  rely  on  the  army  ;  but,  in  case  of  disaster,  to  seek 
refuge  on  the  British  ships.  Colletta,  who  had  been 
recalled  from  Sicily,  was  appointed  Minister  of  War 
instead  of  Parisi,  and  a  scheme  was  elaborated  whereby 
some  32,000  regulars  and  42,000  militia  could  be  placed 
on  the  frontier.  This  was  only  on  paper,  however,  and 
it  is  probable  that  not  more  than  25,000  regulars  were 
eventually  concentrated,  allowance  being  made  for  the 
garrisons  of  Naples,  Capua,  and  Gaeta.  The  native 
forces  received  some  slight  reinforcement  from  liberal 
and  other  sympathizers  from  abroad.  About  a  hun- 
dred old  Napoleonic  officers  tendered  their  services, 
which  were  accepted.  An  English  colonel  offered  to 
raise  a  corps  of  volunteers,  and  a  London  merchant  to 
supply  some  ships  of  war  ;  these  offers  were  apparently 
commercial  in  their  nature. 

It  was  decided  to  form  two  armies  to  defend  the 
frontier  of  the  kingdom  ;  one  to  take  position  in  the 
Abruzzi,  the  second  on  the  Garigliano.  The  command 
of  the  first  was  given  to  Pepe,  of  the  second  to  Caras- 
cosa.  Florestano  Pepe  was  appointed  Chief  of  Staff. 
Carascosa  did  his  best, — even  for  some  days  went  into 
hiding, — to  avoid  this  command  ;  with  such  a  disposition 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  131 

he  was  not  likely  to  cause  the  Austrian  generals  great 
difficulty.  It  was  therefore  a  prudent  step  on  the  part 
of  the  Regent  to  include  in  his  army  the  best  troops 
and  commanders,  —  the  Royal  Guard  and  Generals 
D' Ambrosio,  Filangieri,  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  and  Rocca- 
romana.  Pepe,  who,  whatever  his  failings,  was  likely 
to  fight,  was  given  a  command  far  smaller  and  inferior 
in  quality. 

Before  their  departure  for  the  frontier,  the  Duke  of 
Calabria  reviewed  the  Guards,  the  Duchess  attaching 
tricolour  ribbons  to  their  standards  ;  and,  not  to  be 
outdone  by  the  Regent,  the  Alta  Vendita  invited  the 
generals  to  a  patriotic  banquet  that  was  fitly  terminated 
by  an  improvisation  of  Rossetti.  But  the  central  point 
of  interest  soon  shifted  to  the  frontier,  and  to  that  part 
of  the  frontier  that  was  in  Pepe's  keeping. 

Pepe  was  familiar  with  the  scene  of  action  to  which 
he  was  now  called.     Leaving  out  of  account  his  experi- 
ence under    the  preceding   reign,   he  had  visited    the 
Abruzzi  on  a  tour  of  inspection  in  December,  in  com- 
pany  with    Minichini,    and    had   found   there   neither 
fortifications  nor  munitions  of  war  worthy  of  mention. 
From    the   Abruzzi    Minichini   had    proceeded    north 
under  an  assumed  name  to  stir  the  secret  society  men 
to  action.     In  Lombardy,  in  Romagna,  in  Piedmont, 
insurrection  was  smouldering,  and  a  spark  set  by  the 
Carbonaro  leader  might  yet  save  Naples  from  invasion. 
When  Pepe  returned  to  the  Abruzzi  in  February  to 
take  up  the  command  to  which  he  had  been  appointed, 
he  found  himself  at  the  head  of  a  badly  armed  and 
disciplined  force,  without  magazines,  without  transport, 
without  hospitals,  without  money.     The  officers  of  his 
staff  asserted  openly  that  Carascosa's  army  would  never 
support  them.     The  inhabitants  were  discontented,  and 


132  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  ii 

at  Aquila,  where  Pepe  fixed  his  headquarters,  there  was 
no  artillery.  His  total  force  was  about  25,000  men, 
of  which  three-quarters  were  militia,  and  of  this  part 
was  unarmed.  Pepe's  instructions  from  the  Hereditary 
Prince  were  to  retain  Aquila  at  all  costs,  while  Rieti 
was  designated  as  a  point  which  he  might  with  advan- 
tage occupy. 

On  the  13th  of  February,  the  day  on  which  the 
Hereditary  Prince  had  announced  the  decisions  of  the 
Congress  of  Laybach  to  Parliament,  the  Austrian  troops 
were  ordered  to  cross  the  Po  on  their  march  south.  On 
the  1 7th  one  division  reached  Ancona,  where  several  gun- 
boats had  preceded  them  ;  four  days  later  Field-Marshal 
Mohr, — the  officer  who  had  driven  D'  Ambrosio  and 
King  Joachim  back  from  Occhiobello  in  18 15, — was 
at  Foligno  with  the  main  body,  and  on  the  28th  he 
pushed  out  an  advance  guard  as  far  as  Rieti.  The 
Austrian  Commander-in-Chief,  Frimont,  had  issued  a 
proclamation  to  his  troops,  in  which  he  told  them  that 
they  were  entering  a  friendly  country,  of  which  the 
King  was  their  ally,  and  of  which  the  inhabitants  should 
be  well  treated. 

Pepe  duly  received  notice  of  the  presence  of  an 
Austrian  brigade  at  Rieti,  and  determined  to  attack  it. 
He  might  have  awaited  the  Austrians  between  that 
place  and  Aquila,  in  the  long  and  defensible  pass  of 
Antrodoco  ;  but  he  appears  to  have  decided  that  the 
only  chance  of  success  was  to  inspire  his  troops  with 
confidence  by  a  bold  stroke.  Counting  on  the  small- 
ness  of  the  Austrian  force,  on  the  advantage  of  a  sur- 
prise, and  on  the  skill  of  his  dispositions,  he  hoped  to 
win  a  first  success.  Accordingly  on  the  6th  of  March 
Pepe  directed  three  columns,  making  a  total  of  3000 
regulars  and  9000  militia,  on  Rieti.     These  columns 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  133 

were  to  concentrate  on  the  Austrian  position  early  on 
the  morning  of  the  7th. 

At  Rieti  was  Geppert*s  brigade  of  Walmoden's 
division,  making  four  battalions  with  some  details.  He 
was  unexpectedly  and  briskly  attacked  on  the  morning 
of  the  7th  by  the  Neapolitans.  For  half  an  hour  Pepe's 
men  continued  to  advance  ;  but  one  of  his  columns 
failed  to  reach  its  station,  and  his  militiamen  were 
thrown  into  confusion  when  their  own  artillery  opened 
fire  over  their  heads  from  a  position  just  behind  them. 
The  remainder  of  Walmoden's  division,  quartered  at 
Casa  Vicentini,  marched  on  the  sound  of  firing,  and 
soon  the  Neapolitans  had  lost  the  little  spirit  with  which 
they  had  opened  the  fighting.  Hesitation  turned  to 
retreat,  retreat  to  rout,  and  rout  to  disbandment.  Two- 
thirds  of  the  entire  force  fled  into  the  mountains  ;  the 
rest  made  its  way  back,  as  safely  as  rapidly,  into  the 
pass  of  Antrodoco.  The  Austrian  loss  was  fifty-four 
killed  and  wounded,  that  of  the  Neapolitans  even  less. 

Pepe  retreated  on  the  same  evening  to  Civita  Ducale, 
where  he  succeeded  in  mustering  barely  300  men  ; 
thence  he  retired  to  Aquila,  and  again  on  the  loth 
of  March  to  Castel  di  Sangro,  where  he  only  had  one 
hundred  horse  left.  On  the  15th  he  left  Isernia  for 
Naples  ;  his  army  had  completely  disappeared. 

Carascosa's  troops  behaved  even  worse  than  Pepe's  ; 
they  disbanded  without  firing  at  or  even  seeing  the 
enemy.  Desertion  began  some  days  before  Pepe's  action 
at  Rieti,  and  was  doubtless  to  a  large  extent  caused  by  a 
proclamation  of  the  King  which  was  widely  circulated 
through  the  camps.  In  this  Ferdinand  declared  that 
he  was  returning  to  care  for  his  beloved  subjects,  to 
treat  them  with  benevolence,  and  to  restore  order  to 
the   State ;    the   Austrians    were   his   allies,    and    were 


134  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         partii 

to  be  received  as  friends.  Desertions  of  whole  com- 
panies took  place,  in  some  cases  under  the  orders  of  the 
regimental  vendita.  On  the  2nd  of  March  Filangieri 
had  to  report  from  S.  Germano  the  desertion  of  133 
men  from  one  regiment,  of  200  from  another.  A  few 
days  later  the  town  itself  was  pillaged  and  nearly- 
destroyed  by  a  mob  of  disorderly  soldiers. 

After  Pepe's  rout  at  Rieti  became  known,  Carascosa's 
army  melted  away  faster  than  before.  The  state  of 
affairs  is  well  depicted  in  a  letter  of  Filangieri  to  his 
Commander-in-Chief,  written  on  the  17th  of  the 
month  : — 

Your  Excellency  need  have  no  apprehensions  as  to  the 
position  of  Torricella  ;  either  with  my  whole  brigade  or  with 
what  fraction  remains,  I  will  stay  until  further  orders  from 
your  Excellency  ;  and  if  I  have  a  few  hundred  shots  fired  at 
me  from  behind  (as  happened  yesterday  to  Colonel  Smerber) 
and  should  be  so  unfortunate  as  not  to  survive,  your  Excellency 
will  be  so  good  as  to  keep  me  a  corner  of  the  memory  and  for 
my  family  a  part  of  the  friendship  that  honours  me. 

After  the  political  regeneration  that  we  owe  to  .  .  .  and  to 
the  ...  of  Monteforte,  the  Neapolitan  Generals  cannot  die 
otherwise  than  at  the  hands  of  their  own  soldiers,  since  we 
have  reached  a  point  at  which  the  unfortunate  officers  of  all 
ranks  will  never  succeed  in  seeing  the  enemy,  not  even  with  a 
field-glass.^ 

In  the  ranks  of  the  Guard  the  desertion  was  of  a 
somewhat  different  character  from  what  it  was  in  the  rest 
of  the  army.  The  line  regiments  disbanded  through 
indiscipline  and  fear,  the  Guards  kept  to  their  standards, 
but  went  over  to  the  enemy.  When  the  Austrians 
marched  into  Capua,  a  detachment  of  infantry  of  the 
Guard  marched  in  with  them,  drums  beating,  colours 
flying,  and  cheering  for  Ferdinand. 

1  Carascosa,  Mems.  502-529. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI  135 

The  King*s  proclamation,  which  had  caused  such 
havoc  in  Carascosa's  ranks,  was  greeted  with  dismay 
and  indignation  by  the  Parliament.  A  few  among  the 
more  ardent  were  for  declaring  Ferdinand  deposed  and 
the  Duke  of  Calabria  King,  and  failing  the  Regent,  then 
his  young  son,  who  later  had  his  years  of  celebrity  as 
Ferdinand  H.  But  confidence  was  gone,  the  unanimity 
of  the  Parliament  was  destroyed.  It  was  known  that 
Pepe  intended  to  take  the  offensive  during  the  first  week 
of  March,  and  on  the  nth  the  official  journal  admitted 
his  defeat.  From  that  day  the  attendance  of  Members 
of  ParHament  became  scanty,  and  on  the  13th  one  of 
them,  Netti,  proposed  what  was  virtually  a  motion  of 
submission  to  the  King.  It  was  received  with  some 
signs  of  approval,  but  the  dominant  faction  was  still 
strong  enough  to  have  it  voted  down.  During  the 
following  week  the  Carbonaro  Parliament  gradually 
died  a  natural  death.  On  the  19th  Poerio  for  the  last 
time  harangued  twenty-six  members  of  the  Assembly, 
and  recorded  an  eloquent  and  solemn  protest  in 
the  name  of  popular  rights  against  the  forcible 
measures  of  Ferdinand,  or  the  feeble  collapse  of  the 
liberal  movement. 

Carascosa  was  now  in  negotiation  with  the  Austrians, 
after  having  narrowly  escaped  being  shot  by  his 
mutinous  troops.  On  the  1 8th  D'  Ambrosio  signed  a 
convention  surrendering  Capua  and  suspending  further 
hostilities. 

A  few  desperate  men,  whose  chance  of  pardon  was 
hopeless,  attempted  to  protract  resistance.  Silvati, 
MoreUi,  and  a  small  group  of  followers, — the  remains 
of  the  Sacred  Squadron, — retreated  to  Monteforte. 
Avellino  refused  to  receive  them,  their  followers  fell 
away,  and  they  sought  refuge  in  flight.      At  Ancona 


136  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  11 

they  were  captured  and  were  handed  over  by  the  Papal 
police  to  the  Neapolitan  ;  their  ultimate  fate  was  the 
gallows.  Pepe  wandered  aimlessly  between  Naples 
and  Salerno  for  several  days  ;  he  was  finally  furnished 
with  papers  as  Minister  to  the  United  States,  and 
in  this  official  guise  sailed  from  Castellamare  on  a 
Spanish  vessel.  He  proceeded  to  London,  where  he 
met  Carascosa,  also  a  voluntary  exile.^  Borrelli 
obtained  a  passport  from  Sir  William  a  Court,  and 
thus  made  his  escape,  and  many  others  got  away 
by  the  same  means,  Gallo  sending  fictitious  passports 
for  a  Court's  signature.  Rossetti  was  in  hiding  many 
weeks,  and  finally  got  away  in  a  uniform  provided  for 
him  by  a  British  officer.^ 

The  Austrian  advance  had  been  made  in  good  time, 
for  the  north  of  Italy  was  now  following  the  example 
of  the  south.  On  the  22  nd  of  March  it  became  known 
at  Naples  that  the  Piedmontese  army  had  revolted,  and 
that  the  kingdom  of  Sardinia  had  become  a  constitu- 
tional monarchy.  As  it  was,  it  was  too  late  to  help  the 
defunct  liberal  or  Carbonaro  cause  at  Naples.  As  the 
Austrians  advanced  the  country  rose  on  every  side  in 
royalist  reaction.  On  the  i8th  they  were  already  in 
possession  of  Capua  ;  on  the  21st  two  battalions  of  the 

1  Both  Carascosa  and  Pepe  were  condemned  to  death.  Not  having  seen  enough 
fighting  in  Naples,  they  fought  two  duels  on  English  soil,  without  result.  Pepe  lived 
many  years  and  played  a  part  in  the  movement  of  1848,  holding  military  command 
at  Venice  during  the  siege  by  the  Austrians. 

2  Radowsky,  192  j  Rossetti,  Autobiography;  many  got  away  later  on  passports 
issued  by  the  Government,  Arch.  Nap.  cxlvi.  passim,  a  Court  to  Castlereagh, 
March  9,  1821,  For.  Off.  Sicily,  93.  a  Court  granted  these  passports  for  a  reason 
he  stated  as  follows:  "The  history  of  1799  has  left  a  stain  of  blood  upon  our 
character  here  which  I  have  been  anxious  to  efface."  On  the  return  of  Ferdinand 
a  special  court  was  created  to  deal  with  treasonable  offences  before  which  277 
prisoners  were  arraigned.  Two  capital  sentences  were  carried  out,  against  Silvati 
and  Morelli.  On  the  31st  of  May  a  general  amnesty  was  declared,  Arch.  Nap. 
cxlvi.  10,  4720  ;   Giornale  del  Regno,  May  31,  1821,  CoUetta,  Stor.  ii.  443. 


CHAP.  V    THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         137 

Guards,  displaying  the  royal  colours,  marched  down 
the  Toledo.  They  were  followed  two  days  later  by  a 
column  of  white-coated  Imperial  infantry.  The  enter- 
ing troops  were  greeted  with  the  enthusiasm  usual  at 
Naples  under  such  circumstances.  A  revolution  was 
always  to  the  mob  an  occasion  either  for  ferocity  or  a 
festa  ;  on  this  occasion  a  sense  of  pleasantry  fortunately 
prevailed.  A  large  notice  was  found  posted  up  on  the 
abode  of  the  late  Parliament,  Si  Loca, — to  let,  and  a 
satirist  of  no  mean  powers  circulated  the  following  cruel 
epigram  on  his  own  countrymen  : — 

Pulcincllo  malcontento 
Diserto  dal  reggimento, 
Scrisse  a  mamma  a  Benevento 
Delia  patria  il  tristo  evento. 

Movimento,  parlamento, 
Giuramento,  pentimento, 
Gran  fermento  e  poco  argento, 
Armamento  e  nel  cimento 
Tra  spavento  e  tradimento 
Siam  fuggiti  come  il  vento. 
Me  ne  pento,  me  ne  pento. 
Mamma  cara,  mamma  bella, 
Prega  Dio  per  Pulcinella.^ 


On  these  lines  the  superficial  observer,  or  the  cynic, 
wearied  at  the  relation  of  so  much  folly,  might  close. 
But  the  historian  must  carry  his  task  to  a  juster  con- 
clusion. Through  turpitude,  incapacity,  and  cowardice 
he    must  recall  the  unmistakable  march  of  progress  ; 

^  Pulcinella,  unhappy, — deserted  from  the  regiment, — Wrote  to  mamma  from 
Benevento — the  sad  fate  of  the  country. — Movement,  parliament, — oaths,  repent- 
ance,— great  turmoil,  little  money, — arming,  and  at  the  moment  of  trial — what 
with  fear  and  treason — we  fled  like  the  wind. — I  repent,  I  repent. — Dear  mother, 
ovely  mother, — pray  God  for  Pulcinella. — Bit/.  Na%.  Misc.  MSS. 


138  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  11 

among  thieves  and  double-dealers  he  must  point  to 
brave  and  honourable  exceptions  ;  to  national  weakness 
and  national  disaster  he  must  oppose  the  miserable 
tradition  of  the  ages,  the  brutish  system,  so  long 
imposed  on  a  helpless  people,  that  made  of  the  word 
nation  a  term  devoid  of  significance,  and  that  made  of 
men  beasts  driven  to  the  daily  toil  rather  than  members 
of  a  great  family  rising  to  a  higher  destiny.  The  French 
conquest,  with  its  attendant  sacrifices,  had  been  the 
price  paid  for  great  political  and  social  benefits,  and  its 
first-fruits  were  born  in  the  liberal  movement  of  1820. 
With  all  the  disillusions,  the  sadness  and  even 
grotesqueness  of  its  history,  the  Carbonaro  Parliament 
was  national  and  progressive  in  its  character ;  it  marked 
a  great  forward  step  towards  a  future  of  which  none 
may  venture  to  foretell  the  scope. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Intemo,  z"  In^ventario,  5077  :  the  Carbonari  and  the 
army  ;  5078,  5079  :  break-up  of  the  army. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  cxlvi.  10,  4720  :  proceedings  against  the  Carbonaro 
leaders. 

BiBL.  Naz.  Several  MSS.  of  minor  importance  :  the  Difesa  di  Borrellt, 
already  mentioned,  some  Troja  papers  and  miscellaneous  MSS.,  squibs, 
epigrams,  etc. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily^  90-93  :  k  Court's  dispatches  ;  93,  contains 
in  addition  a  useful  report  by  Church  on  events  at  Palermo  and  some  royal 
correspondence. 

Printed  Books 

Atti  relatinji  alV  intewento ;  Bertholdi,  Menu,;  Beyle,  Corresp.  in^d. ; 
BiANCHi,  Diplomazia  Europ.;  Bignon,  Lei  cabinets  et  les  peuples  ;  Bignon, 
Congrh  de  Troppau  ;  Brit.  State  Papers^  1 820-1 821  ;  Cacciatore,  Esame  j 
Campanella,  Influenza  massonica ;  CantO,  Cronistoria ;  Carascosa, 
Mems.;  Carrano,  Fita  di  G.  Pepe ;  Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Church, 
Relation^  Monthly  Magaz.  1826;  Colletta,  Storia ;  D.,  Precis  histor. ; 
Decisione  delta  G.  C.  Speciale ;  Diario  del  Parlamento ;  Giornale  Costituz. ; 


CHAP.  V     THE  FALL  OF  THE  CARBONARI         139 

Indipendente ;  Indirizxo  al  P.  N. ;  Mazza,  Memorie ;  Metternich, 
Mems. ;  Miner'va  Napolitana ;  Palmieri,  Storia  Costituz. ;  Pamphleteer, 
xxiv.  J  Pepe,  Mems. ;  Pepe,  Relation,  Pamphleteer,  xxiii.  j  Radowsky,  Cod 
memorabili ;  Rapporto  sulle  finance ;  Ravaschieri,  Filangieri  j  Vatout, 
Gowvernemem  representatifs ;  Face  del  Secolo ;  Zurlo,  Rapporto  sopra  i 
libelli. 


APPENDIX   A 

THE    MIRACLE    OF    SAN    GENNARO 

A  DEEP  recess  in  the  wall  behind  the  altar  contains  the  relics 
of  Saint  Januarius ;  these  consist  of  a  silver  gilt  reliquary, 
shaped  like  a  head,  in  which  are  placed  the  skull  bones  of  the 
Saint,  and  of  an  ostensory  or  monstrance,  also  of  silver  gilt,  in 
which  is  placed  a  vial  containing  a  red  substance ;  this  is 
asserted  to  be  coagulated  blood,  collected,  according  to  tradition, 
when  the  Saint  suffered  martyrdom  by  decapitation.  .  .  .  On 
the  recess  being  opened,  a  surpliced  canon  brought  out  the 
ostensory,  and  after  showing  to  the  people  that  the  substance 
contained  in  the  vial  was  coagulated,  and  saying  aloud,  11 
sangue  e  duro  (the  blood  is  hard),  he  placed  the  relic  on  a  silver 
pedestal  on  the  Epistle  side  of  the  altar.  He  then  brought  out 
the  image  of  the  Saint  and  placed  it  on  the  Gospel  side.  The 
head  was  then  stripped  of  some  simple  decorations  in  the  shape 
of  a  mitre  and  a  sort  of  cope  in  common  material,  and  others 
were  substituted  of  the  same  kind,  but  much  more  magnificent, 
embroidered  in  gold  and  silver  and  adorned  with  precious  stones. 
A  splendid  golden  collar  was  hung  round  the  neck.  .  .  . 

This  ceremony  being  completed,  the  officiating  canon 
advanced  to  the  Epistle  side,  took  up  the  ostensory  containing 
the  vial  and  turned  it  towards  the  shrine  of  the  Saint,  without, 
however,  bringing  the  two  in  contact.  It  is  at  that  moment, 
and  as  a  consequence  of  that  proximity,  that  the  blood  ought 
to  liquefy  and  the  miracle  be  accomplished.  But  as  the  prodigy 
does  not  occur  instantaneously,  the  hour  is  noted  at  which  these 
two  sets  of  relics  are  brought  together,  and  fatal  or  favourable 
inductions  are  made  according  to  the  greater  or  less  interval 

141 


142  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  a 

before  the  liquefaction  takes  place.  During  this  time  litanies 
are  sung  by  the  choir,  in  which  those  present  join,  while  the 
women  implore  the  Saint  to  effect  the  miracle. 

Meanwhile  the  priest  who  holds  the  ostensory  moves  it 
from  time  to  time,  pausing  to  see  if  any  change  is  talcing  place, 
and  if  he  perceives  none  he  advances  towards  the  people,  and 
showing  them  the  relics,  he  repeats  sadly,  k  duro.  I  remarked 
that  he  did  this  three  several  times  without  success,  and  that 
each  time  prayers  recommenced  with  redoubled  fervour.  At 
length  the  fourth  time,  after  a  pause  of  sixteen  minutes,  the 
miracle  took  place.  I  was  near  the  canon,  and  I  perceived  the 
substance  begin  to  detach  itself  from  the  sides  of  the  glass, 
then  slowly  drop  and  spread  so  as  to  fill  a  greater  space,  i.e, 
nearly  the  whole  bottle,  which  appears  half  empty  when  the 
matter  it  contains  is  in  a  solid  form. 

At  the  moment  of  the  miracle,  tears,  sighs,  and  sobs 
succeeded  to  the  cries  of  those  present.  I  remarked  women, 
who  during  the  ceremony  had  been  in  a  sort  of  convulsive 
delirium,  burst  into  tears  and  throw  themselves  on  their  knees 
with  every  sign  of  devotion  ;  others  cast  themselves  on  the 
ground  and  struck  the  pavement  with  their  foreheads  ;  each 
one,  in  short,  expressed  in  her  own  way  the  reverence  she  felt. 
Many  of  those  present  kissed  the  ostensory,  which  the  officiating 
priest  held  out  to  them  for  that  purpose,  after  which  he  put  it 
back  on  its  pedestal,  where  it  remained  exposed  for  the  rest  of 
the  day. — Miot,  Mems.  ii.  24. 


APPENDIX   B 

TABLES    OF    MEASURES    AND    MONEYS 

The  following  table  is  framed  with  the  sole  object  of  elucidat- 
ing the  text. 

Neapolitan  mile  =  g^th  of  a  degree  =  i  geographical  mile. 
A  tomolo  =51  litres  =  1 1 J  gallons. 

A  soldo  =  I  sou  =  5  centimes  =  an  English  halfpenny  or  American 
cent. 

A  carlin  =  4  soldi. 

A  ducat  =  4.44  lire  or  francs. 

An  once  =  2j  ducats. 

A  scudo  (Papal)  =  rather  more  than  a  Neapolitan  ducat. 


143 


144 


THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


APP.  C 


z 

o 

u 

O 

Q 

w 

^ 

o 

M 

Ph 

CO 

P. 

;d 

< 

o 

S   3. 


.21 

o  i: 

3 
O 

a: 


>    > 


< flS' 


3 

1 

jii 

w> 

^ 

1 

1 

-^ 

> 

2 

3 

X 

O 

Q^ 

, 

2 

CO 

H) 

•S 

s  — 
o 

~"i" 

o" 

-§ 

n4 

^ 

m3 

I-] 

■H  — S 


APP.  C 


THE  HOUSE  OF  BONAPARTE 


145 


pa 

< 
< 

o 
o 

O 


w     — 


-  o 


u 

< 

< 

;z; 
o 

D 

o 

PQ 

< 
< 

o 

PQ 

c5 

p:5 

CO 

Ph 

< 

tn 


J 


•^    g 


I- 


VOL.   II 


146  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  d 

APPENDIX   D 

MARY  Caroline's  memoirs 

The  Memoirs  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  referred  to  more 
than  once  in  the  notes,  is  a  document  of  which  I  was  fortunate 
enough  to  discover  a  copy  among  the  MSS.  of  the  Bibh'oteca 
Nazionale  at  Naples. 

The  events  it  deals  with  are  practically  all  included  within 
the  period  1805-18 14,  and  it  brings  matters  down  to  about 
six  weeks  before  the  Queen's  death.  The  references  to  this 
MS.  in  the  text  will  show  its  use  as  regards  this  history  ;  its 
chief  interest,  however,  is  for  Sicilian  affairs,  and  particularly 
for  the  dispute  between  the  Queen  and  Lord  William  Bentinck, 
which  is  narrated  minutely. 

It  is  very  desirable  that  the  Queen's  Memoirs, — a  jumble  of 
fact,  exaggeration,  and  fiction,  —  should  be  published,  and  at 
the  same  time  that  it  should  be  checked  by  Bentinck's  dis- 
patches covering  the  same  period.  I  intend  undertaking  this 
task  as  soon  as  I  can  see  my  way  to  clearing  the  preliminary 
difficulties  that  attend  the  publication  of  a  book  that  can  only 
hope  to  attain  a  circulation  in  directly  inverse  ratio  to  its 
historical  importance  and  interest. 

APPENDIX   E 

castlereagh*s   falsified   dispatches 

In  May  181 5  Lord  Castlereagh,  to  justify  the  British  Cabinet's 
hostile  attitude  to  the  King  of  Naples,  produced  eight  dis- 
patches to  the  House  of  Commons  tending  to  show  that  in 
the  previous  year  the  King  had  been  false  to  the  Allies  and 
had  come  to  a  secret  understanding  with  Napoleon.  The 
debate  is  reported  in  Hansard.  The  following  is  a  list  of  the 
documents  produced  by  Castlereagh  as  given  in  the  British 
State  Papers^  1814-1815  : — 

I.  EHse  to  Napoleon,  February  14,  18 14. 


APP.  E  CASTLEREAGH'S  DISPATCHES  147 

2.  Napoleon  to  Caroline  [Elise  in  the  text,  by  a  printer's 

error),  February  17,  18 14. 

3.  Fouche  to  Napoleon,  February  18,  18 14. 

4.  Eugene  to  Napoleon,  February  20,  18 14. 

5.  Consular  reports. 

6.  Napoleon  to  Joachim,  undated. 

7.  Clarke  to  Napoleon,  March  3,  18 14. 

8.  Napoleon  to  Joachim,  March  5,  18 14. 

These  dispatches  had  been  supplied  to  Castlereagh  by  de 
Blacas  after  the  first  restoration  of  the  Bourbons.  In  the 
following  year,  after  Napoleon's  return  from  Elba,  they  were 
produced  to  the  House  of  Commons,  and  immediately  after- 
wards the  Paris  Moniteur  repudiated  their  authenticity  and 
declared  that  the  three  above  numbered  2,  6,  and  8  were 
falsified  (May  14,  1815).  There  can  be  no  question  as  to 
Lord  Castlereagh's  good  faith,  there  can  also  be  no  doubt  that 
apart  from  the  dispatches  put  forward,  the  King  of  Naples  had 
pursued  secret  negotiations  hostile  to  the  interests  of  the  Allies  j 
what  is  extraordinary  is  not  that  Castlereagh  had  evidence  to 
produce,  but  that  he  had  so  Httle. 

The  reputation  of  the  Moniteur  for  veracity  is  not  sufficient 
to  make  its  assertion  as  to  the  falsification  of  these  dispatches 
of  any  weight.  According  to  Napoleon's  official  paper  the 
texts  of  the  letters  had  been  altered,  their  dates  changed  from 
181 1  and  1813  to  181 4.  On  the  second  restoration  of  the 
Bourbons  the  rough  drafts  were  withdrawn  from  the  Archives 
and  presumably  destroyed.  It  is  therefore  clearly  to  be  in- 
ferred that  they  were  at  some  time  and  in  some  way  tampered 
with.  But  as  these  drafts  no  longer  exist,  the  case  now 
reposes  on  the  denial  of  the  Moniteur^  on  Meneval's  statement 
that  he  saw  drafts  with  interpolations  [Mems.  ii.  230),  and  on 
the  internal  evidence.  As  to  Meneval's  remarks  they  are 
hardly  specific  enough  to  cover  the  whole  ground  ;  he  does 
not  state  the  number  of  letters  he  saw,  or  what  was  the  nature 
of  the  alterations  except  that  they  were  in  red  ink  ;  this  state- 
ment is  so  contrary  to  what  one  would  expect  as  further  to 
confuse  the  whole  matter.  It  may  be  added,  however,  that  it 
was  quite  usual  for  drafts  made  by  Napoleon  to  be  elaborated 
by  his  secretaries. 


148  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  e 

The  statement  of  the  Moniteur  has  been  accepted  by  the 
editors  of  Napoleon's  correspondence.  The  official  editors  at 
the  time  of  the  Second  Empire  naturally  adopted  Napoleon's 
own  version.  Monsieur  de  Brotonne,  in  his  valuable  collec- 
tion, has  followed  their  lead. 

Of  these  three  letters  I  have  only  felt  justified  in  utilizing 
one,  number  6,  which  is  given  in  vol.  i.  page  296  ;  for  to  this 
one  a  date  may  be  assigned  with  some  certainty  on  exceptionally 
strong  internal  evidence.  Of  the  other  two  letters,  only  this 
need  be  said,  judging  simply  from  their  texts,  that  number  8 
appears  fully  to  justify  the  comments  of  the  Moniteur^  and  that 
number  2,  though  by  no  means  so  certainly,  may  do  so  ;  they 
must  therefore  be  treated  as  probably  or  possibly  falsified, 
and  as  unsound  historical  evidence.  As  to  number  6  it  appears 
perfectly  clear  that  it  was  written  at  the  time  assigned  to  it  by 
Castlereagh,  that  is  between  the  20th  of  February  and  the  3rd 
of  March  18 14. 

The  date  fixed  by  the  Moniteur  for  this  letter  is  the  26th 
of  January  18 13,  that  is,  seven  days  after  Napoleon  had  heard 
that  King  Joachim  had  left  Russia  for  Naples  and  resigned  the 
command  of  the  Grande  Armee  to  Prince  Eugene.  How  is  it 
possible  to  reconcile  with  this  date  the  expressions  of  the  letter 
that  are  here  given  in  italics  ?  "  Turn  to  profit  an  act  ot 
treason  which  I  attribute  to  fear  so  as  to  serve  me  by  a  mutual 
understanding.  I  rely  on  you,  on  your  contrition,  on  your 
promises.  .  .  .  You  have  done  me  every  possible  injury  since 
leaving  Wilna.  .  .  ."  Not  only  are  such  expressions  extra- 
ordinary at  the  date  assigned  to  them,  but  how  can  such  a 
letter,  taken  as  a  whole,  be  reconciled  with  the  attitude  at 
that  period  adopted  by  Napoleon,  with  the  insulting  comments 
on  the  transference  of  the  command  from  Joachim  to  Eugene 
which  he  caused  to  be  published  in  the  official  journal  of  the 
Empire  at  the  very  date  ascribed  to  this  letter,  with  the 
Emperor's  pointed  abstention  from  making  any  allusion  to 
Joachim  to  the  Neapolitan  Minister,  with  Joachim's  expressions 
in  his  letter  to  Belliard  quoted  in  vol.  i.  page  259  ? 

On  the  contrary,  every  significance  of  the  letter  precisely 
fits  the  events  of  February  18 14;  Joachim's  treaty  with  the 
Austrians  is  his  act  of  treason;  it  is  attributable  to  fear^  it  may 


APP.  E  CASTLEREAGH^S  DISPATCHES  149 

be  turned  to  profit  by  a  mutual  understanding  if  Joachim  observes 
his  promises  of  giving  notice  before  embarking  on  hostilities, 
and  perhaps  even  of  joining  Eugene  in  certain  eventualities. 

Not  only  does  it  require  no  stretch  of  any  sort  to  fit  these 
expressions  to  the  circumstances  of  the  end  of  February  18 14, 
but  another  letter  of  Napoleon,  the  authenticity  of  which  is 
uncontested,  the  date  of  which  is  the  26th  of  that  month,  is 
the  logical  counterpart  of  the  one  to  the  King  of  Naples. 
On  that  date  Napoleon  wrote  to  Joseph  urging  the  possibility 
of  regaining  Italy  by  Joachim's  assistance,  and  directing  his 
brother  to  make  overtures  to  the  King  in  that  sense  ;  the 
letter  contains  the  following  expressions  :  "  It  appears  that  the 
Allies  have  not  yet  ratified  the  King  of  Naples'  treaty.  I 
wish  you  to  send  one  of  your  people  to  proceed  with  all  haste 
to  the  King,  that  you  should  write  to  him  .  .  .  offering  to  be 
his  intermediary.  ...  It  is  not  too  late  to  save  Italy  and 
replace  the  Viceroy  on  the  Adige  ;  ...  as  no  battle  has  taken 
place  between  the  French  and  Neapolitan  troops  all  can  yet  be 
arranged"  (Napoleon  to  Joseph,  February  26,  1814;  Meneval, 
Mems.  iii.  166,  transl.  Appleton,  New  York). 

Such  is  the  nature  of  the  internal  evidence  on  which  I  have 
decided  to  disregard  the  assertion  of  the  Moniteur  and  the  sub- 
sequent acquiescence  of  the  French  editors  of  the  Napoleonic 
correspondence.  I  place  the  letter  between  the  20th  of 
February  and  the  3rd  of  March,  and  taking  the  receipt  of 
Eugene's  dispatches  from  Italy  as  the  probable  determining 
cause,  think  the  27th  of  February  the  most  probable  date. 
See  the  Moniteur^  May  14,  1815  ;  British  State  Papers^  1814- 
1815  ;  Napoleon,  Corr.  xxiv. ;  Napoleon,  Corr,  Brotonne, 
422  ;  Meneval,  Mems.  ii.  230  ;  Talleyrand,  Corr.  inedite^  184 ; 
Hansard,  Pari.  Debates^  xxxi.,  with  other  authorities  cited 
in  the  text. 


150  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  f 


APPENDIX  F 

Ferdinand's  proclamation,   ist  of  may   1815 

Cantu  in  his  Cronistoria  (ii.  47),  following  a  number  of 
writers  of  less  importance,  gives  the  text  of  a  proclamation  in 
which  Ferdinand  promised  a  constitution  to  the  Neapolitans 
in  the  event  of  his  return  to  the  throne.  Cantu  traces  his 
authority  for  this  back  to  Pepe's  Relation^  pubHshed  in  London, 
when  the  Carbonaro  leader  was  in  exile.  But  the  text  of  the 
proclamation  may  be  found  in  an  anterior  publication — the 
Jtti  relativi  alV  intervento^  published  during  the  last  months 
of  the  Carbonaro  Parliament,  and  after  Ferdinand's  departure 
from  Naples  in  December  1820.  No  text  of  this  supposed 
document  has  been  found  of  earlier  date,  but  a  trace  of  it,  in 
fact  its  probable  origin,  can  be  placed  a  few  days  before  the 
publication  of  the  Atti  relativi  aW  interuento.  In  his  memor- 
able speech  in  the  Neapolitan  Parliament  on  the  8th  of 
December  1820,  Pasquale  Borrelli  said,  referring  to  King 
Ferdinand's  restoration  five  years  before  :  "  His  declarations 
were  clear  in  his  proclamation  of  the  ist  of  May,  while  yet  at 
Palermo  ;  he  promised  the  sovereignty  to  the  People,  and  the 
most  vigorous  and  desirable  Constitution  for  the  State.  .  .  . 
A  declaration  so  noble  and  so  generous  did  not  fail  to  produce 
the  most  useful  consequences.  It  was  these  declarations  and 
not  Teutonic  valour  that  scattered  our  bands  of  heroes  in  the 
plains  of  Macerata."  In  the  official  journal  of  the  Parliament 
in  which  this  speech  was  printed  {Diario  del  Parlemento^  ^53)) 
it  is  worth  noting  that  the  words  "and  the  most  vigorous  and 
desirable  of  Constitutions  "  are  underlined.  It  is  fortunately 
possible  to  test  the  credibility  of  BorreUi's  assertions,  and  this 
emphatic  and  argumentative  use  of  a  fact  so  important,  which 
is  here  apparently  first  stated  five  years  after  its  supposed 
occurrence,  is  deprived  of  all  weight  by  the  obvious  and 
demonstrable  bad  faith  of  the  speaker  on  another  point. 
BorreUi's  argument  is  that  Ferdinand,  by  his  proclamation 
of  the  1st  of  May,  promised  a  Constitution,  and  that  the 
knowledge  that  this  promise  had  been  made  led  the  Neapolitan 


APP.F       FERDINAND'S  PROCLAMATION  151 

army  at  Tolentino  to  offer  a  weak  resistance  to  the  Austrians. 
But,  taking  the  most  favourable  conditions,  it  is  hardly  possible 
that  the  news  of  this  proclamation  could  have  reached  Naples 
in  less  than  two  days,  and  from  Naples  to  Macerata  must  be 
counted,  at  the  very  least,  three  days,  while  as  an  average 
matter  it  would  take  quite  a  week  for  the  news  to  travel  the 
distance.  But  the  battle  of  Tolentino,  as  Borrelli  apparently 
forgot,  began  at  a  little  past  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  3rd  of  May,  barely  forty-eight  hours  after  the  issue  of  the 
proclamation  at  Palermo.  The  statement  made  by  Borrelli 
was  therefore,  in  this  particular,  nonsensical  and  false.  And  if 
in  one  particular,  why  not  in  the  other  ?  At  the  least  his 
statement  is  unworthy  of  belief  because  every  presumption 
and  probability  is  against  it.  One  writer  indeed,  a  Bourbonist, 
Sclopis,  plainly  asserts  that  the  Constitution  proclamation  is 
an  invention  [Storia  della  legislazione  Italiana^  bk.  v.  ch.  iii.). 
The  presumptive  evidence  supports  him.  In  the  British  State 
Papers  are  two  proclamations  of  Ferdinand,  presumably  sent  to 
the  British  Government  by  a  Court ;  one  of  these  is  dated 
Palermo,  the  ist  of  May,  the  other  later  in  the  same  month  ; 
in  neither  is  there  a  word  of  Constitutionalism.  But  if  that 
most  compromising  of  words  an  absolute  monarch  can  utter. 
Constitution^  had  been  used,  is  it  not  curious  that  the  British 
Minister  should  not  have  made  note  of  it,  and  is  it  not  curious 
that  no  evidence  or  trace  of  it  can  be  found  anywhere  until  on 
the  8th  of  December  1820  Borrelli  turned  an  argument  on  it 
in  the  Neapolitan  Parliament  ?  Nearly  every  presumption 
appears  to  be  against  it,  of  which  only  one  more  will  be 
mentioned  ;  how  is  it  that  in  the  flood  of  political  literature 
poured  out  in  Naples  on  the  establishment  of  the  Hberty  of 
the  Press,  there  is  to  be  found  no  allusion  to  this  remarkable 
proclamation  until  after  the  date  of  Borrelli's  speech  ?  The 
conclusion  decidedly  must  be  that  the  liberal  leader  and  not 
King  Ferdinand  was  the  author  of  the  Constitution  proclamation. 


152  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  g 

APPENDIX  G 

TREATY    OF    THE    HOLY    ALLIANCE 

Trait^  dit  de  Sainte  Alliance  signe  entre  LI.  Mm.  TEmpereur 
de  Russie,  TEmpereur  d'Autriche,  et  le  Roi  de  Prusse,  a  Paris 
le  ^|-  September  1815.  Au  nom  de  la  tres-sainte  et  indivisible 
Trinite. 

LI.  Mm.  I'Empereur  d'Autriche,  le  Roi  de  Prusse,  et 
I'Empereur  de  Russie,  par  suite  des  grands  evenements  qui 
ont  signale  en  Europe  le  cours  des  trois  dernieres  annees,  et 
principalement  des  bienfaits  qu'il  a  plu  a  la  divine  Providence 
de  repandre  sur  les  Etats  dont  les  gouvernements  ont  place 
leur  confiance  et  leur  espoir  en  elle  seule,  ayant  acquis  la  con- 
viction intime,  qu'il  est  n^cessaire  d'asseoir  la  marche  a  adopter 
par  les  puissances  dans  leurs  rapports  mutuels  sur  les  verites 
sublimes  que  nous  enseigne  Teternelle  religion  du  Dieu  Sauveur. 

Declarons  sollennellement  que  le  present  acte  n'a  pour  objet 
que  de  manifester  a  la  face  de  Funivers  leur  determination 
inebranlable,  de  ne  prendre  pour  regie  de  leur  conduite,  soit  dans 
I'administration  de  leurs  etats  respectifs,  soit  dans  leurs  relations 
politiques  avec  tout  autre  gouvernement,  que  les  pr^ceptes  de 
cette  religion  sainte,  preceptes  de  justice,  de  charite  et  de  paix, 
qui  loin  d'etre  uniquement  applicables  a  la  vie  privee,  doivent 
au  contraire  influer  directement  sur  les  resolutions  des  princes, 
et  guider  toutes  leurs  demarches,  comme  etant  le  seul  moyen 
de  consolider  les  institutions  humaines  et  de  remedier  a  leurs 
imperfections. 

En  consequence  LI.  Mm.  sont  convenues  des  articles  suivants : 
Art.  I.  Conformement  aux  paroles  des  Saintes-Ecritures,  qui 
ordonnent  a  tous  les  hommes  de  se  regarder  comme  freres,  les 
trois  monarques  contractants  demeureront  unis  per  les  liens 
d'une  fraternite  veritable  et  indissoluble,  et  se  considerant 
comme  compatriotes,  ils  se  preteront  en  toute  occasion  et  en 
tout  lieu  assistance,  aide  et  secours  ;  se  regardant  envers  leurs 
sujets  et  armees  comme  peres  de  families,  ils  les  dirigeront  dans 
le  meme  esprit  de  fraternite  dont  ils  sont  animes  pour  proteger 
la  religion,  la  paix  et  la  justice. 


App.  H  CARBONARO  DISCOURSE  153 

Art.  II.  En  consequence  le  seul  principe  en  vigueur  soit 
entre  les  dits  gouvernements,  soit  entre  leurs  sujets  sera  de  se 
rendre  reciproquement  service,  de  se  temoigner  par  une  bien- 
veillance  inalterable  I'affection  mutuelle  dont  ils  doivent  etre 
animes  de  ne  se  considerer  tous  que  comme  membres  d'une 
meme  nation  chretienne,  les  trois  princes  allies  ne  s'envisageant 
eux-memes  que  comme  delegues  par  la  Providence  pour 
gouverner  trois  branches  d'une  meme  famille,  savoir  :  FAutriche, 
la  Prusse,  et  la  Russie,  confessant  ainsi  que  la  nation  chretienne 
dont  eux  et  leurs  peuples  font  partie  n'a  reellement  d'autre 
souverain  que  celui  a  qui  seul  appartient  en  propriete  la  puis- 
sance, parcequ'en  lui  seul  se  trouvent  tous  les  tresors  de  Tamour, 
de  la  science  et  de  la  sagesse  infinie,  c'est  a  dire  Dieu  notre 
divin  Sauveur  Jesus  Christ,  le  verbe  du  Tres  Haut,  la  parole  de 
vie.  LI.  Mm.  recommandent  en  consequence  avec  la  plus 
tendre  sollicitude  a  leurs  peuples,  comme  unique  moyen  de 
jouir  de  cette  paix  qui  nait  de  la  bonne  conscience  et  qui  seul 
est  durable,  de  se  fortifier  chaque  jour  davantage  dans  les 
principes  et  Fexercice  des  devoirs  que  le  divin  Sauveur  a 
enseign^  aux  hommes. 

Art.  III.  Toutes  les  puissances  qui  voudront  sollennellement 
avouer  les  principes  sacres  qui  ont  dicte  le  present  acte,  et 
reconnaitront  combien  il  est  important  au  bonheur  des  nations 
trop  longtemps  agitees,  que  ces  verites  exercent  desormais  sur 
les  destinees  humaines  toute  I'influence  qui  leur  appartient  seront 
revues  avec  autant  d'empressement  que  d'aiFection  dans  cette 
sainte  alliance. 

Fait  triple  et  signe  a  Paris  Tan  de  grace  18 15  le  ^|-  Septembre. 

Francois. 

Frederic-Guillaume. 
Alexandre. 


APPENDIX    H 

CARBONARO    DISCOURSE 

The    earliest    societies    of  men,  hoping    to   find    happiness 
within   the  walls   of  cities,  intrusted   the  command  of  their 


154  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  h 

forces  to  one  person  for  the  common  defence.  He,  instead 
of  protecting  and  defending  them,  became  their  oppressor. 
Civil  equality  disappeared,  and  the  rights  of  man  were 
dethroned  by  despotism.  Corrupted  human  nature  suffered 
the  laws  of  truth  and  justice  to  be  supplanted  by  depravity  of 
manners,  and  by  the  persecution  and  oppression  of  the  good. 

A  few  wise  and  good  men,  who  still  cherished  in  their  hearts 
that  morality  whose  principles  are  unalterable  either  by  change 
of  time  or  the  succession  of  generations,  while  they  wept  over 
these  evils  in  secret,  ruminated  on  the  means  of  preserving 
untainted  some  sentiment  of  sound  morality.  They  secretly 
imparted  their  knowledge  and  their  views  to  a  few  persons 
worthy  of  the  distinction.  Thus  transmitted  from  generation 
to  generation,  their  maxims  became  the  fountain  of  that  true 
philosophy  which  can  never  be  corrupted  nor  altered  in  its 
appearance.  It  is  in  the  school  founded  on  them  that,  without 
veil  or  mystery,  men  are  taught  to  respect  and  to  maintain  the 
rights  of  their  fellow-men. 

The  mysteries  of  Mythras  in  Persia,  of  Isis  in  Egypt,  of 
Eleusis  in  Greece,  and  of  the  temples  yet  to  be  rebuilt,  and  the 
light  that  is  yet  to  be  spread,  are  all  so  many  rays  proceeding 
from  the  same  centre,  moving  in  an  orbit  whose  field  is  the 
immensity  of  wisdom. 

Carbonarism  is  not  the  last  or  least  of  the  societies  that  have 
proceeded  from  this  school.  It  has  simplified  many  various 
systems,  and  adopted  only  the  unaffected  language  of  nature. 
It  presents  itself  without  mystery  to  those  who  know  how  to 
understand  it ;  it  receives  them  into  its  peaceful  bosom,  and 
elevates  them  to  the  contemplation  of  never-varying  nature,  to 
the  love  of  man  collectively,  to  the  hatred  of  oppression  and 
despotism,  to  the  knowledge  of  good,  and  of  all  that  is  useful 
to  society  and  confirms  the  general  systems  of  truth  and 
justice. 

Carbonarism  teaches  in  its  haracche  the  true  end  of  moral 
existence,  and  gives  rules  of  conduct  for  social  life.  It  points 
out  the  means  for  diffusing  the  light  of  truth,  and  for  dis- 
seminating the  principles  of  philosophy  and  equality.  It  is  to 
the  sacred  rights  of  equality  that  the  G.  C.  must  especially 
attach  himself. 


APP.  I  FERDINAND'S  INVITATION  155 

The  cross  should  serve  to  crucify  the  tyrant  who  persecutes 
us  and  troubles  our  sacred  operations.  The  crown  of  thorns 
should  serve  to  pierce  his  head.  The  thread  denotes  the  cord 
to  lead  him  to  the  gibbet ;  the  ladder  will  aid  him  to  mount. 
The  leaves  are  nails  to  pierce  his  hands  and  feet.  The  pick- 
axe will  penetrate  his  breast,  and  shed  the  impure  blood  that 
flows  in  his  veins.  The  axe  will  separate  his  head  from  his 
body,  as  the  wolf  who  disturbs  our  pacific  labours.  The  salt 
will  prevent  the  corruption  of  his  head,  that  it  may  last  as  a 
monument  of  the  eternal  infamy  of  despots.  The  pole  will 
serve  to  put  the  skull  of  the  tyrant  upon.  The  furnace  will 
burn  his  body.  The  shovel  will  scatter  his  ashes  to  the  wind. 
The  baracca  will  serve  to  prepare  new  tortures  for  the  tyrant. 
The  fountain  will  purify  us  from  the  vile  blood  we  shall  have 
shed.  The  Hnen  will  wipe  away  our  stains  and  render  us  clean 
and  pure.  The  forest  is  the  place  where  the  Good  Cousins 
labour  to  obtain  so  important  a  result.  The  trunk  with  a 
single  branch  signifies  that  after  the  great  operation  we  shall 
become  equal  to  the  N.  C. — Bertholdi,  Memoirs^  30. 


APPENDIX    I 

Ferdinand's  invitation  to  laybach 

The  Emperors  of  Austria  and  Russia  and  the  King  of  Prussia 
to  the  King  of  Sicily.  (Each  sovereign  wrote  an  identic 
copy  of  this  letter.) 

Troppau,  le  20  No'vembre  1826. 
Monsieur  mon  Frere, 

De  tristes  circonstances  ne  m'ont  pas  permi  de  recevoir  les 
lettres  que  Votre  Majeste  m'a  adressees  depuis  quatre  mois. 
Mais  les  evenemens  auxquels  ces  lettres  ont  du  se  rapporter, 
n'ont  cesse  de  faire  le  sujet  de  mes  plus  serieuses  meditations, 
et  les  Puissances  AUiees  se  sont  reunies  a  Troppau  pour  con- 
sid^rer  ensemble  les  suites  dont  ces  evenemens  menacent  le 
reste  de  la  Peninsule  Italienne  et  peut-etre  I'Europe  toute 
entiere.      En  nous   decidant  a   cette    deliberation    commune, 


156  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  i 

nous  n'avons  fait  que  nous  conformer  aux  transactions  de  1814, 
181 5,  et  1818;  transactions  dont  Votre  Majeste,  ainsi  que 
TEurope,  connait  le  caractere  et  le  but,  et  sur  lesquelles  repose 
cette  alliance  tutelaire,  uniquement  destinee  a  garantir  de  toute 
atteinte  Pindependence  politique  et  I'integrite  territorial  de 
tous  les  Etats,  et  a  assurer  le  repos  et  la  prosperite  de  TEurope 
par  le  repos  et  la  prosperite  de  chacun  des  Pays  dont  elle  se 
compose.  Votre  Majeste  ne  doutera  done  pas  que  I'intention 
des  Cabinets  assembles  ici  ne  soit  de  concilier  I'interet  et  le 
bien  etre,  dont  la  sollicitude  paternelle  de  Votre  Majeste  doit 
desirer  faire  jouir  ses  Peuples,  avec  les  devoirs  que  les  monarques 
Allies  ont  a  remplir  envers  leurs  Etats  et  envers  le  Monde. 
Mais  nous  nous  feliciterions,  mes  Allies  et  moi,  d*executer  ces 
engagemens  solennels  avec  la  cooperation  de  votre  Majeste,  et 
fideles  aux  principes  que  nous  avons  proclames,  nous  demandons 
aujourd'hui  cette  cooperation.  C'est  dans  ce  seul  but,  que  nous 
proposons  a  Votre  Majest^  de  se  r^unir  a  nous  dans  la  ville  de 
Laybach.  Votre  presence,  Sire,  hatera,  nous  en  sommes  surs, 
une  conciliation  aussi  indispensable,  et  c'est  au  nom  des  interets 
les  plus  chers  de  Votre  Royaume,  et  avec  cette  bienveillante 
sollicitude  dont  nous  croyons  avoir  donne  plus  d'un  temoi- 
gnage  a  Votre  Majeste,  que  nous  Tinvitons  a  venir  recevoir  de 
nouvelles  preuves  de  la  veritable  amitie  que  nous  lui  portons, 
et  de  la  franchise  qui  fait  la  base  de  notre  politique.  Recevez 
I'assurance,  etc. 

Sa  Majeste  le  Roi  des  Deux  Siciles. 

Brit.  State  Papers^  1820-1821,  1 147. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


APPENDIX    K 


157 


BIBLIOGRAPHY    FOR    THE    POLITICAL    HISTORY    OF    THE 
KINGDOM    OF    NAPLES,    1805-182I 


Section  I.  Periodical  Publications 


1805- 

-I8I5 

I8I5- 

I82I 

1805- 

-I8I5 

I8I5- 

I82I 

1805 

- 

I82I 

1805- 

-I8I5 

181 5- 

1821 

„     III.  Pamphlets   .... 
„     IV.         „  .... 

„       V.  Books      dealing      generally 

WITH  THE  Period 
„     VI.  Books     dealing    specifically 

WITH  the  Period 
„  VII.  Books     dealing    specifically 

with  the  Period 

This  is  not  a  bibliography  of  hooks  consulted^  but  precisely 
as  stated  in  the  heading,  and,  it  is  hoped,  fairly  exhaustive 
within  its  narrow  limits.  Many  books  consulted, — for  instance 
Ammirati's  Gins  feodale^  Blunt's  Vestiges^  the  Memoirs  of  the 
Duchess  d'Abrantes, — are  not  included,  as  they  do  not,  strictly 
speaking,  come  within  the  definition  of  books  dealing  with  the 
political  history  of  Naples  between  the  years  1805  and  1821. 
A  list  that  included  such  authorities  might  be  extended  in- 
definitely, and  would  soon  lose  all  character  of  preciseness  and 
completeness. 

In  Section  IV.  some  discretion  has  been  used.  Many 
pamphlets  could  have  been  added,  and  a  ^&v^  might  perhaps 
better  have  been  omitted.  The  numerous  ones  emanating 
from  various  classes  of  civil  servants  at  the  time  of  the  revolu- 
tion of  1820  have  been  nearly  entirely  excluded  as  representing 
nothing  more  than  particular  arguments  advocating  personal 
interests.  On  the  other  hand,  others  have  been  included  of 
which  the  political  character  was  doubtful  for  the  reason  that 
they  were  strongly  typical  of  the  state  of  public  opinion  and 
of  its  mode  of  expression.  The  few  examples  of  verse  may  be 
included  among  these. 


158  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

In  Section  V.,  again,  some  process  of  selection  was  necessary, 
for  the  general  histories  of  Italy  are  numberless,  and  for  the  most 
part  of  scanty  value.  In  view  of  the  considerable  amount  of 
special  material  presented,  it  may  be  fairly  claimed  that  this 
class  of  book  is  sufficiently  represented  in  the  few  referred  to  in 
this  section. 

SECTION    I 
Periodical  Publications,  1805-18 15 

1.  Annual  Register.  London,  1805-18 15.     8vo. 

2.  British  and  Foreign  State  Papers. 

London,  from  18 12  annually.     8vo. 

3.  Bulletino  delle  leggi  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1 806-1 8 1 5.     8vo. 

Two  numbers  a  year.  For  its  continuation  see  Col- 
lezione  delle  leggi,  18. 

4.  Corriere  di  Napoli. 

Newspaper,  generally  weekly,  1806  to  1811.  On 
Feb.  I,  181 1,  //  was  absorbed  by  the  Monitore  delle 
Due  Sicilie  ;  was  previously  under  official  ififluence. 
See  8. 

5.  Gazzetta  di  Gaeta. 

Published  irregularly  during  the  siege.  There  are  a 
few  copies  among  the  papers  of  the  British  Admiralty. 

6.  Gazzetta  Napolitana. 

Suppressed  in  1806,  and  succeeded  by  the  Monitore. 

7.  Hansard,  F.  C.    The  Parliamentary  Debates  from  the  year 

1803  to  the  present  time.  London,  annually.     8vo. 

8.  Monitore   Napolitano,   II,   afterwards   Monitore  delle  Due 

Sicilie. 

Official  organ  under  the  French  kings.  At  first 
weekly,  then  irregular,  lastly  daily.  First  number 
March  I,  1806  ;  last.  May  19,  181  5.      See  24, 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  159 

Section  I. — continued 

9.  Papers  respecting  Austria,  Denmark,  the  Ottoman  Porte, 
Portugal,  and  the  United  States,  presented  to  ParHa- 
ment  in  1808.  London,  1808.     8vo. 

See  next  number. 

10.  Treaties  and  Correspondence  presented  by  His  Majesty's 

command  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  28th  January 
1806,  and  3rd  and  4th  February  1806. 

London,  1809.     ^^^• 

Part  of  series  printed  by  Strahan  that  preceded 
British  and  Foreign  State  Papers. 

SECTION    II 
Periodical  Publications,  1815-1821 

11.  Amico  della  Costituzione,  L*. 

Small  \to  periodical^  of  which  the  first  number  was 
published  at  Naples^  July  23,  1820.  //  was  still 
in  existence  in  January  1821.  Among  the  con- 
tributors was  Colletta,  who  wrote  for  it  his  Foe  hi 
fatti  su  Gioacchino  Murat. 

12.  Amico  della  Prosperita,  L'. 

Fortnightly;   Naples,  1820 ;  newspaper. 

13.  Annali  del  patriotismo. 

Naples,  1820  ;  newspaper. 

14.  Annual  Register.  London,  1 815- 1 821.     8vo. 

15.  Biblioteca  Costituzionale. 

Naples,  1820 ;  periodically  about  three  times  a  month. 

16.  British  and  Foreign  State  Papers. 

London,  from  1812  annually.     8vo. 

17.  Censore,  II,  Foglio  politico  letterario. 

Bi-weekly  of  some  importance.     First  number  Naples, 
Nov.  24,  1820  ;   last,  March  13,  182 1.      Not  to  be 
confounded  with    Gioja^s    similarly    named  Milanese 
journal.      Edited  by  Palladini  of  Lecce. 


i6o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  II. — continued 
Cesare,  De.     See  44. 

18.  Collezione  delle  leggi  e  decreti  reali  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napolij  1 8 15-         .     8vo. 

Two  numbers  a  year ;  in  continuation  of  the 
Bulletino,  3. 

19.  Ebdomadario. 

Small  bi-weekly  of  slight  importance.  First  number 
Naples^  July  22,  1820. 

20.  Echo,  L',  Journal  politique,  commercial  et  litteraire. 

First  number  Naples,  July  21,  1820  ;  tri-weekly, 
well  edited. 

FoscHi.     See  Trattenimento,  40. 

21.  Giornale  Anti-Ministeriale. 

Weekly  Carbonaro  organ.  First  number  Naples, 
Sept.  5,  1820. 

22.  Giornale  costituzionale  del  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Official  daily,  succeeding  the  Giornale  delle  Due 
Sicilie.      See  24. 

23.  Giornale  della  R.  Lucana  Occidentale. 

Carbonaro  print  published  at  Salerno,  1820, 

24.  Giornale  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Official  daily,  succeeding  the  Monitore,  May  23, 
1 8 1  $-July  7,  1 820.  Resumed  on  close  of  revolution 
in  1 82 1.      See  8,  22. 

25.  Giornale  degli  Amici  della  Patria. 

First  number  Naples,  July  8,  1820  {by  misprint 
June).  Rossetti  was  a  contributor,  De  Ritis  the 
editor. 

26.  Giornale  di  commercio  e  mode. 

Small  tri-weekly.  First  number  Naples,  October  2, 
1820. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  i6i 

Section  II. — continued 

27.  Giornale  di  piccoli  affissi,  afterwards  Giornale  di  varieta  e 

di  piccoli  affissi. 

Small  weekly.     First  number  Naples^  Oct,  7,  1820. 

28.  Giornale  generale  di  Commercio. 

Good  bi-weekly.  First  number  Naples^  Oct,  10, 
1820. 

29.  Giornale  patriottico  della  Lucania  orientale, 

Carbonaro  print  published  irregularly  at  Potenza. 
First  number  July  10,  1820 ;  last^  March  13, 
1821  ;   14  numbers  in  all. 

Imbriani.     See  43. 

30.  Imparziale,  L',  Foglio  politico. 

Bi-weekly  of  some  importance.  First  number  NapleSy 
July  28,  1820. 

3 1 .  Indipendente,  L',  Giornale  politico,  letterario  e  commerciale. 

Naples,  1820. 

32.  Ingenuo  per  le  dame,  L'. 

Unimportant  weekly.  First  number  Naples,  March 
3,  1 82 1  ;  4  numbers  in  all. 

33.  Liceo  Costituzionale,  II. 

First  number  Naples,  October  1820. 

34.  Luce,  La. 

Weekly,  edited  by  Carlo  Sorrentino.  First  number 
July  zz,  1820. 

Mele.     See  44. 

35.  Minerva  Napolitana,  La. 

Napoli,  1820-21.     3  vols.      i2mo. 
Important  weekly,  edited  and  principally  written  by 
Carlo   Troja.       First  number  Aug.   8,    1820,'    last, 
March  10,  1 82 1. 
VOL.  II  M 


i62  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  II. — continued 

36.  Observatore  Salentino,  U. 

Irregularly  published.     First  number  January  1 82 1 . 

Palladini.     See  17. 

37.  Popolo  Sovrano,  U,  ovvero  il  re  cittadino. 

Monthly.     First  number^  Naples^  Sept.  15,  1820. 

RiTis,  De.     See  25. 
RossETTl.      See  25. 

38.  Solitario,  II. 

Irregularly  published.     First  number  Naples,  -^ug, 
3,  1820. 

SoRRENTlNO.      See  34. 

39.  Spettatore  Napolitano,  Lo,  Giornale  letterario  scientifico. 

Published  fortnightly  at  Naples. 

40.  Trattenimento  mensile,  utile  e  piacevole  che  presenta  in 

varii  articoli  notizie  cosmografiche,  istorie  generali  e 
patrie  del  regno  di  Napoli.  Erudizioni  per  varii  ceti 
di  persone,  curiosita  dilletevoli,  ed  utili  segreti,  col 
riassunto  delle  Nuove  piu  importanti  del  mese  ante- 
cedente,  estratte  da  varii  Fogli,  e  de  Provedimenti 
reali. 

Monthly  gazette   of  slight   importance  published  in 
1 8 1 6.      Perhaps  edited  by  N.  Foschi. 

Troja.     See  35. 

41.  Verita,  La,  Giornale  patriottico,  letterario,  commerciale. 

Published  at  Naples  in  1820  or  1821. 

42.  Vigilante,  II,  Giornale  storico-politico. 

Small  bi-weekly  of  some  importance  edited  by  Girard. 
First  number,  Naples,  Aug.  5,  1820. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  163 

Section  II. — continued 

43.  Voce  del  Popolo,  La. 

Important  weekly,  edited  by  Matteo  Imbriani.  Pub- 
lished at  Naples,  "January  and  February  1 8  2 1 . 

44.  Voce  del  Secolo,  La. 

Bi-weekly  of  some  importance.  Among  the  con- 
tributors was  De  Cesare ;  editor  C.  Mele,  First 
number,  Naples,  Jan.  2;  last,  March  16,  1821. 

Note. — No  attempt  has  been  made  to  include  the  official 
Gazettes  brought  out  at  the  chief  Provincial  towns.  Only  a  few- 
stray  copies  of  these  have  come  under  observation,  ranging  in  dates 
from  1 81 7  to  1 821. 


SECTION   III 

Pamphlets,  1805-1815 
Antico  Uffiziale.     See  54. 

45.  Arditi,  Cav.     Moneta  da  battersi  a  perpetuo  monumento 

della  regale  amnestia  publicata  dal  nostro  augusto  sovrano 
Ferdinando  IV  in  favor  de  suoi  sudditi  co'  suoi  clemen- 
tissimi  proclami  spediti  da  Palermo  e  da  Messina  nel 
Maggio  deir  anno  MDCCCXV.     Memoria  epistolare. 

Napoli,  1 8 15.     4to. 
Interesting  for  public  opinion. 

46.  [Canosa,  Prince  of].    I  Napoletani  compromessi  hanno 

un  dritto  perfetto  ad  essere  sussidiati  nel  regno  di  Sicilia. 
Memoria.  Edizione  seconda  arrichita  di  nuove 
annotazioni.  Palermo,  18 13.     4to. 

47.  Carbonaro  istruito,  II.  Milano,  18 15.     i2mo. 

The  only  copy  of  this  important  and  rare  pamphlet  that 
has  come  under  observation  is  a  MS.  at  the  Biblioteca 
Nazionale,  Naples, 


i64  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  III. — continued 

48.  Conference  entre  deux  diplomates  Tun  fran^ais  et  I'autre 

anglais  sur  les  affaires  de  Naples.  [Paris,  181 5.]  8vo. 
Curious  pamphlet  in  support  of  Murais  claims^ 
probably  published  in  January  or  February, 

49.  Copia  di   una  seconda  lettera  che   un  amico  da  Vienna 

scrive  ad  un  altro  in  Napoli.  Napoli,  1815.     4to. 

There  was  no  first  letter.  In  reply  to  Obbart's 
pamphlet.  Observations.      See  53. 

50.  [Flassan,  de].     Des  Bourbons  de  Naples. 

Paris,  1 8 14.     8vo. 

Published  under  initials  M.  de  F...  Short  pamphlet, 
starting  point  of  considerable  controversy.  A 
Neapolitan  translation  appeared  after  Murat's  fall. 

51.  Lettera  di  un  Inglese  nel  suo  ritorno  in  Inghilterra  da  un 

viaggio  in  Italia  nel  mese  di  Agosto,  18 14. 

[Napoli?]  1814.     8vo. 

Of  slight  importance  ;  in  support  of  Murat  and  trans- 
lated from  an  English  version. 

52.  Memoria  sulla  condotta  politica  e  militare  tenuta  da  Gioc- 

chino  Murat.  Con  le  quali  sull'  appoggio  di  fatti,  e  di 
documenti  fino  ad  ora  non  conosciutti,  provasi  che  il 
solo  di  lui  scopo  fu  di  servire  ai  progetti  ed  alia  causa 
di  Bonaparte  sotto  la  maschera  di  Alleato  nella  Casa 
d' Austria.  Italia,  18 15.     2  vols.     8vo. 

A    French    translation    appeared  in    the    same  year. 

Work  of  a  Bourbonist ;  useful,  though  prejudiced  ana 

inaccurate, 

53.  [Obbart,  Tommaso].     Observations  sur  Fecrit  intitule  : 

Des  Bourbons  de  Naples  et  reflexions  d'un  Napolitain. 

Paris,  1 8 14.     8vo. 

Muratist  reply  to  de  Flassan.  Peltier  may  have  had 
a  hand  in  this  pamphlet ;  there  was  an  Italian  trans- 
lation.    See  50. 

Peltier.     See  53. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  165 

Section  III. — continued 

54.  [Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Francesco].      Discorsi  storici 

sulk  storia  del  reame  di  Napoli  del  General  Colletta. 

Lugano,  1836.     3  parts,  8vo. 

Published  under  pseudo?iym  of  Antico  Uffiziale. 
Important  for  campaign  of  I'^l^  ;  highly  controversial 
and  untrustworthy. 

55.  Sarrazin,  J.    Defense  des  Bourbons  de  Naples  contre  les 

panegyristes  de  I'usurpateur  Murat.     Paris,  18 15.     8vo. 

56.  Satriani,  Domenico.     Considerazioni  storico-politiche  in 

congiuntura    degli    avvenimenti    sul    continente  ed    in 
ispezialta  sul  regno  di  Napoli.  Napoli,  1807.     4^^- 

Curious ;  supporting  theories  as  to  the  Bonaparte 
claims  to  crowns  of  Western  Empire  and  Naples. 

57.  Tabaraud,  Mathieu  Mathurin.       Du   Pape   et   des 

Jesuites,  ou  expose  de  quelques  evenements  du  pontificat 
de  Pie  VIL  Paris,  1814-1815.     8vo. 

58.  [Winspeare,  D.].     Voti  de*  Napoletani  al  Congresso  di 

Vienna.     Risposta  ai  giornali  di  Sicilia. 

Napoli,  1 8 14.     8vo. 
Important  pamphlet  in  support  of  Murat, 


SECTION   IV 

Pamphlets,  1815-1821 

59.  A.  C.  (G...  M...  C...).     Confessione  di  Giampetro. 

[Napoli,  1 82 1.]     Fo.  (i  sheet). 

Curious  and  typical  Carbonaro  attack  on  Giampietro. 

60.  AjELLO,    Giovanni.       Rappresentanza    a  sua    sacra    real 

Maesta  Ferdinando  I.   Re  del  regno  delle   Due  Sicilie 
umiliatale  dal  commessario  di  Polizia  Giovanni  Ajello. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.     8vo. 

Bourbonist  pamphlet    on    restoration ;    of  slight  im- 
portance. 


i66  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

6i.  Amarelli,  Gregorio.  Osservazioni  legali,  fllosofiche, 
politiche,  che  si  sommettono  all'  alto  discernimento 
della  Rappresentazione  Nazionale,  e  del  Re,  contra 
alcuni  principali,  e  piu  interessanti  articoli  del  Codice 
Civile  del  Regno  delle  Due  Sicilie,  pubblicato  in  Napoli 
anno  1819.  E  contra  altri  vizii  e  disfetti  del  Codice  di 
Procedura  Civile,  per  riformersi.  Napoli,  1820.  4to. 
The  title  sufficiently  indicates  contents. 

62.  Ammendola,    Luigi.       AUocuzione    del    Sacerdote    D. 

Luigi  Ammendola  recitata  nella  parrochiale  chiesa  di 
S.  Giuseppe  di  Otajano  nel  di  16  Luglio,  1820. 

[Napoli],  1820.     4to. 
Curious  Carbonaro  address. 

Angelo,  S.     See  \o\. 

63.  Angeloni,  Luigi.     Dell'  Italia  uscente  il  Settembre  181 8. 

Raggionimenti  IV.  Prima  edizione  Napolitana  eseguita 
sulk  originale  impresa  in  Parigi  delF  Autore. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Nationalist  pamphlet  of  considerable  interest. 

64.  A.  P.     Rappresentanza  di  uno  spagnuolo  a  S.  M.  I.  e  R. 

rimperadore  di  Austria  in  seguito  alia  Nota  del  19 
Settembre  relativa  agli  avvenimenti  di  Napoli  e  com- 
municate alle  differenti  Corti  Alemanne. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
Liberal  pamphlet  of  no  great  importance. 

65.  Apertura  dei  sacri  travaglii  per  uso  del  B.  C.  N.  N.  figlio 

della  R.  V.  sotto  il  T.  D.  Napoli  [1820].     4to. 

Of  slight  importance. 

66.  Appel   des    Siciliens    a    la    nation    anglaise   garante  de   la 

constitution  violee  par  le  roi  de  Naples. 

London,  18 17.     8vo. 

Curious  pamphlet  in  French  and  English. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  167 

Section  IV. — continued 

67.  Arcucci,  Gennaro.      Riiflessioni  in  confutazione    della 

rimostranza  della  Societa  de'  Carbonari  al  Sommo 
Pontefice  Pio  VII.  de  20  Settembre  1820,  e  del- 
r  indirizzo  a  S.  A.  R.  il  Principe  Ereditario. 

Napoli,  1822.     Fo. 

Reprinted  from    an    earlier    edition.       Bourbonist 

pamphlet  of  no  great  importance. 

68.  Atti  relativi  all*  intervento  di  S.  M.  il  Re  delle  Due  Sicilie 

nel    Congresso    di    Laybach    accompagnati    di    tutti    i 

documenti  correlativi  e  disposti  in  guisa  da  dilucidare  la 

storia  della  fondazione  del  nuovo  regime  costituzionale 

nel  regno.  Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

Published  in  December.     An  amplified  edition  described 

as  Prima  edizione  ufiziale  was  published  a  few  weeks 

later.     Important  but  untrustworthy. 

69.  B.  Z.     Voti  de'  Calabresi.  [1820.]     Fo. 

Important  and  curious  pamphlet^   in  favour  of  local 
decentralisation. 

70.  Balsamo,  v.      Pensieri  sugli  ultimi  avvenimenti  seguiti 

dal  ragionamento  di  un  elettore  con  se  stesso. 

Lecce,  15  Luglio,  1820.  410. 
The  ragionamento  is  the  reproduction  of  a  pamphlet  of 
Benjamin  Constant.      Of  slight  importance. 

7 1 .  Battaglia  di  Tolentino,  La,  Memorie  storiche  scritte  da  un 

Contemporaneo.  Roma,  1847.     ^v^* 

Rare  pamphlet ;    has  not  been  met  with.      May  be 
that  written  by  Fortunato  Primavera. 

72.  BiANCHi,  Francesco.     Discorso  patriottico  delF  allievo  di 

Solone  agli  amici  del  pubblico  bene. 

Napoli,  8  Agosto,  1820.     4to. 
Carbonaro  pamphlet,  of  slight  importance. 


i68  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

73.  BiGNON,  M.     Du  Congres  de  Troppau,  ou  examen   des 

pretentions  des  Monarchies  absolues  a  Tegard  de  la 
monarchic  constitutionnelle  de  Naples.  Deuxieme 
edition  revue  et  augmentee.     Paris,  Janvier,  1821.     8vo. 

Translated  into  Italian  by  Giuliano  {Napoli^  1821). 
Important ;  the  arguments  are  reproduced  in  the  next. 

74.  BiGNON,  M.      Les    cabinets   et  les   peuples  depuis   1815 

jusqu'a  la  fin  de  1822.  Paris,  Dec.  1822.     8vo. 

Important  pa7nphlet,  embodies  many  arguments  used  in 
Du  Congres  de  Troppau. 

75.  Breve  e  fidele  esposizione  de'  primi  fatti  avvenuti  nella  Luc. 

orientale  del  giorno  4  al  7"^°  Luglio,  per  lo  stabili- 
mento  della  costituzione.  [Potenza  ?  1820.]     4to. 

76.  Brevi  riflessioni  su'  miglioramenti  essenziali  che  sarebbero 

necessarii  a  farsi  alia  Costituzione  spagnuola  per  adattarla 
alio  sviluppo  della  nazione  del  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

NapoH,  1820.     8vo. 

Of  little  importance. 

77.  Bulletin  sur  les  affaires  de  Naples. 

Paris,  Mars  1821.     8vo. 
A  continuation  ^Naples  et  Laybach.      Bee  151. 

78.  Calcaterra,    Nicola.       Importanza    de'    cittadini    co- 

stituenti.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

79.  Catechismo    costituzionale     della    Monarchia    spagnuola, 

destinato  ad  illuminare  il  popolo,  ad  istruire  la  gioventu 
ed  ad  uso  delle  scuole  pri marie.  Prima  traduzione 
italiana.  Napoli,  1820.     i2mo. 

Contents  sufficiently  indicated  in  title. 

80.  Catechismo  costituzionale  per  uso    del  regno  unito  delle 

Sicilie.  Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

Perhaps  written  by  Galanti  about  the  end  of  July, 
Discusses  possible  constitutional  amendment. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  169 

Section  IV. — continued 

81.  Catechismo  di  un  B...  C...  C...  in  grado  di  apprendente. 

Salerno,  1820.      i2mo. 

Unimportant. 

82.  Catechismo   politico  per   la  nazione   del  regno  delle  Due 

Sicilie.  Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

83.  Cauchois    Lemaire,    L.    A.   F.       De   Naples   et   de  la 

declaration  de  Lay  bach.  Paris,  1821.     8vo. 

Short  liberal  pamphlet  of  slight  importance. 

84.  C.    C.      Un'    occhiata    alle    riflessioni    sulle    finanze    del 

Cavaher  Tortora.  [Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Of  slight  importance. 

85.  Cedronio,   Alessandro.      Non    basta  cangiar  governo. 

Discorso  al  popolo.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

86.  Cenno  istorico  su  i  fatti  che  hanno  proceduto  e  prodotto  il 

movimento  del  Battaglione  Sacro  di  Nola. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     i2mo. 

87.  Cepolla,  Luigi.     Saggio  d'  idee  iilosofiche  sopra  la  qui- 

stione  piu  favorita  del  giorno  qual  e  la  migliore  politica 
costituzione.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

The  title  sufficiently  indicates  contents. 

Church.     See  172. 

88.  Cio  che  si  attende  dal  Re.  [Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Unimportant, 

89.  Cittadino  imparziale,  II.     II  bene  e  il  male. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 
Unimportant. 

90.  CoLLETTA,  Pietro.      Pochi  fatti  su  Gioacchino  Murat. 

Estratti  dal  Giornale  V Amico  della  Costituzione. 

NapoH,  1820.  8vo. 
Of  some  interest ;  gave  rise  to  much  controversy. 
Republished  in  the  Opere  inedite  e  rare,  1861. 


170  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

Qi.  CoLLETTA,  PiETRO.     La  storia  di  Napoli  del  2  al  6  Luglio 

1820.  [Napoli,  1820.] 

Republished  in    the    Opere    inedite    e    rare,    1 86 1. 

Panegyric  of  the  revolution. 

92.  CoLLETTA,   PiETRO.     Riconosccnza  e   memoria  militare 

sulla  frontiera  di  terra  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

[Napoli,  1821.]     8vo. 
Republished  in  the  Opere  inedite  e  rare,  1861. 

93.  Colpo  d'  occhio  sulla  finanza  del  Regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

[Napoli,  1821.]  Fo. 
Financial  discussion  ;  of  some  interest ;  probably  pub- 
lished in  January. 

94.  Constant,  Benjamin.     See  70,  126. 

95.  Costituzione  del  Popolo  Carbonaro  della  Republica  Lucana 

Orientale.     Anno  I.  [Potenza  ?]  [1820.]     i2mo. 

Of  considerable  importance  for  the  subject. 

96.  Costituzione   politica   della   monarchia  spagnuola   tradotta 

per  ordine  del  Governo.     Edizione  uffiziale. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
The  Spanish  Constitution  as  adopted  in  July  1820. 

97.  Costituzione  politica  del  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie.     Edizione 

fatta  per  ordine  e  sotto  la  direzione  del  Parlamento. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.     8vo. 

The  Spanish  Constitution  as  amended^  and  promulgated^ 
Jan.  31,  1821. 

98.  CouRTELiN.     Coup  d*oeil  sur  les   revolutions   d'Espagne 

et  de  Naples.  Paris,  1820.     8vo. 

99.  Crotoniate,  Michele    Farina.      Della   responsabilita 

de'  deputati  ossia  breve  osservazioni  sull'  articolo  128 
della  costituzione  della  Spagna. 

Napoli,  30  Luglio,  1820.     4to. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  171 

Section  IV. — continued 

100.  C.   T.      A...  G...  D...  G...  M...   D...  U...  ED... 

N...  P...  S...  T...  [Napoli,  1820.]     8vo. 

Defence,  under  an  assumed  Carbonaro  guise,  of  Zurlo 
against  the  attacks  of  the  Rossetti  party. 

1 01.  De    Attellis,   Orazio,   Marchese    di    S.    Angelo. 

Due  parole  sulla  liberta  della  stampa. 

Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

Reproducing  the  ordinary  arguments  on  the  subject. 
De  Attellis  was  one  of  the  most  prolific  pamphleteers 
of  the  day,  generally  writing  on  matters  of  private 
interest. 

102.  De  Clario,  C.     II  gran  colosso  roso  nel  fondo  di  un  pie 

da  un  vermicino.  Risposta  all'  anonimo  scritto  pubbli- 
cato  contro  S.  E.  il  sig.  D.  Giuseppe  Zurlo  Ministro 
del-1'  Interno.  [Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Curious  rhymed  defence  of  Zurlo. 

103.  Del  Consiglio  di  Stato. 

Napoli,  5  Novembre  1820.     4to. 

There  were  other  pamphlets  on  this  subject;  this  is 
perhaps  the  least  unimportant. 

104.  Della  Maria,  Costantino.      Manuale  politico  per  i 

Siculo-Napoletani  ;  ovvero  Principii  di  dritto  pubblico 
particulare  pel  Regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

105.  Dialogo    di   due  assassini  calderai   per  mezzo  del  quale 

si  scovranno  tali.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Curious,  but  of  no  special  importance. 

106.  Dialogue  entre  un  autrichien  et  un  napolitain. 

Naples,  15  Fevrier,  1821.     8vo. 
Unimportant.     Also  an  Italian  translation. 

107.  Diario  del  Parlamento  nazionale  delle  Due  Sicile.    Giunte 

preparatorie.     Anno  1820.  [Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Official  reports  up  to  Dec,  3,  1820. 


172  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

1 08.   Di  Gese,  Domenico.     Le  voci  della  nazione  napolitana 
agli  eligendi  deputati  per  le  Corti. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
Unimportant. 

lOQ.  DiRCHiME,  Ercole.     Apologia  di  Zurlo. 

Napoli,  Agosto,  1820.  8vo. 
Reply  to  the  Rossetti  attacks.  Of  interest  for  the 
internal  factions  of  the  Carbonari.      See  no. 

1 10.  DiRCHiME,  Ercole.     Apologia  di  Zurlo  con  le  rifflessioni 

critiche   sulle  note  dell'  anonimo  che   ha  scritta  la  di 
costui  vita.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Amplification  of  above ^  and  more  important, 

111.  Discorso  politico  detto  nel  giorno   16  Luglio  dell'  anno 

1820,  nella  sollenne  publicazione  della  nazionale  Costi- 
tuzione.  [Napoli,  1820.]     Fo. 

Contains  much  curious  Carbonaro  symbolism  ;  for  the 
rest  unimportant. 

112.  Estemporanea  arringa  tenuta  in  una  radunanza  di  rispet- 

tabili   buoni   cittadini    per   maggiormente   incoraggiare 
loro  alia  virtu.  [Napoli],  10  Agosto  1820.     4to. 

113.  F.   D.     Esame  sulle  recompense  a'  primi  di  Monteforte 

rimesso  al  pubblico.  Napoli  [1820].     4to. 

Unimportant. 

114.  F.  D.  L.    Catechismo  del  cittadino  d' istruzione  primaria. 

Diretto  al  popolo  della  Monarchia  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
Unimportant. 

Ferrani.     See  203. 

115.  Ferraro,  Vincenzo.    Dottrina  del  popolo  costituzionale. 

Napoli,  1820.     i2mo. 

Unimportant. 

Fontanella.     See  170. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  173 

Section  IV. — continued 

116.  G.  A.     Rimostranza  della  Societa  de'  Carbonari  al  Sommo 

Pontefice  Pio  VII.  Napoli,  20  Sett.  1820.     410. 

117.  G.  G.    Sulla  elezione  de'  deputati  al  parlamento  nazionale. 

Discorso  del  cittadino  G.  G.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

118.  G.  M.  D.     Lo  spirito  di  vertigine.     Poema  eroi-comico 

in  cui  si  narra  Pavvenimento  del  di  i  Luglio  1820. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.  8vo. 
Typical  and  scarcely  more  inaccurate  than  many  more 
prosaic  e^orts. 

119.  G.  V. — A.  S.  A.  R.     II  Principe   Ereditario  del  Regno 

delle  Due  Sicilie  Vicario  Generale.    Riflessioni  politiche 
sulla  liberta  della  stampa. 

Napoli,  20  Settembre  1820.     4to. 

In  reply  to  Rossellt's  pamphlet  {see  179).     Perhaps 

the  work  of  Father  Ventura. 

Galanti.     8ee  80. 

120.  Galluppi,  Pasquale.     Su  la  liberta  individuale  del  citta- 

dino.    Opuscolo  in  cui  si  esamina  la  legge  provvisoria 
de'  26  Luglio  1820  su  la  liberta  della  Stampa. 

Messina,  1820.     4to. 

Lengthy  discussion  by  a  professional  philosopher. 

GiAMPiETRO.      8ee  59. 

121.  Giordano,    Antonio.      Idee   generali    sulla    scelta   de' 

deputati    e    pensieri    di    costituzione    per    un    governo 
rappresentativo.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Curious  Christian  democratic  pamphlet. 

GiULlANO.     See  73. 

122.  [Holland,   Lord].      Letter  on   constitutional   govern- 

ment   to  a  Neapolitan  (the   Duke  di  Gallo)    from  an 
Englishman.  London,  18 18.     8vo. 


174  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

123.  Indirizzo  ai  signori    deputati   al  Parlamento   adunati   in 

Napoli  capitale  del  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie  nell'  anno 
1820.  Siracusa,  1820.     8vo. 

Against  religious  toleration. 

124.  Indirizzo  al  P.  N.  [Napoli,  1820.]     410. 

Important ;  issued  by  the  Alt  a  Vendita^  and  stating 
its  political  views. 

125.  I  rappresentanti  del  popolo  della  regione  lucana  occidentale 

riuniti  in  Gran  Dieta. 

[Avellino  or  Salerno,  1820.]  Fo. 
The  signature  of  Ricciardelli,  later  Secretary  of  the 
Aha  Vendita^  makes  Salerno  probable.  Published 
within  a  few  days  of  the  revolution  ;  of  some  interest. 

126.  L.  G.  C.     Saggio  di  costituzione  di  Benjamin  Constant. 

Prima  versione  italiana  corredata  di  note  relative  alia 
Costituzione  spagnuola.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Constant's  text  is  jnutilated  and  amplified.  Bad 
typography  and  pagination  ;  perhaps  published  periodic- 
ally. 

127.  Lanjuinais,  Comte.     Vues   politiques  sur  les  change- 

mens  a  faire  a  la  constitution  d'Espagne  afin  de  la  con- 
solider  specialement  dans  le  royaume  des  Deux  Siciles. 

Paris,  1820.     8vo. 

Largely  read  and  commented  on  at  Naples. 

128.  Lanzelotti,    B...     C...     G...    M....     Istruzioni     per 

apprendenti  carbonari  ad  uso  della  R...  V...  Partenope 
Rinascente.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

129.  Lanzelotti,  B...  C...  G...  M....    Istruzioni  per  maestri 

carbonari  ad  uso  della  R...  V...  Partenope  Rinascente. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
Unimportant, 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  175 

Section  IV. — continued 

130.  Lanzelotti,    Angelo.      Constituzioni    politiche    delle 

principali  nationi.  Napoli,  1820.      i2mo. 

Useful  as  giving  the  'Neapolitan  constitutions  of  1 799, 
1808,  and  1 81 5.     Inaccurate, 

131.  Lettera  ad  un  amico  in  Chieti.         [Napoli,  1820.]     \x.o. 

Unimportant ;   containing  Neapolitan   news  for  mid- 
September. 

132.  Lettera  al  Parlamento  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli  [1820.]  8vo. 
Of  slight  importance ;  urging  constitutional  amend- 
ment. 

133.  Lettre  d'un  constitutionnel  napolitain  a  un  ultra-royaliste 

etranger.  Naples,  Dec.  20,  1820. 

Unimportant.     Perhaps  written  by  Prado. 

134.  LiPPi,  C.     Prime  idee  concernenti  il  miglioramento  delle 

nostre  istituzioni.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Far  longer,  but  not  more  valuable,  than  the  ordinary 
pamphlet  of  the  period. 

135.  LoNzi,  Ermedoro.     Invito  spartano  alle  belle  di  Napoli. 

[Napoli,  1 82 1.]  8vo. 
Curious  ;  written  in  February  during  war  fever. 

136.  LucoRELLi,    Raffaele.      Lettera    al    signor    Bianchi 

B...   C...   C...   allievo  di  Solone.      Sulla    risposta  alle 
pretenzioni  de'  Siciliani  confutate. 

Napoli,  24  Agosto  1820.     4to. 
Unimportant ;  on  Sicilian  affairs. 

137.  LucARELLi,  Raffaele.     Pretensioni    de'  Siciliani   con- 

futate da  un  Napolitano.  [Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Unimportant ;  on  Sicilian  affairs. 

138.  M....     Des  projets  de  TAutriche  sur  Tltalie. 

Paris,  1 82 1.     8vo. 

Unimportant,      Appended  is  Poerio^s  speech  of  Dec, 
8,  1820. 


176  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 
M.,  Giuseppe.     See  Musso,  147,  148. 

139.  Mancini,    F.      Discorso    del    tenente    Mancini    a   suoi 

confratelli  d'  armi  in  occasione  del  giuramento.  A  spese 
del  capitano  cavalier  De  Angelis  e  del  sottotenente 
Valboa.  Napoli,  1820.     410. 

Characteristic  Carbonaro  pamphlet. 

140.  Manifesto  del  Governo  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

[Napoli,  1 82 1.]  Fo. 
Parliament's  protest  against  action  of  Congress  of 
Laybach. 

141.  Manifesto  della  Giunta  Provisoria  di  Governo  al  Parla- 

mento  nazionale.  Napoli,  1820.     \X.q. 

Apology  of  the  Giunta^  covering  July-October  1820. 

142.  Masdeu,  Gianfrancesco.     Costituzione  politica  della 

monarchia  spagnuola  promulgata  in  Cadice  nel  Marzo 
del  1812,  preceduta  da  tre  lettere  preliminari  colle  quali 
gli  estensori  di  essa  la  diressero  alle  Corti.  Tradotta  in 
Italiano.  [Napoli],  1820.     i2mo. 

143.  Mazza,  Stefano.     Memoria  al  Parlamento  nazionale. 

Napoli,  30  Agosto,  1820.     4to. 

Recommending  constitutional  amendment. 

144.  Mele,   Carlo.      La    costituzione   spagnuola   esaminata 

secondo  i  principii  della  ragione  e  modificata  secondo  le 
circonstanze  del  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.     8vo. 

Recommending  constitutional  amendment. 

145.  Mentore  dei  Carbonari,  II.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
MiOLA.     See  204. 

146.  [MoRGARA,  ViTo].     Osservazioni  sulla  riforma  de  farsi 

alia  costituzione  della  Spagna  per  addatarla  al  regno 
delle  Due  Sicilie.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Sufficiently  described  by  title. 


APP.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  1 7  7 

Section  IV. — continued 

147.  [Musso,    Giuseppe].      Pro    memoria    per    gli    signori 

deputati  al  Parlamento  Nazionale.  Vi  si  donno  alcune 
nozioni  sulla  economia  delle  finanze  sotto  1'  Amini- 
strazione  cessata  il  di  6  Luglio. 

Napoli,  13  Ottobre,  1820.     410. 
See  next  number. 

148.  [Musso,   Giuseppe].      Secondo    pro    memoria    per   gli 

signori  deputati  al  Parlamento  Nazionale,  in  replica 
alle  osservazioni  del  Ministero  di  finanze. 

Napoli,  25  Ottobre  1820.     4to. 

These  two  pamphlets  are  important  as  being  Medians 
apology  for  his  administration. 

149.  N.  N.      Lettera   d'  un    impiegato   ad    un   suo    passato 

compagno.  Napoli,  1821.     8vo. 

Unimportant, 

150.  N.  N.      La  difesa  del   regno    di    Napoli    promessa    dal 

glorioso  S.  Gennaro.  [Napoli,  Feb.  1821.]     8vo. 

Written  during  the  war  fever. 

J51.  Naples  et  Laybach.  Paris,  Janvier  182 1.     8vo. 

Mostly  made  up  of  Neapolitan  documents.      See  77. 

Nicola  ci.     See  156. 
NiCOLiNi.     See  182. 

152.  Nuovo  statuto  organico  della  Carboneria  della  R.  Lucana 

Occidentale   (Principato   Citra)   sanzionato   nella  gran 
Dieta  dell^  anno  II.  Salerno  [181 8?]     4to. 

Of  some  interest. 

153.  Olivier-Poli,  G.  M.    Cenno  istorico  su  la  rigenerazione 

dell'  Italia  meridionale  in  Luglio,  1820. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Loose  statement  generally  favourable  to  the  Pepes. 
VOL.  II  N 


178  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

154.  Organizzazione   del   Potere   Giudiziario,   sanzionata   dai 

Rappresentanti  del  Popolo  Carbonaro  della  Luc.  Occid. 

[Salerno,  1820?]     410. 

Interesting  ;  perhaps  earlier  than  1820. 

155.  P.  O.     Brevi  ricordi  per  i  signori  deputati  che  dovranno 

intervenire  al  gran  Parlamento  Nazionale  nel  di  primo 
del  mese  di  Ottobre  1820. 

NapoH,  19  Agosto  1820.     4to. 

Interesting  for  questions  of  trade  and  taxation. 

156.  P.  S.  R.,  O.S.  N.,  A. S.,  Voce  patriottica  e  nazionale  de 

tre  filantropi  Messinesi. 

Napoli,  Ottobre  1820.    4to. 

Perhaps  by  Serafno  Rocca,  Ottavio  Nicolaci,  and 
another ;  deals  with  commercial  and  other  interests  of 
Messina, 

157.  Parere  sulle  costituzioni  in  generale  ed  in  particolare  sulle 

modificazioni  da  farsi  alia  costituzione  spagnuola. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
Unimportant. 

158.  Pascucci,    Tommaso.       Ai    deputati     del     parlamento 

napoletano.     Memorie. 

Chieti,  Luglio  1820.     4to. 

Unimportant. 

159.  Patriottismo  Europeo.  [Napoli,  1820.]     8vo» 

Unimportant. 

160.  Pieces   inedites  sur  les   affaires  de   Naples,  prec^dees   de 

reflexions.  Paris,  1820.     8vo. 

Slight, 

161.  Pepe,  Guglielmo.     Deux   mots   de  reponse  aux  volu- 

mineux   Memoires   publics   par   le   General   Carascosa, 
traduit  de  Tltalien.  Paris,  1823.     8vo. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  179 

Section  IV. — continued 

162.  Per  la  inaugurazione  del  G  .*.  O  .*.  al  Rito  Scozz  .*.  in 

Napoli.     Discorso   dell'  Orat.*.   nell'  assemblea  de'  13 
Settembre  1820  (E.*.  p.*.).  [Napoli,  1820.]     Fo. 

Important  for  the  secret  societies, 

163.  Pignatelli-Strongoli,   Francesco.     Cenno   dei    fatti 

accaduti  nel  regno  di  Napoli  nei  primi  giorni  di  Luglio 
del  1820.  [Napoli],  12  Luglio  1820.     Fo. 

Single  sheet.     Unimportant  except  for  its  author, 

164.  Pignatelli-Strongoli,    Francesco.      Considerazioni 

strategiche  sul  sistema  di  difesa  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1820.      i6mo. 

Inferior  to  Colletta's  on  same  subject. 

165.  [Pignatelli-Strongoli, Francesco].  Pocheosservazioni 

sopra  r  opuscolo  del  General  Colletta  intitolato  :   Pochi 
fatti  su  Gioacchino  Murat.  Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

Published    under    initials    F,P,S.      Covers    a  few 

interesting  points. 

Prado.     See  133. 
Prima  vera.     See  71. 

166.  Progetti    deir    Austria    nelP    Italia    del    Signor    ***. 

Traduzione  del  francese.  Napoli,  8vo.     1821. 

Unimportant. 

16'j,  PuoTi,  L.     Alia  gioventu  del  regno. 

[Napoli,  1820  or  1821.]     4to. 

Violent  democratic  appeal ;  otherwise  unimportant. 

168.  Quadro  politico  dell'  Europa  dal  18 14  all'  Agosto  del 
1820.  Discorso  per  interrogazioni  e  risposte  scritto  in 
Napoli  da  un  Oriundo  della  Provincia  d'  Aquila  ed  antico 
membro  del  Gran  Consiglio  Legislativo  della  Repubblica 
Cisalpina.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant, 


i8o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

169.  Quistioni     preparatorie    alF    apertura     del     parlamento 

nazionale.  Napoli,  1820.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Of  slight  importance. 

170.  R.  F.    Pensieri  sopra  le  modificazioni  della  costituzione  di 

Spagna  per  adattarla  al  Regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli,  1820.     4to. 
Perhaps  by  Fontanella.      Unimportant. 

171.  Racioppi,  Felice.     Al  Parlamento  Nazionale,  petizione. 

Avellino  [1820].     Fo. 
Against  religious  toleration. 

172.  Rapporto  della  commissione  di  legislazione  al  Parlamento 

nazionale  sopra  le  scritture  per  ora  esistenti,  e  riguardanti 
i  Tenenti  Generali  D.  Diego  Naselli,  e  D.  Riccardo 
Chourch  {sic)  in  seguito  de'  disordini  avvenuti  in 
Palermo  nel  mese  di  Luglio  1820. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Report   on    Sicilian   affairs   ordering   the  release   of 

Church. 

173.  Rapporto    del    Ministro    delle    finanze    al    Parlamento 

nazionale.     Anno  1820.  [Napoli,  1820.]     Fo. 

174.  Regione  Irpina  (Principato  Ultra)  A...   G...   D...   G... 

M...  D...  U...  1...  N...  E...  S...  G...  A...D...N... 
P...  S...  T...e  deir  ordine  in  generale.  Ordone 
centrale  di  Avellino  il  I.  del  III.  mese,  anno  II.  (i 
Settembre  1820,  era  volgare).     S...  S...  S... 

[Avellino,  1820.]     Fo. 
Minutes  of  provincial  vendita  ;  of  some  interest, 

175.  Risposta  ad  una  diatriba  del  di   iii"o.  Agosto   del  Inte. 

Gle.  Fr.  Pignatelli-Strongoli.        [Napoli,  1820.]     8vo. 

176.  Risposta  alia  lettera  di  S.  E.  Signor  Principe  di  Villa- 

franca  a  S.  E.  Sig.  Duca  di  Campo  Chiaro  Ministro  di 
S.  M.  per  le  relazioni  estere  in  Napoli. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     8vo. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  i8i 

Section  IV. — continued 

I'jj,  Risposta  e  la  difesa  di  Zurlo,  La. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     8vo. 

Written    as     Zurlo's    own    defence^    but    obviously 
apocryphal. 

RocCA.     See  154. 

178.  RoMOALDO,  Cassito.     Catcchismo  di   un  B...  C...  in 

grado  di  Apprendente.  Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

Carbonaro  rites. 

179.  RossELLi,  Giuseppe,  A.S.A.R.     II  Principe  Ereditario, 

Vicario  Generale. 

Napoli,  30  Luglio  1820.     4to. 

On  the  press ^  attacking  Zurlo  ministry. 

180.  Rossetti,  Gabriele.     Odi  cittadine. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Mark  the  extreme  of  democratic  violence.     A  number 
of  other  poems  of  Rossetti  were  printed  anonymously, 

181.  [Rossetti,  Gabriele].     Alia  difesa  o  cittadini. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 
Written  in  February  at  the  time  of  the  war  fever. 

182.  [Rossetti,  Gabriele].     Notizie  su  la  condotta  politica 

di  Giuseppe  Zurlo.  Seconda  edizione  con  note  del- 
r  autore.  L'  autore  consultando  la  sua  memoria  ed  ajutato 
da  quella  de  suoi  amici  ha  creduto  necessario  aggiungere 
alcune  note  a  queste  notizie.  Egli  dichiara  che  non 
invocera  la  legge  contro  coloro  che  multiplicassero 
P  edizioni  di  quest'  opuscolo.        [Napoli,  1820.]     8vo. 

Nicola  Nicolini  perhaps  collaborated.     Violent  attack 

on  Zurlo,     Important. 

Rossetti,  G.     See  194. 

183.  RuFFo,   Cardinal,   A.S.A.R.    II    Principe    Reggente. 

Rappresentanza  del  Cardinale  Arcivescovo  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.     4to. 

Protest  against  liberty  of  the  Press  and  suppression  of 
ecclesiastical  privileges. 


i82  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

184.  RuFFO,  Cardinal.     A' signori  deputati  del  parlamento. 

Indirizzo  del  Cardinale  Arcivescovo  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1820.     4to. 
Against  religious  toleration. 

185.  Salerno,  Nicola.     Compendio   della  terapeutica  costi- 

tuzionale,  osia  ristretto  ragionamento  su  la  cura  de'  mali 
politici  e  legali  nel  nuovo  governo  costituzionale  del 
regno  di  Napoli.  Napoli  [1820].     410. 

Important  pamphlet  in  support  of  the  Zurlo  ministry. 

186.  Salfi,  F.     L'ltalie  au  XIX^  Siecle,  ou  de  la  ntossite 

d'accorder  le  pouvoir  avec  la  liberty. 

Paris,  1 82 1.     i2mo. 

The  chief  interest  of  this  important  pamphlet  is  for  the 
literary  history  of  the  Risorgimento. 

187.  [Solotollo,   Eugenio].     Rapporto    delF  intendenza   di 

Molise  a  sua  eccellenza  il  signor  presidente  del  Parlamento 
Nazionale  sullo  stato  di  quella  provincia. 

Napoli,  1820.     Fo. 
A  few  interesting  details  on  provincial  matters, 

188.  Sanchez,  Paolo.     Del  governo  e  delle  amministrazioni. 

Napoli,  1820.     3  vols. 

189.  Sanseverino,    Placido.      Riflessioni    alia    nazione,    al 

Parlamento,  ed  alia  Maesta  del  Re. 

Napoli,  1820.     4to. 

Unimportant. 

190.  Sasso,  Biase.   La  guida  delcittadino  per  gustare  la  felicita 

ossia  il  quadrato  della  vera  cittadinanza. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

191.  Seconda  osservazione  sulla  riforma  politica  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Veiled  attack  on  Spanish  Constitution, 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  183 

Section  IV. — continued 

192.  Siciliano  alia  nazione  napoletana,  Un. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Unimportant ;  perhaps  by  Manciano, 

193.  Solai-Bembi,    Gerardo.       Sulla    riforma    politica    del 

regno    di    Napoli    avvenuta   nel    di     i     Luglio    1820. 
Lettera  diretta  a  Monsieur  Coumerglian  in  Marsiglia. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Narration  favourable  to  Menichini. 

194.  Solitario  della  Majella,  II,  alii  signori  deputati. 

[Napoli,  1820.     8vo.] 
Unimportant ;  perhaps  by  Rossetti. 

195.  Taddeii,    Giovanni.      Catechismo   patriottico   estratto 

delle  opere  di  La  Croix  ed  adattato  al  regno  delle  Due 
Sicilie.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant  ,•  from  the  French. 

196.  Tavassi,  Pasquale.     Istruzioni  2^0'  Gr.  di  M.  Carb. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

197.  Tavassi,  Pasquale.     Istruzioni   sul   lo-   Gr.   di   Appr. 

Carb.  redatto  dal  Gr.  M.  della  R.  V.  all'  O.  di  Napoli. 
Sotto  il  titolo  distintivo  :   I  liberi  Pitagorici. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

198.  Tavola  della  Gran  Dieta  C.  straordinaria  dell'  anno  III. 

della  R.  Lucana  Occidentale.      Salerno  [1820  ?].     4to. 

199.  ToNELLi,  Pasquale.     Breve  idea  della  Carboneria,  sua 

origine  nel  regno  di  Napoli,  suo  scopo,  sua  persecuzione, 
e  causa  che  fa  nascere  la  setta  de'  Calderari. 

Napoli,  1820.     4to. 
Useful  for  the  subject. 

200.  [ToRTORA,  Cav.]      Riflessioni  su  le  finanze  del  regno 

di  Napoli  con  appendice  su  la  contribuzione  diretta. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 
Important  for  financial  matters. 


i84  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  IV. — continued 

201.  Trame  de'  preti  di  Bisceglie  contra  la  liberta,  Le. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 

Unimportant ;  anti-clerical. 

202.  Tribu  militare.  Napoli,  1820.     410. 

Advocating  conscription. 

203.  V.  F.     Sulla  difesa  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  Ottobre  1820.      i2mo. 

Unimportant ;  perhaps  by  Vincentio  Ferrani. 

204.  Vatout,  J.     Les  gouvernemens  representatifs  au  Congres 

de  Troppau.  Paris,  1820.     8vo. 

Italian  translation  by  Miola  (Napoli,  1821). 
On  same  lines  as  Bignon's  more  important  pamphlet, 

205.  [Ventignano,  Duke  of].    Osservazioni  sulla  rivoluzione 

di  Napoli.  Napoli,  20  Luglio  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant, 

Ventura.     See  119. 

206.  Veterano   della  liberta.      Progetto  di  modificazioni   alia 

Costituzione    delle     Spagne     presentato     alia    nazione 
napolitana.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

207.  ViLLAFRANCA,  Principe  DI.     Lcttera  a  S.  E.   Duca  di 

Campo  Chiaro.  [Napoli,  1820.]     Fo. 

Chiefly  Sicilian  affairs, 

208.  Voce  del  cittadino,  La.  Napoli,  1821.     4to. 

209.  VuLPES,    Gio.    Battista.       Catechismo    costituzionale 

per  uso  del  regno  unito  delle  Due  Sicilie  con   nuove 
aggiunte.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

210.  ZuRLO,  G.     Rapporto  sopra  i  libelli  pubblicati  contra  di 

lui,   seguito  da   un  decreto   di    Sua   Altezza    Reale    il 
Vicario  Generale.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Sufficiently  indicated  in  title. 

ZuRLO,  G.     See  177. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  185 

SECTION  V 

Works  relating  generally  to  the  Period  i  805-1 821 

211.  Angelis,  Francesco  de.      Storia  del  regno  di  Napoli 

sotto  la  dinastia  Borbonica.  Coll'  origine  della  rivolu- 
zione  francese  ;  delle  guerre,  e  trattati  seguite  tra  le 
Potenze  alleate,  e  la  Francia  insino  alia  pace  generale  di 
Vienna.  Napoli,  1817-1836.     8  vols.     8vo. 

Pretentious,  voluminous,  and  worthless. 

212.  Balsamo,  p.     Memorie  inedite. 

Palermo,  1845.     8vo. 

213.  Balsamo,  P.     Memorie  segrete  sulla  istoria  moderna  del 

regno  di  Sicilie.  Palermo,  1848.     8vo. 

214.  BiANCHi,  NicoMEDE.      Storia  documentata  della  diplo- 

mazia  europea  in  Italia  deir  anno  18 14  all'  anno  1861. 

Torino,  1865.     8  vols.     8vo. 
Of  considerable  value. 

215.  BiANCHiNi,  L.     Storia  delle  finanze  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1859.     4to. 
Third  edit.     Of  great  value. 

2 1 6.  BoTTA,  C.     Storia  d'  Italia. 

Italia,  1826.     4  vols.     8vo. 

Numerous  other  editions, 

217.  BouRGOiNG,  F.  DE.     Histoire  diplomatique  de  PEurope 

pendant  la  revolution  francaise. 

Paris,  1 865- 1 885.     4  vols.     8vo. 

218.  BucHOLTz,    F.    B.    VON.      Geschichte    der    Regierung 

Ferdinando  I.  aus  gedruckten  Quellen. 

Wien,  1 831-1838.     9  vols.     8vo. 

Useful  work;  the  ninth  volume  has  a  good  selection  of 
documents. 


i86  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  V. — continued 

219.  Cacciatore,  Andrea.     Esame  della  storia  del  reame  di 

Napoli  di  Pietro  Colletta  dal  1794  al  1825. 

Napoli,  1850.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Largely  drawn  from  Colletta ;    additional  matter  is 
generally  unimportant, 

220.  Cagnazzi,   L.     Saggio  sulk  popolazione   del  regno  di 

Puglia  ne'  passati  tempi  e  nel  presente. 

Napoli,  1820.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Unimportant, 

111.  Campanella,  Tommaso.     L'  influenza  massonica  nella 
storia  calabrese  dal  1799  a'  nostri  giorni. 

Catanzaro,  1896.     8vo. 

Sketchy,  but  useful  for  a  few  details. 

222.  CANxtr,  Cesare.     Delia  independenza  italiana.     Croni- 
storia.  Torino,  1875.     3  vols.     4to. 

Vols,  I.  and  II.  contain  useful  material  for  the  present 
subject. 

11'}^.  Carrano,  Francesco.     Vita  di  F.  Pepe. 

Torino,  1851.     8vo. 

Of  slight  importance. 

224.  Carrano,  Francesco.     Cenni  biografici   del  Generale 

Guglielmo  Pepe.     Estratti  dai  N.  102,  103  e  104  dal 
Giornale  La  Liberia  Italiana. 

[Torino?    1856?]      i2mo. 

Slight  sketch  amplified  in  the  following  : 

225.  Carrano,  Francesco.     Vita  di  Guglielmo  Pepe. 

Torino,  1857.     ^^°' 

Useful ;  appended  are  a  number  of  documents. 

226.  Carte  segrete  della  polizia  austriaca  in  Italia  estratte  dal- 

r  Archivio  di  Venezia  e  pubblicate  per  commissione  di 
D.  Manin,  18 14- 1848. 

Capolago,  1 85 1.     3  vols.     8vo. 

Important  but  of  uncertain  authority,  being  a  collection 
of  police  reports. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  187 

Section  V. — continued 

227.  Castlereagh,  Lord.     Correspondence,  despatches,  and 

other  papers  of  Viscount  Castlereagh,  second  Marquess 
of  Londonderry. 

London,  1 851-1853.     12  vols.     8vo. 
Important  collection, 

228.  [Chodzko,  J.  L.  B.].     Recueil  des  traites,  conventions 

et  actes  diplomatiques  concernant  TAutriche  et  I'ltalie. 

Paris,  1859.     ^v°' 

Convenient  to  use  with  Martens  and  de  Cussy. 

229.  Church,  E.  M.     Chapters  in  an  adventurous  life  ;  Sir 

Richard  Church  in  Italy  and  Greece. 

London,  1895.     8vo. 

Untrustworthy ;  the  material  from  which  this  book 
has  been  elaborated  has  been  turned  to  better  and 
sounder  use  by  S.  Lane  Poole.     See  255. 

230.  CoLLETTA,   PiETRO.      Storia    del    reame    di   Napoli   dal 

1734  sino  al  1825.  Paris,  1835.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Numerous  other  editions ;  that  by  Horner^  London^ 
1858,  is  referred  to  in  the  text.  Few  works  of 
equal  importance  and  reputation  are  so  untrustworthy^ 
often  deliberately  so, 

231.  CoLLETTA,  Pietro.     Opere  inedite  e  rare. 

Napoli,  1 861,  1862.     2  vols.     i2mo. 

Including :    a,    Memoria    militare    sulla    campagna 

d^  It  alia  y  181 5  ;   b,  Aneddoti  piu  notabili  della  mia 

vita;    c,    Documenti  relativi  alia  vita;    and  other 

works.     See  Section  IF. 

The  same  untrustworthiness  detracts  from  all  Colletta^s 

work. 

CoNSALVi.     See  234. 

232.  Coppi,  A.     Annali  d'  Italia  dal  1750  sino  ai  giorni  nostri. 

Este,  1 838-1 840.     16  vols.     i6mo. 

Well-known  work  by  a  clerical  writer. 


i88  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  V. — continued 

233.  Craven,    Richard    Keppel.      A    tour    through    the 

southern  provinces  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  to 
which  is  subjoined  a  sketch  of  the  immediate  circum- 
stances attending  the  late  revolution. 

London,  182 1.     8vo. 
Useful  for  occasional  details. 

234.  Cretineau-Jolly,  J.     Memoires  du  Cardinal  Consalvi. 

Paris,  1896.     4to. 

Disappointing  Memoirs  ;  of  slight  use  for  the  present 
subject. 

235.  Dumas,  Alexandre.     I  Borboni  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1863.     10  vols.     8vo. 

Gives  a  number  of  garbled  documents ;  otherwise 
worthless.  Dumas^  other  quasi-historical  works,  such 
as  the  Ultimi  momenti  di  Gioacchino  Murat,  need 
not  be  specified. 

Duval,  Amaury.     See  250. 

236.  Farini,  L.   G.      Storia   d'  Italia   dair  anno  18 14  sino 

a'  nostri  giorni.        Torino,  1854-1859.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Filangieri.     See  Ravaschieri. 

237.  Frost,  T.     The  secret  societies  of  the  European  revolu- 

tion. London,  1876.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Sketchily  written  for  general  readers. 

238.  G.  C.  G.     Itinerario  da  Napoli  a  Lecce  e  nella  provincia 

di  Terra  d'  Otranto  nell'  anno  1818. 

Napoli,  1 82 1.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Unimportant ;  social  and  economic  aspects. 

G.  D.  F.      See  247. 

23 8 A.  GiAMPAOLO,  S.  C.     Le  memorie  dei  miei  tempi. 

Napoli,  1874.     8vo. 

Of  very  slight  historical  value. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  189 

Section  V. — continued 

239.  [GuiLLAUME,  F.].     Quinze  annees  d'un  proscrit. 

Paris,  1835.     4  vols.     8vo. 

Published  under  pseudonym  of  Vaudoncourt. 

240.  Heckethorn,  Charles  William.     The  secret  societies 

of  all  ages  and  countries. 

London,  1875.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Uncritical  and  loosely  put  together. 

241.  Hervey  Saint   Denys,  Marquis   d'.     Histoire  de  la 

revolution  dans  les  Deux  Siciles  depuis  1793. 

Paris,  1858.     8vo. 

242.  Horner,  Susan.     A  century  of  despotism  in  Naples  and 

Sicily.  Edinburgh,  i860.      i2mo. 

Unimportant, 

243.  L...,  F.  VON.     Geschichte  der  neapolitanischen  Kriege 

bis  auf  die  neueste  Zeit.  Berol.  1821.     8vo. 

244.  La  Farina,  Giuseppe.    Storia  d'  Italia  dal  1815  al  1850. 

Torino,  1851.     6  vols.     8vo. 

245.  Lancellotti,  Carme.     Memoires  historiques   de  Fer- 

dinand L,  roi  des  Deux  Siciles. 

Florence,  1829.     8vo. 

Translation  from   Italian    original   {Napoli,    1827). 
Bourbonist  production  ;  unimportant. 

246.  Laurent  de  l'Ardeche.      Storia  di  Napoli  illustrata 

da  O.  Vernet,  voltata  in  italiano  da  A.  Lissoni,  e  da 
esso  cresciuta  delle  imprese  militari  delle  soldatesche 
italiane.  Torino,  1839.     8vo. 

Translated  from  the  French. 

247.  [Le  Comte,  H.  J.].     Memoires   d'un  ancien  capitaine 

italien  sur  les  guerres  et  les  intrigues  d'ltalie  de  1806  a 
1 82 1,     Trad,  de  Tltalien  par  Tauteur  lui-meme. 

Paris,  1845.     8vo. 
Published  under  the  initials  G.  D.  F. 


190  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  V. — continued 

248.  M.  L.  R.     Saggio  politico  su  la  popolazione  e  le  pubbliche 

contribuzioni  del  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie  al  di  qua  del 
Faro.  Napoli,  1834.     8vo. 

Of  slight  authority,  occasionally  supplements  Bianchini 

usefully. 

Manin.     See  226. 

249.  Martens  et  de  Cussy.      Recueil,  manuel  et  pratique 

de  traites,  conventions  et  autres  actes  diplomatiques  sur 
lesquels  sont  etablis  les  relations  et  ies  rapports  existant 
aujourd'hui  entre  les  divers  etats  et  souverains  du  globe, 
depuis  Tannee  1760  jusqu'a  Tepoque  actuelle. 

Leipzig,  1 846- 1 85 7.     7  vols.     8vo. 

250.  Metternich,  Prince.    Memoirs  of  Prince  Metternich. 

London,  1880.     5  vols.     8vo. 
Indispensable  work  for  the  period, 

251.  Moris ANi,  Cesare.       Ricordi    biografici    del    generale 

Florestano  Pepe. 

Reggio  di  Calabria,  1892.     8vo. 
Blight, 

252.  Nicola,  Carlo  De.       Diario  napoletano  dal  1798  al 

1825. 

Archivio  storico  napoletano,  beginning  in  Fart  II.  for 
1899,  unfinished.  Invaluable  for  life  of  Naples 
during  the  period,  but  more  important  for  early  than 
late  years. 

253.  Orloff,  Comte  Gregor.     M^moires  historiques,  poli- 

tiques  et  litteraires  sur  le  royaume  de  Naples,  publics 
avec  des  notes  et  additions  par  Amaury  Duval. 

Paris,  1821.     5  vols.     8vo. 

Most  useful  of  the  contemporary  Memoirs. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  191 

Section  V. — continued 

254.  Palmieri,    Nicolo.      Saggio    storico   e    politico    sulla 

costituzione  del  regno  di  Sicilia  infino  al   i8i6,  con  un 

appendice  sulla  rivoluzione  del   1820.     Opera  postuma 

di  Nicolo  Palmieri,  con  una  introduzione  e  annotazioni 

di  anonimo.  Losanna,  1847.     ^^o- 

Largely  drawn  from  Balsamo,  useful  for  the  relations 

between     Sicily     and    Naples    during    the    French 

conquest. 

255.  Palmieri  de  Micciche,  Michel.     Moeurs  de  la  cour 

et  des  peuples  des  Deux  Siciles. 

Paris,  1837.     8vo. 

256.  Palmieri  de  Micciche,  Michel.     Pensees  et  souvenirs 

historiques  et  contemporains  suivis  d'un  essai  sur  la 
tragedie  ancienne  et  moderne  et  de  quelques  aper^us 
politiques.  Paris,  1830.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Scandalous    but    useful    Memoirs    of   an    eccentric 
Sicilian  liberal. 

257.  Pepe,   Guglielmo.      Memoirs  of  General  Pepe,  com- 

prising the  principal  military  and  political  events  of 
modern  Italy,  written  by  himself. 

London,  1896.     3  vols.     8vo. 
Indispensable^  but  unreliable. 

258.  Poole,  S.  Lane.     Sir  Richard  Church,  Commander-in- 

chief  of  the  Greeks  in  the  War  of  Independence. 

London,  1890.     8vo. 

Short   but   useful  narrative  covering  Church's  pro- 
ceedings in  Italy. 

259.  Radowski,  Count.     Cosi  memorabili  antichi  e  moderni 

del  regno  di  Napoli  ricavati  dagli  autograft  del  fu  Conte 
Radowski.     Seconda  edizione  notabilmente  accresciuta. 

Coblentz,  1842.     8vo. 
Memoirs  of  some  value  ^  especially  for  1 820-1 821. 


192  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  V. — continued 

260.  Ravaschieri,  Teresa.      II  generale  Carlo  Filangieri, 

Principe  di  Satriano  e  Duca  di  Taormina. 

Milano,  1902.  8vo. 
Extremely  unreliable  recollections  of  Filangieri.  Of 
more  value  for  the  later  events  of  his  life  than  for  the 
Napoleonic  period. 

261.  Reuchlin,  Herman.      Geschichte  Italiens  von  Griin- 

dung  der  regierenden  Dynastien  bis  auf  die  Gegenwart. 
Leipzig,  1859.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Blight  for  what  precedes  1846. 

262.  Reuchlin,  Herman.     Geschichte  Neapels  vi^ahrend  der 

letzten  siebzig  Jahre  dargestellt  am  Leben  der  Generale 
Florestan  und  Wilhelm  Pepe. 

Nordlingen,  1862.     8vo. 
Of  no  great  importance, 

263.  RicciARDi,    F.    A.      Scritti    e    documenti    varii    di    F. 

Ricciardi,  preceduti  della  sua  vita  scritta  da  suo  figlio 
Giuseppe  e  da  un  introduzione  di  L.  Tarantini. 

Napoli,  1873.     8vo. 

264.  RiviELLO,  Raffaele.     Cronaca  Potentina  dal   1799  al 

1882.  Potenza,  1888.     8vo. 

Of  little  more  than  local  importance. 

265.  Romeo,  Capitano  Francesco.     Lo  specchio  del  disin- 

ganno  presentato  a  sua  Maesta  Siciliana,  alia  Gran 
Brettagna,  ed  a'  Sovrani  Alleati  ;  riflettente  de'  fatti 
politici  della  maggiore  importanza,  sinora  non  pubblicati. 

Londra,  1820.  8vo. 
Also  an  English  trans,  in  same  year.  Work  of  a 
secret  agent  of  Bentinck's.  May  rank  with  Canosa^s 
Piffari  as  the  most  curious  and  difficult  of  the  pamphlets 
of  the  period.      Of  chief  interest  for  Mary  Caroline. 

266.  RossETTi,  William  Michael.     Gabriele  Rossetti :    a 

versified  autobiography.  Translated  and  supplemented 
by  William  Michael  Rossetti.         London,  1902.     8vo. 

Worthless  for  facts  unrelated  to  Rossetti. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  193 

Section  V. — continued 

267.  Saint  Albin,  A.  de.    Les  Francs-Masons  et  les  societes 

secretes,  suivi  des  actes  apostoliques  des  souverains 
pontifes  Clement  XII.,  Benoit  XIV.,  Pie  VII., 
L6on  XII.,  et  Pie  IX.  Paris,  1867.     8vo. 

268.  Serristori,  Count  L.     Statistica  del  regno  delle  Due 

Sicilie  (Dominii  di  qua  del  Faro).     Firenze,  1839.    4to. 
Excellent  statistical  work, 

Tarantini.     See  262. 

269.  Thiers,  Adolphe.    Histoire  du  Consulat  et  de  I'Empire 

faisant  suite  a  I'histoire  de  la  revolution  fran^aise. 

Paris,  1845.     21  vols.     8vo. 

270.  TiVARONi,  Carlo.    L'  Italia  durante  il  dominio  francese. 

L'  Italia  durante  il  dominio  austriaco. 

Torino,  1894.     5  vols.     i2mo. 

271.  Ulloa,  PiETRO  Cala.     Intomo  alia  storia  del  reame  di 

Napoli  di  Pietro  Colletta.     Annotamenti. 

Napoli,  1877.     8vo. 
Of  some  use,  but  not  to  be  trusted, 

272.  Vannucci,  Atto.    I  martiri  della  liberta  italiana  dal  1794 

al  1848  J  memorie  raccolte.  Milano,  1876.     i6mo. 

First   edition,    Firenze,   1848,   contains  less   matter. 
Popular  work. 

Vaudoncourt.     See  239. 

273.  Vespoli,  G.  F.     Saggio  politico  s.  rivoluzioni  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1824.     4to» 
Unimportant^ 

274.  Vita  politica    del    Cavaliere    D.   Luigi    de'    Medici    gia 

Ministro   Consigliere    di    Stato  del   Regno   delle   Due 

Sicilie.  Parigi,  1832.     8vo. 
Of  little  authority  or  use. 

VOL.  II  O 


194  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

SECTION   VI 

Works  relating  to  the  Period  1805-18 15 

Alcala.     See  334. 

275.  B.,  V.  C.  DE.     Campagne  des  Autrichiens  centre  Murat 

en  1 8 15.  Bruxelles,  1821.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Bazin.     See  347. 

276.  Beauchamp,  Alphonse  de.     Catastrophe  de  Murat,  ou 

recit  de  la  derniere  revolution  de  Naples,  seconde 
edition  revue  et  augmentee  de  la  relation  historique  du 
sejour  de  Murat  a  Toulon  et  en  Corse  ;  de  sa  tentative 
en  Calabre  ;  de  son  arrestation  et  de  sa  mort  j  avec 
les  pieces  justificatives.  Versailles,  18 15.     8vo. 

Giving  all  the  best-known  documents  ;  not  reliable. 

277.  [Beauchamp,  Alphonse    de].      Memoires  de  Fouch6, 

Ministre  de  la  Police  generale. 

Paris,  1824.     2  vols.     8vo. 

English  trans.,  London,  1825.      Written  on  Touches 
notes,  but  quite  untrustworthy, 

278.  Belliard,  Comte.     Memoires  du  Comte  Belliard  ecrits 

par  lui-meme,  recueillis  et  mis  en  ordre  par  A.  Vinet. 
Bruxelles,  1842.     3  vols.     i2mo. 
First  volume  useful  for  Murat. 

279.  Bianco,  Giuseppe.      La  Sicilia  durante  P  occupazione 

Inglese  (1806-18 15).  Palermo.     4to.     1902. 

Useful  and  based  on  much  unpublished  material  drawn 
from  the  archives  of  Palermo  and  Messina, 

280.  Bianco,    N.      Gli    ultimi    avvenimenti    del    regno    di 

Gioacchino  Murat  (edita  per  cura  di  Ireneo  Del  Zio). 

Melfi,  1880.  8vo. 
Memoirs  of  an  officer  who  served  in  the  campaigns  of 
1 8 1 4,  1 8 1 5  ;  of  slight  importance. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  195 

Section  VL — continued 

281.  Blaquiere,  E.  Letters  from  the  Mediterranean,  con- 
taining a  civil  and  political  account  of  Sicily,  Tripoli, 
Tunis,  and  Malta ;  with  biographical  sketches,  anec- 
dotes, and  observations  illustrative  of  the  present  state 
of  those  countries  and  their  relative  situation  with  respect 
to  the  British  Empire. 

London,  18 13.     2  vols.     8vo. 
A  few  useful  details  on  Anglo- Sicilian  relations. 

1%1.  Bolletino  delle  sentenze  emanate  dalla  suprema  Com- 
missione  per  le  liti  fra  i  gia  Baroni  ed  i  Comuni. 

Bee  next  number, 

283.  Supplimento  del  Bolletino  della  Commissione  feudale. 

Napoli,  1 808-1 859.     72  vols.     8vo. 
Bee  next  number. 

284.  BuUetino  delle  ordinanze  de'  commissarii  repartitori  de' 

demanii  ex  feudali  e  comunali  nelle  province  dei 
RR.DD.  al  di  qua  del  Faro.  In  appendice  degli  atti 
eversivi  della  feudalita. 

Napoli,  1 858- 1 867.  24  vols.  8vo. 
(Series  unfinished.) 
The  three  publications  above  contain  the  records  of  the 
Feudal  Commission.  Vol.  Ixxii.  is  the  best  working 
key  to  the  whole,  and  to  the  five  thousand  bundles  of 
MSS.  in  the  Archives  at  Naples  on  which  the  volumes 
are  founded.  The  whole  forms  a  remarkable  concen- 
trated mass  of  matter  relating  to  the  feudal  sptem. 

BoNiOTTi.     See  419. 

285.  BouLAY  DE  LA  Meurthe,  Comte.     Quclqucs  lettrcs  de 

Marie  Caroline.  Revue  d'hist.  diplom.     Vol.  ii. 

Useful  for  the  year  1805. 

286.  Boulger,  Demetrius  C.     Lord  William  Bentinclc. 

Oxford,  1892.     i2mo. 

Unimportant  for  Mediterranean  affairs. 


196  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

287.  Browning,  Oscar.    Hugh  Elliot  at  Naples,  1 803-1806. 

Eng.  Hist.  Review.     Vol.  iv. 

Of  some  utility. 

288.  Browning,  Oscar.     Queen  Caroline  of  Naples. 

Eng.  Hist.  Review.     Vol.  ii. 

Probably  the  best  account  of  the  English  rule  in 
Sicily. 

289.  BuNBURY,  Lieutenant-General  Sir  Henry.    Narra- 

tives of  some  passages  in  the  great  war  with  France 
from  1799  to  1 8 10.  London,  1854.     8vo. 

Generally  referred  to  as^  Bunbury^  Military  Trans- 
actions. Fairly  accurate  and  useful  for  the  British 
operations^  1 8 o  5  - 1 8 1  o. 

290.  Cant^,  Cesare.     Murat  e  Beauharnais  o  F  Italia  nel 

1 8 13-18 14.  Rivista  universale,  1869.     No.  9. 

291.  Capialbi,    U.     La    fine    di    un    re.     Murat   al    Pizzo. 

(Testimonianze  inedite.)         Monteleone,  1894.     8vo. 

292.  Carabelli,  Ignazio.     I  calluniatori  smascherati,  ossia 

confutazione  de'  libelli  pubblicati  dair  ex  generale 
Colletta  e  dal  sedicente  General  Franceschetti  sulla 
catastrofe  di  Murat  nel  1815.  Italia,  1826.      i2mo. 

Violent  and  loose ;  CarabelWs  good  defence  against 
Colletta  is  much  over-stated. 

293.  Castagna,  N.    Delia  soUevazione  d'  Abbruzzo  nelP  anno 

1 8 14.     Memorie  storiche.  Aquila,  1875.      i2mo. 

294.  Causes    politiques    c61ebres    du    xix^.  siecle  ;    proces    de 

Murat  roi  de  Naples.  Paris,  1827.     4^^' 

295.  [Cavaignac,  Mme.].      Les   memoires   d'une    inconnue 

publics  sur  le  manuscrit  original,  1 780-18 16. 

Paris,  1894.  8vo. 
Verbose  record^  with  some  interesting  details  for 
Murafs  reign. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  197 

Section  VI. — continued 

296.  CiccoTTi,    L.      II    brigantaggio   in    Basilicata   da    Fra 

Diavolo  al  1811.  Napoli,  1873.     ^^o. 

297.  CocKBURN,    Lieut.-Gen.      A    voyage    to    Cadiz    and 

Gibraltar,  up  the  Mediterranean  to  Sicily  and  Malta  in 
1 810  and  II.  Including  a  description  of  Sicily  and  the 
Lipari  islands  and  an  excursion  in  Portugal. 

London,  1815.     8vo. 
A  few  interesting  details  for  military  matters  in  1810. 

298.  Codice  di  commercio  dell'  Impero  Francese  adottato  nel 

regno  di  Napoli  per  ordine  di  S.  M.  Edizione  originale 
e  sola  uffiziale.  Napoli,  1809.     Svo. 

299.  Codice  penale  tradotto  d'  ordine  di  Sua  Maesta  il  re  delle 

Due  Sicilie  per  uso  de'  suoi  stati.  Edizione  originale 
e  sola  uffiziale.  Napoli,  181 2.     8vo. 

300.  CoLANGELi,    F.    A.      Quadro    dell'    attuale    stato    ed 

amministrazione  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1809.     ^vo. 

301.  CoLANGELi,   F.  A.     Ordine   di   giudizii   civili   giusta  il 

testo  de'  codici  di  Proced.  Civile,  Napoleone,  e  di 
commercio.  Napoli,  1809.     2  vols.     8vo. 


302.  CoLLiNGV^ooD,  G.  L.  N.  A  selection  from  the  public 
and  private  correspondence  of  Vice -Admiral  Lord 
ColHngwood,  interspersed  with  Memoirs  of  his  life. 

London,  1828.     3  vols.     Svo. 

Valuable  for    British    Mediterranean  policy^    1805- 
1810. 

CoNDOLEO.     See  334. 


198  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

303.  CoNSALVi,     Cardinal.      Corrispondenza    inedita     dei 

Cardinali  Consalvi  e  Pacca  nel  tempo  del  Congresso  di 
Vienna  (1814-1815)  ricavata  dall'  archivio  secreto 
Vaticano  corredata  di  sommarii  e  note  preceduta  da  uno 
studio  storico  sugli  stati  d'  Europa  nel  tempo  dell'  im- 
pero  napoleonico  e  sul  nuovo  assestamento  europeo  e 
da  un  diario  inedito  del  Mse.  di  San  Marzano.  (Edited 
by  P.  Ilario  Rinieri.)  Torino,  1903.     8vo. 

Useful   for     Metternich^s    policy    and    the     Papal 

Neapolitan  negotiations. 

304.  Copia  delle  lettere  originali  del  signor  tenente  generale 

Manhes  che  dimostrano  la  parte  che  ha  avuto  1'  ajutante 
generale  Janelli  nella  distruzione  del  brigantaggio  delle 
Due  Calabrie  dal  i  Ottobre  18 10  fino  a  tutto  Marzo 
181 1.  [Napoli,  181 1.]     4to. 

Useful  for  Manhes  and  Calabria. 

305.  Coppi,  A.     Saggio  sulle  rivoluzioni  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Roma,  1 81 5.     8vo. 

Short  sketch  from  a  Papal  point  of  view, 

CoRRACiNi.     See  356. 

306.  CoRRiDORE,  F.     Per  il  soggiorno  del  Murat  in  Corsica. 

Torino,  1899.     8vo. 

Written  on  a  netuly  found  proclamation  of  Verrieres 
that  adds  nothing  of  any  importance  to  the  subject. 

307.  Courier,  Paul  Louis.     Memoires,  correspondance  et 

opuscules  in^dits.  Paris,  1828.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Vol.  i.  contains  much  interesting  matter  for  the  French 
military  operations  in  Naples. 

308.  Cresceri,  Baron.     Memorie  segrete   del  Gabinetto  di 

Napoli  e  di  Sicilia.  Sitzungsberichte  der  Kais. 
Akademie  der  Wissenschaften.  1892.    Vol.  cxxvii. 

Scurrilous  Memoirs  ;  chiefly  valuable  owing  to  Hei- 
fer fs  learned  annotations. 


APP.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  199 

Section  VI. — continued 

309.  Davidson,  Major.     History  and  services  of  the  78th 

Highlanders  (Ross-shire  BufFs),  1 793-1 881  ;  compiled 
from  the  manuscripts  of  the  late  Major  Colin  Mackenzie 
and  official  and  other  sources. 

London,  1901.     2  vols.     410. 
A  few  details  on  Maida, 

310.  D'   Ayala,   Mariano.     Memoria   storico-militare    dal 

I734ali8i5.  Napoli,  1835.     i2mo. 

Of  slight  importance  ;  unauthoritative, 

311.  Decisione  della  Corte  speciale  di  Abbruzzo. 

Aquila,  1 8 14.     4to. 

312.  Dedem,  General   de.     Un  general  Hollandais  sous  le 

premier  Empire.  Memoires  du  general  Bon.  de  Dedem 
de  Gelder,  1 774-1825.  Paris,  1 900.     8vo. 

Useful  for  facts  that  came  under  the  writer'*  s  observa- 
tion, otherwise  untrustworthy, 

313.  Della  Sicilia  e  dei  suoi  rapporti  coll*  Inghilterra  all'  epoca 

della  costituzione  del  181 2.  Palermo,  1848.     8vo. 

Del  Zio.     See  280. 

314.  Derniere  campagne  de  Parm^e  franco-italienne  en  1813 

et  1 8 14,  suivi  de  memoires  secrets  sur  la  revolution  de 
Milan.  Paris,  1815.     8vo. 

315.  Desvernois,    Baron.     Memoires    du    General    Baron 

Desvernois.  Paris,  1898.     8vo. 

Mons.  Dufourc((s  careful  editing  cannot  redeem  these 
hopelessly  inaccurate  Memoirs. 

316.  Du  Casse,  a.     Memoires  et  correspondance  politique  et 

militaire  du  Roi  Joseph,  publics,  annotes,  et  mis  en 
ordre.  Paris,  1854.     ^^  vols.     8vo. 

Copious  collection,  of  the  greatest  value  for  the  present 
subject;  quoted  as  Joseph,  Correspondence. 


200  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

317.  Du  Casse,  a.     Memoires  et  correspondance  politique  et 

militaire  du  Prince  Eugene. 

Paris,  i860.      10  vols.     8vo. 

Valuable  for  the  campaign  ^1814. 

318.  DuFOURCQ,  Albert.     Murat   et   la   question   de   I'unite 

Italienne  en  18 15.     Melanges  cT archeologie  et  cThtstoire^ 
1898. 

Careful  study  y  and  useful. 

319.  Dumas,  Lieut.-Genj&ral  Comte  Mathieu.    Souvenirs 

du    Lieutenant    General    Comte    Mathieu    Dumas    de 
1770  a  1836,  publics  par  son  fils. 

Paris,  1839.     3  vols.     8vo. 
Useful  for  fosepBs  reign  in  Naples, 

320.  Dumas,  Lieut.-General  Comte  Mathieu.     Precis  des 

evenemens     militaires,    ou    essais    historiques    sur    les 
campagnes  de  1799  a  18 14. 

Paris,  1826.     19  vols.     8vo. 

Valuable  though  incomplete  work  ;  for  present  subject 
see  vols.  xv.  and  xix. 

211  *  DuRET  DE  Tavel.  S6jour  d'un  officier  fran^ais  en 
Calabre,  ou  lettres  propres  a  faire  connaitre  I'^tat  ancien 
et  moderne  de  la  Calabre,  le  caractere,  les  moeurs  de  ses 
habitants,  etc.  Paris,  1820.     8vo. 

In  English,  London,  1822  and  1832.     Of  some  value. 

Eugene,  Prince.     See  ^ij- 

322.  Eustace,  Rev.  J.  C.     A  classical   tour  through  Italy. 

An.  MDCCCii.  London,  1 813.     4  vols.     8vo. 

Popular  but  overrated  work  ;  for  social  aspects  ;   un- 
important. 

Fleischmann.     See  377. 

323.  Fontanarosa,    V.     La    marina    napoletana    nel    1809 

(Ricerche  e  documenti).  Napoli,  1897.     ^^^• 

Of  slight  importance. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  201 

Section  VI. — continued 

324.  FoNTANAROSA,  V.     Studt  sul  dccennio  francese  in  Napoli 

(1806-18 1 5).  Napoli,  1 90 1.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

FoucHJE.     See  277. 

325.  Franceschetti,    general   D.   C.     Memoires   sur   les 

evenements  qui  ont  precede  la  mort  de  Joachim  I^r.^  Roi 
des  Deux  Siciles,  par  Franceschetti,  ex-general,  sortant 
du  service  de  Naples ;  suivi  de  la  correspondance  privee 
de  ce  general  avec  la  reine,  Comtesse  de  Lipano  [sic). 

Paris,  1826.  8vo. 
Important  but  untrustworthy  y  published  just  before 
the  trial  of  Franceschetti'' s  action  against  Murat*s 
executors  to  recover  money. 

326.  Franceschetti,    General    D.    C.      Supplement    aux 

Memoires  historiques  sur  la  mort  de  Joachim  Napoleon 
roi  de  Naples,  ou  reponse  a  M.  Napoleon  Louis 
Bonaparte.  Paris,  1829.     ^^o. 

See  preceding    number;    written   after  failure    of 

Franceschetti^ s  action. 

327.  FoRTUNATO,  G.     Fra  Diavolo.         Roma,  1881.     i2mo. 

328.  G...,  M.  DE.     Notice  historique  sur  M.   le    lieutenant 

general  Charles  Antoine  Comte  Manhes,  extraite  en 
grande  partie  des  Archives  du  ministere  de  la  guerre  de 
France,  et  de  la  chancellerie  de  la  guerre  a  Naples. 

Paris,  1 81 7.     8vo. 

Perhaps    by    Adjutant-General    Galdemard.      Slight 

and  sketchy. 

Galdemard.     See  328. 

329.  Gallo,  Di.     Memorie. 

Archivio  storico  per  le  prov.  napolet.  1888,  vol.  xiii. 

Disappointing  Memoirs, 


202  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

330.  Gallois,  Leonard.     Histoire  de  Joachim  Murat. 

Paris,  1828.     8vo. 
Principal  work  of  the  sort,  useful  but  unreliable. 

331.  Galt,  John.     Voyages  and  travels   in  the  years  1809, 

1810,  and  181 1  ;  containing  statistical,  commercial,  and 
miscellaneous  observations  on  Gibraltar,  Sardinia,  Sicily, 
Malta,  Serigo,  and  Turkey.  London,  1812.     4to. 

A  few  interesting  details^  but  little  of  political  im- 
portance. 

332.  Galvani,  Charles.     M^moires  sur  les  evenemens  qui 

ont  precede  la  mort  de  Joachim  Napoleon  roi  des  Deux 
Siciles.  Paris,  1843.     ^^°- 

Work  of  an  eye-witness. 

333.  Galvani,  Charles.     Nouveaux   memoires   sur   la   fin 

tragique  de  Joach.  Murat  roi  de  Naples,  illustr^s  de 
deux  planches  et  d'une  carte  militaire  de  I'ltalie. 

Paris,  1850.     8vo. 

334.  Gasparri,    G.     La   fine    di    un   re.     Murat   al    Pizzo 

(Testimonianze  inedite.)       Monteleone,  1894.     i2mo. 

Valuable  for  the  contemporary  accounts  of  Condoleo 
and  Alcala. 

Gelder.     See  ^ii. 

335.  Gioacchino  Murat  e  il  suo  patrimonio  privato. 

Napoli,  1863.     8vo. 

336.  Gioacchino  Murat  o  la  storia  del  Reame  di  Napoli  dal 

1800  all  81 5.  Milano,  1839.     2  vols.     i2mo. 

337.  [GoDiN,  A.  J.  L.].     Vie  et  aventures  de  Joachim  Murat 

depuis  sa  naissance  jusqu*a  sa  mort. 

Paris,  181 7.     i2mo. 

Scurrilous  and  not  valuable. 

338.  Greco,  Luigi  Maria.     Annali  di  citeriore  Calabria  dal 

i8o6ali8ii.  Cosenza,  1872.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Voluminous,  but  the  best  authority  on  the  subject. 


APP.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  203 

Section  VI. — continued 

339.  Greco,  Luigi  Maria.     Storica  narrazione  intorno  agli 

assalti  ed  alio  assedio  de'  Frances i  contro  Amantea  dal 
1806  al  1807.  Cosenza,  1844.     8vo. 

Mostly  incorporated  in  the  Annalf. 

340.  Greco,  Luigi  Maria.    Intorno  al  tentativo  de'  Carbonari 

nel  1 813,  storica  narrazione.  Cosenza,  1866.     8vo. 

34OA.  GuARDiONE,  F.     Gioacchino  Murat  in  Italia. 

Palermo,  1899.     i6mo. 
Unimportant. 

341.  [GuiLLAUME,  F.  A.].     Histoire  des  campagnes  d'ltalie 

en  1 8 13  et  18 14  avec  un  atlas  militaire. 

Londres,  181 7.     2  vols.     4to. 
Published  under  pseudonym  of  Faudonccurt. 

GuRWOOD.     See  428. 

342.  Hauteroche,  R.  B.  d'.     Vie  militaire  en  Calabre  1806- 

1809.  Paris  [1890  ?].     i2mo. 

Privately  printed ;  to  judge  from  an  article  of  Mons, 
Sorely  of  no  importance. 

343.  Helfert,  Baron   von.     Joachim  Murat,  seine  letzten 

Kampfe  und  sein  Ende.  Mit  Beniitzung  von  Schrift- 
stiicken  des  K.  K.  Haus-,  Hof-  und  Staats-Archivs. 

Wien,  1878.     8vo. 

Excellent  work  written  on  the  original  Austrian 
dispatches ;  useful  corrective  for  the  Italian  accounts 
./1813-1815. 

344.  Helfert,  Baron  von.     Konigin  Karolina  von  Neapel 

und  Sicilien  im  Kampfe  %'^%'^n  die  franzosische  Welt- 
herrschaft,  1790- 1814.  Mit  Beniitzung  von  Schrift- 
stucken  des  K.  K.  Haus-,  Hof-  und  Staats-Archivs. 

Wien,  1878.     8vo. 
See  next  number. 


204  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

345.  Helfert,  Baron  von.     Maria  Karolina  von  Oesterreich 

Konigin  von  Neapel  und  Sicilien.  Anklagen  und  Ver- 
theidigung  mit  Beniitzung  von  Schriftstiicken  des  K. 
K.  Haus-,  Hof-  und  Staats-Archivs. 

Wien,  1884.  8vo. 
An  avowed  Ehrenrettung,  or  apology,  of  Mary 
Caroline  i  yet  learned,  temperate,  and  always  worthy 
of  close  attention.  Baron  Helferfs  work  on  modern 
Italy,  taken  as  a  whole,  stands  in  a  class  by  itself. 

346.  Helfert,  Baron  von.     Ueber  den  Ursprung  der  Car- 

bonari. 

Beil.  z.  Wiener  Ahendpost  nr.  223  v.  28  Sept.  1877. 

Arguing  the  Calabrian  origin  of  the  Carbonari. 

Helfert.     See  308. 

347.  Histoire  des  societes  secretes  de  Parmee  et  des  conspira- 

tions militaires  qui  ont  eu  pour  objet  la  destruction  du 
gouvernement  de  Bonaparte.  Paris,  1815.     8vo. 

Probably  by  Nodier,  though  Querard  ascribes  it  to 
Vincent  Lombard,  and  according  to  Barbier,  Rigomer- 
Didier,  Bazin,  and  Lemare  collaborated.  Generally 
fanciful,  but  with  some  substratum  of  fact. 

348.  Houssaye,   Henri.      1815.    La    premiere   restauration. 

Le  retour  de  File  d'Elbe.     Les  Cent  Jours. 

Paris,  1899.      i2mo. 
A  few  details  on  Murat  in  1 8 1 5 . 

348A.  Hugo,  Joseph  Leopold  Sigisbert  Comte.    Memoires. 

Paris,  1823.     3  vols.     i2mo. 

C ampaigning  in  Naples  ;  unreliable. 

349.  Imbert  de  Saint  Amand.     Marie  Amelie  et  la  Cour 

de  Palerme,  1806-18 14.  Paris,  1891.     8vo. 

Sketchy. 

Inconnue.     See  295. 


App.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  205 

Section  VI. — continued 

350.  Indice  de'  Diritti  e  prestazioni  che  i  communi  del  regno 

di  Napoli  hanno  dedotto  di  esigersi  dagli  ex-baroni,  e 
de'  quali  ha  giudicato  la  Commissione  feudale. 

Napolij  1 81 2.     8vo. 

Catalogue  of  feudal  rights  abolished  by  the   Feudal 

Commission. 

351.  Jeaffreson,  J.  C.     The   Queen  of  Naples  and   Lord 

Nelson  ;  an  historical  biography  based  on  MSS.  in  the 
British  Museum,  and  on  letters  and  other  documents 
preserved  among  the  Morrison  MSS. 

London,  1889.  2  vols.  8vo. 
Controversial  and  intemperate.  Useful  but  untrust- 
worthy^ and  written  on  insufficient  materials.  Follows 
Mary  Caroline  to  her  death. 

352.  Johnston,  R.  M.     Lord  William  Bentinck  and  Murat. 

Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  xix. 

To  be  read  with  M.  JVeiPs  work  on  the  same  subject. 
See  426. 

Joseph,  King.     See  316. 

353.  Journal  of  an   officer  in   the    King's  German   Legion  ; 

comprising  an  account  of  his  campaigns  and  adventures 
in  England,  Ireland,  Denmark,  Portugal,  Spain,  Malta, 
Sicily,  and  Italy.  London,  1827.      i2mo. 

Koch.     See  373. 

Koch,  de.     See  408. 

354.  Kotzebue,  Augustus  von.     Travels   through   Italy  in 

the  years  1804  and  1805. 

London,  1806.     4  vols.     i2mo. 

Translation  from   German  original.      Of  slight  im- 
portance for  social  aspects. 

355.  L.  D....     Journal  historique  sur  la  campagne  du  Prince 

Eugene  en  ItaHe  pendant  les  annees  1813  et  181 4. 
Par  L.  D...  capitaine  attache  a  I'etat  major  du  Prince. 

Paris,  181 7.     8vo. 


2o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

356.  La  Folie,  C.  J.     Histoire  de  I'administration  du  royaume 

d'ltalie  pendant  la  domination  fran^aise,  prec^dee  d*un 
index  chronologique  des  principaux  ev^nements  con- 
cernant  I'ltalie  depuis  1792  jusqu'en  18 14  et  d'un 
catalogue  alphabetique  des  Italiens  et  des  Fran^ais  au 
service  de  ce  royaume.  Paris,  1823.     8vo. 

Published  under  pseudonym  of  Corr acini  ;  new  edition 

under  following  title : 

357.  La    Folie,  C.   J.     M^moires    sur  la    Cour   du  Prince 

Eugene  et  sur  le  royaume  d'ltalie  pendant  la  domina- 
tion de  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  par  un  Fran^ais  attache  a 
la  cour  du  Vice-roi  d'ltalie.  Paris,  1824.     ^^o- 

358.  Lamarque,    General.       Memoires    et    souvenirs    du 

General  Maximilien  Lamarque,  publics  par  sa  famille. 

Paris,  1835.     2  vols.     8vo. 
Disappointing  for  Naples. 

359.  [Laugier,  C.  De.].     Fasti  e  vicende  dei  popoli  italiani 

dal  1 80 1  al  1815,  o  Memorie  di  un  uffiziale  per  servire 
alia  storia  militare  italiana. 

Firenze,  1830.     5  vols.     8vo. 

360.  Laurenze,  L.  a.  F.     Essai  sur  Naples  en  1804,  avec 

des  notes  indiquant  les  changemens  les  plus  importants 
survenus  depuis  cette  epoque  dans  cette  ville  intdres- 
sante.  Francfort-sur-le-Main,  1820.      i6mo. 

Social  and  political  views  ;  of  slight  importance. 

361.  Leckie,    G.    F.     An    historical   survey  of  the   foreign 

affairs  of  Great  Britain,  with  a  view  to  explain  the 
causes  of  the  disasters  of  the  late  and  present  wars. 

London,  1808.  8vo. 
Interesting  for  details  relating  to  S  icily  ^  but  untrust- 
worthy and,  as  a  Quarterly  reviewer  wrote,  '"''not 
remarkable  for  diffidence" 

Lemare.     See  347. 


APP.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  207 

Section  VI. — continued 

362.  Lemmi,  Francesco.    Gioacchino  e  le  aspirazione  unitarie 

nel  1815.  Archivio  storico  napoletano,  xxxvi. 

On  similar  lines  to,  but  less  valuable  than,  Dufourc^ s 
article  on  same  subject, 

363.  Lemmi,  Francesco.     La  fine  di  Gioacchino  Murat. 
Archivio  storico  italiano  (Vieusseux),  ser.  v.  vol.  xxvi.  1890. 

Unimportant ;  proves  only  that  the  rumour  of  the 
alleged  conspiracy  spread,  not  that  it  was  true ;  adds 
nothing  to  the  subject. 

Lombard.     See  347. 

363 A.  Lumbroso,    a.      Gioacchino    Murat   e   le   aspirazioni 
unitarie  italiane  del  1 81 5.  Roma,  1899.     8vo. 

Lumbroso.     See  382. 

Maceroni.     See  Macirone. 

364.  Macirone,  Francis.     Interesting  facts  relating  to  the 

fall  and  death  of  Joachim  Murat,  King  of  Naples  ;  the 
capitulation  of  Paris  in  1815  j  and  the  second  restoration 
of  the  Bourbons  ;  original  letters  from  King  Joachim 
to  the  author,  and  of  his  persecution  by  the  French 
Government.     Third  edition.        London,  18 17.     8vo. 

Important,  but   on  his   own   showing   the  writer  is 

untrustworthy. 

365.  Madelin,  Louis.     Fouche,  1 759-1 820. 

Paris,  1 90 1.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Valuable  work;  of  considerable  use. 

366.  Mahan,  a.  T.     The  influence  of  sea  povi^er  upon  the 

French  revolution  and  empire,  1793-18 12. 

London,  1893.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Although  the  Mediterranean  is  somewhat  neglected, 
valuable  for  commercial  matters,  especially  Chapter 
XVIII, 

367.  Maresca,   B.      Gioacchino    Murat    e    il    Congresso  di 

Vienna  del  181 5.     Archivio  storico  napoletano,  vol.  vi. 


2o8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

368.  Maresca,  B.    I  due  trattati  stipulati  della  Corte  Napole- 

tana  nel  Settembre  1805. 

Archivio  storico  napoletano,  vol.  xii. 

Both  useful  articles. 

369.  Marmont,  Marshal.     Memoires  du  Marechal  Due  de 

Raguse  de  1792  a  1832,  imprimes  sur  le  manuscrit 
original  de  I'auteur  avec  le  portrait  du  Due  de  Reich- 
stadt,  celui  du  Due  de  Raguse  et  quatre  facsimile  de 
Charles  X.,  du  Due  d'Angouleme,  de  I'Empereur 
Nieolas  et  du  Due  de  Raguse. 

Paris,  1857.  9  vols.  8vo. 
Fol.  Hi.  contains  D^Amitia  incident;  otherwise  un- 
important for  Neapolitan  affairs. 

370.  Marulli,    Count  ,  Gennaro.      Ragguagli    storiei    sul 

regno  delle  Due  Sieilie  dall'  epoea  della  franeese  rivolta 
fino  al  1815.  Napoli,  1845.     3  vols.     8vo. 

371.  Masci,  Angelo.     Diseorso  suir  origine,  i  costumi  e  lo 

stato  attuale  degli  Albanesi  del  Regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1807.     4^0' 
Masdea.      See  400,  430. 

372.  Massarella,  Pietro  Paolo.     II  deeennio  funesto  de' 

Napoletani.  Napoli,  18 16.     8vo. 

Violent  Bourbonist  account ;  unimportant. 

373.  Massena.      Memoires    de   Massena    rediges   d'apres   les 

documents  qu'il  a  laisses  et  sur  eeux  du  depot  de  la  guerre 

et  du  depot  des  fortifications. 

Paris,  1850.     7  vols.     8vo. 

Edited  by  General  Koch. 

Useful  when  following  official  papers  ;  otherwise  very 
untrustworthy.  Vol.  v.  deals  with  the  invasion  of 
Naples. 

374.  Maurice,  J.  F.     The  Diary  of  Sir  John  Moore. 

London,  1904.     2  vols.     8vo. 
Useful  for  period  of  Moore'' s  command  in  Sicily. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  209 

Section  VI. — continued 

375.  Millet,  G.     Voyage  en  Italie  dans  Tannic  1815. 

Paris,  1 81 7.     8vo. 

A  few  interesting  observations  at  the  time  of  Murat*s 
falL 

376.  MiNTO,  Countess  of.     A  Memoir  of  the  Right  Honourable 

Hugh  Elliot.  Edinburgh,  1868.     8vo. 

Partial^  but  useful. 

377.  MiOT  DE  Melito.    Memoires  du  Comte  Miot  de  Melito. 

Paris,  1858.  3  vols.  8vo. 
English  trans  I,  London,  188 1,  is  referred  to  in  text. 
Edited  by  General  Fleischmann.  Important  for 
Joseph'^s  reign. 

378.  MioT  DE  Melito,  Comte  Francois.     Rapport  general 

sur  la  situation  du  royaume  de  Naples  pendant  les  annees 
1806  et  1807  presente  au  roi  en  son  conseil  d'Etat  par 
le  Ministre  de  Tlnterieur  le  28  Mars,  1808. 

Naples,  1808.     4to. 

379.  MoNNiER,  Marc.     Histoire  du  brigandage  dans  Tltalie 

meridionale.  Paris,  1862.     8vo. 

The  chapter  on  Calabria  under  the  French  kings  is 
loosely  put  together  from  Botta,  ^intavalle,  Colletta, 
and  Montefredine.      Unauthoritative. 

380.  Montefredine,  Francesco.      Memorie  autografe  del 

Generale  Manhes  intorno  a'  briganti. 

Napoli,  1 86 1.  i2mo. 
Political  pamphlet  chiefly  concerned  with  Garibaldian 
matters. 

Moore,  Sir  John.     See  Maurice,  374. 

381.  MuRAT,  Comte.     Murat  Lieutenant  de  I'Empereur  en 

Espagne,  1808  ;  d'apres  sa  correspondance  inedite  et 
des  documents  originaux.  Paris,  1897.     8vo. 

Valuable  for  Murat  prior  to  acceptance  of  throne  of 
Naples. 
VOL.   II  P 


210  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

382.  MuRAT,  Joachim.     Correspondance  de  Joachim  Murat^ 

chasseur  a  cheval,  General,  Mar^chal  d'Empire,  Grand 
Due  de  Cleves  et  de  Berg  (Juillet  1791-Juillet  1808). 

Turin,  1899.     8vo. 

Edited  by  Baron  Lumbroso.     Valuable  down  to  1808, 
at  which  point  publication  appears  to  be  suspended. 

383.  Napoleon.       Correspondance   de  Napoleon   I^r.  publi^e 

par  I'ordre  de  I'Empereur  Napoleon  III. 

Paris,  1858.     32  vols.     8vo. 

Indispensable, 

384.  Napoleon.     Lettres  inedites  de   Napoleon   I^r.     Colla- 

tionees  sur  les  textes  et  publiees  par  Leonce  de  Brotonne. 

Paris,  1898.     Bvo. 

Fifteen  hundred  additional  letters. 

385.  Nempde,  General.     Journal  historique  de  ^expedition 

de  Capri  faite  par  I'armee  franco-napolitaine  pendant  le 

mois  d'Octobre  1808.  Naples,  1809,     4to. 

By  the  same  author ^  an  account  of  the  siege  of  Gaeta, 

where  he  was  captured.     All  Nempde^ s  publications 

are  very  scarce. 

386.  NiGRis,   G.   DE.     Vita  e   militari   gesta  di    Gioacchino 

Murat.  Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Nodier.     See  347. 

387.  Notizie  sulle  vite  dei  piu  famigerati  capi   briganti  delle 

due  Calabrie.  [Napoli,  181 1.]     4to. 

Of  some  use  for  Manhes  and  Calabria. 

Pallain.     See  415. 

387A.  Palumbo,  a.     Maria  Carolina,  Regina  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli,  1877.     8vo. 

388.  Pasquier,  E.  D.     Histoire  de  mon  temps.     M^moires 

du     Chancellier     Pasquier    publics    par    M.    le     Due 
d'AudifFret  Pasquier.  Paris,  1894.     5  vols.     8vo. 

Of  slight  use  for  Naples. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  211 

Section  VI. — continued 

389.  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Francesco.     Memorie  intorno 

alia  storia  del  regno  di  Napoli  dalP  anno  1805  al  18 15. 

Napoli,  1820.     8vo. 

Incomplete  and  untrustworthy  though  of  some  use. 

390.  Planet  de  la  Faye.      Le   Prince   Eugene  en    18 14. 

Documents  authentiques  en  reponse  au  Marechal 
Marmont.  Paris,  1858.     8vo. 

Fourth  ed.     Valuable  collection  of  dispatches  largely 
reproduced  by  Du  Casse, 

391.  Processo  compilato  nel  tribunale  straordinario  di  Napoli 

per  r  esplosione  di  polvere  da  guerra,  avvenuta  nel  palazzo 
abitato  dal  ministro  della  polizia  generate. 

Napoli,  1808.     4to, 
Official  report  of  the  trial, 

392.  [QuiNTAVALLE,  Colonel].     Notizia  storica  del  Conte 

Carlo  Ant.  Manhes  scritta  da  un  antico  uffiziale  dello 
stato  maggiore  del  sudetto  generale  Manhes  nelle 
Calabrie.  Napoli,  1846.     8vo. 

Revised  by  Manhes ;   an  apology,  but  of  considerable 

value. 

Raguse.     See  369. 

393.  Rehfues,    p.   J.      Gemahlde   von    Neapel    und   seinen 

Umgebungen.  Zurich,  1808.     3  vols.     8vo. 

Excellent  work  for  social  aspects  of  the  period. 

394.  RicciARDi,  G.     Relazione  autentica  delle  fazione  operate 

in  Calabria  nel  18 15  da  re  Gioacchino  Murat. 
Archivio  storico  italiano,  1876.     Series  iii.,  vol.  xxiv. 
Of  slight  importance. 

RiGOMER-DiDiER.     See  347. 

RiNiERi.     See  Consalvi,  303. 

395.  RiVAROL,  AuGUSTE  DE.     Noticc  historique  sur  la  Calabre 

pendant  les  dernieres  revolutions  de  Naples. 

Paris,  18 1 7.     8vo. 
Good  for  Calabria, 


212  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

396.  RoDiNO.     Narrazione.     Archivio  per  le  prov.  Napol.  vi. 

259. 

Partisan  attack  on  Rodio,  of  very  doubtful  value, 

397.  RoEDERER,  P.  L.     QLuvres  du  Comte  P.  L.  Roederer, 

publiees  par  son  fils  le  baron  A.  M.  Roederer  ancien 
Pair  de  France,  tant  sur  les  manuscrits  in^dits  de 
Tauteur  que  sur  les  editions  partielles  de  ceux  de  ses 
ouvrages  qui  ont  deja  ete  publics,  avec  les  corrections  et 
les  changements  qu'il  y  a  faits  posterieurement. 

Paris,  1853.     ^  ^^^'     4^°* 
Indispensable  for  reign  of  Joseph. 

398.  Roederer,  P.  L.     Rapporto  generale  sulk  situazione  del 

Regno  di  Napoli  negli  anni  1806  e  1807  presentato  al 
Re  nel  suo  Consiglio  di  Stato  dal  Ministro  dell'  Interno 
il  di  28  Marzo  1808.  Napoli,  1808.     4to. 

399.  [RoLLY,  Mme.].     Vie  de  Joachim  Murat  et  relation  des 

evenements  politiques  et  militaires  qui  I'ont  precipite 
du  trone  de  Naples.  Paris,  1815.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

400.  Romano,  G.    Ricordi  Murattiani,  L'  arresto  e  il  supplicio 

di  G.  Murat,  narrazione  del  canonico  T.  A.  Masdea 
con  altri  documenti.  Pavia,  1890.     4to. 

One  of  the  numerous  republications  of  Masdea^ s  account 
first  printed  by  the  Swiss  Westphal  in  1828,  and  even 
at  the  present  day  recurring  as  newly  discovered 
every  few  years. 

401.  S.J...     Derniere   campagne  de  Parm^e  franco-italienne 

sous  les  ordres  d'Eugene  Beauharnais  en  1813  et  18 14, 
suivie  des  m^moires  secrets  sur  la  revolution  de  Milan 
du  20  Avril  1814  et  les  deux  conjurations  de  1815  ;  la 
campagne  des  Autrichiens  contre  Murat ;  sa  mort 
tragique,  et  la  situation  politique  actuelle  des  divers 
Etats  d'ltalie ;  precede  d'une  notice  historique  sur 
Eugene  Beauharnais.  Paris,  Lugano,  181 7.     8vo. 


APP.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  213 

Section  VI. — continued 

402.  Saliceti,  C.    Rapporto  del  ministro  della  polizia  generale 

sulle  congiure  ordite  nell'  anno  1807,  contro  V  armata 
francese  nel  regno  di  Napoli  e  contra  la  persona  e  gli 
stati  di  S.  M.  Giuseppe  Napoleone. 

[Napoli,  1807.]     4to. 

Published  after  the  amnesty,  is  best  supplemented  by 

comparison  with  Nicola. 

San  Marzano.     See  Consalvi,  303. 

403.  Sassenay,  Marquis  de.     Les  derniers  mois  de  Murat. 

Le  guet-apens  du  Pizzo.  Paris,  1896.     i2mo. 

Reviving  a  long-discredited  theory  ;  unreliable. 

404.  Savary,  Due  DE  RoviGO.    Memoires  du  Due  de  Rovigo 

(M.  Savary)  ecrits  de  sa  main  pour  servir  a  I'histoire  de 
TEmpereur  Napoleon.  Paris,  1828.     4  vols.     8vo. 

Unreliable ;    useful  for   relations    of  Napoleon   and 
Murat. 

405.  [Savelli,  p.  M.].     Souvenirs  historiques  de  la  Legion 

Corse  dans  le  royaume  de  Naples.  Paris,  1851.  8vo. 
Not  trustworthy,  but  good  for  details  of  warfare  in 
Calabria, 

406.  ScHiRMER,     Friedrich.      Feldzug     der    Oesterreicher 

gegen  Konig  Joachim  Murat  4m  Jahre  18 15. 

Prag,  1898.     8vo. 

Good  but  technical  military  history  ;  written  from  an 
Austrian  standpoint. 

407.  ScHLiTTER,  H.     Briefe  Murat's  an  Savary. 

Wien,  1889.     8vo. 

408.  ScHOELL,   pRiD^Ric.       Histoirc   abreg^e   des   traites   de 

paix  entre  les  puissances  de  I'Europe  depuis  la  paix  de 
Westphalie,  par  feu  M.  de  Koch.  Ouvrage  entierement 
refondu,  augmente  et  continue  jusqu'au  Congres  de 
Vienne  et  aux  traites  de  Paris  de  1815. 

Paris,  1 818.  15  vols.  8vo. 
Voluminous,  not  always  trustworthy,  useful  for  some 
details  of  Napoleonic  period,  but  on  the  whole  obsolete. 


214  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

409.  ScHOELL,   Frederic.      Recueil  de  pieces  officielles  de- 

stinies a  detromper  les  Fran^ais  sur  les  evenements  qui  se 
sont  passes  depuis  quelques  annees. 

Paris,  1 8 16.     9  vols.      8vo. 

See  above  ;  of  slight  use  for  Naples. 

410.  ScLOPis,  F.     La  domination  fran^aise  en  Italie,   1800- 

1814.  Paris,  1861.     8vo. 

411.  S^GUR,  CoMTE  de.     Histoire  et  m^moires. 

Paris,  1873.     7  v^^^*     ^^^• 
Useful  for  reign  of  Joseph. 

412.  [Serieys,    a.].      Vie    publique    et    privee   de   Joachim 

Murat.  Paris,  18 16,  181 7.     i2mo. 

413.  Sporschill,  JoHANN.     Feldzug  der  Osterreicher  gegen 

Joachim  Murat  i.  J.  1815. 

Braunschweig,  1844.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

414.  Tableau  des  membres  composant  la  R  .*.  L  .*.  de  Joseph  la 

Concorde,  O  .*.  de  Naples. 

Naples,  5813  [1813].     8vo. 

Valuable  for  history  of  secret  societies. 

415.  Talleyrand,  Prince  de.     Correspondance  in^dite  du 

Prince  de  Talleyrand  et  du  roi  Louis  XVIII.  pendant 
le  Congres  de  Vienne,  publi6e  sur  les  manuscrits  con- 
serves au  depot  des  affaires  dtrangeres,  avec  preface, 
^claircissements  et  notes  par  M.  G.  Pallain. 

Paris,  1 88 1.     8vo. 
Valuable  collection, 

416.  Thompson,  W.  H.    Sicily  and  its  inhabitants.    Observa- 

tions made  during  a  residence  in  that  country  in  the 
years  1809  and  1810.  London,  18 13.     4to. 

417.  Travalli,    Giuseppe.       Documenti    su   lo   sbarco,    la 

cattura  e  la  morte  di  re  Gioacchino  Murat  al  Pizzo. 

Palermo,  1895.     8vo. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  215 

Section  VI. — continued 

418.  TuppuTi,  Dominique.     Reflexions  succinctes  sur  I'etat 

de  Tagriculture  et  de  quelques  autres  parties  de  I'admini- 
stration  dans  le  royaume  de  Naples  sous  Ferdinand  IV. 
precedees  d'une  introduction  ou  coup  d'oeil  sur  Pancien 
etat  de  ce  pays  et  suivies  d'un  Memoire  intitule : 
Recherches  sur  la  plante  vulgairement  nommee  Storta 
dans  le  royaume  de  Naples.  Paris,  1807.     4to. 

Second  edition.      Good  work  of  the  sort. 

419.  TuROTTi,  Felice.     Storia  delle  armi  italiane  dal  1794  al 

1 8 15  con  prefazione  e  note  di  Pietro  Boniotti. 

Milano,  1855.     3  vols.     8vo. 

420.  TuRQUANj  Joseph.       Les   soeurs  de    Napoleon.       Les 

princesses  Elisa,  Pauline  et  Caroline. 

Paris,  1896.     i2mo. 
Scandalous,  unauthoritative,  but  occasionally  useful. 

421.  Ulloa,  Pietro  Cala.     Delia  sollevazione  delle  Calabrie 

contro  a'  Francesi.  Roma,  1871.     8vo. 

Of  some  use,  but  very  uncritical. 

422.  Ulloa,  Pietro  CalA.     Marie  Caroline  d'Autriche  et 

la  conquete  du  royaume  de  Naples  en  1806. 

Paris,  1872.     8vo. 

423.  Ungaro,  Gioacchino,  Duca  di  Montagesi.    Prospetto 

economico — politico — legale  del  regno  di  Napoli. 

Napoli,  1807.     4to. 

Only  one  volume  has  been  found,  but  there  may   be 
four  or  five.     Verbose  and  not  valuable. 

Vaudon COURT.     See  341. 

424.  Verri,   Alessandro.      Storia  della  repubblica  francese 

cisalpina  e  cispadana,  ruina  della  repubblica  veneta, 
brigantaggio  nelle  Calabrie,  proclamazione  in  Cam- 
pidoglio  della  repubblica  romana.     Milano,  1862.     8vo. 


2i6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

425.  [ViGNOLLE,    CoMTE    M.    de].       Precis    historique    des 

operations  militaires  de  rarmee  d'ltalie  en  1813  ^^  1814 
par  le  chef  de  I'etat  major  general  de  cette  armee. 

Paris,  181 7.     Bvo. 

ViNET.     See  278. 

426.  Weil,  M.  H.     Le  Prince  Eugene  et  Murat,  1813-1814. 

Operations  militaires,  negotiations  diplomatiques. 

Paris,  1902.     5  vols.     8vo. 

Important  work  setting  out  many  documents.  Better 
for  military  than  political  matters,  and  marred  by 
great  inaccuracy. 

427.  Welden,  Fehr.  L.  von.     Der  Krieg  der  Oestreicher 

in  Italien  gegen  die  Franzosen  in  den  Jahren  18 13  und 
1 8 14.  Gratz,  1853.     8vo. 

Useful  for  Bellegarde^s  operations. 

428.  Wellington,    Duke   of.       The   dispatches   of   Field 

Marshal  the  Duke  of  Wellington  during  his  various 
campaigns  in  India,  Denmark,  Portugal,  Spain,  the 
Low  Countries,  and  France.  Compiled  from  official 
and  other  authentic  documents  by  Colonel  Gurwood. 

London,  1844.     8  vols.     8vo. 
See  next  number. 

429.  Wellington,  Duke  of.     Supplementary  despatches  and 

memoranda  of  Field  Marshal  Arthur  Duke  of 
Wellington.  London,  1858.     22  vols.     8vo. 

Only  a  few  references,  but  those  important  for  Naples. 

430.  [Westphal,  J.  H.  C.].     Spaziergang  durch  Kalabrien 

und  Apulien.  (Gefangennehmung,  Haft,  Todesurtheil 
und  Begrabniss  des  Generals  J.  Murat  erzahlt  von 
Kanonikus  D.  T.  A.  Masdea.) 

Konstanz,  1828.     8vo. 

Masded*s  relation  is  accessible  in  numerous  other  more 

recent  publications. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  217 

Section  VI. — continued 

431.  Wilson,  Sir  Robert.     Private  diary  of  travels,  personal 

services  and  public  events,  during  mission  and  employ- 
ment with  the  European  armies  in  the  campaigns  of 
181 2,  181 3,  1814,  from  the  invasion  of  Russia  to  the 
capture  of  Paris.  London,  186 1.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Some  useful  details  on  the  military  operations  of  \%\\. 

432.  WiNSPEARE,  D.     Storia  degli  abusi  feudali. 

Napoli,  1 8 11.  4to. 
Good  and  useful  work  by  one  of  the  feudal  Com- 
missioners. 

433.  Zahn,  Dr.  von.     Von  Konig  Joachim  Murat's  Ende, 

drei  Berichte  des  General- Itendenten  der  osterr. 
Occupations- Armee  in  Neapel  an  Graf  Franz  von 
Saurau  betrefFs  des  wahren  Sachverhaltes  in  der  Ange- 
legenheit  von  Konig  Joachim's  Sendung  und  Verhaf- 
tung. 

Steiermarkische  Geschichtsblatter.  I,  171.    Gratz. 
See  next  number. 

434.  Zahn,  Dr.  Von.     Konig  Murat's  Gefangnehme. 

Historisches  Jahrbuch,  1880,  512.     Miinster. 

The  letters  merely  prove  the  existence^  not  the  truth, 
of  a  rumour.  The  theory  of  the  conspiracy  against 
Murat  supported  by  Zahn^  Sassenay,  and  Lemmi  has 
been  effectively  answered  by  Dufourcq  and  Lumbroso. 

435.  ZuccHi,  General   Carlo.      Memorie,  pubblicate   per 

cura  di  Nicomede  Bianchi. 

Milano,  Torino,  1861.     i2mo. 
Useful  for  Murat- Be  auharnais  negotiations  in  18 14. 

436.  ZuRLO,  G.     Rapporto   sullo   stato   del   regno   di   Napoli 

dopo  1'  avvenimento  al  trono  di  Sua  Maesta  il  Re 
Gioacchino  Napoleone  per  tutto  T  anno  1809.  Presen- 
tato  al  re  nel  suo  Consiglio  di  Stato  dal  Ministro  del- 
P  Interno.  Napoli,  1 8 1 1 .     4to. 

Important. 


2i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VI. — continued 

437.  ZuRLO,  G.  Rapporto  sullo  stato  del  regno  di  Napoli  per 
gli  anni  1810  e  1811,  presentato  al  Re  nel  suo 
Consiglio  di  Stato  dal  Ministro  dell'  interno. 

Napoli  [18 12].     4to. 

Important ;  dealing  specially  with  the  abolishment  of 
the  feudal  system. 


SECTION    VII 
Works  relating  to  Period  i  8 15- i  821 

438.  Antonelli,  Alessandro.     Memorie  storiche  del  regno 

di  Napoli.  Rivoluzione  del  1820.      Aquila,  1848.     8vo. 

439.  Archives  diplomatiques  pour  I'histoire   du  temps  et  des 

Etats.     Annee  1821. 

Stuttgart  et  Tubingen,  1821.  8vo. 
Inaccurate  work ;  based  on  statements  of  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli. 

440.  [Bertholdi,  Baron].     Memoirs  of  the  secret  societies 

of    the    South    of    Italy,    particularly    the    Carbonari. 
Translated  from  the  original  MSS. 

London,  1821.     8vo. 

Most  important  work  on  the  subject. 

441.  [Beyle,  Henri].     Rome,  Naples  et  Florence  en  181 7, 

ou  esquisses  sur  I'etat  actuel  de  la  society,  des  moeurs, 
des  arts,  de  la  htterature,  etc.,  de  ces  villes  celebres. 

Paris,  1 81 7.     8vo. 

Indispensable  for  social  aspects, 

442.  [BoRRELLi,  Pasquale].     Appcndicc  alia  bibliografia  vi 

si  contengono.     i.  I  pensieri  miscellanei  di  Pirro  Lalle- 

basque.     2.  II  saggio  su  '1  romanzo  istorico  di   Pietro 

Colletta.  Coblentz,  1840.     8vo. 

Lallebasque  was  a  pseudonym  of  Borrellis.     Violent 

attack  on  Colletta^  but  not  of  much  importance. 


APP.K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  219 

Section  VII. — continued 

443.  [BouRG,    E.    T.].      Constitution    et    organisation     des 

Carbonari,  ou  documents  exacts  sur  tout  ce  qui  concerne 
I'existence,  Forigine,  et  le  but  de  cette  societe  secrete. 

Paris,  1 82 1.     8vo. 

Written  under  pseudonym  of  St.  Edme.  Fanciful 
work  of  little  value. 

BuLOZ.      See  465. 

444.  [Canosa,    Prince    of].      I    pifFari    di    montagna,   ossia 

cenno  estemporaneo   di   un   cittadino  imparziale    sulla 

congiura  del   Principe   di   Canosa  e  sopra  i  Carbonari. 

Epistola  critica  diretta  all*  estensore  del  foglio  letterario 

di  Londra.     Corretta  ed  accresciuta. 

Dublino,  Ottobre  1821.  8vo. 
An  earlier  edition^  Dublino,  Maggio  del  1820, 
contains  much  less  matter. 

Apology  of  Canosa  ;  a  tangle  offals ehood  and  exaggera- 
tion, nearly  impossible  to  use  for  historical  purposes. 
Included  with  this  are  the  two  following  numhers. 

445.  [Canosa,    Prince    of].      Risposta    al    no.    cxliv.    del 

giornale  napoletano  intitolato  PAmico  della  Costituzione 
de*  2  Gennaio  del  corrente  anno. 

Published  with  444. 

Of  no  special  importance. 

446.  [Canosa,  Prince  of].     Analisi  sopra  un  articolo  della 

Minerva  Napolitana.  Epistola  dell*  autore  di  pifFari  di 
montagna  ad  un  suo  amico.     Parma  ai  20  di  Novembre 

1820. 

Published  with  444. 

Of  slight    interest^    see    No.    8,    vol.    i.    Minerva 

Napolitana. 

447.  Carascosa,  General.     Memoires  historiques,  politiques 

et  militaires  sur  la  revolution  du  royaume  de  Naples  en 
1820  et  1 82 1,  et  sur  les  causes  qui  I'ont  amenee  j 
accompagnes  de  pieces  justificatives  la  plupart  inedites. 

Londres,  1823.     8vo. 
Important,  but  very  untrustworthy. 


220  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VII. — continued 

448.  Cauchard  d'Hermilly,  G.  F.     Des  Carbonari  et  des 

fendeurs  charbonniers.  Paris,  1822.     8vo. 

449.  Church,   Sir    Richard.      Personal    narrative    of    the 

revolution  at  Palermo  in  the  year  1820. 

Monthly  Magazine,  1826. 
Spirited  and  authoritative  account. 

450.  Codice  per  lo  regno  delle  Due  Sicilie. 

Napoli,  1 8 19.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Revised  and  amended  Codes  of  Joachim. 

451.  CoLLETTA,   Carlo.      Diario   del   parlamento    nazionale 

delle  Due  Sicilie  negli  anni  1820  e  1821.  Illustrato 
dagli  atti  e  documenti  di  maggiore  importanza  relativi 
a  quelle  discussioni.  Napoli,  1864.     2  vols.     4to. 

Record  of  the  Carbonaro  Parliament  from  the  official 
minutes, 

D.,  CoMTE.      See  455. 

452.  Decisione  della  Gran  Corte  speciale  di  Napoli  special- 

mente  delegata  da  S.M.  (D.G.)  nella  causa  contro  i 
rivoltosi  di  Monteforte  ed  Avellino  per  la  ribellione  in 
detti  luoghi  scoppiata  nel  2  di  luglio  1820. 

Napoli,  1822.     4to. 

Trial  of  Morelli,  Silvati^  and  sixty-three  others^  see 

next  number. 

453.  Decisioni  della  Gran  Corte  Speciale  di   Napoli  special- 

mente  delegata  da  S.M.  (D.G.)  proferita  contro  dei  rei 
contumaci,  nella  causa  cosidetta  dei  rivoltosi  di  Monte- 
forte. Napoli,  1823.     4to. 

Trial  of  Pepe,  Carascosa,  De  Conciliis,  Minichini, 

and  other  defaulters. 

454.  Decisione  emessa  della  G.  C.  speciale  di  Napoli  nel  di  29 

Settembre  1821,  per  la  causa  del  barbaro  e  premeditato 
omicidio  commesso  nella  persona  del  Direttore  di  Polizia 
D.  Francesco  Giampietri.  Napoli,  1821.     Fo. 


APP.  K  BIBLIOGRAPHY  221 

Section  VII. — continued 
Diario  del  Parlamento.     Bee  451. 

455.  [Duval,  Henri].     Precis  historique  sur  les  revolutions 

des  royaumes  de  Naples  et  de  Piemont  en  1820  et  1821  ; 
suivi  de  documens  authentiques  sur  ces  evenemens,  et 
orne  d'une  carte  pour  servir  a  I'intelligence  des  opera- 
tions militaires.  Paris,  1821.     8vo. 

Published  under  pseudonym  of  Comte  D...      Useful 

but  unreliable. 

456.  FoNTANAROSA,   ViNCENZo.      II    Parlamento    nazionale, 

1820-21.  Roma,  1900.     8vo. 

Of  slight  importance. 

457.  Harel,    F.    a.      Pieces    officielles    et   inedites    sur   les 

affaires  de  Naples  precedees  de  reflexions. 

Paris,  1820.     8vo. 
Lallebasque.     See  442. 

458.  Morgan,  Lady.     Italy.     London,  182 1.     2  vols.     4to. 

Social;  unimportant. 

459.  MiTTi,  F.  S.     Sui  moti  di  Napoli  nel  1820. 

La  vite  italiana  nel  Risorgimento.  (Bemporad)  ser.  i. 
vol.  i. 

Unimportant. 

460.  P.   G.     Avvenimenti    memorabili,   sentenza  e  morte   di 

Gioacchino  Murat.  Firenze,  1830.     8vo. 

Based  on  Colletta  and  Macirone^  but  generally  useful, 

461.  Pepe,  Guglielmo.     Relation  des  ev6nements  politiques 

et  militaires  qui  ont  eu  lieu  a  Naples  en  1820  et  1821, 
adressee  a  S.M.  le  Roi  des  Deux  Siciles. 

The  Pamphleteer,  London,  1824,  vol.  xxiii.     Useful; 

apology  for  the  part  played  by  Pepe  in  the  revolution, 

462.  Pepe,  Leonida.      Lettre  sur  la  derniere  revolution  de 

Naples  ;  sur  ses  causes,  ses  chefs,  ses  incidents  et  sa 
catastrophe.  Paris,  1821.     8vo. 


222  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  app.  k 

Section  VII. — continued 

463.  [Regnault-Warin,  J.].     Les  Carbonari  ou  le  livre  de 

sang.  Paris,  1820.     2  vols.      i2mo. 

Fantastic. 

463A.  Romano,  Leonardo.  Difesa  per  D.  Francesco  Nicola 
De  Matheis  sospeso  intendente  della  Calabria  citeriore. 
nella  Corte  Suprema  di  Giustizia.     Napoli,  1830.    410. 

Saint  Edme.     See  443. 

464.  Salvo,   Marquis    de.      Reflexions    sur    les    dernieres 

revolutions  de  TEurope.  Londres,  1824.     8vo. 

Unimportant. 

465.  Witt,  Jean.      Memoires  secrets  relatifs  a  I'Etat  de  la 

revolution  du  Piemont,  de  I'esprit  qui  regne  en  Italie  et 
de  ses  societes  secretes.  Paris,  1831.     2  vols.     8vo. 

Translated  from    German  by   A.  Buloz  ?     An  un- 
trustworthy jumble  of  fact  and  romance. 

\iiti.  ZuRLO,  G.     Rapporto  per  gli  afFari  di  Sicilie. 

[Napoli,  1820.]     4to. 
Exculpating  F.  Pepe, 


INDEX 

OF   NAMES   OF    PERSONS   AND   PLACES 

[For  topics  see  chapter  heads) 


Aberdeen,    Lord,  i.   268-270,    277-280, 

292 
Abruzzese,  i.  3,  6 
Abruzzi,  i.  4,  9,  71,  144,  145,  323,  325, 

327.,  349 
Acerno,  i.  i8 
a  Court,  i.  330,  335,  404  ;  ii.  17,  50,  51, 

67,  72,  87,  88,  108,  109, 112,  119, 

122,  125,  126,  130,  136 
Acri,  i.  139,  140 

Acton,  i.  49,  52,  65,  66,  ii8,  i68,  169 
Addington,  i.  55 
Adige,  i.  288-290 
Adriatic,  i.  80 
^schylus,  i.  II 

Agar  de  Mosbourg,  see  Mosbourg 
Agostino,  Fra,  i.  323 
Agrigentum,  i.  9 
Ajaccio,  i.  392 
Albanians,  i.  4 
Alcala,  i.  399,  403 
Alexander,  Czar,  i.  70,   73,   313,  3345 

ii.  15,  16,  74,  110-115,  126 
Alexandria,  i.  170 
Alopaiis,  ii.  113 
Alquier,  i.  59,  64,  67,  68,  70 
Amantea,  i.  137,  141-144,  250 
Amato,  i.  121-124 
Ambrosio,  see  D'  Ambrosio 
Amherst,  i.  235-239 
Amiens,  i.  55,  59 
Anacapri,  i.  200 
Ancillotti,  i.  330 
Ancona,  i.  285,  316,  322,  340,  351,  354, 

362,  363,  365^  366,  368 
Angevins,  i.  4 

Annichiarico,  i.  32  j  ii.  58-63 
Ansalone,  ii.  123 
Antinous,  i.  9 


Antrodoco,  pass  of,  ii.  132,  133 

Apollo,  i.  9 

Appian  Way,  i.  5 

Aquila,  i.  97,  373  J  ii.  132 

Aquino,  see  D' Aquino 

Archipelago,  i.  57 

Arcis-sur-Aube,  i.  314 

Arco  Felice,  i.  383 

Arcovito,  i.  327  ;  ii.  jj 

Arezzo,  i.  355,  363-368 

Aristophanes,  i.  11 

Ascoli,  Duke  of,  ii.  72,  85 

Asia  Minor,  i.  57 

Aspern,  i.  209 

As  pre,  see  D'Aspre 

Atlas,  i.  10 

Atratina,  i.  109 

Aubusson,  d',  Lafeuillade,  i.  202 

Augusta,  Princess,  see  Beauharnais 

Augusta,  i.  184 

Austerlitz,  i.  70,  72,  81 

Austria,  i.  59,  6] 


Avellino,  i.  145  j  1 

135 

Aversa,  i.  86 
Ayme,  i.  245,  246 
Azores,  i.  343 


Baciocchi,  Elise,  see  Bonaparte 

Feiix,  i.  286 
Baia,  i.  211,  383  j  ii.  120 
Bajano,  ii.  82,  83 
Balatscheff,  i.  313,  314 
Balearic  Islands,  i.  184 
Barbara,  i.  396-398,  401 
Bari,  i.  2,  56  j  ii.  61 
Barletta,  i.  56,  104 
Basento,  i.  98 
Basilicata,  i.  97 


■I,  76,  jj,  80-86, 


223 


224 


THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


Bastard,  Capt.,  i.  394-396 
Bastia,  i.  388-390,  393-395 
Bathurst,  Lord,  i.  292 
Baudus,  de,  i.  387 
Bauffremont,  i.  350 
Bausan,  i.  199,  210,  211  j  ii.  100 
Bautzen,  i.  265,  266 
Bavaria,  King  of,  i.  278 
Bayonne,  i.  181,  185,  186 
Beauharnals,  Augusta,  Princess,  i.  298 
Eugene,  i.  83,  182,  204,  257-259,  265, 

266,  275,  286-291,  294,  296,  298- 

302,  309-312,  315*  318,  328 
Hortense,  i.  204 
Josephine,  see  Bonaparte 
Bedford,  Duke  of,  i.  344,  345 
Begani,  ii.  55,  100 
Bellegarde,  i.   290,  293,   294,   298-301, 

308,  309,  311,  312,  314,  318,  321, 

328 
Belliard,   i.    190,   258,   259,    267,    375, 

380  J  ii.  116 
Belmonte,  i.  232,  233 
Benedict  XIV.,  ii.  29 
Benevento,  i,  332  j  ii.  53,  •/•/ 
Benincasa,  i.  250,  251 
Bentinck,  i.  261-265,  268,  275-280,  291- 

293,  305-309,  311-314,   324,  327, 

329,   330,  376;  ii.  27,  34,47,  50, 

51,  56,  57 
Berezina,  i.  257 
Berg,  i.  193 
Berlin,  i.  268 
Bernadotte,  i.  70,  103 
Bernalda,  i.  98 
Bernstorff,  ii.  113 
Berry,  Duke  of,  ii.  65,  109 

Duchess  of,  ii.  65 
Berthier,  i.  67,  267 
Beyle,  ii.  66 
Bianchemani,  ii.  31 
Bianchi,  General,  i.  337,  388,  361,  362, 

365-374,  379,  380,  382,  384,  385  ; 

ii.  4,  46,  55 
of  Bajano,  ii.  83 
Bignon,  ii.  114 
Blancard,  i.  388,  389 
Blaniac,  Mme.  de,  i.  155 
Bliicher,  i.  268,  289 
Boehme,  i.  233 
Bologna,   i.   273,    274,    285,   291,   312, 

316,  317,  339,  356,  364-366 
Bonaparte,  Caroline,  see  Murat 
Elise,  i.  286,  295 
Jerome,  i.  351 
Joseph,  i.  15,  73,  82-84,  86,  88,  94, 

100-105,  "3,  131,  147,   149-161, 

167,  168,  172,  181-188,  197,  204, 

214 


Bonaparte,  Josephine,  i.  191,  192,  229 
Letizia,  i.  344,  381 
Louis,  i.  182,  183,  204 
Lucien,  i.  183,  261 

Napoleon,  i.  40,  52-54,  57-61,  64,  69, 
70,  77,  80-83,  87,  88,  104,  105, 
118,  149,  151-155,  159,  163,  168, 
170-175,  181-185,  188,  201-206, 
212,  216,  217,  219,  228,  229,  234, 
237-239,  243-247,  256-260,  265- 
270,  272,  274,  275,  280,  281,  287, 
289,  296,  297,  309,  310,  314,  315, 
318,  320,  321,  328,  342-351,  367, 
386,  387,  390,  391 
Pauline,  i.  331,  343,  351,  381 

Borghese,  Pauline,  see  Bonaparte 

Borgoforte,  i.  288,  290,   298-302,  354, 
358,  360 

Borodino,  i.  256 

Borrano,  i.  323 

Borrelli,  P.,  i.  222  ;  ii.  33,  98-100,  105, 
106,  118,  128,  136 

Bourbons,  i.  82 

Bourcard,  i.  iii 

Bovino,  Duke  of,  ii.  100 

Briganti,  i,  16 

Brindisi,  i.  5,  56,  62,  173,  237  j  ii.  61 

Brougham,  ii.  73 

Brune,  i.  190,  387 

Bruno,  i.  165,  166 

Brutii,  i.  4 

Burghersh,  i.  382 

Byron,  ii.  73 

Cadiz,  i.  64,  117 

Calabria,  i.  2,  3,  4,   X2,  35,  74,  87,  88, 

92-95,   104,    120,    121,    127,    138, 

141,  172,  247,  249 
Duke  of,  i.  83,  84,  88,  91,  263,  306  j 

ii.  34,  65,  67,  81,  85-90,  95,  99, 

104,  120,  124,  125,  127,  128,  130- 

132,  135 
Duchess    of,    i.    50 ;    ii.    65,    89,   90, 

131 
Calabrians,  i.  3,  6 
Caligiuri,  i._  95,  69 
Camerino,  i.  368 
Cammerata,  i.  141 
Campanella,  Cape,  i.  199 
Campanians,  i.  3 
Campbell,  i,  346,  381,  385 
Campobianco,  i.  326 
Campochiaro,    i.     336,    337,    339-34i> 

346-348,    352,    360  ;    ii.   49,    85, 

109-112,  116-118,  120 
Campotanese,  i.  89,  90,  130 
Campredon,  i.  109,  178 
Canada,  i.  53 
Cancellier,  i.  123,  171 


INDEX 


225 


Canosa,  the  elder,  i.  84 

the  younger,  i.   136,   164,    167,    179, 
213  J  ii.  47,48 

Capaccio,  ii.  123 

Capobianco,  i.  252 

Capodimonte,  i.  330 

Capo  d'Istria,  ii.  113,  127 

Caprara,  i.  182 

Capri,  i.  113,  136,  164-166,  198-200 

Capua,  i.  10,  86,  95,  380  ;  ii.  32,  33, 
134-136 

Carabelli,  i.  393-395 

Carafa,  i.  367 

Carascosa,  i.  284,  294,  295,  299-302, 
304,  310,  315,  316,  327,  328,  354, 
357-368,  374,  382  j  ii.  4,  78-86, 
92,  loi,  108,   120,   122,   123,  130, 

131,  133-135 
Carbone,  i.  138,  171 
Cardito,  i.  60,  61 
Cariati,  i.  259,  271,  313,  336,  337,  340, 

360  J  ii.  no 
Carignano,  i.  258  ;  ii.  49,  121 
Caroline,  Princess  of  Wales,  i.  345 
Carpi,  i.  361,  362 
Carriero,  ii.  80 
Casa  Lanza,  treaty  of,  i.  382  ;  ii.  4,  55 

Duke  of,  see  Bianchi 
Casalmaggiore,  i.  299,  300 
Casalnuovo,  i.  28 
Casa  Vicentini,  ii.  133 
Caserta,  i.  145 
Cassano,  i,  89,  130,  137 

Duchess  of,  i.  13 
Cassetti,  ii.  31 
Cassone,  i.  370,  371 
Castelciccala,  i.  347  5  ii.  no 
Castel  del  Uovo,  i.  99 
Castel  di  Sangro,  i.  375  ;  ii.  133 
Castellamare,  i.  76,  167 
Castellane,  i.  191,  192 
Castelnuovo,  i.  105 
Castignano,  i.  28 

Castlereagh,  i.  279,  280,  292,  293,  311- 
314,  329,  330,  335-338,  341,  345  5 
ii.  108,  115,  116 
Castrone,  i.  164,  234 
Castrovillari,  i.  253 
Catanzaro,  i.  4,  93,  126-128 
Caulaincourt,  i,  267,  275 
Cavaignac,  i.  172,  242 
Ceccaldi,  i.  389 
Cento,  i.  362 
Cephalonia,  i.  213 
Cerchiara,  see  Pignatelli 
Cerigo,  i.  213 
Cervinara,  i.  27 
Cesena,  i.  356,  366,  367 
Champagne,  Marquis  de,  ii.  30 

VOL.    II 


Champagny,  i.  182 
Champaubert,  i.  296 
Championnet,  i.  15,  34,  40 
Charles  III.,  i.  24  j  ii.  29 
IV.,  i.  39,  46  J  ii.  67 
VIII.  of  France,  i.  15 
Archduke,  i.  68,  71,  209 
Chary bd is,  i.  52 
Chiaja,  i.  383 
Chieti,  i.  369-371,  374 
Church,   Sir    R.,    i.    201    note;     ii.    59 

61-63,  121,  122 
CianciuUi,  i.  84,  148,  152 
Cimitile,  ii.  no 
Circello,  i.  184  j  ii.  50,  52,  112 
Ciro,  i.  129 
Civita  Ducale,  ii.  133 
Civita  Vecchia,  i.  285 
Civitella  del  Tronto,  i.  323 
Clarke,  i.  203 
Clary,  Desiree,  i.  103 

Julie,  i.  103 
Claviere,  ii.  29 
Clement  XII.,  ii.  29 
Cobenzl,  i.  66 
CoUetta,  i.  201  note,  228,  272,  284,  318, 

327,  354,  382,  394;  ii-  4,  12,  123, 

130 
Colletti,  ii.  100 
CoUingwood,  i.  48,  no,  117,  118,  174, 

175,  212,  218,  233 
Come,  i.  10 

Compere,  i.  90,  124-126 
Compli,  i.  323 

Conciliis,  De,  ii.  78-83,  86,  90 
Conflenti,  i.  129 
Consalvi,  i.  338  ;  ii.  64,  in 
Constans,  i.  7 
Constant,  ii.  1 14 
Constantine,  i.  7 
Constantinople,  i.  5,  57,  170 
Conversano,  i.  29 
Corfu,  i.  57,  65,  74,  173-175,  183,  213, 

237 
Corigliano,  i.  130 
Corsica,  i.  388,  390 
Cortona,  i.  364 
Corunna,  i,  185 
Cosenza,  i.  91,  93,  101,  128,   130,   137, 

139,.  141-144,  250,  253 
Cosmao,  i.  174 
Cotrone,  i.  31 
Courier,  i.  90,  100 
Craig,  i.  68,  70-76,  169 
Crassus,  i.  121 
Crati,  i.  141 
Crete,  i.  57 
Croton,  i.  5,  20 
Cybele,  i.  9,  10 

Q 


226 


THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


Damas,  i.  6i,  72,  -j-]^  88-91 

D'  Ambrosio,  i.  161,  284,  302,  327,  354, 

357-362,  369;  ii.  8i,  131,  135 
D'Amitia,  i.  234,  235 
Dante,  i.  9,  16 

D' Aquino,  i.  327,  359,  369-374 
Dardanelles,  i.  57 
D'Aspre,  i.  380 
Daure,  i.  248  ;  ii.  33,  116 
Davoust,  i.  256 
De  Dedem,  ii.  12 
Dedon,  i.  133,  178 
De  Filippi,  ii.  82,  86 
Delfico,  i.  16,  26  J  ii,  85,  100,  105 
De  Michele,  i.  128,  130,  141,  142,  144 
Demosthenes,  i.  6 
De  Ritis,  ii.  96 
De  Rosa,  ii.  76 
Despagne,  i,  145 
Desvernois,  ii.  12 
Diana,  i.  9,  10 
Diocletian,  i.  14 
Dissemburg,  i.  202 
Donadieu,  i.  388,  389 
Donop,  i.  235 
Donzelot,  i.  134,  173,  213 
Dragonetti,  i.  222  ;  ii.  11,  105 
Dresden,  i.  266-268 
Drummond,  i.  170,  184 
Duckworth,  i.  170 
Duhesme,  i.  86,  95 
Dumas,  i.  99,  loo,  150,  151 
Dumouriez,  i.  190 
Durand,  i.  264 
Durer,  ii.  26 
Duroc,  i.  267 

Eckmiihl,  i.  209 

Egypt,  i.  52-56,  80,  184 

Eisenach,  i.  270 

Elba,  i.  342-348 

Elliot,  i.  59-63,  66,  67,  74-76,  84,  118, 

119,  169 
Endymion,  i.  9 
Enza,  i.  294,  299,  302 
Erfurt,  i.  58,  269 
Essling,  i.  209 
Eugene,  &ee  Beauharnais 
Euripides,  i.  1 1 
Exmouth,  Lord,  i.  384 

Faenza,  i.  366 

Pagan,  i.  330»  335 

Faro,  i.  239,  240 

Ferdinand,  King,  i.  10,  15,  25,  33,  38, 
40,  42-46,  48,  51,  65-67,  '-J-],  84, 
169,  184,  241,  263,  278,  280,  312, 
33o>  338,  379»  382,  393»  403,  404  } 
ii.  3^  5.6,29,46-58,  64-67,  71,  72, 


78,    81,    84-90,    94-96,    100,    lOI, 
107-112,    115,    117-120,    126-128, 

.»33.  135 
Ferdinand  of  Arragon,  i.  24 
Ferdinand  VII.,  of  Spain,  i.  3155  ii.  78 
Fermo,  i.  322 
Ferrao,  ii.  100 

Ferrara,  i.  274,  354,  357-359 
Fesch,  i.  381 
Filangieri,  Gaetano,  i.  16 

Carlo,  i.  18,  161,  284,  327,  336,  337, 
358;  ii.  81,  131,  134 
Filomarino,  i.  166 
Fiorillo,  i.  1 1 
Fiumefreddo,  i.  141,  144 
Florence,  i.  286,  355,  359-368 
Floridia,  Duke  of,  i.  141 

Duchess  of,  i.  45,  46  5  ii.  6,  54,  65, 
66,  75,  90,  108 
Foggia,  i.  2 
Foligno,  i.  355 

Fontainebleau,  treaty  of,  i.  331,  342 
Forli,  i.  366 
Fouche,    i.    205,    272,    273,   275,   328, 

394 
Fox,  C.  J.,  i.  183,  184 
Fox,  General,  i.  135,  140,  169 
Fra    Diavolo,    i.    32,    "j-]^   97,    111-113, 

136-138,  144,  145 
Francavilla,  ii.  63 
Franceschetti,   i.   389,    391,    392,    398, 

401 
Francis,  Emperor,  i.  46,   61,   73,   295, 

302.   334.   337}   ii.    16,   71,    no, 

113,  115 
Francis,  Grand  Duke,  i.  294 
Francis,  Hereditary  Prince,  iee  Calabria, 

Duke  of 
Frederick,  ii.  22 
Frederick    William,    ii.    16,    113,    115, 

126 
Friedland,  i.  168 

Frimont,  i.  360,  362,  365,  366  j  ii.  132 
Fusaro,  i.  43 

Gaeta.  i.  75,  86,  95,  105-110,  112-116, 
131-135,    144,   382-384,    394  J   ii. 

.55 
Bishop  of,  i.  107 
Gagliardi,  ii.  -j"] 
Galdi,  ii.  101 

Gallo,  i.  64,  66,  67,  73,  148,  152,  219, 
260,  264,  312,  313,  316,  335,  337, 

338,    346-348,    375.   382;    ii.  49. 

85,  no,  H2,  121,  136 
Gantheaume,  i.  173-175,  183 
Gardanne,  i.  138 
Garibaldi,  i.  15 
Garigliano,  i.  2,  71,  86,  113  ;  ii.  130 


INDEX 


227 


Gcnnaro,  i.  14,  15 
Genoa,  i.  286,  292,  310,  321,  331 
Gentz,  ii.  7,  74,  75,  113 
George^  Prince  Regent,  i.  337 
Geppert,  ii.  133 
Germans,  i.  4 

Gernaliz,  i.  128,  130,  137-139 
Giampietro,  ii.  128,  129 
Giannone,  i.  16 
Gibraltar,  i,  54 
Gifflenga,  i.  287 
Giotto,  i.  16 
Gober,  i.  362 
Golowkin,  ii.  113 
Gonsalvo,  i.  15 
Good  Hope,  Cape  of,  i.  53 
Gordon,  i.  391 
Goths,  i.  4 
Gran  Sasso,  i.  2 
Gravina,  i.  98 
Great  Britain,  i.  61,  80 
Greece,  i.  5,  57 
Greek  Empire,  i.  5 
Greeks,  i.  6,  7 

Gregory  Nazianzen,  i.  lo,  1 1 
Grenier,  i.  239,  241,  242,  300-302 
Grenoble,  i.  347 
Gualtieri,  Fortunato,  i.  129 
Nicola,  see  Pane  di  Grano 
Guariglia,  i.  112,  136,  141 
Guastalla,  i.  299,  301,  302 
Gubbio,  i.  355 
Guida,  ii.  77 
Guiscard,  i.  19 
Guise,  i,  34 

Hamilton,  i.  50,  52,  59 

Hardenberg,  i.  3405  ii.  113 

Hautpoul,  d',  i.  199 

Hawkesbury,  see  Liverpool 

Hellenes,  i.  5 

Hercules,  i.  9 

Hesse,    Prince   of,   i.   71,   75,   105-110, 

113,  116,  131-133,  166,  168,  171 
Hetzendorf,  i.  332,  333 
Heytesbury,  see  a  Court 
Hobhouse,  ii.  73 
Holland,  Lord,  i.  345 
Hopes,  i.  155 
Hotz,  i.  133,  134 
Hyde  de  Neuville,  i.  335 

Imola,  i.  365,  366 
India,  i.  10,  53,  54 
Infantado,  i.  399  j  ii.  75 
Ionian  Islands,  i.  172 
Ischia,  i.  H2,  210-212,  384 
Isernia,  ii.  133 
Isis,  i.  8 


I   Ithaca,  i.  213 
Itri,  i.  1 1 1 

Jablonowsky,  i.  403,  404  ;  ii.  54 
Jah,i.8 
I   Januarius,  see  Gennaro 
Jefferson,  i.  218 
Jehovah,  i.  7 
Jemmappes,  i.  190 
Jena  University,  ii.  74 
Jerome,  see  Bonaparte 
Jesi,  i.  368 
Jiovine,  i.  165 
Joachim,  see  Murat 
Jonah,  i.  9 
Jones,  i.  264 
Joseph,  see  Bonaparte 
Jourdan,  i.  173,  185,  324 
Jove,  i.  7,  8 
Junot,  i.  185,  195 
Jupiter,  i.  8 
Juvenal,  i,  10 

Kaunitz,  i.  61 

Kempt,  i.  124,  125 

Klagenfurt,  ii.  124 

Konigsberg,  i.  258 

Kotzebue,  ii.  74 

Kriidener,  Mme.  de,  ii.  15,  16 

Kumae,  i.  5,  383 

Labrador,  i,  334 

Lacour,  i.  108 

Lacy,  i.  64-67,  70-75 

La  Ferronays,  de,  ii.  113 

Laforet,  i.  392 

Lagonegro,  i.  89,  loi,  137,  138,  172 

Lagoscuro,  i.  357,  359 

Lallemand,  i.  387 

Lamarque,  i.  140,  199,  200 

Langlade,  i.  388,  389 

La  Rothiere,  i.  296 

Lauria,  i.  35,  138,  139 

Lauzun,  ii.  29 

Lavauguyon,  i.  226,  245,  272,  322 

Lavello,  i.  177,  178 

Lavrieno,  ii.  79,  80 

Laybach,  ii.  11 5-1 19,  126,  127 

Lecce,  i.  2  j  ii.  61,  62 

Lecchi,  i.  88,  284,  354,  356,  368,  370, 

372;  ii.  31,  32 
Leghorn,  i.  164,  306,  307 
Legnago,  i.  288 
Leipzig,  i.  268 
Leopold,  Prince,  i.  209,  233,  384,  385  j 

ii.  4,  6 
Leveson-Gower,  i.  64 
Licosa,  i.  137 
Lignc,  i.  47 


228 


THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


Lipona,  iee  Murat 

Liri,  i.  380 

Liverpool,  Lord,  i.   55,  292,   329,   337, 

341 
Livron,  1.  226,  295,  310,  354,  355,  359, 

363,  364,  369 
LlandafF,  i.  345 
Lombards,  i.  4,  19 
Lombardy,  i.  331,  353 
Longobardi,  i.  142 
Louis  XIV.,  i.  24 

XV.,  i.  39 

XVL,  i.  59 

XVIIL,  i.  388 
Lowe,  Hudson,  i.  136,  199-201 
Lucanians,  i.  4 
Lucera,  i.  4 

LuUy  of  Majorca,  ii.  25 
Lundville,  i.  55,  59 
Lutzen,  i.  265 

Macchiaroli,  ii.  "ji 

Macchiavelli,  i.  16 

Macedonio,  ii.  85 

Macerata,  i.  322,  368-374;  ii.  73,  77 

Macfarlane,  i.  201 

Macirone,  i.  394-396 

Mack,  i.  69 

Madrid,  i.  193 

Maghella,  i.  224,  226,  245,  272,   324, 

351;  ii.  33,  34,  46 
Magna  Graecia,  i.  5 
Maida,  i.  121-126 
Mallet,  ii.  30 
Malta,  i.  54-56,  58,  65 
Mandarini,  i.  138^ 
Manfredi,  ii.  128 
Manhes,  i.  248-253,  325,  351,  353,  380, 

384 
Manthone,  i.  43 
Mantua,  i.  288-290 
Maratea,  i.  142 
Marches,   i.    316,    322,    32*3,    327-329, 

340,  351 
Marcone,  i.  3  i 
Marengo,  i.  40,  52,  55 
Maria  Louisa,  i.  229,  234,  331 
Maria  Theresa,  i.  46 
Marienswerder,  i.  258 
Marmont,  i.  234 
Martin,  i.  235 
Mary,  Virgin,  i.  9,  10 
Mary  Caroline,  Queen,  i.  39,  40,  46-52, 

58-70,    73-77,    84,  94,    no,    118, 

164-171,  179,  209,  232-239,  261- 

264,  332-334;  ".  29 
Masaniello,  i.  34 
Masdea,  i.  405 
Massena,  i.  68,  70,  85-88,  98-100,  105, 


108,  114,  131-139,  141,  146,    150, 

151,  196,  237,  243 
Matera,  i.  97,  98 
Matthews,  i.  345 
Medici,  i.  327;  ii.  48,    51,  64,  70-72, 

124 
Mediterranean,  i.  51-56,  58 
Mercato,  i.  33,  43»  S^s  H5»  i68 
Mercogliano,  ii,  80 
Mercy,  ii.  113 
Mergellina,  ii.  128 
Merville,  i.  362 
Messina,  city  of,  i.  62,  75,  76,  n8,  120, 

169,  170,  174,  184,  237,  240,  242 
Strait  of,  i.  87,  88,  91,  118,  120,  128, 

172,  i73»  232,  236-243 
Metternich,  i.  195,  203,  228,  229,  259, 

261,  265-271,  277,  278,  313,  314, 

320,   321,  328,  329,  332,  334-341, 

346,   352,  360,  379,  395  ;  ii.  3,  4, 

14,    16,   54,    67,    72-75,    109-115, 

126,  127 
Michael  Angelo,  i.  16 
Mier,  i,  246,  259-261,  265,  293,  294, 

307,  311,  3H,  336-339,  346,   348, 

351,  352 
Mignano,  i.  380 
Milan,  i.  60,  286,  353,  354 
Mileto,  i.  171 

Millet  de  Villeneuve,  i.  294,  295,  354 
Mincio,  i.  288-290,  294,  298,  301,  302, 

311 
Minichini,  ii.  i-]^  79,  80,  82,  86,  89-92, 

122,  131 
MioUis,  i.  245,  285 
Miot,  i.  83,  100,  150,  155,  163 
Mirabeau,  ii.  29 
Mirabelli,  i.  137,  142-144 
Miseno,  i.  211 

Modena,  i.  302,  316,  357,  358,  360-362 
Mohr,  i.  362  j  ii.  132 
Mola  di  Gaeta,  i.  108 
Molano,  i.  35 
Moliterno,  i.  235 
Monte  Casslno,  i.  12,  162 
Monte  Corvino,  i.  18 
Monte  del  Papa,  i.  130 
Monteforte,  ii.  76,  80-82,  84,  88,  135 
Montefusco,  i.  32 
Monte  Grillo,  i.  383 
Monteleone,  i.  93,   141,   171,  210,   326, 

400,  402 
Montemilone,  i.  369-372,  381 
Monte  Secco,  i.  109 
Monte  Vergine,  i.  145,  162 
Monti,  ii.  40 
Montigny,  i.  325 
Montmirail,  i,  296 
Montrond,  i.  226 


INDEX 


229 


Moore,  i.  127   note,  135,  169,  170,  173, 

185 
Morano,  i.  90 
Moreau,  ii.  30 

Morelli,  ii.  79,  80,  83,  89,  90,  135 
Mosbourg,  Agar  de,   i,  214,   249,   311, 

375 

Mosca,  i.  167,  168 

Moscow,  i.  256,  257 

Murat,  Caroline,  i.  194,  195,  202,  226, 
228,  245-247,  256,  258,  279,  283, 
311,  324,  332,  343,  351,  352,  375, 
380-385  j  li.  6,  34,  67 
Joachim,  i,  52,  58,  163,  183,  185, 
188-214,  218,  226-229,  239-247, 
256-260,  264-318,  321-407  J  ii.  34 

Naples,  city  of,  i.   3,   5,  11,  13,  16,  18, 

80 
Napoleon,  see  Bonaparte 
Napoletano,  General,  ii.  84,  86,  90,  92 
Narbonne,  ii.  116 
Naselli,  i.  84  j  ii.  52 
Nassau,  i.  202 
Natali,  i.  392 
Neapolis,  i.  5 

Neapolitans,  i.  6,  7,  10,  11 
Neco,  i.  171 
Negri,  i.  357 
Neipperg,  i.  277-279,  362,  365-370,  374, 

379,  380,  382,  385  j  ii.  4 
Nelson,  i.  40,  50,  52,  55,  69 
Nesselrode,  ii.  113 
Netti,  ii.  135 
Ney,  i.  257 

Nicastro,  i.  121,  129,  250 
Nicholas,  Grand  Duke,  ii.  113 
Nicolai,  ii.  105 
Nile,  i.  55 
Nocera,  ii.  84 

Nola,  i.  2,  283  ;  ii.  jj,  79-81,  83 
Nugent,  i.  273,  285,  294,  295,  298-303, 

308,  315,  317,  361,  363.365,  373  J 

li.  46,  55,  56,  71,  81,  82,  88 
Nunziante,  i.  171,  402-404,406  j  ii.  83, 

84,  86 

Occhiobello,  i.  354,  357,  358,  360,  362 

Ollendorf,  i.  270 

Orlando,  tower,  i.  160 

Orleans,  Duke  of,  ii.  29 

Osmiana,  i.  257 

Otello,  i.  393,  394  note 

Otranto,  i.  56,  57  j  ii.  61 

Ottavj,  i.  98,  392,  395 

Oxford,  Lord,  i.  345 

Paestum,  i.  5,  20 
Paget,  i.  64 


Palaeologus,  i.  4 

Palermo,  i.  161,  174,  175  ;  ii.  122 

Palestrina,  i.  16 

Palmi,  i.  240,  241 

Palmieri,  i.  166 

Panaro,  i.  357,  358,  360,  362,  365 

Panchaud,  ii.  29 

Pane  de   Grano,    i.    128,   129,   138-140, 

171 
Papasodero,  i.  129,  140 
Parafante,  i.  142,  250,  251 
Parisi,  ii.  52,  121,  130 
Parma,  i.  294,  300,  315,  331 
Partanna,  see  Floridia 
Partouneaux,  i.  210 
Paterno,  i.  14 
Patria,  i.  43 
Pecchia,  i.  22 
Pedace,  i.  129 
Pedrinelli,  see  Petrinelli 
Pentemele,  i.  241 
Pepe,  Florestano,  i.  284,  304,  327,  3845 

ii.  122,  123,  130 
Guglielmo,    i.    284,    302-304,    308, 

317,  327,  328,  331,  361,362,  379; 

ii.  12,  71,  72,  76-78,81,84,  S6-95, 

100,  loi,  106-108,  116,  118,  122- 

124,  129-136 
Perignon,  i.  211,  246,  283 
Permon,  Mme.,  i,  163 
Pernice,  i.  401,  402 
Persia,  i.  53 
Perugia,  i.  365 
Pesaro,  i.  355 
Peschiera,  i.  288,  290 
Peter,  i.  8 

Petrinelli,  i.  327,  354 
Pezza,  see  Fra  Diavolo 
Philip  II.,  i.  31 
Piacenza,  i.  288,  289,  294,  298,  300-302, 

311,314-318,354 
Piale,  i.  241 
Picoletti,  ii.  85 
Piedmont,  i.  310,  321,  331 
Pignatelli,  Com.,  i.  214,  249 
Pignatelli-Cerchiara,  i.  327 
Pignatelli -Strongoli,   i.  273,   295,  304, 

327,  354,  355,  359-361,  363,  364, 

366,    368,    371,    373,    374  ■■>     "• 

131 

Pigot,  i.  55 

Pimentel,  i.  43 

Pinckney,  i.  219 

Pino,  i.  272,  273 

Pisticci,  i.  98 

Pius  VII.,  i.   149,   225,   315-317,   338 

339  ;  "•  45,  46 
Pizzo,  i.  398,  406 
Pizzofalcone,  i.  33,  383 


230 


THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 


Po,  i.  288,  290,  299,  354,  3<;7 

Poerio,     i.     228  j    ii.     100,     105,     106, 

Poggiardo,  i.  30 

Poland,  i.  331,  338 

Policastro,  i.  137,  141,  142 

Polignac,  i.  340 

Polistena,  i.  326 

Pompeii,  i.  157 

Ponza,  i.  136,  164,  178,  213 

Porta  Capuana,  i.  34 

Portugal,  i.  183 

Posen,  i,  258 

Posilipo,  i.  330,  383  J  ii.  128 

Potenza,  i.  251  ;  ii.  -j-]^  94 

Pozzo  di  Borgo,  ii.  73,  74 

Pozzuoli,  i.  211,  383 

Prague,  treaty,  i.  329,  338 

Pratzen,  i.  70 

Priapus,  i.  10 

Procida,  i,  112,  384 

Puglia,  i.  4,  5,  13,  17,  35,  55,  56,  62, 

88,   97,    i53»    i73»   ^37  j   "•    58- 

61 
Pugliese,  i.  3 
Pulcinella,  i.  11,  12;  ii.  137 

Quadrilateral,  i.  70,  288,  289 

Ramsay,  ii.  28 

Ranier,  Archduke,  ii.  1 1 1 

Raphael,  i.  9,  16 

Ravenna,  i.  273,  285,  286 

Rayneval,  de,  ii.  116 

Reggio  di  Calabria,  i.  88,  91,  92,  102, 

118,     121,     128,    171,    172,    240- 

242 
Reggio  di  Emilia,  i.  299,  301-303,  307, 

316, 3';8 
Regnier,i.  88-91,95,  118-131,  137,  i39» 

143,  171-173,  199 
Riccardo,  i.  31 
Ricciardi,   i.   152,  160  }   ii.    11,   85,  93, 

104 
Richardson,  i.  112,  113,  132 
Riego,  ii.  78 
Rieti,  ii.  132,  133 
Rimini,  i.  356,  379 
Ritis,  %ee  De  Ritis 
Robinson,  i.  404 
Roccaromana,  i.   270,    336,    383,    388  ; 

ii.  131 
Rochefort,  i.  173 
Rodio,  i.  TJ^  97-100 
Roederer,  i.  100,  150-155,  i6o,  185 
Romagna,  i.  316,  354,  360,  361 
Romans,  i.  6 

Rome,  i.  4,  285,  355,  356,  363,  365 
King  of,  i.  244 


Ronca,  i.  136 
Ronco,  i.  366,  367 
Rosa,  i.  9 

iee  De  Rosa 
Rosaroll,  ii.  99 
Rosenheim,  i.  88,  89,  91 
Rosenkreutz,  ii.  26 

Rossctti,  Gabriele,  i.    16,    324  j    ii.  96, 
130,  131,  136 

General,  i.  354 
Rousseau,  i.  39  ;  ii.  15 
Rovere,  i.  314 
Rufando,  i.  17 
Ruffo,  Cardinal  Fabrizio,  i.  40,  50,  74, 

83 
Cardinal  Archbishop  of  Naples,  i.  44, 

45,  149 
Comm.,  ii.  3,  4,  no 
Ruggiero,  i.  i8,  22 
Russia,  i.  54,  59,  61 

Sacca,  i.  299 

Salerno,  i.  397  ;  ii.  77-79,  83,  94 

Saliceti,  i.  98-100,   105,   150,  162-168, 

177-179,  185,  189,   199,  211,  224. 

226,  272  }  ii.  31 
Salonika,  i.  57 
Samnites,  i.  4 
Sand,  ii.  74 
Sanfelice,  i.  50,  51 
Sangro,  ii.  124 
San  Lazaro,  i.  317 
Santa  Lucia,  i.  33 
Sant*  Ambrogio,  i.  357 
Saracens,  i.  4 
Saxony,  i.  331,  338,  341 
Scaletta,  i.  242 
Scanderbeg,  i.  4 
Schiarino-Rizzeno,  i.  319 
Schinina,  i.  276,  277 
Schoenbrunn,  i.  "jj 
Schwarzenberg,  i.  268,  296,  360 
Sciablone,  i.  145 
Sciarpa,  i.  -j-j,  89,  97 
Scigliano,  i.  96 
Scilla,   i.   28,   52,   118,   128,   140,   171, 

172,  210,  239,  241 
S.  Donino,  i.  317,  327 
Sebastiani,  i.  56 
Segur,  i.  94,  99,  10 1 
Serra,  i.  251,  252 
Serracapriola,  ii.  3,  no,  112 
Sessa,  ii.  72 

S.  Eufemia,  i.  121,  122,  142,  398 
Severoli,  i.  301-303 
S.  Germano,  i.  28,  380  ;  ii.  134 
Sicily,  i.   52,  62,  75,  80,  87,  88,   153, 

184,  231,  232,  305 
Sicilians,  i.  6 


INDEX 


231 


Sila,  i.  3,  92,  250 

Silvati,  ii,  79,  80,  89,  135 

Sinigaglia,  i.  368 

Sligo,  Lord,  i.  345 

S.  Martino,  i.  230 

Smith,    Sidney,    i.    no,    112-114,   117, 

118,  120,  132,  135-137 
Smolensk,  i.  257 
Sommariva,  i.  353 
Sophocles,  i.  II 
Sora,  i.  145 
Soult,  i.  70 
Soveria,  i.  95,  129 
Spaccapitta,  i.  140 
Spain,  i.  183 
Spartacus,  i.  121 
Sperlunga,  i.  144 
Speziale,  i.  50 
Spilimberto,  i.  365 
S.  Sepolcro,  i.  363,  364 
S.  Severino,  ii.  83 
Stackelberg,  ii.  126 
Stael,  Mme.  de,  ii.  73 
Stahrenberg,  i,  294 
St.  Clair,  i.  169  j  ii.  52 
St.  Cyr,  i.  61,  64,  67,  68,  88,  97 
St.  Dizier,  i.  289 
St.  Elie,  i.  337,  345 
St.  Elmo,  i.  105 

S.  Teodoro,  i.  83,  84,  311  ;  ii.  49 
Stewart,  i.  395  j  ii.  113,  115,  116 
Stilo,  i.  250 
Stratti,  403-405 
Strongoli,  i.  129 
see  Pignatelli 
Stuart,  i.  1 19-129,    140,   169,  209,  211, 

212,  240  J  ii.  31 
Suchet,  ii.  116 
Suvaroff,  i.  40 
Swabians,  i.  4 
Sybaris,  i.  5,  20 
Syracuse,  i.  62,  276 

Taccone,  i.  250,  251 

Talleyrand,  i.  64,  66,  67,  184,  205,  206, 

332-345;  ii.  29,  53 
Taranto,  i.  56-59,  62,  80,  131,  173,  174, 

237;  ii.  61 
Taro,  i.  289,  314,  315,  317 
Tatitscheff,  i.  63,  64,  62,  74 
Teano,  i.  384 
Teramo,  i.  325 
Terracina,  i.  144 
Thiebault,  i.  34,  194 
Tilsit,  i.  58,  168,  170,  172,  i8i 
Toledo,  i.  17,  33 
Tolentino,  i.  368-374,  380,  381 

treaty,  i.  322 
Tommasi,  ii.  52 


Toulon,  i.  54,  173,  174,  388 

Trafalgar,  i.  69,  71,  80,  116,  117 

Trentacapilli,  i.  400-402 

Trieste,  i.  395 

Troise,  ii.  121 

Troja,  ii,  96,  97,  105 

Tronto,  i.  374 

Troppau,  ii.  112-115 

Tufara,  i.  29 

Turin,  i.  335 

Turkey,  i.  53,  54,  56,  183,  184 

Tuscany,  i.  309,  311,  212,  314 

Ugolino,  i.  22 
Ulm,  i.  69 
Uovo,  see  Castel  del 
Urbino,  i.  355 

Valeggio,  i.  290,  298 

Valentin,  i.  134 

Vallongue,  i.  114 

Vardarelli,  ii.  59 

Vatican,  i.  8 

Vatout,  ii.  114 

Vattel,  ii.  114 

Venafro,  i.  375 

Venice,  i.  183,  286 

Verdier,  i.  130,  137,  142-144 

Verona,  i.  288,  289,  309 

Verrieres,  i.  392  note 

Vescovado,  i.  389,  392,  395 

Vestals,  i.  8 

Vesuvius,  i.  2,  383 

Vicenza,  i.  288 

Vico,  i.  16,  25 

Victor  Emmanuel  I.,  i.  321,  342 

II.,  i.  15 
Vienna,  i.  69,  332,  346 
Villa  Tranfo,  i.  167 
Villeneuve,  Admiral,  i.  64,  117 

see  Millet  de 
Viscardis,  i.  178,  179 
Volta,  i.  301 
Vomero,  i.  330,  331,  343 

Wagram,  i.  212,  228 

Walewska,  i,  343 

Walker,  i.  346 

Walmoden,  ii.  133 

Waterloo,  i.  387,  394 

Weisshaupt,  ii.  30 

Wellesley,  see  Wellington 

Wellington,  i.  196,  237,  264,  335,  336, 

394 
Wesel,  i.  202 
Whitworth,  i.  55,  56 
Wilna,  i.  257 
Wilson,  i.  311-314 
Winspeare,  i.  160,  222  j  ii.  11,  85 


232  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

Yarmouth,  Lord,  i,  184  [    Zuccari,  i.  338  j  ii.  46 

Zucchi,  i.  290,  310,  328 
Zante,  i,  213  I    Zurlo,  i,  16,  27,160,221-223,227,228, 

Zichy,  ii.  113  I  244,  249;  ii.    II,   50,  85,  92,  93, 

Zimmerman,  ii.  123  |  97,  120,  121,  124 


THE    END 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  LiMiTti),  Edinburgh. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

With  Maps.      8vo.      los.  net. 

THE  ROMAN  THEOCRACY  AND 
THE  REPUBLIC,  1846-1849 

TIMES. — "The  author  has  treated  his  subject  with  the  greatest 
impartiality.  .  .  .  Mr.  Johnston  is  to  be  congratulated  in  having 
made  a  valuable  addition  to  the  already  large  library  of  English 
literature  on  the  Italian  Risorgimento." 

WESTMINSTER  GAZETTE.— '' Mr.  Johnston's  historical 
study  is  both  searching  and  illuminative." 

57:  JAMES'S  GAZETTE.—''  ^  singularly  clear  and  fair- 
minded  narration  of  political  movements  and  events  concerning  which 
contemporary  writers  were  curiously  divided." 

SCOTSMAN. — "The  work  is  thoughtful  and  impartial  through- 
out, its  text  enriched  by  a  well-stocked  bibliography  and  by  several 
interesting  documents  printed  as  appendices.  It  reflects  no  small 
credit  on  its  writer's  erudition,  and  forms  a  valuable  contribution  to 
the  English  literature  that  treats  of  modern  Italian  history." 

With  Maps.     Crown  Zvo,     6s. 

NAPOLEON 

A  SHORT  BIOGRAPHY 

SPECTATOR. — "  This  is  a  quite  admirable  book.  .  .  .  It  gives 
a  clear  and  comprehensive  review  of  Napoleon's  career,  of  his 
military  achievements,  and  of  his  work  as  a  legislator." 

BOOKMAN. — "  A  volume  for  which  we  have  long  been  waiting 
is  here.  ...  As  an  initial  study  of  the  man  and  his  period,  as  an 
illuminator,  too,  of  later  politics,  and  as  a  guide  to  fuller  reading,  this 
book  is  the  very  thing." 

GLOBE. — "We  are  not  aware  of  any  biography  of  Napoleon 
quite  so  concise  and  yet  so  comprehensive  as  this,  and  as  the  founda- 
tion on  which  to  base  a  fuller  study  of  the  subject  it  is  certainly  quite 
admirable." 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO/S  NEW  BOOKS. 

BIOGRAPHY  AND  HISTORY. 
Memorials  of  Edward  Burne- Jones.     By  G.  B.-j.    With 

45  Photogravures  and  other  Illustrations.     Two  Vols.      8vo. 
Fifty  Years  of  Fleet  Street :  Being  the  Life  and  Reminiscences 
of  Sir  John   R.    Robinson.      By  FREDERICK    MOY    THOMAS. 
With  Portrait.      8vo. 

Letters  and  Literary  Remains  of  J.  Henry  Shorthouse. 

Edited,  with  Prefatory  Memoir,  by  his  Wife.     Extra  Crown  8vo. 
English  Men  of  Action.     New  Volume, 

Sir  Walter  Raleigh.    By  Sir  Rennell  Rodd,  K.C.M.G.,  CB. 

With  a  Portrait.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

Twelve  English  Statesmen.     New  Volume. 
Chatham.     By  Frederic  Harrison.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

Two  Volumes  of  Lectures  by 

Edward  A.  Freeman,  D.C.L.,  etc.,  formerly  Regius  Professor  oj 

Modern  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 

Western  Europe  in  the  Fifth  Century.    8vo. 
Western  Europe  in  the  Eighth  Century.    8vo. 


Lectures  on  the  French  Revolution  and  on  General 
Modern  History.  By  the  late  Lord  Acton,  Regius  Professor 
of  Modern  History  at  Cambridge.     Two  Vols.     8vo. 

The  Napoleonic  Empire.  By  R.  M.  Johnston,  Author  of 
"  Napoleon  :  a  Short  Biography,"  and  "  The  Roman  Theocracy 
and  the  Republic."     Two  Vols.      8vo. 

A  History  of  the  English  Church.  Edited  by  the  late  Dean 
Stephens  and  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt,  D.Litt.  A  Continuous 
History,  based  upon  a  careful  study  of  Original  Authorities,  and 
of  the  best  Ancient  and  Modern  writers. 

In  Eight  Volumes.     Crown  8vo.     With  Maps.    Each  volume 
is  sold  separately,  and  is  furnished  with  its  own  Index. 

GUARDIAN. — "  Indispensable   to  all   serious  students  of  the   history  of  the  English 
Church." 

Concluding  Volumes. 

Vol.       V.  Reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James  I.  (1558-1625).     By  the 

Rev.  W.  H.  Frere.     7s.  6d.  [/«  October. 

„      VII.  The  English  Church  in  the  Eighteenth  Century.     By 

the   Rev.    Canon    Overton,   D.D.,   and   the  Rev.   F. 

Relton.  \In  preparation. 

,,     VIII.  The  English  Church  in  the  Nineteenth  Century.     By 

F.  W.  Warre  Cornish,   M.A.,  Vice-Provost  of  Eton 

College.  [In  preparation. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO/S  NEW  BOOKS. 

A  History  of  the  Christian  Church  from  the  Reformation 
to  the  Present  Time.  By  S.  Cheetham,  D.D.,  Archdeacon 
and  Canon  of  Rochester.     Crown  8vo. 

An  Unwritten  Chapter  in  the  History  of  Education. 

Being  the  History  of  the  Society  for  the  Education  of  the  Poor 
of  Ireland,  generally  known  as  the  Kildare  Place  Society, 
1811-1831.  By  H.  KiNGSMiLL  Moore,  D.D.,  Principal  of  the 
Church  of  Ireland  Training  College.     Extra  Crown  Bvo. 

ILLUSTRATED  BOOKS. 

The  Road  in  Tuscany.  A  Commentary.  By  Maurice 
Hewlett.  With  over  200  Illustrations  by  Joseph  Pennell. 
Two  Vols.     Extra  Crown  8vo. 

The  Bab  Ballads.  With  which  are  included  Songs  of  a  Savoyard. 
By  W.  S.  Gilbert.  Sixth  Edition.  With  350  Illustrations 
by  the  Author.     Crown  8vo.      7s.  6d. 

Highways  and  Byways  Series.     New  Volume. 

Oxford  and  the  Cotswolds.  By  Herbert  A.  Evans.  With 
Illustrations  by  FREDERICK  L.  GRIGGS.  Extra  Crown  8vo. 
Gilt  top.     6s. 

Great  Lawn  Tennis  Players.  Their  Methods  Illustrated.  By 
George  W.  Beldam  and  Percy  A.  Vaile.     Medium  8vo. 

Famous  Fighters  of  the  Fleet.  By  Edward  Eraser. 
Illustrated.     Crown  8vo. 

EDITIONS  DE  LUXE. 

Medium  Zvo.     Bound  in  Sateen  Cloth  with  embossed  gilt  back  and 
monogram  on  side. 

The  Five  Nations.    By  Rudyard  Kipling,     ios.  6d.  net. 

In  Six  Vols.   Zvo.  Printed  on  hand-made  paper.,  and  limited  to  100  sets. 

Diary  and  Letters  of  Madame  D'Arblay  (Fanny  Burney). 

With  Notes  by  Austin  Dobson.    With  Photogravure  Portraits 

and  other  Sketches.     £(i  :  6s.  net. 

[Ordinary  Edition.     Six  Vols.     8vo.     ;^3  :  3s.  net.] 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO/S  NEW  BOOKS. 

ART. 

Companion  work  to  "  The  Life  and  Works  of  John  Raphael  S7nith." 

The  Lives  and  Works  of  James  and  William  Ward.    By 

Julia  Frankau.     In  Two  Volumes.     Thirty  Guineas  net. 
The  Edition  is  strictly  limited  to  350  copies. 

Wayside  Etchings.  By  Philip  Pimlott,  A.R.E.  A  Series  of 
Twenty  Mounted  Etchings  bound  in  a  volume.   Folio.  ^5:55.  net. 

The  Artist  Engraver.  A  Portfolio  of  Original  Work  by 
Eminent  Artists.     Price  35s.  net. 

New  and  Revised  Edition. 

Grove's  Dictionary  of  Music  and  Musicians.  Edited  by 
J.  A.  Fuller  Maitland,  M.A.     In  Five  Volumes.     8vo. 

\yol.L,  Nov.  I. 

BELLES  LETTRES.  ^, 

New  Prose  Work  by  the  Poet  Laureate.  "O 

The  Poet's  Diary.    Edited  by  Lamia.    Extra  Crown  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Miriam:  or,  The  Sin  of  David.  A  Poetical  Drama.  By 
Stephen  Phillips.     Crown  8vo. 

Shakespearean  Tragedy  :  Lectures  on  Hamlet,  Othello,  King 
Lear,  and  Macbeth.  By  A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A.,  LL.D., 
Professor  of  Poetry  in  the  University  of  Oxford.      Svo. 

Lectures  and  Essays.    By  the  late  Rev.  Alfred  Ainger,  m.a., 

D.D.,  Master  of  the  Temple  and  Canon  Residentiary  of  Bristol. 
Crown  Svo. 

The  Temper  of  English  Literature  in  the  Seventeenth 

Century.  Comprising  Lectures  delivered  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge  in  1903.  By  Professor  BARRETT  WENDELL,  of 
Harvard  University.     Crown  Svo. 

The  Diary  of  a  Church-goer.    Crown  Svo. 

Oliver  Cromwell.     By  John  Morley.    Globe  Svo.    4s.  net. 

[Everstey  Series. 

English  Men  of  Letters.     New  Series. 
Crown  Svo.     Gilt  tops.     Flat  backs.     2s.  net  each. 
Hobbes.     By  sir  LESLIE  STEPHEN,  K.C.B. 
Adam  Smith.     By  Francis  W.  Hirst. 
Thomas  Moore.    By  Stephen  Gwynn. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


ONIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 


Acme    Library   Card   Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "  Ref .  Index  File." 
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


