Go ogle 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . google . com/ 



TRANSACTIONS 

or TBB 

PARISIAN SANHEDRIM 



TRANSACTIONS 

OF THE 

PARISIAN SANHEDRIM, 

OR 

ACTS OF THE ASSEMBLY 

OF 

3[0mlttt05 l^tputtt» of iFrance oitti 3[talp> 

CONVOKED AT PARIS BY AN IMPERIAL AND ROYAL DECREE. 
DATED MAY 90, 1806. 



T&AJrSLAXED FROM THE ORIGINAL PUBLISHE0 BT 

M.DIOGENETAMA, 

WITH A PREFACE AND ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES 

BY F. D. KIRWAN, Esq, 



LONDON; 
murrsD BY miiAM bukton, PBTifit lami. 
PuBUSBSD BY CHARLES TAYLOR, Ujoiotf Sram. 

1807, 



ERRATA.-^In p. 134, after line 5, read, 7tli. Who elects the Rabbies?** 
The succeeding question should be numbered 8. 

The Binder is requested to notice the folios of P, Q, and It, a mbtake 
having occuired in one of those signatures in a few. copies. 




PS 

A ■ '7 
c 



All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or otherwise without the prior permission of 
Gregg International Publishers Limited. 



ISBN 576 80151 8 



Republished in 1971 by Gregg International Publishers Limited 
Westmead, Farnborough, Hants., England. 

Printed in Offset by Kingprint Limited 
Richmond, Surrey, England. 



PREFACE. 

THE novelty of a Jewish assembly deliberating 
on the national interests of a people which has so 
long ceased to be numbered among nations, in^- 
duces us to offer an account of its proceedings to 
the English public. The French^ Jewish editor, M. 
Diogene Tama, in an advertisement prefixed to his 
collection, expatiates with wonderful complacency 
on the immense utility of his publication. Without 
being quite so sanguine in our expectations, we 
cannot help expressing our conviction that it will 
prove highly gratifying to that curiosity which has 
been excited by the first mention of the meeting of 
such an assembly, 

The ultimate views which Bonaparte may have on 
the Jewish nation are, to this day, involved in ob* 
scurity; while the supposed advantages he so pom- 
pously conferred on them may reasonably be caU« 
ed in question. This will warrant our attempting 
to elucidate them, as far as his dark purposes can 
admit of investigation. 

a2 



iy 



PREFACE. 



The conduct of the former government of France 
towardsits Jewish subjects happilyunited tolerance 
and even encouragement with circumspection: 
indeed their state was, in many instances, preferable 
to that of the Protestants; they were secured in 
tibe enjoyment of their property ; their religious ce- 
remonies were acknowledged by law, (which, till 
the reign of Louis XVL was not the case in respect 
to the Protestants,) and those who proved really 
useful citizens received letters of naturalization. 

Some local badges of their former slavery still 
existed in several of the provinces ; but, as early as 
the year 1785, government had in contemplation 
to remove them ; and it is rather singular that this 
very M. Furtado, who appears so conspicuously as 
President of the present assembly, should have been 
called to Paris, with several other Jews, by M. de 
Malesherbes, Minister of Louis XVL to give the 
necessaiy information on the subject. 

It is more than probable that Bonaparte, in this; 
instance, as indeed in most others, has taken up 
the plan of the ancient French government, giving 
iti at the same time, thattheatiicalform whichisso 



PREFACE, 



peculiar to his conceptions, ^nd Aajp/nVy fixing the 
meeting of the $issembly at a time when it was the 
less necessaiy . For the decree of the National As^^ 
sembly, which had assimilated the Jews to the rest 
of the nation, and which was then in full force, api 
parently left nothing to be done for men who were 
considered as French citizens to all intents and 
purposes. The usurious practices of the Israelites 
of some departments of France were only a plan* 
sible pretext, for it is well known, that the Jews 
were not the only people in France who followed 
that nefarious traffic : the total want of laws to re^* 
press it, the universal laxity of morals, and the un* 
certainty of every kind of speculation, had made 
it almost general among monied men, and five per 
cent, per month has been not unfrequently exact* 
ed by Christians lenders, even with the security of 
landed property. 

A motive more likely to have influenced the ra« 
pacious French government on this occasion is the 
douceur of thirty millions of livres which had beeii 
required from the Jews as the price of the honour 
conferred upon them ; and it probably was with i| 



PREFACE* 



Tiew to frighten them into a compliance with this 
demand, that several French writers have been al^ 
lowed seemingly to differ in opinion from their go- 
vernment, and even to propose the annulling of the 
act which granted to the Jews all the privileges of 
French citizens, such as they are. 

Yet, making every allowance for the stage tricks 
which the crafty agents of a despot usually employ 
to cover the rapacity of their master, and for that 
innate instinct of despotism which impels the 
French ruler to extend his sway even over 
conscience, there are, in the Questions proposed 
to the assembly, and in the measures adopted, se- 
veral features which it is difficult to reconcile with 
the avowed object in view, and which seem to 
convey more than is intended to meet the eye. 

The questions, indeed, are mostly of a nugatory 
nature, and such as might have been easily answer- 
ed without any recourse to a Jewish assembly : 
others are evidently captious; and it is not without 
a motive, although not a very obvious one, that such 
a stress has been laid on the obligation of defending 



PRSFACB. 



th^ countlry, and on the organization of the Rab- 
binical body. 

Mlien we consider that the Jewish population of 
France and of Italy is not calculated, by the de* 
puties themselves^ at more than one hundred thou- 
sand souls, (a small numberindeed when compared 
with the population of those countries) we are at a 
loss to see what great advantages could immediate- 
ly result to Bonaparte from the Jews embracing 
zealously the profession of arms. We well know 
that his gigantic plans of ambition rest on the laws 
of the conscription; but the Jews are already liable 
to them; they can hardly escape their excessive 
rigour; and even the whole of the Jewish youth, of 
the requisite age, would, in point of number, make 
but a contemptible reinforcement to the immense 
armies of France. 

These exhortations to embrace the profession of 
arms, so zealously repeated by the leading mem- 
bers of the French Jews, are, besides, always cou- 
pled with strong recommendations to follow me- 
chanical trades and husbandry; in short, those pro- 
fessions without which a nation cannot ejcist by 



PREFACE. 



ttself^ but which are not more particularly us^efut 
than any others to a small given number of people^ 
who consider cls their country an empire in which 
these professions abound. 

We find these same recommendations strongly 
inforced in the answer of Furtado to the com« 
mercial Jews of Frankfort, who hardly can have a 
choice of employment. " We have/' says he, " too 
many merchants, and bankers among us, and toa 
few artificers and husbandmen, and, above all, toa 
few soldiers:^^ but if their countrymen thorough- 
ly fin these branches of employment, what necessi^ 
ty is there for having husbandmen, artificers and 
soldiers of their own? 

The Jewish deputies ssy that Bonaparte concei- 
ved the idea of their regeneration^ or their />a^i/^ca/ 
redemption^ in the land of Egypt, and on the bank^ 
of the Jordan. This wedoubt not; and though we 
are almost adiamed to hazard the extravagant sup« 
portion,, we feel a conviction that his gigantic mind 
entertains the idea of re-establishing them in Pa- 
lestine, and that this forms a part of hi& plan 



PREFACE. ix 

respecting Egypt, which he is well known never 
to have abandoned. 

No one will contend that this idea is too wild 
for his conception ; it is, on the contrary, perfectly 
consonant with his love for extraordinary, dazzlltig 
enterprises; he acts in this even with more than 
his usual foresight, by attempting to prepare 
the Jews for the new situation he intends for them. 
It is with this vi^w that he encourages them to 
follow those professions which are nect^ssary for 
men forming a distinct nation in aland of their 
own; for certainly, a body wholly composed of 
merchants and traders could never exist as such. 
He attempted, in a like manner, to introduce the 
arts of civilization among the Copts and the Arabs 
of Egypt, and with the same views. Idque apud 
imperitos humanitas vocabatuvj cum pan servitutis 
esset Tacit. 

These measures, we know, are represented as 
the means of uniting the Jews more thoroughly 
with their fellow-citizens, and of checking their 
supposed propensity to usury. 

We have already said that the reproach of usury 
b 



X 



PRlSFACX. 



was only the pretence n^ad^ use of to ciall them 
together; remedies for an evil so general now 
among the French, and of such a magnitude, 
are not to be found in exhortations to a few in** 
dividuals, who, in their rapacious pursuits, are re- 
gardless even of the precepts of their sacred law. 
The other alledged motive is equally fallacious. 
For why recommend the same measures to Jews of 
foreign countries? It is well known, besides, that 
men are more closely united in a state of society 
by their mutual wants than by the similitude of 
their occupations; and, in short, the Regulations 
forced upon the Israelites prove that the intention 
of Bonaparte was to sepamte them more than ever 
from the rest of Frenchmen. 

This will be evident on a mere perusal of them. 
It will be seen that the Israelites have separate 
elective assemblies, separate contributions, and a 
separate police, exercised by their own Rabbies, 
who are to inforce military service among them, 
keep an exact account of their numbers, and even 
interfere in their private concerns. In this, they 
are indeed under the hand of government, but 



PREFACE. 



they are totally secluded from the mass of the 
people. Their actual strength, their several oc« 
cupations, will be known accurately ; they may 
be ready at a moment's warning. 

These Regulations have another remarkable fea« 
ture, common to all the recent politico-religious 
conceptions of the French government. The 
Rabbies are by them set as spies over the Jews, 
like the ministers of the Roman Catholic religioi^ 
over the rest of Frenchmen. Nor does this part 
of the plan stop here ; by means of the close union 
existing between the seteral Jewish communities 
scattered over Europe, the French ruler hopes to 
extend the system far and wide. Already deputies 
of all the Synagogues have been invited to Paris, 
to assist at the Great Saxhedrim. An uniform- 
ity of doctrine will connect them more closely 
with those among the French Jews who are de- 
voted to Bonaparte. What other advantages had 
lie in view in framing the too famous Concordat 
with the Pope of Rome? 

This part of the plan is far from being incom- 
patible with the further views we have alluded to; 

b2 



PREFACE. 



it will even prepare and insure, in some measure, 
their success ; and, should they be frustrated after 
all, will secure advantages sufficient to lessen the 
disappointment. Let it be remarked here, that, 
yvhile the French ruler is so anxious to extend his 
influence in foreign countries by means of the 
Israelites, he has taken care, by the eleventh and 
twenty-sixth articles of hisRegulations, to prevent 
a retaliation from foreign powers. Indeed these 
clauses destroy completely the idea entertained at 
first, by many, that he had in contemplation to in- 
tice the Jews indiscriminately to settle in France: 
and we here repeat it, his motives for calling that 
assembly were his love of money, his fondness of 
theatrical pomp, his plans on the east, and his ex* 
tensive system of espionage. 

It could not be reasonably expected that, under 
Bonaparte, an assembly of any kind should enjoy 
a great share of liberty in their deliberations. 
Indeed, little care was taken, in this instance, to 
disguise the exertions of power; the answers and 
the measures were evidently agreed between the 
Imperial Commissioners and a few of the leading 



FREFACE. 



members, and read afterwards to the assembly 
jno forma; the power attributed to the President, 
devoted to the court, his naming the members of 
every committee, his dissolving the meeting at 
pleasure, hardly left the shadow of deliberating 
forms, while the casual opposition some of the 
propositions experienced was removed by means 
WE should deem unwarrantable in any meeting. 

From the speeches of the deputies, it will be 
seen thsi,t the Jewish assembly could boast of as 
great talents as could probably have been expect- 
ed from any other French assembly of the same 
number of men, taken indiscriminately in any 
class, and this fully justifies our assertion, that, 
under the old government, the Jews enjoyed a 
sufficient share of liberty to encourage the dis« 
play of their natural abilities, and that, with 
equal protection, and liberty of conscience, is 
perhaps the full extent of the advantages which 
non-conformists can expect from a regular govern* 
ment. 

But while we pay a just tribute to their talents, 
we must deplore the way in which they have been^ 



xir PRepACE. 

shamefully abused, in many instances. Few of 
them, indeed, have raised their voices against the 
tyrannical Regulations, which have been imposed 
upon them ; some of their answers it is true, are 
highly satisfactory, and, among them, those con- 
cerning usury ; but, in many other cases, they have 
manifested a culpable readiness to accede to or 
even to anticipate whatever might suit the views 
of their government, without much regard to the 
precepts of their law. But for the stmng opposi- 
tion of the Rabbies, the assembly would, as far as 
its authority could have gone, sanctioned the 
marriages of Jews with Christians, nay, in the 
tumultuous debate which took place on the occa- 
sion, a member broadly declared that marriage 
had nothing of a divine institution, and that the 
first precept was increase and multiply. Nor is 
this the only instance in which we remark, with 
sorrow, that the contagious infidelity of France 
had crept in among the Israelites. In the festival of 
the I5th of August, the cyphei-s of Napoleon and 
of Josephine were profanely blended with the un* 
utterable name of Jehovah, and the Imperial Eagle 
was placed over the Sacred Ark, This we under- 



PREFACE* X? 

stdnd has given much offence, and with very just 
reason, we think, to the most respectable men 
of that community in these kingdoms. 

The answer to the sixth question, by which the 
French Jews acknowledge France as their country, 
without any restriction whatever, is a still more 
heinous dereliction of the tenets of the Mosaic law; 
for they give up, by it, the hope of the expected 
Messiah, and of the everlasting possession of the 
promised land of Canaan, which they deem a part 
of the sacred covenant between God and his chosen 
people. 

While we thus inculpate the Jewish deputies, 
it cannot be expected that we shall lay too great a 
stress on the fulsome and frequently impious flat- 
tery which characterises all their productions. 
Perhaps we even ought to make some apology for 
having so faithfully translated them, could we 
think it possible that any rational man should 
adopt or suspect us of entertaining sentiments 
which the Jews themselves, most probably, only 
feigned to suit their own purposes. 

But flattery is the opiate of the guilty con- 
science; it sooths the pangs of remorse; and great 



giiiiiiMilti i^JiiiMit lie appvoBciied without it ; fikr 
diegfddeii biandt of die SjinL it aoAeiB thr 
fiereneas of those in&mail Avuiitksi. and m the 
only safeguard kft to mortads who appear bufim 
them. 

It woold he lUDyust^ therefiiie, to expect ftoaa 
Ae Jews more sloiciiniiiiesa tham theBooBBipoet^ 
the lepubfican LncaD^ hitiMrif pooRaRd^ wha^ 
after describm^^ with his nsoal euei'^ w > the scenes 
of biood Aroogh wiiA die Roodods waded to 
aniveat theUnmff^* aafaqporial gorannmt, 
lays, even to Nbko— 

Quod a non wJmm reBttxro mta Xetoni 

Sep^iMi Deifly cieiiimiiie sod wrm TamittK 
Non nisi s e TOuui pocuiK po6t b«Ua jpicuitmii : 
Jam nihil, O Supcrv ^foenmiir; «:dftra iidtofli{«K 
Hsc mereede pbM»t 



Xchiiiii Konui tuzm (febict civitilMs ^"^Wi. 

Qood dfai res acta, est 

• tibt Qtimioc ^ omnt^ 

Ccdctur : Jiin9i|iie tnt iHttn tdiiM{KC» 

Qois deos csae Tdia^ obi i«piiiim poom muiMii^ 

We andefstand dtat this passa^ is omitted im 
Fiench tiandations »m1 we know that it is not tQ 
be fcand in that of Marmontel* 



TRANSACTIONS 

OF THE 

PARISIAN SANHEDRIM. 



Collection of Writings and ActSj relating to the for^ 
vier Condition of Individuals professing the Ife- 
hrew Religion in France. 

PREVIOUS even to the memorable epoch of 
the convocation of Les Etats Generaux^ opinion, 
in what concerns us, had experienced changes con- 
ducive to public weal. 

Reason had reassumed lier rights over preju- 
dice, which, to justify oppression, had, for a long 
time, represented us as unworthy of having a 
country. 

In centuries of error and of injustice, degrad- 
ing statutes pointed at our fathers as objects of 
public contempt. All were made to share in the 
punishment deserved only by traitors, who, like 
those of Judea, had, by their calumnies., brought 
destruction on their virtuous and benevolent bre- 
thren. 

B 



( 2 ) 



But when, at last, more liberal ideas had produ- 
ced sentiments of universal justice, we were no 
longer beheld with contempt, we groaned no longer 
under the iron hand of oppression. 

France gave the example of liberality: it was 
the general wish among us to adopt her as our 
country; and petitions consonant to those wishes 
were eagerly laid by us before the ancient govern- 
ment. 

In these attempts we were thwarted by prejudice. 

M any, however, of tried loyalty, among us , having 
proved by their meritorious conduct that they were 
entitled to public esteem, received from the sove- 
reign letters of naturalization. They ]mrchased 
landed property in France ; educated their children 
to honorable professions; proved themselves wor- 
tliy of that first favour; and their conduct, silencing 
the clamours of prejudice, accustomed Frenchmen 
to behold us with that good w ill, which man in 
every country ow es to his fellow creatures. 

From hence, the cahiers^ (1) prepared in 1789, 
proposed to give those professing our religion the 
means of becoming more useful to the state, by 
opening for us the way to preferment. 

As early as the first of October of the same 

(1) These cahters were written instructions given by llie electors in 
the several towns and proYincc^ of Irance to the deputies they sent 
to Us Elats Ccneram^ 



( 8 ) 



year, a member of les Etats Gineraux^ obtained 
from that assembly a vote tliat, on a future day, it 
should, in a sitting held on purpose, take into its 
consideration the condition of the Jews in France. 

And this member, I must observe, was a clcr- 
gj-man, a dignitary of the second rank. 

The sitting thus granted was delayed by mat- 
ters of general interest. But on the one hand, a 
special decree, of the 24th of December, granted 
to all non-catholics the right of being elected 
members of the assembly, and opened for them the 
way to all employments, civil and military. 

And on the other, the decree of the 28th of Ja- 
nuary, 1790, acknowledged, as active citizens, all 
those among us who, previous to the year 1789, 
had obtained letters of naturalization. 

As this decree is the first step towards our adop- 
tion, I shall g-ive it at full length. 

Decree of the 28th of January, 1790, sanctioned 
the same month. 

" All the JewSj known in France^ under the name 

of Portuguese^ Spanish^ and AvignoneseJews^ shall 
" continue to enjoy the same rights they have hitherto 
" enjoyed^ and which have been granted to them 

by letters patent. 

" In consequence thereof, they shall enjoy the 
^* rights of active citizens, if they possess the other 

b2 



( * ) 



" requisite qualifications, as enumerated in the 

decrees of the national assembly.^' 

Still however prejudice led into error. A genei-al 
fei-ment served too well the evil intention of a few 
unjust men. 

The deci'ee of the 16th of April, 1790, sanction- 
ed on the 18th, shews the kind protection of which 
we stood in need, and which was considered as 
justly due to us. 

" The National Assembly again places the Jetos 
^ of Alsace^ and of the other provinces of the king^ 
" doniy under the special protection of the law; 
^'forbids any one from disturbing their peacc^ or 
" otherwise injuring them; directs all municipal offi- 
" cers and national guards to exert their authority for 
" the protection of their persons and property. 

There still remained a ground of prejudice 
against us. In some i^arts of the countrj% people 
could hardly bring themselves to look upon us as 
worthy of the advantages granted by the law, 
because we were still liable to personal taxes. 

We were freed from this burthen by a special 
decree of the 20th of July, 1790, sanctioned the 
7th of August following. 

" The Nafional Assembly^ considering that the 
" public protection is due to all the inhabitants of 
** ihi kingdom^ indiscriminately^ tcithout any other 



( 5 ) 



condition but that of di^c/uzrging their share of the 
" general contributions; 

" Having heard the report of its committee of 
" deines7ies, 

Has decreed and decrees^ that the annual tribute 
of 20,000 livres^ paid by the Jews of Metz and of 
the Messin country, under the denomination of 
duty of habitation, protection and toleration, is 
suppressed and abolished, without any indemnity to 
the present owner of and contractor for the saidiri* 
" bate. 

** Decrees also, that all tributes of similar nature^ 
under whatever denomination they may be, which 
are, any where else, leviedon the Jews, shall likewise 
be suppressed and abolished, without any indem" 

" nityfrom those hitherto liable to them, whether such 
tributes are paid to the public treasury, or towns^ 
corporations or individuals: reserving, nevertheless, 

^* to decide on a future day, on such indemnities ds 
may be due by the nation to the government con-^ 
tractors who may be aggrieved, the same being 

** certified by the directors of the departments in which 
such tributes are raised; and for this end the titles 

^* and writings of the owners and contractors, shall be 
producedinthe course of the present year, 
" Decrees, lastly, that no arrears of the aforesaid 

<^ tributes can be demanded, and that all lawsuits to 

" recover the same shall be totally stopped.^^ 

These various resolutions were the forerunners 



( 6 ) 



of that which has placed the Jews in the full 
enjoyment of all civil and political rights. 

The rule had been laid down in the decree of 
the 28th of January, 1790, There only remained 
to do away the limitation, by which the advantag-es 
it gi'anted were confined to those Jews w lio had 
obtained letters patent, to the exclusion of those 
w ho liad not this kind of pri vileges. 

A general resolution was wanting to fix with 
certainty our rank in society. It was decreed that 
tLe taking c " the civic oath would enable us all, 
w ithout distinction, to participate in the advanta- 
ges granted by the decree of the 28th of January, 
1790. 

Tliis was the design of the adjournment adopted 
in the sittings of the 1st of September, 1789. 

This was the design of the restriction- contained 
in the decree of the 24th of Decem1>er following. 

'iliis was again the design of the exceptions 
arising from that of the 28th of January, 1790. 

By its dispositions the well-known decree of the 
27th of Septembf^r, 1791, sanctioned on the 13th 
of November following, has referred to January, 
1790, the epoch from which we date the full en- 
joyment of our present condition. And indeed, 
this consequence sprung from the very constitution 
itself, w hich was then in full activity. 

" The National Asscmbfy^ considering thai the 



( 7 ) 



conditions requisite to he a French citizen^ and tohc- 
come an active citizen^ are fixed by the constitution^ 
" afid that every man who^ being duly qualified^ tahe$ 
the civic oath J andengagestofulfilaii the duiies pre^ 
scribed by the constitution^ has a right to ail the ad- 
vantages it insures;' 

" Annuls alladjournments^restrictions^ and exccp^ 

tions^ contained in the preceeding decrees, affecting 

individuals of the Jewish persuasion^ who shall take 
" the civic oath, which shall be considered as a renun- 

elation of all privileges granted in their favour. 

All the Jews residing in France hastened to 
take the oath which constituted them citizens, and 
which, from its nature, is a solemn pledge given 
by them of their submission to the laws and of 
their obedience to the ruling powers. 

According to their principles of morality, an 
oath, naturally binding for a man of probity, is 
further strengthened by their religious maxims« 

The God of their fathers, called to witness of 
their engagements, lias forbidden all manner of 
infringement. 

They have been, they are unshaken in the per- 
formance of all their duties as citizens, without a 
»ngle exception, iu the whole of their political or 
civil conduct. 

Of this they are conscious : they have stood the 
test ; they will not swerve from their fidelity to the 
country. 



( 8 ) 



In the year 9, they were deemed worthy of recei- 
ving a proof of national regard. French ag-ents 
obtained for them an exemption from the tributes 
levied on them in the country of Mentz. 

In the year 10, the then government gave them 
leave to establish regulations founded on justice, by 
which the debts of their ancient communities have 
been discharged. 

It is then true that motives of gratitude have 
daily added new strength to those engagements by 
which we are become French citizens; and as, from 
this, we should be the more guilty, were it possible 
that we could be wanting in due submission to 
those measures which are at last to make us com- 
pletely worthy of the honour conferred upon us by 
our adoption; so the world cannot be surprised at 
the eager joy which wehavemanifestedon receiving 
the decrees dictated by the benevolence of our so- 
vereign, to complete the great work of our regene- 
ration. 

Already we were acquainted with his heroic 
virtues; already our hearts, filled with veneration , 
had indulged in the most flattering hopes; we saw 
in the Conqueror of the World, in the Model 
of Sovereigns, the support of our political and 
civil existence, the man whom our childi*en should 
bless as the author of their felicity. 

At the gi*and epochaof his elevation, our temples 
have resounded with joyful exultations ; our pray- 



( 9 ) 



ers^ the effusions of guileless hearts, have been 
poured before the Eternal, with that exquisite 
feeling which is produced bythe prospect of future 
happiness. 

Hymns sung with solemnity, preceeded and fol- 
lowed by fervent prayers, have crowned those days 
of happiness and festivity. 

In that too, we have vied in loyalty with all 
classes of citizens^ 

In that too, our religious ceremonies have con- 
firmed our engagement of concurring, by every 
means in our power, in whatever may tend to pro- 
mote that degree of illustrious celebrity and pros- 
perity which the exalted views of our august Em- 
peror are preparing for the French empire. 

In the productions to which the exemplary zeal 
of our brethren gave birth, we must mention with 
distinction the hymn composed by M. Meubel 
Kargeau, translated into French by M. Michel 
Berr. 

I should hiave given it a place in my collection, 
but that the principles, the respectful sentiments, 
and the wishes it contains, are to be found in wri- 
tings which come more specifically within the plan 
of my work. 

1 must record here, what should be known in 
all our families, that at the very epoch of that fa- 
mous decree^ which, in September, 1791. gave every 

c 



10 ) 

one of lis a country, many among us, in congra- 
tulating their brethren on the greatness of the boon^ 
addressed to them instructions on the full extent 
of their duties, and proved the necessity of altering, 
in our habits and in our manRei*s, whatever might 
tend to perpetuate prepossessions and prejudices 
which had kept us till then in a state of forlorn 
misery. 

I must give at full length the famous letter whicli 
M. Berr4saac-Berr, manufacturer at Nancy, &ther 
of M • Michel Berr, addressed to all his brethren at 
the close of the year 1791. 

Those among us who are acquainted with it will 
be gratilfied by this opportunity of again perusing 
it ; those who have not yet seen it will gratefully 
receive the instructiot^ of enlightened men, whose 
knowledge and judgement have constituted them 
Our supports and directors. 

They will be convinced that our religious max- 
ims, agreeing with every rule of moraLs and of civil- 
ization, elevate us to that rank and those rights 
which a generous nation has conferred on us. 

Our teachers, our children, will therein see those 
principles which will concur in the great work cf 
our happiness^ 



( n ) 



Letter of M. Berr-Isaac-Berr to his Brethren, in 
1791, on the Rights pf active Citizem being grant* 
to the Jews, 

" Gentlemen and dear brethren, 
At length the day is arrived when the veil, by 
which, parted from om' fellow-citizens, we were 
" kept in a state of humiliation,, is rent ; at length 
we recover those rights which have been taken 
*' from us more than eighteen centuries ago. How 
much are we at this moment indebted to the cle- 
inency of the God of our forefathers ! 
" We are now, thanks to the Supreme Being, 
" and to the sovereignty of the nation, not only 
** Men and Citizens, but we are Frenchmen ?— 
" What a happy change thou hast worked in us, 
merciful God ! So late as the 27th of Septenaber 
last, we were the only inhabitants of this vast 
empire who seemed doomed to remain for ever 
in bondage and abasement; and on the foUow- 
" ing day, on the 28th^ a day for ever sacred among 
" us^ thou inspirest the immortal legislators of 
" Fiance. They pronounce, and more than sixty 
" thousand unfortunate beings, mourning over their 
*' sad fate, are awakened to a sense of>their happi- 
" nessby the liveliest emotions of the purest joy, 
" Let it be acknowledged, dearest brethren, that 

c2 



C 12 ) 

we have not desen^ed this wonderftd change by 
" Our repentance, or by the rdformation of our 
manners: we can attribute it to nothing but to 
the everlasting goodness of God: He never for- 
sook us entirely; but, finding that we were not 
yet worthy of seeing the accomplishment of his 
promises of a perfect and lasting redemption, he 
has not, however, thought proper still to aggra- 
vate our sufierings: and surely our chains had 
^< become the more galling from the contemplation 
of the rights of man, so sublimely held forth to 
public view. Therefore, our God, %vho readd 
the heart of man, seeing that all our resignation 
would have proved unequal to the task, and that 
<^ supernatural strength was %vanting to enable us 
to support these new torments, has thought of 
•* applying the remedy; He has chosen the gene- 
" rous French nation to reinstate us in our rights, 
and to operate our regeneration, as, in other 
^* times, he had chosen Antiochus, Pompey, and 
" others, to humiliate and enslave us. How glori- 
ous it is for that nation, who have, in so short a 
time, made so many people happy ! And surely, 
** if Frenchmen are become so themselves, by the 
additional rights and the additional liberty they 
have just acquired, how much the more are we, 
** in particular, gainers by the change! and what 
boimds can there bo to our gratitude for the hap- 



( 18 ) 



py event ! From being vile slaves, mere serfs^ z 
species of men merely tolerated and suffered in 
the emp]]*e, liable to heavy and arbitrary taxes, 
we are, of a sudden, become the children of th« 
country, to bear its common charges, andshare in 
its common rights. 

What orator could presume to express to the 
nation and to it's king, all the extent of our 
** gratitude, and of our unalterable submission? 
** But neither the kingnor the representatives of the 
" nation seek for praises or acknowledgments; their 
only wish is to behold people happy. In that 
" they expect and they will find their reward. 

Let us then, dear brethren, let us conform to their 
" wishes; let us examine with attention what re- 
" mains to be done, on our part, to become truly 
happy, and how we maybe able to shew, in some 
" measure, our grateful sense for all the favours 
" heaped upon us. On this subject, gentlemen 
and dear brethren, give me leave to submit to 
" your judgment the result of some reflection^, 
" which our change of condition has suggested to 
" me. 

" The name of active citizen, which we have just 
" obtained, is, without a doubt, the most precious 
" title a man can possess in a free empire ; but this 
title alone is not sufficient ; we should possess also 
the necessary qualifications to fulfil the duties 



( u ) 



^* annexed to it: we know oursclres how very dc- 
•* ficient we are in that respect; we have been in a 
" manner compelled to abandon the pursuit of all 
•* moral and physical sciences, of all sciences, in 
" short, which tend to the improvement of the 
•* mind, in order to give ourselves up entirely to 
" commerce, to be enabled to gather as much 
** money as would insure protection, and satisfy 
" the rapacity of om* persecutors: in justice to 
*' truth we must say, however, that these many 
years' our hardships have been greatly alleviated 
in France, and particularly in I^orraine, since 
the reign of Stanislaus the benevolent, and that 
we never experienced from our rulers and magis- 
trates but marks of good will and protection; 
yet we always felt the inutility of mental acquire- 
•* ments, from the impossibility in which we saw 
ourselves of ever making any use of them. We 
" must then, dear brethren, strongly bear this 
truth in our minds, that till such a time as we 
work a change in our manners, in our habits, in 
" short, in our whole education, we cannot expect 
to be placed by the esteem of our fellow citizens 
" in any of those situations in which we can give 
signal piX)ofs of that glowing patriotism so long 
" cheri^ed in our bosoms. God forbid that I should 
" mean any thing derogatory to our professed re- 
" ligion, or to our established form of worship; far 



( 15 ) 



from me the idea of proposing any innovation 
in them. I should consider as monsters those 

«' among us, who, from the prospect of some ad- 
vantages they might expect from the new con- 
stitution, would presume to alter the dogmas of 
their religion. If, during our tribulations, we 
have derived some consolation from our strict 
adherence to our religion, how much more are we 
bound to remain firmly attached to it now, when 

" we are reaping the fruits of our perseverance and 
of our attachment to our religious worship, 
when we behold that of all ancient nations 
we are the only one who has been able to with- 
stand the heavy tides of misfortune, succeeding 
each other for centuries ! And now, expressedly 
chosen by the French constitution, should we, at 
the first dawn of liberty, pi-ove refractory to our 
laws, after having remained faithful to them 

" during eighteen centuries of persecution? No; I 
shall not believe any of my brethren capable 
of this. I shall not therefore address you on this 
head, not doubting but we all perfectly agree 
on the fundamental point. But I cannot too 
often repeat to you how absolutely necessary it is 
for us to divest ourselves entirely of that narrow 
spirit, of Corporation and Congregation, in all 
civil and political matters, not immediately con- 
ixectedwitb our spiritual laws; in these things 



( 16 ) 

" we must absolutely appear rimply as indivi- 
duals, as Frenchmen, guided only by a true 
patriotism and by the general good of tlie nation ; 
to know how to risk our lives and fortunes for the 
defence of the country, to make ourselves useful 
to our fellow citizens, to deserve their esteem and 
their friendship, to join our efforts to theii-s in 
maintaining public tranquility, on which that of 

" individuals depends; suchoughttobe the princi- 

*^ pal aim of our daily employment ; and as we 
are not yet able tofulfil those noble functions our- 

•'^ selves, we must turn our minds to the means 
necessary to be acquired, and, above all, in our 
attention on our children, and procure for them 
all the necessary instructions. Let us do for the 
present what is within our power; let us take the 

" civic oath of being faithful to the nation, to the 
law and to the king. This oath contains only the 

*' sentiments we have always professed* We have 
never been accused of being breakers of the 
law, or of having rebelled even ag-ainst those 
whodomineeredover us; we have always respected 

" and obeyed even those by whom we were ill-treat- 

" ed : we shall then,, upon much stronger grounds, 
remain faithful to laws which reinstate us in our 
rights, and place us, on the same footing with all 

" Frenchmen, leaving u»at the same time, at full 
iibiBrty to pi-ofess our religion, and to follow our 



( n ) 



" mode of worsUp. This oath, I say, which, on our 
" side, is nothing but a renuncitrtion of those pre- 

tended privileges and immunities which we en- 

joyed, cannot, under any point of view, wound 
" the conscience of the most orthodox and the most 
" scrupulous of our brethren; our privileges and 

our immunities were only relative to our state of 
" slavery. We had the privilege of forming a dis- 
" linct body of people and a separate commtmity ; 

but this carried with it the exclusion from all 
** other corporations, and the submission to partir 
^'cttlar taxes, much above our means and our 

resources, and arbitrarily imposed. If amember 

of that community was accused of any misde* 
" meanqrwhatever, the reproaches and thehumilia* 
*'tion fell on the whole; we were exempt from 

militia and from pub}ic works, but it was be- 
** cause we were deemed unworthy of it; and to 
" palliate the injustice of such proceedings, we were 

exempted, on condition of paying in money three 
" times the valueof such services, &c. It is certain- 

ly no hard matter to give up such privileges. 

" By the taking of this oath, which will be con- 
" sideredas a renunciation to all privileges and im- 
" munities heretofore introduced in our favour, we 
*• shall enjoy the rights and qualities of active citi- 
" zens, provided always we have the other necessaiy 

qualifications. You see then, dear brethren, that 

n 



( 18 ) 



there cannot be a shadow of difficulty or of scru- 
" pie about taking this oath, by means of which 
" we shall be constitutionally acknowledged as 
" French Jews. 

" This oath once taken, let us exert ourselves to 
" fulfil the dutieswithin our reach, but let us avoid 
" grasping at our rights; let us not rush headlong 
" against the opinions of some of our fellow citizens 
who, rendered callousbyprejudice, will reject the 
idea of Jews being fellow men, fellow creatures. 
" Let it be sufficient for us, at present, to have ac- 
quired the invaluable right of assisting at all as- 
" semblies of French citizens; but let us not attend 
" them, till we have acquired knowledge sufficient 
" to make ourselves useful members; till we know 
how to discuss and to defend the interests of the 
country; in short, till our most bitter enemies are 
convinced, and acknowledge the gross miscon- 
" ceptions they had entertained of us. 

If we cannot ourselves enjoy all the sweets of 
" the new constitution, for it is a hard matter to 
change habits and manners indulged in for thirty 
" or forty years, we shall at least see the first blos- 
" soms of the thriving plant gathered by our chil- 
" dren; we may even expect that indulgence from 
" our generous fellow citizens, should not our pwn 
" regeneration proceed as rapidly as we ourselves 
" could wish. Our education has been defective 



1 



( 19 ) 



inmany pointsof view. Already thefitmous Rab- 
" biHartwik Vessely, of Berlin, has rendered us an 
" eminent service, by publishing several works in 
" Hebrew on thissubject. One of his productions, 

entitled Salutarif Instructions addressed to the 
" Jewish Communities of the Empire^ has beentrans- 
" lated into French, in the year 1782. It details 
" the causes of our present ignorance, and the 
" means by which we may deserve once more the ap- 

pellation of the learned and intelligent nation, 

which God himself gave us. I shall not repeat 
^' here what you find in these useful publications; 
" but I entreat you, dear brethren, to follow this 

author in his meditations; and you will easily re- 
" mark that our fate, and the fate of our posterity, 
" depends solely on the change we shall effect in 
^* our mode of education. 

"Thefirstof our parental cares must be, no doubt, 
" to see that our children, in preference to all 

things, learn the holy Bible in the very language 
^' in which it was penned by the divine hand, and 
" transmitted to us by Moses our lawgiver; let them, 

then, know perfectly the Hebrew language, which 

notwithstanding its penury, is the key of all other 
" languages, and must be, for us in particular, the 
" first object of our studies. But to this day J© 
^* we really understand it? Have we masters able 
" to explairi it to us, and to give us its true mean- 

d2 



( ao ) 



ing in a faithful translation Before we posses- 
" ed a real treasure in the U amlcUion of the Bible 
" in German hy Mendelshon^ our children learnt 

Hebrew from masters whoexpljaneditin a dialect 

which neither the tutor nor the pupil could un- 
" dersixmd. Each master had his- method of trans^ 

lating and his manner of speaking, according to 

the country he came frmn; haixlly could we have 
" met three children, having learnt from three 
" different masters, who would have explained in 

the same manner, in the same language, or with 
" the same pronunciation the clearest passage erf 
" the holy writings, 

' ' Even now that we possess the sublime translation 
*' of Mendelshon, we have but very few teacherswho 
" are truly masters of the two languages into which 
" the Bible is written and ti-anslated.AVe see now and 
" then some scholars fmm Berlin, who come to this 
" country, but they are too few and tooexpensi veto 
" allow many of us to avail themselves of their in- 
" structions. It is however indispensable that, 
" while we are getting our children instructed the 
" principles of their religion in the original language, 
" we should procure for them an explanation in tiie 
" ordinarj'^ language, which they hear and speak 

from their infancy. 

" It appears to me that were it possible to get our 
*' children taught the holy Bible by a French ver- 



( 31 ) 



sion,insteadofa6ennaii one, provided such ayer 
si(m should be as faithful as that of the immor* 
tal Mendelshon, a great andmaterial advantage 
would result from the change: they would have 
only two languages to learn at the same time, 
" HebrewandFrench; whereas now they are obliged 
" to learn three at the same time, Hebrew, German^ 
" and French. Accordingly, this last, which ought 
to be their mother tongue, since they are reared 
with and among Frenchmen, has always been the 
" language in which they have made the least pro- 
" ficiency, and which very often they scarcely un- 
derstand. It is only when compelled by necessity 
" to speak to and to be understood by tlieir neigh* 
" hours that they begin to blunder soraeinarticidate 
" words; from hence proceeds this other inconve* 
niency , that those among us who have felt early 
" enough the usefulness of the French language, 
and have acquired the habit of speaking it with 
" facility, cannot, however, get rid of a German or 
" other foreign accents. Their phrases, too, arc 
generally incorrect I even must say myself, thai 
" while 1 am thus addressing you in French, I feel 
" my want of experience and of proficiency in that 
language, which I have however chosen in pre* 
" ference, to prove to you, that Jews may commune 
together and confer with one another in that lan» 
guage, on all topics even on religious matters, and 



( 22 ) 



that it is entirely in our power to atoid encumber- 
ing the minds of our youth with the useless study 
" of foreign languages. Have we not the example 
of the Jews of Asia, the most devout and the most 
" scrupulousof our brethren, who readandwriteon- 
" ly Hebrew and the language of their country ? 
" Why should we continue to bear thenameof Ger- 
" man or Polish Jews, while we are happily French 
" Jews ? 

I am well aware, dear brethren, that this pfo- 
" position cannot be adopted until we have a 

great part of our holy writings faithfully trans- 
" lated into French ; but till such a time as men 
" are found among us equal to that gi'eat task, let 
" us not neglect the means which may be con- 
" ducive to the unfolding of the necessary talents. 

I would, then, propose to you, dear brethren, to 
" establish a public school for us, on a plan similar 

to that of Berlin, and of several other places in 
"the empire; we shall appoint professors of 
" Hebrew, whom we must, it is true, procure from 
^' great distances ; and we shall likewise appoint 
" French teachers. I have no doubt but our chil- 
" dren will make a rapid progress in both the 
" languages thus taught them ; they mil become 
" at the same time the supports of our religion and 
"of the French constitution; and, after going 
" through the several classes^ they will return to 



( 23 ) 



US with a deep sense of the holiness of our re- 
" ligion, whose dogmas they will here learn from 
^* the true principles, and may prove at the same 
" time good Jews and good French citizens. j4fter 
** the first essay, we may add to the school pro- 
" fessorships of all Arts and Sciences, that our 

children may see glorious careei-s open before 
" them, and may choose, according to their incli- 

nation, that kind of pursuit in which the esteem 
" of their fellow citizens, and an honest mainte- 

nance, will be the reward of their exertions. 

We shall then no longer be exclusively addicted 
" to that mercantile and trafficking spirit, which, 
*^ till now, has been almost the only one by which 
" we have been actuated. 

" Moreover, dear brethren, when we have ful- 
" filled our first duty towards our children ; when 

once they are thoroughly initiated in the prin- 
" ciples and spirit of our religion, we may, with- 
" out apprehension of danger, avail ourselves of 
" the resources offered to us by our generous 
" countrymen, by pending them to share the ad- 
" vantages of national education in the public 
" schools; certainly they will not be thwarted in 
" their religious opinions; and once easy on that 
" score, they soon will become beloved among 
" their comrades, by sharing their emulation and 

their wishes of deserving the approbation of 



( 24 ) 



«^ their superiors. By means of that union in 
^ schools, our children, like those of our fellow- 
^ citizens, willremark from their tender youth that 
^ neither opinions, nor difTcrence of religion, are 
a bar to fraternal love; and that every one na- 
turally embracing and following the religion of 
^ his fathers, all may, in fulfilling their religious 
^ duties, fulfil also those of citizenship; from that^ 
^ aversion, all hatred, all antipathy between 
** them will be done away. In, proportion as they 
increase in years, those ties of friendship and of 
fraternity will b© drawn closer, in whatever is 
^ of social and political nature, not conti'ary to the 
^ dogmas of religion. They will have learned 
that, on leaving the school, some have been with 
*^ their parents to church, others to chapel, others to 
the synagogue, ta worship, in difi^rent modes 
*^ and with different dogmas, the true living 
God, the sole Creator of the Universe. 
^^Let us establish charitable houses of in- 
dustry, tn which the children of poor people and 
those who are not bom to a higher rank, shall 
learn all the trades and mechanical occupations 
necessary to society. Let us form among us 
** carpenters, smiths, tailor$&, &c. And if we can 
succeed to have a man in each profession, able to 
** work as a master, he will soon fonn appren- 
tices; and gradually we shall see Jewish work- 



( 25 ) 

" men who will strive to deserve esteem by eani- 
ing honourably their livelihood. Thus shall we 
banish sloth and indolence, occasioned by the 
idleness of our youth. 

" You will here observe to me, with some truth, 
dear brethren, that it is much easier to propose 
these plans than to carry them into execution, 
and that these proposed establishments would 
require funds probably to a large amount. But 
you will not believe, I trust, that this considera- 
tion has escaped me; and indeed I had already 
found the means of meeting all necessary ex- 
pences, when I determined to impart to you my 
ideas on the sul^ect, Undoubtedly we must 
have fixed and regular revenues before we can 
think of undertaking any of the establishments 
I have proposed. But what Jew is there in 
tolerable circumstances who will not be ready 
" to make sqme sacrifices? Who will refuse to be 
subject even to personal privations, in order 
to contribute something to the general happiness 

of his brethren, and thus give, as far as lays in 
" him, a pledge of our gratitude for the fraten^al 
" act of our fellow-citizens ? 

" When we were forming a separate community 
" in the ci-dev^mt province of Lorraine, we had 

excessive chargestosupport, besides a sum of be- 

tween fifteen and sixteen thousand livres, which 

E 



26 ) 

" we were bound collectively and individually to 

pay either to the king, or as a tax on industry; 
" or for wages of the Parliament, &c. We had 
" besides, individually, to pay arbitrary taxes in 

the places of our residence, for the quartering 
" of soldiers, for the poor, the parish, the public 
" works, public wells, &c.; and again, besides the 

charges peculiar to us, the syndics [wardens) 

elected by our former community were by it au- 
" thorised, with the approbation of government, to 

form lists of contribution, and to tax individuals, 
" members of that community, according to their 

meansarid abilities. Now this community is dis- 
" solved; and, thanks to those who were at the 

head of its administration for more than fifty 
" years in succession, the receipts and the general 
" expences balance each other, without its being 

encumbered with considerable arreai's, or loaded 
" with any debt whatever. We shall pay in fukire 
" our equal share of national taxes, like the rest of 
" assessed people in Fmnce, and in the same pro- 
" portions: we shall, in a manner, pay only what 
" we have consented to pay by the vote of our re- 

presentatives, who are equally those of all French- 

men. In that case, dear brethren, let us make 
" one single effort ; let us shew ourselves capable 
*- of foregoing present advantages, to make our* 

selves worthy of greater ones at a future period, 



( 37 ) 



" not very distant. Let us voluntarily deprive 
" ourselves of a part of the benefits conferred upon 
" us by the new constitution, in order to enable us 
" to offer to the country, in the persons of our chil- 
" dren, worthier objects of her favours than we 
" ourselves are. Let us form communities, such as 
" we had in Lori-aine, and invite those Jews to join 
us, who, by the new division of the kingdom in- 
" to eighty-three departments, are now, like us, 
" inhabitants of that of La Meurthe. Let us 
" unanimously and voluntarily consent to support, 
" for ten years longer, a charge equal to that we 
" were heretofore obliged to pay. Let us employ 
" that sum, by which we formerly purchased tole- 
" ranee and protection, in forming men worthy of 
" that liberty they have just obtained. Once sure 
of a fixed and regular income, nothing can pre- 
" vent us from forming those establishments ne- 
" cessary for the education of our children. 

" We shall continue to maintain the Kabbi 
" elected by our ci-devant community, who will 
*' fulfil the functions of Grand Rabbi in whatever 
relates to our religious customs and ceremonies. 
" Wherever the number of Jewish inhabitants is 
*^ sufficiently numerous, we shall establish parti- 
" cular Rabbis, or vicars^ who shall be named by 
" us likewise, shall be approved by the Grand Rab- 
bi, and placed under his inspection. Wherever 
e2 



( 28 ) 



a vicar shall be appointed, he will have his par- 
ticular district, in which he will be bound to 
discharge his religious and civil functions, inas- 
" much as these last are connected with our reli- 
" gion. All children of the Jews of the depart- 
" ment, and of those who will have voluntarily 
" consented to contribute, according to tlieir 
means, to the general fund, shall be admitted in 
the establishments for education, and in the 
houses of industry, instruction, arts, and trade. 
" We may easily fix the mode of collecting the ne- 
" cessary contributions, and of accounting for the 
produce, by placing at the head of the adminis* 
" tration men in whom we can confide. By means 
" of this general contribution we shall likewise 
relieve and prevent the wants of our aged and 
infirm poor, who are unable to earn their daily 
" bread. It is exclusively to this class that we 
" must direct our attention and extend our cares; 
*' but we must go farther; and when we meet with 
*' men able to work unblushingly asking for alms, 
" let us strive to refuse them; let them experience 
" the harshness of a humiliating refusal, however 
*' repugnant to our charity and to our feelings. 
^* By this means we shall put a stop to idleness, 
" which too often prefers the bread of charity to 
that of labour. If we have been reproached at 
one time with want of industrj', indolence, and 



( 29 ) 

*' aversion to labour, let us now avoid such re- 
** proaches, which might be unjust formerly, but 
" which we should now deserve. Let us exert all 
our influence to accustom our poor, who, till 
now, have been fed by our alms, to prefer the 
gains of labour, even at the sweat of their brows. 
In thus imparting to you my humble ideas on 
" our present situation, I am, dear brethren, fulfil- 
" ling a duty the most congenial to my feelings. 

My thoughts, as you may see, are presented to 
" you in a crude state: it is by your attention and 
by your meditations, should you deem them wor- 
thy of them, that they are to be matured and 
" quickened into action. Whatever success may 
" attend them, I hope, at least, that you shall do 
" justice to the fraternal sentiments, which, un- 
*' mixed with any other motives, have urged me 
to exhort and press you, dear brethren, not to 
lose one moment in taking our situation into 
" your consideration. 

1 have the honour to be most fraternally, 
" Gentlemen and dear brethren, 
" Your most obedient 

" And very humble servant, 
(Signed) " BERR.ISAAC-BERR.'^ 

Every one must feel that this letter deserves to 
be preserved, and to be handed down to posterity. 



( 30 ) 



it will be a lasting monument of the good sense of 
the Israelites acquainted with their duties, and en- 
Kghtened as to their true interests. It will prove 
that, at the very epoch when the rights of citizens 
have been conferred on individuals, till then pining 
unregarded in an abyss of misfortune, those 
among them who were able to make them ac- 
quainted with all the advantages of their new 
condition, have been eager to instruct them ; and 
it is certainly obvious that these men, well ap- 
prized of the habits, the misfortunes, and, if you 
will have it so, the weaknesses of their brethren, 
were before-hand certain of the success of their 
observations, since they chose to give them so 
gi'eat a publicity. 

It would be an absurd thing to suppose that 
M. Berr-Isaac-Berr was widting in 1791, for the 
very purpose of anticipating the contrast between 
the future conduct of the Jews and his sentiments, 
and was thus preparing, beforehand, against his 
brethren a mass of proofs to convince them of 
want of submission and of a breach of the oath 
they were about to take. 

It is impossible not to own that he published 
this letter because, like all men well informed 
of the principles of their religion, he was firmly 
and sincerely persuaded that his brethi^n would 
not turn a deaf ear to the voice of the country, and 



( 31 ) 



to that of honour, but would eagerly fulfil all the 
duties of their new condition. 

We see therefore, a praise-worthy zeal in this 
conduct of M, Berr-Isaac-Berr, and in that of the 
other Israelites, who, like him, have enlightened 
their brethren at the epoch of the decree of Sep- 
tember, 1791. 

On the other hand, the publication of this let- 
ter proves, that there was then a well-grounded 
hope and a moral ceitainty, that all the Israelites 
would loyally exert themselves to deserve the fa- 
vour conferred on them by that law, in fulfilling 
;ill the conditions which did not militate against 
their religious principles. 

And all this has been confirmed by their con* 
duct since 1791. 

In general, the Jews become Frenclmien have 
fulfilled their new duties; this is notorious: all 
have been faithful to the laws of regenerated France; 
all have done their duty as national guards ; all 
have vied with Frenchmen in zeal for the defence 
of the country. Many have vested their fortunei^ 
in landed property, others in commercial esta- 
blishments; some have acquired celebrity in sci- 
ences; some, too, have acquired honour in the 
fields of glory ; and these last are certainly enti- 
tled to some praise for their constancy in overcom- 
ing the disheartening obstacles thrown in their 
way by illiberal prejudices. 



( 92 ) 



The errors of some Jews (2) have aggravated the 
misfortunes of their fellow-citizens; but the jus- 
tice of the laws has put a stop to the evil ; and, 
what is still better, the source of the mischief is 
on the point of being closed by decisions and re- 
gulations, for which we shall be indebted to the 
great thoughts of our august Emperor. 

I own it; thus far the habits of some of our bre- 
thren have afforded pretences to censure ; and in- 
deed there were not wanting men to take hold of 
the subject, in order to make it the theme of their 
declamations against us all indiscriminately. 

In February, 1806, means were sought to plunge 
us again into misfortune. M. de Bonald, more ad- 
vantageously known by other publications, made 
this the subject of his observations, and I must 
give an account of them in this collection. 

I have pledged myself to disguise nothing, and I 
shall adhere to my engagements. It is neccssaiy 
that our brethren, that our children, should be ac- 

(2) This is a liint at the enormous usury practised by the Jews, who 
have been known to take five and six per cent, per month upon bills of 
landholders, the payment of which was the moixi secure, as, by the 
present French laws, landed property is liable to those debts, and a man's 
estate may be sold there for the most trivial debt of that nature, with 
less formality and delay than would be necessar}- to foreclose a mortgage 
in this country. The evil had risen to such a height, that an imperial 
decree had suspended actions for debt in departments where Jews chief- 
ly rrslde. We shall see more on thi* subject in the coiu'se of this work. 



{ 33 ) 



quainted with whatever has passed. It is our duty 
to strengthen our political situation by all the 
means which can possibly prevent dangerous in- 
fringements. We must never forget all the pains 
we have experienced before we could be admitted 
citizens of a great state ; we must frequently look 
back; we must transmit to our children all that 
has been published by our enemies, boasting of 
their zeal, with a view to plunge us again into a 
state of slavery inimifcal to prosperity. Our chil- 
dren, like ourselves, will then appreciate more 
justly the advantages of our new condition, and 
all the extent of the duty imposed on them, to 
shew themselves worthy of it. By this they will 
shew our sincere gratitude for the benefits which 
are our pride, and at the same time they ^vill 
put a stop to those prejudices, which, gi-ounded 
on the errors of some of us, have uniforndy gi- 
ven birth to declamations agiiinst us all, highly 
detrimental, till now, to our dearest interests. 

I am then to give an account of M. de Bonald's 
obsei-valions ; but I must first notice a publication 
of a M. Poujol, entitled, Some Obsermtions con-- 
cerning the Jews in general^ and particularly those 
of Alsace. 

The general wish has been that I should give the 
priority to this work of M. Poujol ; and I am the 



( 84 ) 



more induced to do it, as he has gone farther than 
any of our enemies. Indeed he has been so fatr led 
astray by error, that he has pix>posed to deprive us^ 
at least for a time^ of the rights of citizefiship/ He 
proposes, consequently, the revocation of the de- 
cree of 1791, and would, by an act of the legisla- 
ture, throw us again in the forlorn state from 
whence we have been extricated by the first Na- 
tional Assembly, deferring, says he, to restore to us 
the rank of citizens till such time as the measures 
he proposes will have made us more deserving of 
it. 

This is plainly proposing the question, Mliether 
the public power should not go back to the decree 
of 1791, to rescind and annul it ? 

It is then perfectly right that I should first exa- 
mine a question which, by attacking that decree, 
undermines the very basis of our new condition. 

This inquiry will fiurther the views of M. Poujol. 
if, as he has said in his prefece, he wishes sincerely 
that his iileas should be matured i/i the contest of a 
spund discussioiu 

Certainly this expression itself is not sufficient- 
ly matured ; however, I understand it. M. Poi^ol 
b^ns the discussion. He courts inquiry^ to ap- 
pear just and impartial ; he cannot, therefore, take 
it amiss, if his ideas are submitted to a close in- 
vestigation. The task of maturing them rested 



( 35 ) 



with him ; no one but himself can judge or ap- 
preciate his meaning but by hii^ expressions: and 
since I see myself called upon to publish a critical 
examination, I wish, in my turn, that M. Polijol 
may read it with the intention of benefitting by 
the solutions I give of his questions, and which I 
trust will be found satisfactory. 

In a critical discussion, an adversary must 
expect no favour. 

I cannot pass over even the epigraph M. Poujol 
has affixed to his publication. 

It is a strange inconsistency to introduce the 
idea of all manner of crimes in the title-page of a 
publication, held out as impartial, and whose pre^ 
tended aim is to bring about, with more certain*- 
fy, the happiness of those who are the objects of it. 

In this the heart of M. Poujol is not to blame, 
if, as he says in his preface, he had no injuries of 
his friends to avenge. 

But what name are we to give to that kind of 
wit, which, affecting a treacherous indulgence, ush-f 
ers in his protestations by announcing that the 
subject he is going to treat will offer the picture 
of all the crimes w hich have ever disgraced man- 
kind? 

If the inquirer cannot impeach the rectitude of 
M. PoujoPs intentions, he may justly reproach him 
with a great error of judgment. 



( 36 ) 



Again, was he more judicious in the time cho- 
sen to publish his Observations? after the decree of 
May 30, 1806, (3) and during the sittings of the as- 
sembly it had called together? and at such a mo- 
ment M.Poujol writes to inquire what aretliejittest 
vsays to reform the manners and the habits of ihcJews^ 
and to induce them to adopt those of the nation to 
which they belong? 

These questions were already decided; the 
necessary resolutions were adopted; and this 
is proved by the imperial decree of the 30th of 
May itself, and by the benevolent declarations 
contained in its preamble. 

We had an express declaration that their eiTors^ 
or if you will have it so^ their faults^ sprung from the 
degrading state to which they had been too long redu-- 
ced. 

Another declaration, equally express, states, that 
it is not the sovereign's intention to maintain 
and to renew this order of things. 

It is then very evident, that M. Poujol has pro- 
posed an useless inquiry. It is evident that his 
publication is the produce of error, if not of ha- 
tred. 

(3) An assembly had been called together to assist by its observatlonr 
in the choice of the means which mis;ht be successfully employed to in- 
duce the Jews to follow useful professiom, and to replace, by an honest iiH 
duttrtf, those shameful resources to which tlicy had too long rcsoried. 



( 37 ) 

Why open a discussion on matten^ alreacly settled 
by a solemn imperial decree ? 

Mv Ponjol has been unwittingly hurried by his 
wish of indulgint^in unavailing declamations. 

This of itself would be a sufficient rea^n to re* 
ject his pamphlet among those publications which 
are the offspring of error or passion, which do not 
^ven deserve the attention of the wise or the ho- 
nest man. 

But there ai-e, besides, special motives which 
have actuated M.Poujol, and these 1 must notice. 

Mark the drift and meaning of his publication ; 
he proposes to take from us, at least for some timey 
the benefits resulting from the decree of 1791. 

And this he proposes because, as he says in the 
course of his Observations, we must be made to 
be whatweought to be, before we can be considered 
as citizens. 

But, first. Why that daring censure on the im- 
perial decree of the 30th of May, 1806? 

What, our august Emperor, constituted the 
guardian of the French constitution, has declared 
that it is not his intentioii to maintain or to renew the 
degrading state to which we have been too hiig re^ 
diicedf 

And M. Poujol wants to bring us back to it, 
simply by annulling the decree of 1791 ! 

In opposition to those benevolent and protecting 



( 38 ) 



intentions, to which we are indebted for the decree 
of the 30th of May, 1806, M. Poujol proposes art 
act pregnant with confusion and destruction, such 
as the blind policy of former centuries too often 
produced. 

If such an idea does not tell against his heart, if 
it is not the proof of most malignant hatred, it 
affords, at least, an instance of want of judgment, 
which borders on insanity. 

Indeed this idea of M . Poujol is so vicious in every 
point of view that it cannot fail of meeting with 
universal reprobation. 

In writing these Obsei*v^tions, M. Potijot had 
forgot then the assertion be makes in bis prefece. 

He says there, tluU the faeU and obserocUions he 
is going to preface can an4 ifwt^t applicable to the 
German Jews (mly^ amd not tQ the Fovtuguese JewSf 
who form a different sect^ 

How has it happened, thenj that the measures he 
proposes should be levelled indiscriminately at all 
the Jews who* are become French citizens? M, 
Poujol has thus given an instance of inconsistent 
cy ; bis warmth or his hatred have carried him be- 
yond the bounds he himself had fixed. 

Why did he announce that his Observations were 
applicable to German Jem only, if his intention 
^vas to attack all tliose who have been made French 
citizens ? 



( 39 ) 



Or, if he really intended to stand forth against 
the German Jews only, why pass over the exception 
he had made himself in favour of the Portuguese 
Jews? 

I should ask also, why M« Poujol, in acknow* 
ledging that he should except the Portuguese, has 
forgot the Avignonese Jews ? 

He must know, or assuredly he can learn, that 
when the first National Assembly took into its con- 
sideration the situation of the Jews in France, its 
decrees expressly mentioned Portuguese ^ Spanish^ 
and Avignonese Jews, the Jews of Alsace^ and of the 
other provinces (4). He may learn, that this as- 
sembly having made no distinction, all the Jews 
residing in France, from whatever country they 
came, enjoy the rights of French citizens. 

Why then except the Portuguese Jey/s only, from 
a measure apparently levelled against the German 
Jews only ? 

And lasdy. Why, according to M. PoujoPsideas, 
why, I say, include in a kind of general ostracism 
even those among the Portuguese, Spanish, Avig- 
nonese , or German Jews, who, previous to the year 
1789, had obtained letters of naturalization ? had 
acquired landed property or commercial establish- 
ments, which they securely eiyoyed, and had a 
right to enjoy as French citizens ? 

(4) Decrees of the 28th of January, aad tUth of April; 1790. 



( 40 ) 

For it is notorious, that, besides the Jews of 
Bourdeaux and of Metz, who had collectively ob- 
tained that privilege by letters patent, many indi- 
viduals had obtained letters of naturalization. 
M. Poujol may also rest assured, and it is easy to 
prove, that Avignonese Jews had also been natu- 
ralized as Frenchmen, and on the strength of that 
they had acquired landed property, which was 
indeed almost their whole fortune. 

What would become of them? How should 
they rank in society, they or their descendants, if, 
according to M. Poujol's ideas, all Jews should lose 
their rights of naturalization ? 

The decree of the 2d of January, which declares 
that they shall enjoy the rights of active citizens^ 
should then be annulled likewise. 

And this would produce a fresh degree of con* 
fusion. 

We must be astonished, from everj' circum- 
stance, that M. Poujol, who has proved himself an 
^ble writer, should not have perceived that his plan 
and his ideas are in open contradiction with all the 
principles of public order and of private interest. 

How could it have escaped him, that the reso- 
lutions of the imperial decree of the 30th of May, 
1S06, without altering the laws of 1790 and 1791, 
contains all tlie rules of our future conduct, and 
all the means which an enlightened benevolence 



I 



( 41 ) 



could suggest to conciliate all clashing interests, 
and to make all the Israelites, even those who were 
guilty of the faults laid to their charge, worthy of 
their new condition. 

Instead of a distinction, which a partial measure 
would have rendered necessary, in order to except 
those Jews residing in France who have proved 
worthy of the benefits of the law, the decree of 
the 30th of May gi-ounds its wise resolutions oa 
the general basis fixed in J 791 ; and this is certainly 
a grand and glorious thought of a protecting ge- 
nius. 

Again. — Instead of proposing inquisitorial mpa*.^ 
sures, by which every Israelite residing in 1 ranee 
would have been, in a manner, brought to account 
for his conduct, government has included them all 
in its thoughts, has selected the good to bring back 
the weak to their duty, and to create, with salutary 
foresight, the means of preventing future evils. 

M. Poujol has misconceived every thing; the 
pen sliould have droi)ped from his hand, or, better 
still, he should not have taken it up, since he de- 
clares that lie has been strack by tlie sublime wis- 
dom of the measures prescribed by the imperial 
decree of the 30tli of May, 1806. 

M. Poujol ought to have perceived also that the 
kind of measures prescribed in this decree, indica- 
ted that the views of His Imperial Majesty were 

G 



( 42 ) 

directed towards the attainment of advantages 
which will be an eternal source of glory and of 
prosperity for the whole empire. 

Is it by rigorous measures that moral improve- 
ments are to be effected? That men debarred from 
civil rights by ancient prejudices are to be resto- 
red to society? That they are to be rendered sub- 
servient to the interests of arts and of commerce 
for which they are so eminently qualified by their 
industry and by their economy ? 

And why make use of compulsion, when reason 
and persuasion may, with more certainty and more 
glory, produce all the wished for advantages? 

What then must be the prpsent thoughts of 
Poujol? now that this first examination of his pub- 
lication must have exposed its glaring errors even 
to himself? especially now, that our august Empe- 
ror has announced, by a receipt resolution, that this 
benevolence calls on all Israelites scattered on tlie 
face of the globe, to pave the way for institu- 
tions conceived in his sublime wisdom ? 

The measures proposed by M. Poujol would 
have prevented any good effects ; they would have 
rendered success impossible, A great Emperor, by 
his justice, by his wisdom, and by the sublimity 
of his views, has created means which will be 
crowned with such successes as to astonisli this 
tvorld. 



( 43 ) 



The great work will be accomplished. France 
will become the common country of all Israelites, 
capable of fulfilling all the moral duties of man, 
A combination of knowledge will produce incal* 
culable advantages ; their blessings, ascending to 
the God of their fathers, will be the solemn pled« 
ges of their gratitude. 

And when we should give ourseh es up entirely 
to the contemplation of those exalted ideas, M, 
Poujol presumes to mislead the judgment of his 
readei-s, by saying that His Imperial Majesty has 
conceived the idea of doing what the greatest sove^ 
reigns had vainly attempted to do in former centuries. 

It is not proved that the idea of giving the Jews 
all the rights of citizens useful to society, has ever 
been entertained* 

Oppressive means have always l^een unjustly re- 
sorted to and renewed against them ; they have al- 
ways been punished with excessive severity, perhajis 
for crimes almost justifiable by the iryustice to 
which they have been subjected. 

And was it even true, that other sovereigns had 
ever entertained the idea of giving the Jews an 
acknowledged rank in the state, still it is beyond a 
doubt that excessive prejudices have been pro- 
ductive of great evil, by constantly preventing 
so generous an idea from being carried into execu- 
tion. 

g2 



( 44 ) 

Still, in this point of view, the whole merit is to 
be solely attributed to the measures of tlie decree 
of the 30th of May, and of that now preparing, 
which will combine whatever instruction and the 
love of duty can suggest, to assuage, on the one 
hand, the religious apprehensions of the Israelites, 
and to conquer, on the other, those prejudices 
which have too long raised enemies against them. 

M. Poujol has filled three chapters of his publi- 
cation with common place subjects often treated 
before, and now unwittingly or maliciously repro- 
duced. One is an exposition of facts^ explanatory 
of the laics concerning the Jews; the other, a view of 
the measures adopted against them in several countries y 
and particularly in France and in Alsace ; the third 
is a faithful account of the manners and jrresent 
habits of the Jews in general^ and particularly of the 
Jews of Alsace. Every thing that could be said on 
this head will be found in the Moniteur of the 25th 
of July, 1806 : M. Poujol knew it, since he notices 
it in his preface. 

Why then bring back to oup minds the recollec- 
tion of subjects which, to the wise and impartial 
man, present only scenes of misfortune ? 

The remembrance of these things was perfectly 
fresh; they were recorded in our histories; and, 
more than once, even in courts of justice, zealous 
advocates have been heard attempting to over* 



( 45 ) 



power the Jews against whom they were retained 
by the recital of all the imputations laid to the 
charge of their fathers. 

But must the past errors, or, as they are called, the 
past crimes of some, be for ever the pretence or the 
ground of the oppression and misfortune of all? 

In 1790 and 1791 eveiy thing relating to us was 
perfectly known. In the very report which was 
read at the tribune of the first National Assembly, 
the committee intrusted with the inquiry disguised 
nothing, neither of the facts recorded in history, 
nor of the numerous consequences which writers 
have thought themselves warranted to draw from 
them. 

But this inquiry put a stop to all opposition: it 
was acknowledged that, by giving the Jews a coun- 
try and the rights of citizens, it would be laying 
the basis of their future happiness, and of all those 
advantages which might be expected from their 
residence in France. 

And since, to sum up all, our august Emperor 
had formed the same opinion, why seek for pretexts 
cf hatred and prejudice which an enlightened 
benevolence has determined to bury in oblivion ? 
Would the Israelites be allowed to avail themselves 
now of the loyalty, of the fidelity, of the stupen^ 
dous works of their fathers, previous to those 



( 46 ) 



epochas where commenced that long train of mis- 
fortunes which are now cited against them? 

This, however, would be engaging in the contro- 
versy with equal weapons- 

But it is agreed, and it is consonant to sound 
reason, that no men whatever are to be governed 
according to the prejudices which may result from 
the conduct, the virtues, or the crimes of their an- 
cestors. 

Whenever men c^n be useful, can serve a coun- 
tryj and increase its means of prosperity, they 
have a right to the benevolence of their fellow 
men ; they may expect from their wisdom all the 
encouragements necessary to produce the good 
they are cajlable of effecting. 

And what influence can those results have on the 
exposition which composes the fourth chapter of 
M. PoujoFs Observations : What is the use which 
the Jews have made since 1791 of the protection 
granted to them by the latcs^ and of the rights of ci* 
tizens whichit has conferred on them? 

According to right, the faults or the misdemea- 
nours of some Israelites cannot be imputable to all. 

By the same rule, if some of them have been 
guilty of actions which the decree of the 30th 
of May, 1806, denominates shameful resourcesy how 
many others have shewn talents and virtues which 



( 47 ) 



have rendered them celebrated, and adorned the 
age they li re in ? 

Amoa^ tliem may be enumerated enlightened 
administrators; among them may be enumerated 
me?i glowing with zeal, which they have proved 
bj their services in the French armies; among 
them may be enumerated merchants highly valued 
in tlieir community, and in all commercial towns. 

According to the views of government, measures 
prepared with wisdom and foresight, writings 
which will disseminate instruction, will prevent 
the return of the talked of evils. 

And most certainly it is wiser to forgive a few 
misguided men, than to seek in their faults a pre- 
tence to punish those who have always fulfilled 
their duties. 

That is by far the surer way to obtain those ad- 
vantages which may be expected from the great 
views of a sovereign, who in this, as in every thing 
else, will beheld as a model to future centuries. 

M. Poujol has been guilty of a very strange er- 
ror when he affirms, in his Observations, that 7to 
measures can be taken to correct the manners and the 
habits of the Jews, without taking from them the 
rights of citizens. 

To make any class of men better, why sliould it 
be necessary to go back to the social contract, to 



( 48 ) 



irescind and annul it as far as it concerns them, and 
to begin by throwing them back in a forlorn state 
of political nullity? 

Can the country find no other means to bring 
her children back to habits of virtue, that she 
should resort to the violent measures of exclusion 
and ostracism against those she wants to improve ? 

Again, how will M. Poujol reconcile his ideas 
with the basis laid by the constitutions of the em- 
pire, and especially that of the year 8? Are the 
faults, the usuries, of those Israelites w ho have 
neglected their duties, among those evils which car- 
ry with them the forfeiture or even the suspension 
of the rights of French citizens ? 

M. Poujol will not presume to say so; he must 
be convinced, then, that the measure |ie proposes 
would go beyond the limits fixed by the fourth 
and fifth articles of the constitution of the year 8: 
and that the act, which should thus deprive of their 
rights even those Israelites who have acted wrong, 
would be in itself an unconstitutional measure. 

And what character would it assume towards 
those whom he acknowledge^ to be free from the 
blame he imputes to otliers ? 

M. Poujol must wonder himself at having ever 
conceived the horrid idea of inflictini>* so terrible a 
punisliment on citizens whom he pronounces 
blameless. 



( 49 ) 



What assurance, too, to insinuate that it is im- 
possible to mend the morals of the Jews, or to 
make useof measuresnot general, against them with'- 
out depriving them of the rights of citizens/ 

Indeed M. Poujol himself has taken care to 
prove his own error ; for he says, a few pages lower 
down, that the ^first National Assembly^ in giving the 
Jews their liberty, seemed disposed to adopt towards 
them measures calculated to reform their manners and 
their habits. 

Taking this wish and this resolution for granted, 
it follows that even then the granting of the rights 
of citizens was not considered as an obstacle to sa- 
lutary reforms. 

How could M. Poujol foi-m a different idea? 

How could he take upon himself to publish an 
error now demonstrated more clearly than ever by 
the decree of the 30th of May, 1806, and by the 
succeeding acts? 

It is acknowledged, it is settled, that the bene- 
volence of government will bring back misled 
citizens to the observance of their duties, in which 
they will find their greatest happiness. 

It is a kind of madness in a man to raise his 
voice in opposition, and vainly to censure the acts 
of the first National Assembly, and those of a so- 
vereign who, faithful to his coronation«oath, main- 
tains the bases fixed by our constitutional acts;, and 

H 



( 50 ) 

mngnanhnously fulfils his duties by giving^strength 
and efficacy to their dispositions. 

But, on the other hand, let us see what are, accor- 
ding to M. Poujol, the obstacles to our reforma- 
tion, which might result from the rights of citizens? 

The Jews require, he 'says, particular measures 
which are inconsistent with the titles the quality y and 
the prerogatives of citizens. 

Then he adds, legislative measures are general; 
no particular ones can be adopted against this or that 
class of citizens. 

It is necessary tlien to exclude the Jews from the 
rights of citizens^ in order to submit them to particu* 
iar regulations, to a kind of inquisitorial police, a7id 
io more severe penalties. 

Mere sophism, which most certainly proceeds 
from blindness, from hatred, or from the fancies 
of a delirious imagination* 

What else is this new principle, which goes to 
prevent, in civil legislation, all recourse to mea- 
sures required by the paramount consideration of 
public welfare? 

In the first ages of the ancient monarchy, were 
not the Roman laws adopted in France, while se- 
eral tribes which had obtained leave to settle in 
the country continued to follow their own. 

In the centuries which followed, down to 1790, 
did w^e not remark in the civil code, special laws 



( 51 ) 



between the lords and their vassals, and others 
which made unlawful for some classes of citizens 
what tliey allowed to others? 

Are not instances of laws affecting only some 
particular individuals to be found even in the pre- 
sent civil code? 

There is, then, neither contradiction nor incon- 
sistency when the civil law annexes to its disposi- 
tions of general interest particular exceptions 
which the situation of individuals renders neces-^ 
sary* 

Will M. Poujol, speaking as a rash reformer, 
pretend that no Frenchman should be bound by 
laws not general, without being previously degrad* 
ed by the forfeiture of his rights of citizen? 

He presumes to say that the French government 
will do a great deal for the Jews by giving back 
to those who may appear to deserve it those rights 
which he wishes to see taken from them. 

But has he calculated the extent of the calami- 
ties which would befal even those he acknowledges 
as blameless from the harsh measure he proposes 
against all? 

Indeed M. Poujol is much to be pitied, if he does 
not consider himself bound to renounce publicly 
the errors and the injustices he has so plentifully 
introduced in his publication.. 

It is certaiply the duty of goveiii^m^nt to see that; 

Hi? 



( 52 ) 



justiceis done to debtors who complain of usury 
and extortion. 

But it is equally certain that courts of justice 
can pronounce only according to the rules laid 
down by the laws. 

Why then propose, in this publication, to annul 
written agreements freely entered into by the con- 
tracting parties? 

^Vhy bring to our recollection the ruinous epochs 
of the suppression and abolition of debts — measures, 
which to prevent the success of some partial in- 
justices, aimed a deadly blow to all rights of pro- 
perty, always entitled to the protection of the law? 

M. Poujol has proposed a more useful idea, an 
idea more consonant to the magnanimous views of 
government, when he has observed that a kind of 
special jury might with propriety settle all differ- 
ences between debtors and creditors. 

But why did he propose the unconstitutional 
measure of forming a jury of deputies, who, in the 
legislative body, represent the departments by 
which they have been returned ? 

Legislators can, in no case, receive from the so- 
vereign the commission of distributing justice, as it 
is one of his prerogatives. 

Other men, worthy of his confidence, will then be 
called upon, to form a special jury, whose equlta- 



( 53 ) 



ble verdict will terminate suits which have already 
lasted too long. 

The appeal proposed by M* Poujol is the last of 
his errors. 

A trial by jury does not admit of this mode of 
proceeding. Our laws have wisely ordered that, in 
the ordinary course of justice, each suit should 
bear the test of two judgments. 

But trials by special jury are, from their very na- 
ture, excepted from this rule. Decisions essen- 
tially grounded on the knowledge of facts, and dic- 
tated by an impartial view to general interest, ad- 
mit of no revisions ; they may be useful in ordinary 
cases, where all the rules of actions have been pre- 
viously laid down by the law, but in special cases 
they would supersede all motives arising from cir- 
cumstantial evidence, to make room for general 
opinions, less applicable to them, and defeating the 
true purposes of essential justice. 

M. Poujol has not said, what, however, is very 
true, that his special jury would have all the cha- 
racteristic of a special commission, named by the 
sovereign to distribute justice in his name. 

But at all times and in every circumstance, the 
unlimited power of putting a stop to law proceed- 
ings has justified all the measures taken to fulfil 
that intention of the sovereign. 



( 54 ) 



Thus special criminal courts have hiien institu- 
ted for forgery and for crimes daily renewed hy 
a set of desperate and hardened ruffians (5). 

Thus, to put a stop to the depredations commit** 
ted in our forests, the court des eatsx et forits^ (6) 
has been empowered to pass judgment whenever 
the accused has been taken in the fact, or when 
one of the rangers should become an accomplice 
for the purpose of turning evidence. 

In the case before us, debtors, receiving from 
their sovei*eign a solemn pledge of his protection, 
will see with pleasure their interests placed in the 
hands of men deemed worthy of his confidence. 

In this case too, the Jews, who are creditors, will 
see in the jury who are to decide on their demands, 
judges invested with a special authority, similar to 
that which their first lawgiver, in his wisdom, gave 
to those among their fathers, whom he appointed 
to stand at the gates of cities, to settle all differ- 
ences with justice and promptitude. 

(5) We believe tliis alludes to the famous chauffeurs^ a gang which had 
ramifications over the whole country, and accomplices in men high in 
office : they were guilty of the most enormous atrocities, and got t heir 
name from their practice of Axpotiing their victims to a raging fire alter 
hiving rubbed them with grease, in order to make them discover where 
their money or other properly was hid. 

(6) Aspcciul tribunal, which takes cognizance of tre<f asses in forests, 
'in rivers, &c. 



( 55 ) 



I would also remark, if it come to my point, tliat 
the Emperor Theodosius, wishing to do strict jus- 
tice to the Jews, thought that the best way was to 
give them particular judges, especially bound to 
decide according to the maxims of social interest, 
always paramount to every other consideration (7). 

If this memorable example justifies the idea of 
forming a special tribunal to pronounce defini- 
tively on the merits of judgments, whose execution 
has been suspended by the decree of the 30th of 
May, it evinces at the same time the monstrous 
thought of giving a power of this kind to legisla- 
tors actually in the exercise of their functions. 

But I have said a great deal, and I haye certain- 
ly dwelt long enough on M. PoujoPs publication. 

Let us leave him to calculate and anticipate, in 
his own way, the measures our august Emperor 
will adopt, to efiect the grand regeneration he has 
in view. 

Let us leave him in the full enjoyment of his 
researches, on the several useful alterations which 
may be effected in the rules of conduct which the 
Israelites have received from their doctors, without 
at the same time encroaching on their religious 
principles. 

But let M. Poujol be persuaded, that, after all, 
success will cro\^Ti whatever salutary reforms His 

(7.) Theodosian Code, vol. viii. p. 22T; 



t 56 ) 



Imperial and Royal Majesty shall, in his wisdom, 
think fit to effectuate. 

Let him know, that in the fifteenth century* 
Abarbanel,one of the most esteemed writers among 
the Israelitish doctors, was known by a very learn- 
ed dissertation on the Bible ; and that, in this pro- 
duction, to which he owes, in great measure, his 
celebrity, he establishes a judicious distinction be- 
tween things essentially connected with religious 
dogmas, and those which have reference only to 
points of civil morals, which last are always sus- 
ceptible of changes and modifications, according 
to the civil and jxilitical state of those whose hap- 
piness they have in view. 

Let us once more tell M. Poujol, and all those 
who, like him, are liable to unjust prejudices, that 
the true principles laid down by Abarbanel had 
been already proclaimed in the t^velfth century by 
Maimonides, one of the greatest Rabbics that the 
Israelites ever had. It has been said of him, that 
his philosophical views excited, at first, a violent 
indignation among all those Hebrews who had 
thought, till then, that every article of the law of 
their fathers bore the stamp of a dogma, and, of 
course, that every attempt to alter them was sacri- 
legious. But the temperate philosophy of Mai- 
monides soon became a source of light and instruc- 
tion. There remained but few Israelites w ho were 



( 57 ) 



not convinced by his arguments; and those whom 
prejudice kept longer in error, were at last per- 
suaded by the observations and proofs which the 
talents of Abarbanel presented in a point of view 
the best calculated to ensure conviction. 

This first dawn of a new day had certainly been 
observed, when in 1783, the Academy of Metz 
proposed to examine if means could be found to 
make the Jews happier and more mefulto France? 

It was also acknowledged then, that, even with- 
out waiting for a change in their political state, it 
was possible to give them a milder system of mo- 
rals, and habits more consonant to the interests of 
those nations by whom they were received and tole- 
rated. 

The question occasioned deep researches and 
profound reasoning ; the prize was adjudged to one 
of those men, who, by their talents and their sub- 
lime views, have given the grand impulse to French 
regeneration. M.Gregoire, now a senator, proved 
at the same time, that neither the religion of the 
Jews, nor their mode of worship, were obstacles to 
their being made better men, and that their system 
of morality, brought back to its genuine princi- 
ples, would make them happier and more useful. 

In 1790 and 1791, men zealous for the public 
welfare re-produced these truths already acknow- 
ledged. No one has forgot the speeches of the 

I 



( 58 ) 

Gregoires, the Lally Tolendals, the Bergasses, the 
Desezes ; their cheering assertions sprang from a 
consciousness of the advantages which a mild phi. 
losophj would produce, and all hearts were opened 
to those sentiments of benevolence, to which we 
were at last indebted for the salutary decree which 
gave us a country. 

It was with wonder that in February, 1806, we 
saw M. de Bonald betray a weakness in blanung 
what had passed, and a want of candour by repro- 
ducing ancient charges which hatred had heaped 
against us. 

His observations found a place in the Mercure^ 
and there M. de Bonald wondered at the senti-^ 
ments we had inspired. He went so far as to 
blame what had been done in 1783, and to con- 
demn the favour we had received from the first 
National Assembly. The better to prejudice peo- 
ple's minds against the possibility of our ever be- 
coming better, he wanted to persuade that no one 
had ever entertained the idea of effecting such a pur- 
pose. The object in viewj says he, was much rather 
io improve the political condition of the Jews^ than 
to change their natural state^ or to make the indivi-* 
duals themselves better. 

But how could it ever happen that M. de Bo- 
nald should publish such declam>itions, who$« 



( 59 ) 



manifest errors cannot but betray in him a great 
want of the principles of justice? 

He has, first, been guilty of an erroneous pre- 
tention, by attempting to mislead the public as to 
the object and the true state of the question pro- 
posed in 1783 by the Academy of Metz. 

The question did not go to examine into thepo* 
litical condition of the Jews; the Academy pointed 
out, as the only object of the researches, the means 
of giving them a milder system of morality, and 
habits more congenial to those of all Frenchmen* 
And if, in the various means proposed, and in the 
proofs adduced to support them, it has been said 
that the Jews, once raised to the rank of citizens, 
would be the better disposed to receive benevolent 
instructions, this idea was, shortly after, sanc^ 
tionedby thelegislative decree of September, 1791. 

deBonald, in the second place, has been guil- 
ty of presumption in attempting to attack the de^* 
cree which raised us to the rank of French citizens. 

Doubts and opposition might have appeared 
useful when the question was first proposed fordism 
cussion by the Academy at Metz, 

The examination once closed, and its results, 
whatever they might have been, once sanctioned by 
the decree of 1791, it w^ the duty of M. De Bo- 
nald, in conunon with all his fellow-citizens, to ac-> 



knowledge that a superior wisdom had already pla* 
ced us in a way of being more happy and more 
useful ; and also that we had been judged by it 
capable of proving worthy of so great a favour. 

In the third place, M. de Bonald has been guih 
ty of the grossest calumnies in his assertions 
against us. 

As late as the year 1767, the answer to the un» 
just pretentions of the body of Merchants, who 
wished to see us excluded from the privilege* 
granted, at that epocha, to that class of men, had 
fully demonstrated, by anumber of proofs, that neu 
ther our religion, nor our mode of worship, could 
furnish grounds to perpetuate the abject state of 
degradation, which was the immediate cause of 
the ill-conduct alleged against some of us. 

The inhiretance which our lawgiver had expect- 
ed us to retain, essentially constituted us a nation 
of husbandmen. By our dispersion we were reduced 
to whatever moveable property we could save from 
the wreck, and of course, compelled by necessity, to 
have recourse to commerce as the only means left 
to maintain our existence; and in these pursuits 
we reaped the greatest advantages fi^om our econo- 
my, which insured and furthered the progress of our 
industry. From our experience in trade the great- 
est success was expected^ it then became the du- 
ty of gt)vemment to increase the range of our acti- 



( 61 ) 



vilj, as it was an inducement to grant usevery fe* 
cility in our commercial pursuits. 

And all this was to be found in the expositions 
presented in 1783 to the Academy of Metz. 

All this was strengthened by the authority of 
the benevolent decree of 1791, and by the most in- 
controvertible demonstrations, which have convin* 
ced every mind capable of forming a sound judg«> 
ment, that our belief and our dogmas do not mili* 
tate against any improvement in morals or in ci* 
rilization which may be deemed necessary to make 
us citizens worthy of the country, and to injure 
that success which must contribute to its prospe- 
rity. 

M, Moses Peinado, of Bourdeaux, published an 
answer to M. de Bonald's philippic; it was 
strong in proofs, and has met with no reply. 

In shoxt M. de Bonald might have been con-> 
vinced by proofs of another kind before he at- 
tempted to write, 

These proofs were to be found, in great number, 
in the obser\'ations which M.Gregoire, senator, had 
just published ; and in documents of 1800 and 
1801 ; by which it appeared, that the progress of 
instruction had already produced among the Is- 
raelites the spontaneous resolution of drawing a 
line, first, in the book of their law, between those 
institutions which relate to their belief, and those 



C 62 ) 



which simply inforce rules of conduct suitable to 
their then politcal situation ; and secondly, in the 
works of their doctors, between those interpreta- 
tions connected with dogmas and the mode of 
worship, to which they will always bow with faith 
and submission, and those which, guided by sound 
reason, have carefully selected such articles in the 
book of the law and in the writings of the doctors, 
asare susceptible of the alterations which a change 
in the political and civil situation always renders 
requisite. 

In 1800 a society of Dutch Jews had published 
their resolution to acknowledge only the pure and 
genuine law of Moses, and to reject all those insti- 
tutions which, till then, had been called Talmudic 
taws. 

This society had numerous followers. In 1801 
a plan was proposed to assemble at Luneville a ge- 
neral congress of the representatives of all the Jews 
scattered in the different countries of Europe. 

The object of this assembly was known; the 
strength and the authority of the proofs already 
adduced left no doubt but, by general resolution, 
the prejudices and practices of a banefiil fanatic 
cism should be entirely laid aside, to make room, 
in whatever was not connected with dogmas and 
modes of worship, for institutions calculated for 
meli in a state of civilization, and who already 



( 63 ) 



have, or are anxious to have, a country and fellow- 
citizens. 

It was highly important to collect all the proofi 
which were likely to infuse the wished for success; 
it was necessary to convince all sovereigns that it 
was incumbent on their justice to follow the ex- 
ample which France had given in 1791 ; it was 
necessary to prove that the ill conduct of some 
Jews proceeded from the unfavourable opinion by 
which they were degraded, and fi-om those acts of 
oppression, frequently renewed with additional 
cruelty, by which the whole nation was held up to 
public contempt, and experienced the torment of 
a kind of slavery, the bane of every generous sen- 
timent. 

A work, entitled An Appeal to the Justice of 
Kings and Nations^ written and pulHished at 
Strasburgh in 1801, pointed, at the same time, the 
steps which the congress was to take to accelerate 
the moral regeneration of the Jews, and the proofj; 
which, by removing prejudices long prevailing in 
Europe, and perpetuated sometimes by blind ha- 
tred, and sometimes by lawless cupidity, clearly 
shewed to all powers, that it was equally their du- 
ty and their interest to give aU the Jews residing 
in their territories the rank and rights of citizens, 
as a means to induce them to devote themselves to 
the service of the country. 



( 64 ) 



The hope of success was grounded, in a great 
measure, on the example given by France; this 
was further strengthened by historical truths, 
which, by tracing a faithful picture of all the hor- 
rors of intolerance, solicited, in the name of a 
God of peace, those sentiments of benevolence 
and of love which men ought to have for each 
other, whatever may be the principles of their re- 
ligious belief. 

It is a duty I owe to our brethren of all coun- 
tries, to preser^'e, in a collection of general inte- 
rest like this, the remembrance of truths, which, 
after having promoted the return of happiness and 
benevolence to France, cannot fail of bringing the 
whole earth under the guidance of that justice, 
which the wisdom of the Creator has made the 
common duty of all men. 

" Soon after the establishment of Christianity,^' 
gays this writer, " the Jewish nation, dispersed 
" since the second destruction of its temple, had 
totally disappeared. By the light of the flames 
which devoured the monuments of its ancient 
splendour, the conquerors beheld a million of 
*' victims dead or expiring on their ruins. The 
" hatred of the enemies of that unfortunate na- 
" tion raged longer than the fire which had con- 
" sumed its temple ; active and relentless, it still 
" pursues and oppresses them in every part of the 



( 65 ) 

^' globe over which they are scattered. Their per- 
secutors delight in their torments too much to 
" seal their doom by a general decree of proscrip- 
" tion, which would at once put an end to their 
burthensomeand painful existence. It seems as if 
" they were allowed to survive the destruction of 
*' their country, only to see the most odious and 
calumnious imputations laid to their charge, to 
*' stand as the constant object of the grossest and 
most shocking injustice, as a mark for the insult- 
" ing finger of scorn, as a sport tothe mostinvete- 
rate hatred; it seems as if their doom was inces- 
" santly to suit all the dark and bloody purposes 
which can be suggested by human malignity, 
" supported by ignorance and fanaticism. 

" Weighed down by taxes, and forced to contri- 
" bute more than Christians for the support of so- 
" ciety, they had hardly any of the rights which it 
*' gives. If a destructive scourge happened to 
spread havock among the inhabitants of a coun- 
" try, the Jews had poisoned the springs, or those 
" men, cursed by Heaven, had, nevertheless, in- 
censed it, by their prayers, against the nation 
they were supposed to hate. Did sovereigns 
" want pecuniary assistance to carry on their 
** wars? The Jews were compelled to give up 
" those riches in which they sought some consola- 
" tion against the oppressing sense of their abject 

K 



( 66 ) 



''^ condition: as a reward for their sacrifices, fhey 
" were expelled from the stale they had support- 
" ed, and they were afterwards recalled to be 
" stript again. Compelled to wear exteriorly the 
^' badges of their abject state, they were, every 
" where, exposed to the insults of the vilest popu- 
*^ lace. When from his solitary retreat an enthu- 
" siastic hermit preached the crusades^ to the na- 
tions of Em-ope, and a part of its inhabitants 
" left their country to moisten with their blood 
" the plains of Palestine, tlie knell of promiscuous 
" ftiassacre tolled before the alarm-bell of war. 
" Millions of Jews were then murdered to glut the 
" pious rage of the crusaders. It was by tearing 
*' the entrails of their brethren that these warriors 
" sought to deser^^e the protection of Heaven. 

Skulls of men and bleeding hearts were offered a& 
^' holocausts on the altars of that God who has no 
" pleasure even in the blood of the innocent lamb^ 
^ and ministei*s of peace were thrown into a holy 
enthusiasm by these bloody sacrifices* It is thus 
that Basil, Treves, Coblentz, and Cologn, be- 
** came human shambles. It is thus that upwards 
" of four hundred thousand victims, of all ages, 
and of both sexes, lost their lives at Cesarea and 
" Alexandria. The recollection of these horrors 
dmws tears of blood from my eyes, and I cannot 
^ help blushing for the whole race of mankind. 



( 67 ) 



And is it after they iia\^ experienced such ti^at- 

ment that they are reproached with their vices? 

Is it after being for eigiiteen centuries the sport 
" of contempt, that they are reproached with be- 

ing no longer alive to it ? Is it after having so 

often glutted with their blood the thirst of their 
" persecutors, tliat they asre held out as enemies to 

other nations ? Is it, when tiiey have been be- 
*^ reft of all means to mollify the heaits of their 

tyrants, that indignation is roused if, now and 
^ then, they cast a mournful look towards the ru- 
" ins of their temple, towards their couutry^ wherci 

formerly , happiness crowned their peaceful days, 
^ free from the cares of ambition and of riches? 
^ Is it when the career of arts and of industry has 

been completely shut against them, that the 
" Jewish nation is represented as a lazy, indolent, 
" usekss race, a burthen to the country which 
" supports them ? But whither am I going ? Our 

persecutors woukl have us to kiss our fetters, and 
" hug to our heart's the murderers of our brethren, 

in return for the inveteracy whicji they manifest 

against us evtjry where but in France. The 
" slightest expression of grief wrung from us, 
** marks us a ferocious people, lliey wish to take 

from us even the last distant hope of future hap- 
" piness, to seize wliatever belongs to us most legi-. 

timately, and that, like senseless victims, we 
k2 



( 68 ) 



" should in the mean time refrain from any sign of 
resentment, which, powerless in itself, excites on- 
ly derision or contempt. 

" Since the light of philosophy began to dawn 
over Europe, our enemies have ceased to satisfy 
tlieir revenge with the sacrifice of our lives ; 
Jews are no longer seen, who, generously refu- 
sing to bend under the yoke of intolerance, were 
led with solemn pomp to the fatal pile: but al- 
thou2:h the times of these barbarous executions 
" are past long ago, although the hearts of sove- 
reigns are now strangers to this cruelty, yet sla- 
very itself and i)rcjudices are still the same. 
By what crimes have we then deserved tliis fnri- 
ous intolerance ? What is our guilt? Is it in 
that generous constancy we have manifested in 
defending the laws of oar fathers ? Uut this con- 
stancy ought to have entitled us to tlie admira- 
*' tion of all nations, and it has only sliarpened 
" against us the daggers of persecution. Braving 
" all kinds of torments, the pangs of deatli, the 
still more terrible pangs of life, we alone have 
*' withstood the impetuous torrent of time, sweep- 
ing indiscriminately in its course nations, reli- 
gions, and countries. W hat is become of those 
celebrated empires, whose very name still excites 
" our admiration by the ideas of splendid great- 
ness attached to them, and whose power embra- 



( 69 ) 



cedthe whole surface of the known globe? They 
" are only remembered as monuments of the va- 

" nity of human greatness Rome and Greece 

"are no more; their descendants, mixed ivith 
other nations, have lost even the traces of their 
" origin ; while a population of a few millions of 
" men, so often subjugated, stands the test of thir- 
" ty revolving centuries, and the fiery ordeal of 
fifteen centuries of persecution ! We still pre- 
*' serve laws which were given to us in the first 
days of the world, in the infancy of nature ! 
" The last followei-s of a religion which had em- 
*' braced the universe have disappeared these fif- 
teen centuries, and our temples are still stand- 
" ing ! We alone have been spared by the indis- 
** criminating hand of time, like a column left 
*' standing amidst the wreck of worlds and the 
ruins of nature. The history of this people 
connects present times with the first ages of the 
world, by the testimony it bears of the existence 
of those early periods ; it begins at the cradle of 
mankind, and its remnants are likely to be'preser- 
" ved to the very day of universal destruction. All 
men, whatever may be their opinions and the 
party they have adopted, whether they suppose 
that the will of God is to maintain the people he 
has chosen, or whether they consider that con- 
" stancy which characterises the Jews as a repre- 
hensible obstinacy, or iff at last, they believe in 



( 70 ) 



*^ a God, who, regarding all religions with equal 
^ complacency, needs no other wonders to exem* 

plify his greatness, but the incessant and magni- 
" ficent display of the beauties of nature, all, if 
" their minds are susceptible of appreciating virtue 
^ and tried firmness, will not refuse their just ad- 
" miration to that unshaken constancy unparallel- 

ed in the annals of any nation.^' 

To this picture of die calamities which have se 
long pressed on the Israelites, are joined plans and 
views whicli seem calculated to induce all civilir 
zed countries to restore them to the riglit« which 
they have recovered in France. 

The enquiry has three objects in view ; I wish 
" to prove, that the exclusion of the Jews from the 

rights of citizens, is at the same time immoral^ 

unjust^ and impolitic. 

" It is immoral^ because no government can rc- 

fuse an equal degree of protection and justice to 
" all those inhabitants of the country who consent 
•* to become parties in the social contract, whicli 

alone constitutes the existence of legitimate go- 
" vernment, whatever may be its form ; and because 

religion has nothing to do with the political and 

civil existence of citizens. 

It is unjust^ because the vices with which many 
" among the Jews have been reproached, with 
•* some truth, are not, as their enemies pretend, in 
their natural dispositions, but are certainly the fa- 



( 71 ) 



" tal and unavoidable consequence of the abject 
" state of slavery in which they have so long re- 
" mained} and because they besides makeup for 

those foibles by virtues which exclusively belong 
*' to them^ and which the most inveterate foes have 

never as yet attempted to deny. 

It is impolitic, because the Jews have proved vc- 

ry useful citizens, whenever they have met with 
•'just and humane governments, and because the 
^ states of Europe, who often feel the necessity of 
*' increasing their population, deprive themselves, 
*' by this exclusion, of the industry of apeople who, 

to prove that in zeal and patriotism they are in- 
" ferior to no class of citizens, are only waiting for 
" the liberty they solicit, to exert all their activity 
" and to direct it to public advantage/' 

On each of these heads the author gave the argu- 
ments and proofs which brought about the memo- 
rable decree of 1791 ; and, at last, to move to pity 
hearts hardened by prejudices, he gave the still 
faithful picture of the virtues by which, at the ex- 
ample of France, the Israelites deserv e to be consi- 
dered by other nations as being capable of all the 
sentiments and all the zeal which constitute useful 
citizens. 

" You," said he, " you who consider as depraved, 
" men who are only unfortunate, come with me 
" and study their passions and their private actions, 
"not in books in which hatred has instilled its^ 



( 72 ) 



♦* vcndm, but in the circle of their families, and 
" amidst the objects of their affections and, if the 
** expression could be allowed, under the protection 
" of their household gods. It is among these men, 
" whom you consider as the refuse of nature, that 
" you will find, in all their simplicity, the senti- 
"ments of nature divested of the dross of luxury 
and of the refinements of wit. Their common 
** sufiferings, the enthusiasm produced by persecu- 
tion, have united them in the bonds of sacred 
" friendship, which the most hardened man could 
" not behold without shedding tears of sensibility. 
" Tossed in the wide world by his evil fate, the 
" Jew, wandering, often without assistance, a prey 
*' to misery, on an unknown shore, in meeting with 
a fellow sufferer, always meets with a brother, 
" ready to sacrifice for him his fortune and his life. 

Morose philosophers pretend that misfortunes 
" deaden sensibility ; I believe, on the contrary, for 
" the honour of mankind, that weeping over our 
own misfortunes, teaches us to weep over those of 
others. It is in the crucible of adversity that the 
" Jew has acquired that feeling soul which is his 
" characteristic. No where are the poor of that 
" nation seen abandoned without assistance to be- 
^ come a burthen to the country ; and while those 
" very men, who regard as barbarians those w ho 
are strangers to the world and to its ways, reluc- 



( 73 ) 



" tantly give a trifling portion of their superfluity 
to the wretched victims of misery, a people whose 
" name is held almost synonymous with ferocity, 
" would really think they should deserve the ap- 
" pellation, if they could hesitate to share their 
*' moderate resources with the unfortunate who 
" surround them. Those who delight in affixing 
*' guilty intentions to praise-worthy actions will 
see nothing in this union but a dangerous associ- 
" ation ; but the sentimental observer will never 
" hold back his just approbation. 

It is also in this devoted nation that we must 
" seek for that inviolable attachment among the 
members of the same femily, too scarce among 
** us, where gloomy jealousy, a spirit of contradic- 
** tion and hatred, almost always divides those 
" whom nature intended to bind in everlasting 
" friendship. There, you will never see ungrate- 
" ful children, unmindful of the last will of their 
" parent, tearing each other to come at the spoils 
" of their father. 

" Luxury, that bane of virtue and of peace, is 
hardly known among them ; their inclinations 
" and their sentiments are unsophisticated, like na- 
" ture,fi'om whence they spring ; they do not know, 
** it is true, how to deck with all the ornaments 
of eloquence, actions which they consider as du- 
" ties ; but if they do not know how to extoll the 

L 



( 74 ) 



" charms of virtue, they have learnt to appreciate 
" its intrinsic worth, 

".You will see but seldom among them guilty 
" husbands leaving their virtuous partners foraban- 
" doned prostitutes, or shameless wives abandon- 
" ing the care of their families, and the sacred du- 
" tiesof matrimony and maternity, to plunge heed- 
" lessly inio debaucheiy. 

"It is there that lovely cliastity follows the graces 

and enhances their charms; there an amiable blush 
" still overspreads the face of the modest virgin. 

" The dissolution of the sacred tie of marriage, 
" altho allowed by their religion, always leaves the 
" stamp of i-eprobation on him who gives the sad 
" example of divorce. Vainly would you attempt 
" to find among the Jews, people who coolly part 
" after solemn oaths of eternal love, and who give 
" up without emotion the blessing of ever behold- 
" ing the innocent beings who owe to them their 
" existence. 

" But you will find among them couples united 
" by the bonds of the most inviolable attachment, 
" who, finding in their old age the first links which 
" bring to their minds the beginning of their union, 
" bedew with their tears those sacred pledgesof love ; 
*' you will find mothers who weep for joy when the 
" solemn day approaches in which they are to lead 
" an only daughter under the sacred nuptial veil; 



( 75 ) 



you will find fathers of families whose only care 
" is to insure the happiness of dutiful children, 
^' who are one day to follow their example. 

" Observe, ye philosophers, who delight in stu- 
" dying the heart of man, and in penetrating in- 
" to its inmost recesses; mark what distinguishes, 

among all others, the funeral of a father of a 
*' family of the Jewish nation: you will never re- 
*' mark there those forced tears which a trouble- 

bfesome sense of propriety draws from men, 
" who, for a great while before, were hastening, by 
" their wishes, the moment when they would bar- 

ter for a vile metal even the picture of their fa- 

ther: there you will see real grief, surrounded by 

its darkest and heart-rending attributes ; children 
" frantic with despair, tearing their hair and their 
" clothes, covering their forehead with dust and 
" ashes, embracing the inanimate cor^jse of their 

father, and rending the air with their disma} 
" eries. 

(>ome with me into their cemeteries, where 
every thing traces this idea, that death is the 
passage to immortality. Behold those friends, 
" lying on the tombs of their departed friends, 
" and kissing with transport their cold inanimate 
" remains. There, at least, if an envious fate de- 
" prive me of the object of my affections, I shall 
bedew his tomb with my tears In this di-eary 



( 76 ) 



and silent abode I shall exclaim, ^ Consoling im- 
" mortality 1 no, thou art not a chimera/ The 
" souls of those benevolent beings, whose endear- 
" ing intercourse made the delight of my life, are 
" not surely returned to non-entity ; they exist, no 
" doubt, in a better and purer world; they are ho- 
overing around me ; they hear me; and they are 
" the judges of my actions. If ever I should 
swerve from the path of virtue, if ever I should 
" forget my duties, I would go to this abode of 
melancholy, and, bedewing the sacred tomb 
" with tears of repentance, I should again become 
worthy of visiting these monuments of my love. 
" Will you learn how to appreciate still better a 
" nation which owed its abject state solely to its 
" misfortunes? Reflect on the part the Jews have 
acted in the French revolution, and during the 
" reign of terrpr ; when, suddenly made free, they 
" dared to look in the face those who lately had a 
" right to insult them with impunity. 1 ask those 
" men who know how the multitude is inclined to 
" pass without reflexion from one extreme to ano- 
" ther, and how much persecution sours even the 
mildest tempers— I ask them, I say,in what class 
was it likely to fi|id the greatest number of 
those, who, regardless of the most sacred and 
inviolable duties, have shewn to what excesses 
ipen may be hurried by the violence of passion? 



( 77 ) 



How natural it was to expect that the Jews, iq 
fi*antic delirium, would have laid destructive 
hands on the very last traces of a form of go* 
" vernment under which they had suffered, so 
**much! Well! let the blood-stained annals of the 
infamous reign of Roberspierre be opened, and 
" if, in the number of his supporters, yon find the 
" name of one of these men, who alone could be 
^'justified by the sense of their former sufferings, 
*^ I abandon every one of them to their sad fate. 

Neither will jon find amon^ them those 
" unnatural children who carried sword and 
*' flames into their country, which ought always 
to have been dear to them, who incurred the ha- 
" tred of their countrymen and the contempt of 
" sovereigns, forced by circumstances to assist 
them for a while, though they could never esteem 
*' traitors and perjurors, men very different from 
those who left their country only in those disas- 
" trous times when no one could be just or virtu- 
ous with impunity. But you will find the Jews 
in the path of true honour and of military glo- 
ly ; you will see them shedding their blood in 
the service of their country ; obtaining, by their 
bravery, the admiration of generous enemies ; 
*^ deserving, in short, to be considered as men and 
as citizens, wherever those titles are granted to 



( 78 ) 



them, as they are elsewhere patient and submis- 

sive under the yoke which beai-s on them. 

Shall the pecuniary advantages, which go- 

vernments derive from the extraordinary contri- 
'* butions levied on the Jews, be put in the scale 
" against the glory of proclaiming an act of jus- 
" tice, which is required by so many powerful 
" reasons? Should we even suppose for a moment 
" the truth of that fallacious assertion of the 
** friends of anarchy, that interest is the sole spring 
" of kingly governments, still it would be evident, 

to every enlightened mind, that the pecuniary 
" advantages accruing to the state from the extra- 
" ordinary contributions which lay heavy on the 

Jews, can by no means compensate for the losses 

which sovereigns experience by depriving: them-^ 
" selves of the industry of so numerous a class. 
" The greatest part of the European states cannot 
" increase their resources as much as they wish ; 
" most frequently, and without a doubt, fi-om w ant 
" of a sufficient population : and while many of 
** them collect, at a vast expence, thousands of co- 
y lonists, who cannot be thoroughly incorporated 

with the people, but after many g^enerations, and 
" who, for a great length of time, consider them-? 
" selves as foreigners, they refuse to naturalize 

men, who could not but consider that as their 



( 79 ) 



country which has given them birth, since there 
" alone they could expect to lead a happy and 
" quiet life. 

" But is it impossible that the views even of the 
" present government, should tend to the abolition 
" of the Jewish religion, whose existence is loath- 

some to many ? Is it not with an intention to 

force the Jews to a complete union with other 
" nations, not only by the tie of friendship, but 
" by those of blood and of religion, that the 
" remnants of the ancient settled system of per- 
" secution is so constantly followed up against 
" them ? I think that 1 have proved, in the begin- 

ning of this work, that I am far from imputing 
" views so intolerant to the sovereigns of the 
" eighteenth century; and besides, where is the 

man so little acquainted with the human heart, 
^* net to know, that at all times, martyrs have 

sprung up at the fierce cries of pei*secution, and 

that man prizes the objects of his love only from 
" the extent of the sacrifices they cost him ? The 
" hope of detaching the Jews from the religion of 
*' their fathers must be extravagant and ground- 
" less, as long as they shall be obliged to endure 
" the greatest hardships to follow it. 

" Is it not owing to the rage of the Inquisition 
" and to Auto da fez, that we must principally at- 
" tribute the miraculous existence of this nation 



( 80 ) 



** through the greatest revolutions which have 
•* changed the face of the globe? hen religi- 

on shall have ceased to be for them the dear 
** bought consolation of so many sacrifices, usher- 

ed into the busy scenes of life, Will they not 
" begin to experience the workings of ambi^ 
" tion, superseding in their hearts their religious 
"sentiments? Then, and then only, some hopes 

may be entertained that they may, at some fu- 

ture period, renounce their ancient faith. AVhat-^ 
" everj in short, may be the just or unjust views 
** which are supposed to actuate governments, it is 

an undoubted fact, that the abject state in w hich 
*' the Jews are kept, even now, is excessively impo* 

litic^ and contrary to the interests of those who 
" might put a stop to it. Every thing proves that 
" even their regeneration, which was thought to 
" be the work of centuries, will be equally sudden 
^ and complete. The rapid progress which the 
" French Jews have already made in the career of 
*' civilization^ are the surest pledges of this pro* 
" mise ; the greatest number of them have already 
" got rid of that timid crouching demeanour, 
*' which excluded them from company, or made 

them appear ridiculous- The greater part, 
" throwing off perjudices of all kinds^ intend 
" their children for honourable professions, in- 
" stead of limiting their views, as they hither- 
" to have done. Many attend the national 



( 81 ) 



schools with the most brilliant success, and bid 
*' fair to increase the demesne of sciences by their 
" labours and by their genius. The Jew avoided 
" the Christian, only because he saw in him a fero- 
cious and inveterate enemy; the Christian avoid- 
ed the Jew, only because he considered him as a 
" being devoted from his brith to contempt and 
" slavery ; friendship has been the mutual wish of 
" both, as soon as they have learnt to esteem each 
" other. What should we mind if a few men still 
" preserve hatred against us? They alone are to 
" be pitied, since they are strangers to the sweets of 
" reconciliation. 

I shall not deny that many among us, still deaf 
to the voice of reason, persist in drawing all their 
^' resources from a shameful and dishonest traffic: 
" but this obstinacy of a few individuals will ap- 
*' pear astonishing only to men unacquainted with 
the force of habit, and with the time and cares 
necessary to change the manners and the dispo* 
sitions of a whole nation. I must add, that in 
other European countries, the Jews must ad- 
*' vance more rapidly in civilization than they have 
" done in France, where, since the revolution, each 
** succeeding government, intent only on the de- 
'* structioii of its predecessors, could not accele- 
rate their progress, nor gradually encourage 
*' them. It is incumbent on every government to 

M 



( 82 ) 



" shew the ridiculousness of prejudices, without 
" openly and violently attacking them ; to engage 
" Jewish parents, or even to compel them, to seiid 
their children to share the advantages of public 
" instruction ; to grant signal rewards to the first 
" who should prove, by their success, that they are 
susceptible of emulation; to punish with seve- 
" rity whoever, by his discourses or by his actions^ 
" should betray lurking sjniptoms of suspicion or 
" hatred; such, once more, are the duties of all 
" governments towards a class of men, who must^ 
" at last, be restored to hapj^iness; duties which 
*' the French government has not till now been 
" able to fulfil, and which are well worthy of the 
** monarchs of the eighteenth century.'^ 

The manner in wliich these several measures 
should be put in activity has been already de- 
tailed in many publications 1 have quoted, and 
principally in the excellent dissertation of M. 
Dohm, w hich, for its logic, precision, and sound 
rejisoning, I shall here quote again. 

" The eternal principles of morality, on which 
" monarchies, as well as republics, are jfrounded, 
" those even of a sound and true policy, require 
" that an end should be put, for ever, to tire shame- 
" ful slavery of the Jews ; that they slioiild be freed 
*^ from personal tributes, that the career of indus- 
^* try, of i«rts, and of scienc^'is, should be opened for 



t 83 ) 

ail ; lhat they should reassume the rank they are 
" entitled to from nature, and from whence they 

never ought to have been de<j^raded ; and in short, 

following the example of justice given by France, 
" in the first days of the revolution, governments 

should irrevocably make them real and useful 
" citizens: then only shall the Jews, who, although 
" scattered on the face of the earth, have, till 
" now, formed a separate nation, begin really to 
*' mix and to be incorporated with other nations; 
*' they shall cease to form, as it has been often re- 

proached to them, a state within a state, when 

once they shall have, at last, really acquired a 
" country, and when they shall consider themselves 
*' no longer as the slaves, but as the subjects of go- 
" vernments. Seeing that by mixing with society, 
** they may acquire consideration, they will first 
" necessarily discontinue the practice of those re- 
" cent, nonsensical, and absurd customs, which 

would then become impracticable to them, and 
" would mak^ them appear justly ridiculous. 
" In the different stations of life, they will suc- 

cessfuUy exert that activity and that penetra- 

tion which they are acknowledged to possess, 
" and which, till now, only tended to facilitate 
*^ their pursuits in that degi*ading branch of ti-af* 

fic, which was in a manner left to them ; all citi- 
*^ zens w ill become the object of their affections^ 

H2 



( 84 ; 



formerly concentrated among themselves; thej 
" will consider as brethren not only those who 

worship God in the same manner, but all these 
" to whom the same country has given birth, who 
" defend the same cause, who live under the pro- 
" tecting influence of the same laws and of the 
" same authority: then only they will consider 
" themselves as belonging to the immense family 
" of mankind. 

" It is by such a glorious deed that Europe must 
" crown the century just elapsed, and in which 
" posterity will behold events of such a magni- 
" tude, and succeeded by consequences so dread- 

Nothing in this was intended for France, where 
the progress of knowledge, and sound views of na- 
tional interest had already removed those prejudi- 
ces which had brought oppression and hatred on 
the Jews. 

It may be expected that those observ ations will 
produce on the other states of Europe those senti- 
ments of justice and benevolence on which alone 
can rest the happiness and stability of empires. 

We see, not far distant, the moment when the 
genius of a great and glorious Emperor will, in his 
benevolence, make us reap all the advantages of 
our new situation. We must redouble our pray- 
ers, to obtain from the God of our fathers that he 



( 85 ) 



may be pleased to direct the attention of kings to 
the Israelites living under their dominion, and to 
inspire them with the resolution of distinguishing 
themselves by deeds of greatness and of national 
utility. 

I shall also be entitled myself to the blessings of 
my brethren scattered in all the states of the world, 
since my collection will expose to all kings and to 
all nations, the truths which have opened for us the 
way to happiness, and will record acts which most 
certainly will lay the grounds for a general rege- 
neration. 

On the first of these two points, I must add to 
the proofs I have already adduced, two kinds of tes- 
timonies in our favour, which will acquaint the 
public with the opinions entertained by the wise, 
even before our august Emperor had called us to- 
gether to establish the basisof our future prosperity. 

The first of these testimonies is a letter, replete 
with force and truth, written in the Sorbonne the 
SOth of August, 1762, by M. TAdvocat, Doctor, 
Librarian, and Professor in that University. It con- 
tains his ideas- on the Apologie des Juifs^ just then 
published, in answer to Voltaire^s writings. 

The second is the letter which M . Simon Mayer, 
Jewish deputy for the department of La Seine, 
wrote the SOth of July, 1806, to the editor of the 
Journal de r Empire, to prove that the Israelites re- 



{ 86 ) 



siding in France, far from considering themselves 
foreigners in the territory of the French empire, 
were, in truth, devoted to the country which had 
granted them an honourable adoption and which 
did not cease to contribute to their happiness. 

Sovereigns and nations will see in the letter of 
M. TAdvocat, what they are to think of the unjust 
judgments which the vulgar passed indiscriminate- 
ly on the Israelites. 

In that of M. Simon Mayer, they will see the 
absurdity of the calamities, lately reiterated against 
us, for want of consideration, or by the impulse of 
hatred. 

And if M. de Bonald and M. Poujol do not 
abandon their unjust prepossessions, they will have 
these two antagonists more, whose testimonies in 
favour of truth and justice they nmst strive to do 
away. 

Letter of M. PAdvocat, Doctor^ Librarian, and 
Professor of Sorbonne. 

Sorbonne, 30th of August, 1762. 

" I am very sorry, Sir, to have been absent from 
" Sorbonne, when you did me the honour of call- 
" ing upon me there. I have received in the coun- 

try the little Apology of the Jews, in answer to 



( 87 ) 



** Voltaire. I have read it, and I have affixed my 
" approbation (8) to it, making, however, some 
" slight alterations, which, as you will own your- 
self, do not in the least hurt your cause. No- 
thing can be more unjust than the contempt in 
*' which the Jews are held: this sentiment is repre- 
hensible even in the mob, which is hurried toha- 
" tred or contempt, often without knowing why; 

but it is much more so in a thinking or honest 
" man, since humanity teaches us that we must 
*' avoid hatred and contempt for every one of our 
" fellow creatures, whatever may be his country, 
" his religion, or his profession. If M . de Voltaire 
gloried in being a Christian, I M ould tell him, 
" that Christianity obliges him absolutely to re- 
tract every thing he has advanced against the 
Jews, since Jesus Christ has ordered us to con- 
sider all men, without distinction, as our bre- 
" thten, and to love them as we love ourselves: 
a direction which is incompatible with hatred 
" and contempt towards the Jews. 

" But this famous poet prides himself more on 
being a philosopher than on being a Christian, 
and it was right to refute him in that point of 
*' view in your Apology; nothing being farther 

(8) Every one knows that in the ancient government of France 
books could not be published without the approbation of the censors. 



( 88 ) 



" removed from true philosophy than blindly to 
give up to popular prejudices and prepossessions. 
The reproach of ignorance and barbarism, which 
" he lays to the charge of ancient and modern 
Jews, arising in reality from his own ignorance 
** of the language and of the writing's of the He- 
" brews. It is not from barbarous and tame 
translations that original wi-itings can be judged. 
" If M. de Voltaire's translations were again to be 
" translated, word for word, into barbarous Latin, 
these translations would make M. de Voltaire 
appear more ignorant and more barbarous than 
he is aware of, and he would find himself in the 
" garb of a Vandal or an Ostrogoth (9). Job, 
Moses, David, Solomon, Isaiah, and most of the 
Hebrew poets, are by no means inferior to the 
Greek, Latin, and French poets, without except- 
ing even M. de Voltaire. The poetic writings of 
" the Hebrews are superior to those of every other 
** nation, by the pomp of the expressions, the 
** grandeur of the images, the sublimity of 
" thought, in short, by all the genuine charaeteris- 
** tics of true genius and of poetrj-; and M. de 
\ oltaire will no more succeed in his attempt to 
bring them into disrepute, than Perrault in his 

(9) Favourite €\pressions of M. Voltmirc, by which he compared his 
atiti^iusts to those Dorthern bttbmrimns. 



( 89 ) 

*^ attacks on Homer and the other Greek poets. 
" The Proverbs of Solomon are preferable to the 
" Gnomai of the Greeks, and they contain at least 
as much philosophy, and as much knowledge of 
" the human heart, as the writings of Voltaire. 
" Maimonides, Abenesdra, Abarbanel, Kimchi, 
and many other Hebrew writers, were fully 
" equal, in their times, to the contemporary writers 
of other nations. Raschi, or Solomon Jarchi, 
" was the best commentator of the age he lived 
" in ; and we might mention some modern Hebrew 
" poets, whose productions M. de Voltaire would 
" admire, and by which he would even be impjo- 
ved, were he able to understand them. What he 
saysof the cheats of the inferior Jewish merchants 
" and traders, is what is commonly to be met with 
in tlie conduct of inferior dealers of other na- 
" tions. But, at least, Jews do not bring them- 
" selves to untimely death by their robberies, or it 
happens very seldom. I can bear wiiiiess, that 
" during these thirty years that I have resided in 
" Paris, there has not been three Jews condemned 
to death for robbery or other crimes; so that, 
taking all together, the manners of the Jews in 
general are not worse than those of other people 
in similar stations. The Superstition which M. 
" de Voltaire lays to the charge of the Jews, does 
" not go to prove that they are or ever were equally 

N 



( 90 ) 



" ignorant and barbarous as the Egj^tians are 
•* represented to have been. Neither the Greeks 
** nor the Romans were barbarous nations, and 
" they had superstitions more • dangerous, more 
" absurd, more ridiculous, than those which the 
" Jews are supposed to retain. David, after ha- 
" ving conquered the Syrians, the Ammonites, the 

Moabites, the Idumeans, nnd part of the country 
" of the Philistines, did not condemn to the flames 
** or otherwise put to death, a single individual, 

on accountof religion or of superstition ; he rest- 
" ed satisfied with making these nations tributary, 
" and he treated them with the humanity of a fa- 
" ther as soon as they became his subjects. Na- 
" tions are beside naturally more inclined tosuper- 
" stition than to irreligion, and this disposition 
" turns to the advantage of society. The super- 
" stitious practices of a people are never hurtful 
" to mankind, like the impious maxims of the athe- 
** ists. Let our pretended philosophers, instead of 
" blaspheming the Divinity, offer tlieir thanksgi- 
" vings that nations are so averse to Atheism ; for if 
'* the nations now existing were impious or atheistical^ 
neither the property nor the lives of these pretended 
^^philosophers would be safe (10). Superstition is 

(10) If we bear in mind that this letter was written in i762, this sen- 
tKM% will look like a prediction, too well fidfiUed in the untimely death 



C 91 ) 



•* like those weeds we carefully pluck up from onr 
*• gardens, without hurting the com or the useful 
" vegetables. But our pretended philosophers 
*' want to tear up every thing by the roots. Let 
" not M. de Voltaire exclaim so much against the 
^' superstitions of the Jews in particular. This 

is, Sir, my opinion as to the hatred and unjust 
" contempt to which the Jews are exposed. Some 

years ago I was applied to for advice on this sub* 
*' ject by the ministry of Poland, My memorial 
" confounded their accusers, and their chief was 
" arrested and punished by order of the King of 

Poland. I keep a copy of this memorial, and 
*^ shall with great pleasure eonununicate it to you. 

I am, sincerely, 

UADVOCAT, 

Doctor^ Librarian, and Prqfestorin SorhwM. 

Letter of M, Simon Mayer, Vice Deputy of the De* 
partments o/*La Seine to the Jewish Ammbly^ to 
the Editor of the Journal dePEmpire, 

" Sir, 

^* The Jews, filled with respect and gratitude for 
the august Sovereign Tvho deigns to take their 

bf the leaders of th^ philosophical partj who were at the head of the 
French revolution. 



( 93 ) 



situation into his consideration, were far indeed 
" from expecting that periodical writers would 

presume, without any authority, to judge ques- 
" tions which are on the point of being discussed 

in the assembly, where their deputies are called, 
" and still less that those premature judgments 

should be such as to establish, as an incontro- 
" vertible fact, the greatest reproach to which a 
" class of men can be liable, that of not acknow^ 
" ledging the laws of their country. 

" This asseition, which is represented as an un- 

doubted truth in your paper of the 26th of Ju- 
" ly instant, might have frightened the Jews in 

those times, when, excluded from every class of 
" citizens, their keeping apart was nevertheless 
" considered as a crime — ^when the most absurd 
** inculpations were sought for with avidity, were 
" adopted and employed against them as pretexts 
" for proscription. It cannot cause tlie smallest 

uneasiness at a time when our hear ts are opened 
" to the liveliest gratitude for the benefits we de- 
" rive from those laws which have put us on an 
" equal footing with all citizens, under a prince 
" equally just and firm, whose genius dispels the 
" clouds of ancient prejudices, and whose councils 

ar6 actuated by truth, justice, reason, humanity, 

and the ardent wish of making all Frenchmea 

happy. 



( 93 ) 



But accasationS) made in so public a manner 
and on so important an occasion, mustneverthe- 
" less be confuted ; because tliey may lead into 
" error a few credulous men, allbrd pretences to 
" the evil intentions of others, excite ill-will 
" against us, and throw difficulties in the way of 
*' that union of all Frenchmen, which is the aim of 
" government, and the wish of every wise and en- 
" lightened man. 
" On examining the article of your journal al- 
ready alluded to, it becomes evident tliat the sole 
" object the writer had in view was to present, as 
" an incontrovertible truth, the following suppo* 
sition : 

The Jews do not acknowledge the laws of France; 
** and that, without much minding whether or no 
** his commentary on this assertion afforded any 

meaning, he has run his chance of meeting with 
** credulous readers. 

" In this century says the writer, " the only 
" questions at issue between the friends of the Jews 
" and those who are against them are — to know if 

France, for instance, must reckon those men who 
" do not acknowledge her laws, in the number of her 

children, till such a time as they have pledged 

themselves to assimilate their manners, as much 
" as possible, to those of the rest of the nation ; or if 

sound policy requires that government, before 



( 94 ) 



" it admits the Jews to share all the advantages 
" common to all other Frenchman, should acquire 
" the certainty that they shall make use of them 
" only for the general interests of the empire 
" The absurdity of the first question is evident. 
Can government put in question whether it should 
consider as children of the same country men who 
would refuse to acknowledge its laws^ should they 
even engage to change their manners? 

Whoever refuses to acknovi^ledge the laws of a 
country must be excluded from it,, let his man- 
•* ners bewhatthey may ; and if it were true, as the 
** author pretends, that the Jews refuse to acknoxo^ 
^' ledge the laws of France^ their proposed admission 
among the children of France would not de- 
" serve the slightest consideration. Luckily tlie 
^* falsehood of that assertion will be hereafter 
" proved by facts. 

*^ And how could the author suppose that the 
*' object of discussion was whether France should 
'* admit the Jews among her children? Do not Jews 
*^ enjoy already that advantage ? Have they not 
" been called by the laws to the full enjoyment of 
all civil rights, conmion to all Frenchmen ? Did 
" not the same laws, grant th^m the free exercise 
" of their mode of worship ? Did they not, in short, 
adopt them in the number of the children of 
" France? 



( 95 ) 

" Was the writer ignorant of all this? or does 
" he refuse himself to acknowledge the laws of 
" France while he inconsiderately urges that re- 

proach against the Jews ? 

" The question, then, is not to know if Jews are 
" to be admitted among the children of France. 
" It might be asked, at most, if they have made a 

bad use of the advantages they have received by 

their adoption? if they are become worthy or 
" unworthy of retaining them ? and if there are 
" grounds to hope that the facility they have re- 
" ceived, in common with all Frenchmen, to avail 
" themselves of the protection of the laws, shall 

gradually induce them to adopt the general 

manners of the nation and at last level that 

barrier which the barbarism of antient legisla- 
** tors had raised between them and other nations? 
The Jews do not shun the discussion of these 

questions: well authenticated facts speak in 
" their favour on all these points; and the present, 

if examined without prejudice, will be deemed 

a sufficient pledge for the future. 

" The second question is as absurd as the first; 
" for, to propose advantages to men on condition that 
*' thei/ shall make use of them only for the interest of 
" //i^pw6//c, would prove a total want of knowledge 

of the human heart andofthetrueaimof legisla- 

tion; and I venture to say, that there has never 



( 96 ) 



existed on earth a nation capable of Ailfillin^ 
such an engagement. 

Self interest is in man the fii*st and principal 
spring of action; the advantages he derives 

" from the laws must tend to favour this inclina- 

" tion; but the grand art, I might almost say the 

" cunning of the legislator, consists in regulating 
the use of each of these advantages in such a 
manner as to be naturally productive of the ge- 
neral welfare. It might be asked, then, if, in the 

** opinions of the Jews, in their manners, in the 
professions to which they usually give the pre- 
ference, some particular obstacles may not be 
found which prevent the advantages they share 
in common with all Frenchmen from tending 

*' so directly to the public welfare as when in 
other hands ? Inquiries might be set on foot to 
ascertain the nature of these obstacles, and laws 
or i-egulalions might be afterwards adopted to 
lessen or to do them away altogether; but Jews 
are only men ; and, surely, efibrts above the 

" strength of human nature will not be required 

" of them. 

Thei-eisthen, in reality, no reasonable meaning 
" in the two questions about the Jews which the 
*• author supposes are to come under discussion. 
" These set aside, there remains only this gratui- 
" tons supposition : 



( 97 ) 



*' The Jews do not acknowledge the laws of France. 
Let us examine this assertion: 
A commonand grand mistake in writers, pass- 
" ing judgment on different societies of men, is, 

that they confound times, places, and other cir« 
" stances, according to the side they have taken, 
' " and to the opinion they wish to establish on this 
** or that society. In thus confusing every thing, 
" there exists no nation, no community, no religi- 

ous association, which may not be represented 
" at pleasure, as virtuous or vicious, just or unjust, 

brave or cowardly, atrocious or generous, loyal 

or rebellious, useful or dangerous, as deserving 

the highest praise, or as the fittest object of 

contempt. 

" Certainly, if you consider the Jews at a time 
" when, as says a writer you quote, they were de- 
" barred from possessing lands, from commerce^ 

from industnj, when, in short, they were in a 

manner outlawed, it may be said that they did 
" not acknowledge the laws of France, or, to speak 
" more correctly, that they had been placed in the 

impossibility of acknowledging them. Exclud- 
" ed from all the advantages of general society, 
" they were forced to withdraw into their own 
" particular community, and to seek in their cus- 
" toms, their institutions, the doctrine of their 
" doctors, support and consolations they could 

o 



( 98 ) 



•* find no where else. But, it would be the height 
" of injustice to alledjs^e against them as a crime, 
" tlie state to which they had been reduced by 
" others, and to accuse them of liaviug refused to 
" acknowledge the laws of a society from which 
" they had been ex|>elled. 1 will go still farther; 
" it would be unjust, now, to reproach them w ith 
" some remaining attachment to those custon^s 
" and to those manners, the common source from 
" which generations after generations have drawn 

assistance, hope, and some alleviation of the 
" hardships heaped upon them. 

" Certainly the Jews w ould have been reprehen- 
" sible, they would have justified the severity of 
*' the laws by w hich they were excluded from so- 
" ciety, and even desened to be excluded again, 
" if, when governments more enlightened have 

taken them under their protection, have called 
" them into the bosom of general society by giving 
" them a countr}', they, in return, had ungr.it efuU 

ly rejected the proftered benefits, violated tlio 
*' laws under whose protection they were allowed 

to live, and disdained all the advantages of civil 
" society, to give obstinately the preference to the 
" customs and manners of their particular society; 
** then, indeed, it might have been said, that their 
" abhorrence of the laws of other nations was, to 
" this day, an inherent principle of their associa- 



( 99 ) 



tioii, as it was in those days when the politics of 

their lirst lawgiver made this abhorrence a fun- 
" damental maxim of their gwernment. 

" But considering the Jews, such as they are in 
" in modern times, we shall see that every where 
" their hatred has ceased with persecution; that 
" wherever thev have been admitted to share the 

benefits of the laws, they have gradually been 

united with those nations who have consented 
" to adopt them ; that every where they have re- 
" spected the laws under whose protection they 
^* were allowed to live, 

*^ It has been asserted, that the Jews have be- 
" haved well in Holland, and that, far from giving 

occasion to complaints against them, they have, 

by their industry, contributed to the prosperity 
^' of the country. The cause of this difference 
" between the Jews of Holland and those of other 
^' countries is evident; it is because in Holland 
" they participate in all the advantages from w;hich 

they were excluded elsewhere ; in that coimtry, 
" facts have proved, that when they are considered 
" as men and citizens, they shew themselves, like 
" others, men and citizens. The particular ad- 

vantages they obtain become in their hands con- 
" ducive to public welfare. 

Let us now consider them in France : since 

they have obtained the advantages common to 

2 



( 100 ) 



all Frenchmen, can it be said that they have/re- 
" fused to obey the laws ? Can it be said that, spurn^ 
" ing these advantages and the institutions of their 
" new country, they have remained, as before, ex- 
" clusively attached to their particular society ? 
" On the contrary, many among them have 
abandoned the exclusive professions to which 
" they had been condemned, to follow others which 
" bring them nearer theirnew fellow-citizens; they 
" have acquired considerable landed property, they 
" have formed vast commercial establishments, and 
erected manufactories ; among them are to be 
seen artists and mechanics, practising me* 
" chanical arts and following trades. They have 
sought for a new education in the national 
schools. Called to the armies, they have zea- 
lously taken up anns, they have fought with 
" courage ; and many, under the very eyes of the 
hero, who now governs France, have deser\^ed 
" the recompence of the brave. 

" Can it be said that men who behave thus ch 
not acknowledge the laws of France ? 
" Can it be a matter of doubt that their man- 
ners will gi*adually blend with those of nations 
*' who admit them to share their advantages and 
" their civil rights? 

" Certainly the change is not yet general, nor is 
it the work of a day; but it is wished for by all 



( 101 ) 



" enlightened Jews: many among them have spon* 

" taneously given the example. The impulse is 
given; wise regulations will do the rest; and I 
doubt not but we shall be indebted for them to 

^' the assembly which is now sitting, 

I shall not examine here into the means cal- 
culated to accelerate this happy change, and 
oblige the Jews to follow, more especially, pix>£^-> 
sions from which they were excluded by £>rmer 
laws. But I think that it is absolutely necessa* 
ry to adopt some efficacious measures to obtain 

" this result, and I would even ventm'e to propose 

*' some, if I did not place the most implicit confi- 
dence in the intentions and in the talents of those 
who compose and lead the assembly. 

You would not have received this long letter, 

^' Sir, if, instead of unjustly inculpating the 
Jews, you would have proposed means to make 

" them what government wishes tiiem to be. But 
what did you expect in affirming that Jews do not 

" acknowledge the laws of France? No doubt you 
wanted to represent them as bad citizens, as 
men whom it is impossible to bring under the 
yoke of the laws. Such avowed intentions 

" sour the mind, instead of mending the manners, 
and increase the evil instead of effecting a cure, 
" I would, to conclude, answer M. de Bonald, 
whom you quote towards the end of your article; 



( 102 ) 



^ but the production of this writer does not threat- 
" en much danger; the nature of his intentions is 

too evident, and the acrimony of his zeal acts as 
" an antidote to his opinions. IM. de Bonald sees 

the present in the past and the past in the pre- 
" sent. This illusion may contribute to his hap- 
" piness; but it cannot seduce men of sound minds 
" and enlightened understandings ; and whatever 

he may do, he will not, in this age of knowledge, 
" and under a government equally wise and firm 

in its resolutions, form a party very formidable 
" to the Jews.'* 

(Signed) SIMON MAYER/* 

Thus, in a word, every thing is disposed to in^ 
sure the complete success of measures, by which 
Israelites will, at last, receive manners and habits 
capable of raising them to the ]*ank of citizens 
eminently useful. 

Nations will know, more generally, how to ap^ 
preciate those vicious prejudices which, till now, 
have been the prolific sources of manifold persecu- 
tions, to which they attribute their incessant mis- 
fortunes, not objected to them as crimes. 

Truths placed beyond a doubt, will prove to 
every one that the Jews are capable of fulfilling 
all social duties, and that they zealous>ly support 



( 103 ) 



all those measures which are likely to produce and 
insure their happiness. 

In France, the grand act of justice announced 
by our august Emperor was totally unexpected. 

Memorials w ere transmitted calling the atten- 
tion of His Imperial and Royal Majesty to a number 
of bond-debts which were represented as likely to 
ruin many unfortunate land-holders. 

The history of past centuries induces a belief, 
that, in other times, and under the reign of a weak 
or irresolute sovereign, rigorous coercive measures 
would have been proposed as the means of redi*es- 
sing wrongs, whose existence is not even yet legally 
ascertained. 

Those of our brethren who are accused of injus- 
tice, and the Jews altogether, would have been, 
once more, exposed to the rigour of sanguinary 
laws, similar to those which too often have exposed 
our ancestors to the hatred of nations, and thrown 
them into all the horrors of misery. 

A soul formed forgreatthings;a mindincessant- 
ly bent upon thoughts the best calculated to 
accelerate the liappiness of mankind ; a genius ac- 
customed to conceive whatever can consolidate 
the basis, the stability, and the prosperity of an 
empire created by a provident wisdom; virtues 
which constitute the greatness of sovereigns, up- 



( IM ) 

lidd by the qualities which form the estates* 
man, have produced the memorable example of a 
resolution heretofore unparalleled, and whose uti- 
lity will excite in all the powers of Europe a gene- 
rous emulation. 

Let us place and preserve in our annals the im*- 
perial decree of the 30th of May, 1806. Soon 
will this collection spread it through all .the states 
of Europe. 

It gives us an immediate right to the esteem of 
manlund; it lays the grounds of our future happi- 
ness ; and will afford us the means of proving wor- 
thy of our country. 

The acts to which it has given birth do not re- 
late it; and it is rather surprising that the editor of 
the proces verbal of the sittings of the assembly, 
did not affix it at the head of his work. 

This imposes on me the duty of giving it here at 
full length. It is the work of protecting benevo- 
lence, a deed of a magnanimity unknown before 
on earth ; it bears the stamp of the decrees of Pro- 
vidence. It will cany to the most distant genera- 
tions the pleasing conviction, that, in our times, 
we beheld in our august Emperor the living image 
of the Divinity. 



( 105 ) 



Imperial Decree^ given at the Palace of St. Cloud, 
May 30, 1S06. 

" Napoleon, Emperor of the French, King of 
" Italy. 

" On the report which has been made to us, that 
" in many of the northern departments of ourem* 
" pire, certain Jews, following no other profession 
" than that of usurers, have, by the accumulation 
" of the most enormous interests, reduced many 
" husbandmen of these districts to the greatest 
" distress : 

" We have thought it incumbent on us to lend 
" our assistance to those of our subjects whom ra- 
" pacity may have reduced lo these hard extremi- 

ties, 

" These circumstances have, at the same time, 
" pointed out to us the urgent necessity of revi- 
ving, among individuals of the Jewish persua- 
sion residing in our dominions, sentimexits of 
^' civil morality, which, unfortunately, have been 
" stifled in many of them by the abject state in 
*' which they have long languished, and which it 
" is not our intention either to maintain, or to re- 
" new. 

" To carry this design into execution, we have 
" determined to call together an assembly of the 

p 



( 106 ) 



principal Jews, and tQ make our intentions 
" known to them by commissioners whom we 

shall name for that purpose, and who shall, at 
" the same time, collect their opinions as to the 
" means they deem the fittest, to re-establish 
" among their brethren the exercise of mechanical 
** arts and useful professions, in order to replace, 
*' by an honest industry, the shameful resources to 
" w hich many of them resorted, from generation 
" to generation, these many centuries. 

" To this end, 

" On the report of our Grand Judge, Minister 
" of Justice, of our Minister for the interior, 

** Our Council of State being heard, 

" We have decreed, and do decree as follows; 

" Art. L There is a suspension for a year, from 
" the date of the present decree, of uU executions 
** of judgment and bond -obligations, except so far 
•* as to prevent limitation, obtained against hus- 
" bandmen, not traders, of the departments of La 
" Sarre, La Roer, Mont Terrible, Upper and 
" Lower Rhine, Rhine and Moselle, and Vosges, 
whenever the bonds entered into by these hus- 
** bandmen are in favour of Jews. 

" 11. There shall be fonued, on the 15th of July 
" next, in our gt)od city of Paris, an assembly of 
individuals professing the Jewish religion and 
" I'esiding in the French territorj% 



( 107 ) 



" 111, The members of this assembly, of the 
" number fixed in the annexed List, shall be cho- 

sen in the departments therein named, and no- 
«* minated by the prefects from among the rabbis, 
" the land-holders, and other Jews, the most dis- 
" tinguished by their integrity and their know- 
" ledge. 

" IV. Im all the other departments of our em- 
" pire, not mentioned in the aforesaid table, and 

where men of the Jewish persuasion should re- 
" side to the number of one hundred, and less 

than five hundred, the prefect may name a depu- 

ty for every five hundred, and for a higher num- 
** ber, up to one thousand, he may name four 
** deputies, and so on. 

" V. The deputies thus named shall be in Pa- 

ris before the 10th of July, and shall send no- 
" tice of their arrival, and of their place of resi- 
" dence, to the secretary's office of our Minister of 
^* the Interior, who shall acquaint them of the 
" place, day, and hour of the meeting. 

VI, Our Minister for the Interior is charged 

with the execution of the present decree. 

(Signed) " NAPOLEON- 

" By the Emperor. 
(Signed) " H. B. Maret. 

" Secretart/ / 5/a/«." 

p2 



( 108 ) 



List of the Number of Jews to be returned to the 
Assembly of Individuals of the Jewish persuasion^ 
whose Meeting has been ordered by His Majesty, 



Names of the Departments. Number of Deputies to be sent. 

Upper Rhine - .- .- --12 
Lower Rhiae - -- -- --15 

Mont Tonnerre ------ 9 

Khinie and Moselle 4 

Sarre - 1 

Roer - - - 1 

Moselle - - 5 

Metirtbe - 7 

Vo^65 7 

Gironde - - 2 

Lower Pyrenees ------ 2 

Vaucluse - -- -- -- - 2 

Cote-d'Or 1 

Seine - -----i- - 6 



74 



(Signed) H.B. MARET. 

Secretary of State. 

A true copy. 



( 109 ) 



The proclamation of this decree produced that 
enthusiastic satisfaction which the sudden hopes 
of lasting prosperity always excite in men who con- 
sider themselves as abandoned by the whole world. 

His excellency the minister of the interior^ 
MM. the Prefects of all the departments, havie 
manifested, in the execution of the orders of His 
Imperial Majesty, those sentiments of universal 
justice which, they know, dwell in the bosom of 
His Majesty, and which themselves consider as the 
first of their duties. 

They have proved solicitous to make use of the 
best means to direct their choice so as to fulfil the 
intentions of His Majesty and to answer the ex- 
pectations of the Jews, 

In the beginning of July, 1806, the deputies ar- 
rived in Paris where they have proved worthy of 
the reputation they had acquired by their prin- 
ciples and their conduct, and of the g^at trust 
which had been reposed in them. 

Their names and their places of abode in Paris 
were known by the declai*ations they made, in con- 
formity to the fifth article of the imperial decree, 
to the Secretai-y's office of the minister of the 
interior. 



( "0 ) 



List of MM. the Deputies of the Jewish Na^ 
#1071, in the alphahetical Order of the Departments of 
the Empire. 

Adige. 

Girolamo Bazizea. 
Israel Coen. 

Adriatic. 
Aaron Tatis^ Land-holder, Venice. 
Abraham Tedesco, Merchant, Venice, 
Jacob Samuel Cracovia, Rabbi, Venice. 



Maritime Alps^ 
Isaac Samaal Avigdov, Nice. 

Douches du Rhone. 
Sabaton Costantini, Merchant, Marseilles. 



Cote d'Or. 

David Blum, Merchant, Dijon, 

Crostolo. 
Jacques Carmy, Rabbi, Reggio. 



Doire. 
Joseph Vita Monmilien, 



( 111 ) 



Dimbs. 

Nathan Lippmann, Land-holder and Clock Ma^ 
nuiacturer, Besangon. 

Gitande. 

Abraham Furtado, Land-holder, Bourdeaux* 
Isaac Rodrigues, Merchant, Do. 

Herault. 

M oise Naquet Vidal, Silk Merchant. 

Landes. 

Abraham Andrade, Rabbi, Saint Esprit 
Castro, jun. Do. 
Patto,jun. Do. 

Marengo. 

De Benedetti. 

Donato-Afeu-Lelio-Saloman Vitate. 
Emilie Vitta. 
Joseph-Benoist Pavia. 

Meurthe. 

Berr-Isaac-Berr, Tobacco Manufacturer, Nancy. 
Elias Salomon, Land-holder^ Sarrebourg. 
Gumpel Levy, Merchant, Nancy. 
Jacob Brisac, Land-holder, Luneville. 
Lazare Levy, Land-holder, and Mayor of Donne- 
lay. 



( 112 



Leen Cohen, Land-holder, Toul. 
Moise Levy, Merchant, Nancy. 

Meuse Inferieure^ 

David Joseph. 

Mincio. 
Abraham Cologna, Rabbi. 
Benoit Fano, Merchant, Mantua. 

Montenote.' 
Israel Emmanuel Ottolenghi. 

Mont Tonnerre. 
Aaron Friedberg, Manufacturer, Burgen. 
Benjamin Jacob, Mentz. 
Herz-Loep Lorech, Land-holder, Mentz. 
Henz Oppenheim, Deux-Ponts. 
Jacob Herz, Merchant and Land-holder, Rotskir* 
chen. 

Jacob Lazare, Merchant, Otterburg. 
Joseph Bloch, Land-holder, Hombourg. 
Moise Kautfman, Land-holder, Neu-Leingen. 

Moselle. 

Aaron-Marc Levy, Merchant, Metz. 

Cerf Jacob Gondchaux, Correspondent of theBtok 

of France, Metz. 
Jacob Gondchaux Beer, Landholder, Metz. 



( 113 ) 

Joseph Hertz, Land-holder, Sargaemines* 
Scawab, jun. Merchant, Metz. 

Nord. 

Salomon, Merchant, Lille. 

Alona. 
David Samson, Pavia. 
Moise Formiggini. 

Panaro. 

Benjamin Uzigli. 
Bonavetura Modena, Rabbi. 

Po. 

David Levy, Deputy Mayor of Quiers^ 
Jacques Todros, Turin. 
Samuel Jacob Ghidiglia, Turin. 

Po (Lower). 
Bondi Zammorani, Rabbi, Ferrara. 
Grazziadio Nappi, Rabbi and Physician, Ferrara. 

Pyrenees ( Loxeer ). 
Furtado,jun. Ship Owner. 
Marg Foi, sen. Merchant. 

Felice Lew. 



( 114 ) 



Lazaro Coen* 

Hhine f Lower). 
Abraham Cahen, Saverne. 
Abraham Piccard, sen. Strasbourg. 
Auguste Ratisbonne, Cloth Merchant, Strasbourg, 
Baruch Cerf Bar, Land-holder. 
Cerf Salomon, Merchant, Strasbourg. 
Daniel Levy, Merchant, Strasbourg. 
David Zinsheimer, Rabbi, Ssi'asbourg. 
Hirsch Bloch, Land-holder, Diebolshuheim. 
Israel Rhens, Strasbourg, 
Jacques Meyer, Rabbi, Niederhuheim. 
Joseph Deyfoss, Haguenau. 
Hirsch Lazare, Rabbi, Haguenau. 
Lazare Wolff, Merchant, Neuwiller. 
Ruesse Picard, Strasbourg. 
Samuel Witersheim, Merchant, Haguensiu, 

Rhine (Upper J. 
Abraham Jacol, Colnac. 
Baruch Lang, Land-holder, Fi^rentz. 
Calmau, Rabbi, Beishem. 
David, Rabbi, Hegenheim. 

Heymann Picqart, Land- holder and Leather Ma^ 

nufacturer, Belfort. 
Hirtz Salomon, Land-holder and Horse-dealer, 

Colmar. 
Jacob Brunswieg, Rabbi. 



( 11« ) 



Lipirtan-Cerf-Berr, Paris. 

Miayer Samuel, Strasbourg. 

Meyer Manheimer, Uffholtz; 

Solomon Rabbi, Colmar. 

Wolff Baruch, Mianufacturer^ Turkheitt* 

Rhine and Moselle. 
Emmanuel Deutz, Rabbi, Coblentz. 
Lion MarXi Land-hdlder, Bonn. 
Mayer Marx, Municiple Council-man, Bonn« 
Wolf Bermann, Merchant, Mayen. 

Roer. 

Saloman Openheim, Banker, Cologn. 

Sarre. 

Meyer Nathan Bemcastel, Merchant, Treves* 
Jeremie Hirsch, Land^holder, Sarrebruk^ 

Seine. 

Michel Berr, Paris. 

Theodore Cerf-Berr, Land-holder, Paris (named 

also for Nancy). 
Saul Cremieaux. 
Lazare Jacob; 
Olry Hayem Worms. 
Rodrigue, Banker. 
Rodrigue,jun. 

r2 

A 



( 116 ) 



Aaron SchmoU, Paris. 

Simon Mayer, formerly in the Army, Government 

Initpector in the Military Administration. 
C. L. Wittersheim, Land-holder. 

Sesia. 

Segre, Rabbi, Land-holder, Municipal council-man 
of Verceil. 



Stura. 

Lattes Elie Aaron, Rabbi, Savigliano. 
Latles Solomon, jun. Land-holder, Coni. 

Vaucluse. 

Joseph Montaux, Silk Merchant, Avignon. 
Moise Millaud. 



Vosge$. 

Isaac-Louis May. 

Michel Lazare, Land-holder, Charreau. 
Moise May, Land-holder, Neufchateau. 

All the deputies being arrived at Paris, His 
Majesty the Emperor and King was pleased 
to give orders for the speedy meeting of the assem- 
bly. 

It was by a circular letter of the 13th of July, 
that His Excellency the Minister of the Interior 



( 117 ) 



made them acquainted with the place of their 
sittings , and the day on which they should meet to 
form an assembly under the presidency of one of 
their members. 

The 26th of the same month was the day fixed 
for their first meeting; but Hid Excellency, having 
remarked that it haf^ned to be on a Saturday, 
sent word to the deputies that if they thought 
themselves bound to abstain from every kind of 
labour, on such a day, they were at liberty to ad^ 
journ their first meeting. 

The deputies, however, wishing to prove that 
they observe faithfully their antient laws, which 
command, above all things, a prompt obedience 
to all orders whatever from their sovereign, have 
fulfilled, on that very day, 26th of July, the in- 
tentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King. 

Sitting of the OGth of July, 1806. 

This day, the 26th of July, 1806, at eleven 
o'clock in the morning, the French deputies of 
the Jewish persuasion, called to Paris by the de- 
cree of His Imperial and Royal Majesty dated 
the 30th of May last, have assembled in a hall 
adjoining the town-house, according to the invi- 
tation contained in the circular letter of His Ex- 



( 118 ) 



celleiicy the Minister of the Interior, of the 13th 
of this month, in order to name a president, two 
secretaries and three scrutineers (10). 

In order to proceed to these nominations, thd 
assembly has been formed under the presidency 
of M. Solomon Lipman^ as the oldest member^ 
assisted by MM; Moses Levy and Henry Castrd 
jun. as secretaries. 

It began its proceedings by calling over the 
names of the members; at the same time a scru- 
tiny began for the nomination of a president; 
M. Abraham Furtado, having obtained the ma- 
jority of votes, has been proclaimed president by 
the oldest member. But before taking the 
chair he addressed the assembly to return thankd 
for the honour they had conferred upon him^ 
warning them, at the same time, to avoid tumult 
and dissentions, which too often take place in 
deliberating assemblies. " A sad experience, he 
" saidi has too well proved that men, assembled 

together in great numbers, oftener bring into 
" contact their passions than their virtues.^^ He 
spoke with the most profound respect, and the 
liveliest admiration of the protecting hero who 
governs us, and invited the assembly to second 

(10)Member9 chosen to examine the num^roiii scrutinies which always 
take place in French assemblies. 



( 11» ) 

his magnanimous views by its sbadind^ and it9 
?igilance. 

The assembly tapturously applauded the 
speech of its President, and the erics of long live 
the Emperor, long live the Imperial Family^ 
resounded through the hall. 

The assembly having proceeded afterwards, 
by way of scrutiny, to the nomination of two 
secretaries, MM. Rodrignes, Junr. and Samuel 
Avigdoo obtained the majority of votes. 

The President proclaimed them secretaries, 
and they took their places at the table accord- 
ingly, The nomination of scrutineers began 
afterwards; MM. Olry Bayem Worms, Theo- 
dore Cerf-Berr, and Emilie Vitta, having ob- 
tained the majority of votes, the President pro- 
claimed them scrutineers, and they also took 
their places at the table accordingly. 

The nominations being over, a member pro- 
posed to name a deputation, with the President 
at its head, to go to Saint Cloud, and carry to 
the foot of the throne the expression of the sen- 
timents of respect, love, and loyalty, which 
warmed the heart of every member of the assem- 
bly towards the sacred person of his Imperial 
and Royal Majesty, and to assure the august 
monarch, under whose laws we live, of the eagep 



( 120 ) 

zeal with which this part of his faithful subjects 
will strive to fulfil the benevolent intentions 
which may be communicated to them by his 
commissioners. 

Another member said, " Yes, Gentlemen, our 
" most ardent wish must be to carry to the foot of 
" the throne the expressions of our gratitude and 
" of our dutiful respect ; to take into the august 
" presence of our sovereign, the engagement of 
" furthering, by all the means in our power, the 

grand designs which His Majesty entertains in 
" respect to us, and to renew our oath to be faith- 
" ful and devoted to our Emperor, even till death/* 
He concluded by demanding that His Excellency 
the Minister of the Interior, should be requested 
to transmit to His Majesty this wish of the Jewish 
deputies; and that, in the expectation of this 
favour, on which the assembly could never set 
too great a value. His Excellency would have the 
goodness to express to His Majesty the senti-i 
ments which animated the whole assembly. 

A third member read amotion to the same 
purpose ; but as itcontained various articles, the 
assembly agreed, on the proposition of the Presi- 
dent, to put off the discussion to the next meet- 
ing. 

Several members having delivered their opini- 
ons, the assembly agreed to express its wish of 



( 121 ) 



being collectively admitted into the presence of 
Iiis Imperial and Hoyal Majesty, to express the 
sentiments of respect, love, and loyalty for his 
sacred person, which penetrate the heart of every 
individual member; and to take the solemn en<» 
gagement of furthering, by all the meatis in its 
power, the benevolent and paternal intentions 
which his great soul had conceived, and of which 
tjie meeting of the assembly was the first pledge. 

The assembly adjourned to Tuesday next, 29th 
inst, at twelve o'clock precisely; the President 
closed the sitting, to wait immediately on His Ex- 
cellency the Minister of the Interior, to give him 
the report of the proceedings of the assembly, 
of its adjournment, and of the wish it had ex- 
pressed, to be enabled to carry to the foot of the 
throne the expression of the sentiments by 
which it was animated towards the sacred person 
pf His Imperial and Royal Majesty. 

This fii'st sitting naturally introduces observa- 
tions which will throw a greater light on the several 
acts I am about to record. 

It is not astonishing that at their first meeting, 
the Deputies should have manifested a zeal truly 
enlightened. 

The Prefects had made such a choice as honours 
their discernment, and w hich will be a source 
of blessings to the Jew s. 

R 



( 123 ) 

Attachment to their duties, extensive knowledge, 
wise principles, and an ardent desire to serve the 
country, characterise the Deputies, and have pro- 
duced these resolutions, to which they will adhere, 
of furthering by all the means in their power, the 
magnanimous designs of our August Emperor. 
They are strengthened in these resolutions by^ a 
wish of proving useful to their brethren, and by the 
praise-worthy ambition of fulfilling the hopes en- 
tertained of their ability to consolidate, on firmer 
grounds, the happiness arising from our new con- 
dition. 

BychusingM. Furtado of Bourdeaux for Presi- 
dent, a most worthy choice in every respect, the 
assembly has proved its judicious intentions, and 
given a pledge of the line of conduct it intends to 
follow. 

Portuguese Jews, in general, are, both in theory 
and in practice, far superior to other Jews in the 
habits of social virtues. 

M. Furtado is well known among merchants^ 
and has obtained a distinguished rank among those 
useful writers who consider accurately their ideas 
and diffuse salutary knowledge. 

And lastly, the qualities of his h^art, would, 
without any other merit, amply justify the choice 
of the assembly. 

He has given the first example of ifceal ; he en- 



( 123 ) 

CDumges and employs for the general advantage the 
various talents of the several members. 

Many others, advantageously known alreadyt 
are also distinguished by their extensive know-* 
ledge: their conduct justifies the opinion enter- 
tained of them, and they honourably deserve all the 
gratitude of their brethren, the esteem and the 
consideration of their contemporaries. 

M. Avigdov, one of the secretaries of the assem- 
bly, author of several writings in favour of the 
Jews, has every day given fresh proofs of his zeal. 

M. Michel Berr, councellor at law, member of 
several academies, one of the deputies for the de- 
partment of ZaiS^sn^, author of a pamphlet entitled 
An Appeal to the Justice of Kings andNations, from 
which I have given ample extracts in this collec- 
tion, continues still to exert all his talents in de- 
fence of the rights and interests of the Jews, whom 
he proved, in 1801, entitled to the benevolence of 
all sovereigns. 

M. Segre, Rabbi, deputy for the department of 
La Seine, is highly commendable for his extensive 
learning which he zealously employs in promoting 
the interests and the wishes of his brethren. 

Other deputies have confirmed the hopes con- 
tained in tbeletter of M. Berr Isaac Berr, (11) by 



(11) Sec page 11. 
k2 



( 124 ) 

a remark which proves that this pi-odilction, pub- 
lished in 1791, has really been productive of some 
good effects. It is very true, as they have advan-^ 
ced, and I have ascertained thefact, that, in April, 
1803, an establishment was formed in Copen- 
hagen for the instruction of Jewish youth ; that 
at the end of the year 1805, tlie number of the pu- 
pils was forty ; that, by a public examination, held 
in June, 1806, their success in their studies had 
been ascertained; that they had made great pro- 
gress in the Hebrew, French, and German lan- 
guages, in geography, and in natural history; and 
in short, that this establishment was in a very flou- 
rishing condition. 

A writing published in France at the epocha of 
the first meeting of the assembly^ whose acts I am 
now recording, has^ proved that the Jewish nation 
in Germany, is greatly indebted to the public esta- 
blishment of M. Jiacobson, Privy Councellor of Fi- 
nances at Brunswick, for the instruction of Jew- 
ish youth. 

It is very certain, then, that, to the principles 
containedin this letter, and published by M. Mi- 
chel Berr, in 1801, these first advantages are to be 
attributed. The learning and the views of this 
last writer will assist powerfully in the completion 
of the great work which the enlightened benevo- 



( 125 ) 

lence of a beloved monarch is preparing to efTec* 
tuate in the French empire* 

Immediately after the first sitting of the assem* 
bly, M. Berr-Isaac-Berr published observations 
which afford a new proof and a new pledge of his 
praise-worthy zeal. 

M. Lipmann Cerf-Berr has also contributed 
his share, by ideas and reflexions which have ob- 
tained universal approbation. 

M. Baruch Cerf-Berr, emulous of his father's 
constant zeal, has adopted the sentiments and opi- 
nions of those distinguished writers, whom he 
quotes honourably, in a publication well entitled 
to notice, and which I should introduce in this 
collection, if I was not apprehensive that it would 
interrupt too nmch the account of the sitting of 
the assembly. 

The works of the deputies I have just mention- 
ed, the zeal of all, are the honorable pledges of 
their intentions, and prove that they place their 
happiness in their efforts to deserve the gratitude 
of their bi-ethren. 

Could the French Jews have been assembled to 
name themselves their representatives their choice 
could not have been happier. 

The whole of the acts of the assembly has pro- 
Ted that their interests could not be placed in the 
hands of men better entitled to their confidence. 



( ^6 ) 



Sedond Sitting, July^QQ^ 1S06« 

The president opened the sittings precisely aC 
twelve o'clock. He named, as Commissioners for 
the maintainance of order, MM. Kodrigue, sen- 
Ldpmann Cerf-Berr, and Castre, jun. 

One of the secretaries read a letter addressed 
to the President by His Excellency the Minister of 
the faiterior, dated the asth of this , month, in 
Adiichheiaferms him, that MM. Mole, Portalis, 
•* jtin.and Pasquier^ Maitres des Requiiesj , {12) apd 
chosen by His Majesty as Conmiissioners to 
transact whatever belongs to us, will attend the 
assembly, this day, at three o'clock, to impart 
the inted^tions of His Majesty the £mperor and 
King. 

" The Minister, at the isame time, desires the 
President to acquaint the assembly, that, before 

^* proceeding further, it is necessary to name a 
conunission, which shall prepare the ground- 
work of the discussions which are to take place 
on the communications which the commissioners 

" have received directions to make." 
The President opened the discussion on the 

formation of this commission. 

(12) Law officers attached to the Council of State, with fanctioiu 
nearly similar to those of our Masten in tb« Court of Chancery* 



i 



( 127 ) 



A member proposed that it should be com^ 
posed of twelve members named by the Preii* 
dent. 

Another observed that it would be better to 
defer forming the commission till the Commis- 
sioners have acquainted the assembly with 
the nature of the questions which shall be sub* 
mitted to its judgment, in order to select m^* 
bers accordingly. 

A third thought that, " even fiwn the. coMenU 
*^ of the letter of Hi» Excellency die Minister for 
" the Interior, it is possible to put off the forma* 
*^'tionof the commission till the commissioners of 

His Majesty have acquainted the assembly with. 
" the nature of theit* communications.'^ 

A deputy observed, that, " as several members 
" of the northern departments ate not thoroughly 

acquainted with the French language^ it wouh) 

be proper to name two members to tratxsl^e fat 
" them, verbally and literally, the several opinio 
" ons, that they may,'' sHyg he, " deliberate with 

some knowledge of the subject.^' 

The assembly adopted this resolution, anct 
the President named MM. Lyon Mart and Jo- 
seph Benjamin to translate foi^^ them. 

These two membei*s acquainted those northern 
deputies, who were not sufficiently acquainted with 
the French language, with the several opinions 



( 128 ) 

relative to the formation of the commission, 

which have been expressed in the course of the 

present debate, 

A member observed, that, ^* as the President 

" and the members, officers of the assembly, form 
naturally part of the comiiiission, twelve mem- 
bers added to them, will be sufficient to compose 

« ie\ 

The assembly divided on the question by shew 
of hands, and it was agreed that " the commission 
" shall be composed of twelve members, besides 
" the Pi-esident and .the officers, and that they 
shall be named by the President, after the Com- 
missioners shall have acquainted the assembly 
with the nature of the questions to be submit^ 
ted to its opinion. 

A dispatch was brought to the President, directed 
to MM. Mole, Portalis, jun, and Pasquier, Mai- 
tresdes Bequetes; it was laid on the table. The 
minutes of the meeting of the 26th were read. 

A member demanded leave to speak, and ob^ 
served that " our sentiments of loyalty, respect, 

and love, for the sacred person of His Royal and 
" Imperial Majesty, have not been expressed with 

that warmth and enthusiasm which animate the 
*^ whole assembly.^* 

This member was reminded that it would be a 



( 129 ) 



difficult task to cfxpress those sentiilientd with 

the enthusiasm they excite* 

Another observed that, in the journal of tfaemi^ 

Uutes^ the number of votes v^hich the President, 

the Secretaries, and the Scrutineers had obtained, 

had been omitted. 

The itesembly ordered " that the observations 
of these two members should be mentioned in 
the minutes, as well as the number of votes al- 

" Ittdedto.^^ 

It appeai'ed, from notes taken of the sitting of 
the 26th) M. Solomon Lipmann, as the oldest 
member, being President, and MM; Moses Levi 
and Castro, jun. as the youngest, being Secreta- 
ries, that out of ninety».four votes, Mt Furtado, as 
candidate for the Presidency, had obtained sixty- 
*^ two, aild M. Berr-Isaac-BeiT thirty two ; that, 
for the office of Secretaries, M. I. S. Avigdor had 
" obtained forty«-fbur voteSj and J* Rodrigues 
forty-three; that for that erf Scrutineers, MM. 
" Olry-Hayem- Worms, Theodore Cerf-Berr, and 
Emilie V^itta had obtained^ the first seventy votes, 
** the second sixty- three, and the third twenty-nine/' 
The President named afterwards a deputation 
of fifteen members, viz. MM. Berr-Isaac-Berr, 
Lipmann, Cerf-Berr, Saul Cremieux, Patto, 
jun. Castro, jun. Cadet Carcassonne, Costan- 
tini, IbMiA Zinzheimet*, Mayer, Samuel Rodri- 

s 



( 130 ) 



gues, sen. Moses Levy, Marx, jun. Jacob Lazara, 
Levy, and Baruch Cerf-Berr, to go and meet the 
Commissioners of His Majesty. 

The President then suspended the proceedings 
of the assembly until the arrival of the Commis- 
sioners. 

At three o'clock, it was announced that the Com- 
missioners of His Majesty were conriing to the as- 
sembly, by a door facing that by which the depu- 
ties are admitted. 

Immediately, the fifteen members of the depu- 
tation, with the President and the officers at their 
head>, went to meet them. 

The Commissioners of His Majesty were intro- 
duced into the hall, amidst repeated acclamations 
of Long live the Emperor^ Long live the Imperial Fa* 
mily. The most profound silence succeeded to this 
spontaneouseffusion; the members remained stand- 
ing to hear His Majesty's intentions read. 

M^. Mole, Maitre des Requetes^ one of the Com- 
inissionei-s of His Majesty, opened the letter di-^ 
rected to them which laid on the table, took out 
the documents it contained, and pronounced the 
following discourse to acquaint the assembly with 
the intentions of His Majesty. 

Gentlemen, 
His Majesty, the Emperor and King;, having 



( 131 ) 

^ ttamed us Commissioners to transact whatever 
^ relates to you, has this day sent us to this as- 
^ sembly to acquaint you with his intentions, 
" Called together from the extremities of this vast 
empire, no one among you is ignorant of the 
" object for which His Majesty has convened this 
" assembly. You know it. The conduct of many 
among those of your persuasion has excited 
complaints, which have fbund their way to the 
foot of the throne: these complaints were founds 
ed on truth ; and nevertheless, His Majesty has 
been satisfied with stopping the progress of the 
evil, and he has wished to hear you on the means 
♦* of providing a remedy. You will, no doubtt 
•* prove worthy of so tender, so paternal a conduct^ 
and you will feel all the importance of the trusty 
«^ thus reposed in you. Far from considering the 
government under which you live as a power 
against which you should be on your guard, you 
^ will assist it with your experience and co- 
operate with it in all the good it intends; thus 
«^ you will prove that, following the example of 
all Frenchmen, you do not seclude yourselves 
from the rest of mankind* 

The laws which have been imposed on indi«i 
viduals of your religion have been different in 
the several parts x)f the world: often they have 
been dictated by the interest of the day^ But, 

Mi 



( 132 ) 



as an assembly like the present, has no precedent* 
" in the annals of Christianity, so will you be 
judged, for the first time, with justice, and you 
" will see your fate irrevocably fixed by a Christian 
Prince. The wish of His Majesty is, that you 
should be Frenchmen ; it remains with you to 
" accept of the proffered title, without forgetting 
" that, to prove unworthy of it, would be renounc* 
ing it altogether. 

You will hear thequestions submitted to you; 
" your duty is to answer the whole truth on every 
" one of them. Attend, and never lose sight of 
" that which we are going to tell you ; that, when a 
monarch equally firm and just, who knows every 
thing, and who punishes or recompences every 
" action, puts questions to his subjects, these would 
" be equally guilty and blind to their true interests^ 
if they were to disguise the trath in the least. 
" The intention of His Majesty is. Gentlemen, 
that you should enjoy the greatest freedom in 
** your deliberations: your answei*s will be trans- 
** mitted to us by your President, when they hava 
** been put in regular form. 

As to us, our most ardent wish is to be able to 
report to the Emperor, that, among individuals 
of the Jewish persuasion, he can reckon as many 
** faithftd subjects, determined to conform in eveiy 
^ thing to the laws^ and to the morality, which 



( laa ) 

^'^ught to regulate the oondnisi of idl Fraodv- 

men/' 

One of the Secretaries res(d afterwavds the fol- 
lowing twelve questiom propoeed by theCoiimua* 
sioners* 

Questions proposed to the Asserphly of the Jem by 
the Commissioners named hy His Mqfesty the 
peror and King^ to transact whativMr conesma thenw 

%sk. h it lawful &r Jews to marrj more than 
one wife ? 

and. Is diycHToe allowed by the Jewidi religion? 

Is divorce valid, although not pranemiced hf 
warts of Justice, and by virtue of laws in con- 
tradiction with the French code? 

3d, Can a Jewess^ marry a Christian, or a Jew a 
Christian woman? 

Or has the law ordei«d that die Jws rimM 
only intermarry among themselves ? 

4th« In the eyes of Jews are Frenchmi^n con^ 
sidered as brethren or as strangers ? 

dtlu In either case what conduct does tlwir law 
prescribe towards Frenchmen not of their rdi- 
gion? 

fith. Do the Jew9 bom iaFiancey and treated 



( 134 ) 

by the law as French citizens, acknowledge Fmnca 
as their country? 

Are they bound to defend it ? 

Are they bound to obey the laws, and to follow 
the directions of the civil code? 

7th, What kind of Police-jurisdiction have the 
Rabbies among the Jews ? 

What judicial power do they exercise among 
them? 

9th. Are the forms of the elections of the Rab«- 
bies and their police-jurisdiction, regulated by the 
law, or are they only sanctioned by custom ? 

10th. Are there professions from which the Jews 
are excluded by their law ? 

11th. Does the \aw forbid the Jews fronx taking 
usury from their brethren? 

12th. Does it forbid or does it allon^ usury to- 
wards strangers ? 

During the reading of these questions, the 2s% 
sembly manifested by unanimous and spontanea 
ous emotions, how deeply it was afiected by the 
doubt which the questions seemed to convey, as to 
the attachment of Frenchmen, following the law of 
Moses, for their fellow citizens, and for their coun*> 
try, and as to their sense of the duty by which they 
are bound to defend it. 

-The assembly was not able to conceal the^ 
emotions caused by the sixth question, in which it 



( 135 ) 



is asked if Jews bom in France and treated by the 
law as French citizens, acknowledge France as 
their country, and if they arc bound to defend it. 
The whole assembly unanimously exclaimed,— 
Even to death. 

The reading of the questions being ended, the 
President addressed the following discourse to the 
Commissioners of His Majesty the Emperor and 
King. 

Gentlemen Commissioners, 
" We have listened with all the attention we 
could command to the intentions of his Majesty 

" the Emperor, which you have just communicated 

" tons. 

" Chosen by this assembly as the interpreter 
of its sentiments, 1 must assure you, in the name 
of all those who compose it, that, when His Majes- 
ty determined to call us together in his capital^ 
in order to further the accomplishment of his 
glorious designs, we saw, with inexpressible 
joy, this occasion of doing away many errors and 
putting an end to many prejudices. 

The benevolent intentions of His Majesty 

" have offered us an opportunity, most fervently 
desired this great while, by all honest and en« 
lightened men of the Jewish persuasion, residing 

** in France. 



( 136 ) 

We hitt[, liotvev^r, but a distant prospect of th« 
^ epocha which would coitipletely reform habitft 

occasioned by a long state of oppression. Now 
^ the moment seems almost at hand, and we owe 

this precious advantage to the paternal goodness 
^ of His Majesty. It was impossible that his ex- 
^ alted mind could, eren for an instant, entertain 

a thought on our situation^ without its being 
** materially improved. 

We shared, in common with all Frenchmen^ 
" the sentiments inspired Ir^ that protecting geniui^ 

which had saved this empire from the rage of par- 
^ ty spirit, from the horrors of a bloody anarchy, 
•« Mxd from the ambitions designs of its exterior 
" enemies. 

•* We could not suppose that after so iMnj be- 
nefits, it could be still possible for him to acquire 
•* new rights to our gratitude, or to increase our 
la\^ for his sacred person. Times of ignorance 
and of anarchy had always been, for us, days of 
trials and of misfortune. His Majesty had freed 
us from any apprehension as to the return of the 
first of these scourges, the other was chained by 
^ his powerful hand. His laws, the establish-' 
^ ment of his dynasty, and the return of order, had 
•* csdmed all the fears we might have entertained 
•* of a retrograde motion in the progress of tiic 
great scienceof social economy in France ; we flat« 



( 137 ) 



" tered ourselves with the hope of {irogressivdy 
*^ enjoying the sveeets of so many blessings. The 
*' slow but sure regeneration of some df our bre- 
" thren would have been the result of oar new con- 

dition. His Majesty wishes to hasten the preci-* 

ous moments^ $ind, through his protecting good- 
" ness, we shall enjoy, under his reign, social ad- 
*' vantages, which we could expect only from cen- 
" turiesof perseverance. 

" It is thus that the greatest of heroes becomes 
" the common father of all his subjects; whatever 
" religion they follow, he only sees in them chil- 
" dren of the same family. 

" The enterprize His Majesty undertakes is such 
" as might have been expected from the most 
" asttonishing man whose deeds were ever record- 
" ed by history. Methinks I see the muse hold- 
*' ing her immortal burin^ and tracing on her ada- 

mant tables, amidst so many deeds, which make 

this reign so conspicuous, that which the hero of 
^* the age has done to destroy utterly the banier 

raised between nations and the scattered re- 
" mains of the most antient people. 

Such is, Gentlemen Commissioners, the point 
** of view under which we consider, with compla- 
" cency, tlie communications we have received 
" from you. It confirms us in the idea that no 
** practicable good escapes tlie penetration of 



r W8 ) 



" His Majesty, which can be equalled only by 
" liir. goodness, and by the generosity of his heart. 

" 7 he choice which His Majesty has been pleas- 
" ed to make of you. Gentlemen Commissioners, tc> 
" con^ ey to us his intentions, adds a new value to 
*^ the favour he intends for the Jews. The most 

unlimited confidence will reign between us, in 
" the course of our communications. 

" While this confidence pleads some excuse for 

our involuntary enots, it will be a pledge of the 
"purity of our intentions. 

Have the goodness, Gentlemen Commissioners. 

to convey our sentiments to His Majesty, and t6 

assure him that he does not reign over subje^bts 

more faithful, or more devoted to his sacred p^r- 
" son, than we are.^^ 

The discourse of the President being ended^ 
the hall resounded with repeated cries of Long liv9 
the Emperor* 

The Commissioners of His Majesty have request- 
ed an official receipt for the questions they laid oil 
the table. 

It was given by the President. 

Many members manifested their intention of 
delivering their sentiments before the Commis- 
sioners. But they left the assembly amidst the 
criesof Long live the Emperor? They were conduct* 



( 139 ) 

by the same deputation which had introduced 
them into the halL 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to form a 
commission to prepare the ground work of the 
discussions, which are to take place on the Com- 
munications which the Commissionei*s of His Ma- 
jesty have made to the assembly. The President 
names to compose it — MM. Berr-Isaac-Berr, 
S^gre, Rabbi, David Zinzheimer, Rabbi, Abraham 
Andi*ade, Rabbi, Jacob Lazare, Jacob Gondehaux 
Berr, Moses Levy, Rpdrigues, Samuel Jacob 
Guediglia, Micb^l Berr, Baruch»Cerf-Berr, and 
JLyon Marx. 

Previous to the rising of the assembly, the Prc- 
isident observed, that it was useless for him to ob- 
ijerve, that no answer will be sent to the Commis- 
sioners, without having been previously submit- 
ted to the deliberation of the assembly. 

The President closed the sitting at four o'clock, 
and announced to the deputies that they will be 
acquainted, by letters of convocation, with the 
day and hour of the next meeting. 



Sitting of the 4th of August^ 1S06. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock ; 
one of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 

T 2 



140 ) 



sitting of the 29th of July last, which passed with-* 
out any objection. 

The President named MM. May, of Paris, Sa- 
muel Wittersheim, and Gumpel Levy : as Conunis- 
sionersto maintain order in the assembly. 

The President read a letter from His Excellency 
tlie Minister of the Interior, acquainting him, that 
His Majesty the Emperor and King had consented 
to admit the assembly into his presence, in a hody^ 
whenever its laboui-s shall be sufficiently forward- 
ed to promise some results. The readingof this let- 
ter was followed by repeated acclamations of Long 
live the Emperor^ long live the Imperial Family. 

The President informed the assembiy that a 
secretary would read the answers which the com- 
mission, named to prepare the ground-work of the 
discussions of the assembly, on the questions pro- 
posed by His Majrsty^s Commissioners, had thought 
fit to return to the thrive first questions. He in- 
treated the assembly to remain calm during the 
discussion, and invited those membe*^ who may 
chuse to deliver their sentiments, to give in their 
names at the table. 

One of the Secretaries read the answer proposed 
by the commission to the first question. M. L.yon 
Marx, one of the interpreters of the assembly and 
member of the commission, read the literal ti*ans- 



( 141 ) 

la tion he had made of it into German. The discus- 
sion opened on the first question. 

A member ascended the tribune^ and said, that 
though the answer was within the meaning and 
sense of the law, yet the wording of it was not suffi- 
ciently clear. The President ased if he had another 
to propose in its stead ; he answered in the nega* 
tive. 

Another member expressed his surprize, thatthe 
member who had just sat down should not point 
out in what particulai-s he found the wording re- 
prehensible. A third observed that the French 
word in the question, which means lawful^ more 
particularly alluded to religious law ; the answer 
should be made with a view to this meaning. 
*^ Nobody," said another, having otTered to speak 
against the sense of the answer proposed by the 
commission, it ought to be put to the vote.'' This 
proposition was seconded, and put to the vote; and 
the answer to the first question, was adopted almost 
unanimously, without any alteration. 

The answer to the second question was read. M. 
Lvon Marx read, as before, the translation he had 
made of it into the German language ; no one offer- 
ing to s|>eak on the answ er proposed by the com- 
mission, it w as put to the vote, and passed unani- 
jnously. 

Oi^e of the si?cretaries read the answer to the 



1 



( 142 ) 



third question ; M, Lyon Marx read the German 
literal translation he had made of it. A. Rabbi 
proposed that whenever principles purely theologi- 
cal should be presented for discussion, his brethren 
the Rabbies should be more particularly consulted. 
Is it not evident/^ says he, " that if astronomical 
" subjects were proposed, you would consult only 
*' astronomers? Why then should you not leave tq 
theologiai^s, whatever relates to religion He 
thought that questions of this nature should not be 
determined by the mjgority of votes, 

The President observed to this speaker, that the 
principle of the majority of votes was inherent to 
the nature of every deliberative assembly, and that 
it was impossible to depart from it. 

One of the Secretaries read the written opinioq 
of the Rabbies, members of the assembly, on the 
third question. 

A member said, that government, in forming 
that assembly, had not composed it entirely of 
Rabbies; it had selected also land-holders and 
other pei-sons known by their integrity and by 
their learning; that, on the other hand, the two 
answers were written nearly on the same principles; 
since both acknowledged thj^t Christians were our 
brethren. He thought that the two answers might 
be combined together, so as to make only one. 
A Rabbi expressed as his opinion that the answer 



( 143 ) 

did not include all the bearings 6f the question; 
he thought that it should contain observations oil 
the probable consequences of such marriages. 

Amembersaid that certainly govern nen should 
be made acquainted with all the obstacles which 
stood in the way of unions of tha nat ure. 

Another thought that sdl the members who 
composed that assembly were sufficiently enlight* 
enedon their religion, to deliver their opinion accor* 
ding to their conscience. He deemed the ansvrer 
of the commission perfectly correct, and demanded 
that it should be put to the vote in the smne mode 
as the others had been. 

A member declared, that, in questions of this 
importance, the Rabbies should be more particu- 
larly consulted, in order to be better fixed in the 
true principles. 

Another observed, that Rabbies delivering their 
Opinion like other members, must rest satisfied 
with the inftuence their profession gave them, 
without attempting to increase it. 

A Rabbi intreated his fellow-doctors to discuss 
the question with moderation and docility, as be^ 
came true disciples of Moses; he declared that 
he too would stand forth the champion of religion, 
but that he thought it also a duty incumbent uixm 
him to expose publicly the additions which de« 
gradeit, and which he attribute, with the celebra- 



( 144 ) 

ted Mendelshon, to the pestilent breath of supers 
stition, which had often shewn itself opcnlj. 

A member said, " We shall always hear the 
" Rabbies with pleasure; but their opinion must 
" not have more authority than that of the other 
** members/' 

Another added, that a commission having beeri 
named to prepare the answers, and this commis- 
sion presenting them afterwards to the assembly, 
every member was at liberty to deliver his senti- 
ments, and that, consequently, in the deliberations, 
one vote could not have more weight than another. 

A Rabbi said, that, whenever his feUow-doctoi*s 
delivered an opinion, they should adduce proofs to 
support it ; and consequently that the assembly 
should not admit contrary opinions, unless sup- 
ported by arguments which should refute theirs. 

Several members spake in support of the ansT* er 
proposed by the commission, and at the same time 
approved the- principles laid down by the last 
speaker. 

A Rabbi said, that marriage is a religious act, 
and that the pei-sons united in wedlock, must be 
of the same religion. 

A member stated tl»at it did not appear to him, 
that this necessary condition is expressed in any 
law. " ThedifFerence of religion," says he, " cer- 
" tainly makes those unions more difficult, but 

they cannot be considered as forbidden on that 



( 145 ) 



account ; it will be sufficient to point out these 
" obstacles in the answer/* 

Another observed that, since no law forbade that 
kind of marriages, they must be lawfuL 

A member said that the first precept of the law 
is increcLse and multiply; that in the sacred writings 
he finds no religious ceremonies relative to mar- , 
riage ; that some, indeed, are prescribed in the . 
Talmud, but only to enliven the festivity of the ' 
day, and make it more agreeable to the married 
couple, to their parents, and to their friends. 

A Rabbi thought that marriages with Chris- 
tians were forbidden. He requested the assembly 
to consider that when Moses forbad those unions 
with the proscribed nations, he gave, as the mo- 
tive of this prohibition, the fear and apprehension 
lest, by the seduction of women, men should be led 
astray from the the law of the God in whose name 
he spoke ; that, consequently, the probability of se- 
duction still existing in unions: with other nations, 
the prohibition still existed likewise. 

Another member spake on the same side of the 
question ; he begged of the assembly not to hurry 
the decision, but to give lime to the deputies to 
weigh the question maturely; he proposed to ad- 
journ the deliberation to the following day. 

Another began by reading the four first verm 
of the 7th chapter of Deuteronomy ; then he said, 

u 



( 146 ) 



" Why should we supply to Christians the prohibi- 
" tion contained in these verses? Are we com- 
"missioned to destroy them? not to give them any 

quarter? Do they not u'orship the same God we 
" adore? Surely if God wei^e to send us a second 
*' Moses, far from tracing a line of separation be- 
" tween us, he would tell us — 'Love the Christians ; 
*' cherish them as your brethren ; uiiitewilh them; 
" consider them as children of the same family. 
** You all acknowledge that they are no idolators ; 
*' that they worship, as you do, the Creator of hea- 
" ven and earth; that they are your brethren and 
" your benefactors/ What more is necessary to 
" make marriages lawful betM'een Jews and C^hris- 
" tians? U ill you say that the present Rabbies do 
** not consider them as such? 1 he answer iramed 

by the commission contains this declaration. 

" Great stress has been laid on the domestic in- 
" conveniences which would result from such 
" marriages; but has a word been said of the great 
" political advantages they would produce ? If 
" both should be put into the scale, could the su- 
" periority of the last be doubted? Certainly not: 
" we must, then, adopt the answer proposed by the 
" commission, which contains the whole truth/' 

This opinion was strongly supported by many 
members. 

A Rabbi answered that truth must be told, let 



( U7 ) 

the consequences be what they may. He declared, 
as his opinion, that marriages with Christians are 
not lawful. 

A member said that it would be a difficult 
matter to come to a resolution, if the question be 
not regularly proposed. He demanded that the 
President should put the first part of it tothevote. 

Several Members demanded the priority for the: 
answer of the Rabbies, others for that of the com- 
mission. — [Some tumult took placed] 

A member proposed to adjourn the discussion. 

Another proposed, on the contrsuy, that the de- 
bate should be closed, and that the assembly should 
proceed to^'a division. 

Another insisted that the assembly could not 
rise till the question was decided. 

Another proposed to suspend the discussion ; to 
call the Rabbies to the table, in order to unite the 
two answers into one, in such a manner, as to con- 
ciliate the principles advanced on both sides of the 
question. 

This proposition was adopted; the President 
suspended the discussion, and prepared a new 
answer with the assistance of the Rabbies and the 
members of the commission. 

After a lapse of three-quarters of an hour, the 
President announced that the discussion was re- 
sumed; he read the new answer to the third ques- 

u 2 



( 148 ) 



tion. M. Lyon Maix traudated it verbally into 
German. The question was called for on every 
side. The President put the new answer to the 
vote, and it was adopted almost unanimously. 
The President then called for the reading of a de- 
claration which he thought should be affixed to the 
answers: the assembly approved it by acclamation, 
and with shouts of Long live the Emperor! This 
declaration was translated into German by M. 
Lyon Marx. 

The assembly also ordered that this declaration, 
and the answers to the three first questions, should 
be inserted in the minutes of the proceedings of 
the day. In consequence these four documents 
were annexed to that day's minutes. 

The President proposed afterwards to name a 
commission to prepare the ceremonies of a festival 
to be celebrated in the synagogues, on the 15th of 
August next, in commemoration of His Majesty's 
birth day, and of the re*establishment of religious 
worship, as one of the greatest blessings of his 
reign. 

The assembly adopted this proposition unani- 
mously, and the President named as Commission- 
ers to prepare this festival, MM. J. Rodrigues, sen, 
of La Gironde; Gumpel Levy, of Nancy, May, 
jun. of Paris, Sabaton Constantini, of Marseilles^ 



( i4d ) 



«nd Aaron Schmol, of Paris, who are to €on$aIt 
irith the Adminisirators of Synagogues. 

A member reminded the assembly that in the 
sitting of the 26th of July, he made a proposition 
analogous to this subject, the discussion of which 
had been adjourned to another meeting; he de* 
manded that it should be now taken into consider* 
ation. 

The President referred the propositions of this 
member to the Commissioners, whose report would 
be received at the next meeting^ which the Presi« 
dent fixed for Thurisday the 7th. instant. The 
sitting closed at half past five. 

Declaration adopted by the Assembly, and the 
Answers to the three first Questions^ 

OECLARATION. 

Resolved, by the French deputies professing the 
religion of Moses, that the following Declaration 
shall precede the answers returned to the ques« 
tions proposed by the Commissioners of His Im- 
perial and Royal Majesty. 

The assembly y impressed with a deep sense of 

gratitude^ love, respect, and admiration, for the 



( 150 ) 



" sacred person of kis Imperial and Royal Majesty^ 
declares^ in the name of all Frenchmen prof essing 
the religion of Moses, that they are fully deter^ 
mined to prove worthy of the favours His Majesty 
intends for them, by scrupulously cortforming to 
his paternal intentions; that their religion makes 
it their duty to consider the law of the prince as 
the supreme law in civil and political matters; that, 
consequently, should their religious code, or its 
various interpretations, contain civil or political 
" commands, at variance with those of the French 
" code, those commands would, of course, ceetse to in* 
^^Jluence and govern them,since they must, above all^ 
acknowledge and obey the laws of the prince. 
" That, in consequence of this principle, the Jews 
" have, at all times, considered it their duty to obey 
*' the laws of the state, and that, since the revolution^ 
they, like all Frenchmen, have acknowledged no 
" others:' 



FIRST QUESTION. 

Is it lawful for Jews to marry more than one wife? 

ANSWBR. 

It is not lawful for Jews to marrv more than one 



( 151 ) 

wife : in all European countries they conform to 
the general practice of marrying only one. 

Moses does not command expressly to take 
several ; but he does not forbid it. He seems even 
to adopt that custom as generally prevailing, since 
he settles the rights of inheritance betvireen chil- 
dren of different wives. Although this practice 
still prevails in the East, yet their antient doctors 
have enjoined them to restrain from taking more 
than one wife, except when the man is enabled by 
his fortune to maintain several. 

The case has been different in the West; tha 
wish of adopting the customs of the inhabitants of 
this part of the world has induced the Jews to 
renounce Polygamy. But as several individuals 
still indulged in that practice, a synod was conve- 
ned at Worms in the eleventh century, composed 
of one hundred Rabbies, with Guerson at their 
head. This assembly pronounced an anathema 
against every Israelite who should, in future, take 
more than one wife. 

Although this prohibition was not to last for 
ever,, the influence of European manners has uni- 
versally revailed. 



( 1«2 ) 



SECOND question; 

Is divorce allowed by the Jewish Religion? Is di^ 
wrce valid when not pronounced by Courts of Justice 
by Virtue of Laws in Contradiction with those of the 
French Code? 

ANSWER. 

Repudiation is allowed by the law of Moses; 
but it is not valid if not previously pronounced 
by the French code. 

In the eyes of every Israelite, without excep- 
tion, submission to the prince is the iirst of du- 
ties. It is a principle generally acknowledged 
among them, that, in every thing relating to civil 
or political interests, the law of the state is the su« 
preme law. Before they were admitted in France 
to share the rights of all citizens, and when they 
lived under a particular legislation which set them 
at liberty to follow their religious customs, they 
had the facility of repudiating their wives; but it 
was extremely rare to see it put into practice. 

Since the revolution, they have acknowledged no 
other laws on this head but those of the empire. 
At the epocha when they were admitted to the 
rank of citizens, the Rabbies and the principal 
Jews appeared before the municipalities of their 



( 158 ) 



respective places of abode, and took oath to 
conform, in every thing to the laws, and to ac* 
knowledge no other rules in all civil matters. 

Consequently they can no longer consider a$ 
valid the repudiation pronounced by their Rabbie$, 
since, to make it valid, it must have been pre» 
viously pronounced by competent tribunals; for, 
in like manner as by an arrete of the Consular 
Government, the llabbies could not impart the 
matrimonial benediction till it appeared to them 
that the civil contract had been perf<mned before 
the civil officer, in like manner they cannot pro* 
nounce repudiation, until it appears to them that 
it has already been pronounced by a sentence which 
gives it validity. Supposing even that the afore- 
said arr^/^ had been silent on this head, still the 
rabbinical repudiation could not be valid ; for, ac« 
coi'ding to Rabbies who have written ofi the civil 
code of the Jews, such as Joseph Csurro in th^ 
Abeneser^ repudiation is valid only, in case there 
should be no opposition of any kind. And as the 
law of the state would form an opposition, in point 
of civil interests — since one of the parties could 
avail himself or herself of it against the other— «it 
necessarily follows that, under the influence of the 
civil code, rabbinical repudiation cannot be valid. 
Consequently, since the time the Jews have begun 
to enter into engagements before the civil officer, 

X 



( 154 ) 



no one, attached to religious practices, can repudi- 
ate bis wife but by a double divorce — that pro- 
nounced by the law of the state, and that prescribed 
by the law of Moses; so that under this point of 
view, it may be justly affirmed, that the Jewish re- 
ligion agrees on this subject with the civil code. 



THIRD QUESTION. 

Can a Jewess marry a Christian^ and a Jew a 
Christian woman? or does the law allow the Jews to 
intermarry only among themselves? 

ANSWER. 

The law does not say that a Jewess cannot 
marrj'^ a Christian, nor a Jew a Christian woman ; 
nor does it state that the Jews can only interman-y 
among themselves. 

The only marriages expressly forbidden by the 
law, are those with the seven tTanaanean nations, 
witii Amon and Moab, and with the Egyptians. 
The prohibition is absolute concerning the seven 
Canaanean nations: with regard to Amon and Moab, 
it is limited, according to many Talmudists, to the 
men of those nations, and does not extend to the 
women; it is even thought that these last would 
h^ve embraced the Jewish religion. As to Egyp- 



( 155 ) 



tians,tlie prohibition is limited lo the third genera- 
tion. The prohibition in general applies only to 
nations in idolatry. The Talmud detlares for- 
mally that modern nations are not to be considered 
as such, since they woi^ship, like us, the God of 
heaven and earth. And, accordingly, there has 
been, at several periods, intermarriages between 
Jews and Christians in France, in Spain, and in 
Germany: these marriages were sometimes tolera- 
ted, and sometimes forbidden by the laws of those 
sovereigns, who had received Jews into their do* 
minions. 

Unions of this kind are still found in France; 
but we cannot dissemble that the opinion of the 
Rabbies is against these marriages. According to 
their doctrine, although the religion of Moses 
has not forbidden tlie Jews from intermarrying 
with nations not of their religion, yet, as mandage^ 
according to the Talmud, requires religious cere- 
monies called Kiduschim^ with the benediction 
used in such cases, no marriage can be religiously 
valid unless these ceremonies have been perform- 
ed. This could not be done towards persons who 
would not both of them consider these ceremonies 
as sacred; and in that case the married couple 
could separate without the religious divorce ; they 
would then be considered as married civillf/ but 
not religiously. 



( 156 ) 

Such is tht opinion of the Kabbies, members 
of this assembly. In general they would be no 
more inclined to bless tlie union of a Jewess with 
a Christian, or of a Jew with a Christian woman, 
than Catholic priests themselves would be dis- 
fiosed to sanction unions of this kind. The 
Rabbies acknowledge, however, that a Jew, who 
marries a Christian woman, does not cease on 
that account, to be considered as a Jew by his 
brethren, any more than if he had married a Jew- 
ess civilli/ and not religiouHly. 



After the sittings of the 26th and 29th of July, 
I should naturally have placed many discourses, 
fiome of which, from unforeseen circumstances, 
could not be delivered in the assembly. I was 
forced, much against my intention, by the press of 
matter, to notice them briefly, as may have been 
already remarked ; but many persons having ex- 
pressed a wish to see them inserted in this collec- 
tion, I have been induced to accede to it, particu- 
larly as the sentiments which they contain are ho- 
nourable to the authors, and prove their zeal for 
the interest of our brethren whom they represent, 
and their dutiful attachment to the wise govern- 
ment which protects them. 

I shall, then, with pleasure, introduce them here. 



( 157 ) 



I shall, iii the like manner, and immediately 
after each sitting, give the different writings rela- 
tive to the questions debated. 

Reflections of M. Baruch Cerf-Berr, Deputy to 
tJie Jewish Assembly convened at Paris by Order 
of His Majesty the Emperor. 

It is under the auspicious pi*otection of Napo- 
leon the Great, of that hero whom Providence 
has sent in his mercy to regenerate the French 
empire — that hero, equally wonderful by his 
" profound genius and by his promptitude in ex- 
ecution, and who was destined to fix irrevocably 
" the fate of Europe, that this assembly was formed: 
" it is to our august Sovereign's tender solicitude 
" for the welfare of his faithful subjects, that we 
" are indebted for the happiness of being, for the 
first time, assembled together to represent a 
" part of the nation which, differing from their fel- 
low citizens in religious opinions, are not sur- 
passed by them in love for the sacred person of 
our august Sovereign, or in zeal for the public 
welfare. 

" At the same time General and Soldier, pro- 
found Legislator and consummate Politician, 
His Majesty has formed, in his high wisdom, the 



( 158 ) 



*' means of conciliating the diversity of religions 
**with the public welfare, and binding together 
those divergent opinions, which, nevertheless, 
" tend to the same aim through different ways. 

" Catholics and Lutherans, Jews and Calvinists, 
" are considered by His Majesty as children of the 
same father: he leaves to the Supreme Being the 
" right of calling them to account for their opini- 
«'ons; they enjoy in safety tlie same rights and 
protection, and share equally his paternal atten- 
tion; His Majesty acknowledges no difference 
among them, except that which results from vir- 
" tue and from talents. 

" In reading the annals of history, the most ob- 
durate heart must feel for the misfortunes which 
" we have experienced ; but tears are dried up; the 
" heart is relieved when the reader reaches the age 
" of Napoleon. His Majesty has been pleased not 
only to make us forget hardships which degrade 
mankind, but also to put us in full enjoyment 
of all the rights of French citizens : his wish is 
" to unite us more closely with the greatest nation 
on earth, so as to form but one people. 
" But, to second the benevolent views of His Ma- 
" jesty, how many reforms must be made !....How 
" many abuses are to be corrected !....A11 those in- 
" conveniencies, produced, no doubt by the vari- 
" ous political systems under which we have 



( 159 ) 



^ groaned, have been deeply felt by the celebrated 
writers of our persuasion, and by distinguished 

" persons among our brethren, who luive noticed 
them long ago, but who did not judge tl»c?m in- 
superable. 

And truly under what pretence can a man re- 
" fuse his whole support to a government whicliin- 
" sures him the enjoyment of his rights and of his 
" property? The venerable father, Cerf-Berr, pit) ved 
" that his heart w^s truly French ; that he knew the 
obligations which men contract informing part of 
^ society, when he sought for, when he courted, 
the honour of being useful to his country, even 
at a period when the Jewish nation was groaning 
under an oppressive system.. 

If the tomb which contains the ashes of those 
virtuous men, who have written, who have 
♦•^ thought, who have served their country with 
zeal and disinterestedness, who have been 
*^ sought after by sovereigns, who have diffused 
instruction or encouraged those who propagated 
learning — if the tombs of Blien, of Gradix, 
Humbert, Mendelshon, Aaron-Mayer, of Cerf- 
Berr, could now open, and that their inhabitants, 
once more visiting this world, could sit with us in 
this august assembly, how eagerly would they pay 
their tribute of admiration to the benevolent de- 
signs of His Majesty ! How zealously would they 



( 160 ) 



** contribute to further his regenerating views! But 
why did they enjoy only the dawn of happiness? 
Why are we deprived of their assistance as guides, 
" in deliberations which are to realize our hopes and 
consolidate our happiness ? But if we have not 
" inherited their talents and their extensive learn- 
ing, we can, like them, boast of hearts truly 
French. We are animated by the same attach-* 
ment to public welfare, which entitles us to the 
" confidence of government. Have we not, be- 
*' sides, among us Zinzheimer, Moses Lipmann, 
" Eneishem? And who is there among us, who 
could hesitate to contribute to the great work, 
" by all the means in his power, when he consi- 
" ders that, in the military career, His Majesty has 
" indiscriminately placed eagles and laurels within 
thereach of our children? That hehaso{>ened for 
" them the sanctuary of the law, the temple of arts 
" and sciences, manufactures, &c. ? Some of our 
" children are even entitled to our praises, by their 
efforts to justify the good opinion His Majesty is 
" pleased to entertain of us. But how small their 
" number is still ! Yet my heail tells me that the 
Jewish people will prove worthy of the tender 
** regard of His Majesty : and, if wishes and good 
" intentions only were wanting, we are all disposed 
to give our brethren that impulse M hich has been 
rendered necessary by the torpid state in which 



( 161 ) 



we have so long languished ; and our grand child^ 
" ren, for I durst indulge in the consoling idea^ 

will one day mark the meeting of this august 
" Synod, as the epocha of the regeneration of the 
" people of God, and will bless the memory of 
" those wise and learned interpreter of the law, 

who, by their example, their erudition, their 
" virtues, and theirwritings, have opened for us th% 
" road to happiness; 



Discourse at the Opening of the general Assembly 
of the Jews, delivered by M. Lipmann Cerf- 
Berr, Deputy for the Department of the Upper 
Rhine. 

An ever-memorable imperial decree has called 
us together in this hall; I ascend this tribune to 
express those sentiments of gratitude which I 
" owe to our august Emperor, and to assure you, 
" my dear brethren, of my most inviolable and 
" most sincere affection; 

Government has called us round it, as a father 
" calls his children ; let us prove worthy of the 
" benefit; let us prove worthy of the trust reposed 
in us; let us prove worthy of ourselves in 
^' entering this hall: let us forget from whence we 

T 



( 162 ) 



came; let there be no longer distinction between 
" Alsatian, Portuguese, or German Jews. 

** Scattered on the face of the globe, we form 
only one people, worshipping the same God, ad- 
" hering religiously to the obedience which our 
law commands towards the power under whose 
" protection we live ; and this obedience, which, 
" towards princes in general, is only the expression 
of our duty, is when, paid to Mapoleon, the 
" genuine offspring of love and gratitude. ^V ho 
" does not feel these sentiments for a benevolent 
" and enlightened monarch, equally active in dis- 
** covering the misfortunes of his subjects, and in 
applying the proper remedy ? This union of 
" wisdom and goodness particularly distinguishes 
** the decree by which we are this day assembled. 
It is new for us, it is even unprecedented in his- 
tory. No sovereign has ever done what Napo- 
leon has now affected for the people of God. A 
new career is open for us, and the doors which 
** lead to it are unbarred : all the Hebrews 
" residing in this vast empire, and in Europe, have 
" their eyes fixed on us. If our cotemporariesex* 
** pect their happiness from us, we also must expect 
" to be judged by posterity. Our conduct will be 
" recorded in history; the evil-intentioned watch 
" and observe us ; let us be on our guard, not to 
" afibrd any hold to their malignity. 



( 163 ) 



Moses and Joshua always recommend Rac^ 
chazac veametz — strength and courage. Now that 
we have nothing to fear, let us get rid of that 

** timidity which has overcome us ever since w« 

" have lived for ages in slavery^ This day the 
Grand Napoleon extends towards us his power- 

" ful, protecting hand; what have we to fear but 

" God and Posterity? 
^' Let us be calm in our discussions, wise in our 
deliberations, attentive and indulgent to those 
who deliver their sentiments. We all meet here 
with the purest intentions, of this let us never 
loose sight, and let this truth, which we all ac- 
knowledge, plead excuse for what ever may escape 

•'us in the warmth of debate. 

1 am the first to lay claim to the indulgence I 
recommend: the time I take up, in addressing 
you, is precious : you will excuse me for having 
trespassed on it, as I am conscious of having ex* 

" pressed sentiments congenial to your own. 

These sentiments have suggested to me the 

" following outlines of an arrete which I have the 

*• honour of submitting to your judgment. 

OUTLINES OF AN Arrete. 

" Art. I. The 2nd. 3rd. 4th. 6th- and 6th. arti- 
y2 



( 164 ) 



" cles of the imperial decree of the 30th. of May 
" last, shall be engraved on a marble tablet to be 

hung up in this hall, during the course of our 

sittings, and to be afterwards placed in the me-* 

tropolitan temple of the Jewish worship. 

" 11. The bust of His Majesty the Emperor and 

King shall be placed in this hall. 

" III. An address of thanks, expressive of our 
" gratitude, shall be presented to His Majesty by 

the whole assembly. 

" IV. The Saturday next after the 26th of July, 

shall, every year, be commemorated as an ex-» 
" traordinary festival by all the Jews residing in 
" the French empire 

" V. The Rabbies, sitting among us, are re- 
" quested to compose a new prayer, in form of a 
" benediction, for the welfkre of His Majesty the 
" Emperor, Her Majesty the Empress, and their 
" august family, which shall be solemnly addressed 

to God on that day. 

"VI. A copy of this present Arrete^ shall be 
** most humbly presented to His Majesty, with the 
^' Address of the whole assembly.^^ 



( 165 ) 



Discourse of M, Berr Isaac Berr Deputy of tM 
Department of La Meurthe. 

" Gentlemen, 
More than seventeen centuries have elapsed 

** since the ever memorable epocha when, by victo- 
nous and foreign legions, the Jewish people was 
subjugated and reduced from a tributary to a 
servile condition, and scattered by the storm of 

" adversity, over the face of the habitable globe; 

" always unfortunate, always persecuted, always 
faithfully adhering to the religion of its ances- 

" tors, in spite of tortures and of sufferings, it at- 

" fords, to this very day, a striking phenomenon 
incomprehensible to human reason; it stands 
like a column, erect amidst the wrecks of sue- 

" ceeding centuries; andwhile,in tracing the origin 

*' of this people, wereascend to the cradle^f man- 
kind, it should seem as if its remains are to 
be preserved until the day of universal destruc- 

" tion. 

" Our ancestors, for a considerable time, had to 
encounter injustices and the misfortunes produ- 
" ced by oppression ; we ought to admire their 
" conduct while we congratulate our brethren on 
their better fate; we ought, above all, to return 
our thanks to Providence, who has not suflbred 



( 166 ) 



" that the aged tree should be torn up by the roots, 
though it has often permitted that its branches 
should severely suffer. 

" The Jews have been alternately persecuted and 
" degraded as a punishment for their faithful adhe- 
" rence to the religion of their fathers; they ceased 
" to be considered as men in proportion as they wish- 
" ed to remain Jews. Mixed among civilized na- 

tions, they would have proved useful citizens, had 

they not been prevented by a barbarous policy. 

In fact, humiliation and misfortune did often real- 
" ly degrade us. To these baneful causes is to be 
" attributed the degraded state in which many 

of our brethren still languish in some countries. 
" The progress of reason and of justice among 

the nations of Europe will put an end to these 
" sufferings; but, during our misfortunes, and inthe 
" times of our slavery, religious constancy was not 
" the only characteristic of our fathere. The 

splendid light of talents, the sacred flame of vir- 
" tue, shone among the unfortunate Israelites, 
" under the iron-hand of oppression. Our anna's 
" are stained with blood, since the taking of Jei ii- 
" salem by Titus ; in reading them over, we do not 

once meet with a monarch who called to the foot 
** of his throne those who might have been able to 
** help him in relieving the misfortunes and heal- 
" ing the w ounds of Israel. 



( 167 ) 



M^e live, thanks be to God, in happier times; 
we live under the salutary influence of philoso- 
<^ phy and of reason ; under the most astonishing, 
the most sublime of legislators and of heroes ; 
" under the greatest of mortals, whether consider- 
" ed as to his heart, his virtues, his fortune or his 
genius : it is to him that we are indebted for the 
unprecedented appearance of this assembly, of 
which I am proud to form a part. It is the first 
time, since the fatal epocha of our misfortunes 
" and of our dispersion, that a monarch convenes 
such an assembly, and that he thus shews, in our 
favour, his regard for the principles of reason. 
*' If, after the regenerating laws already existing^ 
the last traces of our humiliation and of our sla- 
" very are not completely erased from among all 
our brethren, if the reprehensible conduct of 
some of them, still hardened against these enlight* 
ened and renovated sentiments, has occasioned 
complaints which have found their way to the 
*' foot of the throne, yet, on the other hand, our 
august monarch deigns to consult and to associ- 
" ate, in the views of reform conceived in his wis- 
dom, the principal persons of the Jews, distin* 
*^ guished by their zeal, their learning, and their 
integrity; it is by acting in concert with us 
that he wishes to bring back all our brethren to 
a sea'^e of their duty, and to make them all wor- 



( 1«8 ) 



" thy of the indefeasiable rights of men, of subjects/ 
and of citizens. 

" We will fulfil theexpectationsof His Majesty^ 
" we will undertake with zeal the noblest task 
" which could be imposed upon us, by the love 
" of our country, of our Sovereign and of our re-* 
" ligion. Who but He could be destined to ac- 
complish such designs? Is he not the only mortal 
*' according to God's own hearty to whom he has 
" intrusted the fate of nations, because he alone 
"could govern them with wisdom? He has car- 
ried his triumphant eagles into the three parts 
" of the ancient world ; he has overcome, as con- 
" queror,the ancient land of the eternal pyramids, 
the scene of our ancestors' captivity; he has ap- 
" peared on the banks of the once sacred Jordan ; 
" he has fought in the valley Sichem, in the plains 
" of Palestine. He alone could conceive this 
" sublime idea to which we are indebted for our 
" being assembled in this place, this idea so well 
" calculated to do away the last traces of misfor- 
" tune, of shame, and of that ancient oppression 
" which has ceased first in France. 

" As Frenchmen and as Jews^ then let us indulge 
all the gratitude which fills our hearts. Let us 
swear never to separate these sacred titles : as 
*' Frenchmen we will defend the country we love, 
and strictly observe the laws of the empire ; as' 



( 169 ) 



Jews we will remain attached to the i&ith and tci 
** the religion of our ancestors: &s Jews and 
" Frenchfnenlet us swear an inviolable attachment 

to our august Enrperor. 

" Let us all together invoke the Almighty^ the 
" God of Armies, the Guide of Kings, terrible in 

his judgments, and return our grateful thanks, 

that he has been pleased to pour incessantly on 
" the great Napoleon the unspeakable treasures of 
" his grace, of his wisdom, and of his might. 

As to you. Gentlemen Commissionei-s, who 
" have been intrusted with so important and so 

interesting a mission, deign to convey to govem- 

ment, and to its august and immortal head, our 
" sentiments and our wishes; assure him of our 
" dutiful and profound gratitude, and our readi- 
" ness to further, by all the means in our power, 
" his benevolent views and his salutary designs^ 

" A noble task has been imposed on you, Gen- 
" tlemen ; you are here, sent by His Majesty to 
" communicate to the assembly the questions sub- 

mitted to its judgment ; this mission is for you 
" an honourable testimony of the esteem of a So- 
" vereign, who knows how to appreciate talents, 
" services, and virtue. Reason, justice, and the 
" love of public weal will guide your steps: we, 

too, shall strive to make these the grounds of 
" our dutiful communications. Happy will be our 

z 



( no ) 



" ^ate, if, on leading this hall, we carry with m 
" the heart'soothing consciousness of having con- 
" tributed to increase, in the bosom of thegeneral 
" civil society, the number of just, laborious, vir- 
tuous, and useful men ; and in having: assisted in 
doing away the traces of eighteen centuries of 
" persecution, from among a class of men, who 
have alwaj^ been, and always will be, attached 
" to the religion of their fore-fathers; this new 
" benejfit will, in future times, mark the most bril- 
" liant period of our history 



Sitting of Augmt 7, 1806. 

The President took the chair at three quarters 
past twelve. One of the Secretaries read the mi- 
nutes of the sitting of the 4th of the month. 

The President demanded if any member had 
any obser^'ations to make on them. 

No one offering to speak, they were put to the 
vote, and adopted unanimously. 

The President named, as Commissionei's to. 
maintain order in the hall, MM. Auguste Ratis« 
bonne, Cadet Carcassonne, and Schawb,jun. 

M. Moses Levy, of Nancy, was requested, by 
the President, to give in the report of the Commis^^ 
sion on the answers to be returned to the fourth, 
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth questions* 



( 171 ) 

He ascended the tribune, and submitted to the 
assembly the draft of the answer to the fourth 
question* 

M. Lyon Mai-x read the German translation, 
and M. Avigdor verbally translated the answer in- 
to Italian, 

A member thought that the answer was consi- 
derably too long, and contained matters quite fo« 
jreign to the question ; he demanded that it should 
again be referred to the Commission, with direc* 
tions to prepare another. 

Another member said, that the too great length 
of this answer is not its only fault ; it establishes 
a difference between Portuguese and German 
Jews, which ought to be suppressed; he concluded 
by supporting the motion of the last speaker. 

A member complained that the Jews of the 
northern departments were particularly pointed at 
in the answer: he declared that, in the department 
in which he resided, although a northern one, 
Jews are as much esteemed and as much consider*^ 
ed as those of the south : he therefore requested 
that these distinctions should be expunged from 
tlie answer, which, with this alteration, he should 
approve. 

Another member proposed to refer the draft of 
the answer to another Commission, which should 
examine all the details it contained, and suppress 



( 172 ) 



whatever did not immediately fell within the 
meaning of the question. 

Another ascended the tribune ; he laid down 
the principles on which, according to his opinion, 
the answer ought to be framed, and read to the as-^ 
sembly the draft of another answer. 

A deputy observed, that the second part of the 
answer only had been the subject of animadver- 
sion; he therefore jproposed to suppress it altoge* 
ther, and to adopt the fir^ part alone, which, by 
itself, fulfilled every purpose. 

This proposition was supported by several mem- 
bers. The President observed, that when the 
Commission established a ditference between the 
Jews of the north and those of the south, it only 
meant to remark that these last have made greater 
progress in civilization, because their hardships 
were much less than the others ; he thought, in the 
mean time, ^vith the last speaker, that the first 
part of the answer might be adopted by itself. 

The President accoi-dingiy read a second time 
the first part of the answer prepared \>y the Com- 
niission. He afterwards requested M. Lyon Marx 
to inform, in German, those members who were not 
sufliciently acquainted with the Jprench language, 
that he was going to put to the vote the answer to 
the fourth question, consisting only of the first 
part, which he had just read. 



( 173 ) 



A member obtained leave to speak ; heobservect, 
that, in the circular letter of the 23d of July, ad- 
dresjsed hy His Excellency the Minister of khel In- 
terior to all the deputies, mention is made of three 
Scrutineers, who have been named accordingly* 
He vras surprized that the assembly should not 
vote by ballot, and demanded that that mode of 
collecting votes shoidd be exclusively adopted in 
the present discussions. 

The President observed to the last speaker, that 
recourse uas had to that mode, (which occasioned 
great dela v ) only when the shew of hands left some 
doubt ; but that it was useless when the majority 
was evident. 

The same speaker replied, that there was a great 
difference between deliberations on principal 
points, and those on acces^ry objects ; that, for 
the last, the shew of hands might be admitted, but 
that the twelve questions, being of the highest im- 
portance, the assembly ought to vote on the answers 
by way of ballot. 

The order of the day was called for. 

The President put to the vote, by shew of 
hands, the new draft of the answer to the fourth 
question : it was adopted unanimously. 

One of the Secretaries read the answer proposed 
by the Commission to the fifth question. M. Lyon 



( 174 ) 



Marx read it in German, and M. Avigdor transia* 
ted it into Italian. 

A member wished to see an expression altered, 
which was done accordingly. After this correc- 
tion, the President put the answer to the vote, and 
it was adopted unanimously. 

The same Secretary read the answer to the sixth 
question* MM. Lyon Marx and Avigdor transla- 
ted it verbally, the first into German, the second 
into Italian. No objections being made to this 
answer, it was put to the vote, and adopted unani- 
mously. 

The President called afterwards for the reading 
of the answer to the seventh question. MM. Ly-* 
on Marx and Avigdor translated it likewise into 
German and into Italian, 

A member observed, that, in the answers to the 
former questions, allusions had been made to the 
order of things previous to the revolution, whcn-» 
ever the case made it necessary ; he thought that, in 
this answer, government should, in like manner, be 
made acquainted with the mode of choosing Ila1>-« 
bies before the revolution, and with that which 
J^as prevailed since, 

A member said, that a difference should be 
made between the officiating Rabbi who holds 
the first rank in a Jewish society, and the man 



( 175 



having only the title of Rabbi, who, ftltfao«^ 
equally learned as the first, is not distinguish* 
ed from the rest of the Jews; that, in this laisft 
point of view, the Rabbi was only an indivi- 
dual, like all others, while in the first instance^ 
the Rabbi became entitled to the consideration 
annexed to this rank, only by the votes of those 
who named him, whether simple individuals or 
administrators of charities. 

The board framed a new answer, whicih was 
also translated into German and into Italian. 

The President afterwards put it to the vote, and 
it was adopted by the majority. 

One of the Secretaries read the answer prepared 
by the Commission to the eighth question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

One of the members observed, that these 
translations contained contradictions, as to the 
functions of Rabbies, and demanded that the mis* 
take might be rectified. 

Another said, that the answerwas not sufficient-* 
ly explicit. One of the Secretaries attempted se^ 
veral altemtions, which he read successively ; they 
were all rejected. The answer was sent back to 
the Commission for revision. 

A deputy mentioned a writing circulated amon^ 
the membeirs by a stranger, and which had ap- 



( 176 ) 



peaxed in several new&^papers; he thought that 
the assembly should publicly disown the proposi-* 
tions it contained. Some members seconded this 
motion; others called for the order of the day. 
In the midst of the tumult which ensued, a mem- 
ber exclaimed that the assembly should be perfect- 
ly indifferent to writings which did not originate 
with its members. Others maintained contrary 
opinions. 

The President quitted the chair at five o'clock, 
and announced the next meeting for Tuesday the 
12th inst. at nine o'clock. 

Here follow the answers adopted to the fourth, 
fifth, sixth, and seventh questions proposed to the 
assembly by the Commissioners of His Royal and 
Imperial Majesty. 



FOURTH QUESTION. 

In the eyes of JewSj are Frenchmen considered 
as their brethren f Or are they considered as siran^ 
gers? 

ANSWER. 

In the eyes of Jews Frenchmen are their brc- 
tibren, and are not strangers. 

The true spirit of the law of Moses is consonant 
to this mode of considering Frenchmen. 



( 177 ) 



Wheii the Israelites formed a settled and in- 
dependant nation, their law made it a rule for them 
to consider strangers as their brethren. 

With the most tender carefOr their welfare; their 
lawgiver commands to love them, (13) " Love ye 

therefore the strangers/' says he to the Israelites^ 

for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt/* 

Respect and benevolence towards strangers are 
inforced by Moses, not as an exhortation to the 
practice of social morality only, but as an obliga« 
tion imposed by God himself. " When ye reap 

the harvest of your land^^ (14) says he to them, 

thou shalt not make clean riddance of the cor-* 
" ners of the field when thou reapest^ neither shalt 

thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest; 

thou shalt leave them unto the poor and to the 
"stranger; I am the Lord thy God. (15) When 
" thou cuttest down thy harvest in the fields and hast 

forgot a sheaf in the fields thou shalt not go hack 
" again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, /or 
" the fatherless^ and the widow: that the Lord thy 
** God may bless the tvork of thy hands. (16) Thou 

shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him. 

(13) Dcut X. 19. Lev. xix. 34. Exod. xxii. 21. xxiii. 9, 

(14) Levit. xxiii. 22. 

(15) Deut. xxiv. 19. 

(16) Exod. xxii. 81, 

A ▲ 



( 178 ) 

" (17) The jLord your God doth execute the judg* 
" ment of the fatherless and widow ^ and love th the 
** stranger, in giving him food and raiment. Love 
V ye therefore the si ranger; for ye were strangers in 
" the land of Egypt 

To these sentiments of benevolence towards 
the Stranger^ IVIoses has added the precept of gene- 
ral love for mankind : Love thy fellow creature 
as thyself. 

David also expresses himself in these terms: 
(18) The Lord is good to all : and his tender 
mercies are over all his works J' This doctrine is 
also professed by the Talmud. 

" We are bound/^ says a Talmudist, " to love as 
" our brethren all those who observe the (19) 
" Noachides^ whatever their religious opinions may 

otherwise be. We are bound to visit their sick, 
" to burj^ their dead, to assist their poor, like those 
" of Israel. In short, there is no act of humanity 

which a true Israelite is not bound to perform to- 
" wards those who observe the Noac hides. What 
are these precepts ? To abstain from idolatry, from 
blasphemy, from adultery, not to kill or hurt our 
neighbours, neither to rob or to deceive, to eat only 

(17) Deut. X. 18. 19. 

(18) Psalm, cxlv. 9. 

(19) The precepts given by the ratriarch Noah. 



{ 179 ) 



the flesh of animals killed ; in short, to obsem the 
rules of justice; and therefore all the principles of 
our religion make it our duty to love Frenchmen 
as our brethren. 

A Pagan having consulted the Rabbi Hillel on 
the Jewish religion, and wishii^g to know in a few 
words in what it consisted, Hillel thus answered 
him: " Do not to others what thou shouldst not 
" like to have done to thyself. This,^* said he, " is 
"all our religion ; the rest are only consequences 
" of this principle.^^ 

A religion whose fundamental maxims are such 
—a religion which makesadutyof loving the stran- 
ger — which enforces the pi-actice of social virtues, 
must surely require that its followers should con« 
sider their fellow-citizens as brethren. 

And how could they consider them otherwise 
when they inhabit the same land, when they are 
ruled and protected by the same government, and 
by the same laws? when they enjoy thesame rights, 
and have the same duties to fulfil? There exists, 
even between the Jew and Christian, a tie which 
abundantly compensates for religion — it is the tie 
of gratitude. This sentiment was at first excited 
in us by the mere grant of toleration. It has been 
increased, these eighteen years, by new favours 
from government, to such a degree of energy, that 
now our fate is irrevocably linked with the com- 
A A 2 



( 180 ) 



mon fate of all Frenchmen. Yes, France is our 
country; all Frenchmen are our brethren, and 
this glorious title, by raising us in our own esteem, 
becomes a sure pledge that we shall never cease tq 
be worthy of iU 



FIFTH QUESTION. 

In either case^ wliat Rue of conduct does their lau> 
prescribe towards Frenchmen not of their religion? 

ANSWER, 

The line of conduct prescribed towards French- 
men not of our religion, is the same as that prescri- 
bed between Jews themselves; we admit of no 
difference but that of worshipping the Supreme 
Being, every one in his own way. 

The answer to the proceeding question has ex- 
plained the line of conduct which the law of Mo- 
ses and the Talmud prescribe towards Frenchmen 
not of our religion. At thepresent time, when the 
Jews no longer form a separate people, but enjoy 
the advantage of being incorporated with the 
Great Nation, (which privilege they consider as a 
kind of political redemption) it is impossible that 
a Jew should treat a Frenchman, riot of his reli- 



( 181 ) 



gion, in any other manner than he would treat 
One of his Israelitish brethren, 

I5IXTH QUESTION. 

Do Jews horn in France^ and treated by the law^ 
as French citizens^ consider France as their country? 
Are they bound to defend it? Are they bound to obey 
the laws and to conforms to the dispositions^ of the civil 
code? 

ANSWER. 

Men who have adopted a country, who have re- 
sided inil ihese many generations — who, even un* 
der the restraint of particular laws which abridged 
their civil rights, were so attached to it that they 
preferred being debarred from the advantages 
common to all otlier citizens, rather than leave it, 
pannot but consider themselves as Frenchmen in 
France; and they consider as equally sacred and 
honourable the bounden duty of defending their 
pountry. 

Jeremiah, (chapter xxix.) exhorts the Jews to 
(consider Babylon as their country, although they 
were to remain in it only for seventy years. He 
exhorts them to till the ground, to build houses, 
to sow, and to plant. His' recommendation was so 



( 182 ) 



much attended to, that Ezra, (chapter ii.) says, 
that when Cyrus allowed them to return to Jerusa* 
lem to rebuild the Temple, forty- two thou- 
sand three hundred ^nd sixty only, left Baby- 
lon; and that this numberwas mostly composed of 
the poorer people, the wealthy having remained in 
that city. 

The lo.e of the country is in the heart of Jews a 
sentiment so natural, so pcverful, and so conso- 
nant to their religioas opinions, that a French Jew 
considers himself, in England, as among strangers, 
although he may be among Jews ; and the case is 
the same with English Jews in France. 

To such a pitch is this sentiment carried among 
them, that, during the last war, French Jews have 
been seen fighting desperately against other Jews, 
the subjects of countries then at war with France. 

Many of them are covered w}th honourable 
wounds, and others liave obtained, in the field of 
honour, the noble rewards of bravery, 

SEVENTH QUESTIOy. 

Who namea the Rabbica? 

ANSWER. 

Since the revolution, the majority of the chiefs oi' 



( 183 ) 



families names the Kabbi, wherever there is a^suffi- 
cient number of Jews to maintain one, after previ- 
ous inquiries as to the morality and learning of the 
candidate. This mode of election is not, how- 
ever, uniform ; it varies according to place, and, to 
this day, whatever concerns the elections of Rabbies 
is still in a stale of uncertainty. 



Sitting of the 12th of August^ 1806. 

The President took the chair precisely at eleven. 
He named as Commissioners to maintain order, 
MM. Baruch Cerf-Berr, Pato, jun. and Michel 
Berr. 

One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
sitting of the 7th of this month. 

A member said, that it was useless to mention 
the remarks made on the difference established be- 
tween German and Portuguese Jews by the draft 
of the answer to the fourth question. He said it 
was equally superfluous to insert the remark made 
on this head by a deputy from a northern depart* 
ment. 

The President observe, that the minutes must 
take notice of whatever is said in the assembly. 
A member called for the order of the day. 



( 184 ) 



Another seconded the motion of the first speaks 
er. 

A loud cry of Question^ 

The President put the minutes to the vote, and 
they were adopted by the majority. 

One of the Secretaries read the draft of the an- 
swer to the eighth question^ M. Avigdor transla- 
ted it into Italian, and M. Lyon Marx into Ger- 
man. 

A member requested leave to speak ; he obser- 
ved, that if in the north most marriages were 
blessed by the Kabbies, the case wasdifFerent in the 
southern departments, where there were but few 
Rabbies; and that, even in places where Rabbies 
were maintained, the father, or one of the elders of 
the family, frequently took pleasure in performing 
himself the marriage ceremony. 

It was resolved that this remark should be in- 
s.i ted in the journal. 

A member observed that the words Kingdom of 
Italy ^ should be added to those of French Empire^ 
as the customs of both countries were similar. 

1 he President had the words inserted; and, af- 
ter a second reading, the draft of the answer was 
a*J.opted almost unanimously. 

A Sec ret ar}'^ read the draft of the answer to the 
Ki:^- h question* 



( 185 ) 

M, Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

A member requested the explanation of aphrase. 

The President explained it for him. 

He then put it to the vote ; it was adopted al- 
most unanimously. 

The President ordered afterwards the reading 
of the draft of the answer to the tenth question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

No objections being offered, the President put 
it to the vote, and it was adopted unanimously. 

One of the Secretaries read the draft of the an- 
swer to the eleventh question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. A vigdor into Italian. 

A member requested leave to speak, and said, 
that, as this answer explained the text of the 24th 
chapter of Deuteronomy, it ought to be especially 
recommended to the attention of Rabbies, who have 
the care of preaching morality, in order that those 
among the Jews who are ignorant of their duty in 
their money ti-ansactions with other Frenchmen, 
should be made acquainted with them, to be on 
their guard against the temptation of cupidity. 

The proposition was seconded. 

Another member observed, that Rabbles, in 
B B 



( 186 ) 



preaching morality certainly would not forget this 
essential exhortation. 

A member ascended the tribune, and expressed 
his astonishment that the expression Law of Mo^ 
ses should always be used in speaking of the writ- 
ten law. " God/' said he, " is our legislator, 
and we must consequently say the Law of God^ 
and not the Law of Moses/^ He demanded that 
the expression should be altered accordingly. 

Another member appeared in the tribune after 
him. He began by praising the scrupulous zeal 
of the last speaker, but he did not think that his 
amendment ought to be adopted. " I can safely 
*' maintain,^' said he, without a wish to offend 
the last speaker, that my parents were, to the 
** full,a.< orthodox as he can possibly be. Yet I 
" well remember to have heard them say always 
" Torat Mosse^the Law of MoseSy in speaking of the 
written law/' He demanded that the wording 
of the Commission should be maintained. 

Some Rabbies delivered their sentiments in fa- 
vour of the first speaker. 

A member observed, that, whenever the expres- 
sion, the Law of Moses^ occurred, it was always un- 
derstood to mean the Law of God transmitted to 
the Jews by Moses. He thought that the best 
tvay to reconcile the different* opinions would be, 
to insert this explanation in the minutes. 



( 1»7 ) 



This proposition was adopted. 
Another member ascended the tribune and 
spoke on the word ahtha^ in the 19th and 20th 
verses of the 23d chapter of Deuteronomy, which 
means Brother , he thought that the word brother 
could be applied only to a fellow Jew. 

A member observed that this word was not ex- 
clusively applicable to men of the same religion ; 
he quoted the 4th verse of the 49th chapter of 
Genesis, where it is used in the more general ac- 
ception of friend. 

He quoted also the 12th verse of the 15th chap* 
ter of Deuteronomy, in which the word Hebrew is 
joined with the word ahiha. Hence he concluded 
that, since the law joined the word Hebrew w\i\\ that 
of brother^ where it meant a man of the same reli- 
gion, it clearly followed that, whenever these two 
expressions were not joined, the word brother had 
a more general acception. He quoted several 
other passages in support of this opinion. 

Another member examined critically the 20th 
verse of the 23d chapter of Deuteronomy, already 
alluded to. He observed that the word Nochri 
which means a stranger, had no reference to reli- 
gious belief, but only to the country or state ; 
that the verb tassich^ which means to make profit, 
was appl'cible to the fo eignerj not to the fellow* 
countryman. And that the substantive ahihuy which 



{ 188 ) 



means brother^ was to be taken in the acceptation 
of fellow-countryman and not of fellow Jew. (18) 
He observed, that the law was purely political; 
and that what preceded and what followed proved 
sufficiently, that profit, and not usury, was meant. 
He concluded by demanding that the answer pro- 
posed by the Commission, which ccmtained nearly 
the same principles, should be put to the vote. 

A member observed that this answer being very 
long, it was fit it should be read a second time. 

The President ordered the answer to be read a 
second time. 

A Rabbi observed, that the answer admitted that 
interest was lawful ; he declared that interest, of 
any kind, was forbidden by the law. 

Another member observed, that, in fact, tlie law 
allowed of no interest, but that, since the Jews 
have ceased to be a nation, and are become mer- 

(30) For tlie intelligence of this part of the debate, ive shall subjoin 
here the two versus alluded to : 

19. Thou shalt not lend upon usury to tl»y brother, usury of money^ 
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury. 

20. Unto a stranger thou maycst lend upon usury, but unto thy bro- 
ther thou shalt not lend upon usury, that the I^rd thy God may bless 
thee in all that thou setlest thine hand to, in the land whither thou goest 
to possess it. 

It should seem that the Jewish doctors give a different meaning to the 
ivord a-HiuIly translated by usury. 



( 189 ) 

chants, they have been allowed to take a small 
profit; that the answer meant a moderate gain 
arising from a commercial speculation, and not 
usurious interest. 

A member observed, that, by explaining this 
idea to the Rabbies, they would perceive that the 
answer was agreeable to the principles of the law. 

Another demanded a third reading of the draft 
of the answer. 

A Secretary read it for the third time. 

A member moved that it should be put to the 
vote. 

The President put it to to the vote, by shew of 
hands, and it was adopted almost unanimously. 

A Secretary read the draft of the answer to the 
twelfth question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

No objections being made against it, the Presi- 
dent put it to the vote, and it passed unanimously. 

The President read the draft of an address to 
Ilis Majesty the Emperor and King, on the anni- 
versary of his birth-day, couched in the following 
terms: 



( 190 ) 



To His Majesty the Emperor of the French and 
King of Italy. 

" Sire, 

" Your French and Italian subjects, whatever 
religion they profess, celebrate this day the an- 
niversary of Your Majesty^s birth-day ; all im- 
plore the King of Kings in their respective tem- 
** pies that he may be pleased to pour his most 
" signal favours on your sacred person, and on the 
august imperial family. We, too, animated with 
the same sentiments, and impressed with a grati- 
** tude still livelier, if possible, put up our fervent 
prayers to heaven in the same frame of mind. 
" Providence, Sire, has given you this vast em- 
pire, to rescue it from the abyss into which it was 
" apparently hurried by the selfish views of jar- 
** ing factions. 

" After rendering France illustrious by your 
" victories, you have given it peace, the first bless- 
" ing on earth ; you astonish the universe, you ex- 
•* haust admiration by holding up to wondering 
** mortals the model of the wisest, the most benevo- 
" lent of lawgivers, and of the greatest of heroes. 

" Deign, Sire, graciously to accept, on this day, 
*' the expressions of those sentiments of profound 
" respect, love, and gratitude, towards your sacred 



( 191 ) 



" person, which fill the hearts of your Trench and 
Italian subjects professing the religion of Mo* 

The Assembly received this address with loud 
acclamations of Long live the Emperor j long live t/ie 
Imperial family. The President was directed to 
transmit it to His Excellency the Minister for the 
Interior, and to request, at the same, time that His 
Excellency would have the goodness to lay it be* 
fore His Majesty. 

M. Rodrigues, of La Gironde, ascended the tri«^ 
bune, and gave in the report of the Commission of 
five, who had been directed to prepare the cere* 
monies of the festival, to be celebrated on the 
15th, in the Jewish Temple of Rue Sainte-Aooie^ in 
honour of His Majesty's birth day. He proposed 
the ten following articles. 

1st. Precisely at ten o'clock in the morning the 
members shall assemble in the hall of meeting. 

2nd. The sitting shall begin by reading the mi- 
nutes of the sitting of the 12th, and the President 
shall leave the chair immediately after they shall 
be concluded. 

3rd. At elevei^ o'clock the deputies, with the Pre- 
sident at their head, shall proceed to the Temple; 
on their entering it, the orchestra shall strike the 
tune of Where can u man be better than in the bosom 



( 192 ) 



of his family? The President shall deliver a dis- 
course analogous to the festival. 

4th. At tvt^elve o'clock precisely an hymn of 
thanksgiving, in honour of His Majesty the Empe- 
ror and King, shall be sung by M. Andrade, ac- 
companied by a chorus. 

5th. M . Abraham Andrade, deputy of Bayonne, 
shall deliver a French discourse, M. Zinzheimer, 
Rabbi, deputy of the Lower Rhine, a German dis- 
course; and M. Segre, Rabbi, deputy of Verceil, an 
Italian discourse. 

6th. The orchestra shall play a sjnmphony of 
Haydn. In the mean time Mile. Caroline Wolf, who 
lias had two brothers this great white in the army, 
the eldest decorated with the starpf the legion of 
honour, the second a lieutenant in .the 3d regi- 
ment of dragoons, wounded at Austerlitz, Miles. 
SchmoU and Julie Theodore Cerf-Berr,tbe first ac- 
companied by M. Rodrigue the eldest, the second 
by M. Castro jun. and the third by M. Avigdor, 
shall make a collection in the Temple. 

The produce of this collection shall be distribu- 
ted among the poor of all persuasions; and shall 
accordingly be divided between the several chari- 
table institutions. 

7th. The Temple shall be illuminated and orna- 
mented \^ i\h garlands and flowers ; the Imperial 
Eagle shall be placed above the Altar. 



( 193 ) 



8th. At night the outside of the Temple shall 
be illuminated as well as the hall in which the 
asseiifbly meets. 

9th. The President shall give the signal of de- 
parture, and the deputies shall return in the same 
order. 

10th. To avoid confusion, carriages shall wait 
in the second yard. 

The assembly approved these dispositions. 

The reporter added, that the Commission had 
also taken into its consideration the discourse of 
M. Lipmann Cerf-Berr. His opinion was to ad- 
journ the execution of the 1st, 3rd, 4th, and 5th 
articles of the proposed plan. There could be 
but one voice on the second article, which express* 
ed a wish to see His Majesty's bust in this halL 
The President was requested to transmit that wish 
of the assembly to His Excellency the Minister 
for he Interior. 

The President quitted the chair at half past three. 
The answers adoptedby the assembly to the eighth, 
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth questions. 



EIGHTH QUESTION, 

What police jurisdiction do Rahhies exercise 
c c 



( 194 ) 

among the Jews? what judicial power do they enjoy 
among them. 

ANSWER, 

The Rabbies exercise no maniier of Police Ju^ 
lisdiction among the Jews. 

The qualification of Rabbi is no where to be 
found in the law of Moses, neither did it exist in 
the days of the first Temple ; it is only mentioned 
towards the end of those of the second. 

At these epochas the Jews were goveroed by 
Sanhedrim or tribunals. A supreme tribunal, cal- 
led the Grand iSawAcrfmn, sat in Jerusalem, and was 
composed of seventy-one J udges. 

There were inferior courts, composed of three 
judges for civil causes and for police; and ano* 
ther composed of twenty-two Judges, which satin 
the capital to decide matters of less importance, 
and which was called the Lesser Sanhedrim. 

It is only in the Misna and in the Talmu 
that the word Rabbi is found for the first time ap- 
plied to a doctor in the law ; and he was common- 
ly indebted for. this qualification to his reputation, 
and to tlie opinion generally entertained of his 
learning. 

When the Israelites wei-e totally dispersed, thoy 
formed small communities in those places where 
they were allowed to settle in certain numbers. 



( 195 ) 



Sometimes, in these circumstances, a Rabbi and 
two other doctors formed a kind of tribunal, 
named Befhin, that is, I louse of Justice; the Ilabbi 
fulfilled the functions of judge, and the other two 
those of his assessors. 

The attributes, and even the existence of these 
tribunals, have, to this daj, always depended on 
the will of governments under which the Jews 
have lived, and on the degree of tolerance they 
have enjoyed. Since the revolution those i*abbini* 
cal tribunals are totally suppressed in France, and 
in Italy. The Jews, raised to the rank of citizens, 
have conformed in every thing to the laws of the 
stvte; and, accordingly, the functions of Rabbies, 
w herever any are established, are limited to preach- 
ing moi-ality inthe temples, blessingmarriages, and 
pronouncing divorces. 

In places where there are no Rabbies, the Jew 
who is best instructed in his religion, may, accord- 
ing to the law, impart the marriage-benediction 
w ithout the assistance of a Rabbi ; this is attend- 
ed with an inconveniency, the consequences of 
which it certainly w ould be proper to prevent, by 
extending to all persons, called uj^on to bless a 
marriage, the restrictions which the consixhir arrete 
placets on the functions of Rabbies in this par- 
ticular. 

As to judicial powers, they possess absolutely 

c c 2 



( 196 ) 



none ; for there is among them neither a settled 
ecclesiastical hierarchy, i*or any subordination 
in the exercise of their religious functions. 



MNTH QUESTION. 

Are these forms of Election^ and that police-judi^ 
eialiJurisdiction, regulated by the law, or are they 
only sanctioned by custom? 

ANSWER. 

The answer to the preceding questions makes 
it useless to say much on this, only it may be re- 
marked, that, even supposing that Kabbies should 
have, to this day, preserved some kind of police-- 
judicial-jurisdiction among us, which is not the 
case, neither such jurisdiction, nor the forms of the 
elections, could be said to be sanctioned by the 
law; they should be attributed solely to custom. 



TENTH QUESTION. 



Are there professions which the law of the Jews 
forbids them from exercising? 



( 197 ) 



ANSWER. 

There are none: on the contrary, the Talmud 
(vide Kiduschim, chap. 1st) expressly declares 
that the father who does not teach a profession 

to his child, rears him up to be a villain/* 



ELEVENTH QUESTION* 

jyoes the law forbid the Jews from taking usury 
from their brethren ? 

ANSWER. 

t>euteronomy (chap, xxiii. vers. 19,) says, 
thou shalt not lend upon interest (21) to thy 
brother, interest of money, interest of victuals, 
interest of any thing that is lent upon interest.*^ 
The Hebrew word nechech has been improperly 
translated by the word usury: in the Hebrew lan- 
guage it means interest of any kind, and not ti^m- 
ous interest. It cannot then be taken in the accep-^ 
tation now given in the word usury. 

It is even impossible that it could ever have had 
that acception ; for usury is an expression relative 
to, and compared with, another and a lawful 

(31) English Translation, 



( ) 



interest; and the text contains nothing which al- 
ludes to the other term of comparison. AVhat do 
we understand by usury? Is it not an interest 
above the legal interest, above the rate fixed by 
the law? If the law of Moses has not fixed this 
rate, can it be said that the Hebrew word means 
an unlawful interest? The wordnechechm tlie He- 
brew language answers to the Latin word fconus: 
to conclude that it means ustirj/y another word 
should be found which would mean interest; and, 
as such a word does not exist, it follows tliat all in- 
terest is usury, and that all usury is interest. 

What was the aim of the lawgiver in forbidding 
one Hebrew to lend upon interest to another? It 
was to draw closer between them the bonds of fra- 
ternity, to give them a lesson of reciprocal benevo- 
lence, and to engage them to help and assist each 
other with disinterestedness. 

The first thought had been to establish among 
them the equality of property, and the mediocrity 
of private fortune; hence the institution of the 
sabbatical year, and of the year of jubilee; the 
first of which came every seventh year, and the 
other every fifty years. By the sabbatical year 
all debtors were released from their obligations: 
the year of jubilee brought with it the restitution 
of all estates sold or mortgaged. 



( 199 ) 



It was easy to foresee, that the diilerent quali^ 
ties of the ground, the greater or lesser industry, 
tlie untowardness of the seasons, which might af- 
fect both, would necessarily make a difference ia 
the produce of land, and that the more unfortu- 
nate Israelite would claim the assistance of him 
whom fortune should have better favoured. Mo- 
ses did not intend that this last should avail him- 
self of his situation, and that he should require 
from the other the price of the service he was soli*- 
citing ; that he should thus aggravate the misery 
jof his brother, and enrich himself by his spoils. 
It is with a view to this that he says, Thou shalt 
not lend upon interest to thy brother. But what 
want could there exist among the Jews, at a time 
when they had no trade of any kind? when so lit- 
tie money was in circulation, when the greatest 
equality prevailed in property ? It was, at most, 
a few bushels of corn, some cattle, some agricultu- 
ral implements; and Moses required that such 
services should be gratuitous; his intention was 
to make of his people a nation of husbandmen. 
For a long time after him, and though Idumea 
was at no great distance from the sea-shores, inha- 
bited by the Ty rians, the Sidonians, and other na- 
tions possessing shipping and commerce, we do 
not see the Hebrews much addicted to trade : all 



( 200 ) 



the regulations of their lawgiver seemed designed 
to divert their attention from commerce. 

The prohibition of Moses must therefore be 
considered only as a principle of charity, and not 
as a commercial regulation. According to the 
Talmud, the loan alluded to is to be considered 
almost as a family loan, as a loan made to a man 
in want ; for in case of a loan made to a merchant, 
even a Jew, profit adequate to the risk should be 
considered as lawful. 

Formerly the word usury carried no invidious 
meaning ; it simply implied any interest whatever. 
The woi'd usury can no longer express the mean- 
ing of the Hebrew text : and accordingly the Bible 
of Osten;^ aid and that of the Portuguese Jews, 
call interest that which Sacy, from the Vulgate, has 
called usury. (22) 

The law of Moses, therefore, forbids all manner 
of interest on loan, not only bet^veen Je^^•s, but 
bet^veen a Jew and his counti-j man, without dis- 
tinction of religion. The loan must be gratuitous 
whenever it is to oblige those who claim our assist- 
ance, and when it is not intended for commercial 
speculation. 

We must not forget that these laws, so humane and 
60 admirable at these early periods, were made for 

(22) Vide Puffcndorir dc JureNatune ac Gentium. 



( 201 ) 



a people which then formed a state>and held a rank 
among nations. 

If the remnants of this people, now scattered 
among all nations, are attentively considered, it 
will be seen, that, since the Jews have been driven 
from Palestine, they no longer have had a com- 
mon country, they no longer have had to maintain 
among them the primeval equality of property. 
Although filled with the spirit of their legislation, 
they have been sensible that the letter of the law 
could no longer be obeyed when its principle was 
done away; and they have, therefore, without any 
scruple, lent money on interest to trading Jews, as 
well as to men of different persuasions. 



TWELFTBi QUESTION. 

Does it forbid or does it allow to take tisury from 
strangers? 

ANSWER. 

We have seen, in the answer to the foregoing 
question, that the prohibition of usury, considered 
as the smallest interest, was a maxim of charity 
and of benevolence, rather than a commercial re- 
gulation. In this point of view it is equally con- 
demned by the law of Moses and by the Talmud ; 

D 



( 202 ) 



^^e are generally forbidden, always on the score of 
charity, to lend upon interest to our fellow-citi- 
Tens of different persuasions, as well as to our fel- 
low-Jews* 

The disposition of the law, which allows to take 
interest from the stranger, evidently refers only to 
nations in commercial intercourse with us ; other- 
w ise there would be an evident contradiction be- 
tween this passage and twenty others of the sacred 
writings. 

" (23) The Lord your God loveth the stranger., in 
** giving him food and raiment; love ye therefore 
" the stranger^ for ye icere strangers in the land of 
*' Egyf)t. (24) One law shall be to him that is 
" home^horn^ and to the stranger. (25) Hear the 
" causes between your brethren^ and judge righteous^ 
" ly between every man and his brother^ and the 
" stranger that is with him. (26) If a stranger 
" sojourn with thee in your land you shall not vex 
" him. (27) Thou shall neither vex a stranger nor 
" oppress him^ for -ye were strangers in the land of 

I^gypt. (28) If thy brother be waxeti poor^ or 

(23) Dcut. X. 18, 19. 
(Q4) Exod. xii. 49, i.c. 
025) Dcut. i. ja. 

(26) Ixiv. xix. S3. 

(27) Exod. xxii. '^1, 
(QH) Lev. x\v. li. 



( 203 ) 



fallen in decay with thcey thou shalt then relieve 
" him; yca^ though he be a stranger^ or a sojourner. 

Hius the prohibition extended to the stranger 
who dwelt in Israel; the Holy Writ places them 
under the safe-guard of God ; he is a sacred guest, 
and God orders us to treat him like the widow and 
like tlie orphan. 

It is evident that the text of the Vulgate, Extra-' 
nei f(enaheris et fvatri tuo non foinaheris^ can be un- 
derstood only as meaning foreign nations in com*- 
niercial intercourse with us ; and, even in this case, 
the Holy A'^'rit, in allowing to take interest from the 
stranger, does not mean an extraordinary profit, 
oppressive and odious to the borrower. Non l{» 
cuisse Israelitis^ say the doctors, iisuras immodcra* 
(as exigere ab extraneis^ ctiam diviiibus^ res est per se 
nota. 

Can Moses be considered as the lawgiver of the 
univei-se, because he was the lawgiver of the Jews? 
Were the laws he gave to the people, which God 
had intrusted to his care, likely to become the ge- 
neral laws of mankind? Thou shait not lend upon 
interest to thy brother. AVhat security had he, that, 
in the intercourse u hich would be naturally esta* 
blished between the Jews and foreign nations, 
these last would renounce customs generally pre- 
vailing in trade, and lend to the Jews without re- 
quiring any interest ? Was he then bound to sa- 
p 1)2 



( 204 ) 

crifice the interest of his people, and to impoverish 
the Jews to enrich foreign nations? Is it not ab^ 
colutely absurd to reproach him with having put 
a restriction to the precept contained in Deutero* 
nomy? What lawgiver but would have considered 
such a restriction as anatural principle of recipro* 
city? 

How far superior in simplicity, generosity, jus- 
tice, and humanity, is the law of Moses, on this 
head, to those of the Greeks and of the Romans} 
Can we find, in the history of the antient Israelites, 
those scandalous scenes of rebellion excited by 
the harshness of creditors towards their debtors; 
those frequent abolitions of debts to prevent the 
multitude, impoverished by the extortions of lend-> 
crs, from being driven to despair? 

The law of Moses and its interpreters have dis- 
tinguished, with a praise worthy humanity, thd 
different uses of borrowed money. U it to main- 
tain a family ? Interest is forbidden. Is it to un- 
dertake a commercial speculation, by which the 
principal is adventured? Interest is allowed, even 
between Jews. Lend to the Poor^ says Moses. 
Here the tribute of gratitude is the only kind of 
interest allowed; the satisfaction of obliging is the 
sole recompencc of the conferred benefit, 'flie 
case is different in regard to capitals employed in 
extensive commerce: there, Moses allows the lend* 



I 



( ao5 ) 



er to come in for a share of the profits of the bor^ 
rower; and as commerce -wbh scarcely known 
among the Israelites, who were exclusively addict* 
ed to agricultural pursuits, and as it was carried 
on only with strangers, that is with neighbouring 
nations, it was allowed to share its profits with 
them 

It is in this view of the subject that M. Cler* 
mont-Tonnerre made use of these remarkable 
words in the first National Assembly : It is said 
that usury is permitted to the Jews; this asser* 
tion is grounded only on a false interpreta« 
tion of a principle of benevolence and fraternity 
which forbade them from lending upon interest 
to one another/^ 

This opinion is also that of Puflendorf and of 
other writers on the law of nations. 

The antagonists of the Jews have laid a great 
stress on a passage of Maimonides, who seems to 
represented as a precept, the expression Anochri 
tassik, (make profit of the stranger.) But although 
Maimonides has presumed to maintain this opinion, 
it is well known that his sentiments have been 
most completely refuted by the learned Rabbi 
AbarbaneL AVe find, besides, in the Talmud, a 
treatise of Macot^ (Perfection) that one of the ways 
to arrive at perfection, is to lend without interest 
jtp the stranger, even to the idolatof. Whatever 



( 206 ) 



besides might have been the condescension of God 
to the Jews, if we may be allowed the expression, 
it cannot be reasonably supposed that the common 
father of mankind could, at any time, make usury 
a precept. 

The opinion of Maimonides, which excited all 
Jewish Doctors against him, was principally con- 
demned by the famous Rabbies Moses de Gironna 
and Solomon Benadaret, upon tlie grounds, tirst, 
that he had relied on the authority of Siffri, a pri- 
vate doctor, whose doctrine has not been sanction- 
ed- by the Talmud; for it is a general rule that 
every rabbinical opinion w hich is not sanctioned 
by that work is considered as null and void. 
Secondhs because, if Maimonides understood that 
the word Nochri (stranger,) wsis applicable to the 
Canaanean people doomed by (iod to destruction, 
he ought not to liave confounded a public right, 
arising from an extraordinary order of God to the 
Israelites, considered as a nation, with tlie private 
right of an individual towards another indivi- 
dual of that same nation. 

It is an incontrovertible jK>int, according to tlie 
Talmud, that interest, even among Isnielites, is 
lawful in commercial operations, where the lender, 
running some of the risk of the borrower, becomes 
a sharer in his profits. This is the opinion of all 
Jewiiih doctoi^s. 



( 207 ) 



It is evident that opinions, teeming with absur- 
dities, and contrary to all rules of social morality, 
although advanced by a Kabbi, can no more be im- 
puted to the general doctrine of the Jews, than 
similar notions, if advanced by Catholic theolo- 
gians, could be attributed to the evangelical doc- 
trine. The same may be said of the general 
charge made against the Hebrews, that they are 
naturally inclined to usury: it cannot be denied 
that some of them are to be found, though not so 
many as is generally supposed, who follow that 
nefarious traffic condemned by their religion. 

But if there are some not over-nice in this par- 
ticular, is it just to accuse one hundred thousand 
individuals of this vice ? AVould it not be deemed 
an injustice to lay the same imputation on all 
Christians because some of them are guilty of usu- 
ry? 



I did not think fit to interrupt the discussions of 
the assembly on the answers to be returned to the 
questionsproposedbyHis Royal and Imperial Ma- 
jesty by mentioning a discoui*se delivered by M. 
Marg Foy, sen, deputy of the department of the 
Lower Pyrenees, on the nature of the answers to be 
returned on the fourth, fifth, and sixth questions. 

M. Marg Foy, in submitting to the assembly 



( 208 ) 



his observations on these three questions, which he 
considered as particularly intitled to his atten-> 
tion, remarked that the answers to be return- 
ed to the august Chief of the French Nation ought 
to be founded on the sentiments which animated 
the Israelites in common with all Frenchmen their 
brethren. He observed, that the questions them- 
fselves referred to the law of the prince and to ci- 
vil rights, rather than to principles of religion, 
and that, according to this mode of considering 
them, the assembly ought to frame the answers 
rather as Frenchmen than as men of any particu- 
lar religion. " I am confirmed in this opinion,^^ 
faid the orator^ " because I see nothing in the 
** precepts of our divine lawgiver which militates 

atrainst our civil rights, and, in this case, we 
" cannot more correctly answer to the call of the 
" prince, than by expressing those lively sentiments 
" which fill our hearts. And indeed how can any 
" one of us remain unmoved when we reflect that 
" we are called upon to give a pledge to Frenchmen 
" that the fraternal love and friendship which they 
" havemanifestcd forushavenotbeen ill bestowed? 
" IIowsadwouldoursituationbe,if it were thought 
" possible that France could be indifferent to us ; or 
" that a country which, in return for manifold bene- 

fits, has received our oatlis of fidelity and love, 
^- could, for an instant, doubt our sincerity ; that the 



( 209 ) 



Fi*encli people could, in short, consider us as form- 
ing a particular body within the state ! No, such 

" a doubt cannot exist; or if it has existed, but for 
one moment, it must have been done away, when, 

" by an energetic and spontaneous impulse, we 
all together manifested before the Commissioners 
of His Imperial and Royul Majesty, how dear and 
sacred France and Frenchmen were to our hearts* 

" Notwithstandingthisconviction, wemust, never- 
theless. Gentlemen, give our Sovereign a pledge 

** of our sentiments; let us satisfy his demands* 
" We must give to Frenchmen a pledge of our 
sentiments of union and fraternity: Moses himself 
has pointed out our duties on this head, for he 

" says^ to the children of Israel, The stranger thai 
dwelleth with you^ shall he unto you as one 
born among you^ and thou shalt love him as thy^- 
^^ifj f^'^ ^^'^'^ strangers in the land of Egypt J' 

" And, Gentlemen, if our divine lawgiver could in-* 

" still in the minds of his people ideas so liberal in 
favour of strangers, what obligations would he 
have imposed on us, had he foreseen, that at some 

** future period, a part of the Israelites, long time 
wandering and despised, would have found pro-» 
tection and an asylum in that fine part of Europe 

" called France! What gratitude would behave 

" prescribed to unfortunate children who thus found 
a second promised land ! How strictly would he 

£ £ 



( 210 ) 



have enjoined towards Frenchmen the indulgence 
of those sentiments of affection dictated by na- 
ture! Yes, Gentlemen, our holy prophet, who in 
" all his laws exhorts to union, to humanity, to the 
love of our neighbour, would have told us — Love 
*' Frenchmen ; they who open their arms to you, 
and deliver you from oppression, are your bre- 
thren ; let wreaths of friendship and fraternity be 
formed of those very fetters of ancient slavery 
in which prejudice had bound you/' 
" We will then say to His Majesty, " Yes, Sire, 
we can, according to religious principles, consi- 
" der France as our country; share the rights of 
" citizens of your empire; follow the dispositions 
•* of the civil code ; and obey, in every thing, the 
** will of the prince. Our duty is to defend the ter- 
** ritory of France, to pay our share of the burthens 
" of the state, and to use all the means in ourpower 
" for the prosperity of the empire^ The law of 
" God commands whatever is just and good; it 
never can raise an obstacle to the obedience due 
•*to the laws; for although we have a different 
** mode of worship, we are, nevertheless, bound to 
fulfil all the honourable duties which constitute 
good citizens/' 

You see. Gentlemen, that I have considered 
the question as relating to civil rights; I could 
have quoted many passages of our holy law, but 



( 211 ) 



" you know it as well as me, and I only made use 
of that particular precept which gives the great- 
est extent to our gratitude. I shall now submit 
to you the draft of an answer. May it prove agree- 
able to you ! May His Majesty the Emperor and 
" King find, in the expression of our sentiments, 
what can never be with him a matter of doubt, 
" a proof of our inviolable attachment to France, 
and to his sacred person!'* 
As the answers adopted by the assembly, differ 
but little from those proposed by M. Marg Foy, I 
have thought it useless to insert them, as he has 
not thought proper himself to have them printed, 
I could also mention the answers sent by the 
Rabbies of Turin, by the learned Rabbi Mardo-^ 
cheeCremieux, of Aix, but they also differ but lit-f 
tie from those adopted by the assembly. I shall 
therefore add but one word : the unanimity in the 
principles on which the declarations are grounded, 
will be, to future ages, one of the strongest testi- 
monies of their truth, and of the conspicuous loyaU 
ty which dictated the answers to all the questions. 

Gratitude and respect have also produced de- 
monstrations of a different nature on the day that 
all Frenchmen were called upon to celebrate the 
anniversary of the memorable period which, ibr the 
happiness of the world, gave birth to the Great Na- 
poleon, 



( 212 ) 



The assembly had unanimously resolved to set 
a part the whole day of the 15th of August, for 
prayers, thanksgivings, and all the demonstrations 
of a pure and lively joy. 

M. Rodrigues, of La Gironde, had been directed 
by the Committee of Five to give in his report on 
the means best calculated to fuliil, to the utmost, 
the intentions of the assembly. 

He gave it in on the 12th of August, and it was 
adopted by the assembly as containing the means 
best calculated to manifest the sentiments which 
animated every member. 

In consequence, on the 15th of August, at ten 
o'clock in the morning, the deputies met in the 
hall of their sittings. The bust of his Majesty the 
Emperor adorned the hall. At this sight cries 
of Long live the Emperor burst from every one. 

The President presented to the assembly an ode 
in Hebrew composed by M. J. Mayer on theFestir 
val of Napoleon the Great. This ode was re- 
ceived with acclamations by the assembly. At 
eleven o'clock the deputies began their procession 
for the grand Synagogue ; they walked in silence, 
in the greatest order, with the President at their 
head. The Temple was ornamented with taste. 
The name of Jehovah, the cyphers, and the arms 
of Napoleon and of Josephine shone on every 
side. The ark, which contained the book of the 



( 213 ) 

law, was surrounded and over-shaded by shrubg 
and flowers ; seats were prepared for the President 
and the officers of the assembly, for the Kabbies, 
and some other persons. The deputies formed a 
circle, into which were admitted many Jewish and 
Christian spectators, from among the most distin- 
guished citizens. The ladies, according to cus- 
tom, had a separate gallery. Order and serenity 
prevailed every where: every countenance exhi- 
bited the most heart-felt satisfaction, mlinifesting, 
on so glorious, so fortunate a day, our gratitude to 
a monarch, who, amidst so many labours, has made 
the fate and the social happiness of the descend- 
ants of Israel the special object of his attention. 
Chorusses and hymns began the ceremony. The 
President, M. Furtado, afterwards delivered a dis- 
course, tracing a rapid sketch of the persecu- 
tions which the Jews had to encounter durinsr 
two thousand years, till the epocha when, recalled 
in France to the enjoyment of their civil and polit- 
ical rights, they saw the first dawn of their com- 
plete regeneration. He concluded by exhorling his 
brethren to bestow the greatest care on the educa- 
tion of their children, in order to enable them to 
repay to the country the manifold benefits confer- 
red upon them, and those which were still in ex- 
pectation. This discourse of the President was 
received with loud plaudits. 



( 214 ) 

iViM. Segre, Zinzheimer, and Andrade, Rabbles 
tod deputies, delivered sermons: thefirst ir\ 
Italian, the second in German, and the third in 
French. M. Segre clothed the sentiments of a 
mild and persuasive morality in elegant language. 
The sermon of M. Andrade v^as marked by nu«» 
merous and appropriate quotations from the Holy 
Writ. M. Zinzheimer traced a more detailed pic- 
ture of the different epochas of Jewish history. 
The same Rabby, in taking from the ark the book 
of the law, and in presenting it round the temple, 
pronounced a prayer for the happiness of all 
Frenchmen, which excited the liveliest emotion. 
Psalmns and Hymns were afterwards sung; and 
when they came to the prayer which Jews are accuse 
tomed to put up, for sovereigns, enthusiasm knew 
no bounds. Cries of Zjong live the Emperor and 
King, in Hebrew and in French, proceeded from 
every mouth. Thus has this festival been render^ 
ed remarkable by all the peculiarities which cha^ 
racterise the most antient people on earth, blended 
with the patriotic effusions so natural to all French* 
men. During a symphony of Haydn, collections 
were made by Mdlles. Julie-Theodore Cerf-Berr, 
Caroline Wolf, and Schmoll, accompanied by 
Avigdor, Rodrigues, sen. and Castro, jun. 
The produce was distributed among the poor of 
fill persuasions. 



( 215 ) 



In the evening the synagogue, and the hall of 
the sittings of the assembly were illuminated : the 
deputies met afterwards in private parties, in which 
the health of the Emperor, and of his august fa- 
mily, were drank with fresh enthusiasm. 

Translation of the Sermon delivered in Italian by 
M. Segre, JRabbi^ Municipal Counsellor of Ver- 
ceil, Deputy of the Department ofL^ Sesia. 

My son^ fear thou the Jjqkd and the King. 

Trov. chap. xxiv. vers. 31. 

Scarcely were my eye-lids opened to the dawn 
•* of this day, when my mind was assailed by the 
crouded images of the victories of Montenotte, of 
" the laurels of Marengo blended with palms, of 
the atchievements and triumphs of Austerlitz. It 
is not then a vain illusion, did I exclaim! A su- 
** pematural genius has really appeared on earth, 
** surrounded with greatness and with glory infi- 
" nite. I saw in the night visions, and behold <me, 
like the son of man, came, and there was given him 
dominion, and glory, and a kingdmn^ Daniel, 
chap. vii. verses 13 and 14. 

Already this day of joy and of universal festi- 
vity arises in renewed splendour, marked in in- 
delible characters by predominant stars ; pur« 



( 216 ) 



" tod serene above all days; day for ever blessed, 
in which Heaven sent unto the earth the great 

" Napoleon enthroned in glory, the restorer of 

" piety, of justice, of good order, the father of na- 
tions, the friend, yea, the sincere friend, of peace ; 
the only title dear to his heart, and the most 

" grateful to his subjects. 

Amidst the far-sounding praises of the hero, 
amidst the joyful hymns of gratitude offered to 
the Etemalfor so precious, so sacred a gift, I has* 

" ten to the Holy Temple, with you, O venerable 
Deputies of France and of Italy. Deemed wor- 

•* thy to be heard among you, permit me to add 
some reflections to the discourse of our honour* 
able President, and to those of the two learned 
orators who have addressed you before me. Do 
not be depressed, if this day I call to your re- 
membrance our ancient calamities, and that 
flood of misfortunes which overwhelmed us be- 
fore we set our eyes on that bote in the cloudj 
which is for us a divine token of a covenant of 
calm and serenity. 

Compare, said Moses^ the condition of your 

<^ fathers and mothers, and that of your children: 
Remember the days of oldj consider the years of 

•* many generations^ (Deut. xxxii. vers. 7.) and 
you will know how to appreciate the invaluable 

^ blessings of the new order of things. 



( 217 ) 



" The scourge of war, Gentlemen, is usually 
ti-ansitory ; either the wisdom of government 
quickly repairs the losses it occasions, or an ho- 
hourable treaty soon relieves the people, and 

brings back peace and plenty. But as to us 

"as to us O God! ..the iron hand of op- 

pression under which we lived, or rather gtoan- 
ed, for so many centuries, crushed us down even 
in the bosom of peace, and hope itself could af- 
" ford no relief by holding the prospect of future 
" deliverance. iVe looked for peace ^ and no peace 
" came. (Jerem. viii. 15.) We were like the leaf, 
" which, torn from the parent bough, becomes the 
sport of the slightest rustling breeze, even after 
the rage of the tempest has subsided. And 
*' where is the man of any nation, even supposing 
him the most passive, who, on reflecting on his 
" situation, on seeing himself thus condemned to 
" sloth, and his talents become useless through 
contempt; where is the man, I say, who, in the 
bitterness of his anguish, would not renounce 
his native land as his country? Thus did King 
" David expresis his thoughts in similar circuni- 
" stances: / looked on mrj right handy and beheld, 
" but there was no man that would knoiv me; refuge 
failed me; no man cared for my soul. Psalm 
cxlii. 4, 

F p 



( 218 ) 



** Thanks be this day to the Most High dispenser 
of all things! Infinite thanks be to the Hero of 
" France, the Solomon of our days! He looked 
** down on the cedars of Lebanon; neither did the 
" humble hyssop, which grows between rocks, 
" among briars, escape his attention : high seated 
" on his throne, surrounded with treasures, the 
hearts of his people are his sole delight. He has 
for ever erased those ancient marks of shame 
and of sorrow, whose baneful influence blasted 
in the bud the most sublime talents, and wither- 
ed the most virtuous hearts. The paternal hai^ 
of the monarch has removed our evils with their 
cause: he points out to us the road of glory and 
** of honour, arts, and sciences. O Israel ! no more 
*• sliall your tears embitter your bread; he says to 
us with the pious Jehosaphat, Deal courageously^ 
and the Lord shall be with the good. 2 Chron. 
" xix. 11. 

" Since our mild and heavenly religion recom- 
mends labour as an antidote to those vices which 
degrade man, and sciences as the worthy means 
" by which we may arrive at the knowledge of 
" God, and since the supreme orders of the Hero, 
whose wisdom fosters all sciences, are entitled to 
" the most religious obedience, what further in- 
" ducements do we want? What brighter exam- 



( 219 ) 



pies could we have to induce us to start in the 
*• noble career, than that of so many wise princes, 
" so many brave generals, and men distinguished 
•* in every branch of science? What efforts shall 
" we make to become, by our own talents, useful 
" to the state, to the country, and to ourselves? 
*' Now that our fate is connected with that of the 
" country, our heart is in a manner already enno* 
bled. Let us embrace, with eagerness, a happi* 
" ness so long unknown to us; call for arms to de- 
" fend from every insult that country so dear to 
us. Soon we shall see our sons passing from 
that state of uneasy listlessness which always 
accompanies idleness, to that happy calm which 
is always produced by the pursuit of useful 
" scienes, and by praise-worthy occupation*. 
*' For thou shall eat the labour of thine hands^ hap* 
py shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee* 
" Psalm cxxviii. 2. 
" Were we to receive only temporal advantages 
from the political regeneration wrought by the 
"wisdom and clemency of the Immortal Hero, 
what gratitude could ever repay such a blessing? 
But it goes much further, Brethren ; a safe and 
** permanent political existence will facilitate to 
us the practice of all religious and moral virtue 
towards God and his creatures ; precious virtues! 
hardly within our reach in the state of degrada* 



( 230 ) 



tion into which we were plunged ! Ennobled, I 
say it once more, by the career of sciences now 
" opened to them, our sons will find within them- 
sel\es powerful incitements to virtue. What a 
field lor instruction, for useful knowledge! 
" Now they will gradually acquire ideas more 
" worthy of God, of religion, of social virtues, and 
" of good manners. Such, Israel, such is the des- 
tiny God has in store for thee. There remains 
" but one wish for thee to form ; it is to have thine 
** eyes opened, that thou mayest discern thy true 
hotiour and thy true glory, and that the Most 
Kigh, on whom every grace depends, might this 
day deign to enlighten thee. And wisdom and 
knowledge shall be the stability/ of thy times^ and 
strength of salvation. Isaiah, chap, xxviii. vers, 
" 6- 

" Always impressed with a deep sense of the sa- 
cred dvtirs of love and gratitude, let\is renew 
" in this august Temple, before the God of our fa- 
" thers, and near that venerable monument of our 
ancient splendour, which we glory in preserving 
like the light of our souls, (the book of the law) 
let us, I say, renew here, in the plenitude of our- 
" hearts, those fer^^ent prayers which every' one of 
us, in the bosom of bis family, addresses to the' 
" Most High, for the preser^ ation of the august^ 
^* imperial, and royal house.'-^God save theKing^ 



( 221 ) 



** Powcrfiil God, Father of Kings, may ourpraj# 
ers ascend to the foot of thy throne. God of 
" justice, who rules the fate of nations, who gave 
this vast empire to a monarch according to thine 
^* own heart, a monarch who is Bravery, Wis- 
^* DOM, and Clemency itself, and whose name is 
" echoed by fame in all the countries which the sun 
^' vivifies by its rays, preserve him for the hap- 
piness of nations, as a mirror and ^ model for all 
kings ; preserve him for us, and for our most 
distant posterity, with all that fulness of glory 
" he has acquired by so many titles. May the 
scepter remain for ever in his powerful hand ! 
^* His virtues, his wisdom, bis name, that august 
" name carries more dread in it than the splendid 
" array of his formidable and victorious armies. 
BlesSi OLord, his substance, and accept the work of 
his hands: smite through the loins of them that 
rise against him, and of them that hate him, that 
they rise not again, Deuteronomy, chap, xxxiii. 
verse 11/^ 

Translation of the Sermon delivered in German by 
M. DBYidZiii^eimer, Rabbi, Deputy /rom Stras^ 
bourg. 

Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my QOiil der 
)ighteth: I have put my spirit upoa him^ he shall bring forth judgement on 



( 223 ) 



£he gentiles; he shall not fail nor be discouraged till he have set judgr 
ment in the earth, and the isles shall wait for his law. I the Lord have 
called thee in rightousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, 
and will give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the gen* 
(ties. 

Isaiah, chapter xlii. 

" Brethren, 

" Assembled here by order of our incomparable 
" Emperor and King Napoleon the Great, 
this day is a day of joy, for us such as our nation 
has never witnessed, for which we are indebted tQ 
divine favour. 

" Yet the joy of this glorious day will become 
" livelier, it will make a much stronger impression 
on your hearts, if you will, with me, briefly comn 
pare the past with the present times. 
" The historj" of the Hebrews is remarkable above 
" that of all other nations, by the vicissitudes of 
" events, the number and the cruelty of the per- 
" secutions of which this unfortunate people has 
" been the deplorable victim or the miserable 
sport, and still more by the unparalled constan- 
" cy the immoveable firmness, which they have uni- 
" formly opposed to oppression since the fatal day 
" that they were forced to abandon the landpro<« 
•* misedto their fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
^* and to their posterity; since the destruction of 
the Holy Temple. Scattered over the face of the 
globe, we have been wandering from nations to 



( 223 ) 

" nations, from kingdoms to kingdoms, without 
" finding rest or safety any where; every whert 
" we saw enemies rising against us, because we 

remained faithful to our laws, to those laws which 
" the Lord himself gave us by his revelation amidst 
" thunder and lightning. (Exod. xix. and xx.) 

" The Lord had designed to take us a nation 
^^from the midst of another nation, by tempta^ 
" tionSy by signs J and by wonders, and by war, and by 
" a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm. (Deu- 
" ter. chap. iv. verse 34.) 

" But, on the other hand, when our ancestors 
** proved unfaithful to these laws, they experien- 
" ced the elfects of the terrible threats the Lord 

had denounced against them (29). 

" Then, Brethren, then, the nations who had 
" not yet received the light of wisdom, these na- 
" tions said. Come and let us cut them off from 
" being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no 

more in reinembrance. Psalm. Ixxxiii. verse. 4. 

" And in fact, can any one read the history of 

our nation without shuddering at the unparal« 
" leled series of calamities of every description 

(29) Deuteronomy, chapter xxviii. verse. 64 and 65. " And tbe 
Lord shall scatter thee among all people from the one end of the earth 
even unto the other;'^and among these nations shalt thou find no ease| 
neither shall the sole of thy foot have a res>.^ 



( 224 ) 



•* which befel our ancestors in France, in Italy, itt 
Germany, in Spain, in other lands ? 
"But notwithstanding all these pereecutions, 
admire, dear Brethren, the miracles and the 
•* power of the Most High : we escape through the 
** wrecks of centuries, and Providence has, at last, 
•* saved us from the total oblivion into which those 
** nations had determined to plunge us. Driven 
from one country to another, we always found 
some magnanimous and benevolent Prince whose 
heart God disposed to receive us, and allow us 
to remain faithful to our laws. Can any thing 
shew more clearly the fulfilment of the promi* 
"ses of the Lord? (30) 

" In the midst of these calamities the Lord^ 
•* about three centuries ago, took pity on our suf* 
*'ferings; he caused the dawn of philosophy to 
*' enlighten Europe especially, some rays of hope 
gladdened our sight, and enlivened our pros- 
pects; a dam was raised against the destructive 
torrent of fanaticism, and human blood no 
longer drenched the earth in the name of God. 
" But persecution did not cease entirely; it was 

(30) Leviticus, chap. xxvi. verse. 44. " And yet for all that, when they 
^ be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will 
^ I abhor them to destroy them utterly and to break my covenants with 
*^ them, for I am tht Lord their God.'' 



( 225 ) 



" reserved for other times to see this dawn of hap* 
piness ushering in a brilliant morning. Philo« 

" sophy now diffuses its light over Europe; hearts 
are now opened every where to the mild senti« 
ments of philanthropy and of tolerance. 
" Men are sensible that their Creator himself 

" allows every one to worship him according to 

" the light of his reason. O Brethren, considei; 
here the wonderful fiavours of the Most High: 
by re-establishing concord among mankind, he 
has prepared the end of our tribulations and of 
our misfortunes. If persecution has not yet en*- 

" tirely ceased, because too many men, hurried by 
baneful habits, which becQine a second nature, 
have refused to open their eyes to the true light 
of philosophy; if, till now we, have seen only the 
dawn of happiness, this dawn will at last usher a 
pure and glorious light which will dissipate the 
last dark shades of ancient prejudices; all hearts 
will open to the noble enthusiasm of humanity, 
and we shall see clearly the infinite wonders t)f 
the Supreme Creator as predicted by Daniel. (30) 

" He has cho^ Napoleon to place him on the 
throne of France and Italy ; be has chosen him 

(31) Daniel, chap. ii. verse ^1. ^ And he changeth the times an^ the 
seasons ; he femoveth kings and setteth up kings : he gireth wisdom 
unto the wise and knowledge to them that know Andentandiqg.'' 

Q a 



( 226 ) 



*^ in the way I have marked in my text. And 
" we must apply to him what Pharoah said to his 
" servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a 
*' man in whom the spirit of God is? We must also 
" apply to him these words of my text, I have put 
" my spirit upon him. 

" And what else can we say when we consider his 
" wonderful works, his first campaigns in Italy, his 

his achievements inAsiaand in Africa,his second 
" campaigns in Italy, and, lastly, his astonishing 
^' campaigns in Germany, and that ever memorable 

victory of Austerlitz, which produced the glori- 

ouspeaceofPresburg? After these wonders, could 
" we one moment hesitate to apply toour invinci- 
^ ble Emperor these words of Isaiah : Thus said 

the Lord to his annointed Cyrus^ whose right hand 

I have holden^ to subdue nations before him; and 
" / will loose the loins of kings'^ to open before him 

the two-leaved gates^ and the gates shall not be 
*^ shut^ I mill go before thee and make the crooked 

places straight; I will break in pieces the gates of 
" brass, and cut in sunder the bars ofrt oji. Isaiah» 
^' chap. xlv. 1, 2. 

" Thus our invincible Emperor overcame that 

inaccessible mountain, the great Saint Bernard^ 
" to gain the immortal victory of Marengo. The 

Lord straightens all ways before him, and he 
" rushes on the land of the enemy ; he brealvs those 



( 227 ) 



" gates ofbfAss, that strong hold of Ulm surtound* 
ed with intrenchments. An innumerable nest of 
enemies occupied the strong hold, but as soon as 
theLord^sannointed appeared, the words of Isaiah 
" were fulfilled, " they that war against thee shall 
*' he as nothings and as a thing of nought » Isaiah, 
" chap, vei-s. 12. 

" O Brethren, 1 have hitherto pointed out to 
you only few of his glorious deeds; my voice is 
too weak to sing the praises of the mighty. I 
shall say with David, My heart is inditing a good 
*' matter: I speak of the things which I have made 
touching the Kingi my tongue is the pen of a ready 
writer^ Psalm xlv. 1. 

I have, till now, spoken only of his military 
prowess; to celebrate his political virtues, I shall 
*' say again with David^ " thou lovest righteousness^ 
** and hatest wickedness. therefore God, thy God Jiath 
annointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows. Psalm, xli. 7. Or with Solomon in 
his Proverbs, The King by judgment establisheth 
the land^ It is not only for his own people, 
" but also for all nations, whose eyes are lixed 
on that monarch, unpai*alleled in the annals of 
nations, and, as I have said it in my text, the 
isles shall tcait for his law. In thus uniting all 
"nations lie opens their eyes to their true ii.- 
" terests, ^Vhere could we find the model of such a 

G u 2 



( 228 ) 



sOTcreign? The Holy Writ says of David that he 
imparted justice to his people, and heaped fa- 
" vors on his subjects. 

" Surely these words are perfectly applicable to 
♦* our august Monarch, who, high seated on his 
" throne, keeps his eyes fixed on a small numberof 
" men professing the religion of Moses, and wisli. 
" es to better their fate and that of their children, 
" that they may no longer be exposed to the injus- 
** tice of other nations. 

" O Brethren, to what height of enthusiasm 
must our gratitude rise towards so great, so vir- 
" tuous a monarch, who heaps so many favours 
•* upon us ? The rigkteovs shall be in everlasting r^- 
** membrance. Psalm cxii. 6. 
•* As to us, called together by the great Empe- 
ror, it becomes our most sacred duty to labour 
" with strength and unanimity according to his 
** will, and to further his benevolent views by 
*' our co-operation. It is also our sacred duty to 
" offer Our thanks to the Most High, who has in- 
" spired the heart of our Sovereign with the wish 
" of relieving from misery men unjustly oppress- 
" ed. Let prayers be poured night and day for 
•* the preservation of his precious life, for that of 
*^ our august Empress, and of the royal and im« 
" penal family. 
** O God, hear the fervent prayers which our 



( 229 ) 



" hearts pour before thee; let a ray of thine own 
*^ glory rest on the brow of our august Monarch; 
preserve the empire in all its splendour; and 
pour thy blessings on our brethren of every per* 
suasion. Amen.^* 



BENEDICTIOX. 

" O God, Creator of heaven and earth, and of 
whatsoever their vast extent containeth, King of 
Kings, who hast appointed them to rule nations^ 
^' among which thou hast, in a peculiar manner, 
" favoured the French and Italians by giving them 
" a man according to thy heart, Napoleon, cloth- 
ed in glory, whose goodness equals his justice 
and his mighty valour, and whose fame embra- 
** ceth both extremities of the world. Deign, O 
Lord, to continue the signal favours thou hast 
heaped upon him. Deign, on this day of his 
anniversary, to hearken to the prayers of the 
deputies of France and of Italy, imploring thy 
blessings on him. Grant him, and to the wor- 
thy wife of his bosom, the Empress Josephine, 
and to their august family, a long and happy 
life. May they always behold the French and 
and the Italians living in peace and plenty, and 
rising into prosperity under their blissful $way, 
** which thou approvest, O Lord, Amen.^ 



( 1230 ) 



MM. Cologna, J. Mayer, and S. Wittersheiin, 
sen. celebrated that happy day by Odes and 
Hymns in Hebrew, which are remarkable by pleas- 
ing sentiments and energetic thoughts, by the 
justness of ideas, the classical elegance of diction, 
and the harmony, of versification* 

M. Moise Milland, deputy of Vaucluse, gained 
also much credit by a Canticle in Hebrew, replete 
with energy and poetical beauties; as did M. Elie- 
Aaron Lattes, a learned Rabbi of Sevigliano, de- 
puty for thiB department of La Stura,by a beauti- 
ful Hymn composed in Hebrew, aiid translated 
into Italian with much fidelity and eleg-ance« 

These several compositions will do the gi-eatest 
honour to their authors, not only among their bre- 
thren, but also among the learned of Europe, who 
are able to understand the originals ; they will be 
tead with pleasure by all lovers of belles-lettres in 
general, and of Hebrew poetry, and more espe- 
cially by those men who see with interest the con- 
vocation made by our august Sovereign, with a 
view to impart the advantages and the duties of 
society to a class of men, who have been sometimes 
degraded, only because they were always oppress- 
ed, and who always reckoned true religion, human- 
ity, and reason, as their auxiliaries against fanati- 
cism, hatred, and violence. 

I much regret the impossibility of giving my 



( 231 ) 



readers the original Hebrew text of these compo« 
sitioi s; I shall attempt to compensate for it by a 
translation of the most remarkable, 

ODE 

For the Birth'day of Napoleon the Great, 
composed in Hebrew by M. A. Cologna. 

I. 

Arise, O Mnse ! and take a lofty flight. Soft-sounding 
be my voice, and grateful to the ear. My heart indites a 
Bong of things most high. Pour thou grace into my lips, 

II. 

My soul is raised to thoughts immortal. My song is of 
glory and of wonder. O that my lips might drop as the 
honey-combat the fountains of the sacred springs, causing 
the tongue to flow with grace, and force, and brilliancy. 

III. 

On the deeds of the mighty will I raise a song ; on the 
deeds of the hero, chief of men, unmatched in battles. Near 
him the glory of kings fades and vanishes : they hide be- 
fore him their diminished heads. Their greatness is a thing 
of nought. 

IV. 

Which of his deeds shall first inspire the bard ? Won- 
ders upon wonders are engraved on glory's adamantine 



( 333 ) 



tablet ! Numberless are hin victories and countless his tri« 
umphs. Who to each bright orb in the starry heaven can 
assign a name, or fix a stedfast eye on the father of light, 
blazing forth in bis meridian glory i 

V. 

Early were his deeds in arms. The hills of Montenotte 
beheld him victorious : Egypt, that ancient land of slaveiy, 
felt the strength of his arm : Ulm, Marengo, Austerlitz wit- 
nessed his prowess, nor weak was there the strife of death. 

VI. 

Distant hills shook with his warlike thunder : by his 
strong arm his enemies were humbled. The mighty of tKe 
earth have bent before him. He has said to nations, *' Let 

there be peace," and the universe is at rest. 

VII. 

Firmly on wisdom is his throne fixed on high; justice 
and truth uphold his crown. He pours the balmy oil of 
grace into the wounds of innocence ; he heals the galling 
sores of oppression. The proud and the haughty he heeds 
not i they stand silent and abashed before him. 

VIII. 

He has placed in justice the delight of his heart : un- 
born races shall hail him Father of his people. By hira the 
happiness of nations rests on the tablet of the law as on a 
rock. The wreaths of victory adorn his brow, the gracious 
seat of law-inspiring wisdom. 



( 333 ) 



Exult, O Francfe ! queen of queens ! His powerful arm 
hath raised thee from the abyss, placing thee over nations ! 
Rejoice, O Italy ! thy days of greatness are near ; the hero 
pours his spirit on thee. Raise, O my country^ raise the 
song of joy! Rest and happmess await thee. 

X. 

Hail, bright dawn of gladness ! A Monarch is this day 
born unto us * in this day shall all other days of the year 
be blessed ! For a great light arose and shineth upon out 
age ; a light of happiness^ and distant generations shall be 
glad and rejoice in it« 

XI. 

But a voice, like the murmur of the breeze, whispereth 
in my ear, and saith : Cease the words of thy praise ; lin* 
speakable is his glory, and above thy strengtli are his deeds; 
too high for mortal man to sing. The name of him stand- 
eth aloft, proclaiming aloud glory and greatness infinite. 
He is Napoleon. 

XIL 

I said unto my soul> Repress thy bold flight.'* Silent 
is my tongue, but high beats my swelling heart, while be- 
fore thy glorious throne I bend my knee, O King beloved ! 
in thy goodness I place my trust; weak is my voice, and 
untaught my song, but my heart is pure and my mindj O 
King, dwelleth in righteousness. 



( 234 ) 



XIII. 

Raifie, Brethren, raise the song of gratitude to the 
hero ; he hath fulfilled his promises to Israel : his promises 
of peace and happiness ! Thanksgiving he loveth not Let 
the mind of youth be trained to wisdom ! let it be its guide 
in the path of virtue ; in such deeds his soul delighteth. 

XIV. 

O God, eteraal and terrible in thy judgments, hearken 
to the toice of thy people, to the prayers of the children of 
Jacob, pouring their souls at the foot of thy altar, in thy 
sanctuary: they cry unto thee, O Lord ! Preserve the life 
of our immortal immortal Emperor long and happy be 
his days. 

XV. 

Lengthen i O Lord, the happy days of his beloved 
spouse, virtuous among women and glorious among queens : 
of his mother* blessed among mothers, for her womb 
brought fonh the hero of the age. As long as the bright 
orb of the night shall shed its pale light on earth, as long 
as light itself shall keep divided from darkness, as thou 
didst set it, may the mighty house of Napoleon flourish 
in splendour and in majesty. 



( 235 ) 



ODE 

Composed in Hebrew hy M, J. Mayer, 

r 

My heart is troubled within me, my soul is on fire, lyir- 
ried by power resistless : tumultuous feelings confound my 
thoughts; wonders strike my eyes, wonders are echoed iu 
my ears. Tune the lyre of mighty deeds surpassing mor- 
tal. I will raise a song to the sons of men. Why is thy 
tongue mute? Pale is thy clieek, weak man ! Above thy 
ptrength is the praise of the hero. 

II. 

No mortal eye can look on the father of light when, in 
mid career, bursting from clouds and mists, dark rolling on 
each side, he pursues the brightness of his steps. The 
green hills lift their dewy heads, the flowers glitter in the 
valley, the soft gale wafts fragrancy around. 

III. 

Such is Napoi^eon in his career of gloiy. Weak are 
the bards of present days to raise the song of bis fame : too 
Iiigh for tbem are his mighty deeds. In wonder their voice 
is lost; the untuned lyre drops from their uplifted hands. 
Thus the sun of wisdom and strength gladdens the world, 
rising above mortal praise. 

IV. 

How great tliy destiny, O Napoleon ! Who can be 

H H2 



( 236 ) 



compared with thee among the glory of nations ? Who 
among renowned warriors, among sage lawgivers, ever 
raised his fame near to thine, O first of mortal men ? — - 
Bright in days of old was the glory of Athens and of 
Kome: dim is their light now before thee. On thee the 
eyes of nations are fixed ; they wonder, and bless thy 
name. 

V. 

What light of joy bursts at once on my soul ! It moves 
my heart and agitates my frame. Give, O give, th^ sp^c! e4 
]yre— fl must pour forth the gladness of my soul, iiail, 
prosperous day of an immortal birth ! Hail, har piest 
among days ! Thy dawn is Xo France the dawn of glory. 
The staj-s which rule the divided year shall mark thy re- 
turn* August shall be the harbinger of peace and happi- 
ness. 

To thee belongs the dominion of the worlds thou hast 
created so sing the celestial seraphs before tlie tjirone 
of God; for thou hast made from nought the world and 
its wonders." To thee, O Napoleon, we sing, Rule in 
peace the empire thy wisdom has established. On truth 
and justice its glory is founded. On kings and heroes thou 
sheddestthy brightness. Thus, revolving round the father 
of light, planets glitter with borrowed rays, 

VII. 

Who is like unto thee, O Napoleon, in the days of thy 
glory, when thou graspest the deatli-dealing steel, that thy 
allies might rest behind its lightning ! Like the eagle of 



( 237 ) 



the rock was thy flight over Germany's plains. Thy he«* 
roes innumerable crouded around thee ; the thunder of war 
wai in their hands, carrying destruction among the foe. 
T]) :»s the cloud, rising from the abyss, borne along by the 
wes*3rri wind, dark, vast, terrible, overspreads the blacken- 
ed field. 

VIII. 

My soul abhorreth the snares of the wicked ; their shafts 
were levelled at ihee. They heard the sYwts of victory, 
the voice of our rejoicings, and were no more. From dis- 
tant shores the song of peace was heard, mingled with 
warlike praise. We mourned, like the tender youth la- 
menting the absence of his beloved sire, and behold he 
comes, high seated on his car, clad with gloiy* 

IX. 

The earth trembled, but now rests in peace. Far dis- 
tant nations bent before the majesty of thy brow. Ulm, 
Marengo, Austerlitz, the plains of Egypt, beheld the feats 
of Napoleon. ** Raise altars to the God of battles,*' he 
said, and altars arose from their ruins ; bitterness fled from 
our hearts, at the dawn of his grace. Happy, happy are 
the children of France. Nations had but a glimpse of the 
star of our pride, swiftly gliding through the misc tinged 
with its glory. 

X. 

Bards of Israel, let your harmonious songs thrill in my 
Boul^ that, amidst th.e voice of nations, the fame of the 
hero may be raised in the ancient words of Jacob, the words 
of the youth pf our people. The great Napoleon looked 



( 238 ) 



down on the children of woe, sport of the proud and of the 
oppressor: he gathered them round him like a tender fa- 
ther: from the dust he raised them to stand as a mark of 
his might. Just are his judgments ; great and big with 
gladness is the propitious light of his wisdom. Before it, 
the darkening cloud of shame retires, rolliiig back on the 
foes of our people, 

XI. 

Sons of Israel, children of happy France/ let songs of 
joy mark the birth of your king ! An eagle, O Israel, 
shelters thee under his wings. Hills and mountains melt 
before him ; he raiseth and keepeth thee on high : joy and 
comfort fill thy heart ; to the noble chiefs of thy tribes he 
imparteth knowledge and wisdom. The glory of Israel 
retumeth; clothe thyself with gladness and strength. The 
stormy cloud of misfortunes has retired behind the hills. 
The proud race of ancient France joins their friendly hands 
with their brethren of Israel. 

XII. 

Exult, O my country ! Thy ships, big with riches, 
shall fly to distant shores ; the bright day of happiness 
shall enliven thy fruitful plains; plenty and prosperity 
shall dwell in the land : for ever shall this song of grati- 
tude be echoed through thy hills -—Long, long may he live, 
our great, our powerful King, first of a thousand heroes ! 
May the beam of his joy, the wife of his bosom, comfort 
bis happy lengthened years. O God of the starry heavehs, 
take them under the protecting shade of thy hand! Oa 
their lives hangs the fate of nationSj O Creator of the 
World. 



( 239 ) 



HYMN, 

Sung hy the French Deputies of the Religion of 
MoseSi composed in Hebrew hy M. S. Wittersheim, 
and dedicated to M. Furtado, President of the 
Assembly^ 

Come ye all, O children of Israel; make a joyful noise 
unto God, with voices and instruments of music : gire 
thanks to the Eternal, and make his praise glorious, for he 
hath shewn mercy unto us this day— therefore shall this 
day be a day of joy unto Israel. 

In the space of a year the sun performeth his course^ 
and the moon begins a new cs^reer each month ; but these 
lights of Heaven do not mark a brighter day than this ; for 
on this day. Napoleon, the greatest of kings, was given 
unto us. 

Let us all sing and rejoice! Be comforted, ye elders; for 
you have witnessed the wonder of this day, the marvellous 
works, above man*s understanding! Rejoice, O jrouth ! the 
King is the dawn of gladness. Happy and blessed shall 
be the reign of our glorious Emperor and King. 

His name fills the universe; non^ have been like him 
among the sons of men ! The fatliers of praise cannot 
raise up their voices to the greatness of his deeds, to thf 
glory of hia works : they stand mute, lost in wonder ! 

Eminent in war is the hero among chiefs. The Nile and 



{ 240 ) 



the Jordan have beheld his deeds, terrible in battles. The 

lightning of his steel gleams on the proud in arms but 

he exulteth not over the fallen foe : his mighty hand raiseth 
the fallen in the strife. 

In V^in the nations of the earth united agaifist him; 
weak was their arm, and powerless their blows. In Ma- 
jengo's and Austerlitz's bloody plains he broke the bow of 
the strong; the thickened phalanxes of his enemies were 
scattered before him. Grateful to humbled kings was the 
olive-branch 6f peace, mildly shining in the magnanimous 
hand of the conqueror. 

To imperial France he bent his victorious steps ; his 
faithful subjects greeted his return. Thus a &ther beholds 
his children, the pride of his heart, dutiful and affection- 
ate : they rejoice in £he firmness of his throne : it rests on 
victory— clemency— -virtue — humanity— justice. 

Let thy shouts, O Israel, proclaim thy gladness. Un*- 
matched are the designs of Napoleon for thee ; among 
the sons of his glory thou shalt be remembered. Away, ye 
scoffers of my people! no longer shall the head of Israel 
be humbled in dust before the pride of the wicked. 

A mournful captive, weighed down by fetters, groaned 
in the dark dwelling of the dungeon ; the sun had hid him 
from his eyes, nor did the mild beams of the moon cheer 
his sleepless eye-«-no light shone on his captivity. 



He heard a voice, as from the darkly-rolling cloud, and 
his soul arose. Is there an end to my sorrows? Shall tlie 



( 241 ) 



fetters be loosed from my hands ? Shall I again behold the 
light of the heavens ? Shall 1 visit, once more, the haunts 
of the living ? Shall 1 be one among them ? 

Such was Israel since he dwelled among nations ; a prey 
lo misfortune, the sport of scorn : his mind failed within 
him; oppressors sought after his soul; he bowed himself 
down heavily, as one sorely troubled with fear. 

Is it a vain illusion— or a vision from above r— Doth the 
dawn of happier days for him rise in the heavens? Is he 
delivered from bondage? Will the glory of his former 
days return, the honour of his name ? Shall he be num« 
bered among the children of magnanimous France ? 

It was a messenger from above ; truth is in his tidings; 
Napoleon hath undertaken our deliverance — in him is our 
trust: he will fulfil his words. Have we not beheld the 
wonders of his sublime genius ? He that has laid low the 
thrones of his enemies, he that has exalted others in their 
stead, and fixed them as on rocks, shall raise us from af- 
fliction and from shame. Under the shield of his wisdom 
we shall prosper in peace. 

From afar he called thee, O Israel, from his distant do- 
minions ; in the first of cities, queen of the world, he ga- 
thered thy chiefs around him : the wings of the eagle arc 
spread over the lamb ; their shadow is the shield of the 
weak. 

His voice sounded in our ears, pronouncing mercy ; like 

1 1 



( 242 ) 



a powerful blast it silenced the evil tongues of the wicked. 
The dawn of happiness shone upon us, ushering the bright 
day of Israel's glory. 

May his fame, like his goodness, fill the universe I May 
our AUGUST Emperor live for ever — May our august 
Empress live for ever. This is our constant prayer, the 
dearest wish of our hearts : and may the Eternal pour his 
holy blessings on the Imperial Faynilij, Amciu 



Sitting of the 18th of September^ 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock ; 
he named three deputies to maintain order, and 
announced that MM. Mole, Portalis, jun. andPas^ 
quier, were to come to the assembly with some 
fresh communications from His Royal and Impe- 
rial Majesty. He named MM. Formiggini, Co- 
logna, Cracovia, Gondchaux, Dreyfoss, Rodrigues, 
sen. Scawb, jun. and Lorich, to go to meet them 
and iritroduce them into the hall. 

Atone o'clock the Commissioners of His Majesty 
arrived, and took their places at the table. 

M. Mole, one of them, read the following dis- 
course : 

" Gentlemen, 
His Majesty the Emperor and Kins; is satis- 
fied with your answers; we are commanded by 



( 243 ) 



him to say, that he has approved the sense in 
which they are written ; but the communications 
" we are going to make in his name will prove, 
" much better than our words, to what extent this 
assembly may depend on his powerful protec- 
" tion. 

" In entering this hall for the second time, Gen- 
" tlemen, we are impressed with the same senti- 
ments, and the same ideas which occurred to us 
" when we were first admitted into it. And who 
" could behold without astonishment such a so- 
ciety of enlightened men, chosen among the 
^' descendants of the most ancient people of the 
" world? If one of those, who lived in former 
years, could again visit this world, and were to 
" be introduced into such an assembly, would he 
not think himself brought into the middle of the 
** Holy City, or would he not suppose that a terri- 
" ble revolution had renewed, from the very founda- 
** tions, the state of all human things? In this he 
would not be mistaken, Gentlemen. It is after a 
** revolution which threatened to s^vallow up all 
nations, thrones, and empires, that altars and 
thrones are raised every where fmm their ruins 
io protect theearth; a furious multitude attempt- 
ed to destroy every thing : a man has appeared, 
and has restored every thing; his eye embraces 
the whole world and past centuries even to their 
113 



( 5244 ) 

very origin ; he has seen the Avaiulcring remnant s 
of a nation, rendered as famous by its fall as 
others are by their greatness, scattered over the 

" face of the earth : it was just that he should 
consider their situation ; and it was right to ex- 
pect that these same Jews, who hold such a dis- 
tinguished place in the memory of mankind, 

" should fix the attention of the man who is to 
occupy it eternally. 

" The Jews, exposed to the contempt of nations, 
" and not imfrequently to the avarice of princes, 
" have never, as yet, been treated with justice. 
TJieir customs and their practices kept them afar 
from society, by which they wcrerqectedin their 
turn ; they have always attributed the ill-con- 
duct and the vices, laid to their charge, to the 
humiliating laws which oppressed them. Even 
" to this day they attribute the backwardness for 
" agricultural pursuits and useful employm€nts, 
manifested by some ot* them to the little reliance 
*' which they can place on futurity, after having 
becn,for so many centuries, the sport of circum- 
" stances, and seeing their very existence depend 
on tlie whim of men in power: they will have no 
cause to complain in future, and. this ground of 
defence will be taken from them. 
" His Majesty's inlentioji is, that no plea shall be 
** left to those who may refuse to become citizens; 
" the free exercise of your religious worship and 



( 246 ) 



the full enjoyment of your political rights, are 

" secured to you. But, in return for his gracious 
protection, His Majesty requires a religious 
pledge for the strict adherence to the principles 
contained in your answers. This assembly, con* 
stituted as it is now, could not of itself give such 
a security. Its answers, converted into decisions 
by another assembly, of a nature still more dig« 
nified and more religious, must find a place near 
the Talmud, and thus acquire, in the eyes of the 
Jews of all countries and of all ages, the great** 
est possible authority. It is also the only means 
left to you to meet the grand and generous views 
of His Majesty, and to impart, to all of your 
persuasion, the blessings of this new aera. 

The purity of your law has, no doubt, been 
altered by the croud of commentators, and the 

" diversity of their opinions must have thrown 
doubts in the minds of those who read them. It 
will be then a most important service, conferred 

" on the whole Jewish community, to fix their be* 
lief on those points which have been submitted 
to you. To find, in the history of Israel, an assem* 

^' bly capable of attaining the object now in view, 
we must go back to the Great Sanhedrim, and it 
is the Great Sanhedrim, which His Majesty this 

" day intends to convene. This senate, destroyed 
together with the temple, will rise again to en« 



( 246 ) 



" lighten thepeople it formerly governed: although 
" dispersed throughout the whole world, it will 
bring back the Jews to the true meaning of the 
law, by giving interpretations, which shall set 
aside the corrupted glosses of commentators; it 
will teach them to love and to defend the country 
^* they inhabit; it will convince them that the land, 
where, for the first time since their dispersion, 
they have been able to raise their voice, is intitled 
to all those sentiments which rendered their an- 
" cient country so dear to them. 
" Lastly, the Great Sanhedrim, according to an- 
cient custom, will be composed of seventy mem- 
*' bers, exclusive of the President, Two thirds, or 
thereabout, shall be Rabbies, and among them, in 
" the first place, those who sit among you, and who 
have approved the answers. The other third 
" shall be chosen, by this assembly itself, among 
" its members, by ballot. The duties of the Great 
" Sanhedrim shall be to 9onvert into religious 
*^ doctrines the answers already given by this as^ 
*^ sembly, and likewise those whiqh may result 
from the continuation of your sittings. 
*^ For you will observe. Gentlemen, your mission 
*' is not yet fulfilled ; it will last as long as that of 
**the Great Sanhedrim, which will only ratify 
** your answers and give them a greater weight; 
" His Majesty is, besides, too well satisfied with j^om 



( 247 ) 



" zeal and with the purity of your intentions, to 
" dissolve this assembly before the accomplish* 
" ment of the great work in which you were cal- 
" led to assist. 

In the first instance it is fit that you should 
name by ballot a committee of nine members to 
" prepare, with us, the ground- work of your future 
discussions, and of the decisions of the Sanhe*- 
" drim. You will observe that the Portuguese, 
" German, and Italian Jews, are equally repre- 
" sented in this committee. We also invite you to 
" acquaint the several Synagogues of Europe of 
the meeting of the Great Sanhedrim without 
delay, that they may send deputies able to give to 
government additional information, and worthy 
" of communicating with you.^^ 

After the reading of this discourse, which was 
loudly applauded, the President answered as fol- 
lows: 

" Gentlemen, 
" The new communications you have transmit- 
ted to this assembly from His Imperial and Roy- 
" al Majesty, confirm, more and more, the hopes we 
had entertained of his paternal views in our be- 
half. 

" Any man, endowed with an enlightened mind 



( 248 ) 



and a benevolent heart, might conceive the idea 
of a political reform useful to mankind ; but 
these philanthropic conceptions usually remain 

" dormant ; they are considered as the idle dreams 
of benevolent men, either because these, being 

" too much taken up with the object in view, do 
not possess minds sufficiently expanded to em- 
brace the means of execution, or because these 

" means are generally beyond the reach of private 
individuals. 

" The case is widely different in regard to a 
powerful and venerated Prince, one of those ex- 

** traordinary beings who carry every thing along 
with them in their vortex, who give their name 
to the age in which they reign, and who are in- 
ces3antly hurried by an ardent desire of doing 

" good. 

" When Heaven gi-ants such sovereigns for the 
felicity of nations, no magnanimous designs 
escape them ; there are none which cannot be 
fully carried into execution by their just and 
"powerful determination. 

" By the ascendancy of theiV energy, they gix»e 
** to all their establiijhments a character of strength 
** and stability, which places them, as it were, 
^ above the reach of human instability and of hu- 
man passions. 
Such is the Prince under whose laws we live : 



( 249 ) 



«^ by his bravery he has obtained the appellation of 
Great — that of Beneficent will be the reward of 

♦Vhis benevolence. To him alone belonged the 
power to heal for ever the wounds which 
eighteen centuries of proscriptions and anathe- 
mas had inflicted on the unfortunate children of 
Israel. 

" Ever since their dispersion they have been the 
victims of a false and wavering policy, the sport 
of prejudices and the caprice of the moment ; and 
" it is a matter of wonder that, among somanydif- 
ferent princes who reigned in various countries, 
" even among those who seemed inclined to better 
" our fate, not one has been found who conceived, 
^' in their full extent and greatness, the idea and 
" the means of raising sober, industrious, and active 
" men from the civil and political nullity in which 
" they were kept. Outcasts of society, the butt of 
" calumny, the innocent victims of injushee, has 
uniformly been, for centuries, to suffer in silence 
" their melancholy fate. 

" His Majesty, amidst the great interests which 
" might absorb the whole attentiou of a man, 
" could not look on our situation with indiffe- 
" rence; our regenerationhasocQupiedhisthoughts; 
" this is abundantly proved by th^ new communica- 
tions we have just received. From the source of 
the evil itself the Emperor has drawn forth the 



( 250 ) 

remedy ; in some of the sad remains of tliebaneful 
" effects of ancient oppression, still lurking ^mong 
" the Jews of thenorth,hehasfound an opportunity 
" ofbringing about the happiness of all the Israelites 
" of the western world. It is like the rod of Moses 
" bringing forth living waters from the barren rock. 

" Here let us stop for a while, and consider that, 
" according to the principles of political right, all 
" forms of religion must submit to the Sovereign 
" authority, inasmuch as they can depend from a 
* temporal power: this super-inspection of govern- 
ment is necessary, first, lest they should split 
into different sects ; for if, fiom the nature of 
" things, several established religions are suf- 
" fered in the same state, public order and social 
morality require, on the other hand, that none of 
these religious should branch out into particular 
sects, which would disturb the internal peace of 
empires. 

" To prevent this danger, reason and the great 
law of public interest require that each esta- 
" blished religion should give the sovereign a re- 
" sponsible pledge, and the means of super-inspec- 
" tion; to this end, it must possess men who, by 
" their profession, should study its principles, 
" preach its morality, and preserve its purity, and 
thus become, in a manner, its trustees and its 



( 231 ) 



guardians ; and such are the duties imposed on 
^' all ministers of religious worship. 

" These principles coincide with and sanction 
" the first communications which have been made 
" to us. 

" The question was, at first, to know in what par- 
" ticulars our religious dogmas coincided or were 

at variance with the law of the state, to ascertain 

whether these dogmas, too long considered as in- 
" tolerant and inimical to society at large, were, 
" really, either the one or the other. Supported by 
" the testimony of our conscience by our feelings, 
" and by the principles we profess, we have here, in 

this capital, almost in the presence of His Ma- 
"jestyj expressed our sentiments with the same 
" frankness and the same liberty as if we had been 
" in the bosom of our fimiilies, and without being 
" influenced by the interpellation of the sovereign 
" authority. 

" This reliance, this unlimited confidence in th6 
" wisdom and in the exalted views of His Majesty 
" were certainly no ordinary proofs of our un- 
" bounded veneration* At last the Emperor has 
" acqxiired the certainty that the religious laws of 
" Moses contained, neither in their precepts nor 

in their practice, any which could justify the 
" exclusion of its followers from the enjoyment of 
" the civil and political rights of Frenchmen. 



( 252 ) 



" Birt His Majesty, deeply impressed with the 
principle, lliat, in religious matters, faith is to be 
*' left to its own workings^ is convinced that our 
answers, however satisfactory to him ^ wereinsuf- 
" ficient; that it w as necessary that all the Syna- 
" gogues of France and of Italy should adopt and 
adhere to them, and they should become rules of 
" faith for all the Jewish congregations of the wes- 
tern world. It is in consequence of this tender 
caution, w hich entitles the most powerful Chris- 
tian Prince to our eternal blessing's, that he has 
" determined, in his wisdom, to call together a 
" Great Sanhedrim, as mentioned before, in 
" order togive to the decisions of this assembly that 
" religious sanction w hich they ought to have, 

" Thus the ruler of the fate of Europe, the 
" dispenser of thrones, this Monarch respected 
" above every thing, himself respects the liberty 
*' of religious opinions, and the sacred asylum of 
" conscience. 

'Jluis a new monument is raised to the glory 
*' of His Royal and Imperial Majesty, more last- 
^.^ iiig than marble and adamant. Ilis reign will 
l3c tlie epocha of the regeneration of our bre- 
thren. Europe will be indebted to him for mil- 
" lions of useful citizens ; and, what must be still 
" more grateful to the heart of His Majesty, he 



( 253 ) 

" willb2liold the men indebted to him for their 
" happiness. 

" The more important functions which His Ma- 
jesty now deigns to intrust to our care might 
" appal us, by the more arduous duties they im- 
" pose, had you not promised, Gentlemen Commi^i- 
" oners, to assist us with your extensive know*' 
*' ledge, in order to enable us to meet His Majesty^^} 
" views with proportionate exertions. Estranged 
" from studies i-elative to such elevated subjects, 
both by our situation and by the nature of our 
" occupations, we should only have brought to our 
discussions the plain light of common sense, 
pure intentions, and an unabated zeal ; but these 
" dispositions are not sufficient ; we have need of 
your indulgence, and we claim it as a boon/' 
The President, after this discourse, which was 
applauded by the assembly, informed the Com- 
missioners, that, wishing to take the sense of the 
assembly on the communications they had just 
made, he requested they would retire, for an in- 
stant, into one of the adjoining rooms, wliere the 
result of the deliberation should be transmitted 
to them. 

The Commissionei-s were accompanied by the 
deputies, and when these had resumed their seats, 
the President proposed the following resolution. 



I 254 ) 



The Assembly of theHehrewDeputies o/* France 
and Italy, havwg heard the official Comjnuni- 

" cations^ just rhade by the Commissioners of 
H>s Royal and Imperial Majesty ^ 

" Considering that his Majestj^ the Emperor and 
" King, in allowing the formation of a society 

of a fixed number of doctors in the law and of 
" the most distinguished laymen, to form a Great 
" Sanhedrim, has anticipated the wishes and the 
" wants of all those who profess the religion of 
" Moses in Europe; that his Imperial benevolence 
^^ towards hislsraelitish subjects shews itself every 

day in so unequivocal a manner as to impose 
** on them the obligation of exerting all their ef- 

forts to further the execution of his grand de-< 
" signs, for the welfare of all their brethren of the 
" western world, 

" This assembly resolves, that the President 
" and the officers of the assembly shall wai^ on 

the Commissioners of His Imperial and Royal 
" Majesty, and intreat them to cany to the foot of 

the throne the expression of the deep and un* 
" shaken loyalty which animates every member. 

" That a proclamation shall be addressed by 
" this assembly to all the Synagogues of the French 
" Empire of Italy and of Europe, to acquaint 
" them, that, on the 20th of October next, the 



( 255 ) 

" Great Sanhedrim will open in Paris, under the 
" protection and by the special permission of His 
" Majesty. 

" That the Rabbies, members of this ^embly, 
" shall beinvited to become membersof thisGREAX 
" Sanhedrim. 

" That five and twenty deputies, members of 
" this assembly shall be elected, by ballot, to be 
" also members of it. 

" That His Imperial and Royal Majesty shall 
" be most humbly requested to give the necessary 
" orders, that twenty-nine Rabbies, chosen in the 
Synagogues of his French empire, and in the 
kingdom of Italy, may come to Parid to assist 
*' at the Great Sanhedrim. 

" That this assembly shall proceed by ballot, 
" and by three different lists, to name a Committee 
" of Nine, which committee shall, in concert with 
the Commissioners of His Majesty, prepare such 
matters as are to be submitted to the Great 
" Sanhedrim. 

" That this assembly shall not separate till the 
" Great Sanhedrim has terminated its sittings ; 
" that it requests the Imperial Commissioners to 
" convey to His Imperial and Royal Majesty their 
" humble vrish of being admitted in a body to his 
" presence, to l^y at the foot of the throne theit 
"just tribute of love and respect. 



( 236 ) 

Resolved also that a copy of these resolutions 

sjiall be immediately delivered to the Commissi* 
"oners before the close of the sitting/^ 

These several resolutions m ere translated into 
Italian, and into German, and adopted unanimous-> 
ly amidst loud acclamations. 

Immediately after, the President and the 
ofiicers of the assembly went to meet the Com- 
missioners, and delivered them a copy of the 
above resolutions, requesting them to lay the 
same before His Imperial and Koyal Majesty. 

On returning into the assembly, the President 
proposed immediately to proceed, by ballot, to the 
nomination of the new Committee of Nine, 

Some members thought, that this might be put 
off till the day after; others were for beginning 
immediately. The assembly adopted this last pro- 
position, and the ballot commenced. 

Out of ninety-nine votes, M. Segre obtained 
seventy-eight, M.CoIogna sLxty-seven, and MM. 
Formiggini and Cracovia, thirty-four each. 

In consequence, the President declai-ed MM. 
Segre and Cologna members of the Committee of 
Mine, 

The assembly began afterwards a fresh ballot 
to name a third member among the Italian depu- 
ties. 

Out of one hundred votes M. Cracovia having 



( 257 ) 



obtained fifty-three, and M. Formigini forty- 
seven, the President proclaimed the former a mem^ 
ber of the Committee of Nine. 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to the elec- 
tion of three m-embers to be chosen from amongt: 
th€ deputies of the north. 

Out of ninety-eight votes, M. Jacob Gond- 
chauxobtainedforty-six; M. BeiT-Isaac-Berr, forty- 
six; M. Zinzheinier, forty ; M. J. Lazare, thirty- 
nine; M.Lyon Mai-x, twenty-five; M. Worms, 
twenty ; M. Moise Levi, twenty. 

None having obtained the absolute (32) majori- 
ty, the President deferred the election till next sit- 
ting, and left the chair. 



Sitting of the I9th of September^ 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock; 
he read the law on the mode of ballotting by 
scrutiny; it appeared, from its contents, that the 
nomination of the third Italian member, which 

(32) The French, with their usual mctnphjsical distinctions, have 
iwo kinds of majority ; the absolute majority, requisite in the most 
important elections, must be composed of more than one half of all 
the voters. Tlie relative majority, is that majority which is decided by 
the actual majority of votes among any number of candidates^ without 
reference to the number of voters. 



( 258 ) 



had been made by ballot on the second scrutiny, 
was not regular. (33) 

It was proposed to proceed to the election of the 
German and Portuguese members, and afterwards 
to have a new ballot for a third Italian member. 

Othe*^ demanded that the nomination of the 
third member should be maintained, and that the 
law should only apply to the future nomination of 
German and Portuguese members. 

The President observed that as the law was 
clear on the point, it was impossible to act against 
it in any case. 

Some members insisted on having the nominati* 
on confirmed, because it had been made bana Jidt. 

Others thought, that the law was applicable 
only to electoral assemblies, and not to an assembly- 
like this; that M.Cracovia, having been proclaim- 
ed a member of the Committee by the President, 
his nomination was sanctioned, and it could not be 
annulled; but that, if any doubts were entertained, 
it was fit to consult the Commissioners of His Im- 
perial Majesty on this subject, before the assembly 
should come to any determination. 

(33) The second scrutiny was so far irregular, as the law directs that 
dU the members who have obtaioed votes in the first instance shall be 
balloted for in the second. Those only who have the majority on that 
repetition are balloted for the absolute majority on the third. 



( 259 ) 



A member maintained, that the of the 
electoral assemblies was not applicable to this: 
he mentioned the letter of His Excellency the Mi- 
nister of the Interior, by which the assembly was 
left at liberty to chuse such a mode of election as 
it might prefer. 

Others observed, that the question was to con^ 
form to the law, and not to confirm or reject the 
jjomination of the Italian member ; and that, even 
for the honour of that deputy, his nomination 
ought to be sanctioned by the legal mode. 

A member thought that the law alone could 
confirm or annul the election of M. Cracovia; 
and, till such time as the case was decided, he 
proposed to the assembly to proceed to the nomi*^ 
nation of the German and Portuguese members* 

To remove all doubts, it was proposed to send a 
deputation of three members to the Commission- 
ers of His Imperial and Koyal Msgesty, to know, 
from them, whether the assembly was to begin a 
new ballot to replace the Italian member, whose 
nomination did not appear regular. 

This proposition was adopted by the assembly, 
and the President named MM, Cracovia, sen. Op- 
penheim, and J. Rodrigues, jun. Secretary, to com- 
pose that deputatioil. They immediately left the 
assembly to wait on the Commissioners of His Im* 
perial and Koyal Majesty. 

L L 2 



( 260 ) 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to aiseoond 
ballot to name the three German deputies. Out 
jof one handled votes, M. J. Lazare obtained fifty- 
five; M. Moiso Levy, fifty-five; M. Ljon Marx, 
forty-nine; M. Berr-isaac-Berr, forty-seven; M. 
David Zinzheimer, forty-^ix ; M. Cerl' Jacob Gou* 
cheaux, forty-one. In consequence, MM. J. La- 
zare and Moise Levv , hanng obtained the abso- 
lute majority of votes, the President proclaimed 
them members of the Committee of Nine. 

The three members deputed to the Comnussion« 
crsof His Imperial and Koyal Majesty entered the 
hall. They said, that they had brought the an- 
swer of M. Portalis, the only one of the Commis* 
sion^rs present ; that his idea was, that no opinio 
on could be formed of the legality or illegality of 
the nomination of the third Italian member till 
the minutes of the proceedings of the assembly 
were formally laid before the Commissioners; that 

a nomination might be annulled in two ways 

either at the request of a party interested, or on 
the requisition of the civil power intrusted with 
the care of enforcing the observ ation of the law . 

" The assembly," he said, may confirm this 

nomination, if it thinks it fit; but as the law 
" has not been attended to, should any interested 
parties object to it, the Commissioners would 
** be obliged to talce their objections into consi- 



( 261 ) 

deration, provided they were signed by the ob- 
jecting parties, and transmitted to the Commis- 
sioners by the assembly/^ As to the applicati- 
of the law to the assembly, he said that, although 
it had been made for electoral assemblies, yet it 
was general for all nominations made by ballot, 
and by an absolute majority. M. Fortalis added, 
that it appeared to him to be the best way to leave 
things as they were, until the Commissioners could 
be made officially acquainted with the doubts 
•which had arisen in the assembly as to the validi- 
ty of the nomination of the third Italian member 
for the Committee of Nine. 

The assembly took that advice, and proceeded 
to a third scrutiny to ballot MM. Lyon Marx and 
Berr-lsaac-Ben-, who, in the second scrutiny, had 
obtained the greatest number of votes after MM. 
Jacob L^zare and Moise Levy, who had an abso- 
lute majority. Out of one hundred votes M. Berr 
Isaac-Berr obtained fifty, and M. Lyon Marx for- 
ty-eight ; two votes were null, one of the lists be- 
ing blank, and another containing the name of an 
Italian member. In consequence the President 
proclaimed M. Berr-Isaae-Berr a member of the 
Committee of Nine. 

Tlie assembly continued the ballot for the no- 
mination of the Portuguese members. Out of one 
hundred votes M. Furtado the President obtaiiied 



( 262 ) 



seventy; M. Avigdor, Secretary, fifty-one; 
Cremieux, forty-nine ; M. Abraham Andrade^ 
Rabbi, forty-six ; M. Sabbaton Constantini, thirty- 
five ; M. Marg Foy, sen. thirty-five. MM. Furta^ 
do and Avigdor, having obtained the absolute ma- 
jority of votes, were proclaimed members of the 
Committee of Nine. 

At the repetition of the ballot for the nomina? 
tion of the third Portuguese member, out of 
ninety-four votes M. Cremieux obtained thirty- 
seven; M. Andrade, Rabbi, thirty-seven; M. Marg 
Foy, sen. eleven; and M. Sabbaton Constantini, 
seven. None of these members having obtained 
the absolute majority of votes, it was proposed to 
postpone the third ballot for those two members 
who had the relative majority of votes, to the fol- 
lowing sitting. This proposition was adopted by 
the assembly. 

The President quitted the chair at half past four 
o'clock, and announced that, on Tuesday, the 23d 
inst. the assembly would resume its sittings. 



Sitting of the 23d of September, 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock. 
The minutes of the proceedings of the last sitting 
were read, and adopted with a few slight alterations. 



( 263 ) 



MM. Cadet Carcassonne, Marg Foy, sen. and 
Lyon Marx, were named Commissioners to main- 
tain order in the assembly. The President an- 
nounced that the ballot between MM. Cremieux 
and Andrade, to complete the Committee of Nine, 
stood for the order of the day. Out of ninety- 
eight votes M. Andrade obtained fifty-one, and 
M. Cremieux forty-seven. The former was ac- 
cordingly proclaimed a member of the Commit- 
tee. 

The President after^vards read the draft of a cir- 
cular letter to all the Synagogues of France and 
Italy, as well as to all the Synagogues of the west- 
ern world, to announce the opening of the Sanhe- 
drim in Paris, and to invite them to send thither 
doctors of the law, to concur, by their advice, in 
the benevolent views of His Royal and Imperial 
Majesty. 

The assembly approved the design, but thought 
that, considering the importance of the measure, a 
single reading was not sufficient to sanction a re- 
solution on a document which was to be sent all 
over the world ; and thought it prudent to refer 
the circular letter to a Committee. 

After some observations from several members, 
on the question. Whether it should be referred to a 
n«w committee or to the Committee of Nine ? the 
assembly adopted this last proposition; and the 



( 264 ) 



President requested the members of the Commit- 
tee to meet at his residence, that very evening, to 
settle the plan of the proposed address^ and to this 
ena to add io tlieir number M, Zinzheimer, Rab- 
bi. This measure was approved by the assembly. 

A member proposed, that the address should be 
first written, in Hebrew, and afterwards translated 
into French and (ierman ; remarking that it was 
much more difficult to translate French into He- 
brew than Hebrew into French; that, besides, the 
Chiefs of the Synagogues, to whom the address 
was directed, understood Hebrew much better 
than modern languages ; that the first had a pe- 
culiar turn which made all literal translation ex- 
cessively difficult ; and lastly, that, in every point 
of view, the Chiefs of foreign Synagogues would 
place much more confidence in the address if writ* 
ten in Hebrew. 

After a slight discussion on the proposition of 
the last speaker, the assembly resolved, that the 
address should be translated from the French into 
Hebrew and into German ; and that it trusted to 
the known talents of the Kabbies to give the trans- 
lation all the precision and all the correctness of 
the ideas contained in the original. 

A member thoudit, that this circular address 
ought not to be sent into the countries now at war 
with France. 



( 265 ) 



He was answered that, as the object His Majes- 
ty had in view, in allowing a Great Sanhedrim 
to be assembled under his protection, was evident- 
ly to attach more particularly the Israelites to the 
different countries they inhabit, and as it was the 
interest of every government, whether friendl;f or 
hostile, to adopt the principles which occupy the 
attention of the assembly, there could be no incon- 
veniency in sending the circular letter indiscrimi- 
nately to all the Synagogues of the western world. 
This proposition was referred to the Committee, 
with instructions to confer upon it with the Com- 
missioners of His Imperial Majesty on this subject. 

The President thouglit that no time should be lost 
in chusing, by ballot, the five and twenty lay mem- 
bers, who were to form a part of the Sanhedrim. 

One of the Rabbies thought that, before tlie as- 
sembly should proceed to such nomination, it 
seemed necessary to ascertain what qualifications 
were necessary to become a member of that au- 
gust assembly. 

A deputy observed that he, and several other 
members, had carefully investigated this subject ; 
that he had looked into all the Jewish antiquities 
without being able to find any rule which pre- 
scribed any particular qualifications as indispensa- 
ble to entitle any man to a seat in that august as- 
sembly. Several members supported that opi- 

M M 



( 266 ) 

nion, and the assembly passed to the order of the 
day. 

The assembly began the ballot for the nomination 
of the twenty-five members ; but after reading the 
first four lists, the President, observing that it was 
four o'clock, proposed to adjourn to tiie next day. 

A member, considering the tediousness of a bal- 
lot, in which the lists contained so many names, 
proposed to form several Committees for tlie regis- 
tering of the votes. 

The assemblyadjourned the consideration of this 
proposition to the next day. The President quit- 
ted the chair. 

It is, no doubt, worth while to remark, that the 
importance of thefunctions attributed to the Com- 
mittee of Nine has made the assembly most parti- 
cularly scrupulous in the choice of the members 
who were to compose it ; and it may safely be said, 
that the expectations raised in consequence have 
been completely fulfilled. 

The Italian llabbies, MM. Segre, Cologna, and 
Cracovia, are all three equally distinguished by 
their virtues, by their zeal, their talents, and their 
learning. The Rabbies of that country have 
been the first to give the example of literary and 
historical pursuits, connected v.ith theological 
learning, and a profound knowledge of the Holy 
^Vritings. The German memhers are all three 



( 267 ) 

equally cbmnlendable for the qualities of the 
mind and of the heart. M. Berr-Isaac-Berr has 
been one of the first in France to claim for the 
Jews the indefeasible rights of citizens, and has 
strenuously laboured to make them worthy of these 
rights, by his example and by his writings. The 
productions of M. Michel Berr, his son, prove that 
he has rendered his zeal and his talents liereditary 
in his family, eoually distinguished by the learn- 
ing and polished manners of those who compose 
it. M. Moise Levy joins to an extensive fund of 
knowledge, and to various talents, the most ardent 
zeal for the interest of his Israelitish brethren ; he 
belongs to one of those Jewish families, equally 
respectable and respected, which, at all times, have 
ranked high in public esteem. M. Jacob Lazare 
joins active zeal to extensive learning: and 
lastly, the choice of the members taken among 
the Portuguese, completes the proof of the dis- 
cerning spirit of the assembly. The talents and 
the qualities of M. Furtado, the President, the 
zeal and the learning of M. Avigdor, Secretary, 
the profound erudition of M. Andrade, Rabbi, 
fulfil all the expectations which that nomination 
excited. The choice of such men may well justi- 
fy the most sanguine hopes entertained by all the 
Israelites of the happy result of the momentous 
undertaking which the Committee of Nine has to 

M M 3 



{ 268 ) 



commence and to complete under the directioti of 
the Imperial Commissioners, so worthy themselves 
of an unlimked confidence, and so well entitled to 
general esteem. 



Sitting of September 24, 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock, 
and named as Commissioners to maintain order 
in the assembly, MM. Gumpel Levi, Wittersheim, 
and J. Benjamin. 

One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
sitting of the 23d which were adopted. 

The ballot for the nomination of the twentj^-five 
lay members, who are to form a part of the Great 
Sanhedrim, was resumed : to proceed with more 
dispatch, it was pi-oposed to form three Commit- 
tees to register the votes, one of the Scrutineers 
presiding over each. The assembly adopted this 
proposition : and the President named for the first 
Committee, MM. Emilie Vitta, Berr-Isaac-Berr, 
and May, of Paris; for the ^cond, MM. Theo- 
dore Cerf-Berr, Benjamin, and Castro, jun. ; for 
the third, MM. Olry-Hayem- Worms, Cerf-Jacob 
Gondchaux, and Baruch Cerf-Berr : fit four o'clock 
the registering of the votes was concluded. 

A member demanded that, before the result 



( 269 ) 



should be known, the votes should be reckoned, ia 
order to ascertain that the ballot was correct. 
There were, he said, one hundred deputies, which, 
at twenty-five votes each, made two thousand five 
hundred votes. This proposition was adopted, 
and the number of votes, registered in the three 
committees, amounted only to two thousand three 
hundred and eighty two. A member, seeing so 
great a diflference, proposed to annul the scrutiny, 
which was adopted. It being late, it was proposed 
to adjourn the new scrutiny for the nomination 
of the twenty-five lay members of the Great 
Sanuedrim to Friday, the 26th inst. ; thispropo- 
fiition was adopted. 

To prevent the recurrence of similar errors, it 
was proposed to form five Committees instead of 
three ; that each Committee should carefully keep 
the lists, to compare them when necessary. That 
one member only should be called at a time to de- 
liver his votes; that his list should be opened be- 
fore it was put in the box, to ascertain the number 
of names it contained. The assembly approved 
these propositions. 

A member demanded the reading of the Ad- 
dress to the Synagogue^ of Europe, which had been 
referred to the Committee of Nine. 

The President i-ead it. 

It was as follows: 



( 270 ) 



Our dear Brethren in Israel, 
* * The Most High clearly manifests his benevo- 
" lent designs in our behalf; a great event is pre- 
" paring. What our fathers had not seen for a 
" long course of centurif»s, what we could never 
expect to see ourselves, is now on the point of 
exciting the wonder of the world. 
" The 20th of October is the day fixed for 
the opening of the Great Sanhedrim, in the 
" capital of one of the most powerful Christian 
" empires, under the protection of the immortal 
Prince who governs it. 

Paris is to be the scene of this great event, 
" for ever memorable, and which shall be, for the 
scattered remnants of the children of Abraham, 
** a new aera of deliverance and of felicity. 

We this day incite you to partake of our joy, 
and to share those sentiments which our com-r 
mon origin and our common religion cannot 
" fail to excite, and which are deeply impressed in 
" our own hearts. 

** Who would not admire with us the impene- 
" trable designs of that Providence who, by means 
unknown to our weakness, changes the face of 
human affairs, consoles the afflicted, raises the 
humble from the dust, sets a term to those trials 
^* decreed in his wisdom, and excites the esteem 



( 271 ) 



and the benevolence of nations towards those 
whose hearts have remained faithful to his law! 

Since oar dispersion, numberless changes have 
manifested the vicissitude of human aiTairs : aa*' 
" tionshave been successively overwhelmed by na<« 
tions, and all have been afterwards mingled and 
heaped on each other; we alone have withstood 
** the torrent of ages and of revolutions. 

" Every thing seemed to announce for us, in 
*^ Europe, a happier state, and a less precarious 
" existence. But it was only a distant though 
" cheering prospect : to see those hopes realized, 
it was necessary that, from the midst of public 
tempests, from the tumultuoas fluctuations of 
an immense people, one of those powerful men, 
round whom nations rally from an instinct of 
self-preservation, should, conducted by Provi- 
" dence, raise his head above the roaring elements. 

" This benevolent and protecting genius wishes 
" to do away every humiliating distinction be- 
" tween us and his other subjects. His piercing 
eye has discovered, in our Mosaic code, those 
" principles of strength and of stability by which 
" it has stood the test of ages, and which formerly 
** gave our fathers that patriarchal simplicity, still 
an object of veneration in present times, and 
that heroical character so glowingly pourtrayed 
" in our history. 



( 272 ) 

" In his wisdom he has thought it consdndnt to 

his paternal views to allow the convocation of a 
** Great Sanhedrim in Paris. The functions of 
" this body, and the objects it is to have in view, 
" are clearly laid down in the eloquent discourse 
" delivered by the Commissioners of His Imperial 

and Royal Majesty. We send it to j^u^ dear 
" Brethren, that you may yourselves judge of the 
" spirit in which it is written, and see that the sole 
" object in view is to bring us back to the prac- 
" tice of our ancient virtues, and to preserve our 
" holy religion in all its purity. 

" We now call upon you to assist your Brethren 
" with your knowledge, as the means of giving a 
" greater weight to the decisions of the Great 
" Sanhedrim, and of happily establishing among 
" us uniformity of doctrine, more consonant to 
the civil and political laws of the several states 
" which you have adopted as your country. 

" Your advice will be useful to us ; and we are 
" authorized by government to claim your assist- 
" ance. 

" Be not deaf to our voice, dear Brethren ! Se- 
^ led among you men known by their wisdom, 
the friends of truth and of justice, and able to 
assist us, in the completion of this great work. 
" Send them to take their places among us, that 



( 273 ) 



their wise and enlightened views, maj conduce 
" to general advantage. 

It must be a pleasing task for all the Israelites 
" of Europe to concur in the regeneration of their 
Brethren, as it must be glorious, for us, in par- 
ticular, to have fixed the attention of an illustri- 
" ous sovereign. 

" Never had men on earth motives equally pow- 
erful to love and to admire this sovereign, for 
none could ever boast of the effects of so signal a 
" justice, so marked a protection. To i-estore to 
" society a people commendable for private virtues, 
" to awake men to a sense of their dignity, by in- 
" suring to them the enjoyment of their rights, 
" such are the favours for which we are indebted 
" to Napoleon the Great. 

" The Sovereign Ruler of kingsand nations has 
" given him to this empire, to heal its wounds, 
to calm its political commotions, aggrandize its 
" destinies, and fix our own, and to be the delight 
" of two nations, which shall for ever bless the day 
" when they placed their happiness in his hands, 
" already intrusted with their defence. 

(Signed) " Fl RTADO, 

*' RODRIGUES, AviGDOR, 

** Secretaries" 



( 274 ) 



The assembly applauded the sentiments con- 
tained in this address, and adopted it unanimously. 

The President afterwards proposed to take into 
consideration the indemnities to be granted totlie 
deputies by their brethren in the departments; 
the assembly approved the plan almost unani- 
mously, and resolved, that the President should 
send it in a circular letter to all the departments 
of the French empire, and of the kingdom of Ita- 
ly, which have deputies in Paris, after having first 
obtained the approbation of His Excellency the 
Minister of the Interior. 

A member proposed, that measures should be 
taken to send into the countries at war with France 
the proclamation addressed to the Synagogues of 
Europe. 

Another proposed to consult on this subject the 
Commissioners of His Majesty the Emperor and 
King, and to conform to their directions. The 
assembly approved this proposition, and directed 
the Committee of Nine to confer with the Com- 
missioners on this subject. 

The President quitted the chair at half past 
four, and announced that he should take it on the 
2(jth inst. at eleten o'clock. 



( 376 ) 



Sitting of September 26, 1806. 

The President took the chair at eleven o'clo6k ; 
he named, as Commissioners to maintain order, 
MM. Auguste Lorrich and Isaac Rodrigues. He 
announced that the nomination, by ballot, of 
twenty-five lay members, who are to form a part 
of the Great Sanhedrim, stood for the order of 
the day. 

A member observed, that, before the assembly 
should proceed to a new ballot, it was proper to 
decide whether the fii'st was irregular, as had been 
stated. 

Another maintained that the former ballot was 
Kgular, and that the hundred and eighteen votes 
wanting in the gross calculation, made by multi- 
plying one hundred by twenty-five, could not af- 
ford a motive for annulling the nomination of 
those who had obtained an absolute majority ; he 
therefore demanded that the assembly should an* 
nul the resolution adopted at the last sitting, and 
that the members already named should form a 
part of the Sanhedrim. 

Others observed, that the assembly had already 
annulled the ballot made at the last sitting ; that 
it found on its results sufiicient motives for that 
resolution, and moved for the order of the day. 

N N 3 



( 276 ) 

It was maintained, on the other side, that a bal- 
lot Gould not be considered as void, because the 
number of votes was less than that of voters. 
That nullity followed only in case the number of 
votes exceeded that of voters. 

Other members combat ted that opinion, and pre- 
tended that any difference, in more or in less, ren- 
dered the ballot void. They again called for the 
order of the day. The President put it to the 
vote, and it was adopted. 

Some deputies objected to the order of the day 
as it stood, and protested against the decision; 
they proposed to adjourn the sitting, and to refer 
the whole of the affair to the wisdom of the Com- 
missioners of His Majesty. 

It was answered, that a question already deci- 
ded required no further examination. The order 
of the day was again called for; the President 
put it again to the vote, and it was again adopted 
by the majority. 

One of the Secretaries called over the names of 
the deputies ; they, one by one, went to the table, 
and put their lists into a box. 

The Scrutineers registered the votes in propor- 
tion as they were given in : there were ninety- 
eight voters. The result of the ballot was as fol- 
lows: 



( 277 ) 



vo 


T£9. 


For M. Berr-Isaac-Berr, deputy of La 




Meurthe . - . 


68 


Jacob Benjamin, (34) deputy of 




Mont-Tonnerre 


72 


Mayer Nathan, deputy of La Sarre 


60 


Isaac Samuel Avigdor, deputy of 




Les Alpes Maritimes 


76 


Lipman Cerf-Berr, deputy of tbe 




Upper Rhine - 


72 


Israel Cohen, deputy of I/Adige 


77 


Theodoi-e Cerf-Berr, deputy of La 




Seine . • - - 


75 


Saul Cremieux, deputy of La 




Seine . - - - 


72 


Furtado, deputy of La Gironde 


86 


Aaron Friedberg, deputy of Mont 




Tonnerre - 


64 


Formigini, deputy of L^Olona 


74 


Cerf Jacob Gondchaux, deputy 




of La Moselle 


75 


Aaron Latis, deputy of L'Adria- 




tique . - . . 


64 


Herz Loeb Lorich, deputy of 




Mottt-Tonnerr^ 


67 



(34) He was afterwards replaced by M, Abraham Cohen, deputy of 
tbfc Lower Rhine— and why is not stated. 



( 278 ) 



VOTES. 

For M. David Levi, deputy of Po 84 

jVIarg Foy, deputy of Lower Py- 
renees . - - . 76 

Lyon Marx, deputy of Rliin et 

Moselle ... 69 

Isaac Rodrigues, deputy of La Gi- 

ronde .... 74 

Rodrigues, jun. deputy of La 

Seine .... 62 

Aaron Schmoll, deputy of La 

Seine ... - 71 

5. Wittersheim, deputy of the 

Lower Rhine - 77 

Olrj' Hayem Worms, deputy of 

La Seine ... 69 

Benoit Fano, deputy of Mincio 86 

Daniel Levi, (35) deputy of the 

Lower Rhine - - 74 

The President, in consequence, proclaimed them 
membersof the Great Sanhedrim, and requested 
the assembly to proceed to a fresh ballot, to name 
a twenty-fifth member. The result of that bal- 
lot gave forty-eight votes to M. Constantini, and 
forty-four to M. Emilie Vitta. 

(35) Replaced by M. Baruch Ccrf^Bcrr, deputy of the Lower Rliini . 



( 279 ) 



The President announced that a ballot would 
take place between these two members. There 
were only seventy-two voters for this third ballot: 
M. Constantini obtained forty-eight votes, and M. 
Vitta twenty-four. The President, in conse- 
quence, proclaimed M. Constantini, deputy for 
the department of Bouche du Rhone, the twenty- 
fifth member for the Great Sanhedrim, and 
quitted the chain 



Sitting of the 9th of December, 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock. 
He named, as Commissioners to maintain order^ 
MM. Baruch-Cerf-Berr, Felix Levi, and Dreyfoss. 

He announced, that a report of the Committee 
of Nine stood for the order of the day, the object 
whereof was to propose a series of regulations for 
the organization of the Mosaic worship, on which 
the assembly was to deliberate. 

The President then requested one of thesecreta* 
ries, member of the Commission, to read the report. 

REPORT. 

" Gentlemen, 
" Your Committee is about to give you the re- 
" port of a plan agreed upon with the Commis« 



( 280 ) 



** sioners of His Imperial Majesty ^ and which is 
" to be submitted to your decision* 

It contains a series of regulations intended to 
" organize our religious worship. It is the result of 
" commmiications given by your Committee, and 

of the instructions given by His Majesty to the 

Commissioners intrusted with tlie management 

of affairs which concern you. 

" Before we proceed further, I am directed by 
" your Committee to say, that it is an absolute 
" duty for every one of its members publicly to 
" declare that they have experienced, from theper- 

sons thus invested with His Majesty's confi- 

dence, amenity, good advice, benevolence, and 
" a constant and sincere wish to promote the salu- 
*' tary measures we thought it our duty to pro- 

pose. 

" If the Mosaic religion, its dogmas, and its 
*' pi-actices, had been as perfectly known to go- 
" vernment as the other forms of religion, our as- 
" sistance would have been altogether useless. 
, " Much better informed than we are ourselves of 
" what may tend to our happiness, government 

might have decided without calling us to Paris. 
" i he regulations which 1 am going to submit to 
" you formed an essential part of the objects for 

which this assembly ivas convened. 
Already more than once, Gentlemen, you have 



( 281 ) 



had opportunities of being convincedi that the 
" government, under whicti we have the happiness 
*^ to live, was far from attempting to act contrari* 
ly to our consciences by attacking, in the leasts 
very ancient religious opinions, or by shocking, 
" in the smallest degree, that sentiment of predi- 
" liction which men in general entertain for things 
they hold sacred from their very infancy* 
" And, in consequence, whatever could inter- 
fere with our religious dogmas, or with our reli- 
" gious practices, has been carefully avoided. We 
" have been consulted on every point connected 
*' with our faith ; and in none of the articles of 
these regulations will you find any point which 
either directly or indirectly militates against it. 
" You will, on the contrary, easily perceive that 
" now, for the first time, the Mosaic worship 
emerges from the obscurity in which it has been 
" involved these two thousand years ; that it 
emerges from that almost complete state of diis- 
organization in which it had been ever since the 
" revolution; that it now acquires a legal exist- 
ence; that its ministers are acknowledged by 
" public authority; their functions are fixed and 
settled ; their salary assured, and their influence 
directed to its true destination. 
" These regulations, while they preserve the Mosa- 
ic worship in all its purity, are far from encroach* 



( 282 ) 



** ing in the least on your civil and political rights. 
They afford, in general, and in every particu* 

" lar, aftiU confirmation of what you heard in your 
sitting of the 18th of September from the Com- 
missioners of His Majesty — The free exercise of 
yowr religious tvcrskip and Ike full enjoyment of 
your political rights are secured to you. But, in 

" return for his gracious protection, His Majesty 

" requires a religious pledge for the strict adhe- 
rence to the principles contained in your an- 
swers. 

" You know, Gentlemen, that such a pledge win 
" be found, in the doctrinal decisionsof the Great 
Sanhedrim, grounded on your answers. In the 
plan of regulations which is about to be sub- 
" mitted to you, and vt4iich, as I have already ob- 
" served, is the result of the instructions given by 
" His Majesty to the Commissioners, and of the 
" views of your Committee, every thing has been 
calculated with liie intention to give and 
strengthen such a pledge. 
" The paternal instructions of His Migesty, in 
this ipespect, cleariy evince his magnanimous 
design of raising an ancient and celebrated na* 
tion from the state of abasement in which it W9B 
" unjustly retained by prejudice. E%'ery thing is 
<^ disposed to secure the attainment of this phi« 
lanthropic object. 



( 283 ) 

" The experience of the past made you justly 
apprehend whatever tended to establish distinc- 
" tions, either in opinion or in deeds, between you 
" and the rest of Frenchmen. You had marked 
with grief tliat those different shades in man* 
" ners greatly widened the breach caused by the 
difference in religion^ and had an evident tend^ 
" ency to keep us farther removed from social in- 
" tercourse, and to perpetuate our forlorn sttUe, 
" Nothing like it is to be apprehended now. As 
" subjects of the French empire or of the king- 
" dom of Italy, the laws of both states contain no 
exceptions affecting us. As subjects of a particu- 
lar religion, the public authority places it imme* 
diately under its inspection^ and thus gives it a 
•* legal existence. As object s of the august protec- 
tion of the prince, we find, in his benevolence, a 
** sure pledge of experiencing, in fature, like sen- 
timents in the breasts of our fellow-citizens. His 
" Majesty himself has been pleased to declare, 
through his Commissioners, that, till now, you 
" had not been treated with justice. Where could 
" we find stronger grounds of Heliance than in the 
avowed intentions of so magnanimous a prince ? 

Who among us but sees and feels all the ad- 
vantages of our new liituation? who but finds in 
it an incitement to emulation, to loyalty, and to 
the most enthusiastic attachment to our country 
o o 2 



( 284 ) 

^ and to its illustrious ruler? Who, in short, does 

" not wish, most ardently, to prove himself worthy 

** of such favours? 

" The means are sure and easy; let the Israelit- 
ish youth take up again the profession of arms, 

** in which our ancestors shone so conspicuously ; 

" let them be numbered among the brave who are 
more particularly devoted to the service of a so- 
vereign who has so many rights to our most un- 
limited services. 

" It is, then, evident to every one, that the firm 
" and avowed intention of His Imperial and Royal 
" Majesty, is to restore our Israelitish brethren to 

the dignity of men and of citizens. As the plan 
" of regulations I am going to present contains all 
" the encouragement which benevolence and jus- 

tice could dictate for our protection, your Com- 
" mittee would think it an insult on your wisdom to 

doubt, for an instant, of its beings adopted in all 
" its parts." 

The plan is as follows: 

The Deputies composing the assembly of the Israelites^ 
convened by the Imperial decree of tlie 30th of May ^ 
having heard the report of the Committee of Nine^ 
named to prepare the ground-work of the delibera^ 
tions of the assembly^ considering what plan might 
Ifepresented to their brethren of France and of Italy 



K 285 ) 



for the better regulation of their religioiis wmihip 
and for the internal police of the same^ has imani- 
mously (36) adopted the following. 

PLAN. 

Art. I. A Synagogue and a Consistory shall be 
established in every department which contain^ 
two thousand individuals professing the religion of 
Moses. 

II. In case a department should not contain two 
thousand Israelites, the jurisdiction of the Consis- 
torial Synagogue shall extend over as many of the 
adjoining departments as shall make up the said 
number. The seat of the Synagogue shall always 
be in the most populous city. 

HI. In no case can there be more than one Con* 
sistorial Synagogue for each department. 

IV. No particular Synagogue can be established, 
but after being proposed by theConsistorialSyna* 
gogue, to the competent authority. Each psurticu* 

(36) This anticipation of the unanimity of the assembly, which, in fact, 
was very far from reIishio|; the plan, must appear rather strange to aa 
FiH^UshmaD, 



( 286 ) 



lar Synagogue shall be superintended by a Rabbi 
and two elders, who shall be named by thecompe* 
tent authorities. 

V. There shal? be a Grand Rabbi in each Con- 
sistorial Synagogue. 

VI. The Consistories shall be composed, as much 
as possible, of a grand Kabbi, and of three other 
Israelites, two of whom shall be chosen among the 
inhabitants of the town which is the Seat of the 
Consistory. 

VII. The oldest member shall be President of the 
Consistory. He shall take the title of Elder qf the 
Consistory. 

VIII. In each Consistorial district the compe- 
tent authority shall name twenty-five Notables 
among the braelites who pay the largest contri- 
butions. 

IX. These Notables shall name the members of 
the Consistory, who must be approved by the com- 
petent authority. 



X. No one can be a member of the Consistory 
if be is not thirty years of age, if be has been a 



( 287 ) 



bankrupt, unless he honourably paid afterwards^ 
or if he is known to be a usurer. 

XI, Every Israelite, wishing to settle in France 
or in the kingdom of Italy, shall give notice of his 
intention, within three months after his arrival, to 
the Consistory nearest his place of residence. 

XII. The functions of the Consistory shall be-« 
1st. To see that the Rabbies do not, either in 

public or in private, give any instructions 
or explanations of the law, in contradiction 
to the answers of the assembly confirmed 
by the decisions of the Great SANHEDtiisr. 

2nd. To maintain order in the interior of 
Synagogues, to inspect the administration 
of particular Synagogues, to i^ettle the 
assessment, and to regulate the use of the 
sums necessary for the maintenance of the 
Mosaic worship, and to see that for causes 
or under the pretence of religion, no pray- 
ing assembly be formed without being ex- 
pressly authorized 

3d. To encourage, by all possible ineam^, the 
Israelites of the Consistorial district tofoI« 
low useful pitifessions, and to report to 
government the names of those who cannot 



( 288 ) 



renderasatisfactoiy account of their means 
of subsistence. 
4th. To give annually to government the 
number of the Israelitish conscripts within 
the district. 

XUL There shall be formed in Paris a Central 
Consistory, composed of three Kabbie^ and two 
other Israelites. 

XIV. The Rabbies of the Central Consistory 
shall be selected from the Grand Rabbies, and the 
rules contained in the tenth article shall apply 
to all others. 

XV. A member of the Central Consistory shall 
go out every year, but he may always be re-elected. 

XVI. The vacant place shall be filled by the 
remaining members. The member elect shall not 
take his place till his election is approved by go- 
vernment. 

XVII. The functions of the Central Consistory 
are, 

1st. To correspond with the Consistories. 
2nd To watch over the execution of every 
article of the present regulations. 



( 289 ) 



3d. To denounce to the competent authority 
all inA*actions of these said regulations, 
either through negligence or through de- 
sign. 

4th. To confirm the nomination of Rabbies, 
and to propose to the competent authority, 
when necessary, the removal of ilabbies 
and of members of Consistories. 

XVIII. The Grand Rabbi shall be named by 
the twenty-five Notables, mentioned in the eighth 
article, 

XIX. The new Grand Rabbi elect shall not 
enter into his functions till he has been approved 
by the Central Consistory. 

XX. No Rabbi can be elected— 

1st. If he is not a native of France or of Ita- 
ly, or if he has not been naturalized. 

2d. ^If he does not produce a certificate of his 
abilities, signed by three Frenchmen, if he 
is a Frenchman, and by three Italians, if he 
is an Italian: and from the year 1820, if he 
does not understand the French language 
in France, and the Italian in the kingdom 
of Italy. The candidate who joins some 
praficiency in Greek or Latin to the know- 



( 290 ) 



ledge the Hebrew language, will be 
preferred, all things besides being equal. 

XXI. The functions of the Kabbies are— 
1st. To teach religion. 

2d. To inculcate the doctrines contained in 
the decisions of the Gfi^£AT Sanhedrim. 

3d. To preach obedience to the laws, and 
more particularly to those which relate to 
the defence of the country ; to dwell eq)e- 
cially on this point every year, at the epoch 
of the conscription, from the moment go- 
vernment shall first call upon the people 
tiU the law is fully executed. 

4th. To represent military service to the Is- 
raelites as a sacred duty, and to declare to 
them, that, while they are engaged in it, the 
law exempts them from the practices which 
might be found incompatible with it. 

5th. To preach in the Synagogues, and to re- 
cite the prayers which are publicly made 
for the £mp£ror and the Imperial Family. 

6th. To celebrate marriagesand to pronounce 
divorces, without, on any pretence, acting 
in either ease, till the parties wIk) require 
their ministry have produced due pir o's of 
the act having been sanctioned by tie civil 
authority* 



( 291 ) 

XXn. The salary of the Rahbies, meirbers of 
the Ceirtral Consistory, is fixed at six thousand 
Uvres; that of the Grand Rabbies of Consistorial 
Synagogues at three thousand livres; that of th# 
Rabbies of particular Synagogues shall be fixed 
by the community of Israelites which shall ha?^ 
required the establishment of such a Syna« 
gogue ; it cannot be less than a thousand livrai. 
The Israelites of the several districts may^ vote an 
augmentation of these salaries. 

XXItl. Each Consistory shall present to the 
competent authority a plan of assessment among^ 
the Israelites of the district for the sums necessary* 
to pay the stipends of the Rabbies. The other 
expenees of worship shall be fixed and assessed by 
the competent authority, on the demands of the 
Consistories. The salary of the central Rabbies 
shall be proportionally paid out of the sums levied 
on the several districts. 

XXIV. Each Consistory shall name an Israelite, 
not a Rabbi, nor member of the Consistory, to 
receive the sums which shall be levied in the dis« 
trict. 

XXV. This Treasurer shall pay quarterly the 
salary of the Rabbies, and the other esxpeucee of 

pjp 2 



( 292 ) 

worship, upon orders, signed by at least three 
members of the Consistory. He shall give his ac- 
count every year, on a fixed day, in a full assem- 
bly of the Consistory. 

XXVI. Every Rabbi who, after the promulga- 
tion of the present regulations, shall be uuemr 
ployed, and will clioose, nevertheless, to remain in 
France or in Italy, shall be bound to adhere for- 
mally, and to sign a declaration of his adherence 
to, the decisions of the Great Sanhedrim. The 
copy of this declaration shall be sent to the Cen- 
tral Consistory, by the Consistory which shall have, 
received it. 

XXVII. The Rabbies who are members of the. 
Great Samhedrim shall be, as much as possible, 
preferred to all others, to fill the places of Grand 
Rabbies. 



Plan of an ArrSti. 

" The assembly of the Israelites of the French 
" empire, and of the kingdom of Italy, having 
** heard the report of its Committee of Nine, and 
" having adopted altogether the plan of regula- 

tions it has proposed ; considering that the close 



( 298 ) 



of their sitting is not very distant; and that it 
has thought it a duty to call the attention of His 
" Majesty on several measures, wnich it thinks 
calculated to promote the regeneration of the 
Jews, although these said measures could not 
all be included in the said plan of regulations; 
considering that among these measures, none 
could be more important than that which tends 
to enforce among the Israelites the obligation o£ 
military service, which the country has a right 
to require from all her children; considering, 
lastly, that it is the duty of all Israelites in the 
" French empire and the kingdom of Italy to shed 
" iheir blood in battle for the cause of France, 
with the same zeal and the same bravery which 
formerly animated their ancestors against th» 
^' enemies of the Holy City, and to seek every op- 
" portunity of proving worthy of the favours 
" which a great prince now deigns to confer on 
" them ; , 
*' Resolves, 

That the Commissioners of His Imperial and 
Royal Majesty shall be requested to lay at the 
foot of the throne the dutiful expressions of its 
unbounded and eternal gratitude. 

That the Commissioners shall likewise be re- 
quested to acquaint the Emperor with thehum- 
" ble wish of the assembly, that His Majesty, 



( »4 ) 



^ b6 f Ie»fted to crown all his f^^^nirs by edntri- 
^ bating something to the salary of the Rabbies, 
^ and by directing the local authorities of the 
•* French empire, and of the kingdom of Italy, to 
" concert measures with the Consistories, that these 
last might, by their interference and their zeal, 
remove the remaining objections which might 
• still prevent the Israelitish youth from following 
^ the noble career of arm^, and thus insure an 
exact obedience to the laws of the conscription.'* 

When the reading was concluded, a member 
made several observations on various articles of 
the Regulations. 

He requested that a clause might be inserted in 
the second article, enacting, that the Israelites of 
a department should always belong to the same 
consistorial district, and that, in no case, the in- 
habitants of the same department should belong 
to different districts. 

That the assessment of the local expenditure 
should be made by the individuals belonging to 
each particular Synagogue, or by the Consistory, 
in case they could not agree. 

That when a Consistory should undertake the 
assessment of the charges of the district, each de- 
partment should have a right to send a deputy to 
assist at that assessment. 



( 293 ) 



Thst it sfaottld be enacted, in the tw^tfa arti-> 
cle, that the maintenance of the Grand Rabbi ons- 
\y should be charged on the district at Inrge^ fAtiA 
^at all other expences should be paid hj those 
who might think proper to incur them ; that eireh 
i»ne third of the salary of the Grand Rabbi should 
be paid, in the first instance, hy the inhabitants of 
the place where the seat of the Consistory is fixedf 
tind who shall, besides, fumii^ their share of tbe 
temaindev. The reason he gave fOr this t^as, thai) 
by the residence of the Grand Habbi, Aey were 
dispensed with maintaining an under Rabbi, who 
would be necessary for each particular Sytu^oigue. 

A member said, that the observations of the iert 
speaker were directed to details which might be 
taken into consideration by the local Consistories^ 
but that they were not sufficiently important to 
warrant any alteration in the general regulation. 
He called for the order of the day. 

Another member owned, that the obs^rviitione 
of the first speaker were mostly directed to de* 
tails ; some, however, were wdl intitled to the at^ 
tention of the assembly. He opposed the Order of 
the day. 

The President pot the order of the ikj to the 
vote; it was adopted; and a m«mb«r <3f (he Com* 
mittee of iNine obtained leave to speak. 



( 296 ) 



This member declared that he thought himself 
bound to renew in this assembly the objections he 
had already made in the Committee to several 
clauses of the Regulations, as unbecoming, ineffi- 
cient^ and inadmissible. That the word usurer^ 
which concludes the tenth article, tended, in a 
manner, to confirm the prevalent prejudice, that 
usury was an inherent vice of men of the Jewish 
persuasion, altho' it was to be solely attributed to 
indinduals, and not to the religion, which strongly 
condemned it, as had been proved in the answers 
of the assembly. That, because usurers were to 
be found in some departments, a phrase so vague 
and so unbecoming ought not to find a place in a 
series of Regulations which were to be common to 
all the Israelites of the French empire and of the 
kingdom of Italy. He thought that nothing could 
justify the clause of the twelfth article, which en- 
acted that the Consistories should report to govern- 
ment the names of those who could not render a 
satisfax^tory account of their means of subsistence* 
He thought this the duty of a police officer, and 
that it could not, ought not, to form a part of the 
functions of Consistories. That those assemblies, 
whose seat would be, in many cases, far removed 
from several members of the district, could not, 
without excessive difficulty, obey the injunction 



t ^ ) 



Mluded to. And lastly, that Consistories could 
not be burthened with police functions, foreign to 
religion, and which, besides, it would be impossi'* 
ble for them to fulfil ; and that, under that three?* 
fold point of view, the clause was inadmissible. 
He spoke afterwards against the clause of the same 
article which enacts that Consistories shall, ever^ 
year, report the number of Israelites within their 
district liable to the conscription. Shall the 
Consistories,'^ he said> " keep a register of the 
birth of everj'^ Jew in their district?'' He ob* 
served that the law of conscription called equally 
upon all Frenchmen, whatever religion they pro* 
fessed ; that, from the information conveyed by se- 
veral deputies, it appeared that the young Israel- 
ites, liable to that common duty, AilfiUed it as 
well as others; that this clause would tend to esta- 
blish a supposition that they were less devoted to 
their country than other Frenchmen; that such a 
supposition w as unfounded ; that, besides, if some 
were refractory, the law could enforce obedience; 
that it must not be believed that Consistories have 
more powerful means to induce the youth to follow 
the career of arms than the local authorities them- 
selves, which have the immediate inspection of the 
inhabitants of their particular districts ; that, td 
fix the attention of government more particularly 
on a class of men following any given religion, was, 

QQ 



( 298 ) 

in fact, establishing a civil difference on account 
,of a religious one ; and, in this point of view, he 
thought th6 clause inadmissible, as it was ineffici- 
ent in every other. Lastly, he observed^ that, as 
two-fifths of the members of Consistories were 
Rabbies, to direct them to watch that Kabbies 
should fulfil their duties, was, in fact, giving the 
power of inspection to those whose conduct was 
to be inspected. He also expressed a wish that 
the twenty-second, twenty-third, twenty-fourth, 
.and twenty-fifth articles should be replaced by a 
single one in these words : The expences of worship 
jshall be provided for. He concluded by moving 
the amendments alluded to in his. observations. 

Another member thought that the Regulations 
contained many equivocal clauses ; he demanded 
that the necessary amendments at least should be 
adopted, and a new plan of resolutions proposed. 

One of the members of the Committee of Nine 
defended the proposed Regulations in the m hole 
and in their details. He maintained that none of 
the clauses were injurious to civil liberty. 

He observed that the members who argued 
against separate clauses took a wrong view of the 
question, because they considered their Israelitish 
brethren, in general, to be, not such as they really 
were, but such as they ought to be, which was far 
from being the case in many parts of France. He 



( 299 ) 

thought diat, while the benevolent views of go« 
verament were so clearly ascertained — while no 
doubt could be entertained of its wisdom, it was 
unreasonable to suppose that it w anted our assist- 
ance to know the means which might complete our 
regeneration; that the word which concluded the 
tenth article reflected no more on the Israelites than 
the law of the republic of Geneva, which exclud-* 
ed from the magistracy the children of insolvent 
debtors, unless they paid the debts of their fathers, 
reflected on the Genevese; that the eleventh arti- 
cle had neither the importance nor was likely to 
produce the effects which bad been attributed to 
it. " Government,'^ said he, knows now the 
" amount of the Jewish population in both coun- 
tries ; its intention may be to ascertain, at some 
" future period, whether it has increased or dimi- 
nished. How could it be known, with certain 
ty, whether any emigi'ations have taken place, 
" from foreign countries, if the means are not ta» 
ken to distinguish the exterior causes which may 
have influenced the state of population from the 
** natural ones? Who, in short, has informed us 
that government is not seeking the solution of a 
^'statistical question He observed, bei^ides, 
jthat a measure which should tend to prevent or 
to lessen the too great influx of a foreign popula- 
tion, driven into France by the <^ression of th* 

4« 2 



( 300 ) 



laws under which the Jews live in foreign coun* 
tries, could certainly not be considered as useless; 
that the alarms excited by the twelfth article were 
equally groundless; for surely, honest fathers of fa- 
milies, who have no known means of subsistence, 
will not be driven from a country they have in- 
habited this great while solely on account of their 
misery. 

Another member observed that the objections 
which had been made on account of the police re- 
gulations which the plan was said to contain, were 
altogether groundless ; that if, in the eyes of those 
who profess a religion, the Regulations relative to 
its mode of worship appeared only in that plain 
point of view, the case was different with a govern- 
ment which connected those regulations with the 
political system: that, in this point of view, it was 
not to be wondered if there were in the Regulations 
clauses relating to the internal administration, 
necessary for the maintainance of social order. 

A member said that he would vote for the Regu- 
lations, provided the word usurer was expunged. 
He observed that a bankrupt was a thing notori- 
ous and ascertained by a variety of facts, but that 
the accusation of usury was vague and unsupport- 
ed; that such an expression would tend to confirm 
a prejudice which we should, on the contrary, en- 
deavour to do away ; he thought that the eleventh 



( 301 ) 



article was liable to be misunderstood, and he pro* 
posed to alter the wording of it. He also stated 
his apprehensions lest the twelfth artkleshoaldre^ 
vive thiQt spirit of community ^ which formerly kept 
the Israelites isolated from the great national family; 
He demanded that whatever, in that article, rela^ 
ted to civil matters, should be omitted, and that 
Consistories should have no other functions but 
those immediately connected with religion. 

Another spoke on the same side of the question; 
he presented the observations of the last speaker 
in a fuller point of view, protested against every 
clause which tended to establish distinctions, and 
demanded the adoption of the amendments alrea^ 
dy proposed. 

A third proposed to adopt the Regulations, Omit<^ 
ting the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth articles. 

A fourth proposed to add to the Regulations an 
article concerning charitable institutions, which 
he supposed connected with religious worship. 

A fifth wished for a clause allowing legacies or 
rents in the public funds, to be devised for pidttS^ 
purposes, as in other religions. 

Many members loudly called for the qu^nStion^ 
pthers wished to continue the debate. 

Others w ere for the Regulations with the amend- 
inents. 

A member proposed to adopt the whole of the 



( 302 ) 

Regulations as they stood, and that, influenced by 
the entire reliance which the assembly had in the 
wisdom and in the magnanimous views of the 
sovereign, it should only insert in its minutes an 
abstract of the objections made by several members 
principally against the tenth aiticle, that such ob- 
jections might be known as they deserved by 
Government, 

The President put the Regulations to the vote, 
by shew of hands, and they were adopted by the 
majority. 

He gave afterwards in the following words, an 
abstract of the several objections against that part 
of the tenth article which states that no man shall 
be a member of the Consistory if he is known as 
a usurer. 

" If the evident intention of His Majesty is to 
" put an end to the abasement of the Jews, to in- 

corporate them more intimately with the rest of 
" Frenchmen, and to make them worthy of the 

dignity of man and of citizen, can it be doubt- 
" ed that one of the readiest means to eflTect that 
" purpose, is to do away as much as jxissible, all 

the shades which might, in public opinion, af- 
* ' ford some pretence to contempt, and thus im- 
•* pede the progress of that happy conformity in 

manners and in habits which make but quq 

family of a numerous nation ? 



( 363 ) 

" If in an act, sanctioned by pablicauthoiity, an 
exception is madeas to the Israelites onlj, which 
impeaches their probity and their morality, itii 

" matters of loans with interest, without any dis- 
tinction as to places, times, or persons, is it not 

" thi-owingon the whole nation the blame deserved 

" by a few individuals? 

" Will it not be said that the prejudice is in full 
force, and that the qualification of usurer, being 

" almost synonimous to that of Jew, the assimila* 
tion will be made, whether the article contains 
that clause or no? 

But if this qualification is acknowledged as 
ilnjust,w hen applied to all indiscriminately, wiH 
not the insertion of that allusion in a law, sane- 
tion, as it w ere, an injurious prejudice against a 

" worthy class of men, and extend its duration to 
an unlimited period? 

" If this law was not intended to be public, if 
it was not common to all, if it was only transi*^ 
tory, it would not be attended with the same in- 
" conveniences, and would, on the contrary, bepro- 
" ductive of some advantages. But this law is fot 
" all, and for ever ; for those against whom it is 
" thought necessary, and for those who stand in no 
need of it, and who consider the clause as an 
" unmerited insult offered to them; but the truth 
" is, that it is useless for every description of men; 



< 304 ) 



^ tfi>r it caimotbe rationally supposed that the five 
and twenty electors should chase for members 
of the Consistory men known as usurers; and 
*' if they should, by chance, so far forget them* 
" selves, could not the competent authority which 
*' approves or rejects their choice, easily exclude 
*' the usurer? 

" Those, who are $o hardened to contempt as to 
follow that vile pi'ofession, will not leave it oiT, 
to become members of the Consistory. To such 
men honour is nothing; they see no shame, where 
they can see profit. The clause will then hurt 
the honest, without changing the manners of 
the dishonest: towards these last, restrictive 
measures of quite another nature must be adopt- 
•*cd. 

*' Will it be said that this clause ought to be a 
matter of indifference to those who do not deserve 
to be excluded, since it does not concern them ? 

•* Surely it would be a very wrong opinion to sup- 
pose that those members who strongly object to 
that article are apprehensive of its being ap- 
plied to them ; and it is precisely because they 
have no such apprehension iliat it gives them 

** more pain. 

" They are included in that general expression 
of jealousy, which the law attaches to all the 
followers of their religion, and which thus 



( 305 ) 



" stamps for ever an indelible mark of shame on 
" everyone of them. Those who are charged with 
" usury may renounce the practice, but the stain, 
" thrown on all indiscriminately, will last for ever. 

And besides, who is to fix the nature of usury, 
" since the laws are silent on the subject? where 
" is the line of separation between legal and illegal 
" interest ? Shall public opinion and general cha- 
" racter direct our judgment ? But then how can 
" we believe that the five and twenty Notables^that 
the cs^mpetent authority which shall inspect their 
" proceedings, can be so far led astray as to honour 
by their choice a man held iii public contempt ? 
** If the Consistories of the departments in 
which usury is practised, or even of those where 
it is unknown, were to adopt particular regula 
" tions, in order to exclude fi-om all honourable 
functions men degraded by that nefarious traf- 
fic, nothing could be more conducive to good 
manners, more congenial to social spirit, or more 
worthy of the approbation of a government 
bent upon reform: this falls, besides;, within the 
compass oi the jurisdiction of the Great 
Sanhedrim. But to have such a degrading 
expression sanctioned in an act of the supreme 
authority, would be again to debase, in their 
*^ own eyes, and in those of their fellow citizens, 
men whom it is meant to raise in the public es« 

R R 



( 306 ) 

" teem ; it would act in direct contradiction to 
the benevolent intentions of the Prince^ and as 

" an impediment to the regeneration he wishes to 
effect. 

" Consequently, to adopt the clause of the 
" tenth article, inasmuch as it affects those Israel- 
" ites of the two countries who form an immense 
" majority, would amount to this declaration in 
" other words, that none can be a membei of a 
" Consistory if he is known to have been guilty of 
*• robbery. Would not the supposition that it is 
" necessary to inforce such a motive of exclusion, 
" throw a slur over one hundred thousand indivi- 
" duals, and represent them as capable of giving 

their votes to a few wretches, who follow that 
" nefarious profession in a corner of the empire 

Such is the abstract of the objections made in 
the assembly against the last clause of the tenth 
article. 

The President afterwards opened the discussion 
on the plan of the Arrcte; but, foreseeing that it 
would be impossible to decide the question in that 
sitting, he proposed to adjourn, which was adopt* 
ed. 

The President then quitted the chair, and an* 
nonnced that he would take it again on the 11 tb, 
at twelve o'clock. 



( 307 ) 



Sitting of December 11, 1806. 

The President took the chair precisely at twelve 
o'clock, and named, as Commissioners to maintain 
order, MM. Castro, jun, Hirch, and Lorich. 

One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
sitting of the 5th, which Were adopted with a few 
alterations. 

The President announced that the plan of the 
Arreidy already read to the assembly, stood for the 
order of the day, 

It was read again, and a member obtained leave 
to speak. He said that he caiue to protest against 
the resolution adopted in the last sitting, which 
went to approve the regulations of the Mosaic wor- 
ship. This resolution he maintained had not been 
adopted with the calmness it deserved. He ob- 
served, that as many amendments hadbeen propo- 
sed and seconded, they sJiould have been disposed 
of, before the whole of the Regulations could have 
been put to the vote. He complained of the 
mode adopted of voting by shew of hands, which 
had left doubts as to the state of the votes, and 
that no second trial had been made to ascertain 
on which side the majority was. He maintained, 
lastly, that the deliberation had been irregular, 
tliat a division had been called for ; and upon 

rr2 



( 308 ) 

these several grounds, he moved that the Resola* 
tion should be annulled. 

Other members answered successively, that the 
deliberation had been perfectly regular ; that tlie 
real irregularity consisted in the attempt of a mi- 
nority to dictate to the majority; that, in the shew 
of hands, the number of votes had been reckoned, 
and the majority ascertained ; that the Scrutineers, 
when called upon for their opinion, had formally 
declared that there was a majority; and, in conse? 
quence, they demanded the order of the day. 

A member opposed that motion, and maintained 
that the deliberation had been irregular : two others 
swpjiorted his opinion, which was combatted by a 
fourth. 

It was proposed that the assembly should divide 
on the question of the iiTCgularity of the last deli- 
beration: this proposition was carried. Out of 
$ixty one members present, forty-five voted for 
the deliberation, twelve against it, and four refused 
to vote. 

The President then opened the discussion on the 
plan of the Arrete. A member made several obser- 
vations on this plan; he thought that to call in the 
assistance of the Consistories to induce the Israel- 
i^h youth to follow the profession of arms, was tq 
appear to doubt its readiness to serve the country. 
He thought that this was an unfavourable and unr 



( 309 ) 

warranted judgment passed upon their childreiu 
Uc observed ih^t many Israelitish conscripts were 
now in the armies ; that others had joined befote 
the age which made them liable to be called upon{ 
that he knew personally seventeen Israelitish 
ofiicers of the northern departments; that what 
had induced a notion that so few Jews were among 
the conscripts was the repugnance they felt at 
owning themselves as such in their respective 
corps, where they took anom de guerre^ under whic^ 
they were generally known afterwards; that, in 
short, he did not believe, that, in proportion to the 
population, the Israelites were in fewer numbers ia 
the army than any other class of men. 

Another member spoke on the same side, and 
considered the interference of the Consistories, in 
a case where the law admits of no exception, as 
a humiliating distinction, 

Several articles were proposed to replace that 
which was objected to, but the assembly main* 
tained the original article as it stood in the 
minutes of the last sitting. 

A member observed that this plan of an Arrete 
contained no grounds, on which the request of the 
assembly, that His Msgesty would be pleased to 
contribute to the salary of the Kabbies, could 
possibly be established. 
A discussion arose on this; the President, seeing 



( 310 ) 

that it could not be closed in that sitting, adjourn- 
ed the debate to the next. 



Sitting of December 18, 18C6. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock. 
One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
last sitting which were adopted nem. diss. 

The President announced afterwards that the 
continuation of the debate on the plan of the 
Arrete stood for the order of the day. 

A member pro))Osed to close the debate and to 
put the question to the vote. 

Another proposed to insert in the Arrete a hum- 
ble prayer to His Imperial and Royal Majesty, that 
lie might be pleased to modify his decree of the 
31st of May, in such a manner as he might, in his 
wisdom, think proper, to prevent the too great 
extension usually given to its meaning, which ex- 
tension was against the real design of the legislator, 
and was productive of the greatest hardships to al- 
most the whole of the inhabitants of the depart- 
ments named in the aforesaid decree. 

Another observed that such a petition ought to 
form a distinct object ; he proi>osed to put first to 
the vote the plan of the Arrete as it stood, and af- 



( 311 ) 



terwards to take into consideration the complaints 
of the Jews of the eigiit departments alluded tOi 
This proprosition was carried; the plan of the Arr Hi 
was put to the vote^ and adopted by a majofity. 

The President announced that the discussion 
was opened on the decree of the 31st of May: A 
member proposed to name a Committee which 
should examine into this affair, and makfe its re** 
port to the assembly. Another proposed tointrust 
the Committee of Nine with the investigation of 
this delicate point. Another wjis of the safne opi- 
nion, and proposed, by way df amendment, that a 
member of each of these departments should be 
added to the Committee of Nine, inorderto afibrd 
such information as was necessary to guide it iii 
its researches; This proposition was adopted^ andt 
the President named 



M. Cerf- Jacob Gondchaux for the department 
of La Moselle 

Hertz-Loeb Lorich, for Mount Terrible. 
Abraham Cohen, for the Lower Rhine: 
Caiman, for the Upper Rhine. 
Lyon Marx, for Rhin ct Moselle. 
Salomon Oppenheimer, for La Roer. 
Jacob Hirch, for La Sai-re. 
Jacob'Louis May, for Le Vosges, 



( 312 ) 

The President requested these members to ar- 
range, among themselves, the day on which they 
CQuld attend the Commission. 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to name six 
lay \ ice-deputies for the Great SANnEDiuM. It 
w as agreed that this election should be made by 
the relative majority of votes* Ottoienghi ob* 
tained forty-seven ; M. Ghedeglia^ forty-^seven; M. 
EmilieVitta, thirty-eight; M. Dreyfoss, twenty- 
seven; M. Hirch, twenty; and M. Felix Levy^ six- 
teen: as they had the relative majority of votes, the 
President proclaimed them vice deputies to the 
Great Sanhedrim. 

One of the Secretaries read an address from the 
Israelites of Frankfort on the Maine, signed by 
two-hundred and fifty individuals ; it was applaud- 
ed by the assembly. A member demanded that it 
should be inserted in the minutes, and that the 
President should be requested to return an answer, 
and to express, to the brethren who have signed 
this address, the sincere wishes of the assembly 
that all the powers might adopt, towards all Israel- 
ites, those principles of justice and of humanity, 
of which France gives them an example this day. 

This proposition was adopted unanimously, and 
the President quitted the chair. 



( 018 



Address of the Israelites of Frslnkfort oa the Maine, 
to the President and to the Assembly of the De^ 
puties of those of France and of Italjr. 

" M. President, 

*' We could no longer remain silent without 
" belying our sentiments, and our wishes. The 
" convocation of the assembly, over which you 

preside, had at first filled us with joy, and with 

the most flattering hopes; our admiration h^s 

been excited by the answers you have returned 
" to the questions proposed by the Great Monarch. 
" Such answers could come only from men equally 
" and deeply impressed with thetrue spirit of their 
*' religion and with a just sense of the duties of 
" viituous citizens^ We have perceived in them 
*' the rectitude of upright negotiators, blended 

with those conciliating manners so well calcu- 

lated to remove difficulties. 

The Israelites, scattered in the immensity of 
" the French empire^ were already liappily rein- 

stated in the indefeasable rights of nature. 

" The Great Nation had already broke the fetters 
" of a people held too long in slavery^ and had 
" overthrown the fatal bander which separated the 
" Hebrews from their brethren. It had already 
" restored to the country useful citizens and de* 

s s 



( 314 ) 



" fenders too long neglected. Obstacles still im- 
•* peded the full enjoj ment of those inestimable 
** blessings, and the immortal Napoleon wias the 
" man destined to complete our hapj.nness. 

" His vast genius clearly perceived that abuses 
" had crept into our religion, which made reform 
" necessary: but, wishing to remove all apprehen- 
** sions of his intending to attack, in any degree, 
*' our ancient religious principles, he has called 
you as a father would call his diildren, to deli- 
berate with him on your dearest interests. May 
the glorious example of France extend beyond 
the limits of its empire ! May the humanity of 
" its sovereign gain ground over the whole earth, 
" and produce a noble sentiment of emulation, by 
" which we shall be admitted to share the happi- 
" ness of our brethren, instead of a barren senti- 
" ment of admiration ! May the Rulers of man^ 
kind lend an attentive ear to the mournful voic^ 
" of an insulted nation ! O Divine Goodness ! 
" deign to cast a look of mercy on a people for- 
" merly the object of thy complacency? Inspire 
" the masters of the world ! Move their hearts in 
favour of Israel!" 

" As to you. Gentlemen, who are called together 
" to prepare the happiness of your brethren, let 
" not your zeal abate, and assist, with all your 

power, the benevolent intentions of your sove* 



( 916 ) 



" reign. If the wicked scorn your labours^ jou 
have the blessings of the wise, Comjdete the 
glorious work ibr which you hiive been caUe4 
together: immortal gkiry awaits you at the end 

" of your career. 

" We could wish, M, President and Gentlemen 
Deputies, that our sentiments and our sincere 

" good wishes for the success of your enterprize 
were better expressed.^' 
The President quitted the chair. 

Sitting of the 23d of December^ 1806, 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock* 
One of the Secretaries read the minuter of the 
13th ; they were adopted nem. diss. 

He read aftervi^ards a letter of the 2d. inst< fron^ 
M. Belluomini, Minister of their Imperial and Se- 
rene Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Lucca 
and Piombino, at the court of His Majesty the 
Emperor of the French and King of Italy, in which 
that Minister informed the President, that^ from 
the new maxims adopted by his government, eve- 
ry individual, following the religion of Moses, 
would be at liberty to settle and acquire landed 

ss 2 



( 316 ) 



property in the principalities of Lucca and Piomr 
bino ; where they would enjoy the same protection 
and the same facilities which are granted to the 
other subjects of their Imperial and Serene High- 
nesses. This Minister concluded by requesting 
the President to impart this information to the 
assembly, to the Great Sanhedrim, and to ail 
Israelites with whom he was in the habit of cor- 
responding. 

The assembly received this communication with 
applauses, and resolved that the President, in an-r 
swering the Minister of their Imperial and Serene 
Highnesses, should express the dutiful gratitude of 
the deputies of the assembly for the new maxims 
of justice and humanity adopted by them. 

The same Secretary read ako a letter from the 
University of Leghorn, signed by M. Pellegrin 
Isaac Worms, dignitary of that respectable acadcr 
my, and by M. Delvecchio, its Chancellor. 

This letter, beingwritten in Hebrew and Italian, 
several mi^mbers demanded that it should be trans- 
lated into French, and inserted in the minutes. 

This proposition was adopted unanimously. 

M. Felix Levi, member of a Commission, named 
in the last General Committee of the Assembly, to 
wait on His Excellency the Minister of the Interi- 
or, and to deliver a letter from the President rela- 
tive to the salary of the members of the assembly, 



( 317 ) 



acquainted the President that His Excellency 
ivished to know the names of the departments 
which had refused to pay their deputies, and that 
he would suspend his judgment till then. 

A niecnber proposed that the President should 
name a Commission which would collect all the 
necessary documents to fulfil the intentions of Hi& 
Excellency the Minister for the Interior. 

Another presented a plan of a general assesf«( 
ment for the payment of the d^uties. The as- 
sembly spontaneously manifested its uiiwiHing- 
ness to fonn a general assessment, which would 
include in one mass all the Israelites of France 
and of Italy. Several members took this occa- 
sion to declare that they were perfectly satisfied 
with the departments which had sent them^ and 
demanded that those deputies who had claims to 
make, should acquaint the President with it, that 
he might acquaint His Excellency the Minister for 
the Interior therewith. This proposition was 
adopted. 

The President read afterwards to the assembly 
the answer he had prepared to the address of their 
brethren at Frankfort on the Maine; it was as fol- 
lows: 

" Gentlemen, 

I have communicated the letter you did me 
the honour of writing tp me. On ihe 2dth of last 



( 318 ) 



month, and the address which acoompamed it, 
to the assembly of which I am President. 

The assembly heard it with the liveliest inte- 
" rest, and justly applauded the sentiments and 
" wishes expressed in it with such a peculiar ele- 
ration of sentiment. 

" It has done justice to your communication by 

unanimously voting its insertion in its minutes, 
" and by directing me, as President, to thank you 

for the honourable approbation you express of 
" our efibrts. 

" We have doxie what circumstances allowed; 
^ we shotdd hare done more and better, if part of 

what happens to day had taken place twenty 

five years ago. 

*• Providence, Gentlemen, has heefn particularly 
•* favourable to us; it inspires the great man who 
governs us with tlie idea of putting an end to 
our state of hunuliation and abasement. Among 
all the triumphal monuments raised e^ery where 
" to his glory, our restoration to all the rights of 
" nature will not be the least durable. 

The impulse given by France, the influence 
^* of its opinions on the European continent, in- 
^ dulge a hope that many states will be proud to 
follow its example. 

" The time will come when people shall no 
longer give vent to those odious and ridiculous 
passions which wei'e gratified by our humiliation. 



( 31» ) 



" The career of esteem and of consideration is 
open for us; let us enter it with a bold step; let 

" us divest ourselves of the rust of prejudices. — - 
1 hus shall we conquer the prejudices of others. 
" Among the followers of our religion we have 

^ too many merchants and bankers, and too few 
land-ownei's and artificers ; above all, too few 
husbandmen and soldiers. 
" We must all wish that sovereigns would adopt 
legislative measures to direct your exertions to 
these two professions. 

You share, no doubt. Gentlemen, our opinion 
on this subject; the good sense which pervades 
your address is a sure pledge of your sentiments, 
as it entitles you to the profound esteem of every 
member of this assembly, and in particular to 
that of 

« FURTADO, 

« Presidentr 

This letter was applauded and approved unani* 
mously. On the proposition of a member, the 
assembly resolved that it should be inserted in the 
minutes. The President quitted the chair at three 
o'clock. 



( 320 ) 



Sitting of the 5th of February^ 1807* 

When the reading of the mnnutes of the last sit^ 
ting was concluded M. Avigdor asked leave ta 
speak, and read the following discourse, and the 
plan of Arrete which follows it. 

** Gentlemen, 

" The day of the opening of tho Great Sanhe- 
*^ DRiM approaches; that day will not be one of 

lea^t memorable in the history of that hero, at 
" whose orders you were bene assembled. 

" The idea of aGREAT Sanhedrim could be con* 
" ceived only by the Great Napoleon. He has 
" seen in the new formation of this Senate, so cele- 

brated in antiquity, the means of removing our 

own prejudices and those which the world may 

have entertained, or still entertains, against us. 

" This philanthropic conception is truly worthy 
" of that man, who cannot be said to belong ex- 
" clusively to any class of men, to any religion, or 

to any nation ; of that sublime genius who is a 
*' gift of Providence to mankind, and whose bene-^' 
** volent influence must be felt by all men. 

" Deeply impressed with his wishes and with 

your duties. Gentlemen, you will, nodoubt, fulfil 
" his expectations and thoi>e of your brethren* 



( 321 ) 



Israel lias been persecuted for many centuries ; 
for many centuries he has been held in a state of 

^^humiliation and abasement; you must assume 
sufficient courage to probe the causes of his de- 
plorable situation; and, in going back to the most 
ancient times, you must not be deteri'edfrom in- 
quiring into the motives which have induced na- 
tions to hate, to despise, and to persecute a peo- 

" pie, whose origin is lost in the obscurity of cen- 
turies, and whose laws have been a faithful source 

** of information to all its persecutors. 

Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans have all taken 

"many things from the law of Moses; modern 
nations have made it the basis of their religion; 

" and yet all these different people have successive-* 

" ly and equally hated^ despised, and persecuted 

•* the Israelites. 

" From whence can proceed this almost tinani^ 

" mous conceit of all nations against us? 

" Are we to seek the cause of it in our religion 

" or in ourselves? 

" But, from general consent, our religion is con- 

" sidered as of divine origin ; and, as to us^ what'* 

" ever may be said, we are not of a nature different 

** from that of other men. 
" Where, then, can we find the ciiuseof such con- 

" slant, such deep*rooted aversion ? 

T T 



( 32i ) 



" Do not seek for it, Gentlemen, either in your 
origin, nor in your laws, nor in your manners, 
" Your origin ascends to the first antiquity, you 
" are the only people \^ ho can trace its pedigree 
" to the cradle of mankind; your laws bear the 
" stamp of the justice of that great God to whom 
" you are indebted for them, and your private 
** virtues, even after many centuries of sufferings 
and misfortunes, attest the purity of your manners, 
" It is, then, neither to your origin, fo your laws, 
" nor to your manners, that you must attribute this 
** common hatred of nations against you ; it must 
" be attributed first, to the ignorance of the first 
" centuries; to jealousy, that vice of all times; and 
" to the too natural force of prejudices on men in 
** general. 

" l o be convinced of this truth, it is enough 
*' rapidly to recur to the most remarkable aeras of 

our history, and to examine your own situation, 
" in respect to the nations among which you have 

lived. 

" You see, first, that Abraham has been the first 
" to proclaim the existence and the unity of a God 

w ho created all things by hi^ sole w ill. 

" Some years afterwards, Joseph, fourth des- 
•* cendant of Abraham, became, by his talents, the 
"arbiter of Egypt and of the neighbouring coun* 

trieSe 



{ 323 ) 



** This sildden elevation of Joseph may, in a 
" political point of view, be considered as the root 
of that astonishing hatred which has lasted to 
our very days, and which has been constantly 
** continued by the difference of religion. 

Every one is acquainted with the expressions 
" of Pharaoh to Joseph, to the great and the learn- 
*' ed of his court — Can we findsuch a one as this 
a man in whom the spirit of God isf 
" Then turning to Joseph : 

Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all things^ 
there is none so discreet and wise as thou art. Thou 
*' shalt be over my house ; and according unto thy 
" word shall all my people he ruled: only in the 
" throne will I be greater than thou.^^ 

" These words, pronounced with great dignity, 
" must have been keenly felt by all the courtiers 
" of that prince. 

" Fallen all at once in the opinion of so power- 
" fula monarch, obliged to bend before a stranger, 
" their sole sentiment must have been fm unjust 
" desire of revengingthemselvesfor somanyhumili- 
ations ; and as they could not wreak their re- 
" sentment on Joseph, it fell with redoubled 
violence on his posterity. 

" Thus ignorance and jealousy were the first 
" causes of the persecution which the Israelites ex- 
perieuced from the Egyptians. 

T T 2 

i 



( 324 ) 



Moses delivered them from the yoke of these 

oppressors, and conducted his people to the 
" frontiers of that land promised to Israel, but 
" of which he was to possess himself by conquest. 
It was there that God's elect, admonished 

that his death was at hand, intrusted to Joshua 
" the fate of the Hebrews. It was under thecom- 
" mand of that worthy successor of Moses, that 
** Israel entered the laud of Canaan. There he 
" fixed his dwelling; and the world beheld, for the 

first time, a regular code of civil, political, and 
" religious laws put into practice ; it was there, 

too, that, after long vicissitudes, Israel acknow- 
" ledged that a monarchical form of government 
*' was the only one which could suit a nation com- 

posed at the same time of husbandmen, soldiers, 
" and merchants, 

" As, however, this conquest had been necessari- 

ly attended with a vast eflusion of blood, the 
" vanquished, driven from their country, must 

have naturally hated a people who abominated 
" idolatry, and who had conquered their country 
" by force of arms. 

" JVevertheless, Solomon, third King of Israel, 
" by his wisdom succeeded in procuring peace from 
" his external enemies, and in inspiring his subjects 
" with the love of sciences, arts, and commerce. 
The description of the temple, raised by that 



( 325 ) 

great king to the true Gad, and thedetailsof the 
magnificent decorations which adorned it,ares6 
many proofs that Solomon had already carried 

*^ commerce, arts, and sciences to a very high 
pitch, such as probably no nation had yet at* 

" tained. 

" The people of Israel, thus become, by its civili- 
" zation, the centre of intercourse between the eastu 
** eru Jtnd the western world, soon arrived to that 

degree of splendour, the natural consequence of 
** such <in advantageous situation. The wish of des- 
" polling it, which jealous neighbouring nations 

must have continually cherished, was evidently 
" the second cause of that active animosity which 
"** incessantly broke out in repeated hostilities, and 

which lasted to that epocha of horrid memory 
"when the Holy City fell under the arms of the 
" Romans. 

" From that period Israel ceased to be a nation; 
*' it is now only a particular race of men, scattered 
" over the whole world. 

" It may be believed that Providence wished 
** to puniiih this people, led astray from the ways 
" of the Lord by the pride of prosperity ; but 
" at least his intention was not to destroy it utterly. 
" Had it been collected on a single point of the 
^* globe, it would have been annihilated at oncej 



( 326 ) 

** but ilsdispersion over the four parts of tbe world 
** has for ever secured it from total destruction. 

After eighteen centuries of persecution, asnlall 
" fraction of Israel is incorporated with the great 

nation. It was the destiny of the greatest of 

monarchs to confirm that law, one of the most 
*' noble monuments of the justice of the Constitu- 
" ent Assembly. It was the destiny of a Christian 

Prince toinforce that spirit of toleration, socare^ 
** fully recotnmended by Christian moi-ality. 

" And indeed, in considering the usual projects 
" of human passions, nothing will appear more 

natural than that deep-rooted hatred of ancient 
" nations against the Israelites. 

" The Egyptians, at first, subjugated by Joseph 

— the Egyptians who worshiped an ox, a dog, a 
" ci-ocodile, could not love a people who acknow* 
" ledged only the true God. 

Neither could the idolatrous Canaaneans, con- 
" quered and driven out of their country by the 
" Hebrews, love them; they must, on the contrary, 

have hated them, as political foes, and have ab- 
" horred them as religious enemies. 

The Greeks, who coolly and judicially murdered 
" Socrates, because he taught the existence of one 
" only God, must have detested a people who pro- 

fessed publicly to worship one only living God. 

" Lastly, nor could the Romans who believed in 

I 



( 327 ) 



oracles, in soothsayers, in augurs, in auspices, 
*' love the Jews who had opposed them with more* 
*^ obstinacy than any other nation, who abhorred 
** idolatrj^ and worshipped only one God, Creator 

of the universe. 

It is, then, no difficult matter tJb account for 
" the hatred of those nations >igainst the Jews. 

All,equally attached to their idols, to their gods, 

to their demigods, in short, to all the supersti- 
" tions of the blindest ignorance, must have de- 
" tested, hated, and persecuted the Jews, the avow- 

ed enemies of all these superstitions. But what 
" is really inconceivable, is to see that the Chris- 
" tians, who have the same origin with us, the 
" Christians, our feliow-sufFerers under Nero, Ves- 

pasian, Titus, Domitian, Adrian, and several 
" othei-s, could, contrary to their duty, have inherit- 

ed, from those irreligious nations, that hatred and 
" that cotitempt which we at first shared together. 

It is really difficult to find the solution of that 

problem. 

" This conduct is the more incomprehensible, as 
the most celebrated Chnstian moralists have for- 

** bidden persecution, professed toleration, and 

" preached Christian charity. 
" St. Athanasius (book i.) says. 
It is an abominable heresy to attempt to convert 



C 328 ) 



** f^^^^t ^9 blowsy by imprisonment^ those whom 
** reason has not been able to convince. 

Nothing is more contrary to religion than con- 
" straintyS^ys Justin Martyr (book v). 

" Shall we persecute those whom God tolerates? 

says St. Augustine. 

Lactantius (book iii.) says, on this subject. 

Compulsory religion is no longer religion: we must 

persuade^ not constrain. Religion is above the 
** reach of power. 

*' Advise^ says St. Bernard, but do not compel. 

" Since, therefore, Christian morality teaches 
** every one the love of his neighbour and of his 
" brother, the causes of the vexations and of the 
" persecutions which we have so frequently expe- 
" rienced must be sought for in ignorance and in- 

veterate prejudice. This is so true, that those 

sublime virtues of justice and humanity have 
" been frequently put into practice by Christians 
" truly learned, and especially by worthy minis- 

ters of that pure morality which calms the ef* 

fervescence of passion and instils the love of vir- 
♦* tue into the mind. 

" It is in conformity to these sacred principles 

of morality that, at different times; Roman pon- 
" tiffs have protected and received into their do- 

minions the Jews, persecuted and driven from 
" various parts of Europe, and that cler£;ymen, of 



( 329 ) 



" every countiy, have often raised their voice in their 
" defence in several states in that part of the world. 

Towards the middle of the seventh century, 
" St. Gregory defended the Jews, and protected 
" them in the Christian world. 

In the tenth century, the bishops of Spain re- 
" sisted, with the greatest energy^ the violence of 

a furious multitude, bent on their destruction. 

" The pontiff Alexander II. wrote to those bi- 

shops a letter full of congratulations on their be- 

haviour on that occasion. 

In the eleventh century, the Jews, then very 

numerous in the diocesses of Uzes and of Cler- 
" mont, were powerfully protected by the bishops. 

" St. Bernard defended them in the twelfth cen« 
" tury from the rage of the Crusaders. 

" They were protected likewise by Innocent IL 
" and Alexander III. 

" In tlie thirteenth century, Gregory IX. shel- 
" tered them in France, in England, and in Spain, 
" from the imminent danger which threatened 
" them ; he forbad, under pain of excoinmunica*^ 

tion, to force their consciences, or to disturb their 
" religious ceremonies. 

" Clement V. went farther; he not only pro- 
" tected them, but also aflbrded them the means 
*' of instruction. 

Clement VI. gave them an asylum in Avig- 

V V 



( 330 ) 

non, when tbey were persecoted over the rest of 
Europe. 

lownxds the middle of the same century, the 
bishop of Spires prevented the general libera- 
tion which the debtors of the Jews claimed by 
•* main force, under the everlasting pretence of 
usury. 

" in the following centuries, Nicholas II. wrote 
to the Inquisition, to prevent it from forcing the 

" Jews to embrace Christianity, 

Clement XIII. calmed the uneasiness of pa- 

*^ rents for the fate of their children, torn very 

^* often from the bosom of their mothers. 
" Lastly, in our own times, the bishop Gregoire, 
Member of the august French Senate, publish- 

" ed,in 1788, a work replete with erudition, crown- 
ed by the Academy of Metz, in which he viclo- 

" riously refuted the absurd calumnies laid, at dif- 
ferent times, to the charge of the Jews. 
" He pointed out the eventual cause of the vices 
with which they are reproached ; and proved that 

** they were qualified ibr the pursuits of every 

" profession and of every science. 
" It was also on the report of that respectable 
prelate, that the National Assembly passed the 

**• decree which put the Jews on a level with the 
rest of citizens. 

** It would be an easy matter to quote several 



( ^1 ) 



^ other instances of charity, manifested, at dif-- 
ferent times, towards the Jews, by clei^ymen, 

*^ fully impressed with a sense of tfadr duties as 
men and as ministers of their religion; 

An exalted sense of humanity could alone, m 
the early dark ages of ignorance and barfoa 
rism, inspire a courage sufficient to protect nn- 
fortunate men, left defenceless at the mercy, of 
direful hypocrisy and ferocious superstition. 

Those virtuous men could expect, fiom their 
philanthn^ic courage, no other reward than 

^* the grateful heartfelt satisfaction which deeds of 
charity excite in unpolluted hearts. 

The people of Israel, always unfortunate* al« 

<^ ways oppressed, had neither the means nor the 
opportunity of expressing its gratitude for so 
many favours; it would have been the more gra-* 
tifying to us to have acquitted our hearts of that 

^ debt, as we were thus indebted to men perfect- 

^ ly disinterested, and therefwe doubly praise- 
worthy. 

This great and happy circumstance, for 
which we are indebted to our august and im- 
mortal Emperor, is the most proper as it is the 
most glorious for us, to manifest, to the philan- 
thropic of every country, and especially to the 
clergy, our gratitude to them and to their pre- 
** decessors. 

u u 2 



( 332 ) 



Let i» hasten, then. Gentlemen^ to avail our- 
selves of this memorable circumstance, to shew 
them that gratitude they have a right to expect 
from us. Let this hall resound with grateful ac- 
clamations. Let us return them our solemn and 
sincere thanks for the favours they have succes* 
sively heaped on the generations which have pre- 
*' ceded us. 

** Let us prove to the universe that we have for- 
gotten our past misfortunes, and that the remem- 
" brance of favours only is engraved on our hearts. 
** Let us hope that the clergy, our cotemporaries, 
** will, by their influence over their flocks, instil 
" those mild sentiments of fraternity which na- 
ture has placed in the heart of every man, and 
" which is inculated still more forcibly by the 
** tendency of every religion. 

" The prejudices of the world have already been 
lessened by the progress of instruction : its in- 
creasing influence will complete their extirpa- 
** pation. Those dark ages, the shame of huma* 
** nity, are happily far removed from us. Let us 
** hope that they never will return : let us indulge 
i*fi the pleasing expectation that the principles of 
justice, oi humanity, and of public morality, 
first adopted in France, will also find their way 
into the other countries of Europe. 
Israel will be indebted to our august Emperor 



( 333 } 

^ for the termination of its misfortunes ; frmn him 
mankind will receive that lesson of fraternal 
charity which forms the basis of every religion 
and of every society. 

I have the honour to propose, Gentlemen, the 
** following resolution for your deliberation-*— 

" The Hebrew deputies of the French empire and of 
the kingdom of Italy to the Jewish assembly con» 
" vened by the decree of the 30th of May^ deeply 
" impressed with gratitude for the manifold favours 
conferred on the Israelites^ in former centuries^ 
" by the Christian clergy in various parts of jEm- 
" rope; no less grateful for the kind reception gi^ 
" by several pontiffs and many other clergy^ 
men at various epochas to the Israelites of all 
" countries^ when barbarism^ ignorance^ and pre^^ 
^^judicej leagued together^ chased the Jews from 
" the bosom of society; 

" Resolve, 

That the expression of these sentiments shall 
be registered in the minutes of ihe proceedings 
of this day, to remain for ever a lasting monu- 
ment of the gratitude of the Israelites whoeOm- 
" pose this assembly, for the favours received by 



( 334 ) 



the genemtkmii which preceded them from der- 
gymen of vjariouB parts of Europe* 

Resolve, also, that a copy of these minutes 
shall be sent to His Excellency the Minister of 
«* Public Worship/' 

The assembly ftj^lauded the discourse of M. 
Avigdor : it was inserted in the minutes, and or« 
dered to be printed. 

The resolutions were also adopted^ 

The President quitted the chain 



TOE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 
UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY 



DUE DATE 




MOV -6198^ 



NON -RESERVE 

FINES: 25t per day per boc 



