
HISTORY 


OF 


THE WAR IN AFGHANISTAN. 


FROM 

THE UNPUBLISHED LETTERS AND JOURNALS 
OF POLITICAL AND MILITARY OFFICERS EMPLOYED IN AFGHANISTAN 
THROUGHOUT THE ENTIRE PERIOD OF BRITISH CONNEXION 
WITH THAT COUNTRY. 


BY JOHN WILIIAM KAYE. 


IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 


LONDON: 

RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 
^u6U«i(er in <®rl>tnar!? to |^et iWalwtii. 

1851. 




DEDICATION, 


IF VULLK; claims ATiOM*: WERE TO BE llEOAHDEl), 1 KNOAV NOT 
TO MiroM 1 COULD MORE FITLY INSCRIBE THESE VOLUMES, 
THAN TO THE t)FFlCi:RS OF A REGIMENT, ON THE ROLLS OF 
MlllCJI ARE THE NAMES OF POLLOCK, MACGREGOR, TODD, 
SUAkKSPEAR, LAWRENCE, ABBOTT, ANPERSON, AND OTHERS, 
I)JsTIx\(4UJSn ED IN THE ANNALS OF THE AFGHAN WAR; BUT 

IT IS IN GRATEEUL RECOLLECTION OF SOME OF THE HAPPIEST 

^ EARS OF AlY Lll E THAT I DEDICATE THESE VOI-UAIES TO THE 

<)Ffk;i:us of tiik jiengal aktilleky. 


30 , 1 k :, i 




PREFACE. 


CiRCUMSTANCFs luiving placed at my disposal a num¬ 
ber of very interesting and important letters and papers, 
illustrative of the History of the War in Afghanistan, I 
undertook to write this Work. There was nothing that 
peculiarly qualified me for the task, beyond the fact that 
I enjoyed the confidence of some of the chief actors in 
the events to be narrated, or—for death had been busy 
among those act<'s—their surviving relatives and friends. 
I had been in India, it is true, during the entire period 
ol the War; but I never took even the humblest part in 
its stirring scenes, or visited the country in which they 
were enacted. 

It was not, therefore, until I considered that no more 
competent party might be disposed to undertake the 
Work—that the materials placed in my hands might not 
in the same number and variety be placed in the hands 
of any other writer—and that those best qualified by a 
full knowledge of the subject to write the History of 



VI 


PREFACE. 


the War, were restrained by the obligations of official 
position from that fulness of revelation and freedom ot‘ 
discussion, which a work of this kind demands—that I 
entered upon the })erilous undertaking. The necessities 
of the subject have rendered the task peculiarly pain¬ 
ful, and, but for the encouragement I have received 
in the prog]*ess of its executimi, alike from strangers and 
Irom friends who have freely jdaced new materials in 
my hands, and expressed a lively interest in my labours, 
I might have shrunk from its completion. 1 now lay 
before the public the result of much anxious thought 
and la])orious investigation, confident that, although the 
Work miglit have been done more ably, it could hardly 
have been performed more conscientiously, by another. 


There is ihe cliancc oi an at every step. I 

have luvii treading all along on dangerous ground. But 
if 1 cannot confidently stale that 1 have asserted nothing 
which I caimot prove, I can declare my belief that, except 
upon Avlnit I had a right to consider as good and sufficient 
authority, I have advanced absolutely nothing. It will 
be seen how careful I liave been to quote my authorities. 
Indeed, I have an uneasy misgiving in my mind that 
I liavc overl)urdeiied my Work with quotations from die 
letters and documents in my possession. But this has 
been done with design and deliberation. It was not 
sufficient to refer to these letters and documents, for 
they were singly accessible only to a few, and collec¬ 
tively, perhaps, to no one but myself. They have, there¬ 
fore, been left to speak for themselves. What the Work 



PKEFACE. 


Vll 


lias lost by this mode of treatment in compactness and 
continuity, it has gained in trustworthiness and authen¬ 
ticity. If the narrative be less animated, the history is 
more genuine. 1 have had to deal with unpublished 
materials, and to treat of very strange events; and I 
have not tlioimlit it suflicient to fuse these materials 

O 

into my text, and to leave the reader to fix or not 
to fix his faith upon the unsupported assertions of an 
unknown writer. 

I would make another observation regaiding the exe¬ 
cution of tliis Work. The more notorious events of the 
A\"ar, which stand fully revealed in military despatches 
and published blue-books, have not been elaborated 
Avith the care, and expanded into the amplitude, which 
their imiiortance may seem to demand. These Volumes 
may bo tliought, perliaps, rather deficient in respect of 
military details. Compelled to condense somewhere, I 
have purposely abstained from enlarging upon those 
events, which have already found fitting chroniclers. 
The military memoir-Avriters, each one on his own 
limited field, hav arranged before us all the strategical 
operations of the Campaign from the assemblage of 
Fane’s army in 1838, to the return of Pollock’s at the 
close of 1842; but the political history of the War 
has never been written. For information on many 
points of militar}’ interest, not sufficiently dAvelt upon 
in these volumes, I Avould therefore refer the reader 
to the Avorks of Havelock, Hough, Barr, Eyre, Stacy, 
Nedl, and other soldierly Avriters. The progi’ess of 
events in Upper Sindh alter the cajiture of Khelat, 
I have not attempted to narrate. The military opera- 



Vlll 


PREFACE. 


tions in that part of the country have found an intelli¬ 
gent annalist in Dr. Buist. 

1 need only now, after gratefully acknowledging my 
obligations to all who have aided me with original 
papers, or with information otherwise conveyed (and I 
have largely taxed the patience of many during the 
progrc'ss of this work), offer one more word of apology. 
I knoAv that ray scholarly Oriental friends will revolt 
against my spelling of Oriental names. I have only to 
bow beneath their correcting hand, and fling myself 
u])on their mercy. I have written all the names in the 
old and vulgar manner, most familiar to the English 
eye. and in pronunciation to the English ear; and I 


October, 1851. 



CONTExNTS OF VOL L 


BOOK I.—INTRODUCTION. 

[1800—1837.] 

CHAPTER I. 

[1800—1801.] PAGE 

.Sliah Zemaun and the Douranee Empire—Threatened Afghan Invasion— 
Malcolm’s First Mission to Persia— Country and People of Afghanistan— 

Fall of Zemaun Shah. 1 


CHAPTER II. 

[1801—1808.] 

The Early Days of Soojah-ool-Moolk—Disastrous Commencement of his 
Career—Defeat of Shah iMahmoud—Reign of Shah Soojali—The Insurrec¬ 
tion of Prince Kaysur—Tidings of the British Mission . 2.1 

CHAPTER III. 

[1801—1808.] 

Franco and Russia in the J‘]ast—Death of Hadjee Khalil Khan—The Mission 
of Condolence—Aga Nebee Khan—Extension of Russian Dominion in the 
East—French Diplomacy in Persia—The Pacification of Tilsit—Decline 
of French Influence at Teheran . 3.1 

CHAPTER IV. 

[1808—1809.] 

The Second Mission to Persia—Malcolm’s Visit to Bushire—Failure of the 
Embassy—His Return to Calcutta—Mission of Sir Harford Jones—His 
Progress and Success... .16 


CHAPTER V. 

[1808—1809.] 

The Missions to Lahore and Cauhul—The Aggressions of Runjeet Singh— 
Mr. Metcalfe at Umritsur—^Treaty of 1809 —Mr. Elphinstone’s Mission— 
Arrival at Peshawur—Reception by Shah Soojah—^Withdrawal of the 
Mission—^Negotiations with the Ameers of Sindh . 

VOL. I. b 


75 








X 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VI. 

[1809—1816.] PAGE 

The Mid-Career of Shah Soojah—Ilis Wanderings and Misfortunes—Cap¬ 
tivity in Cashmere—^Imprisonment at Lahore—Robbery of the Koli-i-noor 
—Reception of the Shah by the Rajah of Kistawar—His Escape to the 
British Territories . 94 


CHAPTER VII. 

[1816—1837.] 

Host Mahomed and the Barukzyes—Early Hays of Host Mahomed—The Pali 
of Euttch Kliaii—Defeat of Shah Mahmoud—Supremacy of the Baruk¬ 
zyes—Position of the Empire—Host Maliomcd at Caubul—Exjiedition of 
Shall Soojah—His Defeat—Capture of Peshawur by the Sikhs . 104 

CHAPTER VIII. 

[1810—1837.] 

Later Events in Persia—The Treaty of Goolistan—Arrival of Sir Gore 
Ouseley—^Ir. fierier and Mr. Ellis—'fhe Hefinitive Treaty—The War 
of 1826-li7—d’hc Treaty of'roorkoinanchai—Heath of Futtcli Ali Shah— 
Accession of Mahomed Shah—His I’rojeets of Ambition—Tlie Expedition 
against Herat . 133 




CHAPTEK I. 

[183.3- 1837.] 

rile Commercial IMission to Caubul—Arrival of Lord Auckland—His Cha¬ 
racter—Alexander Burnes - His Travels m Central Asia—Heimtation to 
the Court of Host Mnlioined—Reception by the Ameer—Negotiations at 
Caubul—Failure of the Mission . IGl 


CIIAl’TER II. 

[1837—1838.] 

'J'he Siege of Herat—Shah Kararan and Yar Mahomed—Return of the 
Shah—Eldred I'ottinger—Preparations for the Defence—Advance of thl* 
I’crsian Army—Progress of the Siege—Negotiations for I’cace—Failure 
of the Attack—Tlie Siege raised. 202 

CHAPTER III. 

[1837—1838.] 

Policy of the British-Indian Government—Our Defensive Operations— 
Excitement in British India—Proiiosed Alliance with Dost Mahomed— 
Failure of Burncs’s Mission considered—The Claims of the Suddozye 
Princes—The Tripartite Treaty—Invasion of Afghanistan determined— 
I’oliey of the Movement... 289 









CONTENTS. 


XI 


CHAPTER IV. 

[July—October: 1838.] pack 

The Simlah Manifesto—The Simlali Council—Influence of Messrs. Colvin 
and Torrens—Views of Captains Burnes and Wade—Opinions of Sir 
Henry Fane—The Army of the Indus—The Governor-General’s Mani¬ 
festo—Its Policy considered . ... 33 


BOCK III. 


[1838 — 1839.] 

CIIAPTEK I. 

The Army of the Indus—Gcathering at Fcrozcpore—Resignation of Sir 
Henry Fane—Route of the Army—Passage through Bahwulporc—Tlu‘ 
Ameers of Sindh—The Hyderabad Question—Passage of the Bolan 
Pass—Arrival at Candahar.?72 


CHAPTER II. 

[April—August: 1839.] 

Arrival at Candahar—The Shah’s Entry into the City—His Installation— 
Nature of his Reception—Behaviour of the Dourances—The English at 
Candahar—Mission to Herat—Hifliculties of our Position—Advance to 
Ghuznee. 422 


CHAPTER III. 

[June—August : 1839.] 

Tlie Disunion of the Barukzycs—Prospects of Dost Mahomed—Keane's 
Advance to Ghuznee—^lassacre of the Prisoners—Fall of Gliuznce— 
Flight of Dost Mahomed—lladjee Khan, Khuukur—Escape of Dost Ma¬ 
homed . 

CHAPTER IV. 

[August—Deeembor: 1839.] 

Dawn of the Rcstorati.ju—DiflBculties of our Position—Pi'oposed With¬ 
drawal of the Army—Arrival of Colonel AVado—Ilis Operations—Lord on 
tlie llmdoo-Koosli—Evils of our Policy—Defective Agency—Moollah 
Shikore—Our Political Agents—Operations in the Khybur Pass—The 
Fall of Khelat. 46 i> 


BOOK IV. 

[1340—1841.] 

CHAPTER I. 

[January—September ; 1840.] 

The Gr-^at Game of Central Asia—The Russian Expedition to Khiva—Ap¬ 
prehensions of Burnes—Colonel Stoddart—Affairs on the Ilindoo-Koosh 
—Failure of the Russian Expedition—Conduct of the Sikhs—Herat and 
Yar Mahomed—Mission of Abbott and Shakespear—Disturbances in the 
Ghilzye Country—Fall of Khelat—Arthur Conolly. 49 (i 









Xll 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER IL 

[June—Noyember; 1840.] page 

The last Struggles of Dost Mahomed-^The British in the Hindoo-Koosh— 

The Ameer’s Family—Occupation of Bajgah—^Disaster of Kamurd—Es¬ 
cape of Dost Mahomed—Fererish State of Caubul—-Dennie’s Brigade— 
Defeat of the Ameer—Sale in the Eohistan—The Battle of Purwan- 
durrah—Surrender of Dost Mahomed. 542 

CHAPTER m. 

[[November: 1840—September: 1841.] 

Yar Mahomed and the Douranees—Season of Peace—Position of the Dou- 
ranees—The Zemindawer Outbreak—Conduct of Yar Mahomed—Depar¬ 
ture of Major Todd—Risings of the Douranees and Ghilzyes—^Engage¬ 
ments with Aktur Khan and the Gooroo—Dispersion of the Insurgents.. 569 

CHAPTER IV. 

[September—October: 1841.] 

Aspect of Affairs at Caubul—The King—The Envoy—Burnes—Elphinstone 
—The English at Caubul—Expenses of the War—Retrenchments of the 
Subsidies—Risings of the Ghilzyes—Sale’s Brigade—Gatherings in the 
Kohistan . 604 

. . 637 


ERRATA IN VOL. I. 

Page 128, line 15, for “ Seigtan,” read “Seistan.” 

„ 131, line 5, for as if though,” read “ as though.” 

„ 378, note, for “Sale and Denniss,” read “ Sale and Dennie." 






THE WAH IN AFGHANISTAN. 


BOOK I-INTRODUCTION. 
[ 1800 — 1837 .] 


CHAPTEE I. 

[ 1800 — 1801 .] 

Shah Zetnauu and the Doiivanee Empire—Threatened Afghan Invasion— 
Malcolm’s First Mission to Fersia—Country and People of Afghanistan— 
Fall of Zemaun Shah. 

At the dawn of the present century, Zemaun Shah 
reigned over the Douranee Empire. The son of Timour 
Shah, and the grandson of the illustrious Ahmed Shah, 
he had sought, on the death of his father, the danger¬ 
ous privilege of ruling a divided and tumultuous people. 
Attaining by intrigue and violence what did not rightfully 
descend to him by inheritance, he soon began to turn 
his thoughts towards foreign conquest, and to meditate 
the invasion of Hindostan. His talents were not equal 
to his ambition, and his success fell far short of the mag¬ 
nitude of his designs. There was too little security at 
home to ensure for him prosperity abroad. And so it 
happened, that he was continually marching an army 
upon the frontier, eager to extend the Douranee Empire 
to the banks of the Ganges; and continually retracing 
von. I. B 



2 


SHAH ZEMAim AND THE DODBANBB EMFIBE. 


Ms steps in alarm, lest his own sovereignty should be 
wrested from him in his absence. For many years 
Zemauu Shah’s descent upon Hindostan kept the British 
Indian Empire in a chronic state of unrest. But he 
never advanced further than Lahore, and then was com¬ 
pelled precipitately to retire. Starvation threatened his 
troops; a brotherly usurper his throne; and he hastened 
back lest he should find Prince Mahmoud reigning at 
Caubul in his stead. 

This was in 1797,* when Sir John Shore was Go¬ 
vernor-General of India. We smile now at the alarm 
that was created along the whole line of country from 
the Attock to the Hooghly, by the rumored approach of 
this formidable invader. But half a century ago, the 
English in India knew little of the resources of the 
Douranee Empire, of the national characteristics of the 
people, of the continually unsettled state of their political 
relations, or of the incompetcncy of the monarch him¬ 
self to conduct any great enterprise. Distance and ig¬ 
norance magnified the danger; but the apprehensions, 
which were then entertained, were not wholly ground¬ 
less apprehensions. All the enemies of the British 
Empire in India had turned their eyes with malicious 
expectancy upon Caubul. Out of the rocky defiles of 
that romantic country were to stream the deliverers of 
Islamism from the yoke of the usurping Franks. The 
blood of the Mahomedan princes of India was at fever 
heat. From northern Oude and from southern Mysore 
had gone forth invitations to the Afghan monarch. 
With large promises of aid, in money and in men. Vizier 
Ali and Tippoo Sultan had encouraged him to move 


* And again in the cold weather 
of 1798-99 he advanced as far as 
Lahore, but was recalled by the in¬ 
vasion of Khorassan by the Persian 
troops. Lord Wellesley had by this 


time succeeded to the government 
of India. The danger was then con¬ 
sidered sufficiently cogent to call 
for an augmentation of the native 
army. 



BUHOBBD AFGHAN INVASION. 


3 


down upon Hindostan at the head of an army of true 
believers. Others, with whom he could claim no com¬ 
munity of creed, extended to him the hand of fellowship. 
The Bajah of Jyneghur offered him a lakh of rupees a 
day as soon as the grand army should enter his dis¬ 
trict.* We, who in these times trustingly contemplate 
the settled tranquillity of the north-western provinces 
of India, and remember Zemaun Shah only as the old 
blind pensioner of Loodhianah, can hardly estimate 
aright the real importance of the threatened move¬ 
ment, or appreciate the apprehensions which were felt 
by two governors-general of such different personal cha¬ 
racters as Sir John Shore and Lord Wellesley.f 

The new century had scarcely dawned upon the Eng¬ 
lish in India, when the perils which seemed to threaten 
them from beyond the Indus began to assiune a more 
complicated and perplexing character. The ambition of 
a semi-barbarous monarch and the inflammatory zeal of 
hordes of Mussulman fanatics, were sources of danger, 
which, however alarming, were at least plain and in¬ 
telligible. But when it was suspected that there was 
intrigue of a more remote and insidious character to 
be combated—i hen intelligence, only too credible, of 
the active efforts of French diplomacy in Persia, reached 
the Calcutta Council-Chamber, and it was believed that 


* I find this fact stated, among The execution of his intentions will 
other answers to queries put in 1800-1 be hazardous unless he can obtain 
by Captain Malcolm to Mahomed the co-operation of the Sikhs and 
Sadik, in an interesting manuscript hostages for the continuance of it; 
document forwarded to government and I have great doubt as to his 
by that officer. success.” Lord Wellesley, two or 

t Of the two, perhaps, Lord three years later, spoke of the threat- 
Wellesley regarded the movements ened invasion “ creating the liveliest 
of the Douranee monarch with the sensation throughout Indiaand 
livelier concern. Sir John Shore added, “Every Mahomedan, even in 
wrote: “Report speaks of an in- the remotest re^on of the Deccan, 
vasion of Hindostan by Zemaun waited with anxious expectation for 
Shah, and with respect to his in- the advance of the champion of Is- 
tention is entitled to credit. . . . lam.” 

B 2 



4 


SHAH ZEMAUN AND THE DOUEANEE EMPIEE. 


the emissaries of Napoleon were endeavouring to cement 
alliances hostile to Great Britain in every quarter of the 
Eastern world, the position of affairs in Central Asia was 
regarded with increased anxiety, and their management 
demanded greater wisdom and address. It was now no 
longer a question of mere military defence against the 
inroads of a single invader. The repeated failures of 
Zemaun Shah had, in some degree, mitigated the alarm 
with which his movements were dimly traced in Hin- 
dostan. The Douranee monarch lost something of his 
importance as an independent enemy; but as the willing 
agent of a hostile confederacy, he appeared a more for¬ 
midable opponent, and might have become a more suc¬ 
cessful one. An offensive alliance between France, Persia, 
and Caubul, might have rendered the dangers, which once 
only seemed to threaten us from the North-west, at once 
real and imminent. To secure the friendship of Persia, 
therefore, was the great aim of the British Government. 
It was obvious that, whilst threatened with invasion 
from the West, Zemaun Shah could never conduct to a 
successful issue an expedition against Hindostan; and 
that so long as Persia remained true to Great Britain, 
there was nothing to be apprehended from French in¬ 
trigue in the countries of Central Asia. It was deter¬ 
mined, therefore, to despatch a mission to the Court of 
the Persian Shah, and Captain Malcolm was selected to 
conduct it. 

The choice could not have fallen on a fitter agent. In 
the fullest vigour of life, a young man, but not a young 
soldier, for, born in that year of heroes which witnessed 
the nativity of Wellington, of Napoleon, and of Mehemet 
Ali, he had entered the service of the Company at the 
early age of thirteen. Captain Malcolm brought to the 
difficult and responsible duties entrusted to him, extra¬ 
ordinary energy of mind and activity of body—talents 



Malcolm’s fibst mission to Persia. 


5 


of the most available and useful character—some experi¬ 
ence of native courts and acquaintance with the Oriental 
languages.* He had been successively military secretary 
to the commander-in-chief of Madras, town-major of 
Fort St. George, assistant to the Eesident at Hyderabad, 
and commandant of the infantry of the Nizam’s contin¬ 
gent. When that army took the field in Mysore, and 
shared in the operations against Tippoo Sultan, Captain 
Malcolm accompanied it in the capacity of political 
agent, which was virtually the chief command of the 
force; and, after the reduction of Seringapatam and the 
death of Tippoo, was associated with General Wellesley, 
Colonel Close, and Captain Munro,f in the commission 
that was then appointed for the settlement of the Mysore 
country. This was in 1799. 

In that same year be was selected by Lord Wellesley 
to fill the post of envoy to the Court of Persia. With 
such address had he acquitted himself in all his antece¬ 
dent appointments; so great had been the knowledge of 
native character, the diplomatic tact, and the sound un¬ 
derstanding he had evinced in all his negotiations; that 
at an age when the greater number of his contemporaries 
were in the discht rge of no higher duties than those en¬ 
tailed by the command of a company of sepoys, Captain 
Malcolm was on his way to the presence of the great 
defender of Islamism, charged with one of the most impor¬ 
tant missions that has ever been despatched by the British- 
Indian Government to the Court of a native potentate. 

• The mission, says Captain Malcolm, was “ completely 
successfuland they who do not trouble themselves to 

* This must be taken, however, made but slight progress in it, al- 
wiih some limitation. At this time, though he had somewhat improved 
according to Malcolm's own account, his Hindostanee pronunciation, 
hb knowledge of Persian was not very f Men who lived to occupy a space 

extensive or profound. Hewrotefrom in history, as the Duke of Welfing- 
Shiraz that he had had so little time ton. Sir Barry Close, and Sir Thomas 
to study the language, that he had Munro. 



6 


SHAH ZEMAtJH AND THE DOUBANEB EMPIRE. 


inquire too nicely into the relations of cause and effect, 
may accept this assertion of its success. But the fact is, 
that time and circumstance did more for us than diplo¬ 
macy. It was the ostensible object of Captain Malcolm’s 
mission to instigate the Shah of Persia to move an army 
upon Herat, and so to withdraw Shah Zemaun from his 
threatened invasion of Hindostan. But the move, which 
was to do so much for our security in India, had been 
made before the British ambassador appeared at the 
Persian Court; and the work, which was thus com¬ 
menced by Futteh Ali, was completed by Prince Mah¬ 
moud.* “ You may rest assured,” wrote Captain Mal¬ 
colm, from Ispahan, in October, 1800, “ that Zemaun 
Shah can do nothing in India before the setting in of the 
rains of 1801. He has not time, even if he had the 
power for such an attempt; and by the blessing of God 
he will for some years to come be too much engaged in 
this quarter to think of any other.”f But some years to 
come of empire he was not destined to see. Even as 


^ A writer in the Calcutta 
who betrays an acquaintance with his 
subject such as could only have been 
iictj^uircd in the countries of which he 
writes, or by the examination of an 
immense mass of contemporary re¬ 
cords, justly observes: “That the 
storm was dissipated in the manner 
suggested by Lord Wellesley was cre¬ 
ditable to his lordship’s foresight, but 
was entirely independent of his mea¬ 
sures. ^ The second expedition of Fut¬ 
teh Ali Khan into Khorassan in 1800, 
which drew Shah Zemaun from Can- 
dahor to Herat, took place almost si¬ 
multaneously with Captain Malcolm’s 
journey from the south of Persia to 
the capital. His majesty received the 
British mission at Subzewar; and 
the subsequent proceedings of Shah 
Mahmood, which led, in the sequel, 
to his dethronement, so far from ori¬ 
ginating in British instigation or in 
Persian support, were in reality in¬ 


debted for their success to their entire 
independence of all foreign aid. As 
the minion of Persia, Shah Mahmood 
could never have prevailed against 
his elder brother. As the popular 
Douraneo champion he was irresis¬ 
tible.”— [Calcutta Review^ vol. xii.] 
Malcolm was at Shiraz in June, 1800, 
when he received intelligence of the 
Shah's successes in Khorassan. “ I 
have sent,” he wrote, “ the firman of 
the king, giving an account of his 
successful progress in Khorassan, 
which came yesterday (June 27,, 
1800), that I may peruse it. My 
doing so will be taken as a com- 
liment. I shall have to give a 
andsome present to the Persian that 
brings and reads it: but I shall be 
able correctly to ascertain its re¬ 
sults.”— [MS, Correspondence of Sir 
John Malcolm,'] 

t MS, Correspondence of Sir John 
Malcolm, 



PB00BE8S OF THE FEBSIAK MISSION. 


7 


Malcolm wrote, the days of his sovereignty were num¬ 
bered, and the bugbear of Afghan invasion was passing 
into tradition. 

But neither Lord Wellesley nor Captain Malcolm 
thought only of an Afghan invasion. Their excited 
imaginations beheld clearly the French in the distance; 
and when it became the duty of the' diplomatist to weave 
into the shape of a treaty the defensive policy of the 
British-Indian Government, it was at once apparent that 
apprehensions of French intrigue and French hostility 
were paramount in the minds alike of the Governor- 
General and his representative. It would have been 
sound policy to conceal these apprehensions. Instead 
of this, we declared them to the world; and from that 
time it stood revealed to all nations, by our own show¬ 
ing, that we looked upon Persia and Afghanistan as the 
high-road from Europe to the heart of our Indian Em¬ 
pire. The terras proposed by Captain Malcolm were 
acceded to with but little reluctance by the Persian 
Court. The envoy was empowered either to offer a sub¬ 
sidy of from three to four lakhs of rupees for a term of 
three years, or by a liberal distribution of presents to 
the king and hit principal ministers, to bribe them into 
acquiescence. Malcolm chose the latter course. He 
threw about his largesses with an unstinting hand, and 
everything went smoothly with him. The name of 
England became great in Iran; and in the breasts of the 
highest and the lowest a fever of cupidity was raised, of 
which every subsequent mention of an English mission 
brought back a serious relapse. 

The ffirther Malcolm advanced into the interior, the 
greater was the attention shown to the Mission, for the 
greater was the renown of the liberality of the Christian 
Elchee. Every difficulty melted away beneath the 



8 


S HAH ZEMAITN AUD THE DOUEANEE EMPIRE. 


magic touch of British gold.* There had been at the 
outset some trifling disputes about formalities—about 
titles and designations—but these were soon cleared 
away; and the serious business of the Mission proceeded 
in the midst of feasts and formalities to a satisfactory 
completion. Of all the terms proposed by Captain Mal¬ 
colm, but one was demurred to by the Persian Court. 
“And that even,” writing some years afterwards, he 
says, “was not rejected. It was referred for future 
settlement through the agency of Hadjee Ehalil Khan, 
who was appointed ambassador on the part of the Persian 
Government to India.”f This proposal related to the 
cession of the island of Kishm in the Persian Gulf, on 
the necessity of which Malcolm wrote a gigantic state- 
paper, and never ceased to expatiate so long as he had 
a hand in the game of Persian diplomacy. But other 
able men then and since have scouted this favourite idea 
of a settlement in the Persian Gulf as a defence against 
European encroachments; and shown, by undeniable 
geographical demonstration, the shadowy nature alike of 
the danger and the defence. 

In February, 1801, Captain Malcolm reported that he 
had accomplished the object of his mission, and brought 
his labours to a close. “ Whether with credit or not,” 
he added in a private letter, “ it is the province of my 
superiors to judge. I can only say, in self-defence, that 
I have done as much as 1 was able; and no man can do 

* But before Malcolm^ left Shiraz thought necessary to answer, or rather 
he began to have some misgiyings on further, the ends of my mission, and to 
the score of his lavish expenditure, support the dignity of the Briti^ 
“ I trust I will not disappoint your Government; but people sometimes 
hopes,** he writes from that place, differ in their opinions on such points, 
under date Jul^ 26, 1800, “ but the However, ‘All’s well Ibat ends well,’ 
expense 1 have incurred is heavy, and as the man called his play.”— 
it is on that score alone I am alarmed. Correspondence of Sir John Malcolm.'] 
Not that it is one farthing more than f Brigadier ^General Malcolm to 
I have to the best of my judgment Lord Minto^ October y 1810. 



THE ANTI-GAliUCAlI TREATY. 


9 


more. I am far from admiring my own work, or con¬ 
sidering it (as termed in one of the preambles) a beau¬ 
tiful image in the mirror perpetuity. It is, on the 
contrary, I know, a very incorrect performance; and I can 
hope it to meet with a favourable consideration only on 
the grounds of the difficulties I had to encounter in a 
first negotiation with a government not two stages re¬ 
moved from a state of barbarism.”* 

The treaty, indeed, called for apology; but not on the 
grounds indicated in this deprecatory letter. It stipu¬ 
lated that if ever again the Douranee monarch should 
be induced to attempt the invasion of Hindostan, the 
King of Persia should be bound to lay waste, with a 
great army, the country of the Afghans; and conclude 
no peace with its ruler that was not accompanied 
with a solemn engagement to abstain from all aggres¬ 
sions upon the English. But it was remarkable chiefly 
for the bitterness with which it proscribed the French. 
“ Should an army of the French nation,” it stated, 
“ attempt to settle, with a view of establishing them¬ 
selves on any of the islands or shores of Persia, a con¬ 
joint force shall be appointed by the two high con¬ 
tracting parties to act in co-operation for their ex¬ 
pulsion and extirpation, and to destroy and put an end 
to the foundation of their treason; and if any of the 
great men of the French nation express a wish or desire 
to obtain a place of residence or dwelling in any of the 
islands or shores of the kingdom of Persia, that they may 

• MS, Correspondence ,—^In another wishing to demonstrate the advan- 
letter Malcolm says: “ Had 1 to do tages of simplicity of style^ he pro- 
with men of sense and moderation 1 duced a copy of an Indian treaty, 
should not fear, but I have to deal when the M^za, after reading two 
with a ^ race that are possessed of articles of it, declared that he would 
nei^».*' The necessity of adopting “ give in his resignation to his sove- 
m all his negotiations the most flowery reign rather than that such a docu- 
language,^ somewhat puzzled him at ment should be copied into the re- 
first; but in time he fell into the right cords of the office over which he 
vein of discourse. On one occasion, presided.'* 



10 SHAH ZEMAUN AND THE DOTJBANEE EMPIRE. 

raise the standard of abode or settlement, leave for their 
residing in such a place shall not be granted.” Nor was 
this all. The British envoy succeeded in persuading the 
Shah to issue a firman of a still more vindictive character. 
In this document the king exhorted his provincial gover¬ 
nors to “ expel and extirpate the French, and never allow 
them to obtain a footing in any place;” adding, “ you are 
at full liberty to disgrace and slay the intruders.” These 
proceedings have been severely censured by French 
writers, and even English politicians have declared them 
to be “an eternal disgrace to our Indian diplomacy.” 
But those were days when, even in India, men’s minds 
were unhinged and unsettled, and their ideas of right 
and wrong confounded by the monstrosities of the French 
revolution. Kevolutionary Frenchmen were looked upon 
as animals to be slain and exterminated with as little 
ceremony and as little compunction as venomous rep¬ 
tiles or savage beasts. It was conceived that there was 
a great and pressing danger, and Captain Malcolm was 
sent to combat it; but it may be questioned whether the 
information which the mission brought back was not all 
the benefit resulting from the movement. The treaty 
was never formally ratified; and the Persian Court praC' 
tically ignored its obligations as soon as it was no longer 
convenient to observe them. 

Before the mission of Captain Malcolm to the West, but 
little was known in India, and nothing in Great Britain, 
about the Douranee Empire, the nature and extent of its 
resources, the quality of its soldiers, and the character of 
its ruler. The information which that officer acquired 
was not of a very alarming description. The Douranee 
Empire, which has since been shorn of some of its fairest 
provinces, then consisted of Afghanistan, part of Kho- 
rassan. Cashmere, and the Derajat. The Sikh nation had 



CHABACTBE OF THE AFGHANS. 


11 


not then acquired the strength whict a few years later 
enabled it, under the military directorship of Bunjeet 
Singh, to curb the pretensions and to mutilate the empire 
of its dominant neighbour. That empire extended from 
Herat in the west, to Cashmere in the east; from northern 
Balkh to southern Shikarpoor. Bounded on the north and 
east by immense mountain ranges, and on the south and 
west by vast tracts of sandy desert, it opposed to external 
hostility natural defences of a formidable character. The 
general aspect of the country was wild and forbidding; 
in the imagination of the people haunted with goules 
and genii; but not unvaried by spots of gentler beauty in 
the valleys and on the plains, where the fields were 
smiling with cultivation, and the husbandman might be 
seen busy at his work. 

Few and far between as were the towns, the king¬ 
dom was thinly populated. The people were a race 
—or a group of races—of hardy, vigorous moun¬ 
taineers. The physical character of the country had 
stamped itself on the moral conformation of its in¬ 
habitants. Brave, independent, but of a turbulent vin¬ 
dictive character, their very existence seemed to depend 
upon a constant succession of internal feuds. The wisest 
among them would probably have shaken their heads in 
negation of the adage —“ Happy the country whose antinlg 
are a blank.” They knew no happiness in anything but 
strife. It was their delight to live in a state of chronic 
warfare. Among such a people civil war has a natural 
tendency to perpetuate itself. Blood is always crying 
aloud for blood. Revenge was a virtue among them; the 
heritage of retribution passed from father to son; and 
murder became a solemn duty. Living under a dry, 
clear, bracing climate, but one subject to considerable 
alternations of heat and cold, the people were strong and 
active; and as navigable rivers were wanting, and the 
precipitous nature of the country forbade the use of 



12 SHAH ZBMATJN AND THE DODBANEE EMPIRE. 


wheeled carriages, they were for the most part good 
horsemen, and lived much in the saddle. Early trained 
to the use of arms, compelled constantly to wear and 
often to use them in the ordinary intercourse of life, 
every man was more or less a soldier or a bandit. Their 
very shepherds were men of strife. The pastoral and 
the predatory character were strangely blended; and the 
tented cantonments of the sheep-drivers often bristled 
into camps of war. 

But there was a brighter side to the picture. Of a 
cheerful, lively disposition, seemingly but little in ac¬ 
cordance with the outward gravity of their long beards 
and sober garments, they might be seen in their villages, 
at evening tide, playing or dancing like children in their 
village squares; or, assembling in the Fakir’s gardens, to 
smoke and talk, retailing the news gathered in the shops, 
reciting stories, and singing their simple Afghan ballads, 
often expressive of that tender passion which, among 
them alone of all Oriental nations, is worthy of the name 
of love. Hospitable and generous, they entertained the 
stranger without stint, and even his deadliest enemy was 
safe beneath the Afghan’s roof. There was a simple 
courtesy in their manner which contrasted favourably 
with the polished insincerity of the Persians on one side, 
and the arrogant ferocity of the Rohillas on the other. 
Judged by the strict standard of a Christian people, they 
were not truthful in word or honest in deed, but, side by 
side with other Asiatic nations, their truthfulness and 
honesty were conspicuous. Kindly and considerate to 
their immediate dependents, the higher classes were fol¬ 
lowed-with loyal zeal and served with devoted fidelity 
by the lower; and, perhaps, in no eastern country was 
less of tyranny exercised over either the slaves of the 
household or the inmates of the zenana. Unlettered 
were they, but not incurious; and although their more 
polished brethren of Persia looked upon them as the 



THE PBODUCTS OE AFGHANISTAN. 


18 


Boeotians of Central Asia, their Spartan simpJidtj and 
manliness more than compensated for the absence of 
the Attic wit and eloquence of their western neigh¬ 
bours. 

Soldiers, husbandmen, and shepherds, they were de¬ 
scribed as the very antithesis of a nation of shopkeepers. 
The vocation of the tradesman they despised. To Tau- 
jiks, Hindoos, and other aliens, was the business of sell¬ 
ing entrusted, except upon that large scale which enti¬ 
tled the dealer to be regarded as a merchant, and gene¬ 
rally entailed upon him the necessities of a wandering 
and adventurous life. The principal commerce of the 
country was with the Persian and Russian states. In 
the bazaars of Herat, Candahar, and Caubul the manu¬ 
factures of Ispahan, Yezd, and Cashan, the spices of 
India, and the broad-cloths of Russia, brought by Astra- 
kan and Bokhara, found a ready market. Occasionally, 
when the settled state of the country gave encourage¬ 
ment to commercial enterprise, an adventurous merchant 
would make his way, through Dera from Bombay, with 
a cafila of British goods, for the scarlet cloths of England 
were in especial demand to deck the persons of the body 
servants of tht king. The indigenous products of the 
country were few, but important; for the rich shawls of 
Cashmere and the gaudy chintzes of Mooltan, exported 
in large quantities, were in good repute all over the 
civilised world.* At Herat some velvets and taffetas of 
good quality were manufactured, but only for internal 
consumption; whilst the assafoetida of that place, the 
madder of Candahar, and the indigo of the Derajat,f 

♦ There was a considerable trade which on an average consist of 
in horses; but rather through than seven hundred camels, each carry- 
from Afghanistan. The animals were ing eighty Tabrizee maunds. These 
brought from Balkh and Toorkistan, come into Persia by the route of 
fattened at Caubul, and sold in India. Candahar and Herat .”—[Mahomed 
^ t “ Five or six cafilas of this in- Sadik's Answers to Captain Malcolm^ 
digo leave the Derajat affnually, 1800-1 (MS'.).] 



14 SHAH ZEMAUN AND THE DOURANEB EMPIRE. 

found a market in the Pemian cities, and the dried fruits 
of the country were in request in all neighbouring 
parts. These, a few other drugs of little note, and some 
iron from the Hindoo Koosh and the Solimanee range, 
formed the main staple of Afghan commerce. Between 
the large towns there was a constant interchange of com¬ 
modities; and long cafilas, or caravans, were ever in 
motion, from east to west, and from north to south, toil¬ 
ing across the sandy plains or struggling through the pre¬ 
cipitous defiles, exposed to the attacks of predatory 
tribes, who levied their contributions often not without 
strife and bloodshed. 

Such was the not very flattering picture of the com¬ 
mercial wealth of the Douranee Empire, which was 
painted by Captain Malcolm’s informants. Nor was the 
military strength of the Empire set forth in any more 
striking colours. Distance and ignorance had vastly 
magnified the true proportions of that famous military 
power, which was to have overrun Hindostan, and driven 
the white men into the sea. The main strength of the 
Afghan army was in the Douranee horse. The Doura¬ 
nee tribes had been settled in Western Afghanistan by 
Nadir Shah. He had first conquered, then taken them 
into his service, and then parcelled out amongst them, as 
his military dependents, the lands which had before been 
held by a motley race of native cultivators. It was the 
policy of Ahmed Shah and his successors—a policy 
which was subsequently reversed by the Barukzye sir¬ 
dars—to aggrandise and elevate these powerful tribes, by 
heaping upon them privileges and immunities at the ex¬ 
pense of their less favoured countrymen. Upon the 
misery and humiliation of others, the Douranee tribes 
throve and flourished. The chief oflSces of the state were 
divided amongst them; they held their lands exempt 
from taxation. The only demand made upon them, in 



dA.Rld.Yi 


15 


return for the privileges they enjoyed, was that they 
should furnish a certain contingent of troops.* It was 
said to be the principle of the military tenure by which 
they held their lands, that for every plough used in culti- 
vationf they should contribute a horseman for the service 
of the state. But it does not appear that the integrity of 
this system was long preserved. In a little time there 
ceased to be any just proportion between the ploughs and 
the horsemen; and it became diflScult to accoimt for the 
arbitrary manner in which each of the different Douranee 
clans furnished its respective quota of troops.J 

In the time of Ahmed Shah the Douranee horsemen 
mustered about 6000 strong. The other western tribes and 
the Persian stipendiaries together reached about the same 
number. In the reign of Timour Shah, the army was com¬ 
puted at some 40,000 soldiers, almost entirely horsemen ;§ 


♦ And even this obligation ceased 
to be recognised by Abmed Shah, 
who paid the Douranee horsemen for 
their services, alleging that their lands 
had been bestowed upon them as a 
free and unencumbered gift. In Ze- 
maun Shah’s time they held pay-cer¬ 
tificates, available when they were 
called out on active service, and rea¬ 
lised, if they could, t.ie amount due 
to them by means of o 'ders on Cash- 
mere, Mooltan, and other outlying 
provinces. — [J/aS. liecords-~-llawUn-‘ 
son and Malcolm,'] 

t Or, more strictly, for every parcel 
of land demanding the services of a 
single kulha, or plough; from which 
the division of land, and the assess¬ 
ment founded upon it, took its name. 

t Thus the Fopulzy es, who had 965 
kulbaSf furnished, in Ahmed Shah’s 
time, 806 horsemen ; the Alekozyes, 
with 1050 kulbas, gave 851; the Ba- 
r^zyes, who had 1018 kulbas^ fur¬ 
nished 907; and so on. I must state 
tlmt I do not derive these details from 
Sir John Malcolm and his informants, 
but from Major (now Colonel) Baw- 
linson, who extracted them from 
the Candahar records when Political 


Agent at that place. To an elaborate 
report on the revenue system of 
Western Afghanistan, especially as 
affecting the Douranee tribes, drawn 
up by that accomplished officer in 
1842, I am indebted for much va¬ 
luable information, which will be 
found incorporated with subsequent 
portions of the narrative. 

§ The authority for this, according 
to Malcolm’s informant, was the Cau- 
bul records. The numbers set down 
are 12,000 Douranees, 12,000 Kuz- 
zilbashcs, 8000 Gliilzycs, 3000 Kho- 
rassanees, 3W0 Beloocbees, 300 Ha- 
zarehs. It is not improbable that in 
this computation, which is somewhat 
va^ely given, account is taken of the 
reliefs; so that, for every one horse¬ 
man on service at a time, two are set 
down in the records. Forster, who 
travelled in Afghanistan in the reign 
of Timour Shah, says that his entire 
anny did not exceed 30,000 men, nor 
his revenue a million of our money. 
How these men were not paid by 
Timour Shah, and how they con¬ 
trived to pay themselves, m^ be ga¬ 
thered frona a passage in Forster’s 
Travels, which is worth transcribing; 



16 fiTTATT ZEMAUN AND THE DOUBANEE EMPIEE. 


but no such force had served under Zemaun Shah, and 
they who had seen in 1799-1800, the muster of his troops 
near Caubul, and had access to the returns of the muster- 
masters, reported that he then assembled only some ten 
or twelve thousand men, and aU, with the exception 
of a few Persian stipendiaries, in the immediate service 
of the Wuzeer, very miserably equipped. Even the 
Kuzzilbashes, when Shah Zemaun took the field in 
1799, refiised to accompany the projected expedition, on 
the plea that they wanted arms to fight their battles, 
and money to support their wives. 

Fighting men, indeed, were never wanting in Afghan¬ 
istan, but money was wanting to induce them to leave 
their homes. It was said that Shah Zemaun might, on 
any great national enterprise, have led 200,000 men 
into the field, if he had had money to pay them. 
But his entire revenues were not equal to the pay¬ 
ment of a very much smaller force. He was con¬ 
tinually being deserted by his soldiery, at critical times, 
for want of the sinews of war to retain them. The 
emptiness of his treasury, indeed, reduced him to all 
kinds of shifts and expedients, such as that of raising 
the value of the current coin of the realm. But no 
devices of this character could confer upon him a really 
formidable army. In one important branch he was 
miserably deficient. The Douranee artillery consisted 
of some twelve brass field-pieces and five hundred 
zumboorucks, or camel guns. Even these were mise- 

“ This day a body of Afghan cavalry tures almost the only means of sub¬ 
encamped in the environs of Akorah, sistence ; for when inactive, they are 
and overspread the country like a often reduced to such distress by the 
swarm of locusts, devouring and de- blind parsimony of their prince, that 
stroying wherever they went. It their horses, arms, and clothes, are 
seemed as if the land was invaded; sold for a livelihood ” The same 
they entered in a violent manner writer, speaking generally of the Af- 
every village within their scope, and ghan army, says that he felt a sen- 
fed themselves and horses at the ex- sible disappointment at seeing it com- 
pense of the inhabitants. Such ex- posed of a tumultuous body, without 
peditions afford these hungry crea- order or common discipline.” 



CHABACTEB OF ZEICAUN SHAH. 


17 


rably equipped; the camels wanted drivers, and the guns 
were in bad condition. It was said by one who visited 
the encampment of the grand army, under 2emaun 
Shah, in 1799*1800, that there were not above 500 
good horses in camp, and that these belonged principally 
to the King and the Wuzeer. The men were moimted for 
the most part on yaboos, or ponies, few of which, at a 
liberal valuation, were worth a hundred rupees. 

Such was the army with which Zemaun Shah medi¬ 
tated the invasion of Hindostan. The personal character 
of the monarch was not mote formidable than the army 
which he commanded. More of a scholar than of a 
soldier, very strict in the observances of his religion, and 
an assiduous reader of the Koran, his way of life, judged 
by the princely standard of Central Asia, was sufficiently 
moral and decorous. Humane and generous, of a gentle, 
plastic disposition; very prone to take for granted the 
truth of all that was told him; by no means remarkable 
for personal activity, and somewhat wanting in courage, 
he was designed by nature for a facile puppet in the 
hands of a crafty Wuzeer. And such was Zemaun Shah 
in the expert hands of Wuffadar Khan. It was reported 
of him that he took no active part in the management of 
public afiairs; and that when it was politic that he should 
make a show of government and appear at Durbar, what 
he said was little more than a public recital of a lesson 
well learnt in private. He was, indeed, the mere mouth¬ 
piece of the minister—of a worse and more designing 
man. Content with the gilded externals of majesty, he 
went abroad sumptuously arrayed and magnificently 
attended; and mighty in all the state papers of the time 
was the name of Zemaun Shah. But it was shrewdly 
suspected that, bad the state of his domestic relations and 
the military resources at his command enabled him to 

VOL. I. c 



18 RTTATT ZEMATJN AND THE DOURANBE EMPIRE. 


take the field, as the invader of Hindostan, a bribe 
any day offered to the Wuzeer might have broken up 
the Douranee army, and kept the invader quietly at 
home. 

On the whole, he was a popular ruler. The culti¬ 
vating classes were happy under his government. It 
recognised their claims to remuneration for whatever was 
taken fi:om them for the service of the state, and no acts 
of fraud and oppression were ever committed in his 
name. The merchants and traders were secure under 
his rule. In the midst of much that was base and un¬ 
worthy in the character and conduct of the minister, he 
had a reputation for fair dealing with these classes, and 
they looked up to him for protection. But far otherwise 
were his relations with the warlike tribes and the chief 
people of the empire. They were not without feelings 
of loyalty towards the king; but it was rather affection 
for his person, than satisfaction with the government of 
which he was the head. The grasping character of the 
minister, who engrossed to himself all the patronage of 
the state, rendered him, in spite of his courteous manners 
and affable demeanour, obnoxious to the principal Sirdars; 
and something of this disaffection began in time to be 
directed against the monarch himself, who had too long 
abandoned his own better nature to the sinister guidance 
of the unprincipled and unpopular Wuzeer. 

Like many a monarch, abler and better than himself, 
Zemaun Shah had chosen his minister unwisely, and was 
undone by the choice. When he entrusted the affairs of 
his empire to the administration of Wuffadar Khan, he 
made the great mistake of his life. A base and design¬ 
ing man, without any of those co mma nding qualities 
which impart something of dignity and heroism to crime, 
the Wuzeer bent his sovereign, but could not bend cir- 



FCTTEH KHAN AND THE BAETTKZYES. 


19 


cumstances to his wilL The loyalty of the Douranee 
sirdars he could extinguish, but their power he could 
not break by his oppressions. Alarmed at their in¬ 
creasing influence, Wi^adar Khan sought to encompass 
them in the toils of destruction; but he destroyed 
himself and involved his sovereign in the ruin. Prince 
Mahmoud was in arms against his royal brother. 
Exasperated by the conduct of Wufiadar Khan, the 
Douranees threw all the weight of their influence into 
the scales in favour of the prince. The rebellion which 
they headed acquired strength and swelled into a revo¬ 
lution. And then began that great strife between the 
royal princes and the Douranee sirdars, which half a 
century of continued conflict, now witnessing the supre¬ 
macy of the one, now of the other, has scarcely even yet 
extinguished. 

The two principal clans or tribes of the Douranees 
were the Populzyes and the Barukzyes. The Suddozye, 
or Royal race, was one of the branches of the former. 
The Bamezye, in which the Wuzeership was vested, but 
not by inalienable right, was another branch of the same 
tribe. Second in influence to the Populzyes, and greater 
in extent, was the tribe of the Barukzyes. To this tribe 
belonged Futteh Khan. He was the son of Poyndah 
Khan, an able statesman and a gallant soldier, whose wis¬ 
dom in council and experience in war had long sustained 
the tottering fortunes of Timour Shah. On the death of 
that feeble monarch he had supported the claims of Ze- 
maun Shah. With as little wisdom as gratitude, that 
prince, it has been seen, sufiered himself to be cajoled by a 
man of less honesty and less ability, and became a tool in the 
hands of Wuffadar Khan. The favourite of two monarchs 
was disgraced; and, from a powerful friend, became the 
resolute enemy of the reigning family. He conspired 
agmnst the King and the Wuzeer; his designs were de- 

c2 



20 SHAH ZKMAUN AND THE DOCBANEE EMPIEE. 


tected; and he perished miserably with his associates in 
the enterprise of treason. 

Poyndah Khan died, leaving twenty-one sons, of whom 
Futteh Khan was the eldest. They are said, after the 
death of their father, to have stooped into a cloud of 
poverty and humiliation, and to have wandered about 
begging their bread. But their trials were only for a 
season. The Barukzye brothers soon emerged from the 
night of suffering that surrounded them. There was no 
power in the Douranee Empire which could successfully 
cope with these resolute, enterprising spirits. In Afghan¬ 
istan revenge is a virtue. The sons of Poyndah Khan 
had the murder of their father to avenge; and they 
rested not till the bloody obligation had been faithfully 
fulfilled. Futteh Khan had fled into Persia, and there 
leagued himself with Prince Mahmoud. Repeated failure 
had not extinguished the ambition of this restless prince. 
The accession of the Barukzye sirdar now inspired him 
with new courage. Upheld by the strong arm of the 
“ king-maker,” he determined to strike another blow for 
the sovereignty of Caubul. With a few horsemen they 
entered A^hanistan, and, raising the standard of revolt, 
pushed on to unexpected conquest. 

There were not many in Afghanistan, nor many among 
the disinterested lookers-on at that fraternal strife, who 
were inclined to jeopardise their character for sagacity 
by predicting the success of the prince. Everything, in¬ 
deed, was against him. His treasury was always empty. 
His friends were not men of note. With the exception 
of the Barukzye sirdars,* no chiefs of influence espoused 


* And even the character of Fut¬ 
teh Khan was at that time yery little 
understood and appreciated. He was 
described to Captain Malcolm as a 
man of influence, but of low, dissi¬ 
pated habits, who spent all his time 


in drinking wine and in smoking bang. 
It should be mentioned, however, 
that Prince Ferooz, Mahmoud’s bro¬ 
ther, was associated in this enterprise. 
He became master of Herat, whilst 
Mahmoud pushed on to Candahar. 



SUCCESSES OP PRINCE MAHMOUD. 


21 


his cause. His followers were described to Captaiu Mal¬ 
colm as men “ of low condition and mean extraction.” 
But in spite of the slender support which he received, 
and the strenuous efforts which were made to destroy 
him, the successes which from time to time he achieved 
seemed to show that there was some vitality in his cause. 
A divinity seemed to hedge him in, and to protect him 
from the knife of the assassin. He escaped as though 
by a miracle the snares of his enemies, and from every 
new deliverance seemed to gather something of prospe¬ 
rity and strength. It was after one of these marvellous 
escapes, when the weapons of the Kuzzilbashes* had fallen 
from their hands, palsied by the mysterious presence of 
the blood royal, that Candahar fell before the insurgents. 
With two or three thousand horsemen of the Barukzye 
and Achekzye tribes, Mahmoud invested the place for 
thirty-three days, at the end of which Futteh Khan, 
with a handful of resolute men, escaladed the fort near 
the Shikarpoor gate, and put the panic-struck garrison 
to flight. The Meer Akhoor, or Master of the Horse, 
fled for his life. The Shah-zadah Hyder sought sanc¬ 
tuary at the tomb of Ahmed Shah; and Prince 
Mahmoud becam i master of the place. 

It is not a peculiarity of Eastern princes alone to 
shine with a brighter and a steadier light in the hour 
of adversity than in the hour of success. The trials of 
prosperity were too great for Prince Mahmoud, as they 
have been for greater men; and he soon began to lose 
ground at Candahar, The marvel is, that his fortunes 
were not utterly marred by his own folly. It was only 
by the concurrence of greater folly elsewhere that in this 

* The Kuzzilbashes, of whom a Persian settlers in Afghanistan; many 
more particular account will be given of whom are retained in the military 
in the course of this narrative, are service of the state. 



22 RTTArr ^MATJN AND THE DOUEANEE EMPIBE. 


conjuncture lie was saved from ruin. His impolitic and 
liauglity conduct towards the Sirdars early demonstrated 
his unfitness for rule, and well-nigh precipitated the en¬ 
terprise in which he was engaged into a sea of disastrous 
failure. There seemed, indeed, to be only one thing 
that could sustain him, and that one thing was wanting. 
He was as poor as he was unpopular. But the days of 
Shah Zemaun’s sovereignty were numbered, and no folly 
on the part of his antagonist could arrest the doom that 
was brooding over him. 

At this time Zemaun Shah was on his way towards 
the borders of Hindostan. He had advanced as far 
as Peshawur, when intelligence of the fall of Candahar 
reached his camp. It was believed that he had little 
actual design of advancing beyond the Sutlej. Partly with, 
a view of enforcing the payment of the Sindh triWe— 
partly to overawe the Sikhs, and partly to abstract his 
own army from the dangerous vicinity of Candahar, and 
the corrupting influences to which in such a neighbour¬ 
hood it was exposed, he had made this move to the south¬ 
ward. It was very obvious that in such a condition of 
his own empire, all idea of invading Hindostan was 
utterly wild and chimerical. If such an idea had ever 
been formed, it was now speedily abandoned. All other 
considerations gave place to the one necessity of saving 
his kingdom firom the grasp of his brother. He hastened 
back to Western Afghanistan; but an impolitic expedi¬ 
tion imder the prince, Soojah-ool-Moolk, who was soon 
destined to play a conspicuous part in the great Central- 
Asian drama, had crippled his military resources, and 
when he retraced his steps he found that the strength of 
Prince Mahmoud had increased as his own had dimi¬ 
nished. He marched against the rebels only to be de¬ 
feated. The main body of the royal troops was imder 



VALL OB ZEUAT7N SHAH. 


the command of one Ahmed Khan, a chief of the Noor* 
zye tribe. Watching his opportunity, Futteh Khan 
seized the person of the Sirdar’s brother, and threatened 
to destroy him if the chief refused to come over bodily 
with his troops, and swell the ranks of the insuigents. 
The character of the Barukzye leader certified that this 
was no idle threat. Ahmed Khan, already wavering in 
his loyalty, for the conduct of the Wuzeer had alienated 
his heart from the royal cause, at once made his election. 
When the troops of Shah Zemaun came up with the ad¬ 
vance of the rebel army, he joined the insurgent force. 
From that time the cause of the royalists became hope¬ 
less. Disaster followed disaster till its ruin was complete. 
The minister and his master fell into the hands of the 
enemy. Wuffadar Khan, with his brothers, was put to 
death. Death, too, awaited the king—^but the man was 
suffered to live. They doomed him only to political ex¬ 
tinction. There is a cruel, but a sure way of achieving 
this in all Mahomedan countries. Between a blind king 
and a dead king there is no pobtical difference. The 
eyes of a conquered monarch are punctured with a lancet, 
and he de facto ceases to reign. They blinded Shah 
Zemaun, and cast him into prison; and the Douranee 
Empire owned Shah Mahmoud as its head. 

So fell Zemaun Shah, the once dreaded Afghan monarch, 
whose threatened invasion of Hindostan had for years been 
a ghastly phantom haunting the Council-Chamber of the 
British-Indian Government. He survived the loss of his 
sight nearly half a century; and as the neglected pen¬ 
sioner of Loodhianah, to the very few who could remem¬ 
ber the awe which his name once inspired, must have 
presented a curious spectacle of fallen greatness—an illus¬ 
tration of the mutability of human affairs scarcely paral¬ 
leled in the history of the world. He died at last full 



24 sffAH ZBMAUN AND THE DOURANBB EMPIBB. 


of years, empty of honours, his death barely worth a 
newspaper-record or a paragraph in a state paper. 
Scarcely identified in men’s minds with the Zemaun Shah 
of the reigns of Sir John Shore and Lord Wellesley, he 
lived an appendage, alike in prosperity and adversity, to 
his younger brother, Soojah-ool-Moolk. That Soojah 
had once been reputed and described as an appendage to 
Shah Zemaun—“ his constant companion at all times.” 
They soon came to change places, and in a country where 
fraternal strife is the rule and not the exception, it is 
worthy of record that those brothers were true to each 
other to the last.* 

^ Since this passage was written, and the Sikhs united should make 
I have had reason to think that it him (Shah Zemaun) King of Afghan- 
ought to be acc^ted with some qua- istan.—[ Correspondence 

lification. In October, 1840, when of Sir W, K Macnaghten,} This 
Dost Mahomed was flitting about the story may seem to be at variance 
Kohistan, and the greatest anxiety with the statement in the preceding 
prevailed among our political officers page,—that “ between a blind king 
at Caubul, Sh^ Soojah said to Sir and a dead king there is no politick 
William Macnaghten, just as he was differencebut I am acquainted with 
taking leave after an excited confer- no Mahomedan law that excludes a 
ence, “You know I have from the blind prince from the throne. The 
first expressed to you a mean opinion exclusion is based upon the popular 
of my own countrymen. If you assumption that blindness disqualifies 
want further proof, look at that from a man from managing the affairs of an 
my own brother.” The Shah then empire. If, however, in Mahomedan 
showed Macnaghten an intercepted countries, there have been no excep- 
letter, bearing the seal of Shah Ze- tions to this rule—of which I am 
maun, to the address of Sultan Ma- doubtful—in the regal line, it is cer- 
homed Barukzye, purposing that, as tain that many provincial govern- 
Shah Soojah had made over the ments have been in the hands of men 
country to the infidels, the Barukzyes who have been deprived of their sight. 



KAlUEiT DATS OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


25 


CHAPTER n. 

[ 1801 — 1808 .] 

The Early Days of Soojah-ool-Moolk—Disastrous Commencement of his 
Career—Defeat of Shah Mahmoud—Reign of Shah Soojah—The Insur¬ 
rection of Prince Kaysur—Tidings of the Britbh Mission. 

From the fall of Zemaun Shah we are to date the rise 
of Soojah-ool-Moolk. They were brothers by the same 
father and mother. At the tkne of the political extinc¬ 
tion of the elder, the younger was about twenty years 
of age. He had taken no part in the government; was 
but lightly esteemed for courage; and had little place in 
the thoughts of the people, except as an appendage of 
the reigning m )narch. In command of the royal troops, 
and in charge of the family and property of the king, 
whilst Zemaun Shah was striking a last blow for em¬ 
pire in the West, he had held his post at Peshawur. 
There he received the disastrous tidings of the fate that 
had descended upon his brother and his prince. He at 
once proclaimed himself king, began to levy troops, and 
in September, 1801, marched upon Caubul with an army 
of 10,000 men. Victorious at the outset, he did not 
improve his successes, and was eventually defeated by 
the Douranees under Futteh Khan. The destinies of 
princes were in the hands of the powerful Barukzye 



26 


EABLT DATS GS SHAH 800 JAH. 


sirdar. TTia energies and his influence alone upheld 
the drooping sovereignty of Shah Mahmoud. Weak 
and unprincipled, indolent and rapacious, that prince 
had been raised to the throne by Futteh Khan; and, 
though it was not in the nature of things that a ruler so 
feeble and so corrupt should long retain his hold of the 
empire, for a while the strong hand of the minister 
sustained him in his place. 

Soojah-ool-Moolk fled to the fastnesses of the Khybur 
Pass. In the winter of 1801 the Grhilzyes broke out 
into open rebellion against the Douranee power; but 
were defeated with great slaughter. The Douranees re¬ 
turned to Caubul, and erected, from the heads of the 
conquered, a pyramid of human skulls. In the spring 
of the following year the same restless tribe was again 
in rebellion; and again the energies of Futteh Khan 
were put forth for the suppression of the dangerous spirit 
of Ghilzye revolt. In March, 1802, the insurgents were 
a second time chastised; and, it is said, on the same 
day, Soojah-ool-Moolk, who had raised an army in the 
Khybur and marched upon Peshawur, sustained a se¬ 
vere defeat at the hands of the Douranee garrison, and 
was driven back into the obscurity from which he had 
fruitlessly emerged. 

Thus for a while was tranquillity restored to the Dou¬ 
ranee Empire. Beading and conversing with learned 
men, and taking counsel with his military adherents, 
Soojah-ool-Moolk, from the time of his defeat, remained 
inactive in the Afreedi country. Even there the .vigi¬ 
lant enmity of the Wuzeer tracked the unhappy prince. 
There was no security in such retirement. The shadow 
of Futteh Khan darkened his resting-place and disturbed 
his repose. He fled to Shawl; and there, in the depth 
of winter and on the verge of starvation, wandered about, 



DECLINE OE SHAH MAHMOXTD. 


27 


making vain endeavours to subsist himself and a few 
followers by the sale of his royal jewels. Among a 
people little understanding the worth of such costly ar¬ 
ticles, purchasers were with difficulty to be found. In 
the extremity which then beset him he changed the cha¬ 
racter of the pedlar for that of the bandit, and levied 
money by plundering caravans, and giving notes of hand 
for the amount that he raised. In this manner he col¬ 
lected three lakhs of rupees, and was enabled to levy 
troops for an attack upon Candahar. But Providence 
did not smile upon his endeavours. He was again re¬ 
pulsed. Again was he involved in a great ruin; with 
little hope of extrication by the energy of his own 
struggles, or the inherent vitality of his cause. 

But in the mean while the sovereignty of Shah Mah¬ 
moud was falling to pieces by itself. He had risen upon 
the weakness of his predecessor, and now by his own 
weakness was he to be cast down. What Shah Zemaun 
had done for him, was he now doing for Soojah-ool-Moolk. 
In the absence of Futteh Khan, the Kuzzilbashes were 
suffered to ride roughshod over the people. The ex¬ 
cesses which they committed at Caubul scattered the 
last remnant ff popularity which still adhered to the 
person of the Shah. At last an open outbreak occurred 
between the Sheeas and the Soonees. The king identi¬ 
fied himself with the former; Akrum Khan, Mooktor- 
ood-Dowlah, with the latter. In this conjuncture Soojah- 
ool-Moolk was sent for to strengthen the hands of Shah 
Mahmoud’s opponents. When he arrived, he found 
Caubul in a state of siege. Futteh Khan had by this 
time returned to aid the royal cause, but too late to re¬ 
gain the ground that had been lost in his absence. There 
was an engagement, which lasted from morning to even¬ 
ing prayer, and at the end of which Mahmoud was de¬ 
feated. Futteh Khan fled. Soojah-ool-Moolk entered 
Caubul in triumph; and Mahmoud threw himself at his 



28 


EABL7 DATS OF SHAH SGOJAH. 


feet.* To him, who in the hour of victory had shown 
no mercy, mercy was shown in the hour of defeat. It is 
to the honour of Shah Soojah that he forbore to secure 
the future tranquillity of his empire by committing the 
act of cruelty which had disgraced the accession of the 
now prostrate Mahmoud. The eyes of the fallen prince 
were spared: and years of continued intestine strife de¬ 
clared how impolitic was the act of mercy. 

For from this time, throughout many years, the strife 
between the royal brothers was fierce and incessant. In 
his son Kamran, the ex-King Mahmoud found a willing 
ally and an active auxiliary. To the reigning monarch 
it was a period of endless inquietude. His resources 
were limited, and his qualities were of too negative a 
character to render him equal to the demands of such 
stirring times. He wanted vigour; he wanted activity; 
he wanted judgment; and above all, he wanted money. 
It is ever the fate of those who have risen, as Soojah 


* This was in July, 1803. Shah 
Soojah’s own account of these trans. 
actions, which forms part of the auto- 
bioOTaphy written by him at Loodhi- 
anah in 1826-27, is contained in the 
following words;—“After our arri¬ 
val at ICazee, we had scarcely pre¬ 
pared our force, when Futteh Khan’s 
army appeared; our troops immedi¬ 
ately were drawn up in battle array, 
and an attack made upon them. The 
battle lasted from the morning to the 
evening prayer, when the enemy gave 
way, and retreated in great disorder 
to the valley Advaz, and then to 
Kamran’s camp in Candahar, where 
the drunkenness of the Kuzzilbash 
soldiery, and the ill-treatment which 
the Soonee doctors received, soon 
disgusted all our subjects, who en¬ 
tirely refused to give Kamran assist¬ 
ance. On hearing this we imme¬ 
diately returned to our capital. Shah 
Mahmoud was so disheartened by 
the news of our victory, that after 
swearing on the Koran ne would not 


again be guilty of treachery, he sent 
some of his principal attendants to 
request the royal piardon, which we 
granted; and had him conveyed from 
the outer to the inner fort with all 
due respect to his rank. We then 
entered the Balia Hissar with regal 
pomp, and seated ourselves on the 
throne of Caubul.” Mr. Flphinstone 
says of this “victory,” that “Futteh 
Khan was at first successful; he 
routed the party of the enemy which 
was immediately opposed to him, and 
was advancing to the city, when the 
desertion of a great lord to Soojah 
threw the whole into confusion: his 
own party then fell off by degrees, 
till he found himself almost alone, 
and was compelled to provide for his 
safety by a precipitate flight. Next 
morning Shah Soojah entered Caubul 
in triumph. Mooktor-ood-Dowlah 
walked on foot by the side of his 
horse, and many other Douranee 
ameers followed in his train.”— 
{Elphinstone^s “ CavibvX'' — AppmdixJ\ 



BEBEUJOK OS' PBmCE EATSUB. 


29 


rose to monarchy, to be dragged down hy the weight of 
the obligations incurred and the promises made in the 
hour of adversity. The day of reckoning comes, and 
the dangers of success are as great as the perils of failure. 
The Douranee monarch could not meet his engagements 
without weakening himself, by making large assignments 
upon the revenues of different provinces; and even then 
many interested friends were turned by disappointment 
into open enemies. This was one element of weakness. 
But the error of his life was committed when he failed to 
propitiate the loyalty of the great Barukzye, Futteh Khan. 
Upon the accession of Shah Soojah, that chief had been 
freely pardoned, and “ allowed to salute the step of the 
throne.” But the king did not estimate the real value of 
the alliance, and, elevating his rival Akrum Khan, refused 
the moderate demands of the Barukzye chief. Disap¬ 
pointed and chagrined, Futteh Khan then deserted the 
royal standard. He chose his time wisely and well. The 
king had set out with an army to overawe Peshawur 
and Cashmere. When they had proceeded some way, 
Futteh Khan, who accompanied him, excused himself on 
the plea of some physical infirmity which disabled him 
from keeping pace with the royal cortege, and said 
that he would join the army, following it by easy 
stages. Thus, disguising his defection, he fell in the 
rear, and as the royal party advanced, returned to fo¬ 
ment a rebellion. 

In this distracted country there was at that time 
another aspirant to the throne. The son of Zemaxm 
Shah, Prince Kaysur, had set up his claims to the sove¬ 
reignty of Caubul. He had been appointed governor of 
Candahar by Shah Soojah; and probably would have 
been satisfied with this extent of power, if Futteh Khan 
had not incited him to revolt, and offered to aid him in 
his attempts upon the crown. The prince lent a willing 



80 


EABLY DATS OP SHAH SOOJAH. 


ear to the charmings of the Sirdar; and so it happened 
that whilst Shah Soojah was amusing himself on the way 
to Peshawur—enjoying the beautiful scenery and the 
diversion of hunting,”—his nephew and the Barukzye 
chief were raising a large army at Candahar, intent upon 
establishing, by force of arms, the claims of the family of 
his sightless brother. 

This ill-omened intelligence brought the Shah back in 
haste to his capital, whence he soon marched towards 
Candahar to meet the advancing troops of the prince. 
And here again, to the treachery of his opponents rather 
than to the valour of his own troops, the Shah owed his 
success. On the eve of the expected conflict, the son of 
Ahmed Khan, with other Douranee chiefs, deserted to 
the royal standard. Disheartened and dismayed, the prince 
broke up his army, and fled to Candahar. In the mean 
while, Shah Soojah returned to Caubul to find it occupied 
by an insurgent force. According to his own confession, 
he was employed for a month in repossessing himself of 
the capital. The insurgent prince and the Barukzye 
chief, during this time, had in some measure recovered 
themselves at Candahar, and the king marched again to 
the westward. Kaysur fled at his approach; andFutteh 
Khan betook himself to Herat, to oflfer his services to the 
son of his old master. The prince was brought back 
and conducted to the royal presence by Shah Zemaun 
and the Mooktor-ood-Dowlah, who besought the forgive¬ 
ness of the king on the plea of the youth and inexperi¬ 
ence of the ofiender, and the evil counsel of the Barukzye 
sirdar. Against his better judgment, Shah Soojah for¬ 
gave him, and restored him to the government of Can¬ 
dahar.* 

• “ Wkae in Candahar,” writes Prince Kaysur’s pardon, as his inez- 
Shah Soojah, “we receired letters perience and the advice of Futtdi 
mm our beloved brother Shah-zadah Khan and other rebels had led him 
Mooktor-ood-Dowlah, requesting from his duty. Out of respect to our 



STRtrooi;BS for rmpirb. 


81 


The affairs of Caiidahar being thus settled for a time, 
Shah Soojah marched into Sindh to enforce the payment 
of tribute which had been due for some years to Caubul. 
He then returned to his capital, and after giving his 
troops a three months’ furlough, began to think of com¬ 
mencing operations against Kamran, who was again dis¬ 
turbing the country to the west. In the mean while, 
this prince had marched upon Candahar, and Kaysur had 
fled at his approach. This was the second time the two 
princes had met as enemies—^the second time that the 
scale had been turned by the weight of the chief of the 
Barukzyes. On one occasion, Futteh Khan had invited 
Kamran to Candahar, and engaged to deliver up the city 
—then suddenly formed an alliance with Kaysur, and, 
sword in hand at the head of a small body of Douranees, 
driven back the prince with whom he had just before 
been in close alliance. Now he forsook the son of Shah 
Zemaun to unite himself with the heir of Mahmoud. 
Forgetful of past treachery, Kamran received the power¬ 
ful Barukzye; and they marched together upon Canda¬ 
har. Kaysur, as I have said, fled at his approach; and 
the insurgents took possession of the city. In the mean 
while, the Penians were advancing upon Herat, and 
Shah Soojah was moving up to Candahar. In this criti- 

brother, we agreed to this. Prince and the Shah. “A suitable answer,” 
Kaysur being in Dehleh, Shah Ze- says the Shah, “ being given to the 
maun and Mooktor-ood-Dowlah went ro 7 al letter, and dresses of honour be- 
there and brought him into the pre- ing given to the ambassadors, we dis- 
sence. Shah Zemaun then requested missed them with gifts. Our thoughts 
that we would give him Candahar were then directed to the state of Can^ 
once more, and became security for dahar^ The point is of little unport- 
his good behaviour in future. We ance in Afghan history; and only 
agreed to this in spite of our good worth noticing in illustration of the 
judgment.” It was whilst still en- difficulty of determining with preci- 
gaged with the settlement of affairs sion the dates of different events, and 
at Candahar, not after their complete the order in which they occurred, 
adjustment, and Soojah’s subsequent No two narratives altogether agree—^ 
^p^tion to Sindh (as stated by Mr, but except where Shah Soojahspeahs 
Elphmstone), that ambassadors ar- of his "victories,” we may regard 
nved from Bokhara to negotiate a him as a tolerably good authority in 
naarriagebetweentheKhan’sdaughter all that relates to himself. 



32 


EABLT DATS OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


cal conjuncture, Kamran returned in alarm to the former 
place, and Kaysur joined the king at the latter. “ We 
again,” says Shah Soojah, “ gave him charge of Canda- 
har, at the request of our queen-mother, and our brother, 
Shah Zemaun. On our return to Caubul, Akrum Khan 
and the other Khans petitioned us to pardon Futteh 
Khan, who was now reduced to poverty. We assented. 
He was then brought into the presence by Akrum Khan. 
We remained some time in Candahar, in the charge of 
which we left Prince Zemaun, and sent Kaysur to 
Caubul.” 

Again was it in the power of Shah Soojah to conci¬ 
liate the great Barukzye. Again was the opportunity 
lost. There was something in the temper of the monarch 
adverse to the formation of new, and the retention of old, 
friendships. Whilst Futteh Khan was again made to feel 
the impossibility of any lasting alliance with a prince 
who could not appreciate the value of his services, and 
who neither invited nor inspired confidence, the chain 
which bound Mooktor-ood-Dowlah to the sovereign 
was gradually relaxing, and a new danger began to 
tlireaten the latter. When the Shah was absent in the 
Sindh territory, the minister fluug himself into the arms 
of Prince Kaysur, and publicly proclaimed him king. 
The rebels moved down upon Peshawur, and took pos¬ 
session of the city. Shah Soojah immediately began to 
direct his operations against that place. It was on the 
3rd of March, 1808, that the two armies came into colli¬ 
sion. “ The sun rising,” says Shah Soojah, who had 
halted for six days in the vicinity of Peshawur, hoping 
that the rebellious minister might perhaps repent, “ we 
saw the opposite armies in battle array. Khojan Mahom- 
med Khan, with a few Khans, followers from Mooktor- 
ood-Dowlah’s army, did great deeds of valour, and at last 
dispersed our raw soldiers, leaving us alone in the field. 



DEFEAT OF SHAH MAHMOtTD. 


33 


protected by a few faithful Douranees. We still remained 
on our guard, when our attendants warned us of the ap¬ 
proach of Khojan Mahommed Khan. We rushed on the 
traitor sword in hand, and cut through four of the iron 
plates of his cuirass. Our chief eunuch, Nekoo Khan, 
brought his horse and accoutrements. Mooktor-ood- 
Dowlah then attacked our force; but he and his whole 
race perished. Prince Kaysur fled to Caubul. We then 
marched in triumphant pomp to the Balia Hissar of 
Peshawur.” The gory head of the minister, borne aloft 
on a spear, and carried behind the conqueror, gave dclat 
to the procession, and declared the completeness of his 
victory. 

Prince Kaysur, after a single night spent at Caubul, 
fled into the hill country; but was brought back to the 
capital by the emissaries of the Shah. The experience 
of past treachery and past ingratitude had not hardened 
the monarch’s heart: and he again “ pardoned the mani¬ 
fold offences of his nephew.” In the mean while Mah¬ 
moud, who had been joined by Putteh Khan, and had 
been endeavouring to raise the sinews of war by plunder¬ 
ing caravans, obtained, by the usual process of treachery, 
possession of Can lahar, and then marched upon Caubul. 
Shah Soojah went out to meet him, and Mahmoud, ren¬ 
dered hopeless by disaffection in his ranks, broke up his 
camp and fled. The king then turned his face towards 
the west, and ordered his camp to be pitched on the road 
to Herat. “Hearing of our approach,” he says, “our 
brother, Feroz-ood-Deen, then in charge of the fort of 
Herat, sent a petition, requesting our orders, proffering 
the tribute due, and offering to become security for Mah¬ 
moud’s future behaviour. The same blood flowed in our 
veins, and we ordered one lakh of rupees to be paid him 
yearly fiom the tribute of Sindh, and conferred on him 
the government of Herat.” This done, he proceeded to 
Caubul, and thence to Peshawur, where he “ received 

VOL. I. D 



34 


EAKLY DAYS OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


petitions from the Khan of Bahwulpore and Moozuffiir 
Khan, Suddozye, stating that ambassadors from the Com¬ 
pany’s territories, by name Elphinstone and Strachey, 
had arrived, and requested orders.” “We "WTOte to the 
ambassadors,” says the Shah, “ and ordered our chiefs to 
pay them every attention.” 

The history of this mission will be embraced in a 
subsequent chapter. It is not without some misgivings 
that I have traced these early annals of the Douranee 
Empire.* But the chronicle is not without its uses. It 
illustrates, in a remarkable manner, both the general cha¬ 
racter of Afghan politics, and the extraordinary vicissi¬ 
tudes of the early career of the man whom thirty years 
afterwards the British raised from the dust of exile, and 
reseated on the throne of his fathers. The history of the 
Afghan monarchy is a history of a long series of revo¬ 
lutions. Seldom has the country rested from strife— 
seldom has the sword reposed in the scabbard. The 
temper of the people has never been attuned to peace. 
They are impatient of the restraints of a settled govern¬ 
ment, and are continually panting after change. Half-a- 
century of turbulence and anarchy has witnessed but little 
variation in the national character; and the Afghan of 
the present day is the same strange mixture of impetu¬ 
osity and cimning—of boldness and treachery—of gene¬ 
rosity and selfishness—of kindness and cruelty—as he 
was when Zemaun Shah haunted the Council-Chamber 
of Calcutta with a phantom of invasion; and the vision 
was all the more terrible because “ the shape thereof” no 
one could discern. 

* The number of Oriental names indistinct phantasmagoric transitions, 
which it is necessary to introduce— The events, too, which I have nar- 
the repetition of incidents, greatly rated have been chronicled before, 
resembling each other, of conquest I have endeavoured, however, to im- 
and re-conquest, of treachery and part some novelty to the recital by 
counter-treachery, ofrebeUions raised following, and sometimes quoting, 
pd suppressed—creates a confusion Shah Soojah*s autobiography, whitm 
S European reader, was not accessible to precedmg histo- 

It IS dimcult to interest him in these rians. 



FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


35 


CHAPTER m. 

[ 1801 — 1808 .] 

France and Russia in the East—Death of Hadjee Ehalil Hhan—The 
Mission of Condolence—Aga Nebee Khan—^Extension of Russian Domi¬ 
nion in the East—French Diplomacy in Persia—The pacification of Tilsit 
—Decline of French influence at Teheran. 

The intestine wars, which rent and convulsed the A%han 
Empire, were a source of acknowledged security to the 
British power in the East. From the time when in the 
first year of the present century Captain Malcolm dictated 
at the Court of Teheran the terms of that early treaty, 
which French writers freely condemn, and Englishmen 
are ashamed to vindicate, to the date of the romantic 
pacification of Tilsit, the politics of Central Asia excited 
little interest or alarm in the Council-Chamber of Cal¬ 
cutta. India had ceased to bestir itself about an Afghan 
invasion. Instead of a shadowy enemy from beyond the 
Indus, the British had now to face, on the banks of the 
Jumna, a real and formidable foe. The genius of the 
two Wellesleys was called into action to curb the inso¬ 
lence and crush the power of the Mahrattas; and whilst 
we were alternately fighting and negotiating with Scin- 
diah and Holkar, we scarcely cared to ask who reigned 
in A%hanistan; or if accident made us acquainted with 

D 2 



36 


FKANCE AND EUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


the progress of events, viewed with philosophic unconcern 
the vicissitudes of the Douranee Empire. 

Content with the obligations imposed upon the Shah 
by the terms of the Malcolm treaty, and engaged in the 
solution of more pressing political questions at home, 
Lord Wellesley and his immediate successors bestowed 
little thought upon the Persian alliance. Throughout 
the remaining years of that nobleman’s administration, 
one event alone occurred to rouse the Governor-General 
to a consideration of the temper of the Court of Teheran. 
That event filled him with apprehensions of danger pre¬ 
posterously incommensurate with its own importance, 
and ridiculously falsified by the result. An accident, 
and a very untoward one, it occurred at a time when the 
Indian Government had not yet recovered from the in¬ 
quietude engendered by their disturbing dreams of French 
and Afghan invasion. The story may be briefly told. 
On the return of Captain Malcolm from Persia, one Had- 
jee Khalil Khan had been despatched to India to reci¬ 
procate assurances of friendship, and to ratify and inter¬ 
change the treaty. The mission cost the Hadjee his life. 
He had not been long resident in Bombay,* when the 
Persian attendants of the ambassador and the detach¬ 
ment of Company’s sepoys forming his escort quarrelled 
with each other in the court-yard before his house, and 
came into deadly collision. The Hadjee went out to 
quell the riot, and was struck dead by a chance shot. 
The intelligence of this unhappy disaster was brought 
round to Calcutta by a king’s frigate. The sensation it 
created at the presidency was intense. Every possible 
demonstration of sorrow was made by the Supreme 
Government. Minute guns were fired from the ramparts 
of Fort William. All levees and public dinners at 

* Hadjee Khalil Khan reached Bombay on the 21st of May, 1802^ 
and was killed on the 20th of July. 



DEATH OF KHAUI. KHAN. 


37 


Government-House were suspended. Distant stations 
caught the alarm from the Council-Chamber of Calcutta. 
The minor presidencies were scarcely less convulsed. 
Bombay having previously thrown itself into mourning, 
instructions for similar observances were sent round to 
Madras; and two days after the arrival of the Chijffbne 
it was announced in the Gazette that Major Malcolm, 
who was at that time acting as private secretary to 
Lord Wellesley, had been directed to proceed to Bombay, 
for the purpose of communicating with the relations of 
the late Hadjee Khalil Khan, taking with him, as secre¬ 
tary, his young friend and relative, Lieutenant Paisley, 
who had accompanied him on his first mission to Persia. 
At the same time Mr. Lovett, a civilian of no long 
standing, was ordered to proceed immediately to Bushire, 
charged with an explanatory letter from Lord Wellesley 
to the Persian king, and instructed to offer such verbal 
explanations as might be called for by the outraged 
monarch. For some days nothing was thought of in 
Calcutta beyond the circle of this calamitous affair. In 
other directions a complete paralysis descended upon the 
Governor-General and his advisers. The paramount 
emergency bewildered the strongest understandings, and 
dismayed the stoutest hearts at the Presidency. And 
yet it was said, not long afterwards, by the minister of 
Shiraz, that “ the English might kill ten ambassadors, if 
they would pay for them at the same rate.” 

Major Malcolm left Calcutta on the 30th of Au¬ 
gust, and beating down the Bay of Bengal against 
the south-west monsoon, reached Masulipatam on the 
19th of September. Taking dawk across the country, 
he spent a few days at Hyderabad in the Deccan, trans¬ 
acted some business there, and then pushed on to Bom¬ 
bay. Reaching that Presidency on the 10th of October, 



38 


FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


he flung himself into his work with characteristic energy 
and self-reliance. Mr. Lovett, who had none of his 
activity, followed slowly behind, and fell sick upon the 
road. Jonathan Duncan, the most benevolent of men, 
was at that time Governor of Bombay, and some mem¬ 
bers of the Persian embassy had presumed upon his good¬ 
nature to assume an arrogance of demeanour which it 
now became Malcolm’s duty to check.* He soon re¬ 
duced them to reason. Before the end of the month 
every difficulty had vanished. Many of the Persians 
were personally acquainted with the English diplomatist. 
All were acquainted with his character. But above all, 
it was known that he was the bearer of the public 
purse. He came to offer the mourners large presents and 
handsome pensions from the Supreme Government,! and 
it is no matter of surprise, therefore, that he had soon, in 
his own words, “ obtained from them a confidence which 
enabled him to set aside all intermediate agents, and 
consequently freed him from all intrigues.”^ 

It was arranged that the body of the deceased ambas¬ 
sador should be put on board at the end of October, and 
that, a day or two later, the vessel should set sail for the 
Persian Gulf. Mr. Paisley was directed to attend the 

* “Mr. Duncan, with that good- 1802, “remunerate his expense, au- 
nature and candour which he so eini- thorise a handsome present to the 
nently possesses, congratulated me Hadjee’s son and wives at Bushire, a 
this morning on the great change distribution of alms at Kurbulai, and 
which had been eflccted in his Per- make a noble present to every one in 
sian friends, and said my conduct the embas^ in the name of the 
had convinced him that an over- Governor-drcneral, and not exceed 
desire to conciliate had led him into the limits of one lakh of rupees. The 
error. The fact is, his errors all pensions which I shall recommend 
arose from timidity. The rascals will amount to 46,000 rupees per 
bullied him.”— [Correspondence of annum. You have here the outline 
Sir J, Malcolm: MS,—October 15, of my plans, and I am sanguine in 
1802.] the hopes that they will be ultimately 

t “I shall satisfy the reasonable crowned with success.”— [MS, Cor- 
expectations of Luteef,” wrote Major respondence of Sir J, Malcolm,"] 
Malcolm from Bombay, in October, f MS. Correspondence. 



89 


DISPOSAX OF THE HADJEE S BEMAINS. 

Hadjee’e remains, and was charged with the immediate 
duties of the mission.* When the vessel reached Bush- 
ire, it was found that the death of the Hadjee had created 
little sensation in the Persian territories, and that before 
the intelligence was ten days old it had been well-nigh 


* “I shall send,” wrote Major 
Malcolm, “Mr. Paisley with the 
Hadjee’s body, which will not only 
be considered a high compliment, 
but be useful in a thousand ways. 
It will preserve this transaction from 
the touch of Mr. Manesty and Mr. 
Jones. It will enable me to convey 
a correet state of the feeling here on 
the subject to many respectable Per¬ 
sians, and I shall obtain from Mr. 
P. a true account of the manner in 
which the transaction is received in 
Persia. He will give Lovett infor¬ 
mation which will secure him from 
error at the outset, and bo of the 
highest utility to him during his 
residence in India.”— \_MS. Corre^ 
spondenceJ] It is not certain, how¬ 
ever, that the high compliment here 
designed was duly appreciated by 
the Persians. Sir Harford Jones 
(from whose “touch” the transaction 
was to be preserved) says that “it 
seems to have escaped Marquis Wel¬ 
lesley that that which might be con¬ 
sidered a complimen at Calcutta, 
might in Arabia, Turkey, and Persia, 
be regarded so improper as almost to 
become an insult.The Per¬ 

sian moollahs as well as the Persian 
merchants at Bagdad, were shocked, 
and on my applpring to old Sulcmein 
Pacha for certain honours to be paid 
to the corpse, when removed from 
Bagdad to be carried to Nejeef, he 
said, ‘Very well; as you desire it 
to be done, it shall be done: but 
Hadjee Khalil Khan lived an infidel, 
and with infidels, and was, therefore, 
destined to hell; he was, however, 
murdered by infidels, and so became 
a ahahyde (martyr); but his former 
friends have robbed him of this 
chance, by deputing an infidel to 
attend his corpse to the grave; his 


fate, therefore, is now fixed, and you 
may carry him to the devil in any 
manner you like best.* ”— [Sir Har^ 
ford Jones's account of the transactions 
of IL M's mission to the Court of Ter- 
sia^ Note vii.'\ It is curious, 
but somewhat humiliating, to read 
the different versions of the same 
transactions put forth by Jones and 
Malcolm, and their respective ad¬ 
herents. For example. Sir Harford 
Jones says that when the Iladjee’s 
body reached Bagdad, Mr. Day, a 
Bombay civilian, who had been de¬ 
puted to accompany it into the in¬ 
terior, took fright at the plague, and 
abandoned his charge. “ Mr. Day’s 
alarm was so great,” he says, “ as to 
become most tormenting to himself, 
and most ridiculous and troublesome 
to us, who had stood the plague the 
preceding year. I, therefore, re¬ 
shipped him for Bussorah as soon as 
possible, and undertook to receive 
and execute such wishes as the 
Khan’s relatives expressed to me.” 
Now the account given of this matter 
by one of the gentlemen of Malcolm’s 
mission, set forth that “Jones has 
frightened away Mr. Day by alarm¬ 
ing accounts of the plague.”—“ On 
this subject,” it was added, “ I need 
make no remarks to you, who know 
him so well. This might be im¬ 
proper, and would, I imagine, be 
perfectly unnecessary.’* I have dwelt 
upon these personal matters at greater 
length than they deserve, because 
they illustrate the feelings, on either 
side, with which Jones and Malcolm, 
at a later and more important period, 
were likely each to have regarded the 
parallel but antagonistic mission of 
the other to the Persian Court. The 
bitterness which then overflowed was 
the accumulated gall of years. 




40 FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 

forgotten. The Resident at Bushire, a Persian of good 
family, naturalised in India, and employed by the Com¬ 
pany_an astute diplomatist and a great liar—had 

thought it necessary to testify his zeal by circulating a 
false version of the circumstances attending the death of 
the Hadjee, and calumniating the memory of the deceased. 
There was no need, indeed, of this. The Persian Govern¬ 
ment seems to have regarded the death of the Hadjee 
with exemplary unconcern; and marvelled why the 
English should have made so great a stir about so small 
a matter. If a costly British mission could have been 
extracted out of the disaster, the Court would have been 
more than satisfied; whilst they who were most deeply 
interested in the event, moved by the same sacra fames, 
thought rather of turning it to profitable account than 
of bewailing the death of their relative and friend. 

The brother-in-law of the late envoy lost no time in 
offering his services to fill the place of the deceased. The 
name of this man was Aga Nebee Khan. He was the son, 
by a second connexion, of the mistress of Mr. Douglas, 
chief of the Bussorah factory, and had been Mr. Jones’s 
moonshee, on a monthly salary of thirty rupees. The 
Hadjee himself had been a person of no consideration. 
Half-minister and half-merchant, he had thought more of 
trading upon his appointment than of advancing the in¬ 
terests of the state; and Nebee Khan, who had embarked 
with him in his commercial speculations, now lusted to 
succeed his murdered relative in his diplomatic office, as 
well as in the senior partnership of the mercantile con¬ 
cern. And he succeeded at last. It cost him time, and 
it cost him money to accomphsh his purpose; but partly 
by bribery, partly by cajolery, he eventually secured the 
object of bis ambition.* It was not, however, till three 

* Especial Instructions having been the appointment of a man of rank 
given to the British mission to secure as successor to Khalil Khan, the in- 



A6A NEBEE KHAN . 


41 


full years had passed away since the death of the Hadjee, 
that his brother-in-law reached Calcutta, “ not exactly 
to fill his relative’s place, but to exercise the triple func¬ 
tions of minister, merchant, and claimant of blood- 
money, which he roundly assessed at twenty lakhs of 
rupees.” 

And in those three years a great change had come over 
the Supreme Government of India. A long war, pro- 


trigues of Aga Nebee to obtain the 
appointment greatly embarrassed our 
diplomatists m Persia. But it was 
acknowledged that the aspirant was a 
man of good temper, good abilities, 
and more than average respectability. 
He professed himself to be heart and 
soul the friend of the English; and, 
doubtless, was perfectly sincere in his 
attachment to their wealth and pro¬ 
fusion. Like all his countrymen, he 
was capable of profound dissimula¬ 
tion, and lied without the slightest 
remorse. Knowing the views of the 
British functionaries with regard to 
the succession, he sent through his 
brother to Mr. Lovett an account 
of an interview he had had with the 
Shah, representing that he had urged 
upon his majesty the propriety of 
appointing an elchei. of high rank as 
successor to Hadjee lihalil Khan, but 
that the king had insisted upon ap¬ 
pointing him, saying, “ I did not call 
Mahomed Nebee here for nothing. I 
sent for him to learn the circum¬ 
stances of the business, and now that 
he has given me a true and just ac¬ 
count of all particulars, I must ex¬ 
emplify my justice to the world. 
Mahomed fl'ebee and Hadjee Khalil 
Khan were brothers, and everybody 
knows they were of one mind. They 
were brothers and relations, and, in a 
word, like father and son. But Ma¬ 
homed Nebee’s capacit^y is greater 
than his was, and it is now three 
years since he has borne the ex¬ 
penses of the embassy, and has had 
ever^hing ready for the mission. It 
is, therefore, proper that I should 
appoint him, in order that his right¬ 
ful claims may be satisfied, and my 


justice made known to all princes 
and nations of the world.” In this 
letter an amusing attempt is made 
to persuade Mr. Lovett to proceed to 
Teheran as an ambassador from the 
British-Indian Government, “with 
handsome and splendid equipments, 
so as to exceed by many degrees those 
with which Major Malcolm travelled; 
for this is the particular wish of the 
king and his ministers, in order that 
it m^ get abroad universally that 
the English had, for the sake of 
apologising, made these new prepa¬ 
rations far exceeding the former, and 
that it is evident they highly regard 
the friendship of the king, and were 
not to blame for the death of Hadjee 
Khalil Khan. His majesty, too, 
when he hears of the splendour and 
greatness of your retinue, will be 
much pleased, and most favourably 
inclined . . . Do not be sparing in ex- 
peiiditure, or presents, or largesses. 
Every country has its customs; and 
every nation may he won somehow or 
other. The people of Persia in the 
manner above stated'' It is hard to 
say which is to be most admired, the 
candour or the craft of this. Mr. 
Lovett, who was lying sick at Bush* 
ire, had no authority to proceed as an 
ambassador to Teheran; but Malcolm 
was sorely afraid lest these tempta¬ 
tions should be too much for an am¬ 
bitious and self-confident young man 
—a character which, however, it is by 
no means certain that Lovett de¬ 
served, for he candidly acknowledged 
his own unfitness for the post, and 
said that it would suit his capacity 
much better to serve in a subordinate 
position.— Records,’] 



42 


FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


secuted with extraordinary vigour, had exhausted the 
financial resources of the state. The reign of India’s 
most magnificent satrap—the “ sultanised” Governor-Ge¬ 
neral—was at an end. A new ruler had been sent from 
England to carry out a new policy; and that policy was 
fatal to the pretensions of such a man as Nebee Khan. 

He had fallen, indeed, upon evil times. Those were 
not days when moneyed compensations were likely to 
be granted even to ambassadors, or when there was any 
greater likelihood of an Indian statesman embarrass¬ 
ing himself with distant engagements which might com¬ 
pel him to advance an army into unknown regions, or 
send a fleet into foreign seas. The system, on which the 
future government of India was to be based, compre¬ 
hended a scheme of painful internal economy and rigid 
abstinence from external interference. Lord Cornwallis 
went out a second time to India, pledged to a policy purely 
domestic. It was his design to turn his back upon other 
states, and to fix his eyes intently on our own. The 
government was on the verge of absolute bankruptcy. 
There were large bodies of irregular troops in our ser¬ 
vice who could not be discharged, even when they were 
useless, because they could not be paid. To reconcile 
two adverse schemes of policy, or rather to prevent an 
abrupt and violent transition from one to the other, was 
the difficult duty of Sir George Barlow. This long-tried 
and intelligent public servant had been appointed to suc¬ 
ceed Lord Wellesley as Governor-General of India j but 
now, with affectionate earnestness and loyal zeal, he ex¬ 
erted himself as senior member of council, to assist the 
government of the friend who had reluctantly snatched 
from him the object of his ambition. The brief reign of 
the aged marquis was one of doubt and uncertainty in 
the minds of the foremost officers of the state. They 
who, under Lord Wellesley, had pursued, and were still 
pursuing, the course of policy favoured by that nobleman, 



RECEPTION OE NEBEE KHAN. 


43 


knew not how to transfer their allegiance to a ruler 
pledged to the abandonment of those measures which 
they believed his predecessor would have resolutely main¬ 
tained. Colonel Malcolm, who had been long acting 
as Political Agent with Lord Lake’s army, determined to 
throw up his appointment; and the commander-in-chief 
saw nothing but discredit before him if he continued at 
the head of a force condemned to ignominious inactivity. 
And so it happened, that when Lord Cornwallis, in Octo¬ 
ber, 1805, sunk under his senile infirmities, and died at 
Ghazeepore, Sir George Barlow, who succeeded to the 
chief seat in the government, was embarrassed by threat¬ 
ened desertions, and compelled to use all his influence to 
prevent abrupt changes in the constitution of the execu¬ 
tive, which might have locked the wheels of government, 
and plunged the aflairs of the state into a sea of danger¬ 
ous and bewildering confusion. 

In the month of October, 1805, the vessel bearing the 
Persian ambassador sailed into the harbour of Bombay. 
He was welcomed with all the formalities befitting his 
station, and with every demonstration of respect. But a 
series of untoward circumstances, like those which, in the 
reign of our secc nd James, delayed the public audience of 
Lord Castlemaine at Borne, postponed, for the space of 
many months, the reception of Nebee Khan at Calcutta. 
At length, on the 28th of April, 1806, the ceremony of 
presentation took place. The Governor-General lined the 
public way with soldiers, and sent the leading officers of 
the state to conduct the merchant-minister to his presence. 
It was an imposing spectacle, and a solemn farce. The 
Persian elchee knew that he had come to Calcutta not to 
treat of politics, but of pice; and the English governor, 
while publicly honouring the Persian, secretly despised 
him as a sordid adventurer, and was bent upon baffling 
his schemes. At the private interviews which took 



44 


BUANCB AND KU8SIA IN THE BAST. 


place between tHe British functionaries and Nebee Khan, 
there was little mention of political affairs. There was a 
long outstanding money account between the parties, 
and the settlement of the account-current was the grand 
object of the Mission. The Persian, who thought that 
he had only to ask, found that times had changed since 
the commencement of the century, and was overwhelmed 
with dismay when the British secretary demonstrated to 
him that he was a debtor to our government of more 
than a lakh of rupees. Satisfied with existing relations 
of friendship between Persia and G-reat Britain, and 
never at any time disposed to embarrass himself with 
unnecessary treaties. Sir George Barlow declined to enter 
into new political negotiations, or to satisfy the exorbitant 
personal claims of the representative of the Persian Court. 
Nebee Khan left Calcutta a disappointed man. The 
speculation had not answered. The investment had 
been a bad one. He had toiled for four long years; had 
wasted his time and wasted his money only to be told at 
last, by an officious secretary, that he owed the British- 
Indian Government a lakh and seven thousand rupees. 
In January, 1807, carrying back a portfolio, not more 
full of political than his purse of financial results, the 
ambassador left Calcutta. Neither the merchant nor 
the minister had played a winning game. Compensa¬ 
tions and treaties were alike refused him; and he went 
back with empty hands. 

In the mean while, the French had succeeded in esta¬ 
blishing their influence at the Court of Teheran.* They 

* Some French agents, under the the British, and endeavoured to ob- 
ieign^ character of botanists, had tain permission to re-establish their 
visited '^heran before Buonaparte footing at Gombroon. Had the emis- 
mvaded Egypt, and wished Aga Ma- saries appeared in a more openly 
Homed Khan, the then ruler of JPersia, diplomatic character, they might have 
to seize Bussorah and Bagdad. They succeeded, for Aga Mahomed Khan 
stimulate the coveted the territory named, and 
bnaU to assist Tippoo Sultan against might have been induced to co-ope- 



MUSCOVITB AGM3BBSSIQK. 


46 


had long been pushing their intrigues in that quarter, and 
now at last w'ere beginning to overcome the difficulties 
which had formerly beset them. The Malcolm treaty of 
1800 bound the contracting parties to a defensive alliance 
against France; but the terms of that treaty had been 
scarcely adjusted, when French emissaries endeavoured 
to shake the fidelity of Persia by large offers of assistance. 
The offers were rejected. The French were told, in em¬ 
phatic language, that “ if Napoleon appeared in person 
at Teheran, he would be denied admission to the centre 
of the universe.” But, undaunted by these failures, they 
again returned to tempt the embarrassed Persian. Every 
year increased the difficulties of the Shah, and weakened 
his reliance on the British. He was beset with danger, 
and he wanted aid. The British-Indian Government 
was either too busy or too indifferent to aid him. The 
energetic liberality of the French contrasted favourably 
with our supineness; and before the year 1805 had 
worn to a close, Persia had sought the very alliance and 
asked the very aid, which before had been offered and 
rejected. 

The assistance that was sought was assismnce against 
Russia. In 180.!:, the Shah addressed a letter to Napo¬ 
leon, then in the very zenith of his triumphant career, 
seeking the aid of the great western conqueror to stem 
the tide of Russian encroachment. For years had that 
formidable northern power been extending its conquests 
to the eastward. Before the English trader had begun 
to organise armies in Hindostan, and to swallow up 
ancient principalities, the grand idea of founding an 
Eastern empire had been grasped by the capacious mind 
of Peter the Great. Over the space of a century, under 

rate in an attack upon the Turkish the representations of the savans ,— 
dominions; but the doubtful charac- Brigadier Malcolm ioLwdMinio: 

ter of the agents thwarted their MS. Becords."] 
schemes, and he gave little heed to 



46 FRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 

emperors and empresses of varying shades of character, 
had the same undeviating course of aggressive policy 
been pursued by Russia towards her eastern neighbours. 
The country which lies between the Black Sea and the 
Caspian was the especial object of Muscovite ambition. 
A portion of it, occupied by a race of hardy, vigorous 
mountaineers, still defies the tyranny of the Czar, and 
still from time to time, as new efibrts are made to subju¬ 
gate it, new detachments of Russian troops are buried in 
its formidable defiles. But Georgia, after a series of wars, 
notorious for the magnitude of the atrocities which dis¬ 
graced them, had been wrested from the Persians before 
the close of the last century, and in 1800 was formally 
incorporated with the Russian Empire by the Autocrat 
Paul. 

These encroachments beyond the Caucasus brought 
Russia and Persia into a proximity as tempting to the 
one as it was perilous to the other. The first few years 
of the present century were years of incessant and san¬ 
guinary strife. In the Russian Governor-General, ZizianoflP, 
were combined great personal energy and considerable 
military skill, with a certain ferocity of character which 
seldom allowed him to display much clemency towards 
the vanquished. A Georgian by extraction, and con¬ 
nected by marriage with the princes of that country, he 
never forgot the cruelties which had alienated for ever 
the hearts of the Georgian people from their old Maho- 
medan masters. The restless aggressive spirit of the 
great Muscovite power was fitly represented by this man. 
He was soon actively at work. He entered Daghistan— 
defeated the Lesghees with great slaughter — carried 
Ganja by assault, and massacred the garrison—a second 
time defeated the Lesghees, after a sanguinary engage¬ 
ment; and then returning to Tifiis, addressed the go¬ 
vernors of Shamakhee, Sheesha, and other fortresses to 



THE CAMPAIGN IN ARMENIA. 


47 


the north of the Aras, threatening them with the fate of 
Ganja if they did not make instant submission in com¬ 
pliance with the orders of the Russian monarch, who 
had instructed him not to pause in his career of conquest 
until he had encamped his army on the borders of that 
river. 

In the spring of 1804, Abbas Mirza, the heir-apparent 
to the throne of Persia, took the field at the head of a for¬ 
midable army, and marched down upon Erivan, the ca¬ 
pital of Armenia. The governor refused to abandon his 
charge, and when the prince prepared to attack him, called 
the Russian general to his aid. The result was fatal to the 
Persian cause. In the month of July, the army of the 
Crown-Prince of Persia and the Russian and Georgian 
force under Zizianoff, twice encountered each other, and 
twice the Persian army was driven back with terrible 
loss. On the second occasion the rout was complete. 
Abbas Mirza lost everything. Taking refuge in a small 
fort, he endeavoured to negotiate terms with Zizianoff; 
but the Russian general told him haughtily, that the 
orders of his sovereign were, that he should occupy all 
the country along the Aras River, from Erivan to the 
borders of the Caspian, and that he chafed under the 
instructions which confined his conquests to a limit so 
far within the boundaries of his own ambition. 

The disasters of the heir-apparent brought the king 
himself into the field. Moving down with a large army 
to the succour of the prince, he again encountered the 
Russian forces, but only to see his troops sustain another 
defeat. Disheartened by these repeated failures, the 
Persians then changed their tactics, and adopting a more 
predatory style of warfare, harassed their northern enemy 
by cutting off his supplies. The year being then far 
advanced, Zizianoff drew off his forces, and prepared to 
prosecute the war with renewed energy in the following 



48 


FKANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


spring. That spring was his last. An act of the blackest 
treachery cut short his victorious career. He was con¬ 
ducting in person the siege of Badkoo, when the gar¬ 
rison, making overtures of capitulation, invited the Rus¬ 
sian general to a conference for the settlement of the 
terms. He went unattended to a tent that had been 
pitched for his reception, and was deliberately set upon 
and slain by a party of assassins stationed there for the 
bloody purpose. The King of Persia, when the tidings 
reached him, grew wild with delight. In an ecstasy 
of joy he published an inflated proclamation, setting 
forth that he had achieved a great victory, and slain the 
celebrated Russian commander. But other thoughts soon 
forced themselves upon the king and his ministers. A 
black cloud was brooding over them—the retribution of 
an outraged nation. A signal chastisement was expected. 
New armies were looked for; new encroachments anti¬ 
cipated from the North; new forfeitures of dominion 
seemed to be inevitable—^the righteous result of an 
act of such atrocious perfidy. Persia felt her weakness, 
and, in an extremity which seemed to threaten her very 
existence, trusted to foreign European aid to rescue her 
from the jaws of death. 

It was at this time, when threatened with the ven¬ 
geance of Russia, that the Persian Court addressed a letter 
to Napoleon, then in the full flush of unbroken success, 
seeking the aid of that powerful chief. It was at this 
time, too, that Aga Nebee Khan commenced his journey 
to India, and it is probable that if the Indian Govern¬ 
ment had shown any disposition to aid the Persian 
monarch in his eflbrts to repel the aggressions of the 
Muscovite, the French alliance would have been quietly 
but effectually relinquished. But the supineness of Eng¬ 
land was the opportunity of France. The Indian Govern¬ 
ment had left the settlement of the Persian question to 



EFFORTS OF FRENCH DIPLOMACY. 


49 


the Cabinet of St. James’s, and the Cabinet had dawdled 
over it as a matter that might be left to take care of 
itself. In this extremity, the Persian monarch forgot the 
treaty with the British, or thought that the British, by 
deserting him in his need, had absolved him from all 
obligations to observe it, and openly flung himself into 
the arms of the very enemy which that treaty so trucu¬ 
lently proscribed. 

In the autumn of 1805, an accredited French agent 
arrived at Teheran. The result of the Indian mission 
was then unknown; and Colonel Romieu was received 
with that barren courtesy which almost amounts to dis¬ 
couragement. It would probably, too, have been so re¬ 
garded by the French envoy, had not death cut short his 
diplomatic career, after a few days spent at Teheran, and 
a single audience of the king. But the following spring 
beamed more favorably on the diplomacy of France. 
The cold indifference of England had been ascertained 
beyond a doubt, and the danger of Russian aggressive¬ 
ness, now sharpened by revenge, was becoming more and 
more imminent. All things conspired to favour the 
machinations of the French ; and they seized the oppor¬ 
tunity with vigour and address. Another envoy ap¬ 
peared upon the scene. Monsieur Jaubert was received 
with marked attention and respect. He came to pave 
the way for a splendid embassy, which Napoleon pro¬ 
posed to despatch to the Persian Court, Overjoyed at 
these assurances of friendship, the king eagerly grasped 
the proffered alliance. He was prepared to listen to any 
proposal, so that his new allies undertook to co-operate 
against his Russian enemies. He would join in an inva¬ 
sion of Hindostan, or, in concert with the French, ampu¬ 
tate any given limb from the body of the Turkish Empire. 
There was much promise of aid on either side, and for a 
time French counsels were dominant at the Persian capi- 

VOL. I. E 



50 


FBANCE AIID RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


tal. Two years passed away, during which the emis¬ 
saries of Napoleon, in spite of accidental hindrances, con¬ 
trived to gain the confidence of the Court of Teheran. 
They declared that England was a fallen country—that 
although protected for a time by its insular position, it 
must fell a prey to the irresistible power of Napoleon— 
that, as nothing was to be expected from its fidendship, 
nothing was to be apprehended from its enmity; and so, 
industriously propagating reports to our discredit, they 
established themselves on the ruins of British influence, 
and for a time their success was complete. 

And BO it happened, that when the British Govern¬ 
ments in London and Calcutta awoke almost simul¬ 
taneously to the necessity of “ doing something,” they 
found a well-appointed French embassy established at 
Teheran, under General Gardanne, an officer of high 
reputation, whom even hostile diplomatists have delighted 
to commend; they found a numerous staff of officers,* 
civil and military, with engineers and artificers, prepared 
to instruct and drill the native troops, to cast cannon, and 
to strengthen the defences of the Persian cities; they 
found French agents, under the protection of duly con¬ 
stituted mehmendars^ visiting Gombroon, Bushire, and 
other places, surveying the harbors of the gulf, and in¬ 
triguing with the ambassadors of the Ameers of Sindh. 
And it was pretty well ascertained that the invasion of 
India by a French and Persian army was one of the 
objects of the treaty, which, soon after the arrival of 
Gardanne at Teheran, was sent home for the approval 
of Napoleon. 

But a mighty change had, by this time, passed over 
the politics of Europe. It was in July, 1807, that on a 

* General Gardanne*s suite seems thirty European officers, and a num- 
to have consisted of “ twenty-five of- her of artmcers,”—at least, I find it 
ficers, two clergymen, a physician, so represented by Malcolm.— [MS, 
some artillery and engineer officers, Records.'] 



THE PACmCATlON OP TILSIT. 51 

raft floating upon the bosom of the River Niemen, near 
the city of Tilsit, in the kingdom of Prussia, the Emperor 
Alexander and Napoleon Buonaparte, after a brief and 
bloody campaign, embraced each other like brothers. 
In the short space of ten days, fifty thousand of the best 
French and Russian troops had been killed or disabled 
on the field of battle. Yet so little had been the van¬ 
tage gained by either party, that it is even to this day a 
moot point in history, as it was in the cotemporaiy re¬ 
cords of the war, whether the first peaceful overtime was 
made by the Russian monarch or the Corsican invader. 
Both powers eagerly embraced the opportunity of repose; 
and in a few days the scene was changed, as by magic, 
from one of sanguinary war and overwhelming misery to 
one of general cordiality and rejoicing. The French 
and Russian soldiers, who a few days before had broken 
each other’s ranks on the bloody plains of Eylau and 
Friedland, now feasted each other with overflowing hos¬ 
pitality, and toasted each other with noisy delight. Such, 
indeed, on both sides was the paroxysm of friendship, 
that they exchanged uniforms one with the other, and 
paraded the public streets of Tilsit in motley costume, as 
though the reig.i of international fraternity had com¬ 
menced in that happy July. And whilst the followers of 
Alexander and Napoleon were abandoning themselves to 
convivial pleasures, and the social affections and kindly 
charities were in full play, those monarchs were spending 
quiet evenings together, discussing their future plans, 
and projecting joint schemes of conquest. It was then 
that they meditated the invasion of Hindostan by a con¬ 
federate army uniting on the plains of Persia. Lucien 
Buonaparte, the brother of the newly-styled emperor, 
was destined for the Teheran mission; and no secret was 
made of the intention of the two great European poten¬ 
tates to commence, in the following spring, a hostile 

E 2 



52 FRANCE ANP RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 

demonstration “ contre les possessions de la Compagnie 

desindes. ” 

But by this time both the British and the Indian 
Governments had awakened from the slumbers of indif¬ 
ference in which they had so long been lulled. They 
could no longer encourage theories of non-interference 
whilst the most formidable powers in Europe were push¬ 
ing their conquests and insinuating their intrigues over 
the countries and into the courts of Asia. Lord Minto 
had succeeded Sir George Barlow as head of the Su¬ 
preme Government of India. Naturally inclined, as he 
was instructed, to carry out a moderate policy, and to 
abstain as much as possible from entanglements with na¬ 
tive rulers, he would fain have devoted himself to the 
details of domestic policy, and the replenishment of an 
exhausted exchequer. But the unsettled state of our 
European relations compelled him to look beyond the 
frontier. What he saw there roused him into action. 
It is observable that statesmen trained in the cabinets 
and courts of Europe have ever been more sensitively 
alive to the dangers of invasion from the North than 
those whose experience has been gathered in the fields of 
Indian diplomacy. Lord Wellesley and Lord Minto were 
ever tremulous with intense apprehension of danger from 
without, whilst Sir John Shore and Sir George Barlow 
possessed themselves in comparative confidence and tran¬ 
quillity, and, if they were not wholly blind to the peril, at 
all events did not exaggerate it. There is a sense of se¬ 
curity engendered by long habit and familiarity with 
apparent danger, which renders a man mistrustful of the 
reality of that which has so often been shown to be a 
counterfeit. The inexperience of English statesmen sud¬ 
denly transplanted to a new sphere of action, often sees 
in the most ordinary political phenomena strange and 
alarming portents. It is easy to be wise after the event. 



THE FRENCH AND RUSSIAN AIXIANCE. 


53 


We know now that India has never been in any real 
danger from French intrigue or French aggressiveness; 
but Lord Wellesley and Lord Minto saw with different 
eyes, and grappled the shadowy danger as though it 
were a substantial fact. In those days such extraordinary 
events were passing around, that to assign the limits of 
political probability was beyond the reach of human 
wisdom. The attrition of great events had rubbed out 
the line which separates fact from fiction, and the march 
of a grand army under one of Napoleon’s marshals from 
the banks of the Seine to the banks of the Ganges did 
not seem a feat much above the level of the Corsican’s 
towering career. 

Eightly understood, the alliance between the two great 
continental powers which seemed to threaten the destruc¬ 
tion of the British Empire in the East, was a source of 
security to the latter. But in 1807, it was not so clearly 
seen that Persia was more easily to be conciliated by the 
enemies, than by the friends, of the Russian Autocrat— 
that the confederacy of Alexander and Napoleon was 
fatal to the Persian monarch’s cherished hopes of the 
restitution of Georgia, and the general retrogression of 
the Russian army; and that, therefore, there was little 
prospect of the permanency of French influence at the 
Court of Teheran. The danger, then, seemed imminent, 
and only to be met by the most active measures of defence. 
Averse as it long had been to unnecessary interference 
with foreign states, the British-Indian Government reluc¬ 
tantly entered upon a new game of external diplomacy; 
but, wisely determined to prosecute it with consummate 
vigour of execution applied to a far-reaching comprehen¬ 
siveness of design. To baffle European intrigue, and to 
stem the tide of European invasion, it seemed necessary 
to enlace in one great network of diplomacy all the states 
lying between the frontier of India and the eastern 



54 


PRANCE AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. 


points of the Eussian Empire. Since India had been 
threatened with invasion at the close of the last century, 
the Afghan power had by disruption ceased to be formi¬ 
dable. We had formerly endeavoured to protect our¬ 
selves against France on the one side, and Afghanistan on 
the other, by cementing a friendly alliance with Persia. 
It now became our policy, whilst endeavouring to re¬ 
establish our influence in that country, to prepare our¬ 
selves for its hostility, and to employ Afghanistan and 
Sindh as barriers against encroachments from the West; 
and at the same time to increase our security by enlisting 
against the French and Persian confederacy the friendly 
offices of the Sikhs. That strange new race of men had 
by this time erected a formidable power on the banks of 
the Sutlej, by the mutilation of the Douranee Empire; and 
it was seen at once that the friendship of a people occupy¬ 
ing a tract of country so situated, and inspired with a 
strong hatred of the Mahomedan faith, must, in such a 
crisis as had now arrived, be an object of desirable attain¬ 
ment. Whilst, therefore, every effort was to be made to 
wean the Court of Teheran from the French alliance, 
preparations were commenced, in anticipation of the pos¬ 
sible failure of the Persian mission, for the despatch of 
British embassies to the intervening countries. 

The duty of negotiating with the Sikh ruler was en¬ 
trusted to Mr. Metcalfe, a civil servant of the Company, 
who subsequently rose to the highest place in the govern¬ 
ment of India, and consummated a life of public utility 
in a new sphere of action, as Governor-General of our 
North American colonies. Mr. Elphinstone, another 
civil servant of the Company, who still lives, amidst the 
fair hills of Surrey, to look back with pride and con¬ 
tentment upon a career little less distinguished than that 
of his cotemporary, was selected to conduct the embassy 
to the Court of the Douranee monarch. Captain Seton 



BRinSH-mDIAlT DIFLOHAOT. 


55 


had been previously despatched to Sindh; and Colonel 
Malcolm, who was at that time Resident at Mysore, was 
now again ordered to proceed to the Persian Court, 
charged with duties which had been rendered doubly 
diflGicult by our own supineness, and the contrasted 
activity of our more restless Gallic neighbours. 



56 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEBSIA. 


CHAPTER IV. 

[1808—1809.] 

The Second Mission to Persia—Malcolm’s Visit to Bushire—Failure of the 
Embassy—His Return to Calcutta—Mission of Sir Harford Jones—His 
Progress and Success. 

When, in the spring of 1808, Colonel Malcolm a second 
time steered his course towards the Persian Gulf, another 
British diplomatist had started, from another point, upon 
the same mission. Moved as it were by one common im¬ 
pulse, the Cabinet of England and the Supreme Council 
of India had determined each to despatch an embassy to 
the Court of Teheran. A curious and unseemly spectacle 
was then presented to the eyes of the world. Two mis¬ 
sions, in spirit scarcely less antagonistic than if they had 
been despatched by contending powers, started for the 
Persian Court; the one from London—the other from 
Calcutta. The Court of St. James had proposed to assist 
Persia by mediating with St. Petersburgh, and Mr. Har¬ 
ford Jones, a civil servant of the Company, who was 
made a baronet for the occasion, was deputed to Teheran 
to negotiate with the ministers of the Shah. It was ori- 
^nally intended that he should proceed to Persia, taking 
the Russian capital in his route; but the pacification of 
Tilsit caused a departure from this design, and Sir Har- 



DESPATCH OP BRIGADIER MALCOLM. 


57 


ford Jones sadled for Bombay with the mission on board 
one of his Majesty’s ships. He reached that port in the 
month of April, 1808, just as the embassy under Bri¬ 
gadier-General Malcolm, despatched by the Governor- 
General to the Court of Teheran, was putting out to sea 
on its way to the Persian Gulf.* 

Sir Harford Jones, therefore, rested at Bombay, await¬ 
ing the result of Malcolm’s proceedings. On the 10th 
of May the latter reached Bushire, and on the 18th wrote 
to Sir George Barlow, who had succeeded to the govem- 
norship of Madras, “ I have not only received the most 
uncommon attention from all here, but learnt from the 
best authority that the accounts of my mission have 
been received with the greatest satisfaction at Court. 
The great progress which the French have made and 
are daily making here satisfied me of the necessity of 
bringing matters to an early issue. I have a chance of 
complete victory. I shall, at all events, ascertain exactly 
how we stand, and know what we ought to do; and if I 
do not awaken the Persian Court from their delusion, 
I shall at least excite the jealousy of their new friends. I 
send Captain Paisley off to-morrow for Court—ostensibly, 
with a letter for the king; but he has secret instructions, 
and will be able to make important observations. He is 
charged with a full declaration of my sentiments and 
instructions in an official form, and you will, I think, 
when ypu see that declaration of the whole proceeding, 
think it calculated for the object. I have endeavoured 

* Malcolm wrote from Bombay on Harford’s character and former petty 
the 15tli of April, stating the course animosities on the same scene, of 
of policy he intended to pursue, and maintaining concord and unanimity 
the tone of remonstrance he purposed in the gulf one hour after his arriyal. 
to adopt, at the same time urging the Sir Harford,” he added, “ is not in 
Governor-General to suroend the possession of that high local respect 
mission of Sir Harford Jones. In and consideration in the countries to 
this letter he says that he should which he is deputed that should at-^ 
despair, “ from his knowledge of Sir tach to a national representative.” 



58 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


to combine moderation with spirit, and to inform the Per¬ 
sian Court, in language that cannot irritate, of all the 
danger of their French connexion. Captain Paisley will 
reach Court on the 20th of June, and on the 15th of 
July I may expect to be able to give you some satisfac¬ 
tory account of his success.”* 

But in this he was over-sanguine. The French envoy 
had established himself too securely at Teheran to be 
driven thence by the appearance of a Malcolm at Bushire. 
A little too impetuous, perhaps—a little too dictatorial, 
that energetic military diplomatist commenced at the 
wrong end of his work. He erred in dictating to the 
Persian Court the dismissal of the French embassy as a 
preliminary to further negotiations, when in reality it 
was the end and object of his negotiations. He erred in 
blurting out all his designs, in unfolding the scheme of 
policy he intended to adopt, and so committing himself 
to a line of conduct which after-events might have ren¬ 
dered it expedient to modify or reject. He erred in 
using the language of intimidation at a time when he 
should have sought to inspire confidence and diffuse good¬ 
will among the officers of the Persian Court. These may 
not have been the causes of his want of success; but it 
is certain that he was completely unsuccessful. The 
large promises and the prompt movements of the French 
contrasted favourably with our more scanty ofiers and 
more dilatory action; and although Malcolm now came 
laden with presents, and intending to pave hia way to 
the Persian capital with gold, the British mission was 
received with frigid indifference, if not with absolute 
disrespect. The despatch of Captain Paisley to the 
capital was negatived by the Persian Government. His 
progress was arrested at Shiraz; and there, at that pro- 


MS, Correspondence of Sir John Malcolm, 



FAII.I7BB OF Malcolm’s mission. 5d 

vincial town, whilst a French and a Russian agent were 
basking in the royal sunshine at Teheran, and were en¬ 
tertained as guests of the prime minister, the represen¬ 
tative of Great Britain was told that he must conduct 
his negotiations and content himself with the countenance 
of lesser dignitaries of state. Persian officers were in¬ 
structed to amuse the British envoys, and to gain time. 
“ The earnest desire of the king,” wrote the prime minister 
to Nussur-ood-Dowlah, at Shiraz, “is to procrastinate, 
and to avoid all decided measures. You must, there¬ 
fore, amuse General Malcolm by offering your assist¬ 
ance;" and in this and other letters the local officers at 
Shiraz were instructed by every means in their power to 
detain Captain Paisley at that place; but he had de¬ 
parted before they were received, or it is difficult to say 
in what manner the imperial mandate might not have 
been obeyed.* “ A consideration of all these things," 
wrote Captain Paisley to government, “ induces me to 
conclude that the subsisting alliance between the Govern¬ 
ment of France and Persia is more intimate than we 
have yet imagined—that its nature is more actively and 
decidedly hostile to our interests than has hitherto been 
suspected, and . hat the reliance of the king on the pro¬ 
mises and assurances of the French agents must be 
founded on better grounds than have yet come to our 
knowledge.”! 

Chafed and indignant at the conduct of the Persian 
Court, General Malcolm at once came to the determina¬ 
tion to return immediately to Calcutta, and to report to 

* MS» Records ,—Copies of these tosh, writing from Bombay to his 
letters were obtained by the Mission, son-in-law, Mr. Rich, at Bagdad, 
and are now before me. I do not find counsels him to be prepared for a 
in them anything to give colour to the rapid retreat, and adds, “ Paisley was 
suspicion that it was intended forcibly very nearly made prisoner at Shiraz.” 
to detain Paisley at Shiraz. But He narrowly escaped, as will be 
such appears to have been the im- gathered from the subsequent not* 
mession at the time, and may have being seized and detained at Bushire. 
been the case. Sir James Mackin- t MS, Records. 



60 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEBSIA. 


the Supreme Government the mortifying result of his 
mission. On the 12 th of July, he sailed from Bushire, 
leaving the charge of the embassy in the hands of Cap¬ 
tain Paisley, who remained at his post only to be insulted, 
and at last narrowly escaped being made a prisoner, by a 
precipitate retreat from the Persian dominions.* The 
failure of the Mission, indeed, was complete. Persia con¬ 
tinued to make professions of friendship to the British 
Government; but it was obvious that at that moment 
neither British diplomacy nor British gold, which was 
liberally offered, could make any way against the domi¬ 
nant influence of the French mission. Napoleon’s officers 
were drilling the Persian army, casting cannon, and 
strengthening the Persian fortresses by the application, 
for the first time, to their barbaric defences, of that sci¬ 
ence which the French engineers had learnt in such per¬ 
fection from the lessons of Vauban and Cormontagne. 

Of the wisdom of Malcolm’s abrupt departure from 
Bushire, different opinions may be entertained. On the 
day after he embarked for Calcutta, one of the most 
sagacious men then in India was seated at his writing- 
table discoursing, for Malcolm’s especial benefit, on the 
advantages of delay. “As to the real question,” wrote 
Sir James Mackintosh to the brigadier-general, “ which 
you have to decide in the cabinet council of your own 
understanding, whether delay in Persia be necessarily 
and universally against the interests of Great Britain, it 
is a question on which you have infinitely greater means 
of correct decision than I can pretend to, even if I were 
foolish enough, on such matters, to aspire to any rivalship 
with a man of your tried and exercised sagacity. I 

* “ Gener^ Malcolm came round hia person being seized by the Per- 
to Cidcutta in August to communi- sian Government, instigated by the 
cate the information he had been able French agents.”— \_From letter of In- 
^ leaving his secretary at structions sent by Supreme Government 

Abushire, who was obliged subse- to MountstuartElphinstone^ in IS09 ,— 
quently to quit the place to prevent MS. Records.’] 



MOVEMENTS OF SIE HARFOED JONES. 


61 


should just venture in general to observe, that delay is 
commonly the interest of the power which is on the de¬ 
fensive. As long as the delay lasts, it answers the pur¬ 
pose of victory, which, in that case, is only preservation. 
It wears out the spirit of enterprise necessary for assail¬ 
ants, especially such as embark in very distant and peril¬ 
ous attempts. It familiarises those who are to be attacked 
with the danger, and allows the first panic time to sub¬ 
side. It affords a chance that circumstances may become 
more favorable; and to those who have nothing else in 
their favour, it leaves at least the ‘chapter of accidents.’”* 
The ‘ chapter of accidents ’ is everything in Oriental di¬ 
plomacy. Malcolm, too impetuous to profit by it, left his 
successor to reap the harvest of altered circumstances. 
Sir Harford Jones, who had been waiting his oppor¬ 
tunity at Bombay, entered the arena of diplomacy a few 
months later than Malcolm, and his progress was a long 
ovation. It was the ‘ chapter of accidents’ that secured 
his success. 

On the first receipt of intelligence of General Mal¬ 
colm’s withdrawal. Lord Minto despatched a letter to Sir 
Harford Jones, urging him to proceed to Persia with the 
least possible dilay. But he very soon revoked those 
orders, and addressed to the Bnglish envoy stringent 
communications, desiring him to remain at Bombay.^ 


* Another passage from this letter 
is worth quoting m the margin:— 
“ What I doubt (for I presume to go 
no further), is, whether it be for our 
interest to force on the course of 
events in the present circumstances. 
You are a man of frank character 
and high spirit, accustomed to repre¬ 
sent a successful and triumphant go¬ 
vernment. You must from nature 
and habit be averse to temporise. 
But you have much too powerful an 
understanding to need to be told, 
that to temporise is sometimes ab¬ 
solutely necessary, and that men of 


your character only can temporise 
with effect. When Gentz was in Eng¬ 
land, in 1803 (during the peace), he 
said to me, that ‘it required the 
present system, and the fate minis¬ 
ters for nothing required the reality 
and the reputation of vigour so much 
as temporising.** — {^Mackintosh to 
Malcolm: July 13,1808.] 
t The first letter appears to have 
been written on the 10th of August. 
On the 20th, Brigadier Malcolm 
reached Calcutta. On the 22nd, a 
letter was sent to Sir Harford JonJf 
directing him to wait for further 



62 


THE SECOND MISSION TO FEBSIA. 


Malcolm had reached Calcutta in the interval; and set 
forth, in strong colours, the nature of the inEuence that 
had been opposed to his advance, and mapped out a plan 
of action which, in his estimation, it would now be expe¬ 
dient to adopt. Lord Minto appears to have fallen 
readily into the views of the military diplomatist; but 
he failed altogether to cut short the career of Sir Har¬ 
ford Jones. Letters travelled slowly in those days; and 
before the missive of the Governor-General, ordering his 
detention, had reached Bombay, the vessel, which was to 
bear the representative of the Court of London to the 
Persian Gulf, had shaken out its sails to the wind. 

On the 14th of October, the Mission reached Bushire. 
Sir Harford Jones set about his work earnestly and con¬ 
scientiously. He had difficulties to contend against of 
no common order, and it must be admitted that he faced 
them manfully. He found the Persian authorities but 
too well disposed to arrogance and insolence; and he 
met their pompous impertinence with a blustering 
bravery, which may have been wanting in dignity, but 
was not without effect. He bullied and blasphemed, and 
after a series of not very becoming scenes, made his way 
to Teheran, where he was graciously received by the 
Shah. The ‘ chapter of accidents ’ had worked mightily 
in his favour. The reign of Gallic influence was at an 
end. Our enemies had overreached themselves, and been 
caught in their own toils. Before Napoleon and the Czar 

orders, and on the 29tli another and Mintons letter, I embarked on board 
more urgent communication was ad- Za Nereide, and she, with the Sap- 
dressed to him, with the intent of phire^ and a very small vessel belong- 
annulling his mission. It appears mg to the Company, called the Sylj^ 
that in those days a letter took more sailed out of Bombay harbour for 
^an three weeks to accomplish the Persia on the 12th of September, 
journey between Calcutta and Bom- 1808.” Malcolm had calculated that 
bay. ^e Grovemor-General*s letter the letter of August 22nd would rea^ 
of the 10th of August must have Bombay by September 13th; and that 
djpiched the latter place about the in all probability Jones would not em« 
^h of September. Jones says, In bark before that date. But, as usual, 
seven days from receiving Lord he was over-sanguine. 



DECLINE OF FRENCH INFLUENCE. 


63 


had thrown themselves into each other’s arms at Tilsit, 
it had been the policy of the French to persuade the Per¬ 
sian Court that the aggressive designs of Russia could be 
successfully counteracted only by a power at enmity with 
that state ; and now Napoleon boasted that he and the 
emperor were “ invariablement unis pour la paix comme 
pour la guerre.” 

Skilfully taking advantage of this, Sir Harford Jones 
ever as he advanced inculcated the doctrine which 
had emanated in the first instance from the French 
embassy, and found every one he addressed most willing 
to accept it. There was, fortunately for us, a galling 
fact ever present to the minds of the Persian minis¬ 
ters to convince them of the truth of the assertion that 
it was not by the friends, but by the enemies of Russia 
that their interests were to be best promoted. The 
French had undertaken to secure the evacuation of 
Georgia; but still the Russian eagles were planted on 
Georgian soil. The star of Napoleon’s destiny was no 
longer on the ascendant. The “ Sepoy General,” whom 
he had once derided, was tearing his battalions to pieces 
in the Spanish peninsula. Moreover, the French had lost 
ground at Teheran, in their personal as in their political 
relations. They had not accommodated themselves to 
the manners of the Persian Court, nor conciliated, by a 
courteous and considerate demeanour, the good-will of 
their new allies. They were many degrees less popular 
than the English, and their influence melted away at 
the approach of the British envoy. The Shah, too, had 
by this time, not improbably, become suspicious of the 
designs of the French. It was urged with some force 
that if the French invaded India they would not leave 
Persia alone. Mahomed Shereef Khan, who was sent 
by Nussur-oolah-Ehan to General Malcolm just befor^ 
his departure from Bushire, to repeat the friendly assu¬ 
rances of the Persian Government, very sagaciously ob- 



64 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


served, “ If the French inarch an army to India, will they 
not make themselves masters of Persia as a necessary pre¬ 
lude to further conquests, and who is to oppose them 
after they have been received as friends ? But our king,” 
continued the old man, “ dreams of the Bussians. He 
sees them in Aderbijan, and within a short distance of 
the capital, and, despairing of his own strength, he is 
ready to make any sacrifice to obtain a temporary relief 
from his excessive fear. In short,” he concluded, whilst 
strong emotion proved his sincerity, “ affairs have come 
to that state that I thank my God I am an old man, 
and have a chance of dying before I see the disgrace 
and ruin of my country.”* Had Malcolm remained a 
little longer at Bushire, he would have seen all these 
dreams of French assistance pass away from the ima¬ 
ginations of the Persian Court, and might, under the 
force of altered circumstances, have carried everything 
before him. 

When Sir Harford Jones reached the Persian capital. 
General Gardanne had withdrawn; and there was little 
difficulty in arranging preliminaries of a treaty satisfac¬ 
tory alike to the Courts of Teheran and St. James’s. 
The work was not done in a very seemly manner; but it 
was not less serviceable when done, for the manner of 
its doing. Perhaps there is not another such chapter as 
this in the entire history of English diplomacy. Jones 
had left Bombay under the impression that he was acting 
in accordance with the wishes of Lord Minto; but he 
had not been long in Persia before he found that the 
Indian Government was bent upon suspending his opera¬ 
tions, and, failing in this, was resolute to thwart him at 
every turn. They dishonoured his bills and ignored his 
proceedings. A totally opposite course of policy had been 
determined upon in the Council-Chamber of Calcutta. 


♦ MS, Correspondence, 



THE PROJECTED EXPEDITION TO KARRACK. 66 

The proceedings of Brigadier Malcolm at Bushire had not 
been viewed with unmixed approbation by Lord Minto 
and his council; but he was the employ^ of the Indian 
Government; they had confidence in the general sound¬ 
ness of his views; and they felt that in the maintenance 
of their dignity it was expedient to support him. In no 
very conciliatory mood of mind had that eager, energetic 
officer returned to Calcutta. Chewing the cud of bitter 
fancies as he sailed up the Bay of Bengal, he prepared a 
plan for the intimidation of Persia, and was prepared 
with all the details of it when, on the 20th of August, he 
disembarked at Calcutta. There was no unwillingness 
in the Council-Chamber to endorse the schemes of the 
baffled diplomatist. It was agreed that an armament 
should be fitted out to take possession of Karrack, an 
island in the Persian Gulf, or, in the delicate language 
of diplomacy, to form an establishment ” there, as “ a 
central position equally well adapted to obstruct the 
designs of France against India, as to assist the King of 
Persia (in the event of a renewal of the alliance) against 
his European enemies.” 

These measures were described as ‘‘ entirely defensive, 
and intended e\ en to be amicable.” The command of 
the force was of course conferred on Brigadier Malcolm. 

I am vested,” he wrote to his friends at Madras, “ with 
supreme military and political authority and control in 
the Gulf, to which, however threatening appearances 
may be, I proceed with that species of hope which fills 
the mind of a man who sees a great and unexpected 
opportunity afforded him of proving the extent of his 
devotion to the country.”*" It was to be a very pretty 
little army, with a compact little staff, all the details of 
which, even to the allowances of its members, were soon 
drawn up and recorded. An engineer officer was called 
in and consulted about the plan of a fort, with a hou^ 

* MS, Correspondence, 



66 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEESIA. 


for the commandant, quarters for the officers, barracks 
for the men, a magazine to contain five hundred barrels 
of gunpowder, and everything else complete. The acti¬ 
vity of the Brigadier himself at this time was truly sur¬ 
prising. He drew up elaborate papers of instructions to 
himself, to be adopted by the Governor-General. One 
of these, covering twenty-six sheets of foolscap, so be¬ 
wildered Lord Minto in his pleasant country retreat 
at Barrackpore, that he could come to no other con¬ 
clusion about it than that the greater part had better 
be omitted. Every conceivable contingency that could 
arise out of the movements of France or Russia, or dis¬ 
pensations of Providence in Persia, was contemplated 
and discussed, and instructions were sought or suggested; 
but a new series of contingencies occurred to the Brig¬ 
adier after ho had embarked, and a new shower of ifs 
was poured forth from the Sand-heads still further to 
perplex the government. Lord Minto had by this time 
fully made up his mind that the French were coming; 
wrote of it, not as a possible event, but as a question 
merely of time; and contemplated the probability of con¬ 
tending in Turkey for the sovereignty of Hindostan.* 
But the French had too much work to do in Europe 
to trouble themselves about operations in the remote 
Asiatic world. 

At the beginning of October Malcolm started for 
Bombay, from which Presidency the details of his army 
were to be drawn. But before the vessel on which he 
had embarked had steered into the black water, he was 

♦ For example, in one^ of his mi- proach of the army may be earlier 
nutes written about this time, he than on the former supposition, and it 
says: “It appears doubtful whether will have less difficulty to encounter, 
the partition of European Turkey The route of our divisions must in 
wiU precede the French expedition to this event be Ihrou^ the territory of 
There appears to be reason, Bagdad. ... I incline, under 
hj the late advices, to suppose that all the circumstances now known to 
the consent of the Porte may have me, to think that the force stationed 
been obtained to the passage of the at Earrack should be greater than we 
French army. In this case, the ap- before looked to.”— Records.^ 



EMBABBASSMENTS OF THE IKOIAK OOVEBBMEKT. 67 

recalled, in consequence of the receipt of intelligence of 
Sir Halford Jones’s intended departure for Bushire. 
This was, doubtless, very perplexing; but Malcolm did 
not despair. “ I am this instant,” he wrote, on the 5th 
of October, “ recalled to Calcutta in consequence of ad¬ 
vices from Sir Harford, stating his intention of leaving 
Bombay on the 11th of September. As it appears 
possible that he may not be ready to sail before the 
13th, he wiU, I think, receive a letter from this govern¬ 
ment of the 22nd, desiring him to stay; and if that has 
the effect of stopping him, the letter of the Supreme 
Government, dated the 29th, will probably put an end 
to the mission.”* Vain hope ! Sir Harford Jones was 
at that time not many days’ sail from Bushire; and be¬ 
fore Malcolm finally quitted Calcutta, had started fairly 
on his race to Teheran. 

The Supreme Government now more urgently than 
before addressed instructions to the nominee of the Bri¬ 
tish Cabinet, ordering him to retire from Persia. The 
Council were all agreed upon the subject. Mr. Lumsden 
and Mr. Colebrooke, who were Members of Council at 
the time, expressed themselves even more strongly on 
the subject than the Governor-General. All were cer¬ 
tain that Sir Harford Jones must either fail signally, or 
disgrace and embarrass the government by a delusive 
success. He might be repulsed at Bushire—or balBed at 
Shiraz—or drawn into a treaty favorable to the French. 
In any case, it was assumed that he was sure to bring 
discredit on the British Government and the East India 
Company. Without asserting that the conduct of the 
Persian Court had been such as to call for a dedaratioD 
of war from the rulers of British India, it was contended, 
and not, perhaps, without some show of reason, that any 
advances made at such a time would compromise its 
dignity, and that the attitude to be assumed should be 

* MS. Correqxmdence of Sir John Malcolm. 

F 2 



68 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEESIA. 


rather one of reserve than of solicitation. Both parties 
were in an embarrassing position. Whilst Lord Minto 
was writing letters to Sir Harford Jones, telling him that 
if he did not immediately close his mission, all his pro¬ 
ceedings would be publicly repudiated,* Sir Harford 
Jones, as representative of the sovereign, was repudiating 
the proceedings of the Supreme Government of India, 
and offering to answer with his fortune and his life for 
any hostile proceedings on the part of the British not 
provoked by the Persians themselves. The government 
did its best to disgrace Sir Harford Jones by dishonour¬ 
ing his bills and ignoring his proceedings; and Sir Har¬ 
ford Jones lowered the character of the Indian Govern¬ 
ment by declaring that it had no authority to revoke his 
measures or to nullify his engagements with the Persian 
Court. 

In the mean while, Brigadier Malcolm had sailed down 
the Bay of Bengal, and reached Bombay by the first 
day of December. His instructions had preceded him; 
a select force of some two thousand men was ready to 
receive his orders; and by the 18th of January the ex¬ 
pedition was prepared, at all points, to take ship for the 
Gulf, to pounce upon Karrack, and to strike a great 
panic into the rebellious heart of the Persian nation. 
“ But,” says Malcolm, in one of his voluminous narra¬ 
tives, “ the accounts I heard of the great change caused in 
the affairs of Europe by the general insurrection of Spain, 
and the consequent improbability of Buonaparte making 
an early attack upon India, combined with the advance 
of Sir Harford Jones into Persia, led me to suspend the 
sailing of the expedition. My conduct on that occasion 

* In one of these letters, written and retiring from Persia, it has been 
in February, 1809, it is said: “ I can- determined, imd measures have been 
not venture to omit acquainting you taken accordingly, to disavow your 
that in the event of your not comply- public character in that country 
ing, without further reference or de- subsequent to your receipt of iny 
lay, with the instructions conveyed in letter of 3l8t of October.**— 
this letter, by closing your mission Records,'} 



THE PBELIMINABY TREATY. 


69 


was honoured by approbation, and the expedition coun¬ 
termanded.” But though the military expedition was 
countermanded, the Mission was not. Malcolm, con¬ 
fident that the proceedings of such a man as Jones, for 
whom he entertained the profoundest possible contempt, 
could be attended only with disastrous failure, deter¬ 
mined to procee^ to Persia, in spite of the civilian’s 
accounts of his favorable reception. “ I have private 
accounts from Bushire,” he wrote on Christmas-eve, 
“ which state that Sir Harford Jones is, or pretends to 
be, completely confident of a success which every child 
with him sees is unattainable through the means he uses. 
His friends now believe he will go on in spite of any 
orders he may receive from the Governor-General. 1 
mean to go on too (there is, indeed, nothing in these 
despatches that can stop me for a moment), so we shall 
have 9.fine mess (as the sailors say) in the Gulf. Will 
this lesson cure the fools at home of their mischievous 
propensity to interfere with the local government?”* 
Such, indeed, was the feeling between the two diplo¬ 
matists, and so little was it disguised, that the Shah, per¬ 
ceiving plainly the true state of the case, abused Mal¬ 
colm before Joaes, and Jones before Malcolm, as the 
best means, in his opinion, of ingratiating himself with 
them both. 

In March, 1809, the preliminary treaty was inter¬ 
changed, on the part of their respective sovereigns, by 
Sir Harford Jones and Meerza Shefiee. No treaty be¬ 
fore or since was ever interchanged imder such ex¬ 
traordinary and unbecoming circumstances. Meerza 
Shefiee, the prime minister of Persia, was an old and 
infirm man. His age and rank among his own people 
had given him a sort of license to speak with an amount 
of fi-eedom such as is not tolerated among Europeans in 

• MS, Correspondence of Sir John Malcolm — JDecend)er 24,180S. 



70 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PEESIA. 


social, mucli less in diplomatic, converse. There was an 
intentional indefiniteness in one of the articles of the 
treaty, which was to be referred to the British Govern¬ 
ment for specific adjustment, and Meerza Sheffee, not 
understanding or approving of this, blurted out that the 
British envoy designed to “cheat” him. The figure 
used in the Persian language is gross^and offensive, and 
the word I have employed but faintly expresses the force 
of the insult. Jones had not patience to bear it. He 
started up, seized the counterpart treaty lying signed on 
the carpet before him, gave it to Mr. Morier, and then 
turning to the astonished Wuzecr, told him that he was a 
stupid old blockhead to dare to use such words to the 
representative of the King of England, and that nothing 
but respect for the Persian monarch restrained him from 
knocking out the old man’s brains against the wall. 
“ Suiting the action to the word, I then,” says Jones, in 
his own narrative of his mission, “ pushed him with a 
slight degree of violence against the wall which was be¬ 
hind him, kicked over the candles on the fioor, left the 
room in darkness, and rode home without any one of 
the Persians daring to impede my passage.” It is not 
surprising that, after such a scene as this, the Persians 
should have shaken their heads, and said, “ By Allah ! 
this Feringhee is either drunk or mad.” 

But, in spite of this and other untoward occurrences, 
the preliminary treaty was duly interchanged. It bears 
date the 12th of March, 1809. By this treaty, the Shah 
of Persib, declaring all other engagements void, cove¬ 
nanted “ not to permit any European force whatever to 
pass through Persia, either towards India, or towards 
the ports of that country.” He fiirther undertook, in the 
event of the British dominions in India being attacked 
or invaded by the Afghans or any other power, “ to 
afford a force for the protection of the said dominions.” 



PROVISIONS OF THE TREATY. 


71 


On the part of the British Government, it was stipulated 
that in case any European force had invaded, or should 
invade, the territories of the King of Persia, his Britan¬ 
nic Majesty should afford to the Shah a force, or, in lieu 
of it, a subsidy,-with warlike ammunition, such as guns, 
muskets, &c., and officers, to the amount that might be 
to the advantage of both parties, for the expulsion of the 
force so invading.” The general provisions of the treaty 
were included in this, but the anticipated arrival of Bri¬ 
gadier Malcolm with a military expedition in the Persian 
Gulf rendered it necessary that certain specific articles 
should be inserted with especial reference to this move¬ 
ment. It was provided that the force should on no 
account possess itself of Karrack or any other places in 
the Persian Gulf; but that, unless required by the 
Governor-General for the defence of India, it should be 
held at the disposal of the Persian shah, the Shah under¬ 
taking to receive it in a friendly manner, and to direct his 
governors to supply it with provisions “ at the fair prices 
of the day.” This preliminary treaty was conveyed by 
Mr. Morier, accompanied by a Persian ambassador, to 
England, where it was duly ratified and exchanged; and 
Sir Harford Jones was confirmed in the post of Resident 
Minister at the Court of Teheran. 

The success of Sir Harford Jones embarrassed the 
British-Indian Government even more than did the 
apprehension of his failure. Lord Minto and his coun¬ 
cillors were sorely perplexed. It was desirable, as they 
all acknowledged, that the engagements entered into by 
the representative of the Court of England should be 
completed ; but it was not desirable that the Indian 
Government should be degraded in the eyes of the Per* 
sian Court. Between their anxiety to accept the thing, 
done and to disgrace the doer, they were thrown into a 



72 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


state of ludicrous embarrassment.* The resolution, how¬ 
ever, at which they arrived was, under all the circum¬ 
stances of the case, as reasonable as could be expected. 
It was determined to accept Sir Harford Jones’s treaty, 
and to leave the dignity of the British-Jndian Govern¬ 
ment to be vindicated on a future occasion. Perhaps it 
would have been even better quietly to have lived down 
the slight; for it cost a large sum of money, expended 
on a profitless mission, to satisfy the British-Indian 
Government that it had re-established its name at the 
Court of the Persian, and confounded the malignity of 
Jones.f 

This is a curious chapter of diplomatic history. It is 
one, too, which has evoked from the partisans of both 
parties an extraordinary amount of bitterness. It hardly 


♦ Mr. Lumsden wrote a minute 
(July 10, 1809), in which he says: 
“We must either continue to employ 
at the Court of Persia an agent in 
whom we have no confidence, who 
has studiously endeavoured to de¬ 
grade the authority of the Govern¬ 
ment of India, under whose orders 
he was placed; or by deputing an 
agent of our own to Teheran, whilst 
he continues there, acknowledged by 
the Persian Government as the repre¬ 
sentative of his Britannic Majesty, 
we may expose the public interest to 
danger from the presence in Persia of 
two distinct authorities, who cannot 
act in concert, but will, it is to be 
feared, necessarily counteract each 
other, and occasion great perplexity 
to the Persian minister.” At the 
same time, Mr. Colebrooke wrote: 
“Our situation as regards Sir H. 
Jones is certainly difficult and em¬ 
barrassing in the extreme. We are 
desirous of fulfilling the engagements 
he has contracted, and of maintaining 
the alliance concluded by him. And 
we are glad that he should continue 
at the Court of Persia to watch the 


wavering counsels of that Court, and 
to oppose the revival of French in¬ 
fluence at it, until he can be replaced 
by our own envoy; but by either 
re-accrediting him with the Court, or 
silently executing his engagements, 
we acquiesce in the continued degra¬ 
dation of this government.”—[JlfiS*. 
Records."] 

t On the details of Malcolm’s sup¬ 
plementary mission it is unnecessary 
to dwell. Its political results are 
compressible into the smallest pos¬ 
sible space. It was, indeed, a mere 
pageant; and a very costly, but not 
wholly a profitless one. It yielded a 
considerable harvest of literary and 
scientific results, among the most 
important of which may be men¬ 
tioned Malcolm’s voluminous “ His¬ 
tory of Persia” and the present 
Sir Henry Pottingcr’s admirable 
“Account of Beluchistan;” works 
which, it haft been well said, “not 
only filled up an important blank 
in our knowledge of the East, but 
which materially helped to fix the 
literary character of the Indian 
services.” 



STTMMABT 0^ THE AMBASSADOBIAl. WAB. 73 

comes within the proper compass of this history to nar¬ 
rate the incidents of the ambassadorial war, still less to 
comment upon them. But it may be briefly remarked 
that all parties were wrong. Mistakes were unquestion¬ 
ably committed by Malcolm, by Jones, and by the In¬ 
dian Government. There was an old feud between the 
two former, which certainly did not tend to smooth 
down the difficulties which had arisen; and the Govern¬ 
ment of India was not very patient of the home-born 
interference with what it conceived to be its rightful 
diplomatic prerogative. Jones, though receiving his 
credentials from the Crown, was placed in subordination 
to the local government, and ought to have obeyed its 
mandates. That he would have done so, had he re¬ 
ceived instructions to withdraw before he had fairly en¬ 
tered upon his work, it is only just to assume; but having 
once made his appearance in Persia as the representa¬ 
tive of his sovereign, he thought that he could not 
abandon his mission under orders from the Indian Go¬ 
vernment without lowering the dignity of the Crown. 

He did not commence his expedition to Persia until 
some time after Malcolm had retired; and when he 
went at last, it was imder urgent solicitations from the 
Governor-General to proceed there without delay. He 
cannot, therefore, be charged with indelicacy or pre¬ 
cipitancy. He went only when the coast was clear. 
That he succeeded better than Malcolm is to be at¬ 
tributed mainly to the “ chapter of accidents.” Malcolm 
says that it was owing to his measures that Jones was 
enabled to advance—that the rumour of his military 
preparations overawed the Persian Court—and that all 
the rest was done by bribery. We are not bound to 
accept this version of the story. That there was at 
that time little hope of any mission succeeding with¬ 
out bribery no man knew better than Malcolm. But 



74 


THE SECOND MISSION TO PERSIA. 


Malcolm could not bribe his way to Teheran in the 
spring, because the French were then dominant at 
Court. Had he waited till the autumn, the road 
would have been lubricated for him. One thing at 
least is certain. Nothing could have been more fortu¬ 
nate than the miscarriage of Malcolm’s military expe¬ 
dition. It would have embarrassed our future proceed¬ 
ings, and entailed a large waste of public money. As to 
the question of prerogative, it would be little use to dis¬ 
cuss it. It has been settled long ago. The “ fools at 
home,” as Malcolm called them, have taken into their 
own hands the appointment of our Persian ambassadors, 
and the conduct of all subsequent negotiations with the 
Persian Court. Henceforth we shall have to regard the 
relations subsisting between Persia and Great Britain as 
affairs beyond the control of the East India Company 
and their representatives, and to look upon the ministers 
of the Crown as responsible for all that we have to con¬ 
template in that quarter of the world.* 

* From 1826 to 18«S5, however, Government; but the diplomatic 
the nomination of the Persian envoy control was not relinquished by the 
was again vested in the Indian Foreign-office. 



THE MISSIONS TO LAHOEE AND CADEtTI,. 


75 


CHAPTER V. 

[1808—1809.] 

The Missions to Lahore and Caubul—^The Aggressions of Runjeet Singh— 
Mr. Metcalfe at Umritsur—^Treaty of 1809—Mr. Elphinstone's Mission 
—Arrival at Peshawur—Reception by Shah Soojah—Withdrawal of the 
Mission—^Negotiations with the Ameers of Sindh. 

It was whilst Sir Harford Jones was making his way 
from Bombay to Bushire, in the months of September 
and October, 1808, that the Missions to Caubul and 
Lahore set out for their respective destinations. Since 
the time when the rumored approach of an army of 
invasion under Zemaun Shah had troubled the hearts of 
the English in Lidia, the might of the Douranee rulers 
had been gradually declining, as a new power, threaten¬ 
ing the integrity of the A%han dominions, swelled into 
bulk and significance, and spread itself over the country 
between the Sutlej and the Indus. It was no longer 
possible to regard with indifference the growth of this 
new empire. We had supplanted the Mahrattas on 
the banks of the Jumna, and brought ourselves into 
proximity to the Sikhs. A group of petty principalities 
were being rapidly consolidated into a great empire by 
the strong hand and capacious intellect of Runjeet SingTi, 
and it had become apparent to the British that thence¬ 
forth, for good or for evil, the will of the Sikh ruler must 



76 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBUL. 


exercise an influence over the councils of the rulers of 
Hindostan. 

It was part of Lord Minto’s policy at this time, as we 
have seen, to include the Lahore chief in the great Anti- 
Gallican confederacy with which he had determined to 
frustrate the magnificent designs of Napoleon. But the 
posture of afiairs on our northern frontier was such as to 
occasion some embarrassment in the Council-Chamber of 
Calcutta. The military power of the Sikh rajah had 
been put forth, with almost unvarying success, for the 
subjection of the petty principalities within his reach; 
and now it appeared that he was desirous of reducing to 
a state of vassalage all the chiefs holding the tract of 
country which lies between the Sutlej and the Jumna. 
There was much in this to perplex and embarrass Lord 
Minto and his colleagues. It was desirable, above all 
things, to maintain a friendly power beyond the frontier, 
but whether this were to be done by supporting the 
Sikh chiefs in the Cis-Sutlej territories, even at the risk 
of actual hostilities with Runjeet Singh; or whether, on 
the other hand, it were expedient to sacrifice the petty 
chieftains to Runjeet’s ambition, and enter into an offen¬ 
sive and defensive alliance against the Persians and the 
French with that prince, were questions which agitated 
the minds of our Indian statesmen, and found no very 
satisfactory solution in the elaborate minutes which they 
provoked. Lord Minto, whilst expressing his natural 
inclination to assist a weak country against the usurpa¬ 
tion of a powerful neighbour, and fully recognising the 
principle of non-interference, so consistently inculcated 
by the government at home, maintained that the emer¬ 
gency of the case was such as to justify a departure from 
ordinary rules of conduct, and a violation of general 
maxims of policy. The defence of India against the 
dangers of French invasion was stated to be the most 



THE NOBTH-WESTEEN FBONTIEB. 


77 


pressing object of attention, and entitled to most weight 
in the deliberations of the state; but it was doubted 
whether the alliance with Runjeet Singh would effec¬ 
tually secure that desirable end,* whilst it was certain 
that the gradual extension of his dominions would be 
permanently injurious to British interests in the East. 
It was desirable, in a word, to secure his alliance and 
to check his presumption at the same time. Any act 
of hostility and discourtesy on our part might throw 
him into the arms of Holkar and Scindiah, and other 
native princes; and a confederacy might be formed 
against us that would disturb the peace of India for 
years. Starting, however, with the assumption that the 
French were undeniably about to invade Hindostan, it 
was contended by the Governor-General, that whilst 
the native princes would be inclined to wait the coming 
of the great western liberator, it was our policy to hus¬ 
band our strength for the. grand struggle with our ter¬ 
rible European opponent. “ We are, in reality,” wrote 
Lord Minto, “ only waiting on both sides for a more 
convenient time to strike. We know that Holkar and 
Scindiah, the Rajah of Bhurtpore, and probably other 
chiefe, have taken their part, and are sharpening their 
weapons in expectation of a concerted signal.” 

Thus, oscillating between two courses of policy, and 
considering the question solely as one of expediency— 
that kind of expediency, however, to which something 
of dignity is imparted by a great national crisis, real or 
supposed—the Governor-General at last came to favour 
an opinion that sound policy dictated a strenuous effort 

* “ I doubt,” wrote Lord Minto, and elsewhere for the purpose of com- 

whether his jealousy would permit munication, as shouldrender us inde- 
him to admit, by treaty, our troops pendent of his fidelity. If he does not 
freely into his country, and to con- accede to this, we shall derive little 
sent that we should establish such benefit from his alliance.”*—[[Mtnute 
posts both in front against the enemy of Lord Minto: MS. Eecorda^ 



78 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBHL. 


on the part of the British Government to curb the 
aggressive spirit of the Sikh conqueror, and to set a limit 
to his dominions. It was seriously debated by Lord 
Minto whether Eunjeet should not at once be deprived 
of all power to work us mischief; but the recollection of 
the advantages of maintaining, if possible, a longer peace, 
and of the non-interference system so strenuously enforced 
upon him by the home authorities, suggested to him the 
expediency of following a more cautious line of policy, 
and merely simulating, in the first instance, an intention 
to oppose a hostile front to the aggressiveness of the 
Sikhs. “ If it were not found expedient,” wrote Lord 
Minto, “ ultimately to pursue or to favour these views, 
the apprehension alone of so great danger brought home 
to him may be expected to render Eunjeet Singh more 
subservient to our wishes than any concessions or com¬ 
pliances will ever make him.” 

In this conjuncture, the Governor-General, harassed 
and perplexed by doubts, was fortunate in the personal 
character of the officer to whom had been entrusted the 
conduct of the mission to the Sikh ruler. Mr. Charles 
Metcalfe had early recommended himself to the favor¬ 
able consideration of Lord Wellesley, who was never 
slow to recognise in the junior officers of the state the 
promise of future eminence.* He had been but a short 
time in the service, when the Governor-General placed 
him in his own office—that nursery of Indian statesmen 
—and he soon confirmed the expectations that had been 
formed of his judgment and intelligence by proving him- 

* A remarkably able paper on the of it now before me is the following 
disposal of the subsidiary force which, marginal note, written in the Go- 
under the provisions of the defensive vernor-Generai’s fine, bold, charac- 
■alliance with Scin^ah, that prince teristic hand:—“ This paper is highly 
had agreed to receive, drawn up by creditable to Mr. Metcalfe's charac- 
Mr. Metcalfe, in 1804, conduced more, ter and talents. It may become 
perhaps, than anything else to confirm very useful. A copy of it should be 
Lord Wellesley’s high opinion of the sent to the Commander-in-Chief, and 
young civilian's talents. On a copy another to M^jor Malcolm.—^W.” 



THE CAPRICES OP EUNJEET SINGH. 


79 


self, in the camp of the Commauder-in-Chief, and at the 
Court of Delhi, an oflELcer of equal courage and saga¬ 
city. The estimate which Lord Wellesley had formed 
of his talents was accepted by Lord Minto; and in the 
whole range of the civil service—a service never want¬ 
ing in administrative and diplomatic ability of the highest 
order—it is probable that he could not now have found 
a fitter agent to carry out his policy at Lahore. 

On the 1st of September, 1808, Mr. Metcalfe crossed 
the Sutlej, and on the 11th of the same month mot the 
Sikh ruler at Kussoor. The conduct of the Kajah was 
arbitrary and capricious. At one time courteous and 
friendly, at another querulous and arrogant, he now 
seemed disposed to enter into our views and to aid our 
designs; and then, complaining bitterly of the inter¬ 
ference of the British Government, insisted on his right 
to occupy the country beyond the Jumna. Nor did he 
confine his opposition to mere verbal argument, for 
whilst the British envoy was still in his camp, he set 
out to illustrate his views by crossing the river, seizing 
Furreedkote and Umballah, and otherwise overawing 
the petty Sikh chiefs between the Sutlej and the 
Jumna.* 

On the receipt of this intelligence by the Calcutta 
Council, it was debated whether it would be expedient 

• “ The Kajah coupled his acqui- would tender any engagements with 
escence in the proposed arrangements him for that purpose entirely ineffi- 
of defence against an invading Euro- cient and nugatory. Even during 
pean army with the condition of the reference he made to government 
being permitted to extend his domi- on these demands, he crossed the 
nions over all the Sikh territories Sutlej to attack the Sikh territories, 
between the Sutlej and the Jumna. The extreme jealousy and suspicion 
He also provisionally demanded that of us evinced by the llajah, together 
the British Government should not with his own conduct and ambitious 
interfere in favour of the King of character, rendered it indispensably 
Caubul in his aggressions against necessary to resist his pretensions to 
that monarch’s dominions—at the sovereignty over the territories on 
same time shackling the advance of this side of the Sutlej, and the Kajah 
the British troops into his country, was required to withdraw his army.” 
and the establishment of the neces- — [5/afemew/ in Instrwtions to Mr, 
sary depdts, with conditions which E^hinstone: MS. Itecords,^ 



80 


THE MISSIONS TO lAHOEE AND CAUBUL. 


to adopt the more dignified course of ordering Mr. Met¬ 
calfe to withdraw at once from the Sikh camp, and, re¬ 
garding the conduct of Kunjeet Singh as an outrage 
against the British Government, to take measures at once 
to chastise him;—whether, as recommended by Mr. 
Edmonstone, who always brought a sound judgment to 
bear upon such questions, and whose opinions were 
seldom disregarded by the Governor-General, to limit the 
negotiations with Runjeet Singh to defensive measures 
against the French, leaving the question of the subjuga¬ 
tion of the Cis-Sutlej states for future adjustment;—or 
whether it would not be more prudent to direct Mr. 
Metcalfe to encumber himself as little as possible with 
engagements of any kind—to adopt a cautious and tem¬ 
porising line of policy, so as to admit of frequent refer¬ 
ences to Calcutta in the course of his negotiations, and 
to wait for anything that might chance to be written 
down in our favour in that great “ chapter of accidents,” 
which so often enabled us to solve the most perplexing 
questions, and to overcome the most pressing difficulties.* 
This was the course finally adopted. On one point, 
however, the tone of government was decided. Eun- 
jeet Singh had required the British Government to 
pledge itself not to interfere with his aggressions against 
Caubul; and Mr. Metcalfe was now informed, that 
“were the Rajah to conclude engagements with the 
British Government in the true spirit of unanimity and 
confidence, we could not accede to any proposition upon 
the part of Caubul injurious to his interests: uncom¬ 
bined with such engagements, that question (of his 
aggressions against the Caubul territories) cannot pos¬ 
sibly form an article of agreement between this go- 

• “The point to aim at in our without a rupture. I should, on 
present transactions with Uie Rajah this principle, rather wish to pro¬ 
of Lahore,” wrote Lord Minto, “ ap- tract them, to accelerate the treaty.” 
pears to be that we should keep —[Minute of Lord Minto: MS, i2c- 
ourselves as free as can be done cords.'] 



MOVEltfEXTS ON THE FRONTIEB. 


81 


vernment and the Rajah of Lahore; and on this ground 
the discussion of it may be properly rejected. At the 
same time, if the occasion should arise, you may in¬ 
form the Rajah that Mr. Elphinstone is not authorised 
to conclude with the State of Caubul any engagements 
injurious to his interests. You will be careful, how¬ 
ever, as you have hitherto been, to avoid any pledge 
on the part of government which might preclude any 
future engagements with the State of Caubul on that 
subject.” And whilst Mr. Metcalfe was carrying out 
this temporising policy inculcated by the Calcutta coun¬ 
cil, troops were pushed forward to the frontier to 
watch the movements of the Punjabee chief. A body 
of King’s and Company’s troops, under General St. 
Leger, and another under Colonel Ochterlony, com¬ 
posed entirely of native regiments, were posted in 
the neighbourhood of Loodhianah, ready, at a mo¬ 
ment’s notice, to take the field against the followers 
of Nanuk. Vested with political authority, the latter 
officer, on the 9th of February, 1809, issued a pro¬ 
clamation calling upon the Sikh ruler to withdraw his 
troops to the further side of the Sutlej, and placing all 
the Cis-Sutlej principalities under the protection of the 
British Government. It was plain that we were no 
longer to be tampered with, and that there was nothing 
left to Runjeet Singh but to yield a reluctant compliance 
to our terms. 

Up to this time the primary object of the British 
Government had been the establishment of such an alli¬ 
ance with the rulers of the Punjaub, as might ensure a 
strenuous conjoint opposition to an European army ad¬ 
vancing from the West. But those were days when a 
constant succession of great changes in the European 
world necessarily induced a shifting policy on the part 
of our Indian statesmen. It was difficult to keep pace 
with the mutations which were passing over the political 

VOL. I. Q 



82 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHOBB AND CAUBttL. 


horizon—difficult to keep a distant mission supplied 
■with instructions which were not likely to become 
totally useless before they could be brought into effective 
operation. With Mr. Metcalfe at Umritsur it was com¬ 
paratively easy to communicate. He had been ordered 
to temporise—^to do nothing in a hurry; and he had 
succeeded so well as to protract his negotiations imtil the 
spring of 1809. The delay was most advantageous to 
British interests. The “chapter of accidents” worked 
mightily in our favour. The war with Napoleon had 
now been carried into the Spanish peninsula, and it de¬ 
manded all the energies of the Emperor to maintain his 
position in Europe. The necessity of anti-Gallican alli¬ 
ances in India became less and less urgent. The value 
of Sikh friendship dwindled rapidly down, and the pre¬ 
tensions of the Sikh ruler naturally descended with it. 
The sight of a formidable British force on the frontier— 
the intelligence of the European successes of the great 
“ Sepoy General” who, a few years before, on the plains 
of Bcrar, had given the Mahrattas a foretaste of the 
quality of his military skill*—the declining influence of 
the French in Central Asia,—all suggested to the wily 
Sikh Rajah the expediency of forming a friendly alliance 
with the British.f He was now in a temper to accede 
to the terms proposed to him by the British diplomatist; 


^ “ At the time when the proposal 
was made for the adjustment of difle- 
rences, the forces on both sides re¬ 
mained quiet in sight of each other, 
when the news of the defeat of Junot 
(Duke of Abrantes) at Vimiera, by 
the British army, under Sir Arthur 
Wellesley, was received in the camps 
of General St. Leger and Colonel 
Ochterlony, and, as usual, cele¬ 
brated by royal salutes. The cause 
of this firing being made known to 
Runjeet Singh, the salute was, by 
his special command, repeated from 
.all the artillery in his camp—a cir- 
oumstance which, whether it be attri¬ 


buted to politeness towards the Bri¬ 
tish commanders, with whom he was 
in treaty, or to a general condemna¬ 
tion of the system of Buonaparte, 
was felt equally agreeable.”—[Asiatic 
Annual Register. 

t It is said, too, that an accidental 
collision between some of the Ma- 
homedan sepoys of Mr. Metcalfe's 
mission, and a far superior body of 
Sikhs, in which the inferiority of 
the latter was most munistakeably 
demonstrated, had no inconsiderable 
effect upon the mind of Hunjeet 
Singh, who was a spectator of the 
discomfiture of his countrymen. 



THE I^ORE TREATY. 


83 


and accordingly, on the 25th of April, 1809, a treaty 
was executed by Runjeet Singh in person, and by Mr. 
Metcalfe on the part of the British Government, in which 
there was no more mention of the French than if the 
eagles of Napoleon had never threatened the eastern 
world. It was stipulated that the Bajah should retain pos¬ 
session of the territories to the north of the Sutlej, but 
should abstain from all encroachments on the possessions 
or rights of the chiefs on the left bank of the river. This 
limitation was merely a prospective one. It had been in¬ 
tended to deprive Runjeet of the tracts of country which 
he had previously occupied to the south of the Sutlej; 
and the rough draft of the treaty contained, as a part of 
the first article as it now stands, the words, “ And on the 
other hand, the Rajah renounces all claim to sovereignty 
over the Sikh chiefs to the southward of that river, and 
all right of interference in their affairs but this passage 
had been subsequently erased by Lord Minto, and Run¬ 
jeet Singh was now left in possession of the tracts he had 
originally occupied, though restrained from all further en¬ 
croachments. The Sikh chiefs between the Sutlej and 
the Jumna, not already under the yoke of Runjeet Singh, 
were taken under British protection, and on the 5th of 
May a proclamation was issued declaring the nature of 
the connexion which was thenceforth to exist between 
them and the dominant power on the south of the 
Jumna. 

In the mean while, Mr. Elphinstone’s Mission was 
making its way to the Court of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. 
The envoy had been originally instructed that he was 
empowered to receive from the King of Caubul proposals 
having for their basis the employment of the power and 
resources of that state against the advance of any 
European army. He was authorised to express a convic¬ 
tion, as regarded offensive operations, that in the event of 

* MS. Records. 

g2. 



84 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBUL. 


Persia being found decidedly confederated Avith the 
Prench in their projected expedition to India, the British 
Government “ would not hesitate to adopt any plan of 
hostility against Persia consonant to the views of the 
King of Caubul.” But he was cautioned against enter¬ 
ing into any permanent arrangement, or pledging his 
government to any ulterior line of conduct. Everything 
was to be limited to the occasion. It was to be the 
policy of the envoy rather to draw the Court of Caubul 
into solicitations to the British Government, than to make 
any spontaneous offers of assistance. And he was in¬ 
structed especially to impress upon the mind of the King, 
that both as regarded security from without, and the in¬ 
ternal safety and tranquillity of his own dominions, it was 
above all things the interest of the Douranee monarch to 
break up the alliance existing betAveen the Court of Tehe¬ 
ran and those of Paris and St. Petersburgh. 

But this alliance Avas already in a state of dissolution. 
The spring of 1809 brought, as we have seen, glad 
tidings from Europe to the Anglo-Indian capital, and all 
fear of a French invasion ])assed away from the minds 
of our rulers. Whilst Mr. Metcalfe was bringing to a 
conclusion, irrespective of all reference to the French, 
his long-pending negotiations with Lahore, Mr. Elphin- 
stone was instructed* that the important events which 
had occiured in Europe Avould necessarily induce a 
modification of the course of policy to be pursued at the 
Court of Caubul. He was told that it was no longer 
necessary to entertain a thought of offensive operations 
against Persia, but that the British Government would 
accede to engagements of a nature purely defensive 
against that state, should such a stipulation appear to be 
an object of solicitude to the Afghan monarch. This 
was merely stated as an admissible coiurse. The Gover¬ 
nor-General declared that he would wish, if possible, to 

♦ Under date March 6, 1809. 



MR. ELPHINSTONE’s MISSION. 


85 


avoid contracting even defensive engagements with the 
Court of Caubul; and added, “ Should the contracting 
those engagements be absolutely required by the King, 
the eventual aid to be afforded by us ought to be limited 
to supplies of arms, ordnance, and military stores, rather 
than of troops."* 

The Mission proceeded through Bekanier, Bahwul- 
pore,f and Mooltan; and ever as they went the most 
marked civility was shown to the British ambassadors. 
But one thing was wanting to render the feeling towards 
them a pervading sentiment of universal respect. They 
had not long crossed the frontier before they discovered 
that a more liberal display of the facial characteristics of 
manhood would elevate them greatly in the eyes of a 
people who are uniformly bearded and moustached.^ 

• MS, Records, Another paragraph Mission received this hint from an 
of these instructions is worth quoting. European deserter, namcd^ Pensley, 
“ Although there is not now the same who had been entertained, in a mili- 
immediate exigency for forming a tary capacity, by Shah Soojah. They 
friendly connexion with the Court of might nave learnt the lesson from 
Caubul, yet that measure is of impor- Mr. Forster, who, twenty years be- 
tance, and contains an object of sound fore, had travelled in Afghanistan, 
policy, in the event, however remote. That enterprising gentleman, a civil 
of either the French or any other servant of the Company, found his 
European power endeavouring to ap- beard of the greatest service. He 
I)roach India by that route.” suffered it to grow for fifteen months, 

t It is worthy of remark in this and had reason to regret that before 
place, that Mr. Strachey, who accom- he had wholly shaken off Eastern 
panied Mr. Elphinstone's Mission in associations, he allowed the razor 
the capacity of secretary, and who to profane it.^ Putting himself on 
on this as on other occasions evinced board a Russian frigate in the Cas- 
the possession of a high order of in- plan, he thought that he might reduce 
tellect, drew up a very able memo- nis face to its old European a^ect; 
randum on the advantages of forming but he tells us that “ the Ghilan 
a connexion with Bahwul Khan. In envoy, then proceeding on the frigate, 
this paper there occurs the following expressed a surprise to see me, "i^om 
prescient passage:—Bahwul Khan he thought a Mahomedan, eating at 
might also be induced, in the event the same board with the Russian gen- 
of actual hostilities, to invade the tlemen; but when he saw a barber 
territories of Runjeet Singh at any commencing an operation on my 
point we might suggest, and thereby beard, which I took the opportunity 
form an important diversion, whilst of having shaved, he evinced great 
the British army would be advancing amazement and indignation; nor did 
froin another quarter of the Sikh he, until repeatedly informed of my 
territoiy.”— [JliS. Records,"] real character, cease his reprehension 

t It IS said that Mr. Elphinstone’s of the act; during the process of 



86 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHOEB AND CAUBTO. 


Our officers have ever since carefully abstained from in¬ 
curring this reproach; and it may be doubted whether, 
ever again, any hint will be required to stimulate them to 
encourage an Asiatic development of hair on the lower 
part of the face. 

I do not intend to trace the progress of the Mission. 
The story has been told with historical fidelity and gra¬ 
phic distinctness in a book which is still, after the lapse 
of nearly forty years, the delight of Anglo-Indian readers, 
and which future generations of writers and cadets will 
turn to with undiminished interest. On the 25th of 
February, the Mission entered Peshawur. Crowds of 
wondering inhabitants came out to gaze at the represen¬ 
tatives of the nation which had reduced the great Mogul 
to a shadow, and seated itself on the throne of Tip- 
poo. Pushing forward with the outstretched neck of 
eager curiosity, they blocked up the public ways. The 
royal body-guards rode among the foot-passengers; lashed 
at them with their whips; tilted with their lances at 
grave spectators sitting quietly in their own balconies; 
and cleared the way as best they could. But fast as they 
dispersed the thronging multitude, it closed again around 
the novel cavalcade. Through this motley crowd of ex¬ 
cited inhabitants, the British Mission was with difficulty 
conducted to a house prepared for them by royal man¬ 
date. Seated on rich carpets, fed with sweetmeats, and 
regaled with sherbet, every attention was paid to the 

which he threw on me many a look of breadth, though it had been somewhat 
contempt. When the barber began to shrivelled W the severity of the late 
cut off the moustachios, he several winter. When you advert to the 
times, in a peremptory manner, re- general importance of an Asiatic 
quired him to desist, and, seeing them beard, to the essential services which 
gone, ‘ Now,’ said he, * of whatever mine had rendered, and to our long 
country or sect you may be, your and intimate association, I trust that 
disgrace is complete, and you look this brief introduction of it to your 
like a woman.’ Thus, after a growth notice will not be deemed imperti- 
of fifteen months fell my beard, nent. This operation of cutting it 
which in that period had increased to ought, however, to have been post- 
a great magnitude, both in length and poned till my arrival at Astracan.” 



RECEPTION OP MR. EEPHINSTONE. 


87 


European strangers. The hospitality of the King was 
profuse. His fortunes were then at a low ebb; but he 
sent provisions to the Mission for two thousand men, 
with food for beasts of burden in proportion, and was 
with difficulty persuaded to adopt a less costly method of 
testifying his regal cordiality and respect. 

Some dispute about forms of presentation delayed the 
reception of the English ambassadors. But in a few days 
everything was arranged for the grand ceremonial to take 
place on the 5th of March. When the eventful day ar¬ 
rived, they found the King, with that love of outward 
pomp which clung to him to the last, sitting on a gilded 
throne, crowned, plumed, and arrayed in costly apparel. 
The royal person was a blaze of jewellery, conspicuous 
among which the mighty diamond, the Koh-i-noor, des¬ 
tined in after days to undergo such romantic vicissitudes, 
glittered in a gorgeous bracelet upon the arm of the Shah. 
Welcoming the English gentlemen with a graceful cordi¬ 
ality, he expressed a hope that the King of England and 
all the English nation were well, presented the officers of 
the embassy with dresses of honour, and then, dismissing 
all but Mr. Elphinstonc and his secretary, proceeded to 
the business of the interview. Listening, attentively to 
all that was advanced by the British envoy, he professed 
himself eager to accede to his proposals, and declared that 
England and Caubul were designed by the Creator to 
be united by bonds of everlasting friendship. The pre¬ 
sents which Mr. Elphinstone had taken with him to 
Afghanistan were curious and costly; and now that they 
were exposed to the view of the Shah, he turned upon 
them a face scintillating with pleasure, and eagerly ex¬ 
pressed his delight. His attendants, with a cupidity 
that there was no attempt to conceal, laid their rapacious 
hands upon everything that came in their way, and 
scrambled for the articles which were not especially 



88 


THE MISSIONS TO LAHORE AND CAUBUL. 


appropriated by their royal master. Thirty years after¬ 
wards, the memory of these splendid gifts raised longing 
expectations in the minds of the courtiers of Caubul, 
and caused bitter disappointment and disgust when Cap¬ 
tain Burnes appeared with his pins and needles, and 
little articles of hardware, such as would have disgraced 
the wallet of a pedlar of low repute.* 

At subsequent interviews the impression made by the 
Shah upon the minds of the English diplomatists was of a 
description very favorable to the character of the Afghan 
ruler. Mr. Elphinstonewas surprised to find that the Dou- 
ranee monarch had so much of the “ manners of a gentle¬ 
man,” and that he could be affable and dignified at the 
same time. But he had much domestic care to distract 
him at this epoch, and could not fix his mind intently 
on foreign politics. His country was in a most unsettled 
condition. His throne seemed to totter under him. He 
was endeavouring to collect an army, and was projecting 
a great military expedition. He hoped to see more of the 
English gentlemen, he said, in more prosperous times. 
At present, the best advice that he could give them was 
that they should retire beyond the frontier. So on the 
14th of June the Mission turned its back upon Peshawur, 
and set out for the provinces of Hindostan.f 


* It was the very costliness of might have been limited with respect 
these presents, and the lavish expen- both to the nature and extent of the 
diture of the entire Mission, that gave items composing them, and that the 
the deathblow to the system of diplo- provision of articles for presents to 
matic extravagance which had been an extent so enormous as that exhi- 
favoured by the Elphinstones and bited in the accounts of these Mis- 
Malcolms. When the accounts of sions has been regulated by a prin- 
the Afghan and Persian Missions ciple of distribution unnecessarily 
came before the Governor-General profuse.”—[AfS. Records.’] 
in Council, Lord Minto stood aghast t It Is to be regretted that Shah 
at the enormous expenditure, and, in Soojah’s own notices of the British 
a stringent minute, recorded “his Mission are very scanty. He says, 
deliberate opinion, that the actual in his autobiographical narrative, 
expenditure has far exceeded the “ On receiving intelligence that the 
necessity of the occasion—that the English ambassadors had arrived at 
personal expenses of the envoys Kohat, we sent an appropriate party 



THE CAUBUL TREATY. 


89 


Three days after the Mission commenced its homeward 
journey, the treaty which had been arranged by Mr. 
Elphinstone was formally signed at Calcutta by Lord 
Minto. The first article set out with a mis-statement, 
to the efiect that the French and Persians had entered 
into a confederacy against the State of Caubul. The two 
contracting parties bound themselves to take active mea¬ 
sures to repel this confederacy, the British “ holding 
themselves liable to afibrd the expenses necessary for the 
above-mentioned service, to the extent of their abilityT 
The remaining article decreed eternal friendship between 
the two States: “ The veil of separation shall be lifted 
up from between them; and they shall in no manner 
interfere in each other’s countries; and the King of 
Caubul shall permit no individual of the French to enter 
his territories.” Three months before these articles were 
signed, Sir Harford Jones had entered into a preliminary 
treaty with the Persian Court, stipulating that in case 
of war between Persia and Afghanistan, his Majesty the 
King of Great Britain should not take any part therein, 
unless at the desire of both parties. The confederacy 
of the French and Persians had been entirely broken 
up, and all the essentials of the Caubul treaty rendered 
utterly null and useless. 

But before this rapid sketch of the diplomacy of 1808-9 
is brought to a close, some mention must be made of 
another subordinate measure of defence against the pos- 

to meet and do them honour. On dignity, and our most confidential 
their arrival, we gave them suitable Ameers waited on them. . . . We 
dwellings, and ordered their wants learned that Shah Mahmoud had lefb 
and wishes to be attended to. After Caubul, and halted at Chuk-Dilah. 
a few days* rest the ambassadors came Hearing this, we immediately re- 
to the presence, and presented vari- fiected on the state of the Company’s 
ous articles of European and Hin- ambassadors. We resolved, first, to 
dostanee workmanship, also many place them in a state and place of 
elephants with superb accoutrements, safety; and proceed to punish the re- 
Hresses of honour were conferred on bels; and then, if God would grant 
all* We gave strict orders that the a victory, we intended to return to 
Mission should be treated with every treat them in a proper manner.*’ 



90 


THE MISSION TO SINDH. 


sibility of a foreign invasion. The low countries lying 
on the banks of the river Indus, from its junction with 
the Punjabee tributaries to the sea, were known as Upper 
and Lower Sindh. The people inhabiting the former 
were for the most part Beloochees—a warlike and tur¬ 
bulent race, of far greater physical power and mental 
energy than their feeble, degraded neighbours, the Sindh¬ 
ians, who occupied the country from Shikarpoor to the 
mouths of the Indus. The nominal rulers of these pro¬ 
vinces were the Talpoor Ameers, but they were either 
tributary to, or actually dependent upon the Court of 
Caubul. The dependence, however, was in effect but 
scantily acknowledged. Often was the tribute to be 
extracted only by the approach of an army sent for its 
collection by the Douranee monarch. There was con¬ 
stant strife, indeed, between Sindh and Caubul—the 
one ever plotting to cast off its allegiance, and the other 
ever putting forth its strength more closely to rivet the 
chains. 

In July, 1808, Captain Seton was despatched by the 
Bombay Government to the Court of the Ameers at 
Hyderabad. Misunderstanding and exceeding his in¬ 
structions, he hastily executed a treaty with the State of 
Sindh, imposing, generally and unconditionally, upon 
each party an obligation to furnish military aid on the 
requisition of the other. The mind of the envoy was 
heavy with thoughts of a French invasion, which seem 
to have excluded all considerations of internal warfare 
and intrigue in Central Asia. But the Ameers were at 
that time intent upon emancipating themselves from the 
yoke of Caubul, and Captain Seton found that he had 
committed the British Government to assist the tributary 
State of Sindh against the Lord Paramount of the coun¬ 
try, thereby placing us in direct hostility with the very 
power whose good offices we were so anxious to concili- 



PROCEEDINGS OP CAPTAIN SETON. 


91 


ate. There was, indeed, a Persian ambassador at that 
very time resident at the Sindh capital, charged with 
overtures for the formation of a close alliance between 
Persia and Sindh subversive of the tributary relations of 
the latter to the State of Caubul.* He was acting, too, 
as the secret agent of the French; and the Ameers made 
no secret of the fact, that but for the friendly overtures 
of the British they would have allied themselves with 
the Persians and French. They now grasped at the 
proffered connexion with the Indian Government, believ¬ 
ing, or professing to believe, that it entitled them to assist¬ 
ance against the State of Caubul, and industriously pro¬ 
pagated a report of the military strength which they had 
thus acquired. The danger of all this was obvious.f 
Captain Seton’s treaty was accordingly ignored ; and Mr. 
Elphinstone was instructed that, in the event of Shah 
Soojah remonstrating against Captain Seton’s treaty, he 
might, without hesitation, apprise the Court of Caubul 
that the engagements entered into were “ totally unau¬ 
thorised and contrary to the terms of the instnictions 
given him;” and that, in consequence of these errors. 
Captain Seton had been officially recalled, and another 
envoy despatched to Sindli to negotiate the terms of a 
new treaty. 

The agent then appointed was Mr. N. H. Smith, who 
had been filling, with credit to himself, the office of Resi¬ 
dent at Bushire. He was instructed to annul the former 
treaty, and to “endeavour to establish such an inter¬ 
course with the chiefs of Sindh as would afford the 

* The Ameers had sent vakeels to determined upon, to ascertain the 
Persia, seeking assistance against practicability of sending an embassy 
Caubul; and the Persian ambassa- to Candahar or Caubul, by the route 
dor had accompanied them on their of Sindh; and upon the strength of 
return to Sindh. these instructions, had taken upon 

t Nor was this the only error himself to address a letter to the 
into which Captain Seton had fallen. King of Caubul, expressing the desire 
That officer was instructed, before of the British Government to form an 
Mr. Elphinstone^s Mission had been alliance with that monarch. 



92 


THE MISSION TO SINDH. 


means of watching and counteracting the intrigues of the 
French in that and the neighbouring States.” It was no 
easy thing to establish on a secure basis friendly relations 
with so many different powers, if not at open war with 
one another, in that antagonistic state of conflicting in¬ 
terests which rendered each principality eager to obtain 
the assistance of the British to promote some hostile de¬ 
sign against its neighbour. But partly by open promises, 
and partly by disguised threats, our agents at this time 
succeeded in casting one great network of diplomacy 
over all the states from the Jumna to the Caspian Sea. 
The Ameers of Sindh coveted nothing so much as assist¬ 
ance against the Douranee monarch. The British envoy 
was instructed to refuse all promises of assistance, but to 
hint at the possibility of assistance being given to the 
paramount State in the event of the tributary exhibiting 
any hostility to the British Government. It was dis¬ 
tinctly stated that the object of Mr. Elphinstone’s Mission 
to Caubul was exclusively connected with the appre¬ 
hended invasion of the Persians and the French; that 
the affairs of Sindh would not be touched upon by the 
Caubul embassy, and that, therefore, the affairs of Cau¬ 
bul could not with propriety be discussed by the ambas¬ 
sador to Sindh; and it was adroitly added, that the rela¬ 
tions between Caubul and Sindh could only be taken into 
consideration by the British Government in the event of 
the latter state exhibiting a decided disposition to encou¬ 
rage and assist the projects of our enemies. 

Nor was this the only use made of the conflicting claims 
of Caubul and Sindh. It happened, as has been said, 
that Persia had been intriguing with the Ameers, and had 
promised to assist them in the efforts to cast off the Dou¬ 
ranee yoke. The French had favoured and assisted 
these intrigues; and Mr. Elphinstone was accordingly 
instructed to instigate the resentment of the Afghan 



RESULTS OF OUR DIPLOMACY. 


93 


monarch against the French and Persian allies, and to 
demonstrate to him that the very integrity of his empire 
was threatened by the confederacy. It was the policy of 
the British-Indian Government to keep Sindh in check by 
hinting at the possibility of British assistance rendered to 
Caubul for its coercion; and, at the same time, to alarm 
Canbul by demonstrating the probability of Sindh being 
assisted by Persia to shake off the Douranee yoke. 
Operating upon the fears of both parties, our diploma¬ 
tists found little difficulty in bringing their negotiations 
to a successful termination. The Ameers of Sindh en¬ 
tered readily into engagements of general amity, and 
especially stipulated never to allow the tribe of the French 
to settle in their country. But before these treaties were 
exeeuted, France had ceased to be formidable, and Persia 
had become a friend. The Sindh and Caubul treaties 
were directed against exigencies which had ceased to 
exist; but they were not without their uses. If the em¬ 
bassies resulted in nothing else, they gave birth to two 
standard works on the countries to which they were 
despatched; and brought prominently before the world 
the names of two servants of the Company, who have 
lived to occupy no small space in the world’s regard, and 
to prove themselves as well fitted, by nature and educa¬ 
tion, to act history as to write it.* 

* I need scarcely write the names flowery courtiers of the Celestial Em- 
of Elphinstone and Pottinger—or al- pire, and thence to the control of the 
hide to their respective works. Of Caflre savages of Southern Africa, is 
the former statesman I have already now quietly anchored in the more 
spoken. The Lieutenant Henry Pot- commonplace government of Madras, 
linger, who, early in the century, ac- The materials for Pottinger’s work 
companied the Sindh Mission, and was on Beloochistan were mainly collected 
attached to General Malcolm’s staff in the course of the journey under- 
on his second visit to Persia, after taken in connexion with Malcolm^s 
passing, at a later stage of his career. Mission; but it was the Sindh em- 
frem the management of the wild bassy that first directed his atten- 
tribes of Beloochistan to play an in- tion to the countries of which he 
tricate game of diplomacy with the wrote. 



94 


THE MID-CAREBR OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


CHAPTER VI. 

[ 1809 — 1816 .] 

The Mid-Career of Shall Soojah—His Wanderings and Misfortunes—Cap¬ 
tivity ill Cashmere—Imprisonment at Lahore—Robbery of the Koh-i-noor 
—Reception of the Sliah by the Rajah of Kistawar—His Escape to the 
British Territories. 

Before Mr. Elpliinslone’s Mission had cleared the limits 
of the Douranee Empire, Shah Soojah had given battle 
to his enemies, and been disastrously defeated. The 
month of June, 1809, had not worn to a close, before it 
was evident that his cause was hopeless. Still he did 
not abandon the contest. Despatching his Zenana, with 
which was his blind brother, to Rawul Pindee, he made 
new efforts to splinter up his broken fortunes. But sus¬ 
taining several defeats, and narrowly escaping, on more 
than one occasion, with his life, he desisted for a time 
from operations, of which every new struggle demon¬ 
strated more painfully the utter fruitlessness. He wanted 
military genius, and he wanted the art to inspire confi¬ 
dence and to win affection. Deserted by the chiefs and 
the people, he withdrew beyond the frontier, and there 
entered upon new preparations for the renewal of the 
contest under circumstances more favorable to success. 
Entertaining and drilling troops, he spent a year at 
Rawul Pindee. Some defections from his brother’s party 



HIS CAPTIVITr IN CASHMERE. 


95 


inspiring him with new hopes, he marched thence to 
Peshawur, and took possession of the Balia Hissar. But 
here the treachery of his friends was likely to have 
proved more fatal to him than the malice of his enemies. 
The chiefs on whom he had most relied were bribed over 
by the Governor of Cashmere to seize the person of the 
King. Persuading him, before he commenced the expe¬ 
dition to Caubul, to send out the horses of his troopers 
to graze in the neighbouring villages, and thus stripping 
him of his only defence, they escaladed the Balia Hissar, 
seized the royal person, and carried the unfortunate 
monarch to the valley of Cashmere. Here he was offered 
his release at the price of the Koh-i-noor; but he refused 
to surrender this magnificent appendage to the Crown 
of Caubul, and rescued it from the hands of one plunderer 
only to suffer it to fall into the gripe of another. 

It was in 1812 that Shah Soojah was carried off a 
prisoner to Cashmere. He appears to have remained 
there about a year, and, during that time, to have been 
treated with little kindness and respect. Mahmoud was 
then in comparative quiet and security at Caubul, and, 
in his good fortune, seems to have regarded with com¬ 
passion the fate of his unhappy brothei'. “ When Shah 
Mahmoud heard of the way in which we were treated,” 
writes the royal autobiographer, “ the latent feelings of 
fraternal affection were roused within him, and he imme¬ 
diately sent a force into the Barukzye country. After 
plundering the whole tribe of Atta Mahmoud Khan, ho 
carried men, women, and children into captivity. Find¬ 
ing that this had not the desired effect, viz., our release 
from bondage, he sent a force to Cashmere, under Futteh 
Khan.” Atta Mahmoud advanced to give him battle; 
but his followers deserted to the standard of the Baruk¬ 
zye Wuzeer, and he fled homewards to Cashmere. Here 
threatened by Futteh Khan, he implored the assistance 



96 


THE MID-CAREER OP SHAH SOOJAH. 


of his captive. “ Seeing his escape could not be effected 
without our aid, he came,” says Shah Soojah, “ to our 
place of confinement, bare-headed, with the Koran in 
one hand, a naked sword in the other, and a rope about 
his neck, and requested our forgiveness for the sake of 
the sacred volume.” The Shah, who, according to his 
own statements, was never wanting in that most kingly 
quality of forgiveness, forgave him on his own account, 
and recommended him to make submission to Futteh 
Khan. The Wuzeer was advancing upon Cashmere from 
one direction, and the Sikhs from another; and it was 
plain that the rebellious Nazim had nothing before him 
but to submit. 

I wish to believe Shah Soojah’s history of the amiable 
fraternal impulses which dictated the expedition to Cash- 
mere. But it is difficult to entertain a conviction that it 
was not directed towards other objects than the release of 
the exiled monarch. The result was, that Atta Mahmoud, 
the rebellious Nazim, made submission to Futteh Khan;— 
that Mokhura Chund, the leader of the Sikh expedition, 
met the Dourance minister about the same time, and that 
both recommended Shah Soojah to proceed on a visit to 
Runjeet Singh.* The Maharajah, it soon became very 
clear, coveted the possession of the great Douranee dia¬ 
mond. On the second day after Shah Soojah entered 
Lahore, he was waited on by an emissary from Runjeet, 
who demanded the jewel in the name of his master. 
The fugitive monarch asked for time to consider the re¬ 
quest, and hinted that, after he had partaken of Run- 
jeet’s hospitality, he might be in a temper to grant it. 

* The Shall sajs : “ Mokhum his master’s fame would be increased 

Chund, on the part of Kunjeet Singh, by our going. According to Futteh 
informed us, that his master was llhan^s petition, we agreed to this, 
anxious that we should proceed to and marched towards Lahore with 
Li^ore as soon as at lioerty, and Mokhum Chund and other Sinshs, 
visit the residence of our seraglio in whilst Futteh Khan returned to Shah 
that city; he also mentioned that Mahmoud in Caubul.” 



EXTOBTION OF THE KOH-I-NOOB. 


97 


On the following day, the same messenger presented him¬ 
self again, and received a similar reply. Runjeet Singh 
was in no mood to brook this delay. Determined to pos¬ 
sess himself of the Koh-i-noor, he now resorted to other 
measures to extort it from the luckless owner. “We 
then,” says Shah Soojah, “ experienced privations of the 
necessaries of life, and sentinels were placed over our 
dwelling. A month passed in this way. Confidential 
servants of Runjeet Singh then waited on us, and inquired 
if we wanted ready cash, and would enter into an agree¬ 
ment and treaty for the above-mentioned jewel. We 
answered in the affirmative, and next day. Ram Singh 
brought 40,000 or 50,000 rupees, and asked again for the 
Koh-i-noor, which we promised to procure when some 
treaty was agreed upon. Two days after this, Runjeet 
Singh came in person, and, after friendly protestations, he 
stained a paper with safflower, and swearing by the 
Grunth of Baba Nanuck and his own sword, he wrote 
the following security and compact:—That he delivered 
over the provinces of Kote Cumaleeh, Jung Shawl, and 
Khuleh Noor, to us and our heirs for everj also ofiering 
assistance in troops and treasure for the purpose of again 
recovering our throne. We also agreed, if we should 
over ascend the throne, to consider Runjeet Singh always 
in the light of an ally. He then proposed himself that 
we should exchange turbans, which is among the Sikhs 
a pledge of eternal friendship, and we then gave him the 
Koh-i-noor.” 

Having thus obtained possession of the great diamond, 
Runjeet Singh, who at no time of his life had very high 
ideas of honour, was unwilling to give up the jagheer 
which he had promised as the price of it. Whilst Shah 
Soojah was still thinking over the non-performance of the 
contract, Runjeet Singh invited him to accompany an 
expedition which was proceeding under the Maharajah 

VOL. I. H 



98i 


THE MED-CAKEER OP SHAH BOOJAH. 


to Pesliawur, and held out to him hopes of the recovery 
of his lost dominions. The Shah joined Bunjeet Singh 
at Rotas, and they proceeded together to Bawul Pindee. 
There the Maharajah, seeing little chance of success, 
abandoned the expedition, and, according to the account 
given by Shah Soojah, desired him to proceed onward in 
the company of Ram Singh. Left alone with that chief, 
ho was shamelessly plundered by robbers of higher note 
than the Sikh chiefs would willingly admit. All thought 
of proceeding to Peshawur was now abandoned, and, 
accompanied by Ram Singh and the heir-apparent, Shah 
Soojah returned to Lahore. 

At the capital his property was not more secure 
than on the lino of march. There was something 
yet left to be plundered, and the plunderers were of still 
higher rank. Runjeet Singh stripped the wretched 
monarch of everything that was worth taking, and 
“ even after this,” says Shah Soojah, “ he did not per¬ 
form one of his promises.” Instead of bestowing new 
favours upon the man who had yielded up his treasures 
BO unsparingly, the Maharajah began to heap new indig¬ 
nities upon him. Spies were set over him, and guards 
surrounded his dwelling. Five months passed in this 
way; and as time advanced, the condition of the wretched 
Douranee Prince became more hopeless; his escape from 
this wretched thraldom more to be coveted, and yet 
more difficult to encompass. He remembered the friendly 
overtures of the British Government, and sighed for a 
peaceful asylum under the shelter of the wings of the 
great power beyond the Sutlej. “We thought,” he 
says, “ of the proffered friendship of the British Govern¬ 
ment, and hoped for an asylum in Loodhianah. Several 
Mussulmans and Hindoos had formerly offered their ser¬ 
vices, and we now engaged them and purchased several 
of the covered hackeries of the country. Every stra- 



ESCAPE OF SHAH SOOJAH. 


99 


t£^em was defeated by the spies, until at last we found 
that Abdool Hussan had disdosed our plans to Bunjeet 
Singh. At last, being hopeless, we called Abdool 
Hussan and Moollah Jaffier into the presence, and after 
oflfering them bribes, and giving expectations of reward, 
we bought them to our purpose; and the members of the 
seraglio, with their attendants, all dressed in the costume 
of the country, found a safe conveyance in the hackeries 
above mentioned to the cantonments of Loodhianah. 
When we received accounts of their safe arrival, we gave 
sincere thanks to Almighty God!” 

But his own escape was yet to be effected. Outwitted 
to this extent, Runjeet Singh redoubled his precautions, 
and in no very conciliatory mood of mind hemmed in 
the ex-King with guards, and watched him day and 
night with the keenest vigUance. “ Seven ranges of 
guards,” says the royal autobiographer, “ were put upon 
our person, and armed men with lighted torches watched 
our bed. When we went as far as the banks of the 
river at night, the sentinels upon the ramparts lighted 
flambeaux until we returned. Several months passed 
in this manner, and our own attendants were with diffi¬ 
culty allowed to come into the presence. No relief was 
left but that of our holy religion, and God alone could 
give us assistance.” And assistance was given, in the 
shape of unwonted resolution and ingenuity. In this 
critical hour the resources of the Shah seem to have 
developed themselves in an unexampled manner. He 
foiled all Runjeet’s efforts to secure his prisoner, and 
baffled the vigilance of his guards. A few faithful 
attendants aided his endeavours, and he escaped ft'om 
the cruel walls of Lahore. “We ordered,” he says, 
“ the roof of the apartment containing our camp equi¬ 
page to be opened, so as to admit of a person passing 
through; apertures were formed by mining through 

H 2 



100 


THE MID-CAEEEB OE SHAH SOOJAH. 


seven other chambers to the outside of the building.” 
Everything being thus prepared, the unhappy King dis¬ 
guised himself as a mendicant, and leaving one of his 
attendants to simulate the royal person on his bed, crept 
through the fissures in the walls, escaped with two fol¬ 
lowers into the street, and emerged thence through the 
main sewer which ran beneath the city wall. 

Outside Lahore he was joined by his remaining follow¬ 
ers. He had been thinking, in confinement, of the bless¬ 
ings of a safe retreat at Loodhianah ; but no sooner did he 
find himself abroad than he courted new adventures, and 
meditated new enterprises. Instead of hastening to the 
British provinces, he turned his face towards the hills of 
Jummoo. Wandering about in this direction without 
seemingly any fixed object, he received friendly overtures 
from the Rajah of Kistawar, and was easily persuaded to 
enter his dominions. 

The Rajah went out to meet him, loaded him with 
kindness, conducted him to his capital, and made the 
kingly fugitive happy with rich gifts and public honours. 
Offering up sacrifices, and distributing large sums of 
money in honour of his royal guest, the Rajah spared no¬ 
thing that could soothe the grief or pamper the vanity of 
the exiled monarch. But the novelty of this pleasant 
hospitality soon began to wear away, and the restless 
wanderer sighed for a life of more enterprise and excite¬ 
ment. “ Tired of an idle life,” he says, “ we laid plans 
for an attack on Cashmere.” The Rajah of Kistawar was 
well pleased with the project, and placed his troops and 
his treasury at the command of his royal guest. The 
Shah himself, though robbed of all his jewels, had a lakh 
of rupees remaining at Lahore, but as soon as he began to 
possess himself of it, the Maharajah stretched out his 
hand, and swept it into his own treasury. Nothing 
daunted by this accident, the Kistawar chief, who was 



THE EXPEDITION TO CASHMEKE. 


101 


“ ready to sacrifice his territory for the weal” of the Shah, 
freely supplied the sinews of war; troops were levied, and 
operations commenced. 

But it was not written in the Shah’s book of life that 
his enterprises should result in anything but failure. 
The outset of the expedition was marked by some tem¬ 
porary successes; but it closed in disaster and de¬ 
feat. The Shah’s levies charged the stockaded posi¬ 
tions of the enemy sword in hand, and were pushing 
into the heart of the country, when the same inexorable 
enemy that has baffled the efforts of the greatest Euro¬ 
pean states raised its barriers against the advance of the 
invading army. “ We were only three coss,” relates Shah 
Soojah, “ from Azim Khan’s camp, with the picturesque 
city of Cashmere full in view, when the snow began again 
to fall, and the storm continued with violence, and without 
intermission, for two days. Our Hindostanees were be¬ 
numbed with a cold unfelt in their sultry regions; the 
road to our rear was blocked up with snow, and the sup¬ 
plies still far distant. For three days our troops were 
almost famished, and many Hindostanees died. We could 
not advance, and retreat was hazardous. Many lost their 
hands and feet from being frost-bitten, before we deter¬ 
mined to retreat.” 

These calamities, which seemed to strengthen the de¬ 
votion of the Rajah of Kistawar to the unfortunate Shah, 
and which were borne by him with the most manly forti¬ 
tude, sobered the fugitive Afghan monarch, and made him 
again turn his thoughts longingly towards a tranquil 
asylum in the Company’s dominions. At the earnest 
request of his new firiend, he remained during nine months 
beneath the hospitable roof of the Rajah, and then prepared 
for a journey to Loodhianah.* Avoiding the Lahore 

* Shah Soojah records that the ‘‘burst Into tears. He urged the 
faithful Rajah, on the King announc- dangers of the road, his wish to sacri- 
ing his determination to depart, fice his wealth for us, and every ex- 



102 THE MrD-CAEEER OF SHAH SOOJAH. 

territory, lest he should fall into the hands of Runjeet 
Singh, willing rather to encounter the eternal snows of the 
hill regions than his ruthless enemies on the plains, he 
tracked along the inhospitable mountains of Thibet, 
where for days and days no signs of human life or vegeta¬ 
tion appeared to cheer his heart and encourage his efforts. 
‘‘The depth of the eternal snows,” he says, “was im¬ 
mense. Underneath the large bodies of ice the mountain 
torrents had formed themselves channels. The five rivers 
watering the Punjaub have their rise here from fountains 
amid the snows of ages. We passed mountains, the 
snows of which varied in colour, and at last reached the 
confines of Thibet, after experiencing the extremes of 
cold, hunger, and fatigue.” 

His trials were not yet over. He had still to encounter 
dangers and difficulties among the hill tribes. The people 
of Kulloo insulted and ill-treated him; but the Rajah 
came to his relief, and, after a few days of onward travel¬ 
ling, to the inexpressible joy of the fugitive monarch the 
red houses of the British residents at one of our hill sta¬ 
tions appeared in sight. “ Our cares and fatigues were 
now,” says the Shah, “ forgotten, and giving thanks to 
Almighty God, who, having freed us from the hands of 
our enemies, and led us through the snows and over the 


cuse whicli afTection could dictate, to the whole story to encour^e any 
prolong our stay.” “ The Rajah,” he doubt of its authenticity. The free 
adds, “ accompanied us two marches, use, indeed, which I have made of 
and at parting, which took place Shah Soojah's autobiography is suffi- 
in silence, tears stood in the eyes of cient proof of my belief in the gene- 
both parties. We had no dress of ral fidelity of the narrative. It was 
honour, no khillaut worth his accept- written ^ dv the Shah^s ^ Moonshee, 
ancc, but he accepted our thanks under his Majesty’s superintendence, 
and blessing, and departed with eveir I have yioted Lieutenant Bennett's 
mark of grief.” Amidst so mucn translation, as published in the Cal- 
of selfish rapacity and dark ingrati- cutta Monthly Journal, It supplies, 
tude as marks these annals of the at the same time, more interesting and 
Douranee Empire, it is a pleasure to more authentic materials of Aighan 
chronicle such an episode as this in history tlian are to be found else- 
the history of Shall Soojah’s for- where, and to the majority of readers 
tunes. I am too wiUing to believe is probably as good as manuscript. 



HIS BBCEPTION AT LOODHIANAH. 108 

trackless mountains, had now safely conducted us to the 
land of friends, we passed a night, for the first time, with 
comfort and without dread. Signs of civilisation showed 
themselves as we proceeded, and we soon entered a fine 
broad road. A chuprassie from Captain Ross attended 
us; the hill ranas paid us every attention; and we soon 
reached Loodhianah, where we found our family treated 
with marked respect, and enjoying every comfort after 
their perilous inarch from Lahore.’^ 

It was in the month of September, 1816, that Shah 
Soojah joined his family at Loodhianah. lie sought a 
resting-place, and he found one in the British dominions. 
Two years of quietude and peace were his. But quietude 
and peace are afflictions grievous and intolerable to an 
Afghan nature. The Shah gratefully acknowledged the 
friendly hospitality of the British, but the burden of a life 
of inactivity was not to be borne. The Douranee Empire 
was still rent by intestine convulsions. The Barukzye 
sirdars were dominant at Caubul; but their sovereignty 
was threatened by Shah Mahmoud and the Princes of 
Herat, and not, at that time, professing to conquer for 
themselves, for the spirit of legitimacy was not extinct in 
Afghanistan, they looked abroad for a royal puppet, and 
found one at Loodhianah. Azim Khan invited Shah 
Soojah to re-assert his claims to the throne; and the Shah, 
weary of repose, unwarned by past experience, flung him¬ 
self into this new enterprise, only to add another to that 
long list of failures which it took nearly a quarter of a 
century more to render complete. 



104 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 


CHAPTER VII. 

[ 1816 — 1837 .] 


Dost Mahomed and the Barukzyes—^Early days of Dost Mahomed—The 
fall of Futteh Khan—Defeat of Shah Mahmoud—Supremacy of the 
Barukzyes—Position of the Empire—^Dost Mahomed at Caubul—^Expedi¬ 
tion of Shah Soqjah—His Defeat—Capture of Peshawur by the Sikhs. 


Among the twenty brothers of Futteh Khan was one 
many years his junior, whose infancy was wholly disre¬ 
garded by the great Barukzye Sirdar. The son of a 
woman of the Kuzzilbash tribe, looked down upon by the 
high-bred Douranee ladies of his father’s household, the 
boy had begun life in the degrading office of a sweeper at 
the sacred cenotaph of Lamech.* Permitted, at a later 
period, to hold a menial office about the person of the 
powerful Wuzeer, he served the great man with water, or 
bore his pipe; was very zealous in his ministrations; kept 
long and painful vigils; saw everything, heard everything 
in silence; bided his time patiently, and when the hour 
came, trod the stage of active life as no irresolute novice. 
A stripling of fourteen, in the crowded streets of Pesha- 

* “ By an honorary or devotional to Meiter Lam by his mother, and 
vow of his mother he was consecrated instructed to exonerate her from the 
to the lowest menial service of the consequences of a sacred obligation, 

^red cenotaph of Lamech.by sweeping, for the period of a 

This cenotaph is known in the col- whole day, the votive area included 
loquial dialect of the country by the within the precincts of the holy place 
appellation of Meiter Lam. In con- inclosing the alleged tomb of the an- 
formity with the maternal vow, when tediluvian, the father as he is termed 
the young aspirant became capable of the prophet Noah.”—[GcncroZ 
of wielding a brush, he was carried Harlan,’} 




EAItLT DATS OF DOST MAHOMED. 


105 


wur in broad day, as the buyers and the sellers thronged 
the thoroughfares of the city, he slew one of the enemies 
of Futteh Khan, and galloped home to report the achieve¬ 
ment to the Wuzeer. From that time his rise was rapid. 
The neglected younger brother of Futteh Khan became 
the favourite of the powerful chief, and following the for¬ 
tunes of the warlike minister, soon took his place among 
the chivalry of the Douranee Empire. 

The name of this young warrior was Dost Mahomed 
Khan. Nature seems to have designed him for a hero of 
the true Afghan stamp and character. Of a graceful 
person, a prepossessing countenance, a bold frank manner, 
he was outwardly endowed with all those gifts which most 
inspire confidence and attract affection; whilst undoubted 
courage, enterprise, activity, somewhat of the recklessness 
and unscrupulousness of his race, combined with a more 
than common measure of intelligence and sagacity, gave 
him a command over his fellows and a mastery over cir¬ 
cumstances, which raised him at length to the chief seat 
in the empire. His youth was stained with many crimes, 
which he lived to deplore. It is the glory of Dost Ma¬ 
homed that in the vigour of his years he looked back with 
contrition upon the excesses of his early life, and lived 
down many of the besetting infirmities which had over¬ 
shadowed the dawn of his career. The waste of a deserted 
childhood and the deficiencies of a neglected education he 
struggled manfully to remedy and repair. At the zenith 
of his reputation there was not, perhaps, in all Central 
Asia a chief so remarkable for the exercise of self-discipline 
and self-control; but he emerged out of a cloudy mom of 
vice, and sunk into a gloomy night of folly. 

As the lieutenant of his able and powerful brother, the 
young Dost Mahomed Khan displayed in all the contests 
which rent the Douranee Empire a daring and heroic 



106 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZIES. 


spirit, and considerable military address. Early acquiring 
the power of handling large bodies of troops, he was re¬ 
garded, whilst yet scarcely a man, as a dashing, fearless 
soldier, and a leader of good repute. But, in those early 
days, his scruples were few; his excesses were many. It 
was one of those excesses, it is supposed, which cost the 
life of Futteh Khan, and built up his own reputation on 
the ruin of his distinguished brother. 

It was shortly after the retirement of Shah Soojah to 
the British possessions that Futteh Khan set out, at the 
head of an army, to the western boundary of Afghanistan. 
Persia had long been encroaching upon the limits of the 
Douranee Empire, and it was now to stem the tide of 
Kujjar invasion that the Afghan Wuzcer set out forKho- 
rassan. At this time he was the virtual ruler of the 
country. Weak, indolent, and debauched, Shah Mahmoud, 
retaining the name and the pomp of royalty, had yielded 
the actual government of the country into the hands of 
Futteh Khan and his brothers. The Princes of the blood 
royal quailed before the Barukzye Sirdars. Ferooz-ood- 
Decn, brother of the reigning monarch, was at that time 
governor of Herat. Whether actuated by motives of per¬ 
sonal resentment or ambition, or instigated by Shah Mah¬ 
moud himself, Futteh Khan determined to turn the Per¬ 
sian expedition to other account, and to throw Herat into 
the hands of the Barukzyes. The execution of this 
design was entrusted to Dost Mahomed. He entered 
Herat with his Kohistanee followers as a friend; and 
when the chiefs of the city were beyond its gates, in 
attendance upon the Wuzeer, with characteristic Afghan 
treachery and violence he massacred the palace guards, 
seized the person of the Prince, spoiled the treasury, and 
violated the harem. Setting the crown upon this last act 
of violence, he tore the jewelled waistband from the person 



THE PAIil* OF FUTTEH KHAN. 


107 


of the royal wife of one of the royal Princes.* The out¬ 
raged lady is said to have sent her profaned garment to 
Prince Kamran, and to have drawn irom him an oath that 
he would avenge the injury. He was true to his vow. 
The blow was struck; but it fell not on the perpetrator of 
the outrage: it fell upon Futteh Khan. 

Dost Mahomed had fled for safety to Cashmere. 
The Wuzeer, returning from the Persian expedition, 
fell into the hands of Prince Kamran, who punctured 
his eyes with the point of a dagger.f What followed 
is well known. Enraged by so gross an outrage on a 
member of the Suddozye family, alarmed at the grow¬ 
ing power of the Barukzyes, and further irritated 
by the resolute refusal of Futteh Khan to betray his 
brothers, who had effected their escape from Herat, Kam¬ 
ran and his father, Shah Mahmoud, agreed to put their 
noble prisoner to death. They were then on their way 
from Candahar to Caubul. The ex-minister was brought 
into their presence, and again called upon to write to his 
brothers, ordering them to surrender themselves to the 
Shah. Again he refused, alleging that he was but a poor 
blind captive; that his career was run; that he had no 
longer any influence; and that he could not consent to 
betray his brethren. Exasperated by the resolute bearing 
of his prisoner, Mahmoud Shah ordered the unfortunate 
minister—the king-maker to whom he owed his crown— 

* There are varying accounts re- t So Shah Soojah—^who, however, 
specting the identity of this lady, does not allude to the outrage com- 

Vigne says that she was dau^ter mitted by Dost Mahomed. He merely 
of Timour Shah, and sister to Shah says, “After the Kujjar campaign, 
Mahmoud. Mohun Lall, probably Futteh Khan grew ambitious, and 
with more correctness, places her in a determined to tS^e into hitf own hands 
lower generation—asserting that she the reins of government, and for this 
was the sister of Prince Kamran, and ^rpose resmved to ensnare Prince 
the wife of Prince Malik Qasim, son Kamran, who, hearing of the plot, 
of Ferooz-ood-Deen. There is some- seized Futteh Khan, put out his eyes 
thing rather penilexing in these rela- with the point of a sh^ dagger, and 
tionships. As Ferooz-ood-Deen was after performing on him an operation 
the brother of Shah Mahmoud, if Mr. similar to the African mode of scaJp- 
Vigne*s account be correct, his son was ing, placed him in confinement.”— 
the nephew of the lady in question. [Autobiography.'] 



108 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


to be put to death before him; and there, in the presence 
of the feeble father and the cruel son, Futteh Khan was 
by the attendant courtiers literally hacked to pieces. His 
nose, ears, and lips were cut off; his fingers severed from 
his hands, his hands from his arms, his arms from his 
body. Limb followed limb, and long was the horrid 
butchery continued before the life of the victim was ex¬ 
tinct. Futteh Khan raised no cry, offered no prayer for 
mercy. His fortitude was unshaken to the last. He died 
as he had lived, the bravest and most resolute of men— 
like his noble father, a victim to the perfidy and ingrati¬ 
tude of princes. The murder of Poyndah Khan shook 
the Suddozye dynasty to its base. The assassination of 
Futteh Khan soon made it a heap of ruins.* 


* Calcutta Review, This passage, 
with many others of the present chap¬ 
ter, is taken, with some additions and 
curtailments, from a bio^aphy of 
Dost Mahomed Khan, written a few 
years ago by the author of this work. 
As the article was the result of much 
research, and written at least witli 
the greatest care, I do not know that 
I can much improve upon it. Of the 
circumstances attending the death of 
Futteh Khan, an elaborate account is 
given by Captain James Abbott in his 
“Journey to Khiva.” lie received 
the story from Sumund Khan, “ who 
had been much about the person of 
Shah Kainran.” I subjoin the closing 
scene of this tragic episode:—“Fut¬ 
teh Khan was brought into a tent, 
pitched between Herat and the ri¬ 
ver, (?) in which sat a circle of his 
mort^ foes. They commenced by 
each in turn accusing him of the in¬ 
juries received at his hands, and heap¬ 
ing upon him the most opprobrious 
epithets. Atta Mahmoud nThan then 
stepped up to him, and seizing one of 
his ears, cut it off with his knife, say- 
ing, ‘ This is for such and such an in¬ 
jury done to such an one of my rela¬ 
tives.’ Shahagaussie Newaub cut off 
the other ear. Fach, as he wreaked 
this unmanly vengeance upon the 


victim, whom he would have crouched 
to the day before, named the wrong 
of which it was the recompense; thus 
depriving him of the highest consola¬ 
tion the mind of man can possess 
under torment—the conscience void 
of offence. Another of the barbarians 
cut off his nose; Khana Moolla Khan 
severed his right hand; Khalook Dad 
Khan his left hand, the blood gush¬ 
ing copiously from each new wound. 
Summurdar Khan cut off his beard, 
saying, ‘ This is for dishonouring 
my wife.’ Hitherto the high-spirited 
chief had borne his sufferings without 
either weakness or any ebullition of 
hi.s excitable temper. He had only 
once condescended, in a calm voice, 
to beg them to hasten his death. The 
mutilation of ears and nose, a punish¬ 
ment reserved for the meanest of¬ 
fences of slaves, had not been able to 
shake his fortitude; but the beard of 
a Mahomedan is a member so sacred, 
that honour itself becomes confounded 
with it; and he who had borne with 
the constancy of a hero the taunts 
and tortures heaped upon him, seemed 
to lose his manhood with his beard, 
and burst into a passion of tears. 
His torments were now drawing to a 
close. Gool Mahomed Khan, with a 
blow of his sabre, cut off his right 



INTBIGUES OP ATTA MAHOMED. 


109 


From this time, the rise of Dost Mahomed was rapid. 
He had the blood of kindred to avenge. The ingratitude 
—the cruelty of Mahmoud and his son, were now to be 
signally punished by the brother of the illustrious sufferer. 
Azim Ehan, who ruled in Cashmere, counselled a course of 
forbearance; but Dost Mahomed indignantly rejected the 
proposal; and declaring that it would be an eternal dis¬ 
grace to the Barukzyes not to chastise the murderers of 
their chief, swore that he would march upon Caubul, at 
the head of an army of retribution. Inclined neither to 
enter personally upon so perilous an undertaking, nor to 
appear, in such a juncture, wholly supine, Azim Ehan 
presented his brother with three or four lakhs of rupees to 
defray the charges of the expedition—a sum which was 
exhausted long before the Sirdar neared Caubul. But in 
spite of every obstacle. Dost Mahomed Ehan reached 
Eoord-Caubul, two marches from the capital, and there 
encamped his army. 

The youthful son of Eamran, Prince Jehangire, was 
then the nominal ruler of Caubul. But the actual admi¬ 
nistration of affairs was in the hands of Atta Mahomed. 
A Sirdar of the Bamezye tribe, a man of considerable ability, 
but no match for Dost Mahomed, he was now guilty of 
the grand error of underrating such an adversary. He had 
acted a conspicuous part in the recent intestine struggles 
between the Suddozye brothers; but he had no love for 
the royal family—none for the Barukzyes. He it was 
who had instigated Eamran to the cruel murder of Futteh 
Ehan, and had with his own hands commenced the inhu¬ 
man butchery. Now, to advance ambitious projects of 
his own, he was ready to betray his masters. Simulating 
a friendship which he did not feel, he leagued himself 
with their enemies, and covenanted to betray the capi- 

foot, and a man of the Populzye tribe Khan finished his torments by cutting 
severed the left. Attah Mahomed his throat.*’ 



110 DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZTES. 

tal into the hands of the Barukzye Sirdars. But Dost 
Mahomed and his brethren had not forgotten the terrible 
tragedy which had cut short the great career of the chief 
of their tribe. In a garden-house, which had once be¬ 
longed to the murdered minister, they met Atta Mahomed, 
there to complete the covenant for the surrender of the 
city. A signal was given, when one—the youngest— 
of the brothers rushed upon the Bamezye chief, threw him 
to the ground, and subjected him to the cruel process 
which had preceded the murder of Futteh Khan. They 
spared his life; but sent him blind and helpless into the 
world, with the mark of Barukzye vengeance upon him— 
an object less of compassion than of scorn. 

The seizure of the Balia Hissar was now speedily 
effected. The Shah-zadah was surrounded by treachery. 
Young and beautiful, he was the delight of the women of 
Caubul; but he had few friends among the chivalry of 
the empire. Too weak to distinguish the true from the 
false, he was easily betrayed. Persuaded to withdraw 
himself into the upper citadel, he left the lower fortress 
at the mercy of Dost Mahomed. The Sirdar made the 
most of the opportunity; ran a mine under the upper 
works, and blew up a portion of them. Death stared the 
Shah-zadah in the face. The women of Caubul offered 
up prayers for the safety of the beautiful Prince. The 
night was dark; the rain descended in torrents. To re¬ 
main in the citadel was to court destruction. Under cover 
of the pitchy darkness, it was possible that he might effect 
his escape. Attended by a few followers, he made the 
effort, and succeeded. He fled to Ghuzni, and was saved. 

Dost Mahomed was now in possession of Caubul. But 
threatened from two different quarters, his tenure was 
most insecure. Shah Mahmoud and Prince Kamran were 
marching down from Herat, and Azim Khan was coming 
from Cashmere to assert his clmms, as the representative 



BE-AFFEABANCE OF SHAH 800JAH. 


Ill 


of the Barukzye family. But the spirit of legitimacy was 
not wholly extinct in Afghanistan. The Barukzyes did 
not profess to conquer for themselves. It was necessary 
to put forward some scion of the royal family, and to 
fight and conquer in his name. Dost Mahomed pro¬ 
claimed Sultan Ali, whilst Azim Khan invited Shah 
Soojah to emerge fi'om the obscurity of Loodhianah and 
re-asscrt his claims to the throne.* 

Weary of retirement and inactivity, the Shah con¬ 
sented, and an expedition was planned. But the covenant 
was but of short duration. The contracting parties fell out 
upon the road^ and, instead of fighting a common enemy, 
got up a battle among themselves. The Shah, who never 
lived to grow wiser, gave himself such airs, and asserted 
such ridiculous pretensions, that Azim Khan deserted his 
new master, and let loose his troops upon the royal cortege. 
Defeated in the conflict which ensued,f Shah Soojah fled to 
the Khybur hills, and thence betook himself to Sindh. 
Another puppet being called for. Prince Ayoob, for want 
of a better, was elevated to this dignity, and the new 
fnends set out for Caubul. 

* This was in 1818. See close of the 
last chapiter, “AzimKhan,”says Shah 
Soojah, m his autobiography, “sent us 
a fawning petition, informing us that 
he had collected all Futteh Khan’s 
relations, comprehending the whole 
of the Barukzye tribe, and swearing, 
by everything sacred, that he and the 
other chiefs had taken an oath of 
fidelity to us their lawful king, en¬ 
treated that we would march imme¬ 
diately to Peshawur, where he would 
join the royal standard with all the 
troops and the treasury of Cashmere. 

We sent for Mr. Murray, and ordered 
him to make the Resident of Delhi 
acquainted with this, and inform us 
of their opinion. This opinion he 
^ve ns, some days afterwaras, name¬ 
ly,^ ‘ That for political reasons no 
assistance could be given, but that 
we were at liberty eitner to depart or 


remain in the asylum allotted to us.* 
Two years had liecn passed in case, 
and we now determined to make an 
attempt to reascend our throne.” 

t Shah Soojah attributes his de¬ 
feat to an accidental explosion of 
gunpowder. “ Our attendants,” ho 
says, “only amounted to 300, with 
two guns, but they had taken up on 
advantageous position on a bridge, 
near the garden. The Meer Akhor 
charged us with his horse; but the 
first fire from the cannon made him 
bite the dust, when an unfortunate 
accident happened. A large quan¬ 
tity of powder had been brought to 
be divided among the matchlock men. 
This caught fire, ly which fifty men 
were blown up and others wounded. 
Resistance was now in vain, and we 
escaped with difficulty to the Khybur 
hills.” 



112 DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 

In the mean while, the royal army, which had marched 
from Herat under Shah Mahmoud and Prince Kamran 
approached the capital of Afghanistan. Unprepared to 
receive so formidable an enemy, weak in numbers, and 
ill-supplied with money and materials, the Dost could not, 
with any hope of success, have given battle to Mahmoud’s 
forces. The danger was imminent. The royal troops 
were within six miles of the eapital. Dost Mahomed and 
his followers prepared for flight. With the bridles of 
their horses in their hands, they stood waiting the 
approach of the enemy. But their fears were groundless. 
A flight ensued; but it was not Dost Mahomed’s, but 
Mahmoud’s army that fled. At the very threshold of 
victory, the Suddozye Prince, either believing that there 
was treachery in his ranks, or apprehending that the 
Barukzyes would seize Herat in his absence, turned 
suddenly back, and flung himself into the arms of de¬ 
feat. 

The Barukzyes were now dominant throughout Afghan¬ 
istan. The sovereignty, indeed, of Aziin Khan’s puppet, 
Ayoob, was proclaimed; but, Herat alone excepted, the 
country was in reality parcelled out among the Barukzye 
brothers. By them the superior claims of Azim Khan 
were generally acknowledged. Caubul, therefore, fell to his 
share. Dost Mahomed took possession of Ghuzni. Poor 
Dil Khan, Kohan Dil Khan, and their brothers, occupied 
Candahar. Jubbar Khan, a cousin of Dost Mahomed, 
was put in charge of the Ghilji country. Sultan Mahomed 
and his brothers succeeded to the government of Pesha- 
wur, and the Shah-zadah Sultan Ali, Dost Mahomed’s 
puppet, sunk quietly into the insigniflcance of private 
life. 

But this did not last long. Shah Soojah had begun 
again to dream of sovereignty. He was organising an 
army at Shikarpoor. Against this force marched Azim 
Khan, accompanied by the new King, Ayoob. Recalled 



EXPEDITION AGAINST THE SIKHS. 


113 


to the capital by the intrigues of Dost Mahomed^ and 
delayed by one of those complicated plots which display 
at once the recklessness and the treachery of the Afghan 
character,’* the Wuzeerwas compelled for awhile to post¬ 
pone the southern expedition. The internal strife sub¬ 
sided, the march was renewed, and Azim Khan moved 
down on Shikarpoor. But the army of Shah Soojah melted 
away at his approach. 

Then Azim Khan planned an expedition against the 
Sikhs. He had no fear of Runjeet Singh, whom he had 
once beaten in battle. Dost Mahomed accompanied his 
brother, and they marched upon the frontier, by Jella- 
labad and the Karapa Pass. But the watchful eye of 
Runjeet was upon them, and he at once took measures 
for their discomfiture. He well knew the character of the 
Barukzye brothers—knew them to be avaricious, ambi¬ 
tious, treacherous; the hand of each against his brethren. 
He thought bribery better than battle, and sent agents to 
tamper with Sultan Mahomed and the other Peshawur 
chiefs. Hoping to be enabled, in the end, to throw off 
the supremacy of Azim Khan, they gladly listened to his 
overtures. Dost Mahomed received intelligence of the 
plot, and signified his willingness to join the confederacy. 
His offer was accepted. This important accession to his 
party communicated new courage to Runjeet Singh. 
Everything was soon in train. Azim Khan was at Min- 
chini with his treasure and his Harem, neither of which, in 
so troubled a state of affairs, could he venture to abandon. 

* The story is worth giving in a Khan would return the compliment, 
note, as eminently characteristic of W assassinating Dost Mahomed. 
Afghan history. ^ Dost Mahomed, Inis was agreed upon. Sultan Ali 
who had proclaimed Sultan Ali was strangled in his sleep. Shah 
king, advised that prince to murder Ayoob then called upon Azim Khan 
ShA Ayoob; and Azim Khan ad- to perform his part of the tragedy; 
vised Shah Ayoob to murder Sultan but the minister coolly asked, “ How 
Ali. Sultan Ail indignantly re- can I slay my brother and recom- 
jected the proposal; Shah Ayoob mended a renewal of the expedition 
consented, on condition that Azim to Shikarpoor. 

VOL. I. I 



114 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAUUKZYES. 


Sultan Mahomed wrote to him from the Sikh camp that 
there was a design upon both. The intelligence filled the 
Sirdar with grief and consternation. He beheld plainly 
the treachery of his brothers, shed many bitter tears, looked 
with fear and trembling into the future; saw disgrace on 
one side, the sacrifice of his armies and treasure on the 
other; now resolved to march down upon the enemy, 
now to break up his encampment and retire. Night 
closed in upon him whilst in this state of painful agitation 
and perplexity. Rumours of a disastrous something soon 
spread through the whole camp. What it was, few could 
declare beyond the Sirdar’s own tent; but his followers 
lost confidence in their chief. They knew that some evil 
had befallen him; that he had lost heart; that his 
spirit was broken. The nameless fear seized upon the 
whole army, and morning dawned upon the wreck of a 
once formidable force. Ills troops had deserted him, and 
he prepared to follow, with his treasure and his Harem, to 
Jellalabad. Runjeet Singh entered Peshawur in triumph; 
but thought it more prudent to divide the territory be¬ 
tween Dost Mahomed and Sultan Mahomed, than to 
occupy it on his own account, and rule in his own name. 
The division was accordingly made. In the mean while 
Azim Khan, disappointed and broken-spirited, was seized 
with a violent disorder, the effect of anxiety and sorrow, 
and never quitted the bed of sickness until he was carried 
to the tomb.* 

This was in 1823. The death of Azim Khan pre¬ 
cipitated the downfal of the Suddozye monarchy, and 

* Azim Khan does not appear to quire the services of his brother, but 
have recognised the strength of had actually laid siege to Ghuzni. 
Dost Mahomed's character; and Azim Khan^s batteries caused great 
to this grand error must be attri- slaughter; but Dost Mahomed could 
buted his premature death. Shortly not be persuaded to open the gates 
before the expedition to the Sikn of the fortress. A negotiation took 
frontier, he had not only contemptu- place; and the brothers embraced, 
ously declared that he did not re- But they never forgave each other. 



nOTVOTAI. OF THE STJDDOZTES. 


115 


raised Dost Mahomed to the chief seat in the Douranee 
Empire. The last wretched remnant of legitimacy was 
now about to perish by the innate force of its own corrup¬ 
tion. The royal puppet, Ayoob, and his son attempted to 
seize the property of the deceased minister. Tidings of 
this design reached Candahar, and Shere Dil Khan, with 
a party of Barukzye adherents, hastened to Caubul to 
rescue the wealth of his brother and to chastise the spoli¬ 
ators. The Prince was murdered in the presence of his 
father, and the unhappy King carried off a prisoner to 
that ill-omened garden-house of Futteh Khan, which had 
witnessed the destruction of another who had done still 
fouler wrong to the great Barukzye brotherhood.* 

In the mean while, Habib-oolah-Khan, son of Azim 
Khan, had succeeded nominally to the power possessed by 
his deceased parent. But he had inherited none of the 
late minister’s intellect and energy, and none of his per¬ 
sonal influence. Beside the deathbed of his father he had 
been entrusted to the guidance of Jubbar Khan, but he 
had not the good sense to perceive the advantages of such 
a connexion. He plunged into a slough of dissipation, 
and, when he needed advice, betook himself to the coun¬ 
sels of men little better and wiser than himself. The 
ablest of his advisers was Ameen-oolah-Khan, the Loghur 
chief—known to the present generation as “ the infamous 
Ameen-oolah”—he who played so distinguished a part in 
the recent tragedies at Caubul. This man’s support was 

* “ One Ilajl All,” says Mr. Mas- and regarded them with apathy, 
son, “ who is reported to have shot The Sirdars, when they had given 
the Prince, despoiled the Shah of his the orders consequent on the feat 
raiments and clad him in his own; they had performed, returned to 
then by the Sirdar’s orders, placed their dwellings in the city with the 
him behind himself on a horse and same composure after the deposition 
carried him off to the Burj Vazir. of a monarch, as if they had been 
A singular spectacle was offered to enjoying a morning ride/’ Tlie un- 
the people of the city as Haji Ali fortunate puppet subsequent^ found 
bore the degraded monarch along his way to Lahore, where Kunjeet 
the streets; but they had become Singh allowed him a monthly pen- 
familiar with extraordinary events, sion of 1000 rupees. 

I 2 



116 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


worth retaining; but Habib-oolab, having deprived the 
“ good Newab” of his government, attempted to destroy 
Ameen-oolah Khan ; and thus, with the most consummate 
address, paved the way to his own destruction. Dost 
Mahomed, ever on the alert, appeared on the stage at the 
fitting moment. Alone, he had not sufficient resources 
to compete with the son of Azim Khan; but the Newab 
speedily joined him; and soon afterwards, in the midst 
of an engagement in the near neighbourhood of Caubul, 
the troops of Ameen-oolah-Khan went over bodily to Dost 
Mahomed; and the son of Azim Khan sought safety 
within the walls of the Balia Hissar. 

Dost Mahomed, having occupied the city, invested the 
citadel, and would, in all probability, have carried every¬ 
thing before him, if the Candahar chiefs, alarmed by the 
successes of their brother, and dreading the growth of a 
power which threatened their own extinction, had not 
moved out to the ostensible assistance of their nephew. 
Dost Mahomed retreated into the Kohistan, but the unfor¬ 
tunate Habib-oolah soon found that he had gained nothing 
by such an alliance. His uncles enticed him to a meeting 
outside the city, seized him, carried him ofF to the Loghur 
country; then took possession of the Balia Hissar, and 
appropriated all his treasure. Dost Mahomed, however, 
was soon in arms again, and the Peshawur brothers were 
before Caubul. The affairs of the empire were then 
thrown into a state of terrible confusion. The Barukzye 
brothers were all fighting among themselves for the 
largest share of sovereignty; but it is said that “ their fol¬ 
lowers have been engaged in deadly strife when the rival 
leaders were sitting together over a plate of cherries.” 
To this fraternal cherry-eating, it would appear that Dost 
Mahomed was not admitted.* Sitting over their fruit, 

* Masson.—Mr. Vtoe says, that were the cherry-eaters. We do not 
Dost Mahomed and ^er Dil Kban pretend to determine the point. 



SUPREMACY OP DOST MAHOMED. 


117 


his brothers came to the determination of alluring him 
to an interview, and then either blinding or murder¬ 
ing him. The plot was laid; everything was arranged 
for the destruction of the Sirdar; but Hadjee Khan 
Kakur, who subsequently distinguished himself as a 
traitor of no slight accomplishments, having discovered in 
time that Dost Mahomed was backed by the strongest 
party in Caubul, gave him a significant hint, at the proper 
moment, and the Sirdar escaped with his life. After a few 
more fraternal schemes of mutual extermination, the bro¬ 
thers entered into a compact by which the government of 
Ghuzni and the Kohistan was secured to Dost Mahomed, 
whilst Sultan Mahomed of Peshawur succeeded to the 
sovereignty of Caubul. 

The truce was but of short duration. Shere Dil Khan, 
the most influential of the Candahar brothers, died. A 
dangerous rival was thus swept away from the path of 
Dost Mahomed. The Kuzzilbashes, soon afterwards, gave 
in their adherence to the Sirdar, who now felt himself 
in a position to strike another blow for the recovery of 
Caubul. Sultan Mahomed had done nothing to strengthen 
himself at the capital. Summoned either to surrender or 
to defend himselfj he deemed it more prudent to nego¬ 
tiate. Consenting to retire on Peshawur, he marched 
out of one gate of Caubul whilst Dost Mahomed marched 
in at another, and the followers of the latter shouted out 
a derisive adieu to the departing chief. 

From this time (1826) to the day on which his fol¬ 
lowers deserted him at Urghandi, after the capture of 
Ghuzni by the British troops. Dost Mahomed was supreme 
at Caubul. His brothers saw that it was useless to con¬ 
test the supremacy; and at last they acknowledged the 
unequalled power of one whom they had once slighted 
and despised. And now was it that Dost Mahomed began 
fully to understand the responsibilities of high command. 



118 


DOST IdAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZTES. 


and the obligations of a ruler both to himself and his 
subjects. He had hitherto lived the life of a dissolute 
soldier. His education had been neglected, and in his 
very boyhood he had been thrown in the way of pollution 
of the foulest kind. From his youth he had been greatly 
addicted to wine, and was often to be seen in public reel* 
ing along in a state of degrading intoxication, or scarcely 
able to keep his place in the saddle. All this was now to 
be reformed. He taught himself to read and to write, ac¬ 
complishments which he had before, if at all, scantily pos¬ 
sessed. He studied the Koran, abandoned the use of 
strong liquors, became scrupulously abstemious, plain in 
his attire, assiduous in his attention to business, urbane, 
and courteous to all. He made, and without exposing 
himself to a charge of hypocrisy, a public acknowledgment 
of his past errors and a profession of reformation, and 
did not belie by his life the promises which he openly 
made.* 

It is not to be questioned that there was, at this time, 
in the conduct of Dost Mahomed, as a ruler, much that 
may be regarded with admiration and respect even by 
Christian men. Success did not disturb the balance of 


* ** The days^” says General Har¬ 
lan—and the truth of the statement 
is not to be questioned—“ that Dost 
Mahomed ascended the musnud, he 
performed the ‘ Toba/ which is a 
solemn and sacred formula of re¬ 
formation, in reference to any accus¬ 
tomed moral crime or depravi^ of 
habit. He was followed in the Toba 
by all his chiefs, who found them¬ 
selves obliged to keep pace with the 
march of mind—to prepare for the 
defensive system of policy, this as- 
sumj^ion of purity, on the part of 
the ^ince, suggested. The Toba 
was a sort of declaration of princi¬ 
ples; and the chiefs, viewing it in 
that ligh^ beheld their hopes of su- 

1 >remacy in imminent hazard .... In 
ater life the Ameer became sensible 


of the advantages arising from learn¬ 
ing. Although knowledge of litera¬ 
ture among Mahomedan nations is 
confined to a contracted sphere, at 
least the reputation of theological 
science was essential to the chief, on 
whom had been conferred the title of 
Ameer-ul-Mominin, or Commander 
of the Faithful. To escape the humi¬ 
lity of dependence upon subordinate 
agents, more especially the secre¬ 
taries necessarily employed in all re¬ 
venue and judicial transactions, he 
tasked his mind with the acquisition 
of letters, and became worthy, by his 
industry and success in the pursuit, 
of the greatest respect of the great, 
as he commanded the admiration of 
the vulgar, who are ever accustomed 
to venerate the divinity of wisdom.” 



CHABACTEB OF DOST MAHOMED. 


119 


his mind, nor power harden his heart. Simple in his habits, 
and remarkably affable in his manner, he was accessible 
to the meanest of his subjects. Ever ready to listen to 
their complaints and to redress their grievances, he sel¬ 
dom rode abroad without being accosted in the public 
streets or highways by citizen or by peasant waiting to lay 
before the Sirdar a history of his grievances or his suf¬ 
ferings, and to ask for assistance or redress. And he never 
passed the petitioner—never rode on, but would rein in 
his horse, listen patiently to the complaints of the meanest 
of his subjects, and give directions to his attendants to 
take the necessary steps to render justiee to the injured, 
or to alleviate the sufferings of the distressed. Such was 
his love of equity, indeed, that people asked, “ Is Dost 
Mahomed dead that there is no justice ?” 

He is even said, by those who knew him well, to have 
been kindly and humane—an assertion which many who 
have read the history of his early career will receive with 
an incredulous smile. But no one who fairly estimates the 
character of Afghan history and Afghan morals, and the 
necessities, personal and political, of all who take part in 
such stirring scenes, can fail to perceive that his vices 
were rather the growth of circumstances than of any ex¬ 
traordinary badness of heart. Dost Mahomed was not by 
nature cruel ; but once embarked in the strife of A%han 
politics, a man must cither fight it out or die. Every 
man’s hand is against him, and he must turn his hand 
against every man. There is no middle course open to 
him. If he would save himself, he must cast his scruples 
to the winds. Even when seated most securely on the 
musnud, an Afghan ruler must commit many acts abhor¬ 
rent to our ideas of humanity. He must rule with vigour, 
or not at all. That Dost Mahomed, during the twelve 
years of supremacy which he enjoyed at Caubul, often 
resorted, for the due maintenance of his power, to mea¬ 
sures of severity incompatible with the character of a 



120 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 


humane ruler, is only to say that for twelve years he re¬ 
tained his place at the head of affairs. Such rigour is 
inseparable from the government of such a people. We 
cannot rein wild horses with silken braids. 

Upon one particular phase of Barukzye policy it is 
necessary to speak more in detail. Under the Suddozye 
Kings, pampered and privileged, the Douranee tribes 
had waxed arrogant and overbearing, and had, in time, 
erected themselves into a power capable of shaping the 
destinies of the empire. With one hand they held down 
the people, and with the other menaced the throne. 
Their sudden change of fortune seems to have unhinged 
and excited them. Bearing their new honours with little 
meekness, and exercising their new powers with little 
moderation, they revenged their past sufferings on the 
unhappy people whom they had supplanted, and, partly 
by fraud, partly by extortion, stripped the native culti¬ 
vators of the last remnant of property left to them on 
the new allocation of the lands. In the revolutions 
which had rent the country throughout the early years 
of the century, it had been the weight of Douranee in¬ 
fluence which had ever turned the scale. They held, 
indeed, the crown at their disposal, and, seeking their 
own aggrandisement, were sure to array themselves on 
the side of the prince who was most liberal of his pro¬ 
mises to the tribes. The danger of nourishing such a 
power as this was not overlooked by the sagacioTis minds 
of the Barukzye rulers. They saw clearly the policy of 
treading down the Douranees, and soon began to exe¬ 
cute it. 

In the revolution which had overthrown the Sud¬ 
dozye dynasty, the tribes had taken no active part, and 
the Barukzye Sirdars had risen to power neither by their 
aid nor in spite of their opposition. A long succession of 
sanguinary civil wars, which had deprived them, one by 
one, of the leaders to whom they looked for guidance and 



SUPPBESSIOK OF DOUBANEE POWER. 


121 


support, had so enfeebled and prostrated them, that but 
a remnant of their former power was left. No imme¬ 
diate apprehension of danger from such a source darkened 
the dawn of the Barukzye brethren’s career. But to be 
cast down was not to be broken—to be enfeebled was 
not to be extinct. There was too much elasticity and 
vitality in the order for such accidents as this to subject 
it to more than temporary decline. The Douranees were 
still a privileged class; still were they fattening upon the 
immunities granted them by the Suddozye Kings. To 
curtail these privileges and immunities would be to strike 
at the source of their dominant influence and command¬ 
ing strength; and the Barukzye Sirdars, less chivalrous 
than wise, determined to strike the blow, whilst the Dou¬ 
ranees, crippled and exhausted, had little power to resist 
the attack. Even then they did not venture openly and 
directly to assail the privileges of the tribes by imposing 
an assessment on their lands in lieu of the obligation to 
supply horsemen for the service of the state—an obligation 
which had for some time past been practically relaxed— 
but they began cautiously and insidiously to introduce 
“ the small end of the wedge,” by taxing the Eyots, or 
Humsayehs of the Douranees, whose various services, not 
only as cultivators but as artificers, had rendered them 
in the estimation of their powerful masters a valuable 
kind of property, to be protected from foreign tyranny 
that they might better bear their burdens at home. 
These taxes were enforced with a rigour intended to 
offend the Douranee chiefs; but the trials to which they 
were then subjected but faintly foreshadowed the greater 
trials to come. 

Little by little, the Barukzye Sirdars began to at¬ 
tach such vexatious conditions to the privileges of the 
Douranees—so to make them run the gaundet of all 
kinds of exactions short of the direct assessment of their 
lands—^that in time, harassed, oppressed, impoverished 



122 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEHKZTES. 


by these more irregular imposts, and anticipating every 
day the development of some new form of tyranny and 
extortion, they were glad to exchange them for an assess¬ 
ment of a more fixed and definite character. From a 
minute detail of the measures adopted by the Barukzye 
Sirdars, with the double object of raising revenue and 
breaking down the remaining strength of the Douranees, 
the reader would turn away with weariness and impa¬ 
tience; but this matter of Dourariee taxation has too 
much to do with the after-history of the war in Afghan¬ 
istan, for me to pass it by in this place without at least 
a slight recognition of its importance. 

In the heyday of their prosperity, the Douranees had 
been too arrogant and unscrupulous to claim from us much 
commiseration in the hour of their decline. The Baruk¬ 
zye Sirdars held them down with a strong hand; and the 
policy was at least successful. It was mainly the humi¬ 
liation of these once dominant tribes that secured to Dost 
Mahomed and his brothers so many years of comparative 
security and rest. Slight disorders, such as are insepa¬ 
rable from the constitution of Afghan society—a rebel¬ 
lion in one part of the country, the necessity of coercing 
a recusant governor in another—occasionally distracted 
the mind of the Sirdar from the civil administration of 
Caubul. But it was not until the year 1834 that he was 
called upon to face a more pressing danger, and to pre¬ 
pare himself for a more vigorous contest. The exiled 
Suddozye Prince, Shah Soojah, weary again of inactivity, 
and imdaunted by past failure, was about to make another 
effort to re-establish himself in the Douranee Empire; 
and, with this object, was organising an army in Sindh. 

Had there been any sort of unanimity among the Ba¬ 
rukzye brothers, this invasion might have been laughed 
to scorn; but Dost Mahomed felt that there was trea¬ 
chery within, no less than hostility without, and that 
the open enemy was not more dangerous than the con- 



EB-APPEARANCE OF S HAH SOOJAH. 


123 


cealed one. Jubbar Kban, Zemaun Khan, and others, 
were known to be intriguing with the Shah. The Ne- 
wab, indeed, had gone so far as to assure Dost Ma- 
liomed that it was useless to oppose the Suddozye in¬ 
vasion, as Soojah-ool-Moolk was assisted by the British 
Government, and would certainly be victorious. He 
implored the Sirdar to pause before he brought down 
upon himself certain destruction, alleging that it would 
be better to make terms with the Shah—to secure 'some¬ 
thing rather than to lose everything. But Dost Ma¬ 
homed knew his man—knew that Jubbar Khan had 
thrown himself into the arms of the Suddozye, laughed 
significantly, and said, “ Lala, it will be time enough to 
talk about terms when I have been beaten.” This was 
unanswerable. The Newab retired; and preparations 
for war were carried on with renewed activity. 

In the mean while, Shah Soojah was girding himself 
up for the coming struggle with the Barukzyc Sirdars. 
In 1831 he had sought the assistance of Runjeet Singh 
towards the recovery of his lost dominions; but the 
Maharajah had set such an extravagant price upon his 
alliance, that the negotiations fell to the ground without 
any results.* The language of the Sikh ruler had been 

* Among other stipulations was in two ways; firstly, a real friend is 
one, that “ the heir-apparent of the he who is interested in the good 
Shah shall always attend his highness name of his friend. The Maharsnah 
with a force, having also his family bcin^ my friend, how can he find 
along with him; that he shall he satisfaction in my eternal disgrace ? 
treated with distinction, and expected ^J'o desire the disgrace of one’s 
to accompany the Maharajah in all friend is not consistent with the dic- 
his journeys.” Another demand put tates of wisdom. Secondly, there 
forth by llunjeet was for the de- is a tradition among all classes of 
livery to him of the sandal-wood people that the forefathers of the 
gates of Somnauth (or Juggernauth, Sikhs have said that their nation 
as the Maharajah called them), dcs- shall, in the attempt to bring away 
tined afterwards to confer such cele- the portals of sandal, advance to 
brity upon the Indian administration Ghiznee; but having arrived there, 
of Lord EUenborough. Shah Soo- the foundation of their empire shall 
jah’s answer to the demand is worth be overthrown. I am not desirous 
quoting:—“Regarding the demand of that event. I wish for the per- 
of the portals of sandal at Ghiznee, manence of his highness’s domi- 
a compliance with it is inadmissible nion.” 



124 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZTES. 


insolent and dictatorial. He had treated the Shah as a 
fallen prince, and endeavoured, in the event of his resto¬ 
ration, to reduce him to a state of vassalage so complete, 
that even the prostrate Suddozye resented the humilia¬ 
ting attempt. The idea of making another effort to 
regain his lost dominions had, however, taken such 
shape in his mind, that it was not to be lightly aban¬ 
doned. But empires ai'e not to be won without money, 
and the Shah was lamentably poor. Jewels he had to 
the value of two or three lakhs of rupees; and he was 
eager to pledge them. But the up-country bankers were 
slow to make the required advances. “ If 1000 rupees 
be required,” said the Shah, “ these persons will ask a 
pledge in property of a lakh of rupees.” From the ob¬ 
durate bankers he turned, in his distress, to the British 
Government; but the British Government was equally 
obdurate. 

In vain the exiled Shah pleaded that the people of 
Afghanistan were anxious for his arrival; and that 
those of Khorassan would flock to his standard and ac¬ 
knowledge no other chief. In vain he declared that 
the Barukzyc Sirdars were “ not people around whom 
the Afghans would rally”—that they had no authority 
beyond the streets and bazaars of Caubul, and no power 
to resist an enemy advancing from the northward. 
Neither up-country bankers nor British functionaries 
would advance him the requisite funds. “My impa¬ 
tience,” he said, “ exceeds all bounds; and if I can raise 
a loan of two or three lakhs of rupees from any banker, 
I entertain every expectation that, with the favour of 
God, my object will be accomplished.” But although 
the Persians were at that time pushing their conquests 
in Khorassan, and the Shah continued to declare that 
the Douranee, Ghilzye, and other tribes, were sighing 
for his advent, which was to relieve them from the 
tyranny and oppression of the Barukzyes, and to secure 



SHAH SOOJAH’s EXPEDITION. 


126 


them against foreign invasion. Lord William Bentinck, 
too intent upon domestic reforms to busy himself with 
schemes of distant defence, quietly smiled down the 
solicitations of the Shah, and told him to do what he 
liked on his own account, but that the British Govern¬ 
ment would not help him to do it. “ My friend,” he 
wrote, “ I deem it my duty to apprise you distinctly, 
that the British Government religiously abstains from 
intermeddling with the affairs of its neighbours when 
this can be avoided. Your Majesty is, of course, master 
of your own actions, but to afford you assistance for the 
purpose which you have in contemplation, would not 
consist with that neutrality which on such occasions is 
the rule of guidance adopted by the British Govern¬ 
ment.” But, in spite of these discouragements, before 
the year 1832 had worn to a close, Shah Soojah “ had 
resolved on quitting his asylum at Loodhianah for the 
purpose of making another attempt to regain his throne.” 

The British agent on the north-western frontier. Cap¬ 
tain Wade, offically reported this to Mr. Macnaghten, 
who then held the office of Political Secretary, and with 
the announcement went a request, on the part of the 
Shah, for three months of his stipend in advance. The 
request, at a later period, rose to a six months’ advance; 
and a compromise was eventually effected ior four. So, 
with 16,000 rupees extracted as a forestalment of the 
allowance granted to his family in his absence, he set out 
for the re-conquest of the Douranee Empire. 

On the 28th of January, 1833, he quitted his resi¬ 
dence at Loodhianah, and endeavouring, as he went, to 
raise money and to enlist troops for his projected expe¬ 
dition, moved his camp slowly to Bahwulpore, and 
thence, across the Indus, to Shikarpoor, where he had 
determined to rendezvous. 

But having thus entered the territory of the Ameers 



126 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


of Sindh as a Mend, he did not quit it before he had 
shown his quality as an enemy, by fighting a hard battle 
with the Sindhians, and effectually beating them. The 
pecuniary demands which he had made upon them they 
had resisted; and the Shah, having a considerable army 
at his command, deeply interested in the event, thought 
fit to enforce obedience. Early in January, 1834, an 
engagement took place near Eori, and the pride of the 
Ameers having been humbled by defeat, they consented 
to the terms he demanded, and acknowledged the supre¬ 
macy of the Shah,* 

Having arranged this matter to his satisfaction, Shah 
Soojah marched upon Candahar, and in the early sum¬ 
mer was before the walls of the city. He invested the 
place, and endeavoured ineffectually to carry it by 
assault. The Candahar chiefs held out with much re¬ 
solution, but it was not until the arrival of Dost Ma¬ 
homed from Caubul that a general action was risked. 
The Sirdar lost no time in commencing the attack. 
Akbar Khan, the chief’s son, who, at a later period, 
stood out so prominently from the canvas of his coun¬ 
try’s history, was at the head of the Barukzye horse; 
Abdul Samat Khanf commanded the foot. No great 
amount of military skill appears to have been displayed 
on either side. Akbar Khan’s horsemen charged the 
enemy with a dashing gallantry worthy of their im¬ 
petuous leader; but a battalion of the Shah’s troops, 
under an Indo-Briton, named Campbell, fought with such 
uncommon energy, that at one time the forces of the 
Barukzye chiefs were driven back, and victory appeared 

* “ The Sindhians have agreed to them for the entire execution of these 
pay a contribution of either five or articles .**—\Captain Wade to Mr, 
seven lakhs of rupees to farm the MacnaghUn: March 5^ 1834.1 
Shikarpoor territory for a settled f Not the minister—but a jPersian 

annual sum from Shah Soojah, and adventurer of the same name, who 
to provide him with an auxiliary afterwards obtained service in Bok- 
fbree, the Shah taking hostages from hora. 



DEFEAT OP SSHAH SOOJAH, 


127 


to be in the reach of the Shah. But Dost Mahomed, 
who had intently watched the conflict, and kept a hand¬ 
ful of chosen troops in reserve, now let them slip, rallied 
the battalions which were falling back, called upon Akbar 
Khan to make one more struggle, and, well responded 
to by his gallant son, rolled back the tide of victory. 
Shah Soojah, Avho on the first appearance of Dost Ma¬ 
homed had lost all heart, and actually given orders 
to prepare for flight, called out in his desperation to 
Campbell, “ Chupao-chupao,”* then ordered his elephant 
to be wheeled round, and turned his back upon the 
field of battle. His irresolution and the unsteadfastness 
of the Douranees proved fatal to his cause. 

The Douranee tribes had looked upon the advance of 
the King with evident satisfaction. Trodden down and 
crushed as they had been by the Barukzyes, they would 
have rejoiced in the success of the royal cause. But 
they had not the power to secure it. Depressed and 
enfeebled by long years of tyranny, they brought only 
the shadow of their former solves to the standard of 
the Suddozye monarch. Without horses, without arms, 
without discipline, without heart to sustain them upon 
any great enterprise, and without leaders to inspire 
them with the courage they lacked themselves, the 
Douranees went into the field a feeble, broken-spirited 
rabble. Had they been assured of the success of the 
enterprise, they would at least have assumed a bold 
front, and flung all their influence, such as it was, into 
the scales on the side of the returned Suddozye; but 
remembering the iron rule and the unsparing vengeance 
of the Barukzye Sirdars, they dreaded the consequences 
of failure, and when the crisis arrived, either stood aloof 
from the contest, or shamefully apostatised at the last. 

* Mr. Vime Baj^s that lie had this attack, but is employed here to si^- 
Campbell himself. The word nify an irregular descent, or rush, 
indicates more properly a plundering upon the enemy. 



128 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


The few, indeed, who really joined the royal standard 
contrived to defeat the enterprise; for whilst the Shah’s 
Hindostanees were engaging the enemy in front, the 
Douranees, moved by an irrepressible avidity for plun¬ 
der, fell upon the baggage in the rear, and created such 
a panic in the ranks that the whole army turned and 
fled. It was not possible to rally them. The battle 
was lost. The Barukzye troops pushed forward. Camp¬ 
bell, who had fallen like a brave man, covered with 
wounds, was taken prisoner, with others of the Shah’s 
principal officers; and all the guns, stores, and camp- 
equipage of the Suddozye Prince fell into the hands of 
the victors. The scenes of plunder and carnage which 
ensued are said to have been terrible. The Shah fled 
to Furrah, and thence by the route of Seigtan and Shora- 
wuk to Kelat. The Candahar chiefs urged the pursuit 
of the fugitive, but Dost Mahomed opposed the measure, 
and the unfortunate Prince was suffered to escape. 

But scarcely had the Sirdar returned to Caubul when 
he found himself compelled to prepare for a new and 
more formidable enterprise. Runjeet Singh was in 
possession of Peshawur. The treachery of Sultan Ma¬ 
homed Khan and his brothers had rebounded upon 
themselves, and they had lost the province which had 
been the object of so much intrigue and contention. In 
their anxiety to destroy Dost Mahomed, they opened a 
communication with the Sikhs, who advanced to Pesha¬ 
wur ostensibly as friends, and then took possession of 
the city.* Sultan Mahomed Khan ignominiously fled. 
The Sikh army under Hurree Singh consisted only of 
900Q men, and had the Afghans been commanded by a 

* Shah S(^jah, when on his way to blished his title to give away any 
Shikarpoor, in 1833, had entered into portion of the Afghan dominions; so 
a treaty with Hunjeet Sinnh, by one ne sent his grandson, Nao Nehal 
of the articles of which ne ceded Singh, a boy, who then “ took the 
Peshawur to the Sikhs. But Bun- spear into ms hand” for the first 
jeet Singh was by no means inclined time, to take possession of the 
to wait until the Shah had esta- place. 



LOSS OF PESHAWUK. 


129 


competent leader they might have driven back a far 
stronger force, and retained possession of the- place. 
The Peshawur chiefs were everlastingly disgraced, and 
Peshawur lost to the Afghans for ever. 

But Dost Mahomed could not submit patiently to 
this. Exasperated against Runjeet Singh, and indig¬ 
nant at the fatuous conduct of his brothers, he deter¬ 
mined on declaring a religious war against the Sikhs, 
and began with characteristic energy to organise a force 
sufficiently strong to wrest Peshawur from the hands of 
the usurpers. To strengthen his influence he assumed, 
at this time, the title of Ameer-al-Mominin (commander 
of the faitlifiil*), and exerted himself to inflame the 
breasts of his followers with that burning Mahomedan 
zeal which has so often impelled the disciples of the 
Prophet to deeds of the most consummate daring and 
most heroic self-abandonment. Money was now to be 
obtained, and to obtain it much extortion was, doubtless, 
practised. An Afghan chief has a rude and somewhat 
arbitrary manner of levying rates and taxes. Dost Ma¬ 
homed made no exception in his conduct to ‘‘ the good 
old rule,” which had so long, in critical conjunctures, 
been observed in that part of tlie world. He took all 
that he could get, raised a very respectable force, 
coined money in his own name, and then prepared for 
battle. 

At the head of an imposing array of fighting men, 
the Ameer marched out of Caubul. He had judged 
wisely. The declaration of war against the infidel— 
war proclaimed in the name of the Prophet — had 
brought thousands to his banner ; and ever as he 
marched the great stream of humanity seemed to swell 
and swell, as new tributaries came pouring in from 

* He had been recommended by poor to support his dignity as a Sir- 
some to assume the titles of royalty, dar, it would be preposterous to think 
but he replied, that os he was too of converting himself into a King. 

VOL. I. ' K 



130 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BAEUKZYES. 


every part, and the thousands became tens of thousands. 
From the Kohistan, from the hills beyond, from the 
regions of the Hindoo-Koosh, from the remoter fast¬ 
nesses of Toorkistan, multitudes of various tribes and 
denominations, moved by various impulses, but all 
noisily boasting their true Mahomedan zeal, came flock¬ 
ing in to the Ameer’s standard. Ghilzyes and Kohis- 
tanees, sleek Kuzzilbaslies and rugged Oosbegs, horse¬ 
men and foot-men, all who could wield a sword or lift a 
matchlock, obeyed the call in the name of the Prophet. 
“ Savages from the remotest recesses of the mountainous 
districts,” wrote one, who saw this strange congeries of 
Mussulman humanity,* “ who were dignified with the 
profession of the Mahomedan faith, many of them giants 
in form and strength, promiscuously armed with sword 
and shield, bows and arrows, matchlocks, rifles, spears 
and blunderbusses, concentrated themselves around the 
standard of religion, and were prepared to slay, plunder, 
and destroy, for the sake of God and the Prophet, the 
unenlightened infidels of the Punjab.” 

The Mussulman force reached Peshawur. The brave 
heart of Runjeet Singh quailed before this immense 
assemblage, and he at once determined not to meet it 
openly in the field. There was in his camp a man named 
Harlan, an American adventurer, now a doctor and now 
a genei'al, who was ready to take any kind of service 
with any one disposed to pay him, and to do any kind 
of work at the instance of his master.f Clever and un¬ 
scrupulous, he was a fit agent to do the Maharajah’s 

* General Harlan. Major (now Sir George) Pollock to 

t Harlan originally went out to Rangoon. He does not appear to 
China and India as supercargo of a have earned a Tery good name during 
merchant vessel. He left his vessel his connexion with the Company’s 
at Calcutta, and obtained service, as army, which he soon quitted, and ob- 
a supernumerary, on the medical tained service with Runjeet Singh— 
establishment of the Company. He afterwards to seek the patronage of 
was posted to the artillery at Dum- Dost Mahomed, whom he had so 
Dum, and afterwards accompanied foully betrayed. 



BETUAYAI. OF DOST MAHOMBO. 


131 


bidding. Runjeet despatched him as an envoy to the 
A%han camp. He went ostensibly to negotiate with 
Dost Mahomed; in reality to corrupt his supporters. 
“ On the occasion,” he says, with as little sense of 
shame as if though he had been performing an exploit 
of the highest merit, “ of Dost Mahomed’s visit to 
Peshawur, which occurred during the period of my 
service with Runjeet Singh, I was despatched by the 
Prince as ambassador to the Ameer. I divided his 
brothers against him, exciting their jealousy of his 
growing power, and exasperating the family feuds, with 
which, from my previous acquaintance, I was familiar, 
and stirred up the feudal lords of his durbar, with 
the prospects of pecuniary advantages. I induced his 
brother, Sultan Mahomed Khan, the lately deposed 
chief of Peshawur, with 10,000 retainers, to withdraw 
suddenly from his camp about nightfall. The chief 
accompanied me towards the Sikh camp, whilst his fol¬ 
lowers fled to their mountain fastnesses. So large a 
body retiring from the Ameer’s control, in opposition to 
his will, and without previous intimation, threw the 
general camp into inextricable confusion, which termi¬ 
nated in the clandestine route of his forces, without beat 
of drum, or sound of bugle, or the trumpet’s blast, in 
the quiet stillness of midnight. At daybreak no vestige 
of. the Afghan camp was seen, where six hours before 
50,000 men and 10,000 horses, with all the busy host 
of attendants, were rife with the tumult of wild emo¬ 
tion.”* 

* It would appear that Dost Ma- opinion of the Sikhs; but Sultan 
homed, instigated by Meerza Samad Mahomed, after having taken a 
Khan, seized Mr. Harlan, as well as number of oaths on the Koran, 
the Fakir Azizoodeen, who was also pledging himself to compliance with 
sent as an ambassador into the the AmeeFs wishes, sent back the 
Ameer's camp. The Dost endea- prisoners (or hostages^ as Dost Ma- 
Toured to throw the odium of the homed called them) to the Maha- 
act upon Sultan Mahomed, Tioping rajah's camp. Mr. Harlan himself, 
thereby to ruin liiiu utterly in the however, says nothing about this. 

K 2 



132 


DOST MAHOMED AliTD THE BABITKZTES. 


Thus was this great expedition, so promising at the out¬ 
set, brought prematurely to a disastrous close. Trea¬ 
chery broke up, in a single night, a vast army which 
Runjeet Singh had contemplated with dismay. The 
Ameer, with the dibris of his force, preserving his guns, 
but sacrificing much of his camp equipage, fell back 
upon Caubul, re-seated himself quietly in the Balia 
Hissar, and, in bitterness of spirit, declaiming against the 
emptiness of military renown, plunged deeply into the 
study of the Koran. 

From this pleasant abstraction from warlike pursuits, 
the Ameer was, after a time, aroused by a well-grounded 
report to the effect that Sultan Mahomed had been 
again intriguing with the Sikhs, and that a plan had 
been arranged for the passage of a Punjabec force 
through the Khybur Pass, with the ultimate intention of 
moving upon Caubul. An e.xpedition was accordingly 
fitted out, in the spring of 1837; but the Ameer, having 
sufficient confidence in his sons Afzul Khan and Maho¬ 
med Akbar, sent the Sirdars in charge of the troops with 
Meerza Samad Khan, his minister, as their adviser. The 
Afghan forces laid siege to Jumrood, and on the 30th of 
April Hurree Singh came from Peshawur to its relief. 
An action took place, in which both the young Sirdars 
greatly distinguished themselves, and Shumshoodeen 
Khan’s conduct was equally conspicuous. The Sikh 
chieftain, Hurree Singh, was slain, and his disheartened 
troops fell back and entrenched themselves under the 


Hohun Lai says that “ the appalling 
news (of the treachery of Sultan 
Mahomed) wounded the feelings of 
the Ameer most bitterly. There were 
no bounds to the sweat of shame and 
folly which flowed over his face, and 
there was no limit to the laughter of 
the^ people at his being deceived and 
ridiculed. His minister, Meerza Sa¬ 


mad Khan, was so much distressed 
by this sad exposure of his own trick, 
and still more by the failure of his 
plan in losing the Fakir, that he hung 
down bis head with great remorse and 
shame, and then, throwing away his 
state papers, be exclaimed, that he 
would avoid all interference in the 
government aflairs hereafter.” 



THE BATTLE OF JUMBOOD. 


133 


walls of Jumrood. Akbar Kban proposed to follow up 
the victory by dashing on to Peshawur; but the Meerza, 
who, according to Mr. Masson, had, during the action, 
“secreted himself in some cave or sheltered recess, 
where, in despair, he sobbed, beat his breast, tore his 
beard, and knocked his head upon the ground,” now 
made his appearance, declaring that his prayers had 
been accepted, and “ entreated the boasting young man 
to be satisfied with what he had done.” The advice 
was sufficiently sound, whatever may have been the 
motives which dictated it. Strong Sikh reinforcements 
soon appeared in sight, and the Afghan army was com¬ 
pelled to retire. The battle of Jumrood was long a 
theme of national exultation. Akbar Khan plumed 
himself greatly on the victory, and was unwilling to 
share the honours of the day with his less boastful bro¬ 
ther. But it was not a very glorious achievement, and 
it may be doubted whether Afzul Khan did not really 
distinguish himself even more than his brother. In 
one respect, however, it was a heavy blow to the 
Maharajah. Kunjeet Singh had lost one of his best 
officers and dearest friends. The death of Hurree Singh 
was never forgotten or forgiven. 

The loss of Peshawur rankled deeply in the mind of 
Dost Mahomed. The empire of Ahmed Shah had been 
rapidly falhng to pieces beneath the heavy blows of the 
Sikh spoliator. The wealthy provinces of Cashmere 
and Mooltan had been wrested from the Douranees in 
the time of the Suddozye Princes, and now the same 
unsparing hand had amputated another tract of country, 
to the humiliation of the Barukzye Sirdars. The 
Ameer, in bitterness of spirit, bewailed the loss of ter¬ 
ritory, and burned to resent the affiront. In spite, 
however, of the boasted victory of Jumrood, he had 
little inclination to endeavour to wrest the lost terri- 



134 


DOST MAHOMED AND THE BABUKZYES. 


tory, by force of arms, from the grasp of the Sikh 
usurpers. Mistrusting his own strength, in this con¬ 
juncture he turned his thoughts towards foreign aid. 
Willing to form almost any alliance so long as this great 
end was to be gained, he now looked towards Persia 
for assistance, and now invited the friendly aid of the 
British. It was in the autumn of this year, 1837, that 
two events, which mightily affected the future destinies 
of Dost Mahomed, were canvassed in the bazaars of 
Caubul. A British emissary was about to arrive at the 
Afghan capital; and a Persian army was advancing upon 
the Afghan frontier. Before the first snows had fallen, 
Captain Burnes was Resident at Caubul, and Mahomed 
Shah was laying siege to Herat.* 

* The authorities consulted in the jah ; and the manuscript reports of 
preparation of this cha])tcr are the Colonel Itawlinson. To the latter I 
published works of Burnes, Conolly, am indebted for much valuable in- 
Vigne, Masson, Mohuii Lai, Harlan, formation relative to the Dourance 
&c.; the autobiograi)h7 of Shah Soo- tribes. 



LATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


135 


CHAPTER VIII. 

[1810—1837.] 

Later Events in Persia—The Treaty of Goolistan—Arrival of Sir Gore 
Ouseley—Mr. Morier and IVIr. Ellis—The Definitive Treaty—The War 
of 1826-27—The Ti'eaty of Toorkomanchai—Death of Eutteh Ali Shah— 
Accession of Mahomed Shah—Ilis Projects of Ambition—The Expe¬ 
dition against Herat. 

It is necessary now to revert, for a little space, to the 
progress of affairs in Western Asia. Whilst the Sud- 
dozye Princes in Afghanistan had been gradually relax¬ 
ing their hold of the Dourance Empire, Persia had 
been still struggling against Russian encroachment—still 
entangled in the meshes of a long and harassing war. 
Though enfeebled by the paramount necessity of con¬ 
centrating the resources of the empire on the great 
European contest, which demanded the assertion of all 
her military strength, the aggressive tendencies of the 
great northern power were not to be entirely controlled. 
Little could she think of remote acquisitions of territory 
in Georgia, whilst the eagles of Napoleon were threaten¬ 
ing her very existence at the gates of Moscow itself. 
Still with little intermission, up to the year 1813, the 
war dragged languidly on. Then the good offices of 
Great Britain were successfully employed for the re¬ 
establishment of friendly relations between the two con- 



136 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


tending powers;* and a treaty, known as the treaty of 
Goolistan, was negotiated between them. By this treaty 
Persia ceded to Russia all her acquisitions on the south 
of the Caucasus, and agreed to maintain no naval force 
on the Caspian sea; whilst Russia entered into a vague 
engagement to support, in the event of a disputed suc¬ 
cession, the claims of the heir-apparent against all com¬ 
petitors for the throne. 

During these wars, which were carried on with 
varying success, the Persian troops upon more than 
one occasion had been led to the charge by English 
officers of approved gallantry and skill. Accompany¬ 
ing General Malcolm to Persia in 1810, they were re¬ 
tained in the country by Sir Harford Jones; and were 
very soon busily employed in drilling and disciplin¬ 
ing the infantry and artillery of the Persian Prince.f 
Of these officers, the most conspicuous wen- Captain 
Christie and Lieutenant Lindsay, who led into the field 
the battalions which they had instructed, and more than 
once turned the tide of victory against their formidable 
European opponents.^ 

* Hussia refused to accept the 
formal mediation of Great Britain; 
but the good offices of the ambassa¬ 
dor were employed with success. 

t “ Poor Captain Christie and Lieu¬ 
tenant Lindsay,” says Sir Harford 
Jones, “by their indefatigable per¬ 
severance had brought, when I left 
Persia, the one, several of the regi¬ 
ments of the Prince’s infantry, and, 
the other, the corps of horse artillery, 
considering the shortness of the time 
they had been employed, to a state of 
perfection that was quite astonishing. 

And what is e^ally to the credit of 
these gallant officers, they were both 
adored the officers and men under 
their tuition; though in the beginning 
they had often been obliged to treat 
the latter with a degree of severity 
that could not then have been prac¬ 


tised with safety at Constantinople. 
The Prince Royal, however, had much 
merit in this respect, for whenever a 
punishment v/as inflicted and com¬ 
plained of to him, he invariably gave 
the offender a double portion of it, 
and by this means soon put an end 
to complaint.”— {Sir Harford Jones's 
Account of the Transactions of his 
Majesty's Mission to the Court of Per¬ 
sia^ 1807-1811.] Malcolm took with 
him to Persia, as a present from 
the Indian Government to the Shah, 
twelve field-pieces, with harness and 
all necessary equipments for horse 
artillery. 

f Captain Christie was an officer 
of the Bombay army, selected for 
employment in Persia, bjr General 
Malcolm, on account of his high re¬ 
putation for gallantry and personal 



SIK GOKE OUSEI^Y’s TREATY. 


137 


In the mean while, Sir Harford Jones had been suc¬ 
ceeded in the Persian embassy by Sir Gore Ouseley, 
who in the summer of 1811 reached Teheran in the 
character of Ambassador Extraordinary from the King 
of England. The preliminary treaty which Jones had 
negotiated was now to be wrought into a definitive one. 
It was somewhat modified in the process. The new 
treaty was more liberal than the old. In the preliminary 
articles relaling to the subsidy, it had been set down that 
the amount should be regulated in the definitive treaty; 
but it was understood between the British and the Per¬ 
sian plenipotentiary, that the amount was on no account 
to exceed 160,000 tomauus, and that the manner in 


activit^^, and his thorough acquaint¬ 
ance with the native character. As¬ 
sociated with Pottingcr, on their first 
entry into Beloochistan, he after¬ 
wards diverged to the northward, 
and, in the guise of a horse-dealer, 
penetrated through Seistan to Herat, 
and thence, by the way of Yezd and 
Ispahan, reached the northern re¬ 
gions of Persia. A great part of the 
line which he thus traversed had 
never before, and has never, I be¬ 
lieve, since, been explored by an 
European traveller. Stories of Chris¬ 
tie’s extraordinary personal strength 
and prowess are current to the pre¬ 
sent day in the north of India and 
in Persia. In the latter country, in¬ 
deed, he was adored by the soldiery, 
and his name is still a household 
word among the old officers of the 
Azerbijan army. He was killed at 
the head of his famous Shegaughce 
brigade, in the night attack which 
was made by the Russians on the 
Persian camp at Aslandooz, in 1811. 

Lieutenant Lindsay was an officer 
of the Madras Horse Artillery, and, 
to scientific attainments of no ordi¬ 
nary extent, added the most imposing 
personal appearance. He was six 
leet eight inches in height (without 
his shoes), and thus revised, in the 
minds of the Persians, their ideas 
of the old heroes of romance. After 


many years’ service in Persia, he re¬ 
signed his appointment in the Indian 
service, and, succeeding to the estate 
of Kincolquhair, settled in Scotland 
as Lindsay Bethune. In 1834 he 
was again sent to Persia by the Bri¬ 
tish Government, with a view to his 
employment in the expected war of 
the succession, and was thus enabled, 
in the following year, to add to his 
former laurels, by leading (on the 
death of Futteh Ali Shah) the ad¬ 
vanced division of the Persian army 
from Tabreez lo Teheran, and sub¬ 
sequently quelling a very serious 
rebellion against the authority of 
Mahomed Shah, that was set afoot 
in the south of Persia by the Prince 
of Shiraz and his sons. For this 
service, on his return to England, 
he was rewarded with a baronetcy, 
and in 1836 he was a third time 
sent out with a Major-General’s com¬ 
mission, to take command of the 
Persian army. Owing, however, to 
the misunderstanding which arose 
out of the advance upon Herat, the 
Persian Government on this occa¬ 
sion declined to employ him, and 
he finally retired from military life 
in 1839. Sir H. Bethune, in a green 
old age, is, I believe, at the pre¬ 
sent day, again travelling in Persia, 
revisiting the scenes of his former 
prowess. 



138 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


■whicli it was to be afforded should be left to the discre¬ 
tion of the British Government. But in the definitive 
treaty the amount was fixed at 200,000 tomauns (or 
about 150,000/.); and a special article was introduced, 
setting forth that “ since it is the custom of Persia to pay 
her troops six months in advance, the English ambas¬ 
sador shall do all in his power to pay the subsidy 
granted in lieu of troops in as early instalments as may 
be convenient and practicable,”—a pleasant fiction, of 
which it has been said, with truth, that it might “ well 
be taken for a burlesque.” 

On the 14th of March, 1812, this treaty was signed 
by Sir Gore Ouseley, Mahomed Shefi, and Mahomed 
Hassan; and a week afterwards, the British ambassador 
wrote to inform the Court of Directors of the East India 
Company that “ the good effects of the definitive treaty, 
and the proofs of the confidence with which it has in¬ 
spired the Shah, are already manifest.” The Persian 
monarch, having declared his fixed determination to 
strengthen Abbas Meerza to the utmost of his ability, by 
raising for him a disciplined army of 50,000 men, re¬ 
quested Sir Gore Ouseley to obtain for him, with the 
utmost possible despatch, 30,000 stands of English mus¬ 
kets and accoutrements, the price of which was to be 
deducted from the subsidy. “The Shah,” wrote the 
envoy, “ has further promised me, that this large deduc¬ 
tion from the subsidy shall be made up, through me, to 
Abbas Meerza’s army from the royal coffers, so that we 
may congratulate ourselves on having worked a wonder¬ 
ful (and, by many, unexpected) alteration in the Shah’s 
general sentiments.”* 

Sir Gore Ouseley returned to England, leaving his 
secretary, Mr. Morier, in charge of the Mission j but 
before the treaty was finally accepted, it was modified by 

* Sir Gore Ouseley to (he Court of Directors; March 21, 1812.—[JkfS'. 
Records.^ 



THE DEFINITIVE TREATY. 


139 


the British Government, and Mr. Henry Ellis was de¬ 
spatched to Persia, in 1814, to negotiate these alterations 
at the Persian Court. A comparison of the treaty, signed 
by Sir Gore Ouseley, with that which was subsequently 
accepted, will show that the alterations, which were very 
considerable in respect of words, were less so in respect 
of substance. The most important conditions of the 
treaty are to be found in both documents. But the pro¬ 
gress of events had rendered it necessary to expunge 
certain passages from the treaty negotiated by Sir Gore 
Ouseley. For example, the 7th article of that treaty 
provided, that ‘‘ should the King of Persia form maga¬ 
zines of materials for ship-building on the coast of the 
Caspian Sea, and resolve to establish a naval force, the 
King of England shall grant permission to naval officers, 
seamen, shipwrights, carpenters, &c., to proceed to Persia 
from London and Bombay, and to enter the service of the 
King of Persia—the pay of such officers, artificers, &c., 
shall be given by his Persian Majesty at the rates which 
may be agreed upon with the English ambassador,”* 
But by the treaty of Goolistan, Persia engaged not to 
maintain a naval force on the Caspian. The article, 
therefore, was necessarily expunged. 

On the 25th of November, the definitive treaty, which 
was finally accepted, was concluded at Teheran by 
Messrs. Morier and Ellis. It was declared to be strictly 
defensive. The plan of defence thus marked out was 
more extensive than practicable. It bound the Persian 
Government to engage “ not to allow any European array 
to enter the Persian territory, nor to proceed towards 
India, nor to any of the ports of that country; and also 
to engage not to allow any individuals of such European 

* MS. Becords. Sir Gore Ouse- which does not appear in the subse- 
lej^s treaty is not given in the collec- qnent treaty, the amount of the allow- 
tion of treaties in the published ances to be granted by Uie Shah to 
“ Papers relating to Persia and Af- the British officers serving in Persia 
ghanistan.” In another article of this, is laid down. 



140 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


nations, entertaining a design of invading India, or being 
at enmity with Great Britain, whatever, to enter Persia.” 
“ Should any Buropean powers,” it was added, “ wish to 
invade India by the road of Khorassan, Tartaristan, 
Bokhara, Samarcand, or other routes, his Persian Majesty 
engages to induce the kings and governors of those 
countries to oppose such invasion as much as is in his 
power, either by the fear of his arms or by conciliatory 
measures”—an engagement of very little value, inasmuch 
as the “ power” to perform it would have been of the 
smallest possible amount. In the third article it is laid 
down, that “ the limits of the territories of the two states 
of Russia and Persia shall be determined according to 
the admission of Great Britain, Persia, and Russia”—a 
stipulation of an extraordinary and, perhaps, unexampled 
character, inasmuch as Russia had not consented to this 
mode of adjudication. The eighth and ninth articles 
related to Afghanistan, and are contained in the follow¬ 
ing words: 

VIII. “ Should the A%hans be at war with the British 
nation, his Persian Majesty engages to send an army 
against them, in such manner, and of such force, as may 
be concerted with the English Government. The expenses 
of such an army shall be defrayed by the British Govern¬ 
ment, in such manner as may be agreed upon at the 
period of its being required. 

IX. “ If war should be declared between the Afghans 
and Persians, the English Government shall not interfere 
with either party, unless their mediation to effect a peace 
shall be solicited by both parties.”* 

• Of this article it has been said by Britain; and if proceeding from 
an experienced writer: “ The obliga- Persia, it indicated that desire of ter- 
tion which we contracted in the 9th ritorial extension which was more 
article, to abstain from interference in fully developed in the sequel, and 
the event of a possible contest be- which, when developed, compelled us 
Afjgfhans and Persians, is on general grounds to repudiate the 
hardly intelligible. Such a proposal treaty altogether.”— [^Calcutta Review^ 
could not have proceeded from Great vol. xii.] 



ORGANISATION OF THE PERSIAN ARMY. 141 

One more clause of the definitive treaty calls for notice 
in this place. In Article VI., it is covenanted that 
“ should any European power be engaged in war with 
Persia, when at peace with England, his Britannic Ma¬ 
jesty engages to use his best endeavours to bring Persia 
and such European power to a friendly understanding.” 
“ If, however,” it is added, “ his Majesty’s cordial inter¬ 
ference should fail of success, England shall still, if re¬ 
quired, in conformity with the stipulations in the pre¬ 
ceding articles, send a force from India, or, in lieu thereof, 
pay an annual subsidy (200,000 tomauns) for the support 
of a Persian army, so long as a war in the supposed case 
shall continue, and until Persia shall make peace with 
such nation.” By this article we, in effect, pledged our¬ 
selves to support Persia in her wars with Russia, even 
though we should be at peace with the latter state. By 
the convention of Goolistan, it is true that amicable rela¬ 
tions had been re-established between the Russian and 
Persian Governments; but these relations were likely at 
any time to be interrupted; and it was not difficult to per¬ 
ceive, that, before long, the aggressive policy of Russia 
would again bring that state into collision with its Per¬ 
sian neighbour. The article, in reality, pledged us at 
least to the probability of a war with Russia; and laid 
down the doctrine that every future aggression of the 
latter against the dominions of the Persian Shah was 
to be regarded in the light of a hostile demonstration 
against our Indian possessions. 

For some time there was little to disturb the even cur¬ 
rent of affairs, or to change the character of our relations 
towards the Persian state. It was the policy of Great 
Britain, by strengthening the military resources of the 
coimtry, to render Persia an insurmountable barrier 
{gainst the invasion of India by any European state. But 
by this time France had ceased to be formidable; and 



142 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


what was ostensibly defence against the powers of Europe, 
was, in reality, defence against the ambition of the Czar. 
It is doubtful, however, how far our policy was success¬ 
ful, We supplied the Persian army with English arms 
and English discipline; our officers drilled the native 
troops after the newest European fashions, and for some 
time the Crown Prince, Abbas Meerza, was delighted with 
his new plaything. But the best-informed authorities 
concur in opinion that the experiment was a failure; and 
that the real military strength of the empire was not 
augmented by this infusion of English discipline into the 
raw material of the Persian army.* It has been said, 
indeed, and with undeniable truth, by one who was him¬ 
self for many years among the instructors of the Persian 
army, that “ when Persia again came into collision with 
Russia in 1826, her means and power as a military nation 


^ * The exiflanation of this failure, 
j^iven hy the same experienced writer, 
IS worth quoting:—“ If it be remem¬ 
bered that when the system is af¬ 
fected with chronic paralysis, the at¬ 
tempt is vain to restore any particular 
member to a healthy action, it will be 
understood that, to a nation devoid 
of organisation in every other de¬ 
partment of government, a regular 
army was impossible. It thus hap¬ 
pened that, notwithstanding the ad¬ 
mirable material for soldiery which 
were offered by the hardy peasantry 
of Azerbijan, and the still hardier 
mountaineers of Kermanshah—not¬ 
withstanding the aptitude of the offi¬ 
cers to receive instruction—notwith¬ 
standing that a due portion of physi¬ 
cal courage appertained generally to 
the men—the disciplined forces of 
Persia, considered as an army, and 
for the purpose of national defence, 
were, from the epoch of their first 
creation, contemptible. Beyond drill 
and exercise, they never had anything 
in common with the regular armies 
of Europe and India. System was 
entirely wanting, whether in regard 


to pay, clothing, food, carriage, equi¬ 
page, commissariat, promotion, or 
command; and under a lath-and- 
plaster government like that of Per¬ 
sia, such must have been inevitably 
the case. At the same time, how¬ 
ever, a fiilse confidence arose of a 
most exaggerated and dangerous cha¬ 
racter; the resources of the coun¬ 
try were lavished on the army to an 
extent which grievously impoverished 
it at the time, and which has brought 
about at the present day a state of 
affairs that, in any other quarter of 
the world, would be termed a national 
bankruptcy; above all, the tribes— 
the chivalry of the empire, the forces 
with which Nadir overran the East 
from Bagdad to Delhi, and which, 
ever yielding but ever present, sur¬ 
rounded, under Aga Mahomed Khan, 
the Russian armies with a desert— 
were destroyed. Trulj then it may 
be said that in presenting Persia with 
the boon of a so-called regular army, 
in order to reclaim her from her un¬ 
lawful loves with France, we clothed 
her in the robe ofNessus.—[Ga/ctttta 
Review^ vol. xii.] 



THE OUTBREAK IN GEORGIA. 


143 


■were positively inferior to those which she possessed at 
the close of her former struggle.” 

From the date of the convention of Goolistan, up to 
the year 1826, there was at least an outward observ¬ 
ance of peace between the Russian and Persian states. 
The peace, however, was but a hollow one, destined 
soon to bo broken. The irritation of a disputed boun¬ 
dary had ever since the ratification of the treaty of 
Goolistan kept the two states in a restless, unsettled 
condition of ill-disguised animosity; and now it broke 
out at last into acts of mutual defiance.* It is hard 
to say whether Russia or Persia struck the first unpar¬ 
donable blow. The conduct of the former had boon in¬ 
solent and offensive—designed perhaps to goad the 
weaker state into open resentment, and to furnish a pre¬ 
text for new wars, to be followed by new acquisitions of 
Eastern territory. Both parties were prepared, by a 
long series of mutual provocations, for the now inevitable 
contest. It needed very little to bring them into open 
collision. 

In Georgia there had been frightful misrule. The 
officers of the Christian government had wantonly and 
insanely outraged the religious feelings of its Mussulman 
subjects; and now an outburst of fierce Mahomedan 
zeal in the adjoining kingdom declared how dangerous 
had been the interference. The Moollahs of Persia rose 
as one man. Under pain of everlasting infamy and 
everlasting perdition, they called upon the Shah to 
resent the insults which had been put upon their re¬ 
ligion. The mosques rang with excited appeals to the 
feelings of all true believers; and every effort was made 
by the excited ecclesiastics to stimulate the temporal 
authorities to the declaration of a holy war. 

The King, however, shrank from the contest. He 
had no ambition to face again in the field the formidable 



144 


LATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


European enemy who had so often scattered the flower 
of the Persian army, and trodden over the necks of the 
vanquished to the acquisition of new dominions. But 
the importunity of the Moollahs was not to be with¬ 
stood. He pledged himself that if Gokchah—one of 
the disputed tracts of country occupied by the Russians 
—were not restored, he would declare war against the 
Muscovite power. Convinced that the Russian Govern¬ 
ment would yield this strip of land, acquired as it was 
without justice, and retained without profit, the Shah 
believed that the condition was, in effect, an evasion 
of the pledge. The error was soon manifest. It was 
not in the nature of Russia to yield an inch of country 
righteously or unrighteously acquired—profitably or un- 
profitably retained. Gokchah was not restored. The 
Moollahs became more and more clamorous. The Shah 
was threatened with the forfeiture of all claims to para¬ 
disaical bliss—and the war was commenced. 

Excited by the appeals of the Moollahs, the Persians 
flung themselves into the contest with all the ardour 
and ferocity of men burning to wipe out in the blood of 
their enemies the insults and indignities that had been 
heaped upon them. They rose up and massacred all 
the isolated Russian garrisons and outposts in their 
reach. Abbas Meerza took the field at the head of an 
army of 40,000 men; and at the opening of the campaign 
the disputed territory of Gokchah, with Balikloo and 
Aberan, were recovered by their old masters. 

These successes, however, were but short-lived. The 
son of the Prince Royal, Mahomed Meerza, a youth more 
impetuous than skilful in the field, soon plunged the 
divisions he commanded into a sea of overwhelming dis¬ 
aster. The Prince himself, not more fortunate, was in 
the same month of September, 1826, beaten by the Rus¬ 
sian General, Paskewitch, in open battle, with a loss of 



TREATY OF TOOEKOMANCHAI. 


145 


1200 men. The war was resumed in the following 
spring, and continued throughout the year with varying 
success; but the close of it witnessed the triumph of the 
Russians. Erivan and Tabreez fell into their hands.* 
Enfeebled and dispirited, the Persians shrunk from 
the continuance of the stru^le. The intervention of 
Great Britain was gladly accepted, and Persia submitted 
to the terms of a humiliating peace. 

After some protracted negotiations, a new treaty, 
superseding that of Goolistan, was signed at Toorkoman- 
chai, in February, 1828, by General Paskewitch and 
Abbas Meerza. By this treaty, Persia ceded to the Czar 
the Khanates of Erivan and Nakhichevan; and consented 
to the recognition of the line of frontier dictated by the 
Russian Government. The frontier line between the 
two empires, laid down in the fourth article of the 
treaty, commenced at the first of the Ottoman States 
nearest to the little Ararat mountain, which it crossed 
to the south of the Lower Karasson, following the course 
of that river till it falls into the Araxes opposite She- 
rour, and then extending along the latter river as far as 
Abbas-Abad.f The line of frontier then followed the 
course of the Araxes to a point twenty-one wersts be¬ 
yond the ford of Ledl-boulak, when it struck off in a 
straight line drawn across the plain of Moghan, to the 

^ Tho words of the llussian mani- top of Ararat, and penetrating fur- 
festo, announcing these events, are ther and further into the interior of 
worth quoting:—“ Obliged to pursue Persia, it occupied Tabreez itself, with 
the enemy through a country with- the country aepending on it. The 
out roads, laid waste by the troops Khanate of Erivan, on both sides of 
which were to have defended it; often the Araxes, and the Khanate of 
opposed by nature itself; exposed to Nakhichevan, a part of the ancient 
the burning sun of summer, and the Armenia, fell into the hands of the 
rigour of winter; our brave army, conquerors.” 

after unparalleled efforts, succeeded t This fortress, together with the 
in conquering Erivan, which was re- surrounding country, to the extent 
puted impregnable. It passed the of three wersts and a half, was ceded 
Araxes, planted its standards on the to Russia. 

VOL. X. L 



146 


LATBB EVENTS IN PBB8U. 


bed of the river Bolgaron, twenty-one wersts above the 
point of confluence of the two Rivers Adinabazar and 
Sarakamyshe; then passing over the summit of Ojil- 
koir and other mountains, it extended to the source of 
the River Atara, and followed the stream until it falls 
into the Caspian Sea. 

Such was the boundary laid down in the treaty of 
Toorkomanchai. The other articles granted an indemnity 
to Russia of eighty millions of roubles for the expenses of 
the war—yielded to that state the sole right of having 
armed vessels on the Caspian—recognised the inheritance 
of Abbas Meerza—and granted an amnesty to the inhabi¬ 
tants of Aderbijan. To Persia this treaty was deeply 
humiliating; but the manifestoes of the Emperor boasted 
of its moderation, and declared that its ends were merely 
the preservation of peace and the promotion of commerce. 
“ For us,” it was said, “ one of the principal results of 
this peace consists in the security which it giv^s to one 
part of our frontiers. It is solely in this light that we 
consider the utility of the new countries which Russia 
has just acquired. Every part of our conquests that did 
not tend to this end was restored by our orders, as soon 
as the conditions of the treaty were published. Other 
essential advantages result from the stipulations in favour 
of commerce, the free development of which we have 
always considered as one of the most influential causes 
of industry, and at the same time as the true guarantee 
of solid peace, founded on an entire reciprocity of wants 
and interests.” 

The hypocrisy of all this is too transparent to call for 
comment. Russia had thus extended her frontier largely 
to the eastward; and England had not interfered to pre¬ 
vent the completion of an act, by which it has been said 
that Persia was delivered, bound hand and foot, to the 



THE QUESTION OF AGfOEESSION. 


147 


Court of St. Petersbuigh.”* How far the British Go- 
verhment was bound to assist Persia in the war of 
1826-27, still remains an open question. The treaty of 
Teheran pledged Great Britain, in the event of a war 
between Persia and any European State, either to 
send an army from India to assist the Shah, or to grant 
an annual subsidy of 200,000 tomauns during the con¬ 
tinuance of the war j but this article was saddled with 
the condition that the war was to be one in nowise pro¬ 
voked by any act of Persian aggression. A question, 
therefore, arose, as to whether the war of 1826-27 was 
provoked by the aggressions of Persia or of Russia. 
Each party pronounced the other the aggressor. The Per¬ 
sian Government maintained tliat the unjust and violent 
occupation of Gokchah by a Russian force furnished a 
legitimate casus belli; but the Russian manifestoes de¬ 
clared that, “ in the midst of friendly negotiations, and 
when positive assurances gave us the hope of preserving 
the relations of good neighbourhood with Persia, the 
tranquillity of our people was disturbed on the frontiers 
of the Caucasus, and a sudden invasion violated the ter¬ 
ritory of the Emperor in contempt of solemn treaties.” 
Russian statesmen have never been wanting in ability to 
make the worse appear the better reason. Whatever 
overt acts may been committed, it is certain that the 
real provocation came not from the Mahomedan, but 
from the Christian State. The backwardness of Eng¬ 
land at such a time was of dubious honesty, as it doubt¬ 
less was of dubious expediency. A more forward policy 
might have been more successful. Had Russia been as 
well disposed to neutrality as Great Britain, it would 
have been to the advantage of the latter to maintain the 
most friendly relations with the Muscovite State; but 


* Sir Harford Jones* 
L 2 



148 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


the unscrupulousness of Russia placed England at a dis¬ 
advantage. The game was one in which the more 
honourable player was sure to be foully beaten. Russia 
made new acquisitions of Eastern territory, and England 
looked idly on. 

It is doubtful whether our statesmen were ever clearly 
satisfied that, in refusing the subsidy, .they acted up 
strictly to the spirit of the treaty of Teheran.* Certain it 
is, that the claim of the Persian Government, at this time, 
awakened our British diplomatists to a re-consideration 
of those subsidy articles which had involved, and might 
again involve us in difliculties, not only of an embar¬ 
rassing, but of a somewhat discreditable, character. It 
was desirable to get rid of these perplexing stipulations. 
The time was opportune; the occasion was at hand. 
The large indemnity insisted upon by Russia drove the 


* A writer in the Foreign Quar^ 
terly Revieu\ who, if not Sir John 
M‘NeiIl himself, has unblushingly ap¬ 
propriated, without acknowledgment, 
a large portion of the pamphlet on tJie 
“ Progress and present position of 
Bussia in the East,” published some 
three or four years before, says: 
“ Assuredly Prince Abbas Meerza 
relied strongly upon this (the 4th 
article of the treaty), and without it 
would never have engaged in the con¬ 
test he provoked; we are bound in 
justice to say, and we say it on good 
authority, wantonly and in defiance 
of the feelings of the Persian Govern¬ 
ment and King. But though Persia 
had fairly executed all her share of 
the treaty in question, the English 
minister, when called upon to fulfil 
this condition, hesitated, hung back, 
negotiated, and delayed under every 
possible pretext, while he could not 
deny the faith or the claim of Persia. 
It was clear, however, to all the par¬ 
ties that Mr. Canning only sought a 
means of escaping the fulfilment of 
the stipulations. He was hard pressed 


by the reluctance to engaging in a 
war with Bussia, represented as too 
probable by the minister of that power 
at the British Court, and by the dex¬ 
terity of a first-rate female diploma¬ 
tist, to whom, indeed, the manage¬ 
ment of the matter was fairly confided 
by the Bussian Court, and whose in¬ 
fluence was fatally effective in this 
and the Turkish questions. In 
affecting to adhere simply to the 
policy of his predecessors, Mr. Can¬ 
ning forgot the immense difference 
and disgrace of refusing the fulfilment 
only at the time when, and because, 
the need was urgent. He could not 
foresee that Persia must become, if 
further humbled, the tool of Bussia 
against the East; if he had, no earthly 
power would have balanced against 
his duty. He did not even per¬ 
ceive that the crisis to Persia had 
arrived; and contented himself with 
a double sacrifice to vanity, in as¬ 
suming to arbitrate against a sove¬ 
reign prince, and hearing his praises 
resounded by the lips of successful 
beauty.” 



THE REIGN OF INTIMIDATION. 


149 


Persian financiers to extremities, and reduced them to 
all kinds of petty shifts to meet the extortionate demand. 
In this conjuncture, England, like an expert money¬ 
lender, was ready to take advantage of the embarrass¬ 
ments of the Persian State, and to make its own terms 
with the impoverished creditor of the unyielding Mus¬ 
covite. The bargain was struck. Sir John Macdonald, 
on the part of the British Government, passed a bond 
to the Shah for 250,000 tomauns as the price of the 
amendment of the subsidy articles, and subsequently 
obtained the required erasures by the payment of four- 
fifths of the amount. 

A season of outward tranquillity succeeded the com¬ 
pletion of the treaty of Toorkomanchai. But the great 
northern power did not slumber. Though, during 
those years it added little outwardly to its dominions, 
it was obtaining more and more that great moral as¬ 
cendancy which, perhaps, was better calculated to secure 
its ends than an ostentatious extension of territory. The 
game of quiet intimidation was now to be tried. The 
experiment succeeded to the utmost. Obtaining such 
an ascendancy over its counsels as enabled it to induce 
Persia to transgress its legitimate boundaries, and adopt 
an aggressive policy towards the countries on its east¬ 
ern frontier, the European power overawed its Asiatic 
neighbour. It was the object of Eussia to use the re¬ 
sources of the Persian State in furtherance of its own 
ends, without overtly taking possession of them, and thus 
bringing itself into collision with other powers. To 
secure this ascendancy it was necessary to assume a com¬ 
manding—indeed, an offensive—attitude of superiority, 
and, whilst abstaining from acts of aggression, sufficiently 
momentous to awaken the jealousy of other European 
States, to keep alive the apprehensions of its Eastern 
neighbour by an irritating, dictatorial demeanour, often 



150 


LATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


implying threats of renewed hostility. Conscious of 
weakness, Persia yielded to the influence thus sought to 
be established; and in due course became, as was in¬ 
tended, a facile tool in the hands of the Eussian minister. 

Such, briefly stated in a few sentences, is the history 
of the relations subsisting between Russia and Persia 
since the treaty of Toorkomanchai. It need not be added 
that, during this time, English influence declined sensibly 
at the Persian Court. Little pains, indeed, were taken 
to preserve it, until it became apparent that the en¬ 
croachments of Persia upon the countries between its 
frontier and India, instigated as they were by the Rus¬ 
sian Government, were calculated to threaten the secu¬ 
rity of our Indian Empire. In 18.S1, Abbas Meerza, the 
Prince Royal, against the advice of the Shah, determined 
on sending an army into Khorassan; and then projected 
an expedition against Khiva, for the chastisement of that 
marauding state, which had so often invaded the Persian 
frontier, and carried off into slavery so many Persian 
subjects. The Russian agent encouraged, if he did not 
actually instigate, these movements. It was said, in¬ 
deed, that the active co-operation of Russia would soon 
be apparent in both enterprises—^that it was her policy 
to seek the assistance of Persia in a movement upon 
Khiva, and to aid that state in the subjugation of Kho¬ 
rassan. Not only in Khorassan itself, in Afghanistan 
and Toorkistan, but in the bazaars of Bombay,* was the 

* “ A letter has been received in the echo of a lie—but ‘ coming events 
town from Persia, which has excited cast their shadows before,’ and many 
a good deal of talk in the bazaar, of these rumours, combined with the 
and the substance of which we give tone which now and then breaks out 
merely as a rumour of the day. It in the Russian journals, show but too 
states that Prince Abbas Meerza has well the turn of men’s thoughts and 
ordered 30,000 men to march upon wishes, and should warn us to be pre- 
Herat, and that this movement is pared .”—\_Bomhay Gazette^ August 25, 
onl^ preparatory to an advance upon 1832.] About the same time, Dr. 
India in conjunction with Russia. Wolff, who was then travelling in 
This is probaoly a mere rumour or Central Asia, wrote: It is remark- 



THE KHORA88AH EXPEDITION. 


151 


advance of tke confederate armies of the two states into 
Khorassan, and thence upon Herat and India, generally 
discussed and believed. Such, indeed, at this time, was 
the ascendancy of Muscovite influence over the mind of 
Abbas Meerza, that it was reported he had married a 
Russian Princess, and adopted the Christian faith. 

There was a British officer in the Persian camp. Cap¬ 
tain Shee, whose interference brought about the post¬ 
ponement of the Khivan expedition, and in the follow¬ 
ing year it was determined to abandon the Oosbeg enter¬ 
prise for the time, and to punish the olTending Aighans. 
An expedition against Herat Avas then planned; but 
British interference, this time directed by the sagacity 
of Mr. M‘Neill, was again successfully put forth, and 
the movement Avas suspended. In the mean while the 
Khorassan campaign was prosecuted with vigour. The 
arms of Abbas Meerza were triumphant. The inde¬ 
pendence which the province had endeavoured to assert 
could not be maintained in the face of the battalions 
of the Prince Royal, aided, as they were, by European 
courage and skill.* Ameerabad and Koochan fell be- 


able that there is a current belief, not 
only throughout Khorassan, but, as I 
found it afterwards, throughout Toor- 
kistan even to Caubul, that Abbas 
Meerza had married a Russian Prin¬ 
cess, and adopted the Russian reli¬ 
gion ; and that <50,000 Russians would 
come to Khorassan by waj of Khiva, 
and assist Abbas Meerza in conquer¬ 
ing Khorassan. So much is true 
that Russia has written to Futteh 
Ali Shah, offering him 5000 men for 
taking Khorassan, and putting down 
the cni^w—i.c., plundering system 
of the Toorkomans; and 1 hope to 
prove it to a certainty that Russia 
will be very soon the mistress of 
Khiva, under the pretext that the 
King of Khiva has 8000 Russian 
slaves, whilst I know by the most 


authentic reports that there arc not 
above 200 Russian slaves and 60 
Russian deserters at Khiva.”—[CaZ- 
evUa Christian Observer^ September^ 
1832.] It was stated at one time 
that Russia had consented to yield 
her claim to the balance of the indem¬ 
nity money remaining then due by 
Persia, on condition of the latter join¬ 
ing in an expedition against Khiva. 

* Abbas Meerza gratefully ac¬ 
knowledged the assistance he re¬ 
ceived from Captain Shee, Mr. Beek, 
and M. Berowsai, the Pole, of whom 
subsequent mention will be made. 
At the siege of Koochan a sergeant 
of the Bombay Horse Artillery, 
named Washbrook, directed the mor¬ 
tar batteries, which mainly conduced 
to the reduction of the place. 



152 


lATEB EVENTS IN PERSIA, 


fore him. The recusant chiefs made their submission; 
and before the close of 1832 all the objects of the cam¬ 
paign had been accomplished, and the subjugation of 
Khorassan was complete. 

Emboldened by success, Abbas Meerza now contem¬ 
plated new enterprises. The project of an expedition 
against Khiva, to be subsequently extended to Bokhara, 
was then revived; and the reduction of Herat, a design 
favoured alike by the ambition of the Prince and the 
insidious policy of Kussia, was again brought under re¬ 
view. Herat, which lies on the western frontier of 
Afghanistan, had, on the partition of the Douranee Em¬ 
pire among the Barukzye Sirdars, afforded an asylum 
to Shah Mahmoud, and had ever since remained in the 
hands of that Prince aud Kamran, his successor. To 
subjugate this tract of country was to open the gate to 
further Eastern conquest. The Kussian agent was eager, 
therefore, to promote a movement which squared so well 
with the designs of his own Government. The expe¬ 
dition against Herat was no longer to be postponed. In 
1833 it was actually put into execution; and the com¬ 
mand of the invading force was entrusted to Mahomed 
Meerza, the son of the Prince Eoyal. 

In the autumn of 1833 Abbas Meerza died at Meshed. 
Arrested in the prosecution of the siege of Herat by 
the tidings of his father’s death, Mahomed Meerza re¬ 
turned, in no enviable frame of mind, and withdrew 
within the Persian frontier. There were some doubts, 
too, at that time, regarding the succession; but these 
were soon set at rest. The Shah nominated Mahomed 
Meerza as his heir, and both the British and the Russian 
Governments gave their cordial assent to the choice. 

A few months afterwards, in the autumn of 1834, 
Futteh Ali Shah died at Ispahan; and Mahomed Meerza 
ascended the throne. The change was not favorable to 



DEATH OF FUTTEH ALI SHAH. 


153 


British interests. Futteh Ali had ever been our friend. 
From him the Russians had received little encouragement 
—^but his son and his grandson had thrown themselves 
into the arms of the Muscovite; and now that the latter 
had ascended the throne, there was every prospect of 
Russian influence becoming paramount at the Persian 
Court. Great Britain had done for the young King all that 
he required. He believed that those good oflices, which 
mainly had secured for him the succession to the throne, 
were employed only for the purpose of counteracting 
the dreaded ascendancy of Russia; and he was in no 
humour to display his gratitude towards a nation, the 
character and the resources of which he so little under¬ 
stood. 

The thought of breaking down the monarchy of Herat 
still held possession of the mind of Mahomed Shah. 
Ever since, in the autumn of 1833, he had been arrested 
in his first expedition against that place by the death of 
his father, he had brooded over his disappointment, and 
meditated a renewal of the hostile undertaking. It is 
said, indeed, that he swore a solemn oath, sooner or later 
to retrace his steps to the eastward, and to wipe out his 
disgrace in Afghan blood. Seated on the throne of his 
grandfather, and upheld there by British influence, he 
dreamt of Eastern conquest, openly talked of it in 
durbar, and delighted to dwell upon his prospective 
triumphs over Oosbeg and Afghan hosts. He needed 
little prompting to push his armies across the Eastern 
frontier. But there were promptings from without as 
well as from within. Russia was at the elbow of the 
Shah, ever ready to drop tempting suggestions into the 
young monarch’s ear, and to keep alive within him the 
fire both of his ambition and his revenge. It was the 
policy of Russia at this time to compensate for its own en¬ 
croachments on the Western frontier of Persia, by help- 



154 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


ing that country to new acquisitions of territory on the 
East. Mahomed Shah had little real love for his great 
Northern neighbour; but he profoundly reverenced the 
gigantic power of the Czar, and, mistaking quiescence 
for weakness, aggressiveness for strength, contrasted 
the resources of Russia and England in a manner very 
unfavorable to the pretensions of the latter.* The 
enormous wings of the Russian eagle seemed to over¬ 
shadow the whole land of Iran; and the Shah was 
eager that they should be stretched over him in pro¬ 
tection, and not descend upon him in wrath. He knew, 
by bitter experience, Avhat was the might of the Nor¬ 
thern army; he had fled before the Cossacks on the field 
of Ganjah, and narrowly escaped with his life. But 
of the English he knew little more than that some 
courteous and accomplished gentlemen were drilling his 
native troops, and doing their best to create for, him a 
well-disciplined army out of the raw materials placed 
at their disposal. 

And so it happened, that in 1835, when Lord Pal¬ 
merston wrote to Mr. Ellis, who had been sent out from 
London on a mission of condolence and congratulation 
to Mahomed Shah, that he was “ especially to warn the 
Persian Government against allowing themselves to be 
pushed on to make war against the Afghans,” he could 
obtain no more satisfactory reply from the ambassador 
than that the Shah had “very extended schemes of 
conquest in the direction of A%hanistan.” “ In common 

* Nor did he scruple outwardly to the British ambassador.—J2e- 
cvince the relative degrees of respect cords. ] This incident, however, 
which he entertained for the two wLich created some sensation in 
nations in the persons of their repre- the Calcutta Council-Chamber, may 
sentatives. On one occasion, for have had its source in the private 
example, when the Kussian envoy, feelings of Meerza Massoud, the 
Count Simonich, was returning from foreign minister, who, having long 
an excursion, the foreign minister resided at St. Petersburgh, was 
went out to meet him, but demurred a mere creature of the Russian 
to paying the same compliment to State. 



AMBITIOUS PROJECTS OF MAHOMED SHAH. 155 

with all his subjects,” added Mr. Ellis, “ he conceives that 
the right of sovereignty over Herat and Candahar is as 
complete now as in the reign of the Sufiarean d 3 masty.” 
“ This pretension,” it was added, “ is much sustained by 
the success of his father Abbas Meerza, in the Khorassan 
campaign, and the suggestions of General Berowski.”* 
The Persian ministers declared that the rightful do¬ 
minions of the Shah extended to Ghuzni; that an expe¬ 
dition against Herat would be undertaken in the follow¬ 
ing spring; that the capture of Candahar would shortly 
follow; and that then he would launch into new fields 
of enterprise among the Beloochees and the Toorkomans. 

The Heratee campaign, however, was the most 
cherished, as it was the proximate of all these under¬ 
takings ; and the Eussian minister was ever ready with 
suggestions for the immediate march of the Persian army, 
lest the British Government should step in to discourage 
the undertaking, or take measures to thwart its success. 
It was urged, too, that the expedition would be rendered 
more diificult by delay, and at a later period more ex¬ 
tensive military resources would be required to prosecute 
the war with success. 

The British minister watched all these proceedings 
with interest and anxiety. It seemed to him, that 
whilst the restlessness of Russian intrigue was con¬ 
stantly threatening to educe a state of things in Cen¬ 
tral Asia, embarrassing to the British-Indian Govern¬ 
ment, it became the British, on their parts, to make a 
counter-move that would keep her dangerous ally fairly 
in check. It had been seen, long before this, that the 
experiment of drilling the Persian army was nothing 
better than an expensive failure. It had, to some ex¬ 
tent, the effect of excluding other European disciplina- 

* Mr. Ellis to Lord Palmeraton: lisTied Papers relating to Persia and 
Teheran^ November 13, 1835.—[Pm6- Afghanistan.'] 



156 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


rians, but, beyond this, it did not increase our influence 
in the Persian dominions, or the security of our Indian 
frontier. It was advisable, therefore, to do something 
more. Never doubting that the network of Russian in¬ 
trigue would soon extend itself beyond the Persian fron¬ 
tier, it appeared to the British minister expedient that 
we should anticipate the designs of Russia in Afghanis¬ 
tan by sending an envoy to Dost Mahomed, and offering 
to despatch British officers to Caubul to discipline the 
Ameer’s army.* It was obvious that a decided move¬ 
ment was becoming every day more and more necessary. 
A mere conciliatory course of policy, dictating oflers of 
quiet intervention, was found of no avail in such a con¬ 
juncture. The British minister offered to use his in¬ 
fluence with Shah Kamran to induce that ruler to ab¬ 
stain from the commission of those acts which had 
offended the Shah-in-Shah of Persia, but the offer had 
been coldly received. It was evident that the ' aggres¬ 
sive designs of Mahomed Shah were largely promoted 
by the Russian minister, and that no peaceful mediation 
would induce the young King to abandon his projects 
of Eastern conquest. 

In the spring of 1836 the plan of the campaign was 
laid down, but it was doubtful whether the Shah pos¬ 
sessed the means of immediately reducing it to practice. 
An unhappy expedition against the Toorkomans in the 
course of the summer somewhat cooled the military 
ardour of the Shah; and before the year had worn to a 
close he opened negotiations with Herat. A gallant 
answer was sent back to his demands. “ You demand 
hostages,” said the Heratee minister. “ We gave no 
hostages during the reign of the late Shah; and we will 


• The officer whom he proposed to rank of Major in Persi^ and who had 
send was Lieutenant Todd, of the long been employed in instructing the 
Bengal Artillery, who held the local artillery of the Persian army. 



THE HERATEE CAMPAIGN. 


157 


give none now. You denaand a present; we are ready 
to give as large a present as we can afford. If the Shah 
is not satisfied with this, and is determined to attack us, 
let him come. We will defend our city as long as we 
can; and if we are driven from it, it will of course re¬ 
main in your hands till we can find means to take it 
back again from you.” The Shah was, at this time, 
on the way back to his capital. He at once summoned 
a council of war, laid the offensive answer of Yar Ma¬ 
homed before the chief ofllicers who attended him in 
his tent; and sought their advice. The result was a 
determination to return to Teheran for the winter 
months, and to commence the expedition against Herat 
early in the following spring.* 

But the spring of 1837, like the spring of 1836, passed 
by, and the expedition was not commenced. There ap¬ 
peared to be some hope of bringing matters to an issue 
by peaceable negotiation. But the demands of Persia 
involved the sacrifice of the independence of the state of 
Herat, and Shah Kamran could not be persuaded to reduce 
himself to a state of vassalage. He had great respect for 
the Shah of Persia he said; but he could not acknow¬ 
ledge him as his sovereign—could not coin money or 
suffer prayers to be read in his name. He consented 
that hostages should reside for two years at Meshed as 
guarantees for the fulfilment of the terms of the pro¬ 
posed treaty. He consented that certain sums of money, 
in the way of tribute, should be paid annually to the 
Persian Government. He consented to furnish troops 
in aid of any Persian expedition against Toorkistan. 
He consented to restrain his subjects from marauding, 

* The Russian minister had urged voured to persuade the Shah not 
the King to undertake a winter cam- to proceed against Herat at all; 
paign against Herat. But Count and Simonich told the same story 
Nesselrode always resolutely mmn- in his letters to his own govern- 
tained that Simonich had endea- ment. 



158 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


and plundering, and capturing slaves on the Persian 
frontier. But he could not consent to relinquish the 
title of Shah, and acknowledge himself a dependent of 
Persia. The propositions submitted by Herat were 
moderate and reasonable; they called for nothing from 
the Persian Government beyond a pledge of non-inter¬ 
ference in the internal affairs of Herat. But the preten¬ 
sions of the King of Kings to the sovereignty of Western 
Afghanistan were not to be sobered down even by the 
representations of the British minister, who endeavoured 
to reconcile conflicting interests, and to cement a friendly 
alliance between the contending parties. Mahomed 
Shah was determined cither to break down the indepen¬ 
dence of Herat, or to batter down its walls. So the 
enterprise long projected—long brooded over, was un¬ 
dertaken in earnest at last.* 

The Barukzye Sirdars of Afghanistan watched the 
advance of the Persians with evident satisfaction. They 
had never ceased to see in Shah Kamran the murderer 
of Futteh Khan. They had never ceased to regard 
with impatience and irritation that last remnant of 
Suddozye supremacy which marred the completeness of 
Barukzye rule, and at times even threatened to extend 
itself towards the East in an effort to restore the old 
dynasty of the successors of Ahmed Shah. The ap¬ 
proach of the Persian army seemed now to promise at 


* Though we need not seek the 
causes of this expedition in anything 
either nearer or more remote than 
the ambition of the young Shah and 
the intrigues of the Bussian Govern¬ 
ment, a pretext was put forth by or 
for I'ersia of a more plausible kind. 
It was urged that the Heratees had 
carried off and sold into slavery 
the subjects of the Persian Shah. 
There is no doubt of the fact. But 
it was never put prominently for¬ 


ward by the Shah, who always urged 
that Herat had no right to be 
independent. Another pretext, but 
k weak one, for undertaking the 
war was also alleged. Hulakoo, 
son of the Prince of Kerman, after 
his father wa.s taken and blinded, 
and Kerman occupied by the Shah’s 
troops, fled to Herat, and from 
thence endeavoured to excite dis¬ 
turbances in Kain, Khaf, and Eastern 
Kerman. 



INTRIGUES OF THE CANDAHAB SIRDARS. 


159 


least the overthrow of Shah Kamran; and the Gandahar 
brothers looked eagerly for the transfer of the Heratee 
principality to themselves.* 

To cement the alliance with Mahomed Shah, and to 
secure the most advantageous terms for himself and his 
brothers, Kohun Dil Khan determined to send one of 
his own sons to the Persian camp. Dost Mahomed dis¬ 
approved of the movement. “ If you look upon me,” 
he wrote to the Gandahar chief, “ as greater than your¬ 
self, do not send your son to Persia. In the event of 
your not attending to my advice, such circumstances will 
happen as will make you bite the finger of repentance.” 
But the Gandahar chief was not to be turned from his 
purpose by the remonstrances of the Ameer. The bait 
held out by Persia was too tempting to be resisted; and 
Russia was standing by, ready to guarantee the alluring 
promises of Mahomed Shah. M. Goutte, the Russian 
agent with the Persian army, wrote letters of encourage¬ 
ment to Kohun Dil Khan, and General Berowski en¬ 
dorsed the flattering assurances they contained. “ It is 
better,” wrote the former, “ to despatch Omar Khan with¬ 
out apprehension, and I will write to the Persian Go¬ 
vernment to remove all apprehensions at your sending 
your son. He will be treated with great distinction by 
the Shah and his nobles.” “ Nothing but good,” said 
the latter, “ will result from this your connexion with 
the Shah ; so much good, indeed, that I can not put it 
to paper. Be convinced that your serving the Shah will 
turn out every way to your advantage.” The Gandahar 
chief was easily convinced. He had fixed his eye upon 

♦ Kamran had threatened Canda- from Dost Mahomed, had sent an 
har on more than one occasion; and emissary to the Bombay Government, 
at the end of 1835 Mr. Masson re- offering to cede their countir to the 
ported to the Supreme Government British!—[il/iS. Records,1 I merely 
that the Sirdars of that place, de- give this as a report sent down by the 
spairing of obtaining any assistance English news-writer. 



160 


LATER EVENTS IN PERSIA. 


Herat, and he fell readily into an alliance which he 
hoped would place that principality securely in his 
hands. 

With very different feelings Dost Mahomed Khan 
viewed the advance of the Persian army. He wished 
Mahomed Shah to assist him in a religious war against 
the Sikhs; but even an alliance based upon these grounds 
he was willing to forego, if he could secure the friendly 
offices of the British. A new actor was by this time 
upon the scene, and new schemes of policy were begin¬ 
ning to unfold themselves before the Ameer. Little 
did he think, when he received with honour, and took 
friendly counsel with a British officer sent to his Court 
to discuss matters of commerce, how soon that officer 
would again enter the Afghan capital accompanied by a 
British army. Burnes appeared at Caubul—Mahomed 
Shah at Herat; and the seeds of the Afghan war were 
sown. 


The various treaties referred to in this Introductory Book will he found 
in an Appendix at the end of the I'olume, 



THE “ COMMERCIAE” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 161 


BOOK II. 
[ 1835 — 1838 .] 


CHAPTER I. 

[1835—1837.] 

The Commercial Mission to Caubul—Arrival of Lord Auckland—His Cha¬ 
racter—Alexander Burnes—His Travels in Central Asia—Deputation 
to tlie Court of Dost IVIaliomed—Reception by the Ameer—Negotiations 
at Caubul—Failure of the Mission. 

In the autumn of 1835 Lord Auckland was appointed 
Governor-General of India. The Whigs had just re¬ 
turned to power. The brief Tory interregnum which 
had preceded the restoration to office of Lord Melbourne 
and his associates had been marked by the appointment 
to the Indian Viccroyship of Lord Heytesbury—a noble¬ 
man of high character and approved diplomatic skill. 
His official friends boasted largely of the excellence of 
the clioice, and prophesied that tlie most beneficial re¬ 
sults would flow from his government of I^jdia. But 
nothing of the Governor-General ever devolved upon him, 
except the outfit. The Whig ministers cancelled the ap¬ 
pointment, and, after a time, selected Lord Auckland to 
fill the rudely-vacated place. 

The appointment occasioned some surprise, but raised 
little indignation. In India, the current knowledge of 
Lord Auckland and his antecedents was of the smallest 

VOL. T. M 



162 THE “ COMMEBCIAI-” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 


possible amount. In England, the general impression 
was, that if not a brilliant or a profound man, he was at 
least a safe one. The son of a Tory lawyer, who had 
been one of the most' consistent supporters of Pitt’s 
administration, and had been raised to the peerage in 
reward for his services, he was generally regarded as one 
of the steadiest and most moderate of the Whig party. 
As an industrious and conscientious public servant, 
assiduous in his attention to business, and anxious to 
compensate by increased application for the deficiencies 
of native genius, he was held in good esteem by his 
colleagues and respected by all who had official inter¬ 
course with him. India did not, it was supposed, at 
that time demand for the administration of her affairs 
any large amount of masculine vigour or fertility of re¬ 
source. The country was in a state of profound tran¬ 
quillity. The treasury was overfiowing. The quietest 
ruler was likely to be the best. There was abundant 
work to be done; but it was all of a pacific character. 
In entrusting that work to Lord Auckland, the ministry 
thought that they entrusted it to safe hands. The new 
Governor-General had everything to learn; but he was a 
man of methodical habits of business, apt in the acquisition 
of knowledge, with no overweening confidence in himself, 
and no arrogant contempt for others. His ambition was 
all of the most laudable kind. It was an ambition to 
do good. When he declared, at the farewell banquet 
given to him by the Directors of the East-India Com¬ 
pany, that he “ looked with exultation to the new pros¬ 
pects opening out before him, affording him an opportu¬ 
nity of doing good to his fellow-creatures—of promoting 
education and knowledge—of improving the adminis¬ 
tration of justice in India—of extending the blessings of 
good government and happiness to millions in India,” it 
was felt by all who knew him that the words were 



CHABACTEE of LOBD AUCKLAND. 


163 


uttered with a grave sincerity, and expressed the genuine 
aspirations of the man. 

Nor did the early days of his ^vemment disappoint 
the expectations of those who had looked for a pains¬ 
taking, laborious administrator, zealous in the prosecu¬ 
tion of measures calculated to develop the resources of 
the countiy, and to advance the happiness of the people. 
It appeared, indeed, that with something less of the un¬ 
compromising energy and self-den3dng honesty of Lord 
William Bentinck, but with an equal purity of bene¬ 
volence, he was treading in the footsteps of his prede¬ 
cessor. The promotion of native education, and the 
expansion of the industrial resources of the country, 
were pursuits far more congenial to his nature than the 
assembling of armies and the invasion of empires. He 
had no taste for the din and confusion of the camp; 
no appetite for foreign conquest. Quiet and unobtru¬ 
sive in his manners, of a somewhat cold and impassive 
temperament, and altogether of a reserved and retiring 
nature, he was not one to court excitement or to desire 
notoriety. He would fain have passed his allotted years 
of office in the prosecution of those small measures of 
domestic reform which, individually, attract little atten¬ 
tion, but, in the aggregate, affect mightily the happiness 
of the people. He belonged, indeed, to that respectable 
class of governors whose merits are not sufficiently pro¬ 
minent to demand ample recognition by their cotempo¬ 
raries, but whose noiseless, unapplauded achievements 
entitle them to the praise of the historian and the grati¬ 
tude of after-ages. 

It was not possible, however intently his mind might 
have been fixed upon the details of internal administra¬ 
tion, that he should have wholly disregarded the a^res- 
sive designs of Persia and the obvious intrigues of the 
Russian Government. The letters written from lime to 

M 2 



164 THE “ commercial” mission to caubul. 

time by the British minister at the Persian Court were 
read at first, in the Calcutta Council-Chamber, with 
a vague interest rather than with any excited appre¬ 
hensions. It was little anticipated that a British 
army would soon be encamped before the capital of 
Afghanistan, but it was plain that events were taking 
shape in Central Asia over which the British-Indian 
Government could not afford to slumber. At all events, 
it was necessary in such a conjuncture to get together 
some little body of facts, to acquire some historical and 
geographical information relating to the countries lying 
between the Indian frontier and the eastern boundaries 
of the Russian Empire. Secretaries then began to write 
“ notes,” and members of Council to study them. Sum¬ 
maries of political events, genealogical trees, tables of 
routes and distances, were all in great requisition during 
the first years of Lord Auckland’s administration. 

The printed works of Elphinstone,Conolly, and Burnes, 
of Malcolm and Fraser, were to be seen on the breakfast- 
tables of our Indian statesmen, or in their hands as they 
wore driven to Council. Then came Sir John M‘Neiirs 
startling pamphlet on the “Progress and Present Posi¬ 
tion of Russia in the East.” M‘Neill, Urquhart, and 
others were writing up the Eastern question at home; 
reviewers and pamphleteers of smaller note were rush¬ 
ing into the field with their small collections of facts 
and arguments. It was demonstrated past contradiction, 
that if Russia were not herself advancing by stealthy 
steps towards India, she was pushing Persia forward in 
the same easterly direction. If all this was not very 
alarming, it was, at least, worth thinking about. It was 
plainly the duty of Indian statesmen to acquaint them¬ 
selves with the politics of Central Asia, and the geo¬ 
graphy of the countries through which the invasion of 
India must be attempted. It was only right that they 



CORRESPONDENCE WITH DOST MAHOMED. 


165 


should have been seen tracing on incorrect maps the 
march of a Russian army from St. Petersburgh to Cal¬ 
cutta, by every possible and impossible route, now floun¬ 
dering among the inhospitable steppes, now parching 
on the desert of Merve. The Russian army might not 
come at last; but it was clearly the duty of an Indian 
statesman to know how it would endeavour to come. 

It was in the spring of 1836 that Dost Mahomed 
addressed a letter of congratulation to Lord Auckland 
on his assumption of the office of Governor-General. 
“ The field of my hopes,” he wrote, “ which had before 
been chilled by the cold blast of wintry times, has by 
the happy tidings of your Lordship’s arrival become the 
envy of the garden of paradise.” Then adverting to the 
unhappy state of his relations with the Sikhs, he said: 
“ The late transactions in this quarter, the conduct of 
reckless and misguided Sikhs, and their breach of treaty, 
are well known to your Lordship. Communicate to me 
whatever may suggest itself to your wisdom for the 
settlement of the aflairs of this country, that it may 
serve as a rule for my guidance. I hope,” said the 
Ameer, in conclusion, ‘‘ that your Lordship will consider 
me and my country as your own;” but he little thought 
how in effect this Oriental compliment would be accepted 
as a solemn invitation, and the hope be literally fulfilled. 
Three years afterwards Lord Auckland, considering Dost 
Mahomed’s country his own, had given it away to Shah 
Soqjah. 

To this friendly letter the Governor-General returned 
a friendly reply. It was his wish, he said, that the 
Afghans “should be a flourishing and united nation;” 
it was his wish, too, that Dost Mahomed should encourage 
a just idea of the expediency of promoting the navigation 
of the Indus. He hinted that he should probably soon 
“ depute some gentlemen” to the Ameer’s Court to dis- 



166 THE “ C0MMEBCIA1-” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 


pUss with him certain commercial topics j and added, 
■with reference to Dost Mahomed’s unhappy relations 
with the Sikhs, and his eagerness to obtain assistance 
from any quarter: “My friend, you are aware that it is 
not the practice of the British Government to interfere 
with the aflairs of other independent states.” With 
what feelings, three years afterwards, when a British 
army was marching upon his capital, the Ameer must 
have remembered these words, it is not difficult to con¬ 
jecture. 

This project of a commercial mission to Afghanistan 
was no new conception of which Lord Auckland was 
the parent. It had at least been thought of by Lord 
William Bentinck—and, certainly, with no ulterior 
designs. That Lord Auckland, when he wrote to Dost 
Mahomed about “deputing some gentlemen” to Caubul 
to talk over commercial matters with the Ameer, had 
much more intention than his predecessor of driving the 
Barukzye Sirdars into exile, is not to be asserted or 
believed. He may have seen that such a mission might 
be turned to other than commercial uses; he may have 
thought it desirable that the gentlemen employed should 
collect as much information at the Ameer’s Court as 
the advantages of their position would enable them to 
acquire. But at this time ho would have started back 
at the barest mention of a military expedition beyond 
the Indus, and would have scouted a proposal to sub¬ 
stitute for the able and energetic ruler of Caubul that 
luckless Suddozye Prince—the pensioner of Loodhianah, 
—whose whole career had been such a series of disasters 
as had never before been written down against the name 
of any one man. 

He had, indeed, at this time, apart from the com¬ 
mercial bearings of the case, httle more than a dim 
notion of obtaining a clearer insight into the politics of 



£ABLY TRAVELS IN CENTRAL ASIA. 167 

Central Asia. Since distant rumours of an Afghan 
invasion had disturbed the strong mind of Lord Welles^ 
ley, much had been learnt both in India and in England 
concerning the countries between the Indus and the 
Oxus. The civil and military services of the East India 
Company, numbering in their ranks, as they ever have 
done, men of lofty enterprise and great ability, had, since 
the commencement of the century, brought, by their 
graphic writings, the countries and the people of Central 
Asia visibly before their home-staying countrymen. Be¬ 
fore the close of the eighteenth century but one English 
traveller—a Bengal civilian, named Forster—had made 
his way from the banks of the Ganges across the rivers 
of the Punjaub to the lakes of Cashmere, and thence 
descending into the country below, had entered the for¬ 
midable pass of the Khybur, and penetrated through 
the defiles of Jugdulluck and Koord-Caubul to the 
Afghan capital, whence he had journeyed on, by Ghuznee, 
Candahar, and Herat, to the borders of the Caspian Sea. 
The journey was undertaken in 1783 and the following 
year, but it was not until some fifteen years afterwards 
that the account of his travels was given to the world. 
Honourable alike to his enterprise and his intelligence, 
the book exhibits at once how much, during the last 
seventy years, the Afghan Empire, and how little the 
Afghan character, is changed. 

The great work of Mountstuart Elphinstone, published 
some fifteen years after the appearance of Mr. Forster’s 
volume, soon became the text-book of all who sought for 
information relating to the history and geography of the 
Douranee Empire. But Elphinstone saw little of the 
country or the people of Afghanistan; he acquired in¬ 
formation, and he reproduced it with marvellous fidelity 
and distinctness, and would probably not have written 
a better book if he had travelled and had seen more. 



168 THE “ commekcial” mission to caubui.. 

It was left for a later generation to explore the tracts of 
country which were unvisited by the ambassador; and 
for a later still to elicit encouragement and reward. 

Years passed away before government began to re¬ 
cognise the value of such inquiries. When Mr. Moor- 
croft, of the Company’s Stud-Department, a man of 
high courage and enterprise, accompanied by Mr. Tre- 
beclc, the son of a Calcutta lawyer, set out, in 1819, 
in the mixed character of a horse-dealer and a merchant, 
upon his long and perilous journey; spent the last six 
years of his life in exploring the countries of Ladakh, 
Cashmere, Afghanistan, Balkh, and Bokhara ; and died 
at last in the inhospitable regions beyond the Hindoo- 
Koosh, nothing but absolute discouragement and oppo¬ 
sition emanated from a government that had not the pre¬ 
science to see the importance of such investigations. 

In 1828 Mr. Edward Sterling, an officer of the Bengal 
civil service, being in England on furlough, undertook 
to return to India by the route of Khorassan and Af¬ 
ghanistan. From Sir John Macdonald, the Resident 
Minister at Teheran, he received every encouragement 
and assistance; but the Indian Government looked 
slightingly upon his labours, and neglected the man. 
The information he had acquired was not wanted; and 
he was put out of employment because he had over¬ 
stayed, by a few weeks, the period of his leave of 
abisence. Those were days when no thought of an 
invasion from the westward overshadowed the minds 
of our Indian statesmen.* But when, a few years after- 

* o apathy,” says ragement for the production of 

Mr. Sterling, “ prevailed, and the it. Neglect had been preceded by 
members of the government could the deprivation of my appointment, 
not be roused to take an interest I was no longer collector of Agra; 

T L knowledge that situation had been disposed of 

that I had been in these interest- nearly two months prior to my reach¬ 
ing countries produced no desire ing the Presidency: my return was 
for intelligence regarding them, deemed hopeless, and my death anti- 
ana my reception gave no encou- cipated.” 



ARTHUR CONOLLY. 


169 


wards, a young officer of the Bengal cavalry, named 
Arthur Conolly—a man of an earnest and noble nature, 
running over with the most benevolent enthusiasm, 
and ever suffering his generous impulses to shoot far 
in advance of his prudence and discretion—set out 
from London, proceeded, through Eussia, across the 
Caucasus, and thence through Persia and Khorassan, 
accompanying an Afghan army from Meshed to Herat, 
and journeyed on from the latter place to Candahar, 
and, southward, through Beloochistan and Sindh to 
India, there was little chance of the information which 
he collected on his travels being received with ingra¬ 
titude and neglect, and held as of no account. The 
period which elapsed between the time when those 
travels were completed and the date at which their 
written results were given to the world, deprived Arthur 
Conolly of some portion of the credit which he might 
otherwise have received, and of the interest which at¬ 
tached to his publication. Another officer had by this 
time made his way by another route, through the unex¬ 
plored regions of Central Asia, and laid before the 
government and the country an account of his wan¬ 
derings. On him, when Lord Auckland bethought 
himself of despatching a commercial agent to Caubul, 
the choice of the Governor-General fell. 

Born in the year 1805, at Montrose, and educated in 
the academy of that town, Alexander Bumes proceeded 
to Bombay at the early age of sixteen, and, at a period of 
his career when the majority of young men are master¬ 
ing the details of company-drill, and wasting their time 
in the strenuous idleness of cantonment life, had recom¬ 
mended himself, by his proficiency in the native lan¬ 
guages, to the government under which he served. 
Whilst yet in his teens, he was employed to translate 
the Persian documents of the Suddur Court, and, at 



170 THE “ COMMERCIAL MISSION TO CAUBVL. 


the age of twenty, was appointed Persian interpreter 
to a force assembled for a hostile demonstration against 
Sindh, rendered necessary by the continued border feuds 
which were disturbing the peace of our frontier. In a 
little while he became distinguished as a topographer no 
less than as a linguist; and as a writer of memoirs, and 
designer of maps of little-known tracts of country, soon 
rose into favour and repute. Attached to the depart¬ 
ment of the Quartermaster-General, he was employed 
upon the survey of the north-western frontier of the 
Bombay Presidency, and shortly afterwards was ap¬ 
pointed Assistant Political Agent in Cutch, a province 
with which he had made himself intimately acquainted. 
In the young officer a spirit of enterprise was largely 
blended with the love of scientific research. He was 
eager to push his inquiries and to extend his travels into 
the countries watered by the Indus and its tributaries— 
the fabulous rivers on the banks of which the Macedo¬ 
nian had encamped his victorious legions. It was not 
long before occasion offered for the gratification of his 
cherished desires. A batch of splendid English horses 
had been despatched, in 1830, to Bombay, as a present 
to Runjeet Singh; and Sir John Malcolm, then Go¬ 
vernor of that Presidency, selected Alexander Bumes to 
conduct the complimentary mission to Lahore.* In¬ 
structed, at the same time, to neglect no opportunity of 
acquiring information relative to the geography of the 
Indus, he proceeded through the country of the Ameers 
of Sindh, though not without some obstruction, from the 
jealousy and suspicion of the Talpoor rulers.f At the 

„ * William Napier says, that ver, in 1831, under pretence of con- 
an enlightened desire to ascertain veying presents to liunjeet Singh.”— 
the commercial capabilities of the T Conquest of Sindh.l 

Lord Ellenborough, f And, doubtless, very absurd and 
i^esident of the Indian Board uncalled for the jealousy was consi- 
Conteol, to employ the late Sir dered in those days. As Bumes as- 
Alexander Burnes to explore the ri- cended the Indus, a Syud on the 



CAKEEB OE AEEXANOEB BUBNES. 


171 


Sikh capital he was received with becoming courtesy 
and consideration. The old lion of the Punjaub flung 
himself into the arms of the young British officer, and 
retained him as an honoured guest for a month. Leaving 
Lahore, Bumes crossed the Sutlej, and visited Lood- 
hianah, where, little dreaming of the closer connexion 
which would one day exist between them, he made the 
acquaintance of the ex-King, Soojah-ool-Moolk, and his 
blind brother, Zemaun Shah. “Had I but my king¬ 
dom,” said the former to Bumes, “ how glad I should be 
to see an Englishman at Caubul, and to open the road 
between Europe and India.” 

From Loodhianah the traveller proceeded to Simlah, 
to lay an account of his journeying and its results at 
the feet of the Governor-General. Lord William Ben- 
tinck was then recruiting his exhausted energies in the 
bracing climate of that hill station. He received the 
traveller with kindly consideration, and listened to his 
narrations with interest and attention. Full of enthu¬ 
siasm, with his appetite for enterprise stimulated by his 
recent adventures, Burnes pressed upon the Governor- 
General the expediency of extending the fields of geo¬ 
graphical and commercial enquiry upon which he had 
entered, and succeeded in obtaining the sanction of the 
Governor-General to an expedition into Central Asia, 
to be undertaken under the patronage of government, 
but not avowedly in connexion with any public objects. 

water's edge lifted up his hands, and he said that although some of his 
exclaimed, Sindh is now gone, since reports respecting their immediate 
the English have seen the river, designs might not be quite cor^ 
which is the road to its conquest.” rect, yet this tribe never began as 
Nearly twenty years before. Sir James friends without ending as enemies, 
Mackintosh had written in his journal: by seizing the country which they 
“ A Hindoo merchant, named Der- entered with the most amicable pro- 
ryana, under the mask of friendship, fessions.” ** A shrewd dog,” said 
had been continually alarming the Mackintosh; but he did not live to 
Sindh Government against the Eng- see the depths of the man^s shrewd- 
lish mission. On being reproved, ness. 



172 THE “ commercial” mission to caubul. 


He set out on his overland journey to England ostensibly 
as a private traveller, but protected by passports de¬ 
signed to show that he was travelling under the coun¬ 
tenance of the government which he served. 

Accompanied by Dr. Gerard, an assistant-surgeon on 
the Bengal establishment; by a young native surveyor, 
named Mahomed Ali; and by Mohun Lai, a Hindoo 
youth of Cashmerian descent, who had been educated 
at the Delhi College, and patronised by Mr. Trevelyan, 
Burnes set out on his long and perilous journey. Start¬ 
ing at the commencement of the new year of 1832, the tra¬ 
vellers crossed the Punjaub, and proceeded by the route 
of Peshawur and Jellalabad to Caubul. Here they were 
hospitably received by Dost Mahomed. The character 
of the Caubul chief and of the Afghan nation impressed 
themselves favorably upon the mind of Alexander 
Burnes. Of the latter he spoke as a simple-minded, 
sober people, of frank, open manners, impulsive and 
variable almost to childishness. He had seen and con¬ 
versed with Shah Soojah at Loodhianah, and declared 
his conviction that the exiled Prince had not energy 
sufficient to empower him to regain his throne or tact 
sufficient to enable him to keep it. The character of 
the Barukzye Sirdar now presented, in the eyes of the 
English officer, a favorable contrast to that of the Sud- 
dozye Prince. He saw before him a man of no common 
ability, with a well-disciplined mind, a high sense of 
justice, and a general appreciation of his duties and re¬ 
sponsibilities, as a ruler of the people, not unworthy of a 
Christian potentate. I do not believe that from that time 
he ever changed his opinion of the man. 

Leaving Caubul, Burnes and his fellow-travellers 
ascended the mountain-paths of the Hindoo-Koosh, and 
journeying onward by the route of Syghan and Koon- 
dooz, debouched into the valley of the Oxus, followed 



BURNES’S RECEPTION IN ENGLAND. 173 

the course of that river for many days, and then made their 
way to Bokhara. After two months spent in that city, 
they re-crossed the Oxus and journeyed westward to the 
Persian frontier. Visiting Meshed, Teheran, Ispahan, 
and Shiraz, and making the acquaintance on the way 
both of Abbas Meerza and the Shah, they proceeded to 
Bushire and Bombay. From Bombay, Bumes pushed 
on to Calcutta, and early in 1833 had laid before the 
Governor-General the results of his Central-Asian travels. 
Lord William Bentinck received him with marked atten¬ 
tion and respect, and sent him to England, that he might 
impart, in person, to the home authorities the information 
with which he was laden. 

His reception in England was of the most flattering 
character. The commendations of the East India Com¬ 
pany and the Board of Control were endorsed by the 
commendations of the public. He published his book. 
It was read with avidity. In the coteries of London, 
Bokhara Bumes became one of the celebrities of the 
season. Learned societies did him honour. Fashionable 
dames sent him cards of invitation. Statesmen and 
savans sought his acquaintance. At Holland House and 
Bowood he was a favoured guest. He was no niggard 
of his information; he talked freely; and he had “ some 
new thing” whereof to discourse. His fine talents and 
his genial social qualities recommended him to many; 
and there was more than enough in the overflowings of 
English hospitality to satisfy a vainer man. 

These, however, were but unsubstantial rewards. He 
looked for promotion in the paths of Oriental diplomacy; 
and Lord Ellenborough, who then presided at the India 
Board, recommended him for the appointment of Secre¬ 
tary of Legation at the Persian Court.* This offer he was 


^ He was promised, too, the reversion of the office of minister. 



174 THE “ commercial” mission to caubttl. 


recommended to decline; and he returned to India, in 
the spring of 1835, to resume his duties as Assistant to 
the Kesident at Cutch. Rescued in the autumn from 
the obscurity of this appointment, he was despatched to 
the Court of the Ameers of Sindh. The duties of the 
Mission were performed with judgment and ability. The 
Ameers consented to the proposal for the survey of the 
Indus, and would gladly have entered into more inti¬ 
mate relations with the British Government had it been 
considered, upon our part, desirable to strengthen the 
alliance. 

Whilst still in the Sindh country, Burnes received 
instructions from the Supreme Government of India to 
hold himself in readiness to undertake the charge of the 
“ commercial” mission which it had been determined 
to despatch to Afghanistan, and to proceed to Bombay 
to make preparations for the journey. He reached 
that Presidency in the course of October, 1836, and 
on the 26th of November, accompanied by Lieutenant 
Leech, of the Bombay Engineers, and Lieutenant Wood, 
of the Indian Navy,* Burnes sailed from Bombay to 
“ work out the policy of opening the River Indus to 
commerce”—that policy, the splendid results of which, 
years afterwards, when our army, our treasure, and our 
reputation, had been buried in the passes of Afghanistan, 
Lord Palmerston openly boasted in Parliament amidst 
the derisive cheers of the House. 

Taking the Sindh route, Burnes presented himself at 
the Court of the Ameers, and was hospitably received. 
The English officer explained the object of his mission; 
talked about the navigation of the Indus; and dvjglt 
encouragingly upon the instructions which he had re¬ 
ceived, “ to endeavour to infuse confidence into all classes 

i, * Lorf of the Bom- the Mission in transitu. Mohun Lai 

bay Medical Estbalishment, joined also accompanied it. 



RECEPTION OF THE MISSION AT CAUBUL, 


176 


by a declaration of the happy and close friendship which 
subsisted between the British and the powers on the 
Indus.” From Hyderabad he proceeded to Bahwulpore; 
and thence to Dehra Gazee Khan. At the latter place 
he received intelligence of the battle of Jumrood; 
and, pushing on to the neighbourhood of Peshawur, 
soon found himself near the theatre of war. jFrom 
Peshawur to Jumrood, Avitabile* drove the British 
officers in his carriage. The deputation that was to 
conduct them through the Khybur Pass had not made 
its appearance. They were suffering martyrdom from 
the effiuvia of the putrifying corpses of the Afghan and 
Sikh soldiers who had fallen in the recent conflict; and, 
at all hazards, they determined to push on. The Khybur 
was cleared without accident or obstruction. Friendly 
deputations from the Ameer greeted the British officers 
as they advanced. On the 20th of September, they en¬ 
tered Caubul. 

They were received “ with great pomp and splendour.” 
At the head of a fine body of Afghan cavalry Akbar 
Khan came out to meet them. Placing Burnes on an 
elephant beside him, he conducted the British officers to 
his father’s Court. The Ameer, intent on doing honour 
to the occasion, had requested the principal citizens of 
Caubul to unite with him in welcoming the strangers. 
Nothing could have been more honourable than the 
reception of the British Mission—more indicative of 
the high estimation in which the British were held by 
the ruler of Caubul. A spacious and beautiful garden 
within the Balia Hissar, and near the palace, was allotted 
as the residence of the Mission. 

On the following day, “ with many expressions of his 
high sense of the great honour conferred upon him,” 

• Avitabile, an Italian by birth, was Singh, and at that time Governor of 
a ijeneral m tne service of Kunjeet Peshawur. 



176 THE “ COMMERCIAL ” MISSION TO CAUBUL. 


Dost Mahomed formally received the representtaives of 
the British Government. Burnes submitted his creden¬ 
tials. The letters were opened by the Ameer himself, 
and read by his minister, Meerza Samad Khan. They 
introduced Burnes to his Highness solely as a commercial 
agent. The flimsy veil was soon dropped. It was evident 
from the first that whatever might have been his instruc¬ 
tions—whatever might have been the proximate, or 
rather the ostensible object of the mission, Burnes had 
ulterior designs, and that he, in reality, went to Caubul 
either as a spy or a political diplomatist. He had not 
been three days at the Afghan capital, before he wrote 
to Mr. Macnaghten, that he should take an early oppor¬ 
tunity of reporting what transpired at the Ameer’s Court; 
and ten days afterwards we find him announcing “ the 
result of his inquiries on the subject of Persian influence 
in Caubul, and the exact power which the Kuzzilbash, 
or Persian party resident in this city, have over the 
politics of Afghanistan.” To a private friend he wrote 
more distinctly: “I came to look after commerce, to 
superintend surveys and examine passes of mountains, 
and likewise certainly to see into affairs and judge of 
what was to be done hereafter; but the hereafter has 
already arrived.”* It is hard to say what our Oriental 
diplomatists would do if they were forbidden the use of 
the word “ commerce.” It launched Burnes fairly into 
the sea of A%han politics; and then he cut it adrift. 

On the 24th of September Burnes was invited to a 
private conference with the Ameer. It took place in 
“ the interior of the Harem” of the Balla-Hissar. Akbar 
Khan alone was present. Dinner was served; and “ the 
interview lasted till midnight.” The Ameer listened 
attentively to all that Burnes advanced relative to the 
navigation of the Indus and the trade of Afghanistan, 

* Unpublished Cori'espondence of Sir Alexander Burnes. 



INTERVIEWS WITH DOST MAHOMED. 


177 


but replied, that his resources were so crippled by his 
war with the Sikhs, that he was compelled to adopt 
measures injurious to commerce, for the mere purpose of 
raising revenue. He spoke with much warmth of the 
loss of Peshawur, which, he alleged, had been basely 
wrested from him, whilst he was engaged in war with 
Shah Soojah. Burnes replied with a number of cut- 
and-dried sentences about the ability and resources of 
Runjeet Singh. To all of this the Ameer cheerfully as¬ 
sented. He acknowledged that he was not strong enough 
to cope with so powerful an adversary as the ruler of 
Lahore. “ Instead of renewing the conflict,” he said, 
“ it would be a source of real gratification if the British 
Government would counsel me how to act: none of our 
other neighbours can avail me; and in return I would 
pledge myself to forward its commercial and its political 
views.” Remarking that he heard with pleasure this 
acknowledgment, Burnes assured him that the British 
Government would exert itself to secure peace between 
the Punjaub and Afghanistan; and added, that although 
he could not hold out any promise of interference for the 
restoration of Peshawur, which had been won and pre¬ 
served by the sword, he believed that the “ Maharajah 
intended to make some change in its management, but 
that it sprung from himself, not from the British Govern¬ 
ment.” The Ameer could not repress his eagerness to 
learn the precise character of these contemplated ar¬ 
rangements ; but all that Burnes could ofier was a con¬ 
jecture that the Maharajah might be induced to restore 
the country, under certain restrictions, to Sultan Maho¬ 
med Ehan and his brothers, to whom, and not to the 
Ameer, it had formerly belonged. 

On the evening of the 4th of October, Burnes was 
again invited to the Balla-Hissar. The Ameer had in 
the mean time waited upon him in his own quarters. 

VOL. I. N 



178 THE “ commeecial” mission to caubul. 


At this second conference in the palace, the Newab 
Jubbar Khan was present. On this occasion, to the 
surprise of the British envoy, the Ameer carried his 
moderation and humility to an excess which might 
almost have aroused suspicion. He declared that if the 
representative of Great Britain recommended him to do 
so, he would express to Runjeet Singh his contrition for 
the past, and ask forgiveness; and that if the Maharajah 
“ would consent to give up Peshawur to him, he would 
hold it tributary to Lahore; send the requisite presents 
of horses and rice; and in all things consider himself, in 
that part of his dominions, as holding under Lahore.” 
Burnes suggested that such an arrangement would be 
destructive to the hopes of Sultan Mahomed, who ought 
to be regarded with compassion; and asked whether it 
would not be equally advantageous to the reputation of the 
Ameer that Peshawur should be restored to his brother. 
To this the Ameer replied, that the country might as 
well be in the hands of the Sikhs as in those of Sultan 
Mahomed, who had been to him both a treacherous 
friend and a bitter enemy. Little more passed at this 
meeting. Burnes retired to speculate upon the conduct 
of the Ameer and write letters to the political Secretary, 
Mr. Macnaghten, who was destined soon to play so con¬ 
spicuous a part in the great drama, of which this “ Com¬ 
mercial” mission was the prologue. 

In the mean while the attention of the Mission was 
directed to the state of affairs at Candahar. The chief 
of that place, Kohun Dil Khan, had not only declared 
his willingness to embrace the Persian alliance, but had, 
as we have seen, determined on sending his second son, 
with the Persian Agent, to Mahomed Shah, as the bearer 
of presents to the Shah and the Russian embassy. Against 
this course of procedure Dost Mahomed had protested. 
“ Oh! my brother,” he wrote, “ if you will do these 



CONDUCT or THE CANDAHAK SIEDABS. 179 

things without my concurrence, what will the world say 
to it ?” There can be no doubt of the Ameer’s sincerity. 
Indeed, it was the conviction that the Caubul chief was 
entering with his whole soul into the British alliance, to 
the exclusion, as it was believed, of the Candahar Sirdars, 
that drove the latter to strengthen their alliance with 
the Persian Court. Bumes himself had no doubt that 
the Ameer was at this time acting a straightforward part. 
On the 30th of October he wrote to a private friend: 
“ Here a hundred things are passing of the highest in¬ 
terest.Dost Mahomed Khan has fallen into all 

our views, and in so doing has either thought for him¬ 
self or followed my counsel, but for doing the former I 
give him every credit, and things now stand so that 
I think we are on the threshold of a negotiation with 
King Kunjeet, the basis of which will bo his withdrawal 
from Peshawur, and a Barukzye receiving it as a tribu¬ 
tary of Lahore, the chief of Caubul sending his son to 
ask pardon. What say you to this after all that has 
been urged of Dost Mahomed Khan’s putting forth ex¬ 
travagant pretensions ? Runjcet will accede to the plan 

I am certain.I have, in behalf of Government, 

agreed to stand as mediator with the parties, and Dost 
Mahomed has cut asunder all his connexion with Russia 
and Persia, and refused to receive the ambassador from 
the Shah now at Candahar. His brothers at that city 
have, however, caressed the Persian Elchee all the more 
for this, and 1 have sent them such a Junius as, I be¬ 
lieve, will astonish them. I had, indeed, reason to act 
promptly, for they have a son setting out for Teheran 
with presents to the Shah and the Russian ambassador; 
and I hope I shall be in time to explain our hostility to 
such conduct. Everything here has, indeed, run well; 
and but for our deputation at the time it happened, the 

n2 





180 THE “commercial” MISSION TO CAUBDL. 


house we occupy would have been tenanted by a Rus¬ 
sian Agent and a Persian Elchee.”* 

On the 31st of October, Burnes wrote to Mr. Mac- 
naghten that another conference had taken place on the 
24th between himself and the Ameer, and that what 
passed on that occasion “ set Dost Mahomed’s conduct 
in a light that must prove, as I believe, very gratifying 
to Government.” On the British Envoy expressing the 
regret which he felt on being made acquainted with the 
misguided conduct of the Candahar Sirdars, the Ameer 
had declared that if such conduct was distressing to the 
British agent, it was much more distressing to him; that 
he himself repented of having ever listened to the over¬ 
tures of Persia; that he would take care publicly to 
manifest his desire to strengthen his relations with the 
British Government, and do everything in his power tb 
induce his Candahar brothers to adopt a wiser course 
of policy. Burnes replied that he was delighted to hear 
the expression of such sentiments; but distinctly stated 
“ that neither he nor his brothers were to found hopes 
of receiving aid from the British Government;” that so 
long as they conducted themselves with propriety they 
might rely upon the sympathy of the British Govern¬ 
ment, but that they must, by no means, expect to derive 
anything more substantial from the alliance.f Dis- 

* Unpublished Correspondence of Russia has come forward with offers 
Sir A, Burnes, which are certainly substantial. Persia 

t And, on the 30th December, has been lavish in her promises, and 
Burnes, with reference to this pro- Bokhara and other States have not 
mised sympathy, wrote, in the follow- been backward. Yet, in all that has 
ing words, to Mr. Macnaghten. The passed or is daily transpiring, the chief 
passage was not published in the offi- of Caubul declares that he prefers the 
cial correspondence. It was thought sympathy andfriendly offices of the -Bri- 
better to suppress it:—“ The present tish to all these offers^ however alluring 
position of the British Government tkey may seem^ from Persia or from 
at this capital wpears to me a most the Emperor —which certainly places 
gratifying prooi of the estimation in his good sense in a light more than 
which it IS held by the Afghan nation, prominent, and, in my humble judg- 



MODIFICATION OP BDENBS’S INSTRUCTIONS. 181 


coura^ng as this was, the Ameer still courted the Bri¬ 
tish alliance—still dedared that he would exert himself 
to the utmost to detach his Candahar brothers from 
their connexion with Persia, and even, if desired by the 
British agent, would commence active operations against 
them. Discountenancing the idea of an active move¬ 
ment against Candahar, Bumes commended the good 
feeling of the Ameer, and exhorted him to do his best, 
by pacific means, to break down Kohun Dil’s connexion 
with Persia—an effort whicli “ could not fail to be re¬ 
ceived by the British Government as a strong mark of 
his desire for our friendship, and of great good sense.” 

Bumes, who had gone to Caubul, as a commercial 
agent, was at this time without any political instructions. 
As he ascended the Indus, he had received letters from 
Government, somewhat modifying the character of his 
mission, and placing a larger amount of discretion in his 
hands.* But he did not feel that he was in a position to 
deal with the Peshawur question without positive in¬ 
structions from the Supreme Government; so all that 
he could now do was to temporise, to amuse Dost Ma¬ 
homed with vague assurances of sympathy and good¬ 
will, until the wishes of the Governor-General were con¬ 
veyed to him in a specific shape. He could promise 

ment, proves that, by an earlier at- scene of carnage, where, instead of 
tention to these countries, we might embarrassing my government, I feel 
have escaped the whole of these in- myself in a situation to do good. It 
trigues, and held long since a stable is this latitude throughout life that 
influence in Caubul. — [Ungarbled has made me what I am, if I am any- 
Correspondence of Sir A. Bumes.'] thing, and I can hardly say how 
* “As I approached Caubul,’' he grateful I feel to Lord Auckland, 
wrote to a private friend, on the 5th .... 1 have not as yet got the re¬ 
ef July, “ war broke out with the plies to my recommendation on our 
Afghans and Sikhs, and my position line of policy in Caubul, consequent 
became embarrassing. I was even on a mscovered intrigue of Bussia, 
ordered by express to pause, and and on the Caubul chief throwing 
while hanging on my oars another himself in despair on Perso-Bussian 
express stul cries pause, but places a arms. I have at last something to 
vast latitude in my hands, and ‘for- do, and I hope to do it well.”—[TVi- 
ward’ is my motto—forward to the vate Correspondence of Sir A, Bumes."} 



182 THE “ COMMEBCIAL” mission to CAUBtTL. 


nothing substantial. He could only write for instruc¬ 
tions, and await patiently the receipt of letters fix)in 
Hindostan. 

But Bumes, though he shrunk from compromising his 
government in the direction of Lahore, had no such 
scruples with regard to the proceedings of the Barukzye 
Sirdars in the countries to the westward. He thought 
that some latitude having been allowed him, he might 
take prompt measures to meet a pressing difficulty threat¬ 
ening us from a quarter so far removed from the ordi¬ 
nary circle embraced by the dehberations of the Calcutta 
Council. Before he entered Afghanistan the conduct 
of the Candahar chiefs had engaged his serious atten¬ 
tion, and he had written to the British minister at the 
Persian Court, saying that he should leave nothing un¬ 
done to try and put a stop to their intercourse with the 
Russian mission. “ If matters go rightly,” he added, 
“ we shall be able to neutralise the power of the Can¬ 
dahar chiefs, or at all events place them in complete 
subjection to Dost Mahomed Khan, w'hose influence 
increases daily.” Bumes, as has been seen,* had de¬ 
spatched in October a letter to Kohun Dil Khan, threat¬ 
ening him with the displeasure of the British Govern¬ 
ment if he continued his intrigues with the Persian and 
Russian Court; and the measures taken at this time were 
so far successful, that, encouraged by their result, the 

* AntCy page 179. In a letter to could do good. The first exercise of 
another correspondent, written about the authority has been to despatch a 
the same time, Burnes s^s : With messenger to Candahar, to tell them 
war came intrigues, and 1 have had to discontinue their intercourse with 
the good fortune to find out all the Persia and Russia, on pain of dis- 
doings of the Czar and his emissaries pleasure—and not before it was time, 
here, where they have sent letters and for a son of the chief of that city, with 
presents. After proving this, I plainly presents for the Russian ambassador, 
asked the Governor-General if such is ready to set out for Teheran.”— 
things wore to be allowed, and I got [5ir A, Burnes to Captain Jacob — 
a reply a week ^o, altering all my Caubuly 29(h of Octobery 1837: MS, 
instructions, giving me power to go Correspondence,'] 
on to Herat, and anywhere, indeed, I 



AFFAIRS AT CANDAHAB. 


183 


British agent determined to take further steps’to secure 
the alliance of the chiefs of Candahar. On the 22nd of 
December, Burnes became convinced of the improved 
temper of Kohun Dil Khan, who declared that he had 
dismissed the Persian Elchee, had determined not to 
send his son to the Persian Court, and was anxious, above 
aU things, for the counsel and assistance of the British 
Government, and of his brother, Dost Mahomed Khan. 
Mahomed Shah had by this time began to cool down 
in his zeal for the Afghan alliance; and it appeared to 
bo at least possible that the Sirdar, instead of receiving 
Herat from the Shah, would, after the capture of that 
place, bo threatened with the loss of Candahar. Seizing 
the opportunity afforded him by this favorable change 
in the aspect of affairs, Burnes wrote at once to Kohun 
Dil Khan, stating that if the Persian monarch threatened 
to subdue his chiefship, he would go at once to Can¬ 
dahar, accompanied by Dost Mahomed, and assist him 
by every means in his power, even to the extent of pay¬ 
ing his troops. 

In the mean while he determined to despatch at once 
an officer of the British mission to Candahar. That 
officer was Lieutenant Leech. On Christmas-day, 
Burnes sat down and wrote him a long and clearly- 
worded letter of instructions. It was hoped that the 
presence of a British agent at Candahar would keep 
Persia in check, and if not, he could despatch to Caubul 
the earliest intelligence of the advance of the Persian 
army, and so enable Burnes to counteract the movement 
with the least possible delay.* 

* “ The chiefs of Candahar,’* he thority to do so; but am I to stand 
wrote a few days afterwards, to a by and see us ruined at Candahar, 
mrivate friend, “ had gone over to when the Government tell me an at- 
Persia. 1 have detached them and tack on Herat would be most im- 
offered them British protection and palatable. Herat has been besieged 
^h i£ they would recede, and if fifty days, and if the Persians move 
Persia attacked them. I have no au- on Candahar, I am off there with the 



184 THE commercial'^ mission to caubul. 


Burnes Exceeded his instructions, and was severely 
censured by the Governor-General. Lord Auckland 
was then on his way to Simlah; and from Bareilly Mr. 
Secretary Macnaghten wrote a long letter to the Caubul 
agent, at the close of which he touched upon the pro¬ 
mises made to the Candahar chiefs. “ It is with great 
pain,” he said, that his Lordship must next proceed to 
advert to the subject of the promises which you have 
held out to the chiefs of Candahar. These promises 
were entirely unauthorised by any part of your instruc¬ 
tions. They are most unnecessarily made in unqualified 
terms, and they would, if supported, commit the Govern¬ 
ment upon the gravest questions of general policy. His 
Lordship is compelled, therefore, decidedly to disapprove 
them. He is only withheld from a direct disavowal of 
these engagements to the chiefs of Candahar, because 
such disavowal would carry with it the declaration of a 
difference between you and your Government, and might 
weaken your personal influence, and because events 
might, in this interval, have occurred which would ren¬ 
der such a course unnecessary. But the rulers of Can¬ 
dahar must not be allowed to rest in confidence upon 
promises so given, and should affairs continue in the 
same uncertainty as that which prevailed at the date of 
your last despatches, you will endeavour to set yourself 
right with the chiefs, and will feel yourself bound in 
good faith to admit that you have exceeded your in¬ 
structions and held out hopes, which you find, upon 
communication with your Government, cannot be realised. 
After what has been stated, his Lordship feels that he 
need not enlarge on his strict injunction that you in 

AmcCT and his forces, and mean to and I am glad to say I am up to it in 
We have good health and all that, and was never 
s^ft—forty-six guns and stout Af- more braced in my life.”—[Corrc- 
ghans, as brave as irregular troops spondence, of Sir A. Bumes—privately 
need be. I am on stirring ground, printed.'\ 



ABRIVAL OF VICKOVICH. 


185 


future conform punctually on all points to the orders 
issued for your guidance.”* And so Bumes was censured 
for a measure which, under all the circumstances of the 
case, was the very best that could have been adopted; 
and the Candahar chiefs threw themselves again into 
the Persian alliance, and entered into a formal treaty 
with the Shah—under a Bussian guarantee. 

In the mean while a new actor had appeared on the 
political stage, ready to pick up the leavings of the 
British agent, and to appreciate what the British Go¬ 
vernment had been pleased to reject. On the after¬ 
noon of the 19th of December, a Russian officer 
named Vickovich,f entered the city of Caubul. Born 
of a good family in Lithuania, and educated in the 
national university of Wilna, he had attracted attention, 
whilst yet a student, by the liberalty of his sentiments and 
the fearlessness with which he expressed them. Associated 
with others of kindred opinions and equal enthusiasm, 
he took part in a demonstration in favour of the Polish 
cause, which well-nigh ended in the suppression of the 
institution; and, whilst other more formidable conspira¬ 
tors were condemned to end their days in Siberia, he 
and his immediate colleagues in the university were sent 
to Orenburgh, as a kind of honourable exile, to be em¬ 
ployed in the military colony of the Ural. Here the 
general intelligence, the aptitude for instruction, the 
love of adventure, and the daring character of young 

* Mr. W. H, Macnaghten to Cap^ Captain Bumes. Lord Auckland 
tain A. Bumes, Cartw, Bareilly, 20th subsequently, with praiseworthy can- 
January, 1838. The letter from dour, admitted that the best autho* 
which this passage is taken consists rities at home were of opinion that 
of twenty-four paragraphs, of which the measure which had evoked these 
three only appear in the published expressions of the severe displeasure 
correspondence. There seems, indeed, of his Lordship, was the very best that 
ta have been a studious suppression could have been adopted, 
ofthe entire history of the oners made f I ^ave given the vulgar ortho- 

to the Candahar chiefs, and of the graphy of the name. His real name 
censure which they called down upon was Viktevitch, or Wiktewitch. 



186 THE “ COMMBBCIAli" MISSION TO CAOBUL. 


Vickovich, soon distinguislied him above his associates* 
Attached to the expeditions sent out for the survey of the 
Desht-i'Kipchak, he lived for some years among the 
Calmucks, gaining an acquaintance with the Nogai and 
Jaghatai dialects of the Turkish language, and sub¬ 
sequently, during a residence of some months in Bokhara, 
whither he was sent with the Caravan from Orenburgh, 
acquired a sufficient knowledge of the Persian language 
to enable him to converse intelligibly, if not fluently, in 
it. When, therefore, the Russian Government began to 
meditate a mission to Caubul, and to cast about for a 
competent agent, there seemed to be no likelier man 
than Vickovich to perform, with advantage to the state, 
the dubious service required of him. He was at this time 
aide-de-camp to the Governor of Orenburgh. The Caubul 
agency was entrusted to him without hesitation. He was 
despatched at once to Astrakan, whence he crossed over 
to Resht, in Ghiliin, and received his final instructions 
from Count Simonich, at Teheran, in September, 1837. 
Before the end of December he was at Caubul,* 

* The first information relative to a week. The last morning of my 
the fact of Vickovich’s mission to Can- ride I had an adventure. Our whole 
bul was accidentally obtained by Major party were pretty well knocked up, 
Rawlinson, when on his way to the and in the dark, between sleeping and 
camp of Mahomed Shah, who was then waking, we had managed to lose the 
marching upon Herat. The circum- road. As morning dawned, we found 
stances, as set forth in a private ourselves wandering about on the 
letter, from that ofiicer himsmf, are broken plain whi& stretches up 
not unworthy of narration :—“ Tehe^ from Subzewar to the range contain- 
ran, November 1, 1837. I have just ing the Turquoise mines, and shortly 
returned from a journey of much afterwards we perceived that we 
interest. M‘Neill had some business were close to another party of horse- 
in the Persian camp which he thought men, who were also, apparently, try- 
I might help to arrange, and I was ing to regain the high road. I was 
bid accordingly to make my way to not anxious to accost these strangers, 
the ‘ Royal wtirrup,* with all con- but on cantering past them, I saw, to 
venient despatch. Iwasobli^dtoride my astonishment men in Ck)ssack 
day and night, as the post^iorses on dresses, and one of my attendants 
the road, owing to the constant pas- recognised among the pivty a servant 
sage of couriers, were almost un- of Ike Russian Mission. My curiosity 
serviceable, and yet 1 was only able, was, of course, excited, ana on reach- 
ailer all, to accomplish the distance ing the stage 1 told one of my men to 
of something more than 700 miles in watch for the arrival of the travellers. 



HBST MEETING WITH VICKOVICH, 


187 


On the day after the arrival of Vickovich at Caubul, 
Bumes reported the incident to the supreme Government, 
and detailed the circumstances of his reception. Like al¬ 
most everything in Burnes’s public letters, which places 
the conduct of Dost Mahomed in a favorable light, the fol- 


and find out who they were. Shortly 
afterwards the Russian party rode 
up, inquired who I was, and finding 
1 was a British officer, declined to 
enter the Khan, but held on their 
road. In such a state of afiairs as 
preceded the siege of Herat, the 
mere fact of a Russian gentleman 
travelling in Khorassan was sus¬ 
picious. In the present case, how¬ 
ever, there was evidently a desire for 
concealment. Nothing had been 
heard of this traveller by our Mis¬ 
sion at Teheran. I had been told, 
indeed, absurd stories on the road, of 
a Muscovite Prince having been sent 
from Petersburg to announce that 
10,000 Russians would be landed at 
Asterabad, to co-operate with the 
Shah in reducing Herat; and this 
was evidently the man alluded to, 
but I knew not what to believe, and 
I thought it my duty, therefore, to 
try and unravel the mystery. Follow¬ 
ing the party, I tracked them for 
some distance along the high road, 
and then found that they had turned 
off to a gorge in the hills. There at 
length I came upon the group seated 
at breakfast by the side of a clear 
sparkling rivulet. The officer, for 
such he evidently was, was a young 
man of light make, very fair com¬ 
plexion, with bright eyes and a look 
of great animation. He rose and 
bowed to me as I rode up, but said 
nothing. 1 addressed him in French 
—the general language of communi¬ 
cation between Europeans in the 
East, but be shook his head. I then 
rooke English, and he answered in 
Russian. When I tried Persian, he 
seemed not to understand a word; at 
last he expressed himself hesitatingly 
in Turcoman, or Uzbeg Turkish. 1 


knew just sufficient of this language 
to carry on a simple conversation, but 
not enough to be inquisitive. This 
was evidently what my friend w.’inted, 
for when he found I was not strong 
enough in Jaghatai to proceed very 
rapidly, he rattled on with his rough 
Turkish as glibly as possible. All 
I could find out was, that he was a 
hond fide Russian officer, carrying 
resents from the Emperor to Ma- 
omed Shah. More he would not 
admit; so, after smoking another pipe 
with him, I remounted, and reached 
the Royal Camp beyond Nishapoor 
before dark. I had an immediate audi¬ 
ence of the Shah, and in the course of 
conversation, mentioning to his Ma¬ 
jesty my adventure of the morning, 
he replied, ^ Bringing presents to me ! 
why, I have nothing to do with him; 
he IS sent direct from the Emperor 
to Dost Mahomed, of Caubul, and I 
w merely asked to help him on his 
journey.’ This is the first informal 
tion we have ever had of a direct 
communication between Petersburg 
and Caubul, and it may be of great 
importance. The gentleman made his 
appearance in camp two days after 
my arrival, and I was then introduced 
to him by Mons. Goutte, as Captain 
Vitkavitch. He addressed me at once 
in good French, and in allusion to our 
former meeting, merely observed, 
with a smile, that ^ It would not do to 
be too familiar with strangers in the 
desert.’ 1 was so anxious to bring 
back to McNeill intelligence of thS 
Russian Mission to Caubul, that I re¬ 
mained but a very few days in camp; 
and here I am again in T^eran, after 
a second gallop of 7fi0 miles, accom¬ 
plished this time in about 150 consecu¬ 
tive hours.’^— Correspwdence,’] 



188 THE “ commercial” mission to caubul. 


lowing passages were cut out of the correspondence before 
it was placed in the printer’s hands;—“ On the morning of 
the 19th,” wrote Burnes, “that is, yesterday, the Ameer 
came over from the Balia Hissar early in the morning 
with a letter from his son, the Governor of Ghuznee, re¬ 
porting that the Russian agent had arrived at that city 
on his way to Caubul. Dost Mahomed Khan said that 
he had come for my counsel on the occasion; that he 
wished to have nothing to do with any other power than 
the British; that he did not wish to receive any agent of 
any power whatever so long as he had a hope of sym¬ 
pathy from us; and that he would order the Russian 
agent to be turned out, detained on the road, or act in 
any way I desired him. I asked the Ameer if he knew 
on what business the agent had come, and if he were 
really an agent from Russia. He replied that I had read 
all his letters from Candahar, and that he knew nothing 
more. 1 then stated that it was a sacred rule among 
civilised nations not to refuse to receive emissaries in 
time of peace, and that I could not take upon myself to 
advise him to refuse any one who declared himself duly 
accredited, but that the Ameer had it in his power to 
show his feelings on the occasion by making a full dis¬ 
closure to the British Government of the errand on which 
the individual had come; to which he most readily as¬ 
sented. After this the Ameer despatched a servant on 
the road to Ghuznee to prevent the agent’s entering Cau¬ 
bul without notice; but so rapid has been his journey, that 
he met him a few miles fix>m the city, which he entered 
in the afternoon, attended by two of the Ameer’s people. 
He has not yet seen the Ameer. He has sent a letter 
from Count Simonich, which I have seen, and states that 
he is the bearer of letters from Mahomed Shah and the 
Emperor of Russia. I shall take an early opportunity of 
reporting on the proceedings of the Russian agent, if he 



THE LETTERS FROM NICHOLAS. 


189 


be so in reality; for, if not an impostor, it is a most un¬ 
called-for proceeding, after the disavowal of the Bussian 
Government, conveyed through Count Nesselrode, al¬ 
luded to in Mr. M‘Neiirs letter of 19th of June last.”* 
The letters of which Vickovich was the bearer, like 
those brought by Bumes, were purely of a commercial 
tendency. One was from the Emperor himself; the 
other from Count Simonich—written in the Russian 
and the Persian languages. The authenticity of the 
letter from the Emperor has been questioned.f The 
fact is, that it was one to be acknowledged or re¬ 
pudiated, as most convenient. It was intended to satisfy 
Dost Mahomed on the one hand, and to be suspected by 
the European allies of Russia upon the other. That it 


* A few days afterwards, in one of 
those undress communications from 
which we often gather more signifi¬ 
cant truth than from the more formal 
official documents, Burnes wrote to a 
private friend: “We are in a mess 
here. Herat is besieged, and may 
fall; and the Emperor of Russia has 
sent an envoy to Caubul, to offer 
Dost Mahomed Khan money to fight 
Runjeet Singh 1!!!! I could not be¬ 
lieve my eyes or ears; but Captain 
Vickovich—for that is the agent’s 
name—arrived here with a blazing 
letter, three feet long, and sent im¬ 
mediately to pay his respects to my¬ 
self. I, of course, received him, and 
asked him to dinner. This is not the 
best of it. The Ameer came over to 
me sharp, and offered to do as 1 like, 
kick him out, or anything; but I stood 
too much in fear of Vattel to do any 
such thing; and since he was so 
friendly to us, said I, give me the 
letters the agent has brought; all of 
which he surrendered sharp; and 1 
sent an express at once to my Lord 
A., with a confidential letter to the 
Governor-General himself, bidding 
him look what his predecessors had 
brought upon him, and telling him 
that after this 1 knew not what might 
hap^n, and it was now a neck-and- 
neck race between Russia and us; 


and if his Lordship would hear rea¬ 
son, he would fortnwith send agents 
to Bokhara, Herat, Candahar, and 
Koondooz, not forgetting Sindh. How 
all this pill will go down I know not, 
but I know my duty too well to be 
silent .”—IPrimte Correspondence of 
Sir A. Burnes.'] 

t Mohun Lai says that he trans¬ 
lated the Persian copy of the letter 
from the Emperor, but that he lost 
the translation during the insurrec¬ 
tion of 1841-42. “It plainly ac¬ 
knowledged,” he states, “ the receipt 
of the Ameer’s letter, and assured 
him that all the Afghan merchants 
shall be well received in the empire 
of Russia, justice and protection shall 
be extended towards them, and their 
intercourse will cause to flourish the 
respective states .”—[Zife of Dost 
Mahomed^ voL 2 ., p, 300.] Masson 
declares that it was a forgery^ seal 
and ^1, alleging, in proof, that it bore 
no signature. To this Mohun Lai 
replies, that the absence of the royal 
signature is a proof rather of the 
genuine than the counterfeit character 
of the document. The reasons given 
are not very conclusive, as regards 
the general usage of the Czar; but, 
under the circumstances of the case, 
he would have been more inclined to 
omit than to attach the signature. 



lyo THE “ commbbcial” mission to caubitl. 

came firom the Cabinet of St. Petersburgh there is now 
little room to doubt. 

Bnmes, however, for some time, was doubtful of the 
real character of the agent and his credentials; but after 
some weeks of hesitation, he wrote to Mr. Macnaghten, 
“ Though a month and upwards has elapsed since Mr. 
Vickovich reached Caubul, and my suspicaons were from 
the first excited regarding his real character, I have 
been unable to discover anything to invalidate the cre¬ 
dentials which he brought, or to cast a doubt on his 
being other than he gives himself out, and this, too, after 
much vigilance and inquiry.” 

This was written on the 22nd of January. In the 
same letter Bumes writes: “ Mr. Vickovich himself has 
experienced but little attention from the Ameer, and has 
yet received no reply to his communications. He has 
been accommodated in a part of a house belonging to 
Meerza Samee Khan,* and is entertained at the public 
expense. He paid his respects to the Ameer on the 12th 
of January, and has had no other personal intercourse 
with him. He has been luging the Ameer to send an 
agent to Count Simonich to receive the presents of the 
Emperor.” Nothing, indeed, could have been more dis¬ 
couraging than the reception of the Russian agent. Dost 
Mahomed still clung to the belief that the British Go¬ 
vernment would look favorably upon his case, and was 
willing to receive a little from England, rather than 
much from any other state. But he soon began to per¬ 
ceive that even that little was not to be obtained. Be¬ 
fore the dose of the month of January, Bumes had re¬ 
ceived specific instructions from the Governor-General, 
and was compelled, with the strongest feelings of reluct- 

* ** Samad Samee Ehan, with Ahdool Samad, 

KnaD. The reader must be careful or Samat, Khan, the Persian adven* 
not to confound Dost Mahomed's turer, of whom I have spoken in a 
secretary and confidential adviser, note at page 126. 



RECEPTION OF VICKOVICH. 


191 


ance and mortification, to strangle the hopes Dost Ma¬ 
homed had so long encouraged of the fnendly media¬ 
tion of the British Government between the Ameer and 
Runjeet Singh. 

The whole question of Peshawur was now fully dis¬ 
cussed. Bumes, with his instructions in his hand, 
miserably fettered and restrained, enunciated the opi¬ 
nions of his government, from which he inwardly dis¬ 
sented, and strove, in obedience to the orders he had 
received, to make the worse appear the better reason. 
Dost Mahomed was moderate and reasonable; and 
Burnes must have felt that the argument was all in 
favour of the Ameer. That others, in higher place, 
thought so too, is clearly indicated by the fact that pains 
have been taken to keep the world in ignorance of what 
Dost Mahomed, on this occasion, advanced with so 
much reason and moderation in reply to the official 
arguments of the British agent, who was compelled to 
utter words which were dictated neither by the feelings 
nor the judgment of the man. 

In a letter of the 26th of January, which I now have 
before me in an ungarblcd stale, Burnes forwarded to 
the Governor-General a full account of the important 
conference between the Ameer and himself, held after 
the receipt, by the latter, of instructions from the 
Gktvernor-General.* At this meeting Burnes commu¬ 
nicated to Dost Mahomed the sentiments of .the Go¬ 
vernor-General, and recommended the Ameer, in accord- 


* An attempt, in the published 
Blue Book, was made to conceal the 
fact of the receipt of these letters, and 
to make it ap^ar that Bumes acted 
entirely upon his own responsibility. 
The genuine letter conunenced with 
the following words:—“ I have now 
the honour to acknowledge the receipt 
of your (the Political Secretary’s) 


letters of the 2dth of Ifovember and 
2nd of December last, which reached 
me about the same time, and con¬ 
veyed the views of the Right Honour¬ 
able the Govemor-Goneral regarding 
the overtures made by Dost Maho¬ 
med, &c., &c.” In the published ver¬ 
sion the letter commences with the 
word “regarding.” 



192 THE “commercial” mission to catjbul. 


ance "with the opinions expressed by Lord Auckland, to 
■wave his own claims to Peshawur, and be content "with 
such arrangements as Kunjeet Singh might be inclined 
to enter into with Sultan Mahomed. The Ameer replied 
that he bore no enmity against his brother, though his 
brother was full of rancour against him, and would gladly 
compass his destruction; but that with Sultan Mahomed, 
at Peshawur, he would not be safe for a day; and that 
it would be less injurious to him to leave it directly in 
the hands of the Sikhs, than in the hands of an enemy 
ever ready to intrigue with the Sikhs for his overthrow. 

“ Peshawur,” said he, “ has been conquered by the 
Sikhs; it belongs to them; they may give it to whom¬ 
soever they please; if to Sultan Mahomed Khan, they 
place it in the hands of one who is bent on injuring me; 
and I cannot therefore acknowledge any degree of grati¬ 
tude for your interference, or take upon myself to render 
services in return.” And then follow these mollifying 
sentences, which it was a gross injustice to Dost 
Mahomed to omit from the published letter: “ I admit,” 
said the Ameer, “ that it will be highly beneficial in 
many ways to see the Sikhs once more eastward of 
the Indus, but I still can dispense with none of ray 
troops or relax in my precautionary measures, as equal 
if not greater anxieties will attach to me. I have un¬ 
bosomed myself to yoii, and laid bare, without any sup¬ 
pression, my difficulties. I shall bear in lively remem¬ 
brance the intended good offices of the British Govern¬ 
ment, and I shall deplore that my interest did not per¬ 
mit me to accept that which was tendered in a spirit so 
friendly, but which to me and my advisers has only 
seemed hastening my ruin. To Runjeet Singh your in¬ 
terference is beneficial, as he finds himself involved in 
serious difficulties by the possession of Peshawur, and he 
is too glad of your good offices to escape from a place 



THE PESHAWUB QUESTION. 


193 


which is a burden to his jfinances, but by that escape a 
debt of gratitude is exactible from him and not from 
me ; and if your government will look into this matter, 
they will soon discover my opinions to be far from 
groundless, and my conclusions the only safe policy 
I can pursue.’^ 

The Ameer ceased to speak, and Jubbar Khan fol¬ 
lowed, proposing a compromise. He suggested that it 
might be found advisable to deliver over Peshawur con¬ 
jointly to the Ameer and Sultan Mahomed—^Runjeet 
Singh receiving from the two chiefs the value which he 
might fix as the terms of surrender. The Ameer ob¬ 
served that such an arrangement* would remove his 
fears, and that if he appointed Jubbar Khan to repre¬ 
sent him at Peshawur he would be sure of an equitable 
adjustment of affairs. Burnes replied in general terms 
that the withdrawal of the Sikhs to the eastward of the 
Indus would be a vast benefit to the Afghan nation ; 
and asked Dost Mahomed whether he would rather 
see the Sikhs or Sultan Mahomed in Peshawur. The 
Ameer replied that the question put in plain words was 
ii startling one; but he asked in return if that could be 
considered beneficial to the Afghan nation which was 
especially injurious to him who possessed the largest 
share of sovereignty in Afghanistan. He then ob¬ 
served, in evidence of the truth of his assertions re- 

* Burnes, commenting on the Ne- attempt was made to bring about a 
wab’s proposal,^ observes : “ The ob- settlement of the Peshawur question 
serrations coming from the Newab on the basis of this proposal, I have 
Jubbar Khan are the more remark- not been able to ascertain. But Cap¬ 
able, since he is devoted to his brother, tain Wade, considering it by no 
Sultan Mahomed Khan, and would means unreasonable, decTared his will- 
rejoice to see him restored to Pesha- ingness, with the consent of the Su- 
wur. Thej consequently carried with preme Government, to urge it upon 
me a conviction that the Ameer’s fears the acceptance of Kunjeet. (See post- 
are not groundless, and that they will page 343, note.) It is doubtful, how- 
deserve all due consideration before ever, whether, even if Runjeethfiidcon- 
govemment entered upon any mea- sented to it, Sultan Mahomed would 
sures for attaching this chief to its have fallen into the arrangement, al- 
interests.” This passage was, of though Jubbar Khan declared his 
course, suppressed. Whether any abiUty to reconcile the brothers. 

VOL. I. O 



194 THE commeecial’’ mission to caubul. 


lative to the dangers to which he was exposed from 
the supremacy of Sultan Mahomed at Peshawur: 
‘‘ Sultan Mahomed Khan has just sent an agent to the 
ex-King at Loodhianah (Shah Soojah) to offer his 
services to combine against me and to secure my 
brothers at Caudahar, in support of this coalition/' 
‘‘ What security,” asked the Ameer, “ am I to receive 
against a recurrence of such practices ?” He then con¬ 
tinued: “As for the ex-King himself, I fear him not; he 
has been too often worsted to make head, unless he has 
aid from the British Government, which I am now 
pretty certain he will never receive. If my brother at 
Peshawur, however, under a promise of being made his 
minister, and assisted with Sikh agents and money, 
appears in the field, I may find that in expressing my 
satisfaction at his restoration to Peshawur, I have been 
placing a snake in my bosom—and 1 may then, when 
too late, lament that I did not let tlie Sikhs do their 
worst, instead of replacing tliem by another description 
of enemies.”* 


♦ All this was carefully erased from 
the letter before it was allowed to 
form a part of the published Blue 
Book; and the following just obser¬ 
vations of Captain Burnes shared no 
better fate : “ It has appeared to me 
that they” (the opinions and views of 
the ruler of Caubul) “ call for much 
deliberation. It will be seen that the 
chief is not bent on possessing Pesha¬ 
wur, or (m gratifying an enmity to¬ 
wards his brothers, but simply pur¬ 
suing the worldly maxim of securing 
himself from injury; the arguments 
which he has adduced seem deserving 
of every consideration, and the more 
so when an avowed partisan of Sultan 
Mahomed does not deny the justice 
of the Ameer’s objection.” And fur¬ 
ther on, our agent observes : “ Since 
arrmng here, I have seen an a^ent 
of Persia with alluring promises, 
after jKinetratiiig as far as Candahor, 
oompelled to quit the country be¬ 


cause no one has sent to invite him 
to Caubul. Following him, an agent 
of Russia with letters highly compli¬ 
mentary, and promises more than 
substantial, has experienced no more 
civility than is due by the laws of 
hospitality and nations. It may be 
urged by some that the offers of one 
or both were fallacious, but such a 
dictum is certainly premature; the 
Ameer of Caubul has sought no aid 
ill his arguments from such oflfers, but 
declared that his interests are bound 
up in an alliance with the British 
Government, which he never will de¬ 
sert as long as there is a hope of 
securing one.” There is much more 
in a similar strain—much more can¬ 
celled from the published correspond¬ 
ence—with the deliberate intention 
of injuring the character and mis¬ 
representing the conduct of Dost Ma¬ 
homed, and so justifying their after¬ 
conduct towards him—but enough 



TIIE GABBLED DESPATCHES. 


195 


Still, in spite of the declarations of Burnes that Dost 
Mahomed had little to hope from the co-operation of 
the British Government, the Russian Mission made 
scant progress at the Afghan capital. Alluding to the 
negotiations of our agent, Vickovich wrote some time 
afterwards: “ All this has occasioned Dost Mahomed 
Khan to conduct himself very coldly towards me; and 
then, as he daily converses with Burnes, from my arrival 
here to the 20th of February I have hardly been two or 
three times in his presence.” The fact is, that up to this 
time, as we are assured on the concurrent testimony of 
the British and tlie Russian agent, the latter was received 
in a scurvy and discouraging manner. But on the 21st 
of February letters were opened from the Governor- 
General, stating, in the most decisive language, that 
there was no intention to accede to the proposals of 
the Ameer, and that Peshawur must be left to the Sikhs. 


has already been given to prove how 
mightily the Ameer has been wronged. 

I cannot, indeed, suppress the 
utterance of my abhorrenoo of this 
lystem of garbling the oflicial corre¬ 
spondence of public men — sending 
the letters of a statosinan or diplo¬ 
matist into the word mutilated, emas¬ 
culated—the very pith and substance 
of theiii cut out by the unsparing 
hand of the state-anatomist. The dis¬ 
honesty by which lie upon lie is 
palmed upon the world has not one 
redeeming feature. If public men 
are, without reprehension, to be per¬ 
mitted to lie in the face of nations— 
wilfully, elaborately, and maliciously 
to bear false-witness against their 
neighbours, what hope is there for 
private veracity ? In the case before 
us, the snppreasio veri is virtually the 
nssc 'tio fi&i. The character of Dost 
Mahomed has been lied away; the 
character of Burnes has been lied 
away. Both, by the mutilation of the 
correspondence of the latter, have 
been fearfully misrepresented—both 
have been set forth as doing what 


they did not, and omitting to do what 
they did. 1 care not whose knife— 
whose hand did the work of mutila¬ 
tion. And, indeed, I do not know. 1 
deal with principles, not with persons; 
and have no party cn<is to serve. The 
cause of truth must be upheld. Of¬ 
ficial documents arc the sheet-anchors' 
of historians—the last courts of appeal 
to which the jiublic resort. If these 
documents are tampered with — if 
they are made to misrepresent the 
words and actions of public men, the 
grave of truth is dug, and there is 
seldom a resurrection. It is not al¬ 
ways that an afflicted parent is ready 
to step forward on behalf of an in¬ 
jured child, and lay a memorial at 
the feet of his sovereign, exposing the 
cruelty by which an honourable man 
has been represented in state docu¬ 
ments, as doing that which was ab¬ 
horrent to his nature. In most cases 
the lie goes down, unassailed and 
often unsuspected, to posterity; and 
in place of sober history, we have a 
florid romance. 

2 



196 


THE “commercial” MISSION TO CATJBUL. 


Then, but not till then, a change came over the conduct 
of Dost Mahomed, and the Russian Mission began to rise 
in importance. 

But still another effort was to be made by the Baruk- 
zyes to secure the friendship of the British Government. 
On the 1st of March, Jubbar Khan came in from his 
country seat, and next morning called upon Burnes. He 
had read Lord Auckland’s discouraging letter; but he 
still believed that, through his agency, for he was 
notoriously friendly to the British, something might yet 
be done. His efforts, however, were fruitless. Burnes, 
tied down by his instructions, could give the Newab no 
encouragement. The British Government called upon 
Dost Mahomed to abstain from connecting himself with 
every other state; and promised, as the price of this 
isolation, that they would restrain Eunjeet Singh from 
attacking his dominions; “And that,” said Jubbar Khan, 
“ amounts to nothing, for we are not under the appre¬ 
hension of any aggressions from the side of Lahore.”* 
The Peshawur diflSculty, he said, might be got over; 
but the offer of so little, in return for so much that was 
asked from the Ameer, placed him in a most humiliating 
position, and would, if accepted, lower him in the eyes of 


* Lord Auckland’s offers to re¬ 
strain Runjeet from attacking the 
country of the Sirdars were laughed 
at by them. Jubbar Khan said that 
they indicated very little knowledge 
of the state of Afghanistan; for that, 
“ so far from the proffered protection 
from Runjeet being of the value 
stated, the Maharajah never sought 
to attack Caubul, and that hitherto 
all the aggression had been on the 
part of the Ameer, and not the ruler 
of Lahore.” He added, with unde¬ 
niable truth, that “it appeared we 
valued our offers at a very high rate, 
since we expected, in return, that the 
Afghans would desist from all inter¬ 
course with Persia, Russia, Toorkis- 


tan,” &c. “Were the Afghans,” he 
asked, “to make all these powers 
hostile, and to receive no protection 
against the enmity raised for their 
adhering to the British?” “As for 
Peshawur,” he added, “being with¬ 
held from the Ameer, it might be got 
over; and he believed he did not 
overrate his influence with Sultan 
Mahomed Khan, when he stated that 
he might bring about a reconciliation 
between him and the Ameer; but he 
must say that the value of the Afghans 
had, indeed, been depressed, and that 
he did not wonder at the Ameer’s 
disappointment.” — [ Ungarbled Cor^ 
respondence of Sir A, Burnes.} 



FURTHER NEHOTIATIONS. 


197 


the world. Meerza Samee Khan, next day, told the same 
story;* but, fettered by the orders of the Supreme Go¬ 
vernment, Burnes could give him no hope. 

On the oth of March, Jubbar Khan again appeared be¬ 
fore Burnes with a string of specific demands, dictated by 
the Ameer. “ These consisted of a promise to protect 
Caubul and Candahar from Persia; of the surrender of 
Peshawur by Ilunjeet Singh; of the interference of our 
government to protect, at that city, those who might 
return to it from Caubul, supposing it to be restored to 
Sultan Mahomed Khan; with several other proposals.” 
Upon this Burnes, with an expression of astonishment, 
declared that, on the part of the British Government, he 
could accede to none of these propositions; and added, 
that as he saw no hope of a satisfactory adjustment, he 
should request his dismissal. The Newab,” said Burnes, 
left me in sorrow.” 

The British agent then sat down, and drew up a 
formal letter to the Ameer, requesting leave to depart for 
I'lindostan. In spite of what had taken place, the letter 
somewhat startled the Ameer, who summoned a meeting 
of his principal advisers, “which lasted till past midnight.” f 


* “ The Meerza made nearly the 
same observation as the Newab about 
the exj)ectations wliich the Ameer had 
cherished of doiii^ service for the 
British, and devoting himself to it; 
that it was not the adjustment of 
Feshawur affairs that dissipated his 
hopes, but the indifference to his suf¬ 
ferings and station, which it was now 
clear we felt.” The Meerza truly 
said that Dost Mahomed had often 
written to the British Government 
about his affairs, and that in reply 
th^ answered him about their own. 
—lUngarbled Correspondence of Sir 
A, Jiumes,] 

f It is probably of this meeting, or 
one shor^ preceding it, of which 
General Harlan, who has not much 
reg^d for dates, speaks in the fol¬ 
lowing passage. Harlan had by 


this time quitted Kunjeet Singh’s 
service, nnd taken service with 
Dost Mahomed :—“ The document 
(Lord Auckland’s ultimatum) was 
handed to me amongst others. T 
satisfied myself, by the Governor- 
Gcneral’s signature, of its authen¬ 
ticity, surveying the contents with 
extreme surprise and disappointment. 
Dost Mahomed was mortified, but 
not terrified.The Governor-Ge¬ 

neral’s ultimatum was handed round, 
and an embarrassing silence ensued. 
A few minutes elapsed, when Abdul 
Sami Khan recalled the party from 

abstraction. lie proclaimed that 

the Governor - General’s ultimatum 
left no other alternative than the dis¬ 
mission of the English agent, for the 
spirit of the Kuzzilbash party was 
supercilious and unyielding, though 





198 THE “commercial” mission to caubul. 


On the following morning the conference was resumed; 
and about mid-day Meerza Samee Khan waited on Burnes, 
and invited him to attend the Ameer in the Balia Hissar. 
Gracious and friendly even beyond his ordinary courtesy 
and urbanity, Dost Mahomed expressed his regret that 
the Governor-General had shown so little inclination to 
meet his wishes; but added, that he did not even then 
despair of forming an alliance advantageous both to Eng¬ 
land and Afghanistan. A long argument then ensued; 
but it led to nothing. The old ground was travelled over 
again and again. Burnes asked for everything; but pro¬ 
mised nothing. He had no power to make any con¬ 
cessions. The meeting, though it ended amicably, was 
productive of no good results. Burnes took his departure 
from the Balia Hissar. He might as well have departed 
from Caubul. 

On the 21st of March, the Ameer wrote a friendly 
letter to Lord Auckland, imploring him, in language 
almost of humility, to “ remedy the grievances of the 
Afghans;” to “ give them a little encouragement and 
power.” It was the last despairing effort of the Afghan 
chief to conciliate the good-will of the British Government. 
It failed. T\iQ fiat had gone forth. The judgment against 
him was not to be reversed. Other meetings took place; 
but Burnes knew them to be mere formalities. He re- 


full of duplicity.Nicb Ma- advantageous settlement of your af- 

liomcd Ameer Khan, Akbondzadeli, fairs;' and to this proposition the 
openly opposed the Kuzzilbash party, council assented.” The 

and urged many weighty arguments proposition, it appears, was made to 
in favour of a pacific settlement of Burnes; but Burnes declined the ho- 
thc Ameer’s relations with the Bri- nour of negotiating with the doctor- 
tish Government, which had now as- general. Harlan says that he then 
Burned a position so inauspicious. He wrote to the British envoy, offering 
concluded his oration with these words, to “ negotiate upon his own terms;” 
addressing the Ameer: ‘ There is no but Burnes sent “ a reply personally 
other resource for you but to intro- friendly,” but “ evincing a deficiency 
duce Mr. Harlan in the negotiations of knowledge of first principles con- 
with Mr. Burnes, and he, through his cerning the rights of independent 
own facilities and wisdom, will ar- powers in political negotiations.” 
range a treaty, according to their Burnes says nothing about this in his 
European usage, for the pacific and official or private letters. 




PROCEEDINGS OF VICKOVICH. 


199 


xaained at Caubul with no hope of bringing matters to a 
favorable issue; but because it was convenient to remain. 
He was awaiting the return from Koondooz of Dr. Lord 
and Lieutenant Wood. The month of March passed away, 
and the greater part of April. These oflScers did not 
rejoin the Mission. But one of the Candahar Sirdars, 
Mehr Dil Khan, appeared at Caubul, with the object of 
winning over the Ameer to the Persian alliance. The 
do-nothing policy,” as Burnes subsequently characterised 
it, had done its work. The Russians, as he said, had 
given us the coup-de-grace. Vickovich was publicly sent 
for, and paraded through the streets of Caubul. So 
Barnes determined to depart. Accordingly, on the 26th 
of April, he turned his back upon the Afghan capital.* 
Burnes went; and Vickovich, who had risen greatly 
in favour, soon took his departure for Herat, promising 
everything that Dost Mahomed wanted—engaging to 
furnish money to the Barukzye chiefs, and undertaking 
to propitiate Runjeet Singh.f The Russian quitted 
Caubul, accompanied by Sirdar Mehr Dil Khan and 
one Aboo Khan, Barukzye, a confidential friend of Dost 
Mahomed, and, on the present occasion, his repre¬ 
sentative. It had been arranged that Azim Khan, the 
Ameer’s son, accompanied by the minister, Samee Khan, 


* Mr. Masson says, that before its 
departure the ^Mission had fallen into 
contempt, and that the assassination 
of Burnes was talked of in Caubul. 
He explains, too, what, according to 
his account, were the real causes of 
Burncs’s departure without his com¬ 
panions ; but it does not come within 
our province to investigate Masson’s 
charges against the envoy. 

+ Overtures had been made to 
Runjeet by Vickovich, who offered 
to visit the Maharajah's Cmirt. But 
British influence at this time was too 
strong at Lahore for the Russian to 
make way against it. Runjeet, how¬ 
ever, who was not ignorant of the 
Russo-phobia then rampant amongst 


us, turned the Cossack’s overtures to 
some account, and probably pretended 
more uncertainty on the score of the 
answer to be returned to him than he 
in reality felt. Mackeson, to whom 
the business of counteracting the 
designs of Vickovich was entrusted, 
managed it with great address, and 
won from the Maharajah a promise to 
have nothing to do with the Musco¬ 
vite agent. But the knowledge that 
the Russian agent was, as it were, 
knocking at the gates of Lahore, made 
our autliorities especially anxious to 
conciliate the Maharajah^ by refrain¬ 
ing from entering into any negotia^ 
tions with Caubul wiiich might pos¬ 
sibly give umbrage to Runjeet 



200 


THE “ commercial” MISSION TO CATTBUL. 


should be despatched to the Shah; but this arrange¬ 
ment being set aside, in consequence of the scruples of 
the Meerza, Aboo Khan was despatched in their place. 
There were now no half measures to be pursued. Dost 
Mahomed had flung himself into the arms of the Persian 
King. 

Vickovich was received with all honour in Western 
Afghanistan.* Russian promises now began to carry every¬ 
thing before them. A treaty between the Candahar bro¬ 
thers and the Shah was drawn up and signed by the latter. 
The Russian ambassador to whom it was forwarded 
sent it back to the Sirdars, saying, “ Mahomed Shah has 
promised to give you the possession of Herat; I sincerely 
tell you that you will also get Ghorian, on my account, 

from the Shah.When Mahomed Omar Khan 

arrives here I will ask the Shah to quit Herat, and I will 
remain here with 12,000 troops, and, when you join, we 
will take Herat, which will afterwards be delivered to 
you,”—magnificent promises, most refreshing to the souls 
of the Candahar chiefs. The letter was sent on to Dost 
Mahomed; but it did not fill the heart of the Ameer 
with an equal measure of delight. The Russian alliance 
was unpopular at Caubul. It had “ ruined him in the 
eyes of all Mahomedans.” It soon became obvious, too, 
in spite of the fair beginning, that whilst he was losing 


* What befel the unhappy agent 
after this, it is painful to relate. 
When he returned to Persia, in 1839, 
after giving a full report of his mission 
to M. Duhamel, the new minister at 
Teheran, he was instructed to proceed 
direct to St. Petersburgh. On his 
arrival there, full of hope, for he had 
discharged the duty entrusted to him 
with admirable address, he reported 
himself, after the customary formality, 
to Count Nesselrode; but the minis¬ 
ter refused to see him. Instead of a 
flattering welcome, the unhappy envoy 
was received with a crushing message, 


to the effect that Count Nesselrode 
“ knew no Captain Vickovich, except 
an adventurer of that name, who, it 
was reported, had been lately engaged 
in some unauthorised intrigues at 
Caubul and Candahar.** Vickovich 
understood at once the dire portent 
of this message. He knew the cha¬ 
racter of his government. He was 
aware of the recent expostulations of 
Great Britain. And he saw clearly 
that he was to be sacrificed. He went 
back to his hotel, wrote a few bitter, 
reproachful lines, burnt all liis other 
papers, and blew out his brains. 




FAILDKB OP THE RUSSO-PEBSIAN LEAGUE. 201 


everything by the dissolution of his friendship with the 
British, the Russians could really do nothing to assist 
him. Mahomed Shah was wasting his strength before 
Herat. The Persian army, under the command of the 
Sovereign himself, moved by Russian diplomacy and 
directed by Russian skill, was only precipitating itself into 
an abyss of failure, and the Candahar brethren, who had 
been promised so much, were linking themselves with 
a decrepit cause, from which they were likely to gain 
nothing. Soon other tidings came to alarm him. The 
Russian game was nearly played out; and the resent¬ 
ment of the British was about to break forth in a man¬ 
ner which threatened the total extinction of Barukzye 
supremacy in Afghanistan. He looked out towards the 
West, and he could plainly see that, in flinging himself 
upon Russo-Persian support, he had trusted to a founda- 
dation of sand. The ground was shifting under his feet. 
His new friends were not able to assist him. A subal¬ 
tern of the British army within the walls of Herat was 
setting them at defiance.* 

* I have spoken at page 189 of the (which are now commenced between 
letterfrom the Emperor Nicholas, with you and myself) in my heart, I will 
which Vickovich made his appear- feel always happy to assist the people 
ance at Caubul. 1 have since found of Caubul who may come to trade 
a translation of it. It was excluded into my kingdom. On the arrival of 
from the published papers : your messenger I have ordered him 

“ A.C. In a happy moment, the to make preparations for his long 
mcs.senger of your Highness, Meerza journey back to you, and also ap* 
Hosam, reached my Court, with your pointed a man of dignity to accom- 
friendly letter. I was very much de- pany him on the part of my govern- 
lighted to receive it, and highly grati- ment. If it pleases God, and he 
fied by its perusal. I’lie contents of reaches safe, he will present to you 
the letter prove that you are my well- the rarities of my country, which 1 
wisher, and have friendly opinions have sent through him. By tlie grace 
towards me. It flattered me very of God, may your days be prolonged, 
much, and I was convinced of your — Sent from St, Petersburgh^ the 
friendship to my everlasting govern- capital of Ritssia^ on the 27th of Aprils 
ment. In consequence of this, and 1837, A,D,^ and in the I2th year of 
preserving the terms of friendship my rei^P 



202 


HERAT. 


CHAPTEE n. 

[1837—1838.] 

The Siege of Herat—Shah Kamran and Yar Mahomed—Return of the 
Shah—Eldred Pottinger—Preparations for the Defence—Advance of the 
Persian Army—Progress of the Siege—Negotiations for Peace—Failure 
of the Attack—The Siege raised. 

SuEKOUNDEU by a fair expanse of country, where alter¬ 
nating coru-fields, vineyards, and gardens varied the rich¬ 
ness and beauty of the scene; where httle fortified villages 
studded the plain, and the bright waters of small 
running streams lightened the pleasant landscape, ‘ lay 
the city of Herat.* The beauty of the place was be¬ 
yond the walls. Within, all was dirt and desolation. 
Strongly fortified on every side by a wet ditch and a 
solid outer wall, with five gates, each defended by a small 
outwork, the city presented but few claims to the admi¬ 
ration of the traveller. Four long bazaars, roofed with 
arched brickwork, meeting in a small domed quadrangle 
in the centre of the city, divided it into four quarters.f 

* Arthur Conolly. The correct- not be recognised by its former visi- 
ness of this description is confirmed tants. Moreover, the city and its 
by Eldred Pottinger, in his unpub- surrounding places have been so well 
lished jouraal. 1 liave been obliged described by Lieut. A. Conolly, that 
to write it in the past tense. “ The I need not repeat the description.”— 
late war,” says Pottinger, “ and its [^Eldred Pottinger's MS, Journal.'] 
consequences have so changed the en- f Of these bazaars Pottinger writes: 

tire neighbourhood of the city, that, “ The interior of the city is divided 
under its present appearance, it would into four nearly equal divisions, by 



THE cmr OF HERAT. 


208 


In each of these there may have been about a thou¬ 
sand dwelling-houses and ten thousands of inhabitants. 
Mosques and caravanserais, public baths and public reser¬ 
voirs, varied the wretched uniformity of the narrow dirty 
streets, which, roofed across, were often little better than 
dark tunnels or conduits, where every conceivable de¬ 
scription of filth was suffered to collect and putrify. 
When Arthur Conolly expressed his wonder how the 
people could live in the midst of so much filth, he was 
answered, “ The climate is fine; and if dirt killed people 
where would the Afjfhans be ?”* 

Such to the eye of an ordinary traveller, in search of 
the picturesque, was the aspect of the city and its en¬ 
virons at the time when the army of Mahomed Shah 
was marching upon Herat. To the mind of the mili¬ 
tary observer both the position and construction of the 
place were suggestive of much interesting speculation. 
Situated at that point of the great mountain-range which 
alone presents facilities to the transport of a train of 
heavy artillery, Herat has, with no impropriety of desig¬ 
nation, been described as the “ Gate of India.” Within the 
limits of the Hcratec territory all the great roads leading 
on India converge. At other points, between Herat and 
Caubul, a body of troops unencumbered with guns, or 

two streets which, at right angles, country are, with a vacancy at the 
cross each other in the centre of the apex, filled merely with bits of broken 
city. The principal one joins the bricks. . . . The whole of the lower 
gate of Candahar to the l*ay-i-llissar, floors on each side are used as shops.” 
and was formerly covered by a sue- —[Eldred Pottinyer's MS, Journal.'] 
cession of small domes, springing * Conolly says: “ The town itself 
from arches which cross the streets, is, I should imagine, one of the 
About two-thirds of this magnificent dirtiest in the world. . . . No drains 
bazaar still remain; but so choked up having been contrived to carry off 
with rubbish, and so ruinous, that it the rains, which falls within the walls, 
has lost much of its attraction to the it collects and sta^ates in ponds 
eye. This bazaar was about 1300 which are dug in different parts of 
yards long and 6 in width. The soli- the city. The residents cast out the 
dity of the masonry of this work refuse of their houses into the streets, 
should have ensured its stability; but and dead cats and dogs are commonly 
unfortunately the arches are all de- seen lying upon heaps of the vilest 
fective—not one has a keystone, filth.**— [ConoUy'a Journey to the North 
They are built, as all others m this of India?] 



204 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


having only a light field artillery, might make good its 
passage, if not actively opposed, across the stupendous 
mountain-ranges of the Hindoo-Koosh ;• but it is only 
by the Herat route that a really formidable well-equipped 
army could make its way upon the Indian frontier from 
the regions on the north-west. Both the nature and the 
resources of the country are such as to favour the success 
of the invader. All the materials necessary for the 
organisation of a great army, and the formation of his 
depots, are to be found in the neighbourhood of Herat. 
The extraordinary fertility of the plain has fairly en¬ 
titled it to be called the “ Granary of Central Asia.” 
Its mines supply lead, iron, and sulphur; the surface of 
the country, in almost every direction, is laden with salt¬ 
petre ; the willow and poplar trees, which furnish the 
best charcoal, flourish in all parts of the country; whilst 
from the population might at any time be drawn hardy 
and docile soldiers to recruit the ranks of an invading 
army.’*'^ Upon the possession of such country would de¬ 
pend, in no small measure, the success of operations un¬ 
dertaken for the invasion or the defence of Hindostan. 

The city of Herat, it has been said, stood within solid 
eartheni walls, surrounded by a wet ditch. The four 
sides were of nearly equal length, a little less than a mile 
in extent, facing towards the four points of the compass. 
The most elevated quarter of the city was the north-east, 
from which it gradually sloped down to the south-west 
corner, where it attained its lowest descent.f The real 
defences of the place were two covered ways, or fausse- 
braies^ on the exterior slope of the embankments, one 
within and the other without the ditch. The lower one 
was on the level of the surrounding country, its parapet 
‘‘ partly covered by a mound of earth on the counter- 

♦ Report of Major Eldred Pot-- Calcutta: July, 1840. — [iliiS. Re- 
Huger to the Supreme Government cords,'] 

of India on the defences of Herat, f Eldred PotHnger's MS. Journal. 



INTERNAL CONDITION OF HERAT. 


205 


scarp, the accumulation of rubbish from the cleansings of 
the ditch.” On the northern side, surrounded by a wet 
ditch, the citadel, once known as the Kella-i-Aktyar- 
Aldyn, but now as the Ark, overlooked the city. Built 
entirely of good brick masonry, with lofty ramparts and 
numerous towers, it was a place of considerable strength; 
but now its defences, long neglected, were in a wretched 
state of repair. Indeed, when, in 1837, tidings of the 
advance of the Persian army reached Herat, the whole 
extent of the fortifications was crumbling into decay. 

The population of Herat was estimated at about 
45,000 inhabitants. A large majority of these were 
Sheealis, It was said that there might have been 1000 
Hindoos, of various callings, in the city; there were 
several families of Armenians, and a few families of 
Jews. The general appearance of the inhabitants was 
that of a poor and an oppressed people. Dirty and ill- 
clad, they went about in a hurried, anxious manner, 
each man looking with suspicion into his neighbour’s 
face. Few women were to be seen in the streets. It 
was hardly safe for a stranger to be abroad after sunset. 
Unless protected by an armed escort, there was too great 
a likelihood of his being seized and sold into slavery. 
There was no protection for life, liberty, or property. 
They who should have protected the people were the 
foremost of their oppressors. During the absence of the 
King, in 1837, such was the frightful misrule—such the 
reign of terror that had been established by the char¬ 
tered violence of the rulers of the city, that the shops 
were closed before sunset, and all through the night 
the noise and uproar, the challengings, and the cries for 
help, were such as could scarcely have been exceeded if 
the place had been actually besieged. A son of Yar 
Mahomed Khan, the Wuzeer, was then governor of the 
city. Compelled to hold office upon a small salary, he 
enriched himself by plundering the houses of the inha- 



206 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


bitants, and selling the people into slavery. All who 
were strong enough followed his example, and when 
detected, secured immunity for themselves by giving 
him a portion of the spoil.* So remorseless, indeed, was 
the tyranny exercised over the unhappy Sheeahs by 
their Afghan masters, that many of the inhabitants of 
Herat looked forward to the coming of the Persian King 
as to the advent of a deliverer, and would gladly have 
seen the city given over to the governance of one who, 
whatever may have been his political claims, was not an 
alien in his religious faith.f 

Such was the last remnant of the old Afghan mo¬ 
narchy in the hands of Shah Kamran—the only one of 
the Suddozyc Princes who had retained his hold of the 
country he had governed. His government was at this 
time a pageant and a name. An old and a feeble man, 
broken down by long years of debauchery, he had re¬ 
signed the active duties of administration into the hands 
of his Wuzeer. He was, perhaps, the worst of the royal 
princes—the worst of a bad race. His youth had been 
stained by the commission of every kind of Oriental 


* Eldred Pottinger, from whose 
manuscript journal the materials of 
this chapter are mainly drawn, gives 
a remarkable illustration of the man¬ 
ner in which justice was then admi¬ 
nistered. “ During this period,” he 
says, “a Ileratee detected a noted 
robber in his outhouse, and with the 
aid of his neighbours arrested him. 
In the morning, when taken before 
the Sirdars by the cutwal, to request 
the order for punishment might be 
given as the case was proved, the 
robber declared, that on hearing the 
citizen call for aid, he had run to his 
help, and being immediately laid hold 
of, made prisoner and accused. He 
also accused the cutwal of being a 
partner in the plan. The young Sir¬ 
dar, with an acumen to be wondered 
at but not described, decided that 
his was the truth of the story—-sold 


the accuser, and so severely fined the 
witnesses, that they were reduced to 
poverty and debt to the soldiers—^the 
sure precursor of slavery. He then 
gave the thief, who was his own ser¬ 
vant, a I'helat (or dress of honour) 
and released him. U nder such a go¬ 
vernor the misery of the people would 
require a more eloquent pen than 
mine to narrate.” 

t It need scarcely be said that the 
Persians are generally of the Sheeah, 
and the Afghans of the Soonee sect. 
At Herat uie rulers and the soldiery 
were Soonees, whilst the shopkeepers 
and other peaceful citizens were 
Sheeahs. Tne oppression of the 
Sheeahs by their Afghan masters was 
one of the circumstances by a refer¬ 
ence of which Mahomed Shah sought 
to justify his invasion of Herat. 



CHABACTEB OF SHAH KAMRAN. 


207 


crime; and now in his old age, if the evil passions of 
his nature were less prominently developed, it was only 
because physical decay had limited his power to in¬ 
dulge them. In his younger days he had set no restraint 
upon himself, and now it was nature only that restrained 
him. The violent gusts of passion, which had once 
threatened all who were within his influence, had given 
place to an almost incessant peevishness and petulance of 
manner, more pitiable to behold than it was dangerous to 
encounter. He had once played openly the part of the 
bandit—placing himself at the head of gangs of armed 
retainers, plundering houses by night and slaying all 
who opposed him; now he suffered others to commit the 
violence which he had before personally enacted, and 
oppressed, by deputy, the weakness which he could not 
see smitten before his face. He had once been immo¬ 
derately addicted to sensual pleasure, and in the pursuit 
of such gratification—arrested by no feelings of compas¬ 
sion, by no visitings of remorse—had violently seized 
the objects of his desires, to whomsoever they belonged, 
and cast them adrift when his appetite was sated; now 
he sought excitement of another kind, to which age and 
feebleness were no impediments, and turned from the 
caresses of women to seek solace from the stimulants of 
wine. Unfaithful to his friends and unmerciful to his 
enemies, ingratitude and cruelty were conspicuous in his 
nature, and these darker features of his character there 
was little to lighten or relieve. Among his countrymen 
he was esteemed for a certain kind of courage, and in 
his younger days he had not been wanting in activity 
and address.* Though naturally haughty and arrogant, 
there were times when he could assume, for his own 

♦ Pottinger says that “he was divide a sheep in two by a single 
much devoted to field sports, and cut of his sabre, and with a Lahore 
spent the greater part of his time in bow send an arrow through a cow.” 
their pursuit. He was an unerring —[Mi?. Journal] 
shot with a matchlock; he could 



208 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


ends, a becoming courtesy of demeanour; and, as by 
assiduous attention to costume, he endeavoured to com¬ 
pensate for the deficiencies of an unattractive person, 
there was something of a high and princely aspect about 
the outward bearing even of this degraded man. Short 
and thickset, with mis-shapen limbs and an unseemly 
gait, his appearance was more comely in repose than in 
action. His face was pitted with the small-pox, and 
there was a harshness in his countenance stamped by the 
long possession of arbitrary power and the indulgence of 
unbridled passions; but he had a finer, more massive, 
more upright forehead, than the majority of his country¬ 
men, with more of intellect impressed upon it. His voice 
had once been loud and deep; but the feebleness of age, 
much sickness, and much suffering, had given a queru¬ 
lousness to its tones which was equally undignified and 
unpleasing. 

If in the character and the person of Shah Kamran 
there was little that was estimable or attractive, there 
was less in the person and character of his Wuzeer. 
Yar Mahomed Khan was a stout, square-built man, of 
middle height, with a heavy, stern countenance, thick 
negro-like lips, bad straggling teeth, an overhanging 
brow, and an abruptly receding forehead. His face was 
redeemed from utter repulsiveness by the fineness of his 
eyes and the comeliness of his beard. Like his master, he 
attired himself with care and propriety; but his manner 
was more attractive than his appearance. Affable in 
his demeanour, outwardly courteous and serene, he seldom 
gave the rein to his temper, but held it in habitual con¬ 
trol. He talked freely and well, had a fund of anecdote 
at his command, was said to be well read in Mahomedan 
divinity, and was strict in his attention to the external 
formalities of his religion. His courage was never 
questioned; and his ability was as undoubted as his 
courage. Both were turned to the worst possible ac- 



KAJfRAN AND TAB MAH0MT3D. 


209 


count. Of all the unscrupulous miscreants in Central 
Asia, Yar Mahomed was the most unscrupulous. His 
avarice and his ambition knew no bounds, and nothing 
was suffered to stand in the way of their gratification. 
Utterly without tenderness or compassion, he had no 
regard for the sufferings of others. Sparing neither sex 
nor age, he trod down the weak with an iron heel; and, 
a tj’rant himself, encouraged the tyranny of his retainers. 
As faithless as he was cruel, there was no obligation 
which he had not violated, no treachery that had not 
stained his career. If there was an abler or a worse man 
in Central Asia, I have not yet heard his name.* 

In the summer of 1837 the bazaars of Herat were 
a-stir with rumours of the movements of the royal army. 
The King and the Wuzeer were absent from the city on 
a campaign in Seistan. To gratify the personal rancour 
of the latter they had laid siege to the fortress of Jowayn, 
and in the vain attempt to reduce a place of no political 
importance, had crippled their own military resources in 
a manner which they soon began bitterly to lament. 
The waste of so much strength on so small an enter¬ 
prise was unworthy of a man so able and so astute as 
Yar Mahomed; but the feeling of personal resentment 
was stronger in him than either avarice or ambition, 
lie had a larger game in hand at that time, and he 
should have husbanded all his resources for the great 
struggle by which he sought to restore to the Suddozye 
Princes the sovereignty of Caubul and Candahar.f 

* Yar Mahomed was the nephew same capacious mind and energetic 
if Atta Mahomed, an influential Sir- character which distinguished their 
W of the Alekozyc tribe, who was cousin, Yar Mahomed, who was al- 
ninister to Shah Mahmoud and ways, more or less, at enmity with 
dadjee Feroz, and afterwards of them, and at last drove them out of 
>hah Kamran. This man left two Herat, in 1841. 
ons, Been Mahomed and Sultan f Pottinger says, with reference to 

dahomed; but neither possessed the this ill-judged movement, that the 

VOL. I. P 



210 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


It was soon buzzed ‘abroad in Herat that the army 
was about to return—that it had broken off from the 
siege of Jowayn—and was coming back to gird itself 
up for stirring work at home. Cossids were coming in 
daily from the royal camp with instructions for the col¬ 
lection of grain and the repair of the defences of the 
city. The meaning of this was involved in no obscurity. 
The ambassador who had been sent to Teheran to seek, 
among other objects, the assistance of Mahomed Shah in 
the projected enterprise for the recovery of Candahar 
and Caubul* had brought back an answer to the effect 
that the Persian monarch claimed both principalities lor 
himself, and intended to take possession of Herat as a 
preliminary to further operations. It was said to be the 
intention-of the King of Kings to proceed to Caubul, 
and, receiving as the price of his assistance the sub¬ 
mission of the Amcor, to join Dost Mahomed in a reli¬ 
gious war against the Siklis. Herat was to be reduced 
on the road. Kuinran was to be deprived of liis regal 
titles. Prayers were to be said and coin struck in the 
name of the Persian King; and a Persian garrison was 

Wuzcor played away the last stake of Yar iVTahoincd ever really contem- 
his master by which he could have plated an expedition for the recovery 
hoped to recover his former domi- of Cundalnir and Caubul; but it is 
iiions or to defend his present. In- certain that they talked about it. In 
deed, after-events have shown that the letter which Kamran sent to Ma- 
the body of cavalry which he thus homed Shah, by Futteh Mahomed 
frittered away and destro 3 ’ed was Ivhan, lie e.xpressed a “ hope o! ob- 
stron^ enough to have prevented the tainin^ the favour of his Majesty, so 
Per ^ian army leav ng its own frou- that with the aiil of the well-wishers 
tier.” There was, however, some com- of Persia he minht subdue his here- 
pensat on whicli, whether the result of ditary ilominion.s, and overwhelm Ids 
the sie»je or not, is worth mentioning, rebellion'^ enemies;” and in the mes- 
in the fact that when Herat was at- sage whieli Pottinger was coinmis- 
tiMjked by the Persians, many of the sioned to deliver to the Persian ino- 
old garrison of Jowayn came to the narch, it was distinctlv declared that 
assistance of their former enemies. Futteli ^lahomed Khan liad been sent 
* It is doubted by some, whose to Teheran to beg for aid towards 
opinions arc entitled to the highest the recovery of Kainran's paternal 
respect, ‘whether either Kamran or kingdom.— post, page 229, 



RUMOURS OF THE PERSIAN ADVANCE. 


211 


to be received into the city. These were the terms 
dictated by Mahomed Shah, and thrown back by Shah 
Kamran with defiance. 

The greatest excitement now prevailed throughout the 
city. There was but one topic of discourse. Every 
man met his neighbour with a word about the coming 
of the Persian army. The Sheeaffs, smarting under the 
tyranny to which they had long been subjected, spoke 
of the advent of the Persian monarch as of the coming 
of a deliverer, whilst the Soonee Afghans, whom they 
taunted with predictions of the success of the invading 
force, swore that they would defend, to the last drop 
of their blood, the only remnant of the old Afghan 
monarcliy which liad not been violently wrested from 
the hands of its legitimate possessors. 

*On the 17th of September the King returned to Herat. 
Moved by one common impulse of curiosity, the people 
wont forth to meet him. The streets were lined with 
eager thousands, and the house-tops were alive with 
gazers. A procession of the true Oriental type, it pre¬ 
sented, in vivid contrasts, strazige alternations of the 
shabby and the superb. First came a few strong bag¬ 
gage-mules, and a few straggling horsemen, mounted on 
tine well-built animals, but lean, and often lame and 
wounded. Then, in their high red-cloth caps, appeared 
he criers and the executioners, bearing aloft the instru- 
nents of their calling; and, in spite of the grim sugges- 
iveness of the large knives and tiger-headed brazen 
aaces, presenting an appearance less solemn than gro- 
esque. Next came a string of horses led by armed 
rooms, their fine stag-like heads telling the purity of 
heir blood, and their handsome equipments the royal 
wnership they boasted. Then followed, close behind, 

1 a covered litter of red cloth, carried by Hindostanee 
carers, Shah Kamran himself. Very plainly, but taste- 

V 2 



212 


THE SIEGE OF HEKAT. 


fully attired, the golden bosses on his sword-belt, and 
the jewels on his dagger-hilt, being the only ornaments 
about the royal person, he returned, through the open 
curtains of his litter, with a kingly and a graceful cour¬ 
tesy, the salutations of the people. Next came the Koyal 
Princes, with the eunuchs, and other personal attendants 
of the Shah ;* and then, but at a long interval, a motley 
crowd of armed foot-men, the regular infantry of Herat, 
in all sorts of irregular costumes. These preceded the 
cavalcade of the Wuzeer, Yar Mahomed, who, with all 
the chiefs of note around him, headed the main body of 
the Afghan cavalry, whose low sheepskin caps and 
uniform attire made up a very soldierly appearance. 
Another body of infantry closed the procession. The 
guns had been left behind. 

Among the many Avho went forth on that September 
morning to witness the entrance of Shah Kamran into 
his capital, was a young European officer. Riding out 
a mile beyond the city walls, he picketed his horse in 
the court-yard of a deserted house, and joined a party of 
Afghans, who, sitting on the domed roof of the build¬ 
ing, were watching the procession as it passed. He had 
entered Herat about a month before, after an adven¬ 
turous journey from Caubul, through the Imauk and 
Hazareh coimtries. The name of this young officer was 
Eldred Pottinger. He was a Lieutenant in the Bombay 
Artillery; and had been despatched by his uncle. Colonel 
Pottinger, who was then Resident in Sindh,f for the 
purpose of exploring the countries of Afghanistan, and 
collecting materials for a full report to be drawn up on 
his return. He started in no recognised official capacity, 

♦ Among these was M. Euler, the the condition of Afghanistan by the 
Shall'8 European physician. reports of Mr. Masson, who was then 

t Colonel (Sir Henry) Pottinger the British news-writer at Caubul. 
had been particularly interested in 



KT.n nKn pottingee. 


213 


but travelled onward in the most unostentatious manner, 
assuming the disguise of a Cutch horse-dealer, and at¬ 
tracting little attention on his route. Journeying up¬ 
wards by Shikarpoor and Dehra Ismael Khan to Pesha- 
wur, he proceeded thence to Caubul, and there chang¬ 
ing his disguise for that of an Indian Syud, made his way 
tlirough the rude country of the Imauks and Hazarehs 
to Herat. Though at this period he was but slightly 
acquainted with the Persian language, and was ignorant 
of the Mahomedan prayers, of their genuflexions, modes 
of worship, and similar observances, he passed on almost 
unquestioned by the credulous Afghans. In Herat itself, 
tliough he seems to have taken little pains to conceal 
his real character, he remained, for some time,* lodging 
iu a caravanserai, and mixing freely with its inmates, 
but seldom recognised as an European by those with 
whom he associated. 

The King and the Wuzeer returned to Herat; and 
Eldred Pottinger soon sent a message to the latter, 
offering, as a stranger and a traveller, to wait upon him, 
if he desired to see him. To the surprise of the Eng¬ 
lish olBccr, Yar Mahomed sent a messenger to him inti¬ 
mating that, early on the following morning, he would 
be happy to receive him. Pottinger went. The minis¬ 
ter, who was seated in an alcove in the dressing-room 
of his bath, rose as the stranger entered, invited him to 
take a seat beside himself, and welcomed him with 
becoming courtesy. As the only articles he possessed 
worthy of the acceptance of the chief, Pottinger pre¬ 
sented his detonating pistols; and the gift was graciously 
received. A few days afterwards he paid, “ by desire,” 

♦ “ I have heard him,” writes one Mecca, he silenced all questioning by 
who knew Pottinger well, “ describe appealing to the usage of India.”— 
how on two occasions, when challenged [Private Correspondence."] 
about not praying or turning towards 



214 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


a visit to the King.* Little did Shah Kaiuran and Yar 
Mahomed, when they received that unassuming traveller, 
think how much, under Providence, the future destinies 
of Herat were in the hands of that young Englishman. 
The spirit of adventure was strong in Eldred Pottinger. 
It had brought him to the gates of Herat, and now it 
kept him there, eager to take a part in the coming 
struggle between the Heratees and their Persian in¬ 
vaders. And when the day of trial came—when the 
enemy were under the walls of the city—he threw him¬ 
self into the contest, not merely in a spirit of adven¬ 
ture, as a young soldier rejoicing in the opportunity thus 
afforded him of taking part in the stirring scenes of active 
warfare, but as one j^rofoundly impressed with the con¬ 
viction that his duty to his country called upon him, in 
such a crisis, to put forth all his energies in aid of those 
who were striving to arrest a movement threatening not 
only the independence of Herat, but the stability of the 
British Empire in the East. 


* rottinjjer, who is ])r()vokin^ly 
chary, in his jounuil, of inlbrmatioii 
about himself, does not say wliether 
he appeared at these interviews in 
his true cliaracter of a Ih-itishoflicer; 
but I conclude that he did not, on 
these occasions, attempt to conceal 
his nationality. Nor does it seem 
that, in his intercourse with the higher 
class of Heratees, he wore any dis¬ 
guise ; for we soon find him taking 
part in a conversation about Arthur 
Conolly, and addressed as a country¬ 
man of that fine* hearted young Eng¬ 
lishman. I cannot transcribe, without 
a glow of pleasure, the following pas¬ 
sage in Pottinger’s journal:—“I fell 
in with a number of Captain Conolly's 
acquaintances. Every person asked 
after him, and appeared disappointed 
when 1 told them 1 did not know him. 
In two places I crossed Mr. Conolly's 
route, and on his account received 
the greatest hospitality and attention 


—indeed, more than was jdeasant, for 
such lilierality re([uired correspond¬ 
ing upon my part; and my funds 
were not well adapted for any extra¬ 
ordinary demand upon them. In 
Herat, Mr. Conolly’s fame was great. 
In a large party where the subject of 
the Europeans who had visited Herat 
was mooted, Conolly’s name being 
mentioned, I was asked if I knew him, 
i\iid on replying, ‘ Merely by report,’ 
Moollah IMahomed, a Sheeah Moolhili 
of eminence, ealliii" to me across the 
room, said, ‘You have a great plea¬ 
sure awaiting you. When you see him 
give him my salutation, and tell him 
that I say he has done as much to 
give the English nation fame in 
Herat, as your ambassador, Mr. El- 
phinstone, did at Peshawur;’ and in 
this he was seconded by the great 
mass present.” — [Eldred Pottinger^s 
MS, Journal.'} 



PREPARATIONS FOR THE SIEGE. 


215 


Scarcely had the King returned to Herat, when a 
proclamation went forth into the surrounding villages, 
decreeing that all the grain and forage should be 
brought into tlie city, and tliat the villagers should abide 
within its walls, on pain of the Shah’s resentment. The 
danger seemed something dim and remote, and the order, 
at first, was little iieeded. But wlien, towards the close 
of C)etol)er, intelligence re.iched Herat that the Persian 
army had arrived at Toorbut, another more imperative 
edict was is'^ucd, commanding all tlie outstanding crops, 
grain, and forage, to be destroyed, and the fruit trees to 
be cut down in the surrounding gardens. The soldiery 
were let loo<e upon the country to carry out the royal 
decree. The ])olicy of this measure is apparent; but 
tliere was unlooked-for evil in the result. It was the 
object of the Ileratec Government to keep all the avail¬ 
able grain, forage, and firewood outside the city from 
falling into the hands of the invading army. If these 
nccc'ssaries could not be stored in Herat, the next best 
thing was to destroy them. But the license thus given 
to the soldiery completely unhinged the little discipline 
Uiat had before^ kept them together. They were, indeed, 
li’om that time so completely disorganised, that it was 
never afterwards found practicable to reduce them to 
order. 

In the mean wliile, the city was alive with rumours of 
the progress of the Persian army. It was ascertained 
that they were moving forward^ in three bodies, the 
advance of which was a force of 10,000 or 12,000 men, 
under Alayar Khan.* Every now and then a prisoner 

* Better known by his title of hash^ or younger branch. Futteh Ali 
Asoof-ood-dowlah. He was the head Shah, to stanch an old tribe feud, 
of the Yukhaiv-bash division of the had married his son and heir-appa- 
Kajjar tribe, and, according to the rent, Abbas Meerza. to the heiress of 
liOTaldry of the clans, was thus of the rival branch, and Mahomed Shah 
higher rank than the Shah, who being the issue of this marriage, the 
was merely the chief of the Ashagha^ Asoof-ood-dowlah was his maternal 



216 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


was brought in; but the people, who seized them, bitterly 
complained that they could not make more captures. 
The Persian army, they loudly declared, was composed 
of a set of the most contemptible cowards, because they 
marched in compact bodies, defended by their guns, 
instead of straggling boldly about on purpose to be cut 
off by marauding Afghans.* 

Early in November there was a hard frost, and the 
Heratees began hopefully to speculate on the chances of 
a severe winter. Never were the predictions of the 
weatherwise so cruelly falsified; but the hope buoyed 
them up for a time. Another cheering anticipation was 
belied in the same mortifying manner. It was long a 
matter of anxious conjecture whether the Persians 
would attack Ghorian. In 1834-35 they had left it 
untouched ; and it was believed that now again they 
would mask it, for its reputed strength was greater than 
that of Herat, and it was defended by a picked garrison, 
under the command of the brother of Yar Mahomed. 
But these hopes were soon dispersed by the arrival of 
couriers from Ghorian, with tidings that the place was 
besieged. On the 15th of November it was announced 
that Ghorian had fallen. 

Matters now began to wear a more alarming aspect. 
Cursing with his whole heart the cowardice or trea¬ 
chery of his brother, who, almost without a struggle, had 
shamefully surrendered his charge,f Yar Mahomed, with 


uncle. The Asoof was Governor of 
Kliorassan, with almost independent 
powers, from 1835 to 1847. He is 
now in exile at Baghdad. 

* As the army approached Herat 
some important captures were made. 
Among others, the secretary of the 
Asoof-ood-dowlah was carried off, 
with all his papers. 

*|* This was Yar Mahomcd*s first 
angry view of the case; but it may 


be doubted whether Shere Mahomed 
Khan was fairly to be censured for 
the loss of Ghorian. Of small dimen¬ 
sions, and unfurnished with bomb- 
proofs, the place was ill calculated to 
sustain the heavy vertical fire of shot 
and shell which the Persian artillery 
poured into it. A magazine and 
storehouse took fire; and at the time 
of its surrender Colonel Stoddart 
pronounced it to be quite untenable. 



DEFENSIVE OPEBATIONS. 


217 


increased vigour, addressed himself to the defence of 
the city. The gates were closed against all egress. 
. The people poured into Herat in floods from the sur¬ 
rounding country. In eveiy house were huddled to¬ 
gether the members of five or six families. The very 
ruins were thickly tenanted. But still the streets were 
alive with throngs of people seeking habitations in the 
city. Everywhere excitement and alarm w'ere visible 
in the countenances .and the gestures of the Ileratees. 
It was a strange and fearful conjuncture, and no man 
felt himself secure. A fiat had gone i'orth for the 
apprehension of all persons of doubtful loyalty. Many 
suspected of infidelity were seized, their persons impri¬ 
soned, and their property confiscated, whilst others, 
in whom the spirit of rebellion had been more clearly 
evidenced, were plunged, with all their family and 
dependents, into one great sea of ruin. When it was 
known that Shuins-ood decn Khan,* an Afghan chief of 
note, had thrown off his allegiance to Herat, his Per¬ 
sian dependents were seized and stripped of all they 
possessed. Some were tortured, some were sent into 
slavery, and some were condemned to death. The 
women and children were sold or given away. Those 
of the Afghan tribes were more mercifully treated; but 
lew escaped imprisonment and fine. Nor were even 
the priesthood spared. The Moollahs of the Sheeah 
sect were arrested and confined, lest they should stir 
up intrigue and disafiection among the people. 

* Shums-ood-deen Khan of Herat minister's persecution that he de- 
was a Populzye nobleman of very serted to the Persian camp on the 
good family, and in great favour with approach of the invading army. Had 
Shah Kamran before the commence- he remained in the city, he would 
ment of the siege of Herat. His certainly have been imprisoned or 
sister was the Shah's favourite wife, assassinated, for the Shah was power- 
and he was entirely in his Majesty’s less to protect him. It was sur- 
confidence. A position of so much mised, indeed, that his Majesty coun- 
p)wer, however, made Yar Mahomed selled, or at any rate connived at, his 
his enemy, and it was to escape the flight as his only means of escape. 



218 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


Whilst these precautions against internal revolt were 
taken by the Shah and his unscrupulous minister, 
actively and unceasingly they laboured to defend the 
city against the enemy advancing from without. The 
fortifications now began to bristle with armed soldiers. 
The hammer of the artificer rang upon the guns in the 
embrasures. The spade of the workman was busy upon 
the ramparts. Eager for the foray, the trooper mounted 
his horse and scoured the country to cut off stragglers. 
But still the Persian array moved forward in that com¬ 
pact and well-ordered mass which had baffled the efforts 
and kindled the indignation of marauders along their 
whole line of march. Soon the contest actually com¬ 
menced. On the 22 nd of November, the advanced 
guard of the Persian army took up its position on the 
plain to the north-west of the city. Watching its op¬ 
portunity, the Afghan horse charged the enemy’s cavalry 
with success, and then fell upon an infantry regiment, 
which stood firm, and repulsed the attack. The Persian 
field artillery opened briskly upon the Afghan force. 
A couple of guns in the city replied to them ; whilst 
a party of Alghan liorsemen, dismounted, crept under 
cover, and with their long rifle-barrelled matchlocks, 
fired on the Persian gunners. Upon this, skirmishers 
were sent out by the Persians, who turned the flank 
of the Afghans, and forced them back to the position 
which they had taken up before. No advantage was 
gained by either party. But the contest was now fairly 
commenced. 

The following day witnessed the opening of the siege 
of Herat—one, whether we regard the protracted nature 
of the operations, the vigour of the resistance, the gal¬ 
lantry of the chief actors concerned in it, or the magni¬ 
tude of the political results, of the most remarkable in 
modern history. It was on the 23rd of November that 



COMMENCEMENT OF THE SIEGE. 21& 

the siege actually commenced. Taking possession of all 
the gardens and enclosures to the west of the city, and 
establishing themselves in considerable force among a 
cluster of ruins that afforded them good shelter, the Per¬ 
sians began to make their preparations for the attack. 
The garrison sallied out as they advanced. The Afghan 
infantry disputed every inch of ground, and the cavalry 
hung on the flanks of the Persian army. But they 
could not dislodge the enemy from the position they had 
taken up; and after carrying off a few prisoners, were 
compelled at last to retire. From the events, however, 
of that day, two significant facts were to be deduced. 
The Persians had tried their artillery upon the walls of 
Herat in answer to the guns which the garrison had fired 
in support of their skirmishers; and the rotten parapets 
had fallen like tinder even to the light shot that was 
poured upon them.* It was plain that little reliance was 
to be placed upon the strength of the defences. It was 
plain, too, that the war thus commenced would be car¬ 
ried on in a spirit of unsparing hatred and savage inhu¬ 
manity— that what was wanting, on either side, in 
science, would be made up for in cruelty and vindictive¬ 
ness. The Afghan skirmishers that evening brought in 
some prisoners and some heads. The latter were paraded 
about the ramparts.f The former were bartered for 
horses with the Toorkomans, and sent off to Merve. 

• “A good many light shots,” says that were brought in daily, nor in- 
Eldred Pottinger, “ were fired at the deed do I know. I never could 
walls to keep down the fire in sup- speak of this barbarous, disgusting, 
port of the skirmishers ; and it was and inhuman conduct with any tem- 
a very disheartening sight to see the per. The number, however, in these 
breaches they made in the rotten sorties was always insignificant, and 
parapets.”— Journal,'] the collecting them invariably broke 

Of this barbarous custom of the vigour of the pursuit, and pre¬ 
bringing in the heads of the enemy, vented the destruction of the 
Pottinger speaks with becoming in- trenches. There is no doubt great 
dignation. “ I have not thought it terror was inspired by the mutilation 
necessary,” he writes in his journal, of the bodies amongst their comrades. 

to recount the number of heads But there must have been, at least, 



220 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


The siege was soon in full operation. Whilst the 
Heratees were busily at work strengthening their de¬ 
fences, the Persians were entrenching themselves, throw¬ 
ing up their batteries, planting their guns, and trying 
their effect upon the walls of the city. After a day 
or two, guns, mortars, and rocket batteries were all in 
full play upon Herat. The rockets ranged too widely 
to work any serious mischief to the besieged; but their 
grand fiery flight as they passed over the city struck 
terror into the hearts of the people, who clustered upon 
the roofs of the houses, praying and crying by turns. 
“ The uproar and confusion inside was tremendous, 
whilst not a sound was heard from the ramparts which 
a few nights before had been shaken by clamour.”* 
The defenders of the city had too much serious occu¬ 
pation on hand to expend themselves in much noise. 
It was no easy thing to repair the defences which 
were crumbling to pieces under the fire of the Persian 
batteries. Silently, but resolutely, they set about their 
work, repairing the mischief as it arose, and giving a 
new character of defence to the battered fortifications.f 


equal indignation—and that a corre¬ 
sponding exaltation was felt by the 
victors at the sight of these barbarous 
trophies, and the spoils brought in.'* 
— iMS, Jourtial.'] As rewards were 
always given for these bloody tro¬ 
phies, the garrison were naturally very 
active in their endeavours to obtain 
them. Sometimes their avarice out¬ 
stripped both their honesty and their 
nationality. On one occasion, after 
an unsuccessful sortie, an Afghan 
brought in a pair of ears. A doak 
and some ducats were given him as a 
reward for his butchery. Before 
any questions could be put to the 
fellow, he suddenly vanished.. About 
half an hour auerwards, another 
man, covered with mud, made his 
wpearance with a head in his hand. 
TheWuzeer, thinking it looked as 


though it had no cars, ordered one of 
his retainers to examine it. On 
this the bearer of the ghastly 
trophy threw it down, and ran away 
with all the speed he could command. 
The head was picked up by one of 
the Wuzeer's retainers, and found to 
be that of a comrade, who had fallen 
during the sortie of the preceding 
night. The fellow was pursued, and 
soundly beaten and kicked—but the 
more successful bringer-in of the 
ears was not to be found, though 
several rough unscrupulous fellows 
were told by the Wuzeer that they 
might possess themselves of botu 
cloak and ducats if they could. 

* MS. Journal of Eldred Pot* 
Unger. 

f “ The enemy’s fire being directed 
to the parapet at all points, the 



INCIDENTS OF THE SIEGE. 


221 


Day after day, with little change of circumstance and 
little gain to either party, the siege continued throughout 
the months of November and December. At the end 
of the former, Pottinger wrote in his journal, “ The Per¬ 
sians have wasted some thousand rounds of ammunition, 
and are not more advanced than when the firing com¬ 
menced.” The dreaded artillery of Mahomed Shah was 
less formidable in reality than in the excited imagina¬ 
tions of the Heratees; and the besieged gathered new 
courage from the success of their resistance. The fire 
from the Persian batteries was irregular and spasmodic; 
sometimes maintained with exceeding spirit, and at 
others languid and uncertain. The round shot from the 
guns went over the batteries, often clearing the entire 
city, but sometimes falling within it. The vertical firing 
from the mortars told with better effect. The shells* 
were thrown less at random, and many houses were de¬ 
stroyed. The loss of life was not great in the city; but 
those domestic episodes of war, which give so painfiil an 
interest to the annals of an attack upon a fortified town, 
were not absent from the siege of Herat. In the next 
house to that in which Eldred Pottinger resided, a shell 
descended close to the spot on which an infant was sleep¬ 
ing. The terrified mother rushed between the deadly 
missile and her child. The shell exploding carried off 
her head; and the corpse of the mother fell upon the 
babe, and suffocated it. 

In the mean while, with a vigour and a constancy 
worthy of any garrison, in ancient or in modern times, the 

rubbish began to shelter the foot of formed.”—[UfA’. Joumai of Eldred 
the escarp. Strong working parties Pottinger,'} 

commenced building up backs to the ♦ “ A great number of these shells 
rampart at the point fired at, so that are carved out of slate-rock, and 
the body of the old rampart ma^ their chamber contains little more 
become a paranet, and the summit than a bursting charge. Hence they 
of the new back a terre-pleine from are unable to do much execution.’*-^ 
which to deiend the breaches when [MS, Joumai of Eldred Pottinger,} 



222 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


besieged continued to conduct their defensive operations. 
Three of the five gates of the city were kept open, and 
the communications with the surrounding country were 
preserved. The cattle were sent out to graze. Fire¬ 
wood and other commodities were brought into the city. 
Every week found the beleaguered Heratees in better 
spirits and higher courage. The terror inspired by the 
name of the descendant of Nadir Shah was rapidly wear¬ 
ing out. The Persians, after all, did not seem to be 
such formidable opponents. Every night the garrison 
sallied out, attacked the working parties, carried off their 
tools, often destroyed their entrenchments, wounded and 
sometimes killed the workmen, and carried their bleed¬ 
ing heads, with barbarous triumph, into the city. 

Whilst the activity of the garrison seemed rather to 
increase, that of the besiegers was plainly declining. 
Throughout the mouth of December little progress was 
made. The fire of the Persian batteries slackened— 
sometimes altogether ceased. When it was most lively, 
it was wild and eccentric—so slovenly, indeed, as to 
warrant the belief that every gun was pointed in a dif¬ 
ferent direction, and every gunner firing at some parti¬ 
cular mark of his own. At last, on Christmas-day, 
when the siege had been continued for more than a 
month, Eldred Pottinger wrote in his journal, “ I could 
not help recollecting the three shots a day which the 
Spanish army before Gibraltar fired for some time, and 
which the garrison called after the Trinity.” 

The following day was one of barbarous retaliation. 
All the Persian prisoners in Herat were sent ofl" for sale 
to Kurookh. There were Afghan prisoners, at this time, 
in the Persian camp; and Mahomed Shah had no re¬ 
fined Christian notions on the score of returning good 
for evil. He ripped up the bellies, or destroyed after 
some cruel fashion, all the prisoners who fell into his 



MISSION OF SHERE MAHOMED. 


223 


hands. After this, in spite of the heavy rains that fell 
during the two succeeding days, there were some demon¬ 
strations of increased vigour in the conduct of the siege. 
A mine was sprung, and a practicable breach effected; 
but the storming party was driven back with consider¬ 
able loss. Hadjee Khan, who commanded the party, 
was severely wounded, and one Mahomed Shery, a de¬ 
serter from Herat, and a soldier of very formidable re¬ 
putation, was killed in the breach. So much was this 
man dreaded, and such throughout the city was the opi¬ 
nion of his prowess, that when intelligence of his death 
was conve 3 "ed to Kamran, the Shah exclaimed, with 
eager delight, “ Mahomed Shah, I am well satisfied, will 
never take Herat now'' 

The 30tli of December was the great day of the fes¬ 
tival of the Eyd-i-Ramzan. On this day the long Ma- 
homedan fast terminates; and it is ordinarily one of 
feasting and i*ejoicing. Even now, with becoming festi¬ 
vity, was it observed both by besiegers and besieged. 
On either side there was a tacit suspension of hostilities. 
Accompanied by the royal family, Shah Kamran vrent 
in procession to the Juma Musjid, or great mosque 
and, after offering up the accustomed prayers, distributed 
sweetmeats among the Moollahs. The holy men scram¬ 
bled for the delicacies with surprising activity; but they 
were deprived of their accustomed banquet of more sub¬ 
stantial food. The liberality of his Majesty, on this 
occasion, flowed in a different channel. It was not a 
time ill which to distribute valuable provender among 
such unserviceable people as priests, nobles, and cour¬ 
tiers. The customary entertainment to these worthies 
gave place, therefore, to a distribution of all the dispo¬ 
sable provisions to the fighting men and operatives on 
the works. 

* “ They made,** says Poiiinger, “ but a beggarly appearance.** 



224 


THE SIEGE OP HERAT. 


The new year opened with some increase of activity on 
the part of the besiegers. Their mining operations alarmed 
the garrison; and vigorous efforts were made by a corre¬ 
sponding activity in the works, to frustrate the designs of 
the assailants. All true Mahomedans were called upon, 
by proclamation, to aid in the defence of the city, as the 
danger was very pressing. The assistance of the Mool- 
lahs was called in to organise working parties from 
among the people; and the houses of the Sheeahs and all 
suspected persons were again searched for arms. In the 
midst of these preparations, an emissary from the Persian 
camp made his appearance in the trenches opposite to 
the south-west bastion, and demanded to speak with 
the Wuzeer. This was the brother of Yar Mahomed, 
Shere Mahomed Khan, who had delivered up Ghorian 
to the Persians. The Wuzeer refused to see him ; but 
the Sirdar implored the soldiers at the post to tell his 
brother that if Herat were not surrendered to Mahomed 
Shah, the Persian monarch would put him to death, 
storm the city, hang Yar Mahomed like a dog, and give 
his women and children to be publicly dishonoured by 
the muleteers. 

The Afghans replied with a volley of abuse, cursing 
the Sirdar and the Persians; but the message was deli¬ 
vered to the Wuzeer. It found the minister in no very 
gentle mood. The mention of his brother’s name ex¬ 
asperated him beyond control. “ Tell the Sirdar,” he 
said, “ I am glad that Mahomed Shah intends to save 
me the trouble of putting the traitor to death. He 
is no brother of mine. I disown him. He is not my 
father’s son. He is not an Afghan, but a Cashmerian, 
after his mother. As for myself, when Mahomed Shah 
takes the city, he is at liberty to do with me what he 
likes. In all other respects, I am his Majesty’s most 
obedient servant; but I cannot obey him in this matter, 



DESIGNS OF THE WDZEEB. 


225 


for the A ^hftna will not hear of surrender.”* And with 
this message Shere Mahomed returned, crestfallen, to the 
Persian camp.f 


* The Wuzeep was too crafty a man 
to do anything to exasperate the Shah 
of Persia whilst there was the least 
prospect of his success. Pottinger’s 
Opinion on the subject is worth quot¬ 
ing:—“The minister throughout all 
the negotiations constantly addressed 
Mahomed Shah as his sovereign, and 
called both Hadjee Akasy (tlie Per¬ 
sian prime minister) and Alayar Khan 
( Asoof-ood-dowlah) his father. He also 
invariably threw the blame of the de¬ 
fence on some one else, and regretted 
being obliged to fight. He constantly 
talked of nis being bound in honour 
to serve his master, Kainran, but in 
inclination to serve Mahomed Shah. 
He also invariably avoided mixing 
himself up individually in any act 
decidedly hostile to Persian feelings 
or prejudices ; allowing some of ms 
friends to act, and then, under (to the 
Persians) a show of inquiry, sharing 
the advantages; so that in reality 
very few tangible instances could be 
mentioned of his hostility, and none 
but what, as a good talker, he could 
easily assert were not so; and that 
he had taken the Persian side. He 
knew that the King was aware that 
ail the chiefs of the Persian army 
supported themselves by the same 
means as he did; and in many in¬ 
stances without adding the lip-loyalty 
which he always gave vent to—that, 
moreover, he comd say that he did 
not oppress the Persian people—that 
it was the other chiefs who did so— 
that without aid, he could not check 
it in his equals, who would otherwise 
join to overthrow him—that the ay- 
layats (wandering tribes) always act¬ 
ed so—that he would not desert the 
cause of his patron and benefactor. 
In a despot, who only looks in his 
followers for personal attachment, 
and prefers the hardiest and most 
unscrupulous, less than this would 
have secured favour; nay, more, 
raong chiefs who support themselves 
in the same way, such arguments 

VOL. L Q 


would have secured popularity; and 
as parties also ran hign in the Per¬ 
sian camp, and he had secured the 
favour or the two chiefs, both sides 
would have been anxious to secure 
so knowing and powerful an assistant 
by exertions in procuring his liberty. 
Yar Mahomed, with that shrewdness 
which characterises the Afghan na¬ 
tion, saw the favorable position he 
was in, and availed himself of it to 
the utmost. He had an overweening 
idea of the valour of his countrymen 
in arms, and a corresponding low one 
of that of the Persians. From having 
failed in a siege with his own people, 
he thought no other army could suc¬ 
ceed against his nation; and in the 
event of being taken, his eyes, over¬ 
looking the danger to which the Per¬ 
sian wrath mi^t expose him, were 
dazzled with visions of the wealth, 
the power, and glory he might ac- 

a uire in the service of what he 
lought a rich and ill-managed go¬ 
vernment. I do not mean to say 
that any persons had recommejided 
this plan to Yar Mahomed, or that it 
had been [obscure in MS ,]; but that 
from the multitude of his counsellors, 
some recommending war, some sub¬ 
mission, this must have been the mean 
opinion; and, added to the knowledge 
that, whether he defended himself or 
not, his life was in the same danger, 
and that the promise of a Kajar was 
only to be trusted as the last resource. 
He, therefore, address^ himself to 
the task of defence; but, at the same 
time, took steps to secure his interest 
in case of a reverse, I do not think 
that he could have succeeded in the 
latter point: but he, doubtless, had 
hopes of succeeding.**—[3f5. Jour- 
nal.'] 

f On the 10th of January, “ money 
being wanted, the houses of the Per¬ 
sian followers of Shere Mahomed 
were confiscated on a charge of trea¬ 
son, in giving up Ghorian.^— 
gerU JowmaT: MS.1 



226 


SIEGE OF HEBAT» 


The aiege operations were continued, but with little 
access of vigour. The Persians were conducting no less 
than &ve several attacks on different points of the for- 
tifications. The work was not carried forward in a 
manner that would have gladdened the heart of the 
commanding officer of a corps of English sappers; but 
the real nature of the enemy’s movements was so little 
xmderstood, that the garrison often exaggerated the 
danger, and gave the Persians credit for stratagems that 
had never entered their minds. One example of this 
will suffice. From beneath the rampart opposite the 
attack, conducted by General Samson and the Russian 
regiment, a mysterious noise, as of mining, was heard to 
proceed. It was audible to very few, and then only from 
a particular point; but abundant confirmation of the 
worst apprehensions of the garrison was derived from 
the fact that there was a working party in constant 
activity, throwing out black mud from the trench in 
the neighbourhood of the spot whence the mysterious 
sounds were heard to issue. The greatest alarm was oc¬ 
casioned by this intelligence; and the Heratees began 
at once to take counsel as to the best means of counter¬ 
acting the stratagems of the besiegers. In this crisis, as 
in all others, the advice of Eldred Pottinger was sought 
by the garrison. His activity was unfailing; he was al¬ 
ways on the ramparts ; always ready to assist with his 
counsel—the counsel of an educated English officer—the 
ruder sciince of the responsible conductors of the defence, 
and to inspire with his animating presence new heart 
into the Afghan soldiery. They asked him now if it 
were possible to min e below the ditch. His answer was 
in the affirmative; but he represented at the same time 
how much more feasible it was to fill up the ditch and 
sap across it. “The fear of stratagem, however,” he 
says, “was predominant; and they took stronger mea- 



EMPLOTHENT OE ETiBBBD POTTINGER. 227 

sures to counteract the supposed danger^ and went to 
greater trouble about it than they did with actions of 
vital importance to their preservation. I recommended 
that a gallery of envelope under the lower fausse-hraie 
should be completed, and in it a few shafts simk a little 
below the floor of the gallery. This did not satisfy them; 
so they sunk shafts on both sides of the wall and con- 
nected them by galleries; and dug a ditch inside the 
city, at the foot of the mound, till the water stood seve¬ 
ral feet deep in it.” The sequel of all this is sufficiently 
diverting. It was not until some months afterwards, 
when these extensive and laborious works were nearly 
completed, that it was discovered that the mysterious 
noise, which had struck so great a terror into the hearts 
of the garrison, arose from nothing more formidable than 
“ a poor woman, who was in the habit of using a hand- 
mill to grind her wheat, in an excavation at the back of 
the mound.”* 

On the 18th of January, Yar Mahomed besought 
Eldred Pottinger to proceed as an envoy, on the part of 
the Afghans, to the Persian camp. The young English 
officer readily assented to the proposal; and it was ar¬ 
ranged that on the morrow he should have an audience 
of Shah Kamran, and receive instructions for the con¬ 
duct of his mission. Accordingly, on the following day, 
he was conducted to the residence of the Shah. As he 
went along, he observed with pain, in the interior of the 
city, the desolating effects of the siege. ‘‘Scarcely a 
shop had escaped destruction. The shutters, seats, 
shelves—nay, even the veiy beams and door-posts had 

* The digging a gaUery,” writes consequences resulted to the Sheeah 
Pottinger, und^ the wall, and en- i^abitants; and many domicilianr 
tering m the midst of the town, ap- viaits were paid in seai^ of the gal- 
pear^ a most capital pl^ and suit^ lery, whilst the ruins and empty 
much better th& cunning than any houses were particularly patrolled 
other. ConsequentlT, they were seri- for many nights.” — Jbtir- 

ously alarmed, and mr a time serious noZ.] 

q2 



228 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


in general been tom out for firewood. Scarcely any 
business was going on. Here and there were gathered 
knots of the pale and anxious citizens, whispering their 
condolences and grievances—anxious that they might 
escape the notice of the rude Afghans, who were swag¬ 
gering about the streets.”* The room in which the 
Shah received the English officer was a dreary, comfort¬ 
less place. “ I have seen nothing I can compare to it,” 
wfote Pottinger, “ but an empty store-room carpeted.” 
Plainly, but richly attired, attended only by his eunuchs, 
the Shah welcomed the young Englishman. But he ap¬ 
peared ill at ease—unhappy about himself—peevish, and 
lost in thought; for he was sick. It was plain, indeed, 
that he was more concerned about his health than about 
the safety of the city. Sending for his chief physician, 
he consulted him about the royal symptoms, and in the in¬ 
tervals of this interesting personal conversation, coughed 
out, with considerable energy and warmth, his instruc¬ 
tions to the British officer. His cough, indeed, in all 
probability, saved him fi:om something more serious. 
For when he had worked himself into a passion, it com¬ 
pelled him to pause, and whilst he was applying himself 
to the restoratives at hand, he cooled down till the next 
paroxysm of rage and coughing brought him to a full 
stop. 

The interview was long and tedious. Much was said in 
a very wordy language by the Shah, but the substance of 
the message sent through the young English envoy to the 
Persian King, is thus set down in the words of the latter: 
“ You are acting very ungenerously and very unjustly in 
coming to deprive me of the last city of eighty—of the 

♦ Eldred Pottinger'^s MS, Journal, ter class of the Afghi^ used to say, 
“ No matter,** he adds, ** how the ‘ Afsoos ast, lekin chi koonjm*—‘ it 
cowardice and meanness of these is a pit^, but what can we do?* In the 
men might be despised, no one Fay Hissar (esplanade in front of the 
could hdp pitying the wretchedness drawbridge) were lying half a dozen 
they were awering. Even the bet- Ferrian hea^ lately brought in.*’ 



MESSAGE OF SHAH KAMRAN'. 


229 


rest of whicli my rebellious subjects have deprived me. 
Your grandfather always styled my father ‘ brother,’ and 
rae ‘ son;’ and now you, to show your fraternity, leave 
the seventy other cities of your dominions to besiege an 
empty one, which can never become yours whilst an 
A%han remains to wield a sword in its defence. I took 
refuge here, as it was near your grandfether’s (may he be 
blessed!) dominions; and became entitled to the rights 
of a neighbour. I looked for aid to recover mylbst 
territories—to drive out the false traitors who have 
seized them—but, lo I my neighbour is come with an 
army to turn me out of the last corner of my paternal 
dominions. You have acquired them all during the 
dissensions of my family, and now you wish to deprive 
me of the last morsel. It becomes not kings to ally 
themselves with traitors. How differently did I behave 
on the death of your grandfather (Futteh Ali Shah) ? 
Was not all Khorassan in rebellion, or ready to rebel ? I 
had received letters from all its chiefs, inviting my aid to 
throw off your yoke. All my nobles and people were 
pressing me to march. I had 10,000 horsemen; and the 
news of an attack on Khorassan would have raised and 
brought double that number after me. Nishapoor was 
in rebellion. You had only a few troops in Meshid. 
No other force was between me and Teheran. In this 
state, I said that I would not take advantage of the 
troubles of your family. I despatched my troops, that 
they might prepare for a campaign against my rebellious 
subjects. I also sent Futteh Mahomed Khan to congra¬ 
tulate you on your succession, and to beg for aid—offer¬ 
ing that, if you would give me a force of regular infantry 
and guns sufficient to recover my paternal kingdom, I 
would, on achieving success, transfer Herat to you. 
What is your answer ? How generous I You. look 
round to see who your neighbours are. I am your 



230 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


weakest one* You, therefore, assemble all your force to 
rob me of my last of eighty cities. You answer my 
supplication for aid by the roar of yomr cannon and 
bombs. Act generously: raise the siege; retire and give 
me the troops and guns I want; and I will give you, on 
my success, Herat. Also, turn the Afghan traitors out 
of your camp. If you persist in your present purpose, 
futiue ages will call you a robber, who preyed upon the 
agdR and helpless. If you do not act generously, God is 
great; and on him we rely. We have still got our 
swords.” 

Such was the message Pottinger was commissioned to 
deliver to the Shah of Persia. It came out by snatches, 
in an excited spasmodic manner; but was understood by 
the British officer. Having heard all that was to be 
said, he took his departure, and joined the Wuzeer upon 
the works. But, for some time, the projected negotiations 
never advanced beyond the threshold. It occurred to 
Shah Kamran that it would be well to strike a blow, and 
to achieve some demonstrable success, before despatch¬ 
ing an emissary to the Persian camp, lest the overtures 
should be attributed to conscious weakness, and rather 
increase than lower the pretensions of the Shah. 

An attempt was soon made to strike an important 
blow, but it was singidarly unsuccessful. On the 21st of 
January, the Afghans determined to Uiake a night attack, 
in considerable force, upon the camp of Sirdar Mahomed 
Khan at Karta. Nearly the whole garrison turned out, 
and was reviewed by the Wuzeer. The King himself, 
looking out from a tower of the citadel, surveyed in secret 
the gathering below, as Tar Mahomed, on the terre- 
pleine of the rampart, surrounded by all the principal 
chiefr not absolutely on duty, mustered the fighting men 
on the lower part of the works. Twelve hundred men 
were selected for the sortie, and told off in detachments, 



6ENEBA1. ACTION ON THE FIAIN. 


231 


under tlie command of different chiefs. Divesting them* 
selves of whatever could, in any way, encumber their 
movements—of everything, indeed, but their shirts, 
drawers, skull-caps, and swords—they filed out of the 
Kootoobchak gate, the chief of each party naming his 
men, one by one, as they crossed the drawbridge. Fut- 
teh Mahomed Khan, to whom the command of the entire 
party had been entrusted, followed last, upon foot. But 
of all these great preparations nothing came at*last. 
“The business failed; no attack was made; and every 
one was blamed by his neighbour.”* 

This lamentable failure determined the Shah to post¬ 
pone Pottinger’s departure for the Persian camp. To 
commence negotiations immediately after a miscarriage 
of so formidable a nature, would have been a confession 
of weakness, very impolitic in such a conjuncture. The 
King, therefore, imperatively arrested the movements of 
the young English ambassador, whilst the Wuzeer began 
to bethink himself of the best means of removing the im¬ 
pediment which loomed so largely before the eyes of the 
King. Accordingly it was determined that, on the 26th 
of January, both the cavalry and the infantry should 
be sent out to draw the Persians into action. It was a 
fine bright morning. The whole city was in an unusual 
state of excitement. Partly impelled by curiosity, partly 
moved by a more laudable ambition to fill the places of 
those whose services were required beyond the walls, the 
citizens flocked to the ramparts. Along the whole 
eastern face of the fortifications the parapets and towers 
were alive with men. “ The old Afghans and relatives 
of the military,” writes Pottinger, “in like manner 
crowded iAie fausse-hraies. I do not think that less than 
7000 men were assembled on one side in view of the 
enemy.” The scene on which they looked down was a 
* MS. Jouraalo/Elclred PotSiiger, 



232 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


most exdting one.. It stirred the hearts of that eager 
multitude as the heart of one man. The Afg han cavalry 
on issuing from the city, had spread themselves over the 
open country to the east, and the foot-men had taken pos¬ 
session of a neighbouring village and its surrounding gar¬ 
dens. The Persian videttes had fallen back; the trenches 
and batteries had been manned; and the reserves had 
stood to their arms, when, looking down from the ram¬ 
parts, the excited Heratees saw the Persian Sirdar, 
Mahomed Khan, with a large body of troops, prepare 
himself for an offensive movement, and push onward to 
the attack. At the head of the column was the Persian 
cavalry. As soon as they appeared in sight, the Afghan 
horse streamed across the plain, and poured themselves 
full upon the enemy. 

The charge of the Afghans was a gallant and a success¬ 
ful one. Whilst the ramparts of Herat rang with the ex¬ 
cited acclamation of Shabdsh! ChiRoostum- 

any!" (“Bravo! Bravo! conduct worthy of Roostum 
liimself!”) the Persian column gave way before its im¬ 
petuous assailants, and retreated amongst the buildings 
i'rom which it had debouched. For a short time the pro¬ 
gress of the struggle was lost sight of by the gazers on the 
ramparts; but the sharp, quick rattle of the musketr}'’, 
the loud booming of the guns, and the columns of dust 
that rose against the clear sky, told that the infantry and 
artillery had covered the retreat of the Persian horsemen. 
The tide of victory now turned against the A%han 
force. The Heratees, who before had driven back the 
Persian cavalry, were now in turn driven back by the 
enemy. The squadrons in the rear, instead of closing up, 
wheeled about, and the whole column was soon in flight. 
Recovering themselves, however, for a short time, the 
stru^le was briefly renewed on tire plain; but the Per¬ 
sian horse, being well supported by the infantry planted 



SELF-CONGRATULATIONS OP THE GARRISON. 233 

in the gardens on both sides, whilst the rear of the 
A%han cavalry afforded no support to the troops in 
front, the flight of the Heratees was renewed, and a gun 
was brought to bear upon their retreating columns. With 
vaiying success the battle was continued throughout 
the day. Towards evening the A%hans regained the 
advantage which they had lost at an earlier period of the 
engagement; and as the shades of evening fell over the 
scene, the Persians evacuated the posts they had occupied, 
and the A^hans were left in possession of the field. 

The engagement, though a long, was not a sanguinarj* 
one. The loss on the side of the A%hans was not estimated 
at more than twenty-five or thirty killed. The Heratees, 
of course, claimed the victory; but the Sheeah inhabi¬ 
tants, who had made their way to the walls of the city, 
and were among the spectators of the fight, could not 
repress their inclination to sneer at a success of so dubious 
a character.* To the young English oflicer who had 
watched the events of the day, it was very clear that 
neither army was of a very formidable character. The 
A%han cavalry made a better show than that of the 
enemy, but in the infantry branch the advantage was 
greatly on the side of the Persians. The whole affair 
was nothing better than a series of skirmishes, now re¬ 
sulting in favour of one party, now of the other. But 
the crafty Wuzeer boasted of it as a great triumph; and 
on the following morning went round to all those parts 
of the works from which the scene below could not be 

* Contendin^emotions of Sympathy, through the whole of his discontent, I 
now with their co-rellgionists, and observed he felt a sort of pride and 
now with their feUow-citizens, agi- satisfaction in being the countryman 
tated the breasts of the Heratees. of those who set we Persians at de- 
“ I went,’’ writes Pottinger, on the fiance.. But he appeared fully im- 
2nd of February, “ to see a Sheeah: pressed with the idea that the city 
he was grieving over the fate which must whilst the Afghans I had 
hung over him; one moment curs- just left were talking of plundering 
ing Mahomed Shah’s pusillanimity— Teheran with the aia of our artillery 
the next, the Afghani tyranny. But, and infantry Records,^ 



234 


TBE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


observed, rendering a highly embellished account of the 
events of that memorable day. “ Though so changed,” 
says Pottinger, “ that scarcely any one could recognise it, 
those who had been present in the fight,, finding them¬ 
selves such heroes, commenced swelling and vapouring. 
The soldiery gathered round in the greatest excitement, 
and their opinion of their own superiority to the Per¬ 
sians was greatly increased- Many of them would say, 
“ If we had but guns I” Others, evidently disliking the 
Persian cannon, would improve on this, and say, “ Ah! if 
the infidels had no guns we would soon send them 
away.” 

On the 8th of February, Pottinger received permission 
to visit the Persian camp. In the public baths of the 
city, where Yar Mahomed, with other men of note, in 
a state of almost entire nudity, was sitting at breakfest 
on the floor—his officers and servants standing around 
him armed to the teeth—the English officer took leave of 
the Wuzeer. “ Tell Hadjee Meerza Aghassi” (the Persian 
minister), said Yar Mahomed, “ that ever since he has 
honoured me with the title of son, and the Hadjee has 
assumed that of my father, I have been most desirous of 
showing him filial afiection, and have endeavoured to do 
so. But the Hadjee, in a most unpatemal manner, has 
brought the Shah-in-Shah with an army to besiege Herat; 
and I am bound, by the salt I am eating, to stand by my 
old master. If, however, they will return to Persia, I 
will follow and show my obedience as the son of the 
Hadjee and the servant of the Shah-in-Shah. Further, 
tell him, that whatever may be my own wish, the A%han3 
would never surrender the city, nor dare I propose it to 
them. And you may tell him, too, that we have all 
heard of the bad treatment received by the A%hans who 
have joined the camp of Mahomed. Shah, and are thereby 
deterred from joining his Perrian Majesty.” 



POTTmaEB'S BBCEPTTON IN THE PEESIAN CAMP. 285 

CartTing this message with him, Pottinger lefb the 
city, accompanied by a small party of A%hans. They 
attended him some distance beyond the walls, and then 
shouting out their good wishes, left him to pursue his 
journey. A single attendant, Syud Ahmed, and a cossid 
went with him. Pushing on through narrow tortuous 
lanes, bounded by high mud walls, and every moment 
expecting to be saluted by a bullet from some zealous 
sentinel posted on his line of road, the young English 
oflScer pushed on towards the Persian camp. “ I kept a 
good look-out,” he wrote in his journal, “ and fortunately 
I did so, as, through one of the gaps in the wall, I observed 
the Persians running to occupy the road we were fol¬ 
lowing. I therefore stopped and made Syud Ahmed 
wave his timban for want of a better flag of truce. The 
Persians, on this, came towards us in a most irregular 
manner—so much so that, if twenty horsemen had been 
with me, the whole Persian picket might have been cut 
offl Some were loading as they ran; and one valiant 
hero, who came up in the rear after he had ascertained 
who we were, to prevent danger, I suppose, loaded his 
musket and fixed his bayonet. They were a most ragged 
looking set, and, from their dress and want of beard, 
looked inferior to the Afghans. They were delighted 
at my coming; and the English appeared great favourites 
among them. A fancy got abroad that I was come with 
proposals to surrender, which made the great majority 
lose all command over themselves at the prospect of 
revisiting their country so soon. They crowded round; 
some patting my legs, and others my horse, whilst those 
who were not successful in getting near enough, con¬ 
tented themselves with Syud Ahmed and the cossid—the 
whole, however, shouting, “ Afreen! Afreen! Ehoosh 
amedeedi Anglish hameshah dostan-i Shah-in-Shah.” 



236 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


(“Bravo! Bravo! Welcome! The Englisli were always 
friends of the King of Kings.”)* 

The officer who commanded the picket, a major in the 
Persian army who had served under Major Sart; who 
knew all the English officers recently connected with the 
Persian Court or the Persian army; and who had, more¬ 
over, been the custodian of Yar Mahomed, when the 
Wuzeer was a prisoner at Meshid, conducted Pottinger 
to the guard-room. Apologising, on the plea of mili¬ 
tary necessity, for any interference with his free progress, 
he stated that discipline required that the emissary should 
be taken to the Major-General commanding the attack. 
It happened that General Samson,f of the Russian regi¬ 
ment, was the officer in command. The way to the 
General’s quarters was “ through gardens and vineyards, 
in which not even the roots of the trees and shrubs were 
left.” The General received the British officer with 
much courtesy, conceiving him at first to be an Afghan; 
and was greatly surprised to find that he was in the 
presence of an European soldier. Sending for tea and 
kalyans (pipes), he regaled his guest with becoming 
courtesy, and then sent him on in safety to the Persian 
camp. 

Intelligence of Pottinger’s arrival had preceded him, 
and the whole camp came out to meet the ambassador. 
None knew who or what he was. A report had gone 
forth that he was some great A%han dignitary from 
Herat, who brought the submission of Kamran to the 
terms of Mahomed Shah. As he advanced, the torrent 
of people swelled and swelled, imtil in the main street of 
the camp the crowd was so dense that, if the escort had 
not plied their iron ramrods with good effect, it is doubt- 


* Eldred PoUtnget^B MS. Jourtud. Ferrian aervice, commanding a corps 
t Samson was a Busnan in Uie of Bnssian refiigees. 



POTTINGBB AND THE PEESIAN WUZEBB. 237 

ful whether the embassy would ever have reached the 
tent of the Peraan Wuzeer. The quarters of the great 
snan were gained at last, and the envoy was graciously 
received. The interview was a brief one. Keadily ob¬ 
taining permission to visit the tent of Colonel Stoddart, 
and to deliver the letters of which he was the bearer 
from the Government of India, the question of admission 
to the presence of Mahomed Shah was left to be de¬ 
cided by the monarch himself. It is easy to imagine the 
delight of the two English officers on finding themselves, in 
so strange a place and under such strange circumstances, 
in the presence of one another.* It was cruel to in¬ 
terrupt such a meeting; but before the two English 
officers had exchanged many words, and partaken of a 
cup of coffee in Stoddart’s tent, a peremptory message 
came from the minister to summon Pottinger to his pre¬ 
sence. The two officers went together to Hadjee Meerza 
Aghassi’s tent, where the Wuzeer, after the usual cour¬ 
tesies, asked what was the message brought by Pottinger 
from “ Prince” Kamran to the King of Kings, and what 
was that which Yar Mahomed had sent to himself. “ I 
replied,” says Pottinger, in his journal of these events, 
“ that the message from the Afghan King was to the 
Persian King, and that I could not deliver it to any one 
else; that regarding his own message, probably a smaller 
number of auditors would be desirable.” The tent 
accordingly was cleared; and the Hadjee, a small, thin 
man, apparently in a very bilious and excitable state, 

* “ I then proceeded to Colonel door, where he overwhelmed me with 
Stoddarf s tent, who I found in the a most affectionate Persian welcome, 
greatest astonishment possible, as his to which I, to his great surprise, re- 
servants, tahing up the general report plied in English. No one who has 
of mj rank, had announced me as the not experienced it can understand 
Mooshtehid of Herat. He had been the pleasure which countrymen enjoy 
undressed; and putting on his coat when they thus meet—^particularly 
to do honour to the high dignitary, when of the same profession and pur- 
gave me time to enter hui tent before suing the same object.** — [Etdi^ed 
he could get out, so we met at the Pottinger's MS. Joumall 



238 


THE SIEGE OF HESAT. 


twbted himself into all kinds of undignified contortions, 
and prepared himself to receive the message of the A%han 
Wuzeer. 

Pottinger delivered his message. A long, animated, 
but profitless discussion then arose. The Hadjee refused 
to listen to the A%han proposals, and declared that the 
English had themselves set down Herat on their maps 
as a part of the Persian dominions. In proof of the 
assertion, Bumes’s map was produced, and, to his inex¬ 
pressible chagrin, the Hadjee was shown to be wrong. 
Colonel Stoddart was then appealed to; but his answers 
were shaped in true diplomatic fashion. He had no in¬ 
structions on the subject—he would refer the case to the 
envoy at Teheran—^he was not aware that the British 
Government had ever received official information from 
the Persian Government of Herat being annexed to that 
state, whilst a branch of the Suddozye family, which the 
British Government, in conjunction withFutteh Ali Shah, 
had acknowledged as sovereign in Afghanistan, still held 
possession of the place. The difliculty was not to be 
solved; and the English ofiicers took their departure 
from the tent of the Wuzeer, to be summoned shortly to 
the presence of the Shah. 

Under a tent, surrounded on all sides by an outer wall 
of red canvas, Mahomed Shah, plainly attired in a shawl 
vest, with a black Persian cap on his head, received, 
with becoming courtesy, the British officers. At the op¬ 
posite end of the tent, in posture of profound reverence, 
heads bent, and arms folded, stood the personal attend¬ 
ants of the Eong. The message of Shah Kamran was 
delivered; and the Persian monarch, speaking at first 
with much dignity and calmness, stated, in a dear and 
forcible manner, his complaints against Herat and its 
ruler. But, warming as he proceeded, he lashed himself 
into a passion; denounced Shah TTamran as a treacherous 



CONTINDATION OF THE SIEGE. 


239 


liar; and declared that he would not rest satisfied until 
he had planted a Persian garrison in the citadel of Herat. 
There was nothing more to he said upon the subject ; 
and the British officers were formally dismissed. 

A violent storm, which broke over Herat on the fol¬ 
lowing day, prevented Pottinger’s return to the city. 
But on the 10th of February he turned his back upon 
the Persian camp. “ I mounted,” he writes, “ and riding 
out by the flank of the Persian line, I returned to the 
city by the gate I came out at; and so avoided the 
points where hostilities were going on. On my coming 
back the whole town was in a ferment. What they 
had expected I do not pretend to know; but from the 
instant I entered the gate, I was surrounded by messen¬ 
gers requesting information. I, however, referred them 
all to the Wuzeer, and went there myself. After a short 
interview, I was summoned by a messenger from the 
Shah. His Majesty having seen my reton with his 
glass, was awaiting my arrival, anxious to hear Maho¬ 
med Shah’s message. When he had heard it, he re¬ 
plied by a gasconading speech, abusing every one.” And 
so terminated these first negotiations for a suspension of 
hostilities in an utter and mortifying failure. 

With little variation from the procedure of the two 
previous months, the siege operations were continued. 
The Persians had expected much from the addition to 
their siege train of an immense sixty-eight pounder, which 
was to batter down the defences of Herat as easily as 
though they had been walls of glass.* But the gun was 
so badly mounted, that, after the fifth or sixth round, the 
light carriage gave way, and this formidable new enemy, 

♦ They fired from this piece eight- case of copper. These were of so 
inch sheUs frill of lead, or twelve or much yalue, that the garrison fought 
eighteen-poimd shot, with an outer for them. 



240 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


that was to have done such great things, sank into an 
useless incumbrance. 

The siege continued without intermission; but it was 
evident that both parties were anxious to conclude a 
peace. Not many days after Pottinger’s return to Herat, 
a Persian officer* came into the city, with instructions 
from General Samson, privately endorsed by the Wuzeer, 
to endeavour to persuade the Afghans to consent to the 
terms offered by Mahomed Shah. It was better, he 
said, for them to settle their differences among them¬ 
selves, than to employ the mediation of infidels.f At 
the same time, he assured the A%hans that Mahomed 
Shah had no desire to interfere in the internal adminis¬ 
tration of Herat. What he required them to do was, to 
supply his army with soldiers, as they had, in times past, 
supplied the armies of Nadir Shah. The present move¬ 
ment, he said, was not an expedition against Herat, but 
an expedition against Hindostan, and that it behoved, 
therefore, all true Mahomedans to join the army of the 
King of Kings. Let them only unite themselves under 
the banner of the great defender of the faith, and he 
would lead them to the conquest and the plunder of 
India and Toorkistan. 

The Persian emissary returned, on the following day, 
bearing promises of a vague and delusive kind, and sug¬ 
gestions that if the Persians were really inclined for 
peace, the best proof they could give of the sincerity of 
their inclinations would be the retirement of the besieg¬ 
ing force. Great was the excitement after his departure, 
and various the views taken of his mission. By some, 

* The same man, a major in the should be taken from our conduct in 
army, whom Pottinger had first met India, where we had pretended fraend- 
in the Persian camp. ^ ship and trade to cover our ambition, 

t ‘J The man,** says Pottinger, “ was and finally, by such deceit, had mas- 
also instructed to say that warning tered all lndia.*’-->[il//S. Journal] 



SUCCESSES OF THE PEB81ANS. 


241 


the young and thoughtless, it was conjectured that his 
visit betokened a consciousness of weakness on the part 
of the enemy; and they already began to picture to 
themselves the flight and plunder of the Persian army. 
But the elder and more sensible shook their heads, and 
began, with manifest anxiety, to canvass the Persian 
terms. It mattered little, they said, whether Kamran 
was designated prince or king—whether the supremacy 
of the Persian Shah was or was not acknowledged in 
Herat, so long as they did not endeavour to plant a Per¬ 
sian garrison in the city. But the Wuzeer declared that 
he had no confidence in the Persians—^that he desired to 
be guided by the advice, and to be aided by the media¬ 
tion of the English; and that if the Shah would place 
the conduct of negotiations in the hands of Colonel 
Stoddart, he on his part would trust everything to Lieu¬ 
tenant Pottinger, and agree to whatever was decided 
upon by the two English officers. “ This,” wrote the 
latter, “ was a most politic measure. It threw all • the 
odium of continuing the war OS’ the shoulders of the 
Afghan war party on those of the Persians, whom every 
one would blame, if they declined to trust their guest, 
Colonel Stoddart; and it would tend to make the Afghans 
believe that nothing but their destruction would satisfy 
Mahomed Shah.” 

On the 20th of February, the Persian emissary again 
appeared with a letter from the camp of the besiegers. 
It stated that the Shah had no desire to possess himself 
of Herat; he only claimed that his sovereignty should be 
acknowledged. The answer sent back on the following 
day was full of compliments and promises. Everything 
asked for would be done if the Persian army would 
only retire. On the 24th, the negotiations were con¬ 
tinued—but with no result. The siege, in the mean while, 
proceeded. The garrison continued their sallies and 

VOL. I. R 



242 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


sorties—sent out foraging parties—carried off large quan¬ 
tities of wood—and generally contrived to return to the 
city without suffering any injury from the activity of the 
investing force. 

On the part of the latter, as time advanced, the firing 
became more steady; but the severity and uncertainty 
of the weather, and the scarcity of food, which was 
now beginning to be painfully felt, damped the energy of 
the besiegers. Continuing, however, to push on their 
approaches, they did at least mischief enough to keep the 
garrison in a constant state of activity. Some unimpor¬ 
tant outworks were carried; and on the 8th of March, to 
the great mortification of the Wiizeer, the enemy gained 
possession of a fortified post about .SOO yards from the 
north-east angle of the fort. The Afghans vrho manned 
the post were found wanting in the hour of danger, and 
were visited with summary punishment for this cowardly 
offence. Their faces were daubed with mud, and they 
were sent round the works and through the streets of 
the city, accompanied by a crier, commissioned to pro¬ 
claim their cowardice to the world. 

From the moment that this post fell into the hands of 
the enemy, “ the investment,” says Pottinger, “ began to 
be really felt.” The operations of the besiegers were 
pushed forward with some vigour, but the constancy of 
the garrison was not to be shaken.* Towards the end of 
March, the Asoof-ood-dowlah, whose force had encamped 
on the plain to the north-west of the city, sent in a mes¬ 
sage to the Afghan minister, offering to be the medium 
of negotiations for the suspension of hostilities. The 
Afghans sent word back that they were prepared to 
listen to any reasonable overtures; but that if peace was 

* It would be tedious to narrate to the sclentitic reader, without the 
all the details of the siese, and diffi- ud of a series of elaborate plans, 
cult to render them intelligible, even 



RECEPTION OP MR. MCNEILL. 


243 


to be made, it must be made quickly. Seed time, it was 
said, was passing; and once passed, peace was impos¬ 
sible. Their subsistence would then depend upon their 
plunder. After a few days, an interview was arranged 
between Yar Mahomed and the Asoof-ood-dowlah, and 
on the 2nd of April it was held on the edge of the ditch 
opposite the north-east tower. But the Wuzeer re¬ 
turned, hopeless of any arrangement.* On the following 
day a grand meeting of chiefs was held ; but there was 
an end of all tli ought of peace. 

On the 6th of April, Mr. M‘Neill, the British minister 
at the Persian Court, arrived in the camp of Mahomed 
Shah. He had left Teheran on the 10th of March; 
and, in spite of efforts made by the Persian ministers to 
arrest his progress at Ghorian, had pushed on with all 
possible rapidity to the Persian camp. It was urged 
that his presence could not fail to encourage the Heratees 
in their resistance. But the British minister pleaded his 
duty to his sovereign, and was not to be detained. He 
was coldly received in the Persian camp, but he de¬ 
manded and obtained admittance to the Shah, and having 
exacted the customary formalities of reception, presented 
his credentials recently received from the Queen. The 
impression made upon the King, and subsequently upon 
the minister, was favorable to the British Envoy, and 
soon his discreet and conciliatory bearing smoothed down 
the irritation which had been engendered by his advance. 
But the Kussian minister. Count Simonich, was also on 
his way from Teheran; and Mr. McNeill felt that the 
approach of this man was an obstacle to his success.f 

* The point,” says Mr. M‘Neill, casion, require that a g^ison of their 

on which the negotiation broke oiT troops should be ad^tted into the 
was, I believe, the demand of the town.”—[ilifr. M^NeiU to Lord Auck» 
Shah, that Shah Kamran and Yar Zand, 1838. PMished Cor^ 

h^homed should wait upon him in responaenceJ} 

his camp, and there make their sub- f Afr. M'^NeUl to Lord AucldaTid, 
mission to him. I learn that the April 11, 1838. Papers relating to 
Persians did not, as on a former oc- Persia and Afghanistan, 

R 2 



244 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


On the 13tli of April, Mr, M'Neill had an audience of 
the Persian monarch, in the course of which he stated 
that the proceedings of Persia in Afghanistan were an 
obvious violation of the treaty between Great Britain 
and the former state ; and that the British Government 
would be justified, therefore, in declaring it to be at an 
end, and in taking active measures to compel the with¬ 
drawal of the Persian army from Herat. The audience 
lasted two hours. The Shah solemnly protested that he 
had never meditated anything injurious to the interests 
of Great Britain; and the minister, with still stronger 
emphasis, repeated the declaration. At a subsequent 
interview, the Shah consented to accept the mediation 
of the British mission; and on the 16 th of April the 
Persian soldiers proclaimed from the trenches that Ma¬ 
homed Shah had determined to send Shere Mahomed 
Khan into Herat, accompanied by the British minister. 
But it was not Mr. M‘Neill, but an inferior officer of the 
embassy, who was about to present himself on the mor¬ 
row in the character of a mediator, beneath the walls of 
the beleaguered city. 

The 18th of April was one of the most memorable 
days of the siege. The Persian batteries opened, before 
noon, with unwonted activity, against the ramparts be¬ 
hind the great mosque. The walls soon began to crum¬ 
ble beneath the heavy fire of the enemy. First the thin 
parapets fell; then the terre-plein came down; “ the old 
walls sliding into masses at every round.”* Before 
evening, on the eastern and northern sides, the breaches 
were practicable, and that on the west was greatly en¬ 
larged. But the Afghans were in no way disheartened. 
They saw their walls crumbling beneath the heavy fire 
of the Persian batteries, and were neither alarmed nor 
discouraged by the spectacle. They had never trusted, 

• Eldred Pottinger*s MS, Journal. 



ABBTVAL OF MAJOR TODD, 


245 


they said, to their walls. The real defence, they de¬ 
clared, was the fausse-braie. About noon the Persians, 
having pushed on a gallery at this point, the garrison 
exploded it with a mine, and taking advantage of the 
alarm occasioned by the explosion, the Afghans rushed 
upon the besiegers, and at first carried everything be¬ 
fore them. But in a short time the trenches of the 
enemy were lined with musketeers. The small-arm 
fire of the Persians overwhelmed that of the garrison, 
whilst the breaching batteries resumed their fire against 
the wall. Yar Mahomed and Pottinger were both upon 
the works. The Wuzeer ordered the men to cease fir¬ 


ing, and to sit down, that they might be sheltered from 
the storm of musket-balls; but instead of this they drew 
their swords, brandished them over their heads, and 
calling to the Persians to come on, rushed down to the 
attack. They paid dearly for this bravado.* Pottinger 
himself narrowly escaped a bullet, which entered the 
lungs of Aga Ruhem, a favourite and devoted eunuch of 
Yar Mahomed, and sent him to his grave. 

In the evening, the Persians in the trenches announced 
that an Englishman in their camp sought admittance to 


* “ Several men,” says Pottinger, 
“ received bullets through the hands 
and arms. One fellow, more fool- 
hard;^ than the rest, kept brandish¬ 
ing his huge Afghan knife, after the 
others had complied with the repeated 
orders to sheathe their weapons, and 
had the knife destroyed by a bullet, 
which struck it just above his hand. 
I had gone down to the spot to see 
the mine sprung, and was sitting on 
the banquette with the Wuzeer and a 
party of chiefs, who, whilst tea was 
preparing, were bantering the man 
whose knife was broken, and who 
came to beg a sword instead, when a 
bullet came in through a loophole 
over my head, and, smashing a brick 
used for stopping it, lodged in Aga 
Ruhem's lungs, who was standing 
opposite—one of the splinters of the 


brick at the same time wounding him 
in the face. The poor fellow was an 
eunuch of Yar Mahomed's, and was 
always to be seen wherever any dan¬ 
ger was. He died in two or three 
days. I had been but the moment 
before looking through the top of 
the parapet, with my breast resting 
against the loophole, watching the 
Persians, who were trying to esta¬ 
blish themselves in the crater of the 
mine; and the Afghans on the coun¬ 
terscarp, who were trying to grapple 
the gabions and overset them, so tnat 
the scene was very interesting; and I 
had not sat down with the chiefs until 
Deen Mahomed Khan actually pulled 
me down by my cloak to listen to the 
jokes passed on the man who had his 
knife destroyed; and 1 thus escaped 
Aga Ruhem's bullet.— IMS. Journal.} 



246 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


the city. The announcement was received with peals 
of derisive laughter and abuse. The Englishman was 
Major Todd, an officer of the Bengal artillery, who had 
been for many years employed with the Persian army, 
and whose great attainments and estimable personal 
qualities had won for him the respect of all with whom 
he had been associated. When a note was conveyed to 
the Wuzeer stating that the officer who sought admit¬ 
tance was the naib of the English ambassador, Yar 
Mahomed sent for his young English ally. Pottinger 
immediately joined him. The Wuzeer and many other 
chiefs were sitting on the fausse-braie near the breach. 
Making room for him on the charpoy on which he was 
seated, Yar Mahomed laughingly remarked, “ Don’t be 
angry with me. I have thrown ashes on it (the offered 
mediation), and blackened its face myself.” Pottinger 
asked for an explanation, and was told that the Wuzeer 
had sent back word to the Persian camp that the Af¬ 
ghans wanted neither the Turks, the Russians, nor the 
English to interfere—that they trusted to their good 
swords; that at that hour of the evening they would not 
allow the Shah-in-Shah himself to enter; and that no 
one should be allowed to enter at that point. But if, 
they added, the English naib would present himself on 
the morrow at the south-east angle, he would be granted 
admittance to the city.* Much of this was mere bra¬ 
vado. Yar Mahomed acknowledged that he only wished 
to impress the Persians with the belief that he was care¬ 
less about British mediation. 

On the following day, Major Todd made his appear¬ 
ance. A vast crowd went out to gaze at him. He was 
the first European who had ever appeared in Herat in 

• “ I was much annoyed,’’ says sdf by saymg^ that he acted so to 
Pottinger, and told him he had pro* make the Persians think he was not 
bably prevented the English ambas- solicitous for the English to interfere.*’ 
sador interfering, and he excused him* —[MiS. Journal'} 



AW-BAKANCE OF BIB. M‘NE11A,. 


247 


full regimentals; and now the tight-fitting coat, the 
glittering epaulettes, and the cocked hat, all excited un¬ 
bounded admiration. The narrow streets were crowded, 
and the house-tops were swarming with curious spectators. 
The bearer as he was of a message firom Mahomed Shah, 
announcing that the Persian sovereign was willing to 
accept the mediation of the British Government, he was 
received with becoming courtesy by Shah Kamran, 
who, after the interview, took the cloak from his own 
shoulders, and sent it by the Wuzeer to Major Todd, as 
a mark of the highest distinction he could confer upon 
him.* The English officer returned to the Persian camp 
with assurances of Kamran’s desire to accept the media¬ 
tion of the British minister. But there was no suspen¬ 
sion of hostilities. That evening the aspect of afiairs was 
more warlike than ever. “ The Persian trenches were 
filled with men. The parties of horse and guards of the 
line of investment appeared stronger than usual; and 
everything betokened an assault of which at dusk the 
garrison received intelligence. The Afghans made all 
arrangements to meet it; the difierent chiefs were sent 
off to different points either to strengthen the posts or 


♦ “ A horse,’* says Pottinger, “ was 
also given; but Major Todd was as 
anxious not to accept presents, as the 
Afghans were to make them—so he 
would not wait for*he horse, notwith¬ 
standing they set about cutting away 
the parapet of the fausse-hrak^ and 
making a ramp up the counterscarp 
to get the nag out. The Wuzeer was 
obstinately bent upon sending out 
the horse; but as there was no use in 
destroying a parapet in the only en¬ 
tire work left, or making an easy road 
across the ditch, when there were four 
practicable breaches * * » 

As soon as the Persians were gone, 
my people led the horses off in an¬ 
other direction, and 1 told the work¬ 
men to stop and repair the damage 


done, so that the Wuzeer did not 
know of the ruse till late in the after¬ 
noon, when his master of the horse 
reported the return of the horses. 
He immediately sent them to me, 
saying he had given them to the 
English and would not take them. I 
told him I had not enough of grain 
to keep them; and suggested that 
if he did not like to keep them, they 
might be eaten. The people present 
on the receipt of the message highly 
approved of the latter part; and x ar 
Mahomed gave to the most clamorous 
the horse intended for the Persian, 
which was duly roasted. I believe 
the other one underwent the same fate 
a few weeks subsequently.*’— 
JournalJ] 



248 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


form reserves. Yar Mahomed’s post was at the gate of 
Miilik, as the breach close to it was the most dangerous, 
and the point was defended by the worst troops.” It 
was agreed among the different chiefs that not a shot 
should be fired until the enemy reached the counter¬ 
scarp, on pain of the immediate loss of the delinquent’s 
ears. 

The assembly had scarcely broken up when intelli¬ 
gence arrived that the British minister, Mr. M‘Neill, had 
arrived at the edge of the ditch and sought entrance 
to the city. The report was presently confirmed by a 
messenger who brought letters from the envoy to Yar 
Mahomed and Lieutenant Pottinger. Pottinger, who 
was just composing himself to sleep, started up and 
proceeded, with all haste, to the Wuzeer’s post. Yar Ma¬ 
homed mustered the chiefs to receive the Envoy with 
becoming respect, and conducted him to his quarters. 
The greater part of the night wms spent in discussion. 
It was nearly dawn when M‘Neill accompanied Pottin¬ 
ger to his residence, and they lay down to sleep. 

Pottinger rose before seven o’clock, and found M‘Neill 
engaged in writing. The Wuzecr, having been sent for 
by the former officer, soon made his appearance, grum¬ 
bling at, but still honestly commending the vigilance 
of the British minister,* whom he conducted to the 
presence of Shah Kamran. The Shah, ^with the ut¬ 
most frankness and unreserve, placed the negotiations 


* “ I was a food deal surprised on 
awaking at hiuf-past six to see the 
Envoy already up and busy writing. 
At seven, according to engagement, I 
sent to let the'Wuzeer know that his 
Excellency was ready to receive him. 
Yar Mahomed was asleep when the 
message arrived; but they awoke 
him, and he joined us in a short time 
with a whole posse of chiefs. On my 
meeting him at the door he asked me 


was it customary for our ministers 
not to sleep at night, declaring that he 
had scarcely closed his eyes when he 
was told that Mr. McNeill was wait¬ 
ing for him; and further remarked, 
“ I do not wonder your affairs prosper 
when men of such high rank as your 
minister plenipotentiary work harder 
than an Afghan private soldier would 
do even under the eye of the Shah.” 
—{Eldred Pottinger s MS, Journal,'] 



NEGOTIATIONS BKOKEN OEF. 


249 


in the hands of Mr. M‘Neill, and said that he would 
gladly consent to any terms agreed upon by that officer. 
After partaking of some refreshment, the British minis¬ 
ter took his departure; and the armistice ceased. 

This was on the 21st of April. On the 23rd Major 
Todd was despatched from the Persian camp with intel¬ 
ligence no less surprising than discouraging. Mahomed 
Shah had resolutely refused to submit to British arbitra¬ 
tion the disputes between the states of Persia and Herat. 
In an abrupt and peremptory manner he had “ refused 
the proposed agreement and spoke of prosecuting the 
siege.” “ Either,” he said, “ the whole people of Herat 
shall make their submission, and acknowledge themselves 
my subjects, or I will take possession of the fortress by 
force of arms, and make them obedient and submissive.”* 
The British minister was deeply mortified at the result. 
He had been, however unwittingly, a party to the de¬ 
ception of the Government of Herat. He had told Yar 
Mahomed that the Shah would accept his intervention 
and abide by his decision; and now his overtures had 
been peremptorily declined.f It was suggested by some 
whether it would be expedient to send any reply to the 
hostile declaration of Mahomed Shah, but as it had been 
forwarded by the British minister, etiquette demanded 
that an answer should be returned.J That answer was 
grave and dignified. “ If the Persians,” wrote Yar Ma¬ 
homed, “ will not attend to your words, we must answer 
with our bodies and leave the result to God. Be not dis¬ 
tressed. Now that we have suflered so many injuries, 

* Mr, MNeill to Yar Mahomed — he never expected anything else— 
Published Correspondence. that the Kajars have been noted for 

•f* Pottinger explained to Kamran their want of faith ever since they 
the manner in which Mr. M‘JS'eill have been heard of—-that his father 
had been deceived. “ On the 24th,” and himself had several times tried 
he says, ^ 1 had an audience of Shah their promises but always been 
Kamran to explain the manner in miserably deceived.”— [MS. Journal.'] 
which the Persians had deceived the { Pottinger's MS, Journal. 

British Envoy. His Majesty said that 



250 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


find lifl>ve been kept beck fi^om our tillage and cultiva- 
tion, and bave suffered that loss which should not have 
befallen us, what have we now to care for ?” * 

And now the siege was prosecuted with increased 
activity. A new actor had appeared on the stage. A 
Russian officer, Count Simonich, who represented the 
government of the Czar at the Persian Court, arrived 
in camp on the morning of the day which witnessed 
Mr. M‘Neiirs visit to the city of Shah Kamran. 

The inopportune arrival of the Russian diplomatist at 
once suggested to Mr. M'Neill the hopelessness of his 
mission. When he returned to the Persian camp, he 
found all his apprehensions realised. Count Simonich 
soon manifested his inclination to remain no passive 
spectator of the contest. Freely giving advice and ren¬ 
dering assistance, he began, in effect, to conduct the 
operations of the siege; whilst the officers of his suite 
were teaching the Persian soldiers to construct batteries 
of a more effective character than those which had been 
hitherto employed. Nor was Russian skill all that was 
supplied, in this conjuncture, to raise the drooping spirits 
of Mahomed Shah. Russian money was freely distri¬ 
buted among the Persian soldiers and a new impulse 
was given to them at a time when their energies were 
well-nigh exhausted, and their activity was beginning 
to flag.f 

Mr. M‘Neill remained in the Persian camp, and in 
spite of the failure of his endeavours to reconcile the 
contending parties, determined not to abandon all hope 
of bringing about a satisfactory arrangement. A strongly- 

* Yar Alahomed to Mr, M^NeUl-^ Count Simonich had reconnoitred the 
Piibli^ed Correspondence, city, and had examined with a tele- 

t Mr, MNeUl to Lord Palmerston scope from the top of the Masula, 
-^Published Correspondence, Intelli- ana given his opinion that all the 
gence of Simonich's movements soon points attacked were too strong to be 
reached the beleaguered garrison, ti^en; and that the only vulnerable 
“ We were told,’’ says Fottinger, “ that side was the eastern side.” 



KUSSIAN INFLUENCE. 


251 


worded letter was addressed to the Persian ministers; 
and at one time it seemed likely that'the Shah would 
accede to the terms offered by the Government of Herat; 
but the arrival of Mendly letters from Kohun-dil Khan, 
the Candahar chief, offering to aid him in the prosecu¬ 
tion of the siege, inflated him with new courage, and 
caused him to rise in his demands. He demanded com¬ 
pensation for the losses he had sustained; and the nego¬ 
tiations were again broken off at a time when they 
seemed likely, at last, to reach a favorable termina¬ 
tion. 

Nor was it only in the Persian camp that at this time 
Russian influence was making its way. The garrison 
was beginning to think whether it would not be expe¬ 
dient for Herat to fling itself into the arms of the great 
northern power. On the night of the 23rd of May there 
was a consultation among the chiefs, when it was pro¬ 
posed that an envoy should be sent to the Russian 
ambassador, acknowledging the dependence of Herat 
upon that state. It was asserted, at the suggestion of M. 
Euler, the Shah’s physician, that if such a step as this 
were taken the Persians dare not continue the siege, and 
that the English dare not interfere. The proposal was 
favorably received. It was with difficulty that the 
chiefs could be induced to listen to a suggestion for 
delay; but on the following day intelligence of the 
energetic course pursued by Mr. M‘Neill foimd its way 
into the city. It was announced that the British minister 
had threatened Persia with hostilities if Herat should fell 
into its hands; that the city would be retaken, at any 
cost, by the British army; and that Major Todd had 
been sent to India to make arrangements with the Gover¬ 
nor-General for the sustenance of the people of Herat 
after the siege. This intelligence—which was not wholly 
correct—changed at once the complexion of affairs. It 



252 


THE SIEGE OE HEKAT. 


was plain that the British were, after all, the best friends 
of the Afghans, and that it would be folly to reject their 
good offices for the sake of the problematical friendship 
and good faith of the Russian Government. The an¬ 
nouncement, indeed, raised the spirits of the garrison, 
and inspired them with new courage. Even those who 
the day before had been loudest in their support of the 
Russian alliance, now abandoned it without reserve. 

This feeling, however, was but short-lived. It soon 
appeared that the intentions of the British Government, 
as reported to have been set forth by Mr. M‘Neill, had 
been over-stated; and again the chiefs began to bethink 
themselves of the advantages of a Russian alliance. 
Many meetings were held, at which the terms to be 
offered and accepted were warmly debated. At all of 
these Pottinger was present. Sometimes he was received 
and listened to with respect; at others he was treated 
with marked discourtesy. Now the value of the British 
alliance outweighed that of the Russian in the estima¬ 
tion of the chiefs; now it was held of far lighter account; 
and as the scale of their opinions turned, so varied 
with intelligible capriciousness their bearing towards the 
English officer. A man of temper and firmness, he was 
little disconcerted. The whole assembly might be against 
him; but he was not to be overawed. 

On the evening of the 27th of May, Pottinger sought 
a private interview with Yar Mahomed. Telling the 
Wuzeer that his conduct towards the Persians had 
caused him to be suspected by the British ambassador, 
he insisted upon the necessity of acting decidedly upon 
two points—Kamran, he said, must never submit to be 
called the servant of Persia; nor must he on any account 
admit the interference of the Russians. Yar Mahomed 
assented to these conditions—declared that he would 
never sacrifice the independence of Herat, and, finally, 



POTTINGEB’S DIFFICTn:.TrES. 


253 


with Pottinger’s approval despatched a letter into the 
Persian camp, intimating that “ he agreed to the sup- 
pression of slavery, and would aid in its extinction; that 
he would release from bondage, and send back the 
people of Jam and Bakhurs if possible, and he would try 
to make the Soonee Hazarehs serve Persia; that he 
would pay a yearly present after the current year, and 
would also give his son and one of the King’s sons 
as hostages. Persia should, on her part, restore Gho- 
rian, and when his son joined the Persian camp, his 
brother, Shere Mahomed Khan, should be sent back, and 
that Mahomed Shah should give them an order for five 
or six thousand kurwars of grain on the Governor of 
Khorassan.” “ If these terms be not accepted,” it was 
added, “ nothing but the possession of Herat will satisfy 
you.” 

Pottinger had no easy part to play, at the best; but 
now his difficulties began to thicken around him. He 
could only hope to counteract Russian influence by im¬ 
pressing Yar Mahomed with a conviction that the 
British Government would do great things for Herat. 
But on the 29th of May he received instructions from 
Mr. M‘Neill on no account to commit the government 
by any offers of aid to Herat, as he had received no 
authority to make them. Startled and embarrassed by 
these injunctions, for, seeing that without such promises 
Yar Mahomed would have accepted the mediation of 
Russia, he had already committed the government, 
Pottinger went at once to the Tukht-i-pool, where the 
chiefs were assembled, and honestly stated that in his 
anxiety to bring affairs to a satisfactory adjustment, he 
had exceeded his powers. Exasperated by this an¬ 
nouncement, the chiefs broke out into violent reproaches 
against Pottinger, M‘Neill, and the whole British nation, 
and then began to discuss the advantages of the Russian 



254 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


alliance. Firm in the midst of all this storm of invec¬ 
tive, the young British officer declared that he had only 
spoken the truth—that such were the instructions of the 
British minister—that he had no power to disobey 
them ; but that a representation to Mr. M'Neill of the 
disappointment they had occasioned might induce him 
to depart from this cautious policy. To this the chiefs 
were induced to listen; and it was finally resolved to 
await the results of another reference to the British 
Envoy.* 

But the influence of Mr. M‘Neill at the Persian Court 
was now rapidly declining; and his departure was at 
hand. His position, ever since his arrival in the camp 
of Mahomed Shah, had been one of no little difficulty 
and embarrassment. Unhappily, at that time, one of 
those petty perplexities, which arising between state and 
state, often evolve more serious misunderstandings than 
affairs of far higher moment, was constantly obtruding in 
the way of a satisfactory adjustment of differences, an 
obstruction of a very annoying and irritating kind. A 
Gholam, or courier, of the British minister, Ali Maho¬ 
med Beg by name, was on his way from Herat to 
Teheran, bearing some letters from Yar Mahomed, Pot- 
tinger, and others, to Mr. M‘Neill, and escorting some 
horses, sent by Futteh Mahomed Khan, the Herat agent, 
as presents to the same officer. YTithout any interrup¬ 
tion he had passed the Persian camp and was within 
three stages of Meshed, when Berowski recognised the 
man and officiously reported him at head-quarters. 
Immediately horsemen were despatched to carry him to 
the Persian camp. What followed could not be nar¬ 
rated better or more briefly than in the language of Mr. 

^ • “ Notwithstuiding,” says Pot- never contemplated that I should be 
tmger, “that I micht then oe con- kept out of their assembly.”— [MS. 
sidered a doubtw Mend, it was JoumaU'] 



POSITION OF MB. MCNEILL. 


255 


M‘Neill;—“ He was forced,” wrote the minister to Lord 
Palmerston, “ to return with them; a part of his clothes 
were taken from him; the horses which he was bringing 
for me from Herat were seized; he was draped to camp, 
and there placed in custody. He succeeded, however, in 
making his way to the tent of Colonel Stoddart, and was 
by that officer conducted to the prime minister, who, 
after he had been informed by Colonef Stoddart that the 
man was in the service of this mission, again placed him 
in custody, while Hadjee Khan, an officer of the rank of 
Brigadier in the service of the Shah, not only used offen¬ 
sive language in addressing Colonel Stoddart in presence 
of the prime minister, but after the messenger had been 
released by order of his Excellency, seized him again in 
the midst of the camp; stripped him to search for any 
letters he might have concealed about his person ;* took 
from him Lieutenant Pottinger’s letter, which was sent 
to the prime minister; used to the messenger the most 
violent threats and the most disgusting and opprobrious 
language, and took from him a portion of his accoutre- 
ments.”t 

This was, doubtless, a grievous insult; and Mr.M'Neill 


* Published Correspondence relating 
to Persia and Afghanistan. 

t The Gholam’s own account of the 
treatment he received from Hadjee 
Khan is worth quoting:—“Hadjee 
Khan then turned to me, and threa¬ 
tened me with instant death. I de¬ 
manded the reason, but he gave me 
no other answer than abuse, calling 
me a traitor and a rascal, and said 
that he himself would be mj execu¬ 
tioner. He then began to imbutton 
his coat sleeves, threatening me all 
the while, and every now and then 
half unsheatibun^ his dagger. ‘ I will 
be your executioner myself,’ said the 
Khan. * K there be an enemy to the 
English, I am the man—you are a 
traitor and a rascal—your eyes shall 


be plucked out; the Shah has ordered 
me to kill you; I will first cut off 
your bands. You must have papers 
from Herat, and unless you instantly 
deliver them up, you shall be cut to 
pieces.’ Hadjee Khan went on in 
this strain for a long time, during 
which I was stripped nearly to my 
skin, the air being so cold that water, 
on being exposec^ instantly froze. I 
was silent under all these threats 
and demonstrations, merely observing 
that, having such a noble executioner 
as Hadiee Khan, I was content to 
die, and I hoped the office woidd re¬ 
main in his family.**— Statement of 
AH Mahomed Beg.—[Published Cor- 
respondence relating to Persia and Af¬ 
ghanistan.'] 



256 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


believed that it was intended to be one. It was designed, 
he thought, “ to exhibit to the Afghans and to the Per¬ 
sian army an apparent contempt for the English, with a 
view to diminish the moral effect which might have 
been produced on either party, by the general belief that 
we were opposed to the conquest of Herat by the 
Persians.” It was an insult for which reparation, if not 
offered by one state, might be rightfully exacted by the 
other; and Mr. M‘Neill was not a man to sit down 
tamely under such an outrage as this. But the incident 
had taken place in October, and now, in May, though the 
subject had been repeatedly forced upon the attention of 
Mahomed Shah and his ministers, no fitting reparation 
had been offered to the British Government. The Per¬ 
sian Government had, indeed, asserted their right to 
seize, punish, or put to death, without reference to the 
British minister, the Persian servants in his employ¬ 
ment. The breach was thus palpably widening. The 
Governor of Bushire, too, had used offensive language 
towards the British Resident in the Persian Gulf; and 
the redress, which had been sought by Mr. M‘Neill, had 
not been granted by the Persian Government. Then 
there was another grievance of which the British minister 
complained. The Persian Government had continued 
to evade the conclusion of the commercial treaty, which 
was guaranteed to us in the general treaty of friendship 
between the two states. 

All these cumulative offences, added to the great sub¬ 
ject of complaint—the conduct of Persia towards Herat— 
made up such an amount of provocation, that Mr. M‘]S[eill 
felt his position at the Persian Court was little likely to 
be one of much longer continuance. The Shah had 
declared that he would raise the siege if the British 
minister would afford him a pretext for the retrograde 
movement, satisfiwitory in the eyes of his countrymen, by 



MISUin)EBSTAin)IN6S WITH THE PEBSIAH COURT. 257 


threatening, on the part of his government, to attack 
Persia if she continued her offensive operations against 
Herat; but from this promise he had receded, or thrown 
such difficulties in the way of its fulfilment, as practi¬ 
cally to nullify the pledge. Mr. M'Neill massed all his 
demands upon the Persian Government. The Shah re¬ 
quired that he should keep the question of Herat distinct 
from the others, and, on the British minister refusing to 
do so on his own responsibility, declared that he would 
do it himself, by acceding to all the demands except that 
which related to Herat. “ The Shah then,” says Mr. 
M‘Neill, in his report of these proceedings to the Foreign 
Secretary, “ immediately dismissed me, with an assurance 
that he should adopt that course; but before I had left 
the area on which the royal tent was pitched, he called 
after me, that on his agreeing to the other demands, he 
should expect me to avoid all further discussion of the 
affairs of Herat, and to order Mr. Pottinger to quit that 
city. In answer, I represented that I could not tie up 
the hands of my own government in respect to the ques¬ 
tion of Herat, and that Mr. Pottinger was not under my 
orders.”* 

There was obviously now little hope of bringing these 
long-protracted negotiations to a favorable conclusion. 
The British mission was fast falling into contempt. The 
Russians were exalted at the Persian Court. The British 
were slighted and humiliated. There was not a tent- 
pitcher in camp who did not know that the British 
mission was treated with intentional disrespect. It was 
time, therefore, to bring matters to a crisis. So, on the 
3rd of June, Mr. M‘Neill addressed a letter to the Fo¬ 
reign minister in the Persian camp, announcing his in¬ 
tention to depart for the frontier on the following day. 

* Mr. MNeUl to Lord Palmerston: Meshed, June 25, 1838. 

VOL. I. S 



258 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


“I feel myself called upon,” lie concluded, “to inform 
you that, until the reparation and satisfaction I have 
demanded, for the indignities already offered, shall have 
been fully given, the Queen of England cannot receive 
at her Court any minister -who may be sent thither by 
the Shah of Persia.” The decisive language of the 
British minister called forth an evasive reply from the 
Persian Government. The Shah professed not to un¬ 
derstand “ his Excellency’s object in all these ■writings,” 
and declared that there had been no indignity or disre¬ 
spect ever offered to him. But M‘Neill was not to be 
thus appeased. He sent back, in a few plain words, a 
statement of his demands. He demanded that Hadjee 
Ehan, who had outraged the servant of the British mi¬ 
nister, should be removed from office; that Hadjee Meerza 
Aghassy, who had connived at the outrage, should go to 
the British minister’s tent, and apologise for the insult; 
that a firman should be issued, commanding the servants 
of the Persian Government not to interfere with the de¬ 
pendents of the British mission; that the Governor of 
Bushire should bo removed from office for his insults to 
the British Resident; and that the commercial treaty 
should be forthwith concluded and ratified. All these de¬ 
mands but the last were to be carried into effect within 
three days of the date of the letter. 

Again the Persian minister declared, on the part of 
the Shah, that no indignities had ever been offered to 
the British mission; and again Mr. M‘Neill requested his 
dismissal. The Shah was not ready to grant it. “ No,” 
he said; “never shall we consent to the departure of his 
Excellency. Let him by all means lay aside his inten¬ 
tion, and let him not allow this idea to enter his mind.” 
But he was not to be persuaded to lay aside his inten¬ 
tions. The Persian ministers continued to declare that 
no insults had been offered the British mission. So, re- 



SOTPBBING® OF THE CITIZENS. 


259 


luctant as he was abruptly to terminate our diplomatic 
intercourse with Persia, Mr. M'Neill, on the 7th of Jime, 
took his departure from the Persian camp. Prom the 
ramparts of Herat they looked out upon the striking 
of the English ambassador’s tents, and a large party of 
horsemen were seen making their way across the plain. 
The rupture was now complete. Persia was no longer 
an ally of Great Britain. 

In the mean while, as the year advanced, the miseries 
and privations of the siege were more and more severely 
felt by the inhabitants. The wonder is, that at a still 
earlier period they had not become wholly unendurable. 
Houses were pulled down to supply fuel.* Horses 
were killed for food. The vast number of people 
assembled within the walls had not only generated an 
extreme scarcity of provisions, but was in a fair way to 
generate a. pestilence. The city was altogether without 
sewers or other means of drainage. The accumulations 
of filth had therefore become inconceivable, and the 
stench hardly to be borne. The decaying bodies of the 
dead had polluted the air to a still more horrible extent; 
so that there was every probability of some fearful 
epidemic breaking out among the people.f Indeed, at 

* The Jews’ synagogue had been as we had got now intimate he told 
devoted to this unhofy use; but they me that he as yet had not commenced 
had contrived to accomplish its re- the practice; that he wanted to 
demption. pursue the science allowed by the 

t An amusing illustration of the Hudyth; not the accursed magic— 
unsavoury condition of the city at Sihr Malown; that he wished but for 
this time is given in Pottinger’s «four- power to summon the ^ns and angels 
nal. He had made the acquaintance to his aid. Though this was not ex- 
of a magician, and wished to have a actly what I wanted, I should have 
specimen of his art. ** People of his been most happy of an introduction 
class,” he writes, “ are very careful to either of these classes; and, there¬ 
of exposing themselves; and are ex- fore, not to lose my labour, I used my 
cessively suspicious and bigoted. It utmost endeavours to get my friend 
was therefore a long time before I to commence his incantations at once, 
could venture to request a turn of He made many excuses. First, he 
his art. However, I at last did so, had not got clean clothes to change 
but was disappointed at finding he as the scarcity had obliged him to 
was not a regular practitioner; and part with ev^ything extra to buy 

s 2 



260 


THE SIEGE OP HERAT. 


the beginning of May, feimine and sickness pressed so 
severely upon the inhabitants, that it was debated 
whether it would not be expedient to suffer a number of 
them to depart out of the city. Fever and scurvy were 
rife among them; and it appeared that the enemies out¬ 
side the gates were less terrible than the viewless ones 
within. In this extremity they mustered in large num¬ 
bers, and petitioned the Shah to suffer them to depart. 
The Shah referred the matter to the Wuzeer; and the 
Wuzeer consulted the chiefs. The discussion was long 
and animated. The decision was against the departure 
of the people. The petitioners were mainly women 
and children; and to suffer them to depart would be to 
throw them into the hands of the licentious Persian sol¬ 
diery, and to expose them to a fate more terrible than 
famine and death.* 

The Persians now, under Russian direction, continued 
to prosecute the siege with increased vigour and judg¬ 
ment. The whole of the investing force—some portion 
of which had before been scattered over the great plain 
—was now drawn in more closely round the city. 


grain whilst it was tolerably cheap. 
This and sundry other excuses were 
easily overcome; but he evidently 
wished to avoid the employment, or 
to make excuses for use when he 
failed. As soon as one objection was 
overruled another was raised; but I 
overcame all except that the stench 
of the dead bodies from the city would 
prevent these spirits from venturing, 
except under extraordinary strong 
incantations, within its walls; as 
angels and gins are smd to be parti- 
cumrly fond of sweet odours, and 
excessively angered by the contrary. 
The argument was a clencher, and no 
ingenuity could overturn it, for cer- 
^nly the smell was abominable, and 
in a calm, or when the wind came 
from the southward, in which direc¬ 
tion the greatest number had been 


buried, the human kind could scarcely 
withstand the horrible effluvia of 
putrid flesh.” — \Eldred Pottinger^s 
MS. Journal.'] 

* A few days afterwards, however, 
a party of some 600 or 700, mostly 
old men, women, and children, were 
put out of the gates. “ The enemy,” 
says Pottinger, “ opened a heavy 
fire on them until they found out 
who they were, when they tried to 
drive them back with sticks and 
stones; but Nfdb Dustoo, to whom 
the business was entrusted, liker a 
fiend than a man, opened a fire upon 
the wretched citizens from the works, 
and the Persians thus let them pass. 
From the besiegers* fire no one suf¬ 
fered, as a rising ground was between, 
but ^m that of the garrison it is 
said several fell.” 



UNSUCCESSFUL ASSAULTS. 


261 


On the 13th of June an assault was attempted at the 
south-west angle, but gallantly repulsed by the garrison. 
Informed by some desertem &om Herat that the defence 
of the famse-braie was comparatively neglected during 
the mid-day heats, the Persians surprised the guards at 
the outer works, and pushed on towards the Jansse-braie. 
But a little party of Afghans—not more than three or 
four in number—stood at bay in the passages of the 
traverses, and heroically defended the post until assist¬ 
ance was at hand. The relieving party came down 
gallantly to the defence. Headed by Sultan Mahomed 
Omar, they flung themselves over the parapet of the 
upper famse-braie, and pouring themselves down the 
exterior slope overwhelmed the assailants and dislodged 
them with great slaughter.* 

Another attempt, made at the same time, to efiect a 
lodgment at the south-east angle, was equally unsuccess¬ 
ful. Twice the storming column advanced, and twice it 
was repulsed. The fortune of the day was against the 
Persians. 

In nowise disheartened by these failures, the besi^ers 
now redoubled their exertions, and pursued their mining 
operations with a vigour and an activity which the gar¬ 
rison could not match. The Afghans were now becoming 
dispirited and inert; even the chiefs began to despond, 
and the wonted constancy of the Wuzeer forsook him. 
Everywhere Pottinger saw with uneasiness signs of 
failing courage and impaired activity. He had been 
deputed by Mr. M‘Neill to act as British Agent at Herat, 
and now, in his official capacity, he redoubled his exer¬ 
tions. There was need, indeed, of his best efforts. The 

* It was said that Mahomed Shah who, attended by a party of idlers, 
had come down in person to wit- and a small body ot horse, was a 
ness the assault; but the Boyal ama- spectator of the defeat of his coim- 
teur was only the Shah's brother, trymen. 



262 


THE SIEGE OF BEBAT. 


siege was being pushed forward, not only with an energy, 
but with an intelligence that had not marked the earlier 
stages of the attack. The breaches had be6ome more 
practicable. The Persians were filling up the ditch at 
some parts, and constructing bridges to span it at others. 
Another assaidt of a more formidable character than 
any before attempted was said to be in contemplation; 
and as these rumours were circulated through the works, 
and the obscure terms of the future were magnified 
by the palpable dangers of the present, the defenders 
scarcely strove to conceal the fear which had overcome 
them. 

The threatened assault was at hand. The 24th of 
June was a memorable day in the annals of the siege. 
It opened with a heavy fire fi:om the Persian batteries on 
all the four sides of the city. Then there was a perfect 
lull, more ominous than the uproar that preceded it. 
The signs of the coming assault were plain and intelli¬ 
gible ; but strangely were they disregarded. The Wuzeer 
was at his quarters. The garrison were off their guard. 
Many, indeed, had composed themselves to sleep. The 
enemy had been seen assembling in great force; but no 
heed was taken of the movement. Suddenly the still¬ 
ness was broken by the booming of a gun and the flight 
of a rocket; another gun—then another—and presently 
a heavy fire of ordnance from all sides, supported by 
a discharge of musketry, which, feeble at first, grew 
presently more vigorous and sustained. There was 
no longer any doubt of the intentions of the besieging 
force. The enemy had braced themselves up for a 
general assault upon the city, and were moving to the 
attack of five different points of the works. 

At four of these points they were repulsed.* At the 

* ** The assault on the gate of Can- chased back into their trenches; but 
dahar was repulsed, and the Persians the danger at the souih^^ast angle 



ASSAULT OF THE.24TH OF JUNK. 


268 


fifth, gallantly headed by their officers, the storming 
column threw itself into the trench of the lower fausse- 
braie. The struggle was brief, but bloody. The defenders 
fell at their post to a man, and the work was carried by 
the besiegers. Encouraged by this first success, the storm¬ 
ing party pushed up the slope. A galling fire firom the 
garrison met them as they advanced. The officers and 
leading men of the column were mown down; there was 
a second brief and bloody struggle, and the upper fausse- 
braie was carried. A few of the most daring of the 
assailants pushing on in advance of their comrades 
gained the head of the breach. But now Deen Ma- 
homed came down with the Afghan reserve. Thus 
recruited, the defenders gathered new heart. The Per¬ 
sians on the breach were driven back. Again and again, 
with desperate courage, they struggled to effect a lodg¬ 
ment, only to be repulsed and thrown back in confiision 
upon their comrades who were pressing on behind. The 
conflict was fierce; the issue was doubtful. Now the 
breach was well-nigh carried; and now the stormers, 
recoiling from the shock of the defence, fell back upon 
the exterior slope of the fausse-braie. It was an hour 


prevented them following up the ad¬ 
vantage. At the south-west angle, 
or Pay-in-ab, the Persians can scarcely 
be said to have attacked, as they never 
advanced beyond the parapet of their 
own trenches* It was evidently a 
mere feint. At the western, or Arak 
gate, a column composed of the Rus¬ 
sian regiment, and other troops under 
Samson, and those under Wully Khan, 
marched up to the counterscarp; but 
Wully Khan being killed, and Samson 
carried off the field wounded, the men 
broke and fled, leaving an immense 
number killed and wounded. The 
latter were nearly all shot by idlers on 
the ramparts, or murdered by the 
plunderers, who crept out to strip the 
slain. The other attack, on the centre 


of the north-west face, was repulsed 
in like manner, after reacliing the 
counterscarp.” — [Eldred Pottinger's 
MS. Journal.] Wully Khan's body 
was found on the following day, and 
his head was brought into the city. 
On his person were found several 
letters relating to the plan of assault, 
which satisfactorily proved tliat it had 
been designed by the Russian officers 
in the Persian camp. There were 
two letters among them from Ma¬ 
homed Shah himself—one addressed 
to Wully Khan, ordering him to 
conform to the plan of the Russian 
ambassador, and another to Hadjee 
Meerza Aghassy, directing him to 
give similar instructions to Wully 

l^n. 



264 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


of intense excitement The fate of Herat was trembling 
in the balance. 

Startled by the first noise of the assault, Yar Mahomed 
had risen up, left his quarters, and ridden down to the 
works. Pottinger went forth at the same time, and on 
the same errand. There was a profound conviction in 
his mind that there was desperate work in hand, of which 
he might not live to see the end. Giving instructions to 
his dependents, to be carried out in the event of his 
falling in the defence, he hastened to join the Wuzeer. 
It was a crisis that demanded all the energy and cou¬ 
rage of those two resolute spirits. The English officer 
was equal to the occasion. The Afghan Sirdar was not. 

As they neared the point of attack, the garrison were 
seen retreating by two and threes; others were quitting 
the works on the pretext of carrying off the wounded. 
These signs of the waning courage of the defenders 
wrought differently on the minds of the two men who 
had hitherto seemed to be cast in the same heroic mould 
—soldiers of strong nerves and unfailing resolution. 
They saw that the garrison were giving way. Pottin¬ 
ger was eager to push on to the breach. Yar Mahomed 
sat himself down. The Wuzeer had lost heart. His 
wonted high courage and collectedness had deserted 
him in this emergency. Astonished and indignant at 
the pusillanimity of his companion, the English officer 
called upon the Wuzeer again and again to rouse him¬ 
self—either to move down to the breach or to send his 
son, to inspire new heart into the yielding garrison. 
The energetic appeal of the yoimg Englishman was not 
lost upon the Afghan chief. He rose up; advanced fur¬ 
ther into the works; and neared the breach where the 
contest was raging. Encouraged by the diminished 
opposition, the enemy were pushing on with renewed 
vigour. Yar Mahomed called upon his men, in God’s 



IRRESOLUTION OF TAR MAHOMEI). 


265 


name, to fight; but they wavered and stood still. Then 
his heart failed him again. He turned back; said he 
would go for aid; sought the place where he had before 
sat down, and looked around, irresolute and unnerved. 
Pointing to the men, who, alarmed by the backwardness 
of their chief, were now retreating in every direction, 
Pottinger in vehement language insisted upon the abso¬ 
lute ruin of all their hopes that must result fi’om want 
of energy in such a conjuncture. Yar Mahomed roused 
himself; again advanced, but again wavered; and a 
third time the young English officer was compelled, by 
words and deeds alike, to shame the unmanned Wuzeer. 
The language of entreaty was powerless; he used the 
language of reproach. He reviled; he threatened; he 
seized him by the arm and dragged him forward to the 
breach. Such appeals were not to be resisted. The 
noble example of the young Englishman could not infuse 
any real courage into the Afghan chief; but it at least 
roused him into action. The men were retreating from 
the breach. The game was almost up. The cowaidice 
of the Wuzeer had well-nigh played away the last 
stake. Had Yar Mahomed not been roused out of 
the paralysis that had descended upon him, Herat would 
have been carried by assault. But the indomitable cou¬ 
rage of Eldred Pottinger saved the beleaguered city. 
He compelled the Wuzeer to appear before his men as 
one not utterly prostrate and helpless. The chief called 
upon the soldiery to fight; but they continued to fall 
back in dismay. Then seizing a large staff, Yar Maho¬ 
med rushed like a madman upon the hindmost of the 
party, and drove them forward under a shower of heavy 
blows. The nature of the works was such as to forbid 
their falling back in a body. Cooped up in a narrow 
passage, and seeing no other outlet of escape, many of 
them leapt wildly over the parapet, and rushed down 



266 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


the exterior slope hill upon the Persian stormers. The 
effect of this sudden movement was magical. The Per¬ 
sians, seized with a panic, abandoned their position and 
fled. The crisis was over; Herat was saved.* 

But no exultation followed a victory so achieved. 
The bearing of the Afghans was that of men who had 
sustained a crushing defeat. The garrison were crest¬ 
fallen and dispirited. A general gloom seemed to hang 
over the city. Yar Mahomed, long after the danger 
was past, moved about as one confused and bewildered. 
There were few of the chiefs whose minds were not so 
wholly unhinged by the terrors of that great crisis as to 
be unable, for days afterwards, to perform calmly their 
wonted duties. A complete paralysis, indeed, descended 
upon men of all ranks. The loss on both sides had 
been severe; but if half the garrison had fallen in the 
defence of the breach, Herat could not have been more 


* There is nothing finer in tlic an¬ 
nals of the war in Afghanistan than 
tlie heroic conduct of Eldred Pot- 
tingcr on tiiis 24th of June. But I 
should as little discharge my duty as 
an historian, as 1 should gratify my 
inclinations as a man, if I were not 
to say that I have extracted, with 
some difficulty, from Pottinger’s manu- 
scrijpt journal, the real history of the 
service that he rendered to his country 
on this memorable day. The young 
Bombay artilleryman was endowed 
with a rare modesty, which made him 
unwilling to speak or to write about 
himself. In the copy of the journal 
before me he has erased, throughout 
the entire record of this day, every 
entrance made in the first person; and 
only by giving rein to a curiosity, 
which I snould not have indulged, or 
considered pardonable in any ordi¬ 
nary case, nave I succeeded in ex¬ 
tracting the real history of an inci¬ 
dent which has already, in one or 
two incorrect shapes, been given to 
the world. Wherever Pottinger had 


written, in the original copy of his 
journal, ** I,” he had erased the ego¬ 
tistical monosyllable, and substituted 
the words, “the people about the 
Wuzeer,” or had otherwise disguised 
the record of his own achievements. 
For example, the words, “ I had several 
times to lay hold of the Vizier, and 
point to him the men, who turned as 
soon as he did,” are altered into “ the 
people about abused, and several times 
had to lay hold of the Vizier, &c., &c.” 
The story, I believe, was first pub¬ 
lished on the authority of a letter 
from Colonel Stoddart. What was 
thought of Pottinger’s conduct be¬ 
yond the walls of Herat, may be 
gathered from the fact, that a few 
days afterwards a man came in from 
Kurookh, bringing some important 
intelligence, who, immediately on his 
arrival, went up to Pottinger, seized 
his hands, kissed them, said he was 
indeed “ rejoiced that he had made so 
great a pilgrimage,” and sfioke with 
enthusiastic praise of the l«|itt]8e of 
the Persian stormers. 



SrnrFEBINGS of the besieged. 


267 


stunned and prostrated by the blow. The Persian camp 
was equally dispirited; and a week of inaction super¬ 
vened.* Even the work of repairing the damaged forti¬ 
fications was slowly recommenced by the garrison; and 
when at last the men returned to their accustomed duties 
it was plain that they had no heart. Nor was there any¬ 
thing strange and unaccountable in this. The A%hans 
had repulsed the Persians on the 24th of June; but they 
felt that nothing but a miracle could enable them to 
withstand another such assault. The resources of the 
government had failed them. Food was scarce; money 
was scarce. The citizens could not be fed. The soldiers 
could not be paid. 

In all of this there was much to disquiet with painful 
doubts and misgivings the mind of Eldred Pottinger. 
To protract the siege was to protract the sufferings of 
the Heratees. The misery of the people was past 
counting. The poor were perishing for want of food; 
the rich were dying under the hands of the torturers. 
The soldiers clamoured for money; and wherever money 
was known or suspected to be, there Avent the ruthless 
myrmidons of Yar Mahomed to demand it for their 
master, or to Avring from the agonised victim the treasure 
which he sought to conceal. To tear from a wretched 
man, at the last gasp of life, all that he possessed; then, de¬ 
manding more, to torture him anew, until, sinking under 

* The loss upon the Persian side have been very great in proportion to 
was very heavy. A large number of the whole number killed and wounded, 
officers, including several chiefs of Major-General Berowski and Sirteps 
note, were killed and wounded. Mr. Wully Khan and Kebbee Khan, have 
M^Xeill wrote from comp, near Te- been killed; Sirteps Samson Khan^ 
heran, to Lord Palmerston: “The Hossein Pasha Khan, and JaffierKooli 
number of the killed and wounded of Khan, have been wounded; and al- 
the Persian army is variously stated; most all the field-officers of these bri- 
but the best information 1 have been gadcs have been killed or wounded.** 
able to obtain leads me to believe There is little doubt, however, that 
that it cannot be less than 1700 or the entire number of casualties is 
1800 man. The loss in officers, and greatly overstated in this passage, 
especially those of the higher ranks, 



268 THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 

tiie accumulated agony, the miserable victim was released 
by death; and then to fling his emaciated corpse, 
wrapped in an old shawl or blanket down at the 
threshold of his desolated house, was no solitary achieve¬ 
ment of the Wuzeer. Even ladies of rank were given 
over to the torturers. The very inmates of the Shah’s 
Zenana were threatened. A reign of terror was esta¬ 
blished such as it sickened Pottinger to contemplate. 
He felt that he was the cause of this. Many reproached 
him openly. The despairing looks and gaunt figures of 
others reproached him more painfully still. All that 
he could do to redress the wrongs of the injured and 
alleviate the suflerings of the distressed he did in this 
fearful conjuncture. Men of all kinds came to him im¬ 
ploring his aid and importuning him for protection. 
Some he was able to save, stepping between the wrong¬ 
doer and the wronged; but from others he was power¬ 
less to avert by his intervention the ruin that was im¬ 
pending over them. Every day brought palpably before 
him new illustrations of the unsparing cruelty of the 
Wuzeer. But dire political necessity compelled him to 
protract a conjuncture laden with these terrible results. 
It is impossible to read the entrances in his journal at 
this time without feeling how great was the conflict 
within him between the soldier and the man. 

The events of the 24th of June, though they had 
raised Pottinger’s character, as a warrior, in the A%han 
city, in the Persian camp, and in the surrounding 
country, had, greatly indeed, diminished his popularity 
in Herat and increased the difficulties of his position. 
In the negotiations which followed, Mahomed Shah in¬ 
sisted upon Pottinger’s dismissal. The young English 
officer had excited the measureless indication of the 
Persian King; and the A%han Wuzeer was not disin¬ 
clined to reproach him with presenting a new obttocle 



PROPOSED DISMISSAL OF POTTINGEB. 


269 


to the adjustment of the differences between the two 
states. The A%han envoys said that they had always 
thought Pottinger was one man, but that the importance 
the Persians attached to his departure showed that he 
was equal to an army.* Pottinger was always ready 
with a declaration that no thoughts of personal safety or 
convenience should ever suffer him to stand in the way 
of an arrangement conducive to the safety of Herat 
and the welfare of his country, and that if these objects 
were to be gained by his departure, he was willing to 
depart. But Tar Mahomed, whilst unwilling to retain 
him, was unwilling to persuade him to go. The dis¬ 
missal of the man who had saved Herat from the 
grasp of the Persians, would have been an act that might 
have fixed a stain upon the character of the "Wuzeer, 
prejudicial to the success of his after-career. Moreover, 
it was possible that Pottinger’s assistance might be wanted 
at some future time—that the Persians, having obtained 
his dismissal, might hesitate to perform their promises, 
and rise in their demands on the strength of the advan¬ 
tage which they had thus gained. 

The month of July was not distinguished by any 
great activity on the part of the besiegers. The siege, 
indeed, now began to assume the character of a blockade. 
The question of surrender had become a mere question 
of time. It seemed impossible much longer to protract 

“ The Wuzeer told me the whole taiy, and expressed loudly their gra- 
business hung upon me; that the titude to the British Government, 
Persians made a point of obtaining to the exertions of which they attri* 
my dismissal, without which they buted the change in the tone of the 
would not treat. They were so press- Persians. They, however, did not 
ing, that he said he never before mve the decided answers they should 
guessed my importance, and that the have done, but put the question off 
Afghan envoys who had gone to camp by sayi^ I was a guest. The Per- 
had told him they had always thought sians onered to be security for my 
me one man, but the importance the safe passage to any place I chose 
Persians attached to my departure to go to.**—* [Eldred Pottinger^$ MS. 
showed that 1 was equal to an mrmy. J<mmah'\ 

The Afghans were very complimen- 



270 


THE SIEGE OF HEBAT. 


the defence. Yar Mahomed, with all the resources of 
uttscrupulous cruelty at his command, could not ex¬ 
tort suflBcient money from his victims to enable him to 
continue his defensive Operations with any prospect of 
success. But it appeared to him, as it did to Pottinger, 
expedient to postpone the inevitable day of capitulation, 
in the hope that something might yet be written down 
in their favour in the “ chapter of accidents,” out of 
which so often had come unexpected aid. Yar Ma¬ 
homed looked for the coming of an Oosbeg army. He 
had long anxiously expected the arrival of a relieving 
force from Toorkistan; and scarcely a day had passed 
without some tidings, either to elevate or depress him, 
of the advent or delay of the looked-for succours. Pot¬ 
tinger, though unwilling to encourage in others expecta¬ 
tions which might not be realised, was inwardly con¬ 
vinced that something of a decisive character respecting 
the intentions of his own government must soon be 
heard, and that the knowledge of those intentions would 
have an effect upon the Afghan garrison and the Persian 
camp very advantageous to the former. With the ob¬ 
ject, therefore, of gaining time, the Wuzeer renewed his 
exertions to raise money for the payment of the troops. 
Assemblies of the chiefs were held, at which every 
practicable method of recruiting their exhausted finances 
was discussed. The Sirdars addressed themselves to the 
discussion as men wholly in earnest, determined to do 
their best.* The resolution of the chiefs in this con- 


* At one of these consultations, 
held on the 18th of July, “ Been 
Mahomed,** said Pottinger, ** proposed 
that each chief shoum bring what 
he had to the Wuzeer. The Wuzeer 
proposed that each chief should 
retam his own men. The Topshee- 
Bashee said: * As the Shah has 
mon^ and won't give it, we can¬ 
not force him; but if you allow 


me to seize whom I like, and the 
chiefs five me their promise that 
they will not interfere in favour of 
any one, I will undertake to provide 
the expense of the men for two 
months.* The chiefs immediately 
said, * Done!* and had an agreement 
made out, and those present sealed it. 
.... They were, or appeared Well 
satisfied with me; and we Wuzeer 



THE KABBACK EXPEDITION. 


271 


juncture surprised and delighted Pottinger, who was little 
prepared for the unanimity with which they determined 
on protracting the defence. “ With open breaches, trem¬ 
bling soldiery, and a disaffected populace, they deter¬ 
mined to stand to the last. How I wished,” exclaimed 
Pottinger, “ to have the power of producing the money!” 

The plan which was at last resolved upon—one which 
threw into the hands of a single chief the power of 
seizing the property of whomsoever he thought fit to 
mulct for the service of the state—sunder a written pledge 
from the other chiefs not to interfere, as had been their 
wont, for the protection of their own friends, threw the 
city into such confusion, and produced so many appeals 
to the assembly of chiefs, that Pottinger, anxious to 
establish a less arbitrary system of levying contributions, 
suggested that all who voluntarily brought their money 
would be reimbursed, at his recommendation, by the 
British Government. But money came in slowly. The 
difiiculties of the garrison seemed to thicken around 
them. Negotiations were, therefore, again resumed, with 
a determination at last to bring them to an issue; and mes¬ 
sengers were constantly passing and repassing between 
the city and the Persian camp. 

But in the mean while, far beyond the walls of Herat, 
events were taking shape mightily affecting the issue 
of the contest. Lord Auckland, who had watched with 
much anxiety the progress of affairs in the West, had, in 
the course of the spring, determined on despatching an 
expedition to the Persian Gulf, to hold itself in readi¬ 
ness for any service which Mr. M'Neill might deem it 
expedient to employ it upon, “ with a view to the main¬ 
tenance of our interests in Persia.” Instructions to this 
effect were forwarded to Bombay. In conjunction with 

<juoted my anxiety and efforts as an and children to defend.’*—[iJWrsd 
example to those who had their women Pottinger's MS, J 



272 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


Sir Charles Malcolm, the chief of the Indian navy, the 
Bombay Gkivemment despatched the Semiramis and 
Hugh lAndsay steamers, and some vessels of •war, "with 
detachments of the 15th, 23rd, and 24th Regiments, and 
the Marine battalion, to the Persian Gulf; and instructed 
the Resident, Captain Hennell, to land the troops on 
the island of Karrack, and concentrate the squadron 
before it. On the 4th of June, the Semiramis steamed 
out of the Bombay harbour, and on the 19th anchored 
off Karrack. The troops were- immediately landed. The 
governor of the island, greatly alarmed by the coming 
of the steamer and the fighting men, but somewhat 
reassured by the appearance of Captain Hennell, said that 
the island and everything it contained, himself and its 
inhabitants, were at the disposal of the British Resident; 
and at once began to assist in the disembarkation of the 
troops. 

The demonstration was an insignificant one in itself; 
but by the time that intelligence of the movement had 
reached the Persian camp, the expedition, gathering new 
dimensions at every stage, had swollen into bulk and 
significance. The most exaggerated reports of the 
doings and intentions of the British soon forced them¬ 
selves into currency. The Persian camp was all alive 
with stories of the powerfal British fleet that had sailed 
into the gulf, destroyed Bunder-Abassy and all the other 
ports on the coast, taken Bushire, and landed there a 
mighty army, which was advancing upon Shiraz, and 
had already taken divers towns in the province of Pars. 
Nothing could have been more opportune than the 
arrival of these reports. Mr. M‘Neill was making his 
Way towards the frontier, when intelligence of the 
Karrack expedition met him on the road. About the 
same time he received letters of instructions from the 
Foreign-office, issued in anticipation of the refusal of 



STOBDART IN THE PERSIAN CAMP. 


273 


Mahomed Shall to desist from his operations against 
Herat; and thinking the hour was favorable, he re¬ 
solved to make another effort to secure the withdrawal 
of the Persian army, and to regain for the British Mission 
the ascendancy it had lost at the Persian Court. 

Fortified by these instructions from the Foreign-office, 
Mr. M‘Neill despatched Colonel Stoddart to the Persian 
camp, with a message to the Shah. The language of 
this message was very intelligible and very decided. 
The Shah was iiiformed that the occupation of Herat or 
any part of Afghanistan by the Persians would be con¬ 
sidered in tlie light of a hostile demonstration against 
England; and that he could not persist in his present 
course without immediate danger and injury to Persia. 
It was stated, that already had a naval armament arrived 
in the Persian Gulf, and troops been landed on the 
island of KaiTack, and that if the Shah desired the 
British Government to suspend the measures in progress 
for the vindication of its honour, he must at once retire 
from Herat, and make reparation for the injuries which 
had been inflicted upon the Britisli Mission. 

On the 11th of August, Colonel Stoddart arrived in 
the Persian camp. Repairing at once to the quarters of 
the minister, he found the son of the Candahar chief 
and a party of Afghans waiting in the tent. The Hadjee, 
on his return, received him with courtesy and friend¬ 
liness, and fixed the following day for an interview with 
the Shah. Stoddart went at the appointed hour. The 
King was sitting in a raised room, up six or seven steps. 
Beckoning to the English officer to come up more closely to 
him, he welcomed him with much cordiality, and listened 
to the message from the British Government. Taking 
advantage of a pause in the recital, the King said: “ The 
fact is, if I don't leave Herat, there will be war, is not 
that it?” It is war,” returned Stoddart; “ all depends 

VOL. I. T 



274 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT 


upon your Majesty’s answer—God preserve your Ma¬ 
jesty !” The message, written in the original English, 
was then given to the King. “ It is all I wished for,” 
he said. “ I asked the minister plenipotentiary for it; 
but he would not give it to me. He said he was not 
authorised.” “ He was not authorised then,” returned 
Stoddart; “ but now he has been ordered to do it. No 
one could give such a message without especial autho¬ 
rity from Sovereign.” The Shah complained that 
the paper was in English, which he could not under¬ 
stand; but said that his Meerzas should translate it for 
him, and then that he would give a positive answer to 
its demands. Two days afterwards Stoddart was again 
summoned to the royal presence. “We consent to the 
whole of the demands of the British Government,” said 
the Shah. “ We will not go to war. Were it not for the 
sake of their friendship, we should not return from before 
Herat. Had we known that our coming here might 
risk the loss of their friendship, we certainly would not 
h.ave come at all.”* The English officer thanked God 
that his Majesty had taken so wise a view of the real 
interests of Persia; but hinted to the Foreign Minister 
as he went out, that although the Shah’s answer was 
very satisfactory, it would be more satisfactory still to 
see it at once reduced to practice. 

Whilst, in the Persian camp, Mahomed Shah was 
promising the English diplomatists to withdraw his army 
from Herat, an officer of the Russian Mission—M. 
Goutte, who had approved himself an adept in intrigue 
—^was bus 3 dng himself in Herat to bring about an 
^rangement that would give a colour of victory to the 
achievements of the investing force. If Kamran could 
have been persuaded to come out and wait upon Ma- 

* Colonel Stoddart to Mr, M^NeUL Correspondence relating to Persia and 
Afghanistan, 



POTTINGER AND YAR MAHOMED. 


276 


homed Shah in token of submission, the army might 
have been withdrawn with some show of credit, and 
the Russian Mission might have claimed a diplomatic 
victory. The Afgh ans were not, in their present re¬ 
duced state, disinclined to acknowledge the supremacy 
of Mahomed Shah, and to consent that Eamran should 
visit the Persian monarch at Ghorian—^but the Bussiaa 
envoy demanded that he should come out of Herat, and 
make his obeisance to the King of Elings, as a prelimi¬ 
nary to the withdrawal of the Persian army.* 

This was on the 17th of August. On the morning of 
the 18th, Yar Mahomed sent a messenger to Pottinger, 
requesting his attendance at the Wuzeer’s quarters. The 
English officer was received with coldness almost amount¬ 
ing to discourtesy. Scarcely a word was spoken to him 
whilst the levee lasted j but when the assembly broke 
up, Pottinger, in a tone of voice that showed he was not 
to be trifled with, asked him why he had sent for him 
if he had nothing to communicate and nothing to ask. 
The "Wuzeer took him by the hand and was about to 
leave the room ; when Pottinger, arresting his progress, 
demanded a private interview. The room was cleared. 
The young English officer and the A%han Sirdar sate 
down together, and were soon in friendly discourse. Yar 
Mahomed, the most plausible and persuasive of men,t 
soon stilled the tempest that was rising in Pottinger’s 
breast. All meekness and gentleness now, he was ready 
to submit patiently to any rebuke, and to say anything 

• Eldred Pottinger's Journal: MS. his while. A person who disregards 

t ** Yar Mahomed is one of the truth, and thinks nothing of denying 
most persuasive talkers I have met. what he has asserted a few minutes 
It is scarcely possible to talk with him before, is a most puzzling person to 
and retain anger. He is ready in a argue with. Until you have thought 
surprising degree, and is so patient over what has been said, you cannot 
under rebuke, that I never saw him understand the changeable colours 
fail to quiet the most violent of his which pass before you.*’ w \Eldr 9 d 
countrymen, when he thought it worth Pottingefs MS. <7buma/.] 

T 2 



276 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


tliat might pacify his visitor. They were soon in ear¬ 
nest conversation, as friends and brothers, regarding the 
general condition of the garrison and its available re¬ 
sources. The Wuzeer declared that “ he regretted much 
the step he was obliged to take, but that indeed no 
alternative was left him—that every resource which 
even tyranny commanded was exhausted—that he dared 
not lay hands on the property of the combatants, though 
many of them had large funds.” The chiefs, he declared, 
were misers. The eunuch, Hadjee Ferooz, he said, 
could easily contribute two lakhs of rupees towards the 
expenses of the war, and the Shah might contribute ten 
—but neither would advance a farthing. “ They are 
all,” he said, “ equally niggardly. They have money, but 
they will not advance it. When their wives are being 
ravished before their faces, they will repent of their 
avarice—but now it is impossible to convince them of 
the folly and the danger of the course they are pur¬ 
suing. With such people to deal with, and the soldiery 
crying out for pay and subsistence, how can I hold out 
longer by force ?” He consented, however, to protract 
the negotiations to the utmost—to amuse the Persians— 
and to gain time. And, in the mean while, he extracted 
from the weak and unresisting all that he could wring 
from them by torture. On the night after this confe¬ 
rence with Pottinger, the Moonshee-Bashee died under 
the hands of the torturers. 

The struggle, however, was now nearly at an end. 
The movements in the Persian camp appear, at this 
time, to have been but imperfectly known within the 
walls of Herat. Whilst Mahomed Shah was making 
preparations for the withdrawal of his army, Yar Ma¬ 
homed and the A%han Sirdars were busy with their 
financial operations for the continuance of the defence. 
A Finance Committee was appointed. Kamran was 



FINANCE OPERATIONS. 


277 


told that he must either provide money for the payment 
of the soldiery, or authorise the Committee to set about 
their work after their own manner. Eager to save his 
money, he sacrificed his people, and armed the Com¬ 
mittee with full powers to search the houses of the 
inhabitants, to order the expulsion of all who had less 
than three months’ provisions, and to take jfrom those 
who had more all that they could find in excess. The 
'L’opshee-Bashee, or chief artilleryman, to whom the 
executive duties of the Committee were entrusted, con¬ 
trived to extort from the inhabitants several days’ food, 
and a large supply of jewels, with which he enriched 
the Wuzeer and himself. It was always believed that 
the former had amassed large sums of money during 
the siege; that he had turned the scarcity to good ac¬ 
count, by turning into his own coffers no small portion of 
the coin which he had wrung by torture from the 
Avretched inhabitants. Noav, when the soldiery, lacking 
the means of subsistence, entered upon a course of plun¬ 
dering that threw the whole city into confusion, the 
Wuzeer, whilst issuing a proclamation forbidding such 
irregularities, and declaring severe penalties for the 
offence, allowed a continuance of the license to his own 
people, that he might avoid the necessity of paying them 
at his own cost. It is not strange, therefore, that when 
reports were circulated throughout the city that the 
Persian army was about to move, the Soonee Parsewans, 
scarcely less than the Sheenhs, should have received the 
intelligence, some with sorrow, and some with a forced 
incredulity, “ preferring the miseries of the siege with 
the ultimate prospect of the city being taken and sacked, 
to the raising of the siege and the prospect of Kamran’s 
and Yar Mahomed’s paternal government.” “All I 
wonder,” said Pottinger, recording this fact, “is, that not 



278 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


a man is to be found among them bold enough to termi¬ 
nate their miseries by the death of their oppressors.”* 

But it was now becoming every day more obvious that 
Mahomed Shah was about to break up his camp. Some 
countrymen came in to Herat and reported that the 
Persians were collecting their guns and mortars, and 
parking them as though in preparation for an immediate 
march. Parties of horsemen also had been seen moving 
out of camp. Others brought in word that the enemy 
had destroyed their 68-pounders, were assembling their 
carriage-cattle, and were about to raise the siege. The 
English, it was said, had taken Shiraz; but the Persians 
in the trenches, declaring that they were ready for 
another assault, cried out, that though the English army 
had advanced upon that city, the Prince-Governor had 
defeated it. All kinds of preposterous rumours were 
rife. Some asserted that the Russians had attacked and 
captured Tabrecz; others that the Russians and English 
had formed an alliance for the overthrow of Mahomed- 
anism, and the partition of the countries of the East 
between the two great European powers. But amidst 
all these rumours indicating the intended retrogression of 
the Persian army, the garrison was kept continually on 
the alert by alarming rumours of another attack; and it 
was hard to say whether all these seeming preparations 
in Mahomed Shah’s camp were not designed to lull the 
Heratees into a sleep of delusive security, and render 
them an easier prey. 

But the month of September brought with it intelli¬ 
gence of a more decided character. There was no 
longer any doubt in Herat that Mahomed Shah was 
breaking up his camp. Letters came in from the Per¬ 
sian authorities intimating the probability of the “ King 

♦ Eldr^d Pottinger^s MS. Journal. 



THB SIEGE BAISED. 


279 


of Kings” forgiving the rebellion of Prince Kamran on 
certain conditions which would give a better grace to 
the withdrawal of the Persian monarch. To some of 
these, mainly at Pottinger’s suggestion the Heratees 
demurred; but on the 4th of September, the Persian 
prisoners were sent into camp; and the Shah-in-Shah 
promised Colonel Stoddart that the march of the army 
should commence in a few days. There was, indeed, a 
pressing necessity for the immediate departure of the 
force. “ The forage in camp,” wrote Colonel Stoddart 
to Mr. M‘Neill, “ will only last for five or six days more, 
and as messengers have been sent to turn back all cafilas, 
no more flour or grain will arrive. The advanced 
guard under Humza Meerza leaves camp on Friday 
evening.” 

Everything was now ready for the retreat. The guns 
had been withdrawn from their advanced positions, and 
were now limbered up for the march. The baggage- 
cattle had been collected. The tents were being struck. 
The garrison of Herat looked out upon the stir in the 
Persian camp, and could no longer be doubtful of its 
import. The siege was now raised. The danger was 
at an end. Before the 9th of September, the Persian 
army had commenced its retrograde march to Teheran; 
and on the morning of that day the Shah mounted his 
horse “ Amecrj,” and set his face towards his capital. 

To Mahomed Shah this failure was mortifying indeed; 
but the interests at stake were too large for him to sacri¬ 
fice them at the shrine of his ambition. He had spent 
ten months before the walls of Herat, exhausting his 
soldiery in a vain endeavour to carry by assault a place 
of no real or reputed strength. He had succeeded only 
in reducing the garrison to very painful straits; and had 
retired at last, not os one well-disposed to peaceful ne¬ 
gotiation and reasonable concession, submitting to the 



280 


THE SIEaE OF HEBAT. 


fnendly intervention of a neutral power, and willing to 
wave the chances of success; but as one who saw before 
him no chance of success, and was moved by no feeling 
of moderation and forbearance, but by a cogent fear of 
the consequences resulting from the longer prosecution 
of the siege. On the whole, it had been little better 
than a lamentable demonstration of weakness. The 
Persian army under the eye of the sovereign himself, 
aided by the skill of Russian engineers, and the wisdom 
of Russian statesmen, had failed, in ten months, to re¬ 
duce a place which I believe, in no spirit of national self- 
love, a well-equipped English force would have reduced 
in as many days. The real cause of the failure is not 
generally understood. The fact is, that there was no 
unity in the conduct of the siege. Instead of devising 
and adhering to some combined plan of operations, the 
Sirdars, or Generals, under Mahomed Shah, to whom the 
prosecution of the siege was entrusted, acted as so many 
independent commanders, and each followed his own 
plan of attack. The jealousy of the chiefs prevented 
them from acting in concert with each other. One 
would not serve under the other, or even support the 
operations of his brothers. Each had his own inde¬ 
pendent point of attack, and they would not even move 
to the assistance of each other when attacked by the 
Heratees in the trenches. Except when Mahomed Shah 
insisted on a combined assault, as on the 23rd of June, 
and the Russian minister directed it, there was no union 
among them. Each had his own game to follow up; 
his own laurels to win; and was rather pleased than dis¬ 
appointed by the failures of his brethren. It was not 
possible that operations so conducted should have re¬ 
sulted in anything but failure. But it was the deli¬ 
berate opinion of Eldred Pottinger, expressed nearly 
two years after the withdraw?! of the Persian army. 



EXCUSES FOR THE FAILURE. 


281 


that Mahomed Shah might have taken Herat bj assault 
within four-and-twenty hours after his appearance before 
its walls, if his troops had been efficiently commanded.* 
Whether Mahomed Shah ever rightly understood this 
matter I do not pretend to know, but he felt that it was 
necessary to make an effort to patch up the rents which 
this grievous failure had made in his reputation. So he 
issued a firman setting forth all the great results of his 
expedition to the eastward, and attempted to demon¬ 
strate, after the following fashion, that he gained a vic¬ 
tory even at Herat:—^“At last,” so ran the royal pro¬ 
clamation, “ when the city of Herat existed but in name, 
and the reality of the government of Kainran was re¬ 
duced to four bare walls, the noble ambassadors of the 
illustrious British Government, notwithstanding that 
three separate treaties of peace between the two govern¬ 
ments of England and Persia, negotiated respectively by 
Sir Harford Jones, Sir Gore Ouseley, and Mr. Ellis, were 
still in force, disregarding the observance of the condi¬ 
tions of these treaties, prepared to undertake hostilities, 
and as a warlike demonstration, despatched a naval 
armament with troops and forces to the Gulf of Persia. 
The winter season was now approaching, and if we pro¬ 
tracted to a longer period our stay at Herat, there ap- 


* “ It is my firm belief that Maho¬ 
med Shah miglit have carried the city 
by assault the very first day that he 
reached Herat, and that even when 
the garrison gained confidence, and 
were flushed with tlie success of tiieir 
sorties, lie might have, by a proper 
use of the means at his disposal, taken 
the place in twenty-four hours. His 
troops were infinitely better soldiers, 
and quite as brave men,as the Afglians. 
The non-success of their efforts was 
the fault of their generals. We can 
never again calculate on such, and if 


the Persians again return, they will 
do so properly commanded and en¬ 
lightened as to the causes of their 
former failure. Their material was 
on a scale sufficient to have reduced 
a powerful fortress. The men worked 
very well at tlic trenches, considering 
they were not trained sappers, and 
the practice of the artillery was really 
superb. They simply wanted engi¬ 
neers and a general to have proved 
a most formidable force .”—[Eldred 
Pottinger^s Report on Herat: Calcutta^ 
July^ 1840. MS. Records."] 



282 


THE SISGE OF HERAT. 


peared a possibility that our victorious army might suffer 
from a scarcity of provisions, and that the maintenance 
of our troops might not be unaccompanied with diffi¬ 
culty; the tranquillity of our provinces was also a matter 
of serious attention to our benevolent thoughts; and 
thus, in sole consideration of the interest of our faith and 
country, and from a due regard to the welfare of our 
troops and subjects, we set in motion our world-subduing 
army upon the 19th of Jumady-al-Akber^ and prepared 
to return to our capital. . . . During the protracted siege 
of Herat, a vast number of the troops and inhabitants 
had perished, as well from the fire of our cannon and mus¬ 
ketry as from constant hardship and starvation; the re¬ 
mainder of the people, amounting to about 50,000 families, 
with a large proportion of the Afghan and Persian chiefs, 
who had been treated with the most liberal kindness by the 
officers of our government, and who being compromised, 
could not possibly, therefore, hold any further inter¬ 
course with Yar Mahomed Khan, marched away with 
us, with zealous eagerness, to the regions of Khain and 
Khorassan, and there was no vestige of an inhabited 
spot left around Herat.” 

But although the failure of Mahomed Shah is mainly 
to be attributed to the jealousy, and consequent disunion, 
of his generals, it would be an injustice to the garrison of 
Herat not to acknowledge that they owed their safety, 
in some measure, to their own exertions. Their gallan¬ 
try and perseverance were not of the highest and most 
sustained character; and might have yielded to the 
assaults of the Persians if there had been any union 
among the assailants. They gathered courage from 
the languid movements of the besiegers; and, surprised 
at the little progress made by the once dreaded army of 
Mahomed Shah, they came in time to regard themselves 



SEBVICES OF ELDRED FOTTINGEB. 


288 


as heroes, and their successful sorties as great victories. 
When, however, the Persians really attempted anything 
like a combined movement against their works, the garri¬ 
son began to lose heart, and were with difficulty brought 
to repulse them. To what extent they were indebted 
to the unfailing constancy and courage of Eldred Pot- 
tinger, has been set forth, but I believe very imperfectly, 
in this narrative of the siege. Enough, however, has 
been shown to demonstrate that but for the heroism of 
this young Bombay artilleryman, Herat would have fallen 
into the hands of Mahomed Shah. The garrison were 
fast breaking down, not so much under the pressure from 
without as the pressure from within—the chiefs were 
desponding—the people were starving. But still the 
continued cry of Eldred Pottinger was, “ A little longer 
—a little longer yet.” When the chiefs talked of sur¬ 
render—when they set forth the hopelessness of fur¬ 
ther efforts of defence—he counselled still a little fur¬ 
ther delay; his voice was ever for the manlier course; 
and what he recommended in speech he was ever eager 
to demonstrate in action. Yar Mahomed did great 
things at Herat. It would be unjust to deny him the 
praise due to his energetic exertions in the prosecution 
of the defence, however unscrupulous the means he em¬ 
ployed to sustain it. But his energies failed him at last; 
and it was only by the powerful stimulants applied by 
his young European associate that he was supported and 
invigorated in the great crisis, when the fate of Herat 
was trembling in the balance. There was one true sol¬ 
dier in Herat, whose energies never failed him; and 
History delights to record the fact that that one true 
soldier, young and inexperienced as he was, with no 
knowledge of active warfare that he had not derived 
from books, rescued Herat from the grasp of the Persian 



284 


THE SIEGE OE HERAT. 


monarch, and baffled the intrigues of his great northern 
abettor.* 

About these intrigues something more should be 
said. No sane man ever questions the assertion that 
Russian diplomatists encouraged Mahomed Shah to 
undertake the expedition against Herat, and that 
Russian officers aided the operations of the siege. No 
reasonable man doubts that, so encouraging and so aid¬ 
ing Persia, in aggressive measures against the frontier of 
Afghanistan, Russia harboured ulterior designs not 
wholly unassociated with thoughts of the position of the 
British in Hindostan. At all events, it is certain that 
the first word, spoken or written in encouragement of 
the expedition against Herat, placed Russia in direct an¬ 
tagonism with Great Britain. “ The British minister at 
Teheran was instructed to dissuade the Shah from such 
an enterprise; urging reasons of indisputable force, and 
founded upon the interests of the Shah himself. But the 
advice given by the Russian ambassador was all of an 
opposite tendency. For while Mr. M‘Neill was appeal¬ 
ing to the prudence and the reason of the Shah, Count 
Simonich was exciting the ambition and inflaming the 
passions of that Sovereign; whilst the one was preaching 
moderation and peace, the other was inciting to war and 
conquest; and whilst the one pointed out the difficulties 
and expense of the enterprise, the other inspired hopes 
of money and assistance.”! 

• It will have been perceived that ters of Colonel Stoddart and Mr. 
I have described the operations of M‘Neill, whilst no account has ever 
the sie^e of Herat almost entirely as yet been given to the public of the 
from within the walls. I have done defensive operations of the Heratees. 
this, partly because I believe that the I have already stated that my infor- 
interest of such descriptions is greatly ination has been, for the most part, 
enhanced when the reader is led to derived from the Manuscript Jour- 
identify himself more particularly nals of Eldred Pottinger. 
with one contending party; and f Draft of a Note to he presented 
partly, because the outside move- by the Marquis of Clanricarde to 
ments of the Persian army have been Count Nesselrode. Published Papers. 
already detailed in the published let- 



RUSSIAN SUBTERFUGES. 


285 


Such, verj^ plainly stated, in grave, official language, 
had been the relative positions of Russia and Great 
Britain. But when Lord Durham, in 1837, was directed 
to seek from the Russian minister an explanation of 
conduct so much at variance with the declarations of 
the Muscovite Government, the answer was, that if 
Count Simonich had encouraged Mahomed Shah to 
proceed against Herat, he acted in direct violation of his 
instructions. 

But for a man disobeying the instructions of an 
arbitrary government, Simonich acted with uncommon 
boldness. He advanced to the Persian ruler 50,000 
tomauns, and promised, that if Mahomed Shah took 
Herat, the balance of the debt due by Persia to Russia 
should be remitted. Thus encouraged, Mahomed Shah 
advanced upon Herat. How Simonich followed M‘Ncill 
to the Persian camp, and how he thwarted the efforts of 
the British diplomatist to bring about an accommodation 
of the differences between the two contending states, and 
how Russian officers subsequently directed the siege, has 
been already shown. It has been shown, too, how a 
Russian agent guaranteed a treaty, injurious to British 
interests, between Mahomed Shah and the Sirdars of 
Candahar. It has been shown, too, how a Russian 
agent appeared at Caubul, and how he endeavoured to 
detach Dost Mahomed from an alliance with the British, 
and to encourage him to look for support from the 
Persian King and his Muscovite supporters. 

Considering these things, the British Government 
asked whether the intentions of Russia towards Persia 
and Afghanistan were to be judged from Count Nessel¬ 
rode’s declarations, or from the actions of Simonich and 
Vickovich. The answer was, that Vickovich had been 
despatched to Caubul on a ‘‘ Commercial Mission,” and 
that, if he had treated of anything but commerce, he 



286 


THE BIBOE OF HEBAT. 


had exceeded his instructions; and that Simonich had 
been instructed not only to discourage Mahomed Shah 
from prosecuting the expedition against Herat, but to 
withdraw the Kussian-deserter regiment, which formed 
no insignificant portion of the invading army. “ Not 
upon the cabinet of Russia,” it was said, “ can fall the 
reproach of having encouraged or suggested that fatal 
enterprise.”* The proceedings of the agents were repu¬ 
diated. Vickovich, being a person of no account, was 
remorselessly sacrificed, and he blew out his brains. 
But an apology was found for Count Simonich. It was 
said that he only assisted a friendly state when in ex¬ 
treme difficulty, and that any English officer would have 
done the same.f 

There was some truth in this. At all events, when it 
was added by the Russian minister that his government 
had more reason to be alarmed by the movements of 
Great Britain, than Great Britain by the movements of 
Russia; and that England sought to monopolise the pri¬ 
vilege of intrigue in Central Asia, it was difficult for any 


* It is not very clear, however, 
that the Rusian Government, though 
doubtless discredited by the failure, 
regarded it as a “ fatal enterprise.” 
Russia had a double game to play. 
Ill the familiar language of the turf, 
she “ hedged.” Whether the Persians 
won or lost, she was sure to gain 
something. The views of Russian 
statesmen have been thus set forth, 
not improbably in the very language 
of one of them: 

** RiUMia,** it is stated, **has played a 
very successful, as well as a very safe, 
game in the late proceedings. When 
she jirompted the Shah to undertake 
the siege of Herat, she was certain of 
oarrjing an important point, however 
the exp^ition terminated. If Herat 
fbll, which there was every reason to 
expect, then Candahar and Caubul 
would certainly have made their sub« 
mission. Russian influence would 


thus have been brought to the thresh¬ 
old of India; and England, however 
much she might desire peace, could 
not avoid being involved in a diflicult 
and expensive war, in order to avert 
more serious dangers. If, on tbe 
other hand, England interfered to 
save Herat, she was compromised— 
not with the mere Court of Mahomed 
Shah, but with Persia as a nation. 
Russia had contrived to bring all 
Persia to Herat, and to identify all 
Persia with the success or failure of 
the campaign: and she had thus gra¬ 
velled tne old system of partisanship, 
which would have linked Azerbijan 
with herself, and the rest of the na¬ 
tion with her rival.”— \^Calcutta Re^ 

t Count Nesselrode's Instructions to 
Count Pozeo di Bor go: November 1, 
1839. 



BNOLAND Ain> RUSSIA. 


287 


candid and unprejudiced observer of events to pro¬ 
nounce harsbly upon the injustice of the imputation. 
When, too, some time afterwards, Baron Brunow said 
to Sir John Hobhouse, “ If we go on at this rate, 
the Cossack and the Sepoy will soon meet on the 
banks of the Oxus,”* it would have been hard to have 
laid the contemplated collision wholly to the account 
of the restlessness of the Czar. True it is, that the 
policy of Russia in the East had been distinguished 
for its aggressive .tendencies jf and it is equally true, 
that in tlie plenitude of our national self-love, we en¬ 
couraged the conviction that Great Britain had con¬ 
quered the entire continent of Hindostan by a series 
of purely defensive measures. Looking merely at the 
recognised policy of the East India Company, the dis¬ 
tinction may be admitted. For a century have this great 
body been steadfastly setting their face against the ex¬ 
tension of their empire; but their empire has been ex¬ 
tended in spite of them, and their agents have been less 
pacific than themselves. The general tendencies of 
the Eastern policy worked out by the English in India 
has not been purely defensive, and they are, perhaps, 
the last people in the world entitled to complain of the 
encroachments ol‘ their allies. England and Russia seemed 
at one time to be—and, perhaps, they are stUl—ap¬ 
proaching each other on the vast Central-Asian battle¬ 
field; but when the account between the two great Euro- 


* Sir John Hobhouse^s answer is 
worth giving. “ Very probably, Baron; 
but however much 1 should regret the 
collision, I should have no fear of the 
result.” I give this on the authority 
of a distinguished writer on ** Our 
Political Relations with Persia,” in 
the Calcutia Review, 

’j' For a very interesting and ably 
written summary of the progress of 
Russia in the East, and an elaborate 


investigation of the question of the 
possibility of a Russian invasion of 
India, see Mr. Robert Bell*f excellent 
“ History of Russia.” It was written 
before the British crossed the Indus— 
before Russia entangled herself in the 
steppes, and England in the dehles of 
Central Asia. Neither country now, 
remembering these disasters, thinks 
of the meeting of the Sepoy and the 
Cossack without a shudder. 



m 


THE SIEGE OF HERAT. 


pean states comes to be struck, it is doubtful whether 
History will set down against the Muscovite power any 
greater transgression than that which it is the object of 
these volumes to record.* 


♦ I may as well mention here that 
the chasm between Persia and Great 
Britain, created by the events nar¬ 
rated in this chapter, was not bridged 
over until the spring of 1841, when 
Ghorian was given back to the Hera- 
tees. Before the close of that year, 
Mahomed Shah was collecting a great 
army, and contemplating extensive 
operations, the object of which, ac¬ 
cording to Sir John M‘Neill, though 
disguised under the name of opera¬ 
tions against Khiva, was another as¬ 
sault upon Herat.— [Sir John JUPSeill 
to Sir Alexander Barnes: January 5, 
1842. MS.'] This letter was written 
more than two months after Burnes 
had fallen a victim to the policy which 
I am now about to elucidate. Sir 
John M'Neill wrote : “ I have now to 
inform vou, that since the arrival of 
Count Medem, the new Uussian mi¬ 
nister, about a month ago, tlie Shah 
has given orders for collecting an 
army in iUe spring, about two months 
hence, which is intended to be nu¬ 
merous, and to be accompanied by 
two hundred pieces of artillery; and 
he announces his intention to*^ march 
in the direction of Meslicd, for the 
purpose of attacking Khiva. The ad¬ 
vance of the Shah, with such an army 


to Meshed, may produce some com¬ 
motion in Afghanistan, as you will 
no doubt hear of his proposing to go 
to Herat; and I conclude, therefore, 
that you will be prepared to put down 
any movements tliat may be caused by 
the rumour of his approach, and for 
any ulterior measures that may be 
necessary.” But in a postscript, dated 
January 6, the very day on which 
the British commenced their lament¬ 
able retreat from Caubul, he added : 
“ Since writing the preceding lines, 
some circumstances which have come 
to my knowledge lead me to think it 
quite possible that the Shah may not 
follow out his intention of going with 
an army into Khorassan, and it is even 
possible that no army may be sent in 
that direction ; but I am still of opi¬ 
nion that it is considerably more pi*o- 
bable that a force will be sent, than 
lliat it will not; and if a large army 
should march to Meshed, its objects 
will, 1 think, have reference rather to 
Herat than to Khiva.” [MS. Cor- 
respo7ide7ice.] The expedition was 
abandoned at the time; but as these 
pages are passing through the press. 
It is announced that Yar Mahomed is 
dead, and that a Persian garrison is 
occupying Herat. 



POLICT OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


289 


CHAPTER HI. . 

[1837—1838.] 

Policy of the British-Indian Government—Our Defensive Operations— 
Excitement in British India—Proposed Alliance with Dost Mahomed— 
Failure of Burnes’s Mission considered—The Claims of the Suddozye 
Princes—The Tripartite Treaty—Invasion of Afghanistan determined 
—Policy of the Movement. 

Whilst the Persians were pushing on the siege of Herat 
to an unsuccessful termination, and the Russians were ex¬ 
tending over them the wings of encouragement and assist¬ 
ance, the English in India were devising measures for the 
security of their own dominions, which seemed to be 
threatened by these movements on the frontier of Af¬ 
ghanistan. 

But what these measures were to be it was not easy to 
determine. It was believed that the danger was great 
and imminent. There was a Persian army, under the 
command of the “ King of Kings” himself, investing 
Herat, and threatening to march upon Candahar and 
Caubul. There were Russian diplomatists and Russian 
engineers in his camp, directing the counsels of the Shah, 
and the operations of the siege. The Barukzye Sirdars 
of Afghanistan were intriguing with the Persian Court; 
and far out in the distance, beyond the mountains of the 
Hindoo-Koosh, there was the shadow of a great northern 
VOL. I. u 



290 


POLICY OP THE INDUN GOVERNMENT. 


army, tremendous in its indistinctness, pushing on by 
rapid strides towards the frontiers of Hindostan. 

The remoteness of the countries in which these inci¬ 
dents were passing, might have reconciled our Anglo- 
Indian statesmen to dangers of a character so vague, and 
an origin so distant; but the result of all these disturbing 
rumours was an after-growth of new perils springing up 
almost at our very doors. The native states on our own 
borders were beginning to evince signs of feverish unrest. 
From the hills of Nepaul and the jungles of Burmah 
came mutterings of threatened invasion, which compelled 
the British-Indian Government to look well to their lines 
of frontier. Even in our own provinces, these nimours of 
mighty movements in the countries of the north-west 
disquieted the native mind; there was an uneasy, restless 
feeling among all classes, scarcely amounting to actual 
disaffection, and perhaps best to be described as a state 
of ignorant expectancy—a looking outwards in the belief 
of some coming change, the nature of which no one 
clearly understood. Among our Mussulman subjects the 
feeling was somewhat akin to that which had unsettled 
their minds at the time when the rumored advent of 
Zemaun Shah made them look for the speedy restoration 
of Mahomedan supremacy in Hindostan. In their eyes, 
indeed, the movement beyond the Afghan frontier took 
the shape of a Mahomedan invasion, and it was believed 
that coimtless thousands of true believers were about to 
pour themselves over the plains of the Punjaub and Hin¬ 
dostan, and to wrest all the country between the Indus 
and the sea from the hands of the infidel usurpers. The 
Mahotnedan journals, at this time, teemed with the ut¬ 
terances of undisguised sedition. There was a decline in 
the value of public securities; and it went openly from 
mouth to mouth, in the streets and the bazaars, that the 
Company’s Raj was nearly at an end. 



DANGERS READ AND SUPPOSED. 


291 


The dangers which threatened the security of our 
Anglo-Indian Empire, in 1837-38, were seen through the 
magnifying medium of ignorance, and greatly exaggerated 
in the recital. But the appearance of the Persian army 
before Herat—the presence of the Russian officers in the 
Persian camp—and the intrigues of the Barukzye Sirdars 
of Afghanistan, were, at all events, substantial facts. It 
was little doubted that Herat would fall. There seemed, 
indeed, no possibility of escape. The character of Ma¬ 
homed Shah was well known; and it was not believed 
that, having conquered Herat, he would there stop short 
in his career of conquest. It had long been officially re¬ 
ported, by Mr. EUis and others, to the Anglo-Indian 
Government, that Mahomed Shah encouraged very ex¬ 
tensive ideas of Afghan conquest, and that the Russian 
officers about his Court were continually exerting them- 
sfelves to foster the flame of his ambition. It seemed 
probable, therefore, that Herat, having fallen into the 
hands of Mahomed Shah, the Persian monarch would 
either push on his conquests to Candahar and Caubul, 
or, having transferred the Heratee principality to the 
hands of the Candahar Sirdars, and rendered Dost Ma¬ 
homed such assistauce in his wars against the Sikhs as 
would make him, in effect, the vassal of Persia, would 
erect, in Afghanistan, a platform of observation which 
might serve as the basis of future operations to be under¬ 
taken, not only by the Persians themselves, but also by 
their great northern allies. 

It was, plainly, the policy of the British Government 
to preserve the independence of A^hanistan, and to 
cement a friendly alhance with the ruler or rulers of 
that country. But it was not very easy to discern how 
this was to be effected. Our Indian statesmen had never 
exhibited any very violent friendship for the Barukzye 
Sirdars. Lord William Bentinck had refused to connect 

u 2 



292 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


himself in any way with the politics of A%hanistan; but 
he had suffered Shah Soojah to raise, in 1833-34, an 
army of invasion under the shadow of the British flag, 
and had done everything but openly assist the enterprise 
he was undertaking for the recovery of his lost domi¬ 
nions. Some nice ideas of legitimacy and usurpation, 
suggested by our own position in India, may have closed 
the sympathies of our Anglo-Indian rulers against men 
who were simply the de facto rulers of Afghanistan, and 
who laboured under the imputation of having rather 
acquired their dominions by right of conquest than 
possessed them by right of birth. The British-Indian 
Government had not concerned itself for a quarter of a 
century about the government of the Douranee Empire; 
but it now appeared that, because Zemaun Shah had 
threatened to invade India, and Shah Soojah had de¬ 
monstrated his incapacity to maintain himself in secu¬ 
rity on the throne, or to preserve the integrity of his 
dominions, the English in India, when they thought of 
establishing a friendly and a permanent power in the 
countiy beyond the Indus, turned to the Suddozye 
Princes as the fittest instruments for the furtherance of 
these ends. Even in 1833-34 it was plain that the 
success of Shah Soojah would have delighted our Indian 
statesmen. Though we declined to aid him in a very 
substantial manner, our sympathies went with him; and 
now again it was obvious that we had very little desire 
to conciliate the friendship of the Barukzye Sirdars, who 
had long been eager for a closer alliance with the great 
European power beyond the waters of the Sutlej, but 
had always been condemned to have their advances 
coldly received. 

Before Mahomed Shah had advanced upon Herat, the 
British Minister at the Court of Teheran, well acquainted 
with the ambitious projects of the Persian monarch, had 



BBCOMMENDATIONS OF MB. M‘NEILL, 


293 


earnestly pressed upon the attention of the British Go¬ 
vernment the expediency of some counteracting move¬ 
ment in the country between Persia and Hindostan. 
And when it was known to Mr. M‘Neill that Lord Auck¬ 
land had despatched Captain Burnes upon a mission to 
the Court of Dost Mahomed, he wrote a long confiden¬ 
tial letter to that officer, setting forth the advantages 
of subsidising the Ameer, and placing both Herat and 
Candahar under his rule. The letter was dated March 
13th, 1837. “I sincerely wish,” wrote Mr. M‘Neill, 
“ if the Ameer Dost Mahomed Khan and you come to a 
good understanding, that he were in possession of both 
Candahar and Herat.”* 

And again, in the same communication, he wrote more 
explicitly: “ Dost Mahomed Khan, with a little aid from 
us, could be put in possession of both Candahar and 
Herat. I anxiously hope that aid will not be withheld. 
A loan of money would possibly enable him to do this, 
and would give us a great hold upon him. He ought to 
be precluded from receiving any other foreign represen¬ 
tative or agent of any kind at his Court, and should agree 
to transact all business with foreign powers through tlic 
British agent. Unless something of this kind should be 
done, we shall never be secure; and until Dost Mahomed 
Khan or some other Afghan shall have got both Can¬ 
dahar and Herat into his hands, our position here must 
continue to be a false one.”f 

At this time, the Envoy in Persia, though profoundly 
convinced that the Candahar Sirdars were not to be 
trusted, and that the game they were playing was one 
injiuious to the interests of Great Britain, seemed to re¬ 
pose confidence in the good feeling of Dost Mahomed, 
and to believe that it would be easy to secure his 

• Mr. WNeUl to Captain Burnet, t McNeill to Captain Burnes. 
MS, Becords. MS, Records, 



294 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


alliance. Of the intrigues of the former he wrote: 
“ Kohun Dil Khan is playing a double game, and trying 
to strengthen himself by the alliance with Persia against 
both Caubul and Herat. He has put himself in com¬ 
munication with the Kussian minister here, who has sent 
by the return envoy, Tej Mahomed Khan, Barukzye, a 
letter and presents. The letter will not find its way to 
the Khan,* for I am sending it to Lord Palmerston; but 
the presents have been forwarded, and it appears that 
Kohun Dil was the first to open the correspondence, and 
I think it not improbable that he had been advised to 
do so by Aziz Mahomed Khan, the agent formerly sent 
hither, who found the Court apparently devoted to 
Russia. I hope you will be able to put a stop to the 
intercourse, which I have only been able to impede and 
interrupt for a time.” 

Such were the views and recommendations of Mr. 
M‘Ncill. Among the few officers in the Company’s ser¬ 
vice who at that time had any knowledge of the politics 
of Central Asia, not one was more conspicuous than 
Captain Claude Wade, who had held for some years 
the delicate and responsible office of Governor-General’s 
agent on the North-Western Frontier. It was natural that 
in such a conjuncture the opinions of so well-informed 
and experienced an officer should have been sought 
by the Supreme Government. Captain Wade, through 
whose office the Trans-Indian correspondence passed, 
now therefore, on forwarding to government a copy of 
Mr. M'Neill’s letter, freely expressed his opinion against 
the proposal to consolidate the Afghan Empire under the 
rule of the Caubul Ameer. “ In my opinion,” he wrote 
to Mr. Colvin, the private secretary of the Governor- 

• Count Simonich’s letter was in- subsequently placed at the disposal 
tercepted, and taken to McNeill by of Burnes. 
one Mecr Mahomed, whom M'iNeill 



OPINIONS OF CAPTAIN WADE. 


295 


General, “ such an experiment on the part of our 
government would be to play into the hands of our 
rivals, and to deprive ourselves, as it were by a felo-de-se, 
of the powerful means which we have in reserve of con¬ 
trolling the present rulers of A^hanistan. The attempt 
to reduce the country to the sway of one of them would 
be an arduous enterprise. The chief obstacle in the way 
of Dost Mahomed would be in the opposition of those 
who are inimical to him and his family, and these in¬ 
clude every other Douranee tribe in the country, to 
whom, therefore, the knowledge of such a design would 
render our name generally odious—whilst the attempt 
itself would undoubtedly lead the Toorkomans and other 
great bordering tribes to view with jealousy the powers 
of a chief whose interests they would soon have the 
sagacity to discover we had adopted for the purpose of 
serving our own interests at their expense.” 

“ Our policy,” continued Captain Wade, “ ought not 
to be to destroy, but to use our endeavours to preserve 
and strengthen the different governments of Afghanistan 
as they at present stand; to promote among themselves 
a social compact, and to conduce, by our influence, to the 
establishment of that peace with their neighbours, which 
we are now endeavouring to produce between them and 
the Sikhs on one side, end the Sikhs and Sindhians on 
the other. Whilst distributed into several states, the 
Afghans’are, in my opinion, more likely to subserve the 
views and interests of the British Government than if we 
attempted to impose on them the yoke of a ruler to whose 
authority they can never be expected to yield a passive 
obedience. Though undoubtedly weak, they would col¬ 
lectively be fully adequate to the defence of their country, 
when they have derived the advantages of a more de* 
cided intercourse with our government than at present 
exists. . . . Supposing that we were to aid Dost 



296 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


Mahomed to overthrow in the first place his brother at 
Candahar, and then his Suddozje rival at Herat, what 
would be the consequence ? As the system, of which it 
is intended to be a part, would not go to gratify the long¬ 
ing wish of Mahomed Shah for the annexation of Herat 
to his dominions, the first results would be, that the 
Shah-zadah Kamran would apply to Persia, and offer, 
on the condition of her assistance to save him from the 
fate which impended over his head, to submit to all the 
demands of that general, which Kamran has hitherto so 
resolutely and successfully resisted, and between his fears 
and the attempts of Dost Mahomed Khan to take it 
(Herat), which is regarded by every one who has studied 
its situation as the key to Afghanistan, would inevitably 
fall prostrate before the arms of Persia, by the effect of 
the very measures which we had designed for her security 
from Persian thraldom.”* 

The expediency of maintaining the integrity of Herat 
was not at this time more palpable than the injustice 
of destroying it. But it hardly seems to have entered 
into the consideration of our Indian statesmen, that 
to transfer Herat, or any other unoffending principality 
from the hands of one ruler to those of another, was 
to perpetrate an act of political tyranny not to be 
justified by any reference to the advantages resulting 
from such a course. We had not, at that time, the 
shadow of a pretext for breaking down the independ¬ 
ence of Herat. Kamran, indeed, was at this time about 
to play the very game that tended most to the advance¬ 
ment of British interests. Had he formed an alliance 
with Persia, having for its end the recovery of his father’s 
dominions—had he advanced, with a confederate Persian 
army, upon Caubul and Candahar, and consented to 
abandon Herat as the price of Kujjur assistance—some 

• Captain Wade to J. R, Colvin, Esq^ June 27, 1837. MS. Records. 



FAILURE OF BURNES’S MISSION. 


297 


pretext might have been found in these aggressive mea¬ 
sures for the confiscation of the principality. But Herat 
was now about to erect itself into a barrier against Russo- 
Persian invasion, and to fight single-handed the first great 
battle of resistance at the gates of Afghanistan. 

Mr. McNeill’s project for the consolidation of the 
Afghan Empire found little favour in the eyes of our 
Indian statesmen; but there were many who thought 
that, without any acts of spoliation and oppression, the 
de facto rulers of Afghanistan might be so encouraged 
and conciliated by small offers of assistance, as to secure 
their friendly co-operation in the great work of resisting 
invasion from the westward. But when Captain Burnes 
was despatched to Caubul, his powers were so limited, 
that, although he was profuse in his expressions of sym¬ 
pathy, he had not the authority to offer substantial 
assistance; and when he ventured to exceed the instruc¬ 
tions of government, he was severely censured for his 
unauthorised proceedings. 

His mission failed. What wonder? It could by no 
possibility have succeeded. If utter failure had been the 
great end sought to be accomplished, the whole business 
could not have been more cunningly devised. Burnes 
asked everything; and promised nothing. He was tied 
hand and foot. lie had no power to treat with Dost 
Mahomed. All that he could do was to demand on 
one hand and refuse on the other. He talked about the 
friendship of the British Government. Dost Mahomed 
asked for some proof of it; and no proof was forthcoming. 
The wonder is, not that the Ameer at last listened to 
the overtures of others, but that he did not seek other 
assistance before. 

No better proof of his earnest desire to cement an 
alliance with the British Government need be sought for 
than that involved in the fact of his extreme reluctance 
to abandon all hope of assistance from the British, and to 



298 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


turn his eyes in another direction. It was not until he 
was driven to despair by resolute refusals from the 
quarter whence he looked for aid, that he accepted the 
offers so freely made to him by other States, and set the 
seal upon his own destruction. Our government,” said 
Burnes, “would do nothing; but the Secretary of the 
Russian Legation came with the most direct offers of 
assistance and money, and as I had no power to counteract 
him by a similar offer, and got wigged for talking of it at 
a time when it would have been merely a dead letter to 
say Afghanistan was under our protection, I was obliged 
of course to give in.’’* What better result Lord Auckland 
could have anticipated, it is hard to say. If the failure 
of the Mission astonished him, he must have been the 
most sanguine of men. 

I am unable to perceive that there was anything unrea¬ 
sonable or unfriendly in the conduct of Dost Mahomed at 
this time. That, from the very first, he was disappointed, 
there is no doubt. He had formed exaggerated ideas of 
the generosity and munificence of the British Government 
in the East, and, doubtless, expected great things from the 
contemplated alliance. The Mission had scarcely been 
a day in Caubul, when the feelings of the Ameer were 
shocked—the exuberance of his hopes somewhat straitened 
—and his dignity greatly offended, by the paltry character 
of the presents of which Burnes was the bearer. No one 
ignorant of the childish eagerness with which Oriental 
Princes examine the ceremonial gifts presented to them 
by foreign potentates, and the importance which they 
attach to the value of these presents, as indications of a 
greater or less degree of friendship and respect on the 
part of the donor, can appreciate the mortification of Dost 
Mahomed on discovering that the British Government, 
of whose immense resources and boundless liberality he 
had so exalted a notion, had sent him nothing but a few 
* Private Correspondence of Sir A, Bnmes, 



CONDUCT OF DOST MAHOMED. 299 

trumpery toys. Burnes had been directed to ‘‘procure 
from Bombay such articles as would be required to be 
given in presents to the diflFerent chiefs.” And it had 
been characteristically added: “ They ought not to be 
of a costly nature, but should be chosen particularly 
with a view to exhibit the superiority of British manu¬ 
factures.” Accordingly the envoy had provided himself 
with a pistol and a telescope for Dost Mahomed, and a 
few trifles for the inmates of the Zenana—such as pins, 
needles, and playthings.* The costliness of the presents 
lavished upon Shah Soojah, when the Mission under 
Mountstuart Elphinstone had entered Afghanistan, was 
still a tradition throughout the country. The Ameer was 
disappointed. He thought that the niggardliness of the 
British Government, in this instance, portended no good. 
Nor was he mistaken. He soon found that the intention 
to give little was manifest in all the proceedings of the 
Mission. 

It has been said that the Ameer asked more than 
could reasonably be granted; that he had no right to look 
for the restoration of Peshawur, as that tract of country, 
since the dismemberment of the Douranee Empire, had 
fallen to the share of Sultan Mahomed. It is very true 
that the country had once belonged to Sultan Mahomed. 
Now, to have re-established him at Peshawur would have 
been to have paved the way for the march of Runjeet 
Singh’s army to Caubul. So thought Dost Mahomed. 
It was better to submit quietly to the unassisted enmity 
of the Maharajah, than to have an insidious enemy on the 
frontier, by whose agency Runjeet Singh might have 
accomplished that which he could not have achieved 
alone. It was the treachery of Sultan Mahomed that had 
lost Peshawur to the Afghans. It was the personal 
energy, the martial prowess, of Dost Mahomed that had 

* See Harlan^s account of the reception of these presents. X see no 
reason to question its veracitj. 



300 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


Becured the supremacy of the Barukzyes in Afghanistan; 
and as Sultan Mahomed Khan wanted the ability, or the 
honesty^ to hold his own at Peshawur, it was but natural 
and fitting that the chief of the Barukzyes should endea¬ 
vour to enter into arrangements better calculated to pre¬ 
serve the integrity of the Afghan frontier. He desired, 
in the first instance, the absolute possession of Peshawur 
on his own account. He subsequently consented to hold 
it, conjointly with Sultan Mahomed, in vassalage to Run- 
jeet Singh. Had the British Government endeavoured 
to effect an amicable arrangement between the Ameer and 
the Maharajah, there is no room to doubt that Dost Ma¬ 
homed would have rejected all overtures from the west¬ 
ward, and proved to us a firm and faithful ally. But, 
instead of this, we offered him nothing but our sympathy; 
and Dost Mahomed, with all respect for the British Go¬ 
vernment, looked for something more substantial than 
mere meaningless words. 

That his conduct throughout the long negotiations with 
Burnes was characterised by an entire singleness of pur¬ 
pose and straightforwardness of action is not to be main¬ 
tained ; but it may with truth be said that it evinced some¬ 
what less than the ordinary amount of Afghan duplicity 
and deceit. Singleness and straightforwardness do not 
flourish in the near neighbourhood either of Eastern or 
Western diplomacy j and perhaps it is not wise, on our 
own account, to look too closely into these matters. The 
wonder is, not that the Ameer was so deceitful, so tor¬ 
tuous, so arrogant, and so exacting, but that he was so 
sincere, so straightforward, so patient, and so moderate. 
He might have possessed all these qualities in much 
scantier measure, and yet have been a very respectable 
Afghan chief. 

It was, however, decreed that Dost Mahomed was a 
hostile chief; and the policy of the British Government 
soon made him one. Had Burnes been left to obey the 



THE SnCLAH COUNCIL. 


301 


dictates of his own reason and to use the light of his 
own experience, he would have conciliated both the 
Candahar Sirdars and the Caubul Ameer, and raised 
up an effective bulwark in Afghanistan against Persian 
invasion and Russian intrigue. We refused to detach 
Kohun Dil Khan from the Persian alliance, and we de¬ 
liberately drove Dost Mahomed Khan into it. In fact, 
our policy, at this time, seems to have been directed to 
the creation of those very difficulties to encoimter which 
the British Government launched into the Afghan war. 

Unfortunately, at this time, Lord Auckland was sepa¬ 
rated from his Council. He was on his way to that 
pleasant hill Sanitarium, at Simlah, where our Governor- 
Generals, surrounded by irresponsible advisers, settle the 
destinies of empires without the aid of their legitimate 
fellow-counsellors, and which has been the cradle of 
more political insanity than any place within the limits 
ofHindostan. Just as Mahomed Shah was beginning 
to open his batteries upon Herat, and Captain Bumes 
was entering Caubul, Lord Auckland, taking with him 
three civilians, all men of ability and repute—Mr. William 
Macnaghten, Mr. Henry Torrens, and Mr. John Colvin— 
turned his back upon Calcutta. 

Mr. Macnaghten was at this time chief secretary to 
Government. He had originally entered the service of 
the East India Company in the year 1809, as a cadet of 
cavalry on the Madras establishment; and whilst yet a 
boy acquired considerable reputation by the extent of 
his acquirements as an Oriental linguist. Transferred 
in 1814 to the Bengal civil service, he landed at Cal¬ 
cutta as the bearer of the highest testimonials from the 
government under which he had served; and soon jus¬ 
tified by his distinguished scholarship in the collie of 
Port William the praises and recommendations of the 
authorities of Madras. It was publicly said of the young 
civilian by Lord Hastings, that “ there was not a Ian- 



302 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


guage taught in the college in which he had not earned 
the highest distinctions which the government or the col¬ 
lege could bestow.” On leaving college he was appointed 
an assistant in the office of the Register of the Sudder 
Dewany Adawlut, or High Court of Appeal; and in 1818 
he quitted Calcutta to enter upon the practical duties of 
the magistracy, but after a few years was recalled to the 
Presidency and to his old office, and in a little while was 
at the head of the department in which he had com¬ 
menced his career. During a period of eight years and 
a half, Mr. Macnaghten continued to occupy the respon¬ 
sible post of Register of the Sudder Dewany Adawlut, 
and was only removed thence to accompany Lord Wil¬ 
liam Bentinck, in the capacity of secretary, on the tour 
which that benevolent statesman was about to com¬ 
mence, at the close of 1830, through the Upper and 
Western Provinces of India. The objects of this jour¬ 
ney were connected entirely with measures of internal 
reform ; but having approached the territories of Runjeet 
Singh, the Governor-General met the old Sikh chief at 
Roopur, and there Macnaghten, who had up to this 
time been almost wholly associated with affairs of do¬ 
mestic administration, graduated in foreign politics, and 
began to fathom the secrets of the Lahore Durbar. 
Returning early in 1833 to Calcutta, with his experience 
greatly enlarged and his judgment matured by the op¬ 
portunities afforded him on his journey, as well as by 
his intimate relationship with so enlightened and libe¬ 
ral a statesman as Lord William Bentinck, Macnaghten 
now took charge of the Secret and Political Department 
of the Government Secretariat, and remained in that 
office during the interregnum of Sir Charles Metcalfe, 
and the first year of Lord Auckland’s administration, 
until summoned by the latter to accompany him on his 
tour to the North-Western Provinces. 

Such, briefly narrated, were the antecedents of Mac- 



TOBBENS AND COLVIN. 


303 


naghten’s oflBcial life. That he was one of the ablest 
and most assiduous of the many able and assiduous civil 
servants of the East India Company all men were ready 
to admit. With a profound knowledge of Oriental lan¬ 
guages and Oriental customs, he combined an extensive 
acquaintance with all the practical details of government, 
and was scarcely more distinguished as an erudite scholar 
than as an expert secretary. In his colleague and assis¬ 
tant, Mr. Henry Torrens, there were some points of resem¬ 
blance to Macnaghten; for the younger officer was also 
an accomplished linguist and a ready writer, but he was 
distinguished by a more mercurial temperament and more 
varied attainments. Perhaps there was not in all the pre¬ 
sidencies of India a man—certainly not so young a man 
—with the lustre of so many accomplishments upon him. 
The facility with which he acquired every kind of infor¬ 
mation was scarcely more remarkable than the tenacity 
with which he retained it. With the languages of the 
East and the West he was equally familiar. He had read 
books of all kinds and in all tongues, and the airy grace 
with which he could throw off a French canzonet was 
something as perfect of its kind as the military genius 
with which he could sketch out the plan of a campaign, 
or the official pomp with which he could inflate a state 
paper. His gaiety and vivacity made him a welcome 
addition to the Governor-General’s vice-regal court; and 
perhaps not the least of his recommendations as a tra¬ 
velling companion was that he could amuse the ladies 
of Lord Auckland’s family with as much felicity as he 
could assist the labours of that nobleman himself’. 

Mr. John Colvin was the private secretary of the 
Governor-General, and his confidential adviser. Of all 
the men about Lord Auckland, he was believed to exer¬ 
cise the most direct influence over that statesman’s mind. 
Less versatile than Torrens, and less gifted with the 
lighter accomplishments of literature and art, he pos- 



304 


POLICY OP THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


sessed a stronger will and a more powerful understand¬ 
ing. He was a man of much decision and resolution of 
character; not troubled with doubts and misgivings; 
and sometimes, perhaps, hasty in his judgments. But 
there was something noble and generous in his ambition. 
He never forgot either the claims of his country or the 
reputation of his chief. And if he were vain, his vanity 
was of the higher, but not the less dangerous class, which 
seeks rather to mould the measures and establish the 
fame of others than to acquire distinction for self. 

Such were the men who accompanied Lord Auckland 
to the Upper Provinces of India. About him also clus¬ 
tered the common, smaller staff of military aides-de- 
camp; and not very far in the back-ground were the 
two sisters of his Lordship—ladies of remarkable intel¬ 
ligence and varied accomplishments, who are supposed 
to have exercised an influence not wholly confined to 
the social amenities of the vice-regal camp. Lord Auck¬ 
land was possessed of a clear judgment, and his inte¬ 
grity of purpose is undoubted; but he wanted decision 
of character—he too often mistrusted his own opinions, 
and yielded his assent to those of irresponsible advisers 
less single-minded and sagacious than himself. There 
was no want of capacity in Lord Auckland’s camp. The 
men by whom he was surrounded were among the ablest 
and most accomplished in the country; but it was for the 
most part a dangerous kind of cleverness that they pos¬ 
sessed; there was too much presmnption in it. These 
secretaries, especially the two younger ones, were too 
ardent and impulsive—they were of too bold and ambi¬ 
tious a nature to be regarded as anything better than 
perilous and delusive guides. But Lord Auckland'en¬ 
trusted himself to their guidance. Perhaps, he scarcely 
knew to what extent he was swayed by their counsels; 
but it is my deliberate conviction, that if he had not 
quitted Calcutta, or if he had been surroimded by older 



WASLIKB FBOMPTINGNS. 


805 


and more experienced advisers, he would have followed a 
line of pplicy more in accordance with his own feelings 
and opinions, and less destructive to the interests of the 
empire. 

But, so surrounded. Lord Auckland journeyed by easy 
stages towards the cool mountain-ranges of the Hima- 
layah; and as he advanced there came to the vice-regal 
camp tidings, from time to time, of the progress or no¬ 
progress of Mahomed Shah’s army before Herat, and of 
Burnes’s diplomatic movements at the Court of the Caubul 
Ameer. There was much in all this to perplex Lord 
Auckland. He was in all sincerity a man of peace. 
They who best knew his character and that of his chief 
secretary,* predicted that if war could, in any way, be 
avoided, there would be no war. But from all quarters 
came disturbing hints and dangerous promptings; and 
Lord Auckland thus assailed, had not resolution enough 
to be true to his own moderate and cautious character. 
Mr. M‘Neill had despatched Major Todd from Herat to 
the camp of the Governor-General; and had urgently 
solicited Lord Auckland to adopt vigorous measures for 
the intimidation of Persia and the defence of Herat, which, 
it was alleged, could not much longer resist the efforts of 
the investing force. Nothing short of the march of a 
British army upon Herat was thought by some suf¬ 
ficient to stem the tide of Russo-Persian invasion. The 
British Government, seeing everywhere signs of the 
restless aggressive spirit of Russia, and the evident 
tendency of all her movements towards the East, had 
written strong letters to the Governor-General, urging 
him to adopt vigorous measures of defence. His own 
immediate advisers were at hand to second the sugges- 

* Lord Waiiam Bentinck is said war! The very last men in the 
to have exclaimed, “What! Lord world I should have suspected of 
Auckland and Macnaghten gone to such folly!” 

VOL. I. X 



306 


POLICY OP THB INMAN GOVERNMENT. 


tions both of Mr. M‘Neill and the British Minister; and 
so Lord Auckland, though he hesitated to undertake a 
grand military expedition across the Indus, was per¬ 
suaded to enter upon defensive measures of a dubious 
character, affecting the whole question of the sovereignty 
of the Douranee Empire. 

The open, acknowledged danger to be met, by vigorous 
measures on the part of our Anglo-Indian statesmen, 
was the attempt of Mahomed Shah to destroy the in¬ 
tegrity of Herat, and his asserted claims to the sovereignty 
of Ghuznee and Candahar. It is true that by the ninth 
article of the treaty with Persia, England was especially 
bound not to interfere in any quarrels between the 
Afghans and the Persians; but our statesmen both in 
the East and the West, saw a ready means of escape 
from these conditions in the circumstances of the assault 
on Mr. M'Neill’s courier, which however contemptible 
in themselves were sufficient to bring about a tempo¬ 
rary rupture between Persia and Great Britain. Lord 
Auckland was slow to encourage an idea of the expe¬ 
diency of such direct interference as would be involved 
in the passage of a British army across the great boim- 
dary line of the Indus. But he saw the necessity of so 
establishing our influence in Eastern Afghanistan as to 
erect a secure barrier against invasion from the west¬ 
ward ; and now that he had abandoned all desire to pro¬ 
pitiate Dost Mahomed and the Barukzye chiefs, and had 
begun to think of carrying out his objects through other 
agency, it was only natural that he should have turned 
his thoughts, in the first instance, to the Suddozye pen¬ 
sioner of Loodhianah, who had made so many unsuc¬ 
cessful efforts to reseat himself upon the throne of the 
Douranee Empire. 

Shah Soojah had lived so long upon the bounty of 
the British Government, that it was only reasonable 



OPINIONS OP LORD AUCKLAND. 


307 


to believe that we should find in him a fast friend 
and a faithful ally. But when in the month of May, 
1838, Lord Auckland, then at Simlah, wrote an elabo¬ 
rate minute, setting forth his opinions regarding the 
measures best calculated to secure the integrity of the 
western frontier of Afghanistan, and suggesting the 
restoration of the exiled Suddozye Prince, it was evi¬ 
dent that he had not, at that time, grasped the grand, 
but perilous idea, of sending a British army into the fast¬ 
nesses of Afghanistan to break down the dynasty of 
the Barukzyes, to set up a monarch of our own, and so 
to roll back for ever the tide of western invasion. He 
meditated nothing more at this time than the encourage¬ 
ment of an expedition to be undertaken by Shah Soojah 
and Kunjeet Singh, the British Government supplying 
money, appointing an accredited agent to accompany the 
Shah^s camp, and furnishing a certain number of British 
officers to direct the movements of the Shah^s army.** It 
appeared to him that there were but three courses open 
to him; “ the first to confine our defensive measures to 
the line of the Indus, and to leave Afghanistan to its fate; 


* “ Of plans of this nature, that 
of granting our aid or countenance 
in concert with Kunjeet Singh, to 
enable Shah Soojah-oobMoolk to re¬ 
establish his sovereignty in the Eastern 
division of Afghanistan, under en¬ 
gagements which shall conciliate the 
fedings of the Sikh ruler, and bind 
the restored monarch to the support 
of our interests, appears to me to be 
decidedly the most deserving of at¬ 
tention. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk and 
Maharajah Kunjeet Singh would pro- 
bablj^ act readily upon such a plan, 
it being similar to tnat in which they 
were before engaged, but which failed 
principally from the want of pecuniary 
aid, and the absence of our active 
sanction and support. In such an 
enterprise (which both from past ex- 

X 


perience, and from the circumstance 
that it would be undertaken in resis¬ 
tance of an attempt to establish Shecah 
supremacy in the country, would, 
we believe, have many partisans in 
Afghanistan) Kunjeet Singh would 
assist by the employment of a portion 
of his troops, and we by some contri¬ 
bution in money, and tne presence of 
an accredited agent of uie govern¬ 
ment, and of a sufficient number of 
officers for the direction of the Shah’s 
army .”—[Minute of Lord Auckland: 
Simlah, May 12, 1838~3f5. Records.^ 
A portion of this minute is given in 
the published correspondence. The 
passage quoted, and, indeed, all the 
latter and more practical portion of 
of it, is omitted. 

2 



308 


POLICY OP THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


the second, to attempt to save A%hanistan, by granting 
succour to the existing chiefships of Caubul and Can- 
dahar; the third, to permit or to encourage the advance 
of Runjeet Singh’s armies upon Caubul, under coimsel 
and restriction, and as subsidiary to his advance to orga- 
nise an expedition headed by Shah Soojah, such as I 
have above explained.” “ The • first course,” argued 
Lord Auckland, “ would be absolute defeat, and would 
leave a fi:ee opening to Russian and Persian intrigue 
upon our frontiers. The second would be only to give 
power to those who feel greater animosity against the 
Sikhs, than they do- against the Persians, and who would 
probably use against the former the means placed at 
their disposal; and the third course, which in the event 
of the successful resistance of Herat, would appear to be 
most expedient, would, if the state were to fall into the 
hands of the Persians, have yet more to recommend it, 
and I cannot hesitate to say, that the inclination of my 
opinion is, for the reasons which will be gathered from 
this paper, very strongly in favour of it.”* 

All this is sufficiently moderate, if it is not sufficiently 
just. The whole question is argued simply as one of 
expediency. It appeared to Lord Auckland to be most 
expedient to construct an alliance between Runjeet Singh 
and Shah Soojah for the recovery of the lost dominions 
of the latter. England was to remain in the back-ground 
jingling the money-bag. At this time, it had been ar¬ 
ranged that Macnaghten should proceed, with little de¬ 
lay, to the Court of Lahore. It had been intended, in the 
first instance, that the mission should be merely a com¬ 
plimentary one. But as events began to thicken, in the 
north-west, it appeared impossible to confine to such nar¬ 
row limits the communications which he was instructed 


Minute of Lord Auckland^Unpuhlishcdportion: MS. Records. 



SIACNA6HTBN S mSTKUCTIONS. 309 

to make to the Maharajah. He was now enjoined to 
sound Runjeet Singh on the subject of the proposed 
confederate expedition against the Barukzye Sirdars of 
A%hanistan. These instructions were written three days 
after the minute of the 12 th of May. It seems that in 
this brief interval some idea of the employment of Bri¬ 
tish troops in support of the Suddozye prince had dawned 
upon the understanding of the Governor-General. It is 
certain, at least, that the letter written by Mr. Torrens 
speaks of a demonstration to be made “ by a division of 


the British army occupying 

* It were worth while to quote 
some passages from this letter of 
instructions, only a grandiloquent 
passage setting forth generally the 
pacific views of Lord Auckland, and 
the power of the British Government 
havmg been inserted in the Blue 
Book. “You can then, as you ob¬ 
serve the disposition of the Maharajah, 
listen to all he has to say, or, in the 
event of his showing no disposition to 
commence the conference, you can 
state to him the views of your own 
government — that two courses of 
proceeding had occurred to his lord- 
ship—the one that the treaty formerly 
executed between his Highness and 
Shah Sooiah should be recognised by 
the British Government—that whilst 
the Sikhs advanced cautiously on 
Caubul, accompanied by British 
agents, a demonstration should be 
made by a division of the British 
army occupy i ng Shikarpoor wi th Shah 
Soojah in their company, to whom the 
British Government would advance 
money to enable him to levy troops 
and purchase arms, and to whom also 
the services of British officers should 
be lent, that the same opportunity 
should be taken of securing to the 
Maharajah what it had been custo¬ 
mary for him to receive from the 
Scindians, and that with regard to 
Shikarpore, the supplementary arti¬ 
cle in the treaty now proposed (and 
which with a second supplementary 


Shikarpoor.”* This was a 

article relating to Herat is annexed 
to this despatch) should be substi¬ 
tuted for article IV., in the former 
treaty—that in the event of his 
Highness agreeing to this convention, 
the Governor-General would be pre¬ 
pared to ratify it, unless circumstan¬ 
ces should intermediately have oc¬ 
curred to induce his Lordship to alter 
his views as to its expediency, and 
that in the event of the convention 
being ratified by his Lordship, the 
descent on Shikarpoor, for temporary 
occupation, should be directed as soon 
as due preparations could be made, 
and the season will permit. If his 
Highness also approved of this con¬ 
vention, and agreed that the opera¬ 
tions of the allies should be conducted 
in concert with each other, by means 
of British agents in the camp of each, 
the Governor-General would be pre¬ 
pared to enter into a general de¬ 
fensive alliance with his Highness 
against the attacks of all enemies 
from the westward. 

“ You will, at the same time, pro¬ 
pound the only other course of pro¬ 
ceedings, which, in the opinion oi the 
Governor-General the case admits 
of, which is to allow the Maharajah 
to take his own course against Dost 
Mahomed Khan without any refer¬ 
ence to us. Should his Highness 
show a decided preference for this 
course, you are authorised to tell him 
at once that he is at liberty to follow 



81.9 ttitict OS' IfCB IKSIAN OOVXBinEENT. 

Btep m adrance. The great project to which Lord Auck> 
land subsequently lent himself was only then b^inning 
to take shape in his mind. 

The Mission crossed the Sutlej, and on the 31st of 
May were presented to Kunjeet Singh at Adeena-nuggur. 
In a mango-grove—each under the shadow of its own 
tree—the Sikh ruler had ordered a number of mud- 
huts to be erected for the accommodation of Macnaghten 
and his companions. Small and comfortless as were these 
abodes, the officers of the Mission joyfully resorted to 
them for shelter from the intolerable summer-sun and the 
burning winds, which had scorched them in their own 
tents. Even now something horrible in the retrospect 
to the survivors of the Mission is the fiery heat of that 
June weather. 

In the midst of much pomp and splendour, sur¬ 
rounded by his courtiers, the Maharajah received the 


it, but ;yrou should point out to him 
the possibility of defeat, by the com¬ 
bined army of the Persians and Af¬ 
ghans, and you will, as far as you 
can consistently with propriety, im¬ 
press upon him the necessity of cau¬ 
tion, and of using Afghan rather than 
Sikh iniluence or agency. Should 
he wish to make an instrument of 
Shah Soojah, you will apprize him 
that the Governor-General attaches 
too much importance to the person 
of the ex-King to admit of his going 
forth otherwise than with the almost 
assured certainty of success; but 
that the ex-King will be permitted 
to proceed to Caubul with a view of 
being re-instated in his sovereignty, 
should the Sikhs succeed in tuning 
possession of Caubul, and that ar¬ 
rangement be desired by his Highness. 

“ Of the relative advantages which 
may be derived from these two plans 
you will be better able to judge after 
you shall have fully opened them, 
with the consideration which each 
has to recommend it to the Maha¬ 


rajah. His Highness may possibly 
be unwilling to commit his troops in 
the passes of the Khybur, and he 
may strongly feel the difficulty which 
religious and natural animosity will 
oppose to any measure mainly rest¬ 
ing on Sikh power and Sikh innuence. 
He may not, therefore, reject the 
plan that stands first in this paper; 
and there can be little doubt that, for 
ultimate efficiency, and for bringing 
greater weight and greater strength 
to bear in concert upon the objects 
in view, that this plan should have 
the preference; but it is cumbrous, 
and a considerable time may elapse 
before it can be set in motion; and 
if it might conciliate Afghan opinion 
on one hand, on the other it might 
impair with the Sikhs that cordiauty 
which would be so essential to the 
success of co-operation. His lord- 
ship, on the whole, is disposed to 
think that the plan which is second 
in order is that which will be found 
most expedient”—[MiS. Records,"] 



CONFBBESNOE WITH BDKJEET SINGH. 


311 


English gentlemen* with befitting cordiality and re¬ 
spect. As Macnaghten entered the hall, the aged 
Prince rose fi'om his seat, and tottering along the 
whole length of the presence-chamber, warmly em¬ 
braced the British minister, and welcomed the other 
gentlemen of the Mission. After the usual compliments 
had been exchanged, and the presents sent by the Bri¬ 
tish Government had been examined by the Maharajah 
with curious minuteness, a conversation ensued on an 
infinite variety of topics. “ The Maharajah,” wrote 
Macnaghten to the Governor-General, “ passed from 
war to wine, and from learning to hunting, with breath¬ 
less rapidity. He was particularly anxious to know how 
much each member of the Mission had drunk of some 
ardent liquor he had sent them the night before. He 
was equally anxious to know the distance at which 
a shrapnel shot could do execution. It is impossible to 
say on which of these subjects his interrogatives were 
most minute. He asked me if I was a good huntsman, 
and on replying in the negative, he asked me if I knew 
Arabic and Sanscrit. On receiving a reply in the af¬ 
firmative, as if doubtful of what I had said, he insisted 
on my reciting a couplet of the former language. He 
asked about Herat—about Dost Mahomed Khan, about 
the Persian army and their connection with the Russians, 
and the possibility of their invading India.”f It was not 
prudent to enter too minutely into this matter in open 
Durbar. Macnaghten replied, briefly and generally, to 
the questions about Russo-Persian invasion, and laughed 
the idea to scorn. “ I can enter more fully into the ques¬ 
tion,” he added, “ at a private interview.” 

On the morning of the 3rd of June, Macnaghten and 

* Captain Osborne, Lord Auck- dated with some of the most honour^ 
land^s nephew and military secretary; able incidents of the Afghan war; 
Captain George Macgregor, of the and Dr. Drummond, accompanied 
artillery, one of his aides-de-camp, Macnaghten. 
whose name has since become asso- t Records, 



812 


POLICT OP THE INDIAN GOYBBNMBNT. 


the Other members of the Mission, accompanied also by 
Captain Wade and Lieutenant Mackeson,* appeared by 
invitation at Durbar. There was some general conver¬ 
sation about the relations between Russia and Persia j 
and then a signal was made to the British officers to 
retire into an inner apartment. There the business of 
the conference was now to be transacted. On the part 
of the Lahore Government there were present—Dhyan 
Singh, the minister; his son Heera Singh, the favourite 
of the Maharajah; Lehna Singh, Adjeet Singh, and 
other Sirdars, with the doctor-secretary, the Fakir 
Azeez-ood-deen. On the part of the Mission, there were 
present with Macnaghten, Captains Osborne and Wade. 
Macgregor, Mackeson, and Dr. Drummond remained 
outside with some other officers of the Maharajah’s 
Court. 

Runjeet Singh commenced the conference. The letter 
of the Governor-General, he said, had been read to him, 
and he fully understood its contents. He desired that 
all present should hear it; and accordingly the Fakir 
Azeez-ood-deen, whose polished manners and admirable 
address presented a striking contrast to the ruder bear¬ 
ing of the Sikh chiefs by whom he was surrounded, read 
the letter aloud, and, with that unequalled power of in¬ 
terpretation of which he was the master, distinctly ex¬ 
plained every sentence. Macnaghten was then requested 
to state what he had to say on the part of the British 

* Lieutenant (now Colonel) Mac- freely with the young officer regarcl- 
keson was one of the assistants to ing the progress of Bumes*s nego- 
the Governor-General’s agent on the tiations at Caubul, the mission of 
north-west frontier. Whilst Burnes Vickovich, and other matters con- 
was at Caubul he was directed to nected with the politics of Afghan- 
remain at Peshawur, a place with istan. Rumours had then reached 
which his name has since become him of the designs of the British 
historically associated. Some two Government to invite him to co-ope- 
montbs before the arrival of Mac- rate in measures for the overthrow 
n^hten’s Mission he joined Runjeet of the Barukzye Sirdars. He cUs- 
Sinch’s camp and travelled with the cussed the subject with little reserve; 
Mimarajah through difiereiit parts of and it was evident that the project 
the Sikh Empire. Runjeet conversed had little attraction for him* 



CONTEBENCE WITH BUNJEET SINGH. 


313 


Government This he did fluently and well. Whether 
all he advanced were strictly true it is hardly necessary 
to inquire. Diplomacy is not intended to be subjected 
to such a test. The tender interest taken in the honour 
and dignity of the Maharajah were descanted upon, on 
the one side, and the unreasonableness of Dost Mahomed 
on the other. The failure of Burnes’s Mission was spoken 
of as the result of the unwillingness of the Caubul 
Ameer to break off negotiations with other foreign agents, 
though even at that time Dost Mahomed, after Burnes’ 
departure, was making a last despairing effort to win 
back the friendship of the British Government. Then 
came a somewhat inflated eulogium on the resources 
of the British Government, and the 200,000 soldiers who 
could at any time be brought into the field to resist 
a simultaneous invasion from all the four sides of 
India. If then, urged Macnaghten, such were the unaided 
power of the British Government, what must that power 
be when united with the strength of the Sikh empire? 
There was nothing, indeed, of a palpable character to be 
apprehended from the movements of the Russians and 
Persians, or the hostility of the Barukzye Sirdars, but as 
their intrigues, it was said, must have the effect of un¬ 
settling men’s minds, both in the British and the Sikh 
dominions, it was desirable to concert measures for the 
future suppression of all these disturbing influences. He 
had, therefore, been despatched by the Governor-General 
of India to the Court of the Maharajah, to ascertain the 
wishes of his Highness. 

Bunjeet listened very patiently to this address, only 
interrupting the speaker now and then to express his 
assent to Macnaghten’s statements; and when asked what 
were his wishes, replied that they were the wishes of 
the British Government. After some further inter¬ 
change of compliments, Bunjeet asked what were the 



814 


POLICT or THE INDIAN QOVEBNHENT. 


of the British Government; and the British Envoy 
then b^an guardedly to state them after the manner of 
the instructions he had received. There were two courses, 
he said, open to the Maharajah—the one was, to act in¬ 
dependently; the other was to act in concert with the 
British Government. A murmur of approbation arose 
from the assembled chiefs, when Runjeet broke in with 
the assertion that it was his wish to act in concert with 
the British Government. Entreating him not to decide 
hastily, but to weigh well the details of the two schemes, 
Macnaghten then said, “ Your Highness some time 
ago formed a treaty with Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. Do 
you think it would be still for your benefit that the 
treaty should stand good, and would it be agreeable 
to your wishes that the British Government should be- 
c>ome a party to that treaty?” “ This,” replied Runjeet, 
would be adding sugar to milk.” “ If such,” said Mac¬ 
naghten, “ be decidedly the wish of your Highness, I do 
not think that the Governor-General would object to 
supply Shah Soojah with money and ofiicers to enable 
him to recover his throne.” He then proceeded to state 
what were the views of the Governor-General—that the 
Shah should advance by the route of Candahar, whilst 
the Sikh troops should advance upon Caubul through 
the Khybur Pass. “ Circumstances,” it was added, 
“might arise to render it necessary for the British 
Government to send some of its own troops down the 
Indus, to repel any threat of aggression in that direction.” 
“ How many ?” asked Runjeet. The answer was, “ As 
many as the exigency of the occasion may require; but 
their employment in that direction will only be tem¬ 
porary.” 

Macnaghten next launched into a panegyric on the 
general moderation of the British Government; and then 
having entered into some particulars relating to the 



NEGOTIATION OF THE TBEATT. 


816 


necessary modification and extension of the treaty be¬ 
tween Shah Soojah and Bunjeet Singh,* proceeded to 
call the attention of the Maharajah to the second 
plan suggested by the Governor-General—^the plan of 
independent action on the part of the Sikh ruler, which 
Lord Auckland declared that he was more inclined to 
favour than the other project. But it was with diffi¬ 
culty that Bunjeet Singh could be induced to listen to 
this proposal. His impatience broke out openly. His 
mind, he said, was made up on the subject. He 
would have nothing to do with the independent expe¬ 
dition. The plan first set forth by the British Envoy 
was the one which he purposed to accept; and so Mac- 
naghten could only say in reply, that though the Go¬ 
vernor-General approved of the course last stated, his 
Lordship set too much value on the friendship of the 
Maharajah to wish to force it upon him. 

It now only remained to settle the details of the project 
for the subversion of Barukzye ascendancy in A^hanistan. 
So little at this time was it in contemplation that the 
brunt of the expedition should fall upon the British 
army, that Bunjeet, who soon began to have his mis¬ 
givings regarding the success of an undertaking in which 
his own troops and the raw levies of Shah Soojah were 
to be the main actors, sent the Fakir Azizoodeen to 
ask Macnaghten whether, in the event of the allies 
sustaining a reverse, the British Government were pre¬ 
pared to support him. The affirmative reply hardly 
seemed to satisfy the Sikh agent, who spoke of the 
remoteness of our resources from the scene of action; and 
it was obviously then the desire of his master that the 
British troops should take a more prominent part in the 
coming expedition. He seemed, indeed, to think that too 

* The greater part of the proposed were added to it. One of these re- 
tretLtj was substantiallj and Uterally eognised the independence of the 
the same as that negotiated in 1833 Ameers of Sindh (Runjeet thereby 
—•but some supplementaiy articles withdrawing all clidme <m Shikar* 



316 


POUCY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT, 


lai^e a share of the danger* devolved upon him, and 
that he was to be allowed too little of the spoil.f The 
advantages to be derived from the alliance with Shah 
Soojah were not, he said, so great that he might not 
reasonably ask for something beyond what had been set 
forth in the proposals of the British Government; and it 
is not to be denied that there was at this time some show 
of truth in the assertion. Macnaghten continued to 
reply that the Maharajah, if he were not satisfied with 
the terms of the treaty, was at liberty to act inde¬ 
pendently, and that it would be no offence to the British 
Government if he preferred that scheme to the other; 
but he took the opportunity, in the course of one of his 
conferences with the Sikh agents, to hint that it was 
possible that “ circumstances might occur to render it 
necessary for us to counteract danger, and that if it 
seriously threatened us we might be compelled to arrest 
the advance of the Persians by the advance of our own 
troops, and in this case we might find it expedient to 


poor), in consideration of the pay¬ 
ment by them of compensation-money 
to the amount of twenty lakhs of 
rupees; and another recognised the 
integrity of Herat. 

• Kunjeet was always doubtful 
whether his soldiers would not shrink 
from attempting to force the Khybur 
Pass. He told Mackeson, before the 
arrival of Macnaghten's Mission, that 
the Khalsa entertained very strong 
prejudices against that kind of war¬ 
fare, of which, it may be added, both 
he and his chiefs had the vaguest 
possible idea. He believed tliut to 
Ibrce the Khybur Pass was to push 
a column of troops into it, somewhat 
as you would push them over a nar¬ 
row bridge, the men in the rear 
stepping over the bodies of their 
slaughtered comrades. He had no 
notion of turning the pass by flank 
movements—of crowning the heights 
on either 8ide--and accomplishing by 
skilful dispositions what could not be 
ilone by brute force without a dread¬ 


ful sacrifice of life. Subsequently, 
at his interviews with the officers of 
the British Mission, he reverted to 
this subject. He said that he had 
never tried the Khalsa at such work; 
that he doubted whether they could 
be induced to march over the corpses 
of their countrymen; and asked 
whether British troops could be de¬ 
pended on for such service. He added, 
that the Sirdars, whom he had sent 
to command his troops at Peshawur, 
had often urged him to suflcr them 
to move through the Khybur upon 
Jellalabad; but that he had uniformly 
refused to listen to their proposals. 
IMS. Notes."] 

f Kunjeet put in a claim for more 
than a moiety of the tribute-money bf 
twenty lakhs of rupees that was to be 
wrung from the Ameers of Sindh 
and mvided between him and the 
Shah; and he asked also for the 
transfer of Jellalabad to his own rule. 
The latter demand was steadfastly re¬ 
fused; but an arrangement was ef- 



SCRUPLES OP RDNJEET SINGH. 


317 


support the cause of Shah Soojah.” This, however, was 
uttered in a precautionary spirit, “in order to guard 
against the possibility of its being supposed hereafter 
that we designedly concealed our intentions from his 
Highness, and that we had sinister and exclusive views 
of our own.”* 

On the 23rd of June, by which time the Mission had 
followed the camp of the Maharajah to Lahore, and the 
patience of the British negotiators had been well-nigh 
exhausted, by the vexatious claims and frivolous objec¬ 
tions of the Sikh party, a statement to the same effect 
was made on Macnaghten’s authority by Lieutenant 
Mackesonf to Runjeot Singh himself; and the Maha¬ 
rajah told the British officer at once, in his hurried, 
emphatic manner, to prepare the treaty. It seemed as 
though the many objections which had been started had 
originated from the Maharajah’s advisers rather than 
from himself, and that they had kept out of his way the 
probability of the British Government acting for them¬ 
selves independently in the matter before him. But 
now that the case had been plainly stated in his own 
hearing, Runjeet at once grasped the whole question; 
fully comprehended his own position; and resolutely 
decided for himself. But, never forgetful of his own 
interests, he clamoured still for the cession of Jellala- 
bad;J and, with seeming coquettishness consented to 
receive two lakhs of rupees in the shape of an annual 


fected with regard to the former, at 
the expense of the Ameers of Sindh; 
Runjeet receiving a larger amount 
without detriment to the Shah. 

* Mr, Macnaghten to Government, 
Camp^ near Lahore^ June 20 , 1838 : 
MS, Records, 

t Mackeson was the general mes¬ 
senger on the part of the British 
agent, as was the Fakir Azizoodeen, 
or Kishen Chund, on the part of the 
Maharajah. These functionaries were 
Constantly going backwards and for¬ 


wards, in the frightful heat, to com¬ 
municate the suggestions or replies 
of their respective chiefs. 

t It is probable that the demand 
for Jellalabad was intended to be 
refused, in order that the refusid 
might strengthen Runjeet*8 claims to 
increased pecuniary compensation; 
for before the arrival of the Mission 
he was in the habit of speaking of 
Jellalabad as a possession not to be 
coveted by the Khalsa. 



318 POUCT OV THB INDIAN OOVBHNMENT. 

Bubffldy, instead of the territorial accession, which the 
British agent had resolutely refused.* 

On the 26th of June the treaty was formally signed 
by the Maharajah. It had been slightly modified since 
the original draft was prepared; but, with the exception 
of the introduction of the subsidy article, had undergone 
no essential alterations. It was, in effect, a treaty be* 


* Captain Cunninghame (^History of 
the Sikhs) says that Runjeet was in¬ 
formed that the expedition for the 
restoration of Shah Soojah would be 
undertaken, whether the Maharajah 
chose to share in it or not. “ That 
Runjeet Singh,'* the author adds in 
a note, “ was told he would be left out 
if he did not choose to come in, does 
not appear on public record. It was, 
however, the only convincing argu¬ 
ment used during the long discussions, 
and I think Major Mackcson was 
made the bearer of the message to 
that edect." But this is stated some¬ 
what too broadly. Runjeet Sin^h 
was not told that the British, in the 
event of his refusing to co-operate 
with the Shah, would undert^e by 
themselves the restoration of Shah 
Soojah, but that they might be com¬ 
pelled to do so in self-defence. Macke- 
son told Runjeet, as Macnag:hten had 
before told the Fakir Azizoodeen, 
that in order “ to guard against any re¬ 
proach of reserve or concealment, here¬ 
after,” it was ri^ht “ to inform him 
now of the possibility that might occur 
of our being compelled, in self-defence, 
to take our own measures to ward off 
approaching danger, and use our own 
troops to restore Shah Soojah to the 
throne.” The Maharajah, receiving 
this communication as though he had 
not been prepared for it by Fakir 
Azizoodeen, told Mackeson at once 
to prepare the treaty. Not imme¬ 
diately understanding,” says Macke¬ 
son, in his memorandum of this inter¬ 
view, “ to what treaty he might 
allude,^ 1 asked the Fakir whether 
that with the supplementary articles 
presented by Mr. Macnaghten to 
the Maharajidi's approval was the 


one alluded to. The Maharajah ob¬ 
served, ‘ That oneand the Fakir 
recalled his attention to the point by 
asking how the question of Jellalabad 
was to be settled; to which his High¬ 
ness replied, that if the Sikhs could 
not be allowed to hold possession of 
Jellalabad, some other arrangement 
could be made, which would have the 
effect of making the Kalsa-jee act in 
cordial co-operation—that the friend¬ 
ship between the Sikhs and the 
British was great, and had lasted 
many years—that the British and 
Sikh Governments had no care, and 
were both able to act independently, 
but that they had a care for tne 
mutual friendship which had lasted 
so long. The Fakir hinted to me to 
suggest some other mode to supersede 
that of the Sikhs holding possession 
of Jellalabad. I observed that it now 
rested with the Maharajah to suggest 
any plan that might have occurred to 
his mind. After some further conver¬ 
sation, Runjeet Singh said that an 
annual tribute of two lakhs of rupees 
from Shah Soojah would satisfy him 
for the non-possession of Jellalabad; 
and this granted, he was willing to 
co-operate for the restoration of the 
Shah. The British agents objected 
to the payment of tribute, as it would 
be an acknowledgment^ of inferiority 
on the part of the SHah; but they 
consented that the two lakhs should 
be paid, in the shape of a subsidy, 
Runjeet Singh undertaking to keep 
up a force on the frontier, at the cafi 
of the Afghan monarch.*'— \^Lieutenant 
Mackeson's Memorandum of a convert 
saHon toith the Maharajah^ Runjeet 
Singhy cdLahorey 2Srd of JunCy 1838: 
MS. R^^ords.) 



THB TEIPABTITE TREATY. 


319 


tween Runjeet Singh and Shah Soqjah, guaranteed by 
the British Government; and it ran in the following 
words: 

Treaty of alliance and friendship executed between Maharajah 

Runjeet Singh and Shah Soojah-oohMoolk^ with the appro- 

bation of and in concert withy the British Government 

Whereas a treaty was formerly concluded between Maharajah 
Runjeet Singh and Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, consisting of four¬ 
teen articles exclusive of the preamble and the conclusion; and 
whereas the execution of the provisions of the said treaty wad 
suspended for certain reasons; and whereas at this time Mr. W. 
H. Macnaghten, having been deputed by the Right Honourable 
George Lord Auckland, Governor-General of India, to the pre¬ 
sence of Maharajah Runjeet Singh, and vested with full powers 
to form a treaty in a manner consistent with the friendly engage¬ 
ments subsisting between the two states, the treaty aforesaid is 
revived and concluded with certain modifications, and four new 
articles have been added thereto, with the approbation of, and in 
concert with, the British Government, the provisions whereof as 
contained in the following eighteen articles, will be duly and 
faithfully observed, 

1st. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk disclaims all title on the part of 
himself, his heirs, successors, and all the Suddozyes, to whatever 
territories lying on either bank of the River Indus that may be 
possessed by the Maharajah—viz.. Cashmere, including its limits, 
east, west, north, and south, together with the Fort of Attock, 
Chuch Hazara, Khebel, Amb, with its dependencies on the left 
bank of the aforesaid river; and on the right bank Peshawur, with 
the Eusafzae territory, Kheteks, Husht Nagger, Mechnee, Kohat, 
Himgoo, and all places dependent on Peshawur, as far as the 
BdiyburPass; Bunnoo, theVezeree]territory, Dour Tuwk, Goraug 
Kulabagh, and Kushulgher, with their dependent districts; Dera 
Ishmael Khan, and its dependency, together with Dera Ghazee 
Khan, Kut, Methen, Omerkoth, and their dependent territory; 
Seeughur, Heren Dajel, Hajeepore, Rajenpore, and the three 
Ketchees, as well as Mankeera, with its districts, and the province 
of Mooltan, situated on the left bank. These countries and 
places are considered to be the property and to form the estate 



320 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVEBNMENT. 


of. the Maharajah; the Shah neither has nor will have any con¬ 
cern with them. They belong to the Maharajah and his posterity 
from generation to generation. 

2nd. The people of the country on the other side of Khybur 
will not be suffered to commit robberies, or aggressions, or any 
disturbances on this side. If any defaulter of either state who 
has embezzled the revenue take refuge in the territory of the 
other, each party engages to surrender him, and no person shall 
obstruct the passage of the stream which issues out of the Khybur 
defile, and supplies the fort of Futtehgurh with water according 
to ancient usage. 

3rd. As agreeably to the treaty established between the 
British Government and the Maharajah, no one can cross from 
the left to the right bank of the Sutlej without a passport 
from the Maharajah; the same rule shall be observed regarding 
the passage of the Indus, whose waters joins the Sutlej; and no 
one shall be allowed to cross the Indus without the Maharajah's 
permission. 

4th. Regarding Shikarpoor and the territory of Sindh lying 
on the right bank of the Indus, the Shah will agree to abide by 
whatever may be settled as right and proper, in conformity with 
the happy relations of friendship subsisting between the British 
Government and the Maharajah, through Captain Wade. 

5th. When the Shah shall have established his authority in 
Caubul and Candahar, ho will annually send the Maharajah the 
following articles—viz., 55 high-bred horses of approved colour 
and pleasant paces, 11 Persian cimeters, 7 Persian poniards, 25 
good mules; fruits of various kinds, both dry and fresh, and 
surdees or musk melons of a sweet and delicate flavour (to be 
sent throughout the year), by the way of Caubul River to Pesha- 
wur; grapes, pomegranates, apples, quinces, almonds, raisins, 
pistales or chronuts, an abundant supply of each; as well as pieces 
of satin of every colour, choghas of fur, kimkhobs wrought with 
gold and silver, and Persian carpets, altogether to the number of 
101 pieces; all these articles the Shah will continue to send every 
year to the Maharajah. 

6th. Each party shall address the other in terms of equality. 

7th. Merchants of Afghanistan, who will be desirous of trading 
to Lahore, Umritsur, or any other parts of the Maharajah’s pos¬ 
sessions, shall not be stopped or molested on their way. On the 



THE TRIPARTITE TREATY. 


321 


contxarr, strict orders shall be issued to facilitate their intercourse, 
and the Maharajah engages to observe the same line of conduct 
on his part in respect to traders who may wish to proceed to 
Afghanistan. 

8th. The Maharajah will yearly send to the Shah the follow¬ 
ing articles in the way of friendship: 55 pieces of shawls, 25 
pieces of muslin, 11 dooputtas* 5 pieces of Jcinkhob, 5 scarves, 
55 tinbuns, 55 loads of Bara rice (peculiar to Peshawur). 

9th. Any of the Maharajah’s officers who may be deputed to 
Afghanistan to purchase horses, or on any other business, as well 
as those who may be sent by the Shah into the Punjaub for the 
purpose of purchasing piece goods or shawls, &c., to the amount 
of 11,000 rupees, will be treated by both sides with due atten¬ 
tion, and every facility will be afforded to them in the execu¬ 
tion of their commission. 

10th. Whenever the armies of the two states may happen to be 
assembled at the same place, on no account shall the slaughter of 
kine be permitted to take place. 

11th. In the event of the Shah taking an auxiliary force from 
the Maharajah, whatever booty may be acquired from the Baruk- 
zyes in jewels, horses, arms, great and small, shall be equally 
divided between the two contracting parties. If the Shah should 
succeed in obtaining possession of their property without the 
assistance of the Maharajah’s troops, the Shah agrees to send a 
portion of it by his own agents to the Maharajah in the way of 
friendship. 

12th. An exchange of missions, charged with letters and pre¬ 
sents, shall constantly take place between the two parties. 

13th. Should the Maharajah require the aid of any of the Shah’s 
troops in furtherance of the object contemplated by this treaty, 
the Shah engages to send a force commanded by one of his principal 
officers; in like manner, the Maharajah will furnish the Shah, 
when required, with an auxiliary force composed of Mahomedans, 
and commanded by one of his principal officers as far as Caubul, 
in furtherance of the objects contemplated by this treaty. When 
the Maharajah may go to Peshawur, the Shah wiU depute a 
Shah-zadah to visit him; on which occasions the Maharajah will 
receive and dismiss him with the honour and consideration due to 
his rank and dignity. 

14th. The friends and enemies of each of the three high 

VOL. I. Y 



322 POLICY OP THE nn>IAN GOVERlfMENT. 

powers—that is to «ay, the British and Sikh Governments and 
Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, shall be the friends and enemies of all# 

15th. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk agrees to relinquish for himself, 
his heirs, and successors, all claims of supremacy and arrears of 
tribute over the country now held by the Ameers of Sindh 
(which will continue to belong to the Ameers and their successors 
in perpetuity), on condition of the payment to him by the Ameers 
of such a sum as may be determined, under the mediation of the 
British Government, of such payment being made over by him to 
Maharajah Runjeet Singh. On these payments being completed, 
article 4 of the treaty of the 12th of March, 1833, will be con¬ 
sidered cancelled, and the customary interchange of letters and 
suitable presents between the Maharajah and the Ameers of Sindh 
shall be maintained as heretofore. 

16th. Shah Soojah engages, after the attainment of his object, 
to pay without fail to the Maharajah the sum of two lakhs of 
rupees of the Nanukshahee or Kuldar currency, calculating from 
the date on which the Sikh troops may be despatched for the 
purpose of reinstating his Majesty in Caubul, in consideration of 
the Maharajah stationing a force of not less than 5000 men— 
cavalry and infantry—of the Mahomedan persuasion within the 
limits of the Peshawur territory for the support of the Shah, and 
to be sent to the aid of his Majesty whenever the British Govern¬ 
ment, in concert and counsel with the Maharajah, shall deem the 
aid necessary; and when any matter of groat importance may 
arise to the westward, such measures will be adopted with regard 
to it as may seem expedient and proper at the time to the British 
and Sikh Governments. In the event of the Maharajah requiring 
the aid of the Shah’s troops, a deduction shall be made from the 
subsidy proportioned to the period for which such aid may be 
afforded; and the British Government holds itself responsible for 
the punctual payment of the above sum annually to the Maharajah, 
so long as the provisions of this treaty are duly observed. 

17th. When Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk shall have succeeded in 
establishing his autliority in Afghanistan, he shall not attack or 
molest his nephew, the ruler of Herat, in the possession of his ter¬ 
ritories, now subject to his government. 

18th. Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk binds himself, his heirs, and suc¬ 
cessors, to refrain from entering into negotiations with any foreign 
state without the knowledge and consent of the British and Sikh 



DSPABTUBS OSt THE MISSION. 


323 


Govermnents, and to oppose any power having the design to 
invade the British and Sikh territories by force of arms, to the 
utmost of his ability. 

The three powers parties to this treaty—^namely, the British 
Government, Maharajah Runjeet Singh, and Shah Soojah-ool- 
Moolk—cordially agree to the foregoing articles. There shall be 
no deviation of them, and in that case the present treaty shall be 
considered as binding for ever; and this treaty shall come into 
operation from and after the date on which the seals and signa¬ 
tures of the three contracting parties shall have been affixed 
thereto. Done at Lahore this 26th day of June, in the year of 
our Lord 1838, corresponding with the 15 th of the month of 
Assar, 1895, Aera of Bekramajeet. 

The treaty was despatched to Simlah for the signature 
of the Governor-General, which Runjeet Singh expressed 
some anxiety to obtain with the least possible delay. But 
Lord Auckland at once decided that he could with no 
propriety attach his name to the treaty until it had been 
sanctioned and signed by Shah Soojah. Anxious as he 
was to conclude the negotiation, Runjeet Singh could 
not demur to this decision. His patience, however, was 
not to be severely taxed, Macnaghten was directed to 
proceed with all possible expedition to obtain the con¬ 
sent of the Shah; and so, on the 13 th of July, the Maha¬ 
rajah gave the English gentlemen their audience of leave; 
and, amidst the most profuse expressions of friendship 
and attachment, they took their departure from Runjeet’s 
Court. 

They turned their faces towards Loodhianah. A 
pensioner on the bounty of the British Government, 
Shah Soojah, ever since his last disastrous attempt to 
regain his empire, had dwelt there in the midst of his 
family as one not yet reconciled to a life of peaceful 
obscurity, but somewhat sobered down by the repeated 
failures which had beset his unfortunate career. It is 
probable that no political vicissitudes in Afghanistan, 

Y 2 



TfmtBf'm TmTsmjm crnmaot^sr. 


himever fiivorable to the restoration of the monarchy, 
'Wbuld have tempted him to head another expedition for 
the recovery of Caubul and Candahar. But when reports 
reached him of the designs of the British Government, 
and the probability that he would be supplied with 
British money and British skill for the support and 
conduct of the army which he was to lead against the 
Barukzye Sirdars, he saw more clearly his way to his old 
place in the Balia Ilissar of Caubul; and long dormant 
hopes and expectations began to revive within him. But 
he could not wholly suppress his suspicions of the sin¬ 
cerity, both of the British and the Sikhs; and his delight 
was straitened by the thought that he would, in effect, 
be little more than a passive instrument in the hands of 
his powerful and ambitious allies. 

On the evening of the 15th of July, accompanied by 
Captain Wade and Lieutenant Mackeson, Mr. Mac- 
naghten waited on Shah Soojah at Loodhianah. Seated 
on a musnud slightly elevated above the level of the 
room, the Shah received the British gentlemen with 
becoming cordiality, and desired them to seat themselves 
on a carpet beside him. Macnaghten commenced the 
conference. He spoke of the friendly feeling that had 
always existed between the British Government and the 
Suddozye Princes, since Mr. Elphinstone’s mission to 
Afghanistan—said that, although unable actively to co¬ 
operate with the Shah in his first attempts to regain his 
kingdom, the British Government had always desired 
the success of his undertakings; explained the circum¬ 
stances under which a mission had been sent to the 
Court of Dost Mahomed; and commented upon the un¬ 
friendly manner in which it had been received, and the 
conductor the Ameer in “rejecting our good offices;” 
conduct which had rendered it necessary to counteract 
his hostile designs by establishing a friendly power in 
the territories of Afghanistan. 



OOttRWBWCn wnH shah sooiah 


8t» 

To all of this the Shah listened attentively, and then 
said that he had always foretold the result of the mission 
to the Court of Dost Mahomed—(which was a piece of 
good luck he was not able to appreciate)—that he who 
had not been true to his own master was little likely 
to be true to a foreign power—but that now he would 
see the result of his folly, and be baffled in his attempt 
to betray his country into the hands of the Persian in¬ 
vaders. 

Upon this Macnaghten at once announced the inten¬ 
tion of the British Government to restore Shah Soojah to 
his hereditary dominions. It would have been more agree¬ 
able, he said, to his government to act in such a matter 
■without consulting any other state; but that the Sikhs 
were now in actual possession of so many of the provinces 
of the old Douranee Empire, and their interests so in¬ 
timately associated with those of the British in that part 
of the country, that it was impossible to omit them from 
the compact—that, consequently, the Governor-General 
had instructed him to wait on Runjeet Singh, and that 
the result had been the formation of a treaty which 
was now to be submitted for his Majesty’s approval, 
together with a letter from Lord Auckland. The letter 
was then read; and Macnaghten reverting first to the 
old treaty between Shah Soojah and Runjeet Singh, 
said that it was the intention of the British Govern¬ 
ment to become a party to its stipulations under certain 
alterations and additions. With the utmost unconcern 
the Shah said that a paper of some kind had been ex¬ 
changed with Runjeet Singh, but that it was merely to 
the effect, that if he regained his dominions there should 
be an interchange of friendly letters, presents, and mis¬ 
sions between the two Courts. 

Whether Macnaghten smiled at this version of the old 
alliance is not on record. But he began now to read 



326 


POUCr OF THE ISDIAK GOVESRMEirr. 


and explain the articles of the amended treaty. The 
Shah’s comments were frequent and emphatic. Sneer¬ 
ing at the minuteness with which the possessions of Bun- 
jeet Singh were defined in the first article, he declared 
that Peshawur was only a burden to the Sikh govern¬ 
ment, and that Bunjeet would willingly hand it over 
to any one but Dost Mahomed. Indeed, he said, 
the Maharajah’s vakeel had often pledged his word to 
him that, in the event of his recovering his throne, 
Peshawur should be reannexed to his dominions. But 
when Captain Wade and Moollah Shikore* recalled to 
his Majesty’s recollection that Peshawur had been ex¬ 
pressly named in the old treaty among the possessions of 
Bunjeet Singh, the Shah acknowledged that it was so, 
and yielded the point. 

Other articles were then commented on by the Shah 
and his agent; but that which seemed most to stagger him 
was the stipulation for the annual payment by Caubul 
of two lakhs to the state of Lahore. Little advantage, 
observed the Shah, could the British Government ex¬ 
pect to derive from his restoration, if they placed him 
in a position inferior to that held by the present ruler 
of Caubul, who paid no tribute to the Sikhs. “ He had 
said, “ indulged a hope that the day would 
come when the British Government, whose honoured 
guest he had been for more than twenty years, would 
restore him to the throne and possessions of his ancestors 
—that the British Government must be aware that, after 
such a period of dependence on them, in whatever man¬ 
ner they chose to send him forth, his fair name was 
identified with their own—^that in this world a good 
name alone deserved to be prized—that half a loaf with 

* Moollah Shikore was at this time be made of him in a subsequent por- 
the Shah's ^ent and confidential ad- tion of the narrative. 

Tiser in exile. Further mention will 



QcxsnaN ot xee 32^7 

a good name were better than abundance without it. 
He then alluded to the small revenues of A%hanistan— 
said that Caubul and Candahar yielded nothing—that 
when Shikarpoor paid its revenues regularly, the amount 
realised was only three lakhs—that to enable him to 
establish his government, and keep it, he would require 
to maintain 15,000 troops; and how were they to be 
paid ?—that it would be less irksome if the money were 
only required to be paid whenever be had occasion to 
make use of the services of Runjeet Singh’s troops.”* 
To all of this Macnaghten replied, that the payment 
was not, by any means, to be regarded in the light of 
tribute from a weaker to a more powerful state, but 
simply as remuneration for services performed. Adroitly 
alluding to the subsidy recently paid by the British Go¬ 
vernment to the Persian state, the Enghsh Envoy said 
that a powerful government often subsidised, for its own 
uses, a weaker one; and that if Runjeet did not furnish 
the troops, the Shah would be exempted from paying 
the money; but that as the former was bound to hold 
them always in readiness for service, it would not be 
reasonable to pay them only when they were called into 
the field. Indeed, he urged, Runjeet Singh had with 
difficulty been persuaded to consent to the terms of this 
very article, which imposed upon him no light condi¬ 
tions, and had, moreover, been substituted as a com¬ 
pensation to the Maharajah for withdrawing the de¬ 
mands he had made for actual territorial concessions 
both at Shikarpoor and Jellalabad. 

There was little to be said in reply to this. The Shah 
yielded a somewhat reluctant assent; the remaining arti¬ 
cles of the treaty were read, and called forth but slight 

* Memorandum^ hy LieuUMacheson^ on the \5th. of July^ 18381 MS, JRe^ 
of Mr, MacnaghterCs Interview urUft cords, 

Soojdk>ooUMoolky at Jjoodhianah^ 



FOUCT OF THE INBIAN CtOTEENHENT. 


comment. Macnaghten then invited the Shah to state 
unreservedly his opinions on the whole question. Thus 
appealed to, the exiled King spoke out cordially and un¬ 
restrainedly, but with a full sense of what was due to 
himself. “He spoke of his long connexion with the 
British Government, of his fortune being entirely in their 
hands—said that he had entertained the hope, in his long 
exile, that it would sooner or later stretch out its arm to 
restore him to all the possessions and powers of his ances¬ 
tors—^but that if this hope could not at once be fulfilled, 
he must content himself with what now remained of the 
disjointed kingdom of Afghanistan; that in the event of 
the straitened revenue of Candahar and Caubul being 
further reduced by the payment of two lakhs of rupees 
annually to the Sikhs, he must look to support from the 
British Government to meet and oppose any increased 
danger from the approach of more powerful enemies from 
the westward. On this point full assurance was given him. 
He then observed that there were one or two other points 
in which he wished to have assurance given him, and 
that, in other respects, he was at the disposal of the 
British Government—1st. That no interference should be 
exercised with liis authority over those of his tribe and 
household; 2ndly. That he should be allowed to raise 
forces of his own to go with some show of power, and 
not as though he were a mere puppet in the hands of 
the British Government to work out their views. He 
then dwelt on the importance of this in the eyes of his 
people who would come to join his standard—said that 
if they found he was no longer the source of honour and 
reward, they would desert him and return to their homes, 
as they would have no object in connecting themselves 
with the schemes of foreigners—that he should’ therefore 
be allowed to commence recruiting men, as many were 
wmting to enter his service—that when his adherents 



CONTEKENCE WITH SHAH SOOJAH. 


flocked to his standard, he should be able to ^ve them 
hopes of reward for their services.”* 

On all these points the fullest assurances were given 
to the Shah. Then Macnaghten began to set forth 
how it was the desire of the British Government that 
one of their own functionaries should be stationed at the 
Shah’s Court ;f and that British ofBcers should be fur¬ 
nished to discipline the Shah’s levies, to command them 
during the expedition, and to remain with him after his 
restoration. To all of this the Shah readily assented. 
Declaring himself confident of success, he then expressed 
an eager hope that no delay would be permitted, but that 
the expedition would set out as soon as ever the troops 
could be raised for the purpose. When the beginning 
of the ensuing cold weather was named as the time for 
commencing operations, the Shah expressed surprise and 
regret that the movement should be so long delayed; and 
urged the expediency of moving whilst Herat was still 
holding out. His appearance in the neighbourhood of 
Candahar, he said, would doubtless compel Mahomed 
Shah to withdraw his investing army, and secure the 
frontier against all future attacks.^ 

Then Macnaghten asked the King whether it were his 
desire to advance by the Khybur Pass, or the route of 
Sindh. To this Shah Soojah replied that the Khyburees 
were his slaves—that they were willing to sacrifice them¬ 
selves at his bidding—that he frequently received im¬ 
ploring letters from the Momunds, the Eusofzyes, and 
other tribes in the neighbourhood of Peshawur, but that 
there were so many solid advantages in the combined 

* Lieutenant Mackeson's Memoran- days before sent an emissary to Kam- 
dum: MS, Records, ran to conjure him, for the honour of 

t “Who would, however,” it was the Afghans, to hold out for two short 
added, “ not interfere with the full months, and he would hear of miracles 
exercise of his authority over his worked in his favour.”— {Lieutenant 
subjects.” MackesorCs Memorandum: MS, Re- 

t “ He mentioned having a few cords."] 



380 


POUCT OF THE USTDIAN GOVEBimENT. 


movement by Candahar and Peshawur, which would 
completely paralyse the movements of Dost Mahomed, 
that he gave it the preference. His own force, he said, 
should advance by Candahar, whilst his eldest son, 
Prince Timour, might accompany the Sikh army through 
the Khybur Pass.’*' 

Little more now remained to be said. But before 
taking his leave of the Shah, Macnaghten invited him to 
state in writing the points on which he required the 
assurances of the British Government, and expressed a 
hope that, as the Mission had received instructions to re¬ 
turn immediately to Simlah, his Majesty’s wishes might 
be laid before him with the least possible delay. 
Desiring the British Envoy to call upon him again on 
the following evening, after leisure had been allowed 
him to study well the contents of the proposed treaty, 
the Shah then bade him adieu; and the English officers 
took their departure. It did not appear to those present, 
on this occasion, when the sovereignty of Afghanistan 
was ofi’ercd to the long-exiled monarch, and now, for 
the first time since his dethronement, there dawned upon 
him something like a certainty of recovering his lost 
dominions, that he received the announcements of the 
English Mission with feelings of very earnest exultation 
and delight. There were evidently some misgivings in 
the mind of the Shah, who mistrusted both Eunjeet 
Singh and the British Government. Everything seemed 
to have been already arranged between the two parties, 
whilst he himself, it appeared, was designed to be a 
passive instrument for the furtherance of their ends—a 
puppet in their hands, to give grace to the show and 
character to the expedition. 

• Some anxiety was expressed by of the Sikhs, but he was assured that 
ue Shah lest Prince Timour should the presence of British officers in his 
be consigned entirely to the guidance camp would effectually preyent this. 



STIPULATIONS OP THE SHAH. 


331 


An hour before the time appointed for the second 
meeting between Shah Soojah and the British Emissary, 
Moollah Skikore waited upon the latter with a paper, 
setting forth the points upon which the Shah especially 
desired to have the assurances of the British Government. 
They ran to the following effect: 

Firstly. That as regards the descendants of the King of the 
Douranees (Ahmed Shah), and the sons and relations of myself, 
whoever they may be, the right of providing for them or not, and 
the direction of all that concerns them, belong to me alone; in 
this matter neither the British Government nor other shall exer¬ 
cise any interference.* 

Secondly. After I have been reinstated in Caubul and Canda- 
bar, if, in consequence of the smallness of my possessions, I should 
desire to send an army against Balkh, Seistan, Beloochistan, and 
the neighbourhood and dependencies of Caubul and Candahar, 
and take possession of them, no hindrance shall be offered.f 

Thirdly. When Caubul and Candahar become mine, the de¬ 
pendencies of those places, as they existed in the time of the 
monarchy, ought to belong to me.J 

Fourthly. When I have been reinstated at Caubul, and the 
officers of the British Government prepare to return, should I 
desire to retain one of them as an envoy, and some others for the 
purpose of forming and disciplining my army, they will not be 
refused.§ 

Fifthly. The British officers shall exercise no authority over 


* It will be more convenient for 
purposes of reference to append, as a 
note to each article, Macnagliten’s re¬ 
plies to these several points, as given 
at the subsequent interview: “ VVitli 
regard to the first article,” he writes, 
“ 1 told the Shah tliat he might make 
his mind perfectly at ease, as the Bri¬ 
tish Government had no intention or 
wish to interfere between his Majesty 
and his family and dependents.”— 
{Mr. MacnagUen to Government^ 

17, 1838 : MS. Records.'] 
t “ With regard to tlie second arti¬ 
cle, I pointed out to the Sliali that 
the conquest of Shikarpoor would be 
directly opposed to one of the articles 


of the treaty. To the rest of the ar¬ 
ticle 1 could only say that it would be 
naturally the wish of the British Go¬ 
vernment to witness the consolidation 
and extension, to their proper limits, 
of his Majesty’s dominions.”— 
Records.] 

% “ On the subject of the third ar¬ 
ticle, I observed that, of course, the 
Shah did not mean to include the 
territories ceded to Runjeet Singh by 
the new treaty, and that the mention 
of Shikarpoor was inadmissible.’^— 
[Mis'. Records ] 

§ ** The fourth article I stated would 
doubtless be approved by the Go- 
vemor-Geneial.”—[MS. Records.] 



332 


POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 


the people of Afghanistan, whether soldiers or subjects, without 
my approbation and concurrence.* 

Sixthly, With respect to giving two lakhs of rupees, and some¬ 
thing besides from Shikarpoor, it appears to me very hard and 
difficult; firstly, because my country will not afford means suffi¬ 
cient for the expenses of my government and the maintenance of 
my troops ; and secondly, because the measure will be considered 
by the world as payment of tribute. It rests, however, with the 
British Government, and if it is of opinion that the country has 
the means, and that the measure is a proper one, I do not object. 
The conduct of my affairs is in the hands of the British Govern- 
ment.f 

Seventhly, After the decay of the monarchy, in the same man¬ 
ner as my servants rebelling usurped the country, so did the 
Sindhians place officers in possession of Shikarpoor; now that I 
shall regain possession of my kingdom, the Sindhians must release 
Shikarpoor. It is a royal possession, and must belong to me.J 

Eighthly, With respect to slave-girls who ran away from their 
masters, although to deliver them up may be against the regu¬ 
lations, yet as it is a matter of necessity, for respectable people 


* “ The wisli, I said, expressed in 
ihc fifth article would be scrupulously 
attended to.”— ^MS, Itecords.^ 
t ” With respect to the objection 
urged in the sixth article, to making 
money-payments to Maharajah Run- 
jeet Singh, 1 reiterated the arguments 
formerly used, to show the distinctions 
between a tributary and a subsidiary 
obligation. These arguments, it will 
be observed, had due weight with his 
Majesty, for in the written article he 
brings forward the objection as one 
that may occur to the world, not as 
one to which he himself attaches any 
importance. Ultimately, however, his 
Majesty admitted that it would be 
impossible to satisfy all unreasonable 
objections, and that to those who un¬ 
derstood the subject, and whose opi¬ 
nions alone were to be valued, the 
reciprocal nature of the subsidiary 
obligation would be sufficiently obvi¬ 
ous. With regard to the objection 
specitied in this article, founded on 
the anticipated want of means, I gave 
his Majesty encouragement to hope 
that the British Government would 


not permit him to be in distress for 
the means of discharging his necessary 
pecuniary obligations.”— [A/aS^. Re¬ 
cords.2 

X ” The seventh article, I observed, 
was at variance with the proposed 
provisions in the new treaty regarding 
Shikarpoor. His Majesty, after some 
conversation, agreed to expunge the 
article, as well as to exclude the men¬ 
tion of Shikarpoor in other places 
where it had been introduced, from 
his paper of requests ; but he seemed 
to set great value on his claim to 
Shikarpoor and the Sindh possessions 
generally. The Ameers, he observed, 
had no legitimate title to their domi¬ 
nions but what they derived from him. 
Shikarpoor, he said, he was particu¬ 
larly desirous to obtain possession of, 
as being an appropriate place of re¬ 
fuge and escape for his family in case 
of reverses; but he ultimately admitted 
that the object would be sufficiently 
secured to him so long as the Britiui 
influence prevailed with the Ameers.” 
—[il/5. Records,} 



ASSENT OF THE SHAH. 


333 


(females) cannot dispense with servants, however the regulations 
may be enforced with other people, it is not right to apply them 
to a guest, it is proper that the slave-girls of the Vilaitis (native 
of Afghanistan) attached to me, who may run away from their 
masters, be made to return.* 

Having mastered the contents of this paper, Mac- 
naghten proceeded to the audience, and after the first 
salutations, began, with his Majesty’s permission, to read 
over the several articles, and comment on them as he 
proceeded.f He then went on to say that it was now 
plain that the Shah’s mind had been set at rest on all the 
points which had before occasioned him doubt, and as 
his Majesty was now prepared without scruple to ratify 
the treaty, he hoped that he would furnish him with 
a written paper to this effect. To this the Shah readily 
assented, and the following postscript was then appended 
to the document: 

After a reperusal of the treaty, and hearing the representations 
made by the British officers of high rank, it appeared to me right 
that, in the foregoing enumeration of the objects to be desired, 
the mention of Shikarpoor should not be introduced, and with 
respect to the objections which I have stated, to giving two lakhs 
of rupees to Runjeet Singh, in exchange for the services of his 
troops, as it does not appear to me injurious to my dignity, I 
liave omitted all mention of that also, and am now prepared with 
willingness and satisfaction to sign the treaty. J 

The negotiation now at an end, the Shah expressed 
his eagerness to commence work without delay; and was 
urgent in his solicitations for an immediate supply of 
money, arms, and ammunition. He again, too, ex¬ 
pressed his desire to conduct the expedition for the re- 

* “ On the very delicate subject in- into consideration with the same anxi- 
troduced into the last article, I ob- ous desire to gratify his Majesty in 
served to his Majesty that its con- this as in all other matters.”— [MS, 
nexion with the treaty generally did RecordsJ] 
not seem to me to be obvious, but f MS. Records, 
that I would nevertheless bring it to t Macnaghten*s comments are 
the notice of the Governor-General, ^ven, for easier reference, in the 
who would, I felt persuaded, take it preceding notes. 





POLICY OF THE INDIAN GOVEENMENT. 


covery of his dominions, as one relying mainly upon the 
strength of his own army. He wished to obtain the 
assistance of British officers in raising and disciplining 
his troops, but he hoped “ that the immediate operations 
for regaining his throne might be conducted” by those 
troops. Such reliance on his own arms would raise, 
he said, his character in the estimation of the people, 
‘‘ while the fact of his being upheld by foreign force 
alone could not fail to detract, in a great measure, 
from his dignity and consequence.”* He had already, 
he declared, in reply to a suggestion from the British 
Envoy, sent letters to many persons of influence in 
Afghanistan, calling upon them to join his standard, 
and he was certain that thousands would flock to it 
from all parts of the country.f He appeared to be in 
the highest spirits, and spoke strongly of the debt of gra¬ 
titude which he owed to the British Government, both 
for the protection that had been yielded him during 
past years, and for the more active assistance which 


♦ JIfr. Macnaqhtm to Covernment, 
July 17, 1838 : MS. Jlecords. 

t Many of those letters were 
promptly responded to, and in some 
instances voluntary tenders of service 
were made by chiefs discontented 
with the Barukzyc rule. Among 
others, Khan Shereen Khan, chief of 
the Kuzzilbashes, wrote to Shah 
Soojah declaring his intention to join 
his standard. “ Since we have been 
so unfortunate,” said the chief, “ as 
to be far from your royal household, 
it is only known to God how 
wretchedly we pass our days. We 
have now resolved, as soon as the 
troops of your Majesty arrive on the 
frontier, to lose no time in waiting 
upon your Majesty and proving our 
fidelity b^ sacrificing ourselves in 
your service. For God’s sake do 
not make this letter public.” Even 
before it was known that there was 
any intention on the part of the Shah 
to attempt to regain his kingdom, 
many of the chiefs, either offended 
by Dost Mahomed’s alliance with the 


Persians, or warned by the failure of 
Burnes’s Mission of the danger of 
clinging any longer to a falling house, 
wrote to the Shah, beseeching him to 
return. “The faggots,” it was said, 
“ are ready. It merely requires the 
lighted torch to be applied.” It is 
remarkable that one of the first to 
tender his services to the Suddozye 
Prince was that very Abdoollah 
Khan, Achetzkye, who was the prime 
mover of the insurrection at Caubul, 
which brought about the restoration 
of the Barukzyes.— [^Captain Wade 
to Mr. Macnaghten^ June 5th^ 1838: 
MS. Records.'] At this time the Shah 
was restricted from corresponding 
with his Afghan friends; but Captain 
Wade, whilst reporting to govern¬ 
ment the receipt of the letters from 
Abdoollah Khan and others, recom¬ 
mended that the restriction should 
be removed. The Shah seems to 
have laid before the British agent, in 
perfect good faith, all the letters he 
received from Afghanistan whilst a 
pensioner on the British Government. 



MEETIKO WITH ZEMAUH SHAH. 


335 


was about to confer upon him so much power and 
grandeur. 

Macnaghten now took his leave of the Shah, and 
proceeded with the officers of the Mission to pay a visit 
to Zemaun Shah, who, blind and powerless, had re¬ 
mained since his dethronement an appendage to the faded 
Court of his younger brother, dreaming over the past 
grandeur of his magnificent reign, and sighing to revisit 
the scene of his by-gone glories. V.ague rumours of the 
intention of the British .Government to restore the Sud- 
dozye Princes to the sovereignty of Afghanistan had 
reached him in his dreary exile; and now tliat the Bri¬ 
tish Envoy was at his door, so eager was he to learn 
the whole truth, that almost before the ordinary salu¬ 
tations had been exchanged, he pressed Macnaghten for 
a full revelation of the glad tidings of which he was the 
bearer. The intelligence, which the English gentleman 
imparted to him, stirred the heart of the old blind Prince 
with joy and exultation. “ He seemed filled with delight 
at the prospect of being permitted to revisit the land of 
his ancestors.”* This was the first gleam of good fortune 
that had burst upon him for many years; and it was a 
curious and affecting sight to mark the effect which the 
announcement of the good offices of the British wrought 
upon one, who, forty years before, had threatened vast 
expeditions to the southward, which had filled the Bri¬ 
tish in India with anxiety and alarm. 

On the 17th of July, Macnaghten and his suite turned 
their backs upon Loodhianah, and repaired, with all pos¬ 
sible haste, to Simlah, there to discuss with Lord Auck¬ 
land and the secretaries who had remained with him, 
the measures now to be adopted for the restoration of 
Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk to the long-lost empire of Ahmed 
Shah. 

♦ Mr, Macnaghten to Government, July 17, 1838 : MS. Records. 



336 


THE SI MLA H MANIFESTO. 


CHAPTER IV. 

[July—October, 1838.] 

The Simlah Manifesto—The Simlali Council—Influence of Messrs. Colvin 
and Torrens—Views of Captains Burnes and Wade—Opinions of Sir 
Henry Fane — The Army of the Indus — The Governor-General’s 
Manifesto—Its Policy considered. 

It is obvious that, in all the negotiations detailed in the 
preceding chapter, the paramount idea was that of an 
alliance between Runjeet Singh and Shah Soojah, gua¬ 
ranteed by the British Government, and a conjoint ex¬ 
pedition into Afghanistan from the two sides of Pesha- 
wur and Shikarpoor, to be undertaken by the armies of 
the Lahore ruler and the Suddozye Prince. It was hinted 
to Runjeet Singh that events might be developed, which 
would render necessary the more active co-operation of 
the British army; but Shah Soojah, who was desirous 
above all things that the British should not take the 
foremost part in the coming expedition, was led to be¬ 
lieve that, assisted by a few British officers, he would be 
left to recover for himself his old dominions, and that 
he would by no means become a puppet in the hands of 
his Feringhee allies.* 

* It was, as I have shown, the first ed, the invasion of Afghanistan (see 
wish of the Governor-General that the Lord Auckland's Minute and instruc- 
Sikhs should undertake, single-hand- tions to Mr. Macnaghten in the pre- 



VIEWS OF THE OOVBBMOR-OENEBAI.. 


387 


But these moderate views were about now to be ex¬ 
panded into a political scheme of far wider scope and 
significance. Whilst Macnaghten was negotiating the tri¬ 
partite treaty at Lahore and Loodhianah, John Colvin 
and Henry Torrens remained at Simlah, as the scribes and 
counsellors of the Governor-General. To what extent 
their bolder speculations wrought upon the plastic mind 
of Lord Auckland it is not easy, with due historical 
accuracy, to determine. But it is generally conjectured 
that the influences then set at work overcame the 
scruples of the cautious and peace-loving statesman, and 
induced him to sanction an enterprise of a magnitude 
commensurate with the bold and ambitious views of his 
irresponsible advisers. The direct influence mainly 
emanated from John Colvin. It is probable, indeed, 
that the counsels of a man so young and so erratic as 
Henry Torrens would have met with no acceptance from 
the sober-minded nobleman at the head of thp govern¬ 
ment, but for a circumstance which gave weight to his 
opinions and cogency to his advice. By all the accidents 
of birth and early associations, as well as by the bent of 
his own genius, the young civilian was a true soldier. 
The son of a distinguished officer and an approved mili¬ 
tary teacher, he had graduated, whilst yet a boy, in 
the learning of the camp, and his after studies had done 


ceding chapter). Macnaghten, on his 
way to Runieet’s Court, wrote to Mr. 
Masson: “You will have heard that 
I am proceeding on a mission to 
Runjeet Singh; and as at my inter¬ 
view with his Highness it is probable 
that the question of his relations with 
the Afghans will come on the 
I am naturally desirous of obtaining 
the opinion of the best-informed men 
with respect to them. Would you 
oblige me, therefore, by stating what 
means of counteraction to the policy 
of Dost Mahomed Khan you would 

VOL. L 


recommend for adoption; and whe¬ 
ther you think that the Sikhs, using 
any (and what ?) instrument of Au 
ghan agency, could establish them¬ 
selves in Caubul?’'— [^Masson's Nar¬ 
rative, vol. iii.] A letter, with a si¬ 
milar suggestion, was sent to Captain 
Bumes, of whose reception of the 
project I shall speak more in detail. 
The matter is fisher noti^able as 
an indication of the unwillingness 
of Lord Auckland to interfere more 
actively in the politics of Afghanis¬ 
tan. 



338 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


much to perfect his acquaintance with the tactics and 
strategy of modern warfare. He possessed, indeed, the 
very knowledge which the other members of the Simlah 
Council most wanted; and hence it was that he came to 
exercise considerable influence over Lord Auckland, 
more perhaps through his brother secretaries than 
directly brought to bear upon the mind of the Governor- 
General himself. It was urged that the expedition, if 
entrusted entirely to Shah Soojah and the Sikhs, would 
set in disastrous failure; and there was at least some 
probability in this. Runjeet Singh was no more than 
lukewarm in the cause; and the Sikhs were detested in 
Afghanistan. Lord Auckland shrunk from the respon¬ 
sibility of despatching a British army across the Indus; 
but, warned of the danger of identifying himself with a 
slighter measure promising little certainty of success, he 
halted, for a time, between two opinions, and slowly 
yielded to»the assaults of his scribes. 

There were two other men then on the frontier whose 
opinions Lord Auckland had been naturally desirous to 
obtain. Captain Burnes and Captain Wade were at 
least acquainted with the history and politics of Afghan¬ 
istan, and they had freely placed their sentiments on 
record. It has been advanced that the course of policy 
eventually pursued was in accordance with the views of 
these two officers. It is important, therefore, that it should 
be clearly ascertained what those views actually were. 

On the 20th of July Captain Burnes joined the Simlah 
Council. On the 29th of May, whilst halting at Pesha- 
wur, he had received a letter from Mr. Macnaghten, in¬ 
structing him to proceed at once to join the British 
Mission, and in obedience to the summons had started 
at once on his downward journey. In the middle of 
June he had joined the camp of the British Envoy at 
Lahore, and taken part in the later deliberations which 
had preceded the acceptance by Ruiijcct Singh of the 



OPIKIONS OP CAPTAIN BURNES. 


339 


terms proposed by the British Government; and on the 
departure of the Mission for Loodhianah had proceeded 
to join Lord Auckland and his advisers at Simlah.* 

Bumes had already placed his opinions on record. 
At Hussan Abdool he had received Macnaghten’s letter 
calling upon him for his views regarding the best means 
of counteracting the hostile influence of the Barukzye 
chiefs, and on the 2nd of June he had despatched a long 
demi-ofEcial letter, stating the policy which, under the 
then existing circumstances, he conceived it expedient to 
adopt, “ not,” in his own emphatic words, “ what was 
best; but what was best imder the circumstances, which 
a series of blunders had produced.” 

It is plain that no advice offered by Burnes could 
have had any effect upon the question of the restoration 
of Shah Soojah. Macnaghten, on reaching Adeena- 
nuggur, had determined not to await the arrival of the 
agent from Caubul before stating the views of the 
British Government to Eunjeet Singh. He had, indeed, 
given the Maharajah the option of participating in an ex¬ 
pedition for the restoration of Shah Soojah before he had 
received, either orally or by letter, the recommendations 
of Captain Burnes. When Bumes joined the British 
Mission, our government was irretrievably committed to 
a course of policy which he either might or might not 
have supported. If he had any influence on the future 
out-turn of events, it was rather as the adviser of Eun¬ 
jeet Singhf than as the adviser of the British Mission. 


• Mr. Masson says {Narrative, vol. 
iii., p. 495J that Burnes told him that 
the expedition across the Indus ** had 
been arranged before he reached 
Simlah, and that when he amved 
Torrens and Colvin came running to 
him and prayed him to say nothing to 
unsettle Ids Ii6rdship; that they had 
tdl the trouble in the world to get him 
into the business, and that even now 

Z 


he would be glad of any pretext to 
retire from it.'* I was for a long time, 
very sceptical of the truth of this 
story; and 1 do not now vouch for it. 
But I know that many men, with far 
better opportunities than my own of 
determinmg the authenticity of the 
anecdote, are inclined to believe it. 

t Bunjeet was very anxious to ob¬ 
tain Bumes’s private opinion regard- 

2 



340 


THE S TWnr.AH MANIFESTO. 


The fatal offer had been made to the Maharajah before 
Bumes joined the Mission camp. 

. What Burnes really recommended, as the growth of 
his own free and unfettered opinion was, that the case 
of Dost Mahomed should be reconsidered, and that the 
British Government should act with him and not against 
him. “ It remains to be reconsidered,” he wrote,* “ why 
we cannot act with Dost Mahomed. He is a man of un¬ 
doubted ability, and has at heart a high opinion of the 
British nation; and if half you must do for others were 
done for him, and offers made which he could see con¬ 
duced to his interests, he would abandon Kussia and 
Persia to-morrow. It may be said that opportunity has 
been given him; but I would rather discuss this in per¬ 
son with you, for I think there is much to be said for 
him. Government have admitted that he had at best 
a choice of difficulties; and it should not be forgotten 
that we promised nothing, and Persia and Russia held 
out a great deal.” But Burnes had been asked for his 
advice, not regarding the best means of counteracting 
Persian or Russian influence in Afghanistan, but the 
best means of counteracting Dost Mahomed; and he 
gave it as his opinion, that if Dost Mahomed were to be 
counteracted, the restoration of Shah Soojah was a more 
feasible project than the establishment of Sikh influence 

ing tlic state of politics in Afghanis- of Shah Soojah would be really to 
tan, and the course which it was ex- his advantage. Burnes’s answer was 
pedient for the Maharajah to adopt, in the affirmative; and Runjeet seems 
The Fakir Noor-ood-deen had two to have been, to some extent, in- 
or three conferences with Burnes lluenced by it .—[Captain Bumes to 
upon these points. The whole his- Mr. Macnagliten, Lahore^ June 20<A, 
tory of the negotiations with Dost 1838 : iiecorifo.] Ido not know 

Mahomed were gone over and re- whether this letter has ever been 
ported, from notes taken down at the made public from any private souroe. 
time, by the Fakir to the Maharajah. Like almost ever 3 rthmg else relating 
Runjeet declared himself very grate- to the proceedings at Lahore and 
ful for this information; and sent Loodhiamdi in June and July, 1830, 
again to ask Bumes to tell him, not it was studiously suppressed by go* 
as a public functionary, but as a pri- vemment. 

vate friend, whether the restoration ♦ To Mr. Macnaghten^ June2^ 1838. 



OPINIONS OP CAPTAIN BURNES. 


341 


at Caubul. Captain Wade had declared his conviction 
that the disunion of the Afghan chiefs was an element 
of security to the British; but this opinion Burnes con¬ 
troverted, and pronounced himself in favour of the con¬ 
solidation of the A%han Empire. “ As things stand,” 
he wrote, “ I maintain that it is the best of all policy to 
make Caubul in itself as strong as we can make it, and 
not weaken it by divided forces. It has already been 
too long divided. Caubul owed its strength in bygoii^ 
days to the tribute of Cashmere and Sindh. Both are 
irrecoverably gone, and while we do all we can to keep 
up the Sikhs, as a power east of the Indus, during the 
Maharajah’s life or afterwards, we should consolidate 
Afghan power west of the Indus, and have a king, and 
not a collection of chiefs. Divide et impera is a tem¬ 
porising creed at any time; and if the Afghans are 
united, we and they bid defiance to Persia, and instead 
of distant relations wo have everything under our 
eye, and a steadily progressing influence all along the 
Indus.” 

Such were the general views that Burnes enunciated, 
in the knowledge that the Simlah Cabinet had deter¬ 
mined on the deposition of Dost Mahomed. In fulfil¬ 
ment of the object thus contemplated, he recommended 
that the empire should be consolidated under Shah 
Soojah, rather than under Sultan Mahomed or any 
other chief. He believed that the restoration of the ex 
Eiing could be accomplished with the greatest facility, 
at a very trifling expenditure of the resources and dis¬ 
play of the power of the British Government. “ As 
for Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, personally,”* he wrote, “ the 

* Burnes had originally written, quote the passages in the text from 
** Of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, per- a copy, the accuracy of which is cer- 
sonally, I have, that is as ex-King of tihed by two Justices of the Peace 
the Afghans, no very high opinion f* at Bombay. This letter was cited by 
but he had scored out tuc words. 1 Sir John Hobhouse in the House of 



842 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


Britisli Government have only to send him to Peshawur 
vrith an agent, and two of its own regiments as an 
honorary escort, and an avowal to the A%han8 that we 
have taken up his cause, to ensure his being fixed for 
ever on the throne. The present time is perhaps better 
than any previous to it, for the Afghans, as a nation, 
detest Persia, and Dost Mahomed having gone over to 
the Court of Teheran, though he believes it to be from 
dire necessity, converts many a doubting Afg han into a 
bitter enemy. The Maharajah’s opinion has only, there¬ 
fore, to be asked for the ex-King’s advance on Peshawur, 
granting him, at the same time, some four or five of the 
regiments which have no Sikhs in their ranks, and 
Soojah becomes King. He need not move from Pesha¬ 
wur, but address the Khyburrees, Kohistanees of Caubul, 
and all the Afghans from that city, (stating) that he has 
the co-operation of the British and the Maharajah, and 
with but a little distribution of ready money—say, two 
or three lakhs of rupees—he will find himself the real 
King of the Afghans in a couple of months. It is, how¬ 
ever, to be remembered always, that we must appear 
directly, for the Afghans are a superstitious people, and 
believe Shah Soojah to have no fortune—but our name 
will invest him with it.” 

Such were the sanguine expectations of Captain 
Burnes, and the very moderate policy which he was 
inclined to recommend, on the presumption that all 
amicable relations with Dost Mahomed had now been 
repudiated by the British Government. The opinions 
of Captain Wade were scarcely less in accordance 
with those which found favour in the Simlah Coimcil- 
Chamber. It had ever been the belief of this officer 

Conunom, in Terifioadon of the aaser- land. That I may not be myself ac- 
tjon that Bumes had recommended cused of garbling, I give the letter 
the course adopted by Lord Auck- entire in we Appendix, 



OPINIONS OP CAPTAIN WADE. 


343 


that the consolidation of A%hauistan would prove 
injurious to British interests. He had insisted that it 
was the wisest policy to support the existing rulers, and 
to encourage the disunion among them. Of Dost Ma¬ 
homed, personally. Captain Wade entertained no favor¬ 
able opinion. He undeixated both the character of the 
man and his influence over his countrymen; but so little 
was he disposed to counsel the subversion of the existing 
rule in A^liauistan, that he was always willing to 
endeavour to bring about an arrangement with Dost 
Mahomed, by recommending Runjeet Singh to accept 
the overtures of the Ameer.* It was his opinion, that if 
the consolidation of the country were to be attempted at 
all, it would be more expedient to support the claims of 
Shah Soojah than of Dost Mahomed; but he regarded 
the restoration of the Shah only as a last resort, and 
would rather have seen the Barukzye chiefs left quietly 
in their own possessions. Indeed, in the very letter of 
the 1st of January, 1838, on which so much stress has 
been laid. Captain Wade, even in the printed version, 
says: “Shah Soojah’s recognition could only, however, 
be justifled or demanded of us, in the event of the prostra¬ 
tion of Herat to the Persian Government;” and in the 
unprinted portion of this letter the writer says: “ I can 
see nothing in the state of parties at present in the 
Punjaub to deter us from pursuing a line of policy” (in 

With reference to the final oiTers more reasonable than his former over- 
of Dost Mahomed to hold Feshawur, tures, though the Maharajah’s opinion 
conjointly with Sultan Mahomed, of their operation on the Peshawmr 
tributary to Lahore (Jubbar Khan branch ot the family remains to be 
acting as the Ameer's representative), (hsclosed. 1 am ready, with the sane* 
Captain Wade wrote: “ They seem tion of the Governor-General, to 
to be in some accordance with the communicate the proposition now 
overture made by Bunjeet Sin^h made to Runjeet Sing^ and to sup- 
to Dost Mahomed before Captain port by every argument that I can 
Bumes's arrival at Caubul, as re- use the expediency of its acceptance 
ported in my despatch of the 8th of by him .”—{Captain Wade to Afr. 
Angost last, and appear, as far as I Macnaghten^ March 3, 1838.] 
can ju^e of them at present, to be 



344 


THE SIlfLAH SIAKIFESTO. 


A%lianistati) “every way consistent with our engage¬ 
ments, our reputation, and our interests—viz., that of 
recognising the present holders of power, and discourag¬ 
ing any ambitious schemes of one party to the detriment 
of another.” And in conclusion. Captain Wade sums up 
what he believes to be the true policy of the British, 
declaring that “ if Dost Mahomed is kept, as he now is, 
at Caubul, whether as a Governor of the province, under 
Shah Soojah, or in independence of him, and Peshawur 
be restored to Sultan Mahomed, or remain as at present, 
we might not only be safe from disturbances, or any 
sudden inroads from the western powers, but be enabled 
to secure the integrity of the Sikh nation as far as the 
Indus, and would mould these people and their already 
more than half-disciplined troops to our wishes.”* 
Captain Wade over-estimated the popularity of Shah 
Soojah. He was in constant receipt of information to the 
effect that the Douranecs and other tribes were eager for 
his return; and he did not, perhaps, sufficiently consider 
that the Afghans always long for what they have not, 
and arc seldom unripe for revolution. But although he 
believed it would be safer to attempt to re-establish the 
integrity of Afghanistan under Shah Soojah than under 
Dost Mahomed, he thought that it would be better policy 
still to leave untouched the disunion and antagonism of 
the Barukzye Sirdars. 

Such, read by the light of their immutilated de¬ 
spatches, were the genuine opinions of Burnes and Wade. 
But the Simlah Council had more ambitious views, and 
were disposed towards more extensive plans of opera¬ 
tion. First one project, then another, had been dis¬ 
cussed. It had been debated, firstly, whether the move¬ 
ment on Candahar could be undertaken by the Shah’s 

* Captain WadetoMr,Macnaghien: have been garbled almost as shame- 
MS, Records, Captain Wade’s letters lessly as Captain Burnes’s. 



SIR HENBT FANE. 


345 


raw levies, supported only, as originally intended, by a 
British army of reserve at Shikaipoor; and secondly, 
whether some two or three regiments of British troops 
would not be sufficient to escort the Shah’s army into 
the heart of his old dominions. Both of these projects 
were abandoned. 

Sir Henry Fane was at this time commander-in-chief 
of the British forces in India. He had pitched his tent 
at Simlah, and was in ffiequent consultation with the 
Grovernor-Greneral. He was a fine old soldier of the Tory 
school, with very strong opinions regarding the general 
“ shabbiness” of all Whig doings, and a strenuous dis¬ 
like of half-measures, especially in military affairs. It is 
believed that he did not approve of the general policy 
of British interference in the affairs of Afghanistan, but 
he was entirely of opinion that it was the duty of 
government, in the conjuncture that had arisen, either 
not to interfere at all, or to interfere yi such a manner 
as to secure the success of our operations. Always by 
nature inclined towards moderate measures, the Go¬ 
vernor-General for some time resisted the urgent recom¬ 
mendations of those who spoke of the formation of a 
grand army, drawn from our own regular establishment, 
to be headed by the commander-in-chief in person, and 
marched upon Candahar, perhaps upon Herat itself. 
But Lord Auckland was never the most resolute of men. 
His own confidential advisers had long been endeavour¬ 
ing to convince him of the necessity of adopting more 
vigorous measures. The commander-in-chief was not 
only recommending such measures, but insisting upon 
his right, as the first military authority in the country, 
to determine the number of British troops to be em¬ 
ployed, and the manner of their employment. And the 
ministers of the Crown, fortified by the knowledge that 
the expenses of the war would fall upon the treasury 



B46 


THE 8IMLAH MANIFESTO. 


of the East India Company, and that they would not 
be called by the British people to account for any ex¬ 
penditure, however lavish, upon remote warlike opera- 
^ns, which the public might easily be persuaded to re¬ 
gard as the growth of the most consummate wisdom, 
were exhorting Lord Auckland to adopt effectual mea¬ 
sures for the counteraction of Bussian intrigue and 
Persian hostility in the countries of Afghanistan. So, 
after some weeks of painful oscillation. Lord Auckland 
yielded his own judgment to the judgment of others, 
and an order went forth for the assembling of a grand 
army on the frontier, to be set in motion early in the 
coming cold weather, in support of Shah Soojah and 
his levies; to cross the Indus; and to march upon Can- 
dahar. 

In August, the regiments selected by the commander- 
in-chief were warned for field-service, and on the 13th 
of September ho published a general order, brigading 
the different components of the force, naming the staff- 
oflicers appointed, and ordering the whole to rendezvous 
at Eurnaul. The reports, which all through the dry 
summer months had been flitting about from cantonment 
to cantonment, and making the pulses of military aspirants, 
old and young, beat rapidly with the fever of expectancy, 
now took substantial shape; and everywhere the ap¬ 
proaching expedition became the one topic of conversa¬ 
tion. Peace had reigned over India for so many years, 
that the excitement of the coming contest was as novel 
as it was inspiriting. There was not an officer in the 
army who did not long to join the invading force; and 
many from the distant Presidency, or from remote pro¬ 
vincial stations, leaving the quiet staff-appointments 
which had lapped them long in ease and luxury, rushed 
upwards to join their regiments. Even in that un- 
propitious season of the year, when the country was 



rOBMATION OF THE OBANS ABMT. 


347 


flooded by the periodical rains, corps were set in motion 
towards Kumaul, flrom stations as low down as Be¬ 
nares, and struggled manfully, often through wide sheets 
of water, to their destination at the great northern 
rallying point. There had been no such excitement in 
military circles since the grand army assembled for the 
reduction of Bhurtpore; and though the cause was not 
a popular one, and there was scarcely a mess-table in 
the country at which the political bearings of the inva¬ 
sion of Afghanistan were discussed without eliciting the 
plainest possible indications that the sympathies of our 
officers were rather with the Barukzye chief than the 
Suddozye monarch, there was everywhere the liveliest 
desire to join the ranks of an army that was to traverse 
new and almost fabulous regions, and visit the scenes 
rendered famous by the exploits of Mahmoud of Ghuzni 
and Nadir Shah. 

The army now warned for field-service consisted of 
a brigade of artillery, a brigade of cavalry, and five 
brigades of infantry. Colonel Graham was to command 
the artillery j Colonel Arnold the cavalry j whilst the 
brigades of infantry were assigned respectively to Colo¬ 
nels Sale and Dennis, of the Queen’s; and Colonels Nott, 
Roberts, and Worseley, of the Company’s, service. The 
infantry brigades were told off" into two divisions under 
Sir Willoughby Cotton, an old and distinguished officer 
of the Queen’s army, who had rendered good service 
in the Burmese war, and was now commanding the 
Presidency division of the Bengal army, and Major- 
General Duncan, an esteemed officer of the Company’s 
service, who was then in command of the Sirhind 
division of the army, and was therefore on the spot to 
take the immediate management of details. 

The regiments now ordered to assemble were her 
Majesty’s 16th Lancers, 13th Infantry, and 3rd Buffi; 



348 


THE SIMIAH MANIFESTO. 


the Company’s European regiment; two regiments of 
Native light cavalry, and twelve picked Sepoy corps.* 
Two troops of horse artillery and three companies of 
foot, constituted the artillery brigade; and some details 
of sappers and miners, imder Captain Thomson, com¬ 
pleted the Bengal force. The usual staff-departments 
were formed to accompany the army,f the heads of 
departments remaining in the Presidency whilst their 
deputies accompanied the forces into the field. ■ 

Whilst the Bengal army was assembling on the 
northern frontier of India, under the personal command 
of Sir Henry Fane, another force was being collected at 
Bombay. It was composed of a brigade of cavalry, in¬ 
cluding her Majesty’s 4th Dragoons, a brigade of artillery; 
and a brigade of foot, consisting of two Queen’s regiments 
(the 2nd Koyals and 17th Foot) and one Sepoy corps. 
Major-General Thackwell commanded the cavalry; 
Major-General Wiltshire the infantry; and Colonel 
Stevenson the artillery brigade. Sir John Keane, the 
commander-in-chief of the Bombay army, took com¬ 
mand of the whole. 

Such was the extent of the British force warned for 
field-service in the autumn of 1838. At the same time 
another force was being raised for service across the 
Indus—the force that was to be led by Shah Soojah into 
Afghanistan; that was to be known distinctively as his 
force; but to be raised in the Company’s territories, to be 
commanded by the Company’s officers, and to be paid by 
the Company’s coin. 

To this army was to have been entrusted the work of 
re-establishing the authority of the Suddozye Princes in 

• The 2nd, 5th, 16th, 27th, 28th, Quartennaster-General; Major J. D. 
Slst, 35th, 3_7th, 42nd, 43rd, 48th, Fareons, Deputy Commissary-Gene- 
and 53rd repinenta. ral; M^jorHoi^h, Deputy Advocate- 

t. The principal stafT-officera were General; and Major T. Byrne, As- 
hujor P. Craigie, Deputy Acljutant- sistant Adjutant-General of Queen’a 
General; Major W. Garden, Deputy Trooju. 



SHAH SOOJAH’S FORCE. 


349 


Western A%hanistan; but it had now sunk into a mere 
appendage to the regular army which the Bridsh-Indian 
Government was about to despatch across the Indus; 
and it was plain that, whatever opposition was to be 
encountered, the weight of it would fall; not upon Shah 
Soojah’s raw levies, but upon the disciplined troops of 
the Indian army that were to be sent with them, to 
secure the success of the otherwise doubtful campaign. 
Whatever work there might be in store for them, the 
recruiting went on bravely. For this new service there 
was no lack of candidates in the Upper Provinces of 
India. The Shah himself watched with eager pride the 
formation of the army which was to surround him on his 
return to his own dominions, but was fearful lest the 
undisguised assumption of entire control by the British 
officers appointed to raise his new regiments should de¬ 
prive him of all the kclat of independence with which 
he was so anxious to invest his movements. It was, 
indeed, no easy matter, at this time, to shape our mea¬ 
sures in accordance with the conflicting desires of the old 
King, who wished to have everything done for him, and 
yet to appear as though he did it himself. To Captain 
Wade was entrusted the difficult and delicate duty of 
managing one who, by nature not the most reasonable 
of men, was rendered doubly unreasonable by the ano¬ 
malous position in which he found himself after the rati¬ 
fication of the tripartite treaty. It was difficult, indeed, 
to say what he was at this time. At Loodhianah he had 
hitherto been simply a private individual. He had held 
no recognised position. He had been received with no 
public honours. He had gone hither and thither, almost 
unnoticed. He had excited little interest, and met with 
little attention. Some, perhaps, knew that he had once 
been an A%han monarch, and that he received four 
thousand rupees a month from the British Government 



350 


THE SIBILAH MANIFESTO. 


as a reward for his incapacity and a compensation for his 
bad fortune. Beyond this little was known and nothing 
was cared. But now, suddenly, he had risen up from the 
dust of Loodhianah as a recognised sovereign and framer 
of treaties—a potentate meeting on equal terms with the 
British Government and the Maharajah of the Punjaub. 
He could not any longer be regarded as a mere tradition. 
He had been brought prominently forward into the light 
of the Present; and it was necessary that he should now 
assume in men’s eyes something of the form of royalty 
and the substance of power. 

It was natural that, thus strangely and embarrassingly 
situated, the Shah should have earnestly desired to 
bring his sojourn at Loodhianah to a close, and to 
launch himself fairly upon his new enterprise. The 
interval between the signing of the treaty and the actual 
commencement of the expedition was irksome in the 
extreme to the expectant monarch. It was plain that 
he could not move without his army; he therefore did 
his best to expedite its formation. Constantly attending 
the parade where the work of recruiting was going on, 
he desired personally to superintend both the payment 
and the enlistment of his men; and was fearfiil lest a 
belief should become rooted in the public mind that 
he was not about to return to Afghanistan as an inde¬ 
pendent Prince, ruling his own people on his own ac¬ 
count. The tact and discretion of Captain Wade 
smoothed down all diflSculties. Whilst preventing such 
interference on the part of Shah Soojah as might em¬ 
barrass the movements of the British officers appointed 
to raise and disdpline his regiments, he contrived to 
reconcile the mind of the King to the system in force, by 
directing that certain reports should be made to him on 
parade, and at other times through on appointed agent, 
of the number of men enlisted into his service, and the 



POLITICAL MANAGEMENT OF THE CAMPAIGN. 351 


amount of pay that was due to each.* At the same 
time, it was suggested to the commanding officer of the 
station that, as one entitled to the recc^itions due to 
royalty, the Shah should be saluted by the troops when 
he appeared in public. The suggestion was promptly 
acted upon; and the King, whose inveterate love of forms 
and ceremonies clung to him to the end of his days, re¬ 
joiced in these new demonstrations of respect, and bore 
up till his time of trial was over. 

In the mean while Lord Auckland, having thus mapped 
out a far more extensive scheme of invasion than had 
ever been dreamt of, a few months before, in his most 
speculative moments, was thinking of the agency which 
it was most desirable to employ for the political manage¬ 
ment of the ensuing campaign. It had been determined 
that a British Envoy should accompany Runjeet Singh’s 
army by the Peshawur route, and that another should 
accompany Shah Soqjah’s camp on its march towards the 
western provinces of Afghanistan. There was no diffi¬ 
culty in naming the officer who was to superintend the 
demonstration to be made by the Sikh troops through 
the formidable passes of the Khybur. Captain Wade 
was nominated to this office. He was to be accom¬ 
panied by the eldest son of Shah Soojah, the Prince 
Timour, a man of respectable character, but not very 
brilliant parts, whose presence was to identify the Sikh 
movement with the immediate objects of his father’s 
restoration, and to make obvious to the understandings 
of all men that Runjeet Singh was acting only as Shah 
Soojah’s ally. 

But it was not so easy to determine to whom should 
be entrusted the difficult and responsible duty of direct¬ 
ing the mind of Shah Soojah, and shaping, in all beyond 

* Captain Wade to Mr* Macnaghten^ Loodhianahj September 23rcf, 1838: 
MS* Records. 



THE smi^ MAIHEESTO. 


352 

i 

the immediate line of military operations, the course of 
this great campaign. It seemed at first that the claims 
of Alexander Bumes could not be set aside. No man 
knew the country and the people so well; no man had 
so fairly earned the right to be thus employed. But it 
soon appeared to Bumes himself, sanguine as he was, 
that Lord Auckland designed to place him in a subordi¬ 
nate position; and chafing under what appeared to him a 
slight and an injustice, he declared that he would either 
take the chief place in the British Mission, or go home to 
England in disgust.* But these feelings soon passed 
away. ^ It had been debated whether the chief political 
control should not be placed in the* hands of the com¬ 
mander-in-chief; and Sir Henry Fane, naturally favouring 
an arrangement which would have left him free to act 
as his own judgment or his own impulses might dictate. 


* “ We are now planning a grand 
campaign/* he wrote on the 22nd of 
Julj, “to restore the Shah to the 
throne of Caubul—llussia having 
come down upon us. What exact 
part I am to play I know not, but if 
full confidence and hourly consulta¬ 
tion be any pledge, I am to be chief. 
I can plainly tell them that it is aut 
Ccesar aut nullus, and if I get not 
what I have a right to, you will soon 
see me en route to England.** On 
the 23rd of August he wrote : “ Of 
myself I cannot tell you what is to 
become. The commander-in-chief 
wants to go and to take me—but this 
will not be, and 1 believe the chief 
and Macnaghten will be made a 
commission—Wade and myself poli¬ 
tical agents under them. I plainly 
told Lord Auckland that this does 
not please, and I am disappointed. 
He replied that I could scarcely be 
appointed with the chief in equality, 
and pledged himself to leave me in¬ 
dependent quickly, and in the high¬ 
est appointment. What can I do 
when he tells me I am a man he cannot 


spare. It is an honour, not a disgrace 
to go under Sir Henry; and as for 
Macnaghten, he is secretary for all 
India, and goes pro tern. Besides, I 
am not sorry to see Dost Mahomed 
ousted by another hand than mine.*’ 
—[PnVflfc Correspondence of Sir A. 
Burnes,'] These fetters were written 
to his brother. In another letter 
addressed to Captain Duncan, also 
on the 23rd of August, Bumes wrote : 
“ Of my own destinies, even, I cannot 
as yet give an account. I go as a 
Political Agent with the Shah, but 
whether as the Political Agent re¬ 
mains to be seen. I find I bask in 
favour, but Sir Henry Fane is to go, 
and he must be the Agent; but it is 
even hinted that they will place a 
civilian with him, and employ me in 
advance. Be it so. 1 succeed to the 
permanent employ sdter all is over. 
. . . . The chief wishes to go 

and to take me with him, and I am 
highly obliged for his appreciation.” 
-^mvate Correspondence of Sir A. 
Bumes: MS.^ 



APPOINTMENT OF ME. MACNAGHTBN. 353 

wished to take Burnes with him as his confidential 
adviser. But this plan met with little or no encourage¬ 
ment. The Governor- General appreciated Bumes’s 
talents, but mistrusted his discretion. He thought it 
advisable to place at the stirrup of Shah Soojah an older 
head and a steadier hand. Men, who at this time 
watched calmly the progress of events, and had no pre¬ 
judices and predilections to gratify, and no personal 
objects to serve, thought that the choice of the Governor- 
General would fall upon Colonel Henry Pottinger, who 
had been familiar from early youth with the countries 
beyond the Indus, ancj was now in charge of our political 
relations with the Court of Hyderabad, in Sindh. But 
Lord Auckland had no personal knowledge of Colonel 
Pottinger. There was little identity of opinion between 
them; and the Governor-General recognised the expe¬ 
diency of appointing to such an office a functionary 
with whom he had been in habitual intercourse, who 
was necessarily, therefore, conversant with his views, 
and who would not scruple to carry them out to the 
utmost. 

The choice fell on Mr. Macnaghten. It seems, at one 
time, to have been the design of the Governor-General 
to associate this gentleman with the Commander-in- 
Chief, in a kind of commission for the management of 
our political relations throughout the coming expedi¬ 
tion ;* but this idea seems to have been abandoned. It 
•was finally determined that Mr. W. H. Macnaghten 
should be gazetted as “ Envoy and Minister on the part 
of the Government of India at the Court of Shah 
Soojah-ool-Moolk.” And at the same time it was resolved 
that Captain Burnes should be employed, “ under Mr. 
Macnaghten’s directions, as Envoy to the chief of Kelat 
or other states.” It was believed, at this time, that Shah 

* See Burnes’s correspondence, quoted in a preceding note. 

VOL. I. 2 A 



854 


THE 8IMLAH MANIFEBTO. 


Soojah having been reseated on the throne, Macnaghten 
•would return to Hindostan, leaving Burnes at Caubul, 
as the permanent representative of the British-Indian 
Government at the Court of the Shah. It "was this belief 
that reconciled Burnes to the subordinate office which 
was conferred upon him in the first instance, and made 
him set about the work entrusted to his charge with all 
the zeal and enthusiasm which were so conspicuous in 
his character.* 

And so Burnes was sent on in advance to smooth the 
way for the progress of the Shah through Sindh, whilst 
Macnaghten remained at Simlah to assist the Governor- 
General in the preparation of the great official manifesto 
which was to declare to all the nations of the East 
and of the West the grounds upon which the British 
Government had determined to destroy the power of 
the Barukzye Sirdars, and to restore Shah Soojah-ool- 
Moolk to the throne of his ancestors. 

On the 1st of October the manifesto, long and anxiously 
pondered over in the bureau of the Governor-General, 
received the official signature and was sent to the press. 
Never, since the English in India first began the work 
of King-making, had a more remarkable document issued 

* Lord Auckland, with charac- when the army crosses, to regard you 
teristic kindliness, exerted himself to as an independent political officer to 
allay any feelinp of mortification that co-operate with Macnaghten.’ No- 
may have welled up in Burnes’s thing could be more delicately kind, 
mind; and the latter wisely revoked for I have permission, if I like, to 
his determination to be aut Ccesar send an assistant to Kelat. I start 
autnullus. The extracts from Burnes’s in a week, and drop down the Indus 
letters, given in a preceding note, ex- to Shikarpoor, where, with a brace 
plain the motives that induced him to of Commissaries, I prepare for the ad- 
forego his original resolve ; and the vance of the army and the disburse- 
following passage, from another private ment of many lakhs of rupees. I 
letter, wows still more plainly the care not for the responsibility ; I am 
feelings with which he regarded the firm in the saddle, and have all confi- 
considerate conduct of the Governor- dence. 1 think you will hear the 
General, of whom he writes: “ ‘ I result of my negotiation to be, that 
mean, therefore,’ continued he (Lord the British flag flies at Bukkur.”— 
Aucldan^, ‘ to gazette you as a ^Private Correspondence of Sir A, 
Political Cooixiiisaioner to Kelat, and iwmes.] 



THE SnCLAH MAKIFKSTO. 


866 


from the council-chamber of an Anglo-Indian viceroy. 
It ran in the following words, not one of which should be 
omitted from such a narrative as this: 

DECI.ABAT10N ON THE PAKT OF THE BIGHT HONOTTBABLE 
THE GOVEBNOB-GENEBAI. OF INDIA. 

Simlah, October 1, 1838. 

The Right Hon. the Governor-General of India havings with 
the concurrence of the Supreme Council, directed the assem** 
blage of a British force for service across the Indus, his Lordship 
deems it proper to publish the following exposition of the reasons 
which have led to this important measure. 

It is a matter of notoriety that the treaties entered into by 
the British Government in the year 1832, with the Ameers of 
Sindh, the Newab of Bhawalpore, and Maharajah Runjeet Singh, 
had for their object, by opening the navigation of the Indus, to 
facilitate the extension of commerce, and to gain for the British 
nation in Central Asia that legitimate influence which an inter¬ 
change of benefits would naturally produce. 

With a view to invite the aid of the de facto rulers of Afghan¬ 
istan to the measures necessary for giving full effect to those 
treaties, Captain Burnes was deputed, towards the close of the 
year 1836, on a mission to Dost Mahomed Khan, the chief 
of Caubul. The original objects of that officer’s mission were 
purely of a commercial nature. Whilst Captain Burnes, how¬ 
ever, was on his journey to Caubul, information was received by 
the Governor-General that the troops of Dost Mahomed Khan 
had made a sudden and unprovoked attack on those of our 
ancient ally, Maharajah Runjeet Singh. It was naturally to be 
apprehended that his Highness the Maharajah would not be 
slow to avenge the aggression; and it was to be feared that, the 
flames of war being once kindled in the very regions into which 
we were endeavouring to extend our commerce, the peaceful and 
beneficial purposes of the British Government would be altogether 
frustrated. In order to avert a result so calamitous, the Governor- 
General resolved on authorising Captain Burnes to intimate to 
Dost Mahomed Khan, that if he should evince a disposition to 
come to just and reasonable terms with the Maharajah, his Lord- 

2 a2 



356 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


ship would exert his good offices with his Highness for the resto¬ 
ration of an amicable understanding between the two powers. 
The Maharajah, with the characteristic confidence which he has 
uniformly placed in the faith and friendship of the British nation, 
at once assented to the proposition of the Governor-General, to 
the effect that, in the mean time, hostilities on his part should be 
suspended. 

It subsequently came to the knowledge of the Governor- 
General, that a Persian army was besieging Herat; that intrigues 
were actively prosecuted throughout Afghanistan, for the purpose 
of extending Persian influence and authority to the banks of, and 
even beyond, the Indus; and that the Court of Persia had not 
only commenced a course of injury and insult to the officers of 
her Majesty’s Mission in the Persian territory, but had afforded 
evidence of being engaged in designs wholly at variance with 
the principles and objects of its alliance with Great Britain. 

After much time spent by Captain Burnes in fruitless negotia¬ 
tion at Caiibul, it appeared that Dost Mahomed Khan, chiefly in 
consequence oi’ his reliance upon Persian encouragement and 
assistance, persisted, as respected his misunderstanding with the 
Sikhs, in urging the most unreasonable pretensions, such as the 
Governor-General could not, consistently with justice and his 
regard for the Irlendship of Maharajah Runjeet Singh, be the 
channel of submitting to the consideration of his Highness; that 
he avowed schemes of aggrandisement and ambition injurious to 
the security and peace of the frontiers of India; and that he 
openly threatened, in furtherance of those schemes, to call in 
every foreign aid which he could command. Ultimately he gave 
his undisguised support to the Persian designs in Afghanistan, of 
the unfriendly and injurious character of which, as concerned the 
British power in India, he was well apprised, and by his utter 
disregard of the views and interests of the British Government, 
compelled Captain Burnes to leave Caubul without having effected 
any of the objects of his mission. 

It was now evident that no further interference could be^ exer¬ 
cised by the British Government to bring about a good under¬ 
standing between the Sikh ruler and Dost Mahomed Khan, and 
the hostile policy of the latter chief showed too plainly that, so 
long as Caubul remained under his government, we could never 



THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


357 


hope that the tranquillity of our neighbourhood would be secured, 
or that the interests of our Indian Empire would be preserved 
inviolate. 

The Governor-General deems it in this place necessary to re¬ 
vert to the siege of Herat, and the conduct of the Persian nation. 
The siege of that city has now been carried on by the Persian 
army for many months. The attack upon it was a most unjusti¬ 
fiable and cruel aggression, perpetrated and continued, notwith¬ 
standing the solemn and repeated remonstrances of the British 
Envoy at the Court of Persia, and after every just and becom¬ 
ing ofier of accommodation had been made and rejected. The 
besieged have behaved with a gallantry and fortitude worthy of 
the justice of their cause; and the Governor-General would yet 
indulge the hope that their heroism may enable them to main¬ 
tain a successful defence, until succours shall reach them from 
British India. In the mean time, the ulterior designs of Persia, 
affecting the interests of the British Government, have been, by 
a succession of events, more and more openly manifested. The 
Governor-General has recently ascertained by an official despatch 
from Mr. M‘Neill, her Majesty’s Envoy, that his Excellency has 
been compelled, by a refusal of his just demands, and by a sys¬ 
tematic course of disrespect adopted towards him by the Per¬ 
sian Government, to quit the Court of the Shah, and to make a 
public declaration of the cessation of all intercourse between the 
two Governments. The necessity under which Great Britain is 
placed of regarding the present advance of the Persian arras into 
Afghanistan as an act of hostility towards herself, has also been 
officially communicated to the Shah, under the express order of 
her Majesty’s Government. 

The chiefs of Candahar (brothers of Dost Mahomed Khan of 
Caubul) have avowed their adherence to the Persian policy, with 
the same full knowledge of its opposition to the rights and in¬ 
terests of the British nation in India, and have been openly assist¬ 
ing in the operations against Herat. 

In the crisis of affairs consequent upon the retirement of our 
Envoy from Caubul, the Governor-General felt the importance 
of taking immediate measures for arresting the rapid progress of 
foreign intrigue and aggression towards our own territories. 

His attention was naturally drawn at this conjuncture to the 
position and claims of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, a monarch who, 



358 


THE RTMT.AH MANIFESTO. 


wHen ill power, had cordially acceded to the measures of united 
resistance to external enmity, which were at that time judged 
necessary by the British Government, and who, on his empire 
being usurped by its present rulers, had found an honourable 
asylum in the British dominions. 

It had been clearly ascertained, from the information furnished 
by the various officers who have visited Afghanistan, that the 
Barukzye chiefs, from their disunion and unpopularity, were ill 
fitted, under any circumstances, to be useful allies to the British 
Government, and to aid us in our just and necessary measures of 
national defence. Yet so long as they refrained from proceed¬ 
ings injurious to our interests and security, the British Govern¬ 
ment acknowledged and respected their authority; but a different 
policy appeared to be now more than justified by the conduct of 
those chiefs, and to be indispensable to our own safety. The 
welfare of our possessions in the East requires that we should 
have on our western frontier an ally who is interested in resisting 
aggression, and establishing tranquillity, in the place of chiefs 
ranging themselves in subservience to a hostile power, and seeking 
to promote schemes of conquest and aggrandisement. 

After serious and mature deliberation, the Governor-General 
was satisfied that a pressing necessity, as well as every considera¬ 
tion of policy and justice, warranted us in espousing the cause of 
Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, whose popularity throughout Afghan¬ 
istan had been proved to his Lordship by the strong and unani¬ 
mous testimony of the best authorities. Having arrived at this 
determination, the Governor-General was further of opinion that 
it was just and proper, no less from the position of Maharajah 
Runjeet Singh, than from his undeviating friendship towards the 
British Government, that his Highness should have the offer of 
becoming a party to the contemplated operations. 

Mr. Macnaghten was accordingly deputed in June last to the 
Court of his Highness, and the result of his mission has been the 
conclusion of a triplicate treaty by the British Government, the 
Maharajah, and Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk, whereby his Highness 
is guaranteed in his present possessions, and has bound himself to 
co-operate for the restoration of the Shah to the throne of his 
ancestors. The friends and enemies of any one of the contracting 
parties have been declared to be the friends and enemies of all. 

Various points have been adjusted, which had been the subjects 



THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


359 


of discussion between the British Government and his Highness 
the Maharajah, the identity of whose interests with those of the 
Honourable Company has now been made apparent to all the sur¬ 
rounding States. A guaranteed independence will, upon favor¬ 
able conditions, be tendered to the Ameers of Sindh, and the 
integrity of Herat, in the possession of its present ruler, will be 
fully respected; while by the measures completed, or in progress, 
it may reasonably be hoped that the general freedom and security 
of commerce will be promoted; that the name and just influence 
of the British Government will gain their proper footing among 
the nations of Central Asia; that tranquillity will be established 
upon the most important frontier of India; and that a lasting 
barrier will be raised against hostile intrigue and encroachment. 

His Majesty Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk will enter Afghanistan 
surrounded by his own troops, and will be supported against 
foreign interference and factious opposition by a British army. 
The Governor-General confidently hopes that the Shah will be 
speedily replaced on his throne by his own subjects and adhe¬ 
rents ; and when once he shall be secured in power, and the inde¬ 
pendence and integrity of Afghanistan established, the British 
army will be withdrawn. The Governor-General has been led to 
these measures by the duty which is imposed upon him of pro¬ 
viding for the security of the possessions of the British Crown; but 
he rejoices that, in the discharge of his duty, he will be enabled 
to assist in restoring the union and prosperity of the Afghan 
people. Throughout the approaching operations, British influ¬ 
ence will be sedulously employed to further every measure of 
general benefit, to reconcile differences, to secure oblivion of 
injuries, and to put an end to the distractions by which, for so 
many years, the welfare and happiness of the Afghans have been 
impaired. Even to the chiefs, whose hostile proceedings have 
given just cause of offence to the British Government, it will seek 
to secure liberal and honourable treatment, on their tendering 
early submission, and ceasing from opposition to that course of 
measures which may be judged the most suitable for the general 
advantage of their country. 

By order of the Right Hon. Governor-General of India, 

W. H. Magnaghten, 

Secretary to the Goyemmeat of In<Ua, with the 
Govemor-General. 



360 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


NOTIFICATION. 

With reference to the preceding Declaration, the following ap¬ 
pointments are made:—Mr. W. H. Macnaghten, Secretary to 
Government, will assume the functions of Envoy and Minister on 
the part of the Government of India at the Court of Shah Soojah- 
oohMoolk. Mr. Macnaghten will be assisted by the following 
officers:—Captain A. Burnes, of the Bombay establishment, who 
will be employed, under Mr. Macnaghten’s directions, as Envoy 
to the Chief of Kelat, or other States; Lieutenant E. d’Arcy 
Todd, Bengal Artillery, to be Political Assistant and Military 
Secretary to the Envoy and Minister; Lieutenant Eldred Pottin- 
ger, Bombay Artillery; Lieutenant R. Leech, of the Bombay 
Engineers; Mr. P. B. Lord, of the Bombay Medical Establish¬ 
ment, to be Political Assistants to ditto, ditto; Lieutenant E. B. 
Conolly, 6th Bengal Cavalry, to command the escort of the Envoy 
and Minister, and to be Military Assistant to ditto, ditto; Mr. G. 
J. Berwick, of the Bengal Medical Establishment, to be Surgeon 
to ditto, ditto. 

W. H. Macnaghten, 

Secretary to the Government of India, with the 
Governor-General. 


It was not to be supposed that such a manifesto as 
this could be published in every newspaper in India and 
in Europe, and circulated, in an Oriental dress, throughout 
all the states of Hindostan and the adjoining countries, 
without provoking the keenest and the most searching 
criticism. In India there is, in reality, no public; but if 
such a name can be given to the handful of English 
gentlemen who discuss with little reserve the affairs of 
the government under which they live, the public looked 
askance at it—doubting and questioning its truth. The 
press seized upon it and tore it to pieces.* There was 
not a sentence in it that was not dissected with an un¬ 
sparing hand. If it were not pronounced to be a collec- 

* I do not^ mean that the entire time, it had very few genuine sup- 
pren of_ India and England con- porters; and I know that now it has 
demned it; but I believe that, at the fewer still. 



ITS POLICY CONSIDERED. 


361 


tion of absolute falsehoods, it was described as a most 
disingenuous distortion of the truth. In India every 
war is more or less popular. The constitution of Anglo- 
Indian society renders it almost impossible that it 
should be otherwise. But many, who rejoiced in the 
prospect before them, wished that they were about to 
draw their swords in a better cause; and openly criticised 
the Governor-General’s declaration, whilst they could not 
bring themselves to wish it unwritten. 

Had the relief of Herat been the one avowed object of 
the expedition, a war now to be undertaken for that 
purpose would have had many^more supporters. The 
movement might have been a wise, or it might have been 
an unwise one; but it would have been an intelligible, 
straightforward movement, with nothing equivocal about 
it. It would have been addressed to the counteraction 
of a real, or supposed danger, and would have been 
plainly justifiable as a measure of self-defence. But it 
was not equally clear that because Mahomed Shah made 
war upon Herat, England was justified in making war 
upon Dost Mahomed. The siege of Herat and the 
failure of the Caubul Mission were mixed up together in 
Lord Auckland’s manifesto; but with all his own and his 
secretary’s ingenuity, his Lordship could not contrive, 
any more than I have contrived in this narrative, to make 
the two events hang together by any other than the 
slenderest thread. It was believed at this time that 
Herat would fall; and that Candahar and Caubul would 
then make their obeisance to Mahomed Shah. But we 
had ourselves alienated the friendship of the Barukzye 
Sirdars. They had thrown themselves into the arms of 
the Persian King, only because we had thrust them off. 
We had forced them into an attitude of hostility which 
they were unwilling to assume; and had ourselves ag¬ 
gravated the dangers which we were now about to face 



m 


THE SCAKIFESTO. 


on %he western frontier of A^hanistan. That in the 
summer of 1838, there existed a state of things calling 
for active measures on the part of the British Govern¬ 
ment is not to be denied; but I believe it to be equally 
undeniable that this state of things was mainly induced 
by the feebleness of our own policy towards the Barukzye 
Sirdars. 

The comments which might be made in this place on 
Lord Auckland’s Simlah manifesto have been, for the 
most part, anticipated. How far Dost Mahomed “ per¬ 
sisted in using the most unreasonable pretensions,” and 
“ avowed schemes of aggrandisement and ambition, in¬ 
jurious to the security and peace of the frontiers of 
India,” I have shown in a former chapter. I have 
shown, too, how far the best authorities were of opinion 
that the Barukzye Sirdars were “ ill-fitted, under any 
circumstances, to be useful allies to the British.”* Little 
comment is called for beyond that involved in the recital 
of these facts, the studious suppression of which by the 
government of the day is the best proof of the im¬ 
portance attached to them.f 


* The facts may be briefly repeat¬ 
ed in a note, M‘ij'eill recommended 
the consolidation of Afghanistan un¬ 
der Dost Mahomed. Burncs recom¬ 
mended the same course. Wade re¬ 
commended the government to rely 
upon the disunion of the Barukzye 
Sirdars, and was opposed to consoli¬ 
dation of any kind. 

t The responsibility of this fhmous 
manifesto belongs to Lord Auckland, 
though some of nis colleagues in the 
government at home have declared 
toemselves willing to share it with 
him. Sir John Hobhouse, in 1850, 
told the Ofliciel Salaries Committee, 
in reply to a question on the subject 
of the Afghan war, that he did it 
himself;^* and so far as the announce¬ 
ment went entirely to acquit the East 
India Company of taking part in the 


origination of the war, it is to be 
accepted as a laudable revelation of 
the truth; but although Lord Pal¬ 
merston and Sir John xiobhouse saw 
the expediency of extricating the 
British Government from the diffi¬ 
culties into which the conduct of 
Mahomed Shah had thrown them, by 
encouraging a demonstration from 
the side of India, the expenses of 
which would be thrown upon the 
Indian exchequer, they are to be re¬ 
garded rather as accessories after, 
than before, the fact. The truth is, 
that Lord Auckland had determined 
on the course of policy to be pursued, 
not before the India Board despatches 
were written, but before they were 
received. Sir John Hobhouse stated 
in the House of Commons (June 23, 
1842) that Lord Auckland must not 



OPUIIONg AT BOMB. 


868 


The oldest, the most experieoced, wd the most 
sagacious Indian politicians were of opinion that the ex¬ 
pedition, though it might be attended at the outset with 
some delusive success, would close in disaster and dis¬ 
grace. Among those who most emphatically disapproved 
of the movement and predicted its failure, were the Duke 
of Wellington, Lord Wellesley, Mountstuart Elphinstone, 
Mr. Edmonstone, and Sir Charles Metcalfe.* The Court 


bear the blame of the measure; it 
was the policy of government; and 
he might mention Siat the despatch 
which he wrote, stating his opinion 
of the course that ought to be taken 
in order to meet expected emergen¬ 
cies, and that written by Lord Auck¬ 
land, informing him that the expedi¬ 
tion had already been undertaken, 
crossed each other on the way.” 
When the Whig ministry went out 
of office in the spring of 1839, it 
was believed that the Peel cabinet 
would repudiate the Simlah mani¬ 
festo, and direct a considerable modi¬ 
fication of the measures which were 
to follow the declaration of war. The 
bedchamber emeuie arrested the for¬ 
mation of the Peel ministry; and it 
was mainly to serve Lord Auckland, 
and to escape the disgrace of a public 
reversal of their Indian policy, that 
the Whigs again took the reins of 

f overnment. After this. Sir John 
[obhouse never neglected an oppor¬ 
tunity of publicly identifying him¬ 
self with Lord Auckland’s policy, 
and was not deterred, even by the 
disastrous termination of the war, 
from boasting that he was the author 
of it. 

* The Duke of Wellington said 
that our difficulties would commence 
where onr military successes ended. 
Lord Wellesley always spoke con¬ 
temptuously of the folly of occupy¬ 
ing a land of rocks, sands, deserts, 
ice and snow.” Sir Charles Metcalfe 
from the first protested against Lord 
Auckland’s measures with respect 
to the trade of the Indus; and in 


1835-36, when Mr. Ellis’s proposal 
to assist Dost Mahomed with British 
officers and drill-instructors to disci¬ 
pline his army (anpage 156), came 
down to Calcutta, said, one day after 
council, “ Depend upon it, the surest 
way to bring llussia down upon our¬ 
selves is for us to cross the Indus and 
meddle with the countries beyond it.” 
Mr. Edmonstone always hung down 
his head, and almost groaned aloud, 
when the Afghan expedition was 
named; and Mr. Elphin stone wrote in 
a private letter: “ You will guess what 
I think of afiairs in Caubul. You re¬ 
member when I used to dispute with 
you against having even an agent in 
Caubul, and now we have assumed the 
protection of the state, as much as if 
It were one of the subsidiary allies in 
India. If you send 27,000 men up the 
Durra-i-Bolan to Condahar (as we 
hear is intended), and can feed them, 
I have no doubt you will take Can- 
dahar and Caubul and set up Soojah ; 
but for maintaining him in a poor, 
cold, strong, and remote country, 
among a turbulent people like the 
Afghans, I own it seems to me to be 
hopeless. If you succeed, I fear jrou 
will weaken the position against 
Bussia. The Afghans were neutral, 
and would have received your aid 
against invaders with gratitude—* 
they will now be disaffected and glad 
to join any invader to drive you out, 
I never knew a close alliance Detweeu 
a civilised and an uncivilised state 
that did not end in mutual hatred 
in three years. If the restridnt of 
a close connexion with ua were not 



364 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


of Directors of the East India Company were strongly 
opposed to the war, and had no part in its initiation 
beyond the performance of such mechanical duties as 
are prescribed by act of parliament. The members of 
the Secret Committee are compelled to sign the despatches 
laid before them by the Board of Control; and the Pre¬ 
sident of the Board of Control has unreservedly ad¬ 
mitted that, beyond the mere mechanical act of signing 
the papers laid before them, they had no part in the 
recommendation or authorisation of the war. The policy 
of the East India Company is a policy of non-inter¬ 
ference. They had seldom lost an opportunity of incul¬ 
cating upon their governors the expediency of refrain¬ 
ing from intermeddling with the Trans-Indian states.* 
The temper, indeed, of this great body is essentially paci¬ 
fic ; all the instructions which emanate from them have a 
tendency towards the preservation of peace and the non¬ 
extension of empire; and when tlie merits and demerits 
of their government come to be weighed in the balance, 
it can never be imputed to them that they have been 
eager to draw the sword from the scabbard, or have 
willingly squandered the resources of India upon un¬ 
just and unprofitable wars. 

But it is stated in the manifesto itself that the war 
was undertaken “ with the concurrence of the Supreme 
Council of India.” It would be presumptuous to affirm 
the absolute untruth of a statement thus publicly made 
in the face of the world by a nobleman of Lord Auck- 

enough to make us unpopular, the dated September 20, 1837, there oc- 
connexiou with Runjeet and our curs this remarkable passage : — 
guarantee ofhis conquests must make “With respect to the states west of 
us detested. These opinions formed the Indus, you have uniformly ob- 
at a distance may seem absurd on the served the proper course, which is to 
spot; but I still retain them notwith- have no political connexion with any 
standing all I have yet heard.'’— state or party in those regions, to 
[3f5. CorrespondenceJ] t^e no part in their quarrels, but to 

* In a despatch from the Court of maintain so far as possible a friendly 
Directors to the Governor-General, connexion with all of them,” 



KETTBEMENT op the PERSIAN ABUT. 


365 


land’s unquestionable integrity; but so certain is it that 
the manifesto was not issued with the concurrence of the 
Supreme Council, that when the document was sent down 
to Calcutta to take its place among the records of the 
empire, there issued from the Council-Chamber a respect¬ 
ful remonstrance against the consummation of a measure 
of such grave importance, without an opportunity being 
afforded to the counsellors of recording their opinions 
upon it. The remonstrance went to England, and elicited 
an assurance to the effect that the Governor-Greneral 
could have intended no personal slight to the members 
of the Supreme Council; but those members were far 
too high-minded to have thought for a moment about 
the personalities of the case; they thought only of the 
great national interests at stake, and regretted that they 
should ever be jeopardised by such disregard of the 
opinions of the Governor-General’s legitimate advisers. 
Such a manifesto as this would never have been cradled 
in Calcutta. 

It would not be just, however, to scrutinise the policy 
of Lord Auckland at this time by the light of our after 
experience. We know now that before the Simlah mani¬ 
festo was barely incubated, the Persians had raised the 
siege of Herat,—that, for all purposes of defence against 
encroachments from the westward, the expedition to Kur- 
rack, contemptible as it was in itself, had sufficed. We 
know that the handful of “ rotten Hindoos,” as Maho¬ 
med Shah subsequently designated them, magnified by 
report into an immense armament, had caused that 
monarch to strike his camp before Herat, and march 
back his baffled army to Teheran. But, on the 1st of 
October, 1838, Lord Auckland believed, and had good 
grounds for believing, that the fall of Herat was inevi¬ 
table. At this time it may have been questioned whe¬ 
ther the restoration of Shah Soojah to the sovereignty 



THE SIULAH MANIEESTO. 


of the Douranee Empire were the best means of resisting 
Persian aggression and combating Russian intrigue, but 
few doubted the propriety of doing something to meet 
the dangers that threatened us from these sources. Had 
Herat fallen to the Persian arms, the Barukzye Sirdars, 
without some intervention on our part, would have 
prostrated themselves at the feet of the Persian monarch; 
and Russia would have established an influence in Af¬ 
ghanistan which we should have striven in vain to 
coimteract. There was a real danger, therefore, to be 
feared. Though the means employed were of doubtful 
justice and expediency, the end to be accomplished was 
one of legitimate attainment. 

But before the Simlah proclamation had obtained 
general currency throughout India, authentic intelli¬ 
gence of the retrograde movement of the Persian army 
had reached the camp of the Governor-General. The 
tidings which arrived, in the first instance, from various 
native sources, and had been conveyed to Lord Auck¬ 
land by the political ofiicers on the frontier, were now 
oflicially confirmed. The siege of Herat had been raised. 
Mahomed Shah had “ mounted his horse, Ameerj,” and 
turned his face towards his own capital. The legitimate 
object of the expedition across the Indus was gone. 
All that remained was usurpation and aggression. It 
was believed, therefore, that the army assembling on the 
north-western frontier would be broken up; and Shah 
Soojah and Runjeet Singh left to pursue their own 
policy as might seem most expedient to them. The 
Simlah proclamation had placed the siege of Herat in 
the foreground as the main cause of the contemplated 
expedition; and now that the pretext for the invasion 
of A%hanistan was removed, political consistency seemed 
to require that the sword should be returned to the 
scabbard. With no common anxiety, therefore, was the 



THE HOTEMBBS DECI.ABATION. 


367 


result of this unexpected intelligence from Herat awaited 
by the regiments which had been warned for active 
service, and were now in all the excitement of pre¬ 
paration for a long and adventurous march. The dis¬ 
appointment anticipated by many descended only upon a 
few. On the 8th of November, all doubts were set at 
rest, and all anxieties removed by the publication of an 
order by the Governor-General, setting forth that, al¬ 
though the siege of Herat had been raised, the expedi¬ 
tion across the Indus would not be abandoned: 

OBDERS BT THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL 
OF INDIA. SECRET DEPARTMENT. 

Camp de Buddee, 8th November. 

The Right Hon. the Governor-General of India is pleased to 
publish, for general information, the subjoined extract of a letter 
from Lieutenant-Colonel Stoddart, dated Herat, the 10th Sep¬ 
tember, 1838, and addressed to the Secretary to the Government 
of India. 

“ I have the honour, by direction of her Britannic Majesty's 
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, and the Hon. 
East India Company's Envoy at the Court of Persia, to acquaint 
you, for the information of the Right Hon. the Governor- 
General of India in Council, that his Majesty the Shah of Persia 
yesterday raised the siege of this city, and with the whole of 
the royal camp marched to Sangbust, about twelve miles, on his 
return to his own dominions. His Majesty proceeds without 
delay, by Torrbut Sheki Jaum and Meshid, to Teheran, 

This is in fulfilment of his Majesty's compliance with the 
demands of the British Government, which I had the honour of 
delivering on the 12th inst., and of the whole of which his 
Majesty announced his acceptance on the 14th of August. 

“ His Majesty Shah Kamran and his Vuzeer, Yar Mahomed 
Khan, and the whole city, feel sensible of the sincerity of the 
friendship of the British Government, and Mr. Pottinger and 
myself fidly participate in their gratitude to Providence for the 
happy event I have now the honour to report." 

In giving publicity to this important intelligence, the Governor- 



368 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


General deems it proper at the same time to notify, that while he 
regards the relinquishment by the Shah of Persia of his hostile 
deigns upon Herat as a just cause of congratulation to the 
Government of British India and its allies, he will continue to 
prosecute with vigour the measures which have been announced, 
with a view to the substitution of a friendly for a hostile power in 
the eastern provinces of Afghanistan, and to the establishment of 
a permanent barrier against schemes of aggression upon our north¬ 
west frontier. 

The Right Hon. the Governor-General is pleased to appoint 
Lieutenant Eldred Pottlnger, of the Bombay Artillery, to be 
Political Agent at Herat, subject to the orders of the Envoy and 
Minister at the Court of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. This appoint¬ 
ment is to have effect from the 9th of September last, the date on 
which the siege of Herat was raised by the Shah of Persia. 

In conferring the above appointment upon Lieutenant Pottin- 
ger, the Governor-General is glad of the opportunity afforded him 
of bestowing the high applause which is due to the signal merits 
of that officer, who was present in Herat during the whole period 
of its protracted siege, and who, under circumstances of peculiar 
danger and difficulty, has, by his fortitude, ability, and judgment, 
honourably sustained the reputation and interests of his country. 

By order of the Right Hon. the Governor-General of India, 

W. H. Macnaghten, 

Secretary to the Government of India, with the 
Governor-General. 

When the Persian army was before Herat—when the 
Afghan garrison was on the eve of surrender—when 
the chiefs of Caubul and Candahar were prostrating 
themselves at the feet of Mahomed Shah, the expedition 
for the restoration of Shah Soojah was one of doubtful 
honesty and doubtful expediency. The retrogression of 
the Persian army removed it at once from the category 
of questionable acts. There was no longer any question 
about it. The failure of Mahomed Shah cut from under 
the feet of Lord Auckland all ground of justification, 
and rendered the expedition across the Indus at once a 



INEXPEDIENCT OP THE EXPEDITION. 


369 


folly and a crime. The tripartite treaty did not pledge 
the British Government to send a single soldier beyond 
the frontier. The despatch of a British army into the 
heart of Afghanistan was no part of the covenant either 
with Eunjeet Singh or Shah Soojah. It was wholly an 
after-thought. When Macnaghten, after his conferences 
with the Maharajah of the Punjaub and the ex-King of 
Caubul, returned to Simlah to lay the result of his 
mission before the Governor-General, the British Go¬ 
vernment had pledged itself only to furnish a handful of 
European oflScers to raise and discipline the Shah’s regi¬ 
ments; and so little had any obligation been imposed 
upon us to surround the ex-King with our battalions, 
on his restoration to his old dominions, that he himself 
expressed an eager hope that he would be suffered to 
advance as an independent prince, and not as a mere 
puppet in our hands.*^ 

To march a British army into Afghanistan was not, 
therefore, an obligation upon the Indian Government; it 
was their deliberate choice. The avowed object of the 
expedition, as set forth in the November declaration, was 
the establishment of a friendly power in Afghanistan. 
But the subversion of an existing dynasty could only be 
justified on the ground that its hostility threatened to 
disturb the peace and tranquillity of our own dominions. 
Whatever the hostility of the Barukzye Sirdars may have 
been when Mahomed Shah was before the gates of 
Herat, it had now ceased to be formidable. It was 
obvious that the chiefs of Caubul and Candahar were 
little likely to exaggerate the power of a Prince that 
had brought all his military resources to bear upon the 
reduction of a place of no reputed strength, and, after an 

• A general assurance had been British Government would advance 
given to Runjeet Singh, in reply to a to their aid; but he bad failed to elicit 
difficulty started by himself, that if from Macnaghten any more specific 
the allies met with any reverses, the promise of co-operation. 

VOL. I. 2 B 



870 


THE SIMLAH MANIFESTO. 


ineffectual struggle of nine months’ duration, had re¬ 
treated, either because he was unequal to the longer con¬ 
tinuance of the contest, or because the British Govern¬ 
ment had landed 500 Sepoys on an island in the Persian 
Gulf. It was only in connexion with the Russo-Persian 
movement that an aUiance with the rulers of Afghanistan 
had become a matter of concernment to the British Go¬ 
vernment. It was only by a reference to the crisis which 
had thus arisen that the Indian Government could in 
any way justify their departure from the course of non¬ 
interference laid down by the Court of Directors, and re¬ 
cognised by Lord Auckland and his predecessors. But 
now that the danger, to the counteraction of which the ex¬ 
pedition across the Indus was directed, had passed away, 
the expedition was still to be undertaken. A measure so 
hazardous, and so costly, as the march of a British army 
to the foot of the Hindoo-Koosh, was only justifiable so 
long as it was absolutely indispensable to the defence of 
our Indian possessions; but if so extreme a measure had 
ever been, it was no longer necessary, to the security of 
India, now that the army of Mahomed Shah, defeated 
and disgraced, was on its way back to the capital of 
Persia. The expedition now to be undertaken had no 
longer any other ostensible object than the substitution 
of a monarch, whom the people of Afghanistan had 
repeatedly, in emphatic, scriptural language, spued out, 
for those Barukzye chiefs who, whatever may have been 
the defects of their government, had contrived to main¬ 
tain themselves in security, and their country in peace, 
with a vigour and a constancy unknown to the luckless 
Suddozye Princes. Had we started with the certainty 
of establishing a Mendly power and a strong government 
in Afghanistan, the importance of the end would have 
borne no just relation to the magnitude of the means to be 
employed for its accomplishment. But at the best it was 



INJUSTICE OP THE EXPEDITIONi 


371 


a mere experiment. There were more reasons why it 
should fail than why it should succeed.* It was com¬ 
menced in defiance of every consideration of political and 
military expediency; and there were those who, arguing 
the matter on higher grounds than those of mere ex¬ 
pediency, pronounced the certainty of its failure, because 
there was a canker of injustice at the core. It was, 
indeed, an experiment on the forbearance alike of Grod 
and of man; and therefore, though it might dawn in 
success and triumph, it was sure to set in failure and 
disgrace. 


* Shah Soojah Himself said tHat 
there would be little chance of his 
becoming popular in Afghanistan, if 
he returned to the country openly 
and avowedly supported, not by his 
own troops, but by those of the 
Feringhees. Even the less overt as¬ 
sistance of an infidel government 
was likely to cast discredit upon 
the undertaking in the eyes of “ true 
believers.” The Shah talked about 
the bigotry of the Mahomedans; 
but it was plain that he had his mis¬ 
givings on the subject. “ During a 
visit,says Captain Wade, “ which I 
paid to the Shah, the day before 
yesterday, he informed me that some 
Mahomedans of Delhi had been 
writing to him, to inquire how he 
could reconcile it to his conscience, 
as a true believer in the Koran, to 
accept the assistance of a Christian 
peome to recover his kingdom. The 
Shah said that he contemplated with 
pity the bigotry of these people, and 


began to quote a passage of the Koran 
to prove their ignorance of its doc¬ 
trines with reference to the subject on 
which they had presumed to address 
him. Having a day or two previously 
received information that the Newab 
of Bhopal had made a particular re¬ 
quest of his Lordship to be permitted 
to place a party of his kinsmen and 
retainers at the service of the British 
Government, on the present occasion 
from the desire which he had to testify 
his deep sense of gratitude to it for 
the manner in which it had watched 
and protected the interests of their 
family in every necessitude of their 
political existence, I mentioned the 
circumstance to his Majesty, to show 
the different views that prevailed 
among the followers of the faith, both 
with regard to their duty to the state 
and to their religion .”—^Captain 
Wade to Mr. Macnaghten: October 6, 
1838. MS. Records.’] 


2b2 



872 


THE ARMY Ot THE INDUS. 


BOOK III. 
[1838—-1839.] 


CHAPTER I. 


The Army of the Indus—Gathering at Ferozepore—Eesignation of Sir 
Henry Fane—Route of the Army—Passage through Bahwulpore—The 
Ameers of Sindh—The Hyderabad Question—Passage of the Bolan Pass 
—Arrival at Candahar. 

The army destined for the occupation of Afghanistan 
assembled at Ferozepore, on the north-western frontier 
of the British dominions, in the latter part of the month 
of November. It had been agreed that the expedition 
across the Indus should be inaugurated by a grand 
ceremonial meeting between Lord Auckland and Run- 
jeet Singh;* and that the troops of the two nations 
should be paraded before the illustrious personages, 
there reciprocating hospitalities and interchanging other 
marks of friendship and respect. 

The Governor-General reached Ferozepore on the 
27th of November. The Commander-in-Chief and the 
infantry of the Army of the Indus had arrived a day or 

• The meeting was agreed upon complishment, on the ground of the 
TOfore the British Government had expense that he was obliged to incur 
determined to cross the Indus ; and in Keeping his troops together. 
Runjeet complained of its tardy ac- 



EECEPTION or BUNJBET SINGH. 


373 


two before; and on the following day the main body of 
the cavalry and artillery took up their ground on the 
plain.* On the 29th,f the first meeting between Lord 
Auckland and Bunjeet Singh took place amidst a scene 
of indescribable uproar and confusion. The camp of 
the Governor-General was pitched at the distance of 
some four miles fi'om the river Gharra, In the centre 
of a wide street of tents were those set apart for the 
purposes of the Durbar. A noble guard of honour 
lined the way, as amidst the roar of artillery and the 
clang of military music, Bunjeet Singh, escorted by 
the English secretaries and some of the principal poli¬ 
tical and military oflGicers in camp, rode up, in the centre 
of a line of elephants, to the Durbar tent. The Gover¬ 
nor-General and the Commander-in-Chief came forth to 
meet them. Then came the crush of the two lines of 
elephants, urged forward by the goads of their drivers, 
and meeting with a terrific shock—the clangour of a 
tumultuous crowd of Sikh horsemen and footmen—a 
rush of English officers eager to see the show; and, pre¬ 
sently, amidst such tumult and such noise as had sel¬ 
dom before been seen or heard, the elephants of the 
Governor-General and the Maharajah were* Brought 
side by side, and Lord Auckland, in his uniform of 
diplomatic blue, was seen to take a bundle of crimson 
cloth out of the Sikh howdah, and it was known that 
the lion of the Punjaub was then seated on the elephant 
of the English ruler. In a minute the little, tottering, 
one-eyed man, who had founded a vast empire on the 

♦ It is generally acknowledged that rity on such points, says: “ A force 
nothing could have been more orderly, has never been brought together in 
or more creditable both to the regi- any country, in a manner more ere- 
ments and their commanding officers, ditable and soldier-like than was the 
than the style in which all the com- Bengal portion of the Army of the 
ponents of the “ Army of the Indus” Indus.” 

made their way to Ferozepore. Cap- f Captain Havelock says the 28th 
tain Havelock, an excellent autho- —‘Colonel Fane, the 29th. 



374 


THE ABMY OB' THE INDUS. 


banks of the fabulous rivers of the Macedonian con¬ 
quests, was leaning over the side of the howdah shaking 
hands with the principal officers of the British camp as 
their elephants were wheeled up beside him. Then the 
huge phalanx of elephants was set in motion again. 
There was a rush towards the Durbar tent—the Eng¬ 
lish and the Sikh cortige were mixed up together in 
one great mass of animal life. Such was the crush— 
such was the struggle—that many of the attendant 
Sikhs believed that there was a design to destroy their 
old decrepit chief, and “ began to blow their matches 
and grasp their weapons with an air of mingled distrust 
and ferocity.”* But in time a passage was made, and 
the imbecile little old man was to be seen tottering into 
the Durbar tent, supported on one side by the Governor- 
General, and on the other by Sir Henry Fane, whose 
fine manly proportions and length of limb, as he forced 
his way through the crowd, presented a strange contrast 
to the puny dimensions of the Sikh chieftain who leant 
upon his arm. 

In the tent the ladies of the Governor-General’s 
family, and those of some of the principal military and 
political officers, were seated, ready to receive his High¬ 
ness. The customary formalities were gone through, 
and civilities interchanged; and then the Maharajah 
was conducted into an inner chamber, where the pre¬ 
sents intended for his reception were laid out in costly 
and curious array. Here, a picture of Queen Victoria, 
from the easel of Miss Eden, whose felicitous pencil has 
rendered the European eye familiar with the persons of 
many of the principal Sikh chieftains who graced the 
Ferozepore gathering, was presented to Bunjeet Singh. 

* Captain Havelock's i^arra/ive— Years in India ; and Mr. Stocqueler's 
from wnich this description has been Memorials of Afghanistan also con- 
mainly written; Colonel Fane's Five tributes some det^. 



VISIT TO BUNJEET SINGH. 


375 


Sir Willoughby Cotton bore it, with becoming reverence, 
into the tent, and as he presented it to the Maharajah, 
who bowed before it, the guns of the camel battery 
roared forth a royal salute. Then Runjeet was escorted 
to another tent, where specimens of British ordnance, 
caparisoned elephants, and horses of noble figure, stood 
ready for his Hi g hn ess’s acceptance. All these were 
inspected with due expressions of admiration and a be¬ 
coming interchange of courtesies, and then, amidst an 
uproar of hurras, a crash of military music, and another 
scene of indescribable confusion, Runjeet Singh as¬ 
cended his elephant and turned his back upon the 
British camp.* 

On the following day Lord Auckland returned the 
visit of Runjeet Singh. It was said by one present 
on this occasion, that the Sikhs “shone down the 
English.”f The camp of the Maharajah was on the 
other side of the river; and there, amidst a scene of 
Oriental splendour, difficult to describe or imagine, the 
great Sikh chieftain received the representative of the 
British nation. The splendid costumes of the Sikh 
Sirdars—the gorgeous trappings of their horses—^the 
glittering steel casques and corslets of chain armour— 
the scarlet and yellow dresses—the tents of crimson and 
gold—^made up a show of Eastern magnificence equally 
grand and picturesque. As the Maharajah saluted the 
Governor-General, the familiar notes of the national 
anthem arose from the instruments of a Sikh band, and 
the guns of the Kalsa roared forth their expected wel- 

♦ “ It is worthy of notice that a tive.'\ Remembering how the Sikh 
strange accident befel the old Maha- Empire fell before the British guns 
rajah in the tent containing the at Groojrat, we may at least observe 
larger g^ of the British Govern- that this was a cipious type of the 
ment. *^e was not very firm on his destiny then awaiting the great king* 
legs at any time, but here he had the dom founded by Runjeet Bingh. 
misfortune to stumble over a pile of t StocqueUr'sMemorkilaofAfglianr 
shells, and fell prostrate before the istan. 

British guns.”—[Raveioch’s Narra^ 



376 


THE AKMY OF THE INDUS. 


come. In the splendid Durbar tent of the ruler of the 
Punjaub, the British Statesman and British General, 
after the due formalities had been observed and some 
conversation had been carried on through the medium 
of interpreters, were regaled with an unseemly display 
of dancing girls, and the antics of some male buffoons. 
The evening entertainments were still less decorous. It 
was a melancholy thing to see the open exhibition, even 
on this great public occasion, of all those low vices 
which were destroying the life, and damning the repu¬ 
tation, of one in whom were some of the elements 
of heroism—who, indeed, but for these degrading sen¬ 
sualities, would have been really one of the greatest, 
as he was one of the most remarkable, men of modern 
times. 

Then came a grand display of the military resources 
of the two nations. On one day the British force was 
manoeuvred by Sir Henry Fane, and on another the 
Sikh troops were exercised by the Sirdars. The con¬ 
summate skill with which the British chief attacked an 
imaginary enemy was equalled by the gallantry with 
which he defeated it. He fought, indeed, a great battle 
on the plain, and only wanted another army in his .front 
to render his victory a complete one. The Sikh Sirdars 
were contented with less elaborate movements; but 
what their troops were ordered to do they did readily 
and well, and military critics in the British camp ad¬ 
mitted that their allies made no contemptible show of 
the tactics which they had learnt from their French 
instructow.* 

Runjeet Singh returned to Lahore, and the Governor- 
General followed him, on a complimentary visit, to the 
Sikh capital; whilst the British troops prepared to cross 

For an account of the manoeuvres both of the British and Sikh divisions, 
see Captain Havelock's Narrative, 



KEDUCTION OF THE ABMY. 


377 


the frontier in furtherance of the objects mapped out in 
the great Simlah manifesto. But there was no longer a 
Persian army to be encountered at Herat—no longer 
a Russian force in the background. The expedition 
had lost half its popularity with the army; and the 
force that was to take the field had been shorn of a 
portion of its original dimensions. On the 27th of 
November it had been publicly announced by the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, “ that circumstances in the countries 
west of the Indus had so greatly changed since the 
assembly of the army for service, that the Governor- 
General had deemed that it was not requisite to send 
forward the whole force; but that a part only would be 
equal to effecting the future objects in view.” It had 
become the duty therefore of the Commander-in-Chief to 
determine what regiments should cross the Indus, and 
what should remain in Hindostan. Sir Henry Fane had 
selected for service the corps whose efficiency, on his 
recent tour of inspection, had been most clearly demon¬ 
strated; and now that it devolved upon him to dash the 
hopes of some of these regiments, unwilling to make an 
invidious choice, he had decided the difficult question by 
lot. Instead of two divisions, the Bengal army was now 
to consist of one, under the command of Sir Willoughby 
Cotton. The brigades of infantry commanded by 
Colonels Denniss and Paul were to be left behind ;* the 

* These brigades consisted of the the one had seldom been at fault in 
3rd Buffs, the 2nd, 27th, 5th, 20th, India or in Europe; the other was 
and 53rd Regiments of Native In- above suspicion. Sortilege, after all, 
fantry. Captain Havelock and other did little for the army ii^ne instance ; 
military authorities have condemned for it sent forward to Ine labours of 
this decision by lot. It is said that the campaign the 13th Light Infantry, 
the principle of selection should have then as ever zealous, indeed, and full 
been adhered to on the reduction, as of alacrity, but even at Ferozepore 
well as on the formation of the force, shattered by disease ; the spirit of its 
^*Sir Henry Fane,” says Captain soldiers willing, but unequal to the 
Havelock, “ need not thus have dis- task ; whilst it doomed to inactivity 
trusted or paid so poor a compliment the Buffs, one of the most effective 
to his own sagacity and impartiality; European corps in India.” This is 



378 


THE ABMT OP THE INDUS. 


Irregular Cavalry, under that fine old veteran, Colonel 
Skinner, of the Local Hoirse, were to share the same 
fate; and the artillery force, greatly reduced in strength, 
now lost its Brigadier (Colonel Graham), and was order¬ 
ed to go forward under Major Pew, who had organised 
the camel battery, and had joined the brigade in com¬ 
mand of that experimental section of the ordnance corps. 
Nor were these the only changes which the intelligence 
of the defeat of Mahomed Shah had wrought upon the 
Bengal force. Sir Henry Fane, as Commander-in-Chief 
of the Indian army, had determined to take command in 
person of the forces assembled for the expedition across 
the frontier. The assemblage of regiments ordered upon 
this service was to be called “ The Army of the Indus.” 
Both the extent of the force, and the objects of the 
expedition, seemed to demand the supervision of the 
chief military authority in the country. But now that 
the force had been greatly reduced, and the objects of 
the campaign had dwindled down into a measure of 
interference with the internal government of an inde¬ 
pendent country. Sir Henry Fane had no ambition to 
command such a force, or to identify himself with such 
an expedition. There was no want of physical energy 
or mental vigour in the man, but his health was failing 
him at this time; and it was expedient that he should 
altogether escape from the fiery climate of the Eastern 
world. He determined, therefore, to resign the command 
of the expedition into other hands, and to set his face 
towards his native land. 

Sir John Keane, the Commander-in-Chief of the Bom¬ 
bay army, was coming round from the western pre- 

the impartial testimonv of an officer chance which gent Sale and Dennigg 
of the ISth Li^ht Infantry. It was into Afghanistan, and associated the 
written immediately after the first name of the 18 th Light Infantiy with 
mmpai^ of the Army of the Indus, some of the most illustrious incidents 
No writer would now regret the of the war. 



SIB HENRY FANE AND SIB JOHN KEANE. 


379 


sidency, in command of the Bombay division, which 
was to be conveyed by water firom that port to Kurra- 
chee. On the junction of the two divisions, the chief 
command would fall into his hands. In Sir Henry 
Fane the Bengal army had unbounded confidence. 
They knew him to be a strict, but a good officer. They 
may have thought that he made of too much account 
external forms and appearances, better suited to the mild, 
cloudy atmosphere of Great Britain than to the fiery 
skies of Hiudostan. But they admired the energy of his 
character; the decision of his judgment; the promptitude 
of all his actions. The initial measures which had been 
entrusted to him had been carried out with remarkable 
ability. There was a coolness in all that he did; a 
clearness in all that he said; which inspired with un¬ 
limited confidence the officers with whom he was asso¬ 
ciated. They knew that he had the welfare of the 
army at heart;—that their safety and honour could not 
be confided to one less likely to abuse the trust. It was 
with no common regret, therefore, that they saw him 
yield into other hands the command of the Army of the 
Indus. Of Sir John Keane they knew little, and what 
little they did know did not fill them with any very 
eager desire to place themselves under his command. 

Such was the position of affairs at the commencement 
of December. The Bengal army, then encamped at 
Ferozepore, consisted of about 9500 men of all arms. 
The levy that had been raised for the immediate service 
of Shah Soojah was then passing through Ferozepore. 
It comprised two regiments of cavalry; four regiments of 
infantry; and a troop of horse artillery—^in all, about 
6000 men. It had marched from Loodhianah on the 
15th of November, under the command of Major-General 
Simpson; and was now about, on the 2nd of December, 
to commence its progress across the frontier. On the 



380 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


10th of the same month the Bengal division was to 
break ground from Ferozepore. 

The line of march to be followed by the invading 
army ran, in a south-westerly direction, through the 
territories of Bahwulpore, and thence crossed, near 
Subzulkote, the frontier of Sindh, striking down to the 
banks of the Indus, and crossing the river at Bukkur. 
It then took a north-westerly course, passing through 
Shikarpoor, Bhag, and Dadur to the mouth of the Bolan 
Pass; thence through the pass to Quettah, and from 
Quettah, through the Kqjuck, to Candahar. A glance 
at any map of the countries on the two sides of the 
Indus will satisfy the reader at once that this was a 
strangely devious route from Ferozepore to Candahar. 
The army was about to traverse two sides of a triangle, 
instead of shaping its course along the third. 

But it was hardly a subject for after-consideration, 
when the tripartite treaty had been signed, what route 
should be taken by the army destined for the restoration 
of Shah Soqjah to his old dominions. It had from 
the first been intended that the Shah should proceed 
through the Sindh country, whilst Runjeet’s troops 
were advancing through the Khybur Pass. It was 
not, indeed, a geographical but a political question. It 
was necessary that the army should proceed through 
Sindh, for the Ameers were to be coerced. 

It had been determined, in the first instance, that 
twenty lakhs of rupees should be paid by the Ameers 
of Sindh, as ransom-money, for Shikarpoor. Runjeet, 
as has been seen, asked for more than a moiety of the 
money, which it was proposed to divide equally between 
him and Shah Soojah; and, as it was not deemed ex¬ 
pedient by the British Government to gratify Runjeet’s 
cupidity at the expense of the King, it was determined 
that the amount demanded from the Ameers should be 



THE AMEERS OR SIHDH. 


381 


increased, and that Runjeet should receive fifteen in¬ 
stead of ten lakhs, without injury to the claims of his 
ally. But there seemed to be some doubt whether the 
Ameers would consent to pay the money thus appro¬ 
priated to others’ uses. The Shikarpoor question, in¬ 
deed, required some definite settlement by Shah Soojah 
himself; and as Shah Soojah was to proceed through 
Sindh, for the purpose of bringing the Ameers to a 
proper imderstanding of their duties, it was necessary 
that the British army that escorted him should march 
by the same route. 

That the Ameers should have demurred to the pay¬ 
ment of the money claimed by an exile of thirty years’ 
standing would, under any circumstances, have been a 
result of the demand exciting no purprise in the mind of 
any reasonable being on one side of the Indus or on the 
other. But that, having already received a formal re¬ 
lease from the Shah, they should have objected to the 
revival of an abandoned claim, is something so natu¬ 
ral and so intelligible that it would have been a miracle 
if they had not resisted the demand. Colonel Pottinger 
saw this at once : he saw the injustice of the whole pro¬ 
ceeding; and he wrote to the Supreme Government: 
“ The question of a money-payment by the Ameers 
of Sindh to Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk is, in my humble 
opinion, rendered very puzzling by two releases written 
in Korans, and sealed and signed by his Majesty, which 
they have produced. Their argument now is, that they 
are sure the Governor-General does not intend to make 
them pay again for what they have already bought and 
obtained, in the most binding way, a receipt in full.”* 

Injustice ever begets injustice. It was determined by 
the Simlah Council that Shah Soojah and the Army of 


Colonel H, Pottinger to Government: Puhlished Papers relating to Sindh, 



S82 


THE ABMT OF THE ITOTJS. 


the Indue should be sent through the country of the 
Ameers. To accomplish this, it was necessary that, in 
the first instance, an existing treaty should be set aside. 
When the Ameers consented to open the navigation of 
the Indus, it was expressly stipulated that no militaiy 
stores should be conveyed along the river. But as soon 
as ever Lord Auckland had resolved to erect a friendly 
power in Afghanistan, and to march a British army 
across the Indus, it became necessary to tear this pro¬ 
hibitory treaty to shreds, and to trample down the 
scruples of the Ameers. “ Whilst the present exigency 
lasts,” it was intimated to Colonel Pottinger, “ you may 
apprise the Ameers that the article of the treaty with 
them, prohibiting the using of the Indus for the convey¬ 
ance of military stores, must necessarily be suspended 
during the course of operations undertaken for the per¬ 
manent establishment of security to all those who are 
a party to the treaty.” And that there might be no 
miscomprehension of the general course of policy, 
which the Governor-General desired to pursue towards 
the Ameers, a letter was addressed to Colonel Pottinger, 
stating that “he (the Governor-General) deems it hardly 
necessary to remind you that in the important crisis 
at which we are arrived, we cannot permit our enemies 
to occupy the seat of power: the interests at stake are 
too great to admit of hesitation in our proceedings; and 
not only they who have shown a disposition to favour 
our adversaries, but they who display an unwillingness 
to aid us in the just and necessary* undertaking in 
which we are engaged, must be displaced, and give way 
to others on whose friendship and co-operation we may 

♦ Just and necessary r 

-Earth is sick, 

And Heayen is weary of the hollow words 
Which States and Kingdoms utter when they talk 
Of truth and justice. 



IKJUSTICB TO THE AMEEBS. 


383 


be able implicitly to rely.” This was the dragooning 
system now to be carried out in ’ Sindh. Sensible of 
the injustice of such proceedings, and the discreditable 
breach of faith that they involved, Colonel Pottinger did 
his best to soften down these intimations; but still the 
naked fact remained, that if the Ameers of Sindh dis¬ 
played any unwillingness to co-operate with the parties 
to a treaty under which they were to be fined a quarter 
of a million of money, they were at once to be dra¬ 
gooned into submission and deprived of their posses¬ 
sions, at the point of our bayonets and the muzzles of 
our guns.* 

The system now to be adopted was one of universal 
intimidation and coercion. Along the whole line of 
country which the armies were to traverse, the will and 
pleasure of the British Government was to be the only 
principle of action recognisable in all our transactions 
with the weaker States, which were now to be dragooned 
into prompt obedience. Their co-operation was not to 
be sought, but demanded. Anything short of hearty 
acquiescence was to be interpreted into a national of¬ 
fence. The Khan of Bahwulpore and the Ameers of 
Sindh were ordered not only to suffer the passage of our 

* I do not intend to enter into the tow.] A letter, also said to have 
politics of .Sindh more than is abso- been written by the Persian King to 
lutely necessary to the elucidation of two of the Ameers (Mahomed lUian 
the history of the war in Afghanistan; and Nussur Khan), acknowledging 
but it ought to be mentioned here the receipt of letters from them 
that the harsh and unjust treatment and exhorting them to look to him 
of the Ameers in 1838-39 has been for protection, was forwarded from 
defended or extenuated upon the Khelat to Kunjeet Sin^, who sent 
grounds of an alleged traitorous cor- it in through Captain W'ade to the 
respondence with Mahomed Shah of Govemor-GeneraL But Major Todd, 
Persia. A letter from one of the who by this time had joined Shah 
Ameers to the King of Kings*’ was Soojah at Loodhianah, did not hesi- 
intercepted, but Colonel Pottinger tate to pronounce it, from its style 
declared that it was of no political and language, to be a palpable fabri- 
importance, but simply an ebullition cation.’— [Captoin Wade to Mr, 
of Sheeahism, addressed to Mahomed Macnaghten: October MS. 

Shah as Defender of the Faiths lUcord^.'] 

[Corretpondence relating to Afghanis^ 



384 


THE ABMY OP THE INDUS. 


troops through their dominions, but also to supply them 
on their way. The former had ever been regarded as 
one of the staunchest friends of the British Government ; 
but when he was called upon to collect camels and to 
place supplies at the different stages for the use of the 
array, the work was carried on with obvious reluctance. 
It was found necessary to remind the Khan of his “ ob¬ 
ligations” and “responsibilities.” The officers of the 
Khan affected to believe that the British force would 
not march, and, whilst laying in supplies for the Shah’s 
troops, hesitated to make an effort in behalf of our 
supporting columns. The “obstinacy and perversity” 
—the “duplicity and equivocation”—the “neglectful, 
if not reckless conduct of the Bahwulpore authorities,” 
was severely commented upon by our political officers;* 
and it was apprehended that the march of the army 
would be delayed by the misguided conduct of our 
respectable ally. 

The reluctance of the Bahwulpore authorities was 
soon overcome; but the demands made upon the for¬ 
bearance of the Ameers of Sindh were of a more 
oppressive and irritating character. The Bahwul 
Khan has ever been held up to admiration as the 
most consistently friendly of all the allies of the British 
Government; but the expedition was distasteful to him 
and his people, and the real feeling broke out in the 
beginning, though, after a while, it Avas suppressed. It 
is not strange, therefore, that the Talpoor Ameers, of 
whom so much more was demanded, should have 
co-operated somewhat unwillingly in a measure which 
had openly exacted from them a large amount of 
treasure, and was not unlikely in the end to deprive 
them of all that they possessed. Interpreted into 


Captain Wade to Mr, Macnaghten: Nw, 8 and 9, 1838. MS. Becords. 



THE AMBERS OF SINDH. 


385 


homely English, the language now to be addressed to 
these unhappy Princes was simply, “ Tour money or 
your life/’ Colonel Pottinger was the agent employed, 
in the first instance, to dictate terms to the Court of 
Hyderabad; but he was too clear-headed and too high- 
minded a man not to perceive the injustice of the course 
prescribed by his government, and to feel painfully un¬ 
willing to pursue it. The instructions he had received, 
divested of the specious outside dress of diplomatic 
phraseology, and rendered in plain English by Colonel 
Pottinger himself, were truly of a startling character. 
The British agent was directed to tell the Ameers that 
“ the day they connected themselves with any other 
power than England would be the last of their inde¬ 
pendence, if not of their rule.” “ Neither,” it was 
added, “ the ready power to crush and annihilate them, 
nor the will to call it into action, were wanting, if it 
appeared requisite, however remotely, for the safety or 
integrity of the Anglo-Indian Empire or frontier.” The 
Ameers were known to be weak; and they were be¬ 
lieved to be wealthy. Their money was to be taken; 
their country to be occupied; their treaties to be set 
aside at the point of the bayonet, but amidst a shower 
of hypocritical expressions of friendship and good-will. 

Whilst Colonel Pottinger, not without some scruples, 
was enclosing the Ameers of Lower Sindh in the toils 
of his diplomacy. Captain Burnes, who by this time had 
reaped the reward of his services in knighthood and a 
lieutenant-colonelcy, was proceeding to operate upon the 
Princes of Beloochistan. Originally sent upon a mission to 
Mehrab Khan of Khelat, he had turned aside, however, to 
negotiate with the Ameers of Khyrpore, in Lower Sindh, 
and had found them more tractable than the Hydera¬ 
bad Princes in Colonel Pottinger’s hands. It was deemed 
expedient that the British troops should cross the Indus 

VOL. I.. 2 c 



386 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


at Bukkur, and Burnes was instructed to obtain the 
temporary cession of the island. The fortress stands on 
a rock, dividing the river into two channels. Appre¬ 
hending that the incursion of British troops into their 
country would be followed by acts of territorial spolia¬ 
tion, the Ameers of Khyrpore, whilst expressing in 
general terms their willingness to co-operate with our 
government, expressly stipulated that the forts on either 
bank of the river were to be untouched. But as Buk¬ 
kur stood on neither bank, but on an island, it appeared 
to the British diplomatist that the wording of the me¬ 
morandum actually placed the fortress in his hands. 
Ashamed, however, of such an exhibition of legal acute¬ 
ness, he declared that he had no intention to take advan¬ 
tage of such a reading of the document; he cited it merely 
as an instance of the manner in which very cunning 
people sometimes overreach themselves. There was no 
need, indeed, to look lor flaws in a state paper, when the 
Army of the Indus was assembling to help itself to what 
it liked. The Ameers were told that, whatever might 
be their dislike to the march of our troops through 
Sindh, “ the Sindhian who hoped to stop the approach 
of the British army might as well seek to dam up the 
Indus at Bukkur.” . The fiat had gone forth, an army 
was to march, and it was now on the road. 

There was every reason why the restoration of Shah 
Soojah, who was famous for the extravagance of his 
pretensions in the direction of Sindh, should have been 
viewed with apprehension and alarm by the Talpoor 
Ameers. But the matter now began to wear a much 
more formidable aspect. The British Government had 
not only announced its intention to assist the long-exiled 
monarch in his attempt to regain his crown, but had 
encouraged him to assert long dormant claims, and had 
announced its intention to march an army into the 



CONDUCT OP THE AMBERS. 


387 


country of the Ameers, to plant a subsidiary force there, 
to compel the Princes of Sindh to pay for it, to knock 
down and set up the Princes themselves at discretion, to 
take possession of any part of the country that might be 
wanted for our own purposes—in fact, to treat Sindh and 
Beloochistan in all respects as though they were petty 
principalities of our own. That the Ameers thus strug¬ 
gling in our grasp, conscious of their inability openly to 
resist oppression, should have writhed and twisted, and 
endeavoured to extricate themselves by the guile which 
might succeed, rather than by the strength which could 
not, was only to follow the universal law of nature in all 
such contests between the weak and the strong. Mac- 
naghten complained, some time afterwards, that no civi¬ 
lised beings had ever been treated so badly as wore the 
British by the Princes of Sindh. If it were so, it was 
only because no civilised beings had ever before com¬ 
mitted themselves to acts of such gross provocation. 
Throughout the entire period of British connexion with 
Afghanistan, a strange moral blindness clouded the vi¬ 
sions of our statesmen: they saw only the natural, the 
inevitable results of their own measures, and forgot that 
those measures were the dragon’s teeth from which 
sprung up the armed men. The Ameers of Sindh 
viewed all our proceedings at this time with mingled 
terror and indignation. Our conduct was calculated to 
alarm and incense them to the extremest point of fear 
and irritation; and yet we talked of their childish dis¬ 
trust and their unprovoked hostility. 

The Ameers of Sindh were told that, whether they 
were friendly or unfriendly to the movement, the British 
army would cross the Indus when and where our go¬ 
vernment directed, and do whatsoever our government 
pleased—that resistance on their part would be not only 
useless, but insane^ as it would bring down inevitable 

2 c 2 



388 


THE ABMT OF THE INDUS. 


destruction on the head of all who stood up to oppose 
US. From that time these unhappy Princes felt that 
they ruled only by sufferance of the British. They 
knew their helplessness, and if at any time they thought 
of open resistance, the idea was speedily abandoned. Two 
British armies were bearing down upon their dominions 
—the one from Upper India—the other from the Sea. 
Burncs and the Commissariat officers were in advance, 
laying in supplies for the consumption of the invading 
force, and threatening with heavy penalties all who re¬ 
fused to co-operate with them. It would be difficult to 
conceive anything more distressing and more irritating; 
and yet we expected the Ameers to open their arms and 
to lay down their treasures at our feet. 

The Bengal army moved from Ferozepore on the 10th 
of December.* Availing themselves of the water-car¬ 
riage, they moved down parallel to the river. The sick, 
the hospital stores, and a portion of our Commissariat sup¬ 
plies were forwarded on boats, which were subsequently 
to be used for the bridging of the Indus. The force 
consisted of about 9500 men and 38,000 camp-followers. 
Some 30,000 camels accompanied the army.f There 
was an immense assemblage of baggage. Sir Henry 
Fane had exhorted the officers of the Army of the Indus 
not to encumber themselves with large establishments 
and unnecessary equipages; but there is a natural dis¬ 
position on the part of Englishmen, in all quarters of the 
globe, to carry their comforts with them. It requires. 

* Shah SoojaVs force passed burden, had been mostly drawn on 
through Ferozepore on the 2nd. hire from Bekaneer, Jaysujmer, and 
Major Todd accompanied the Shah, the northern and north-western pro* 
Macnaghten joined the royal camp yinces of India; but the country had 
at Shikarpoor. been so drained, that at last it became 

t It had been no easy matter to necessary to indent upon the brood* 
provide carriage-cattle for that im- camels of the government stud at 
mense assemblage. The camels, which Hissar. 
constituted the bulk of the beuts of 



BAGGAGE OF THE ABMY. 


389 


a vast deal of exhortation to induce officers to move 
lightly equipped. The more difficult the country into 
•which they are sent—the more barbarous the inhabi¬ 
tants—the more trying the climate—the greater is their 
anxiety to surround themselves with the comforts which 
remote countries and uncivilised people cannot supply, 
and which ungenial climates render more indispensable. 
In the turmoil of actual war, all these light matters may 
be forgotten; but a long, a wearisome, and unexciting 
march through a difficult but uninteresting country, 
tries the patience even of the best of soldiers, and fills 
him with unappeasable yearnings after the comforts 
which make endurable the tedium of barrack or canton¬ 
ment life. It is natural that with the prospect of a long 
and wearisome march before him, he should not be 
entirely forgetful of the pleasures of the mess-table, or 
regardless of the less social delights of the pleasant 
volume and the solacing pipe. Clean linen, too, is a 
luxury which a civilised man, without any imputation 
upon his soldierly qualities, may, in moderation, desire 
to enjoy. The rudeness and barrenness of the country 
compel him to supply himself at the commencement of 
his journey with everything that he will require in the 
course of it; and the exigencies of the climate necessarily 
increase the extent of these requirements. The expedi¬ 
tion across the Indus had been prospectively described 
as a “grand military promenade;” and if such were 
the opinion of some of the highest authorities, it is not 
strange that officers of inferior rank should have en¬ 
dorsed it, and hastened to act upon the suggestion it 
conveyed. And so marched the Army of the Indus, ac¬ 
companied by thousands upon thousands of baggage¬ 
laden camels and other beasts of burden, spreading 
themselves for miles and miles over the country, and 
making up with the] multitudinous followers of the camp 



390 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


one of those immense moving cities, which are only to be 
seen, when an Indian army takes the field, and streams 
into an enemy’s country. 

It was clear, bright, invigorating weather—the glo¬ 
rious cold season of Northern India—when the Army of 
the Indus entered the territories of Bahwul Khan. Nature 
seemed to smile on the expedition, and circumstance to 
favour its progress. There was a fine open country 
before them; they moved along a good road;* supplies 
were abundant everywhere. The coyness of the Bah- 
wulpore authorities, which had threatened to delay the 
initial march of the army, had yielded in good time, 
and at every stage Mackeson and Gordon had laid up in 
depot stores of grain, and fodder, and firewood, for the 
consumption of man .and beast.f Officers and soldiers 
were in the highest spirits. “ These,” it was said by 
one who accompanied the army on the staff of its com- 
mimder, and has chronicled all its operations,^ “were 
the halcyon days of the movements of this force.” To 
the greater number who now crossed the frontier this 
was their virgin campaign. The excitement was as 
novel as it was inspiriting. They might be about to 
meet mighty armies and to subdue great principalities; 
or they might only be entering upon a “ grand military 
promenade.” Still in that bright December weather 
the very march through a strange country, with all that 


This road, some 280 miles in 
length, had been prepared, under 
Mackeson’s directions, to facilitate 
the march of our troops. 

t As the army advanced, the Khan, 
to whose court Mackeson had been 
despatched to conclude a treaty of 
protective alliance, exerted himself 
to assist the enterprise, and exhibit¬ 
ed the most friendly feeling towards 
Shab Soojah. He gave the Shah two 
guns—made him a present of money 


—sent a party of irregular horse, 
under one of his chief officers, to escort 
him through the Bahwulpore domi¬ 
nions ; and allowed the office^ of the 
Shah's contingent to recruit their 
regiment from the ranks of his own 
regular infantry. The Shah's regi¬ 
ments were in this way raised to their 
full strength, six hundred men having 
been drawn from the Bahwulpore 
army.”— [MS. Notes.'] 

% Captain Havelock. 



LOSS OF CATTLE. 


391 


great and motley assemblage, was something joyous and 
animating. The army was in fine health, full of heart, 
and overflowing with spirits. It seemed as if. an expe« 
dition so auspiciously commenced must be one great 
triumph to the end. 

There was but one thing to detract from the general 
prosperity of the opening of tho campaign. Desertion 
was going on a-pace—not from the ranks of the fight¬ 
ing men, but from the mass of officers’ servants, camel- 
drivers, and camp-followers whicli streamed out from 
the rear of the army. The cattle, too, were falling sick 
and dying by the way-side. The j)rovi8ions with which 
they were supplied were not good, and dysentery broke 
out among them. Many were carried off by their 
owners, who shrunk from the long and trying journey 
before them; and it soon .became manifest that the 
most formidable enemy with which the advancing army 
would have to contend, would be a scarcity of carriage 
and supplies. 

Even in those early days the voice of complaint was 
not wholly silent;* but when the army began to make 
its toilsome way through Sindh and Beloochistan, there 
were few in its ranks who did not look back with regret 
to the march through Bahwulpore, when all their wants 
had been supplied in a manner which they were little 
likely to see again. It was on the 29th of December 
that the head-quarters of the army reached the capital 
of Bahwul Khan’s country. Sir Henry Fane, who had 
been proceeding down the river by water, landed from 
his boats, and held a Durbar on the following day; and 
on the 31st returned the visit of state which the Khan 

♦ Some of the Shah’s troops were the grain districts of Upper India, 
very unreasonable in their expecta- made violent complaints because they 
tions and their complaints. The raw found that to the westward barley 
levies of horse, just recruited from was the food of horses. 



892 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


had paid him.* On the first day of the new year the 
army broke ground again, and set out for the frontier 
of Sindh. 

On the 14th of January, the head-quarters of the 
Ar my of the Indus entered the Sindh territory near Sub- 
zulkote. On the preceding day, Sir Alexander Bumes 
had joined the British camp; and though he had ob¬ 
tained by his negotiations the cession of Bukkur to the 
British Government,! for such time as it might seem ex- 


* Sir Henry Fane was much 
pleased with the economy of Bah- 
wul Khan’s Court. Though not on 
an extensive scale, it was, perhaps, 
better ordered, on the whole, than 
that of any native potentate at the 
time. 

t The manner in which Meer 
Koostuin, the Ameer of Khvrpore, 
was dragooned out of Bukkur, ift 
worth relating. It was at first inti¬ 
mated to Burnes that the Ameer ob¬ 
jected to the British army passing the 
river at that point. Of this Burnes 
wrote: “ As to Meer Mahomed 
Khan’s message about this chief’s 
(Meer Roostum’s) objections to the 
Bengal army passing .at Bukkur, 
the minister did speak of such a 
wish, when I first reached Kohree, 
which I treated witli complete in- 
diflerence, adding that the army 
would cross at the most conccnwnt 
point,*'—[^Burnes to Pottimjer: Novem¬ 
ber 3,1838.] Burnes, however, at this 
time, was doubtful whether it were 
expedient that the Bengal column 
should cross the river at Bukkur at 
all. ^ “ I find,” he wrote, “ on minute 
inquiries, that if 1 suggest that the 
Bengal army should come to Bukkur 
at on, I shall bring them about fifty 
miles out of their road to Shikarpoor. 
Their most direct route is b^ Gotkee, 
and when I have seen the river there 
and the roads from it to Shikarpoor, 
I shall be able to say whether the 
army crosses at Gotkee or Bukkur.” 
After a lapse of two or three weeks, 
it appeared to Burnes that the army 


would more expediently cross the 
river at neither of these points. 

“ The point at which the army would 
cross the Indus,” he wrote to Mac- 
naghten, on the 22nd of November, 

“ has received the fullest considera¬ 
tion. It at first appeared to me that 
the ferry of Golkee, being on the 
most direct route to Shikarpoor from 
the frontiers of Sindh, it should be 
chosen; but an examination of the 
country between this and the river 
showed so much jungle, that I aban¬ 
doned the intention and sought a 
ferry lower down, which was found 
at Azeezpore, east of Shikarpoor, 
and near the spot’where Shah Soojah 
formerly crossed. By avoiding Roh- 
ree, three marches arc thus saved.”— 
[Bumes to Macnaghten: November 
22, 1838. MS, Becords,'] But the 
possession of Bukkur itself was 
coveted by the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment ; and four days afterwards 
Burnes wrote : “ The resolution 

to fix a force permanently in this 
country certainly diminishes the va¬ 
lue of Bukkur as a military posi¬ 
tion, since we can possess our¬ 
selves of it when we choose. ... I 
will by no means lose sight of his 
Lordship’s views on the subject of 
Bukkur; but if Hyderabad becomes 
the station of the subsidiary force, 
and Bukkur is demanded by us, 
men’s eyes will see only that we have 
seized Sindh, and made no distinc¬ 
tion between friend and foe.” — 
[Bumes to Macnaghten : November 26, 
1838. MS* Records,'] 



THE CESSION OF BUEKUB. 


393 


pedient to us to retain it, and had thus secured the 
peaceful passage of the Indus, the report which he 
made of the general feeling of the Sindhians was not 
very encouraging. It was plain that our armed passage 


But the wishes of the Supreme 
Government were so distinctly ex¬ 
pressed, that Burnes’s reluctance was 
soon overcome. The course which 
was to be pursued towards the Hy¬ 
derabad Ameers seemed to render 
less objectionable the demand to be 
made upon the Khyrpore Prince. 
But the cession of ilukkur was ex¬ 
tremely distasteful to Meer Roos- 
tum. It was calculated to lower him 
in the eyes both of the other Ameers 
and of his own subjects ; and Burnes, 
fearing that he would be dissuaded 
by his relatives, made the stipulation 
for the surrender of the jilacc a 
separate article of the treaty, in 
order that the Ameer might conceal 
it from them if he feared that they 
would remonstrate against it. “I 
sent my Moonshee, Mohun Lai,” wrote 
Burnes, “ with the treaty, signed 
and sealed, to Khyrpore on the 11th 
instant, first directing him to give 
the document to the minister, and 
then wait on the chief if invited. 
After a delay of four days, it ap¬ 
peared that all would end well; but 
the minister was then directed to 
wait upon me at Shikarpoor, and 
he came full of (jrkf and dismay 
at the demands made^ and even stated 
that he had not shown the separate 
article to Meer Jioostum Khan from 
downright shameJ'^—[^Burnes to G’o- 
vernment: Dec. 25, 1838.] When 
Burnes, disbelieving the minister’s 
story, despatched Mohun Lai to Khyr¬ 
pore, to deliver the treaty and the 
separate article, “ face to face,” to 
the Ameer, and to demand his ac¬ 
ceptance of its terms, “the con¬ 
sternation,” says Burnes, “caused 
by this public declaration, was very 
great. The Ameer first offered 
another fort in its stead; next, to find 
security that our treasure and muni¬ 
tions were protected; but the Mooo- 


shee, as instructed, replied to all that 
nothing but the un^alified cession 
of the fortress of Bukkur, during 
the war, would satisfy me. He 
said it was the heart of his country, 
his honour was centred in keeping 
it, his fainihr and children would 
have no confidence if it were given 
up, and that if I came to Khyrpore 
the Ameer could speak in person to 
me many things. To this I had in¬ 
structed the Moonshee to say, that it 
was impossible till he signed the 
treaty, as I asked a plain question 
and wanted a plain answer.”—[P m6- 
lished Papers.~\ Earnestly was Meer 
Roostum entreated by his family not 
to sign the treaty, but to determine to 
resist the unjust demand. Greatly 
perplexed and alarmed, he wrote a 
touching letter of entreaty to Burnes; 
but by this time his doom was sealed. 
It was useless for liim any longer to 
struggle against his fate; so on the 
morning of the 24th of December he 
sent for Mohun Lai, told him that 
Burnes had been the first and best 
friend of the Khybur state, but that 
he had made an unexpected demand 
upon him, and that his good name 
would be irrecoverably lost if Lord 
Auckland did not seize upon Kura- 
chee, or some other place from the 
Hyderabad family, who were our 
enemies, and now triumphing, whilst 
he, ovir dearest friend, was thus de¬ 
pressed. If they were suffered to 
escape, he said, that his only course 
would be to commit suicide. “ With 
this,” wrote Burnes to government, 
“and saying Bismillah! (in the name 
of God) he sealed the treaty and 
the separate article in the presence of 
All Morad Khan, Meer Zungee, Soola* 
man Abdur, and about twenty other 
people.” A day or two afterwards, 
Burnes himself called on Meer Roos¬ 
tum and received his submission in 



894 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


through the country of the Ameers was extremely dis. 
tasteful to them; and that if they did not break out 
into acts of open hostility, their conduct towards us was 
likely to be marked by subterfuges, evasions, and deceit 
of every possible kind. 

But it soon began to be suspected that the temper of 
at least some of the Talpoor Princes was such, that a 
hostile demonstration against them was little likely to be 
avoided. The Hyderabad Ameers had assumed an atti¬ 
tude of defiance. They had insulted and outraged Co¬ 
lonel Pottiuger, and were now collecting troops for the 
defence of their capital. Sir John Keane, with the 
Bombay army, had landed at Vikkur at the end of 
November, and, after a long and mortifying delay, had 
made his way on to Tattah. Having come by sea, he was 
necessarily without carriage. He had relied upon the 
friendly feelings of the Sindh rulers ; but the Sindh 
rulers were not disposed to do anything for him, but 
everything against him. They regarded the British Ge¬ 
neral as an enemy, and threw every obstacle in his way. 
Sir John Keane was compelled, therefore, to remain 
in inactivity on the banks of the river until the 24th 


person. The poor old man, declaring 
that he was irretrievably disgraced, 
asked what he could now do to 
prove the sincerity of his friendship 
for the British Government. “ The 
answer to this declaration,” wrote 
Burncs, “was plain—to give us orders 
for supplies, and to •place all the country 
as far as he could at our command — 
and he has done so as far as he can.'* 
—[^Burncs to Government: Khyrpore^ 
Dec, 28, 1838. Published Papers 
A week after the treaty had been 
signed, Burnes received a letter from 
government, containing an allusion to 
the possibility of some other place 
being taken instead of Bukkur from 
the Khyrpore ruler. To which 
Burncs replied: “ I beg to correct any 


error in my own communication that 
may have led his Lordship to the 
belief that this place is not well 
adapted for a depot. I look upon it 
as the most important military posi¬ 
tion on the Indus, and in this I am 
now joined by Major Leech, who has 
examined it professionally. It is 
uitc a mistake to imagine that it is 
ifiicult of access, and that there is 
but one landing-place. There are 
two gates, and the ferry-boats can 
track all round the island. For three 
months during the swell, the water 
certainly runs with great velocity, 
but now the Indus is here as un¬ 
ruffled as a pond .”—[Bumies to Go~ 
vemment: Uzeezpoor Ferry^ Decern^ 
her 31, 1838.] 



CONDUCT OF MEER BOOSTUM. 


395 


of December. A supply of carriage from Cutch, ob¬ 
tained by the energetic exertipns of Captain Outram—a 
supply by no means adequate to the wants of the force, 
but most welcome at such a time—came opportunely to 
release Sir John Keane from this local bondage, and the 
Bombay column then commenced its march into Sindh. 
Proceeding up the right bank of the Indus to Tattah, 
and thence to Jerruk, he awaited at the latter place 
the result of the negotiations which were going on at 
Hyderabad. Captain Outram and Lieutenant Eastwick 
had been despatched to the Court of the Ameers wjth 
Lord Auckland’s ultimatum; and Keane, with the Bom¬ 
bay column, was now, at the end of January, awaiting 
the* result. 

Surrounded by his own contingent, Shah Soojah had 
proceeded in advance of the Bengal column; and his 
force had crossed the Indus, in very creditable order, 
before the end of the third week of January. Shikar- 
poor had been fixed upon as the place of rendezvous. 
There the force was now encamped, and there the Envoy 
and Minister joined the suite of the Douranee monarch. 

Cotton was to have crossed the Indus at Eohree, 
which lies opposite to the fort of Bukkur. Some delay 
had taken place in the cession of the fortress; for the 
Bengal column had arrived on the banks of the river 
before the treaty with the Ameer of Khyrpore, by 
which it was to be ceded, had arrived with the ratifica¬ 
tion of the Governor-General; and after its arrival, some 
further delay was occasioned, either by the mistrust or by 
the guile of the Sindh ruler. He was not ignorant of the 
state of affairs at Hyderabad. He knew, or suspected, 
that there was a likelihood of a large portion of the 
Bengal column being detached, and he was eager to 
temporise. Something might be written down in the 
chapter of accidents, that might enable him to retain 
possession of Bukkur; or something might be gained by 



396 


THE ABMT OF THE INDUS. 


the detention of Cotton’s troops. It was not, therefore, 
till the 29th of January that the British flag waved from 
the fort of Bukkur—and even when the detachment of 
troops, which was to, receive possession, crossed the 
river, opposition seemed so probable, that some powder- 
bags, wherewith to blow in the gates of the fort, were 
stowed away in one of the boats. 

The military authorities now determined to despatch 
the greater part of the Bengal column down the left 
bank of the Indus to co-operate with Sir John Keane 
against Hyderabad. Burnes entirely approved of the 
movement.* It does not appear that Keane had made 
any requisition for more troops."f" The two columns, 
indeed, were entirely ignorant of each other’s opera¬ 
tions. Thus early the want of an intelligence-depart¬ 
ment was painfully apparent; but up to the last day 
of our connexion with Afghanistan nothing was done, 
nor has anything beeu dope in more recent wars, to 
remedy the admitted evil. But down the left bank of 
the Indus went Cotton with his troops, glorying in the 
prospect before them. The treasures of Hyderabad 
seemed to lie at their feet. Never was there a more 
popular movement. The troops moved on in the highest 
spirits, eager for the affray—confident of success. Here 
was an unanticipated harvest of honour—an unexpected 


* “The aspect of aiTairs to the south 
being anything but satisfactory, the 
Commander-in-Chief intimated tome, 
in the presence of General Cotton, that 
the passage of the army across the 
Indus, even had the bridge been 
ready, which it will not be for ten 
days, was inexpedient, whilst matters 
were unadjusted at Hyderabad—that 
it was further his decided opinion 
that a portion of the army should at 
once march down towards Hydera¬ 
bad. Participating entirely in these 
sentiments, as far as political matters 


were concerned, I felt myself bound 
to give the fullest effect to the views 
of his Excellency, and notify the in¬ 
tended movement of the troops to 
the south to Meer Koostum Elhan.'* 
— A, Burnes to Government: 
Rohree^ January^ 28, 1839. MS, 
Records,"] 

f Some days after Cotton’s force 
had moved down the river, a re¬ 
quisition came for a troop of horse 
artillery, a detachment of cavalry, 
and a brigade of infantry.—[Have- 
hek's Narrative,] 



POSITION OF BIACNAGHTEN. 


897 


promise of abundant prize-money—^within their reach, 
A march of a few days would bring them under the 
walls of Hyderabad, to humble the pride of the Ameers, 
and to gather up their accumulated wealth. 

But there was one man then on the borders of the 
Indus to whom this movement down the left bank of 
the river was a source of unmixed dissatisfaction. Mr. 
Macnaghten, who, under the''title of Envoy and Minister 
at the Court of Shah Soojah, had been appointed politi¬ 
cal director of the campaign, viewed with alarm the de¬ 
parture of Sir Willoughby Cotton from Kohree, just as it 
was hoped that the Bengal column was about to cross to 
the right bank of the river. The Shah, with his con¬ 
tingent, was at Shikarpoor. Macnaghten had joined the 
royal camp. The King and the Envoy were alike eager 
to push on to Candahar; but, deserted by the Bengal 
troops, they were compelled to remain in a state of 
absolute paralysis. Seldom has any public functionary 
been surrounded by more embarrassing circumstances 
than those which, at this time, beset Macnaghten, At 
the very outset of the campaign there was a probability 
of the civil and military authorities being brought into 
perilous collision. The Envoy looked aghast at the 
movement upon Hyderabad, for he believed it involved 
an entire sacrifice of the legitimate objects of the cam¬ 
paign. It appeared to him, in this conjuncture, to be 
plainly his duty, as the representative of the British- 
Indian Government, to take upon himself the responsi¬ 
bility of preventing the march for the restoration of 
Shah Soojah from being converted into a campaign in 
Sindh. Yet to no man could the assertion of such au¬ 
thority be more painful than to one of Macnaghten’s 
temper and habits. It was certain that the military 
chiefe would resent his interference, and that the whole 
army would be against him. But he turned his face 



398 


THE ARMY OF THE INDTTS. 


steadfastly towards Candahar; and determined to arrest 
the progress of the Bengal column on its march to the 
Sindh capital 

In what light this diversion was viewed by him, and 
for what reasons he deprecated it, Macnaghten’s letters, 
written at this time, indicate with sufficient distinctness; 
and it is just, therefore, that in a matter which has en¬ 
tailed some odium upon him, he should be suffered to 
speak for himself: 

The Governor-General,” he wrote to Burnes, “ never seems to 
have contemplated the diversion of the army of the Indus from its 
original purpose, except on emergency. No such emergency ap** 
pears to have arisen. We are utterly ignorant of the state of affairs 
below. It is hardy possible to conceive that matters should not have 
been settled, unless under the very improbable supposition that 
Sir J. Keane should be waiting for reinforcements, or that a suspen¬ 
sion of liostilities may have been agreed upon, pending the receipt 
of further instructions from the Governor-General In the first 
place, it may be presumed that the Bombay reserve will reach Sir 
John Keane long ere Sir Willoughby Cotton can do so. In the 
latter case, it is probable that the suggestions with which I have 
this day furnished Colonel Pottinger, will bring matters to an 
amicable conclusion. As far as I have learnt the motives of Sir 
W. C.’s movement down the left bank of the Indus, it was with 
a view of creating a diversion, and never with any intention of 
actually proceeding all the way to Hyderabad. The effect of the 
movement, whatever it may have been, must have been already 
produced. At all events, by crossing to this side of the river, the 
effect will rather be heightened than lessened; while, if the force 
should not be required further, it might be all ready to proceed at 
the proper season to its original destination in Afghanistan, I 
should hope in less than ten days from this date to receive a reply 
from Colonel Pottinger; and, in the mean time, the boats might 
be got ready to proceed with the troops downwards, should 
their services be required. Thus no time would be lost. But, as 
in that case there could be Kttle hope of the return of the troops 
to proceed this season into Afghanistan, 1 would strongly urge 
that a force, to the extent specified in the second paragraph of 



macnaghten’s letters. 


399 


this letter (one European regiment, one Native cavalry, a troop of 
horse artilleiy, with a suitable battering train), with a sufficiency 
of carriage-cattle for itself and Shah Soojah’s army, should be 
directed to proceed to Shikarpoor. With such a force I am 
clearly of opinion that the views of the Governor-General, in 
regard to Afghanistan, could be carried into effect during the 
present season. The consequences of losing a whole season are 
not to be foreseen.”* 

In another letter he wrote to the Governor-General 
—and the passage has an additional interest, as affording, 
for the first time, a glimpse of the unreasonable character 
of Shah Soojah, and the extent to which his Majesty’s 
peculiarities heightened the difficulties of Macnaghten’s 
position: 

We should not, I think, on any account, lose the season for ad¬ 
vancing upon Candahar. With our European regiment, some 
more artillery, a couple of Native regiments, and a small battering 
train, we might not only occupy Candahar, but relieve Herat; 
and by money, if we have no disposable troops, make Caubul too 
hot for Dost Mahomed. 

The Shah is very solicitous about future operations, and, I am 
sorry to say, talks foolishly every time I sec him on the subject 
of his confined territories that are to be—and frequently says it 
would be much better for him to have remained at Loodhianah. 
The next time he touches on the subject, I intend to remind him 
of the verse of Sadi, “ If a king conquers seven regions he would 
still bo hankering after another territory.” I have little doubt of 
being able to bring him into a more reasonable temper of mind. 
He is much delighted with the four six-pounders presented to 

. him by your Lordship.I hardly think it probable that 

50,000 rupees per mensem will suffice for the Shah’s expenses, but 
on this point I will write tp your Lordship more fully on another 
Occasion.! 

And again he wrote, soon afterwards, to Mr. Colvin: 

I grieve to say that I have no consolation to afford you. Out 
accoimts from every quarter as to what is really passing are most 

♦ Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W. //. MacnnglUen, f Ibid, 




400 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


unsatisfactoiy, and Sir Willoughby Cotton is clearly going on a 
wild-goose chase. He cannot possibly, I think, be at Hyderabad 
under twenty-five days from this date, and he seems to be 
travelling by a route which has no road. He will soon, I fear, 
find himself in the jungle. If this goes on as it is now doing, 
what is to become of our Afghan expedition? Burnes’s letters 
are most unsatisfactory.* 

He had hardly despatched the letter from which this 
last passage is taken, when a communication from the 
Governor-General was put into his hands, and it became 
more than ever obvious from its contents, that Lord 
Auckland's first wish was, that the Bengal column 
should accompany Shah Soojah and his contingent as 
expeditiously as possible to Candahar. Fortified by 
these advices^ Macnaghten, on the following day, wrote, 
in emphatic language to Sir Willoughby Cotton, in vir¬ 
tue of the power vested in him by the Governor-Ge¬ 
neral, requiring that military chief to furnish him with 
a force sufficient to enable him to give effect to his 
Lordship's plans in Afghanistan: 

“ I have already urged,” he added, in the strongest terms, 
your crossing over to this side of the river with your whole force. 
Of Sir John Keane’s army there can be no apprehension. His 
Excellency will always be able to keep up his communication 
with the sea, whilst your presence on this side would enable us 
to establish a strong post at the extremity of the Sindh territories, 
and ensure the safety of the supplies for the Army of the Indus 
in its advance into Afghanistan. The Ameers cannot for any 
length of time keep up an army—they must be reduced to act 
on the defensive, and then the result could hardly be doubtful. 
Dangerous as the experiment might be* it would, in ray opinion, 
be infinitely better that we should let loose fifteen or twenty 
thousand of Runjeet Singh’s troops (who would march down 
upon Hyderabad in a very short space of time), than that the 
grand enterprise of restoring Shah Soojah to the throne of 

* Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W. H, Macnaghten: Feb. 6, 1839. 



SUBMISSION OF HYDBBABAD. 401 

Caubul and Candahar should be postponed for an entire season. 
By such a postponement it might be frustrated altogether.” 

Thus were the military and political authorities 
brought into a state of undisguised antagonism. Ciiv 
cumstances, however, had already occurred to unravel 
the web of diflSculty that had been cast around them. 
The progress of the Bengal column towards Hyderabad 


was arrested by the receipt 
that the Ameers, awed by 
mitted to the demands of 

♦ On the 20th of January, Outram 
and East wick had arrived opposite 
Hyderabad. A few passages from the 
journal of the former will best indi¬ 
cate the progress and result of their 
negotiations. 

“ January —Waited till evening, 
in expectation of being summoned to 
the Durbar, but a frivolous excuse 
was sent for not seeing us this day, 
and our attendance was requested at 
2 p.M. to-morrow. 

“ January 22. — «... At 4 p.m. 
the Ameers sent for us, and received 
us with much affectation of cordia¬ 
lity. After the usual complimentary 
speeches, all excepting contidential 
attendants were directed to withdraw, 
when their Highnesses entered upon 
the subject of the treaty, a copy of 
which had been previously furnished 
to them, and every article of which 
was commented on ; many objections 
being made and supported with much 
plausibility bv the Ameers, especially 
by Noor Mahomed Khan. These 
matters were discussed until sunset, 
when we were dismissed with every 
assurance that ‘the will of the British 
Government was law to that of Sindh,’ 
but tnat a definite answer could not 
be given until next day. 

** January 28.—The hostile inten¬ 
tions of the Ameers are hourly evinced; 
all supplies to and communication 
with our camp are prohibited, and we 
ascertain that it had even been pro¬ 
posed to attack our little party, and 
that an engagement had been solemnly 

VOL. I. 2 


of intelligence to the efiect 
impending danger, had sub- 
the British Government.* 

sworn to by all the Ameers and the 
chiefs to stand by each other in the 
approaching struggle. Under these 
circumstances .... determined to 
demand either an acceptance of the 
treaty or an explicit avowal of their 
own intentions, together with our dis¬ 
missal.This message was ac¬ 

cordingly sent in the evening, and an 
immediate answer demanded. None 
was, however, received, ... 

“ January 24,— . . . Sent again to 
Noor Mahomed demanding an answer 
to our message of yesterday, , , The 
answer given was, that the treaty would 
be sent back, and that we might stay 
or go, as we pleased. At noon em¬ 
barked, and steamed down the Indus 
to Jerriik. 

“ January 25.—The army (Sir John 
Keane’s) arrived here. 

** January 27.—The native agent at 
Hyderabad writes that two of the 
Ameers—viz., Noor Mahomed and 
Nufar Kban, are still wavering and 
inclined to yield, but that Meer Ma¬ 
homed Khan and the Beloochees are 
determined not to submit. 

“ January 29.—A deputation from 
the Ameers arrived, but merely de¬ 
livered letters to the Commander- 
in-Chief and the Resident. 

^'January 30.—^The deputation de¬ 
livered their messages, which were 
expressive of the kindljr intentions ot 
tlie Ameers, but required explana¬ 
tions on certain points of the treaty. 

** January 81.— In the evening ac¬ 
counts brought from Hyderabad that 

D 




402 


fHE ASHY 07 TBE mDtJS. 


They had consented to pay the money which had been 
required from them, and it was believed that it would 
soon be paid.* They had submitted to the terms of a 
stringent treaty, which had been fastened upon them 
by the British authorities, and agreed to pay annually 
three lakhs of rupees for the support of a British sub¬ 
sidiary force in their dominions. Cotton was, there¬ 
fore, instructed to halt his division; and on the very 
7 th of February on which Macnaghten had written and 
despatched the letter which I have above quoted, the 
hopes of the Bengal column were dashed by the an¬ 
nouncement that Hyderabad and its treasures were no 
longer lying at their feet. The Ameers paid an instal¬ 
ment of the tribute-money, and Cotton, to the great joy 
of the Envoy, but to the extreme disappointment of his 
troops, retraced his steps to Rohree, and prepared to 
effect the passage of the river, whilst Keane, with the 
Bombay column, moved up along the right bank of the 
Indus, and saw, through the dusty atmosphere of Lower 
Sindh, the palace and the city where was stored the 
gathered wealth which was to have enriched his army. 

Meer Shere Mahomed, of Meerpore, “ Febrmry 4.— .... The Ameers 

had arrived at that city with his army, now express the utmost anxiety to ful- 
and had plundered our grain depots I lil the terms of the treat)’, and im- 
“ February I.—Deputies from the mediately to make good Shah Soojah’s 
Ameers arrived, to intimate that their tribute, tt^ether with the value of the 
Highnesses had resolved to submit grain lately plundered. This alacrity 
to the treater, adding that the plunder rs caused by their having heard of the 
of the grain was in opposition to approach of the Bengal army down 
their authority, and that many persons the opposite side of the river, and of 
had been kiJJed in an attempt to Shah Soojah’s on this^not to mention 
prevent it. They further promised a report that the latter had plundered 
to repay the value of the grain, and Larkhana.”— OutranCt Rough 
requested a few verbal alterations in Note# of tht C«nq>aign in Sindh and 
the treaty, with which their envoys Afghanistan.'] 

returned to the capital. • The amount was twenty lakhs of 

Febrmry 2.-—Accounts from Hy- rupees, a moiety of which was paid 
derabad mention that the Ameers down. The otlier seven lakhs, making 
tmve ratified the treaty, returned into up the gross amount to be paid by 
the fort from the camp they had oc« the Talpoor Princes, were paidby the 
c^ied on the banka of the river^ and Ameer of Kbyrpore. 
ordered the dispersion of tbeir army. 



CAPTDBE OP KUBACHBE. 


403 


Halting for some days opposite Hyderabad,* the Bom¬ 
bay troops received intelbgence to tbe effect that the 
Reserve which had been sent to their assistance from the 
Presidency had arrived at Eurachee, under Brigadier 
Valiant. The 40th Queen’s Regiment formed a portion 
of this brigade. It had been brought from Bombay in 
a seventy-four gun-ship—the Wellesley —and Admiral 
Sir Frederick Maitland was on board. In the position 
which affairs had assumed in Lower Sindh, it seemed 
desirable that the English should possess themselves of the 
fort of Eurachee; so the Admiral summoned it to sur¬ 
render. The answer of the Commandant was a gallant 
one. “ I am a Beloochee,” he said, “ and I will die 
first.” With characteristic mendacity the Sindhian boat¬ 
men in the harbour declared that the place was prepared 
to withstand a siege, and that one of the Ameers had 
come down with an army of 3000 men. The English 
sailor had now an answer to give as gallant as that of 
the Beloochee chief. “The more the better,” he said; 
“ we shall have the first trial of them.” Everything was 
soon ready for the attack. But British humanity again 
interposed, and Maitland a second time summoned the 
garrison to surrender. The reply was a word of defiance, 
and a shot from the fort. Then was heard by the gar¬ 
rison that which had never been heard there before, and 
of which they had no conception—a broadside from an 
English man-of-war. The Wellesley's guns did their 
work in less than an hour, and the British colours soon 
floated over the place. The garrison had consisted of 
only some twenty memf 

* ** The city of Hyderabad/* says the Ameer, which surmounts their 
Dr. James Burnes, in his Visit to the capital, is but a paltry erection of Bl- 
Court of Sindh^ an interesting and burnt bricks» crumbling gradually to 
valuable work, ** in a collection of decay, and perfectly incapable of with* 
Wretched low mud hovels, as destitute standing for an hour the attack of re- 
of the means of defence as they are of gular troops.** 
external elegance or internal coodbrt; *|* Kennedy, 

and even the boasted stronghold of 

2 D 2 



404 


THE AEMY OF THE INDUS. 


On the 20th of February, Sir Willoughby Cotton, 
with the head-quarters of his force, arrived at Shikar- 
poor. On the morning of that day the General and 
the Envoy were for some time in conference with each 
other. The discussion was a long and a stormy one. 
The General seems to have anticipated the interference 
of Macnaghten, and to have resented it before it took 
any really offensive shape. The two officers looked on 
each other with suspicion. The General leapt hastily 
to the conclusion that the civilian was determined to 
overrule his military authority; and the Envoy, on the 
other side, thought that the soldier regarded him, the 
King and the King’s army, with something very like 
contempt. Macnaghten wanted carriage for the Shah’s 
force, and asked for 1000 camels. Sir Willoughby re¬ 
sented this as an act of interference; accused the Envoy 
of wishing to assume the command of the army, and de¬ 
clared that he knew no superior authority but that of 
Sir John Keane. At this, and at subsequent meetings, 
the Envoy urged that he had no intention of inter¬ 
fering with the military movements of the General, but 
that if he thought it for the good of the service that 
Shah Soojah should be left behind, the matter must be 
referred for the decision of the Governor-General, In 
tlie evening they met at dinner in the Envoy’s tent. 
The meal was not over when important despatches from 
the Governor-General were placed in Macnaghtens 
hands. In the Envoy’s private tent they were read 
and discussed. Burnes and Todd were present at the 
conference. Late at night the General and the Envoy 
parted “ very good friends.”* 

“ Sir Willoughby,” wrote the En- from me, however quietly and mo- 
voy to Mr. Colvin, on the 24th of destly given, was received with hau- 
February, “ made his appearance in teur ; and I was distinctly told that I 
camp yesterday morning. He is evi- wanted to assume the command of 
detitly disposed to look upon his the army; that he, Sir Willoughby, 
Majesty and his disciplined troops and knew no superior but Sir John Keane, 
myself as mere cyphers. Any hint and that he would not be interfered 



PROGRESS THROUGH CUTCH. 


405 


It was decreed that the Bengal column should at once 
move in advance. On the following day it was ma- 
ncBuvred in presence of the King. The parching heats 
of Sindh, and the evil effects of a failing Commissariat, 
had not then begun to impair our army; and, in full 
health and fine condition, the troops moved before the 
well-pleased Shah. On the 23rd, Sir Willoughby Cotton 
began to put his force again in motion. But the Shah's 
contingent remained halted at Shikarpoor. There was 
not carriage sufficient for its advance. 

The difficulties of the march now began to obtrude 
themselves. Between Sukkur and Shikarpoor the 
camels had dropped down dead by scores. But there 
was a worse tract of country in advance. The officers 
looked at their maps, and traced with dismay the vast 
expanse of sandy desert, where no green pasture met 
the eye, and no sound of water spoke to the ear. But 
the season was favorable. Escaping the arid and pesti¬ 
lential blasts of April and May, and the noxious exhala¬ 
tions of the four succeeding months, the column ad¬ 
vanced into Cutch. The hard, salt-mixed sand, crackled 
under their horses’ feet as the General and his staff 
crossed the desert, on a fine bright night of early March 
—so cool that only, when in a full gallop, the riders 

with, &c., &c. All this arose out of to leave Shah Soojah in the lurch, 
my requesting 1000 camels for the without the means of moving, I 
use of the Siiah and his force. Sir should esteem it my duty, as a poli- 
Willoughby was ably backed by tlie tical officer, to protest most strongly 
Commissariat officers. My arguments against the arrangement, and that the 
were urged throughout in the most Governor-General would determine 
mild and conciliatory tone. I was which of us was right. Sir Wil- 
determined on no account to lose my loughby dined with me, and at dinner 
temper ; and we parted at a late hour the important despatches from the 
last night very good friends. I told Governor-General and yourself, dated 
him 1 was the last man in the world the 5th instant, were put into my 
who would presume to interfere with hands. We discussed their contents 
his military arrangements; but I in my private tent afterwards—-pre¬ 
found it requisite to tell him, during sent Sir W. C., Todd, and Burnes.”— 
one of our conversations, that if he [^Z/npublished Correspondence of Sir 
thought it for the good of the service W. H, MacnagUenJ] 



406 


THE ABMY OF THE INDUS. 


ceased to long for the warmth of their doaks.* The 
distance from Shikarpoor to Dadur is 146 miles. It 
was accomplished by the Bengal column in sixteen pain¬ 
ful marches. Water and forage were so scarce that the 
cattle suffered terribly on the way. The camels fell 
dead by scores on the desert; and further on the Beloo- 
chee robbers carried them off with appalling dexterity. 
When the column reached a cultivated tract of country, 
the green crops were used as forage for the horses. The 
ryots were liberally paid on the spot; but the agents of 
the Beloochee chiefs often plundered the unhappy culti¬ 
vators of the money that had been paid to them even in 
front of the British camp. 

It was on the 10th of March that the Bengal column 
reached Dadur, which lies at the mouth of the Bolan 
Pass. Whatever doubts may before have been enter¬ 
tained regarding the provisionary prospects of the Army 
of the Indus, they were now painfully set at rest. Major 
Leech had been long endeavouring to collect supplies 
for the army at this place; but, in spite of all his zeal 
and all his ability, he had signally failed. Mehrab Khan 
of Khelat, under whose dominion lay the provinces 
through which the army was now passing, had thrown 
every impediment in the way of the collection of grain 
for our advancing troops. The prospect, therefore, be¬ 
fore them was anything but an encouraging one. At 
Dadur they found themselves, on the 10th of March, 
with a month’s supplies on their beasts of burden. Cot¬ 
ton saw that there was little chance of collecting more; 
so he determined to push on with aU possible despatch. 

On the 16th he resumed his march; and entered the 
Bolan Pass. Bumes had gone on in advance with a 
party under Major Cureton, to secure a safe passage for 
the colunm; and had been completely successful. The 


♦ Havelock. 



TBS PASSAGE OF THE SOLAN. 


407 


Beloochee authorities rendered him all the aid in their 
power;* and when Cotton appeared with his troops on a 
clear, stiil morning, at the mouth of the defile, there was 
little likelihood of any obstacle being opposed to his free 
progress. But the baggage-cattle were fidling dead by 
the wayside; the artillery horses were showing painful 
symptoms of distress. The stream of the Bolan river 
was tainted by the bodies of the camels that had sunk 
beneath their loads. The Beloochee freebooters were 
hovering about, cutting off our couriers, murdering 
stragglers, carrying off our baggage and our cattle. 
Among the rocks of this stupendous defile our men 
pitched their tents; and toiled on again day after day, 
over a wretched road covered with loose flint stones, 
surmounting, at first, by a scarcely perceptible ascent, 
and afterwards by a difficult acclivity, the great Brahoo 
chain of hills. The Bolan Pass is nearly sixty miles in 
length. The passage was accomplished in six days. 
They were days of drear discomfort, but not of danger. 
A resolute enemy might have wrought mighty havoc 
among Cotton’s regiments; but the enemies with which 
now they had to contend were the sharp flint stones 
which lamed our cattle, the scanty pasturage which 
destroyed them, and the marauding tribes who carried 
them off. The way was strewn with baggage—with 
abandoned tents, and stores; and luxuries which, a few 
weeks afterwards, would have fetched their weight twice 
counted in rupees, were left to be trampled down by the 


* ** The conduct of the officers of the bouring Beloochee tribes to attempt 
Khelat chief has been most creditable at their peril to molest us* Such 
and praiseworthy. Syud Mahomed has been the confidence thus given^ 
Sheriff, the Governor of Gundava, that a great body of the migratory 
and Moolla Ramzan, a slave of the inhabitants from Cutchee availed 
Khan, have attended me the whole themselves of our escort to ascend 
way, procured a band of eighty of the into Afghanistan.’’-~[jBttmes to Molo 
natives to escort us, and they likewise naghten: March 16, 1889« MS» 
addressed the Ameers and the neigh- eordi.] 



408 


. THE ABMT OP THE INDUS. 


cattle in the rear, or carried off by the plunderers about 

them. ^ 

Happy was every man in the force when the army 

again emerged into the open country. The vaUey of 
Shawl lay before them, a favoured spot in a country of 
little favour. The clear crisp climate braced the Euro¬ 
pean frame; and over the wide plain, bounded by noble 
mountain-ranges, intersected by many sparkling streams, 
and dotted with orchards and vineyards, the eye ranged 
with delight; whilst the well-known carol of the lark, 
mounting up in the fresh morning air, broke with many 
home associations charmingly on the English ear.* On 
the 26 th of March the Bengal column reached Quettah 
—“ a most miserable mud town, with a small castle on a 
mound, on which there was a small gun on a rickety 
carriage.! Here Sir Willoughby Cotton was to halt 
until further orders. Starvation was beginning to stare 
his troops in the face. 

Seldom has a military commander found himself in the 
midst of more painful perplexities than those which now 
surrounded Cotton. It seemed to be equally impossible 
to stand still or to move forward. His supplies were now 
so reduced, that even upon famine allowances his troops 
could not have reached Candahar with provisions for 
more than a few days in store; and to remain halted 
at Quettah would necessarily aggravate the evil. There 
appeared to be no possibility of obtaining supplies. All 
the provisions stored in Quettah and the surrounding 
villages would not have fed our army for many days. 
In this painful conjuncture. Cotton acted with becoming 
promptitude. He despatched his Adjutant-General to 
Sir John Keane for orders, whilst Burnes proceeded 
to Khelat to work upon the fears or the cupidity of 

• See HavelocVs Narrative. 

t Hough's Narrative of the Operations of ike Army of the Indue. 



BUBNES AT KHELAT. 


40 ^ 


Mehrab Khan; and, in the mean while, reduced to the 
scantiest dole the daily supplies meted out to our un> 
fortunate fighting men and our more miserable camp-fol¬ 
lowers.* These privations soon began to tell fearfully 
upon their health and their spirits. The sufferings of 
the present were aggravated by the dread of the future; 
and as men looked at the shrunk frames and sunken 
cheeks of each other, and in their own feebleness and 
exhaustion felt what wrecks they had become, their 
hearts died within them at the thought that a day was 
coming when even the little that was now doled out to 
them might be wholly denied. 

Burnes hastened to Khelat. He was courteously re¬ 
ceived. He found Mehrab Khan an able and sagacious 
man. Suspicious of others, but with more frankness and 
unreserve in his character than is commonly found in 
suspicious men, the Khan commented freely on our policy 
—said, with prophetic truth, that we might restore Shah 
Soojah to Afghanistan, but that we should not carry the 
Afghan people with us, and that we should, therefore, 
fail in the end—and then, after launching into an indig¬ 
nant commentary on the ingratitude of Shah Soojah, for 
whom he had suffered much and reaped nothing in re¬ 
turn, he proceeded to set forth the evils which had 
resulted to him and his people from the passage of the 
British army through his dominions.! “ The English,” 

* Captain Havelock says : “ From dertaking the British had embarked 
the 28th of March, the loaf of the in—declared it to be one of vast mag- 
European soldiers was diminished in nitude and difficult accomplishment— 
weight, the Native troops received that instead of relying on the Afghan 
only half instead of a full seer of ottah nation, our government had cast them 
(that is a pound of flour) per diem, aside and inundated the country with 
and the camp-followers, who had foreign troops—that if it was our end 
hitherto found it diffictdt to subsist to establish ourselves in Afghanistan, 
on half a seer, were of necessity re- and give Shah Sooiah the nominal 
duced to the famine allowance of a sovereignty of Caubul and Canda- 
quarter of a seer.” har, we were pursuing an erroneous 

t “ The Khan, with a good deal of course—that all the Afghans were 
earnestness, enlarged upon the un- discontented with the Shah, and all 



410 


THE ABHT OV THE mDUS. 


he said, “ had now come, and by their march throng 
his country, in different directions, destroyed t|)is crops, 
poor as they were; helped themselves to‘the water 
which irrigated the lands, made doubly valuable in this 
year of scarcity;”—“ but he had stood,” he added, “ qui¬ 
escent, and hoped from the English justice, from the 
Shah justice; hoped that his claims might be regarded 
in a proper light, and he for ever relieved from the mas¬ 
tery of the Suddozye Kings.” He then spoke freely and 
fluently of our policy in Central Asia, of the position in 
which we had placed ourselves at Herat by supporting 
such a miscreant as Yar Mahomed, and of the failure of 
our negotiations at Caubul and Candahar. “ I might 
have allied myself,” he said, ‘‘ with Persia and Russia— 
but I have seen you safely through the great defile of 
the Bolan, and yet I am unrewarded.” 

Burnes had brought with him the draft of a treaty, 
which, on the following day, ho sent to the Khan. He 
had made it a condition of all peaceable negotiation with 
the Beloochee Prince that he should wait upon Shah 
Soojah in his camp—a condition which Mehrab Khan 
disliked and resisted, but from which he could not ex¬ 
tricate himself. The treaty, by which the supremacy of 
Shah Soojah was distinctly acknowledged, bound the 
British Government to pay Mehrab Khan a lakh and a 
half of rupees annually, in return for which the Khan 
engaged to “ use his best endeavours to procure supplies, 
carriage, and guards to protect provisions and stores 
going and coming from Shikarpoor, by the route of 

Mabomedans alarmed and excited at chief of Caubul was a man of ability 
what was passing—that, day by day, and resource and though we could 
men returned discontented, and we easily put him down by Shah Soojah 
might find ourselves awkwardly is- even in our present mode of proce- 
tuated if we did not point out to Shah dure, we comd never win over the 
Soojah his errors, if the fault origi- Afghan nation by it.**—[Bamss to 
nated with him, and alter them if Maenaghten: Khdaty March 80^ IS99. 
they sprung fix»m ourselves—that the MS. Reoords.2 



BUBNSS AT KH£l<AT. 411 

Rozan, Dadur, the Pass of Bolan, through Shawl to 
Koochlafe, from one frontier to another.” 

Mehrab Khan affixed his seal to the treaty. But he 
disliked the bargain he had made. He was altogether 
suspicious of Shah Soojah and the Suddozyes. He 
was by no means certain of the success of the present 
enterprise. He believed, that by paying homage to the 
Shah, he would raise up a host of powerful enemies, 
and plunge himself into a sea of ruin. Striving to allay 
the apprehensions of the Khan, Burnes made some tri¬ 
fling concessions, which were not without their efiect; 
and then proceeded to press upon him the subject which 
at that moment was of most immediate importance to 
British interests—the matter of supplies; and earnestly 
pointed out the imperative necessity of every possible ex¬ 
ertion being made by the Khan to provide them. But it 
was easier to suggest such provision than to make it. 
Mehrab Khan said that he would do his best—that he 
would place men at Burnes’s disposal to proceed to 
Nooshky and other places, where the crops were nearly 
ripe (“ and,” said Burnes, parenthetically, “ he has done 
so”)—that he would “ give grain in Gundava and Cutchee, 
and if we would send for our stores at Shikarpoor to 
Dadur, he would actively aid in passing them through 
the Bolan—that he might also aid us at Moostung in 
getting a small quantity of grain; but that there was 
really very little grain at Khelat, or in the country—that 
he had reduced his escort to wait on the Shah to lOQO 
men, on account of the scarcity—and that he could not 
then furnish the grain, but each man must bring his own.” 
“This intelligence,” wrote Burnes to Macnaghten, “i$ 
very distressing in our present position; but my inquiries 
serve to convince me that there is but a small supply 
of grain in this country, and none certainly to be ^ven 
us, without aggravating the present distress of the in- 



412 


THE AEMT OF THE INDUS. 


habitants—some of whom are feeding on herbs and grasses 
gathered in the jungle. It is with some difficulty we 
have supported ourselves, whilst the small quantities we 
have procured have been got by stealth. This scarcity is 
corroborated by a blight in last year’s harvest. Under 
such circumstances, the only way of turnmg the Khan to 
account is in supplying sheep; and here be can and is 
willing to assist us to a great extent. Probably 10,000 
or 16,000 may be procured; and arrangements are now 
being made for purchasing and sending them down to 
Shawl.”* 

In the mean while, the Shah’s contingent and the Bom¬ 
bay division of the Army of the Indus were making their 
way through Sindh.f Greatly straitened for carriage, it 
had been for some time doubtful whether the whole of 
the Shah’s army would be able to proceed to Candahar. 
There had been a disposition on the part of Sir Wil¬ 
loughby Cotton to look with contempt upon the Sud- 
dozye levies, and to make the King and his regiments 
play a part in the coming drama, by no means in accord¬ 
ance with the estimate which Macnaghten had formed 
of their importance. And now Sir John Keane seemed 
equally inclined to throw into the background the King, 
the Envoy, and the contingent. But Macnaghten had 
claimed for the Shah a prominent place in the coming 
operations,! and the military chief had yielded to his 

♦ Bumes to Macnaghten : Khelat, being in advance with at least a por- 
April 2, 1839. tion of his own troops after the junc- 

*1* The Shah and his contingent tion of the several divisions shall have 
moved from Shikarpoor on the 7th of been effected, or rather after you have 
March. ^ ^ made your final arrangements for the 

± “ His Majesty the Shah is natu- order of our advance. This you will 
rall^ anxious to occupy a prominent observe will be conformable to the 
position in our movements, and it is wishes of the Governor-General, as 
very desirable, on political grounds, expressed in the accompanying ex- 
that he should do so ; 1 trust, there- tracts. His Lordship never contem- 
fore, that your Excellency will see fit plated the leaving behind any portion 
to attend to his Majesty’s wishes in of the Shah's force except in the case 
this particular, |and to authorise bis of opposition being shown by Sindh 



DEVASTATIONS OF THE AEMT. 


4ia 

representations, and even placed at his disposal a number 
of baggage-cattle which he greatly needed for his own 
force. Anxious to conciliate the commander of the army, 
and never unmindful of the public interests, the Envoy 
gratefully declined the offer.* Keane was “in a wretched 
plight for want of cattle,” and Macnaghten, believing that 
the Bengal Commissariat had neglected the Bombay chief, 
did his best to enable him to move. 

Sir Willoughby Cotton had suggested to Macnaghten 
the expediency of a movement upon Khelat; but the 
Envoy was then little inclined to take the same unfavor¬ 
able view of the conduct of Mehrab Khan which Cotton, 
smarting under the privations to which his force had 
been subjected, was prone to encourage. “ With regard 
to moving upon Khelat,” he wrote on the 15 th of March 
to the Bengal General, “ I am not prepared at present to 
take upon myself the responsibility of that measure; and 
I am in great hopes that Sir Alexander Burnes will be 
able to arrange everything satisfactorily.The further 
he advanced, indeed, the more obvious it became that the 
Khan of Khelat had just grounds of complaint against 
the English army. Everywhere traces of the devasta¬ 
tion—much of it unavoidable devastation—which our ad¬ 
vancing columns had left behind them, spoke out intel¬ 
ligibly to him; and he plainly saw how extremely dis¬ 
tasteful both our ofBcers and measures had become to the 
Beloochees. Pondering these things, he sate down and 


and Khelat.”— \^Mr,Macnaghten to Sir 
J, Keane: Shikarpoor, Feb, 27, 1839. 
Unpublished Correspondence.'] 

♦ “lam exceedingly obliged to you 
for the attention you hare paid to 
my suggestions regarding the Shah’s 
troops; but your want of camels is 
so pressing, that I feel it impossible to 
retain the 1000 camels placed at my 
disposal. Deeply as I regret, on po¬ 
litical grounds, the necessity of leav¬ 


ing behind any portion of the troops 
of his Majesty, I feel that any scru¬ 
ples on this score must give way to 
the more urgent exigencies of the 
public service.”—[ilfr. Macnaghten to 
Sir J, Keane: Shikarpoor, March 3, 
1839. Unpublished Correspondence,] 
•f* Mr, Macnaghten to Sir W, Cot¬ 
ton: March 15, 1839. Unpiibluhed 
Correspondence, 



414 


THE ABH7 OF THE nSTDIJS. 


wrote the following letter to Lord Auckland—a signifi¬ 
cant letter, which shows how early had hurst upon Mac- 
naghten the truth, that only by a liberal expenditure of 
money was there any hope of reconciling to our opera¬ 
tions the chiefs and people beyond the Indus: 

Camp Bagh, March 19. 

I found the Khelat authorities in the worst possible humour. 
Our enemies have evidently been tampering with them, and they 
had good cause for dissatisfaction with us; their crops have been 
destroyed, and the water intended for the irrigation of their fields 
has been diverted to the use of our armies. A great portion of 
these evils was perhaps unavoidable, but little or no effort seems 
to have been made either to mitigate the calamity or to appease 
the discontent which has been created by our proceedings. Our 
officers and our measures are alike unpopular in this country, and 
I very much fear that Sir A. Burnes may be led, by vague 
rumours of the Khan’s unfriendly disposition, to recommend offen¬ 
sive operations against him. In what difficulties we might be 
involved by such a proceeding it would be impossible to foretell. 
My most strenuous efforts have been day and night directed to¬ 
wards reconciling all persons of influence to our operations; and 
in this I have been successful; but considerable sums must be 
expended, not only in remunerating the people for the severe 
losses they have sustained, but in bribing the authorities. Your 
Lordship may rely upon it, that I shall not expend one rupee of 
the public money more than I deem indispensably necessary; but 
here we are quite at the mercy of the Bcloochees. This very 
day, had they been inimically inclined, they might with the 
greatest ease have turned an inundation into our camp, which 
would have swept away our entire force and everything belonging 
to us. The change in the demeanour of the authorities since 
yesterday is wonderful. They are now our devoted servants, and 
the Vizier has promised to write off instantly to his master at 
Khelat, advising him to give us his entire and unqualified friend¬ 
ship and support. Sir John Keane is in a wretched plight for 
want of cattle, and I cannot help thinking he has been neglected 
in a very unwarrantable manner by the Bengal authorities. . . • 
1 went out myself this morning to see what damage had been 



DIFFICDliTIBS OF THE EXPEDITION. 


415 


done to the crops. The devastation is grievous; but the interest 
which the people saw me ttike .in their complaints has done more 
to pacify them than I ever expected. Another source of great 
dissatisfaction has been the seizure by our troops of different in¬ 
dividuals, and even families, on the plea of being robbers. This 
I have done all in my power to remedy.* 

More and more sensible, after every march, of the 
miserable country through which he was passing, and the 
difficulties which now beset the expedition, Maenaghten 
was anxious to push on with all possible expedition. But 
Sir John Keane, who was in the rear with the Bombay 
column, dreading the assemblage, on the same spot, of so 
large a body of troops as would be brought together by 
the junction of the three forces, urged upon him the ex¬ 
pediency of halting, whilst his Excellency went forward 
to ascertain the chances of finding forage and provisions 
in the Bolan Pass.f So the Shah and his contingent 
halted for a few days at Bagh,J whilst Sir John Keane 
pushed on with his escort. On the 28 th of March, the 
King, the Minister, and the Commander-in-Chief were all 
assembled together at Dadur. “ Their united camps dis- 

* Unpublished Correspondence of t From Bagb, Maenaghten wrote 
Sir W, H. Maenaghten, to the Governor-Genorars Private 

t “Ihave a letter from Todd, dated Secretary: “This is a wretched 
yesterday, from Gundava, giving a country in every respect. It may be 
lamentable account of the Bombay said to produce little else but plun- 
force. They are nearly on the point derers; but with the knowledge 
of starvation. . . . Sir John starts we now have of it, we may bid 
to-morrow for Dadur with a small defiance to the Russian hordes as 
escort, and he has begged me to keep far as this route is concerned. Any 
back the Shah with his troops and army might be annihilated in an 
followers until he reaches that place, hour by giving it either too much 
and is able to gain some information or too little water. The few wells 
as to the state of forage and provi- that exist might easily be rendered 
sions there and in the pass. We have unavailable, and by just cutting 
a wretched time of it nere; and 1 am the Sewee bund the whole coun- 
most anxious to push on, but I cannot try might be deluged.”— [ Afr. Mac^ 
venture to run counter to the wishes of naghten to Mr. Colvin: Camp Bagh, 
his Excellency.”— [Mr. Maenaghten March 22, 1839. Unpublished Cor- 
to Sir A. Burnes: Bagh^ March 22, rc,9pondence.^ 

1839. Unpublished Correspondence.'] 



416 


THE AEMT OP THE INDUS. 


played all the pomp and circumstances of a triple head* 
quarter.” The passage of the Bolan was accomplished 
without difficulty, and on the 4th of April, Sir Wil¬ 
loughby Cotton, having ridden out with his staff from 
Qucttah, greeted the General-in-Chief and his com¬ 
panions as they were resting at the entrance to the 
Shawl Valley, after the fatigues of the passage through 
the defile. The tidings which he had to communicate 
were of the gloomiest hue. He reported that his men 
were on quarter-rations, and that there was every pros¬ 
pect of the army, as it entered Afghanistan, being op¬ 
posed at every step. Macnaghten, however, more san¬ 
guine, was already beginning to think and to write about 
the means of disposing of the Barukzye Sirdars. On 
that 4th of April he wrote to the Governor-General a 
letter, which indicates the tone of his own feelings and 
of those of the Afghan Prince: 


April 4, 1831. 

We are now encamped within ten miles of Shawl. Sir W. 
came in here this morning, and talks in a most gloomy strain of his 
prospects. He says he has but twelve days’ supplies, and his men 
arc already on quarter-rations. We cannot reckon on being at 
Candahar under a fortnight, and it will go hard with us if we can¬ 
not get supplied in the mean time from other quarters. Sir W, 
is a sad croaker; not content with telling me we must all inevitably 
be starved, he assures me that Shah Soojah is very unpopular in 
Afghanistan, and that we shall be opposed at every step of our 
progress. I think I know a little better than this. My accounts 
from Candahar lead me to believe that the religious excitement is 
subsiding, and that the Sirdars are only thinking how they can 
make good terms for themselves; or, failing that, how they may 
best contrive to effect their escape. It will be as well not to reduce 
them to desperation; for though they cannot oppose us in the 
field, yet they make sad havoc with our supplies. Large bands 
of camel-plunderers kept hovering over our line of march, and it 
certainly looks as if they had been incited by some one of 



DIFFICULTIES OF THE EXPEDITION, 417 

influence. The mistakes and contretemps which are constantly 
occurring in our motley camp, require the exercise of much 
patience and discrimination. The Shah is in good health and 
spirits; but says he never had so much trouble and bother in his 
lifetime as he has met with during this campaign. The reason is 
obvious; the people on former occasions helped themselves to 
everything they wanted, and no complaint was permitted to ap¬ 
proach the sacred person of his Majesty. His opinion of the 
Afghans as a nation is, I regret to say, extremely low. He 
declares that they are a pack of dogs, one and all, and, as for the 
Barukzyes, it is utterly impossible that he can ever place the 
slightest confidence in any one of that accursed race. We must 
try and bring him gradually round to entertain a more favorable 
opinion of his subjects. I cannot yet say how the Barukzye chiefs 
shall be disposed of, but 1 am decidedly of opinion that it would 
be a wise measure to get them quietly out of Afghanistan and 
pension them, if we can do so at an expense not exceeding a lakh 
of rupees per annum. If they oppose us and are taken, the Shah 
must, I imagine, be permitted to do what he likes with them 
short of putting them to death; and his own humane nature is a 
sufficient security that he will not proceed to extremities.* 

On the 6th of April, Sir John Keane fixed his head¬ 
quarters at Quettah, and assumed the personal command 
of the army. Reviewing all the circumstances of his 
position, he came to the determination to push forward 
with all possible despatch to Candahar. There was no 
prospect of obtaining supplies through the agency of 
Mehrab Khan. Already was the Envoy convinced of 
the treachery of that Prince—already was he beginning 
to talk about dismembering the Khanate of Khelat, and 
annexing the provinces of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutchee 
to the Douranee Empire. On that day he wrote to the 
Private Secretary of the Governor-General: 

Camp Quettah, April 6, 1839. 

* * * Sir John Keane has represented to me in the strongest 
terms the necessity for moving on. The fact is, the troops and 


♦ Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W- H. Maenaghien, 
VOL. I. 2 E 



418 


THE ARMY OF THE INDUS. 


followers are nearly in a state of mutiny for food, and tlie notion 
of waiting for such a person as Mehrab Khan, who has done his 
best to starve us, seems utterly preposterous. I trust the Governor- 
General will see fit to annex the provinces of Shawl, Moostung, 
and Cutchee to the Shah’s dominions. This would be the place 
for cantoning a British regiment. It is so cold now that I can 
hardly hold my pen, and the climate is said to be delightful all 
the year round. I am certain the annexation could be made with¬ 
out the slightest difficulty .... Now for Gandahar. The game 
is clearly up with the Sirdars. I had a letter from the triumvirate 
yesterday, brought by Syud Muhun Shah, whom they have sent 
to treat, or rather to get the best terms for themselves they can. 
As to opposition, it is quite clear that they look upon that as hope¬ 
less, and they have not even the power to retreat. I am un¬ 
willing to reduce them to desperation, and shall try and get the 
Shah to make some provision for them; but he is very loth to do 
so. Their demands now are extravagant beyond measure; but I 
do not think that a lakh of rupees per annum distributed among 
the three brothers would be too much for the King to give, if 
they agreed upon that to sink into the retirement of private life. 
Notwithstanding all the croaking about Shah Soojah’s want of 
popularity, I feel certain that my prediction will be verified, and 
that his Majesty will be cordially welcomed by all classes of the 
people.* 

On the 7th of April the army resumed its march.f 
On the 9th it was at Hykulzye, a spot rendered famous 
in the later annals of the war. From this place Mac- 
naghten wrote again to the same correspondent: 

Camp Hykulzje, April 9. 

* * * I have reason to believe that the Sirdars of Gandahar 
are at their wit’s end. They make resolutions one day and break 

• Unpublished Correspondence of when Sir John Keane joined the 

Sir W. H. Macnaghten, Bengal column, Cotton tell back to 

f The head-quarters of the 2nd the divisional command, and Nott re¬ 
brigade were left in garrison at Quet- turned to the brigade to which he had 
tah, under General William Nott, of originally been posted. Out of this 
the Company’s army, who, at a later much controversy arose; the command 
period, so distinguished himself in of the other division of the “ Army 
wmmand^ of the troops at Gandahar. of the Indus” having been conferred 
Whilst Sir Willoughby Cotton was on General Willshire, of the Queen’s 
^mmanding the Benral army in chief, army, a Junior major-general, but an 
Wott had comfBanded a division; bot older officer and Ihratenant-colonel. 



UCACNAGHTUN TO COLVIN. 4ld 

them the next. But all accounts concur in reporting that they 
are abandoned by the priesthood, and that if there is any reli¬ 
gious feeling extant, it is all in favour of Shah Soojah. In a fit 
of desperation the last resolve of Kohun Dil Khan is stated to 
be, that he will make a night attack on our camp with about 
2000 followers who are still attached to his person. This I fully 
believe to be fudge. The whole of the force, from Sir W. Cot¬ 
ton downwards, are infected with exaggerated fears relating to the 
character of the King and the prospects of the campaign. They 
fancy that they see an enemy in every bush. The Khan of Khelat 
is our implacable enemy, and Sir J. Keane is burning with revenge. 
There never was such treatment inflicted upon human beings as 
we have been subjected to on our progress through the Khan’s 
country. I will say nothing of Burnes’s negotiations. His in¬ 
structions were to conciliate, but I think he has adhered too 
strictly to the letter of them. The Commander-in-Chief is very 
angry. I would give something to be in Candahar; and there, 
Imhallahy we shall be in about a week; but, in the mean time, 
this union of strictly disciplined troops with lawless soldiers is 
very trying to my patience. With a less tractable king than 
Shah Soojah the consequences might be fatal. I have references 
every minute of the day, and we are compelled to tell his Majesty’s 
people that they must not touch the green crops of the country. 
This they think very hard, and so I believe does the King, but he 
has, nevertheless, forbidden them. Supplies are now coming in, 
but they are yet very dear—2^ seers of flour for a rupee I But 
this price will, no doubt, daily fall. The groat thing is to give 
people confidence. All the villages in the Khan of Khelat’s 
territory were deserted at our approach, and not a soul came near 
us, except with the view of plundering and murdering our fol¬ 
lowers. The instant we crossed the frontier the scene was 
entirely changed. The inhabitants remained in their villages, 
and have manifested the greatest possible confidence in our jus¬ 
tice and good faith. Is it possible to conceive that the difference 
of feeling in the Khelat country has not been brought about by 
design? * * * 

Mactidghten was naturally of a sanguine temperament. 
Civilians seldom estimate military difficulties aright. It 
is true that our political difficulties were melting away. 

2 £ 2 



420 


THE AEMT OF THE INDUS. 


The Candahar Sirdars, deserted and betrayed, seemed to 
have given themselves up to despair, and there was little 
chance of the progress of our army being disputed by an 
Afghan force. But the scarcity, which had pressed so 
severely on our troops, and had nearly destroyed our 
horses, was not less a reality because no enemy appeared 
to educe all the disastrous results which were likely to 
flow;from such deterioration of the physique of our army. 
The Army of the Indus surmounted the Kojuck Pass as 
safely as it had traversed the Bolan. The Shah, with 
his contingent, was now in advance, leading the way as 
it became him into his restored dominions; and many 
of the chiefs and people of Western Afghanistan were 
flocking to his standard.* There were not wanting 
those who said that, if there had been any prospect 
of opposition at Candahar, the Bang and his levies 
would not have been the first to appear under the walls 
of the city. But authentic intelligence had reached 
Macnaghten, to the effect that Kohun-dil-Khan and 
his brothers had fled from Candahar—that there was 
no union among the Barukzyo brotherhood—and that, 
if a stand were to be made at all, the battle-field would 
be nearer the northern capital. The way, indeed, 
was clear for the entry of the Suddozye monarch; so 
he pushed on in advance of Sir John Keane and his 
army, to receive, it was said, the homage of his people. 
Money had been freely scattered about; and the people 
had already begun to discover that the gold of the Pe- 
ringhees was as serviceable as other gold, and that there 
was an unfailing supply of it. Early in the campaign, 

* Foremost among these was the contingent. He joined the Shah on 
notorious Hadjee Khan, Rhaukur, the 20th of April, and from this time 
whose sudden defection broke up the the Sirdars saw that their cause was 
Barukzye camp, just as Raliun Dil hopeless. Further mention of this 
Khan and Mehr Dil Khan were medi- chief will be found in a subsequent 
tating a night attack on the Shah's cliapter. 



THE COMMISSAKIAT. 


421 


Macnaghten had encouraged the conviction that the al¬ 
legiance of the A%hans was to be bought—^that A%han 
cupidity would not be proof against British gold. So he 
opened the treasure-chest; scattered abroad its contents 
with an ungrudging hand; and commenced a system of 
corruption which, though seemingly successful at the 


outset, wrought, in the end, 
he had reared.* 

* I have not attempted in this 
chapter to give a minute account of 
the march of the three columns of the 
invading army to Candahar. It is no 
part of my design to render this work 
conspicuous for the completeness of its 
military details. I do not underrate 
their importance; but the operations 
of the Army of the Indus have al¬ 
ready been so minutely chronicled, 
that I have only to refer the reader 
to the works of Havelock, Kennedy, 
and Hough. The real history of the 
march is to be found in the records of 
the Commissariat department. The 
difficulty of obtaining carriage and 
supplies was almost unprecedented, 
and the expenditure incurred was 
enormous. There were two different 
Commissariat departments (the Ben¬ 
gal and the Shah's) sometimes to be 


the utter ruin of the policy 


found bidding against one another. 
Everything was paid for at a ruinous 
price. The sums paid for the hire 
and purchase of carriage-cattle were 
preposterous; and the loss incurred 
by government from the deaths of 
the animals may be surmised, when it 
is stated that the number of deaths 
between Ferozepore and Candahaxhas 
been estimated at not less than 20,000. 
Large sums, too, were often paid for 
demurrage. For example, on one 
batch of camels hired from Bekanier 
and Jaysulrnere, 44,000 rupees were 
paid for demurrage and remuneration 
for losses before they reached the 
place (Shikarpoor) at which their 
services were required, or were even 
seen by our Commissariat officers.— 
[MS. Notes.] 



422 


THE HALT AT CAMDAHAE. 


CHAPTER n. 

[April—August: 1839.] 

Arrival at Candahar—The Shah’s Entry into the City—His Installation— 
Nature of his Reception—Behaviour of the Douranees—The English at 
Candahar—Mission to Herat—Difficulties of our Position—Advance to 
Ghuznee. 

On the 25th of April, Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk re-entered 
the chief city of Western A^hanistan. As he neared 
the walls of Candahar, riding in advance of his con¬ 
tingent, some Douranee horsemen had gone out to wel¬ 
come him; and as the cavalcade moved forward, others 
met him with their salutations and obeisances, and 
swelled the number of his adherents. It is said that 
some fifteen hundred men, for the most part well dressed 
and well mounted, joined him before he reached the 
city. 

Accompanied by the British Envoy, his staff, and the 
principal officers of his contingent, and followed by a 
crowd of A%hans, the Shah entered Candahar. There 
was a vast assemblage of gazers. The women clustered 
in the balconies of the houses, or gathered upon the 
roofs. The men thronged the public streets. It was a 
busy and an exciting scene. The curiosity was intense. 
The enthusiasm may have been the same. As the 
royal cortige advanced, the people strewed flowers be- 



THE SHAH AT CANDAHAB. 


428 


fore the horses’ feet, and loaves of bread were scattered 
in their way. There were shouts, and the sound of 
music, and the noise of firing; and the fitces of the 
crowd were bright with cheerful excitement. The 
popular exclamations which were flung into the air 
have been duly reported. The people shouted out, 
“ Welcome to the son of Timour Shah I” “ We look to 
you for protection!” “ Candahar is rescued from#the 
Barukzyes I” “ May your enemies be destroyedi" It 
was said, by some who rode beside the Shah, to have 
been the most heart-stirring scene they ever witnessed 
in their lives. Thus greeted and thus attended, the 
King rode to the tomb of Ahmed Shah, and ofiered up 
thanksgivings and prayers. Then the procession re¬ 
turned again through the city, again to be greeted with 
joyous acclamations; and “ the eventful day,” as the 
Court chroniclers affirmed, “ passed off without an ac¬ 
cident.” 

The welcome thus given to the Shah on his public 
entry into his western capital, filled Macnaghten with 
delight. The future appeared before him bright with 
the promise of unclouded success. It seemed to him 
that the enthusiastic reception of the Shah would be a 
death-blow to the hopes of Dost Mahomed, and that in 
all probability the Ameer would fly before us like his 
brothers. It was encouraging intelligence to commu¬ 
nicate to the Governor-General; so on his return from 
the royal progress through the city, Macnaghten sate 
down and wrote thus to Lord Auckland: 

Candahar, April 25,1839. 

We have, I think, been most fortunate in every way. The 
Shah made a grand public entry in the city this morning, and 
was received with feelings nearly amounting to adoration. I shall 
report the particulars officially. I have already had more than 
one ebullition of petulance to contend with. The latest 1 send 



424 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAR. 


herewith, and I trust that a soft answer will have the efiect of 
turning away wrath. There are many things which I wish to 
mention, but I really have no leisure. Of this your Lordship 
may judge, when 1 state that for the last three days I have been 
out in the sun, and have not been able to get my breakfast before 
three in the afternoon. I think it would be in every way advan¬ 
tageous to the public interests if, after Shah Soojah gains pos¬ 
session of Caubul, I were to proceed across the Punjaub to Simlah, 
having an interview with Runjeet Singh, and giving him a detail 
of all our proceedings; perhaps getting him to modify the treaty 
in one or two respects. I have broached the subject of our new 
treaty to his Majesty, but my negotiations are in too imperfect a 
state to be detailed. Of one thing I am certain, that we must bo 
prepared to look upon Afghanistan for some years as an outwork 
yielding nothing, but requiring much expenditure to keep it in 
repair. His Majesty has not yet nominated a Prime Minister, 
nor has he as yet, I believe, determined his form of administra¬ 
tion. His new adherents are all hungry for place; and in answer 
to their premature solicitations, he tells me that he has informed 
them that, since it took God Almighty six days to make heaven 
and earth, it is very hard they will not allow him, a poor mortal, 
even the same time to settle the affairs of a kingdom. I am 
gratified at being able to assure your Lordship that the best feel¬ 
ing is manifested towards the British officers by the entire popu¬ 
lation here, and I devoutly hope that nothing may occur to dis¬ 
turb the present happy state of things. Dost Mahomed will, I 
doubt not, take himself off like his brothers, though not, perhaps, 
in quite so great a hurry, when the intelligence reaches him of the 
manner in which Shah Soojah has been received at Candahar. 
The Sirdars have carried off ray elephants, and I am informed 
that the animals proved of the greatest service to them in crossing 
their ladies over a deep and rapid river not far from this. W^e 
have heard nothing since our arrival here of the embassy from Herat. 
If 1 go to Simlah from Caubul, Sir A. Burnes could be left to 
officiate for me, and in case of my return he might go to Can¬ 
dahar and relieve Major Leech, who might be left there in the 
first instance. I remain, my Lord, yours, &c. 

W. H. Macnaghtbn.* 

Unpublished Correspondence of Sir W, H. Macnaghien^ 



INSTALLATION OF THE SHAH. 


425 


Encouraged by the presumed “ adoration” of the 
people, it was now determined to give them another 
opportunity of testifying the overflowing abundance of 
their loyalty and aflection. So the 8th of May was 
fixed upon for a general public recognition of the re¬ 
stored sovereign, on the plains before Candahar. Both 
columns of the British army had now arrived. The 
troops were to pass in review order before the King; 
and other ceremonial observances were to give tclat 
to the inauguration. Upon a raised platform, under 
a showy canopy, sate the restored monarch of the Dou- 
ranee Empire. He had ridden out at sunrise under a 
royal salute. The troops had presented arms to him on 
his ascending the musnud, and a salute of a hundred 
and one guns had been fired in honour of the occasion. 
Around him were the chief military and political officers 
of the British Government. Everything went off as it 
had been ordered and arranged, and most imposing was 
the spectacle of the review-march of the British troops. 
But the King had then been a fortnight at Candahar, 
and the curiosity of the people had subsided. There 
was no popular enthusiasm.* The whole affair was a 
painful failure. The English officers saluted the King; 
and the Eiing made a speech about the disinterested 
benevolence of the British Government. Greatly pleased 
was his Majesty with the exhibition; and when the 
troops had been dismissed, he said that its moral in¬ 
fluence would be felt from Pekin to Constantinople.f 

* Captain Havelock, who is by no city to be present in the plains; and 
means msposed to take an unfavor- it was remarked with justice, that the 
able view of the policy out of which passage in the diplomatic proCTamme 
emanated the assembling of the Army which presented a place behind the 
of the Indus, says: Unless I have throne for ‘ the populace restrained 
been deceived, all the national enthu- by the Shah's troops,* became rather 
siasm of the scene was entirely con- a bitter satire on the display of the 
fined to his Majesty^a immediate re- morning.’* Compare Dr. Kennedy*8 
tainers. The people of Candahar version of these proceedings. All 
are ^ said to have viewed the whole private accounts 1 have received con- 
afisdr with the most mortifying in^- firm the truth of thepxintednarratives. 
ference. Few of them qmt^ the f Kennedy. 



426 


THE HALT AT CANBAHAB. 


But the miserable paucity of Afghans who appeared to 
do homage to the King, must have warned Shah Soojah, 
with ominous signihcance, of the feebleness of his tenure 
upon the affections of the people, as it bitterly dis. 
appointed and dismayed his principal European sup* 
porters. Every effort had been made to give publicity 
to the programme of the ceremony; and yet it is said, by 
the most trustworthy witnesses, that barely a hundred 
Afghans had been attracted, either by curiosity or by 
loyalty, to the installation of the adored King. 

Such were the mere outward facts of Shah Soqjah’s 
reception as recorded by the chroniclers of the day. It 
is certain that, surrounded by his own contingent, and 
supported by the British army, he advanced unopposed 
to Candahar. The brief local excitement which his en¬ 
trance into the city had aroused, cannot be regarded as 
national enthusiasm. When the first outbreak of curiosity 
had subsided, the feeling which greeted the restored Ki n g 
was rather that of sxUlen indifference than of active devo¬ 
tion. In the vicinity of Candahar the Douranee tribes 
constituted the most influential section of the inhabitants. 
They had been oppressed and impoverished by the Ba- 
rukzye Sirdars, and had longed to rid themselves of the 
yoke of their oppressors. But when the representa¬ 
tive of the Suddozye dynasty, under which they had 
been pampered and protected, appeared at the gates of 
the Douranee Empire, they had neither spirit nor 
strength to make a strenuous effort either in support o^ 
or in hostility to, the restored monarch. It is doubtful 
whether, in the conjimcture which had then arisen, the 
Douranees, had they possessed any military strength, 
would have openly arrayed themselves on the side of 
the Shah; for although they hated the Barukzyes who 
had oppressed them, there were the strongest pational 
and religious feelings to exdte them against a Prince 
who had brought an army of Franks to desolate their 



BEHAVIOUB OF THB DOUBAXIFES. 


427 


country. Had they stood erect in the cdd pride of 
conscious power, a mighty conflict would have raged 
within them. The antagonism of personal and national 
interests would have rent and convulsed them; and it 
is not improbable that in the end, abhorring the thought 
of an infldel invasion, they would have determined to 
support the cause of the Sirdars. But when Shah 
Soojah was advancing upon Candahar, the Douranees 
were in a state of absolute feebleness and paralysis. 
They held aloof, for they had neither power nor incli. 
nation to take any conspicuous part in the revolution 
which was then brooding over the empire. 

But when, supported by his Feringhee allies, the Shah 
had established himself in Candahar, the Douranees, 
ofiering their congratulations and tendering their allegi¬ 
ance, gathered round the restored monarch. The issue 
of the contest seemed no longer doubtful. The do¬ 
minion of the Barukzye Sirdars had received its death¬ 
blow. The restoration of the Suddozye dynasty was 
certain; and with whatever feelings the Douranees may 
have inwardly regarded it, it was politic to make an 
outward show of satisfaction and delight. The change 
had been efiected without their agency; but they might 
turn it to good account. So they dusterod around the 
throne, and began to clamour for the wages of their pre¬ 
tended forbearance. They put forward the most extra¬ 
vagant claims and pretensions; bargained for the restora¬ 
tion of all the old privileges and immunitiee which they 
had enjoyed under Ahmed Shah and his successors; and 
would fain have swept the entire revenues of the state 
into their own hands. 

It was plain that the Eing could not recognise the 
claims which were thus profusely asserted. But it 
would have been imprudent, at such a time, to have of¬ 
fended or disappointed these powerful tribes. The Shah 



428 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAB. 


liad establislied himself at Candahar. Kohun-dil-Kban 
and his brothers had fled for safety across the Helmund. 
But Dost Mahomed was still dominant at Caubul. There 
was work yet to be done. There were dangers yet to 
be encoimtered. It was necessary, therefore, to con- 
conciliate the Douranees. So steering, as well as he 
could, a middle course, the Shah granted much that was 
sought from him; but he did not grant all. He restored 
the Sirdars to the chieftainships of their clans, and to 
the offices which they had been wont to hold about the 
Court. He gave them back the lands of which they had 
been denuded, and granted them allowances consistent 
with the rank which they had been suffered to reassume. 
Some vexatious and oppressive imposts were removed, 
and a considerable remission of taxation was proclaimed. 
But the system of assessment which the Barukzye Sir¬ 
dars had introduced was continued in operation; and 
the same revenue officers continued to collect the tax. 
These men were thoroughly hateful to the Douranees. 
They had been the willing instruments of Barukzye op¬ 
pression, and had carried out the work of their masters 
with a ferocity, strengthened by the recollection of one 
of those old hereditary blood-feuds, which keep up from 
generation to generation a growth of unextinguishable 
hate. 

If any feelings of delight at the thought of the restora¬ 
tion of the Suddozye dynasty welled up anywhere in 
the breasts of the people of Afghanistan, it was among 
these Douranee tribes. As the grandson of Ahmed 
Shah, they were prepared to welcome Shah Soojah. 
They were prepared to welcome him as the enemy of 
the Barukzye Sirdars. But the ugly array of foreign 
bayonets in the background effectually held in control 
all their feelings of national enthusiasm. They regarded 
the movement for the restoration of the Suddozye 



APPEARANCE OP THE CITT. 


429 


Prince in the light of a foreign invasion; and chafed 
when they saw our English officers settling themselves 
in the palaces of their ancient Princes. 

In the mean while, the Army of the Indus remained 
inactive at Candahar. The halt was a long and a weary 
one. Provisions were miserably scarce. It was necessary 
to remain under the city walls until a sufficiency could 
be obtained, and to obtain this sufficiency it was neces¬ 
sary to await the ripening of the crops. Every one was 
impatient to advance. The delay was simply painful 
and disheartening. There were no compensating ad¬ 
vantages to be obtained from a halt under the walls of 
Candahar. Save a few who had the real artist’s eye to 
appreciate the picturesque, the officers of the force were 
disappointed with the place. They had believed that 
they were advancing upon a splendid city; but they 
now found themselves before a walled town, presenting 
so few objects of interest that it was scarcely worth 
exploring. After the desolate tracts over which they had 
passed, the valley of Candahar appeared to the eye of 
our officers to be a pleasant and a favoured spot. There 
were green fields, and shady orchards, and running 
streams, to vary the surrounding landscape. But they 
found the city itself to be little better than a collection 
of mud-houses, forming very unimposing streets.* The 
citadel was in ruins. “ The interior consisted only of 

* As at Herat, the four principal eye, as nothin? appears above the 
streets meet in the centre of the city, long, high walls but the top of 
and at their junction are covered Ahmed Sbah^s tomb, the summits of 
over with a great dome. The pic- a few minarets, and the upper parapets 
turesque accessories of Candahar are of the citadel. But the interior, as 
by no one so well described as by seen from the battlements, cannot 
Lieutenant Rattray, in his letter- fail to delight. Its irreguli^ mud- 
press accompaniments to his admira- houses, partly in ruins, varied with 
ble series of Views in Afghanistan.** trees and minarets ; the square red- 
With true artistic feeling, he writes : brick dwelling with doors and win- 

Viewing Candahar from without, dows of Turkish arches; the lofly 
or at a distance, there is no pecu- habitations of the Hindoo; the tents 
liarity in its structure to strike the pitched here and there on the flat 



430 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAB. 


the relics of houses of foigotteu Princes.”* There was 
altogether an air of dreariness and desolation about the 
place. Many of the houses had been thrown down by 
repeated shocks of earthquake, and had not been rebuilt. 
The public buildings were few; but conspicuous among 
them was the tomb of Ahmed Shah, whose white 
dome, seen from a distance, stood up above the houses 
of the city, whilst a spacious mosque, with its domes 
and minarets, seen also from afar, enshrined a relic of 
extraordinary sanctity—the shirt of the Prophet Ma¬ 
homed. 

When the British arrived before Candahar in April, 
1839, it was said that the principal inhabitants had 
forsaken the place. But enough remained to give an 
animated and picturesque aspect to the city. The streets 
and bazaars were crowded with people of different castes 
and different costumes — Afghans, Persians, Oosbegs, 
Beloochees, Armenians, and Hindoos; whilst strings of 
laden camels everywhere passing and repassing, enhanced 
the picturesque liveliness of the scene. 

There was little to break the monotony of the halt at 
Candahar. The movements of the enemy, and the 
probabilities of a stirring or a languid campaign, were 
discussed in our officers’ tents; and when, on the 9th of 
May, a brigade under Colonel Sale—an officer who had 


house-tops; the long terraces crowded stupendous and inaccessible moun- 
with people, busied in their various tains, from the whole rise a panorama 
callings in the open air; the dung pleasing to look uj^ii*** 
and mud^plastered hut of the Khau* ♦ Kennedy. Tlie author adds i 
kur, with his heavy, wild-looking buffa- ** Shah Soojah had sheltered himself 
Iocs tethered round it; the high enclo- in one, Mr. Macnaghten in another, 
sures of the different tribes; the war- and Sir Alexander Burnes in a third, 
like castles of the chieftains; the The latter had been rebuilt by one 
^ily-decorated palace of some great of the chieffa of Candahar for his 
Douranee Lord, with its fountains, favourite wife. It had an air of 
squares, and court-yards; and the magnificence and grandeur where it 
domed houses of the other inhabitants, stood; but in the Mogul Serai of 
the bazaars, mosques, turrets, and Surat, or in Ahmedabad, it would be 
cupolas, rising up in the midst of passed unobserved.” 



FUOHT OF THF SIBDABS. 


481 


already done much good service to his country, and was 
destined now to play a conspicuous part in the great 
Central-Asian drama—was despatched to Ghiresk, a place 
some seventy-five miles in a westerly direction irom Can- 
dahar, in pursuit of the fugitive Sirdars, there were 
few officers in Keane’s army who did not long to ac* 
company it. But the campaign was a brief and an in¬ 
glorious one^Sale marched to Ghiresk and returned to 
Candahar. The Sirdars had abandoned the place, and 
fled across the Persian frontier. They had but a hand¬ 
ful of followers, and they were powerless to offer any 
resistance to our advancing troops. From Kohun-dil- 
Khan and his brothers nothing was to be apprehended. 
Their very names were soon almost forgotten by the 
Feringhees who had driven them from their homes. 
Candahar and the surrounding country was in possession 
of the restored Suddozye Princes. But Shah Soqjah 
and his supporters still looked anxiously towards the 
north, where Dost Mahomed, the ablest and the most 
powei’ful of the Barukzyo brotherhood, was still muster¬ 
ing his fighting men—-still endeavouring to rouse the 
chiefs to aid him in the defence of his capital against 
the often-rejected King, who had now come back to 
them again, supported by the gold and bayonets of the 
infidels. 

But the very circumstances which might be supposed 
to work to our disadvantage, and to give strength to the* 
enemy, really favoured our cause. The protracted halt 
at Candahar gave Dost Mahomed and his adherents 
abundant time to mature their measures of defence. 
Whilst the British army was starving at Candahar, the 
Barukzyes at Caubul might have been collecting troops 
and strengthening their defences for a vigorous and well* 
organised opposition. But to Dost Mahomed this con¬ 
tinued halt was altogether unintelligible. He could 



432 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAB. 


not understand why, if they really purposed to advance 
upon Caubul, Macnaghten and Keane were wasting their 
strength in utter idleness at Candahar. It was the Ameer’s 
belief that the British were projecting a movement upon 
Herat; that the Army of the Indus would branch off to 
the westward; and that its operations against Caubul 
would be deferred to the following year. Believing 
this, Dost Mahomed turned his thoughts rather to the 
defence of the eastern than of the western line of road. 
It had been arranged,* under the Tripartite treaty, that 
Prince Timour, the eldest son of Shah Soojah, accom¬ 
panied by Captain Wade and a Sikh force, should pene¬ 
trate the passes beyond Peshawur, and advance upon 
Caubul by the road of Jellalabad and Jugdulluck. This 
force was now advancing. Dost Mahomed sent out 
against it some of his best fighting men, under the com¬ 
mand of bis favourite son, Akbar Khan—the young 
chief who was destined to stand out with such terrible 
prominence from among the leading personages distin¬ 
guished in the later history of the war. 

No thought, however, of a movement upon Herat 
weighed at this time on Macnaghten’s mind. It ap¬ 
peared to him little desirable to march a British army 
into the dominions of Shah Kamran, so long as there 
was a possibility of attaining the desired results by any 
means less costly and hazardous. There was little im¬ 
mediate prospect then of Mahomed Shah returning for 
the re-investment of Herat. There was no pressing 
danger to be combated. So Macnaghten determined to 
send, instead of a British army, a British mission to 
Herat, with a handful of engineer and artillery officers, 
and a few lakhs of rupees to be expended on the de¬ 
fences of the place. 

It was in the montb of September, 1838, that, after 

* See ante, page 351. 



AOTAIBS Arr HERAT. 


438 


a nine months’ investment of Herat, Mahomed Shah 
struck his camp and turned his face towards his own 
capital Eldred Pottinger had saved the city from the 
grasp of the Persians. But his work was not yet done. 
The wretched people were starving. The necessary 
evils of the protracted siege had been greatly enhanced 
by the grin^ng cruelty of Yar Mahomed. To have 
left Herat immediately on the departure of the Persian 
army would have been to have left the inhabitants to 
perish. Moreover, the accursed traffic in human flesh, 
which the Persian Prince had set forth as the just cause 
of his invasion of Herat, had not been suppressed. So 
Pottinger remained in Herat, and Stoddart, having wit¬ 
nessed the breaking up of the Persian camp, joined his 
brother-officer in the city, and then the two began to 
labour diligently together in the great cause of universal 
humanity. 

But these labours were distasteful to the Wuzeer. 
Pottinger and Stoddart had done the work which Yar 
Mahomed required of them. The one had driven off, 
and the other had drawn off, the Persian army. He 
did not desire that they should interfere with his in¬ 
ternal tyranny. To oppress the helpless people at his 
will seemed to be his rightful prerogative. The slave- 
trade, which he carried on with such barbarous acti¬ 
vity, was the main source of the Heratee revenue. The 
English officers did not propose to effect its suppression 
without securing adequate compensation to the slave- 
dealing state. But Yar Mahomed viewed all their 
proceedings with jealousy and suspicion; and two 
months after the close of the siege of Herat, they were 
grossly insulted in the presence of the King, and ordered 
to withdraw themselves beyond the limits of the Heratee 
territory. 

VOL. I, 2 F 



484 


THB HALT AT OAHDAHAB. 


Stoddart had work to do in another quarter. He 
quitted Herat and made his way to Bokhara. But 
Pottinger was solicited to postpone his departure, and 
the dawn of the new year still found him at the Court 
of Herat. He only remained to be insulted. In Janu¬ 
ary, 1839, another outrage was committed upon him. 
His house was attacked by the retainers of Yar Maho¬ 
med. One of his public servants was seized and muti¬ 
lated. As the year advanced, the hostile temper of the 
Wuzeer became more and more apparent. Tidings of 
the advance of Shah Soojah and his British allies had 
reached Herat; and although the integrity of that state 
had been especially guaranteed by the Tripartite treaty, 
and British money was then maintaining both the go¬ 
vernment and the people of Herat, Yar Mahomed 
began to intrigue both with the Persian Court and the 
Candahar Sirdars, and endeavoured to form a confede¬ 
racy for the expulsion of the Shah and his allies from 
Afghanistan.* 

But the Persian Court was little inclined to commit 
itself to an act of such direct hostility against Great 
Britain. The Army of the Indus continued to advance; 
there was no prospect of any organised opposition. Our 
success was sufficiently intelligible to Yar Mahomed. 
He respected success. So, when Shah Soojah entered 
Candahar, and the British army encamped beneath its 
walls, he hastened to congratulate the Shah upon his 
restoration, and sent a friendly mission to the British 
camp. In return for this, Macnaghten now determined 
to despatch a British officer to Herat to negotiate a 
friendly treaty with Shah Kamran. His first thought 

* “ Facts regarding our Political Noyember, 1837, to February, 1841,” 
Kelations with Herat, and the Con- by Dr. J. S. Login, attached to the 
duct of Yar Mahomed Khan, from Heratee Mission. 



BCAJOR TODD. 


486 


was to entrust the duty to Bumes; but Bumes was 
disinclined to undertake it; and Sir John Keane was of 
opinion that he could not be spared.* 

So the choice of the Envoy fell upon Major Todd, an 
officer of the Bengal Artillery, who had been for many 
years employed in Persia, instructing the artillerymen 
of Mahomed Shah in the mysteries of his profession, and 
assisting the British Mission in matters lying beyond 
the circle of mere military detail. Thoroughly ac¬ 
quainted with the languages and politics of Western 
Asia, a man of good capacity, good temper, and good 
principle, he appeared to be well fitted for the office 
which the Envoy now thought of delegating to him. 
He had been in the camp of Mahomed Shah during the 
siege of Herat, and had been employed in the negotia¬ 
tions which had arisen between the two contending states. 
He had subsequently travelled down through Afghanis¬ 
tan to India, charged with information for the Governor- 
General, and had then recommended himself, by the 
extent of his local knowledge and general acquirements, 
scarcely more than by the integrity of his character and 
the amiability of his disposition for emplo 3 rment, upon 
the Minister’s staff. He was military secretary and 
political assistant to Mr. Macnaghten when the Envoy 
deputed him to Herat. There went at the same time 
other officers, whose names have since been honourably 
associated with the great events of the Central-Asian 
War—James Abbott and Richmond Shakespear, of the 
Bengal Artillery; and Sanders, of the Engineers, who fell 
nobly upon the field of Maharajhpore.f They went to 

♦ ** I think Sir A. Burnes is dis- f Lieutenant North, of the Bombay 
inclined to go to Herat, and Sir J. Engineers, and Drs. Login and Rit- 
Keane is averse to his goi^ there, chie, also accompanied them, llie 
It is probable I may send ^dd in- Mission left Candahar on the 2l8t of 
stead.’*— [Mr. Macnaghten to Lord June, and reached Herat on the 25th 
Auckland: Candahar, April 25,1839. of July. 

UnpvibUshed Correspondence.'] 

2 F 2 



436 


THE HALT AT CANDAHAR. 


Strengthen the fortifications of the place, and they took 
with them guns and treasure. 

A few days after the departure of the Mission to 
Herat, the army recommenced its march. It had been 
halted at Candahar from the 25th of April to the 27th 
of June. During this time the harvest had ripened; the 
carriage-cattle had gained strength ; but sickness had 
broken out among our troops. The heat under canvas 
had been extreme. Fever, dysentery, and jaundice had 
been doing their work; and many a good soldier had 
been laid in a foreign grave. Money, too, had been 
painfully scarce. It had been scattered about so pro¬ 
fusely on our first arrival at Candahar, that now an 
empty treasury stared Macnaghten in the face; and he 
tried in vain to negotiate a loan. All these were dis¬ 
piriting circumstances; and there were others which 
pressed heavily upon the mind of the Envoy. It was 
becoming plainer and clearer to him every day, that the 
Afghans regarded the intrusion of the British into their 
dominions with the strongest feelings of national hatred 
and religious abhorrence. A different class of men from 
the Belooch marauders, who had carried off our cattle 
and plundered our stores in the southern country, were 
now surrounding our camp. If our people straggled far 
from their supports, they did it at the peril of their 
lives. “ Remember, gentlemen, you are not now in 
Hindostan,”* was the significant warning which broke 
from Shah Soqjah, when two young officers,f returning 
from a fishing excursion along the banks of the Ur- 
ghundab, had been cut down by a party of assassins. 
It was plain, too, that the Ghilzyes of Western Afghan¬ 
istan—the original lords of the land—^were disinclined 
to bend their necks to the Suddozye yoke. They had 

* HaYdock. former was murdered; the latter es- 

t liwerari^ and Wilmer. The caped with his life. 



ADVANCE UPON GHUZNEE. 


437 


rejected the overtures made to them. They were not 
to be bought by British gold, or deluded by British 
promises. Perhaps they may have doubted the sin¬ 
cerity of the latter. Already were Shah Soojah and 
Macnaghten scattering about those promises even more 
freely than their money ; and already were they ceasing 
to respect the obligation of fulfilling them. The G-hil- 
zyes now regarded us with unconquerable mistrust 
There was every prospect of their long continuing to be a 
thorn in the flesh of the restored monarch and his sup¬ 
porters—a wild and lawless enemy, not to be reduced 
to loyalty by Douranee Kings, or to subjection by foreign 
bayonets. 

This, at all events, had been learnt at Candahar 
during the two months’ halt of our army, which, when 
everything has been said on the subject of supplies, 
seems still to demand from the pen of the historian 
something more in the way of explanation. The sup¬ 
plies had now come into camp. They might not be 
available for the troops on the line of march to Caubul;* 
but there was no longer any excuse for protracting the 
halt. So, on the 27th of June, as Runjeet Singh, the 
old Lion of Lahore, was wrestling with death at his 
own capital, the British army resumed its march; and 
on the 21st of July was before the famous fortress of 
Ghuznee. 


* A convoy of camels laden with 
grain had been for some time ex¬ 
pected from the southward, under 
the charge of a Lohanee merchant, 
named Surwar Khan. Some efforts 
had been made by the enemy to in¬ 
tercept this convoy, or to corrupt the 
Lohanee chief; and it is said that 
nothing but the determined fidelity 
of the leader of the Irre^ar Horse 
that accompanied it, saved the convoy 
from being carried off to the Baruk- 
zyes. It reached Candahar, but there 
a new difiicidty presented itself. The 
camel-drivers refused to proceed. 


There were 20,000 maunds of ^ain 
now at the disposal of our Commissa¬ 
riat officers; out the contumacy of 
these men was now likely to render 
it wholly useless. Suwar Khan had 
contracted to bring the convoy to 
Candahar; but the camel-drivers, 
afraid of the vengeance of Dost Ma¬ 
homed, refused to proceed any further. 
There was kio contending against this; 
so the supplies were made over to the 
Commissariat, and stored at Candahar, 
where a detachment of our troops was 
left. 



438 


XHB VALL 09 GHUZXnBB. 


CHAPTER m. 

[June—August: 1839.] 

The Disunion of the Barukzyes—Prospects of Dost Mahomed—Keane’s 
Advance to Ghuznee—Massacre of the Prisoners—Fall of Ghuznee— 
Flight of Dost Mahomed — Hadjee Khan, Khaukur—Escape of Dost 
Muiomed. 

The disunion of the Barukzye brethren lost Afghanistan 
to the Sirdars. The bloodless fall of Candahar struck 
no astonishment into the soul of Dost Mahomed. He 
had long mistrusted his kinsmen. Candahar, too, was 
the home of the Douran^es. Ho knew that the Baruk¬ 
zyes had nothing to expect from the allegiance of that 
powerful tribe. He knew that they were little inclined 
to strike a blow for the existing dynasty; but he knew, at 
the same time, that they were so prostrate and enfeebled, 
that the Suddozye Prince would derive no active as¬ 
sistance from them—that they would only throw into 
the scale the passive sullenness and harmless decrepitude 
of men broken down by a long course of oppression. 

If Dost Mahomed and the Candahar Sirdars had 
leagued themselves firmly together, without jealousy 
and without suspicion—^if they had declared a religious 
war, had appealed to the Mahomedan feelings of the 
people—if they had, by their own energy and activity, 
encouraged Mehrab Khan, of Khelat, to array himself 
against the invaders, and throwing themselves heart and 
soul into the cause, had opposed our passive through 
the Bolan and Eojuck Passes, they might have turned 



DISUNION OF THE BABUEZTES. 


439 


to the best account the sufferings of our &uiine-stricken 
army, and have given us, at the outset of the campaign, 
a check fix)m which we should not have speedily re¬ 
covered. But it seems to have been the design of Pro¬ 
vidence to paralyse our enemies at this time, and so to 
lure us into greater dangers than any that could have 
beset us at the opening of the campaign. 

But although with slight feelings of astonishment 
Dost Mahomed now contemplated the successful esta¬ 
blishment of Shah Soojah at Candahar, it could not 
have been without emotions of bitterness and mortifica¬ 
tion that he beheld his countrymen either flying ignobly 
before the invaders, or bowing down without shame 
before the money-bags of the infidels. It was a sore 
trial to him to see how almost every chief in the country 
was now prepared to sell his birthright for a mess of 
pottage. He had not suflScient confidence in his own 
strength, or the loyalty of his people, to believe that he 
could offer any effectual resistance to the approach of 
the Suddozye King, supported as he was by British 
bayonets and British gold. His enemies were advanc¬ 
ing upon Caubul, both along the eastern and western 
lines of approach; and he was necessitated to divide his 
strength. Nor could he even give his undivided atten¬ 
tion to his foreign enemies. There were danger and 
disaffection at home. The Kohistan was in rebellion.* 
He could see plainly that the Kuzzilbashes were against 
him. Indeed, all the bulwarks of national defence 
which he could hope to oppose to the advancing enemy, 
were crumbling to pieces before his eyes. Believing 
that all nationality of feeling was utterly extinct in the 
souls of his brethren, it had, ever since he had established 
himself at Caubul, been his policy to place the least pos- 

* The Eohistan is the hiU countiT’ to the north o£ Ceubul, Ijing between 
the capital and the Hindoo-Koosb. 



440 


THE FALL OF 6HUZNEE. 


sible amount of power in their hands, and to entrust all 
his delegated authority to the hands of his sons. His 
only trust now was in them. Akbar Khan had been de¬ 
spatched through the eastern passes to oppose the 
march of Wade and the Sikhs; Hyder Khan was in 
command of the garrison of Ghuznee; and Afeul Khan, 
with a body of horse, was in the neighbourhood of that 
fortress, instructed to operate against the flanks of our 
army in the open country. The Ameer himself was at 
the capital waiting the progress of events, and husband¬ 
ing his strength for the final conflict. 

In the Ameer’s camp there seems to have been little 
knowledge of the movements and designs of the enemy. 
It had been for some time believed that it was the in¬ 
tention of the British chiefs to march upon Herat, and 
now again it was the opinion that they purposed to 
mask Ghuznee and move at once upon Caubul. It 
seems, therefore, to have been the design of Dost Ma¬ 
homed that Afzul Khan and Hyder Khan, having suf¬ 
fered us to advance a mSrch or two beyond Ghuznee, 
should fall upon our rear, whilst Dost Mahomed himself 
was to give us battle from the front.* But he had 
not measured aright the policy of the British Com¬ 
mander. It was not Sir John Keane’s intention to mask 
Ghuznee, but to reduce it. 

The strength of Ghuznee was the boast of the Afghans. 
They believed that it was not to be carried by assault. 
On the other hand. Sir John Keane, persuaded that it 
was not a place of any strength, had advanced upon 
Ghuznee without any siege guns. A battering train had 
been brought up, with great labour and at great ex¬ 
pense, to Candahar, and now that it was likely to be 

* This was the account of the munication with the Prince after his 
Ameer's tactics given by Hjder Khan, capture, and ought to be well in- 
Mohun Lai, upon whose authority 1 formed upon this point, 
instance it, was in daily personal com- 



ABANDONMENT OE THE 6IEOE TBAIN. 


441 


brought into use, and so to repay the labour and the 
expense, Sir John Keane dropped it by the way. He 
was nearing the strongest fortress in the country—he 
knew that it was garrisoned by the enemy, and that, if 
he advanced upon it, it would be vigorously defended. 
He determined to advance upon it; and yet, with an 
amount of infatuation which, although after-events have 
thrown it into the shade, at the time took the country 
by surprise, and was, perhaps, unexampled in Indian 
warfare, he left his heavy guns at Candahar, and ad¬ 
vanced upon Ghuznee with nothing but light field- 
pieces. He had been told that it was a place of no 
considerable strength, and that it would give him 
no trouble to take it. Major Todd and Lieutenant 
Leech had seen Ghuznee, and their reports had dissi¬ 
pated the anxieties of the Commander-in-Chief. So he 
found himself before a place which he subsequently de¬ 
scribed as one of “ great strength both by nature and by 
art,” without any means of effecting a breach in- its walls. 

The city of Ghuznee lies between Candahar and 
Caubul—about 230 miles distant from the former, and 
ninety miles from the latter place. The entire line of 
country from Candahar to Caubul is, in comparison 
with that which lies between Caubul and Peshawnr, 
an open and a level tract, opposing no difliculties to the 
march of an army encumbered with artillery and bag¬ 
gage. As a city, it was of less importance than either 
Caubul or Candahar.* But the strength of the citadel 

♦ “ The town,” says Lieutenant you for the darkened narrow streeta 
Rattray, stands on the extreme and small charloo of Ghuznee. How- 
point of a range of hills, which slope ever, it possesses snujg houses and 
upwards and command the north- capital stabling, sufficient for a ca- 
east angle of the Balia Hissar, near valry brigade, within its walls ; and 
which u perched the tomb of Be- in the cit^el, particularly, the squares 
lool the Wise, among ruined mosques and residences of its former goyer- 
and grave-stones. As a city, it will nors were in many instances spacious 
not bear comparison with Caubul and even princely in their style and 
or Candahar; and a previous visit decorations.** 
to the bazaars of either would spoil 



442 


THE EALL OE OHaZNEE. 


had been famous throughout many generations; and the 
first sight of the fortress, as it burst suddenly on the 
view of our advancing army, “ with its fortifications 
rising up, as it were, on the side of a hill, which seemed 
to form the background to it,” must have thrust upon 
every officer of the force the conviction that, at Can- 
dahar, they had all under-rated the strength of the 
place. It obviously was not a fortress to be breached 
by nine-pounder and six-pounder guns. 

From the fortifications of the citadel Hyder Khan 
looked out through a telescope, and beheld our British 
columns advancing slowly and steadily across the plain. 
Some preparations had been made for external defence; 
but not on any extensive scale. Parties of the enemy 
were posted in the villages and gardens around the‘fort; 
but our light companies soon dislodged them. The 
morning was spent in brisk skirmishing;* the range of 
the enemy’s guns was tried; the engineers reconnoitred 
the place; and then it was determined that the camp 
should be pitched upon the Caubul side of the city. It 
was reported that Dost Mahomed himself was advancing 
from the capital, and it was expedient to cut oft’ his 
direct communication with the fort. Not without some 
confusion the camp was pitched. Had Afzul Khan 
descended with his cavalry upon us at this time, he might 
have wrought dire mischief amongst us. 

Day had scarcely dawned on the 22nd, when Sir John 
Keane, accompanied by Sir Willoughby Cotton and the 
engineers, ascended the heights commanding the eastern 
face of the works, and reconnoitred the fortress. He had 
determined on carrying the place by assault. In ignorance 
of the means whereby this was to be accomplished, the 

* The en^oiyy dislodged from the chief among them. Captain Graves 
garden, retreated to an outwork, of the 16th Native Infantry, and 
whence they directed a heavy fire Lieutenant Homrigh, of the 48th, 
upon our people, and did some mis*^ were wounded* 



FliAK OV THK Aa8AX]I.T. 


44S 


King had recommended that the army should leave 
Ghuznee to itself, and march on at once to CaubuL It 
was evident that the light field>pieces which Keane had 
broiight up with him from Candahar could not breach 
the solid walls of Ghuznee. “ If you once breach the 
place,” said the Shah, “it is yours; but I cannot im- 
derstand how you are to breach it—how you are to 
get into the fort.” But Sir John Keane did understand 
this; for his engineers had taught him. He imderstood, 
though he had left his siege train behind, that there was 
still a resource remaining to him. Though the walls 
could not be breached, a gate, Captain Thomson assured 
him, might be blown in with gunpowder. 

The gate to be blown in was the Caubul gate. All 
the others had been built up. The military historians 
leave it to be surmised by the reader that the know¬ 
ledge of this important fact was derived from the recon^ 
naissances of the British Commander and his engineers. 
The truth is, that the British had then in their camp a 
deserter from the Ghuznee garrison—a Barukzye of 
rank, who had been induced to turn his traitorous back 
upon his tribe. Abdool Bashed Khan was the nephew 
of Dost Mahomed. When the “ Commercial Mission” 
was in Afghanistan, Mohun Lai had made the acquaint¬ 
ance of this man. The Moonshee seems to have been 
endowed with a genius for traitor-making, the lustre of 
which remained imdimmed to the very end of the war. 
He now began to operate upon his friend; and he 
achieved a brilliant success. Abdool Bashed was not 
deaf to the voice of the charmer. Mohun Lai wrote 
him a seductive letter, and he determined to desert. As 
the British army approached Ghuznee he joined our 
camp. “I introduced him,” says Mohun Lai, “to the 
Envoy, who placed him under the immediate disposal 
of Lord Keane. The information which he gave to 
Major Thomson, the chief engineer, relative to the 



444 


THE EAIX OF OHCZNEE. 


fortifications of Ghuznee, was so valuable and necessary, 
that my friend Abdool Rashed Khan was requested to 
attend upon him in all his reconnoitring expeditions.” 
He was precisely the man we wanted. He gave us all 
the information we required. He taught us how to 
capture Ghuznee. 

Having determined to enter Ghuznee through an 
entrance effected by an explosion of gunpowder, Keane 
began to issue his instructions for the assault, which was 
to take place before daybreak on the following morning. 
Every preparation was made, and every precaution was 
taken to ensure success. It was a day of expectation 
and anxiety, and not wholly uneventful. On that 22nd 
of July was made known to us, with fearful demon¬ 
strativeness, the character of those fanatic soldiers of 
Islam, who have since become so terribly familiar to us 
under the name of Ghazees. Incited by the priesthood, 
they flock to the green banner, eager to win Paradise 
by the destruction of their infidel foes, or to forestal the 
predestined bliss by dying the martyr’s death in the 
attempt. A party of these fearless followers of the 
Prophet had assembled in the neighbourhood of Ghuznee, 
and now they were about to pour down upon the Shah’s 
camp, and to rid the country of a King who had out¬ 
lined Mahomedanism by returning to his people borne 
aloft on the shoulders of the infidels. A gallant charge 
of the Shah’s Horse, led by Peter Nicolson, who took 
no undistinguished part in the after-events of the war, 
checked the onslaught of these desperate fanatics; and 
Outram, with a party of foot, followed them to the 
heights where the cavalry had driven them, and cap¬ 
tured their holy standard. Some fifty prisoners were 
taken. It is painful to relate what followed. Con¬ 
ducted into the presence of Shah Soojah, they gloried 
in their high calling, and openly reviled their King. 
One of them, more audacious than the rest, stabbed one 



ICASSACBE OF THE GHAZEES. 


445 


of the royal attendants. Upon this, orders were issued 
for the massacre of the whole. 

The Shah ordered them to be beheaded, and they 
were hacked to death, with wanton barbarity, by the 
knives of his executioners. Coolly and deliberately the 
slaughter of these unhappy men proceeded, till the whole 
lay mangled and mutilated upon the blodd-stained 
ground.* Macnaghten, a little time before, had been com¬ 
mending the humane instincts of the King. The hu¬ 
manity of Shah Soojah was nowhere to be found except 
m Macnaghten’s letters. It is enough simply to recite 
the circumstances of a deed so terrible as this. It was 
an unhappy and an ominous commencement. The Shah 
had marched all the way from Loodhianah without en¬ 
countering an enemy. And now the first men taken 
in arms against him were cruelly butchered in cold 
blood by the “humane” monarch. The act, impolitic 
as it was unrighteous, brought its own sure retribution. 
That “martyrdom” was never forgotten. The day of 
reckoning came at last; and when our unholy policy 
sunk unburied in blood and ashes, the shrill cry of the 
Ghazee sounded as its funeral wail. 

* There has been so much bitter and other servants amusing them- 
controversj on this unhappy subject, selves (for actually they were laugh- 
that I have not written this bare out- ing and joking, and seemed to look 
line of the event without instituting upon the work as good fun) with hack- 
inquiries among those who were most ing and maiming the poor wretches in- 
likely to have had some personal cog- discriminately with their long swords 
nizance of it. That I have rightly and knives. I was so horrified at 
characterised these murders 1 know, coming so suddenly on such a scene 
for 1 have the evidence of one who of blood, that I was for the instant, as 
saw the butchery going on. An officer it were, spell-bound. On inquiry, 
of the highest character writes, in I ascertained that the King had or- 
reply to my inquiries: As regards dered this wholesale murder in con- 
what is called the Ghuznee massacre, sequence of one of the number (they 
I was walking one day in camp, and were, or were said to be, all Ghazees^ 
came upon the King^s tents, at the who had shortly before been taken 
rear of which 1 saw a fearfully bloody prisoners) having stabbed, in his Mar 
sight. There were forty or fifty men, jesty’s presence, a Pesh-Khidmut, or 
young and old. Many were dead; body-attendant of the King. My 
others at their last gasp; others with friend and I made our exit; and he 
their hands tied behind them; some went direct to the Envoy’s tent and 
sitting, others standing, awaking their reported the circumstance.’*— 
doom; and the King^s executioners Correspondence.'] 



446 


THB VAUa of GHTJZNEE* 


A gusty niglit had heralded a gusty morn, when 
Keane, inwardly bewailing the absence of his heavy 
guns, planted his light field-pieces on some command¬ 
ing heights opposite the citadel, and filled the gardens 
near the city walls with his Sepoy musketeers. No 
sound issued from the fortress, nor was there any sign of 
life, whilst unseen under cover of the night, and unheard 
above the loud wailings of the wind, the storming 
column was gathering upon the Caubul road, and the 
engineers were carrying up their powder-bags to the gate. 
The advance was under Colonel Dennie, of the 13 th 
Light Infantry; and the main column under Brigadier 
Sale.* Captain Thomson, of the Bengal Engineers, 
directed the movements of the explosion party; and 
with him were his two subalterns, Durand and Mac- 
leod, and Captain Peat, of the Bombay corps. Three 
hours after midnight everything was ready for the 
assault. 

Then Keane ordered the light batteries to open upon 
the works of Ghuznee. It was a demonstration— 
harmless but not useless; for it fixed the attention of 
the enemy, and called forth a responsive fire. A 
row of blue lights along the walls now suddenly broke 
through the darkness and illuminated the place. The 
enemy had been beguiled by the false attack, and were 
now looking out towards our batteries, eager to learn 
the nature of the operations commenced by the invest¬ 
ing force. And whilst the Afghans were thus engaged, 
anticipating an escalade and manning their walls, the 
British engineers were quietly piling their powder-bags 
at the Caubul gate. 

The work was done rapidly and well. The match 

^ * The advance consisted of the storminff columns. The regiments 
light companies of the four European were: 3ie 2nd, the 13th, and 17th 
regiments; the remaining companies (Queen’s), and the Company’s Euro* 
composed the other sections of the pean Be^ment. 



THS STOlEtlimO OS' 6UUZNBK. 


447 


was applied to the hose. The powder exploded,* 
Above the roaring of the guns and the rushing of the 
wind, the noise of the explosion was barely audible.f 
But the effect was as mighty as it was sudden. A 
column of black smoke arose; and down with a crash 
came heavy masses of masonry and shivered beams in 
awful ruin and confusion. Then the bugle sounded the 
advance. Dennie, at the head of his stormers, pushed 
forward through the smoke and dust of the aperture; 
and soon the bayonets of his light companies were cross¬ 
ing the swords of the enemy who had rushed down to 
the point of attack. A few moments of darkness and 
confusion; and then the foremost soldiers caught a 
glimpse of the morning sky, and pushing gallantly on, 
were soon established in the fortress. Three hearty, 
animating cheers—so loud and clear that they were 
heard throughout the general camp|—announced to their 
excited comrades below that Dennie and his stormers 
had entered Ghuznee, 

Then Sale pressed on with the main column, eager to 
support the stormers in advance; and as he went he met 
an engineer officer of the explosion party, who had been 
thrown to the ground, shattered and bewildered by the 
concussion,§ and who now announced that the gate was 
choked up, and that Dennie could not force an entrance. 
So Sale sounded the retreat. The column halted. 
There was a pause of painful doubt and anxiety; and 
then the cheering notes of the bugle, sounding the ad¬ 
vance, again stirred the hearts of our people. Another 
engineer officer had reported that, though the aperture 
was crowded with fallen rubbish, Dennie had made good 

* Hongh says: “LieutenantDurand f Hayelock. Hough says: “ The 

was obliged to scrapNe the hose with explosion was heard by nearly all.*^ 
his finger-nails, finding the powder J Havelock, 
failed to ignite on the first appUca- § Captain Feat, 
tion of title port-fire.** 



448 


THE EAIX OE GHUZNEE. 


his entrance. Onward, therefore, went Sale; but the 
enemy had profited by the brief pause. The opposition 
at the gateway now was more resolute than it would 
have been if there had been no check. The Afghans 
were crowding to the gate—^some for purposes of de¬ 
fence, others to escape the fire which Dennie was pour¬ 
ing in upon them. Sale met them amidst the ruins— 
amidst the crumbled masonry and the fallen timbers. 
There was a sturdy conflict. The Brigadier himself 
was cut down ;* but after a desperate stru gg le with his 
opponent, whose skull he clove with his sabre, he re¬ 
gained his feet, again issued his commands; and the 
main column was soon within the fortress. The sup¬ 
port, under Colonel Croker, then pushed forward; the 
reserve in due course followed; the capture of Ghuznee 
was complete; and soon the colours of the 13th and 
17th Regiments were flapping in the strong morning 
breeze on the ramparts of the Afghans’ last strong¬ 
hold.! 


♦ I give the circumstances of Sale’s 
escape in the words of Captain 
Havelock, who has detailed tjiem 
with trustworthy minuteness. “ One 
of their number rushing over the 
fallen timbers, brought down Briga¬ 
dier Sale by a cut in the face with 
his sharp shiuisheer (sabre). The 
Afghan repeated his blow as his op¬ 
ponent was falling; but the pummel, 
not the edge of his sword, this time 
took cflect, though with stunning 
violence. lie lost his footing, how¬ 
ever, in the effort, and Briton and 
Afghan rolled together amongst the 
fractured timbers. Thus situated, 
the first care of the Brigadier was to 
master the weapon of his adversary. 
He snatched at it, but one of his 
lingers met the edge of the trenchant 
blade. He quickly withdrew his 
wounded hand, and adroitly replaced 
it over that of his adversary, so as 
to keep fast the hilt of his shunsheer. 
But he had an active and powerful 


opponent, and was himself faint from 
the loss of blood. Captain Kershaw, 
of the 13th, aide-de-camp to Brigadier 
Baumgardt, happened in the mulee to 
approach the scene of conflict; the 
wounded leader recognised and called 
to him for aid. Kershaw passed his 
drawn sabre through the body of the 
Afghan ; but still the desperado con¬ 
tinued to struggle with frantic vio¬ 
lence. At length, in the fierce grap>- 
ple, the Brigadier for a moment got 
uppermost. Still retaining the wea¬ 
pon of his enemy in his left hand, he 
dealt him with his right a cut from 
his own sabre, which cleft his skull 
from the crown to the eyebrows. 
The Mahomedan once shouted, ^Ne 
UUanr (Oh! God!) and never 
moved or spoke again .”—[^Captain 
Havelock's ifarraiive,"] 

t Havelock. The colour of the 
ISth was the first planted by the 
hand of Bnsign Frere—a nephew of 
the Hon. John Hookbam Frere. 



FOEBEABANCE OF THE VICTOES. 


449 


But there was much hard fighting within the walls. 
In the frenzy of despair the A%hans rushed out from 
their hiding-places, sword in hand, upon our stormcrs, 
and plied their sabres with terrible effect, but only to 
meet with fearful retribution from the musket-fire or the 
bayonets of the British infantry. There was horrible 
confusion and much carnage. Some, in their frantic 
efforts to escape by the gateway, stumbled over the 
burning timbers, wounded and exhausted, and were 
slowly burnt to death. Some were bayoneted on the 
ground. Others were pursued and hunted into corners 
like mad dogs, and shot down, with the curse and the 
prayer on their lips. But never, it is said by the his¬ 
torians of the war, after the garrison had ceased to fight, 
did the wrath of their assailants overtake them. Many 
an Afghan sold his life dearly, and, though wounded 
and stricken down, still cut out at the hated enemy; 
but when resistance was over, mercy smiled down upon 
him. The appeals of the helpless were never dis¬ 
regarded by the victors in their hour of triumph. The 
women, too, were honourably treated. Hyder Khan’s 
Zenana was in the citadel; but not a woman was out¬ 
raged by the captors.* 

Resistance over, the Commander-in-Cljief and the 
Envoy entered Ghuznee by the Caubul gate. Shah 
Soojah, before the contest was over, had ridden down 
to the point of attack, and watched the progress of 
events with the deepest interest, but with no apparent 
want of collectedness and nerve.f Keane and Mac- 

* Havelock. The military histo- diflerent if individual soldiers had 
rian attaches the forbearance of the entered the town primed with arrack, 
soldiery to the fact, that no spirit or if spirituous liquors had been dis- 
rations had been served out to them covered in the Afghfin depots.’* 
during the preceding fortnight. ‘‘No f I bave been assured by an officer 
candid man,” he says, “ of any mi- on the staiT of the Shah's army, that 
litary experience, will deny that the he was near his Majesty, at the 
character of the scene, in the fortress taking of Ghuznee, when under fire, 
and the citadel, would hare been far and that he exhibited great coolness 

VOE. I. 2 G 



450 


THE FAUi OF GHUZNEE. 


naghten now led him up to the citadel. The wife of 
Hyder Khan, and the other women of his Zenana, 
were conducted, under the orders of the political and 
military chiefs, by John ConoUy, a cousin of the Envoy, 
to a house in the town, where they were placed under 
the charge of the Moonshee Mohun Lai.* But Hyder 
Khan himself had not yet been discovered. The Suddozye 
Prince and the British chiefs were inquiring after the 
commander of the garrison; but no tidings of him were 
to be obtained. He might have been concealed in the 
fortress, or ho might have effected his escape. Accident 
only betrayed the position of the young Sirdar. He 
■was found in a house near the Candahar gate, by an 
officer of the Company’s European regiment.f At once 
acknowledging that he was the governor of Ghuznee, he 
threw himself upon the mercy of his captors. Con¬ 
ducted to Keane’s tent, the Sirdar was guaranteed his 
personal safety, and placed under the charge of Sir 
Alexander Burnes.J He was unwilling at first to appear 
in the presence of Shah Soqjah; but the assurances of 

and courage. He is said by my in- Stocqueler (^Memorials of Afghanis- 
formant, who was close beside him, to tan) attributes the honour of the 
have sate “as firm as a rock,not show- capture to Brigadier lloberts, who di- 
ing the slightest alarm either by word rected Captain Tayler to proceed to 
or gesture, and seeming to think it the house. 

derogatory to his kingly character to J “ The Sirdar, mounted on a 
move an inch whilst the firing lasted.” small horse, and accompanied by a 
— iMS. Correspondence.'] few of his companions, was conducted 

* Mohun Lai says : “ Captain John by Major Maegregor to the tent of 
Conolly conducted them, with every the Commaiider-in-Chief. Sir Alex- 
mark of deference, to a house in the ander Burnes and myself were sent 
town, where it fell to my lot to pro- for, and as soon as the Sirdar saw 
vide them with everything necessary him he felt a little easy in his mind; 
which they wanted; and that respon- and discovering me with him, the ex- 
sible charge of them I had for a long pression of his countenance was at once 
time, and executed it to the satisfac- changed, and he asked me for a glass 
tion of the ladies, until they were sent of water. Lord Keane allowed him 
to India .”—[_Life of Dost Mahomed.] to remain in my tent, under the charge 
f Captain Tayler, Brigade-Major of Sir A. Burnes. I clothed hSn 
of the 4th Brig^e. Mohun Lai says with my own clothes every day, and 
that “ Miyor Maegregor found him he partook of my meals .”—[Mohun 
concealed with an armed party in the Lafs Life of Dost Mahomed.] 
tower, waiting for the night.” Mr. 



FLIGHT OF AFZUX KHAK. 


451 


the Commander-in-Chief overcame his reluctance, and 
Keane conducted him both to the Mission and to the 
King. Instructed as to the reception he was to accord 
to the fallen Barukzye chief, the Suddozye monarch re< 
ceived him with an outward show of kindness, and, with 
the dignified courtesy which he so well knew how to 
assume, declared that he foi^ave the past, and told him 
to go in peace. 

And so Ghuznoe fell to the British army, and was 
made over to the Suddozye King. It cost the victors 
only seventeen killed and a hundred and sixty-five 
wounded. Of these last eighteen were officers. The 
carnage among the garrison was more fearful. Upwards 
of five hundred men were buried by the besiegers; and 
many more are supposed to have fallen beyond the 
walls, under the sabres of the British horsemen. Six¬ 
teen hundred prisoners were taken. Immense stores of 
grain and flour, sufficient for a protracted defence, fell 
into our hands; and a large number of horses and arms 
swelled the value of the captured property. 

The fall of Ghuznee—a fortress hitherto deemed by 
the Afghans impregnable—astounded Dost Mahomed 
and his sons, and struck terror into their souls. Afzul 
Khan, who was hovering about the neighbourhood, pre¬ 
pared to fall upon our baffled army, found, to his won¬ 
derment, that the British colours were waving over the 
far-famed citadel of Ghuznee, and immediately sought 
safety in flight. Abandoning his elephants and the whole 
of his camp-equipage, which fell as booty into the hands 
of Shah Soojah, the Sirdar fled to Caubul. His father, 
greatly incensed, ordered him immediately to halt, and 
“ peremptorily refused to receive him.”* He had ex¬ 
pected something better from one who had done such 
good service on the boasted battle-field of Jumtood. 

* Outram. 

2 o 2 



452 


THE FALL OF GHUZNEE. 


In little more than four-and-twenty hours after the 
fall of Ghuznee, intelligence of the event reached the 
camp of the Ameer. He at once assembled his chiefs, 
spoke of the defection of some of his people, expressed 
his apprehension that others were about to desert him, 
and declared his conviction that, without the aid of 
treachery, Ghuznee would not have fallen before the 
Feringhees. Then he called upon aU present, who 
wavered in their loyalty, at once to withdraw from his 
presence, that he might know the extent of his resources, 
and not rely upon the false friendship of men who 
would forsake him in the crisis of his fate. All protested 
their fidelity. A council of war was held, and the Ne- 
wab Jubbar Khan was despatched to the British camp* 
to treat with Shah Soojah and his allies. 

The Newab mounted his horse and rode with unac¬ 
customed rapidity to Ghuznee. Mohun Lai went out to 
meet him some miles beyond the camp; and Burnes re¬ 
ceived him at the piquets. A tent was pitched for his ac¬ 
commodation near the Envoy’s; and he was well received 
by the British Mission. The King received him, too, with 
the same well-trained courtesy that he had bestowed on 
Hyder Khan—but the efforts of the Newab were fruit¬ 
less. He tendered on the part of the Ameer submission 
to the Suddozye Prince; but claimed, on the part of the 
brother of Futteh Khan, the hereditary office of Wuzeer, 
which had been held so long and so ably by the Baruk- 
zyes. The claim was at once rejected, and the mockery 
of an honourable asylum” in the British dominions 
offered in its stead. Jubbar Khan spoke out plainly and 
bluntly, like an honest man. His brother had no ambi¬ 
tion to surrender his freedom and become a pensioner 

* Whether this step was taken by agreed to by his principal partisans, 
Dost Mahomed on his own account, does not very clearly appear, 
or whether it was recommended or 



SITUATION OF THE AMEEB. 


453 


on the bounty of the British Government. Had liis 
cause been far more hopeless than it was, Dost Maho¬ 
med would have rather flung himself upon the British 
bayonets than upon the protection of the Feringhees. 
Jubbar Khan then frankly stating his own determination 
to follow the fortunes of his brother, requested and re¬ 
ceived his dismissal.* 

The Newab returned to the Ameer’s camp. All hope 
of negotiation was now at an end, and Dost Mahomed, 
with resolution Avorthy of a better fate, marched out to 
dispute the progress of the invaders. At the head of an 
army, in which the seeds of dissolution had already 
been sown, he moved down upon Urghundeh. There 
he drew up his troops and parked his guns. But it was 
not on this ground that he had determined to give the 
Feringhees battle. The last stand was to have been 
made at Maidan, on the Caubul river—a spot, the 
natural advantages of which would have been greatly in 
his favour. But the battle was never fought. At Ur¬ 
ghundeh it became too manifest that there was treachery 
in his camp. The venal Kuzzilbashes were fast desert¬ 
ing his standard. There was scarcely a true man left in 
his ranks. Hadjee Khan, Khaukur, on whom he had 
placed great reliance, had gone over to the enemy, and 
others were fast following his example. This was the 
crisis of his fate. He looked around him and saw only 
perfidy on the right hand and on the left. Equal to 

• Mohun Lai says that the Ne- wab took his departure without see- 
wab, who had acted with the greatest ing the Sirdar. He said significantly 
friendliness towards Bumes and his to the Envoy, in the course of con- 
Mission, and was known to have been versation, ‘‘ If Shah Soojah is really 
at the head of the English party in a King, and come to the kingdom of 
Caubul, begged that the wife of Hy- his ancestors, what is the use of your 
der Khan might be given up to him; army and name ? You have brought 
but preferred the request in vain, him, by your money and arms, into 
He sought an interv iew, too, with his Afghanistan. Leave him now with 
nephew; and it would have been us Afghans, and let him rule us if 
granted to him, but the official re- he can.’' 
ferences caused delay, and the Ne- 



454 


THE FALL OF GHHZKEE. 


the occasiou, but basely deserted, what could the Ameer 
do ? Never had the nobility of his nature shone forth 
more truly and more lustrously. In the hour of ad¬ 
versity, when all were false, he was true to his own 
manhood. Into the midst of his own perfidious troops 
he rode, with the Koran in his hand; and there called 
upon his followers, in the names of God and the Prophet, 
not to forget that they were true Mahomedans—not to 
disgrace their names and to dishonour their religion, by 
rushing into the arms of one who had filled the country • 
with infidels and blasphemers. He besought them to 
make one stand, like brave men and true believers; to 
rally round the standard of the commander of the faith¬ 
ful; to beat back the invading Feringhees or die in the 
glorious attempt. He then reminded them of his own 
claims on their fidelity. “ You have eaten my salt,” he 
said, “ these thirteen years. If, as is too plain, you are 
resolved to seek a new master, grant me but one favour 
in requital for that long period ol‘ maintenance and kind¬ 
ness—enable me to die with honour. Stand by the 
brother of Futteh Khan, whilst he executes one last 
charge against the cavalry of these Feringhee dogs; in 
that onset be will fall; then go and make your own 
terms with Shah Soojah.”* The noble spirit-stirring 
appeal was f ainly uttered; few responded to it. There 
was scarcely a true heart left. With despairing eyes he 
looked around upon his recreant followers. He saw 
that there was no hope of winning them back to their 
old allegiance; he felt that he was surrounded by 
traitors and cowards, who were willing to abandon him 
to his fate. It was idle to struggle against his destiny. 
The first bitter pang was over; he reassumed his serenity 
of demeanour, and, addressing himself to the Kuzzil- 
bashes, formally gave them their discharge. He then 

• Havelock. 



FLIGHT OF DOST MAHOMED. 


455 


dismissed all who were inclined to purchase safety by 
tendering allegiance to the Shah; and with a small hand¬ 
ful of followers, leaving his guns still in position, turned 
his horse’s head towards the regions of the Hindoo- 
Koosh. 

It was on tlio evening of the 2nd of August that Dost 
Mahomed fled from Urghiindeh. On the following day 
the British army, which had moved from Ghuznee on 
the 30th of July, received tidings of his flight. It was 
now determi)ied to send a party in pursuit. It was 
mainly to consist of Afghan horsemen; but some details 
from our cavalry regiments were sent with them, and 
Captain Outram, ever ready for such service, volunteered 
for the command. Other officers — bold riders and 
dashing soldiers*—were eager to join in the pursuit; 
and a party of ten, with about five hundred mounted 
men, mustered that afternoon before the Mission tents, 
equipped for the raid. 

If the success of this expedition had depended upon 
the zeal and activity of the officers. Dost Mahomed 
would have been brought back a prisoner to the British 
camp; for never did a finer set of men leap into their 
saddles, flushed with the thought of the stirring work 
before them. But when they set out in pursuit of the 
fallen Ameer, a traitor rode with them, intent on turn¬ 
ing to very nothingness all their chivalry and devotion. 
There was an Afghan chief known as Hadjee Khan, 
Khaukur, of whom mention has been made. He was a 
man of mean extraction, the son of a goat-herd,f but from 
this low estate had risen into notice, and obtained ser¬ 
vice with Dost Mahomed. It was not in his nature to 
be faithful. He deserted Dost Mahomed, and attached 

♦ The names of many of them Trere Lieutenants Broadfoot, Hogg, Ryves, 
subsequently associated with the later and Dr. Worral. Captains Tayler and 
incidents of the war. They were Trevor joined them on the 8«i. 
Captains Wheler, Troup, Lawrence, f Outram says he was a melon- 
Backhouse, Christie, and Erskinc: fseller. 



456 


THE FALL OF GHDZNBE. 


himself to the Candahar Sirdars. On the advance of 
the British army he deserted the Sirdars, and flung him¬ 
self at the feet of the Suddozye. Delighted with such 
an accession to his strength, the King appointed him 
Nassur-ood-dowlah, or “ Defender of the State,” and con¬ 
ferred on him a Jaghire of the annual value of three 
lakhs of rupees. 

At Candahar, whence the Sirdars had fled, the Had- 
jee, profoundly conscious of the hopelessness of their 
cause, broke out into loyalty and enthusiasm, and was, to 
all outward seeming, a faithful adherent of the Shah. 
But as he entered the principality of the Caubul Ameer, 
he seemed to stand upon more uncertain ground; the 
issue of the contest was yet doubtfiil. Dost Mahomed 
and his sons were in the field. So the Hadjee made 
many excuses; and fell in the rear of the British army. 
He was sick; it was necessary that he should march 
easily; he could not bear the bustle of the camp. Keep¬ 
ing, therefore, a few marches in the rear, he followed 
our advancing columns, with his retainers; and there, it 
is said, “ enjoyed the congenial society of several discon¬ 
tented and intriguing noblemen.”* 

If Ghuznee had not fallen, Hadjee Khan and his 
friends would have gone over in a body to the Ameer, 


* See the “ Life of Hadjee Khan, 
Khaukur, the Talleyrand of the East,” 
published originally in the Delhi Ga¬ 
zette. It is attributed to the pen of 
Arthur Conolly. The writer adds: 
“ In the comp of those chiefs con¬ 
spiracies against Shab Soojah and his 
allies were daily agitated. Their 
letters formed the pride, the comfort, 
the hope, and the amusement of the 
Caubul Court.Some¬ 

times it was proposed by the traitors 
to attack the English camp in con¬ 
cert with the Ghilzyes at night. Fear 
prevented this plot ripening; but had 
the army met with a repulse, it would 
undoubtedly have been attacked in 
rear. At last, at a full meeting—1 


have it from the lips of one present 
at it—it was determined to loin Dost 
Mahomed e7i masse. At this meet¬ 
ing were the Hackee Khan, Hadjee 
Dost, FyztuUub Khan, Noorzye, and 
many others. They had been de¬ 
ceived by a false report of a partial 
action of cavalry the day before; 
the opportunity had arrived, they 
thought, for giving us the coup de 
grace, Harmy had the conclave 
separated, when intelligence wa? re¬ 
ceived of the capture of Ghuznee. It 
need hardly be said that, a few hours 
afterwards, Hadjee Khan and the 
rest were congratulating his Majesty 
on the splendid victory. ’ 



HASJEE KHAN, KHAUKUB. 


457 


and on the slightest information of a reverse having be¬ 
fallen us, would have flung themselves on our rear. But 
the fall of this great Afghan stronghold brought the 
Hadjee again to the stirrup of the Shah; and he was 
again all loyalty and devotion. Confident of his fidelity, 
and perhaps anxious to establish it in the eyes of all 
who had viewed with suspicion the proceedings of the 
Hadjee, the King now put it to the proof. The man 
had once been Governor of Bameean. He knew the 
country along which the Dost had taken his flight. 
What could be better than to entrust the conduct of the 
expedition to the veteran chief? The King and Mac- 
naghten were of the same mind; so Hadjee Khan, who 
had been for some time in treasonable correspondence 
with Dost Mahomed, was now despatched to overtake him 
and bring him back a prisoner to the camp of the Shah. 

The result may be easily anticipated. Hadjee Khan 
cheerfully undertook the duty entrusted to him. The 
enterprise required the utmost possible amount of energy 
and promptitude to secure its success. The Ameer and 
his party were more than a day’s journey in advance of 
his pursuers. Every hour’s delay lessened the chance 
of overtaking the fugitive. So the Hadjee began at 
once to delay. The pursuers were to have started four 
hours after noon; Hadjee Khan was not ready till night¬ 
fall. Then he was eager to take the circuitous high 
road instead of dashing across the hills. His people 
lagged behind to plunder. He himselti when Outram 
was most eager to push on, always counselled a halt, and 
in the hour of need the guides deserted. The Ameer 
was now but little in advance; he Avas encumbered 
with women, and children, and much baggage. He had 
a sick son,* on whose account it was necessary to dimi- 

* Akbar Khan, who had by this joined his father's camp prostrated 
time been withdrawn from the de- by sickness, 
fence of the Khybur line, and had 



45d 


THE FALL OF GHUZNEB. 


nisli the speed of his flight. Outrani seemed almost to 
have the Ameer in his grasp; when Hadjee Khan again 
counselled delay. It was necessary, he said, to wait for 
reinforcements. The Ameer had two thousand fighting 
men. The Afghans under Hadjee Khan were not to be 
relied upon. They had no food; their horses were 
knocked up; they were unwilling to advance. Angry 
and indignant, Oiitram broke from the Hadjee in the 
midst of his entreaties, and declared that he would 
push on with his own men. Again and again there 
was the same contention between the chivalrous ear¬ 
nestness of the British officer and the foul treachery of 
the Afghan chief. At last, on the 9th of August, they 
reached Bameean, where Hadjee Khan had repeatedly 
declared that Dost Mahomed would halt, only to learn 
that the fugitives were that morning to be at S 3 'ghan, 
nearly thirty miles in advance. The Ameer was push¬ 
ing on with increased rapidity, for the sick Prince, 
who had been carried in a litter, was now transferred 
to the back of an elephant, and his escape was now 
almost certain. The treachery of Hadjee Khan had 
done its work. Outram had been restricted in his 
operations to the limits of the Shah’s dominions; and 
the Ameer had now ])assed the borders. Further 
pursuit, indeed, would have been hopeless. The horses 
of our cavalry were exhausted by over-fatigue and want 
of food. They were unable any longer to continue their 
forced marches. The game, therefore, was up. Dost 
Mahomed had escaped. Hadjee Khan, Khaukur, had 
saved the Ameer; but he had sacrificed himself. He 
had over-reached himself in his career of treachery, and 
was now to pay the penalty of detection. Outram 
officially reported the circumstances of the Hadjee’s 
conduct, which had baffled all his best efforts—efforts 
which, ho believed, would have been crowned with sue- 



CAPTtmfi Ot THK AMEBr’S BARK. 


459 


cess*—and the traitor, on his return to Caubul, was 
arrested by orders of the Shah. Other proofs of his 
treason were readily found; and he was sentenced to 
end a life of adventurous vicissitude as a state prisoner 
in the provinces of Hindostan.f 

So fled Dost Mahomed Khan across the frontier of 
Afghanistan. His guns were found in position at Ur- 
ghundeh by a party of cavalry and horse artillery sent 
Ibrward to capture them. They were mostly light 
piecesand neither the ordnance nor the position which 
had been taken up, could be considered of a very for¬ 
midable character.^ It has been already said, however, 
that the Ameer had fixed upon another spot on which 
to meet the advancing armies of the Shah and his allies 
—a spot well calculated for defence, which, three years 
afterwards, Shumshoodeen Khan selected for his last 


♦ Others, however, thought that his 
failure was fortunate, it being onl^yr 
too probable, in their opinion, that, if 
he had come up with the fugitive, his 
little party would have been over¬ 
whelmed by the followers of the 
Ameers and the traitorous Afghan 
horsemen whom Hadjec Khan had 
taken with him. 

t He was confined at Chunar, 
where he seems to have borne his 
imprisonment with considerable phi¬ 
losophy. 

J “ With regard to the ordnance 
captured at Urghiindeh, the guns 
were of all calibres, chiefly below 
6-pounder—one a 17-pouiider, and a 
few of different sizes, between 17 and 

12-pounders.The number of 

shot left at Urghundeh was 4270, of 

various sizes.The shot is 

hammered iron, and so uneven, that, 
unless weighed, their weight could 
not be told. They are chiefly much 

under 6-pounder shot.With 

regard to the other stores taken at 
Urghundeh, nothing was of the 
slightest service, except the old iron of 
the carriages, and the axletrees, also 
good as old iron only, and to which 


purpose they have been appropriated.** 
—{^TAeutenant Warhurton to Sir W. 
Jl. Macnaffhten: Cauhul^ August 15, 
1841. MS, Records.'] 

§ “ Onward,” says Captain Have¬ 
lock, “ moved the force, and an hour 
had not elapsed since the day broke 
when it came full upon the abandoned 
ordnance of the fallen Barukzye. 
Twenty-two pieces of various calibre, 
but generally good guns, on field 
carriages, superior to those generally 
seen in tlic armies of Asiatic Princes, 
were parked in a circle in the Ameer’s 
late position. Two more were placed 
in battery in the village of Urghundeh, 
at the foot of the hills. . . . The route 
by which we had advanced was 
flanked by a deep, impracticable 
ravine, on which the Afghan left 
would have rested ; there their artil¬ 
lery had been parked, and would pro* 
bably from this point have swept the 
open plain, and searched the narrow 
defile by which we would have de¬ 
bouched upon. Their front was open 
for the exertions of a bold and active 
cavaliys and here the Ameer might at 
least liave died with honour.” 






460 


THE PAM. OP GHUZNEE. 


Stand against the battalions of General Nott; but on which^ 
like his distinguished clansman, he never gave us battle. 

On the 6th of August, Shah Soojah and the British 
army appeared before the walls of Caubul. On the fol¬ 
lowing day the King entered the capital of Afghanistan. 
The exile of thirty years—^the baffled and rejected repre¬ 
sentative of the legitimacy of the Douranee Empire, was 
now at the palace gates. The jingling of the money¬ 
bags, and the gleaming of the bayonets of the British, had 
restored him to the throne which, without these glitter¬ 
ing aids, he had in vain striven to recover. The Balia 
Hissar of Caubul now reared its proud front before him. 
It was truly a great occasion. The King, gorgeous in 
regal apparel, and resplendent with jewels, rode a white 
charger, whose equipments sparkled with Asiatic gold.* 
It was a goodly sight to see the coronet, the girdle, and 
the bracelets which scintillated upon the person of the 
rider, and turned the fugitive and the outcast into a 
pageant and a show. There were those present to 
whom the absence of the Koli-i-Noor, which, caged in 
Hyde Park, has become so familiar to the sight-seers 
of Great Britain, suggested strange reminiscences of the 
King’s eventful past. But the restored monarch, want¬ 
ing the great diamond, still sparkled into royalty as he 
rode up to the Balia Hissar, with the white-faced Kings 
of Afghanistan beside him. In diplomatic costume, Mac- 
naghten and Burnes accompanied the Suddozye puppet. 
The principal military officers of the British army rode 
with them. And Moonshee Mohun Lai, flaunting a 
majestic turban, and looking, in his spruceness, not at 
all as though his mission in Afghanistan were to do the 
dirty work of the British diplomatists, made a very con¬ 
spicuous figure in the gay cavalcade.f 

* Havelock. the military annalist to disturb the 

*1* I am indebted for this, as for gravity of the historical inquirer, but 
much else, to Captain Havelock, it is impossible to restrain asmile at the 
There is but little in the pages of happy wording of the following; ** Let 



ENTBT IKTO CAUBUL. 


461 


But never was there a duller procession. The King 
and his European supporters rode through the streets of 
Caubul to the palace in the citadel; but as they went 
there was no popular enthusiasm; the voice of welcome 
was still. The inhabitants came to the thresholds of the 
houses simply to look at the show. They stared at 
the European strangers more than at the King, who had 
been brought back to Caubul by the Feringhees; and 
scarcely even took the trouble to greet the Suddozye 
Prince with a common salaam. It was more like a 
funeral procession than the entry of a King into the 
capital of his restored dominions. But when Shah 
Soojah reached the palace from which he had so long 
been absent, he broke out into a paroxysm of childish 
delight—visited the gardens and apartments with eager 
activity—commented on the signs of neglect which 
everywhere presented themselves to his eyes—and re¬ 
ceived with feelings of genial pleasure the congratula¬ 
tions of the British officers, who soon left his Majesty 
to himself to enjoy the sweets of restored dominion.* 


me not forget to record that Moonshec 
Mohun Lai, a traveller and an au¬ 
thor, as well as his talented master, 
appeared on horseback on this occa¬ 
sion in a new upper garment of a 
very gay colour, and under a turban 
of very admirable fold and majestic 
dimensions, and was one of the gayest 
as well as the most sagacious and 
successful personages in the whole 
cortege" 

* General Harlan, who was at 
Caubul at this time, has written an 
account of the desertion of Dost 
Mahomed by his followers at Ur- 
ghundeh, wmch only wants a con¬ 
viction of its entire truth to render 
it extremely interesting. According 
to this writer, the Ameer was not 
only deserted, but plundered by his 
followers at the last. A crowd of 


noisy disorganised troops,^’ he says, 
“insolently pressed close up to the 
royal pavilion—the guards had dis¬ 
appeared—the groom holding the 
Prince’s horse was unceremoniously 
pushed to and fro—a servant auda¬ 
ciously pulled away the pillow which 
sustained the Prince’s arm—another 
commenced cutting a piece of the 
splendid Persian carpet—the beau¬ 
tiful praying rug of the Prince was 
seized on by a third. . . . ‘Take 
all,’ said he, ‘that you find within, 
together with the tent.’ In an in¬ 
stant the unruly crowd rushed upon 
the pavilion—swords gleamed in the 
air and descended upon the tent— 
the canvas, the rojies, the carpets, 
pillows, screens, &c., were seized and 
dispersed among the plunderers.” 



46) 


DAW or THE RESTORATION. 


CHAPTER IV. 

[August—December : 1839.] 

Dawn of the Kestoration—Difficulties of our Position—Proposed With¬ 
drawal of the Army—Arrival of Colonel Wade—Ilis Operations—Lord 
on the Hindoo-Koosh—Evils of our Policy—Defective Agency—Moollah 
Shikore—Our Political Agents—Operations in the Khybur Pass—The 
FallofKhelat. 

The restoration of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk to the sove¬ 
reignty of Afghanistan had now been outwardly accom¬ 
plished. The Barukzye Sirdars had been expelled from 
their principalities; a British garrison had been planted 
in Candahar and in Ghuznee; and a British army was 
now encamping under the walls of Caubul. A great 
revolution had thus been perfected. The Douranee 
monarchy had been restored. 

But Shah Soojah was not contented. Even during 
the excitement of the march he had complained of the 
narrow kingdom to which he was about to retiurn; and 
now, as he looked out from the windows of his palace 
over the fair expanse of country beneath him, he sighed 
to think that the empire of Ahmed Shah had been so 
grievously curtailed. 

Very different, indeed, was the Douranee Empire, over 
which the sceptre of Shah Soojah was now waved, from 
that which his father had handed down to Zemaun 



DljnCULTIBS OF ODB POSITION. 


468 


Shah and his brothers, to be sacrificed by their weakness 
and disunion. The kingdom, which had once extended 
firom Balkh to Shikarpoor, and from Herat to Cashmere, 
had now shrunk and collapsed. On every side its inte* 
grity had been invaded. Cashmere and Mooltan had 
fallen to the Sikhs; Peshawur had been wrested from 
the Afghans by the same unscrupulous neighbour; the 
independence of Herat had been guaranteed to a branch 
of the Royal family; the Beloochees had asserted preten¬ 
sions unknown in the times of Ahmed Shah; the petty 
Princes on the northern hill frontier no longer acknow¬ 
ledged their allegiance to Caubul. In whichever direc¬ 
tion he turned his eyes, he beheld the mutilations to 
which the old Douranee Empire had been subjected; 
and yearned to recover some of the provinces which had 
been severed from the domain of his fathers. 

But already was the kingdom to which he had been 
restored more extensive than he could govern. There 
were many difficult questions now to be solved—the 
first and the most important of which related to the con¬ 
tinuance of his connexion with his Fcringhee allies. The 
British Government had now done all that it had under¬ 
taken to do. It had escorted Shah Soojah to his palace 
gates, and seated him upon the throne of his fathers. 
In accordance with Lord Auckland’s manifesto, the time 
had now arrived for the withdrawal of the British army. 
But it was obvious that the British army could not 
yet be withdrawn. The Shah had no hold upon the 
affections of his people. He might sit in the Balia 
Hissar, but he could not govern the Afghans. Such, 
at least, was the conviction which by this time had 
forced itself upon Macnaghten’s mind. If the British 
Minister had ever contemplated the early abandonment of 
the restored King, the idea had now passed away. The 
Shah himself felt no confidence in his own strength. He 



464 


DAWN OF THE BESTOEATION. 


did not believe that the power of Dost Mahomed was 
irretrievably broken; but still saw him, in imi^nation, 
flitting about the regions of the Hindoo-Koosh, raising 
the Oosbeg tribes, and pouring down for the recovery 
of Caubul. There were objections, many and weighty, 
to the continued occupation of Afghanistan by British 
troops—objections of one kind, which the Shah acknow¬ 
ledged and appreciated ; and objections of another, 
which every statesman and soldier in India must have 
recognised with painful distinctness. But the experi¬ 
ment of leaving Shah Soojah to himself was too dan¬ 
gerous to be lightly tried. The Shah would fain have 
rid himself of British interference and control, if he could 
have maintained himself without British support; and 
the British Government would fain have withdrawn its 
troops from Afghanistan, if it could have relied upon the 
power of the Shah to mainttdn himself. But to leave 
the restored Suddozye to be dethroned and expelled, after 
the homeward march of the troops that had restored him, 
would have been to court an enormous failure, which 
would have overwhelmed our government with dis¬ 
grace. Neither was the restoration sufficiently popular 
in itself, nor was there sufficient stability in the character 
of the King to warrant so hazardous an experiment. If 
the policy of the Afghan invasion had not been based 
upon error, the experiment would not have been a hazard¬ 
ous one. But the very acknowledgment of the Shah’s 
inability to maintain himself after the departure of the 
British army, was a crushing commentary on the asser¬ 
tions put forth in the great October manifesto. The truth 
was not to be disguised. The “ adoration” which had 
greeted the Shah on his return to his long-lost dominions, 
was found to be a delusion and a sham. The palace of his 
fathers had received him again; but it was necessary still 
to hedge in the throne with a quickset of British bayonets. 



LORD Auckland’s minute. 


465 


So thought Lord Aiickh'uid.* He had given his mind 
long and painfully to tlie subject, and had written an ela¬ 
borate minute, reviewing all the circumstances of our po¬ 
sition in Afglianistan after the entry of the Shah into the 
country. Macnaghten had been settled little more than 
a month in Caubul, when a copy of this minute, dated 
Simlah, August 20, was put into his hands. There 
was nothing unintelligible in it. Ably written, clearly 
worded, it enunciated, in unmistakeable paragraphs, 
the views of the Governor-General, and left Mac¬ 
naghten, even had he been disposed to follow an oppo¬ 
site course, which ho was not, no alternative but to 
retain a portion of the troops, and himself to abide at 
Caubul as controller of the Shah. Lord Auckland saw 
plainly the advantages of withdrawing the Army of the 
Indus. India could ill afford the abstraction of so large 
a body of disciplined troops, and it was probable that 
their services might be required in less remote regions; 
but he could not purchase the advantages of their with¬ 
drawal at the price of the failure of the Afghan ex¬ 
pedition, f 

It was the opinion of the Governor-General at this 
time, that although the British army could not with 


* As to whetlicr the presence of injurious speculations which have 
the British did or did not increase tlic been founded on their absence. It 
stability of the restored inonarehy, mi^ht check the restless and un- 
different opinions are entertained, friendly spirit which has prevailed 
The matter will be subsequently di.s- beyond our northern and eastern 
cussed. It was calculated to give frontiers, andivould give us disposable 
the King present support, but not strength for the requisitions which it 
permanently to rivet his hold of the seems probable, in the present aspect 
empire. of affairs, may, in more quarters than 

f “lam anxiously desirous,” wrote one, be made for military demonstra- 
Lord Auckland, in the minute of tion. Yet I need scarcely add, that 
August 20, “ that the forces which even these objects, and the immediate 
compose the Army of the Indus should reduction of expenditure, would be ill 
be once more stationed within our attained at the price of leaving unac- 
own provinces. The political effect of complished the great purposes with 
their return could not but be advan- which the expedition to Caubul was 
tageous. It would put an end to the undertaken.”—[MiS. RecordsJ] 

VOL. I. 2 n 



466 


THU DAWN OF THE RESTOBATION. 


safety be wholly withdrawn, a force consisting of some 
five or six regiments of all arms would be sufficient to 
keep Shah Soojah upon his throne.* The Bombay 
troops were to be withdrawn, en masse^ by the Bolan 
Pass; and a portion of the Bengal army by the route of 
Jellalabad and the Khybur. The posts at which it was 
expedient to plant these troops were, in the opinion of 
the Governor-General, the two chief cities of Caubul 
and Candahar; and the principal posts on the main 
roads to Ilindostan—Ghuznee and Quettah, on the 
West, and Jellalabad and Ali-Musjid on the East. The 
orders which Sir John Keane had issued, before the 
Governor-General’s minute reached Caubul, anticipated 
with much exactness the instructions of the Governor- 
General.f A brigade under Colonel Sale was to re¬ 
main in Afghanistan. Sir John Keane was to take the 
remainder of the Bengal troops back to India by the 
Khybur route; and General Willshirc was to lead the 
Bombay column down by the western line of the Kojuck 
and the Bolan. 

Such were the intentions both of the Supreme Go¬ 
vernment and the local authorities, when Prince Timour 
arrived at Caubul, accompanied by Captain, now Co¬ 
lonel Wade, and the little force that had made good his 
entry into Afghanistan by the eastern passes. It was 

* “ I certainly expect that a con- I should hope, that if of the force 
sidcrable portion of the force now in from Bengal, three regiments of 
Afglianistan may be withdrawn in Native Infantry, one regiment of 
the ensuing autumn, and I indulge Kuropean Infantry, and one ol'Native 
the hope that, unless new events Cavalry, with a proper complement 
should occur, all, or nearly all, of the of Artillery and Irregular Horse, 
remainder may be recalled to India were left in Afghanistan, the whole 
when the routes shall be open in the of the remainder of the Army of the 
next spring; but to enable us to do Indus (with the temporary excep- 
this with safety, the Shah’s disci- tion of one Bombay Native corps, 
}dined contingent must be made in left for a while at Quettah) might be 
all respects elficient, and its organisa- at once withdrawn.*’ 
tion must probably be essentially f General orders : Camp near 
changed and improved.Caubul, August 27, 1839. 




OPERATIONS OP COLONEI. WADE. 


467 


on the 3rd of September that Cotton, Bumes, and other 
British officers, with a guard of honour, went out to 
receive the Prince. With befitting pomp, the proces¬ 
sion made its way through the narrow streets of Caubul 
to the Balia Hissar; and there were those who said that 
the gaiety of the heir-apparent and his cortige fairly 
shone down the King’s.* 

Wade had done his duty well. The magnitude of the 
operations to the westward has somewhat overlaid the 
more modest pretensions of the march through the eastern 
passes; and it may be doubted whether the merit of the 
achievement has ever been fully acknowledged. Viewed as 
the contribution of the Sikh Government towards the con¬ 
quest of Afghanistan, it is absolutely contemptible.f But 

* Shaliainat Ali, Wade’s Moon- The death of Runjcet at this time 
shoe, says : “ As we entered the fijreatly embarrassed Colonel Wade, 
seat of empire the crowd increased There is a note on this subject in 
more and more; the balconies and Shahamat Ali’s book, which may be 
terraces of the houses were filled fairly attributed to a more important 
with women wrapped in hoorkas or pen than the Moonshec’s. “ Itunjeet 
long veils to see their Prince. A Singh being the only person in the 
man, on the part of the Shah, pre- Sikh nation who was well disposed 
ceded him and cleared the way, towards his allies in the expedition, 
which was necessary, ns the streets his death before that part of it was 
were very narrow, and we advanced carried out which depended on their 
very slowly. The bustle was great; co-operation was a serious and em- 
the spectators stood admiring the barrassing event, as it encouraged the 
procession; ^key observed that his hopes of the disalfected, both among 
Majesty himself even did not make Afghans and Sikhs, of our failure, 
his entry in such majestic style.”— Its first effect was to create a desire 
\_T1ie Sikhs and Afghans: hij Shaha- on the part of Nao Nihal Singh, and 
7 nat Ali.'\ the Sirdars and troops with him, to 

t Runjeet was dying when the hasten back to Lahore, where parties 
troops were assembling; and his struggling for ascendancy were 
death was announced before they beginning to form their intrigues, 
commenced their march. There was, They hesitated for a time between 
at the outset, a liberal exhibition of their inclination and duty, but the 
the good intentions of the Durbar; latter prevailed. No sooner, how- 
but, before they were reduced to ever, had the Shah-zadah advanced, 
practice, they had dwindled down to than the whole of the Reserve broke 
a very small amount. There was a up their camp at Attock, and marched 
highly important gathering at Pesha- in haste to Lahore; but the con- 
wur. The young Prince, Nao Nehal tingent, the command of which had 
Singh, was there; Gholab Singh, the now devolved on a Mahomedan 
present Maharajah of Cashmere, was officer — viz.. Sheikh Bassawan, a 
there; as were also Lena Singh, Ma« Colonel and Brigadier in the French 
jeetia, and other principal Sirdars, legion, remained faithful to its post.” 



468 


THE DAWN OF THE EESTOEATION. 


the greater the inefficiency of the Sikh demonstration, the 
greater the praise that is due to the English officer who 
triumphed over the difficulties thrown in his way by the 
base infidelity of his allies. Wade found himself at 
Peshawur with a motley assemblage of Hindoos, Sikhs, 
and Afghans, on the fidelity of a considerable portion of 
which it was impossible to rely. The Prince him¬ 
self was soon found to be an absolute cypher. His 
most remarkable characteristic was, to speak paradoxi¬ 
cally, that he had no character at all. He was a harm¬ 
less, respectable personage, with an amount of apathy in 
his constitution which was sometimes advantageous to 
those in whose hands he placed himself; but, at others, 
engendered an amount of impracticability that was very 
embarrassing and distressing. It was plain that, what¬ 
ever was to bo accomplished, must be accomplished by 
the energy of the British officers. Left to themselves, 
the Sikhs, aided by the Afghans who had joined the 
standard of the Prince, would never have forced the 
Khybur Pass. This formidable defile was supposed to 
be, if vigorously defended, impassable; and the long halt 
at Peshawur had given the Afreedis, if they were not 
inclined to sell the passage, abundant time to mature 
their defensive operations, and Akbar Khan, who had 
come down from Caubul to oppose the march of Wade 
and the Sikh auxiliaries, every opportunity of perfecting 
his plans. It was not until the 25th of July that Wade 
found himself before Ali-Musjid. The Afreedis, on 
that and the preceding day, had made some show of re¬ 
sistance; and our troops—the regulars under Captain 
Farmer, and the irregulars under Lieutenant Mackeson,* 
had done good service; whilst Colonel Sheikh Bassawan, 

* Mackeson, after doing good ser- way to Peshawur, where he had joined 
vice at Bahwulpore, to facilitate the Colonel Wade. He was, therefore, 
march of the Bengal column of the engaged both in the eastern 
Army of the Indus, had made his western operations. 



COLONEL wade’s OEEBATIONS. 


4G9 


with the Sikh auxiliaries, had exhibited au amount of 
zeal which had won the confidence of the British ofiSicers. 
But Akbar Khan himself had refused to come down to 
conduct in person the defence of Ali-Musjid. Dost Ma¬ 
homed had by this time discovered that the greater 
danger was to be apprehended from the western line of 
attack, and had recalled his son to the capital. The 
Afghan troops had garrisoned Ali-Musjid; but so closely 
had Wade invested it, so determined was the attitude 
he had assumed, and so successful was now the play of 
his guns,* that on the night of the 2Gth they evacuated 
the fortress; and on the following morning Wade took 
possession of the place. 

There was little more work for Wade and the 
auxiliaries. Akbar Khan, who had pitched his camp 
at Dakha—a place to the south of Jellalabad—had now 
broken it up, and retired to join his father at the capital. 
The Shah-zadah and his party, therefore, advanced 
without further opposition. Opposite Dakha, on the 
other side of the Caubul river, Avas the fort of Lalpoorah, 
where dwelt Sadut Khan, chief of the Momund tribe, 
llis conduct had evinced strong feelings of hostility to 
the Suddozj’e Princes. He Avas now, therefore, to 
be reduced, and his chiefship confeired on another. 
Throughout our entire connexion with Afghanistan, it 
Avas seldom our good fortune to select fitting objects 
Avhei’eon to lavish our bounty. It Avas generally, indeed, 
our lot to set up the wrong man. But the case of Tora- 
baz Khan, who was appointed to the chiefship of Lal¬ 
poorah, was one of the few fortunate exceptions to this 
calamitous rule. In this man we found a faithful ally; 
and when misfortunes overtook us, he was not unmind¬ 
ful of the benefits he had received at our hands. 

♦ Under Lieutenant Barr, of the tions, to which I would refer the rea- 
Bengal Artillery, who has written a der for authentic details, conveyed in 
Narrative of Colonel Wade’s Opera- a pleasant, soldierly manner. 



470 


THE DAWE OP THE BESTOBATION. 


On the 3rd of September, Wade and the Shah-zadah 
reached Caubul. The operations of the motley force which 
they had led through the difficult passes of Eastern Af¬ 
ghanistan, have been dwarfed, as I have said, by the more 
ostentatious exploits of Sir John Keane’s bulkier armyj 
but it is not to be forgotten, that it was in no small measure 
owing to the operations of Wade's force that the resist¬ 
ance offered to Keane’s army was so slight and so ill- 
inatured. It was long before Dost Mahomed ceased to 
regard the movement through the Khybur with greater 
anxiety than that of the main army along the western 
route. Akbar Khan and his fighting men never met 
Wade in the field; but they wore drawn away from the 
capital at a time when they might have done good 
service in the West; and it is in no small measure owing 
to this division of the Ameer’s military strength, that he 
was unable to offer any effectual resistance to the march 
of the IJritish army from Candahar. Nor, when we take 
account of tlie circumstances which facilitated our suc¬ 
cess at the outset of the war, ought it ever to bo over¬ 
looked that Wade, from his forward position at Pesha- 
wur, was enabled to open a correspondence with parties 
at Caubul favorable to the restoration of the monarchy, 
and to win over many adherents to the Shah before he 
approached his capital. It was in no small measure 
owing to Wade’s diplomacy, carried on mainly through 
the agency of Gholam Khan, Populzye, that the Kohis- 
tanees were induced to rise against the Ameer.* These 
were important services. Wade carried on the work 
with much address; and there were able men associated 
with him.f But the whole affair was a melancholy 
illustration of the lukewarmness, if not of the positive 

* Sec Shahamat All’s Sikhs and the letters into Persian, is ali-suiE- 
Afghuns ; also Mohun Lai’s Life of dent on such a point as this. 

Dost Mahomed. The authority of f Mackeson, Lord, and Cunning- 
the former, who must have translated ham. 



detention op the tboops. 


471 


infidelity of our Sikh allies. It was plain that, hence¬ 
forth, we were to expect little from their alliance but 
ill-concealed attempts to thwart and baffle the policy to 
which they were parties. 

The month of September passed pleasantly over the 
heads of the officers of the Army of the Indus. The fine 
climate, the fair scenery, and the delicious fruits of 
Caubul, Avere all things to be enjoyed after the sufferings 
and privations of the long and toilsome march from 
Hindostan. Then there were shoAVS, and spectacles, 
and amusements. Tlie troops wore reviewed; and the 
officers rode races; and the Shah, ever delighting in 
pageantry and parade, established an order of knight¬ 
hood, and held a grand Durbar, at which the ceremony 
of investiture was performed with becoming dignity and 
grace. And the officers, happy in the belief that they 
were soon about to turn their backs on Afghanistan for 
ever, went about purchasing memorials of their visit 
to Caubul, or presents to carry back to their friends.* 

But the hopes of many were doomed to disappoint¬ 
ment. On the 18tli of September the Bombay column 
commenced its inarch to India by the route of the 
Kojuck and the Bolan; and it was believed that a large 
portion of the Bengal troops would soon be in motion to¬ 
wards the provinces along the eastern country just tra¬ 
versed by Colonel Wade. A country in which wine was 
selling at the price of 300 rupees a dozen, and cigars at 
a rupee a piece,* was not one in which the officers of the 
army were likely to desire to pitch their tents for a 
sojourn of any long continuance. When, therefore, it 
began to be reported among them that the original 
intentions of withdrawing the troops, with the exception 
of a single brigade, had been abandoned, there was a 

• These were the prices fetelied at Arnold, who died at Caubul in the 
the sale of the effects of Brigadier mouth of September. 



m 


THE DAWN OF THE KESTOHATION. 


general feeling of disappointment. The official order 
was looked for with anxiety; and on tlie 2nd of October 
it appeared.* The principal portion of the division was 
to be left in A^hanistan, under Sir Willoughby Cotton; 
and only a comparatively small detachment was to 
march to the provinces with Sir John Keane. A week 
afterwards, orders were issued for the disposition of the 
troops, and the military occupation of Afghanistan was 
complete.! 

A change so great as this in the military arrange¬ 
ments, consequent on the restoration of Sh^ Sooj^, 
could only have been brought about by a behef in the 
presence of some new and pressing danger. Dost Ma¬ 
homed had been driven across the Hindoo-Koosh; but 
it was believed that he might there be hospitably re¬ 
ceived by some of the petty Oosbeg chiefs, between 
Bameean and Balkh; and that he might, united with 
them, gather sufficient strength to encourage him to tuni 
his face again towards the South, and to sweep down 

♦ I may as well append the most f “ G. 0. October 9.—Her Ma- 
important portion of It: jesty’s 13th Light Infantry, three 

“ G. O, October 2.—Tlic whole of guns of No, 6 Light Field Bat- 
the 1st (Bengal) Division of Infantry, tery, and the 35th N I., to remain at 
the 2nd (Bengal) Cavalry, and No. 6 Caubul, and to be accommodated in 
Light Field Battery, will continue the Balia llissar. 
in Afghanistan, and a detachment “ The 48th N.I., the 4tli Brigade, 
of 30 Sappers, under an Engineer and detachment of Sappers and 
officer. ^ Major-General Sir W. Cot- Miners and 2nd Cavalry, with a Hes¬ 
ton will command the troops in salah of Skinner’s Horse, to be can- 
Afghanlstan, and all reports to be toned at Jellalabad. 
made to him after the 10th instant. “ Ghuznee to be garrisoned by tlie 

“ The 2nd Troop, 2nd Brigade 16th N.I., a llessalah of Skinner’s 
Bengal Horse Artillery, her Ma- Horse, and such details of his Ma- 
msty s 16th Lancers, the 3rd Light jesty Shah Soojali’s as are available. 
Cavalry, 4th Local Horse, the re- The whole to be under the command 
mainder of the Sappers and Miners, of Major M‘Laren. 
a Company of 20th N.I., with Cap- “ Candahar will have for its gar- 
tam Farmer’s Company 21st N.I., rison the 42nd, 43rd N.I., 4th Com- 
and the detachment now in progress pany 2nd Battalion Artillery, a lies- 
to head-quarters, under Captain Hop- salah of the 4th Local Horse, and 
kins, 27th N.I., will move towards such details of his Majesty Shah 
^‘Vi 1 order as Sooiah’s troops as may be available, 

will be hereafter issued.” Major-General Nott will comuiand.” 



EXPEDraON TO THE HINDOO-KOOSH. 


473 


upon the country which had been wrested from him. It 
had not, at first, been conceived that the prospect of the 
Ameer’s recovery fix>m the heavy blow which had de¬ 
scended upon him, was sufiiciently imminent to indicate 
the necessity of making any preparations upon a large 
scale to arrest his return to Afghanistan. But it was 
considered expedient to send a detachment of the Shab’s 
troops, with some field artillery, to Baraeean, the ex¬ 
treme frontier station of the Shah’s dominions. Ac¬ 
cordingly, on the 12 th of September, a detachment had 
marched for the Hindoo-Koosh. A troop of Native 
Horse Artillery, which had just come in from Candahar, 
formed the most remarkable portion of this little force. 
The difficulties of the road to be traversed were such as 
no European artillery had ever before encountered.* 
But, in spite of this, the 4th troop, 3rd Brigade of Horse 
Artillery, under Lieutenant Murray Mackenzie (leaving 
its captain dead at Caubul), made good its way to Ba- 
meean; and the Shali’s Goorkha regiment, with other 
irregular details, accompanied it to its dreary winter- 
quarters, in the mountainous recesses of the great Cau¬ 
casian range. 

Upon the policy of this movement I cannot pause to 
speculate. I believe that the system of planting small 
detachments in isolated positions was one of the great 
errors which marked our military occupation of Afghan¬ 
istan. But something more was designed than this. It 
was in contemplation to send a larger force to explore 
the mountains of the Hindoo-Koosh. Dr. Percival Lord, 

♦ The Envoy said, that as Dost guns which Dost Mahomed sent along 
Mahomed had sent guns over the these roads were three - pounders, 
same road to Bameean, there was no whilst ours were six^pounders. The 
reason why our guns should not go. troop came along the wheel-track of 
The Doctor-General Harlan boasted the Ameer’s guns, and reported “ the 
that he had crossed the Hindoo- breadth between the wheels less 
Koosh with artillery. But Mac- than half of that of ours.” 
naghten had not considered that the 



474 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


who had been one of Burnes’s companions on the “ Com¬ 
mercial Mission” to Caubul, had just returned to the 
Afghan capital with the force under Colonel Wadej 
and now that it was considered desirable to despatch a 
political officer to the Oosbeg frontier, it was but natural 
that Lord, who liad visited the neighbourhood of Koon- 
dooz in 1837-1838, should have been selected for the 
duty. Lord went; but had not been long absent from 
Caubul, when he returned with exaggerated stories of 
the success of Dost Mahomed among the petty chiefs of 
the Hindoo-Koosh, and of a great movement which was 
about to be made for the re-establishment of the supremacy 
of the Ameer.* Upon tliis, Macnaghten, who had begun 
to doubt the extreme popularity of Shah Soojah, and the 
safety of confiding lus protection and support to the 
handful of British troops which it was originally in¬ 
tended to leave hi Afghanistan, made a requisition to Sir 
John Keane for a stronger military force; and turned Dr. 
Lord's story to account in the furtherance of his own views. 

It was easy to issue orders for the maintenance of a 
large body of British troops in Afghanistan; but it was 
not so easy to house the regiments thus maintained. 


♦ A writer in the Calcutta Review^ 
who was at Caubul at the time in¬ 
dicated, thus explains the manner 
ill which Lord was beguiled: “ It 
soon became known that Lord’s sud¬ 
den retreat to Caubul was the subject 
of merriment amongst the Afghans; 
who said, ‘ That it was in no way sur¬ 
prising for Shah Soojah to run away, 
that being his custom; but that it 
was not expected than an English¬ 
man would run so soon, or so easily.’ 
Snow liad fallen on the mountains; 
and the sight of their white-capped 
heads disinclined the Afghans, who 
formed Lord’s escort, to attempt the 
passage of the Hindoo-Koosh at a 
season when inclement weather and 
an early winter seemed setting in. 


They therefore caused various re¬ 
ports of the occupation of Ivoondooz 
by Lost Mahomed to be brought, in 
order to try and deter Lord from 
prosecuting a disagreeable journey. 
Finding him hesitate upon these 
rumours whether or not to proceed, 
they were encouraged to dupe him 
still further by intelligence that a 
rebellion was raging around him; 
upon which, in hot haste, he rode 
back to Caubul. Macnaghten, after 
a few da^s, finding that the rebellion 
was a fiction, was not ^ altogether 
pleased with his own participation in 
needless alarm, though well satisfied 
that the occasion had been afforded 
him of making the requisition with 
which Keane had complied.” 



accommodation fob the troops. 


475 


The winter was before them. They could not remain 
encamped on the plain around Caubul. It became, 
therefore, matter of anxious consideration how accommo¬ 
dation was to be provided for so large a body of regular 
troops. The subject, indeed, had pressed upon the at¬ 
tention of the political and military chiefs before the 
brigade, which was originally to have been left in the 
country, had swelled into a division; and the engineer 
officers had been called into council, and had given the 
only advice that was likely to emanate fi'om competent 
military authority. Lieutenant Durand—a gallant sol¬ 
dier and an able scientific officer—saw at once the im¬ 
portance of posting the troops in the Balia Hissar.* And 
there, m the winter of that year, they were posted, to be 
removed in the following autumn to the fatal canton¬ 
ments which by that time had sprung up on the plain. 


* The importance of this subject 
is so great when viewed in connexion 
with the melancholy history of our 
subsequent disasters, that I cannot 
do better than quote the following 
account of the difficulties thrown 
in the way of the engineers—an ac¬ 
count, the authenticity of which is 
not to be questioned: “ Occupied 
with the reception of Shah-zadah 
Timour, with the foregoing expedi¬ 
tions and detachments, and with the 
establishment of the Shah’s Court and 
of his civil administration, Macnagli- 
ten for some time neglected to con¬ 
sider how the troops, which he kept 
at Caubul, were to be lodged.^ The 
uestion was one demanding instant 
ecision, as the winter of 1839 was 
rapidly approaching, and there was 
no suitable cover for troops. Though 
pressed upon this subject, as soon as 
It was decided that a portion of the 
British army was to remain, it was 
not until the end of August that any 
steps were taken in this important 
matter, and then they consented in 
sending an engineer officer. Lieu* 


tenant Durand, accompanied by Mo- 
hun Lai, to examine three small forts, 
which Burnes had reported as afford¬ 
ing a suitable position for the troops. 
These diminutive forts were west of 
Caubul several miles; and having 
neither cover, space, water, nor in 
fact any other requisite for the con¬ 
venience of the troops, and being, in 
a military point of view, ill placed as 
a position for the force, were at once 
rejected bjr the engineer, who consi¬ 
dered that it was essential to have mili¬ 
tary possession of the Balia Hissar; 
and that it was the proper place, under 
every point of view, both with re¬ 
ference to the present and the future, 
for lodging the troops. The Shah, 
upon various pretences, opposed this 
measure of precaution, and Mac- 
naghten yielded to objections which 
he felt and acknowledged to be ridi¬ 
culous. Sale was to to left in com¬ 
mand at Caubul; and he had there¬ 
fore a voice in the selection of the 
locality for the cantonment of his 
force. 1'he engineer, however, stated 
that it was impossible, before the win- 



476 


THE DAWN OP THE EESTOBATION. 


The city of Caubul* is situated between two ranges of 
lofty hills, along the ridges of which run lines of loop- 


ter set in—that is, in the course of six 
weeks—to build barracks, hospitals, 
sheds and stables for a brigade and 
its attached cavalry and guns, outside 
the Balia Hissar—building material 
having as yet to be made and col¬ 
lected ; whereas, inside the Balia His- 
sar, by taking advantage of what 
already existed, it was possible to 
obtain good and sufficient cover. 
Thus circumstanced, a reluctant con¬ 
sent was extracted from the Shah, 
and the pioneers of the force were 
immediately set to work with the 
view of rendering the citadel a strong 
work, with cover for its garrison, 
stores, and ammunition. The Shah 
no sooner learned that the work was 
seriously commenced, than he re¬ 
newed strenuously his objections, 
urging that the citadel overlooked 
his own palace and the city ; that its 
occupation would make him unpopu¬ 
lar, as the feelings of the inhabitants 
would be hurt; and that he had al¬ 
ready received strong remonstrances 
against the measure. Macnaghten, 
with fatal weakness, yielded; and 
peremptory orders were issued for 
the discontinuance of the work. 
Foiled in his avowed purpose of ren¬ 
dering the citadel a post, which, with 
a thousand men, a few guns, and 
proper provisions, might be held 
against all that Afghanistan could 
bring before it, the engineer was 
forced to content himself with keep¬ 
ing such hold of the Balia Ilissar as 
admitted of its citadel being occupied 
at any moment, by lo.lging the 
troops in hastily-prepared accommo¬ 
dation at its base. It seemed, in¬ 
deed,^ that the troops, being once 
in military possession of the Balia 
Ilissar, the evacuation of that strong¬ 
hold in future was an event as 
improbable as it would be impolitic, 
and that the occupation of the 
citadel and the repair of its works 
would in time inevitably follow. 
Macnaghten could not but coincide 


with the engineer and those who suc¬ 
ceeded him and held similar views; 
and, as the cost would have been 
trifling in comparison with the sums 
thrown away in Afj^hanistan upon 
objects to which political importance 
was attached, the Envoy for some 
time contemplated following up the 
project. But the Shah and the Kuz- 
zilbash party, as well as the Afghans, 
were very averse to a measure which, 
so long as the British troops remained 
in Afghanistan, would keep Caubul 
subject to their effectual control; and 
Macnaghten, being in the false posi¬ 
tion of having to reconcile the de¬ 
clared intention of the government 
to withdraw the army from Afghan¬ 
istan with its present actual military 
occupation in force, wavered on the 
adoption of necessary measures of 
precaution, which might countenance 
the suspicion of a purpose on the 
part of the British Government per¬ 
manently to hold the country; and, 
ultimately, in an evil hour for himself 
and his country’s arms, not only en¬ 
tirely neglected such salutary pre¬ 
caution, but gave up the barracks 
constructed in the Balia Ilissar to 
,the Shah as accommodation for his 
Harem, evacuated the fort, and 
thought no more, until too late, of 
strengthening himself therein. ”— 
\_Calcntta Review,] 

* The picturesejue aspects of the 
town arc well described by Lieutenant 
Rattray : “ It is well-built and hand¬ 
some, and is one mass of bazaars. 
Every street has a double row of houses 
of different heights, flat-roofed, and 
composed of mud in wooden frames. 
Here and there a larch porch of carved 
wood intervenes, giving entrance to 
the court-yard of the residences of 
the nobles, in the centre of which is 
a raised platform of mud, planted 
with fruit-trees, and spread with car¬ 
pets. A fountain plays near; and 
here, during the heat of the day, 
loll the chiefs at case, listening, as 



THE cnr OF CAtTBUX. 


477 


holed walls, with here and there small obtruding towers 
or bastions, too weak and too extended to be serviceable 
for purposes of defence. It is said to be about three 
miles in circumference. The Balia Hissar stands on 
a hill, overlooking the city. There are, strictly speak¬ 
ing, two Balia Hissars; the lower of which, on our 
first entry into Caubul, was in a rickety and decayed 
state, and could rrot Irave stood for an hour agairrst 
British artillery. Both were commanded by the w^alled 
hills above them. The upper Balia Hissar, or citadel, 
commands the whole of the city and the suburbs. The 
lower Balia Hissar, which is surrounded by a shallow 
but rather deep ditch, commands only part of one of the 
bazaars—the Shore bazaar, two large forts (Mahmoud 
Khan’s and the Beenee Hissar), and the road to Jellala- 
bad.* The houses of the town are mostly flat-roofed; 


they smoke their pipes, to the sound 
of the * saccringni,* or guitar, the 
falling water, or the wonderful tales 
of the Persian story-teller. The 
houses overhang the narrow streets; 
their windows have no glass, but con¬ 
sist of lattice-work wooden shutters, 
which push up and down, and are 
often richly carved and otherwise 
ornamented. The shop windows are 
open to the sun, and tlje immense 
display of merchandise, fruits, game, 
armour, and cutlery, defies descrip¬ 
tion. These articles are arranged 
in prodigious piles from floor to 
ceiling; in the front of each sits the 
artificer engaged in his calling, or 
from amidst the heaped-up prolusion 
peeps out the trader at nis visitors 
The grand bazaar (Char Chouk, or 
Chutta) has a substantial roof built 
in four arcades, which are decorated 
with painted panels, now nearly in¬ 
distinct, and originally watered by 
cisterns and fountains, which are ne¬ 
glected and dried up.^* 

* *• The Balia Hissar, particularly 
the citadel, completely commands the 
city; but the streets are so narrow 


and winding, that from the summit 
of the fort an expanse of flat-roofed 
houses is alone seen, and the tho¬ 
roughfares of the city are seldom to 
be traced. The houses, of unburnt 
brick walls and mud roofs, have ns 
little timber as possible in their con¬ 
struction—this material being costly 
at Caubul; it follows, therefore, that 
they are not easily set on fire. From 
their irregularity of height and struc¬ 
ture, and from the jealousy which 
guards each flat roof from the gaze of 
the curious by surrounding walls, com- 
muniention from housetop to house¬ 
top would be very difficult, except in 
a few portions of tlie moie regular 
parts of the city. The line of hill, 
between whicli and the river the city 
lies, is steep and difficult, but acces¬ 
sible; and its domineering aspect 
formerly led to its being included 
within the defences of Caubul; for a 
stone wall with a crenelated' parapet 
runs along its summit, and dips down 
to the gorge, by which the Caubul 
river, breaking tlirough the ciiain, 
enters the city. The ends of some 
of the streets, which cross the main 



478 


THE DAWN OF THE BESTOEATION. 


the streets for the most part narrow and tortuous. The 
most important feature of it is the great bazaar, built, 
or commenced, by Ali Murdan Khan—a mart for the 
produce of all the nations of the East. 

The Bombay division of the Army of the Indus 
marched from Caubul on the 18th of September; and on 
the 15th of October, Sir John Keane, with the troops 
destined for Bengal, set out for the provinces by way of 
the eastern passes. The Shah had by tliis time begun to 
think of escaping from the severity of the Caubul winter, 
and reposing in the milder climate and more tranquil 
neighbourhood of Jellalabad. The sweets of restored 
dominion had not gratified him to the extent of his anti¬ 
cipations. He was, indeed, a disappointed man.* He 
felt himself only half a King; he was fettered, controlled. 
It was plain that, in the eyes of his subjects, his con¬ 
nexion with the Feringhees had greatly humiliated him. 
But he wanted the English money and the English bayo¬ 
nets, and was compelled to bear the burden. 

Macnaghten was to accompany the Kmg to Jellala¬ 
bad; and, in the mean while, Burnes was to be left in 
pohtical charge of Caubul and the neighbourhood. The 
people seemed to bo settling down into soraetliing like 
quiescence. If there were little enthusiasm among them, 
they seemed at first to be outwardly contented with the 


thoroughfares, abut upon the foot of 
the hill, which thus looks into them : 
but, as the minor streets are still more 
tortuous than the main ones, such 
views along them are very partial.”— 
[ Calcutta Revieiv.'] 

♦ “ The capital and the fort had 
disappointed nis expectations. He 
often sate at a window of the palace, 
wiling away time, his eye wandering 
over the different objects which the 
city and its plain offered. On one 
of these occasions, after a long silent 
pause, Shah Soojah made the remark 


that ‘ everything appeared to him 
shrunk small and miserable; and 
that the Caubul of his old age in no 
respect corresponded with the recol¬ 
lections of the Caubul of his youth.’ 
He was glad, therefore, to escape 
from the severity of the winter of a 
place, the ideal charms of which age 
and the experience of the reality had 
banished. Jellalabad, although a still 
more wretched town, enjoys, from its 
lower altitude above the sea-level, 
a warmer climate, and the winter is 
far less severe*”—[C'a/caWa Hcview,'] 



THB MONBY-BAO. 


4ytf 


change. Cupidity is one of the strongest feelings that 
fnds entrance into the Afghan breast. The boundless 
wealth of the English had been a tradition in Afghanistan 
ever since the golden days of Mountstuart Elphinstone’s 
mission. Money had been' freely scattered about at Can- 
dahar; and it was believed that Tvith an equally profuse 
hand it would now be disbursed at Caubul. It is true 
that the military chest and the political treasury had 
been so indented upon, that when the ai-my reached the 
capital there was a painful scarcity of coin.* But there 
were large supplies of treasure on the way. The jingling 
of the money-bag was already ravishing their ears and 
stirring their hearts. They did not love the Feringhees; 
but they delighted in Feiinghee gold. 

This was a miserable state of things—and even the 
influence of the gold was limited and short-lived. After 
the outbreak at Caubul, when Mohun Lai was secreted 
in 'the Kuzzilbash quarters, lie heard the men and 


A passage in Lord Auckland’s 
unpublished minute of August 20, 
1839, to which allusion has already 
been made, contains a summary of 
the efforts of the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment to supply Macnaghten with 
funds. It exhibits the fearful man¬ 
ner in which already the war was 
beginning to tell upon the hnaiices of 
India : “ It has been a matter of con¬ 
cern and some disappointment to 
learn that the military chest and the 
political treasury was exceedingly 
low at the time of the departure of 
the army from Candahar, and that 
some embarrassment was in conse¬ 
quence apprehended. The difficulty 
has no doubt arisen from causes un¬ 
foreseen : from a longer detention 
than was anticipated at Candahar, 
from the disasters which have delayed 
the arrival of Major Newport’s con¬ 
voy, and from an extent of expense 
far beyond what was expected in the 
purchase of grain and of camels, whilst 
the death of the Maharajah Kunjeet 
Singh has made it difficult for me to 
apply so instantaneous a remedy as 


I could have desired. But the 10 
lakhs, under the charge of Major 
Newport, will in all probability have 
arrived at Candahar about the 26th 
of July. Thirteen lakhs are now 
traversing the Punjaub under the 
care of Captain Nuthall, and should 
be at Peshawur in the first week of 
September; arrangements have been 
made by the political agent at Urn- 
ballah, >)y bills on Peshawur, or by 
negotiations through the Sikh Go¬ 
vernments, to have a further sum of 
10 lakhs available at an early period 
across the Indus, and an additional 
amount of 7 or 8 lakhs will be soon 
ready for immediate transmission to 
the same quarter; 30 lakhs more will 
be ready for remittance in October; 
a further sum will be with the lapse 
of time at hand at Delhi; and besides 
all this, 21 lakhs of Company’s ru¬ 
pees, with 5 or 6 lakhs of bullion, now 
at Shikarpoor, may be sent on to 
Candahar, as soon as the inundations 
subside.” Here we have a million of 
money disposed of by a few strokes of 
the pen. 



480 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


women talking among themselves, and saying that the 
English had enriched the grain-sellers, the grass-sellers, 
and others who dealt in provisions for man and beast, 
whilst they reduced the chiefs to poverty, and killed the 
poor by starvation.* The presence of the English soon 
raised the price of all the necessaries of life. This was 
no new thing. If a flight of Englishmen settle in a 
French or a Belgian town, it is not long before the 
price of provisions is raised. But here was a Commis¬ 
sariat department, with a mighty treasury at its com¬ 
mand, buying up all the commodities of Caubul, and 
not only paying preposterous sums for everything they 
purcliased, but liolding out the strongest inducement to 
purveyors to keep back their supplies, in order to force 
a higher range of ])rices. 

Even from this early date everything was working 
sil(‘ntly against us. The inherent vice of the course (jf 
policy wliich we liad initiated was beginning to infect 
evenly branch of the administration. The double go¬ 
vernment which had been established was becoming a 
curse to the wliole nation. The Shah and his officers 
ostc'iisibly controlled all the departments of civil ad¬ 
ministration ; but everj^vhere our English officers were 
at their elbow, to counsel and suggest; and wlien it 
was found necessary to coerce the disobedient or punish 
the n^bellious, then it was British authority that drew 
the sword out of the scabbard, and hunted down ofTen- 
clers to the death. Bound by treaty not to interfere in 
the inteiTial administration of the countrj", the British 
functi<maries were compelled to permit the existence of 
much which they themselves would never have mitiated 
or allowed in provinces subject to their rule; but they 
were often called upon to enforce measures, unpopular 
and perhaps unjust; and so brought down upon them¬ 
selves opprobrium which was not always their due. It 
* Mohun Lai’s Life of Dost Mahomed* 



INSECURITY OF THE GOVERNMENT. 


461 


could hardly be said that the King possessed a govern¬ 
ment of his own, when the control of the army and the 
exchequer was in the hands of others. England supplied 
the money and the bayonets; and claimed the right to 
employ them both according to her own pleasure. It 
would have been a miracle if such a system had not 
soon broken down Avith a desolating crash, and buried 
its authors in the ruins. 

It was said prophetically by more than one statesman, 
that our difficulties would begin where our military 
successes ended. Englishmen and Afghans alike said 
that it was easy to restore Shah Soojah to the throne, 
but difficult to maintain him upon it. It was, from the 
first, only a question of time—only a question how long 
such a system could be propped up by the strong arm 
and the long purse of the King-makers. No amount of 
wisdom in the agents of such a policy could have saved 
it from ultimate ruin. Sooner or later it must have 
fallen. If there had been nothing else indeed to bring 
it to the ground, the utter exhaustion of the Indian 
treasury must have given it its death-blow. 

To have placed Shah Soojah on the throne, and to 
have left him again to be driven back an outcast and a 
fugitive, to seek an asylum in the provinces of India, 
would have been a failure and a disgrace. It was the 
object of the British Government, therefore, to hedge 
him in a little longer with our authorit}^, and to establish 
him more firmly on the tlironc. But so far from these 
being synonymous terms, and coexistent states of being, 
they were utterly antagonistic and irreconcileable. The 
more w'e surrounded the King with our authority, the 
less firmly he was fixed on the throne. It might have 
been sound policy to have continued the occupation of 
Afghanistan, if our continuance had tended to secure the 
supremacy of the Shah, and to establish him in the affec- 

VOL. I. 2 I 



482 


THE DAWN OF THE BESTOEATION. 


lions of the people; but it was not in the nature of 
things that the effect of the experiment should not have 
been diametrically the reverse. 

So prodigious an anomaly was the system itself, that, 
except so far as it affected the period of its dissolution, 
retarding or expediting it by a few months or a few 
years, the agency employed in the vain attempt to up¬ 
hold it was a matter of little moment. But that agency 
was assuredly not of a character to enhance the chances 
even of its temporary success. Shah Soojah had brought 
from Loodhianah one Moollah Shikore*—a man who 
had shared his exile, and acted as his confidential agent. 
He was old, and enfeebled by age. His memory was 
gone; so were his ears. For some offence against his 
Majesty in former days, he had forfeited those useful 
appendages. A happy faculty of remembering the per¬ 
sons and personal histories of men, is one of the most 
useful ingredients in the character of a statesman, and it 
is one which, in rare exuberance, some of our greatest 
statesmen have possessed. But it was said of this Mool¬ 
lah Shikore, that men whom he had seen on one day he 
forgot on the next.f The King had abundant faith in 
his loyalty, and confidence in his personal attachment. 
The man had managed the personal affairs of the royal 
exile with such address, that it was believed that he 
could now manage the affairs of his royal master’s re¬ 
stored dominions. So the King made him minister of 
state. They called him Wuzeer. But his master did 
not acknowledge the title, and the British did not call 

♦ Moollah Shikora came through Macnaghten: August 7, 1840. Un- 
the Khybur with Prince Timour and published Correspondence,'} “ He had 
Colonel Wade. lost his memory to such an extent that 

T^“So completely is this poor he could not recognise a person whom 
man s memory gone, that he never he had well known before, if he had 
recognises a man he has once seen ; not seen him even for a day.*— 
that the dommonest business requires [Mohun LaVs Life of Dost MaTiomed,} 
half a dozen notes.** — [Humes to 



MOOLItAH SHIKOBB. 


483 


him by it. ‘‘ Bad ministers,” wrote Bumes, “ are in 
every government solid grounds for unpopularity; and I 
doubt if ever a King had a worse set than Shah Soojah.” 
The system itself was rotten to the very core; and the 
agency employed was, perhaps, the corruptest in the 
world. Had ther<^ been much more vitality and strength 
in the system, MooUiih Shikore and his deputies would 
soon have given it its death-blow. 

But though feeble in other respects, this Moollali 
Shikore was not feeble in his hatred of the British. The 
minister op]3re>.5(Kl the people. The people appealed 
to the British func*tionaiies. The British functionaries 
remonstrated witli the minister. And the minister 
])imished tlie j)c‘ 0 ])le for ap])ealing to the British func¬ 
tionaries.* The SJuili and his minister chafed under the 
interference of the British. But they loved the British 
money; and they required the support of the British 
bayonets. And so bravely for a time v/orked the double 
government at Caubul. 

Whilst such was the state of things at the supremo 
seat of government, there was little less to create dis¬ 
satisfaction in the intemal administration of Candahar. 
The }>rincipal revenue officers were two Sheeahs, the 
sons of that Hussein Khan, the obnoxious minister whom 
Shall Zemaun had put to death. Their names were 
Mahomed Takee Khan and Wulloo Mahomed Khan. 
Cradled in intense enmity to the Douranees, they had 

* “ Erery day complaints were ing an order from Moollah Shikore. 
made to us, and we permitted ourselves If there was any man among them 
to interfere, by giving notes to the known to us, and whonu we would 
complainants, requesting the Moollah wish to favour, the Moollah took 
to settle their cases,* but this did no care to annoy and vex hiin^ by giving 
good, for, instead of having redress him an order to a distant village for 
to their grievances, they were beaten, such sums, which he would likely spend 
and sometimes confined, for coming during his journey; or else to poor 
and complaining to us against the villages, where there was very uttle 
Shah’s authority. All the chiefs or chance of gaming anything.”—-filio- 
heads of tribes received their allow- hun lAxJUt Life of Dost Mahomed."]^ 
ances from certain villages, by obtain- 

2 I 2 



484 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


grown into unscrupulous persecutors of the tribes. Se- 
lected by the Barukzye Sirdars as willing agents of 
those humiliating and enfeebling measures by which 
they sought to extinguish the vitality of the Douranees, 
they entered upon their work in a ruthless and uncom¬ 
promising spirit, and plied the instruments of their office 
with remarkable success for the pewecution and degra¬ 
dation of their enemies. The hatred with which the 
Dourances regarded these men was too deep to suffer 
them to embrace with complacency any measures, how¬ 
ever conciliatory in themselves, of which the old Baruk¬ 
zye tools were the executors. Such unpopular agents 
were enough to render distasteful the most popular 
measures. The Dourances were, indeed, greatly disap¬ 
pointed. Do what they would, they could not obtain a 
paramount influence in the state. The door was closed 
against them by the British janitors who kept watch 
iiTound the palace j and the chiefs soon began to chafe 
under the foreign intrusion wliich deprived them of all 
siscendancy in th(i councils of the restored monarch, and 
prevented them from regaining the full extent of those 
financial privileges which they had enjoyed under his 
Suddoyze predecessors.* 

* “ Immediately consequent on finding that they no longer possessed 
his Majesty’s accession, certain feel- a dominant voice in the royal coun- 
ings began to take root among the cils, or the ability, as formerly, to 
Douranees, in connexion with the render the sovereign the victim of 
presence of British troops, which their intrigues, and that this conyic- 
promised ill for the future tranquil- tion of their political influence being 
lity of the country. Several of the for ever superseded, must have led 
most influential chiefs acconmanied them to value the many personal ad- 
the Court ftom Cnndahar to Gaubul vantages they had gained by the re- 
and Jellalabad; and although it must storation, and to regard with peculim* 
have been with feeling of gratified hostility the intruders upon their 
pride that they behdd the leader fancied rights. At Candahar the 
of their order—their Shah Baba, or progress of events had the same ten- 
father King, as he was familiarly dency to render the Douranees dis- 
named—seated upon the throne of contented, if not actually inimic^. 
his ancestors, yet it is also not un- The chiefs who had remidned with 
necessary to suppose that their mor- the tribes were of inconsiderable in* 
tification must have been great at fluence; but they still looked, under 



THE POLITICAL AGENTS. 


485 


And so it hq^pened that, fix>m the very dawn of the 
restoration of the monarchy, unpopular and unscrupulous 
Afghan agents were employed to carry out a monstrous 
system. Of a very different character were the British 
agents upon whom now devolved the duty of watching 
the proceedings of the native executive, and, without any 
palpable acknowledged interference, virtually controlling 
it. The political agents scattered about Afghanistan have 
drawn down upon themselves a larger measure of vitu¬ 
peration than perhaps has ever descended upon any body 
of British functionaries. They were mixed up with an 
unholy and a disastrous policy, and per]ia])s some little of 
the evil that subsequently developed itself may be attri¬ 
buted to their personal defects; but, on the whole, they 
were not unwisely chosen, and it is doubtful if other men 
would have done ])etter. At all events, when Burnes, 
Conolly, Leech, Pottinger, Todd, Lord, and others, who 
had previously made thianselves acquainted with the 
country and the j)eople of Afghanistan, were sent to 
overlook the progress of affairs in different parts of 
Afglianistan, it cannot be said that no care was taken to 
select our agents from among the officers who were most 
qualified by previous experience to perform the new 
duties devolving upon them. Macnaghten’s assistants 
were, for the mc/St part, men of local exj)erience and 
proved activity. The Governor-General had imparted 
to the Envoy his ideas of the manner in which it would 

the revived Suddozye monarchy, to vested almost entirely in the hands of 
be admitted tb the share of power Wuliee Mahomed Khan, the revenue 
which they deemed their right, and manager, and the direction of the * 
from which they had been jealously government was to the same extent 
excluded by the Sirdars. Xo such dependent upon Brttish guidance.*’ 
participation whatever was extended — \_Major RuwUnsorCs Report on the 
to them. The present governor of Assessment of the Douranee Tribes, 
the province, being altogether disqua- MS, Records.'] 1 have met with no 
lified by his youth and inexperience abler official paper than this in the 
to take an active part in the admi- whole course of my inquiries, 
nistration, the executive power was 



486 


THE DAW OE THE BESTOEATION. 


be most expedient to employ them.* And it may be 
doubted whether, if the system itself had not been so radi¬ 
cally defective, it would have ever broken down under 
the agency which was commissioned to carry it into effect. 

Such, traced in dim outline, were some of the ele¬ 
ments of decay planted deep in the constitution of the 


* The Supreme Government were 
desirous to place Burnes at Canda- 
har, with Leech as his assistant; but 
Burnes was disinclined to leave Cau- 
bul; and the charge of the agency 
was entrusted to Leech. In the 
August minute, already quoted. 
Lord Auckland thus sketches the 
proposed political arrangements :— 
“ Mr. Macnaghten will himself be, of 
course, as much as possible near to 
the King. He has, in co-operation 
with Sir John Keane, conducted, with 
an ability and with a success that I 
shall always be forward to acknow¬ 
ledge on the part of both these offi¬ 
cers, the extremely difficult duties of 
his present office. I should be sorry, 
indeed, to see committed to another 
the prosecution of the great work 
in which he has been engaged, and I 
trust that he may be induced to re¬ 
main at Caubul until the power of the 
Shah shall appear to be thoroughly 
consolidated, the institutions of his 
kingdom placed on a satisfactory 
footing, and the salutary influence of 
the British name acknowledged there 
and in the countries beyond it. I 
think a political agency, subordinate 
to the Mission at Caubul, should be 
maintained at Candahar, and that it 
cannot be better entrusted than to 
the approved zeal and ability of Sir 
Alexander Burnes. Candahar, I pre¬ 
sume, will be the seat of a Viceroy ; 
and as for some period of the year all 
communication between that city and 
Caubul is, I believe, cut off, to the 
agent at Candahar may, I think, be 
delegated some control over the poli¬ 
tical agents at Herat and Khelat, and 
the correspondence which may be 
necessary with the political agents in 
Sindh. X would not disturb Lieute¬ 


nant Pottinger at Herat. His name 
is attached to the establishment of 
British influence in that city. He 
has had a most difficult task to exe¬ 
cute, and I would suspend all opinion 
on the instructions with which it 
may be determined to furnish him, 
until I have a report of the result of 
the mission of Major Todd. I think, 
also, that Captain Bean should cer¬ 
tainly remain in charge of the poli¬ 
tical functions which have been com¬ 
mitted to him at Quettah. I have 
had occasion to remark with un- 
ciualified approbation all the mea¬ 
sures of that officer which have been 
brought before me; he has done 
much for the pacification of the wild 
country about him; his presence 
will be necessary for the protection 
of commerce in its transit through 
the one avenue which exists between 
Lower Afghanistan and the Indus, 
and I should be exceedingly sorry to 
see him moved to any other quarter. 
Under these general arrangements, 
Major Leech will render assistance 
at Candahar to Sir A. Burnes, and 
perhaps Ur. Login to Lieutenant 
Pottinger at Herat; and Mr. Mac¬ 
naghten will report in detail upon 
the number of officers whose aid will 
be indispensably necessary, under his 
own personal superintendence. He 
will have with him Major Todd, 
Lieutenant Macgregoi^ and presently 
Messrs. Lord, Leech, and Arthur Co- 
nolly. I am aware that the duties 
of his office will be complicated and 
extensive. He may have missions to 
send to Bokhara and Koondooz, and 
to other neighbouring states, and I 
would not stmt him in assistance.’*— 
\_Minute of' Lord Auckland: Sindah, 
August 20, 1839. MS, Records.2 



EIJBMENTS OP BPCAT. 


487 


political sj'stem which we were attempting to cany out 
in Afghanistan. Always of a sanguine temperament, 
and one whose wish was ever father of his thoughts, 
Macnaghten did not see that already the seeds of a great 
and sweeping revolution were being sown broadcast across 
the whole length and breadth of the land. He was pre¬ 
pared, and it was right that he should have been, for local 
and accidental outbreaks. The Afghans are a turbulent 
and lawless people—little inclined to succumb to autho¬ 
rity ; and have a rough way of demonstrating their dis¬ 
likes. Had he expected the authority of the Shah to be 
universally established in a few weeks, the British Envoy 
would have manifested a deploriable ignorance of the 
national character; but little less was the ignorance 
which he manifested, when he believed that the system 
of government he was countenancing could ever esta¬ 
blish the country in tranquillity, and the King in the 
affections of the people. There were others who saw 
clearly that such a system was doomed to set in dis¬ 
aster and disgrace;* but Macnaghten, when he accom¬ 
panied the Court to Jellalabad, carried with him no 
forebodings of evil. He believed that the country was 
settling down into quietude under the restored mo¬ 
narchy; and so little, indeed, did he think that any 
danger was to be apprehended, that he encouraged his 
wife to join him in Afghanistan, and sent a party of 
irregular horsemen under Edward Conolly to escort 
her from the provinces of India. 

But already was ho beginning to have some expe¬ 
rience of the turbulent elements of Afghan society, and 

* Keane, immediately before his possible, I cannot but congratulate 
departure, remarked to an officer who you on quitting the country ; lor, mark 
was to accompany him : “ 1 wished my words, it will not he long before 
yon to remain in Afghanistan for the there is here some signal catastrophe/* 
good of the public service; but since —{Calcutta Review*"} 
circumstances have rendered that im- 



488 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


the difficulty of controlling the tribes. In the West, the 
Ghilzyes had been demonstrating the unruliness of their 
nature ever since Shah Soojah re-entered Afghanistan, 
and, shortly after his restoration to the Balia Hissar of 
Caubul, Captain Outram had been sent out against 
them, and had achieved one of those temporary successes 
which, in a country like Afghanistan, where blood is 
ever crying aloud for blood, can only perpetuate the dis¬ 
quietude of a disaffected people—and now in the East, 
the passes of the Khybur were bristling with the hostile 
tribes. The Khybur chiefe had always turned to good 
account the difficulties of the passage through their ter¬ 
rible defiles. They opened the highway in considera¬ 
tion of certain money-payments from the Caubul rulers. 
The sums paid under the Suddozye Kings had been 
reduced by the Barukzye Sirdars; but on his restoration, 
Shah Soojah, who, in a day of difficulty, had sought and 
found a refuge among the Khyburees, now promised to 
restore to the tribes the privileges which they had en¬ 
joyed under his fathers. But the Shah had acted in this 
matter without the authority or the knowledge of Mac- 
naghten, and the chiefs were little likely to receive the 
amount which the King had agreed to pay to them. In¬ 
censed by what they considered a breach of faith, they 
rose up against the small detached parties which Wade 
had left at different posts between Peshawur and Jel- 
lalabad.* Ali-Musjid was attacked—but not taken. 
Ferris, who commanded the garrison, .repulsed them with 
heavy loss. But a battalion of Nujeebs, entrenched in 
the vicinity of the fort, was cut up by an incursion of the 
mountaineers.f The appearance of Sir John Keane, 

* Some of these parties were de- suffering severely from sickness at 
tachments of Sikh troops, the time. One half of them, it is said, 

f The Khyburees fell upon them were ineffective when the Khyburees 
in their stockaded position before at- fell upon them, 
tacking Jellalabad. The Nujeebs were 



OPEEATIONS AGAINST THE KHTBUHBES. 


m 


with the residue of the Army of the Indus, quieted for a 
time the turbulent tribes. But when the column had 
cleared the pass, they harassed the detachments sent to 
the relief of Ali-Musjid,* and a force under Colonel 
Wheeler was therefore sent out from Jellalabad to over¬ 
awe the refractory mountaineers, and support the nego¬ 
tiations in which Mackeson was engaged. The Khy- 
burees attacked his baggage, hamstrung his camels, and 
thus contrived to sweep some booty into their hands. 
Wheeler’s operations were for a time successful; but it 
was not until Macnaghten himself appeared on the scene, 
and recognised, in view of their formidable defiles, the 
expediency of conciliating by sufficient money-payments 
these troublesome clans, that they sunk into temporary 
quiescence. 

It was at Avitabilo’s hospitable table in the Goork- 
hutra of Pesliawur, that Macnaghten received intelli¬ 
gence of the fall of Khelat. Tlic licalth of the victors 
was drunk with delighted enthusiasm, manifestmg itself 
hi the “tlu’ce times three” of a good English cheer. 
Al l the circumstances of the capture of the stronghold 
were discussed with deepest interest to a late hour. It 
was told how, on the morinng of the 13th of November, 
General Willshire, with the 2nd and 17th Queen’s 
Regiments, the 31st Bengal Native Infantry, with two 
howitzers, four of the Shah’s six-poimder guns, and 
a detachment of local horse, found himself before 
Khelat. It was plain that Mehrab Khan was in no mood 

* Two companies of the 27tli Na- attacked by the Khyburees in great 
live Infantry, under Lieutenant Laing force, and worsted, with the Joss of 
—a very gallant officer, who fell ho- their cattle. Another party, sent by 
nourably at Caubul in the winter Sir John Keane to throw ammunition 
of 1841-42, were sent by Sir John into Ali-Musjid, was also attacked ; 
Keane to reinforce Ferris at Ali-Miis- two officers were severely wounded, 
jid. Afterwards, two companies of and some men killed; but the convoy 
the 21st, with one of sappers, were ultimately reached its destination, 
despatched to throw provisions into McLeod, with his sappers, did good 
the fort. On tlieir return they were service on this occasion. 



490 


THE DAWN OF THE EESTOEATION. 


to submit to the terms dictated to him. He had at first 
doubted the intentions of the British to move against his 
stronghold, and had been slow to adopt measures of 
defence. But when he knew that our troops were ad¬ 
vancing upon Khelat, he prepared himself, like a brave 
man, to meet his fate, and flung defiance at the infidel 
invaders. Khelat is a place of commanding strength. 
Tile citadel rises high above the buildings of the town, 
and fi’owns menacingly at its assailants. On the north¬ 
west of the fort were three heights, which the Khan had 
covered with his infantrj'^, supported by five guns in 
position. The engineer officers reported that, until these 
heights were carried, it would he impossible to proceed 
against the fortress. Orders were then given for the 
attack. It was Willshirci’s hope that the enemy might be 
driven down to the gates of the fortress, and that our 
stormers might rush in with them. Gallantly the hills were 
curried; gallantly the guns were captured. The infantry 
atlvanccd under a heavy fire from the British artillery. 
The shrapnel shot from Stevenson’s batteries fell with too 
deadly an aim among the Bidoochee footmen for them to 
hold thehr position on the hUls. They fled towards the 
walls of tlie fortress, and our infantry pushed hotly after 
them. But not in time were they to secure an entrance; 
the gates were closed against their advance. 

The artillery was now brought into play. The in¬ 
fantry, compelled to protect themselves against the heavy 
fire poured in from the rocks, sheltered themselves be¬ 
hind some ruined buildings, whilst our batteries, planted 
on the heights, opened upon the gate and the neighbour¬ 
ing defences. Two of Cooper’s guns were brought within 
a distance of 200 yards; and whilst the guimers feU 
under the matchlock fire of the enemy, played full upon 
the gate. At last it gave way. Pointing his hand to¬ 
wards the gate, Willshire rode d.own to show the infiintry 



THE FALL OF KHELAT. 


491 


that an entrance was ready for them. Rising at once 
from their cover, they rushed in with a loud hurrah. 
Pennycuick and his men were the first to enter. The other 
companies soon followed, until the whole of the storming 
column were within the walls of Khelat. Onward they 
struggled manfully towimds the citadel. Evei*}’^ inch of 
ground was obstinately disputed. But at last the citadel 
was won. There was a desperate resistance. Sword in 
hand, Mehrab Khan and some of his principal chiefs stood 
there to give us battle. The lOuin himself fell dead 
with a niuskc't-ball through his breast. Eight of his 
principal ministers and Sirdars fell beside him. From 
some inner apartments, of difficult approach, a fire was 
still poured in upon our people; and it was not until 
Lieutenant I^uveday, an assistant of the British agent, 
went up to them alone, that they werc^ induced to sur¬ 
render.* Loveday received them as prisoners; and then 

* The private letters of Lieutenant our capture of the fort, the death of 
Loveday (quoted in the Asiatic Jonr~ Mehrao Khan, and the near approach 
7ial) throw some light iqjon the inci- of her son, whom our government had 
/ dents of the capture. “ In one court- placed on the MusnmL You may 
yard I saw aheap of their dead, some readily fancy the scene; what witli 
forty or fifty—some very fine hand- surprise and joy, she burst into tears, 
some fellows — their shields shot said she was my slave, and would 
through, and broken swords and have thrown herself at my feet if 1 
matchlocks 1 ving about in tn cry had not prevented her. On the fol- 
dircction, telling of the fierce fight, lowing day a few of Mehrab Khan’s 
There was still, however, a small servants brought the body of their 
party who obstinately lield out in an master for burial—a fine looking man. 
inner apartment; there was no going There was one little hole in his 
at them except by a narrow passage, breast, which told of a musket-ball 
which admitted but of one at a having passed through. He had no 
time; three or four attempted it, and clothes on, except his silk pyjammahs. 
were instantly shot dead. AVeofl'ered One of his slaves whispered me for 
them quarter, but they would not a shawl; alas! I had nothing of the 
trust us. At last 1 was sent up alone, kind, but luckily remembered a bro- 

when they surrendered.cade bed-cover, which I had bought 

I then went to the mother of Shah in my days of folly and extravagance 
Newaz, who is the new Khan, and at Delhi. I called for it immediately, 
who made his escape from prison and gave it to the Khan's servants, 
seven years ago. This poor creature, who were delighted with this last 
with a few old women, had been shut mark of respect, and wrapping up 
up in a distant apartment ever since the body in it, placed their deceased 
the flight of her son, miserably fed master on a charpoy and carried him 
and m^erably clothed. I explained to the grave." 
in a few words what had taken place; 



492 


THE DAWN OF THE RESTORATION. 


proceeded to rescue from captivity the aged mother 
and other female dependents of an old rival, whose 
claims were to be no longer denied. 

Nussur Khan, the chiefs son, had fled. A considerable 
amount of prize property was collected; an old preten¬ 
der to the throne, known as Shah Newaz, who had for 
some time been hanging on to the skirts of Shah Soojah 
and his allies, was set up in his place; and the provinces 
of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutchee, which had long been 
sentenced to spoliation, were stripped from the old do¬ 
minions of the Khan of Khelat, and annexed to the ter¬ 
ritories of Shah Soojah-ool-Moolk. The Shah had been 
hankering after an extension of empire; and it was de¬ 
termined that the much-coveted aggrandisement should 
be conceded to him in the direction of Upper Sindh. 

It is possible that, whilst all these circumstances were 
being narrated and discussed at Avitabile’s dinner-table, 
there may have been jnesent one or two officers much 
troubled with self-questionings regarding the justice of 
these proceedhigs. But the general opinion, all through¬ 
out Alghanistan and India, was that this Mehrab Khan 
had been rightly punished for his offences. Few knew 
distinctly what these oflences were. There was a gene¬ 
ral impression that he had been guilty of acts of in¬ 
describable treachery; and that during the passage of 
the British army through Beloochistan, he was con¬ 
tinually molesting our advancing columns. It was the 
fashion to attribute to the wickedness of Mehrab Khan 
all the sufferings which afflicted the Array of the Indus 
on its march to Candahar, the scarcity which pressed so 
heavily upon man and beast, and the depredations of the 
marauding Beloochees. The very barrenness of the 
country, indeed, was by some laid at his door. It was 
not very clearly seen at this time that the Army of the 
Indus was at least as much the cause, as it was the 
victim of the scarcity in Beloochistan. When our troops 



THE CONDUCT OF MEHRAB KHAN. 


493 


passed tlirough the dominions of the Elhan of Ehelat, 
there was already, as has been shown by Bumes’s admis¬ 
sions, a scarcity in the land; and now the army in¬ 
creased it.* The safe passage of the Bolan Pass was ef¬ 
fected through the friendly agency of the Brahoo chief.f 
And we have it emphaticallj', upon the authority of 
Macnaghten, that the progress of the Army of the Indus 
through the coimtry of Melirab Khan was attended by 
much devastation—that a great injury was inflicted 
upon the pwple—and that nothing would have been 
easier than for the Khan to have destroyed our entire 
force.J Such was the language of our diplomatists up 
to the end of March; but in April, Bumes recommended 
the castigation of the Khan of Khelat; and Mehrab 
Khan was doomed to be stripped, on the first conve¬ 
nient opportunity, of his territory, and deprived either 
of his liberty or his life. The evidence of Mehrab 
Khan’s treachery is not sufficiently strong to satisfy me 
that the British righteously confiscated his principality 
and sacrificed his life. He was surrounded by traitors. 
When his stronghold was entered, it was seen that the 
servants he had trusted had the means of betraying their 
master; and it was clear, to all who investigated the 
charges against him with judicial impartiality, that he 
had been betrayed. It was clear that many of the of¬ 
fences imputed to him were to be ascribed rather to the 
machinations of his secret enemies than to his own 
enmity and bad faith. But he had been early doomed 
to destruction. The recommendations of the British 
diplomatists in Afghanistan had been adopted by the 
Govenior-General; and the deposition of Mehrab Khan 
and the annexation of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutchee, 
had been decreed in the Simlah Council Chamber.§ It 


♦ iinte, page 411. 
t Ante^ page 407, note. 
t AntCy page 414. 


§ In his minute of Aujgust 20, Lord 
Auckland wrote on this subject:— 
** Mr. Macnaghten has authoritj^ as 



494 


bestobation of the monabcht. 


was true that Shah Soojah had, in the hour of need, been 
succoured by Mehrab Khan. A statesman in whom 
the kindly instincts of humanity were so strong as in 
Lord Auckland, was not likely to forget the obligations 
which so essential a service at such a time imposed upon 
the restored monarch.* But the graceful suggestion of 
the Governor-General was lost; and the Khan lived just 
long enough to curse himself for his folly in having 
opened his arms to receive the Suddozye pretender, 
when he fled, baffled and beaten, from the battle-field 
of Candahar. For that act of hospitality he paid five 
years afterwards with his life. 

Whether any thoughts of this kind arose to dash the 
pleasure of those who toasted the victors of Khelat 
at Avitabile’s dinner-table, can only be conjectured; bgt 
all present acknowledged that the capture of Mehrab 
Khan’s stronghold was a great militaiy exploit. The 
native soldiery are said to have esteemed it more highly 
than the capture of Ghuznee. The native soldiery, too, 
had been allowed to participate in the honour of the 
exploit. Sir John Keane had been much censured for 
composing liis storming column entirely of European 
companies. The exclusiveness of the act seemed to imply 
mistrust in his Sepoy regiments, and did not raise the 

respects the Khelat territories, to de- spectin^ it, either by bringing it also 
clarc the annexation of the provinces under the direct rule of the Shah, or 
of Shawl, Moostung, and Cutch Gun- placing the claimant, Shah Newaz 
dava to the Afghan dominions; and 1 Khan (or any other Beloochee chief), 
have but to add, that it is my strong in possession of it.”—[3/6\ Records. 
opinion that no power should be left * “ As to Mehrab Khan himself, 
in the hands of Mehrab Khan, who he may have claims upon Shah 
has shown himself our bitter and de- Soojah-ool-Moolk, arising out of the 
ceitful enemy, wholly unworthy of important succour given to his Ma- 
our confidence. For this object, it jesty in his expedition in 1834, and 
will, I conceive, be sufficient to occupy Mr. Macnaghten will naturally not 
Khelat itself, and to hold it and the fail to second any proposition of a 
districts adjacent, in addition to Moos- liberal personal support to the chief 
tung and Shawl, under our pro- which the Shah may be disposed to 
visional management or superintend- make, in generous acknowledgment 
ence, for the very short period that of those services .”—[Lord Auckland's 
will elapse, until it may be seen what Minute: August 20, 1839. MS. Re~ 
final arrangement can be made re- cords,"] 



DISSOLUTION OF THE ABHT OF THE INDUS. 495 


Greneral in the estimation of their officers. It was a 
subject, therefore, of general congratulation throughout 
the Company’s army, that a Native regiment had shared 
with two of the Ghuznee storming corps the glory of 
the assault upon Khelat, and had proved themselves well 
worthy of the confidence that had been placed in them. 
And so Sir John Keane and General Willshire returned 
to India. The “Army of the Indus” was broken up; 
and soon there came from England the welcome announce¬ 
ment that the successes of the campaign had been duly 
appreciated by the Sovereign, and the chief actors duly 
rewarded. Lord Auckland was created an Earl; Sir 
John Keane rose up as Buron Keane of Ghuznee; Mr. 
Macnaghten took his place in history as Sir William 
Macnaghten, Baronet; Colonel Wade became thenceforth 
Sir Claude Wade, Knight; and a shower of lesser dis¬ 
tinctions, of brevets and bath-honours, descended upon 
the working officers, whose gallantry had contributed so 
largely to the success of this memorable campaign. 



496 


THB GEEAT GAME IN CENTRAL ASIA. 


BOOK IV. 

[ 1840 — 1841 .] 


CHAPTER I. 

[January—September: 1840.] 

The Great Game in Central Asia—the Russian Exfiedition to Khiva— 
Apprehensions of Burnes—Colonel Stoddart—Affairs on the Hindoo- 
Koosh—Failure of the Russian Expedition—Conduct of the Sikhs—Herat 
and Yur Mahomed—Mission of Abbott and Shakespear—Disturbances in 
the Ghilzye Country—Fall of Khelat—Arthur Conolly. 

The King and the Envoy spent the winter at Jellalabad. 
There was something like a lull in Afghanistan. When 
the snow is on the ground the turbulence of the Afghans 
is wont to subside.* The time was favorable for the 
consideration of revenue matters, and Macnaghten began 
to inquire into the expenditure and the resomces of the 


* The winter, however, \ias not 
wholly iinprodiictiveof military events. 
A detachment was sent out under 
Colonel Orchard to reduce the fort of 
Piishoot, which lies some fifty miles 
to the north-east of Jellalabad, and 
to expel the “ refractorj^hief ” of the 
surrounding district, ^le affair was 
a successful failure. Repeated at¬ 
tempts were made by the Engineer 
Pigou to blow in the gate, after the 
Ghuznee fashion; but the heavy 


rains had damaged the powder, which 
was naturally bad; and every effort 
was unsuccessful. As there was no 
hope of efiecting an entrance in this 
manner; as Abbott and his artillery 
had vainly exhausted their ammuni¬ 
tion, and a considerable number of 
our men had fallen under the fire of 
the fort, Orchard drew off the assail¬ 
ants. Soon after their withdrawal, 
however, the enemy evacuated the 
place. 



k^[^3oal. inquiry uriii not k iMttMMtory cne. It 
troB'c^^vknis that the govliham^t could he carried on 
<H>ly by the eztractirm of large sums Scaca the ^treasury 
of India; and Macna^ten was continua%' turgiog the 
SufH^^e Govemroeut to authoiire the expenditoe of 
these large sums of money, and contmually ezlmrting ^he 
authorities in the north-western proyinces to smid Um 
all the treasure they could spare. 

But there was much in the state of our foreign rela¬ 
tions at this time to distract the thoughts of the minister 
from the afhirs of the home department. The Kussian 
question was now forcing itself again upon our Indian 
statesmen. Even before the Court turned its back upon 
Caubul, tidings had been received, in the first instance 
fiom Pottinger at Herat, wMch left little room to doubt 
that a Russian force was about to set out from Oren- 
buigh on an expedition into Central Asia. The imme¬ 
diate object of this movement was to threaten the state 
of Khiva, which had long been throwing obstacles in the 
way of Russian commerce, and carrying off Russian sub¬ 
jects into hopeless captivity. Russia had been carrying 
on an extensive trade with the countries of Central 
Asia; but the state of Khiva which borders on fh^ 
country occupied by the Kerghiz Cossacks, was now de¬ 
clared by the Russian Govenunent to be “ daily haram* 
ing the wanderii^ tribes that encamp on our fiontaerB, 
interrupting the intercourse the othm? states of Asia keep 
up with us, detaining the caravans of Bokhara on thdr 
way to and from Russia, obliging them to pay e^lxava*; 
gaut duties, and compelling them by main foree ko ptM 
through its territory, and there sming a cdUad^nhlii^ 
poxtipn their merdiandise” “ These •in8idts^..to 
smgitem, holding conunercial intercourse wUh . IfaBsi ij) 
continuis riie RustiMn state-papei^i^ite 
AMLrojjfiaato nf tho Govqmmeixt of tbe.C«aei dedbn^iypijit 

veil. I. 



JM «nr«auar auis js cmamsjmtu 

l^aotMMI^Qt'tbeff ezpeditioii into Central Aaia^V'^lfiee 
t h«n the atta>ck8%jbiQh have been:mw^e.on 
caravana. Not one these can xtow (^kms the 
without danger. It was in this manner that, a 
Bnssian caravan from Orenburg with goods belonging 
to our merchants, was pillaged by the armed bands of 
Khiva. No Russian merchant can now venture into 
that country without running the risk of losing Im life 
or being made a prisoner. The inhabitants of Khiva 
are constantly making incursions into that part of the 
country of the Kerghiz which is at a distance feom our 
lines, .... and to crown all these insults, they are de¬ 
taining several thousand Russian subjects in slavery. 
The number of these unfortunate wretches increases 
daily, for the peacefel fishermen on the banks pf the 
Caspian are continually attacked and carried off as slaves 
to Khiva.” 

Here were plainly and intellipbly set forth the injuries 
committed by the state of Khiva against the subjects of 
the Russian Government, and the groimds on which the 
latter called for redress. Every attempt, it was stated, 
to obtain satisfection for these wrongs, by reascm and per¬ 
suasion, had fiuled. It was necessary, th^^efore, to rescxrt 
to more decisive measures. ‘‘ Every means of permuir 
sion,” condnued the manifesto, “ has now been exhausted. 
The rights of Russia, the security of hm* trade, the tran¬ 
quillity of her subjects, and the dignity of the state, call 
for decisive measures; and the Emperor has judged it to 
be time to send a body of troops to Khiva, to put an end 
to robbery and exacticm, to deliver those Russians who 
loe^di^ained in slavery, to make the inhabitants cff Khiva 
esteem and respect the Russian name, and fisi^y. tp 
strengthen m that part of Am the feWul influence to 
which Rusajahas a and whidk alone eaa insure the 
waitttwwm iete of peace. Thu »,the jutpose of thep^^ 



eapitiWiioB? d>d m «% 

arder'«f: tU^pi edufoinnabt^ to the ^iotateats <x£.)]ENusiai 
Mkd like nei|^bonnK^ Asiado ststei ihafi«1bd e rt a j b ii ii he d 
on » pemaoient fisotmg, the body of teoc^ w^ph has 
teeeiyed orders to mar^ on Khi^ will Z8tam ’4x>'4hs 
fiontiera of the em^^re.” 

The oatut beUtiru here laid down with sufficient dua 
tincteess, and the &cts stated in the manifesto were not 
to be denied. But it was believed that Ihuain Imdodior 
objects in view than the libation of her slaves and the 
safety of her commerce; and that if the British army had 
not occupied A^hanistan, this manifesto would not have 
been issued by the Czar. It was regarded, indeed, as a 
counter-movement called forth by our own advance; and 
candid men could allege nothing against it on the score 
of justice or 6xpedien<^. There was something suq^kaous 
in the time and manner of its enundadon. But there 
was less of aggression and usurpaticm in it than in our 
own manifesto. The movement was justified by ihe law 
of nations. There was outwardly something, indeed, of 
positive righteoumess in it, appealing to the best instincts 
of our nature. And, if thme were bdiiud all this out¬ 
side show of humanity a politic desire to keep in check 
a rival power, that was now intruding in covmtries &r 
beyond its own line of fioutier, it can only be said that 
our own movement into Afghanistan was directed against 
a danger of the same kind, but of much less substantial 
proportions. 

But the expedition of Russia into Central Asia mccited 
the alarm of our statesmen in A^hanistan, ihoi;^ it did 
not rouse thdr indignation. There was, at all et^ta, 
m it diuch feod finr anxious ccmsideratioa. It ww this 
One gi!eait subject of thought and topio of ffisceunotihi the 
trfhtdr of 1889-1840: Burtit*^ who wss kA^^otNM 
at'Caubul, whilst Maem^teu was-with thO'lll^'WI 

2 K 2 


ASIA. 


j^jiliiS’tetdjiioW, with the aeow «rou|d 
iif te^1i«^«tij(^ent of a s^aseii df o^paniIi¥d4!Qlsux»i 
|p^:l>d& to think and to write; / “ Whi^ a<rjpear ika| 
Ipbh ^ past,” he wrote to a M^d St 

November—“not to me, I ihe^ btft tp' our 
ii|rf;ixs in the East. Eurther submisripn to' what was 
going on, and our days of supremacy in the Eiutt.'were 
numbereil As it is, we have brou^t upoi;; CHirselves 
Some additional half-million of aimuai expen^ttue, 
ere 1840 ends, I predict that our fiontieis and those ci 
Sttssia will touch—^that is, the states dependent upon 
either of us will—and that is the same thing. . ; . 

Every week brings iiesh business; and all the worid wifi 
now have it that Russia has advanced on Khiva. What 
of that? She has the right to relieve her enriaved 
«(Hxntrymen; and if rixe have the power, why should she 
have BO long hesitated ? But the time she has chosen 
for this blow is an awkward one. I hold, however, 
that the man who recommends the cantonmCnt of a 
British, or an Indian soldier west of the Indus'is an 
enemy to hw country.”* 

After the lapse of a month, he wrote again to another 
correspondent, more emphatically, on the same subject:. 

. ' But everything past and present has been cast into the shade 
hy the expedition which the Rusi^ns have noW padrCd into 
Central Ana. I have known of it for eight weeks past, and had 
huiaerpus and authentic reports concerning &eir Wi^goas, thehr 
fiud^u^ do., i&c., ah of which are on a grand sesde, givl% rito 
jto Mrioi^u appr^eiinons that thdir plans are not ocnifia^ 10 AjS 
,eh^aOTWt of ^e petty Khan of S3nva| indeiel, eur-pt^ey aA 
^ joint, and we have reaSda to kMw that 
Bii^'l^m j^va-looks to d^it <^.' ]^’aitfa[tidt^Oli Kllira js 
jusn^i^ 1)y afi and ih k oaOntiylikeBb|^Mid, 

whi^alfae-deBlii^is w odi<^y’de^i(U^''oli^tr'lo'jyt^&tAM0r 
In taihef a 






|MBo7«i?>f}iii iMIer Js my of^nii^li luid.ly 

^yide Apb ^twe^ t|iem^ and the prp 
the cirq^a in the water fill they are Ipet in . 

^neraficma^wiU search for both of hs In tfaesbtegii:^ lb 
seek'fer the remains of Alexander and hiaOieelca.' ^ 

While external afBun stand Am, intemal xm^terahmuntiAM 
Aom ansoety. Doat Mahomedk power is nomina^y 1 d^iSolyad^l^)rllt 
he has jnst been invited to Boklmra at the insfigafiqo of 
and he ho#es to receive Balkh as a gift imm the King thepj^; hi^ 
in May next we shall occupy Balkh^ and if Russia adyanm be^ 
jond jj^ya, be prepared to meet her. Troops are, inde^^ 
wan^qd; but as we cannot act till May, we shall have abundaach 
of tiine. As for withdrawing our army, it is out of the ^uesfiorr; 
for fiiough 1 maintain that man to be an enemy to his oountly 
who recommends a soldier to be stationed west of the Indni^ 
what is to be done? Shah Soojah’s contingent has been hithertq 
so mismanaged that it is fit Ibr nothing; and till fit (supposing 
Russia not to have appeared), the Shah cannot rely on Afghaiis. 
So he says; but if he will but place British officers over fiiehu 
pay them regularly, and not interfere with their repubHo&ti 
ideas, they would alone keep this country in order* Now, iherb 
is a dose of politics for you, as verbose as I used to give you when 
w^ dined at the house in Waterloo-plaoe, or when, over a lobster, 
after some of those brilliant society meetings in (london, My 
prasent position is as follows: I drive the coach in Caubql whi^ 
Msonaghten is with the King. On pur arrival here, ^e 
made a bold push to get away, hie being tired pf kis phu^; kui'J^e 
GovcamoTrGkfDeral bes^hed him to stay a while longer, ax^ ajK 
^ppinted jrpnr humble servant Resident at Candaliar; bui&isl 
4eclbied> end I now get 2/500 rupees, j for steyipg here^j^o^U 1 
jilmpa ip .xpcmve my ^<ient’s salary. The atr^oijji i^e^^ 
JQUHgniitn ‘^1, wltot I iniagine rkeep* A 

moped all teal power, and Enruk Sui^ la aegrpUer. 

Aeir atrift will lead to ilus*“diriaeUi(tion^'ot Peahawor* EfBsii Idd 




THB oAmtB or ASIA. 

H«Mt; and theH, ud qpt dli liamiAiS^Wi 
b«»B iMtoied the A^han momidiy.* 

']6nt iax less heavily on Machaghten’s mind (tote the 
^bought of this Busnan invasion. There were other 
wmrces c£ inquietude less dim and conjectural to trotiUe 
him at this time. In whatsoever direction he turned 
his eyes, he was glared at by some great trouble. Bvety^ 
thing was going wrong. At Herat, Yar Mahomed was 
playing a game of unexampled treachery. In tiie remote 
regions of Central Asia, a Britiidi envoy was groaning 
under the tyranny of the unscrupulous Ameer of Bok¬ 
hara. Nearer home, the measures of the double govern¬ 
ment in A%hani8tan were beginning to bear their own 
bitter fruits. At Candahar, the Douranees were chafing 
under the exactions of unpopular revenue officers. In 
the Kohistan, already were those, who had revolted, in 
a critical hour, against Dost Mahomed, and contributed 
largely to his expulsion from Afghanistan, dghing for his 
return. And further down towards the South, the 
country which we had made the burial-place of Mehrab 
Khan, was breaking out into rebellion against the autho¬ 
rity which we had attempted to establish; and the Sikhs, 
to whom we had conceded so much, our associates in 
the Tripartite treaty, were imscrupulously intriguing 
against us. 

An these things were against him. It was plain that 
he was among a people of a very different stamp from 
those with whom he had been connected throughout the 
earlier years of his administrative career. * There was 
mu^ to disquiet his mind, to engage his thou^ts, and to 
occu]^y Im rime, One alter another he passed in review 
before him aU the difficulties which beset his path; but 
thm was nothing that pressed more heavily on his min<^ 
or whidi seemed to arouse fom info intenser aerioni than 
MW, fiffr^rtilTriri* 



tlie^Mintg«(f to wUoIi 

jected at BoUiara. 

StoddaM^ had bei^ at Bolduffaij^i^j 99f!e 
of the y«ar 183S. He had bei^ despat^hf^ 
M^N^to toat Court, with inatriu^CHU 
libemdoQ of all the Bnssiaa captives, and to ooin^^ik4f;a 
iriaidfy treaty with the Ameer. His recefdton, th<»^ 
marked by seme oapiice, was not altogether tmoourto^i^ 
fie was Very ignorant of the cnstonu of the cophtry, 
and was indined to resent as insults the exac ^ fi of 
farmalities in accordance with the ordinary usa^ of 
Bokhara. He seems to have made no effort to win the 
favour of the barbarous monarch by the adoption of a 
ccmdliatory demeanour; but somehow or other he 
scrambled through the first ceremonials without givmg 
the Ccunmander of the Faithful very mortal offence. 

- But it would appear that he soon excited the bitter 
enmity of the Reiss, or minister. His letters had been 
addressed to the predecessor of this man. The old 
minister had been disgraced whilst Stoddart was on his 
way to Bokhara, and the new man was little inclined to 
regard with favour the Feringhee who had sought the 
protection of the old. In a very short time, Stoddart, 
having been invited to the residence of the Reiss, was 
suddenly seized, thrown to the ground, bound with 
cords, Mid threatened with death by the minister himscS^ 
who stood over him with a long kn^e. He was theh 
carried out, on a dark rainy night, into the streete,'hu]v 
ried horn place to place, by torchlight, and at last 
lowered down by ropes into a dark well, 
wito most'nauseous vermin, to,be the cpmpt^^ 
of murderers and thieves. In this wiet(j^ dunj^e^ 

“ “in^ hy long^to^i^ 
s^etinm. .lie, cpnsente^l putwardlv to contocih 
t^ets of tile Hahome^ 


TSB OBEAT (GUMS I17iaSIf3SA.i:i ASIA. 

Htj|^fcei''Avo israllis of eztrenio Mtiferiii^ jStodAliaAiiiT’si! 
zeloased from this dreadhil dungeon. The<ciUdf.aiffiBec 
oft-poliee then rec^ved Um into hie house;, nod. fi^om 
^istiiiie, throQ^out the year 1839, tboii^h aabjdci\1» 
tiu caprices of a tyrannous monarch and an un8ciupuh)us 
ministei^ and the insults of barbarians of less hote^his emi* 
didon, on the whole, was bettered. The success oi the 
British in A^ianistan seemed for a time to awaken the 
Amem: to a just sense of the powmr of the British nadon, 
and Stoddartrose into importance at the Bokhara Court* 
as the agent of a powerful state, capable of ezermnng a 
mi^ty.influenoe over the desdnies of Central Asia. But 
the caprices of this barbarous potentate were great. The 
smiles of to-day were followed by the cruelties of the 
morrow. Stoddart continued a jaisoner at Bokhara; 
and Macnaghten, sympathising with the sufferings of 
a brave officer, and eager to chastise the insolent bar¬ 
barity of the petty Central-Asian tyrant, again con¬ 
templated the despatch of a brigade across the moun¬ 
tains of the Hindoo-Koosh. 

It was necessary, however, to tread cautiously on this 
groTind. There were more reasons than one why Mac- 
naghten, at this time, turned his thoughts towards Bok¬ 
hara. Dost Mahomed had sought an asylum at the 
Ameer’s Court.* The “ Commander of the Faithful,” as 
this rude Mussulman potentate ostentatiously tmmed him- 
self! received the fiigitive with open arms. For a little 
whSe he lavished upon the Mien Prince all the benignities. 

* nidlnff that be bed Kttle hope pert of the Ameer, end wu deteSned 
ofeo estAlShing hii inflnenoe emong iintil tbe errhel of Do«t Mibemed 
the petty CNiBb^Btetes ei to enable bimeelf. Tbeir tbe Amter M in* 
bin^'idu&'ibeiraMiitaiiee, ton^ake formed that the Kbae of Bokbera 
e0>it1o ngm bne loet doadnioiM, deeaed tbe praenoe alliieeai^fdef. 
the Ajnesr &d eontemidated a digbt tfaeex^mlerof Caabnl. Sor^per*-' 
ibto the Fenian terrttoriei. But die plezed, and abnoBt helpleae, but not 
(bovemer ef Balkh mteroepted the wtthodt fome mli^Tiaga DoitMa^' 
Ibgitive, and invited him to that bemed tben iMI to Mmenu 
p&e. jQbte Shell travt en tbe 



mtam aop 

of /falilieli^blily f «iiid then liaid iqioii 

bim x prisoner. 

^ItlMemseertaia lihst thel> 06 t]iMgofe into Jbad odour 
sCBcUun,” wrote Macni^liten to Bame^ aMi ;AeS0th 
of I^e^aiy, " anidlto> is very improbable tibat two 
Amems^l'bfoomnneen will ever act ooidiaUy togethw." 
It was tbe policy of our British d^lomatists, at tMs tud^ 
to ke^ithe two Ameers in a state of disunion and anta¬ 
gonism. But the very course ;which Macnt^htenKwaa 
disposed to pursue towards Bokhara, was that of all: 
others which was most surely calculated to cement an- 
aUiance between them. A military expedition againstr 
Bokhara would, in all probability, have induced the 
Khan to rdease Dost Mahomed, and to supply him with 
the means of crossing the frontier at the head of an im¬ 
posing body of fighting men, and, aided by the Wullee of 
Ehooloom and other chie& of the Oosbeg hill states, 
makiug an effort to regain his lost dominions. There was 
something, too, in the alleged cause of Dost Mahomed’s 
confinement at Bokhara, which made Macnaghten waver 
still more in his determination to send an army across the 
Hindoo-Eoosh, and su^ested to him the expedi^cy of 
defoting himself to the furtherance of objects of another 
kind. It was sdd that the Ameer of Bokhara was 
greatly incensed by Dost Mahomed’s practical refusal to 
bring bis &mily to Bokhara.* They had remained under 

* The Commander of the Faith- the same time he wrote privately iQ, 
aa Ihe Khan stales himself, re- authorise lum rather to put thew to 
ceiyed Dost Mahomed with co^ia- death, than to aUow them to aet foot 
IHy, and pressed him to send for his within the territories of Bolfham. 
fhndlj, to wimm he promised erery Long and anxiously did the Cou^ 
Idndneas. But the Dost knew the maader oftbeFalfehM look out 
<diaraoter of the Khan too well to the Dost’s Zenana and iheu^ mob 
jpboe the objects of his sdeotson with- and omomenls, whidi be intended to 
m^tlmneaebof thatPrinee. He ao* transfer to Ins own treasures; bnl 
omrdtBirly wrote a^ktler to hit l»o- when he found that he was 
thjsri was shown to the Kham hb guest, he east bolb tbe iDoit 
leqiiestii^ibblbeyttii^tHs 9m his sons into nriisB^ mfkm 
totbafebndly ConrtofBdchAra; at ^VSiere thsb thoil f n liy 


{$06 THE OBEAt <IAMS m CEITTEAL ASIA. 

tll0 eb»f^ of Jubbar Ehan, in the ho£pitahle temtoiy of 
tiie WuUee of Khooloom; and it was said that tbe Khan 
of [Ebkhara had declared, that if they sought the protec¬ 
tion of the British Government, he would destroy Dost 
Mahomed. But Jubbar Khan was^ ell disposed at this 
time to seek from the British an honourable asylum for 
his brother’s family; and the question of their reception 
was earnestly pondered by Macnaghten, and discussed 
with the Shah. In the middle of February, he wrote to 
Bumes, from Jellalabad: 

I have just received your letter, with its enclosures from Lord. 
The question he puts as to the reception to be given to any ofier 
that may be made for placing the Dost*s family under our protec¬ 
tion, is a very important one; and as he has expressed his anxiety 
for early instructions, I can have no hesitation in communicating 
to you ray opinion for his guidance. Common hospitality requires 
that an asylum should not be refused to persons who are in so 
distressed a plight as the Dost’s family; but, at the same time, 
common prudence requires that in the exercise of this office of 
humanity, we do not expose ourselves to the machinations of 
perfidious enemies. I think, therefore, that Lord should at one# 
say, in reply to any request on the subject that may be 
him, that we are prepared to accord a safb and honourable 
to the whole of Dost Mahomed’s family, on the condition oftftteir 
residing wherever our government may think proper. they 
come in, they might, in the first instance, be sent down to^uettah 
or Cutch Gundava, and it would rest with the Governw-G^cneral 
to determine whether they should ultimately be sent toLsoodhianah. 
I think it exceedingly probable that these terms will gladly 

be accepted.Before giving any decided opinimi as to 

our policy in Toorkistan, I wish to await Lord’s promised official 
despat^; but I am strongly disposed to think that we had better 

is brouf^t to Bokhara.” Jub- fi>ro, opened with the Envoy, who 
bar Khan was now at a loss to know was, above all thinm anxious to ob- 
how to act, as his own residence and tain possession of &e Dosfs family, 
^at of his hvoiher’s Ikmily ceased to as, ”in that case, the Khan of Bok-' 

he safh in Khooloom, afw the sen- hara could make no use of him.”_ 

toents of the Bokhara chief were TCtdaUta .fiMkw.} 
known. Kegodations were, there- 




ooet'iftURWim’^ kaiolt. 


601 


sot « 6 f 4 we»bc 7 <«d SygMi* veSm wAtm bossd in good fudi 
to clo<M^ of iriiiidi I am not aware. Fean oi oqr approach might 
prore as incentive to the Shah of Bokhan to set M^omed 
on again.* 

A few days aftervrards, he wrote agam to the same 
correspondent: 

Jellalabad, February 28,1840* 

Mr DEAB Bubnes, 

Since I wrote to you yesterday, I have communicated 
with his Majesty on the subject of the Dost’s family. He does 
not understand upon what principle he can be expected to grant 
them an asylum or a maintenance, and nothing can persuade him 
that he is called upon, either by humanity or policy, to do so. 
Against the Newab Jubbar Khan his Majesty’s wrath is especially 
turned. He trusts that we are not to be gulled by hia professions 
of friendship, whilst the whole tenor of his conduct towards us 
has been that of rancorous hostility. His Majesty will not object 
to our allowing them an asylum in Quettah or Cutch Gundava, 
until the pleasure of the Governor-General is known regarding 
the future disposal of the family; but nothing short of absolute 
Ibrei would induce him to contribute one rupee towards their 
support. Under present circumstances, the family cannot expect 
from us more than a general assurance of kind and honourable 
treatment, on condition of their living wherever we choose to 
locate them; and there must be no more waiting on events. If 
they wish for protection, they must seek it instantly. As to Jub¬ 
bar Khan himself, I doubt whether his Majesty will do more than 
assign him a decent maintenance. If we get the Dost’s family 
into our possession, our objection to the movement into Toorkis* 
tan will be obviated. In that case, the Shah of Bokhara could 
make no use of the Dost. Iiot us examine what we are. to gain 
by such a movement, and upon what principles it should be con¬ 
ducted. The first thing to be gained is the punishment of the 
Shah of Bokhara, for his frequent and outrageous violation of 
the law of nations, and the release of our agent, Colonel Stoddar^ 
who, without some exertion on our part, will, it is likely^ be 
doomed to incarceration for life. I suppose the expeditaon to be 
conveniently feasible, if entered upon at the proper season of the 
* UnpvbUihed Corre$p<mdenee. 



Jlwoor Shah effec^ ^ aax M^jJjipijfgfOf 
.nw Mijnseineat we muy eltlier enlirt on oiir nde, (Kj,s|^<r|)eu* 
1^ between ns and Bokbiaia. If we conii|)^^^ tbe 

Snlii^'Bokhan to release Stoddart, to evacdaie tE(S 'Odun- 
(A tins side of the Qzus, and to paj the eipeht^ 6t tbe 
wA should have achieved dl that is desaablsJ 
Believe me, yours, &o.,jSKi., 

W. H. Macnaohten. 

The Court remained at Jellalabad up to the third 
week of April,- mmI the excursive mind of the Envoy 
was still wandering out in the wild regions beyond the 
Hindoo>Koosh. It was certain that a Bussian army was 
advancing upon Khiva. In the country about Khooloom 
the adherents of Dost Mahomed were exciting against 
us the hostility of the Oosbegs. Jubbar Khan, with the 
Ameer’s family and a large party of retainers, were there. 
The petty chie& beyond the mountains were in a state 
of doubtful vassalage, scarcely knowing whether they 
were subject to Herat or to Caubul; whether they 
would recognise the Khan of Bokhara or the Khan of 
Khiva as their suzerain; or whether they would be, in 
effect, independent of all.* It was desirable to annek 
these Cis-Oxus principalities to the territory of the Shah, 
to strengthen our frontier, and keep them out of the 
hands of the Bokhara ruler. Already was there a weak 
detachpent wintering amid the inhospitable snows of 
Bameean. The despatch of a strong brigade to the 
country beycmd was still among the cherished projects 
of the Envoy. Writing from Jellalabad, he turned his 

* Helmib Kluui, the WuUee of rat, and your Engllah agaut adviae* 
BfikUDioinia, tSid to Artihur ConoHy, me to aend my Mn UieN.‘ Qn tba 
in the autumn of ISM, **]fyaneea* othar hand, the Ccouiandeir of the 
tm ware CPStant to tern too King faithfiil olaima aUenaapa £te 
of Cplml; aaid whea mamlMM of that hara. The Khan Bnurut dhaiiai mia 
hdnta ftlt intomistettmak lhey feand to pnt myaelf under hhn; jMd you 
bp^pMelity heje., Shph ^omah. ia know hrpw I waa. dswad to* aet am 
imn npon .jM throne pt Cannnl; U>e Petnan AaaiphpOod>dowlah eroM> 
mt'now ioMtflier 8al«>m'King edthe M oor f ^h a nb.* 

«idta upon iaa te^eulWit 01 ^ ta Ba- 



tigmatwwmmmmmm 


sotttliem 

Caucasian mountain^^' of’Afp^ 
he t^ii^ja^dx^sed hunself on :(£e 
l^ter ia wmusj not only as ^veloping yimn wUii 
regard totlie country on the south ^ Oxusj 
opinions of the difficulties of forcing the Khybur Pass: 

The sin^iity of the wish professed by the Khybur chiefs tQ be 
bn good tEcrms with us has recently been put to a sev^te testy and 
they have come well out of the ordeal. We reqtdted thetn^ to 
deliver up the murderers of Sergeant Cameron^ and they hate 
aetnally seized and made over to us two of the ringleaders. Bht 
their power over their respective clans is more powerful to esecite 
than to prev^t mischief^ and we must be prepared to hear pf 
many outrages for some time to come. Only yesterday evening 
I received account of an attack upon some travellers in the pass* 
They were plundered of the whole of their property ; two of the 
party were killed and several wounded. This occurrence has not 
altered my opinion as to the proper method of dealing with these 
savBgeSy and hardly any provocation would induce me to send 
our own regular troops into their fastnesses. 

DoubtleaSy it must have appeared to you an inconsistency that 
1 should think of sending troops across the Hindoo-Koosh, while 
we are without the power of subjugating the IQiyburees. But 
I regard the former undertaking as infinitely easier than tbe 
latter. We know tolerably well what we should have to contend 
witb in Toorkistan, whereas we are utterly ignorant of the fast¬ 
nesses of the Kbyburees, and of the means of resistance pos¬ 
sessed by their ohiefi. All we know isy tbat the country is 
fully strongy and that each individual is a soldier and a good 
jpaarksman behind his native rook* BesideSy in sending a force 
into Toorkistan, we should be able to turn to account the str^^th 
of the A%han nation, which consists in its cavalryf^ and Vihmh 
would be uttmly useless^in Ehybinr* A brigade of ours, wifh4 
duepro^i^n''of jattillery, would, I ihin]^„from alt f 
^/liQy competent to overcome any o^pontion that^iCMsIulje 
oifated tts between this; and Bokhara. 

m pne bif;gsieat dtsiont^ri^ 
deBcacy. Tou ^ have seen all the ptw whidioeto 



iW THE QfiSAV OAHE IN CBimBAXi ASIA. 

to m my letter to Dr. Lord. 1 do not ihiidt^ tliat we 

iiiO^ incur the risk of the moietn^t solely for the pnipoee of 
Monmdng the Cis-OxoB ptovinces to ihe dominions of his 
Mi^eBty Shah Soojah; though if they are not so reannexedy 
Bokhara, at the instigation of Russia^ will certainly assert a real 
supremacy. At present she has only Balkh and its dependencies, 
and her sway over that even is hut nominal. But we cannot 
allow Dost Mahomed's family to occupy so commanding a posi¬ 
tion as Khooloom, close to the Afghan frontier. And may not the 
contingency upon which the home authorities direct an advancey 
be said to have arisen should the Russians establish themselves in 
force at Bokhara? I confess I am rather sceptical as to the power 
of the Autocrat to push anything in the shape of an army so far, 
in oney or even in two campaigns. Bumes, howevery is alarmed. 
He says, we are altogether deceived as to the strength of the 
Russian army, that it is now actually in possession of Khiva, and 
will shortly be at Bokhara. In the mean time, you may imagine 
the anxiety with which I am looking for authentic intelligence 
from the North. This we must shortly get from Abbott. 

I intend sending Arthur Conolly, who has joined me here, and 
Rawlinson on a mission to Kokan, with a view, if possible, to 
frustrate the knavish tricks of the JRusse log in that quarter. 
Though there are doubtless many of the elements of mischief in 
this country, yet I should not apprehend any internal explosion, 
even if the greater portion of our troops were withdrawn. The 
Berowski mentioned in the Madras paper was killed at the siege 
of Herat. Perofsski, I think, is the name of the leader of the pre¬ 
sent expedition. Depend upon it we shall never be at our ease 
in India until we have subjugated the Punjaub and Nepaul; and 
the sooner we can come to a reckoning with our faithful allies the 
Singhs, the better. They are doing all they can to injure us in 
this quarter, and arc comforting all the rebels and parties di&- 
afiected to his Mcgesty Shah Soojah. We should here have no 
difficulty in dealing with them in this quarter, and I will venture 
to say there would not be a disciple of Nanuk on this side the 
Indus a week after the dedaradon of hostilities.’* 

* AfiSf.Cbrrefpon(fe«ce. Inihisletter 1^ cjrpher; and as at a later period, 
the Enroy ^us alludes to the ii 7 «tem muiug General FoUock's ooeupaficm 
writing which has now,super* of the passes between Pe^wur and 
seded the old plan of correspondence Caubtu, it was found of the utniist 



m 


As month advanced, ti|ie inteiligenpe fix>m the 
North more and more calculated to jivd^ the opinion 
entertained by the Mission of the success of the Russian 
expedition. On the 2l8t of March, Mimnaghten had 
written to the Agra Governor: 

Lord Auckland tells me that the Russian force consists only of 
3000 cavalxy Cossacks, 800 mounted artillerymen, and twelve 
light field-pieces ; but Burnes tells me that he knows, from goo4 
information, that the force is much larger. Let . us hope the 
armadi^ may be dispersed before it reaches Bokhara, whatever 
may be the strength of it. If the Russians are likely to establish 
themselves there, we had better be up and doing.^ 

But on the 15th of April he wrote from Jellalabad: 

You will see from Captain Abbott’s report how contemptible 
is the enemy with which the Russians have to contend, and I fear 
they will experience no obstacle to their progress all the way to 
Bokhara. Had we not been here, they would by this time next 
year have established themselves without the slightest opposition 
or difficulty in Afghanistan. They appear to have completely 
gained over (whether by promises or threats) the King of Bokhara, 
who turns a deaf ear to all our advances.f 

On the 23rd, the Court having then commenced its 
progress to Caubul, the Envoy wrote in a still less con¬ 
fident strain: 


service to our officers, it may be 
interesting to describe the method 
in the words of the Envoy : “Are 
you in possession of the hikmvi of 
ooneealed writing, by means of con- 
je^water and a solution of iodine ? 
This is much better than any cypher. 
The paper is to all appearance blank, 
but when rubbed over with the solu- 
ti^ony the words written with conjee- 
water start into life, as it wer^ most 
miraculously. Something unimpor¬ 
tant is cenerally written with omn- 
mon and what is intended^ as 
seeiet. is hiterliited with "ooiuec* 
water. 3^ this some ^ diw. Any 
tyiedioal man in your neishroiirliood 
will give the solution. The paper 


intended to be used should first have 
a gentle coat of the solution passed 
over it, and suffered to dry.*’ 

In another letter to the same cor¬ 
respondent, the Envoy again adverts to 
tills mode of cypher writing: “ I find 
it is not necessary to prepare the 
paper in the first instance. You 
write on ordinary pa|«r, and having 
spread a volution of iodine over it, 
the invisible writing becomes ap¬ 
parent. When there is any writing 
of thb kind on my pap^, I shall put 
the day of the month in ktterpy In¬ 
stead cu figures. ^ Bfriitps ypu would 
adc^t the same sign.’* 

* MS. Corr§fp(mdene€. 
t Und. 



qppB l a | I» c 4 W » # --' 

'jJ^lgatOi^ cunenr ia (totiz^, t^fiasaiaiM MvatpeMbed 
I aptic^pate anyiihiiig l)Qt « be^of jkmm si^.inaian 
Be kime to Street peopleV. attentioa from '>ti|e. iniiig^ 
tSuedAfhy patting a atop to tizose in our rear. llre,aie nbw'ra 
tm fieicl of battle on wbibh ^hah Soojah lost bis ibti^ein iS^Q. 
What must his Majesty's feefings be now 

And in another letter, written a few days later, he ex¬ 
presses himself still more emphatically re^fding .the 
dangers of European intrigue: 

I hare at present my hands quite full of the affidrs. of this. 
quarter, as you will see from my several official de^tcK^ P^n- 
lem Lord Auckland act with vigour and promptitude to. secure 
and open our rear, we shall soon be between two fires—if not 
under them. France and Russia are advancing with only the 
remote contingency of profit to stimulate them. We are supine, 
whilst OUT inactivity will probably be the cause of onx ruin. 
France gratuitously supplies Persia with 300,000 muskets, at a 
time when Persia may be said to be at war with us. I cannot, 
though I have repeatedly and earnestly pressed my request, obtain 
a single musketif 

A fortnight after this letter was written, the Envoy 
proposed to Burnes that he should proceed on a mis¬ 
sion to the Bussian camp. He said, he would will- 
ingly go if ordered—but that," added Macnaghtep, 
“is not the spirit which should animate our Elchee;” 
and the design was abandoned. It mtist have been 
very isoon after thist that the glad tidings of the 
break-down of the Russian expedition reached the 
Court of Shah Soojah. The Envoy had spoken der 
spondingly of the contemptible extomy which-tire Russian 
army ,ha.d to encounter—^but there was an. enemy of 
which W) account was taken—ah enemy &at had de¬ 
stroyed Vone of K^leon^s finest armies,, and which^ 
was doopiad to overthrow utteriy our own ^liey in 
Central Ana—^reading its t(^ niouiid Perol^^ 
advah<^ cdlumns. anovf yraa d.^^ wbr]k.. 

* MS, Chrrttptmdtnce. >t ^id. t Mxy ia> 




^'tbe lSth of Mardi, tKo fhrlbatpe^ti&ii 

wii» AnAtm^ced in the publijB jotirAalfl tif St. Peetefsbiogh) 
and Lbid'dlapricarde, on the same "day int^lli* 

gOQ^ to Lord Palmerston. The joimtais atmouxioed 
that the intense cold, the deep snow, and the hiaoceni'r 
bility of the country, had destroyed the camel% wd 
compellM the army to retrace its steps. But the actual 
truth was worse than the newspaper history; for Pe* 
roifski’s ill-fated army had been attacked by pestilence 
and famine.* 

As the year advanced, Macnaghten’s difficulties seemed 
to thicken around him. The failure of the Bussian expe¬ 
dition removed one source of inquietude; but it was a 
remote one. And nearer home, many dangers were 
bristling up in his path. Immersed, however, in foreign 
politics, the Envoy gave little heed to the domestic 
troubles which were gathering around him. His thoughts 
were continually ranging beyond the limits of Shah 
Soojah’s dominions; and whilst the edifice he had reared 
was falling to pieces by the force of its own innate cor¬ 
ruptness, he was devising measures of external defence. 

During the spring and the early summer months two 
subjects pressed greatly on his attention, and became the 
burdens of his discourse. The one was the conduct of 
the Sikhs; the other, the state of affairs at Herat. Ever 
since the death of Bunjeet Singh, the temper of the 

^ " Jam informed that the situation dated 28th June. He condrmi the 
of €eneral Peaoffski and his army is retreat of tlie Rns^ians^ whoee oamp 
more perilous than this account states, appears to have been attacked by a 
because, in conseouenCe of the delays pestilence. 'Ftie Rhan of Khiva writes ' 
that h^d occurred, his. etook of pro* to Todd that Uie Russian forts and, 
visions is found to be insufficient, and entrenchments have been destroyed, 
be IS not in a condition either to await and that some guns and a ouanti^' of' 
tihe thaw and then to proceed to Khivi^ stores helontpg tothem .^^aUji bm 
dr to return home without further brought in triumph to Kliiva.—[w 
t&dJ^*^L^JCIanrioorde-to LordPaU W. & MacutMf^n to Majbr > 
fnersfon., MS* lUcordsJl linson: July 1841* 4fSS* Corre^ 

** 1 had thik thqr a letter from Toad, tpMence.^ 

TO£. U 2 !• 



Ill .1»|B0iniA7aAHSXNaipi»*lim4. 

j^iahore Durbar had been such as to impress the Envoy 
singly with the conviction that nothing but decisive 
measures would ever biing our allies to r^ard the terms 
of the Tripartite treaty. The real ruler of the Punjaub 
was the young and impetuous Prince, Nao Nehal Singh, 
who had almost set aside the authority of his imbecile 
&,ther, and was longing for the day when he might take 
more openly and undisguisedly the sceptre into his hands. 
In every possible way our allies had evaded the stipula¬ 
tions of the treaty. They had rendered no efiectutd aid 
to the Prince Timourin the operations which, conjointly 
with Wade, he had undertaken for the recovery of his 
father’s throne. They were making light of the obliga¬ 
tion to support a contingent force of Sikh troops on the 
frontier, in return for the subsidy granted by the treaty; 
and proof had been afforded that they were engaged in 
treasonable correspondence with our enemies in Afghan - 
istan. It is certain, at least, that they were harbouring at 
their frontier stations the rebel Ghilzye chiefs, who had 
been driven out of Shah Soojah’s territory, and suffering 
them to return again to foment new distiurbances.” Sul¬ 
tan Mahomed Ehan and his brothers at Peshawur were 
servants of the Maharajah, but they were Barukzyes still; 
and it-was not strange that they regarded with undis¬ 
guised satisfaction the clouds which were gathering over 
the restored Suddozye monarchy. 

But more important still than the considerations in¬ 
volved in these questions, was the question which had now 
arisen regarding the free passage of our troops and convoys 
through the dominions of Lahore. It was obvious that 
we could not maintain our position in A fghaniBt,aTi so long 
as the Punjaub stood impassable between that country and 
Hindostan. But Nao Nehal Singh and the Ealsa viewed 
with insurmoimtable jealousy the passage of our arma¬ 
ments through the Punjaub. They dedared, tlia» when 
Mr. Clerk negotiated for a passage for the troops return- 





ai 

iog fiom ^ eocpedituKoi into A^anistan, l^e aooozded 
p«rmi8aiQa w«$ limited to that e^eoUd cnse, and liras by 
no meaai intended to convey a general lioeoee ftnr tbe re* 
peated crosangs and re<ax)enng8 which now se^ed to be 
in contemplation. But Macnaghten declared that it was 
absolutely necessary to “ macadamise'* the road through 
the Puiyaub; and the authorities at Calcutta began to 
think that a war with the Sikhs was no improbable 
event* 


• " Tbe plot it thickening,wrote 
Mocn^hteii, on the 10th of April, 
**and Thave no hesitation in assert¬ 
ing my belief tlmt we shell find our¬ 
selves in a very awkward predica^ 
ment, unless we adopt measures for 
macadamising the road through tbe 
Punjaiib.*' On the 15th of the same 
montli he wrote t ** It may not be 
the interest of our neighbours to give 
us offence; but it is their interest to 
do 118 injury, and in attempts to effect 
this, a certain good neighbour has 
certainly been most active and per- 
tcvoring. We have fresh instances 
and clear proof of this spirit daily. 
Nothing would give us a greater 
name in Central Asia than success 
in such a cause; but I need not dilate 
on the ten thousand advantages that 
would attend a vigorous policy in 
this direction.” — [Af5. Correspond^ 
encs.] Avitabile’s proceedings at this 
time were a source of extreme annoy¬ 
ance to Macnagbten. The General 
vras interfering with the Ehyburees. 
The Koochlee-Kbail tribe of Afreedis, 
from whom he demanded revenue, 
went to Mackeson for protection, and 
said: **Formerly the Sikhs used to 
pay ns 18,000 rupees a year to get 
water at Jnmrood; and now. on the 
strength of tbdr alliance with you, 
thCT ask ns for revenue.”—[.iiei#- 
Umnt Matckeson: AprU 12| 1840, 
OfftrespondmceJ] The chief of 
the tribe saio to Mackeson: ** Why 
do you stay at Peshawur? Ton are 
poweiless were, and yon prevent us 
from we Pikfis ip return for 

dm tajam thpy inflict upon us. 

Si 


Come and tarry witli us.” Avitabile 
threatened to carry Ore and sword 
among the Koochfee-Khail people; 
and Mackeson, to prevent the em¬ 
ployment of force, went security for 
them. Besides this, he laid an em¬ 
bargo on all merchants and travellers, 
subjects of Shah Soojah, passing 
through Peshawur, and declar^ that 
not one of them should proceed until 
the Shah had given ample security 
against the commission of robberies 
in the pass .—ILieutmant Mackeson 
to Mr, Haddock: April 26. MS, 
Correspondence,^ These things greatly 
embarrassed our position, at a time 
when we especially desired to tran- 
quillise tbe Kbyburees. Macnaghten 
wrote urgently to government on the 
subject: *' By this day's dawk 1 am 
sending to the Supreme Government,” 
he wrote, in a private letter, on the 
2drd of April, **a budget containing 
the proceedincs of General Avitabile. 
These are calculated to do infinite 
mischief—so much so, indeed, that 
unless redress is afforded, I do not see 
how it is possible that a rupture with 
the Sikh Government can 1^avoided; 
it's a necessary consequence of such 
proceedings; all our ties must be 
renewed in tbe pass, mid commerce 
^ tliis route may be extinguished. 
Can tbe Fofpa be acting without 
instructions? Why should ho fOOk 
to exasperate us ? But our convoy 
has got safely through, apd wa arf op 
tbe best possible terms with tpa 
Khyburees, who detest oua MUWt 
Boc/i^ deruHiitoa olodpr * 

^2 



STS TOE C^REAT GAME lE CENTRAL ASIA. 

Fualld with these inquietudes arising out 6^ the «6n- 
diict of the Lahore Durbar and its agents, ran the trbuTaIra 
which weighed upon Macnaghten’s mind in cbnnekion 
with the ill-omened aspect of afifairs at Herat. The' inso¬ 
lent ingratitude of Tar Mahomed had reached a pitcTb of 
sublime daring. The British Government were lavishing 
their treasures upon Herat; and the chief tainister of 
Herat, in return for this support, was insulting tlie British 
officers, and intriguing with the Persian Court. In the 
history of human infamy there is nothing more infamous 
than the conduct of this man. The treaty between the 
British Government and the state of Herat, by Which 
the latter bound itself not to enter into negotiations with 
other states without the knowledge and consent of the 
British Berident, had only been signed a few weeks, 
when Tar Mahomed was detected in carrying on a 
correspondence with the Persian Asoof-ood-Dowlah at 
Meshed, offering to place himself and his country under 
the protection of the Persian Government, ahd^ip^tmg 
him to enter into a league for the expulsion' tn^ infidel 
English from Afghanistan.* 

Up to this time eight lakhs of rupees had been ad¬ 
vanced to the Heratee Government. When the new 
year dawned upon Herat, twelve lakhs had been so ad¬ 
vanced. The utmost benefits had been conferred upon 
the state. The measures of our British officers had rescued 

* The treaty with Shah Kainran Government. In reporting this cir- 
had been signed but a few weeks; cumstance for ^oiir information, I eit* 
a treaty which secured to the au« pressed my opinion tliat the mainte* 
thorities of Herat solid advantages, nance of friendly relations with a 
but prohibited them from negotia- eovernment that had proved imelf 
ting with foreign states without insensible of bene^ and ignbrant of 
the knowled^ and consent of Uie the obligations of a treaty, seemed no 
British Resiaent Agent; when it longer possible; and that It would be 
was discovered tliat Tar Maho- found necessary, Ihr the safe^ of our 
med Kban, the de facto ruler of the newly-acquired position bey^d the 
country had secretly made overtures Indus, to reannex the territoiy of 
to the Persian authorities at Idesbed, Herat to the dominions of his 
expressing his hatred towards the ’ShtHi Soojah.***— 2bdd to A 
English, and ofibring to place himself W. H, MacM^Uen: Qheiruk^ Mardi 5, 
under the protection of the Persian 1841. MS. H€cordtS\ 



OraDUCT Oft JAR RAIKnOEP* 


5J7 


Bod people fi;om starntt^.”* B^t a1| this 
y«cj tiioe a letter was addre^ to Mahomed Shah of 
Persia, Jo the name of Shah Eamran, declaiing the 
Heiatee’ruler to be the faithful servant of the Sh^*in* 
Shah; and setting forth that he only tol^ted the ^le- 
smioe of the English because they were useM to him— 
that, in truth, they were not tugsardly with thmr money;; 
but that the hopes of his Majesty were in the a^lw 
of Iskm. 

In explanation of such black-hearted treachery as this, 
it is said that the apprehensions of Yar Mahomed had 
been excited by the imposing attitude of Great Britam in 
A^hanistan—that he looked upon the danger to be ap¬ 
prehended from the cont%uity of the British army as 
something less remote and more alarming than the return 
of Mahomed Shah; and’ that it was his policy at this 
time to play off one state against another, and to secure 
the good offices of Persia, whilst openly receiving the 
bounties of Great Britain. This is, doubtless, the view 
in which the matter is to be regarded with reference to 
the case of Yar Mahomed, the statesman. He was not 
incapable of taking a statesmanlike view of the posi¬ 
tion of his principality. He understood the interests of 
Herat. But better still did he understand the interest of 
Yar Mahomed. The presence of the English officers 
at Herat was a burden and a reproach to the Wuzeer. 
He hated their interference; he had no sympathy with 
their high-toned notions of humanity—with their horror 
of slavery—^with their compassion for the weak and op- 

w « “ The price «f flour in the Herat Ari; emunds of flour were with difl|- 
bewer wetiUboet tbit tiffl«> one Com- culbr procured in the benar, |iid tp 
pecgr'e rupee, for Iheo four Hin- meet the demand whidt the erriral^ 
dottenceeeeie i and thewbole euj^y the Minion (coniiatiug of abpnt'tfO 
ftDm,Tooikietaa,tbemarketg of winch penoni; occamoned, we brnr im^ 
baAbeea opened. 1^ our negotiationt diately to eepd fof auppiiea tp 8e!^ 
fWithKMra.. Ob ourartindat Herat, taii.'*.f[Fa«(i rwjng 
Jdtheii||b the bamat bad been reaped, iV.7.A.Xopra.] 



df the p€iO{^!4e)n?^iiea)i:^ 

^i^mfiSlafiM of the ^tish fitisacHi ki^peekldhitlW>eif06iiBe 
of hif Brbitrftiy desire to eoiich Mioself At i^ie - '0|t^Mie 
of his poorer counttymeo. So he hated Pottinget;* he 
hated Todd; he hated every high-minded Englishman. 
But he bore with them for their money. Todd’s measures 
were especially distasteful to him. The efibrt which he 
was making to break down the accursed slave-trade of 
Central Asia, was more obnoxious than everything beside. 

Associated with Todd—an artillery officer—were two 
other subalterns of Artillery ““James Abbott and Bich- 
mond Shakespear. They were men of ability, of enthu¬ 
siasm,' and of high courage. Abbott’s mind was of a more 
imaginative and romantic cast than that of his associate, 
who had qualities of a more serviceable kind, more prac¬ 
tical, and more judicious. They were men sure to carry 
out any duty, however hazardous, entrusted to them, in 
a conscientious and intrepid manner. They were well 
inclined for any kind of personal adventure; and, ardent 
in the pursuit of knowledge, were eager to explore new 
countries, to mix with an unfemiliar people, and to visit 
uncivilised courts. When, therefore, Todd, acquainted 
with the menacing attitude which Russia had assumed 
towards the Court of Khiva, and the declared grounds of 
her Central-Asian expedition, recognised the expediency 
of despatching a British officer to the capital of the Khan 
Huzzrut, to mediate for the liberation of the Russian 
slaves in captivity there, he was fortunate in having at 
his elbow two men, to either of whom he might securely 
entrust the charge of a mission at once hazardous and 
delicate. In Becember, 1840, Abbott, who was the 

* t*otttiig«r did not remain long in as a special one. But Bottini^ soon 
Herat. Lord Auckland, it baa men made his to Cuubul, and tuba^ 
^own, desired to retain him thera t quentlj prooeed|d to Calcutta, 
and only looked upon Todd*s misaion 



mmmm tm, 

Kkiirai* lie WmiA 

ap^«ac9i of tbo Musoovite 

Qostt^idous of the f<a^ard movemeois of 

was well-inclined to receive the lifiedcm; but Tw liiu 

homed had set at work the same dark intrigues irhldi 

had caused Colonel Stoddart to be cast into captivity at 

Bokham, and was doing his best to thwart the humane 

efforts of the British artilleryman. He seems to have 

had an instinctive hatred of men who were exertit^ 

themselves to sweep away the foul slave-marts df Central 

Asia. 

With deep and painful interest Macnaghten watched the 
progress of events at Herat. The perfidy of Yar Maho¬ 
med Was so glaring—so unblushing—that^the Envoy had 
not hesitated to recommend offensive proceedings against 
the state of Herat, to be followed by its reannexation 
to the dominions of Shah Soojah. But Lord Auckland, 
when the proposal first came before him, was disinclined 
to embrace it. He thought it better to forgive Yar Maho^ 


• “When Major Todd, in June, 
1889, arrived as envoy at Herat, he 
selected MooUah Hussan, a Mahome- 
dan priest of great respectability) as 
bearer of a letter of friendship to 
the Khan Hnzzrut (Supreme Lord) of 
KhivU) called also Khaurism Shah, or 
King of Khaurism. Moollah Hussan, 
arrived at Khiva when the state was 
threatened with a Russian invasion, 
was well received; and on his return 
was accompanied by an Oosbeg Lord, 
Shookkurroola Bre by name, as am¬ 
bassador from the Khan Huzzrut to the 
Indian Government. The letter borne 
by this ambassador accepted of the 
tender of British friendship, and made 
several demands, which could not be 
complied with on the responsibility 
of Todd. It was in answer to 
this mission that the Envoy deputed 
me to timi the Court of Khifa.^— 


[^Captain Abbott's Narrative of a Jour* 
ney from Herat to Khiva: Prelimi¬ 
nary Pemarks*'} 

For an account of Captain Abbott’s 
personal adventures, with a glimmer¬ 
ing here and there of his political nego¬ 
tiations, 1 would refer the reader to 
these interesting volumes. Abbott 
says, at the commencement of his nar¬ 
rative : We (Todd and Abbott) sepa¬ 
rate under circumstances suffimtmly 
gloomy. 1 leave him in the very 
stronghold of robbers. I go myself as 
agent of the British Government to a 
Court, of the language and manners of 
which 1 am utterly ignorant, and to 
accomplish that of which tbi( gmst 
sanguine have no hope. It is singly 
a matter of duty) andas su^ evUimd 
upon cheerfully, and wltb thU A^ter- 
minatioD to cany my tfibits |o'the 
ttttasost.'' 




npill and make a fmtiber experiiimiit 
lidbsHof the Wuzeer. So, instead of an army, m Mao^ 
aei^ten eagerly recommended, a further supply of money 
sent to Herat; and Yar Mahomed continued to in¬ 
trigue with the Persian Government^ 

It seemed to the Envoy, at this time, that thcsre was 
no middle course to be pursued. Ail through our Cen¬ 
tral-Asian policy, indeed, there ran two substantive 
ideas. It was either the bayonet or the money-bag that 
was to settle everything for us. When Macnaghten 
found that the rulers of Herat were not to be dragooned 
into propriety, he declared that there was nothing left for 
us now but to bribe them. He proposed that a subsidy 
of two or three lakhs per annum should be granted to 
Herat; that guns, muskets, and ordnance stores in abun¬ 
dance should be furnished to the state; and in the mean 
while he continued to send up more treasure, with a 
profusion which startled the Calcutta Government, to 
be expended on the strengthening of its defences and 
the sustentation of the people.f 

* •* Your deputation of Abbott to ws, I think, if we wish to secure the 
Khiva will, 1 trust, be fully approved fidelity of Yar Mahomed Khan, is to 
of in every quarter. I have told you give him a subsidy of two or three 
more than once that the measure has lakhs per annum, on condition of his 
my entire approbation, and you will being ready with a force at our com- 
have learnt that the Governor-Gene- mand. Kamran cannot last much 
ral thinks well of it. You will also longer, and it would be well to deter- 
have leaitit that the GovemoivGene- mine beforehand what is to be done 
ral inclines to your views, and that on his death. Should there be a 
be is totally opposed to my recom- stniggle for the sovereignty among 
mendation of punishing the treachery his sons, the country, now fiist recover- 
of Yar Mahomed. In fact, he says ing, would be exposed to all the 
tbe^ scheme is neither ^practicable nor horrors of civil war. The best plan, 
politic. His Lordship is opposed perhaps, vroiild be to let Tpr Ma- 
alio to llie project of the contingent, homed govern on the part of Shah 
thoufl^ in this particukr he may, and Soojah, and penelon off Kamranb 
i ^ felent a family. This at least is the courw 

^ to into which I should wish etcfits of 

Major T^f March 2, themselves to slide.*— W. H. 

IB^. OkpatiisIM €oftoipowdmee,'\ Macnaghten to ZcrdAackkmd: April 

t ** As Hevat is not to be treated as 11, 1840. UtqmbUehed Corretpond^ 
our en^y, and as a contingent* is^imt ence.} 

to be given, the only courseopen to trust that wa alMfi not go to 



Bnft ttiifae aiow 

fiiUy dairdoped, tiie Qoyemot^^S^eiamkhe^ mbtztutt 
tfaa^bany of the oofUEse ib tfeeai «i m:ai^‘e(«ncitortaoa 
whidi be bad in Ibe first inatbnoe r e eo naiaiMided. - He 
bad authorised Major Todd to declare bis fiDigiveneaa of 
all past ofibnees, and mta willing to enter Upon • liew 
covenant of friendship, rasd tabtdd, wi& the offeadHig 
state. But he was not then acquainted with the ftot ctf 
the leiter to Mahomed Shah, in whidi, with almost an^ 
e;zampled shameleesnees, the writer boasted of the ea> 
jolery practised upon the English, who disbursed their 
money freely upon Hend;, whilst its rulers were flinging 
themsdves into the arms of Persia; for although that 
letter had been written in January, and came, th^fore, 
within the margin of those offences for which forgive* 
ness had been declared, it was not until some time aft^ 
wards that this crowning act of perfidy was discovered 
and laid bare before the Governor-Greneral. Then it 
would seem that Lord Auckland began to waver in his 
resolution to maintain the independence of Herat. But 


sleep whilst all tlie reit of the world 
are wide awake. Here are the French 
sending dOyOOO muskets to Persia; 
whilst you will not furnish us with 
one. Just look to our relative stakes, 
and then say, is this economy pru¬ 
dent ? 1 long ago reoDroraendM that 
some ordnance and ammunition stores 
should be sent to Herat, and 1 men¬ 
tioned my belief that thousands of 
guns [muskets] were lying useless at 
Bombay. I would even now recom- 
iqend toatas many guns as carriage can 
be provided for, and as man^ muskets 
as can be spared, together witli a due 
nmportion of ammunition, be sent 
for tlte garrisoa of Herat. Sir Jainee 
Camac would, I doubt not;, be iiappy 
to assist us in tb|s matter.*’*— W» 
to Mr. Cobm: .April 

SO, W40.] 

** 1 am as sensible as any mau can 
lie*wf the necessity of economy^ but 


it is too soon, at the present crisis, to 
begin calculating the worth of every 
rupee that Todd may expend at 
Herat.”— W. U. Macnaghten io 
Mr, Colvin: Cauhuly May 184 ^. 
Unpnbliafied Correspondence.'] 

** I do trust that now you will have 
done something about lierat. If ymi 
neglect Yar Mahomed, how can yon 
hope that he will not connect himsdf 
wi^h some of the many intrigi^ by 
whom lie is beset? As you declined to 
punish his perfidy by taking Herat, 
and as you object to giving a CQiHin* 
ent, toe oidy alternative left is |p 
rihe him with mon^. Our firon^ ii 
sufilciently insecure^ and if ouf fcp 
is not made safe, csir positicffi .will 
shortly be anything but entfial^!^ 
[5itr w, ILMacncmimtoMr. 

May 9, lS4<k UiipsbfiMM Cbrre^ 

y^ondenesp] 


fiii THB OSSMAV O&ME W tiJAMHUL AftA. 

IM' ir«i Mi this time residait at Caloatta. I%r Jaeper 
NieaUi,* who had held the chief command at Madras, 
aa old and distinguished officer, who had done good 
service in the Nepaul war, and was possessed of an 
amount of Indian experience almost unexampled in an 
Indian Commander-in-Chief, was how at the Preridency. 
The war in Afghanistan had been extremely distasteful 
to him from the beginning, and he now viewed with 
suspicion and alarm all the projects which were passing 
before him for the despatch of more troops and the 
diversion of more treasure from their legitimate pur¬ 
poses in Hindostan. No warlike promptings, therefore, 
from the military aide of the Council Chamber, ever 
stimulated Lord Auckland to bury his legions in the 
inhospitable defiles of Afghanistan, or to waste the 
finances of India in insane attempts to change the nature 
of the chiefs and people of Central Asia, and to bribe 
them into quiescence and peace. 

But ever was it the burden of Macnaghten's letters, 
that he could do nothing with Afghanistan until Tar 
Mahomed and the Sikhs had been chastised; and Herat 
on the one side, and Peshawur on the other, reannexed 
to the Douranee Empire. How strongly he felt on these 
points may be gathered both from the public and private 

* In Council, the CommandeMn- marked at the foot that this aggre^e 
Chief was consistently opposed to the exceeded, except in horse artilleiy 
project of an advance on Herat or the and cavalry, the two armies which in 
countries beyond the Hindoo-Koosh. 1803 beat down the great army of 
On the Sdth of May be writes: “ In Scindiab, under Lake and W^esley. 
a quiet way, without any formality, I did this in the hope of Inducing 
I placed in the Govemor-GenetaTs Lord Auckland to pause before he 
hands to-day in Council a paper de- sanctioned any advance upon Balkh 
taiung the numben of regiments and or to Herat, for we «■" ill s^id any 
ttoops or companies of artillery now bu(^ extension of our force. In truth, 
bmond our frontier. It is very great: we are much weaker now than in 
1 faroop and 3 erapanlea of Ahilleiy; 1338, when foe first aagbentadou 
1 rmmeat of Native Cavalry; 3 regl- was ordered in view to our later cam- 
foencs of European and IS) of Nauto paign.’*— QM& JoanuU qf ^ Jaaer 
lnfitntry:2|companiesofGeIuodauUt MNOa] 
atul S companies of Sappers. I to. 



letters whiohy in mmm^ ^ he tdespfttcted 
from Caubnl to his oorrespo&denttf in difihrent of 
India s^d Afghanistan. To the lieutenint^Govemor of 
the North-West Provinces he wrote, on the 10th of July : 

• • . « {urged the removal of the Sikhs to the east of the Indus 
as a matter for amicable negotiation, by purchase or otherwiiS^ 
in the event of their acceding to our other just demands, and 
as a matter of coercion only in the event of their forcing us 
into actual hosdlities. It is clear to me, however, that this country 
can never rise into prosperity while it is shorn of its two wings, 
Peshawur and Herat. 

TTe have heard nothing lately regarding the Russians, and 
probably shall receive no accurate intelligence until the arrival 
of the overland mail. I participate in your fear that Arthur 
ConoUy will not be permitted to proceed northwards. I regret 
this for the sake of the public interests, and on his private ac< 
count, for the opportunity would have been a grand one to obtain 
distinction. 

I am in daily expectation of hearing of the capture of 6ho* 
rian, hut of the policy which directed this measure I confess 
myself unable to form a judgment.* It is apparently calculated 
to make an irreparable breach between us and the Kujjurs. We 
have patched up a sort of truce in the Ghilzye country, which 
may improve into a state of solid and permanent tranquillity if 
the Sikhs will only give us fair play. If we had the countries 
to the west of the Indus, I feel satisfied that you would never 
hear of an insurrection in Shah Soojah’s dominions; but when I 
hint at this in higher quarters, I am charged with wishing to gain 


* Ghorian, the frontier post of He¬ 
rat, had been taken by the Persians 
in 18S8.— ante^page 216.] When, 
in the spring of 1840, the perfidy of 
Yar Mahomed was discovered, the 
Wuseer expressed some contrition, 
and ad anxiety to prove his sinceriqr, 
by fitting out an expedition for the re¬ 
covery of Herat. All that he wanted 
was moD^» If the British amt 
would advance him two lakhs or ru¬ 
pees, be would speedily recover Oho- 


rian. The money was advanced; and 
of course Ghorian was not recovered. 
It was believed by the Mission that, 
whilst pretending to make his prepa¬ 
rations for the expedition, the Wuxeer 
was sending messes to the Feihian 
commandant at Ghorian, telling bila 
not to be under any wprehenslpt^ 
for that although the Biitkh 
him to recover the place, hi hid ii 
intention of making the attempt. 



m 


THE QEEAT GAME IN Ca^l^tjAXr ASIA* 


popcil^y f6r the Shah, at the .ejqpense of lahhi 

All I ean aaj i% that if a&ira aiie allowed 
k^fetttain on their preaent footing, I would rather that an abler 
malt , than myaelf were appointed to administer ihe afimrs of the 
ooiintry.* 

Ten days afterwards he wrote to the Governor- 
General: 

This, if the means are available, appears to me the time for 
aoeompliahing the great work which your Lordship has eom- 
mence^ and of e&otually frustrating the designs of Russia. 
Herat should now be taken possession of in the name of Shah 
Soojah. To leave it in the hands of its present possessors, after 
the fresh proofs of treachery and enmity towards us which they 
have displayed, would, in my humble opinion, be most dan¬ 
gerous. Herat may be said to be the pirot of all operations 
affecting the safety of our possessions and our interests in the 
East, and thence Balkh and Bokhara would be at all times acces¬ 
sible* The Sikhs should no longer be suffered to throw unrea¬ 
sonable obstacles in the way of our just and necessary objects, 
and if they really feel (as they are bound by treaty to do) an 
interest in the success of our operations, they should not object to 
the passage of our troops, or even to their location in the Punjaub, 
should suoh a measure be deemed conducive to the welfare of us 
both. Your Lordship will, I feel assured, forgive the freedom of 
these remarks. I am convinced that one grand ef&rt will place 
the safety of our interests on a firm and solid basis. .... 1 
shall only add, that should offensive operations against Herat be 
undertaken, X should not entertain the smallest doubt of their 
comidete and speedy success, especially as wc should have many 
friends in the country.t 

jLad again, on the same day, writing to Maior Todd 
^at ^rart, he said: 

Yon are quite right in keeping on good terms with Tar Mep. 
hoesed Ehani but this doubl^istiiled tieaeheiy will, I think, 
prowimther too etroi^ ferthe stomach of omr govemmeiit. If 
the means exist, 1 cannot entertain doubt of our sending a force 

* AfS. Camtpwdmee of Sir W. M, MacnagMm. 


t isio. 



_ ar 


m 


to tftik^ tixe mLmei^ SBiii SdojdirTiMO’t eiArrimh 

From tantage gioimd ire proeied^'t^' oee^ Balkbi 

ot evtiri attack BoUiara at li^ time, imt 

claxe war agaiiist ike Ameer just ttoWi^ ®lih Soojah is 
about to send two Sahibzadahs to Bokhara with a view^ IC* k£feet 

release pf Colonel Stoddart. I have promiMPed of j^em 

ten thousand rupees if they succeed, llie chief anxiety f naye 
in the event of operations against Herat is, as to how ybd ' aiiia 
your party are to get away. I dbould say, that whmi goveniiiient 
retolve on aen^g a force, your plan would be to ^ssiii4 Sheer 
Mcdiummud on his proposed embassy to India, with Sanders and 
North as escorts to Candahar. • • • • But a better sclmmb 
will probably occur to yourselff 

And again, with that activity of penmanship wluch 
was so conspicuous at this time, he wrote on the same 
day to Sir James Camac, the Governor of Bombay* It 
should be premised that Shakespear had by this time 
followed Abbott across to the Oxus to the capital of the 
Khivan territories, and was busied in negotiations for 
the release of the Russian prisoners: 

I presume you will have heard from Major Todd of all that has 
occurred in the direction of Khiva. Captain Abbott had been 
attacked and wounded by banditti—(he lost a finger of his right 
hand, but wrote a letter with his left)—but he had reached Dadrt- 
KuUah, and, it was rumoured, had thence sailed for Russia. 
Shakespear had been well received by the Khan of Khiva; and 
he was about to attempt a mediation with the Russian authorities. 
Hiis will, doubtless, fail; and now is our time to enter the fidd. 
If we do not avail ourselves of the opportunity now ofl&red to get 
possession of Herat, I apprehend that what we have done, will 
prove worse than useless. If the Governor-General should insist 
upon sincere co-operation from the ruler of the Putijaub, it'is, 'l 
think, not impossible that the Sikhs will throw off the inafliG4 lu 
which case our communications with tiie Punjaub will for A>sbo#t 
time be interrupted; and^ under sudi carcumstenceB, il nugfat life 

As Todd recommended, to fore* f MS* Cdtr^tpondmce' W* 

stal any declaration by Kosiia of a MaenaghUn. 
treaty mere. 




to any tsoops youoan i!^Mue,yoiiabo<ild 
iflQJliil n« irith fi&em or twenty iaUu of ropeea eaob, in odditum 
to tho nun zoquiied for the Bombfty t|»7ops. We hare now a 
bfntdiiul game on our hands, if we have the means and inclipa» 
tibn i(o play it properly. Our advance upon Herat would go far 
to induce the Bnssian Government to attend to any reasonable 
overtures on the part of the Khan of Khiva.* 

And so still was Macnaghten’s cry ever for more 
money and more bayonets, that be might play tba 
“beautiful game” of knocsking down and setting up 
kingdoms and principalities, with which it became us 
not to interfere, to the waste of the resources, and the 
sacrifice of the interests of those which Providence had 
especially committed to our care. 

In the mean while, in the dominions of Shah Soojab, 
everything was going wrong. Macnaghten still pro¬ 
fessed his belief in the popularity of the King, and was 
unwilling to acknowledge that the people were not in a 
state of repose. But every now and then, both in Af¬ 
ghanistan itself, and in the country that had been 
wrested from Mehrab Khan, awkward evidences of the 
unsettled state of the country rose up to proclaim far 
and wide the fact that there was little loyalty in men’s 
minds towards the Shah, and little afihction for our* 
selves. The Ghilzyes, whom in the preceding autumn 
Captain Outram had attacked, and, it was said, re¬ 
duced, were now again rebelling in Western Afghanistan. 
The chiefs had fled to Pe8hawur,had been harboured there 
during the winter, and now, on the return of the spring, 
had been slipped from thmr retreat, strengthened, it 

♦ MS. Correspondence qf Sir W. before us, tlie results will be incalcu- 
H, Mficna^fUen. I have taken litis lablybeneficial tous,and to ^le tribes 
and tbe two preoediqg oxtmcm from whose destinies we may change from 
copies in Arthur Conolly's hand- turmoil, violence, ignorance, and po- 
writiog. Oonidly biinieff writes: verly, to ptaoe, emighteniiieata and 
!* We are on the eve of stlimiig Mmm ; varM happiness.'* 
but if we play the great game that is 



iifit 

ym faelieredtbySikh gold. At aU evoatf, in tiw mrath 
of April iltey were actively employed fairing [the tribea 
and catting off our communications between. Candahar 
and Caubul. Gleneral Nott had by this time assumed 
the command of the troops at the former place—a place 
with which his name has since become imperishaJdy 
associated. Under-rating the strength of the “ rebelSi*' 
as all were called at this time who did not appreciate 
the new order of things which the British had estS' 
blished in A%hanistan, he sent out a party of 200 
horsemen, under Captains Walker and Tayler, to clear 
the road. But the detachment was not strong enough 
for the purpose. It was necessary to reinforce them, 
Nott had some good officers about him, but he had not 
one better than Captain William Anderson, of the Ben¬ 
gal Artillery, commandant of the Shah’s Horse Artillery 
at Candahar. So, on the 6th of May, the General sent 
for Anderson, and asked him whether he could prepare 
himself to march on the following morning, with a re¬ 
giment of foot, four guns, and 300 horsemen. Ander¬ 
son answered promptly that the artillery were always 
ready, and that he would do his best. By seven o’clock 
on the following morning the detachment was under 
arms and ready for the march. On the 14th they 
came up with Tayler and Walker, in the neighbour¬ 
hood of the Turnuk river. The Ghilzyes were about 
eight miles distant, variously reported at from 600 to 
3000 men. Anderson’s cattle were exhausted; so he 
halted, and, to gain time, opened negotiations with the 
enemy. The answer sent back by the chiefr was a 
gallant one. They said, that they had 12,000 men—a 
firm faith in God and in the justice of their cause—and 
that they would fight. So Anderson prepared to At¬ 
tack th^. Detaching his cavalry to the right and left, 
he moved down, on the 16th, with his infiantiy and his 



S88< THB COnSAV GAME nr CBNTRiilVABlA. 

gcoiAj and, after a march of some five miles, {bund 
eaem^ al^ut 2000 strong, occupying some biUs in his 
froiBt. The action was a gallant one on both sides. 
Twice the enemy charged. The first charge was re¬ 
pulsed by a heavy fire firom Turner’s guns—^the second 
was met at the point of the bayonet by Spence's in¬ 
fantry. Anderson, after the first march ^m Can- 
dahar, beguiled by some accounts of the retirement of 
the enemy, had sent back the greater part of the 
cavalry with which he had started; so that he was 
weak in that arm. But for this, he would have cut up 
the enemy with heavy slaughter. As it was, the victory 
was complete. The enemy fled and betook themselves 
to their mountain fastnesses, whilst Anderson re-formed 
column and marched on to take up a good position 
above Olan Robat. The country around was quieted 
for a time by this victory; but disaffection was not 
rooted out. Indeed, every action of this kind only in¬ 
creased the bitter animosity of the Ghilzyes, and esta¬ 
blished unappeasable blood-feuds between our people 
and the tribes. 

But the money-bag was now brought in to complete 
what the bayonet had commenced. It was expedient 
to conciliate the Ghilzyes, who had at any time the 
power of cutting off oiu: communications between Can- 
dahar and Caubul; and Macnaghten, therefore, recom¬ 
mended the payment of an annual stipend to the chiefe,* 
on condition that they woitld restrain their followers 
from infesting the highways. But neither the bayonet 
nor the money-bag could keep these turbulent tribes in 
a continued state of repose.f 

* 80,000 mpeei (or SOOOI.) per Wnlloo Efam. I bellere tliot &e 
annuBie following accoimt of the transaedon, 

t In oonneiion with the Ghilzye whidi appear^ in a Calcutta jour* 
affain at tbia time, cornea in the un* nal, h snoatantially correct: Wul- 
pleaaant atoiy of the surrender of loo Khan, after hu bea^g, wi^ed 





m 


At |t^ fame lame, dm state pi^rthe^aowthempirovinceB 
was siid^ .mi to ezdte paioM disquietude m Mao^ 
nsgjbten’s mind. The tmd of coimtrji.tiriueb, dfter die 
c^iqre of Khelat, had been anneamd, bgr the did, of the 
Indian Government, to the territory of Shah Sobjah, 
was perpetually breaking out into fierce spasms of 
unrest. It had been almost entirely denuded ol 
British troops; and small detachments were sent 
here, and there, or solitary political agents sate 
themselves down, with only a handful of fighting 
men at command, as though all their paths were 
pleasantness and peace, and all their homes bowers of 
repose. But the Beloochees neither liked their new 
chief nor his European supporters. The blood of 
Mehrab Ehan was continually crying out against the 
usurpation. Ever and anon opportunity offered, and it 
was not neglected. One officer,* on his way from the 
fort of Kahun with a convoy of camels, was over¬ 
whelmed and destroyed by the Beloochees. Eahun was 
invested by the Murrees. Quettah was besi^ed by the 
Khaukurs.f It was soon apparent that the whole country 

to make terms. Anderson allowed but he is sent prisoner to Canbul.** 
him to go into Candahar to do so. The writer adds^ that ** three^ of 
He was successful, and received a the prisoners made over to Lieu- 
dress of honour from Major Leech, tenant Nicolson and the Shah-sadah 
and one Arom the Shah-zadah ruling Tiinour had their heads strudc ^ 
Candahar. He declared he had been but I have before me a specific 
instigated to reaistance by men in declaration, made by the Envoy in a! 
Calabar, and that he would show letter to Lord Auckland, dated Ko- 
their letters. He returned to Ander- vember 24, 1840, that ** not a single 
son, and then to his home; when political execution hae taken place 
hearing that Lieutenant Nicolson and since his Majesty’s accession 
Sha^adah Timour were near, re- power.” 

lying on ^e pledged words of our * Lieutenant Walpole Cleri^ii 
political agent. Major Leech, and the young officer of conspicuous gallantq^ 
Shah • zadah Futteh Jung, WuUoo and Seal. n ' ^ ^ 

Khan went to make his obedience, f The defence of the former place 
and was immeffii^yiKized and made , by Qpptaio Lewis Broviii end of 
priionet; His letters and dress pf latter by Captain Bean,' are aoHlfit 
honWy with a d^ngpio* the most noticeable, incldeiitix of iitfeO 

test ai^m siich pfooeoc^p irom war, oihI deservf more, extended:'boit 
Anfiospon, may have saved his heed, dco than can give, 4itoiilo>4Wt 

vox. I. 2 m 



690 


THB CfflBAT Q*M« IN CUTCBAIi ASIA. 


WM in ravolt. The youthful scm of Mehrab Eb&a Vras 
in the field. The tribes were flocking around him. The 
dbiief who had been set Up in his place was at Khelat. 
Lieutenant Loveday was with him. The defences of 
the place were miserably out of repair. The garrison 
mainly consisted of the chiefs own people. There were 
scarcely any means of resistance at their command, when 
the wild tribes, headed by the family of Nussur Ehan, 
came crowding around the walls of Khelat. The new 
chief was staunch and true. But there were traitors and 
eyil counsellors in the fort, and Loveday listened to bad 
advice. No succours could be sent to his relief, for our 
other positions in Upper Sindh were threatened by the 
hostile tribes. And so it happened that, after some days 
of beleaguerment, Khelat fell to the Brahoo chiefs.* 
Newaz Khan abdicated in favour of the youthful son of 
the chief who had fallen in the defence of his strong* 
hold; Loveday was made a prisoner; and when, some 


place. I am compelled to leave it to 
others to chronicle more minutely the 
progress of events in Upper Sindh. 

* Commenting on the neglect of all 
ordinary precautions, by which tlie in- 
•urrection had been suffered to make 
so much head in Upper Sindh, 
Burnes, on the 7th of August, wrote 
to Macnaghten: ** In April, 1639, 
when called upon by you to state 
officially what should be done to 
chastise the treachery of the chief of 
Khelat, 1 recommended, in common 
with jrourself and Lord Keane, his 
deposition ; but I as plainly stated in 
mv letter of the 10th of that month, 
* that while our troops continued at 
Shawl, this may be an unnecessary 

but both at Moostung and Culc^M 
ve^ eneraetic measures will be re¬ 
tired to Uiese countriesand happily 
their tetonrces art such, that this wifi 
amply repay the labour and expense/ 
Wat tide vigour displayed by his 
M^{esty*s Govemment on the spot. 


or by our own authorities F One of 
his Majesty^s governors has joined 
the insurgents, and the political agent 
Was taken by surprise on an occasion 
which the slightest foresight might 
have anticipated. What right have 
we to expect that any chief placed in 
power shall flourish by us, unless his 
government is better than that which 
we have overthrown? Did Shall 
Newaz muster or even organise his 
troops ? Did he point out the neces¬ 
sity for payment, or the means of 
making them superior to his advei^ 
saries ? We advanced him a lakh of 
rupees, and allowed him to oontintie 
most at Caubu], while we withdrew 
all our troops. Khelat is the capitid 
of Beloochistano-a poor but vast cottn- 
tryi stretchine from the mountsiiii in 
sight of the Indus to the confines of 
Persia* Tbro^h tbb Wide tract Our 
discomfiture aflSets Onr reputatietii 
the only solace in it will be found in 
our chieL not our troops beiim van** 



0TAT1 OF THB OOOJRtkt, 


531 


mdnihk a detacbittfent of fiiitlsh ikt6pB ad¬ 

vanced to the relief of Dadur, which had been at- 
tacked by the enemy, the unfortunate young ofiSicer was 
found in the deserted camp of the Brahoosi chained to a 
camel-pannier^ half naked, emaciated, and dead. His 
throat had just been cut by the sabre of a Beldoohee 
horseman. • 

But in spite of all these indications of unrest—^these 
signs of the desperate unpopularity of the restored 
monarchy—Macnaghten clung to the belief that the 
country was settling down under the rule of Shah 
Soojah, and never ceased to represent to Lord Auckland 
and his secretaries that there were no grounds for un-^ 
easiness or alarm. He was, indeed, most anxious to re¬ 
move any impressions of an opposite character which 
may have forced themselves upon the minds of the Go¬ 
vernor-General and his advisers. On the 8th of July, 
he wrote to Mr. Colvin : 

..... You tell me that my letter has left a very painful 
impression upon you, as manifesting my sense of the weakness of 
the royal cause. I fear 1 must have written my mind to very 
little purpose regarding the state of this country. You rightly 
conjecture that the Barukzyes have most inflammable material 
to work upon.” Of all moral qualities, avarice, credulity, and 
bigotry, are the most inflammable, and the Afghans have all these 
three in perfection. I’hey will take Sikh gold, they will believe 
that Shah Soojah is nobody, and they will esteem it a merit to 
fight against uS. When, in addition to these indueementS, there 
has been positively no government in the country for ihe last 
thirty years, it will cease to be wondered at that cemmorion can 
easily be raised by intriguers possessing a long contiguity of 
flpontier, and having, besides, all the means and appliances to 
ensure suoceSs* though our presence here, doubtless, Strengihens 
Shah Soojah, it must be rsonembered that in aeme sense it 

* This, however, was not aniil the had then been tor SdUle lUbnihS la 
beginning of November. Loveday captivity. 

2m2 




THE OBBAT GAME IN CENTRAL ASIA. 

likens him. There is no denying that he has been supported 
hj infidek; and were we not here, he would adopt A%haii 
means of suppressing disturbances, such as we could not he a 
party to. To break faith with a rebel is not deemed a sin by the 
most moral Afghan; and assassination was an every-day occurrence. 
By the encouragement of blood-feuds, it is notorious that Dost 
Mahomed propped up the little power he had beyond the gates of 
Caubul.* 

It vexed Macnaghten’s spirit to think that he could 
not communicate to other British officers in Afghanistan 
his own overflowing faith in the popularity of the Shah, 
or his own respect for the royal person. From the very 
outset of the campaign the popular feeling throughout 
the army had been strong against Shah Soojah, and the 
conduct of his Majesty himself had not tended to lessen 
it.f And the worst of it was, that all kinds of stories 
about the haughty exclusiveness of the Shah, and the 
estimation in which he was held both by the British 
officers and by his own subjects, were perpetually 
making their way to Government House, and there 

* UnpMiahed Correspondence of happy to have saved government the 
Sir W* //. Macnaghten, trouble of passing orders on the ques- 

f About this time Macnagliten had tion, had Sir Willoughby so far sup- 
been much vexed by the conduct of ported me as to have conveyed a 
General Nott, vho, from first to last, censure to General Nott for the de- 
treated the Eoyal Family of Caubul liberate and gratuitous violence which 
with the aupremestcontempt. Nothing he had committed. The animus by 
could induce him to behave towards which he has been actuated is ap- 
any one of them with ordinar}' respect, parent throughout—lie relused to pay 
At last Macnaghten was compelled the Prince the common cpmpliment 
to lay his complaints before the Su- of calling upon him, although told 
preme Government. “It was with that such a civility was expected. 
inuchregret,^he wrote to Lord Auck- There is, 1 regret to say, a feeling 
land, “ tliat I felt compelled to refer too prevalent amongst the officers of 
to governsient a diierence of opinion the force against his Majesty, who is 
between myself and Sir Willoughby, considered the sole cause of titeir de¬ 
but if such an outrage as tliat commit- tention here—antbl hope that though 
ted by General Nott ia to be tolerated they may not be compelled to treat 
and justified, there roust be an end of the Royal Family with becoming re- 
our efforto to make it be b^ieved that spect, yet that tn^ will not 1^ per- 
Shih Soejah is king of this country, roitted to offer them a direct insult 
I know how embarnusing these re& with impunity.** 
rences are, and I should have been 



DEFENCE OF SHAH 800JAH. 


m 


finding ready acceptance. It irritated Macna'ghten to 
receive letters from Colvin^ commenting on failure, and 
hinting at mismanagement in Afghanistan, At last his 
patience gave way, and on the 4th of August he wrote 
to the Private Secretary: 

It is painful to me that government pay any attention to the 
stories of persons who are afficted with the ** imposthume of too 
much leisure,” and who are daily fabricating the grossest false- 
hoods against his Majesty and the authorities, who are supposed 
to be the cause of their detention in a land “ not overflowing with 
beer and cheroots.” The Shah is conciliating in the extreme to 
all his chiefs. He is too much so, in fact. He listens with the 
greatest patience to all their requests and representations, however 
unreasonable, and he cannot bear to give any of them a direct re¬ 
fusal on any occasion. You have been told that he is a ruler 
who seeks to get on “ without trusting, rewarding, or punishing” 
any of his own people. It is nonsense upon the face of it, and is 
contradicted by every hour’s experience. I have nothing more 
to say about his Majesty’s character than I have already said. I 
believe him to be the best and ablest man in his kingdom. The 
history of the revenues of this poor country may be given in a 
few words. The whole is consumed in the pay of the priesthood, 
the soldiery, and the support of his Majesty’s household. You 
shall have the particulars of these as soon as I can get half an 
hour’s leisure. You know we are solemnly bound to refrain from 
interference in the internal administration; and, in my advice, I 
have been cautious to urge no innovations which could, ai this 
early stage of our connexion with them, shock the prejudices of 
the people. 

Bumes has had no special duties under me. He has cheerfully 
done everything that 1 have asked him to do, and has been of 
much assistance to tne. I have stated, fully and officially, all the 
particulars regarding Nioolson and Wulloo Khan* I know that 
the case has been made the subject of much malicious misre¬ 
presentation. 

And now, my dear Colvin, you must allow me to disbvurdm 
my mind to you. 1 have perceived, or fancied I perc^Ved, din 
several occasions lately, a want of confidence in my proceedings, 



m 


THE QlBfSiA^ (3AME IN CENTBAZi ASIA. 


$$i3L ^ ^lapofdtieii tp listen to every unfavorable r^iort i^gai4lllg 
fijS^its ixK this quarter; whilst I do not receive that ^ 

Vfhieh the overwhelnaing difficulties of my position entitle pae* 
In deciding upon a ccrntTOversy thrust upon me by Brigadier 
Roberts, the government convey to me an iiuplied censure for 
not supporting his military position, though the justice of my 
views is admitted; and take that occasion of conveying a compli¬ 
ment to Brigadier Roberts, though he had written to me a most 
disrespectful letter. If no important operations should b^ 
templated for next year in this quarter, for the conduct of which 
it may be thought desirable that I should remain, some of the 
public money will be saved by the appointment of a less paid 
though equally qualified agent. I never yet have served in an 
office where I had not the confidence of my superiors, and my 
inclination to do so is by no means strengthened after a labo¬ 
rious public life of thirty-one years.* 

But above all these petty cares and distractions rose 
the one dominant thought in Macnaghten’s mind of the 
great and beautiful game that was to be played by the 
annexation of Herat and the coercion of the Sikhs; and 
still he coptinued to write to Lord Auckland that there 
was nothing else to be done. One letter of many will 


* UnpuhUshed Cormspoudence. In 
another letter to the same correspon¬ 
dent, he writes: ** You observe, after 
the first expression of disorder, a oon- 
ciliating policy is the only ope thpt 
can be successful, or tliat we can 
countenance. Who is to judge as to 
whether the disorder is repressed or 
not; we here, or you at the Presi¬ 
dency? And why should you pre¬ 
judge ps and suppose us guilty of 
w|ui|on crvolty at the suggestion pf ^ 
malevolent and inter^t^ raction? 
This treatment is anytliing hut fair, 
anct ypn will fin^ that it is not the 
to secure zealous and honest service.^ 
On the 20th of August, writing to 
another correspondent, he thus spohe 
of hit contemplated resj^tiun; ** I 
am much obliaed to you'for the kind 
hint contained in yoor last. 1 thotild 


never for a moment think of resign¬ 
ing my post from any difference qf 
opinion between myself and my supe¬ 
riors as to the measures which should 
be adopted for the security of our in¬ 
terests in this quarter, but when a 
want of confidence is shown in myself 
personally, 1 would rather not wait 
till 1 get a less equivpcal hint to move. 
Of late, I find that there has been 
kept up a system of esnionage on my 
proceedings, pn4 thai me mps^ rep^y 
credence has been afforded to the 
malevolent tales of every idle felloyr 
about caiup, to lay nothing nf newi- 

paper fabrications, which are taken 
for gospel. I cannot well help myself 
as to my coffespondents, for Colvin 
evidently w^tes to me witfe tbt 
tion or the GovernoF-Oenend," 



AWKWxjom (Hr 594 

suffioo to show how this iMcUng idea still bverbom 
eveiything in his mind; 

TO I<OBD AlJCBIiAJnO. 

Oftubttly Avgvuit IMif 

My Lo»p, 

We are now arrived at a crisis which oallfl for tho IftOil 
serious coasideration. If such a course riiould suit the copvfN 
nience of government, I should say that a vigorous poliey aow 
is that which ought to be pursued. It is, indeed, in my opinioHi 
by such a course alone that our interests can be secured, aud your 
Lordship’s past policy justified. Py annexing Herat to the 
crown Caubul, and by insisting upon the concession of our 
rights from the ruler of the Punjaub, your Lordship will at once 
provide for the consolidation of Shah Soojah’s power, and show 
to the world that the attainment of all the advantages contem> 
plated from the movement across the Indus, has been hitherto 
opposed only by the perfidious intrigues of the two powers pro* 
fessing to be our friends and allies. In addition to the demands 
already made upon the Sikhs, they should be required, I think, tP 
admit unequivocally our right of way across the Punjaub, and in 
the event of their denying this right, they should be convinced 
that we can take it. I confess myself utterly ignorant of what 
political objections may exist to this course of proceeding, or of 
the military means that may be available; and I am much staggered 
at a paper which I have just seen from Captain Sanders, who 
talks of its being expedient to take 12,000 men against Herat. 
I believe, however, that military authorities seldom underrate the 
difficulties to be encountered. This paper will, I believe, be sent 
to your Lordship by Sir W^. Cotton. I have a proposition from 
Captain Bean to recognise the right of Mehrab Khan’s son to 
the mnsnud of Khelat. This I think might be done, if he would 
come and pay homage in person to Shah Soojah, as Shah 
Karwaa can never be reinstated. But I shall tell Captain Bean 
to k^ the qupption Qp§n if possible, until I know ypur Lord^ 
drip’s vie?ra regarding H«»t* If it hp intended ^ to land i 
large fprcQ into the cpuntry with a view of raduping 
the Khelat affair will afford an excellent screen to our ihten- 
tiona.' I must beg your Lordship most earnestly, if posrible, 
to relieve the two European and five Native regiments now 



THE GREAT GAME IN CENTRAL ASIA. 


neighbourhood. They are inefficieiit and wtmi cut, 
and both officers and men are grumbling and diso<Hitented. 
tn the present state of afiairs it would be very hazardous to 
admit of their return, unless their places were filled by fresh 
troops, and a relief would enable us to settle with promptitude 
the Bajor afiairs, and to place our relations with the Khy- 
buxees on a firmer bans. Then, should Dost Mahomed come 
in, he will have to be sent to India, and in the present state 
of Sikh feeling, I doubt if it would be prudent to send him 
across the Punjaub with only a regiment for his escort. We have 
a rumour very generally credited that Colonel Stoddart has been 
poisoned by the Ameer of Bokhara, but I yet hope that it will 
prove incorrect. On the Ghllzye afiairs alluded to in your Lord¬ 
ship’s letter of the 16th, I have this day written to Mr. Colvin. 
In a day or two it is my intention to send up officially, with my 
comments, a paper handed to me by Sir A. Burnes, on the pre¬ 
sent state and future prospects of this country. I hope to show 
that, all things considered, we are in as prosperous a condition as 
could have been expected. Sir A. of course wishes to prove the 
contrary, since by doing so, when he succeeds me, his failures 
would thus find excuse and his success additional credit. This 
is all natural enough. I have been exposed to a thousand inter¬ 
ruptions whilst writing this, and beg pardon if I have used too 
much freedom. I remain, &c., 

W. H. Macnaghten.* 

In a letter despatched a few days afterwards to Lord 
Auckland, Macnaghten wrote: ‘^I trust the Russians 
may not come to Khiva this year, for we have quite 
enough on our hands without them. Captam Conolly 
starts in a few days. I trust your Lordship will have 
the goodness to direct that both he, |ihd Captain Ab¬ 
bott be gazetted as lieutenant-colonels whilst serving in 
Toorkistan.*’ There had gone forth a Mission—and an 
ill-omened one, to Bokhara—th^e had gone forth two 
MimSns to Khiva^^^d now one was to be despatched 
to the intervening s^&fe Vif Kokund. 

^ MS, CarreqMmdaw^ of Sir W, H, MaenaghUn, 



AlliHDK 


m 


Eagestfy did Arthur Con<^ the idea of this 
Ec^omd Ifiasicm. He was a man of an earnest, impul¬ 
sive nature, running over with the purest fee^ngs of 
benevolence, and glowing with the most intense longings 
after the civilisation and evangelisation of the human 
race. He believed that the great Central-Asian move¬ 
ment was designed by Providence to break down the 
huge walls of Mahomedanism which begirt the shining 
East, and to substitute civilisation, liberty, and peace, fi>r 
barbarism, slavery, and strife. He was a visionary; but 
one of the noblest order; and when he looked out 
beyond the great barrier of the Hindoo-Koosh, traversed 
in imagination the desert of Merve, and visited the bar¬ 
barous Courts of the Khans of Khiva, Kokund, and Bok¬ 
hara, he never doubted for a moment that the mission 
which he was about to undertake was one of the highest 
and holiest with which a Christian officer could be en¬ 
trusted.* 

Ever delighting in adventure, and prone to romance, 
he was at this time in a frame of mind which rendered 
him peculiarly greedy of excitement. A great sorrow 
was weighing heavily upon his heart. He sought relief 
in stirring occupation—in active adventure upon new 
scenes of enterprise; and when, for a time, it seemed 
that the unwillingness of the Supreme Government to 


* ** I feel very confident,” be wrote trary, others still selfish, but quali- 
to a fidend, ** about all our policy in fied with peace and generosity, all 
Central Asia, for 1 think that the de- made instrumental to good. See the 
signs of our government there are French in Africa, the English, Aus^ 
honest, and that they will work with trians, and Russians on the Bospho« 
a blessing from God, wbo seems now rus, forcing the Turks to be Enropeah 
to be breaking up all the barriers of under a smdow of Mabpmedaoisiq | 
the long-closed £ast, for the intro- and providing for the peaceful settle- 
duction of Christian kiiowledg|e and meot of the fairest and moat aacred 
peace. It is deeply interesting to countries in the world.’* —[Af& 
watch the efiects that are being pro- remndenee of Arthw CanoUif: Cm* 
duced by the exertions of the Euro- bid, May 16, 1840.] 
pean powers, somp selfish and con- 



SIS THE OBEAV OAMS Of tOmfiAL ASIA. 

ihe ll^os wiM sot to be oyeroome, he gnve 
ymt to the liveliest feelings of disappointment.* Mejmr 
BftwlinsoB mid Captain Oonolly wei« to have proceeded 
together to the camp of General Peroffiki. But the 
Muscovite expedition to Khiva was brought by cold and 
want to a mournful end at Ak-boulak, and there was 
soon no Busaian camp in Central Asia to which these 
entexprising offices could be despatched. But ConoUy, 
believing in his inmost heart that there was a mudi 
grandw game to be played in those remote regions than 
one suggested by the mere accidental circumstance of 
the Bussian advance, still clung to his conviction of the 
policy of the contemplated Mission, and earnestly em 
forced his opinions upon his political chief. Macnaghten 
listened—yielded—and indulging rather the wishes of 
his hiend than conforming to the dictates of his own 
judgment, recommended the enterprise to the favorable 
consideration of the Supreme Government; and acting 
upon certain passages in a letter from the Chief Secre¬ 
tary, which might be construed into an implied permis¬ 
sion, of a general rather than a specific character, ordered 
Conolly to proceed to Khiva and Kokund-f 

* " You will have seen Sir Wil- the following passages of a letter to 
liam*s flying seal despatch about our the Supreme Government: “ Re¬ 
mission to the Russian camp, and ferring, therefore, to the general per- 
on to Kokund, if permitted. I was mission accorded in the Secretary’s 
greatly disappointed when Lord Auck- letter of the 11th of May last, on the 
land's proliibitory letter arrived, for point of Captain Conollj’s mission to 
I had set my heart upon this nobly- Rokund, 1 nave come to the determi- 
stirring employipent $ and when the nation of at once sending off th^t 
chance of it seemed removed, I felt oflicer to the Court in question bj 
the blanh Uiat a mao must fbel who the route of Khiva, aod in compimy 
has a heavy grief as tliq first thing to withYakoobRai, the Khan Puzarut^ 
fall bach npon."— [ilfxSi, Corremond^nce envoy here, "ifho Is |m|doui tp return 
pf Ardwr ConeUy: Cqttbu^ May 80, home. Y^oqb l>e a good 

1840«]| escort Captain Conolly through the 

t Ine groiinds upcm which 'wbolp of the desert pOMPtry extend- 
naghten proceeded iij tlds mettmt ing from Sindop-Koiwih to KhlVo, 
as weU M the recognised objects of a^ theqce, w shown by the memo- 
tbe Misuon, may be gathered from randum of the envoy’s conversation 





m 


It -mB iHih &eliDgi of irrepren^lQ de%ht, l^at now, 
at die begiimi^ of Angoit,^ Arthiff OonoUy fewid him- 
odf “ feu*ly going’’ on his entarpiisii^ jotusnof to the 
Courts of the Trans-Oxian Khan8.f Hit hettt waa in 


with me on the ISth of June last, his 
way will be saih and easy on to 
Kopund, the ruler of which place cim 
be directly advised of his approach. 
His Lordship in Council has nimself 
be^p pleased ^ express his sense of 
Captain ConoUy’s qualifications fbr 
the duty proposed to be entrusted to 
him, apd I venture to hope that this 
Mission will give great ^support to 
pur position in Af^sniitap, besides 
being the means of obtaining other 
important advantages. 1 have so 
repeatedly had the hopqur of laying 
before the Eight Honourable the Go- 
vemor«General my opinions as to the 
afi'aii’s of Toorkistan, that I need not 
repeat them. I will do myself the 
honour of forwarding on another 
occasion my specific instructions to 
Captain Conolly for his journey, 
which will have for its chief object 
the establishment of a correct im¬ 
pression, at every place which he 
visits, of British policy and strength, 
as it bears upon Asia and on Europe, 
with reference especially to the late 
interference in Afghanistan — the 
strengthening of amicable relations 
with the chief Oosbeg powers, which 
have shown a friendly disposition to¬ 
wards us, and endeavouring to per¬ 
suade them to help themsdves, and 
enable us to help them, by doing 
present justice te their enemies, ana 
fbrming an agreement with each 
other to prevent or to redress fbture 
injury done by any one party among 
them to Eussui, so as to deprive the 
latter power of mretext for interfe¬ 
rence with their independence. Cap¬ 
tain Conolly will either at Khiva 
or Kokund'learn the result of the 
endeavour committed to the two 
deputies of Shah Soojah, mentioned 
in my letter of yestm^lay, to brhm 
the Ameer of Bokhara to reason. If 


by this infiuence, or by ofheir means, 
the Ameer should f^mptiy eiddblt 
a decided dippopJtiou IP %tane feu? hif 
past, and to be friends with us and 
the A%haB King, Captain CpnoUy 
can return to Ai^anietan pid 
hara, otherwise his course must be 
regulated by eircumptance8.”--r[4iir 
JV, JET. Macnaghten fq Goverr^m^: 
Caubiil, August 2, 1842. MS. Ccrp&f 

ipon^ence.^ I have taken thi* frpfl 
a copy in Arthur Conolly’s hand¬ 
writing. 

* The Shah» it has been shown, at 
Macnaghten*s request, had despatched 
two holy men to Bokhara) to endea¬ 
vour to obtain Stoddart*s liberation* 
“ At last,” wrote Conolly, we have 
got the letter for the Aipeer of Bpkr 
hara, through the Shah’s Duller, and 
tlie two Sahib-zadahs propose starting 
with it to-morrow, wliich their calen¬ 
dar shows to be a remarkably fortu¬ 
nate day. May their errand be suc¬ 
cessful ! Poor Stoddart’s health was 
drunk last night at the Ghusnee an¬ 
niversary dinner, among absent Eng¬ 
lish friends, after a briefly eloquent 
speech by Sir Alexander, who con¬ 
cluded by expressing a hope that, if the 
last of Sir W. Macnaghten’s amicable 
endeavours to bring the Ameer to 
reason should fail, our gallant and 
unfortunate countiymen would be re¬ 
leased by Baron Bokhara.**— {MS, 
Correspondence of Arikur Conolly: 
Oauhuly July 24, 1840.] 

t Cauhul, August 4, 1840.—^ Hip, 
hip, hurrah! Uz ikhbal^hjenab, I do 
believe that 1 am fairly going now, so 
accept my best thanks ror your con¬ 
gratulations. 1 receive th8m with a 
pang of real regret that yon are not 
going with me; but Todd bids me be 
eommrted with the thou^ts of your 
realised important elevation t sO Pit 
utter no vain sorrow. Nothing cto 



THE OBBAT OABIE IN CKSnlBAli ASIA. 

i^e cause. He was full of impetuous enthusiasm. He 
Was eager that the British ^vemment should play 
” the grand game” in Central Asia, and declared that a 
mission so righteous in its objects must prosper in his 
hands. His spirits rose, as he looked into the future; 
and, full of generous enthusiasm, he began to mal® pre¬ 
parations for his journey.* An ambassador from Shah 
Soojah was to accompany him. But it was long before 
the King could select from the people about his Court 
one to whom he could entrust so responsible a duty. 
At last, after much hesitation, his choice fell upon Allah- 
dad Khan, Populzye—a little, scrubby-looking, sallow¬ 
faced man, with a busy look and a restless eye, believed 
to be skilful in political intrigue, and as little likely to 
betray his trust as any man about the Court. He left 
his family and his money behind him, and these, as the 
Shah significantly said, were the best guarantees for his 
good conduct. 


be done a>head, unless Afghanistan is If the British Government would 
settled ; and I have confident liope of only play the grand game; — help 
your being highly instrumental to this Russia cordially to all that she has a 
desirable end/*—[Af5. Correspondence right to expect—shake hands with 
of Arthur ConoUy,'} Persia—get her all possible amends 

♦ “ Caubul, August 22.—^We are from the Oosbegs, and secure her 
just on the wing; and 1 shall make such a frontier as would both keep 
the best of my way to the two capitals these man - stealers and savages 
for which 1 carry credentials. Shakes- in wholesome check, and take away 
pear has really done wonders; and her pretext for pushing herself and 
if we can follow up the good impres- letting herself be pushed on to the 
sions which he and Abbott have Oxus—force the Bokhara Ameer to 
made, and the British Government be just to us, the Afghans, and the 
will give pecuniary aid, we may keep other Oosbegs states, and his own 
the Oroos (Russians) out of Toor- kingdom—but why go on; you know 
kistan altogether; and bring about my, at ai^ rate in one sense, enl^ed 
a fine order of things there for every views. fnshaUah ! The expediency 
party concerned. It is a work which —nay, the necessity of them will lie 
must prosper; and I only wish again seen, and we shall play the noble 
that you were to be of the party to part that the first Chnstian nation of 
accomplish it; but, as I said bemre, the world ought to fill .’*—{Captain 
you occupy a high and useful station, ConoUy to Maw BiatoUMon, MS, 
and can’t be at two places at <mce. Correspondence^ 



CSOIKWI.t’b 


541 


Eveiytbwg now waa ready. ConpUy, oarlys in Sep) 
tember, turned his face towards the Hlndoo-Koosh. 
There was a Mission of anoth^ kind theii setting to< 
wards those dreary regions. It was not a Mission of 
Peace. Colonel Dennie, who had distinguished himself 
at th head of the Ghuznee stormers, was about to 
maKsh, with the 35th Sepoy Begiment, to reinforce the 
Bameeah detachment, and to take the command of all 
the troops on the northern frontier.* 


* In one of Macnaghten's letters, 
at page 534, there is an allusion to a 
controversy forced upon him by Bri¬ 
gadier BoWts. The Brigadier was 
in chief command of Shah Soojah's 
regular force. He complained that 
his position was not respected by the 
Envoy, and his authority reduced to 
a mere sham. In consequence of this 
representation, government addressed 
Macnaghten on the subject, in the fol¬ 
lowing w<»d8: 

**Ilis Lordship in Council has a 
strong desire, in which he looks for 
your concurrence, to uphold the mi¬ 
litary position of Brigadier Boberts. 
whenever the regular troops shall be 
Withdrawn from Afghanistan, he will 
be your first nulitary authority; and 
every British officer employed in that 
country should be led to look to 
him. His Lordship can only express 
his approbation of the care which is 
exhibited bjr the Brigadier for the 
force committed to his charge, and 


he will be glad when ciroumstances 
will permit mm to car^ into efibet 
his views for its discipline and com- 
fort.” 

Fortified by^ this, the Brigadier 
pressed his opinions and his advice 
on the Envoy, in a manner which the 
latter resented. There was another 
controversy. The Brigadier wrote 
both to the Envoy and to the Gover¬ 
nor-General. He insisted that the 
people of the country were hostile to 
us; and that it was madness to post 
small detachments of troops in iso¬ 
lated fortresses. Macna^ten paid 
little attention to his representations, 
and never heeded his advice.— {Bri¬ 
gadier Roberts to Lord Auckland, Sej^ 
temher 30<A, 1840; and to Sir W, H. 
Macnaghten^ same date, MS, Records,"} 

The Brigadier was right; but the 
collision cost him his appointment. 
Plain truths were not very palatable 
in those days. 



ms THE LAST IVBCSCaSt oreow ItAHOlfEl}. 


CHAPTER H. 

tJtlil^ltoVembel:': 1840j 

The last Struggles of Dost Mahomed—The British in the Hindoo-Koosh— 
2^e Ameer's Family—Occ^ation of Bajgah—Disaster of Itamurd— 
Es^pe of Dost Mahomed—^Feverish State of Caubul—Dennie’s Brigade 
—Defeat of the Ameer—Sale in the Kohistan—^The Battle of Purwan** 
durrfidi^-Surrender of Dost Mahomed. 

It is time that to these regions of the EUndoo-Keosh 
attention should now again be directed. The little force 
which had been despatched thither in the autumn «f 
1830^ and had wintered among the caves of Bameean, 
was, by the coming in of spring, released from its 
inactivity. It was not Lord’s policy to be quiet. There 
Was Jubbar Rhan with the family of Dost Mahomed at 
Khooloom. Already it has been seen that the reception 
of these people had been the subject of correspondence 
between Lord and Macnaghten. But Jubbar Khan 
halted between two opinions. The winter passed away. 
The spring passed away. And still he remained with 
his brother’s family at EJiooloom. The WuUee, or chief 
of that place, was still true to the cause of the Ameer; 
and he permitted the Newab to maintain this numerous 
party by levying the transit duties of the place. 

This was a state of things which, in Lord’s and Mac- 
naghten’s opinions, had already lasted long enough. 
They were eager to bring the Newab to a decision. So, 
at the end oi May, or the beginning of Jxme, a party 



wxmAVa* cor siMAa. 


648 


wttf Mttt oat u&der Goptnin (Mrbett, MtsHBiMy ftnr tho 
puipose of Fecoanoitiing the pMMi tO the fiOlth Of OUf 
poidtioa at Bameean. But theVe was, dOttbUese, another 
object in view. It was believed that such a detnonstra- 
tilon Would have the effect of quickening the movements 
of Jobbar Khan, who had more than once been on the 
point of starting for the British post, but, overcome bv 
his irresolution, had struck his tents and returned. Al^ 
ready had some of the party of refugees left their 
asylum at Khooloom, and sought the hospitality of the 
British. Azim Khan, one of the Ameer’s sons, had 
“come inj” and some of the women and children, too, 
had passed on towards Caubul. But the Newab him¬ 
self still vacillated; and it was believed that a forward 
movement of our troops would stimulate him to come 
to a decision. 

The movement had the desired effect. At all events, 
Jubbar Khan set out for Bameean. Nor was this the 
only noticeable result of the reconnaissance. Beyond 
the valley or glen of Kamurd, which stretches north¬ 
ward from Syghan across the great mountain-range, 
lay the isolated fortress of Bajgah. When our recon¬ 
noitring party came upon this place, to their surprise 
they found it deserted. It belonged to one Syud Ma* 
homed, who now appeared, and declared that he had 
vacated it for the express purpose of making a tender 
of the fort to the British, as an outpost that might be 
of great service to them. A small party of infantry 
were accordingly placed in the fort, and the circum¬ 
stance was immediately reported to Dr. Lord. Lord 
grasped at the offer; and in the strongest terms recom¬ 
mended both to Cotton and Macnaghten the perma¬ 
nent occupation of the post. Bis aiguments prevised; 
and on the 29th of June the Shah's 4th Begiment, under 
Oaptaha Hay, was teat to garrison this isolated ftirt. 
On the Srd of July, Jubbar Khun arrived at BamiMNus 



544 THB T.AB T STBUOOIJBS 07 ZKMST MAHOMED. 

unth tbe aemainiiig members of^tbe Ameer’s, 
of retamers 

li Soon became obvious that the occupatioD.pf Bajgah 
Wfis a mistake. Sturt, the engineer, who )ia4 .b^,spnt 
to survey the passes, pronounced upon.^ ioh^tuess af; 
a military post. It was plain, too, that the temper of 
the surrounding tribes was very different from that :0^. 
the population about Bameean. At the latter place: 
soldiery and the peasantry were on the best possible 
terms. About Bajgah the people looked upon theuew 
corners with a jealous eye. All the efforts of Captain 
Hay to establish a friendly intercourse between himself 
and the inhabitants failed They would not bring in 
grain; they would not bring in forage. Soon their hos¬ 
tility began to evince itself in a more alarming manner. 
“ On the extreme summits of the northern hills overlook¬ 
ing Bajgah, were frequently seen groups of horsemen, 
apparently watching the movements of the people in the 
deep glen below.”* 

Unfortunately, at this time Hay, the only officer at 
Bajgah, was incapacitated by sickness. So he sent tj 
Syghan for Lieutenant Golding; and on the 2nd of Au¬ 
gust sent out a party of two companies, under Sergeant 
Dot^las, to escort that officer to Bajgah.^ . They per¬ 
formed their march without intenuption, at night 
bivouacked under the walls of a fort held ^’one Sula 
Beg. The chief received them with an dutrade show of 
friendlineas; and then despatched a message to another 
chief, Baba Beg, of Ajur, saying—“ See I 1 have the 
Ferin^ees in a dieg (caldron). They are ready to your 
hand. If you are not here by noontide to-morrour, 1 
will jddd up Boy fort to them." 

Morning came. There was no Appearance ^f the 

* See "The Britidi on tbe Hindoo- riati of Af^aiAtan, Inrefemngto 

^ w fah 

publiali^ m more uka one Inoi^ pnae, mj obugetloiis to # iarotlier>^ 
periodical, and in StocqueUr'^B Memo^ pei^ 



ANXIETr AT CAUBCftk 


545 


pany wltom they had^lieen sent to oieet; so Douglas 
was preparing to return to Bajgah, when a heavy match¬ 
lock fire was opened on his men^ fix>m the and the 
surrounding prchards; and presently a party of Oosbeg 
horsemen appeared in sight, and charged down upon the 
little hand, who met and repulsed the attack. It waa 
a fine thing then to see the bold front which Douglas 
and his men showed to the enemy, at they made their 
way, ezpo^ to a heavy matchlock fire, through the 
dense orchids and wilderness of gardens. But many 
fell on the retreat; and many more would have fallen; 
for their ammunition was well-nigh gone, when Sturt 
suddenly appeared with two more companies of the same 
sturdy Goorkha Regiment,* and rescued them from 
inevitable destruction. The enemy turned and fled; and 
Sturt and Douglas returned to Bajgah. 

The evil tidings of this disaster soon reached CaubuL 
It was a time of deep anxiety. As this month of 
August advanced, the perplexities which distracted 
the mind of the Envoy gathered around him more 
closely and more tormentingly. A series of small 
but mortifying failures, of which this Bajgah affair was 
one, not without a significance of their own, kept him 
in a constant state of excitability, and left him neither 
rest of body nor serenity of mind. On the 12th of 
August, writing to Major Rawlinson, he said: 

There has been an awkward business near Bajgah, owing to the 
incapacity o( the officer in command of the 4th or Goorkha Regi¬ 
ment. He haa allowed a company to lose thirty or forty men, 
killed and wounded. I think bnt little of this afi&ir. Lord haa 
gone off to put things to rights. Ma<^regor haa failed also in hia 
3 ffi>rts to set matters to rights in Bajore. His invincibles have bean 
vanquished, and he has lost a gun. All these little acmdents 

* He arrived at Bajssh on his wajr from Kooloom, and v6ldittea«d hb 
serrioesto-Hqr. 

VOL. L 2 H 



THE XiAST STBUCKHES OV DOST MAHOMED. 


IjM^pmug at once ace enough to filiigint one; but, AtAaUsA / the 
Ck^pany’s Nuaseeb will prove superior to them alL* 

A week later, and it had become still more apparent 
that, even in the very neighbourhood of the capital, 
sedition was weaving plots for the subversion of the att- 
thoiity of the Shah; and that the Sikhs were intriguing 
from a distance for the restoration of Dost Mahomed. 
On the 19th of August, the Envoy wrote to the same 
correspondent; 

We have intercepted a letter which, if genuine (as I have every 
reason to believe it to be), implicates many chiefs in this quarter 
as meditating an insurrection in favour of the DostI It distinctly 
states that Nao Nahal Singh has promised pecuniary aid in fur¬ 
therance of the derign. 1 am now just going to his Majesty to 
consult as to what should be done.t 

It was time, indeed, that the King and the Envoy 
should take counsel together. Dost Mahomed had es¬ 
caped from Bokhara. 

For a while, the fugitive Ameer had tasted the 
bitterness of close confinement in the city of Bokhara. 
Afzul Khan and Akbar Khan shared his captivity. 
We know how the Khan of this inhospitable place is 
wont to treat his Christian guests. His Mahomedan 
visitors, whom he at first received with an outside 
show of kindness, were dealt with somewhat more 
leniently. But the natural ferocity of the man was 
not to be kept down. .Dost Mahomed nearly became 
the victim of a treacherous murder. Baffled in this 
attempt on the life of his prisoners, and not daring 
openly to slay them, he kept them for a time under 
strict surveillance, forbidding them even to repair to 
worship in the mosques. This inhospitable treatment 
seems to have called forth a remonstrance from the Shah 
of Persia, in consequence of which greater liberty was 
allowed to the unfortunate Princes. They made the 
* MS. Corrapmieiice. f Ibid. 



B80APB OV DOST^KABQUXD. 


547 


most of &e rdlaxatioDt «nd eifected th^ esca^ie. Many 
Tomantio incidents are told about this flight from 
Bokhara. The horse on which the Ameer fled fdl 
exhausted l)y the way-side. So he transferred him- 
sdf to a caravan, which he chanced to overtake; and 
escaped detection only by dyeing his beard with ink* 
The WuUee of Khooloom, with unshaken fidelity, opened 
his arms to receive his old ally, and placed all his re¬ 
sources at his command. 

It was not long before the Ameer again found him¬ 
self at the head of a considerable force. His family, 
with the exceptioa4>f the two sons, who had shared his 
captivity in Bokhara, were in the hands of the British. 
He knew the danger of his determined course; and, 
when reminded that his wives and children were in our 
power, sorrowfully replied, “ I have no family; I have 
buried my wives and children.” As the Oosbeg fighting 
men flocked to the standards of Dost Mahomed and the 
Wullee of Khooloom, the hopes of the former seemed to 
rise; and his determination to strike a vigorous blow for 
the recovery of his lost empire, gathered strength and 
consistency. To have cut up the Bameean detachment, 
and emeiging from the Hindoo-Koosh, to have appeared 
on the plains below flushed with victory, raising the old 
war-cry in the name of the Prophet, and profiting by the 
unpopularity of Shah Soojah and his supporters, in that 
part of the country, would have been a mighty achieve¬ 
ment—one which would have rendered easy his trium¬ 
phant pn^ress to the very walls of the capital. He de¬ 
termined to make the eflbrt; and early in September 
advanced upon Bameean, with a force of six or eight 
thousand men. 

The ’^month of September brought with it no miti- 
gatioxi aS the anxieties of the Envoy. From the country 
beyond the BQndoo-Eooth came exaggerated tidily 
the successful progress of Dost Mahomed: 

2x2 



THE LAST SXBUGGLES OF DOST HABOHED. 

“jljt 18 reported to-day,” wrote IMacpaghten on the 3rd, “ that 
all 'l?oorkistan is in arms against the Feringhees, and the 
tidt here arc very hard at work. It is certain that Hybuk has 
fikllen to the Dost, and it is probable that Codrington will have 
to retire on Syghan. I put the best face on matters, and a slight 
success which our troops had at Bajgah over a party of the 
enemy, furnishes me with the foundation of a good story.”* 

But this good story soon became a bad one. On the 
30th of August the Oosbegs had attacked Btggah; and 
the Goorkha regiment, aided by Battray with a party of 
Afghan horse, had driven back the assailants. But it 
was plain that this isolated post, in the midst of a hostile 
population, was no longer tenable. It was expedient, 
therefore, to fall back upon Syghan. So Bajgah was 
evacuated. The Goorkhas commenced their retreat; 
and then it was pronounced that Syghan could not be 
held against a large body of hostile troops. Sio it was 
determined that they should fall back upon Bameean. 
They lost everything upon the retreat. We had pushed 
on our out-posts to these remote points, only to abandon 
them disactively on the first appearance of the enemy. 

But there was something far worse than this. A regi¬ 
ment of Afghan infantry had been raised, and Captain 
Hopkins commanded it. It was the commencement of 
an attempt to establish a national army for the support 
of the throne. Its loyalty was now to be put to the 
proof, by placing it within the reach of all those sinister 
influences which were most likely to undermine it. The 
result may be readily anticipated. The atmosphere of 
the Hindoo-Koosh, and the contiguity of Dost hfohmned, 
were fatal to the fidelity of the corps. The A fghan 
soldiers, headed by their commandant, Saleh Mahomed,f 

MS. CorreaptmdMce. JohnioBiluittheooiMlmotoftiKeEiiro- 

^ t Saleh Mahomed, of whom men- pean non-commissioned officers had 
tion will he made io a snhseqaent aisgosted him and his men, and 
|Murt of thb narrative, tcdd Captain moved them to desert* 



BBVERISn STATE OP CAt»0L. 54^^ 

dolled tHMr colours; and a number of them joined the 
enemy. 

On the 5th, the Envoy wrote to Lord Audcland: 

We have just heard that the whole country between this and 
the Oxus is up in favour of Dost Mahomed Khan. Our troops 
have retired upon Bameean, and if the enemy attack them in iStat 
position, 1 should have little fear of the result; but their tactics 
will probably be different. The Kohistan is ready to rise, and 
the whole town is full of traitors and disaffected characters. Our 
attention will probably be distracted by risings in difieiont direc¬ 
tions at the same time.* ^ 

Again, on the following day, he wrote in the same 
strain to Major Rawlinson : 

We are in a stew here—perhaps greater than the occasion 
warrants; but our situation is far from comfortable. It is reported 
that the whole country on this side the Oxus is up in favour 
of the Dost, who, with the Wullee, is certainly advancing in 
great strength; so much so that our troops have been obliged to 
fall back upon Bameean, whilst we have a formidable band of 
conspirators in the city, and the Kohistan is ripe for revolt. 
These matters of course engross my serious attention, and I have 

about fifty chits to answer every half hour.We are 

wretchedly weak, having only three infantry regiments, includ¬ 
ing one of the Shah’s. Wc have been compelled to send off the 
35th to reinforce the garrison at Bameean, but still we arc strong 
enough, I hope, in a fur field, to lick all the Moofsids that could 
be brought against us.t 

Macnaghten’s worst fears were confinned. Caubul 
now seemed to be on the eve of an insurrection. On 
the 9th, the Envoy, in perturbation of mind, wrote again 
to Bawlinaon at Candahar: 

The town is in a very feverish state. Some people are shutting 
up their shops; others, sending their families away; end seme 
active measures must soon be taken for stopping the panic. We 
have taken poaMnon of the gate of the Balia Hissar by a guard 
from Craigie's regiment, and brought the mountain train ihside 

* MS. Corr&tpondeMce. Ihid 



550 THE LAST STBTTOGLES OE DOST MASOMED. 


the dtadeU The apparently inaignificant &ct of Mesdamos 
Trevor and Marsh having come up . from the Balia Hissar from 
ihe town, has created a great sexisation. We are sending out a 
party to watch the Charekar Pass, and Sanders goes with them; 
so that between force and conciliation and intrigue (in which art, 
I am sorry to tell you, I have now taken my degree), I hope we 
shall be more than a match for the Dost. But I have an anxious 
time of it, as you may imagine. 

I had a letter from Lord Auckland yesterday, and from that I 
gather that his Lordship’s intentions are essentially pacific, both 
as regards Herat and the Punjaub* Oh! for a Wellesley or a 
Hastings at this juncture. By a most ingenious process, he has 
substituted the cause for the effect, or rather the e£^t for the 
cause. He says, so long as we are continually agitating the 
question of taking possession of Peshawur and Herat, we cannot 
expect honest co-operation from the powers owning those places; 
thus overlooking, or affecting to overlook, the fact, that but for 
the dishonesty of those powers the question would never have 
been contemplated by us. This drivelling is beneath contempt. 
I shall now send up the proofs I have obtained (and they are 
tolerably strong) of the perfidy of the Sikhs without note or 
comment, and leave the rest to Providence. I shall adopt the 
same course with regard to the intrigues of Yar Mahomed. 

Day after day, the clouds gathering over C^nbul grew 
denser and darker. On the 12th, Macna^ten wrote to 
the Governor-General: 

MtLosd, Ikubul, Sept 12, 184a 

1 am much fatigued, having been severely worked the 
whole day; but I write these few lines just to apprise your Lord- 
that affairs in this quarter have the worst posmhle appearance. 
THie whole Kohistan is reported to be ripe for revolt, though pos- 
ribly in this there may be some exaggeration; and we hear of re¬ 
solutions to rise in other parts of the country. But the worst 
n^rs of all is that received fiom Dr. Lord this morning, to the 
eflbct that an entire compi^ of Captain Hopkins’s corps has gone 
off mth its aims and aocouwements to join Dost Mahomed Khan, 
•xid it is fully eiqpected that their example will be followed by the 
whole regiment Dost Mahomed Khan is said to be advandng 



DBSPoin>»rcT m dost mahoicbd. 


551 


with his foioe; but Dr. Lord’s iatelligenoe seema very de¬ 
fective. I hsve just had a note from Sir W. Oottbn, in which he 
observes: I really think the time has now arrived for you and I 
to tell Lord Auckland, totidem verUs^ that oircumslati6ea have 
proved incontestibly that there is no Afghan army, and that unless 
the Bengal troops are instantly strenglhened, we cannot hold the 
country.” I have long since, and strongly and repeatedly, urged 
my opinion that another brigade should be sent to us. I have 
al^ pointed out that there is no such thing as an A%han army, 
and I have incessantly urged my earnest opinion to the efl^t that 
our position here would be most perilous unless a stop Were put 
to Sikh intrigues. They have now been allowed to go on till the 
country is thoroughly convulsed by them. Dp to this raomenl 
Syud Mahomed Khan, one of the Barukzye triumvirate, is carry¬ 
ing into effect his iniquitous designs against his Majesty’s Govern¬ 
ment. Caubul is full of Sikh emissaries, and letters were yeste]^• 
day intercepted from the Sikh agent to the address, amongst 
others, of Nao Nehal Singh, which clearly shows the anitnus by 
which the Sikhs are actuated towards their allies of the Tripartite 
treaty. The Sikh agent acknowledged the letters were his own. 
He did not know they had been opened. Copies of these may, T 
hope, be sent down officially to-morrow. 

I have the honour to be, &c., &c., 

W. H. Macnaghten. 

The 18th of September was a memorable day. It was 
the turning-point of our fortunes in Afghanistan. On 
that day the anxieties of the British minister were at 
their height. Never was the aspect of affairs more 
threatening—never was there so little to cheer and en¬ 
courage the perplexed political chief. The pale cast of 
despondency was over all his thoughts. His physical 
and mental energies were alike beginning to fail. At 
no period of my life,” he wrote on that 18th of Septem¬ 
ber, do I remember baying been so much harassed in 
body and mind as during the past month. Nor is tny 
yet much lessened. The Aj%hans as^e gun¬ 
powder, and the Dost is a lighted match. Ofhiswhens- 
abouts we are wonderfiiUy ignorant. I have no hope 



I 



attack Bameeaa, and I have 


hB nill fhmv himself into the Kobistfui, it is 

jthe whole country will rise in Ms &Tour. I 
weary of conjecture; and we must in^e the best 
preparation we can i^ainst every possible omtingeacy. 
“Not the least of my vexations arises from our ina¬ 
bility to depute Shah-zadah Timour at the present mo¬ 
ment. But his pres^ce in the Kohistan is indisp^sably 
necessary. He sets out this evening att^ded by all the 
chivalry of Caubul.” 

But upon that very 18 th of September—perhaps whilst 
the British minister, in perturbation and despondency of 
mind, was tracing these very lines, and looking with 
pain&l forebodings of evil for intelligence from the 
Hindoo-Koosh, the detachment of troops, long shut up 
in^those dreary mountain firstnesses, now reinforced from 
Caubul, were achieving a great and decisive victory 
over the forces of Dost Mahcnned and the Wullee of 
Khooloom, and changing the entire aspect of affairs in 
those remote Caucasian regions. 


On the 14th, the reinforcements under Brigadier 
Dennie had reached Bameean. It was curr^tly re¬ 
ported that, on that day, Dost Mahomed wdtiild attack 
our position. , Nothing, however, was seen ief his army, 
and contradictory reports of his movements continued to 
pour into camp. From the stories which were drculated 
at .Bameean, and the contents of the letters divulged 
by the neighbouring chiefe, it appeared that the Ame^ 
had not yet fully determined whether to make a descent 
Upon our detxKshment, or to avoid the contest. From 
I^pmed he wrote to one chief: “ For God’s saks, tell 
me ,tiie news f Will the Feringhees run or fight ?” To 
the $ud^ of the Affghan corps that has just befirre de¬ 
serted, 1^ wrote that all Toorkistan had jc^ed.him, and 
that he had 40,000 men at his calL £a all his letters he 
declared that hehsd taken up arma-fpr the h^tour of his 



wa-ei^ed all f»e3iev«x» to fiock totli^ 
Hol;^ etioidaid of llie fititli. 

l^iigad^ D^ude's first measure, upotai-retK^bmg Ba< 
meeau, liras to disarm the apostate daffib.' fie 

theu began to bethink himself of marcfidng 
to meet the advuicmg troops of the Ameer. But *016 
enemy were then nearer than he anticipated; On 'ih^ 
eranmg the 17th, he obtained intelligence to tKe 
effect that some advanced bodies of cavalry were “ en* 
teiing the valley fiom the great defile in our fiont," ax 
miles fix>m Bameean; and on the following morning it 
was reported that they had attacked a fiiendly villa^ 
which had claims to the protection of our troops. The 
Brigadier resolved, therefore, to expel them. It was be^ 
Ueved that they constituted the advanced guard of the 
Amear’s army under his son Afizul Ehan. On the 
morning of the 18th, a detachment was ordered out to 
drive the enemy firom the valley. Soon-after mght 
o’clock, two horse-artiUery guns imder Lieutenant 
Murray Mackenzie, two companies of the 85th Native 
Infentry, two companies of the Goorkha corps, and about 
400 AJ^ian horse, marched out to meet the enemy. 
About half an hour afterwards, Dennie, with two more 
companies of the Native Infantry regiment, and two 
also of the Goorkha corps, followed in support of the 
adranced detachment. Instead of coming merely upoh 
the advance of the enemy, the Brigadier found an army 
in ids fhmt. But, in spite of the slender force at his 
command, and the overwhelming numbers of the dtiemy, 
Demne did not hesitate for a moment fils ihmi wer^e 
et^er to advance; add he himself was foil of cbnfid^cb 
and courage. The enemy had got ppstession of a (?hafo' 
of forts reachit^ to the naouth' of the defile,'and. 
doBected ih bodies round the several forts, tod 
hiUa on ekheT ride the vril^. lAac^eni^e’s 
began to j^ay ujKm thrin. A' l^le wluld bo^gs 



5S4 T8B 9AUj ov dost hahomsd. 

stood the fixe; but the gonenobly serredy and the 
shrapnel practioe told with tarifio effect on dense bodies 
nfmen who bad nothing to give back in return. The 
Oosb^ fell back, and, as they retreated, the guns were 
pushed forward; and first from one distance, then fix)m 
another, opened a destructive fire upon the wavering 
disconcerted enemy. The Oosbeg force was soon broken 
to pieces; and our cavahy were then let slip in pursuit. 
Following the disordered masses for some miles along 
the defile, they cut down large numbers of the enemy, 
and dispersed them in all directions. Dost Mahomed 
and his son are said to have o>ved their lives to the 
fieetness of their horses. 

Intelligence of this victory soon reached Caubul, and 
was received with the liveliest emotions of joy by the 
British Resident. His spirits rose at once. Again he 
began to look at the present without alarm, and into 
the future without despondency. Never was a victory so 
much wanted as in that month of September. Writing 
to Major Rawlinson, on the 21st, he said : 

Before 1 close this, I may be able to tell you of some of the 
consequences of this glorious success. It has enabled me, in the 
mean time, to breathe a little more freely. I can assure you I was 
beginning to be very nervous, and I entertained great apprehen¬ 
sion that Afghanistan was about to be convulsed from one end to 
the other. Hardly an hour passed without brkiging me some 
unpleasant intelUgence, and the Mufrids in all quarters were be¬ 
coming Kummun basta. The Dost had only one weapon—that 
was religion, and he certunly wielded it most skilfully. I think 
the Oosbegs will now abandon him. Lord has offered handsome 
terms to the WuUee, and should this fail, I am not without hope 
that Meer Mahomed Beg will seize the present opportunity of 
revenging himself on his old enemy. .... 

The attempt to detach the WuUee of Khooloom finm 
hia alliance with Dost Mahomed was crowned with com- 
{dete succ^ Doubtlm Mackenme’e guns were the great 




BD-iimutAiica 09 Am asoodi. 


5S5 


suad're power. The battle of Bameean must ha^e shown 
theOosbeg oMef the hopelessness of hirther reedstanoe ; 
and as Dennie was moving on to' Syghan, it was prudent 
to come at once to terms. Lieutenant Battray was sent 
forward to arrange a meeting between the Wtillee and 
Dr. Lord; and on the 28th of September, on the summit 
of the Dundun-i-Shikun, the British political agent and 
the Oosbeg chief entered into engagements, by which the 
latter bound himself not to harbour or assist Dost Ma¬ 
homed, or any member of his family. The country to 
the south of Syghan was yielded to Shah Soojah; that 
to the north of it to the Wullee; and a telescope, which 
he said had been promised, and which he was hurt at 
not having received before, was given to the latter in 
completion of the bargain. 

“I am like a wooden spoon,” said Dost Mahomed; 
“ you may throw me hither and thither, but I shall not 
be hurt.” Defeated on the Hindoo-Koosh, he reappeared 
in the Kohistan. Disaffection was rife throughout that 
part of the Douranee Empire. The chiefe had begun to 
feel the evils of the new revenue system, or rather the 
manner of its administration, which rendered the tax- 
gatherer something more than a name. Supported by 
British power, the executive officers of the Shah no 
longer stood in awe of the petty chieitains, who soon 
began to murmur against the change of government, and 
to lay all their grievances at the door of the Feringhees. 
Thus irritated and exasperated, they were in a temper 
to welcome back the Barukzye Sirdar. More than one 
fortress was in the hand of a recusant chief; and it was 
appreh^ded that the presence of Dost Mahomed would 
set the whole country in a blaze.* 

* lii^or who wm suliBe- aceesBion of Shah Swjah, he apttnted 

emjfisjjed as Political Agent to the Kohistanee chiefs, who had em- 
m this part of the country, thus de* braced his cause and raked the tn- 
serfeest^c ayea of the general dis- sarrection (which so paralysed the 
affection In the year 1839, on the movements of Dost Mahomed Khan), 



rnfs VAU. of uAfioMto. 

: In sudi a conjuncture it became necessaiy M Jih' wofuei 
iking in the Eobistan. But it was not easy to detmv' 
aiiie what. A blow was to be stnu^, and the chapter 
of accidents was to determine how and in what direc¬ 
tion it should fall. Accordingly, in the last week of 
September, a force under Sir Robert Sale was ordered 
to take the held. Sir Alexander Barnes accompanied it, 


an increase of wages, amounting to 
five hundred tomauns a year, which 
sum, however, was not payable in 
ready money, but by order on the 
land-tax of ^e chief himself, or on 
that of some turbulent district where 
regtdar payment was doubtful, and 
the influence of the chief necessary to 
sectnre any payment at all. The value 
of the sum thus given, might, there¬ 
fore, in the government amount be 
rated at notmng. I may here men¬ 
tion that all the pay, as termed, of 
these chiefii, was of the same kind; 
jmd I am not aware of any instance 
in which the amount surpassed that 
of the land-tax payaUe by the chief, 
or, inde^ equalled it; and, in my 
opinion, it would have ^en better to 
have released the duels altogether 
then fh>m the payment of that tax, for 
the manner of realising it was one of 
the greatest grievances, as our power 
rendered it unnecessary for the tax- 
gatherers to show the same considera¬ 
tion for these nobles which they bad 
formerl;y been obliged to do. Our 
instructions not to interfere in these 
internal afikira, rendered us powerless 
to afford relief, though we saw dis¬ 
content and dbloyalty growing around 
us. During the year 1840 the chiefs 
in the dilTerent parts of the countiy 
found that tlie change of government 
was inimical to their interests and 
power, Insoniuch that it had given 
them a master who was able to compel 
obeefienee, instead of one who was 
obliged to overlodt their excesses in 
exchange fbr their support. They 
therefore gladly revolted to export 
^e return of Dost Mahomed I^an. 
No doubt other causes largely com¬ 
bined to irritate them. Hatred of 


foreign domination, fanaticism, the 
licentiousness of the troops, and 
especially the impunity with which 
women could be seduced and carried 
off* in a country celebrated for tlie 
strictness of the late ruler on this 
point, and the extreme jealousv of 
the natives. The consequence of this 
revolt was the despatch of General 
Sale's force to the Kohbtan in the 
autumn of that year. The force was 
too weak for the destruction of the 
rebels; and Sir A. Burnes, the 
Political Agent, with a force, found 
it necessary to temporise and treat 
with all who had not made themselves 
very remarkable in Opposition; and 
of those who liad, the most extreme 
step ventured upon was delivering 
over the possessions of the rebel to 
his cousin, or nearest of kin, who was 
of the royal party; and Sir A. Burnes 
(under the authority of Sir W. H. 
Macnaghten, afterwards sanctioned 
by the Governor-General in Council) 
promised to those persons, and the 
others who bad remained neuter 
during the contest (joining us at the 
end), that they should enjoy the pay 
and advanta^s promised on the suc¬ 
cession of Shah Soojah. It was also 
understood that no alteration would 
afterwards be made. Hiese agree¬ 
ments were made by Prince Timour, 
who had plenary powers from his 
father, ana the arrangements were 
fioidly approved of by the Shah him¬ 
self;'and under die feeling that the 
promises of the British Dovesnment 
would be sacredly observed, the dis¬ 
contented who remained untouched 
sat^ down and tufsssdllieiratteiitioii 
to agriculture." — 

Hepert. 



miwABp Qom»m> 


m 


and du^ctcd' its movements. At ^ entrance of the 
Ghorehund Pass was a fortified vUlage* and a chain of 
detached foi$s, belonging to a hostile chief, who was 
known to be in league with the fagitiye Ameer. The 
name of this place was Tootundurrah. On the 29th of 
September, Sale invested the enemy’s position. There< 
sistance was very slight. The fire of our guns and the 
advance of the infantry column soon compelled its eva¬ 
cuation, and the place was speedily in possession of the 
British troops. The success was complete, and would 
have be^i dieaply purchased; but one fell there, who^ 
mourned in anguish of spirit by the Envoy, was lamented 
by the whole force. Edward ConoUy, a lieutenant of 
cavalry, one of three accomplished and enterprising 
brothers who had followed the fortunes of their distin¬ 
guished relative, Sir William Macnaghten, and obtained 
employment under the British Mission, had on that very 
morning joined Sale’s force as a volunteer. He was act¬ 
ing as aide-de-camp to the General; when, as the column 
advanced, he was struck down by a shot fi'om the 
enemy’s position. The bullet entered his heart. “ My 
mind was in too disturbed a state all day yesterday,” wrote 
the Envoy on the 1st of October, “ to admit of my 
writing to you. Poor Edward ConoUy (Arthur’s next 
brother) has been kiUed by a dubious hand at a petty 
fortress in Kohirtan. Never did a nobler or a kinder 
spirit inhabit a human fiame. Poor feUowI he was shot 
through the heart, and 1 believe he was the only m- 
dividual oa our side killed during the operations of the 
29th, when three fcnts belonging to the chief rebel in 
the country w«a taken. The whole of the chi^ 
the Eohistan have now taken to flight. This is a resvilt ' 
I by no means anticipated; my wisii was to piinkih 
some, and to conciliate others. As it is, I fear thatBc^t ! 
Mahomed Khan wiU now be received by them ydth 



S58 CTB WALL or DOST MAHiTMMW). 

open anas. There never was such a set villains. 
They came in here, and bound themselves to s^ve the 
fthah under the most solemn oaths conceivable, and yet 
they had not returned to their homes half an hour 
before they reopened thdr correspondence with Dost 
Mahomed. Their punishment became indispensable, for 
they would shortly have had Dost Mahomed amongst 
them; and now there is a possibility of their having im¬ 
bibed BO wholesome a terror of our arms, as to prevent 
their ever again assuming an offensive attitude.”* 

Having destroyed the defences of Tootundurrah, Sale 
advanced on the 3rd of October to the attack of Joolgah 
—another fortified position held by the Kohistanee 
rebels. The walls of this place were too thick to be 
eadly breached, and too high to be easily escaladed. 
The guns were light; the scaling ladders were short; 
and the enemy on the crest of the breach offered the 
most determined resistance. The storming party, led by 
Colonel Tronson, of the 13th Light Infantry, advanced 
to the attack with a desperate gallantry worthy of a 
more distinguished success. Many of the leading men 
were shot dead in the breach; the stru^le to efiect a 
lodgment was ineffectual; and the column was even¬ 
tually withdrawn. Bepulsed, but not disheartened by 
failure, the British troops were preparing to renew the 


♦ Writing on the let of October, 
the Envoy Sius sketched the aspect 
of affairs: “ The result of the vic¬ 
tory at Bameean has not been bj any 
means such as I could have wished. 
Dost Mahomed will not come in, and 
the Wullee of Khooloom will not gnve 
him up. The latter has omitted to 
T6pij to Dr. Lord's last overture, so 
I imagine we must retreat from 
8yghan, re infectQ, Two of the Dost's 
sons have escaped from Ghizni, and 
thev will no doubt endeavour, and 
probably wHh success, to raise a dis¬ 


turbance in the Ghilzye country. In 
short, the aspect of imairs is by no 
means agree^le, and we shall have 
abundance of work on our hands for 
next season. B^ore, Khooloom, and 
divers other places it will be requi¬ 
site to visit with our arms before 
the country can be called settled. 
Amongst a bigoted pec^e aoeustom- 
ed to anardiy, it never can be diffi¬ 
cult to scatter the seeds of rebellion.** 
—[ Carreaptmdenee ef Sir W* H. 

MacnaghUn,\ 



icofrainm cw SBB AinaiB. 


m 

attack, the enemy, dreadii^ the recommencement 
of hostilitiee, the fort in the hands of the beeaegera 
The works were destroyed; and so fer the movement 
was snccessfnl—^but the failure of the assatilt deeply 
mortified the Envoy. “ I have bad news to send you,” 
he wrote on the 4th of October; ‘^our arms have met 
with a reverse at Joolgah in the Kohistan.* A storm 
and escalade was attempted, but it would not do. The 
enemy evacuated the place in the evening; but 1 fear that 
the whole of the Moofisids (rebels) have escaped. .... 
Bumes represents the country as being in a very unsettled 
state; and I fear that it will be necessary for his Majesty 
to remain in Caubul this winter. I intend to write and 
tell Lord Auckland that he must send us reinforcements 
vid the Punjaub. The Dost was last heard of at Eanjau; 
but I have no doubt of his soon entering Nijrow. 
Would it be justifiable to set a price on this feUow’s 
head? We have intercepted several letters from him, 
irom all of which it appears that he meditates fighting 
with us so long as the breath is iu his body.” 

During that month of October, to the annoyance and 
embarrassment of the political officers and the discom¬ 
fort of the troops, Dost Mahomed was flitting about 
fi:om place to place, with no intelligible plan of action to 
give it any shape and consistency to our countervaUing 
movements. Various were the reports which reached 
the British camp—various the accoimts of the nature of 
his movements and the number of his adherents. Many 
of these were of the most conflicting character;—and 
the best-informed officers in the British camp were beset 

* MS, Corretpondence of Sir W, have heard of the diattier at 
JET. Macnaghten. The todc a which I think was a worse afiair wan 

▼etj gloomy view of this anair. In tiiat of Fushoot.*’ 
aamer he says, ^You will 



Tint VALIi OF DOST MABOMED. 


tritii doubt and peiplexity. On the lldi of October it 
WAS known that the Dost was in the vall^ of Ghore- 
bund. “ I believe that there can be little or no doubt;” 
wrote Sir William Macnaghten to Lord Auckland, on 
the following day, ^ of Dost Mahomed’s having entered 
Ghorebund, and of his being at this moment within 
forty or fifty miles distance from Caubul. It is impos¬ 
sible to say what may be the effect of his coming into 
this neighbourhood. But I apprehend very serious con¬ 
sequences, fot both the town of Caubul and the country 
are ripe for revolt. Dr. Lord writes that, as soon as 
Dost Mahomed heard of Mr. Rattray’s approach, he said 
he would not remain to be sold to the Feringhees, and 
immediately took the road to Ghorebund. I cannot 
ascertain how many men he has with him—some ac¬ 
counts say ten thousand, others, three hundred., The last 
is, I dare say, nearer the mark—^but what I dread is, the 
effect of his incessant intrigues (whilst he is so near us) 
upon the minds of the population.” Such, indeed, at ^is 
time, were the gloomy forebodings which overahadowed 
the minds of the political chiefs, that they predicted the 
necessity of concentrating the troops in the Balia Hissar 
of Caubul, and actually began to talk of making piepara- 
tions for a siege. Guns were mounted on the citadel to 
overawe the town. The guards were everywhere in¬ 
creased. The Bameean detachment was ordered to 
return to the capital with all possible despatch. And 
Sir William Macnaghten began to talk about submit¬ 
ting to the disgrace of being shut up in Caubul for a 
time.” It was, indeed, a critical moment. It has been 
seen that the Envoy had begun to contemplate the expe¬ 
diency of soling a price on the Ameer’s head. It is a 
proof alike of the dangers that beset our poaticm in 
Afghanistan, and the disturbing effects they had wrought 



KXXSPSBAflON OP TRS KtNO. 86t 

upon ihe'tnmds of our poHtical ministers, that ihich was 
the ^miasperalaon produced by thfe apparent success of 
Dost Mahomed, even upon the kindly nature of the 
Envoy, that he talked about “ showing no mercy to the 
man who was the author of all the evil now distracting 
the country.” Shah Soojah had long been eager to 
“ hang the dog;” and now, in conversation with Mac- 
naghten, he taunted him with his mistaken leniency. 
“ I suppose you would, even now,” said the King, “ if I 
were to catch the dog, prevent me from hanging him.” 
“ It will be time enough,” said the Envo)’’, “ to talk about 
that when your Majesty has caught him.” The British 
minister was about to take his leave, when the Shah 
arrested him, and said: “You know I have from the first 
expressed to you a mean opinion of my own countrymen. 
If you want further proofs, look at that from my own 
brother.” He then placed in the Envoy’s hands an in¬ 
tercepted letter to the address of the Barukzye chief, 
Sultan Mahomed, proposing that, with his aid, and that 
of the Sikhs, Shah Zemaun should be placed on the 
throne, as Shah Soojah had made over the country to 
the dominion of infidels. The letter bore the seal of the 
old blind king himself. It was on the following day 
that the Envoy wrote to the Governor-General that no 
mercy should be shown to the Ameer; but he added, 
“ should he be so fortunate as to secure the person 
of Dost Mahomed, I shall request his Majesty not to 
execute him till I can ascertain yoiu: Lordship’s senti¬ 
ments.”* 

In the mean while, the force under Sir Bobert Sale had 
moved, in pursuit of the Dost, into the Nijrow country. 
Ckj the 18th they were encamped near Kardurrilb; and 
on the 20th were meditating an attack on the plkdA 

.'.U '' 

* Sir W, B, Macnaghten to Lord Auckland: October 31, 1840. Vnpuh^ 
liahed Correspondence. 

VOL. I. 2 O 



60S THE IJUST STBUGGLES OF DOST MAHOMED. 

The Envoy, who watched their procee<^gs with extreme 
anxiety, was impatient of the seeming dilatoriness of their 
movements ; and wrote to one of his colleagues; “ Bumes 
and Sale, with nearly 2000 good infantry, are sitting down 
before a fortified position about twenty miles distant, 
and are afraid to attack it. The enemy made an attack 
upon them the night before last—killed and wounded 
some of our people, and got off unscathed. All this is 
very bad.” But it was not in reality so bad as it seemed 
to the perplexed and anxious minister at Caubul. Whilst 
he was writing, preparations were in progress for an 
attack, on the following day. On the morning of the 
21st the force was ready and eager for action. But, 
as the troops advanced, fresh and in good spirits, upon 
Kardurrah, a party of villagers met them with tidings 
to the effect that the enemy had abandoned their position, 
and that the place was without an inhabitant. If any 
feelings of mortification welled up on the discovery that 
the garrison had escaped our toils, the}'^ very quickly sub¬ 
sided. It was plain that the enemy had m^e a great 
mistake, and that the British force had providentially 
been delivered from a great danger. The position that 
the “ rebels ” had abandoned was one of uncommon 
strength, and had it been defended with any spirit, could 
only have been carried, if at all, after a large expenditure 
of life. 

Dost Mahomed was now in the Nijrow country. His 
cause seemed to gather strength. Even some of Shah 
Soojah’s soldiers deserted their British officers and flocked 
to the Ameer’s standard. On the 27th of October he 
broke ground, and moved down towards the capital. On 
the 29th, intelligence of his movements having reached 
the British camp at Bhag-alum, the force marched out to 
intercept the enemy. The two following days were em¬ 
ployed by the engineer officers in reconnoitring and but- 



IKMSt MAHOKBD IN NUBOVr. 


56S 


Teying the surrounding country ; and on the 1st of 
November the force encamped before Meer-Musjedee’s 
fort. Here it was ascertained that they were in the 
neighbourhood of the enemy, and preparations were 
made to give battle to the Ameer and his adherents. 

On the 2nd of November—a day which has obtained 
a melancholy celebrity in the annals of the English in 
Afghanistan—the British force came at last in sight of 
the enemy. The army of the Ameer was posted in 
the valley of Purwandurrah. The Nijrow hills were 
bristling with the armed population of a hostile country. 
Unprepared for the conflict, Dost Mahomed had no 
design on that November morning of giving battle to the 
Feringhees. An unexpected movement precipitated the 
collision. On the first appearance of the British troops 
the Ameer evacuated the village of Purwandurrah and 
the neighbouring forts; and was moving off to a position 
on some elevated ground commanded by a steep hill to 
the rearward, when, at the suggestion of Dr. Lord, the 
British cavalry were moved forward to outflank the 
Afghan horse. What followed is one of the most 
exciting, as it is one of the most melancholy inci¬ 
dents of the Afghan war. It was a clear bright 
morning. The yellow foliage of autumn glittered like 
gold in the broad sunlight. The opposite hills were 
alive with the enemy. The crisp fresh air, so bracing 
and invigorating to the human frame, seemed to breathe 
confidence and courage. Dost Mahomed, who, since his 
defeat at Bameean, had been often heard of, but never 
seen, by the British troops, and who seemed to elude the 
grasp of the Army of Occupation like an ignis fatuus, 
was now actually within their reach. It ought to have 
been an hour of triumph. It was one of humiliation. 
The Afghans were on the hills skirting one side of the 
pass; the British troops were on the opposite declivity. 

2o 2 



564 THE IiAST STBUGGIiES OF DOST MAHOMED. 


l>OBt Mahomed saw our cavalry advancing, and from that 
moment cast behind him all thought of retreat. At 
the head of a small band of horsemen, strong, sturdy 
A%hans, but badly mounted, he prepared to meet his 
assailants. Beside him rode the bearer of the blue 
standard which marked his place in the battle. He 
pointed to it; reined in his horse; then snatching the 
white lunghi from his head, stood up in his stirrups un¬ 
covered before his followers, and called upon them, in 
the name of God and the Prophet, to drive the cursed 
Kaffirs from the country of the faithful. “ Follow me,” he 
cried aloud, “ or I am a lost man.” Slowly, but steadily, 
the Afghan horsemen advanced. The English officers, 
who led our cavalry to the attack, covered themselves 
with glory. The native troopers fled like sheep. Em¬ 
boldened by the craven conduct of the British cavalry, 
the Afghan horsemen rode forward, driving their enemy 
before them, and charging right up to the position of the 
British, until almost within reach of our guns.* The 
Afghan sabres told, with cruel efiect, upon our mounted 
men. Lieutenants Broadfoot and Crispin were cut to 
pieces. A treacherous shot from a neighbouring bastion 
brought Dr. Lord to the ground; and the dagger of 
the assassin completed the work of death. Captains 
Fraser and Ponsonby, whose gallantry has never been 
surpassed even in the annals of old Roman heroism, still 
live to show their honourable scars; and tb tell, with 
mingled pride and humiliation, the story of that melan¬ 
choly day. 

In iront of our columns, flaunting the national stan¬ 
dard, the A%hans stood for some time masters of the 
field, and then quietly withdrew fixjra the scene of 
battle. Sir Alexander Bumes, awed by this disaster, 

* ^me of the troopers were pup- her 6, “ that two squadrons of them 
sued fop a considerable distance. “ I were pursued for a mile <w two by 
learn, wrote the Envoyy on Noyem- twenty Douranees.’* 



SUJUtBHJOBB OV DOST IfAHOHBD. 


565 


wrote to Sir William Macnaghten that there washothing 
left for the force but to &11 back upon Caubul, and im¬ 
plored the Envoy there to concentrate all our troops. 
Sir William received the letter on the 8rd of November, 
as he was taking his evening ride in the out^irts of the 
city. His worst forebodings seemed to be confirmed. 
Little did he know what thoughts were stirring in 
the breast of the Ameer. Dost Mahomed, in the very 
hour of victory, felt that it was hopeless to contend 
against the power of the British Government. He had 
too much sagacity not to know that his success at Pur- 
wandurrah must eventually tend, by moving the British 
to redouble their exertions, rather to hasten than to 
retard the inevitable day of his final destruction. He 
quitted the field in no mood of exultation; with no 
bright visions of the future before him. He had won 
the last throw, but the final issue had ceased to be a 
matter of speculation. The hour in which, with dignity 
and grace, he might throw himself upon the protection 
of his enemies, now seemed to have arrived. He had 
met the British troops in the field, and, at the head of a 
little band of horsemen, had driven back the cavalry of 
the Feringhees. His last charge had been a noble one; 
he might now retire from the contest without a blot 
upon his name. 

So thought the Ameer; as was his wont, taking 
counsel of his saddle. None knew in the British camp 
the direction he had taken; none guessed the character 
of his thoughts. On the day after the victory of Pur- 
wandurrah he was under the walls of Caubul. He had 
been four-and-twenty hours in the saddle; but be* 
trayed little symptoms of fatigue. A single horseman 
attended him. As they approached the residence of 
the British Envoy, they saw an English gentleman re¬ 
turning from his evening ride. The attendant gaU 



566 THE IwlST STBHGOtBS OF IWST MAHOMED. 


loped forward to satisfy himself of the identity of the 
rldmr, and being assured that the Envoy was before 
him, said that the. Ameer was at hand. “ What 
Ameer?” asked Macnaghten. “ Dost Mahomed Khan," 
was the answer; and presently the Ameer himself stood 
before him. Throwing himself from his horse. Dost 
Mahomed saluted the Envoy, and said he was come to 
claim his protection. He surrendered his sword to the 
British chief; but Macnaghten returning it to him, 
desired the Ameer to remount. They then rode to¬ 
gether into the Mission compound—Dost Mahomed ask¬ 
ing many eager questions about his family as they went. 
A tent having been pitched for his accommodation, he 
wrote letters to his sons, exhorting them to follow his 
example and seek the protection of the British Grovern- 
ment. 

He scorned to have become reconciled to his fate. 
He had no wish, he said, to escape. Force, indeed, would 
not drive him to abandon the refuge he had voluntarily 
sought. With Macnaghten he conversed freely of his 
past history ; and raised, by the recital alike of his 
doings and his sufferings, the strongest feelings of admi¬ 
ration and compassion in the Envoy’s breast. Every 
effort was made to soothe the Ameer’s feelings; and he 
soon became serene and cheerful. A report that it was 
the design of our government to banish him to London, 
disturbed his equanimity for a time; but he was soon 
reassured by the promises of the Envoy, and began to 
look forward with hopefulness to a life of repose and 
security in the British dominions.* ** 

• “ The Dost,” wrote Sir W. Mao- my guarding hhn, as he would not go 
naghteoi on the 6th of November, were I even to attempt his expulsion 

** occupies a tent in my compound; with blows of a stick* He k certainly 
and he does not, I think, as yet, re- a wonderful fellow*’^ In a letter to 
gret the step he has taken. Ue says, anotheroorrespondenthesays: ^ This 
indeed, that there is no necessity mr morning I have passed a pleasant 



OOBTOOT OF THE AMEES. 


567 


A prisoner, but an honoured one, in the British camp, 
Dost Mahomed remained some ten days at Caubul, 
during which time all the leading officers of the garrison 
paid him the most marked attention. Men, who kept 
aloof from Shah Soojah, as one to be religiously avoided, 
were eager to present themselves before the unfortunate 
Ameer, and to show that they [respected him in hia 
fallen fortunes. He received his visitors with courtesy, 
and conversed with them with freedom. Seated on the 
ground, he desired them to be seated; and seemed to 
take pleasure in the society of the brave men who did 
him honour. Captain Nicolson, an officer of distin¬ 
guished gallantry and great intelligence, whose early 
death on the banks of the Sutlej is to be deeply de¬ 
plored, having been selected by Sir W. Macnaglxten to 
fill the difficult and delicate office of custodian to the 
fallen prince, acted, on these occasions, as interpreter. 
It may be doubted whether a single officer q[uitted his 
presence without drawing a comparison between the 

hour with the Dost. I went to see is necessary to restrict the number of 
him in his tents, where he is very his* visitors, because Afghans are the 
comfortable. He gave me the whole most mischief-making people oii the 
account of his wanderings, from the face of the earth. We could not 
timeofhisdightat Urgbundeli. What- deny him an interview with his mo- 
ever else he may be, he is certainly a ther; and yesterday evening, shortly 
shrewd, clever fellow ; and it is dif- after the old lady went away, Burnes 
ficult to refrain from compassionating went in to see him, and found him 
his fallen state. 1 hope lie is tolera- in a state of considerable affliction 
bly reconciled now to nis Indian des- and excitement. It seems that some 
tination. Mussoorie would be the one had told him (and 1 have no 
best place for his location, and if you doubt his mother, instigated by some 
could give him a Zemundaree in the mischievous people in the town, was 
Dhoon, he might have some occupa- his informant) that it was our inten¬ 
tion for his restless mind.*’ Three tion to send him to London. I told 
days afterwards, writing; to Lord him to make his mind at ease, for 
Auckland, the Envoy saidi ** 1 have that without hti consent we Imd no 
the pleasure to announce the arrival wish to send him beyond Loodbianah; 
this morning of Mahomed Afaiil, the and at his request 1 gave him a wri* 
eldest son of Dost Mahomed Khan, ting to this effect. He to ainee 
We are doing all we can to soothe seemed perfectly well satisfied*^*** 
the eX'pchicTs feelings, and up to yes- \Unpubluihed Corrupondmct nf jS^ 
terday evening our efforts appear to W, Macnoffkkn,’} 
have been attended with success. It 



Ameer and the Shah, very much to the disadvantage 
of the latter. The King refused to see his prisoner, al¬ 
leging that he would not be able to bring himself to 
show common civility to such a villain. “ This is well,” 
said the Envoy, writing to the Private Secretary of 
the Governor-General, “ as the Dost must have suffered 
much humiliation in being subjected to such an or¬ 
deal.” All the natural kindliness of the Envoy now set 
in towards the fallen prince, and all the courtesies of 
the English gentleman were fteely bestowed upon him. 

On the 12th of November, 1840, Dost Mahomed 
Khan, under a strong escort,* commenced his journey 
towards the provinces of India; and two months after¬ 
wards Macnaghten wrote: 

I trust that the Dost will be treated with liberality. His case 
has been compared to that of Shah Soojah; and I have seen it 
argued that he should not be treated more handsomely than his 
Majesty was; but surely the cases are not parallel. The Shah 
had no claim upon us. Wc had no hand in deprivii^ him of his 
kingdom, whereas wc ejected the Dost, who never oficnded us, 
in support of our policy, of which he was the victim.t 

And SO Macnaghten, in a few linM of irrepressible 
truth and candour, denounced the in^stice of the policy 
of which he himself had been one of the originators. 
It is possible, too, that Lord Auckland may have felt 
that Dost Mahomed “ never offended us,” but that we 
had victimised him; for he received the Prince he had 
deposed with becoming hospitality and respect, and bur¬ 
dened the revenues of India with a pension in his fevoiu 
of two lakhs of rupees. 

* A detac^meDt of our troops was coxnmaDded the troops in Afghanis- 
then returning to India. The Com- tan, set his face towards Indm; and 
plmy^B European regiment, and Cap- the command temporarily devolved 
tain Garbetvs troop of Horse Artil- on Sir R. Sale, 
lery, marched from Caubul; and the f Sir TV. H. Macnaghten to Mr. 
48th Native Infhnt^"'joined the es- HcSertson: Jan, 12,1841. MS, Corro- 
eM at JellalabadhltAi the same time, spondence, 

3ir Willoughby Cotton, who had* 



Asm tss boubansss. 


$ 


CHAPTER III. 

[NoTember: 1840—September: 1841.] 

Yar Mabomed and the Douranees — Season of Peace — Position of the 
Douranees—^The Zemindawer Outbreak—Conduct of Yar Mahomed— 
Departure of Major Todd—Risings of the Douranees and Ghilzjes— 
Engagements with Aktur Khan and the Gooroo—Dispersion of the 
Insurgents. 

The remainder of the month of November passed away 
in peace and tranquillity. The Envoy began now for 
the first time to taste the blessings of repose, and to 
enjoy the advantages of leisure. But his active mind 
was soon again busily at work. Dost Mahomed had 
surrendered; but the Sikhs had not been coerced. The 
time for the “ macadamisation” of the Punjaub seemed 
now to have arrived. To the Lieutenant-Governor of 
the North-Western Provinces of India, he wrote on the 
24th of November: 

Now that I have a little leisure to write, I have nothing to 
write about. These piping times of peace are unfavorable to the 
exercise of the epistolary art. I could, indeed, write a volume as 
to what I would do were I Governor-General. Never did cards 
play so beautifully into any man’s hands. Now is the rime for a 
Bubridiary force in the Punjaub, and for the cession of the £striotB 
to the west of the Indus. We are clearly not bound any logger 
by the Tripartite treaty, and so I have told Lord Auckland; but 
I don’t think his Lordship’s ambirion will aim at more riwn ke^ 
ing matters on their present foorii^. 'The Dost is getring on 



870 


YAB ICAHOMSP AND THB DOUEANSES. 


▼ery well. He evidently sees that it is useless kicking against 
the pricks; and he wishes now to cultivate our friendship as 
eagerly as he before provoked our enmity. We start for Jellala- 
bad in three or four days; and it is high time we should do so, as 
the weather is becoming bitterly cold here. We shall now have a 
little time to devote to the affairs of the country, and I trust its 
condition will be soon as flourishing as its poor resources will 
admit.* 

And again, on the 9th of December, he wr8te in the 
same cheerful strain of the tranquillity by which he was 
surrounded: 

The surrender of the Dost has been productive of so much 
quiet that I have positively nothing to write about. The officers 
who, the other day, were grumbling audibly at being overworked, 
now complain that they are dying of ennui. By my last accounts, 
the Dost had reached Peshawur in safety, and his family had 
arrived at Jellalabad. They will start again to-day to join him. 
I see no reason to apprehend any obstacle in the passage of the 
Punjaub.t The Royal Family will, I trust, be on the wing for 
Afghanistan before the Dost gets near Hindostan, in order that 
the apartments they occupied may be prepared for the illustrious 
Dosf. He will, I have no doubt, petition for a more congenial 
climate by the time he has had one taste of the hot winds.} • • • 

This was written from Gundamuck. The Court was 
on its way to its winter quarters at Jellalabad. On the 
morning of the 13th they reached that place. The 
Envoy found Sir Willoughby Cotton still there, but 
“ anxious to get away f and Captain Macgregor, the 
political agent in charge of the district, surrounded by a 
motley crew of the chiefs of the country, who seemed to 

• MS, Correanondence. original prudence of fixing a route 

t Kurruok Singh and Nao Nehal for British troops dear of the Sikh 
Singh had bv this time been gathered capital, and the complete subjumflon 
to Uieir fathers. They died a few of the Mahomedan tribes, left the 
days after the surrender of Dost Ma- English commander unaware of the 
homed, when the Ameer and Ids struggle going on, except ikom ordi- 
cscort passed through the Pumaub, nary reports and news^writers.^’ — 
their march was a cpiiet one, Al- \Cmningham's History of ihe Sikhs.'] 
though Shere Sii^ was then laying } MS. Correspondence. 

^jjfgP to the cita£l of Lahore, the 



0(»miXiON OF THF DOOSAims. 


571 


look up to him as their common faUier. In the enjoy* 
meat of a little rest from pressing anxieties, the Envoy 
began to turn his thoughts to the dmnestic administration 
of the country. “We have hitherto,” he nrrote to the 
Private Secretary of the Governor-General, “ been strug¬ 
gling for existence, without any leisure to turn to the. 
improvement of the administration.”* And very little of 
this leisure was even now vouchsafed to him. Though 
Dost Mahomed was on his way to the provinces of India, 
and the winter snows had now set in, the struggle for 
existence was still going on, and more fiercely than ^er. 
The Ghilzyes and Kohistanees had already rise*up 
against the government of the Shah and his supporters; 
and now the Douranees were breaking out into revolt. 

It has been shown, that on the appearance of Shah 
Soojah at Candahar, the Douranees, enfeebled and pros¬ 
trated by their Barukzye oppressors, clustered around 
the throne, and sought from the restored monarch the 
privileges and immunities which had been wrested from 
them by the Sirdars. Uncertain, at that time, of the 
ultimate success of the expedition, and eager to swell 
the number of his adherents, the Shah was willing to 
grant, and more willing still to promise. He made cer¬ 
tain remissions of taxation in favour of the tribes; but 
he entrusted the execution of these new popular mea¬ 
sures to the old unpopular agency; and the Parsewan 

* Writing to the same correspon- expenditure to keep it in repair. You 
dent shortly afterwnrdti he cautioned are a little too sanguinei I think, in 
him not to expect any very speedy or your hope of a speedy and universal 
extensive reforms ; and, above all, reform in this countiy. For thirty 
not to look for any favorable iinan- years the inhabitants of most qf the 
‘ eial results* ** By-«nd*by his Ma<- districts have never paid a fraction of 
jesty," said the Envoy, "vrill, I hope, revenue, until they were coerced into 
be able to make both ends meet* At payment by the presence of troops* 
present, pecuniary assistance to a con** habit has grown into second na* 

siderabie extent will be indispensable, ture with them, and we cannot expect 
As I said when we drst reacned Can- them to subside at once into the con* 
dahar, the country must be looked dition of dieerful ta:x«payem«’^<**>C17a* 
upon as an outwork, requiring large pvkUthed Corrsi;poii(fefice«] 



672 


YAB 1CAHOHB0 AND THE DOUBANEES. 


revenue-collectors, who had oppressed the tribes during 
the reign of the Sirdars, were still left to ezm;i3e their 
hated calling under the King. 

The experiment of giving is a dangerous one. In the 
ordinary concerns of human life, it is found that the 
shortcomings of those who give bring down upon them 
more hatred and more reproach than the withholdings 
of those who give not. It is perilous to raise hopes not 
to be fulfilled. The Douranees had looked for much 
from the restoration of the Shah; and they were dis- 
ap^nted. They had patiently submitted to the ex¬ 
actions and oppressions of the Barukzyes—but the im¬ 
perfect liberality of the Suddoyze monarch irritated them 
past endurance. They looked upon the Barukzyes as 
their natural enemies, and they submitted when they 
knew that they had no power of resistance. But be¬ 
lieving that it was the wish of the restored government 
of the Shah to conciliate and encourage them, they de¬ 
monstrated their dissatisfaction in a violent and offensive 
manner, with the strongest assurance in their mind 
that their grievances would be redressed. Under the 
Barukzyes such a course would have been worse than 
useless, for their spasms of painful unrest were pleasing 
to the Sirdars. But as it seemed that the Shah desired 
to please them, they strove to evince, by most unmis- 
takeable signs, that they were not pleased; and broke 
out into rebellion.* 


♦ “ It is curious to observe the 
manner in which the Douranees have 
reasoned ^on the liberalitj of his 
Majestj^s Grovemment, and the gra* 
dual modifications which we maj 
suppose their feelings to have under- 
gone» from the evidence of alterations 
in their tone and conduct. Daring 
the first year of his Majesty's restored 
goverament, they exhibitea outwardly 
but little change from the same pas- 
i to demeanour which had ehaxuo- 


terised their submission to the Sirdars 
under the later periods of the Baruk* 
zye administration. No sooner, how¬ 
ever, had the new order been issued 
for the remission of the land-tax, than 
with resuscitated hopes they benan 
to remonstrate, to agitate, and inti¬ 
mately to take up imns, when their 
means of intimidation fiuled them. 
I bring forward, by way of illustra¬ 
tion, the example of the tribes in Ze- 
mindawer. They had been subjected. 



DI8APP0INTMEKT 07 THE DOHRANEES. 


578 


In Z^nindawer, a district which lies to the north-west 
of Candahar, symptoms of inquietude began to evince 
themselves at the end of 1840. At this time, the affairs 
of Candahar and its neigbourhood were, as r^ards all 
European superintendence, under the chaise of Major 
Bawlinson. This officer, who had been employed for 
some years in Persia,* and on the rupture of our friendly 


during the preceding year, to some 
severity of treatment by the financial 
arrangements of Wullee Mahomed 
Khan; but they had endured the yoke 
almost without a murmur. Since the 
arrival of the Wukeel at Candahar, 
they had been, on the contrary, en¬ 
tirely free from interference. Iwot a 
government agent of any class had 
appeared in Zcmindawer, nor had a 
khurwar of grain been realised, yet 
the tribes of that district, on the first 
demand of revenue, took up arms 
to withstand, as they said, oppressive 
exactions; and whilst ajjart^ of horse 
were encamped upon this side of the 
Helmund,* appointed to support the 
government officer in his collections, 
they crossed the river, and attacked 
them without the semblance of an 
excuse on the score of provocation 
or actual rapacity. The unpopu¬ 
larity of the agent deputed to realise 
the revenues, and the apprehension 
of a repetition of the exactions of the 
previous year, may have been instru¬ 
mental in assembling the tribes in 
arms as a measure of defence; but 
surely such motives are insufficient to 
justify or explain a gratuitous attack 
before the collections of the present 
yemr had commenced; or, if the 
motives which the Zemindawarces 
assigned for their ofifensive hostility 
be admitted, surely some radical 
change of character must have taken 
place, to have emboldened to this 
act of sggressive rebellion tribes who 
had sumnitted passively to the most 
gelling tyranny on the part of the 
Sirdars, and who had ^en yielded, 
since the accession of his Majesty, to 
the harshness of the collections of the 


preceding year, without betrayiim 
any open signs of discontent. It 
appears to me that, had the land-tax 
on the Tajul Kulbaa been continued, 
the tribes in Zemindawer, seeing no 
indication of a change in the poHcy 
of the government, and conscious 
that the power of coercion was 
stronger, at the present, than at any 
reviouB time, would have never 
reamed of assembling in arms to 
resist the royal authority, and that 
we must consequently attribute to the 
exercise of his Majesty’s clemency, 
and to the impression which had 
arisen from it, that it was the aim of 
the government to manage the Dou- 
ranees through the agency of their 
hopes rather than of their fears, and 
that rebellion might thus be attempt¬ 
ed with impunity, so sudden and 
unusual a display of boldness as 
could induce the tribes to rise in 
arms and attack a government agent, 
however, and perhaps deservedly, un¬ 
popular.”—[if/q/or RawlinsorCs JDou- 
ranee UeporU MS. Recotdi,] 

* Major Rawlinson went out to 
India as a cadet on the Bombay Es¬ 
tablishment in 1827. He was a fel¬ 
low-passenger of Sir John Malcolm, 
from whom he imbibed his earliest 
taste for Oriental literature* In 
1828, having passed, whilst yet a 
cadet, an examination in the Hin- 
dostanee language, he was posted 
to the Ist Grenadier Regiment^ with 
which he served until 1833. In 
this interval he passed in^two other 
languages, Mahratta and Persian. 
In 1833, when Lord William Ben- 
tinck d^atched a party of ofibers 
to Persia to drill the ftfmy of Ah]^ 



5T4 


TA& MABOVSD AND m DOmtAHTBES. 


Mlfttionfi 'Rrith that state, necessarily remanded to India, 
had been so strongly recommended, for his intimate ac¬ 
quaintance with the languages, the people, and the 
politics of the East, as well as for his general aptitude 
and intelligence, by Sir John M‘Neill to Lord Auckland, 
that the Governor-General ordered him to proceed to 
Caubul, to be employed under Macnaghten. In the 
early part of 1840 it had been proposed to despatch 
Rawlinson and Arthur Conolly on a mission to the 
camp of the Russian General Peroffski, but the breaking 
up of the Russian expedition caused this project to be 
abandoned; and another field of activity was opened 
out to Rawlinson in a region less inhospitable and re¬ 
mote. The supervision of affairs at Cnndahar had 
hitherto been entrusted to Major Leech; but Leech had 
given offence to the Envoy by the dilatoriness with 
which he had sent in his accounts, and it had seemed 
good to Macnaghten to remove him from his post.* He 
could not have appointed a better man than Rawlinson 
to fill it. So, on the 4th of July, he sent to that oflicer 
the Shah’s official notification of his appointment as poli¬ 
tical agent at Candahar. 

The command of the troops at Candahar was in the 
hands of Major-General Nott. He was an old Sepoy 
officer of good repute; a man of some talents, but blunt 


Meerxa, Rawlinson, still an ensisn, Lord Auckland for employment in 
was selected as adjutant of the de- Afghanistan, 
taohment. In Persia he continued * Other grounds of complaint may 
to serve until the rupture with that have subsequently arisen, but this 
state. During a space ^ of nearly dilatoriness was the first offence, 
three years he was^ in military com- Leech pleaded in extenuation that he 
mand of the province of Kerman- liad been removed fVom one smpoint- 
shab, living entirely among the Per- ment to another, before he.\nad had 
sians, and becoming as familiar with time to make up the financial state- 
their language and literature as with ments of his last mission; and sent In 
htsown. He graduated in diplomacy a list of no less than eight different 
under Sir John M*NeiU, by whom he counts of which he had to bring 
was entrusted with various political the arrears.—LeecA to Sir W. 
duties, and strongly recommended to H. Macnaghten: June 30, 1840.] 



OINBBAL NOTT. 


676 


addreM—an honest, plain-spoken soldier, not always 
right, but always believing himself to be right—hearty, 
genuine, and sincere. His &ults were chiefly those of 
temper. He had not been well used. Sir Hmry Fane 
bad recognised his merits; but Sir John Keane, who 
was accused of fostering a narrow-minded prejudice 
against the Company’s service, had superseded him in a 
manner which had greatly incensed the General himself 
and the army to which he belonged.* Labouring under 
a strong sense of the injustice that had been done him; 
feeling that his worth had not been duly appreciated, or 
his services duly rewarded; seeing much in the general 
management of the afiairs of the distracted country in 
which his lot had been cast to excite his unqualifled 
disapprobation; and being, moreover, constitutionally of 
an irritable temperament, he sometimes said and wrote 
what was calculated to offend others; and as the political 
officers were the especial objects of his dislike, he was 
in no favour at the Residency. Macnaghten declared 
that that general’s conduct frequently embarrassed him, 
and recommended, therefore, his recall; but it was lelt 
that Nott was a fine soldier; and, though the govern¬ 
ment eventually listened to the Envoy’s counsel in this 
matter, they were slow to remove him from a sphere 
in which his energy and decision were likely to be so 
serviceable to the state. And, perhaps, it was felt that, 
in his political colleague at Candahar, Nott had a man 
of excellent temper, of great tact and forbearance, and 

♦ It would be foreign to the objects colonel than General Nott, and the 
of this work to discuss the question Indian Commandcr-in-Chief had de» 
of Nott*s supercession. It was at one creed that the relative ranks of the 
time a fertile subject of discussion in majorogenerals should be determined^ 
India, involving, as it-did, a general not bv the dates of their brevets as 
question of militaiy rank in the higher such, nut by the dates of their lieu- 
grades. General Wiltshire was an tenant-colonels* commissions* 
older officer and an older lieutenant- 



5T6 


TAB MAHOHED AND THE DODBAKEBS. 


that the difficulty was much lessened by so fortunate BH 
association. 

Such were the men upon whom, at the b^inning, 
of 1841, devolved the duty of looking this Douranee 
outbreak fairly in the face. The task that fell to Nott’s 
share was the easier of the two. He had simply to beat 
the enemy in the field. The insurgents of Zeminda- 
wer had risen up against a party of the Shah’s horse, 
who had been sent out to support the revenue officers, 
and had defeated and dispersed them. A detachment, 
therefore, was ordered out against them, under Captain 
Farrington. On the morning of the 3rd of January 
they came up with the rebels. The Douranee horse, 
some 1200 or 1500 strong, showed a bold front; but 
the fire of Hawkins’s guns was too hot for them, and 
they began to waver. The infantry well completed what 
the cavaliy had well begun; the insurgents were driven 
from their position, and were soon broken and dispersed. 
And so, for the time, the military officer had done his 
work, and with good success. The political officer had 
a more difficult duty to perform. Rawlinson was called 
upon to elucidate the causes of the dissatisfaction of the 
Douranees, and to recommend the best means of quench¬ 
ing the dangerous spirit of revolt. On the 13th of 
January, Macnaghtcn wrote to him from Jellalabad; 
and the letter is curious, as it contains the earliest allu¬ 
sion to the suspicion which subsequently, in a more de¬ 
cided manner, attached itself to the fidelity of Shah 
Soojah: 

« * # • * 

I do not exactly know the drift of your observation as to 
the tone ultimately to be given to our relations with this country.” 
Nor am I aware of the true sentiments of government as applicable 
to such a case as that which we are now considering. Ihe dis- 
affection of Aktur Khan could not have been foreseen by them, 



MACNAGHTEN ON THE HOURANEES. 


577 


still less any general feeling of disafiection on the part of the 
Douranees. We must first ascertain, as clearly as possible, the 
causes of this feeling. If there is just ground of dislike to the 
Vakeel, we should persuade his Maj^ty to remove him, and at the 
same time adopt measures for keeping the Douranees in check, 
either by reverting to the old system of taxation, or requiring their 
presence and performance of duty. The Vakeel’s assertion as to his 
Majesty’s wish to support the Douranees in their unreasonable 
proceedings, and his motive for doing so, is ridiculous. But it is 
only one of the thousand and one calumnies that are daily pro¬ 
pagated with the view (God only knows why) of injuring his 
Majesty’s character. His Majesty, when I told him of the neces¬ 
sity of sending out a regiment against Aktur Khan, at once 
admitted the propriety of the move, but lamented that the 
Douranees were such donkeys as to require coercion. There is 
one point mentioned in your letter which I feel clear about. 
The domestic tranquillity of the country is an object far more 
important than the provision of a national force against Persian 
inroads. I have no notion how many Douranees would acquire 
the means of being formidable to his Majesty by his remission of 
the Roobbas; but I think every safe and fair opportunity should 
be taken of limiting their power (as it seems the indulgence 
already granted has had so baneful an efiect) and of improving 
the revenues. I would commence with all those who have taken 
any part in this rebellion, and deprive them of any favour that 
may have been shown to them. What honours and privileges 
have recently been conferred upon the Douranees that they had 
not before? Lot me know, in your official letter, whether you 
deem the removal of the Vakeel desirable, and how you would 
recommend his place to be supplied. I cannot help thinking that 
Yar Mahomed has more to do with this tmeute than you ascribe 
to him. 

I am aware that it is difficult for you to furnish correct notions 
of the feelings of the strange people amongst whom our lot is cast; 
but without some information of the kind, it must be impossible 
for me to form a correct judgment as to the course to be pursued. 
One would suppose it could not be a very difficult matter, with 
our invincible means, to keep in proper subjection people who 
trembled under the feeble sway of the Barukzyes. At tlje same 
time, their real grievances should be removed, and if the Vakeel is 

VOL. I. 2 P 



578 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOTJRANEES. 


a rapacious tyrant, as lie is represented to be, he should certainly 
be ejected, and another arrangement made for next year.* 

In another letter, written on the 5th of February, to 
Mr. Colvin, the Envoy again adverted to the subject of 
Douranee disaffection, which had now become, in reality, 
the most important to which the attention of the au¬ 
thorities could be addressed: 

Aktur Khan was disappointed In not getting the chiefship of 
Zemindawcr; and he found the people in a temper to aid his 
rebellious project, owing to the oppressions practised by the 
Vakeel. They submitted to these oppressions in the time of the 
Barukzye Sirdars, knowing that there was no remedy. But now, 
having their own King restored to them, they take their own 
rude way of having their grievances made known, in full confi¬ 
dence of their being redressed. Major Rawlinson observes, on 
the authority of the Sirdar, that the Douranees were elated be¬ 
yond all bounds of dutiful service. I doubt much whether such 
an efiect could be produced by such a cause; and I moreover 
much doubt whether the Douranees have any such real cause to 
bo elated, for, according to the best information I can obtain, the 
royal bounty has been intercepted by the revenue managers. The 
whole question, however, of the Candahar revenue system requires 
very careful consideration. Our unpopularity is assigned as an¬ 
other reason for the cmeute. With a certain class, the aristo¬ 
cracy attending the Court, whose consequence we have annihilated, 
we are, doubtless, unpopular; but I question whether there exists 
any bad feeling against us in the country generally. In support 
of my opinion, I may adduce the fact of Lieutenant Pattenson 
having recently made the tour of the disturbed districts with a 
small escort. 

He was looked up to wherever he went as a deliverer, and 
heard nothing but universal execrations against the Vakeel and 
his clique. I am perfectly satisfied of the imperative necessity of 
at once removing these obnoxious individuals. They will be im¬ 
mediately summoned to Jellalabad, and a successor in every way 
competent will this day set out to succeed them. I shall suspend 
my judgment as to the supposed necessity of breaking the power 
* MS* Correspondence of Sir W* H* MucnagTUen. 



INTRIGUES OF YAR MAHOMED. 


579 


of the Doutailees, until I get Major Rawlinson's promised Kulba 
report; but I shall desire Rawlinson at once to banish from his 
thoughts the wild project of seizing “ at least fifty or sixty of the 
most powerful and turbulent of the Douranee Khans,” and send¬ 
ing them to India. It is hard if we cannot find some means less 
stringent of restoring tranquillity. My own impression is, that 
matters will revert to a wholesome state, as soon as ever the incubus 
of apprehension is removed from the body of the people; and this 
will be effected by the simple recall of the obnoxious Parsewan 
managers. Our appearing in the field as their allies is the surest 
method of gaining for ourselves universal detestation. In the 
mean time, you may set your mind at ease whatever may happen. 
We have force enough at Candahar to crush any hostile combina¬ 
tion against us, however extensive.^ 

It will have been gathered from these letters that 
Macnagliten was not altogether without a suspicion at 
this time that the disaffection of the Douranees had 
been fomented by the intrigues of Yar Mahomed. The 
suspicion soon rose into knowledge. There were un¬ 
deniable proofs that the Heratee Wuzeer had been 
writing inflammatory letters to the Douranee chiefs. 
He had sent a delegate, named Nussur-ood-deen Khan, 
into the Zemindawer country, with letters to each of the 
principal Douranee chiefs, and one of them had for¬ 
warded to Lieutenant Elliot, Rawlinson^s assistant, a 
copy of the seditious missive, which ran to the follow¬ 
ing efiect : 

Let each of you assemble his followers, and go in to Aktur 
Khan in Zemindawer, and be ready and prepared, for I have 
moved out of Herat; and from Meshed, troops 10,000 strong, 
with twelve guns and two lakhs of rupees, are marching to our 
assistance. At latest, 1 shall arrive at Bukhwa by the end of the 
month Mohurram. Let not any Douranee chief of those now 
assembled disperse his followers, for I am most assured of coming 
to join you.t 

* Unpublished Correspondence. t Records. 

2 p 2 



580 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


Upon the goodly tree of Lord Auckland’s forbearance 
was now clustering, thick and ripe, the expected fruit. 

But there was other intelligence than this to astound 
the Envoy, and make him cry out more and more bit¬ 
terly against the authorities, who had thwarted his long- 
cherished desire to play the “ great game.” Suddenly 
there came upon him the intelligence that the outrages 
and the exactions—the treachery and the insolence—of 
Yar Mahomed had reached such a pitch, that Todd had 
broken up the British Mission, and set his face towards 
Candahar. 

The first thought of Macnaghten on receiving this 
intelligence, was to muster all our available resources, 
especially the “ big guns,” and to commence another siege 
of Herat. On the 25th of February he wrote to Raw- 
linson: 

This, indeed, is astounding intelligence, and there is no 
longer any necessity for delicacy as regards Herat. You can 
send over the big guns, therefore, and take any other precautions 
that may be deemed necessary for the safety of the frontier, with¬ 
out reference to anything I have said in former letters; and, 
moreover, a strong clTort should be made to crush Aktur Khan 
without delay. I cannot tell what government will do, though 
1 know what tliey ouglit to do. I have strongly recommended 
their sending as large a force as may be available, and as speedily 
as possible, to Candahar, even if an attack on Herat should not 
be meditated.* 

And again, three days afterwards, he wrote to the 
same correspondent: 

I shall be curious to know what his Lordship thinks of the 
present crisis. I presume that he will %oUh to proceed against 
Herat, but there may be doubts as to the means of our effectually 
doing so; and certainly we ought to run no risks. If we are 
compelled to postpone the operation for another season, it would 
be well, 1 think, to erect a strong post at Washeer, or some other 

* MS. Correspondence of Sir W, H. MacnaghUn. 



THE RUPTURE WITH HERAT. 


581 


place on the frontier which may promise to be salubrious. A 
battering-train would, I imagine, be our chief want, and I rather 
think there is one at Sukkur, which was left there by Sir John 
Keane for want of carriage. I have written to Ross Bell on this 
subject, and begged him to send their heavy guns up to you as 
soon as practicable, with their material. I have further suggested 
to him to apply to Major Parsons at Ferozcpore for draught 
bullocks, if he cannot get them more handily. Possibly you 
might supply them. What does Sanders think now of the means 
at our command for subduing Herat? We could, easily co¬ 
operate via the Hazura route with a brigade, the mountain train, 
and a respectable body of horse. 

I had written thus far, when I received your important letter 
of the 19th, with its inclosures. The rupture with Herat now 
seems to be complete, but the proximate cause of it is yet un¬ 
known to mo. I trust that Todd and his party may have safely 
arrived at Candahar, and I wish him to remain there for the pre¬ 
sent. Is there any chance of our mustering heavy guns and 
force suflicient to attack the place this year? What does Todd 
say of the best season for operations, and what aid does he hope 
we might obtain from people in and around Herat? Our money 
ought now to fructify. 

With regard to your opinions as to our policy in this country, 
I may say mine arc diametrically opposed to them. I deny both 
your premises and conclusion. I deny that we arc universally 
hated; if we were, I deny that such would be a sufficient reason 
f )r our returning and abandoning the fruits of our signal triumph, 
still less for taking the country to ourselves. This liowever, is 
no time for unprofitable argument. With the notions you en¬ 
tertain, you may be apt to be led into despondency; otherwise, 
the notions which you or I may entertain arc of little consequence, 
as the determination of our superiors is fixed. It would be a 
rash attempt to send troops through the snow from Caubul to 
Mooltan; and besides, we have them not to spare at present.* 

After another lapse of three days, he wrote again: 

Jellalabad, March 2nd, 1841. 

I have had a long conversation with his Majesty this morn¬ 
ing, dc rebus omnibus, but chiefly with regard to the state of 

* MS. Correspondence of Sir W. H. MacnagJiten. 



582 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


things at Candahar. His Majesty has just received a letter from 
the Vakeel ■which has convinced him of the Chaoos-Bashee’s 
guilt. I told him that though the evidence from such a quarter 
might be exceptionable, there could be no doubt of the fact. 
His Majesty’s rage knows no bounds. He swears that he will 
burn the Chaoos with excrement, and I feel certain that he will 
inflict upon him some grievous punishment such as we could not 
abet. Cutting out the tongue, the offending member, is the 
smallest penalty thought of, but I really think there would be no 
harm in depriving the rascal of his ears. Now touching the 
Vakeel.* His Majesty was a little impatient with me this morn¬ 
ing. There is, he says, no stability in my counsels. I first re¬ 
commend that he should be recalled instantly, then that he should 
be left at Candahar to give an account of his stewardship; but it 
is his wish to leave to you the final determination of the ques¬ 
tion.You may imagine how anxious I am to hear 

of Todd’s safety, and to learn the particulars of his departure 
from Herat, or the proximate cause of that important event, as 
well as his, and your, and Sanders’s opinion as to the practicabi¬ 
lity of successful operations against Herat this season. I suppose 
if the force were to move from Candahar by the middle of May 
it would be time enough, but will the requisite battering-train 
be then forthcoming, and shall we have a quantum suff. of grain 
and camels? The Governor-General will, I fear, if possible, do 
nothing.f 

The particulars of Todd’s departure from Herat were 
these. Yar Mahomed had long been accommodating 
his demands to every change in the political barometer. 
Unfortunately, those changes had indicated little but 
the depressed circumstances of our position in Afghan¬ 
istan. The fall of Khelat; the progress of Dost Ma¬ 
homed on the Hindoo-Koosh; the insurrection in Zemin- 
dawer, were adverse circumstances which encouraged 
the Wuzeer to rise in his demands for more money, and 
even to meditate aggressive movements of a more pal¬ 
pable character than any which had yet been undertaken 

* The Chaoos-Bashee had reported that the King had encouraged the 
revolt of the Douraneea. f MS^ Corre^ondence. 




THE EXACTIONS OE TAB MAHOMED, 


583 


against the power of Shah Soojah and his supporters. 
At one time he contemplated an attack upon Candahar, 
and was anxious that his intentions should be known to 
the British Mission. But the surrender of Dost Ma¬ 
homed had somewhat checked his presumption; and the 
descent upon Candahar was postponed. But the project 
was not wholly abandoned.* 

The knowledge of the Zemindawer outbreak soon 
caused it to be revived. Yar Mahomed, it has been 
seen, despatched an emissary to the disaffected country 
to keep alive the spirit of revolt. At the same time he 
sent a deputation to the Persian chief at Meshed, urging 
him to unite in an attack on Candahar, whilst the com¬ 
munications between that place and Caubul were cut off 
by the snow. 

This last glaring act of perfidy excited Todd to re¬ 
taliate. He believed that there was a point of forbear¬ 
ance beyond which it would be disgraceful to his country 


* “ The continued forbearance and 
generosity of the British Government 
were, however, alike unapjireciated 
by Yar Mahomed Khan. The cir¬ 
cumstances detailed in my demi-offi¬ 
cial letter to your address of the 30th 
of September, will sufficiently prove 
this; and on the 30th of November 
last I had the honour to report as 
follows ; ‘ During the past month, 
the most aggravated and absurd re¬ 
ports of the advantages gained by 
Dost Mahomed Klian, the Kohis- 
tanees, and Beloochees, over our 
troops, and of the weakness of our 
position in Afghanistan, had acquired 
ready credence in Herat. Urgent 
and repeated demands for extra assist¬ 
ance in money have been made by 
the Vizier and others, but without 
effect. The opportunity has been 
thought favorable for attempting to 
work upon our fears ; and a foray on 
Candahar was seriously discussed, and, 
I believe, ultimately decided on, by 
the minister and his advisers, letters 
having been received by him from the 


city dwelling on the weakness of its 
garrison, and inviting him to make 
the attempt.’ 

“ The extravagance of the Vizier 
about this time involved him in debt 
to a cunsideiablc amount; and find¬ 
ing that I was not disposed to advance 
more money than had been sanctioned 
by government, he endeavoured to 
obtain my consent to his ebappowing 
the Persian territory. Failing in this, 
he proposed to foray some of the dis¬ 
tricts nominally subject to his own 
authority ; and at length, discovering 
the futility of attempting to obtain 
money from me on these pretences, 
he thought that by giving publicity to 
his intention of attacking Candahar, 
he might intimidate me into purchas¬ 
ing his forbearance. The enterprise 
was, 1 believe, resolved on; and 
though the timely surrender of Dost 
Mahomed Khan caused this project 
to be laid aside for the time, it was 
not fully abandoned.” —[Major Todd 
to Sir W. H, Macnaghten: Ghiresk, 
March 5,1841. MS. Eecordt,^ 



584 


YAK MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES. 


to descend; so he determined to suspend the payment 
of the allowance* which had been granted to the state; 
and, taking advantage of the presence of a large body 
of troops in Upper Sindh, announced, on the 1st of 
February, his intention to the Wuzeer. But Yar Ma¬ 
homed, at this time, was intent on playing a ‘‘great 
game/’ He believed that his deputation had been favor¬ 
ably received at Meshed; he believed that the Dou- 
ranees were again working themselves into rebellion; and 
he had abundant faith in the continued forbearance of 
the British Government. So he played, with his accus¬ 
tomed craft, for a large stake; and little heeded the 
consequences of failure. The one object of all his in¬ 
trigues was to obtain money. Seeing that he could not 
any longer drive Todd to open the treasury, he de¬ 
termined to cajole him. He reminded the British agent 
of the desire he had long before expressed, to post a 
British contingent in the valley of Herat; and declared 
that, on the payment of two lakhs of rupees, he would 
give his assent to the measure. Never had he the shadow 
of an intention of fulfilling his part of the contract— 
but he wanted the money. His sincerity was soon tested. 
Todd demanded that the Wuzeer’s son should be sent 
to Ghhesk. there to await an answer from the Govern¬ 
ment of India, and to escort, if the answer were in 
approbation of the measure, the British troops to Herat; 
and it was added, that on the Sirdar’s arrival at that 
place the money demanded would be paid. But Yar 
Mahomed at once refused his assent to Todd’s proposal. 
He required the immediate payment of the money or the 
departure of the Mission. So Todd chose the latter 
alternative, and turned his back upon Herat, f 

Never before, perhaps, had the British Government 

*25fiOO Tupees(2600l)per mensem, was printed, some time ago, in the 

t Dr. Login's “ Statement of Facts Calcutta Review, from a copy given 
relating to Herat.” This document me by Todd. 



TBEATMENT OF MAJOR TODD. 


585 


been so insulted and so outraged in the person of its 
representatives. Shah Kamran, at a private audience, 
told one of the officers of the Mission that, but for his 
protection, “ not a Feringhee would have been left 
aliveand asked if he did not deserve some credit for 
not acting towards Todd and his companions as the 
Ameer of Bokhara had acted towards Colonel Stoddart. 
Yar Mahomed had intercepted Todd’s letters to Can- 
dahar. He had been for some time in an habitual 
state of intoxication. The seizure of the persons of the 
British officers, and the plunder of their property, had 
been openly discussed by the Wuzeer and his profligate 
friends, and there is little doubt that, if the Mission had 
remained longer at Herat, the members of it would have 
been subjected to indignities of the worst kind.* 

The Mission left Herat, and halted for a time at 
Ghiresk. When the tidings of its abrupt departure 
reached Lord Auckland at Calcutta, he was roused into 
a state of very unwonted exacerbation. He was not a 
hasty man—he was not an unjust one. But on this 
occasion he committed an act both hasty and unjust. 
He at once repudiated the proceedings of Major Todd 
at Herat; and removed him from political employment. 
The first intelligence of Todd’s suspension of the allow¬ 
ance was received from the Sindh agency. On the 11th 
of March, the Governor-General wrote to Macnaghten: 

1 will not pronounce upon Major Todd’s proceedings until I 


♦ “ My departure from Herat may 
appear to you unnecessarily precipi¬ 
tate ; and it is possible tliat 1 might 
have remained a lew days longer. But, 
had I done so, I should have exposed 
the officers of the Mission to certain 
insult and danger, and thus have pr^ 
vented the possibility of a future ami¬ 
cable adjustment of our differences 
with the Herat Government. Tlie 


Vizier had latterly been constantly 
in a state of intoxication ; and the 
project of seizing us, and plundering 
our property, was seriously discussed 
by himself and his drunken associates, 
as the readiest mode of replenishing 
his coffers.” — {Major Todd to Sir 
W, //. Macnaghten: March 5, 1841. 
MS. Records.] 



586 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURAKEBS. 


have an account of them from him. Yet they are bo contrary to 
the policy I have enjoined towards Herat—^so regardless of con¬ 
sequences, and of all considerations of prudence and propriety, 
that I can hardly conceive how they may by possibility be at¬ 
tended with circumstances such as may relieve him from that ex¬ 
treme displeasure with which, upon a first impulse, I am disposed 
to visit him.* 

But although Lord Auckland declared that he would 
not pronounce upon Todd’s conduct until he had re¬ 
ceived that officer’s explanations, he publicly remanded 
him to his regiment before those explanations were re- 
ceived.f How strongly he felt on the subject may be 
gathered from another letter, dated the 16th of March: 

I am writhing in anger and in bitterness at Major Todd^s con¬ 
duct at Herat, and have seen no course open to me, in regard to 
it, but that of discarding and disavowing him; and we have 
directed his dismissal to the provinces. What we have wanted 
in Afghanistan has been repose under an exhibition of strength, 
and he has wantonly, and against all orders, done that which Is 
most likely to produce general disquiet, and which may make our 
strength inadequate to the calls upon it. I look upon a march 
to Herat as perfectly impracticable; and if it were not so, I should 
look upon it, under present circumstances, as most inexpedient. 
We have taught Yar Mahomed to be more afraid of us than of 
the Persians. It is possible that, when he has been left a little 
time to himself, he will be more afraid of the Persians than of us 
—but, in the mean time, the state to which things have been 
brought is a cause of much anxiety and more apprehension to 
me.J 

Against an armed interference with the affairs of 
Herat, Lord Auckland had always steadfastly set his 
face. It was his belief that it was necessary to establish 
ourselves firmly in Afghanistan before operating upon 

* MS. Correspondence, suspended the allowance to Herat. 

t When, however, he declared his He did not know that Todd had 
intention to wait for further informa- quitted Herat, 
tion, he only knew that Todd had J MS. Correspondence. 



INSTRUCTIONS OF LORD AUCKLAND. 


58T 


Herat; but Macnagbten always declared that there was 
no possibility of achieving the former object until the 
latter had been accomplished. But his instructions were 
imperative. Even after the departure of the Mission, 
the Governor-General counselled a mild and forbearing 
course. On the XOth of April, he wrote to Mao 
naghten: 

I cannot apprehend organised invasion from Herat, though 
there may be a foray on the frontier, which will not have the 
effect of making the advent of Yar Mahomed popular in Zemin- 
dawer. I think it, however, more likely that you will have 
to deal with letters and agents than with troops; and you ask me 
in what manner you are to receive overtures which may bo made 
to you by Yar Mahomed. I would receive them calmly and 
coldly, but not repulsively. I would show no impatience to 
renew a Mission to Herat. I would have it to be understood that 
the stoppage of the allowances was unauthorised, and that the 
detachment of a brigade to the citadel of Herat was not desired, 
and would not have been acceded to by the British Government, 
but that the conduct of the Vizier has given great offence, and 
that we can regard Herat with no confidence or friendly feeling 
until there shall have been on the side of that state an entire 
change of policy. I can only repeat, therefore, what I have said 
very many times within the last two years: That you must be 
strong in Afghanistan before you can hope to exercise a whole¬ 
some influence upon Herat; and I am glad that you are giving 
your attention to the condition of the internal government of 
the country.* 

* MS. Correspondence. Sir Jasper Afghanistan ours, we should, perhaps, 
Nicolls, as Commander-in-Chief, had be compelled to make Herat our ad- 
always consistently opposed the ad- vanced post; it is really the gate of 
vance to Herat, on the grounds that India. The problem is solved in a 
we had not troops for the purpose, military sense; politically, it remains 
and, as a Member of Council, on the with your Lordship and the au- 
grounds that we had not money. On thorities at home, acting on your 
the 1 8th of August, 1840, on returning views. To show front at Herat, and 
some papers to Lord Auckland, he at some selected point on or near the 
wrote to the Governor-General: “lam Oxus, we should be very strong in 
glad that your Lordship has repressed .^ghanistan. The elements of sta- 
the anxiety to annex Herat again to bility are sadly deficient there, and 
Caubul in the way hinted at. Were two quicksands interpose between 



Ooo YAR MAHOMED AND THE DODBANEES. 

Whilst Lord Auckland was thus writhing in anger 
and bitterness at the thought of Major Todd’s departure 

Candahar and Caubul and our own means to leave as it is, unless tlie 


provinces. I mean the Punjaub and 
the Ameers’ country. Being out of 
India, we cannot keep such establish¬ 
ments as will be required there with¬ 
out a large augmentation of our army, 
and this without any perceptible in¬ 
crease of revenue. I very much 
doubt that Shah Soojah will ever be 
able to support himself. With this 
opinion, and seeing here the relief is 
given up on account of six regiments 
only, we may feel some apprehension 
that our numbers are at this moment 
too low. Discontent may follow.” 
“I wanted him,” adds Sir Jasper 
Nicolls, in his private journal, “to 
feel that we cannot go further, or 
even retain seven regiments in Af¬ 
ghanistan without increase of force. 
We shall maintain ourselves there 
with difficulty. Yet all the young di¬ 
plomatists want to aid Khiva—occu¬ 
py Balkh—threaten Bokhara—and, 
lastly, to seize Herat before its traitor 
Vizier may give it up to Persia and 
llussia. We are beset with hollow 
friends in that quarter.” “Lord 
Auckland said nothing of importance 
in reply, and did not allude to it 
next day in Council.” 

The only member who counte¬ 
nanced the proposed expedition was 
Mr. Prinsep. On the 15th of March 
(on which day intelligence of Todd’s 
departure was received), Sir Jasper 
Kicolls wrote, after Council, in his 
journal: “Lord Auckland has pro¬ 
hibited any advance. This accorded 
with my often-expressed opinion that 
wc are too much extended already; 
but when I signed my assent to-day 
in Council to his letters, I whispered 
to him, that if Herat was to be oc¬ 
cupied by us against the will of the 
Vizier, the present circumstances 
were very propitious. We had a 
large body of troops at hand, and 
probably their plans were not ma¬ 
tured.” “ On the 26th he wrote: 
“ Lord Auckland sent home a long 
minute regarding Herat, which be 


Persians should show that they were 
anxious to lay hands upon it. He 
means to preserve our footing in Af¬ 
ghanistan.” 

In what manner the home autho¬ 
rities regarded the Herat question 
may be gathered from another pas¬ 
sage in Sir Jasper Nicolls’ journal: 

“ August 19, 1841.—I wrote a h^ty 
paper to-day, and a short one, against 
the occupation of Herat, if it can 
possibly be avoided. It was no sooner 
written than orders were received to 
seize it, if the Persians made any 
preparations to attach any part of 
Kamran’s dominions to their own. 

I wrote in the way of warning. Lord 
A. also advised the government not 
to carry our arms further before 
this despatch was received. I only 
fully expressed my opinion that we 
are not justified in risking the 
revenues of India for anything ex¬ 
ternal. As this subject may be 
brought unpleasantly forward, I shall 
just note that, by the June mail, we 
received a letter desiring us to take 
Herat. There was by the same mail 
a later despatch, not so anxious about 
it, or more cautious. I thought 
Lord Auckland’s minute alluded to 
the June letter, and very desirous to 
damp our ardour in carrying on hos¬ 
tilities, and spending our money so 
far out of India, I wrote as I did. 
Two hours after my paper was sent 
in, I received for perusal the Secret 
Committee’s despatch of July, enclos¬ 
ing Lord Palmerston’s directions to 
check Persia in this object. They 
will not look for any difficulty to be 
started by me; but really I am most 
deeply impressed by a conviction that 
a continuance of so large a force, and 
of such expenditure beyond the In¬ 
dus, will go far to break us down. I 
have no desire to embarrass the ques¬ 
tion, or to take a distorted view of it. 
We all concurred with Lord Auck¬ 
land except Prinsep. He thinks 
that we must displace Tar Mahomed, 



attempts to conciliate the douranees. 589 


from Herat, the tribes on the Helmund, whom Yar Ma¬ 
homed had endeavoured to excite, were collecting their 
strength for another struggle. In spite of all our concilia¬ 
tory efforts, the Douranees had not been quieted. Aktur 
Khan had outwardly tendered his allegiance to the 
King, and had received a dress of honour, with an as¬ 
surance from our political officers that the past would be 
forgotten.* The revenue officers, whom the Douranees 
detested, had been removed. The old earless minister, 
Moollah Shikore, had been replaced by Oosman Khan, 
a younger, an abler, and a more honest man; and Mac- 
naghten was contemplating other fiscal reforms than 


and he apprehends nothing from the 
distance or expenditure, in com- 
arison with what must follow from 
is keeping Afghanistan in revolt. 
My argument as to the intolerable 
drain was taken from his minute of 
March.'' Again, on the 31st of 
August, Sir Jasper wrote : “Weekly 
wc expend large sums upon the Shah 
and the country—not only in allow¬ 
ances, salaries, supplies, stores, pen¬ 
sions, compensations, and numberless 
contingencies ; but barracks, stables, 
forts, magazines, and even a long 
causeway in Cutchee. Yet no return 
can ever be made. To crown all — 
the hUster HeratJournal of 
Sir Jasper Nicolls.~\ 

* Lieutenant Elliot to Major Raw- 
linson: MS, Correspondence. Elliot 
went out into the Zemindawer 
country and met Aktur Khan in the 
camp of the Douranee Sirdar, Atta 
Mahomed Khan. He conducted his 
negotiations with some tact and ad¬ 
dress ; but Major Kawlinson had 
little hope that these conciliatory 
efforts would have any permanent 
effect on the tribes. Forwarding a 
report of Elliot's proceedings, he 
wrote to Macnaghten: “I have 
reason to believe that a very bitter 
feeling of hostility to ourselves pre¬ 
vails amongst the Douranees gene¬ 
rally; and thisfeeling, which could not 
but ^ highly dangerous to us in the 


event of foreign invasion, would pro¬ 
bably be confirmed and extended by 
any measures of coercion which fell 
short of extermination. At the 
present time, therefore, when the 
Government of Herat is threatening 
our western frontier, and endeavour¬ 
ing by inflammatory letters to ex¬ 
cite opposition to his Majesty Shah 
Soojah's authority in all parts of the 
province, it would be, I think, par¬ 
ticularly desirable to avoid any col¬ 
lision with the Douranee tribes which 
might add a further impetus to their 
inclination to join the ranks of our 
enemies. I do not anticipate, at the 
same time, that, by the conciliatory 
treatment recommended by Lieu¬ 
tenant Elliot, we gain any other ad¬ 
vantage than that of temporary tran¬ 
quillity ; and however prudent, there¬ 
fore, it may be at present to induce 
the rebel chief of Zemindawer to 
abstain from disorders, by the hope 
of obtaining through his forbearance 
substantial personal benefits, I still 
think that, when the danger of foreign 
aggression is removed, and efficient 
means are at our disposal, the rights 
of his Majesty's Government should 
be asserted in that strong and dig¬ 
nified manner which can alone en¬ 
sure a due respect being paid to his 
authority ."—[March 11, 1841. MS, 
Records,} 



590 


TAB MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES. 


those which he had already sanctioned, and hoping to 
restore the tribes to their allegiance. But their dis¬ 
affection was too deeply rooted to be operated upon by 
such measures. The entire system of government was 
offensive to them. The presence of the British was a 
perennial source of irritation. What they regarded as 
their legitimate influence had been usurped by the 
Feringhees; and they were soon ready again to appear 
in the field, and cross their sabres with the foreign 
bayonets. 

And as the Douranees were mustering their men, the 
Ghilzyes also in Western Afghanistan were showing 
how little we had yet done, either to dragoon them or 
bribe them into quiescence. Early in the spring, with¬ 
out sufficient pretext for such a proceeding, a Ghilzye 
fort had been attacked, under the directions of Major 
Lynch, one of ovu' political officers, by a party of the 
Shah’s regular troops under Captain Macan, aided by 
Sanders, the engineer; and the chief, with fifteen of his 
men, had been killed by the assailants.* The act, which 


* Th^se proceedings in the Ghil¬ 
zye country wer^reatly disapproved 
of both by the Envoy and the Go¬ 
vernor-General ; and Major Lynch, 
the political officer at Ehclat-i-Ghil- 
zye, subsequently forfeited his 
pointment. The Envoy wrote : “ It 
is a great pity that our officers will 
thrust themselves and us into a di¬ 
lemma before we are prepared for it. 
1 foresaw the likelihood of the Ghil¬ 
zyes resenting the erection of a fort 
in the heart of their country. But why 
should we go and knock our heads 
against mud forts ? Why should we 
not have waited till the Ghilzyes 
chose to attack usP*’— [aSiV W. H, 
Macnaghten to Major Rawlinson: 
May 1841. MS. Correspondence.’] 
The Governor* General thus con¬ 
veyed his opinions on the subject: 

** I am looking with anxiety for fur¬ 
ther accounts from Khelat-i-Ghilzye, 
and the more so, as I must regard 


with great mistrust the manner in 
which our affairs have been managed 
in that direction. It has seemed to 
all of us to be wise that a mili¬ 
tary post should be established of 
some strength between Candahar and 
Ghuznee. The steps towards its es¬ 
tablishment should nave been quietly 
and carefully taken, and at a time 
when we are strong, and without ob¬ 
structions in other quarters. In this 
instance we have been weak at Can¬ 
dahar. We have had (1 hope not up 
to this time) troops beyond the Hel- 
mund, and Major Lynches proceed¬ 
ings have been marked by a vapour¬ 
ing and needless parade, such as has 
been most likely to provoke popular 
excitement. I hope by every de¬ 
spatch to learn that you have warned 
an officer of better qualifications to 
take his place.**— [Lord Auckland to 
Sir W. H. Macnaghten: June 5, 
1842. MS. Correspondence.] 



DEFEAT OF THE 6HILZTES. 


591 


in itself was a gallant military exploit, was looked upon 
as an unjustifiable aggression; and did much to keep 
alive the animosity which we had already contrived to 
excite. It soon began to bear the accustomed fruit. To 
assist us in keeping the Ghilzyes in check, it had been 
determined to restore the dismantled fort of Khelat-i- 
Ghilzye, which lies between Candahar and Caubul, and 
to occupy it as a military position. The tribes had wit¬ 
nessed with jealousy the restoration of the works, and 
clustered menacingly around the place. Their irritation 
was now increased. They assumed a more threatening 
attitude. So Nott sent out a force against them. 
Colonel Wymer, a good and successful officer, with 
400 men of his own regiment, the 38th Sepoys, four 
horse-artillery guns, and a party of Christie’s horse, took 
the field in the month of May. The Ghilzyes, eager 
for the conflict, moved down from Khelat-i-Ghilzye to 
meet our advancing troops; and, on the 19th, gave 
them battle. Night was beginning to fall when they 
came up with Wymer’s camp at Assiai-Ilmee. A Ghilzye 
chief of high estate, named Gool Mahomed, known as 
the “ Gooroo,” who had threatened Keane’s army 
nearly two years before, was at the head of the 
tribes. They came on with unwavering gallantry, but 
were met with a heavy fire from Hawkins’s guns, 
which, served with equal rapidity and precision, com¬ 
mitted mighty havoc in their ranks. Upon this, the 
Ghilzyes, resolutely intending to attack simultaneously 
both flanks and the centre of Wymer’s force, divided them¬ 
selves into three columns; and, coolly and deliberately, 
they came down sword in hand to the charge. Wymer 
had an extensive convoy to protect. His movements, 
therefore, were crippled; and he was compelled to stand 
on his defence. But the destroying grape from the guns, 
and the steady musketry fire of the Sepoys, sent back the 



592 


YAE MAHOMED AND THE DO0RANEES. 


Ghilzye swordsmen again and again reeling under the 
iron shower. For five busy hours continued that mortal 
struggle; and then the Ghilzyes gave way. They had 
greatly outnumbered our party, and they left many dead 
on the field. All night long, too, the moving lights an¬ 
nounced that many more, both of killed and wounded, 
were carried off to their camp. 

This was a signal military success; and Wymer’s 
Sepoys covered themselves with glory. But great was 
the shame of the political measures out of which the 
action had arisen. Lynch had irritated the Ghilzyes, 
whom he ought to have soothed. His conduct was 
viewed with general disapprobation. Lord Auckland’s 
opinions have been recorded. Macnaghten virtually 
removed Major Lynch from his appointment. What 
Bumes thought of the matter, may be gathered from 
the following letter, which is distinguished equally by 
good feeling and good sense: 

Caubul, June 30, 1841. 

Mr DEAR Lynch, 

I have just got your letter, with the statement on 
Ghilzye affairs, and am concerned to find you arc in trouble. I 
spoke to the Envoy about you; and, in fact, I showed to him the 
statement. But he tells me that you have resigned, and that he 
and you are altogether at variance on the mode of working out 
Ghilzye politics. I am not cognizant of all which you relate 
regarding affairs in your quarter; but I am sorry to tell you that 
1 am one of those altogether opposed to any further fighting in this 
country; and that I consider we shall never settle Afghanistan at 
the point of the bayonet. And this opinion, which I have so long 
held, I am glad to see has been at length adopted in Calcutta, and 
will be our future guide. As regards the Ghilzyes, indeed, immense 
allowances ought to be made for them; they were, till within three 
generations, the Kings of Afghanistan, and carried their victorious 
arms to the capital of Persia. It is expecting too much, therefore, 
to hope for their being at once peaceful subjects; and as they 
exhibited so much indisposition to the King^s Government, it 



LETTEES OF BURNES AND MACNAGHTEN. 


593 


was, I think, right to build a fort at Khelat-i-Ghilzye, and thus 
bridle them; thereby enabling us, in the heart of the Ghilzye 
country, to protect those who were disposed to join us, and 
gradually undermine our enemies. 

Do not think you did wrong in writing to me, I was glad to 
hear from you; and, had it been in my power, would have been 
glad to assist you also. I think you have been unfortunately 
situated, and had a questio veccata at every step. Had I been by 
you, I would have said build Khelat-i-Ghilzye, and pardon all 
kinds of insolence, for those who laugh may win. From what 
I hear, and from what, indeed, you told me here, 1 rather suspect 
you will be glad to get to Old England, and have done with this 
kind of work. I have not heard who is to succeed you; but 
here again, had I power, I would send no one, for I would leave 
the Ghilzycs to themselves, and quarter our troops at Khelat 
with the new chief, and allow him to rally all parties around 
him; but, perhaps, you will think me very heterodox in all my 
views. . . , Yours, very sincerely, 

Alexander Burnes.* 

Wliilst in this manner efforts were being made to 
tranquillise the Ghilzyes, the proceedings of Aktur Khan 
and the Douranees were again exciting the apprehen¬ 
sions of the Envoy. Unable to obtain all that he wanted 
for himself, the chief, who at one time had affected con¬ 
trition, was now again breaking out into revolt Irri¬ 
tated by this, Macnaghten wrote toRawlinson (May 31) 
as he had before written in the case of Dost Mahomed, 
that if he could seize Aktur Khan, he would recom¬ 
mend his execution : 

I think you should strain every nerve to lay hold of that 
indomitable Moofsid, Aktur Khan, and that if you can seize him, 
the Prince should be recommended to execute him. The five 
Khans whom you propose sending out will of course do their 
utmost to effect his capture, but it occurs to me that the services 
of Ibrahim Khan, the Tymunce chief, might be turned to some 
account on this occasion, and that the deputation of the Kazee's 
son will afford an opportunity of urging him to assist us. I 
♦ MS, Correspondence of Sir A, Burnes, 

2 Q 


VOL. 1. 



594 


YAK MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


further think that a reward of 10,000 rupees should be offered 
for the apprehension of Aktur Khan. 

This moment I have received an express letter from Major 
Lynch, dated the 27th inst. He tells me that he is besieged by 
about 5000 Ghilzyes, who are within three miles of his position, 
but that he is prevented by my instructions from attacking them! 
Could any man in his senses have so construed those orders? 
The question to be asked in this case is. Why did the chief 
military authority at Khelat suffer the rebels to occupy a menacing 
position so close to him in force ? If, as I suspect, it should 
turn out that Major Lynch has been interfering to prevent the 
military authorities from exercising their own discretion on the 
strength of my orders, his conduct will be so utterly indefensible, 
that I must request you at once to supersede him, and I shall tell 
him so. We cannot assist him from this place. Colonel Wymer 
must have reached him before to-day, and the rebels must have 
dispersed or been severely punished ere now. I shall desire John 
Conolly to remain with the Prince at Ghuznec till the road is clear.* 

The Ghilzyes and the Douranees were both in arms 
against the authority of the Shah and his supporters. 
The whole country of Western Afghanistan was in a fear¬ 
ful state of unrest. Rawlinson, at Candahar, saw clearly at 
this time the frail tenure by which we held our position 
in Afghanistan, and was continually warning the Envoy 
of the dangers which loomed so largely before him. 
But Macnaghten only censured his correspondent for his 
‘‘ unwarrantably gloomy vieAVs,” and denounced every¬ 
thing that was said about the unsettled state of the 
country as an “ idle statement.” How unwilling he was 
to believe that the clouds were gathering over his head, 
may be gleaned from the long letter which he wrote to 
Rawlinson on the 13th of June: 

Your letter of the 7 th arrived this morning. I don’t like 
reverting to unpleasant discussions, but you know well that I 
have been frank with you from the beginning, and that I have 
• MS, Correspondence of Sir JV. IL Macnaghten, 



macnaghten’s opinions. 


595 


invariably told you of what I thought I had reason to complain. 
This may be confined to one topic—your taking an unwarrant¬ 
ably gloomy view of our position, and entertaining and dissemi¬ 
nating rumours favorable to that view. We have enough of 
difficulties and enough of croakers without adding to the number 
needlessly. I have just seen a letter from Mr. Dallas to Captain 
Johnson, in which he says the state of the country is becoming 
worse and worse every day. These idle statements may cause much 
mischief, and, often repeated as they arc, they neutralise my pro¬ 
testations to the contrary. I know them to be utterly false as re¬ 
gards this part of the country, and I have no reason to believe 
them to be true as regards your portion of the kingdom, merely 
because the Tokhees arc indulging in their accustomed habits of 
rebellion, or because Aktur Khan has a pack of ragamuffins at 
his heels. As I have said before, there is nothing in these matters 
which might not have been foreseen, or which ought to cause us 
the slightest uneasiness. We will take such precautions as shall 
prevent the Ghilzycs from annoying us; and this is all that is re¬ 
quisite for the present. We may safely leave the rest to time. 
As to the documents protesting against the appointment of Sun- 
mud, I look upon them as pure fudge. Send for the Janbaz. 
Let them make a forced march by night, and come in the rear 
of Aktur. Seize the villain, and hang him as high as Haman, 
and you will probably have no more disturbances. The Janbaz 
may remain out while the collections are going on, if necessary. 
I have already explained to you that I never intended offering a 
reward for Aktur’s head, nor should I approve of encouraging 
the man who has a blood-feud with him to put him out of the 
way. This, besides being objectionable, would be superfluous, 
because his enemy must know that we could not be other¬ 
wise than gratified at the removal of so atrocious a traitor. 
With regard to the Tymunees, all I meant was, that they 
should be encouraged to seize Aktur if he attempted to take 
refuge in their territory, and I thought that a large pecuniary 
reward would be necessary to overcome their natural scruples 
to such a proceeding.* 

But these Doiiranee children were now again to be 
corrected. “Though all was content and tranquillity 

• MS, Correspondence. 

2 Q 2 



596 


YAK MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES, 


from Mookoor to the Khybur,” it was necessary that our 
troops should be continually in the field. And it was 
not always child’s play in which they were summoned 
to engage. Aktur Khan, that “ indomitable Moofsid,” 
was now, at the beginning of July, still in arms before 
Ghiresk, with a body of three thousand men, and it was 
necessary to strike a blow at the rebel chief.* So 


* Macnaghteri’s correspondence, 
during these months of June and 
July, afford many illusttation^> of Ins 
views with reference to tlie policy to 
be pursued towards the disaffected 
clnefs. Tliey show that he had, as he 
sometimes mournfully acknowledged, 
become by this time an adept in in¬ 
trigue. His natural humanity, too, 
seems to iiave been somewhat blunted : 

“ June 20.— I am out of all patience 
with Aktur Khan, but 1 feel satisfied 
that a judicious use of the Janbaz will 
extirpate the villain. If not, we must 
tolerate his audacity no longer; and 
a regular force must be sent after him, 
to hunt him to the world's end. 

“ Ju7ie 24.—You will never get any 
good out of }Our Douranee allies. I 
don’t understand why you should wait 
until Ghiresk i^ taken, before you send 
out a force to quell this insurrection. 
Nothing is so catching in this country 
as the spirit of rebellion; and if the 
insurgents should gain possession of 
Gliiresk, 1 apprehend a very general 
rising in favour of that contemptible 
rascal, Aktur Khan. . . . Our pre¬ 
dicament as legards these Afghan 
chiefs is by no means an enviable one. 
They arc such arrant blockheads, that 
any knave may in a day make a traitor 
of the most loyal of them. . . . This 
is my day for receiving natives, and I 
don’t remember when I have been so 
bothered. Certes, reform is a trouble¬ 
some thing to manage in any country.” 

On the 2nd of July, he wrote; 
“If the garrUon of Ghiresk will only 
hold out a few days longer, and Aktur 
Khan will only have the goodness to 
remain until Hart gets in rear of him, 
I confidently hope that hi» carcase is 
ere now a prey to the vultures. Certes, 
he is a most impudent sug. 


July 16.— I had a visit from Atta 
Khan yesterday. I never beheld a 
more forbidding countenance than 
that which graces the shoulders of this 
worthy. I'he fool predominates over 
the villain ; but there is at the same 
time a vicious-looking obstinacy of 
purpose about the lips and features 
geneially, which would lead me to 
suppose, that though the man had not 
intellect enough to discern his true 
interests, yet that he would be a most 
dangerous instrument in the hands of 

designing persons. 

What do you think of sending a 
secret and trustworthy emissary to 
Aktur Khan, and promising him pro¬ 
tection in the event of his divulging 
the names of all those from whom 
he received assistance in Candahar? 
Though a dishonest man, he is a con¬ 
temptible fellow. Our object is not 
so much to punish him for his au¬ 
dacity, as to prevent future rebellions ; 
and this would be effectually done by 
making an example of those who, 
keeping in the background them¬ 
selves, have instigated other poor 
devils to go to slaughter. If you com¬ 
municate with Aktur, I would treat 
him as if we knew he was but an 
instrument in the hands of others. 1 
do not at present know where 1 can 
obtain evidence to convict Sydul or 
Atta Khan, or even the Cliaoos- 
Bashee. Could you send me Meer 
Allium's letter, and any witnesses 
to prove that the Chaoos-Bashee 
made use of the treasonable language 
imputed to him on the road to Can¬ 
dahar ? Tej Khan accompanied him, 
and that scoundrel I believe to be at 
the bottom of the whole Fussad. If 
there are no strong political objec¬ 
tions to the measure, pray lose no 




REBELLION OF THE DOUKANEES. 


597 


Woodburn, a fine dashing officer, who commanded one 
of the Shah’s regiments, was sent out against him, with 
his own corps (the 5th Infantry), two detachments of 
Janbaz, or A^han Horse, under Hart and Golding, and 
some guns of the Shah’s Horse Artiller)', under Cooper. 
The enemy were posted on the otlier side of the river. 
Woodbiun tried the lords, but they were impassable. 
Hart, however, had tried them at anotlier point, but, 
finding himself unsupported, he returned. This was in 
early morning. Four hours after noon the enemy 
struck their camp, and soon afterwards commenced the 


time in urging tlie Prince to seize and 
imprison liim. In my letter of yester¬ 
day, 1 named four disaffected JMool- 
lalis, wlioni I suggested that the 
Prince should scud for and latc 
soundly. This should be done in open 
Durbar ; and I am not certain that 
it would not be advisable, ^pour e/t- 
courager les autres,* to hang up one or 
two of the rebels taken flagrante 
delicto. But this is a matter best left 
to your own discretion.” 

On the 19th, he wrote: “ I saw 
his Majesty yesterday evening, when 
we had a good deal* of conversation 
as to the expediency of seizing Atta 
Khan and Sydul Khan. One of his 
Majesty’s arguments against the mea¬ 
sure was to me convincing. He said, 
‘ I sent an honourable invitation to 
these individuals and sngs^ as they are. 
Who would ever believe my word 
again if I were now to seize them, 
in defiance of the implied pledge?’ 
So they will remain at large, but be 
well looked after and deprived of 
power and money. His Majesty 
quaintly obseived, ‘If you wish to 
destroy a blind man, it is not neces¬ 
sary to kill him. Take away his 
stick.’ 

“ July 26.—Sydul Khan and Atta 
Khan both deserve to be hung ; but 
I have already told you that his Ma¬ 
jesty is prevented from bringing these 
individuals to condign punishment by 
the consideration (and it is a weighty 


one) of his having invited them to 
Caubul on a promise of honourable 
treatment. The same reason does 
not apply to the Chaoos-Bashee ; and 
I iiope, in the course of to-morrow, to 
request you to send evidence against 
him, or to tell you that he has ex¬ 
piated his offence on the gallows. You 
aie the best judge of the expediency 
of arresting Taj Khan. . . . My own 
notion is, that this (the league be¬ 
tween Persia and Ilerat) will not 
induce Lord Auckland to swerve 
from his pacific policy, and that he 
will rely on the return of our am¬ 
bassador to Teheran for setting 
matters to rights. Put, in the mean 
while, what will Yar Mahomed be 
about? I fear that he will be 
desperate, since we have told him dis¬ 
tinctly that we will not tolerate a 
Persian ascendancy at Herat; and 
this seems to be already established 
by his submission. He may therefore 
imagine that he could not be worse 
off; and he may feel really inclined 
to invade Candahar. In this case, 
would it be prudent to leave one 
regular regiment in advance, far from 
support? But this is a consideration 
which will have suggested it to your¬ 
self. The rebels in the Kohistan are 
still giving us trouble ; but I hope to 
arrange that affair without the em¬ 
ployment of tioops. Leech writes 
checringly of his prospects.” 



598 


YAB, MAHOMED AND THE DOUBANEES. 


passage of the river. Woodburn made his arrangements 
for their reception. The Douranees made a spirited 
attack, but Woodburn’s infentry, well supported by 
Cooper’s guns, met them with too prompt and sure a 
fire to encourage them to greater boldness. The Janbaz, 
already graduating in treachery and cowardice, covered 
themselves with that peculiar kind of glory which clung 
to them to the end of the war. It was a busy night. 
The enemy far outnumbered Woodburn; but the steady 
gallantry of his gminers and his footmen achieved the 
success they deserved. Before daybreak the enemy had 
withdrawn. It would have been a great thing to have 
followed up and dispersed the rebels, but with all the 
country against him, and a body of horse at his back, 
on which no reliance could be placed, it would have 
been madness to make the attempt. 

The month of August found the Envoy still cheerful 
and sanguine. The convulsions of the Douranees and 
the spasms of the Ghilzycs were regarded by him as the 
accompaniments only of those infantine fevers which 
were inseparable from the existence of the tribes. In 
vain Eawlinson, with steady eye watching these symp¬ 
toms, and probing with deep sagacity the causes of the 
mortal ailments out of which arose all those fierce 
throes of anguish, protested that throughout Western 
Afghanistan there was a strong national feeling against 
us; and that difficulties and dangers were coiling their 
serpent folds around us with irresistible force. Mac- 
naghten still asked what we had to fear, and thus, on 
the 2nd of August, addressed his less sanguine colleague: 

I am not going to read you a lecture, first, because when you 
indited your letter ot the 28th ult. you pleaded guilty to the 
influence of bile; and secondly, because at the present writing I 
must own the same impeachment; but I must pen a few remarks, 
in the hope of inducing you to regard matters a little more 



ENGAGEMENT WITH AKTUE KHAN. 


599 


“ couleur de rose." You say, “ The state of the country^ causes me 
many an anxious thought— we may thresh the Douranees over 
and over again, but this rather aggravates than obviates the diffi¬ 
culty of overcoming the national feeling against us—in fact, our 
tenure is positively that of military possession, and the French in 
Algiers, and the Russians in Circassia, affiord us an example on a 
small scale of the difficulty of our position.” Now upon what do 
you found your assertion that there is a national feeling against 
us, such as that against the French in Algiers or the Russians in 
Circassia? Solely, so far as I know, because the turbulent Dou¬ 
ranees have risen in rebellion. From Mookoor to the Khybur 
Pass all is content and tranquillity, and wherever we Europeans 
go we are received witli respect, and attention, and welcome. 
But the insurrection of the Douranees is no new occurrence. The 
history of the rule of the Barukzye Sirdars would show that they 
were engaged in one continuous struggle with their turbulent 
brethren. If they were able to reduce them to subjection with 
their contemptible means, what should wo have to fear from them? 
We have given them something to lose which they had not before; 
and you may rely upon it that they will be quiet enough as soon 
as they are satisfied (which they ought to be pretty well by this 
time) of the futility of opposition, provided some means are 
adopted of preventing Yar Mahomed from carrying on his in¬ 
trigues. Then, the Ghilzyes have been in arms. True. But it 
would have been unreasonable to suppose that they should sur¬ 
render their independence without a struggle, and wo have now 
put the bit in their mouths. I do not concur with you as to the 
difficulty of our position. On the contrary, I think our prospects 
are most cheering, and with the materials we have there ought to 
be little or no difficulty in the management of the country. 

It is true the population is exclusively Mahomedan, but it 
is split into rival sects; and we all know that of all antipathies 
the sectarian is the most virulent. We have Hazaras, Ghilzyes, 
Douranees, and Kuzzilbashes, all at daggers drawn with each 
other, and in every family there are rivals and enemies. Some faults 
of management must necessarily be committed on the first assump¬ 
tion of the administration of a new country, and the Douranee 
outbreak may be partially attributed to such faults; but what, 
after all, do such outbreaks signify? The modem history of India 
teems with such instances. There is hardly a district in which 



600 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


some desperate adventurer has not appeared at some time or other, 
and drawn the entire population after him. The whole province 
of Bareilly, in 1817, rose against us on a religious war-cry. The 
whole province of Cuttack, shortly afterwards, followed the stan¬ 
dard of the rebel Jugbeneda, and we had infinite trouble in 
quelling the insurrection. Instances of this kind might be infi¬ 
nitely multiplied, and yet we find the effects of such outbreaks 
are very evanescent. The people of this country are very credulous. 
They believe any story invented to our prejudice; but they will 
very soon learn that we are not the cannibals we are painted. 
Mr. Gorman’s fate was doubtless very melancholy; but are there 
no assassinations in other countries? I read in Bombay Times 
only this morning an account of a cavalry officer being shot at in 
the open day in one of our villages. You say, The infatuated 
town’s-people are even beginning now to show their teeth; there 
have been three cases to-day of stones thrown from the tops of the 
houses on Sepoys’ heads walking along the streets.” Certainly 
our troops can be no great favourites in a town where they have 
turned out half the inhabitants for their own accommodation; 
but I will venture to say there is not a county town in England 
where soldiers are quartered in which similar excesses have not 
happened. European and Native soldiers have traversed the town 
of Candahar unarmed; and though it is to be apprehended that 
their conduct has been occasionally very aggravating, only two 
assaults have been committed upon them. When I went to 
Hyderabad in 1810, and for many years after, no European could 
venture to show himself in the city, such was the state of feeling 
against us. Look upon this picture and on that. Now I believe 
the lieges of Hyderabad look upon us as very innocent Kaffirs. 

You are quite right, I think, in directing Pattinson to accept 
the submission of all the rebels, save Aktur, who may be desirous 
of coming in. They should be required to furnish security for 
appearance sake. But these people are perfect children, and 
should be treated as such. If we put one naughty boy in the 
corner, the rest will be terrified. We have taken their plaything, 
power, out of the hands of theDouranee chiefs, and they are pouting 
a good deal in consequence. They did not know how to use it. 
In their hands it was useless and even hurtful to their master, and 
we were obliged to transfer it to scholars of our own. They insti¬ 
gate the Moollahs, and the Moollahs preach to the people; but 



ENGAGEMENT AT SECUNDBEABAD. 


601 


this will be very temporary. The evil of it we must have borne 
with, or abandoned all hope of forming a national army.* . . . 

The Douranee children, however, required more chas¬ 
tisement. No man could have done more than Wood- 
burn did with his means; but these means were in¬ 
sufficient. It was the custom then, both against the 
Ghilzyes and the Douranees, to send out detachments 
sufficiently large to accomplish, with the aid of their 
guns, small victories over the enemy, and so to increase 
the bitterness of their hostility, without breaking their 
strength. Aktur Khan was still in arms. Banded with 
him was Akruin Khan, another Douranee chief, inspired 
with like bitter hatred of the restored monarch and his 
Feringhce allies. A force mider Captain Griffin was 
now sent out against them. It was strong in the 
mounted branch. Eight hundred sabres, three hundred 
and fifty bayonets, and four six-pounder guns, followed 
Griffin into the field of Zemindawer. On the 17th of 
August he came up with the insurgents. It was a 
moment of some anxiety. The Janbaz had not by their 
conduct under Woodburn won the confidence of the 
British officers. Nott always mistrusted them, and the 
feeling was, not unreasonably, shared by others.f But 
here they were associated with the men of the King’s 
regular cavalry, and they may have felt the danger of 
defection. Be the cause what it may, they did no 

• MS. Correspondence. peruses the General’s subsequent, and 

t jSTott’s disparagement of the Jan- most uncandid despatch, in which he 
baz so irritated Macnaghten, and omitted all notice of the exemplary 
displeased Lord Auckland, that his conduct of the Janbaz at Secunder- 
removal from Candahar was contem- abad. 

plated. The following extracts from “ September 5.—You are not likely 

Maciiaghten’s correspondence show to have Xott with you much longer, 
what was thought on the subject: His conduct in respect to the Janbaz 
^^Septemhe-2 .—Between you and me, has elicited the severest displeasure 
Lord A. is much displeased with of government, by whom he nas been 
General Nott for his light and indis- declared disqualified for his present 
criminate censure and disparagement important command.”—[ MS. Com * 
of the Janbaz; and I think his dis- spondence.^ 
pleasure will be increased when he 



602 


YAE MAHOMED AND THE DOUEANEES. 


shrink from the encounter. The enemy were strongly 
posted in a succession of walled gardens and small 
forts, from which they opened a heavy matchlock fire 
upon our advancing troops; but the fire of our guns and 
musketry drove them from their enclosures, and then 
the cavalry, headed by the young Prince Sufder Jung, 
who had something more than the common energy of 
the royal race, charged with terrific effect, and utterly 
broke the discomfited mass of Douranees. The victory 
was a great one. Aktur Khan fled. The Douranees 
were disheartened; and for a time they sunk into the 
repose of feebleness and exhaustion. 

The Ghilzyes, too, had received another check. Co¬ 
lonel Chambers, early in August, had been sent out 
against them, with a party of his own regiment, the 5th 
Light Cavalry, the 16th and 43rd Sepoy Regiments, and 
some details of Irregular Horse. He came up with the 
enemy on the morning of the 5th; but before he could 
bring the main body of his troops into action, a party 
of his cavalry had fallen upon them and scattered them 
in disastrous flight. 

Under the influence of these victories, Macnaghten’s 
confidence rose higher and higher. The Douranees were 
broken, and the Ghilzyes had submitted “ almost with¬ 
out a blow.” Aktur Khan had fled, and the “ Gooroo” 
had surrendered. Now, indeed, the Envoy thought that 
he might report “ all quiet fi:om Dan to Beersheba.” If 
anything caused him a moment’s inquietude, it was the 
thought that Aktur Khan, the favourite son of Dost 
Mahomed, was still abroad, hovering about Khooloom. 
With something that now seems like a strange presenti¬ 
ment, he wrote that “ the fellow would be after some 
mischief, should the opportunity present itself.” It was 
on the 20th of August that, writing to Mr. Robertson, 
he thus expressed himself: 



MACNAGHTEN ON THE DOURANEBfiL 


603 


The victory of the Helmund was very complete. I believe the 
enemy on that occasion was as numerous a body as could ever 
be congregated in this country, consisting of some 4000 or 5000 
men. The Douranees want one more threshing, and then they 
would be quite satisfied of the futility of opposing us; but my 
last letter from Rawlinson gave me no hope that they would 
collect again. The whole of the Ghilzye tribes have submitted 
almost without a blow; for the gallant little afiair in which the 
5th Cavalry redeemed the honour of that branch of the service, 
could hardly be dignified with the name of a fight. Those who 
knew this country when it was ruled by Barukzyes, are amazed at 
the metamorphosis it has undergone, and with so little bloodshed. 
The former rulers were eternally fighting with their subjects 
from one year’s end to another. Now we cannot move a 7iaick 
and four without having all the newspapers setting up a yell about 
the unpopularity of the Shah. The Shah is unpopular with the 
Douranee Khans, and wo have made him so by supplanting them, 
and taking the military power which they were incompetent to 
use from their hands into our own. With all other classes his 
Majesty is decidedly, but deservedly, popular, and the Khans are 

too contemptible to be cared about. 

We have had very unpleasant intelligence from Bokhara, it 
being reported that Colonel Stoddart is again in disgrace and con¬ 
finement; and I am the more alarmed about this, from thinking 
it probable that Arthur Conoily will return from Kokund •oia 
Bokhara. But the intelligence requires confirmation. Mahomed 
Aktur, the Dost’s favourite son, is still at Khooloom, and has re¬ 
jected my overture to come in. The fellow will be after some 
mischief, should the opportunity present itself. . . . You will 

see that Shah Soojah has most handsomely given back Cutchee 
and Moostung to the young Khan of Khelat. His Majesty’s re- 
venue is little more than fifteen lakhs per annum—hardly enough 
for the maintenance of his personal state—and yet the government 
below are perpetually writing to me that this charge and that 
charge is to be defrayed out of his “ Majesty’s resources!” God 
help the poor man and his resources!! The country is perfectly 
quiet from Dan to Bcersheba.* 


^ MS* Correspondence. 



604 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


But although all was quiet from Dan to Beersheba, 
there was a considerable force out in the Dehrawut, and 
a party of indomitable Douranees still defying the King 
and his allies. Akrum Khan refused to submit. It was 
determined, therefore, to make an attempt to seize him. 
It was not difficult to find one, willing for a few pieces 
of gold, to lead a small party of our people to the lair 
of the untamed chief. John Conolly, with a little band 
of horsemen, went out on this duty. It is said that the 
legs of the guide were tied under his horse’s belly, that 
he might not treacherously escape. Akrum Khan was 
surprised, captured, and carried, a doomed captive, to 
Candahar, where, under the orders of Prince Timour, he 
was blown from a gun. 

I cannot close this chapter without a few more words 
relating to Todd and the Herat Mission. That, in one 
sense, the Mission failed, is certain; but, there were some 
of Todd’s measures which did not fail, and it is not to 
be forgotten that on his own responsibility he despatched 
Abbott and Shakespear to Khiva, and the good that 
was done by these Missions was often in the retrospect 
a solace to him in after days, when smarting under the 
injustice of his masters.’*' Lord Auckland never forgave 


* I cannot refrain from quoting 
here a letter on this subject from 
Todd to Outraiii, written before his 
removal from political employment: 

“ Your kind letter of November 
3rd reached me a few days ago. I 
would fain send you an adequate 
return, but I am out of sorts, and, 
beshles, have but little to tell you. 
Shakespear's proceedings have been 
in all respects admirable. The zeal, 
perseverance, and judgment he has 
displayed throughout his arduous 
undertaking, entitle him to the 
highest praise; and I trust he will 
be rewarded as he deserves. The 
property restored by Russia is valued 


at upwards of a crore of rupees; 
and the number of merchants and 
others released, exceeds 600. The 
news was received at Khiva with 
every demonstration of joy; and 
Shakespear’s name has been inserted 
in the calendar of Oosbeg saints! 
The^ Russians, by liberating their 
captives immediately on the arrival 
of Shakespear and his ‘ company,* 
have given a strong proof that they 
are^ unwilling or unable to renew 
their attempt on Khiva; and 1 hope 
that they will now be prevented 
taking up that formidable position on 
the road to India. I cannot help 
congratulating myself on even the 



MAJOR TODD. 


606 


him. His departure from Herat was inopportune; for, 
although Todd had no reason to believe the settle- 
ment of our differences with Persia was any nearer to its 
consummation than it had been for some time, they were 
then on the eve of adjustment. So Todd, remanded to 
his regiment, proceeded to join it at the head-quarters of 
the Artillery at Dum-Dum. “ Equal to either fortune,” he 
fell back upon the common routine of regimental service, 
and, in command of a company of Foot Artillery, devo» 
ted himself with as much earnest and assiduous zeal to 
the minutim of military duty, as he had done, a year 
before, to the affairs of the Herat Mission. It has often 
been said that political employ unfits a man for regimen¬ 
tal duty; but Major Todd, from the time that he first 
rejoined his regiment to the hour of his death, never 
slackened in his attention to his military duties ; and, 
perhaps, in the whole range of the service, there was not 
a more zealous, a more assiduous—in otlier words, a 
more conscientious regimental officer than the old anta¬ 
gonist of Yar Mahomed. The trait of character here 
illustrated is a rarer one than many may suppose. No¬ 
thing in his political life became him like the leaving of 
it. There are few who know how, gracefully, to descend. 


small share which I have had in 
these proceedings. Had I waited 
for orders, the Russians might have 
been within a few marches of Khiva; 
and had we been satisfied with the 
tales of Sir Alexander’s agents, we 
should have now believed the Russians 
300,000 strong, and to be within as 
short a distance of Caubul. The road 
between Teheran and this place is 
infested by roving bands of Toorko- 
mans, who have been let loose on 
Persian Khorassan by the Khan of 
Khiva. His Highness thinks that he 
is thus doing us service; but 1 have 
written to undeceive him in this mat¬ 
ter, and I have pointed out to him 
that the practice of man-stealing is 
abhorrent to us, whether the man be 

fi T^iiaatnn rtn n T^Ai*oinrt TTia Arkn/1ii/»f 


on this occasion reminds me of an 
answer given to me by Mahomed 
Shah’s Wuzeer, one Meerza Maho¬ 
med, a great oaf. I had been super¬ 
intending some artillery practice at 
Teheran. A jackass having been 
I)laced as the target, I remonstrated 
against the cruelty of putting up one 
of God’s creatures as a mark, when 
wood or canvas would answer every 
purpose. The Wuzeer replied, * On 
my eyes be it, I will stick up a j)ony 
next time.’ As if I had specially 
pleaded the case of jackasses. 

“ Sheil thinks that the prospect of 
a settlement of our differences with 
Persia is as distant as ever, and is 
strongly opposed to my plan of al¬ 
lowing the bhah to keep Ghorian, and 



606 


YAR MAHOMED AND THE DOURANEES. 


It i8 not improbable that these years of regimental 
duty were the happiest period of his life. Shortly after 
his return to the Presidency, from which he had so long 
been absent, he married; and in the enjoyment of domes¬ 
tic happiness, such as has rarely been surpassed, he soon 
forgot the injustice that had been done to him. Cheer¬ 
fully doing his duty in that state of life to which it had 
pleased God to call him, respected and beloved by all 
who had the means of appreciating the simplicity of his 
manners, the kindness of his heart, the soundness of his 
intelligence, and the integrity of his conduct, he found 
that, in exchanging the excitement of a semi-barbarous 
Court for the tranquillity of cantonment life and the 
companionship of a gentle and amiable wife, the barter, 
though not self-sought, had been greatly to his ad¬ 
vantage. 

Being appointed to the command of a horse-field bat¬ 
tery, stationed at Delhi, he left Dum-Dum for the im¬ 
perial city, where he continued to serve, until, shortly 
before the Sikh invasion, he attained that great object of 
regimental ambition, the command of a troop of horse- 
artillery. In the Upper Provinces, he had more than 
once been disquieted by the illness of his young and 
fondly-loved wife ; but the heavy blow, which was to 
prostrate all his earthly happiness, did not descend upon 
him until within a few days of that memorable 18th of 
December, which saw the British army fling itself upon 
the Sikh batteries at Mudkhi. It was at Ferozshuhur 
that Todd, broken-hearted, with a strong presentiment 
of his approaching end, perhaps, in the extremity of his 
anguish, scarcely wishing to escape destruction, led his 
troop into action and perished in the unequal conflict,* 
and among the many who fell on that mournful day, 
there was not a braver soldier or a better man. 

♦ Calcutta Review, A round shot from one of the Sikh batteries, I 
believe, carried off his head. 



THE GATHEBING OF THE STORM. 


607 


CHAPTER IV. 

[September—October: 1841.] 

Aspect of Affairs at Caubul—The King—The Envoy—Burnes—Elphinstone 
—The English at Caubul—Ex[>ense9 of the VVar—Retrenchment of the 
Subsidies—Risings of the Ghilzycs—Sale’s Brigade—Gatherings in the 
Kohistan.—Sale’s Arrival at Gundamuck—The 1st of November. 

Taking advantage of the lull that followed the defeat of 
the Dourauees and the Ghilzyes in Western Afghanistan, 
it is advisable that I should glance briefly at the general 
condition of things at the capital in this month of Sep¬ 
tember. 

The King was in the Balia Hissar. Discontented 
and unhappy, he complained that he had no real autho¬ 
rity; that the English gentlemen were managing the 
affairs of his kingdom; and that he himself was a mere 
pageant and a show. He had watched with satisfaction 
the growth of the difficulties which were besetting the 
path of his allies, and was not without a hope that their 
further development would be attended by our with¬ 
drawal from so troubled a sphere. It was plain to him 
that, although deference was outwardly shown to his 
opinions, and a pretence of consulting his wishes was 
made by his British advisers, they really held all the 
power in their hands; and he said, complainingly, to one 



608 


SHAH SOOJAH. 


of them,* for whom he entertained no little personal 
affection, that he “ did not understand his position.” The 
appointment of the new minister, Oosman Ehan, in the 
place of his old and tried servant, Moollah Shikore, had 
been extremely distasteful to him; and it chafed him to 
think that a functionary so appointed must necessarily 
be less eager to fulfil his wishes than those of his Euro¬ 


pean allies.f 

* Captain Macgregor.— \_See Mac- 
gregor's Report on the Causes of the 
Caubul Outbreak. 

f The King’s health too, began to 
fail him about this time, and Mac- 
iiagliten began to consider the expe¬ 
diency of sending for the heir ap- 
arent. On the 5th of September, 
e wrote to Rawlinson, complaining 
that his Majesty, since the return of 
his family, had been in a very nerv¬ 
ous and irritable state: 

“ September 5 .—I have lately had 
a great deal of trouble with our good 
old King, who, since the arrival of 
his family, seems to have lost all his 
nerve and temper. But I hope to 
bring him round again soon, for he 
has a large stock of sterling good 
sense.” .... 

By the beginning of the third week 
of September, the King had worked 
himself into a fever : 

“ September 21.—His Majesty is 
ill of fever, which has been hanging 
about him for some time; and, at his 
time of life, the issue, to say the 
least of it, is very doubtful. It seems 
to be in the highest degree desirable 
that Shah-zadah Timour should be 
here, in the event of a fatal termina¬ 
tion of his Majesty’s illness. The 
Nizam-ood-Dowlah and I have had a 
serious conversation this morning on 
the subject. He thinks, and 1 am 
disposed to agree with him, that it 
might be well if Shah-zadah Timour 
were to address an areeza to his Ma¬ 
jesty, stating how much grieved he 
was to hear of his Majesty’s illness— 
the intelligence of which had filled 
him with so much uneasiness as to 


incapacitate him from the proper per¬ 
formance of the duties of government, 
and expressing an earnest desire to 
come and kiss his Majesty’s feet, and 
thereby give relief to his mind.” 

Next day, however, the King was 
better, and Macnaghten wrote : 

“ September 22.—I am happy to 
tell you that his Majesty is very 
much better to-day—so much so, in¬ 
deed, that if you have not spoken to 
the Shah-zadah on the subject of my 
yesterday’s note, 1 think it unneces¬ 
sary to do so.” 

Prince Timour was, at this time, 
overnor of Candahar. Futteh Jung 
ad, in the first instance, been sta¬ 
tioned at the western capital; but 
the atrocities be bad committed com¬ 
pelled his removal. One of Mac- 
naghten’s letters (5ep^em5cr 21, 1840) 
contains an abominable story, which 
had travelled to Caubul, hardly fit 
for publication, but horribly illustra¬ 
tive of the cruelty of the Prince. He 
was subsequently removed, and his 
brother, a very moderate and respect¬ 
able man, sent to Candahar in his 
place. Sir Jasper Nicolls* Journal 
contains a notice of the Prince’s re¬ 
moval: “ Futteh Jung has just been 
removed by force from Candahar, 
for tyranny, extortion, drunkenness, 
and all manner of crimes. His re¬ 
moval was skilfully performed by 
Major Rawlinson. The fellow loaded 
his double-barrelled pistols when he 
suspected all was not right; but his 
attached servants were one by one 
called away, and his younger brother 
also, and he feared to act alone.”— 
IMS. Journal^ 



THE GOVERNORSHIP OP BOMBAY, 


609 


Macnaghten, indeed, was paramount at Cauljul. But 
the days of his Afghan sovereignty were numbered. 
He was about to receive the reward of a life of success¬ 
ful and appreciated service, and to end his official days 
in comparative quiet and repose. He was about to 
escape out of the cares and inquietudes—the difficulties 
and dangers—the incessant harassing turmoil and ex¬ 
citement of a life of resjionsibility among a turbulent 
and discontented people, and to commence a new career 
of useful and honoured public service, upon a less 
stormy and tumultuous scene. He had been appointed 
Governor of Bombay. The same recognition of approved 
zeal and capacity which had been extended to Malcolm 
and Elphinstone, had now come to testify the estimation 
in which Macnaghten’s services were held by his em¬ 
ployers. It was a high and a flattering mark of con¬ 
fidence, and it was doubly welcome after all the doubts 
and misgivings engendered in his mind by the implied 
censures of his immediate superior. The value of the 
gift, too, was enhanced by the seasonableness of the time 
at which it was received. Macnaghten looked around 
him, and saw that “ everything Avas quiet from Dan to 
Beersheba;” and he rejoiced in the thought that he was 
about to quit Afghanistan for ever, and to carry with 
him no burden of anxiety and fear. 

Burnes was also at Caubul. He had been there ever 
since the restoration of the Shah, in a strange unrecognised 
position, of which it is difficult to give any intelligible 
account. He used to say, that he was in the “ most 
nondescript of situations.” It appears to have been his 
mission in Afghanistan to draw a large salary every 
month, and to give advice that was never taken.* This 

* On the Ist of April, 1841, Bumes to his brother: “ I am now a highly 
described his position thus, in a letter paid idler, having no less than 3500 

VOL. I. 2 R 



610 


THS GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


might have satisfied many men. It did not satisfy 
Bumes. lie said that he wanted responsibility; and 
under Macnaghten he had none. He had no precise 
duties of any kind; but he watched all that was going 
on in Afghanistan with a comprehending eye and an 
understanding brain, and he wrote, in the shape of let¬ 
ters to Macnaghten, long and elaborate papers on the 
state and prospects of Afghanistan, which his official 
chief dismissed with a few pencil-notes, for the most 
part of contemptuous dissent. Burnes saw clearly that 
ever 5 rthing was going wrong. He probed, deeply and 
searchingly, the great wound of national discontent—a 
mighty sore that was ever running—and he felt in his 
inmost soul that the death-tlirocs of such a system could 
not be very I'cmote. But better days were now begin¬ 
ning to dawn upon him. He had been waiting for 
Macnaghten’s office, and now, at last, it seemed to 
be within his reach. A few weeks, and he would be 
supreme at Caubul; and the great object of his ambition 
gained. 

The command of the troops was in the hands of Ge¬ 
neral Elphinstone—an old officer of the Queen’s service, 
of good repute, gentlemanly manners, and aristocratic 
connexions. He had succeeded Sir Willoughby Cotton 
in the early part of the year. But it must have been a 
wonder to him, as it was to all who knew him, what 
business he had in such a place. He had no Indian 
experience o» any kind, and he was pressed down by 
physical infirmities. When Sir Willoughby Cotton 
imtimated his desire, on the plea of ill health, to be re¬ 
lieved from the command of the troops in Afghanistan, 


rupees a month as Resident at Caubul, by which I mean that I give paper 
and being, m the lawyers call it, only opinions, but I do not work them 
counsel, and that, too, a dumb one— out.” 



GEanmAi. elphinstone. 


611 


there was an officer already in the country to whom 
their charge might have been safely delegated. But he 
was not in ffivour either at the Mission or at the 
Calcutta Government House. Sir Jasper Nicolls would 
have placed Nott in command; but there were obstacles 
to his appointment, at which I have already hinted; and 
it was deemed expedient to send to Caubul a man of a 
more ductile nature, with as few opinions of his own as 
might be to clash with those of the political chief. So 
Lord Auckland despatched General Elphinstone to Af¬ 
ghanistan—not in ignorance of his disqualifications, for 
they were pointed out to him by others—but in spite of 
a clear perception of them. Whether those who sent 
the brave old gentleman to India with all his infirmities 
thick upon him, recommended him for this especial 
field of service, or whether any notions of routine and 
the obligations of the roster pressed themselves upon 
Lord Auckland with irresistible force, I cannot confi¬ 
dently declare; but so inexplicable by any reference to 
intelligible human motives and actions is an appoint¬ 
ment of this kind, that it is impossible not to recognise 
in such a dispensation a mightier agency than that of 
man, or to reject the belief that, when Elphinstone went 
to Caubul, the curse which sate upon our unholy policy 
was working onward for our overthrow. 

Next in rank to General Elphinstone were Sir Robert 
Sale and Brigadier Shelton—both officers of the Queen’s 
service, but soldiers of long Indian experience. Each 
had served with his regiment in the Burmese war; and 
each had acquired a reputation for the highest personal 
courage. Sale’s regiment was the 13th Light Infantry. 
Shelton’s was the 44th.* Both of these regiments were 

* Sbdton liad ocone up from India His brigade was employed against 
with the 44tb, through the Punjaub. the refractory tribes of the Sungboo- 

2 R 2 



612 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


now at Caubul. But the 13th was about to return to 
India, and soon afterwards to Great Britain. It had seen 
many years of Indian service, and had been in Afghan¬ 
istan since Keane’s army first entered the country. The 
44th had come up early in the year, and had done some 
service in the Naziain valley, near Jellalabad, on the way. 

The main body of the British troops were in the new 
cantonments. These works had been erected in the 
course of 1840. They wore situated on a piece of 
low ground open to the Kohistan road. They were 
extensive and ill defended. They were nearly a mile in 
extent, and were surrounded by ramparts so little for¬ 
midable that they might be ridden over.* Near the 
cantonments was the Mission compound, occupying an 
extensive space, and surrounded by a number of houses 
and buildings belonging to the officers and retainers of 
the Mission. There was here, also, a weak attempt at 
defence j but the walls were beyond measure contemp¬ 
tible; and the whole expanse of building, the entrenched 
camp and Mission compound together, were so planted, 
as to be swept on every side by hills, and forts, and vil¬ 
lages, and whatever else in such a country could bristle 
with armed men. No such works were ever known— 
so wretched in themselves, and so doubly wretched by 
position. If the object of those who constructed them 
had been to place our troops at the mercy of an enemy, 
they could not have been devised more cunningly in 
furtherance of such an end. They were commanded on 


Khail in the month of February, and 
reduced them to a fitting state of sub¬ 
jection ; but not without the loss of 
two valuable officers. Lieutenant 
Pigou, of the Engineers, was blown 
to pieces, whilst endeavouring to 
force in, with powder, the gates of 


a fort; and Captam Douglas, As¬ 
sistant-Adjutant-General, was shot 
dead hj the side of the Brigadier. 

^ A small pony, says Lieutenant 
Rattray, was backed by an officer to 
scramble down the ditch and over 
the wall. 



THE CANTONMENTS. 


613 


every side; and so surrounded with villages, forts, gardens, 
and other cover for an enemy, that our troops could 
neither enter nor leave the camp without exposing them¬ 
selves to a raking fire from some one of these points of 
attack. And to crown the calamity of the whole, the 
Commissariat supplies, on which our army depended for 
its subsistence, were stored in a small fort, not within, 
but beyond, the cantonments. The communication be¬ 
tween the two places was commanded by an empty 
fort, and by a walled garden, inviting the occupation of 
an enemy. Human folly seemed to have reached its 
height in the construction of these works. There stood 
these great, indefensible cantonments, overawed on 
every side, a monument of the madness which Provi¬ 
dence, for its own ends, had permitted to cloud and be- 
w'ilder the intelligence of the “ greatest military nation 
of the world.” There it stood, a humiliating spectacle; 
but except by new comers, who stood in amazement be¬ 
fore the great folly, little account was taken of it. Men’s 
eyes had become accustomed to the blot.* 

The English had by this time begun to settle them- 


** A writer already g^uoted, of hi^ 
authority on this point, says: “It 
has been already noted, that the tena¬ 
city of purpose displayed by the en¬ 
gineer, Durand, had forced Mac- 
naghten and the reluctant Shah into 
the precaution of constructing bar¬ 
racks and occupying with troops the 
Balia Hissar; also, it has been men¬ 
tioned, that the Envoy subsequently 
cave up these barracks to the Shah 
for the use of the 160 ladies and 
women of the Harem, and threw up 
all military hold of this important 
post. Sturt, Durand^s successor, was 
in nowise participant in this grievous 
error: for he too pertinaciously ad¬ 
vocated placing the troops in the 


Balia Hissar, clearing it of all private 
houses, and rendering it a good 
stronghold. It is bitter to think, 
that had the repair of the works and 
their improvement been commenced 
in 1839, when urged by the first en¬ 
gineer, or even later, when again 
pressed by the second engineer, a 
tithe of the sums thrown away at 
Herat would have rendered the Balia 
Hissar, by November, 1841, a for¬ 
tress impregnable, when held by a 
British garrison, against all that 
the disanected Afghans could have 
brought before its walls.” The same 
writer adds: “ These grave errors 
had been committed, it must be re¬ 
membered, in justice to the memory 



614 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


selves down in Caubul. Indeed, from the very commence¬ 
ment, they had done their best, as they ever do, to ac¬ 
commodate themselves to new localities and new circum¬ 
stances, and had transplanted their habits, and, I fear it 
must be added, their vices, with great address, to the 
capital of the Douranee Empire. It was plain that they 
were making themselves at home in the chief city of the 
Afghans. There was no sign of an intended departure. 
They were building and furnishing houses for them¬ 
selves— laying out gardens — surrounding themselves 
with the comforts and luxuries of European life. Some 
had sent for their wives and children. Lady Mac- 
naghten. Lady Sale, and other English women, were 
domesticated in comfortable houses within the limits of 
the great folly we had erected on the plain. The Eng¬ 
lish, indeed, had begun to find the place not wholly 
unendurable. The fine climate braced and exhilarated 
them. There was no lack of amusement. They rode 
races; they played at cricket. They got up dramatic 
entertainments. They went out fishing; they went out 
shooting. When winter fell upon them, and the heavy 
frosts covered the lakes with ice, to the infinite astonish¬ 
ment of the Afghans they skimmed over the smooth 
surface on their skates. There is no want of manliness 
among the Afghans; but the manliness of the Feringhee 
strangers quite put them to shame. They did not like 
us the less for that. The athletic amusements of our 
people only raised their admiration. But there was 
something else which filled them with intensest hate.* 

of the gallant, but luckless Elphin- and sacrificed to a false show of secu- 
stoniS, before his arrival at Caubul. rity .”—\^Calcutta Review. 

He at once observed them and sought * For a pleasant descriptive sketch 
to have them remedied; but holding of the amusements of the English at 
a secondary place, the safety of his Caubul, see Mr. Gleig's account of 
troops and their magazines was made the Operations qf Sale's Brigade in 
likewise of secondary consideration, Afghanistan. 



THE WOMEN OF CAUBUL. 


615 


I am not writing an apology. There are truths which 
must be spoken. The temptations which are most 
difficult to withstand, were not withstood by our English 
officers. The attractions of the women of Caubul they 
did not know how to resist. The Afghans are very 
jealous of the honour of their women; and there were 
things d.one in Caubul which covered them with shame 
and roused them to revenge. The inmate of the Maho- 
medan Zenana was not unwilling to visit the quarters of 
the Christian stranger. For two long years, now, had this 
shame been burning itself into the hearts of the Cau- 
bulees; and there were some men of note and influence 
among them who knew themselves to be thus wronged. 
Complaints were made; but they were made in vain. 
The scandal was open, undisguised, notorious. Redress 
was not to be obtained. The evil was not in course of 
suppression. It went on till it became intolerable; and 
the injured then began to see that the only remedy was 
in their own hands. It is enough to state broadly this 
painful fact. There are many who can fill in with vivid 
personality all the melancholy details of this chapter of 
human weakness, and supply a catalogue of the wrongs 
which were soon to be so fearfully redressed. 

Such, dimly traced in their social aspects, was the 
general condition of things at Caubul in this month of 
September, 1841. Politically—such was Macnaghten’s 
conviction — everything was quiet from Dan to Beer- 
eheba. The noses of the Douranee Khans had, he said, 
“ been brought to the grindstone and the Gooroo and 

* Macnftgbten bad hj ibis time tbeir claws. His letters written at 
arrived at the conclusion that it was this time exhibit his feelings towards 
necessaiT’ to adopt towards the Dou- the ** blackguard Douranees t*’ 
ranees the same harsh policy which d?i^t<s^29.^The Douranee ohieft 
had been pursued by the Barukzye who have been in rebellion must be 
Sirdars. He had brought many of efiectually humbled. And we must 
the principal chiefs to Caubul^ and put it out of their power to attempt 
was now endeavouring to extract any further mischief. The Barukzye 



616 


THE 6ATHEBIN0 OF THE SXOBM. 


other Ghilzye chiefs were in his safe keeping at Caubul, 
seemingly contented with their lot. As the month ad¬ 
vanced, our prospects seemed to brighten. The Envoy 
continued to write that everything was covlewr de rose*'* 


Sirdars took the only effectual me¬ 
thod of keeping these gentry quiet. 
We must never dream of conciliation. 
Terror is the only instrument which 
they respect. 

“ Augiist 31.—These fellows must 
be crushed, and our only refuge from 
constant intrigue and disaffection is to 
show the hopelessness of both. In 
short, we must treat the Douranees 
as the Barukzye Sirdars treated them. 
The difference in our favour is, that 
we have better means of humiliating 
them. 

“ September 2.—-All that I would 
urge is, that you impose very strin¬ 
gent conditions on these blackguard 
I)ouranee8, so as to take the conceit 
thoroughly out of them, and to pre¬ 
vent the possibility of their being 
again impertinent. I have at length 
prevailed upon his Majesty to exer¬ 
cise a little wholesome severity to¬ 
wards the Moofsids of that class in 
Caubul. They were, night and day, 
meditating mischief, and striving to 
create disunion between us and the 
Shah. His Majesty, yesterday morn¬ 
ing, required them to execute a 

promising that they would be 
loyal and obedient for the future. 
This, metliinks, was no very severe 
obligation ; yet they one and all (six 
of them) point-blank refused, I then 
recommended his Majesty to give 
them five days’ law to prepare and 
proceed with their families to Pe- 
shawur. This, if his Majesty con¬ 
tinues firm, will very shortly bring 
them to their senses, and we shall 
enjoy much aram for a long time to 
come. 

“ September 4.—The noses of the 
Khawaneen have now, I am happy 
to say, been brought to the grind¬ 
stone. Seeing that his Majesty was 
firmly resolved on their expatri¬ 
ation, they are now as humble as 
they were before insolent. 


“ September 5.—I am glad that no 
executions have taken place — not 
because I think they are not re¬ 
quired, but because experience 
teaches me that detraction is at 
work with regard to all our proceed¬ 
ings—that malevolence will magnify 
an act of retributive justice into a 
cold-blooded murder; and, moreover, 
that we can expect no support from 
our own government. When tran¬ 
quillity is restored, let a list be made 
of the chief offenders selected for 
punishment, with a statement of the 
offences of each, and then let his Ma¬ 
jesty determine the, penalty.”— \MS. 
Correspondence 

* See Macnaghten’s letters passim: 

“ September 5.—Everything has a 
favorable aspect for us; and xezeen 
and Dehrawut having been subdued, 
a more solid foundation will have been 
laid for the tranquillity of this coun¬ 
try than ever was dreamt of. 

“ September 15.—Our prospects in 
this country are brightening in every 
direction, and the Dehrawut expedi¬ 
tion once successfully terminated, we 
shall have no other enemy to oppose 
us. The Gooroo and the other (ihil- 
zye chiefs are safely located in the 
city of Caubul, and are quite Koosh. 

“ September 17.—I have told Lord 
A. that affairs have assumed a much 
more cheerful appearance since the 
date of my letter of July 22. Whe¬ 
ther or not we shall have another bri¬ 
gade in lieu of the returning troops, 
will depend upon circumstances. My 
own opinion is, that we could easily 
do without them, unless operations 
beyond our present boundary are 
contemplated. 

“ September 20.—We are all quiet 
here; and 1 am in great hopes that 
we sWl be able to come to an ar¬ 
rangement with I^row—the only 
thorn in our side. Cf^he Zoormut re¬ 
venue has been realised with unex- 



THS KOHISTAN AKD NUBOW. 


617 


It is true that Pottinger was not sending in very favorable 
reports from the Kohistan and the Nijrow country, which 
were now his new sphere of action;* but of these 
troubles Macnaghten made light account. He believed 
that Pottinger was an alarmist. It is true that an expe¬ 
dition was going out to Zao, to reduce some turbulent 
robber tribes; but this necessity he attributed to the 
indiscretion of one of our own officers, who had need¬ 
lessly attacked the place with insufficient means, and 
been compelled to beat a retreat.f The expedition, too, 
as Macnaghten said, was only a “ little go;” and im¬ 
mensely popular with our officers, who were zealously 
volunteering for the 8port.J 

ampled facility, and everything is t ** September 25.—Our little go 
couleur de rose ^"—[Jl/5. Correspond-- against Zao is very popular. Half 
fiwce.] the officers here are volunteering for 

* After leaving Herat, Pottinger the fray. I hope the thing vrill be 
had gone down to Calcutta in 1840 ; done cleverly and completely. Nij- 
but had returned to Afghanistan, and row will then be the only thorn in 
been appointed political agent in the our side. Pottinger has a project of 
Kohistan, in May, 1841. subjugating these wild mountaineers, 

t “ September 22.—Hay’s foolish at- and of seizing or ejecting the Moof^ids, 
tack upon the fort of Zao has entailed who have taken refuge in their terri- 
upon us the necessity of sending out tory, by employing the Ooloos, and at 
a force in that direction. Itwillcon' the same time marching through it 
sist of two infantry regiments, with a the troops returning to Hindostan and 
quantum sufficit of artillery and cavalry. Jellalabad. This would certainly form 
I have long been impressed with the an overwhelming force—eighteen guns 
necessity of sending an expedition of sorts, two regiments of cavalry, and 
against the Khowajahs and other six regiments of infantr}*. 1 have sub¬ 
robber tribes ; but I had hoped to milted the plan to the General, but I 
postpone it till next season. After do not know what he will say to it. 
the punishment inflicted upon them Were the rebel Kohistanee chiefs 
by Outram in 1839, they were for expelled from Nijrow, 1 should beg 
some time quiet; but now their au- of government to send us no more 
dacity has become again conspicuous, troops.”— [Sir W. H. Macnaghten to 
They have incessantly fired into our Major Rawlinson, MS, Correspond- 
camps, and plundered and murdered ence.] Brigadier Roberts savs, that 
our defenceless camp-followers. Were when the Kohistanee expedition of 
we not to raze to the ground the 1840, which nearly had such a dis- 
fort that resisted the Shah’s authority, astrous termination, was first pro- 
and harboured the robber chiefs, we jected, it was looked upon as a mere 
might expect to be hourly insulted, party of pleasure, and that ladies 
and to have our dawks with Canda- were talking of joining it. It does 
har cut off during the winter.”—[Sir not appear whether they had any 
W, H, Macnaghten to Major Raw- notion of participating in the plea- 
linaon, MS. Correspondence.^ sures of the popular expedition to Zao. 



618 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


The popular expedition into the Zoormut country waa 
completely successful. Macgregor, who accompanied 
the force in the character of political adviser, found the 
rebellious forts evacuated. He had only, therefore, to 
destroy them. The results, however, of the movement 
were not wholly pacificatory. Pottinger said that the 
feeling which it engendered in the Kohistan was ex¬ 
tremely unfavorable to us. It confirmed, he said, in 
the minds of the malcontents, “ the belief so industriously 
spread of our difficulties, whilst rumours from Herat and 
Candahar of invasion, renewed rebellion, and disturb¬ 
ances, were again spread abroad.”* 

During the early part of October the Kohistanees re¬ 
mained perfectly quiet. But every hour, said Pottin¬ 
ger, “ brought rumours of the formation of an extensive 
conspiracy.” These he at first doubted; but he reported 
them to the Envoy, and asked for information on the 
subject. The answer was, that neither Macnaghten nor 
Bumes could perceive any grounds for suspicion. 

In the mean while, the Eastern Ghilzyes were break¬ 
ing out into revolt.f They had the same cause of com¬ 
plaint as the Kohistanees. The money-bag, which had 
kept them in order, was beginning to fail. It is a moot 
point whether revenge or avarice is the stronger feeling 
in the Afghan breast. Both were now arrayed against 
us. The bayonet and the money-bag were failing to do 
their work. 

The expenses of the occupation of Afghanistan had 
long been telling fearfully upon the revenues of India. 
Lord Auckland had been slow to look the intolerable 
evil of this exhausting drain fairly in the face. But the 
other members of the Supreme Council had been less 

* Major Pottinger*s Budeeabad Re» the Douranees, were all leagued to- 
port. ^ gather; and that the compact be- 

t Pottinger was of opinion that tween them was formed about the 
the Ghilzyes, the Kohistanees, and end of September^ 



EXPENSES OE THE WAB. 


619 


slow to address themselves fully to the subject ; and the 
home authorities had written out urgent letters regard¬ 
ing the miserable results of the continued occupation of 
a country that yielded nothing but strife. Looking at 
the matter in the most favorable point of view, it was 
found that the support of Shah Soojah cost the treasury 
of India at least a million and a quarter a year. The 
Court of Directors and the Board of Control, or that 
fusion of the two authorities known as the Secret Com¬ 
mittee, had taken, before the close of 1840, a correct and 
statesman-like view of the subject, and had written out 
that they could see nothing in the continued support of 
Shah Soojah, who, it was plain, had no hold upon the 
affections of the people, to compensate for this alarming 
exhaustion of the financial resources of India, and the 
necessary injuries inflicted upon the people by such a 
fearful waste of the revenues of the country. And, in 
the spring of 1841, it had become a matter for serious 
consideration whether the policy, which had proved so 
utterly disastrous, should not be openly and boldly 
abandoned. The question came before the Supremo 
Council at the end of March.* Either by some negli- 


♦ Sir Jasper Nicolls^ MS. Journal — 
some passages of which may be cited 
in illustration of this part of the 
inner history of the war : 

** March 12.—My letter of the 10th 
of November will be found difficult 
to parry after all ; and 1 regret to 
say that the immense expenditure 
cannot long be borne. A million a 
year will not cover our charges ; and 
Lord Auckland’s answers to the last 
week’s applications prove to me that 
he begins to feel it. 

** March 2 \.—We are called upon 
to make early and large remittances 
to the Upper Provinces; and fifty 
lakhs have been ordered (tlieir requisi¬ 
tions increased in a week to eighty 
lakhs). Thirty lakhs went last week to 
Bombay, and twenty-niuc are now at 


Ferozepore, waiting for transmission. 
This will never do. Even if we had 
a firmer hold of Afghanistan than we 
have, we shoidd be compelled to give 
it up, fur a drain of a million a year 
will infallibly swamp us. Even a 
good share of the Punjaub would not 
cover this great charge. Lord Auck¬ 
land is not inclined to look this in the 
face, and acknowledge by a loan the 
unfortunate result of our successes. 

“ March 26.—Lord Auckland sent 
home a long minute regarding Herat. 
. . . He means to preserve our foot¬ 
ing in Afghanistan. Mr. Bird and 
Mr. Prinsep approve of this, though 
the latter rouncily and justly asserts 
that it cannot be done under a crore 
and a quarter (a million and a quarter) 
annually; and that no present mode 



620 


XHB OATHEBINa OF THE STOBM. 


gence, or by some juggle, the opinions of the military 
members of Council were not obtained; but Lord 
Auckland and the civilians decided in favour of the 
continued occupation of the country, though it was 
certain that it could only be done at the cost of a million 
and a quarter a year. But money had already become 
painfully scarce. It was necessary to recruit the ex¬ 
hausted treasury. There was no other mode of accom¬ 
plishing this than by opening a new loan. Such a 
public declaration of the embarrassed condition of the 
government was distressing to Lord Auckland; but 
nothing else was to be done. So at the end of March 
he drew up an advertisement for a five per cent, loan.* 
It is a remarkable instance of that kind of monomaniac 
blindness which besets some men, under peculiar condi¬ 
tions of existence, that when Macnaghten learnt that a 
new loan had been opened, he asked, “ What can this 
be for ?” and spoke of the war— in China ! f 

of extending our receipts to that ex- .Auckland did not advert to a deli- 
tent, is open to us. Lord Auckland ciency of three-aud-a-half crores in his 
wrote a note to ask our opinions on paper on Afgiianistan, be now acts 
the subject. Mr. Maddock never upon it. This will force on the Court 
circulated the note. Sir W. Case- a decision as to our maintaining our 
ment and myself were therefore silent, position in that quarter at such a 
We are clearly in a great scrape. That price, for they will assuredly never pay 
country drains us of a million a year even the charges of the Shah, 
and more; and we only in truth are May 12.— Before I close this 
certain of the allegiance of the people book (volume of the Journal), I 
within range of our guns and cavalry, would record my opinion that the 
. . . , One part of Lord Auck- whole thing will break down. We 

land's paper only will be received for cannot afford the heavy, yet increas- 
a time. He states our resources to ing drain upon us. Nine thousand 
be only a crore less than when we troops between Quettah and Kura- 
crossed the Indus. The Accountant- chee ; at least 16^000 of our army 
General says, that on the doth of and the Shah's to the north of Quet- 
April we may expect the reduction tah. The King's expenses to bear in 
to amount to three crores and three- part — twenty-eight political officers 
quarters. 1 told Prinsep that he had to pay, besides Macnaghten — Dost 
been very complaisant not to point Mahomed's allowance — barracks—a 
this out.'*^ fort or two to build — loss by ex- 

* Sir Jasper NicolW MS, Jbitr- change, &c., &c. To me it is alarm- 
naly March 29.—“ At last the adver- ing. The silver does not return, and 
tisement for a loan is prepared, and it is becoming scarce." 
will shortly appear. Though Lord t “ You will have seen that Govern- 



CHANGE OP MINI8TBT AT HOME. 


621 


But the call was responded to but slowly.* Money 
did not come in freely, though it was going out with a 
freedom perhaps unexampled in the history of Indian 
finance; and the Court of Directors still continued to 
write out, as Sir Jasper Nicolls and others in India were 
declaring, that it had become necessary either to withdraw 
altogether from Afghanistan, or to fall back upon the 
alternative of a large augmentation of the army. As the 
year advanced, too, other influences were at work to 
move the Indian Government to consider more and more 
intently the subject of the continued drain upon the 
resources of India. Great Britain was on the eve of 
a change of ministry, which would settle in Downing- 
street a party of Conservative statesmen, and send to 
Calcutta one of their number, known to be hostile to 
the whole policy of the expedition across the Indus; 
and Macnaghten was already beginning to tremble at the 
thought of what he called prospectively an “ unparalleled 
atrocity ”—but what many would have regarded as an 
act of wisdom and justice—the withdrawal of the British 
army from Afghanistan. How strongly Macnaghten felt 
upon this subject, and in what manner he argued against 
it, may be gathered fi:om a letter which, on the 26th of 
September, he addressed to the Governor of Agra. Still 
he continued to report that the whole country was quiet, 
and insisted that the Shah’s force, aided by one European 


ment is opening a new five per cent, 
loan. What can this be for ? I ap¬ 
prehend it augurs ill for the Chinese 
settlement, and that we shall have 
that work to do over again.*’—[<Sir 
W, H, Macnaghten to Major Raw^ 
linson: April 20^ 1841. MS. Corres- 

* Sir '\a^per NicolU MS. Journal^ 
May 20.—“ Here is a very untoward 
account of the Afghan finances. It 
will never do to have India drained 
of a million and a quarter annually 
for a rocky frontier, requiring about 


25,000 men and expensive establish¬ 
ments to hold it even by threats as at 
present. The specie, too, is drawn 
away not to return. Little comes from 
China. How is it to end? Money is 
not rapidly subscribed to the loan, 
because it gains twelve to eighteen 
per cent, for short periods elsewhere 
—amongst natives, twenty>four per 
cent, or more. Unless a large acces¬ 
sion of Punjaub territory comes in to 
connect us safely with Caubul, and to 
aid our very heavy expenses, we imui 
wUhdrawy 



622 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


regiment at Caubul, and another at Candahar, would be 
sufficient to keep the whole country in order : 

.Rumours are rife as to the intentions of the 

Tories towards this country, when they get into power. If they 
deprive the Shah altogether of our support, I have no hesitation 
in saying (and that is saying a great deal) they will commit an 
unparalleled political atrocity. The consquences would be fright¬ 
ful. The act would not only involve a positive breach of treaty, 
but it would be a cheat of the first magnitude. Had we left 
Shah Soojah alone, after seating him on the throne, the case 
would have been different. He would have adopted the Afghan 
method of securing his sovereignty. But we insisted upon his 
acting according to European notions of policy, and we have 
left all his enemies intact—powerless, only because we are here. 
In short, we should leave him with all the odium of having called 
in the aid of foreign infidel auxiliaries, and with none of those 
safeguards which he himself would have provided for his security. 
How could we expect him, under such circumstances, to maintain 
his power ? I know that he would not attempt it. He would 
pack up his all, and return to his asylum in India, the moment 
our resolution was imparted to him. We have effectually pre¬ 
vented his forming a party for himself. In a few years hence, 
when the present generation of turbulent intriguers shall have 
been swept away, the task will be comparatively easy. As it is, 
the progress we have made towards pacifying, or rather subjugat¬ 
ing (for neither the Douranees nor the Ghilzyes were ever before 
subject to a monarchy), is perfectly wonderful. The Douranee 
Kings kept these unruly tribes in good humour by leading them to 
foreign conquest. The Barukzye rulers kept them down by sharing 
their power with some, and sowing dissensions amongst others, by 
the most paltry and unjustifiable shifts and expedients, to which 
the Shah could not, if it were in his nature even, have recourse. 
Now the whole country is as quiet as one of our Indian chief- 
ships, and more so—but the reaction would be tremendous if the 
weight of our power was suddenly taken off. There are gangs 
of robbers here and there which it would be desirable to extirpate; 
and I had intended to postpone this job till a more favorable 
opportunity; but you will see, from my official letters, that it has 
been forced upon me, by Captain Hay^s proceedings, at an earlier 
period than I anticipated, Wq are yreW prepared, however, and 



ahgumbkts against withdkawal. 


623 


the coercion of these brigands will have an excellent effect all 
over the country. Dost Mahomed not only tolerated them, hut 
went snacks in their spoils. After their dispersion shall have 
been effected, there will be literally nothing to do except the sub¬ 
jugation of Nijrow. Pottinger has a project for effecting this, 
without trouble or expense, by marching through their country 
the troops returning to Hindostan and Jellalabad. I have sub¬ 
mitted this to the General; and should it be carried into effect, I 
shall beg of government to send us no more troops, for they 
would only be an encumbrance. A million and a quarter per 
annum is certainly an awful outlay; but if the items were exa* 
mined, you would find that a full moiety of this is to be laid to the 
account of Mr. Belfs proceedings in Upper Sindh, where they 
have had an army, cui hono 9 larger than the Army of the Indus. 
All this profligate expenditure will now cease, and, barring Herat, 
I am quite certain that the Shah’s force would be ample, with the 
addition of one European regiment at Caubul and another at 
Candahar, to keep the entire country in order. I am, too, making 
great reduction in our political expenditure; and I feel certain that, 
in a very short time, an outlcJJr of thirty lakhs per annum will 
cover, and more than cover, all our expenses. The process of 
macadamization (which, notwithstanding the present lull, I cannot 
but consider as near at hand) would reduce our outlay to nothing. 
I should not be surprised to see Colonel Stoddart and Arthur 
Conolly walking in any fine morning. I am glad you approved of 
the wig I conveyed to the latter. I am satisfied it adverted from 
him worse consequences. His enthusiasm, which I found it im¬ 
possible to repress, is continually leading him into scrapes.* . . • 

Such, at the close of September, were Macnaghten’s 
views of our continued occupation of Aghanistan. But, 
before this, the letters of the Court of Directors, the 
orders of the Supreme Government, and the portentous 
shadow of the coming Tory ministry, had roused Mac- 
naghten to a sense of the great fact that it was ne¬ 
cessary to do something to render less startlingly and 
offensively conspicuous the drain upon the resources 
of India, which was exhausting the country, and para- 

♦ MS. Correspondence of Sir W, H. Macnaghten. 



624 


THE GATHERING OP THE STORM. 


lysing the energies of its rulers. So it was determined 
to carry into effect a system of economy, to be applied 
wherever it could be applied, to the expenditure of 
Afghanistan; and, as ordinarily happens, both in the 
concerns of public and of private life, the retrenchments 
which were first instituted were those which ought to 
have been last. Acting in accordance with the known 
wishes of government, Macnaghten began to retrench 
the stipends, or subsidies, paid to the chiefs. He knew 
how distasteful the measure would be; he was appre¬ 
hensive of its results. But money was wanted, and he 
was compelled to give it effect.* 

The blow fell upon all the chiefs about the capital— 
upon the Ghilzyes, upon the Kohistanees, upon the 
Caubulees, upon the Momunds, even upon the Kuzzil- 
bashes.f Peaceful remonstrance was in vain. So they 
held secret meetings, and entered into a confederacy to 
overawe the existing government, and to recover what 
they had lost. Foremost in this movement were the 
Eastern Ghilzyes. Affected by the general retrench¬ 
ments, they had also particular grievances of their own. J 
They were the first, therefore, to throw off the mask. 
So they quitted Caubul—occupied the passes on the 
road to Jellalabad—plundered a valuable cahla—and 

* The retrenchments, too, were to oaths were taken to support each 
touch the Court. “ 1 have suggested otlier, and a plan of operations was 
sundry retrenchments,” lie wrote to formed .”—[^Report of Captain Mac» 
Kawlinson, “ which, though necessary, gregor. MS, Records.'] 
will be most unpalatable to his Ma- t ** Ghilzyes, however, had 
jesty and his myrmidons.” another grievance—viz., that during 

f “ In carrying out the system of the rule of Ameer Mahomed Khan 
economy, the Kuzzilbashes, Can- (Dost Mahomed's brother), who had 
bulees, Kohistanees, Ghilzyes, and managed partially to subdue this wild 
Momunds, were alike sufferers. De- tribe, and had effected a reduction in 
putations were sent on their part their pay of 18,000 rupees, this was 
to the Nizam-ood-Dowlah, to Sir restored to them in 1839, on the 
>\illiam H. Macnaghten, and to the return of the Shah ; but it was a^in 
Shah, to seek redress; but their com- reduced on the present occasion, 
plaints being unattended to, they all Further, they were held responsible 
united heartily to resist and upset, if for thefts committed beyond their 
possible, a measure so obnoxious to respective boundaries.** — [Captain 
them. Secret meetings were held, Maegregor^s Report, MS, Records.] 



RISING OP THE EASTERN GHILZYES. 


625 


entirely cut oflF our communications with the provinces 
of Hindostan. 

Upon this, Humza Khan, the governor of the Ghilzyes, 
was sent out to bring them back to their allegiance. 
“ Humza Khan,” wrote Macnaghten to Macgregor, on 
the 2nd of October, “ who is at the bottom of the whole 
conspiracy, has been sent out by his Majesty to bring 
back the Ghilzye chiefs who have fled; but I have little 
hope of the success of his mission.”* Humza Khan, 
whose own stipend was included in the general re¬ 
trenchment, had been commissioned to carry the ob¬ 
noxious measure into effect; and he had instigated the 
chiefs to resist it. He was now sent out to quell a dis¬ 
turbance of which he was himself the parent and the 
nurse. 

These movements did not at first much alarm Mac¬ 
naghten. He was intent upon his departure from Cau- 
bul; and he said that the outbreak had happened at a 
fortunate moment, as his own party and the troops pro¬ 
ceeding to the provinces could take them en route to 
India.”f But a few days afterwards he began to take a 

* MS. Records. See the Duke of middle of December. I am suffering 
Wellington’s Comments on this Sub- a little atixiety just now, as the 
ject in the Appendix, Kastern Glulzye chiefs have turned 

j- ** October 3 .— You will have heard Yagkce, in consequence, I believe, of 
ere now of my appointment to Bom- the reduction of their allowances, and 
bay. I could wish that this most ho- their being required to sign an itte- 
nourablc distinction had been withheld zain against robberies. We have 
a little longer, until 1 could have pro- sent to bring them back to their alle- 
nounced our relations in this country giance, and I think there will be no 
as being entirely satisfactory ; but, difficulty about them, unless the root 
thanks in a gieat measure to your ofthe JPWsadliesdeeper, and they are, 
zealous co-operation, 1 may even now as some assert, in league with iViaho- 
say, tliat everything is rapidly verging nied Akbar. In that case, it will be 
to that happy consummation. No necessary to undertake Of)erations on 
time is fixed for my departiiie. That a larger scale against Nijrow and 
will depend upon the instructions I re- Tugao, in the latter of which districts 
ceive from Lord Auckland. Should his the JVJoofsids have taken refuge. 
Lordship direct xne to deliver over I'hey are very kind in breaking out 
my charge to iiurnes, there is little or just at the moment most opportune 
nothing, that 1 know of, to detain me, for our purposes. The troops will 
and 1 ought to be in Bombay by the take them en route to India. To- 

VOL. I. 2 s 



626 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


more serious view of the matter; and he urged Mac- 
gregor to return with all despatch to Caubul, that he 
might accompany the expedition he was about to send 
out against the rebels. But at the same time he wrote 
to Rawlinson, that he did not apprehend any open oppo¬ 
sition ; and he never seemed to doubt that the insurrec¬ 
tionary movement would promptly be put down.* 

Sale’s brigade, wliich was returning to the provinces, 
was, it has been seen, to stifle the insurrection en route to 
Jellalabad. Macnaghten, however, thought of strength¬ 
ening the force, with a view to the operations against 
the Ghilzyes, and he wrote to Captain Trevor, who, 
pending the arrival of Macgregor, was holding the enemy 
in negotiation, that he believed the General would send 
out ‘‘ two (ight-inch mortars, two iron nine-pounder 
guns, Abbott’s battery, the 5th Cavalry, the Sappers and 
Miners, and the 13th Queen’s, with the 36th and 37th 
Native Infantry.”f But he continued to talk of the im¬ 
pudence of the rascals,” and expressed his belief that, the 
insurrection put down, the country would be quieter than 
ever. J On the 9th of October, Colonel Monteith marched 

morrow I hope our expedition will or ten days. I shall leave a paper 
reach the refractory forts of Zao, and of instructions with Burnes. The 
teach them a most salutary lesson.”— country, 1 trust, will be left in a state 
[Air W. II, Alacnaghten to Major of tranquillity, with the exception of 
Jiawliiison, MS. Correspondence.] the Gliilzves, between this and Jel- 
* ‘‘Oct. 7.—The Eastern Gin Izyes lalabad, and I hope to settle their 
are kicking up a row about some de- hash on the road down, if not be- 
ductions which have been made from fore.”— [Ifjid.^ 

their pay. The rascals have com- f The i37th Native Infantry and 
pletely succeeded in cutting off our the oth Cavalry were not a part of 
communications for the time being, the relieved brigade, 
winch is very provoking to me at this % “ October 11.—One down, t’other 
juncture; but they will be well come on, is the principle with these 
trounced for their pains. I have sue- vagabonds; and lucky for us that it is 
ceeded in sowing dissensions among so. No sooner have we put down 
them, which will, Inshallah! make one rebellion than another starts up. 
some of them «>ar^/ia/a. A force will The Eastern Ghilzyes are now in an 
move out against them to-morrow or uproar, and our communications with 
next day, but I do not apprehend any Jellalabad are completely cut off. This 

open opposition. state of tilings— InskalldkJ —^will not 

“ I hope to be off from tliis in eight last long. Only imagine the impu- 




CLEABING THE KHOOBD-CAUBUL PASS. 


627 


from Caubul, with the 35th Native Infantry, a squadron 
of the 5th Cavalry, two guns of Abbott’s battery under 
Dawes, and Broadfoot’s Sappers and Miners. That 
night his camp was attacked at Bootkhak—the first 
march on the Jellalabad road. On the 10th, therefore, 
Sale received orders to march at once with the 13th, 
and on the following day he started to clear the passes. 
On the 12th, Sale entered the defile of Khoord-Caubul. 
The enemy occupied the heights in considerable force, 
and, in their own peculiar style of warfare, opened 
a galling fire upon our advancing column. Sale was 
wounded at the first onset, and Dennie took command 
of the troops. He spoke with admiration of ‘‘ the 
fearless manner in which the men of the 13th, chiefly 
young soldiers, ascended heights nearly perpendicular 
under the sharp fire of the insurgents.” And added, 
that the Sepoys of the 35th, who had fought under 
him at Bameean, rivalled and equalled them in 
steadiness, activity, and intrepidity.”* The pass was 
cleared, and then the 13th retraced its steps to Boot- 


dence of the rascals in having taken than ever it was, after the insurrection 
up a position, with four or five liun- is put down. It is particularly pro- 
dred men, in the Khoord-Caubul Pass, yoking that Maegregor is absent with 
not fifteen miles from the capital. I a large portion of our force at this 
hope they will be driven out of that juncture. My accounts from Burn at 
either to-day or to-morrow; but the Gundamuck are very satisfactory. The 
pass is an ugly one to force. They efforts of the rebels to raise the tribes 
fired last night upon the 35th Regi- are as unavailing as incessant. His 
ment, and succeeded in killing or Majesty’s name has been freely nsed, 
wounding twenty-four Sepoys. Tiigao as usual; no wonder—-it is a tower 
has been the nursery, and Ilumza of strength; but never was a more 
Khan the dry-nurse of this insurrec- foul calumny uttered than that which 
tion. Tugao will be visited, I hope, in would associate his Majesty with our 
a day or two, and I have solicited his enemies.” — [Sir W. If. Macnaghtm 
Majesty to put Humza in durance vile, to Major Rawlinson, MS. Correspond^ 
and to confiscate all his property, cnce. 

This imeute of ours is particularly * Captain Vounghusband, of the 
provoking just as I am about to quit 35th, Captain Wade, the Brigade- 
Afghanistan. I had hoped to leave Major of the force, and Lieutenants 
the country in perfect tranquillity; Mein and Oakes, of the 16th, were 
and I still think that it will be quieter wounded in this affair. 

2 s2 



628 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


khak, whilst Monteith, with the 35th and the other 
details, was left encamped in the Koord-Caubul valley. 

In the mean while, Macgregor had returned from the 
Zoormut country. Macnaghten had known him long, 
and had abundant confidence in the man.* He had 
for some time been employed in political superintend¬ 
ence of the country between Caubul and Jellalabad, and 
by an admirable union of the vigorous and the con¬ 
ciliatory in his treatment of the tribes, had won both 
their respect and their affection. The Envoy now be¬ 
lieved that Macgregor would soon restore the country to 
tranquillity, and was impatient until his return. Mac¬ 
gregor reached Caubul on the 11th of October, and 
soon started for Monteith’s camp. Macnaghten, who 
believed that the outbreak was local and accidental, 
looked with eagerness to the result. He took little heed 

o 

of what was going on in the Kohistan. He did not 
think that the Douranee Khans, whose “ noses he had 
brought to the grindstone,” were plotting their emancipa¬ 
tion from the thraldom of the infidels. 

But Pottinger, in the Kohistan, plainly saw the storm 
that was brcAving—plainly saw the dangers and dif¬ 
ficulties by which he was surrounded. As the month 
of October advanced, the attitude of the Kohistanees 
and the Nijrowees was more and more threatening. 
Meer Musjedee had been, some time before, described 
in the newspapers paragraphs of the day as stalking 
about the country, and sowing broad-cast the seeds of 
rebellion. The measures of the King’s government had 
long before made these very people, who had risen up 

* Macgregor, an officer of the Macnaghten, to negotiate the Tripar- 
Beneal Artillery, had been one of tite treaty, lie subsequently accom- 
Lord Auckland’s aides^dt-campf and panied the Envoy to Caubul,'and was 
had accompanied, as has been shown, always in his confidence.] 
the British Mission, despatched under 



AFFAIRS IN THE KOHISTAN. 


629 


against the tyranny of Dost Mahomed, ripe for revolt 
against the more consummate tyranny of the Shah. 
And now, in the middle of October, Pottinger saw that 
the state of things was fast approaching a crisis; so he 
demanded hostages from the Kohistanee chiefs. To this 
the Envoy reluctantly consented. “ And,” wrote Pot¬ 
tinger, in his official account of these transactions, “ I 
only succeeded in procuring them by the end of the 
month, when everything betokened a speedy rupture 
with the Nijrowees.” By tliis time, indeed, Meer Mus- 
jedee had openly raised the standard of revolt, and the 
people were clustering around it. 

Macnaghten thought very lightly oi' these movements 
in the Kohistan. Nothing disturbed his faith in the 
general tranquillity of the country, and the popularity of 
the double government. He greatly desired the settle¬ 
ment of the Ghilzye question, for there was something 
palpable and undeniable in such a movement; and he 
was anxious to set his face towards the provinces of 
Hindustan. Eagerly, therefore, he looked for intelligence 
from Macgregor. He had begun, however, to doubt 
whether so troublesome a business could be settled by 
peaceful negotiation. “We must thrash the rascals, I 
fear, after all,” he wrote to Macgregor, on the 17th; “ but 
I don’t think that the troops will be under weigh until 
the 20th. Is not this provoking ? Abbott has made 
some excuse about his guns being injured. Pray write 
a circumstantial plan of the best means of surrounding 
and preventing the escape of the villains.”* Abbott 
was not a man to make excuses of any kind, but the 
Envoy was becoming impatient. On the 18th, he wrote 
again: It has been determined that the Sappers and 
miners, the mountain train, and two companies of the 

* iStr W. H. Maenaghtat to Captain Macgregor : OeUAer 17, 1841. MS. 
Records. 



630 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


37th Native Infantry, march out to join you to-morro-w 
morning. They will make one march to Khoord-Caubul. 
The next day I hope you will be joined by the 13th, 
the 37th, and Abbott’s battery. I hope you will arrange 
the plan of attack before Sale arrives.”* But although 
Macnaghten was eager to “ thrash the rascals,” certain 
prudential considerations suggested to him that it would 
only be expedient to punish them as much as could 
“ conveniently ” be done. It would not be convenient, 
at such a time, to exasperate the insurgents too much, 
and drive them to block up the passes, and plunder 
everything that came in their way.f 

In the mean while, Monteith, in his isolated post in 
the Khoord-Caubul valley, was exposed, if not to some 
danger, to considerable inconvenience, for the enemy 
made a night attack upon their camp, aided by the 
treachery of the Afghan horsemen,! who admitted them 
within their lines. One of our officers. Lieutenant Jen¬ 
kins, and several Sepoys, were killed; and a number of 
camels carried off by the enemy. Monteith reported the 
treachery of his Afghan friends, and the Envoy resented 
his just suspicions.§ But he was now to be relieved. 


* Sir W. H. Macnaghten to Captain 
Macgregor: October 18, 1841. MS. 
Records. 

*1* “ With regard to Tezeen, I wish 
to leave matters very much to your 
discretion. But the season is far ad¬ 
vanced, and if the rebels are very 
humble, I would not be too hard 
unto them. But Gool Mahomed can 
have nothing but war, and the de¬ 
fences of Khoda Buxsh's fort must be 
demolished ; he can only have the 
reduced Mowaiib, and the plundered 
property must be restored. Hostages 
must be furnished by both ; the more 
we can conveniently punisli these ras¬ 
cals, the better; but I should be sorry 
to hear of their bolting, probably to 
renew their depredations; but jou 


must judge for the best on the spot— 
u thousnnd things may happen which 
1 cannot foresee.”— W.IL Mac~ 
naghtcn to Captain Macgregor: Octo- 
her 19, 1841. MS. Records.'] 

t The Shah’s llazir-bash. There 
was no doubt of their treachery, and 
next day Macgregor sent them back to 
Caubul. 

§ “ Monteith’s official letter is so 
full of the treachery of the whole party, 
I believe the General will send it 
back to him for reconsideration. If 
he had clear proof against the party, 
he should have summarily executed 
the whole of them. If his accusation 
rests on suspicion alone, he has acted 
most unwisely and most unjustly. It 
is a vtry convenient and a very com- 



macgbegob’s negotiations. 631 

Sale appeared with two more infantry raiments, with 
more guns, and more sabres; and after a brief halt, for 
want of carriage, which much tried the patience of the 
Envoy,* the whole swept on to Tezeen. Here the force 
halted for some days, and Macgregor busied himself 
in negotiations with the enemy. Macnaghten had in¬ 
structed him to accommodate matters, if it could be done 
without any loss of honour; and Macgregor was candid 
enough to acknowledge that the insurrection of the 
GhUzyes had been brought about by “ harsh and unjust ” 
measures of our own; so he opened a communication 
with the rebel chiefs; and, being known to most of them, 
consented to a personal interview. So Macgregor met 


mon process to ascribe to our Afghan 
allies every calamity that befalls us. 
But why were the camels committed 
to such custody? Their loss is very 
provoking in every way, but I trust 
they will soon be recovered. Sale 
will be with you to-morrow, and you 
will advance upon Tezeen the next 
day.”—[6’trlF. If. Macnaghten to Cap¬ 
tain Macgregor: Oct 19, 1841.] 

♦ “ October 21.—Our troops have 
halted to-day at Khoord-Caubul for 
want of camels I I ! I had hoped, ere 
evening, to have announced to you 
the capture or dispersion of the 
Tezeen rebels ; but of this there is no 
hope till to-morrow. Our people in 
this quarter have a happy knack of 
bitching matters. However, let that 
pass. All's well that ends well. In 
the mean time, it is very satisfactory 
to think that, notwithstanding we 
had rebellion at our very doors, not a 
single tribe has joined the rebels. The 
interruption of our communications is 
very provoking, but the road will soon 
be opened. ... 1 do not think I 
can possibly get away from this be¬ 
fore the 1st proximo. The storm will 
speedily subside!; but there will be a 
heaving of the billows for some time, 
and I should like to see everything 
right and tight before I quit the helm. 


Burncs is naturally in an agony of 
suspense about the succession to me. 
I think, and hope, he will get it. I 
know no one so fit for the office. 
Qukta non movere is his motto; and, 
now that tranquillity is restored (or 
will be in a day or two), all that is 
required will be to preserve it. I 
hardly know how to answer your 
separate note of the 15th, received 
this morning; but 1 can assure you 
I feel exceedingly proud at having 
gained your good opinion. We have 
had a very trying time of it since we 
were first officially associated, and it 
was no wonder that you, occupying as 
you did the post of danger, should 
have occasionally yielded to despon¬ 
dency, especially when under the in¬ 
fluence of severe illness. But in all 
other respects you have given me en¬ 
tire satisfaction, and 1 feel that we 
are mainly indebted to your temper, 
judgment, and energy, for overcoming 
the numerous difficulties 1^ which we 
have been surrounded. Wherever I 
go, I shall carry with me a pleasing 
recollection of your friendship, and of 
the laborious and successful opera¬ 
tions which have fallen to our joint 
lot.”— W. H. Macnaghten to Ma¬ 
jor RawUneon. MS. Corrupondence."] 



632 


THE GATHERING OF THE STORM. 


the chiefs. There was a long and animated discussion. 
They demanded that their salaries should be restored to 
their former footing; and to this Macgregor consented. 
Other demands were made and resisted altogether, or 
conceded to with some qualification; and it was sup¬ 
posed that the Ghilzye affair had been “ patched up after 
a fashionnot, perhaps, without some loss of dignity, 
but with as much vigour as was convenient at the time. 
At all events, Macnaghten was able to report that the 
affair was settled.f 


* “ I met them according to their 
own desire, being accompanied by 
Captain James Paton (wlio wished to 
examine more closely the fort in case 
we mighi find it necessaiy to proceed 
against it), my Persian writer, and an 
orderly Sowar, for I thouglit, by 
throwing myself completely on their 
mercy, I should be more likely to 
secure their protection. The chiefs 
demanded that tiieir salaries should 
be placed on their former footing— 
that they sliould not be held respon¬ 
sible for thefts committed beyond their 
respective boundaries, and that Gool 
Mahomed Khan should be reinstated 
as their chief. To the two first-men¬ 
tioned demands I agreed, but to the last 
1 objected, for by displacing Biirkutt 
Khan, w'ho had been appointed to the 
chief&hip (on Gool Mahomed having 
joined in the rebellion), the honour of 
the government would have been 
compromised. This led to a long and 
warm discussion ; but the chiefs, find¬ 
ing that on this point I was firm, 
yielded to me, and 1 returned to camp. 
On the 25th they sent in their agents 
to remain with me, and to make ar¬ 
rangements for re-establishing the 
Thannahs and Dkk Chokies, &c. The 
next day we left Tezeen for Gunda- 
muck. Although 1 felt a little doubt¬ 
ful in my own mind as to the good 
faith of the chiefs, Gool Mahomed 
and Mahomed Shah Khan (they not 
appearing to be satisfied), in the pro¬ 
mised fulfilment of their engagements, 
still I saw no good reason why they 


should notact up to them if they con¬ 
sulted their own interests ; and any 
infraction of the treaty might be re¬ 
sented at Gundamuck, when the chiefs 
would be far more tangible than in 
their present position, from which to 
extricate the troops, in itself formed 
an object of much solicitude to me.*’ 
— [^Captain Macgregor's Report. MS. 
Records.'] 

t “ October 26.—I am glad that 
affairs liave been settled; and I con¬ 
clude that you have got such as¬ 
surances, whether by hostages of a 
sufficient description or otherwise, to 
satisfy you that there is no intention 
of breaking out again when they 
catch us off' our guard. I have just 
got a note from Pottinger, who evi¬ 
dently writes in great trepidation. 
He says the Nijrowees are coming 
down to attack him. But 1 have no 
doubt that the storm will blow over, 
when they hear of the settlement of 
the Ghilzye question.”— [^Sir W. H. 
Macnaghten to Captain Macgregor. 
MS. Corretpondence.] 

“ October 26.—I have not much 
time to spare to-day, but I cannot 
resist writing, to tell you that our 
Ghilzye differences are brought to a 
settlement. I cannot say a most 
satisfactory one. But we are well 
out of the scrape, as we are posi¬ 
tively unable to compete with these 

mountaineers and their jezails. 

If we expect to keep the people 
of this country in order, we must 
get two or three regiments of moun- 




MACGREGOR S NEGOTIATIONS. 


633 


He thought the terras granted to the rebels were too 
favorable; and the King was dissatisfied with them;* 
but the Envoy replied that it was the treachery of the 
Shah’s own people that had paralysed the efforts of our 
negotiators. Indeed, it was known that people about 
the Court had left Caubul for the purpose of joining in 
a night attack upon our troops. Still Macnaghten could 


taineers from different tribes, and 
arm them with the jezail of the 
country. In the mean time, we are 
lucky in having patched up this 
quarrel. The worst part of the trans¬ 
action is our having conceded to 
Khoda Buksh, one of the chief re¬ 
bels, his mowajib, on the old footing, 
without deductions. The best part 
of it is, our having persuaded the 
confederates to tlirow overboard Gool 
Maliomed, one of tlieir number, and 
to recognise Burkutt Khan as the 
chief of Jubbar Kheil. They were 
very averse to this, and stood out 
against it for a long time. Pottinger 
writes as if he were about to be in¬ 
vaded by the Nijrowees, but I ima¬ 
gine there is little ground for this 
alarm, and that at all events the 
fellows will sneak into their holes 
again when they hear that the Ghil- 
zyes are quiet. If all is quiet, 1 in¬ 
tend being off on the 1st proximo. 

“ . . . There is no use in my saying 
anything about Akrum, as I presume 
he is past praying for. But if Futteh 
Khan put to death his renowned fa¬ 
ther, IVleer Aulum, the Prince need 
have little hesitation about putting to 
death the son.”—[5ir W, U, Mac- 
naghten to Major RawUnson, MS. 
Correspondence.] 

* “ October 27.—I do not entertain 
the smallest doubt of the policy of 
your proceedings, or of the wisdom 
of your granting such favorable terms 
to the rebels. His Majesty sent for 
me this morning before breakfast. He 
was evidently much dissatisfied; but 
1 proved to him that, if the terms 
granted were less stringent than they 
should have been, the fault lay with 
his own traitorous servants, who con¬ 


spired with the enemy and paralysed 
our troops. He promised to seize 
Mahomed Ali Aieer Khan this day, 
and to make an example of him if his 
treason were proved. 1 am almost 
satisfied of the fellow’s guilt, and 
think that Gool Mahomed’s letter 
must have been intended for our 
perusal. His Majesty particularly 
dwelt upon the description of hostages. 
He said they were jlistens, &c, I 
explained to his Majesty that these 
people were not sent as hostages, 
but merely to assist our troops, and 
to be the medium of a friendly com¬ 
munication, until the chiefs acquired 
sufficient confidence to send their 
relatives. I wish you could prevail 
upon them to do this. You might 
say that, until this was done, his Ma¬ 
jesty never could feel assured of their 
sincerity, and that consequently the 
door will always be open to future 
misunderstanding. 1 understand that 
four companies of the 54th, with the 
cavalry and artillery, march to-morrow 
morning as an escort to the sick, &c. 

I shall probably make a start on 
Monday morning, the 1st proximo, 
that is, if everything is quiet; but 
matters have still a threatening ap¬ 
pearance in the direction of the Ko- 
histan, and 1 dread to open the letters 
I receive from Pottinger, but I sin¬ 
cerely trust that the accommodation 
of our differences with the Ghilzyes 
will have the effect of keeping quiet 
the Moofsids in that quarter. 1 am 
a good deal bothered, as you may 
imagine, just now. Now that my 
departure is so near, every fellow is 
having at me.**—[5ir W. H. Mac¬ 
naghten to Captain Maegregor. MS. 
Correspondence. ] 



634 


THE GATHERING OP THE STORM. 


not believe that there was any wide-spread feeling of 
disaffection among the chiefs and the people of Caubul; 
nor when Pottinger sent in gloomy reports from the 
Kohistan, could he bring himself to think that they were 
anything but the creations of a too excitable brain.* 
Maegregor soon learnt the value of his treaty. From 


* “ Oct. 27.—The Eastern Ghilzye 
affair having been patclied up after a 
fashion, our friends have condescended 
to open the road, and I have been 
very busy all day writing letters. . . 

I take my departure, barring any 
more rows, on the 1st proximo ; but 1 
shall retain charge of my office until I 
reach Ferozeporc. 1 am trembling lest 
there should be a row in the Koliistan, 
which Pottinger constantly threatens, 
though, I believe, without sufficient 
reason. The settlement of the Ghil- 
lye question will. 1 dare say, keep the 
-Vloofsids quiet in that quarter. No¬ 
thing, however, that has occurred in 
this country has annoyed me so much 
as the mode in which this settlement 
has been effected; but 1 have not yet 
got the particulars, and 1 have the 
fullest reliance on the judgment and 
discretion of Maegregor, by whom the 
negotiation was conducted. 

“ Oct. 29.—I am glad to find, from 
your letter of the 2(ith, which reached 
me this morning, that the execution of 
that incorrigible malefactor Akrum was 
conducted so quietly. It is as well, per¬ 
haps, that the Prince spared the ears of 
Yar Mahomed [Akrum’s nephew], as 
these mutilations are very shocking ; 
but does he not des»‘rve perpetual im¬ 
prisonment ? Our affairs in this quar¬ 
ter are gradually settling down into 
tranquillity; but we have an ugly 
matter upon our hands. The Shah’s 
Meer Akhor, who with eighty horse 
was in Monteith’s camp on the night 
of the Shubkoom, is said to have 
dealt foully with us, and I fear, if his 
guilt is proved, that I shall have a 
great deal of difficulty in procuring 
his execution. His Majesty is natu¬ 
rally averse to believe that one of his 


dependents could have behaved so 
treacherously, as he rightly conjec¬ 
tures that a large portion of the dis¬ 
grace of such rascality will be reflected 
on himself. But 1 shall endeavour to 
persuade him that he will incur a still 
larger portion of it if he liesitate about 
inflicting the most signal punishment 
on the guilty individual. I tremble, 
indeed, to think of the consequences 
which must ensue if his Majesty 
fails in his duty in this respect. But 
his natural good sense and devotion 
to us will, I hope, come to his rescue. 
Maegregor’s letters (his last was dated 
the day before yesterday, from Kutta 
Sung) lead me to hope that the few 
robbers, by whom alone the road is 
now infested, will speedily disperse. 

. I trust I have at last 

got Pottinger into a pacific mood, 
though I tremble when I open any of 
his letters, lest I should find that he 
has got to loggerheads with some of 
his neighbours. In the present ex¬ 
cited state of men’s minds, a row in 
any quarter would be widely infec¬ 
tious, and we are not in a condition 
to stand much bailing. You may rely 
on hearing from me when anything 
of interest takes place. The rebels 
had very favorable terms given them 
by Maegregor. He acted wisely in 
acting leniently; and it is rather for¬ 
tunate that they had a good grievance. 
They had been required to give an 
ittzaim for thefts by Ghilzyes wher¬ 
ever committed, and this was jubhur 
of the most intolerable kind. But 
the rascally Governor, Humz Khan, 
who excited the chiefs to rebellion, 
took care that I should know nothing 
of what was going on.”—[Af5. Corre¬ 
spondence of Sir W. H. Macnaghten.'] 




ACTION NEAR SOORKHAB. 


686 


Tezeen to Grundamuck the agents of the Ghilzye chiefs 
•were in our camp; but there was some hard fighting for 
the brigade. The enemy mustered in force, and attacked 
our column; and the old excuse was made, that it was 
owing to no faithlessness on the part of the chiefs, but 
to their inability to control the tribes. It was a terrible 
country for a baggage-encumbered force to toil through, 
in the face of an active enemy. Jugdulluck was gained 
with little opposition; but, on the next march, it was 
seen that the heights were bristling with armed men, 
and a heavy fire was poured in from all the salient 
points, on which, with the instincts of the mountaineer, 
they had posted themselves, with such terrible effect. 
Sale threw out his flanking parties, and the light troops, 
skirmishing well up the hill-sides, dislodged the enemy, 
whilst a party under Captain Wilkinson, pushing 
through the defile, found that the main outlet had not 
been guarded, and that the passage was clear. The 
march was resumed; but the enemy were not yet weary 
of the contest. Eeappearing in great numbers, they fell 
furiously upon our rear-guard, and, for a time, our 
people, thus suddenly assailed, were in a state of ter¬ 
rible disorder. The energetic efforts of our officers 
brought back our men to a sense of their duty, and 
restored the confidence, which, for a little space, had 
forsaken the young soldiers. Broadfoot, Backhouse, and 
Fenwick, are said to have rallied and reanimated them. 
But the loss that fell upon them was heavy—more than 
a hundred men were killed and wounded; and among 
them was Captain Wyndham, of the 35th, who fell like 
a brave soldier in the unequal fight.* 

♦ “ The only officer killed, Wynd- that moment of peril to save the life 
ham, a captain of the 35th Native of a wounded soldier, by bearing him 
Infantry, fell nobly. Himself lame from the combat on his charger, 
from a hurt, he had dismounted at When the rear-guard broke before 



636 


THE GATHEBING OF THE STORM. 


Sale halted at Gundamuck. Macnaghten heard oi 
the loss sustained between Jugdulluck and Soorkhab, 
but wrote to Macgregor, on the 1st of October, that he 
“hoped the business last reported was the expiring 
effort of the rebels;” and that the party would have 
dispersed, and thannahs been re-established.* To Ma¬ 
jor Rawlinson he wrote on the same day, and congratu¬ 
lated him on the tranquil appearance that affairs had 
assumed in the direction of Candahar. It was now the 
very day that he had fixed upon for his departure from 
Caubul; and still he did not doubt for a moment that 
his emancipation was close at hand. 

the onset of the Ghilzyes, Wyndham, swords and knives of an unsparing 
unable to keep pace with the pur- foe .”—[Calcutta Review,^ 
sued, turned, fought, and, over- ♦ MS, Correspondence* 
powered by numbers, fell beneath the 



APPENDIL 


[Vol. L, Page 70.] 

Preliminary Treaty with Perm, concluded hy Sir Harford Jones, 
on the 12M of March, 1809. 

In the Name of Him who is ever necessary, who is all-sufficient, 
who is everlasting, and who is the only Protector. 

In these times, distinguished by felicity, the excellent Ambas¬ 
sador, Sir Harford Jones, Baronet, Member of the Honourable 
Imperial Ottoman Order of the Crescent, has arrived at the Royal 
City of Teheran, in quality of ambassador from his Majesty the 
King of England (titles), bearing his Majesty’s credential letter, 
and charged with Ml powers munited with the great seal of 
England, empowering him to strengthen the friendship and con¬ 
solidate the strict union subsisting between the high states of 
England and Persia. His Majesty the King of Persia (titles), 
therefore, by a special firmaun delivered to the said ambassador, 
has appointed the most excellent and noble Lords Meerza Ma¬ 
homed Shefieh, qualified with the title of Moatumed-ed-Dowlah, 
his first vizier, and Hajee Mahomed Hoosseln Khan, qualified 
with the title of Amcen-ed-Dowlah, one of the ministers of record, 
to be his plenipotentiaries to confer and discuss with the afore¬ 
said ambassador of his Britannic Majesty, all matters and affairs 
touching the formation and consolidation of friendship, alliance, 
and strict union between the two high states, and to arrange and 
finally conclude the same for the benefit and advantage of both 
kingdoms. In consequence whereof, after divers meetings and 
discussions, the aforesaid plenipotentiaries have resolved that the 
following articles are for the ^nefit and advantage of both the 
high states, and are hereafter to be accordingly for ever observed. 

Art I. That as some time will be required to arrange and 



638 


APPENDIX. 


form a definitive treaty of alliance and friendship between the two 
high states, and as the circumstances of the world make it neces¬ 
sary for something to be done without loss of time, it is agreed 
these articles, which are to be regarded as preliminary, shall become 
a basis for establishing a sincere and everlasting definitive treaty of 
strict friendship and union; and it is agreed that the said definitive 
treaty, precisely expressing the wishes and obligations of each 
party, shall be signed and sealed by the said plenipotentiaries, 
and afterwards become binding on both the high contracting 
parties. 

II. It is agreed that the preliminary articles, formed with the 
hand of truth and sincerity, shall not be changed or altered, but 
there shall arise from them a daily increase of friendship, which 
shall last for ever between the two most serene kings, their heirs, 
successors, their subjects, and their respective kingdoms, dominions, 
provinces, and countries. 

III. His Majesty the King of Persia judges it necessary to 
declare that from the date of these preliminary articles, every 
treaty or agreement he may have made with any one of the 
powers of Europe becomes null and void, and that he will not 
permit any European force whatever to pass through Persia, either 
towards India, or towards the ports of that country. 

IV. In case any European forces have invaded, or shall invade, 
the territories of his Majesty the King of Persia, his Britannic 
Majesty will afford to his Majesty the King of Persia, a force, or, 
in lieu of it, a subsidy, Avith warlike ammunition, such as guns, 
muskets, &c., and officers, to the amount that may be to the 
advantage of both parties, for the expulsion of the force so 
invading; and the number of these forces, or the amount of the 
subsidy, ammunition, <fec., shall be hereafter regulated in the 
definitive treaty. In case his Majesty the King of England 
should make peace with such European power, his Britannic 
Majesty shall use his utmost endeavours to negotiate and procure 
a peace between his Persian Majesty and such power. But if 
(which God forbid) his Britannic Majesty’s efforts for this purpose 
should fail of success, then the forces or subsidy, according to the 
amount mentioned in the definitive treaty, shall still continue in 
the service of the King of Persia as long as the said European 
forces shall remain in the territories of his Persian Majesty, or 
until peace is concluded between his Persian Majesty and the said 



AFPBNPIX. 


639 


European power. And it is further agreed, that in case the domi¬ 
nions of his Britannic Majesty in India are attacked or invaded 
by the Afghans or any other power, his Majesty the King of 
Persia shall afford a force for the protection of the said dominions, 
according to the stipulations contained in the definitive treaty. 

V. If a detachment of British troops has arrived from India in 
the Gulf of Persia, and, by the consent of his Persian Majesty, 
landed on the island of Karrak, or at any of the Persian ports, 
they shall not in any manner possess themselves of such places; 
and, from the date of these preliminary articles, the said detach¬ 
ment shall be at the disposal of his Mnjesty the King of Persia, 
except his Excellency the Governor-General of India judges such 
detachment necessary for the defence of India, in which case they 
shall be returned to India, and a subsidy, in lieu of the personal 
services of these troops, shall be paid to his Majesty the King of 
Persia, the amount of which shall be settled in the definitive treaty. 

VI. But if the said troops remain, by the desire of his Majesty 
the King of Persia, either at Karrak, or any other port in the 
Gulf of Persia, they shall be treated by the governor there in the 
most friendly manner, and orders shall be given to all the 
governors of Farsistan, that whatever quantity of provisions, &c., 
may be necessary, shall, on being paid lor, be furnished to the said 
troops at the fair prices of the day. 

VII. In case war takes place between his Persian Majesty and 
the Afghans, his Majesty the King of Great Britain shall not take 
any part therein, unless it be at the desire of both parties, to afibrd 
his mediation for peace. 

VIII. It is acknowledged the intent and meaning of these pre¬ 
liminary articles are defensive. And it is likewise agreed, that as 
long as these preliminary articles remain in force, his Majesty the 
King of Persia shall not enter into any engagements inimical to 
his Britannic Majesty, or pregnant with injury or disadvantage to 
the British territories in India. 

This treaty is concluded by both parties in the hope of its being 
everlasting, and that it may be productive of the most beautiful 
fruits of friendship between the two most serene kings. 

In witness whereof we, the said plenipotentiaries, have hereunto 
set our hands and seals in the royal city of Teheran, this 
twelfth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand 



640 


APPENDIX. 


eight hundred and nine, answering to the twenty-fifth of 
Mohurrum el Haram, in the year of the Hegira one thousand 
two hundred and twenty-four. 

(L.S.) Harford Jones. 

(L.S.) Mahomed Sheffeeh. 

(L.S.) Mahomed Hoossein. 


[Vol. I., page 83.] 

Treaty with Runjeet Singli^ the Rajah of Lahore^ dated 26th April, 

1809. 

Whereas certain differences which had arisen between the Bri¬ 
tish Government and the Rajah of Lahore have been happily 
and amicably adjusted; and both parties being anxious to maintain 
the relations of perfect amity and concord, the following articles 
of treaty, which shall be binding on the heirs and successors of tlie 
two parties, have been concluded by Rajah Runjeet Singh on his 
own part, and by the agency of Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, 
Esquire, on the part of the Britisli Government. 

Art. I. Perpetual friendship shall subsist between the British 
Government and the state of Lahore. The latter shall be consi¬ 
dered, with respect to tlie former, to be on the footing of the most 
favoured powers; and the British Government will have no con¬ 
cern with the territories and subjects of the Rajah to the north¬ 
ward of the River Sutlej. 

II. The Rajah will never maintain, in the territory occupied by 
him and his dependents on the left bank of the River Sutlej, 
more troops than are necessary for the internal duties of that 
territory, nor commit, or suffer, any encroachment on the posses¬ 
sions or rights of the chiefs in its vicinity. 

III. In the event of a violation of any of the preceding articles, 
or of a departure from the rules of friendship, on the part of 
cither state, this treaty shall be considered null and void. 

IV. This treaty, consisting of four articles, having been settled 
and concluded at Uniritser, on the 25th day of April, 1809, Mr. 
Charles Jheophilus Metcalfe has delivered to the Rajah of Lahore 
a copy of the same in English and Persian, under his seal and 



APPENDIX. 


641 


signature; and the said Rajah has delivered another'copy of the 
same under his seal and signature; and Mr. Charles Theophilus 
Metcalfe engages to procure, within the space of two months, a 
copy of the same, duly ratified by the Right Honourable the 
Governor-General in Council, on the receipt of which by the 
Rajah the present treaty shall be deemed complete and binding on 
both parties, and the copy of it now delivered to the Rajah shall 
be restored. 


[Vol. I., page 89.] 

Treaty with the King of Cauhuly dated VIth June^ 1809. 

Wlicrcas, in consequence of the confederacy with the state of 
Persia, projected by the French for the purpose of invading the 
dominions of his Majesty the King of the Douranees, and, ulti¬ 
mately, those of the British Government In India, the Honourable 
Mountstuart Elphinstone was despatched to the Court of his 
Majesty, in quality of envoy plenipotentiary, on the part of the 
Right Honourable Lord Minto, Govern or-General, exercising the 
supreme authority over all affairs, civil, political, and military, in 
the British possessions in the East Indies, for the purpose of 
concerting with his Majesty^s ministers the means of mutual 
defence against the expected invasion of the French and Persians; 
and whereas the said ambassador, having had the honour of being 
presented to his Majesty, and of explaining the friendly and 
beneficial object of his mission, his Majesty, sensible of the 
advantages of alliance and co-operation between the two states 
for the purpose above described, directed his ministers to confer 
with the Honourable Mountstuart Elphinstone, and, consulting 
the welfare of both states, to conclude a friendly alliance; and 
certain articles of treaty having accordingly been agreed to be¬ 
tween his Majesty's ministers and the British ambassador, and 
confirmed by the royal signet, a copy of the treaty so framed has 
been transmitted by the ambassador for the ratification of the 
Governor-General, who, consenting to the stipulations therein 
contained, without variation, a copy of these articles, as hereunder 
written, is now returned, duly ratified by the seal and signature 
of the Governor-General, and the signatures of the members of 
the British Government in India. And the obligations upon 
VOL. 1 . 2 T 



642 


APPENDIX. 


both Governments, both now and for ever, shall be exclusively 
regulated and determined by the tenor of those articles, which are 
as follow: 

Abt. 1. As the French and Persians have entered into a con¬ 
federacy against the state of Caubul, if they should wish to pass 
through the King’s dominions, the servants of the heavenly throne 
shall prevent their passage, and, exerting themselves to the extent 
of their power in making war on them and repelling them, shall 
not permit them to cross into British India. 

II. If the French and Persians, in pursuance of their confede¬ 
racy, should advance towards the King of Caubul’s country in a 
hostile manner, the British state, endeavouring heartily to repel 
them, shall hold themselves liable to afford the expenses necessary 
for the above-mentioned service, to the extent of their ability. 
While the confederacy between the French and Persians continues 
in force, these articles shall be in force, and be acted on by both 
parties. 

III. Friendship and union shall continue for ever between these 
two states. The veil of separation shall be lifted up from be¬ 
tween them, and they shall in no manner interfere in each other’s 
countries; and the King of Caubul shall permit no individual of 
the French to enter his territories. 

The faithful servants of both states having agreed to this treaty, 
the conditions of confirmation and ratification have been per¬ 
formed, and this document has been sealed and signed by the 
Right Honourable the Governor-General, and the Honourable 
the Members of the Supreme British Government in India, this 
17th day of June, 1809, answering to the 1224 of the Hegira. 


[Vol., I., page 93.] 

Treaty with the Ameers of Sindh, dated 22nd August, 1809. 

Abt. L There shall be eternal friendship between the British 
Government and that of Sindh—namely, Meer Gholam Alee, 
Meer Kurreem Alee, and Meer Murad Alee. 

II. Enmity shall never appear between the two states. 

III. The mutual despatch of the vakeels of both Governments 
--^namely, the British Government and Sindhian Government— 
shall always continue. 



APPE£iDIX. 643 

fV. Th© Govemmeiit of Sindh will not allow th© ©stablishment 
of the tribe of the French in Sindh. 

Written on the 10th of the month of Rujeeb-oohMoorujub, 
in the year of the Hegira 1224, corresponding with the 22nd of 
August, 1809. 


[Vol. I., page 139.] 

Definitive Treaty with Peraia^ concluded at Teheran^ by Mesara, 
Morier and Ellia^ on the 25th November^ 1814. 

Praise be to God, the all-perfect and all-sufficient. 

These happy leaves are a nosegay plucked from the thornless 
garden of Concord, and tied by the hands of the plenipotentiaries 
of the two great states in the form of a definitive treaty, in which 
the articles of friendship and amity are blended. 

Previously to this period, the high in station, Sir Harford 
Jones, Baronet, Envoy Extraordinary from the English Govern¬ 
ment, came to this Court to form an amicable alliance, and, in 
conjunction with the plenipotentiaries of Persia, their Excellencies 
(titles) Meerza Mahomed Shefieeh, and Hajee Mahomed Hussein 
Khan, concluded a preliminary treaty, the particulars of which 
were to be detailed and arranged in a definitive treaty; and the 
above-mentioned treaty, according to its articles, was ratified by 
the British Government. 

Afterwards, when his Excellency Sir Gore Ouseley, Ambas¬ 
sador Extraordinary from his Britannic Majesty, arrived at this 
exalted and illustrious Court, for the purpose of completing the 
relations of amity between the two states, and was invested with 
full powers by his own Government to arrange all the important 
affairs of friendship, the ministers of this victorious state, with the 
advice and approbation of the above-mentioned ambassador, con¬ 
cluded a definitive treaty, consisting of fixed articles and stipular 
tions. 

That treaty having been submitted to the British Government, 
certain changes in its articles and provisions, consistent with 
friendship, appeared necessary; and Henry Ellis, Esquire, was 
accordingly ^patched to this Court, in charge of a letter expla¬ 
natory of the above-mentioned alterations. Therefore, their Ex¬ 
cellencies Meerza Mahomed Shefieeh, Prime Minister, Meerza 

2 T 2 



644 


APPENDIX. 


Bozoork, Caimacan (titles), and Meerza Abdul Wahab, Principal 
Secretary of State (titles), were duly appointed, and invested with 
full powers to negotiate with the plenipotentiaries of his Britannic 
Majesty, James Morier, Esquire, recently appointed minister at 
this Court, and the above-mentioned Henry Ellis, Esquire. These 
plenipotentiaries having consulted on the terms most advisable 
for this alliance, have comprised them in eleven articles. What 
relates to commerce, trade, and other affairs, will be drawn up 
and concluded in a separate commercial treaty. 

Art. I. The Persian Government judge it incumbent on them, 
after the conclusion of this definitive treaty, to declare all al¬ 
liances contracted with European nations in a state of hostility 
with Great Britain null and void, and hold themselves bound not 
to allow any European army to enter the Persian territory, nor to 
proceed towards India, nor to any of the ports of that country; 
and also engage not to allow any individuals of such European 
nations, entertaining a design of invading India, or being at 
enmity with Great Britain, whatever, to enter Persia. Should 
any European powers wish to invade India by the road of Kha- 
razm, Tartarlstan, Bokhara, Samarcand, or other routes, his Per¬ 
sian Majesty engages to induce the kings and governors of those 
countries to oppose such invasion, as much as is in his power, 
either by the fear of his arms, or by conciliatory measures. 

II. It is agreed that these articles, formed with the hand of 
truth and sincerity, shall not be changed or altered; but there 
shall arise from them a daily increase of friendship, which shall 
last for ever, between the two most serene kings, their heirs, 
successors, their subjects, and their respective kingdoms, domi¬ 
nions, provinces, and countries. And his Britannic Majesty 
further engages not to interfere in any dispute which may here¬ 
after arise between the princes, noblemen, and great chiefs of 
Persia; and if one of the contending parties should even offer a 
province of Persia, with view of obtaining assistance, the English 
Government shall not agree to such a proposal, nor, by adopting 
it, possess themselves of such part of Persia. 

III, The purpose of this treaty is strictly defensive, and the 
object is that from their mutual assistance both states should 
derive stability and strength; and this treaty has only been con¬ 
cluded for the purpose of repelling the aggressions of enemies; 
and the purport of the word aggression in tins treaty is an attack 



APPENDIX. 


645 


upon the territories of another state. The limits of the territory 
of the two states of Russia and Persia shall be determined accord¬ 
ing to the admission of Great Britain, Persia, and Russia. 

IV. It having been agreed by an article in the preliminary 
treaty concluded between the high contracting parties, that in 
case of any European nation invading Persia, should the Persian 
Government require the assistance of the English, the Governor- 
General of India, on the part of Great Britain, shall comply with 
the wish of the Persian Government, by sending from India the 
force required, with officers, ammunition, and warlike stores; or, 
in lieu thereof, the English Government shall pay an annual 
subsidy, the amount of which shall be regulated in a definitive 
treaty to be concluded between the high contracting parties; it is 
hereby provided that the amount of the said subsidy shall be two 
hundred thousand (200,000) tomauns annually. It is further 
agreed that the said subsidy shall not be paid in case the war with 
such European nation shall have been produced by an aggression 
on the part of Persia; and since the payment of the above 
subsidy will be made solely for the purpose of raising and dis¬ 
ciplining an army, it is agreed that the English minister shall be 
satisfied of its being duly applied to the purpose for which it is 
assigned. 

V. Should the Persian Government wish to introduce Euro¬ 
pean discipline among their troops, they are at liberty to employ 
European officers for that purpose, provided the said officers do 
not belong to nations in a state of war or enmity with Great 
Britain. 

VI. Should any European power be engaged in war with 
Persia when at peace with England, his Britannic Majesty en¬ 
gages to use his best endeavours to bring Persia and such Euro¬ 
pean power to a friendly understanding. If, however, his Ma¬ 
jesty’s cordial interference should fail of success, England shall 
still, if required, in conformity with the stipulations in the pre¬ 
ceding articles, send a force from India, or, in lieu thereof, pay an 
annual subsidy of two hundred thousand (200,000) tomauns for 
the support of a Persian army, so long as a war in the supposed 
case shall continue, and until Persia shall make peace with such 
nation. 

VII. Since it is the custom of Persia to pay the troops six 
months in advance, the English minister at that court shall do all 



646 


APTBUDrS. 


in his power to pay the subsidy in as early instalments as may be 
convenient. 

VIII. Should the Afghans be at war with the British nation, 
his Persian Majesty engages to send an army against them in such 
manner and of such force as may be concerted with the English 
Government. The expenses of such an army shall be defrayed 
by the British Government, in such manner as may be agreed 
upon at the period of its being required. 

IX. If war should be declared between the Afghans and Per¬ 
sians, the English Government shall not interfere with either 
party, unless their mediation to effect a peace shall be solicited by 
both parties. 

X. Should any Persian subject of distinction, showing signs of 
hostility and rebellion, take refuge in the British dominions, the 
English Government shall, on intimation from the Persian Go¬ 
vernment, turn him out of their country, or, if he refuses to leave 
it, shall seize and send him to Persia. 

Previously to the arrival of such fugitive in the English terri¬ 
tory, should the governor of the district to which he may direct 
his flight receive intelligence of the wishes of the Persian Govern¬ 
ment respecting him, he shall refuse him admission. After such 
prohibition, should such person persist in his resolution, the said 
governor shall cause him to be seized and sent to Persia; it being 
underatood that the aforesaid obligations are reciprocal between 
the contracting parties. 

XI. Should his Persian Majesty require assistance from the 
English Government in the Persian Gulf, they shall, if convenient 
and practicable, assist him with ships of war and troops. The 
expenses of such expedition shall be accounted for and defrayed 
by the Persian Government, and the above ships shall anchor in 
such ports as shall be pointed out by the Persian Government, 
and not enter other harbours without permission, except from 
absolute necessity. 

The articles are thus auspiciously concluded: 

A definitive treaty between the two states having formerly been 
prepared, consisting of twelve articles, and certain changes, not 
inconsistent with friendship, having appeared necessary, we the 
plenipotentiaries of the two states, comprising the said treaty in 
eleven articles, have hereunto set our hands and seals, in the royal 
city of Teheran, this twenty-fifth day of November, in the year of 



APFEimiX. 


647 


our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fourteen, corresponding 
with the twelfth Zealhajeh, in the year of the Hegira one thousand 
two hundred and twenty-nine. 

(L.S.) James Morier. 

(L.S.) Henry Ellis. 

(L.wS.) Mahomed Sheffeeh. 

(L.S.) Abdul Wahab. 

(L.S.) IsAH (Meerza Bozoobk). 


[Vol. L, page 149.] 

Bonds given by Abbas Meerza^ Prince Royal of Persia, and by 
the Shall, cancelling the Subsidy Articles of the Treaty of 
26th November, 1814. 

Bond granted by Abbas Meerza, Prince Royal of Persia, to 
Lieutenant-Colonel Macdonald, British Envoy. 

Be it known to Colonel Macdonald, British envoy at our 
Court, that we, the heir apparent to the Persian throne, in virtue 
of the full powers vested in us by the Shah, in all matters touch¬ 
ing the foreign relations of this kingdom, do hereby pledge our 
solemn word and promise, that if the British Government will assist 
us with the sum of two hundred thousand tomauns (200,000), 
towards the liquidation of the indemnity, due by us to Russia, we 
will expunge, and hereafter consider as annulled, the Illrd and 
IVth articles of the definitive treaty, between the two states^ con¬ 
cluded by Mr. Ellis, and obtain the royal sanction to the same. 

This paper bears the seal of his Royal Highness Abbas Meerza, 
and that of his Persian Majesty^s Minister the Kaim-Mukam. 

Dated in the month of Shaban, or March, 1828. 

Ruckum of his Royal Highness the Heir Apparent, in ratification 
of the Annulment of the Illrd and IVth Articles of the 
Treaty with England. 

Relative to the articles III. and IV. of the propitious treaty 
between England and Persia, which was concluded by Mr. Ellis, 
in the month Zeekaud, A.H. 1229, agreeably to the engagements 
entered into with your Excellency, that, in consequence of the 
sum of 200,000 tomauns, the currency of the country, presented 
as an aid to Persia, in consideration of the losses she has sustained 
in the war with Russia, we, the heir apparent, vested with full 
powers in all matters connected with the politics of this nation, 



648 


APPENDIX. 


have agreed that the said two articles shall be expunged, and 
have delivered a bond to your Excellency, which is now in your 
hands. 

In the month of Zikeyla, A.H. 1243, on our going to wait 
upon his Majesty at Teheran, in consistence with the note addressed 
to your Excellency by Meerza Abul Hassan Khan, the Minister 
for Foreign Affairs, we were appointed sole agent in this matter 
by his Majesty, with unlimited authority; therefore, as the 
Government of England, through the medium of Colonel Mac¬ 
donald, have afforded us the assistance of 200,000 tomauns, wc, 
the representative of his Majesty, have, on this day, the 14tli of 
the month Suffer, and the 24th of the Christian month August, 
annulled the two obnoxious articles of our propitious treaty. 
The envoy, considering this document as a ratification on the 
subject of the two articles, will know that it is liable to no further 
comment from the ministers of his Majesty’s Court. 

Sealed by 

Month of Suffer, A.H. 1244. H.R.H. Abbas Meebza. 

Firmaun from his Majesty the Shah to Colonel Macdonald^ 
British Envoy in Persia. 

A.O. 

Let it be known to Colonel Macdonald, the English envoy, 
exalted by our munificence, that, our noble son having represented 
to us his having recently come to an arrangement relative to the 
two articles of the treaty with England, we have ordered that 
what has been executed by our son, touching this transaction, in 
conformity with the firmaun of full pow^ers granted to him by us, 
be confirmed by our royal ratification and consent; and we duly 
appreciate the exertions of your Excellency during the last year, 
which have obtained you the goodwill of the Shah. 

Regarding the crore of tomauns required for the redemption of 
Khoee, agreeably to what has been laid before us, H.R.H. Abbas 
Meerza has directed the payment of 400,000 tomauns by Mo- 
hamed Meerza; and we have besides instructed the remaining 
100,000 tomauns to be delivered to Meerza Abul Hassan Khan, 
Minister for Foreign Afi&irs, for the purpose of being transmitted 
to you. 

Your Excellency will, therefore, conceiving this firmaun as your 
security, become responsible for the payment of the above sum. 



APPENDIX. 


649 


which will be afterwards paid to you by the lord of exalted rant, 
Meerza Abul Hassan Khan. Also make known to us all your 
wishes. Sealed by 

His Majesty Futteh Ali Shah. 


[Vol. I., page 587.] 

Minute op Sir Jasper Nicolls. 

loth November, 1840. 

The manner in which the affairs of Afghanistan have pressed 
upon the military resources of India arc well known—upon 
Bengal they have borne so heavily, added to a prospect of a war 
with Nepaul, that the annual and most necessary relief of the 
native troops has been in a great degree suspended. 

Whilst we are very liberal in our care and payment of our 
army, it would be most imprudent to risk the loss of their attach¬ 
ment to the Company’s government by denying them the periodi¬ 
cal return to their homes, which they so much covet, and which 
is so necessary for their domestic comfort and respectability. 
As long as an expectation of being able to withdraw a portion of 
our troops from Caubul this year was entertained, or could be 
reasonably hoped for, I abstained from offering any remarks on 
the subject of relief; but instead of withdrawing regiments from 
Afghanistan and Sindh, we are now sending into those countries 
between six and eight thousand men to confirm, in some place to 
re-establish, our supremacy. I use these words, because it is now 
clear to me that Shah Soojah, even with a force commanded by 
European officers, most inconveniently spared to instruct the 
troops, and to lead them on, will never be the independent King 
of Afghanistan. The semi-barbarous tribes of that country, who 
have been freed from any well-established rule for centuries, will 
not submit to any settled form of government under a native of 
that land. They have shown us that they do not stand in much 
awe even of our power and resources. 

From the advanced position which we have taken up, we can¬ 
not, perhaps, consistently withdraw; in good faith we cannot dis¬ 
place Shah Soojah ; we have, therefore, to continue to rule, as 
we now do, in his name, which entails the expense of his esta¬ 
blishments, personal, civil, and military, upon us, without any 



APPENDIX. 


660 

prospect c£ reimbursement. It is not, however^ on financial 
grounds that I am anxious to lay my opinions before the Governor- 
General in Council—^it is to recommend that the future may be 
considered, and that the Honourable Court may be solicited to 
authorise such addition to the Indian army as our present position 
seems to demand. Our occupation of Afghanistan draws a con¬ 
siderable portion of our troops entirely out of India, and the com¬ 
munication with them is always tedious—at times impracticable. 
We have at present five European regiments beyond the Indus, 
or proceeding thither, and I cannot, under existing circumstances, 
estimate our permanent European force at less than three regi¬ 
ments, two in the north and one in Sindh. 

Our native troops have conducted themselves exceedingly well 
in Afghanistan ; but it is to them a foreign country: the climate 
is most uncongenial; to the Hindoos most injurious. We ought 
not, I think, to suffer any native corps to remain more than two 
years there. There are at this time nineteen regiments of native 
infantry beyond the Indus, or moving thither by various routes: 
of these it is possible, but not certain, that two may return to 
Bengal and four to Bombay before the end of March, leaving 
thirteen far beyond our frontier. I have little doubt that the im¬ 
posing bodies of troops now proceeding to Sukkur and Caubul 
will place the Shah’s government on a firmer footing than it has 
ever yet been. Allowing, however, the most perfect success to all 
our operations in the south, and fully expecting lasting benefit 
from the important advantages gained by Brigadier Dennie and 
Sir Robert Sale, I cannot think that less than ten regiments of 
native infantry can be considered sufficient to restrain the ferocity 
of the northern tribes, to curb the independence of the Beloochees, 
and to crush the propensity of both to eject us, by intrigue and a 
harassing war of details. The Shah’s troops are not included. 
Taking, then, three European and ten native regiments as the 
force by which we may expect to hold the country, maintaining 
our communications of diplomacy : two and six would be the 
Bengal proportion—one and four the proportion of Bombay. 

The augmentation ordered last year by the Honourable Court, 
when the three new European regiments are fit for service, will 
give the number desired ; indeed, they were raised to meet the 
probable consequences of our advance beyond the Indus; but if 
other regiments melt away, as her Majesty’s 13th Light Infantry 



APPENDIX. 661 

and the let European Regiment have done^ we shall fcfel the drain 
a very heavy one. 

Madras is reduced to four Queen’s regiments of infantry, one of 
which is at Moulmein, and therefore, at some seasons of the year, 
out of reach. We have drawn from that Presidency the largest 
number that it can safely spare, and no other source is open to us 
on this side of the Cape from which to strengthen the European 
portion of this army. 

Recent events assure us that the Sikhs will not long quietly 
admit our establishment in Afghanistan: surrounded as they will 
be; humbled by the superiority which we claim when we require 
a passage for our troops and convoys through their territory; and 
elated by many years of successful encroachment on their neigh¬ 
bours, they will venture upon a trial of their strength. 

Indian history proves that a sense of inferiority has not pre¬ 
vented adjoining states from forcing the British Government into 
hostilities:—Tippoo in 1799, Nepaul, Ava, the Mahrattas in 
1817, afford instances of this. The Sikhs will follow their exam¬ 
ples, I have no doubt, whenever they have, or think they have, 
a favourable opportunity. Nepaul will urge them on conti¬ 
nually to the contest, and will probably afford the opportunity 
alluded to. 

We ought to be at all times strong enough to enter upon war 
simultaneously with these two states; and not entirely to forget 
that Ava still smarts under'the loss of its territory. When com¬ 
pelled to enter into hostilities at the same time with the Sikhs 
and Nepaulese, it may be so arranged that we, at first, adopt a 
defensive line of proceeding towards one of them. If we can 
draw upon Madras for cavalry, there will be the means, in that 
arm, of meeting both contingencies. We ought, however, to have 
more than seven European regiments to give weight and effect to 
operations carried on in countries so far apart, that mutual sup¬ 
port is impracticable. If I am not mistaken, the Marquis Wel¬ 
lesley desired that the establishment of her Majesty's troops should 
not be less than 25,000 men. Since his Lordship left India, 
great additions have been made to our territory, and wo have 
been brought into contact with warlike tribes, inhabiting coun¬ 
tries badly suited to the constitution of our native soldiery. 
When I state that we have at this time ten and a half European 
regiments beyond the limits known in Lord WeUeslefe time, it 



652 


APPENDIX. 


may be granted that I cannot be very wrong in urging that the 
established number of her Majesty’s troops to be employed in 
India shall be raised to 25,000 men. Bombay is undoubtedly over¬ 
pressed at this moment. There are nine of her native infantry regi¬ 
ments in Sindh, or moving thither, of which four must soon return 
to be recruited and restored. To enable Bombay to do this, and 
to garrison Aden and Kharack, Madras has been resorted to ; in¬ 
deed, the other two Presidencies would now be crippled, were it 
not for the great assistance given by Fort St. George. To carry 
on happily through all we have undertaken, through contests 
which may be expected; to check the germs of disloyalty at 
home, should such arise ; to give our native corps short periods of 
foreign service, and to carry on the reliefs ; I recommend govern¬ 
ment seriously to consider whether it is not most necessary that 
an early augmentation of the army should take place. 

I advise an early increase under certain knowledge of the diffi¬ 
culty of raising good men, and of the time required to train them, 
and to establish confidence in their officers. Ten regiments ap¬ 
pear to be sufficient to give us security in Afghanistan and Sindh. 
They should be effective corps. We have not only neighbours to 
overawe, but treacherous subjects to control, and doubtful friends 
to intimidate. Five for Bengal, three for Madras, and two for 
Bombay, seem to be the due proportions, the addition to Madras 
being given on the acknowledged condition that she must be 
ever ready to take some of the southern stations of Bengal and 
Bombay, as at present. I very much prefer augmentation by re¬ 
giments to numerical increase by companies, though well aware 
of the additional expense, and that for some years (five at least) 
wc shall not have our regiments well officered. 

Again, I assure his Lordship and my colleagues, that my sole 
object in drawing their attention to this subject is my anxiety 
to provide for the future. We well know the difficulties expe¬ 
rienced from the monsoons and seasons, in drawing troops toge¬ 
ther ; we must be convinced that we have force and stability in 
every quarter, and that our power is felt and acknowledged. 
When we require an instance of the difficulties alluded to, let us 
remember that Brigadier Shelton’s column will not reach Jellala- 
bad until four months after it was urgently applied for, and that 
it cannot proceed to Caubul till the roads are free from snow. 
Afghanistan not being well suited to cavalry operations, and the 



APPENDIX. 


653 


difficult passes compelling us to nan*ow the artillery branch of our 
equipment, I do not see that we are likely to meet any impedi¬ 
ment in increasing these portions of our force when it may be 
necessary. 

I have carefully avoided all reference to Herat, or to any em¬ 
ployment of troops beyond the Hindoo-Koosh. If hostilities 
should be undertaken in either, the case I have attempted to 
establish will even more urgently require consideration and fore¬ 
thought. 

J. Nicolls. 


[Vol. I., page 088 .] 

Minute of Sir Jasper Nicolls, 19th August, 1841. 

When the opinions of the members of government were 
last given on the affairs of Afghanistan, I did not offer mine, 
because there was very little time for doing so before the despatch 
of the mail—and further, because I had partly recorded my sen¬ 
timents on the 10 th of November, 1840, when advising an in¬ 
crease of the army, to meet the demand our new conquest called 
for. The surrender of Dost Mahomed, a few days before, was 
given as a proof that no such increase was required, and the 
serious increase of expense was another ground for setting aside 
the recommendation. I was well disposed to yield assent to both; 
but I observe by the activity with which our reinforcements have 
since been sent, that there is a conviction at home that our 
European troops should be kept on a high establishment. I cor¬ 
dially join in the Governor-GeneraFs opinion now recorded, that 
we should not advance upon Herat, if it can possibly be avoided. 
We experience anxiety and difficulty in keeping Shah Soojah 
upon his throne, without extending his kingdom at the risk of 
our own power and security. The military base on which our 
positions in Afghanistan are now supported, is very objectionable 
on account of distance; difficulty of communication; foreign 
interposition. The seasons control and cramp every movement, 
and the proceedings and policy of the Sikhs cannot be antici¬ 
pated. To advance beyond the Helmund would greatly increase 
our difficulties. A corps at Herat could not be easily reinforced, 
and, as a bridle upon Persia, Russia, and the Turcomans, it should 



654 


4FFEND1X. 


contain, at l^ast, the power of protracted self-defence. We 
should be called upon, probably at no distant time, to take the 
field in its support. To do this safely, we should be strong on 
our whole line from Gaubul to Khelat, for Afghan intrigue would 
undoubtedly be actively employed to disturb the district from 
which the troops were drawn. Yar Mahomed is certainly a very 
insidious enemy, but if ejected from Herat he would not be less 
so. The Douranees and Ghylzes are stimulated by him no doubt, 
and perhaps other tribes may be so; they do not however receive 
either money or aid from him, and they will tire of advice which 
only leads to their discomfiture. 

Although Dost Mahomed is now residing amongst us, I do not 
perceive that the Shah’s government is much more at ease than 
it ffas at this time last year; though our military force beyond 
the Indus has been much increased. The hope of leaving the 
Shah’s dominions to his own force and government seems more 
distant than it then was. 

My former proposal was met by an assertion (a very just one) 
that the heavy drain upon the finances would not admit an in> 
crease of establishment. 1 was not then aware of the full extent 
of that drain—it is now rated so high as to create a deficit of a 
million and a quarter annually, and I think we should not venture 
to send a second army beyond the Indus, to destroy the resources 
of India; for such a consequence may be apprehended from such 
a heavy annual exportation of the necessary funds. Again, 
when our jealous and intriguing neighbours observe our forces 
spreading to the east and west, so far beyond our former limits, 
and learn that our finances are decreasing annually, will they not 
be tempted to encourage each other to regain what we have 
wrested from them, and to unite the turbulent spirits within our 
provinces to rebellion. 

I offer these opinions with hesitation and regret—but I lost 
the opportunity of stating them some months since, and am 
fearful that similar idlence at this time might be misconstrued. 

J. Nicolls. 



APPENDIX. 


655 


[Vol. L, page 619.] 

COPY OF A MEMORANDUM BY THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON, ON 
SIR W. MACNAGHTEN’S LETTER OP OCTOBER 26, 1841. 

January 29th, 1842. At night. 

It is impossible to read tbe letter from Mr* Macnaghteu 
to the Secretary to the Government in India, without being sen¬ 
sible of the precarious and dangerous position of our affairs in 
Central Asia. 

Mr. Macnaghtcn complains of reports against the King Shah 
Soojah Khan and his government, as libels. 

Of these we can know nothing; but I am convinced that no 
complaints or libels can be so strong as the facts stated by Mr. 
Macnaghten in this letter. 

It appears that when Mr. Macnaghtcn heard of the first 
symptoms and first acts of this rebellion, he prevailed upon the 
king to send a message to the rebels, inviting them to return to 
their allegiance. 

The selection of the person sent is curious—Humza Khan, 
the Governor of Caubul. His mission tailed, of course, says Mr. 
Macnaghten, because Humza Khan was the chief instigator of 
the rebellion! 

We know in this country something of the customs of those 
countries—of the meaning of some of the native expressions in 
this letter. It appears that there are four thanahs, or posts, 
between Caubul and Gundarauck. A thanah is either a per¬ 
manent or a temporary post, to guard a road or district of 
importance. We have seen who the person was selected to 
induce the rebels to submit; let us now see who were the per¬ 
sons appointed to take charge of these thanahs or posts in the 
disturbed country—those named in the subsequent part of the 
despatch as the very men who were the leaders in the rebellion, 
in the attack, and destruction, and murder, of the East India 
Company’s officers and troops! 

No libels can state facts against the Afghan Government 
stronger than these. 

But Mr. Macnaghten has discovered that the Company’s 
troops are not sufficiently active personally, nor are they suffi¬ 
ciently well armed for the wai&re in Afghanistan. Very pos- 



APPENDIX. 


sibly an Afghan will run over his native hills faster than an 
Englishman or a Hindoo. But we have carried on war in hill 
countries, as well in Hindostan and the Deccan as in the Spanish 
Peninsula; and I never heard that our troops were not equal, as 
well in personal activity as by their arms, to contend with 
and overcome any natives of hills whatever. Mr. Macnaghten 
ought to have learnt by this time that hill countries are not 
conquered, and their inhabitants kept in subjection, solely by 
running up the hills and firing at long distances. The whole of 
a hill country of which it is necessary to keep possession, par¬ 
ticularly for the communications of the army, should be occu¬ 
pied by sufficient bodies of troops, well supplied, and capable of 
maintaining themselves; and not only not a Ghilzye or insurgent 
should be able to run up and down hills, but not a cat or a goat, 
except under the fire of those occupying the hills. This is the 
mode of carrying on the war, and not by hiring Afghans with 
long matchlocks to protect and defend the communications of the 
British army. 

Shah Soojah Khan may have in his service any troops that ho 
and Mr. Macnaghten please. 

But if the troops in the service of the East India Company 
are not able, armed and equipped as they are, to perform the 
service required of them in Central Asia, I protest against their 
being left in Afghanistan. It will not do to raise, pay, and 
discipline matchlock-men, in order to protect the British troops 
and their communicu/ions, discovered by Mr. Macnaghten to be 
no longer able to protect themselves. 

Wellington. 


END OF VOL. 1. 


WHITINO, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STBAKD. 




