NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE




TRENT UNIVERSITY
    LIBRARY
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
             in 2019 with funding from
             Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/britishpreeminenOOOOmanc
BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
   ITS RISE AND DECLINE
British Preeminence in Brazil
    Its Rise and decline


    q/I Study in European Expansion



                    By
        Alan K. Manchester, Ph.D.




                 19 6 4
        OCTAGON BOOKS. INC.

              NEW    YORK
    Copyright 1933, by The University of North Carolina Press




                         Reprinted 1964
by special arrangement with The University of North Carolina Press


                OCTAGON BOOKS, INC.
                       175 Fifth Avenue
                      New York, N. Y. 10010




       Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 64-24848




                         Printed in U.S.A. by
                     NOBLE OFFSET PRINTERS, INC.
                         NEW YORK 3, N. Y.
    J. Fred Rippy
SCHOLAR, TEACHER, FRIEND
                                FOREWORD


In September of 1922 the commercial secretary of the British
Embassy at Rio de Janeiro wrote to his government that Great
Britain since the World War had been overtaking slowly but
surely its American rival and that the official statistics for the
first quarter of the current year showed that Great Britain
once more occupied “its original position as the most impor¬
tant of Brazil’s suppliers.”1 A year later he ignored the United
States altogether and warned his government that Germany
was now the “most serious competitor of Great Britain in the
Brazilian markets.”2 But his satisfaction over England’s recov¬
ery after the war period was shortlived, for in 1924 the United
States surpassed Britain’s sales to Brazil by two hundred thou¬
sand pounds sterling. In 1925 the lead was increased to two
millions sterling; and by 1926 the United States was selling to
Brazil one and a half times as much as England.3
  Great Britain’s loss was serious. For one hundred and six¬
teen years, with the single exception of the World War period
and the post-war readjustment, England dominated the mar¬
kets of Portuguese America. Shortly after the middle of the
nineteenth century the United States began to purchase more
from Brazil than did any other country, and it has maintained
that position ever since. But England has not made a question
of absorbing Brazilian exports: its efforts have always been di¬
rected toward maintaining the supremacy of English goods in
Brazilian markets. Not once from 1808 until the World War
did Great Britain lose its position, but in 1922 England re¬
gained it only to lose it again to the United States. The loss is

  1 Great Britain, Diplomatic and Commercial Reports, 1922, Department of Over¬
seas Trade, “Report on Economic and Financial conditions in Brazil,” by E.
Hambloch, p. 23.
 * Ibid., 1923, p. 40.
 * Brazil, Directoria de Estatistica, Commercio Exterior do Brasil, 1927, pp. 8-13.
vlii                          FOREWORD
more striking in view of the predominance of English capital
in Portuguese America. In 1927 there was four times as much
British as American money invested in Brazil and over one and
a half times as much as all other foreign capital combined.4 *
In Central America and in other parts of South America, Eng¬
land lost first place in the markets to the United States before
the World War period; but it took the catastrophe of 1914 to
pry Britain loose from dominance in Portuguese America.
Brazil occupies half the territory and includes over half of the
population south of Panama.6 Supremacy in that market is a
valuable prize.
  The importance of Brazil to English exporters has been dem¬
onstrated by two missions which Great Britain has sent to
South America within the last few years in an effort to pro¬
mote the consumption of British goods. The first of these was
the D’Abernon mission of 1929, which visited Argentina, Uru¬
guay, and Brazil with the purpose of studying markets and
consulting with British and native importers in the countries
visited. The second of these missions occurred in the spring of
 1931 when the Prince of Wales and his brother toured South
America. With all the pomp and ceremony of the British Em¬
 pire the two princes were sent with the frankly avowed purpose
 of regaining markets for English articles. Their reception in
 Brazil demonstrated the importance of British interests in that
 country.
   Although the population of about forty-two millions does not
 possess a high purchasing power, the consumption of native
 products, both raw materials and manufactured articles, is in¬
 creasing steadily. Tobacco, which at one time was grown prin¬
 cipally for export, is now being consumed within the country
 itself, the amount exported being reduced to one-half of the
 production. Only a very small percentage of the sugar pro¬
 duced is sent out of the country and packing houses utilize the
 greater part of the production of fresh meat for home con-

   4 South American Handbook for 1928, p. 188. The estimate was made by Wileman’s
 Brazilian Review.
   6 Funk and Wagnalls, Atlas of the World and Gazeteer, 1924.
                                  FOREWORD                                       ix
sumption. Almost the entire production of cotton, which until
recently has been one of the principal exports, is being absorbed
by the textile industry in home manufacturing.6
   Brazil, therefore, with its forty millions of population offers
an economic market of domestic consumption, a condition
which is favorable to the investment of foreign capital and
the growth of foreign enterprise in Brazil itself. The growing
foreign trade7 is enhancing the value of the shipping business
and the increasing purchasing power of the population invites
international rivalry in the contest for control of the markets
of Brazil. Until 1914, British capital, British enterprise, British
shipping, and British goods predominated in the economic life
of Brazil. To-day Great Britain is still supreme in the amount
of capital invested and in the carrying trade of Brazil; but the
United States has won the markets for North American goods
and Yankee enterprise is challenging the traditional British
supremacy.
   In the words of the Prince of Wales, “the prestige of Britain
as a manufacturing country” is “no longer what it used to be
in South America. . . .”              So great has been that change, the
prince pointed out, that only by a personal visit of inspection
is it possible “to realize the extent to which the influence of the
North has penetrated into the industrial and commercial life
of the South.”8 In Brazil this waning of traditional economic
preeminence is in startling contrast to the absolute mastery en¬
joyed by British interests for over a century.
   The winning of half of a continent as a virtual economic col¬
ony and the maintenance of that position for one hundred
years constitute a British achievement which suggests several
interesting problems. How was that position of preeminence
secured? To what extent did Great Britain dominate the eco¬
nomic and political life of Brazil? What were the factors which
  6 Max Winkler, Investments of United States Capital in Latin America, p. 81.
  7 The foreign trade of Brazil increased thirty-three per cent, between 1913 and
1926 {ibid.).
  8 The New York Times, May 22, 1931, Sec.        I, pp. 3, 13. The quotations are
from a speech delivered by the Prince of Wales before three thousand members
of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, May 12.
X                          FOREWORD
tended to undermine England’s influence in Portuguese Amer¬
ica? In what way and to what extent was British preeminence
threatened by foreign competitors? How did it happen that a
European power could win for itself the dominant political
and economic position in half the continent of South America?
     The attempt to answer these questions disclosed the fact that
there was a line of continuity in Anglo-Brazilian relation^ which
originated in the European background of the Anglo-Portu-
guese Alliance. The foundations of British preeminence in
Brazil, laid in Europe prior to 1808, were transferred to South
America when the exigencies of war forced the flight of the
Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro. Two chapters (I, II), there¬
fore, are devoted to the establishing of British preeminence in
Portugal; four chapters (III, IV, VII, VIII) explain the man¬
ner in which that supremacy was transferred to the independ¬
ent empire of Brazil between 1808 and 18275 three chapters
(IX, X, XI) discuss the decline of British political preeminence
in Brazil; and a concluding chapter (XII) deals with the rise
of competitors who were to challenge Britain’s economic su¬
    premacy. Two chapters (V, VI) are concerned with the at¬
titude of the British Foreign Office toward the intricate prob¬
    lems created by the determination of the Rio court to annex
    and hold the eastern bank of the Rio de la Plata.
      The study does not pretend to be an exhaustive discussion
    of Anglo-Brazilian relations. The objective has been rather to
    discover how Great Britain, a European power, established its
    preeminence in Brazil, a New World nation, and how and to
    what extent that preeminence has declined.
     The writer wishes to express sincere gratitude for the very
    careful revision and personal inspiration of Professor J. Fred
    Rippy, by whose kindly cooperation this project was made pos¬
    sible. Grateful acknowledgment is made also of the fertile sug¬
    gestions and helpful criticism of Professor W. T. Laprade, par¬
    ticularly with reference to the first two chapters. Both Professor
    Rippy and Professor Laprade read the entire manuscript. Pro¬
    fessor Percy A. Martin was kind enough to examine the manu¬
    script also and to offer valuable suggestions. The map repro-
                        FOREWORD                             xi
ductions are the work of Mr. Ben F. Lemert of Duke University.
The writer is indebted for many courtesies received from the
authorities and personnel of the Public Record Office, the
British Museum, and the Pan-American Union, and from the
staffs of the Library of Congress, the Iberian Library of the
Catholic University of America, and the library of Duke
University. Much valuable material was received from Dr.
Mario Behring, Director of the Bibliotheca Nacional of Brazil.
And lastly, it is a pleasure to acknowledge the debt incurred
from the assistance of my most helpful co-worker, my wife.


                                    Alan   K.   Manchester
  February, 1933
I
                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter                                                 Page

    I. The Basis of English Supremacy in Portuguese
        Commerce.                                          i

   II. A Period of Stress and Readjustment.               26
  III. The Transfer of the Portuguese Court to
          Rio de Janeiro.                                54

   IV. England   Secures   Preferential   Rights   in
          Brazil.                                        69
    V. Lord Strangford and Portuguese Designs on
          the Banda Oriental. 109
  VI. Success and Failure in the Banda Oriental,
          1815-1828. 136
 VII. England’s Attempt to Abolish the Portu¬
          guese Slave Trade, 1808-1822. 159

VIII. The Price of Recognition, 1822-1827. 186
  IX. The Beginnings of the Revolt Against Brit¬
          ish Dominance. 220

   X. The Decline of British Political Preeminence . 254
  XI. The Abolition of Special Privileges. 285
 XII. The Challenge to      Britain’s Economic Su¬
          premacy . 312

Summary. 337
Bibliography.                                           343

Index. 355
BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    ITS RISE AND DECLINE
                                 CHAPTER I


THE BASIS OF ENGLISH SUPREMACY IN PORTU¬
                          GUESE COMMERCE


From i 147      when English Crusaders helped the young AfFonso
Henriques of the House of Burgundy, first king of the new
state,1 to capture Lisbon from the Moors, until the first quarter
of the nineteenth century, when D. Joao VI was shorn of the
best of his overseas dominions, Portugal was an important pawn
on the chessboard of European history. Never much larger than
the modern state of Panama, it demanded the attention of
Spain, France, Holland, and England by virtue of its strategic
position in Europe and its overseas possessions. England’s in¬
terest in the country was greatest from 1654, when British mer¬
chants and shipping interests made of Portugal practically an
English commercial vassal, to 1825 w^en the colony of Brazil
won its independence.
  England secured a dominant influence in Portuguese com¬
merce by the triple complementary treaties of 164.2-^4.-61.
Some foundation on which to base these treaties had been laid,
however, in the five hundred years previous. Other crusading
expeditions called at Portugal after the first detachment and
helped Affonso’s successors to round out the kingdom, while
the Patent Rolls2 reveal much commerce between the two coun¬
tries in King John’s time. Henry IIP issued fresh letters patent
in the middle of the thirteenth century. These friendly rela¬
tions continued down to the reign of Edward III when the


 1J. P. Oliveira Martins, Historia de Portugal, I, 53-78, 82-86.
 2 Violet Shillington,   “The Beginnings of the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance,”
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, New Series, XX, 111-112.
 8 Patent Rolls, 42, Henry III, m. 13, p. 613. In 1258.
2               BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
first written treaty4 * between the two kingdoms was signed by
Edward on behalf of his people and by Alfonso Martin Alho,
a citizen of Portugal, on behalf of the merchants of Lisbon and
Oporto. The agreement, among other things, guaranteed the
safety of subjects of one country trading in the territory of the
other. The first political alliance6 was signed by Edward and
Fernando in 1373, with an eye to Spain. Later John of Gaunt,
whose wife, Constance, was the daughter of Peter the Cruel of
Castile, attempted to grasp that crown for himself after Peter’s
death; but succeeded only in getting his daughter, Phillipa,
married to Joao of Aviz and the two recognized as sovereigns
of Portugal by the effective aid of English land and sea forces.6
The Treaty of Windsor7 in 1386 guaranteed safe-conduct to
subjects of both countries, ceded commercial privileges, and
stipulated mutual defense. Phillipa’s son, Prince Henry the
Navigator, preferring his Portuguese ships to the captaincy of
Henry VTs armies, turned Portugal into a nation of maritime
explorers in advance of the other European peoples.8 Henry
VII9 conferred the Order of the Garter on Joao II and con¬
firmed the Treaty of Windsor.
    In 1580 Philip II brought Portugal under Spanish domina¬
tion but in 1640 the Duke of Braganga initiated a revolt to free
his country from the control of Spain.10 Striving for independ¬
ence and distracted by the inroads the Dutch were making on
the rich booty coming from the colonies, Lisbon turned to
England for help and sent a commission to London to nego¬
tiate a treaty which would recognize the newly proclaimed in¬
dependence. The instructions sent by Joao IV to his ambassa¬
dors, Antao d’Almada and Andrade Leitao, are illegible in the
only known copy, but the objects sought by Portugal are given
in the “Capitulagdes” which the ambassadors addressed to

    4 T. Rymer, Foedera, III, pt. i, p. 88. In 1353.
    6 Ibid., pt. iii, p. 8. June 16.
    6 Ibid., pp. 175-177.
    7 Ibid., p. 200.
    8 Ibid., IV, pt. iii, p. 5.
    6 Ibid., V, pt. iii, p. 194, pt. iv, pp. 4-5.
    10 Oliveira Martins, Historia de Portugal, II, 109-149.
         SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                        3
 Charles on April 1, 1641.11 They proposed peace and amity
 and abstention from aiding the enemy of either contracting
 party; permission for English subjects to serve in the Portuguese
 army and navy with their own persons, munitions, and ships;
 free commerce subject to customary duties; and the status quo
 in India. On April 8, they obtained a public audience, and
 commissioners were appointed to treat with them. News leaked
 out of the treaty signed between Portugal and Holland on June
 12, and the merchants of London presented to the Lords Com¬
 missioners eighteen articles for “better benefit and accomoda¬
 tion of” the treaty.12 The Portuguese ambassador protested
against five of these demands, refusing to concede to the Eng¬
lish freedom of religion and exemption from the power of the
Inquisition; the right of Englishmen to sail in British ships
hired by Portugal for her colonial trade, without the express
license from the king to trade with the colonies; the right to
reexport      goods    from     Portugal without paying additional
duties; the right to trade with all Portuguese dominions—
Africa, America, and the East Indies—on the same footing as
Portuguese subjects; and the payment of import and export
duties as fixed in the time of Sebastiao and Henry of Portugal
with exemption from all taxes levied since then. The merchants
replied to his protest, reasserting these demands and adding
others. A ten page “Remonstrance for the continuance of Trade
from England for Portugal” by merchants begging Charles to
arrange a treaty is included in this bundle of treaty papers.13
   These demands by British merchants demonstrate the im¬
portance of Portuguese trade to English commerce. The points

  11 Capitulates que A magestade do serenissimo Carlos Rey da Gra Bretanha
propoem os ambaixadores do serenissimo dom Joao Rey de Portugal. Signed by
Leitao. Great Britain, Public Record Office, State Papers, Foreign, Treaty Papers,
103/57* In view of the great number of citations from the Public Record Office,
dates will be given only in cases where the absence of a number on a dispatch re¬
quires a date for identification or where the date is considered necessary for a
more complete understanding of the text.
  13 S. P. For., Treaty Papers, 103/57. The group cited is dated 1640 on the back
of the packet. The records of the negotiations are largely undated and are in dis¬
order.
  “   Ibid.
 4           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 to which the Portuguese ambassador objected, with the excep¬
 tion of the religious demands which were partly commercial,
 deal exclusively with the question of colonial trade. Portugal
 was the “staple” for two streams of commerce; one from the
 Portuguese colonies through the mother country to England
 and one from England through Portugal to the colonies. The
British merchant desired control of this entrepot business and a
share in the carrying trade resulting from these two streams of
commerce. The treaty of 164214 was a decisive step in that
direction.
     The treaty was negotiated by England in a time of turmoil.
Strafford was executed during the month of the public audience
granted to the newly arrived Portuguese ambassadors; the five
members were impeached January 3, 1642; the king came for
his “birds” the next day; and seven days later Charles left
London. On the twenty-ninth the signed treaties were ex¬
changed. The English commissioners kept a cool head during
the excitement for the agreement left England with everything
to gain and little to lose, while on Portugal’s side the conces¬
sions were exorbitant and the advantages attenuated.
     By the twenty-one sections of the treaty England secured re¬
ligious toleration for her subjects resident in Portugal, said resi¬
dents being largely merchants, and protection from primary
losses resulting from action by the Inquisition; most favored
nation status commercially; a limited but effective extra-terri¬
torial jurisdiction under its own consul and immunity from
Portuguese laws for English subjects. Commissioners were to
be appointed to treat of concessions to the British in Brazilian
commerce, the first formal knock by the English at the door of
Portuguese South America. One searches in vain for an eco¬
nomic clause in behalf of the Portuguese. All they obtained
was recognition of independence and England’s friendship,
which was not a very stable commodity in 1642.

     J. F. Borges de Castro, Collecfdo de Tratados, I, 82-101. Signatures: Antao
d’Almada and Francisco de Andrade Leitao for Portugal and Arundel & Surrey,
John, Count of Bristol, W. Say & Seale, and Falkland for England. Signed Jan¬
uary 29, 1642. Renewed by Article XXVI of theTreaty of 1810.
       SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                           5
    The treaty came to nothing for the time being, but it served
 twelve years later as the basis of Cromwell’s sledge-hammer
 demands. It was, in fact, the basis of all subsequent treaties.
    D. Joao helped his friend Charles loyally, more sincerely
 even than France or Spain.15 Letters, money, and supplies were
 smuggled to Charles by Antonio de Souza de Macedo, Portu¬
 guese ambassador in London from 1642 to 1646.16 Portugal was
 the first to protest against the Regicides, the first to recognize
 the Commonwealth and send an ambassador, and the first to
 renew relations with Charles at the restoration; or, as it were,
 it was first in war with the Puritans, first in peace with Crom¬
 well, and first in friendship for the Stuarts.
    In the meantime, the British merchants in Lisbon were sub¬
 mitting to D. Joao and his auditor, Nicolau Dias Tinoco, who
was also judge conservator of the English, a complaint against
the non-execution of privileges justly theirs with certain papers
showing the nature of these privileges. Arranged chronologi¬
cally, these documents were: a charter dated August 10, 1400,
by which D. Joao I conceded to the English the same privileges
as had been conceded to the Genoese; a charter dated October
29? i45°j by which D. Affonso V conceded to the English the
right to a special judge in all commercial cases which should
arise between them and the Portuguese; a charter dated March
28, 1452, by D. Affonso V, granting the right to Englishmen
to live and move about at will within the Portuguese kingdom;
and the letter patent, dated February 7, 1495, by which D.
Manuel granted special privileges to merchants from certain
German cities.
   In consequence of the petition Tinoco issued an order dated
May 11, 1645, commanding that “no other officer of ours,
either disturb or meddle with them [the English merchants],
or anything that belongs to them, except [through] their said
  15 Guernsey Jones, “The Oldest European Alliance—England and Portugal,
1640 to 1661,” American Historical Association, Reports, 1916, pt. I, p. 411.
  16 Macedo’s residence in England is given in: Quadro Elementar, XVII, 27-38;
S. P. For., Portugal, 89/4, fl. 220; Birch MS. 4155, fl. 250; Commons Journals, II,
III, IV; Edgar Prestage, Diplomatic Relations of Portugal with France, England and
Holland from 1640 to 1668, pp. 99-108.
 6            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 judges, or any [Portuguese officer] by their order.” In case of
 the necessity of imprisonment, the English were to be conducted
 to the castle by their said judge, or by his bailiff, in person and
 not by the servants or followers of these officials. The English
 might carry arms, and no other officer of justice might enter
 the house of English merchants without an order from the Eng¬
 lish conservator. The petition with its enclosures and the order
 were approved by D. Joao on November 4, 1647. These docu¬
 ments constituted the famous Charter of English Privileges in
 the Portuguese Dominions,17 and served to uphold Cromwell’s
 demands in 1654.18
     After the execution of Charles, Portugal waged a feeble war
on the English, doing its greatest damage by sequestering the
property of English merchants and imprisoning them. Prince
Rupert, son of the ex-king of Bohemia and a Stuart fire-brand,
used Lisbon as a place of refuge for his fleet and was bottled
up by Admiral Blake.19 When D. Joao despite his attitude of
ostensible neutrality refused to drive the prince out into the
jaws of the Puritan fleet, Admiral Blake wrote20 to Charles
Vane in Lisbon to tell the king that he “should take it far bet¬
ter at his hands that he did openly declare for Prince Rupert
against us than by such indirect policies to undermine us, and
by uncertain and equivocal pretenses of amity to entertain us
and to lead us along by the nose any longer with an opinion
of neutrality, when we may clearly perceive by that order21 to
his forts the contrary is intended.”

  17 Privileges of an Englishman in the Kingdoms and Dominions of Portugal, London,
1736, pp. 51-73. The compiler copied these papers from the original certificate
in the office of the scrivener of the Spanish Conservatory in Lisbon. These docu¬
ments of English privileges were found in the archives of the Spanish Conservator
because in 1691 a decree granted to the Spaniards the same privileges as those
enjoyed by the English (Relafdo de Leis Extravagantes, No. u, fl. 243). Borges de
Castro, Collecfdo de Tratados, I, 2o4ff. gives the “Charter of English privileges.” He
points out errors in the documents: the 1400 charter should be 1427 and D. Fer¬
nando, not Affonso, granted the 1450 charter.
  18 See Article III of the Treaty of 1654.
  18 See Historical Manuscripts Commission, Portland MSS., I, 520-542.
  20 Ibid., p. 522.
  21 The order reinforced the garrisons of the forts commanding the port and the
English fleet.
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                        7
  Two facts deterred the wily D. Joao from openly declaring
for Prince Rupert. The first of these was the cogent argument
of Dunbar. Whitelock states22 in December of 1650 “that upon
news of Parliament’s victory in Scotland, the King of Portugal
released” the English merchants whom he had seized and “re¬
solved to send an ambassador to England to the Parliament.”
D. Joao de Guimaraes therefore was authorized by the king
to treat of all points of difference between Portugal and
England and to attempt to confirm the treaty of 1642.23
The second fact which deterred Joao from breaking definitely
with the Roundheads was a real anxiety for his overseas domin¬
ions. The English council of state, in view of Rupert’s extended
stay in the neutral port, had ordered Admirals Popham and
Blake to blockade Lisbon and by letters of marque to prey on
Portuguese shipping and take “all and sundry,”24 with the re¬
sult that in October, Blake had captured rich booty from the
annual Brazilian fleet as it attempted to enter Lisbon. Dunbar
and his lost ships convinced D. Joao, and Guimaraes was dis¬
patched to England the next month.
  His was a luckless mission. His troubles began as soon as he
landed in Portsmouth, when the council of state demanded to
know whether he was an ambassador or only an agent and
what powers he had to treat of the damages done the English.
He made a conciliatory speech before the committee of Parlia¬
ment, seeking presentation; he extolled the past services of Eng¬
land to Portugal and requested that the sale of the Portuguese
goods seized by Blake be arrested until his mission could be
accomplished.26 A third petition by Guimaraes for admittance
before Parliament and for the suspension of the sale of the goods
received the reply that “England was getting redress in one
way for wrongs suffered but that it would be ready to take it
in another if he were sufficiently authorized for the purpose.”28


 33 Memorials of English Affairs, p. 484.
 33 Hist. Mss. Com., Portland Mss., I, 540-541; Commons Journals, VI, 530.
 34 Portland Mss., I, 527-528; Commons Journals, VI, 525.
 35 Portland Mss., I, 552; Commons Journals, VI, 523.
 38 Portland Mss., I, 555; Commons Journals, VI, 529.
 8           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Parliament then presented six articles for Guimaraes’ acquies¬
 cence before it would treat of any further accord, and the Por¬
 tuguese agent was unable to find out from the stiff-necked
 House of Commons what further demands or possible compen¬
 sations he would receive if he consented.
     All English persons concerned in the murder of Blake’s sail¬
 ors in Lisbon and the attempt on Blake’s flagship by an infernal
 machine were to be punished; all ships brought into Portu¬
 guese waters by Rupert were to be turned over, reparation
 being made for all English ships seized by the Portuguese; and
over two hundred thousand pounds sterling (later reduced to
one hundred and eighty thousand) was to be paid by Portugal
to cover the expenses of Blake’s fleet during the blockade.27
Guimaraes, with no money or sufficient authorization from D.
Joao, fought for time to soften these demands, by what the
committee of Parliament called “ambiguous and insignificant
answers to draw the business into length upon pretense of diffi¬
culties. 28 In desperation Guimaraes finally accepted all six,
but could not guarantee the execution of them for want of the
proper authorization. Instead he pawned “his head and per¬
son for his majesty’s putting into execution all and every of the
Six Articles,”29 and suggested a commercial treaty. Parliament
gave him three days to present security other than his head.30
When Guimaraes pleaded for time to return to Portugal for
the king s consent, Parliament gave him fourteen days to set
out with a one way passport and ordered the council of state
to supply any deficiencies in the matter of prize-taking among
the Portuguese trade.31
  Guimaraes was followed by an important personage, the
king s chamberlain, D. Rodrigo de Sa e Menezes, Conde de
Peneguiao, ambassador extraordinary with an imposing train.
On September 28, 1652, he forwarded his credentials to Par-
  27 Portland Mss., I, 565-566; Commons Journals, VI, 539, 558-560.
  28 Council of state to Parliament, April 1, 1651, Commons Journals, VI, 565.
  29 Ibid., p. 568.
  10 Portland Mss., I, 569-572; Commons Journals, VI, 570.
  " Comm°ns Journals, VI, 574'575- See John Thurloe, Collection of the State Papers
of John Thurloe, I, 141-142, 145, 168, for various side lights on these incidents.
        SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                            9
 liament and requested an audience.32 He agreed to all six ar¬
 ticles after gracefully reducing the indemnity demands to fifty
 thousand pounds sterling, by pointing out a “slight error in
 arithmetic made by Parliament.” Thereupon he proposed a
 revival of the treaty of 1642. During the ensuing negotiations
 the English merchants interested in the Portuguese trade gave
 the committee a list of thirty-six articles of additional privi¬
 leges and concessions which they thought desirable,33 and got
 them all.
    The treaty which resulted was the great charter of English
 liberties in Portugal.34 It confirmed, strengthened, and ex¬
 tended rights previously granted, removed petty annoyances,
 extended extra-territorial jurisdiction and religious freedom,
 gave English merchants freedom of trade with Brazil and the
 west coast of Africa on terms of equality with Portuguese sub¬
jects, and provided that Portuguese customs duties to be paid
 by the English should never be raised above the current rate
 without the consent of two English merchants residing in Por¬
 tugal and chosen by the English consul.36 Thirteen of the
 twenty-eight articles of the treaty36 were ratifications of the
 1642 document with amplifications, and the rights conceded
in the Charter of English Privileges were incorporated in
the agreement. Again England limited her obligations to pro¬
fessions of friendship with no expressed liabilities for military
assistance, while Portugal became virtually England’s com¬
mercial vassal.
   Cardenas, Spanish ambassador, wrote Philip IV on Decem¬
ber 21/31, 1654, that the treaty had been agreed upon fifteen
months before. His information was correct, for the negotia¬
tions had been concluded and now the agreement depended
solely on Peneguiao’s signature. He had hesitated to sign, how-

  31 Portland Mss., I, 663.
   33 Papers of the Com. of Eng. Council of State, Add. Mss. 4192.
   34 Guernsey Jones, “The Oldest European Alliance,” p. 413.
   85 This last provision was in a secret article appended to the treaty.
   30 George Chalmers, Treaties, II, 267-286. Done at Westminster. Between Oliver
Cromwell and Joao IV. Ratified by Portugal at Alcdntara, June 9, 1656. Reaf¬
firmed by Article XXVI of the Treaty of 1810.
  10          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 ever, despite the undercurrents which swirled about him. Spain
 had worked feverishly for an alliance with England but the
 religious clauses demanded by Protestant England, when sub¬
 mitted to the Inquisition for an opinion, had been rejected and
 any possibility of an Anglo-Spanish alliance had vanished.
 The Portuguese envoy had circulated verses written in red let¬
 ters to the dishonor of Holland,37 and the Dutch ambassadors
 had refused to visit the Portuguese minister and had returned
 a pipe of wine and a cellar of strong waters sent them by the
 Portuguese envoy.
    Peneguiao still hesitated while his king failed in an offer at
 the Hague of an offensive and defensive alliance to be sealed
 by the marriage of one of his daughters to the king with four
 millions of florins as dowry.38 But personal reasons soon after
 forced his signature. His nineteen year old brother, D. Pan-
 taleao de Sa, after a scuffle in the Arcade in the New Exchange
 south of the Strand, returned with fifty men and in the brawl
 shot and killed one Greenway, an innocent bystander who was
 attempting to protect his sister and fiancee. Pantaleao was tried,
convicted, and sentenced to be beheaded, and Cromwell re¬
fused to interfere. On July io, 1654, the morning of the execu¬
tion, Peneguiao signed the treaty and fled in horror. White-
locke adds39 that the luckless ambassador was arrested at Graves¬
end by some London merchants to whom he owed great sums
of money. His goods were attached and he left for Portugal to
get the treaty ratified. As a guaranty for the fifty thousand
pounds due the English under the six preliminary articles, half
of the duties paid by the English merchants in Portugal were
to be held in pledge.40


  37 Thurloe, State Papers, I, 317, 324; Whitelocke, Memorials, p. 559. July 4 and
11, 1655 (N. S.).                                                       J
  38 Thurloe, State Papers, II, 50. February 4, 1654 (N. S.).
  39 Memorials, p. 598.
  40 Thurloe, State Papers, II, 200-201. Sources for Peneguiao’s mission are: Birch
VtV^p ^anSd°WneoMs; 223’ fl- "7; Add. Ms. 15170, fl. 295; Commons Journals,
     , S. P. For., Port., 89/4; Portland Mss., I. Fragmentary accounts of Pantaleao’s
trial are given in Howell’s State Trials, V, and a statement by him is given in
Harleian Miscellany, III,_285.
      SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                    n
  The treaty had thus been negotiated but ratification was
delayed due to the clauses conceding to the English mer¬
chants and seamen the free exercise of worship in their ships
and houses, the same article which had been refused at Madrid.
Philip Meadows was sent41 to Lisbon therefore to demand sig¬
nature without the change of a syllable. D.Joao offered to sub¬
mit the religious clause to the Pope42 for a decision, but Crom¬
well took the suggestion as an insult and became incensed when
he learned from Langland, English agent at Leghorn, that
it was “credibly reported in Italy that Spayn and Portugal
ar as good as agreed, which may hapilly be a reason why the
latter seeks to fly off from the agreement made with the Pro¬
tector’s hyhness.”43 Cromwell by way of reply ordered Blake and
Montague from Cadiz to Lisbon with the fleet. When an at¬
tempt was made to assassinate Meadows,44 the ambassador came
off with a shattered hand but a steady head. The talk at Lis¬
bon centered around the religious article, but Meadows divined
the trouble to be the fifty thousand pounds since the Pope had
not recognized D. Joao as king of Portugal after his revolt from
Spanish domination in 1640 and there was only one bishop
in the kingdom. D. Joao died soon afterwards, however, and
Meadows, playing a shrewd hand with the high trump of the
arrival of the British squadron to capture the overdue annual
Brazil fleet with its rich booty, obtained D. Affonso VTs con¬
sent to the treaty on May 31. He shipped the fifty thousand
pounds compensation on board the fleet46 and the full ratifi¬
cation was signed finally on June 9, 1656.
  The treaty thus finally ratified was a diplomatic triumph for
the Commonwealth, for by it great commercial and religious
advantages were secured from Portugal which had been sought
from Spain and refused while in return the Portuguese obtained
only what concerned peace and mutual amity. It gave a con-

   41 He was commissioned February 19, 1655 (Thurloe, State Papers, IV, 546).
   42 Ibid., p. 759.
   « Ibid., p. 566.
   44 The attempted assassination was in vengeance for Pantaleao’s execution
(ibid., V, 28, 35, 124).
   46 Whitelocke, Memorials, p. 649.
  12           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  vincing proof of the ascendency of England, whose subjects
  trading with or residing in Portugal, were for the future in a
  better situation than the Portuguese themselves.46 Britain here
  laid the foundations of its privileged position in Portuguese over¬
  seas dominions.
    When in the summer of 1657 news reached Lisbon that
  France, Sweden, and England were resolved to join in the
 league against Spain, Portugal sent the Marquez de Sande to
 London with public and secret instructions ordering him to
 ask for the inclusion of his government in the negotiations.47
 Portugal, he suggested, would serve admirably as a southern
 base     naval as well as land— for the northern league against
 Spain, a potent argument in favor of his country for the suc¬
 ceeding one hundred and fifty years. His plea was successful,
 for in October the council appointed a committee of seven to
 treat with him. Although Mazarin blocked the league and de¬
 serted Portugal by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, the Portuguese
 Marquis signed an agreement with the English council of state,
 in April, 1660, authorizing Portugal to enlist twelve thousand
 infantry and to buy twenty-five hundred horses and arms.48
 He was ready to sail to secure ratification when the Restoration
 came in May.
  The agreement was reached just in time to have Charles II
return and catch his old friends, who had suffered so much for
the Stuart cause, red-handed in collusion with the murderers of
his father. Charles was sensitive on this point; he dispatched
unceremoniously, the French ambassador, Bordeaux, for his
too great intimacy with Cromwell, and for a time the rumor
spread that he would not receive any ambassador who had
treated with the preceding government. Portugal was in des¬
pair over this last blow of a malignant fate.
   Several forces were working beneath the surface, however,


  44 Prestage, Diplomatic Relations of Portugal, p. 132.
  47Quadra Elementar XVIII, 160 ff, under date of July 10, 1687, an error made
by Santarem which Ribello da Silva did not correct.
  “Ibid XVII 1,8. Little is given about this part of his mission in English
sources, due to the domestic turmoil in 1659-1660. The treaty was never ratified.
      SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                          13
that were to have bearing on the play of the pawn. France had
abandoned its ally in the treaty of the Pyrenees, ending its
twenty years of conflict with Spain and gaining a breathing
space of peace. During the war, France had protected the
House of Braganga in its secession from the empire of the Phil¬
ips; now, although nominally at peace with Spain and no
longer an ally of Portugal, France had no idea of allowing
Spain to wreak retarded vengeance. As to England, if the
Mediterranean naval policy adopted by Cromwell and de¬
manded by English merchants was to be continued, a base of
operations had to be retained in southern Europe. Portugal
fitted the bill precisely: her empire was vast and overflowing
with riches which were only in part fabulous and imaginary;
her ports were ideal for bases in South European Atlantic and
Mediterranean waters; and she was an irritating and effective
foil to be used against Spain. From England’s point of view
she would also-serve equally as well as a base of operations
against France.
  At the moment, Portugal was further backed by two forceful
arguments: Jamaica, which Cromwell had taken from Spain,
and the lure of India with its “most beneficialest trade that ever
our nation enjoyed.” Moreover, if Charles were to reverse
Cromwell’s policy of supporting Portugal against Spain, he
would have to run counter to Louis XIV and to the merchants
in the City. The argument was conclusive, and the negotiations
for the 1661 agreement were begun.
  In October the Marquis left for Portugal to obtain full powers
to complete the treaty which was to be sealed by the marriage
of Charles to Catherine of Braganga. Since the negotiations
were a deep secret, Sande departed with his whole household
as if discontented in order to deceive the diplomatic world.49
He secured the approval of the Portuguese court to his plans
and returned in February of 1661, as Conde da Ponte, the

  49 Sande’s first mission is found in: State Papers, Domestic, 1657-8, 1658-9, and
1659-60; S. P. For., Port., 89/4 and 5; Quadro Elementar, XVII, 114 ff. One of
Sande’s letterbooks, January, 1659-July, 1660, is at the Instituto Historico in Rio
de Janeiro, cod. no. 1158.
   14          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  title to depend on the fulfillment of the marriage proposals.
  Batteville, the Spanish ambassador, and Mazarin opposed his
  project, and the London court seethed with intrigue.
     The subsequent negotiations are given in detail by Claren¬
  don in the secret letters50 exchanged in cipher between him
  and M. Bastide in France. In March, 1661, Clarendon anx¬
  iously inquired how Louis XIV viewed the proposed Anglo-
  Portuguese alliance and whether he thought a wedding in
 Spain would be of better advantage. Bastide replied that he had
 the authority to assure Charles that the king of France was of
 the opinion that no wedding would do so well as one in Portu¬
 gal.61 In April, Bastide urged the wedding and promised the
 aid of Louis if such assistance were kept secret. Charles needed
 help, for the Spanish ambassador in London was creating
 trouble.62 But since Batteville was not a man of “great dex¬
 terity in treaties,” his propaganda in favor of a Protestant mar¬
 riage with the Princess of Saxe, or any other, with the king of
 Spam adopting her and giving as large a dowry as England
 should demand, was making little headway. When Bastide re¬
 peated an offer of money if Charles should need it at the meet¬
 ing of Parliament, Clarendon asked for fifty thousand pounds.63
    In May the Privy Council unanimously voted for the mar¬
 riage. Bastide at the same time warned Clarendon of the anti¬
marriage propaganda getting under way to upset the scheme.
The opposition, he said, planned to “raise the Protestants and
make a party at home by showing them that the King of Eng¬
land is so little concerned for their religion, that being in ca¬
pacity to make choice betwixt many protestant matches, all
of an equal advantage, by reason of the King of Spain’s proffers,
  ;° Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement. The cor¬
respondence was known to only six persons: Clarendon; his son, who carried the
 ispatches; M. Bastide, who had been secretary of the French embassy at London

Wl65^“7aS.again SCnt t0 L°nd0n by L°uis in i662J the two kings; and
atcr, M. d Estrade, French ambassador in London at the time of the correspond-

  61 Ibid., Supplement, i.

              Dip‘°m“k           of Por“S‘‘. p. 46, gives Battevillc’s activities in

 68 Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement, ii-v.
      SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                       15
he is more inclined to betake himself to a Catholic, who is so
far from affording him any considerable countenance or greater
advantages than others could do, that it is like to bring him a
Great War, the undoing of trade, and thereby of the whole
nation, and hurt the Merchants of London in their very
heart. 54 The propaganda was good but there were two ob¬
stacles of importance in the eyes of these merchants which pre¬
vented any acceptance of Spain’s offers: Dunkirk and Jamaica,
 taken from Spain by Cromwell in time of peace, would have
to be returned. Jamaica with her sugar and rum weighed
heavily on the side of Portugal.
   The Conde was informed of the decision of the Council and
told to hurry the project along as it would soon be made pub¬
lic. On May 21, Charles announced the proposed marriage to
an enthusiastic Parliament. One member wrote to the Conde
that this was the only business of importance that he had ever
 seen treated by Parliament without any opposition whatso¬
 ever.55 Bastide promised that although Louis could not show
 his joy over the marriage due to his peace with Spain, he would
be indifferent and not oppose it, while Louis himself was sar¬
castic over Spanish offers since not one penny of the Spanish
dowry of his wife had ever been paid.56 On June 23, the treaty
was signed.
   By one line the basic treaty negotiated so obstreperously dur¬
ing the Cromwellian regime was declared valid, for the first
article stated that “All treaties since 1641 are hereby reaf¬
firmed.” Tangier was ceded with proper precautions taken for
the transfer without riots. Due arrangements were specified
for the safe conduct to England of the lady involved in the
treaty, and for her reception there. Portugal presented two
million crowns57 dowry, a sufficiently attractive palliative to
accompany a princess torn from a convent; and due precau-
  64 Ibid., Ill, Supplement, vi.
  66 Francisco de Mello e Torres, Relagam da Embaixada, Lisbon, 1661. In a col¬
lection of Relafdes de Embaixadas, in the British Museum.
  66 Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement, ix.
  67 In 1688 the value of one crown was about five shillings gold (R. Holme,
Armory, III, 28/2. Given in New English Dictonary).
 16            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 tions were taken as to her privileges, financial and religious.
 The Portuguese guaranteed the English trade in the East In¬
 dies against the Dutch, and ceded Bombay permanently, while
 the English fleet was to aid the Portuguese in maintaining order
in its East India possessions. England was granted the privilege
of having resident merchants in Goa, Cochim, and Dio in the
East; in Bahia, Pernambuco, and Rio de Janeiro in Brazil;
and in all the Portuguese West Indies. Any town or territory
formerly belonging to Portugal which England might capture
was to remain in its possession, except Mascate or a part of
Ceylon, which were to be handed over to the original owners.
In return England, for the first time in this series of treaties,
promised more than its friendship, for troops and ships were
to be furnished; the British guaranteed help if Lisbon or Oporto
should ever be besieged, and a pledge was made never to make
a treaty with Spain which would interfere with this promised
assistance to Portugal. Nor would England ever deliver Dun¬
kirk or Jamaica back to Spain, or refrain from aiding Portugal
even to the extent of war with Castile. A secret clause promised
to defend Portuguese possessions against all enemies.68
   By the treaty of 1654 Portugal had become the virtual com¬
mercial vassal of England; by the present treaty that relation
was maintained and concrete fruits were added. Bombay, with
Madras and the station on the Hoogli, was to from one of the
three points of the triangle whence the East India Company
was to spread over India. The Portuguese East and West In¬
dies trade was thrown open to the English and further advance
was made in Brazil, while Charles was to get two millions of
crowns pocket money, the largest dowry ever conferred in a
European marriage settlement to that date. The price to be
paid was a Catholic queen on the throne of England, two regi¬
ments of soldiers, and ten ships in Portugal, and a guaranty
  68 Chalmers, Treaties, II, 286-296. June 23, 1661. Reaffirmed by Article XXVI
of the Treaty of 1810. For these negotiations see also; Prestage, Diplomatic Rela¬
tions, p. 142-147; Guernsey Jones, “Oldest European Alliance,” pp. 414 ffi; S. P.
For., Port., 89/4 and 5; Quadro Elementar, XVII. The best source for the Conde
da Ponte’s activities between February 17 and May 15, 1661, is his letter book in
the Iberian Library of the Catholic University at Washington, D. C.
       SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                     17
of armed support against any enemy which might attack—a
good bargain which had revealed an amazing paradox; for
Spain and the English Catholics had urged Charles to espouse
a Protestant queen while Clarendon and the Puritans had
zealously supported the cause of a Catholic.
   In the meantime, Lord Sandwich in Portugal was hastening
arrangements there. “Things have been dispatched here,” he
wrote,69 “with greater haste than this people (I believe) have
been known to make (though not so fast as I have desired and
urged them into).” But when the princess reached Portsmouth,60
trouble arose in regard to the form of the marriage ceremony
since the queen was a Catholic and Charles an Anglican. Over
Lord Russel’s vehement protest, the king took her by the hand
and declared her to be his wife; she did the like for him, de¬
claring him her husband, and afterwards the Bishop of London
read the words written on a piece of paper.61 The Bishop of
London declared the marriage legal and the king said that the
question did not interest him, if the queen was satisfied.62 On
June 23, the treaty was declared ratified.
   The agreement was consummated but, as before, dissatisfac¬
tion reigned. Queen Catherine led a dog’s life, held up to ridi¬
cule by Charles and forced to accept the king’s mistress, the
Countess of Castlemain, as her own Lady of the Bedchamber.
In former treaties Portugal had shown reluctance in paying
fifty thousand pounds; now the two million crowns were slow
of payment. Robert Southwell, sent three years after the treaty
was signed as agent to Portugal, returned only after fifteen
years of arduous service to claim his reward. By virtue of his
signal service in recovering so effectively the residue of the
marriage portion—sixty thousand pounds having entered, with
the rest coming in every day—the king ordered the Duke of

  69 Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement, xx.
  90 Quadro Elementar, XVII, 236-256, devotes twenty touching pages to the pic¬
ture of Catherine leaving Lisbon.
  91 Doctor Douglas, who saw the paper before it was destroyed, said the words
were those of the Liturgy in joining the hands of the parties (Clarendon, State
Papers, III, Supplement, xxi).
  91 Ibid., xxi. The Earl of Portland to Clarendon, May 20 and 21, 1661.
   2
 18          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Ormond to discharge Southwell of his quitrents in Ireland.63
 Moreover, mutiny broke out in Bombay; the soldiers com¬
 plained and did more harm than good; Tangier was a costly
 gift to maintain; and the Portuguese Conde got fro ward and
 captious.
   Nevertheless, Spain recognized Portugal as an independent
state in 166864 and England forced the Dutch to leave Portugal
alone.65 The doors to the East and West Indies and to South
America were opened to England while a base and a lucrative
market in a strategic point in southern Europe were obtained.
The alliance more than justified itself in the long run.
   General opinion names the Methuen Treaty of 1703 as the
principal alliance formed between England and Portugal, and
it was customary in after years to refer to this treaty as the be¬
ginning of England’s dominance over her ally and of the lucra¬
tive profit from her Portuguese relations. The seeds had been
sown, however, in the complementary treaties of i642-’54-’6i
with profitable results for half a century. The importance of
Portuguese affairs was enhanced by the Methuen Treaty in a
way which would attract attention, as it created a new vested
interest which became vociferous throughout the remainder
of the century at any suggestion of a rapprochement with
France. Portugal entered local English politics and got itself
allied with a strong element in the City which would lose its
lucrative business if England should turn from Portugal to
France. In the former treaties of i642-’54-’6i, England could
unite with France in negotiating and maintaining the clauses
specified therein, but the Methuen Treaty decisively ran coun¬
ter to France and would continue to do so as long as it was in
force. The importance of Portugal was enhanced by the dignity
of its opponent.
  The Methuen Treaty was signed only after the customary
vacillation on the part of the king of Portugal and the usual

  68 Warrant to James, Duke of Ormond, Lieut.-Gen. and Gov.-Gen. of Ireland,
in Hist. Mss. Com., Egmont Papers, II, 89-90. The quitrents amounted to fn*. a
year.                                                                      0
  M Borges de Castro, Tratados, I, 357 and 410.             65 Ibid., pp. 444 ff.
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                           19
trump card of the English fleet. A base for operations in the
Mediterranean and Spain was necessary to the allies then en¬
gaged in the War of the Spanish Succession, but Portugal had
agreements with Spain and France and maintained a strict
neutrality. In March of 1702, Anne declared her intention of
waging war on a large scale both by sea and land, much to
the relief of the Grand Alliance which had been formed against
the Bourbons. In the middle of the next month, John Methuen,
who was well versed in Portuguese affairs from long residence
at the court of Lisbon, was dispatched to demand a positive
answer of the king of Portugal whether he would recede from
his alliance with France and Spain or persist therein.66 War
was declared at London and at the Hague in May, and Marl¬
borough crossed to the Continent with the British army.
  Methuen found no easy task on his arrival in Lisbon. For
some time the French minister had been very importunate with
his Portuguese Majesty to recognize the Pretender, James Ed¬
ward, as the Prince of Wales, but his efforts had obtained no
reply from the king other than “I have acknowledged one
King of England already, and so long as he lives I shall ac¬
knowledge no other. I seek repose and love peace.”67 Little
chance had he to enjoy peace with two kings centering the
play around his section of the chessboard! Yet he stoutly af¬
firmed his neutrality and maintained it so resolutely that even
until the moment of the final presentation of the treaty in
London by Methuen, rumor had it that he had refused to
sign.68 He sincerely endeavored to keep peace with both sides,
for in February, 1702, before Methuen’s arrival in Lisbon all
of the ministers who had been turned out of his council for
opposing the earlier treaties with France and Spain were re¬
stored to favor again,69 while at King William’s death the king
of Portugal wrote Queen Anne that he intended to maintain
inviolable his old treaties with Holland and England.70

 66 Narcissus Luttrell, A Brief Historical Relation of State Affairs, V, 163.
 67 The Present State of Europe, XIII, 35.
 68 Luttrell, Historical Relation, V, 265, 282, 286, 289-90.
 «»Ibid., p. 78.                               70 Ibid., p. 190.
20           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  A rift in the Portuguese-French relations appeared in July,
however, when only four galleys and some few brigantines ap¬
peared instead of the forty men-of-war promised by France to
protect the Portuguese coast. The king told the French am¬
bassador to take them back home and called to mind Mazarin’s
desertion at the Treaty of the Pyrenees.71 But as Portugal still
refused to allow the English and the Dutch to use its harbors,
clubs were declared trumps by England, and the fleet at the
Isle of Wight was ordered to be victualled and to sail at once.72
Fresh news from the south soon mentioned a noticeable change
in the state of affairs in Lisbon due to Methuen’s activities,
although the Portuguese subjects still insisted on neutrality to
protect their trade. Porto Carrero, the Spanish minister at Lis¬
bon, after the manner of Batteville at the court of Charles II,
helped Methuen by overplaying his hand, and sneered that
“it was no more than could be expected from a rebel Duke of
Bragan$a.”73
  In September Lord Godolphin wrote to Robert Harley that
“the letters from our English Merchants at Lisbon as well as
those from Methuen say that the King has publicly signified
himself free from all engagements from France and resolved to
live in entire friendship with England, so I reckon if we suc¬
ceed at Cadiz, it will be our own fault if we do not come to an
alliance with the rest of our confederates.”74 Unfortunately Sir
George Rooke and the Duke of Ormond failed disgracefully
in the attack on Cadiz. On the way home news came to them
that the treasure galleons from the West Indies with a score of
French and Spanish warships had slipped into Vigo. By an
extraordinary feat of arms the British stormed the forts, broke
the boom, destroyed the great fleet,75 and wiped out the dis¬
grace of Cadiz.
  The argument was a sound one in the ears of the king of
Portugal, for Vigo is a short day’s trip (nowadays) north of

 71 Luttrell, Historical Relation, V, 280-281.
 73 Ibid., p. 180.
 73 Present State of Europe, XIII, 321 and 433.           74 Portland Mss., IV, 46.
 76 G. M. Trevelyan, England Under the Stuarts, p. 483; Luttrell, Relation, V, 231.
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                         21
Lisbon, and a victorious English fleet added weight to Me¬
thuen’s point of view. Rumors were current in Lisbon by De¬
cember that a treaty between the Grand Alliance and Portugal
had been reached, and the breach between the court of Portu¬
gal and those of France and Spain was widening.76 Yet when
Methuen returned to England with the treaty, the belief was
still current in London that the king of Portugal had resolved
to stand neutral.77 Unlike the previous treaties the Methuen
agreement was negotiated and ratified in Lisbon before it was
presented at London, and with such secrecy that even the best
informed circles of London had no hint of the provisions stip¬
ulated. The final ratification was given by the queen at Windsor
on July 12, 1703.78
  The treaty renewed for another and a longer lease of life the
system of alliance between Portugal and Britain originated by
the triple agreements of 1642-1661. Old treaties were reaf¬
firmed; the king of Portugal espoused the cause of Charles of
Austria as king of Spain and agreed to maintain fifteen thou¬
sand men and accept subsidies for thirteen thousand more; he
received twelve thousand auxiliary troops from abroad to swell
his army. Various arrangements as to money, horses, men,
munitions, and the command of the combined armies and
navies occupied twenty articles of the defensive and twenty-
nine of an offensive agreement in favor of Charles. The upshot
of the treaty was simply that Portugal joined the Alliance and
would serve as a base in southern Europe against Spain and
France.
  Had this been all, the Methuen Treaty would have no im¬
portance except in so far as it bore on the strategic operations
of the war. Another element of great significance entered how¬
ever. Between 1662 and 1701 the woolen export from England
had increased79 by over a million pounds sterling, or more than

  76 Present State of Europe, XIII, 472; XIV, 37, 78, 158, 196.
  77 Luttrell, Relation, V, 289.
  78 Chalmers, Treaties, II, 296-305 (Renewed by Article XXVI of the Treaty of
1810); Commons Journals, XIV, 224-226.
  78 The figures which follow are from a report by a special committee on the
“Account of the trade of this Kingdom since the last session of Parliament,   laid
 22          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 fifty per cent. In 1698 woolen goods lacked but little of ac¬
 counting for exactly one-half of the total value of the general
 exports. The wool business was important. But in 1700, despite
 the fact that the general exports increased, the woolens de¬
 creased in value. Complaints by producers of wool and by
 clothiers proclaimed the fall of the price of goods and their
 imminent ruin. Importation of wool from Ireland had jumped
 seven hundred per cent between 1693 and 1701; importation
of superfine Spanish wool had increased; the demand for woolen
articles on the Continent had decreased; and two and a half
pages of closely typed words lamented the growth of manufac¬
tures in the colonies with the resultant fall in the demand for
 the English commodity. The Turkey Company reported80 to a
select committee in November that the importation of silks
from India was the greatest enemy of their trade in Turkey as
it killed the trade in woolens which amounted to more than
two-thirds of the business of the company. The East India
Company was bringing in silk enough for the whole kingdom,
but India would not buy wool cloth. Woolens continued to
decrease in value of exportation during 1702.81 The woolen
industry was facing a serious crisis.
  In the meantime commerce with Portugal was undergoing
another transition. In the early part of the seventeenth century,
Brazilian tobacco and sugar shipped to England through Por-
tugal supplanted spices from Portuguese Asiatic colonies as the
principal articles sent to England. Virginia tobacco with the
aid of the navigation laws gradually forced the Brazilian prod¬
uct from the English market, leaving sugar as the mainstay
of Portuguese exchange. The planter of Brazil, using low marsh
lands with horses, Negroes, and cattle much cheaper than could
be had in English plantations, conveying his wood, canes, and
sugar by water and grinding by the same power—conveniences
not to be had on English plantation—was able to produce

before the House, November 20, 1702 (Lords Journals, XVII, 169, and Hist Mss
Com   Mss of House of Urds, 1702-4, V, 66-73) and signed by Dartmouth, Ph.
      WS> Wm' Blathwayt> Math- Prior> and others, to wit, the Board of Trade
 80 Mss. House of Lords, V, 73.
 n Ibid-> P- 334-
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                         23
sugar thirty per cent, cheaper than the English planter.82 But
as the British sugar colonies developed under the navigation
laws, the last product exportable in any great quantity from
Portugal to England was cut off. By 1669 only 705 tuns of white
sugar, worth £38,480, were brought from Portugal, not one-
tenth of what had been the yearly importation before the rise
of the English sugar plantations.83 By 1690 the trade was limited
to not more than two thousand chests of finest Brazilian sugar,
worth about forty thousand pounds. One-quarter of the sugars
received in exchange for English manufactures was not brought
to England at all, but was carried to other European markets
in British ships.84 By 1700 the stream of commodities from the
Portuguese dominions, flowing to England through the ports
of Lisbon and Oporto, was well-nigh choked off.
  English shipments of commodities to Portugal had remained
practically the same from 1500 to 1700, textiles, hardware, and
provisions being the staples. As the woolen industry rose toward
the end of the seventeenth century, textiles became of para¬
mount importance. But Portugal, imitating England’s sugar
policy, imposed a protective tariff, and began to develop a
cloth industry of its own,85 thus adding to the already serious
woes of the English industry. The privileges gained so obstreper¬
ously by the triple treaties of 1642-1661 were of advantage only
in case the Englishman could find a profitable interest in the
Portuguese trade. These privileges could not create commerce;
their purpose was to give England a commanding advantage
in case such a trade existed. In 1700 it appeared that the ac¬
tive exchange which had gone on between the two allies for
over two hundred years was about to cease, and this at the very
time when the mines of Brazil were beginning to send a golden
stream of riches across the seas to Lisbon.86
  82 Tracts Relating to Various Trades, Item 265, “The State of the English Sugar
Trade with that of Portugal,” British Museum. The tract dates about 1689.
  83 Ibid., Item 266, “The Case of their Majesties Sugar Plantations,” also un¬
dated, but about 1689. See also: A. B. W. Chapman, “Commercial Relations of
England and Portugal, 1487-1807,” Trans. Roy. Hist. Soc., 3rd. Series, I, 164-169.
  84 Tracts, “State of English Sugar Trade.”
  86 Chapman, Commercial Relations, 164-169, passim.
  88 J. P. Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil e as Colonias Portuguezas, pp. 78-82.
  24         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    There was one commodity, however, which could substitute
 for sugar as a basis of Portuguese shipments to England. Wine,
 “the nerve of commerce between England and France,” had
 been prohibited87 entrance into England during the wars, and
 Portuguese wines had been substituted. In 1697, English trad-
 ers, judging that there would be a renewal of commerce with
 France, diminished their wine orders in Portugal with the re¬
 sult that exportation of English manufactures to that country
 likewise diminished. The next year wine orders increased, and
 so did the value of articles exported to Portugal. If the wine
 trade were extinguished, which would result if French wines
 were admitted on a par with Portuguese vintages, England’s
 “so flourishing trade” in manufactured articles “must needs be
 extinguished       also, which would be “of ill consequence” in
 view of the fact that only one-fourth of the value of all English
 manufactures exported to Portugal was returned in goods and
 three parts in money. “What trade can be more coveted by
 England?”88
   John Methuen met the crisis by his famous treaty concluded
at Lisbon December 27, 1703,89 a momentous document, re¬
freshing in its brevity and simplicity. Portugal was forever to
admit into Portugal the woolen cloths and the rest of the woolen
manufactures of the Britons free of duty; in return for this con¬
cession, England was forever thereafter to “admit Portuguese
wine into England in such a manner that even in war between
England and France, or in peace, no greater duties or customs
or charges by whatever title should be imposed on Portu¬
guese wine than is demanded of French wine with one-third
reduction.”
   The woolen business was saved, and the long argument over
heavy Portuguese port wine and the lighter French vintage,
  87 I. W. & M. c. 3, 4.
  88 S. P. For., Foreign Ministers, 100/37, “Reflexions on the importance of trade
with Portugal.” Unsigned, undated document attached to document dated April
21, 1699, from the Portuguese ambassador in London. It was written in 1699.
  89 S. P. For., Treaty Papers, 103/58. Ratification by Portugal, December 27,
1703; by England, May 6, 1704. A copy of the treaty in Portuguese (and Latin)
is given in Castro, Tratados, II, 192-198.
    SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                        25
which lasted throughout the century, was begun. A stream of
woolens was to flow from England to Portuguese possessions
through the gateway of Lisbon and Oporto, where trade was
admitted. In time, Brazil came to absorb the greater part of
the stream. The return came to England largely in the shape
of wines from Portugal and gold from Brazil. By the treaties
of i642-’54-’6i England secured its privileged position in Por¬
tuguese commerce; by the Methuen Treaty Portugal tied Eng¬
land to its side and an economic basis for commercial exchange
favorable to both contracting parties was worked out. Britain
could not renounce Portugal without running counter to the
wool and wine interests; yet as long as it hung on to its ally,
France was irritated. England manoeuvred itself into a position
wherein it was forced to choose between Portugal and France
instead of being free to favor either as occasion demanded.
Portugal and England were united against France by new ties
of commercial advantage and new vested interests arose.
                              CHAPTER II


    A PERIOD OF STRESS AND READJUSTMENT
                                  1703-1800


By the opening of the eighteenth century, England had estab¬
lished its preeminence in Portuguese commerce. The strong
English economic interests, strengthened by the treaty of 1703,
were enjoying special privileges obtained by the series of agree¬
ments concluded during the previous half century. The next
hundred years, however, witnessed a conflict between certain
forces which tended to destroy those firmly intrenched interests
and other influences of a military and economic nature which
tended to maintain the Portuguese alliance. During the first
decades of the eighteenth century the economic forces of union
triumphed decisively in the rejection of the French Commer¬
cial Treaty of 1713 5 by 1786 economic pressure reversed that
decision, and England chose France in preference to Portugal;
but at the turn of the century, war and new economic forces
brought reconciliation between the old allies. The colony of
Brazil was an important factor in this conflict.
 John Methuen won Portugal to the Grand Alliance in 1703
by treaties of offense and defense. During the entire war the
Portuguese ports served as bases for the English navy in its
operations in the Mediterranean and South-Atlantic waters.1
From a naval standpoint, Portugal was a success; but as mili¬
tary allies, the Portuguese were a constant tribulation to Eng¬
lish commanders and ministers.2 When Portugal began treating
secretly for a separate peace with France3 in 1711, the English

 1 Able Boyer, Annals of Anne, IV, 137; V, 314; VII, 178-179.
 *Ibid" ?VD30’ i63; V’ 308-309; VI, 31; VIII, 93-95; IX, 110-117; Hist. Mss.
       B“th PaPers> h 71. 84, 176; Cobbett, Parliamentary History, VI, 936-993.
  Able Boyer, The Political State of Great Britain,’ II, 313-316.
                  STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                           27
withdrew their troops, leaving the Portuguese “to stand on
their own bottoms.” The Marquis of Bey, seeing his oppor¬
tunity, broke into Portugal with a formidable Spanish force,
at a time when that country was destitute of its main support.
But the Portuguese defended themselves more vigorously than
at any time during the war and drove the Spaniards out by the
battle of Campo Mayor. Almost simultaneously with the ar¬
rival of the news of this victory at Lisbon, the Brazil fleet
reached port, very richly laden, and an heir was born to the
throne. In Portugal the war ended in a blaze of happiness.4
   At Utrecht Portugal fared well.5 At the end of the conference,
besides the usual terms such as those relating to the exchange
of prisoners and return of property and territory seized, Portu¬
gal secured from France the renunciation of its claims to the
north bank of the mouth of the Amazon and to any rights of
navigation on that river.6 This clause, which was of the utmost
importance to Brazil, was guaranteed directly by England.7
   Equally as significant was the sixth article of the treaty ex¬
changed with Spain at Utrecht, which provided that Colonia
do Sacramento should be ceded forever to the Crown of Por¬
tugal.8 Colonia, a town on the north bank of the River Plate
above the present site of Montevideo and almost straight across
from Buenos Aires, had been a thorn in the flesh of the Spanish
governors of that region. The Brazilians had founded the colony
mainly to establish rights to all land north of the river, but it
also served admirably as a place of secure deposit in the very
heart of the Spanish colonies for the smuggling trade of Por¬
tugal, England, France, and Holland. In 1701 Portuguese pro-

  4 Ibid., IV, 342 ff.
  6 The conference adjourned for three days of celebration when the news of the
birth of the heir reached Utrecht (Boyer, Political State, V, 25).
  1 David MacPherson, Annals of Commerce, III, 35.
  7 Article XXIV of Treaty of Peace and Friendship with France concluded at
Utrecht, March 1-April 11, 1713. Chalmers, Treaties, I, 385.
  8 Bernard Moses, Spain’s Declining Power in South America, 1790-1806, p. 29. For
the history of Colonia, from its founding in 1680 to 1713, see: Jos6 de Charlevoix,
Historia del Paraguay, Tomo IV, Libro 13, pp. 67-96, 197-203; Robert Southey,
History of Brazil, II, 570-573; Calvo, Colleccion completa de los tratados de la America
Latina, I, 114 and II, 53.
 28           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 tests, backed by England and France, forced Spain to return
 the colony, which had been seized by the Spanish governor of
 Buenos Aires. During the war it had again fallen into Spanish
 hands; but England, at the insistence of its ally and mindful
 of the commercial advantages which the possession of the place
 afforded, urged that the town with enough territory for its de¬
 fense be given up to the Portuguese. Philip V was forced to
 consent, and Portugal obtained the special guaranty of England
 to the terms of the treaty with Spain.9
    In this manner Portugal reaped its reward for signing the
two treaties of offense and defense negotiated by John Methuen
in 1703. The two famous commercial articles concluded in
December of the same year had a more spectacular fate, for
they were largely instrumental in defeating the important
Anglo-French treaty of commerce of 1713.
   At first glance it is surprising that a country only a little
larger than Scotland and decadent almost to stagnation after
a glorious colonial period, should have competed successfully
for British trade against France. A more careful scrutiny, how¬
ever, reveals important factors supporting Anglo-Portuguese
trade relations.
   In the first place, there was a fairly brisk trade between
Portugal and the English colonies in America. Lisbon was a
good market for pitch, for early in the war several gentlemen
of the Pennsylvania Company petitioned the Commissioners of
Trade and Plantations for a bounty on some four hundred
barrels of pitch and tar which they might have sold in Portugal
for fifty shillings a barrel when their ship stopped on its way
from the Carolinas. In England, they complained, they could
not afford to sell for less than forty shillings per barrel unless
her Majesty helped them.10 By 1714 a yearly average of six
thousand barrels of rice was shipped from the Carolinas di¬
rectly to Portugal.* 11 Lisbon lay on the regular route of ships

   Chalmers, Treaties, II, 306-307; Calvo, Colleccidn, II, 115; Southey, History of
Brazil, III, 131-140; R. Altamira, Historia de Esparia, III, 179 ff. and IV, no.
  10 Journal of Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, I, 156.
  11 Ibid,, p. 156.
                      STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                             29
going from England to the British colonies in America and
served as a provisioning station.12 In addition, the fish trade
between Newfoundland and Portugal in the first years of the
century was considerable,13 and a free trade in everything ex¬
cept enumerated articles could be carried on between the Eng¬
lish colonies in America and the Portuguese Madeira Islands,
since these were considered to be in Africa and did not fall
within the application of the navigation laws. Consequently
Madeira wine poured into the colonies, until by 1775 the taste
for it was general; the English officers returning after that date
set the fashion for it in England.14 South Carolina alone took
yearly 230 to 250 pipes of wine from the islands.16 In exchange
any surplus of corn in the plantations went to the Madeiras.16
Usually one-half of the bill for wines was paid in British goods
and the other half by bills of exchange on Lisbon,17 although
sometimes the proportion rose to two-thirds payment in Eng¬
lish woolens and only one-third in letters of exchange.18
   Besides this trade in naval stores, rice, woolens, and fish from
the English plantations in America to Portugal, there was a
lucrative export business of lumber from the northern colonies,19
and six to ten thousand hogsheads of tobacco a year passed
through England to Portuguese ports.20 Considerable quanti¬
ties of wine, brandy, salt, oil, French linens, and other articles,
were carried to Newfoundland by English ships that fetched
salt from Portugal. On the banks these commodities were ex¬
changed for tobacco, sugar, and other enumerated articles,
brought there by New England vessels. This contraband was
then carried back to Lisbon.21 Also salt was obtained on the
Portuguese Islands of May and Bonavista, a trade which re¬
quired the full time of some 120 English vessels in 1713.22
   In the second place, the direct trade between England and

  12 Ibid., pp. 69, 395.                  13 Ibid-, P- 4*7-
  14 W. Cunningham, Growth of English Industry and Commerce, Modern Times, I,
460.
  14 Jour, of Comrs. Trade, IV, 202.      19 Ibid., II, 74-
  17 Ibid., IV, 210.                      u Ibid., IV, 300.
  » Ibid., II, 274; IV, 328.              20 Ibid., I, 251.
  21 Ibid., I, 465.                       23 Ibid., HI, 94-
 3o          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Portugal was important. An economic basis for a commercial
 exchange which was favorable to both of the contracting parties
had been worked out in the 1642-1703 period. On the one
hand, the Portuguese proprietors of vineyards and manufac¬
 turers of wine, who were prospering under Methuen’s solution
 to the crisis of 1700, supported the activities of the British mer¬
chants in Portugal. On the other hand, while Portugal itself
absorbed a large amount of English woolens, the passage of
goods between England and the Portuguese colonies through
the ports of Portugal where trade was permitted was favorable
to the establishment of English factories at these points.
   The complementary treaties of i642-’54-’6i, by granting an
extraordinary amount of liberty to these organizations of Brit¬
ish merchants, had become the Magna Carta of the Portugal
trade. After consultation with the Portugal merchants, one
Milner, whose brother was consul general at Lisbon, insisted
in 1714 before the Commissioners for Trade and Plantations
that these merchants emphatically desired the confirmation of
the whole treaty of 1654.23 These factories developed rapidly
until they became a powerful group with influence in Portugal
and London.24 As a matter of fact, at the beginning of the eight¬
eenth century practically all of the carrying trade of Portugal
was done through English hands.25 In view of the extensive
commerce between Lisbon and her colonies, this was a lucra¬
tive business for the Britisher.
   After 1703 business with Portugal increased amazingly. From
1675 to 1696 France sent an average of fifteen thousand tuns
of wine26 to England, and Portugal only three hundred. In 1712

  23 Jour, of Comrs. Trade, II, 535.
  24 As early as 1654 the claims sent in by these factories for damages during
Admiral Blake’s blockade amounted to £10,000 from Lisbon companies and
£12,500 from Oporto companies for damages to their business. One company
alone entered a claim for £5,000. Claims for English ships engaged in their
trade and seized by Blake amounted to £23,614. With allowance for exaggera¬
tion, these figures indicate a real prosperity for these companies.
  26 Chapman, “Commercial Relations of England and Portugal, 1487-1807,”
p. 168.
  26 3l Vi °ld wine gallons to the barrel, two barrels to the hogshead, two hogs¬
heads to the pipe, and two pipes to the tun.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                        31
England imported 585,954 tuns of Portuguese wines and a little
over eight thousand of French wine.27 The export of English
woolens quadrupled in a few years and included colored cloths,
druggets, hats, and such manufactures as had been excluded
formerly.28 Duties imposed by Portugal were evaded by abate¬
ments and other means until they “were reduced very low and
the merchants made very easy therein,”29 while English families,
settled by special permission in Brazil as resident traders, were
of great advantage to English commerce.30 In the ten years of
the war English exports to Portugal jumped from three hundred
thousand pounds sterling a year to over a million whereas the
imports from Portugal grew from two hundred thousand to a
maximum of four hundred thousand.31 By gold brought from
Brazil the Portuguese made up the difference between the four
hundred thousand pounds worth of goods sent to England and
the million due for merchandise received. Under the condi¬
tions of trade existing after 1703, Portugal was shipping from
five hundred thousand to a million pounds sterling of gold a
year into England. One estimate places the amount of bullion
imported from Portugal as high as fifty thousand pounds a
week.32 It is apparent that with such a trade there would be
created a powerful set of interests intent on maintaining their
business.
   The woolen industry was the basis of this trade, and its rami¬
fications were many. The merchants and shipping interests
were at the top of the pyramid. Beneath them were the manu¬
facturers of woolen cloths such as bays, broadcloths, draperies,
and white goods; the dyers, packers, and setters; the manufac-

  27 Oscar Browning, “The Treaty of Commerce between England and France
in 1786,” Trans. Roy. Hist. Soc., N. S., II, 352.
  28 Chapman, “Commercial Relations,” p. 171.
  29 Jour, of Comrs. Trade, II, 535.
  30 Ibid., Ill, 179-180.
  31 Chapman, “Commercial Relations,” p. 171. Ireland carried on an export
trade to Lisbon of over £200,000 a year {Jour, of Comrs. Trade, I, 427).
  32 Cunningham, Growth of English Industry, I, 460-461. In Ireland the gold cur¬
rency was said to consist almost entirely of Portuguese pieces, received in exchange
for cattle, bacon, linen, and dairy produce, staples of Irish trade with Portugal
(Chapman, “Commercial Relations,” p. 172).
 32          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 turers of rugs, stockings, belts, hats, blankets, and serges. Be¬
 hind these interests were the large landowners whose profits
from raw wool mounted with the price of the manufactured
 article. Linked with both the manufacturer and the wool pro¬
 ducer was the newly created banking group. These interests
were scattered in the city of London, and its vicinity; in the
towns of Plymouth, Gloucester, Leeds, and Worcester; in coun¬
ties such as Essex, Devon, Suffolk, and Norfolk.33 Together
their influence possessed something of the power of a Standard
Oil Company or a United States Steel Corporation of to-day.
   A third factor tending to favor Anglo-Portuguese trade re¬
lations was British fear of French competition in the home
market. In the time of the Stuarts the English court had fav¬
ored34 trade with France for the sake of the large revenue which
a tariff on importations would bring. Under William and Mary,
however, a bill was passed prohibiting all trade with France
for “it hath beene found by long experience that the Importing
of French Wines, Vinegar,] Brandy, Linnen, Silks, Salt, Paper,
and other Commodities of the Growth, Product, or Manufac¬
ture of France or of the territories or Dominions of the French
King, hath much exhausted the treasure of this Nation, lessened
the value of the native commodities and manufactures thereof,
and greatly impoverished the English Artificers and Handy-
crafts and caused great detriment to this Kingdom in gener-
ale. ... 35 This         complete      prohibition       lasted    until    1710.
Houblon and Papillon drew up a document in support of the
bill, showing that England, besides suffering disastrous com¬
petition in her home markets, was the loser by a million pounds
sterling a year in her trade with France.38 Colbert began his
  33 Commons Journals, XVII. See various petitions, pp. 315 ff.
  34 James had removed (I James II, cc. 6, 7) the prohibition set on French trade
under Charles II (29> 3*-* Ch. II, c. par. 70).
  36 I W. & M. c. 3, 4.
  34 This document was published again in 1713 at the time of the French treaty
crisis, by Boyer in his Political State, V, 4,9. Sir John Houblon (died 1712) was a
merchant interested in the Spanish trade and was the first governor of the Bank
of England. He served in various governmental positions such as member of the
Admiralty Commission, the Victualling Office, and others. Thomas Papillon
(died 1702) was a merchant who served on the Board of Trade and on the Direct-
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                       33
revival of French commerce soon after 1661, imposed his pro¬
hibitory tariffs six years later, and put his rigid mercantilist
theory of commerce into practice during the succeeding years.87
Wars aggravated the rivalry. By 1713 the commercial and in¬
dustrial interests of England were as opposed to French trade
as they were enthusiastic for Portuguese commerce.
  Thus in 1713, due to the trade carried on between Portugal
and the British colonies, the advantages of the direct trade be¬
tween England and the Portuguese possessions through Lisbon
and Oporto, and the fear of French competition in the English
markets, the opinion was firmly intrenched among a powerful
class of Englishmen that the Portugal trade was “at present
the most advantageous that we drove anywhere.”38 Methuen
had opened a large foreign demand for manufactured goods
and stimulated employment of labor at home, and returns
from Portugal came to England largely in the form most neces¬
sary for restoring the currency and most convenient for carry¬
ing on the great European conflict.
  A fourth factor in the crisis of 1713 was the state of English
politics, for the Opposition used these economic forces as an
instrument with which to attack the ministry. Any attempt to
explain the decisive triumph of the Portuguese trade over its
French rival which fails to take into consideration the struggle
going on for the control of the English Government will be
wide of the mark. The Opposition defeated the French treaty
by arousing the fears of that powerful class which were profit¬
ing by an economic situation based on trade with Portugal.
                ,
   On May 8 1713, the queen’s message respecting the treaties
of peace and commerce which had been concluded at Utrecht
was read to the Commons and the agreements presented. The
forty-one articles of the French treaty of commerce were “in

orate of the East India Company. He also served as Victualler for the Navy {Diet.
Nat. Biog.).
 v l. B. Packard, The Commercial Revolution. 1400-1776, pp. 71 ff.; Cunningham,
The Growth of English Industry, I, 458 ff.
  18 Cobbett, Pari. Debates, VI, 1211. MacPherson quotes contemporary opinion
which stated that the Portugal trade was the “very best branch of all our European
commerce” {Annals, III, 30).
    s
 34          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 the customary form” except for the eighth and ninth articles
 which were so “extraordinary in themselves” and “occasioned
 so great a stir and uneasiness at that time, as to bring the whole
 treaty of commerce to miscarry then, and ever since.”39 Article
 8 gave most favored nation privileges to France in England;
 by the ninth a law was to be passed that no higher duties
 should be paid for goods brought from France than those pay¬
 able on like goods imported from any other country in Europe.40
 The high protective tariff wall erected against France in favor
of English manufacturers and traders was to be demolished,
and the foundation of the Portuguese trade as established by
the commercial articles of the Methuen Treaty destroyed.
Henry St. John, Lord Bolingbroke, secretary of state, who rep¬
resented England in the negotiation at Paris, demonstrated in
the terms of the treaty his inclination toward the Church and
the gentry and his opposition to the moneyed class. The ac¬
tivities of the war, favorable to the profiteers of the war party,
made difficult the position of the ministry under Robert Har¬
ley, Earl of Oxford. The land and malt tax weighed on the
landed men, and a swarm of duties on the necessaries of life
came home to every household. Harley’s majority in the Com¬
mons was based in large measure on a wave of feeling hostile
to the war and the moneyed class and favorable to the Church.
Attention had to be paid to the feelings of this group in making
the treaty. To strengthen their position St. John and Harley
hoped to create a mercantile group in their own interest in
the City, then largely hostile to them.41 As a result, the existing
economic system, which was pro-Portuguese and anti-French,
was seriously threatened.
   The project aroused immediate opposition. Article 9 of the
treaty called for a law to reduce the tariff on French goods to
the level of duties levied on the goods of any other country. On

  39 MacPherson, Annals, III, 472-473.
  40 Chalmers, Treaties, I, 390-424. Articles 8 and 9, pp. 396-398.
  41 St. John to Harley, October 11 and November 6,1708, Hist. Miss. Comm., Bath
Papers, I, 191-94; Keith Feiling, History of the Tory Party, 1614-1714, pp. 433; 405,
429; Trevelyan, England under the Stuarts, p. 511.
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                     35
the same day that a bill to this effect was introduced for the
first reading,42 a petition against the measure was presented by
the powerful Levant Company. On June 4, the day set for the
second reading, thirteen petitions from London, Worcester,
Gloucester, Trowbridge, Liverpool, and the counties of Essex
and Suffolk came in. From then on an ever-increasing volume
of objections came up from every side.
  The arguments against the project as shown in the petitions
were more or less the same. The export of woolens to Potrugal
depended on the importation of Portuguese wines; if the French
treaty went through, Portuguese wines would be supplanted
both because the Englishman liked French wines better43 and
because the distance would add freight charges that would
make the Portuguese wines dearer than the French. Portugal
in retaliation, would renew its woolen industries and prohibit
the entrance of English goods. If French silks were allowed to
enter, the English silk industry, grown up under protection,
would go to the wall, carrying with it the Italian and Levant
trades, for the basis of that commerce was the exchange of raw
silk for manufactured woolens. A still worse calamity threat¬
ened, for the French woolen industry, developed under French
protection and carried on with cheaper labor and less expen¬
sive raw materials, would compete successfully with English
goods in the home market. And finally a trade with Portugal
which brought in from four hundred thousand to a million
pounds sterling of gold and silver a year would be exchanged
for a trade with France which would drain over a million out
of the country in the same length of time. Moreover “many
thousands of poor Manufacturers would be undone . . . and
many thousands of poor Families must become a Burthen to
their respective parishes, and the value of lands of England
would sink to a great degree and taxes rise.”44


  45 Commons Journals, XVII, 386.
  « Swift to Stella, Journals, February 18, 1711; Earl Stanhope, History of the
Reign of Queen Anne, p. 112.
  44 See various petitions presented to the House of Commons, Commons Journals,
XVII, 391-429; Cobbett, Pari. Debates, VI, 1211-1213.
36           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
   As a matter of fact, that pyramid of special interests built
up under protection against France and based on the woolen
trade with Portugal and its ramifications, was seriously men¬
aced. Using that threat as an incentive, the Opposition found
little difficulty in setting up a hue and cry against the bill and
the ministry. Such momentum was acquired that when the
crisis came on June 18, the debate lasted from three in the
afternoon till eleven at night. The turning point came when
Sir Thomas Hanmer changed sides and took with him two
members holding government positions. The City representa¬
tives, who had been elected as supporters of the ministry, and
the Scotch members voted against the bill irrespective of party.
On a vote to engross the bill, the tellers for the Noes counted
194 and the Yeas 185. And so it passed in the negative.45 That
night the London drapers, mercers, and weavers, “overjoyed
at the failure of the bill,” staged a big celebration with illumi¬
nations and bonfires.46
   Thus the Portugal trade, chartered under the triple treaties
of i642-’54-’6i and founded on the two short articles of the
Methuen Treaty of 1703, was largely instrumental in defeating
the commercial agreement with France and furnished the club
with which the Opposition belabored Harley’s ministry. The
economic forces of the period tended toward union between
England and Portugal, and the triumph was decisive in main¬
taining what to-day is the oldest existing European alliance.
   The treaty of commerce with France in September, 1786,
offers a curious parallel to the projected agreement of 1713.47
In both, the Portugal trade was the chief factor used in oppo-

  46 For details of the political battle which arose over the treaty, see: Jour. Comrs.
Trade, II, 34, 68, 355-357, 371-372; Cobbett, Pari. History, VI, 1170, 1211-1213;
Commons Journals, XVII, 310, 314-315, 347-358, 386; Swift, Journal to Stella, April
7 and 8, 1713; Feiling, A History of the Tory Party, pp. 417-423.
 48 Cobbett, Pari. Debates, VI, 1223-1224; Commons Journals, XVII, 429-430;
Boyer, Political State, V, 444.
  47 Twice in the intervening seventy-odd years Portugal demanded England’s
attention: In i735-’37 Walpole prevented a war between Portugal and Spain
which would have involved England. In 1762 Portugal was forced into the Seven
Years’ War and fared well at the Peace of Paris. In both of these cases the Spanish-
Portuguese frontiers in America played important parts. See Chapter V.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                37
sition to the legislative action needed to make the terms of the
treaties effectual. On both occasions a coalition party fallen
from power attempted to drive out the ministry by defeating
the commercial policy adopted by the agreements. In both
cases a long economic development which determined the out¬
come preceded the crisis. In 1713 the opposition won and the
Portugal trade triumphed. In 1786 the ministry was easily vic¬
torious and England turned from Portugal to France. The re¬
versal was due in the first place to the changing state of Eng¬
land’s commercial relations with Portugal during these seventy
years, and in the second place to the rise of a new group of
vested interests in England, whose profit dictated a new com¬
mercial policy.
  Although in 1713 the opinion was quite universal that the
Portugal trade “was the very best branch of all” England’s
“European commerce,”48 friction between the two countries
soon developed. Frequent complaints came up before the Com¬
missioners for Trade and Plantations. Two years after the
peace, the factors of Blackwell Hall complained that their ship¬
ment of coarse woolens to Portugal had fallen off to one-fifth of
what it had been formerly.49 Before the war was over the Eng¬
lish merchants in Lisbon sent in repeated representations
against the Irish traders in that city for their refusal to contrib¬
ute toward the expenses of the factory while they enjoyed the
benefits of that institution.60 The Assiento Contract with Spain
(1713) suggested a similar arrangement with Portugal, and
that matter was well discussed by the Commissioners.61 Since
Portugal refused to grant a monopoly of the slave traffic to
Portuguese possessions, participation by England in that trade
in which so many nations already shared, could result only in
increasing the number of Negroes carried to Brazil, with the
consequent fall in the price of slaves. The Brazilian sugar
planter could then undersell the product of the British sugar
colonies in European markets. The Commissioners therefore
decided against any agitation to share the Portuguese slave

 48 MacPherson, Annals, III, 30.         49 Jour. Comrs. Trade, III, 95-96.
 60 Ibid., II, 269, 271-272, 287.        61 Ibid., II, 490, 491, 492.
  38           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  trade.52 By 1726 the English African Company was demanding
  forts as protection against the Portuguese whose jealousy of the
  growing strength of that company had led them to destroy the
  English fort at Cabinda.53 Moreover, after the discovery of gold
  and diamonds in Brazil, Portugal tightened its restrictions on
  contacts between the colony and other nations with uncom¬
 fortable results to the resident foreigners. The offer of Portugal
 to expel the French traders resident in Brazil, if the British
 would withdraw voluntarily,54 was rejected by the Commission¬
 ers for Trade and Plantations, however, and English families
 continued to live in Brazil under rights acquired by the 1654
 treaty despite Portugal’s desire to “abridge” the English “as
 much as possible.”55
    In fact, the fabulous quantities of gold and diamonds arriving
 at Lisbon from Brazil56 incited the English to import the metal
 and stones clandestinely. In 1732 the king of Portugal ordered
 all the letters arriving by the Brazil fleet to be opened “under
 pretence of discovering who had brought gold in a clandestine
 manner . . . which put the People of Business in great fear.”57
 The king got 2880 pounds weight of gold and many diamonds.
 The penalty for smuggling gold was confiscation with banish-


   62 Jour. Comrs. Trade, II, 491-492.
   63 Ibid., V, 234, 237-238, 242, 268.
  64 S. P. For. Port., 89/64. Letter of August 22, 1766. Resident merchant privi¬
leges in Brazil had been granted the French by the treaty of 1667.
  56 Jour. Comrs. Trade, III, 179-180.
  " OIivei^ Martins estimates that D. Joao V (1 706-, 750) received about 130,000,-
000 cruzados (over $50,000,000) from gold works and 40,000,000 cruzados ($16 -
000,ocxi) fromdiamonds (Hist, de Port., II, 151). The fifths due the crown rendered
about $2,00°,oooannually; some think double that sum (Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil
p. 84 footnote). Fifths were paid on about half the production, the rest leaving Brazil
clandestinely (ibid., p. 83, footnote). The fleet from Rio in 1753 was thought to
have brought gold, and silver, and goods worth $15,000,000 (Keller, Colonization,
p. 166, note). See Oliveira Martins 0 Brazil, Chap. VII and Keller, Colonization pp
!*9'l53, u‘!67 f°r bnefdlscussions of Brazilian gold mines. Humboldt estimates
that from the date of discovery to 1803, there came in gold from Portuguese America,
6,290,000 gold marcs (Castilian weight) and from Spanish America, 3,625,000
go d marcs (Essai Politique sur le Royaume de la Noveau Espagne, II, 645).
    Hon. Charles Compton to Lord Wilmington, Lisbon, January 12, 1732, Hist.
Mss. Comm., Marquis of Townshend Papers, pp. 351-352.
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                       39
ment or the gallows, yet the English escaped by relying on the
judges conservators.
  The friction which arose between the two countries from
these minor sources became acute during the administration
of one of the strongest men Portugal has ever produced, F.
Jose de Carvalho e Mello, of humble parentage but later Mar¬
quis of Pombal. Made secretary of state for foreign affairs and
of war on August 2, 1750, three days after the death of D.
Joao V, he soon became absolute head of the government with
complete ascendancy over D. Jose, the new king.58
  The man who was to rule Portugal for twenty-seven years
after the manner of Cardinal Richelieu in France held de¬
cided views in regard to the English alliance and influence.
He wrote that, at the time of the Lisbon earthquake,59 the

   Portuguese Monarchy was at its last gasp. The English had firmly
bound the nation in a state of dependence. They had conquered it
without the inconvenience of a conquest. . . . Portugal was power¬
less and without vigour, and all her movements were regulated by
the desires of England. ... In 1754 Portugal scarcely produced
anything towards her own support. Two-thirds of her physical ne¬
cessities were supplied by England. . . . England had become mis¬
tress of the entire commerce of Portugal, and all the trade of the
country was carried on by her agents. The English were at the same
time the furnishers and the retailers of all the necessaries of life that
the country required. Having a monopoly of everything, no business
was carried on but through their hands. . . .
   The English came to Lisbon to monopolize even the commerce
of Brazil. The entire cargo of the vessels that were sent thither, and
 consequently the riches that were returned in exchange, belonged
 to them. . . . These foreigners, after having acquired immense
fortunes, disappeared on a sudden, carrying with them the riches
of the country.60
  68 Mello was born 1699 and died 1782. He became Conde de Oeiras in 1759
and Marquis of Pombal in 1770. He was ambassador to London, 1738-1745. He
was dismissed from office, March 4, 1777, by D. Maria I, successor to D. Jos6. For
a brief sketch of his life see La Grande Encyclopedic, XXXVII, 177-178.
  69 November 1, 1755.
  60 John A. Smith, Count da Carnota, Memoirs of the Marquis of Pombal, I, 85,
112-116.
 40           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
      Cromwell’s treaty, negotiated before the discovery of gold
 in Brazil, continued, in the opinion of the minister, to bind
 Portugal to England after the gold mines had brought Euro¬
 pean prominence to Pombal’s country. The “former manufac¬
 tures of Portugal were destroyed. . . . Every article of clothing
 the” Portuguese nation “required was drawn from England,
 to the amount of twenty millions of cruzados annually.”61 When
 the rush to the mines began, Brazil ceased to send agricultural
 products to supply the needs of the mother country, allowing
 England to take over the provision trade in addition to the
 clothing business. “Every measure of political change was pre¬
 determined by the Cabinet of London.”62
    Moreover the marquis could see no advantage to his country
 from the influx of gold from Brazil.

    Gold and silver are fictitious riches ... the more they are mul¬
 tiplied, the less is their real value. . . . The Negroes that work in
 the mines of Brazil must be clothed by England, by which the value
 of their produce becomes relative to the price of cloth. To work the
 mines, it is necessary to have a large capital expended on slaves. If
 this sum be twenty millions, the interest, which is one million, inde¬
pendent of the cost of extraction, must be the first money paid for
 this produce. Add to this the food and clothing for more than an
hundred thousand persons, blacks and whites, which the mines
carry to Brazil, which food is not to be had in the colony, but must
be purchased from foreigners. Lastly, to supply the physical wants
of the country, which since the discovery of the mines had lost its
arts and manufactures, all the gold became the property of other
nations. What riches, great God! the possession of which involves
the ruin of the state!63

   These words of the man who ruled his country with an iron
hand present a vivid picture of England’s supremacy in the
dominions of Portugal during the first half of the eighteenth
century. With due allowance made for exaggeration by one
who was Pleading a cause, it is clear that Portugal was the vir-

 H About £ 10,000,000, according to Smith’s estimate, given in footnote (Smith
Memoirs of Pombal, I, 117).
  M Ibid., I, 117-120.
                                               63 Ibid., I, 123, 125-126.
                  STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                       41
tual commercial vassal of England. To a man of Pombal’s in¬
telligence and spirit, such a condition could not continue. As
soon as he rose to power, he began his effective struggle to cur¬
tail England’s power in Portuguese dominions.
   By the law of October 30, 1752, the English judge conserva¬
tor was forbidden to grant mandates to impede the execution
of writs or orders issued by the ordinary courts, under penalty
of suspension from office for six months. Pombal thus repealed
the right granted by the Charter of English Privileges in
1647 and confirmed by the treaty of 1654, whereby the English
subject could not be arrested without the consent of the judge
conservator.64 The new trading companies of Grao Para and
of Pernambuco, the Alto Douro Wine Company, and the stat¬
utes of the newly organized Junta do Commercio, created Portu¬
guese judges conservators whose authority superseded that of
the English conservator. The power of these new courts was
so extreme that Britishers had first to litigate extensively as to
jurisdiction—whether the case lay in the British or the new
conservatorial courts—before they could bring suit even for
debt.66 In this way Pombal struck at the very roots of the priv¬
ileges of the English in Portugal. He now turned to commerce.
   By a decree dated June 7, 1755, the Portuguese trading com¬
pany of Grao Para and Maranhao was established. Every ship
which sailed from Portugal to the Brazilian provinces of Grao
Para and Maranhao had to belong to the company and had to
sail from Lisbon; no ship but that of the company could enter
or leave airy port of these provinces; no person who did not
belong to the company could send, take, or introduce any
goods whatever into them, although the company was prohib¬
ited from selling by retail in the colonies; and the exclusive
right to import slaves was granted to the company.66 In 1759
another company was instituted on the same basis to trade
with the provinces of Parahiba and Pernambuco.67 Both or-

  64 S. P. For., Port., 89/64.                        66 Ibid.
  88 Ignacio de Freitas, Collecgdo Chronologica de Leis Extravagantes, III, 432-465.
Capitulates 17, 20, 28, 29, and 30 of the alvard.
  87 S. P. For., Port., 89/64.
 42           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 ganizations had conservators to decide cases arising from action
 by the companies under their statutes.
      The year following the establishment of the Company of
 Grao Para, Pombal set up a Junta do Commercio,68 It had power
 to regulate all affairs connected with commerce, to prevent
 and punish smuggling, and to grant or refuse license for open¬
 ing retail shops. The members of tht junta had power to visit
 and inspect those retail shops already open, in order to check
 abuses of smuggling and the ownership of two or more shops
 by the same person. In many cases the shops, operating under
 different names, really belonged to one individual and he a
 foreigner, although such double ownership was contrary to law.
 This measure was directed especially against the English, be¬
 cause they carried on the principal commerce and engrossed
 much of the profit of the retail trade.69 As the junta maintained
 a conservatorial court with authority superior to the English
 tribunal and as the matters falling under the cognizance of the
junta involved English merchants, a clash between the two
 courts was inevitable.
   To curtail further the trade enjoyed by the English, the junta
declared contraband a long list of articles.70 Tanned leather
was prohibited entrance in 1758. New duties were added, such
as an additional two per cent, at Oporto to pay for the Portu¬
guese frigates which accompanied the ships of the Alto Douro
Wine Company on their voyage to Brazil. British merchants
complained that the king granted royal letters of protection
or moratoriums to his subjects who owed money to the English
and prevented the latter from bringing suit for recovery. The
Portuguese government often seized goods for the king’s troops,

  68 Ignacio de Freitas, Collecgao, III, 541, gives the alvard, dated December 16,
1756. The statutes defining the powers and duties of the junta follow, pp. 543-582
The junta was substituted for the old Board of Trade, dismissed by Pombal for
inefficiency and corruption, at the time of the organization of the new junta.
  69 Smith, Memoirs of Pombal, I, 298-299.
  70 The Pragmatick or Sumptuary Law of 1749 prohibited the importation into
 ortugal of certain articles named as luxuries. The junta now used this law as
grounds for prohibiting importation of many articles which the English did not
consider as coming under the title of luxuries. S. P. For., Port., 89/64.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                          43
or household, and even for convents and monasteries, from the
English proprietor, who received no pay or payment only after
an extended delay, while accounting houses and homes of the
English were entered by common officers of the law without
the proper order from the British conservator.71 Pombal thus
conducted a vigorous campaign against English privileges and
English commercial supremacy.
  There yet remained one branch of commerce which Pombal
considered to be in need of regulation. The establishment of the
Portuguese wine business on a firm basis had been Portugal’s
share in the bargain of 1703. Yet by the middle of the century
English merchants, established at Oporto, bought the wines
directly from the farmer at prices set by themselves and so
reaped the profit from that trade.72 A delegation of the princi¬
pal husbandmen of the Upper Douro region and some inhabi¬
tants of Oporto delivered to Pombal in 1756 a statement of the
conditions of the wine trade. By holding a monopoly of the
middleman and shipping business, the commission asserted,
the English had pushed the price so low that utter misery re¬
sulted for the wine growers.73 Consequently after an investiga¬
tion, the marquis issued the alvara establishing the Alto Douro
Wine Company74 (August 31, 1756) for the purpose of regulat¬
ing the wine business of that region. As the Alto Douro district
was the center of the vineyard areas of Portugal, the company
in reality was to regulate the wine business of the country.
   By sections 29, 30, and 31 of the statutes of the company,
the exportation of wines from Portugal was limited to the pro¬
duction of the Alto Douro area. Only wine with a permit
could be sent down from Alto Douro to the port of Oporto;


  71 S. P. For., Port., 89/64. The complaints are taken from a memorandum of
merchants living in Lisbon, dated November 29, 1764.
  71 Thomas Hay, English ambassador at Lisbon, to secretary of state for foreign
affairs, March 18, 1763. The letter is given by Smith in Memoirs of Pombal, II, 47.
  73 From “An Account of the Establishment and Progress of the Oporto Wine
Company,” written by Pombal after his retirement from the ministry (Smith,
Memoirs of Pombal, I, 143 ff).
 74 Ignacio de Freitas, Collecfdo, III, 488-517. There are fifty-three sections to the
regulations of the company.
 44          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 failure to secure the permit resulted in confiscation of the wine
 by the agents of the company. Permits were issued by official
 tasters who approved for exportation or condemned for home
 use at their own judgment. The tasters were employees of the
 wine company, which was a competitor of the British mer¬
chants, and no appeal from their decisions was permitted. The
only sale possible for wine belonging to English merchants
which had been condemned was to the wine company itself,
as section 28 said that only the company could sell to any one
within a radius of three leagues of Oporto, and sale beyond that
limit became “exportation.” The English merchant therefore
was forced to accept for his condemned wine whatever price
the company set, while the employees of the company possessed
the power to condemn any amount they adjudged advisable.
By section 19, the company obtained a monopoly of the export
of wines, brandies, and vinegars to Brazil. By sections 7 and 8
the judge conservator of the company could commandeer all
means of conveyance, warehousing, and all artificers needful
for the wine trade of the company. By such drastic regulations,
Pombal tried to retrieve the wine business from the hands of
the English.
  Practically all of the measures adopted by the minister to
combat English supremacy were contrary to the treaty stipu¬
lations existing between England and Portugal. It was plain
that his design was to establish an active trade among the sub¬
jects of Portugal, and to make the foreign merchant useless.
Yet Thomas Hay, British ambassador at Lisbon, could add to
this declaration of Pombal’s purpose that he did not know a
more upright man than Pombal and that he was sure that the
minister firmly believed that he had advised only what every
sovereign had a right to do, independent of treaties, within his
own dominions.75 Pombal was not an enemy of England; he
was attempting to retrieve his country from a condition of virtual
vassalage to a foreign state.
  The result of this policy soon became obvious, for England’s
 76 Hay to sect, of state for foreign affairs, March 18,1763, Smith, Memoirs of Pombal
  49,50.
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                      45
trade with Portugal fell off decisively after the Peace of Paris.
In 1765 the woolen trade was half what it had been ten years
earlier. Fish from Newfoundland had diminished by one-fourth;
and the silk export to Portugal, begun so prosperously, had
been checked by the rise of home manufactures and importa¬
tion from Spain and Italy. French and Dutch woolens were
competing favorably with the English article while the silk
stocking trade was equally divided between France and Eng¬
land. Twenty years earlier there arrived annually at Lisbon
six or seven hundred English vessels which were the almost ex¬
clusive carriers of Portuguese trade in the Mediterranean.
Now due to Dutch and Swedish competition the number of
English vessels had shrunk to less than four hundred.76
  In summing up their findings, certain commissioners ap¬
pointed to study Anglo-Portuguese trade relations reported in
1767 that what appeared to them to be by far the most im¬
portant phase of all that had come under their consideration
was the situation of the trade with Brazil. They unanimously
concurred with the reports which came up yearly from Lisbon
representing that the improvement or diminution of Great
Britain’s commerce with Portugal depended on the trade with
the South American colony. Now the exclusive trading com¬
panies and the Junta do Commercio instituted by Pombal threat¬
ened to deprive England of participation in Brazilian colonial
commerce, which, in the opinion of the commissioners, was
by far the most important element in Anglo-Portuguese com¬
mercial relations.77
 In 1774 the trade with Portugal “usually so highly extolled”
was “sunk down to less than half of what it used to be form¬
erly.”78 In 1781 the Portuguese, after strictly prohibiting the
importation of cotton goods from England, now refused to ad-

  78 MacPherson, Annals, III, 425-426. From 1748 to 1755, 1294 British ships
entered Oporto. From 1756 to 1763, the number was reduced to 757 (S. P. For.,
Port., 89/64, Annex 2). Another annex gives total value of exports and imports to
and from Portugal by years from 1750 to 1765. Exports diminished steadily after
1761, except for 1764 immediately after the Peace of Paris.
  77 S. P. For., Port., 89/64, pp. 118-119.
  78 MacPherson, Annals, III, 560; Smith, Memoirs of Pombal, II, 254.
46          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
mit woolen goods and printed linens from Ireland.79 In 1760
the balance of trade was nearly a million pounds sterling in
favor of England; by 177° it was down to two hundred thou¬
sand; by 1780 there was a balance against England of nearly
one hundred thousand pounds. In 1760 only Holland and
Germany took more English goods than did Portugal; but
fifteen years later, Holland, Germany, Spain, Italy, and Flan¬
ders pushed Portugal to sixth place among Britain’s foreign
traders, while Africa, the East Indies, Ireland, and the Amer¬
ican colonies far outstripped the Portuguese as buyers of British
merchandise.80
  It is evident from the foregoing discussion that the Portugal
trade underwent a radical change between 1713 and 1786.
The irritation from minor causes became acute under the
Marquis of Pombal’s anti-English policy; the income of gold
resulting from a favorable balance of trade shrank from over
a million sterling to little or nothing; and the trade itself fell
from being “the most advantageous that” England “drove
anywhere       to an humble sixth place among the foreign na¬
tions buying from England. Economically Portugal had lost
its paramount importance.
  Coincident with this change in the Portugal trade, there
arose a new group of vested interests in England, whose profit
dictated a new commercial policy. Before the rise of the new
class, the productive resources of England were mainly in the
hands of the landlords who controlled the national resources,
and of merchant princes who based their business on a monop¬
olistic commercial system. The great manufacturers, who rose
to power in the first half of George Ill’s reign as a consequence
of the transition to mechanical production, did not maintain
themselves by a monopoly either of raw materials or of trade
artificially acquired by protective laws at home and special
concessions abroad. By virtue of their new machines, they
could produce more goods at less cost for sale at prices under
those of any competitor. Trade restrictions on those articles in
 79 MacPherson, Annals, III, 685.
 80 Ibid., Ill, 339, 500, 673.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                         47
the production of which they excelled the world were not
necessary.81
  One of the principal articles which benefitted from the in¬
vention of machinery was cotton. In 1769 only some fifty thou¬
sand wheels were employed in spinning, but twenty years later
the number was around two millions. Manchester and Bir¬
mingham developed as centers of the new interests. Woolens suf¬
fered from competition of cotton cloths and from the slowness
with which the woolen manufacturers gave up their old meth¬
ods and adopted the new machine system.82 The tide of fashion
which had been so long in favor of French goods in England
now turned strongly in the contrary direction, with the result
that English manufactures of almost all kinds were in such de¬
mand in France that shop-keepers wrote over their doors “Afar-
chandises d’Angleterre” England could buy raw cotton from
France, work it up under double freights, send it back to
France under              per cent, duty, and still undersell the French
fabric by twelve to twenty per cent.83
   Leagued with the cotton group were the pottery and iron
manufacturers. Josiah Wedgwood, of pottery fame, testified
before a committee of the House of Lords that “there are ar¬
ticles of the utmost consequence to the manufacturers of this
kingdom, as they enable us to baffle all competition with for¬
eign markets. . . . These are the machines, presses, dies and
tools, in which the manufacturers of Great Britain excell all
the world.”84
  The ramifications of the new power were as far-reaching as
the woolen business of 1713, with an even larger number of
people “called from idleness to comfortable independence” by


  81 For the best discussion of the rise of the great manufacturers of England,
1760-1790, see Witt Bowden’s book of that title. See also MacPherson, Annals, IV,
79-83, 132-134.
  82 Bowden, Rise of the Great Manufacturers, pp. 35-37. In West Riding of Yorkshire,
however, the transition to machines in wool manufacture followed quickly on the
revolution in cotton manufacturing.
  83 Bowden, op. cit., p. 39; MacPherson, Annals, IV, 82; Oscar Browning, “Com¬
mercial Treaty between England and France,” p. 359.
  84 Bowden, op. cit., pp. 41, 79.
 48         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 increased demands of labor.86 The new interests were able by
 their organization and finances to ship their own foreign trade
 and to search out new markets. They made money quickly,
 for one cotton lord cleared seventeen thousand pounds sterling
 a year for two successive years, and various manufacturers paid
 twenty to twenty-six thousand pounds excise tax in 1785.86
   These new industrialists felt the need of wider markets for
 their increased output. “It was now (and, strange to say, not
till now) discovered that France was capable of being a most
valuable commercial connection to Great Britain, and that a
trade with twenty-four millions of people, possessing many val¬
uable commodities which we stand in need of and wanting
many valuable articles which we manufacture and having
moreover a currency of near ninety millions sterling of real
gold and silver money, was likely to be an object of greater
importance to a manufacturing and commercial people than a
trade with any other nation of inferior population and opu¬
lence. 87 At the time when England’s market was narrowing
down, the creation of new outlets was becoming imperative.
Against this need of new markets to soak up the surplus of man¬
ufactures produced in England, Portugal closed its doors and
revived its own industries. On the other hand France turned
from Colbert Mercantilism to faith in the physiocrats and was
ready to offer liberal terms to English commerce.88
   When in October, 1785, England had not yet acted in re¬
gard to article 18 of the treaty of Versailles,89 France forbade
the importation of a number of British manufactures and in¬
dicated that it intended to turn to Holland.90 William Pitt,
then prime minister, was thus prodded into action. He had
learned by the failure of his Irish project that any measure

  “ MacPherson, Annals, IV, 133.
                                     84 Bowden, Rise of the Manufacturers, p. 62.
  87 MacPherson, Annals, IV, 11.
  » Cunningham, Growth of English Industry, I, 6oa; Hist. Mss. Comm, Dropmm.
rapersy I, 201, Buckingham to Grenville, May 17, 1786.
  89 1783. The article called for a commission to be appointed by England and
France to draw up a new arrangement of commerce between the two countries
on the basis of reciprocity.

 *° Br0Wnmg> “Treaty of Commerce between England and France,” pp. 349-363.
                  STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                            49
dealing with commerce must have the approval of the new in¬
dustrial lords.91 He therefore cleverly chose William Eden from
the opposition to negotiate with France,92 with instructions to
remain in constant communication with the members of the
General Chamber of Manufacturers.93 Before he left for Paris,
Eden spent days in consultation with both the old and the new
style manufacturer, but his results show that he heeded the
advice of the cotton, hardware, and pottery groups, which made
up the new interests.94 The chamber, through its individual
members, exerted a profound influence on the terms of the
treaty, with Josiah Wedgwood and the Birmingham and Man¬
chester groups controlling the action of the manufacturers.96
The treaty was signed on September 26, 1786, and on January
26 following, a copy was placed before the House of Commons.98

   91 Witt Bowden, “The Influence of the Manufacturers on Some of the Earlier
Policies of Wm. Pitt,” American Historical Review, XXIX, 615 ff.; Hist. Mss. Comm.,
Dropmore Papers, I, 248-254, Earl of Momington to W. W. Grenville, April 1, May
20-31, August 13, 1785.
   81 George Tomline, Memoirs of the Life of William Pitt, II, 220 and footnote;
Stanhope, Life of Pitt, I, 287; Correspondence between Pitt and the Duke of Rutland,
1781-1787, p. 136.
   98 The Chamber had been organized March 14, 1785, by the manufacturers to
oppose Pitt’s Excise Tax and Irish Resolutions. It had modified the first and caused
the defeat of the second project.
   94 Add. Ms. 34,462, Evidence for the Commercial Treaty with France taken before
theBoard ofTrade, 1785-1786.Edenattended every oneof the twenty-four meetings
held between January 4, and March 16, 1786. The committee examined repre¬
sentatives from manufacturers of linens, woolens, iron, cutlery, and plated work;
cotton goods of all kinds, leather goods, printed calicoes, pottery and china; glass,
hardware, hats, paper, and gauze. Merchants and bankers dealing with Portugal
and wine merchants in general were examined. With very few exceptions these
groups demanded that trade be opened with France. They had no fear of French
competition and they needed the new market badly. Journal and Correspondence of
William, Lord Auckland, Chapters V and VI, gives some letters bearing on the nego¬
tiations leading to the signing of the treaty.
   96 Witt Bowden, “English Manufacturers and the Treaty of 1786,” Amer. Hist. Re¬
view, XXV, 28-30; Add. Ms. 34,420 ff. 253-4, Letter from Josiah Wedgwood to
Eden, December 13, 1785; ibid., ff. 280-281, Knox to Eden, December 19, 1785;
ibid., ff. 296 ff., Sheffield to Eden, December 28, 1785; ibid., ff. 348 ff. gives rdsum6
of information obtained through the widespread inquiry made by the govern¬
ment among manufacturers as to their opinion on Anglo-French commerce. Little
mention is made of Portuguese trade.
   94 Commons Journals, XLII, 266 ff.; Cobbett, Pari. Debates, XXVI, 235 ff.
    4
50          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
     The most important of the forty-seven articles was the sixth
which specified the duties to be charged on goods imported
into the two countries. The first division of this article stated
decisively that “the wines of France, imported directly from
France into Great Britain, shall in no case, pay any higher
duties than those which the wines of Portugal now pay.” The
duties on vinegar and brandies were reduced while those on
olive oils were made equal to the most favored nation. These
clauses were clearly detrimental to the Portuguese trade. On
the other hand, hardware, cutlery, cabinet ware, and iron;
steel, copper, and brass works; cotton manufactures and pottery
interests secured the advantages which the members of those
groups desired, while cotton or woolens mixed with silk were
absolutely prohibited. The most favored nation clause was
guaranteed each, with the right of each crown to reserve the
special concessions granted respectively to Spain and to Portu¬
gal by the French Compact of 1761 and the Methuen treaty97
of 1703.
  Pitt intended to reserve all of England’s rights under the
Methuen Treaty, “in case Portugal makes it worth our while
to agree with it,” and he was going to “insist on Ireland’s
having the full benefit of the Methuen Treaty, if it is to be
preserved at all. 98 The 1703 treaty was to continue, but as a
matter of fact, its effect was destroyed. French wines had paid
ninety-nine pounds a tun duty while Portugal paid only forty-
six.99 By the reduction of the duties to less than half the former
rate, French wines would become cheap enough to lie within
the reach of the average buyer and permit the general popu¬
larity of French over Portuguese wines to overbalance the rela¬
tively cheaper price paid for the latter. The French treaty was
a renunciation of the Portuguese trade in favor of France, al¬
though by virtue of the clause which reserved the right to pre¬
serve the special concessions granted to Portugal in 1703, the
letter of the Methuen treaty was not violated.

 w Article VII.
 " Pltt to Rutland, Downing Street, August 19, 1786, Correspondence, pp. 159-160.
 " Browning, “Treaty of Commerce Between England and France,” p. 358.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                        51
   Charles James Fox with seventy faithful followers attempted
to revive the drama of 1713. From January 29 to February
21, he labored, by rallying the Opposition around the banner
of Portugal, to defeat the French treaty. The minister empha¬
sized the manner in which Portugal had been departing from
the very treaties which Fox was holding up as the idol of Eng¬
lish commerce, while Pitt insisted that whether the Portuguese
trade survived or collapsed, it was better to agree quickly with
France. Numerous accounts of the state of all branches of the
trade of Great Britain with Portugal, France, and the world
at large, were loaded on the table for the perusal of the mem¬
bers of the House of Commons, who thus came to realize the
changed conditions of Anglo-Portuguese commerce. Only one
petition was presented against the bill. A discontented minor¬
ity of the General Chamber of Manufacturers pleaded for de¬
lay on the treaty without advancing any argument against
it.100 But Fox’s effort was futile,101 as Pitt had spiked the guns
of any opposition when he gave heed to the wishes of the new
class who stood to profit by a different commercial policy for
England. The Portuguese trade was a broken reed for the Op¬
position. On April 4, 1787, the bill for repealing the duties and
customs necessary to put the treaty into effect was carried,
119 to 43, and the treaty became a fact.102 The decision of 1713
had been reversed.
  But at the very time when English commercial policy so de¬
cisively turned against Portugal, a new element was develop¬
ing in the economic relations of the two countries. In his efforts
to free Portugal from its dependence on England, Pombal had

   100 Eden had kept in touch with the members of the Chamber which, in Decem¬
ber after the signature of the treaty, had approved the terms negotiated. Oppo¬
sition developed among the older manufacturers and at a separate meeting the
futile petition was prepared and signed (Bowden, Rise of the Manufacturers, pp. 72-
79)-
  101 For a detailed account of the efforts of the Opposition to defeat the treaty,
see: Commons Journals, XVII, 278-279, 299-307, 365-367, 375, 379, 386; Cobbett
Pari. Debates, XXVI, 260-268, 343-351, 357, 358, 361-378, 381-408, 408-468; Hist.
Mss. Comm., Rutland Papers, II, 373, Daniel Pulteney to Rutland, February 16
and 20, 1787.
  102 Cobbett, Pari. Debates, XXVI, 894-913.
 52          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 fostered plantations in preference to mines in the colony. Un¬
 der his influence, the culture of cotton, rice, indigo, coffee, and
 cacao began to spread rapidly through Brazil. By 1806 from
 136,000 to 140,000 bales of cotton (of four arrobas—32 lbs. to
 an arroba—each) entered Lisbon from the colony; and Pom-
 bar s huge warehouses, constructed in the market place of Lis¬
 bon amid the jeers of his enemies, were now insufficient to hold
the cotton, coffee, sugar, and indigo flowing in from Brazil.103
Between 1789 and 1792 importation at Lisbon of cotton from
Brazil increased from 38,243 to over sixty thousand bales of
from 140 to 200 pounds each.104
   Coincident with this increased supply of raw cotton from
Brazil, there came an increased demand for it on the part of
the new manufacturers of England who had turned their backs
on the Portuguese trade. In 1786, of the twenty millions of
pounds imported into England, less than six millions were from
British domains. Eight years later the empire supplied no more
than one-sixth of the amount needed.105 On the other hand, the
old stream of gold from Brazil through Portugal to England
was replaced by the flow of raw cotton. From less than one hun¬
dred thousand pounds sterling worth in 1785, the importation
of raw cotton from Portugal to England grew to over six hun¬
dred thousand pounds in value in 1791.106 In that year there
was a balance of trade in favor of Portugal of nearly £252,000,
and English gold was shipped through Portugal to Brazil.107
This was before the wars started on the Continent.
   In 1792 only Russia, the United States, and Italy sold more
merchandise to England than did Portugal. The war, starting
in 1793» by closing the markets of France to Great Britain and


  103 Biographie Universelle, XXXV, 371, footnote.
  104 Add. Ms. 9252, ff. 101-102.
   106 Bowden, “English Manufacturers and the Treaty of 1786,” pp. 25-26.
   109 General Statement made by the factory at Lisbon at request of the English
ambassador, dated Lisbon, November 12, 1792. Of the cotton exported from
Lisbon in 1791, nearly 4,800,000 lbs. came from Pernambuco and about 3,000,000
from Maranhao. The rest came from Pard, Bahia, and Rio de Janeiro (Add. Ms.
9252, ff. 101-102).
  107 Add. Ms. 9252, fl. 98, reverse.
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                         53
preventing the operation of the stipulations of the treaty of
1786, drove England’s shipments to her old ally beyond the
million pounds sterling mark, whereas Britain’s bill for goods
received, contrary to former times, did not lack much of reach¬
ing the same amount.108
  The swing of the pendulum back toward Portugal was ac¬
celerated by the French Revolution. War with France, as of old,
drove England and Portugal together. On February 1,                          1793,

France declared war on England; on September 26, Grenville
signed a short but significant treaty with Portugal. All old trea¬
ties were reaffirmed, and Portugal promised to help England
against France. The trading vessels of each nation were to be
considered as of the same nationality and to be so treated in
the ports of each country; Portuguese ports were to be closed
to French war vessels and privateers and to all trade in muni¬
tions with that country. If France should attack Portugal, the
latter would at once close her ports to all classes of French
ships, and England was to come to the aid of its ally.109 The
short treaty of six articles prophesied clearly the struggle be¬
tween Napoleon and England for control of the Portuguese
ports, the importance of which lay in their strategic and com¬
mercial value.
 The European situation of 1703 was being repeated in an
aggravated form. Raw cotton and provisions from Brazil now
surpassed in importance the wine provision of Methuen’s treaty,
although England was again dependent on Portugal for its
liquors. The new market opened in 1786, and still urgently
needed by British manufacturers, was closed by the French
wars; but Portugal would serve as a gateway for the entrance
of such articles to the Continent, and to the colony of Brazil.
Strategically, Portugal was necessary to England as a land and
naval base. At the turn of the century the Anglo-Portuguese
Alliance was firmly reestablished.

  108 MacPherson, Armais, IV, 262, 536.
  io» Commons Journals, XLIX, 10; J. Debrett, A Collection of State Papers, I, 25-27.
The treaty was presented to the Commons together with the treaties with Spam,
the two Sicilies, Prussia, and the Emperor (Cobbett, Pari. Debates, XXX, 1048).
                                CHAPTER III


 THE TRANSFER OF THE PORTUGUESE COURT TO
                             RIO DE JANEIRO


 Portugal,       caught like a shellfish in a tempest between the
waves of England’s seapower and the rock of Napoleon’s armies,
wavered in its allegiance to the English treaty of 1793. In Lisbon
Queen Maria hovered between lucid intelligence and com¬
plete insanity, with the fat, irresolute, silent D. Joao waiting
to become Joao VI. Pombal had been dropped overboard
when D. Maria succeeded Jose in 1777, and D. Joao had mar¬
ried D. Carlota Joaquina, sister of the future Ferdinand VII
of Spain. Pombal’s efforts to play Richelieu and create a strong
court group ceased at his fall, and now a decadent court sur¬
rounded a half-insane queen and an obese prince royal who
suffered from a chronic case of indecision.1
  In 1796 D. Maria declared Lisbon a free port2 under certain
conditions, and four months later she announced that Portugal
was neutral.3 In Paris D. Antonio d’Araujo e Azevedo, who
eighteen years later at Rio de Janeiro was to cause the recall
of Minister Strangford, concluded a secret peace4 * with Talley¬
rand which closed the ports of Portugal to English vessels.6 But

  1 This picture of Joao VI is given by Tobias Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, A
Elaborafdo da Independence, passim. A more sympathetic picture is given by J. M.
Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundofdo do Imperio Brazileiro, I, 50-51, 57-68.
  2 F. Martens, Recueil des Traitis des Puissances e Etats de I'Europe Depuis 1761, VI
604-608.
  * Ibid., VII, 140.
  4 Ibid., Recueil, VII, 201. Signed August 20, 1797.
   6 Lord Malmesbury, English peace envoy, called Araujo a “very strange man
. . . partial to revolutionary principles and modern philosophy.” Hist. Mss.
Comm., Dropmore Papers, III, 355, Malmesbury to Grenville, Lille, August 22
1797-
          TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                        55
Lord Grenville demanded that Lisbon disavow the negotia¬
tions and the treaty was not ratified.* * * * * 6 Diplomacy had failed to
win Portugal to France.
   By 1801 the overflowing warehouses of Lisbon, the trade with
England mounting to the two million pounds sterling mark, and
the strategic position of Portugal in the Peninsula could no
longer be overlooked by Napoleon. Hence he peremptorily de¬
manded that the Portuguese close their ports to the English,
send him fifteen to twenty million livres, and cede him the
Guianas in South America; if they refused, Spain, under the
unconscionable Godoy, Principe de la Paz, would oblige them
to obey.7 The Portuguese refused, and were forced to sign the
disastrous treaty of Badajoz with Spain, the second article of
which specified that the Portuguese ports in all the possessions
of the kingdom were to be closed to all English ships.8 A French
treaty negotiated by Lucien Bonaparte on the same occasion,
although it was apparently very stringent in its demands,
failed to please Napoleon, and a second agreement was forced
on the Portuguese by the Treaty of Madrid, September 29,
 1801. The ports were closed; no help of any sort was to be
given to the enemies of France; French Guiana was enlarged;
the original payment of one million livres monthly till fifteen
millions were paid was increased by five more millions;9 and
Lannes, one of Napoleon’s most brilliant generals, was ordered
to Lisbon to “hold the bridle on the Portuguese.”10
   By the Treaty of Amiens which soon followed, the integrity
of Portuguese territory was guaranteed by England, but the
French did not return the gains in Guiana nor did Spain re-

   9 For the Araujo-Malmesbury negotiations and the reaction of Pitt and Gren¬
ville, see: Hist. Mss. Comm., Dropmore Papers, III, 282, 355, 359, 373; Cobbett,
Debates, XXXI, 1422; J. Debrett, A Collection of State Papers, V, 173-212, VI, xvi-xx
and 136; Malmesbury, Diaries and Correspondence of James Harris, 1st Earl of Malmes¬
bury, III, 460-467, 488-496; Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 54-57. After
the time limit of six months had expired, Joao, fearing a French invasion, did
send a ratification which was rejected by France.
   7 A. Sorel, LEurope et la Revolution franfaise, VI, 106.
   8 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, II, 340 ff.; Sorel, op. cit., VI, 153.
   * Ibid., II, 589 ff.; Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, p. 3.
   10 A Sorel, L' Europe et la Revolution franfaise, VI, 175.
 56           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 linquish the territory won by the Treaty of Badajoz.11 At the
 moment of the crisis in the Portuguese affair of 1801, England
 was forced to choose between Egypt and its old ally. By with¬
 drawing its forces from Portugal and concentrating on Egypt
 in accordance with a plan agreed upon by both countries,
 England left Portugal exposed to the advance of Godoy, Prince
 of Peace. In return, the English ministry voted the Portuguese
 a subsidy to help pay the twenty millions of francs demanded
 by Napoleon. The additional articles forced on Portugal re¬
 quiring the closing of the ports and the loss of territory were
 unfortunate, but could not be helped.12
   About the middle of June, 1803, Joao, now prince regent
 ruling in place of his demented mother, declared his country
 would be neutral if war broke out among his allies and friends,
 which included both France and England. In addition, re¬
membering the outcome of the 1801 affair, he prohibited the
entrance into Portuguese ports of privateers, war vessels, and
prizes, a stipulation which was detrimental to England’s in¬
terests.13 In March of the next year he secured the guaranty
of France to Portuguese neutrality by signing a convention
whereby the former agreed to convert the obligation of the
treaty of Madrid into a subsidy of sixteen million francs pay¬
able in monthly installments.14 Quite sure that he had brought
his country into safe harbor just in time to escape the tempest
of war which broke out afresh in 1803, D. Joao dismissed the
affairs of Europe from his mind, and the Portuguese nation
rejoiced in the prospects of peace.16
  But D. Joao was resting in false security, for “after Tilsit the
one great gap in Napoleon’s barrier was Portugal.”16 Closely
allied to England economically and politically and preoccu¬
pied with its colonial possessions, Portugal was reluctant to

 11 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, II, 566.
  12 Speech by Lord Hawkesbury, Cobbett, Debates, XXXVI, 665; also speech
by Chancellor Addington, ibid., XXXVI, 667-668.
 13 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, III, 536 ff.
 !! Monteiro, Histona do Imfierio, p. 4; Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 57-61.
 16 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., I, 60-61.
 16 A. D. Innes, A History of England and the British Empire, IV, 37.
           TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                            57
enforce the restrictions of the continental blockade. Yet Na¬
poleon believed it necessary, if England was to be starved out,
to stop British trade with Portuguese ports. “For the moment
he dreamed of but one thing; that was to secure in the Penin¬
sula the severest restrictions on British commerce and to ob¬
tain the submission of Portugal to his vast designs.”17
  When, in 1806, Talleyrand warned England that the em¬
peror intended to take possession of Portugal unless England
made peace with France, the Portuguese minister in London
reported to his government that the warning was only a threat
to frighten the English government into concluding peace.
The Portuguese cabinet thereupon refused the offer of ten
thousand English troops and frowned upon the British fleet
which was ordered to Lisbon by England in reply to Talley¬
rand’s threat.18
  In view of the critical situation, the English government
sent the energetic Percy Clinton Sydney Smythe, Viscount
Strangford, to Lisbon to hold Portugal fast to the English
alliance.19 There he found two groups in the Portuguese court,
each striving for control over the prince regent. One party, led
by Antonio d’Araujo e Azevedo, then minister for foreign af¬
fairs, leaned toward France. Napoleon, Araujo said, had given
a positive promise not to allow Spain to attack Portugal by
land, and France had guaranteed the neutrality of Portugal.
His group, however, would be guided by the example of Den¬
mark, which was then neutral; if Bonaparte should respect
that neutrality, Portugal would also be spared. Resistance to
France, he argued further, was futile, for what Prussia had
failed to do, Portugal could never accomplish.20 But to counter¬
act Spanish intrigues at the emperor’s court, Araujo estab¬
lished his former secretary as a special Portuguese agent in
Paris.21
  This party was in the ascendency when Strangford arrived.

 17 M. A. Thiers, Histoire du Consulat et de l’Empire, VIII, 20.
 18 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 99-100.
 19 F. O., 63/54, from Strangford, Nos. 1-5.
 20 Ibid., Strangford to Howick, No. 5.
  "Ibid., No. 21.
58           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
The other group, led by Rodrigo de Souza e Coutinho, brother
of the Portuguese minister at London, was intriguing against
Araujo. Souza Coutinho favored active military measures and
a strong alliance with England in the face of Napoleon’s de¬
mands.22 From this group Strangford received valuable infor¬
mation and support.
   The two groups and the British minister centered their ac¬
tivities on the prince regent, where lay the final decision re¬
garding whatever course might be chosen. In their efforts to
influence D. Joao, these conflicting elements faced a provok¬
ing difficulty. Toward the end of 1805 the prince regent had
discovered a plot to declare him insane and seat D. Carlota
on the throne. The fact that the leader of the conspiracy was
his wife drove D. Joao into retirement at the convent at Mafra
six leagues from Lisbon. He rarely received visitors, still more
rarely came to Lisbon, and began to suffer from attacks of
vertigo. He saw treason in every corner and mistrusted every¬
body and everything.23 Thus during the critical months of
1807, the man in whom rested the ultimate authority and
responsibility for the Portuguese nation permitted only a
meager contact with his ministers and the diplomatic corps at
Lisbon and remained out of touch with developments in
Europe.
   Immediately on his arrival, Viscount Strangford was faced
by the hostility of Spain. Spanish rowboat privateers were
seriously damaging British commerce on the Portuguese coasts,24
and the Spanish minister at Lisbon complained in a nasty way
that it was only in consequence of supplies received by British
ships from Brazilian ports that England could maintain its
system of hostilities against the colonial possessions of Spain.26
  22 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 54.
  23 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 65-68.
  24 The rowboats could escape into Portuguese ports where British warships could
not follow, due to Portugal’s declaration of neutrality. Strangford said that there
were portions of the Portuguese coast more dangerous to British subjects than any
equal extent of coast in possession of England’s enemies (F. O. 63/54, Strangford
to Howick, No. 23).
  26 F. O., 63/54, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 27, 28; F. O., 63/55, Strangford
to Canning, No. 41.
             TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                           59
Strangford appealed to the Lisbon cabinet for aid against the
rowboat privateers and urged that a proper national defense
be prepared.26 The inroads made by the Spanish on British
commerce led him to send home a long dispatch in which he
discussed the whole question of Anglo-Portuguese trade rela¬
tions. He suggested that a remodeled Methuen Treaty be
signed whereby Portugal was to admit English cotton manufac¬
tures at twenty per cent, ad valorem duty while England was
to give preference to Portuguese raw cotton from Brazil.27 Al¬
though the suggestions were fruitless, the dispatch demon¬
strates the minister’s preoccupation with the economic rela¬
tions of the two countries.
    On August 12, 1807, Portugal received notice that Talley¬
rand’s warning of the previous year was more than a threat.
A joint note signed by France and Spain was delivered on
that date, demanding that Portugal declare war on England
by withdrawing its minister from London and requesting the
recall of the English representative at Lisbon; that the ports
of Portugal be closed to British war vessels and merchantmen;
and that English residents in Portugal be imprisoned and their
property confiscated. A reply was to be made by September,
 and failure to comply with the demands would mean war.28
   Neutrality was no longer possible; Portugal had to choose
sides before the end of the month, but the cabinet was split,
and the prince regent was hiding in Mafra. Orders were sent
to the Chevalier de Souza in London to inform the English
government that the very existence of the Portuguese monarchy
depended on England’s making peace with Napoleon, and
that D. Joao would not confiscate the property of English sub¬
jects under any hazard. Strangford believed that Portugal
   26 F. O., 63/54, Strangford to Howick, Nos. 17, 23; Strangford to Canning,
No. 33.
   27 Ibid., Strangford to Canning, No. 33.
  28 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 46. Also 63/57, Letters and Papers
from Cheu. de Souza, Portuguese Minister, and Others, extract of dispatch of D. Louren^o
de Lima, Portuguese minister at Paris, to Araujo, August 7, 1807, and the certified
copy of the French minister’s note of August 12, delivered at Lisbon. The copy
was sent to Souza with orders to show it to the English foreign minister. These
papers are in some confusion and are not numbered.
 6o           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
would accede to all of the other demands however.29 On Au¬
gust 20, news from England dispelled any hopes of salvation
through peace between Britain and Napoleon, and the Portu¬
guese court in despair begged England to be merciful. Strang-
ford suggested to the Foreign Office in the dispatch which con¬
veyed this plea for mercy, that in the situation which was
rapidly developing an opportunity would be presented for
England to secure concessions from Portugal such as the estab¬
lishment of English commercial houses in Brazil,30 the impor¬
tation of British cotton manufactures into Portuguese domin¬
ions, and the amending of the treaty of 1654 and of the Char¬
ter of Privileges to the advantage of England.31
   On the nineteenth the council of state formally refused to
confiscate British property and imprison British subjects. Time
was to be gained until an “apparent system of hostility” could
be worked out with England. Portugal required only that
England should not destroy Portuguese colonies and com¬
merce. War would be declared and England could seize all Por¬
tuguese warships which should operate against the British (al¬
though Portugal would prevent such operation by their ves¬
sels) and no letters of marque would be issued by Lisbon to
Portuguese subjects. Strangford added to his report of this
astounding proposal of a simulated state of war between Eng-

 29 F- ° > 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 46; F. O., 63/57, Minister Souza to
George Canning, August 28, 1807.
   80 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 79-80, gives the following statistics for
the trade of Portugal with foreign countries and with its colonies for 1806; im¬
ported from all foreign countries, 16, 440: 9218781 (read 16,440 contos 921 mil 781
reis); exported to all Portuguese colonies, 1 i,3i4:3i3$554;exported to Brazil,8,426:-
0978899; exported to all foreign countries, 23,255:5058141; imported from.all
colonies, 16,103:9668250; imported from Brazil, 14,153:7528891. These figures,
which he quotes from Balbi, Statistique du Portugal, demonstrate the importance
°f Brazil in Portuguese commercial exchange. Strangford, F. O., 63/55, Strang¬
ford to Canning, No. 67, states that of the £657,510 worth of merchandise which
England imported from Lisbon as an annual average for the five year period end¬
ing 1792, nearly £427,000 was produce of Brazil. His figures were taken from the
books of the English factory at Lisbon. It would be advantageous to English com¬
merce with Portugal to eliminate the entrepot of Portugal and establish commercial
houses in Brazil with direct Anglo-Brazilian trade.
  31 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 47.
          TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                       61
land and Portugal that, in truth, no military means could save
Portugal from French invasion as the army was thoroughly
incapable. Lisbon could be saved by means of the British fleet,
but English property at Oporto, which was defenseless, was
five times as valuable as that at Lisbon.32
  Five days before the expiration of the time limit set for this
reply, the council voted to take no action until the opinion of
the English cabinet could be secured.33 This opinion, as given
by Strangford, was for the court to move to Brazil immediately,
finding refuge beyond the reach of Napoleon’s armies.34 Active
preparations were begun in the ship yards and the minister
was told that D. Joao would appreciate help from England
in case the flight took place.35 The Portuguese foreign minister
asserted that a great and powerful empire, protected in its in¬
fancy by the naval power of England, was to be established
in America. Strangford, at this point in his report of the inte r-
view, gleefully interjected that, in such a case, nothing could
prevent the granting to England of an exclusive trade to the
ports of Brazil. By the decision of the council of state, the eldest
son of the king was to leave for the colony at once as a warning
to Spain and France that in case Portugal did fall into their
hands, the Portuguese monarchy would remain intact to threat¬
en Spanish colonies and fatten British commerce. If French
troops should enter Portuguese territory, the prince regent
would follow his son, and although France would gain Portu¬
gal, England would gain Brazil.36 The English minister ex¬
pressed himself as being well content with this plan, and noted

  32 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 48. The minister enclosed a state¬
ment of the value of British property in Oporto in Dispatch 67. He estimated the
value of the movable property, houses and land, and debts due English residents
in Oporto to be 2,900:0008000, the factory to be £20,000, the burying ground,
£2,000, while debts due British manufacturers for goods of all kinds reached
the amount of £250,000. i$ooo was worth something over three shillings in
1800.
  33 Ibid., No. 50.
  34 Ibid., Canning urged the same solution (F. O., 63/56, Canning to Strangford,
Nos. 9, 11).
 36 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 51.
  36 Ibid., No. 55. Council meeting of September 2, 1807.
 62            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 with approval that thirty-nine Portuguese warships of all
 classes were collected in the harbor of Lisbon with this policy
 in view.37
       Toward the end of September Strangford secured a decree
 allowing English merchants to withdraw all goods from the
 customs houses free of duties and expenses, as an emergency
 measure to prevent the seizure of British property by the French
in case of invasion.38 A day or so later the French minister re¬
peated his demands, to which he had as yet received no reply
although almost a month had elapsed since the time limit had
expired. A five day limit was set this time.39 The Portuguese
offer, in reply, to close the ports to the English was not satis¬
factory, and both the Spanish and French ministers demanded
their passports. A courier was sent to General Junot who was
waiting at Bayonne with a French force, and Strangford was
certain that the French troops would advance at once.40
       In the meantime full powers had been sent to the Chevalier
de Souza, Portuguese minister in London, to conclude a secret
treaty whereby England was to be compensated for the closing
of the Portuguese ports.41 By the secret convention of October
22,42 which was the result of the ensuing negotiations, England
secured the right to occupy the Madeira Islands as soon as
France made a hostile move or Portugal closed its ports to
English vessels , the prince regent promised not to let any
part of his naval or mercantile fleet fall into French hands44;
England pledged an escort in case the royal family fled to
Brazil,46 and guaranteed never to recognize as king of Portugal
any prince who was not the legitimate heir of the house of

  37 The list of the warships is appended to Dispatch 55.
  38 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 60.
  33 Ibid., No. 62. The dispatch is dated September 25. The original demand of
confiscation of British property was modified to sequestration; otherwise the de¬
mands were identical {ibid.. No. 64).
  40 Ibid., No. 64.
  41     O., 63/57. The instructions are dated September 27, 1807.
   « F. O., 93, Treaties and Protocols, 37/iB, Portugal. The convention is given
also in Borges de Castro, Collecfao de Tratados, IV, 236.
  43 Preamble and Articles I and III.
  44 Article IV.                             43 Article II.
           TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                        63
Bragan9a.46 As soon as the court was established in Brazil
negotiations were to be started at once for a treaty of assistance
and commerce between Great Britain and the Portuguese gov¬
ernment.47 An additional article48 stipulated that in case Por¬
tuguese ports were closed to British ships, there would be
established on the island of Santa Catharina or some other point
on the coast of Brazil, a port where British merchandise could
be imported in English ships on payment of the same duties
as those charged on such articles in the ports of Portugal. The
prince regent ratified the convention, November 8, with cer¬
tain important reservations, chief among which was the rejec¬
tion of the Additional Article regarding the port on the island
of Santa Catharina.49 This matter, he said, could be taken up
when and if the court arrived in Brazil.
  Despite the departure of the French and Spanish ministers,
the Portuguese court was tranquil, convinced that Napoleon’s
warnings were only threats.50 The departure of the eldest son
of the prince regent was delayed from day to day to the ex¬
treme annoyance of Strangford, and the entire Portuguese
fleet was assembled in the Tagus where it would fall prey to
the French if Lisbon should be taken.51 The ports were closed
to the British by the edict of October 22, and Strangford failed
to make any headway with the petulant prince regent despite
two long interviews.52
  This assurance, which the Portuguese felt, of Napoleon’s
peaceful intentions was shortlived. On November 1, D. Lour-
en^o de Lima, Portuguese minister at Paris, reached Lisbon
with a message from the emperor. If, said Napoleon, the prince
regent acceded to all of the demands as delivered by the French

  46 Article VI.
  47 Article VII.
  48 Additional Article I.
  49 F. O., 63/58, Domestic, Letters and Papers from Chev. de Souza, Dispatch of
November 28, 1807. Also Borges de Castro, Collecfdo, IV, 254-262.
  60 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 68, 71, 72.
  61 Ibid., Nos. 70, 71, 75; F. O. 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 80. Canning
was extremely anxious over the possibility that the fleet might fall into the hands
of the French (F. O., 63/56, Canning to Strangford, Nos. 10, 11, 14).
  52 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 79, 80.
64              BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
minister, Portugal would be saved. No half measures would
serve; war against England must be declared at once. Success
in his mission, Napoleon advised D. Louren^o, meant the sal¬
vation of his country, while failure meant ruin.63 Consequently
the Portuguese court now faced a serious dilemma as the choice
had to be made at last between the demands of France and
those of England. By yielding to the emperor’s demands, Por¬
tugal might be saved, but at the price of losing the colonies
for the British fleet could easily sever the arteries binding the
Portuguese possessions to the mother country. On the other
hand, by yielding to England’s demands, the colonies might
be saved, but at the price of losing Portugal, as resistance to
the Napoleonic armies was hopeless.
     The vivid picture of French wrath which Louren$o painted
at the council meeting stampeded the ministers.64 On Novem¬
ber 6, Araujo suggested that it would be advantageous to Por-
tugal s interests if Strangford and the consul general, James
Gambier, should leave Lisbon. The viscount replied that it
would be better if the Portuguese ministry would cease its dis¬
graceful subterfuges, and that he could not leave just at pres¬
ent. Strangford explained to Canning that his departure would
be proof of Portugal’s compliance with Napoleon’s demands,
and hence he refused to go.66 Two days later the order to
sequestrate all English property and detain English residents
in the country was issued, and Strangford was forced to ask
for conveyance for his departure.66 Since the prince regent was
unaware of the Treaty of Fontainebleau concluded between
Spain and France, October 27, by which Portugal was divided
between Napoleon, the Prince of Peace, the royal family of
Spam, and the queen of Etruria,67 he hoped that by these
    M F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 84.
    64 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, m.
    66 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 89.
    M Ibid., No. 91. Comparatively little damage was done to the English at Lisbon
 y the decree as most of their property had been removed under the emergency
permission secured by Strangford late in September and a majority of the English
residents had already left the country,

.."Pereiora da Silva’ Historia do ImPerio> !» >04-105; Thiers, Histoire du Consulat,
V    II   OEM                                                                      1
            TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                        65
measures against the English, he would avoid the invasion of
Portugal by the French. In case General Junot should cross
the frontier with his troops, however, the flight to Brazil would
be undertaken at once.58
    Viscount Strangford lingered in Lisbon for ten days after he
had asked for his passports, to the great uneasiness of the Por¬
tuguese ministry. A spirited note from Araujo drove him out
on the eighteenth59 to the British fleet which then blockaded
Lisbon. But on the twenty-seventh, he was back in the Tagus
to force the surrender of the Portuguese fleet or the immediate
departure of the royal family to Brazil.60
   When he landed in Lisbon on the night of November 28,
 1807, he learned that the greater part of the nobility had al¬
ready embarked on the fleet which was destined to sail for
Brazil.61 Six days before he returned, news had reached Lisbon
that Junot had crossed the Portuguese frontier with twenty-
three thousand troops. Two days later, the arrival in Lisbon
of Le Moniteur, the official gazette of the French Empire, an¬
nouncing Napoleon’s decision to dethrone the house of Bra-
gan^a,62 proved to the prince regent that he could no longer
hope to remain on his throne in case of the absorption of his
kingdom by the French. On the other hand, he had alienated
his old ally by the recent measures against the English, and
the British fleet was blockading Lisbon. The embarkation had
been ordered for the twenty-seventh, but as yet no command
to sail had been issued.
   On his arrival, Strangford learned that the prince regent
wished urgently to see him. As soon as he discovered from
Antonio d’Araujo that D. Joao still vacillated, nourishing the

   68 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 93.
   69 Ibid., Strangford to Canning, Nos. 96 and 99. Strangford argued that it
would be unbefitting the dignity of an English minister to leave on a Portuguese
frigate and insisted on waiting until the English fleet arrived. On the eighteenth
he left on a fishing boat and reached the fleet after two very uncomfortable days
of rough seas.
  60 Ibid., Dispatch of November 29, Separate.
   61 Ibid., No. 103.
   62 Thiers, Histoire du Consulat, VIII, 339*340 Sorel, L’Europe et la. Revolution
frangaise, VII, 219.
    5
 66          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 hope that matters might yet be arranged with France, Strang-
 ford exerted his best talents to secure an immediate departure
 for Brazil. He wrote to the prince regent, pledging forgiveness
 for the acts of hostility shown by Portugal against England and
 help for the future, on condition of a departure for Brazil with¬
in two hours. Another note was dispatched to Sir Sidney Smith,
who commanded the blockading fleet, advising him to help
and not attack the Portuguese when they sailed.63 The min¬
ister’s next move, as he reported to George Canning,

 was to see the Prince Regent, and to follow up the effect of my let¬
ter. I saw that not a moment was to be lost, and that my duty was
to destroy in H. R. H.’s mind all hopes of accomodating matters
with the Invaders of his Country, to terrify him with dark and
gloomy descriptions of the state of the Capital, which I had just
left, and then to dazzle him suddenly with the brilliant prospects
before him, to direct all his fears to a French army and all his hopes
to an English fleet; not to permit him to doubt an instant of the
reception which he would meet from the latter and finally by teach-
ing him to expect everything from the Friendship and Magnanimity
of the best and most generous of Sovereigns, to put him at peace
with himself and to remove from his mind the humiliating recol¬
lections of having done amiss, and the fear of the consequences.®4

  Strangford was sure that the magnitude of the benefits ac¬
cruing to England from securing such action by the prince
regent would outweigh any transgression of his instructions.
Successful in his appeal, the minister was

convinced that by calling them [feelings of gratitude and respect
toward the king of England for services rendered to Portugal] forth

   “ fiy ordcrs from Canning dated November 7, and received after Strangford
left Lisbon, the English fleet was to capture the Portuguese fleet and blockade
Lisbon in case all of the terms of the Convention of October 22 were not made
operative immediately by the Portuguese. The utmost that Canning would grant
the Portuguese ministry was to close the ports; any further measures would mean
instant wan Cannirg “rejected with contempt” the project of the “simulated
state of war.” In rase the prince regent failed to go to Brazil, Strangford and Smith
were empowered to repeat the Copenhagen affair in Lisbon (F. O., 63/56, Can-
ning to Strangford, Nos. 11, 13, 14).
  44 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 103.
             TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                        67
upon this occasion, I have entitled England to establish with the
Brazils the Relation of Sovereign and Subject and to require Obe¬
dience to be paid as the Price of Protection.65

    The order was given to sail at daybreak. From eight to fif¬
teen thousand persons66 and half of the money in circulation
in the kingdom were on board thirty-six ships, with as much
furniture as could be managed. Eighty millions of cruzados
of treasure accompanied the fleet.67 In the city day and night
armed bands roamed aimlessly and ominous crowds packed
the quays, watching the ignominious flight of the royal family,
nobles, domestics, and hangers-on. Fourteen royal personages
were on board the fleet, among them being D. Pedro Carlos,
Infante of Spain. Early in the morning of November 29, the
fleet sailed out through the narrows and then lay to with an
adverse wind. A delay of two hours in weighing anchor would
have resulted in the detention of the fleet within the harbor as
the wind shifted immediately after the narrows had been
passed.68
   Meanwhile Junot, obeying Napoleon’s emphatic commands
to hurry, pushed on over the mountains to Alcantara on the
Spanish-Portuguese border and down the Tagus to Lisbon.
On the thirtieth, he left Saccavem with his vanguard reduced
to fourteen men and his army to twelve hundred, all that the
mountains and swollen streams had left of the twenty-three
thousand who had set out from Bayonne. Without cavalry,
artillery, cartridges, shoes, or food, stumbling with fatigue, the
troop resembled “the evacuation of a hospital more than an
army triumphantly marching to the conquest of a kingdom.”69
He entered Lisbon without opposition from the sullen and dis-

  65 Ibid.
  86 Thiers gives 8,000 (Histoire du Consulat, VIII, 340); Monteiro gives 15,000
(Historia do Imperio, p. 59); Pereira da Silva agrees with Monteiro (Historia do Im-
perio, I, 121).
  67 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., I, 121. A cruzado was worth about three shillings
{New English Dictionary).
  68 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., I, 122, 123; F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning,
No. 103.
  69 Sorel, VEurope et la Revolution frangaise, VII, 231.
68          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
gusted townspeople, in time to see the sails of the Portuguese
fleet, lying to beyond the narrows.70 His prize had escaped him.
   Sir Sidney Smith shared what supplies he could spare and
detached four ships of the line to escort the Portuguese fleet to
Brazil. Viscount Strangford returned to England for further
instructions; Sir Sidney Smith blockaded Lisbon; Junot held
Portugal with a handful of survivors; and the Portuguese stood
off on the course followed by Cabral three hundred years be¬
fore. The prince regent had been forced to the great decision;
he had delivered himself and his dominions into the hands of
England under circumstances which the representative of the
British nation deemed such as to entitle England to establish
with Brazil the relation of sovereign and subject.

  70 Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, p. 51, and footnote 1; Pereira da Silva, Historia
do Imperio, I, 123-124; F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 103.
                               CHAPTER IV


  ENGLAND SECURES PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN
                                   BRAZIL


On   board the Portuguese fleet, conditions were deplorable.
D. Joao’s ship, the Principe Real, carried the incredible number
of sixteen hundred people. The water supply was insufficient,
food ran short, and plague beset the emigres in the crowded
and unhygienic quarters. Monteiro adds the interesting detail
that the fleas became so bad that the ladies, including the royal
princess, were forced to cut their hair in order to eliminate the
pests with the usual treatment.1 On the ninth day out the mis¬
ery was increased by a storm which separated the fleet. But
on January 19, 1808, the Principe Real with one English convoy
ship and a part of the thirty-six vessels which had left the Tagus
on the morning of November 29, sighted the captaincy of
Bahia, and two days later, amid extraordinary manifestations
of joy by the people, the prince regent landed on Brazilian
territory.2
  After a short period of rest, D. Joao instituted public audi¬
ences and sought advice as to what measures were necessary
in view of the peculiar situation which had developed in the
Portuguese empire. Taking advantage of the opportunity thus
offered, a colonial, Jose da Silva Lisboa,3 urged that the ports
  1 Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, p. 59- When the court reached Rio de Janeiro,
the colonials took the new style hair-dressing as the latest mode and cut their own.
Monteiro cites the number on board the Principe Real from the figures of an Eng¬
lish officer.
   2 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 5-8.
   3 Later Visconde de Cayru. He was born in Bahia, July 16, I75^> graduated
from the University of Coimbra, and taught Greek, Hebrew, and Philosophy in
Lisbon and the colony. He had published books on commercial law and political
economy which had made him famous in Lisbon. He was secretary of the Com¬
mission of Agricultural and Commercial Inspection of the Captaincy of Bahia
 70           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 of Brazil be opened to the trade of the world, a measure that
 at one stroke would abolish the restrictions of colonial com¬
 merce. The idea was one of common sense, he argued, for it
 was impossible to continue to close the ports of Brazil to world
 commerce and limit trade exclusively to Portugal when the
 French were in control of the mother country. In addition, the
 question of revenue was staring the Portuguese government in
 the face. The supply of gold had ceased, leaving industry and
 foreign commerce as the only resource available to the Portu¬
 guese court for a much needed income; yet no commerce was
possible unless the ports were opened to vessels of foreign
nations.
   Bento Lisboa, Jose s son, maintained4 that his father found
it difficult to carry his point. The prince regent was loath to
take such an important step, within a week after arriving in
his new home and without the greater part of his councillors
present to render an opinion on a measure which would de¬
stroy the old principle of colonial monopoly. But “such was the
force of Lisboa’s arguments,” asserted the son, “that Fernando
Portugal yielded to his persuasions and obliged the prince
regent to publish the Carta Regia of January 28.”
   By the letter patent6 direct commerce between Brazil and
nations friendly to the Portuguese crown was permitted, sub¬
ject to importation duties of twenty-four per cent, ad valorem
on drygoods (mercadorias seccas) and double the current duty
on certain provisions (generos molhados7), irrespective of the
when D. Joao landed (Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 8-9, and footnotes).
    Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brazileiro, 1856, Tomo I, 240. Monteiro,
Histories do Imperio, p. 65, Varnhagem, Historia Geral do Brazil, II, 1081, and Pereira
 a Silva, op. cit., II, 9, give Lisboa great credit for securing the measure. Rocha
 omb°, Htstona do Brazil, VII, 138, footnote 2, says it was inevitable and Lisboa
 ad little to do with it. The Brazilian does deserve credit for getting D. Joao to
make up his mind, however, and for suggesting a measure so liberal that all the
ports were opened to all friendly nations.
   ‘ Fernando Jos6 de Portugal, later Conde de Aguiar, had been captain general
ol Bahia, from 1788 to 1792, and viceroy at Rio de Janeiro from 1801 to x806.
He became minister of the interior (which included all internal administration
except war and navy) in the new cabinet. He accompanied D. Joao.
  6 It is given verbatim in Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 137, footnote 1.
    Such as wines, vinegars, olive oil, etc. Mercadorias seccas includes, besides dry-
           PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                      71
place of production or manufacture or the nationality of the
ship bringing in such goods. Exportation duties remained the
same as those charged previously. An exception to these regu¬
lations was made of the royal monopolies of Brazil-wood, dia¬
monds, or what by law or contract were considered as monop¬
olies.
   Canning had tried to secure such an open port for British
goods on the coast of Brazil at the time of the secret convention
of October 22, but the prince regent had refused to ratify the
additional article which conceded that privilege to the Eng¬
lish. Now by the decree of January 28, D. Joao opened all of
the ports of Brazil to the trade of all nations friendly to Portu¬
gal whereas Great Britain had urged one port open to England
alone. Later when the prince regent, after reaching Rio de
Janeiro, asked Mr. Hill, chargt in the absence of minister Strang-
ford, if England was satisfied with the decree of January 28,
he received the reply that “it could not fail to produce a good
effect in England, but that had it authorized the admittance
of British vessels, and of British manufactures upon terms more
advantageous than those granted to the Ships and Merchan¬
dize of other Foreign Nations, it would necessarily have afforded
greater satisfaction.”* * * 8
  The opening of the ports of Brazil to the commerce of the
world meant, in reality, that, as far as Europe was concerned,
they were opened only to the commerce of England as long as
the war lasted on the Continent. From the English point of
view, some provision had to be made for the time when the
blockade of Europe would end and other nations would
compete with Great Britain in Brazil. Two years were to pass,
however, before Strangford framed a treaty to the satisfaction
of the British Foreign Office, granting England preferential
rights in Portuguese America.
   The effect of the decree, although it was only provisional

goods, groceries such as flour, sugar, cheese, etc. Generos molhados includes “wet
provisions.” The terms are translated “drygoods” and “provisions” in this chap¬
ter.
   8 F. O., 63/63, Hill to Canning, No. 3. Dated March 30, 1808.
 72          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 and exacted a higher rate of duties than those of the previous
 regime, was far-reaching in the development of national con¬
 sciousness in Brazil.9 Contact with the outside world awakened
 the torpid colony; new people, new capital, and ideas entered.
 As a consequence of the new importance of the colony, the
 Brazilians felt their destiny to be larger and more important,
 a factor of potent influence among this Latin people. A national
 self-consciousness appeared; customs, habits, dress, social con¬
 tacts, business methods were changed. As a matter of fact, the
 political and social consequences set in motion by this provi¬
 sional decree of January 28, 1808, were to lead finally to an
 independent Brazil. The doors shut for three hundred years
 were thrown open, and the colony passed beyond the control
 of the mother country.10
   After a delay of nearly a month at Bahia, made more mem¬
 orable by the efforts of the inhabitants of that captaincy to per¬
suade the prince regent to establish his court there instead of
 at Rio de Janeiro, D. Joao sailed for the capital of the colony.
There the rest of the fleet with the three English convoy ships
anxiously were awaiting his arrival. On March 8, the prince
regent landed in Rio de Janeiro amid the delirious ovations
of the colonials, who cherished only respect and veneration
for the Portuguese monarchy. All of the blame for past mis¬
rule was laid at the door of the ministers and favorites who,
so the people thought, had failed to acquaint the prince with
the just complaints sent to the court. The monarchical senti¬
ment still dominated the colonials so profoundly that the royal
person was equivalent to a kind of divinity, and the love of the


  9 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 140.
  10 In an article by Vicente d’E^a called “Abertura dos Portos do Brazil,” written
for the Sociedade de Geographia de Lisboa, 1908, a version of the affair between
France and Portugal from 1800 to 1808 with the part played by England, is given
by a pro-English Portuguese. England is ennobled, France is an archvillain with
Spain at its beck and call. The article is given verbatim in Rocha Pombo, Historia
do Brazil, VII, 217-225, footnotes. On the other hand, Martins concludes his ver¬
sion with the statement that “We were the instrument, the servant, the beast of
burden for England . . . our English allies did us greater harm than our enemies,
the Spanish and the French” {Historia de Portugal, II, 246-247).
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                       73
subject for the sovereign formed a second religion, not less
respected than that of the church.11
   As soon as the days of festival were concluded, the Portu¬
guese court set to work with an activity unusual in that ordi¬
narily stagnant body. The pro-French ministry had been dis¬
missed when the flight was ordered, and the pro-English group
installed. Fernando Portugal, a man of industry and expe¬
rience, but of limited, mediocre intelligence, became minister
of the interior. The jovial courtier, the Visconde de Anadia,12
became minister of the navy and colonies. Rodrigo de Souza
Coutinho—with the exception of Araujo now fallen from power,
the most intelligent Portuguese of the court group—received
the post of minister of war and foreign relations. Energetic,
vivacious, impulsive, a lover of the novel and grandiose, he
was an absolute monarchist with an intense aversion for the
principles of the French Revolution. Nearly all of the measures
proposed by the government during the next six years were
products of his initiative regardless of whether they fell within
his department. Decidedly pro-English in his sympathies, he
was on intimate terms with Viscount Strangford.13
   None of these ministers were colonials, nor was a single Bra¬
zilian chosen to serve on the council of state, which was nomi¬
nated along with the ministers. A bureaucracy, modeled on
the institutions of Lisbon without regard for the changed situ¬
ation of the government, was set up with an almost infinite
number of posts to care for the swarm of Portuguese nobles who
had accompanied the prince regent. Colonials were excluded
from participation in these offices also.14
  11 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 19-20.
  12 A Portuguese who had held the post of minister of the navy in Lisbon. He
died soon after his arrival in Rio de Janeiro.
  13 He was born in Lisbon, 1755. He later became Conde de Linhares. His father
had been minister to Spain and his brother was then minister to London (Pereira
da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 30-32).
  14 The various departments created by the ministry are given by Pereira da
Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 37-47. The editor of the Correio Braziliense pointed
out that no heed was paid to the necessities of the new country. Nothing like a
department of mines, of roads, maps, navigation, etc., was set up. The council
of state, he affirmed, was made up of men who thought it dishonor to study. Every
 74           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
      Considerable economic progress was made during the two
 years following the proclamation of the Carta Regia of January
 28. Cotton was planted in larger quantities; factories for sugar
 and salt multiplied; cultivation of wheat and hemp was begun
 on an extensive scale in the southern provinces of Santa Cath-
 arina and Rio Grande do Sul.15 By the decree of April 1, 1808,
 permission was given to the colonials and to foreigners of any
 nation to establish manufacturing plants of all kinds.16 Raw
 materials were exempted from import duties and drawbacks
 on re-exported articles were conceded. To favor Portuguese
 shipping, coast-wise trade was closed to foreign vessels, and
 foreign commerce was restricted to the ports of Rio, Bahia,
 Pernambuco, Maranhao, and Para. By decree of June 11, 1808,
the import duties of twenty-four per cent, ad valorem on dry-
goods were lowered to sixteen per cent, and the duty on pro¬
visions was reduced by a third for goods belonging to the Por¬
tuguese and imported in Portuguese vessels.17
   In October a bank of emission was founded.18 Before this date
there had been no commerce on credit nor any kind of bank in
Brazil despite the example of England and Holland.19 The bank,
founded by the initiative of Souza Coutinho, passed through
many vicissitudes in the first quarter of a century of its exist¬
ence, the king used it for his “private purse” and on his return
to Portugal in 1821 almost sacked it; the directors got rich and

official adviser to the prince regent was a stranger to Brazil (Correio Braziliense,
V, 567). The editor overlooked the fact that Fernando Portugal had had expe¬
rience in the colony.
  18 Dunshee Abranches, Tratados de Commercio e Navigafdo do Brazil, p. 2.
  18 The decree is given verbatim by Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imgerio, II, Ap¬
pendix, Document 3, pp. 308-309. By decree of January 5, 1785, all manufacturing
in the colony had been prohibited.
  17 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., II, 48-51.
  18 Decrees of October 8 and 12. The decree and the statutes governing the bank
are given by Pereira da Silva, op. cit., II, Appendix, Document 4, See also F. O.,
63/68, Strangford to Canning, No. 4. By decree of May 10, 1808, the Superior
Court of Rio was made the Supreme Court of Brazil (Correio Braziliense, I, 423).
On September 10 following, the first number of the official gazette was issued
from the Royal Press (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 83).
  18 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 180, footnote 2. ’
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                       75
the bank poorer; but it weathered the storm, and after 1855 it
became firmly established.20
   In November of the same year the prince regent issued a
decree conceding to any foreigner irrespective of religion who
would establish himself in Brazil land grants (dotes de terra por
sesmarias) on the same terms as such grants were made to Por¬
tuguese and Brazilians. The immigration from England, stim¬
ulated by this decree, underwent many difficulties, largely due,
in the opinion of an English traveller of the times,21 to the hatred
of the Portuguese for the English. They had chosen the British
in 1807 not because they loved the English, but because they
feared what England could do to their colonial empire. When
the effects of the treaties of 1810 became evident, the Brazilians
also developed an antipathy for the British. Despite numerous
attempts throughout the century on the part of the Brazilian
Government and of societies in London, English immigration
was a failure, except in the case of such immigrants as trained
mechanics, bankers, shopkeepers and traders, engineers, ranch
owners, public utilities experts, and professional men. The
agricultural colonist or unskilled laborer met misery and death
or begged for a free return to England.22
   Although English immigration failed to materialize in Brazil,
English commerce with the country took on new life after 1808.
An order23 published in the London papers by the Portuguese
minister called upon all merchants of that city who intended to
do business with Brazil to meet on June 25 to consider ways
of improving their interests. One hundred thirteen London
merchants joined the association which was organized at the
meeting of that date. Later a permanent committee of the

  20 Ibid., VII, 180, footnote 2 and 181, footnote 1; Pereira da Siiva, Historia do
Imperio, II, 55-62.
  21 Rev. R. Welsh, Notices of Brazil in i828-i82g, I, 320. The question of English
immigration in Brazil throughout the century is interesting. Due to the climate,
low standards of living, and slave labor, the English common laborer never gained
a foothold in Brazil.
  22 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1870, pp. 234-235; 1874 (1-2), pp.
37-49! 1875 (4-6), PP- 1424-1426; 1876 (4-6), pp. 760-781, etc.
  23 June 1, 1808.
 76           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
Association of English Merchants Trading to Brazil was elected,
 composed of sixteen members, two of whom were members of
 Parliament.24 The association met at intervals to hear reports
from the committee as to the state of trade with Brazil and to
frame suggestions and demands to be presented to the Foreign
 Office. The permanent president kept in touch with the lega¬
tion and merchants in Rio de Janeiro and with representatives
in Bahia, Pernambuco, Maranhao, and Para, and communi¬
cated with the Board of Trade and the British foreign secre¬
tary.26 This group of merchants with their effective organiza¬
tion became an important factor in Anglo-Brazilian trade
relations.
   In 1808 ninety ships flying a foreign flag entered Rio, while
two years later 422 (foreign and Portuguese) entered that port.
By 1811 there were in the capital 207 Portuguese and 75 Eng¬
lish commercial establishments besides those of other nations
friendly to Portugal.26 Bahia increased its importation by fifty
and its exportation by fifteen per cent, between 1807 and 1810.
The government income from the customs houses at the five
ports where foreign commerce was permitted increased twenty
per cent, over the amount of the years previous to 1808, despite
the glaring corruption of treasury officials.27 In the port of Rio
alone, during the five months previous to December 31, 1808,
merchandise brought from England in British ships mounted
to nearly £674,000 while exports from the same port to England
totalled over £203,000.28
  These two years of unusual progress after the emancipation
from the colonial regime are noteworthy for the impartiality
shown all foreign nations at peace with the Portuguese crown.

  24 Correio Braziliense, I, 115-116.
  S6 Ibid., II, 129; Pereira da Silva, Historia da Imperio, II, 77-78; Rocha Pombo,
Historia do Brazil, VII, 205-206; F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 33
and 35.
  26 The French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Dutch were excluded as being
enemies of the crown. The United States and Sweden followed England into the
new commercial field.
  47 The statistics are from Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 79-84.
  28 F. 0-, 63/68, Strangford to Canning, No. 10.
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                 77
Although at that time, due to the European situation, England
was profiting almost exclusively from the new economic free¬
dom of the colony, world peace would bring serious competi¬
tion in the Brazilian markets. Consequently from 1808 to 1810
England exerted strong pressure on the Portuguese court to
secure the preferential rights in Portuguese America which it
had enjoyed in European Portugal for centuries. The agent
chosen for the task was the man29 who believed that on the night
of November 28, 1807, he had established the relationship of
sovereign and subject between England and the Portuguese
government in Brazil. Although his task was a difficult one,
he succeeded beyond the expectations of the British Foreign
Office.
   Viscount Strangford’s credentials as envoy extraordinary and
minister plenipotentiary to the Portuguese court at Rio were
dated April 17, 1808.30 At the same time, he was given full
powers to negotiate a treaty of friendship and alliance, which
Canning considered important enough to merit special and
very detailed instructions.31
   Strangford was informed, in the first place, that “the general
and political relations of the British and Portuguese monarch¬
ies” were “not altered by the removal of the seat of the Portu¬
guese Government from Portugal to the Brazils. The ancient
treaties subsisting between the two Crowns sufficiently” de¬
fined “the nature of this connection. Those treaties must be
considered in force, until they” should “have been abrogated
by some ulterior arrangement.” But such an arrangement could
be deferred until the Portuguese government had taken root
in the new situation and the fate of Portugal had been decided.
   The minister was authorized in the meantime to conclude
formally any part of the secret convention of October 22 which
D. Joao was willing to accept, but he was to take care to insert
  29 Viscount Strangford.
  80 F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. i.
  81 Ibid., Nos. 2-10. These instructions occupy the major part of a volume of
dispatches. They reveal clearly Canning’s attitude as regards the Portuguese
South American situation and merit special study. For clearness of thought and
conciseness of expression, these dispatches are superb.
78            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
that all old treaties were to be renewed until further negotia¬
tions took place. The prince regent, Canning thought, would
wish to have the clauses of the old treaties relating to Portugal
continue, while England wished to retain those referring to
Brazil. In addition, the minister was to secure permission at
once for the British squadron to continue off the coast of Brazil
and for the admission of all British ships—war or merchant
vessels—without regard to numbers, into the ports of Portu¬
guese America.32
     In a secret dispatch Canning urged that Strangford press
upon the prince regent the necessity of attending to his Bra¬
zilian domains and of relinquishing any hope of a quick return
to Lisbon. D. Joao was to concentrate on internal improve¬
ments of Portuguese America and leave Portugal in England’s
hands.33
  As to the commercial relations between the two countries,
Canning insisted that it was not expedient to conclude a defi¬
nite agreement at once, as the Brazilian court was too new.
For the present, the minister was to seek to open the commerce
of Brazil to England and to make secure the life and property
of Englishmen engaged in that commerce. He was to obtain
for them the right of free residence and exemption from moles¬
tation on account of religion and to secure the liberty of recip¬
rocal importation of all articles of the produce or manufacture
of each country, subject to regular duties. “With respect to
the amount of duties,” Canning added, it did “not seem neces¬
sary that any precise scale should be fixed at present. Although
it would undoubtedly be advantageous to obtain for British
manufactures a distinct preference over those of any other coun¬
try.    Brazil would profit immensely if Anglo-Brazilian com¬
mercial relations were placed on such a footing as “to induce
the British merchant to make the Brazils an Emporium for
British Manufactures destined for the consumption of the whole
of South America.”34

    F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 2.
 33 Ibid., No. 3, Secret.
 14 Ibid., No. 4.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                     79
   The main difficulty in the way of such universal importation
was the admission into Brazil of goods from the British East
Indies and into England of the Brazilian staples, coffee and
sugar, which would compete with the products of the British
West Indies. Such merchandise could be admitted for reex¬
portation, however, and England would absorb great quanti¬
ties of Brazilian hides, timber, tobacco, drugs, dyeing woods,
hemp, and other articles. Raw cotton would find an unlimited
market, and England would reduce the tax on the raw article,
which had been collected when cotton had entered England
in a Portuguese ship. The differential duties imposed on other
Brazilian produce when brought in by Portuguese ships could
be reduced also, if the reciprocal favor were granted by the
Portuguese government.35
   In case the minister secured these privileges, he was not to
press the right to set up the factory association in Brazil, as the
Portuguese government opposed those establishments. Such or¬
ganizations were unnecessary, provided the privileges and im¬
munities so long enjoyed by the British subject in Portugal
were guaranteed to him in Brazil. These privileges were known
to Strangford, but special attention was to be paid to obtaining
the special court of the English judge conservator, to the secur¬
ity of the property of persons dying intestate, and to the ex¬
emption of the English from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition.
In return, the Brazilians in England were guaranteed recip¬
rocal privileges “by the acknowledged excellence of the British
Jurisprudence, especially such as relate to matters of trade and
the important administration of Justice between Foreigners and
natives.” There was to be no equivalent in England for the
judge conservator, but Strangford was to press the point as
compensation for relinquishing the factory privilege. This was
“a point which must on no account be abandoned.”36


  “ Ibid.
  38 Ibid., No. 4. Consuls were to be appointed at Rio, Sao Sebastiao (capital of
Sao Paulo), Sao Salvador (capital of Bahia), Olinda (capital of Pernambuco),
Sao Luiz (capital of Maranhao), and Belem (capital of Pard), Sao Salvador was
another name for the city of Bahia, Sao Luiz for Maranhao, and Belem for Pard.
80         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
   With the two most important phases of Anglo-Brazilian rela¬
tions—political and commercial—cared for, Canning concluded
his instructions to Strangford by suggesting certain desirable
privileges which he could bear in mind. If possible, he was to
secure a free port on the island of Santa Catharina, where goods
might be transferred to Spanish and Portuguese ships for trans¬
portation to Spanish colonies with the connivance of the Spanish
colonial governors.37 The minister was to inform the Portuguese
court that in any treaty which should embody the final ar¬
rangement of the relations between the two countries, an article
dealing with the slave trade must be included,38 and he was to
do his utmost to prevent the granting of monopolies by the
prince regent to private individuals or companies.39 Finally,
the last of the instructions included a project for establishing
a line of packetboats between England and Brazil for carrying
correspondence.40
   Laden with these precise instructions, Strangford landed in
Rio de Janeiro on July 22, 1808.41 He found that one part of
his instructions had already been decreed by the prince regent,
as the jurisdiction of the British judge conservator had been
recognized, and courts had been established in Rio and Bahia.42
Souza Coutinho himself hinted at the advisability of immedi¬
ately concluding a definite commercial agreement and treaties
of friendship and alliance43 and informed Strangford that the
prince regent had authorized the Chevalier de Souza in Lon¬
don to borrow six hundred thousand pounds.44 By September
14, the convention establishing the packetboat line was con¬
cluded, securing every point contained in Canning’s instruc-
  37 F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 5.
  38 Ibid., No. 6.
  39 Ibid., No. 8.
  40 Ibid., No. 10.
  41 Ibid., Strangford to Canning, No. 1.
  42 Ibid., No. 5.
  43 Ibid., No. 8.
  44 Ibid., No. 9. The loan was secured, April 21, 1809. The revenue from the
commerce of Madeira Island and, if necessary, the revenue resulting from the
sale of the crown monopoly of Brazil-wood were pledged as guaranty (F. O.,
93/37/5. Protocol, Portugal).
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                      81
tions in regard to that matter.45 On the last day of the same
month full powers were exchanged between Souza Goutinho
and Strangford to negotiate the treaties of commerce and
alliance.46
   In the meantime news of the June 11 decree which had re¬
duced the rates on goods brought in by Portuguese ships from
twenty-four to sixteen per cent, reached England. Instead of
gaining perferential rates in Portuguese America, England was
being discriminated against in favor of Portuguese shipping.
Strangford was ordered to “make the most forcible Repre¬
sentations upon this subject to the Brazilian government” and
to inform Souza Coutinho that England expected the decree
to be revoked immediately. The minister was severely repri¬
manded for not having effected the repeal as soon as he had
arrived in Rio.47 England, by the Order-in-Council of Decem¬
ber 21, 1808, had removed the last of the duties on reexported
articles, which had not been included in the order of Novem¬
ber, 1808, allowing Brazilian produce free market-passage to all
European countries by way of England.48 The British Govern¬
ment, expecting the prince regent to reciprocate the friendly
attitude of England, was extremely disappointed in this dis¬
crimination against British commerce.
  Spurred by the reprimand, Strangford labored to conclude
a commercial agreement with Souza Coutinho. The two min¬
isters soon reached an understanding, but opposition arose in
the Portuguese court against the proposed treaty, while the
Papal Nuncio was using all his influence49 on the superstitious
prince regent to prevent his approval of the clause granting
religious toleration to the Protestants. The merchants in Rio

  46 F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 13.
  46 F. O., 63/60. Strangford to Canning, No. 15.
  47 F. O., 63/61, Canning to Strangford, No. 38. Pressure was brought to bear
on Canning by the Board of Trade which insisted on the serious disadvantages
under which British commerce would labor as a result of the decree. See also F. O.,
63/60, Canning to Strangford, No. 28.
  48 F. O., 63/61, Canning to Strangford, No. 40.
  48 Strangford reported, F. O., 63/68, No. 5> that the Nuncio had written four
memorials to D. Joao that were “strong and menacing . . . containing senti¬
ments worthy of the darkest ages of persecuting Superstition.”
   6
82          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
who had been ordered by the committee of the London Asso¬
ciation to “watch the several Regulations which” were “now
under discussion at the Court of the Prince Regent,” and to
report to London their opinion of the negotiations, were “ob¬
truding into the business, making things more difficult.”50 The
consul general, Sir James Gambier, was creating yet more
trouble for Strangford by his efforts to participate in the social
life of Rio despite the strict etiquette of the Portuguese court.51
     Nevertheless, despite these handicaps, a treaty of alliance
and commerce was signed, February 28, 1809. Strangford
feared that he had exceeded his instructions by making a
permanent instead of a temporary agreement, but the moment
was, in his opinion, too favorable to let slip. The anxiety of the
prince regent over Portugal had led him to sign a treaty emi¬
nently favorable to England, since it contained a clause which
guaranteed to him his possession of the mother country. In¬
stead of “most favored nation” treatment for English commerce
in Brazil, the minister had striven for “much greater conces¬
sions” as a remuneration to his country for the preservation of
Portugal. He had entered on the negotiations, therefore, de¬
termined to concede no more than his instructions stated but
to obtain more than they stipulated. The results were embodied
in the treaty which he now sent to London.52 In the negotia¬
tions he had been governed by the principle that “England had
contented Herself with the Advantages which She must ever
derive from the Magnitude of Her Capitals, from the more
practiced Industry of Her Manufactures, and from the Great
Extent of Her Navigation.” In his opinion England by this
treaty had used its “undoubted Superiority” only to “acquire
a still stronger claim to the Title of Protector and Friend of
Brazil.”53
  Although the treaty had been signed and a copy sent to Eng¬
land, Strangford and Souza Coutinho still faced serious trouble

 60 F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, No. 33.
 61 Ibid., No. 41.
 6S F. O., 63/68, Strangford to Canning, No. 8 (Duplicate).
 M Ibid.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                         83
in Rio. The Nuncio threatened D. Joao with the “most terrible
exertions of . . . the vengence of” the Holy See, and even the
ministers joined the opposition in the effort to pull Souza Cou-
tinho from power by using this treaty as a bludgeon. The vis¬
count, to save the friend of England and the “only man of tal¬
ents and judgment in the Empire,” was forced to “make some
strong effort” to protect Souza Coutinho from his enemies.
Hence he proposed to the prince regent to drop out the clauses
dealing with the Inquisition, and to add a secret article guar¬
anteeing Englishmen against any jurisdiction of that institu¬
tion. D. Joao acquiesced, and the additional article was signed
by the minister, sub spe rati, and sent to England to be appended
to the original agreement.54
   When the treaty reached London, it was handed over to the
“Lords of the Privy Council for Trade” for the opinion of that
body on its stipulations.55 On the whole Canning approved of
the terms negotiated by his minister and praised his zeal, but
the document would have to be signed anew. Two points had
to be changed. In the first place, the clause which guaranteed
the reciprocal right to purchase, inherit, possess, or occupy
land, houses, and property of every sort would have to be modi¬
fied, as in England no one except a native born or a natural¬
ized subject could purchase or possess real property, and no
one could become naturalized who was not a Protestant. The
point could be remedied easily, said Canning, as this privilege
could not be of importance to the Portuguese, whereas the
right of the Englishman to own real property in Brazil was
necessary.56
  In the second place, the agreement reaffirmed all old trea-


  64 Ibid., No. 11.
  66 F. O., 63/69, Canning to Strangford, No. 11. See 63/73, Papers on the Proposed
Treaty of Commerce, July-Sept., 1809, for the action of the council on the treaty and
the exchange of letters between Canning and the council and Canning and the
solicitor general. Canning opposed successfully some of the demands of the Coun¬
cil for Trade while he embodied others in his instructions to Strangford for the
revision of the treaty. The new draft passed through the hands of the council for
change and approval.
  66 F. O., 63/70, Canning to Strangford, No. 13. Dated August 1, 1809.
84            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ties. Now by Article 23 of the treaty of 1654 “all goods and
merchandise of the Enemies of either on board the ship of
either, or their People or subjects,” should remain                            “un¬
 touched,” a stipulation which would confirm the Portuguese
contention of “free bottoms, free goods.”67 Canning explained
to Strangford that the “question of free bottoms making free
goods” was “of such incalculable importance in the present
state of the world, that no consideration would induce His
Majesty to concede that Principle, or even to admit any modi¬
fication of it at the present moment.”68
       Hence Strangford’s treaty was returned to him, with a few
corrections and a new arrangement of the articles which sepa¬
rated the political clauses from the commercial stipulations.
The minister was to explain the necessity of a new signature
on the grounds that the extraordinary step of changing the
treaty after it had been signed and sent to England nullified
the entire document.69 Full powers to sign any treaty during
his stay in Brazil were sent to Strangford in order to allow him
to use his initiative in regard to such negotiations.60
       Although the new draft of the treaty was essentially the same
as Strangford’s first effort, there were some changes in addition
to the two points mentioned by Canning in his first criticism.
The definition of what constituted a British or a Portuguese ves¬
sel was added; the religious article, so vehemently opposed by
the Nuncio, was to stand in its original form; the clause stipu¬
lating the return of military and naval deserters was dropped,
as no satisfactory working of such a stipulation was possible;61
and some doubtful wording was modified.62

  67 F. O., 63/70, Canning to Strangford, No. 13.
  68 Ibid., No. 14. The principle to which Canning referred was the contention
supported by Brazil that a neutral flag covered all goods except contraband of
war on that vessel regardless of the fact that such goods might belong to a belliger¬
ent.
  69 Ibid., No. 13.
  60 Ibid., No. 16. Dispatch No. 19 under date of October .., 1809, was signed by
Bathurst.                                                                       7
  61
   The present difficulty with the United States taught that lesson to England,
Canning explained.
  62 Ibid., No. 14. Dated September 23, i8og.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                    85
   When the revised treaty reached Strangford in Rio, he found
little difficulty in obtaining the consent of the prince regent to
the changes desired by the British Government. The difficulty
which he now encountered was the refusal of D. Joao to ratify
for a second time some of the unaltered articles. The Nuncio
was again vehement in protest against the provision concerning
the religious question, and Fernando Portugal, minister of the
interior, fought the stipulations concerning the slave trade. The
whole court was united against the viscount and Souza Cou-
tinho in an effort to block the ratification.63 Strangford was
forced to exert all of his magnetic influence on the prince re¬
gent, who was never “in the same mind during two Successive
Days.” At last, learning that the “frittering away of time” had
reached the point of transferring the treaty negotiations to Lon¬
don, the minister felt himself obliged “to assume a tone which
had the effect of instantly determining the Prince Regent to
accede to all” of his proposals.64
   The opposition to the treaty had been centered around sev¬
eral points. The stipulation which required that the master
and three-fourths of the crew be natural subjects of the prince
regent before the vessel could enter English waters as a Portu¬
guese ship was won by the minister only after an obstinate fight,
as the Portuguese merchantmen were manned largely by Span¬
iards and other foreigners. This clause would practically de¬
stroy the Portuguese carrying trade resulting from the Oporto
wine business, as the crews of the vessels engaged in that trade
were Gallician or Biscayan seamen.
   It was the religious clause, however, which gave Strangford
his greatest difficulty. The Nuncio declared that the phrase of
the treaty stating that British subjects might perform public

  63 F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Bathurst, No. 2.
  64 Ibid., No. 12; Strangford to Wellesley, No. 17. Strangford sent D. Joao an
ultimatum demanding immediate signature; failure to sign would cause the min¬
ister to “give this court a demonstration which would prove very clearly that it
was easier to lose confidence and friendship than to regain them.” His conduct
and success rendered him obnoxious to the ministers opposing the treaty and an
effort was made to force D. Joao to complain to London of Strangford’s “pressing
and urgent manner” of carrying on the affair.
 86           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 worship to the “Honour of Almighty God” seemed to him to
 be a scandalous abuse of language. The prayers of heretics
 were regarded by the Almighty as an insult, and it did not be¬
 come the prince regent as a Catholic sovereign to establish a
 contrary principle. In support of his opinion he continued to
 threaten D. Joao with severest penalties from Rome if he signed
 such a clause. A favorite in the court65 maintained that “an en¬
 tire toleration of the Protestant Religion was all that was want¬
 ing to render Brazil an English colony.” The best means to
 secure a distinction, which he deemed necessary, between for¬
 eigners and natives in Brazil was to establish severe restrictions
in matters of religion. Despite the formidable opposition to the
clauses, however, Strangford carried his point.
   The minister even succeeded in obtaining concessions which
had not been included in the first treaty. The English were now
given the right, specifically stated, to sell by retail as well as
wholesale; goods might be consigned to either English or Por¬
tuguese subjects on the same terms; the Portuguese crown was
made responsible for loss or damage in case of goods deposited
in the royal customs houses; the right to pay customs duties by
three, six, or nine months notes instead of specie payment on
withdrawal of goods was secured; and the formal abrogation
of Article 23 of the treaty of 1654 was made by the Portuguese
government, whereas all other articles, alvaras, and decrees of
the past which granted privileges to Englishmen were specifi¬
cally reaffirmed.66
   The final stipulations, which were divided into three treaties
and some secret articles, were signed February 19, 1810, and
ratified by D. Joao seven days later.67 The preamble of the first
of these, the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation,68 main-

  66 The Conde das Galveas, formerly Chevalier d’Almeida.
  M F-     63/83, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 16.
  67 Ibid., No. 19. The letter patent of D. Joao, explaining the terms of the treaties
of 1810 and ordering the execution of the same, was issued March 7, 1810 (Os
Privilegios da Nagao Britannica, pp. 15-20).
  68 F. O., 93/37/7, Portugal, Treaty of Commerce and Navigation, signed at
Rio de Janeiro, February 19, 1810. It is given in English and Portuguese in par¬
allel columns and contains thirty-four articles. The signatures are those of Strang¬
ford and Linhares (Souza Coutinho).
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                       87
tained that the sole purpose of the agreement was to consoli¬
date and strengthen “the ancient friendship and good under¬
standing which so happily subsist, and have during so many
ages subsisted between the two Crowns” and to improve and
extend “the beneficial effects thereof to the mutual advantage
of their respective subjects.”
  The first nine articles were devoted to establishing the recip¬
rocal rights of the two contracting parties under the system of
opendoor commerce and navigation. The right of a subject of
one nation to sojourn or travel or trade in any port, town, or
province of the other country was guaranteed69; most favored
nation rights were set up as to payment of taxes and imports70;
reciprocity in drawbacks and bounties of exported goods was
instituted71; mutual commerce and navigation of both coun¬
tries on the basis of the most favored nation was expressly per¬
mitted in the ports and seas of Asia72; the sanctity of the home
of the subject of one nation dwelling in the territory of the other
was assured73; Portugal reserved the crown monopolies of ivory,
brazil-wood, urzela, diamonds, gold-dust, gunpowder, and to¬
bacco in the form of snuff74; and the reciprocal right to appoint
and maintain consuls was ceded.75 A clause, which later be¬
came irritating to Brazil when it wished to develop its own
merchant marine, stipulated that British vessels should not pay
any higher port duties within Portuguese dominions than the
Portuguese ships paid in English ports.76
  The lofty purpose enunciated in the preamble, of “liberal
commerce and reciprocal benefits” was strikingly illustrated in
the famous article ten. The prince regent by this clause granted
to England the privilege of nominating special magistrates to
act as judges conservators in those ports and cities of his domin¬
ions in which national tribunals and courts of justice were or
might hereafter be established. The judges were to try all cases
involving British subjects according to the laws established in
Portugal for such jurisdiction since the 1654 treaty. Eng-

 68 Article II.        70 Article III.       71 Article V.
 71 Article VI.        73 Article VII.       74 Article VIII.
  7S Article IX.       76 Article IV.
  88          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  lish subjects residing in the port or city where the tribunal was
  to be set up should choose the magistrate by a plurality vote,
  subject to the ratification of D. Joao or his successors. Removal
  of judges by Portugal was possible only by appeal through the
  British ambassador or minister. In return for this concession by
  Portugal, his Britannic Majesty engaged to guarantee the “most
  strict and scrupulous observance of the laws, by which the per¬
  sons and property of Portuguese subjects residing within His
  Dominions are secured and protected, and of which they (in
 common with all foreigners) enjoy the benefit, through the ac¬
 knowledged equity of British jurisprudence and the singular
 excellence of the British Constitution.”77
    Article XII granted to the English religious toleration and
 the right to worship in their homes or in the churches and chap¬
 els to be built by them, provided such chapels and churches
 should resemble private dwelling houses and no bells should be
 rung to announce public worship. No one should be persecuted
 for his belief unless he declaimed against the Catholic religion
 or endeavored to gain converts to his own faith. Offenders, how¬
 ever, should be amenable to the civil police and not to religious
 tribunals and should be punished by fines or confinement to
 their dwellings.
    The “liberal system of commerce founded upon the basis of
 reciprocity and mutual convenience,” announced as the pur¬
 pose of the treaty in the preamble, was exemplified by the
clause which set the duties to be paid on British goods whether
consigned to English or Portuguese subjects, at fifteen per cent,
ad valorem. The tariff table by which this duty was to be as¬
sessed was to be drawn up by an equal number of British and
Portuguese merchants, aided by the English consul general and
the Portuguese administrator general of the customs. On the
other hand, Portuguese goods entering England were to pay

  77 This tactless vaunting of British superiority following the implied reasons for
the establishment of the special magistrates in Brazil was bitterly resented by the
Brazilians. The “acknowledged equity ...” phrase became to Brazilian writers
a pass word for British pretensions and effrontery. The phrase is usually attributed
to Strangford, but the idea and part of the phrasing were taken from Canning’s
instructions of April 17, 1808 (F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 4).
              PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                    89
 the duties demanded of the most favored nation.78 An attempt
 was made to render these terms iron-clad by the clause which
 prohibited the extension to any other nation whatsoever of the
 special privileges in import duties, granted exclusively to Eng¬
 land by Portugal or to Portugal by England.79 As the import
 tariff for all nations was twenty-four per cent, established by
 the Carta Regia of January 28, 1808, with the special rate of
 sixteen per cent, conceded to Portuguese vessels by the decree
 of June 11 of the same year, England gained a lower rate than
 even the colony or the mother country.80
    Brazilian sugar, coffee, and other articles similar to the pro¬
 duce of the English colonies were denied entrance to British
 markets, although the right was granted to Portugal to send
 such produce to England for reexportation, exempt from the
 higher duties imposed on such articles destined for consump¬
 tion within the British Dominions,81 a stipulation which in¬
 sured British vessels of cargoes and English merchants of busi¬
 ness. Likewise, the prince regent could set up prohibitory du¬
ties on English articles known by the name of British East In¬
dies goods and on West Indies produce, such as sugar and
coffee.82
   To facilitate communications, a packet line was to be estab¬
lished between England and Rio de Janeiro.83 All former trea¬
ties and agreements existing between the two crowns not con¬
trary to the new treaty were declared in force, while special
mention was made of the continuance of the articles of the
Methuen Treaty of 1703, in regard to Portuguese wines and

  78 Article XIX.                            79 Ibid.
  80 By decree of October 18, 1810, the duties on merchandise brought in by
Portuguese ships was lowered from sixteen to fifteen per cent. (Pereira da Silva,
Historia do Imperio, II, 138, footnote 2).
  81 Article XX.                              82 Article XXI.
  83 Article XIII. The convention, which constituted the third of the treaties
signed February 19, 1810, set up a monthly service between Falmouth and Rio
touching at Madeira on the way. Regulations as to sailing dates, port privileges,
management, postal rates, etc., were specified. The convention is given by L.
Herstlet, Commercial Treaties, V, 406-411. The convention was included in these
treaties although it was practically the same as the earlier agreement made by
Strangford soon after his arrival in Rio.
go            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
English woolens.84 Stipulations as to contraband of war, ship¬
wrecks, pirates, and rights of subjects residing in the domin¬
ions of the other country at the time of the outbreak of war
occupied several articles.85
   To conserve the advantages gained for England by the agree¬
ment, Strangford added to the above the final articles86 that
“it is agreed and stipulated by the high contracting Parties,
that the Present Treaty shall be unlimited in point of duration,
that the obligations and conditions expressed or implied in it
shall be perpetual and immutable; and they shall not be
changed or affected in any manner in case His Royal Highness
the Prince Regent of Portugal, His Heirs or Successors, should
again establish the seat of the Portuguese Monarchy within
the European Dominions of the Crown.” At the end of fifteen
years from the date of ratification,87 the articles of the treaty
might be revised, with the stipulation, however, that no modi¬
fication could become effective until both parties agreed to the
change.88
  The second89 of these treaties dealt with political questions.
Perpetual union between the two countries was guaranteed90
and the obligation to preserve peace was accepted by both.91
Great Britain promised never to recognize as sovereign of Por¬
tugal any prince who was not the legitimate heir of the house
of Braganga; while the additional articles of the secret conven¬
tion of October 22, 1806, relative to Madeira Island, were re¬
affirmed.92 Portugal was to indemnify British subjects who had
suffered losses during the crisis of 1807, while England recipro¬
cated in regard to Portuguese losses caused by the seizure of
Goa by the British.93 In grateful remembrance of the assistance
rendered him by the English fleet, D. Joao conceded the privi-

  84 Article XXVI.                         85 Articles XXVII-XXXI.
  86 Articles XXXII-XXXIII.                87june 1 g, 1810.

  88 Article XXXIII. This last stipulation was added at the insistence of Galveas
and Aguiar (F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 16).
  88 F. O., 93/37/8, Portugal, Treaty of Friendship and Alliance.
  80 Article I.          n Article II.                « Article III.
  83 Articles IV and V. The English seized Goa when the order of sequestration
of English property in Portugal was issued.
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                       91
 lege to the British of cutting timber from Brazilian forests for
 the construction of war vessels,94 and pledged supplies of fresh
 meat, vegetables, and wood in case English war ships again
came to his aid.93 British war ships without limit as to the num¬
ber might enter any port in the Portuguese Dominions, even
in time of peace, a privilege which was expressly prohibited to
the ships of any other nation.96 Finally, the prince regent de¬
clared that the Inquisition should never be established in his
American possessions,87 and forbade his subjects to carry on the
slave traffic from any place in Africa except from the actual
possessions of the Portuguese crown in that continent.98
  By two secret articles99 England pledged its good offices with
the Ottoman Porte and the Barbary States in order to secure
peace between these states and Portugal and promised to work
for the restoration of Oliven^a (seized by Spain by the Treaty
of Badajoz) and for the settlement of the boundary dispute over
the French Guiana region according to the Portuguese inter¬
pretation since the Treaty of Utrecht. In return D.Joao prom¬
ised to prohibit the slave trade at Bissao and Cacheo on the
West African coast, and to cede these places to England for
fifty years, provided Great Britain secured Oliven^a and the
desired solution to the Guiana boundary.
   Thus an astute English minister, ably directed by the British
Foreign Office, secured preferential rights for his country in
Brazil. In negotiating the treaties, the Portuguese court had in
mind almost exclusively the necessities of Portugal itself. No
Brazilian was in the ministry or in the prince regent’s council
of state to fight for the welfare of the colony and point out the
stipulations which would be detrimental to its interests. The

  94 Article VI.
  86 Article VII. This article was reciprocal; if Portuguese war vessels should come
to the aid of England, Great Britain was to furnish similar supplies.
  88 Article VIII.
  87 Article IX. This article was severely criticized by the Portuguese and Brazil¬
ians as being a humiliating declaration. D. Joao should have decreed the closing
of America to the Inquisition, as the declaration in a treaty had the appearance
of having been forced by England.
  88 Article X.                 88 F. O., 93/37/9, Portugal.
 92           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Portuguese minister, pro-English in his sympathies, ignorant of
 conditions in Brazil, and precipitate in his manner of conduct¬
 ing public business, was guided by his preoccupation with the
 situation of Portugal, whereas England’s attention was directed
 principally to Brazil. Although the treaties were concluded in
 Rio de Janeiro, they were negotiated by a Portuguese court on
 the basis of past Anglo-Portuguese relations, with the European
 situation of the mother country uppermost in the minds of the
 small clique which controlled Portuguese foreign policy. In ad¬
 dition, strong pressure was exerted by the representative of the
 other party to the compact, under circumstances which forced
 on the Portuguese court a well-nigh hopeless handicap. In the
 words of Oliveira Martins, “once more the dynasty sold the
kingdom as Esau had sold his birthright; once more, the House
of Bragan$a, to preserve its throne, sacrificed the nation.”100
   Brazilian historians are quite unanimous in condemning the
treaties, maintaining that England had cornered the unheroic
prince regent in such a way that he could do nothing but sign
when the masterful Strangford presented his terms.101 While the
negotiations were still in progress, the editor of the Correio Bra-
ziliense warned his readers from London that a treaty of com¬
merce between Brazil and England was a most delicate task,
as the agreements existing between England and Portugal could
not serve as precedents. The two principal bonds of union be¬
tween those two countries, mutual interests of exportation and
protection against enemies, did not apply to Brazil, for the col¬
ony was self-sustaining in produce and, being isolated, feared
no invasion. In addition it was impossible to foresee what path
either the cultivator or the manufacturer would take in Brazil,
or whether the United States would not offer articles at less
price than would England. In view of these facts, the present
negotiations were very dangerous for Brazil, in the opinion of
  100 Historia de Portugal, II, 248.
  101 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos para 0 Direito International, I, 29 ff., is especially
bitter; Abranches, Tratados de Commercio e Navigagao do Brazil, pp. 2-5, condemns
the treaty unsparingly; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 173 ff., restrains
himself to stating that the treaty “was an error” and gives proof for his assertion;
Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 137, calls the treaty “defective and fatal.”
           PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                        93
the editor, especially since the Portuguese court possessed little
knowledge or experience of conditions in the colony.102
  In November of 1809, the Correio was warning Brazilian mer¬
chants that English traders were bringing influence to bear on
the British negotiator and was calling on them to awaken and
send in suggestions and demands of their own to serve as weap¬
ons with which the Portuguese court could refute the English
demands.103 Early in the succeeding year the editor gave as his
opinion that Brazil under the present circumstances could not
close an equitable treaty with England and preached the Man¬
chester doctrine of laisseifaire.104 Realizing the handicaps under
which the Portuguese negotiator was laboring, the editor
throughout the negotiations was determined to defend him
when the terms of the agreement should become known; but
the complete “capitulation” of Brazil to English demands which
the publication of the treaties revealed, deprived him of any
possible grounds on which he could support the minister.108
  The Portuguese version of the treaty, the editor pointed out,
demonstrated clearly that the agreement was a translation from
the English original and that the English negotiator had taken
the initiative throughout,106 while the terms themselves demon¬
strated the truth of that assertion. There was no real reciprocity
in the stipulations, although such an assertion was repeatedly
made in the treaty; the English were to enjoy privileges in Bra¬
zil denied even to the natives living in the colony; the effects of
  102 Correio Braziliense, II, 129-130. The editor was Hipolyto Jos6 Soares da Costa.
He was born in Colonia de Sacramento, 1774. While in Portugal, he had suffered
torture by the Inquisition, and had fled to London. He started the Correio Bra-
ziliense in 1808 and continued the paper until 1822. He died 1825 (Pereira da
Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 84-85). The British Museum has the set of twenty-
nine volumes. The September, 1811, and March, 1820, numbers are missing,
however. For the influence of the journal on Brazilian questions see F.          O.,
63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, September 6, 1817, Separate.
  103 Correio Braziliense, III, 526-527.
  im Ibid., IV, 188.                         106 Ibid., V, 189.
  ion Snuff (tobacco em p6) was translated “tobacco manufacturado,” which included
cigarettes, cigars, etc., in Portuguese. Thus England recognized only the monop¬
oly of snuff whereas Portugal recognized as a monopoly all articles manufactured
of tobacco. The editor pointed out several such inaccuracies (Correio Braziliense,

V, 189).
94            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
the treaty would retard the growing prosperity of the colony;
and the dignity and honor of the Portuguese nation was humil¬
iated before the world by the confessions and admissions con¬
tained in the agreement.107
   If the treaty had frankly stated what everybody knew to be
the truth, that England was the only support of the Portuguese
government, which was maintaining itself exclusively by means
of British troops, loans, munitions, arms, and ships; that these
benefits were so great and essential that in the actual state of
affairs, without them, the Portuguese would cease to be even
nominally a nation; that the Portuguese government, being de¬
void of any other means of repaying such favors, had granted
preferential commercial privileges to the English nation, then
the lack of reciprocity in the treaty would have appeared to be
the result of facts which were evident to all the world.108 The
Portuguese government had now paid in full for the support
received from Great Britain.
   The editor, however, did not censure England for securing
such a treaty, for that power was simply behaving in accord¬
ance with a national ambition which resulted in prosperity,
greatness, and power. The blame for the fatal agreement of
1810 lay at the door of the Portuguese ministry and court. By
inefficiency, ignorance, and selfish ambition to maintain them¬
selves and Jtheir patron in power, the ministers of the prince
regent had betrayed the nation.109
   While these criticisms, made by a man who was a fervent
Brazilian and an acute observer, have grounds of truth, it must
be admitted that the colony received some benefits from the
transaction. The influx of British capital and enterprise stimu-

  ]07 Correio Braziliense, V, 189.
   108 Ibid V, 302. He points out Articles 7, 10, 15, 16, and 19 as demonstrating
a lack of reciprocity in the treaty.
  m Ibid., XI, 218-219. Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 131, lays the
responsibility entirely on Souza Coutinho who dominated the councils of the
price regent “by the superiority of talents” which he displayed in advocating
the treaty terms. There were good reasons for concluding such a treaty from the
point of view of Portugal, a fact which influenced Souza Coutinho far more pro¬
foundly than the necessities, largely unknown to him, of the colony of Brazil.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                   95
lated the economic growth of Brazil, even though it crushed
the budding industries which had sprung up since 1808. Pro¬
fessional men, artisans, trained mechanics, capitalists, and trad¬
ers, invited by the special privileges announced in the treaties,
flocked to Brazil. In 1808 the colony was emancipated, eco¬
nomically, from the decadent mother country; in 1810 it ac¬
quired a rich step-mother. Whether the emancipation of 1808
would have been sufficient, or whether the legal recognition of
England’s special position was necessary, is a question difficult
to decide. The economic superiority enjoyed by Great Britain
over its world competitors would have enabled it to baffle com¬
petition, but it is doubtful whether the economic resources of
that country would have been attracted to Brazil without the
legal recognition of special privileges and personal security.
Moreover, under the system of government promotion of trade
practised by the powers of Europe, it was incumbent upon Eng¬
land to guarantee itself against action by its rivals. Strangford’s
treaty forestalled any possible discrimination against Great
Britain in favor of any other country. In any case, the treaties
of 1810 were vital factors in Anglo-Brazilian relations until the
middle of the century.
 The English trade set in motion by the Carta Regia of 1808
received a powerful stimulus from the new treaty of commerce.
There was an influx of British merchants at Rio de Janeiro,
and speculation ran rife in England. So great was the volume
of goods sent out that the distracted customs service was unable
to clear its warehouses. Goods were left in the open, and the
natives, amazed at such a quantity of merchandise and listen¬
ing to golden rumors of Britain’s kindness to their sovereign,
thanked the “generous English” and “helped themselves to
what their own countrymen had hitherto charged a good price
for.”110 The supplies sent out of cut glass, brilliant chandeliers,
superfine woolen cloths, high priced English saddles, whips,
and bridles found no market; and ice skates, shipped to sub-

  110 John Mawe, Travels, pp. 450-471. He pictures trade conditions on or before
1816. The following pages of description of conditions in Rio are taken from in¬
formation given in his book of travels.
96        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
tropical Rio, were left to rust themselves into junk. Crates of
prospectors’ hatchets with the sharp edge on one end and the
hammer on the other, destined for the use of those who wished
to go to the nearest mountain, break the rocks, and cut out the
precious golden metal, testified to the sanguine and ignorant
hopes of English exporters.
   The gullible representatives of these exporters exchanged
their goods, or money, for turmalines bought for emeralds or
for fake diamonds. They accepted at face value gold dust largely
mixed with powdered brass. The young agents, recently arrived
from England, had “grand ideas” as to the manner of conduct¬
ing their business. They took big stores at outrageous rentals,
set aside their hours for riding in the morning, visited their
country-seats in the afternoons, and attended gay parties at
night. Shopkeeping being considered manual labor, they were
forced to sell their goods by auction at ruinous prices. Brazil¬
ians and some levelheaded Englishmen who were less concerned
with their social position bought marketable merchandise, sold
at these auctions at prices below the wholesale quotations from
Europe, and set up firmly established businesses catering to the
real necessities of the population. Eventually the crash came;
bankruptcy notices filled the London Gazette; judges conserva¬
tors and the Brazilian authorities cooperated in clearing away
the debris; and trade between England and Brazil was estab¬
lished on a firm basis.
  By 1816 England was exporting to Brazil a steady stream of
goods, half of which went to Rio alone. The study of the articles
included in this stream gives a curious side light on the life of
Brazilian colonials with a European court in their midst. Stout,
fine cloth, particularly blue or black, sold quickly. There was
a steady demand for dress hats, boots, and shoes; earthenware
and glass; bottled porter, Cheshire cheese, and butter; mirrors,
silk and cotton hosiery, and fashionable dresses for women.
Hams, tongues, and pork; oil, wine and brandy; cotton goods
of all kinds, linens, and common woolens brought good prices.
Although the smiths preferred Swedish iron, there was a good
market for iron and steel articles. Salt, some hardware, glass,
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                        97
and some plated goods found ready sales. Tinplate, matches,
brass, lead, shot, gunpowder, and drugs sold well.                           Flour,
turpentine, tar, staves household furniture, and other items
from North America prevented any great sale of such articles
of British manufacture.
  In return for these articles shipped to Brazil, British mer¬
chants carried back to England from Rio de Janeiro gold, dia¬
monds, and precious stones; sugar, raw cotton, hides, and to¬
bacco; rum, wax, indigo, and certain highly prized woods. The
port of Bahia led in the raw cotton shipments, sending eight-
ninths of its cotton export to Liverpool. Much molasses and
rum left this port for England also. Britain took three-fourths
of the cotton exported from Pernambuco and half the sugar.
From tropical Pard, English vessels carried back cocoa, coffee,
rice, sarsaparilla, gums, drugs, sugar, hides, molasses, and
woods.
 A comparison of British exports to various foreign markets
demonstrates the importance of this Brazilian trade to English
foreign commerce. In 1812 Portuguese America took twenty-
five per cent, more English merchandise than did all of Asia,
half as much as did the United States or the British West Indies,
and more than four-fifths of the total sent to South America.111
Over three-fourths of the value of articles exported to Brazil
were cottons, with woolens ranking a poor second.112 World
peace in 1815, with thirsty markets thrown open to British ex¬
porters, reduced the importance of Portuguese America, for
Asia during that year surpassed Brazil by a million pounds
sterling, the British West Indies did the same by nearly five
millions, and the United States by ten millions. Yet the prince
regent’s American possessions still took two-thirds of the total

  111 Customs 8/1, Exportation from Great Britain by Countries, 1812. Exports to Asia
were £1,648,067 plus New Holland (Asia) £15,210; to the United States £4,032,-
445; to West Indies £4,109,096; to Foreign Colonies of South America (including
Pensacola) £2,470,006; to Brazil £2,003,253. There is little reason to believe that
smuggling thrived during this period, as the low rate of fifteen per cent, discouraged
that sort of trade.
  112 The value of cottons exported to Brazil was £i,557>455i of woolens £i99.945
(ibid.).
     7
  98          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  amount sold to continental American foreign colonies.113 By
  1820 Brazil had regained the importance of the earlier period,
 however, for in that year it purchased of British exporters more
 than half as much as did all Asia or the British West Indies and
 very nearly two-thirds as much as did the United States, while
 it still absorbed three-fourths of the total amount shipped offi¬
 cially to the Spanish and Portuguese colonies of America.114
    The fact that the principal interest of the Englishman in the
 Brazilian trade has always been in selling rather than in buy¬
 ing was demonstrated in this early period. In 1812 Brazil sold
 to the Britisher less than £700,000 worth of goods115; while three
 years later the value had advanced only to a little over £829,-
 ooo.116 Five years later England took nearly £1,300,000 of Bra¬
 zilian goods, the most important item being raw cotton.117 These
 figures ranked Brazil far down the scale among the foreign sup¬
 pliers to England, and left a big balance of trade in favor of
 Great Britain. Thus, soon after the opening of the ports of Por¬
 tuguese America to foreign trade, a permanent character¬
 istic of Anglo-Brazilian commercial relations was determined.
Brazil was henceforth an important market for English manu¬
factures, but a secondary source of British importation.
   Strangford’s success united the Portuguese court in a cam¬
paign to oust both the viscount and the foreign minister from
power, but the effort was hopeless as long as Souza Coutinho
lived. At the marriage of D. Maria Thereza, eldest daughter
of the prince regent, to D. Pedro Carlos, Infante of Spain,
  111 Customs 8/3. Exports to Asia were £2,930,412; to British West Indies £6,-
587,999; to the United States, £12,746,913; to Continental Foreign Colonies of
America, £2,547,368 (East Florida £231,103, Buenos Aires, £399,025), and to
Brazil, £1,896,064. These figures are according to the official value in conformity
with the rates of 1696.
  114 Customs 8/12. Exports to Asia £3,809,246; to the United States, £3,691,365;
to British West Indies, £3,860,260; to Spanish colonies £820,271; to Brazil, £2,-
°99,396- Figures are by real or declared value.
  116 Customs 4/8. Principal items were: raw cotton, £473,067; woods, £5*; 676-
hides, £34,661; sugar, £19,091; coffee, £^,393.                          5 7 ’
  116 Customs 4/10. Official value according to the rates of 1696.
  117 Customs 4/15. Total imports from Brazil, £1,294,025, of which raw cotton
amounted to £942,857; coffee to £182,998; sugar to £110,351; hides to £8,390;
and woods ^>£5,655. Figures are by real or declared value.
           PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                   99
Strangford was placed at D. Joao’s right hand over the vehe¬
ment protests of the Nuncio and of the Spanish minister.118
Yet despite such marks of favor shown to the British represen¬
tative, by the end of 1810 the relations between England and
the Portuguese court were not so promising, due to court in¬
trigues at Rio and to the unpopularity of Englishmen in
the American possessions of the prince regent. “The Brazil¬
ians,” Strangford reported,119 were “in general jealous and dis¬
contented; they” looked “upon the English as usurpers of their
commerce; they” were “offended with the haughty language
and proceedings of our Consuls, and with the heavy charges
which” were “levied in their Departments; and they” com¬
plained “(certainly not without reason) of the insults daily of¬
fered to their Prejudices, Customs, and Religion, by the Eng¬
lish Settlers of this country.” The commerce of the Brazilian
merchants, the minister admitted, had “in truth fallen into
utter decay.”120 In addition, the main support of the popularity
of England among the Portuguese was not valid in the minds
of the Brazilians, as the maintenance of the Braganga family
on the throne was not of the least importance to the colonials
after four years of experience with the court.
  As had happened in the case of past treaties between Eng¬
land and Portugal, trouble arose over the execution of the terms
of the agreements of 1810. The most serious complaint made by
England was in regard to the Oporto Wine Company. In Au¬
gust, 1811, Wellesley sent a fourteen page121 letter to Strang¬
ford demanding that the monopoly enjoyed by that company
be abolished as contrary to the eighth and twenty-fifth articles
of the commercial treaty. Two months later the chairman of
the committee of merchants trading to Brazil reiterated the
same complaint.122 The Board of Trade added its voice to the
chorus, denouncing the “unwarrantable and unaccountable de-

  118 Casa Irujo. The wedding took place May 13, 1810. F. O., 63/84, Strangford
to Wellesley, No. 42.
   u» F. O., 63/86, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 86.
  140 F. O., 63/103, Strangford to Wellesley, Nos. 58 and 63.
  121 F. O., 63/101, Wellesley to Strangford, No. 14.
    Ibid., No. 18.
  100        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 lay” of D. Joao in executing several of the leading articles of
 the treaty.123 Castlereagh also insisted on the same point im¬
 mediately after entering office.124
    In obedience to the commands accompanying these com¬
 plaints, Strangford informed Souza Coutinho126 in strong and
 explicit language that either the monopoly at Oporto would
 have to be abolished in accordance with the stipulations of the
 treaty or confidence between England and Portugal would be
 suspended. He learned in reply that the Portuguese govern¬
 ment did not intend to abolish the wine company as the result
 of the treaty, but simply to refuse to renew the charter which
 would expire at an early date. Strangford suggested to Lord
 Wellesley that he could frighten D. Joao into obedience by ab¬
 senting himself from court, or the Foreign Office could with¬
 draw the British squadron from the Brazilian coast. Either
method would be effective. The minister reported regretfully
 that he had not succeeded thus far in his efforts to abolish the
wine company, due to the waning power of Souza Coutinho
caused by his illness, to the growth of the opposition in the
court to English influence, and to D. Joao’s growing antipathy
to England for interference in other things than the defense of
Portugal itself.126
  The influence of Souza Coutinho abruptly terminated at his
death on January 26, 1811. Only Strangford stood now as a
bulwark between the prince regent and the wave of anti-Eng¬
lish sentiment in the court.127 From that date Strangford’s path
was beset with increasing difficulties. He was exasperated al¬
most beyond endurance by the passive, inert opposition which
resulted in no action by the Portuguese ministry, favorable or
otherwise, on the complaints which he presented in regard to
the non-execution of the terms of the treaty of 1810.128 Eventu-

  123 F>     63/101, Wellesley to Strangford, November 14, 1811.
  124 F> O., 63/103, Castlereagh to Strangford, Nos. 2 and 38.
  126 Now Conde de Linhares.
  m «.?**■f3/Iaa> Strangford to Wellesley, No. 3. Dated January 24, 1812.
  137 Ibid., No. 10.
trXF‘      63^. Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 132.F.O., 63/144, Castlereagh
to Strangford, No. 8, dated March 11, 1813, gives a rdsumd of the complaints.6
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                      ioi
ally the matter was transferred to London by the Rio court to
be threshed out between Castlereagh and the Chevalier de Sou¬
za.129 The British foreign minister refused to take the matter
out of Strangford’s hands, however, and at the end of 1812, he
demanded of the prince regent a categorical decision on the
disputed points of the treaty of 1810, with special reference to
the two main points at issue: the Oporto Wine Company mo¬
nopoly and the suppression of the slave traffic. Strangford was
to conclude a signed agreement on these points, and any refer¬
ence of the matter involved to the court at London by the Portu¬
guese minister would be considered as a rejection of the negoti¬
ations.130
   On the last day of 1813 Strangford gloomily reported that
nothing now was “to be expected from the Justice or Good
Faith of the present Brazilian Ministers,” and the time had
come to show the Rio court that its reluctance to fill its engage¬
ments would no longer be tolerated, and that the “change of
System which it” had “adopted since the Death of the Conde
de Linhares [Souza Coutinho]” was “not unnoticed by an Ally
to whom so much” was due and “whose Exertions have hitherto
met such inadequate returns of Gratitude.”131
 Two months later the prince regent was forced to call An¬
tonio d’Araujo to enter the ministry. He could not do other¬
wise after the death of Souza Coutinho,132 for it was “an abso¬
lute fact,” in the opinion of Strangford, “that the Ignorance of
the Individuals composing this court” was “such that scarcely
one among them” was “capable of writing an ordinary letter.”
There was no one to appoint to the office except Araujo, un¬
less D. Joao called on a colonial. There were men of undoubted
talent among that element, but such promotion would be con¬
trary to the customs of the Portuguese court and inimical to

  129 Now Conde de Funchal. Ibid., No. 30. Dated October 11, 1813.
  130 F. O., 63/144, Castlereagh to Strangford, October 11, 1813, Secret and Sepa¬
rate.
   131 F. O., 63/148, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 157.
   132 Souza Coutinho’s brother, the minister in London, was ordered to return to
Rio to take his brother’s place, but he refused to obey. Nor did he lose his post for
his disobedience.
 102          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 the interests of England, as there existed “not a class of men
 under the government less friendly disposed towards Great
 Britain than the members of the Brazilian Magistracy.” Strang-
 ford prevented the appointment of Araujo to the foreign office,
 but he was certain that the Conde de Aguiar, who became
 foreign secretary, would be a pliable instrument in the hands
 of the new minister. The appointment of Araujo pleased the
 Rio public, and illuminations on three successive nights after
 the announcement took place as a demonstration of joy over
 the rise to power of the anti-English faction.133
   England’s influence in Portuguese affairs, which had reached
 the crest in 1810, now began to decline sharply. The struggle
 resolved itself into a conflict between Strangford on the one
 hand and the ministers and court group on the other, for pos¬
session of the prince regent. The viscount, deprived of the sup¬
port of Souza Coutinho, strove to get D. Joao to return to Lis¬
bon, where once more he would be under traditional English
influence, while Araujo endeavored to keep the prince regent
in Brazil, where the “hatred of the natives . . . towards Eng¬
land” was “more violent than” Strangford could describe, and
where London was on the other side of the globe. In addition,
Araujo counted on the support of Lord Holland in England in
his opposition to the English envoy and Castlereagh.134 At first
D. Joao inclined to Strangford’s point of view and publicly and
privately signified his willingness to return to Lisbon if an Eng¬
lish squadron should appear in Rio to take him back. Conse¬
quently, during the latter part of September, two ships of the
line and one frigate were dispatched from England under Sir
John Beresford to conduct the prince regent to Lisbon.135
  The categorical answer demanded by Castlereagh in the dis¬
patch of October n, 1813, in regard to the Oporto Wine mo¬
nopoly and the slave trade regulations, was given to Strangford
by the Conde de Aguiar at the end of November, 1814. News

 2 f,'.?’’ f3/167’ Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 7. Dated February 20, 1814.
 134 Ibid., Nos. 8, 9, 23.

          N°' 53’ Dated June 2I) i8i4- F- 0-> 63/166, Bathurst to Strangford,
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                   103
of Napoleon’s defeat had relieved the anxiety of the Portuguese
court over the mother country and the reply was totally unac¬
ceptable.136 When, in order to influence public opinion in favor
of the suppression of the slave traffic, the viscount requested
permission from the Portuguese Foreign Office to publish the
recent messages of the British House of Commons and Lords
in regard to the slave trade, the Conde de Aguiar accused
Strangford of willfully desiring to incite the Negro slaves of
Brazil to rebellion under the protection of Great Britain and
warned him that the utmost rigors of the law would be imposed
on anyone, native or foreigner, who disturbed the public tran¬
quillity. When Strangford indignantly complained to D. Joao
of such outrageous language used to a foreign diplomat, he re¬
ceived a note from the Conde de Aguiar saying that he had
transgressed the respect due the prince regent and would be
debarred from further private interviews with the sovereign.137
Thus Araujo through Aguiar closed the avenue so long open
between Strangford and D. Joao, and the wire to London was
cut.
  On December 28, 1814, Sir John Beresford with the fleet ar¬
rived in Rio,138 and the play had reached the climax. Beresford
and Strangford used every effort to get the prince regent to re¬
turn, but Araujo triumphed, for the hapless D. Joao, through
the mouth of the Conde de Aguiar, affirmed that he had never
requested the ships, that the English minister had presumed by
sending for the squadron, and that he intended to remain in
Brazil. Strangford, who had foreseen the trend of events, had
written to Castlereagh before the arrival of the ships that his
word could not stand in the face of the word of a sovereign,                 al¬
though all the world knew that the sovereign’s word was false,”
and had petitioned for leave to return to London.139 On January
3, 1815, Bathurst signed his recall at the request of the prince
  136 F. O., 63/169, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. i to. Dated December i, 1814.
The Portuguese court offered to submit the points in dispute to the Congress of
the Allies. “Preposterous,” Strangford said.
  137 Ibid., No. 114.
  138 Ibid., No. 126.
  139 Ibid., December 17, 1814, Separate.
  104         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  regent,140 and on April 8, the minister turned the files over to
  Chamberlain as chargt and sailed for home.141 Before he left,
 however, the decree was issued which extended the charter of
 the Oporto Wine Company for fifteen years, from January i,
  1817. The proclamation was totally unnecessary as the com¬
 pany still had twenty-two months to run before the old charter
 expired.142 It was Araujo’s parting shot at his old enemy.
     British influence at the Portuguese court in Rio and among
 the Brazilians and Portuguese living in Brazil was at low ebb
 during the succeeding six years. Chamberlain noted in 1816
 that the extreme unpopularity of England among the Brazil¬
 ians and Portuguese was getting worse. No story, however
 extravagant, of unjust pretensions on the part of England
 against Brazil failed to receive implicit confidence.143 An at¬
 tempt was made to restrict the commercial freedom of the Brit¬
 ish within Brazil, for in December of the same year, the trans¬
 port of English-owned goods from one Brazilian port to another
 even in Portuguese ships was forbidden.144 In June, 1817, how¬
 ever, Araujo died, and his virulent anti-English policy was soft¬
 ened by his successors.146 In November, 1819, Edward Thorn¬
 ton, the new minister to Rio de Janeiro, took over the office
from Chamberlain, who had remained char si since Straneford’s
recall.146
     On his arrival, Thornton, who had been ordered to secure
an arrangement in regard to the disputed points of the treaty
of 1810, a settlement of the slave traffic question, and the re¬
turn of the king to Lisbon,147 found that he himself was caught

      F. O., 63/181, Bathurst to Strangford, No. i.
  141 Ibid., Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 22.
  142 Ibid., No. 7. The question of the slave traffic regulation which embittered
chaSpte'rPOrtUSUeSe rdatl°nS duHng this Period wil1 be discussed in a separate

  !“ F. O., 63/193, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, April 27. Separate.
No   Decree of December 16, 1816. F. O., 63/202, Chamberlain to Castlereagh,

  146 F. O., 63/203, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 61.
  146 F. O., 63/221, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No 74
  147 The insane queen mother died March 16, 1816, and D. Joao was acclaimed
king, February 6, 1818, after almost two years of delay.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                       105
in the stream of events which were leading to the critical days
of 1820. Portugal, abandoned by the prince regent in 1807 and
governed by a junta which had been controlled partly by Mar¬
shal Beresford,148 now begged for the return of the king, while
the colonials, surfeited with the sycophantic court, urged his
departure for Lisbon. In Europe Beresford shared the unpop¬
ularity of D. Joao among the Portuguese, who had been thor¬
oughly angered by the loss of the Brazilian commercial mo¬
nopoly, transferred to England by the opening of the ports and
by the treaty of 1810. The decree of December 16, 1815, rais¬
ing Brazil to the status of co-kingdom with Portugal,149 increased
this irritation, while it freed the Brazilians from fear of a return
to the status of the colonial regime.
  The news of the Spanish uprising of 1820 set off the spark in
Portugal; a revolution broke out in August, and the. junta or¬
dered the king to return. Afraid of losing his Portuguese king¬
dom if he did not return and yet dreading what the Cdrtes might
do to him after his arrival, divining that his eldest son would
be difficult to check if he were left alone in Brazil as governor
in the absence of the king, D. Joao vacillated between two opin¬
ions until, during the stormy April events in Rio de Janeiro,
he was bustled on board a ship and dispatched to Europe.150
The tmigre ot 1807 returned, leaving his son, D. Pedro, as regent
of Brazil.161

  148 For the history of Portugal during the absence of D. Joao, see Oliveira
Martins, Historic de Portugal, II, 240-257, for a brief account, and Pereira da Silva,
Historia do Imperio, II-V, various books, for an extended study.
  149 Borges de Castro, Collecfao de Tratados, V, 248.
  160 for the story of these days in Rio, see: Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 104*
112; Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, V, 55-109. The dispatches from Thorn¬
ton and Chamberlain from 1819 to 1821 give excellent contemporary accounts
by witnesses, of the events leading up to the return of the king to Lisbon (F. O.,
63/210 to 63/237).^
  161 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., V, Documents, p. 315, decree of April 22, 1821.
Beresford had gone to Rio early in 1820 to obtain decisive action by D. Joao in
regard to the regency in Portugal and had returned with complete control to find
that the revolution had broken out during his absence (F. O., 63/228, Thornton
to Castlereagh, No. 23; tbid., May 31, Separate; August 12, Separate. Secret and
Confidential). When news of the revolution reached Rio, Thornton advised the
king to grant moderate constitutions to both Brazil and Portugal and to send his
  io6        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    Thornton, an experienced and able official, exerted what
 pressure he could to secure the departure of D. Joao. Late
 in 1820, after the outbreak of the revolution in Lisbon, he
 was instructed by the Foreign Office to emphasize with the
 king two important points. In the first place, D. Joao could
 not count on the Holy Alliance to reconquer Portugal for him
 if he lost it on account of the revolution. Castlereagh had al¬
 ways endeavored to awaken the Portuguese king’s ministers
 “to a just estimate of the illusory character of that league as a
 resource. 152 In the second place, England by its guaranty of
 Portuguese integrity under the old treaties was not bound to
 sustain the authority of the sovereign over his subjects, an au¬
 thority which the revolution had now put in jeopardy. Nor, if
 a third power, Spain for instance, should interfere, would Eng¬
 land undertake the whole burden of maintaining the king’s in¬
 terests both against his own people and against the Spaniards.
 Castlereagh emphasized these two points in order to show D.
Joao the indispensability of “accepting what He” could “save
 out of the wreck of His own Power, which by bad management
 and unfounded jealousy of and indifference to” England’s
 “councils, His Majesty” had “exposed to an entire dissolution.”
The Portuguese court had given evidence that it considered
England would combat not only the threatening movements
of Spain toward Portugal,153 but also the revolutionary move-
eldest son, D. Pedro, to Portugal (F. O., 63/229, Thornton to Castlereagh, Au¬
gust 12, Separate; October 12; and No. 60). Distrustful of Pedro’s fidelity, D. Joao
refused to act until a revolution in Rio expelled him from his South American
capital.

  ® The Portuguese ministers at St. Petersburg and Berlin, alarmed at the events
m Spam, with which Portugal was in bitter controversy in South America over
the River Plate region, had asked for the guaranty of the Holy Alliance from
Russia and Prussia. Their request was made before the Madrid revolution of
1820 (C. K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1815-1822, p. 228). Castle¬
reagh however, secured from the great powers of the Alliance recognition of the
fact that England’s guaranty of Portuguese territory, while it did not include
internal peace, would become operative by the armed invasion of another power.
Hence the Portuguese were freed from the danger, which faced Spain, of a foreign
invasion (ibid., pp. 277 ff).                                                 8

  163 England fulfilled its pledge to protect Portuguese territory from violation
by a foreign power by opposing actively the designs of Spain (Webster, Foreign
rolicy of Castlereagh, pp. 233-249).
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                  107
ments within the latter kingdom. That opinion was erroneous,
for Great Britain had no intention of interfering with the
internal politics of its ally and would not guarantee the house
of Bragan^a against its own people.154
  In the turmoil of the months preceding the return of the king
to Lisbon, Thornton’s efforts to obtain a revision of the com¬
mercial treaty of 1810 and the final abolition of the slave traffic
were fruitless. But from January 8, 1821, to the departure of
the king in April of the same year, the minister cooperated in¬
timately with the Conde de Palmella, who had just arrived
from England to take over the Foreign Office, in the effort to
force D. Joao to go back to Portugal.155 When the king sailed
for Lisbon April 25, 1821,156 the foreign envoys followed close
on his heels. The Baron de Marechal remained in a rather un¬
defined character of Austrian agent, due to the close connec¬
tions between the ruling houses of Austria and Portugal,157 but
all other official representatives returned home. Thornton sailed
June 19,158 and Rio de Janeiro became once more a provincial
capital.
  Although the court had returned to Portugal, the commercial
treaty of 1810 remained intact with its stipulations still appli¬
cable to the colony. The thread of continuity had been woven
and the privileges enjoyed by England in Portugal for centuries
had been transferred to Brazil. The impartial economic tend¬
ency manifested by the court during the first two years of its
residence at Rio was checked by the treaties negotiated by
Strangford, and England secured for itself a special position
in the colony. From the first, Portuguese and Brazilians pro¬
tested against the terms of the agreement of 1810 while Eng¬
land accused its ally of bad faith in carrying out the Stipula¬

  te F. O., 63/227, Draft to Thornton, No. 17. Dated November 15, 1820.
  166 F. O., 63/228, Thornton to Castlereagh, No. 1; No. 5 (Most secret and con¬
fidential); No. 6; No. 7 (Most secret).
  iH F. O., 63/237, Thornton to Castlereagh, No. 29. The most authoritative
work on Brazilian history between 1808 and 1821 is Oliveira Lima’s Dom Joao
VI no Brazil, 1808-1821. 2 volumes.
  167 F. O., 63/237, Thornton to Castlereagh, No. 35. D. Pedro’s wife was an
Austrian princess.                                 168 Ibid., No. 40.
108      BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
tions specified in the treaty; yet at the time of the departure
of D. Joao, England still retained its privileged position in Bra¬
zil. When D. Pedro sought recognition by England of Brazilian
Independence, a part of the price exacted by Great Britain
was the ratification by the new state of the commercial stipu¬
lations which were negotiated by the Portuguese element of the
court at Rio with the situation of Europe as the dominating
factor. The commercial relations of England and Portugal from
1808 to 1821 constituted the intermediate step in the transfer of
England s century-old preeminence in Portuguese economic
life to the independent state of Brazil.
                                 CHAPTER V


LORD STRANGFORD AND THE PORTUGUESE DE¬
             SIGNS ON THE BANDA ORIENTAL

A Glance at the map of South America demonstrates the eco¬
nomic and strategic importance to Brazil of the north bank of
the River Plate basin. The three great tributaries which form
the river have their origin in Brazilian territory and drain all
of the rich central and southern part of that country. The Para¬
guay starts southward from the watershed of Matto Grosso.
The Parana flows for nearly twelve hundred miles, separating
the states of Goyaz and Matto Grosso from those of Sao Paulo
and Parana, before it becomes the dividing line between Para¬
guay and Argentina. By a magnificent system of tributaries it
serves the interior of two of the most progressive states of the
union, Sao Paulo and Minas Geraes, and drains the promising
state of Parana. One of these tributaries, the Tiete, crosses the
coffee state from east to west with a course of six hundred miles,
for its source is almost within sight of the Atlantic Ocean be¬
tween the coast towns of Santos and Rio de Janeiro. The
Uruguay, the third of the rivers which unite to form La Plata,
serves the two southernmost states of Santa Catharina and
Rio Grande do Sul and forms the dividing line between Brazil
and Argentina and, in continuation, between Argentina and
Uruguay.1
 Thus, due to the abrupt mountain range which follows the
coast from the shoulder of Brazil to the southernmost state of
the union, the rivers of the region which since 1700 has been
the most important part of the country, drain westward into
three great streams which unite to form the River Plate. Com-

  1 Delgado de 'Carvalho, Geographia do Brasil, pp. 104-107; 377-3^1 > Varnhagem,
Historia Geral do Brasil, I, Sec$ao I.
 I ro              BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 mercial strategy, ever since early colonial times, has demanded
 that the Portuguese control the mouth of the system, while
 military strategy has required that the broad La Plata and the
 Parana-Paraguay rivers, or at least the Uruguay, divide Portu¬
 guese America from its Spanish neighbors. But such a position
 would enable the Portuguese at will to choke the only available
 outlet eastward open to that part of Spanish America which
 lies south of the Amazon and east of the Andes. The inevitable
 clash between these two conflicting interests centered in a strug¬
 gle for control of the eastern bank of the Uruguay river, gener¬
 ally known as the Banda Oriental.
      The simplicity of the conflict which began in 1580 was com¬
plicated by two factors of importance. In the first place, the
legal grounds on which each side rested its claim for possession
were confused by a universal doubt as to the location of the
famous Line of Demarcation set by Pope Alexander VI2 and by
the Treaty of Tordesillas.3 Both the Portuguese and Spanish
officials on occasion showed authenticated maps which placed
the Banda Oriental within the territory allotted to each nation.4
     2 The Bull Inter caetera, May 4, 1493, assigned to the present and future sover¬
eigns of Castile the lands discovered or to be discovered by their subjects to the
west of a line drawn from pole to pole at a distance of one hundred leagues to the
west of the Azores (Francis Davenport, European Treaties Bearing on the History of
the United States and its Dependencies to 1648, p. 56, document 7).
     3 Portugal, protesting vigorously against the Papal bull, forced Spain to sign
the Treaty of Tordesillas, June 7, 1494, which moved the line of demarcation
270 leagues farther west, and stipulated that a commission should be set up to
determine the boundary (Davenport, op. cit., p. 84, document 9). This extension
ot the line made possible the claims of Portugal to Brazil.
 ,*SP^ asserted ^at the line ran from Pari in the north to Iguap6, just south
of Sao Vicente; while the Portuguese located the line from Pari to a point close
to the Parani river, west of Buenos Aires. Although Spain’s contention very closely
approximated the line as measured to-day, Portugal’s claims seem to have been
accepted by a large number of Continental authorities throughout the period of
 issensiom        or t e Spanish claims, see L. Dominguez, “Conquest of the River
Plate        Hakluyt Society Publications. For the Portuguese side see Clovis Bevilaqua,
 As Capitamas Hereditarias perante o Tratado de Tordesillas,” Revista do Insti-
      Hutonco e Geographico Brasileiro, tomo especial, part II. For the history of the
        T'^fth        °/ <Jemarcation> see Davenport, European Treaties Bearing on
 e History of the United States, Bevilaqua, oP. cit., L. Dominguez, op. cit., E G
     urne.    The History and Determination of the Line of Demarcation Established
 y     ope Alexander VI,” Amer. Hist. Asso., Reports, XXII; Rocha Pombo, His-
                    BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                          111
It was not until the middle of the eighteenth century that a def¬
inite treaty settled further doubt in the matter by superseding
the old line of demarcation.5
   In the second place, the commercial interests of the great
powers drew the question into the maelstrom of European poli¬
tics. Whereas Portugal granted other nations a share in its co¬
lonial commerce on condition that the stream pass through the
ports of the mother country, Spain endeavored to maintain a
strict colonial monopoly to the exclusion of all foreigners and
for a century even closed La Plata itself to any trans-oceanic
commerce. Under Portuguese control, therefore, the mouth of
the river would serve as a base for European contraband trade
with the southern Spanish colonies and even with the viceroy¬
alty of Peru. In the course of events, although France and
Holland maintained an active interest in the question, Eng¬
land, due to its close relations with Portugal, became the um¬
pire in the struggle between the Spanish and the Portuguese
for control of the Banda Oriental.
  The importance of Golonia do Sacramento, which was re¬
turned to Portugal by the Treaty of Utrecht,6 finally penetrated
to Madrid. When in 1723 Philip V cut Colonia off from the
sea by ordering Montevideo to be fortified, the Portuguese un¬
der Joao V’s instructions seized the place, but were forced to
relinquish it to the Spanish governor of Buenos Aires.7 The gov¬
ernor then attempted to strengthen the town against the wave
of Portuguese settlers from the north and decided to stop the
“barefaced contraband” trade carried on through Colonia by
destroying that town,8 but England, Holland, and France again
united to prevent the expulsion of the Portuguese from the
River Plate region.9

toria do Brazil, I, passim; Calvo, Colleccion completa de los tratados, I, 190-262, 263-302.
  6 Treaty of 1750.                         6 See supra, pp. 27-28.
  7 Revista del Archivo, General Administrativo; Coleccion de Documents, collected by
Dr. Pedro Mascard, pp. 5, 21, 52, 53.
 8 Robert Southey, History of Brazil, III, 287; Grimaldi, “Respuesta del Marquds
de Grimaldi, Ministro de Espana, a la memoria . . . de Portugal de D. Fran¬
cisco Ignacio de Souza Coutinho,” Calvo, Coleccidn de los tratados, III, 5-
  » Altamira, Historia de Espana, IV, 110; B. Moses, Spains Declining Power in South
 112          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    After the 1735 incident, the contraband trade of Colonia
 grew until Spain felt that “the necessity of cutting out that sore
 spot of commercial corruption” was urgent.10 In 1750 Ferdi¬
 nand VI, under the influence of his mother, D. Barbara de
 Bragan$a of the reigning house of Portugal, attempted to reach
 an amicable settlement with Joao V by taking Colonia for
 Spain and relinquishing the Seven Missions territory to Portu¬
 gal,11 but neither Jose, who succeeded Joao, nor Charles III of
 Spain approved of the agreement. An accord in 1761 between
 Portugal and Spain therefore annulled the 1750 arrangement,
 and England saw to it that the possession of Colonia by Portu¬
gal was firmly reestablished by the Treaty of Paris in 1763.12
   After 1763 Governor Cunha at Rio de Janeiro, by ordering
an advance south and west from the captaincy of Santa Cath-
arina, secured for the Portuguese the territory which extended
from the village of S. Pedro westward to the Ibicuf and Pepiri
rivers.13 Moreover, Portuguese depredations continued, one ex¬
pedition alone taking half a million head of cattle and seven
thousand Indian families.14 Charles III, losing patience in 1777,
sent a strong expedition to America which seized the island of
Santa Catharina and the village of S. Pedro in Brazil and Co¬
lonia on the River Plate.15 Portugal was thereupon forced to
sign an agreement which ceded Colonia with all its claims on
the north bank of La Plata and acknowledged the exclusive

America, 1730-1806, pp. 31-32. In 1735 Portugal and Spain were on the verge of
war, but were quieted by the intervention of England, France, and Holland.
Walpole sent a fleet of twenty-eight ships and 12,840 men to Lisbon as a gesture
of warning to Spain {Historical Register, 1735, pp. 192-203; London Magazine, 1735,
p. 333; Innes, Britain and Her Rivals, p. 44; Newcastle Papers, CX, Add. Ms., 32,795,
Trawley to Keene, Lisbon, May 5 and 15, 1737; S. P. Foreign, Portugal, 89/36^
38, and 39; S. P. Foreign, Spain, 94/122, 123, 125, 126, and 127).
  10 Altamira, Historia de Esparia, IV, 110.
  11 Martens, Recueil des TraiUs, Supple., I, 328-374; Southey, History of Brazil, III,
443-
  12 Altamira, op. cit., IV, 61; Calvo, Coleccidn de los tratados, II, 148 359 384- S P
For., Port., 89/54, 55, 56, 57, 58.
   13 M. Lastarria, ‘Memoria sobre la linea divisoria de los dominios de S. M.
Cathblica y del Rey de Portugal en la America Meridional,” Calvo, Coleccidn de
los tratados, IV, 364.
  u Altamira, Historia de Esparia, IV, 61.             15 Calvo, op. cit., VI 258, 266.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   113
right of Spain to the estuary and to the Uruguay river as far
up as the Pepiri-Guazu. The line of demarcation between the
Banda Oriental and Portuguese territory was fixed approxi¬
mately as it exists to-day, except for the region of the Seven
Missions, which was regained by the treaty ofBadajoz in 1801.16
By Article VII of the treaty of Amiens England guaranteed
the status quo.11
  Thus when D. Joao fled to Brazil in 1807, Portugual had
been forced to relinquish all claims to the north bank of La
Plata basin. Yet during the next twenty years the Portuguese
court was to make its most determined effort to obtain possession
of the Banda Oriental by taking advantage of Ferdinand VII’s
imprisonment by Napoleon, and, later, of the revolt of the
Spanish colonies. England’s intervention and final mediation
were the determining factors in the outcome of this last attempt
by the Portuguese to secure control of the mouth of the River
Plate.
  The Portuguese, hatching their plans for the conquest of the
Banda Oriental on the high seas between Lisbon and Rio, were
ready to put them into execution as soon as the court disem¬
barked. By chance a Spanish agent, Antonio Lopez, on his way
from Buenos Aires to Spain, was waiting in Rio to continue
his journey when Souza Goutinho arrived. The Portuguese min¬
ister induced him to return with a message for the cabildo which
proposed a commercial union of Brazil and Buenos Aires and
the protection of the Spanish colony by the Portuguese mon¬
archy now established in America. This protection presupposed
liberty of commerce and cessation of all hostilities between the
two peoples, so that its refusal by La Plata authorities would
force D. Joao to yield to the necessity of making common cause
with his powerful ally, England.18 The message was dated

  16 The 1777 treaty is found in Martens, Recueil, II, 545"55^- The 1801 treaty
is found in Martens, op. cit., Supple., II, 340. England guaranteed the 1801 agree¬
ment.
 17 Martens, Recueil, Supple., II, 542.
 18 Diego Luis Molinari, Antecedentes de la Revolucidn de Mayo, I, 5-6, and appendix
xvii, xv. The threat involved in the last sentence was intended to call to mind
the English occupation of Buenos Aires of two years previous.
 114          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 March 13, 1808, five days after the arrival of the prince regent
 in Rio de Janeiro. At the same time a Portuguese agent, Brig-
 adeiro Curado, was dispatched to Buenos Aires with private
 instructions.19
    Coincident with these events came the arrival of Count Luiz
 Enrique Liniers, brother of Santiago Liniers of Buenos Aires,
 who under an assumed name touched at Rio on his way from
 Europe. He was recognized and taken to Souza Coutinho, who
 proposed that the count undertake the task of completing the
negotiations suggested in his message of March 13 to the cabildo.
The minister informed the count that his purpose was to work
out commercial security and personal safety for the subjects of
each power trading to or residing in the territory of the other,
and to prevent the Spaniards of Buenos Aires from being mo¬
lested by the English, since an attack by that nation on La Plata
would be very harmful to commerce between the two parties
involved. As a pledge of good faith on the part of Buenos Aires,
Portuguese troops were to be admitted into certain strategic
places in the viceroyalty.20 The count refused to consider the
guaranty of security, but communicated the proposals to his
brother, Santiago de Liniers, in Buenos Aires.
   Chargt Hill was unaware of this activity until the first week
in April, when Souza Coutinho expressed to him with great
earnestness his preoccupation over the possibility of inducing
the Spanish-American colonies “to declare in favour of the
Prince Regent, who would by that means become the sole
Sovereign of this immense Continent.” The Portuguese gov¬
ernment would attempt to gain this object by fair means; but
if the effort failed, the assistance of England would be asked
in order to take the Spanish colonies by force. Hill expressed
neither approval nor objection to this surprising communica¬
tion.21

  19 Molinari, Antecedentes, I, 7, footnote 4.
  0 Ibid., I, 7 and documents in appendix, xii-xv. Reports sent by the count to
his brother in Buenos Aires are dated March 26 and April 12.
  21 F. O., 63/63, Hill to Canning, No. 4. Although Hill did not discourage the
project, he did not encourage it; or if he did, he failed to report the action to
Canning.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   115
  Having acquainted his ally with his plans, Souza Coutinho
continued his operations. On May 1, the manifesto declaring
war between Portugal and France22 ended with such a men¬
acing tone toward Spain that Luiz Liniers realized the true
intent of the prince regent toward La Plata.23 He remained
two weeks longer, however, until Sir Sidney Smith reached Rio
with the English fleet and forced his departure by expelling
all subjects of the Bourbons.24
   In the meantime the Portuguese agent, Brigadeiro Curado,
having presented in writing his friendly overtures in regard to
a commercial convention and peaceful relations between the
two countries, obtained permission to enter Buenos Aires over
the protest of the cabildo.25 About the same time, however, Souza
Coutinho’s note of March 13 with the veiled threat was de¬
livered to that body, which rejected the Portuguese offer of pro¬
tection and passed the note on to Liniers in the hope that the
menacing tone adopted by Souza Coutinho would induce him
to refuse Curado entrance. The viceroy suspected the cabildo
and Elio, the governor of Montevideo, of setting a trap for him,
and Curado was allowed to enter, but secret instructions were
sent to Eh'o by Liniers to detain him at Montevideo until
further orders. Active preparations to attack the province of
Rio Grande were begun by the cabildo, only to be stopped by
the news of Sir Sidney Smith’s arrival in Rio, for that body
believed that England was behind the moves initiated at the
Portuguese capital and perceived that Buenos Aires was power-

  22 Correio Braziliense, I, 255.
  23 The cabildo of Buenos Aires was so concerned over Liniers’ safety that it sent
a spy to Rio to effect his escape from prison in case he had been seized. Luiz
Liniers was a Frenchman.
  24 Hill had been worried about Liniers’ long stay at Rio, certain that the latter
was collecting information to be used against Portugal. Liniers, Hill said, was an
enemy of England, being French by birth and sympathies (F. O., 63/63, Hill to
Canning, No. 13). The count reached Buenos Aires August 17 (Molinari, Ante-
cedentes, I, 10).
  26 Molinari, op. cit., documents in appendix, xvii, xxii, xxiii, Iv. The audiencia
opposed Curado’s entrance but the viceroy argued that it was better to let him in
peacefully than to refuse him entrance and have him come in anyway. Oliveira
Lima in D. Joao VI no Brazil, I, 289, sets Curado’s mission in 1809, a mistake,
Molinari says, op. cit., p. 13.
 116            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 less to attack Brazil backed by the English fleet and army.26
        When Santiago Liniers27 was informed by his brother of the
 warlike preparations also begun by Souza Coutinho, he notified
 the cabildo that the Portuguese minister would never embark on
 such a path were he not being instigated by the English min¬
ister.28 Yet ChargS Hill, by June 2, still had no more to commu¬
nicate to Canning than that the Spaniards feared a combined
 English and Portuguese attack but could offer little resistance
to such a move. Perhaps Hill inclined to the proposed plan in
view of the fact that during the preceding three months alone
the value of the commercial intercourse between Rio and
Buenos Aires had amounted to £120,000.29
    The reply of the cabildo of Buenos Aires refusing Souza Cou-
tinho’s offer of protection against France provoked orders from
the Portuguese court addressed to Curado, which instructed
him to inform the viceroy that unless the cabildo were forced to
accept the Portuguese proposals, he would be obliged to with¬
draw to the frontier of the Rio Grande. Consequently, Curado
prepared a letter to Liniers in which he peremptorily demanded
the delivery to the prince regent of the north bank of La Plata
under the pretext of the menace of an occupation by the
French.30 He presented his ultimatum to the audiencia at the
        Molinari, Antecedentes, I, 13-21 and documents in appendix, xxvii, xxviii, lii,
liii.
   27 By orders from Godoy which reached Buenos Aires May 13, 1808, Liniers
was given supreme political command of the colony. Hitherto he had had supreme
command of the army (Molinari, op. cit., I, 21 and footnote 2). But his position
was very precarious, with the cabildo of Buenos Aires, led by Alzaga, and the
governor of Montevideo intriguing against him. The merchants turned against
him when he attempted to raise much needed money by imposing import duties,
June 1. The tariff was modified, July 13, giving the viceroy the power to grant
special privileges to traders with foreign countries by exempting them from the
tariff, but this modification increased the opposition among the native merchants
who had to pay the tariff (Molinari, op. cit., II, 12-18).
   28 Molinari, op. cit., II, 5-6.
  29 F. O., 63/63, Hill to Canning, No. 13. June 2. It is probable that Hill lent
some support to the Portuguese plan as D. Joao praised Hill highly to Strangford
later (F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 1).
  80 “Oficio del Mariscal de Campo, Joaquin Xavier Curado a Santiago Liniers,
en que le hace saber que el Principe Regente exige que le entregue la guarda de
la margen septentrional del Rfo de la Plata, antes la amenaza de una occupacibn
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                    117
same meeting in which Elio and the cabildo of Montevideo de¬
manded the resignation of the viceroy. Liniers in reply told
Curado to leave Spanish territory at once.31 The general re¬
treated to Rio Grande, fearing an immediate invasion by the
troops of Buenos Aires,32 but conscious also that he had con¬
tributed to the breach between Liniers and Elio which eventu¬
ally was to enable Souza Coutinho to interfere between the
conflicting elements of La Plata.33
  Up to this point England’s participation in the affair had
been limited to tacit acquiescence by the chargi d'affaires at Rio
and the active cooperation of the English admiral in command
of the fleet in South American waters. But on July 22 the mas¬
terful Strangford landed in Rio, and Souza Coutinho hastened
to acquaint him with what had been done and to ask his help
in carrying out the Portuguese plans in La Plata. D. Joao, the
minister reported, was afraid of French designs in that region34
and was determined to take possession of both sides of the river.
As peaceful methods had failed, more violent measures were
necessary. Therefore it had been planned that the Paulistas who
first were to take Asuncion, Corrientes, and the Missions re¬
gions, were to join the forces from Santa Catharina and Rio
Grande in an attack on Montevideo, while Sir Sidney Smith
with the English fleet, after landing two thousand troops from
Rio in La Plata, was to prevent communications between Mon¬
tevideo and Buenos Aires. To this proposal Strangford mur¬
mured a non-committal reply and suggested to Canning that

francesa.” Dated September 2, 1808. The document is given by Molinari, Ante¬
cedent es, III, appendix, i.
  81 Molinari, op. cit., Ill, 5. The Portuguese court later attempted to disallow
Curado’s action but Molinari does not believe he was acting contrary to instruc¬
tions.
   82 Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Bras., XLI, 302.
  88 The cabildo of Buenos Aires accused Elio of being in communication with
Curado after the withdrawal of the latter (Molinari, op. cit., Ill, 6, footnote 3).
  84 Liniers was accused of being pro-French and D. Joao’s fears were grounded
on the opinion held by a large group in La Plata itself. Bernardo de Sassenay,
agent of Napoleon sent to Buenos Aires in 1808, asserted that Liniers would have
acted favorably to the French view had he been able to ignore public opinion
(Carlos A. Villanueva, Napoledny la Independence de America, pp. 205-214).
  ii8          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  England should retain either Montevideo or Buenos Aires in
  case the plan succeeded.35
     In less than a month this grandiose scheme grew in Souza
  Coutinho’s mind until on August 20, he proposed to the Eng¬
  lish minister a joint Portuguese-British expedition to take the
  Philippines and to attack the west coast of South America. The
  viscount, waiting for news as to Britain’s relations with Spain,
  continued to be non-committal in his attitude.36
    But quite suddenly those plans were cast aside and an en¬
  tirely different policy was inaugurated, for news arrived from
  Europe of the abdication of Charles IV, the mutiny at Aran-
 juez, the captivity of Ferdinand, and the proclamation of the
 Napoleonic dynasty at Bayonne. The plans for the joint attack
 were replaced by a scheme to establish the wife of D. Joao as
 regent of the Spanish-American colonies. The prince regent’s
 wife, D. Carlota Joaquina, being the sister of Ferdinand (later
 VII), now became in her opinion the representative of the
 royal house of Spain, since the legitimate king was incapable
 of ruling.37 Four manifestoes were published in which D. Car-
 Iota and the Infante D. Carlos as members of the royal family
 of Spain protested against the forced abdication of the Spanish
 Bourbons and required the recognition by all Spanish-Amer¬
 ican colonies of their rights ad interim as representatives of their
 dynasty. One of the manifestoes was addressed to D. Joao, re¬
 questing that he approach Sir Sidney Smith in order to obtain

   85 F- O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 2. Dated July 25, 1808.
   36 Ibid., No. 11, August 24, 1808.
   37 Alfredo Varela in Duos Grandes Intrigas, I, 71-72 and 628, note (2), maintains
that the change in policy was due to Carlota’s efforts exerted on Coutinho. The
minister drew up the minute of the manifesto asserting her claims, on August 11,
and Sir Sidney Smith corrected it before it was translated into Spanish. Molinari,
Antecedentes, III, 7 and footnote (4), believes that Coutinho changed suddenly due
to the extraordinary successes won in the Spanish Peninsula and to the influence
o the English cabinet. Strangford’s correspondence does not show any influence
o the sort however. Strangford said the manifesto was drawn up by Sir Sidney
Smith (F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 12). The legal basis of D.
Carlota’s claims to succession to the throne in case of failure by her brothers and
their legmrnate descendants is given by J. M. Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina
y la Politico de Espana en America, pp. 42-45.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   ng
from that officer the means of defending Spanish America
against the designs of France. The prince regent, in his reply,
which was also one of the manifestoes, promised to support the
claims of the princess and the infante.38
   Strangford prophesied that these documents, which were to
be broadcast throughout Spanish America, would only inten¬
sify the hatred of the Spanish for the Portuguese. Joao’s real
purpose was to extend “the Portuguese American Empire as
far as the River of Plate,” and to recover the territories which
had been ceded by treaty either to France or to Spain. The
prince, so the minister thought, hoped that the reception of
these proclamations by the colonials would warrant him in
commencing hostilities. Strangford, until he should receive
definite information as to the relations of England with Spain,
would continue to be careful not to “check the Energy and
Spirit” which Joao had developed on the subject, but person¬
ally he was opposed to such a project, which was far beyond
the strength of the prince regent.39
   The viscount received his desired information in short order,
for on September 2, Canning wrote that it was “scarcely neces¬
sary to inform your Lordship, that in the present state of His
Majesty’s relations with Spain, He cannot countenance any
design hostile to the Peace and Independence of the Spanish
Dominions in South America.” Strangford was ordered, there¬
fore, earnestly to urge the Portuguese minister to suspend all
further operations undertaken with this in view, and to respect
in the South American colonies those ties of common interest
  38 The manifestoes are dated August 19 and 20, 1808. They are given in fac¬
simile by Molinari, Antecedentes, III, appendix, documents 2, 3, 4, 5. Strangford
enclosed copies in F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 12. The first mani¬
festo was the complaint against Napoleon’s action made by D. Carlota and the
Infante Don Carlos to D. Joao, requesting his aid and that of the admiral of the
British squadron in support of the two petitioners. The second was the reply of
D. Joao promising to support these claims. The third was directed to the faithful
vassals of Spain by D. Carlota, in which she declared null the forced abdication
of her father and brothers, asserted that she was the nearest representative of her
house, and called on all Spaniards to acknowledge her claims during the impris¬
onment of Charles and Ferdinand. The fourth was a similar document signed by
the Infante Don Carlos.
  39 F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 12. August 24, 1808.
120         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
and friendship by which Spain and Portugal were now united
in Europe.40 Two months later Canning added to those instruc¬
tions that “nothing could be more futile than the attempt”
made by Joao to extend his empire to Spanish America, “ex¬
cept the manner of conducting it.” Strangford was to continue
to oppose any such moves and to express England’s “entire
disapprobation of them.” Especially was Britain opposed to
any pretensions of Joao through his wife to the regency of
Spain.41
   These instructions left no doubt as to the course which Strang¬
ford was to pursue. Henceforth he was to employ all of his sub¬
tlety and masterfulness in checkmating the Portuguese designs
on the River Plate basin. To execute his instructions he needed
every bit of finesse of which he was capable, for his position
was a delicate one. D. Joao, with his faction, had acceded to
the publication of the manifestoes in the hopes that they would
result in a situation which would enable Portugal to take the
Banda Oriental by force under the cloak of a legitimate de¬
fense of Spanish rights in America. The ambitious D. Carlota,
who was living separated from her husband, hoped to make
herself queen over all of Spanish America. Sir Sidney Smith,
in command of England’s fleet in South American waters, used
all of his social and naval power to support D. Carlota’s as¬
pirations in opposition to the policies of D. Joao and Lord
Strangford. Spain added a further element of difficulty by
sending the firebrand, Casa Irujo, as minister to Rio after his
withdrawal from Washington, while revolutionary and royalist
agents from La Plata swarmed to the Portuguese capital in the
hope of securing aid.42

  40 F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 18.
  41 F. O., 63/60, Canning to Strangford, No. 30. November 26, 1808. D. Carlota
sent letters to important political leaders in Spain such as D. Melchior Gaspar,
Dr. Francisco Saavedra (member of the Junta Central), the Conde de Floridablanca,
and the Bishop of Orense (who became the president of the regency). Letters were
sent also to military leaders such as Jos6 Palafoy, Francisco Xavier Castanos,
Gregorio de la Cuesta. Local and sectional juntas also received communications
from her, and she wrote to her father, mother, and brother recommending changes
in America (Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, pp. 65-73).
   Jos6 Presas, Memorias secretas de la Princesa del Brasil, por su antiguo secretario, pp.
                     BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                      121
   In addition to the manifestoes, D. Carlota began an exten¬
sive private correspondence in support of her pretensions. Per¬
sonal letters copied in her own hand were sent by means of an
English agent under Smith’s orders to Viceroy Liniers, to the
audiencia of Buenos Aires, to Juan Almagro (assessor of the vice¬
royalty), to the dean of the Cathedral of Cordova del Tucu-
man, and to others in the viceroyalty of La Plata. Letters were
sent also to the governor, to the ayuntamiento, and to private
individuals of Montevideo; to the viceroy of Peru and to Goy-
eneche, who commanded the troops in that region; and to the
audiencia of Chile.43 Communications were addressed also to
the Marquis de Someruelos, governor of Havana, and to the
authorities of Guatemala. Most of the letters to the west coast
were carried by an Englishman who was supercargo on a
British ship, D. Carlota having secured him a commission as
a royal agent of the Portuguese monarchy in order to clothe
him with the proper authority.
   The manifestoes reached Buenos Aires on the day following
the receipt of Curado’s ultimatum.44 Such a sudden change of
front led Liniers to believe the manifestoes were either spur¬
ious or a trap for his fall. Consequently, he denied the right of
D. Carlota to assume the regency over the Spanish colonies.
Since Buenos Aires had sworn to support Ferdinand VII and
the Junta of Seville had proclaimed him king, the viceroy could
not acquiesce in the assertion that Carlota and the Infante Car¬
los were the titular heads of the Spanish House. The audiencia
adopted the same attitude in its reply to the private letter which
Souza Coutinho directed to that body, while the cabildo called
the documents <(tumultuarios,> and the governor of Montevideo
politely declined to support Carlota’s claims.                     The audencia of
Chile was equally unenthusiastic over the plan.46

27, 36) 39) 55-64, 84-99, I32*I33- Casa Irujo insisted that Joao allow Carlota to
go to Madeira Island in order to be near Spain in case the Spanish government
should invite her to occupy the throne in the absence of Charles and Ferdinand
(F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Bathurst, No. n. February 6, 1810).
  43 Presas, op. cit., pp. 27-34; Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, p. 49, footnote 2.
  44 They arrived September 11 (Molinari, Antecedentes, III, 6-7).
  46 Ibid., Ill, 9-14.
  46 Presas, Memorias, pp. 33-34. The Junta Central of Spain also refused to ac-
 122         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    In general, therefore, the manifestoes met a cold reception.
 Yet a powerful group in Buenos Aires did accept the idea as a
 means of opposing the Junta of Seville, whose authority many
in the colony denied. A secret society counting such illustrious
 names as Manuel Belgrano, Martin Pueyrredon, and Mariano
 Moreno, was formed to watch the movements of the new vice¬
roy, Hidalgo de Cisneros, who had taken the place of Liniers
by orders of the Junta, to call the people to arms when the time
was ripe for action, and to proclaim D. Carlota Joaquina
regent of all Spain. General Pueyrredon was sent by the com¬
mittee to Rio to hasten the arrival of the princess in Buenos
Aires.47
   In the meantime, D. Carlota was fishing in very troubled
waters at the Portuguese capital. While Sir Sidney Smith and
Viscount Strangford were spending a few days at D. Joao’s
place at Santa Cruz outside of Rio, letters came from the prin¬
cess addressed to the prince and to Smith. D. Joao was informed
—his permission was not asked; he was merely informed—that
the princess intended to go at once to Buenos Aires, taking with
her D. Miguel, their second son, and all of the princesses. Smith
was nominated plenipotentiary for D. Carlota who now con¬
sidered herself an independent sovereign with jurisdiction over
Spanish America. He was given powers by the princess to cede
to D. Joao La Plata territory desired by Portugal on condition
that the Amazon river be opened to her subjects, the Spaniards.
The English admiral was to take the princess to La Plata; or,
in case he could not go, D. Carlota was to go alone, for go
she would regardless of what might arise to frustrate her plans.48
   Although the letters were in D. Carlota’s handwriting, it
was evident, at least to the prince, that Smith himself had com¬
posed them. D. Joao was exceedingly angry and requested
Strangford to make representations to London against the ad-

quiesce in the pretensions announced in the manifestoes. D. Carlota then sought
the consent of the regency and the Cortes to her claims and succeeded eventually,
but too late (Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, pp. 50-51).
  47 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 108-m.
 48 F. O., 63/60, Strangford to Canning, No. 20. Most Secret and Confidential.
October 9.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                   123
miral. When the party returned to Rio and the prince regent
discovered that D. Carlota had already taken her jewels from
the palace preparatory to leaving, he was shaken from his pla¬
cid taciturnity and complained violently to Strangford of the
admiral’s instigation of D. Carlota’s outrageous conduct. The
minister, in reporting the affair to Canning, lamented that such
an able officer as Smith should have been led astray by a “Serv¬
ice replete with circumstances of a new and romantic Na¬
ture.”49
  On October 15, D. Joao called Smith and Strangford to¬
gether for a conference on D. Carlota’s pretensions in Buenos
Aires, but the admiral cut short any conversation by stating
laconically that his recently arrived instructions gave him all
he needed to know and that they were so secret that even
Strangford was not to be informed of their contents. “The fate
of South America,” he asserted, “was in his hands.” This dec¬
laration checkmated Strangford until he could write home,
while it stimulated Souza Coutinho to urge Smith to go to La
Plata to calm the dissensions reigning in that region. D. Carlota,
belligerently encouraged by Smith’s stand, was determined to
accompany the admiral, “even though the batteries of Rio de
Janeiro should fire upon her at her departure.” The admiral
went so far as to promise England’s support of Carlota’s claims
to the throne of Spain in case of the failure of the reigning
branch, thus putting the entire Peninsula wholly under the
Bragan$a family.50
  In the face of these developments, D. Joao once again halted
between two opinions. Quite willing to have the English ad¬
miral capture La Plata for a member of the house of Bragan^a,
he acquiesced at first in Souza Coutinho’s insistence that Smith
be allowed to sail for Buenos Aires. But Strangford sowed seeds
of distrust in his mind by insinuating that, once queen of Span¬
ish America, D. Carlota might swallow Brazil with Smith’s aid
with as much facility as D. Joao could absorb the Spanish col¬
onies. The prince regent, perceiving clearly the imperious am-

 49 Ibid.
 60 Ibid., Nos. 23 and 25.
 124           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 bition of his wife and realizing what that energetic princess
 thought of her fat, irresolute, unheroic husband, wavered be¬
 tween the advice of his own minister and that of the viscount.61
       Strangford’s pressure soon began to bear fruit, however. On
 October 24, he protested formally and energetically to the For¬
 eign Office against Smith’s interference in affairs of state, and
 three days later a protest from D. Joao was added. The next
 day Souza Coutinho, by authority of the prince regent, asked
 that the admiral be recalled;              and a few days later D. Joao
 flatly ordered his wife not to leave for Buenos Aires until he had
 secured the official concurrence of England in that move.63
       Although the Carlota faction was balked temporarily, the
princess and the admiral continued to agitate D. Joao, driving
him at times to the verge of his endurance.64 In April, 1809,
D. Carlota visited Smith at his country home, presented him
with a jeweled sword in recognition of his services,66 and prom¬
ised him the title of Duke of Montevideo as soon as they should
arrive in Buenos Aires. That happy event was never consum¬
mated, however, for on March 1, 1809, Canning wrote to
Strangford that England would never “countenance any meas¬
ure which” had “for its object any interference in the political
state” of Spanish dominions in America. The viscount was
praised for his moderation and steadiness during the interfer-
   61 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 251-254. The Portuguese ministers were
not averse to Carlota’s pretensions (F. O., 63/70, Strangford to Canning, No.
65). Smith maintained that D. Joao actually gave his consent to Carlota’s expe¬
dition (F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, No. 39). Rubio, La Infanta Carlota
Joaqmna, appendix, document VIII, gives a letter dated November 22, 1808, in
which D. Joao formally gave permission for D. Carlota to go to Buenos Aires
The permission was revoked by a letter dated November 28, 1808, on the grounds
that the British minister called the project “Absolutely inadmissable” (ibid, ap¬
pendix, document IX).
  **     O., 63/60, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 25, 26, 28.
   ** F'°-’ 63/6l» Strangford to Canning, No. 39. Presas lays the chief blame for
this refusal to the activity of Strangford (Memorias, p. 38). Brazilian authorities
concur m asserting that Strangford was the chief element in frustrating D
Carlota’s plan (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 240-258; Pereira da Silva,
Histona do Impeno, II, 112-113). Calvo also lays the responsibility at the minister’s
door (Anales de La Revolucidn de la Amirica Latina, I, 80).
  M F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, No. 39.
  66 Presas, Memorias, pp. 55-62.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                    125
ence in his business which had resulted in such confusion in the
Rio court, and Sir Sidney Smith was recalled.66
  This dispatch cleared the air when it arrived at Rio. Strang-
ford at once wrote to the governors of Montevideo and Buenos
Aires, assuring them that England “would not countenance any
attempt to effect a change in the established authorities of the
Spanish colonies” as long as they persevered in their allegiance
to Ferdinand VII.57 As D. Carlota herself had long foreseen,
without the admiral’s help, hers was a lost cause.58 The plan
had received very chilly reception in Buenos Aires in the first
place; now her inability to appear in person to be acclaimed
regent frustrated the efforts of the secret committee, and Pueyr-
redon, disgusted, returned to La Plata. The conspirators lost
interest in part also because they learned that D. Carlota ab¬
solutely refused to consider a constitutional monarchy. Thus
failed the second attempt of the Portuguese court to win the
Banda Oriental by peaceful means.
  Although they had been balked twice in their efforts to secure
control of the River Plate basin, both D. Joao and Souza Cou-
tinho, with characteristic Portuguese tenacity, continued to
work for the annexation of the north bank of the river. This
time they were aided by events in La Plata itself, which set
them on the path which eventually led them to success.
  Late in 1809 the viceroy at Buenos Aires lifted the ban on
foreign merchandise and induced great quantities of British
goods to enter the city, assuring the merchants that sufficient
time would be given them for the sale of these imports. Yet on

  66 F. O., 63/68, Canning to Strangford, No. 2.
  67 F. O., 63/69, Strangford to Canning, No. 40. June 7, 1809. Both Montevideo
and Buenos Aires weie convinced by Smith’s action that England was encouraging
a total change in the colonial government of Spain. Strangford prophesied a serious
danger to the friendly relations of England and Spain unless something were done
at once (F. O., 63/70. Strangford to Canning, No. 59, July 2, 1809). The minister
therefore in addition to his first note, assured the governors and juntas of La Plata
that England would not interfere to aid either side in the dissensions which were
rapidly developing between Montevideo and Buenos Aires (ibid.. No. 63, August,
16).
  68 “Yo voy viendo el caso perdido si sir Sidney Smith afloja,” Carlota wrote to
Presas (Presas, Memorias, p. 39).
 126         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 December 25, the alcaldes notified British subjects in Buenos
 Aires by order of the viceroy to leave within eight days regard¬
 less of the vast amount of goods which had been landed but
 still remained unsold. The committee of British merchants, ap¬
 pealing to Strangford for aid, estimated the British property
 involved to be “a million and a half” pounds sterling.69 The
 Portuguese were ordered to leave also.60
    Such acts on the part of Cisneros inclined Strangford to favor
 the revolutionary group in La Plata although he perceived
 clearly that the colonies were very near to an assertion of in¬
 dependence. D. Joao, fearing quite naturally to have the inde¬
 pendence wave break against his own dominions, would be
 satisfied, in Strangford’s opinion, by the cession of the north
 bank of the River Plate, which was half-Portuguese anyway.
 Moreover, the prince’s liberal commercial policy, contrasted
with Spain’s narrow restrictions, inclined the inhabitants of
that region to union with Brazil. Perhaps it might be wise to
let the prince have that region, the viscount hinted to Wellesley.
Unless England took the lead in some way and at once, in regard
to the situation created by the independence party of La Plata,
the United States would step in ahead of Britain. Why not give
the Banda Oriental to D. Joao and let the insurrectionary ele¬
ment in Buenos Aires feel that England was sympathetic with
the aspirations of autonomy and liberal commercial policies,
provided of course the allegiance to the Spanish royal house
was preserved? In great perplexity, Strangford urgently re¬
quested instructions in regard to the proper attitude to be as¬
sumed with reference to the revolutionary movement.61
   Scarcely had the minister written this dispatch when news of
the May revolution in Buenos Aires reached Rio. Simulta¬
neously with the news of the uprising, there arrived a special
letter from the cabildo beseeching Strangford to represent the
    F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 26.
  60 Ibid., Strangford to Bathurst, No. 10. June 10, 1810.
  61 F. O., 63/84, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 48. June 10, 1810. The minister
was worried over Sumter’s mission. A plenipotentiary with full powers from the
United States must have important business, Strangford thought. Thomas Sumter
was United States minister to the Portuguese court in Brazil from 1810 to 1819.
                     BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                   127
new government in a favorable light to the London court and
to secure from Brazil a pacific policy toward Spanish America.
An agent, following close on the heels of the letter, explained
that the junta at Buenos Aires wanted England, first, to protect
the new government from the Junta of Seville as well as from
D. Carlota’s faction until the Federal Government could be
formed; second, to protect the new government after its for¬
mation with a just recompense granted to England by Buenos
Aires for that protection; third, to furnish arms and ammunition;
and fourth, through Strangford, to prevent Brazil from em¬
barking on any military action on the frontier. In reply Strang¬
ford promised to forward these requests to London and to en¬
deavor to induce D. Joao to refrain from using his army beyond
the southern boundary of his dominions.62
  At an interview granted the minister at the palace, the prince
regent assured Strangford that he would be guided in his atti¬
tude toward the American Spaniards by that of England. Souza
Coutinho,       however,     bombarded     the viscount with letters
which pointed out the urgency to England as well as to Brazil
of having a natural southern boundary to Portuguese America.
The minister, Strangford reported, was only too glad of the
outbreak of revolutionary spirit in La Plata, since it offered an
opportunity of extending Brazil to the river. The minister as¬
sured Wellesley, however, that he would prevent any measures
in that direction until orders from England should arrive.63
  Once more the claims of D. Carlota to the government of
the Spanish colonies was pressed. The movement now was
backed by Carlota’s ambitions, by the Portuguese government,
which again hoped to obtain the north bank under the cloak
of her pretensions, and by the Spanish officials at Montevideo,
who conceived this plan to be the only way left to them of per¬
petuating their power. In Strangford’s opinion, however, it was
“scarcely possible to devise any project more entirely and uni¬
versally contrary to the wishes of the Spanish Americans than
that of establishing the Princess of Brazil as their Regent.”64

 62 Ibid., No. 49. June 20, 1810.
 03 Ibid., No. 49.                  84 Ibid., No. 56.
 128        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
      On July 23, 1810, the viscount learned that Cisneros had
   been expelled from Buenos Aires and had been sent back to
   Europe. At the same time he was informed that Portuguese
   troops had crossed the borders into the Banda Oriental between
   the Ibicuf and Quarahim rivers, and Casa Irujo communicated
   to him officially that he had protested to the Portuguese gov¬
   ernment against such a step. Strangford thereupon presented a
   note to Souza Coutinho which, he hoped, would put “a com¬
  plete stop” to such designs of the Portuguese court.65 Souza Cou¬
  tinho in reply denied any knowledge of an advance by the
  troops—a diplomatic subterfuge, snorted Strangford,66 who im¬
  mediately warned the minister that nothing could endanger the
  relations between Portugal and England more quickly than a
  premature move on the part of Portugal to occupy territory on
  the north bank of La Plata.67
     In a dispatch written toward the end of September, the vis¬
  count revealed the motives which impelled him to oppose both
  the Portuguese and the Montevideo governments in their efforts
  to crush the Buenos Aires revolutionists. “Unless some assur¬
 ance of future protection and countenance on the part of Great
 Britain” should be given right speedily to the junta, there was
    great reason” to fear that it would “throw off its allegiance
 to its legitimate Sovereign” and thus be forced to a “premature
 declaration of independence, too probably under the guaran¬
 tee of France.” As only some action by England could now
 prevent the Spanish colonies from becoming French, the min¬
 ister urged that his country recognize immediately the new
junta, which upheld the sovereignty of Ferdinand VII, before
 complete independence should be declared. He warned Wel¬
lesley that to force the revolutionists to submit to the colonial
restrictions imposed by the Junta of Seville would result in the
total independence of Buenos Aires.68
     The delicacy of the minister’s position was increased by the
failure of the Foreign Office to reply to his plea of June 10 for

 u F. O., 63/85, Strangford to Wellesley, Nos. 57, 58, 60.
 68 Ibid., No. 61.              st Ibid> No 63>
 88 Ibid., No. 72. September 28, 1810.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                 129
instructions as to the attitude of his government toward the
revolutionists. Montevideo, the stronghold of the adherents of
the Seville Junta, blockaded Buenos Aires, with Captain Elliott,
commander of the British squadron in that region, acqui¬
escing.69 Carlota fomented discord between the two capitals of
La Plata, going so far as to send her jewels to Elio, the gover¬
nor of Montevideo, when she could not send arms or money.
She even managed to obtain a printing press and type for him
for propaganda purposes.70 In October the Portuguese govern¬
ment advised Strangford that if the Buenos Aires forces crossed
the Paraguay or Parana rivers to attack Montevideo, Portu¬
guese troops would cross the frontier. As Montevideo controlled
the naval forces of the region, the revolutionists were thus forced
either to acquiesce in the blockade or to face both the Spanish
troops of Montevideo and the Portuguese troops from the prov¬
ince of Rio Grande. The English minister, however, by great
exertions succeeded in obtaining a promise from D. Joao not
to allow his troops to move until news of England’s attitude
could be ascertained.71
  By the middle of November D. Joao became tired of waiting
on England’s pleasure. Several vessels had returned from Brit¬
ain without a reply since the urgent request for instructions,
sent on June 10. The increasing body of Buenos Aires troops
which were being massed near the Brazilian border necessitated
action on the part of the Portuguese,72 although through de
  69 Ibid. The blockade was illegal, Strangford asserted, since it was the local
government at Montevideo and not the sovereign power which had declared it.
  70 F. O., 63/86, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 87. D. Joao was highly incensed
at the jewel episode (Presas, Memorias, pp. 127-128). The printing press was ob¬
tained by Presas for Carlota from the Royal Printing shop with the permission
of Souza Coutinho. Strangford protested vigorously and obtained an order to
withhold the press and type; but he was too late, as the boat which was taking it
to Montevideo left two hours before the order was delivered to Presas (Memorias,
pp. 120-122). Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, chapter XII, gives the story of
the jewels in detail. The value of the jewels sent was 40,030 pesos.
  71 F. O. 63/85, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 76. October 13.
  72 F. O., 63/86, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 90. November 15. No reply from
the English government as to its opinion on the political events in La Plata had
been received by December 5, although Strangford’s urgent request had been
sent June 10 (ibid., No. 97).
    9
 13o         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Courcy’s intervention, the blockade in La Plata had been lifted
 in so far as British commerce was affected.73
   Early in 1811 Portuguese troops crossed into Paraguay at the
 request, Souza Coutinho maintained, of a Spanish commander
 who was attempting to cut off General Belgrano’s revolution¬
 ary troops.74 Strangford protested and then showed the letter
 from Souza Coutinho, which announced the movement of the
 troops, to Casa Irujo, who immediately exploded to D. Joao,
 demanding that the Portuguese stay out of Spanish territory.75
The situation in La Plata had at last reached such a critical
stage that Strangford judged he should not only throw off pas¬
sive resistance to Portuguese aggression, but should also stop
the fight between the two Spanish parties in the south. He there¬
fore offered to Elio and to Buenos Aires the good services of
England as mediator, a proposition to which Joao acceded on
condition that he be co-mediator with his ally. Even Casa Irujo
agreed to cooperate in the effort. But when a violent insurrec¬
tion in favor of the revolutionists broke out in the Banda Orien¬
tal, Souza Coutinho ordered Portuguese troops to advance, re¬
gardless of the effect on the plan of mediation,76 security, not

  73 Ibid., No. 95. December i. De Courcy had succeeded Sir Sidney Smith. Brit¬
ish property worth seven millions had been tied up in Montevideo by the block¬
ade. De Courcy was having trouble with his subordinate, Elliott, who supported
the Montevideo party in opposition to the interests of British commerce. Elio’s party
planned to reinstitute a rigorous colonial policy very detrimental to English in¬
terests. Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, pp. 120-124, maintains that the raising of
the blockade at the demand of the English assured the revolutionists of Buenos
Aires of eventually winning their independence as by the loss of the weapon of
blockade, the reactionary forces of Montevideo fell an easy prey to Buenos Aires.
Thus, he maintains, England was responsible for the loss by Spain of the River
Plate region.
  74 The Portuguese commander, Diogo de Souza, carried secret orders from the
minister which show that the plan was to get D. Carlota declared regent. She
was then to settle the limits question with Portugal in a manner favorable to
Brazil’s interests (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 262-263 and footnote
(2), p. 262).
  75 F. O., 63/102, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 18. April 7, 1811.
  76 Ibid., No. 30. April 12, 1811; F. O., 63/103, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 37,
June 17. Buenos Aires was still loyal to Ferdinand but only on condition that
Buenos Aires be made an integral part of the monarchy with equal privileges
with the rest of the empire.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                     131
conquest, being the real motive in this case.                       Nevertheless
Strangford’s intervention bore fruit, for on October 20, 1811,
the first armistice was signed at Montevideo by which the
troops of Buenos Aires were to retire beyond the river, leaving
Elio in command of the Banda Oriental, while the Portuguese
were to withdraw at once.77
  A new menace now arose to threaten Montevideo, for Artigas
appeared in the Banda Oriental in favor of revolution. As his
only means of safety, Elio, now viceroy by order of the Cadiz
junta, requested the Portuguese troops to remain. Diogo de
Souza, the Portuguese commander, gladly complied and hov¬
ered within striking distance of the viceroy’s capital.78 Buenos
Aires, in retaliation, confiscated all Portuguese property and
declared its exceeding embitterment against England, due
largely to the activities of an American, Joel R. Poinsett, or so
Strangford thought.79
  At this critical juncture the longed-for instructions from Eng¬
land arrived. The British minister was informed by Castlereagh
that an English commission of mediation between Spain and
its colonies had left London (April 7) for the purpose of recon¬
ciling the colonies with the regency of Spain, of assuring Ferd¬
inand of recognition, and of obtaining for the colonies an in¬
tegral part in the Spanish monarchy. It was not expedient, the
instructions read, for the Portuguese to share the mediation of
a dispute in which they had such a deep interest; and further¬
more, they should keep out of the Banda Oriental until the
English mediators could do their work.80
   It was fortunate for Strangford that he could act now with
the full authority of England to back his words. The armistice
of October 20, 1811, was strained to the breaking point, while

  77 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira do Prataate A Guerra contra Rosas,”
Revista do Instituto Hist, e Geogr. Bras., 1917, tomo especial, V, 573; F. O., 63/103,
Strangford to Wellesley, No. 73; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 263-264.
The events from January to October 20, 18x1, are given in detail by Rubio, La
Infanta Carlota Joaquina, Chapters XIV, XV.
  78 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira do Prata,” p. 573.
  79 F. O., 63/123, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 16. March 16, 1812.
  80 F. O., 63/122, Castlereagh to Strangford, Nos. 2 and 13. April 10 and May 29.
  132         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Galveas81 was demanding vehemently that England comply with
  the guaranty of Portuguese territory stipulated under Article
  I of the treaty of alliance and friendship of 1810. Brazilian
  forces, he argued, were totally unable to cope with the danger
  which arose from the threat of the insurgents against Portu¬
 guese territory in the south. The minister had reason on his
 side, for Strangford, after reviewing the resources at the dis¬
 posal of the Portuguese government, confessed himself con¬
 vinced that only total ruin could result from a war with Buenos
 Aires.82
    Therefore, he proposed, instead of military aid from England,
 that another armistice be signed. Over the vehement but in¬
 effectual protests of the Portuguese secretary of state, Strang¬
 ford dispatched his confidential agent, Lieut.-Col. John Rade-
 maker, of the British army, to La Plata with instructions from
 the Portuguese court, which had been approved by the vis¬
 count, to mediate between Montevideo, Buenos Aires, and the
 Portuguese commander. In addition, the minister sent to the
 Buenos Aires junta a personal letter of assurance that Rade-
 maker had the support of England in his present mission and
 of guaranty that the terms agreed upon would be carried out
 by Brazil.83
    On the night of the day of his arrival at Buenos Aires, Rade-
maker signed the agreement which again stopped hostilities in
La Plata.84 An armistice, which could be broken only after three
month’s notice by either side, was agreed upon, and both the
Buenos Aires and Portuguese troops were to retire within the
limits of their respective countries as understood before the
Brazilian troops began their march. Montevideo was not in¬
cluded in the negotiations despite Rademaker’s instructions to

  81 Galveas, it will be remembered, had succeeded Souza Goutinho as secretary
of state and war at the death of the latter in January, 18i1.
  82 F. O.. 63/123, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 30. May 2, 1812.
  83 Ibid.
  84 Calvo, Andes, II, 53-54. The armistice was dated May 27, 1812, although it
was concluded on the twenty-sixth. It was signed by Nicolds Herrera for Buenos
Aires and John Rademaker for Portugal (Quesada, Historia Diplomdtica Latino-
Americana, II, 32-35; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 265-267).
                 BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   133
do so. On May 27 orders were sent to both commanders to
withdraw.85
  When the stipulations of the armistice reached Strangford,
he was exceedingly annoyed, as he had instructed Rademaker
to state specifically that the Buenos Aires troops hereafter should
not cross the Parana River. The territorial limits of the two
parties to the armistice as “understood before the Brazilian
troops began their march” included Montevideo within Buenos
Aires jurisdiction, according to the claims of the insurgents.
Thus the revolutionists of La Plata could again advance on
Montevideo and threaten the Brazilian frontiers, apparently
without violating the terms of the armistice. The viscount forced
Galveas to hasten new instructions to Rademaker in an effort
to rescind the first agreement and to rectify the mistake by
signing a second document, but the agent had left before the
orders to that effect reached him. The first agreement had to
stand, therefore, although it took the utmost pressure by Strang¬
ford on Galveas to obtain the ratification of the armistice by
Portugal.86 Nevertheless, the Portuguese troops withdrew with¬
in their own frontiers, despite the angered remonstrance of the
Portuguese commander of the forces in the south and the urgent
request from Montevideo begging them to stay.87
  The armistice stood as long as Strangford remained in Rio
de Janeiro, due almost entirely to his efforts. Although his ear¬
lier regard for the insurgents was fast breaking down, as the
radical tendency of the revolutionists became evident, he stuck
by his attitude of neutrality in favor of the status quo in La Plata.
Before the end of 1812 the minister warned Gastlereagh that
Buenos Aires was showing unmistakable signs of desiring a com-


  86 F. O., 63/123, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 37.
  88 F. O., 63/124, Strangford to Castlereagh, Nos. 52, 66. D. Joao’s ratification
was dated September 13, 1812 (Calvo, Andes, II, 54*55)• Later Rademaker ex¬
plained bis haste in concluding the armistice and returning to Rio as quickly as
possible. He had learned of a plot participated in by Carlota and Diogo de Souza,
Portuguese commander, to assassinate the members of the government of Buenos
Aires in order to secure control in that city. Vigodet, the governor of Montevideo,
was involved also (F. O., 63/124, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 68).
  87 F. O., 63/123, Strangford to Castlereagh, Nos. 52, 66, 67, 79.
  134         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  plete separation from its European connections.88 In August of
  the next year he reported that the Spanish colonies were for¬
  ever lost, with no hope of the reestablishment by Spain of the
  old order of things, and that the new government of Buenos
 Aires was reviving the “wretched and Vulgar Cant of the
 Jacobins.”89
    Yet the minister was forced to make one more effort to pacify
 La Plata before his recall early in 1815. The liberation of Spain
 in 1813 impressed the insurgents with the necessity of obtain¬
 ing England’s backing, while the constant refusal of the Portu¬
 guese court to accede to Governor Vigodet’s requests for troops
 to aid him in the defense of Montevideo impelled that govern¬
 ment to seek security also under England’s protection. There¬
 fore in December, 1813, Strangford and the Spanish minister,
 Castillo, were working at Rio on an armistice between Buenos
 Aires and Montevideo which was to enable England to medi¬
 ate between the two factions.90 It appeared as though the last
 months of Strangford’s stay in Rio were to be undisturbed by
 further troubles in La Plata.
   Yet the clouds began to gather once more before his recall.
 In March, 1814, news arrived in Rio that Artigas had broken
with the Buenos Aires government and in his activity in the
Banda Oriental was threatening the Portuguese frontier. Con¬
sequently troops were again assembled on the Rio Grande front
just in time to receive the news of the surrender of Montevideo
to the revolutionists of Buenos Aires. Although the viscount
gloomily predicted that the armistice so strenuously negotiated
two years earlier would soon be broken, he still exerted all his
ingenuity to restrain D. Joao from ordering his forces to cross
the frontier.91 He succeeded in his efforts, frustrating to the
 ast any move of Portugal to acquire control of the River Plate
region. Yet when news came that Artigas had taken Montevideo

  88 F. O., 63/125, Strangford to Castlereagh, No.
                                                     102. December 24, 1812.
  89 F. O., 63/147, Strangford to Castlereagh, No.
                                                     103. August 1, 1813.
  90 F-     63/148, Strangford to Castlereagh, No.
                                                     150. December 18, 1813.
  91 F. O., 63/167, Strangford to Castlereagh, Nos.
                                                    I5> 2IJ F. O., 63/168, Strang-
ford to Castlereagh, Nos. 67, 71.
                 BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                               135
and had agreed to unite with Buenos Aires in case Spain at¬
tempted to reconquer La Plata basin,92 he realized that the
affairs of that region were fast approaching another crisis. Per¬
haps if he had remained in Rio, he might have controlled events
as he had done in 1812, but on April 8, 1815, he sailed for Lon¬
don, leaving the Portuguese court free from English domina¬
tion for the next six years.
  High praise is due the minister for the part which he played
in La Plata troubles during the seven years of his stay at Rio.
He had received definite instructions to keep Portugal out of
Spanish affairs in the colonies and in the Peninsula as regards
both military and political intrigues. Moreover, he had con¬
ceived on his own account that whereas he should sustain the
insurgents of Buenos Aires as long as they adhered to their
loyalty to Ferdinand, he should not allow them to meddle in
Montevideo. His efforts, therefore, had been directed toward
restraining each group from executing a political or military
offensive against the others. In carrying out his plan, he faced
the opposition of the prince regent, the Portuguese ministry,
D. Carlota Joaquina, the admiral of the English squadron,
the revolutionists of Buenos Aires, and the Spanish authorities
at Montevideo. Single-handed, by virtue of the authority of
England with which he was clothed as minister plenipotentiary
and by his own forcefulness and finesse, he maintained peace in
the River Plate basin until the end of the Napoleonic wars and
frustrated Portuguese efforts to extend their territory to the
river. It was a remarkable exploit.

  92 F. O., 63/181, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 17. March 29, 1815.
                             CHAPTER VI


SUCCESS AND FAILURE IN THE BANDA ORIENTAL
                               —1815-1828


Even as Strangford was relinquishing his task in Rio de Jan¬
eiro, other hands were picking up the question of the River
Plate Basin. From 1808 until the fall of Napoleon, the conflict¬
ing interests involved in the struggle for control of the Banda
Oriental were concentrated at Rio de Janeiro. Now the lines
of influence were extended across the waters, where the powers
of Europe were to play a decisive role in the final outcome.
  The events which transpired in the Spanish Peninsula were
of the utmost importance in determining the action of the Por¬
tuguese court at Rio and of the European powers in regard to
the River Plate affair. Until 1815 Spain was incapable of pay¬
ing anything more than the scantiest attention to her colonies.
After the forced abdication of the Spanish Bourbons and the
proclamation of Joseph as king of Spain, a Junta Central of
twenty-four members (later thirty-five) was set up at Aranjuez
as the supreme body over the many local juntas which had
arisen in protest against Napoleon’s action. Later this Junta fled
to Seville, where it remained for a year before it finally estab¬
lished itself at Cadiz. In January, 1810, it set up the Regency
of Five with instructions for that body to call the Cdrtes. The
assembly met late in 1810 to pass its liberal measures and event¬
ually to adopt the Constitution of 1812. When Ferdinand re¬
turned two years later, however, he declared null and void the
constitution and the liberal decrees of the Cdrtes, and instituted
a rigorous reactionary policy, which was blind, unscrupulous,
and rancorous in its severity.1 The liberal regime adopted by
the juntas with regard to the colonies was doomed.

 1 Charles E. Chapman, A History of Spain, pp. 492-496.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                 137
  In the larger field of Europe as a whole, the unity which had
existed during the common effort to defeat Napoleon was suc¬
ceeded now by a spirit of intrigue and suspicion. The rivalry
among diplomats and ministers for predominant influence was
especially violent at Madrid, where, due to the conflict between
the reactionary policy of Ferdinand and the liberal measures
demanded by the colonies, the dominance of the great powers
over the liberties of the small found a fruitful field for action.
The Quadruple Alliance had been formed with obligations
which only the great powers could undertake. In it the smaller
powers had no rights, but it was precisely the complications
raised by these lesser powers, such as Spain artd Portugal, which
were to prove difficult to overcome. The temptation was great
for the powers of Europe to treat the smaller states peremp¬
torily; yet the necessary concerted action among the members
of the Alliance in reference to the lesser powers, and particu¬
larly to Spain, was to prove increasingly difficult of attainment.2
  From the very first England through Castlereagh protested
against dragooning the rest of Europe to force the acceptance
of the decisions of the great powers. Although he agreed to
have the dangerous dispute between Spain and Portugal over
differences in Europe and South America brought up before
the conference of ambassadors at Paris, he vetoed the proposal
of the Russian, Pozzo de Borgo, to have the entire question of
the independence of the Spanish colonies discussed by the con¬
ference and refused point blank to accede to Metternich’s sug¬
gestion that the conference should become the organ of the great
powers in putting down intrigues of revolutionists all over Eu¬
rope. He would not allow the use of the ambassadorial com¬
mittee sitting at Paris as a means of arrogating to the great
powers a directing authority over the internal affairs of the
other states of Europe.3
  Thus early4 in the restoration period following the fall of Na¬
poleon did Castlereagh demonstrate his divergence from the

  s C. K. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, pp. 63-69.   3 Ibid., pp. 70-73.
  4 The documents cited by Webster in support of these statements are dated from
i8i5,to 1817.
 138         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 plans of the Quadruple Alliance. The various congresses which
 met during the years from 1815 to 1822 carried this deviation
 to a final break between England and Eastern Europe; but
 before that time came, Portugal was to feel the conflicting cur¬
 rents of intrigue which were fomented by the various great
 powers in their efforts to attain their ends. It was into this mael¬
 strom of European politics that the question of La Plata was
drawn. The problem was particularly difficult, as it concerned
not only the relations of two of the smaller European powers,
 Spain and Portugal, but also the critical question of the status
of the South American colonies themselves, which were directly
involved in this dispute.
     In the River Plate region the situation was critical. Artigas
with his band of revolutionists held Montevideo and the Banda
Oriental, having forced the withdrawal of the Buenos Aires
troops which had held the capital since capturing it from the
Spanish governor, Gaspar de Vigodet. Artigas had an agree¬
ment to unite with Buenos Aires if Spain should make an at¬
tempt to regain the colonies; otherwise he intended to keep on
fighting the troops from across La Plata.6 The control of the
Banda Oriental by Artigas and the prevalence of what the Rio
government called revolutionary excesses aroused an uneasy
feeling in the autocratic Portuguese court and lent an aroma
of righteousness to its dreams of territorial expansion.
     The desire of the Rio court to conquer the north bank of La
Plata had been frustrated thus far by two principal factors; the
opposition of Strangford and the lack of adequate military
forces. In 1815, however, simultaneously with the withdrawal
of the English minister, came the demobilization of troops in
Europe, which freed Portuguese forces for use in South America
and provided an army of adventurers who preferred to fight
under any banner rather than return home to postwar read¬
justment. By November 25, more than twelve hundred Portu¬
guese troops had reached Rio from Europe and more were
expected daily.6 Preparations for war at the Brazilian capital

  6 F. O., 97/76, Memorandum-Montevideo—1811-1824 (February, 1826), extracts
rom dispatches of July 9, 1814, to March 29, 1815.
 *     O-’ 63/183, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 61.
                    BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                              139
became so pronounced that the foreign minister, Aguiar, was
forced to confess to Charge Chamberlain that the Portuguese
court planned an aggressive campaign against Artigas in the
Banda Oriental. The expedition, he added, was almost ready
to sail.7 On June 12, 1816, the fleet with about three thousand
five hundred men left for La Plata.8 Chamberlain’s protests,
made in conformity with the instructions sent to Strangford by
the Foreign Office, proved entirely unavailing. His efforts mere¬
ly elicited the reply that since Artigas was a very undesirable
neighbor for Brazil and a disturbing enemy to Spain and Buenos
Aires, the only thing to do was to suppress him by force. Buenos
Aires had tried and failed; Spain was in no condition to bring
about his subjugation; therefore, Brazil must do it in behalf
of Ferdinand VII.9
  This laudable declaration, Chamberlain reported, was serv¬
ing as a camouflage for the real purpose of the Portuguese court.
The plan was to acquire the Banda Oriental and perhaps to
annex the entire viceroyalty of Buenos Aires to Portuguese ter¬
ritory, thereby establishing the “Empire of South America.”
This dream was only in part chimerical, for a secret under¬
standing existed between certain leaders in La Plata and the
Portuguese court. Manuel Garcia, secretary of state for foreign
affairs of the Buenos Aires government (1816), after several
trips to Rio on secret business, had proposed that Buenos Aires
and its dependent provinces should acknowledge for their sov¬
ereign the prince regent of Portugal. D. Joao refused to sign
a treaty to this effect, but he intended to take advantage of the
offer to secure the northern bank of La Plata.10 The plan to
form the “Empire of South America” was wildly impracticable,
but there was every possibility of D. Joao’s securing the coveted
Banda Oriental.11

  11bid., No. 47.                           8 Ibid., No. 51.
  » F. O., 97/76, Memorandum, extracts from dispatches November 25,        1815,
to June, 1816.
   10 F. O., 63/194, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, July 20, 1816, and August 2,
Secret. The chargi enclosed numerous secret documents, which he obtained, as
proof of this intrigue (F. O., 97/76, Memorandum, extracts from dispatches, July
20-August 2, 1816).
  11 When news of the Portuguese expedition reached Buenos Aires, Balcarce, the
  140         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    In August the Portuguese forces entered Spanish territory,12
 and in November the Spanish minister at Rio formally pro¬
 tested, hinting that the continuation of the project of aggran¬
 dizement would result in a break between Spain and Portugal.
 In reply the Rio court informed Minister Villalba that Portugal
 had taken the River Plate region once before in behalf of Spain
 to prevent the spread of the revolutionary propaganda ema¬
 nating from Buenos Aires and had been forced to withdraw;
 that the revolutionary movements still continued, with Spain
 incapable of suppressing them; that Portugal in self-defense
 was forced to take drastic steps; and that the nearness of Artigas
 to Brazil compelled Portuguese troops to enter Spanish terri¬
 tory. Villalba in his counter-reply asserted that the proposed
 action by Portugal was illegal unless approved by the Spanish
 court, and such approval had not been given, nor had it even
 been asked.13
   Chamberlain reported that the Spanish minister was want¬
ing in energy, and the Portuguese court felt that nothing was
to be feared from Spain. The minister’s protests would be un¬
availing, therefore, unless England stepped in to back Spanish
demands.14 Moreover, the position maintained in the Portuguese
repiy that their action was based on self-defense against the
spread of revolutionary propaganda was strengthened when
news reached Rio that the United Provinces of Rio de La
Plata had declared their independence at Tucum&n, July 9,
1816, and had hurled defiance at Ferdinand and his successors
or any other foreign power which should try to subjugate
them.15
  As Chamberlain had foreseen, the Portuguese were deter-
acting director, made no preparations to oppose it. The junta turned him out, put
m two of themselves until Pueyrreddn, named supreme director by the Congress
at Cdrdoba, could arrive, and prepared to defend themselves against the Portu¬
guese. Thus the Portuguese party in La Plata was turned out (F. O., 63/10*
Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 82).

,“F' °-> 63/*95, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 84. See also Carlos A.
Villanueva, Bolivary et General San Martin, pp. 30-33, 51-57.
  18 Ibid., Nos. 102, 10*.
 14 Ibid.
 16 Ibid., No. 89. October 8, 1816.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                               141
mined to carry the thing through to completion. On January
20, 1817, General Lecor with the Portuguese troops entered
Montevideo, proclaimed himself captain-general of the prov¬
ince, and appointed his second-in-command, Sebastiao Pinto,
governor of Montevideo. In reply to a demand from Buenos
Aires that the Banda Oriental be turned over to the United
Provinces, Lecor announced that Buenos Aires had nothing
to do with the question, that the Portuguese troops had rid
both the United Provinces and Brazil of a common enemy,
that the territory was entirely independent of the authorities
across the river, and that the whole question was one which
had to be taken up in Rio de Janeiro.16 Buenos Aires thereupon
declared Portugal to have violated the armistice of 1812, and
announced the beginning of hostilities between them and the
Rio government.17
  The dream of centuries had come true for Portugal; for at
last its boundaries extended to La Plata, and the Banda Orien¬
tal was under Portuguese control. The triumph resulted when
Antonio d’Araujo, after his return to power, took the bit be¬
tween his teeth and proceeded to the conquest of La Plata over
the protests of the English and the Spanish representatives at
the court of D. Joao. Favored by the release of Portuguese
troops from the European battlefields and by a large number of
foreign volunteers, he was able to defeat Artigas and his band
of gauchos. The question which now arose was whether Portugal
would be able to retain the River Plate region after having
conquered it.
  Unfortunately for Portuguese aspirations, when General Le-
cor’s forces crossed the frontier and entered Spanish territory,
Portugal thereby was plunged into the maelstrom of European
politics. The first warning came from Castlereagh, who wrote
to Chamberlain, December 19, 1816,18 that Spain had appealed
to Austria, France, Russia, and England to mediate in the face
  16 F. O., 63/202, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 19.
  n F. O., 63/203, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 26. General Lecor informed
his government, however, that he had an understanding with the supreme director
that the latter would not execute the order to begin hostilities.
  18 F. O., 63/195, Castlereagh to Chamberlain, No. 11.
 142          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 of the Portuguese aggressions against Spanish dominions in
 South America. Unless the Portuguese court could give a satis¬
 factory explanation for its conduct, England would consider
 that Portugal had forfeited all claim to the fulfillment by Eng¬
 land of the guaranty of Portuguese dominions made by Article
 3 of the treaty of January 22, 1815.19 If the breach between
 Spain and Portugal over the South American question should
 lead to war, Spain would attack Portugal in Europe, and Eng¬
 land would not defend its ally unless D. Joao could convince
 Chamberlain as to the correctness of its action in La Plata.
 But Chamberlain was to use this threat only as a last resort.
    Furthermore England and the other powers appealed to by
 Spain had accepted the proposal to mediate and had agreed
 to settle the question by their envoys assembled at Paris. Ac¬
 cordingly, the Portuguese court, said Castlereagh,20 was to give
full powers to a minister in Europe to complete a settlement of
the Plate affair without further reference to Brazil.
   Chamberlain, in accordance with his instructions, inter¬
viewed Antonio d’Araujo. The minister informed the chargi
that the Banda Oriental belonged to Spain, but that Portugal
would not give it up even if a sufficiently large Spanish force
should be sent over to insure the security of the Brazilian fron¬
tier. His court, however, was willing to negotiate the question.
Much voluminous correspondence then ensued between the
two agents, Chamberlain endeavoring to get Portugal to with¬
draw from the Banda Oriental and Araujo attempting to justify
its seizure. Finally the charge informed the minister that his ex¬
planations were not satisfactory and therefore, by orders from
the Foreign Office, he declared England’s guaranty of Portu¬
guese territory no longer valid.21
   This declaration failed to frighten the Portuguese, for at the
court levee given by D. Joao to receive the congratulations of


  19 This article annulled the treaty of alliance and friendship of 1810, but it
guaranteed Portuguese territory from attack by any foreign power, in conformity
with the old treaties since 1642 (Martens, Recueil, Supplement, VI, 100).
  20 F. O., 63/201, Castlereagh to Chamberlain, No. 5. April 9, 1817.
  21 F. O., 63/203, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 27. April 5, 1817.
                     BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                             143
the diplomatic body on the marriage of his eldest son, D. Pedro,
the deputies from Montevideo were received by the royal family
in the same manner as the subjects of Brazil.22 But Araujo showed
himself greatly vexed when Chamberlain delivered the threat
ordered by Castlereagh that Britain would withdraw all Eng¬
lish officers from the Portuguese army unless Rio submitted to
the demands of England in regard to La Plata. The loss of such
officers in that region and in Portugal would be a serious blow,
especially as it would mean the retirement of Marshal Beres-
ford, who was holding Portugal for D. Joao during his absence
at Rio.23 Yet, when the charge delivered the message sent in
Castlereagh’s dispatch of April 9, in regard to the mediation
of the great powers, Araujo still refused to change his plans in
La Plata, although D. Joao did promise to send a full explana¬
tion to the conference.24
  The Spanish envoy had no better success when by specific
instructions from his court, he demanded that the Portuguese
troops withdraw at once from the Banda Oriental, for Arau¬
jo flatly refused25 and, instead of withdrawing troops, sent rein¬
forcements. Alarmed by this move, Chamberlain called the
ministers of the mediating powers at Rio together and present¬
ed a joint note to the Portuguese government, offering to
transmit to the respective courts represented by the note any
explanation which the Portuguese minister wished to give.26
This united pressure exerted in the name of the great powers
and presented after the manner of the Quadruple Alliance,
elicited a dictatorial reply from the new minister, Bezerra,27
who refused to recognize the right of the envoys at Rio to
meddle in the matter. Apparently, Chamberlain reported, Por¬
tugal was determined to hold the Banda Oriental.28
 22 Ibid., No .50.                       23 Ibid., No. 51.
 24 Ibid., No. 55.
  26 F. O., 63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 77.
  26 Ibid., No. 89. September 6, 1817.
  27 Araujo died June, 1817. Conde de Palmella, minister at London, was made
minister of foreign affairs and war; Conde de Arcos, captain-general of Bahia,
was appointed minister of navy and colonies; but Joao Paulo Bezerra was to oc¬
cupy both posts until the new ministers should arrive.
  28 F. O., 63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, Nos. 89, 92. Castlereagh did not
 i44         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    Chamberlain was traveling too fast to suit Castlereagh, how¬
 ever, for early in January, 1818, the foreign minister informed
 his chargi that he had misunderstood his instructions in regard
 to the withdrawal of England’s guaranty of Portuguese terri¬
 tory. By the dispatch of December 19, 1816, Chamberlain had
 been told to declare that if the explanations of the Portu¬
 guese government in regard to the Plate expedition did not
 satisfy the prince regent of England, then the guaranty would
 be withdrawn. No such declaration by the British government
had been made as yet, although trouble had arisen in Paris
and Madrid, where the belief was current that Chamberlain
had declared in an official manner, the abrogation of the
guaranty.29
   Castlereagh’s motive was clear in restricting to a threat the
annulment of England’s guaranty of Portuguese dominions. If
Great Britain should relinquish the pledge to preserve the
frontiers of Portugal in Europe, the minister would lose one
of the most effective weapons available to him against the grow¬
ing policy of intervention which the powers of Europe were
announcing with increasing insistence. By the loss of the right
to protect Portugal, a right which was based on the sacred
obligations of treaties of nearly three centuries’ standing, Castle¬
reagh would place himself on the same footing as the Eastern
European powers in regard to Portugal. In the face of the im¬
pending conference at Paris, which was to settle the difficulties
between the two most troublesome of the lesser powers, Portu¬
gal and Spain, the minister could not afford to relinquish the
advantage accruing to him through the special guaranty of
Portugal, which Europe had long accepted as an established
fact.
   That Castlereagh would have need of every available weapon
in the impending settlement of the Portuguese-Spanish question
was made evident by the manner in which the intervention
approve of the method adopted by Chamberlain in the protest against sending
reinforcements. He had meant for the thargi to cooperate with the other ministers,
but he was to protest individually, not in a joint note (F. O., 63/201, Castlereagh
to Chamberlain, No. 20. December 2, 1817).
  59 F. O., 63/210, Castlereagh to Chamberlain, No. 1. January 6, 1818.
               BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                     145
was suggested. The Russian minister first brought the question
before the conference of ambassadors at Paris in consequence
of a representation to the Czar from the Spanish minister at
St. Petersburg, in which the interference of the Russian govern¬
ment was requested in order to prevent the rupture which must
ensue between Spain and Portugal should their differences not
be settled speedily. The ambassador was to propose that Russia
and the three governments included in the appeal should de¬
mand an explanation from Rio of the occupation of Spanish
territory in South America. Unless a satisfactory reply was re¬
ceived, the Russian ambassador was to declare that his em¬
peror could not view with indifference the unprovoked aggres¬
sion which had taken place and that in conjunction with his
allies he would omit no effort to enable the court of Spain to
support its rights and to compel the Portuguese government
to return to that state of affairs which the interests of both
parties required. Austria agreed to this proposal, but France
demurred on the grounds that the territory occupied was not
governed by persons acknowledging the authority of Spain.
France, therefore, could not admit that Portugal’s occupation
was an act of hostility.30
   The Austrian ambassador was then instructed by his gov¬
ernment to propose an amicable mediation as a substitute for
the menacing one made by the Russian minister. Consequently
in March the five powers agreed to a joint note to both Spain
and Portugal in which they took upon themselves the media¬
tion of the dispute and called upon Portugal for an explana¬
tion of the invasion. Castlereagh authorized Sir Charles Stuart
to sign the note and agreed to transmit it to D. Joao through
the English representative at Rio, with the understanding
clearly expressed, however, that Great Britain was not thereby
pledged beyond the employment of its good offices.31 The note
was transmitted in Castlereagh’s dispatch to Chamberlain of

  80 F. O., 97/76, Proceedings of the Ministers of the Mediating Powers at Paris and of
the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle, on the subject of the differences between Spain and Portugal,
January, 1817 to January, 1820, pp. 109-m.
  81 Ibid., pp. 112-113.
     10
 146          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
April 9, 1817,32 while the Spanish ambassador at Paris was ap¬
pealing vehemently to the conference on the necessity of im¬
mediate use of arms against the Portuguese.
   In May, 1818, Sir Charles Stuart, at the request of the other
ministers, presented a project to settle the differences between
Spain and Portugal. The plan was submitted to both the Span¬
ish and Portuguese representatives, each of whom returned pro¬
posals for a settlement. The mediating ministers on receipt of
these counter-proposals, drew up the project which was to serve
as the basis of the settlement suggested by the powers. By it
Montevideo was to be delivered to Spanish troops equal in
number to the Portuguese forces then holding that city with
the express declaration that the surrender of the place was due
to the mediating powers; Spain was to indemnify Portugal by
the payment of seven million five hundred thousand francs at
the time of the delivery of Montevideo; a negotiation was to be
initiated under the mediating powers to settle all territorial
disputes between the two lesser powers in Europe33 and in Amer¬
ica; the Spanish expedition to Montevideo was to number at
least eight thousand troops; and if the expedition did not ar¬
rive within six months, Spain was to pay Portugal an indemnity
of three hundred thousand francs a month until the city was
delivered to Spanish troops.34
   A few modifications were made at the insistence of both the
Spanish and Portuguese envoys, and the document was de¬
livered to Spain with the statement by the mediating ministers
that Portugal had agreed to every concession which could
reasonably be expected. The mediating powers therefore hoped
that Spain would accept and end the trouble.35
   There the matter stuck, for no satisfactory reply could be ob¬
tained from Spain. Early in October the Portuguese plenipoten-

  32 See supra, p. 142, footnote 20.
  33 Spain still held Olivensa on the Spanish-Portuguese frontier in Europe, con¬
trary to treaty stipulations. Portugal affirmed that the seizure of the Banda Orien¬
tal was no more violation of Spanish territorial rights than this retention by Spain
of Portuguese territory.
  34 F. O., 97/76, Proceedings, pp. 124-127.
  36 Ibid., pp. 127-134.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                  147
tiaries gave their ultimatum, stating that since they had ac¬
cepted the mediation of the powers and the settlement pro¬
posed by them, Portugal was absolved from further responsi¬
bility to the conference.36 At Aix-la-Chapelle nothing was done
except to authorize the ambassadorial conference at Paris to
receive Spain’s reply,37 if one should ever be forthcoming. In
December, 1818, Sir Charles Stuart reported to his govern¬
ment that the delay by Spain in replying was intentional. Mon¬
tevideo, in the power of the Portuguese, was safe from the dan¬
ger with which the remainder of Spanish America was threat¬
ened as a result of insurrectionary movements; the indemnity
per month had not begun; and the expedition being prepared
at Cadiz could be sent to other parts of Spanish America.38
   Six months later, June, 1819, the English ambassador at
Paris was instructed to enquire confidentially of the Portuguese
representative what his government would do in case the medi¬
ation failed. He was to inform the Portuguese agent also that
from the moment when Portugal had accepted unconditionally
the project of the mediating powers, the “King of Portugal
was considered to have satisfied the claims of justice, and there¬
by to have entitled Himself to the full measure of His Rights,
under Treaty with Great Britain.”39
   In August, 1819, the Spanish representative suddenly re¬
tracted certain promises made on behalf of his government in
regard to the mediation and left Paris on a special mission.40
The Portuguese envoy41 thereupon declared the negotiations at
an end and returned to London. The Spanish minister on his
return to Paris issued a long note justifying Spain’s action dur¬
ing the mediation; the Portuguese representative replied from
London; and no further proceedings took place.42 Spain’s dila-
  36 Ibid., pp. 137-138.                      37 Ibid., pp. 138-142.
  38 Ibid., p. 147.
  39 Ibid., pp. 155-156. The dispatch to Stuart was dated June 29, 1819.
  40 The minister went to Strassburg to compliment the Spanish queen.
  41 Palmella, nominated foreign minister at the death of Araujo, was still am¬
bassador at London. He had been named plenipotentiary to Paris for the medi¬
ation.
   42 F. O., 97/76, Proceedings, pp. 157-161. For a Portuguese version of the medi¬
ation, see Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, IV, 41-75.
 148          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 tory tactics and characteristic refusal to make the slightest con¬
 cessions had spiked the guns of the mediators.
    The Portuguese emerged victorious from this intervention
 of the European powers in the River Plate question for the Rio
 court still retained the guaranty of England for its European
 territory despite the fact that it now enjoyed complete posses¬
 sion of the Banda Oriental. When Montevideo was occupied
 in 1817, the Portuguese maintained that their forces would
 withdraw when the necessity for their presence should cease.
 But, tired of bloodshed and anarchy, the local body at Monte¬
video intervened in the struggle still going on out on the plains
 and the Banda Oriental became pacified43 at about the same
time that the mediation of the powers was coming to a stand¬
still. Artigas was forced to flee to Paraguay, and Portuguese
domination over the Banda Oriental was complete.
   But there still remained the task of convincing the British
government that the Portuguese should retain the north bank
of La Plata. In his instructions to the new minister to Rio,
Castlereagh ordered Thornton to inform D. Joao that England
expected Portugal so to conduct itself in South America that
the continued mediation of the great powers would be fur¬
thered. Unless such a conciliatory attitude were shown, the
British government would be forced “even to hesitate as to the
propriety . . . of giving effect” to its guaranty. D. Joao, Castle¬
reagh warned, was to observe “a scrupulous delicacy towards
Spanish Rights and Interests.”44
   Thornton, however, soon after his arrival in Rio, recom¬
mended that his government favor the status quo in La Plata.
Although the Buenos Aires government had declared war on
the Portuguese as far back as March, 1819, no active operations
had followed. Now, with the failure of the Cadiz expedition,
there was every likelihood of a renewed activity on the part
of the insurrectionists. If Portugal withdrew from Montevideo,
the envoy said, that district would be irrevocably lost to Spain.

  43 Rio de la Plata, written by Ignacio Niinez at the request of Woodbine
                                                                             Parish,
1824, pp. 295-296; Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, IV, 271-276.
  44 F. O., 63/227, Castlereagh to Thornton, No. 6. May 25, 1820.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                      149
Let the Portuguese retain their coveted prize, therefore.45
   The stream of events began to move rapidly toward the end
of 1820. The Portuguese government disclaimed any knowledge
of the plan to place the Duke of Lucca, a Bourbon prince, on
the throne of Buenos Aires, thus clearing its skirts of complicity
in the French intrigue which so aroused the ire of Castlereagh.46
On April 26, 1821, D. Joao sailed for Lisbon, leaving Brazil in
care of D. Pedro, and the diplomatic body, including Thorn¬
ton, soon followed. In July, the congress of the province of
Montevideo declared its incorporation with Brazil under the
title of the Cisplatine Province. On September 7 of the follow¬
ing year D. Pedro raised the cry of “Independence or Death,”
and the Baron de Laguna, captain-general of the Cisplatine
Province, declared in favor of the Brazilian cause. The Portu¬
guese troops in Montevideo returned to Europe in March,
1824, and the Brazilian army, which took the place of the Portu¬
guese force, requested D. Pedro to allow the Cisplatine Prov¬
ince to continue as an integral part of the Brazilian Empire.47
   During the four turbulent years from 1821 to 1825, when
Brazil was striving for independence, tranquillity reigned in
Buenos Aires. The provincial administration of the United
Provinces fostered trade and established commercial intercourse
with the rest of the world upon the most liberal principles,
with the result that foreign trade was brisk.48 The proportion
of British merchandise in this trade was significant in view of
later events in the struggle for control of La Plata. In 1822
England’s exports to Buenos Aires constituted over half of the
total of all foreign goods entering that city. Compared with
the figures of the most liberal period of the Spanish colonial

  46 F. O., 63/228, Thornton to Castlereagh, No. 9. February 19, 1820. Rocha
Porribo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 300-310.
  44 F. O., 63/229, Thornton to Castlereagh, No. 48. September 29. For the in¬
trigue, see F. O., 63/227, Castlereagh to Thornton, No. 10, and July 13, Most
Secret and Confidential; Thornton to Castlereagh, No. 18; F. O., 63/229, Thorn¬
ton to Castlereagh, No. 48; Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, pp. 423-425.
  47 F. O., 97/76, Extracts from dispatches dated from September, 1820, to the
end of 1824.
  48 Woodbine Parish, Buenos Aires and the Provinces of the Rio de la Plata, edition of

i839> P- 335-
 150           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 system, British imports alone were now more than double the
 average value of the whole yearly importation into the viceroy¬
 alty for the supply of Upper Peru and Paraguay in addition to
 Buenos Aires.49 In 1824 England sent over a million Spanish
 dollars worth of produce and manufactures (exclusive of for¬
 eign and colonial produce) to the United Provinces of La
 Plata,50 while over three thousand British residents were living
 in Buenos Aires.51 In addition, Brazil ranked second, after
 Great Britain, as a supplier to the United Provinces, and a
 large proportion of that trade was in English hands.52 There
 was, therefore, an important economic aspect involving Great
 Britain in the question of the peace and security of the River
 Plate basin.
       Coincident with this increasing prosperity, there developed
among the people of Buenos Aires a determination to recon¬
quer the lost province of the Banda Oriental. The United Prov¬
inces could not permit any foreign nation, and especially their
Portuguese rival, to possess the key to their ports and the con¬
trol of their trade. When D. Joao, on leaving Brazil, sent an
agent to La Plata to promise recognition of their independence
by Portugal on condition of the acknowledgment by Buenos
Aires of Portuguese possession of Montevideo, the offer was
refused. An envoy sent by D. Pedro a year later asking for the
recognition of Brazilian independence by the United Provinces
met the same reply, for Buenos Aires refused to treat with Bra¬
zil as long as the troops of D. Pedro remained in the Banda
Oriental.53
   Taking the aggressive in response to a universal demand

  49 Parish, Buenos Aires, pp. 336-338. Value of total British exports of Buenos
Aires in 1822 was 5,730,952 Spanish dollars; total imports at Buenos Aires were
11,267,622 Spanish dollars. Official valuation of average imports from 1792 to
1796 was 2,606,754 dollars. Parish obtained his figures from the custom house at
Buenos Aires.
  60 Ibid., p. 340.

  61
   J- Fred RiPPy> Rivalrv Of the United States and Great Britain over Latin America
p. 140.

  62 In 1822 Brazil exported to Buenos Aires goods worth 1,418,768 Spanish dollars
The United States came third with 1,368,277 dollars (Parish, Buenos Aires, p. 337).
  63 Nunez, Rio de la Plata, pp. 299-304.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                 i5r
 which arose throughout the province, the government at Bue¬
 nos Aires then sent an agent to Rio to negotiate the return of
 the disputed territory. This special commission, the English
 chargi at Rio reported, was to be the last effort to negotiate by
 peaceful means; if D. Pedro should refuse to give up the Cis-
 platine Province, Buenos Aires would be forced to resort to
 arms. The Brazilian government formally declined to cede
 the territory, and Gomez, the agent from Buenos Aires, left,
 threatening war.64
   Nothing happened for over a year, but early in 1825 the flag
of insurrection was raised by Lavalleja and harsh decrees were
issued against the “rebellion” by the Brazilian authorities in
the capital of the province. Letters from Consul Parish in Bue¬
nos Aires indicated the certainty of a rupture between the
United Provinces and Brazil, although D. Pedro insisted that
he would avoid a break by all means within his power.55 Cham¬
berlain in great distress informed the Brazilian emperor that
England’s “interests, and indeed those of all Commercial Na¬
tions in these countries, were essentially connected with a State
of Peace and Tranquility.” He warned D. Pedro “that it would
become all parties in South America to ponder well before they
adopted any line of conduct by which those Interests might be
effected; or that, besides endangering their own Comfort and
prosperity, might also perhaps compromise their very exist¬
ence.”56
   The question of the Montevideo territory had again reached
an acute stage, and unless it were settled soon, the charge warned
Canning, it would cause trouble for England. Whatever might
be said by the Brazilian authorities, the charge had no doubt
that with the exception of a few rich and respectable persons
within the city of Montevideo, the whole of the population of
the Cisplatine Province was absolutely opposed to remaining
Brazilian. It was equally as opposed to becoming subject to


  64 F. O., 63/261, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 125. October 17, 1823; F. O.,
63/276, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 18. February 10, 1824.
  66 F. O., 13/9, Chamberlain to Canning, Nos. 54 (May 21, 1825), 59> 85.
  66 Ibid., No. 85.
152          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
Buenos Aires, however—independence was the real object in
view in the Banda Oriental itself. But the United Provinces
would be forced to enter the question, since as long as Brazil
held Montevideo, Maldonado, and Colonia, it controlled the
commerce of Buenos Aires and La Plata basin.67 The chargi
might have added also that the situation was complicated seri¬
ously by the fact that England’s stake in that region would not
let the British stand by with folded hands while the two prin¬
cipals were fighting it out between themselves.
  Chamberlain predicted the final solution of the question
when he insisted to Canning, in August, 1825, that there was
no hope of reaching a settlement between Brazil and Buenos
Aires as long as the two protagonists were left alone, as the
passions of both were too violent. A third party to mediate was
necessary.68 Eventually England was to take upon itself the
task, but only after the two principal actors had fought to a
draw before they would accept the proffered aid.
  War started when the Buenos Aires Congress on October 25,
1825, incorporated the Banda Oriental into the United Prov¬
inces of Rio de la Plata. Brazil considered the act a declaration
of war and retaliated with a formal declaration dated Decem¬
ber io.69 Seven days later, the blockade of the Provinces of La
Plata was announced by the Brazilian authorities at Monte¬
video.60 D. Pedro determined to settle the matter by arms.61
  The blockade of the River Plate began to produce results,
although on land the armies of D. Pedro suffered reverses.
British imports into Buenos Aires dropped from over a million
Spanish dollars in value in 1824 to less than 155,000 in 1826.62
Canning was overwhelmed with applications for interference
in the enforcement of the blockade, but he steadfastly refused
to demand of Brazil that it relinquish belligerent rights which
Great Britain had always insisted upon when at war. Provided

 67 F. O., 13/9, Chamberlain to Canning, Nos. 59, 85.
 68 Ibid., No. 85.
 M F- O., 13/11, Chamberlain to Canning, Nos. 145, 155.
 80 F. O., 13/22, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 13.
 81 F. O., 13/23, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 37.
 81 Parish, Buenos Aires, p. 340.
                BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                   153
 the blockade were effective, England would not interfere on
 the score of injuries suffered by its commerce in consequence
 of the naval policy of Brazil.63
   Although Canning refused to interfere on account of the
 blockade, he did not refrain from taking active steps to stop
 the conflict between Brazil and Buenos Aires. Before the war
 broke out, Brazil had requested the mediation of Great Britain
 in the settlement of the Montevideo question,64 in the hopes
 that its old ally would aid in the retention of the Cisplatine
 Province by the Brazilians.65 Lord Ponsonby, appointed min¬
ister plenipotentiary to Buenos Aires after the recognition by
England of the independence of the United Provinces, had
been instructed by Canning to pass through Brazil to see if he
could avert war.
   In various instructions to Ponsonby, Canning suggested that
Buenos Aires had the strongest claim to Montevideo and had
the force necessary to back it. He was anxious that D. Joao
should not antagonize the rest of Spanish America by his ac¬
tion in La Plata and warned that Bolivar was being incited to
undertake a war against Brazil to overthrow the only monarchy
which existed on the continent of America. Ponsonby was not
to take sides under any circumstances in the struggle going on,
but to demonstrate that despite the large stake which England
possessed in La Plata, its action was impersonal. Later, after
his own failure, the minister was instructed to cooperate with
Gordon at Rio in the efforts of the latter to bring about a
settlement.66
   Ponsonby reached Rio too late to stop hostilities and sailed
for La Plata to take up his duties there.67 Sir Charles Stuart
was instructed not to go into the question when he came to
negotiate the recognition of the independence of Brazil,68 but

  93 F. O., 13/25, Canning to Gordon, Nos. u, 14. September 16 and November
20, 1826.
  64 F. O., 13/11, Chamberlain to Canning, December 7, 1825, Secret.
  66 F. O., 13/22, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 10.
  99 Harold Temperly, Foreign Policy of Canning, pp. 182-184.
  97 F. O., 13/24, Chamberlain to Canning, August 13, 1826, Secret and Confi¬
dential, No. 86.                     98 F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 23.
i54         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
the irrepressible minister could not refrain from suggesting as
a solution to the problem that an independent state of Monte¬
video should be set up in case Buenos Aires and Rio could not
be brought to agree. Canning received the idea coldly, saying
that in such a case England would be accused of self interest.69
As a matter of fact, at the time, General Sarratea from Buenos
Aires was in London, where a proposal of mediation was then
being discussed.70
  The war was disastrous to the Brazilians. Twice in the clos¬
ing months of 1825 the imperial forces were defeated by the
troops from Buenos Aires. When D. Pedro took the field him¬
self in November, 1826, in order to incite his men to valor, he
was forced by the illness of the empress to return to Rio without
having gained a victory. Early in 1827 Bis forces on land suf¬
fered a serious defeat; one fleet was captured by Admiral Brown,
commander of the Buenos Aires squadron; another fleet was
lost off the coast of Patagonia;71 and an agent from La Plata
appeared in Rio to negotiate terms.72
  But by the first article of the preliminary treaty of peace which
was signed by the agent, Manuel Garda, and the Brazilian
government, the Republic of the United Provinces recognized
the independence of Brazil and renounced all of its rights to
the Cisplatine Province. Thus by diplomacy did Brazil recoup
what its army and navy had lost.73 Although this preliminary
convention was rejected by the Buenos Aires government, the
Brazilians were aroused to a new enthusiasm by their elation
over the terms obtained from Garcia74 and new impetus was
given to the war. While Gordon at Rio was counselling moder¬
ation to D. Pedro, the Brazilian navy under Admiral Norton
defeated the Buenos Aires squadron under Admiral Brown,
and the commander of the land forces of the republic confessed
to his government that he could not end the war. An attempt

 **    G., 13/2» Canning to Stuart, No. 39. December      182s.
 70 Ibid., No. 40.
 71 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira no Prata,” p. 583.
 72 F. O., 13/37, Gordon to Canning, No. 39. May 10, 1827.
 73 Pinto da Rocha, op. cit., p. 584; F. O., 13/37, Gordon to Canning, No. 45.
 74 F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. 6.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                              155
to draw Bolivar into a concerted attack on the Brazilian Em¬
pire failed, and internal anarchy threatened to disrupt the
United Provinces. D. Pedro at Rio maintained an obstinate
refusal to any solution which would separate the Banda Orien¬
tal from the empire, until the news that the Caudilho Rivera
had invaded the Missions territory induced a more conciliatory
mood.75
   Minister Gordon, since his arrival on October 13, 1826, had
striven fruitlessly to bring about a settlement of the Montevideo
question. Now in the following October, he advised his govern¬
ment firmly, and somewhat grimly, that the war between Bue¬
nos Aires and Brazil called for the direct interference of Great
Britain. The reasons for such action by England were suffi¬
ciently weighty, in the opinion of the minister. The struggle
waged on the sea was a war between Englishmen, for twelve
hundred English seamen were in the Brazilian navy alone, and
the commanders of both sides were English. Every British ves¬
sel which entered Brazilian ports lost a large quota of its crew,
for considerable numbers of seamen deserted from each ship
to join their countrymen in the service of Brazil. That the con¬
flict had long since escaped from the control of Buenos Aires
was demonstrated by the fact that the many privateers com¬
missioned by that government were largely English and Amer¬
ican and acted like pirates in their disrespect of neutral prop¬
erty. If the war continued, both the Buenos Aires and Rio gov¬
ernments would be shattered, since the United Provinces were
already shaken by internal anarchy, while the avowed purpose
of the Buenos Aires government in the war was to cause the
dismemberment of the Brazilian Empire. A proclamation call¬
ing on Pernambuco, Bahia, and other centers of disaffection
within the empire to secede from their allegiance to the Bra-
gan$as had been published by the government of La Plata. Such
a state of affairs, the minister maintained, warranted the in¬
tervention of England, just as the three powers had intervened
between Greece and the Ottoman Porte. It was now up to

  76 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira no Prata,” pp. 584-585; Hildegarde
Angell, Simon Bolivar, South American Liberator, pp. 203-204.
 156         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 England to decide independently what interference was ad¬
 visable in order to end this war, “than which none was ever
 waged more iniquitous or more disastrous to all parties con¬
 cerned.”76
    Gordon, turning from eloquence to action before a reply to
 his statement of the case came from London, presented a proj¬
 ect to the Brazilian secretary of state for foreign affairs, which
 should serve as a basis of pacification. The project, which the
 minister received favorably, raised the Banda Oriental to a
 free and independent state through the mediation of the British
 Government.77 The Brazilian court at the earnest insistence of
 Gordon accepted the proposal with slight modifications and
 agreed to an armistice on the basis of the status quo;78 and Buenos
Aires signified its concurrence and promised to send agents to
Rio to conclude the formal preliminary convention.79 Gordon
had high hopes of ending the dispute quickly.
   But the minister was not permitted to finish the task so well
begun, for he was promoted to a European post, leaving Rio
August, 1828, before the envoys from La Plata arrived. Lord
Ponsonby, who was shifted from Buenos Aires to Rio, assisted
at the birth of the new nation by witnessing the signature of the
preliminary convention of August 27, 1828. By the agreement
both parties concurred in the establishment of an independent
Banda Oriental and bound themselves to defend the new state
for the length of time to be set in the final treaty of peace which
was to be negotiated on the basis of the present convention.
Certain articles provided for a temporary government to rule
the new state until the permanent organization could be set
up, while others specified the machinery for the prospective
elections and for the framing of a constitution, granted am¬
nesty to all concerned, and provided for the evacuation of the
territory by the troops of the contending armies.80

  ” F. O., 13/39, Gordon to Dudley, No. 26 (October 1, 1827) and No 20 (No¬
vember 10).                                                         3 v
  77 F. O., 13/47, Gordon to Dudley, No. 9. January 17, 1828.
 78 Ibid., No. 14. February 13.
 79 Ibid., No. 18. February 17.
 80 F. O., 13/50, Ponsonby to Aberdeen, No. 5. August 29, 1828.
                    BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                  157
   Ponsonby then notified the agent from Buenos Aires that
“any retreat on his part from the engagements to me as a min¬
ister of the Mediating Sovereign, must originate the most serious
question between His Majesty’s government and the Argen¬
tine republic.” Then, turning to the other party in the dispute,
he later repeated the same threat “in pretty strong terms” to
the Brazilian minister.81 His ponderous bombast was unneces¬
sary, however, as both parties were agreed on the necessity of
calling the dispute a drawn battle. On October 4, 1828, ratifi¬
cations were exchanged at Montevideo82; the constitution of the
new state was accepted by Brazil and Buenos Aires two years
later; and the troops of the contending parties were with¬
drawn.83
  Thus from 1680 to 1826 the wave of Portuguese control re¬
ceded and advanced incessantly; Colonia changed hands five
times; the Brazilian frontier advanced to La Plata and the
Uruguay rivers only to fall back in the darkest days of the
eighteenth century far northward into the province of Santa
Catharina; while by the agreements of 1777 and I^01 the Por¬
tuguese were penned up behind the legal barriers of what, ap¬
proximately, are the limits of to-day. When the Portuguese
court was transferred to Rio, however, D. Joao seized the golden
opportunity created by the Napoleonic wars in Europe and the
independence movement of the Spanish colonies, to extend his
boundaries to La Plata and the Uruguay rivers. Strangford

  si Ibid.                                82 Ibid-, No. 21.
  83 W. S. Robertson, History of the Latin American Nations, p. 256. The preliminary
convention of peace between Brazil and Buenos Aires is given in Parish, Buenos
Aires and the Piovinces of the Rio de la Plata, 2nd edition, Appendix V. Article 7
called for commissioners to be appointed by Buenos Aires and Rio to approve
the constitution which was to be drawn up by the Constitutional Assembly of
the proposed state of Uruguay before it should be sworn to by the new state.
Article 17 called for commissioners to be appointed after the ratification of the
present preliminary treaty to draw up a definitive treaty of peace. The convention
was ratified by Buenos Aires September 29, 1828, and by Brazil August 30, 1828.
An additional article assured free navigation of La Plata river for fifteen years.
No definite treaty was negotiated, but on May 25-27, 1830, the commissioners
from Brazil and Buenos Aires, meeting at Rio, approved the proposed constitution
of Uruguay (.Republica Argentina,   Tratados,   Protocols, Actos y Acuerdos Interna-
cionales, II, 411-425).
 158       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
postponed the realization of the project until Europe had set¬
tled down in 18155 but at his withdrawal, the Portuguese court
pushed on to victory in spite of the intervention of the great
powers. Yet the movement for independence among the Span¬
ish colonies, which enabled D. Joao to succeed, foreshadowed
the very forces which caused the eventual failure of the aspira¬
tions of the Rio court. For Buenos Aires, once convinced that
it could not hold the province for itself, yielded to the yearn¬
ings for independence manifested among the inhabitants of the
Banda Oriental, and Brazil was not strong enough to hold the
north bank of La Plata against the insurrectionary forces.
Through the mediation of Great Britain, the new state of Uru¬
guay emerged and the Portuguese aspiration of nearly two cen¬
turies was realized in 1817 only to be irrevocably lost in 1828.84
 84A recent discussion of the war between Brazil and Buenos Aires is Juan
Beverina’s, La Guerra contra el Imperio del Brasil. 2 volumes.
.
                                CHAPTER VII


ENGLAND’S ATTEMPTS TO ABOLISH THE PORTU¬
                GUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822

The     most     serious     friction which has ever arisen between
England and Portuguese America resulted from the attempts
of the British government to suppress the slave trade. From
1808 through the century until slavery was abolished in Brazil
(1888), the constantly increasing pressure which the London
Foreign Office brought to bear in its efforts to abolish the
traffic caused such an intense feeling of resentment on the part
of the Brazilians that the friendly relations of the two countries
were seriously menaced. The question disturbed Anglo-Portu-
guese relations during D. Joao’s sojourn in Rio and contributed
to the growth of the separatist, republican sentiment in the
provinces of Pernambuco and Bahia; it became a sine qua non
of recognition by England of Brazilian independence; and it
injected itself so forcibly into the relations of the two countries
between 1827 and ^42 that it frustrated every effort of Eng¬
land to renew the commercial treaty negotiated as the price
of the recognition of Brazilian independence. The climax came
in the two decades between 1845 and 1863, which terminated
in the severance by Brazil of diplomatic relations with the
British government.1

  1 The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, II, 238, states that in “1826
Brazil entered into a Convention with Great Britain promising to abolish the
trade in three years; and in 1830 this promise was carried out.” Yet in 1842 the
House of Commons complained to the cabinet that “at no period had the Brazilian
Slave Trade been so intensively carried on as it is at the present moment in Rio
de Janeiro itself” (F. O., 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 10, June 4, 1845).
Oliveira Martins estimates the average importation into Brazil from 1819 to 1847
at 40,000, not counting the loss during the voyage by death or capture. Before
England’s attempt to suppress the traffic, fifteen per cent, of the slaves died during
 160         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    The special economic privileges which the English had en¬
joyed in Portugal for centuries were transferred to Portuguese
 America with the removal of the Lisbon court to Rio and were
 eventually fastened on the independent empire of Brazil as a
 part of the price of the recognition of its independence by Great
 Britain. There was a continuity, therefore, in the commercial re¬
lations of the English and the Portuguese from the formation of
the independent state of Portugal in the twelfth century to the
Brazil of the nineteenth century. In like manner, England im¬
posed on the new empire of Brazil the agreements concluded
with Portugal in regard to the suppression of the slave trade
at a time when the latter state was virtually a vassal of the
British Empire. The agreements under which England acted,
and against which Brazil protested so vehemently after 1827,
were negotiated between the British and Portuguese govern¬
ments before D. Pedro raised the cry of independence. As in
the case of the special economic privileges, the ratification by
Brazil of the stipulations concerning the slave trade, together
with a promise of total abolition in 1830, was demanded and
obtained as a part of the price of the recognition of its independ¬
ence by England. Thus there were foisted on Brazil, as the only
way out of an impossible situation, restrictions of which neither
the government nor the people approved, with the result that
the enforcement of these stipulations by Great Britain aroused
bitter resentment among the Brazilians after 1830.
   The future course of Great Britain in regard to the interna¬
tional suppression of the slave trade was forecast even before
the final bill for the abolition of the traffic passed the houses of
Parliament. On March 31, 1806, the importation of slaves into
those American colonies which had been conquered by the Brit¬
ish in the course of the war was prohibited; English subjects
were forbidden to import slaves into the colonies of any foreign
country whether neutral or hostile; and all British capital and
subjects were denied the privilege of engaging in the traffic in

passage, while after the attempt began, the loss rose to twenty-five per cent.
British cruisers captured only four per cent, of the total shipped from Africa
(Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil e as Colonias Portuguesas, p. 58, footnote 1).
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                       161
foreign ships. The outfitting of slavers of any nationality in
English ports was prohibited also.2 The following June, real¬
izing that the complete abolition of the trade by England was
merely a question of time, Wilberforce moved to address the
king “praying that he would be graciously pleased to direct a
negotiation to be entered into, by which foreign powers should
be invited to cooperate with his majesty, in measures to be
adopted for the abolition of the African Slave-trade.” His reso¬
lution passed both the Commons and the Lords without a
division.3
   These measures were forerunners of the acts of 1807, which
abolished the traffic entirely as far as the subjects of England
were concerned. Early in that year the bill was passed declar¬
ing illegal any participation by a British subject in the pur¬
chase, sale, or transfer of slaves on or from the African coast
after May 1. No slave was to be admitted into any British col¬
ony after March 1, 1808, and any vessel fitting out in the United
Kingdom for the traffic was to be confiscated.4 *
   England thus decreed the end of the slave trade in so far as
its own subjects were concerned. With the cruisers at its com¬
mand and the determination to enforce the laws enacted, the
British government was abundantly able to make its prohibi¬
tion effective. Yet the battle was only half won, since Holland,
France, Spain, the United States,6 * * * * 11 and Portugal still carried
  2 Thomas Clarkson, History of the Abolition of the African Slave-Trade by the British
Parliament, p. 334; Abstract of the Laws of Jamaica relating to Slaves—“An Abstract of
the Acts of Parliament Relating to the Abolition of the Slave-Trade,” pp. 149-
165. The bill passed the Lords, May 7.
  3 Clarkson, op. cit., pp. 337-341.
  4 Ibid., pp. 344-347; Abstract, pp. 165-174. The bill was passed in the Commons
despite the vigorous opposition of the West India interests which were supported
by the Duke of Clarence (later William IV). “The victory . . . was a crushing
defeat for the planter-merchant group ... a triumph . . . over the power of
vested interest and property” (Lowell Joseph Ragatz, The Fall of the Planter Class
in the British Caribbean, 1763-1833, p. 276).
  6 W. E. B. DuBois points out that despite the Act of March 2, 1807, which pro¬
hibited the importation of slaves after January 1, 1808, and the Treaty of Ghent
by which the United States bound itself to suppress the trade, the traffic continued
briskly until the Civil War. He estimates the annual importation between 1807
and 1862 to have been from 1,000 to 15,000 (American Historical Asso., Reports,
1891, “The Enforcement of the Slave-Trade Laws,” pp. 161-174).
   11
 162          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 on a thriving trade in slaves. Under the formidable pressure
 exerted by public opinion ably directed by enthusiastic reform¬
 ers and under the powerful influence brought to bear by those
 financially interested in the British West Indies, the English
 government, in conformity with the resolution of Wilberforce
 of June, 1806, now turned to securing the complete abolition
 of the trade. “The subject was one in which almost the whole
 nation had become interested. It could not be ignored. To the
 leaders of the movement no sacrifice appeared too great to se¬
 cure the complete cessation of the abominable traffic. They
 insisted that it should be put in the forefront of every diplo¬
 matic transaction. The relations between Britain and every
 other Power were thus affected, particularly relations with other
 maritime Powers, with whom, naturally, there was always the
 most friction.”6
   Chief among the nations7 on whom England exerted its in¬
fluence to obtain the abolition of the traffic was Portugal, since
that country was the traditional sinner and, on account of the
peculiar relations existing between the two governments, of¬
fered special opportunities for action by Britain. Yet the Portu¬
guese were to prove, perhaps, the most recalcitrant of all in
their determination not to renounce the trade. The reforming
public of England quite naturally failed to understand Portu¬
gal’s reluctance to follow Britain’s example and laid the per¬
sistence of the Portuguese slave traffic to the natural perver¬
sity of that race. Yet there were fundamental reasons which
impelled the subjects of the Bragan$as to cling to the trade in
slaves, which long since had been restricted to an exchange
between Africa and the colonies, principally between the west
coast of Africa and the east coast of South America.
   Negro slavery was deeply rooted in Brazil, far more so than
in Spanish America. The Indians, fleeing, disappearing, or dy-
ing, failed to supply the needed labor, as they did in the Spanish
  6 Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, p. 454.
  7 The diplomacy of the abolition of the slave trade has never been investigated.
Such a study is much needed (Webster, op. cit., p. 454, footnote). The nearest ap¬
proach to an investigation along this line is the work of William Law Mathieson,
British Slavery and Its Abolition and Great Britain and the Slave Trade, 1839-1865.
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                        163
possessions, while even the Jesuits themselves favored the Afri¬
can slave trade in an effort to save the Indians from the hands
of the Portuguese mameluco. Between the founding of Rio (1567)
immediately following the defeat of the French and the ex¬
pulsion of the Dutch from Pernambuco (1662), came the gold¬
en age of the Jesuits with their monopoly of Indian labor in
the missions of Bahia and the Amazon valley. Consequently
the Brazilian settler in those regions was forced to abandon his
plantation or to import Negro slaves,8 with the result that the
Portuguese became the first to develop the modern slave trade
extensively. Without Negro labor Brazil could never have been
developed, nor would Portuguese America exist to-day.9 From
1575 to 1591 from Angola alone fifty thousand Negroes were
exported to Portugal, Brazil, and the Spanish Indies, while
during the first half of the seventeenth century the number
reached fifteen thousand annually. After the expulsion of the
Dutch in 1662, a new impetus was given to the trade; but the
Marquez de Pombal, by his abolition of Indian slavery and
the emphasis which he placed on plantations instead of mines,
caused a striking increase in the traffic. During the first years
of the Company of Grao-Para more than one hundred thou¬
sand Negroes were carried to Brazil annually. From 1759 to
1803 the colonial registers state that between fourteen and fif-

  8 Oliveira Martins,   0 Brazil, pp. 24-30. The need for slave labor in Bahia was
acute since that region was the center of the sugar production of Brazil. From the
middle of the sixteenth century to the beginning of the seventeenth, the Brazilian ou t-
put was large, the Brazilian product being the only sugar consumed in Europe
during that half century (Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundafdo do Imperio, I, 233).
Since the Indians of Brazil had an unconquerable aversion to agriculture, Negro
labor was necessary for the sugar plantations (Azeredo Coutinho, An Essay on the
Commerce and Products of the Portuguese Colonies in South America, p. 53) •
  » Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 52-53. The same was true of the development of
the British West Indies sugar plantations. F. W. Pitman in The Development of theBritish
West Indies, 1700-1763, says that “it is very probable that the production of sugar
would not have developed as soon as it did if slavery had not existed to furnish a
sufficiently large and continuous body of labor.” He adds (pp. 62-63) that        there
is little doubt that” the decline in the annual average of sugar exported from the
British sugar colonies after 1805 “was owing to the abolition of the slave trade and
slavery itself.” The Portuguese sugar growers in Brazil had pointed the way to
such a solution of the labor problem (p. 61).
  164          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  teen thousand yearly left Angola.10 In 1803 in the city of Rio
 de Janeiro there were over fourteen thousand Negro slaves and
 nearly ten thousand free Negroes out of a total population of
 almost forty-seven thousand.11
    By 1807 slave labor in Brazil had become an economic god
 with the slave trade as its strong right arm. To attempt to sup¬
 press the traffic, which was an essential adjunct to slavery it¬
 self, by simply passing statutes and signing treaties was a futile
 performance. In England a long and intensive education of
 public opinion preceded the final abolition of the trade, but
 now the British Foreign Office was being compelled to force
 the same measure on a country which believed fervently in the
 necessity of slave labor and relied on the African trade for the
 needed supply of fresh Negroes. The religious appeal which
 exercised such a deep impression in Britain12 did not influence
 either the Portuguese government or the subjects of the Bra-
 gan^as, whereas the economic influences in England which de¬
 manded universal abolition served only to strengthen the finan¬
 cial and agricultural interests of the Portuguese in their deter¬
mination to hold fast to the traffic. Faced by this opposition,

   10 Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 54-56 and 56 footnote (1). Not all came to Bra¬
zil. There was a market for Brazilian sugar in Europe throughout the century for
England did not preempt the European sugar trade. Although the import of raw
sugar into Great Britain from the British plantations grew from 500,000 cwt. in
 1700 to close to 2,000,000 in 1770, the export of raw sugar to Europe remained
practically stationary around 200,000 cwt. annually (Pitman, British West Indies,
p. 168). Brazilian sugar found ready markets in Italy and the eastern Mediter¬
ranean country (ibid., pp. 163-164). The export of English refined sugar was
killed by 1693 anc* very little of the refined article was exported thereafter (ibid.,
p. 157). Brazilian sugar in 1760 constituted one-third of the total world produc¬
tion. By 1776, however, the percentage had fallen to less than six per cent, of the
world total, but toward the end of the century the production revived. By 1800
there were over 1000 engenhos in Brazil (Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundafdo do
Impeno, I, 232-233). With the European market open to the Brazilian product
and with the principal agricultural emphasis of the colony being placed on sugar,
the need for slaves in Brazil continued to be pressing and the slave trade flourished.
    F- O., 63/84, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 35.
  12 Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, p. 455. A discussion of the propaganda
in favor of the slave-trade suppression is given by Ragatz, Fall of the Planter Class
pp. 237-276.                                                                          ’
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                     165
both Canning and Castlereagh, nevertheless, honestly exerted
every effort to bring about the complete abolition of the trade
by Portugal.
   Canning, who made the first attempt before D. Joao fled to
Rio, was rebuffed in unmistakable terms by Araujo, then for¬
eign minister. Araujo assured Strangford, in reply to the en¬
quiries of the latter as to the attitude of the Portuguese govern¬
ment relative to the suppression of the slave traffic, that it was
impracticable to expect Portugal either to annihilate or to dis¬
courage the trade. He explained that public opinion was en¬
tirely opposed to such a step, and although he himself admired
the philosophy which impelled Great Britain to abolish the
traffic, he would be very sorry to imitate it in his own country.
Moreover, he added, the Portuguese colonists would never con¬
sent to such a measure.13
   The London Foreign Office was not allowed to accept such
an answer, for both the reformers and certain financial inter¬
ests were determined to check the Portuguese slave trade. A
sample14 of the propaganda which was carried on about 1808
demonstrated the part played by economic influences in the
humanitarian mania which demanded the cessation of the so-
called “inhuman traffic.” The author of this document states
unequivocally that “the establishment of an independent met¬
ropolitan Government in Brazil” would be “ruinous to our
Sugar Colonies and to the commercial interests dependent upon
them, and” would prove also “a heavy political incumbrance,
instead of an advantage to Great Britain, unless the renuncia¬
tion of the African Slave Trade” were made an “article of any
Treaty of Commerce and Alliance into which we may now en-

  14 F. O., 63/54, Strangford to Canning, No. 31. June 4, 1807.
  14 The sample referred to is an unsigned, undated paper found among the Mis¬
cellaneous Papers of Lord Bexley, 1796-1844, Add. Ms., 31, 237, pp. 182-191. The
paper was written between 1808 and 1810, however. Nicholas Vansittart, first Baron
Bexley, was secretary to the treasury in Grenville’s administration to 1809 (March).
He was very active in the Commons during 1809 in regard to financial measures.
He refused the chancellorship of the Exchequer in October, 1809, but accepted
in 1812. He was chancellor during Castlereagh’s period in office (Dictionary of
National Biography, LVIII).
166       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ter with that power.” In order to prove such a statement to
the public, pamphlets should be prepared and scattered abroad
in England, for the fate of the British West Indies was at stake.
  The danger which threatened the sugar colonies, that of over¬
production, would be remedied by the cessation of the slave
traffic within the British dominions, since such a measure would
prevent the extension of sugar growing through lack of labor.
But that remedy was now imperiled by the threat of a new and
enormous increase of sugar planting in Brazil. “In that vast
and fertile territory, an influx of British Capital and British
enterprise alone” was “wanting to compleat the ruin of all our
Islands in the Antilles . . . .” Land was ninety per cent, cheaper
in Brazil than in Jamaica while most of the supplies for a sugar
plantation were raised within the country. Hence the Brazilian
planter could sell with profit in Europe at a price which would
mean ruin to the West Indian plantation owner, and the Euro¬
pean market was essential to the British sugar trade, since Eng¬
land no longer absorbed anything like the total output of the
sugar colonies.
  The only solution to the difficulties confronting the West In¬
dies, therefore, was either to abolish the Portuguese slave trade
which supplied cheap labor to Brazilian plantations, or to pro¬
hibit any commercial intercourse between Great Britain and
Brazil; for the latter measure would prevent the influx of British
capital and enterprise into the Portuguese colony. Since com¬
mercial relations with England were fundamentally necessary
to Brazil, the Portuguese government should be made to pay
the price of attaining that advantage by a renunciation of its
traffic in slaves. By the influx of British capital into the colony
and by the pledge of alliance and protection by the British gov¬
ernment, Great Britain would acquire a right to prescribe the
terms of the partnership between the two countries. Therefore
let England “refuse to form any conventional relations, com¬
mercial or political, with Brazil, of which the cessation of its
Slave Trade” was not a fundamental article.
  The group which was represented by this propaganda was
an important element in British economic life. Since the West
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                     167
Indies were largely one-crop colonies, whatever affected the
sugar interests became at once the vital concern not only of the
plantation owners themselves, but also of the shippers and Lon¬
don middlemen. More indirectly but no less seriously, a group
of English exporters also was linked to the rise or fall of the
sugar business, for the merchandise shipped to the British West
Indies constituted one of the principal items of English trade.
If the sugar industry should decline, the manufacturers of West
Indies necessities, the exporters, and shipping interests would
suffer in proportion. Therefore these economic groups of Eng¬
land joined those of the islands in the demand for the universal
abolition of the slave trade, once that traffic had been forbid¬
den to the sugar colonies. Together these interests wielded an
important influence.15
   The propaganda was only in part successful, for although the
treaty of alliance of 1810 did include a clause dealing with the
slave traffic, D. Joao merely prohibited the trade from any
part of Africa not belonging to Portugal, while within the Por¬
tuguese dominions full license was allowed to the traders. He
promised, however, to cooperate with England in an effort to

  16 In 1830 sugar constituted in value two-thirds of the total exports of the island
of Demerara, over one-half of the exports of Jamaica, ten-elevenths of those of
Barbadoes, and more than eight-ninths of those of St. Vincent. Sugar alone ac¬
counted for over sixty-one per cent, of the total exports of the British West Indies
in that year (Customs, 4/25, British Imports by Countries). Diagrams opposite
pp. 98 and 108 of 77le Development of the British West Indies by Pitman demonstrate
the one-crop agricultural system of the Barbadoes and Jamaica through the eight¬
eenth century as far as 1770. The same characteristics were true for Antigua,
Montserrat, Nevis, and St. Christopher. The exports to the West Indies in 1812
were greater than those to the United States and double the value of exports to
Brazil. In 1815, an unusual year, exports to the islands equaled half the value of
merchandise shipped to the United States and over three times the amount sent
to Brazil. In 1820 the British West Indies absorbed more English exports than did
the United States or Brazil. In 1825 the islands took over half as much as did the
United States and more than half as much as all of the South American States.
In 1830 and 1835 the United States forged ahead but the British West Indies
maintained their position in regard to the South and Central American states.
In 1835 the value of exports from Great Britain to the British West Indies was
nearly £3,200,000, while all of the South American states took less than £4,900,-
000. Brazil in that year received over £2,600,000 of English exports (Customs,
8/1, 3, 12, 21, 32, 42).
168          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
bring about the gradual abolition of the traffic throughout the
world.16
   Even this mild concession was gained with difficulty, and
England from the first accused Portuguese slave ships of viola¬
tion of the prohibition imposed by the treaty.17 Subjects of other
powers changed their flag to the Portuguese banner and plied
the trade unhampered by the international agreements of their
countries,18 while in Brazil immediate complaints arose against
the seizure of slavers off the coast of Africa by British cruisers.
   The city of Bahia especially grew very bitter over the sub¬
ject, for out of thirty-two vessels which had been fitted out for
the slave trade at that place in 1811, seventeen were known to
have been seized by British cruisers, while others were conjec¬
tured to have suffered the same fate. Five principal commercial
houses failed by the early part of 1812 and the indignation of
Bahia against England reached a high pitch. This attitude was
extended to include the Portuguese government at Rio, which
by its supineness in the face of Britain’s action was considered
by the inhabitants of that region no longer to merit the support
of Brazilians. Strangford warned his government that a very
real danger of rebellion in that province threatened the unity
of the colony as a result of the action of the British cruisers.
The envoy advised that the English authorities relax a bit in
their efforts to suppress the trade, for the abolition would have
to be very gradual as far as Brazil was concerned. Later over
half a dispatch book of documents was submitted by the Rio
government in proof of its contention that the aggressions of
the English cruisers were illegal and arbitrary.19

  16 Article io of the treaty of friendship and alliance, 1810. F. O., 93/37/8,
Portugal.
  17 The minister of the interior, Fernando Portugal, opposed it bitterly (see
supra, p. 85. F. O., 63/122, Draft to Lord Strangford, No.            1. January 7,
1812).
  18 The British government repeatedly demanded of Portugal an act of renunci¬
ation of its rights to be the carrier of slaves for other states and the positive pro¬
hibition of the use of the Portuguese flag in the slave trade not permitted by Article
10 of the treaty of 1810 (F. O., 63/122, Draft to Strangford, No. 1).
  19 F. O., 63/123, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 32. May 20,1812. F. O., 63/125,
Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 78. November 10, 1812.
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                  169
   In reply to these complaints, Castlereagh preached the Rio
court a sermon. “It is high time,” he wrote,20 “that the Prince
Regent of Portugal should seriously set about redeeming his
Pledges for the abolition of this traffic in human blood,” for it
was only under the Portuguese flag that such a traffic was now
possible to any great extent.21 In a later note, the foreign min¬
ister dryly advised Strangford that the cruisers would continue
to bring in Portuguese slave ships off the Gold Coast and north
Africa for adjudication. If the commanders erred, the Bahianos
would receive indemnity; but if the courts of admiralty upheld
the seizures, there would be no remedy for the inhabitants of
that city. It was unfortunate if the Bahianos did not approve,
but their complaints were useless. The best solution was for
them to trade within the territory specified in Article 1 o of the
treaty of alliance of 1810.22
   The net result thus far of the attempt to suppress the Portu¬
guese slave trade forced on the British Foreign Office by home
influence was to drive D. Joao into the opposite camp. Early
in 1814, Strangford reported that there was no hope of any
further steps being taken by the Portuguese court toward abol¬
ishing the traffic, for any inclination which the prince regent
had had in the past had now disappeared in consequence of
the “universal clamour and discontent which the indiscrimi¬
nate captures made by the British cruizers on the coast of Af¬
rica” had excited. This was the only point, the viscount re¬
marked, on which he had seen such a general national feeling
exhibited by the Brazilians and Portuguese. The sentiment was
most powerful and very extensive throughout the kingdom.23
Despite the action of the cruisers, nearly twenty-four thousand
slaves were imported into Bahia alone between May, 1811,

  20 F. O., 63/144, Castlereagh to Strangford, No. 19. May 12, 1813.
  21 This statement was true, in view of the European situation in 1812 and 1813.
  22 F. O., 63/144, Castlereagh to Strangford, No. 30. October 11, 1813. As later
events showed, the Bahianos had grounds for their complaints, as the indemnity
of 1815 and the London Mixed Commission confessed that many seizures had
been illegal (see infra pp. 170, 179). England needed vessels between 1810 and
1815.
  22 F. O., 63/167, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 40. April 20, 1814.
170         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
and June, 1814, by far the greater number of vessels giving the
Gold Coast (Costa da Mina) as the origin of their Negroes.24
Into Rio during the same four years (but including all of 1811
and 1814 to November) there were imported over sixty-three
thousand.25
   In the face of this activity and the attitude of the Portuguese
government, Strangford despaired of concluding any negotia¬
tions relative to the traffic and intended merely to issue a
declaration “defining the limits beyond which Great Britain”
would “no/ suffer the Portuguese Flag to be used in the Slave
Trade, and 20 the Circumstances which would render a Ship
under Portuguese colours liable to capture within these Lim¬
its.” Castlereagh could back this declaration and enforce it,
regardless of the Portuguese position in the matter. This, so
Strangford asserted, was the only way left to England in its
efforts to restrict the Portuguese slave traffic.26
   Castlereagh succeeded where his minister failed, however,
for early in 1815, he concluded two treaties with the Portu¬
guese plenipotentiaries who acted for their court at the Con¬
gress of Vienna. By the first,27 signed January 21, England gave
three hundred thousand pounds in full payment of all claims
of the Portuguese arising from seizures made by British cruisers
before June 1, 1814.28 By the second,29 signed the following day,
the Portuguese prohibited all trade in slaves north of the equa¬
tor; the traffic was expressly permitted between Portuguese Af-

  24 F. O., 63/168, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 74.
  56 F. O., 63/169, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 109. Neither the figures for
Bahia nor those for Rio included those dying during the passage. Nearly 5,000 of
the importations to Rio died on the way.
  ” F. O., 63/169, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 88. October 1, 1814.
  27 F. O., 93/37/10, Portugal.
  28 This was not a bribe to win Portugal’s consent to the treaty which was signed
the next day, but just compensation for damages done to Portuguese shippers.
D. Joao, however, being in need of money, stipulated that the distribution of the
sum to the various claimants should be made by his government at Rio, an ar¬
rangement to which the Bahianos objected strenuously, as the “probity of England”
was recognized as more just than that of the Rio court. They feared that they would
never receive payment from their sovereign (F. O., 63/182, Chamberlain to
Castlereagh, No. 34).
  ” F- O., 93/37/11, Portugal.
           PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                     171
rica to the south of the line and Brazil; the prince regent bound
himself to negotiate a separate treaty later which should set a
definite time for the complete abolition of the traffic;30 and the
Portuguese were forbidden to carry slaves to any country or
possession not under the dominion of the house of Bragan$a.
The treaty of friendship and alliance of 1810 was declared an¬
nulled, with the express understanding, however, that all the
ancient treaties between the two powers should continue in
force, while England remitted the unpaid balance due on the
loan of six hundred thousand pounds made to D. Joao in 1809.
Ratifications were to be exchanged at Rio within five months.
   Bathurst sent the treaties to Chamberlain with instructions
to present two explanations for the acceptance of D. Joao be¬
fore the chargt should exchange ratifications. The prince regent
was to agree that the purpose of England in signing the trea¬
ties was to remove misunderstandings and misinterpretations
from Anglo-Portuguese relations and to promise that he in¬
tended thoroughly to cooperate with other nations in their
methods of prohibiting the slave trade within the limits set
down in these treaties.31
   Armed with these pious declarations, Chamberlain presented
the treaties to D. Joao for ratification. The prince regent ac¬
cepted the explanations without comment and exchanged rati¬
fications on June 16, 1815-35S But Chamberlain prophesied an
unfavorable reaction in Bahia to the agreements when they
should become known, since the trade to the Gold Coast, the
principal source for the Bahia slave traffic, was prohibited (the

  3° YVebster in his Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, pp. 459-460, states that Portugal
promised to abolish the trade altogether within eight years. No such time limit
appears in the copy of the treaty preserved at the Record Office, however. The
convention of 1817 also failed to set a definite date for the final abolition. Webster
likewise states that in return for this promise by Portugal the treaty of commerce
of 1810 was altered in its favor. The treaty of commerce remained intact; it was
the treaty of friendship and alliance dealing with political matters of a temporary
nature that was abolished entirely (see Article 3 of the treaty of January 22, 1815).
The treaty of commerce and the treaty of friendship and alliance were separate
and distinct treaties (see supra, pp. 86 ffi).
  81 F. O., 63/181, Bathurst to Strangford, No. 3. February 28, 1815.
  82 F. O., 63/182, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, Nos. 30, 31.
 172          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Gold Coast lay north of the equator), and the inhabitants of
 that province would not approve the arrangement in regard
 to the indemnity for the seizures by the British cruisers.33 Later
 the chargS informed34 Castlereagh that Pernambuco also refused
 to acquiesce in the stipulations, the inhabitants of that city
 going so far as to fit out fast sailing ships for illicit trade to the
 north of the equator with the tacit approval of the Rio court.
 Moreover, large Portuguese vessels entered African ports near¬
 est to the line and were there supplied with Negroes from north
 of the equator by small boats. In 1815 nearly fifteen thousand
slaves entered Rio from Africa, despite the restrictions imposed
on the traffic by the agreements.
   In the face of such activity it was evident that the Portuguese
were quite out of sympathy with England’s efforts to suppress
the slave traffic, yet the British policy of abolishing the trade
on paper was pushed industriously by the Foreign Office. Bas¬
ing his demands on the clause in the treaty of January 22, 1815,
in which D. Joao promised to negotiate the complete abolition
of the trade, Castlereagh forced the signature in London of the
famous agreement of 1817.35 By the additional convention (ad-

  MF. O., 63/182, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 34. July 18, 1815; F. O.,
63 /194> Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 71, July 30, 1816.
  34   O., 63/192, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 5. February 10, 1816.
  36 F. O., 93/38/15? Portugal. The additional convention was signed July 28,
1817, and the separate article, September 11, 1817, by Castlereagh and the Conde
de Palmella. Webster in his Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, p. 460, says that Castle¬
reagh obtained from Portugal a further convention dated September 28, 1817, to
carry out the terms agreed upon at Vienna, that this convention granted a limited
right of visit and search, and that the slave trade south of the equator should be
legal under the Portuguese flag for another five years. The convention was signed
July 28, however, with the separate article dated September u. No time limit as
to the Portuguese trade south of the equator appears in the copy of the convention
preserved at the Record Office and signed by Castlereagh and the Conde de
Palmella. Since England signed an agreement with the Portuguese government
in 1823 which was termed “additional” to the 1817 convention with the purpose
of regulating seizures by British cruisers of Portuguese slavers south of the equator,
it would seem that the five years limit mentioned by Webster did not exist. No
mention is made in this 1823 additional convention of a promise to abolish the
trade entirely (see F. O., 93/38/16, Portugal). The trade south of the equator was
allowed in conformity with the terms of the Vienna agreement, which placed no
time limit to that traffic.
           PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                      173
ditional to the Vienna agreement) and the separate article
signed less than two months later, the English foreign minister
laid the foundation on which Great Britain based its action in
enforcing the abolition of the Brazilian slave trade until the
disturbing question was finally settled. When all other means
failed, England recurred to certain provisions contained in the
convention and the separate article and acted on them regard¬
less of the Brazilian interpretation of those documents.
   The convention of July, 1817, declared the object of the
agreement was to prevent the subjects of the respective powers
signatory to the documents from carrying on any illicit slave
trade. Such traffic was declared illicit if prosecuted by British
ships, under British flag, or by British capital; by Portuguese
vessels engaged in any other manner than that specified by the
Vienna agreement of January 22, 1815, or bound for any port
not in the dominions of the Portuguese king. The territories
in which the traffic was permitted to the subjects of D. Joao
were specified by name.36 Within two months from the date of
the ratification, the Portuguese king was to publish the penal¬
ties prescribed for violations of the existing agreement and to
prohibit by decree the importation of slaves into Brazil under
any other flag than that of his country, assimilating “as much
as possible the legislation of Portugal on this subject to that of
Great Britain.” All Portuguese vessels engaged in illicit slave
traffic were to carry royal passports, drawn up in conformity
with the model annexed to the convention.37
   Thus far the stipulations did not differ much from former
agreements on the subject, but the next article furnished the
weapon so long desired by England in the fight to suppress the
trade universally. In order to carry out the purpose of the con¬
vention the two signatory powers agreed that the ships of war
of each could visit any merchant vessel of the two nations that
might be suspected upon reasonable grounds of having slaves
  36 All of them lay to the south of the equator in Africa, on the east and west
coasts.
  37 Articles I-IV inclusive. The decree publishing the penalties to be inflicted upon
the offenders in the slave trade was dated January 26, but printed in May, 1818
(F. O., 63/212, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 85. August 23, 1818).
174          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
on board. Guilty slavers should be detained and brought for
adjudication before special tribunals which were to be estab¬
lished. Ships empowered to make such seizures were to carry
specially prepared instructions drawn up in conformity with
the model annexed to the convention, while any losses incurred
by the subjects of either party by virtue of unlawful detention
were to be paid by the respective country implicated.38 Thus
did Great Britain obtain the right from Portugal of visit and
search applicable to merchant vessels in time of peace.
   The next article39 was a costly mistake on the part of Castle-
reagh, for it stipulated that no seizure was lawful unless slaves
were actually found on board. Evidence of the recent presence
of illicit slaves was not sufficient to condemn the vessel—a stip¬
ulation which resulted in the wholesale dumping overboard of
Negroes by slave-traders when they were in danger of capture
by British cruisers.40 Two mixed commissions were to be ap¬
pointed within a year of the ratification of the convention to
adjudicate captured ships, one in English and one in Portu¬
guese territory,41 in Africa and in Brazil, while regulations were
annexed to the convention for the guidance of those tribunals.
A third commission sitting at London was to settle Portuguese
claims arising from illegal detention by British cruisers between
June i, 1814, and the setting up of the mixed commissions
mentioned above.42
  The three hundred thousand pounds indemnity promised by
the treaty of January 21, 1815, had never been paid by Eng¬
land, but now the promise was renewed and the manner of pay¬
ment guaranteed, such payment to be effected only after D.
Joao had ratified the present convention.43 The first annex gave
the passport which the Portuguese merchant vessel was to carry,
and the second the instructions44 for the ships of war of each

  M Article V.                                «9 Article VI.
  40 Peter Leonard, The Western Coast of Africa, Journal of an Officer, 1830-1832, pp.
92-96, gives an instance witnessed by him of such action by a slaver off the coast
of Africa.
  41 Article VIII.              « Article IX.                  « Article XI.
  44 No slave ship or merchantman could be searched in a port or roadsted be¬
longing to either crown. Every Portuguese vessel engaged in legal traffic had to
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                   175
nation destined to prevent the illicit traffic in slaves. In the
third annex, it was stipulated that the mixed commissions were
to render judgment on detained vessels within twenty days after
such ships were brought in, and the decisions were to be abso¬
lutely without appeal. The commissions were to have a com¬
missioner judge and a commissioner of arbitration from each
nation. In case the two judges could not agree, one of the com¬
missioners of arbitration should be chosen by lot, and the ma¬
jority decision would be final. The Negroes found on those
ships which the commissioners judged to have been guilty of
illicit traffic were to be freed, and each country bound itself to
guarantee the liberty of those slaves consigned to it.45
   To this detailed and complete plan for the restriction of the
Portuguese slave traffic was added on September 11 of the
same year a very significant separate article, which stated sim¬
ply that “as soon as the total abolition of the Slave Trade for
the subjects of the Crown of Portugal” would have taken place,
“the Two High Contracting Parties” should agree to “adapt to
that State of circumstances, the stipulations of the Additional
Convention concluded at London” on July 26 previous. “But
in default of such alterations the additional convention of that
date” should remain in force “until the Expiration of fifteen
years, from the day on which the General Abolition of the
Slave Trade” should take place on the part of the Portuguese
government.46
  At last Castlereagh had obtained from the worst sinner47 en-
have a Portuguese skipper and the crew had to be at least three-fourths Portu¬
guese. No conveyance of slaves from one port of Brazil to another or from the
continent or islands of Africa to possessions of Portugal outside of America was
to be permitted except by vessels carrying a special passport from the Portuguese
government.
    This stipulation was to give rise to a peculiar form of slavery in Brazil. The
Negroes nominally freed by the commissioners sitting in Brazil were re-enslaved
by various schemes, so that there arose in the ’40’s and ’50’s the problem of the
emancipation of slaves legally held and of Negroes already emancipated but still
slaves.
  « F. O., 93/38/15, Portugal.
  a Denmark abolished the trade to take effect in 1804 and forbade its citizens
to engage in the traffic in 1814. Sweden prohibited its subjects from participating
in the trade in 1814; Holland in 1815. Spain prohibited the trade by its subjects
176       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
gaged in the slave trade definite restrictions on that traffic.
The trade was limited to Africa south of the equator and to
Portuguese America, with the right of visit and seizure granted
to British war vessels. Detained slavers were to be tried by
mixed commissions from whose decisions there was to be no
appeal. If Portugal should ever consent to abolish the trade
entirely, these stipulations were to be modified by common
consent; but in case the Portuguese could not be brought to
agree to the terms that England deemed best, the present regu¬
lations—including the right of visit and search—were to con¬
tinue for fifteen years from the date of the abolition of the traf¬
fic. There was only one serious slip to be found in the provi¬
sions of the convention and separate article; namely, the stipu¬
lation which required the actual presence of illicit slaves on
board to justify seizure.48 By the convention the traffic was se¬
verely restricted on paper; the problem was to obtain from D.
Joao the complete abolition of the trade within his dominions
and to effect the enforcement of the restrictions already agreed
upon.
   The first of these two tasks proved impossible, for the Portu¬
guese king stubbornly refused to advance another step on the
road toward the complete suppression of the traffic despite the
pressure exerted by his dominating ally. At first Castlereagh
attempted to obtain his end by calling in the great powers, but
he had made little headway by 1817. After the Vienna decla¬
ration signed by all of the European powers, which unanimously
to foreign colonies in 1814, granted England the right of visit in 1817, and abol¬
ished the trade to its colonies in 1820. France refused to allow the slave trade to
be called piracy or to permit mutual visit and search until 1831 and 1833 when
the reciprocal right of search was granted England. The United States remained
recalcitrant until the Civil War (Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1783-
1919, II, 235-238; DuBois, “Enforcement of the Slave-Trade Laws,” pp. 167-174).
  48 This error was partially remedied as far as Portugal was concerned by the
additional article signed March 15, 1823, at Lisbon, which legalized the seizure
of Portuguese slavers provided evidence was found that illicit slaves had been on
board in the particular voyage in question (F. O., 93/38/16, Portugal). But by
that date Brazil had declared its independence, and the stipulations therefore did
not apply to the Brazilian trade, which soon came to overshadow the traffic of the
mother country. The new empire refused to grant this right to England and held
fast to the original stipulation.
         PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                  177
condemned the slave trade, he instituted formal and perma¬
nent conferences at London where he hoped to create a center
of information and action for the complete suppression of the
traffic. Fourteen meetings were held prior to the conference at
Aix-la-Chapelle, but the minister accomplished nothing, beyond
the collection of material, toward the suppression of the trade49
either by the European powers or by his ally at Rio. After the
Portuguese Convention of 1817, he was driven on by the re¬
formers to make another attempt at the conference soon to
meet at Aix-la-Chapelle to persuade the powers to support a
universal condemnation of the trade. The abolitionists sent
Clarkson to the conference as an “unofficial observer” in be¬
half of the African Association, while Wilberforce exerted pres¬
sure on the British Foreign Office; but the net result was merely
a pious joint note signed by all the powers and addressed to the
king of Portugal, which urged the complete abolition of the
traffic carried on by that country.60 Under date of January 12,
1819, Chamberlain transmitted his copy of the note to the Por¬
tuguese Foreign Office and a month later obtained from Vil-
lanova Portugal an acknowledgment of the receipt of the
note and its contents with no comment whatsoever.61
  Any observation by the Portuguese court was unnecessary in
the face of the lists of slave importations which the chargt was
sending in to his government. Despite the fact that his every
move was closely watched by the authorities and statistics were
hard to get, Chamberlain succeeded in reporting over twenty
thousand slaves brought into Rio in 1816 with over five thou¬
sand taken to Bahia from Africa.62 In September, 1817, twenty-
one slave ships left Rio alone with the certainty that this fleet
would bring in half as much as the total number brought in
during the previous year.63 Not all of these vessels returned to
Rio but, even so, over twenty-two thousand Negroes were em¬
barked in Africa for the Brazilian capital,64 while Bahia con-
 48 Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, pp. 455-458.       60 Ibid., p. 463.
 61 F. O., 63/220, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 17. February 20, 1819.
 11 F. O., 63/202, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, Nos. 7, 24.
 M F. O., 63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 97.
 64 F. O. 63/220, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 7, January 22, 1819.
  12
178        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
turned to trade north of the equator despite the convention of
1817.55 From 1811 through 1818 nearly one hundred forty thou¬
sand slaves were actually landed in Rio de Janeiro, while very
incomplete returns from Bahia give close to thirty thousand as
entering that port in spite of the activity of the British cruisers,
which disrupted that traffic so disastrously.56 No figures are
available for Pernambuco, Maranhao, or Para during this pe¬
riod owing to local disturbances which prevented the proper
supervision of the affairs of those provinces by the central gov¬
ernment at Rio. It is likely, however, that this northern section
participated to some extent in the astonishing increase which
occurred in the slave traffic after the removal of the Portuguese
court to Rio and the opening of the colony to foreign trade and
enterprise. In the face of this activity, it would have meant dis¬
aster for D. Joao to decree the total suppression of the traffic,
for his throne was none too secure toward the end of the second
decade of the century. Even had he so desired, he could not
have abolished the trade.
  Yet Castlereagh continued to the end in his efforts to satisfy
the abolitionists of England. Once more before he tossed aside
the burden which had become intolerably heavy, he preached
a sermon to the Portuguese court. Early in March, 1821, he
called Thornton’s attention to “the subject which the King’s
Government and the Country” had                    “anxiously at heart, to
witness by a general prohibition of the Slave Trade through¬
out the Portuguese Dominions, a prospect of a complete aboli¬
tion of that inhuman Traffick in every part of the world and
forever.” The time set by Spain for the final abolition had ar¬
rived, leaving Portugal as the only nation represented at Vi¬
enna which still legalized the traffic. The subject of the dispatch
was “one of the most anxious solicitude to His Majesty” and
Thornton was to press it upon the attention of the Portuguese
government.67 This persistence in the face of the impossible was
  M F. O., 63/246, Chamberlain to Londonderry, No. 20. July 3, 1822.
  M These figures were obtained from consular reports sent in by the consul gen¬
eral at Rio. F. O., 63, 1811 to 1818, various volumes.
  17 F. O., 63/237, Castlereagh to Thornton, No. 3. March 5, 1821. Overproduc¬
tion brought on by the increase of British possessions in the British West and East
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                   179
worthy of better success, but the minister died without having
attained his object. Yet his efforts were not entirely in vain,
for he restricted the Portuguese trade to the region south of the
equator and he obtained the signature of the king of Portugal
to the convention and separate clause of 1817.
  The first task, therefore, which confronted the British For¬
eign Office after the negotiation of the agreements of 1817—
the complete abolition of the traffic— was not accomplished
before D. Pedro raised the cry of independence. In his efforts
to effect the enforcement of the restrictions imposed by the
convention, the English government was only partially success¬
ful. Portugal signed on the dotted line, obedient as always to
its powerful ally; but the government lacked both the ability
and the will to carry out the terms agreed upon. The work of
the mixed commission set up by the convention demonstrated
clearly this attitude on the part of the Rio court.
   The London commission, which was to settle claims arising
from illegal detention of slavers by British cruisers between
June 1, 1814, and the setting up of the permanent mixed com¬
missions, carried on its work with some minor friction and was
dismissed after successfully accomplishing its task.68 The com¬
mission sitting at Sierra Leone on the coast of Africa likewise
dispatched its business quickly, after it had declared itself
ready, and continued to function efficiently during the years
of revolt and the independence period which followed.69 Since

Indies was glutting the English market and causing the ruin of the planter class
of the West Indies. “Of far greater moment, however, was the fact that continental
consumers were increasingly turning to new tropical areas where produce might
be obtained more cheaply. The development of Cuba and Brazil, begun during
the period of high prices ushered in by the French Revolution, was carried on at
an astonishing rate’’ (Ragatz, Fall of the Planter Class, pp. 332-337).
  68 The commission opened for business on November 4, 1819. A difficulty arose
in August, 1821, over the death of one of the commissioners of arbitration, but it
was settled favorably to the Portuguese contention. The detention by British
cruisers was proved illegal in many cases and indemnities were imposed on Eng¬
land (F. O., 84/5, November 4, 1821; 84/12, August 18 to October 25, 1821;
84/17, March 8, 1822; and 84/12, London Commission, passim).
  u The British commissioners, Thomas Gregory and Edward Fitzgerald, were
sent to Sierra Leone early in 1820 (F. O., 63/219, Castlereagh to Chamberlain,
No. 3). Portugal could not obtain anyone of ability to go to such a place to serve
i8o         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
it was advantageous to Portugal to support the London Com¬
mission and the African court was beyond the reach of its in¬
fluence, these two tribunals succeeded in carrying out the task
assigned to them.
  But the special tribunal at Rio de Janeiro was hampered
from the beginning. After a vexatious delay arising from an
excess of formality and procrastination in the Rio court, the
commission held its first session on December 23, 1819.60 It
took a year for the commission to work out a set of regulations
by which it was to be governed, while another half year passed
before the Portuguese government furnished a place in which
the tribunal should hold its sessions.61 When the first case arose,
two years after the arrival of the British commissioners, the
tribunal was still unable to operate, as the Portuguese govern¬
ment had not yet ratified the regulations submitted for its ap¬
proval. But the arrival of the captured slave ship, the Emilia,
with three hundred slaves aboard at last forced the Rio court
to take action in regard to the commission.62
   The principal point of disagreement between the                         Eng¬
lish commissioners and the Portuguese court was over the man¬
ner in which the captured ship and the emancipated slaves
were to be disposed of. The decree issued by D. Joao on Jan¬
uary 26, 1818, which regulated the execution of the convention
of 1817, took out of the hands of the commissioners both the
sale of the condemned vessel and the registering and disposal
and was obliged to authorize the minister in London to secure two Portuguese
subjects resident there to go (F. O., 63/220, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No.
32 and 63/221, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 65). From February, 1820, to
September, 1821, the commission condemned six vessels flying the Portuguese
flag, for illicit slave trade (F. O., 84/17, April 10, 1822. London Commission).
Later after Brazilian independence had been declared, the Anglo-Brazilian
commission adjudicated 109 Brazilian ships (F. O., 315, Bundles 41-45). The Sierra
Leone commission was effective.
  60 F. O., 84/5, Rio Commission, August 21, October 13, December 22, 1819.
   61 F. O., 84/12, Rio Commission, March 20, 1821. Copy of the proceedings
from November 2, 1819, to date.
  M F. O., 84/12, Rio Commission, July 22, 1821, from Henry Hayne. The captor
delivered the papers seized on board the slaver and turned over the three hundred
slaves and the vessel for adjudication on July 10,
             PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                           181
of the liberated Negroes. The judge of contraband was to su¬
pervise the auction of the ship, the proceeds to go to the expenses
of the commission, while the slaves were to be handed over to
the district judge (Juiz da Ouvidoria da Camarca), to be employed
in the public service at sea, in forts, in agriculture, or to be
hired to individuals for fourteen years as free blacks under pre¬
scribed conditions. The British commissioner wished to place
the disposal of both the ship and the slaves directly under the
commission, and, with the approval ofhis Portuguese colleague,
so recommended to the Rio court. The request elicited a flat
refusal and a reprimand for the Portuguese commissioner.63
  The Emilia was condemned August 10, and the schooner was
turned over to the judge of contraband to be sold at auction
and the slaves to the district judge to be hired out64; but the sen¬
tence of condemnation, which was identical in form to those
issued at Sierra Leone, was rejected by the Portuguese author¬
ities on the grounds that due legal procedure had not been fol¬
lowed. The British commissioner contended, but in vain, that
the decision, being without appeal, was not subject to the reg¬
ular Court of Chancery, and that the commission was a special
tribunal independent of all other judicial procedure in the Por¬
tuguese government and exempt from all fees usually paid to
the courts.65
  The Negroes eventually were auctioned off to the highest
bidder at the door of the district judge after each had received
a certificate of emancipation from the mixed commission. A
bond was given by the successful bidder for each Negro, guar¬
anteeing proper clothing, maintenance, and instruction in the
Christian religion, with the added obligation of teaching the
emancipated slave some mode of livelihood. A sum was agreed
upon in advance, which the bidder was to pay annually; and
in addition certain fees to the judge, his clerk, and the curator

  63 Ibid.
  M A review of the case is given in F. O., 84/12, Rio Commission, August 27,
1821.
  •6 Ibid., September 7, 1821.
182         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
were due at the time of the signature of the bond. Competition
was great and Negroes were hired at the rate ofqSooo to 34S000
per year.66 An account was to be opened in the name of each
Negro and “the money received on [his] account” was “to be
placed in a coffer which” was “to have three keys, to be in the
possession of the judge, [the] Curator, and a treasurer.” What¬
ever might be due each was to be paid at the expiration of their
servitude,”67 which by law was to last fourteen years.
  When six months after the condemnation of the Emilia, the
Portuguese commissioner joined in a complaint to the Rio
court insisting on the immediate sale of the ship, he was severely
reprimanded by his government for even listening to a proposal
which criticized the manner in which his government was con¬
ducting the case.68 Meanwhile, over twenty thousand slaves
from Angola, Cabinda, and Mozambique, entered Rio during
182169; nearly fifteen thousand entered during the first six
months of the following year70; and in February, 1822, the
judge of contraband presented voluminous documents explain-


  68 1 $000 was equal to 54c! on July 25, 1820 (Correio Braziliense, XXV, 37). The
current price of slaves in Rio varied. A Negress house servant eighteen years old
was offered for sale at 3008000. A monthly rental of 30 patacas (about 60 shillings,
F. O., 63/123, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 84. November 21, 1812) was offered
for two slaves fit for general service. Other house servants (female) were offered
at prices from 1928000 to 2608000 (0 Diario do Rio, May 19, 1825). Exchange was
quoted in this same edition as 54d to the 18000.
  87 F. O., 84/12, Rio Commission, October 24, 1821. In 1830 at Sierra Leone,
after adjudication, the emancipated slaves were taken to a spot assigned to them
in the colony and under a superintendent were set to work cutting wood and build¬
ing and thatching huts. Sometimes they were distributed throughout the colony.
For six months they were supported by the government, 2d a day being given to
males. Clothing, necessary tools, and seeds were furnished by England also. After
six months they were left to their own devices. Some labored on public works,
picking up money enough to start small farms. The articles furnished were valued
at £1,1 os. With the six month’s subsidy, the cost per male to the British govern¬
ment was £3. Women received 2d for three months and the children were ap¬
prenticed out (Leonard, The Western Coast of Africa, pp. 59-60).
  88 F. O., 84/17, Rio Commission, No. 25.                         69 Ibid.
  70 Ibid., March-June, passim. The importation for 1822 was 31,240 embarked in
Africa and 27,784 landed at Rio (F. O., 84/23, Rio Commission, February 13,
1823).
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                   183
ing why the Emilia, rotting in the Rio harbor, still remained
unsold.71
   It is evident therefore from the attitude assumed by the Por¬
tuguese government toward the mixed commission that the
Rio court lacked both the ability and the will to carry out the
stipulations of the convention of 1817. The English commis¬
sioners attributed this attitude to the perversity of the minis¬
ters of the king, yet the advisers ofD. Pedro were not altogether
free agents in the matter. As the editor of the Correio Braziliense
pointed out in 1815, the difficulty which would confront the
government in any attempt to restrict the slave trade was a
serious one. Such measures, he maintained, would mean an
increase in the price of slaves in Brazil with a resultant rise in
the cost of labor; every person in the colony who enjoyed the
service of slaves or the profits derived from the institution,
would be affected; and, consequently, the opposition of the
mass of the population of Brazil would be aroused.72 In addi¬
tion the slave traders, who imported around thirty thousand
Negroes yearly into Rio alone, were powerful interests and used

  71 F. O., 84/17, Rio Commission, February 16, 1822. The Emilia was sold finally
and the money used to pay the expenses incurred by the maintenance of the slaves
during the extended period before their auction took place (F. O., 84/23, Rio
Commission, February 20, 1823). When D. Pedro definitely broke with the mother
country late in 1822, the English commissioners remained at their posts to transact
business as usual, thereby winning the approval of Canning, who had succeeded
to the direction of the Foreign Office (F. O., 84/23, Rio Commission, from Can¬
ning, January 10, 1823). The Emilia was the only case decided by the commission
before Brazilian independence.
  75 Correio Braziliense, XV, 735-739. In 1822 there were 1,136,669 slaves, 800,000
Indians, and 2,543,839 free out of a total population of 4,480,508 (Correio Brazil¬
iense, XXIX, 332). The figures were taken from the Amigo do Rey e da Nag do, a
periodical of Rio, the calculations having been made by M. Pizarro. The provinces
of Rio Grande and Cisplatina were lacking, and no figures were included as to the
proportion of whites and blacks in the free population statistics given, although
there must have been a considerable number of free Negroes in Brazil in that year.
Strangford gave the number of slaves in Brazil in 1810 as 754,626, with no figures
for Ceard, Maranhao, Pard, upper Amazon, and Matto Grosso (F. O., 63/84,
Strangford to Wellesley, No. 35). If the two estimates are correct, the death rate
of slaves in Brazil was quite high in view of the large number imported between
1810 and 1822.
184        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
every influence to balk the operation of the restrictions set up
by the convention and to prevent any further steps along the
road toward the total abolition of the traffic. Had D.Joao been
secure on his throne between 1817 and 1822, the enforcement
of the restrictions imposed by the convention of 1817 would
have been beyond his strength; but his authority in Portugal
was actually maintained by Marshal Beresford, an English
army officer, while in Brazil, the colonists were moving toward
the revolt of 1822. The English nation, which, as the editor of
the Correio Braziliense maintained, was ready to go to war against
any country rather than to allow the continuation of the traf¬
fic,73 was attempting to impose upon its ally a measure of which
neither the government nor the people approved. The failure
of the Portuguese court to enforce the stipulations of the con¬
vention of 1817 was the natural outcome of these circumstances.
  Both Canning and Castlereagh did their best to carry out
the wishes of the reformers and the financial interests of Eng¬
land for the suppression of the Portuguese slave trade. Canning
took the first step in the mild provisions of the treaty of 1810,
which limited the traffic to the Portuguese dominions. Castle¬
reagh gained another advance in 1815 when he restricted the
trade to the region south of the equator and exacted a prom¬
ise from D. Joao to abolish the traffic entirely at some date in
the future. But the greatest contribution was obtained in 1817,
when the British minister set up the mixed commissions whose
judgments were to be swift and without appeal and gained
the right of visit and search of Portuguese merchantmen by
British cruisers in time of peace, with the understanding that
the right was to last fifteen years beyond the date of the total
abolition, if the Portuguese government should ever decree
such a measure. But every effort to force the Rio court to take
the final step of total abolition, or even to enforce the restric¬
tions imposed by the convention of 1817, met failure, as neither
the ministry nor the people of Brazil were willing to dethrone
the economic god, slavery, or to interrupt the source by which
 73 Correio Braziliense, XV, 735 (1815).
         PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                   185
that god was fed. Between 1808 and 1822 the British Foreign
Office restricted the Portuguese slave trade on paper, but to
carry those restrictions on to the total abolition of the traffic,
or even to make them effective, was beyond its power. More
slaves entered Brazil in 1821 than in 1808.74

  74 Andrew Grant, writing about 1808, stated that around 5000 slaves were sold
annually in Rio de Janeiro, this number representing about one-fourth of the
number imported into Brazil (History of Brazil, p. 153). In 1821 a total of 20,854
arrived at Rio alone. The first six months of 1822 saw 14,827 actually landed in
the Brazilian capital (F. O., 84/17, Rio Commission, Nos. 23, 24). These figures
do not include the slaves brought to other ports.
                             CHAPTER VIII


        THE PRICE OF RECOGNITION, 1822-1827


England’s concern in its relations with Brazil during the resi¬
dence of the Portuguese court at Rio were centered on three
principal currents of interest. One of these was the attitude
which the Portuguese monarchy adopted in regard to the Banda
Oriental; another was commercial; and the third was involved
in the suppression of the slave-trade. The first of these points
was carefully detached by the British Foreign Office1 and even¬
tually was settled apart,2 while the other two were more or less
closely associated. The commercial and slave traffic questions
converged in 1822 when they became the price exacted by
Great Britain for its recognition of Brazilian independence. The
new state was forced to ratify the special economic privileges
obtained by England in the treaty of 1810 and to accede to the
continuation of the African-trade stipulations of Castlereagh’s
conventions of 1815 and 1817. In addition, the total abolition
of the traffic within a specified number of years was required
by the London court.
  The payment of the price demanded involved the new state
in serious difficulties which arose from the manner in which
the independence movement had developed in the colony.
Hence to understand the attitude which the Rio court assumed
toward the terms exacted by England, some knowledge of the
situation in Brazil itself is necessary.

  1 Sir Charles Stuart who negotiated the treaties of recognition of Brazilian in¬
dependence by Portugal and England was instructed by Canning not to enter
into the question of the Banda Oriental, which was finally settled in 1828 (F. O.,
13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 23).
  2 Consequently this point was treated as a separate topic in this work in chapters
V and VI. Chapter VIII thus continues the two themes presented in chapter IV
and chapter VII.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                        187
  Events in the revolting colony are associated with the name
of the young prince, D. Pedro, eldest son of the king of Portugal.
Despised by his mother who preferred her second son, D. Mig¬
uel, and feared and distrusted by his father, who favored D.
Pedro Carlos, a son-in-law and nephew, Pedro grew up in the
stables of the palace at Rio. Uncultured, inexperienced in the
business of government, untrained in the court etiquette of
Europe, and uneducated beyond the rudimentary stage, he
was more of a colonial than a European. A superb horseman,
impulsive, vivacious, handsome, and vigorously self-willed, his
immorality has become proverbial, his bonhommie a tradition,
and his personal bravery the subject of many ballads. He was
a very democratic-mannered son of a divine-right father.3
   His appointment as prince regent of Brazil after the Portu¬
guese court sailed for Lisbon in April, 1821, forced him into
the field of action when he was twenty-three years old. Almost
coincident with the departure of D. Joao, the Cortes in Lisbon
began to manifest its purpose of limiting the powers of D.
Pedro and of restricting the liberties of the co-kingdom. In con¬
sequence of an order issued in April, which detached all pro¬
vincial governments from Rio and made them subject directly
to Portugal, petty provincial and municipal juntas sprang up
throughout the colony but especially in the north, each cor¬
responding with Lisbon and refusing to pay revenue to Rio.
Thus though nominally regent of all Brazil, Pedro really be¬
came merely governor of Rio and the southern provinces. The
bank, looted by the king and robbed by the directors, failed in
July, and the treasury of the prince was empty.4 In September
the downfall of the co-kingdom was completed when the Cortes
by decree5 abolished the chancery court, the treasury, the junta
of commerce, and the various tribunals and establishments set

  * For different pictures of the prince, see Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 108-109;
Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhecimento da Independence, pp. 65-67; John Armitage, The
History of Brazil, I, 37-38.
  « Armitage, History of Brazil, I, 41-49; Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundafdo do
Imperio, V, 143-177; Cartas de D. Pedro a Seu Pae, 1821-1822, letter of September
21, 1821.
  6 Decree of September 2g, 1821.
188         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
up during the reign of D. Joao; at the same time D. Pedro was
peremptorily ordered home. Two days later another decree
appointed governors-at-arms for each of the provinces. It was
clear that the Cortes intended to reestablish the colonial status
of Brazil which had been abolished when the colony was raised
to the rank of a kingdom in 1815.6
  The issue divided the inhabitants of the colony into two
camps; one approving the action of the Cortes and favoring the
return to the colonial status, the other insisting on the equality
of the two kingdoms under one ruler. To the first belonged those
Portuguese who had immigrated during the residence of the
court at Rio or those who still looked on the mother country
as the center of their interests although they had resided in
Brazil before 1808. These Portuguese constituted that part of
the commercial class which hoped to reestablish its ancient
privileges and immunities. Every foreigner was an interloper
in their eyes and the treaty of commerce of 1810 with England
was the special object of their detestation.7 They formed the
element which, with the soldiers and functionaries who looked
to Lisbon for their positions, remained loyal and forced a civil
war during the struggle for independence.
  To the other class belonged the Brazilians and those Portu¬
guese who, by marriage or interest, had become attached to
the colony. Both of these elements looked to D. Pedro as their
leader, yet between them there existed a traditional hostility.
During colonial times the descendants of the first conquerors or
of those who had occupied colonial governmental positions,
refused to accept the new arrivals as equals. Consequently the
latter were forced into commercial or mechanical pursuits,
leaving farming to the Brazilian colonial aristocracy. These
landowners with their relatives who lived in the cities as colon¬
ial office holders created a nobility native to the colony, and
forced the new arrivals to join the commercial and industrial

  6 Armitage, History, I, 50-54; Pereira da Silva, Historia, V, 211-243.
  7 Armitage, op. cit., I, 41-42. In the northern provinces of Bahia and Pernambuco
this element constituted a very large part of the commercial class. In Rio there
were more Portuguese of Brazilian sympathies (ibid., I, 42).
                         PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                     189
class of the cities which reciprocated the antagonism of the
Brazilians.8 The traditional cleavage still existed at the time of
the independence movement.
   This Portuguese element among the colonists which had be¬
come firmly rooted in Brazil by financial or social ties and had
severed connections with the mother country, was faced with
ruin9 when the Cortes threatened to restore the exclusive, mo¬
nopolistic system of colonial commerce. The Brazilians, for their
part, found it impossible to relinquish the gains which had
been obtained since the Carta Regia of 1808 had taken the first
step toward releasing the colony from its subjection to the
mother country. Both parties looked to D. Pedro to lead their
resistance to the decrees of the Cortes and, if necessary, to save
them by proclaiming the independence of Brazil from Portu¬
gal.10 Both elements, uniting to bring every influence to bear
which might lead the young prince to disobey the orders dis¬
patched from Lisbon, cooperated in inducing D. Pedro to defy
the Cortes and to raise the cry of “Independence or Death.”* 11
   During the early part of the revolt, the two parties continued
to cooperate in supporting D. Pedro in his struggle against the
loyalists and the feeble efforts made by Lisbon to subjugate
the colony. Yet, as the loyalists were expelled or silenced, a
  8 Pereira da Silva, Historia, I, 209-211.
  9 The old system of Portugal as the entrepot for the commerce of the colony was
to be reestablished by stringent legislation proposed in the Cortes (Pereira da Silva,
op. cit., VI, Documento 14, Parecer da Commissao Especial das Cortes sobre as Relafoes
Commerciaes entre Portugal e Brazil).
  10 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., V, 215, 232-234, 236-237; Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio
Brazileiro, pp. 41-42.
  11 The province of Sao Paulo was the most active in its influence; it was the first
to protest against the decrees of the Cortes; it furnished the principal leaders of the
independence movement, such as the Andrada brothers, Joao Carlos Oyenhausen,
Jose Costa Carvalho, and others; and the cry of independence was raised on the
outskirts of the city of Sao Paulo. The province was the center of traditional col¬
onial disobedience and the birthplace of the slave-hunting Bandeira expeditions.
With Minas Geraes this province was the center of the Brazilian party. For the
history of the manner in which the two parties influenced D. Pedro to proclaim
independence, see: Pereira da Silva, op. cit., V, 235-277, VI, 3-41, 69-151, 197-
233; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 622-757; Cartas de D. Pedro a Seu Pae,
1821-1822, entire, but with special reference to letters of December 10, 1821, and
June 19, 1822.
19o          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
distinct cleavage began to appear between the two groups
which supported the prince. The Portuguese party on the one
hand favored an absolute monarchy under D. Pedro, with a
government entirely independent of the Lisbon court, but with
the two crowns united by family ties. To these Absolutists be¬
longed the Portuguese office holders who had been thrown out
by the suppression of the Brazilian courts and governmental
departments, the Portuguese commercial class and wealthy fam¬
ilies, and some Brazilians who, while they admitted the advan¬
tages of constitutional government, yet denied the policy of ap¬
plying it to the ignorant and heterogeneous population of the
new empire. The Brazilian party, or the Patriots, favored a
constitutional monarchy totally independent of Lisbon, while
a large element in the group leaned toward republican ideas. In
numbers the Patriots were stronger; but in experience in gov¬
ernment, in negotiable wealth, and in strategic location in the
cities, the Absolutists had the advantage. The divergence be¬
tween the two parties grew more acute as the success of the in¬
dependence movement became evident, while the struggle for
control of the prince grew more bitter. His adherence to either
party meant the dominance of that group.12
   It is evident therefore that the final success or failure of the
movement for independence in Brazil depended on the support
which both the Absolutists and the Patriots gave D. Pedro. It
is evident also that the two elements were so antagonistic that
the prince eventually would be forced to choose one side or the
other. His own arbitrary nature and the anarchy which the

  12 Armitage, History, I, 198-200; Pereira da Silva, Historia, VI, 126-149, VII,
107-191. The division between Brazilians and Portuguese was shown clearly
by the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly. Two “Patriot”          papers, the
Sentinella and Tamoyo attacked all Portuguese born who were in the service of
Brazil; two Portuguese army officers chastised the supposed author, and the troops,
largely Portuguese, demanded the punishment of the Brazilian deputies of the Con¬
stituent Assembly who were responsible for the two newspapers. The Assembly took
up the matter; Pedro moved the troops to a site near his palace and ordered the
Assembly to dissolve. The first experiment in constitutional government failed, due
in part to a conflict between the Portuguese and Brazilian elements (Annaes do Por¬
tamento Brazileiro, Assemblea Constituinte, 1823, tomo VI, 229-247; Oliveira Lima, 0
Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 13-15).
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       191
disintegrating factors of republicanism had sown in Spanish
America and which constantly threatened to disrupt the new
empire, inclined D. Pedro toward absolutism,13 although that
policy, as the year 1831 later demonstrated, was to lead to his
expulsion from Brazil. On the other hand, he was a liberal at
heart14; his regard for the colonials was sincere15; and the con¬
stitution which he conceded after the dissolution of the Con¬
stituent Assembly remained the fundamental law of the nation
until 188916. Between 1821 and 1824 by relying on the Brazil¬
ians, or Patriots, for support, he succeeded in establishing his
authority throughout the empire. Separatist movements were
suppressed, the new constitution was in force, and no foreign
soldier or functionary was in Brazil.17 Thus by the aid of the
Constitutionalists, the prince made himself supreme.
   But the price demanded by England as payment for recogni¬
tion entailed the alienation of the support of these very patriots
and of a large part of the absolutist party. The strength of the
Constitutionalists rested in the support of the Brazilian land-
owners, who clung to slavery and the slave trade as the only
possible solution to their labor problem, while the commercial
element of the Absolutists had long cherished a particular
grievance against the preemption of Brazilian trade and com¬
merce by English agents who were acting under the special
privileges obtained in 1810 by the treaty of commerce. This situ¬
ation furnishes a key to the response which the Rio court made
to the action of Great Britain throughout the drama of 1822
and 1827.

  15 Pereira da Silva, Historia, VII, 191-307.
  14 Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, 108-109.
  15 Armitage, History, I, 39-40.
  16 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., VII, 245-246. For a detailed comparison of the two
constitutions, see Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 68-78. The constitution
was amended by the additional act of 1834. The project presented by the Assembly
is given in Pereira da Silva, op. cit., VII, Appendix, pp. 372-412. The constitution
granted by D. Pedro is given by H. G. James, The Constitutional System of Brazil,
pp. 237-252.
  17 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., VII, 305-306. The letters of Consul Chamberlain at
Rio to the Foreign Office give an excellent description of the events in Brazil from
1822 to 1824 (F- O., 63/246, 258-261, 276-279).
i92          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
   The immediate recognition of the new state by England was
a vital necessity, for “in quite a peculiar way Brazil’s destiny
was bound up with those of Portugal, of Europe, and above
all, of England.”18 The special relations which had existed for
centuries between Great Britain and Portugal enabled the
latter to claim by treaty rights assistance against foreign ag¬
gression, which was held to include help against the revolting
colony19. The Continental powers refused to acknowledge the
independence of the new empire until the Lisbon court had
done so20; yet relying on the obligation which it considered
England owed to Portugal, that court resolutely refused to con¬
sider the recognition of the new state. The powers of the Holy
Alliance through their ministers urged the Lisbon government
to delay any action with reference to Brazil21, and although in
reality he did not differ with Canning in his views in regard to
Portuguese America, Metternich was obliged to support the
theory that the prior consent of the king of Portugal was neces¬
sary to establish the independence of Brazil.22 Alexander of
Russia called D. Pedro “a rebel and a Parricide” and exerted
his influence with Austria to prevent the recognition of the new
state,23 while Hyde de Neuville, French minister at Lisbon,
used his dominant influence to uphold D. Joao in his obstinate
course.24
   Under these circumstances, Brazil was forced to turn to Eng-

  18 H. Temperly, Foreign Policy of Canning, p. 212.
  12 The Portuguese court asserted that this protection extended to internal danger
arising from revolting colonies. Both Castlereagh and Canning denied that Eng¬
land was obligated by treaty to maintain Portugal’s control over the colonies, but
Canning did admit that Lisbon had a general moral claim on England in reference
to internal questions with its possessions (Temperly, Foreign Policy of Canning, pp.
194, 212; F. O., 13/7, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 1). The Portuguese court
cited the treaties of 1642, 1654 (Articles 1 and 16), and 1661 (secret article) as the
basis of its demand for protection by England against Brazil (Oliveira Lima, O
Reconhecimento, p. 57).
  20 A. A. de Aguiar, Vida do Marquez de Barbacena, p. 98.
  21 F. O., 13/7, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 1.
  22 Temperly, op. cit., p. 215; Archivo Diplomatico da Independencia, IV (Austria),
Telles da Silva to Carvalho e Mello, July 10, 1824.
  28 Temperly, op. cit., p. 215 and footnote (1).
  24 Ibid., pp. 201-208.
                      PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      193
land.25 Unless Great Britain could be induced to recognize the
new state, complete independence would be delayed indefi-
nitely, with disastrous results to the empire. For, as long as
Portugal refused to grant recognition, anarchy and the divi¬
sion of Brazil into smaller republics after the manner of the
rest of South America threatened the huge colony. A big,
united, homogeneous republic like the United States, a form
of government repugnant to the dominant faction and yet the
only satisfactory alternative to an empire, would have been
the first and only example of that sort of thing among Latin
races.26 Consequently D. Pedro was forced to stake the existence
of the new state on England’s action.
   Great Britain was not free to act as it wished, however, for
in the opinion of Canning, Portugal appeared “to be the chosen
ground on which the Continental Alliance” had “resolved to
fight England hand to hand,” and Great Britain had to be
“prepared to meet and defeat them, under every imaginable
form of intrigue or intimidation, or to be driven from the
field.”27 In addition Canning was faced with the delicate ques¬
tion of the succession to the Portuguese crown. If by the recog¬
nition of the independence of Brazil, its emperor should lose
his right to succeed his father as king of Portugal, D. Miguel,
the absolutist son of the autocratic D. Carlota and the tool of
Metternich and France, would inherit the crown with unfavor¬
able results to British influence in the “chosen ground of bat¬
tle.”28 Therefore in order to preserve English influence in the
traditional strategic position in Europe, Canning was forced
to secure some arrangement regarding the succession and to

  26 On July 23, 1823, Brant Pontes, Brazilian agent in London, wrote to Jos6
Bonifacio, foreign minister of D. Pedro, that “with England’s friendship, we can
snap our fingers at the rest of the world ... it will not be necessary to go begging
for recognition from any other power, for all will wish our friendship in order to
participate in the advantages of commerce, which will be exclusively for our
friends” (Archivo Diplomatic, I, 278).
  26 Aguiar, Barbacena, pp. 98-99.
  27 A. G. Stapleton, George Canning and His Times, p. 501. The conflict between
England and the Continental powers which took Portugal as the field of battle is
given in detail by Temperly, Canning, pp. 189-225.
  28 Archivo Diplomatic, I, lxxxv-lxxxvii.
   13
i94         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
obtain the consent of the Portuguese monarch to the recogni¬
tion of the independence of the colony before Great Britain
itself could act.
   A second difficulty prevented England from yielding to the
insistence of the Brazilians for recognition. Although, in the
opinion of Canning, there were no specific stipulations which
required England to maintain the control of the Lisbon court
over its possessions as long as Brazil remained a colony, the
mere recognition of its independence would turn the new em¬
pire into a foreign country, thus obligating the London court
to fulfill against Brazil every guaranty which had been made
to Portugal since 1640. Unless Portugal acquiesced in the inde¬
pendence of the colony, a state of war between the two king¬
doms would continue despite the recognition by England, and
Great Britain ipso facto would be forced into war against Bra¬
zil.29 In addition, Canning considered that since his father still
reigned over Portugal and his father-in-law was emperor of
Austria, D. Pedro was too intimately connected with Europe
to detach himself from the ties which linked his new kingdom
to the old world.30 It was clear therefore that England did not
possess as much independence of action in regard to Brazil as
it enjoyed in relation to the Spanish American republics.
  By 1824 Canning believed the attainment of Brazilian inde¬
pendence was assured. The question was, how best to conciliate
the establishment and recognition of that independence with
the powers of the Old World.31 Hence the subsequent negotia¬
tions which took place in London, Lisbon, and Rio de Janeiro
were centered around this point. On September 23, 1823, the
Portuguese minister in London, Villa Real, applied for British
mediation, but insisted on conditions which Canning could not
accept. The appeal was renewed in December and Canning,
still not acquiescing in the grounds specified by Portugal, ac-

  19 F. O., 13/7, Canning to Chamberlain, No. i.
  ,0 Ibid. Canning throughout this long dispatch emphasized the difference be¬
tween England’s relations with the Spanish American republics and its obligations
to Spain on the one hand and its connection with Brazil and its duties to Portugal
on the other. The cases were entirely different, he argued.
  91 Ibid.-, F. O., 63/257, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 17. December 8, 1823.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       195
cepted the task of mediator and asked Brazil to send agents.
In April Felisberto Caldeira Brant Pontes returned from Rio
to unite with Manuel Rodrigues Gameiro Pessoa as the Bra¬
zilian commissioners nominated to negotiate the recognition of
independence by Portugal. The conference, held under the
mediation of England and Austria,32 lasted from July 12, 1824,
to February 18, 1825, when the Brazilian commissioners form¬
ally rejected the ultimatum of Portugal and declared their ne¬
gotiation ended. They could not accept the demand made by
the Lisbon commissioner that the basis of any agreement should
be the reestablishment of the sovereignty of Portugal over Brazil.33
Canning likewise lost patience and, politely ignoring Austria,
despatched Sir Charles Stuart on a special mission to Lisbon
and Rio to negotiate with D. Pedro a final settlement of the
question, preferably with, but if necessary, without, the previ¬
ous agreement of Portugal.34
  There were several reasons why Canning changed his policy

  « Baron Neumann, and later Prince Esterhazy, represented Austria during the
negotiations. Brant (later Marquez de Barbacena) had been in London in 1821 -
1822, as the agent of D. Pedro to checkmate any move of Lisbon in London and to
win Canning to support the Brazilian cause. He had purchased supplies and re¬
cruited soldiers and sailors for the Brazilian service. Portugal proposed to treat
with Brazil on the basis of four conditions: cessation of hostilities, restitution of
Portuguese property seized by Brazil, obligation of Brazil not to seize any colony
faithful to Portugal, and dismissal of all English subjects in the Brazilian service
(Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 903). Portugal called on the treaties closed
with England since 1640 to substantiate the demand for protection against the
colony. To this and to the fourth condition Canning disagreed (Oliveira Lima, 0
Reconhecimento, pp. 57-58).
  33 Portugal’s persistence in maintaining its sovereignty was based on more than
obstinacy. The Lisbon court feared that, since Pedro refused to state formally the
renunciation of his rights to succeed to the throne of Portugal, the mother country
eventually would become subordinate to the colony when D. Joao should die. The
danger lay in the fact that the rich, powerful colony would exchange places with
the weakened and decrepit mother country. The tail would wag the dog (Aguiar,
Barbacena, p. 56, letter from Palmella to Brant, Lisbon, August 7, 1824).
  34 The story of the London negotiations has been worked out in detail by Tem-
perly, Canning, pp. 213-220, and Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhecimento, pp. 73-166. The
minutes of the conferences are given in the appendix to this work. For original
sources on the negotiations, see Archivo Diplomatic, I, 39-155;    1 “543; Canning’s
letters to Chamberlain, F. O., 63/275, Nos. 4, 5, and 13/7, Nos. 1, Confidential,
2, 6; Aguiar, Barbacena, various letters.
196          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
of waiting until Portugal could be induced to recognize the
empire before England took action. In the first place, while
the conference of allies at Paris was urging D. Joao to sustain
the conditions which he had laid down as the basis of any recog¬
nition, France35 and Spain signed the agreement of December
io, 1824, which continued the French penetration in Spain.36
To counteract the evident wish of the allies to aid Portugal to
reconquer the lost colony, Canning felt himself obliged to act.
Consequently he forced the pro-French minister, Subserra,
from power in Lisbon,37 achieved the recall of the obnoxious
de Neuville as French minister to the Portuguese Court,38 and
dispatched Stuart on his mission.
   In the second place, the commercial treaty of 1810 would
be subject to revision in the middle of 1825 and the commer¬
cial elements of England were pressing him to reach an agree¬
ment as to their standing in Brazil.39 On February 7, therefore,
Canning informed Brant that he had warned Portugal of his
intention not to delay direct negotiations between England and
Brazil beyond the date when the commercial treaty should
have to be renewed. Unless Portugal yielded before that time,
Stuart would treat independently with Brazil to obtain a com¬
mercial agreement which would mean the recognition by Eng¬
land of the independence of the other contracting party.40
  36 Temperly, Canning, p. 219.
  88 Archivo Diplomatic, I, ciii.
  87 Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII, 906-908; Temperly, Canning, pp. 206-208; Archivo
Diplomatico, I, cv-cvi. The Lisbon court tried twice to enter into direct negotiations
with D. Pedro, but on the basis of the sovereignty of D. Joao over Brazil. The Conde
do Rio Maior was sent officially and reached Rio on September 17, 1823. He was
unsuccessful (Pereira da Silva, Historia, VII, 175-186). In June, 1824, during the
London mediation, a tool of Subserra’s, one Leal, was sent secretly to Rio where
he was thrown into prison (Temperly, op. cit., pp. 218-219). Brant advised his gov¬
ernment that the Holy Alliance was behind the obstinate refusal of Portugal to
grant independence to Brazil (Archivo Diplomatico, II, Brant to Carvalho e Mello,
December 15, 1824).
  88 Temperly, op. cit., pp. 205-206.
 89 Stapleton, George Canning and His Times, pp. 501-503, Canning to Liverpool,
October 25, 1824.
  40 Archivo Diplomatico, II, 201-204, Brant to Carvalho e Mello, February 10, 1825.
Rio threatened to increase the import tax on British goods from fifteen per cent,
as stipulated by the treaty of 1810 to twenty-four per cent., the rate charged all
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       197
  A third reason impelled England to recognize the new state
regardless of Portugal’s attitude. Canning feared that the one
nation of the new world which promised to establish a stable
monarchy would set up a species of Monroe Doctrine of its own
and would join definitely the New World in opposition to the
Old. Brazil, he advised Rio, would profit greatly if its new
rank “should be not merely arrogated by Herself but confirmed
to Her by the Consent of Portugal with the sanction of the
other Powers.”41 He had tried to obtain the consent of Lisbon
and the other powers and had failed: now he was desirous of
introducing into the family of European nations a monarchy
established in the continent of republics, with the new member
under the protection of England, since it would owe its exist¬
ence to that power.42
  A final reason inclined Canning to recognize the new em¬
pire before Austria or France could take matters into their own
hands and reconcile the two branches of the family of Bragar^a.
If England should permit the house of Austria to come to the
aid of its son-in-law or France to win special favors in Brazil43
on the basis of a defense of the slave traffic, the opportunity to

other foreign merchandise, the increase to go into effect at once after June 19, 1825
(F. O., 13/8, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 61). The foreign minister of Brazil
informed Chamberlain in November, 1822, that the “Emperor had resolved not
to mix in the politics of Europe and would not allow Europe to interfere in those
of Brazil, or of South America” (F. O., 63/247, Chamberlain to Bathurst, No. 9).
  41 F. O., 63/275, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 1.
  42 Ibid. January 9, 1823, Secret and Confidential; Stapleton, George Canning and
His Times, pp. 394-395. The United States had recognized Brazil in 1824 (May
26). The United States was the first to recognize the new state, and Brazil was the
first government to adhere to the Monroe Doctrine (Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII,
909, footnote 1).
  43 The Comte de Gestas de Roquefeuille, French minister at Rio, by orders from
Chateaubriand, offered the Brazilian Government the cooperation of the French
squadron then in the harbor of Rio in putting down disaffection and maintaining
the authority of the emperor (F. O., 63/276, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 29-
March 3, 1824). In June, 1825, Gestas offered D. Pedro recognition of the com¬
plete independence of Brazil in return for a treaty of commerce (F. O., 13/8,
Chamberlain to Canning, No. 64. Confidential). This was before Stuart arrived
in Rio. Pedro’s wife, Princess Leopoldina, constantly urged her father, the emperor
of Austria, to recognize her husband’s position as emperor (Rocha Pombo, His¬
toria, VII, 897).
198          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
strike at the root of that trade would be lost.44 Unless Great
Britain by its mediation or independent action should guaran¬
tee the independence of the new state, the bill for services ren¬
dered could not be presented. On the other hand, if the ob¬
structive tactics of Austria and France were to delay recognition
so long that the disintegrating factors in the new empire caused
its fall, the advantages which would accrue to England from
the commercial concessions demanded of the new empire would
be seriously lessened.
  Brazil, therefore, succeeded in winning England to support
its declaration of independence. If possible, Portugal was to
be forced to concede the validity of the separation; but if the
Lisbon court remained obstinate, then Great Britain would
negotiate separately with the new empire.
  By Canning’s instructions to Stuart, dated March 14, 1825,
the envoy was to seek to preserve in both hemispheres, the in¬
terests of the family of Bragan^a; yet, since the treaty under
which the trade with Brazil was carried on was now threatened
with revision at the option of the new state, England could not
delay longer. As it was only by entering into new stipulations
that Great Britain could continue to enjoy a special footing in
Brazilian commerce, the Lisbon court was to be informed
clearly that Stuart could not “in any case leave Brazil, with¬
out some arrangement with the Brazilian Government respect¬
ing the treaty of 1810.” D. Joao by his own act, Canning
argued, had abolished the colonial character of Brazil, had
given it an independent judicature, had raised it to a separate
kingdom, had established a national representation, and had
provided for the case in which it might be necessary for the
safety of that separate kingdom to pronounce its independence
of Portugal.46 Pedro for his part had preserved the Portuguese
monarchy in America despite the unwise action of the Lisbon
Cdrtes. Nothing now remained but to complete the work.

  44 Archivo Diplomatico, I, xlv-xlvi.
  46 On leaving Rio, D. Joao told Pedro to seize the crown for himself in case some
adventurer threatened to grasp the throne (Cartas de D. Pedro a Seu Pae, 1821-1822,
D. Pedro to D. JoSo, June 19, 1822).
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                          199
  Therefore D. Joao should command, not merely consent,
that Brazil be independent, that Pedro hold the royal authority
under whatever titles the representative assembly of Brazil
might confer upon him, and that the connection between the
two crowns should be continued. This union between the two
crowns was to be signified by the use of the title “Heir Appar¬
ent of Portugal” when reference was made to the prince in the
royal letter. Brazil had already consented to a commission to
settle claims as to property losses, most favored nation com¬
mercial privileges, and similar questions. Nothing short of in¬
dependence would now serve, nor should Portugal attempt to
retain any rights of sovereignty over Brazil.46 Stuart was au¬
thorized to be the bearer of the royal decree commanding the in¬
dependence of Brazil, or he could serve as plenipotentiary for
the Lisbon court if Portugal chose to negotiate a treaty. If D.
Joao preferred to send an agent of his own, however, he could
do so, but Stuart was forbidden to accept the collaboration of
a Portuguese envoy, or even to accompany one to Brazil. In
case the Lisbon court refused to yield, he was to proceed to
Rio at once to treat independently on the part of Great
Britain.47
  Stuart was not to negotiate the revision of the 1810 treaty.
On the contrary, he was authorized merely to continue that
agreement for two years from the date of its expiration in order
to allow for proper provision without undue haste, to waive


  48 Portugal offered to acknowledge Pedro as emperor provided D. Joao should
share the same title and all future legislation, acts of grace, titles, and appointments
should be submitted to Joao for approval. Later Portugal proposed that the right
to negotiate treaties for Brazil be reserved to Lisbon, while both countries were to
have one diplomatic service and one army (F. O., 13/3, Stuart to Canning, No.
6). Such stipulations were vicious, Canning said (F. O., 13/z, Canning to Stuart,
No. 1). Canning’s fears as to the fate of Portugal after the death of D. Joao were
realized when the reactionary revolution under D. Miguel broke out soon after
the recognition of Brazilian independence (Temperly, Canning, pp.             208-210;
Armitage, History, I, 230-236, 293-308; Oliveira Martins, Historia de Portugal, II,
263-284).
  47 F. O., 13/1, Canning to Stuart, No. 1. Canning also suggested to Stuart the
possibility of securing reparations for losses by obtaining from Brazil the pledge
to pay some debt or to deliver property values to the mother country (ibid., No. 3).
200         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
any objection by England to the admission of Portuguese com¬
merce with Brazil to a more favored footing than that of the
British, and to stipulate that in the revised treaty there should
be introduced an article for the immediate and effectual aboli¬
tion of the Brazilian slave trade.48
   The envoy encountered an exasperating obstinacy in Lisbon
when he arrived to carry out his instructions. The trouble arose
over the question of the manner by which D. Joao should style
himself in granting the independence. He consented to ac¬
knowledge an emperor of Brazil by himself either as emperor
of Brazil and king of Portugal and the Algarves, or as emperor
of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algarves; or to acknowledge a king
of Brazil by himself as king of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algar¬
ves. Canning remarked, dryly, that these three royal letters in¬
cluded every variety “except the one which would have en¬
sured a speedy as well as a fortunate end to the negotiations.”
But D. Joao would not concede a royal letter which acknowl¬
edged an emperor of Brazil by the king of Portugal, Brazil,
and the Algarves.49 Every other point was arranged easily
enough, but Stuart could not force D. Joao from his position
in regard to the employment of the titles. Canning therefore
instructed him to do his best to secure the approval of the Rio
court to one of the three forms proposed by the Portuguese
king.60
   Stuart eventually obtained verbal permission from the Lis¬
bon court to modify one of the three royal letters after his ar¬
rival in Rio in case of absolute necessity, provided the entire
outcome of the          negotiations       hung     on     such   a   revision.61
His full powers as plenipotentiary of the Portuguese Govern¬
ment were drawn up in due form and a bill of Portuguese
claims against Brazil amounting to around three million sterling
was handed to him before he left Lisbon in May, 1825.62                       ad-

  48 F. O., 13/1» Canning to Stuart, No. ig. May 12, 1825. Later Canning in¬
structed Stuart to extend the treaty for three years to give the London Office time
to negotiate a commercial treaty with Portugal first (F. O., 13/2, Canning to
Stuart, No. 31. October 10, 1825).
  48 F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 22.                       » Ibid.
  61 Oliveira Lima, O Reconhccimento, p. 201.
  61 F. O., 13/3, Stuart to Canning, Nos. 6, 20, 27, 43.
                    PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      201
dition D. Joao specified as the conditions under which the royal
letter conceding independence could be delivered that Brazil
should consent to the cessation of hostilities, the restitution of
prizes, the return of sequestered property, the assumption by
the new state of a part of the public debt, the payment of the
sums due by the Lisbon treasury to the holders of original dona¬
tions in the colony, and the basic stipulations for a commercial
treaty favorable to Portuguese interests.63
  Stuart arrived in Rio de Janeiro on July 18, 1825, and entered
into immediate negotiations with three Brazilian plenipoten¬
tiaries.64 Trouble arose at once over the question of the titles,
since any of the three forms advocated by the Lisbon court
connoted that independence had resulted, not from any efforts
of the colony but from the gracious condescension of the king
of Portugal. Brant Pontes suggested that D. Joao first grant
independence, acknowledge D. Pedro as emperor, and then
assume the title for himself, a formula which would acknowl¬
edge the part played by the colonials without granting to their
emperor a title which D. Joao did not himself enjoy.66 The Bra¬
zilians flatly refused to consider any other form of recognition.
  Stuart finally consented to a fourth royal letter which adopted
the suggestion of Brant Pontes. D. Joao acknowledged the in¬
dependence of the colony and D. Pedro as emperor, then as¬
sumed the same title for himself and transferred, freely and of
his own volition, his rightful sovereignty over the empire to his
son. The reciprocal question of the right of D. Pedro to the
throne of Portugal was carefully avoided, nothing appearing
in the treaty on that point. Stuart signed a reciprocal note which

  63 Oliveira Lima, 0 Rzconhecimento, p. 201. Metternich favored the negotiations
and persuaded France and Russia to instruct their ministers at Lisbon to render
any aid possible (ibid., pp. 180-181, 195-196; Archivo Diplomatico, II, Brant and
Gameiro to Carvalho e Mello, April 28, 1825).
  M They were Carvalho e Mello, minister of foreign affairs, Villela Barbosa, later
Marquez de Paranagud, then minister of the navy, and the Visconde de Santo
Amaro, who later succeeded Carvalho e Mello as foreign minister.
  66 Oliveira Lima, op. cit., pp. 223-224. Any formula which failed to emphasize
the part played by the colonials connoted to their mind the hidden purpose of the
house of Braganga to reunite the two kingdoms when an opportune moment should
arrive. The Absolutists favored such a policy, but the Patriots were vigorous in
their denunciation. This was why the formula became so important.
202         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
prohibited the publication by Portugal of any of the royal let¬
ters formulated in Lisbon, although D. Joao might issue a
diploma regio (royal declaration) modeled after the preamble of
the treaty, antedating the document to precede the time of
the negotiations.68
  Brazil acceded to the six conditions which constituted the
price which the colony was required to pay the mother coun¬
try. In addition, D. Pedro pledged himself not to accept the
union of any other Portuguese colony to the new empire, even
though such possessions should so petition.57 Hostilities were
declared at an end; a mixed commission with the collaboration
of England was to determine the indemnity for prizes, confis¬
cated or sequestered property; Portugal was to receive com¬
pensation for the loss of public property in Brazil; mutual most
favored nation clauses and fifteen per cent, importation tax
were granted and five months were given for ratification.68
   By an additional article, which was kept secret until the
Brazilian Assembly met in 1826, Brazil agreed to pay two mil¬
lions sterling to compensate Portugal for all losses sustained by
the independence of the colony. In liquidation of that sum,
the Rio treasury took over the debt of one million four hun¬
dred thousand pounds which had been contracted by the Lis¬
bon court in London (182369), and pledged itself to pay the

  M Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhccimcnto, pp. 132-141. D. Joao violated this agreement,
as the royal letter of May 13 with all the objectionable features including the asser¬
tion that Pedro was to inherit the Portuguese throne was issued at the time of the
publication of the terms of the treaty in Lisbon. The incident aroused bitter feeling
in Brazil against Portugal and created distrust of Pedro among the Patriots.
  67 England linked great importance to this provision, for if Benguela, Angola,
or the other African colonies which furnished Negroes for the slave trade should
unite with Brazil, there would be even greater difficulty in stopping the traffic.
The matter would be purely a domestic one and would cease to be a question of
international trade (Oliveira Lima, op. cit., p. 241).
  68 The treaty is given in Oliveira Lima, op. cit., Appendix, pp. 352-360. It is
dated August 29, 1825. It was ratified by D. Pedro the next day and by D. Joao
November 15, 1825. Copies were enclosed by Stuart in F. O., 13/4, Stuart to Can¬
ning, No. 67.
  69 The purpose of the loan had been to acquire funds to prosecute the war against
the Brazilians. The original debt had been £1,500,000, but £100,000 had been
paid by Portugal.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       203
remaining six hundred thousand within one year of the ratifi¬
cation of the treaty.60
   Such was the price demanded of the new state by the mother
country in payment for the recognition of independence, a
price which had been negotiated under the direct intervention of
England. Less than three years had passed since D. Pedro had
declared himself emperor of Brazil, and yet independence was
an accomplished fact. Gameiro Pessoa was received as minister
from Brazil by the king of England, January 30, 1826. Austria
recognized the new state in December, 1825, and France fol¬
lowed its example the next month. Recognition by the Vati¬
can61 (January 23), Sweden (January 5), Switzerland (Jan¬
uary 30), the Hanseatic States (February 14), Holland (Febru¬
ary 15), Hanover (February 18), and Prussia (March 6) fol¬
lowed rapidly.62 England had turned the key and opened the
door to the new nation, and the powers welcomed the empire
at once.
   By its own efforts and alone, Great Britain thus secured rec¬
ognition for Brazil; Sir Charles Stuart now presented England’s
bill for the service rendered. After divesting himself of his pow¬
ers as Portuguese envoy, he declared himself a minister from
England and began negotiations for an extended treaty of com¬
merce which was to take the place of the agreement of 1810.
To the surprise of the court of Brazil, instead of the simple
two-year prolongation of the 1810 treaty, he asked for the im¬
mediate conclusion of a permanent agreement, which should
contain the special privileges specified by the earlier treaty.
Carvalho e Mello, foreign minister, wrote to Gameiro Pessoa
in London, bitterly commenting that although such a proposal
  60 Oliveira Lima, op. cit., Appendix, pp. 363-365. The negotiations between
Stuart and the three Brazilians are given in Archivo Diplomatico, VI, Portugal,
pp. 36-142.
  91 The right of patronage was granted D. Pedro by the Pope, May 15, 1827. The
Chamber of Deputies refused to approve the Bull and declared that D. Pedro pos¬
sessed the right of patronage by virtue of the Imperial Constitution, Article
102 (Oliveira Lima, ibid., p. 297).
  92 Oliveira Lima, op. cit., pp. 287-305; Archivo Diplomatico, II, Itabayana (Gamei¬
ro Pess6a) to Rezende, January 31, 1826. Russia recognized the empire in 1827
and Spain in 1834 (Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII, 916, footnote 1).
204        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
was repugnant to the Rio court in view of the fact that Eng¬
land was not treating with Brazil on the same basis as that
which had been employed for the negotiations with the Span¬
ish republics, he could not refuse the demand for special priv¬
ileges in consequence of the part which the London govern¬
ment had taken in the question of the recognition of independ¬
ence. Sir Charles Stuart, said Carvalho e Mello, was demand¬
ing disproportionate commercial advantages and                        the   im¬
mediate abolition of the slave traffic without adequate compen¬
sation as payment for the intervention of his government, but
Brazil could not refuse.63
  Stuart, however, was exceeding his instructions.64 When Can¬
ning learned of the negotiations, he was biting in his criticism
and ordered the envoy, in case he had signed such a treaty as
the project which he had remitted to London, to inform the
Rio court that he had done so without instructions.66 But be¬
fore Canning’s dispatch reached Brazil, Stuart had signed two
permanent treaties, one of commerce and the other for the
abolition of the slave trade, and had secured the ratification of
D. Pedro to both documents.66 When they reached Canning’s
hands, he found it was impossible to approve of either, al¬
though he had anticipated that at least the slave trade treaty
would be in the correct form. His rejection of the commercial
agreement was due to three principal defects; first, the right of
visit and search in time of war had been relinquished; second,
the so-called reciprocity clause in commerce guaranteed noth¬
ing to England since no one knew as yet what privileges the
“most favored nation” in Brazilian trade would enjoy, whereas
all the world knew what favors the Rio court would secure
  M Archivo Diplomatic, I, Carvalho e Mello to Gameiro, September 28, 1825.
  M Canning had hinted to Stuart that he would send detailed instructions for the
negotiation of a new treaty (F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 22) but later he
forbade the minister to close a definite treaty in revised form. He was merely to
obtain the simple prolongation of the 1810 agreement (F. O., 13/2, Canning to
Stuart, No. 31). Stuart began negotiations without waiting for the detailed in¬
structions (F. O., 13/3, Stuart to Canning, No. 48, 64).
  M F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, Nos. 33, 35. The project was sent to London
on September 30, F. O., 13/5, Stuart to Canning, No. 81.
  M F. O., 13/6, Stuart to Canning, No. 86. The treaties were dated October 18.
                      PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                         205
from England; and third, the office of judge conservator was
abolished.67 As for the slave trade treaty, it would have been
sufficient merely to state that the new empire accepted the
obligations incurred by Portugal under the convention of July
28, 1817, and that it pledged the abolition within a stated
number of years.68
   Fortunately the ratification by Brazil enabled England to
accept or reject the agreements as a whole, so that one point of
disagreement would suffice as grounds by which Canning could
reopen negotiations. But before the London Office could take
action, news arrived that the terms of both treaties had been
published in the Diario Fluminense69 at Rio in the edition of
November 14, 1825. Apparently, thought Canning, the Bra¬
zilian government was attempting to force his hand.70 In fact
he was placed in a very embarrassing position by the publica¬
tion of the terms of the agreements, for enquiries were made
immediately on the floor of Parliament and Russia demanded
the extradition of a political refugee.71 The treaty with Mexico
had been rejected on the grounds that it included the abolition
of the right of visit and search, and just the year before Can¬
ning had refused to define that right despite the fact that the
United States had been very insistent. By the present treaty
closed by Stuart, right of visit and search was relinquished. In
addition although the minister had persistently demanded the
continuation of the office of judge conservator in Portugal dur¬
ing the negotiations with that country concerning the renewal
of the treaty of 1810, his efforts were rendered futile by the
publication of Stuart’s document, for the Portuguese agent,
immediately after having read the Diario Fluminense, presented
a project in which that privilege was omitted. In view of these
embarrassments, therefore, Canning was forced to send a gen-

  67 F. O., 13/17, Canning to Stuart, Nos. i, 2.
  68 Archivo Diplomatic, I, cxxix; F. O., 84/56, Slave Trade, Draft 1.
  69 Archivo Diplomatico, I, cxxix and II, Gameiro to Carvalho e Mello, January
9, 1826.
  70 The Rio ministry denied any share in the publication of the terms (ibid., In-
hambupe [Pereira da Cunha] to Itabayana, May 6, 1826).
  71 Stuart’s treaty had granted the right of extradition of political refugees.
206         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
eral disavowal of the work of his envoy to all British ambassa¬
dors and agents with instructions that it be communicated to
all foreign governments.72
   The first bill presented by Great Britain to the new empire
failed, therefore, to receive the sanction of the Foreign Office.
To rectify the errors of Stuart’s attempt, Charles Gordon was
nominated by Canning as minister plenipotentiary to the court
of Brazil, with full powers to negotiate treaties of commerce
and the suppression of the slave trade.73 He was given projects
for both agreements which had been carefully worked out with
the collaboration of the Brazilian minister at London, and
Canning expected Gordon would have little difficulty in secur¬
ing the acceptance of D. Pedro to both treaties. The minister
was authorized to conclude the negotiations in Rio provided
no substantial alterations were made by Brazil in the terms
demanded by England. The correspondence which Gordon
would find in the Rio legation would suffice for his instructions,
but under no condition was he to yield to the Brazilian demand
for the abolition of the judge conservatorship. Also he was not
to sign the slave traffic agreement until the commercial treaty
had been agreed upon.74
  Gordon reached Rio on October 13 and began negotiations
at once on the two-fold task assigned to him. The commercial
problem which faced the minister was less complicated than
the slave trade question, since the economic preeminence of
England in Brazil was a fact of long standing to which the
Brazilians had become more or less reconciled. From the Eng¬
lish point of view, the empire had usurped the old place occu¬
pied for, centuries by Portugal. Canning, in addressing Pal-
mella during the Anglo-Portuguese negotiations for the renewal
of the treaty of 1810, was forced to admit to him that “the
English merchants considered the treaty with Brazil as an ob¬
ject of greater importance, far superior, without comparison,
to the treaties with Portugal.”75 In the interests of those mer-

 72 F. O., 13/17, Canning to Stuart, April 19, 1826. Separate.
 72 F. O., 13/25, Canning to Gordon, No. I. August 1, 1826.
 74 Ibid., No. 3.                                  75 Archivo Diplomatic, I, cxxi.
                      PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       207
chants, the British minister had maintained resolutely through
the period of revolt that the terms of the treaty of 1810 still
held for the colony, although the authority of the government
which had negotiated this agreement had been renounced.76
He maintained his attitude in view of the importance of the
Brazilian trade to the British merchants. In 1825 the exports
to Portuguese America equalled almost half of the value of the
merchandise shipped to the United States and was a little less
than the total amount sent to the British West Indies. In that
year Brazil alone absorbed almost half of the entire value of
goods exported to all South America and Mexico combined,77
while England, on the other hand, purchased very little from
the empire.78
   In addition, the shipping interests were deeply concerned
over their economic relations with the new state. The number
of British ships which entered the harbor of Rio grew steadily
after 1815, the fleet engaged in that trade having more than
doubled by 1821. Although England itself did not absorb any
great amount of the exports carried on the return trip, the
British ships enjoyed the profits accruing from the steadily in¬
creasing value of goods which Brazil sold abroad. That carry¬
ing trade was becoming constantly more profitable, for be¬
tween 1815 and 1821, merchandise which left Rio for foreign
ports multiplied five times in value.79
   Gordon’s mission therefore was an important one. He was
chosen for his known ability and his negotiation proved his
  78 F. O., 63/275, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 17; 63/261, Chamberlain to
Canning, No. 123, Confidential. For a time the Rio court threatened to declare
the treaty at an end and did announce that it had expired de jure and only existed
defacto by virtue of the good will ofBrazil (F. O., 63/260, Chamberlain to Canning,
No. 101). This attitude was temporary, however (ibid., No. 122; F. O., 13/8,
Chamberlain to Canning, February 22, 1825. Separate. Secret; 13/11, Chamber-
lain to Canning, December 5, 1825).
  77 Customs, 8/21, Comparative Tables. The same ratio held for 1830 (Customs
8 / 32). In 1835 the same ratio held in reference to the United States and the British
West Indies, but in that year Brazil took close to a million sterling more merchan¬
dise than did all of South America and Mexico combined (Customs 8/42).
  78 Customs, 4/20. The same was true in 1830 (Customs 4/25) and 1835 (Customs
4/30). Raw cotton always constituted by far the largest item.
  79 F. O., 63/247, Chamberlain to Londonderry, No. 59.
208         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
worth. He acted with an efficiency which resembled that dis¬
played by Strangford in 1810. Although he took up the com¬
mercial question only after having concluded the vexing prob¬
lem of the suppression of the slave trade and although he had
met “most strange reverses,” he was able to send the treaty,
ratified by the Rio court, to the Foreign Office with provisions
which were “precisely according to the terms” which he had
been “instructed to require” of the Brazilian government.80 On
November io, 1827, ratifications of the commercial treaty of
1827 were exchanged in London and the agreement became
effective.81
  The document82 was an adaptation of the 1810 treaty to the
empire, with all of the old privileges of the earlier agreements
retained by England. Some of the articles were unobjection¬
able in the eyes of Brazil. Peace and friendship were to exist
between the two countries; consuls were to be appointed with
their powers clearly specified by the treaty; perfect liberty of
conscience in matters of religion was guaranteed; the invio¬
lability of domicile was assured; deserters were to be delivered
up on demand; mutual liberty of commerce in all ports of both
parties was granted, although coastwise trade was restricted to
national ships; port duties were specified; the packet service
was to continue; piracy was outlawed; shipwrecked or dis¬
tressed vessels were to be protected; mutual right of ware¬
housing and reexportation without payment of consumption
tax were conceded; drawbacks or bounties on reexported arti¬
cles were declared to be independent of the nationality of the
vessels receiving such reexported articles; Brazil abolished all
monopolies or exclusive commercial companies, except existing
crown monopolies; and the English merchants obtained the
privilege of making payments to the customs house on the same
footing as the subjects of Brazil.83
  80 F. O., 13/18, Gordon to Dudley, No. 17. Dated August 18, 1827. In contrast
to Stuart’s verbose reports, Gordon merely stated that it was unnecessary to tell
of his difficulties. His mission had been successful and that would suffice.
  81 F. O., 13/35) Dudley to Gordon, No. 31.
  82 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, XI, Seconde Partie, 479-491.
  88 Articles I-V, VII-XI; XIII-XIV, XVI-XVIII, XXII-XXIII, XXV-XXVII
respectively.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      209
  There were other stipulations, however, to which the Brazil¬
ians objected strenuously. Article VI conceded that since “the
Constitution of the Empire of Brazil” had “abolished all special
jurisdictions,” the “office of Judge Conservator for the British
Nation,” should “subsist only until some satisfactory substitute
for that jurisdiction” should “be established, capable of pro¬
viding, in an equal degree, for the protection of the persons
and property of His Majesty’s Subjects.” That time never ar¬
rived, however, and the extra-territorial jurisdiction of Great
Britain in Brazil continued until the Rio court declared the
treaty void and refused to negotiate another agreement.
  Another source of friction arose from Article XII, which
specified that the nationality of a vessel, whether British or
Brazilian, was to be determined by the ownership, place of
construction, and nationality of the master and three fourths
of the crew, except such ships as should be lawfully captured
in war or as pirates. By such a stipulation the number of vessels
sailing under the Brazilian flag which could enter British ports
and enjoy the fruits of the present treaty was greatly dimin¬
ished, since Brazil purchased from abroad a large part of its
merchant fleet and manned its vessels principally with for¬
eigners.
  Despite the efforts of the Rio court to limit the number of
articles declared to be contraband of war, Gordon secured a
long list favorable to England’s traditional viewpoint (Article
XV). The low import duty of fifteen per cent, on British im¬
ports was to continue,84 also, with the additional pledge by
Brazil that no other country, Portugal excepted, should be con¬
ceded a lower rate than that granted to England.85 By virtue
of most favored nation stipulations, the empire was forced to
grant to the other powers the same low rate,86 which Brazilian

  84 England had enjoyed exclusively the low rate of fifteen per cent, since 1810,
whereas all other foreign countries had paid twenty-four per cent. (Oliveira Lima,
0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 199). Brazil had threatened to raise the rate of Portuguese
imports to twenty-four per cent, also during the revolt since Portugal became a
foreign nation in the eyes of Brazil.
  86 Article XX.
  86 Austria, June 30, 1826; Prussia, July 9, 1827; the Hanseatic Cities, November
17, 1827; Denmark, April 26, 1828; the United States, December 12, 1828; Hol-
   14
2io        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ministers of finance continually assailed as the underlying cause
of the poverty of the national treasury. The empire might have
found compensation for the loss if its sugar and other tropical
produce could have gained entrance to the market in England,
but the preferential rates in favor of the British West Indies,
recognized by Article XXII, prevented this importation for
English consumption.
  The duration of the treaty87 was for the same period as the
1810 agreement; namely, for fifteen years from the date of rati¬
fication, with the understanding that its stipulations should re¬
main in force thereafter until one of the contracting parties
should give notice of its termination. In case of such notifica¬
tion the treaty was to expire only at the end of two years from
the date of the notice.88
  The transfer of the special privileges which England had en¬
joyed for centuries in Portuguese commerce was completed
and the continuation of Great Britain’s preeminence in the
economic life of its old European ally was assured in Portu¬
guese America despite the severance of the colony from the
mother country. The thread of continuity is remarkably clear,
running back through the transition years of 1810-1827 to the
Anglo-Portuguese relations of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. In a very real sense, the triple complementary treat¬
ies of i642-’54-’6i may be considered as the basis of the Anglo-
Brazilian commercial agreement of 1827.
  One item of the bill due England had been paid, but there

land, December 20, 1828. France was the first to obtain the privilege of fifteen per
cent, duties by reason of the most favored nation clause. The treaty was signed on
January 8, 1826, with slight modifications effected June 7, 1826 (Oliveira Lima,
0 Reconhecimento, pp. 287-292). By decree of September 24, 1828, all nations with
or without treaty were granted the fifteen per cent. rate. In 1844 the tax was raised
to thirty per cent. The fifteen per cent, rate deprived Brazil of the easiest tax for
revenue and in 1836 the ministry was forced to impose an eight per cent, export
tax (Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 199-200).
  87 Article XXVIII.
  88 The treaty actually expired in November, 1844, despite vigorous efforts by
England to renew it or to negotiate a new agreement (see F. O., 131/12, 15,
Proposed Treaty of Commerce—1843-1845 and Hamilton’s dispatches, February, 1844,
to December, 1845, F. O., 13/211-215, 221-227).
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                     2ii
 still remained the far more difficult question of the suppression
 of the slave trade. By a long tradition inherited from previous
 centuries, the colonials had become reconciled to British dom¬
 inance in their economic life, but no such preparations had
 paved the way for the suppression of the slave traffic. On the
 contrary, the history of England’s attempts to suppress the
 trade between 1810 and 1822 demonstrated the obstinate op¬
 position of the Brazilians to any measure which threatened to
 cut off what they felt to be their only effective supply of labor.
    So impossible was it for D. Pedro to curb the trade that he
 was forced to refuse a direct offer of recognition of independence
 which England made as early as November, 1822, on the con¬
 dition that Brazil abolish the traffic.89 Although Brant Pontes
 warned his government that Great Britain was so determined
 to give the death blow to the trade that Brazil would be com¬
 pelled to yield by force unless it should conform of its own free
 will,90 the Rio court merely expressed its determination to abol¬
ish the trade as soon as it could do so without endangering the
very existence of the government itself.91 Canning demonstrated
the sincerity of his offer by sending Lord Amherst by Rio on
his way to India, with an offer of immediate recognition in
payment for abolition; but Jose Bonifacio, minister of foreign
affairs, was forced to confess that as necessary as recognition
was to the harassed empire, he could not stop the traffic at
once. He was willing to take measures to effect the gradual
cessation of the trade, but Canning could not be content with
half-measures.92 Abolition of the Brazilian slave traffic was so
desirable in the eyes of England that it outweighed the diffi¬
culties which instant recognition of the new state would raise
for Great Britain in Europe, but the cessation had to be absolute
and immediate.

  89 F. O., 63/257, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 5. Secret; Archivo Diplomatico,
I, Brant to Bonifacio, November 16, 17, 20, 1822 and May 6, 1823.
  90 Archivo Diplomatico, I, Brant to Bonifacio, June 1, 1823.
  91 Ibid., I, Brant to Bonifacio, June 29, 1823; Carvalho e Mello to Brant and
Gameiro, January 3, 1824.
  92 Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII, 899; Archivo Diplomatico, I, Brant to Bonifacio,
May 10, 1823; F. O., 63/259, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 20.
2i2        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Jose Bonifacio, intimate friend ofD. Pedro in the first months
of the revolt, assured Consul Chamberlain in April, 1823, that
he heartily detested the traffic and desired total abolition. But
it could not “be done immediately, the people” were “not pre¬
pared for it and until this” had “been brought about, it would
endanger the existence of the Government if attempted sud¬
denly.” The minister insisted that it was impossible for him to
undertake an international promise which he was unable to
fulfill. Yet he ardently wished that English “cruisers would
take every Slave Ship they” encountered at sea, for, he said,
“I want to see no more of them, they are the gangrene of our
Prosperity. The population we want is a White one.”93
  The minister was sincere in his personal desire to see the
trade exterminated, but two reasons forced him to withhold hfs
hand. In the first place, Negroes were an absolute necessity for
the cultivation of the land until white immigration should set
in to take their places. As this immigration increased, Bonifacio
promised, the incoming supply of Negroes would be lessened
until final abolition was secured. In the second place, the ac¬
tual precarious stability or even the very existence of the gov¬
ernment itself would have been destroyed by any measure
which precipitously abolished the traffic. The interests engaged
in the trade, powerful as they were, might possibly be faced
successfully, but there was no hope of a victorious conflict with
the owners of the great plantations of the interior, the element
which formed the backbone of the Patriot Party. The govern¬
ment, Bonifacio asserted, did not share in the opinion firmly
held by the agricultural people of Brazil, but that class was
the powerful element of the country. Manifestly, D. Pedro
could not abolish the trade at once, although the Brazilian
government was willing to enter into negotiations for the grad¬
ual extinction of the traffic.94 Chamberlain added to his report
of the interview the interesting detail that the government in-

  93 F. O., 63/259, Chamberlain to Canning, April 2, Secret.
  94 Ibid., No. 55. Secret, April 26, 1823. The consul was reporting an interview
with Bonifacio in which the latter gave him the result of a cabinet meeting at
which D. Pedro himself was present.
                       PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                        213
 come from the tax on Negroes imported into the country was
 close to two hundred thousand pounds a year. It was his opin¬
 ion that a gradual abolition” was “the only one this new gov¬
 ernment dared agree to.”95
    Brazil was forced, therefore, to refuse the enticing bait of an
 early recognition by Canning, who offered to act irrespective
 of the attitude of Portugal if the new state would grant him
 one condition. The Rio court was obliged to follow the longer
 path of negotiations at London and Lisbon, and to await the
 result of the interplay of European politics before England
 turned the magic key. Then Stuart came with his instructions
 to secure the abolition of the traffic, not on the basis of an un¬
 conditional concession by Brazil to a positive demand by Eng¬
 land, but merely as the continuation of engagements made by
 the Rio government in 1815 and 1817.96 To the preamble of the
proposed treaty, which stated that “the separation of Brazil
from Portugal entitles England to claim from Brazil the ob¬
servance of the Treaties concluded between England and
Portugal before the separation.” Canning added four simple
articles. The        trade should         be prohibited           entirely within
a specified number of years, with the penalty of piracy to be in¬
flicted on violators thereafter; until the abolition should take
place, the treaties, conventions, and additional articles of Jan¬
uary 22, 1815, and of July 28, 1817, should continue; the in¬
structions, powers, forms, and regulations annexed to the 1817
agreement should be applied to the present understanding97;
and the mixed commissions should continue.98

  96 Ibid. The British agents reported “scandalous frauds” practiced by the Brazil¬
ians in the question of the slave trade. Freed slaves serving their fourteen years were
fraudulently declared dead; Negroes were secretly taken from seized slavers, de¬
clared dead, and sold into slavery; and the traffic was carried on openly in an illegal
manner in Maranhao despite the protests of the British agent (F. O., 84/56, Can¬
ning to Gordon, Nos. 2, 3, 4). Stuart wrote from Bahia that 18,000 Negroes were
imported annually into that province, by far the greater number coming from the
part of Africa north of the equator (F. O., 84/56, Stuart to Canning, March
14, 1826).                               96 F. O., 84/56, Canning to Stuart, No. 1.
  97 This provision guaranteed the right of visit and search of Brazilian merchant¬
men by British cruisers to ascertain the illegal presence of slaves.
  98 F. O., 84/56, Canning to Stuart, No. 1. January 12, 1826.
214        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Stuart failed," but Gordon took over the task and on Octo¬
ber 30, 1826, held his first conference with two Brazilian com¬
missioners. The first obstacle which he encountered was the
fact that the Assembly itself during its last session had proposed
a bill to abolish the traffic within six years, and the Brazilian
agents considered themselves unable to negotiate until the rep¬
resentative body had taken action. Gordon countered by point¬
ing out that since Brazil no longer constituted a part of the
Portuguese dominions, the trade was automatically prohibited
by virtue of the conventions of 1815 and 1817 between Eng¬
land and Portugal, as those agreements abolished the traffic
between Portuguese Africa and any foreign country. England
was merely insisting upon a free will expression by which the
Rio government should acquiesce in a fact that had already
been accomplished.100 The Brazilians were reminded also that
Great Britain had treaty rights with Portugal which would
enable it to enforce the prohibition of the slave trade between
its old ally and foreign powers. Any resistance, therefore, which
the Rio court could make to the proposed total abolition of
its traffic, would be futile.101
   At the second conference, the Brazilians notified Gordon
that D. Pedro himself preferred to wait until the Assembly
could meet and take action. But again the envoy refused, sug¬
gesting as a solution to the difficulty that the negotiation and
the treaty should be kept secret until the Chamber met.102 At
the next meeting, Gordon brusquely refused to consider a four-
year time limit for the traffic and stated laconically that the
indemnity demanded by D. Pedro for loss of revenue to his
government could not be granted by England. He likewise
refused to change the preamble required by Canning, by which
 the empire acknowledged the validity of the conventions of
 1815 and 1817.103 On November 22, the Brazilians finally gave
   *® F. O., 84/56, Canning to Stuart, No. 1. In this dispatch Canning gives in detail
 the reasons why the treaty negotiated by the envoy was unsatisfactory.
   100 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. i. Protocol of First Conference.
   101 F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. io. Gordon denied making this threat
 but the situation was quite clear to the Brazilian commissioners (ibid.).
   101 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. i. Protocol of Second Conference.
   10S Ibid., Protocol to the Conferences of November 21 and 22.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      215
 their consent to a three year time limit to count from the date
 of ratification, and the next day the treaty was signed.104
   Gordon, by obeying orders, thus obtained the treaty in the
 exact terms set down by Canning,105 but he was dubious as to
 the outcome of the affair. Writing to the foreign minister, he
 admitted that it could not “be denied that the measure of
 abolishing the Traffic in Slaves” was “to the highest degree
 unpopular in this country. . .                From the first he had been
 convinced      ‘that so far from its being advisable” to yield to
 the emperor s desire to wait until the meeting of the Assembly,
D. Pedro would not have been able to grant the abolition at
 all if the decision had been left to that body. Moreover, the
trade, as Gordon foresaw, would be carried on ten-fold during
the next three years and afterwards it would continue by a
system of contraband with the connivance of the Rio govern¬
ment. When the final abolition should take place, therefore,
 the task of sweeping the seas” would be thrown “entirely
upon the hands of Great Britain.”106
   The minister was a true prophet, for when the convention
was transmitted to the Assembly at the next regular session,
the storm raged for days.107 By a document108 dated May 22,

  104 Ibid., Protocol to the Conferences of November 22 and 23. A “reversal note”
was presented by the Brazilians which required the English government to enter
into negotiations in London for a reasonable prolongation of the time limit with
the sole view of fulfilling the obligations of the ministry toward the pending law
in the Assembly (ibid.). Gordon transmitted the note to his government without
guaranteeing its ratification.
  106 Ratifications were exchanged in London, March 13, 1827 (F. O., 13/35,
Canning to Gordon, No. 19). Hence the traffic was to cease on March 13, 1830.
Some difficulty arose in Rio over the ratified document returned to Brazil, since
it lacked the signature of the British secretary of state. To render such a document
valid in Brazil, the foreign minister was required to sign. An attempt was made t’o
throw out the entire convention on this pretext of improper ratification by Eng¬
land, but the movement failed (F. O., 13/37, Gordon to Canning, Nos. 37, 42,
June 8, Separate; Gordon to Dudley, Nos. 3, 17).
  108 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. 2. November 27, 1826.
  107 F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. 3. July 14, 1827. The Assembly met
May 3, 1827. Itwas the second time that body had held session since the dissolution
of the Constitutent Assembly in 1823. The other meeting occured May 6, 1826
(Armitage, History, I, 281, 237).
  108 The document was enclosed in F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. 10.
Gordon immediately protested against this letter and demanded an explanation
216        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
1827, the Marquez de Queluz, foreign minister, delivered the
treaty to the Chamber with explanations as to why D. Pedro’s
ministers had consented to such an agreement. The progress
of the negotiations was given in detail; the desire of the Bra¬
zilian commissioners to delay matters until the Assembly could
act on its own project, Gordon’s refusal to postpone a settle¬
ment, and his insistence that the trade actually was prohibited
at the moment by treaties existing between England and Por¬
tugal were explained accurately. The marquis pointed out that
the envoy had made it perfectly plain, that in case the Brazilian
government refused to act, England would oblige the king of
Portugal to close his African ports to Brazilian slavers or it
would prevent by means of its cruisers any access to those ports
by Brazilian ships. He explained that in the face of the fear¬
ful losses which would accrue to Brazilian lives and property
under the threat to treat slavers as pirates, the ministers of D.
Pedro had been forced to concede what would otherwise be
accomplished by forceful means, and the slave trade treaty had
been signed.
  The letter of the foreign minister fanned the flames of indig¬
nation which consumed the deputies as they listened to the
death knell of their slave traffic. Five members of the Com¬
mittee on Diplomacy and Statistics reported caustically against
the convention on June 16. Although the deputies had no voice
in the matter, due to the provision in the Constitution which
placed the treaty making power exclusively in the hands of the
emperor,109 they could express an opinion and they were vocif¬
erous in their denunciation of the accomplished fact. The con¬
vention was derogatory to the honor, interests, dignity, inde¬
pendence, and sovereignty of the Brazilian nation, asserted
Cunha Mattos, who advanced seven arguments to prove his

from Queluz, on the grounds that the abolition had not resulted from menaces
by Great Britain nor as a concession to that government, but for humanity’s sake
and the honor of Brazil. Queluz explained more or less satisfactorily (ibid.).
  109 The constitution had been formulated by the emperor and had been declared
in force without the sanction of any constituent assembly. Some municipal bodies
voted to accept it (Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 76).
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      217
charge.110 By virtue of this treaty, he argued, Brazilian citizens
would become subject to the jurisdiction of British Admiralty
courts; the only supply of labor possible to the country was
checked; and the only shipping business left open to the Bra¬
zilians after the commercial treaties with England and France
was prohibited.
   The Bishop of Bahia favored the convention, but the Bishop
of Maranhao opposed it.* * 111 Clemente Pereira, historic leader
of the republican wing of the Patriots, in a clear, forceful speech
delivered in the session of July 4, agreed entirely with Cunha
Mattos in his opinion that the convention was a serious mis¬
take. But the treaty was signed, he pointed out, and, in the
face of that action taken by D. Pedro and his ministers, there
was no recourse left to the Chamber but to accept it.112 His
speech was roundly cheered throughout.
   On July 4, after a long debate, the Chamber merely voted
not to take any action in regard to the convention but to re¬
serve its deliberations for the proper time.113
   The second item of the bill which Great Britain had pre¬
sented for its services in securing the recognition of the inde¬
pendence of Brazil was thus paid in full. But the payment had
entailed the desertion by D. Pedro of the Patriot, or Constitu¬
tionalist Party, for it was only by virtue of his absolute power
that the demands of England could be met. Early in 1824, the
prince stood hesitating between the Absolutist and the Patriot
  110 Raymundo Jos6 da Cunha Mattos, member of the Committee on Diplomacy
and Statistics. He spoke during the session of July 3.
  111 Debate of July 3.
  112 Clemente Pereira demonstrated that Brazil had not a sufficient number of
laborers. Yet neither would the Indians serve nor would the Europeans come.
Since the Negro supply from Africa was to be cut ®ff, the only recourse left was
to propagate the Negroes already in Brazil. More than three years were necessary
for that solution, however, and yet in 1830 the traffic must cease. The trade should
be stopped for philanthropic reasons, if for no other, but he could not believe that
England’s action was based exclusively on that ground. Economic and special
class motives likewise instigated its action, but Brazil also had its own economic
and special class reasons for delaying abolition.
  113 Gordon enclosed copies of the speeches in F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley,
No. 3.
218         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
parties, with powerful influences pulling him toward both
camps. He chose the way of the autocrats and surrounded him¬
self with adulating sycophants and ignorant favorites. The lib¬
erty of the press, though nominally guaranteed, was extin¬
guished; presidents of provinces who exercised arbitrary au¬
thority were promoted; legislative powers were arrogated by
the cabinet; and members of the Absolutist Party were favored
throughout the empire.114
  Other factors than his relations with England undoubtedly
influenced the prince in the adoption of his autocratic course.
But it is evident that only absolute power in his hands could
have enabled D. Pedro to concede the price demanded by Eng¬
land for its old ally Portugal and to pay in full the bill rendered
by Great Britain for its services in securing the recognition of
the empire by the mother country and by the European na¬
tions. To establish the empire and to repress the disintegrating
tendencies of republicanism which threatened to disrupt Bra¬
zil, the prince was forced to betray the party by which he had
made himself supreme. The treaty with Portugal, negotiated
under the pressure of London, placed the monarchy and the
cabinet in a precarious position in the eyes of the Brazilians
who were becoming ever more suspicious of the reactionary
tendencies of their government.116 While it caused serious diffi¬
culties in the Absolutist Party and annoyed the Patriots, the
commercial treaty with England was accepted for the time
being, since the traditional dominance of Great Britain in
Portuguese economic life had prepared the Brazilians for the
inevitable preeminence of that nation in their own commerce.
But the slave trade convention, the work of a monarch acting
with absolute power and surrounded by irresponsible ministers,

  114 Armitage, History, I, 200-204; Oliveira Lima, O Reconhecimento, pp. 255-256.
  116 Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhecimento, p. 255; Pereira da Silva, Historic, VII, 332-
333- The payment of the £2,000,000 was especially objectionable to the Brazilians.
It was not published along with the Portuguese Treaty recognizing the independ¬
ence, but the article, which was secret, was reserved until its final presentation to
the Assembly when that body met. It also was an accomplished fact and there was
nothing that the Chamber could do about it. It served as an additional reason for
distrust of Pedro’s intentions in regard to the future union of the two kingdoms.
                    PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      219
raised a storm of protest. Canning was almost violent in his
denunciation of D. Pedro when he heard the rumor that the
prince had offered to abolish the constitution in return for
recognition by Austria116; and yet to satisfy the demands of
that very minister the prince was forced to resort to absolute
power and to ignore the will of the Assembly and the dominant
party in the empire. The fiasco of the emperor’s policy in the
Banda Oriental and the distrust of his intentions in relation to
Portugal after the death of D. Joao in 1826 completed the alien¬
ation of the Patriots, and on April 13, 1831, the Brazilian party
expelled the absolutist prince who had established the empire of
Brazil and had secured the entrance of the new state into the
society of the nations of Europe.117 England’s price for its recog¬
nition of the independence of the empire was a serious con¬
tributing factor to the downfall of the founder of the Brazilian
nation.

  118 Archivo Diplomatico, II, Brant and Gameiro to Carvalho e Mello, May 11, 1825.
  117 Rocha Pombo, Historia, VIII, 254-264; Armitage, History, II, 103-143; Oli¬
veira Lima, 0 Imperio Bmzileiro, pp. 21, 210. For a discussion of the manner in
which D. Pedro won and lost the support of the Brazilians between 1822 and 1831
see the article by the author, “The Paradoxical Pedro, First Emperor of Brazi ”
The Hisp. Amer. Hist. Review, XII (1932), May.
                       CHAPTER IX


THE BEGINNINGS OF THE REVOLT AGAINST BRIT¬
                    ISH DOMINANCE


Between   1825 and 1827 British preeminence in Brazil reached
its culmination. The traditional supremacy in Portuguese eco¬
nomic life was transferred to the independent empire between
1808 and 1827; the virtual monopoly of Brazilian commerce
enjoyed by England during the Napoleonic wars was prolonged
until 1827 by means of the preferential importation tax secured
in 1810; and the opening of the ports of the colony to world
trade stimulated British interests. Between 1808 and 1827 Great
Britain thus secured a favored position among foreign powers
in Brazilian commerce, investment, and shipping, and estab¬
lished the Englishman as a permanent factor in the economic
life of the nation. Politically, Great Britain was beginning to
exercise a virtual protectorate over the empire. Under the com¬
pelling direction of the London Foreign Office, peace terms
with Portugal which aroused the distrust and resentment of
the Brazilian Patriot class were forced on the Rio government;
due solely to English influence, acknowledgment of independ¬
ence by Portugal and recognition by the European powers
were achieved by D. Pedro; a commercial treaty, disliked but
tolerated, solidified British economic privileges; a convention
suppressing the slave trade was forced on a vehemently pro¬
testing people who were unable to prevent ratification; and
extra-territorial privileges freed the Englishman from Brazilian
jurisdiction. Thus in 1827 British economic and political pre¬
eminence in Portuguese America was definitely established.
  The parallel between England’s position in Brazil in 1827
and the Anglo-Portuguese situation after 1703 is striking. In
both cases England had helped to establish the independence
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                   221
of a revolting nation; a profitable economic interchange pro¬
moted by special privileges which were guaranteed by treaties
tightened the union between the allies; and the Englishman
became the paramount factor in the economic life of the weaker
power. But here the parallel ceases: whereas in the eighteenth
century, England pushed these advantages until Portugal be¬
came virtually an economic and political vassal,1 nineteenth
century Brazil resisted similar efforts so strenuously that by
1845 the special favors granted England were revoked, the
commercial and slave trade treaties were declared annulled,
and the Rio court was frankly in revolt against the pressure ex¬
erted by the London Foreign Office.
   This revolt against British preeminence revealed two phases
one political and the other economic. The issue in the first
phase arose from England’s efforts to suppress the slave trade;
in the second phase, it was forced by Brazil’s determination
to place Great Britain on an equal footing economically with
other foreign powers. The discussion of Anglo-Brazilian rela¬
tions during the hundred years following 1827 whl be concen¬
trated, therefore, upon these two principal issues.
   England’s attempt to abolish the traffic was the direct cause
of the decline of its political preeminence in Portuguese Amer¬
ica. From the very moment of the signature of the convention
of 1826 until the late ’sixties, Anglo-Brazilian relations were
embittered by the slave trade, the distrust and contempt of
the British2 being matched by the fear and hatred of the Bra¬
zilians in whose minds the suppression of the traffic and sub¬
ordination to England were synonymous. Even the more mod¬
erate historians and statesmen of Portuguese America consid-


  1 See supra, pp. 39-40.
  2 The attitude of distrust in regard to the sincerity of the Rio government and
of contempt for the moral degradation of the Brazilians in continuing the in¬
human slave trade were evidenced in the diplomatic correspondence between the
Foreign Office and the British representatives in Rio. See, as examples, F. O.
84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, December 6, 1828; F. O. 84/122, Palmerston to
Aston, November 1, 1831; F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, June 4, and Au¬
gust 9, 1845; and F. O. 97/97, Scarlett to Clarendon, June 25, 1857. The most ex¬
treme expression occurs in W. D. Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions.
222         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ered Britain’s actions as equivalent to an effort to maintain
political control over its ally. In the opinion of one senator,* 3
Great Britain wished to dominate Brazil; it desired that the
weaker power should acknowledge a shameful protectorate un¬
worthy of the Brazilian. An ambassador4 who had served in
London for many years asserted that “under the pretext of our
old faults (which were numerous) the British legation assumed
a tone of censure, of vigilance, of insufferable dominance.”
The foremost historian5 of the founding of the empire com¬
plained that every argument with England was settled accord¬
ing to its own interpretation and the Brazilian nation was
forced to submit to the violence and force of a stronger power.
Writing in the ’sixties, the noted compiler6 of Brazilian treaties
asserted that although he admired the excellence of British in¬
stitutions, rendered homage to its civic development, and val¬
ued the help of its capital in opening roads and developing na¬
tional industries in Portuguese America, he could not“ tolerate
passively the affronts which this country” had “arrogated to
itself to force” on Brazil. The drastic conduct of the English re¬
sulted, in his opinion, not in the abolition of the traffic (the Bra¬
zilians suppressed the trade by their own efforts), but in mutual
resentment between the two nations.7
   This hostile resentment of the weaker toward the stronger
nation was reflected in the attitude of the Brazilian citizen as
well as in that of the historian and statesman. The clearest ex¬
pression of this point of view was given by Consul Pennell in
his reports to Canning and Dudley8. In Bahia, he said, the gen¬
eral public seemed “to regard the Treaties with England on
the Slave Trade, as the dictations of a superior authority, from
   8 Visconde de Jequitinhonha. Speech made in the Senate as quoted by Oliveira
Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 211.
   4 Letter of Barao de Penedo to Rio Branco, May 6, 1856. Quoted by Oliveiro
Lima, op. cit., p. 212. Penedo was minister in London from 1855 to 1888.
   6J. M. Pereira da Silva (author of the seven-volume Historia da Fundafdo do
 Imperio Brasileiro), Memorias do Meu Tempo, I, 101.
   6 Antonio Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos para 0 Direito Intemacional, I, 386.
   7 Ibid., p. 387.
   8 F. O. 84/71, Pennell to Canning, June 8, 1827; Pennell to Dudley, August 22,
 1827.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                      223
which it is lawful to escape, rather than as compacts which
they are bound to enforce.” The opinion was current, more¬
over, that the Rio government had submitted to the conventions
under duress, sacrificing the national dignity before the dicta¬
torial power of England. This dictation by Great Britain was
particularly odious to the public, he reported, since it was ex¬
erted over a weaker but friendly nation which, since independ¬
ence, had favored English interests beyond all others. The con¬
duct of the London court in attempting to abolish the traffic
by all legitimate means was conceded to be highly honorable;
but when Great Britain employed threats, it carried zeal to
reprehensible lengths and violated the principles of non-inter¬
vention on which it professed to act.
   These expressions indicate the deeply-rooted conviction9
which existed in the minds of the Brazilians that England in
its effort to stop the slave trade was intervening in the affairs
of the empire in a manner which was not permissible under
international usage and which evidenced a determination to
force upon a weaker country policies favorable to the more
powerful nation. An absolute emperor against the will of the
elected representatives of the people10 had undertaken obliga¬
tions which the Brazilian nation was unable to renounce. The
prince could be expelled from his throne, but the efforts of the
Rio government to induce England to rescind or modify his
engagements were entirely fruitless. The situation, therefore,
resolved itself into a tale of distress in which the Brazilian gov¬
ernment at Rio was caught between the two millstones of the
inexorable pressure exerted by Great Britain to end the traffic
and the dogged determination of the Brazilian public to con¬
tinue it.

  * Similar expressions might be multiplied. For others see article in the Jornal
do Commercio, March 19, 1845, enclosed in Hamilton’s dispatch to Aberdeen, F. O.
84/581, March 22, 1845; copies of speeches made in the Assembly of 1845, en¬
closed in Hamilton’s dispatch to Aberdeen, F. O. 84/581, April 21, i845;Joao Luiz
Alvez, “A Questao do Elemento Servil. A Extinc$ao do Traffico e a Lei de Repres-
sio de 1850. Liberdade dos Nascituros,” Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico
Brasileiro, Tomo Especial VI, Parte IV (1916), pp. 196-204, 206-208, 253.
  10 See supra, pp. 217-219.
224       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Under these circumstances the position of the Rio court was
difficult. Its first move was to try to obtain an extension of
time beyond the stipulated period during which the traffic should
be legal. Preliminary action in favor of an extension had been
taken during negotiations of the convention itself when the
two Brazilian plenipotentiaries presented a “reversal note” for
the acceptance of Gordon. The note stipulated that Great
Britain should enter into an understanding to be reached in
London for a reasonable prolongation of the time agreed upon .11
The British minister consented to transmit it to London al¬
though he assured the Brazilian agents in writing that he did
not consider it more than an “observation” and that he could
see no necessity for a prolongation of the time specified in the
convention.12
  Two years later, on the strength of this reversal note, Am¬
bassador Itabayana in London proposed that the period of the
final abolition be deferred.13 Aberdeen not only refused14 to
encourage Itabayana in his efforts to obtain an extension,15
but informed Ponsonby at Rio in categorical terms that “His
Majesty’s Government” refused “to admit any modification of
that stipulation of the Convention of November 23rd 1826,”
which limited the slave trade to March 13, 1830.16 When Ita¬
bayana persisted in the appeal for more time, Aberdeen was
astonished at his “extraordinary misconception” of the value
of the reversal note presented by the Brazilian plenipotenti¬
aries; evidently, Brazil considered it had the right “to cancel
solemn obligations of Treaty” on the strength of a “prefatory
observation which was itself not complied with.”17

  11 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. i. November 27, 1826. Enclosure No.
6, conference of November 23.              12 Ibid., No. 2 and enclosure No. 3.
  13 F. O., 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3. December 3, 1828.
  14 Ibid., Draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, September 15, 1828.
  16 Some consideration was given to the proposal, however, for a memorandum
is included in this group of documents, advancing certain considerations which
would tend to make it advisable for England to discuss Itabayana’s proposal. The
principal consideration was that an extension might be used to secure an equip¬
ment clause {Ibid., Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3, Enclosure 1).
  18 Ibid., Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3.
  17 Ibid., Draft to Itabayana, November 29, 1828.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                     225
  Despite emphatic denials by the British government18 the
report persisted in Rio that an extension of time was being
arranged.19 It was a futile hope, for beyond conceding that
any slave vessel encountered at sea after March 13, 1830,
would not be detained if it left the African coast before the
date of expiration, Aberdeen refused to acquiesce in any modi¬
fication whatever.20 On October 1, 1829, the Rio Gazetta an¬
nounced that after the tenth no passports to slavers would be
granted,21 and on March 13 of the following year the traffic in
slaves from any part of the world to the coast of Brazil became
illegal under the treaty between England and Brazil. Castle-
reagh’s dream of securing an absolute prohibition of the slave
trade to Brazil was realized.22
  The traffic was forbidden but, instead of ceasing at the stip¬
ulated time, the importation of African Negroes grew steadily
after 1830. The continuation of the trade in the face of treaty
obligations was the principal source of that friction between
the Rio and London courts which resulted in the decline of
British political influence in Brazil; but there were certain al¬
lied questions which also contributed to the growing irritation.
These may be grouped under three heads: England’s desire to
add an equipment clause to the convention prohibiting the
trade; the disposal of captured slaves brought into Brazilian
ports; and the finality of the decisions of the Sierra Leone com¬
mission. Each merits attention.
  When Castlereagh secured for British cruisers the right to
  18 An official refusal to consider an extension of time was delivered to the Rio
Government by the British minister early in 1829 (F. O. 84/95, Ponsonby to
Aberdeen, No. 2. March 23, 1829).
  »Ibid., No. 4.
  20 Ibid., Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 7; Aberdeen to Aston, Nos. 2 and 3; and
Aberdeen to Itabayana, March 18, 1829.
  21 Ibid., Aston to Aberdeen, No. 1. Issue of October 1.
  22 An effort was made to import free Negroes from Africa as colonists to supply
the needed agricultural labor which was threatened by the cessation of the slave
trade. Aberdeen ordered the British envoy to inform the Rio government that
those Brazilians who participated in such a scheme would be treated as regular
slave traders (F. O. 84/95, Aberdeen to Aston, No. 4; F. O. 84/95, Consular, No.
2, Weatherby to Bidwell, Rio, January 26, 1829; F. O. 84/111, Aston to Aberdeen,
No. 2. March 27, 1830).
   15
226        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
visit and search Brazilian ships in peace times, it was specifi¬
cally stated that seizures would be permitted only in case illegal
slaves were actually on board.23 Evidence that the ship was a
slaver, that it was outside the region in which legal traffic
might take place, or that slaves had been on board on that
particular voyage, was insufficient to warrant detention of the
vessel. Consequently, Great Britain was seriously handicapped
in its efforts to suppress the trade both before and after the
prohibition of March 13, 1830. Slaves were assembled on the
shores of Africa to be embarked only when darkness or fog
made sailing comparatively safe from detection; and masters
of vessels often threw slaves overboard to destroy the technical
evidence of guilt when they were threatened with capture.
Ships fully equipped with hand and leg cuffs, chains, water
casks, between decks, and food could sail unmolested to the
coast of Africa, land at some secret point where a supply of
slaves had been assembled, and escape to the high seas where
the danger of capture was practically non-existent.25 The evil
could be remedied only by ordering the seizure of vessels
equipped for the trade26; for armed with such a stipulation, the
British cruiser could detain the Brazilian slaver on the outward
as well as the inward voyage and on the coast of Africa before
the swift flight after loading could be effected. To obtain

  23 See supra, pp. 173-174.
  24 W. L. Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, 1839-1865, p. 13.
  25 Peter Leonard, The Western Coast of Africa, pp. 92-96.
  26 England attempted to secure an equipment clause in connection with other
nations engaged in the traffic. In 1822 Spain agreed that evidence of slaves on
board during that particular voyage warranted seizure, but a four year delay in
ratification and difficulties of proving the presence of slaves on the voyage of the
seizure rendered the provision useless. Holland (1823) and Sweden (1824) agreed
to satisfactory equipment clauses. France (1833) agreed to equipment and break¬
ing up clauses. Spain refused until 1835 when equipment and breaking up clauses
were signed, but the severe penalties to be imposed by the Spanish government
to make these clauses effective were delayed. Similar negotiations with Lisbon
in 1835 broke down. By the Portuguese Bill of 1839 (August) the English Parlia¬
ment authorized seizure of vessels flying the Portuguese flag if they were equipped
for the traffic and in 1842 an agreement was reached between England and Por¬
tugal. Only Brazil and the United States resisted the pressure by Great Britain
to secure equipment clauses (Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, pp. 14-23).
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                     227
Brazil’s consent to that remedy England exerted every effort.
  With the absolute prohibition of the trade set for March,
1830, an equipment clause became urgently necessary. There¬
fore, in obedience to instructions received from the Foreign
Office, Gordon addressed a note to the Brazilian foreign min¬
ister in which he proposed that an article should be concluded
which would establish “the illicit employment of ships by their
fitting up and by general circumstances therein specified in lieu
of the clause requiring proof of the slaves having been actually em¬
barked.” Great Britain, he continued, considered it to be essen¬
tial for the maintenance of the spirit and object of the slave
trade treaty that such an article should be concluded. Further¬
more, he advised the minister, the commissioners at Sierra
Leone already had been given instructions to act in the spirit
or principle of such an article.27
  The proposal, which received no answer from the Rio court,28
was revived in 1831 when Palmerston instructed Chargi Aston
to bring the question of seizures of vessels fitted out for the trade
before the Brazilian government.29 Two years later30 Consul
 General Ouseley again proposed negotiations, this time with
some slight hope of success, he thought.31 The present admin¬
istration, he reported in a confidential letter,32 was favorable
 to such a clause, but it was probable that                the Interest taken
 by the Inhabitants of this Country generally in defeating the
 Intentions of the Govt, and rendering negatory their efforts
for an effective suppression of the illegal Traffic in question

   87 F. O. 84/71, Gordon to Dudley, No. 3. December 24, 1827. British cruisers
 had already seized vessels equipped for the trade but without slaves on board when
 they were found north of the equator (since Castlereagh’s convention the traffic
 north of the equator had been illegal). F. O. 84/71, Gordon to Dudley, No. 1;
 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3.
   28 F. O. 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3, Enclosure: Draft, Aberdeen to
 Itabayana, December 1, 1828.
    29 F. O. 84/122, Palmerston to Aston, No. 9. October 8, 1831.
   80 Palmerston on May 7, 1833, sent authorization to Fox to conclude an addi¬
 tional article to the Convention of 1826, securing an equipment clause, provided
 he could prod the Brazilian government to action (F. O. 84/141, Palmerston to
 Fox, No. 2).
   81 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 14. July 4, 1833.            « Ibid.
228          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
might succeed once more. In carrying on the negotiations, he
was refraining from any mention of how effective the desired
clause had proved to be in suppressing the Dutch trade, for
the “Brazilian Chambers” would “be much less likely to ob¬
ject to any measure, however great its prospect of success, the
effect of which” was “still uncertain, than to one that” had
“been actually proved to be effective in suppressing the Slave
Trade.” Experience had shown them that despite every pre¬
caution exercised by the framers of the conventions, they had
been able to evade the stipulations thereof. It was quite true,
he concluded, that although the chambers did not wish to in¬
cur the odium of encouraging the trade, many representatives
would be “very unwilling to adopt any measure that would
in their opinion practically prevent it.”
   Ouseley read the situation correctly, for although the foreign
minister expressed willingness to negotiate 33 and an additional
convention was agreed upon, the lower chamber prevented
ratification.34 During the minority of D. Pedro II, the regency
was forbidden to ratify any treaty of which the Assembly had
not previously approved35; that body by delaying action on the
proposed convention for eight months, was able, therefore, to
prevent ratification.
   This was not the first, nor the last, time that the lower house
of the Assembly prevented action by the regency or the cabinet
in the question of an equipment clause. In August of the pre¬
vious year the Senate had passed a law for the better execution
of the slave trade suppression only to have the lower house kill
the project by adjourning the discussion and never voting on
it. The famous Barbacena project of June 30, 1837, carrying


  33 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 18.
  34 The articles were signed by Henry S. Fox and Alves Branco, July 27, 1835.
Fox presented his credentials as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary
on August 25, 1833. The convention agreed that a vessel might be seized if prima
facie evidence proved that it was destined for the traffic although no slaves were
on board, condemned seizures were to be broken up before being sold, and rati¬
fications were to be exchanged within eight months (Alves, “A Questao do Ele-
mento Servil,” p. 222).
   36 This was by the law of June 14, 1831, Art. 20. p. 1 (Alves, op. cit., p. 222).
                       BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                  229
an equipment clause, was approved by the Senate but defeated
in the Chamber of Deputies.36 Two years later negotiations be¬
tween the foreign offices at London and Rio were renewed,
but the propositions presented by Great Britain on the basis
of a memorandum drawn up by the Rio government were
again declined. In 1842 the Brazilian foreign minister, in reply
to further proposals by England, refused peremptorily even to
enter into negotiations on the subject of the slave trade,37 as
the mere fact that the minister had entertained the possibility
of conversations had aroused public opinion and disturbed the
Chamber of Deputies.38
   Aberdeen, accordingly, had recourse to force. He warned
the Rio office that since Brazil declined to agree to stipulations
which would enable the convention of 1826 to be executed
efficiently, England intended “to take alone and by Her own
Means the Steps which She” might “feel called upon to adopt
for carrying into full and complete effect” the first article of
that convention. Great Britain, therefore, would fall back upon
that stipulation and seize all Brazilian slavers on the grounds
of piracy unless the Brazilian government agreed to a conven¬
tion similar to those signed by England with Spain in 1835
and with Portugal in 1842.39
  Yet no convention including an equipment clause was ever
agreed upon between the two countries40; for as long as the
Aberdeen Bill of August 8, 1845, was in f°rce> the Rio
court refused to treat with England on any matter dealing
with the means of suppressing the traffic.41 When an equip¬
ment article sanctioned by Brazil finally came into existence,
it was not the result of negotiations between the two nations;
it was an act passed by the National Assembly to be effective
  36 Alves, op. cit., pp. 221, 226-228.
  37 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. io. June 14, 1845.
  38 Pereira da Silva, Memorias do Meu Tempo, I, 102-108.
  39 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 10. The article referred to declared
that the slave trade would be considered piracy after March 13, 1830.
  40 Renewed negotiations took place after the expiration of the convention in
1845 and the Aberdeen Bill of August 8, of the same year, but they ended in
failure (F. O. 84/582, Hamilton to Aberdeen, Nos. 25, 35, 40, 42, 49, 52, and 55).
  41 Alves, op. cit., p. 234.
230        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
in Brazilian territory or on the high seas when a Brazilian
cruiser met a Brazilian slaver. In 1850 when the central gov¬
ernment of the empire became firmly enough established to
enforce its will in regard to the slave trade, an equipment
clause was the first article of the drastic law passed to make
the suppression effective.42 England, therefore, never succeeded
in obtaining from Brazil a formal acquiescence to the coveted
agreement; but with the rapid extinction of the traffic after
1850, the necessity for an equipment clause ceased and that
element of friction between the two governments was removed.
  Thus Brazil resisted successfully the pressure exerted by Eng¬
land to secure an international convention containing an equip¬
ment clause. The second of the irritating questions related to
the traffic, the disposal of the captured slaves, ran a similar
course: continued friction arising from the enslavement of free
Negroes by the Brazilians and the vigorous but unavailing
protests of England from 1826 to 1850 culminated in action
by the central government at Rio after it had fought its way
to stability.
  The case of the captured slave (emancipado) was presented by
Consul General Ouseley in a report to Palmerston in 1833.43
“In every instance,” he asserted, “the humane Intentions of
the Framers of the Convention of 1826” had been defeated as
far as they related to the victims of the traffic.44 Not one of the
Africans taken from captured vessels and placed at the service
of private individuals for a term of years had escaped from a
more rigorous species of slavery. Every Brazilian authority
from the highest to the lowest person, employed nominally to
protect the Negro, was actively engaged in placing the Afri¬
cans in a state of slavery beyond the reach of any remedy or
interference from the British, or even from his own govern¬
ment. Old and worn out slaves were substituted for the emanci¬
pado who became a legal slave in place of the old one; Negroes

  42 Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 250, note 20.
  43 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 15. July 8.
  44 For the stipulations in regard to the disposal of captured slaves see supra, p. 175.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                        231
obtained by auction were sent to the interior far from the super¬
vision of the government and beyond the investigation of the
British agent; false certificates of death were produced, and,
he concluded, “every device that unprincipled and unscrupu¬
lous cupidity” could “put in force, assisted by the connivance
or support of those whose duty it was to prevent such proceed¬
ings” were “daily and hourly made use of in this country.”45
  Although this severe arraignment was quite accurate, the
Brazilian government was not entirely to blame for the situa¬
tion. It had taken steps already to remedy the evil, but they
had proved abortive due to circumstances over which the Rio
authorities had little control. Realizing that it would be im¬
possible to guarantee freedom to emancipados as long as they
remained in Brazil, the government included in the law of
1831,46 passed to make the abolition of the trade effective, a
provision that captured slaves should be exported to the coast
of Africa with the greatest possible dispatch.47 Six months later
a decree of eleven articles was issued regulating the reexpor¬
tation of Africans liberated by capture in Brazilian territory.48
But England immediately pointed out that this regulation was
contrary to the convention of 1826 which provided for the
emancipation of the captured slaves in Brazil itself,49 and nego¬
tiations were begun in London and Rio to reconcile reexporta-

  46 This was not the first complaint sent in by English representatives in Brazil.
Consul Hesketh of Maranhao reported to Consul General Chamberlain that fake
burial certificates were being used to enslave emancipados in the north (F. O. 84/71,
Hesketh to Chamberlain, No. 2. February 27, 1827. Enclosure 1). In November,
1830, Aston reported that of 981 Africans sequestered from three vessels (seques¬
trations dated from September 9 and October 30) only 419 remained by Novem¬
ber 20. Such excessive mortality was evidence of fraud, he contended (F. O. 84/111,
Aston to Aberdeen, No. 15). For other complaints, see F. O. 84/122, Aston to
Palmerston, No. 2; F. O. 84/129, Grigg to Palmerston, No. j. Enclosure; Extract
from the report of the minister of justice to the Assembly at the opening session
of May, 1832.
  46 F. O. 84/120, Cunningham and Grigg to Palmerston, No. 18. Copies in Por¬
tuguese and in translation of the Law of November 7, 1831, are given.
  47 Article 2.
  48 F. O. 84/129, Grigg to Palmerston, No. 7. Copy of the decree of April 30,
1832, is given.
  49 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 1. February 13, 1833.
232         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
tion with the provisions of the 1817 and 1826 agreements.
   Palmerston refusing to consider reexportation on the ground
that the fate of the Negro sent to Africa would be death on the
return voyage or re-enslavement after landing, demanded that
the law and decree be rescinded at once,60 and blocked the
efforts of Brazil to secure a safe destination for reexported
slaves. Various places in Africa and America were suggested;
but the only one which received Palmerston’s consent proved
impossible of attainment,61 economic difficulties preventing a
satisfactory arrangement.62 Until some agreement could be
reached which would grant asylum for the reexported slaves,
Brazil was forced, therefore, to continue to dispose of captured
Negroes by auction with the consequent abuses63 complained
of so bitterly by Ouseley.
  As no agreement was ever reached, the disposal of the eman-
cipados continued to be an irritating question between the two
governments64 until local legislation and the extinction of the
traffic settled the problem. Article 6 of the law of 1850 stated
categorically that captured slaves should not be auctioned to
private individuals; in December, 1853, any emancipado who
petitioned the proper authorities at the expiration of his four¬
teen years apprenticeship was declared free; and on September
24, 1864, emancipation was granted to all free Negroes in the
empire.66 Since the extinction of the traffic after 1850 had pre¬
vented the influx of additional emancipados, the second of the
minor causes of friction between London and Rio fell from


  60 F. O. 84/141, Palmerston to Fox, No. 3, and No. 4, Enclosures.
  61 Sierra Leone, the West Indies, and British colonies on the northern coast of
South America were refused by Palmerston. Fie favored negotiations with the
United States in favor of exportation to Liberia (F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palm¬
erston, Nos. 15 and 19; Palmerston to Ouseley, No. 7).
   62 Correio Official, April 24, 1835. Correspondence exchanged between Aureliano
and Fox and Aureliano’s report to the Assembly, dated August 9, 1834.
   63 Ibid., May 20, 1835. Report of the minister of justice to the Assembly, dated
 May 20, 1835.
   64 The fate of the emancipado provoked Christie to severe criticisms of the Brazil¬
 ian government in 1865 (Jvotes on Brazilian Questions, pp. 3-6, 38-39).
   66 Christie, Notes, pp. 38-39; Joaquim Nabuco, Estadista do Imperio, Nabuco de
 Araujo, Sua Vida, Suas Opindes, Sua Epoca, I, 244.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                        233
sight. But as in the first case, Brazil had shown clear and un¬
mistakable evidence of a successful revolt against the pressure
exerted by Great Britain.
  The third of the allied questions arising from England’s at¬
tempts to suppress the traffic, the dispute over the finality of
the decisions of the Sierra Leone commission, did not terminate
in the same manner as the two already discussed. Since the
commission existed by virtue of an international agreement, it
could not be restricted by Brazil to national legislation; and
instead of dropping into oblivion at its expiration in 1845, it
left a heritage of claims to vex the foreign offices of both na¬
tions. The present discussion will be limited to the period dur¬
ing which the commission actually functioned.
  By Castlereagh’s convention of 1817, mixed commissions were
set up, one on British territory in Africa and one on Brazilian
soil in Brazil, to decide on the legality of seizures made under
the terms of the convention. The Rio commission, which has
been discussed in an earlier chapter,66 never became an effi¬
cient instrument for the suppression of the slave trade. But the
court at Sierra Leone, located on English territory and sub¬
ject to the influence of the British Foreign Office, rendered de¬
cisions which aroused the Rio government to heated protest
and left claims that remained unsettled for decades. In this
case the revolt of Brazil against what its ministers termed the
arbitrary and illegal proceedings of Great Britain proved in¬
effectual; yet the attempt was made and friction resulted.


  66 Supra, pp. 180-183. The inability to operate efficiently continued after the
renewal of the 1817 convention was effected in 1826. It is fair to add, however,
that the Rio government in the later period attempted to facilitate its operation
(Brazil, Ministerio das Relagoes Exteriores, Relatorio da Repartifdo dos Negocios dos
Extrangeiros apresentado a Assemblia Geral Legislativa, 1839, pp. 4-5). Located in ter¬
ritory where public opinion strongly favored the traffic and severely hampered by
the difficulties surrounding the disposal of the emancipados, the Rio commission was
hopelessly handicapped. Consequently British cruisers began to take prizes seized
in Brazilian waters to Cape of Good Hope or to Demerara colonies for adjudi¬
cation instead of to the regular mixed commission (Relatorio dos Negocios Extran¬
geiros, 1841, p. 7, and 1844, p. 4). A list of vessels adjudicated by the Rio Commis¬
sion between November 28, 1826, and September 13, 1845, is given in Relatorio
dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1846, pp. 17-21.
234        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Trouble was precipitated by the case of the slave ship Active,
which was brought before the Sierra Leone mixed commission
in May, 1826. The capture had taken place south of the equa¬
tor (the traffic was permitted south of the line until 1830) and
no slaves were on board at the moment of seizure; but it was
fairly well established that three hundred slaves escaped to the
shore and that the ship had obtained the Negroes from north
of the equator. The claim for damages entered by the owners
for illegal seizure was awarded by the commission, but pay¬
ment of damages was to be made only if the governments should
decide that such claims were “according to the true interest
and meaning of the Convention.” In September of the same
year, another slaver, the Perpetuo Defensor, was brought in under
similar circumstances and received the same sentence. Four
months later the Heroina was captured north of the equator
with no slaves on board but with all the equipment necessary
for the transportation of Negroes.67 All of these ships were re¬
turned to the owners by the court since the letter of the con¬
vention had not been violated, but the claims of compensation
for illegal seizure were to be decided upon by the two govern¬
ments.
 The decision was a shrewd one in that it forced negotiations
on the legality of seizure when a vessel was obviously engaged
in illegal traffic although no slaves were actually on board.
Minister Gordon immediately invited the Brazilian govern¬
ment to issue “a joint declaration which” should “set at rest
the above and all the future cases of the same nature,” by
authorizing the seizure of vessels with or without slaves on
board if they were found in places where the trade was not
permitted.68
  By the convention of 1817 authorizing visit and search, de¬
tention on such grounds was illegal if judgment was rendered


  67 For the detailed correspondence relating to the three cases, see: F. O. 84/84,
Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3 and Enclosures: drafts, Aberdeen to Itabayana,
December 1 and 2, 1828; 84/84, Gordon to Dudley, No. 2; 84/95, Draft, Aberdeen
to Itabayana, March 17, 1829.
  68 F. O. 84/71, Gordon to Dudley, No. 1, July 5, 1827.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                        235
according to the letter of the law; and Brazil at once demanded
that a special commission be appointed to review the decisions
of the Sierra Leone court.59 But an appeal from the decisions
of the mixed commissions was forbidden by the same conven¬
tion, and Aberdeen laconically refused to entertain any such
proposal.60 Later, he confessed that there had been an evident
breach of the treaty in the cases of the Activo and the Perpetuo
Defensor, but indemnities had been awarded “provided the
British and Brazilian Governments” agreed in declaring “that
the said sums ought to be paid according to the said Conven¬
tion and not otherwise.” It was not the fault of England, he con¬
tinued, that the agreement in question had not been concluded,
since the Brazilian government had maintained a studied si¬
lence in the face of Gordon’s repeated efforts to conclude an
additional clause to the convention of 1826.61 As to the Heroina,
Aberdeen replied somewhat scornfully that since Brazil had
violated the convention in respect to the issuance of passports
to slavers,62 “England had no alternative” but to consider such
action as the expression of “Brazil’s determination to break
the Convention” and orders had been issued to the commis¬
sioners “to use the latitude thus given to the meaning of the
Convention.” The Heroina was the result of one such capture.
If Brazil did not like this point of view, it could obey the con¬
vention or sign an article containing an equipment clause.63 He

  69 F. O. 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3, Enclosures: drafts,”Aberdeen to
Itabayana/September 15 and November 29, 1828.
  60 Ibid.
  81 Ibid., No. 3, Enclosure: draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, December 1, 1828.
The negotiations referred to were those begun by Gordon in an effort to secure
an equipment clause. By the shrewd manipulation of the Sierra Leone Commission
the question of an equipment clause was thus forced to an issue. See supra, pp. 225-
230.
  69 Aberdeen asserted that “the Brazilian Government themselves have departed
in respect to the Passports, both from the spirit and the letter of the original Con¬
vention: not only by allowing their subjects to infringe with impunity, the stipula¬
tions of the Convention with respect to the Passports actually granted to them [the
Heroina had no papers permitting it to land north of the equator and should not
have been in waters north of the line]” but by issuing passports at variance with
the terms of the convention (F. O. 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3, Enclosure;
draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, December 2).                                83 Ibid.
236         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ordered Gordon to inform the Rio government, therefore, that
England refused to establish a commission to revise the deci¬
sions of the Sierra Leone court, that such sentences were final
and without appeal, and that British cruisers would continue
to stop illicit trade by seizing slavers north of the equator under
similar circumstances.64
   Cruisers assigned to the coast of Africa continued to bring
in vessels suspected of illicit traffic regardless of whether Negroes
were actually on board and the commission continued to re¬
lease the ships but to refuse claims of compensation for time
and expense incurred by the slavers.65 In answer to further
protests by the Brazilian minister at London, Aberdeen ex¬
plained that the cruisers and the court were acting “in strict
accordance with the spirit of the Convention.”66
   Since Great Britain refused to consider a special commission
to revise the decisions of the Sierra Leone court, Brazil’s next
step was to attempt to abolish the tribunal entirely. The mixed
commissions, Rio maintained, had been established to decide
the legality of seizures while the traffic was permitted; but
when abolition came in 1830, there was “nothing for those
courts to decide upon and therefore all sentences pronounced
by them after the 13th of March, 1830,” had to “be considered
as complete nullities.” Moreover, one injustice after another
had been perpetrated by the commission: vessels without slaves
on board had been condemned; ships that had proved they
were not engaged in the trade and others that had just begun
voyages and had not been near the African coast had been de¬
tained; seizures had been made by vessels other than author-

  M F. O- 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3. When Itabayana protested such
seizures and demanded that the cruisers be instructed not to detain vessels on which
no slaves were actually found, Aberdeen refused (F. O. 84/95, Aberdeen to Pon¬
sonby, March 24, 1829).
  *6 The Minerva, Cerqueira, and Creola were detained by cruisers and brought be¬
fore the commission (F. O. 84/95, draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, March 10, 1829).
Other seizures were: Tres Amigos, Tentadora, Eclipse, Venturoso, Esperanza, Voador,
and Vencedora (F. O. 84/111, draft, Aberdeen to Chev. de Mattos, December 10,
1830).
  ** F. O. 84/95, draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, March 17, 1829. The seizures
continued after March 13, 1830, south as well as north of the equator.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                       237
ized ships of war; some vessels had been detained but never
tried; and others that had been granted indemnities had never
received payment. The commission had exceeded its authority
and had adopted a code of action agreeable to its own fancy.
Therefore the imperial government felt justified in attacking
the proceedings at Sierra Leone.67
  Again Britain refused to accede to the demand made by the
Rio Government, for Palmerston pointed out that by the sepa¬
rate article annexed to the treaty of 1817, the mixed commis¬
sions were to continue until some new arrangement should be
reached, or, in case such an agreement was not made, until
fifteen years after the date set for the final abolition. As no
arrangement had been concluded between the two govern¬
ments, the commissions would continue. And furthermore, Eng¬
land could not acquiesce in any re-opening of cases already
decided by the court at Sierra Leone.68
  The negotiations had reached an impasse from which they
never emerged. In 1833 the Rio government made its last futile
effort to secure an appeal from the decisions of the Sierra Leone
court69; and when Palmerston remained obdurate, the Cheva¬
lier de Mattos delivered a formal notice, dated November 30,
in which he stated that his government protested most solemnly
against the injustice and arbitrary decision of Great Britain
and denied that the enforced silence on the subject, which

  97 F. O. 84/122, Palmerston to Mattos, August 16 and September 16, 1831; and
F. O. 84/122, Palmerston to Aston, No. 3, Enclosure.
  98 F. O. 84/122, drafts, Palmerston to Mattos, August 16 and September 16,
1831. The Sierra Leone commission frequently acted without the full quota of
Brazilian commissioners as the unhealthy and desolate character of the town led
representatives nominated by the Rio government to delay sailing or to refuse to
accept the post. This was one cause for the evident anti-Brazilian bias demonstrated
by the commission (F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 9. May 28, 1833).
  69 Brazil offered to submit the revision to the arbitration of a third power, but
Palmerston could “see no reason to doubt the principle upon which” the English
government “declined to submit the Sentences of the Mixed Commission Court
to revision” and refused to consider the arbitration of a third power (F. O. 84 /141,
drafts of correspondence exchanged between Palmerston and Mattos, January 26,
March 6, May 3 and May 18, November 30, and December 13, 1833). This cor¬
respondence was the culmination of the whole matter and served later as the basis
for each side in the claims question.
238         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
would follow the protest, would in any way prejudice the right
of his government to enter claims for damages at a later date.70
On March 13, 1845, the convention signed in 1826 terminated;
the mixed courts continued to sit for six months in order to
dispose of cases arising prior to the expiration of the conven¬
tion71; and on September 13, both the Rio and the Sierra Leone
mixed commissions dissolved. The third question relating to
the suppression of the trade disappeared from the stage, leaving
behind a legacy of claims that were to vex Anglo-Brazilian re¬
lations for decades. In dealing with all three questions, the Rio
court revealed a growing spirit of rebellion against political
dictation from London.
  These three elements of friction in Anglo-Brazilian relations
after 1827 were merely phases of the main point at issue between
the two governments. As long as the slave trade continued,
the question of the equipment clause, the disposal of the eman-
cipados, and the validity of the decisions of the Sierra Leone
commission remained to vex both countries. When the traffic
stopped, with the exception of the legacy of claims, these issues
vanished, leaving behind, however, a heritage of bitter recol¬
lections in the minds of the South Americans and a tradition of
Brazilian procrastination and duplicity in the British Foreign
Office. The main problem throughout the period, therefore,
was to stop the traffic itself.
  Nominally, the slave trade ceased on March 13, 1830, but
there is abundant evidence that importations continued stead¬
ily after that date. From 1824 t° 1827? the period comprised
between the success of the revolution in Brazil and recognition
by European powers, the average annual importation into
Rio72 was slightly above twenty-five thousand Negroes actually
landed. With the announcement of the formal cessation of the
traffic set for 1830, the number of Africans brought to the city


  70 F. O. 84/141, Draft, Mattos to Palmerston, November 30, 1833.
  71 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 10. June 4, 1845.
  72 The figures for the northern regions are incomplete but the statistics for Rio,
gathered by the British consul and faithfully reported to London, may be con¬
sidered sufficiently accurate.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                       239
jumped to 47*45° in J828; to 57,108 in 1829; and to 32,229
in 1830, a year in which no slaver legally could leave the coasts
of Africa later than March 13.73 For the next few years, the
traffic declined since the unusual number brought in between
1827 and 1830 over-supplied the demand.74 The average price
of a young, healthy, male slave previous to the abolition was
about £70; in the early months of 1831, the price fell to £55;
and by July a low mark of ^35 was reached.75 Yet the illicit
importations continued despite the decline in price. The Aurora
Fluminense complained in November of the same year that Ne¬
groes were landed at nearby points, marched through the
streets of Rio, and sold at public auction without action being
taken by the police.76
   In 1835 the minister of justice reported regretfully that the
traffic continued; the provisions of the treaties were being
evaded and the law ignored. The “furor of this barbarous traf¬
fic,” he lamented, “seemed to progress from day to day with
constantly increasing force.”77 The following year the minister78
confessed to the national Assembly that it was impossible to
remedy the evils of the traffic by the methods then in force.
   In 1842, twelve years after the nominal cessation of the trade,
importations still continued. Exact statistics of course are im¬
possible to obtain and figures vary widely. Christie asserted
that over seventy thousand Negroes were imported in that
year.79 The Brazilian government officially estimated the num-

  73 These figures are taken from F. O., Brazil, Consular and Diplomatic Reports,
General Correspondence, 1825-1830. They do not include the number which died
during the passage. In 1827, there died on the voyage over 1,154 with 25,191
landed; 2,539 died on the way in 1828; the number increased to 5,189 in 1829,
and fell to 3,332 in 1830.
  74 Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 217.
  78 F. O. 84/122, Pennell to Palmerston, No. 7. July 23, 1831. The price of the
slave in Africa was £5 (ibid.).
  78 Article in the issue of November 30, 1830. Enclosed in F. O. 84/120, Cunning¬
ham and Grigg to Palmerston, No. 18.
  77 Correio Official, May 20, 1835. Report of Alves Branco to the Assembly.
  78 Antonio Paulino Limpo de Abreo succeeded Alves Branco as minister of jus¬
tice. The citation is from his report to the Assembly, given in Correio Official, May
27, 1836.
  79 Notes, pp. 51-53.
240         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ber to be 17,435; and by 1845 the importation crept up to
nearly twenty thousand, according to the same authority.80
Just where the truth lies between Christie’s seventy thousand
and Rio’s seventeen thousand importations, it is impossible to
ascertain; but the fact is undeniable that a steady stream of
Africans poured into Brazil in spite of the nominal abolition
of the trade in 1830. Neither the pressure exerted by Great
Britain nor the efforts of the central government at Rio sufficed
to stop the traffic between 1830 and 1845.
  It is equally certain, however, that both England and the
Rio government tried to accomplish the desired result. The
persistent, though ineffectual, attempts of Great Britain to se¬
cure an equipment clause and the instructions sent to the Sierra
Leone commission to act according to the spirit and not the
letter of the convention of 1826 demonstrate the determination
of the British to employ every means possible to hinder the il¬
licit trade. In addition to the African squadron maintained to
prevent the slave traffic, a special fleet was kept off the coast
of Brazil. In 1833 Ouseley reported to Palmerston that the Rio
government had implied a wish that more British cruisers of a
light and small class should be sent to the Brazilian coast. Such
vessels should be small enough to follow the slavers into the
lesser harbors and mouths of rivers; armed steam vessels in¬
dependent of the winds would be the most serviceable.81 In
1839, according to the report of the minister of foreign affairs,82
British cruisers had captured 1763 Negroes since his last report;
and two years later detained slavers were being taken by these
cruisers to the Cape of Good Hope or to the Demarara Islands
for adjudication instead of to the regular mixed commission at
Rio.83 In 1844 English vessels were detaining ships flying the
  80 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1852, xiii. The figures are from a
paper ordered printed March 26, 1852, extracts of which are given in this report
to the Assembly by the minister of foreign affairs.
  81 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 8. May 2, 1833.
  84 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1839, pp. 4-5. Between 1810 and
1846 English cruisers captured and liberated, from slavers of all nationalities, 116,-
862 slaves (Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p. 123. His authority is a
return in Parliamentary Papers, 1847-1848, vol. LXIV).
  83 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1841, p. 7.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                     241
Brazilian flag within Brazilian ports before they sailed, al¬
though the evident destination was another national port; the
capture of the Maria Theresa by Commander Hoare of the
Dolphin at Ubatuba was cited as a case in point.84 The persist¬
ence of the British cruisers in Brazilian waters finally became
so disturbing to the coastwise trade of the nation that Aberdeen
was forced by protests from Rio to issue orders that no seizures
should be made in territorial waters without the express ap¬
proval of the local authorities.85
  That England was sincere in its efforts to suppress the trade
needs little proof; it is more difficult to demonstrate that the
central government at Rio likewise endeavored to restrict the
illicit importation of Negroes. Yet the Rio authorities were in
favor of the abolition of the traffic and took what steps were
in their power to make the abolition effective. Ouseley testified
in 1833 to the “desire of the Imperial Government to prevent
that odious and impolitic traffic” but it was unsupported and
found its efforts counteracted in almost every case.86 When one
of the three regents was discovered to be involved in the trade,
the other high officials were greatly embarrassed.87 As a matter
of fact, Ouseley reported,88 the government was “probably sin¬
cere in its wish to prevent the introduction of Negroes,” but
“the feeling against the Slave Trade” was “by no means uni¬
versal among the Inhabitants generally.” To this testimony by
a keen British agent of long experience in Brazil may be added
the admission of Hamilton-Hamilton that there was no dissent¬
ing opinion in the ministry to the prevailing one that there was
urgent need for suppressing the slave trade.89
   This desire of the central authorities to suppress the trade is

  84 Ibid., 1844, p. 4. The Vencedora, Tartaruga, Anna, and Relampago suffered the
like fate. The Brazilians protested this action as being detrimental to their coast¬
wise trade (p. 18). The case of the Maria Theresa was decided in favor of the Bra¬
zilians and the captor was censured, but the seizures continued.
  86 Ibid., p. 20.
  86 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 8.
  87 Ibid., No. 16. Confidential. July 13, 1833.
  88 Ibid., No. 3.
  89 F. O. 13/212, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 47. June 8, 1844.
   16
242         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN RAZIL
evidenced by the various measures promoted by the govern¬
ment after 1830. That these were inadequate in the first place
or were rendered ineffectual after enactment does not prove
the want of determination on the part of the Rio court, for
circumstances beyond the control of the central power pre¬
vented the effective execution of its will until 1848. In spite of
public disapproval, the Brazilian government sincerely at¬
tempted to make the prohibition of the slave trade effective.
  The first of its measures was proposed on the last day of May,
1831, when the Marquez de Barbacena introduced a project
into the Senate, which had as its purpose the enactment of the
national regulations necessary to make the international agree¬
ment effective. It was approved, sent to the Chamber of Depu¬
ties in June, and became a law November 7 after having been
amended by the lower house.90 By the terms of the statute, all
slaves entering the territory of Brazil in the future were declared
free91; the importer of illicit slaves was to be punished according
to the terms imposed by the criminal code on those who re¬
duced free persons to slavery, with the added penalty of a fine
of two hundred milreis per head plus the expense of reexporta¬
tion to Africa. “Importers” were defined as the commander,
master, and mate of the vessel; the actual owner and the pre¬
vious title holder in case he was aware of the intended purpose
of the purchase; any one who invested in the enterprise or ren¬
dered assistance in any way whatsoever in the preparation, the
voyage itself, or the landing of the slaves; and anyone who
knowingly bought slaves brought in by such importers. In case
slavers were captured beyond the territorial waters of Brazil by
national vessels the same process would hold as in the case of
seizures in national ports.          Thirty milreis reward for each per¬
son apprehended was granted to informers; the commander,
officers, and crew of the vessel effecting a seizure on the seas

  90 Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” pp. 1206-210. The text of the law is
given verbatim, pp. 210-211, note 21. It is also to be found in Great Britain, British
and Foreign State Papers, XX, 165. A printed copy in Portuguese with a translation
was enclosed in F. O. 84/120, Cunningham and Grigg to Palmerston, No. 18.
  91 Exception was made of slaves in the service of ships flying the flag of a country
where slavery was lawful.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                       243
were to divide the fines as a reward. Negroes brought in from
Africa as free laborers would not be permitted to land on Bra¬
zilian territory, the officials of the vessel importing such Ne¬
groes being subject to a fine of a hundred milreis and costs of
reexportation. Any amounts over expenses and rewards ac¬
cruing from seizures were to be used for foundling asylums or
hospitals in the provinces in which the seizures occurred.92
  Although the bill was a very real effort to comply with the
convention abolishing the traffic and was the best that could
be done under the circumstances,93 it was inadequate. The
trade was not declared piracy nor was an equipment article
included; and the reexportation scheme, a sincere effort of the
Brazilian government to remedy the evils arising from the dis¬
posal of freed slaves,94 was blocked by England as being con¬
trary to the terms of the convention of 1826. Three years later
the Senate, influenced by the Regency, attempted to remedy
the worst defect of the bill by passing a law in which an equip¬
ment article was included, but the Chamber of Deputies killed
the project, as we have already noted, by adjourning discus¬
sion.95 The additional articles including the desired clause, ne¬
gotiated the next year between the foreign offices of Rio and
London, failed also.
  In 1837 Barbacena again presented a project which, in bal¬
ancing opposing interests, attempted to secure effective meas-

  91 Articles I-IX, respectively.
  93 Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 211.
  94 By decree of April 12, 1832, the Regency attempted to regulate the reexporta¬
tion of captured slaves. All vessels should be searched by the police or by a justice
of the peace immediately after arrival and before departure for evidence of illicit
slave trading; any blacks found on board were to be noted, a minute description
of physical characteristics written down, and a check-up on departure to be made
by the authorities to see that they left the country; if blacks should prove to be
illicit slaves or free laborers, they were to be seized and reexported at the expense
of the importer; deaths of blacks while in port were not to be valid unless the ac¬
tual body was produced and checked by the description; sales of Negroes recently
brought from Africa (the bofal was easily distinguished by his state of savagery)
should be investigated by the authorities to see if the black was landed before
March 13, 1830 (F. O. 84/129, Grigg to Palmerston, No. 7. Enclosure).
  95 The bill passed the Senate on August 21, 1834 (Alves, “A Questao do Ele¬
mento Servil,” p. 221).
244         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ures for operation on the high seas by relinquishing the gain
made within the national territory. The bill, which passed the
Senate on August 9, included an equipment clause, but article
XIII revoked the law of November 7, 1831. Seizure, there¬
fore, might be made on the high seas in case the vessel was
equipped for the trade; but once the slaver was in Brazilian
territory, he would be safe as there would be no national law
forbidding importation.96 The Chamber of Deputies once again
defeated the project of the Senate.
  In the meantime, efforts were made to stop the traffic by
propaganda in the government newspapers97 and by main¬
taining armed vessels along the coast. In 1833 the minister of
marine requested that there be placed at his disposal the “most
efficacious means” of stopping the traffic, namely, a sufficient
number of small vessels armed and equipped to capture slav¬
ers. The two schooners under his orders for that purpose were
inadequate and he requested a greater number,98 the need for
which was especially urgent in view of the fact that he had
already promised a man-of-war to patrol the coast of the prov¬
ince of Sao Paulo.99 In May of the same year Consul General
Ouseley reported the sincere lamentations expressed by the
Rio ministry over the inadequacy of the means at its disposal
and advised the Foreign Office of the desire, implied by the
Brazilian minister, to see more British cruisers off the coast of
Brazil.100 Four years later the foreign minister was urging the
Assembly to take some action on the articles signed by Alves
Branco and Minister Fox on July 27, 1835,101 while he re-

  98 Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 228.
  97 Correio Official, February 20, 1836 and May 27, 1836; Jornal do Commercio,
April 24, 1830 (enclosed in F. O. 84/129, Grigg to Palmerston, No. 7); Diario do
Povo, April 24, 1832 (enclosed in F. O. 84/129, Grigg to Palmerston, No. 13).
  68 Report of May, 1833. Enclosed in F. O. 84/138, Rio Commission to Palmers¬
ton, No. 8. June 17, 1833.
  89 The president of the province wrote to the minister, explaining the hopeless
nature of the attempts to prevent the landing of illicit slaves and requesting the
man-of-war (F. O. 84/138, Rio Commission to Palmerston, No. 13. November
12, 1833).
  100 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 8.
  101 Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1837, p. 6. The articles referred to were the
                       BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                  245
gretted the futility of the efforts made by the government to
suppress the traffic.102
   It is clear, therefore, that the Rio government attempted to
stop the traffic. Handicapped by popular opinion which fav¬
ored the importation of Negroes, it was unable to carry out
its wish, and Great Britain, by the arbitrary nature of the meth¬
ods employed to suppress the trade, failed to ease the situation
in which the central government found itself. Incapable of
stopping the traffic and unable to cooperate with England be¬
cause such cooperation meant submitting to measures which
would make Brazil virtually a British protectorate, the Brazil¬
ian authorities were helpless in the face of the dilemma. Al¬
though both governments wished to achieve the same object,
their common purpose failed to bring united action; instead,
the friction which began immediately after the signing of the
convention of 1826 increased in bitterness until the crisis of
1845 ended even the pretense of cooperation between London
and Rio.
  The issue was forced in 1845 bY the expiration of the fifteen
years during which the convention of 1826 was to be in force.
The agreement had never been satisfactory to England and
repeated efforts103 had failed to secure the desired modification;
yet the convention was the basis for the existence of the Sierra
Leone commission and it granted to British cruisers the pre¬
cious right to visit and search Brazilian merchantmen in time
of peace. If the agreement were allowed to expire, Great Brit¬
ain, at a time when importations were numbered by increas¬
ing thousands, would be deprived of the only two instruments
that had yielded results in checking the traffic. On the other
hand, Brazil would be freed from the detested legacy inherited
from an absolutist prince who had foisted the agreement upon
his people under pressure from a stronger power. The issue

stipulations contained in the additional convention signed by the plenipotentia¬
ries but unratified due to the refusal of the Chamber of Deputies to accept them.
  102 Ibid., 1838, p. 14.
  103 On an average of every two years between 1827 and 1844 England attempted
negotiations with a view to modifying the convention. In 1827, 1829, 1831, 1835,
1837, 1839-40, and 1841-43 more or less formal discussions occurred.
246         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
was clearly defined: could England, by repeating the exploit
of 1825-27, secure the acceptance of Brazil to a convention
which in popular opinion was derogatory to the dignity and
national interests of the nation?
  A warning was sounded at the time of the Ellis mission in
1842 that a renewal of the 1826 agreement was profoundly
distasteful to the Brazilian public. When it was announced
that D. Pedro had nominated representatives to treat with the
English plenipotentiary, great apprehension was manifested
in all classes of society. Brazilians of every rank were anxious
to have the convention terminate with the result that public
opinion “was energetically resolved to reject any convention
whatsoever with England.” The minister of foreign affairs,
Aureliano de Souza e Oliveira Coutinho, lost popularity and
his brother, who was running for election to the Assembly, was
defeated, due in large part to the disgust of the public over the
conduct of the minister. So uncertain was the Assembly itself
over the question of Aureliano’s ability to sustain Brazilian
rights in the face of British pressure, that it demanded the en¬
tire correspondence exchanged between the minister and the
English envoy. When his successor, Honorio Hermeto, broke
off the negotiations, he won amazing signs of public favor.104
  No agreement was ever reached, despite long negotiations
in Rio and London,105 and on March 12, 1845, Hamilton re¬
ceived a note from the Brazilian Foreign Office, which stated
succinctly that “under the Stipulations for the Slave Trade
Convention between Great Britain and Brazil, the Conven-

  104 Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 99-108. Henry Ellis presented his credentials
as envoy extraordinary on November 19, 1842. He continued with Honorio Her¬
meto Carneiro Leao the negotiations begun by Hamilton for the renewal of the
treaty of commerce and the slave trade convention (Brazil, Ministerio das Rela¬
tes Exteriores, Relates Diplomatics do Brasil, contendo os names dos Representantes
Diplomaticos do Brazil no extrangeiro e dos representantes Diplomaticos dos diversos paises
no Rio de Janeiro de 1808 a 1912, p. 175). Honorio Hermeto succeeded Aureliano as
foreign minister on January 20, 1843 (F. O. 13/227, Supplement, Foreign Min¬
isters of Brazil, 1822-1845).
  105 Hamilton continued negotiations in Rio after Ellis’ failure, but his efforts
dealt largely with the commercial treaty. The details of the negotiations are dis¬
cussed in the chapter on the economic phase of Anglo-Brazilian relations.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                   247
 tion of July 28, 1817, would cease to have force and effect
 from the day following; and that consequently from that date,
 namely, the 13th of the month, would cease the right of visit
 and search provided for by the said convention of July 28, 1817,”
 with all the additional articles, instructions, and provisions ap¬
 pended thereto. The mixed commissions would sit for six
 months longer to finish cases that might be pending, if England
 agreed to the extension in time.106 On the following day the
 minister of justice notified the courts of law of the cessation of
 the right of visit and search, and informed them that until
further instructions captured slavers would be tried in the
ordinary courts.107
   The notice of expiration was received with approval by the
Brazilian public. An article in the Jornal do Commercio108 asserted
that the cessation of the terms of the convention was “a motive
for congratulations as regards” Brazilian “National Commerce,
which” was “thus freed from the vexations to which it” had
“been subjected by the violence of the British cruisers, and
which would have annihilated it entirely; and it” was “also a
motive for” Brazilians sincerely “to congratulate the English
Merchants established in the Country, to whom the new order
of things” could not “but be advantageous.” Moreover, the
article continued, no one was “ignorant of the progressive
prosperity of British Commerce in Brazil since 1808, of the
benevolence which Englishmen met with, of the Confidence
with which they came to the Country, and of the good recep¬
tion and preference which they encountered; but everyone”
knew “also that from 1835, the period when the violences of
the British cruisers commenced, and were exercised without
measure, and even in contempt of the Treaties, that confidence
and mutual kindly feeling began to be weakened and an irri¬
tation of minds appeared, which unhappily manifested itself


  106 F. O. 84/581, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 8. The note is given also in Rela-
torio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1846, Supplement, Document 1.
  107 F. O. 84/581, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 8.
  108 Hamilton sent the article to London as an example of the opinion commonly
held by the Brazilians. It was published in the issue of March 19, 1845.
248         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
more than once in acts, and which at length might have pro¬
duced the most fearful consequences.”
  The article concluded with a significant paragraph. “We
who acknowledge,” it said, “how advantageous the produce
of the Industry of England, and its capital are to Brazil; we
who believe that no Foreign Commerce is more useful to the
Country, desire that the former good feeling be reestablished
and therefore we sincerely wish that the Right of Visit, happily
terminated, be interred forever.”
  Another illustration both of the resentment felt by the Bra¬
zilians against the arbitrary position assumed by England and
of their relief over the termination of the Convention occurred
in the speeches given in the session of the Assembly of March
31. One speaker109 pointed out that the offended nationality
of the Brazilians appeared desirous of supporting the traffic,
“if only in despite of England. If there was not a nation,” he
said with perhaps more emotion than veracity, “pretending to
impose the laws on” Brazilians, certainly their “Christian feel¬
ings, their patriotism” would have made them “reflect upon
the matter, and it” was “not possible that so many sessions
would have passed away without some steps having been taken
to put an end to the traffic in some manner or other, but
treated” as the Brazilians had been, they had on their part
“tried to uphold the traffic if it were only to show” their re¬
sistance.
  This rejoicing over the termination of the right of visit and
search was premature, for Aberdeen had no intention of re¬
linquishing the advantage which England had stubbornly
maintained for thirty years. In reply to the Brazilian note of
March 12, 1845, advising him of the termination of the con¬
vention and the cessation of the right of visit and search, he
sent an ominous warning110 to the government at Rio. In a
detailed review of the history of Anglo-Brazilian relations since

  109 Junqueira’s speech was forwarded to London by Hamilton, F. O. 84/581,
Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 25. April 21, 1845.
  110 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 10. June 4, 1845. Instructions for
an official communication to be presented to the Brazilian government.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                   249
1828 in so far as they related to the slave trade, he pointed out
England’s efforts to obtain efficient cooperation from the Bra¬
zilian government and the failure to reach an agreement which
would serve as a basis for the complete suppression of the traf¬
fic. When the negotiations of 1840-41 failed, he had warned
Rio that if the Brazilian government still declined “to enter with
Great Britain into formal engagements calculated to give full
effect to the declared intentions of the Parties of the Conven¬
tion of 1826 for the total and final abolition of the Slave Trade
of Brazil,” it would “remain for Her Majesty to take alone and
by Her Own Means the steps which she” might “feel called
upon to adopt for carrying into full and complete effect the
humane object of the obligations imposed upon Her Majesty
by the first Article of the Convention.”111
  The warning, he continued, passed unheeded, the next com¬
munication from the Rio Office being the notification of March
12. He admitted that according to the terms of the agreement,
the convention of 1817 with all its annexes terminated on
March 13 last; but in that case, he affirmed, England was
forced to fall back on the stipulation of the first article of
the convention of 1826, “under which Her Majesty” had “acquired
the right to order the seizure of all Brazilian subjects found upon the
high seas engaged in the Slave Trade, of punishing them as pirates, and
of disposing of their vessels in which they ” might “be captured together
with the goods belonging to them as ''bona piratoram’. ” Great Brit¬
ain had hoped to the very last moment that Rio would not
force it to this step; but it now had no alternative but to ad¬
vise the Brazilian government that the necessary legislation
would be proposed in the English Parliament for the complete
execution of that article.112
  In pursuance of the intentions announced in this letter, Aber¬
deen had a bill introduced in Parliament giving to the courts
of admiralty the “power to take cognizance of and to adjudi¬
cate upon all” Brazilian “vessels captured for carrying on the

  111 The first article declared the slave trade to be piracy.
  112 Aberdeen agreed to the extension of time granted to the mixed commissions
to enable them to close pending cases.
250         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
Slave Trade.” Cruisers would continue to detain and visit
slavers as under the conditions specified by the convention of
1826; but instead of taking prizes to the mixed commission for
adjudication, they were to bring them before British admiralty
or vice-admiralty courts.113 At the same time Aberdeen in¬
structed his agent at Rio to inform the Brazilian government
that this bill would not be passed, or in case it became law, it
would be repealed, if the Brazilian trade should cease entirely
or the Rio government should enter into satisfactory agree¬
ment with Great Britain.114
 The bill became law on August 8, 1845, and on the next
day, Aberdeen sent Hamilton instructions115 for concluding a
new agreement with Brazil. The annexes and stipulations of
Castlereagh’s convention of 1817 were to be renewed; seizures
by English cruisers were to be authorized on the grounds of
equipment for the trade; and the duration of the new agree¬
ment was to be for a specified length of time with a stated num¬
ber of months to pass after the notification of termination by
either country. In a confidential aside to his agent, Aberdeen
added that in case of abrogation by Brazil, England could
again revert to the methods of suppression announced in the
bill just passed.
  Any hope of a new convention, however, was dissipated by
the passage of the Aberdeen Bill. Negotiations for a new agree¬
ment were already under way116 when news of the enactment
into law of the warning issued by the English Foreign Office
blocked further proceedings. Limpo de Abreu, Brazilian for¬
eign minister, advised Hamilton that the “new act of the Brit¬
ish Parliament was virtually a menace” and that a renewal of
the old convention would be “inadequate and unprofitable to
Brazil unless some stipulation offering more positive security
to her Coasting Trade” was included.117 Full powers were is-
  113 Great Britain, British and Foreign State Papers, XXXIV, 1216-1219; F. O.
 4/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 12.
  114 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 12.
  115 Ibid., No. 18.
  118 F. O. 83/582, Hamilton to Aberdeen, Nos. 25, 31, and 35.
  117 Ibid., No. 40.
                       BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                  251
sued to a Brazilian plenipotentiary to negotiate with Hamil¬
ton118 but nothing resulted from the nomination.119 Hamilton
finally gave up hope in December and advised London of the
utter failure of his endeavors to obtain a new treaty.120
  Only an incurable optimist could have hoped for a renewal
of the convention in view of the storm which the Aberdeen
Bill created in Brazil. An able note121 written by Limpo de
Abreu phrased the point of view not only of the Foreign Office
but of the nation as well. In his reply to the act of the British
Parliament, he pointed out that no nation had the right to
exercise an act of jurisdiction over the property or persons of
another country, particularly within the territory of the second
nation. Visit and search on the high seas was exclusively a
belligerent right and unlawful in time of peace; yet Great
Britain by national legislation was proceeding contrary to in¬
ternational usage and was violating the sovereignty and inde¬
pendence of a free nation. Since the convention which declared
slave trading to be piracy had expired, that provision termi¬
nated also, particularly as no universal consent to treat the
traffic as piracy existed. In conclusion he stated emphatically
that “the Aberdeen Bill was not based either on the text or on
the spirit of the Convention of 1826; it contradicted the clearest
principles of the rights of nations, violated the sovereignty and
independence of Brazil and of all nations.” Therefore Brazil
refused to accept responsibility for the consequences of the bill
and affirmed its belief that the act was the result “of force and
violence.” His government at once entered claims for the dam¬
ages which its subjects might suffer as a consequence of acts
performed under the authority of the bill.122
  118 F. O. 84/583, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 42.
  118 Ibid., No. 52.
  120 Ibid., No. 55.
  m The note was dated October 22, 1845. It is given in Brazil, Relatorio dos
Negocios Extrangeiros, 1846, Supplement, Document 3.
  122 An acrimonious exchange of letters between the two foreign offices followed
the passage of the Aberdeen Bill but neither side moved its opponent to modify
his position (F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 18; F. O. 84/582, Hamil¬
ton to Aberdeen, Nos. 25, 35, and 40; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros,
1846, Supplement, Document 29).
252        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  The issue was clearly defined: the Brazilian government,
which thus far had been unable to suppress the slave trade,
renounced the convention granting to England the two instru¬
ments employed for the abolition of the traffic, namely, the
mixed commission at Sierra Leone and the right of visit and
search. The utmost pressure by Great Britain failed to modify
that determination; hence the London Foreign Office decreed
that Brazilian slave ships were to be captured “under the some¬
what singular authority of a British statute,”123 until the Rio
government should agree to a satisfactory convention with
England. Persuasion had failed; coercion was to be employed
to quell the Brazilian revolt against submission to the desires
of the London Foreign Office.
  It is evident from the foregoing discussion that the twenty
years between 1825 and 1845 witnessed a steady decline in the
political influence exerted by Great Britain over Brazil.      In
1825 ^e larger power, to all appearances, was beginning to
exercise a virtual protectorate over its South American ally,
thus carrying on the tradition of Anglo-Portuguese relations
in a new setting. But friction that grew more embittered as
time passed arose over the continuance of the slave trade. The
three allied questions of an equipment clause, the disposal of
emancipados, and the finality of the decisions of the Sierra Leone
commission, increased the ill-feeling between London and Rio,
which not even the desire, common to both governments, of
stopping the traffic could surmount. The smoldering resent¬
ment felt by Brazil over what it termed the arbitrary and dom¬
inating action of England broke into open revolt at the expi¬
ration of the convention of 1826 when GreatBritain, determined
on the suppression of the traffic at any cost, employed coercion
when persuasion failed. Could that revolt be maintained, or
would the Rio government be forced to come to terms with
London and sign an agreement satisfactory to the British For¬
eign Office? The simplest solution to the crisis would be for
the Brazilians to stop the traffic by their own efforts, ignore
Great Britain’s stand, and maintain their attitude of hostility
 123 Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p. 130.
               BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                       253
until London granted recognition of the fact that the tradi¬
tional position of England in Portugal could not be continued
in Brazilian affairs. Such, as a matter of fact, was to be the
solution of the crisis of 1845, as the succeeding twenty years
were to show.
                               CHAPTER X


        THE DECLINE OF BRITISH POLITICAL
                            PREEMINENCE


By 1845 the efforts of the London Foreign Office to suppress
the slave trade had forced England into an extraordinary posi¬
tion. In that year the means which it had employed to suppress
the traffic since 1817 slipped from its grasp, for the interna¬
tional agreements authorizing them terminated. Thus deprived
of the only instruments which it considered effective in restrain¬
ing the traffic, England faced the necessity of withdrawing en¬
tirely its opposition to the Brazilian slave trade or of finding a
way to impose its will on the empire. The second alternative
was chosen, for the Foreign Office announced that it consid¬
ered the declaration of piracy contained in the first article of
the extinct treaty to be perpetual and that it would continue
to act against the Brazilian slave trade on the authority not of
a bi-partite agreement but of a special statute passed by the
British Parliament to cover cases of piracy arising under the
declaration. That the Brazilian government denied the per¬
petual nature of the first article of the treaty of 1826 did not
alter the case; the Aberdeen Bill was enacted and seizures
continued.
  The activity of the British cruisers after 1845 demonstrated
the determination of the London Office to check the Brazilian
traffic at any cost. Between October 13, 1845, and May 16 of
the following year fifteen vessels flying the Brazilian flag were
seized by British cruisers and submitted to English admiralty
courts for adjudication.1 The protests of the Rio government
elicited the reply that the Aberdeen Act authorizing such seiz-

 1 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847, Supplement, Note 8.
         DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                     255
ures would be repealed if the Brazilians would sign an agree¬
ment similar to that concluded between England and Portugal
in 1842, conceding the right of visit and search with seizure
on the grounds of equipment for the trade.2 Since Brazil made
signature of any arrangement whatsoever contingent upon a
clause which would grant indemnity for seizures made under
the Aberdeen Act, and since the granting of such indemnities
by England would be equal to a confession of the illegality of the
actions of the cruisers, no agreement was possible3 and the ac¬
tivity of the British vessels continued.4 Between August, 1849,
and May, 1852, ninety Brazilian ships were seized by British
cruisers.5
  When in 1850 the Rio government again entered a vehement
protest against what it termed particularly flagrant breaches
of international usage, Minister Hudson made “known to the
Brazilian Govt, that the only way to avoid the continuance of
such inconvenient questions, and perhaps even of more serious
ones, would be for it to execute faithfully and energetically its
promises, and to stop entirely the slave traffic in Brazil!”6 Un¬
til such action should be taken, it would be impossible to stop
visit and seizure.7 Moreover, he added by way of admonition,
the present state of affairs was “ignominious” and the Brazil¬
ian government was “by the violation of its promises, the pro¬
moter not only of crime in Brazil but also of desolation and
barbarism in Africa.”8
  The repeal of the Aberdeen Bill by the negotiation of another
convention was out of the question; the only other possibility
lay in the complete extermination of the traffic itself. Yet this

  * Ibid., 1848, p. 6.                     * Ibid-, 1847. P- 8.
  4 Early in January, 1850, the Santa Cruz was seized between S. Sebastiao and
Rio by a British cruiser, declared a pirate, burned, and sunk, and its crew set
ashore. The Paguete de Santos suffered a like fate (ibid., 1850, notes 1 to 6 and 7
to 13).
  6 These are Brazilian figures (Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, I, 364, note 11).
  6 Brazil, Relalorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1851, Annex B, No. 4.
  7 Ibid., No. 6. Hudson stated succinctly that when there should be “not one
Negro ship to be apprehended by English vessels in these waters, these English
ships” would “abstain from making such captures (ibid., No. 20).”
  8 Ibid., No. 8.
256          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
avenue appeared as hopeless as the attempt to conclude a new
agreement, for the importation of Africans increased astonish¬
ingly after 1845. By the official estimates9 of the Brazilian gov¬
ernment the number of slaves brought into the country rose
from 19,453 in 1845 to over fifty thousand in 1846, to fifty-six
thousand in 1847, and to sixty thousand in 1848. The number
dropped to fifty-four thousand in 1849, but that was little con¬
solation to the London Office in view of the extraordinary
number of importations made in the years following the termi¬
nation of the treaty of 1826. Evidently something more severe
than the Aberdeen Act itself was needed; and in June, 1850,
orders were received by the British cruisers to enter the ports of
Brazil and seize all ships fitted out for the slave traffic.10 There¬
after English war vessels nosed into bays, rivers, and ports of
the empire, seizing slavers and carrying them off for adjudica¬
tion in British admiralty courts or destroying them in case of
resistance.* 11 These orders were suspended for a few months in
1850, but early in the following year they were declared in full
force once more.12 It was not until June, 1852, that these orders
were cancelled and the activity of the British cruisers again
limited to the high seas.13
  The attitude assumed by Great Britain in regard to the Bra¬
zilian slave trade was the result of active propaganda carried
on in England. Between 1823 and 1838 attention, which had
been centered since 1807 on securing agreements with other
nations to suppress the traffic,14 was directed toward the aboli-


  • Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1852, xiii.
  10 Ibid., 1851, Annex B, No. 19.
  11 One of the interesting incidents which resulted from these orders occurred in
Paranagud where the Cormorant entered to destroy a “nest of pirate slave ships”
and was fired upon by the Brazilian fort, one seaman being killed and two wounded
(ibid., No. 15). Hudson requested the Rio government to issue orders to all fortres¬
ses not to fire on English ships making seizures in Brazilian ports (ibid., No. 22).
The Brazilian minister refused brusquely as such an order would acknowledge the
right of England to make seizures in Brazilian waters on the strength of a British
statute (ibid., No. 23).
  14 Ibid., 1851, No. 18. The suspension was due to the Brazilian act of September
4, 1850. The orders were renewed in January, 1851.
  13 Ibid., 1853, Annex, No. 25.                               14 Supra, chapter VII.
         DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                      257
tion of slavery itself within the British Empire.15 The abolition¬
ist movement, which succeeded partially in 1833 and com¬
pletely five years later, gave way in turn to a renewed interest
in the international trade when the reformers, finishing one
task and realizing the failure of the earlier movement, turned
to making the foreign agreements effectual.16 In 1838 T. F.
Buxton, who had inherited the mantle of Wilberforce, pro¬
posed a plan of operation to Melbourne, Glenelg, Palmerston,
Howick, Hobhouse, Spring-Rice, Grey, Stanley, and others in
the ministry; won the approval of the cabinet; organized the
Society for the Extinction of the Slave Trade and the Civiliza¬
tion of Africa17 in 1839; and published his Remedy in 1840.18 In
1839 also, Joseph Sturge started his British and Foreign Anti-
Slavery Society in an effort to stop the traffic by abolishing
slavery itself in all nations where that institution still remained.19
   At the same time economic interests became involved in the
effort to stop the traffic carried on almost exclusively by Spain,
Portugal, Brazil, and the United States. The ten shilling extra
duty on Indian sugar was removed in 1836, permitting the
cheap-labor product of India to compete with the British West
Indies commodity20; five years later despite the opposition of
the East and West Indian interests and the abolitionists, the
government reduced the prohibitive additional duties on for¬
eign sugar.21 The export of machinery from England to Brazil,

  16 T. F. Buxton, Memoirs, pp. 383-384, 442-461; W. L. Mathieson, British Slavery
and its Abolition, 1823-1838, passim.
  15 Buxton laid his first investigation of the slave trade before Parliament, May,
12, 1835, with the recommendation that new efforts be made to stop the traffic
which was going on despite the agreements for its suppression (Memoirs, pp. 382-
384)-
  17 At the first meeting Prince Albert presided. Among the four thousand who
attended were nobles, prelates, and statesmen (W. L. Mathieson, Great Britain and
the Slave Trade, 1833-1863, p. 51).
  18 Buxton, Memoirs, pp. 447-461, and The African Slave Trade, The Remedy.
  19 Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, pp. 47-48.
  20 In the first year of equal duties 14,000 tons of India sugar entered England;
ten years later 80,000 tons entered (Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p.
76).
  21 The argument used by the opposition was that foreign sugar was grown by
slave labor whereas the British article was produced by free labor (Hansard,
   17
258          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
intended largely for sugar-mills, more than doubled between
1845 and 1847; from Bahia in 1846 there were shipped sixty-
six thousand sugar barrels and in 1848, ninety-eight thousand.
Coincident with this increased demand for sugar came a growth
in slave importations, for, as we have seen, from twenty thou¬
sand in 1845 the number of Africans brought into Brazil in¬
creased to over fifty thousand the next year.22
   Thus both reformers and economic interests were concerned
in stopping the flow of cheap labor to Brazil,23 and the period
of severest measures directed against the slave trade of the em¬
pire coincided with the renewed activity of the reformers and
the movement toward free trade.24 The vigorous action of the


Debates, 1841, pp. 269, 641). Peel cut down sugar duties until only ten shillings
preference remained to the British grown article after the expiration of the Brazil¬
ian treaty in November, 1844. In July, 1846, the equalization scheme whereby a
uniform duty of fourteen shillings per cwt. was to be levied on all sugar regardless
of origin was ordered to be initiated in July, 1847, the plan to be consummated by
1851 (Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, pp. 82-84).
  22 Mathieson, op. cit., pp. 91-92.
  23 There were certain economic interests which opposed coercion in suppressing
the Brazilian traffic. The Aberdeen Act was unpopular in northern England, a
member from Manchester moving its repeal in 1849. John Bright called attention
to the four or five millions of capital and three millions of export to Brazil and dem¬
onstrated the damage done to British interests by the slave trade controversy (Han¬
sard, Debates, 1849, pp. 75$> 7^3"7^7> 800). When a motion to withdraw the whole
preventive system and coercive methods was made in 1849 and 1850, Cobden,
Bright, and Gladstone voted in favor of the proposal (Mathieson, op. cit., pp. 105-
111). The motion was defeated by 232 to 154. A committee of the Lords also sup¬
ported coercion and reported against the proposal to cease coercive methods.
  24 The detailed study of this activity in England and the steps taken by the
British government to suppress the trade have been presented by Mathieson in
Great Britain and the Slave Trade. The author’s point of view is expressed in the pref¬
ace when he states,   It is a controversial story; but though not without experience
in the treatment of such themes, I have found no scope for impartiality.” He
identifies himself completely with those .who attempted to suppress the trade by
coercion. Less than one paragraph is devoted to the Aberdeen Bill; no reference
is made to the correspondence in the Foreign Office Archives; and no citation
from any Brazilian historian or document is given although an entire chapter is
devoted to “The Brazilian Crisis.” For a brief review of the efforts of England to
suppress the Brazilian traffic and for a detailed account of the participation of the
United States in that trade see Lawrence F. Hill “Abolition of the African Slave
Trade to Brazil,” Hispanic American Historical Review, May, 1931. Other informative
articles are: Jane Addams, “The Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade,” Journal
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                      259
Foreign Office, which threatened to undermine English influ¬
ence in the South American empire, was the result of this pres¬
sure and of British public opinion created by those interested
in suppressing the Brazilian traffic by coercive means.25
  Just as the London Office shaped its policy under the influ¬
ence of local conditions in England, so the action of the Rio
court reflected the national situation in Brazil. From 1830 to
1848 the ministry admitted year after year its inability to stop
the trade; from 1848 to 1850 the ground was prepared for de¬
cisive action; in 1850 an effective measure was forced through
the Assembly by the cabinet; and by 1853 the traffic ceased.
Was the failure of the Rio court from 1830 to 1848 due merely
to its supineness and duplicity; was the sudden change of policy
to vigorous and effective action after 1848 due solely or even
in large part to British coercive measures26; or was there some
decisive change in national conditions in 1848 which enabled
the cabinet at last to enforce its will in regard to the slave
trade question?
  It will be remembered that the success of the Brazilian strug¬
gle for independence was due to the support which both the
Portuguese party and the Brazilian patriots gave D. Pedro. It
will be remembered also that as success became assured, the
young prince inclined to the Portuguese, or absolutist, party
and alienated the Patriot, or constitutionalist, party, although,
as Jos6 Bonifacio admitted, the latter group was the powerful
element in the new nation. In 1831 the Brazilians expelled the
absolutist prince with the result that thereafter the destiny of
the empire lay in the hands of the native aristocracy: Brazil
after 1831 was controlled by the Brazilians.27


of Negro History, October, 1925, and R. W. VanAlstyne, “British Right of Search
and the African Slave Trade,” Journal of Modern History, II, No. 1.
   26 Lord John Russell admitted in 1861 that public opinion was a large factor
in the adherence of the government to the policy of coercion (Parliamentary Debates,
 1861, p. 961).
   18 Mathieson believes that it was due to the pressure exerted by the British that
the Rio government was prodded into action after 1848 and especially in 1850
{Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p. 133”135) -
   *7See supra, pp. 188-191, 211-213, 217-219.
26o          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  The native aristocracy with roots that extended back to the
early seventeenth century was based on land. The landowner
established his family socially as well as financially while he
arrogated to himself absolute power over slaves, dependents,
renters, share-croppers, mechanics, overseers, members of his
own family—any who existed on his possessions. In the north
the basis of this class distinction was the cultivation of sugar;
in the south, the plantation of the bandeirante28 or his descendant;
in both north and south the labor supply of the engenho or plan¬
tation was dependent on the slave trade.29
   It was this native aristocracy dependent on land and slave
labor which rose to power in 1831. Opponents of absolutist
centralization, this element favored a constitutionalist or even
a republican regime; and for the next ten years Brazil passed
through a period of severe internal readjustment when the an¬
archy and chaos which was sweeping over so many of the Span¬
ish republics threatened to dissolve the central government es¬
tablished at Rio.30 Under various names and led by different
figures, two main parties emerged and struggled for control,
the liberals and the conservatives.
   The liberals favored democratic forms, strove to diminish
the authority of the central government, worked to gain more
autonomy for the provinces, and appealed to the lower classes
and the radicals for support.31 The camaras32 (town councils)
were encouraged to enlarge their powers and decentralization

  28 The bandeirante was a member of the famous expeditions called bandeiras which
explored the interior of Brazil and wrested from the Spaniards three-fourths of
what became the Brazil of to-day. These expeditions originated in the captaincy
of Sao Paulo (Alfonso de E. Taunay, Historia Geral das Bandeiras Paulistas, 6 vols.).
  29 For a discussion of the rise of this Brazilian aristocracy and the manner in
which that class obtained control of the Brazilian government in 1831, see Alan
K. Manchester, The Rise of the Brazilian Aristocracy,” The Hispanic American
Historical Review, May, 1931.
  30 J- M. Pereira da Silva, Situation Sociale, Politique et Tconomique de VEmpire du
Brisil, pp. 35 ff.
    Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Biazileiro, p. 42; Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 29.
  32 The legal basis for the native aristocracy lay in the right to vote for or sit in
the camara. The town council had always been the center of the influence and ac¬
tivity of the native aristocracy (See Manchester, “Rise of the Brazilian Aristoc¬
racy,” p. 145).
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                      261
followed the absolutism of the exiled prince,33 the local bodies
thus becoming the key to the enforcement of the law with the
resultant ability to checkmate the execution of the imperial
decrees by the central authority.34 Thus the camaras, which
were controlled by the landed aristocracy, or the provincial
assemblies, which were responsive to the attitude of the locality,
could defy successfully the will of the Rio government in its
efforts to suppress the slave trade by serving as the effective
vehicles for popular opinion which considered the importations
beneficial to the agricultural life of the country.35 When threat¬
ened with defeat by the Conservatives, these Liberals, or de¬
centralists, were ready to resort even to arms in their effort to
maintain autonomy in the face of the centralization policy of
their opponents.36 The keynote to the ten years of regency rule
following 1831, therefore, was this conflict between the forces
of centralization37; nor was the issue settled until 1848 when
despite the disruptive tendencies manifested in the period be¬
tween 1841 and 1848, the Rio government was able to extend
its authority until it no longer feared the separatist efforts of
the Liberals.38
  The year 1848 was the turning point in the struggle to estab¬
lish a strong central government. During the four years prior
to this date, short-lived, ineffective coalition cabinets consisting
of leaders from all groups attempted to manage affairs with
no true majority possible in the national Assembly. But in 1848
the abortive revolt of the Liberals in Pernambuco resulted in

  33 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VIII, 284-285.
  34 Ibid., pp. 299-301.
  36 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1832, p. 5.
  36 The liberals were instigators of the revolts in Rio Grande do Sul (1835-1845),
in Minas Geraes (1842), Sao Paulo (1842), and Pernambuco (1848) (Oliveira
Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 42).
  37 For a detailed account of the period between 1831 and 1841 with special
reference to the decentralization struggle, see Rocha Pombo, op. cit., VIII, pp.
269-391.
  38 The new attitude was illustrated in a striking manner after the abortive revo¬
lution in Pernambuco in 1848. After the suppression of the revolt, no one involved
in the uprising was sacrificed in vindictive punishment by the central government
(Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, IX, 5 and note).
262         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
their ostracism, and the Conservatives obtained an undisputed
supremacy which was to last for many years39; in that year also
the “personal rule” of D. Pedro II began.40 Thereafter the
governmental institutions, forged in these seventeen years of
conflict, were everywhere accepted and only legal and consti¬
tutional means of attaining modifications were employed by
the opposition. The central government was strong through¬
out the empire.41
  Moreover in 1850 the economic revival of Brazil began. The
first protective tariff had been passed in 1844 on the expira¬
tion of the commercial treaty with England; railroad building
began42; telegraphs were installed43; and private commercial
and industrial corporations were organized.44 Centralization of
power and stability of government was followed by a period of
economic development.
  Under these circumstances the Rio court was able to move
toward the realization of the desire to suppress the traffic, which
observers as keen and experienced in Brazilian affairs as Con¬
sul General Ouseley and Minister Hamilton-Hamilton had
noted during the period of instability. The opportunity came
in September, 1848, when on the first day of the month the old
Senate project of 183745 was brought up in the lower house by


  39 Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 42-44.
  40 Pedro was not yet six years old when he was proclaimed emperor in 1831.
Ten years later the Conservatives proclaimed his majority and strove to centralize
power around the monarch. Their restrictions on the provincial assemblies and
local bodies resulted in revolts in Minas Geraes (1842), Sao Paulo (1842), and
Pernambuco (1848), but by 1848 opposition was crushed in the provinces and the
ten year revolt in Rio Grande do Sul was ended (1845). In 1848 began the “per¬
sonal rule” of the young emperor, which was to last until 1878 (Oliveira Lima
op. cit., pp. 96-107).
   41 Pereira da Silva, Situation Sociale, Politique et £conomique de VEmpire, pp. 35-51.
   42 The first railroad was inaugurated April 10, 1854; the second, February 9,
 1858; and the third, March 29, 1858. The first two were built by English capital,
 the third by the Brazilian government (Oliveira Lima, op. cit., p. 207).
   43 The first telegraph line was inaugurated in 1857 {ibid., p. 207).
   44 In 1851 eleven of these Sociedades Anonymas were incorporated {ibid., p. 207).
   46 This was the project proposed by Barbacena which established the equipment
 clause for seizure on the high seas, but by Article XIII annulled the Law of 1831.
 The Senate passed the project in 1837 but it was defeated in the lower house.
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                          263
the cabinet which insisted on the unmodified acceptance of
Article XIII. The chamber adjourned discussion, the cabinet
resigned, and the Conservatives with Eusebio de Queiroz as
minister of justice came into power. The ministry thereupon
called for an election and won a decisive majority in the As¬
sembly convoked for January 1, 1850. Then, overriding the
opposition which used England’s arbitrary action as the weapon
of attack, the Conservative majority, in secret sessions46 to avoid
pressure from public opinion, amended the proposal adjourned
two years previously and issued the famous law of September
4, 1850.47
   The first article of this drastic law established the right of
seizure on grounds of equipment for the trade, while Article
IV declared the traffic to be piracy. The ships and everything
in them were to be sold if they were found to be fitted out for
the transportation of Negroes; captured slaves were to be re¬
exported eventually, but in the meantime they could be used
in the service of the state, concession of their services to private
individuals being expressly forbidden. Shipping papers for ves¬
sels bound for Africa were to be granted only to those who
gave security to the total value of the ships and goods, the
security to be returned only after eighteen months had expired
and proof had been presented that no slaves had been received
on board. Brazilian admiralty courts were given jurisdiction
over prizes and slaves, with appeal to the council of state and
over principals and accomplices,48 with appeal to the Court of

  46 Pereira da Silva in his memoirs states that it was only in secret sessions that
such a delicate question as the slave trade suppression could be treated. Farmers
and rich business men who manipulated public opinion in favor of the traffic ex¬
ercised too great influence over the representatives who were dependent on the
ballot for their next election to allow the necessary independence of action. The
law of 1850 was debated and passed in secret sessions therefore (Memorias, I, 219).
  47 J. L. Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras.,
Tomo Especial VI, Parte IV, 1916, pp. 234-249. The law is given verbatim, p.
250, note 20. It is given also in Great Britain, British and Foreign State Papers,
XXXIX, 1060-1062.
  48 The principals were captain, owner, mate, pilot, and supercargo; and ac¬
complices were anyone who helped or were implicated in the unloading, hiding,
or sale of slaves brought in by the principals.
264         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
Appeals. Thus cases were taken from the jury and placed in
courts which upheld the authority of the central government.
It was an effective measure,49 placed in the hands of a strong
central government which was able to enforce its will.
  Eusebio de Queiroz executed the law inexorably.50 Importa¬
tions, which in 1849 numbered fifty-four thousand, dropped to
twenty-three thousand in 1850, to a little over three thousand
in 1851, and to scarcely seven hundred the next year.51 On
June 11, 1852, the British minister advised the Rio government
that the orders authorizing British cruisers to make seizures
within Brazilian waters was revoked; the next year jurisdiction
was given to the Brazilian navy in cases of seizure of traffickers
inland as well as on the seas; and in 1854 the final law in the
series was enacted with the aim of preventing the disappear¬
ance of illicit Africans by indiscriminate mixture with legal
slaves.52 Between 1853 and 1856 only two landings of slaves
were recorded, one in Serinhaem53 (in Pernambuco) and the
other in S. Matheus (in Espirito Santo). In June of the latter
year, Lord Palmerston announced in the British Parliament
that the Brazilian slave trade had ceased.54
  Was the suppression due to the activity of the British cruisers

  49 Two decrees were issued by D. Pedro for the effective execution of the Law
of 1831 (Great Britain, British and Foreign State Papers, XXXIX, 1062-1074) and
of the Law of September 4, 1850 {ibid., pp. 1074-1076).
  60 Alvez, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 253; Pereira da Silva, Memorias,
I, 219; Joaquim Nabuco, Estadista do Imperio, Nabuco de Araujo, Sua Vida, Suas
Opinioes, Sua Epoca, I, 225-226.
  61 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, I, 369; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros,
1852, xiii (Report of the minister of foreign relations to the Assembly).
  62 Joaquim Nabuco, op. cit., I, 226-229.
  63 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1853, p. 8. The Serinhaem case was
serious. On October 13, 1855, some 209 Africans were landed, the importation
was detected, but forty-seven Negroes were stolen. By severe measures twenty-one
were recovered while families of great importance were implicated. The English
consul, Jerningham, threatened to renew the in-shore activity of British cruisers;
Nabuco de Araujo, minister of justice, removed or pensioned officials of the court
before which the case had been tried and the criminals absolved. Pernambuco
protested such high-handed procedure, but illicit importations ceased (Joaquim
Nabuco, op. cit., I, 231-241).
  64 Alvez, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 254. The Aberdeen Act was not
repealed until 1869 however (Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p. 136).
            DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                       265
between 1845 and 1853? Christie was quite certain that it was,
for he repudiated emphatically the assertion of Queiroz that
the Brazilian government stopped the traffic despite the handi¬
cap of the arbitrary and unlawful action of Great Britain.55
Pereira Pinto, on the other hand, pointed out that the largest
importations occurred during the years of England’s violence
while the traffic ceased abruptly when the Rio government
was able to take decisive steps.56 In the opinion of the Brazil¬
ian court, the activity of the British cruisers not only failed to
stop the traffic, but placed the Rio government in the paradox¬
ical position of protesting against such seizures and thus seem¬
ingly adopting a position against the suppression when in real¬
ity it was sincerely endeavoring to accomplish that end.67 At
the same time Great Britain could not understand why Brazil
did not appreciate England’s help since without it the imperial
government could not control the traffic.58
   Regardless of where the credit for suppression lies, the fact
remains that the Aberdeen Act embittered Anglo-Brazilian
relations until the Christie affair resulted in a diplomatic break
between the two countries.59 The Rio government was con¬
vinced that England had acted in a dominating, arbitrary
manner and that to Brazil alone was due the credit for the

  65 W. D. Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions, pp. 90-92.
  66 Apontamentos, I, 369. Alvez (“A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 253) and
Pereira da Silva (Memorias, I, 219) agree with Pinto Pereira. Joaquim Nabuco,
(Estadista do Imperio, I, 226) agrees with Christie to the extent that the terror of
the British cruisers aided Queiroz in his successful suppression of the trade. Math-
ieson (Great Britain and the Slave Trade, pp. 123-124) agrees with Christie. In a brief
and superficial discussion, Sousa S& Vianna presents a pro-English version of the
diplomatic phases of the suppression of the slave trade (‘'O Trafico e a Diplomacia
Brasileira,” Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., Tomo Especial VI, Parte 5, pp.
539-565)-
  67 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1851. Annex B, Note 7. In proof of the
sincerity of the Brazilian government, the foreign minister stated that between
October, 1849, and January, 1851, Brazilians had captured 1,200 slaves (ibid.,
note 19).
  68 Ibid., 1854, Annex B, p. 7. Both John Russell and Palmerston stated in the
House of Commons that without the Aberdeen Act the Brazilian slave trade would
not have ceased (ibid., 1855, Annex D, p. 6).
  68 Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazilerio, p. 209; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Ex¬
trangeiros, 1855, xx, lx, and Annex D, pp. 6-7.
266         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
final suppression of the traffic. The feeling of resentment per¬
sisted with consequent loss of influence by Great Britain in the
political affairs of the empire. Economically, Brazil still leaned
toward England; but politically, the Rio court shifted to the
United States, and an entente cordiale developed between the two
American nations which lasted as long as D. Pedro II remained
on the throne. Due largely to the arrogant tone assumed by
Great Britain in the slave trade controversy, the Brazilian gov¬
ernment was alienated from its traditional friendship for Eng¬
land.60
  The fundamental cause of the irritation which had em¬
bittered Anglo-Brazilian relations since 1827 did not cease
with the actual suppression of the slave trade; for in addi¬
tion to the resentment which persisted, there were two types
of claims which in the opinion of the Rio court remained to
be settled. To the traditional claims for damages arising from
the decisions of the Sierra Leone Commission as stated in the
formal protest of the Chevalier de Mattos on November 30,
1833, there were now added others arising from the seizure of
Brazilian vessels by English cruisers under the authority of a
British statute, the Aberdeen Act. Until these claims, which
were inextricably bound up with the political relation's of the
two countries, could be settled or forgotten, amicable cooper¬
ation between London and Rio proved very difficult, for the
efforts to secure satisfactory settlement caused repeated reviv¬
als of the controversy and kept alive the bitterness of the
1845-56 period.
  In forcing action in regard to these claims, Brazil was aided
by the fact that English subjects were demanding compensa¬
tion for losses suffered during the revolution for independence
and the period of national instability which followed. With the
long slave trade controversy apparently settled by the actual
termination of the traffic and with a strong, centralized gov¬
ernment in command of the situation in Rio, England con¬
sidered the moment opportune to present these claims. Conse¬
quently, P. Campbell Scarlett, envoy extraordinary and min-
  10 Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 210-211.
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                         267
ister plenipotentiary at Rio, presented a list of the “very nu¬
merous and long outstanding British claims against Brazil.”16
The reply of the minister of foreign affairs and Scarlett’s com¬
ment on that reply present a vivid description of the relations
of the two powers in the middle of the century after the slave
trade controversy to all appearances had been settled. Scar¬
lett s dispatch to the London Office merits special attention,
therefore.
  The reply of the Brazilian minister to his note, Scarlett re¬
ported,62 was written in the usual very courteous terms and
stated that the more pressing claims specifically alluded to by
the British envoy had been referred to the competent depart¬
ment for a solution and the others would be taken up shortly for
consideration by the minister for foreign affairs. On the face
of it, the reply was satisfactory; but, Scarlett complained, this
was merely “one of many of a similar character adopted to¬
wards Her Majesty’s Ministers at Rio de Janeiro as a conven¬
ient form, when the last thing ever contemplated” was “a sin¬
cere intention to accede to repeated demands, or to give any
definite effect to assurances which” meant “really nothing.”
For a succession of years the ruling policy of the Brazilian gov¬
ernment had been one of courteous delay and civil evasion;
note after note had been written without the slightest hope of
success. Scarlett, convinced of the futility of continuing such a
procedure, requested instructions and hinted at the necessity
of “holding firm language” with the Rio government or of
“resorting if necessary to still more stringent measures for ob¬
taining reparations for the parties aggrieved.” His dispatch
shows the growing irritation of the British legation over the
polite inertia which was being used to counter the forceful ac¬
tion of a powerful and unwelcome friend.
  As a result of this report Scarlett received from Clarendon
full powers to negotiate a convention for the settlement of
claims existing between the two nations, a printed copy of the
instrument recently concluded between England and the

 61 F. O. 97/79, Scarlett to Clarendon, No. 62. June 25, 1857.
 •* Ibid. A copy of the reply was enclosed in the dispatch.
268        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
United States being sent as a model.63 The Brazilian emperor
approved the idea; a plenipotentiary was appointed; and the
convention was signed June 2, 1858.64
  By the convention65 “all claims on the part of the corpora¬
tion companies, or private individual subjects                of either coun¬
try upon the government of the other contracting power pre¬
sented since the date of the declaration of independence of the
Brazilian Empire or to be presented before a given date, were
to be referred to two commissioners, one appointed by Eng¬
land and the other by Brazil. Each commissioner would select
a permanent secretary who would also act as commissioner in
the case of the incapacity or absence of the latter. The com¬
mission was to sit in Rio; decisions were to be absolutely final;
and in case of disagreement by the two commissioners, they
were to select an arbiter, by lot if necessary, who would cast
the deciding vote. All claims had to be presented within twelve
months, or at the latest, eighteen months from the first meeting
of the commission; at least eight sittings a month were obli¬
gatory; a final decision on every claim presented was to be
rendered within two years; and each government engaged to
consider the result of the proceedings of the commission as a
final and perfect settlement of every claim prior to the exchange
of ratifications whether or not that claim was actually presented.
   Great Britain appointed its commissioner and secretary late
in September, 1858; in November, the Brazilian representa¬
tives were named; the first sitting occurred on March 10, 185966;
and claims were received for adjudication. By May 1, i860, of
the fifty-one British and ninety-nine Brazilian claims entered,


  63 F. O. 97/79, Scarlett to Clarendon, No. 112, and note dated February 15,
 1858. The convention between England and the United States was concluded in

 1853-
  64 Ibid., Scarlett to Malmesbury, Nos. 32, 43, 46. The London Office approved
of the convention (ibid., Draft to Scarlett, No. 8. July 7) and ratifications were
exchanged in London, September 9, 1858 (ibid., Draft to Scarlett, No. 12).
   66 F. O., Treaties, Protocols, 94/477, Brazil. The text is found also in Brazil,
Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1859, Annex C, Note 5.
   66 F. O. 97/79, Draft to Morgan, No. 1; Stuart to Malmesbury Nos. 83 (1858)
 and 18 (1859); and Morgan to Malmesbury, March 10, 1859.
         DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                          269
five British and eight Brazilian had been decided.67 Of the
ninety-one Brazilian cases remaining for consideration there
were fifty-two arising from sentences pronounced by the mixed
commissions of Sierra Leone and of Rio, chiefly of the former,
sixteen from condemnations by vice-admiralty courts under the
Aberdeen Act, and twenty-three miscellaneous cases. The
amount claimed by the Brazilians totalled about two millions
sterling; if the sixty-eight cases arising from the Sierra Leone
commission and the vice-admiralty courts were deducted, the
total was about four hundred thousand pounds sterling.
   The British claims arose from damages suffered by English
subjects during the revolutionary disturbances of 1821 to 1825,
or incurred as a consequence of the Brazilian blockade of La
Plata in 1825-1827. Some demanded compensation for excess
duties levied on imports, others for arrears of allowances or
pay due military officers or their widows, and still others for
destruction of goods during the numerous revolutions of the
period of instability.68 The total value of claims entered by
British subjects was two hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling.69
   The proportion of Brazilian claims based on damages for the
action of the Sierra Leone commission and seizures made un¬
der the Aberdeen Act revealed the purpose of the Rio govern¬
ment to use the claims commission as a means of liquidating
the heritage received from the slave trade controversy. In the
negotiations leading up to the signing of the convention and
the articles of the agreement no mention was made specifically
of the status of such claims before the proposed commission;
yet the first article provided that any claim could be submitted

  67 F. O. 97/80, Christie to Russell, No. 57. Of the five British claims decided,
three were granted compensation; of the eight Brazilian, three were granted com¬
pensation. The British awards amounted to seven thousand sterling and the Bra¬
zilian to fifteen thousand seven hundred. The Brazilian minister of foreign affairs
reported to the Assembly that at the first meeting 108 Brazilian and fifty-one Eng¬
lish claims were entered (Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, i860, pp. 67-71).
  68 F. O. 97/80, Christie to Russell, No. 57. May 1, i860.
  69 F. O. 97/84, Christie to Russell, No. 72. A list of these claims with amounts
specified is given in Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions, Appendix, pp. 233-236.
270         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
“which might have been presented to either government for
its interposition with the other since the Declaration of Inde¬
pendence of the Brazilian Empire and which yet” remained
“unsettled by either of the two governments.” The inference
seemed clear that these old claims which the Brazilian gov¬
ernment had pressed so often would be permitted.
  The English commissioner concurred with the Brazilian opin¬
ion that the first article of the convention empowered him to
review the decisions of the Sierra Leone court. In an early case
decided June 7, 1859, he concurred in the decision that since
the vessel in question had been condemned by the mixed com¬
mission of Sierra Leone the case had been definitely adjudicated
and the commissioners could not take cognizance of it. When
the Brazilian government protested this admission of the final¬
ity of the sentences of the Sierra Leone court and the Brazilian
commissioner argued for a revision of such cases, the English
commissioner yielded and in the case of the Principe do Guini
concurred in asserting the right of revision. Commissioner
Morgan, Christie explained to Lord John Russell, labored un¬
der the impression that his oath of office bound him “to act
entirely according to his own judgement without reference to
the opinions of Her Majesty’s Government.” Consequently, the
wording of the first article of the convention had led him to
take, “erroneously and unfortunately,” the same position in
regard to these slave trade claims as that assumed by the
Brazilian government.70
  Neither the British minister at Rio71 nor the London office
approved of this action of the English commissioner. On Feb¬
ruary 28, i860, Morgan presented to his Brazilian colleague a
dispatch from the English envoy stating that Lord John Russell
had issued instructions not to deal with any more cases arising
from the decisions of the Sierra Leone commission or from
seizures made under the Aberdeen Act until further notice.

  70 F. O. 97/84, Christie to Russell, No. 81. June 24, i860 (see particularly
Morgan’s letter of explanation to Christie, enclosure); Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios
Extrangeiros, i860, pp. 67-71.
  71 Ibid., No. 57. May 1, i860,
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                         271
Such an order, the Brazilian commissioner maintained, made
a suspension of the sittings unavoidable; Morgan concurred;
and work was interrupted. Toward the end of March when
the English envoy tried to force the required eight sittings for
that month by inviting the Brazilian commissioner to act with¬
in the limitation imposed by the London office, the Brazilian
government refused unless the motive for the suppression were
removed, and Morgan again concurred in the continued ces¬
sation of the work of the commission. The success or failure of
the claims commission now rested on the question as to whether
the disputed slave trade cases would be made subject to revi¬
sion or ruled out of consideration.72
  The decision of the British Foreign Office in regard to the
question was communicated to Christie under the date of July
18, i860.73 As to the admission of claims arising from the ac¬
tion of the Sierra Leone commission, England had uniformly
refused to have the decisions of the mixed courts reviewed and
had considered as absolutely final the sentences imposed by
that commission; neither government had a right, therefore,
to require that such cases be reopened. As to the second set of
claims, those arising from seizures made under the authority
of the Aberdeen Act, London could not admit that Brazil had
“any just foundation whatever on which to rest any remon-

  7* Ibid., No. 81. June 24, i860; and No. 61. May 5, i860. During the period
when the sittings were interrupted, the Rio government and the British legation
agreed that no new cases were to be received after March 10, i860 {ibid.).
  75 Ibid., Draft to Christie, No. 51. July 18, i860. A draft of a tentative reply was
first submitted to the law officers (see F. O. 97/84, Draft to Christie, June, i860
—Draft as submitted to the law officers, June 22, i860); two minutes by Lord
Wodehouse, dated July 6 and 14, suggested certain changes; and Lord Palmerston
and the queen passed on the final draft. The suggestions of Lord Wodehouse,
which were incorporated in the final draft, excluded “the argument introduced
by the Law Officers as to there being an appeal from Vice-Admiralty courts to
which the Bras, did not resort,” and included in the British refusal “all Slave
Trade Claims, whereas the draft as allowed by the Law Officers would confine”
British “objections to cases adjudicated, and would allow claims to be discussed
arising out of capture where the vessels were released without sentence—claims
which” England “had always refused to discuss . . . and which it would be most
dangerous now to admit.” He also changed the language somewhat (see F. O.
97/84, Draft to Christie, No. 51, July 18, i860. Two minutes by Lord Wodehouse).
272        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
strance against the action of the British cruisers under that
bill.” Consequently, Great Britain could not admit that the
Brazilian government was justified in attempting to treat as
“unsettled” claims which England had “invariably treated as
settled and into the merits of which it had always, upon this
very ground, refused to enter.”
  Christie was to acquaint the Rio government with the de¬
cision. If Brazil should concur with this interpretation of the
convention of 1858, the commissioners were to resume work
with an extension of time; or if the Rio court wished to submit
a list of claims excluding those of the two types under discus¬
sion, England would consent to a new convention, which
would specify in detail the character of the claims to be con¬
sidered; but if the Brazilian government adhered to its present
view, England would have no alternative but to allow the com¬
mission to expire. Whatever inconvenience might result would
be regrettable but Great Britain could not “yield to a preten¬
sion on the part of Brazil which would involve a departure
from the settled policy” of the London office.
   Christie delivered the note as instructed,74 although he had
already learned that the Brazilian government was firmly de¬
termined to adhere to its point of view. The cases to which the
protest of the Chevalier de Mattos of November 30, 1833, re¬
ferred and other similar cases since that date “were naturally
considered by the Brazilian government as still pending”; the
Rio court, therefore, held that “they were necessarily proper
to be referred to the Claims Commission and that the recon¬
sideration of these cases and of the cases adjudicated by British
Admiralty courts under the provisions of the Aberdeen Act in
defiance of the protests of the Brazilian Govt, was the advantage
which induced the Bras. Govt, to agree to the convention.”75
  Since neither London nor Rio would yield, the suspension of
the claims commission continued indefinitely with scarcely
more than a dozen cases actually adjudicated and no warrants
for payment issued even for those claims awarded.76 Thus as

  74 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1861, Annex, Notes 45-56.
  76 F. O. 97/84, Christie to Russell, No. 72. June 2, i860.
  78 Ibid., No. 123. September 24, i860.
              DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                  273
far as the settlement of the long-standing claims was concerned,
the work of the commission was absolutely void of results. The
Brazilian government used every influence to prevent the ex¬
piration of the convention by insisting that the sittings were
suspended not terminated, until England could “decide the
question in consonance with justice”; but Lord John Russell
merely reiterated the stand taken in the instructions sent to
Christie and on February 24, 1862, announced that Great Brit¬
ain considered the claims commission to have expired by vir¬
tue of the two years time limit specified in the convention.77
Thus the whole question of claims reverted to the status so bit¬
terly complained of by P. Campbell Scarlett in 1857. Both
governments were forced to resort again to settlement of sepa¬
rate claims taken up individually with the competent depart¬
ment through the respective foreign offices.78 The shadow of
the slave trade controversy still poisoned Anglo-Brazilian rela¬
tions.
  The failure of the claims commission served to increase the
tension already existing between the London and Rio courts.
Thus in the early 1860’s relations were so strained that a rela¬
tively minor incident would precipitate an explosion of serious
proportions. In the delicate state of affairs caused by the cumu-
  77 F. O. 97/85, Christie to Russell, No. 91. June 24, 1861; Draft to Christie, No.
48. July 5, 1861; Bailie to Russell, No. 13. August 24, 1861; Moreira to Russell,
Brazilian Legation at London, November 20, 1861 (this dispatch gives the final
stand of Brazil in regard to the point at issue. It is a reply to Christie’s note of
September 11, i860, containing Russell’s instructions); Draft to Christie, No. 5.
February 24, 1862; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1862, Annex, Notes
46-56.
  78 Despite repeated efforts to revive the claims commission method of settlement,
the question dragged on for years. It was not possible to follow the point to its
conclusion in the records of the British government as the Foreign Archives are
closed to research in the later period. In 1871, 1872, 1873, 1874, 1875, 1883, and
1884, the report of the minister of foreign affairs of Brazil revealed that attempts
to submit the matter to arbitration, to revive the commission, or to negotiate a
new convention failed. The difficulty arising from the two types of claims, those
resulting from the action of the Sierra Leone mixed court and from seizures made
under the Aberdeen Act prevented a satisfactory settlement (Brazil, Relatorio dos
Negocios Extrangeiros, various dates). No record of a settlement by a claims conven¬
tion is given in the check list of diplomatic agreements compiled from official
Brazilian sources by Jose Manoel Cardoso de Oliveira (Actos Diplomaticos do Brazil,
l493'l912)-

         18
274              BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
lative friction of the past thirty years, England needed a cool,
able diplomat in Rio to prevent a total loss of that political in¬
fluence which had been so dominant in 1827; but unfortunately
W. D. Christie, minister from i860 to the break in 1863, was
impulsive, precipitate, and totally out of sympathy with the
point of view of the Rio government. How hostile his attitude
was may be seen in his letters and in the prefaces to his books
dealing with the Brazilian crisis.79 The opinions expressed by
him in those publications furnish a striking arraignment of a
friendly government by a high official in the British diplomatic
service.
  The letters and prefaces were written to offset the “paid
puffers of Brazil and the lacqueys of its legation” who had “had
it too much their own way in the English press and with the
general public.” Since no trustworthy book in English existed
on Brazil80 and a general ignorance as to South America and
a general indifference to Brazil prevailed, it was “time that
some truth about the Brazilian government should be told.”81
Christie, therefore, enlightened the British public on the sub¬
ject of the empire.
   In the first place, he reviewed the slave trade controversy.
The cessation of the traffic was due, in his opinion, not to an
aversion to slavery or to a sense of moral wrong but to external
pressure and public opinion.82 Moreover, the liberation of the
emancipados was a mockery: “the course of the Brazilian Gov¬
ernment about the Emancipados” had “been like that which
it pursued about the slave trade. Left to itself, it did nothing:

  79 These letters appeared in the Daily News from July 2 to October, 1864, over
the signature C. They were collected and published by Christie in 1865 under the
title of Notes on Brazilian Questions with a long preface. In 1863 he published The
Brazil Correspondence in the Cases of the “Prince of Wales” and Officers of the “Forte
Reprintedfrom Papers Laid before Parliament, containing “an introduction telling some
truths about Brazil.” The following discussion of the Christie affair is based largely
on these two publications and on the documents and correspondence in the for¬
eign relations reports of Brazil.
  80 Christie termed Kidder and Fletcher’s Brazil and the Brazilians an “elaborate
fulsome puff of Brazil which” had “done much mischief” (The Brazil Correspond¬
ence, p. iii).
  81 The Brazil Correspondence, p. iii.             82 Ibid., p. ix.
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                      275
it treated for a long time with neglect representations of the
English Government; it did not answer notes. When obliged
to reply, it protested that its dignity did not allow it to act
while pressed by a foreign government; it resented interference,
and claimed to be left free to execute its own laws, forgetting
that treaty stipulations gave a right to England to interfere.
At last after force had been used, and the English government
was known to be serious, and there seemed no help for it, it”
had “done what it ought to have done long before.”83 As for
the Aberdeen Act, it still remained on the English statute books
because Brazil had refused to make a new treaty, as other na¬
tions had done, which would enable Great Britain to maintain
the suppression of the traffic. The act was continued as secur¬
ity against the renewal of the Brazilian trade. England could
not “abandon in South America the privilege, which Mr.
Bright freely” used “in the north of‘teaching the nations how
to live’.”84
  The English merchants in Brazil, Christie contended, needed
“the strong arm of their government to protect them,” as fear
was “the only effectual security for justice” and the British
navy was “the right arm of the merchants. The gross amount
of commerce” would be “regulated by wants, without treaties,
which wants dispense with, and in spite of bad legislation,
which wants baffle. But individuals from time to time” needed
aid and protection: this their government must give them.85
When he went to Brazil, Christie confessed, he was favorably
inclined toward it, just as was the general public of England;
but slowly by contact with the Rio court “he swung to the other
side, since he saw that the government would do justice only
through fear and that all reasonable demands were met with
excuses and delays, evasions, subterfuges, and unfounded as¬
sertions.”86 In the end he became convinced that as England
was necessary to Brazil, if the Brazilian government found “that
they must behave properly,” they would “take care so to be¬
have.” As long as the Rio court was “just and becomingly mod-

 83 Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions, p. xxxv.   84 Ibid., pp. xlvi, lii-Iiii.
 86 Ibid., p. liii.                                    88 Ibid., p. lxvii.
276        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
est and respectful,” it need not fear violence and want of mod¬
eration” by England against a weaker nation; but any devia¬
tion from the path of justice, modesty, and respectfulness would
bring down upon Brazil the power of the British navy.
  These were the opinions of the diplomat in charge of the
English legation at Rio during the crisis of 1863. He arrived
at the time when the claims commission had reached the im¬
passe resulting from the dispute over the slave trade cases. A
firm believer in fear as the only effective security for justice
and in force as the only instrument by which Brazil could be
kept in hand thus became the crucial factor in Anglo-Brazil-
ian relations at a time when thirty years of growing irritation
and critical tension required the utmost tact to avoid a com¬
plete break between the two countries. The failure of the claims
commission with the revival of the slave trade controversy
greeted the impulsive Christie on his arrival; the habitual easy
procrastination of the Latin irritated the envoy imbued with
British ideas of energetic promptness; and no comprehension
of the internal problems confronting the Brazilian government
relieved the severity of his judgment. It was unfortunate that
the course of Anglo-Brazilian relations depended on the action
of a diplomat of Christie’s bent.
  Two incidents served as the occasion for the break in diplo¬
matic relations which occurred in 1863. The first arose from
the shipwreck of the Prince of Wales, out of Glasgow, on the des¬
olate coast of the province of Rio Grande do Sul near a place
called Albardao. Rumors of robbery and murder in connec¬
tion with the disaster reached Consul H. P. Vereker who de¬
manded an investigation of the “savage and wicked proceed¬
ings of the natives.” At the inquest held on June 24, 1861,
seventeen days after the wreck, only four bodies were produced,
the burial place of six more having disappeared in the shifting
sands of the deserted coast. The physician pronounced drown¬
ing as the probable cause of death in two cases; the other two
bodies were in too bad a state to enable him to render any de¬
cision. But several facts pointed to robbery, or perhaps murder,

  87 Brazil Correspondence, pp. xxix and xxx.
          DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                         277
 and the possible complicity of the local officials in the crime.
The sub-chief of police, a local officer who had arrived on the
spot five days after the wreck, failed to inspect the bodies al¬
though ten could have been produced in good condition at
that time. Many empty crates of crockery, many barrels, chests,
and cases lay scattered on the beach with contents pillaged al¬
though nothing could be found except a Bible and some empty
packing boxes which were unearthed in the house of the chief
landed proprietor of the district. Moreover, the affair was ag¬
gravated by the distance of the wreck from any center of civil¬
ization, the quality and condition of the inhabitants of that
region, and the prolonged time necessary to effect communi¬
cation between Rio and the province.88
   The imperial government, after receiving reports of the in¬
cident through regular channels, ordered a thorough investi¬
gation. When on October 25, the British envoy presented his
official complaint, it was passed on to the provincial authorities
by the Rio officials who entertained suspicions of robbery but
denied the possibility of murder.89 On September 6 a request
to the Admiralty by the British Foreign Office asked that a
war vessel be detached from the Rio squadron and sent to Rio
Grande do Sul90 where the inadequacy of the investigation car¬
ried on by the Brazilian authorities and the improbability of
bringing the individuals involved to justice was disturbing
Consul Vereker.91

  88 Brazil Correspondence, No. i and Enclosure i, No. 2; Christie, Notes, pp. 177-
179; Brazil, Relatorio dos JVegocios Extrangeiros, 1862, pp. 56-57. R. P. Stephens of
the Steampacket Company of Glasgow demanded £5,500 exclusive of the ship,
plus £1,025, J9S for freight by way of damages, urged that a warship be sent to
demand restitution, and insisted that “no more humbugging on the part of the
Brazilian authorities be allowed” (Brazil Correspondence, Nos. 6 and 11).
  89 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1862, p. 57, and 1863, pp. 10-11;
Christie denied that any action was taken until he forced the issue at Rio (Brazil
Correspondence, No. 41).
  90 Brazil Correspondence, No. 4.
  91 Ibid., No. 19. The chief of police pointed out the wealthiest inhabitants of the
coast as the principal criminals (ibid.). Rio Grande do Sul was a frontier province,
the traditional center of revolt against the authority of Rio. Public order was largely
a question of local action among these independent plainsmen who recognized
little authority beyond their own wills.
278        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  The president of the province refused to allow Captain Sau-
marez of the gunboat Sheldrake, sent as a result of the above
request, to participate in the investigation,92 while Consul
Vereker reported that the action of the local authorities was
entirely inadequate, the investigation being conducted not to
ascertain the truth but to satisfy the British and the Rio gov¬
ernments.93 By May 23? fifteen days less than a year after the
wreck, seven culprits had been ascertained but none pros¬
ecuted.94 At the same time Foreign Minister Taques declared
to Christie that although the imperial government was free
from any responsibility for acts ascribed to the inhabitants of
the coast of Albardao, it intended to exert every effort to bring
the culprits to justice.95
  Just as Christie had reached the point of advising his home
office that “as much pressure as possible” be exerted on the
Brazilian government, a second incident occurred to aggravate
the situation. According to Christie’s version, three officers, a
chaplain, a lieutenant, and a midshipman, of the crew of the
British naval vessel, the Forte, on their return from a pleasure
jaunt to Tijuca outside the city of Rio de Janeiro, were set
upon by a Brazilian sentry, seized, forced to walk to the city as
culprits, thrown into the worst prison of the capital, changed
to a better and again to a better, and finally were released
without cause shown for the detention. The reasons given later
by the Brazilian authorities were that the officers were drunk
and disorderly on the road; they had attacked the sentry with¬
out provocation and had been arrested on just cause. They
were not in uniform and as soon as the fact was ascertained
that they belonged to the English navy, they were released.
Thirteen depositions were produced as evidence of this version

  92 Russell sent instructions to Christie insisting that a British officer should be
on the spot at the time of the investigation (Brazil correspondence, No. 29).
   93 Ibid., No. 33.                          94 Ibid., No. 37.
   95 Ibid., No. 27. For a detailed story of the events which occurred in Rio Grande
 do Sul and of the efforts of the Rio government to execute justice, see Brazil,
 Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, Annex, Documents Nos. 1-15. For texts
 of notes exchanged between the Brazilian Foreign Office and Christie, see ibid.,
 Nos. 16-29.
          DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                           279
 of the story. The officers swore, on the other hand, that they
 were the sober victims of an unprovoked attack by a sentry
 on the road to Rio.96
    Both Christie and Admiral Warren, who credited the story
 of the three officers, considered that an insult had been offered
 the British navy. They recommended to London that the en¬
 sign in charge of the post and the sentry who started the row
 ought to be punished and that the Imperial Government should
 express regrets over the affair and apologize for the conduct
of the prison officials of the capital.97 Lord John Russell ac¬
cepted the version of the minister and instructed him to de¬
mand the dismissal of the ensign, the punishment of the sentry,
an apology by the Brazilian government, and a censure of the
chief of police of Rio and the officials of the prison. He also
demanded restitution and indemnity in the Prince of Wales case,
the amount to be decided by arbitration.98 On November 4,
1862, Russell authorized Christie to resort to reprisals in case
Brazil refused to comply with these demands, although the
minister was to refer any proposal of arbitration made by the
Imperial Government to London. Later he suggested that the
reprisals be in the form of seizure of property such as a gov¬
ernment ship or, better, of private property in order to avoid
a clash between the two governments.99
   When Marquez de Abrantes, foreign minister, attempted to
transfer the question to London where the Brazilian legation
could confer directly with Lord John Russell, Christie pointed

  96 Brazil Correspondence, No. 45. Christie to Russell, August 7, 1862. For docu¬
ments and correspondence exchanged between the Brazilian Foreign Office and
Christie on the case of the Forte, see Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863,
Annex, Nos. 30-34.
  97 Brazil Correspondence, No. 48.
  98 Ibid., Nos. 52 and 53. On August 23, 1862, Christie reported that the sub¬
chief and the inspector of the district in the province had been dismissed for com¬
plicity or neglect of duty; eleven arrests had been made; fugitives to Montevideo
were being sought; and prosecutions were being arranged. No admission by the
Brazilian authorities as to the possibility of murder had been made and the action
had been delayed until conviction would be difficult {ibid., No. 49).
  99 Brazil Correspondence, Nos. 61 and 62. Orders were sent to Admiral Warren to
carry out the reprisal orders {ibid., No. 66).
280         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
out that unless satisfaction were given to him in Rio, he would
be forced to resort to reprisals; if on December 27? n0 satisfac¬
tion had been received, he warned, recourse would be had to
the navy.100 On the twenty-ninth Abrantes refused to accede
to the demands made by Lord John Russell; on the thirtieth
Christie advised the minister of his order to Admiral Warren
authorizing reprisals; from December 31 to January 5, Rio was
blockaded; and Admiral Warren seized and held five merchant
vessels flying the Brazilian flag.101
  The notice of the blockade and the manner in which the five
vessels were seized set the capital in a turmoil. Furious crowds
gathered in the streets, on the squares, hills, and beaches,
shouting curses and threats at the English, while some threat¬
ened to attack the British consulate and legation. Christie kept
discreetly within doors and sent heated notes to the Brazilian
foreign minister in regard to statements allowed to appear in
the Rio papers. Both police and regular troops were required
to prevent violence while only the popularity of the emperor
and of Joao L. Viera Cansancao de Sinimbu (minister of com¬
merce) enabled them to quiet the threatened riots by appeal¬
ing to the crowds in person.102 Forced to submit to superior
force, Brazil yielded on the fifth and promised to pay whatever
indemnity England might demand in the case of the Prince of
Wales, without, however, recognizing the principle of respon¬
sibility which was an attribute to such acquiescence and against
which it protested categorically. The demands in regard to the
Forte were rejected outright but Rio consented to arbitration
of the case.103 The reprisals were stopped and the king of Bel¬
gium was chosen arbiter.
  The Brazilian government immediately ordered its minister
in London, Carvalho Moreira (later Barao de Penedo) to de¬
mand satisfaction from Great Britain for the seizure of the five
vessels within Brazilian territorial waters and their detention
  100 Brazil Correspondence, No. 71; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, p. 12.
  101 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, Annex, Nos. 39 and 40; Brazil
Correspondence, No. 72.
  102 Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 311; Brazil Correspondence, No. 72.
  103 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, pp. 12-13, and Annex, No. 53.
         DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                          281
within the bay of Rio.104 On February 23, 1863, Moreira re¬
mitted a check to Lord John Russell for £3,200 in payment
for the damages caused by the loss of cargo and personal effects
of the crew of the Prince of Wales, together with a heated pro¬
test reserving the right to require satisfaction for the seizures
made in Rio. Two months later he demanded an expression of
regret by England for violations of the national territory of Bra¬
zil and a recognition of the obligation to pay compensation,
the amount of which would be determined by an arbiter. Rus¬
sell refused; Moreira requested his passports and left England
June 4, 1863.105 One month later Cornwallis Eliot, charge in the
absence of Christie who had returned to England, obtained
passports and left Brazil.106
   Leopold of Belgium announced his acceptance as arbiter
early in March before Moreira requested his passports107 and
in June rendered the decision that “in the manner in which
the laws of Brazil were applied to the English officials, there
was no offense, either premeditated or intended, to the British
navy.”108 Thus the initiative in healing the breach between the
two countries was left to England. Russell announced in Par¬
liament his desire to renew relations; Portugal offered its med¬
iation; and Brazil consented.109
   Negotiations began in London in May, 1864, when the Con-
de de Lavradio, plenipotentiary mediator, proposed that Eng¬
land send a special envoy to Rio to declare: first, that the British
government had no intention of offending the dignity nor of
violating the territorial sovereignty of Brazil; second, that in
view of King Leopold’s decision, England deplored all acts

  104 Ibid., 1863, Annex, No. 56.
  106 Brazil Correspondence, Nos. 78, 79, 81,83-86, 88-91; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios
Extrangeiros, 1863, Annex, Nos. 74-79; and 1864, Annex, Nos. 3-9.
  106 R. A. Campos, Relafdes Diplomaticas do Brazil, p. 176. A list of all the cabinets
with dates of formation and changes from July 17, 1823, to March 7, 1871, is
given in A. J. Mello Moraes, Historia do Brazil-Reino e Brazil-Imperio, I, 425-441.
  107 Brazil Correspondence, No. 87. Lord Howard de Walden to Russell, Brussels.
March 4, 1863.
  108 The text of the decision is given in Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros,
1864, Annex I, No. 10. It may be found also in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, 316.
  109 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1864, pp. 8-9.
282         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
which had been practiced to revenge an offense which did not
exist; third, that the British government lamented certain facts
which had accompanied the reprisals; and fourth, that Eng¬
land admitted the obligation of paying the claims arising from
the seizure of the five ships and would accept the decision of a
mixed commission as to the amount due. Lord John Russell
refused, but proposed that Edward Thornton, minister in Bue¬
nos Aires, should go to Brazil on a special mission to solicit an
audience with the emperor when he would “express the sor¬
row with which the Queen” had “considered the circumstances
which accompanied the suspension of friendly relations.” Eng¬
land would disavow “in a most solemn manner every inten¬
tion of offending the dignity of the Empire of Brazil”; it would
accept unreservedly the sentence of the king of Belgium and
would be pleased to nominate a minister to Brazil as soon as
the emperor would consent to renew relations. The indemnity
for seizures was refused, but in view of the threatened war with
Paraguay and the delicate international situation created by
Emperor Maximilian in Mexico, the Rio government yielded
on that point. Thornton, who hastened from Buenos Aires to
Uruguayana (in the province of Rio Grande do Sul) to pre¬
sent the apology to the emperor as agreed upon by the terms
of the mediation, was received officially on November 14,
1865, as minister of England, while Carvalho Moreira was re¬
ceived in London in March of the next year.110
  The interruption of diplomatic relations did not break the
traditional economic connections between England and Brazil.
On the contrary, in the words of a foreign minister of the Rio
cabinet, they had “continued so closely allied in reciprocal in¬
terests that it could scarce be imagined that the two govern¬
ments were separated by a question of so great an importance
and difficulty.”* * 111 During the period of suspension of formal
relations two loans were floated in England by Brazil, Roths¬
child with Lord Palmerston’s backing handling the bonds which

  110 Brazil, Relatorio dos JVegocios Extrangeiros, 1866, pp. 1-5, and Annex I, Nos. 1-
50; Nabuco, Estadista do Imperio, 11, 317-318.
  111 Brazil, Relatorio dos JVegocios Extrangeiros, 1866, p. 2.
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                             283
were quickly absorbed by the British public.112
  “Trembling, hoping, or grateful holders of Brazilian invest¬
ments” which under the propaganda directed by a Brazilian
agency in England had rapidly accumulated in the years pre¬
ceding the crisis, socially prominent capitalists involved in
loans and speculations, eminent Britishers on boards of direc¬
tors of Brazilian railways and other companies, bankers, and
merchants protested the action of the Foreign Office in the
Christie affair.113 Their position was stated in a Daily News
article on February 12, 1863, by a writer who complained:
“who of us, we ask Lord Russell, can trade safely with Brazil
or any other country, who can buy Brazilian or foreign bonds
of any kind, who can with common prudence invest his money
in the railway shares of small and defenseless states ... if
mines like this are to be sprung under his feet by his own gov¬
ernment”?114 It was not economic interests that forced the crisis
of 1863; on the contrary it was a question almost exclusively
of the perpetuation or failure of the traditional political in¬
fluence of Great Britain in Portuguese America.
   In the contest Brazil yielded only when superior force was
actually employed and severed relations when the pressure was
removed, thus consummating the revolt against the political
preeminence of England. It was definitely determined that the
traditional political dependence which had existed for centuries
between England and Portugal in Europe was not to be contin¬
ued between Great Britain and Portuguese America. The trans-


  112 Nabuco, Estadista do Imperio, II, 319-320.
  113 Christie, Notes, p. Ixix.
  114 Brazil Correspondence, pp. xvi-xvii    Christie gives a detailed account of the
means employed by the Brazilian government to spread favorable propaganda
in England and of the agencies, newspapers, and persons connected with that effort.
Letters in the Daily News, inspired articles in the Edinburgh Review, the. Morning Her aid,
The Brazil and River Plate Mail, The News, and The Star; the attacks of Cobden,
Bright, Lord Palmerston, Mr. Bramley Moore, and others; the conferring of de¬
grees on Brazilian ministers by Oxford; and the expenditure of large silms (Christie
estimated the amount spent yearly in foreign countries by Brazil for this purpose
to be £30,000) by Brazilian agents were pointed out as evidences of the effort to
create a favorable reputation for the empire (see the prefaces and letters in Notes
and Brazil Correspondence, passim).
284         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
fer of that dominance to the new world effected between 1808
and 1825 and the virtual protectorate begun in the new em¬
pire between 1825 and 1827 failed to last. In the words of a
writer115 in the Daily News, “what English interests” had the
succession of foreign ministers “promoted in Brazil?” They had
not obtained a treaty of commerce nor a consular agreement
such as France had secured; and they had not produced a set¬
tlement of the claims which the subjects of each country had
on the government of the other, as the United States long since
had obtained. In the opinion of the author, “a very different
policy in Mr. Canning’s time made Brazil an Empire almost
dependent on England. A subsequent policy of ‘taunting’ ”
had “converted it into an Empire on which the English Gov¬
ernment” had “not a particle of influence.”116
  In the first quarter of the century Brazil had been obliged
to yield to the forceful diplomacy of the able ministers, Vis¬
count Strangford and Lord Gordon, who were acting under
the keen direction of Castlereagh and Canning. By 1850 the
incipient empire was stabilized, confident with reference to the
future, and divorced from the old idea of maintaining close
relations with the European powers. Thirty years of continued
friction, arising principally from the slave trade controversy,
and the marked national and economic development of the
empire had weaned Brazil from its political allegiance to Great
Britain. In i860 it was strong enough to sustain its revolt;
thereafter friendly relations were to exist between the two gov¬
ernments, but the thread of political control by England in
Portuguese territory—a thread which runs back in a remark¬
ably clear fashion to 1640—was definitely broken in Brazil.
  116 The author, who signed as a “Friend of Both Countries,” was W. H. Clark,
formerly registrar of the Great Northern Railway, member of the Reform Club,
paid correspondent of the Rio Jornal do Commercio (Brazil Correspondence, p. xiii),
and coffee broker for a Rio firm (Christie, Notes, p. xxxiii).
  116 The article appeared in the Daily News of August 23, 1864, signed by a
“Friend of Both Countries,” quoted by Christie, Notes, pp. 105-106.
                                CHAPTER XI


      THE ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES


The attitude which led the Rio government to resist British
economic preeminence differed somewhat from that which
prompted its revolt against the political dominance threatened
by Great Britain. In the latter case, Brazil sought to eliminate
English influence outright and, by cutting the traditional
thread which had linked the British and Portuguese empires
politically for centuries, to terminate the virtual protectorate,
the foundations of which had been established in Brazil be¬
tween 1808 and 1827. The economic phase of the revolt, on
the other hand, aimed not at severing connections with Eng¬
land, but at placing that country on an equal footing with
other nations by abolishing the special privileges granted by
the treaty.
  Evidence of this point of view may be found in the protests
of Brazilian writers, which are directed, not against British
economic enterprise, but against the vexatious restrictions im¬
posed by the stronger on the weaker nation. Pereira Pinto, who
was so severe in his criticism of the arbitrary and arrogant at¬
titude of England in political matters, commended the aid
which British capital had rendered Brazil in opening roads and
developing national industries.1 Dunshee de Abranches2 inter¬
preted the action of the Brazilian statesmen who negotiated
the treaties of 1825-1827 as an effort to free Brazil from the
humiliating position of Portugal which had always lived “un-
  1 Antonio Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos para o Direilo Internacional, I, 386.
  J Dunshee de Abranches, authority on foreign affairs, member of the Assembly,
and at one time chairman of the Committee on Diplomacy and Treaties of the
National Assembly, was a severe critic of Great Britain in its dealings with Brazil.
For an expression of an opinion see his speech reprinted with a bitter preface by
an unsigned author under the title A Inglatcrra t a Soberania do Brazil.
286         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
der the mailed fist of old England.”3 Although the effort failed
and a mortifying reproduction of the 1810 treaty was forced
upon the empire, it was not the preeminence of English cap¬
ital and commerce which provoked his criticism but the extra¬
territorial privileges, consular concessions, and restrictions on
the sovereignty of the nation imposed by the terms of the
treaty.4 * Oliveira Lima summarized the attitude of Brazil in
regard to this phase of the revolt against British preeminence
in his statement that England enjoyed in the empire privileges
which called to mind those imposed by European powers on
far-Eastern nations.6
  The desire to abolish those privileges and restrictions in¬
spired the revolt of Brazil against British economic preemi¬
nence, this issue thus becoming another phase of the move¬
ment described in the preceding chapters. The aim of the Bra¬
zilians was not to eliminate British interests in their foreign
commerce, capital investments, or domestic enterprises, but to
free themselves from economic restrictions imposed by England
and to open their country to the competition of other nations.
As long as Great Britain could maintain its paramount posi¬
tion by economic superiority, its preeminence in Brazilian com¬
merce, investment, and shipping would be assured. If a com¬
petitor should come to rival the advantages offered by England,
no exclusive privileges obtained by political pressure would
remain to bolster Britain’s position. The story of Anglo-Bra-
zilian economic relations after 1827 t^lus centers, first, in the
efforts of the Rio government to free itself from the restrictions
imposed by England during the period from 1808 to 1827,
and second, in the rise of competitors who were to challenge
Britain’s position.
   The main obstacle which barred the path to freedom from
restriction^ was the commercial treaty negotiated by Lord
Gordon in 1827.6 That agreement was objectionable for several
  8 Dunshee de Abranches, A Expansao Economica e o Commercio Exterior do Brazil,
p. 70.
  4 Ibid., pp. 70-71.
  6 Manoel de Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 208.
  8 See supra, pp. 208-210.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                      287
reasons. In the first place, although the constitution of the em¬
pire had expressly abolished all special jurisdiction, the Eng¬
lish were granted a continuation of the century-old right to
maintain judges conservators or special magistrates, before
whom cases involving British subjects might be tried. The right
was to continue until a satisfactory substitute could be estab¬
lished; yet despite the criminal code and the judicial system
inaugurated by the empire, England refused to relinquish the
extra-territorial privilege and in 1835 the council of state in
Rio announced formally that it was “prudent to yield to the
demands” of the British government “since it refused to recog¬
nize as satisfactory the judges instituted under the Constitu¬
tion of the Empire.”7
   A second objection arose from the right granted to English
consuls not only to administer the property of British subjects
who died intestate in Brazil8 but also to sign clearance papers
and handle complaints in the customs houses on the same plane
as native administrators. A third objection resulted from the
fifteen per cent, maximum import duties levied on English
goods. By most favored nation clauses this rate was granted
at once to certain other countries which signed commercial
treaties with the empire; and by the decree of September 28,
1828, it was extended to include all goods imported into the
country irrespective of the nationality or origin of the com¬
modities. Thus although the market of Brazil was thrown open
to the competition of all nations despite the efforts of England
and France to maintain an exclusive field for their efforts, the
empire was limited to a maximum tariff of fifteen per cent.
Since the revenue from the customs houses furnished the chief
income of the imperial government, the Rio court in 1836 was
forced to impose an export tax of eight per cent, when growing
expenses created a deficit.9

 7 Dunshee de Abranches, Expansdo Economica, p. 73.
  8 This point rose to importance after the abolition of the judge conservatorship
at the expiration of the treaty in 1844. It is discussed in detail in connection with
Anglo-Brazilian relations of that period. See infra, pp. 298 ff.
  * Dunshee de Abranches, A Expansdo Economica, pp. 71 and 132; Oliveira Lima,
0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 199-200.
288        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Moreover, under the treaty the manufacturers of Brazil were
hopelessly handicapped by the lack of protection and British
articles had practically free entrance into the empire; yet the
principal exports of coffee and sugar from the South American
nation were excluded from England by prohibitive duties. Bra¬
zilian shipping was also sacrificed in benefit of the English
merchant marine; and the coastwise trade, by right the ex¬
clusive privilege of the native, was endangered by the preten¬
sions of British shipping interests.10
   The irritation which resulted in Brazil from these privileges
granted to a foreign power and from the restrictions imposed
on the sovereignty of the empire were aggravated by the tone
assumed by the London Foreign Office.* 11 The opinion was cur¬
rent among Brazilians that the English cabinets and foreign
ministers adopted as the only method of treating with the Rio
government a note of disdain on the one hand or threats of
armed intervention on the other; their attitude was the same
as that assumed toward the uncivilized or semi-barbarous na¬
tions of the South Seas or Africa. In the words of Minister
Macedo, “it was always with a threat on its lips that the Eng¬
lish Government spoke to Brazil.”12
   By Article XXVIII the obnoxious treaty of 1827 was to re¬
main in force for fifteen years from the date of ratification,13
with the understanding that it would continue to operate there¬
after unless one of the contracting parties should give notice
of its termination. In case of such notification two years were to
elapse before the treaty became void. Thus in 1842 England
was faced with the necessity of renewing the existing treaty,
concluding a new agreement, or allowing the privileges ob¬
 tained in 1827 to expire.
    Consequently, early in 1842 Aberdeen sent14 a draft of a new
 treaty to be negotiated by Minister Hamilton-Hamilton at Rio.

   10 Dunshee de Abranches, A Expansdo Economica, p. 73; and supra, pp. 208-210.
   11 Dunshee de Abranches, op. cit., p. 74.
   12 Letter of Minister Sergio de Macedo to Lord Clarendon, May 16, 1854, quoted
 by Dunshee de Abranches, op. cit., p. 75.
   12 Ratifications were exchanged in London on November 10, 1827.
   14 F. O. 131/12, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 2. February 1, 1842.
          ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                    289
The diplomat, in the first place, was to insist that the treaty
of 1827 was to be valid until 184415 in order to give time for
the negotiation of a new agreement. The draft sent to the min¬
ister as a basis for his efforts was a reproduction of the old treaty
with two important innovations. By Article IX of the new
project the emperor of Brazil was to engage “to take into His
consideration the question of abolishing Slavery throughout
the whole of His Dominions” and in the meantime to decree,
within two months from the date of ratification, that all chil¬
dren born in Brazil whether of slave parents or free should be
free subjects of the empire. Thus he would settle effectively the
vexing question of the slave trade by abolishing the incentive
of the traffic. In return for that concession on the part of the
emperor, England (by Article XV of the project) undertook
to lower its duties on Brazilian sugar and coffee six months
after the decree granting freedom to all children had been is¬
sued. Furthermore, reductions on Brazilian nuts, cocoa, un¬
tanned hides, bones, ostrich feathers, sarsaparilla, woods, and
other articles would be conceded. In other respects the draft
resembled the treaty then in force.16
   If, however, Hamilton found it impossible to secure the new
clause as to slavery, he was to warn the Rio government that
England would “never relax in any effort which Her treaties
and Her power” might “enable her to apply” in stopping the
traffic. Then he was to secure an extension of the old treaty
intact.17
  When the envoy proposed negotiations, he was informed that
the Brazilians intended to treat with Aberdeen direct through
their minister at London. Yet on April 10, undaunted by this


  16 The Brazilian government insisted that the treaty terminated outright in 1842
but England maintained that notification of expiration could not be given until
November of that year, which would cause the agreement to terminate two years
later, or in November, 1844. After consulting the ministers of France and the
United States, the Rio government consented to the extension of time (F. O.
131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 30. February 20, 1843).
  18 F. O. 131/12, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 2. Enclosure: draft of proposed
treaty.
  17 Ibid., No. 2. Instructions to Hamilton.
    19
290         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
initial check, he opened the subject of the commercial treaty
with Foreign Minister Aureliano; on May 18, however, he re¬
ported to the London Office his impression that Brazil would
conclude no commercial treaty with England or anyone else.18
In July Aberdeen modified his instructions so as to leave three
options open to his agent: first, an arrangement which, in ad¬
dition to the advantages of the second and third options, in¬
cluded the slavery and sugar claims; second, an arrangement
with no mention of slavery or sugar but with guaranties of
special privileges such as the admission of Brazilian coffee (not
sugar) at reduced import duties into England and the fifteen
per cent, on English articles taken into Brazil; and third, a
simple reciprocity agreement with a most favored nation
clause.19 The first option was the paramount point to be ob¬
tained. Two months later, however, he modified these instruc¬
tions still further by authorizing the signature of an agreement
which omitted any reference to sugar or slavery, those subjects
to be left for a separate convention at a later date.20 Thus Aber¬
deen gradually reduced his original demands to the simple ex¬
tension of the existing treaty.
  Despite Hamilton-Hamilton’s pessimistic report, the London
Office considered the question of the commercial agreement
important enough to warrant a special envoy. Henry Ellis,
therefore, was sent to negotiate in place of the diplomat sta¬
tioned at Rio. On his arrival he was “met with ceremonial
pomp, received by the emperor and his sisters, saluted by all
the war vessels at anchor in the port of Rio de Janeiro, and
applauded and hailed by the English merchants residing in the
capitol.    His ostentatious magnificence with guards at the door
of his residence, his splendid carriages with eight thoroughbred
horses brought from England, his liveried servants and sump¬
tuous mode of living made him the object of universal curi¬
osity.21

  18 F. O. 131/12, Aberdeen to Henry Ellis, No. 2. August 26, 1842, and enclos¬
ures.
  18 Ibid., Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 14. July 6.
    Ibid., Aberdeen to Ellis, No. 7. September 28.
  21J. M. Pereira da Silva, Memorias do Meu Tempo, I, 98-99.
          ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                       291
  Yet his task was a difficult one; for despite the splendor of
his reception, he faced the apprehension and even the hatred of
the public and the press. As he reported to Aberdeen,22 the
language of the newspapers of Rio was “absurdly violent and
impertinent.” One journal23 pointed out that the emperor could
not act as D. Pedro I had done in signing the 1827 agreement,
as by Paragraph 8 of Article 102 of the constitution any treaty
which set new rates for imports must be approved by the Cham¬
ber before it could become law. Thus the empire could defend
itself against the determination of England “not to lose the
power which she” had “of enslaving Brazil with treaties . . .
after the same manner as she” had “accomplished with regard
to Portugal during the long intercourse of two hundred years”
since the separation from Spain in 1640. The history of Anglo-
Portuguese relations was clear evidence, the article continued,
of Britain’s systematic policy of utilizing occasions when its
allies were in difficulties to increase its own power. That “po¬
litical leech” was now talking of renewing a treaty which had
made of Brazilian commerce an English monopoly; no such
agreement should be signed.
  In addition to the opposition of public opinion24 Ellis was
faced with the ill will of the ministry. He reported that it was
hopeless to propose in the actual temper of the Brazilian gov¬
ernment any comprehensive scheme such as that laid down in
the instructions to Hamilton. Moreover, it was futile even to
attempt to fix a set rate of import duties on British articles en¬
tering Brazil as the cabinet then in office, as wfell as any other
that might succeed to power, was opposed to fettering the cus-

  ss F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 11. November 26, 1842.
  S3 0 Pharol Constitutional of November 12. Translation was enclosed by Ellis
(ibid.). Translation of another article of similar vein, published in Diario do Rio
on November 22, was enclosed also. In a later dispatch Ellis enclosed a vicious
attack on him personally, published in 0 Brazil (ibid., No. 21).
  34 For a detailed exposition of the attitude of the public toward the ministers
who negotiated with the English agent, see Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 100-108.
At one time the Chamber of Deputies became so uncertain as to the ability of the
foreign minister to sustain Brazilian rights in the face of Britain s attitude that it
demanded the entire correspondence exchanged between the minister and the
envoy (ibid., p. 106).
292        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
toms house with permanent maximum rates. The only recourse
left was to secure a treaty which would guarantee the individ¬
ual rights of the persons and property of British subjects, thus
putting Great Britain on an equality with other nations in
Brazil.26
  As a matter of fact, he reported, the British merchants in
Rio did not require more than that guaranty of equality. He
had learned this to his surprise at a meeting wherein he had
discussed the situation with the merchants themselves. They
revealed to him quite clearly that they linked no importance
to the continuation of the treaty of 1827. Under various forms
English goods were paying twenty-one per cent., some as high
as forty per cent., and Brazil would be stupid, said the mer¬
chants, to load any more duties on suddenly. Nor were they
solicitous about maintaining the conservatorial courts, for, as
they reported, traders of other nations were not suffering in¬
justice in the administration of the law although only the British
had the privilege of extra-territorial jurisdiction. They accepted
the customs rates then in operation and merely desired a guar¬
anty of the status of equality of all nations for the future. A
simple reciprocity treaty with a most favored nation clause
would suffice for their desires, but even that would be difficult
to secure as the action of the British government in suppressing
the slave trade had created such antagonism that any agree¬
ment whatever was very uncertain.26
  Ellis, therefore, decided to sacrifice the fifteen per cent, rate
and the conservatorial courts and to present terms so free from
objectionable points that their rejection could occur only in
case the Rio court was determined “to stand aloof from all
connection with Great Britain.” But when he proposed to For¬
eign Minister Aureliano a treaty granting England equality
with other nations, France for instance, the minister parried
by insisting that something would have to enter as to the con¬
duct of British cruisers in Brazilian waters. When Ellis sug¬
gested that the slave trade and commercial treaties were sepa-

  25 F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 16. December 16. 1842.
  26 Ibid., No. 15.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                293
rate negotiations and should not be confused, Aureliano, si¬
lenced but unconvinced, returned to the point at a later date.27
  In January, 1843, the envoy learned that the Assembly op¬
posed any treaty with any nation which refused to allow Bra¬
zilian produce to enter on the same basis as produce from the
colonies of that nation.28 Soon afterward the new foreign min¬
ister29 announced that the conditions on which he proposed to
treat were the admission into England of Brazilian produce on
the same footing as goods introduced from British colonies,
and, despite the warning by Ellis that such conditions would
terminate negotiations, persisted in his stand.30 The British en¬
voy thereupon advertised his furniture for sale, had one more
conversation with the minister, closed the negotiation, and
sailed for home.31 In a confidential report Ellis interpreted the
action of the Rio court as an attempt to force England to send
another special minister who should bring larger powers en¬
abling him to grant the concessions required by Brazil in re¬
gard to the entrance of its chief exports, sugar and coffee, into
England. In Honorio Hermeto’s opinion Great Britain would
be forced eventually to concede those terms in view of the large
credits granted to Brazil by English interests.32
  Without waiting for that second mission to materialize, the
Rio office ordered Jose de Araujo Ribeiro, Brazilian minister
at Paris, to negotiate a treaty at London.33 On November 3,
1843, he presented two projects, one of commerce and the other
of limits,34 with the statement that he was authorized to sign


  27 Ibid., No. 16 (December 16) and No. 19 (December 23). Ellis stated that he
was empowered also to close a slave trade convention but the two negotiations
were to be kept distinct.
  28 Ibid., No. 23. January 14, 1843.
  22 Honorio Hermeto Carneiro Leao followed Aureliano de Souza e Oliveira
Coutinho as foreign minister on January 20, 1843. He was also prime minister
(Mello Moraes, Historia do Brazil-Reino e do Brazil-Imperio, I, 435).
  50 F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 27.
  81 Ibid.
  82 Ibid., No. 28. February 20, 1843.
  83 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1844, pp. 7-8.
  84 The second project was an attempt to settle the boundary between British
Guiana and Brazil.
294       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
both or neither.35 The first was unacceptable in Aberdeen’s
opinion as it was more restricted in its terms than any treaty
then in force between Great Britain and any other power in
any part of the world; and the second was not a matter to be
confused with commercial questions. Hence England could not
accept these terms; Ribeiro could not grant others; and nego¬
tiations again broke down.36
  In his reply to Ribeiro, Aberdeen revealed the motives un¬
derlying Britain’s actions during the negotiations. Brazil, he
said, was demanding entrance into England of its chief raw
materials, sugar and coffee principally, on the same terms that
such imports from British colonies enjoyed, and in return was
willing to grant only most favored nation treatment to Eng¬
land in the matter of importations of manufactured articles.
Such an arrangement would mean that while England would
be forced to compete with other foreign nations for the Bra¬
zilian market, the empire would be allowed to compete with
English colonial possessions in the British market, a situation
which was quite inadvisable. In the first place, no real reci¬
procity was possible under those conditions, for whereas Brazil,
by imposing a high tariff on all nations and thereby fostering
its own manufacturing interests, could limit British imports,
England could not restrict Brazilian importations without
prejudicing ipso facto imports from its own colonies.
  In the second place, as long as slavery and the slave trade
persisted in Brazil, the entrance of raw products grown in the
empire would have to be excluded from British markets. This
was necessary for two reasons: first, the admission of Brazilian
sugar into England would tend to increase the traffic and to
strengthen slavery by the increased demand for the product;
and second, it would not be “just to expose the West Indian
planters, the cost of whose production” had “been greatly en¬
hanced by the emancipation of the negroes,37 to a competition

 86 F. O. 131 /15, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 1. January 3, 1844. Enclosure 1.
 88 Ibid., No. 1. Enclosure 2.
 87 On the margin opposite this statement in Aberdeen’s letter there is an un¬
signed, uninitialed comment, “a dangerous admission.” It will be remembered
            ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                      295
 upon terms nearly approaching to those of absolute equality
 with the Sugars of a Country in which labour” was “obtained
 at a much lower charge and from very different sources.” To
 replace the advantageous treaty of 1827 with an agreement so
 unfavorable to England’s interests was quite impossible.
    Thus the initial efforts of Hamilton, the special mission of
 Ellis, and the London negotiations failed to secure even a
 simple renewal of the treaty which was to expire in November,
 1844. In a last futile effort Aberdeen sent Hamilton instruc¬
 tions to sign an agreement in Rio which, though not as desir¬
 able as England could desire, might save the situation. He was
 authorized to propose a treaty in every essential point similar
to the commercial draft presented by Araujo Ribeiro in Lon¬
don.38 Great Britain would be content to remain on a footing
of equality with other nations, provided that status could be
guaranteed by treaty.
   But even this moderate wish proved impossible of attainment,
due largely to the shadow cast by the slave trade controversy.
In the five months prior to the date when Hamilton received
instructions to close any treaty which would grant England
parity with other nations,39 three assaults on British naval offi¬
cers occurred in different sections of the empire. On January 5
at Santos the commander, the master, and the steward of the
Frolic were severely beaten on their way from the town to the
beach where their gig was awaiting them. All three were in
uniform. On March 4 the envoy reported an assault on the
crew of the Growler at Pernambuco; and on February 27 he
reported the imprisonment of the sailors and the seizure of the
gig of Lieutenant Hoare of the Dolphin when he went ashore
for supplies at Ubatuba. In all three cases the cruisers had been
that the apprenticeship period in the British possessions ended in 1837 when com¬
plete emancipation was granted.
  ** F. O. 131 /15, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 7. April 3, 1844. Aberdeen stated
that a refusal to sign the commercial treaty would be “little short of actual hos¬
tility” and that England had a right to demand a continuation of the old slave
trade convention (J. F. Cady, Foreign Intervention in the Rio de la Plata, 1838-50, p.
132)-
  39 The instructions were sent April 3 and were received May 16, 1844 (F. O.,
131/15, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 7).
296         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
active in suppressing the slave traffic in the vicinity where the
assaults occurred.40 So sensitive had public opinion become on
the subject of Anglo-Brazilian relations, or so the Brazilian
foreign minister interpreted the situation, that any negotiations
had to be kept a profound secret in order to prevent the oppo¬
sition from utilizing the issue to carry the next election.41 In
the provinces the opposition was raising the cry of “subserviency
to England” as the outstanding dishonor of the present minis¬
try,42 and was preaching a crusade against the venality of the
cabinet in its devotion to Great Britain.43
  On May 18 Hamilton broached the subject of the proposed
treaty,44 yet no plenipotentiary had been named to treat with
him by October, although the existing agreement would ex¬
pire the following month.45 On November 9 the minister of
foreign affairs notified the provincial authorities that the Anglo-
Brazilian treaty of 1827 had expired and the conservatorial
courts were abolished.46 Plenipotentiaries were appointed to
treat with Hamilton late in November,47 full powers were ex¬
changed in January, 1845, and there the matter rested48 until
in June the Brazilian minister submitted two conditions as the
sine qua non of any commercial treaty. In the first place, Eng¬
land must grant indemnities for seizures made by British cruis¬
ers under the illegal interpretation of the convention existing
between the two countries; and second, the boundary dispute
over the British Guiana frontier must be settled.49 Since Eng¬
land consistently refused to recognize the illegality of the seiz-
  40 F. O. 13/211, Hamilton to Aberdeen, Nos. 13, 17, 21, and 35.
  41 F. O. 13/212, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 48.
  42 Ibid., No. 50.
  43 F. O. 13/213, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 73.
  44 F. O. 13/212, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 42.
  45 F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 75.
  46 Hamilton attempted to secure the continuance of the courts as a perpetual
institution until a satisfactory substitute could be secured. Neither the Brazilian
government nor his own Foreign Office consented to this view, however, and the
courts were abolished definitely (F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 88,
and F. O. 13/224, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 23, April 21, 1845).
  47 F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 89.
  48 F. O. 13/215, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 5.
  49 F. O. 13/224, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 46. June 21, 1845.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                    297
ures in question, negotiations terminated, this time indefinitely.
  The Aberdeen Act of 1845 was a climax to the negotiations
just as it was to the attempts to conclude a slave trade con¬
vention. In reporting the situation in December, 1845, Ham¬
ilton, after enclosing a very bitter attack on England published
in a Pernambuco newspaper, stated that it was not alone in
that city or province that the Brazilian press indulged “in such
virulent invective against England, her Government, and her
people.” Wherever a provincial press existed, the same feeling
was manifested in its publications and that hostile attitude was
spreading and acquiring day by day, greater intensity. The
moving principle at that time, he explained, was the so-called
“Piratical Act of Parliament”60 and England’s “intrusive in¬
tervention” in the affairs of South America.51 In the face of
that universal opposition no cabinet dared enter into a treaty
with Great Britain.
   As a matter of fact, no treaty of commerce and amity was
concluded, nor has one ever been signed between Brazil and
England since that date. The empire, liberated at last from
the restrictions imposed by Great Britain as the price of recog¬
nition in 1827, was free to develop a national foreign policy
unhampered by international complications of a political char¬
acter. The key to this independence of action was Great Brit¬
ain, for that country with its extraordinary privileges had
served as the basis for the most favored nation treatment ex¬
tended to other powers. Thus with the termination of the
Anglo-Brazilian treaty, the Rio government was free to estab¬
lish a new basis for its commercial relations with all foreign
countries.     Extra-territorial jurisdiction            was    materially      re¬
stricted; the continuance of the British monopoly was hence¬
forth to depend on England’s economic superiority over its
rivals; and tariffs could be adjusted to the needs of the em-

  60 The “Piratical Act” referred to the Aberdeen Act.
  61 F. O. 13/227, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 84. December 6, 1845. A detailed
account of this intervention of Great Britain in South America may be found in
John F. Cady, Foreign Intervention in the Rio de la Plata, 1838-50. The relations of
Brazil and England during that intervention, particularly between 1838 and 1846,
are discussed in chapter V.
298         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
pire as understood by the Rio government.
  Yet despite the successful revolt against special concessions
there still survived one form of extra-territorial jurisdiction
which Brazil found it extremely difficult to abolish. By Article
II of the Anglo-Brazilian commercial treaty of 1827, consuls
were granted the right to administer the properties of the cit¬
izens of their respective countries, who died ab intestato, in so
far as the laws of each nation permitted such action.52 The stip¬
ulations which defined that right were so vague, however, that
innumerable controversies arose in relation to the collection,
the care, and the final disposal of the possessions of British
subjects dying in Brazil, the consular jurisdiction over the prop¬
erty of the deceased being extended eventually to include all
cases of goods left by foreigners whether or not wills existed or
relatives or heirs were present to serve as administrators.53 The
article was interpreted by one English envoy to mean that
British citizens although living in Brazil could dispose of their
properties strictly according to the laws of England without
any reference whatever to the national laws of Brazil.54
  With the expiration of the commercial treaty in 1844, the
jurisdiction of English consuls over the property of their fellow
citizens dying intestate terminated, and all possessions of de¬
ceased British subjects were administered by the judge of or¬
phans (juiz dos orfaos) if the deceased left no will or if there was
no heir or relative to administer the estate. Minister Hamilton
admitted the legality of the new regime, but lamented the harm
which the change in administration would do to the commer¬
cial relations of the two countries. It was unfortunate, he con¬
tended, that the English should be subjected to national jurisdic¬
tion in these cases whereas the French were exempt forever
from any interference by local authorities in the disposal of
goods left by their citizens, and he requested that the law grant-


  62 Treaty of Friendship, Navigation, and Commerce, signed August 17, 1827.
See supra, pp. 208-210.
  63 Pinto Pereira, Apontamentos, II, 286-288.
  M Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1854, Annex A, Henry Howard to
Limpo de Abreu, April 24, 1854.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                    299
ing jurisdiction to the judge of the orphans not be enforced.66
   The law was enforced, however, and as far as England was
concerned, the consular jurisdiction over the estates of deceased
citizens dying intestate in Brazil was ended for the time being.
Since the stipulations contained in the Anglo-Brazilian commer¬
cial treaty served as the basis of the demands of other foreign
powers to similar jurisdiction, it was to be expected that after
1844 all consular jurisdiction of this nature would terminate
regardless of the nationality of the consul or of the deceased.
France, nevertheless, flatly refused to consider the privileges ter¬
minated, successfully retained jurisdiction by its consuls over
the property of French citizens dying in Brazil, secured a con¬
sular convention in i860, and by keeping alive the privilege,
eventually enabled England to recover the right lost in 1844.
It was not until 1907 that the Rio government succeeded in
throwing off this form of extra-territorial jurisdiction. The story
is a curious one, illustrative of the long struggle required of
Brazil in its efforts to free itself from the tutelage of European
powers.
  The commercial treaty66 signed by D. Pedro I and Charles
X of France on January 8, 1826, did not grant judge conserva¬
torships to the French, but by Article IV consuls were granted
the same privileges in protecting the interests of their fellow
citizens as those which were or had been granted to the consuls
of the most favored nation. They were thus conceded the right
to collect, administer, and liquidate the inheritances of French
citizens who died intestate, unhampered by any interference
from the local Brazilian authorities.
   In an attempt to clarify the whole question of the adminis-
  66 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847, Annex, No. 93, Hamilton to
the Imperial Government, April 2, 1846. The envoy was protesting against the
administration of the goods left by one John George March, a British subject who
died on his farm in the Organ Mountains in 1845. Despite the protests of Hamilton
and his successor, James Hudson, the Brazilian authorities, not the English consul,
administered the goods of the deceased British subject (ibid., Nos. 94-96, 98).
Protests on other cases which terminated in the same way as the March question
were entered also (ibid., Nos. 99-110).
  66 The treaty was ratified by Brazil on June 6 and by France on March 19. The
text is given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, 43-56.
3oo         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
tration of properties left by deceased, whether natives of Brazil
or foreigners, the Rio government in 1842 and 1845 issued regu¬
lations respecting the collection and disposal of the goods of
deceased persons or of persons whose whereabouts was un¬
known. In these regulations were included certain stipulations
regarding the administration of properties of foreigners dying
without a will or without heirs present to take charge of the
inheritance. Such properties were defined and ordered liqui¬
dated and the proceeds turned over to the national treasury
in case of escheat; a system of bookkeeping was established; the
duties and pay of officials were specified; and provisions for
methods of sale and liquidation drawn up. Then by Article
XLIII it was declared that the unclaimed inheritances (bens
jacentes) and escheats (bens vagos) belonging to foreigners dying
in Brazil with or without testament who were not citizens of
nations signatory to conventions containing stipulations to the
contrary should be subject to the terms of these regulations.
All judicial and administrative acts relative to such goods
should be performed in Brazilian courts with the assistance of
the respective consuls or of some person authorized by them
to act in their place.67
   France protested immediately and effectively.68 The follow¬
ing September the Rio court issued a circular letter to the gov¬
ernors of the provinces explaining that the decrees of 1842 and
1845 did not apply to the unclaimed inheritances or escheats
belonging to French subjects who died with or without testa¬
ment,69 although the Anglo-Brazilian treaty which had served
as the most favored nation basis for these claims of France had

  67 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, Documentos A, pp. 70-88, and B, pp. 89-92.
Properties of deceased and absent were defined as: goods of deceased with or with¬
out wills when it is known or presumed that there are heirs who are absent; goods
of absent persons, whose whereabouts are unknown or whose existence is unde¬
termined. Such goods were to be administered until the heirs appeared or until
they escheated to the state. Escheated goods were defined as: properties without
established owners; properties belonging to a deceased who left no relative nearer
than the tenth degree, or whose heirs repudiated the inheritance.
  68 Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 42.
  68 The text of the circular is given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, note 6, pp.
17-18.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                     301
expired. Again France protested, this time against the fact that
merely unclaimed inheritances and escheats were excluded
from the operation of the decrees; France maintained that all
inheritances whether heirs were present and known or absent
and unknown fell under the exclusive jurisdiction of French
•consuls.60 The right to this jurisdiction was based on Article
XXV of the commercial treaty of 1826 which stated that con¬
sular privileges granted in the terms of the agreement were
perpetual. The Rio government on the other hand maintained
that although by the perpetual nature of the privileges granted
by the 1826 treaty France did possess the right to administer
the unclaimed inheritances and escheats of its subjects, no fur¬
ther jurisdiction was justified under the agreement. In the case
where heirs were present to receive and administer inheritances,
legal proceedings must conform to Brazilian law and all taxes,
tithes, and expenses paid as stipulated in the decrees of 1842
and 1845. Moreover, since the Franco-Brazilian treaty called
for perfect reciprocity, Brazil recommended that France estab¬
lish similar regulations with reference to the jurisdiction of
Brazilian consuls, pointing out at the same time that the ex¬
emptions conceded the Paris government established France
as the most favored nation in Brazil in view of the expiration
of the agreement with England.61
   A second difficulty complicated the situation, for in addition
to the question of jurisdiction over inheritances, there arose
the problem of nationality. By the constitution of the empire62
all persons “born in Brazil, whether free-born or freedmen,
even of foreign fathers” were Brazilian citizens, “so long as
these” were “not in residence in the service of their country.”
France, backed by England and other powers, denied cate-

   60 Ibid., II, 19. Note of the French minister dated March 4, 1846.
  61 Reply of Barao de Cayru to the French minister, October 21, 1846. Text is
given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, note 7, pp. 19-21. Councillor Alves Branco
stated the grounds on which Brazil could contest the perpetual nature of the con¬
sular privileges in an opinion rendered as a member of the Council of State, Jan¬
uary 27, 1847 (ibid., IV, Note 5, pp. 228-231).
  62 Title II, Article 6, Paragraph 1. Text of the constitution is given in H. G.
James, The Constitutional System of Brazil.
302          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
gorically the loss of citizenship by the son of a foreign national
born in Brazil and maintained the right of consular jurisdic¬
tion over the property of such children, whereas Brazil asserted
that the mere fact of the place of birth irrevocably determined
Brazilian citizenship and established the right of national juris¬
diction over such persons.63
  In order to clarify the situation and in response to the pro¬
tests of the foreign powers, the Rio government promulgated
the decree64 in 1851 by which it clearly specified the exemp¬
tions and prerogatives of the consuls and the manner in which
they should collect, administer, and liquidate the inheritances
of subjects of their respective nations. By this decree consuls
were granted jurisdiction in case the deceased died intestate
without legal heirs present or in case there was a will but no
heir present to claim the inheritance. In case one of the heirs,
whether present or absent, was a Brazilian citizen, however,
jurisdiction fell to Brazilian courts.
   Liberal as the decree was,66 it still left the question of nation¬
ality on the basis established by the constitution and restricted
the jurisdiction of consuls to the administration of one type of
inheritance. The powers of Europe demanded complete and
exclusive jurisdiction over all kinds of inheritances and insisted
pertinaciously in a reinterpretation of the disputed article of
the constitution.66 The inheritance law of 1851, Minister How¬
ard pointed out, worked great injury to English subjects since
if they had any capital invested in Brazil, they were forced to
dispose of their property and make their wills in accordance
with Brazilian laws instead of British regulations. If any error

  63 By a joint note signed by the entire consular body at Rio, dated January 11,
1845, an interpretation of this article of the constitution was requested. The con¬
suls asserted that this stipulation was optional, not imperative, the choice of citi¬
zenship being left to the person born on Brazilian soil of a foreign father (Brazil
Relalorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847).
  64 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, Documento C, pp. 93-102.
  66 The French minister commented specifically on the liberality of the regula¬
tions in respect to the entire range of consular activity (Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos,
II, Note 10, p. 23). It was the position assumed in regard to inheritances and
nationality to which the powers objected.
  89 Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 43.
            ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                          303
 was discovered in the will, the deceased was declared to have
 died intestate, his goods were sold and estate liquidated to the
great damage of heirs in England, to business partners, or to
anyone investing in the company. Moreover, many vexatious
delays and losses resulted from the local jurisdiction of thejuiz
dos orfaos and the expenses of administration under Brazilian
laws were so great that often there was nothing left for the
heirs. And finally, every member of an English family when
only one child was born in Brazil became subject to Brazilian
jurisdiction although the parents and other children were still
natives of England. Surely, the minister concluded, the Rio
government would not refuse to remedy a situation so preju¬
dicial to Anglo-Brazilian commercial relations.67
   In the face of similar protests the imperial government grad¬
ually shifted its attitude in regard to the question of inherit¬
ances and nationality of foreigners. At first, from 1842 to 1857,
the Rio court vigorously defended its right to extend national
jurisdiction over inheritances of foreigners and maintained the
principles of nationality enunciated in the Constitution.68 But
after 1857 a distinct change occurred in the language of the re¬
ports of the foreign minister to the Assembly and in the meas¬
ures adopted by the Rio government. When early in that year
the French opened negotiations intended to settle disputed
points in regard to consular jurisdiction over properties of de¬
ceased citizens and to the nationality of French children born
in Brazil, it was discovered that no solution was possible until
the legislative body should modify the stipulations concerning
Brazilian nationality.69
   On June 13, 1859, Councillor Pimenta Bueno, therefore, pre-
  67 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1854, Annex A, Henry Howard to
Limpo de Abreu, April 24, 1854. The minister also complained of the fact that
by the Brazilian law of nationality minors of foreign parents were liable to com¬
pulsory military service. This point was still in discussion in 1877 when the son of
an English citizen was forcibly called to the colors (ibid., 1877, p. 25, and Annex
1, Nos. 101-104). The question of nationality of children was important in Brazil
in view of the large immigrant population and the relatively small number who
were natives of a third or fourth generation.
  68 See the report of the foreign minister in Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847.
  69 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, IV, 234.
304         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
sented a project to the senate regulating the nationality of chil¬
dren of foreigners70; and on September io of the following year,
the project became a law. By the terms of this new interpreta¬
tion of nationality, children of foreign subjects born in Brazil
retained the citizenship of the father until they were twenty-
one when they automatically became Brazilians. In case a
Brazilian woman should marry a foreigner, she lost her nation¬
ality until she became a widow, when she could recover her
former citizenship if she so desired; foreign women marrying
Brazilians acquired the civil status of the husband.71
  This law enabled the Foreign Office to sign consular con¬
ventions which contained stipulations satisfactory to France.
Three months to a day from the date of the final approval of
the law of i860, a convention was signed with France72 con¬
ceding to French minors the same civil rights as those enjoyed
by their fathers until they were twenty-one, and by 1863 sim¬
ilar conventions were concluded with Switzerland, Italy, Spain,
and Portugal. England was not included in the list of European
powers which secured such agreements.
  Almost immediately trouble arose over the interpretation of
the law of i860, as the consuls of the powers signatory to con¬
ventions stretched the privileges obtained by the agreements
to lengths unauthorized by any clause or understanding be¬
tween the governments in question. Consequently, on January
27, 1864, a circular was sent to the governors of the provinces
of the empire which specified the only cases in which consular
intervention would be allowed. These cases were: when there
were no heirs or executors by the will and when the heirs were


  70 Two members of the Senate committee on the constitution reported favorably
on the bill, one member, the Marquez de Olinda, opposed the project as uncon¬
stitutional (Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, IV, Note 8, p. 234, and Brazil, Relatorio dos
Negocios Extrangeiros, i860, Annex C).
  71 The text of the law is given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, IV, Note 1, p. 226.
Formerly Brazilian women retained their original citizenship although married to
a foreign husband. Pereira Pinto asserts that the law of i860 was unconstitutional
since by legislative act a constitutional provision was modified. Only a constitu¬
tional amendment could effect the modification legally (op. cit., IV, 238-239).
  77 The convention is given in Pereira Pinto, op. cit., IV, 259 ff.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                         305
unknown, legally incapable, or were absent.73 In protest against
this interpretation of the consular conventions signed between
i860 and 1863, the five powers signatory to those agreements
sent a joint note to the imperial government74 demanding ex¬
clusive jurisdiction over all minors of foreign parents, over all
types of inheritances, and over all expenses and fees involved
in the administration of these cases. The Rio government re¬
fused to yield; Barao de Penedo was sent to France to arrange
matters if possible; and on July 21, 1866, a declaration inter¬
pretative of the consular convention was signed, in which the
Rio court while yielding on some points maintained the
ciples enunciated in the circular.75 Yet the intervention of for¬
eign consuls in Brazil continued in regard not only to inherit¬
ances but also to the loading and unloading of ships, customs
matters, damages, and other questions.76
   In 1872 the Rio government notified the five powers with
which it had signed agreements that the conventions would
terminate at the time limit specified in the terms thereof.77
France accepted the announcement but fell back at once on
the perpetual clause of the 1826 treaty, thus forcing Brazil to
renew in a slightly modified form the convention which had
expired.78 In the meantime Great Britain at last secured the
coveted convention on April 22, 1873,79 and Spain and Portu¬
gal renewed their old agreements.80 But again when the time
limit of these conventions was reached in 1887, Brazil declared
them expired and refused, this time successfully, to sign re-
  73 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1865, pp. 43-49, and Annex, pp.
15-157-
  74 The note was dated May 1, 1864. It is given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos,
IV, Note 16, pp. 248-249.
  76 The text of the declaration is given in Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros,
1867, Annex I, No. 87, pp. 144-149.
  76 Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 43.
  77 The time of duration was for ten years.
  78 The renewal occurred after Spain and Portugal had accepted a modified form
of the old conventions and after England secured an agreement (Dunshee de
Abranches, op. cit., p. 45).
  79 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1873, p. 3, and 1874, Annex, Nos.
114-116.
  80 Ibid., 1875, p. 15; 1877, p. 23 and Annex, No. 94.
   20
306         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
newals.81 Great Britain, in accepting the annulment, suggested
a treaty to cover maritime and commercial affairs, but the
Rio government politely refused. Three-quarters of a century
of experience with European entanglements had demonstrated
the inadvisability of commercial treaties and consular conven¬
tions. In replying to the proposal of the London Office, the
Rio court stated laconically that the policy had been adopted
to conclude agreements of that nature only with countries
which bordered on Brazilian territory.82
 Thus terminated the long struggle by which Brazil freed it¬
self from the obligations incurred by the treaties concluded
during the first decade of its national existence. The extra¬
territorial privileges, consular concessions,                  and restrictions
placed on the sovereignty of the nation by the Anglo-Brazilian
treaty of 1827 terminated in 1844; but bY a rather curious turn
of affairs, certain of the privileges granted by that agreement
were perpetuated in Franco-Brazilian relations and eventually
were renewed between Great Britain and the empire. These
restrictions were thrown off finally in 1887 with the termina¬
tion of the consular conventions; thenceforth Brazil was free,
definitely and permanantly, from the last vestiges of the tradi¬
tional privileged position of Great Britain in the political af¬
fairs of Portuguese America.83
   Two incidents in later Anglo-Brazilian relations illustrate the
changed attitude assumed by the London Office toward the
empire. Both were disputes over territory; one arising over the


  81 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1887, p. 11, and Annex, Nos. 25-43.
It was not until 1907, however, that Brazil denounced the perpetual articles of the
1826 commercial treaty with France. All provisions based on the perpetual stipu¬
lations of that treaty as well as the additional articles ceased on June 13 of that
year (Cardoso de Oliveira, Actos Diplomaticos do Brazil, I, 101).
  82 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1887, p. 12, and Annex I, Nos. 48-55;
and Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 45.
  88 The agreements in force between Brazil and Great Britain in 1924 were: 1)
delivery of deserters from merchant ships (signed 1888), 2) arbitration conven¬
tion (1909), 3) peace commission (1919), and 4) domestic postal rates, (1921). The
complementary declaration to the Treaty of Arbitration for the solution of the
boundary dispute over British Guiana (1901) was still in force (Hildebrando
Accioly, Actos Intemacionaes Vigentes no Brazil).
          ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                      307
determination of a boundary line between Brazil and British
Guiana, and the other over the possession of a small group of
islands off the coast. The first,84 which was the more serious of
the two, became an international question in 1838 following
a scientific expedition sent by the English into territory claimed
by the empire. Robert Schomberg, a German in the service of
Great Britain, traversed the region between Demerari and the
Rio Branco in 1836, and two years later after repeating his
exploit, this time penetrating to the Rio Negro, sailed for Lon¬
don to report and to receive his reward of promotion to a col¬
onelcy. Soon after his departure, a missionary, one Thomas
Yowd (or Youd), of the Methodist Society, entered the dis¬
puted region of the upper Rio Branco with the purpose of con¬
verting the Indians to loyalty to Methodism and the British
Empire. A Catholic priest, backed by the Brazilian governor
of the province, forced him to withdraw until Schomberg re¬
turned from England with orders to take possession of the region
to the west of the river called Rupunuri and east of the Rio Bran¬
co, a section which had been neutral ground between territory
recognized as belonging to England and Brazil respectively.
The Methodist missionary then returned, expelled the Cath¬
olic, and occupied the mission of the Carmelite friar. The priest
appealed to the governor of the province, who in turn presented
the case to the national government for solution.85
  The London Office, after appointing a commission to de¬
termine the true boundary, delivered a note through its agent
in Rio, laying claim to a frontier quite beyond the historic
limits. On March 24, 1841, the Rio court stated its position in
an able dispatch written by Aureliano de Souza e Oliveira
Coutinho, and by refusing to treat as long as the military oc¬
cupation continued, forced England to order the withdrawal

  84 One of the conditions, it will be recalled {supra, p. 293) which Minister Araujo
presented as the price of a commercial treaty in 1843 was a proposal for the settle¬
ment of a boundary line between Brazil and British Guiana.
  86 Antonio L. Monteiro Baena, “Memoria,” Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras.,
1841, pp. 322-332. Explorations and demarcations of limits in this region had been
accomplished by Brazil between 1754 and 1823. The claims of the Rio govern¬
ment were based on the charts and maps resulting from these expeditions.
308        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
of the expedition. In September of the next year an accord
was signed which declared the region in question to be neu¬
tral until some decision could be reached as to the true bound¬
ary. Until the line could be determined, the Indians were to
be sole possessors of the land and no armed force of either na¬
tion should enter the disputed territory.86
   Schomberg, however, continued the occupation, erected signs
asserting the ownership of Great Britain, and maintained an
armed force in support of the missionary, Thomas Yowd. The
Rio court protested; London ordered the signs removed and re¬
called the expedition87; and the dispute slumbered until 1895
when a rumor of another invasion of the neutral territory by
Great Britain disturbed Rio.88 Three years later when the Bra¬
zilian minister at London protested the expedition promoted
by the authorities of British Guiana, Lord Salisbury replied
that the English official who had entered the neutral zone was
merely on a visit of inspection and had not raised the British
flag nor proclaimed title of sovereignty. London, so the min¬
ister reported, had already ordered the withdrawal of the only
post established by the expedition.89
  In 1901 the long dispute was settled when the case was sub¬
mitted to the arbitration90 of the king of Italy for a definitive de¬
cision as to the location of the boundary line. The arbiter in
rendering his decision June 6, 1904, stated that since neither
Brazil nor England had established indisputable rights of sov¬
ereignty over the territory in litigation and since it was impos¬
sible to divide the region into equal portions, either in extent
or value, he had based his judgment on natural geographic
features. By the boundary which followed the watersheds of
the disputed region, Great Britain obtained the major part of
the territory in question, but both powers accepted the deci-

  86 Cardoso dc Oliveira, Actos Diplomaticos, I, 130.
  87 For a summary of the dispute of 1842, see Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, Note

3*. PP- 3”-3!4-
  88 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1896, Annex I, Nos. 21-23.
  88 Ibid., 1898, p. 20 and Annex I, No. 62.
  M The treaty was signed November 6, 1901, and ratifications were exchanged
January 28 of the following year (ibid., 1902, Annex, No. 3).
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                         309
sion and the question was definitely settled.91
   The second incident concerned the possession of a group of
small islands located 1,112 kilometers off the coast of Brazil
in the latitude of Espirito Santo. Discovered in 1501 by the
Portuguese, they remained unoccupied until 1700 when Ed¬
mund Halley took possession in the name of England. No set¬
tlement was made, however. Seventy-five years later J. Cook
touched at the islands and in 1781 the British attempted to
colonize the group. Portugal protested, and when England
withdrew, sent an expedition of military and agricultural col¬
onists to occupy the territory. In 1797 the attempt was aban¬
doned as the unfertile, volcanic soil proved incapable of sup¬
porting the population. No further attempt was made to estab¬
lish settlements although throughout the nineteenth century
occasional visits were paid the islands by the French (in 1817,
1825, and 1829) and by the Brazilians (in 1825, I846, 1871,
and 1873).92
   In 1895 England secretly but officially occupied Trindade,
incorporating that island and the smaller Martim Vaz into
British territory. When the news reached Rio six months later,
a vigorous protest was made to the British legation by the for¬
eign minister.93 Lord Salisbury for England offered to arbitrate
or to return the islands at once if Brazil would guarantee to
utilize them as a station for a cable which an English company
wished to lay; but Foreign Minister Carlos de Carvalho re-

  91 The boundary followed the watershed to the Mahu river and thence to the
Tacutu (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, X, 452). Later the line was corrected
in view of certain errors made in the decision as to the location of the source of the
Cotingo River (Cardoso de Oliveira, Actos Diplomaticos, II, 323). For details of the
dispute see: Joaquim Nabuco, Primier Mimoire (7 vols.), Second Mimoire (6 vols.),
and Troisiime Mimoire, in which the case for Brazil was presented to the arbiter;
Barao do Rio Branco, Mimoire sur la question des limites entre les Etats- Unis du Brisil
et la Guyane Britannique; and Paul Fauchille, “Le Conflit de limites entre le Bresil
et la Grande Bretagne et la Sentence arbitrale du Rio d’ltalie,” Revue Generale de
Droit Internacional Public, January-February, 1905, pp. 25-142.
  92 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, X, 445; and Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios
Extrangeiros, 1896, Annex I, Supplement, Correspondencia e Documentos Diplo¬
maticos sobre a occupa^ao da Ilha da Trindade, Nos. 13 and 14.
  93 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1896, p. 57, and Annex I, Supple¬
ment, Nos. 13 and 14.
3io         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
fused to arbitrate or to condition the return of territory, the
ownership of which was clearly demonstrated by document
in the archives of four nations, Brazil, England, Portugal, and
Spain. He refuted energetically the argument advanced by
Lord Salisbury that in cases where the well-being and interests
of a densely populated nation required the use of certain places
for purposes for which that nation had shown special aptitude,
the owners of the localities in question had no right to prohibit
the proposed use or to retire those places from the service of
humanity. That doctrine, in the opinion of the Brazilian min¬
ister, was a very serious threat to the sovereignty of those na¬
tions which combined extensive territories and inadequate re¬
sources.94
  Through the mediation of Portugal, in which the traditional
ally of Great Britain explained the basis of Brazil’s claim to
ownership, England yielded. By orders from London the Bara-
couta, the same vessel which had taken the expedition to the
islands, was sent to remove all signs of occupation and in Jan¬
uary, 1897, a Brazilian cruiser placed a bronze plaque on the
largest island of the group as evidence of ownership.96
   The methods of solution and the outcome of these two inci¬
dents offer a striking contrast to the story of Anglo-Brazilian
relations during the first half of the nineteenth century. The
days of privileged position and practical tutelage established by
Viscount Strangford and Lord Gordon were past; the revolt
against the preeminence of Great Britain in the political affairs
of the empire and the attempt to abolish the special privileges
secured in the early years of national existence had liberated
Brazil from the traditional position maintained by England in
Portuguese territory. The dream cherished by George Can¬
ning of attaching the South American empire to Europe by
close political ties failed of realization, for not even England,

  M Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1896, Annex I, Supplement, No. 49.
  96 Ibid., 1897, Annex I, Nos. 1 and 2 and p. 8; and Rocha Pombo, Historia do
Brazil, X, 446. For description and history of the islands see “Memoria historica
e geographica da ilha da Trindade. Organisada e dedicada ao Exmo. barao da
Ponte Ribeiro, pelo bacharel Pedro Torquato Xavier de Brito,” Rev. do Inst. Hist,
e Geog. Bras., 1877, pt. II.
        ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                    311
the traditional privileged power in Portuguese territory, could
maintain the concessions won in Brazil between 1808 and 1827.
By a struggle which lasted for nearly three-quarters of a cen¬
tury, the tutelage of Europe was renounced by the Rio gov¬
ernment while at the same time the position of Great Britain
was reduced to a plane of equality with other foreign powers.
Preeminence in the markets, investments, and shipping business
of the empire thus became a question not of privileged position
but of economic superiority over rivals.
                              CHAPTER XII


    THE CHALLENGE TO BRITAIN’S ECONOMIC
                               SUPREMACY


The   preeminence of Great Britain in Brazilian markets, in¬
vestments, and shipping was already an established fact when
the colony became an independent empire. The favored posi¬
tion in Portuguese territory during colonial times; the success¬
ful transfer of the historic privileges enjoyed on the European
continent to the South American possession when the seat of
the monarchy was shifted to Rio de Janeiro; the period of mo¬
nopolistic participation in Brazilian commerce while Europe was
at war; the great advantage resulting from the fifteen per cent,
import tax as against twenty-four for all other foreign powers;
the economic penetration carried forward under favorable cir¬
cumstances between 1808 and 1825; and the final consolidation
of these advantages in the young empire by the treaty of 1827
all worked together to secure for Great Britain the favored
position in Brazilian economic life.
  Statistics for the early period of the empire are uncertain or
non-existent, but there is no doubt that in 1827 England was
the greatest foreign supplier of the markets of Brazil.* 1 In the
number of ships entering the port of Rio, where more than
half of the imports of the empire was landed, Great Britain was
far in the lead. In 1821 for instance, there were reported 124
ships flying the Portuguese flag, 192 British, fifty-four American,
and thirty-one French. Five years later only seventeen Portu¬
guese vessels entered whereas in 1828, some 260 British ships
were registered.2 No figures are available as to the amount of

  1 Centro Industrial do Brazil, 0 Brazil: Suas Riquezas Naturaes, Suas Industrias,
I. 275-
   1 0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 276. In 1842 the port of Rio returned to the treasury
        CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                              313
foreign capital invested in the empire in 1827, but it is more
than probable that British investments exceeded those of other
foreign powers.* * 3
   Yet competition began at once. For coincident with their
recognition of the independence of the empire, France, the
United States, the Hanseatic Cities, Holland, and Sweden in¬
itiated the long struggle which eventually was to result in the
successful rivalling of Britain’s favored position. In the early
period France was most active despite very serious handicaps
which resulted in part from French colonial laws and in part
from lack of capital and industrial development.4 Due to this
competition the number of British ships entering Rio in 1837
fell to no w'hereas French vessels numbered sixty-eight and
American ships (in 1836) almost equalled the British with 102.5 6
   This competition proved futile, however, as long as the mar¬
ket in which it occurred remained comparatively stationary in
the value of goods imported. That condition existed from 1827
to 1850 due to the disturbed conditions of the last years of the
reign of D. Pedro I and the internal disorder of the period of

in import duties one and a half times as much as did all other ports combined
(Diogo de Soares da Silva de Bivar, “A Chronica do Anno de 1842,” Revista do
Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., V [1843], 388-389).
  * The only foreign loan contracted by the empire had been floated in London
and the economic penetration of the preceding twenty years would indicate an
influx of British capital.
  4 By the colonial laws France prohibited entrance of nearly all Brazilian prod¬
ucts, for coffee, sugar, and tobacco came from the French West Indies. Freights
from France were very high as a result, for the return voyage was usually in ballast
(0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 275). In 1839 Horace Say in his Histoire des Relations
Commerciales entre la France et le Brisil accused the Brazilians of favoring British arti¬
cles from force of long habit. A committee composed of Bento da Silva Lisboa and
J. D. de Attaide Moncorvo after studying the criticism advanced by Say reported
to the Institute Historico e Geographico that low cost and superior goods could
undermine England’s position but France did not have either the vast capital of
England, nor mechanics and engineers as expert as the British, nor machines capa¬
ble of putting as excellent goods on the Brazilian market as cheaply as did Great
Britain. France, in the opinion of the committee, was essentially agricultural, as
was Brazil, whereas England had a manufacturing and business interest which
obtained for it the favored position in Brazilian markets (report of the committee
found in Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., 1839).
  6 0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 276.
314          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
the Regency and of the first years of the rule of the second
Pedro.6 During that period, Great Britain not only maintained
a fairly level average of exports to Brazil but even increased
its annual sales slightly. The fact that the income from the
fifteen per cent, duties on British goods rose from £321,735
in 1832 to £393,876 in 18417 * indicates this gradual increase.
Thus there was little chance for the rise of a successful rival.
  By far the largest item in the list of British exportations to
Brazil during this period was cotton manufactures with woolens
a poor second. Then followed, in order of value, linens, hard¬
ware and cutlery, Irish butter, iron of all sorts, hard soap, com¬
mon earthenware, copper goods, stationery, glass, silk goods,
beaver hats, beer and ale, gunpowder, lead and shot, painters
colors, umbrellas, steam engines and machinery, musical in¬
struments, and military stores. In 1835 the value of all exports
from the British Islands to Brazil was £2,553,203.®
  Of the imports received by England in exchange for these
articles, raw cotton led the list with coffee a poor second. Then
followed, in order, sugar, hides, woods, and cocoa.9 The total
value of imports from the empire into the British Islands was
£i,479,588.10
  As these figures show, British sales to Brazil greatly exceeded
British purchases. In 1842, whereas over fifty-one per cent, of
the total importations received at the port of Rio came from
Great Britain and its possessions, only twenty per cent, of the

  • 0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 277.
  7 F. O. 131 /1 a, Aberdeen to Ellis, No. 2. August 26, 1842. Enclosure: Letter
from Board of Trade. An estimate taken from official figures of British exports is
given of what the fifteen per cent, tax should have returned annually to the Bra¬
zilian Exchequer between 1831 and 1842. In 1836 the duties were £454,576; in
1837 they were £273,612; and in 1839 they were £397,605.
  • Customs 8/42, British Exports by Countries. Value of cottons was £1,501,689;
of woolens £338,698; of linens (British and Irish) £157,273; of hardware and
cutlery £85,096; of Irish butter £82,052; of iron £67,850; of hard soap £50,689.
Other items were below £50,000 in value. These are values for 1835.
  ' Customs 4/30, British Importations by Countries. The value of items mentioned
were: raw cotton, £806,852; coffee, £275, 318; sugar, £111,852; hides,£110,000;
woods, £98,155; cocoa, £37,472. The values are for 1835.
  10 Ibid.
         CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                            315
 exportations were destined for English ports.* 11 As explained to
 Henry Ellis by the Rio merchants, this unbalanced trade was
 completed in a triangular exchange. Goods were sent by con¬
 signment to Brazil on long term credit, the only kind of credit
 under which Brazilian buyers could operate. After selling his
 articles, the British merchant loaned the proceeds of his sales
 to non-British foreign merchants, taking bills of exchange on
 London jn return. These non-British agents used the money so
 obtained to buy Brazilian articles for shipment to their respec¬
 tive countries, where English purchases equalized the bills of
exchange drawn on London. Thus by means of British capital
 Brazilian trade with Sweden, Denmark, Hamburg, Trieste, and
 other places was helped materially.12
    Moreover in 1843 approximately three-eighths of the sugar,
one-half of the coffee, and five-eighths of the cotton exported
from Pernambuco, Bahia, and Rio de Janeiro were shipped on
British accounts although, except for cotton, very little of these
products were actually landed in England.13 Of the coffee
shipped from Rio, for example, over three hundred and fifty
thousand sacks were sent to the United States alone whereas
the British Isles took less than two hundred thousand. Han¬
seatic towns received some three thousand sacks less than Eng¬
land while Austria imported over one hundred and twenty
thousand sacks. Thus although less than one-fifth of the total
coffee export was shipped to England, one-half of the crop, by

  11 Silva de Bivar, “A Chronica . .         pp. 395 and 396. Minister Hamilton re¬
ported to Lord Aberdeen that the statistics in this report, which was presented to
the Historical Society, were as reliable as any that could be obtained (F. O.
13/211, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 38. May 13, 1844). He enclosed the article.
France was second with 14.64 per cent., Portugal third with 9.01 per cent., and
the United States fifth with 6.10 per cent., in the list of exporters to Brazil. As
buyers the United States led with 26.09 per cent.; England followed with twenty
per cent., with the Hanseatic Cities, Austria, Belgium, Portugal, and France in
the order named. These percentages were for Rio only.
  11 F. O. 131 /12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 15. December 10, 1842. Leland H. Jenks
in Migration of British Capital to 1873, pp. 68-70, describes the part played by British
capital in the United States-Brazil trade.
  11 F. O. 131 /12, Letter from Ellis to Honorio Hermeto, February 22, 1843.
Enclosure No. 2 in Dispatch of February 22, 1843.
316         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
the estimate of Henry Ellis, ordinarily was handled through
British accounts.14 Consequently in the evaluation of Anglo-
Brazilian economic relations, there must be added to the ac¬
tual commercial interchange carried on between the empire
and Great Britain the participation of British agents and cap¬
ital in the trade of Brazil with other foreign powers.
   No less commanding was England’s position in the invest¬
ment field in 1842. Of the internal funded debt British sub¬
jects held over eight times as large a share as citizens of all other
foreign powers combined.16 In addition, all foreign loans since
the declaration of independence had been floated in London,
a new loan of £732,600 being secured in 1843.16 As to the value
of British capital employed in private enterprise in Brazil, there
are no figures available for the ’forties, but in shipping Eng¬
land still maintained its lead, although the United States was
a close rival.17
   The cessation of the commercial treaty in 1844 did not alter
England’s preeminent position in Brazilian economic life. On
the contrary, during the last days in which the fifteen per cent,
import     duties     operated        every   facility     was    accorded       the
British merchants in their effort to clear their goods before the
expiration of the treaty. As Minister Hamilton reported to
Aberdeen, there were only two instances at the port of Rio where
any particular hardship was experienced and even these cases
were not such as to warrant formal complaints.18 The mer-
   14 The total export of coffee in 1842 from Rio was 1,161,436 sacks plus 574 bar¬
rels (Silva da Bivar, “Chronica . .     p. 391). Of this amount 548,903 bags were
shipped on British accounts (F. O. 131/12, Letter of Ellis to Honorio Hermeto,
February 22, 1843, Enclosure No. 2).
   16 The internal debt amounted to approximately 38.134:4198000 (read thirty-
eight thousand, one hundred thirty-four contos, four hundred nineteen milreis).
Of this British subjects held 8.491 :ooo$ooo and subjects of all other foreign nations
only 979:0008000 (Bivar, “Chronica . . .,” pp. 385-386).
   18 Four loans were contracted between 1824 and 1843; namely, £3,686,200
 (1824), £769,200 (1829), £411,200 (1839), and £732,000 (1843). See Liberato
de Castro Carreira, Historia Financeira e Orfamentaria do Imperio do Brazil, p. 656.
   17 In 1842 of the 695 foreign merchant vessels which entered Rio, 167 were
British, 164 American, 65 Danish, 58 Swedish, 47 from Hamburg, 42 Sardinian,
 34 Portuguese, 28 French, and 27 Spanish (Bivar, op. cit., p. 397).
   18 F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 88, and F. O. 13/222, Hamilton to
 Aberdeen, No. 2.
          CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                             317
 chants themselves placed slight importance on the continuation
 of the treaty if they could be assured of equality of treatment
 with other foreign agents,19 and the percentage of British
 goods in the import values of the empire in 1854 revealed no
 loss by England of the preeminent position maintained prior
 to the expiration of the treaty.20
     During the period when the trade of the Portuguese empire
 was a monopoly of the mother country, these special privileges
 had played a useful part in opening colonial possessions to
 British trade, while their continuation in the early years of the
 independence of Brazil had guaranteed a low import tax dur-
 ing the critical transition period and at the same time had pre¬
 vented the granting to other foreign powers of special favors
 adverse to British interests. Their usefulness, however, was
 past, for as long as all competitors were placed on a basis of
 equality and Brazil continued to be essentially an agricultural
 country, the economic superiority of England would guaran¬
 tee its preeminent position in the markets of the South Amer¬
 ican nation. The historic privileges enjoyed by England in
 Portuguese possessions for centuries ceased to exist in Brazil
 without damage to British trade.
    The year 1850 marked a turning point in Brazilian economic
development.21 The centralization of power in the hands of D.
Pedro II, who began his personal rule two years earlier, the
restoration of order after the revolutions of the preceding twenty
years, and the extension of the authority of the national gov¬
ernment to the provinces introduced a period of economic ex¬
pansion which in turn increased the purchasing power of the
empire. The federal income, which had grown from twenty to
forty thousand contos of reis between 1838 and 1850, leaped


  19 F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 15.
  20 The relative position of the principal countries in value of goods imported
into Brazil during the fiscal year 1854-1855 was: Great Britain 54.6 per cent.,
France 11.6 per cent., the United States 8.3 per cent., Portugal 6.9 per cent.,
Argentina 6.3 per cent., and the Hanseatic Cities 5.6 per cent. (Brazil, Relatorio
d Assembled Geralpelo Ministro e Secretario de Estado dos Negocios de Agricultura, Commer-
cio e Obras Publicas, 1866, p. 118).
  21 Pereira da Silva, Situation de LEmpire du Brisil, p. 58.
318         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
to one hundred thousand contos in 1858.22 Deficits ceased, Bra¬
zilian credit abroad became more firmly established,23 and im¬
port taxes trebled between 1836 and 185624—an increase which
was due in part to the higher rates imposed when the commer¬
cial treaty with England expired, and in part to the fifty per
cent, rise in the value of goods brought in. In the same period
exports more than doubled.26
  In the years immediately following 1850 commercial and
industrial corporations began to be organized for the first time26;
the Bank of Brazil was founded with numerous state and pri¬
vate banks appearing immediately after the authorization of
the national banks27; the first telegraph line began operation
in Rio with extensions to various points in the provinces; and
the first railroad was inaugurated.28 Although the preeminence
of north Brazil in the production of articles for export still con¬
tinued, the south was rising to importance as the province of
  22 Pereira da Silva, L'Empire du Brisil, p. 59.
  33 The loan of 1839 was contracted for 76 per cent., that of 1842 at 85 per cent.,
that of 1852 at 95 per cent., that of 1858 at 95^2 per cent., and that of 1859 for
100 per cent. The interest rate was lowered from 5 per cent., which hitherto had
been charged on all loans, to 4^ per cent, for the 1853 and 1858 loans (Castro
Careira, Historia Financeira, p. 656).
  34 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., p. 64.
  26 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., p. 70.
  28 A mutual benefit society (1838) and three banks (1842, 1845, 1850) had been
organized but the movement really began in 1851 when eleven commercial and
industrial companies were incorporated. Between 1851 and i860 some 148 cor¬
porations were formed. These sociedades anonymas were founded to promote banks,
railroads, steamship lines, insurance agencies, manufacturing enterprises, city
traction and gas works, mining, colonization, and other activities (Antonio
de Barros Ramalho Ortigao, “Surto de Cooperativismo,” Chapter V of “Con-
tribui^oes para a Biographia de D. Pedro II,” in Rev. do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras.,
Tomo Especial, IX, Pt. I, pp. 290-251).
   27 This was the third bank of Brazil. The first, organized in 1808, suspended
operations in 1828; the second, authorized in 1833, was never incorporated. When
the third bank was authorized, only four banks existed in Brazil, all in the north.
Bahia had two, Maranhao one, and Pard one. By 1858 eight more banks were
founded and in 1859 alone sixteen appeared. Private banks as commercial corpo¬
rations and mutual benefit societies swelled the number of such institutions. The
 London and Brazilian Bank was installed in Rio in 1862 with branches (1863 and
 1864) in Pernambuco, Bahia, Santos, Rio Grande do Sul, and Parand (Ortigdo,
 op. cit., pp. 292-293).
   28 Ortigao, op. cit., pp. 289, 309-311,295-308. By 1889 there were 8,966 kilometers
 of railroads actually in operation in the empire (ibid., p. 308).
         CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                      319
 Sao Paulo began its striking development.29 Sugar, cotton,
 cacao, coffee, hides, and tobacco with two new articles, rub¬
 ber and matte, were the chief exports of the country just as in
 the first quarter of the century30; it was in the quantity of pro¬
 duction of these articles that 1850 differed from 1827.
    The significance of this economic revolution in the social
 life of Brazil was described by Joaquim Nabuco who returned
 to Rio in 1843 after a long absence. As it appeared to him,
 the old social order of the time of the first Pedro was being
 supplanted by a new nobility based on political position and
 wealth. The old habits, etiquette, principles, and education
 were disappearing and new fashions, instituted by leaders who
 had risen through the revolutions or become rich through com¬
 merce, were coming into vogue—politics and money had be¬
 come the two wheels of the social cart. The essential morality,
almost ostentatious honesty, and simplicity of life exemplified
in the leading men of the old regime were yielding to the luxury
of the fifties, as the “elegant vices” crept in to accompany the
 “French veneer” so long affected by the Rio court.31
   Thus in the social life as well as in economic development of
the empire the year 1850 marks a transition from the customs
and manners of the first half of the century. The political in¬
dependence gained in 1825 did not produce an immediate rev¬
olution in the social and economic life of Brazil, for the suc¬
ceeding twenty years revealed slight differences in the condi¬
tions which had existed prior to the formation of the empire.
But by 1850 with stability and order came prosperity and a
striking economic development which in turn reacted on the
social life and national consciousness of the Brazilians.
  29 In 1808 almost the entire exportation of the colony was produced in the north
and-as late as 1852 Bahia and Pernambuco each exported over five times the value
of goods shipped out of Sao Paulo. It was not until 1872 that the latter province
exceeded the northern cities in value of exports (Agenor de Roure, “Eleigao
Direita-Ensino Publico,” Chapter IX in “Contribuigoes para a Biographia de
D. Pedro II,” in Rev. do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., Tomo Especial, IX, Pt. I. p.
709). A large part of these exports were sent to Rio for reexportation.
  30 Agenor de Roure, op. cit., pp. 709-710.
  31 Augusto Olympo Viveiros de Castro, “Emancipagao Gradual . . .,” Chap¬
ter VIII in “Contribuigoes para a Biographia de D. Pedro II,” in Rev. do Inst.
Hist, e Geog. Bras. Tomo especial, IX, Pt. I, pp. 540-542.
320         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  These changes made the empire a more desirable market
than before, with the result that England encountered severer
competition in this traditional field of interest. Partly as a reply
to the threat of other nations and partly as the natural result
of the increased purchasing power of the Brazilians, England
increased its activity in the empire. In 1851 the first mail steam¬
boat line to England was inaugurated by a special convention
signed by the two governments. The Royal Mail Steam Packet
Line was granted the contract, two-thirds of the expenses to be
paid by the British and one-third by the Brazilian government.
Special exemptions from port taxes and quarantine laws were
specified and the postage rates agreed upon. The vessels which
carried the mail averaged eight hundred tons burden.32 The
advantages accruing to England from the arrangement were
visible immediately, for, in the opinion of the British legation
at Rio, the inauguration of this steampacket line was a strong
contributing factor in the sudden growth of British exports
which occurred after 1850.33
 As an indication of the trend of international relations exist¬
ing between Brazil and foreign powers the number of consuls
maintained by other countries in the empire and by the Rio
government abroad is suggestive. In 1853 England outranked
all other nations with the exception of Portugal in the number
of consuls serving in Brazil while the Rio government main¬
tained its greatest number of representatives in Great Britain
and its possessions.34 By 1870 the relative position in regard to
  ** Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1851, Notes 8-16, and 1852, p. x.
The first concession granted to any steamship company was conceded to France by
an agreement closed November 21, 1843. France was to maintain a steamship
line for travellers and official correspondence with regular sailings. The vessels
were to be French warships moved by steam. A monthly service from St. Nazaire
by Lisbon, Cape Verde, Pernambuco, and Bahia to Rio was specified (Rocha
Pombo, Historia do Brazil, IX, 451, note 3).
   88 Great Britain, Commercial Reports-Diplomatic, 1861, pp. 461-462. Exports from
 England to Brazil grew from a little over £2,500,000 in 1850 to £5,500,000 in
 1856.
   84 In 1853 England had fifteen consuls in Brazil, France fourteen, Hamburg
 twelve, Spain and Austria eleven each, the United States eight, and Portugal
 thirty-five (Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1853, Annex, No. 4). In Eng¬
 land and all dominions Brazil maintained thirty-six consuls; in Portugal and pos-
        CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                       321
foreign consuls in Brazil was modified considerably, for Spain
(with twenty-six), the United States (with eighteen), France
(with seventeen), and Portugal (with ninety-one) had increased
the number of their representatives whereas the consular body
of Great Britain (sixteen in number) remained stationary. In
1880 Germany (with twenty-one) demonstrated its interest in
the empire by maintaining more consuls than did England,
only Portugal (with ninety-eight) and Spain (with twenty-six)
outranking it while Great Britain (with twenty) came fourth.
In 1888, just before the fall of the empire, Portugal (with 107),
Spain and the United States (with twenty-five each), Germany
(withtwenty-three), and Italy (with twenty-two) exceeded Great
Britain (with twenty-one) in the number of representatives ap¬
pointed to Brazil, a position which England maintained more
or less constantly until just prior to the World War, when it
increased the number of its consuls appointed to Brazil.
   On the other hand, by far the largest representation of the
Rio government abroad was maintained in Great Britain and
its possessions: in 1870 there were fifty-one Brazilian consuls
in English territory to thirty-one in Portugal, with Italy, France,
and Spain following; in 1880 there were seventy-two in Eng¬
lish territory to forty-four in Portugal, with Spain, France, and
Italy following; in 1888 the same relative positions held except
that the United States supplanted France; and in 1912, just
prior to the World War, there were 109 Brazilian consuls in
British territory, to fifty-one in France, with Spain, the United
States, Italy, Portugal, and Germany following close behind.36
   These figures are indicative of the particular phases of in¬
terest felt by foreign powers in Brazil. Great Britain as the
greatest supplier of the South American country received a
large body of Brazilian consuls within its territory in order to
furnish the necessary invoices, whereas Portugal and Spain,


sessions, twenty-four; in Spain and possessions, eighteen; in France, fourteen; and
in the United States, eleven (ibid.).
  36 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1870, Annex II, pp. 34-51; 1880,
Annex II, pp. 34-46; 1888, Annex II, pp. 48-78; 1900, Annex II, pp. 78-114;
1912, Annex B, pp. 137-166.
   21
322          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
and later Italy and Germany,36 required a large representation
in Brazil to care for the emigrants who settled there and to
supply invoices for purchases. The United States as the greatest
buyer of all foreign countries maintained an increasing number
of consuls.
  These figures are also indicative of the growth of British ex¬
ports to Brazil. In 1835 the value of goods sent to the empire
from Great Britain was a little over two and one-half million
pounds sterling37; by 1854-5, exports doubled in value38; by
1863-4 they were forty-one per cent, over the 1854-5 figure39;
by 1874-5 they were fifteen per cent, above the value of the
previous decade40; by 1905 a decrease occurred when the av¬
erage exports from England fell to the 1854-5 period41; but by
1912, just prior to the World War, British sales to Brazil not
only recovered from the depression of the early years of the
twentieth cenutry but reached the highest figure ever attained.42
  86 In 1882 of the 25,845 immigrants who landed at Rio, 10,562 were Italians,
9,269 \yere Portuguese, 3,738 were Spanish, 1,538 were Germans, and 249 were
French (Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1884 [1-4], p. 13). Consul
Cowper in 1886 reported a tide of hardy Italian immigrants who were replacing
the slaves as laborers (ibid., i886,pp. 211-212). Germans settled in the south in Rio
Grande do Sul, Santa Catharina, and Parand (Great Britain, Commercial Reports,
Diplomatic and Consular, 1886, pp. 1-11). After the abolition of slavery Sao Paulo
became a favorite destination for Italian immigrants (ibid., 1889, Report No. 498,
by Consul Cowper),
  87 Customs 8/42. The exact figures are £2,630,767.
  88 Brazil, Relatorio d Assemblia Geral pelo Mmistro e Secretario do Estado, i866,p. 116.
By these Brazilian figures, British exports to Brazil in 1854-5 were valued at 46,-
565:0008000. At the rate of exchange of 1854-5 (27 5/8 d per milreis) this is equiv¬
alent to about £5,000,000.
  88 Exports to Brazil in 1863-4 were valued at 65.678:8008000 (ibid.), at the ex¬
change rate of 27d per milreis, about £7,400,000.
  40 The figures for 1874-5 were 76.750:0008000, at the rate of exchange of the
period (26d per milreis) equivalent to more than £8,300,000 (O Brazil, Suas
Riquezas, I, 295).
  41 According to Brazilian figures, the average importation from England for
the years 1902-5 was 63.407:6108000 gold milreis or at par of 27d per milreis,
£7,124,450 (0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 296).
  41 The value of imports into Brazil from Great Britain was placed at 239.554:-
1618000 by official Brazilian figures (Brazil, Annuario Estatistico do Brazil, i° Anno,
II, 102-103). With exchange at i6d per milreis this sum is equivalent to a little
over £ 16,000,000. During the same period, however, the total of Brazilian im¬
ports increased nineteen times. Imports in 1842 (estimate by Silva de Bivar, “A
       CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                          323
Thus Great Britain, although it was the leading supplier of
Brazil in the early period with a relative high value of exports,
succeeded in increasing its sales six hundred per cent, between
1835 and 1912.
  To accompany this growth in exports, British enterprise in
Brazil was intensified after 1850. Although the first railroad
inaugurated in the empire was constructed by Brazilians with
national capital,43 English capital and agents were a large fac¬
tor in the expansion of railroad building which occurred during
the last half of the nineteenth century.44 In 1856 a company
was incorporated in London with British capital to construct
a line from Santos up the mountain to the city of Sao Paulo
and down to Jundiahy, a town which lies at the point where
the vast inner plateau joins the mountains.45 The first railways
in Pernambuco46 and Bahia47 were constructed by English com¬
panies. In the case of the Pernambuco line all the plant, ma-
Chronica,” p. 395) were 30.000:0008000 or at 27c! per milreis, £3,370,000; im¬
ports in 1912 were 951.369:5568000, or at 16 5/326 per milreis, about £64,000,000
(Brazil, Annuario Estatistico, 1° Anno, II, 102-103).
  48 An English engineer, Thomas Cochrane, secured a contract with the Rio
government in 1840 to construct a railroad from Rio to the province of Sao Paulo,
but he was unable to initiate construction. In 1855 a national company operating
under the supervision of the government began construction of the line which to¬
day links the cities of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo. The first to operate was a
short line from Rio to Petropolis, where the mountain palace of the emperor was
located, constructed without guarantee by a famous Brazilian engineer, Irineu
Evangelista de Souza, later Visconde de Maud. The first section of the Rio-Sao
Paulo project was inaugurated in May, 1854 (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil,
IX, 444-446). It soon became the most important railroad of Brazil and has con¬
tinued to hold that position.
  44 For a detailed account of the lines constructed or projected during the empire
regime, see Ramalho Ortigao, “Surto de Cooperativismo,” Chapter V of “Con-
tribuigoes para a Biographia de D. Pedro II,” Rev. do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., Tomo
Especial, IX, Pt. I, pp. 295-308.
  45 This road was a remarkable engineering feat as the abrupt rise from the port
of Santos to the summit of the ridge necessitated the use of a cable section for the
severest part of the incline. It still serves as the funnel through which the im¬
ports and exports of the state of Sao Paulo pass. Financially, it has been ex¬
tremely successful. The line from Santos to Jundiahy was in operation by 1867
(Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, IX, 447).
  44 Capital £ 1,200,000 with an increase of £485,000 later. The line extended from
Recife to Sao Francisco. It was inaugurated 1875 (ibid., p. 448, note 1).
  47 From Bahia to Sao Francisco (ibid., note 2).
324        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
terials, and labor were imported from England; costly and
complete locomotive workshops were constructed with a staff
from Great Britain; and the road was administered by British
subjects. A telegraph line built along the right of way was
opened to public use.48
  In the province of Sao Paulo railroad expansion was rapid
and profitable. By 1877, ten years after the line was open to
traffic, the Santos-Jundiahy road not only dispensed with the
government guaranty of seven per cent, but returned a profit
to the government in excess of the specified returns to the com¬
pany. By connections with other lines a continuous road pene¬
trated 170 miles into the interior with numerous offshoots to the
most productive sections. In 1877 between seven and eight hun¬
dred miles of line were either in operation or under construc¬
tion or survey. All lines seemed prosperous.49
  The greatest activity in railroad construction occurred in the
provinces of Pernambuco, Bahia, Rio de Janeiro, Minas Geraes,
and Sao Paulo, although lines were built in other sections.60 The
extent to which Great Britan contributed to that phase of eco¬
nomic life is indicated by the estimate compiled by Acting
Consul General Rhind in 1901. In railway enterprises through¬
out the republic there was invested according to his figures,
about thirty million pounds sterling of British Capital.61
  It was not only in railroad construction and management
that British enterprise was manifested in the years following
1850.62 In 1863 an English company was installing gas works to
  48 The Brazilian government guaranteed seven per cent, on the capital invested.
The line which was inaugurated in November, 1862, made a profit of less than
£3,500 during 1862-3. The 77H English miles of road and the workshops, stock,
etc., cost £1,800,000 (Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1863-4, PP- 49-
51). As the line did not pay, the company obtained authorization to continue this
first stretch of 77M miles to Sao Francisco, 230 additional miles, in an effort to
secure increased traffic. The government guaranteed £350,000 yearly for construc¬
tion although it had already paid a sum equal to the original cost of the road as
a result of the seven per cent, guaranty {ibid., 1877 [4-5], p. 1185).
  49 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1877 (4~5)» PP- 1206-07.
  60 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, IX, 448-451.
  61 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1901, Report No.
2724.
  ** The first mail steamship line inaugurated by England in 1851 was followed by
       CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                        325
light the city of Para63 while a Manchester firm under the direc¬
tion of British engineers was completing a similar plant in the
city of Pernambuco. A reservoir and connections had just been
completed in the latter place at a cost that was below the esti¬
mate and the enterprise was yielding fifteen per cent, profit. A
drainage contract signed with a Frenchman had not been exe¬
cuted, although, the consul reported, since the contractor had
gone to London to raise two hundred thousand pounds sterling
to float a company, something might yet result from it.64 Sev¬
eral years later a dry dock cut from solid rock and large enough
to accommodate the largest vessels afloat was constructed and
operated in the Rio harbor by an English company.56
   In 1875, at the invitation of the Brazilian government, a
group of British engineers, headed by Sir John Haupshaw, vis¬
ited Pernambuco and other ports of the country with a view
to suggesting plans for improvements, while English contrac¬
tors were building a magnificent bridge to connect the mainland
on which part of the city of Pernambuco was situated.56 That
region was a special center of English interest: for more than
half a century the greater part of the commerce of that port
had been carried on by the English; large British import and
export houses prospered there; two English telegraph compa¬
nies, the Western Brazilian and the Brazilian Submarine, had
stations there; two English banks maintained branches in the
city; a long railroad constructed with British money joined the
capital to the interior; regular steamship lines picked up a siz¬
able volume of business at the port; the light, gas, and sewer¬
age works were in the hands of an English company; and many
millions of pounds sterling were invested there.57 The tramways


the Liverpool, Brazil, and River Plate Steam Packet Company, the Pacific Steam
Navigation Company, the London, Belgium, Brazil, and River Plate Steam
Packet Company, the Lamport and Holt Company, and others (Great Britain,
Commercial Reports, Consular, 1870, p. 242).
  63 Ibid., 1863-64, p. 6.
  64 Ibid., pp. 55-56.
  66 Ibid., 1870, p. 424. The dry dock was the property of Hett, Wilson, and Co.
  66 Ibid., 1875 (4-6), p. 1424.
  67 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1877, Annex, I, Document 107.
326       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
were owned and operated by the British and a steam cotton
press was under British control.68
   The drainage contract not only for the city of Rio but for
outlying districts was secured by one Joseph Hancox, an engi¬
neer who had acquired a favorable reputation in the country
by his public improvements work.69 In Bahia two English com¬
panies, one of which had already constructed the “stupendous”
bridge which connected the two sections of the city,60 secured
concessions from the imperial government to construct eight
sugar factories when Brazil endeavored to rejuvenate that his¬
toric business. By the law of 1875 the government had author¬
ized a guaranty of six and seven per cent, on capital, not to
exceed three millions sterling, which was to be invested in
sugar factories throughout the northern and central provinces.
By 1884 fifty factories with a capital of £2,965,000 were set
up under this plan while eleven more without guaranty were
in operation. Most of the capital employed in these enterprises
was British.61
   In the Sao Paulo region the British were equally prominent.
In the words of one of the chief local authorities, the Brazilian
might be jealous of the foreigner but he could “not do without
the English.” The Sao Paulo Railway from Santos to Jundiahy,
the Cities Improvement Company of the capital supplying
gas, water, and tramways, the Western and Brazilian Tele¬
graph, the English banks, all were owned and administered
by British subjects and all were prospering.62 By one estimate
over six million pounds sterling of English capital were invested
in Sao Paulo by 1888,63 while by another estimate over twelve
  68 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1889, Report No. 606.
  68 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1878 (4-5), pp. 1415-1416. This
enterprise was successful. By 1895 nearly two millions sterling, all English, had
been invested in the sewerage project (Great Britain, Commercial Reports Consular
and Diplomatic, 1895, Report No. 1531).
  60 Ibid., 1884 (8-10), p. 1594-1619. The companies were Dennis Blair and Com¬
pany, and Hugh Wilson and Son. The latter company constructed the bridge.
The eight factories constructed by Dennis Blair failed (Great Britain, Commercial
Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1890, Report No. 793).
  61 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic, 1884, pp. 352-353.
  61 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1888, No. 315.
  63 Ibid., 1889, No. 498.
        CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                        327
millions were employed in the state in 1890.64 The strong
financial and commercial position acquired by the English in
Sao Paulo was due, in the opinion of the consul, to the fact
that they were the first to develop its resources. The marvelous
prosperity noticeable in 1890 from the seacoast to the interior
had its inception “with the advent of the English merchant,
engineer, and capitalist.”65
   As might be surmised, British banks were numerous in
Brazil. The London and Brazilian Bank with a capital of a
million and a half sterling, all British, was established at Rio
in February,        1863, with branches in Bahia, Pernambuco,
Santos, and Rio Grande do Sul. During the first year it did
business to the amount of more than two million sterling. At
the same time the Brazilian and Portuguese Bank was incor¬
porated, with headquarters in London, its million sterling
capital being all English.66 By 1913 the assets of the British
banks operating in Brazil constituted almost thirty per cent, of
the total assets of all banks, national and foreign, and over
fifty-seven per cent, of the assets of all foreign banks operating
in Brazil.67
   The opportunities which the growth of Brazil offered to
British economic interests are seen in the report of Consul
Cowper in 1884.68 After describing the prosperous trade which
had begun to pass through Santos to and from the interior of
Sao Paulo, the consul predicted that this embryonic trade was
but the first flow of the sap from a few incisions which would
become channels of incalculable commerce. To reach and
utilize the regions of future wealth two things were required;
first, a solid and abundant immigration; and, second, the
resources of foreign industries and civilization. The first would
be supplied from Germany, Italy, and Spain; the second,

  64 Ibid., 1890, No. 693.
  66 Ibid., 1890, No. 693.
  66 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1863-64, p. 73.
  67 Brazil, Ministry of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce; What Brazil Buys
and Sells, pp. 98-99. The figures are: assets of British banks $304,620,000 (gold
dollars); all foreign banks $532,548,000; total assets of all banks, $1,047,956,000.
  68 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1884 (1-4), pp. 261-262.
328      BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
which comprised the principal factors of development of a
new country, would be derived from England. Many thousands
of miles of railroads would have to be built and immense
supplies of rails, rolling stock, and supplies furnished; new
lands would be brought under cultivation and agricultural
interests promoted; new industries requiring the most improved
machinery would be started; and many thousands of pounds
sterling would be required to carry out urban improvements
and rural developments. This activity had its basis in gold,
coal, and iron—factors of which Great Britain possessed a
virtual monopoly. As long as England controlled these three
factors, its supremacy in Brazil would remain unrivaled.
  But the consul warned his government that already the
United States had entered a thin wedge by furnishing some of
the new railroads with rolling stock while American farm
machinery was beginning to attract notice. The British manu¬
facturer should break that entering wedge by supplying the
market with the most suitable materials of that nature before
the Americans obtained too strong a leverage, for once lost,
a trade was exceedingly difficult to regain.
  The consul was right, for Britain’s strength lay in its abun¬
dant capital and excellent manufacturing ability. As long as
England commanded the necessary capital to be invested in
this virgin field, maintained its leadership in the manufacturing
of those articles which Brazil needed but did not make, and
controlled the foreign shipping business of the South American
nation, its preeminent position in Brazilian economic life
would remain intact. But, as the consul intimated, that position
was not to be maintained without a struggle, for since the
founding of the empire other nations had attempted to rival
England’s favored place and as the century wore on, that
competition grew more keen.
  That rivalry, as we have seen, was futile in the first half of
the nineteenth century. France, the greatest threat to England’s
supremacy, supplied less than twelve per cent, of the total
imports of Brazil in 1854-5 as against nearly fifty-five per cent.
       CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                             329
by Great Britain.69 English shipping represented more than
one-third of the total foreign                 tonnage entering Brazilian
ports,70 and British capital and enterprise were the first to
enter the field when the rapid economic development of the
empire began in 1850.
   The first rival to threaten Britain’s position in a serious way
was Germany. As early as 1873 German tonnage was threaten¬
ing to displace the United States, which held third place
among foreign nations trading with Brazil,71 while the consul
at Santos, a British stronghold, was complaining that the
German crews were better trained, made a better appearance,
and were far more sober than their English rivals. Shippers,
to his distress, were beginning to prefer German and Nor¬
wegian boats, as rumor had it that they took better care of
the cargo and charged lower rates.72 By 1885 German tonnage
to Brazil was rivalling the French73 and by 1912 it was second
only to England.74
  It was in the competition for the markets of Brazil, however,
that the threat of Germany was most pronounced. In the
northern and central sections of the country, long the favored
localities for English interests, an increasing chorus of warning
was raised by British consuls as the nineteenth century ended,
while in the south, German interests drove their English rivals
from the field.75
  69 Brazil, Relatorio d Assemblta Geral pelo Ministro de Agricultura, Commercio e Obras
Publicas, 1866, p. 118. The United States came next with 8.3 per cent, and Portu¬
gal next with 6.9 per cent.
  70 British tonnage was given as 225,674, American as 145,802, Portuguese as
82,713, and French as 59,780. The total of all foreign vessels was 764,217 {ibid.,
Supplement R. Table No. 6).
  71 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1876 (4-6), p. 787. England was
easily first and France second.
  72 Ibid., 1877 (4-5), pp. 1209-1210. The same complaint was repeated by the
consul at Rio {ibid., 1878 [4-5], p. 1420).
  73 Ibid., 1886, pp. 195-196.
  74 Brazil, Annuario Estatistico, i° Anno, II, p. 18. Britain was first with 8,748,770
tons net. Germany next with 3,520,328, and France third with 1,222,122. England’s
margin thus was still quite large.
  76 See Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1881 (7-8), p. 143°i 1884 (8-10),
330         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  One of the principal causes of German success in the markets
of Brazil was stated by a vice-consul in Porto Alegre, one of
the principal towns of Rio Grande do Sul, the southernmost
province of the empire. In his opinion, the stubbornness of the
English manufacturer in clinging persistently to old forms and
styles, quite in defiance of their suitability to the special re¬
quirements of the market, contributed largely to England’s
downfall in that region. The German, and American, manu¬
facturer studied the predilections of the particular market for
which the goods were intended, and sought to follow out as
closely as possible the suggestions and wishes of the customers,
even in relatively small orders. The English manufacturer,
however, seemed to consider that the people ought to want
what the manufacturer produced;                     he disregarded special
recommendations or suggestions made by his customers and
acted on the theory that what had been good enough to gain
a fortune fifty years before must still be good.76 The glassware
trade in the province of Sao Paulo was an illustration of the
argument advanced by the Porto Alegre consul; for although
Great Britain at one time supplied that region, Germany pre¬
empted the trade by introducing lighter, more novel, more
attractive forms to compete with the old style English article.77
Crockery and earthenware were other examples.78
  To this complaint which cropped out in report after report
sent by British consuls from every section of Brazil to the Lon¬
don office,79 were added other causes for the successful com¬
petition of the Germans. In the two southernmost provinces,
Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catharina, the German popula-

P* 1594> 1886, pp. 210-211; Diplomatic and Consular, 1886, Rio Grande do Sul,
Report No. 32; 1887, Santos, Report No. 168, and Rio Grande do Sul, Report No. 216;
1888, Pernambuco,Report No. 374, and Rio Grande do Sul, Report No. 323; 1892,
Rio Grande do Sul,Report No. 1077; 1897,Rio, Report No. 1874; 1898,Rio,Report
No. 2058; 1901, Porto Alegre, Report No. 2602; 1902, Sergipe, Report No. 2740; and
Porto Alegre, Report No. 2859; 1903, Porto Alegre, Report No. 2996; 1906, Santa
Catharina, Report No. 3737.
  78 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Consular, 1881 (7-8), p. 1430.
  77 Ibid., 1886, pp. 210-211.
  78 Ibid., Consular and Diplomatic, 1887, Santos, Report No. 168.
  79 See references, supra, note 74.
      CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                      331
tion, which by virtue of an extremely pronounced immigra¬
tion toward the end of the century became very numerous,
demanded German-made articles. By 1886 British exporting
houses were reduced to one and importing houses to two with
the importing trade of the city of Rio Grande (the port of the
province) almost entirely in the hands of the Germans who
supplied their countrymen.80 In other sections of Brazil, where
the German population was not numerous, commercial travel¬
lers were sent from Europe who by virtue of a command of
Spanish or Portuguese could treat directly with Brazilian
buyers, discover their likes and dislikes, and guarantee an
article that would please. Catalogues of German and American
firms were printed in Portuguese or Spanish also, whereas
English travellers could not speak either language, and ad¬
vertising literature was sent from England printed in a tongue
absolutely foreign to the vast majority of the commercial ele¬
ment of Brazil.81
  There were other ways in which the Germans showed a
progressiveness foreign to the British manufacturer. In the
matter of candlesticks, for instance, the Germans made a light
weight, showy article which came within the tariff minimum
exemptions, while the British article by its old-fashioned solidity
exceeded the weight limit; consequently German agents sold
candlesticks and the English firms lost the market. Moreover,
the German and American houses were content with smaller
profits if they could secure the market for their goods, while
the British agent demanded larger returns.82 Sheffield knives,
packed without oiling, often arrived too rusty to be salable,
although such ignorance of shipping technique was unknown
in goods from Germany and the United States.83
  By 1904 Germany had taken the leadership in the importa¬
tion of several articles which previously had been received


  80 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1886, Rio Grande
do Sul, Report No. 32.
  81 Ibid., 1892, Rio Grande do Sul, Report No. 1077.
  82 Ibid., 1898, Rio, Report No. 2058.
  83 Ibid., 1899, Bahia, Report No. 2282.
332          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
chiefly from Great Britain. These were: tanned hides and
leather, plated ware, iron wire, earthenware and china, sewing
machines, printed matter, lighting apparatus, rubber manu¬
factures, and rice. In wool embroidery, cement, lace, and
ammunition, German importation was superior to England
but below the figures for other countries; and in pig and sheet
lead, cutlery, iron nails and screws, locomotives, and books
and periodicals, it was threatening British supremacy.84 From
1893 to 1912 the value of German importations, which through¬
out the period was second only to that of Great Britain, grew
at a threatening rate, for whereas in 1895 the value of English
goods sold in Brazil was over two hundred per cent, greater
than that of German articles, in 1912 it was less than fifty per
cent, greater. In 1850 British goods comprised over half of the
total imports of the empire; in 1912 they comprised only
25.18 per cent.85 Thus in the period just prior to the World
War the competition of Germany in the Brazilian market had
developed into a serious threat of British preeminence.
   The cataclysm of 1914 eliminated Germany as a rival in
the South American republic; and yet it prepared the way for
another competitor which was to succeed where others had
failed. Until 1914 the United States was never a serious con¬
tender     for    economic        preeminence         in   Brazilian       markets,
shipping, or investments. In 1854-5 the value of American
goods imported into the empire constituted a small fraction
of the total value86; twenty years later the United States was
in fourth place among importers with less than one-seventh
of the value of British goods87; thirty years later it was still

 84 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1906, Rio, Report
No. 3521.
  86 Brazil, Annuario Estatistico, i° Anno, II, pp. 102-103, and Bureau of American
Republics, The United States of Brazil, p. 138.
  86 Importations from the United States were valued at 7.073:0005000, or 8.3
per cent, as against 54.6 per cent, for Great Britain (Brazil, Relatorio d Assemblia
Geral pelo Ministro da Agricultura, Commercio, e Obras Publicas, 1866, p. 118). The
figures given in United States, Statistical Abstract of Foreign Countries, 1909, p. 59,
are taken from Brazilian sources, the original figures in milreis being converted
to dollars on the basis of rates of exchange on London.
  87 The figures are: Great Britain, 76.750:0005000; the United States, 10,813:-
000S000 (0 Brazil: Suas Riquezas, p. 295).
        CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                           333
fourth with a fraction over ten per cent, of the total imports88;
and in 1912 it was third with 15.61 per cent, of the total value
of goods brought into Brazil as against 25.18 per cent, for
Great Britain and 17.20 per cent, for Germany.89
   As for shipping, the Yankee clipper with its threat to the
preeminence of British navigation interests in the ’forties,
faded into the background with the innovation of steam
vessels. In 1842 only three more English vessels entered the
harbor of Rio than did American ships,90 and yet twelve years
later British tonnage recorded as entering the ports of the
empire was fifty per cent, greater than American,91 and in
1912 the tonnage of vessels registered under the flag of the
United States was in fourteenth place among the arrivals of
foreign ships.92 The same inferiority was visible in the partici¬
pation of American capital in the field of Brazilian invest¬
ments, for prior to the World War the total amount of American
money so invested scarcely exceeded fifty million dollars.93
   There was, however, one field in which the United States
surpassed all foreign countries. Late in the ’fifties the North
American republic had increased its purchases from the empire
so rapidly that it was on the point of superseding Great Britain
as the largest consumer of Brazilian exportations. The Civil
War checked the rise for a decade but by the ’seventies the
United States had become the largest foreign buyer of Bra¬
zilian products, a position which it has maintained ever
since.94 Great Britain, however, has never made a question

  88 Ibid., p. 301.
  89 Brazil, Amuario Estatistico do Brazil, i° Anno, II, 102-103.
  90 Silva de Bivar, “A Chronica,” p. 397.
  91 Brazil, Relatorio d Assemblia pelo Ministro de Agricultura, Commercio, e Obras
Publicas, 1866, Supplement R, Table 6.
  92 Brazil, Annuario Estatistico do Brazil, i° Anno, II, 18-19.
  93 Max Winkler, Investments of United States Capital in Latin America, p. 91.
  94 Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic, 1861, p. 463; Brazil, Relatorio d
Assemblia pelo Ministro da Agricultura, Commercio e Obras Publicas, p. 119; 0 Brazil:
Suas Riquezas, pp. 295 and 296; Brazil, Annuario Estatistico do Brazil, 1 0 Anno, II,
100-101. In 1912 the United States purchased three times as much as did England.
The figures are: The United States, 438,008:9068000; Germany, 160.272:2078000;
Great Britain, 136.789:7098000 (Brazil, Annuario Estatistico do Brazil, i° Anno, II,
101).
334          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
of maintaining its early supremacy in the field of Brazilian
exportations: it is primarily interested in Brazil as a market
for English goods, not as a supplier of raw materials for home
consumption.
  Thus despite the occasional warning voiced by British con¬
suls,95 the United States figured as a minor competitor of
England until the World War, when it supplanted Great
Britain as the principal supplier of the South American re¬
public.96 The failure of England to maintain its traditional
position during the years following I9J4 was merely the
natural result of war conditions and, to the Britisher, a tem¬
porary eclipse which would be rectified at the proper moment.
Consequently, the real struggle for supremacy came after 1918.
  For three years after that date the United States continued
to command the situation in both the buying and selling mar¬
kets of Brazil; but in September of 1922 E. Hambloch, com¬
mercial secretary to the British legation at Rio, reported with
intense satisfaction that Great Britain had “been slowly but
surely overhauling her American commercial rival and the
official statistics for the first quarter of the current year [1922]”
showed “that Great Britain once more” occupied “its original
position as the most important of Brazil’s suppliers.” The next
year he failed to mention Yankee competition, confining his
warnings to alarming reports of Germany’s extraordinary

  •6 The consuls included the American manufacturer and merchant in their
warnings against the rise of German competition (Great Britain, Commercial Re¬
ports, Consular, 1885 [8-9,] p. 1664; Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular,
1888, Pernambuco, Report No. 374; 1889, Rio de Janeiro, Report No. 504, Rio
de Janeiro, Report No. 1531; 1897, Rio de Janeiro, Report No. 1874; 1899, Riode
Janeiro, Report No. 2284; 1908, Pernambuco, Report No. 4139. See also refer¬
ences, supra, note 74). An attempt at a reciprocity agreement between the United
States and Brazil, concluded in 1891, failed and was revoked by the United States
(Great Britain, Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1892, Porto Alegre, Re¬
port No. 1077; 1893, Rio Grande do Sul, Report No. 1263, and Bahia, Report
No. 1290; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1891, July, text, p. 6; and
Annex I, pp. 3-30; 1893, June, text, p. 5 and August, text, p. 43; 1895, May,
text, pp. 20-22; 1900, August, text, p. 52.
  96 For 1917 and 1918 see Brazil, Directoria de Estatistica Commercial, Commercio
Exterior do Brasil (Resumo por Mercadorias), January to December of 1917 and 1918,
pp. 18-19.
        CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                           335
recovery; but in 1925 he announced laconically that figures
for the previous year revealed that the United States had
again surpassed Britain in the value of goods sold to Brazil.97
   In that year the superiority of the North American rival was
slight, a matter of some two hundred thousand pounds sterling
in excess of the value of Britain’s sales; but in 1925 the lead was
increased to two million pounds sterling and in 1926 the
United States was furnishing over twenty-nine per cent, of
Brazil’s imports to nineteen per cent, for Great Britain and
nearly thirteen per cent, for Germany.98 Thus, after having
lost the lead in 1922, the United States not only regained it
but by 1926 furnished a greater proportion of imports to
Brazil than did Great Britain in 1912. In the opinion of the
commercial attache, the explanation of this rapid increase
in exports from the United States to Brazil lay in the extra¬
ordinary demand for American motor cars, gasoline, and
electrical material. Largely as a result of increased purchasing
power on the part of Brazil, for imports in 1929 were nearly
sixty per cent, greater than in 1923, United States sales in these
and other articles99 grew from slightly over eleven millions
  97 Great Britain, Diplomatic and Commercial Reports, September, 1922, Department
of Overseas Trade, “Report on Economic and Financial Conditions in Brazil,”
by E. Hambloch, p. 24; ibid., September, 1923, p. 40; ibid., September, 1925, p.
22; ibid., October, 1926, p. 23.
  98 The figures are, in pounds sterling: 1924: United States, 16,543,809 and Great
Britain, 16,346,931; 1926: the United States, 23,308,962; Great Britain, 15,207,-
459; and Germany, 10,129,524 (Brazil, Directoria de Estatistica, Commercio Ex¬
terior do Brasil, 1927, pp. 12-13). In 1929 the percentage of imports from these three
countries in relation to the total importation of Brazil were: the United States, 30
per cent.; Great Britain (including all possessions) 20      per cent.; and Germany
12M per cent. (Brazil, Departamento Nacional de Estatistica, Commercio Exterior
do Brasil-Importafao por Paizes de Procedencia, Janeiro a Dezembro, 1926-1330).
  99 The principal articles in which the United States was competing with Great
Britain in the Brazilian market were: coal, iron bars and plates, steel bars and
plates, railway material, telegraph and telephone posts, staples, screws and rivets,
tubes and pipes, wire, cutlery, tin plates, tools and utensils, motor cars and acces¬
sories, gasoline, scales, hydraulic pumps and boilers, cranes, sewing machines,
industrial and agricultural machinery, copper plates and electric copper wire,
soda ash, paints and varnishes, caustic soda, drugs and chemicals, electric cables,
electrical apparatus, dynamos, motors and transformers, lubricating oils, photo¬
graphic apparatus, rubber tires, and skins and hides (E. Hambloch, “Report on
Industrial and Financial Conditions in Brazil,” September, 1926, p. 23).
336          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
sterling in the earlier period to over twenty-six millions in
1929, whereas Great Britain was able to increase its sales by
less than one-third of the value of the earlier period.100
  Thus by the end of 1929 the United States was successfully
rivalling Great Britain in the buying and selling markets of
Brazil.101 On the other hand, in the fields of shipping and in¬
vestments, English preeminence was still virtually unchallenged.
In 1926 the tonnage of vessels flying the British flag was almost
twice as large as that of its nearest competitor, Germany.102 In
investments, of the estimated two billion, five hundred million
dollars of foreign capital invested in Brazil in 1929 half was
British.103 In 1927 there was four times as much British as
American money invested in Brazil, and over one and one-half
times as much as all other foreign capital combined.104 In two
of the three traditional fields of British interest in the South
American republic, England was still preeminent at the end
of the last decade.
  Will the United States be able to maintain its paramount
position as the successful rival of the British in the markets of
Brazil, and perhaps even displace England in the investment
field as well? Or will Great Britain be able to regain its tradi¬
tional position of absolute economic preeminence in Brazil?
These are questions to which only the future can reveal
answers.
  100 Exports from Great Britain in 1923 were £13,427,738 and from Great Britain
and all possessions in 1929, they were £17,850,514 (Brazil, Directoria de Estatistica,
Commercio Exterior do Brasil, 1927, pp. 12-13, and Departamento Nacional de Es¬
tatistica, Importafdo por Paiz.es de Procedencia, Janeiro a Dezembro, 1926-1930).
  101 It would be premature to assert that the preeminence of the United States
in Brazilian markets was permanently assured. Due to the unsettled conditions
resulting from the revolution, United States sales dropped fifty per cent, in 1930,
although it still maintained its leading position (Brazil, Departamento Nacional
de Estatistica, op. cit.).
  102 Brazil, Directoria de Estatistica, Commercio Exterior do Brasil, 1927, p. 174.
  i°8 Winkler, Investments of United States Capital in Latin America, p. 88. For a de¬
tailed statement of United States capital in Brazil see ibid., pp. 86-93.
  104 South American Handbook for 1928, p. 188.
                         SUMMARY

The   foundations  of British preeminence in Portuguese
America were laid before Brazil became a nation, for the line
of continuity may be traced to the Anglo-Portuguese treaties
of i642-’54-’6i. By those agreements practices which had be¬
come recognized by custom and by the decrees of Portuguese
kings were legalized, and additional privileges in Portuguese
economic life demanded by English merchants were guaran¬
teed to them. Methuen’s solution of the crisis of the last
decades of the seventeenth century established     a   lucrative
economic exchange between the two countries which the
British exploited under the special privileges obtained by the
earlier series of agreements. So valuable to Englishmen were
the commercial relations which developed after 1703 that
Portugal outrivaled France in the esteem of the British mer¬
chant and industrial class. Consequently, by the middle of the
eighteenth century English penetration developed to such a
degree that Portugal became the economic vassal of its ally.
To the British merchant, the principal factor in this Anglo-
Portuguese exchange was the colony of Brazil, for the mother
country served as the entrepot for the streams of merchandise
which flowed from England to the Portuguese colonies and
from these colonies back to England.
  The industrial revolution in Great Britain, which was co¬
incident with the effort of the Marquez de Pombal to free his
country from its economic vassalage, almost severed the con¬
nection between the two allies; but raw cotton from Brazil and
the wars with France reestablished the intimate relations which
had been threatened with dissolution. When the invasion of
the French forced D. Joao to flee to Rio under the protection
of England, the opportunity came for Great Britain to transfer
its old privileges and preeminent position in Portugal to the
    22
338      BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
colony itself. Strangford, by his treaty in 1810, succeeded in
this task beyond the expectations of the London court.
   From 1808 to 1821 the relations between the two countries
were conducted on the traditional European basis, although
the Portuguese court was residing in the colony. During these
thirteen years English penetration into Brazil assumed formid¬
able proportions, for, encouraged by the special privileges,
immunities, and guaranties specified to them by treaty, British
capital and enterprise were enticed into the huge colony, ripe
for exploitation. When the cry of independence was raised in
1822, these interests had become so important that Great
Britain forced the revolting colony to accept as binding upon
itself the obligations which Portugal had incurred by the
treaty of 1810, despite the fact that Brazil had renounced the
authority of the government which had negotiated that agree¬
ment. This transfer of the traditional English privileges so
long enjoyed in Portugal to the independent empire of Brazil
was completed by the commercial treaty of 1827, by which the
new state paid a debt due Great Britain for its services in se¬
curing the entrance of the empire into the family of European
nations.
  Two currents of interest threatened to disrupt the transfer
of traditional British privileges in Portugal to the new state.
One was the desire of the Rio court to absorb the north bank
of the Plate River, but under British mediation the question
was settled in 1828 without fundamentally disturbing Anglo-
Brazilian relations. The other problem, the suppression of
the slave traffic, was far more serious and proved impossible
of solution during the formative period of the empire, although
Great Britain succeeded in forcing Brazil to sign agreements
which nominally abolished the slave trade under conditions
which would enable the English to employ their cruisers to
enforce the prohibition. The history of the Portuguese and
Brazilian slave traffic between 1808 and 1827 presaged the
difficulties which were to confront the London court in its
relations with Brazil during the succeeding forty years. The
fact that the empire in 1827 acceded to the demands of Eng-
                           SUMMARY                              339
land in regard to the slave trade is evidence of the preeminence
of Britain in Brazil, but persistence in those demands con¬
stantly threatened during the first three-quarters of the century
to destroy the good relations which existed between the two
governments.
  Between 1825 and 1827 British preeminence in Brazil
reached its zenith. In shipping, commerce, and investments
Great Britain enjoyed the paramount position among foreign
powers interested in Brazil, and politically the London Office
was beginning to exercise a virtual protectorate over the em¬
pire. Yet the twenty years following 1827 witnessed a steady
decline in the political influence exerted by Great Britain over
Brazil. Friction which arose from England’s efforts to suppress
the slave trade embittered Anglo-Brazilian relations and led
to a revolt by the South American nation against the traditional
position of Great Britain in Portuguese affairs. The smoldering
resentment felt by Brazil over what it termed the arbitrary
action of England came to a crisis in 1845 at the expiration of
the convention of 1826 when Great Britain, determined on the
suppression of the traffic at any cost, employed coercion when
persuasion failed.
  The revolt against British preeminence in the political
affairs of Brazil was carried to a successful conclusion in the
two decades following 1845. By 1850 the imperial government,
which in the first quarter of the century had been forced to
yield to the commanding diplomacy of British agents, was
stabilized, confident of its future, and divorced from the old
idea of maintaining close relations with the European powers.
Irritated by forty years of friction arising mainly from the slave
trade controversy, and aided by the marked national and
economic development of the empire, Brazil was able to throw
off its political subjection to Great Britain. In i860 it was strong
enough to sustain its revolt; thereafter friendly relations were
to exist between the two governments, but the thread of political
control by England in territory possessed by the Portuguese
race was definitely broken in Brazil.
  A different phase of this revolt against British preeminence
340      BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
was revealed in the efforts exerted by the South American em¬
pire to free itself from the extra-territorial privileges, consular
concessions, and economic favors imposed by England during
the period from 1808 to 1827. The aim of the Brazilians was
not to eliminate British interests from their foreign commerce,
capital investments, and domestic enterprises, but to open their
country to the competition of all other nations, and thus to
make the paramount position of England dependent not on
special favors but on economic superiority over rivals. That
objective was attained by the middle of the century.
  Yet Great Britain was able to maintain its position of eco¬
nomic supremacy in Brazilian shipping, markets, and invest¬
ments throughout the nineteenth century. The traditional
privileges, won in Portugal centuries earlier and transferred
to South America between 1808 and 1827, were abolished at
the expiration of the treaty in 1844 without altering England’s
preeminence in Brazilian economic life. During the period
when the trade of the Portuguese empire was a monopoly of
the mother country, these special privileges had played a use¬
ful part in opening colonial possessions to British trade and
their continuation in the early years of the independence of
Brazil had guaranteed a low import tax during the transition
period and at the same time had prevented the granting to
other foreign powers special favors adverse to British interests.
By the middle of the century, however, their usefulness was
past, for in open competition Great Britain was superior to
any rival.
  That superiority was threatened seriously for the first time
when Germany appeared to challenge England’s position as
the chief supplier of Brazilian markets. By 1914 it had risen
to second place in the carrying trade and in exports to Brazil,
only to drop out of the race when the World War started. For
the next eight years the United States, which since the late
’sixties had been the largest buyer of Brazilian products, oc¬
cupied Great Britain’s place as chief foreign exporter to the
South American nation. In 1922 England regained the lead
only to lose it again two years later to the same rival. The
                         SUMMARY                            341
United States not only succeeded to first place but by 1926
furnished a greater proportion of imports to Brazil than did
Great Britain prior to the outbreak of the World War.
  Yet England still retains a commanding position in the fields
of investments and shipping, despite the fact that the United
States is the largest buyer of Brazilian products and the prin¬
cipal supplier of foreign goods to the South American republic.
Thus the historic preeminence of Great Britain in Portuguese
domains has been challenged successfully in only one of its
three principal economic phases. Politically, British preemi¬
nence in Brazil has disappeared; economically, it is still a de¬
cisive factor in the life of Portuguese America.
*
              BIBLIOGRAPHY OF CITATIONS

                           /.   SOURCES

A.   Manuscript materials

     In the British Museum:
       Papers of the Commission of the English Council of State.
     Add. Ms., 4192.
       Newcastle Papers. Add. Ms., 32795.
        Eden Correspondence. Add. Ms., 34420.
       Evidence for the Commercial Treaty with France taken be¬
     fore the Board of Trade, 1785-1786. Add. Ms., 34462.
       Coxe Papers. Add. Ms., 9252.
       Miscellaneous Papers of Lord Bexley, 1796-1844. Add. Ms.,
     31237.
       Birch Manuscript, 4155.

     In the Catholic University of America, Washington, D. C.:
       Cartas a Suas Magestades—Anno 1661—do Conde da Ponte.

     In the Public Record Office, London:
       Customs and Excise:
          Customs 8, vols. 1-42. Ledgers of Exports of British Mer¬
       chandize, 1812-1835.
          Customs 4, vols. 8-30. Ledgers of Imports into Great Brit¬
       ain, 1812-1835.
       Foreign Office:
          Claims Commissions 97, vols. 79-85, Rio Mixed Commis¬
       sion of 1858.
          Embassy Archives, Brazil, 131, vols. 12, 15, 211-215.
          General Correspondence, Portugal, 63, vols. 6-8, 54-279.
       Correspondence between London, Lisbon, and Rio de Jan¬
       eiro, 1785-1786, 1807-1824.
          General Correspondence, Brazil, 13, vols. 1-50 and 211-
344                       BIBLIOGRAPHY
        227. Correspondence between London and Rio de Janeiro,
         1825-1828 and 1844-1845.
           General Correspondence, Brazil, 97? vol. 76. Brazil and
         Buenos Aires Memorandum. Montevideo. 1811-1824.
           Secretary of State’s Office, 95, vol. 183. 1806-1808.
           Slave Trade, 84, vols. 5-17. London and Rio Commissions.
         1819-1822.
           Slave Trade, 84, vols. 23-145. Rio Commission and reports
         of consuls, charges, ambassadors, agents. 1823-1833.
           Slave Trade, 84, vols. 581-583. Correspondence between
         London and Rio, January-December, 1845.
           Treaties, Protocols, Portugal, 93/37, vols. 1B-16. 1807-
         1823.
           Treaties, Protocols, Brazil, 93/9, vol. 1. 1826.
           Treaties, Protocols, Brazil, 94/55. 1826.
           Treaties, Protocols, Brazil, 94/477. 1858.
         State Papers, Foreign, Portugal:
           Treaty Papers, 103, vols. 57-58. 1673-1777.
           Foreign Ministers, 100, vol. 37. 1648-1710.
           General Correspondence, 89, vols. 4, 5. 1634-1660.
           General Correspondence, 89, vols. 17, 18. 1690-1705.
           General Correspondence, 89, vols. 36-39. 1728-1737.
           General Correspondence, 89, vols. 54-64. 1761-1767.
         State Papers, Foreign, Spain:
           General Correspondence, 94, vols. 122-127. 1735-1737-

B.     Official Published Documents


     Brazil
         Annaes do Parlamento Brazileiro. Assembled Constituinte. 1823.
       6 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1874.
         Archivo Diplomatico da Independencia. 6 vols., Rio de Janeiro,
       1922.
         Annuario Estatistico do Brasil,   i° Anno, 1908-1912. Rio de
      Janeiro, 1917.
        Directoria de Estatistica, Commercio Exterior do Brasil. Rio de
      Janeiro, 1927.
        Directoria de Estatistica Commercial, Commercio Exterior do
      Brasil (Resumo por Mercadorias) Janeiro-Dezembro, igij-igi8. Rio
      de Janeiro, 1919.
                         BIBLIOGRAPHY                               345
     Ministry of Agriculture, Industry, and Commerce, What Bra¬
  zil Buys and Sells. Rio de Janeiro, 1918.
      Ministerio das Relates Exteriores, R. A. Campos (ed), Rela¬
  tes Diplomatieas do Brazil, contendo os nomes dos Representantes Dip¬
  lomatics dos diversos paizes no Rio de Janeiro de 1808 a igi2. Rio de
  Janeiro, 1913.
  .   Ministerio das Rela$6es Exteriores. Relatorio da Repartigao dos
  JVegocios dos Estrangeiros, apresentado a Assemblea Geral Legislativa.
  Rio de Janeiro, 1837—.
   Ministerio do Trabalho, lndustria e Commercio, Departa-
  mento Nacional de Estatistica, Commercio Exterior do Brasil, Im-
  portagao por Paizes de Procedencia, Janeiro a Dezembro, 1326-1330.
  Rio de Janeiro, 1930.
      Relatorio a Assemblea Geral pelo Ministro e Secretario de Estado
  dos JVegocios de Agricultura, Commercio e Obras Publicas, 1866.

Great Britain
      British and Foreign State Papers. London, 1841—.
      Calendar of Patent Rolls. London, 1891.
      Commercial Reports, Diplomatic, 1858-1866.
      Commercial Reports, Consular, 1862-1866.
      Commercial Reports, Diplomatic and Consular, 1866—.
     Department of Overseas Trade, Reports on the conditions in
  Brazil by commercial secretary of the Embassy at Rio de Jan¬
  eiro. Various dates.
    Journals of the Commissioners for Trade and Plantations. London.
  I92°     •
      Journals of the House of Commons.
      Journals of the House of Lords.
      Parliamentary Debates from the Tear 1803 to the Present Time. Lon¬
  don (Hansard), 1812—.

Portugal
      Collecgao Chronologica de Leis Extravagantes, Posteriores a nova
  Compilagao das Ordenagoes do Reino Publicados em 1603. Collected
 by J. I. de Freitas. 7 vols., Coimbra, 1819-1833.
      Quadro Elementar das Relagoes Politicas e Diplomatieas de Portugal
 com as diversas potencias do Mundo. Collected and written by Vis-
 conde de Santarem by order of the Portuguese government.
346                        BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Last two volumes finished by L. A. Rebello da Silva. 18 vols.,
      Lisbon, 1842-1860.

 United States
        Department of Commerce and Labor, Bureau of Statistics,
      Statistical Abstract of Foreign Countries, October, 1909. Washing¬
      ton, D. C., 1909.

C.    Other Sources

        Accioly, Hildebrando, Ados Internacionaes Vigentes no Brasil.
      Rio de Janeiro, 1927.
         Aguiar, Antonio Augusto de, Vida do Marquez de Barbacena.
      Rio de Janeiro, 1896.
         Republica Argentina, Tratados, Protocolos, Ados y Acuerdos In¬
      ternacionaes. 11 vols., Buenos Aires, 1911.
         William, Lord Auckland, Journal and Correspondence. 4 vols.,
      London, 1861-1862.
         Azeredo Coutinho (Bishop of Pernambuco), An Essay on the
      Commerce and Products of the Portuguese Colonies in South America,
      especially in the Brazils. London, 1807.
         Borges de Castro, Jose Ferreira, Collecgao dos Tratados Conven-
      goes, Contratos e Ados Publicos celebrados entre a Coroa de Portugal e
      As Mais Potencias desde 1840 ate ao Presente. Lisboa, 1856-1863.
         Boyer, Abel, The History of the Reign of Qyeen Anne. 11 vols.,
      London, 1703-1713.
         Bureau of American Republics, The United States of Brazil.
      Washington, 1899.
         Calvo, Carlos, Anales de la Revolucion de la America Latina. 5
      vols., Paris, 1864.
         -, Coleccion Completa de los tratados . . . de todos
      los estados de la America Latina. 10 vols., Paris, 1862-1864.
         Cardoso de Oliveira, Jose Manoel, Ados Diplomaticos do Brazil,
      1493-1912. 2 vols. Rio de Janeiro, 1912.
         Centro Industrial do Brasil; O Brazil: Suas Riquezas JVaturaes,
      Suas Industrias. Rio de Janeiro, 1907.
         Chalmers, George, A Collection of Treaties between Great Britain
      and other Powers. 2 vols., London, 1790.
         Charlevoix, Jose, Historia del Paraguay, Colleccion de Libros y
      Documentos referentes a la Historia de America. 5 vols., Madrid, 1910.
         Christie, W. D., The Brazil Correspondence in the Cases of the
                      BIBLIOGRAPHY                                   347
“Prince of Wales” and Officers of the “Forte.” Reprinted from Papers
laid before Parliament. With an introduction telling some truth about
Brazil. London, 1863.
              , Notes on Brazilian Questions. London, 1865.
  Cobbett, William, Parliamentary History of England. 36 vols.,
London, 1806-1820.
  Debrett, J., A Collection of State Papers. 7 vols., London, 1794-
I799-
  Hertslet, L., A Complete Collection of Treaties and Conventions
and Reciprocal Regulations between Great Britain and Foreign Powers.
London, 1841—.
  Historical Manuscripts Commission,
    Bath Papers, vol. 1.
    Mss. of the House of Lords, vol. 5.
    Townshend Papers, vol. 1.
    Rutland Papers, vol. 2.
    Dropmore Papers, vols. 1-3.
     Buckinghamshire Papers.
     Portland Mss., vols. 1-5.
     Egmont Papers, vol. 2.
  Howell, Thomas B., A Complete Collection of State Trials and
Proceedings for High Treason and other Crimes and misdemeanors from
the earliest period to the year 1820. 34 vols., London, 1816-1826.
  Hyde, Edward, Earl of Clarendon, State Papers. 3 vols., Ox¬
ford, 1767.
  Leonard, Peter, The Western Coast of Africa, Journal of an Offi¬
cer, 1830, 1831 and 1832. Philadelphia, 1833.
  Lunan, John, An Abstract of the Laws of Jamaica, relating to
Slaves with the Slave Law at length. Also an Appendix containing an
Abstract of the Acts of Parliament relating to the Abolition of the Slave-
Trade. Jamaica, 1819.
  Luttrell, Narcissus, A Brief Historical Relation of State Affairs.
6 vols., Oxford, 1857.
  MacPherson, David, Annals of Commerce. 4 vols., London,
1805.
  Malmesbury, Diaries and Correspondence of James Harris, First
Earl of Malmesbury. Edited by the Third Earl. 4 vols., London,
1844.
  Martens, F., Recueil des Traites des Puissances e fftats de l’Europe
depuis iy6i. Gottengue.
348                       BIBLIOGRAPHY
        Mascard, Pedro, Revista del Archivo, General Administrativo,
      Coleccion de Documentos. Collected by Mascard. Montevideo,
      i885-
        Mawe, John, Travels in the Gold and Diamond Districts of Brazil•
      London, 1825.
        Mello e Torres, Francisco, Conde da Ponte e Marquez de
      Sande, Relagam da Embaxaida do Conde da Ponte. Lisboa, 1661.
        Molinari, Diego Luis, Antecedentes de la Revolucion de Mayo. 3
      vols. Buenos Aires, 1923-1926.
        Nabuco, Joaquim, Primier Memoire (Le Droit du Bresil and
      Annexes). 7 vols.
        -, Second Memoire (La Pretention Anglais and
      Annexes). 6 vols.
        -, Troisiemt Memoire (La Construction des Mem-
      oires anglais and an atlas).
        Nunez, Ignacio, Rio de la Plata. London, 1824.
         Parish, Woodbine, Buenos Aires and the Provinces of the Rio de la
      Plata. London, 1st edition, 1839; 2nd edition, 1852.
         Pedro I, Cartas de D. Pedro Principe regente do Brasil a Seu Pae
      D. Joao VI, rei de Portugal. Sao Paulo, 1916. ‘
         Pereira Pinto, Antonio, Apontamentos para 0 Direito Internati¬
      onal, ou Collecgao Completa dos Tratados celebrados pelo Brazil com
      differentes Nagoes Estrangeiros. 4 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1864.
        Pereira da Silva. J. M., Memorias do Meu Tempo. 2 vols. Rio
      de Janeiro and Paris. N. D.
        Pitt, William, Correspondence between William Pitt and Charles,
      Duke of Rutland, iy8i-ij8j. Edinburgh and London, 1890.
        Presas, Jose, Memorias Secretas de la Princesa del Brazil, actual
      reina viuda de Portugal, La Sehora Doha Carlota Joaquina de Borbon.
      Burdeos, 1830.
        Privileges of an Englishman in the Kingdoms and Dominions of
      Portugal. Done in Portuguese and English. London, 1730.
        Privilegios da JVagao Britanica em Portugal    . . . extrahidos
      por ordem do Consul Geral de S. M. B. Lisboa, 1814.
        Rio Branco, Barao do (Jose Marfa da Silva Paranhos), MSm-
      oire sur la Question des limites entre les Ttats-Unis du Bresil et la
      Guyanne Britannique. 1897.
        Rymer, Thomas, Foedra. 5 vols., The Hague, 3rd edition,
      1740.
        Smith, John A., Count da Carnota, Memoirs of the Marquis of
                           BIBLIOGRAPHY                                 349
      Pombal, with Extracts from his Writings and from Dispatches in State
      Paper Office. 2 vols., London, 1843.
        South American Handbook for 1925 (J. H. Hunter, ed.). London.
        South American Handbook for 1928 (J. H. Hunter, ed.). London.
        Stapleton, A. G., George Canning and His Times. London, 1859.
         Tracts Relating to Various Trades. . . .
           “The State of the English Sugar Trade, with that of Por¬
        tugal.” (About 1670)
          “The Case of their Majesties’ Sugar Plantations.” (About
        1688)
       Swift, Jonathan, Prose Works. 12 vols., London, 1897-1908.
       Thurloe, John, A Collection of State Papers of John Thurloe, Esq.
     7 vols., London, 1742.
       Tomline, George, Memoirs of the Life of William Pitt. 2 vols.,
     Boston, 1821.
       Welsh, Rev. R., Notices of Brazil in 1828-1829. 2 vols., Boston,
     1831.
        Whitelocke, Bulstrode, Memorials of English Affairs. London,
      1732.

                   II.   SECONDAR T MA TERIALS
A.   Books


        Altamira, Rafael, Historia de Espahay de la Civilization Espah-
     ola. 4 vols., Barcelona, 1914.
       Angell, Hildegarde, Simon Bolivar, South American Liberator.
     New York, 1930.
       Armitage, John, The History of Brazil. 2 vols., London, 1836.
       Baril, V. L., Comte de la Hure, VEmpire du Bresil. Paris, 1862.
       Beverina, Juan, La Guerra contra el Imperio del Brasil. 2 vols.,
     Buenos Aires, 1927-1928.
       Biographie Universelle. Paris, 1823.
       Bowden, Witt, The Rise of the Great Manufacturers of England.
     1960-1990. University of Pennsylvania, 1919.
       Buxton, Charles (ed.), Memoirs of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton.
     London, 1851.
       Buxton, Thomas Fowell, The African Slave Trade. Pt. II. The
     Remedy. London, 1840.
       Cady, John F., Foreign Intervention in the Rio de la Plata, 1898-90.
     Philadelphia, 1929.
350                      BIBLIOGRAPHY
        Carvalho, Augusto de, 0 Brazil, Colonizagao e Emigragao. Por¬
      to, 1876.
         Carvalho, Delgado de, Geographia do Brasil. Rio de Janeiro,
      I929-
        Castro Carreira, Liberato de, Historia Financeira, e Orgamen-
      taria do Imperio do Brazil• Rio. 1889.
         Chapman, Charles E., A History of Spain. New York, 1927.
         Clarkson, Thomas, History of the Abolition of the African Slave-
      Trade by the British Parliament. Abridged by Evan Lewis. Wil¬
      mington, 1816.
         Cunningham, W., The Growth of English Industry and Commerce
      in Modern Times. 2 vols., Cambridge, 1903.
         Davenport, Francis, European Treaties Bearing on the History of
      the United States and its Dependencies to 1648. Washington, 1917.
         Dictionary of National Biography. Editors, Leslie Stephen and
      Sidney Lee. 66 vols., New York and London, 1885-1901.
         Dominguez, Luiz, Conquest of the River Plate. Hakluyt Society
      Publication, London, 1891.
         Dunshee de Abranches, A Espansao Economica e 0 Commercio
      Exterior do Brazil. Rio de Janeiro, 1915.
         --, A Inglaterra e a Soberania do Brazil■ Rio de Jan¬
      eiro, 1915.
        -, Tratados de Commercio e Navigagao do Brazil• Rio
      de Janeiro, 1909.
        La Grande Encyclopedic. 31 vols., Paris, N. D.
         Feiling, Keith, A History of the Tory Party, 1640-1714. Oxford
      1924-
        Grant, Andrew, History of Brazil. London, 1809.
        Humboldt, F. H. Alexander, Essai Politique sur le royaume de la
      noveau espagne. 2 vols., Paris, 1811.
        Innes, Arthur D., Britain and Her Rivals in the 18th Century.
      London, 1895.
        -, A History of England and the British Empire. 4 vols.,
      New York, 1915.
        James, Herman G., The Constitutional System of Brazil. Wash¬
      ington, 1923.
        Jenks, Leland H., The Migration of British Capital to 1875.
      New York and London, 1927.
        Keller, Albert G., Colonization: A Study of the Founding of New
      Societies. New York, 1908.
                      BIBLIOGRAPHY                                 35i
 Mathieson, William Law, British Slavery and its Abolition. New
York, 1926.
 -, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, 1833-1863. New
York, 1929.
  Mello Moraes, A. J., Historia do Brazil-Reino e Brazil-Imperio.
2 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1871.
  Monteiro, Tobias, Historia do Imperio: A Elaboragao da Indepen¬
dence. Rio de Janeiro, 1927.
  Morse, Jedidiah and Sidney E., A New Universal Atlas of the
 World. New Haven, 1822.
  Moses, Bernard, Spain's Declining Power in South America, 1730-
1806. University of California Press, 1919.
   Nabuco, Joaquim, Estadista do Imperio, Nabuco de Araujo: Sua
Vida, Suas Opinioes, Sua Epoca. 3 Tomos. Rio de Janeiro-Paris,
1897.
  Oliveira Lima, Manoel de, Dorn Joao VI no Brazil, 1808-1821.
2 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1908.
  -, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, 1822-1883. Sao Paulo, 1927.
  -, 0 Reconhecimento do Imperio. Rio de Janeiro and
Paris, 1902.
  -, Relagao dos Manuscriptos de Interesse para 0 Brazil
no Museo Britannico em Londres. Rio de Janeiro, 1903.
  Oliveira Martins, J. P., 0 Brazil e as Colonias Portuguesas. Lis¬
boa, 1920.
  -, Historia de Portugal. 2 vols., Lisboa, J927. nth
Edigao.
  Packard, Laurence B., The Commercial Revolution. 1400-1776.
New York, 1927.
   Pereira da Silva, J. M., Historia da Fundagao do Imperio Brazil¬
eiro. 7 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1864.
  -, Situation Sociale, Politique, et Economique de VEmpire
du Bresil. Rio de Janeiro, 1865.
  Pitman, Frank W., The Development of the British West Indies,
1700-1763. New Haven, 1917.
  Prestage, Edgar,      The Diplomatic Relations of Portugal with
France, England and Holland from 1640 to 1668. Watford, 1925.
  Quesada, Vicente G., Historia Diplomatica Latino-Americana.
Vol. II, La Polltica del Brasil con las Republicas del Rio de la Plata.
Buenos Aires, 1919.
  Ragatz, Lowell Joseph, The Fall of the Planter Class in the
;52                       BIBLIOGRAPHY
      Caribbean. 1763-1833. New York and London, 1928.
        Rippy, J. Fred, Latin America in World Politics. New York,
      1928.
        --, Rivalry of the United States and Great Britain over
      Latin America (1808-1830). Baltimore, 1929.
        Robertson, William S., History of the Latin American Nations.
      New York, 1927.
       Rocha Pombo, Jose F. da, Historia do Brazil. 10 vols., Rio de
      Janeiro, N. D.
        Rubio, Julian Maria, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina y la Politica
      de Espaha en America [1808-1812). Madrid, 1920.
         Sorel, Albert, VEurope et la Revolution frangaise. 8 vols., Paris,

      i9°3*
        Southey, Robert, History of Brazil• London, 1822. 2nd edi¬
      tion.
         Stanhope, Earl, History of England Comprising the Reign of Queen
      Anne. 1701-1713. London, 1870.
        -, Life of William Pitt. 4 vols., London, 1861.
        Taunay, Alfonso E., Historia Geral das Bandeiras Paulistas. 6
      vols., Sao Paulo, 1925-1929.
        Temperly, Harold, Foreign Policy of Canning, 1822-1827. Lon¬
      don, 1925.
        Thiers, M. A., Histoire du Consulat e de VEmpire. 21 vols., Paris,
       1849.
         Trevelyan, G. M., England Under the Stuarts. New York and
      London, 1912.
       Varnhagem, Frc°. Adolpho, Visconde de Porto Seguro, His¬
      toria Geral do Brazil. Rio de Janeiro, 1854.
         Villanueva, Carlos A., Bolivar y el General San Martin. Paris.

       I911-
         -, Napoleony la Independencia de America. Paris, 1911.
         Ward, A. W. and G. P. Gooch, Cambridge History of British
      Foreign Policy. 1783-igig. Cambridge, 1922.
        Webster, C. K., Foreign Policy of Ca$tlereagh, 1813-1822. Lon¬
       don, 1925.
         Winkler, Max, Investments of United States Capital in Latin
       America. Boston, 1929.

B.     Periodicals and Newspapers

         Addams, Jane, “The Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade,”
       Journal of Negro History, October, 1925.
                          BIBLIOGRAPHY                                353
       Alvez, Joao Luiz, “A Questao do Elemento Servil. A Extinc-
     gao do Traffico e a Lei de Repressao de 1850. Liberdade dos
     Nascituros,” Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brasileiro.
     Tomo Especial 6, Parte IV (1916), pp. 188-257.
       Baena, Antonio L. Monteiro, “Memoria,” Revista do Instituto
     Historico e Geographico Brasileiro. 1841, pp. 322-332.
       Bevilaqua, Clovis, “As Capitanias Hereditarias perante o
     Tratado de Tordesillas,” Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico
     Brazileiro, Tomo Especial, Parte II, Rio de Janeiro, 1915.
       Bourne, E. G., “The History of the Determination of the Line
     of Demarcation Established by Pope Alexander VI,” American
     Historical Association, Reports, 1891.
       Bowden, Witt, “The English Manufacturers and the Com¬
     mercial Treaty of 1786 with France,” American Historical Re¬
     view, XXV (1920).
                  -, “The Influence of the Manufacturers on some of
     the Early Policies of William Pitt,” American Historical Review,
     XXIX (1924).
       Browning, Oscar, “The Treaty of Commerce between Eng¬
     land and France in 1786,” Transactions Royal Historical Society,
     New Series, II.
       Chapman, A. B. W., “Commercial Relations of England and
     Portugal, 1487-1807,” Transactions Royal Historical Society, Third
     Series, I.
       Dubois, W. E. B., “The Enforcement of the Slave-Trade
     Laws,” American Historical Association, Reports, 1891.
       Fauchille, Paul, “Le Conflit de limites entre le Bresil et la
     Grande Bretagne et la sentence arbitrale du Roi d’ltalie,” Revue
     Generale du Droit Internacional Public, Jan.-Feb., 1905.
       Hill, Lawrence F., “Abolition of the African Slave Trade to
     Brazil,” Hispanic American Historical Review, May, 1931.
      Jones, Guernsey, “The Oldest European Alliance—England
 and Portugal, 1640 to 1661,” American Historical Association,
 Reports, 1916. Pt. I.
       Manchester, Alan K., “The Rise of the Brazilian Aristoc¬
 racy,” Hispanic American Historical Review, May, 1931.
       -,              “The   Paradoxial    Pedro,   First    Emperor of
     Brazil,” Hispanic American Historical Review, May, 1932.
       Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brazileira do Prata ate a Guerra
 contra Rosas,” Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brasil¬
 eiro, 1917, Tomo Especial V.
23
354                        BIBLIOGRAPHY
        Ramalho Ortigao, Antonio de Barros, “Surto de Coopera-
      tivismo,” Chapter V in Contribuigoes para a Biographia de D. Pedro
      II, Pt. I, Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brasileiro, Tomo
      Especial IX, Pt. I.
        Roure, Agenor de, “Elei^ao Direita—Ensino Publico—,”
      Chapter IX in Contribuigoes para a Biographia de D. Pedro II, Pt. I.
      Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brasileiro, Tomo Espe¬
      cial, IX, Pt. I.
        Shillington, Miss Violet, “The Beginnings of the Anglo-Por-
      tuguese Alliance,”     Transactions Royal Historical Society, New
      Series, XX.
        Silva de Bivar, Diogo de Soares, “A Chronica do Anno
      1842,” Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brasileiro, 1843.
        Sousa Sa Vianna, Dr. Manoel Alvaro de, “O Traffico e a
      Diplomacia Brasileira,” Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico
      Brasileiro, Tomo Especial, V. 6, Pt. 5 (1917), pp. 539-565.
        Van Alstyne, “British Right of Search and the African Slave
      Trade,” Journal of Modern History, II, No. I.
        Viveiros de Castro, Augusto Olympo, “Emancipac^ao Grad¬
      ual,” Chapter VIII in Contribuigoes para a Biographia de D. Pedro
      II, Pt. I, Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brasileiro. Tomo
      Especial, IX, Pt. I.
        Xavier de Brito, Pedro Torquato, “Memoria Historica e
      Geographica da Uha da Trindade,” Revista do Instituto Historico
      e Geographico Brasileiro, 1877, pt. 2.
        Aurora Fluminense. Rio de Janeiro, November 30, 1830.
        Correio Braziliense ou Armazen Literario. 29 vols., London, 1808-
      1822.
        Correio Official. Rio de Janeiro, 1833, 1835, 1836.
        Diario do Povo. Rio de Janeiro, April 24, 1832.
        Diario do Rio. Rio de Janeiro, 1825, and November 22, 1842
        Journal do Commercio. Rio de Janeiro April 24, 1830 and
      March 19, 1845.
         The Historical Register. London, 1735.
         The London Magazine. London, 1735.
         0 Pharol. Rio de Janeiro, November 12, 1842.
         The Political State of Great Britain. 26 vols., London, 1711-1741.
         The Present State of Europe. London, 1688-1736.
                                        INDEX

                                                 Coutinho, ioif.; opposes English
./Aberdeen: threatens Brazil but fails            interests, 102 ff.; forces occupation of
  to secure equipment clause, 229 f.;             Banda Oriental, 141; refuses to with¬
  refuses to review decisions of Sierra           draw forces, 142?.; upholds slave
  Leone Commission, 235 f.; accuses               trade, 165
  Brazil of treaty violation, 235 and n.        Araujo Ribeiro, Jose de: mission to
  62; warns Brazil, 248f.; declares               London, 293
  piracy clause of convention perpet¬           Artigas: threatens to take Banda Ori¬
  ual, 249; passes Aberdeen Act, 249 f.;          ental, 131; breaks with Buenos Aires,
  orders new treaty negotiated, 250,              134; controls Montevideo, 138; con¬
  without results, 251 and n. 122;                quered by Portuguese, 139 ff.
  drafts new commercial treaty, 288 f.;         Assiento: contract with Portugal re¬
  proposes Brazil abolish slavery, 289;          jected by England, 37 f.
  modifies terms of proposed treaty,            Aston, Chargi: fails to secure equip¬
  290, 295; refuses Brazilian proposals,          ment clause, 227
  294 f.; fears competition of slave la¬        Auckland, William Eden, Lord: ap¬
  bor sugar, 294 f. and n. 37                     pointed to negotiate Anglo-French
Aberdeen Act: passed, 250; seizures               Commercial Treaty, 49; consults
  under, 254 f.; Brazilian slave im¬              new industrialists, 49, 51, n. 100
  portations increase, 256; repealed,           Aurora Fluminense: complains of illicit
  264, n. 54; embitters Anglo-Brazilian           slave importation, 239
  relations, 265 f.; leaves legacy of           Austria: proposes amicable mediation
  claims, 266; causes failure of claims           between Spain and Portugal, 145;
  convention, 269 ff.; climaxes com¬              mediates between Portugal and Bra¬
   mercial treaty negotiations, 297               zil, 195 and n. 32; recognizes Brazil,
Abolition Movement (in British Em¬                203; secures low import rate in Bra¬
   pire): 257 and notes                           zil, 209, n. 86; consular representa¬
Abranches, Dunshee: protests English              tion in Brazil, 320, n. 34
   privileges, 285 f.
Abrantes, Marquez: refuses Russell’s
   demands, 280                                 Badajos, treaty of: signed, 55; terms
Activo (slave ship): condemned, 234,              ratified by treaty of Amiens, 56
   contrary to convention, 235                  Bahia (province): first railroad in,
Affonso VI (of Portugal): ratifies treaty         British promoted, 323 and n. 47
   of 1654, 11                                  Bahia (town): damaged by slave trade
Affonso Henriquez, first king of Portu¬           controversy, 168, 169 and n. 22, 170
   gal, 1                                         and n. 28, 171 f.; slave importations,
Africa: early Portuguese slave trade in,          178; anti-English sentiment strong,
   163 f.; illegal slave traffic from, 226 f.     222 f.; increases sugar output, 258;
 Amherst, Lord: stops at Rio, 211                 British enterprise in, 326 and n. 60
 Amiens, treaty of: 55 f.                       Banda Oriental: economic and strategic
 Anna (slave ship): seized, 241, n. 84            importance of, 109 f.; conflict be¬
 Anne (of England): joins Grand Alli¬             tween Spain and Portugal over,
   ance, 19; ratifies treaty of alliance           110 ff.; uncertainty of boundary be¬
   with Portugal, 21                              tween Portuguese and Spanish Amer¬
 Antonio Lopez (Spanish agent): util¬             ica, no and n. 4; involved in
   ized by Rio Court, 113                         European politics, in, 137 f.; history
 Araujo e Azevedo, Antonio d’: con¬               of, to 1808, in ff.; boundary agree¬
   cludes separate peace with France,             ments over, between Portugal and
   54; leads pro-French party, 57; falls          Spain, 112 f.; Rio Court initiates
   from power, 73; succeeds Souza                 action to secure control of, 113 ff.;
356                                  INDEX
  Rio proposes to use force, 116 ff.;        opening ports, 71 f.; Portuguese
  Carlota Joaquina’s plan to secure          bureaucracy set up, 73; colonials
  control of, fails, 118 ff.; Portuguese     excluded from office, 73; economic
  troops enter, 128; conflict reaches        progress of, 74 ff.; manufacturing in,
  crisis, 130, settled by Strangford by      permitted foreigners, 74; special im¬
  armistice, 131; Artigas appears, 131;      port duties granted Portuguese ves¬
  second armistice forced by Strang¬         sels, 74; coastwise trade limited, 74;
  ford, 132 f.; occupied by Portuguese,      bank founded, 74; supreme court
  141; powers mediate dispute at             and newspaper set up, 74, n. 18;
  Paris, 145 ff.; mediation fails, 146 f.;   British immigration to, 75; shipping
  occupation by Portugal complete,           and trade statistics (c. 1808), 76;
   148; joins Brazil in revolt, 149; wins    impartial trade policy of, in 1808,
  independence, 156 f.                        76 f.; treaties of commerce, 86 ff.,
Bandeirantes: basis of native aristocracy,   and alliance, 90 f., between England
  260 and n. 28                              and, negotiated, 81 ff.; concedes
Banks (in Brazil): national bank, 74,        judges conservators to English, 87 f.,
  318 and n. 27; private banks, 318          and religious toleration, 88; interests
  and n. 27; British banks, 327 and          of, neglected in 1810 treaties, 91 ff.;
  n. 67                                      opposition to England develops, 99;
Baracouta    (British vessel): sent to       Rio becomes provincial capital again,
  Trindade, 310                               107; trade with Buenos Aires (1822),
Barbacena, Felisberto Caldeira Brant          150; incorporates Banda Oriental,
  Pontes, Marquez de: Brazilian com¬          149; war with Buenos Aires, 152 ff.;
  missioner in London, 195 and n. 32;        accepts English mediation, 156, and
  warns of English attitude on slave         recognizes independence of Uru¬
  trade, 211; project for suppression        guay, 157 and n. 83; Negro slavery
  of slave trade, 228 f., 243 f., 262 f.     in, 162 ff.; sugar production in, 163,
  and n. 45                                  n. 8, 164, n. 10, 166, 257 f.; early
Battevile (Spanish ambassador in Eng¬        slave trade to, 163 f.; threatens
  land) :    opposes   Anglo-Portuguese      British West Indies sugar production,
  treaty of 1661, 14                          166; united in favor of slave trade,
Belgrano,     Manuel:    favors   Carlota     169 f.; slave importations into, 163 f.,
  Joaquina’s scheme, 122                      169 f., 172, 177 f., 182, 185, n. 74,
Bens jacentes: defined by Brazil, 300        288 ff. and notes; price of slaves in
Bens vagos: defined by Brazil, 300            (1820), 182, n. 66; population of
Beresford, Marshall: controls Portugal        (1822), 183, n. 72; commercial and
  in absence ofjoao VI: 105 and n. 150       slave trade questions converge, 186;
Birmingham (town): center of cotton          liberties of, restricted by Portugal,
  manufacture, 47                             187 f.; loyalists in, 188; elements
Blake, Admiral: protests unneutral           supporting Pedro I, 188 ff.; Portu¬
  action of Portugal, 6                      guese Absolutists, 188, 189, 190 f.,
Bolingbroke, Henry St. John, Lord:           259; Brazilian Patriots, 188, 189 and
  negotiates Anglo-French commercial         n. 11, 190 f., 259; recognition of in¬
  treaty, 34; opposes Anglo-Portuguese       dependence of, by England urgent,
  trade, 34; his treaty defeated by Pro-      192 f.; difficulties preventing recog¬
  Portuguese opposition, 36                  nition of, by England, 193 f.; media¬
Bonaparte, Lucien: negotiates Franco-        tion of England and Austria fails,
  Portuguese agreement, 55                    194 f.; reasons impelling Canning’s
Bonifacio, Jose: unable to stop slave        recognition of, 195 ff.; Anglo-Portu¬
  trade immediately, 211 f.; opposes         guese commercial treaty terminates
  slave    trade,   212;    acknowledges     in Brazil, 196 and n. 40, 207, n. 76;
  strength of Patriots, 212, 259             terms of recognition of independence
Bragan£a, Duke of: leads revolt against      of, by Portugal, 201 ff.; recognized
  Spain, 2                                   by European powers, 203; growth of
Bragan^a, house of: throne guaranteed        shipping and exports, 207; forced to
  by England, 62 f., 90                      grant low import rates to England,
Brant Pontes, Felisberto Caldeira: see       209, and to all countries, 209 f. and
  Barbacena, Marquez de                      n. 86; Brazilian Patriots support
Brazil: receives Portuguese Court, 69;       slave trade, 212 f.; Assembly protests
  ports of, opened, 70 f.; effect of         slave trade treaty, 215 ff.; British
                                     INDEX                                       357
preeminence in, reaches culmination,           economic       relations   undisturbed,
220 f.; revolt against British pre¬            282 f.; consummates revolt against
eminence, 221, develops two phases,            British political preeminence, 283 f.,
221; Anglo-Brazilian relations em¬             306, 310 f.; initiates revolt against
bittered by slave trade, 221 ff. and           British economic preeminence,
notes 2 and 9; anti-English sentiment          285 f.; objections of, to .English com¬
in, 222 f. and n. 9; attempts to defer         mercial treaty, 286 ff.; Ellis Mission,
abolition of slave trade, 224, but             290 ff.; assaults on British vessels in,
fails, 225; resists English attempts to        295 f.; English conservatorial courts
secure equipment clause, 225 ff.;              in, abolished, 296 and n. 46; termi¬
Chamber blocks action on slave trade           nates special concessions to English,
suppression, 228 f.; Senate action             297; question of consular jurisdiction,
favoring suppression, 228 f.; passes           298 ff.; freed from obligations of
national act containing equipment              early treaties, 306; agreements with
clause, 229 f.; controversy with Eng¬          England in force (1924), 306, n. 83;
land over emancipados, 230 ff., settled        British Guiana boundary dispute,
by national legislation, 232 f.; con¬          307 f.; Trindade controversy, 309 f.;
troversy with England over Sierra              preeminence of England in economic
Leone Commission, 233 ff.; demands             life of, 312 ff.; markets of, stationary
review of Sierra Leone Commission              until 1850, 313 f.; exporters to
decisions, 235; England refuses, 236;          Brazil rated by values, 315, n. n,
attempts to abolish Commission, 236;           317, n. 20, 328 f. and n. 69, 332 and
England refuses, 237; estimates of             notes 86-87, 333i importers from
illegal slave importations, 238 and            Brazil rated by values, 315, n. 11,
n. 72, 239 and n. 73, 240, 256; British        333 and n. 94, 335 and n. 98; British
cruisers on coast of, 240 f., 254 f.; Rio      capital as factor in total foreign
authorities attempt to suppress slave          trade of, 314 ff.; internal funded
trade, 241 ff.; slave trade law of 1831,       debt of, 316 and n. 15; foreign loans
242 f.; ineffective, 243; projects             of, 316 and n. 16, 318, n. 23; eco¬
killed by Chamber, 243 f.; anti-slave          nomic revolution in, 317 ff.; pre¬
trade propaganda, 244; repressive              eminence of North Brazil, 318 f. and
measures, 244 f.; expiration of 1827           n. 29; social revolution in, 319;
slave trade treaty forces crisis, 245 ff.;     consuls maintained abroad, 321 f.
refuses to renew slave trade conven¬           and n. 34; immigration, 322 and
tion, 246 f. and n. 105; public ap¬            n. 36; growth of imports (1842-1912)
proval of expiration, 247 f.; protests         322, n. 42; British enterprise in, in¬
Aberdeen Act, 250 f.; decline of               tensified, 323 ff; municipal works in,
British political influence in, 252 f.,        promoted by British interests, 324 ff.;
283 f., 306, 310 f.; resists British           British banks in, 327 and n. 67;
coercion, 254 f.; seizures ordered by          opportunities in, open to British,
England within waters of, 256 and              327 f.; rise of German economic
n. 11; increased sugar output, 258;            interest in, 329 ff.; rise of United
Foreign Office of, reflected national          States interests, 333 ff.; United
policy in slave trade controversy,             States wins preeminence in markets
259 ff. and notes; Brazilian aristoc¬          of, 335 f. and n. 94; British pre¬
racy controls Brazil, 259 f. and n. 29;        eminent in shipping and investments
Liberals force decentralization, 260 f.        in, 336
and notes, and support slave trade,          Brazil, 0: attacks Ellis, 281, n. 23
261; centralization effected, 261 f.,        Bueno, Pimenta: project of regulating
and economic revival begins, 262 f.;           nationality, 303 f.
passes effective slave trade measures,       Buenos Aires: refuses Rio Court’s offer
263 ff.; slave trade to, ceases, 264;          of protection, 116; receives threat
who stopped it? 264 f. and notes               from Rio, 116; commerce between
56-58; develops entente cordiale with          Rio and, 116; refuses to deliver the
United States, 266; Anglo-Brazilian            Banda Oriental, 116 f.; rejects Car-
claims convention, 266 ff., fails,             lota Joaquina as regent, 121; secret
272 f.; case of Prince of Wales, 276 ff.;      society accepts Carlota Joaquina’s
case of Forte, 278 ff.; diplomatic             plan, 122, but loses interest, 125;
relations with       England severed,          British commerce increases, 125 f.;
280 f., and renewed, 281 f., but               May Revolution in, 126 f.; blockaded
358                                    INDEX
 by Montevideo, 129; blockade lifted            festoes, 118 f. and n. 38; promotes
 by England, 130 and n. 73; armistice            scheme, 120 and n. 41, 121; rejected
 forced by Strangford, 131, 132 f.;              by Spanish colonies, 121 f.; creates
 declares independence, 140; tran¬               trouble in Rio, 122 f.; Strangford
 quillity in, 149 f.; British trade with,        blocks plans, 123 f.; renews claims
  149 f.; attempts to recover Banda              backed by Montevideo, 127; aids Elio
  Oriental, 150 flf.; war with Brazil,           against Buenos Aires, 129 and n. 70
  152 ff.; accepts English mediation,          Carneiro Leao, Honorio Hermeto:
  156, and recognizes independence of            breaks off slave trade negotiations,
  Uruguay, 157 and n. 83                         246; terminates commercial treaty
Buxton, T. F.: anti-slavery activity,            negotiations, 293
  257 and notes 16-17                          Carta Regia: of 1808, opens Brazilian
                                                 ports, 70 f.
                                               Carvalho, Carlos de: refuses to arbi¬
Q^/amaras: favor decentralization, 260 f.        trate Trindade controversy, 309 f.;
Canning, George: rejects Portuguese              refutes Salisbury’s imperialism, 310
 proposal of simulated warfare, 66,            Carvalho Moreira: see Penedo, Barao
  n. 63; threatens Portugal, 66, n. 63;          de
  instructions to Strangford, 77 ff.;          Casa Irujo: Spanish minister to Portu¬
  views on Anglo-Brazilian political             guese Court at Rio, 120
  relations, 77 ff.; views on Anglo-           Castlereagh: refuses to suppress revolu¬
  Brazilian commercial relations, 78 f.;         tion in Portugal, 106; resists inter¬
  demands extra-territorial rights in            vention by powers in Portugal, 106,
  Brazil, 79, and additional privileges,         n. 152; orders Portuguese to with¬
  80; authorizes packetboat service, 80;         draw from Banda Oriental, 131; op¬
  protests special privileges to Portu¬           poses policy of Quadruple Alliance
  guese commerce in Brazil, 81; rejects           137 f.; demands explanation for
  first treaty signed by Strangford, 83,          Portuguese occupation of Banda
  for two reasons, 83 f.; disapproves of          Oriental, 142, 145; repudiates Cham¬
  Portuguese designs on Banda Orien¬              berlain’s action in Rio, 144; media¬
   tal, 119 f. and 124 f.; refuses to inter¬      tion fails, 146 f.; absolves Portugal of
  fere with Brazilian blockade of Mon¬            blame, 147; concludes slave trade
   tevideo, 152 f.; mediates Brazil-              agreements with Portugal, 170 f.,
   Buenos Aires dispute, 153 ff.; pro¬            172 ff.; establishes anti-slave trade
   poses suppression of Portuguese slave          conferences, 176 f.; fails to secure
   trade, 165; admonishes Portugal con¬           complete abolition by Portugal,
   cerning slave trade, 169; prevented            178 f.
  from recognizing Brazilian inde¬             Catherine of Bragan$a: marriage to
   pendence, 193 f.; differentiates be¬           Charles II to seal 1661 treaty, 13;
   tween Anglo-Portuguese and Anglo-              marriage arranged, 15; dowry, 15,
   Spanish relations, 194 and n. 30;              16; marriage ceremony, 17; as wife
   attempts to reconcile Brazilian in¬            of Charles, 17; dowry payment de¬
   dependence with European powers,               layed, 17, but paid, 17 f.
   194 ff.; mediates between Portugal          Cerqueira (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65
   and Brazil, 194 f. and notes 32-34;         Chamberlain (consul at Rio): left as
   decides to recognize Brazil, 195;              chargt by Strangford, 104; protests to
   motives leading to recognition of              Rio Court unavailingly, 139; de¬
   Brazil, 195 ff.; desires monarchy in           mands explanation for Portuguese
   New World, 197 and n. 43; instruc¬             occupation of Banda Oriental, 142;
   tions to Stuart, 198 ff.; repudiates           revokes England’s guaranty of Portu¬
   Stuart’s treaties, 204 f.; embarassed          guese territory, 142; sends joint note
   by publication of terms of, 205 f.;            to Araujo, 143; warns Brazil against
   sends Gordon to rectify Stuart’s               war in La Plata, 151; exchanges
   errors, 206; desires immediate aboli¬          ratification of 1815 slave trade
   tion of Brazilian slave trade, 211             agreements, 171; warns of Brazilian
Cape of Good Hope: detained slavers               dissatisfaction over slave trade sup¬
    taken to, 240                                  pression, 171 f.
Car lota Joaquina: marries Joao of             Charles I (of England): receives Portu¬
   Portugal, 54; proposed as regent of             guese envoys, 3; leaves London, 4;
   Spanish America, 118; issues mani¬              executed, 6
                                      INDEX                                         359
Charles II (of England): occupies              ceased, 300; France protests, 300 f.;
 throne, 12; inclines to Portuguese            nationality complications, 301 ff.;
 rather than Spanish alliance, 13;             Brazilian decree of 1851 concerning,
 marriage to Catherine of Bragan^a,            302 f.; England protests, 302 f.;
   i3» 15 ff-                                  Brazil shifts position, 303 f.; signs
Charles X (of France): signs Franco-           consular convention with powers,
  Brazilian treaty, 299                        304; more controversies, 304 f.; Bra¬
Charter of English Privileges in Portu¬        zilian circular of 1864, 304 f.;
  guese Dominions: origin of, 5; terms         Franco-Brazilian declaration of 1866,
   of, 5 f.                                    305; Brazil terminates conventions,
Christie, W. D.: estimates Brazilian           305, but France forces renewals, 305;
  slave importation, 239; rejects slave        Brazil terminates conventions per¬
  trade claims, 270, 272; minister to          manently, 306, and denounces per¬
  Brazil, 274; opinions concerning             petual articles of French treaty, 306,
  Anglo-Brazilian relations, 274 ff.;          n. 81
  favors coercion, 275 f.; loses patience    Consuls: foreign, in Brazil, 320 f.;
  over Prince of Wales case, 278; sup¬         Brazilian, abroad, 321 f.; significance
  ports officers in Forte case, 279;           of representations, 321 f.
  orders blockade and reprisals, 280;        Corporations (in Brazil): first private
  returns to England, 281                      commercial and industrial, organ¬
Cisneros, Hidalgo de: viceroy of Buenos        ized, 262 and n. 44, 318 and n. 26
  Aires, 122; restricts British trade in     Correio Braziliense: views of editor of, on
  Buenos Aires, 126; expelled from             Anglo-Portuguese        negotiations    of
  Buenos Aires, 128                             1810, 92 f.; denounces terms of
Claims (Anglo-Brazilian): from Sierra          treaties, 93 f.; explains Brazilian
  Leone Commission, 238, 266; from             pro-slave trade attitude, 183 f.
  Aberdeen Act, 250, 266; from other         Correio Official: anti-slave trade propa¬
  sources, 266; convention negotiated,         ganda, 244 and n. 97
  267 f.; terms of convention, 268;          Cortes: restricts liberties of Brazil, 187 f.
  commissioners appointed, 268; num¬         Cotton, manufacture of (English): rise
  ber, value, and types of, received,          of, 47 ff; favors trade with France,
  268 f. and n. 67; British commissioner       47; creates a new vested interest,
  accepts Sierra Leone and Aberdeen            47 f.; influence of need for raw cotton
  Act claims, 269 f.; Russell rejects          on Anglo-Portuguese trade, 51 f.
  them, 270; claims commission sus¬          Courcy, de: lifts blockade of Buenos
  pended, 271 f. and n. 73; no settle¬         Aires by Montevideo, 130 and n. 73
   ment by claims convention, 273,           Cowper, Consul: reports on Brazilian
   n. 78                                       immigration, 322, n. 36; reports on
Clarendon, Edward Hyde, Earl of:               opportunities in Brazil, 327 f.
  activity of, in negotiation of Anglo-      Creola (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65
  Portuguese treaty of 1661, 14 f.           Cunha Mattos, Raymundo Jose da:
Clemente Pereira: speech against slave         speech against slave trade treaty,
  trade treaty, 217 and n. 112                 216 f. and n. 110
Colonia de Sacramento (town): history        Cur ado, Brigadeiro: sent to Buenos
  of, to 1713, 27 f.; returned to Portu¬       Aires by Rio Court, 114, 115;
  gal by Peace of Utrecht, 28; history         ordered to deliver threat to cabildo,
  of, to 1808, 111 f.; center of smuggling     116; expelled from Spanish territory,
  trade, m                                     117
Conservatives (in Brazil): emerge, 260;
  favor centralization, 261; rise to
  power, 261 f. and n. 40; pass effective    Dai/y News: protests diplomacy of
  slave trade measures, 262 ff. and            Foreign Office, 283, 284
  n. 46                                      Demarara Islands: detained slavers
Constitution (Brazilian): 191 and n. 16        taken to, 240
Consular jurisdiction (in Brazil): con¬      Denmark: prohibits slave trade, 175,
  suls administer property of intestate        n. 47; secures low import rate in
  citizens, 298; British consuls lose          Brazil, 209, n. 86
  right, 298 f. and n. 55, but French        Diamonds (Brazilian): cause Portugal
  retain privilege, 299; Brazilian regu¬       to tighten restrictions, 38; smuggled
  lations concerning property of de-           by English, 38 f.
360                                    INDEX
Diario do Povo: anti-slave trade pro¬            ordered, 279 f.; Brazil refuses Rus¬
  paganda in, 244 and n. 97                      sell’s demands concerning, 280; sub¬
Diario Fluminense: publishes Stuart’s            mitted to arbitration, 280, 281 f.;
  Anglo-Brazilian treaties, 205 and              decision favorable to Brazil, 281
  n. 70                                        Fox, Charles James: leads opposition
Diario do Rio: attacks England, 281,             to Anglo-French agreement of 1786,
  n. 23                                          51; fails, 51
Dolphin (English naval vessel): gig and        Fox, Henry S.: signs equipment clause
  sailors of, seized by Brazilians, 295 f.       agreement, 227, n. 30 and 228, n. 34,
                                                 but Brazilian Assembly blocks rati¬
                                                 fication, 228 and n. 35
Eiclipse (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65      France: prohibits slave trade, 175, n.
Eden, William: see Auckland, Lord                47; renews Franco-Spanish agree¬
Elio (governor of Montevideo): opposes           ment, 196; intrigues for special
  Liniers, 115, 117; blockades Buenos            favors in Brazil, 197 and n. 43; se¬
  Aires, 129; receives aid from Carlota          cures low import rates in Brazil,
  Joaquina, 129 and n. 70; requests              209, n. 86; slave trade agreements
  Portuguese aid against Artigas, 131            with England, 226, n. 26; retains
Eliot, Cornwallis: obtains passports,            consular privileges in Brazil, 299;
  281                                            protests Brazilian regulations con¬
Elliott, Captain: acquiesces in blockade         cerning consular privileges, 300, and
   of Buenos Aires by Montevideo, 129            concerning nationality, 301 f.; Fran-
Ellis, Henry: mission to Brazil, 246,            co-Brazilian consular convention,
   n. 104, 290; warns of Brazilian anti¬         304; forces renewal of conventions,
   slave trade convention feeling, 246;          305; convention expires, 305 f.;
   arrives in Rio, 290 f.; encounters            Brazil denounces perpetual articles
   opposition, 291 f. and notes 23-24;           of treaty with, 306, n. 81; competition
   abandons special privileges, 292;             with England in Brazil weak, 313
   fails, 293                                    and n. 4, 328 f.; consular representa¬
Emancipados: Anglo-Brazilian contro¬             tion in Brazil, 320 f. and n. 34;
   versy over, 230 ff.; captured slaves          emigration to Brazil, 322, n. 36
   reenslaved, 230; Brazil attempts re¬        Frolic (English naval vessel): officers of,
   exportation of, 231, 243, n. 94, but          maltreated in Brazil, 295 f.
   Palmerston rejects plan, 232 and
   notes 51-52; problem of, settled by
   Brazilian legislation, 232 f.               (jambier, James (consul at Rio):
Emilia: captured, 180; condemned,                interferes with Strangford’s negotia¬
   181; disposal of Negroes of, 181 f.;          tions, 82
   sold, 183, n. 71                            Gameiro Pessoa, Manoel Rodrigues:
Engenho: dependent on slave labor, 260           see Itabayana, Barao de
Equipment clause: needed to suppress           Garda, Manuel: plots with Rio Court,
   slave trade, 226 f.; agreements se¬           139 and n. 11; agent of Buenos Aires
   cured by England, 226, n. 26;                 to Rio, 154
   Brazil resists British efforts to secure,   General Chamber of Manufacturers:
   227 ff.; Brazil passes national act           influence of, on Pitt, 49 n. 93; in¬
   containing, 229 f.                            fluence of, on French commercial
Esperanza (slave ship): seized, 336,             treaty, 49
   n. 65                                       Germany: consular representation in
Esterhazy, Prince: Austrian mediator             Brazil, 321; emigration to Brazil, 322
   in London, 195                                and n. 36; first to threaten British
                                                 economic preeminence in Brazil,
                                                 329 f.; growth of shipping, 329 and
Ferdinand VII (of Spain): institutes             n. 74; secures markets of South Bra¬
  reaction, 136                                  zil, 329; reasons for success of Ger¬
Fontainebleu, treaty of: dismembers              many, 330 f.; German articles ex¬
  Portugal, 64                                   ported to Brazil, 331 f.; eliminated
Forte (British naval vessel): case of,           by war, 332; recovers after War,
  278 ff.; officers of, arrested by Bra¬         334 f-
  zilian officials, 278; officers’ version     Gestas de Roquefeuille, Comte de: of¬
  backed by Russell, 279; reprisals             fers French aid to Pedro I, 197, n. 43
                                        INDEX                                     361
Godoy, Principe de la Paz: leagues             secures right of visit and search from
 with Napoleon against Portugal,               Portugal, 173 f.; Anglo-Portuguese
  55. 56                                       mixed commissions, 175, 179 ff.;
Gold (Brazilian): as factor in Anglo-          recognition of Brazilian independ¬
 Portuguese trade in 1713, 31; causes          ence by, urgent, 192 f.; difficulties
 Portugal to tighten restrictions, 38;         impeding recognition, 193 f.; deter¬
 smuggled by English, 38 f; Pombal             mines to recognize Brazil, 195 ff.;
 disapproves of, 40                            negotiates Portuguese-Brazilian treaty
Gordon, Charles: recommends England            of independence, 198 ff.; recognizes
 stop Brazil-Buenos Aires War, 155 f.;         Brazil, 203; demands special favors
 mediates between Brazil and Buenos            in Brazil, 203 ff.; comparative trade
 Aires, 156; leaves Brazil, 156; sent          export statistics (1825-35), 2°7 and
 to Brazil, 206; negotiates commercial         notes 77-78; retains extra-territorial
 treaty, 206 ff.; secures long contra¬         rights in Brazil, 209; obtains low
 band of war list, 209; negotiates slave       import rates in Brazil, 209; tradi¬
 trade treaty, 214 ff.; threatens Brazil,      tional position in Portugal trans¬
 214 and n. 101, 216; refuses to await         ferred to Brazil, 210; desires im¬
 action of Assembly, 214; signs treaty,        mediate abolition of slave trade by
 214 f., but is dubious over enforce¬          Brazil, 211; Anglo-Brazilian treaties
 ment, 215; fails to secure equipment          of 1827 a factor in expulsion of Pedro
 clause, 227, 234, 235                         I, 218 ff.; preeminence in Brazil
Great Britain: activity in Portugal            reaches culmination, 220 f., but
 prior to 1640, 1 f.; first treaty with        anti-slave trade activity causes de¬
 Portugal, 2; first political alliance         cline, 221; seeks equipment clause
 with Portugal, 2; treaty of 1642 with         agreement, 225 ff. and n. 26; con¬
  Portugal, 2 ff.; treaty of 1654 with         troversy with Brazil over emancipados,
  Portugal, 7 ff.; alliance of 1661, 12 ff.;   230 ff.; complains of Brazilian pro¬
  Portuguese alliance of 1703, 19 ff.;         slave trade activity, 230 f. and n. 45;
 prevents Portuguese-Spanish War,              controversy with Brazil over Sierra
 36, n. 47; makes political and eco¬           Leone Commission, 233 ff.; attempts
 nomic vassal of Portugal, 39 ff.;             to stop illicit Brazilian slave trade,
 turns to France, 44 ff.; forced back          240 ff.; maintains cruisers on Bra¬
 to Portugal by French Wars, 52 f.;            zilian coast, 240 f.; seizures by
 Anglo-Portuguese relations during             cruisers, 240 and n. 82, 254 f.; ex¬
 French Wars, 53 ff.; influences Por¬          piration of 1827 slave trade treaty
 tuguese Court to move to Brazil,              forces crisis, 245 ff.; Brazil refuses to
 61 ff.; secures preferential rights in        renew slave trade convention, 246 f.;
 Brazil, 77 ff.; comparative statistics        loses right of visit and search, 247;
 of British export trade (1812-15),            authorizes seizure by act of Parlia¬
 97 f. and notes; loses favor in Brazil,       ment, 249 f.; decline of political in¬
 99 ff.; demands abolition of Wine             fluence of, in Brazil, 252 f., 266,
 Company monopoly, 99 f.; influence            283 f.; determines to coerce Brazil,
 of, at low ebb in Brazil, 104; blocks         252 f., 254 f.; orders seizures within
 Portuguese attempts to win La Plata,          Brazilian waters, 256 and n. 11;
  120 ff.; forces armistice in Banda           anti-slavery crusade in, 256 f. and
 Oriental, 130 f.; breaks with Quad¬           notes; anti-slave trade crusade in,
 ruple Alliance, 138; accepts media¬           257 f.; economic interests opposed to
 tion of Portuguese-Spanish dispute            Brazilian slave trade (c. 1840), 257 f.
 in La Plata, 142; acquiesces in Portu¬        and notes 20, 21, 23; interests op¬
 guese occupation of Banda Oriental,           posed to coercive policy, 258, n. 23;
  148; trade with Buenos Aires (1822),         free trade and Brazilian slave trade,
  149 f., 150, n. 49; mediates war be¬         258; did coercion stop Brazilian
 tween Brazil and Buenos Aires,                slave trade? 259 ff.; acknowledges
  156 ff.; prohibits slave trade, 160 f.;      cessation of Brazilian slave trade,
 moves to make prohibition universal,          264; who stopped it? 264 f. and notes
  161 ff.; economic interests in slave         56-58; Anglo-Brazilian claims con¬
 trade      suppression      propaganda,       vention, 266 ff., fails, 272 f.; case of
  165 ff.; 1815 slave trade agreements         Prince of Wales, 276 ff.; case of the
 with Portugal, 170 f.; Anglo-Portu¬           Forte, 278 ff.; diplomatic relations
 guese slave trade agreement, 172 ff.,         with Brazil severed, 280 f., and re-
362                                  INDEX
   newed, 281 f., but economic rela¬        Hamilton-Hamilton:     proposes    new
   tions undisturbed, 282 f.; Brazilian      commercial treaty, 289 f., 296; nego¬
  revolt against political preeminence       tiations break down, 296 f.
   of, consummated, 283 f., 306, 310 f.;    Hancox, Joseph: promotes sewerage
   pro-Brazilian propaganda in, 283,         project in Rio, 326
  n. 114; attempts to secure new com¬       Hanover: recognizes Brazilian inde¬
  mercial treaty, 288 ff., but fails,        pendence, 203
   296 f.; Ellis Mission, 290 ff.; con-     Hanseatic States: recognize Brazilian
  servatorial courts in Brazil abolished,    independence, 203; secure low im¬
   296 and n. 46; special concessions in     port rate in Brazil, 209, n. 86; com¬
  Brazil terminated, 297, 306; secures       pete for Brazilian markets, 313
   consular convention, 305, but loses      Harley, Robert: see Oxford, Earl of
  it, 305 f.; agreements with Brazil in     Haupshaw, John: engineer, visits Bra¬
  force (1924), 306, n. 83; Guiana            zil, 325
  boundary dispute, 307 f.; Trindade        Hay, Thomas: English ambassador to
  controversy, 309 f.; gains preemin¬         Portugal, 44; praises Pombal, 44
  ence in Brazilian economic life, 312;     Heroina (slave ship): condemned, 234;
  greatest foreign supplier of Brazil,        seizure by England reprisal for Bra¬
   312, 317, 322 f., 334; preeminence of      zilian treaty violation, 235 and n.
  investments of, in Brazil, 312 f. and       62
   n. 3, 3i4>       327 and n. 67, 336;     Hill, Chargi: desires special privileges
  capital of, employed in Brazilian           for England in Brazil, 71; attitude
  foreign trade, 314 ff.; consular repre¬     toward Portuguese designs on Banda
  sentation in Brazil, 320 f. and n. 34;      Oriental, 114 and n. 21
  promotes municipal works in Brazil,       Hoare, Commander: detains slaver in
  324 ff.; banks of, in Brazil, 327 and       Brazilian waters, 241; censured, 241,
  n. 67; secret of preeminence of, in         n. 84; gig of, and sailors seized, by
  Brazilian economic life, 328; pre¬          Brazilians, 295
  eminence in Brazilian shipping, 329       Holland: ceases to molest Portugal, 18;
  and notes 70 and 74, 333, 336; pre¬         prohibits slave trade, 175, n. 47;
  eminence in Brazil threatened by            recognizes Brazil, 203; secures low
  Germany, 329 ff; and by the United          import rates in Brazil, 209, n. 86;
  States, 333 ff; loses preeminence in        signs equipment clause with England,
  Brazilian markets, 335 f. and n. 98;        226, n. 26; competes for Brazilian
  still preeminent in Brazilian shipping      markets, 313
  and investments, 336                      Honorio Hermeto: see Carneiro Leao
Grenville, George: blocks Franco-           Hyde de Neuville: influences Portugal
  Portuguese peace, 55                        against Brazil, 192; recall forced by
Growler (English naval vessel): crew of,      Canning, 196
  assaulted in Brazil, 295 f.
Guiana (British): Araujo Ribeiro pro¬
 ject concerning, 293 and n. 34;            India: English secure foothold in, from
  boundary dispute, 307 f.; Schomberg          Portugal, 16; competition of sugar of,
  expedition, 307; Yowd’s activity, 307;       in English markets, 257 and n. 20
  England extends boundary, 307, but        Inquisition: Joao VI agrees not to es¬
  withdraws, 307 f.; dispute slumbers,         tablish, in Brazil, 91
  308; England renews advances, 308;        Iron: rise of manufacture of, in Eng¬
  settled by arbitration, 308 and notes        land, 47
  90-91                                     Itabayana, Manoel Rodrigues Gameiro
Guimaraes, Joao de: sent to England            Pessoa, Barao de: Brazilian com¬
 (1650), 7; difficulties with Parlia¬          missioner in London, 195; received
 ment, 7 f.; receives six demands as           as Brazilian minister in London, 203;
 basis for negotiation, 8; mission             attempts to defer slave trade pro¬
 fails, 8                                      hibition, 224 f.
                                            Italy: consular conventions with Brazil,
                                               304, 305 f.; arbitrates British Guiana
t”Iambloch, E.: reports on Anglo-              boundary controversy, 308 f. and
  Brazilian trade relations, 334 f.            n. 91; consular representation in
Hamburg: consular representation in            Brazil, 321; emigration to Brazil,
  Brazil, 320, n. 34                           322 and n. 36
                                      INDEX                                       363
                                               Lavradio, Conde de: mediates Anglo-
                                                 Brazilian dispute, 281 f.
Jamaica: factor in uniting England
                                               Le Moniteur: announces dethronement
   and Portugal, 13, 15, 16; sugar pro¬
   duction of, 167 and n. 15                     of Bragangas, 65
                                               Lecor, General: conquers Montevideo
Jequitinhonha, Visconde de: speech on
   Anglo-Brazilian relations, 222                for Portugal, 141
                                               Leopold (of Belgium): arbitrates Forte
Jesuits: favor Negro slave trade in
                                                 case, 281
   Brazil, 163
                                               Liberals (in Brazil): emerge, 260; favor
Joao IV: sends envoys to England, 2;
                                                 decentralization, 260 f.; in power,
   helps Stuarts, 5 f.; approves Charter
                                                 261 and n. 37; lead revolts, 261 and
   of English Privileges, 6; comes to
                                                 notes 36 and 38; fall, 262
   terms with Cromwell, 7 ff.; refuses to
                                               Limpo de Abreu: protests Aberdeen
   ratify treaty of 1654, 11; death of, 11
                                                 Act, 250 f.
Joao VI (of Portugal): marries Carlota
                                               Line of Demarcation (of Alexander
   Joaquina, 54; prince regent, 56; de¬
                                                 VI): 110 and n. 2
   clares neutrality in 1803, 56; hesi¬
                                               Linhares, Conde de: see Souza e
   tates between England and France,
                                                 Coutinho, Rodrigo de
   58; Napoleon announces dethrone¬
                                               Liniers, Luiz Enrique: receives pro¬
   ment of, 65; decides to move to Bra¬
                                                 posals concerning the Banda Orien¬
   zil, 65 f.; lands in Bahia, 69; opens
                                                  tal, 114
   Brazilian ports, 70 f.; lands in Rio,
                                               Liniers, Santiago: viceroy of Buenos
    72; sets up Portuguese bureaucracy
                                                  Aires, 115 and 116, n. 27; fears trap,
   in Brazil, 73; vacillates over return to
                                                  1x5; suspects English backing of
    Lisbon, 102; refuses to leave Rio,
                                                  Portuguese action, 116; refuses Por¬
    103, and requests Strangford’s recall,
                                                  tuguese proposals, 116 f., 121
    103 f.; crowned king, 104, n. 147;
                                               London Mixed Commission (slave
   forced to return to Lisbon, 105 and
                                                  trade): established, 175; functions,
    n. 150, 107; develops enthusiasm for
                                                  179 and n. 58
    Carlota Joaquina’s plot, 119; angered
                                                Lourengo de Lima: stampedes Portu¬
    by her activity in Rio, 122 f.; wavers
                                                  guese court into anti-English policy,
    toward her scheme, 123; influenced
    by Strangford against her, 124 f.;            63 f.
                                                Loyalists: in Brazil, 188, 189
    prohibits slave trade beyond Portu¬
    guese borders, 167, and north of
    equator, 170 and n. 30, but refuses to
                                               IVIadeira Islands: security against
    prohibit Portuguese trade entirely,
                                                 anti-English policy, 62
     169 f., 176 ff.; unable to enforce con¬
                                               Madrid, treaty of: between France and
    vention of 1817, 184; violates Portu-
                                                 Portugal, 55; terms converted into
    guese-Brazilian treaty of independ¬
                                                 subsidy, 56
    ence, 202, n. 56                           Manchester (town): center of cotton
 Jornal do Commercio: anti-slave trade
                                                 manufacture, 47
    propaganda, 244 and n. 97; approves
                                               Manufacturers, Great, in England:
    expiration of slave trade convention,
                                                 rise of, 46, as result of transition to
     247 f-                                      mechanical production, 46 f.; need
Judges conservators (British): estab¬
                                                 wider markets, 48; influence of, on
  lished in Portugal, 5 f., 9; Pombal
                                                 Pitt, 48 f.; consulted by Eden, 49
  restricts powers of, 41; transferred
                                               Marechal, Baron de: Austrian agent in
  to Brazil-colony, 86 ff.; established
                                                 Rio, 107
  in Brazil-empire, 206 ff.; British
                                               Maria (of Portugal): becomes queen, 54;
  merchants in Brazil indifferent con¬
                                                 weakens in support of England, 54 f.
  cerning, 292; abolished, 296 and
                                               Maria Theresa (slave ship): seized within
  n. 46                                          Brazilian waters, 241 and n. 84
Junot: ordered to advance on Portugal,         Maria Thereza (daughter of Joao VI):
  62; takes Lisbon, 67, but loses
                                                 marries Pedro Carlos, 98 f.
  Portuguese fleet and Court, 68               Martim Vaz (island): occupied by
                                                 England, 309; restored to Brazil, 310
 T pannes: sent to Portugal, 55
 Lavalleja: starts revolt in Banda Orien¬
                                               Mattos, Chevalier de: presents formal
                                                 protest against Sierra Leone Com¬
                                                  mission, 237 f.
   tal, 151
364                                 INDEX
Meadows, Philip: secures ratification of   Ouseley, Consul General: fails to secure
  Anglo-Portuguese treaty of 1654, 11       equipment clause, 227 f.; presents
Methuen, John: mission to Portugal          case of the emancipados, 230 f.
  (1702), 19 flf.; wins Portugal to side   Oxford, Robert Harley, Earl of: favors
  of Allies, 20; negotiates treaty of       Anglo-French commercial treaty,
  alliance, 21; negotiates treaty of        34; defeated by pro-Portuguese op¬
  commerce, 24 f.; treaty of, threat¬       position, 36
  ened by Anglo-French agreement of
  1786, 50; treaty of, reaffirmed by
  Anglo-Portuguese treaty of 1810, 89      Palmella, Conde de:          minister of
Metternich: supports Portugal against        foreign affairs, 107
  Brazil, 192                              Palmerston: rejects Brazilian reexpor¬
Miguel: tool of Metternich, 193; prob¬        tation of emancipados, 232 and n. 51;
  able heir to Portuguese throne, 193 f.     refuses to review decision of Sierra
Minas Geraes: revolts, 251, n. 36            Leone Commission, 237 and n. 69;
Minerva (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65      backs Brazilian loans, 282 f.
Montevideo: intrigues against Buenos       Pantaleao de SI (brother of Conde de
 Aires, 115, 117; favors Carlota Joa-        Peneguiao): executed by Cromwell,
 quina’s     scheme,    127;  blockades       io
 Buenos Aires, 129; English raise          Pari (town): gas works installed by
 blockade, 130 and n. 73; requests           British, 324 f.
 Portuguese aid against Artigas, 131;      Paranl: receives German immigrants,
 armistice forced by Strangford, 131.        322, n. 36
  132F-; occupied by Artigas, 138;         Pedro I (of Brazil): left as regent in
 occupied by Portuguese, 141 fF.;            Brazil, 105, 187; marriage, 143;
 becomes Brazilian province, 149;            characterized, 187; powers as regent
 desires independence, 151 f.; block¬        restricted, 187 f.; ordered to Portugal
 aded by Brazil, 152 f.; wins inde¬          by Cortes, 188; supporters of, 188,
 pendence, 156 f.                            divided into two groups, 188 ff., 190,
Moreno, Mariano: favors Carlota Joa-         n. 12; declares independence, 189;
 quina’s scheme, 122                         wavers     between    absolutism   and
Morgan: appointed commissioner, 268;         liberalism, 190 f.; threatened with
 accepts Brazilian view of convention,       loss of support, 191; forced to obtain
 270; ordered to reject Brazilian con¬       England’s recognition, 193; closely
 tention, 270 f.                             linked to Europe, 194; threatens a
                                             Brazilian Monroe Doctrine, 196,
                                             n. 40, 197, n. 42; secures recognition
^^abuco, Joaquim: describes social           by Portugal, 201 ff., and by Europe¬
  revolution, 319                            an powers, 203; ratifies Stuart’s
Napoleon: becomes interested in Por¬         treaties, 204; Anglo-Brazilian treaties
  tugal, 55; determines to stop Anglo-       alienate Brazilian support of, 217 ff.
  Portuguese trade, 56 f.; demands           and n. 115; driven to side with Ab¬
  Portuguese declare war on England,         solutists, 218; expelled from Brazil,
  59; sends ultimatum to Portugal, 62        219 and n. 117, 259; signs Franco-
Nationality (in Brazil): regulations         Brazilian treaty, 299
  determining, of inhabitants, 301;        Pedro II: proclaimed emperor, 262,
  powers deny loss of nationality of         n. 40; majority declared, 262, n. 40;
  citizens, 301 f. and notes 63, 65;         personal rule begins, 262; issues
 Brazil shifts position concerning,          slave trade decrees, 264, n. 49; quiets
  303 f.; new regulations concerning,        Rio populace, 280
  304                                      Pedro Carlos (Infante of Spain): ac¬
Neumann, Baron: Austrian mediator            companies Joao to Brazil, 67; mar¬
 in London, 195                              ries Maria Thereza, 98 f.
Nuncio, Papal (in Brazil): opposes re¬     Penedo, Carvalho Moreira, Barao de:
 ligious clauses of Anglo-Portuguese         opinion on Anglo-Brazilian rela¬
 treaty of 1810, 81,84, 85 f.                tions, 222; demands satisfaction for
                                             reprisals, 280 f.; severs diplomatic
                                             relations, 281; returns to London,
Oliveira Lima, M. de: opinion on             282; mission to France, 305
 Anglo-Brazilian relations, 286            Peneguiao, Rodrigo de Si e Menezes,
                                     INDEX                                     365
  Conde de: mission to England, 1652,        Spanish Succession, 19, 26 f.; at¬
  8 ff.; negotiates treaty, 8 ff.; hesi¬     tempts neutrality, 19, but is won
  tates to sign, 9 f.; forced to sign, 10    over by Methuen, 20; trade with
Pennell, Consul: reports anti-English        English colonies, 28 f.; Walpole pre¬
  sentiment in Bahia, 222 f.                 vents war between Spain and, 36,
Pereira Pinto, Antonio: opinion on           n. 47; and Seven Years’ War, 36,
  Anglo-Brazilian relations, 222, 285        n. 47; political and economic vassal
Pereira da Silva, J. M.: opinion on          of England, 39 ff.; Pombal attempts
  Anglo-Brazilian relations, 222             to free, from English control, 41 ff.;
Pernambuco (province): first railroad        joins England against France in
  in, British promoted, 323 and n. 46,        1793, 53; concludes separate peace
  324 and n. 48; telegraph line, con¬        with France, 54 f., but fails to ratify
  structed by British, 324                   treaty, 55; defeated by Spain, 55 f.;
Pernambuco (town): resists slave trade       declares neutrality, 56; vacillates be¬
  suppression, 172; revolts, 261, notes       tween England and France, 58;
  36 and 38: English activity in, 325 f.      forced to choose, 59 ff., 64; simulated
Perpetuo Defensor (slave ship): con¬          war on England proposed, 60, but
  demned, 234, contrary to conven¬            rejected by Canning, 66, n. 63; value
  tion, 335                                   of British property in Oporto, 61, n.
Pharol Constitutional, 0: attacks Eng¬        32; departure of Court for Brazil de¬
  land, 291                                   layed, 63; ports of, closed to English,
Philip II (of Spain): unites Spain and        63; sequesters British property, 64;
  Portugal, 2                                 Court moved to Brazil, 65 ff.; the
Pitt, William: forced to negotiate            embarkation, 67; Court set up in
  Anglo-French commercial treaty,             Rio, 72 f.; negotiates treaties with
  48 f.; appoints Eden to negotiate, 49;      England, 81 ff; Lisbon and Rio
  favors French as opposed to Portu¬          force return of Court to Europe,
  guese trade, 50                              iosf.; rivalry with Spain over
Pombal, Jose de Carvalho e Mello,             mouth of La Plata, 110 ff; boundary
  Marquez de: the Richelieu of Portu¬         agreements with Spain, 112 f.; plots
  gal, 39; views on Anglo-Portuguese          to secure the Banda Oriental, 113 ff.;
  relations, 39 f.; favors agricultural as    fails twice, 116, 123 ff; sends troops
  opposed to mining development of            to Banda Oriental, 128; agrees to
  Brazil, 40; curtails England’s power        armistice, 130, but troops remain at
  in Portuguese dominions, 41 ff.; re¬        request of Elio, 131; afraid of revolu¬
  stricts powers of English judges con¬       tionists in Banda Oriental, 130;
  servators, 41; creates monopolistic         armistice forced by Strangford, 131,
  trading companies, 41 f.; establishes        132 f.; secures military forces for
  Junta do Commercio, 42; violates            conquest of Banda Oriental, 138 f.;
  treaties with England, 42 f., 44; at¬       determines to conquer Artigas, 139 f.;
  tempts to retrieve wine business            occupies Banda Oriental, 141; ac¬
  from English control, 43 f.; dismissed      cepts mediation proposals,         146;
  54; stimulates slave trade, 163             mediation fails, 146 ff.; completes
Ponsonby, Lord: minister to Buenos            occupation of Banda Oriental, 148;
  Aires, 153; instructed to mediate be¬       develops slave trade, 163 f.; limits
  tween Brazil and Buenos Aires, 153,         slave trade to national boundaries,
  but fails, 153; completes mediation          167; abuse of flag of, in slave trade,
  between Brazil and Buenos Aires,             168 and n. 18; slave trade agreement
   156 f.                                     with England (1815), 170 f.; pro¬
Ponte, Conde da (Marquez de Sande):           hibits slave trade north of equator,
  mission to London in 1657, 12;               170; Anglo-Portuguese slave trade
  negotiates treaty of 1661, 13 ff.           agreement of 1817, 172 ff; grants
Pottery: rise of manufacture of, in            England right of visit and search,
   England, 47                                 173 f.; refuses to prohibit intra-
Portugal: relations of, with England           Portuguese slave trade, 176 ff; urged
  prior to 1640, 1 f.; seeks England’s         by powers to suppress slave trade,
  help in 1640, 2 f.; fights Puritans, 6;      177; unable to enforce slave trade
  makes peace with Cromwell, 7 ff.;           convention,     179 ff; Anglo-Portu¬
  wins alliance with Charles II, 12 ff.;      guese mixed commissions, 175, 179 ff;
  as base of operation in War of               attempts to restore colonial regime in
366                                    INDEX
   Brazil, 187 f.; refuses to recognize          notes; British investments in, 324
   Brazilian independence, 192; relies         Relampago (slave ship): seized, 241,
   on England to quell Brazil, 192 and           n. 84
   n. 19; becomes battleground be¬             Rio de Janeiro: becomes royal capital,
   tween England and Continental                 72; reverts to provincial capital, 107;
   Alliance, 193; mediation of England           Negro population of (in 1803), 164;
   and Austria fails, 194 f.; fears sub¬         slave importations, 170, 172, 177,
   ordination to Brazil, 195, n. 33;             178; illicit slave importation, 238 fF.;
   attempts direct negotiations with             blockaded by English, 279 f.; indig¬
   Pedro, 196, n. 37; terms of, condi¬           nation of populace, 280; British
   tioning recognition of Brazilian in¬          merchants in, desire equality only,
   dependence, 198 f., 199, n. 46, 200 f.;       292; statistics on vessels entering,
   recognizes Brazilian independence,            312, 313, 316, n.         17; customs
   202; forced to sign equipment clause          statistics of, 312, n. 2, 314 f.; coffee
   with England, 226, n. 26; mediates            exports from, 315, 316, n. 14; sewer¬
   Anglo-Brazilian dispute, 281 f.; con¬         age project, promoted by English,
   sular conventions with Brazil, 304,           326
   305f.; consular representation in           Rio Grande do Sul: revolts, 261, n. 36;
   Brazil, 320 f. and n. 34; emigration          case of Prince of Wales, 276 ff.; re¬
   to Brazil, 322, n. 36                         ceives German immigrants, 322,
Portugal, Fernando: advises Joao VI              n. 36; German population demands
   to open Brazilian ports, 70                   German products, 330 f.
Prince of Wales (English naval vessel):        Rio Mixed Commission (slave trade):
   wrecked on Brazilian coast, 276 and           established, 175; delays action, 180;
   n. 88; suspicion of robbery and               first case, 180 ff. and n. 62, 183, n.
   murder, 277 and n. 91; difficulty of          71; continues despite Brazilian in¬
   administering justice, 277 and n. 91;         dependence, 183, n. 71; ineffective,
   British war vessel sent to Rio Grande,        233 and n. 56; dissolves, 247
   277; no convictions, 278; Russell           Rothschild: floats Brazilian loans, 282 f.
   demands indemnity, 279; Brazil              Royal Mail Steam Packet Line: in¬
   forced to pay, 280, 281                       augurates first steam service to Bra¬
Principe do Guine (slave ship): case of, 270     zil, 320
Prussia: recognizes Brazilian independ¬        Russell, John: rejects slave trade
   ence, 203; secures low import rate in         claims, 270 f.; announces expiration
   Brazil, 209, n. 86                            of claims convention, 273; attitude
Pueyrredon, Martin: favors Carlota               in Forte and Prince of Wales cases, 279;
  Joaquina’s scheme, 122; is sent to             orders reprisals, 279; refuses Brazil’s
   Rio by secret society, 122                    demand for satisfaction, 281; renews
                                                 diplomatic relations with Brazil, 282
                                               Russia: proposes intervention in Portu¬
^^uadruple Alliance: policy toward               guese-Spanish conflict, 145
  lesser powers,     137; proposes to
  mediate Portuguese-Spanish conflict
  in La Plata, 142; mediation fails,           St. John, Henry: see Bolingbroke,
  146 f.; favors Portugal against Brazil,        Lord
  192; threatens to help Portugal re¬          Salisbury, Lord: proposes arbitration
  gain Brazil, 196 and n. 37                     over Trindade, 309; doctrine of im¬
Queiroz, Eusebio de: rises to power,             perialism, 310
  263; executes slave trade laws, 264          Sande, Marquez de: see Ponte, Conde
Queluz, Marquez de: explains Anglo-              da
  Brazilian slave trade agreement, 2x6         Santa Catharina: open port in, pro¬
                                                 posed by England, 63; refused by
                                                 Portugal, 63; receives German immi¬
iR.ademaker, John: Strangford’s agent,           grants, 322, n. 36; German popula¬
  negotiates armistice, 132 and n. 84,           tion of, demands German goods,
  133 and n. 86                                  330 f-
Railroads (in Brazil): building of, be¬        S. Matheus (town): slave trade case,
  gins, 262 and n. 42, 318 and n. 28;            264 and n. 53
  native enterprise, 323 and n. 43;            Sao Paulo: leads independence, 189,
  promoted by England, 323 fF. and               n. 11; revolts, 261, n. 36; begins
                                    INDEX                                       367
  striking development, 319 and n. 29;        182, n. 67; factor in securing recog¬
  receives Italian immigrants, 322,           nition of Brazilian independence,
  n. 36; British promoted railroads in,       197 f.; Portuguese African colonies
  323, 324; British enterprise in, 326;       denied union with Brazil, 202 and
  investments in, 326 f.; Germany wins        n. 57; Stuart’s treaty repudiated by
  foothold in markets of, 330                 Canning, 204, 205; Brazilian income
Saumarez, Captain: sent to Rio Grande,       from import tax on slaves, 212 f.;
  278                                         supported by Brazilian Patriot party,
Scarlett, P. Campbell: negotiates claims      212; prohibited by Anglo-Brazilian
  convention, 266 ff.                         treaty of 1827, 213, 215, n* 105;
Schomberg, Robert: precipitates Gui¬          causes decline of British political
  ana boundary dispute, 307, 308              preeminence in Brazil, 221 ff.; Bra¬
Sentinella: Brazilian newspaper, 190,         zilian attempts to defer prohibition
  n. 12                                       of, fail, 224 f.; Brazilian slave trade
Serinhaem (town): slave trade case,           legally ended, 225, but causes Anglo-
  264 and n. 53                               Brazilian friction, 225; equipment
Sheldrake (British gunboat): sent to          clause needed, 226 f., but Brazil
  Rio Grande, 278                             resists British efforts to secure agree¬
Sierra Leone Mixed Commission (slave          ment, 227b; emancipados controversy,
  trade): established, 175; functions,        230 ff.; controversy over Sierra Leone
   179 f. and n. 59; disposes of captured     commission, 233 ff.; Brazilian im¬
  slaves, 182, n. 67; violates letter of      portation continues after prohibition,
   1817 convention, 227, 234 ff.; Anglo-      238 ff. and notes; deaths on slave
  Brazilian controversy over, 233, f.;        ships, 239, n. 73; Brazilian law of
  forces action on equipment clause,          1831, 242 f., ineffective, 243; expira¬
  234 f.; Aberdeen declares sentences         tion of 1827 treaty forces crisis, 245
  of, final, 336; Brazil attempts to          ff.; Brazil refuses to renew conven¬
  abolish, 336, but fails, 337; pro-          tion, 246 f.; England attempts coer¬
  English bias of, 237, n. 68; dissolved,     cion, 252 ff.; Brazil resists, 254 ff.;
  238, 247; leaves legacy of claims,          did English coercion stop, of Brazil?
  238; causes failure of claims con¬          259 ff.; Brazilian centralization and
  vention, 269 ff.                            economic revival permit effective
Silva Lisboa, Jose da: urges Brazilian        action, 261 ff. and notes; law of
  ports be opened, 69 f.; influence in        1850, 263 f. and n. 48; Brazilian
  opening ports, 70, n. 4                     slave trade ceases, 264 and n. 53;
Sinimbu, Joao L. Cansangao de: quiets         who stopped it? 264 f. and notes
  Rio populace, 280                           56-58; Anglo-Brazilian irritation con¬
Slave Trade: Canning desires clause on,       tinues, 266; Anglo-Brazilian contro¬
  in Portuguese treaty of 18x0, 80;           versy over, defeats claims conven¬
  Joao VI prohibits trade outside             tion, 273
  Portuguese dominions, 91; influence       Smith, Sidney: orders convoy for Por¬
  of, on Anglo-Brazilian relations, 154;      tuguese Court, 68; is stationed at
  England prohibits, 160 f.; England          Rio, 115; participates in manifestoes
  moves to make prohibition universal,        of Carlota Joaquina, 118, n. 37;
   161 ff.; as element in sugar produc¬       sides with Carlota Joaquina, 122 f.;
  tion, 161, n. 8 and 9; English pro¬         blocks Strangford’s opposition to
  paganda for suppression of, 165 ff.;        scheme, 123; recalled, 124 f.
  Portugal limits, to national bounda¬      Smythe, Percy Clinton Sydney: see
  ries, 167; Brazilian protests over Eng¬     Strangford, Viscount
  lish activity in suppressing, 168 f.;     Soares da Costa, Hipolyto Jose de:
  Portuguese trade prohibited north of        editor of Correio Braziliense, 93, n.
  equator, 170 and n. 30; Anglo-               102
  Portuguese agreement of 1817,172 ff.;     Southwell, Robert: collects dowry of
  Anglo-Portuguese mixed commis¬              Catherine of Braganga, 17 f.
  sions established, 175; London com¬       Souza, Chevalier de: negotiates loan in
  mission, 179 and n. 58; Sierra Leone        London, 80, and n. 44
  Commission, 179 f. and n. 59; Rio         Souza e Coutinho, Rodrigo de (Conde
  commission, 180 ff. and notes 62 and        de Linhares): leads pro-English party,
  71; disposal of captured slaves, in         58; rises to power, 73; negotiates
  Brazil, 180 ff., and in Sierra Leone,       treaties with Strangford, 81 ff.; Court
368                                   INDEX
   opposed to negotiations, 81 ff., 85 f.;     terms, 81 ff.; signs treaty of alliance
   pushes through treaties, 82, 85 f.;         and commerce, 82, but modifies it
   death of, 100; initiates move to take       later, 83; treaty rejected by Canning,
   the Banda Oriental, 113 ff.; advises        83; negotiates another with addi¬
   Chargt Hill of plans to make Joao VI        tional concessions, 85 f.; maintains
   sovereign of Spanish America, 114;          dominance in Rio Court, 98 f.; fails
   threatens Buenos Aires, 116; ac¬            to secure abolition of Portuguese
   quaints Strangford of plans in La           wine monopoly, 100 f.; loses influence
   Plata, 117 f., and in Spanish America,      in Rio Court, 102 ff.; fails to secure
   118; suddenly changes plans, 118;           return of Joao VI to Lisbon, 103,
   orders troops to occupy Banda               and is recalled, 103 f.; learns of
   Oriental, 130 and n. 74                     Portuguese plans to take Bacda
Souza e Oliveira Coutinho, Aureliano           Oriental, 117 f.; not responsible for
   de: negotiates with Ellis, 246, 292 f.;     manifestoes of Carlota Joaquina,
   resists English action in Guiana,            118, n. 37; disapproves of mani¬
   307 f.                                      festoes, 119; ordered by Canning to
Spain: recognizes independence of              checkmate Portuguese designs on
   Portugal, 18; attacks Portugal, 55 ff.;     Banda Oriental, 120; blocks Car-
   rowboat privateers, 58, n. 24; inter¬       lota’s scheme, 123 f. and notes 51
   feres with English commerce, 59;            and 53; disclaims English banking
   rivalry with Portugal over mouth of         in Carlota’s scheme, 125 and n. 57;
   La Plata, no ff.; boundary agree¬           inclines toward revolutionary ele¬
   ments with Portugal over the Banda          ment in Buenos Aires, 126; revolu¬
   Oriental, 112 f.; liberal regime of the     tionists request his aid, 127; opposes
  juntas, 136, reversed by Ferdinand           efforts of Rio and Montevideo to
   VII, 136; protests action of Portu¬         crush revolutionists, 128 f.; forces
   guese troops in La Plata, 140; ap¬          two armistices in La Plata, 130 f.,
   peals to powers against Portugal,           132 f.; maintains peace in La Plata
   141 f.; demands withdrawal of               until recall, 131 ff.; announces col¬
   Portuguese troops, 143; refuses to          onies are lost to Spain, 134; offers
   accept mediation proposals, 146 f.;         mediation between Montevideo and
   causes failure of mediation, 147 f.;        Buenos Aires, 134; reports unwilling¬
   prohibits slave trade, 175, n. 47;          ness of Portuguese to stop slave trade,
   renews Franco-Spanish agreement,            169 f.; proposes forceful measures
   196; signs equipment clause with            against slave trade, 170
   England, 226, n. 26; consular con¬        Stuart, Charles: represents England at
   ventions with Brazil, 304, 305 f.;          conference of Paris, 145; presents
   consular representation in Brazil,          project of mediation between Spain
   320 f. and n. 34; emigration to Bra¬        and Portugal, 146; suggests solution
   zil, 322, n. 36                             for Brazil-Buenos Aires dispute,
Steamship lines (to Brazil): English           153 f-j selected by Canning for Bra¬
   line inaugurated, 320; French line          zilian mission, 195, 196; instructions
   proposed, 320, n. 32; other lines           from Canning, 198 ff.; to negotiate
   organized, 324, n. 52                       Portuguese-Brazilian agreement, 198
Strangford, Percy Clinton Sydney               f., 200; lands in Rio, 201; signs
   Smythe, Viscount: sent to Portugal,         Portuguese-Brazilian treaty of in¬
   57; meets Spanish opposition, 58;           dependence, 201 and notes 54-55,
   urges Portuguese Court to move to           202 f. and notes 57-59; negotiates
   Brazil, 61; unable to secure action,        Anglo-Brazilian treaties, 203 ff., 213;
   63; forced to leave Portugal, 65 f.,        treaties repudiated by Canning,
   but returns, 66; secures immediate          204 ff.
   departure of Court to Brazil, 66 f.;      Sturge, Joseph: organizes anti-slavery
   establishes sovereign-subject relation      society, 257
   between England and Portugal, 66 f.;      Sweden: prohibits slave trade, 175,
  returns to England, 68; sent to Bra¬         n. 47; recognizes Brazil, 203; signs
   zil to win special privileges, 77; his      equipment clause, 226, n. 26; com¬
  instructions, 77 ff.; lands in Rio, 80;      petes for Brazilian markets, 313
  concludes packetboat convention,           Switzerland: recognizes Brazil, 203;
  80 f.; negotiates treaties, 81 ff.;          consular conventions with Brazil,
  opposition in Portuguese Court to            304, 305 f.
                                      INDEX                                        369
                                                import-export statistics, (1835) 314
TTalleyrand: threatens Portugal, 57             and notes 8-9 (c. 1850) 320, n. 33,
Tamoyo: Brazilian Patriot newspaper,            (1850-1912) 322 f. and notes, (1912)
  190, n. 12                                    333* n. 94, (1925) 335 and n. 98;
Tariff (Brazilian): first protective, 262       unaffected by expiration of com¬
Tartaruga (slave ship): seized, 241,            mercial treaty, 316 f.; threatened by
  n. 84                                         German competition, 329 ff; threat¬
                                                ened by United States competition,
Telegraphs (in Brazil): first line in¬
  stalled, 262 and n. 43, 318; English          333 ff.
                                              Trade, Anglo-French: English fear of
  companies operating, 325
                                                French competition favors Anglo-
Tentadora (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65      Portuguese trade, 32; prohibited,
Thornton, Edward: minister to Court             32 f.; commercial treaty, proposed,
  at Rio, 104; aids in securing de¬             33 f.; antagonistic to Anglo-Portu¬
  parture of Joao VI, 106 f.; acquiesces        guese trade, 34; arguments against,
  in Portuguese occupation of Banda             in 1713, 35; treaty defeated, 36; de¬
  Oriental, 148; instructed to stop             velopment of, after 1713, 37 ff.;
  Portuguese slave trade, 178; special          favored by industrial revolution in
  mission to Brazil, 282                        England, 47 f.; opened by agreement
Tordesillas, Treaty of, no and n. 3             of 1786, 51; closed by war, 52
Trade, Anglo-Brazilian: first move            Trade, Anglo-Portuguese: importance
  toward, by English, 4; English resi¬          of, to English merchants, 3ff; com¬
  dent merchants permitted in Brazil,           modities received by England from
  16; Brazilian tobacco and sugar               Portugal prior to 1700, 22 f.; com¬
  supplant Asiatic spices in Anglo-             modities sent by England to Portugal
  Portuguese trade, 22, but are sup¬            prior to 1700, 23; crisis in, about
  planted by Virginia tobacco and                1700, 23; wine as possible backbone
  West Indies sugar, 22 f.; vital ele¬          of, 24; Methuen solves crisis, 24 f.;
  ment in Anglo-Portuguese trade in             British preeminence in Portuguese
  eighteenth century, 45; checked by            trade established, 26; factors sup¬
  Pombal, 45; English need for raw              porting, in 1713, 28 ff; trade be¬
  cotton answered by increased Bra¬             tween Portugal and English colonies
  zilian production, 51 ff; Brazilian           in America (c. 1713), 28 ff; trade
  ports opened, 69 ff; London mer¬              between England and Portugal (c.
  chants organize for Brazilian trade,           1713), 29 ff; increases amazingly,
  75 f.; England seeks special privi¬           30 f.; wool, wine, and gold, basis of,
  leges in, 77 ff.; Canning’s instructions      30 ff.; influence of fear of French
  to Strangford concerning, 78 f.; re¬          competition on, 32 f.; in 1713 most
  ciprocal rights established by treaty         profitable of all English trade, 33;
  of 1810, 87; exclusive fifteen per cent,      more advantageous than Anglo-
  import duty on English goods, 88 f.;          French, 35 f.; causes defeat of Anglo-
  Brazilian coffee and sugar denied             French treaty, 36; undergoes change
  entrance to British markets, 98, 210;         in eighteenth century, 37 ff.; de¬
  stimulated by 1810 treaty, 95 ff.;            clines sharply after 1763, 44 ff;
  articles exchanged, 96 ff; compara¬           balance against England in 1780, 46;
  tive statistics of British exports (1812-     industrial revolution in England
  1815), 97 f. and notes; British exports       lessens importance of, 48; renounced
  to, exceed imports from Brazil, 98,           by England in favor of French trade,
  314 f.; influence of, on recognition of       51; need for raw cotton revives
  Brazilian independence, 196, 198;             Anglo-Portuguese trade, 52; wars of
  Stuart’s treaty repudiated by Can¬            French Revolution drive England
  ning, 204 f.; Anglo-Brazilian com¬            back to Portuguese trade, 52 f.;
  mercial treaty (1827), 206 ff; over¬          threatened by Napoleon, 56 f.; over¬
  shadows Anglo-Portuguese trade,               shadowed by Anglo-Brazilian trade,
  206 f.; comparative trade statistics          206 f.
  (1825-35), 207 and notes 77-78;             Treaties: Anglo-Portuguese, of 1642,
  sugar machinery export to Brazil              negotiated 2 ff, influence of British
  increases, 257 f.; increased sugar            merchants in negotiations of, 3,
  output results, 258; British merchants        terms of, 4, basis of all later treaties,
  in Rio demand equality only, 292;             5; Anglo-Portuguese, of, 1654, nego-
                                     INDEX
  tiated, 7 ff., British merchants secure      97; recognizes Brazilian independ¬
  demands in, 9, terms of, 9, ratified,        ence, 197, n. 42; secures low import
  11; Anglo-Portuguese, of 1661, ne¬          rate in Brazil, 209, n. 86; develops
  gotiated, 12 ff., signed, 15, terms of,     entente cordiale with Brazil, 266; begins
  15 ff.; Methuen’s treaties, negotiated,      competition for Brazilian markets,
  18 ff., treaty of alliance ratified, 21,     313; rivals British shipping in Brazil,
  terms of treaty of alliance, 21, treaty      316, 333; consular representation in
  of commerce negotiated, 24, terms of         Brazil, 320 f. and n. 34; greatest
  treaty of commerce, 24 f.; proposed          buyer of Brazilian products, 322,
  Anglo-French commercial treaty of            333 f. and n. 94; unimportant as
  1713, threatens Methuen’s treaty,           supplier of Brazil, 332 f. and notes
  33 f., but is defeated, 36; Anglo-          86-87; loses out in Brazilian shipping,
  French commercial treaty again               333; capital investment in Brazil in¬
  proposed in 1786, 36, successful, 37,       significant, 333; supplants England
  reasons for success, 37 ff., signed, 49,     as chief supplier of Brazil, 334, but
  terms, 50, antagonistic to Portuguese        loses, 334 f.; regains preeminence in
  trade, 50, opposition to fails, 51,         Brazilian markets, 335 f. and n. 98;
  ratified, 51; Anglo-Portuguese secret        articles sold by, to Brazil, 335, n. 99
  convention of 1807, 62 f.; Anglo-          Uruguay: wins independence by aid of
  Portuguese treaties of 1810, nego¬           England, 156 f. and n. 83. See also
  tiated by Strangford, 81 ff., terms          Banda Oriental
  divided into three treaties, 86 ff., of    Utrecht, Peace of: provisions relative to
  commerce, 86 ff., of alliance, 90 f.,        Portugal, 27 f.
  of communication, 89 and n. 83; all
  old Anglo-Portuguese treaties re¬
  affirmed by 1810 agreement, 89;
                                             \/atican: recognizes Brazilian inde¬
  secret articles of 1810 treaties, 91;
                                               pendence, 203 and n. 61
  views of Brazilians on 1810 agree¬
                                             Vencedora (slave ship): seized 236, n. 65,
  ments, 92, n. 101; 1810 treaties eval¬
                                               241, n. 84
  uated, 94 f.; difficulties over execu¬
                                             Venturoso (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65
  tion of 1810 treaties, 99 ff.; Anglo-
                                             Vereker, Consul: disturbed over Prince
  Portuguese slave trade, of 1815,
                                               of Wales case, 277
   170 f.; 1810 treaties modified, 171
                                             Vigodet, Gaspar de (governor of
  and n. 30; Anglo-Portuguese slave
                                               Montevideo): loses Montevideo, 138
  trade, of 1817, 172 ff. and n. 35, and
                                             Villa Real: Portuguese minister to
  additional article, 175; Portuguese-
                                               London, 194
  Brazilian treaty of independence,
                                             Voador (slave ship): seized, 336, n. 65
  201 ff.; Anglo-Brazilian commercial
  treaty (1827), negotiated, 206 f.,
  signed and ratified, 208, terms of,
  208 ff., points of, objectionable to       War of Spanish Succession: Portugal
  Brazilians, 209 f., 286 ff., based on       as base of operations in, 19
  Anglo-Portuguese treaties of 1642-         Warren, Admiral: supports officers in
  61, 210, expires, 286 ff.; Anglo-Bra¬       Forte case, 279; blockades Rio, 280;
  zilian slave trade treaty (1827),           seizes Brazilian vessels, 280
  negotiated, 214 ff., terms of, 213,        Wedgewood, Josiah: voices English in¬
  ratified, 215 and n. 105, expires,          dustrialists’ disdain of competition,
  245 ff.; Anglo-Brazilian agreements         47; influence on Anglo-French com¬
  in force (1924), 306, n. 83                 mercial treaty negotiations, 49
Tres Amigos (slave ship): seized, 336,       West Indies (British): slavery and slave
  n. 65                                       trade of, 163, n. 9; threatened by
Trindade (Island): discovered by Por¬         Brazilian competition, 166; sugar
  tuguese, 309; England occupies, 309;        production in, 167, n. 15; interests
  Portugal occupies, 309; visited, 309;       involved in sugar production of,
  secretly occupied by England, 309;          166 f.; forced to compete with India
  Brazil protests, 309 f.; England with¬      and foreign sugar, 257 and notes
  draws, 310                                  20-21
                                             Wilberforce: resolution on slave trade,
                                              161, 162; exerts pressure on Foreign
T_Jnited States: early trade to Brazil,       Office, 177
                                   INDEX
Wine (Portuguese): as possible back¬      Woolens, manufacture of (English):
 bone of Anglo-Portuguese trade, 24;       increase prior to 1700, 21 f.; necessity
 Methuen opens English markets to,         of larger markets for, 22; Portugal
 24 f.; in English colonies on American    closes markets to, 23; Methuen opens
 continent, 29; basis of Anglo-Portu¬      them, 24 f.; basis of Anglo-Portu¬
 guese trade in 1713, 30 f.; controlled    guese trade in 1713, 30 ff.; vested
 by English agents in Portugal, 43;        interest in 1713, backing Anglo-
  Pombal attempts to retrieve control      Portuguese trade, 31 f.
 of, from the English, 43 f.; Alto
 Douro Wine Company created, 43;
  English protest wine monopoly,
 99 f.; Wine Company monopoly re¬         "\owd (Youd), Thomas: missionary
 newed, 104                                 in Guiana, 307, 308
                Date Due
APR
rc        ■3
           gL-ig
               8 ^ 77
                   H—




               ES
   JUM gd iyj£   inno
    l ! 8 4S <



  JLtti 5 8®
    DEC 0 6 1993

   NOV 2IQQS
          21§§S
-FEfH"?
    FEB- 1« /91QQJ>
                 IOOJ
 jjnv 1: 3 'MS
    r4U v itU /:+ 1QQ4
    MOV           i7/O
            CAT. NO. 23 233   PRINTED IN   U.S.A.
                                 HF 3508 ,B7 M3 1964
                                 Manchester, Alan Krebs 1
                                                                   010101 000
                                 °ri||,Sm Prfem'nence in Brazil,




                                        0 1 63 0111 894 3
                                           TRENT UNIVERSITY




                 HF3508 .B7M3 1964

      Manchester, Alan K.

          British preeminence in Brazil
                                                        ■     *    --




         date
                                 ISSUED TO




                                       42486
                —  y,—,
                    / •"   -/'         !-■ . <   '          ---




J_

                                                 42486
 HF             Manchester, Alan Krebs
 3508              British preeminence in
 B7M3           Brazil
 1964
 Trent
 University
