AT SPES NON FRACT A
Benjamin West (1738-1820)   The Hope family in 1802      Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Mass.
                            (Cj List of Illustrations)           (by courtesy of the owner)
    RIJKSUNIVERSITEIT TE GRONINGEN



AT SPES NON FRACTA
     HOPE & CO. 1770 -1815
  MERCHANT BANKERS AND DIPLOMATS
             AT WORK



                PROEFSCHRIFT

 TER VERKRIJGING VAN HET DOCTORAAT IN DE LETTEREN

      AAN DE RIJKSUNIVERSITEIT TE GRONINGEN

 OP GEZAG VAN DE RECTOR MAGNIFICUS DR.A. W ATTEL

   IN HET OPENBAAR TE VERDEDIGEN OP DONDERDAG

     30 MEl 1974 DES NAMIDDAGS TE 4 UUR DOOR



        MARTEN GERBERTUS BUIST
             GEBOREN TE GRONINGEN




  MARTINUS NIJHOFF / DEN HAAG I 1974
      Promotor: Prof dr. E.H.Kossmann
       Co-Referent: Prof dr. H.Baudet




 © 1974 by Martinus NijholJ. The Hague, Netherlands
 Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1974

All rights reserved, including the right to translate or to
    reproduce this book or parts thereof in any form
ISBN 978-94-011-8201-0            ISBN 978-94-011-8858-6 (eBook)
DOl 10.1007/978-94-011-8858-6
  To Jonkheer Wilco Julius van Sminia,
aformer partner in thefirm of Hope & Co.
                             STELLINGEN

  Nederland, als voor organisaties van een meer algemene opzet, zoals de
  Vereniging 'Het Nederlands Philologen Congres'.

9. Stelselmatige wetsovertreding en ondermijning van het bestaande ge-
   zag dragen bij tot het scheppen van een geestelijk klimaat waarin ook
   een kolonelsregime kan gedijen.
                             STELLINGEN




I.   Granvelle heeft ten opzichte van de expansionistische economische
     politiek van Enge\and veel duidelijker een 'nationaal' Nederlands be-
     lang laten gelden dan de adelsgroep die na Granvelle's vertrek in 1564
     invloed op de regering kreeg.

2.   Door gebrek aan voldoende deelstudies is de sociaal-economische com-
     ponent van de opstand tegen Spanje in de Nederlandse geschiedschrij-
     ving tot dusverre onvoldoende tot zijn recht gekomen.

3. Dc categorie 'merchant banker' is weinig bruikbaar.

4. Het is opvallend dat de overeenkomsten tussen achttiende eeuwse stro-
   mingen en het hedendaagse activisme in Nederland nog niet tot een
   grotere aandacht voor die eeuw hebben geleid.

5. Het is juister de geschiedenis als 'menswetenschap' te betitelen dan als
   'sociale wetenschap'.

6. Om hun huidige identiteitscrisis te overwinnen, zullen de confessio-
   nele partijen in Nederland zich indringend moeten gaan verdiepen in
   hun oorspronkelijke uitgangspunten.

7. De geschiedenisstudenten aan de lerarenopleidingen nieuwe stijl moet
   worden bijgebracht hoe zij, uitgaande van plaatselijke historische gege-
   yens, aan hun scholieren het bredere historische verband duidelijk kun-
   nen maken.

8. Als voor de bijscholing van leerkrachten in het Nederlandse onderwijs
   een overkoepelende regeling wordt getroffen, dan moeten ook de or-
   ganisaties worden ingeschakeld die, uit de onderwijswereld zelf voort-
   kamen, zich al ettelijke decennia met deze bijschaling hebben bezig
   gehauden. Dit geldt zowel vaor organisaties op een speciaal vakgebied,
   zoals de Vereniging van Leraren Geschiedenis en Staatsinrichting in
                             PREFACE



The setting for this study is reflected in the sub-title 'Merchant bankers
and diplomats at work.' The aim is to follow the partners in their many
and diverse activities: in their relationship towards each other, in their
contacts with other houses and in their attitudes towards government of-
ficials. Moreover, the author has attempted to show the motives for their
commercial and financial actions, where these were discernible. A point of
departure such as this implies that the surviving correspondence consti-
tutes the principal source of information. Quantitative data are included,
but within this framework their role is subsidiary.
  Because this book is intended for various categories of readers, it has
been divided into three parts. The introductory chapter, which contains an
abridged history of Hope & Co. up to 1815, is intended for those whose
interest in the subject is of a more general nature. In the same chapter, a
number of main themes such as the growth of foreign loans in the Nether-
lands and the technique per se of issuing loans are discussed, and at-
tention is devoted to some of the problems of trade and to the question
whether Hope & Co. should be viewed as merchants or as bankers. In
conclusion, an impression is given of the part played by Amsterdam as a
financial centre during the Napoleonic era and of the very exceptional po-
sition which Hope & Co. occupied at that time.
  In the succeeding chapters, the principal themes are examined in detail
with the aid of a number of case studies. There is more to the subdivision
into Baltic Affairs and Iberian Affairs than appears at first sight: while
Baltic Affairs according to the sub-title deals only with loans, and Iberian
Affairs only with produce, it becomes clear in the elaboration of the
chapters that, in the eyes of Messrs. Hope, mercantile transactions and
financial affairs were inextricably interwoven. Accordingly, only in the
final chapter do contents and title correspond.
  The Notes are intended for researchers who desire to go deeper into
certain aspects of this study. This explains their comprehensive nature.
  But for the decision taken by Messrs. Hope in 1953 to commission a
history of the house, this study would not have been embarked upon.
Without the decision of the present-day Board of Bank Mees & Hope to

                                    VII
                                 PREFACE


allow the study to continue and to have the result published in book form,
the work would not have been completed. The great abundance of data in
the Hope archives is illustrated by the fact that, in spite of the length of
this book, the author was obliged to limit himself to the period up to 1815.
  The author acknowledges with gratitude the interest displayed by the
former partners and by the members of the present Board throughout the
period during which this book was written. This applies particularly to
Jhr. W.J. van Sminia, to whom the book is dedicated. Without his sup-
port, mediation and encouragement, this study might well not have seen
the light of day.
  The author owes a debt of gratitude to his mentor, Jhr. Prof. P.J. van
Winter, who brought about the contact between Messrs. Hope & Co. and
him, and who, by reason of his exceptionally wide knowledge of the sub-
ject matter, has been a source of constant support. Prof. E.H.Kossmann
read through the chapters and, drawing on his very great knowledge of
literature and wide experience, offered valuable advice which benefited
this book and for which the author is most grateful.
  Three successive librarians of the University of Groningen, Dr. H. de
Buck, the late Dr. S.J.Bouma and Mr. W.R.H.Koops, offered the hospi-
tality of their institution to the Hope archives and to the author for a
period of twenty years. The author is greatly indebted to Mr. Koops who,
as a friend, allowed him to benefit from his experience as a publisher. The
author's thanks are due to the staff of the University Library for their
willing assistance and their interest in the advancement of the study.
  A search into the history of Hope & Co. would be impossible without
data from the municipal archives in Amsterdam. The author is grateful to
the archivist, Dr. W.J. van Hoboken, for having made it possible for him
to freely carry out his researches, and also to Dr. S.Hart who, with his im-
mense knowledge of economic data, so willingly assisted him in this task.
  Many have assisted the author during his investigations, or have aided
him in other ways. While it is impossible to refer to them all by name, the
author wishes to make an exception in the case of Mr. Derek S.Jordan,
the translator of this book, whose critical observations were instrumental
in ironing out a number of wrinkles.
  Finally, the author is indebted to his family: to his children, who from an
early age have shown him every consideration, and above all to his wife,
who sustained her husband in the broadest sense of the term throughout
the genesis of this book.




                                    VIII
  INTRODUCTION

THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM
                            CHAPTER ONE

          THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM
             SOME OBSER V A TIONS ON COMMERCE AND
              BANKING IN THE LATE 18TH CENTURY



'This is my plan for you, my Lord, and you never had a better opportunity
for executing it ... Your Lordship should come over in the beginning of
April, spend some weeks with us at The Hague till the end of May, then
some weeks at one of my seats in this province from whence we make all
our acquaintance to see the country ... Towards the end of the year we
may spend some time in Amsterdam, return to The Hague and from
thence I give you my word of honour that I and my wife will accompany
you to England to make a considerable stay there.' 1
  In this letter, dated 12th March 1776, John Hope, merchant of Amster-
dam and a partner in the house of Hope & Co., not only sketched his
seigneurial mode of living, but also confirmed his kinship to the recipient,
the Earl of Hopetoun, by signing himself 'Your most affectionate cousin.'
  John Hope'S urge to confirm and maintain his ties with the noble Scot-
tish branch of the family merits closer inspection, for genealogists have so
far not succeeded in providing irrefutable proof of the relationship be-
tween the Scottish and Dutch branches.
  According to the tradition, a certain Jean de Hope travelled from France
to Scotland with one of the French wives of James V, the Scottish king. It
is improbable that this Jean will have accompanied James's first wife,
Madeleine of France, for she died in July 1537, only six months after her
marriage. It therefore seems more likely that he accompanied Mary de
Guise, whom James V married in 1538.
  For those who are inclined to doubt this romantic origin, there is a
certain John Hope, who was admitted as a Burgess and Guild Brother
of Edinburgh in 1528 or 1529. One thing is certain: in 1560 or there
abouts, the son of Jean or John Hope, Edward, played a part in bringing
about the Reformation. The succeeding generation included a Henry
Hope, who married Jacqueline de Tot or de Jot; they had at least four
sons. The French-sounding name of Henry's wife may indicate a Con-
tinental link; indeed, an entry in the Edinburgh Roll shows that their
son James, a 'factor in Dieppe,' was admitted as a Burgess and Guild
Brother in 1619.
  Upon the death of James Hope in 1634, his son Henry or Harry took

                                     3
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

{lver the business activities. The diary kept by Henry's uncle, Thomas,
who received a baronetcy and took the title Hope of Craighall, contains
references to his nephew's regular visits to port towns in France. The
diary for 1637 also refers to contacts with Holland: 'Saturday 5th August:
Harry my nephew went by sea to Calais and given him five twelve pound
pieces of gold; and at his return he promised to serve some merchant in
Amsterdam.' The visit can not have been of long duration, for on 26th
March 1639 Sir Thomas recorded that: 'This night Harry Hope, my
nephew, came from France.'
  It is tempting to allow this Henry to marry his cousin, Ann, daughter of
Sir Thomas, and to let the couple move to Rotterdam in 1660 or there-
abouts; this, however, does not correspond to the genealogical facts,
added to which it is unlikely that Henry, at his relatively advanced age,
would have raised a family in Rotterdam. As a last possibility, there
could have been a Henry Hope Jr. who, moreover, might have married
the daughter of Sir Thomas's son. No evidence of this is to be found in
Edinburgh. 1
  It has, however, been established that in 1664 Henry Hope and Anna
Hope (variously written as Hop or Hoop) had their son Archibald
christened in the Scottish Church in Rotterdam. They subsequently had
other children, three of whom, Bethea, Elizabeth and Anna, reached
adulthood. 2
  In the 1680s Henry Hope's business fortunes declined, and eventually he
and his family were forced to leave Rotterdam and settle in London. But
even there his creditors continued to harass him: on 3rd September 1688,
Gilles van Braem, a merchant in Rotterdam, authorized John Schoppens
and Samuel Sale of London to recover monies owed to him by Henry
Hope. 3
  Shortly after this, it appears, Henry Hope died, leaving his wife and
children in impoverished circumstances. In the meantime, however,
Archibald had resumed his father's profession in Rotterdam and, as his
Wills show, was increasingly successful. In 1694 he married Anna Claus,
the daughter of a well-to-do Amsterdam buttonmaker and like himself, a
 Quaker. Their union was richly blessed with children, of whom eight sons
 and two daughters reached adulthood. With each new Will, they were
 more handsomely provided for. 4
  Archibald did not forget his mother and his sisters. Even before his
 marriage he had brought them back to Rotterdam, where he gave his
 mother an annual allowance and provided his sisters with capital to start
 a draper's shop.

                                    4
                      THE FAMIL Y A ND THE FIRM

 A Will dated 1720 shows Archibald to have been the owner of malting
 houses in Ipswich, Stowmarket and Bury St. Edmunds, and of two vessels
 used specially for the transport of malt. He also owned at least two other
 vessels, the 'Henry' and the 'Marlborough,' which were engaged in the
trade with England and Ireland. 1
  The ties with Scotland were also maintained. On 22nd February 1701,
 Charles Hope of Hopetoun authorized Archibald Hope, 'Merchant in
 Rotterdam, My Cousin,' to collect a debt owed to him by the Rotterdam
merchant Cornelis van der Pot. Charles Hope, who owned important lead
mines, had supplied Van der Pot with lead ore for which the latter had
failed to pay. This authorization is of particular importance because it
provides irrefutable proof of the relationship between the Hopes of Rot-
terdam and the ennobled Scottish family.2
  Archibald Hope's Will of 1720 stipulated that, upon his death, the
merchant house should be carried on by his sons Henry and John. Places
in the firm were also reserved for their brothers Isaac and Thomas, who
were then under age. The name of the second eldest son, Archibald Jr.,
does not appear in this connexion, but it is known that in 1720 he lived
with his uncle, Warner Lulofs, at a house flanking the Singel in Amster-
dam and worked with him as a stockjobber dealing in speculative issues.
It was not until 1722 that the name of Archibald Hope Jr. appeared in the
Amsterdam Notarial Archives and in the account books of the Exchange
Bank in that city.3
  It is interesting to note that several other Amsterdam merchant houses
which played an important role in the 18th century also commenced oper-
ations there during the early decades of that century. For example, the
distinguished house of Andries Pels & Sons was founded in 1707, while in
1712 Pieter Schout Muilman and Dionijs Meulenaar established a house
from which the firm of Muilman & Sons was to evolve fifteen years later.
The house of Hogguer, like that of Hope, was not of Dutch origin. At
about the time when Archibald Hope was establishing himself, Jacques
Christophe Hogguer, on the advice of his father, set up in business in Am-
sterdam. The Hogguers, who were of Swiss extraction, had settled at
Lyons in 1680 or thereabouts and had rapidly achieved a prominent po-
sition in banking circles there. 4
  Despite the consolidation and a mild recession in certain sectors of Hol-
land's trade, the Amsterdam of the early 18th century was evidently still
so attractive and vital as a centre that enterprising foreigners undertook
ventures there-and succeeded.
The notarial archives show clearly that Archibald Jr. followed in his

                                    5
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

father's footsteps, albeit in Amsterdam, and devoted himself to trade and
shipping. He was soon joined by his younger brother Thomas, who evi-
dently foresaw a better future in Amsterdam than in the family business in
Rotterdam. On 14th June 1724, Archibald Jr. granted power of procu-
ration to 'His Brother Thomas Hope, also a Merchant of this place,' en-
abling him, in Archibald's absence, to perform any acts necessary in the
interests of the house. 1
  In the absence of accounts for this period, it is difficult to form an
opinion of the nature and extent of the business transacted by the Hope
brothers. However, the figures for the house's annual turnover with the
Amsterdam Exchange Bank are of some value in this context, particularly
when they are compared with the turnover of certain other houses. For
this purpose we have chosen the aforementioned houses of Muilman, Pels
and Hogguer, and in addition the somewhat older houses of De Smeth
and Clifford. De Smeth, which, like Hope, was later to earn a reputation
as an issuer of loans, had its roots in the Southern Netherlands. After
residing for some time in Cologne, Joost de Smeth settled in Amsterdam
round about 1650. The Cliffords were by origin British and had arrived in
Amsterdam a little later. 2
  The majority of the changes affecting the accounts maintained with the
Exchange Bank related to sums transferred to or from other bank ac-
counts. The total of the credits and debits during a period of a year con-
stituted the turnover of the account concerned. The value for our purpose
of the sums thus obtained, and reproduced in graph form, is, of course,
relative, since we do not know the ratio between the Exchange Bank ac-
count turnover of a given house and its total turnover. The ratios may
well have varied from year to year and from house to house. Nevertheless,
they at least afford a certain indication of the level of business. 3
  If we examine the figures relating to the early years of the Hope brothers'
career, the first thing that strikes us is the gradual nature of the growth: in
 1728 neither Hope nor Hogguer reached a turnover of two million
guilders. In the same year, Muilman and Clifford achieved more than
twice this figure, while Pels, with a turnover of twenty million, stood head
and shoulders above them all. In 1726, when, in the wake of the adoption
by France of the monetary system devised by John Law, French gold and
silver coin poured into Amsterdam, Pels had achieved the staggering fig-
ure of thirty million guilders. It is clear from the absence of peaks in the
graph relating to the turnover of Archibald and Thomas Hope that they
did not then deal in specie on a large scale. 4
  The third decade of the eighteenth century saw a change in the house of

                                      6
Power of attorney granted by Charles Hope of Hopetou n to Archibal
                                                                   d Hope of
                              Rotterda m, 170 I
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 Hope in Amsterdam. Archibald Jr. died on 28th March 1733. His death
 occurred in Rotterdam, and the fact that he was buried there-even
 though he was described as a 'merchant of Amsterdam' -suggests that he
 had earlier ceased to concern himself with the day-to-day affairs of his
 business. 1 Prior to Archibald's death, a younger brother, Adrian, had
joined the firm, and in 1734 Thomas made him a partner, whereupon the
title of the house was changed to Thomas & Adrian Hope. 2
  Of these two, Thomas was destined to achieve the greater reputation as a
 merchant, and his fame reflected on the firm which bore his name. The
house of Thomas & Adrian Hope was renowned for its consistent policy
 of covering risks and for the high degree of continuity in its commodity
trading in the face of changing political circumstances.
  The turnover figures at the Exchange Bank confirm this image of solidity
and stability. Until the outbreak of the Seven Years' War in 1756, the
figures continued to grow slowly but surely, displaying no sensational
peaks or troughs. It is notable that De Smeth achieved an appreciably
smaller rate of growth, and that Hogguer stood still.
  The graphs representing Clifford and Pels display dramatic peaks in the
post-174° period. These are undoubtedly allied to the outbreak of the War
of the Austrian Succession, a trial of strength between Prussia and France
on the one side, and England and Austria on the other, which afforded
exceptional trading opportunities for Holland, a neutral state. But by 1743
the era ofrecord turnover had passed for Pels, and by 1745 the same ap-
plied to Clifford. In the latter year, the country's trade commenced to
decline under the influence of the war between France and the Dutch
Republic.
  By the eve of the Seven Years' War, Thomas & Adrian Hope had left
Hogguer and Muilman far behind in terms of turnover with the Exchange
Bank. They were roughly on a par with De Smeth, and in the period 1750-
1755 both houses achieved an annual figure of about ten million guilders.
Pels and Clifford were at this time turning over something like twenty
million annually, Pels remainingjust under this figure and Clifford slightly
above it.
  In 1747, under the pressure of the French invasion of the southern part
of the Netherlands, the stadholdership was restored in the provinces of
Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Geiderland and Overijssel. The young stad-
holder, from whom major political reforms were expected, was showered
with offices and powers. As an example, he was appointed Director-
General and Governor of the Oost-Indische Compagnie and the West-Indi-
sche Compagnie in 1750, but soon afterwards he appointed Thomas Hope
                                     8
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 and another Amsterdam merchant, Jan van Marselis, to represent him in
 the latter. 1
  This, however, was not to be the only token of the stadholder's favour.
Among the problems facing William IV was the economic decline of the
 Republic. Concern at the eclipse of Holland as a trading nation by Eng-
 land, and at the increasing competition from France, Sweden and Den-
mark in the maritime sector, had been expressed during the second decade
 of the century. In addition, Hamburg was growing into a competitive
staple market for colonial produce. In the industrial sector, Dutch firms
were suffering increasingly from protectionist measures in the neighbour-
ing countries. Added to all this, the French invasion of the southern part
of the Netherlands, as we have seen, had adversely affected the country's
trade, and when, following the ending of the War of the Austrian Suc-
cession, the anticipated recovery failed to materialize, William comman-
ded that a committee should be established to draw up a plan to revive the
commercial and industrial activity.
  Jan van Marselis and Thomas Hope were appointed members of this
committee, though not without protest. Hasselaer, a powerful burgomas-
ter of Amsterdam, described Thomas Hope as 'the greatest scoundrel of
Amsterdam,' and when Gronsfelt, a favourite of the stadholder and a
champion of Hope, stood up for him and praised his skill, Hasselaer re-
torted that this was one more reason for being on one's guard against him.
Charles Bentinck, who also enjoyed the stadholder's favour and who was
present during the conversation, added that in this respect the Amsterdam
Stock Exchange shared Hasselaer's opinion. 2 The immediate causes of
these spiteful remarks by Hasselaer and Bentinck, are of secondary im-
portance. In all probability, they stemmed from a combination of envy
at Hope's success in business and jealousy of his position as confidant of
the stadholder. It is clear that Thomas Hope had become embroiled in a
struggle between rival factions at the Court, but this was something which
would be repeated when the house undertook loans for countries ruled by
despots.
  The committee of which Thomas Hope was a member had meanwhile
set about its task. One of the focal points of its deliberations was the ex-
tent to which import and export duties would have to be reduced if the
Republic was again to be attractive as a staple market for the whole of
Europe. After lengthy discussions, Thomas Hope succeeded in getting his
views adopted. These embraced a limited free trade system in which, in
order to provide a measure of protection for traders, farmers and cattle
breeders, import duties were retained for a number of competitive com-

                                     9
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

modities. The end of all import duties was in any case not feasible, for the
revenue from these was used by the provincial Boards of Admiralty to
defray the costs of maintaining the fleet. At the same time, the transit
trade had to be given a measure of relief in order to attract more goods to
the staple market.
  In August 1751 these plans, in the shape of a 'Proposition,' were sub-
mitted by the stadholder to the States General of the Republic and the
Provincial States of Holland, accompanied by an explanatory document
entitled 'Verhandeling over den Koophandel.' A fragment of the draft of
the 'Verhandeling' has survived, and as this is in Thomas Hope's own
hand it may safely be assumed that he was the author of the document. 1
 The Proposition was ill-fated. The first setback came with the death of
William IV a few months after it had been submitted. Added to this, there
was disunity among the provinces of the Republic, each of which desired
that locally produced goods should be protected by a tariff barrier.
  In spite of all efforts by Thomas Hope and his supporters, the Propo-
sition stranded on the rocks of provincial and local particularism. The
widow of William IV, the English princess Anne, who ruled as 'Gouver-
nante' in the minority of her son, was so preoccupied with the mainte-
nance of her own power, and so unfamiliar with relationships in Holland,
that she was unable to force a decision on the plan. Furthermore, interest
in it began to wane in 1755, when it became clear that the War of the
Austrian Succession had been no more than an initial phase in the struggle
between England and France for the colonies in North America and In-
dia. The Republic, which had maintained close ties with England since
the reign of the King-Stadholder William Ill, faced a new threat of being
caught up in the Anglo-French conflict.2
  In the debate concerning the strengthening of the armed forces, a sharp
controversy arose on the question of whether the army or the navy should
receive priority. The Gouvernante greatly favoured reinforcing the army,
and this led to the suspicion that, as an English princess, she sought to
pursue a harsh, anti-French policy. When hostilities commenced in 1756,
the issue of higher or lower import duties became one of secondary im-
portance: what mattered now was to preserve Holland's neutrality in
order that trade with all the belligerent parties should continue.
  Thomas Hope continued to work for the adoption of the Proposition to
the bitter end, but after the death of the stadholder he associated himself
less closely with the group surrounding the Gouvernante and with her
policy of orientation on England. He showed himself to be a supporter of
a powerful policy of neutrality in the face of British demands -an attitude

                                    10
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

which i~ the more remarkable since he maintained contact with the Hopes
of Hopetoun and, through them, with political circles in England. Thomas
Hope took the view that ties with a particular party or country of origin
ought not to imply unconditional conformity with the opinions prevailing
there, and this view was to be shared by his successors. 1
 The information obtained from the Exchange Bank shows that the
Hopes' definitive rise to the summit of their profession coincided with the
Seven Years' War. From 1755 onwards, turnover rose steeply, reaching 34
million guilders in 1759. A period of diminished growth ensued, but in
176I turnover again rose, reaching 47 million guilders in 1762. This peak
was followed by a sharp decline in I763 and I764. when the figures were
42 and n! million guilders respectively.
 The other houses to which reference has been made also made progress
in this period, but with the exception of Pels and Clifford their rate of
growth was considerably less spectacular. Peb and Clifford reached max-
ima of 4I and 341 million guilders respectively. It is noteworthy that Pels's
turnover reached its peak in 1758, after which it declined steadily. De
Smeth succeeded in maintaining a level in excess of 20 million guilders
from 1758 to 1761, but three years later this had plummeted to just under
four million.
 The steep rises achieved by Hope, Clifford, Pels and De Smeth indicate
that these houses had their share of the greatly enlarged trade in specie.
The war served also to stimulate commodity trading, but in this sector
large profits could turn into equally large losses in the event of piracy or
confiscation.
  Despite the risks, the Hopes engaged in commodity trading on a large
scale. They had originally concentrated on Great Britain, but by now
their activities had for some time been extended to embrace the whole of
Europe and even areas beyond, such as North America and the West In-
dies. Bya fortunate coincidence, a member of the family had emigrated to
Boston, and was available as correspondent there. Henry, the eldest
brother of Thomas and Adrian, had left his father's firm in Rotterdam in
1720 or thereabouts, and had set up in business on his own. But, like his
grandfather before him, he had had little success, and his position steadily
deteriorated until, round about 1730, he left for America. With the death
of Archibald Sr. in 1743, the Rotterdam house had passed into the hands
of Henry's younger brothers Isaac and Zachary, and now specialized in
the conveyance of emigrants to North America. 2
  During the Seven Years' War the brothers in Amsterdam and Rotterdam
maintained a lively correspondence on the subject of trade with the Carib-

                                     I I
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

bean. Trade with the islands of the French West Indies, which were cut off
from the mother country by the superior English fleet, was maintained via
the Dutch colonies of St. Eustatius and Cural;(ao. This back-door supply
route was a thorn in the flesh of England, and it is thus not surprising
that the correspondence between the brothers abounds with reports of
vessels and cargoes being lost as a result of British naval superiority or the
activities of pirates. Nevertheless, the trade with the Western Hemisphere
continued, albeit caution was exercised in the traffic with the French colo-
nies.
 Isaac and Zachary Hope were among the most enthusiastic supporters of
the attitude adopted by the Province of Holland, which was pressing the
Gouvernante for a rapid expansion of the fleet and strong action against
the English 'piracy.' 1 But the Gouvernante persisted in her view that if the
navy was enlarged, the army would have to be also. With this, supporters
and opponents of a strong policy against England and supporters and
opponents of the Gouvernante began to discover common ground. It was
not until Anne's death in 1759 that the conflict abated.
 Thomas and Adrian Hope utilized the services of their brothers in Rot-
terdam for the delivery of coin to France via houses in Brussels and Ant-
werp. The Amsterdam house also supplied cannon to the French East
India Company. These were ostensibly sold to the Hopes in Gothenburg,
and the house had them shipped to Amsterdam at their own risk. There,
the French East India Company resumed ownership.2 The timber trade
with France and the Iberian peninsula, in which the Hopes engaged on a
large scale, also continued, although the number of cargoes declined. 3
 As far as the Hopes were concerned, the trade with, and for the benefit
of, France in no way diminished the ties with England. In the financial
sector, in particular, there was much for houses such as Hope and Clifford
to do. Between 1756 and 1762 the British government was obliged to float
loans totalling nearly 50,000,000 pounds sterling to defray the cost of the
war, and a substantial portion of these loans were placed in Amsterdam
through the medium of Hope and Clifford. Amsterdam also served as the
intermediate centre for the transfer of subsidies to Prussia and other allies
of Britain on the Continent. For this, the British government issued
payment orders to houses like Hope, and these were negotiated in Ger-
many. Subsidies were also paid in gold and silver bullion, most of which
passed through Amsterdam. 4
 The incessant calls made upon the money market in Amsterdam led to a
scarcity of funds, and this in turn produced a major extension of ac-
ceptance credit. The demand for credit did not cease with the restoration

                                     12
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

of peace in February 1763, and funds continued to be required for pur-
poses such as the restoration of currencies weakened by the war, as in the
case of Prussia, or the payment of war levies, as in the case of Saxony.
With money so scarce, the greatly inflated circulation in the form of drafts
could only be maintained by honouring a matured draft with a draft on
another house. This wisselruiterij or cross-accommodation system was
hazardous inasmuch as a failure anywhere along the line could bring the
whole structure tumbling down. To make matters worse, many houses
were holding large stocks of colonial produce, the price of which had
slumped with the news of peace and the prospect of an early resumption
of fresh supplies direct from the colonies.
  At the end of July I763 the ground caved in, and the speculators com-
menced to drag each other over the precipice. The most startling bank-
ruptcy concerned the house of De Neufville, which had achieved a dubi-
ous reputation by indulging with others in practices aimed at debasing the
currency in Prussia. 1 Efforts by those at the Stock Exchange, including
Hope, to establish an emergency fund failed when Pels backed out. The
house of Pels had a reputation for being rigid and conservative (its dwin-
dling turnover with the Exchange Bank in the years after I7S8 is an indi-
cation of this). Thomas and Adrian Hope had not been in danger for a
single moment during the crisis: their cautious and consistent policy of
covering risks had stood them in good stead. 2
 It is noticeable that the turnover of all six houses which we investigated
declined during 1762, indicating that they reduced the scale of their credit
operations before peace was proclaimed. With the exception of De Smeth,
who lost more than 400,000 guilders when De Neufville failed, they em-
erged from the crisis comparatively unharmed. 3

At this point, let us take a closer look at the Hope brothers. Soon after
1720, Archibald Jr. had moved to a house flanking the Herengracht and
situated near the Blauwburgwal. In 1726 he had married Geertruyd Rees-
sen, the daughter of a merchant in the Warmoesstraat. In the following
year, Thomas Hope had married Margareta Marcelis, the daughter of an
Amsterdam merchant and soap-boiler, and they, too, had settled on the
Herengracht, but 'beyond the Bergstraat.' They had one son, John. Tho-
mas's brother, Adrian, who was a bachelor, made his permanent home
with them.4
 In I7S8 Thomas purchased a house, with adjacent coach-house and
stables, situated on the Keizersgracht, near the Molenpad. This he ac-
quired from Mattheus Levestenon van Berkenrode, who at that time

                                    13
                      THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

represented the Republic in France. Thomas paid cf 83,000 for the house
and its contents. Shortly after the purchase he embarked on a programme
of alteration and expansion which was to occupy several years. The first
step was the acquisition of houses situated on the Prinsengracht and
backing on to Thomas's home. When he had acquired six of these, he had
them demolished and replaced by two large warehouses known as Kerk-
kroon A and B, which were used for storage and stabling. Wagons loaded
with goods entered the premises via a narrow street leading past the stables
and ending in an inner courtyard which had once been the garden of the
house on the Keizersgracht. 1
 It took until 1769 to obtain all the properties needed to make way for the
warehouses, and this fact alone indicates that the house must still have
handled a large volume of goods. The next step was to join the original
coach-house and stables to the house proper; this was probably done for
the benefit of Thomas's brother, Adrian.
  Conditions in the house on the Keizersgracht are revealed in the diary of
Bengt Fermer, a Swedish professor of astronomy who, in company with
the son of the wealthy Swedish manufacturer Lefebure, was touring
Europe. Thanks to Lefebure's business connexions, the two were invited
to dine with Thomas and Adrian Hope on a day in March 1759. When
the company had finished discussing the progress of the wars on the Con-
tinent and in America, and the activities of the English pirates, the conver-
sation tumed to the swarm of Dutch authors who, Thomas Hope com-
plained, were always trying to dedicate books to him in order to get
money out ofhim.2
  As one who depended upon the favours of the rich, Fermer was annoyed
by the ease with which Thomas Hope dismissed such authors as 'beg-
gars.' But he went on to remark that the Hopes were recognized as ex-
perts par excellence in mercantile matters and that both men, especially
Thomas, worked like slaves. The latter observation will not have been
meant as a compliment, but it does show once again that the 18th-century
merchant was not content to sit back and live on his capital.
  Fermer also noted that Thomas Hope was 'a director' of the Oost-Indi-
sche Compagnie. After the death of William IV in 1751, Thomas Hope had
relinquished the post of representative of the stadholder on the Board of
the West-Indische Compagnie, but in 1756 he was made a director of the
much more important Oost-Indische Compagnie. From 1766 to 1770 he
represented Stadholder William von the Board of this company, where, as
previously, his immense energy and drive soon made him the pivot about
 which everything revolved. He was the first and only person to attempt to

                                     14
                                                                    If ifI"    • t , •• :;.'   • '7($:·




                          Sir




        Srgn ..... r.
        be: r.bjamtJ at hu '<lom,) unJer our n<                     I atm. COIIIm"""'f: lhi d.y or
        II 0 P r. $: Comp>n~: tn whkh we pr <"1".1 rdi I and ««i" m'l be: ~rcn,
               fib!. or YOl" .'OTOUn mJ fnmdflup lu our It                    )11'0. ...
                                                                     p.er.me ..,
        ''''l"cll the                       all'lUlIll! lou lh'" "". llllol1 C!ld ,oun ..III be:
        cnl"h.-d to mer.                     Ini. tbern.
                                             \\ it.h "    •.crecL


                            ',.




            .....' ,•• r.II, ,'rllo.l\              trOPr..



Tlx S'"",     0( \',    J. II. .   '''I n   1.\    HOP I..



The • ><= 01'), ~I, Il             IIt'.·n        1I0PI




        Circular announcing the establishment of Hope & Co., 1762
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 devise a system of calculating cost prices within the Oost-Indische Com-
 pagnie.!
  Towards the end of the Seven Years' War, Thomas and Adrian Hope
 were joined in the firm by Thomas's son, John, and their American
 nephew Henry. Henry's father, it will be recalled, had emigrated to Boston
 round about 1730. In 1735 his wife bore him a son, and five years later a
 daughter, Henrietta Maria. Henry Jr. was sent to England at the age of
 thirteen to complete his education, and in 1754 he commenced his com-
 mercial career in the house of Gurnell Hoare & Co. of London, with
 whom the Amsterdam Hopes also were associated. 2 In 1760 he visited his
 uncles, and such was their opinion of him that he was invited to join the
 house. Indeed, they were so taken with their nephew that on 1st January
 1762 he and Thomas's son, John, were admitted to partnership of what
 was henceforth to be Hope & Co. In 1763 the property to the east of
 Thomas's house on the Keizersgracht was purchased, probably for Hen-
 ry's benefit. John meanwhile continued to live further along the canal. 3
  Of the two new partners, Henry Hope was the better known and without
 doubt the more able. He may be regarded as the successor to Thomas,
 although he was less of a public figure than his uncle. This was undoubt-
 edly related to his Anglo-American origin, as a result of which he will
 have identified himself far less with specific Dutch situations than his
 cousin, John. When, in the 1780s, contrasting political opinions flared up,
 Henry Hope observed that because of his civil status (he took no part in
 administrative affairs) he was not obliged to take sides, and that he there-
fore maintained strict neutrality in his actions in Amsterdam. 4
  Like Thomas, Henry Hope had pro-Orange sympathies-which he made
no attempt to hide-but as an outsider he felt no compulsion to drain the
cup of political engagement. Such polarization was not in keeping with his
character, which is described to us as 'singularly even, mild, engaging and
amiable.' Henry Hope was well known for his concern for his fellowmen,
a concern manifested in many ways including liberal donations to charity. 5
'None ever more perfectly realised the idea of a merchant prince, diligent
in gathering, delighted to distribute wherever he could find an object of
commiseration and this not thoughtlessly, on the impulse of the moment,
merely to relieve the unpleasant sensation of witnessing distress, but with
judgement and consideration for the improvement of the sufferer as well
as his immediate relief and with all the delicacy of a refined mind, which
led him to lessen as far as possible the weight of obligation when his quick
tact showed him that it would be oppressive.' 6
  A relative of the authoress of this glowing tribute experienced the extent
                                     16
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

of Henry Hope's mildness at first hand. A young Cornishman, John
Williams, worked as a clerk in a merchant house in Amsterdam. He be-
came seriously ill and, to make matters worse, did not receive the neces-
sary care at his lodgings. News of his plight reached Henry Hope, who
immediately took action to assist him, going so far as to have the sick man
transferred to his own house. He was so taken by his compatriot-for so
must Henry Hope have regarded him-that Williams continued to live in
the Hope household.
  Henry Hope's sister, Henrietta Maria, had married in 1762. Her hus-
band was John Goddard, an English merchant in Rotterdam. Their
eldest daughter, Anne, was the apple of Henry's eye, and he contrived
a plan which ended in his niece marrying his protege, John Williams,
in 1782. Simultaneously, the latter was made a partner of Hope & Co. l
Out of gratitude to his benefactor, he added the name Hope to his own
surname.
 John Williams Hope is described to us as a 'desk man' who ran the office
precisely and with pleasure. He was not a dynamic, enterprising mer-
chant, however, and the manner in which he acquiesced in the otherwise
well-intentioned arrangements made by Henry Hope is suggestive of a
measure of docility. His wife, Anne, possessed the qualities which he
lacked, and according to the stories resembled her uncle both inwardly
and outwardly. For a woman with such a strong character, it is not sur-
prising that a mariage de convenance ultimately proved to be too much.
 With the description of this remarkable episode, we have got somewhat
ahead of our story. We have still to concern ourselves with John Hope,
the second of the new partners admitted in 1762. In 1737 his father had
entered his name in the register of births of the Mennonite Community in
Amsterdam, and in doing so had shown that he had not completely
abandoned the Quaker sympathies which existed in his parental home.
Thomas Hope will therefore not have been a member of the Established
(Reformed) Church, and public offices will not have been open to him.
But in 1756 John, then aged nineteen, was baptized in the English Presby-
terian Church in Amsterdam, probably in preparation for membership of
that Church. As the English Presbyterian Church was recognized by the
Netherlands Reformed Church on a basis of equality, the way to public
office lay open for John Hope. 2 With his marriage in 1763 to Philippina
Barbara van der Hoeven, the daughter of a member of the Vroedschap of
Rotterdam, he took the first step towards membership of the regency
class. In 1768, at the intercession of William Y, he was made a member of
the Vroedschap of Amsterdam. In all probability he benefited here from

                                    17
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

his father's close ties with the stadholder. By now, John Hope had entered
upon a process of aristocratization which was gradually alienating him
from the everyday affairs of the firm. Lagging appreciably behind his
cousin Henry in mercantile skill, he sought satisfaction in official po-
sitions and a seigneurial style of living. In 1770, he succeeded his father as
a director of the Oost-Indische Compagnie. In 1767 he purchased the
Groenendaal estate near Heemstede, to which the adjoining Bosbeek
estate was added in 1784. Plans to erect new buildings on the land were
thwarted by his death in the same year, but these were subsequently imple-
mented by his widow. 1
  In 1774 John Hope acquired Nederhorst den Berg Castle, which lay
amid the Ankeveen lakes, near Hilversum, and with it the right to the
title 'Master of Nederhorst den Berg.' In Amsterdam, he had assumed
occupation of the family home in 1772, but in 1782 he moved again, this
time to a house on the Herengracht. In the same year he bought 'a house
and adjoining property known of old as Het Tapijthuis' situated on the
north side of the Korte Voorhout in The Hague. His duties as Delegate
Councillor of Amsterdam in the States of Holland and his connexion
with the Stadholder's Court will have influenced this purchase. 2 With this
widely scattered property, his life became one of continuous travel from
one seat to another, a nomadic existence which was common among the
English nobility and was reflected in John Hope's travel plan for his
illustrious Scottish relative, with which this chapter opened.
  Henry Hope and his relatives in Amsterdam had meanwhile applied
themselves to the business, and had achieved some notable successes.
From 1765 to 1772, the firm's turnover with the Exchange Bank comfort-
ably exceeded the record levels attained during the Seven Years' War.
Between 1768 and 1772, the annual figure was of the order of fifty million
guilders, with a peak of more than sixty-five million in 1769. With the
exception of De Smeth, the other houses also achieved higher turnover
after 1764, but they failed by a substantial margin to match their wartime
maxima. Only Muilman and Hogguer, who had profited little if at all
from the wartime conditions, achieved a substantially higher figure after
1765 than during the Seven Years' War.
  Although commodity trading in Amsterdam began to recover after 1765,
the spectacular growth of Hope's turnover with the Exchange Bank must
be attributed solely to their considerably enlarged share of the money
trade in all its forms. The house had gained experience during the Seven
Years' War, and it clearly succeeded in making use of this in the post-war
era. At this time also, the house commenced to issue loans for foreign

                                     18
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

powers, but its activities in this field were not of such magnitude as to
 constitute an explanation for the sharp increase in turnover with the Ex-
 change Bank.
  Hope & Co. was not the first house to issue loans, nor was it the only one
to engage in this activity. Loans had been entered into in the Republic
during the 17th century, mostly at the request of foreign monarchs and
with guarantees provided, from political motives, by the States General.
At first, many such loans were issued by collectors of taxes, but with the
passing of time they proved to be less than well-suited to the role of
bankers, if only because the sums required became steadily larger. 1
  A second line developed directly from the mercantile sector, in which a
number of houses succeeded in obtaining a monopoly of the sale of cer-
tain articles. When a ruler who had granted a monopoly ran into serious
financial difficulty, he would demand larger and longer-term advances on
the sale of the article concerned. If the burden of these advances became
too great, the house which held the monopoly could at a given moment
resort to issuing a debenture loan, and in doing so exchange the role of
merchant for that of banker.
  A good example of this is provided by the Amsterdam house Deutz,
which in 1659 secured a monopoly of the sale of Austrian quicksilver.
When, during the wars against Louis XIV, the German emperor faced a
financial crisis, a number of loans were issued on the security of quick-
silver. These commenced in 1695 and were initially guaranteed by the
States General because it was in Holland's interest to ensure that the
emperor had the funds to pursue the war against the French. When hos-
tilities ceased in 1715, however, the guarantee was withdrawn. 2
  The next step was to divorce the loan from the delivery of a given article,
and instead to require as security a number of specified sources of revenue
accruing to the ruler. This applied to two loans, totalling six million
guilders, issued by Deutz on behalf of the German emperor in 1734 and
1736, the security for which consisted of revenues from Silesia. This de-
velopment, however, did not preclude loans on the security of quicksilver
or another article being negotiated concurrently or subsequently. Mixed
forms also occurred, as will become clear in the chapter describing the
Portuguese diamond loan. 3
  Later still, loans carrying guarantees given by another power appeared.
This arrangement would be applied in the case of a country with a doubt-
ful financial status, which for political reasons received support from
another, e.g. the loan to Poland which was guaranteed by Russia. 4
As far as can be ascertained from the information at our disposal, Hope's

                                     19
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

activities in this field commenced in 1768 with the issue of a loan of cf
750,000 on behalf of Sweden. The chapter which deals with that country
shows that the affair originated with a request by the riksdag that the king
should arrange a loan abroad. In the period up to the end of 1787, Hope
& Co. issued twelve loans on behalf of Sweden, totalling cf 14,500,000. In
1769 the Company issued a loan of cf 250,000 on behalf of Count Louis of
Nassau-Saarbriick. In 1771 the house assisted the Elector of Bavaria with
a loan of cf 400,000 at 4 % interest, for which the Bavarian crown jewels
served as security.!
  A distinctive variant of the loans which had developed from trade was
manifested in the so-called plantation loans, for which plantations in the
Caribbean-which in this context covered the West Indian islands and also
the coastal area of Guiana-served as security. In the majority of cases, the
underlying contract stipulated that all the produce of the plantation
should be shipped to the issuer of the loan-who was known as 'the di-
rector' -so that the proceeds could be used first and foremost for the
payment of interest and principal. 2
  Hope & Co. were concerned in loans to planters on the Danish West
Indian islands of St. Croix, St. Thomas and St. John. In 1768 the house of
Lever & De Bruine had placed a loan, identified by the letter A, on behalf
of planters on all three islands and a second, similar loan, identified by the
letter B, on behalf of planters on St. Croix only. These were probably for
the benefit of planters who had got into serious financial difficulties as a
result of a tornado which had caused damage estimated at more than one
million pounds sterling on St. Croix alone. The management of these loans
was subsequently transferred to Hope. It may be assumed that this
change reflected the close relationship which then existed between the
Company and the Danish Court, and which in turn explains the special
ties with the Danish West India Company.3
  Hope & Co. also managed a number of loans to planters on the British
West Indian islands of Grenada and Tobago. Under a special law passed
in England, foreign bondholders, in the event of non-payment, were en-
titled to apply to a British court for an order for the sale of the mortgaged
plantation. To the greater reassurance of Dutch investors, the payments of
interest and principal on these loans were guaranteed by a London house. 4
  In spite of guarantees of this sort, bondholders will all too often have had
cause to regret their choice of investment. The planters were easy-going
and thriftless, and overproduction, delay in shipment or other setbacks all
too soon led to debts. In some cases, the upshot was that the creditors
took over a plantation-and with it the attendant commercial risks. We

                                     20
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

shall see how, in the Napoleonic era, Hope & Co. inherited problems of
this nature.

A fresh economic crisis in 1772 brought an abrupt end to Hope's record
levels of turnover with the Exchange Bank. The cause of the upset lay in
England, where the ending of the Seven Years' War had been followed by
lively speculation in shares of the British East India Company. But the
high expectations of dividends, which had done much to encourage the
speculation, were not fulfilled. At the end of the war, the East India Com-
pany was obliged to extend its administrative apparatus to cover a far
greater area than before, a task for which it was ill-equipped in both
organizational and financial terms. By 1772 the company's debt to the
Bank of England reached the point where further credit was withheld. At
about the same time, the Bank of England, faced with roaring speculation
in goods and shares, restricted the discounting of drafts. 1
  When news of the East India Company's plight became known in Lon-
don, its shares declined in value, to be followed shortly afterwards by
other issues. In the commodity sector, the disclosure put an end to the
steady rise in prices.
  On the heels of these developments came the sudden bankruptcy of the
London house of Neale & Co. It transpired that one of the partners,
Alexander Fordyce, had on his own initiative speculated with the firm's
capital. Fordyce fled to France, and in the wake of his disappearance
twenty other London houses failed.
  Speculation in English shares was just as rife in Amsterdam, and ac-
ceptance credit there was just as overstrained. The house of Clifford &
Sons had indulged so rashly in bull speculations that it was obliged to sus-
pend payments at the end of 1772, ruining a number of smaller firms in
the process. In 1773 Andries Pels & Sons went into liquidation, partly, it
was said, as a result oflosses suffered through Clifford's downfall. 2
  Hope & Co. were involved financially in Neale's bankruptcy. The part-
ners had done a lot of business with Alexander Fordyce, and this had
included advancing him monies in association with Gurnell Hoare &
Harman of London. A sum of fifty thousand pounds sterling was out-
standing when Neale & Co. failed. In addition, Hope had under-
taken commissions for Fordyce on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange,
involving dealings for the account in shares of the British East India
Company.
  When the Hopes heard that Fordyce had levanted, they did not await
instructions from the receivers but proceeded to liquidate his forward

                                    21
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

deals. By writing off the proceeds against their claims on Fordyce, they
succeeded in keeping their losses within reasonable limits.!
  Although the Company came through the crisis well, it suffered from the
aftermath. The turnover with the Exchange Bank plummeted from more
than 50 million guilders in 1772 to 30 million in 1773, thus falling beneath
the lows established in 1764 and 1765. It is remarkable that the figures
should have remained at this low level, climbing to 38 million only in
1779. The levels of turnover achieved in the 1760s, after the Seven Years'
War, were thus by no means equalled during the ensuing decade.
  It is not possible to draw comparisons with Pels and Clifford for the
177os. Hogguer's turnover in this period was generally lower, although
the differences were less significant than those applying to Hope. De
Smeth and Muilman achieved a higher level of turnover in the 1770S than
in the preceding decade, the former by a margin of 9-10 million guilders
annually. In assessing these figures, however, it must be borne in mind
that the 17605 were exceptionally unfavourable from De Smeth's point of
view. It is possible that the firm's share in the issuing of loans for Russia
during the succeeding decade tipped the scales.
  It is not easy to pinpoint the cause of Hope's lagging turnover. It is
known that the crisis of 1772 had a more lasting effect upon the economy
than the crisis of 1763. The scarcity of credit also impeded commodity
trading, and it was not until 1775 that the curve commenced to rise. Ifwe
proceed from the premise that Hope's high turnover figures in the 1760s
stemmed principally from financial operations, it is conceivable that the
decline in the '70S reflected the diminution of activities in that sphere. One
thing is certain: the crises of 1763 and 1772 undermined Amsterdam's
position as the centre for billbroking. With its superior credit organiza-
tion, London gained ground at the expense of Amsterdam, which had
neither a central bank nor deposit banks. 2
  The rise in the number of foreign loans issued is also indicative of a
decline in exchange dealings. The effect of this was to release money, for
which other forms of investment were sought. For Hope & Co. and their
correspondents, a decline in mercantile or credit operations automatically
led to increased activity in the loan sector. 3
  The loans issued by Hope & Co. in the 1770s included those for Sweden
to which reference has already been made, and which between 1770 and
 1780 totalled 6 million guilders, and one of cf 2,625,000 for the Republic
of Poland, which was negotiated in 1777; the latter is described in detail
elsewhere in this book.4 The loans to planters in Tobago and Grenada
also belong to this period.

                                     22
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

As we are about to concern ourselves increasingly with Hope's loan ac-
tivities, it is of value to look more closely into the technique developed by
the house over the years.
  Firstly, there is the manner in which Hope and the borrowers came into
contact. It is probable that the house's entree to the sphere of loans to
governments resulted from its own initiatives, since this was an area in
which it had yet to earn a reputation. Later, the approach in many cases
came from the borrower, but the Company continued to deploy initia-
tives. In the case of Russia, Hope succeeded in supplanting De Smeth as
the issuing house by assisting the Russian Court Banker at a crucial
moment, thereby getting him on their side. 1
  The loan negotations were usually conducted in Amsterdam, the mon-
arch in question being represented by his envoy or by a special represen-
tative armed with the necessary authority. When agreement was reached,
the loan sum, the interest rate, the loan period, the securities, the repay-
ment periods and the commission due to the issuing house were embodied
in a contract. This was subject to the approval, by decree, of the monarch,
who then signed a principal debenture in which, having set out the under-
taking to the lenders in the matter of interest and principal payments, he
declared himself officially to be the debtor for the full sum of the loan.
Upon receipt of the principal debenture, the house concerned could em-
bark upon the issue of the bonds, which were usually of cf 1,000. All loans
entered into in the Netherlands carried the stipulation that interest and
principal should be paid in that country and in guilders Hollands Cou-
rant. The latter provision meant that bondholders were not affected by
fluctuations in rates of exchange-a decidedly important point in view of
the fact that debasing of the currency and inflation were common phe-
nomena in the countries which sought capital.
  It was customary for British and French loans to be issued in those
countries. Interested Dutch investors could purchase bonds of these loans
either in the country of issue or through a house in Amsterdam. 2 But then
these were countries with a certain reputation for creditworthiness and a
well-developed economy, which were thus in a stronger position vis-a.-vis
the lenders.
  Other countries chose Dutch houses for the issue of their loans in order
to enhance their credit standing. Most of these were countries in which
capital formation was non-existent or, at most, in its infancy. They had a
predominantly agricultural, often feudal structure in which the land-
owning nobility, usually under the protection of an absolute monarch,
was omnipotent. Generally speaking, the middle class was small and polit-
ically powerless.
                                     23
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

The majority of the countries in this category were situated in the 'outer
zone' of Europe. They included Sweden, Russia, Poland, Austria, a num-
ber of large and small German states, Spain and Portugal. The young
United States, a pioneer country with a matching hunger for credit, was
a special case, but there, too, the capital formation was inadequate to
meet the demand.
  On the one side stood those abroad who sought capital, and on the other
the Dutch capitalists who, because of the relative fall in the volume of
trade and the fact that the Amsterdam exchange market had passed its
zenith, were having difficulty in finding suitable objects for investment.
The role of an issuing house lay in bringing the parties together through
the medium of a loan. The task of actually mobilizing capital in Holland,
however, did not fall to the issuing house, but to other, usually smaller,
houses which were concerned with selling the bonds. A special broker was
in turn engaged to induce these houses to subscribe a given portion of the
loan sum-a form of underwriting as we now know it in the world of
marine insurance. The names of Ten Kate, Volckmar and Berck, who ful-
filled this role, appear on numerous occasions in connexion with the loans
issued by Hope & Co. In many cases, two or three such brokers were en-
gaged, their joint services being rewarded with a certain percentage (usu-
ally t %) of the sum subscribed.!
  In the Hope correspondence, these underwriters are referred to as entre-
preneurs. While it is realized that this may cause confusion, the title has
deliberately been retained: 'stockbrokers' could be equally misleading,
for the entrepreneurs included merchant houses of substance which on
other occasions acted as issuing houses. For example, Weduwe E.Croese
& Co., who were among the entrepreneurs in the majority of loans issued
by Hope & Co., themselves issued loans on behalf of Spain. Similarly,
Pieter Stadnitski issued loans on the security of America's domestic debt,
while Abraham and Dirk van Vloten acted as trustees for a number of
American loans. Nor was there a clear dividing line between brokers and
entrepreneurs. The brokers repeatedly subscribed to loans which they had
helped to arrange, partly for their own account and partly on behalf of
others. 2
  Up to the time of the French invasion of 1794, the number of contract-
ing entrepreneurs per loan continued to rise. In 1780 there were eight, but
in 1792, when a loan was floated for Spain, there were thirty-two. The
majority, having once participated, continued to do so. Of the eight in
1780, five were still subscribing to loans in 1792. The increase in the num-
ber of houses which engaged in entrepreneurial activities, in this sense,

                                    24
                                                                    · ,,·.;nrr('t _




                                                                         .f . c
                                                                         ,;..,
                                                                         .$0.000
                                                                         /00.000
                                                                         100. QtJtJ
                                                                          ).'-01)0
                                                                         MO.




Part of the entrepreneurs' contract relating to the 8th Russian loan of May 1790
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

clearly reflects the growing importance to Holland's mercantile houses of
the business of floating new issues. Following the French invasion, the
volume of this business declined, and with it the number of entrepreneurs:
in 1807 only four or five subscribed to the loans which Hope & Co. issued.
  Most entrepreneurs-32 of the 42 known to us from contracts-lived in
Amsterdam. The remainder hailed from smaller towns in the provinces of
Holland and Utrecht, such as Rotterdam, The Hague, Leiden, Haarlem
and Utrecht itself.l The principal market for bonds relating to the loans
issued by the Company will thus have comprised the three western prov-
inces of the Netherlands. Merchant houses elsewhere in the country-and
abroad-ordered bonds from Hope, either directly or through business
associates in Amsterdam. We have already referred to the role of the bro-
kers in this context. The Company counted the Austrian-controlled region
of Brabant among its most important markets outside the Republic.
  When the prospect of a new issue arose, Hope lost no time in ascertain-
ing, via the brokers, which of the entrepreneurs would be willing to partic-
ipate. It often happened that the contract with the entrepreneurs was
signed simultaneously with the loan contract, or very shortly afterwards.
In the case of the Polish loan of 1786, the contract with the entrepreneurs
actually preceded the loan contract.
  If the entrepreneurs judged the times to be unfavourable, they reduced
their shares, leaving the issuing house to shoulder a larger portion of the
burden. In such a situation, there was, of course, little likelihood of the
issuer giving an explicit guarantee that the loan would be fully subscribed.
But the reverse could also apply: if the issuing house felt that the circum-
stances were conducive to a quick sell-out, it could reserve a larger pro-
portion of the loan for itself. 2
 Entrepreneurs' contracts usually contained a clause stipulating that the
apportionment of the loan to the entrepreneurs would be preceded by the
opening of a public subscription list at the offices of the issuing house. The
sum thus subscribed was deducted pro rata from the portions allocated to
the entrepreneurs, the douceur of t %or t %granted to public subscribers
being deducted from the entrepreneurs' commission. If the entrepreneurs
felt that they could place more bonds than they had contracted to take,
they could always obtain the balance by way of the public list, and thus at
least earn the douceur.
 The rate of commission granted to the entrepreneurs was not high. Up to
1789, it varied between I % and I t %; thereafter, as the contracts with
which we are familiar show, it rose to 2 %. This increase probably indi-
cates a strengthening of their position as intermediaries. But even 2 % was
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

not overly generous, particularly if one considers that, in order to reach
the ultimate investors, it was often necessary to employ middle men, who
also demanded their reward. The entrepreneurs therefore had to rely upon
the volume of their turnover in bonds, and accordingly they aimed not
only at the moyen peuple, but also at the small saver. Some contracts prov-
ided for such widely spaced instalments by the entrepreneurs that these
extended beyond the date at which interest on the allocated bonds com-
menced to be paid. This could mean a small bonus for the entrepreneurs,
and in the vast majority of instances Hope willingly granted this.
  Hope's own commission-from which all other expenses had to be met-
was naturally higher than that accorded to the entrepreneurs, but was sub-
ject to wide fluctuation. especially in the '70S and '80S. In the case of the
Swedish loans, it ranged from 4 % to 91 %.1
  Why a lower rate of commission was granted at a given moment, is not
clear. An obvious assumption is that an abundant money market, in
which a loan could be easily placed, tended to produce a lower commis-
sion -always provided that the borrower was aware of the state of the
market. In return for a high commission on the Swedish loans, the Com-
pany was required to guarantee their success. 2 A demand for such a guar-
antee was normally made only if the borrower was extremely short of
funds, or if conditions on the money market were less favourable; in ei-
ther case, a guarantee was costly by reason of the borrower's weak posi-
tion. It was customary for an issuing house to require a courtage for hand-
ling payments of interest and principal; this was in addition to the nor-
mal commission. For interest payments, the rate varied from 1 % to 1 % of
the sum paid out, and for principal payments it was usually r %. The Rus-
sian Court was only prepared to pay Hope a commis~ion of 5 % on its
loans, but subsequently allowed itself to be persuaded to raise this to
61 % on condition that the courtage was included. A similar arrangement
was stipulated for the great conversion in 1798.3
  The loan contracts entered into prior to 1794 provided for Hope & Co.
to take over the loans at par. In a few instances, the entrepreneurs were
permitted to pay for their bonds 'at 99 % free money,' which implied a
profit of I % if, as was clearly intended, they sold them at par. After 1790,
however, contracts with the entrepreneurs stipulated a minimum selling
price. At first this was 98i%, but in 1792 it rose to 991%-probably on
account of the abundance of capital in that year. It had apparently be-
come the custom to sell below par, and Hope was anxious to put a stop to
this.4
In the Napoleonic area, takeovers at par could not be sustained. The
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

majority of the older loans had fallen in price, and new ones had to be
competitive if they were to appeal to the investors. Accordingly, the Por-
tuguese loan of 1802 and the Spanish and Neapolitan loans of 1807 were
taken over at 90 %.1
  Like the transfer price, the rate of interest was an important factor.
Apart from the obvious financial advantage to the borrower, a low inter-
est rate possessed status value: it was a symbol of a country's credit-
worthiness. It was consequently a personal triumph for Baron Liljen-
crantz, the Minister of Finance under Gustav III, when, in 1775, he
achieved a reduction of the interest on a Swedish loan from five per cent
to four. Conversely, Poland's poor credit standing was reflected in the
fact that she was obliged to pay 5 % for loans in 1777 and 1786, while in
those years Sweden paid only 4 %and 41 %respectively. 2
  Russia also set great store by equality with other powers in the matter of
interest on loans. When Hope & Co. first issued loans on behalf of Russia,
the Court, while consenting to an extra 1 % for douceurs sous mains, was
adamant that the interest should not exceed 4 %. When the Company
raised the rate on its own initiative, it was able to avoid a dispute by
pointing to the success of the loan in comparison with one of 4 % for
Austria, which had not got off the ground. Moreover, Hope pointed out,
douceurs sous mains might well have tempted the entrepreneurs to sell
below par, and that would have been highly injurious to Russia's credit
standing. 3
  In addition to the prestige and creditworthiness of the borrower, the
level of funds available on the market also played a part in determining
the interest rate. The loans issued by Hope & Co. between 1767 and 1792
bore interest at rates of between 4 % and 5 %, but even this variation was
sufficient reason for a government to keep a very close watch on the
money market in Amsterdam, and to grasp any and every opportunity to
convert old, high-interest loans into new ones and thus benefit in terms of
its interest burden. One example ofthi& was provided by Sweden, which in
 I780 converted a number of 5 % loans into 4 % issues. Another came in
 I792 when Russia, having induced De Wolf in Antwerp to make an offer,
used this as a lever to force Hope to effect an identical conversion on her
behalf. Sweden performed a similar balancing act, with Hasselgreen &
Co. on one side and Fizeaux Grand & Co. and Hope & Co. on the other,
and succeeded thus in avoiding overdependence on either. 4
  With the French invasion, the flow of capital diminished and interest
rates gradually rose. In I802 Portugal succeeded in obtaining a loan at
5 %, but by I805 Spain had to pay 51 %, as she was again obliged to in
                       THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

 1807. In that year, the loans for Naples and the Kingdom of Holland
 were issued at 6 %, although this was purely nominal since the takeover
 price was of the order of 90. If the issuing house and the entrepreneurs suc-
ceeded in selling bonds at a higher price, the profit was theirs-a specu-
 lative element which certainly possessed attractions.
  A conversion could also have attractive speculative aspects, especially if
it related to old loans which stood low on the Stock Exchange. This is
illustrated by the great Russian conversion of 1798, which embraced a
 number of loans to the Republic of Poland, its ruler and several Polish
magnates, on which neither interest nor principal had been paid for many
years. By buying up the bonds prudently and in good time, the partners of
 Hope & Co. made a huge profit. According to the agent of Prussia, Nie-
buhr, the partners admitted having made six million guilders, but he
believed that the true sum was considerably greater.!
  The Spanish loan of thirty million guilders floated in 1807 similarly af-
forded opportunities for speculative profit on the conversion of old, low-
priced Echenique bonds. But Spain's financial predicament, coupled with
political developments in the country, produced an early drop in the
market quotation for the new bonds, making them difficult to sell. 2
  Hope & Co. viewed a measure of speculation in bonds as an aid to sales;
but excessively large or rapid fluctuations in quoted prices were undesir-
able and could bring the issue into disrepute. It was with this in mind that
Labouchere watched with anxiety the bear speculation on the Russian
bonds following Napoleon's invasion of Russia, the principal victims of
which were small investors who lived from their dividends. Major price
falls were in general pernicious, for they could erode the prestige of bor-
rower and issuer alike, and frighten the respectable investor to death. 3 In
1793 Hope & Co. felt it their duty to purchase Russian bonds in order to
support the price, thereby giving investors the certainty of being able to
encash their Russian holdings from day to day without incurring losses. 4
  In some cases, instructions for support-buying came from the govern-
ment concerned. When the price recovered, the bonds so purchased were
disposed of at a profit. In addition to the economic motive, considerations
of prestige will certainly have played a part in such actions. A significant
fall in the price of an issue was a blow to the credit standing of the govern-
ment, and could adversely affect the placing of subsequent loans.
  The prestige element was also of importance to the issuing house. Al-
though its role, once the loan had been fully subscribed, was limited to
the payment of interest and principal, the house regarded it as a point of
honour to ensure that the conditions of the loan were complied with. The

                                     29
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

name of Hope & Co. constituted a guarantee for the borrower that the
loan wuuld be fully subscribed, and for the investor that the terms on
which it was effected would be scrupulously adhered to. Thus, the Com-
pany's code of ethics and its business interests compelled it to stand up
for the bondholders in all cases where the payment of interest or principal
was imperilled. To this end, partners in the firm, or their confidential
agents, made repeated visits to Russia and other distant places, primarily
in order to defend the interests of bondholders. During the history of the
Portuguese loan, no effort was spared to safeguard the interest and prin-
cipal instalments, while in the case of Spain these payments were financed
for as long as possible from the proceeds of the Mexican silver trans-
action. 1
  Hope & Co. also saw it as their duty to stand up for other houses. When
a government which had defaulted in regard to previous loans approached
the Company for a new one, it was required to set right its default before
negotiations could proceed. This is plainly demonstrated in the Company's
handling of the Spanish loan of 1807, when, after long insistence, it
succeeded in getting the outstanding Echenique bonds converted. 2 During
his journey to Russia in 1797-98, Robert VOllte acted on behalf of a
number of other houses, and such was the success which he achieved that
Hope was requested to take up the cudgels for the holders of Austrian
bonds when, in the early 1800s, the government of that country central-
ized payments against its loan in Vienna, and proceeded to effect these in
depreciated paper money. Two journeys to Vienna for this purpose were
rendered fruitless by the prevailing circumstances, but a third, undertaken
by Pierre Cesar Labouchere in 1818, brought the long-awaited rehabili-
tation of the Austrian loans.
 The relationship between the issuing house and the borrower govern-
ment forms a quite separate facet of the business of floating loans. This
was always a delicate relationship. Mter all, nearly all the monarchs
concerned were absolutists, and sometimes even despots, who were accus-
tomed to recruiting their ministers and senior civil servants from among
the nobility. In their kingdoms, the middle-class citizen was a second-
rate figure who, as a provider of funds to the Court and those who sur-
rounded it, might occasionally be raised to the rank of nobleman, but
even then continued for long to be regarded as a parvenu.
  On the other hand, however, the monarch's position vis-a.-vis the house
was one of a supplicant, and this implied a measure of weakness. Before
the loan which he desired was placed, there were down-to-earth questions
to be answered concerning the value and dependability of the securities

                                    30
            D.      Ol1d<yttl.obnd<ll i. • .... W";jk••p d", . ,,:,,, SeptOlDbe, ,812 go ."dr. bii-
            eeukonu.t van Geiote.reueetdrni in de. eIQIi.atie ten lut~ nil bd Ru.uiHCh Kei·
            senijk, ten Comploire \"an do llen-m HOPE &. c·. KCvestigd I mel tn benenDJ mj-
            len de. Boc,' WJl.LElI BORSKI """81." """ .... d, om d...... H.. m> UOPJo: & Co.
            Ol'"f"r de IIjrmeene bdaogcns der GeiDte.~rdCln Ie "diecml. hcbbto IJel ~f"DOt'Ien
            &<had t. ,",up o.dtrrindtm . dol d...... beWlIl"'-' doo, , ..... Id. U..... HOPE & Co.
            lJle.t ondlcbrokm ijv~r eD -wrga: IijD pdo gabgen en bnoNr:N. hi dar de Groot..
            moedi&1> .-.g1 ••lI\ligh.id ..... Z1JNE MAJESTEJ.T DEN KEIZER VA IIU !.A:-'D
            da.e Gtldluning h8en lerug gchragl in allr hire rqleD . met eene \'t:I"£"d&ng 't'OOt
            den .tililand diann doar dt pubticke onutaadi&hcdlCn o»utaan.
                 Bij dele. Itlukkige uii.kolDJ l n.n 1.UkrA hcbben de Ondel1clrekrndrn ni t uit
            btl oog mogen nrlleze.1:I de oDko.lw door de Hcertn UOPE &. Co••. I in CD TOo'r het
            be11ng dar GeHl.ll!reueerdtt!.J grmaakt , en de nrpligtin8 no d(~en, om druly.
            olllko!lU!D iD eeoC! billijkc e.nPfedigbeid t~ dra£rn I ttrWij. de Ondt.l'Ktttekendm AS
            Tan de reg1maligc dtnkwijr.e del' bellDghebbenden bij '-oorrud TClUkml hielden .
            dl:t nimllnd lig zoude willen onUre""" un d~ &00 otlhvijfrolbure ,t"l'pligtiug Iu
            diel" uake op hem bct wlrndo , en 41111 Ond.rgetetkf'l\dtn lu~bbm uil dien hoofdo
            ....ftmeend bij tie flftttl\ HOPE & C9• .unvrail,&C O"CI" die enkellen Ie motten
            dotn I doeb dudt'o Heeren -Us d •• ror liD de' OndCfJet keDdm hebbtade SO'"
            lie,-en to \luklart'P. dl.. hotue.t huu die UDV",P un~num                      ""a..   ttl Ii;
               daltin n'let we:Igt'".. Utn btlllcrktea die encluenil HD £ houJroheid tot leha·
             c1tloos.tlellinl. "e1kc  00"        in publi..~e Gt'ldllo oliali"n op de    cin ltcmnordcDJ
            btlUlt, onureDt de Huu.en die Ilit:h in builtnle\~one om.unlli",bed~n en 0('
             ttne buittogcwono wij1:o mel de I Ddha,ml uer al.K,euletnc btlAn rnl lilt
             bewlf'll. 'l.ij Het'~n UOPE 6: C·. «blt'r, ten einde dunloor hunl1enijds bij
             t. dtGige:n , tot vetm«rderillll qn d~ ,,~ellenNenhC'IJ dC'r btul1&hehbtaldf':n " 001"
             lieu uitkonut un zJlktR. 'ftariD. de oogmerll.C'Q ".an den nrbClvC'n ~Innarch toO
             banblijkdij" Joontraaldt"D. om de llelanghtbhtnden 1.00 nd mogt:lijk kia.. Jtlc>OJ
             to ,!.tUtD n ot de \e:rlnsing I doot de buitt':Dsewane omltanl.li&hro,)tu tt w~ gf!-
             bra. t , iD bel oDde-marir gtf \ . e Eonde:r cODjequeatie op addrrco "',. n:n , ,oot
            hoi YerTol,. lIIid 'fn'koolfft feui            pplic:.li 'ftn huft, re t te malren. en mi.
            di.en .Ie OndlCtgeleekenden 1001" alle verde-to tuuc:btnkOmll dlUrtoe bohuktlijk ,
             dank betu1.s:,teD.
                  Zoo II . . n de. Ond«"rget'l'eendC"D I in de un bun opgrd,.~ene.          miqie. nieu
             .tldel'. Ie T"rriKIIM ovens IfJblee~ tn. dan om huane Commille.nten Yin htl bo-
             TWJlailDda bij ,Iezen kennis te ge .. en, en. un d~tv. lennI Ie '\trklUf'n I dat
            ai,    Ondcoflljtleeke.Bden die Commi.Plo thal1J houden \'OOr geheel .rgeloptD en W:t.
              eiode ge:bra&l..

                     A.nuttniDm I n     D"U7IW ,8.5.
                                                                J.   'YAJI   ua POLL.
                                                                C . ...      aD.   0   DERMEULEN.

                                                                l. BONDT.
                                                                l . .. BURL£TI'.
                                                                l . .... DO MA. DELE.




Final report of the representatives of the holders of Russian bonds, dated December
        [8[5. This states that Messrs.Hope decline the offer by the bondholders
                              to share in the costs incurred
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


  offered-and these could expose particular weaknesses in the system of
 government. Sometimes guarantees were demanded which struck at the
 dignity of a monarch. King Stanislaw Poniatowski, for example, refused
 for this reason to provide a guarantee by his heir, relating to the mort-
 gaging of the king's personal possessions. 1
   In correspondence and personal contact with ministers and senior civil
 servants, it was necessary to observe the existing rules of respect and even
 servility, yet at the same time to avoid excess subservience in order not to
 undermine one's own position. With his eminent amiability, Henry Hope,
 in particular, must have been a master in the art of balancing on a sharp
 edge. His action in declining the title offered to him by Empress Cathe-
 rine II in November 1789 must be viewed as an extremely refined way of
 showing that the Hopes preferred their citizenship to an obscure barony
 in one or other Eastern or Northern European country. The noble estate
 of the Scottish Hopes will certainly have influenced his decision. In this
 respect, too, the Hopes differed from the Hogguers, the De Smeths and
 the Hasselgreens. 2
   In their activities on behalf of absolute monarchs, Hope & Co. came in
 contact with intriguing cliques and Court cabals, which in many cases
 served to determine the course of government. The difficulties which this
produced are clear from the description of Robert Vo[lte's first sojourn
in Russia. 3 The conseq uences of a shift of power at the Court emerged
during Voute's second visit to that country, when, following the eclipse
of the wife of Paull, the Company had for many years to endure the
enmity of the head of the treasury.4 At the time of the Spanish affairs,
Hope suffered greatly from the trouble stirred up by a Spanish confiden-
tial agent in Paris, Izquierdo, who regarded Hope as a lackey of Napoleon
and equated the house with the speculator-financier Ouvrard. Izquierdo's
reports to Madrid repeatedly short-circuited communications between
Hope and the Spanish Court. 5
   In his way, Labouchere perpetuated Henry Hope's policy towards for-
eign Courts. His personal relationship with both French and Russian
ministers earned him a position which the Prefect of the Zuyder Zee
departement, De Celles, spitefully summed up as 'an unaccredited agent
of a foreign power.' 6 The amicable relationship between his brother-in-
law, Alexander Baring, and Sir Arthur Wellesley, later the Duke of Wel-
lington, gave Labouchere an excellent entree in England, a factor which
assisted him greatly in his peace mission on behalf of King Louis Napo-
leon. 7


                                     32
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 Having thus dealt at length with the numerous aspects of the role of an
 issuing house, let us turn to trade, and in particular to the nature of the
 organization and the various links which went to make up the chain.
According to a treatise which appeared at the beginning of the 19th
century, Dutch merchants could be divided into categories, the first com-
prising maritime traders, the 'first hand,' who were responsible for the
supply of wares to the Dutch market and who usually concentrated on
particular geographical areas, and the 'second hand' consisting of rich
merchants, specialists in particular commodities, who, by storing huge
stocks, fulfilled a buffer role between supply and sale. Exports were handled
by wholesalers, who distributed them in the various market areas. 1
  This picture earlier attracted criticism on the grounds that it was too
rigid and schematic, and that there was very little division of responsibili-
ties in the world of trade in the 18th century.
  For Hope & Co., as general merchants, this division was in any case of
minor importance, since the house combined all three functions. Nor was
there any question of specialization, geographical or in terms of merchan-
dise. Hope's commercial contacts embraced the whole of Europe and
north and central America, stretching from Archangel to Asia Minor. As
far as wares were concerned, it would be difficult to find an article in
which the house did not trade: money, grain, colonial produce, ship's
articles, gold, silver, diamonds, drysaltery, ordnance, textiles, tobacco,
tea, wine, flower bulbs; in short, anything which could be sold at a profit
was traded. 2
  Nevertheless, a distinction between first and second hands did exist:
Henry Hope himself employed these terms in l787, in his description of
the cochineal trade in Cadiz.3 It may be deduced from this that trade was
classified, but that the boundaries were neither sharply defined nor gener-
ally upheld. We encountered a similar situation when describing issuing
houses, entrepreneurs and brokers.
  As general merchants, the partners of Hope & Co. could not, of course,
be au fait with the situation in every area with which contact was main-
tained, or have detailed knowledge of every article in which the house
dealt. This know-how resided in the brokers, whose original role as inter-
mediaries in trade in specific articles was at times changed by Hope into
one of partners in a transaction. These men were regarded as indis-
pensable, as is evidenced by Henry Hope's remarks concerning Rouen,
where all transactions took place between merchants, a practice which
was costly in time and, according to Hope. demanded greater knowledge
of wares than the average merchant possessed. 4 Robert Voute, who had

                                     33
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

started out as a broker in coffee, tea and dyestuffs but, through his
personal friendship with the Hopes, had progressed beyond the role of
pure middleman, observed during his stay in Moscow that there were no
brokers there either, which fact put foreign merchants in an unfavourable
position. 1
  Foreign trade was fraught with risks, and houses which engaged in it
had to be on their guard not only against their associates abroad, but also
against the governments with which they had to deal. Most of the coun-
tries with which Hope & Co. were concerned were mercantilistic in their
trade policy, and their governments tended to protect their own mer-
chants against foreigners; this was especially true of the economically less
developed lands. The protection could take the form of reserving monop-
olies or specific areas of trade for indigenous houses, or of harassing
foreigners. The consequences of the latter policy were clearly demon-
strated to Robert Voute during his first period in Russia. 2
  Governments frequently failed to honour agreements entered into with
foreigners. In many cases this can be attributed to ill-will, for attitudes
towards strangers were in general grudging; but in others it is conceivable
that the Court or a particular minister simply did not have sufficient grip
on the often corrupt administrative apparatus. In Hope's case, the official
monopoly for the sale of Brazilian diamonds proved to be anything but
watertight, while the exclusive right to trade with the colonies in Spanish
America was soon breached for the benefit of Court favourites and high
officials. 3
  In its dealings with foreigners, too, the house frequently met with un-
pleasant surprises, and owing to the distances involved it was far more
difficult to react adequately to these than would have been the case had
another Dutch house been involved. In serious cases, the cause could lie
in embezzlement, as occurred with Alexander Fordyce, or the use of
funds for purposes other than those for which they had been entrusted.
The latter practice resulted in heavy losses for Hope when the house of
Sutherland at St.Petersburg went bankrupt in 1794. 4
  Less serious, but equally annoying, was the furnishing of partially or
wholly inaccurate trade information. In many instances, the cause lay in
ignorance rather than malice. Erroneous information concerning extant
stocks of cochineal was among the causes of the failure of Hope's specu-
lation in the article. The ideal solution lay in sending a trusted representa-
tive to collect information on the spot, but this could only be justified if
the transaction was large and involved a restricted area. In the ensuing
chapters of this book we shall find Hope & Co. employing such agents. 5

                                     34
                      THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

A commission having been placed with a foreign house, it remained to be
seen whether this was executed with appropriate enthusiasm and busi-
ness sense. It might involve purchase, as in the case of the cochineal
speculation, or selling, as in the case of Operation R.M. following Robert
Melvil's departure from Russia.! A lack of success could stem from lack
of drive or commercial acumen on the part of the correspondent, but it
could also result from a counterspeculation undertaken secretly by the
agent concerned, for his own benefit, which was given priority over the
commiSSIOn.
 The slowness of postal communications could also adversely affect busi-
ness, the more so where long distances were involved. Instructions issued
from Amsterdam on the basis of market information received there had
to complete the long journey back, and often a month passed before these
reached the correspondent. By this time, the market situation could have
changed so drastically that to implement them would have been valueless.
The effect of this situation was particularly marked during the cochineal
affa ir. 2
  Should the partners of a house such as Hope & Co. be regarded as
bankers? Opinions on this are divided. The crux of the matter lies in the
question whether a clear degree of specialization between merchants and
bankers had already manifested itself in the 18th century.3 Strangely
enough, while contemporary outsiders repeatedly referred to the Hopes as
bankers, the latter seldom if ever applied the term to themselves in their
correspondence. During the political troubles of 1787, Henry Hope ex-
pressly described himself as a merchant, not as a banker. 4 In the view of
the partners, exchange dealing and acceptance credit fell within the scope
of trade, and the issuing of loans did not lead to neglect of trading in
commodities; on the contrary, where possible the partners attempted to
combine trade deals with loan transactions. This mercantile approach to
loan business was to continue beyond the period dealt with in this book.
 Finally, in this context, we must examine the stature of the firms with
which Hope maintained contact, and the stature of the house itself.
Needless to say, solidity was a prerequisite for an association with Hope &
Co. For the outsider, however, it was difficult to establish the magnitude
of a firm's capital and how much of this was committed to transactions.
The higher the percentage available in cash or on demand, the greater
was the solidity of the house. But those on the outside could do no more
than guess. In many instances, outward signs served as a yardstick: a
luxurious style of living and dissoluteness in the private sphere were
regarded as signs of reduced solidity. Sobriety, a good family life, hard

                                    35
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

work, knowledge of the trade, prudence and reliability: these were the
hallmarks of the first-class merchant. Trading beyond the limit of one's
financial resources was regarded as a mortal sin. Financial capacity was
of course important, but was not the primary consideration. 1
  The amount of credit which could be allowed to a correspondent was of
great importance. In determining this, references were usually sought
from more than one house, and these were compared. This information,
together with the solidity characteristics already referred to, were entered
in separate books. If a change of partners occurred, information had
quickly to be obtained concerning the wealth and solidity of the new
member or members. Sometimes the death of a partner revealed weak-
nesses which were capable of bringing a house to the verge of bankruptcy.
With the death of the Hamburg merchant Martin Dorner, it transpired
that his affairs had been so neglected during his long illness that suspen-
sion of payments could not be averted. 2 When James Rowand, a partner
in the Moscow house of Thomson Rowand & Co., died in 1791, a seven-
year backlog in the bookkeeping was discovered, making it almost im-
possible to assess the solvency of the firm. 3 Clearly it was possible to
struggle on for years without actually coming to grief, and thus we may
assume that similar arrears also existed in houses whose affairs were to all
appearances in first-class order.
  Against this background, the punctiliousness of Hopes' bookkeeping
stood out well, and it explains the reputation of the house in this respect.
Twice a month, the daily entries in the journaal were transferred to the
appropriate account in the grootboek in accordance with the double-entry
system. At the end of the year, the credit or debit balances were entered
in the Balance Sheets, from which the Profit and Loss Account was
derived. The profit, or loss, was then divided among the partners in the
proportions laid down in the partnership agreement. Usually a substan-
tial portion of the profit was allocated to the firm's capita1. 4
  In thus describing Hope's exactitude in matters of accountancy, one runs
the risk of creating an undue impression that the partners were 'modern'
men. They lived in an era of mercantile capitalism which produced a
mentality differing from that which we know today. As the considerations
and motivations of the partners will repeatedly emerge in the following
chapters, mention of one or two specific points suffices here.
  In the correspondence at our disposal, where reference is made to the
writing off of losses on transactions, there is in no case any trace of a
deliberate attempt to calculate the loss as a more or less exact proportion
of the capital invested. The sums written off during the cochineal specu-
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

lation give the impression of having been arrived at arbitrarily. The expla-
nation for this probably lies in the abundance of capital in 18th-century
Holland, which made it difficult for the house to find productive in-
vestments for all its funds. Moreover, it was the custom for solid houses
to maintain substantial liquid assets which usually earned no interest. 1 It
is therefore probable that the loss of interest on invested capital was
viewed less seriously than it is today.
  It is also noticeable that the partners did not seek to make a profit at any
cost. Labouchere's admonition to Vincent Nolte, to place honour above
profit in establishing business contacts in the United States, is a brief but
unmistakable example. 2 This was not an empty gesture for the benefit of
the world outside, for Labouchere's instructions to Nolte were confiden-
tial. That he did not stop at words became clear when relations with the
house of Stephen Girard of Philadelphia were broken off following the
latter's discourtesy towards Hope. Nolte, who described the incident in
his autobiography, confessed that such a high sense of honour went too
far for him, and that he would have given preference to the material
advantage. 3 Labouchere and his co-partners were also patently relieved
when the detestable Michel the Younger finally went away, taking with
him his ill-gotten drafts on the Mexican treasury.4 This code of ethics in
no way precluded keenness in business matters, or the running of risks,
but the latter were always of a calculated nature and the margins set were
such as to rule out any real danger.
  But we digress. We were about to examine the fortunes of the house in
the 1780s. That period brought far-reaching changes in the partnership.
Thomas Hope had died in 1779, and his brother, Adrian, in 178I. It thus
became necessary to inject new blood into the firm, and to this end
Nicolas Bauduin, who had been in Hope's employ since 1765, and John
Williams Hope, whose acquaintance we have already made, were admitted
as partners on 4th July 1782. Their contracts ran for six years, commencing
on 1st January 1782, and were subject to one year's notice of termination.
One of the opening paragraphs contained the stereotyped sentence: 'that
the firm shall engage only in matters of commerce and commissions, and
not in any negotiations relating to deposited funds or similar trans-
actions.' This meant that outside capital would not be accepted. The
stipulation was probably made because the house was already finding it
difficult enough to keep its capital profitably invested. Later, too, con-
siderable reservations were exercised in regard to deposited funds, while
on current account interest a charge and a decharge was charged only
where large sums were involved, and even then with reluctance. 5

                                     37
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

A striking feature of the partnership contracts is the care taken to ensure
that the assembled capital remained within the firm. In these, the decease
of the partners in all conceivable sequences was anticipated, and the manner
in which the share of each in the capital was either to pass to the other
partners or could gradually be withdrawn by the deceased's heirs was laid
down.
  In the partnership deed of 1782, Henry Hope took a ·H-ths share in the
capital, John Hope a ~~ths share, and the other two partners a share of
966ths each. The sum of the capital at the end of 1782 was cf 8,731,205.0.0.
The ploughing-back of profits steadily increased this, with the result that
by 1794 it totalled cf 13.435,648.7.8.1
  With the death of John Hope in 1784, fresh arrangements became neces-
sary. John's sons, Thomas, Adrian Elias and Henry Philip, were still
minors, and Nicolas Bauduin had intimated his desire to retire from
business upon the expiry of his contract at the end of 1787. To ensure the
continuity of the house, J an Casper Hartsinck Cornelisz., a sheriff or schepen
of Amsterdam, was admitted as a partner. Pending Bauduin's retirement, he
was to have no share in the profits or losses, but would receive a salary
of cf 15,000 per annum. The partnership which thereupon commenced
was to be for a period of 14 years. Henry Hope's share of the capital was
 ~ ;jths, John Williams Hope's ·H-ths, John Hope's children's share -H-ths
and Hartsinck's 966ths, the portion with which John Williams Hope had
commenced in 1782. This contract, too, contained provisions relating to
inheritance and to the period for the withdrawal of shares. 2
  The contract, however, was short-lived. Nicolas Bauduin died of a stroke
in January 1787, and on 16th November 1789 Hartsinck resigned from the
house 'on account of accepting senior government posts,' a probable ref-
erence to his nomination to the Vroedschap of Amsterdam at the end of
 November 1787 when, following the intervention of a Pruss ian army in
Holland's domestic troubles, Prince William v dismissed a number of
Patriotic regents from the Vroedschap and replaced them by his support-
ers. Hartsinck was zealously pro-Orange, and had taken an active part in
 organizing those loyal to the prince. Evidently his new office occupied so
 much of his day that he had no time left for his duties on behalf of the
firm. Hartsinck received cf 500,000 from his co-partners by way of com-
 pensation, and was given the option of taking this in cash or in bonds at
 the price ruling on the day. He was obliged to leave the house which he
 rented from John Hope's widow, and this makes one wonder whether,
 apart from the demands of his position on the council, his resignation
 stemmed from differences of opinion with his colleagues. 3
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

In a convention entered into at this time, Henry Hope, John Williams
Hope and the widow of John Hope agreed to continue the house in the
manner prescribed in the event of Hartsinck's death. His share in the capi-
tal was divided among John Williams Hope and the three sons of John
Hope. The new situation was to become effective on 1st January 1790 and
run for the period originally stipulated in the contract with Hartsinck, i.e.
until the end of 180 I. 1
  The convention referred to the possibility of John Hope's son, Thomas,
taking an active part in the firm in due course; however, the surviving
correspondence contains no reference to Thomas's role and it must there-
fore be assumed that he was no more than a sleeping partner. Thomas
turned out to be a passionate collector of works of art and a connoisseur
of antique architecture, which he studied during his many journeys
through the Mediterranean countries. After eight years of travelling
about, he settled in Duchess Street, off Portland Place, in London, where
he displayed his collection of antiquities, which was as bizarre as it was
valuable, in a manner which may be described as ostentatious rather than
tasteful. 2
  With the description of this enthusiastic supporter of neo-classicism, we
have moved ahead of our story; nevertheless, it shows clearly why there
was little to be expected from this member of the family when it came to
the day-to-day business of the firm. So, despite all efforts, it had not
proved possible to fill the gap in the management which in fact had arisen
with the deaths of Thomas and Adrian Hope. This may well account part-
ly for the appearance in the 1780s of a man who was to head major specu-
lations in tea and dyes on behalf of Hope & Co. He was Robert Voute
- known to his friends as 'Little Bob' or 'Swarte Rob' - born the son of a
Huguenot emigre, Jean Jacques Voute, in Amsterdam in 1747. At the age
of twenty-four he entered his father's brokerage firm, which specialized in
dyes, coffee and tea. 3
  In 1785 and the years which followed, Robert Voute co-ordinated large-
scale speculations in tea and indigo undertaken by Hope. The houses of
Thomas Littledale in Rotterdam, and Harman Hoare & Co. and John and
Francis Baring & Co. of London were also concerned in these. 4 The co-
chineal speculation, in which Hope & Co. also availed themselves of Ro-
bert Voute's services, is described in detail in this book. The mercantilistic
intervention of governments in the economic life of their countries fa-
voured monopoloid operations of this nature. At the end of 1792 Robert
Voute withdrew completely from the house which bore his name, in order
to have time for his hobby, the study of the economy, and for journeys on
behalf of Hope & Co.
                                      39
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

The leadership which the house needed was to be forthcoming from a
young man who entered Hope's employ in 1790. Pierre Cesar Labouchere,
the son of a Huguenot cloth merchant, was born in The Hague in 1772.
While working in his uncle's merchant house in Nantes, he rapidly distin-
guished himself to a degree which led his uncle to recommend him to
Henry Hope as a clerk. The latter engaged him, and was so impressed
with his achievements that after three years he gave Labouchere power of
procuration. When the partners moved to England, the day-to-day man-
agement of affairs was to rest with him. 1
 Labouchere's contacts with John and Francis Baring & Co. were also to
prove of great value for the future. The earliest transactions with this
house dated from before 1770, but it was only with the joint speculations
that the parties became well acquainted. The Barings almost certainly had
their roots in Groningen, in the northern part of the Netherlands. An
early ancestor was a Lutheran minister in Bremen, from whence he moved
to London. One of his sons, John, opened a cloth mill in Devonshire. Of
the ensuing generation, two sons, John and Francis, moved to London,
where they bought raw materials for their father's mill and also sold the
products of it. Gradually, however, the house dissociated itself from the
family business, and by the beginning of the 19th century it had become
one of the most important in its field. 2
 Legend has it that the transactions with Hope laid the foundation for
Baring's later greatness. The Hope archives do not bear this out. They do,
however, show that the strong and fast-growing house of Baring made
grateful use of the capital belonging to the partners of Hope & Co. when
they fled to England. As the Hopes did not develop any activities there,
they needed objects in which to invest, and Barings were an excellent
starting point. 3
 Hope's relationship with Barings was closer than with any other house,
and this fact can only be explained by a far-reaching similarity in outlook,
in both the commercial and private spheres. This naturally did not rule
out differences of opinion in matters of business, or personal tiffs, but
these did not impinge upon the underlying mutual confidence. Thus was
the foundation laid for a friendship which has survived to this day.

Political developments in the Holland of the 1780s also gave rise to count-
less problems for the partners. The war against England came to an igno-
minious end in 1784, but this by no means solved the domestic difficulties.
The demands by Emperor Joseph II of Austria for the opening of the
ScheIdt, which the Dutch had kept closed since the outbreak of the anti-

                                    40
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Spanish revolt, served to maintain the tension. The Patriots utilized the
situation to widen their influence. Their belligerence towards the Austrian
ruler, however, was largely of a verbal nature, France having refused the
military support which they sought. Only when an agreement with Joseph
II was reached would the French be willing to enter into an alliance with
the Republic. 1
  Strengthened by the support of this ally, the Patriots succeeded in weak-
ening the power of Prince William v in Holland to the point where he and
his family were obliged to leave the province. The prince embarked on a
series of goodwill visits with the aim of strengthening his position in other
regions. While these were taking place, an ideological split in the Patriot
ranks emerged; this was most serious in Holland and Utrecht. The regents
who opposed the stadholder had only one aim, to increase their own
power, and they had no desire to share this with radical groups among the
populace which, on grounds of historical rights and customs, claimed a
voice in municipal and regional government. 2
  The situation became even more complex when foreign diplomats com-
menced to concern themselves actively with the party conflicts. The
British envoy, Harris, proceeded to organize the Orange party and to
bribe regents; his French counterpart openly supported the Patriots, albe-
it only verbally. In the meantime the stadholder, with the aid of his army,
had managed to restore his authority in a number of towns in Gelderland.
The response of the radical groups was to seize power in several towns in
Holland, thereby gaining the upper hand in the States of Holland. Patriot
militia, so-called free corps, thereupon crossed the borders of Utrecht to
aid their political associates in the provincial capital. 3
  While all this was going on, the Hopes had remained in Amsterdam,
although with the radicals in power there they were anything but safe. On
30th May 1787 a full-scale battle developed between the pro-Orange ship-
wrights, the 'Bijltjes,' and the Patriot militia-an encounter which ended
with the siege and capture of the 'Bijltje' bastion of Kattenburg. This
Orange defeat was followed by the plundering of the homes of prominent
supporters of the prince, some of whom escaped death by fleeing through
their gardens. While, according to Harris, 'many of the first commercial
families' sought refuge in The Hague, Henry Hope remained at his post
throughout this turbulent period. Naturally, the troubles had an adverse
effect on trade. For example, an auction of a consignment of tobacco on
behalf of the Swedish Crown failed to take place for the simple reason
that the brokers stayed away.4
In a letter to the French banker Laborde de Mereville, Henry Hope ex-

                                     41
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

plained that he thus far had been able to stand his ground between the
opposing forces 'for, not being obliged either by status or duty to take
sides, I have observed strict neutrality.' In this context, we must not over-
look his Anglo-American origin.l
  Hope, devoting himself to 'the neglected issue amid all this confusion,
trade,' even managed to set up a speculation in cochineal, details of which
appear in a subsequent chapter. At this time he was also deeply involved
in the building and furnishing of his country seat 'Welgelegen', which was
situated in the wooded area known as the Haarlemmerhout, on the out-
skirts of the town of Haarlem. He had purchased the farmstead of that
name in 1769, and had steadily enlarged the estate by the acquisition of
adjoining properties. The farmstead was demolished in 1784, and two
years later the construction of a new house commenced.
  Henry Hope's country seat was designed by the consul of the Sardinian
Court in The Hague, Triquetti, who had modelled it on the Borghese and
Albani villas in Rome. When it was completed, in 1788, Hope obtained
permission from the municipal authorities to transplant some of the trees
in the Haarlemmerhout (at his own expense) in order to obtain an unin-
terrupted view from the house.
  'Welgelegen' is the only example of a villa suburbana in the French clas-
sic style which exists in the Netherlands. The facade, with its centrepiece
of twin Doric and Ionic columns, is characterized by a terrace which ex-
tends over the full width and is approached by means of two curved drives.
The whole is decorated with reproductions of classic sculptures. The high
central hall, overlooked from the balcony with its gilded, wrought-iron
balustrade, the library, the circular music room, the reception room and
the octagonal dining room are all richly adorned with classicistic orna-
ments. The three large front rooms on the first floor were for the purpose
of housing Henry Hope's collection of paintings and sculptures. 2
  Three catalogues of paintings, which were compiled by insurers follow-
ing Henry Hope's departure for England, provide an insight into the ex-
tent and nature of his collection. The emphasis was on works by Italian
and Dutch masters, but Flemish and French painters were also repre-
sented. Henry Hope had been careful to spread his purchases, with the
result that the collection contained no more than ten works by a single
artist. His favourites among the Italian masters were Titian, Guido Reni,
the Caraccis and Maratti. Of the Dutch painters, Rembrandt, Willem van
Mieris and Gerard Terborch were the best represented, although their
works were somewhat less numerous than those of the Italian artists. The
collection also contained a substantial number of canvases by Van Dijck

                                     42
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

and Rubens. Altogether 372 paintings were shipped to England in 1794.1
  The party quarrels in the Republic had meanwhile reached a new climax.
The vacillatory stadholder having funked a military solution to the crisis
of authority in Holland, his wife, Princess Wilhelmina, journeyed to The
Hague in an attempt to win support for him there. On 28th June 1787, she
was stopped by Patriot militiamen near Goejanverwellesluis and forced
to abandon her mission.
  King Frederick William II of Prussia viewed the detention of his sister as
a personal insult, and he demanded full satisfaction from the States of
Holland. In this he was supported by the British government, which put
heavy pressure on the French Court to withdraw its promise to the
Patriots. Throughout the month of August the issue of satisfal:tion re-
mained in abeyance, but in Prussia itself preparations were made for a
punitive expedition. France, which continued to retreat because it was on
the rocks financially and dared not risk another war with England, made
an abortive effort to persuade the States of Holland to meet the Prussian
ruler's demand. When a fresh ultimatum by Prussia was rejected on 13th
September, her troops commenced to advance across Dutch soil. 2
  Henry Hope had continued to hope for a peaceful settlement of the con-
flict. 'We are at present enjoying a large measure of peace locally, and we
console ourselves with the thought that the issues between the provinces
will soon be settled, in one way or another, without influencing the safety
of the individual or the peace of Europe,' he wrote to his correspondent in
Marseilles, Councler, on 30th August. With the Prussian invasion, how-
ever, his tone became more sombre, and in a letter of 14th September to
Baring he said: 'We are still more embarrassed in regard to our own situ-
ation, which has become very serious, but we still hope that extremities
possibly may be avoided.' The stagnation of trade was an extremely hard
blow, particularly as far as the cochineal speculation was concerned, and a
Franco-British war could have incalculable consequences. 3
  The last days of the Patriotic resistance were a period of great anxiety for
Henry Hope. On 16th September 1787, Prussian troops occupied Utrecht.
Two days later, the States of Holland surrendered and consented to the
restoration of the prince in all his dignity. Amsterdam alone refused to
capitulate, and became a centre for Patriots put to flight elsewhere. The
power of political radicalism in Amsterdam became so great that the city
refused to bow to demands for submission, preferring to face repeated
clashes with the Prussian forces. After three days the city surrendered, but
the capitulation was not signed until loth October. 4
As it became increasingly clear that the days of the Patriot regime were

                                     43
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

numbered, Henry Hope made less and less of a secret of his preference for
the old government. In a letter of 4th October 1787 to Councler in Mar-
seilles, he said: 'Our internal troubles are at last coming to an end, our
fine city having decided to join with others in bringing about the re-estab-
lishment of the former constitution, the only means by which we can pre-
serve our commercial prosperity, our existence and our political respect.' 1
  In Amsterdam, however, the revival of the old order was no straightfor-
ward matter. The Patriots were still armed, and in spite of an official decree
prescribing the wearing of an orange cockade (the colour forbidden by the
Patriots), such a demonstration was not without hazard. The Messrs.
Hope were to discover at first hand that, as the Nieuwe Nederlandsche
Jaarboeken expressed it, 'the defeated party did not find it easy to sup-
press its pain and rancour.' 2
  In pursuance of the decree of the previous day, a number of merchants
wearing orange cockades appeared at the Stock Exchange on 12th October.
Among them were Henry Hope and John Williams Hope. The Nieuwe
Nederlandsche Jaarboeken subsequently noted that: 'Some embittered
Patriots, incensed by the somewhat larger Orange Cockades worn by the
Gentlemen referred to, drew attention to these, made scornful utterances
and at last pushed towards them on the Exchange, ostensibly out of curi-
osity; but they jostled so forcefully that the Gentlemen named were in
danger of being crushed and trampled underfoot; assistance was there-
upon requested, and a number of officers of the Law hurried to the place,
but they were not able to deal with the situation. Thus on the orders of the
Government a Company of armed Citizens was sent, whereupon the ma-
jority of those present left the Exchange, and the Gentlemen referred to
were conducted safely to their homes.' 3
  Messrs. Hope were so angered by the scorn heaped upon the Stock Ex-
change and 'the slight to which they had been subjected,' that they lodged
a protest with the Court of Justice; in anticipation of the outcome, they
avoided the Exchange. The court, however, was unable to give them satis-
faction until after 15th October, when Amsterdam admitted troops loyal
to the prince in order to avoid further Prussian occupation. On the very
next day, Messrs. Hope were collected from their homes by the Schepe-
nen Van Muyden and Muilma:1, and taken to the Stock Exchange,
where Van Muyden made a 'very polite' speech 'in the presence of many
members, as a result of which the wearing of Orange on the Stock Ex-
change has since become sufficiently general.'4
  To Baring, Henry Hope wrote only a few sentences concerning the epi-
sode. But in another letter he clearly revealed his feelings of bitterness:

                                     44
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

'This miserable country, having been devastated and practically ruined
during the past ten years by an ambitious faction, is about to take a little
rest, but twenty years of economy and industry will not succeed in making
good the ruinous losses.' Here, once again, the emphasis is on the eco-
nomic consequences of the political troubles.!
  But whereas the confused situations had clearly had an adverse effect on
trade, the reverse applied to the activities relating to loans. The events in-
volving Joseph II had been something of an obstacle to the placing of
Swedish loans, but by the time the one of 1786 was issued the investment
climate in Amsterdam was decidedly favourable. A loan for Poland was
floated in the same year, and the principal objection raised by Hope in
connexion with this related not to the difficult political situation in the
Netherlands, but to King Stanislaw's unsteady position. 2
  The relationship between the stagnation of trade and the ease of placing
loans emerged even more clearly in 1787. While drawing the attention of
the Swedish government to the effect of political unrest on trade, Hope
desired to increase the sum of the loan which had been requested from one
to one and a half million guilders. The fact that, under the prevailing cir-
cumstances, Hope and Fizeaux together accepted responsibility for two-
thirds of this loan indicates that they were confident of being able to place
the bonds. 3
 The summer and early autumn of 1787 also saw preparations for the ini-
tialloans to Russia. On 9th October of that year, the day preceding the
official capitulation of Amsterdam, Henry Hope, in a letter to the Russian
Court Banker, made a passing reference to the disturbances; but he clearly
viewed the situation as transient. As far as the placing of the Russian loan
was concerned, Henry Hope was cautiously optimistic; in the event, he
was proved right in a manner surprising even for him: while the brokers
had proceeded on the basis of a loan of one and a half million guilders,
subscriptions totalled six million within a week. 4 Apart from the slightly
higher rate of interest, which was also a factor, Henry Hope attributed
this phenomenon to a lessening of 'the general diffidence, which pre-
vented people from placing the large sums which have been accumulating
in consequence of the stagnation of trade for so long a time.' In a letter to
Baring, he described the success of the loan as 'a melancholy proof of the
discredit of our own Government securities.'5
 Thus we arrive at an economic factor-stagnation of trade, which caused
money to be diverted into other channels-and a political factor-an ab-
horrence of the re-established regime, which led Patriot supporters to
subscribe to foreign loans in preference to those issued on behalf of the

                                     45
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Dutch government. A general lack of confidence in the chances of sur-
vival of the stadholder's regime, which depended upon Prussian and
English support, may also have played a part.
 This is not the place to go into the placing of the successive Russian loans
(this is dealt with in a separate chapter), but the market, at times easy and
at others stressed, more or less clearly reveals a number of general trends.
In 1789, fear of a financial debacle in France initially produced reticence
on the part of the investors, but when the anticipated catastrophe failed to
materialize a relative glut of funds existed, because much had remained
uninvested. 1 In 1790, issues became more difficult following the revolt in
the Southern Netherlands, which aroused all manner of anxiety con-
cerning international ramifications which, however, did not occur.2 In
1791 the capital market was easy in the extreme. The principal reason for
this must be sought in the assignats-paper currency issued in France and
secured by confiscated Church property-the value of which began to fall
alarmingly in May of that year. The outbreak of the fourth Anglo-
Dutch war had caused an appreciable proportion of investors in the
Netherlands to switch from English stocks to French, and the results of
this were now being felt. As French loans were usually issued in Paris,
interest was paid in French currency. With the assignats falling in value, a
mass flight from French stocks occurred, and this manifestly benefited
Hope's Russian loans. 3
  Henry Hope, who described this process in a memorandum, and the
house which bore his name soon became the bete noire of the French revo-
lutionaries. When, in 1789, southern Europe suffered a general shortage of
grain and France purchased large quantities of corn in Amsterdam, the
French charge d'affaires in The Hague, Caillard, circulated a report which
suggested that Hope & Co., on instructions from the Dutch government
(and probably also from England), was buying up corn in order to block
supplies to France and so add to her difficulties.
  The facts were otherwise. When, in the summer of 1789, a number of
Amsterdam merchants reacted coolly to huge orders from France, the
French minister Necker intervened personally, and successfully, with the
Company. The grootboeken show that Hope & Co. purchased wheat to a
value of slightly more than half a million guilders on behalf of the 'King
of France.' The house also bought rye and wheat on behalf of the burgo-
masters of Amsterdam and Haarlem and the magistrate of Liege. When
the prices fell, the Company, acting on instructions from its principals,
resold the cereals. 4
In later years, Caillard accused Hope & Co. of having a hand in the fall
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in the French rate of exchange. Another spokesman asserted that the
Company repeatedly drew on Paris with the aim of undermining the rate.
It was alleged that when their drafts were returned protested, the partners
refused to meet the redrafts, and that by this means they sought to elicit
a legal process ending in a ruling that there was no rate of exchange for
drafts on France. The only element of truth in this ridiculous story lay in
a recommendation to the National Convention that the Hope assets held
by the Paris house of Vandenijver should be confiscated. 1
  It is abundantly clear from these stories that radicalism was steadily
gaining ground in France. In 1792 the French Legislative Assembly de-
clared war on Austria, a development which brought the revolutionaries
dangerously close to Holland, since the war was initially to be fought in
the Southern Netherlands. The conditions embodied in the contracts
made in 1792 show clearly that the entrepreneurs were again experiencing
difficulty in disposing of bonds. 2 In the autumn of that year the political
situation became decidedly alarming, following the victory of the French
general Dumouriez in the Southern Netherlands. It became still worse
when the Convention declared war on 'the King of England' and 'the
Stadholder of Holland' early in T793. By March of that year Dumouriez
had advanced to the major rivers, but his defeat by the Austrians and his
subsequent defection provided a brief respite.
  In February 1793, a loan of six million guilders was issued on behalf of
Spain. Like the Russian loans, this was in tranches. In May of the same
year Hope & Co. contracted for two more Russian loans, each of three
million guilders. 3 Subscriptions to these loans continued during the
summer, but a major French victory in September brought the flow of
funds to a halt. Of the Spanish loan, only the first tranche, of six million
guilders, had by then been subscribed. In the case of the Russian loans,
which came on to the market later, it proved impossible even to reach the
first three million guilders. 4
  Remarkably, Hope's turnover with the Exchange Bank during the event-
ful years after 1785 reached heights which were not achieved in the pre-
ceding fifteen years. Between 1786 and 1790, the annual figure was of the
order of 40 million guilders; in 1791 it rose to 52 million, and in the
following year the all-time high of 76 million was attained. The factors
which contributed to this peak are not immediately apparent. It is very
probable that payments arising from the numerous Russian loans nego-
tiated in 1791 played a part. After 1792 the turnover fell sharply, totalling
40 million in 1794. Of the other houses which we investigated, only
Hogguer achieved a comparably protracted and significant improvement

                                     47
                      THE FAMIL Y AND THE FIRM

in the years 1785-1794. De Smeth's turnover declined in this very period,
and the figure achieved in 1787 was not repeated until I79I. The growth
of turnover by Muilman, while not marked, was consistent.
  As the economic history of the Netherlands shows, trade as it were
continued to bask in autumn sunshine during the last years of the old
Republic.! The figures of turnover with the Exchange Bank reveal that
Hope & Co. had their full share of this recovery, and more. The revival of
trade with Russia will have contributed to this. The Company did a large
volume of business in Russian produce with the house owned by the
Court Banker, Sutherland, in St.Petersburg. The underlying transactions,
which in part were aimed at restoring the rate of exchange in Russia, were
undertaken on the instructions of the government. 2 In 1794, Hope & Co.
received special permission from Empress Catherine II to import a large
quantity of sugar into Russia. 3
  Early in the 1790S Hope also established relations with merchant houses
in the United States. They had long ignored these avenues on account of
political developments. At that juncture, however, there was no question
of the Company becoming involved in America's national finances. Gou-
verneur Morris, who, as the executive agent of President Washington, was
on a tour of western Europe, during which he visited the Hopes, attempted
to interest the partners in his country's financial affairs, but without
success. The time for such business had not yet come. 4
  It will be abundantly clear from the foregoing that the partners were
busy safeguarding life and property against the French armies. In France
itself, radicalism had reached its climax in the Reign of Terror, the targets
of which included bankers and speculators. In the Southern Netherlands,
the French occupation had been followed by a wave of confiscations of
property belonging to 'aristocrats', and this boded ill for the North.
Shortly after the declaration of war on the Netherlands and England, the
Convention, anticipating the victory, declared forfeit the property of the
stadholder, 'his friends, his supporters and his willing slaves' -categories
which plainly embraced the Hopes. s
  When Breda fell to the French in February 1793, Henry Hope, sensing
imminent danger, fled to England, taking John Williams Hope's family
with him. The daily management of the house was left in the hands of his
protege. Although he returned in December 1793 when, following Du-
mouriez's defection, the situation appeared to be slightly easier, he no
longer felt really safe. 6
  The summer of 1794 brought a fresh defeat for the allied armies, and
again the future of the Republic was in doubt. Against this background,
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the partners prepared once more to leave for England. Henry Hope
enquired of the British government regarding the possibility of British
ports being opened for the goods and chattels of refugees from Holland.
The foreign secretary, Lord Grenville, through his envoy in Holland,
sought the views of the government there. The Raadpensionaris, Van de
Spiegel, flatly rejected the idea of permission being granted, as this would
be tantamount to a sauve qui peut. And he added, bitterly, that an inverse
measure would be more appropriate, 'in order to leave to the Hopes and
other over-grown capitalists of this country no other chance for saving
their property than the giving or at least lending a part of it to supply the
wants of the Government.' 1
  While Van de Spiegel's bitterness is understandable, the material and
moral bankruptcy of the regime was so complete that there was no jus-
tification for condemning Henry Hope's attempt to save himself and those
dear to him from almost certain death under the guillotine. An outsider
could not know that the Terror had just then come to an end.
  Indeed, Henry Hope had given all possible assistance to the government
following the restoration of the stadholder in 1787. He had, for example,
expressed to Van de Spiegel his readiness to support a loan for the benefit
of the decrepit Oost-Indische Compagnie. At the same time, he was not
willing to throw good money after bad. When the Compagnie's debts
continued to mount, and the States of Holland maintained support for the
Compagnie even at the risk of their own financial position, Henry Hope
slowly turned away from the government. To make matters worse, the
Compagnie, in an attempt to recover lost ground, resorted to senseless
prohibitions. In 1791 it persuaded the States of Holland to thwart the
sale of some parcels of tea imported by Henry Hope, and in 1793 the
same thing occurred with a cargo of Javanese sugar consigned by Hope
in an American vessel. 2
  When the French had advanced to the river Maas, and a Patriot action
group openly took up the cudgels against the sitting regents in Amster-
dam, the Hopes considered that their time had come. On 17th October
 1794 Henry Hope and John Williams Hope embarked at Hellevoetsluis
and crossed to England, where the latter's wife and children had been
 since the end of August. Thomas, Henry Philip and Adrian Elias fled to
 Germany.3
  Before leaving, John Williams Hope had explained the reasons for their
 departure to the hereditary prince, later King William I. He had pointed
 to the systematic neglect of the army and the fleet, which was among the
 causes of the country's hopeless position. Since the outbreak of the war,

                                     49
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the Hopes had repeatedly urged the need for compulsory loans, since only
by this means could the Patriots be forced to participate. But the govern-
ment had been both lax and timid in responding to the advice, with the
result that the country was now beyond salvation.!
  Pierre Cesar Labouchere and the young Alexander Baring, a son of Sir
Francis who was serving his apprenticeship with the house, remained at
their posts until the last minute. A severe frost in mid-December had
robbed the major rivers of their value for defence. Early in January 1795
the defeated Anglo-Hanoverian army retreated eastwards. The Dutch
army was in disarray, and the civilian population was in the grip of
apathy. Holland was there for the taking.
  The time had come for Labouchere and Baring to make their escape.
But ice, driven by the westerly gales, had jammed the estuaries, making
a crossing to England impossible. It was 17th January before the wind
moderated and backed to the southeast, freeing the packed ice. On the
night of 18th January-at about which time the first French troops were
entering Amsterdam-the two embarked at Den Helder. 2
  In London, the Hopes had meanwhile suitably installed themselves.
From his distant relative, Lord Hopetoun, Henry Hope purchased a
house in Harley Street, off Cavendish Square, to which he added a wing
to accommodate the works of art which he had brought from Holland. 3
He also acquired a country seat, the East Sheen estate, near Richmond.
  The offices in Amsterdam had been left in the charge of Paulus Taay,
'trusted clerk.' The plan provided for Taay only to liquidate current
transactions. There would, of course, be no place under the new regime
for a 'maison anglo-orangiste' such as Hope & Co. With this in mind,
Messrs. Hope arranged for an advertisement to appear in January 1795,
stating that payments by the Company would henceforth be made in
London and that drafts on Hope should be sent there. 4
  With the ending of the Terror, however, things in France had changed,
and this became apparent after the conquest of the Netherlands. The
'representatives of the people of France,' who had occupied Hope's resi-
dence on the Keizersgracht, gave assurances that they would respect the
offices, and issued express instructions that the Company was not to be
hampered in completing its affairs. Their attitude stemmed not only from
the milder political climate in France, but also from a realization that a
substantial portion of Holland's wealth, both capital and goods, was
highly mobile and could only be enticed back by the right kind of noises.
  The new Batavian rulers in Amsterdam were no less forthcoming and
they, too, laid emphasis on the peaceful continuation of the business, 'as

                                   50
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in that case the Inhabitants of these Countries would not suffer in the
 matter of the payments to be made to them by that House of Commerce.'
 Taay optimistically informed the worried correspondents that Messrs.
 Hope would certainly not have departed if they had known everything in
 advance, 'since the new order of things has been established here in an
 indescribably orderly and peaceful manner.' 1
   This unexpected reprieve, however, gave rise to new problems. Now
 that early liquidation was no longer the primary issue, Taay faced the
 costly duty to meet incoming claims. Although arrangements had been
 made with a number of business friends to assist Taay in time of need,
they backed out when the stream of demands grew into a flood. At the
crucial moment Robert Voute came to the rescue of the despairing Taay
 and provided him with the funds necessary to keep the business going.
 'If I had not had that good friend, everything would have been in ruins,'
a grateful Taay later wrote to London. 'He is a clever chap, and he is
always ready to help, day and night.' 2
  The arrangements for the payment of interest and principal on current
loans had been made prior to the Hopes' departure. In the case of the
 Russian loans, the house of Martin Dorner had been appointed to deal
with interest coupons tendered by Dutch bondholders. The Hopes dealt
with the Spanish loan of 1792/1793 direct from London, because Spain
was then at war with France. 3 For the Swedish loans, agreement was
reached with Hogguer, who had been associated with Hope & Co. in
floating these.
  When shortly afterwards trade revived, albeit via Hamburg, it became
easier for the partners to meet current liabilities, thus avoiding the bank-
ruptcy of the Amsterdam house. Their energetic associate, Hermann
Albrecht Insinger, dealt with the diamonds, which since 1791 had been
despatched to Hope by the official Portuguese government contractor in
Lisbon. 4 Insinger also handled the sale of coffee which, with Hope's
mediation, reached Amsterdam. We can probably interpret this as a
means of assisting bondholders of the West Indian plantation loans to
obtain their rightful interest. When England and Spain became embroiled
in war in 1797, the partners transferred responsibility for the payment of
interest on the Spanish loans to Jnsinger. Official confirmation of In-
singer's position as a trusted agent came with the transfer to him in May
1796 of the power of attorney vested in Robert Voilte when the latter was
preparing to leave for Russia to intercede on behalf of the holders of
Polish and Russian bonds. 5
The occasion was also used to grant power of procuration to Jan Jacob

                                    51
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Voilte, Robert's eldest brother, whose merchant house, and an account
which Robert Voilte maintained there, provided the partners with another
avenue through which to continue certain activities on a modest scale.
For example, we find settlement accounts relating to tea speculations set
up previously. Extensive correspondence with the house of De Coninck &
Co. in Copenhagen suggests that the Hopes had a financial interest in the
sending of a Danish ship to Batavia. 1 As has been explained, there was
no question of the Hopes undertaking any independent activities in
England, and such business as there was to be done was channelled via
Baring or Harman & Co.
  The scale of operations in Amsterdam was deliberately limited in order
not to arouse the jealousy and greed of the municipal and provincial
authorities. To meet the dire shortage of funds, compulsory loans and
levies were rife, and the authorities were very keen to draw the house of
Hope & Co. into their net. The partners in London instructed Taay to
deny that he had any power to act on behalf of the Company, and to
inform the authorities that they need not anticipate any communication
on the subject from London. When the pressure on Taay increased, the
partners, to the dutiful man's intense dismay, requested him to stay away
from the office. The upshot was that Hope's possessions were sequestered. 2
  The confiscatio!1 was provisionally a formality and, coming from a mod-
erate administration, was probably aimed at silencing extreme radicals.
A moderate policy was to be expected, for Voilte had meanwhile achieved
major successes in his efforts on behalf of the holders of Polish and
Russian bonds. 3 Under the conventions of 30th June and 29th October
 1797, all debts incurred in Holland by the Republic of Poland, its king and
the Polish magnates were converted into Russian bonds bearing interest
at five per cent. A third convention, signed on 15th January 1798, had the
effect of converting all Russian loans issued in Holland and Belgium into
the same 5 %type. 4
  The implementation of these conventions was entrusted to the house of
 Raymond and Theodore de Smeth, Hope's erstwhile competitor in matters
 concerned with Russia's finances. It had briefly looked as if the Company
 would be able to resume operations in Amsterdam, when the politically
 very moderate administrators of the province of Holland made tentative
 proposals for a return by the Hopes. But at the crucial moment the
 partners broke off the contact, because no absolute guarantees were
 forthcoming regarding the safety of persons or property.5 The wisdom of
 their action emerged in January 1798, when a radical group succeeded in
 obtaining the French government's approval to carry out a coup d'etat, in
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

which the moderates were swept from power. For the 'Anglomaniac'
Hopes, little good could be expected from the new regime.
 Fortunately, the partners were able to render valuable services from
their exiled headquarters. When the house of Martin Dorner ran into
serious difficulties after the proprietor's death, and the payment of interest
on the Russian bonds was jeopardized, Labouchere travelled to Hamburg
to put matters right. On his advice, the house of Matthiessen & Sillem
was appointed to succeed Dorner. The old connexion which was thus
strengthened was later to prove immensely valuable to Hope & Co. 1
 The links with America, which were reinforced at about the same time,
were also destined to be of importance to the Company. The American
banker and land speculator William Bingham had written to Hope in 1792
concerning the advantages of buying land in Maine. In 1794 he had sent
an agent to visit the partners in Amsterdam, but by then they had other
problems to contend with and so the man returned to the United States
empty-handed. 2
 With the Hopes settled in London, however, things had changed. There
was now a need for suitable investments for the capital withdrawn from
Holland. Against this background, it is understandable that they associ-
ated themselves with a visit to America by Alexander Baring in 1796. The
Hopes committed themselves to a three-quarer share in any purchases or
other undertakings entered into by Alexander Baring. During his stay,
Baring allowed himself to be talked into buying 600,000 acres which
Bingham had earlier acquired. The land was situated between the Penob-
scot and Scodiac rivers, and was valued at nearly 270,000 dollars. The
deal brought Bingham release from financial difficulties, and Baring a
wife, for he married one of Bingham's daughters. For Baring & Co., the
connexion with Bingham meant an introduction to the circles concerned
with American government finances, and this was subsequently to prove
extremely valuable. 3
 The Hopes were left with a three-quarter share in land which produced
nothing but disappointment and expense. The main stream of immigrants
entered the United States at more southerly points, and most of them
headed west. Year after year, the reports from Hope's agent in Maine,
John Richards, echoed the disconsolate theme of drudgery in getting
colonization under way and of scarcity of settlers who, moreover, were
not an asset but a liability from the financial point of view. 4 The only
redeeming feature in the situation was perhaps that it helped to focus
Hope's attention on America.
Allusions in the surviving correspondence reveal that in 1797 Alexander

                                     53
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

Baring was instructed by the partners of Hope & Co. to attend to their
interests in the Caribbean. Because of the war, arrears of payment had
arisen, particularly on the part of debtors on the islands of St.Eustatius
and Guadeloupe, and these could not be allowed to continue. Baring,
however, found no opportunity to undertake this task, and in 1799 Hope's
interests in the area were entrusted to William Gordon Coesvelt, who
lived on St.Croix. In 1808 and later years we shall find Coesvelt acting as
Hope's agent in Spain and, later still, as a manager at the Company's
offices in Amsterdam. 1
  The bonds between the houses of Hope and Baring had meanwhile been
strengthened by Labouchere's marriage to Dorothea, a daughter of Sir
Francis Baring. Legend has it that when his courtship began to develop,
Labouchere enquired of the partners of Hope & Co. whether, in the event
of his marriage to a Miss Baring, he would be admitted to partnership,
and that upon receiving an affirmative reply he went to Sir Francis, to
whom he imparted the news and thereby won Dorothea's hand.
  This story is probably untrue, for not until the house had returned to
Amsterdam do we find Labouchere as a partner. Nevertheless, it is char-
acteristic of his shrewdness in matters of business. In this, he was a match
for his friend and later brother-in-law, Alexander Baring.
  The lack of progress achieved by England and her allies in their struggle
against Napoleon produced a gradual improvement of Hope's chances of
being able to return to Holland. Czar Paul I had declared war against
France in 1798, but when his armies, after initial successes, suffered de-
feats at the hand of the French (principally as a result of the lack of
Austrian support), he virtually withdrew from the arena. Bonaparte
thereupon vigorously attacked Austria, and a series of French victories
paved the way for the Peace of Luneville in February 1801. England, with
no continental allies and no prospect of a decisive military success, opened
negotiations with France which led to peace preliminaries on 1st October
of that year.
  For the partners of Hope & Co., the time had come to make serious
preparations for the return to Holland, and early in 1801 far-reaching
discussions were held with Robert Voilte, who travelled to London for
the purpose. The idea of returning was certainly attractive, for during
their exile the partners had been obliged to decline requests for a loan for
which Brazilian diamonds were to serve as security. Their circumstances
had also necessitated turning down an Austrian approach for a new loan. 2
  Robert Voilte proved willing to investigate the feasibility of the proposed
move, and was given lengthy instructions regarding the vital issues. First

                                     54
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

and foremost was an investigation of the state of trade in Amsterdam and
the opportunities for the house to resume its activities there. It might be
possible for one of the partners to return to Holland ahead of the others
to look after the Russian loans, and perhaps also the Austrian. But his
presence might not be construed as formal resettlement, and the repatriate
would have to receive protection against house-searches or other forms of
harassment connected with the fiscal claims against the Hope family.!
  Upon his return to Holland, Voute, in conversations with friends and
acquaintances. gathered a certain amount of information concerning the
economic situation. The prospects were none too encouraging. Behind a
facade of prosperity, many Amsterdam houses possessed an inner weak-
ness which, in Voute's opinion, could not fail to lead to their bankruptcy
if the war were to last. 'This country will go to the devil unless it again
becomes seventeen provinces, as in the days before William of Orange,'
he half-jokingly remarked to a friend. The latter promptly replied: 'Can
you persuade England to achieve this? That would be an excellent thing.' 2
A prophetic utterance, which was to be borne out in 1815.
  In Voute's opinion, the lifting of the judicial attachment on Hope's prop-
erty was a matter of urgency, because it was imperative that the house
should be ready to resume its former position when trade revived after the
cessation of hostilities. Early in October 1801, Voute visited The Hague to
discuss the matter with the new government, the Staatsbewind, which had
come to power as a result of pressure exerted by Napoleon. In accordance
with Bonaparte's overall effort towards reconciliation, the new rulers were
mainly conservatives, both Patriot and pro-Orange. This boded well for
Voute's cause.
  In spite of the mutual goodwill, however, Voute made little progress, and
when the first half of November passed without a decision he handed the
task over to Insinger. By the end of the month Insinger had managed to
achieve a settlement concerning the restitution of the confiscated Hope
property, and this was restored to its owners upon payment of a sum of
cf 180,000. 3
 In the meantime, the political skies had cleared to the point where
Labouchere ventured a brief visit to the Republic. From there he travelled
to Portugal to negotiate with the government on a proposed loan against
the security of diamonds. As we have seen, the proposal was not new. His
mission and its outcome form the subject of one of the chapters of this
book.4
 With the signing of the Treaty of Amiens at the end of March 1802,
which finally brought an end to hostilities between England and France,

                                    55
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the early return of the partners to Holland became a matter of great im-
portance, not only from the point of view of the impending Portuguese
loan but also of the management of the Russian loans. Voute had revis-
ited England at the beginning of 1802 and had repeatedly referred to
this. He had also hammered in the point that the deed of partnership
should be amended to cover every conceivable contingency in the event of
a new war. A fictitious contract, in which only the names of those partners
who would play an active role in the house appeared, should be drawn up
for external purposes. Voute also felt that two domiciles should be main-
tained, one in London and one in Amsterdam. The London house could
bear the title Henry Hope & Co., and the Amsterdam house Hope & Co. l
  Family quarrels and the failure to obtain permission for the Portuguese
loan delayed the signing of the new deed of partnership until the begin-
ning of October, by which time Labouchere and John Williams Hope and
their families were on the point of leaving for Holland. The contract itself
has not survived, but correspondence and accounts show that the Hopes
of London took a five-million guilder share in the Amsterdam house
through Henry Hope & Co. Labouchere figured as a partner, but with a
relatively small and fluctuating share which by 1808 had grown to
cf 700,000; however, he had a -tth share of profits. Earlier plans to admit
Alexander Baring to the partnership were not implemented, probably
because of the deterioration of relations between England and France. As
mentioned in the chapter dealing with the Portuguese loan, Sir Francis
Baring considered the possibility of establishing a house in Antwerp. A
merger between Hope and Baring also appears to have been seriously
considered. 2
  Adrian Elias Hope ceased to be a partner, and his share in the old house
was credited to an account held in his name by Henry Hope & Co. It
appeared advisable to exclude him from all discreet arrangements because
of his strange and unpredictable character. 3
  The action of the Staatsbewind in obstructing the Portuguese loan made
Henry Hope decide to stay in England. John Williams Hope repeatedly
delayed his return to Holland, and this, too, will undoubtedly have been
due in part to the opposition to the loan. Weighed down by domestic
problems and attacks of gout, this man, who possessed little fighting spirit,
was reluctant to exchange the familiar circle of family and friends for an
uncertain future in a Holland which had become strange to him.
  The re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam, which was announced
in a circular dated 5th November 1802, was not without its difficulties.
The house naturally resumed control of matters which had been entrusted
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


to others during its exile, and one such matter concerned the Portuguese
diamonds, for the sale of which Hope held a monopoly under the terms of
the Portuguese loan. At the same time, care was taken not to offend other
houses and, in view of the difficult times, to allow them a share in current
business. Moreover, the position of the 'Anglomaniac' house was some-
what delicate, and it was therefore in its interest to create a circle of well-
disposed business associates. The controversy surrounding the Portuguese
loan had amply demonstrated the need for friends. 1
 Accordingly, the sale of Russian bonds was left in the hands ofVoute &
Co., and it was not long before tea imports, under government licence,
added a new dimension to the relationship between the two houses. In-
singer retained a role in the marketing of the diamonds and also became
involved in the growing volume of colonial produce which arrived in
American ships. Sale of brazilwood, for which Hope & Co. secured the
monopoly, were entrusted to the house ofMuhl & Van Winter. 2
 In the case of the Russian bonds, the situation was more complicated.
Hope's uncompromising enemy, Treasurer Vasilyev, made sure that the
house of De Smeth continued to be concerned with the Russian loans even
after the Company had resumed operations in Amsterdam. Hope, how-
ever, remained the principal agent where the encashment of repurchased
bonds was concerned. 3
 In the chapters dealing with the Russian loans, it is explained how trans-
actions in Russia on behalf of the French government were embodied in a
loan to the United States to enable that country to purchase the French
colony of Louisiana. We also see here that the initiative for that loan
stemmed from Alexander Baring. In the light of all that has been written
about Baring's American contacts, this is not surprising.
 In May 1803, Baring and Hope entered into a convention with the
French government concerning the terms of payment by the United States
for Louisiana. When, in the same month, war broke out between France
and England, Hope as it were automatically came to the forefront in the
further negotiations, because they constituted the best avenue for the
payment of the loan instalments to the French Treasury.4
 In a supplementary convention entered into on 2 I st April 1804, the
French government undertook to surrender immediately to Baring and
Hope all American bonds which it still held. As a quid pro quo, the two
houses undertook to substantially accelerate the instalments. The negoti-

                               *
ation of this convention was largely the work of Labouchere. 5
 Of the total loan sum of IT million dollars, 5 million was payable in
Amsterdam and 6* million in London. The 5 million dollars domiciled

                                      57
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in Amsterdam formed the basis for a loan of cf 12,500,000 which bore the
title 'Share in a joint property of original American Stocks.' The shares
concerned had a nominal value of cf 1,000 and bore interest at 51 %. As
the Louisiana bonds bore interest at 6 %, a margin of 1 %existed, and this
was to be used for the purchase of any shares which might come on to the
market. Interest accruing on shares thus purchased was to be used for the
same purpose. 1 All participants were to share in this reserve fund, the
balance of which was to be distributed among them at the end of the 17-
year life of the loan. Investors were offered the alternative of original,
registered, bonds bearing the full 6 %, but the exercise of this option im-
plied forfeiture of a share in the final balance of the reserve fund. The ac-
counts show that 40 participants preferred to manage their own bond-
holdings. 2
  The management of the 'Joint Property' was exercised jointly by Hope &
Co., Raymond and Theodore De Smeth, and Wilhelm and Jan Willink.
Hope had thus deemed it wise to involve competitors in the new loan. The
house of Willink had long been concerned in American loans, but had
now in fact been supplanted by Hope & Co. De Smeth has already been
referred to in connexion with the Russian loans. Alexander Baring had
been at great pains to insist that the Company, once re-established in Am-
sterdam, should become the office for payments for all the old American
loans, but the partners had wisely declined this role. 3
  The new management group was domiciled at the offices of Hope & Co.,
where the official documents relating to the loan were kept in an iron
chest secured with three different locks. Each of the participating houses
had a key to one of these locks, so that it was impossible for any of them
to open the chest independently. Hope made a separate agreement with
De Smeth, giving them a one-sixth share in the entire Louisiana trans-
action. Willink, who was excluded from this, was to receive the mutually
agreed commissions, but Hope and De Smeth undertook to renounce
their commissions and to enter these only pro forma in the books.4
  The loan was a huge success, and the bonds were very quickly placed.
They were even sold to the members of the family and to Willem Borski
and his entrepreneurs at prices between 102 and 103. Of the 6-!- million dol-
lars payable in London, Alexander Baring placed 500,000 dollarsworth in
America. The Barings took a one million dollar share, 1.7 million went to
Henry Hope & Co. in London and 300,000 dollarsworth of bonds were
transferred to Hope & Co. in Amsterdam. This left 2,750,000 dollars to be
subscribed in England. 5
In 1805, with France at war with Austria and Russia, the desire on the
                                   P L A von D~dgeevin~ in cen gemeenrcb3ppclijk beJit                       1'1111
                                       origin ••l. America:lwcne Fondfen.
                                                Arl • ..
   o.u. Ace<\<un(ol.. Fo.dC.. zlj. «,'O$II,d '01<11' de. In.,... van 6 pC •.         '0 1m. ,   dCIG' bet A.,otl-
 tU.Drcbe Gouvememerlt Ie beftllen blnntQ: Amnercbm . teo kOJteG en rifiC'o vaD 'htlulvc Oouvemementt
 ..od.,nl«. ch, de Elg...... d...., Foodr.. 110 g... vml ..... op dl. I.uelf••• btl ail." boord. . .II
 d.. WuCd-Co.n III ••d,rile". ,.lIea bloo, ,e~'1e zlj • •
    Ii.. Capital' d... " FoeM.. moe, door d. V<rae.ICde       S,,,,..
                                                       Arl. '2.
                                                                       VI.  oord·Am .. l.. "'ord.. gorembours-
  rttrd 111 drie Cc.lijke Ttrmijtlt'O, m~' inulin lOt dt cbdtll;ke .floding lot t fecltr ""10 etD dtrdc part t
 ",... me de ~e ulurrllik HD"II"I DtnleII ul O'M' IS Jllrm, U:: I'ftkmen DI primo Januulj 18o.t., t'D de
 Ir.deren In de (wee onmlddelljk dllfOP vol,gcnde JureD t :lood.ol, die Ht le.bfCl~ C.plmill &11 mottfD
 liJa trgelou ea lekwf'tltll - 'iGor of iD den Jure: 1 8~u .
                                                      Arl·3·
    He' Copl",,' der 'oonebree.... PoodC.. , welke ond.. die ,emoeoCeb.ppelijk be.1t ,ull.. word..,
 nrttalcd, ul nlet moocen It: boo"en ,UD het beloop Yln .,Ijf           1JIHMae-n OGUln 'l mllr w~1 IOC HilI!!
 mkTtfn'e rODlllrl of bedm~ kunncn ~~or~D bf~lld t lis wunoe de Hurta Bewl.rd~. tD nl~(turnt
 deb de vrijbeld yoorbehoudtn t Irs metde om Itt lite yoorkoomtnde leVlUcn re moo«~a h,ndetrn In d.
 ultvottln, det nJ Ie meldttlt Anleuten 't en in 11Il"J ~:u de :ldlDlaHlrllle dftlC'l' lemrt1lfcb.ppelljlt I.
 beziuene rondl"en II.pU. ZOO:lt; Iii III dft' djd (('n mC'encn voonle ltD dH btlta,h~bbcad(ft Iullfd
 vC't~etnen It behooml.
                                                       Ad. 4.
     OttZ! orlClDccle Amerh:unrcbe Fondren %ull-en wordC!'U cclteld lro ru!lme \lla
                                         II 0 P F. & CO " P.,
                            d. H..... { n. & T...        D,     S MET H. ..
                                         w. & J. IV' L L , N K •
 • It Reprereal1DtCD nn de ~Ibebbers or C intm~dtnl la dreze Cttnrtllrdlp , en eec M-bOtve
dezelve ouder hunne bewuric ~ d[ttt"Cie vcrblljnc, 101 den uhefndc d.eC'l~ Dtelneemln, roe. lulltnda
                                                                                                             ft.
0'" zulU de lloofdlOmm.. de••er G,., ... Ccb,ppelijt. Fondrtn boboorlijt ,.rplilll. I. dl • ..r. C""'ft~.·
ItO, ttn Dllme VIa yoormrlde Iitereo BewurderJ worden Itfield. to ondtr hunne dlrKlle len btboeve
VIO, ft) voor r~elcC'nhll en rlfico det I tumtnd ljke Dednifeltln, bJlJvC'n ced'tJ1Oat"erd . me.: bljvoe«io,l Yld
loodlru,. Nourlffie ACtcnJ. lb Out den •• rd YID zoorcg:ellJjce rond~ CD Cke:laee:mlncttl ... erebcbl wordea~
                                                      Aft. $.
    leder AI.deel In d, .. , G,m ... rc&.p .. I p;roo, >ljn .Ier Honderd Dollan C'pit,,1 der «,m.lde Food-
reo, C!1I ceftf'kend wordta tegeo, de COUll no 50 n. per Dolllt t C rcprertatceRII Duflt"tld Ouldea.J
liolll a.ueb Cou"., ,old.
                                                      Art. 6.
    Vil de J~rlijkrC'be tnuesrf'D nn btl gtheele FondJ . 'Ell door Uetren DI:!1Aoilllirden en DIrC!C'ltUI'ea 1It1
de ~Ibebber. wordea pdua C't'at uftde-tIiDI \"I n Vljr en Vi jfd, CuldC'1:1J O\'tt I~er A:locleotl • uluDukende
11.100 OYtf de grreprercDttc'rde Hollandfcbt wurde \'.tu Daiz.end Gulden •• tf.QC hUftJc .... n 51 pCe. 's Jilin.
    Het oYt1lrr bllf pCr,. h~l    welle deAID~rtClilnfch:' {~ndrcn Jurtlj*, mctrder lin 'or.:resrta optencrea ..
nl dOOl IiCft"Cn Oe"'urden CD DlreC'~turen Jurl ij u worden btt.letd. roc inkoop vaD 1.00 vette Aandte1tn
:lIJ d.lr \tOOt IDIJCU honm wordea vt'rkrC'el'~;n, die .b a:Hfi dudeUlk zuUeon wordea ,emonl.6cte'C'd.
zulltnde ytrvol,enJ, metJe JurUjlu op ctUJ ke ,ville worden gtheocld mt'e hee mffrdu Ixloop dct
 hlilresl"tD, bel writ ult boorde du vrO<'lere Inkoop .... 11 Allldetlm uJ ovttfc:blcctD.
                                                    ArI.8.
    Dij ,tdotllelljte ,Ooslio, oC It..bounfnl•• , der AmmcuDfcb. Fo.dlb. &>1 b.. bcloop n. 'ood".I.
ge .COlliel' worden btl1«'d tOt rembounrermtDC nn ~D praponlonttl Itul AllindC!'ll!'len In df'tle Dtelne&l
 min,. dnnoe blJ Loclol{ te bepuln, ttl die rrmbollllrml~l leJcbledrn met d~ ,crepreff"'ceude ibmml
 Vlft Dtfit.ead Culden. llolJladith Counol, Yoor federf .... ndnl. lQ,lItade deen .Imo cerembounretrde
 AIQdeelen IDl'l fl'rI Rempel dlt die teD'tbouu •• nduid, (eu: Clld, til :111,1 00 un de Houder. reru, ,t,e"
 vro wordeQ .. om ce dlenll!c. 101 bewij:l Yin 1111" vOO(tdtlureod Al ndeel 111 , of proponJontele IIIOfl>r'tllt
op btl rtfulr1.l( dcelcr De:eID~ml nc, nl dar .Uf de Aand«JcIl ttae ceUjkt do RDI no f .000: - HoU,
C-:.ur. Iwlen btbbco &tooolen. of ook voor red:enf~1 d.t('t.tt Deeln«osfol lullf'a :dju JtmM16C~.
                                                     Arl. 9.
    Bij dl' 6n.ule 16OJ(m, nD ,lie de OrJ&lneele AmtrlCllnf'cbe Fot'ldrt'n. die rot dctze reIDteafdJlp zulltd
hebbtc beboord, :ut lItt :wi ... cr Rcfullllt d~u('t dH'laecminc . btl welt I'll de uhbeu.lfn,-:: YIn ,10001"
lIolI. Cour. OYft" [Ncr nle, ,e'GIordfictffd lIodtel. 111 nn\\'enl, lijn, c\'t1' de' geumCTItlljke nlft gtmofl
tlliceerde aandecJen. ,elijl:elljk wordtD &ertpartitlC'trd, ra IIq de HOlldffJ lec:t'D1 InutULn, ftD d .. "ID'
tlttJtu zelVCD. worden vmQcwoord _




Prospectus of the 'Share in ajoint property of original American Stocks,' 1803
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


part of the Dutch investors to find more peaceful havens for their capital
increased. To this end, Labouchere enquired of Baring whether a further
one million dollarsworth of bonds could be transferred to Amsterdam.
But the deteriorating rate of exchange on England made the bonds too
costly in Amsterdam, and consequently Labouchere was forced to aban-
don the idea. 1
  Individual investors, however, did purchase bonds in England. Indeed,
N.&J.& R. van Staphorst, Ketwich & Voombergh and Willem Borski
went so far as to establish an administrative office to handle joint hold-
ings of Louisiana stock. They themselves probably succeeded in syphoning
the bonds, which had a total value of [78,800 doJlars, from London to
 Holland. 2
  Those who participated in the 'Joint Property' at no time had cause for
complaint. Even in the difficult years after 1808, the United States con-
tinued to meet its obligations promptly. In 181 I, coin was sent to Amster-
dam on board an American warship in order to safeguard the interest
payment. In 1812, there was a threat of stagnation owing to opposition by
the French government, but the outbreak of war between England and
the United States in that year had the effect of ironing out the diplomatic
wrinkles.
  In 18 [9, ]820 and 1821, the loan was redeemed. During the whole period,
1,340 bonds were purchased for the reserve fund, producing for the hold-
ers of the 11,128 shares a final bonus of cf 55.75 per share after deduction
of expenses and commission. 3
  It is surprising to observe how a merchant house such as Hope & Co.,
with its manifest ties with England, became steadily more involved in the
Napoleonic finances. The process is explained in detail in later chapters,
but it is perhaps just as well to preview the sequence of events and the
manner in which the various transactions fitted together.
  The subject of the loan for Portugal was broached even before the part-
ners returned to Amsterdam. After visiting Lisbon, where he successfuJly
concluded the negotiations with the government, Labouchere went to
Paris to plead on Portugal's behalf for an extension of the instalment
period for the war levy imposed by the French. His representations to the
minister offoreign affairs, TaJleyrand, finally achieved the desired result. 4
  Early in 1803, while the house was still occupied with the placing of the
Portuguese bonds, Hope and Baring assumed responsibility for the finan-
cing of the purchase of Louisiana. The payments which Hope was required
to make to the French Treasury in this connexion led on the one hand to
large-scale purchases in Russia of shipbuilding materials on behalf of the
                                      60
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

French navy, and on the other to dealings with the financier and specu-
lator Ouvrard, who in 1804 commenced to tighten his grip on France's
finances.
  When Ouvrard went to Spain to recover monies owed to France, and
while there succeeded in securing a virtual stranglehold on that country's
finances also, Hope became involved in the execution of the gigantic plans
which he had devised for Spain.! If everything had gone as Ouvrard en-
visaged, the two could have secured a joint monopoly of the import and
export trade of all the Spanish colonies on the American continent, and
all the gold and silver accumulated in those colonies would have flowed to
Europe via channels planned by Hope. Spain could then have met her
commitments towards France, Ouvrard could have replaced the stag-
gering edifice of credit which he had erected around the French Treasury
with real money, and he and Hope would together have made profits no
less colossal than the plan in its entirety.
  The failure of the gigantic project is described elsewhere in this book.
When Napoleon purged the French financial system early in 1806, and
forcefully eliminated Ouvrard and his associates, he spared the Company.
This was wise, for late in 1805 it had opened a loan of 10 million guilders
on behalf of Spain, the primary purpose of which was to pay that coun-
try's 'contribution' to France. As Napoleon had temporarily shelved
Ouvrard's American plan in toto, this was one of the few ways to obtain
money from Spain in the short term.2
  Admittedly, the French government, after disposing of Ouvrard, de-
manded the return of the drafts on Mexico which Hope & Co. still held,
but after a time Napoleon also realized that the encashment of these could
best be entrusted to the Company. In 1807, the operation which Ouvrard
had launched was continued, but now with Napoleon as Hope's partner. 3
The French Treasury fared well under the arrangement, for it received in
all IO million piastres or nearly 40 million francs. Three-fifths of this was
in the form of colonial produce, which was shipped to European ports in
American vessels. 4
  1807 also saw the opening by Hope & Co. of a new Spanish loan. This
was of 30 million guilders and, like the previous one, was for the pur-
pose of meeting Spain's financial commitments towards France. The Com-
pany, however, took steps to ensure that older Spanish bonds and overdue
interest vouchers were as far as possible rendered convertible so that in
the event of the loan being fully subscribed, no more than IO million
guilders would be made available in cash. In the event, the subscriptions


                                     61
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

totalled only 23 million guilders, and of the sum remaining available only
9 million francs flowed into the French coffers. 1
  These various operations on behalf of Napoleon did not escape the
notice of his relatives. Elsewhere in the book it is shown how King Louis
Napoleon of Holland withheld permission for a 30-million guilder loan
for Spain until Hope & Co., in association with four other Amsterdam
houses, had succeeded in placing a loan of 40 million for the Kingdom of
Holland. 2
  Hardly had this obstacle been surmounted when King Joseph of Naples
approached the house. His requirements were modest, a mere 3 mil-
lion guilders, but the capital market was tight and the loans for Spain and
Holland were a long way from being fully subscribed. The solution which
emerged involved the house assuming temporary responsibility for a
portion of the loan, the balance being furnished by ihe king's brothers in
France and Holland. 3
  With the Neapolitan loan, the limit had been reached. Overtures by the
Prussian agent, Niebuhr, to obtain a loan in Amsterdam for the purpose
of financing his government's war levy to France met with a refusal from
Labouchere. Similar attempts by a number of small German states and by
the Kingdom of Italy met with a similar fate. 4
  The foregoing shows how important a role the Amsterdam money mar-
ket continued to play within the framework of the Napoleonic regime. In
many instances, the calls made upon it related to a form of pre-financing
of the war levies and contributions imposed by Napoleon on defeated
enemies and allies alike. It is particularly interesting to see how, through a
combination of circumstances, it fell to the pro-English house of Hope &
Co. to play the principal role and, as a result of this, to achieve a more
dominant position than ever in Amsterdam.
  Just how closely Hope's mercantile and loan activities were interwoven
was again demonstrated during the malaise which accompanied the war.
Between 1802 and the end of the Napoleonic wars, the Portuguese loan
brought more than 280,000 carats of diamonds to Holland, enabling a
degree of continuity in the employment of the polishers in Amsterdam to
be maintained. Similarly, the brazilwood monopoly, to which reference
has been made, kept trade in this article going.
  The transactions with Ouvrard, and later with Napoleon, released a flow
of colonial produce which was largely directed towards Amsterdam. This
current of trade was accelerated by the payments which the United States
faced in Holland, and which stemmed from the Louisiana loan and earlier
financial commitments.
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

In the light of these studies, one may pose the question whether the
Napoleonic era did in fact result in such catastrophic losses on the part of
holders of foreign bonds as is commonly suggested. This is not the place
for a detailed investigation of the matter; but of the loans discussed here,
only those granted to Spain had ruinous consequences for the bondhold-
ers. France and Sweden arbitrarily reduced their debts by two-thirds, but
did not abrogate them altogether. Russia and Austria were in arrears in
varying degrees, but both ultimately rehabilitated their former debts,
thereby reactivating large sums which had been considered lost. Amster-
dam's amazing recovery as a loan centre and the amount of capital
invested abroad in the decades after 1815 suggest that the losses suffered
previously were limited. 1
  We have already referred to the delicate nature of the relationship be-
tween a government which desired to float a loan and a middle-class house
such as Hope. In the case of Napoleon and his ministers. the relationship
was more difficult in some ways and easier in others.
  Napoleon's profound dislike of merchants and speculators is revealed in
no uncertain terms in the chapter dealing with the Spanish loans. His
treatment of Ouvrard shows that he could translate this dislike into deeds.
It is thus the more surprising to find him unreservedly displaying respect
for Hope & Co. When on a mission to the house, one of his senior offi-
cials, who was later to become Baron Louis, was patently given the cold
shoulder by Labouchere, yet no hint of a reprisal was forthcoming. 2
  It is obvious that Hope & Co. enjoyed a position of power. They could
have allowed the Mexican transaction to fail without fear of action on the
part of the French government. There was also the point that the nucleus
of the house was situated in England, and was thus beyond the reach of
Napoleon. But there were more factors at work. In spite of his dislike of
merchants, Napoleon must have possessed respect for the independence of
a man like Labouchere and for the financial strength and integrity of a
house which had shown itself to be averse to shady deals and unsound
financing. His statement to his ministerial council, that Hope would not
be tempted by a sum of 40 million francs to furnish false correspondence,
was probably embellished by the spokesman, but it will nevertheless have
reflected the essence of Napoleon's opinion. 3 The diplomatic missions
subsequently undertaken by Labouchere on behalf of both Louis Napo-
leon and Bonaparte himself support this view. 4
  Hope's relationships with the ministers and senior civil servants who
surrounded Napoleon were generally easier than those with similar
officials in countries such as Russia and Spain. Despite the handsome
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

titles bestowed upon them by Napoleon, the majority were of middle-
class origin and thus did not suffer from the inhibitions which Voute and,
later, Melvil were to encounter in Russia. Labouchere was even on
friendly terms with Talleyrand, an old-style aristocrat, though it must be
admitted that the latter's flair for monetary matters will certainly have
influenced their relationship. 1
  These sound connexions in Paris were of great importance to the house
in Amsterdam. Subordinate police officials in Holland observed Hope's
actions with the utmost suspicion, and in their reports to Paris they re-
peatedly urged that the Company's books and correspondence should be
investigated. 2 But thanks to the protection which the Company enjoyed
in the highest government circles, such an investigation never took place.
In this context. it is piquant to read how, in r8I2, Labouchere, who was
then at Bad Pyrmont, arranged for his letters to England to be carried by
extra couriers detailed to travel on behalf of the Duchess of Rovigo, the
wife of the French Minister of Police. 3
  Hope's unassailable position engendered ill-feeling, not only in those
countries which had to suffer Napoleon's caprices, such as Spain, but also
in Holland itself. The radicals who had been present at the birth of the
Batavian Republic found it difficult to stomach a situation in which the
Anglo-Orangist house in Amsterdam was not only permitted to go its
own way unhindered, but even occupied a position of utter supremacy.
  Niebuhr, who as agent of the defeated Prussia had gone to Hope to beg
for a loan, and who afterwards felt that he had been treated humiliatingly
by Labouchere, wrote with scarcely disguised hate of the 'monopolizing,
tyrannical supremacy' of the house. The Amsterdam merchant Brants had
earlier intimated to Niebuhr that he could obtain a couple of million
from other houses, but that for a loan of 20 million he would inevi-
 tably end up 'entre les mains du tyran.' 4 This brings us face to face with a
cold, haughty trait in Labouchere's character which had played him false
during the negotiations with the Staatsbewind concerning the Portuguese
loan. Niebuhr, too, would not forget Labouchere's treatment of him.
  As the Continental System increasingly paralyzed trade to and from the
 European ports, the commercial importance of the Amsterdam house
 declined in the eyes of the partners in London. Personal factors also
 played a role. Henry Hope was nearing seventy years of age and was
 taking a steadily less active part in the business. John Hope's sons still
 displayed a complete lack of interest, and John Williams Hope longed
 more and more to turn his back on Holland and return to England.
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

 In April 1808 John Williams Hope sold the Welgelegen estate, near
 Haarlem, to King Louis Napoleon for cf 300,000. In Amsterdam, John
 Dixon, a former partner in Littledale & Dixon of Rotterdam, was engaged
 in order to strengthen the day-to-day management. It was also arranged
 that Henry Hope Jr., John Williams Hope's eldest son, should work in the
 office. In September 1808, John Williams Hope left for England. His wife
was to have joined him after travelling via Germany, but halfway through
the journey she turned back and joined her lover, Colonel Von Dopff,
with whom she had maintained an association for many years. 1
  Nolte describes in his autobiography how Henry Hope favoured a
divorce, but was opposed by John Williams Hope out of sensitivity
towards the reputation of his benefactor.
  The volume of the grootboeken and journals reveals the extent to which
business decreased after 1808. The Spanish affairs had got completely out
of order since the occupation of Spain by French troops in that year.
William Gordon Coesvelt, acting as Hope's special agent, made frantic
but unsuccessful efforts to find a way of continuing the interest payments. 2
Even earlier than Spain, Portugal had been occupied by the French, and
its Court and government had fled to Brazil. Interest and principal pay-
ments on the Portuguese loan could henceforth be expected to emanate
from Brazil, and it would be far easier to broach these matters from
London than from Amsterdam. 3
  In 18IO Henry Hope Jr., having found that office work interested him
little, resigned from the Amsterdam house. Dixon suffered a stroke in the
same year, from which he died soon afterwards. In an effort to fill the
vacancies, power of procuration was given to one of the foreign cor-
respondents in the office, Pierre Firmin Lestapis.
  With the annexation of the Kingdom of Holland to France, a new era
in the Company's history commenced. Labouchere by now desired to
relinquish the reins of day-to-day management, but the ramifications of
the Spanish affair and growing difficulties concerning the Russian interest
and principal payments prevented him from doing so.
  The gradual disintegration of the Amsterdam house was accelerated by
the death on 25th February 1811 of Henry Hope, 'attacked by a disorder
which baffled all medical skill.'4
  Labouchere had already planned a journey to England for consultations
on the interest and principal due on the Portuguese loan, and his arrival
in London was thus timely from the point of view of the future of the
Amsterdam house. After ample discussions with the surviving partners,
it was decided that Labouchere should retire at the end of the year. He
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

was given full authority to make arrangements with others for the preser-
vation and continuation of the house. It was agreed that he should
continue to sign on behalf of the Company in order that confidence in it
should not be undermined, but John Hope-as John Williams Hope had
called himself since the death of his great benefactor-undertook to in-
demnify Labouchere against any adverse consequences arising from the
use of his signature. To the outside world, Labouchere thus appeared to
be still a partner. 1
 As Labouchere proposed to leave for Russia in June 18I1, the matter of
the day-to-day management in Amsterdam had to be settled without
delay. On 15th June, William Gordon Coesvelt, Pierre Firmin Lestapis
and Adriaan van der Hoop appended their signatures to an agreement
whereby they became managers. 2
 To Labouchere's vexation, John Hope proved to be obsessed with the
idea of liquidating Hope & Co. He insisted that the capital remaining in
Amsterdam should be realized as quickly as possible and transferred to
London. He quarrelled bitterly with his co-partners, Thomas and Henry
Philip Hope, on the subject of money, and his conduct was characterized
by avarice and morbid suspicion. His relationship with Labouchere was
downright bad, and this was undoubtedly among the reasons which led
to the latter's retirement. The steady deterioration of John Hope's health
might perhaps be put forward as a mitigating factor.
  Labouchere was particularly indignant at John Hope's plans to dismiss
the entire staff of the Amsterdam office. Amsterdam was a dead city:
there was no work to be found, and this meant that men who had given
years of their life to the Company would be reduced to begging. In con-
sultation with the managers and the confidential agent, David Berck, it
was decided that John Hope's orders should simply be ignored and that the
remaining staff should be kept on. 3 The problems of liquidity experienced
by the managers by reason of the short financial rein on which they were
kept by John Hope are described in the chapter dealing with the Russian
loans.4 In the case of the Portuguese loan, it took repeated appeals and
warnings to persuade him to approve the payment ofinterest. 5
 John Hope died on 12th February 1813. The tragedy of his life was
reflected in the indecent haste with which his widow remarried: two
months later she became the wife of Baron Von Dopff. John Hope's death
accelerated the process of liquidation which had already commenced.
Thomas and Henry Hope had no ties whatsoever with the Amsterdam
house, and John Hope's widow was only interested in cash. It was only
with difficulty that she was prevented from drawing on Henry Hope & Co.

                                   66
       ~i' ...'''' ~i. I!..      I." "". ri<tri... HI tv'4 bo. t oo bor            ./)f,,'" ;E-N RI
U!lb JOliN 1101'';. ~b<I' "' IM ,l)<ufrf, unO I. foll'~" 12"'leIIlu,rl ••« QJlIII' tM.
bitftr .t"'~ ltlt11    IIrnihr bit \lurmJRluf~(' tau".I~n Jt.I ",rr(.a'm, tile t qUlbUicl\ l\C'r . f l ~
l!l'I~I",       •• m,,"d ~ Utt....i"IIII' f' .. I. bttftr om,h" J)rmo P II T I! R C E A It LA·
UUUCIII!.ne tin i~ •• trl4ftn t:.rri6 •• 7>G.bur~ ftllrb biC'f"' I RGl4:bnn « ~~ IIO f Drtt
=:Jo f(''' Ilute unftrm io.llhlitmrnl uruclgtiolm ~lftl b(r unmmtl6a.~rt !8tp~t r Dtfftlhn.
       1)" 11;""4tn Um~jn , "'(eII'       bit     '("'"'1 j),... b. t u l'VI'IAt" "'I,n, unO Oit
1'I".~<t, !in~'!.'" 3.h ••   ri, Oi • .l)QI\~I.nj hi.. u"' I.~im",. b•., \!n'f<tlu, .(nrr "nl li.
4tn fiquro.II •• Orl .I)'.f" I" ••"..... 1)(, ,.1. 1"1"            a.(.
                                                        ItJlrt<.b. 5"un fell' • 1"('
14m un'"., .I).rm I.ABO CIIERE .nb .I)'", 'IIER O NI~IUS SI L LE~I, Orr
In bo, I"'m     anI~..( ~ •••U.. unO . "<tltl.. J)oufrl MAT 'r III E S5 E & ILL E M
i. j).n,6urt    ."''1''' I~, t OI Oirf<n ~""Itn r.l. 3.ltrti< mil bnn U'(rll" lu ",6;. ' tT.
Sn ~f,tn btmftll4- b-d Ilrrenilg,m ~e"ft1 l1l\iulrlgC'n hi lIir untJ ~orn.rbm(n un ~C'u le
t n, un.tr rtlntr 'DimuCln unb btf1tnl!ltn btr J)trrrn ,.,. VA~ Ol-It. (lOOP unb P. f .
L l=: 'I" A r IS) bit ~  n unr," ~trd)l('t lrit nlt~r r: C' brtO :!:ltlttn Inltn, ul1fnt 1II1I,n
Iltr61nOunStft mh unfttt .)l'tUntwn Allttltr 1111 dC't 'tOit1tttd '"iu'nilpftn, ftlt[~t tlit Urn,
, aobr lu'41im "'trbtu. ~Ir ~lIftn lion I~r~n Un ltrrd;lrtfltl1 Slc'lt IU n r~nlm, fo ~iC' .~ "
bfrltniStR Ullrt~ J)ttrl. l.. ;\ U0 U ell E R Po- I "rI~(' ~lnfli~", bit dnJistft rt1"rt. ttttbtn ,
inl>tm uar,r 3rtunb.«)f1t w. O. c ..:. VEL T eminr4J1 01111 btm (tnl."!, lim fr bitt:.
tl1' on tiff !tirunJ un(trf J)ilUj'ri Imommtn, IU C'n'(lIsm, dn6tf~.'btf intltfl'm btT'l ~nI'Ull1.
I'. ~" 3<""'0!4I<1I u.o ~tun" til. 'Ib Crt. ro I'ni " Sd l .,iI dm Ui'Slrlbm. bt(f, ietlo
 l'minbm..
        B I . ..'.r4>" b.t Ell. an. ,(1 E!,I"mt,1t .,b.. _"•• Eli.... 11r~ ... "' DIe
                                                              .oct . n!,", llI!n fir !»I
Sril ud .., n 0" QJlill" .. C.m 3ttunbo. I" bl.. ,o bnullllllm,
 :lottt';. ,tf4>rN4>' "'L
       Gf.t~ml,.. e i. bit IlnJcllru ....(m, lU'I."I4>""" .1) ...'*1....




IInt"'4>ri(l ••• P. C. L A BOUC H E RE
                                                                ~ J("
Ualtrf4>rirl ~.n fll ER ONIM U S SILLEM
                                                                          I~fb
IInlnr<tri(1 "on ADRIA N •• "            0 . ..   HOOP
                                                                 &rl<-
                                                                  lf~~·

Circular announcing the re·establishment of Hope & Co. in 1815
                       THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

in advance of the completion and provisional balancing of the accounts.
She had from the outset been on bad terms with her cousins, Thomas and
Henry Philip, whom she suspected of planning to cheat her.1
  On I7th July, the two brothers bought out their troublesome relative.
She received the capital which her first husband had possessed according
to the balance sheet for 181 I, less a share of the losses suffered by the firm
as a result of the manipulations of a fraudulent bookkeeper at the Am-
sterdam office. With accrued interest from 1st January 1812 to the day of
John Hope's death, she received a sum of 183,509.2-4 pounds sterling. 2
  This action heralded the complete dissolution of the former partnership.
On 3rd September 1813 Thomas and Henry Philip Hope transferred
everything relating to that partnership to Alexander Baring, and in return
each received three promissory notes to a value of 25,000 pounds sterling,
payable on 1st September in the years 1816, 1817 and 1818. Baring ac-
cepted responsibility for 100,52147 pounds of the payments to Baroness
Von Dopff. He thus paid 250,521.4.7 pounds sterling for the two houses,
Hope & Co. and Henry Hope & Co., and the freedom to make of these
what he wished. 3
  The ideal for which Sir Francis Baring had striven in 1802 had been
achieved. But he did not witness the event, for he had died in 1810. In any
case, he would probably not have been pleased by the condition of the
new acquisition. After all, Hope & Co. was little more than an empty
shell, the facade of which could either be left standing or used to front a
new building, at the discretion of the new owner.
  Although no immediate decision on its future was taken, thoughts of
liquidation receded in November 1813, when the French domination of
Holland came to an end and trade revived.
  For the house itself, things provisionally continued as before. Alexander
Baring approved the payment of current interest and principal instalments,
but made his decision regarding the future of Hope & Co. dependent upon
the decisions which the Congress of Vienna would take regarding the
future of Holland.
  With its fate hanging in the balance, the house could make only a limited
response to Russian requirements for credit to maintain the armies of
occupation in western Europe. 1n spite of going to the limit of its capa-
bility, Hope was more than once obliged to bow to the house of Roth-
schild, which was only too anxious to demonstrate its financial strength
to the allies. 4 The role which Hope & Co. had earlier fulfilled in the loan
sector was to pass to Rothschild after 1815.
The protocol of 2 I st June 1814, in which the allied powers consented to
                                      68
                      THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM

the unification of Belgium and Holland, provided Alexander Baring with
the certainty which he desired. A circular was sent to Hope & Co.'s
correspondents, advising them that, with effect from 1st January 1815,
the affairs of the house would be directed by Pierre Cesar Labouchere,
Hieronymus Sillem, Adriaan van der Hoop and Pierre Firmin Lestapis.
Sillem had been a partner in the house of Matthiessen & Sillem of Ham-
burg, of which we learned in connexion with the perilous days of 1798.
Sillem had visited Russia in 1812, and while there had skilfully represented
the interests of the holders of Russian bonds. Labouchere's role in the
new management team was in some ways as theoretical as his partnership
under the agreement of 1811, for he had stated emphatically that he no
longer wished to bear responsibility for daily affairs. His removal to
London served to underline this. 1
  Hope & Co. had thus been reborn, though it was not the Hope & Co.
which we have come to know through our researches. But the significance
which had become attached to the name with the passing of the years was
clearly reflected in the considerable sum which Baring was prepared to
pay to acquire it.
 Around Hope a silence had descended. All the major houses with whom
Hope has been compared in our story had disappeared: Clifford and Pels
following the crisis of 1772, and Hogguer, De Smeth and Muilman during
the difficult first decade of the 19th century. 2
  Amsterdam's position as the principal financial centre in Europe had
passed to London, and the new-style house was destined to operate within
a narrower framework. The transactions which had been entered upon in
the preceding period provided an outline of the areas upon which the
efforts of the reborn Hope & Co. would be focussed: Russia and the
United States. The family and the firm had gone their separate ways, but
the old business principles remained, and so Hope & Co. in its new
framework remained what it had been in the old: the leader in its field;
a house with a first-class reputation.
      BALTIC AFFAIRS

SWEDISH, POLISH AND RUSSIAN LOANS
                            CHAPTER TWO

                   SWEDISH PRELUDE



Sweden lost its position of power in the Baltic at the beginning of the 18th
century. When in 1687 Charles XII, then fifteen years of age, succeeded
his father, Saxony, Poland, Denmark and Russia considered the moment
ripe to deprive Sweden of the areas on the other side of the Baltic Sea
which it had conquered during the 17th century. In the early
stages of the Great Northern War which ensued, the Swedish king achieved
major successes, but eventually the sheer expanse of Russia and the
superiority of the armies of Czar Peter proved too much for the limited
Swedish forces. At the Peace of Nystad, in 1721, the Baltic states and,
with them, the hegemony in the Baltic region passed into the hands of
Russia, and from then on Russian influence became a permanent feature
there. In the 18th century this unpredictable and expansive country was
to exert ever-increasing pressure on its neighbours.
  In Sweden, the death of Charles XII in 1718 was followed by a reaction
among the nobility which nullified the absolutistic reforms introduced by
earlier kings. Sweden again became a constitutional monarchy in which
the power of the ruler was insignificant in comparison with that of the
riksdag. In this body, the nobles dominated the representatives of the
other three Estates, the clergy, the burghers and the peasants. The nobles,
however, soon disintegrated into two fiercely antagonistic factions: 'the
Hats' and 'the Caps.' The Hats favoured a strong foreign policy, which
they felt could be best achieved by restoring the old ties with France; the
Caps were of the opinion that the country's interests would be best served
by a policy of cautious neutrality. Soon opinions were similarly divided
in the other Estates.
 While the country was recovering from the effects of the long war, the
urge for peace triumphed; but gradually a mood of belligerence developed.
In 1739 the Hats came to power. Their period in office was marked by a
number of ill-conceived wars which produced no gains and brought the
country to the brink of financial ruin.! From 1741 to 1743 Sweden waged
war against Russia, with a signal lack of success, and in the Seven Years'
War (1756-1763), at the instigation of France, forces operating from
Swedish Pomerania undertook a series of pointless and fruitless campaigns

                                    73
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

against Prussia. The ruling Hats attempted to meet the cost of these
military operations by the simple expedient of printing money. A decree
issued in 1745, that banknotes would henceforth not be redeemable in
coin, caused this paper money to depreciate to only one-third of its face
value. 1 Many suffered hardship from the measure, and for some time
there were signs that the riksdag of 1760-1762 would put an end to the
dominion of the Hats. But by skilful manoeuvres, chief among which was
the ending in 1762 of the war against Prussia, they managed to save their
political skin. 2
  However, no solution had been found to the confusion which surrounded
the nation's finances and, to make a critical situation even worse, a
number of disasters occurred. In 1762 the agrarian sector suffered a heavy
blow in the shape of an epidemic of rinderpest, and in the following year
many Swedish business houses were bankrupted by the collapse of the
Stock Exchanges in Amsterdam and Hamburg, which resulted partly from
Sweden's inability to meet its liabilities. 3 Efforts to obtain a loan abroad
failed utterly.
  The bill was finally presented to the Hats during the riksdag of 1765-66.
The Caps had at last secured a majority of support in all Estates, and they
demanded an immediate investigation into the country's financial posi-
tion. The extent of the mismanagement, extravagance and corruption
which the investigation revealed was so great that the riksdag was obliged
to make drastic cuts in expenditure in all fields and to impose heavy taxes,
particularly on merchant members of the Hat party, who were accused of
complicity. Because of these measures, the assembly went down in history
as the 'Reduktion Riksdag.' 4
  During the deliberations of the riksdag, the representatives of the four
Estates had approached the king with a request that he arrange a foreign
loan. A year later, in 1767, this was negotiated, and on 17th November of
that year King Adolph Frederick appended his signature to a document
in favour of Hope & Co. providing for a ten-year debenture loan of
750,000 Dutch current florins bearing interest at 5 %. Two special collat-
eral securities were provided: first, 'the duties levied on the consumption
of imported goods and upon mercantile dealings, the revenues from stamp
duties, the surplus revenue of the postal service, the tithes and the duties
levied upon iron and the appointed fund for the payment of the State's
debts'; secondly, Hope received forty promissory notes of 10,000 rix-
dollars each, issued by the 'Swedish State Treasury' and guaranteed by
the Estates. These were to remain in Hope's possession until the final
repayment against the loan had been made. It was these notes which

                                     74
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

imparted the character of a secured loan to this and subsequent trans-
actions, and with this the title Negotiaties van helening, or loans on
security.
  On 25th February 1768, John Hope, bearing the forty notes, appeared
before Cornelis van Homrigh, notary, in whose presence these were
deposited in a tin box, which was then wrapped in bleached linen and tied
round with a red ribbon to which Hope and Van Homrigh attached their
personal seals. The two then journeyed to the Amsterdam Town Hall,
where the box was handed to the burgomasters. Their seals were im-
pressed upon the package as well, and it was then taken to the Exchange
Bank for safe keeping.1 Apart from the cumbrousness of the procedure,
the reader will have observed that the total value of the promissory notes
exceeded the sum of the loan by one-third; it may well be that this
reflected Sweden's poor credit standing. Be this as it may, such a margin
was not incorporated in subsequent loans.
  Despite this loan and another negotiated in Genoa, the new Caps ad-
ministration failed to balance the budget. In an effort to reduce imports,
fines were imposed for drinking coffee and wine, and smoking tobacco,
but the savage economies and the over-hasty recall of the paper money
caused prices to fall, bringing hardship to large sections of the population.
Dissatisfaction grew and was intensified by the action of the Caps in ever
more openly turning to Russia, where Catherine II was only too eager to
interfere in the affairs of her neighbours. 2 The Hats at that time were
strongly supported by France. Everywhere voices were heard for a new
riksdag to be convened, but not until a serious clash had occurred with
King Adolph Frederick (who went so far as to abdicate for a week in
order to enforce his will) did the Caps consent to call an extraordinary
riksdag for April 1769. The ensuing election campaign was fought with
immense ferocity and amid repeated interference by foreign powers,
notably France and Russia, which liberally distributed funds to the parties
of their choice. In spite of dire warnings by the Caps that their defeat
would open the way for a Russian intervention, the Hats obtained a
majority in all four Estates. 3
  Prior to the election the Hats had given a written undertaking to the
French envoy to reform the Swedish constitution in an autocratic sense:
it was, of course, as much in France's interest that Sweden should be
strong as in Russia's interest that the country should remain weak and
disunited. 4 But although moderate, the reform proposal was rejected by
the riksdag in November 1769, after a protracted debate. The French
reacted by cutting off all subsidies to the Hats, thereby placing the govern-

                                     75
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

ment in a difficult financial position-the more so since, as of old, public
funds were dispensed lavishly. As in the previous riksdag, a solution was
sought in foreign loans.!
 Three loans for Sweden were negotiated in the Republic in the year 1770:
in March, a loan of cf 1,250,000 at 5 % interest by Horneca Hogguer &
Co.; in September one of cf 1,250,000 by Bargum, which was subse-
quently extended by Van den Sandheuvel & Son and Van Orsoy & Son;
and in December a further loan of cf 1,000,000 by Hope & Co. and
Horneca Hogguer & Co. The last two also bore interest at 5 %.2
 On 21st December 1770, Adrian Hope and Daniel Hogguer, representing
their respective firms, appeared before Van Homrigh carrying two de-
bentures issued by the State Treasury, each in the sum of 200,000 rix-
dollars. This time the bonds were not lodged with the Exchange Bank via
the Town Hall, but were placed by Van Homrigh in an iron chest in his
office and one of the keys was given to each of the parties. 3
 The principal debenture did not contain a specification of the goods and
revenues mortgaged (this was not surprising after the two previous loans),
but as an additional guarantee of payment of the interest it was stipulated
that: 'a satisfactory quantity of copper shall be supplied to the lenders by
way of security.' 4 Because of the importance of its copper mines, Sweden
maintained both silver and copper standards; indeed, copper was the
security upon which banknotes were issued. Payment in copper, if other
means failed, was thus a logical demand. 5
 In February 1771, Adolph Frederick died unexpectedly. At the time of
his death, the Crown Prince, Gustav III, was in France. The government
there utilized the opportunity to oblige the young ruler by entering into a
new treaty which gave him an annual subsidy of 1,500,000 livres. In
an effort to counter Russian intrigues, France despatched her best
diplomat, De Vergennes, to Stockholm. Gustav III had meanwhile
returned to his capital, where he had become involved in the fierce
electoral battle for a new riksdag. Thanks to Russian bribes, the
Caps had achieved considerable success in all but the noble Estate,
and again a change of government was threatened. To avert this, the
king did his utmost to have a Hat elected as talman, or spokesman
for the nobility, but since De Vergennes had arrived in Stockholm
empty-handed, the king lacked the funds to attain his goal. Without
consulting the French envoy, he drew on Horneca Hogguer & Co. for
more than 2,000,000 guilders, offering as collateral only the first in-
stalment of the French subsidies, which did not become due until 1st
January 1772. With the funds from Horneca, he succeeded in getting his
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

 man elected. 1 No mention of these transactions appears in the books of
 Hope & Co.: in all probability, the partners viewed financing activities
 of this nature as being too adventurous and too risky.
   Despite this initial success on the part of the king, the Caps gained a
 firmer foothold, and it began to look as if they would succeed in making
 Gustav's position as insignificant as that of his father. Gradually, the
 notion of a coup d'etat commenced to fix itself in the mind of the king,
and this was strengthened by the realization that a Cap government
 would make the country completely dependent upon Russia. But if he
 was to act at all, he would have to hurry, for the war which Catherine II
 was waging against the Turks was progressing extremely favourably from
the Russian point of view and could well end soon. Admittedly, the
 Russians were also occupied with the First Partition of Poland, but there,
too, things could change rapidly. On 19th August 1772 the king, with the
help of a handful of loyal supporters, succeeded in taking his enemies by
surprise. Cowed by the display of military power, the riksdag adopted a
new constitution on the following day.2 The hegemony of the nobility
was at an end, but the rights of the monarch continued to be somewhat
limited by, among other things, the budgetary powers vested in the
riksdag.
  In preparing the coup, Gustav had enjoyed the fullhearted support of
the French envoy. De Vergennes had gone so far as to promise him
10,000 ducats, but on the eve of the coup the money had still not arrived.
At the last minute, a courier arrived bearing 5,000 ducats borrowed from
Grill & Co. of Amsterdam against a guarantee from De Vergennes. 3
  The events which took place in Sweden represented a major setback for
Catherine II. Russia could expect little from a powerful Sweden closely
allied to France. Indeed, even a resumption of the policy of revenge
pursued by the Hats seemed probable. Catherine started to prepare for
war with Sweden, but setbacks in the Turkish campaign forced her to
postpone her plan-not, however, before she had made secret agreements
with Denmark for a future attack against Gustav m.4
  The restoration of peace, albeit somewhat uncertain, provided Gustav
with an opportunity to effect all manner of reforms. Apart from the army
and the navy, the country's finances again demanded much of his atten-
tion. To avert a threat of bankruptcy, the king appointed the skilful and
incorruptible Baron Liljencrantz to the presidency of a newly established
Department of Finance. The latter's first act was to implement a much
needed and greatly overdue reform of the currency. His initial concern
was to abandon the dual standard in favour of a single, silver, standard.

                                   77
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

Then, when the rixdollar had been devalued by 50 %,1 the old bank-
notes (which had become worth only one-third of their face value)
would have to be replaced by new ones. Lastly, the new banknotes would
have to be freely exchangeable for coin. This last step was dependent upon
the Riksens Standers Banque, the historic bank of Sweden, obtaining finan-
cial support from the government, and this in turn depended upon,
among other things, a foreign loan of 1,200,000 rixdollars. In July 1775, in
the face of persistent refusal by the governors of the bank to accept the
convertibility of notes, out of fear of a run on the bank, the king inter-
vened personally. He commanded the governors to comply, but agreed to
postponement of the operation until the beginning of 1777. The interim
period provided Liljencrantz with an opportunity to negotiate the loan
abroad, to which end he approached Hope and Horneca Fizeaux & Co.,
the latter the successor to Horneca Hogguer & Co. 2
  On 26th September and 9th October 1775 Henry Hope and Henri Fizeaux
attended the offices of Van Homrigh for the enactment of the protocol
and registration of debentures provided by Gustav III. The first, in the sum
of 2,000,000 guilders, was dated 6th July and the second, of 1.000.000
guilders, 5th September, 1775. The constituent bonds relating to both
were dated 1st November 1775, giving the appearance of a single loan. 3
  The fact that, despite the absence of a guarantee by the Estates, the loan
bore interest at 4 % instead of 5 %, and was of more favourable duration,
marked a personal triumph by Liljencrantz. 4 The commission due to the
negotiators was admittedly the same as for the 1770 loan, i.e. 41- %, but
in neither case could this be regarded as high.
  The rewards accruing to the negotiators were scrupulously divided.
 Commissions, interest payments and principal monies, all were shared
 down to the last penny. If either exceeded his share as a result of pay-
ments, or if the sum of the silver coins, mostly piastres, sent to Sweden
was less than one-half of the total, the difference was adjusted at the end of
every year. 5
  In addition to the reform of the currency, the national economy de-
manded Liljencrantz's attention. To cover the deficit over 1776, he ob-
tained at the beginning of that year a 4 % loan of cf 3,000,000 from the
 Amsterdam bankers Jan and Carl Hasselgreen. This greatly embarassed
 Hope and Horneca Fizeaux, who had then just floated their loan on the
 market, and in a letter despatched to Sweden they expressed their dis-
 pleasure in no uncertain terms. If Liljencrantz needed more money and
 desired to increase the loans, they argued, he should have approached
 them. What would the public reaction be to a new loan so soon after the
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

other, and one obtained from a different source at that? Sweden's credit
would inevitably suffer.l Liljencrantz's reply was amicable in the ex-
treme, and from the king the bankers received 'the most flattering assur-
ances of the sustained continuation of His protection and His goodwill.'
A severance of relations with Hope and Horneca Fizeaux would not have
been in the interest of Sweden, which by spreading its loans over several
sources avoided undue dependence on anyone. Nevertheless, further
loans to Sweden by Hope and Horneca Fizeaux were out of the question
for the time being.
  After 1775 the government of Gustav III began to lose much of its initial
popularity. In response to a proposal by Liljencrantz, distilling, in which
the peasants had hitherto freely indulged, was decreed a state monopoly.
Efforts to lease to private enterprise the distilleries founded on behalf of
the Crown failed. The government, in a mood of anger, proceeded to run
them, but soon found its efforts sabotaged by large-scale smuggling and
the clandestine production of spirit. 2 The measure was extremely unpopu-
lar among the people.
  For the government, faced with the collapse of this anticipated new
source of revenue, the repayments due against the two ten-year loans
taken up in [770 represented a very heavy burden indeed. If a disastrous
drain on the Treasury was to be avoided, steps would have to be taken to
extend the period of repayment of the existing loans, or to convert them
into new ones. Negotiations were started with Hope & Co. and Fizeaux
Grand & Co. (since 1779 successors to Horneca Fizeaux & Co.) for a loan
to replace the one of cf 1,250,000 entered into with Horneca Hogguer &
Co. on 1st March 1770.3 On 12th November 1779, 'Monsieur de Heiden-
starn,' Charge d'Affaires of the Swedish King at the States General of the
Seven United Provinces of The Netherlands, signed, on behalf of his
sovereign, a contract with Hope and Fizeaux providing for a twelve-year
loan of cf 750,000 bearing interest at 4 %. The fact that the sum to be
repaid by the Swedish government exceeded the newly negotiated loan by
cf 500,000 served to reduce Sweden's debt by this amount. The two bank-
ing houses received by way of commission 2 % of the principal sum,
plus a further 6 % 'as a gratification for the brokers and entrepreneurs
concerned in this operation' and to meet all other expenses. 4
  Having dealt with the loan dated 1st March 1770, the Swedish govern-
ment was faced with the problem of the one-million guilder loan dated
1st December of the same year. Again they succeeded in obtaining a
partial novation. On 14th June 1780, Gustav signed the principal debenture
for a I5-year loan of cf 750,000 bearing interest at 4 %. As had been
                                    79
)1'1'/'   /It/" ,1:, lC' .# '
  ~ ~ (1 (      ~/"C.'" '" I~J"r'/f.F IIISNO"""€..>
                                       ,
21. :1(, 1'11-1."'1 M/~II ·. ftl7·t, ,

                     12 ..~.. I   {;Z I~,·'/.i    I   •
                                                                             /
                                                                        .' '/'II/'·
                                                                                         I'
                                                                                       •1,11''; (" f'.          ,

                                                                                       ~.;.(,.;.7.;.~O;;.;O,:;.;;;.",_!./'l 7. " , _
                                                                                      "t . . . . . . . .   ~   -- ,     .' L .i.~1 '1_

                                                                                                                       ~· I~W"~f.').

                                                                                              /
                                                                                        • S7,~. ('{'. __
                                                                                           ?      1.1 'n   t . 'J. . /I . '1'nl ') ~



                                                                                                                          12A51./f


 ~ . "!"..:/;[:., , , ,.,., ,)" ·h't.:.r"~' (.!!:"",.,.,,- ,1j'(Q""I.'1
                                                                                                                        /20J43 I. 9.8
                                                                                                               M 1.<

          l·!rY":l~~ ,~t. . c.. ~11     ...:~'7   w'.') ",. f'. ,r hi; I..'~,*~....     ...... _ ... ...
      (l             .                  ~.                    .. ~
      .I';UWN it I_ '~/U/·""4... '';''I'/~r                   :.;trl·
                                   l:~tlttl4~' .•.                                  _. ~7"t.
                                                                                                       /
                                   (. in'/: .~~        V:~~t,:.,ut.                 ,:' 7£1.f.'. ~t        1(~(s.~.2_

       I                                / .-I.                 .,' (,.,..,,,/1; "
                                                       .
      .,0"   ·n     I    '.;' I!                       I                                               _.• ,II( {'. ,
      .{",,,:     ", ~/.                          /(       - { .~                                             ~d 1(.1




                                                                                                      .,_ .115M 19"




                                                                                                      ', 1213031.9




Annual settlement between Hope & Co. and Horneca Fizeaux=& Co. relating to the
                         Swedish loan of November 1775
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

the case with the loan of 1st March 1780, bonds relating to the original
loan could be exchanged for new bonds; in addition, the holders would
receive priority. Any surplus remaining when the public subscription clos-
ed would, as usual, accrue to the entrepreneurs. 1
  The rate of interest on the new loans was 4 %, compared with 5 % on
those repaid, so that the novation in fact amounted to conversion. Doubt-
less encouraged by this reduction, the Swedish government decided to
repay the loan obtained from Bargum, Van den Sandheuvel & Son and
Van Orsoy & Son. Admittedly, this had been entered into for a period of
twenty years, but the government had the right to commence repayment
after ten years. Conversion into a 4 % loan would save the Swedish
Treasury 10%, or cf 125,000.2 At the end of November or early in
December, the Swedish envoy signed a contract with Hope and Fizeaux
providing for a fifteen-year loan of cf 1,750,000 at 4 % interest, com-
mencing on 1st December 1780. In addition to the sum of the repay-
ment, a further cf 500,000 was placed at the disposal of the Swedish gov-
ernment to cover current requirements. Probably as a result of the rapid
succession of loans to Sweden, among other factors, Hope and Fizeaux
stipulated that they should be free to furnish the monies at a moment
'which is most convenient to us.' In this case, the question of an obligatory
period for the repayment of the old loan did not arise. Apart from eco-
nomic considerations, others of a political nature will undoubtedly have
played a role in the cautious wording of the contract as this concerned
time. After all, the quarrels between the Patriots and those in the Republic
who stood on the side of the prince had a bearing on foreign policy. In the
conflict which broke out between England and France concerning the
American War of Independence, the Patriots were on the side of the
French, while the prince's supporters were in favour of the English. Spear-
headed by Amsterdam, the pro-Patriot towns in Holland openly sought a
conflict with England, and in 1780 war became almost inevitable. This
perhaps explains partly the high rates of commission paid to the nego-
tiators, rates which rose even higher during 1780. In the period November
1779 to early December 1780 these increased from 8 %to 9t %.
  Just how great was the effect of political developments is shown in an
addendum to the contract concluded at the end of November: 'This Con-
tract suspended in consequence of the Rupture between Great Britain and
the States General.' On 20th December 1780 England put an end to the
uncertainty by declaring war on the Republic. The proposed conversion
having thus been rendered impossible, the negotiators limited themselves
to furnishing the cf 500,000 for Sweden's immediate needs. On 4th Febru-
                                     82
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

 ary 178 I a new contract was signed: of the half million guilders, 50 %
 was to be made available immediately, the balance becoming due only
 after the loan had been floated. The remaining conditions were identical
 to those of the suspended loan. 1
   It was not until 1782 that Hope and Fizeaux were able to achieve the
 postponed repayment of the Bargum loan. In the contract entered into
 with the Swedish envoy on 7th April of that year, they undertook to ar-
 range a loan of cf 1,250,000 by 1st June, the date on which repayment of
 the loan became due. The entrepreneurs were given until mid-June to com-
 plete their part, which meant that, if the worst came to the worst, the
 issuing house would be obliged to advance the principal sum for two
 weeks. Of this sum, Hope had in any case contracted to furnish cf 400,000,
 and Fizeaux cf 150,000.2
  In 1783, bellicose plans on the part of Gustav III necessitated fresh
 foreign loans to Sweden. Early in that year the king seriously contem-
 plated precipitating a war with his old enemy, Denmark, once Russia be-
 came embroiled with the Turks. This, however, did not come about imme-
 diately, and it was finally decided to postpone the Danish war until the
 following year. Liljencrantz, who was the last to be informed of the king's
 plans, received instructions to obtain the funds necessary to increase the
country's armament. 3 In September 1783 King Gustav left Sweden for a
 political tour of southern and western Europe. Before departing, however,
he signed the principal debenture for a new loan from Hope and Fizeaux,
this time one of cf 1,500,000 for fifteen years and bearing interest at
5%·4
  Liljencrantz had succeeded once more and, apart from the higher rate of
interest, on terms which were very favourable to Sweden. The contract
with Hope and Fizeaux, which was dated 30th September 1783, gave them
only 4 % commission, compared with 7 % on the previous loan, but
against this the contracting houses committed themselves only to achieve
the completion of the negotiation at the earliest possible moment. Thus,
no fixed period for payment was laid down, nor was any guarantee of the
success of the loan given. 5 The entrepreneurs' commission took the form of
'99 per cent free money,' which implied a profit of I % if the bonds were
taken up at par. The entrepreneurs, like the issuing houses, were not bound
by time limits and were free to accept the bonds 'at the most convenient
time or times.' They were also free to accept and subscribe for such
additional sums as they might desire, while it was stipulated that the com-
mission paid to brokers and third parties should not exceed t %. 6 Of the
principal sum, the entrepreneurs accepted responsibility for no more than
                          SWEDISH PRELUDE

one-third-a remarkably small proportion. Volkmar and Ten Kate &
Berck, the brokers, jointly undertook to provide half the sum, but it may
be assumed that they were acting for principals who did not wish to be
named. Hope finally subscribed just over one-sixth.!
 The terms on which this loan was negotiated reveal a degree of uncer-
tainty and a lack of faith in the prospects for an early placing. The heavy
blows dealt to the Dutch merchantmen and to the nation's trade by the
English fleet almost certainly contributed to this. Who the brokers' prin-
cipals were, is not clear; perhaps the issuing houses (or the Swedish
government) attempted thus to camouflage a fiasco.
 The eighth loan to Sweden, at the end of 1784, was arranged only after
many difficulties had been overcome. The principal debenture, for
cf 2,000,000 at 41- %interest, had already been issued in the name of Hope
and Fizeaux when Liljencrantz suddenly demanded that another Amster-
dam house (probably Hasselgreen) should be admitted to the consortium. 2
The house concerned had independently offered its services to Liljen-
crantz, and the minister, who was very well disposed towards Hassel-
green, was anxious to reward the initiative. 3 Hope and Fizeaux, however,
stood firm and ultimately got their way. On 25th December a contract
was signed with the Swedish envoy, but only for half the sum stipulated in
the principal debenture. In correspondence with Liljencrantz, both houses
had earlier drawn attention to the thorny situation in which the Republic
was placed and which formed an obstacle to the floating of the loan. They
were in fact referring to the threatening attitude of Emperor Joseph II of
Austria who, as lord of the Southern Netherlands, was demanding the
opening of the ScheIdt estuary and was prepared to use force if necessary
to achieve this. In October 1784 hostilities had broken out near Saeftinge,
on the Scheldt. 4
 It was arranged that the one million guilders covered by the contract
would be available to Liljencrantz from January up to and including April
1785, by way of 70-day drafts, but Hope and Fizeaux were unwilling to
commit themselves in respect of the second million and so the success of
the loan as a whole was at the risk of the Swedish king, 'without which
reservation we are unable to take this upon us under the present circum-
stances.' 5 Each of the two houses received 6 % commission for the ser-
vices rendered. Because the contract was not in accordance with the origi-
nal plan, the royal approval had to be obtained; only when this had been
received could the contract with the entrepreneurs be signed. The agree-
ment of 28th January was so worded as to suggest that Hope and Fizeaux
had undertaken to furnish the floating million, so that responsibility for
                            SWEDISH PRELUDE

 the 'firmly' contracted million devolved upon the entrepreneurs, albeit
with the proviso that public subscriptions would be deducted pro rata
from the sum of the loan. 1 The terms provided for the bonds to be taken
up and paid for within six months of the closing of the period for public
subscriptions, 'subject to the payment of Interest up to the time of taking
up, at 4 per cent per annum.' 2 No mention was made of the fact that the
interest on the bonds up to the moment of taking up would accrue to the
issuing houses, who could thereby obtain an interest bonus of i % in
addition to their commission. 3
  On 3rd February-less than a week after the signing of the contract-the
entrepreneurs empowered the brokers, Volkmar and Ten Kate & Berck, to
subscribe on their behalf to the lists held by Hope & Co. and Henri Fi-
zeaux & Co. 'on the same conditions as all other persons, thus benefiting
from a douceur of t % and with the obligation to take up forthwith half
the sums accepted by us in the capacity of Entrepreneurs, this on condi-
tion that the half thus subscribed shall immediately go to reduce our com-
mitment.'4
  Thus, for a bonus of t % the entrepreneurs were willing to make imme-
diate payment for half their shares, a fact which pointed to an unexpected
response to the public subscription. Now, Hope and Fizeaux were assured
of cf 500,000 at short notice. 5 Soon a start was made with raising the
second million, though this proceeded more slowly than the first. On 9th
April the two houses requested Liljencrantz to spread his drawings over a
somewhat longer period: drafts of cf 250,000 monthly, commencing on
1st May, would be most convenient. 6
  On further consideration it appeared unwise to allow Liljencrantz to
draw on the second million. The first, cf 1,000,000, tranche of the 1775
loan became due for repayment on 1st November 1785; it would thus be
folly to allow him to draw a million guilders which he would have to repay
to Hope and Fizeaux shortly afterwards.? The Swedish minister agreed to
the proposed amendment.
  The effect of this repayment, however, was to deprive Liljencrantz of the
second million, thus leaving a gap which had to be filled by other means.
In a letter dated 18th August, the minister advised Hope and Fizeaux that
the house of De Weduwe Jean & Martin Smets of Antwerp had offered
to negotiate a loan of cf 2,000,000 at 4t % interest. Whether this offer was
solicited or not, is not known, but it is clear that the notification of it was
designed to goad the Amsterdam houses into action. 8 From the Swedish
point of view the result was satisfactory, for early in October Hope and
Fizeaux offered to open a new transaction on or about 1st February and

                                      85
                            SWEDISH PRELUDE

formally committed themselves to furnishing cf 1,000,000. As the entre-
preneurs had not finalized the placing of the previous loan, the new one
could not be launched earlier.1 They advised strongly against arranging a
loan in Antwerp, 'not only because there is no certainty that it would be a
complete success, but also because it will have a highly adverse effect upon
our investors, who would certainly not display any interest in it and who
would perhaps not look with favour upon any fresh negotiations which
the Court might be contemplating.' 2
  With the abandoning by Joseph II of his plans for the opening of the
ScheIdt, and his acceptance of an offer of compensation, the investment
climate in Amsterdam recovered considerably. 3 In the new situation,
Hope and Fizeaux felt justified in offering to guarantee not one, but one
and a half million guilders, in addition to which they undertook to fur-
nish the Swedish government with the proceeds of the loan before loth
June 1786. As with the previous loan, they were allowed 6 %commission. 4
  Even before the contract with the Swedish king was signed, an agreement
was entered into with the entrepreneurs. As in 1783, their share was limited
to one-third of the principal sum, but it is probable that in this instance
the issuing houses did not wish to assign them any more. The contracted
shares had to be taken up and paid for by 1st May, and interest on the
bonds from 1st February accrued to the issuing houses. The entrepreneurs
received I %for their services. 5
  Faith in Sweden's credit had played a major role in the successful nego-
tiation ofloans for that country. This faith, in turn, was allied to the great
personal prestige enjoyed by Liljencrantz in financial circles. But his days
as a minister were numbered. Gustav III was moving steadily towards
absolutism, in which there was no place for independent ministers. Liljen-
crantz's sermons against the extravagances of the Court and his pleas for
economy so incensed the monarch that he had Liljencrantz 'promoted' to
the Senate. He was succeeded at the end of 1786 by Baron Erik Ruuth,
who at the time of the appointment was a protege of circles well disposed
towards the king, and who exercised only nominal authority: before ac-
cepting the post, he requested-and obtained-an undertaking from the
king that he would not be held responsible for the uses to which the monies
which passed through his ministerial hands would be put. 6
  This adverse development did not remain hidden from Hope. A cor-
respondent in Gothenburg kept Hope informed of developments through-
out 1786. The man was clearly in great fear of being identified, for he went
so far as to erase the place name 'Gothenburg' from his notepaper. In
that year the king, partly at Liljencrantz's insistence, summoned a riksdag

                                     86
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

to decide, among other things, upon a number of tax proposals. To the
amazement of the royal advisers, opponents of the king secured an elec-
toral majority in three of the four Estates and proceeded to torpedo prac-
tically all the proposals. Symbolically, the proposed taxes were all re-
duced by I %-a reminder to the king that the riksdag held the purse-
strings.!
  According to Hope's correspondent-who is identified in later corre-
spondence as J aco b Andersson - the Estates, in their investigation into the
State's finances, ignored the loans obtained abroad on the pretext that the
responsibility for these rested solely with the king and that they were
nothing to do with the national debt. 2 This did not imply that the Estates
were opposed to the repayment of the debts, but rather was a hint to the
outside world not to heed future loan proposals from the king. The pro-
ceeds of these loans had after all gone to finance theatrical displays which
in the eyes of the people of poor, remote Sweden were unnecessary.3 The
nation would thus meet its obligations-not out of love for the king, but
only to protect its credit abroad. According to Andersson, Ruuth was a
puppet operated from behind the scenes by his father-in-law, Wahren-
dorff, a Stockholm merchant and a large-scale speculator who had been
involved in many an obscure affair.4

The commercial transactions undertaken for the Swedish Crown, into
which the two Amsterdam houses were drawn by Ruuth, were of the
normal type. In 1787 the Amsterdam house of Benjamin Cohen & Son
had purchased a consignment of tobacco on behalf of the Swedish Crown
and had stored this in its own warehouse. 10,000 or so 'paniers,' or
baskets, of the tobacco were sold, via an intermediary in Paris, to the
Fermiers Generaux, the tax farmers in France, who also controlled the
tobacco monopoly, an important and growing source of their income. 5
In June 1787 Hope entered into negotiations with H. Coecq & Son, the
Amsterdam agents of the Fermiers Generaux, for the sale of the remainder
of the stock held by Cohen. 6 At that time, trade in Amsterdam suffered
severely as a result of the quarrels between the Patriots and the prince's
supporters, which in late May of that year led to a complete civil war. As
a result, a long time elapsed before the brokers acting on behalf of Coecq
visited Cohen's warehouse to inspect the consignment. 7 In the meantime,
a letter arrived from Ruuth containing instructions to sell the tobacco by
public auction on 31st July and to advertise the sale in national and
foreign newspapers. 8
 With great reluctance, the partners in Hope & Co. set about arranging
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

the auction. Because, in their view, it could serve no useful purpose under
the prevailing conditions, they urgently appealed to Ruuth to be allowed
to act as circumstances demanded. The confusion reached its zenith a
week later with the arrival of a letter from Ruuth stating that Ferdinand
Grand of Paris, a brother ofthe erstwhile partner in the house of Fizeaux,
had been empowered to offer the whole consignment to the Fermiers
Generaux for cf 250,000, and instructing Hope to come to an arrangement
withhim.l
  Upon receipt of this information, the partners immediately despatched
a letter to Grand, asking how his negotiations were progressing. They
meanwhile suspended their discussions with Coecq. The Swedish minister
was advised that there could be no question of advertising the sale until
such time as a reply was received from Paris. If the effort there failed, it
would be necessary to recommence negotiations with Coecq, and the
latter would be the more reticent if the plan were to be brought to the
notice of the public in advance. 2
  July came and still Coecq was without definite information from the
Fermiers. Grand maintained a complete silence. Hope expressed to Ruuth
a suspicion that the Fermiers might well keep everyone waiting until it
was too late in the season to sell the tobacco elsewhere, and thus be in a
position to dictate their own price. 3 To meet the minister's wishes, steps
were taken to arrange a public auction for 22nd August, but the partners
repeatedly advised Ruuth to adopt another course. The prevailing cir-
cumstances, both political and commercial, gave grounds for believing that
the sale would go badly; a consignment of this size, moreover, would
deter buyers and this was bound to be reflected in the price. The price
limits set by Ruuth were decidedly too high and would have to be revised.
Why on earth did the minister not accept Cohen's offer to purchase the
whole consignment for cf 200,000? Indeed, Cohen had offered to pay
cf 220,000 on certain conditions, namely that he should be allowed to
import the tobacco into Swedish ports in lots of fifty to a hundred thou-
sand pounds; to pay import duty on half the imported quantity six
months later and on the remainder a year later; and that if there was no
market for it in Sweden, that he should be free to ship it abroad again
without liability for export tax. 4
  In mid-August Hope received Ruuth's approval of this arrangement,
whereupon the sale was negotiated. Cohen was to buy more than a million
and a half pounds of tobacco for cf 220,000, payment to be made in cash
within six weeks without any discount or deduction for warehousing.
Ruuth, for his part, acceded to the import and re-export facilities re-

                                    88
                            SWEDISH PRELUDE

quested. As a portion of the tobacco had to be excluded on grounds of
age or incompatibility with Swedish tastes, Cohen secured the right to
replace it with an equal weight of other tobacco. Thus, after many ob-
stacles, the transaction was completed. Hope confessed-not without
exaggeration - to Ruuth: 'Of all the operations which we have undertaken,
none has brought us so many difficulties and so much sorrow.' 1
  Although the entire transaction was of a commercial nature and was
conducted by Hope, it was considered to form part of the loan affairs
managed jointly by Hope and Fizeaux. Accordingly, the commission,
which amounted to cf 45,096.5.0, was divided equally between the two
houses and added to the account with the Swedish Crown. 2
  Despite all the difficulties concerned with the tobacco, the loans were not
lost sight of. On 23rd June 1787 Hope and Fizeaux warned Ruuth that
the second million guilders of the 1775 loan was due for repayment on 1st
November, and that steps should be taken without delay. If the minister
wished to prolong the tranche, the two houses should be informed of the
fact as soon as possible. 3 When Ruuth reported that the king desired a
fresh loan of I-I t million guilders, he was informed that the entrepreneurs
had rejected the request on the grounds that so small a sum, in addition to
the repayment due, would create an adverse impression 'in view of its
modest proportions.' In spite of the 'ingratitude of the political situation
of this country, which has a dominant influence on trade, especially at a
time when the Stock Exchange is experiencing failures which add to the
uneasiness and lack of confidence,' the Amsterdam houses favoured in-
creasing the loan to 1,500,000 guilders. With the surplus available after
1st November, it would then be possible to repay to Jan and Carl
Hasselgreen the cf 500,000 which the Swedish Court had caused to be
advertised for 1st February 1788, 'which will enable us also to
reconcile the facilities which are required with the wishes of His Majesty.' 4
  In the opinion of Hope and Fizeaux, what was needed was a loan of
1,500,000 guilders at 4 % interest, one half being repayable after twelve
years and the balance after fifteen years, in both cases calculated from
1st November 1787. On that date, however, the two houses would be
required to furnish only cf 1,000,000 to cover the repayment of the second
tranche, while the remaining cf 500,000 would not become due until 1st
February 1788. The interest due on the balance over the three-month
period would accrue to the negotiators, by whom it was regarded as no
more than 'a reasonable incentive in the circumstances existing at the
present time.' The king was not disposed to grant an increase in the
commission of 6 %, and the issuing houses accepted the position even
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

though, in their eyes, this was a mediocre recompense 'in view of the 41- %
interest which the king then paid, whereas it costs him only 4 % today.' 1
  The loan in its entirety was made subject to the right of cancellation 'in
the event of the Sovereign imposing a ban on foreign loans in the mean-
time.' It was unlikely that such a ban would be imposed by Stadholder
William v, 'though perhaps appropriate, in the light of the adverse state
of the political and financial affairs of this country.' Just how seriously
we should take the latter statement is not clear; possibly the houses, for
tactical reasons, wished to appear to Ruuth to be disinterested. 2
  Under the agreement with the entrepreneurs of 30th July 1787, holders
of redeemable bonds were accorded priority until 1st October; the portion
thus subscribed would be deducted, pro rata, from the shares taken by the
entrepreneurs. These would assume responsibility for the remainder of the
loan upon payment in cash in the months of November and December,
paying to the issuing houses interest from 1st November until the date of
taking up their shares. The entrepreneurs received a commission of 11-%,
less a !- % 'douceur' for the brokers, 'who will arrange for the conversion
of redeemable bonds or for subscriptions, these to be paid in cash.' 3 It
was further stipulated that cash subscriptions would be limited to a total
of half a million guilders up to 1st October, 'and remain open until 31st
October for the Balance of the Negotiation, then being finally closed,
unless this Negotiation be previously fully subscribed by the Entrepre-
neurs or other Persons.' Hope and Fizeaux were parties to the contract,
jointly accepting responsibility for two-thirds of the principal sum. As in
1786, this high proportion reflected optimism on the part of the issuing
houses rather than pessimism among the entrepreneurs (it was the latter
who had advised increasing the loan to one and a half million and, with
a loan which in effect served to postpone two repayments, the risks were
comparatively small).
  A month after the 'final closure' on 31st October, Hope wrote to Ruuth
expressing indignation concerning rumours that the house of Jan and
Carl Hasselgreen was about to float a one-million guilder loan for Sweden
and, moreover, on terms very favourable to the entrepreneurs. The tenor
of the reproach was the same as in 1776: why a new loan so soon, from
another house and while Hope and Fizeaux still held the greater part of
their bonds? Hope and Fizeaux had made it known that the cf 500,000
 remaining after the repayment on 1st November would be used to repay
a debt to Hasselgreen on 1st February of the following year. It must be
clear to the minister, they argued, that any other transaction in this
 respect could only prejudice the credit of the Crown.4

                                    90
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

On this note of discord (it is questionable whether we would be justified
in saying 'as a result of this discord'), Hope's activities on behalf of the
Swedish Crown came to an end. Dissatisfaction with Ruuth's conduct
was not in itself sufficient to cause the severance, for, as we have seen,
clashes of this nature had occurred previously, but these had been settled.
Hope's partner in the Swedish transactions-who since 1st January 1788,
had borne the name Hogguer Grand & Co.-did not attach permanent
consequences to the affair, and in fact issued further loans for Sweden in
 1789, 1790 and 1797. 1
  The true cause of the breach with Sweden must rather be viewed against
the background of the commencement of loan negotiations for Russia.
On 5th December 1787 Hope & Co. entered into a contract for a loan of
cf 3,000,000 to Russia; their partners were the same group of entrepreneurs
with whom the Swedish loans had been arranged. A second contract for
a similar sum was signed on loth December. With this operation, Hope
thus competed directly with its own and Hasselgreen's negotiations for
Sweden. And the competition was the more serious by reason of the fact
that the Russian loan bore interest at 41 %compared with 4 % for the two
loans to Sweden. In a letter to Ruuth dated 5th January 1788, Hope
reported that the Swedish bonds were un saleable in Amsterdam and
Antwerp without sacrifices. 2 They maintained that this was a conse-
quence of Ruuth's dealings with Hasselgreen, but it is obvious that the
true cause lay in the higher interest on the Russian loan.
  Any prospect which Hope may have entertained of resuming the Swedish
negotiations evaporated with the launching by Gustav III of the long-
prepared war against Russia in the summer of 1788. We shall not concern
ourselves here with the progress of this conflict. After the peace, in 1790,
Hope was too much occupied with Russian loans to devote any attention
to Sweden. 3
  Looking back on the initial series of loans floated by Hope on behalf
of a foreign power, one is moved to enquire why the partners left the
Swedish transactions to Hogguer Grand & Co. and proceeded to do
business with Russia? The surviving correspondence in the Hope archives
does not provide the answer, so that we must be content with a number of
assumptions.
  Firstly, confidence in Sweden's creditworthiness will have been weakened
by the dismissal of Liljencrantz at the end of 1786 and by the comparative-
ly unfavourable information concerning his successor. Increasing oppo-
sition to King Gustav III, both in the riksdag and beyond, may have
played a role insofar as it created uncertainty regarding the approval by
that body offresh loans.
                                      91
                           SWEDISH PRELUDE

The desire on the part of Hope to act alone in the issuing of loans will
also have been a factor in the shift to Russia. With its extensive experience
and its financial strength, the firm felt confident to undertake loan nego-
tiations without a partner. With the Swedish loans, Hope had virtually no
alternative to continuing with Hogguer Grand & Co. in view of the
latter's excellent relations with both the Swedish and French Courts.
Later correspondence reveals that the partners in Hope & Co. were not
impressed by Hogguer's business methods, but to what degree they were
influenced by this is not clear.
  It is also conceivable that the partners felt uneasy about the outcome of
the clash between Sweden and Russia, the threat of which had long
existed. In the Republic itself, the conflict between the Patriots and the
supporters of the prince was settled, in favour of the latter, by the inter-
vention of the Prussian army. This development, however, placed the
Netherlands in the position of a protectorate of Prussia and England.
Would Sweden, poor in terms of population and internally just as divided
as the Republic, not face a similar fate if she went to war with Russia?
  As the influential position of the Republic declined, it became increas-
ingly important to the capitalists in Holland to find a safe investment for
their money, i.e. in countries which could not be swept off the map by a
single war and with governments possessing sufficient authority to justify
a reasonable expectation that they would honour their commitments.
  The extent to which Russia met these requirements is revealed in the
ensuing chapters.




                                     92
                          CHAPTER THREE

       MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR



The accession to the throne of Empress Catherine II of Russia in 1762
heralded a resumption of the vigorous territorial expansion which had
 been set in train during the reign of Czar Peter the Great. The finances of
the economically underdeveloped country, however, were inadequate for
the waging of lengthy wars, and when, in 1768, Russian intervention in
the chaotic domestic situation in Poland led to a conflict with Turkey,
the empress found herself in an extremely embarrassing position. The
issue of paper money in the form of assignats, for which purpose the
Assignat Bank was founded in 1768, afforded a certain respite. 1 In addi-
tion, Catherine succeeded during the Turkish War in obtaining a number
of loans in the Republic of the Seven United Provinces through the
intermediacy of the house of Raymond and Theodore de Smeth of
Amsterdam. These loans carried interest at 5 %.2
  The treaty of Kutchuk Kainardji in 1774 admittedly gave Russia little
territorial gain, but this fact did not deter Catherine in her far-reaching
plans in regard to the Turkish Empire. In 1782 she entered into an alliance
with Emperor Joseph II of Austria, the aim of which was the division of
European Turkey between the two nations. Although the plan provision-
ally remained on paper the theme of Catherine's policy was clear to see.
The loans negotiated with De Smeth in 1781 and 1782-three and a half
million guilders at 41- % and five and a half million guilders at 4 %, re-
spectively-were said to be required not for purposes of war, but for the
colonization of the areas wrested from the Turks and for reform of the
administration. 3
  It was not until 1787 that Catherine felt strong enough to embark on the
war against Turkey. The latest series of loans, which commenced to become
available in 1788, were not, however, in the hands of De Smeth, but of
Hope & Co. There was no obvious reason for a change of intermediary,
and the fact that one took place merits closer examination. As we have
already seen, Hope, in company with another house, had regularly nego-
tiated loans for Sweden since 1768, and relations between Sweden and
Russia had long been strained. 4 Furthermore, the firm had severely cur-
tailed its trading interests in Russia in the years prior to 1787 on account

                                    93
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

of the substantial losses suffered there. In April 1787 Robert Vollte wrote
to Hope: 'You told me on the last occasion that Russia had proved fatal
for your house, and that this was the reason why your house had ceased
to work there.' 1 The grootboeken for the years prior to 1787 show that
while Vollte exaggerated somewhat, the accounts of the Russian houses
which dealt with Hope displayed little activity.2 Thus, Hope's entry into
the area of the Russian state finances stemmed not from a close involve-
ment with the Russian economy, but solely from a rapid, commercial
coup which in psychological terms was cleverly prepared. In 1784 Richard
Sutherland, with the support of Catherine's powerful favourite, Potemkin,
was appointed to the post of Court Banker. Opposition to the appoint-
ment in certain circles remained, and during Potemkin's protracted ab-
sence from the capital while preparing for the war against the Turks, the
intrigues against Sutherland grew. 3 The efforts of Sutherland's enemies to
blacken his name among his correspondents abroad and to cast doubts
as to his solidity were so successful that in the spring of 1787 De Smeth,
Blaauw & Wilkieson and Pye Rich & Co., all of Amsterdam, declined to
accept his drafts.4 His discredit in Amsterdam quickly spread to other
centres and threatened to completely undermine his position as Court
Banker. At this critical juncture, Henry Hope acted: he accepted supra
protest the disputed drafts from Richard Sutherland and his brother
Alexander Henry in London, and made substantial credits available to the
former through his own house.
  The relationship between Hope & Co. and the extremely grateful Suther-
land rapidly grew in importance. From a sum of cf 78.4.0, which stood
unchanged from 1778 to 1787, the account between the two houses rose
in the brief period June-August 1787 to cf 715,565.8.0, which sum
related solely to the draft transactions. 5 In the trading sector, connex-
ions were established with the firm of Sutherlands & Bock, in which the
Court Banker's commercial interests were vested. The firm acted as inter-
mediary for the purchase of Russian iron and sailcloth, and was com-
missioned by Hope to buy up cochineal, in which large-scale speculation,
spearheaded by Robert Vollte,6 was then taking place. No clear demar-
cation between banking and mercantile dealings was maintained. As early
as 1788, the proceeds of sales to Hope of hemp, iron, ships timber and
linen were offset against Sutherland's account as Court Banker, and
similar adjustments appear in the records for later years. With these
mercantile transactions, which were undoubtedly undertaken on instruc-
tions from the Russian government, Sutherland attempted to reduce the
outflow of money, and thus to shore up the rate ofexchange. 7

                                    94
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

The Russo-Turkish war which finally came in August 1787 brought a
greater need for foreign money, and this fact inspired Henry Hope to
undertake a detailed examination of Russia's financial position. He at-
tributed the fall in the rate of exchange (which Sutherland had sought to
prevent) to the high rate of expenditure by the Court and to the decline
in Russian exports to England. This decline he in turn ascribed to the
suspension of the 1734 trade treaty between the two countries. Hope saw
no prospect of an early recovery of the rate of exchange, first because the
war would impose an additional burden on the already inadequate sources
of aid and secondly because, in the war situation, the requirements from
abroad would increase still further. It was therefore imperative that
Russia should obtain, at an early date, 'des retours en dehors' -and a loan
in Amsterdam offered the best solution. After all, 'this is the obvious
place in which to deposit your funds to meet needs in various parts of
Europe.' This would apply particularly to Italy, at least if, as during the
previous war with Turkey, the Russian Court despatched a squadron to
the Mediterranean. Hope advised the Russians to start by negotiating a
loan of 1- I 1- million guilders with a target date of February or March 1788
and to repeat this if and when circumstances demanded. The timing of
Hope's letter, 9th October 1787, was not very favourable, 'on account of
the disturbances which have long ravaged our country, interrupting trade
and preventing the circulation of money.' 1 This was a reference to the
Patriot disturbances in the Republic (which, in fact, ended on the follow-
ing day with the complete capitulation of the Patriots in Amsterdam to the
Prussian troops).2 If the situation in Amsterdam shortly returned to
normal, and if the Russian armies achieved success against the Turks- 'for
the credit of a country depends largely upon its success, and, conversely,
its success depends upon its credit' - then Hope was certain of being able
gradually to float the loan on the market. In consequence of the Turkish
war, the last Russian loan from De Smeth, at 41- %, had fallen below par
and a further drop was to be expected when news of an extension of the
Russian loans was circulated in the Republic. At the outbreak of the
previous Russo-Turkish War, the Russian Court had been paying 5 %
interest on the loans from De Smeth, and substantial discounts had been
granted to the entrepreneurs; Hope was anxious to limit the interest to
41- %with the aid of bonuses, douceurs sous mains or interest facilities. 3
  Hope stressed-not only to Sutherland, but also to third parties-that the
house which bore his name had not sought business with the Court
Banker; it had even turned Sutherland down after his appointment
because, under his predecessor, such business had been conducted with

                                    95
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

another firm (i.e. De Smeth), so that Hope, 'on grounds of delicacy,'
preferred not to interfere. If the Court had at any time changed its policy
in this respect, however, he would not have hesitated to undertake the
business. Of the acceptance by Hope of Sutherland's drafts, which pre-
ceded the new relationship and in which the initiative indisputably came
from Hope, there was no mention. 1
  As far as the cochineal affair was concerned, we know that Henry Hope's
pessimism regarding the economic circumstances in the Republic at that
time was more than an attempt to temper over-sanguine expectations. The
signal success of the first loan was the more surprising by reason of the
gloomy atmosphere in which it was launched. On 5th December 1787, the
day after the arrival of a letter in which the Committee for Foreign Loans
in St. Petersburg gave its approval for the negotiation of a loan of
1,500,000 guilders, a contract was arranged with the entrepreneurs for
a loan of 3,000,000 guilders-twice the sum which Henry Hope had
envisaged. 2 The list of subscriptions relating to the contract can be divided
into two distinct parts, each of one and a half million. An obvious con-
clusion is that the brokers had initially proceeded on the basis of a loan of
1,500,000 guilders but that during their soundings the interest on the
part of the entrepreneurs had proved so great that the sum had immediately
been doubled. Of the twenty entrepreneurs who subscribed to the first half
of the contract, only five applied for a share in the second half, of which
their total share was just over a quarter; Hope accepted responsibility for
one-half, and the balance was shared among houses outside Amsterdam
which had unsuccessfully applied for a share in the first half. 3
  The final bombshell came on loth December, when a contract for a
further loan of 3,000,000 guilders was negotiated with the entrepre-
neurs. This was for twelve years, as against ten for the previous one, but
both commenced on the same date, 1st February 1788. To avoid the two
 becoming confused, and also to give the entrepreneurs time to place their
initial portion on the market, it was decided that the public subscription
to the later loan would not open until 15th January 1788. The entre-
preneurs were committed to meet their share in three monthly instal-
 ments falling due one month after the corresponding shares in the pre-
 vious loan. Hope ultimately undertook not to float any further loans for
 the Russians before 1st July 1788 without the prior approval of the entre-
preneurs. 4
  Greatly satisfied, Henry Hope wrote to Sutherland: 'This operation
 astonishes everybody and we have received the highest compliments on
it.' 5 In Hope's view, the principal reason for the success lay in the interest
                                      V30 een Nc<;otiatic voor Rcekening en een behoc\'e van hee
      '."o"
o , • _ \                    •       Rusfiscb Keizer·ryk , grooe DIUE           llLLIOE, E             Guldens lIol-
~             ~.l>-A.
.             ~ ;;~ *bnds CoU'3'lC geld , teegens vier en een half Percent IOlr ;se in
               .; .:~:~                        .
] ~ : _~ j'[ jaar, ecn Compeoire van de I {ceren HOPE & COMr. Banquiers
-:.       "b~ . :- "b            •
. .' ¢ ........ _            ~ tOt      /lmner-13m , onder vcrband van nile de Inkomseen van bet
cog:?Q~
~~e . g s:
;

~
    .. ' .~-::-"~
          I    j     I

              . ~~ .~'
                         ;       • VOOfSZ.   ]'eizcr·ryk, en fpecinlyk die vnn ESTLi\ND cn LYF•

~~~ ~ " ~ LI\l\1), benecvens de Tollen en Recbccn. vnn de ID- en Uyt•
.... ;:.:-" ,~
~~..:~-5.fio
!'~ t!      ~ga3Dtle Goed reo dee Seeden RJG.\. PERl /lU, REVAL, en
;. ~~~~:
~~:!~~
:::~,::;,~:.:l,!\Nl~RVA, vooe deo cyd van TIE JAARE ,Olll. oa vecloop
    ~1~~~~
    e~               0   :"&
                                                                                                                       . ~
                                                                                                                       ---
    ~ '-:0 . . ' 'l:,? van zes Jaarcn , ee moogen :Il1osfen
    o a. 0 t) t ,
    !,! :,! _-
    t:~'trrf~
    ~         ;:;:"C ~Q _              De Obligatien , iedc:r groat f           1000    zullen gedateerd %10
                   ~ .. C) ""

    . .*
    -:) Q

    ~~ ;::,
                             ~ J Febru:rry 1788, \Vaunecr ook de Imresfen logano ,                   welke ]aarlyks
    ~;:..~ (g
    -; •• ~ ~,; op Coupons zullen worden betlald; dog de Obligatieo. dill nog
    t " ~h                   _                                                                 .
    I ~ ~ ~~ , nice gcreed zynde, moceen de Foumisfemcnten provifioneel op
      ~,t. ~: t...?
                   ,2' :) ....
    ~ ~..; ~ t ~RECEPI SEt                           gefehledeo.    En zaJ de Icccckening van DU ar
    ~~~':.l~ ""
      t'I "'-l •• ~'! JIb

      i.;' ~,~ iaan ten Compeoirc van voorsz. Heeren HOPE & CoM., ceo un·
      ~ ; ~~~ ~
      ~ ~ ~ 0;: .~ ~VlDg neemen.
      ,
      ~"/l
                    1/ , , '
                             .-:r/J'/ / (.     :} ( { l'. _   Z'"Cy'/It /"/ <I''} - /'7'1
       ... 4 111 '/" -}( I (, {' I ' U                             ,)   _   _           I.   I v(
           ~ i'~ 1. _ 6o", ~ ? '<I "                               I 7'''1'719'} <?           1"'79;
    ~          "'if" - j "ol " ' ~('(I .-_- I 7e6.-n9u ~ 112 01
      ,," i'.- /2IJ/JI (J /S O()(). ___ _                          I '771", I~?/) (>         lIP 0'
      .,.. ,.~.                  Is-oul t· Idc'L'U -" --           J .;;;/ 1'1"" e 1(/0'
                                 I           ...1-)1-                            1'1"          .2.


                    Berigt of the first Russian loan in 1788, with notes concerning converted bonds
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

 rate of 41 %, which was i % above that of competitive loans and thus
 attracted ample funds.
  Because of this, Hope's own loan to Sweden got off the ground only with
 great difficulty, and another, for the Emperor of Austria, issued by Goll &
 Co. of Amsterdam at the end of December, was subscribed only to the
extent of one-half.! Simultaneous loans for the Emperor of Austria issued
in Brussels and Frankfurt, also at 4 % interest, were reported to be in
 similar difficulties.
  Hope's triumphant message probably disguised a certain reserve. The
permit issued by the Committee for Foreign Loans and the covering letter
from Sutherland had both expressly stipulated that the rate of interest
 should not exceed 4 %, and that the difference between this figure and
4! % should go to the entrepreneurs in the form of private douceurs. Hope
had thus unilaterally increased the interest, an act which could incur the
severe displeasure ofthe Committee. In defence of his action, Hope argued
that a 4 % loan for Russia would have been just as slow in attracting
funds as the loans for other countries, so that a higher interest rate
would have been demanded for any subsequent issue. Moreover, he
maintained, the enormous success of the current loan had enhanced Rus-
sia's prestige beyond measure, whereas giving bonuses to the entrepre-
neurs could only have caused the price of the bonds to fall below par,
thereby depressing Russian stocks and damaging Russia's creditworth-
iness. 2 With the arrival of the official documents from St. Petersburg,
which proved to be based upon a 4 % loan, the tension at Hope & Co.
rose. But a week later an express messenger arrived bearing the Com-
mittee's approval of the Company's action. 3
  Yet the attractive rate of interest cannot been the sole reason for
the unexpectedly abundant flow of capital. Following the signing of the
second contract, Henry Hope, who as recently as October 1787 had taken
so sombre a view of the situation, wrote to Sutherland: 'We have had an
amazing run for our new loan and we now only perceive that the scarcity
of money was only apparent and owing to the general diffidence, which
prevented people from placing the large sums which have been accumu-
lating in consequence of the stagnation of trade for so long a time.' 4
    a
  In letter to Baring, Hope described the success of the loan as 'a melan-
choly proof of the discredit of our own Government Securities.' 5 This was
a reference to the aftermath of the disturbances inside the Republic: nego-
tiations for loans for a number of regions had been opened in Amsterdam,
but these had made no progress whatsoever. Was it that the pro-Patriot
investors avoided domestic loans following the restoration of the House of
                                     98
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

 Orange, or was the run on the Russian loans a symbol of doubt as to the
 survival of the Republic as a sovereign state? Hope feared that the unfilled
 demands for capital at home might well lead to a general ban on foreign
 loans, as had been the case previously. To avoid precipitating such a step,
 the entrepreneurs concerned in the second contract were bound to secrecy
 until a date to be decided, and Hope also urged Kalichev, the Russian
 envoy in The Hague, to keep the affair secret. 1
  Hope's success afforded Richard Sutherland a great deal of support in
 his struggle against his numerous enemies; it also served to justify the
 change of hands which he had effected. 2 This change was, of course,
painful for De Smeth, a fact which he confessed to Hope 'with his natural
 candour' when the latter visited him after the first transaction. He added,
 however, that he did not flatter himself that he could retain the Russian
business without having to simultaneously take on extensive and some-
times fearsome Court affairs, which, despite their advantages, were not to
be preferred to peace and quiet. 3
  Hope's superior financial strength had once again proved decisive,
though it was naturally not unlimited. In his dealings with the Committee,
Sutherland had earlier gone too far in his praise of the house of Hope, in
its being equal to all possible wants and exigencies both in regard to loans
and advances of money, and this mistake was later to come home to
roost.4 The Committee was under the impression that Hope would have
no difficulty in negotiating a loan of twenty million guilders by August
 1788 and also that the house could furnish any advance which might be
required. In a cautiously worded letter aimed at correcting this misappre-
hension, Hope pointed out that it would be an unpardonable folly for any
house, however strong, to measure its strength against the needs of a
major country which was in a state of war. Without that qualification, any
offer of services would be pointless and ridiculous. 5
  In order not to appear too negative, Hope hinted that it might well prove
possible to reduce the period ending on 1st July 1788, within which, under
the terms of the contract with the entrepreneurs, no loan might be nego-
tiated, and he requested that the relevant debentures and the official in-
structions of the Court be despatched without delay.6
  Hope's zeal for the Russian cause was well and truly tested when, early
in January 1788, it was learned that the Russian Court proposed to nego-
tiate a loan of three million guilders with the house of C.J .M. de Wolf in
Antwerp. In the opinion of the Hope partners, Antwerp was much too
close to Amsterdam, so that a loan there would mean competition on
Hope's own territory. When the 'Brabanders' had money to invest, they

                                     99
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

usually looked to Amsterdam. Hope advised the Committee that as far
as he was concerned the Antwerp loan could fail, and he expressed the
hope (vainly, as it transpired) that De Wolf would not succeed in obtain-
ing the approval of the Austrian government. De Wolf had initially whet-
ted the appetite of the Russian Court with promises of a J! %loan, but the
negotiation ultimately commenced on the basis of 4 %. When this failed to
produce any activity on the market, he succeeded in getting the rate raised
to 41 %, at which figure he came into direct competition with the loans
floated by Hope. There was also the fact that the methods of issue em-
ployed in Antwerp adversely affected the issue price of loans: there were
no entrepreneurs and so the loan continued to remain open for public sub-
scriptions. The result was that investors delayed subscribing in the hope
of discrediting the loan and so obtaining bonds cheaply.!
  While the Russian Court was thus busy thwarting Hope-and, by its
rash borrowing, creating an impression among investors that it was in dire
need offunds-it was knocking on Hope's door for sums of twenty million
and more! Hope would have done well to raise twelve million in 1788, but
there was no certainty of this 'because of the needs of our neighbours and
of this country itself, and because money is scarce.' 2 When Hope wrote
this, on 19th February 1788, the easiness on the capital market had largely
disappeared. As a gesture of goodwill, Hope asked for debentures for
third and fourth loans of three million guilders each for periods often and
twelve years respectively, commencing on 1st July 1788. The rate of in-
terest could be kept down to 41 %, although there would be pressure as a
result of the scarcity of capital. The proceeds of these loans, however,
could not be made available to the Court until they had been publicly
announced. 3
  The Hope partners were anything but satisfied with the 'extremely mod-
est nature' of the 5 %commission offered. They felt that they were entitled
to an additional remuneration, a premium sous main, since they could
earn so much more by investing their money in other business that under-
taking the Russian loans amounted to 'a deed for the sake of glory.' They
stated that other Courts allowed 6 % and that they desired this from Rus-
sia also. It fell to Sutherland to plead their cause with the Committee, and
this he of course did in cautious terms, 'on grounds of delicacy.' The led-
gers of that time reveal that the request was looked upon favourably; in-
deed, Hope enjoyed a commission of 6t %on these loans. 4
  Sutherland also sought the assistance of Hope in supporting the rate of
exchange of the rouble, which showed signs of crumbling. Before agreeing
to do so, Hope insisted on knowing the true par value, by which he meant

                                    100
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

the intrinsic value of the rouble expressed in Dutch or English currency.
Hope believed that the exchange rate was 36-38 stuivers to the rouble, as
against a true par value of 34. Thus the rate of exchange could fall to 34
stuivers without adverse consequences for Russia. It would be dangerous
to enforce the exchange rate on grounds of needs abroad, for this could
lead to a serious financial crisis such as had occurred, for example, in
Sweden. 'For,' Hope reminded Sutherland, 'it is an invariable axiom that
any nation whose debts exceed the value of its revenues or of its balance of
trade will be stripped of its effective in gold or silver, unless it has the
wisdom to borrow money, to find ways to defer meeting a deficit and to
establish a ratio between the repayment and the annual surplus on its
balance of trade.' Thus, instead of offering his support in raising the rate
of exchange of the rouble, Hope urged the wisdom of consolidating the
national debt.
  By mid-March 1788 Hope had reached agreement with the entrepreneurs
on the third loan for Russia, and he communicated the fact with satis-
faction to the Committee. 1 He was obliged to inform the Committee that
the date earlier referred to for the fourth loan, 1st July 1788, could not
be maintained because the entrepreneurs had insisted on a moratorium on
fresh issues until 1st September, although, he added, they would probably
be willing to reconsider this. Hope viewed the Committee's action in de-
clining loan proposals from the house of Boas in The Hague as very wise
in view of the fact that such firms could not hope to succeed in The Hague,
added to which Boas's reputation was inadequate for such a transaction.
  Russia meanwhile was drawing on other foreign sources of finance, not
only in Antwerp, which has been mentioned, but also in Genoa, where a
loan was negotiated with the house of Regny.2 At Sutherland's request,
Hope went so far as to seek the opinion of his long-standing colleague
Beerend Roosen in Hamburg concerning the prospects for negotiating a
loan in that city. If Roosen was open for such a proposition, Hope wrote,
he could best adopt the Amsterdam method and work with entrepreneurs.
The I %which he would have to pay them out of his commission was vital
to the success of a loan such as was proposed, for 'nothing elicits greater
activity than self-interest.' 'Without this incentive,' Hope continued, 'the
negotiations here would not proceed so smoothly.' He advised Roosen to
start with a moderate sum, say one million marks, and if this went well he
could consider larger loans. Hope expressed his willingness to take a share
of one hundred thousand marks in an initial loan if this would assist in
overcoming Roosen's objections. Roosen remained averse to the sugges-
tion, advising Hope that he saw no prospect of raising a loan in Hamburg.

                                    101
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

Hope respected his decision, 'in view, inter alia, of your blessed and ad-
vanced age.' It would have been very agreeable if a friendly and not too
powerful house had seen its way clear to collaborating with the Company,
but as Hope recognized-and intimated to Roosen-'It is far better not to
begin than to end in distress.' 1
 As had been the case with the Swedish transactions, Hope's aim was to
combine loans with other business. During the previous Turkish War, the
Russian Baltic Fleet had penetrated the Mediterranean and had there
destroyed the Turkish fleet. Acting on the premise that this might well
occur again, Hope made plans. Late in November 1787-that is to say,
prior to the opening of public subscription for the first loan - the Company
established contact with the house of Cambiasso in Leghorn with a view
to preparing the financial operations which such a naval expedition might
demand. 2
 New opportunities arose in March 1788, when the British government
prohibited the use of English ships for the carriage of Russian troops and
supplies to the Mediterranean. Apprehension concerning the ever more
apparent urge for expansion on the part of Catherine the Great, and
resentment at the ukases aimed at England's dominant role in Russia's
foreign trade, clearly played a part in the decision. 3
 Alexander Henry Sutherland, a London merchant and a brother of the
Russian Court Banker, who had been engaged in chartering vessels in
England, approached the partners of Hope & Co. with a request that they
should take over this activity. The Company consulted J.e. van der Hoop,
the Advocate Fiscal to the Admiralty in Amsterdam and confidant of the
stadholder in maritime affairs.4 Van der Hoop was at first very optimistic
about obtaining official approval, since this charter business would help
to bridge a period of malaise for Holland's merchant fleet.
 To Henry Hope's intense dismay, pressure by England on the govern-
ment of the stadholder resulted in a ban on the chartering of Dutch ves-
sels. Efforts by Hope and the Russian envoy, Kalichev, to secure a reversal
of the decision failed. The weak government of the Republic, recently
rehabilitated with British support, dared not risk incurring the displeasure
of its patron. 5 Hope, with Kalichev's support, made a fresh approach to
Van der Hoop in April 1788. The Advocate Fiscal was somewhat more
responsive, but he demanded that the Company's activities on behalf of
the Russian fleet should have no adverse consequences for relations be-
tween the Republic and the Sultan of Turkey or for Holland's trading
interests in the Levant. 6
In order to avoid embarrassing the government, Hope drew up a plan

                                    102
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

under which the chartering of vessels would pro forma be undertaken by a
friendly house, De Coninck & Reyersen in Copenhagen. No opposition
was expected from the Danish government in view of its close relations
with Russia. 1 There are no details of the progress of the plan, but it is
known that Dutch vessels were not chartered because the Russian fleet
was kept in the Baltic by the outbreak of the Swedish-Russian War.2
  This new war, which had to be waged alongside the struggle against the
Turks, served to increase Russia's financial needs. The expectation voiced
by Hope early in March 1788, that it would be possible to proceed with a
fourth loan before September, was not borne out, and it was not until the
end of the year that agreement was reached with the entrepreneurs. This
delay. coupled with the increase of the interest rate to 5 %, suggested that
the scarcity of money, about which Hope had complained in February,
had become acute. The loan, like the last and all those which followed,
was of three million guilders, and Hope's commission on this and subse-
quent loans was 6t%.
  Simultaneously with the fourth loan, the Russian Court empowered the
Company to negotiate a fifth, but the contract between Hope and the
entrepreneurs was not signed until 3rd April 1789. The tighter conditions
on the money market favoured the entrepreneurs, who were thereby in a
position to extract more favourable conditions for their participation in
the fourth and fifth transactions. Their bonus rose from I % for the first
three loans to Ii- % for the fourth and 2 % for the fifth, and in addition
they now received 'the Interests due in the current month, in which the
monies are furnished' -a perquisite which they did not relinquish in sub-
sequent contracts.
  The new contract provided for the entrepreneurs to meet their obligations
in four instalments instead of three, as in the case of the first two loans;
the provision for public subscription at the offices of Hope & Co., and the
accompanying douceur of t %for private investors, however, was omitted.
Hope's share of the fifth loan was cf 870,000, compared with cf 750,000
for the first two. 3
  The increasing political confusion in France will certainly have contri-
buted to the scarcity of capital. After protracted difficulties with his sub-
jects, the French king was finally obliged by lack of funds to recall the
legislative body, the Etats-Generaux, after an interval of more than a
hundred and fifty years. Instead of voting the monies requested, the dele-
gates demanded political reforms; these were refused, and in the summer
of 1789 revolutionary movements burst forth both in Paris and in the
rural areas.

                                    103
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

In spite of the threatening political situation, Hope was able to report to
Sutherland on 25th September 1789 that the fifth loan had been placed,
albeit with a minor concession to the entrepreneurs in the matter of their
instalments. Until shortly before the placing, Hope had taken a very pes-
simistic view of the financial prospects, and although he still feared the
consequences of 'a check to the current payments in France' he took the
view that it was better to embark on a new loan at that moment than
later. If an emergency should arise, a loan which had been launched would
fare better than one which was still at the negotiating stage. There was also
the fact that Russia had scored a major naval victory over Sweden at
Svensksund-and this had to be exploited. Together, these considerations
had led Hope to decide to enter into a contract with the entrepreneurs for
a sixth loan. 1
 The results by far exceeded Hope's expectations. By 13th October, less
than a fortnight after the loan had opened, the entrepreneurs had placed
two million of the three million guilders. 2 In later correspondence, Henry
Hope attributed this sudden success to reticence on the part of investors
in the early part of the year, at which time there was widespread fear of a
catastrophe in France. The failure of this to materialize for the time being
had led to large sums remaining uninvested, and these produced 'an unex-
pected ease in finances.' This situation was, of course, of a temporary
nature; nevertheless, Hope was anxious to obtain debentures for seventh,
eighth, ninth and tenth loans in order to profit from the circumstances of
the moment. Particular care was taken to make each loan appear to be the
last and to convince the public that peace between Russia and her enemies
would bring the whole affair to an end. The Committee in St. Petersburg
had approached the Company on the subject of a separate loan for the
Court, but Hope felt that it would be wrong to upset the established pat-
tern and that it would be preferable to embark upon an eighth loan imme-
diately after the seventh. 3 From the loans remaining to be negotiated, a
sum would be required by February 1791 to repay a loan obtained from
De Smeth in 1781; the remainder would be available for the prosecution
of the war. In the event of hostilities ceasing during the coming winter, the
loans would be of value 'to restore your numerary' and could be used to
curb the large amount of paper money in circulation if the Russian gov-
ernment deemed it wise 'to keep any quantity of it afloat.'
 Catherine II demonstrated her satisfaction with the Company's conduct
of affairs by presenting Henry Hope with a portrait of herself. She had
offered him a title, but this he had declined. 4 In a letter to Sutherland, he
expressed, in a manner appropriate to the autocratic empress, his grati-

                                    104
                      MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

 tude for the honour which had been bestowed upon him. The portrait, he
 wrote, was 'a striking instance of the magnanimity and magnificence of
 the exalted Personage ... Her elevated genius and almost supernatural
 loftiness of mind ... ' Hope instructed Sutherland to give the painter of
 the portrait a gift of one hundred guineas, and he sent, via the Committee,
 a letter of thanks to Catharine, to be delivered' if the etiquette admits it.' 1
  In his references to the Committee, Henry Hope was considerably less
flattering. This body had objected to the extension of the time allowed for
 the payment of instalments of the fifth loan and with this to the 6t % com-
 mission paid to the Company. In Hope's view, at least two-thirds of the
excess of It % over the 5 % offered earlier was 'a sine qua non.' The Com-
 pany denied that Russia was being asked to pay more than any other
Court; on the contrary, Spain gave 7 %plus I %for repayment and 2 % for
 the payment of interest; Poland gave 6 %, also with I % for repayment
and 2 % for the payment of interest; and Sweden had paid the same or
more, according to circumstances. Shortly before this, Sweden had offered
 Hope 8 %, but the Company, which since the opening of the first Russian
loan had dissociated itself from all other negotiations, had declined this,
as it had a Polish request. 2
  With regard to the extension of the settlement date, Henry Hope com-
 mented that: 'an indulgence has been given in proportion to the urgency
of the times.' In the case of French loans an interval of three months was
allowed between the commencement of interest payment and the deposi-
tion of monies by the lender, while England, at the time of the American
War of Independence, went so far as to pay interest from the time of
receipt of the first of twelve monthly instalments. Hope was not disposed
to indulge in further correspondence concerning this humiliating problem,
and he merely requested that the debentures for the eighth loan, with
which the debt to De Smeth would be repaid, be sent to him.3 No mention
was made of the debentures for the ninth and tenth loans to which he had
referred a month previously.
  Henry Hope refused to give any undertaking regarding either an acceler-
ation of the payments to Russia or an opening date for a new loan. In his
view, the 'Brabant Revolution,' the revolt by the people of the Southern
Netherlands against the centralist regime in Austria, could give rise to all
manner of dangerous, international complications, with unforeseeable
consequences for the money market in Amsterdam.
  In the event, these complications were of such a mild nature that on 16th
February 1790 Hope was able to enter into a contract with the entre-
preneurs for a seventh loan. This new three-million guilder loan bore

                                      I05
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

interest at 5 % and, like all loans since the third, was for twelve years.
The entrepreneurs received a bonus of 2 % and were permitted to pay
in four monthly instalments immediately following those relating to
the previous loan. The inclusion in the contract of an agreement between
the entrepreneurs not to sell the bonds at a rate below 98i % proves that
this loan was less easily subscribed. The entrepreneurs also bound them-
selves 'not to permit or to seek any bartering, rebate of interest, commis-
sion, variation, premium, indulgence, etcetera, or any advantage what-
soever, large or small, which renders this agreement illusory.' Any change
in the rate of 98i % required the approval of a majority. 1
  The contract for the eighth loan was signed on 13th August 1790, the
interest rate again being 5 %. The entrepreneurs were given the choice
of paying in cash or in bonds relating to a loan from De Smeth in 1781
which was due to be repaid at the offices of Hope & Co. on 1st
February 1791. The interest on these would accrue to the entrepreneurs
up to the date on which they were lodged with the Company as payment.
Even though this exchange arrangement would in itself make the loan
easier to place-the more so since the De Smeth loan bore interest at 4 %,
making prolongation attractive-the entrepreneurs were permitted to settle
in five monthly instalments instead of four, as with the previous loan.
Clearly, the opportunities for placement had decreased in the course of
1790. The stipulation of a minimum rate of 98i % and those concerning
'bartering' and other illicit rebates were incorporated without amendment
in the new contract, as was the provision for a bonus of 2 %.2
  The slowness with which the 1790 loans were negotiated was matched
only by the speed with which those of the following year were arranged.
The ninth, for which Hope and the entrepreneurs entered into a contract
on 6th January 1791, provided yet more evidence of the difficulties in the
year which lay behind. On 18th February 1790, the Russian Court gave
its approval for the opening not only of the eighth loan, but also the ninth
and even the tenth. Thus, the opportunities had up to then remained far
below expectations. The terms of the contract for the ninth loan were
broadly similar to those of the document of 13th August 1790, although
there were no redeemable bonds from De Smeth and the number of
monthly instalments had again become four-a sign that the tightness had
commenced to ease. 3
  On 28th February 1791 the entrepreneurs, who had still to pay the first
instalment towards the ninth loan, entered into a contract with Hope &
Co. which simultaneously covered the tenth and eleventh loans; this was
for six million guilders, which the entrepreneurs undertook to furnish in

                                    106
                     MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

six monthly instalments. In the months of May and June, these ran
parallel with instalments of the previous loan.! On 18th July the entre-
preneurs again participated for a further six million guilders, for the twelfth
and thirteenth loans, under an almost identical contract. This time the
parallel instalments fell due in September and October.2 On 21st December
of the same year they set a crown on their efforts by pledging themselves
to furnish monies for fourteenth and fifteenth loans.
  While these latest loans bore interest at 4 %, compared with the 5 % of
the ten preceding ones, the entrepreneurs undertook to furnish their shares
in five months as against six under the earlier six-million guilder contracts.
In addition, they bound themselves not to sell at a rate below 991 %, an
increase of ~ %on the previous figure. 3 In all, the entrepreneurs committed
themselves in 179 I to furnish twenty-one million guilders in the space of
sixteen months, an average of more than a one and a quarter million per
month.
  It is obvious that an immense undertaking such as this could only
succeed in a money market characterized by abundance. That such ample
funds were available in the Republic for investment was largely due to the
developments in France. Admittedly, a constitutional monarchy had been
established there in September 1791, following a period of intense bicker-
ing. but since 1790 the king had been at odds with parliament over the
sequestration of Church property and the placing under state supervision
of the Catholic clergy.
 As security for the confiscated Church property, mortgage debentures or
assignats were issued, and these soon assumed the role of a paper currency.
But lack of confidence in this new tender caused the rate of exchange of
the ecu to fall from about 56 stuivers before the Revolution to 50 stuivers
in November 1790. Between May 1791 and the end of that year it dropped
from 44 to 37 stuivers. 4 Investors in the Netherlands who, from political
motives or in pursuit of profit, had earlier opted for French stocks with
their higher rates of interest now had to pay the penalty. This was made
heavier by the fact that these investors had purchased the majority of the
stock through houses in Paris, the interest being paid in French currency
in that city, so that they bore the full brunt of the exchange losses. This
development will have caused a mass flight from French government
securities, from which Hope and his entrepreneurs were able to benefit. 5
 We know from another source that news of the abundance of available
capital had reached Russia and that the Committee for Foreign Loans
saw in this an opportunity to obtain the long-sought reduction in the
interest rate. The Russian Court was due to repay to De Smeth a 41 %

                                     107
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

loan of two and a half million guilders in 1792 and wished to obtain a new
loan of the same size and with the same rate of interest. In addition, it
desired to convert a loan of three and a half million guilders from De
Smeth, which still had several years to run, into one of 4 %. When
Hope declined to reduce the interest rate on his loans, as he had done
in 1789, the Committee approached De Wolf in Antwerp, the former
competitor of the Company. De Wolf was quite willing to provide the
services requested and in the summer of 1791 the house appeared on the
market with a loan for Russia bearing a lower rate of interest (probably
the desired 4 %). In order to avoid incurring Hope's displeasure, it was
made to appear that the bonds were issued in St. Petersburg ; but the
intention was clear to many, including Hope. In the face of angry
representations by the Company, the Committee agreed to cancel the loan
on condition that Hope negotiated one of six million guilders at 4 %
to replace it. It is against this background that the lower interest rate
on the fourteenth and fifteenth loans must be viewed. In this connexion,
it is noteworthy that the contract with the entrepreneurs dated 21st
December contains no reference to an exchange of De Smeth bonds. 1
  The records also show that the entrepreneurs encountered obstacles in
placing the fourteenth and fifteenth loans. The abnormally low rate of
interest will undoubtedly have been the principal stumbling block, but
there was also the adverse effect of the political developments which took
place in the early part of 1792. In April of that year the Legislative As-
sembly in France declared war on 'the King of Bohemia and Hungary,'
as it chose to describe Emperor Francis II of Austria. It was plain that the
war would be fought mainly in the Austrian Netherlands and on the
Rhine, and would thus come dangerously close to the Republic. In the
early stages of the war the French armies made little progress; indeed,
their setbacks enabled the radical groups in Paris to grow in strength
until in August they succeeded, by allegations of treason, in bringing
about the suspension of the monarchy. It is obvious that under such
circumstances investors were less anxious to subscribe to loans than they
had been in the previous year.
  The contract providing for the sixteenth and seventeenth loans, to which
Hope and the entrepreneurs appended their signatures on 6th August 1792,
also bears signs of a less plentiful flow of money. The interest rate was
4-!-%, one half per cent more than in the contract of December 1791, and
the entrepreneurs were given eight months to pay instead of five. It was
agreed that no further loan would be opened until the eight instalments
had been paid, in May 1793. The difficulties which faced the entrepreneurs

                                   108
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

in placing the bonds are evidenced in the provision allowing them to
subcontract portions of their shares to third parties, provided that not
less than cf 50,000 was subcontracted at a time and that the subcontractor
became a party to the terms and conditions of the contract. It was even
felt necessary to impose a penalty for 'bartering, rebate of interest,' etc.;
this took the form of forfeiture of the bonus and a fine of one hundred
golden ducats for each offence, 'all to be applied to the benefit of the
Gerefor111eerde Nederduitsche Poor Relief Board in this City.' 1
  In the autumn of 1792 the military situation in the Southern Netherlands
imposed an increasing threat. Having defeated the Austrian troops in a
battle there, the French general Dumouriez proceeded to occupy the
whole country. In France, the king, after an interrogation before the
National Convention-a new body of deputies elected by universal suf-
frage-was condemned to death in January 1793. Shortly after this, on
1st February, the Convention declared war on 'the King of England' and
'the Stadholder of the Republic.' By early March Dumouriez had reached
the major rivers and it seemed that the Republic was lost. So grave did
the situation appear to Henry Hope that he, in company with the wife of
John Williams Hope and her children, fled to England. Later in the same
month the French general suffered a defeat which forced him to withdraw
from the Southern Netherlands. His subsequent desertion to the Austrian
side helped to bring to power in Paris extreme radical groups which
declared a popular war and acted with vigour against their enemies both
at home and abroad.
  In May 1793, when the period for settlement of the last loan contract
expired, a new contract providing for the eighteenth and nineteenth loans
was negotiated. The terms of this are not known, but records show that
Hope had to subscribe a considerable sum in order to reach the total of
six million guilders. A large sum was also required to support the value
of the Russian bonds so that the holders could be sure from day to day
of being able to exchange these for cash without suffering a 10ss.2 The new
loans bore interest at 5 %.
  The summer came, and in the weeks during which the war against France
proceeded favourably subscriptions totalling more than two million
guilders were received; but with the defeat of the allied armies at the
hands of the French in September, Dutch investors tightened their purse-
strings. It was very fortunate that the Russo-Turkish war had ended in the
Spring of 1792, for this fact served to reduce Russia's need for loans
abroad. The war against Sweden had ended in 1790.
Robert Vofite, the adviser and very close friend of the partners of Hope

                                    109
                    MONEY FOR THE TURKISH WAR

& CO. had left Holland in July 1793, travelling in the direction of Russia.
Besides the unsatisfactory progress of subscriptions to the latest loans for
that country, Voute had matters to attend to in Poland, where major
political changes threatened to endanger the Company's interests.
 Voute's journey in fact marked the end of the initial phase of Hope's
loan-raising activities on behalf of Russia, the provision of money for the
Turkish war. In the second phase the emphasis would be on consolidation
and measures aimed at ensuring regular interest payments and repayment
of principal money. Before dealing with this, however, we must concern
ourselves with the Company's connexions in Poland.




                                    110
                           CHAPTER FOUR

                  POLISH INTERLUDE



Robert Vollte arrived in Warsaw at half past eleven on the night of 24th
July 1793. It was pouring with rain. He had left Berlin on the 19th and,
despite the discomforts of the journey, had travelled day and night over
roads which had been turned into quagmires by an incessant downpour. 1
But Vollte allowed himself and his companions no more than a day or
two's rest before resuming the journey to Grodno, more than 250 kilo-
metres distant. There, the Polish sejm had been in session since the 17th.
Among the issues facing it were demands from Russia and Prussia for
fresh territorial concessions. 2 Hope had a direct interest in this matter,
for such concessions would significantly affect the Polish state finances,
with which the Company had been concerned for more than fifteen years.
  If there was one country which needed the name of Hope to establish its
credit and win the confidence of investors, that country was Poland. The
'Republic' was ruled by an impotent king chosen by the nobility-in whom
the true power rested. These nobles met in sejmiki, or local diets, which
sent delegates to the sejm, or parliament. Under the Polish constitution,
every measure introduced into the sejm had to be adopted unanimously;
a single dissenting voice was sufficient to send a proposal crashing to the
ground. This was the notorious liberum veto. There also existed a 'right
of confederation' which gave to an arbitrarily chosen group of gentry the
authority to impose their wishes, if necessary by force of arms. Many of
these noblemen, however, were in straitened circumstances and were
economically dependent upon twenty or so extremely rich landowning
families, the magnates, many of whom behaved as if they were sovereign
rulers. The remainder of the population consisted of impoverished, un-
educated serfs. Towns of any size or with a prosperous middle-class were
practically non-existent.
  With its form of government, this economically backward country was
constantly open to anarchy, a fact of which its more powerful neighbours,
Russia, Prussia and Austria, often took advantage in order to interfere in
its internal affairs. In 1772 this situation led to the First Partition, the
name given to a treaty under which Prussia acquired what later became
West Prussia; Russia obtained a part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania,

                                    III
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

which was linked to Poland by a personal union; and Austria acquired
territories which became Galicia.
  This amputation served to revive a reformatory movement to which
King Stanislaw Poniatowski - who, on the recommendation of Catherine II,
had been elected in I763-had earlier contributed. The political and finan-
cial frameworks were among the objects of reform. The principle of
majority decision was introduced in the sejmiki, tax reforms were enacted,
import and export duties were introduced and a type of budget devised.
The sejm of 1775 rendered exceptional services in the financial sector.
Among its acts was to vote the king a fixed allowance, a necessary step in
view of the loss of revenue to the Royal Treasury, in particular following
the cession of territory. 1 Owing to a deficit in revenues from taxation, the
sums voted to the king could not be paid in full, but in the light of the
expenditure by the king of substantial sums in the nation's interest, the
sejm of 1776, in Warsaw, authorized the monarch to obtain loans abroad
to the extent of his claims on the Treasuries of Poland and Lithuania,
which totalled nine million Polish guilders (cf 2,625,000). For the repay-
ment of these loans, the king received an annual sum of 50,000 ducats
from the newly established Sinking Fund. As security for the payment of
interest and repayment of principal money, he was also granted, for a
period of ten years, the revenues from the subsidium charitativum, the tax
on those living in property owned by the Church, amounting to 700,000
Polish guilders annually.2 The net revenues of the 'oeconomies' of Brest-
Litowsk, Kobrin, Olitzka and Szawel served as additional security. An
'oeconomy' was an estate, the revenues from which were destined solely
for the Court and the Royal Treasury.3
  In the opinion of Hope & Co., who were approached by the Warsaw
banker Pierre Ferguson Tepper, the sum of these guarantees was inade-
quate. The Company desired in addition a guarantee from Catherine II,
and in this it revealed a realistic view of Poland's dependence upon
Russia. The empress expressed her willingness to provide such a guaran-
tee, which she did in a document dated 18th September 1776.4 The princi-
pal guarantor was the Republic of Poland, which in particular was required
to guarantee that the 'oeconomies' mortgaged as security for the repayment
of the debt would continue to be reserved for this purpose even after the
death of King Stanislaw. In the event of the lenders having any complaint
whatsoever, Catherine was empowered to take over the 'oeconomies' and
to arrange for any arrears to be paid out of the proceeds. On these con-
ditions, the Company negotiated in 1777 a lo-year loan of nine million
Polish guilders (cf 2,625,000) bearing interest at 5 % and commencing on
1st February of that year. 5
                                    II2
                                                                             --=




Authorization by King Stanislaw of Poland to Pierre Tepper & Co. to negotiate with
                    Hope & Co. in the matter of a loan, 1785
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

In 1784, two years before the period of the loan expired, the sejm,
meeting at Grodno, voted to renew the allotment to the king of the
revenues from the subsidium charitativum, totalling 700,000 Polish guilders
per annum, for the same period as before and with the freedom to use
these as security for a fresh loan abroad.! Hope & Co. had by now ceased
to be the only potential source of such a loan. King Stanislaw had ob-
tained a loan of cf 1,000,000 from the Amsterdam house of Quirijn Willenl
van Hoom in 1781 and in addition maintained financial contacts with
Theodoor Glilcher & Mulder, also in Amsterdam. 2
  Early in January 1785 a Redemption Bureau was established on the
premises of Ferguson Tepper & Co. in Warsaw; its principal function was
the administration of the new loan. It was to this bureau that the Public
Treasuries of Poland and Lithuania would pay the approved subsidium
charitativum of 700,000 Polish guilders per annum. 3 The elimination of
the Royal Treasury from the administrative chain was probably aimed
at giving the lenders a greater sense of security.
  As before, the task of negotiating with Hope & Co. was entrusted to
Tepper. He was instructed to negotiate a loan of 250,000 ducats, or
cf 1,312,500, but when he put this to the Company he was advised that the
sum could, if desired, be increased by 100,000 ducats on condition that
part of the proceeds were employed for the accelerated payment of the
first three instalments on the Van Hoom loan. The price of the Van Hoom
bonds had by this time fallen to 94 %, indicating a lack of confidence
among investors; advancing the repayments would have the effect of
restoring the price to par, and this was a prerequisite for the successful
launching of the new loan.4
  In the months which followed, little progress was made in the negotia-
tions. The principal obstacles from the Company's point of view were
the absence of a further guarantee by Catherine II and lack of confidence
in the stability of Stanislaw's kingship, and even an express declaration by
the Public Treasury that the subsidium charitativum would continue to be
paid after the king's death failed to smooth the path. 5
  Late in 1785 King Stanislaw despatched 'Monsieur de Wickede, who is
charged with safeguarding the interests of the King of Poland in this
country,' to Amsterdam with instructions to continue the negotiations
with the Company. To the vexation of the king, the new negotiator met
with a continued lack of confidence in the continuation of his reign.
Stanislaw attributed the mistrust to German newspaper reports suggesting
that new stormclouds were gathering over Poland and that he planned to
abdicate. The truth of the matter probably lay in an Austrian plan which
                                    II4
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

envisaged the replacement of Stanislaw by the Elector of Saxony,
who was less dependent upon Russia. 1 De Wickede had received instruc-
tions to negotiate with other houses in Amsterdam, but it was made clear
to him by Hope that the king must choose between dealing with the
Company alone or going elsewhere. This was communicated to the mon-
arch, who replied that he had no objection to the Company acting alone
in the matter. This decision was accompanied by some flattering com-
ments concerning the partners in Hope & Co., whom the king had 'had
the pleasure to meet thirty years ago. '2 Gratifying as the compliments paid
by King Stanislaw to the erstwhile partners, Thomas and Adrian Hope,
were, however, the Company remained firm in the matter of guarantees.
In addition to the declaration by the Treasury regarding the subsidium
charitativum, Hope desired a special guarantee from Stanislaw's heir,
Joseph Poniatowski, concerning the mortgaging of the king's personal
possessions. In the eyes of the king, a private guarantee from his nephew
and heir was neither proper nor becoming, and he expressed the view that
Hope should respect these 'raisons de delicatesse.' He had no objection
to the insertion of the words 'present and future' in the clause relating to
the mortgaging of his estate, but he would go no farther than that. 3 If this
failed to satisfy Hope, the king was prepared to include his income from
the two Treasuries, totalling four million Polish guilders per annum, in
the securities; and he added that he did not wish to borrow more than one
and a half million guilders altogether.
  The loan was finally arranged at the beginning of April 1786. As on some
previous occasions, the signing of the contract with the entrepreneurs pre-
ceded the issue of the principal debenture. The contract was for two mil-
lion guilders at 5 % interest and for a period of lOt years commencing on
1st June 1786. The contract stipulated that the public subscription to the
loan would open at the offices of Hope & Co. fourteen days after the
publication of the Berigt and that the subscribers would receive a douceur
of t %. The entrepreneurs were to receive a bonus of I % on the total sum
for which they participated plus one month's interest on this sum, which
was equivalent to an extra bonus of /2 %. In addition, they were to receive
t % of the sum actually allocated to them following the public subscrip-
tion. On the assumption that the definitive share would be smaller than
that which they had contracted to subscribe, they would thus have re-
ceived bonuses totalling 2 %of their allotted shares. 4
  The principal debenture, which was dated 21st April, and the contract
between Hope and De Wickede reveal that the king had all his own way
in the matter of mortgages, for there is no mention of special guarantees

                                    115
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

by his heir.1 A notable feature of the loan is the sum, two million guilders,
which exceeds by half a million the amount referred to by the king less
than two months previously. If, however, we deduct the 6 % commission
received by Hope and then compare the result with the 350,000 ducats to
which Hope desired in 1785 to increase the loan, we arrive at approxima-
tely the same figure, namely just over 1% million guilders. 2 No further
mention was made of accelerating the repayment of the Van Hoom loan,
nor of the Redemption Bureau at the house of Tepper; in all probability
this did not operate because the administration of the loan was ultimately
shared between Tepper and the banking house of Blanc. 3
  Hope was also obliged to yield to the king's demands in the matter of
commission on the loan and to accept 6 % instead of 7 %, Stanislaw
having threatened to withhold the I % on the interest payments and
repayment of principal money. It is conceivable that Hope conceded
this in order to sweeten the pill of the 5 % interest, which was t % more
than the king wished to pay and higher by the same margin than the
Swedish loan floated on 1St February 1786.4 This margin and the differ-
ence in bonus paid to the entrepreneurs- I % on the Swedish loan as
against 2 % on the Polish -afford a rough indication of the credit enjoyed
by these countries in Amsterdam.
 According to the contract between Hope and De Wickede, the nett pro-
ceeds of the loan were to be transferred in four instalments, three of
cf 500,000 due on the first day in the months of August, September and Oc-
tober and the fourth, of cf 380,000, on 1st November. Interest, however,
was payable on the whole sum as from 1st June, and this Hope kept for
themselves. A simple calculation shows this to be worth more than 1%,
which means that they were able to give the entrepreneurs a bonus of 2 %
without affecting the remainder of their commission. 5 In December 1786
the king, became aware of the advantage accruing to Hope from the com-
mencement of interest payments on 1st June and, filled with indignation, he
commanded De Wickede to secure a change in the position. Meanwhile
the Chamber of Finances took the law into its own hands and remitted
only half of the seven months' interest due on 1st January 1787.6
 Hope's refusal to issue a certificate of payment for the full sum of the
interest was met by the withholding of the half-yearly interest due on 1st
July 1787. On 25th June the Company had advised King Stanislaw that it
was in the extremely unpleasant position of having up to that moment
received no remittances in respect of interest or the first instalment of the
principal money, while it faced an immediate duty to announce the pay-
ment in the newspapers. If the notice failed to appear, the Polish king's

                                    II6
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

 credit in the Republic would be at an end. To avoid such a situation, the
 Company had decided to proceed with the advertisement and, if neces-
 sary, to meet the interest and capital repayment out of its own pocket.
 The arrears of capital were swiftly paid off, but the interest outstanding
 from 1st January and totalling cf 27,143.15.0 remained a subject of dis-
 pute. In January 1788 Hope again wrote on this subject to the king, and
 also to De Wickede. Even though the interest computation may have been
 'too great a favour,' this fact should have been considered before the
 contract was signed; the terms of the contract were deemed to have been
 approved by the king and as such were inviolable. The writer expressed
 the hope that the king would issue orders on the subject 'which may at
 once bring an end to our fears for the troublesome consequences of the
 refusal of His Chamber of Finances.'! Despite this appeal, Hope's claim
 was not met until 1790.2
   In the request made to King Stanislaw in January 1788, Hope wrote of
 'many other, more essential matters' which undoubtedly occupied the
 monarch's attention. The reference was to a widespread reform move-
 ment in Poland which sought to utilize Russia's preoccupation with the
wars against Turkey and Sweden to extend the modernization of Poland
without risk of Russian intervention. During the 'four years' sejm' (1788-
92), the task commenced in 1775 was carried a stage farther. New taxes
were imposed, the army was strengthened and measures were introduced
to improve the lot of the peasants. These efforts were crowned with the
constitution of 1791, which converted Poland into a hereditary monarchy
and invested the king with executive power. In the new parliament, in
which the peasants were represented, decisions were taken by a majority
vote and the right of confederation was abolished. 3
  In 1790, Poland had entered into a treaty with Prussia providing for
mutual assistance in the event of attack by a third power. 4 This, the Polish
government believed, would protect the country against Russian inter-
vention. The true value of the treaty was revealed in 1792 when Catherine
II, her hands unfettered by the cessation of the war against the Turks, lost
no time in dealing with what to her were displeasing developments in
Poland. Under her auspices, a confederation was formed (ostensibly at
Targowica, but in fact in St. Petersburg) which protested against the new
constitution with its 'pernicious, revolutionary ideas copied from France.'
The confederation appealed to Catherine for military assistance, which
she of course gladly furnished. The King of Prussia- who had cast covet-
ous eyes on more Polish territory, and who was performing an obscure
balancing act between Austria and Russia-left his ally in the lurch, on the

                                    117
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

pretext that the treaty had lost its validity because of the new Polish con-
stitution.! As usual, Stanislaw bowed to the might of the empress and
repealed the constitution. But not before Russian troops had commenced
to occupy Poland.
 Prussia's true nature was revealed in January 1793 with the signing, with
Russia, of a second treaty of partition. The effect of this was to deprive
Poland, whose wings had already been clipped, of half its territory and a
similar proportion of its people. 2 Troops of each of the powers occupied
the areas of Poland which they had thus obtained. Under pressure from
the occupying Russian forces, elections were held for a sejm which was
given the task of ratifying the treaty of partition. The newly appointed
Russian envoy, Baron Sievers, succeeded by liberal gifts of money in
securing the election of the delegates whom Russia favoured. King Sta-
nislaw at first refused to travel to Grodno, where the sejm was to assem-
ble, but his financial plight made him so dependent upon Catherine's
benevolence that he was finally obliged to yield.
 The king's financial difficulties were allied to the total stagnation in mon-
etary transactions in Poland. When news spread of the entry of Russian
troops, and soon afterwards of Prussian forces, money ceased to circulate
and credit transactions ground to a halt. Support from outside was not to
be expected, for the Dutch Republic had just become embroiled in a war
against the revolutionary French, and England had suffered a severe finan-
cial crisis which was to lead to countless bankruptcies. 3 In Poland, a
number of banks and merchant houses were so hard hit by the stagna-
tion that they were forced to suspend payments. Among them were the
banking houses of Tepper and Blanc. In February 1793 Tepper informed
Baron Sievers that he was owed one and a half million ducats by the king
and that if the money was not soon forthcoming he would be obliged to
declare himself bankrupt. The king's debts at that time amounted to
nearly thirty-four million Polish guilders. In consultation with King Sta-
nislaw, Sievers had Tepper's offices in Warsaw placed under seal in order
that the king's financially perilous position should not become public
knowledge-and also to prevent any leakage of information concerning
the bribes which his predecessor had paid, via Tepper, to numerous mem-
bers of the Polish gentry.4
  Naturally, the further payments of interest and capital on Hope's loan
were placed in jeopardy by this development. It was with the aim of seek-
ing some clarification regarding these matters that Robert Voute arrived
in Warsaw on 24th July. The prospects were not particularly favourable.
V oute reported that the sum of the commitments of the houses which had

                                    118
                          POLISH INTERLUDE

been forced to suspend operations was no less than ten million ducats.
Tepper's affairs were in a sad state and he would almost certainly go
bankrupt; with luck, the assets might be sufficient to meet 50-60% of
creditors' claims. Tepper himself was also to blame; his book-keeping was
seven years in arrears and the accounts were in such a state that although
two senior clerks had been able to systematically rob the firm for years,
their crime could not be proven. Tepper was now living in a single room
somewhere, on thirty ducats a month, while his son was trying to find a
livelihood outside Warsaw. Despite Tepper's demise, Voute was of the
opinion that, in principle, banking in Poland still had a solid foundation,
since loans to the gentry were granted only with land as a collateral. The
banks also accepted money on deposit, on which they paid interest; but
the rapid rise in the number of banking houses in the preceding years had
caused the interest rate to rise from 3 % to between 5 and 6 %.
  Blanc & Co. were in a slightly more favourable position, but Blanc him-
self was ageing and was embarrassed by his circumstances. Voute reported
that Blanc had offended Sievers by failing to offer him loans quickly
enough, or of sufficient size, when he arrived in Warsaw and was therefore
out of favour with the Russian envoy. Sievers's current favourite was the
much younger Jean Meisner, a skilful man possessing great physical
strength and thus 'better suited, in all senses, to live among the Poles.' 1
Meisner was closely associated with Hasselgreen of the Amsterdam house
of the same name, who, like Voute, was studying the situation on the
spot-and who in Grodno lived completely in the Polish manner. While in
Warsaw, Voute also met Glilcher of Glilcher & Mulder who, like Hope
& Co., had negotiated a loan for the Polish king and, moreover, were
involved in various loans to Polish magnates. 2
  Voute was accompanied on the journey by William Porter of William
Porter & Co., St. Petersburg. They were jointly authorized to act on
behalf of Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. in negotiations with the house
of G.Thomson Rowand & Co. in Moscow. Porter's presence was of great
value to Voute, for he spoke the language and was au fait with local con-
ditions. When the visitors arrived in Grodno, the sejm had just accepted,
amid violent protests, the cession of territory to Russia; but the anger
expressed on this issue paled into insignificance alongside the fury and
bitterness with which the assembly rounded on the treacherous Prussians
and their demands. Sievers, whose work on behalf of Catherine was done,
left the Pruss ian envoy, Buchholtz, to face the tirade of abuse from the
livid Poles and did not lift a finger to support him. He thus contrived to
demoralize his counterpart to the point where he concurred in the fron-

                                    119
                            POLISH INTERLUDE

tiers set out in the treaty and made no further mention of the changes
which his government had proposed subsequent to the signing.! Accord-
ing to Voiite, the sejm was 'bouillante': the noise was deafening. While he
was present, a motion tabled by Buchholtz was rejected in favour of a
counterproposal calling upon the King of Prussia to first recognize the
integrity of Poland; only when this had been done could there be any
question of a treaty with that monarch. While this spectacle was taking
place, Voiite wrote, the building in which the sejm assembled was sur-
rounded on the one side by a Russian army and on the other by a Prus-
sian army, and a battery of Russian 24-pounders was trained on the royal
castle. He, Voiite, now realized 'that we in the Republic have been badly
informed and have had a very false picture of the behaviour of Russia and
Prussia towards Poland.' 2
  Voiite found it strange that the Poles had continued to cling to the repub-
lican form of government while they, like the Dutch, suffered under its
shortcomings and vices. The situations in the two countries differed great-
ly, of course, but government in Poland was in the hands of many who, in
spite of their differences, had a common aim: to deprive the king of his
power-something which had earlier been attempted against the stad-
holder in Holland. If the tyranny of the minor despots could not be
brought to an end, Poland would soon be done for; it would then fall
under foreign dominance, 'perhaps the only means of changing the vicious
disposition of the inhabitants, a product of the example set by the nobil-
ity.' Voiite thus took the view that the failures of the system of govern-
ment in Poland lay at the root of the partition; in fact, it was the efforts to
eliminate those failures which had given rise to the Russian intervention
and with it the Second Partition.
  Voiite and Porter were the first foreigners to be present at the assembly
of the sejm, and they accordingly attracted a good deal of attention. News
of their presence reached King Stanislaw, who sent a secretary to inquire
who they were, and if he, the king, could be of service to them; indeed,
this occurred so often that the visitors eventually felt obliged to seek an
audience of the ruler. To this end, they enlisted the aid of the British
envoy, Gardiner. During the audience, the king asked searching questions
concerning the state of trade in England, and also the bankruptcies which
had occurred there and which had contributed to Poland's distress. When
the audience came to an end, the king drew Voiite and Porter on one side
and, 'his face etched with grief,' said he was sure that they could judge the
wretched position in which he was placed through his country's serious
plight, and he expressed regret at being unable to make their sojourn in

                                     120
                           POLISH INTERLUDE

Poland as pleasant as possible. To hear such words from the mouth of a
king, Voute wrote, was indeed unusual, and in his opinion the man was to
be pitied because he was not the cause of his country's downfall. The
matter of the king's debts had not arisen during the audience, but Voute
was not optimistic on this score. There was little or no doubt regarding
the payment of the debts incurred by the Republic of Poland because,
among other things, the Russian and Prussian governments would each
accept a share; but Voute had been informed that under the law of Poland
the king himself could not incur debts. Moreover, the king had nothing:
all his property and revenues had been seized by the Russians. 1 Voute's
only hope lay in a meeting with Sievers, but he was so occupied with
affairs relating to the sejm that although Voute and Porter dined at his
house they did not see the man at all. The envoy sent them a written apology
and enclosed letters of introduction to the governors of Minsk and
Smolensk, which would assist them on their journey to Moscow.
 On the eve of their departure for that city, early in August, Voute had
another meeting with Hasselgreen, who was anxious that Voute should
read his memorandum to Buchholtz concerning the debts owed by the
king, the Republic and the magnates, and who had travelled to Grodno
from the Meisner estate near Minsk especially for this purpose. Voute felt
unable to decline so flattering a request, though he feared that, in spite of
Hasselgreen's reasoning, the claims by the Dutch against the king and the
magnates might well be equated with those of their Polish creditors.
 While Poland's future remained undecided, however, nothing could be
done about the loans made to the country, so that Vofite and Porter were
free to concentrate on the commission which they were to undertake for
Hope and Baring in Moscow. When that had been concluded, Voute pro-
posed to travel to St. Petersburg to raise the question of the Polish loans
with the person who wielded the real power, Empress Catherine II of
Russia.




                                    121
                            CHAPTER FIVE

             ADUTCH BROKER AT THE
                RUSSIAN COURT


Although the problems which occupied Voute and Porter during their
visit to Moscow concerned but one mercantile house, they were in many
ways symptomatic of the whole process of trading with Russia. Because
of this, and also in the light of a speculative investment in cochineal,
which will be described later, it is of interest to examine the house con-
cerned more closely.
  Geo.Thomson Rowand & Co. had maintained a business relationship
with Hope & Co. for very many years; since 1788, the extent of their
transactions had grown rapidly. Following the shipment of large quanti-
ties of cochineal to the Moscow home, its account with Hope rose to
more than one and a quarter million guilders in 1791, at the end of
which year a sum of just over a million guilders in Hope's favour was
carried forward to a new account. 1 As this sum included the as yet unsold
cochineal, the Company, not surprisingly, kept a close watch on the situa-
tion following the death of the senior partner, James Rowand, in the
summer of 1791. Shortly before this, Rowand had accepted Thomas
Hawes, George Carr and Alexander Grant into partnership. The four
were also partners in the house of Rowand Carr & Co. of St. Petersburg,
where Carr was responsible for day-to-day management.
  In addition to Hope & Co. and Baring & Co., Thomson Rowand's prin-
cipal correspondents included Raikes & Co. of London, from whom they
purchased diamonds and other precious stones. Like Hope, Raikes were
liberal in the matter of credit. With the death of James Rowand, uncer-
tainty arose regarding the legal validity of his Will in Russia: would it be
accepted, or would the State assume possession of his assets? The effect
upon Carr was one of panic. In his anxiety to disengage himself from the
house, he wrote alarming letters to Raikes. Their reaction was to refuse
further drafts from Rowand and to freeze the house's credit in Amster-
dam. This produced a deluge of accusations from Carr and eventually the
dispute, which was conducted by correspondence, reached the point
where, in May 1792, Raikes refused to have anything more to do with
Rowand as long as Carr remained a partner. Carr had earlier found
among James Rowand's papers a criticism of himself written by Raikes,

                                    123
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

by whom he had previously been employed as a clerk, and this merely
exacerbated the situation.
 Within the firm, Carr was embroiled in a serious conflict with Grant,
whom he accused of embezzling funds belonging to the house, even
though he had earlier given his approval for these to be used by Grant.
By June 1793 the conflict had assumed such proportions that Carr an-
nounced his intention to resign. Liquidity problems, which were so acute
that only loans from friends saved the house from bankruptcy, pro-
bably contributed to this decision, but of these he made no mention. Dis-
quieting reports concerning the house had started to reach Hope & Co.
soon after James Rowand's death, and in 1792 the partners deemed it
wise to send an observer to Moscow. The warning signals received from
this person in the summer of 1793 were among the motives for Voute's
journey. 1
 Voute and Porter arrived in Moscow on 14th August 1793. They were
warmly received by the partners, Grant and Hawes, who offered them
shelter at the house of a former partner. At first the visitors were hesitant
to accept the offer, but as the purpose of their visit had leaked out (the
result, according to Voute, of Carr's malevolence), they decided that it
would be more prudent to do so and thus avoid giving the world outside
an impression that things were amiss.
  After a cursory examination of the firm's books and correspondence,
Voute expressed the view that Carr's resignation should be accepted,
adding that the sooner this was done, the better. Carr's papers, however,
should be retained by the other partners in order to prevent him from
damaging the reputations of Hope and Baring.2 Rowand's books, like
those of Tepper in Warsaw, revealed an immense backlog of entries,
making it difficult to obtain an accurate picture of the firm's financial
position. The last occasion on which Rowand had had a balance sheet
drawn up was in 1784. Voute commented sarcastically that this had
probably revealed more than enough to Rowand, who had feared to
discover more. To obtain a clearer picture, Voute gave instructions for
trial balances to be prepared for the years 1785 to 1792 inclusive. These
showed that, while losses had been incurred, the house was financially
sound and that it enjoyed a high reputation in Moscow. This reputation
was closely linked to the credit obtained from Raikes and other houses,
and this in turn was based on confidence in the person of James Rowand.
But his death and Carr's rash conduct had undermined confidence in the
house, added to which the slowness with which debts were paid gave rise
to problems of liquidity. According to Porter, the Russian debtors, with

                                    124
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

the exception of a few doubtful individuals, were of substance, as were the
 securities or bonds which they furnished. 1 However, there was no pros-
pect of early settlement, for the Russians viewed the weakness of the rate
 of exchange, from which they too had suffered losses, as a reason to delay
paying their accounts. In April 1793 the weak position of the rouble had
led to a drastic reduction of imports, and this also had an adverse effect
 upon trade. 2
  Vollte devised a plan whereby the firm's creditors would be paid on the
due date. Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. alone would be excluded in the
sense that they would leave sums of cf 200,000 and cf 100,000 of their
claims, totalling cf 1,047,589 and cf 530,805, at the disposal of Thomson
Rowand for a period of three years, during which they would receive
interest at 4 % per annum. Vollte felt justified in proposing this because
he was reasonably confident of the abilities of Hawes and Grant. In his
opinion, the latter possessed 'esprit,' even genius and a flair for business,
and he got on well with the Russians. Hawes was a true office man, quiet,
not brilliant but sufficiently intelligent. Both conducted their business
affairs as Rowand had done, in the manner which was common to foreign
houses in Moscow-and which made such connexions with Russia ex-
tremely hazardous. These houses acted as commission agents, and the
monies which they earned enabled them to spread their wings ever wider.
It was thus easy for them to make their fortune. According to Vollte, they
displayed no initiative, nor had they any profound insight into the pattern
of trade in Russia; they were concerned only with earning their commis-
sion, and paid no heed to the finer points of their business deals.
  Thomson Rowand's premises were situated three-quarters of an hour's
walk from the trading centre proper (too far in Vollte's opinion) and the
Russians who wished to do business with them were obliged to travel the
distance. They were received by a Russian clerk, the partners remaining
behind their desks and, like their Dutch counterparts, making too few
appearances in the warehouse and among the traders and shopkeepers. 3
Such reticence, Vollte considered, was the more serious in Moscow be-
cause there were no brokers or other middlemen able to provide infor-
mation concerning the merchandise, as was the case in Holland, and thus
the foreign merchants became even more isolated. In contrast, the Russian
merchants-who monopolized the home trade and, insofar as they did not
have direct contacts, placed orders for west European goods with houses
such as Thomson Rowand-did everything for themselves, saw each other
every day, kept each other informed of developments and acted accord-
ingly. Specialist middlemen were consequently less important.

                                    125
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

Maintaining direct connexions with Russian merchants seemed to VmIte
to be a risky policy, involving as it would incessant parrying of their
artifices. But trading in imported goods for one's own account, as in 'the
good old days,' would be profitable. 1
  To do this would require a foreigner resident in Moscow, or a foreign
merchant who entrusted his interests to a compatriot there. By abandon-
ing the bare role of commission agent, such a merchant would be in a
position to secure better payment terms, say, part in cash and the balance
in instalments spread over six or twelve months instead of wholly in
instalments which dragged on from year to year.
  According to VOllte, Moscow was a more important centre for imported
goods than St. Petersburg, where the emphasis was on exports. He was
greatly impressed by the city of Moscow, with its half a million inhabitants
and its innumerable churches, and also by the volume of its trade. The
various provinces of the czardom traded with one another in the same
way as the nations of western Europe, and from their offices in Moscow,
Russian and Armenian merchants conducted business with faraway places
such as Persia, Bukhara and China. Most of their business was done in
wintertime, when the merchandise could be transported cheaply by sledge.
Moscow was bristling with merchants of every nationality, in addition to
whom there were innumerable money-changers, who congregated in a
particular part of the shopping area. They sat in open-fronted kiosks, the
boxes containing the various currencies standing behind and to one side
of them. The arrangement, Vollte noted, was similar to that employed in
Amsterdam prior to the opening of the Exchange Bank in 1609. The
principal dealings involved changing copper coins for silver-a product of
the retention by the Russian government of a dual standard.
 Trade with China, it was reported, had ceased to be conducted by
caravan since the opening of a road linking the two countries. During his
stay, VOllte dined with a merchant named Gusyatnikov, who was among
Thomson Rowand's debtors and who, with two other!>, monopolized the
trade with China. Vollte extracted from him a promise that he would be
allowed to draw samples from his warehouse. Although Gusyatnikov was
reputed to be a rich man, he did not pay his debts either to Thomson
Rowand or to Amsterdam houses such as Hovy, Hasselgreen and Wilkie-
son, but kept his creditors on a string with promises of payment in three
years time. Here was decisive proof of VOllte's contention that direct
associations with Russian merchants were to be discouraged. 2
 VOllte's role as a broker was to prove a sore point in his dealings with
houses in Moscow. For example, he was greatly incensed to discover that

                                    126
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 the house of Muilman in Amsterdam had written to Thomson Rowand
 saying that 'One Mr.Voute, a chief broker in the article of teas,' was on
 his way to Russia and might well stop in Moscow. The house of Tamesz &
 Co. had so far failed to pay its respects to him and it could well be that
 they had also been informed of the purpose of his journey and of the fact
 that he was but a 'chief tea broker.' A sharp attack in the direction of the
 partners of Tamesz & Co. revealed plainly how deeply he was hurt and
 how great in his eyes was the social gap between brokership and the
 profession of merchant, as personified by the Hopes.!
  Early in September 1793, Carr arrived from St.Petersburg. The impres-
 sion which he made on Voute was anything but favourable, and when he
 began to quibble over the conditions for his resignation from Thomson
 Rowand, Voute took a firm hand, with the result that the deed dissolving
the partnership was quickly signed. Under the terms of this deed, the
house of Rowand & Carr in St. Petersburg would cease to exist and would
be wound up by Hawes and Grant. 2
  The signing of the deed providing for the new partnership was not
achieved so smoothly, however. Voute had prepared a draft agreement
in which Thomson Rowand would be subject to a form of supervision by
the house of Porter in St.Petersburg-to such an extent, indeed, that in the
event of the indisposition or death of Grant the house would come under
the control of one of the partners of Porter, since Hawes could not
manage alone. 3 As an appendix to the deed, Voute had also drawn up a
list of instructions for merchants, showing how and when a balance sheet
should be prepared, how the affairs of the house should be conducted and
how the securities provided for the debts to Hope & Co. and Baring & Co.
should be managed. The complaisant Hawes concurred in both docu-
ments, but Grant asked for time to consider them. Grant was evidently
digging his heels in; according to Voute he had previously been employed
as a clerk by Porter and, in his heart, still looked up to him.4
  It is conceivable that Grant adopted delaying tactics because he believed
that time was on his side. After all, the agreement was the only item on
the Voute-Porter agenda in Moscow, while all manner of urgent business
awaited them in St.Petersburg. In the event, Voute decided to leave the
matter in abeyance, and on 20th September he and his companion
departed for St.Petersburg. Grant had meanwhile left for the same
destination to close the books of Rowand Carr & Co. 5
  Among the disagreeable matters which Voute wished to discuss at a high
level was one concerning Trosien. In December 1792, the house of
Blanckenhagen & Co. in London had been forced by a serious credit

                                    127
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

crisis there to suspend payments. The house of De Bary & Co. in Amster-
dam had thereupon felt obliged to intervene in the matter of drafts drawn
by the St. Petersburg merchant Michel Trosien on Blanckenhagen and
later assigned by him to De Bary to be further dealt with. The repayment
of the advances, however, was not forthcoming despite a series of honeyed
letters from Trosien. He even managed to persuade De Bary to extend to
him a credit of 150,000 marks banco on Beerend Roosen of Hamburg,
for which De Bary stood as guarantor. Trosien, however, continued to
find excuses for non-repayment, even after De Bary wrote to him saying
that further default would lead to their ruin.
  This was no idle threat, for in March 1793 the house was obliged to cease
payments. However, their creditors supported them in an approach to
the Schepenen of Amsterdam with a request that the partners be allowed
to continue in control in order that, with the assistance of the trustees in
bankruptcy, the firm would be enabled to repay its creditors in full. The
trustees, J.C.Hasselgreen, Voute Bros. and A.Vereul, empowered three
houses in St.Petersburg, Amburger & Son, Raimbert & Co. and Rowand
Carr & Co., to collect debts totalling cf 307,000 from Trosien. At the
same time they arranged, through the Russian envoy in The Hague, for
the Vice-Chancellor, Count Ostermann, to be acquainted with the situa-
tion. They argued that Dutch merchants had for some time been suffering
severe losses as a result of the large number of bankruptcies in Russia and,
moreover, were the victims of the evasion by Russian debtors of the law
and of the legal processes for its enforcement.!
  Trosien, stung by these acts against his person, refused to negotiate with
the appointed houses in St. Petersburg. He did not like the look of the
first; he disliked Frenchmen and he refused to negotiate with an English-
man. And he ignored further correspondence from the trustees. 2
  Much more serious, and of direct interest to Hope & Co., was the shaky
position of the house of Sutherland in St.Petersburg. Baron Richard
Sutherland (he had been raised to the nobility by the empress) had died
in the latter part of 1791, soon after his mighty patron, Potemkin. The
enemies who had earlier harassed him now fell with renewed vigour upon
the house which bore his name, accusing it of having indulged, under his
leadership, in questionable financial practices. The campaign led the
Russian government to set up a committee to examine Sutherland's
accounts during his period as Court Banker; pending the committee's
report, the settlement of his estate was suspended.
  Voute's first act upon reaching St.Petersburg was to visit Sutherland's
office and make the acquaintance of the surviving partners, Browne,

                                    128
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

Whishaw and RaIl. His initial impression of them was mixed: Browne
(a son-in-law of Sutherland) he described as 'a man who would not hurt
a fly,' of Whishaw he had a higher opinion, while RaIl was 'a he-man, an
intriguer through and through, restless, possessing the gift of the gab,
and destined to make progress in this country.' Sutherland's own son, a
degenerate libertine, was ill and could not be present, but Whishaw ex-
plained that his condition was improving, 'for Madame Mercury has got
him out of trouble.' 1 Whishaw revealed that the house was going through
a difficult period pending the settlement of Sutherland's estate and that
their drafts were not willingly accepted. From Rail, Vollte learned that
the government was disputing the firm's claim to commission on the
fourteenth and fifteenth loans, and that bad debts of at least 80,000
roubles would have to be written off.2
  With all these factors in mind, Vollte deemed it wise to delay broaching
the subject of Hope's claims on the house. As far as the Trosien affair was
concerned, he proposed to first quietly reconnoitre the ground. He and
Porter did, however, obtain an audience with Count Samaylov, the Attor-
ney General, who occupied a central position in domestic affairs, justice
and financial matters, but whose powers had been limited during the
reign of Catherine II by the influence of the empress's favourite. 3
  The favourite could exert considerable pressure, for good or for evil, and
thus it was advisable not to ignore him. In I793 it was upon Platon Zubov
that the empress's favour fell, and after the meeting with Samaylov Vollte
obtained an audience with him. He also accorded due honour to Zubov's
secretary, Altesti, an Italian fortune-hunter who, within the protection of
his master's influential position, maintained his own circle of proteges
and who was in a position to furnish an entree to Zubov.
  In his reports to Hope & Co., Vollte had difficulty in describing in detail
Zubov's position at the Russian Court. He had soon discovered that his
letters were opened by the Russian police, and thus he had to be ex-
tremely careful in his references to government officials and to the situa-
tion at Court. He went so far as to experiment with a code based on key
words, but even this failed to provide the required secrecy and in the end
he resorted to using the diplomatic bag of a foreign embassy, which was
not subject to Russian censorship.4
  In one such confidential letter, he described Zubov as 'well disposed
but oflimited knowledge and a man with a heavy burden of debt.' It was
reported that he had ousted Bezborodko, the Secretary of State and for
many years the true head of the foreign ministry, from his position of
power. 5 According to Vollte, Bezborodko was 'the brain behind the whole

                                    I29
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

empire,' but in his private life a degraded individual who was addicted to
gambling and abhorred regular work. But when he worked, he did more
in a quarter of an hour than others did in a whole day. Markov, his
secretary, was equally lazy and degraded; his household was ruled by an
actress and several other beauties. He, too, was a gambler, 'but as sharp
as a needle' and he was gradually shifting his loyalties to the up and
coming man, Zubov. Voute reported that the Vice-Chancellor, Ostermann,
an elderly, tired figure, was head of the foreign ministry in name only,
and that he had always been treated like a doormat by his colleagues. 1
Samaylov was good-hearted, but he was a soldier and not a politician; he
was ignorant of jurisprudence and disinterested in financial matters. As
a brother-in-law of Potemkin, he had risen with him, but after the latter's
death in 1791 Samaylov's influence had waned, though he had retained
his office. He, too, was a gambler and was thus continually short of
money.
  Alexander Zablukov, the Imperial Treasurer, struck V oute as being one
of the few respectable people in this environment. He was a man of
enlightened views, well disposed towards foreigners and the only one with
a normal family life. 2 Voute also had great respect for Myatlev, one of the
senior directors of the state-controlled Assignat Bank, whom he described
as 'an unusual man,' adding that he had notions of justice. 3
  This, in Voute's view, was the principal shortcoming in Russia: each and
everyone of the courts could be bribed, and in this situation decent
people had little incentive to bring actions, with the result that only those
who, like Trosien, were up to no good attempted legal proceedings. Voute
was convinced that for fifty thousand roubles he could easily have had
Trosien convicted, but his aim was to secure justice and in doing so to
set an example. The government's financial needs were limitless, and the
Court spent vast sums and paid with cabinet bonds which ran for four
years and at times changed hands at 30 %below par.
  So short of funds was the Russian government that it was unable even
 to meet its commitments towards its own citizens. As a result, trade was
dislocated and private individuals found themselves unable to press their
claims in courts of law since the government was ultimately the principal
debtor. Voute reported that this situation lay behind Bezborodko's deci-
 sion to terminate saltpetre mining on one of his estates. All the organs of
government were affected by the dearth of money, and the failure to meet
invoices for drugs supplied to the College of Medicine added to Suther-
land & Co.'s difficulties. Even the Assignat Bank was living from hand to
 mouth: it was rumoured that when a lady had called to withdraw 50,000

                                    13 0
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

roubles, the bank was obliged to borrow the money from the St. Peters-
burg merchant Ritter.l All these bodies, Voute wrote, were headed by
military men with no understanding of the job and who earned too little,
yet all managed to amass a fortune. They spent more time talking than
working, and every day saw decisions taken which conflicted with earlier
ones.
 The picture which Voute painted of the foreign merchants in St.Peters-
burg was just as dismal. In his opinion, Wegelin, of the house of Bonar,
and Porter and his partner, Brown, were the only men with honest
principles. Bagge, of the house of Bagge & Van Eyssel, was a righteous
man but could not be described as a shining light. Ritter, whom Voute
described as a classic example of duplicity, was on excellent terms with
Samaylov and Ostermann, and because of this Russia's needs abroad had
since Sutherland's death been financed with drafts issued by the house
which he headed. Ritter also had a grudge against Hope & Co. which he
aired everywhere by saying that the Company had made millions out of
Russia. 2 RaIl alone was a match for Ritter, because he understood the
situation in St.Petersburg and knew just who possessed influence and who
did not. Voute judged that RaIl would get very far-a prediction which was
later to come true, with extremely unpleasant consequences for Hope &
Co. RaIl also had connexions with Hasselgreen and, through him, was
associated with Meisner and with the financing operations in Poland. In
view of the very bad example set by the foreign merchants in St.Peters-
burg, Voute concluded that it would be quite wrong to have any illusions
concerning the mentality of their Russian counterparts there.
 The reports which reached Voute concerning Richard Sutherland were
largely adverse. He was said to have recklessly lent out monies entrusted
to him and to have incurred huge losses on exchange operations and
exports of goods. He was described as well intentioned but unsuited to his
profession. He had frittered away his time and money in chasing after
the wife of another merchant, Severin, and had put her above his business
interests. Having achieved the position of Court Banker, thanks to pro-
tection and to his connexions, he had found it extremely difficult to
refuse requests for loans, especially from Potemkin, the mention of whose
name was said to have made him tremble. The upshot of this situation
was that Potemkin's descendants alone owed him 762,000 roubles. Voute
subsequently learned that, prior to his appointment as Court Banker,
Sutherland had incurred debts totalling 450,000 roubles; he had pinned
his faith on recovering this sum, and more, through his new office. When,
in due course, his position indeed improved, success went to his head and

                                   13 1
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

he commenced to fling his money about. Those who had procured the
office for him had known of his weakness and indulgence, and had abused
them shamelessly. During his lifetime Sutherland had never been called
upon to account for his management of the finances, but now that he was
dead the vultures, spearheaded by the most unscrupulous profiteers, were
tearing at his bones. Voute observed that the smallness of Sutherland's
estate (he left practically nothing) said much for his goodheartedness, but
little for his ability as a merchant. 1
  Voute was nevertheless of the opinion that the shortcomings which he
had experienced in the Russian society represented only one side of the
story: against the laziness, depravity, corruption and waste must be set
the immense resources and the limitless potential of the country, which
continued to overawe the observer. It seemed to him that, up to a point,
this potential encouraged the fatalism, improvidence and waste, inasmuch
as the nation, in time of real need, could always fall back on its untapped
reserves which, with only efficient exploitation and strict control, could
rapidly enable the largest deficit to be converted into a surplus. 'If we can
maintain peace, we will repay all our debts within six years,' Voute was
told. And he believed this.2
  Russia's natural resources, however, lay open to attack by her redoubt-
able neighbours, and she was therefore compelled to protect her territory,
which she did by expanding her frontiers. Had Voute been told that: 'The
Russians will never enter Constantinople or Peking,' he would have
replied: 'They will be there; they can do anything on which they set their
minds.' 3 One more war with the Turks would suffice to impart 'a clear
structure' to the pattern of trade in southern Russia, because then the
links with the Greek archipelago and the whole of the Mediterranean
would be firmly established. Voute commented that a glance at the map
of Europe was sufficient to show that Russia's favourable position and
the vastness of her territory enabled her government to smash any nation
which opposed her. Whatever Sir Francis Baring might say in his letters
to Voute, one visit to Russia would be enough to make him change his
views and agree with Voute that Russia's immense strength was founded
on 'the irresistible principle that there is more than enough food to feed
the population.' England was also powerful, but her strength was stretched
over the seas, whereas Russia could concentrate hers. "If only system and
order exist, all must bend.' 4
  Voute might well conjure up visions of system and order, and dream of
the country's inestimable potential wealth, but this in no way detracted
from the fact that the reality in Russia was made up of chaotic situations

                                    132
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 and a desperate scarcity of money. This was brought home to Voute
 when, before he had an opportunity to broach the subject of Hope's loan
 to Poland, he was buttonholed by RaIl with a request for a loan for a
 distinguished Polish lady. At first RaIl declined to reveal her name, but
 later he disclosed that he was acting for the Countess Potocka, who was
 greatly in favour with Catherine II by reason of her pro-Russian sympa-
 thies and of the services which her husband, Count Felix Potocki, had
rendered to Russia in organizing the Targowica Confederation.! The early
 messages indicated that the countess desired a loan of 400,000 ducats,
 security for which would be provided in the form of mortgages on her
estates in Galicia and a guarantee from Catherine II herself. The empress
had formerly advanced money to meritorious subjects, against the secu-
rity of estates, but she could no longer do so since the Treasury coffers
were empty. Voute was informed that the valuation of serfs, which was
customary in the case of imperial loans, would apply to the loan request-
ed. This would be at the rate of forty roubles per head, a very low figure
because women, children, houses and land were totally ignored for the
purposes of a mortgage. If the debtor failed to meet his or her obligations,
the estate was forfeited and became Crown land-with consequent benefit
to the empress. The proposed loan would run for eighteen years-an ab-
normally long period-and bear interest at 5 %. The countess was very
rich, but events in Poland had left her short of ready money and she faced
the obligation to repay a large sum in Dubno, in Galicia, by 6th January
1794. If she failed to do so, she would be put in an extremely difficult posi-
tion, and this had to be avoided at all costs. Voute considered it impor-
tant that Hope & Co. should provide the loan; after all, the countess
ranked high in the favour of the empress and could thus influence, one
way or the other, the proposal that Russia should accept responsibility
for Hope's loan to Poland. Apart from this consideration, however, it was
imperative that the loan be furnished, for: 'The empress must never re-
ceive the impression that your house is unable to surmount its difficulties,'
and her guarantee would have to suffice to ensure success. 2
  Initially, Voute assumed that the imperial guarantee had been given only
to Countess Potocka, but it later transpired that Countess Alexandra
Branicka, a niece and former mistress of Potemkin, had also succeeded in
obtaining such a favour. Her husband, Count Xavier Branicki, had been
concerned in the Targowica Confederation, where he had rendered ser-
vices to the empress comparable with those of Count Potocki. 3 Countess
Branicka had consulted Ritter, to whom she had intimated her wish that
the guarantee be transmitted to Holland as security for a loan to be floated

                                     133
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

there. Vofite had earlier drawn Samaylov's attention to the adverse effect
which incidental, guarantee-backed loans could have upon Hope's latest
Russian loans, which had still not been fully subscribed.
 When he heard that the guarantee was after all to be transmitted to Hol-
land, Vofite hurried to Zubov's palace, where he was met by Countess
Branicka and her husband, Prince Lubomirski, Count Limpicki and
Zubov himself. Countess Branicka, whom Vofite described as 'an avari-
cious virago who tyrannized her husband,' had the most to say. Like
Countess Potocka, she desired that Hope & Co. should arrange for an
advance to be placed at her disposal at Dubno early in January. Vofite
replied that this was easier said than done, since the defeat by the French
of the Dutch armies in Flanders had produced a scarcity of credit, making
fresh loans impossible for the time being. Furthermore, the ban imposed
by the States General of the Republic on foreign loans had to be consid-
ered. The best course would be to await further developments; indeed,
that was the only advice which he could offer. Vofite added that the
guarantee would have to be despatched to Hope, as otherwise the Russian
loans could be prejudiced, and that would be contrary to the wish of the
empress. The countess ultimately agreed, and even allowed herself to be
persuaded to appoint Rall as her agent for the loan. When Vofite reached
this point, Prince Lubomirski commenced to calculate how much money
the Amsterdam merchant Giilcher had in Warsaw, adding that he would
be paying him 25,000 ducats in December. Vofite promptly handed back
the guarantee to Count Branicki and observed that the loan would clearly
not now be required since Prince Lubomirski could furnish the ducats.
This, however, was not in the prince's mind, and the episode ended with
the guarantee being returned to Vofite with a request to try to obtain the
loan in Amsterdam. 1
  One thing which Vofite did achieve was a reduction of the loan sums:
Countess Potocka would now receive no more than 150,000 ducats, and
Countess Branicka 100,000; of these sums, 54,000 and 100,000 ducats
respectively were required in Dubno before 6th January. He again ap-
pealed urgently to Hope & Co. to do their utmost to promote the success
of the loan, if indeed there was any chance at all. He proposed that Berck,
one of Hope's brokers, should spread the sums over as many entrepreneurs
as possible, thus reducing individual shares to a minimum. It was believed
in Russia that Hope & Co. could achieve anything, and with an eye to
other issues it was vital that this impression should be sustained.
  Vofite had already discussed the matter of the loan to King Stanislaw
with Altesti, Zubov's secretary, and on 21st October, at the latter's re-

                                   134
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

quest, he set down the details in a memorandum which was to be given to
Zubov. Motivated by the guarantees in respect ofloans to the two coun-
tesses, Voute made it appear that the loan to King Stanislaw in 1786
formed an extension of the loan of 1777, and that the guarantee given by
Catherine II in 1777 therefore also applied to the loan of 1786. He postu-
lated that Hope & Co. had agreed to negotiate these loans only because
they stemmed from dispensations granted by the empress to the King of
Poland. If the Russian government was prepared to place bonds of the last
Russian loan to a value of cf 800,000 at the Company's disposal, it would
surrender its claims on King Stanislaw to the empress and, moreover, meet
the remaining interest and principal payments in respect of the Polish
loan. Catherine could settle the resulting claim on King Stanislaw by as-
suming direct control of the 'oeconomies' of Brest-Litowsk, Grodno,
Kobrin, Szawel and Olitzka. 1 It is remarkable that Voute should have
invoked a non-existent Russian gurantee for the loan of 1786, the more so
since the Russian government must have known as well as he did that it
did not exist. Moreover, the 'oeconomies' to which he referred served as
mortgage security only for the 1777 loan and not for the one of 1786-un-
less, of course, one wishes to read this into the passage: 'All the wealth
and property, present and future, which belongs to US.'2
  In a memorandum written a few days later and intended for Samaylov,
which dealt principally with the Russian loans, Voute reverted to his
conversion plan. After giving an interesting and detailed description of
the technique of placing loans in Holland (reference to which has already
been made in this treatise), he stated that, following the military defeat in
Flanders, the once so abundant flow of money had dried up, with the
result that only two million guilders had been subscribed towards the
eighteenth and nineteenth loans.
  A victory by the armies of the Dutch Republic and its allies, the memo-
randum continued, would bring an early resumption of the flow. Admit-
tedly, the suspension of the loans to Poland, to King Stanislaw and to the
Polish magnates had no bearing on Russia's credit, but it did not enhance
the loans as a whole. If the empress would agree to accept responsibility
for the balance of cf 800,000, this would undoubtedly have a favourable
influence on the Russian loans in the Republic. Such a step would be natu-
ral now that Catherine had furnished guarantees for loans to individual
Polish subjects, and the Russian government could accomplish this with-
out injury or disadvantage by sequestering the revenues of King Stanislaw
and having the interest and principal payments met from these. In his
proposals, Voute thus allied himself completely with the concept of the

                                    135
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

liquidation of Poland, and in his view the chances of these being accepted
were increased by the fact that on 14th October 1793, under severe pres-
sure from 'the venerable and truly great Mr. De Sievers,' the sejm had
approved a treaty which brought Poland completely under Russian tute-
lage.!
  Late in October 1793 Samaylov informed VOlite that the empress had
consented to take over the loan to the Polish king; however, she had stip-
ulated that the transfer should constitute a separate transaction in order
not to let it weigh upon the bonds of the latest Russian loans. Voute saw
in this an opportunity for speculation: he was willing to buy up Polish
bonds at the current low price, safe in the knowledge that either the King
or the Republic of Poland would ultimately have to meet the obligation,
and that the news that Catherine had assumed responsibility for the loan
would send up the price. 2
  During the discussion, Samaylov referred to the lack of success with the
eighteenth and nineteenth loans to Russia. He had, he said, been offered
six million guilders at 4-2- %interest, whereas Hope had insisted upon 5 %.
It was not the half per cent which was worrying him, but rather the fact
that he had expected immediate results and had not got them. V oute
attempted to convince him that the prevailing circumstances were res-
ponsible for the delay and that if Hope & Co. could not succeed, an
inexperienced house would have no chance whatsoever.
  To Voute, Samaylov's offer smacked of one of the many intrigues which
had been woven in the latter's circle since the death of Sutherland, against
which it was wise to be on one's guard. Voute was particularly apprehen-
sive of Hasselgreen, who, during a visit to Warsaw, had won over the
Russian envoy, Sievers, by means of sizeable loans. Reports indicated
that Hasselgreen was at that moment on his way to St.Petersburg, almost
certainly with the aim of supplanting Hope & Co. at the Russian Court. 3
  Hasselgreen, however, did not put in an immediate appearance, and
Voute had no cause for complaint about the manner in which he was
received into society circles in St. Petersburg. RaIl showed his gratitude to
Voute for having involved him in the loan to Countess Branicka by invit-
ing him to a banquet attended by a host of counts and countesses, and
Samaylov, in a burst of affability, invited Voute to a ball which he and his
wife gave for the Grand Duke Alexander and his lady, at which all the
Russian nobility were present. It was on the grand style, 'les tables splen-
didement servies et les salles illuminees superieurement.' It was none the
less a convivial occasion, unmarred by sharp distinctions of rank or class:
'It resembled a family rather than a group of people of differing classes;
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 everyone, from the members of the Imperial family to plain officers, mixed
 and danced together; there was no trace of etiquette and the rules of pro-
 cedure were flexible and not in the least restrictive. In short, it was the
 greatness of Russia showing itself in all its splendour.' 1
  Despite all the friendly gestures by Samaylov, the wearisome wait in
Zubov's antechamber and the lengthy discussions with Markov and Os-
 termann, little progress was made in the matter of the Polish loan. On 3rd
 December Samaylov promised a decision on the following day, but when
 this arrived the decision was postponed until the sixth on the grounds that
the empress was indisposed. It was later put back to the tenth, and finally,
 on the fourteenth, the Attorney General announced that Catherine was not
favourably disposed towards a settlement because she was greatly dis-
pleased with the King of Poland. 2 Her displeasure will have been directed
not so much at the king himself as at the growing tide of resistance
throughout Poland to the enforced surrender of territory. Vollte declined
to regard the rejection as final and remained convinced that the empress
would change her mind.
  At about the same time, a letter arrived from Hope & Co. saying that the
Company could not entertain the proposed loans to the two countesses.
The news came as a most unpleasant shock to Rall, who had committed
himself to help Countess Potocka, and he appealed to Hope to assist him
in keeping his promise. After consulting Vollte, the Company offered Rall
a credit of cf 130,000. Vollte was gratified by the fact that the warrants and
the guarantees were in the Company's hands, thus preventing the reputa-
tion and the credit of the empress being compromised. 3
  Where the loans in Holland were concerned, Vollte's relationship with
Samaylov became less pleasant. Hope & Co. needed approximately three
million guilders for interest payments on various dates in 1794, but the
Russian government had already received more than half of the two mil-
lion guilders raised towards the eighteenth and nineteenth loans. In a
letter written to Samaylov at the end of November 1793, Labouchere
explained that the Company, in anticipation of further subscriptions to
the loans, was prepared to advance the balance of the sum required.
However, he made it clear that the offer did not apply to the million
guilders already placed a the disposal of the Russian government. 4
  Later reports from Amsterdam severely diminished Vollte's optimism
regarding the chances of completing the Russian loans. The conquest of
Toulon by the forces of the revolutionary government in France- 'a de-
velopment which has deeply disturbed me' -could hardly fail to make the
money market in Holland even tighter.

                                    137
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

The revolts by royalists in the Vendee and in Brittany threatened to col-
lapse, and if the French ceased to be preoccupied in those regions, the full
force of their armies would be turned on the allied troops in Brabant,
Flanders and Germany; the consequences did not bear contemplation. It
was rumoured in St. Petersburg that the Turkish ambassador in London
was planning to mediate between France and the allied powers; if he were
to succeed in his mission, the Turks would gain a firm foothold in central
Europe, but it would make little difference whether they or the French
were there: 'the only distinction lies in the manner in which they chop off
the heads.' 1
 Voute had initially reacted with enthusiasm to Henry Hope's return to
the Republic early in December 1793, but now he began to think differ-
ently. Henry Hope had urged Voute to appeal to the Russian government
to take a strong line with regard to the pro-French tendencies of Denmark
and Sweden, but Voute was careful to avoid the subject: 'that is comple-
tely outside my sphere; it is a political matter, and this fact alone would
make me avoid it.' He reported that the Russian Court favoured action
but that the severity of the Russian winter made it impracticable. 'The
climate is a supreme power and as such cannot be trifled with.' 2
  While in the process of writing his letter dated 18th January 1794, Voute
was urgently summoned by Samaylov, who requested him to approach
Hope & Co. regarding an advance on the uncompleted eighteenth and
nineteenth loans, in the form of gold coins. Voute referred Samaylov to
Labouchere's letter oflate November 1793 in order to show that money was
too tight to permit any advance, adding that under the prevailing circum-
stances earlier promises could not be maintained. He went on to point out
that a report had just been received, stating that the Duke of Brunswick and
General Wurmser had both suffered defeats and that Mannheim had fallen
to the French. In this situation, Holland's riches were illusory, for with no
money in circulation the Dutch investor was obliged to view his bonds as
evidence of money which he had once possessed, and not as proof of
money which he still possessed. He stressed that, in compliance with ear-
lier instructions from Samaylov, Hope & Co. had already despatched a
sum in golden ducats to Igelstr6m, the Russian envoy in Warsaw. Samay-
lov conceded this, but requested that the Company should keep available
a further sum in gold coins. For the moment he would be content with a
draft on Warsaw for 240 ducats, and this Voute could not bring himself to
refuse. 3
  At the end of January 1794, Voute became seriously ill. 'One colique
continuelle' was how he described it to Hope, adding that Dr. Guthrie, a
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 well-known British doctor in St.Petersburg, had saved him from the
grave. 1 Voiite blamed his illness-of which, according to him, there were
 then a thousand other cases in the city-on the mild winter with its wet
 snow. He was put on a diet and, because this had to be prepared separa-
 tely, he was obliged to seek a new headquarters, the Huguet Hotel, even
 though this cost 60 roubles a month more.
  Although Voiite was a sick man, Samaylov summoned him with the
utmost urgency to the Court, where, in the presence of the full ministerial
council, he informed Voiite that the Russian government required a sum
of 200,000 guilders to be placed at its disposal in Frankfurt, and that a
decision must be taken within a matter of hours. Voiite, ill and weak, and
kept on his feet with Chinese rhubarb, drew the attention of the Court to
the large sums owed to Hope & Co. by all manner of merchant houses in
 Russia and to the two million guilders still owing for interest payments in
 1794. Samaylov thereupon offered to give him 160,000-170,000 roubles
which he could remit to London or Amsterdam, on condition that the
cf 200,000 for Frankfurt was forthcoming. Voiite was requested to give his
answer by 6.30 p.m. When he returned, he found that the urgency had
evaporated: it later transpired that Ritter had furnished the money in the
form of drafts on Melvil & Co. and Hasselgreen of Amsterdam. 2
  This episode gave rise to a discussion between Samaylov and Voiite con-
cerning Russia's finances as a whole, and this was continued on the fol-
lowing morning. The meeting gave Voiite an opportunity to bring up the
Trosien case, and he made no attempt to disguise his displeasure concer-
ning the affair. Trosien had used Voiite's presence as an excuse to refuse
further contact with the appointed houses in St. Petersburg. He had
threatened to bring an action against Voiite, who had thereupon let it be
known that he was willing to meet Trosien only in the presence of four or
five merchants of good standing and reputation, in order to have reliable
witnesses should this be necessary. The case against Trosien should have
been heard at the end of November 1793, but owing to slackness, for
which Samaylov was partly to blame, no progress had been made up to
the time of the discussion, in late January 1794. Voiite made it plain that
if people like Trosien were allowed to escape the law, he would have no
alternative but to inform his principals that Russia was an abyss in which
foreign capital became swallowed up, and as such was not worthy of
further credit. 3
  This strong line produced results. Samaylov immediately gave instruc-
tions for the merchant Bacharacht to be summoned and, after a conversa-
tion between these two, Trosien was ordered to appear before the Attorney

                                    139
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

General to explain-in Voiite's presence-his continued default. During
this encounter, Voiite was informed that the case would be laid before an
arbitration tribunal on the following Friday.
  Voiite also succeeded in extracting a number of undertakings in regard
to Sutherland's estate. Whereas he had previously got no farther than
some vague promises to report to the empress, Samaylov now informed
him that the sole obstacle was a report by Bezborodko to Catherine,
which he consented to expedite.
  In view of the pending hearing involving Trosien, Voiite again delayed
his departure for Moscow. At that moment, bringing down Trosien was
his prime objective. As he saw it, Trosien would, at the least, be ordered to
pay a portion of his debts; if he was unable to do so-and this appeared
very likely-his assets would be sequestrated and he would go bankrupt.
If all this took place, he, Voiite, would have shown that Trosien had an
Achilles' heel, and an action of this sort would be of value in his negotia-
tions with the partners of Thomson Rowand.!
  Despite all the straight talking, however, Voiite was ill at ease. He was
again haunted by the thought of Hasselgreen's arrival in St.Petersburg.
Hasselgreen was said to be on very close terms with Ritter, who in turn
had a hold over Samaylov, not only by reason of the credit which he had
furnished in Frankfurt but also because he had settled some of Samaylov's
private debts. It was rumoured that Hasselgreen would make sweeping
proposals to the Russian government and, indeed, that numerous under-
takings had already been entered into. Voiite would dearly like to see
Hope & Co. make an offer to counter the threat. Should the Company
advance the monies for the interest payments in 1794, even though the
million guilders had been placed at the disposal of the Russian govern-
ment, or should it not? This very sombre image formed the prelude to
Voiite's greatest grievance, namely that Hope & Co. had not given him
full powers to act on their behalf.
  He decided that the Company would have to make up its mind on this
issue: either it gave him full power for a specified period and up to a
specified monetary limit, or he would wash his hands of the Russian loan
affair.2 Voiite maintained that he needed this degree of backing in his
negotiations with Samaylov, for he did not hesitate to say what was on his
mind, and the truth was not always to the liking of the Attorney General.
A memorandum from Voiite on the subject of rates of exchange, which
was in fact destined for the empress, had lain on Samaylov's desk for more
than two months for the simple reason that Samaylov was frightened to
pass it on. 3 In this document, Voiite had dealt in depth with the fall in the

                                     140
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 value of the rouble and the factors which had caused this. In a cautious
 but unambiguous manner, he had laid the blame at the feet of the Russian
 government, which had financed its deficits by the inflationary act of
creating assignats.
  Voute also expressed himself at some length concerning the position of
 Court Banker, one which was customarily entrusted to a foreigner. He
referred in particular to Richard Sutherland who, he said, had established
 Russia's credit abroad but, by stubbornly believing in a boom in the
exchange rate of the rouble even when this continued to fall, had suffered
serious losses on exchange operations and the exporting of goods; these
losses, he went on, had harmed Sutherland himself, the Russian govern-
ment and Russian trade as a whole, for the last-named had not been
shown where the fault lay. That, in the final analysis, the fault lay with
the government and its inflationary policy, Voute left unsaid.
  All ills, it was argued, could be cured by taking a slice of Russia's
inestimable natural resources and increasing exports of these. Then why,
for example, did the government leave so much copper in the soil? If
copper mining were to be greatly expanded, exports of this metal could be
increased and silver imported in exchange. With this silver as security,
assignats, which would have to be freely exchangeable for silver roubles,
could be issued. In this manner the exchange rate for the rouble could be
restored to its former intrinsic silver value of 36 stuivers, with consequent
benefit to Russia's trade and to the government itself, which could then
meet its commitments for interest and principal abroad at much less cost
in terms of roubles. Other mined products such as lead and saltpetre
could be dealt with similarly. In later years Voute was to continue to
hammer home the theme of 'the treasures of the bowels of the earth,' and
even to achieve temporary success. 1
  Voute may have refrained from committing any startling truths to paper,
but in a conversation with Samaylov he implied that he was well aware
that, because they were in debt, those at the top hesitated to do justice to
those who sought it. 'He fell silent and appeared embarrassed; a deep sigh
which escaped him convinced me that I had touched a sensitive spot.' For
this reason, Samaylov was anxious for the case against Trosien to be
settled amicably. If Trosien were to be committed to prison, matters
which could better remain hidden might well come to light. It seemed to
Voute that the weakness of Samaylov's position enhanced his own influ-
ence somewhat: 'Bear in mind that a Russian is proud and haughty when
he has the upper hand, but weak and servile when he is at the wrong end
of the stick.' 2
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

v oute did not have long to wait for evidence of the weakness of which
he suspected Samaylov. Early in February 1794 he received an alarming
letter from Hope & Co. concerning a threat of Russian-guaranteed loans
to Poland being negotiated through other intermediaries. After adopting
the treaty with Russia, the sejm at Grodno had discussed the personal
debts incurred by King Stanislaw; these were still unpaid, and his credi-
tors, who included Tepper, Blanc and Meisner, faced serious difficulties.
In response to Polish complaints on this issue, the Russians had offered
to guarantee a loan of lot million guilders which was to be raised in
Holland against the security of Crown lands; this sum roughly corre-
sponded with the total of the king's personal debts as determined by the
sejm at its meeting on 9th November 1793. 1
 In Warsaw, Sievers had commenced negotiations with Hasselgreen and
Gi.i1cher, who were still in that city; but when, in December 1793, he fell
into disfavour-probably as a result of intrigues woven by Zubov-his
successor, Igelstrom, contacted the merchant James Durno from Memel,
who, on his instructions, wrote to Hope & Co. on the subject. 2 To the
Company, the latest Russian plans came as a bolt out of the blue, and the
reply sent to Igelstrom testified to the shock felt by the partners. A copy
of the letter was sent to V oute with instructions to thrust it under Samay-
lov's nose. Voute, who had already heard vague rumours in St.Petersburg
concerning the new Polish loan, made for the Attorney General's office,
bearing the missive. Samaylov listened to him in stunned silence and then
confessed that the guarantee had been given completely without his
knowledge. Voute was inclined to believe him, for it was almost certain
that the principal figure in the whole affair was Zubov, of whom it was
said that where Poland was concerned he had managed to reduce Samaylov
to the role of executor of other people's decisions. 3
 Taking advantage of Samaylov's dismay, Voute again proceeded to
hammer away, both verbally and in writing, at the fundamental issues: an
early decision in the Trosien and Sutherland cases, and the conversion of
Hope's Polish loan into a Russian loan. A copy of his memorandum was
sent to the powerful Zubov, with the advice to look for a new Court
Banker so that he might be expertly advised on economic matters. 4
Voute also discussed this question with Samaylov, advising him to appoint
Rail, who had been in charge of the only efficiently run department of the
house of Sutherland. 5
 As always, Samaylov was lavish with his promises, but Voute was gradu-
ally losing his faith in these: it was already mid-February and no progress
had been made. In matters of finance, the Attorney General repeatedly
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 displayed his utter ignorance. While consenting to raise the matter of the
Polish loan with the empress once more, he appeared to have forgotten
that the sum involved would be deducted from the proceeds of the
eighteenth and nineteenth Russian loans, from which he was anticipating a
million guilders in gold in addition to the sum required to pay the interest.
 When the facts eventually dawned on him, he proposed a new loan of three
million guilders, from the proceeds of which the sum of the Polish loan
would be deducted and the balance remitted to Russia.! When Voute at-
tempted to point out that it would be folly to embark on a fresh loan while
the previous ones were still less than fully subscribed, Samaylov replied
that he had been offered twelve million guilders in Brabant prior to em-
barking on the eighteenth and nineteenth loans with Hope & Co., and
Voute was quite unable to convince him of the absurdity of such an offer
from a quarter which bordered on a theatre of war. Samaylov contented
himself by saying that the financial sacrifices made by Hope in order to
support the price of the Russian bonds on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange
would have to be met from the proceeds of the two loans, and that be-
yond this it was no concern ofhis.2
  Against this background, it is no wonder that the partners in faraway
Amsterdam found it increasingly difficult to understand the situation, and
became more and more impatient with the absence of results. V oute
wrote in lyrical terms about the inestimable riches of Russia and the
immense opportunities which existed there, but no progress was made
with the conversion of the Polish loan, nor were any of the outstanding
debts received. 3 Voute defended himself by pointing out that the situation
in Russia was totally different, that it could in no way be compared with
the situation in Holland or in England. He maintained that he approached
matters 'in a vigorous manner' because he was convinced that a weak and
watery attitude was out of keeping with an atmosphere 'where the severity
(of the weather) tones up the muscles better than does our damp climate.' 4
If any of the Hopes had been to Russia, he wrote, his actions would be
better understood. 5 It was not surprising that, in this colossal empire,
little interest existed in events outside: 'Here, everything must serve to
reinforce the coherence and power of the empire; anything which does
not do so is of no consequence.' Voute was himself anxious to exercise
the patience which seemed to be required, until such time as the Company
cried 'Enough.' But no rapid progress could be expected, for on the day
on which he wrote this to Hope, 25th February 1794, the carnival season
was beginning and all official departments would be closed for eight to
ten days. This would be followed by a six-week period of fasting, which

                                    143
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

included a number of public holidays, so that Hope's business would be
further delayed.!
  While these events were taking place, the outlook for the house of
Sutherland had become steadily more dismal. The committee of inquiry
had still not completed its report, and unless and until Sutherland's estate
was settled the house could not remain solvent. To make matters worse,
the firm's credit standing steadily deteriorated; while on the one hand
Alexander Sutherland in London was threatening to return drafts totalling
80,000 roubles, on the other there was the situation that it would take a
ukase to make the firm's debtors pay up-and this could only come when
the committee had reported on its findings. Voilte reported that the house
faced bankruptcy unless a quarter of a million roubles was received from
the government at an early date. Both he and Whishaw made desperate
efforts to stave off the collapse. Whishaw drew up a plan for dealing with
the firm's liabilities, which totalled 876,100 roubles (including 351,000
roubles owed to Hope & Co.). The assets amounted to 700,800 roubles
and thus, in theory, were adequate to meet 80 %of the debts.
  Whishaw was prepared to accept responsibility for this percentage of
the commitments on condition that Sutherland Jr. and his brother-in-law,
Browne, undertook to meet the balance.
  In a memorandum to Samaylov, Voilte pleaded for honourable treatment
of the Sutherland affair. He agreed that the late Court Banker owed the
government 3,700,000 roubles, but pointed out that this sum included
losses of 660,000 roubles on export shipments and 584,000 roubles on
exchange operations, both of which had arisen from complying with
verbal instructions from the former Attorney General, Prince Vyazemsky,
aimed at bolstering up the value of the rouble. In his opinion, the losses
on these transactions should be borne by the government. Moreover, the
memorandum continued, claims by the house of Sutherland on various
government bodies must be deducted, as must the debts incurred by
Grand Duke Paul and the late Potemkin, amounting to 200,000 and
762,000 roubles respectively. The balance of the deficit might well be met
from the sale of houses and cabinet bonds and the recovery of liquid
debts.
  Voilte went on to say that while he did not seek to cover up the baron's
shortcomings-a cash deficit of 147,000 roubles was a very serious matter-
it was only fair that attention should also be focussed on the complicity
of those who, knowing Sutherland's weaknesses, had helped him to
achieve his office and had then taken advantage of him. It was through
Sutherland that Hope & Co. had finally become convinced of Russia's

                                    144
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

wealth, whereupon the Company had been willing to provide huge sums
for the strengthening of the country's army and navy.1 If Sutherland
were to be declared bankrupt at the time of his decease, not only would
this mean the end of the house which bore his name, but it would also be
a slap in the face of Hope & Co. and would seriously jeopardize Russia's
credit.
 The die, however, had been cast. Voute attempted to see Zubov and
Samaylov, but Zubov threw the ball back into Samaylov's court, and the
latter was adamant. 2 He argued that everyone, inside and outside Russia,
knew that the baron had died a bankrupt, and that it was about time the
fact was established. Voute replied that this was the first he had heard
about it in all the months of effort, by way of memoranda and audiences,
to secure a satisfactory settlement of Sutherland's affairs. He reiterated
that Russia's credit standing would be severely harmed if the house of
Sutherland, Browne and Wi shaw was made bankrupt by reason of the
insolvency of the late Court Banker.
 This remark incensed Samaylov, who asked what Voute was driving at;
was he trying to compare a mighty country like Russia with republics
such as Genoa and Lucca? Sutherland had inflicted great damage on
Russia, and his successors must be made to pay. When Voute repeated his
arguments concerning the role of those who had arranged for Sutherland's
appointment, Samaylov informed him that the empress had commanded
that all who had been concerned in the affair should be punished. Seeing
no point in prolonging the argument, V oute requested a firm decision
concerning the estate on 11th March: either the baron had died insolvent,
in which case the house which he led would become bankrupt on the 12th,
or the successors would receive 250,000 roubles from the estate, in which
case Voute would go to their assistance with a further 100,000 roubles.
Samaylov agreed to the proposal and even offered to delay the departure
of the courier to Amsterdam until the 12th so that Hope & Co. could be
informed of the decision as quickly as possible. 3
 With this, the fate of Sutherland, Browne and Whishaw was in fact
sealed. V oute visited a number of senior officials, but on I Ith March 1794
the empress gave her verdict, which corresponded broadly with Samaylov's
views, and on the following day the house of Sutherland collapsed. 4
Voute was profoundly disappointed: this, then, was the outcome of five
months' hard work. As for the action against Trosien, that would run its
course; he had lost interest in it and had decided to leave for Moscow as
soon as possible. 5
The fact that the empress, as a soothing gesture, had-at long last-con-

                                   145
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

sented to the conversion of Hope's Polish loan did little to comfort Voute.
Fortunately, he could not know that even this success was to elude him,
for on 12th March, the day on which the courier was to leave with the sad
news of the bankruptcy of Sutherland and the good news of the con-
version, an anti-Russian revolt broke out at Ostrolenka, in Poland, and
this made any early settlement of Poland's debts an impossibility. 1
  However unhappy the Sutherland affair may have been, Voute now at
least had an opportunity to devote himself fully to matters concerning
Thomson Rowand-and these certainly required some supervision. The
reader will recall that, up to the time he left Moscow, Voute had been
unsuccessful in persuading Grant to sign a deed of partnership which, in
fact, would have placed the firm under the supervision of Porter in St.
Petersburg. Consequently, no agreement had been reached regarding
security for the debts owed to Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. Instead of
remitting funds, the partners in Moscow had continued to draw on Hope
 & Co. and, moreover, had borrowed money against security in Moscow,
for which they would be paying at least 10 or 12 %interest. 2
  It was for the express purpose of putting an end to these demonstrations
of independence that Voute arrived in Moscow on 25th March, tired and
uncomfortable after a journey lasting exactly a week. From St.Petersburg
 to Novgorod he had travelled through melting snow, but then it had
 started snowing again and between Twer and Moscow the temperature
 had fallen to 20 or 25 degrees below zero. Only when they had stopped at
 Twer had he been able to undress, and then even his hopes of a good
 night's sleep had been dashed by an uncomfortable bed. But after only
 two days in Moscow he was sufficiently refreshed to receive Grant and
 Hawes. Their account had a familiar ring: little of the money owed to
 them had been received, and they had urgently needed 46,000 roubles to
 pay for goods which were to be sent to Baring & Co. Voute gave them a
 stern lecture, pointing out that if they continued to delay their remittances,
 confidence on the part of Hope & Co. and Baring & Co. might one day
 be shaken. 3
  The partners were also warned to take more interest in the domestic
 trade, particularly that with the Crimea, the Caspian Sea and eastern
 Siberia.
   Voute was unable to devote a great deal of time to the affairs of Thomson
 Rowand, for soon he would have to return to his post in St.Petersburg to
 see what impression he, with the aid of Hope's letters concerning the out-
 come of the Sutherland affair, could make on Samaylov. Voute made no
 mention of the signing of the partnership agreement in Moscow, so we
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

must assume that Grant's policy of obstruction succeeded once more.
  On 10th April 1794, in the same changeable weather as had accompanied
his earlier journey, Voute left Moscow. From there to Klin, a distance of
fifty miles, he drove through rain, but this gradually turned to snow and
on the first night an icy north wind caused the temperature to drop so
sharply that Voute was unable to keep warm despite wearing two fur
coats and two pairs of fur boots. During the daytime it became too hot
even for one fur coat, but for five successive nights it was bitterly cold.
The jolting of the coach over the frozen roads so troubled him that he
was no longer able to face bread or meat, and ate only a few apples and
oranges which Countess Golowkin had given him in Moscow. The arrival
of the frosts made it safer to cross the frozen rivers, but on one occasion
Voute, not trusting the ice, insisted on making the crossing on foot, while
the Russians, intrepid as ever, drove the coach-and-six over a staging laid
011 the hard-packed ice.
  The vehicle itself also suffered from the journey, the wheels threatening
to disintegrate, the harnessing pole being fractured and the box shaken to
the point where it had to be held together with pegs and ropes.
  On 15th April Voute alighted from the coach outside the Huguet Hotel,
where he ran into Brown, Porter's partner. Brown, while not expecting
him for another three or four days, had nevertheless instructed Huguet
to light the stoves in Voute's rooms. Although his head was swimming,
Voute remained outside to supervise the unloading of his baggage, 'for
one must keep a weather-eye open in view of the St. Petersburg ravens,
who are less kind than those who attended Elijah.' 1 Once inside the hotel,
he briefly lapsed into unconsciousness. When he recovered, he attempted
unsuccessfully to take some food, and then retired to bed-for the first
time in five days. A few hours later he was awakened by Whishaw, who
brought him letters from Hope & Co.; these were dated 25th March, thus
prior to the arrival of the fatal news from St. Petersburg. Voute could
think of nothing except the wrath which he knew was being voiced in
Amsterdam and of the insult to the Company, and in his own words he
became so worked up that sleep was almost impossible; when he got up,
he fainted so frequently that Dr. Guthrie had to be called in. His diagnosis
was brief but unambiguous: 'You are physically and morally overheated;
little medicine, but a lot of rest and quiet will cure you.' 2 A purgative
served to refresh Voute, and after drinking four glasses of port and eating
some rye bread to give him strength he returned to his bed.
  That evening, Bagge of the house of Bagge & Van Eyssel arrived bearing
letters from Hope & Co. of 31st March. The language in which the writer

                                    147
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

of these had vented his spleen was such that Vofite put them aside and
went back to bed. On the following day, 17th April, letters dated 28th
March arrived from Amsterdam; the pile was now so high that Vofite
spent a large part of the next day reading them. It was not easy to deliver
Hope's letter to Samaylov, for it was Maundy Thursday and the Attorney
General, together with the other members of the Court, had gone to
church at six o'clock in the morning and would not return until four in
the afternoon.
 During the evening, Vofite developed an acute fever; Dr.Guthrie was
called and administered an emetic, but the patient brought up only bile.
By the next day his condition had so deteriorated that Dr. Guthrie called
in Sir Samuel Rogerson, a Scot and the physician to Catherine II, who
diagnosed 'inflammation of the gall bladder, accompanied by fever' and
prescribed quinine. 1 This indeed proved beneficial, and by the 24th Vofite
was over the worst and his skin had commenced to turn yellow. Guthrie
and Rogerson were agreed that only Vofite's strong constitution had
saved him. By the 26th of the month the patient had recovered sufficiently
to write a letter to Henry Hope; this was given to the English courier and
would be posted in Utrecht or Naarden in order to evade Russian cen-
sorship.
 In this, he disclosed that all of Catherine's ministers had been knocked
off balance by Hope's letter of censure to Samaylov, and added that
because the recipient had been so stupid as to leave it on his desk, all
St.Petersburg was now aware of the Company's rage. The letter had
already had some effect, for those of Samaylov's minions who were en-
gaged at Sutherland's offices were now less arrogant, and one had inad-
vertently mentioned that the final outcome of the affair might be less
disagreeable than had at first been thought. 2 It was the custom for those
who attended Eastertide church services to embrace each other before
going their separate ways. The congregation at the Court chapel had
included Grand Duke Paul, who otherwise lived in complete retirement,
and after the service he had embraced all except Samaylov and Zubov;
to Vofite, this was further proof that the two were hand in glove.
  Rogerson had confided to Vofite that the empress's health and intellec-
tual faculties were declining. In contrast, however, it was known that she
had in the past fortnight repeatedly voiced her severe displeasure with the
course of events in Poland, and that she was particularly rankled by the
refusal of the Hollanders to make further loans to Russia. Vofite ascribed
the Russian defeat in Poland-the prime cause of Catherine's wrath-to
lack of experience on the part of the generals and the total failure of the
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 commissariat, to which had to be added the utter chaos in the State's
finances and a lack of ability among its ministers.
   Despite the setback, Voute was sure that the 'Jacobins Polonois' would
 ultimately be crushed by the sheer physical superiority of Russia and
Prussia, and that the Hydra of the revolution would lose even the last of
 its heads. It was a source of satisfaction to him that the rebels would be
given no quarter. After a veiled warning to Hope against 'K' (Kalichev?),
he signed the letter 'Andre Cartier,' reasoning that, with the unsettled
conditions in Poland, there was no certainty that the missive would reach
 Hope & Co. intact.!
   Voute's health improved only slowly-to the great consternation of the
 Russian ministers who, following Hope's letters, feared that the Company
would sever its connexions with Russia. They realized that the drastic
decree in which the Sutherland affair culminated, and which was published
on 28th April, could be equally damaging to good relations with Hope.
The decree prescribed that the sum of the monies owed to the Crown
should be calculated at the unfavourable rate of exchange ruling at that
moment, and not the rate applying when the money had flowed from
Holland to Russia. The State would take over Sutherland's house and its
contents, the inventory of his office, his mortgages on other houses and
his cabinet bonds. At the same time, the government committed itself to
pay the debts incurred by the various official bodies, but excluding the
sums claimed from Potemkin, and it undertook to take vigorous steps to
ensure that private debtors met their obligations. 2
   On the very same day, Sutherland's debtors were pilloried. Zakrewsky,
the president of the College of Medicine, and Cley and Dolst, two of the
members, faced a charge of having extorted money from Yeames, former-
ly Sutherland's cashier and the person principally responsible for deliv-
eries of drugs, for passing Sutherland's invoices. Khlebnikov, head of the
second department, was charged with failing to exercise adequate super-
vision of Sutherland and, in 1787, of having neglected to report the
protesting of Sutherland's drafts to the then Attorney General, Vyazemsky.
Khlebnikov was also ordered to repay 25,000 roubles unlawfully paid to
him by Sutherland. Yeames was held responsible for the cash deficit of
147,000 roubles, and RaIl was accused of delay in informing the authori-
ties of the true state of affairs following Sutherland's death. 3
  Voute predicted that Khlebnikov and Yeames would be severely pun-
ished, but that RaIl had only been dragged in to please Ritter. RaIl would
certainly emerge unscathed, and in any case Ritter was losing favour now
that, on the instructions of the Attorney General, the majority of remit-

                                   149
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

tances were beirig taken care of, not by Ritter but by the Court Broker,
Fock. A substantial portion of the monies involved was destined for Hope
& Co. to be used for the payment of interest. By this means, the govern-
ment was trying to get back into the Company's good books.
  Samaylov made repeated inquiries regarding Voute's progress, and made
it clear that he would be a welcome visitor when his condition permitted.
Voute replied that he was still far too weak, and that he desired to return
to Holland as soon as possible after his recovery. He did, however, visit
Zubov at the Tauric Palace, where he received an extremely friendly wel-
come. During their meeting, Zubov promised to take firm action against
Thomson Rowand's debtors. On the advice of Myatlev, the sworn enemy
of Samaylov, Voute, still weak from his illness, painfully drew up yet
another memorandum on the Sutherland case; this was to be passed to
one of the empress's secretaries so that the matter might be brought di-
rectly to Catherine's attention. There were indications that all the earlier
memoranda on the subject had failed to get beyond ministerial level. The
situation had changed in Voute's favour inasmuch as Catherine had again
taken the reins, and while doing so had administered a severe lecture to
her ministers concerning the unsatisfactory developments in Poland. She
was understood to have relieved Zubov of control over Poland and to
have entrusted this to Bezborodko. 1
  Voute's recovery was a slow process, and early in May 1794 he suffered
renewed attacks of fever accompanied by severe stomach pains. The
British ambassador gave him some 'James pills' (a renowned remedy,
according to V oute), but although these afforded temporary relief they
did not prevent the fever recurring at regular intervals-and always at four
o'clock in the morning. He was obliged to decline a second invitation
from Zubov, but the latter so persisted in his enquiries as to the gen-
uineness of Voute's indisposition that Bagge was eventually obliged to visit
him in person to convince him of the fact. 2 Zubov sent a message to
Voute, assuring him that the Trosien affair would be settled to his satis-
faction and that other matters would be brought to a similarly satisfactory
conclusion. Voute was moved to observe that his illness had at least
served some purpose.
  To be ill in Russia at that time was a costly business: the quinine powders
which Voute had to take at hourly intervals in the early days of his illness
were expensive, and to these were added the cost of bed and bedclothes,
the price of the oranges, lemons and refreshing beverages, and finally the
doctors' fees, which were almost as high in St.Petersburg as in London. 3
Voute's correspondence reveals that Dr. Guthrie accepted banknotes in

                                    ISO
             A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

payment for his services, but that Voute found it more appropriate to
purchase a gift for Sir Samuel Rogerson. Dr. Guthrie advised him to leave
St.Petersburg as soon as possible on the grounds that a change of air
would assist his recovery. Voute had proposed to travel overland via
Narva, Reval and Riga, but this was impossible in view of the Polish
revolution and so he decided to go by sea to Lubeck. 1
 By now, Voute's health was showing a decided improvement and he was
gradually recovering the strength to deal with business matters. The case
against Trosien ended as Zubov had predicted, the arbitrators unani-
mously finding in favour of De Bary and ordering Trosien to pay
cf 307,000, in default of which his assets would be seized and he himself
imprisoned. 2
 By 29th May, Voute was well enough to attend an audience with Zubov
at Tsarkoye Selo. The most important news imparted by Zubov was that
the empress had read Voute's memorandum and the copy of Hope's irate
letter of 31st March and had thereupon stated that she wished to receive
Voute in audience on 5th June. Such an honour was seldom bestowed on
untitled persons, and certainly not on those who had not previously been
presented to her. Zubov went on to say that he had been instructed to
inform Voilte in advance that the empress was completely satisfied with
Hope's conduct and that she would uphold the reputation and honour of
the Company in every possible way. The favourable verdict in the Trosien
case, Voute learned, had been due to Catherine's personal intervention,
and it was she who had instructed Prince Dolgoruky, the Governor
General of Moscow, to support Thomson Rowand in their actions against
their debtors. Whatever the outcome of their struggle might be, Voute
wrote, it was good that the whole of Europe should know that those who
violated the law, as Trosien had done, would be brought to book as soon
as their deeds became known to the empress, and that she was always
ready to put an end to such unjust practices. 3
  On 5th June Voute travelled to Tsarkoye Selo for his audience with
Catherine, 'a memorable moment in my life.' The empress, he later wrote,
was the essence of amiability, and although he had at first been somewhat
shy, the conversation had gone easily and smoothly. But in the matter of
Sutherland she had refused to budge an inch, saying that the manner in
which the Court Banker had abused her trust, and all the things which she
had found out concerning the baron's accomplices, had made her decide
to end the custom of appointing a Court Banker. Voute's impression was
that the empress wished the Crown's claims upon Sutherland's estate to
be placed on the same footing as those of the other creditors. In any case,
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

she was not willing to regard Sutherland as an agent of the Crown in
operations which she regarded as having been outside the authorized
plan. Catherine went on to say that the credit which Sutherland had
enjoyed had been due entirely to the Crown and could thus not be counted
among his merits. In spite of this strong condemnation of Sutherland's
conduct, Voute had the feeling that much would still depend upon the
manner of the liquidation, as prescribed in the report to be published by
the committee charged with investigating the late baron's affairs.
  Turning to the matter of Hope & Co., the empress repeated the flattering
references which she had earlier made through Zubov. She assured Voute
that she had always met her obligations and that as far as Hope was con-
cerned she would continue to do so. When the issue of Russia's natural
wealth arose, Catherine was very modest in describing her role. Since her
accession to the throne, she had had more than ten million roubles in gold
coins minted, compared with the one million of her predecessors in a
similar period; in addition, silver coins to a value of one hundred and
fifty million roubles had been minted during her reign. Banknotes, she
stated, were only for domestic use (this, Voute had already discovered).
The empress had only very vague notions concerning rates of exchange,
but she could not be blamed for this, for she was seated in between three
tables, on each of which lay piles of papers and books. It seemed to Voute
that ruling a vast empire like Russia was never-ending servitude. From six
o'clock in the morning until after dinner in the evening she was conti-
ously absorbed with the affairs of state-a situation which Voute had not
encountered anywhere else in Russia, 'for cards keep any number of
people busy.' 1
  After the audience, which had lasted for more than two hours, Voute
made his way to the office of Zubov, to whom he handed copies of Hope's
most recent letters to the Attorney General and the latter's replies to these,
and also a list of loans opened in Holland and the relevant Berigten in
order that Zubov should have a picture of the current situation in that
area.
  Matters having suddenly taken so pronounced a turn for the better,
Voute was faced with a dilemma: to go, or to stay? If he was to achieve
anything in the Sutherland affair, or to round off the case against Trosien,
he would have to resign himself to a stay of at least six months. But then
it was on the cards that Samaylov and his followers, who had been pushed
into the background by Voute, but only temporarily, would start their
intrigues all over again and finally rob him of his goal. Following his
sensational audience, Catherine's ministers were eagerly trying to discover
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

 what had been discussed, and foreign diplomats, headed by the represen-
 tatives of Britain and the Dutch Republic, were exceedingly curious. On
 balance, Vollte decided that it would be better if he departed on the crest
 of the wave, leaving the strongest possible impression of Hope's influence
 upon Catherine.!
  Thus, Vollte reverted to his earlier plan to go by sea. He reasoned that if
he were to cross to LUbeck and travel overland from there to Holland via
 Hamburg, he would have the certainty that his baggage would not be
searched and that no one would pry into his papers. The Prussian customs
officials were just as inquisitive as the Russian in this respect, and VOllte
was determined to avoid trouble of this nature at all cost. Apart from
this, reports of the military situation in the southern part of the Nether-
lands were becoming steadily more disquieting and he was anxious to
return home before any danger threatened the Republic. 2 Having taken
his leave of Samaylov and had a final audience at Tsarkoye Selo, VOllte
left on 18th June for Kronstadt where, having supervised the loading of
his carriage, he and his servant embarked.
  The voyage was relatively slow and afforded the traveller ample oppor-
tunity to review the events of the preceding weeks. Now, he could commit
his thoughts freely to paper and, having done so, had no need to sign the
letters with the name of Andre Cartier. In his conversation with the
empress, VOllte had carefuIIy avoided any reference to Zubov: 'His phy-
sical relationship with Catherine is so intimate that it would be wrong not
to assume that his bodily virtues outweigh his moral failings, and that the
ageing madonna has a very soft spot for him in her heart.' 3 To VOllte,
Zubov was a true Russian-which implied that he was unreliable. This
trait was aggravated by his position, for if Catherine should die he would
find himself in a serious plight, having no private fortune and, moreover,
being saddled with debauched and thriftless relatives. In his memoran-
dum to Catherine, too, Vollte had been at pains not to say anything
derogatory concerning Samaylov, Markov or Ostermann, for he knew
that the vain Catherine prided herself on her choice of servants, and kept
them in their positions in spite of any criticism. VOllte had seen evidence
of this when at last he had succeeded in bringing his memorandum and
Hope's letters to the attention of the empress. She had received the papers
on the Sunday morning, and must have read them after dinner on that
day; for the remainder of the evening, he afterwards learned, she had
been preoccupied and gloomy. Her first task on the following morning
was to summon Samaylov, to whom she gave a blistering reprimand for
having kept important matters hidden from her with the result that she

                                    153
              A DUTCH BROKER AT THE RUSSIAN COURT

was not even aware that Messrs. Hope had sent a representative to Rus-
sia and that he was anything but satisfied with what he had found there.
 Myatlev was the next to have an audience with the empress, to report on
the affairs of the bank. At the mention of Samaylov's name, Catherine
snapped angrily: 'Be on your guard for that man, he will deceive you; he
has just played me a shabby trick.' She was so incensed that she forcibly
pushed away the table which stood in front of her. Myatlev, who contem-
plated his enemy's disfavour with satisfaction, had later told VOllte that
Samaylov had been ordered to lay all matters for which he was responsible
before the ministerial council in future, and to adhere to its decisions.
Samaylov had thus been placed under supervision - but for how long?
 On 5th July 1794 VOllte arrived in Travemiinde, where he disembarked
and proceeded to Liibeck. When he reached the home of the merchant
Blohm there, he found a pile of letters from Hope & Co. waiting for him.
These included letters of introduction to Hope's correspondents in the
city. To his great satisfaction he read that the partners of Hope & Co.
were fully in agreement with his decision to return to Holland. The letters
of introduction had an almost magical effect, and VOllte received so many
invitations that it would have taken many weeks to pay all the calls. But
he excused himself wherever possible, not only because he was anxious to
return home quickly but also because he wished to avoid creating obli-
gations towards persons who would in all probability view these as an
excuse for seeking additional credit from the Company.!
 While having a meal at his hotel, VOllte heard that traffic on the route
via Hanover was very heavy and that there was consequently a shortage of
horses. There were also stories of the great French victory at Fleurus on
26th June and the ensuing retreat of the English and Austrian armies.
This news strengthened VOllte's resolve to leave as soon as possible and
so put his anxious relatives at ease. 2 He left on 8th July, but it took him a
week to reach Amsterdam. The journey took longer than anticipated
owing to the looseness of the road surface following a severe drought,
and the movement of large numbers of wagons carrying money to Ham-
burg. The flight of Dutch capital from the advancing French armies had
begun. A phase in the history of Hope & Co. was drawing to a close.




                                    154
                            CHAPTER SIX

             THE GREAT CONVERSION



The departure for England of the partners of Hope & Co. in the latter
part of October 1794, and of the managers, Pierre Cesar Labouchere and
Alexander Baring, on the night of 18th January 1795, heralded a tempo-
rary suspension of the Company's activities on behalf of the Empress of
Russia. The invasion by French troops did not come as a surprise to the
Company, which some time beforehand had taken steps to ensure that,
as far as possible, its assets and property were placed beyond the reach of
the French or of any new, revolutionary government in the Republic.
Among the consequences of this action was that, for the first time, Hope
& Co. were unable to make payments of interest on loans. In response to
questions from bondholders, Paulus Taay, Hope's confidential clerk, who
remained behind to look after day-to-day matters in the Republic, was
obliged to announce that there was as yet no information regarding the
payment of interest on the Russian bonds. However, an advertisement
placed by the partners informed the holders that the interest vouchers
which matured on 1st February and 1st May were redeemable at the house
of Martin Dorner in Hamburg, and that subsequent instalments would
also be paid via that house. 1 For the Dutch investors, this was a round-
about procedure involving extra expense, but at least it safeguarded the
payments by making it impossible for the invaders or the revolutionary
government, which by then had taken office, to seize the monies remitted
from Russia.
  But while the interests of those who had invested in the Russian loans
were provisionally safe, the prospects for the holders of bonds relating to
the Republic of Poland and its king were a great deal less favourable.
 As was explained in a previous chapter, Hope & Co. was not the only
house in Amsterdam which was involved; others, such as Quirijn Willem
van Hoorn and Theodoor Gtilcher & Mulder, had provided loans, not
only to the Republic of Poland and King Stanislaw but also to Polish
magnates. Raymond and Theodore de Smeth, Pieter de Haan Pietersz.
and Hogguer Grand & Co. had also been active in this area. In most
cases, the interest and principal instalments on the loans negotiated with
these houses had ceased following the financial crisis early in 1793, though

                                    ISS
                         THE GREAT CONVERSION

a few of the magnates had continued to make payments after that date.
During his stay in St. Petersburg, Voiite had done his best in the matter of
Hope's loan of 1786 to the Polish king, but the outbreak of the revolt
against Russia in the Spring of 1794 had prevented the imperial decision
(which was favourable) being implemented. 1
  The loans to the Polish magnates had been granted against the security
of all or part of their estates, but the creditors in Holland had no way of
enforcing their claims on these properties. In 1795 the territory remaining
to Poland had been divided between Russia, Prussia and Austria, and the
occupying powers had arbitrarily seized a number of estates. Any creditor
insolent enough to attempt to exercise his rights on the spot found himself
entangled in a bureaucratic web, as is evident from the correspondence
between Pieter de Haan in Amsterdam and his agent in Poland, Jan
Abraham Willink, on the subject of the securities provided for the loan to
Count Michael Oginski.
  De Haan's loan, of cf 1,000,000, to Oginski was covered by a contract
signed on 1st February 1791 in The Hague, where Oginski was at that
moment serving as special envoy of the Polish monarch. As security for
the loan, he mortgaged a portion of his estates in Lithuania, the value of
which was put at cf 2,500,000.2 Interest on the loan was paid up to early
August 1793, but the repayments of principal, which initially became due
on 1st February 1794, failed to materialize.
 The cause lay in Oginski's involvement with the Polish uprising of 1794
and the consequent loss of his property, which was confiscated by Em-
press Catherine. De Haan was on the point of bringing an action against
Oginski when, at the end of April 1795, Prince Nikolai Repnin, the Rus-
sian military governor of Lithuania, issued a decree forbidding the courts
oflaw to admit actions against Oginski and his property. On 25th May of
the same year, Repnin announced that Oginski's creditors had three
months in which to appear before a special committee which sat in
Grodno, and which was shortly afterwards given judicial powers. De
Haan thereupon instructed Willink to go to Grodno, taking with him the
principal debenture and the mortgage deeds for verification by the com-
mittee. 3 In spite of all his efforts, Willink failed to obtain a written accep-
tance by the committee of the validity of his claims. Nor did it help him
to extract, by means of a handsel, confidential information from the secre-
tary to the committee, for that body as a whole flatly refused to recognize
a memorandum on the subject in Willink's handwriting. In a desperate
move, Willink bribed a servant to let him into the house of one of the
members of the committee, Brigadier Rusanov, who at that moment had
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 another of the members with him. When Rusanov persisted in his refusal
to accept the memorandum, Willink commenced to read the contents in
a loud voice; but the commissioners continually interrupted him and
finally Rusanov shut himself in his bedroom. Approaches to Count
Panin, the civil governor, and, via him, to Repnin similarly produced no
 result. Repnin went so far as to admit verbally that De Haan's claim
seemed well founded, but a written confirmation was out of the question.
It must be remembered that the committee had been set up by the empress
and was therefore independent of all other authorities; in this situation,
Repnin did not even dare to guess what Catherine's purpose might be. 1
  Even more disquieting was the information, obtained unofficially from
the committee, that very little property belonging to Oginski was situated
in Lithuania, and that Willink would do better to try his luck elsewhere.
When Willink continued to press the matter, he was unceremoniously
shown the door. Further investigation showed that the committee had
been right: of the estates mortgaged to De Haan, only the 'oeconomy'
known as Wilnenska was situated in Lithuania-and Oginski had sold
most of the land which comprised this oeconomy after he had obtained
the loan. 2 Much of the land had since been resold and thus it was difficult
to discover who it actually belonged to. The majority of the remaining
mortgaged property lay in the area which had been ceded to Russia in
1793 and was now under the control of the governor general of Minsk. 3
The fact of the estates being spread out probably made Repnin even more
unwilling to give any firm ruling which could bring him in conflict with
General Tutolmin, his opposite number in Minsk-where Oginski had
similarly realized his assets. There, on the eve of the uprising, he had sold
nearly all his estates at far below their true value. What remained had
been confiscated by Catherine, who had then given part of it to one of her
generals, Count Soltikov.
  Throughout the winter of 1795 and the following Spring, Willink made
every effort to obtain from the Supreme Court of Lithuania a formal
recognition of the validity of De Haan's claims; but he realized that he
had little chance of success because, during the Polish uprising, Catherine
'out of mistaken generosity' had held out to her generals and ministers a
prospect of rewards which, however, could only be realized by the confis-
cation of property. Having done this, she had closed the door on the cred-
itors with claims to the confiscated estates. Obtaining the necessary docu-
ments was a costly business in Poland, but according to Willink the
situation was far worse in Russian-controlled areas, where law and justice
had been supplanted by whim and subjugation. 4

                                    157
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

The outlook being so' gloomy, De Haan, not surprisingly, began to look
for other solutions. He approached other houses in Amsterdam which,
like himself, had furnished loans for Poland. 1 If concerted action was to
be taken, the holders of bonds of the various loans would have to be in-
formed and their sanction obtained. In consultation with the brokers and
entrepreneurs, the necessary deeds of authority were drawn up, after which
the bondholders were informed by an advertisement that these would be
available for inspection and approval at the offices of notary Van Beem
between 20th February and 31st March 1796. At the end of this period it
was found that a sizeable majority of the bondholders had indicated their
approval of the plan. On 11th April of the same year, the Court of Hol-
land empowered the various houses to act on behalf of the interested
parties, but it added a rider that those who had not already signed must
be given an opportunity to attend the Court in company with the repre-
sentatives of the issuing houses on the 6th, 9th and loth May; this was to
be communicated to those concerned by means of an advertisement.
Anyone who failed to attend would be deemed to have given his consent.
On loth May the Court empowered the houses to jointly send one or
more authorized agents to Russia to act on their behalf, and three days
later the mission was formally entrusted to Robert Voiite, 'Observing
that he has no reason to assume that he will be persona non grata for the
purpose of dealing with this matter in the appropriate place.' 2 The choice
of Voiite was an obvious one in the light of his earlier and relatively suc-
cessful journey to Russia. As we shall see, the mission covered not only
the Polish negotiations, but also Hope's Russian loans.
  The sums which V oiite was charged with attempting to recover were
quite considerable: nearly 3.6 million guilders for Raymond and Theodore
de Smeth and Hogguer Grand & Co.; 3 million for Quirijn Willem van
Hoorn and Theodoor Giilcher & Mulder jointly; nearly 2.7 million for
Theodoor Giilcher & Mulder severally; and 2.5 million for Pieter de Haan
Pietersz. Hope & Co.'s interest concerned their loan of 1786 totalling
2 million guilders. These were all nominal sums, a portion of some loans
having been repaid. The capital debts owed by the Republic of Poland and
King Stanislaw totalled just over 6 million guilders, while the outstand-
ing claims on the Polish magnates amounted to 5.8 million plus interest,
which in most cases had not been paid since the end of 1793 or the
beginning of 1794. 3 Hasselgreen had not invested Voiite with authority
to deal with his loan but, as we have seen, he personally looked after his
interests in Poland and Russia, and thus felt that he did not require
Voiite's services.
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

Immediately prior to accepting the authority to deal with the Polish
loans, Vollte appointed Hermann Albrecht Insinger and Jan Jacob Vollte
Jr. to act on behalf of Hope & Co. The relevant deed omitted any reference
to the powers vested by the Company in Vollte himself, and this was
probably done in order to avoid difficulties with the Batavian government,
should it conceive the idea of recovering taxes levied on Hope from third
parties. 1
  De Haan urged Vollte to travel to St.Petersburg via Wilno and Minsk,
in order to investigate the situation there, but he flatly refused. The
failure of Willink's efforts had already shown that it would be a waste of
time and money to visit provincial towns when all decisions were taken in
St.Petersburg. Vollte did not wish to have anything to do with Willink,
firstly because the man seemed to him to be totally unsuited to work of
this nature, and secondly because he regarded Willink's censorious re-
marks concerning the corruption and bad justice in Russia as unseemly.
Vollte had apparently forgotten his own comments on such matters in
1793 and 1794. As in 1794, he held the view that the causes of the partition
of Poland lay with the Poles themselves: 'disorders, intrigues and oligar-
chs.' The giving away by the empress of one of Oginski's estates was
certainly a difficult issue, but Vollte was more afraid of Oginski's actions
than of the empress or the committee, which in his opinion had behaved
correctly. He was convinced that a calm approach and hard work were
the prerequisites for success in dealing with the matters at hand, 'and
these qualities are not given to everyone.' 2
  On his way to Russia, Vollte did however visit Berlin, where late in
July 1796 he wrote a memorandum on the subject of the Polish loans for
the benefit of Kalichev, who in the previous year had exchanged the post
of envoy to The Hague for the equivalent post in Berlin. In January 1795,
following the suppression of the Polish uprising (in the preceding No-
vember), Russia and Austria had reached agreement on the partition of
the remainder of Poland, and in October of that year Prussia had perforce
become a party to this.3 The partitioning powers had also expressed their
willingness in principle to accept responsibility for the debts incurred by
the Republic and its ruler, but consultations on the practical steps, such
as the setting up of a joint committee and the apportionment of the
responsibility, had yet to commence. Negotiations between Russia and
Prussia were proceeding at ambassadorial level, and thus it was logical
that Vollte should be anxious to lay his views concerning the Polish debts
before Kalichev.
Vollte reasoned that if Russia were to assume responsibility for the loans

                                   159
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

made in Holland to the king, the Republic and the magnates, and if she
were to convert these into Russian bonds, she would for a time be free of
the obligation to repay principal money. If, on the other hand, the loans
were simply to be divided between the three powers, it was likely that
Russia would immediately be confronted with repayments which were
either being made or were about to be made. There was also the point
that the vast majority of the assets mortgaged by the Polish magnates
were situated in Russian Poland, and that their value was greatly in excess
of the sums loaned. The magnates were committed to pay interest and
principal in Holland in gold or silver coin. The Russian government could
either allow this practice to continue, in which case the total of the
remittances which it was called upon to make would be smaller, or it
could order the payments to be made in Russia and thereby maintain the
reserves of precious metals. Voute's line of thought was not entirely
correct, for the new bonds which would be created for the purpose of the
conversion would add to the interest burden in Holland, and the increase
would have to be deducted from the deferred repayments of principal.
  Voute proceeded to reason that a conversion operation of this nature
could also be applied to the Russian loans provided in Holland, the
initial repayments against which were due to commence in 1798; however,
in view of the extremely unattractive rate of exchange, such a move might
well be to the disadvantage of the Russian government. 'The general
circumstances in Europe are such that they point to grounds of expediency
which would not have been noticed but for these circumstances.' 1 Here,
he was probably referring to the French offensives in southern Germany
and Italy, which had further inflamed anti-French feeling in St.Petersburg
and increased the risk of a Franco- Russian conflict.
  Soon after his arrival in St.Petersburg, Voute suffered a serious setback.
Having no children of his own, he took as his companion his favourite
nephew, Pierre, the second son of his eldest brother, Jan Jacob. In the
early hours of 5th September 1796 a police officer called and arrested
Pierre in his bed. Pierre was staying with the Bagge family of the house
of Bagge & Van Eyssel, with whom Robert Voute had been in communi-
cation during his earlier visit to Russia. Despite strong protests from
 Robert Voute, Pierre and his servant were taken to Kronstadt, where the
commandant sent them on to a guard-ship two hours' sailing from the
shore. Vessels leaving the port of St.Petersburg were ordered to moor
alongside the guard-ship and take the deportees on board. At six o'clock
that evening, Pierre and his servant boarded a Danish ship bound for
Copenhagen, where they arrived a fortnight later at the end of a stormy
voyage. 2
                                    160
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

Robert VOllte, whose whole prestige as an influential figure at the Rus-
sian Court now hung in the balance, had naturally not stood idly by. On
the day of the arrest, 5th September, he had personally informed the
empress of the incident. His protestation resulted in a courier being sent
to Kronstadt with an order countermanding the arrest, but this arrived
an hour too late. The reason given for the puzzling action on the part of
the authorities was that the police had mistaken Pierre for the Amsterdam
merchant Gtilcher, who had travelled with the VOlltes as far as Warsaw
and who was persona non grata in Russia. Robert VOllte was so distressed
by the episode that he was obliged to rest for a few days-a physical
reaction to mental strain which, as we have seen, also occurred during his
earlier journey. The authorities, however, made formal reparations. An
imperial courier left for Copenhagen in October, and in the early days of
the following month he officially escorted Pierre VOllte to St.Petersburg,
travelling via Sweden. 1
  Despite the official steps taken to remedy the injustice, there is still
something mysterious about the whole affair. Did it stem purely from an
administrative error on the part of the police, or did it point to the work
of a faction opposed to Hope & Co., personified by Robert VOllte? Why,
when VOllte repeatedly assured the police that a mistake had been made,
was his word not accepted? Who invented the story concerning VOllte's
supposed travelling companion, and why was Pierre VOllte deported with
such haste that the mistake could not be corrected? There are no clear
answers to these questions, not even in the letters written by Robert VOllte
himself-for whom it was doubtless a matter of personal prestige to make
the affair appear to be a blunder on the part of the police.
 The situation in Russia altered completely with the death, on 17th No-
vember 1796, of Empress Catherine II and the succession of her son, Paul.
The czar's rule was despotic and thus it was vital for VOllte to get on good
terms with him; this, however, was no simple task, for Paul proved to be
an extremely fickle and unpredictable ruler. But by good fortune VOllte
was looked upon with favour by the empress, Maria Feodorovna, and as
she greatly influenced her husband during the early part of his reign, Voilte
enjoyed his favour also. 2
  VOllte's chances of succeeding in the matter of the Polish loans rose
when, on 26th January 1797, a convention dealing with the division of
the debts incurred by the Republic of Poland and its former king was
signed by the Czar of Russia and the King of Prussia. 3 The Emperor of
Germany also associated himself with this. The convention provided for
a committee, the members of which would be nominated from among the

                                    161
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

three Courts, to meet to verify and liquidate these debts. The debts in-
curred in Holland by the Republic of Poland (the existence of which had
been recognized by the sejm held in Grodno in 1793), together with the
interest which had meanwhile become due, were divided between Russia,
Prussia and Austria in a ratio of 13: 13: 4. The king's debts, which had
been assessed at 40 million Polish guilders, were divided between Russia,
Prussia and Austria in a ratio of 2: 2: 1.1 The committee charged with
realizing the assets of the bankrupt Polish bankers (among them Pierre
Tepper, with whom we have already made acquaintance) was to be re-
vived. This body had originally been set up by the sejm at Grodno, but
had disappeared from the scene during the chaos which accompanied the
uprising in Poland.
 The convention contained nothing akin to Voute's notions of a Russian
acceptance of the Polish debt in its entirety. Voute, however, had not
been wasting his time in St.Petersburg, for on 30th June 1797 a convention
was entered into between Alexei Vasilyev, head of the Treasury, and Robert
Voute, the authorized agent of the creditors of the former Republic of
Poland, its king and also a number of citizens of the former republic. 2
The negotiations leading up to this had commenced on 28th April, and
progress had initially been slow. Vasilyev and, to a greater extent, the
Chancellor, Bezborodko, had opposed Voute's proposals, and in the end
only the direct intervention of the czar had enabled agreement to be
reached on 30th June. 3
 Voute had every reason for satisfaction with the outcome, for this time
his ideas-the ideas which he had elaborated to Kalichev in May 1796-
had in their entirety been embodied in the convention. Russia accepted
responsibility for all the loans made to the Republic of Poland and to its
king, and covered by Voute's powers of attorney, plus overdue interest
up to 31st December 1797. Russia also took over the loans made to
Prince Alexander, Prince Joseph Lubomirski and Count Michael Oginski,
again including the interest due up to 3 I st December 1797. These were
but a few of the loans made to Polish magnates, but Prince Alexander
Lubomirski had taken over the estates mortgaged by his brother Joseph,
and with these the latter's debt, and had then sold all the mortgaged
property to the Russian Crown. The fate of Michael Oginski's assets, the
unsold portion of which had been confiscated by Catherine II, has already
been explained. Both the last-named cases thus involved loans to Polish
magnates against securities which had meanwhile come into the pos-
session of the Russian Crown.
The procedure established for the transfer required that all the original

                                   162
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

debentures, which were still held by notaries in Holland, be sent to
Warsaw for verification by the Russian commissioners appointed to the
Mixed Committee for the Polish Debts. Upon the signing of the con-
vention, Pierre Vollte had departed for Holland to attend to this matter.
  In addition to the claims with which Vollte was empowered to deal, the
convention also embraced a number of personal debentures of King
Stanislaw, in all involving a sum of 125,000 ducats, a substantial propor-
tion of which had been borrowed from Carl Hasselgreen and Jean Meisner.
Theodoor Glilcher's involvement amounted to only 4,200 ducats. The
erstwhile Republic of Poland had issued four assignats, totalling 48,500
ducats, in favour of Jean Meisner, and these were also included in the
agreement. In all these cases, the loans had been used by the king and the
republic to keep on their feet during the second partition of the country.
We may safely assume that the agreement came as a great relief to the
house of Meisner, which faced certain bankruptcy unless the responsi-
bility for meeting its claims was accepted elsewhere. It may also be
assumed that the inclusion of these claims in the convention reflected
efforts by Meisner and Hasselgreen rather than by Vollte. 1
 The czar undertook to convert all these loans and the claims thereon,
which together totalled cf 12.458,455.5.0, into a loan for the account of
the Russian Crown, and to embody this in the loans entered into by
Catherine II in the Batavian Republic, as Holland had become known
since the French conquest. The rate of interest on the conversion loan
was fixed at 5 % per annum, commencing on 1st January 1798 and being
payable half-yearly at the offices of Hope & Co., in their capacity as
bankers of the Crown, or at the offices of any other house whom they
might appoint for the purpose. The conversion of old bonds into new was
to be effected before 1st January 1798.
 The conclusion of this agreement was a major success for Vollte, and
thus also for the Company. Thanks to Vollte's efforts at the Russian
Court, more than 10 million guilders of Dutch investors' money had not
only been saved, but also reactivated after years of dormancy.

The amicable feeling towards Hope & Co. which ensued coincided with
an ebb tide in the fortunes of the revolutionary government in the Ba-
tavian Republic. The initial enthusiasm among Dutch revolutionaries had
been heady, and now many of them were suffering from an emotional
hangover. The bill, in the shape of the Hague Treaty, which the French
presented for their benefaction was startlingly high. Furthermore, fears
regarding the conduct of the active radical wing were growing in the more
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

moderate revolutionary circles. In France, the discovery of the commu-
nist plot headed by Gracchus Babeuf had brought about a pronounced
swing to the right. Peace negotiations with England were started, and an
accommodation between the two states appeared probable. Since the
political course in France had a decisive influence on the run of affairs in
the satellite states, the change favoured the more conservative body in the
Batavian Republic. Some conservative supporters of the old Patriot Party
went so far as to establish secret contacts with members of the House of
Orange who were then in England and Germany. It is therefore not
surprising that the Representatives of the People of Holland, as the States
of this province were by now calling themselves, sought to get in touch
with the Hopes with a view to discussing the latter's possible return to the
Republic. Among the obstacles to such a development was the earlier
confiscation of Hope's assets there. In a polite letter, the commissioners
who had ordered the confiscation, while defending their action, invited
Messrs. Hope to return to the Republic, stating that they were prepared
to suspend their claim if the Company could show good reason why they
should do so.
 But although the partners felt that the time had come to reveal the secret
of their associations with Insinger and Vollte, and show openly that they
were concerned in the settlement of the Polish debts (as if the public had
not long since connected them with this !), they chose not to enter into
direct correspondence with the new rulers in Holland and continued to
challenge the legality of the sequestration of the Company's assets. The
wisdom of their policy was to emerge later. 1

Although we may assume that Czar Paul, in bringing about a settlement
of the Polish debts, was moved by feelings of sympathy towards the
Poles (he confessed to Kosciuszko, a hero of the resistance, that he had
consistently opposed the partition of the country), the elements of busi-
ness were not lacking on the Russian side when it came to the signing of
the convention between VOllte and Vasilyev. 2 The Russian members of
the mixed committee concerned with verifying and liquidating the Polish
debts were instructed that the principal obligations which Pierre VOllte
brought to Warsaw were to be submitted to the committee for verification
like any other documents. This procedure was not expected to produce
any difficulties, since the claims had all been recognized by the sejm at
Grodno. Only the loan of cf 760,000 made to the Republic by Pieter de
Haan Pietersz. in 1792 could possibly evoke objections, because the
banker Prote Potocki, who had since become bankrupt, had not depos-
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

ited these funds in the Treasury, but had allowed them to become dissi-
 pated along with his own capital. His malversation, however, did not
 relieve the former Republic of Poland of its responsibilities. Potocki him-
self faced an inquiry into his conduct by the three Courts.
  The Russian members of the committee were also instructed that if,
contrary to expectations, their colleagues disputed the debentures and
bonds submitted for verification, they were to block further discussion by
stating that their Court had already recognized the legality of these and
that therefore they were not permitted to indulge in any argument. If the
documents submitted were verified, the commissioners were to see to it
that interest up to 31st December 1797 was included. When the process of
verification and liquidation had been completed, the commissioners were
to announce that the czar proposed to deduct the sum of these claims
from his share of the debts incurred by the Polish king. These claims
together totalled less than the amount which the czar was committed to
pay under the terms of the agreement of 26th January 1797. The balance
due from Russia could be dealt with within the committee's terms of
reference. 1
  As Voute had earlier explained, the conversion served temporarily to
relieve Russia of a series of current or impending repayment commit-
ments; in addition, it brought Russia the political advantage of appear-
ing to the outside world to be the saviour of the creditors of the erstwhile
Poland. If Poland's foreign debts had simply been divided, Prussia would
in all probability have attempted to convert her share into a new loan,
and this could have handicapped the Russians in their own conversion.
In the final analysis, the czar had not taken on any commitments beyond
those imposed on him by the convention which regulated the sharing of
the debts, and thus there was no question of any sacrifices on behalf of
Poland.
  At the end of October 1797 a further success set a crown on Robert
Voute's mission on behalf of the Dutch creditors. Early in that month the
czar had issued instructions to Bezborodko and Vasilyev that the balance
of the Dutch claims against the Polish magnates were to be taken over by
the Russian Crown. On the 29th, a second Acte de Cession, in which the
transfer was regulated, was signed. In this, all the loans to Polish magnates
which came within the powers vested in Voute were taken over by the
Crown and converted into a Russian loan which, like the last, was in-
corporated in the other loans obtained in Holland; the interest rate was
fixed at 5 %. The only loan excluded from the conversion was one of
cf 400,000 to the Dowager Princess Jablonowska, and this was probably
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

because the estates which she had mortgaged for the purpose of the loan
were situated in areas of Poland which had since come under Pruss ian
and Austrian control.l In addition to the loans on which Voilte was
empowered to negotiate, a claim by Jean Meisner against the Marquis
Franyois Wielopolski for 66,6661- ducats was included in the conver-
sion, as were six bonds for the account of Prince Dominique Radziwill,
a minor. These had been signed by his guardian, Prince Matthias Rad-
ziwill, and the principal and arrears of interest totalled more than 120,000
ducats.
 These bonds, too, were held by Meisner, for whom their conversion
heralded the full restoration of his credit standing. The loans converted
under the terms of the second agreement totalled cf 3.449,130.14, which
implied that the czar had accepted responsibility for debts of nearly 16
million guilders. 2
 In considering the second convention, one is faced with the question:
Why was the czar prepared to assume responsibility for the Polish mag-
nates' debts even though these were not included in the agreement with
Prussia and Austria? Voilte partially answered this in his memorandum
of 24th July 1796 to Kalichev. Nearly all of the mortgaged estates lay in the
Russian-occupied part of Poland; the value of the estates was far in
excess of the sums loaned; in the event of default, all the assets of the
borrowers could be seized. Czar Paul's action in taking over these loans
could be interpreted as a friendly gesture towards the Polish nobility;
there is, however, the point that he thereby obtained a financial hold over
the magnates, and this will almost certainly have deterred them from acts
hostile to the new regime. For the lenders in Holland the conversion
brought the solution of a complex problem, namely that the partition of
Poland had resulted in the mortgaged estates being on Russian territory,
while the laws of Russia prohibited foreigners from holding mortgages on
land because these could afford rights relating to serfs.
 The Polish affairs having been successfully dealt with, a settlement of
the Russian loans in the Republic became a matter of urgency. The
earliest of these would become due for repayment on 1st February 1798,
and the third on 1st July. But because of the adverse rate of exchange, the
Russian government was disinclined-and perhaps hard put-to remit the
necessary funds to the Republic.
 On 2nd November 1797, a few days after the signing of the second con-
vention, Voilte sent Vasilyev a memorandum which contained a proposal
for reconstituting Russia's foreign loans. In this, Voilte went somewhat
too far, for the loans which Russia had negotiated in Genoa were not

                                    166
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

 within his domain. He calculated as follows. The loans obtained in
Holland totalled cf 53,500,000.1 To these must be added 3 million guilders
 which Russia had obtained from De Wolf in Antwerp, the 16 million
guilders from the two conventions relating to the Polish debts, 12 million
guilders as a reserve, and the commission due to Hope & Co. As far as
the last-named was concerned, Voute proposed 6! % on the loans issued
by the Company (the figure agreed for all eighteen loans) and 4 % on the
sums of the Polish conversions and the Antwerp loan. This commission,
totalling cf 4,233,803.0.0, would be paid in Russian bonds which, how-
ever, would commence to bear interest upon the expiry of the terms of
the converted loans and not on 1st January 1798, as was the case with the
other bonds.
  The reserve of 12 million guilders would serve to meet unforeseen
needs, to finance credits for the repurchase of bonds, and to meet other
expenses on behalf of the Russian Crown. No interest would be payable
on the portion of the reserve not used by the Court, nor would any
commission be due thereon. Ifbonds relating to the reserve were broached,
these would bear interest from the date of use, and the full commission of
6t %would be payable on the sum involved.
  After the expiry of twelve years (a normal period for a Russian loan),
i.e. on 1st January 1810, the Court would have to commence the repay-
ment of the balance of the capital; this would be effected in twenty equal
instalments, so that the debt would finally be eliminated on 1st January
1830-thirty-two years from 1st January 1798. Accelerated repayment
would be permitted. The principal sum, which was nominally cf88,300,000,
would bear interest at 5 % per annum. This figure, which had been laid
down in the two conventions relating to the Polish debts, implied an
increase in the rate of interest on seven of the eighteen loans. 2
  As calculated by Voute, Hope's commission at first sight appears high.
However, if we compare the figure of cf 4,233,803.0.0 referred to in
Voute's memorandum with the cf 76,300,000 on which interest would
immediately become payable and which would be repaid (cf 12,000,000,
it will be recalled, was provisionally to be kept in reserve), we arrive at
a mean commission of 5t %. In contrast to the commission on Hope's
other Russian loans, this would not be payable in cash when the loan was
subscribed, but in bonds, which would be handed to the partners. Such
bonds, however, could not be sold at par. During the second half of 1797,
the average quotation for the Russian bonds did not exceed 90 and the
underlying trend was downward. 3 The Hopes themselves held about 2,000
Russian bonds, some of which they had repurchased, and the effects of
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

the further prolongation of the repayment and the increase of the principal
sum would be to diminish the value of their holding. Furthermore, the
new loan would run for an abnormally long period-32 years, compared
with an average of twelve years for the current Russian loans. It is thus only
fair to multiply the normal commission of 1- % on interest payments on
a twelve-year loan by 2!, which gives a rate of It %. In addition, a further
I! % must be allowed for premiums, douceurs and other rewards for those
who had contributed to the success of the conversion, or who would yet
so contribute. If we now deduct all these items from the total commission
of 5~ %, we are left with something less than 2 % for the actual conversion.
The Company subsequently entered the bonds in the balance sheet at 80 %,
at which price the cash premium for the conversion was I~ %-a perfectly
reasonable figure. 1
  Although VOllte, in his own handwriting, added a note to the memo-
randum, saying that it had become 'une piece nulle' as a result of a letter
from Vasiliev dated 6th November 1797, we find VOllte's ideas, almost
without alteration, in the ukase of 15th January 1798, in which Czar Paul I
promulgated the prolongation of the Russian loans in Holland and the
relevant conditions.
  The sum of cf 88,300,000 and the items which went to make up this total
were adopted without change, albeit the reserve of 12 million guilders and
Hope & Co.'s commission were included under the heading 'Arrange-
ments with various individuals.' It was apparently felt that these items did
not concern the outside world. 2 The new loan bore interest at 5 %, and
holders of 4 % and 41- % bonds were to enjoy the higher rate with effect
from 1st January 1798. Old bonds were to be exchanged for new on the
interest dates in 1798, so that by 1st January 1799 the whole matter,
including the converted Polish loans, would be settled. Moreover, the
payment of interest in Amsterdam would recommence in May 1798. The
new bonds would be countersigned by Baron von Stackelberg, the Russian
envoy to various princedoms and districts in Germany. 3 The payment of
interest would continue even in the event of war between Russia and the
Batavian Republic. The revenues of tolls in St.Petersburg, Livonia and
 Finland, and the duty levied on brandy, would constitute a special secu-
rity. Holders of bonds relating to the loan negotiated by De Wolf in
Antwerp were told to send their bonds to Amsterdam to be exchanged,
and De Wolf was instructed to do the same with the principal debenture.
Hope & Co. were responsible for seeing to it that the sums to be remitted
by the Russian Court were indeed used for the payment of interest and
principal, and they were required to submit accounts and supporting

                                    168
                                                                            ,--
                                                                           . /"I;I~,,-ht "



       ((, I/tit/f'.                      /h. I( 't/////(.                        \ l'IIJ,//III/.IJI':lJlli/

         4 .il,bt:t ' ;;;')~'II; /tfl';{/ f;;/(( (It                                                              II'I(

(tItl111/ulfQ // tI~/Il(/01!i1"1f< ' ( /~/il/I/, f . ~/;;'I/'(/tf/
(        l'~/,)(' (;1/1(/1;;-; .                                             ,,/r' It //!t;/ /r,) ,A~tjf/i:/.


         --
                                            , ~~"   / / H " .... t#'.(                  , h,. (Ii'.   I   't o,

                                                         "
    ",.,A'ftWA;//.Y (~//d//"'.

             /)
             ,1;      • /t'('h~flA «(       !tlCup, ~    fl , ' , , { ',



/('fl-I(t'/(C ~·i 11" ~'l • "/I"I .• ~Ur /'~/h·~"/~//A.:




~"'"     , .. ' ;'rt'<,~ /r,;r.Y'.I'//"'" I 4".,i'/~~:1. ;(//A A, o.               i'
/ / . " / (, , 11'1'//(/.1////(/ l / . ; // / b .I/I'/A- '                 1;,4,~"
                ".7                                      '




t • • oj'     •• '    1'". 1 • • , t//.




'"I:        I. ( •.    /~ 'l';"~ . r. rn//r~. ;.nl. .",,; r.
    ,;

  /. "., ~      .r~( -." Nnr.:-O~ /~ A:'r~'/v/£n.(




       Ukase issued by Czar Paul I concerning the conversion of Russian loans issued in
                              Amsterdam and Antwerp, 1798
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION

documents to the Treasurer at regular intervals. The memory of Suther-
land's malpractices was clearly discernible in this stipulation.
  Despite this triumphant end to Hope & Co.'s activities on behalf of the
Batavian bondholders, it did not fall to the Company to effect the con-
version in Amsterdam. At the end of the circular which brought the glad
tidings to the investors, Raymond and Theodore de Smeth announced
that: 'they had been empowered by Messrs. Hope & Comp., Bankers to
His Majesty the Emperor of the Russian Empire, to cause the instructions
contained in this Berigt to be carried out, and that, accordingly, the
exchange of the Bonds, together with the payment of Interests referred to
in connexion therewith, will be effected at their Comptoir.'
  This comeback to the field of Russian loans must have been a source of
great satisfaction to the house of De Smeth; for Hope & Co., being pre-
vented by an unforeseen change in the political situation from plucking
the fruits of their success was a bitter pill. The change had come in
September 1797, when the coup d'etat of Fructidor brought more radical
groups to power in France. They adopted a more stringent policy which
included breaking off the negotiations with England. As usual, the Ba-
tavian Republic faithfully copied the French example; there, too, the
radicals came more and more to the forefront, and the defeat of the
Batavian fleet by the British at Kamperduin in October 1797 was eagerly
seized upon as an opportunity for accusing the more moderate elements
in the government of treason. Eventually the radicals succeeded in gaining
the support of the French government for a Batavian 'Fructidor,' and on
22nd January 1798 a coup d'etat took place which swept the more moder-
ate members of the National Assembly from office. For an 'Anglomaniac'
house such as Hope & Co., there was little to be expected from such a
radical-revolutionary government, and the partners counted themselves
fortunate in having disclosed so little information to the commissioners in
Holland concerning their confiscated assets. 1
  The ukase dealing with the loan conversion contained no reference to
Hope's commission, but on 18th February 1798 the czar acceded to a
request from the Company that a commission of 6t % should be paid on
the commission itself. 2 Hope & Co. argued that the commission consisted
of interest-bearing bonds and that they were entitled to commission on
these. Interest on these bonds was now calculated from 1st January 1798
and not in accordance with the expiry of the period of the converted loans.
This additional bonus, which amounted to cf 275,197.0.0, was also derived
from the reserve of 12 million guilders and thus consisted of 'activated'
bonds-on which the Company was entitled to its 6t %.3 Hope & Co.'s
                                   170
      I ngevolge het bovenllaande Berigt geeven R. en Th. DE SMETH
      bier meede kennis, dat zij door de Heeren Hop 1: en
      COM P., Bankiers van Zijne Majesteic den Keizer van bet
      Rusnfche Rijk , gequalificeert zijn geworden om de beveelen
      in die Berigc vervat cer uitvoer te doen brengen; -         en
      dat aldus de verwisfeling der Obligatien, mitsgaders de betaa.
      ling der Interesfen daar bij vermeld ten hunnen Comptoire
      zal gefchieden , waar toe de verdere fchikkiDgen nader door
      de Couranten zullen worden bekend gemaakc.




Announcement by the hOllse of De Smeth, consenting to convert the Russian bonds
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 commission rose by cf 293,000 as a result of this, but was still not exorbi-
 tant, as we have already seen; nevertheless, this new concession will have
 been a thorn in the flesh of Bezborodko and Vasilyev, who were declared
 opponents of the conversion. 1
  The czar conceived a highly original plan to show his respect for Robert
 Vollte. On 19th February 1798, Pierre VOllte, Jose Pedro Celestino Velho
 and Alexandre Franr;:ois RaIl announced that they had formed a company,
 VOllte Velho RaIl & Co., and that the czar had appointed the company to
 be bankers to the Court and commission agents for foreign trade. The
 '& Co.' disguised Robert VOllte, who had thus accorded the honour to
 his favourite nephew while retaining the most influential position for
himself. 2
  Thanks to the support of the empress, VOllte succeeded in securing
 acceptance of his earlier plan to improve the rate of exchange of the
rouble by increasing copper exports. The output of copper would be
increased from 160,000 poods to 1,200,000 poods, and the foreign exchange
thus earned would form the basis for an issue of banknotes to a value of
 150 million roubles. Part, at least, of this plan was implemented; the
obstacles to its completion will become clear in due course. 3
  Now that the matter of the conversion had been settled in principle,
Messrs. Hope felt that a good purpose would be served by giving Vasilyev
a few hints. It was of the utmost importance that the interest on the loan
should be paid promptly. This would bring about a recovery in the price
of the bonds, which had fallen somewhat as a result of the postponement
of the maturing date. Vasilyev's plan to effect a principal repayment on
 1st January annually, and to announce this in advance on 1st October,
seemed to the partners to be very effective. A million guilders annually,
commencing on 1st January 1799, was the very minimum acceptable, they
said. In extreme circumstances, this sum could be paid in two instalments
with an interval of six months. The Hopes also drew attention to the
desirability of repurchasing bonds while the price was still low, thus re-
ducing the burden of interest, but they stressed that this must be done
discreetly and that De Smeth and their agents must be advised in advance
of the sums available for the purpose.
  With the appointment of new Court Bankers, the way was now open for
the remittances of interest and principal to be spread over the whole year.
It fell to the Court Bankers to react flexibly to the fluctuations on the
Exchange, by increasing or reducing their purchases of bills of exchange
in accordance with the quantity offered. According to Hope & Co., it was
a simple task to calculate whether the remittances would have an adverse
                                     17 2
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

effect on the value of the rouble: if the value of these exceeded the export
surplus shown on the trade balance, the rate of exchange would fall; if it
failed to match the surplus, the rate would rise.!
 Despite all the wise counsel, however, little came of the plans. This was
due in part to unforeseen obstacles, but the principal factors were that
Vasilyev, an opponent of the conversion from the outset, went out of his
way to thwart both VOllte and the Company, and that it was not long
before RaIl commenced to support him. The methods which were em-
ployed will be dealt with in due course.

An unforeseen obstacle, and one which imperilled the continuity of
 remittances by the Court Bankers, arose in Hamburg. There, the house of
Martin Dorner, which since 1795 had been responsible for the payment
of interest on the Russian bonds, and which under the new arrangement
had been assigned an important role in the remittances to Amsterdam,
had run into difficulties following the death of Dorner. When the news
that the trustees of Dorner's estate had found it necessary for the house
to suspend payments reached the Hopes in London, they despatched
their partner, Pierre Cesar Labouchere, to Hamburg with instructions to
ensure that, in any circumstances, the bills presented by the Court Bankers
would be honoured. A situation which revived memories of the events
surrounding Sutherland in I787 had to be avoided at all costs. Labouchere
was also instructed to seek a suitable successor to Dorner.
  The collapse of Martin Dorner was a serious setback to the new Court
Bankers and also to Hope & Co. Rumours that Dorner was having
difficulty in having his bills negotiated and that, old and in ill health, he
hardly concerned himself with the business, leaving everything to a part-
ner, had reached the Hopes a year previously.2 Following his death on
12th April 1798, the suspension of payments by the house which bore his
name had caused quite a commotion in Amsterdam, for it brought to a
halt the encashment of the Russian bond coupons. 3 As soon as the sus-
pension was announced, the Russian envoy to the Kreits of Lower Saxony
and the Hanseatic towns, Baron Grimm, set about salvaging the Russian
funds; he was assisted in this task by Pierre Voute, who had been obliged
to leave Russia for health reasons in March 1798 and, while en route for
England, fortunately happened to be nearby.4 As a result of their efforts,
eight Hamburg houses contributed to a guarantee fund which assured
more than a million marks banco. This paved the way for the resumption
of the payments on 14th May and for the settlement of the other aspects
of the affair. 5

                                    173
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

Upon his arrival in Hamburg, Labouchere discovered that much was
amiss with the settlement of Dorner's affairs. For example, creditors were
advancing money to the estate against preferential acknowledgements of
debt, which they then used to obtain payment of their ordinary claims
against Dorner. The effect of this was to shift the risks associated with the
liquidation on to the shoulders of creditors such as Hope & Co., who did
not enjoy preferential status. Labouchere lost no time in putting a stop
to this stratagem, after which he proceeded to have new trustees ap-
pointed who treated all creditors impartially.1 He was particularly im-
pressed by Gabe, the principal partner in J.Gabe & Co., a house which
enjoyed the highest credit and an excellent reputation. Labouchere's
opinion of other businessmen in Hamburg was poor: to him, the mer-
chants were parvenus who, with great ostentation, spent money as rapidly
as they earned it. Fortunately, the way oflife of the partners in Matthiessen
& Sillem, the house which Labouchere had in mind as the successor to
Dorner as far as Hope & Co. were concerned, contrasted strongly with
this pattern.
  Upon his arrival in Hamburg, Labouchere had been warned about
Matthiessen & Sillem's pro-French sympathies, and he had resolved to
carefully investigate the matter. Grimm also had let slip something to this
effect, and it was obvious that he would have written to the Russian Court
on the subject. A report of that nature would not have pleased Czar Paul I,
for just then he was becoming increasingly prejudiced against France.
Labouchere discovered that, some years earlier, Matthiessen had married
a Mademoiselle Henriette de Sercey (it was perhaps not without signifi-
cance that Labouchere spelled her name Circe), a pupil and a relative of
the famous femme de fettres, Madame de Genlis. 2 That was not all,
however. A daughter of Madame de Genlis, Pamela, had married Lord
Edward Fitzgerald, one of the leaders of the United Irishmen, a move-
ment dedicated to the violent overthrow-with the aid of a French army-
of the British administration in Ireland and the establishment of an
independent republic. But shortly before the date appointed for the up-
rising, Lord Fitzgerald had been arrested; and he later died from a shot
wound. Immediately after his arrest, his wife had been compelled to leave
Ireland and, still unaware of his death, she had just arrived in Hamburg,
where she was lovingly welcomed by her cousin and intimate friend, Frau
Matthiessen.
  There was thus a danger that the Matthiessen residence would become
a sort of headquarters for a Franco-Irish conspiracy-and anything of
this nature could compromise the company of which Matthiessen himself

                                    174
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

was part. During a serious discussion with the partners, however, Labou-
chere learned that Matthiessen-and to an even greater extent Sillem-was
opposed to anything which could support 'Ie systeme actuel en France,'
and that there was absolutely nothing to fear as far as they were con-
cerned. Matthiessen, who was about forty-five years of age, possessed
sound judgement and his heart was in the right place; but, according to
Labouchere, he was more interested in science and philanthropy than in
business, and it appeared probable that he would soon resign from the
firm. Sillem, in spite of being seventy and suffering severely from gout in
his arms and legs, had 'an excellent brain and all the nerve required in the
spirit of conducting the most difficult business.' His son, Hieronymus, who
had recently married, was the key figure in the firm. Labouchere could not
speak too highly of the young man. 1 He was 'an incredibly clever fellow'
who combined the adroitness required to do business on the hellish market
in Hamburg with 'the most refined sense of honour and integrity.' The
fourth partner, Texier, who was married to Hieronymus's sister, was a good
office-man, but that was all. The thrift and order manifested in the house-
holds of these four men compared most favourably with the magniloquence
of so many other residences, and this, above all, pleased Labouchere.
  Just how solid the house of Matthiessen & Sillem was, emerged during
the negotiations concerning an agency for the Russian Court. When
Labouchere explained that the Court expected its agents to accord un-
limited credit, Matthiessen replied that it was the custom of the house
'never, in any business, to risk more than it could afford to lose without
prejudicing either its independence or its freedom of action.' In this case,
the house was prepared to go up to 300,000 marks banco. In reply,
Labouchere let it be understood that the Court would spread its business
if it failed to find a house willing to provide all the facilities which it
desired. At this, Sillem Sr. immediately raised the credit limit to 500,000
marks banco; Matthiessen, however, was reluctant to concur. Labouchere
hastened to assure the partners that he did not seek to force them to reveal
to the Court the limit to which they were prepared to go, but that it was
important for him to know this. After all, he reasoned, one could hardly
offer the Russian Court anything short of unlimited credit; at the same
time, he would certainly have thought badly of the partners had they
offered this, for they did not yet understand the Russian government's
ways of doing business, so that such an offer would have been extremely
imprudent. Thus, the house came through the test with flying colours.
Labouchere concluded by assuring the partners that the Court would
seldom if ever make use of the unlimited facilities. 2

                                    175
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

The settlement of Dorner's affairs proceeded far more smoothly than
had been anticipated. Confidence having been restored by the creation of
the guarantee fund, the outstanding debts were speedily collected. By
mid-July, 75 %of these had been paid and it appeared that not only would
complete settlement soon follow, but also that a larger sum would be left
for the heirs than had at first been supposed. The monies belonging to the
Russian Court which had been in Dorner's charge were consequently
transferred to Matthiessen & SiIlem without further delay. Dorner had
been 'a worthy man,' but had lacked discretion; among his correspon-
dence, Labouchere found confidential letters from the Hopes which
should have been burned immediately they had been read-and which,
according to Dorner's earlier assurances, had been. And just then the
necessity for discretion was greater than ever.
  The explanation for this lies in the fact that the British government was
working on plans aimed at preventing its nationals from participating in
foreign loans, especially those issued in Holland, and at making all cor-
respondence with the inhabitants of a hostile country a treasonable
offence. The reason for these measures lay in the extremely critical situa-
tion in which England then found itself. In 1797 the country had been
struck by a financial crisis of such severity that the convertibility of paper
money into coin had to be suspended. 1 At about the same time, a mutiny
in the fleet had paralyzed the country's defences-and this just when an
 open revolt, which would probably be supported by a French army of
invasion, threatened in Ireland.
  Against this background, Labouchere, who was still in Hamburg, faced
 the task of organizing the payments of interest and principal on the
 Russian debt in such a manner that they would proceed smoothly without
 the need for intervention by, or correspondence with, Messrs. Hope in
 England. 2 To this end, he introduced, by letter, the houses of Matthiessen
 & Sillem and Voute Velho RaIl & Co. to De Smeth and Insinger. It was
 of even greater importance that the new Court Bankers and the agents in
 Hamburg should become accustomed to each other's ways of working,
 and to further this Labouchere, in his discussions with Matthiessen &
 Sillem, repeatedly cited the person of Robert Voute: 'This is our most
 intimate friend, whose understanding and integrity we respect the most;
 you may count on it that this association can only bring you the greatest
 benefits.' Conversely, as we have already seen, he praised the partners of
 Matthiessen & Sillem in his letters to Voute. The last-named was strongly
 urged to remain in Russia for the time being, because without his support
 little would come of the house ofVoute Velho RaIl & Co. on account of
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 'the peculiar characters of the respective members of which it consists';
 this was an aspect which inspired little confidence among the partners in
 England.
   Pierre Voute, to whom Labouchere referred derisively as 'Monsieur Ie
 Banquier,' was a good-natured young man whose principal trait was that
 he meekly allowed himself to be swayed by the advice of his uncle, Robert.
Velho was an insignificant figure, but Rall was an intriguer and needed
 constant watching. The correspondence in Dorner's files showed that
 Rall planned his business operations well; but while he boasted in his
letters that he always kept 100,000 roubles in cash for emergencies, he
retained monies belonging to Hope with the excuse that he was unable to
repay them. 1
   The setbacks suffered by the Court Bankers, such as the Dorner affair
and the difficulties with remittances caused by the low rate of exchange,
favoured Voute's former enemies, in particular Treasurer Vasilyev who,
in Labouchere's view, had already been far too dilatory in despatching to
Matthiessen & Sillem the official guarantee in respect of the Court
Bankers' operations.
   In the meantime a start had been made with the implementation of
Voute's plans for a large-scale increase in copper exports, and at the end
of February Dorner had reported to Voute that he was prepared to have
copper samples from Siberia assayed. Matthiessen & Sillem now took
over Dorner's role, going so far as to offer to advance between 500,000
and 1,000,000 marks banco on shipments of copper, provided that the
quality was satisfactory.2 Once copper exports got into their stride, both
interest and capital payments could be actively pursued, and it would also
be possible to raise the rate of exchange in Russia. In view of the fickleness
of the czar, however, it remained to be seen what would come of all these
fine intentions.
  Labouchere having thus settled the principal issues, there remained the
matter of correspondence with England. Vasilyev was requested to enclose
letters to the partners in an envelope addressed to Count Simon Voront-
sov, the Russian envoy to the English Court. Matthiessen & Sillem re-
ceived provisional instructions not to write to Hope & Co. unless it was
absolutely necessary, and then in such a manner as not to compromise
the partners. Reports from De Smeth were to be treated similarly, the
date being put on a separate sheet and mention of places or names being
avoided. If anything serious or unexpected should occur, De Smeth was
to send a letter to Mr. James Smith on the island of St.Croix; as with all
other letters, this was to be enclosed in an envelope bearing the address of

                                     177
                        THE GREA T CONVERSION

Harman & Co. in order, above all, to avoid the name of Hope appearing. 1
Insinger, Hope's principal agent in Amsterdam, was advised that confi-
dential messages should be written in lemon juice at the end of letters,
their presence being indicated by a small cross at the top; holding such a
letter to the fire caused the invisible writing to appear.2 Having also
settled these matters to his satisfaction, Labouchere was free to return to
England. 3
  At about this time, Robert Voute's position at the Russian Court was
seriously threatened by an intrigue which led to the empress being de-
prived of all political influence. A favourite of the Court, a man of
Turkish origin named Kutaysov, who had risen from the position of
Court hairdresser to a high office, succeeded in turning the czar against
his own wife by insinuating that he allowed it to appear to his people that
he was ruled by women. At the same time he provided the czar with a
mistress, thereby completing the alienation between the couple. At the
beginning of August 1798 the czar forbade his wife ever to concern
herself with politics, and shortly afterwards the Princes Kurakin, two
ministers sympathetic towards the empress, were dismissed from the
government. 4 Others concerned in the intrigue included Bezborodko and
Vasilyev, both opponents of Voute, and after the elimination of his
patroness, Voute faced a cheerless period.
  Exactly what took place is not clear, but we do know that early in
October Vasilyev, with RaIl's collaboration, manoeuvred Robert Voute
into a position in which he was forced to ask for the resignation of his
nephew, Pierre, from Voute Velho RaIl & Co. The results of a!1 investi-
gation by Councillor of State Wulff into the firm's financial policy were
used as a pretext for the move. Nikolai Rogovikov was appointed Court
Banker in place of Pierre Voute. 5 In this and other ways, Vasilyev made
life so intolerable for Robert Voute that by the end of December 1798
he had no choice but to leave Russia. He journeyed to Warsaw to join his
nephew, who at the onset of the difficulties had set off posthaste to return
to Russia, but had paused in Poland to await further developments. Early
in 1799 the two left Warsaw, bound for western Europe; Robert Voute's
first task was to cross to England to report to the partners of Hope & Co.
 on the events which had taken place. <'

Despite the severe damage done to the Company's influence in Russia
by Voute's enforced departure, the conversion of old bonds into new
continued undisturbed in Holland; even an attempt by De Wolf in Ant-
werp to throw a spanner into the works by refusing to send the principal

                                    178
                         THE GREAT CONVERSION

 debenture to Amsterdam until such time as the bonds were delivered to
 him, duly receipted, failed to upset the process. 1 By his action, De Wolf
 sought to achieve a separate settlement in respect of the Antwerp loan,
 the effect of which would be that he, and not Hope & Co., received the
 full commission. When official letters and instructions from Vasilyev
 failed to dissuade him, and even a visit to Antwerp by De Smeth produced
 no result, it was decided to proclaim the conversion a success and suspend
 the payment of interest on the Antwerp bonds. This, it was considered,
 would spur holders of bonds of the Antwerp loan to bring De Wolf to
 heel; and indeed this succeeded. 2
  On loth December 1798, Baron von Stackelberg, the authorized agent of
 the Russian Court, completed the task of signing and sealing the 88,300
 bonds relating to the new loan. 3 Out of consideration for the Court, and also
 to propitiate its representative, the Hopes had placed their private residence
 in Amsterdam at Von Stackelberg's disposal. As the envoy firmly refused to
 accept a gift to mark the occasion, the Hopes decided that the expenditure
incurred on behalf of Von Stackelberg and his entourage should be met by
 the Company as part of the overall cost of the conversion. Such a gesture,
 the envoy could scarcely decline. 4
  With the end of the conversion now in sight, the time had come to
reward the services rendered, and in this the Hopes were usually generous.
Pierre de Smeth and Robert Voute were each given 400 Russian bonds,
and Jan Jacob Voute Jr. received 100. Hope's confidential representative,
David Berek, was rewarded with 30 bonds, and the lawyer Schimmel-
penninck received 10. 5 Voute had gained the necessary experience during
his first visit to Russia and had already attended to the matter of 'gifts' to
the Russian officials concerned, who included Vasilyev. 6
  The political events which took place during 1798 had been anything but
favourable from the point of view of the Russian loan. During his advance
towards Egypt, General Bonaparte had occupied Malta-to the fury of
Czar Paul I, who shortly beforehand had assumed the patronage of the
Knights of Malta. The czar increasingly came to regard himself as the
spiritual leader of the resistance to the ideas which emanated from the
French Revolution, and towards the end of 1798, after difficult negoti-
ations and numerous promises of subsidies from England, a coalition
consisting of Austria, England, Russia and Naples was formed to oppose
France.
  With minor wars breaking out here and there in Europe, and a clear
threat of a major conflict hanging overhead, it is not surprising that the
reaction of the bondholders was less enthusiastic than the Company had

                                     179
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

earlier anticipated. The preparations for war which were being made in
Russia itself and the financial operations brought about by a war in
western Europe combined to steadily depress the rate of exchange of the
rouble, with the result that the repayment of principal on 1St January
1799, which Hope & Co. so eagerly awaited-and which was to have
made the prolongation of the loans more attractive from the bondholders'
point of view-could not take place. This disappointing development was
reflected in subsequent market quotations for the Russian bonds. Whereas
in the first half of 1798 the price did not fall below 92, Insinger reported
on 20th October that it stood at 83-84.1 The interest payment made on
1st January 1799 put 21 million guilders into circulation, producing a
marginal improvement in the price, but this proved only temporary. The
war, which now erupted in full fury in southern Germany and Italy, added
to the fear among bondholders that, in spite of the express assurance
contained in the principal debenture, Russia might well suspend interest
payments in the Batavian Republic, an ally of France. 2
  These fears grew even stronger when, at the end of August, an Anglo-
Russian military force landed near Den Helder and then attempted to
push southwards. But a lack of energetic leadership on the part of the
British component, coupled with the fact that no pro-Orange uprisings
were taking place elsewhere in the country, caused the expeditionary
force to re-embark in mid-October. The effect upon bondholders of this
incursion is clear from the fall in the market price of the converted bonds
from an average of 85 during the first half of 1799 to a maximum of 74
during the second half. 3
  Although the outlook in the Batavian Republic was gloomy, the Russian
government was in fact doing its utmost to ensure the payment of interest
on 1st January 1800; but its efforts were hampered by what Hope & Co.
described as 'the astonishing revolution which is making itself felt in the
principal areas of currency.' 4 The English subsidies to the Russian and
Austrian armies and the equipping of the Anglo-Russian expedition,
among other factors, produced a financial crisis which dislocated the
rates of exchange and caused the pound sterling to fall so drastically that
many English houses were moved to ship gold and silver to Hamburg as
a protection against excessive exchange losses. The partners in London
 acted similarly, sending gold to Matthiessen & Sillem via Harman & Co.
in order to advertise the interest payment due on 1St January 1800. This
gold, however, could be despatched only in small quantities, for London
 underwriters had become cautious following the loss of the frigate 'Lutine'
 offVlieland, with an extremely valuable cargo of gold, and they were now

                                    180
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION

 unwilling to insure gold consignments exceeding thirty to forty thousand
 pounds in value. 1 As the volume of exchange transactions between Am-
 sterdam and Hamburg had also fallen to zero, it was left to Matthiessen &
 Sillem to decide whether, in the light of price ratios, it was better to send
 the gold straight to Amsterdam, or to sell it in Hamburg.
  Matthiessen & Sillem were given strict instructions to ensure that the
 3.1 million guilders required reached De Smeth before 1st January; in the
event of the orders from the Court Bankers in Russia falling short of this
sum, the house was empowered to take the necessary action under a
 personal guarantee from the Hopes. Messrs.Hope were greatly displeased
by the fact that the Court Bankers, without consulting them, had made
 arrangements for remittances to De Smeth; their annoyance was the
greater because some of the instructions were pointless. For example,
Harman & Co. had been instructed to remit direct to Amsterdam at a time
when exchange transactions between London and Amsterdam were im-
possible. To the immense relief of the partners, the circulation in Hamburg
was restored fairly rapidly and sterling became stronger. Added to this,
exchange traffic between Hamburg and Amsterdam was revived and thus,
despite some anxious moments, De Smeth was able to make the interest
payment on time, as a result of which the price of the Russian bonds rose
again.2
  In the latter part of 1799 Czar Paul virtually dissociated himself from
the war against France. The fruitless invasion of Holland, coming on top
of the defeats suffered by the Russian armies in Switzerland (principally
through poor co-operation with their Austrian allies), produced in the
impulsive emperor a political volte face. Although Russia formally re-
mained at war with France, Paul I informally made increasing efforts
towards a rapprochement with Napoleon, who in November 1799 had
seized power in France. At the same time, Paul adopted a cooler attitude
towards England, which he accused of failing to restore Malta to the
control of the Knights, and which, because of its great naval superiority
in the Mediterranean, constituted a threat to Russia's influence in that
area. In December ISOO his anti-British policy was manifested in a Treaty
of Neutrality between Russia, Sweden, Prussia and Denmark, the aim of
which was to oblige England-if need be, by force of arms-to respect the
rights of neutral vessels in international waters. The measures adopted
under the treaty included placing an embargo on British vessels and
cargoes in Russian ports. In ISOI, under the pretext of maintaining
neutrality, the Danes occupied Hamburg and the Prussians did the same
to Hanover and Bremen. The British answer to these acts included

                                     lSI
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION

blockading the Elbe and despatching a fleet of warships to Denmark; the
latter resulted in the destruction of the Danish fleet at Copenhagen. 1
 Russia having withdrawn, Austria was left alone to face Bonaparte-who
prosecuted the war with immense energy. After a series of French victories
in southern Germany and Italy, the Austrians were forced to treat for
peace with Napoleon. With the signing of the Treaty of Luneville in
February 1801, Austria accepted the new situation in Europe.
 For the partners in London, this development implied an intensification
of the pressures which, since 1799, had tended to exclude them from
matters concerned with the Russian loans. It was becoming increasingly
clear that Rail was the evil genius and that his aim was to deal solely with
De Smeth, to the exclusion of the partners of Hope & Co. The stagnation
of Russia's trade with England, a product of the czar's policies, had an
unfavourable influence on the rate of exchange of the rouble, and this, as
in the previous year, made it impossible to announce a repayment against
the Russian loan. Despite this disappointment for the bondholders, how-
ever, the price of the bonds remainded reasonably high; this was probably
due in part to the cessation of hostilities between France and Russia and
the steady improvement in relations between them. 2
  With these circumstances in mind, the partners in London deemed it
wise gradually to dispose of the Russian bonds, which they had received
by way of commission, in the Batavian Republic, and to reserve the
proceeds for future requirements. To this end, an •Account X' was opened,
ostensibly by Robert Voute, with the house in Amsterdam which bore his
name. The proceeds of the sale of bonds, through the broker Willem
Borski, were placed in this account. Borski was instructed to sell only
when the bonds were in demand and when the price was over 80. 3 Be-
tween loth October and 31st December 1800, a total of 1,103 bonds were
disposed of in this manner at prices which ranged between 82-2- and 87t.
During the following year a further 3,130 were sold; up to October, in
which month England, the sole remaining opponent of France, signed the
peace preliminaries, the price fluctuated between 81 and 84, but with the
news of peace the figure shot up to 89.4

Meanwhile, major changes were taking place in Russia. The caprices of
the czar had eventually assumed such proportions that even a clever
courtierlike Vasilyev could no longer stand his ground. In the autumn of
1800 he had fallen into disfavour and had been dismissed. Prior to his
downfall he had succeeded in obtaining a modest loan in Hamburg, but
a similarrequest to Hope met with a firm refusal. s Following Vasilyev's

                                    182
                        THE GREAT CONVERSION

 dismissal, Voute was approached by the St. Petersburg merchant J.C.Ber-
gien who hoped, with Voute's assistance, to have Vasilyev's protege, RaIl,
 removed from his position as Court Banker. Bergien argued that there
was no better way of establishing his reputation than by succeeding where
 RaIl and Vasilyev had failed, and that he accordingly s~)Ught- Voute's
opinion on the chances of a new loan via Hope & Co.
  Before anything definite could be discussed, Russia was thrown into
turmoil by the assassination of Czar Paul I on 23rd March 1801. The new
ruler, Alexander I, who had known of the plot against his father, chose
his ministers from among those who had earlier fallen into disfavour.
This meant that not only did figures such as Zubov and the Princes
Kurakin become ministers, but also that Vasilyev, who could claim to
have been a victim of the previous czar, was rehabilitated. Bergien assured
Voute that Hope & Co. had nothing to fear from the reappointment of
Vasilyev, for under the new regime the disregard for the Company would
be at an end; after all, one of Alexander's first acts had been to reverse
his late father's anti-British policy.!
  All these friendly gestures were allied to the financial crisis which the
Russian government faced as a result of the capricious conduct of the late
emperor, and in the circumstances a loan arranged by Hope & Co. would
be extremely welcome. 2
  Acting on instructions from the partners, Robert Voute had meanwhile
visited Amsterdam to see whether it would be possible for the Company
to re-establish itself there. As far as a new Russian loan was concerned,
his findings led him to the conclusion that a portion of the bonds held as a
reserve by the Russian government could be sold in Amsterdam at the
current market price. This, however, was conditional upon the repayment
of at least one million guilders of principal money in the near future. 3
Only thus could the Russian government secure fresh funds, for the
Staatsbewind, as the new government of the Batavian Republic was known,
would certainly not consent to a loan being floated publicly.
  Back in London, the partners approached Voute's proposals with the
utmost caution. Labouchere was convinced that the Company ought not
to make it too easy for the new Russian government to obtain money, for
that would encourage improvidence and extravagance in Russia. As for
a Russian loan in England, to which Bergien had also referred, he felt
that the chances of success were slim, though they might improve when
trade relations between the two countries had been restored. 4
  Such views were anything but welcome to Vasilyev and, faced with little
prospect of obtaining a loan, he again allowed the correspondence to lapse.
                       THE GREA T CONVERSION

In the absence of any agreement concerning the reserve, the Russian
government had little choice except to find a way to remit the funds
needed for the interest payment to Amsterdam. All these transactions
took place between the Court Bankers and De Smeth, and did not involve
the Company. When the time came for the next interest instalment,
however, it would probably be impossible to by-pass Hope & Co. com-
pletely, for by this time, December 1801, the plans for a return to the
Republic were taking shape. The signing of the Peace of Amiens on 25th
March 1802 served to remove the last obstacle to the return of the part-
ners; but owing to the difficulties surrounding the Portuguese loan it was
not until October 1802 that John Williams Hope and his family reached
Amsterdam.
 The sale of Russian bonds via 'Account X' proceeded steadily during
1802 at prices round about 90. The proceeds were used to partly finance
the payments due on the Portuguese loan in 1802. 1
  If a complete loss of confidence in the promises made by the Russian
government was to be avoided, it was now imperative that a start be made
with the repayment of the Russian loan. After a good deal of shilly-
shallying, a sum of 263,000 pounds sterling-a balance held in favour of
the Russian Court by the British government and stemming from an
earlier subsidy-was placed at the disposal of Hope & Co. 2 However,
appeals by Harman and Henry Hope to the British Foreign Secretary,
Lord Hawkesbury, to release the money before 15th November 1802
became bogged down in the bureaucratic machine, with the result that
the maturing date for 2,000 bonds had to be postponed from 1st January
to 1st July 1803.3 When the announcement of the redemption appeared,
the price of the bonds rose, reaching 96 at the end of March. During this
period Borski carefully fed the market, limiting his sales to fifty bonds or
less per day.
 The redemption of the 2,000 bonds was the first act which the Company
undertook in connexion with the Russian loan after its formal return to
Amsterdam; but this return was not without an element of irony. Vasilyev
refused to extend the redemption and the preceding ballot to cover the
reserve bonds. Redemption of these, he reasoned, would not lighten the
burden of interest which rested upon the Russian government; moreover,
Hope would be entitled to claim commission on drawn reserve bonds,
and this Vasilyev begrudged the Company. Although De Smeth was no
longer being involved in the payment of interest, the Court Bankers
routed a substantial part of their remittances via that house, and it was
also concerned with the repurchase of bonds by the Russian government.
                       THE GREAT CONVERSION

The Hopes were back, and they had taken up the reins of the Russian
loan; but the prospects of smooth progress in the loan affair, like those
in the political sphere, were anything but encouraging.
                         CHAPTER SEVEN

              'LES TRAITES DU NORD'
                AND OPERATION R.M.


The general peace in Europe which had enabled John Williams Hope and
Labouchere to return to Amsterdam was not of long duration. In May
 1803 hostilities again broke out between England and France. Elsewhere
on the Continent, however, the situation remained calm-at least tempo-
rarily-and this gave Napoleon an opportunity to prepare a large-scale
expedition against England. Such an undertaking demanded not only a
large army, but also a powerful fleet, and so obviously the period of
preparation was accompanied by an extremely urgent need for shipbuild-
ing materials in France. As Russia was the principal supplier, the French
equipment programme would necessarily lead to the export of large quan-
tities of material from Russia, and this could only improve the rate of
exchange of the rouble. This improvement, in turn, would increase the
possibility of repayments against Hope's Russian loans and also im-
mensely facilitate the normal payments of interest.
  While this development was in itself of importance to Hope, the Com-
pany, as good merchants, could not ignore the French procurement
programme, which had got into its stride in June of 1803. In that month,
the house of Recamier in Paris, on behalf of its agent, Xavier Farm-
bacher,l approached Hope & Co. with a request for introductions to
houses in 'diverses places du Nord.' Shortly afterwards David Parish re-
ported from Antwerp that Recamier had entered into an agreement with
the French government for the supply of large quantities of Russian
goods, and that Farmbacher, en route for Russia, had arrived in Hamburg
and had approached various houses in an effort to obtain sizeable credits
on St.Petersburg. As a result of Farmbacher's activities, the drawings on
Paris had assumed such proportions that the rate of exchange there had
fallen. As Hope had predicted, Farmbacher made little headway in Russia,
for besides being unfamiliar with commercial practices there he was un-
duly restricted by the instructions issued from Paris. 2
  Another major obstacle was the virtual absence of exchange facilities
between St. Petersburg and Paris, so that Farmbacher's payments had to be
routed via Hamburg or Amsterdam. Thus it is not surprising that the draft
on Recamier, which was given to the merchant Jos. Morison of Riga, was
presented to Hope & Co. 3
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

While Hope & Co. were regarded as suitable intermediaries in the normal
pattern of financial traffic, some extraordinary events in France served to
emphasize their role. These concerned the sale to the United States of
Louisiana by Napoleon. In 1801 Spain, initially under conditions of strict
secrecy, had ceded Louisiana to France. The formal acceptance of the
territory by France became possible only with the Treaty of Amiens, but
in the United States the revelation of the Franco-Spanish treaty produced
such unrest that President Jefferson was moved to send an envoy to Paris
to negotiate for the transfer of a part of Louisiana to the United States.
But before the envoy reached his destination, Napoleon, who regarded a
resumption of the war against England as inevitable, decided to sell the
whole of the territory on the grounds that it could not be defended. On
30th April 1803 he signed a treaty with the United States providing for
the sale to the latter of Louisiana at a price of 15 million dollars. The
terms provided for the deduction of 3* million dollars representing pre-
vious American claims against France. With the signing of the Franco-
American treaty, the expeditionary force created for Louisiana and com-
manded by General Victor, which was standing by for embarkation at
Hellevoetsluis, was disbanded. 1
  As the United States was not in a position to effect immediate settlement,
it was decided to pay France in 6 % bonds on which interest would be
payable in London and Amsterdam. This solution was proposed by
Alexander Baring, who had been staying in Paris since Christmas 1802
and whose business and family ties (his father-in-law was the American
millionaire, Bingham) linked him closely with America's finances. During
the negotiations Baring had acted as financial adviser to Jefferson's repre-
sentative, and thus it is not surprising that on 3rd May 1803-four days
after the signing of the Franco-American agreement- he, as a representa-
tive of his own company and also of Hope & Co., entered into an agree-
ment with the French Minister of Finance, Barbe Marbois, which resulted
in the two houses acquiring the l I t million doIIarsworth of 6 % American
bonds for the sum of 52 million francs. It was agreed that when con-
firmation reached Paris that one-third of the 6 % bonds had been handed
to a representative of the two houses in America, drafts totalling 171- million
francs would be placed at the disposal of the French government; 6
miIlion francsworth of these would become due in the first month and
thereafter 2 million francsworth monthly. When this portion had been
paid to the French government, a similar tranche would follow at the rate
of 2 million francs per month. As each third of the drafts was placed at
the government's disposal, Baring and Hope would receive the following

                                     188
                                 To ull to \,"h m thac prt:scn               \,)\All come, G IIET I ~C;:

                         1 CERTIFr, ThaI ~ ,.,,."'~ JI'i. i.: '/ ,;,. ,'u~ -IJ"I~,,.t;... 4~

                -(IA. 4/ ....,K*" ,.Ctt'. .. /lluJ/I/~J, r"lri;;.~ "(111 (1,1 ",ul/.;~:"/':7
                ~ rl("~'I#IfJ . .. "f., V'(,. A. ~ ~£,. Ou o,u •. I,,1' ~t""l4 huO;;"~1 "..... ""
                fu"".,,~ -,~·I{('1.4,..· f· J                         ,&,./1'... ", ,.. It; /l,n/"'"        "f'~".""~
                -1.#,11- ~/f'"
                                   //,.ft              "f/Iu //":Ii 'J! ~r· (/"':'1
                                                       ,..:..
                                  rTu. ~,,~.4J4..~.U~"- &'                   ,.
                                                                                   ~#'" /tfH'/"-~
                                                                                            '" .
                       u                       1'£       l ID   /!.: /L,..4:JhiO"J"",tf,.. r .. '~
                " tt- 1lu . ... J,.,1 ~ • . ,J           'lQIJ,   u       4'IL ....   ..

                      l ib #~..,/! .fl,.f!f'//.',;- (I .. " , . . . . . . : , !Jt"":,,,n- 1"- 1'/;.!-1-,J

                           f ., ~ "n ~,... " -
                                       I
                                           I           ..,;/l Iti 6.:,.~dI f},b AhH,'b~/n.~
                 {l4"
                                .J~t:.
                 6[1f';;     ,oJ •       •                                                                 '-r

                 1(~f.~4tJ·.         I       ,; .   ~ tl·'f<~         ---


                                                                                                                  ,I

                                                                      "
                     In Caith \\hmof, J jLhtCJ.II~-                                                        Sarlla r}
                                                       f'" ,be Drparlnunt of Sr.ut (If tIN UmuJ             lalu of




                                                       SltJ/.f nI) Offiu tl) f.c iI}fi (J btrClfl, 111 tll, City tJ/

                                                       II'",/>;   'OIl. ,bi. !h'I'Of                             d"y of
                                                          .!Jtt'_h .. _           A. D. 1801'. ,:o,d i"
                                                       ,be '0',.,... t r" ,I:;i:-          yr", of /h.
                                                        InJrpmJ ncr of Il-, laul S/O/(l•


                                                                                                 ." -




Certificate issued by James Madison, State Secretary, relating to the text of the Act of
                      Congress which approved the Louisiana loan
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 one-third of the American bonds. The payment would thus occupy two
years from the date of arrival in Paris of news of the transfer of the initial
batch of bonds. 1
  Ratification of the agreement by the First Consul did not materialize
until 22nd May, and it was not until 30th July that Alexander Baring was
able officially to hand over the drafts for 52 million francs to the American
envoy who, however, was instructed not to release the initial one-third
until Alexander Baring had reached America and taken possession of a
corresponding portion of the bonds.
  But the war against England had meanwhile recommenced, and Napo-
leon was in dire need of funds. It so happened that President Jefferson
had succeeded in persuading Congress to vote a sum of 2 million
dollars in order to provide his negotiator in Paris with at least a degree of
financial backing. With this security behind them, the Americans in Paris
offered to guarantee an advance of 10 million francs, which was to be
furnished by Baring and Hope. After all, it was conceivable that the long
delay might have caused Napoleon to change his mind, in which case all
their work would have been in vain. 2 On 30th July 1803, the day upon
which the American envoy accepted the drafts from Baring and Hope,
Alexander Baring put his signature to an agreement with the French
Minister of Finance, under which the latter would receive 2 million
francs in the form of drafts on the house of Willings & Francis of Phila-
delphia. It is probable that the money was used for the French expedi-
tionary force on the island of Haiti, which at that very moment was in an
extremely precarious position. 3 Hope & Co. had earlier made efforts to
obtain the balance of 8 million francs, required for French purchases in
Russia, in Amsterdam, but the Company had failed to reach agreement
with the French government on the rate of exchange, and accordingly this
method of payment was abandoned. 4

Following the signing of the contract between Barbe Marbois and
Alexander Baring on 3rd May 1803, Hope & Co. approached Vasilyev in
St. Petersburg with a proposal that funds be made available in Amsterdam
for French purchases in Russia, but that such purchases should in fact be
paid for by the Russian government, which could thus create a credit
balance in Amsterdam and thus avoid the necessity for remitting funds-a
factor of importance in relation to the highly unstable position of the
rouble. Vasilyev reacted by sending Voute's old enemy, Councillor of
State Wulff, 'Controleur des Banquiers de la Cour,' to Amsterdam to look
further into the plan, but owing to the breakdown of the negotiations
                                     190
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

between Hope and the French government nothing came of it-probably
to the great relief of Vasilyev, who in his discussions with others had
earlier revealed his opposition to the whole project. 1
 Bergien, the St.Petersburg merchant, who had got wind of the proposed
arrangement and had seen in it an opportunity to advance his own in-
terests at the Russian Court, approached Voute, and later Hope, pre-
senting himself as the indispensable broker who could manipulate his
many important connexions in such a manner as to ensure that Hope's
proposals were not rejected out of hand. He reasoned that Hope could
expect nothing from Vasilyev, for he was opposed to any suggestions from
them. Knowing that Bergien was a sworn adversary of Rall (as was
revealed in the previous chapter) and that he did indeed have connexions
at the Court, the Company, partly out of consideration for Robert Voute,
opened a credit of cf 50,000 in Bergien's name and persuaded Baring to
do likewise. FollowingVasilyev's dismissal in 1800, Bergien had assumed
responsibility for remittances on behalf of a number of government bodies
and it was in Hope's interest to assist him in this matter. Bergien, however,
did not use the credit for transactions of this sort, but for speculation in
foreign exchange, with the result that he exceeded the limit, and when
called upon to repay the excess he did so with drafts on Baring.2 However
useful Bergien may have been, such conduct was inadmissible, and both
Voute and the Company made it plain to him that the credit afforded was
for the purpose of remitting funds from the Russian government: it did
not constitute an account for speculative purposes, nor would a constant
deficit of cf 50,000 be tolerated. In the uncertain political situation, they
added, Bergien should exercise caution in his transactions. In addition,
Voute informed him that his reputation was at stake, 'in adopting such
a cavalier attitude to the essential aspect of your position as a banker,
namely the credit which is accorded to you.' 3
 That Bergien, in spite of his tendency to speculate with other people's
money, could be of value emerged at the end of 1803, when he reported
to the Company that he had been approached by several Russian ministers
regarding the prospects of obtaining a new loan or broaching the reserve
of 12 million guilders. 4 This news was anything but welcome to the
Company, which had counted on a repayment of principal against the old
loan, but certainly not on a request for a new one. Wulff's visit to the
Republic had given rise to a host of vague rumours, and the public had
got it into its head that his presence was a prelude to a further repayment
of principal in the following January. Indeed, the sum of 6 million
guilders had been mentioned, and this had caused the price to soar to 971;

                                    19 1
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

even when the repayment failed to materialize, the demand for bonds
continued. Adding to the number available by placing the reserve bonds
on the market would certainly cause the price to fall. In a letter to Bergien,
Hope & Co. made it clear that the Russian government need not count
upon a fresh loan, for with the law passed on 1st June 1802 the Staats-
bewind had firmly closed the door on the floating of foreign loans in the
Republic.!

This absolute rejection of Bergien's overtures will not have been entirely
dissociated from Hope's anxieties concerning the Louisiana loan. Owing
to difficulties and delays in America, the confirmatory report did not
reach Paris until late in March 1804. Despite the advance of 10 million
francs which Hope and Baring had furnished, Napoleon was still in dire
straits. Indeed, such was his need of money that on 21st April 1804 Barbe
Marbois put his signature to an agreement which provided for Hope &
Co. to receive the remaining two-thirds of the American bonds imme-
diately in return for a substantial acceleration of the instalments. Labou-
cbere signed on behalf of the Company. For anticipating the payments,
Hope and Baring were granted a discount amounting to 1,675,000 francs.
Among the methods of payment agreed was the establishment by Hope &
Co. of a credit of 12 million francs, divided into 8 bonds of It million
each, the first of which would mature on 1st May 1804 and the re-
mainder at monthly intervals until the end of the year; the sums which
thus became available could be drawn on, up to the monthly limit, by
German and Russian merchants holding permits issued by the French
Admiralty. 2
  Hope & Co. were no strangers to the Admiralty at that time. The pay-
master of the expeditionary force which had been destined for Louisiana
had availed himself of their services for a number of minor indents, and
when the expedition was abandoned the cash balance was returned to the
Payeurs de fa Marine in Dunkirk via the Company.3 Shortly before the
credit for the 'traites du Nord' was made available, the Minister for the
Navy, Decres, had instructed Hope to charter ten neutral vessels and to
place these at the disposal of Morison in Riga for the conveyance of masts
to the Emden merchant Philippus Julius Abegg. 4 Six days later, on 16th
 March 1804, the minister cancelled the instruction, but with the avail-
 ability of 12 million francs in Amsterdam he contacted the Company
fourteen days later.
  By the end of March, both Barbe Marbois and Decres had furnished
 Hope with the names of the authorized merchants and the limits to which

                                     192
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 they were permitted to draw on the credit.! Labouchere applied to the
 French envoy in the Republic for a passport for France, but as this was
 not required until 7th April it must be assumed that the negotiations
leading up to the agreement, which was to be signed on 21St April, were
conducted by him in writing from the Republic. Of the 12 million
francs which Hope & Co. were to make available during the remainder of
 the year, only 9 million had provisionally been allocated. Half this sum
was earmarked for four (later three) merchants in Riga, including Mori-
son; he was to receive just over 2t million. A number of merchants in
St.Petersburg, who were still to be appointed by the French consul gen-
eral, De Lesseps, would together be granted credits totalling 1,800,000
francs; a house in Hamburg was to be allocated 800,000 francs; a house in
Koningsberg 500,000 francs; and three (later two) merchants in Emden
were authorized to draw up to 1,400,000 francs. 2
  The sources and merchants from and through which the shipbuilding
materials were to be supplied were clearly chosen with care. In Konings-
berg and St.Petersburg, only hemp was purchased, while in Riga two
houses, Helmund & Son and J.Morison, were charged with the pur-
chasing of timber. Another Riga merchant, Justus Blanckenhagen, con-
centrated on hemp, and later one-third of the credit originally earmarked
for the St.Petersburg houses jointly was transferred to him. The records
do not reveal the reason for this change, but it may be assumed that the
prices and the stocks available in Riga favoured its selection as the point
of supply. The credits granted to the two houses in Emden, Thomas van
Cammenga and Claas Tholen, were to cover the costs of handling, neu-
tralizing and re-shipping timber and, to a far lesser extent, hemp from
Riga. All shipments from the Baltic to Emden were made in East Frisian
vessels flying the Prussian flag. Some cargoes were taken direct from Riga
to French ports such as Morlaix, Bordeaux, Nantes and, in isolated
instances, Marseilles, and these were carried in Russian or Swedish ships. 3
  The hemp obtained in St.Petersburg was in all cases shipped direct to a
French port, Bordeaux and Nantes being the principal destinations. All
such cargoes were carried in Russian vessels. 4 It was not long before the
credit of 800,000 francs earmarked for Hamburg was allocated to Peh-
moller & Droop, who were requested to supply copper. 5
  The costs and commissions relating to the goods shipped varied greatly,
both in terms of commodity and source. The costs of handling and ship-
ping timber were particularly high, dues and other charges averaging 70 %
of the value of the cargo. 6 The figure for hemp was much lower, probably
because the transport, storage, loading and unloading charges were con-

                                    193
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

siderably less than those for timber. The St.Petersburg houses charged a
total of 13 % for 'droits, frais, commission, passage de Sund, etca .' The
commission paid to the houses in Konigsberg and in Russia varied be-
tween 3 %and 4 %.1
  In the case of the hemp and timber shipped to Emden, the costs of
neutralization, sometimes supplemented by transshipment expenses, were
added to those already mentioned. Van Cammenga's and Tholen's in-
voices for charges and commission on hemp, timber and copper
valued at just over 1 t million guilders and shipped to Emden totalled cf
252,264.3.8, or 16 % of the invoice value of the goods. This implies, for
example, that timber purchased in Riga almost doubled in price by the
time it left the harbour of Emden.
  When, in August 1804, news of the blockading of the Channel ports and
the arrest by the British of a number of vessels engaged in these operations
was received, Decres gave instructions that future timber shipments were
to be consigned to Ryberg & Co. in Copenhagen. This house would
undertake the unloading of the ships and would pay the freight and
unloading charges. 2 Ryberg's charges on ten cargoes of timber shipped to
them by Morison amounted to 34% of the invoice value-more than twice
the figure charged in Emden. Hope & Co. eventually received t % com-
mission on all payments which they effected. 3
  In such uncertain times, the insurance of vessels and their cargoes was
difficult. Decres had initially stipulated premiums of 2 % for marine risks
and 4t-5 % for all-risk cover, but Hope & Co. soon disillusioned him:
insurers in Amsterdam were already demanding 5-7 % for marine risks,
and all-risk cover could not be obtained for less than 8-10%.4 Upon
receiving this information, the minister gave the Company a free hand in
the matter on condition that the premium paid covered the voyage to
a French port. By the time the letter reached Hope, however, the situation
on the Amsterdam insurance market had changed; the report of the
arrest by the British of three ships operating for BIanckenhagen and
Morison, coming on top of other losses, had made it impossible to obtain
insurance against war risks there. 5 In addition, the underwriters were
plainly averse to offering cover on damage; the cause lay in the fact that
a number of merchant houses who had indulged in speculation, and lost,
had resorted to deliberately allowing cargoes to be damaged in order to
be able to shift the consequences of their imprudence on to the shoulders
of the insurers. 6
  With such poor prospects in Amsterdam, Hope advised Decres to try
his luck in Hamburg. The underwriters there proved to be more flexible

                                   194
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

in the matter of marine risk cover to French ports, but all-risk insurance
 on cargoes bound for France had been withdrawn at the beginning of
August, and even Decres's offer of a 10% premium-and later one of
 15 %-did not tempt the insurers. 1
  In response to an allegation by Decres that Hogguer & Co. in Amster-
dam were offering all-risk insurance on shipments to French ports at 6!-
7 %, Hope & Co. replied that Hogguer dealt with Swedish vessels, and
that Swedish captains inspired more confidence than their Russian coun-
terparts, with whom the Company was principally concerned. The
Swedish captains, like the Prussians, were renowned for their skill, knew
every inch of the North Sea, the Baltic and the Channel and, moreover,
sailed in solidly built ships. The Russian merchantmen were inferior,
being built of deal, and easily sustained damage to their cargo-a fact
which in the case of hemp, with its susceptibility to moisture, could result
in heavy claims upon the insurers.2 Apart from this, the premiums in-
creased as the season advanced, marine risk cover rising from 6 % in
August to 7-8 % in September and October. 3
  The formalities which the French authorities sought to impose on the
commercial transactions constituted an obstacle to the whole operation.
According to Decres's original instructions, the sums corresponding to
the invoices were to be drawn only after the loading of the goods. The
merchants in the Baltic were required to furnish Hope & Co. with a
resume of the invoice details and a certificate showing the rate of ex-
change, both bearing the seal of the local French consul or agent. Five
days after these documents had been forwarded, the merchant was per-
mitted to draw on Hope & Co., the periods being 70 days for St.Peters-
burg, 65 days for Riga and 60 days for Konigsberg, while those for Ham-
burg and Emden were governed by local custom. Hope was forbidden to
disclose to the merchants the sum of the credits earmarked for them.
  Decres had initially desired that Hope should verify the invoices and,
before accepting drafts, satisfy themselves that the drawer had fulfilled his
commitments; but the Company, with the support of Barbe Marbois,
succeeded in talking Decres out of this. Hope also advised against the
stipulation that the documents which were to accompany the drafts
should be stamped or initialIed by the French consul in Amsterdam, for
this would attract undesirable attention. The Company would consent to
no more than the initialling by the consul of the letter of advice, which
procedure, it was stressed, would have to be completed rapidly, for in
Amsterdam no more than twenty-four hours was ever allowed for the
acceptance orprotestation ofdrafts. 4 Furthermore, Hope insisted on the un-

                                    195
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

conditional freedom to accept any draft accompanied by such a document.
  In Russia, too, commercial practices proved stronger than Napoleonic
regulations. The merchants of St.Petersburg were accustomed to drawing
immediately after the despatch of the invoice, and nothing would satisfy
them but that De Lesseps should waive the five-day waiting period. 1
  From Hope's point of view, a very disagreeable note was introduced by a
request from Van Cammenga of Emden that the Company should fur-
nish ante-dated, false correspondence for the purpose of securing the
release of a number of vessels which had fallen into British hands. Labou-
chere had made it clear to Decres and his staff in March 1804 that the
Company was only willing to allow drafts to be drawn on them, but would
have no part in the underlying transactions. 2
  When Decres began to press the matter, Hope, gambling on the rivalry
between two ministers and their departments, enlisted the aid of Barbe
Marbois. To the Minister for the Navy, the Company again emphasized
that it was acting as banker to the French Treasury, by whom it was re-
quired to accept instructions emanating from the Admiralty concerning
the funds which it held on behalf of the Treasury, but that its obligations
did not go beyond this. From Barbe Marbois's department, Labouchere
learned that the minister was fully in agreement with Hope's standpoint,
but that he could not admit this publicy, in order not to contradict his
colleague. 3 The matter was finally raised in the ministerial council, where
Napoleon ruled in favour of the Company. According to Roger, the di-
rector of the Droits Reunis and a good friend of Labouchere, the emperor
said: 'Messrs. Hope, who are accustomed to handling transactions of 80
to 100 million, will not furnish these items for 40 million.' This flattering
remark concerning the Company was said to have brought the debate to
anend. 4
  In a review of the matter, Hope & Co. pointed out to Decres that it did
not concern a mere formality, but tampering with existing correspondence
and the issuing of false statements-actions which would debase the Com-
pany in its own eyes and those of others. 'In the profession of merchant,
loyalty and strict rectitude are the sole qualifications for earning the
 respect of the public; it is upon these qualities that we are entitled to the
 confidence we are honoured with. Only on this basis can it delight us and
 do we strive for it, beyond all the gains attached to hazardous opera-
 tions.' 5 For the partners, it must have been very gratifying to be able to
 teach a French minister a lesson, safe in the knowledge that they had the
 approval of the highest in the land.
 By the end of 1804, this operation on behalf of the French Treasury was
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

virtually completed. The balance of the 9 million francs was used to
meet late invoices in 1805, and the unbroached 3 million francs, in the
form of drafts issued by the banker Desprez, were transferred to France in
December 1804.1 All in all, the operation was one upon which Hope could
look back with satisfaction: it had, indirectly, facilitated the Russian
remittances by reason of the drafts on Amsterdam, and, despite the differ-
ences of opinion at the end, the Company's prestige in the eyes of the
French government had remained unimpaired. 2
  Now that the credit established with the Company by the Treasury for
this purpose had been liquidated, the question of financing subsequent
expeditions from the Baltic arose. Decres sought Hope's views on private
expeditions to French ports. Hope felt that such a scheme had merit, but
recommended that the financial aspect be entrusted to a Paris merchant,
to whom the government should supply the necessary funds and who
would take over from the Admiralty the task of maintaining contact with
the merchants in the Baltic. The Company considered De BondevilIe,
with whom it had long been associated, a highly suitable intermediary.
 Under such an arrangement, all transactions could be carried on be-
tween individual merchants, as had been the case during the American
War of Independence, when Hope purchased and consigned ships stores
for the French Admiralty and was only required to negotiate with Le
Chevalier Lambert and Dujardin de Ruzc. For its services on that occa-
sion, the Company had received a commission of 2 % on the value of the
invoices, plus the customary commission on insurance, freight charges
and other services. The French government had had a few of the vessels
engaged in that operation neutralized, but had accepted the risks which
this entailed.
 The Company also expressed the opinion that it would be preferable for
the cargoes to be shipped for the account of the Baltic merchants, and
offered to cover the shippers' risks at an annual premium of 12 %, in the
name of and for the account of the Paris house. Hope felt that it would be
better if the merchants were not informed that the French Admiralty was
behind the transactions, and if they were spared the necessity to furnish
certificates concerning the rate of exchange. Too many formalities and
excessive secrecy were repugnant to the merchant fraternity. Even if
Decres should decide to place orders direct with the Baltic merchants,
Hope would still prefer to have only one house in Paris with which to
correspond; this would in future prevent Decres's time being taken up
with petty issues raised by the merchants. 3
With this elegant ploy, the Company attempted to make it clear that, as

                                   197
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

a mercantile house, it was not anxious to have direct dealings with a
French government department. The reference to Hope's role as a sup-
plier to France during the American War of Independence is noteworthy,
for it reveals that even then Henry Hope, a convinced supporter of the
House of Orange, separated politics from business. But little came of
further large-scale deliveries to the French fleet. In October 1805 that
fleet was destroyed by Nelson at Trafalgar, and with its defeat its role as
an instrument of power came to an end. Hope & Co. continued to be
concerned in the financing of French naval purchases after Trafalgar, but
the sums involved were small. Between 1805 and 18II, a six-year period,
the entries 'pour Ie Service de la Marine' totalled cf 1,672,288.15.8, an
average ofless than 280,000 guilders a year. 1

The keen demand abroad for Russian goods, among other factors, had
resulted in the prompt payment of interest on the Russian bonds at the
end of 1804. While the czar continued to be neutral in the matter of the
war between France and England, this favourable situation might be ex-
pected to continue; but his neutrality was not to last very long. In the eyes
of Alexander I, Napoleon was a threat to Europe, and his plan to partition
the Turkish Empire conflicted with Russia's interests. Despite the efforts
of the British to get the czar on their side after the Treaty of Amiens, he
remained uncommitted, although his relations with France steadily
deteriorated. In May 1804 the French envoy in St. Petersburg was recal-
led, a development which threw the exchange rates into a state of confu-
sion. Bergien wrote to Hope that: 'It was another striking example of the
extent to which political events imperiously control and influence business.' 2
In the autumn of 1804 the czar signed a treaty with Austria, and in April
of the following year he allied himself with England. When, in August
1805, Austria joined the Anglo-Russian alliance, war became inevitable.
 The war, when it came, went extremely well from Napoleon's point of
view. Early in December 1805 he succeeded in defeating the Austrian and
Russian imperial armies at Austerlitz, whereupon Austria sued for peace.
Alexander, however, returned to eastern Europe to continue the struggle
there. For Prussia, which had still not made up her mind whether or not
to join in on the side of Austria and Russia, Austerlitz was a sign to enter
into an alliance with Napoleon. Two months later, under French pressure,
she closed her ports to English ships. When the Prussian decision was
communicated to the British government early in 1806, it retaliated by
blockading the entrances to the Eems, the Weser, the Elbe and the Trave,
and placed an embargo on Prussian vessels. 3 Shortly afterwards England
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 declared war on Prussia. This situation, however, did not by any means
 imply that Prussia was now firmly in the French camp: faced with the
 growth of France's power after her defeat of Austria at Austerlitz, Prussia
 ultimately decided to challenge Napoleon. But in a lightning campaign
 the Prussian armies were defeated at Jena and Auerstiidt, and shortly
 afterwards, in November 1806, Napoleon proclaimed in Berlin the
 Continental System, which prohibited all trade with Britain or her colo-
nies. At about the same time, French troops occupied Hamburg, Bremen
 and Lubeck. 1
  All these disruptions left their mark on France's trade, and that of her
allies, with Russia, and resulted in a growing scarcity of Russian goods. 2
Diminishing stocks and rising prices are a prescription for speculation,
and Hope & Co. were not the type to let such an opportunity pass. The
partners envisaged particularly high profits on potash, and accordingly a
number of orders for this commodity were placed. Bergien was among
the recipients, and he was instructed to purchase 4,000 po ods at a price
not exceeding 46 roubles per pood. When he reported that the price had
risen sharply, he was given discretion, and proceeded to purchase a
quantity at 54 roubles per pood. But when it came to shipping the potash,
fresh problems arose. On 27th April 1806 Bergien wrote to say that the
news of the blockade of the Elbe, Weser and Trave had reached St. Peters-
burg, and that he was in a quandary regarding the choice of flag for the
shipment. A month later he reported that the French government had
declared all vessels carrying cargoes of Russian origin which might be
captured in open waters as prizes of war. In view of this, he wondered
whether it might not be wiser to resell the potash in St.Petersburg; but
finally he decided to consign it to a house in Lubeck, with instructions to
ship it to Hope in a Danish vessel via the Holstein Canal. 3
  Russia also suffered as a result of the stagnation of trade with western
Europe. In April 1806 Bergien was already complaining of the inactivity
on the commodity markets and the decline in rates of exchange, but by
November he reported that things had got far worse. The commodity
markets were dead, and in the complete absence of business the value of
the rouble was steadily falling-and was in any case purely nominal. 4 The
occupation of Hamburg by French troops will certainly have had some-
thing to do with the difficulties in that November. After all, Hamburg was
an important centre for the financial aspects of Russia's foreign trade.
Under normal circumstances, Britain had a deficit in her trade with Rus-
sia, while the German territories had a trading surplus with Russia but a
deficit with England, so that imbalances in the demand for drafts in these

                                    199
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

three areas were corrected at the central point, Hamburg. 1 The proclama-
tion of the Continental System and the occupation of Hamburg, however,
had eliminated this balancing facility, and Russia was to feel the conse-
quences.
  Not surprisingly, there was a degree of pessimism in Amsterdam con-
cerning the question whether the Russian remittances for the interest
instalment due on 1st January 1807 would arrive and, if so, whether they
would be on time. Fortunately, Matthiessen & Sillem reported in mid-
December that RaIl and Rogovikov had instructed them to remit the
appropriate sum to Hope & Co. Owing to the war situation in eastern
Europe, the Russian remittances had had to be routed via Sweden. Mat-
thiessen & Sillem had transferred the funds received from Russia to a
place of safety even before the French occupation, but it proved possible
to remit to Amsterdam in the normal manner.2 Hope & Co. were thus
enabled to pay the interest on the due date, with consequent benefit to the
price of the Russian bonds. Despite the war with Russia, the price had
held up excellently, thanks to the prompt payment of interest, and during
1805 and 1806 the six-monthly average had not fallen below 95. 3
  The Russian armies had no more success in 1807 than in the preceding
years. While winter held the country in its grip, the battle continued to
sway back and forth, but in June Napoleon secured a decisive victory at
Friedland. The czar and the King of Prussia sought peace, and this Napo-
leon gladly granted in order to avoid a risky campaign deep in Russia.
During a personal meeting, Napoleon so captivated Alexander that the
Peace of Tilsit, signed on 7th July 1807, in fact embodied a Franco-Rus-
sian alliance. In the treaty, the czar undertook to declare war on England
if that country had not become a party to the general peace by 1st Decem-
ber 1807, and also, in company with France, to force the governments of
Denmark, Sweden, Austria and Portugal to adopt the Continental
System. Denmark no longer required forcing, for the British government,
upon receiving news of the Peace of Tilsit, had anticipated the consequen-
tial decisions and had occupied the island of Seeland. After a preliminary
bombardment, Copenhagen was captured and the Danish fleet was taken
to England intact. Not surprisingly, the Danish government declared war
on England, to be followed soon afterwards by Russia. 4
  It is almost superfluous to say that this upset in the political relation-
ships on the continent of Europe had serious consequences for foreign
trade, and thus for the rates of exchange in Russia. England now ceased
to be the principal buyer of ships supplies, and although this trade link
was later to be restored, under foreign flags, a decline was unavoidable. In

                                   200
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

fact, exports to England continued at the previous level throughout the
season of 1807 because British traders, anticipating the severance of rela-
tions with Russia following the Peace of Tilsit, laid in the largest possible
stocks of Russian goods.!
  With Russia's trade thus proceeding on relatively favourable lines, the
departure in May 1807 of the formidable Councillor of State Wulff for
Copenhagen, from whence he attempted to mobilize funds in western
Europe for the benefit of the Russian government,2 did not augur well. In
mid-June he approached Hope & Co. regarding the possibility of a loan
on the security of bonds. Wulff had been empowered by Vasilyev to nego-
tiate with the repurchased bonds and the reserve of 12 million guilders
in order to minimize remittances from Russia at the low rates of exchange
which then obtained. 3 The Company replied that it favoured selling the
repurchased bonds, adding that the price had risen to 90-92 following the
Peace of Tilsit, compared with 85 or thereabouts during the first half of
1807. A loan on the security of bonds entailed certain risks, because it
would imply that the Russian government was bound to fixed repayment
periods, and with the exchange rate falling this could result in major
losses. 4 If Wulff was in urgent need of money, Hope was prepared to
advance 2-300,000 guilders on the security of the bonds which the Com-
pany held; this would be repayable at a mean annual rate of exchange.
 Wulff ultimately chose a compromise between his own plan and Hope's
proposals. The Company received instructions to send 2,060 repurchased
bonds to Israel Dehn & Co. in Altona, who would then remit to Amster-
dam. De Smeth and Hope were each instructed to sell one thousand
bonds, but the order to De Smeth was pointedly issued first with the aim
of emphasizing Vasilyev's displeasure with Hope. 5 In fact, the instruction
to De Smeth was pointless, for upon receiving it the house immediately
approached Hope and consented to the whole of the sale being effected
via the Company. Hope & Co., in turn, gave instructions to the broker
Willem Borski, with whom it was agreed that the bonds should be sold
only when the price was above 90. A condition for this was that they
should be released gradually and without 'empressement.'6
 The death of Vasilyev on 15th August 1807 may have freed Hope of a
bitter enemy in Russian government circles, but as his successor, Fedor
Golubtsov, had little expert knowledge and so relied heavily on Wulff and
RaIl for advice, little really changed from the Company's point of view.
Golubtsov and Count Rumyantsev, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade, together constituted the Committee for Foreign Loans, and in this
capacity Golubtsov instructed De Smeth and Hope to sell not 1,000, but

                                    201
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

2,000 bonds each. 1 At about the time when this amendment was issued,
Hope & Co. reported to Wulff that all of the one thousand bonds held
by De Smeth, and about half of the thousand which they had, had been
sold at prices ranging from 92 to 92t. With the proceeds of these sales,
plus the remittances from Israel Dehn and others from Rail to De Smeth,
Hope now had sufficient funds to cover the interest due on 1st January
1808, and under these circumstances the Company enquired whether the
government wished for more bonds to be sold.
 Early in October 1807 Bergien had put out a feeler to Hope regarding a
new loan of 10-12,000,000 guilders with a life of 10 years. In a separate
letter he had urged a quick decision. 2 According to Bergien, the Russian
government was prepared to take the necessary steps to obtain the ap-
proval of King Louis for such a loan. Hope passed Bergien's letter to
Robert Voute, who had accepted the office of Director General of the
Treasury under King Louis and could therefore greatly influence the
sanctioning of new loans in Holland. Voute considered Bergien's proposal
to be inopportune on the grounds that there was already a heavy demand
on the capital market in Holland as a result of a Dutch state loan of 40
million guilders, a Spanish loan of 30 million and a loan to the Kingdom
of Naples of 3 million. 3 Hope & Co., who were involved in these loans,
had assumed that Bergien was unofficially angling for a loan, and on
receiving Voute's views they fobbed Bergien off with the statement that
the Russian Treasury employed far simpler means to obtain funds for
interest payments. 4 Only later did the Company discover that Bergien
had acted with some authority-and that he had also raised the subject of
a loan with Bethmann in Frankfurt.
  In his overtures, Bergien had hinted that his government would not be
unsympathetic to a request for a quantity of Russian goods as security for
part of the loan. This suggestion offered interesting possibilities, for with
the value of the rouble at a low level (in November 1807 the rate in Am-
sterdam had fallen below 20 stuivers), large quantities of goods could be
bought cheaply in St.Petersburg; ifthf. rate subsequently recovered, these
could be sold and the proceeds-including a substantial profit-transferred
to Holland.
  Another opportunity for profiting from the exchange situation lay in
lodging funds in Russia with the aim of withdrawing them when the rate
improved. Matthiessen & Sillem, who broached this to Hope, felt that no
risk would be involved if the monies were deposited with the Assignat
Bank, but Hope argued that any operation of this nature would require a
trusted associate, and that they knew of no one to fill the role. The Com-

                                    202
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

pany had ended its personal connexion with Rall many years earlier and
had no reason to think well of his business principles. It had not forgotten
the example of Sutherland, Browne and Whishaw-whom it had instructed
to deposit money in the Assignat Bank, but who had failed to do so-and
was only willing to participate if Matthiessen & Sillem accepted the risk
inherent in employing their agent in Russia, for which they would receive
a commission of t %or I %.1
  The name of Bergien, as a trusted agent, does not appear anywhere in
this letter. The indiscreet manner in which he exceeded the credit afforded
to him by Hope has already been described; to make things worse,
however, he offered the Company bank debentures, as a collateral for
fresh credits, at an exchange rate of 25 stuivers per rouble while Hope
could obtain them for 18 stuivers by having them purchased in Russia and
later allowing the buyers to draw on Amsterdam. Once again it was im-
pressed upon Bergien that a collateral, be it money, goods, banknotes or
in another form, was required whenever he drew on others. As Hope &
Co. were unwilling to allow Bergien to make a remittance at the low rate
of exchange then ruling, they agreed to wait until the following Spring
on condition that Bergien continued to hold Russian goods to a value
commensurate with the security required. There were at that moment
good opportunities for purchases and contracts in that sector. 2
 The lack of consistency in the policies pursued by the new Minister of
Finance was shown by a letter from the St.Petersburg merchant J.A.Kreh-
mer, of Krehmer Lang & Co., who, almost at the same time as Bergien
but entirely on his own initiative, put forward a proposal for a Russian
loan-this time, however, one of between 30 and 50 million guilders.
Hope & Co. promptly replied that a loan of this size was out of the
question since it would interfere with the placing of the bonds of the
current loan. The Company suggested that the government would do
better to take another look at the proposals which they had put forward
in 1803 concerning the making available of goods in Russia by the govern-
ment as security for the furnishing of guilders in Amsterdam by Hope. 3
In an effort to clarify this highly unusual situation, Hope sent a copy of
Krehmer's letter to Bergien. The confusion reached its climax when, on
the last day of 1807 according to the Russian calendar, Rumyantsev and
Golubtsov sent two letters to Hope, one of which requested a loan of at
least 30 million guilders, while the other contained an instruction to
place the 12 million guildersworth of reserve bonds on the market! 4
Hope's reply was tactical, but unambiguous. No reference was made to
the proposed loan, but the letter did refer to the encashment of the

                                    203
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

repurchased bonds and to the reserve, which, as a result of the raising of
Hope's commission in 1798, no longer totalled cf 12,000,000, but
cf 11,525,000. It was made plain to both members of the Committee that
it was also in the interest of the Court that a start should be made with
the sale of the repurchased bonds, since this would not involve the pay-
ment of a further 6t % commission, as was the case with the reserve. The
entire operation, the letter continued, should be entrusted to a single
house, as had been done with the sale of the repurchased bonds. The 2,060
bonds held as security by Israel Dehn & Co. should therefore be brought
back to Amsterdam; the money required for their release could be ob-
tained by Hope and De Smeth from the sale of the balance of the bonds.
Prior to the commencement of the sale, the two houses had jointly held
9,227 repurchased bonds. Of these, 3,000 had been sold by the beginning
of February 1808, so that the balance and the reserve together represented
a nominal value of nearly 18 million guilders. 1
  Hope & Co. offered to try to persuade the entrepreneurs to take over the
bonds in three consecutive transactions, each involving 6 million guilders,
the terms and conditions of which could be adapted to meet the rapidly
changing situation. The partners were confident that the first of the
transactions could be accomplished at a transfer price of 90 %, payment
being made in instalments between early February 1808 and 1st January
1809, leaving the entrepreneurs a douceur of 2-2-!- % in the shape of inter-
est. If the tranches could be disposed of to the entrepreneurs in rapid
succession, it should be feasible to sell all 18 million guildersworth
of bonds to investors during the course of the year. Hope and De Smeth
would require -!- % commission plus a i % brokerage fee on the value of
the repurchased bonds; Hope would also be entitled to the deferred
commission of 6-!- % on the reserve. The Company proceeded to say that
the Russian Court would naturally appreciate how advantageous such an
arrangement would be: at a time when other powers, in spite of offering
interest rates of 8 % and even 10 % on par value, were unsuccessful in
their attempts to obtain loans on the market, Russia would succeed for
less than 6 % of the par value. The opportunity lay solely in the fact that
the public at large would not discover that, in fact, a new loan was being
floated; but to ensure that it did not, absolute secrecy must be maintained,
even towards those 'who seem to have the best opportunity to interfere
with it.' That this was a reference to RaIl and his associates-and, doubt-
less, to Bergien and Krehmer also-will have been obvious to the ministers.
No one, Hope added, must know of Russia's needs; and if the public
were awed by Russia's resources, this would guarantee success.

                                   204
                          'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 The Committee had little answer to such a proposal, and after some
 mutterings to the effect that a new loan would be preferable, Hope's plan
 was accepted at the end of March 1808, the sole amendment being that the
 price of 90 % should immediately be applied to the whole transaction. It
 was also expressly stipulated that the sale of the repurchased bonds should
 be effected in collaboration with De Smeth. 1
  When the time came to agree terms with the entrepreneurs, however,
 developments on the international political scene did not favour the
 Company. The peace which many had expected to spread through Europe
 as a result of the Tilsit treaty had still not materialized. Napoleon utilized
 the breathing space afforded by the alliance with Russia to carry the
 completion of his dominion a stage farther and to bring more states
 within the Continental System. Portugal was occupied in November 1807
 and was followed a few months later by the Papal State. Meanwhile,
 military preparations for a French conquest of Spain were being made.
In northern Europe, Czar Alexander launched an offensive against Fin-
land in order to force Sweden to adopt the Continental System in ac-
cordance with the provisions of the peace of Tilsit.
  The clash of arms and the 'combinaisons politiques' together made
Dutch investors more cautious, with the result that the price of the Russian
bonds fell, while the rate at which the market could absorb bonds de-
clined noticeably. Whereas they had stood at over 921 in early February
1808, the bonds fell to 91i or less during the first few days of March. By
the end of that month they had fallen to 90, and it required powerful
support by Hope to restore them to 9 It by early April. 2 This recovery
was vital if a contract with the entrepreneurs was to be achieved. At the
end of April the Company was able to report to the ministers that it had
succeeded in negotiating an agreement with Borski, 'Ie principal des
entrepreneurs, au nom de tous.'
  On 26th April 1808, Hope transferred to Borski Russian bonds to a
nominal value of 17 million guilders, at a price of 90 %, plus the
interest thereon since 1st January. The agreement stipulated that the
Russian government should not negotiate any fresh loan abroad before
1st July 1809 without the prior sanction of the entrepreneurs. Should the
Court do so, the entrepreneurs would be entitled to cancel the contract
and to claim compensation of 2 % of the uncompleted portion. Termi-
nation of the contract by the entrepreneurs would render them liable to
pay Hope & Co. 10 % of the uncompleted portion and to forfeit the
privilege of the interest. 3
Observing that Hope had a 6-million guilder share in this operation, it

                                     20 5
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

is strange that the Company adopted a critical and reticent attitude to-
wards the Committee in the matter of Borski's contract. In all probability
it was forced to take part in a transaction, the feasibility of which it
viewed with doubt. After all, the magnitude of the sum and the short
period in which the sale of bonds had to be completed made it a risky
venture, and if circumstances became unfavourable the parties to the
contract might ask to be released from part of their commitments-al-
though in that case they would naturally face a 10 % penalty. However,
the contract not only assured the interest payment due at the end of the
year but also enabled a reserve fund to be created, and this could only be
welcome to the Russian government. 1
  Just how welcome this fund was, emerged from the fact that the Russian
Court called upon it even before it was created. During the war against
France, a Russian naval squadron under the command of Admiral Zen-
yavin had operated successfully against the French bastions on the Dal-
mation coast, and also against the Turkish fleet, from bases on the Ionian
Islands. These islands were ceded to France under the terms of the Peace
of Tilsit, and this meant the ending of the Russian occupation and the
evacuation of the Russian flotilla. Because the Turks had blockaded the
straits, Zenyavin was obliged to sail via the Atlantic Ocean in order to
reach the Baltic. 2 When the flotilla had passed through the Straits of
Gibraltar and into the Atlantic, a severe storm blew up, forcing the vessels
to put into Lisbon. This event, in November 1807, coincided with Na-
poleon's orders to General Junot to occupy Portugal. Faced with this
threat, the Portuguese government entered into an agreement with England
providing for the British navy to convey the members of the Portu-
guese royal family to Brazil. Almost at the same moment came the news
that Russia had declared war on England. The British thereupon block-
aded the Lisbon roads, leaving Zenyavin and his men trapped in the
harbour.3 The Russian government now faced the problem of sending
money to the flotilla for the purchase offood and other necessities. 4
  On arrival in Lisbon, Zenyavin wrote to Hope saying that he proposed to
draw on the Company to meet the costs incurred in maintaining his ships
and their crews. 5 During his stay there he drew in all cf 2,550,000. At the
end of August 1808, Zenyavin and his British counterpart signed a treaty
which provided for the Russian crews to be repatriated at British expense,
in return for which Zenyavin would sail his vessels to Portsmouth, where
they would be left 'in custody' until the end of the hostilities. 6
 With the Russian government facing such an urgent need for funds
abroad, the Committee in St.Petersburg had little option but to approve

                                    206
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Hope's contract with Borski. Nevertheless, it made its approval subject
to the deletion of the clause prohibiting new loans, on the grounds that
such a stipulation was incompatible with the honour of the Russian
Court. 1 Despite Hope's insistence on secrecy regarding the contract with
Borski, events proved that a leakage had occurred. On 1st June 1808
Robert VOllte informed Hope by letter that he had arrived in Amsterdam
to look into the conditions and payment dates relating to the Russian loan
which, it appeared, was to be floated. Despite the fact that VOllte had
enjoyed Hope's confidence, and presumably continued to do so, his
position as Director General of the Treasury made him an outsider as far as
the Russian transaction was concerned; Hope therefore replied in friendly
terms that, according to the latest reports from St. Petersburg, the Russian
Court was not planning to negotiate any new loans, but that if Hope
received any further news on this subject, VOllte would be informed
without delay. The letter made no mention of the encashment of the
reserve, which VOllte himself had earlier urged. 2
 The mood of the market proved to be anything but favourable for the
execution of the contract with Borski, with which a start had meanwhile
been made. Early in June 1808 the demand for bonds fell alarmingly and
the price of the Russian issues dropped to 90-the figure at which they had
been transferred. When, after considerable difficulty, they were eased up
to 91, others took advantage of the situation and sold. During June the
turnover in Russian bonds declined so severely that at the end of the
month the entrepreneurs were extremely reluctant to accept a further 2,000.
 In order to make the fulfilment of the conditions of the contract more
palatable to the entrepreneurs, Hope & Co.-again on their own initiative-
drew up a supplementary agreement on 4th July 1808. The document
implemented the rejection of the clause prohibiting new Russian loans,
but against this it provided that if such a loan should be floated the
entrepreneurs would have the right to demand that the Court purchase the
unsold bonds of the current transaction at the market price. It was also
stipulated that the penalty of 10 % for non-acceptance of the balance of
12 million guilders in bonds would not become payable until the end
of the year, and that this would apply only to the tranche which the
entrepreneurs then refused to accept. 3
 In defence of their unilateral action, Hope & Co. pointed out to the
Committee that further delay would have rendered it too late in the year
to guarantee the payment due on 31st December. If they had not made
some concessions, the entrepreneurs would probably have declined to
accept further bonds. Indeed, if the entrepreneurs had been faced with the

                                    20 7
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

decision at that moment, when the Russian bonds stood at between 86 and
88, they would never have embarked on the transaction. Looking at the
other side, the Company argued, the difficulties encountered in disposing
of the bonds showed very clearly that the government could only raise
funds by placing the reserve on the market, since under the prevailing
circumstances a new loan would be doomed to failure and would merely
destroy the established credit. It had required a great deal of time and
effort to get the entrepreneurs to accept the supplement to the contract
and to dispel the mood of panic which they shared with all on the Stock
Exchange. The fact that, as a result of the measures adopted, funds would
be available for the interest payment at the end of the year was of the
utmost importance for the Russian Court, because the continuing erosion
of exchange rates in St. Petersburg (the rouble had by now fallen to r6
stuivers in Amsterdam) made remittances increasingly undesirable. 1

The exchange position led Hope, in the letter to the Committee, to revert
once again to the proposal which they had made to Wulff in r803, that
guilders should be made available in Amsterdam in exchange for roubles
in St.Petersburg, at the rate ruling on the day. Wulff had not been recep-
tive to the suggestion, but he had died on 30th January r808, and Hope
evidently reasoned that with his passing, and that of Vasilyev, a fresh
opportunity existed. 2 The Company was unwilling to go above the ruling
rate as this would make it more profitable to draw on Hope from st.
Petersburg and then to invest the proceeds of the drafts in Russian prod-
ucts. The Company was thinking in terms of several million guilders,
subscribed by a number of rich investors in Amsterdam, against which
the Russian government would make roubles available in St. Petersburg at
the day rate. By this means, Dutch capital would be invested in Russia,
while that country would be relieved of a quantity of goods, the sale of
which was greatly hampered by the suspension of shipments to England.
  As has already been mentioned, exports of Russian products to England
continued at a high level during the shipping season in r807. However,
during the winter of that year, following Russia's declaration of war on
England, both Bergien and Krehmer complained of low prices and small
turnover, which produced a critical situation on the Russian market. 3
  British shipments to Russian ports were also limited during the early
part of the shipping season of r808. It was in St. Petersburg that the
consequences of the declaration of war on England were most noticeable:
by the end of July, no more than 25 vessels had entered Kronstadt and
only r6 had sailed. In Riga and Archangel the situation was slightly better,

                                    208
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

because official controls were less stringent and neutral vessels were gener-
ally admitted without delay.l Nevertheless, the level of shipments up to
the end of August was far below those of the preceding years. At this
point, the influence of the events in Spain began to be felt. Napoleon had
gradually accomplished the military occupation of Spain, and he followed
this by deposing the reigning monarch and replacing him by his brother,
Joseph Bonaparte. The reaction of the Spaniards to this step was not long
delayed, and Napoleon found himself faced with a popular revolt which
rapidly spread to all parts of the country and occupied increasingly more
of his attention, which was thus diverted from events in the rest of Europe.
  Meanwhile in Russia, the economic problems left Golubtsov little alter-
native to accepting, for the second time, a fait accompli presented by
Hope. He did, however, stipulate that the Company should advance
monies to the government in the event of the proceeds of the bond trans-
action proving inadequate to meet the Court's needs. Golubtsov indicated
that he considered the proposal to furnish guilders in Amsterdam in
exchange for roubles in St.Petersburg to be worthy offurther examination,
but he insisted that matters such as the rate of exchange at which the
guilders made available would be converted into roubles and the manner
in which the money was to be invested in Russian goods would have to be
agreed in advance. In the minister's view, the correct procedure would be
for the Company to report to the Committee when the funds had been
assembled in Amsterdam, the date of posting the letter being taken as the
basis, in conjunction with a fixed transmission time of twenty-one days for
such postal items. The rate of exchange at which the guilders were to be con-
verted would be that ruling on the St. Petersburg Exchange on the first day
of business after the expiry of twenty-one days from the posting date.
Payment would be made via the Treasury in St.Petersburg to a company
or individual named by Hope. The purchase of the goods would have to
be effected by Hope or their representative, since the government as such
never participated in speculative transactions. 2 The guilders furnished by
Hope would not be credited to the Court's ordinary account, but to a
separate one. Unknown to Hope, the minister simultaneously made simi-
lar proposals to Matthiessen & Sillem in Hamburg and Bethmann Broth-
ers in Frankfurt, while at the same time enquiring about the possibility of
a loan. 3 As a matter of fact, Hope had already joined with Matthiessen &
SiIlem, at their invitation, in the speculative purchase of hemp via
BothIingk & Co. in St.Petersburg; conversely, the Hamburg house had
been informed of Hope's proposals to Golubtsov-at first in vague terms
but later, following the minister's positive reaction, in detail.

                                    20 9
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

As presented to Matthiessen & Sillem by Hope, the speculation was
simple and safe. Because the blockades decreed by England and France
had brought trade in Hamburg and Amsterdam practically to a halt, the
affair was attractive as an investment, and Hope & Co. were certain of
finding between 3 and 4 million guilders among their closest busi-
ness friends. The Company proposed to entrust the management to an
intelligent and reliable agent, who would be sent to Russia to conduct the
purchases. The partners favoured Hieronymus Sillem for the post, but
they were aware that he had been away from Hamburg for several months
and that he would probably not be interested in a new and lengthy
sojourn abroad. 1 According to Bothlingk, the winter was the best time
for making purchases, for then the demand from abroad declined. Hope &
Co. were prepared if necessary to advance their partners a half-year's
share at 4 %interest. Secrecy was vital to the success of the operation. 2
  Ultimately the Company's choice of agent fell on Robert Melvil of the
Amsterdam house Melvil & Co. After making the necessary enquiries,
Melvil consented on loth October 1808 to undertake the journey.3 The
partners thereupon briefed him on all the aspects of the operation. After
Hope & Co., the principal participant was Willem Borksi, 'l'agent et Ie
conseil de la plupart de nos capitalistes,' a description which implied that,
as usual, he was acting on behalf of many others. He initially took a
quarter share of the total sum of 4 million guilders, but subsequently
increased this to three-eighths. The correspondence with Borski does not
reveal the names of the others whom he represented. Matthiessen & Sillem
took a one-eighth share, amounting to cf 500,000, and Bethmann a one-
sixteenth share, of cf 250,000. Melvil was given until a month after his
arrival in St. Petersburg to decide whether he wished to participate and,
if so, was given the option of a one-sixteenth or a one-thirty-second
share. The remaining seven-sixteenths, representing cf 1,750,000, was
taken by Hope.
  The partners, Melvil was informed, had considered a similar speculative
transaction after the peace of Tilsit, but the arrival of so many American
and other vessels in the Russian ports had caused prices to rise again. The
Company anticipated that the meeting between Napoleon and Alexander,
which was very soon to take place at Erfurt, would lead to stricter appli-
cation of the Continental System in the Russian ports, producing a buyer's
market in the winter of 1808. Rigorous controls on the trade with
England could scarcely fail to depress the prices of Russian goods.
  Under his contract, Melvil was to be reimbursed for travelling and
lodging expenses, and to receive commissions of 2 % on the value of all

                                    210
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

goods purchased and I % on exchange operations. This implies that the
Company was willing to pass on to him the whole of the commission
which it had requested from the Russian Court.! It was laid down that all
transactions should be effected through local merchants. Melvil was free
to choose these, and it was left to him whether or not he used the houses
with which Hope had connexions. He was given letters of introduction
to known houses, but these contained no reference to the reason for his
presence in Russia or to his relationship to the Company.
  Melvil was also given information concerning Hope's association with
the above-mentioned houses. He was told that, despite the drawbacks of
which we are aware, Bergien could be brought into Melvil's activities,
particularly in view of his connexions with the Court. In the light of the
long feud between Hope and RaIl, Melvil was advised to seek a letter of
introduction from another firm, for example Matthiessen & Sillem. Porter
& Brown, old and trusted friends of Hope, had, like other British houses,
been non-operational since the Russian declaration of war on England,
and their assets had been confiscated. Nevertheless, Brown could be an
extremely valuable source of information, and it might even prove feasible
to involve him in the operation under the name of another house.
  Hope & Co. had also had incidental dealings with other firms in St.
Petersburg, such as J.C.Meyer (the successor to Thomson Bonar & Co.),
Bothlingk & Co., Cramer Smith & Co., Archibald Cramp and Ant.Co-
lombi. In Riga, they had recently corresponded with Jos.Morison, and in
earlier years Cumming Fenton & Co. had rendered good service. In
transactions for third parties-by which the partners meant the French
Admiralty, although it was not necessary for Melvil to know this-the
Company had had dealings with Justus Blanckenhagen & Son and HeI-
mund & Son, but of these Hope considered only Blanckenhagen to be
suitable as an associate.
 Since the termination of the correspondence with Thomson Rowand &
Co., Hope had had no correspondents in Moscow; but Melvil was advised
that if he required anyone there, Brown could make a suitable recommen-
dation.
 As a general rule, Melvil was advised to pay more attention to integrity,
skill and drive than to wealth and 'ostensible importance' in his search
for the right houses. Influence in government circles, however, was also
an advantage, for this would enable matters to proceed much more
smoothly.
 When Melvil received funds from the Treasury, he was to lodge these
with various houses with the aim of putting their goodwill and counsel to

                                   2II
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

the test. He was advised that it would be worthwhile to pay a visit to Riga,
and perhaps also to Archangel, even though the results would probably
be meagre because, according to reports, the volume of trade had ex-
hausted stocks in these towns, especially the latter. He was in principle
free to purchase goods of every nature, provided that they were cheap,
possessed sound storage properties and could be sold at a profit. The aim
of the operation was to resell the goods locally at a profit, even if this took
some time. If, as a result of speculation by others, exchange rates fluctu-
ated widely, Melvil could accept solid drafts on Hamburg, London or
Amsterdam and transmit these to Hope. If he made only occasional
appearances on the market, other houses would not guess the reason for
his presence and would therefore not thwart his plans. Broadly speaking,
the best time to invest in commodities was in the Spring, when the stocks
from the rural areas reached the port towns and prices were at their
lowest.
  As far as the Amsterdam end of the financial transaction was concerned,
the partners felt that it would perhaps be wise not to make more than
three to five hundred thousand guilders available at the outset. If the
exchange rate was highly attractive, this could promptly be increased,
since the total sum was immediately available in Amsterdam. Melvil was
to receive twelve letters from Hope informing him of payments made in
 Amsterdam, but these would be undated and the space for the amount
 would be left blank. If the exchange rate seemed favourable, he could fill
in the blanks at will in accordance with the formula contained in Golub-
 tsov's letter of 2nd September 1808. 1 To meet the possibility of officials of
 the Ministry of Finance abusing their knowledge of Melvil's activities and
 informing other houses, he was instructed to cease operations whenever
 it might be expected that he was busy, and vice versa. It could be dan-
 gerous to complain to the most senior officials about such abuses, but
 it was best left to Melvil to choose his opportunity. Of the goods which
 lent themselves to the operation, hemp and flax headed the list. It was not
 easy to find satisfactory warehouses in which to store them, but Hope was
 counting on assistance from the Russian government in this matter. It was
 of great importance that the stocks should be seen as Russian property in
 all circumstances, including war. It was imperative that the goods be
 insured against fire, and this could best be arranged in Hamburg now that
 cover in England had been rendered impossible by political developments.
 The underwriters in Amsterdam were demanding a premium of 2-2-! %
  on the grounds that the warehouses were timber-built, but the rate in
  Hamburg was sure to be lower.

                                     212
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Because of its wide sales potential, hemp was the prime commodity for
 speculation -and the one whose price was most rapidly influenced by
political changes. Melvil was instructed to watch these changes very care-
fully, since a quick reaction could produce large speculative gains. Ac-
cording to Hope, he could assume that clean hemp purchased for 40
 roubles per pood, the rouble standing at 20 stuivers, could be allowed to
depreciate by 20 %, the sum of lost interest, warehouse rental, insurance
and other charges, over a period of two years and could, in all probability,
then be sold at a profit of 20 %. When this was discussed, the rouble stood
at 16 stuivers and clean hemp was fetching between 47 and 51 roubles per
pood. 1 If Melvil were to buy at that price and resell when the exchange
rate improved, the profit margin of 20 % would be assured. Because he
would be on the spot, Melvil would have the great advantage of being
able to seize every opportunity to resell locally at a profit-a practical
impossibility for other major buyers, such as the Americans and the
British and French governments.
  Flax was a commodity which held little interest for the brokers; in the
Prussian ports, however, it attracted a great deal of attention. 2 Melvil was
advised that in the event of flax which was of lower quality, but better
processed, being offered in other Baltic ports, he could send his drafts on
Amsterdam and Hamburg to the port concerned for the purchase of this.
Such a procedure, however, was worthwhile only if a substantial profit
could be envisaged.
  Sailcloth and raven-duck, a fine grade of sailcloth, both of which were
made from linen, had been bought in large quantities by the Russian
government in order to bolster up the price. As the demand by the Ameri-
cans for these had also increased in the preceding years, Hope & Co. felt
that the price would be too high to justify speculative purchases. But they
suggested to Melvil that he should approach the minister with a proposal
for a major deal involving all or part of the government-held stock. These
materials were very interesting commercially because, not being bulky,
they were easy to store and, in contrast to hemp and flax, did not shrink
or lose their quality during storage.
  As regards tallow, the demand fluctuated continuously and could not be
predicted; moreover, tallow deteriorated in store. It might be worthwhile
purchasing a quantity on contract for delivery in July 1809, but this would
imply speculating on the possibility of selling it locally or despatching it
elsewhere in 1810. Iron prices were extremely low, but it might be worth
buying large quantities of selected grades. The shipping of iron usually
produced difficulties, because the freight charges could only be offset by

                                    21 3
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

employing it as ballast, but against this it could be stockpiled for years
without losing its value. Potash had become an important product in
Holland in the preceding years and, even at the high price which it was
then fetching, it could be sold at a profit. It had, however, the drawback
that it deteriorated rapidly. Linseed, hare pelts and brushes were also
unsuitable as objects of long-term speculation owing to their rapid dete-
rioration, but if they would be purchased at a price which permitted them
to be sent overland to Hamburg or Amsterdam, Melvil could consider
them.
  As France and England were both in the market for masts and hemp, it
would clearly be worth trying to obtain licences for these two countries;
it would be necessary to apply for an equal number so as to ensure that
the same quantity of shipments reached each country. Fortunately, they
had until the following Spring to consider this matter. 1
  Melvil left for Russia on 1st November 1808, taking with him credentials
which he was to present to Golubtsov, Rumyantsev and Count von Stackel-
berg, the Russian envoy to Prussia, who at that moment resided in
Konigsberg and who had been given a certain amount of information
regarding the true purpose of Melvil's journey. As Melvil despatched his
letters in duplicate, one via Matthiessen & Sillem and the other via
Bethmann, both houses were kept simply up to date with developments. 2

We have seen how Golubtsov was obliged by circumstances to accept
Hope's supplementary agreement with the entrepreneurs. However, the
situation on the bond market so deteriorated that the concessions which
he had made became less and less attractive to the hard-pressed entre-
preneurs. During the month of July, not a single Russian bond was placed,
and the price-which was purely nominal-scarcely rose above 86. Accord-
ing to Hope, the market had been gripped by fear and panic. Undoubtedly
the investors had a premonition that Europe was heading for another
period of major unrest, now that the uprising in Spain was proving so
surprisingly successful: for the first time since the French Revolution, an
entire detachment of the French army had been forced to surrender.
Under these adverse circumstance, the entrepreneurs could be persuaded
to take only one thousand bonds by I st August. 3
 In spite of the difficulties which beset the Russian finances, money was
shortly required, for on 1st December 1808 the balance of the Russian
loan obtained from Regny & Co. in Genoa was due to be repaid. The
sum outstanding was nearly 4i- million Genoese lire, which was equivalent
to about Ii million guilders. 4

                                   214
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Remitting funds to Genoa, however, was no simple matter; indeed,
drafts were scarce at all the financial centres in Italy owing to the stag-
nation of the country's trade. When it proved impossible even to remit
via Hamburg, Hope & Co. opened credits in Regny's name at the Paris
houses of Babut and Baguenault & Co. However, the acute shortage of
drafts on Paris rendered it impossible for these firms to provide drafts to
the equivalent value, and in the end Hope & Co. were obliged to send
rixdollars, Mexican piastres and bars of silver to cover the deficit.!
 Viewed against the Russian government's great financial need, the failure
of the entrepreneurs to meet their obligations under the new agreement
was a bad omen. At the beginning of September they were totally in
default, and in early October and again in November they took no more
than one thousand bonds. The Conference of Erfurt, at which Napoleon
had gathered around him the rulers of all the countries which he had
subjugated and also those which had allied themselves with his cause, had
produced little of substance for the emperor, despite all the outward
manifestations of continental unity and the formal expressions of friend-
ship by Alexander I. The Emperor of Austria was absent from the con-
gress, and within his empire vigorous preparations for war were taking
place.
 Although the circumstances thus hardly favoured a revival of demand
for Russian bonds, it was vital that the interest payment due on 1st
January 1809 should be assured. The greater part of the funds held by
Hope & Co. on behalf of the Russian government had been used up in
the drafts for Zenyavin and in payments for the settlement of the debt in
Genoa, and so the Company was obliged to enter into a new agreement
with Borski before the year ended. Late in November, Hope had got him
to the point where he gave a firm undertaking on behalf of the entre-
preneurs to take 4,109 bonds at a price of 90. Borski was given until 1st
July 1809 to decide whether he would take over the balance of 4,000 bonds,
and it was agreed that the 10% penalty should apply only to bonds which
the entrepreneurs refused to take on that date. 2 The payment of interest
on these 4,000 bonds proved to be a thorny problem. Borski insisted on
receiving the full year's interest on bonds accepted during the course of
1809, but Hope & Co. were only willing to give six months' interest which,
however, would be proportionally increased if Borski and his associates
accepted the bonds at an earlier date. The obstacle was eventually sur-
mounted when the Company offered the entrepreneurs a 'remedy' in the
shape of 2 % out of the 6-!- % commission which it was to receive on the
bonds relating to the reserve. The entrepreneurs, however, complained

                                   21   5
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

that their commission was still minimal, because the Russian bonds stood
no higher than 88 and thus the douceur from Hope served only to bridge
the gap between the market price and the acceptance price of 90.1 While
this transaction served to assure the payment of interest on 1st January
1809, it did little to extract the entrepreneurs from their predicament. Of
the 13,109 bonds which they had accepted, less than 4,500 had been sold,
and the political situation did not justify any expectation of an improve-
ment during the first six months of 1809.2

In the meantime, Melvil, travelling via Osnabriick and Leipzig, had
arrived in Konigsberg. His reconnaissance of the market there revealed
few opportunities for speculation. Hemp and flax were available only in
limited quantities, and the prices were considerably higher than in Russia.
Melvil therefore decided to make for Riga as quickly as possible, but
poor roads and difficulties concerning his passport resulted in an unwel-
come delay. In Mitau, he was obliged to stay for a whole day because the
local governor refused to recognize the validity of his passport. When he
finally reached Riga, he found that, as in Archangel, prices were higher
than in St. Petersburg on account of the large export trade. Exports of
flax to England were reported to have been even greater than in previous
years. Out of a total of 180,000 ship-pounds of flax exported from Russia
-which equalled the level in previous shipping seasons-nearly 80,000
ship-pounds had left from Riga. 3
  As we have seen, the difficulties which confronted Napoleon in Spain
served to divert his attention from the rest of Europe. British shippers
gladly seized upon this opportunity to send vessels to ports all over the
continent, including Russia, in an attempt to make good the shortfall in
the first half of the shipping season. The crisis in Anglo-American rela-
tions, which centred around the rights of neutral vessels, had not yet led
to a conflict, and thus American vessels continued to call at Russian
ports. 4
  When Melvil reached Riga early in December, the shipping season had
ended and the price of hemp had fallen to a level at which, according to
insiders, there were opportunities for speculation. Melvil instructed J.D.
Drachenhauer & Co. and B. Zuckerbacker Klein & Co. each to purchase
500 ship-pounds of hemp for delivery in the Spring, under their own
guarantee; payment was to be effected by means of drafts on Melvil & Co.
In accordance with advice, Hope & Co. remained completely outside this
transaction in order not to betray the connexion, and Melvil accordingly
avoided the houses which the Company had recommended s . Shortly be-

                                   216
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

fore his departure from Riga, Melvil purchased a further 1,000 ship-
pounds on contract from Hope's former correspondent, Cumming and
 Fenton. As 30,000 ship-pounds had already been contracted in Riga and
the owners of hemp, in anticipation of still higher prices, were hesitant to
sell, he decided to suspend further purchases until he reached St. Peters-
 burg.
  Melvilleft Riga on 13th December 1808, and arrived in St.Petersburg
four days later. Golubtsov accorded him a very friendly welcome, but on
the subject of the rate of exchange the minister was adamant and refused
to depart from the procedure which he had earlier devised. This put paid
to the plan for Melvil to apply to Golubtsov for funds whenever he thought
fit and then to apply the rate of exchange on the final postday. Moreover,
the minister refused to accept a letter from Melvil as the basis for a
payment unless a letter referring to an identical sum simultaneously
reached the Committee from Amsterdam. Obviously, it had not escaped
Golubtsov's attention that Hope & Co. had been vague in their reply on
this point. He reasoned, not without justification, that if Melvil's proposal
were to be accepted, one party would be aware of the rate of exchange
and would secure all the advantages. The fact that Melvil was in a position
to offer him half a million guilders on the spot made no impression
whatever on Golubtsov. Faced with this situation, Melvil had little choice
but to render the blank letters from Hope unusable and to send a mounted
courier to Amsterdam with a message urging the Company to send an
early report to the Committee concerning the payment of monies in
Holland. Only when this had been received could he resume his negotia-
tions with the minister. In the meantime, he would devote his energies to
a thorough study of the market in St.Petersburg, and afterwards cautious-
ly embark on the purchase of goods.!
  In the light of the rumours which were circulating in Riga, Melvil at
first found the prices in St.Petersburg somewhat high; but on reflection
he had to confess that they were higher still in Riga. 2 There was general
anxiety in the Russian capital concerning the disposal of the country's
produce in the ensuing year, but this was tempered by the fact that the
State Loan Bank provided credits on the security of goods, thus enabling
Russian merchants to store their wares, albeit on payment of high charges,
until the last moment, thus keeping prices relatively high. Sometimes a
merchant would be unable to renew his credit, and when this happened
there were bargains to be had. To deposit money in the Assignat Bank, it
was first necessary to submit a request in writing, but when the bank
accepted funds it issued a simple receipt which, with a blank endorsement,

                                    21 7
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

became fully transferable. Upon the change of ownership of a receipt, it
was necessary to submit another written request-this time for the account
to be transferred to the new owner- but the cost was limited to one day's
interest.! Despite the fact that money invested in goods earned no interest,
it was better to use it thus than to lodge it with the bank, for both the
price of goods and the exchange rate offered possibilities for profit.
  As far as hemp was concerned, Melvil reported that there were oppor-
tunities for speculation in St. Petersburg, but that individual purchases
would have to be small. Half the St. Petersburg hemp had already been
bought up, and Russian merchants were combing the countryside in
search offurther stocks and even offering small advances to tempt possible
sellers. As a result, the price of hemp in the rural areas, in relation to the
current price in St.Petersburg, was higher than normal. The Russians sold
only enough to provide funds for their purchases in the country. If the
stocks thus being built up were to be taken to the ports in the Spring, and
if problems of shipment were to deprive the merchants of their markets,
trade in this commodity would entirely collapse. 2
  Flax, Melvil wrote, was not a neglected article, as Hope had thought,
but a true object of speculation; accordingly, stocks were held until the
commencement of the shipping season. The quantity offered on the market
would not exceed 35,000 po ods, to which perhaps a further 14,000 poods
would be added from the new harvest. But because the additional quan-
tity would not arrive until late in the season, Melvil considered it wise to
make purchases of local stocks without delay; this would largely obviate
the disputes about quality which tended to occur when forward purchases
were delivered. Taken in conjunction with the rate of exchange, the price
was low, while the exorbitant prices which flax fetched in England showed
that there was an immense demand. 3 Linen, sailcloth and other linen
fabrics and calamanco, a woollen material, were also suitable as objects
of speculation, Melvil reported; contrary to the information given by
Hope, the prices of these had risen only slightly, and stocks were just then
arriving in the port towns. The quantities offered in the following season
would certainly not be greater, for the Russian government required
substantial amounts for the army and the navy.4 Moreover, it was already
evident that prices would be higher by then because, as a result of the fall
in the rate of exchange, the labour costs and transport charges affecting
these articles had risen. Sailcloth was chiefly sold to North America.
  There were also sizeable stocks of tallow. Although the nominal price
was high, the low rate of exchange made this commodity well worth
considering. Yellow tallow was at least 7 roubles per pood cheaper in

                                     218
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

St. Petersburg than in Riga, and could be kept for years without loss of
quality. White tallow, which contained mutton fat and thus did not fully
solidify, had a much shorter storage life. Melvil preferred Siberian tallow,
which was extremely hard and could be kept for very long periods. A
large quantity of this was held by a small group of rich merchants.!
  Iron prices, it was anticipated, would shortly reach their lowest level,
reflecting a need on the part of stockholders for money to be sent with
their agents to the mines in Siberia to meet all manner of liabilities. The
cost of transporting iron would be 60 kopecks per pood, and would add
substantially to the overall costs.
  Potash, brushes, hides and wax travelled overland, the principal desti-
nation being Memel. In spite of the high transport costs, however, Melvil
felt that potash offered possibilities for speculation.
  If we compare Melvil's findings with the information furnished by Hope
& Co., we see how frequently and how seriously the information sent
from Holland was at variance with reality. In the case of flax, the Com-
pany had clearly been completely misinformed, and the same applied to
linen fabrics and calamancoes; similarly, Hope's information concerning
the keeping qualities of tallow differed widely from Melvil's findings. The
fact that the Company's contacts were regarded as solid and reliable did
not, it appears, afford any guarantee against erroneous commercial infor-
mation. This will certainly have been among the reasons why the Com-
pany attached so much importance to having its own agent in making
purchases on the scale involved.
  Melvil had also made enquiries concerning the merchant houses in
St.Petersburg. It was rumoured that Rall had sunk in the government's
estimation, not only by reason of his somewhat abrupt manner, but also
on account of his 'different system of politics.' His skill and his wealth,
however, were not doubted. Just what Rail's political convictions were,
we are not told, but as the majority of Alexander's ministers at that time
were pro-French, it seems probable that his sympathies were with the
English.
  Because of its relative displeasure with RaIl, the Russian government
employed other houses for the purchase of coin abroad. Bothlingk,
Stieglitz, Bergien and Severin Bros., were among these. Hope's reaction
to the spreading of these orders over several houses was to pray that,
faced with hard reality, the Committee would at last realize 'that it is not
always in the multitude of counsellors that there is wisdom.' 2 According
to Melvil, Bergien was increasingly finding favour and being given all the
special assignments. He was particularly friendly with Golubtsov and

                                    21 9
                          'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

Prince Kurakin, while his competitor, Krehmer, was on intimate terms
with Rumyantsev. Melvil expressed the opinion that Bergien, like RaIl,
had a manner which made him extremely well suited to doing business
with the truly great men, from whom the merchants in Russia appeared
to derive the greater part of their profits. It was sad but true that a Russian
house, in order to survive, had to engage in usurious practices of which
a Dutch merchant would be deeply ashamed. Just how bien rec:u Bergien
was in high circles became evident when, during their visit to Russia in
January 1809, the Prussian royal family, accompanied by their imperial
hosts, were entertained at the Bergien residence. Following the death of
Rogovikov in February 1809, the post of Court Banker became vacant;
it was not, however, given to Bergien, but to Severin Bros., who thereupon
joined RaIl and formed the firm of RalI & Severin. Observing that the
czar was attracted to one of the Mesdames Severin, the appointment can
scarcely have been fortuitous.!
  Of the merchants in St. Petersburg, J.C.Meyer, of the house of Meyer &
Bruxner, made the best impression on Melvil. Meyer was prudent, in-
corruptible and opposed to hazardous draft speculations. Sillem and
Bethmann had both expressly recommended him to Melvil, and the last-
named was proposing to place a portion of the orders with Meyer and,
following his departure, to entrust Meyer with the overall supervision of
the operation in Russia, with particular reference to storage and ware-
house accommodation. Bothlingk & Co. was a solid, reliable house, and
the same could be said of Cramer Smith & Co., which traded mainly with
America, in which country one of the partners, Smith, had travelled
widely. The firm maintained a cordial relationship with the American
conl'oul general, Harris, and this benefited it greatly, for vessels arriving
from the United States with cargoes consigned to the house could count
on Harris's full co-operation. 2
 Among the German merchants in St. Petersburg, P.J.Blessig and F.W.
Ktimmel were the most solid. The house of Wolff & Schltisser, which
specialized in trade with Brabant, was also satisfactory. All the British-
owned houses, including Rowand & Co. in Moscow, were inactive, and
many of the partners were awaiting a suitable moment to leave Russia.
Melvil, following Hope's directives, nevertheless proposed to try to in-
volve a few of these houses in the speculation via J.C.Meyer.3
 Melvil's courier reached Amsterdam on 6th January 1809. After a brief
consultation, the partners prepared a reply stating that, in view of the
Treasurer's objections to the method of payment proposed by the Com-
pany, the operation would be limited to one million guilders, 'as it would

                                     220
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 be contrary to all rules of prudence and judgement to venture from hence
 at random, without knowing what variations may have occurred in the
 interval in the course of exchange or in the prices of produce.' 1 A letter
 couched in similar terms was sent to the Committee. The partners subse-
 quently advised MeIvil that if Golubtsov's proposal were to be accepted,
 the government would have prior knowledge of the decisive day from the
 point of view of the exchange rate; in such a situation, it might succumb
 to the temptation to force up the rate on the day in question.
  On 4th February 1809, Melvil reported that he had reached agreement
 with Golubtsov concerning the exchange rate, which was to be 17i stuivers
to the rouble, and that accordingly a sum of 1,134,751.77 roubles had
 been paid to J.C.Meyer. 2 As the highest denomination of the banknotes
 was 100 roubles, Meyer had to transport a mountain of paper. In ac-
cordance with the agreement, he deposited part of the money with a
 number of houses. Cramer & Smith, Blessig and Wolff & Schliisser each
received 100,000 roubles, the balance remaining with Meyer. All held out
the prospect of 5 %interest on the deposited funds. 3
  In the matter of the government-owned warehouses, Golubtsov de-
manded Melvil's written approval of the establishments which had been
proposed. As all the hemp warehouses were leased to Russian merchants,
Golubtsov offered to have a shed build 'in a proper situation.' In the
interests of a smooth settlement of affairs after his departure, and in order
to ensure secrecy, Melvilleft the matter of the inspection of the buildings
entirely to Meyer. 4 The secrecy, however, proved to be a myth. Details of
Melvil's operation, even down to the names of interested parties and the
extent of their financial participation, were known. The method of pay-
ment, however, had not leaked out, and therefore it was anticipated in
St.Petersburg that numerous drafts on Hamburg and Amsterdam would
shortly appear. Melvil suspected that the source of the leak lay in Holland,
for far too many people there knew of the affair. The effect was that every
unidentified purchase was attributed to Melvil, who in the eyes of out-
siders became a buyer on a fantastic scale. 5
  The minister intimated that he would be pleased to continue the payment
transaction with Hope & Co. - but on his terms. He remained amiable and
polite, with 'the softest manners,' even though he was fully aware that the
assembly of funds by Hope in Amsterdam and the reports sent to St.
Petersburg concerning that operation were a complete sham. Melvil re-
ported that he had found Golubtsov looking weak and weighed down by
the burden of his office, and that this probably prevented him from making
a special study of mercantile affairs. 6 This was almost certainly Melvil's

                                    221
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

way of telling Hope, in terms which would not offend the censor, that the
minister knew nothing of the world of business and the demands which it
imposed.
  Melvil's relationship with Golubtsov suffered a setback when the latter
received a report from Hope & Co. stating that they were not disposed to
make any large advances to the Russian Court within the framework of
the agreement with the entrepreneurs. The minister took the view that this
refusal was deliberate and was aimed at forcing him to yield in his dispute
with Melvil. His action in broaching the subject to Melvilled to a some-
what fruitless discussion about who benefited most from the payment
transaction. Golubtsov offered to fix the rate of exchange for a period of
several months, but Melvil declined this on the grounds that it would
rule out any possibility of combining exchange rate and commodity price.
He, in turn, offered the minister an option on a given offer with the free-
dom to decide 'from one postday to another.' For example, Golubtsov
would receive an offer from Melvil on a Wednesday, based on the previous
day's exchange rate, and would have until before the post on Friday to
accept or decline. Golubtsov replied that such an arrangement would
require the approval of the czar, and that it would take at least ten days to
obtain this.!
  The minister also stated that his colleague on the Committee for Foreign
Loans, Count Rumyantsev, who was now back in the Russian capital
after a long sojourn in France, was also not enamoured of the contract,
and insisted on strict compliance with its provisions. He went on to
disclose that Rumyantsev had given an audience to Russian merchants
and commercial counsellors who had protested against the contract with
Hope. This was a sharp rebuff to the partners, who had fully expected
that Rumyantsev, as a good friend of Bethmann, would support the
transaction with the Russian government. 2 In order to show Melvil that
the government was not dependent upon Hope & Co., Golubtsov dealt at
length with French plans to purchase large quantities of Russian produce
-of which he had learned on Rumyantsev's return. Melvil-rightly, as it
transpired-did not have a great deal of faith in large-scale purchases by
France, but the report certainly had an effect on trade. 3 In Riga it caused
the exchange rate to rise, and in St.Petersburg it made the merchants even
more determined to hold on to their wares. The price of hemp rose by a
rouble per pood.
  Of the events which took place outside Russia, only vague reports
reached St.Petersburg, and these aroused interest only when Russia was
involved. The outbreak of war between Austria and France at the begin-

                                    222
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'


ning of April sent a tremor through the exchange and commodity markets,
but when it became clear that the Russian Court was keeping out of the
struggle, and that the declaration of war on Austria was merely a for-
mality, the markets quickly recovered. The absence of British reprisals in
the Baltic, which had earlier been feared, contributed very greatly to the
recovery.
  Following the czar's return from Finland at the beginning of April,
Melvil was informed that the proposal which he had put to Golubtsov had
been rejected. This did not greatly dismay him, for with the approach of
the shipping season the prices had commenced to rise, and he would not
have known what to do with the money if the government had accepted
the proposal.! In the light of the declining exchange rates, Hope & Co.
concurred fully. The season for buying was past, and the time had come
to think about reselling. The partners would have preferred Melvil to
manage this personally, particularly in view of uncertainties created by
the war between France and Austria, but it had earlier been agreed that
he should return to Holland in the Spring and they therefore went no
farther than to req uest him to delay his departure for a few weeks, pending
clarification of the political situation in Europe. 2
 In addition to the Franco-Austrian war, the situation in Sweden de-
manded attention. There, the passionately anti-French King Gustav IV
had been deposed in March 1809, and his successor, Charles XIII, at-
tempted to bring the wars against France and Russia to an end. If his
efforts led to the adoption by Sweden of the Continental System, this
would have repercussions on the attitude of the British Baltic Fleet, which
had hitherto found support in Sweden; the outcome of these repercus-
sions, in turn, could affect the possibilities for shipping goods from Russia.
 As far as the resale of goods in Russia was concerned, Hope & Co.
proposed to instruct Melvil to sell a quarter at 10 % profit, a quarter at
15 %, a quarter at 20 % and the balance at 25 %. But Matthiessen & Sillem
considered that a larger proportion could be sold at a profit of 10%,
particularly if this involved commodities purchased for future delivery
and on which there was an immediate saving of handling and storage
charges. They also urged greater flexibility in regard to price margins in
view of political developments-for example, the revolution in Sweden-
and the possible effect of these on trade. 3 Although somewhat reluctant,
the partners of Hope & Co. agreed to these suggestions.
 The Company desired that the potash-which was eagerly sought in
western Europe-should be excluded from the local resale operation. If
the route across the Baltic was not free, the potash would be sent by cart

                                    223
                        'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

to Memel, from whence it could be taken overland to Elbing and finally
to Hamburg. 1 Blessig was prepared to supply 2,000 poods immediately
from his own stock, on condition that this could be replenished from the
quantities purchased by Melvil on contract from Wolff & Schltisser,
which were due to arrive in St.Petersburg by barge from the hinterland
between May and July. Hope & Co. stipulated that the cost of transport
from St. Petersburg to Memel should not exceed 4 roubles per barrel.
They estimated that the journey would take a month. Melvillater learned
in Riga that it was a good thing that the order for the transport had been
given comparatively late in the Spring, for during the preceding thaw the
roads had been in such a terrible condition that many carriers had given
up and had simply left goods lying by the wayside. 2 After 200 barrels of
potash had been moved by this method, the Company abandoned it on
grounds of cost in view of the fact that the movement of vessels to and
from the Russian ports during the shipping season of 1809 proceeded
almost without hindrance. Accordingly, the volume of cargoes was far in
excess of the 1808 figure, and this was reflected in commodity prices. At
St.Petersburg, ship arrivals in 1809 totalled 376, compared with 60 in the
previous year. In Riga, the number doubled. 3 The majority of the ship-
ments were destined for England, and together these served to restore
Russia's trade with that country to the normal level. 4
  Strangely, however, this spectacular revival of exports was not reflected
in the parity of the rouble. Under the agreement reached between Melvil
and the Russian government on 30th January, this was fixed at I7"i
stuivers. At the beginning of May it was down to 16 stuivers and by the
middle of the month had slipped to 1St. Although it recovered to 17
stuivers at the end of May, there was nothing to suggest a strong recovery,
and indeed the rate of 17 stuivers was scarcely attained during the re-
mainder of the shipping season. 5 The absence of a true recovery will
certainly have been due in part to the continued creation of paper roubles
and to the amateuristic manner in which Golubtsov, with the assistance of
a number of houses, obtained coin from abroad. A proportion of this
coin was put into circulation, but rapidly disappeared.
  With the rate of exchange falling, the Russian government was obviously
not disposed to annul the agreement with Hope. Admittedly Golubtsov,
in a moment of irritation following Hope's refusal to accept his condi-
tions, had said that there could after all be no question of the government
providing warehouses, but he had subsequently rescinded this, albeit not
wholeheartedly. He remained polite, but 'in a condescending manner.'
Rumyantsev, on the other hand, made no secret of his dislike of the

                                   224
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

 whole transaction and admitted that he was glad it was not being con-
tinued. 1 Hope detected in both men 'a little fretfulness at merchants
differing from Ministers.' Clearly, the notion of dealing with merchants
 on a basis of equality was essentially unacceptable to them, and in their
hearts they looked down upon Messrs.Hope and their representatives.
This attitude had undoubtedly lain at the root of Vasilyev's grim hostility:
he had been unable to stomach the mastery of the middle-class Citizen
Voute during the negotiations with Czar Paul I. 2
  Melvilleft St.Petersburg on 25th May 1809 and travelled via Riga and
Berlin to Amsterdam, where he arrived early in July.3 On his advice, the
Company decided to cease shipping the goods and to concentrate on
selling these locally. As English ships were now admitted to Russian ports
almost without let or hindrance, while sailings to western Europe con-
tinued to suffer from the British blockade, local resale had become much
easier and far less risky.4
  With the return of Robert Melvil, the initial phase of Operation R.M.
drew to its close. During his stay in Russia, Melvil had dispensed nearly
two and a half million guilders for the purchase of goods. Of this sum,
nearly 4 % had been invested, through A.Becker of Archangel, in tar,
pitch, iron and mats. Purchases of hemp in Riga had accounted for a
further 8 %, and the remaining 88 % had been spent by eight houses in
St.Petersburg. Of this, 38 % had gone to Melvil's trusted agent, Meyer.
Besides his own share, Meyer had purchased hemp on behalf of Porter
Brown & Co. and Thornton Cayley & Co. who, as British houses, were
debarred from trading but who were thus enabled to obtain a commission.
The purchases made on their behalf accounted for 12 % of the total sum
invested. Next, in order of importance, came Wolff & Schliisser with II %,
Bergien & Co. with 9 %, P.J.B1essig & Co. with 8 %, Cramer Smith & Co.
(which by now had become Cramer Bros.) with 6 %, and Bothlingk & Co.
with4%·
  Nearly one-third of the total was invested in linen fabrics, which ranged
from coarse linen, sailcloth, raven-duck and Flemish linen to damask,
and calamanco. As already mentioned, these were easily stored and
suffered scarcely any loss of quality. Hemp, on which Melvil spent more
than 28 % of his funds, did deteriorate in store, but then it was a readily
saleable commodity and, moreover, was in great demand everywhere.
Hope had earlier indicated that clean hemp purchased at 40 roubles per
pood would afford a substantial profit even at a rate of exchange of 20
stuivers to the rouble. Melvil had paid an average price of 45 roubles, and
for the purpose of his accounts had taken the rate of exchange to be 17

                                    225
                         'LES TRAITES DU NORD'

stuivers to the rouble. If we calculate his purchases at this price and
exchange rate, we see that an extra profit of one guilder and fifteen
stuivers per pood could be obtained. Iron, of which nearly 340,000 pood
was purchased-and which was again a commodity with virtually un-
limited keeping properties-accounted for 23 %. The balance of the money
was invested in potash (8 %), flax (6 %), tallow (2 ~~) and linseed and
copper (each I %).1 If we compare the prices which Melvil was obliged to
pay for the various commodities with those indicated by Hope on 27th
October 1808, it is clear that in general he was skilful in his purchases. 2
  The choice of houses revealed a degree of concentration. Cramer Bros.
and Bothlingk & Co. supplied only linen fabrics; Blessig & Co. and
Wolff & Schliisser supplied linens, calamancoes, potash and tallow; and
Bruxner supplied linens, flax, hemp, linseed, iron and copper. Bergien
received a contract for a large quantity of iron.
  On the sum of the purchases, i.e. cf 2.445,696. 10.0, Melvil received the
agreed commission of 2 %, amounting to cf 48,913.19.0. His commission
on the draft transactions, which totalled cf 105,°38.17.0, was 1 %, so that
in all he received nearly cf 50,000.3 The offer of a 116 th share in the trans-
action was politely but firmly declined.
  If the speculation was to be a success, it was vital that the stocks should
be sold quickly and at good prices; this, in turn, depended upon the
continued freedom of vessels to reach Russian ports. This freedom would
also counteract, or at least limit, any further decline in the value of the
rouble. And even if this should fall, the loss would not be very serious
provided that the brisk shipping trade continued, for then the demand
alone would produce higher prices.
  The ultimate success of Operation R.M. thus depended upon political
developments. The practicability of the contract with the entrepreneurs,
the promptness with which the interest on the Russian bonds would be
paid and the possibility of a resumption of the principal repayments also
depended to a very great extent upon events in the political sphere. And
in 1809 it was already clear that the prospects in this area were not
encouraging.




                                     226
                          CHAPTER EIGHT

               PER ASPERA AD ASTRA
           FROM THE SUSPENSION OF PAYMENTS TO THE
                    ARRANGEMENT OF 1815


 In the previous chapter we left the entrepreneurs, headed by Borski, in a
 state of great anxiety. Through their spokesman, they had agreed at the
 end of 1808 to take a further 4,109 bonds, and they had been given until
 1st July 1809 to decide whether or not to accept the balance of 4,000. We
 also learned that, of the 13,109 bonds which the entrepreneurs had ac-
cepted up to that point, less than 4,500 had been placed. During the
 opening months of 1809 the situation was, if anything, even worse. The
threat of war in eastern Europe led to a virtual absence of buyers, and the
price fell from 86 in January to 82 in April, in which month the conflict
between France and Austria finally broke out. l
  Faced with this situation, Hope & Co. approached the Committee in
St.Petersburg with a request that the penalty for bonds not taken up on
 1st July be waived. Borski and his associates, the Company wrote, re-
gretted their boldness, for they had been left with a large portion of the
bonds which they had already accepted. As there was no prospect whatso-
ever of the situation improving by 1st July, they would not under any
circumstances accept the remaining 4,000 bonds, preferring to pay the
10 %penalty-however painful such a course might be for respectable men
who owed their sad plight to their blind faith in Hope's persuasion and
their long-established preference for everything which came from Russia.
The Company, the letter continued, was embarrassed by its role, for it
had thus disheartened those who had secured the acceptance of foreign
loans on the Dutch capital market and had bred prejudice against the
once eagerly sought Russian bonds. Hope blamed the unfortunate situ-
ation on political developments, which none of the parties concerned
could influence, and on these grounds requested that the penalty clause
be waived. If the Russian government acceded to the request, the Com-
pany would reconsider its earlier decision not to increase the advances to
the Russian Court. 2
  The Committee's reply, dated 23rd June 1809, stated that the czar had
refused the submission and that Hope & Co. could recover the advances
from the one million guilders which had been placed at the disposal of
the Russian government in Amsterdam under the terms of the agreement

                                   227
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


with Melvil. The managers suspected that this abrupt rejection was allied
to the Russian Court's displeasure at the stagnation of Operation R.M.!
On 4th July, Hope reported to the Russian ministers that the entrepre-
neurs had indeed chosen to pay the penalty. The bond price at this time
fluctuated between 82 and 83, and this made it impossible for the entre-
preneurs-whose number, moreover, had recently declined-to place a
further 4,000 bonds. A failure would damage their good name and cause
the price to decline even further. As an alternative, Hope proposed that
the repayment of the initial lo th of the balance of the loan should be
effected early in 1810. This would certainly assist the entrepreneurs, who
would then be in a position to place the balance of the bonds which they
held, and subsequently to accept the remaining 4,000. If the proceeds of
the sale were inadequate for the repayment, the entrepreneurs might be
willing to make good the deficit in exchange for Russian goods due for
delivery in the Spring, at day-prices determined by both commodity price
and exchange rate. 2
  From Bagneres, whence he had taken his wife for the benefit of her
health, Labouchere expressed all manner of objections to this plan. He
saw no great likelihood that the Russian government would agree to it,
for Operation R.M. had already shown that the Court would have no-
thing to do with the purchase and supply of goods. How, he asked, was
this new transaction to be explained to Matthiessen & SiIlem, Bethmann
and Borski's associates, the participants in Operation R.M.? This, after
all, had only just got under way, and would certainly suffer as a result of
the new undertaking. 3 Labouchere also drew attention to the political
situation: would France and Russia remain on friendly terms, or would
their relationship change? We may assume that the writer, whose journey
took him to the French capital, had learned from a reliable source there of
the cooling of relations between the czar and Napoleon.
  Early in July 1809, Napoleon had won a decisive victory over the
Austrians at Wagram, and at the Peace of Press burg in September of that
year he had added the Austrian part of Galicia to the Grand Duchy of
Warsaw, a French protectorate. As the nucleus of a new Polish state, this
would have a certain attraction for Polish subjects under Russian domi-
nation, and could therefore cOI\stitute a pocket of unrest on Russia's
western frontier. We have already seen how, on the one hand, the rigorous
application of the Continental system seriously damaged Russia's trade
while, on the other, the admittance of British ships to Russian ports, to
which the authorities had closed their eyes since the summer of 1808, was
a thorn in the flesh of Napoleon.

                                   228
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Golubtsov having indicated in his reply that he wished for more infor-
mation concerning Hope's proposals, the managers pursued their theme.
The Russian government, they stated, would have to supply such goods
as the purchasers desired, and, if required, store these in government
warehouses at its own risk and for its own account. Dealing with the
balance of the bonds, they expressed the wish to reduce the transfer price
from 90 to 80, because the market price in Amsterdam had meanwhile
fallen to 81. 1
  It is not clear why the managers in Amsterdam, who were aware of the
experience gained from Operation R.M., made such far-reaching stipu-
lations. It may well be that they felt that the minister, wearied by financial
worries, would this time give way. The Committee's reply will in any case
not have surprised Labouchere: Hope's proposal was rejected in its en-
tirety on the grounds that it was an affront to the dignity of the Russian
Court and therefore unacceptable. The managers were requested to cease
the sale of Russian bonds and to keep the balance at the disposal of the
Committee pending further instructions. 2
  The tone of the letter from Russia was stern, and to Hope & Co. it
sounded like a declaration of war. And indeed it was intended as such, as
emerged soon afterwards when reports were received that Golubtsov was
combing the financial centres of Europe in search of fresh loans. In Paris,
his efforts led to a loan being floated by Perregaux Laffitte & Co., but
this failed. 3 The reports caused serious disquiet on the Amsterdam bond
market, and this caused the price of Russian bonds to fall to 68. Support-
buying by Hope & Co. served to restore the level to 75, but this was purely
nominal. At the end of 1809 the rouble fell to a new low of 13-14 stuivers
on the Amsterdam exchange market. Admittedly, the interest on the
bonds was paid on the due date, but Hope was unable to answer the many
questions concerning the date of the first principal repayment. 4
  Golubtsov had by now made his position as Minister of Finance unten-
able. By his inept excursions on the European money markets he had not
only undermined his own creditworthiness, but also brought the Russian
bonds in Holland into discredit and further alienated himself from Hope
& Co. The steady decline in the exchange rate of the rouble was closely
allied to the increasing quantities of paper money which were being
created, and while Golubtsov could not be held solely responsible for this,
his purchases of coin abroad-which were as ill-considered as they were
ineffective-had exacerbated the exchange position.
  In Russia, too, it became clear that things could not go on as they were.
On 24th January 1810, Dimitri Guryev reported that the czar had relieved

                                     229
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Golubtsov of the office of Treasurer of the Russian Empire with effect
from 1st January 1810 and had appointed him as his successor. All
matters relating to foreign loans would henceforth be referred to him, and
not to the Committee. With this development, Rumyantsev's influence
on the country's financial policy came to an end. Guryev had received
particular instructions from the czar to maintain close relations with
Hope & Co. and to reverse his predecessor's unsuccessful action in ap-
proaching other houses and other money markets. 1
 It was, of course, in Guryev's interest to reach agreement with the Com-
pany, for an initial repayment against the Russian loan had somehow to
be effected in the course of 18IO if the Court's credit abroad was not to
be severely shaken. Guryev began by postponing the repayment date until
the end of 1810. He then argued that, owing to the complete stagnation of
trade and the low rate of exchange which resulted from this (a disputable
conclusion, as we have seen), the Russian government would not be in a
position to remit to Holland the sums needed for repayment for two or
three years. This being so, he continued, he was thinking in terms of an
exchange of bonds drawn by lot for others made more attractive by, say,
interest in excess of 5 % or the chance of a bonus on redemption. Such
a new loan-for that was what it would amount to-would have a life of
8-IO years, with the possibility of earlier redemption. In their reply, Hope
& Co. strongly urged that the forthcoming repayment be effected on 1st
July. This, they stated, would serve to dispel anxiety on the part of many
bondholders. If necessary, the instalment could be reduced to, say, two
million guilders. Moreover, it might be desirable to offer holders of drawn
bonds a bonus in exchange for prolongation; the money thus saved would
enable a further repayment to be made, and the prolongation bonus could
again be offered. Indeed, this could be repeated until the whole of the sum
was exhausted. For the outside world, this would create an impression of
large-scale repayments, whereas in fact only two million guilders would
actually be paid out. 2
  Guryev was in favour of a simulated repayment on these lines, but he
could muster no more than cf 863,000. This, he suggested, could be used
for a prolongation bonus of 20 % on the drawn bonds, or to raise the
interest rate on all Russian bonds by I %, whichever Hope considered the
more advantageous. 3
  With the rouble standing at 111- stuivers in Amsterdam, Guryev was quite
unable to remit more than the sum referred to. However, he was very
hopeful that the exchange rate would benefit from a loan which was to be
floated in Russia for the purpose of reducing the excess of paper money in

                                    23 0
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


circulation. This loan was to be funded with capital obtained from the
sale of some of the land owned by the State. 1
 Hope at first objected to the new loan on the grounds that its announce-
ment alone would further undermine the already shaky price of the
Russian bonds in Amsterdam. But in the end they accepted Guryev's
argument that it was not in fact a loan but an amortization of the national
debt, and that it would ultimately lead to an improvement in the rates of
exchange. Such an improvement, however, lay in the future, and Guryev
had difficulty in getting the cf 863,000 remitted. 2
 The changes in the political situation in Holland constituted a further
obstacle to Hope's efforts to keep up the price of the Russian bonds.
Dissatisfied with Louis Napoleon's lukewarm attitude towards the pro-
visions of the Continental System in Holland, Napoleon decided to in-
corporate the territory into the 'Grand Empire.' The area south of the
major rivers was occupied in March 1810, to be followed by the remainder
in July of the same year. In Holland, the loss of national independence
produced serious unrest, and this in turn led to general stagnation on the
Stock Exchange. In mid-June the Russian bonds still stood at 73, but by
mid-August they had fallen to 56. When the initial shock had passed, the
price rose to 60, but this was short-lived, for in mid-September it fell back
to 56 following reports from St. Petersburg of growing disunity between
Russia and France. 3 Only by support-buying was the Company able to
restore the price to 60.
 The unsatisfactory price levelled Labouchere in mid-August to propose
to Guryev that the cf 863,000 should be used not for prolongation, but for
monthly repayments commencing on 1st November 1810. However, as
the terms of the principal debenture stipulated that three months notice
of a repayment of principal should be given, it was already too late to
effect the initial payment on 1st November. To overcome this problem,
he suggested that the payments due on 1st November and 1st December
1810 and 1st January 181 I should be paid simultaneously on the last date
in order to impart a suitable element of sensation. Interest would have to
be paid on all redeemed bonds up to 1st January. If this approach suc-
ceeded in bringing about a more favourable climate, Hope could attempt
to dispose of the remaining bonds and thus secure the funds required for
the interest payment on 1st January.4
  Labouchere did not wait for Guryev's reply before approaching the
Lieutenant General of the newly annexed Holland, Lebrun, for permission
for the projected repayments. When the assent from St. Petersburg was
received, the text of the advertisement was laid before Lebrun, and only

                                    23 1
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


when his approval was obtained was this printed in the newspaper.1
Under the terms of the annexation, Hope & Co. were required to deal
with the Russian envoy in Paris on official matters, and this made commu-
nications with Russia more circuitous and more complicated. It was
therefore fortunate that the first secretary at the embassy, Count Nessel-
rode, was a friend of Labouchere, and that at this very time he was in
charge of day-to-day affairs by reason of the fact that the envoy, Prince
Kurakin, had suffered a serious accident. 2
 The appearance of the advertisement and the draw held on 28th Septem-
ber 1810 produced the anticipated result: in the space of a few days the
price of the Russian bonds rose from 60 to 70. But this improvement, too,
was short-lived, for in mid-October fresh reports of Franco-Russian dis-
unity, coupled with an economic crisis which commenced with the failure
of a number of banks in England and produced a severe shortage of funds
on all the money markets, caused the price to drop back to 60. Hope,
however, had meanwhile managed to place 1,800 bonds. When, in late
November, efforts to boost the price failed and sales commenced to
slacken, the Company eagerly accepted an offer by the entrepreneurs to
take over the remaining 1,861 bonds at a price of 60. With this develop-
ment, the funds needed for the interest and principal payments on 1st
January 181 I were assured. Guryev had been unable to render much
assistance, for the general shortage of money had pushed the value of the
rouble to a new low. In Amsterdam, it had fallen from IIi stuivers in
August to 8i at the end of September; it had rallied slightly in October,
but early in December a new low of 71- stuivers was reached, and the rate
remained at or about this figure until the end of 1810. 3
 Faced with this slump, Guryev was obliged to cease all foreign trans-
actions at the beginning of December, 'our assets having been reduced
to nil,' and he requested Hope to furnish advances. As security for these,
he offered to deposit silver roubles with the Bank and to hand the receipt
for these to an authorized agent of the Company in St.Petersburg. 4

Political events were among the factors which contributed to this crisis.
Following his victory over the Austrians, Napoleon set his mind to
closing the loopholes in the Continental System which had emerged so
clearly during 1808 and 1809. The Kingdom of Holland was annexed, and
along the German North Sea coast French troops and customs officials
exercised strict supervision. In the Baltic, Prussia and Russia, under
pressure from France, tightened their control over illegal imports, fre-
quently resorting to the seizure of vessels and their cargo. s Late in the

                                   232
Blank authorization for the transfer to Hope, De Smeth and Willink of the Louisiana
     Stock , which was domiciled in Amsterdam. The Hope coat of arms which
               appears on the seal is identical to the coat of arms of the
     Scottish branch of the family. The motto ' At Spes Non Fracta' was used by
                 both the Dutch Hopes and the Hopes of Hopetoun
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

 season of 1810, more than 600 English merchantmen, which had been
 forced by adverse winds to lie up in the Gothenburg Roads for more than
 two months, sailed into the Baltic. There, they were struck by an autumn
 gale and the fleet was split up, the survivors being driven towards Prussian,
 Swedish and Russian harbours. Under pressure from France, those which
 sought refuge in Russian and Pruss ian ports-160 ships in all-were cap-
 tured and impounded. Those which reached Sweden were safe for a
 time, but in mid-November 1810 this country, having been presented
 with a French ultimatum, declared war on England and undertook to
introduce the Continental System.!
   In Russia, the ending of the Continental System was drawing nigh. The
annexations and occupations perpetrated in western Europe in order to
achieve rigid adherence to the system had begun to irritate the czar. His
indignation reached a climax when Napoleon, while demanding that the
Russian Court rigorously impose the measures against British goods,
allowed these to be imported on licence into his own empire. This de-
velopment, coupled with the problem of low rates of exchange and the
country's overall economic difficulties, led the Court to ban the import by
land of certain goods with effect from 31st December 1810, and to dras-
tically increase the import duty on others. Goods brought by ship were
to be admitted upon the production of a certificate of origin issued by a
Russian consul. 2
   With this ukase, a turning point was reached in relations between
Russia and France. The czar had not only dissociated his country from
the Continental System but, by placing obstacles in the path of overland
trade, had openly turned against France. Imports from that country could
only reach Russia by land, and the list of proscribed goods included a
number of important French exports.
  The decision afforded Russia an economic breathing space, but in
Holland the outlook for the holders of the Russian bonds was sombre.
What would become of the payments if war broke out between Russia
and France? Even if Russia was willing to meet her commitments, it
would be almost impossible for her to do so, for with practically the
whole of Europe in Napoleon's grip, and England isolated by the Conti-
nental System, there was no centre via which Russian remittances could
reach Amsterdam.
  On the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, tension, which now and then gave
way to spasms of panic, reflected the anxiety which existed concerning
future developments. It was all very well for Labouchere to write in a
somewhat lighthearted vein about the panicky figures on the Stock Ex-
                                     234
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

change; in the past, he had himself expressed misgivings at the growing
estrangement between Russia and France. It was gradually becoming
clear that a conflict between them was only a question of time. How, then,
could the most be obtained for the bondholders before the explosion
came?

Even without Guryev's decision temporarily to suspend remittances to
 Hope, the question of payments by the Russian government would have
been open to doubt. At the end of 1810, both Matthiessen & Sillem in
Hamburg and Raymond and Theodore de Smeth in Amsterdam were lost
as intermediaries. On 16th November of that year, Hieronymus Sillem
informed Hope that he and his partners had decided to liquidate the
house, since the strict enforcement of the Continental System had made it
impossible to trade in Hamburg. Labouchere replied that he was sorry to
learn of the reason for the step, but that he welcomed the decision as such.
When he heard that Sillem was prepared to travel to Russia if required,
he was delighted, for this would enable Operation R.M. to be completed
under expert supervision. 1
  The loss of De Smeth, who was obliged to seek a moratorium early in
December, was a far more serious blow. The house was brought down as
a result of granting excessive facilities to other firms, particularly a num-
ber in France which had run into difficulties owing to the financial crisis.
Pieter de Smeth had died shortly before the crash. Labouchere was
appointed Receiver, and this enabled him to effect a timely intervention
on behalf of the Russian Crown following the formal declaration of
bankruptcy. He succeeded in withholding a number of remittances from
Rall & Severin and Colombi from the assets, and these were returned to
St.Petersburg via Hope & Co. with a request that fresh remittances be
made. 2
 The elimination of Matthiessen & Sillem and De Smeth also had serious
consequences for the entire Russian diplomatic mission in Paris. Follow-
ing the disappearance of these houses, Perregaux Laffitte & Co. refused
to grant further advances to the members of the embassy until such time
as the Russian Court designated houses in Amsterdam and Paris from
whom monies could be recovered. Faced with this emergency, Prince
Alexander Kurakin appealed to Hope & Co. to furnish a credit for the
members of the embassy in anticipation of fresh arrangements by St.
Petersburg, and this was graciously done. 3 The Russian government's
satisfaction at this act of service was increased when the Company de-
clined Guryev's offer to deposit silver roubles with the Bank as security

                                    235
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

for advances. 'We know of no better security than the sense of loyalty of
which His Imperial Majesty has not ceased to give to the whole of Europe
the most constant and most convincing proof,' the Company wrote, with
a mixture of elegance and flattery matched to the occasion. That there was
more behind this than an obligatory rhetorical flourish, and that there
was a genuine conviction on Hope's part, was to emerge at a later date. 1
  For RaIl, the failure of De Smeth was more than a mere setback in
business, and when, early in February I8II, his other correspondent in
Amsterdam, De Weduwe Eduard Croese & Son, was similarly obliged to
seek a moratorium, he had perforce to eat humble pie. In a brief letter to
Hope & Co., he expressed his regret for the long break in their business
relationship, and asked that this might be resumed. As parties with par-
allel goals, namely the safeguarding of Russian interests in the bank-
ruptcies of De Smeth and Croese, the two houses had little difficulty in
patching up their differences. 2
  Although St.Petersburg felt little effect from the wave of bankruptcies
which had swept Europe, the scarcity of credit and the extreme shortage of
money had an adverse effect upon the rouble, the value of which did not
rise above 8 stuivers during the opening months of 18 II. The Russian
government was accordingly hard put to resume the remittances to Hope.
But the interventions with De Smeth and Croese on behalf of the Court
Bankers, the monthly redemption of one hundred bonds-which con-
tinued-and the payment of interest at the end of the year made it impera-
tive that funds should be remitted, since Hope could not furnish un-
limited advances. The Company had received a number of bonds from
the assets of De Smeth, but there were fewer and fewer buyers, and the
atmosphere on the Stock Exchange was one of near-panic. The liquidation
of De Smeth and the periodic rumours of war caused the bond price to
drop from 60 to 5 I. They later rallied, but did not rise above 57. 3
  Gradually it became clear that unusual measures would be needed to
ensure the payment of interest on 1st January 1812. After consultations
between the partners, it was decided that Labouchere should go to Russia
for further discussions with the Court. Trade in Amsterdam being in the
doldrums, it was in any case not necessary for him to remain there. His
first task was to obtain a passport, and for thi1> he vir.ited Paris, where
Prince Kurakin promised to arrange for the necessary documents for
 Labouchere, his secretary, his valet and a courier to be made available at
 Memel. Besides discussing the loan, Labouchere wished to deal with the
settlement of the claims against De Smeth and the unsold stocks from
 Operation R.M.4

                                   236
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

As we saw, Melvil departed from St.Petersburg at the end of May 1809,
leaving local sales in the hands of the houses through which the goods
concerned had been purchased. The unusually high level of shipments
during the 1809 season, in which vessels from England sailed in and out
of Russian ports almost unhindered, served to raise commodity prices
and thus facilitated the disposal of Hope's stocks. In the opinion of the
partners, however, the St.Petersburg houses did not react swiftly enough
to upward price trends, and when a number of them-who included
Meyer, Melvil's confidential agent-remitted willy-nilly, 'without at once
securing the exchange,' Hope's anger was really aroused. The Company
expressed to Sillem its suspicion that, 'par les interets plus immediats,'
Meyer and his associates had seized upon the higher prices to dispose of
their own stocks and had relegated Hope's interests to second place.
Labouchere wrote that this type of behaviour by the houses in Russia had
always been the drawback to employing 'any concerns that way.' He had
hoped that Melvil's presence would have prevented this, but clearly the
problem was as great as ever.!
  Sillem sought to excuse the merchants by pointing to the wide fluctuation
in prices and exchange rates in Russia, but he was forced to admit that the
houses in St.Petersburg at times displayed a lack of zeal and intelligence. 2
It was fortunate that the shipping season of 1809 was abnormally long.
The English, probably sensing possible events in the year ahead, con-
tinued to buy in large quantities with the result that satisfactory, and at
times even high, prices were obtained well into the autumn. This did much
to offset the initial shortcomings, and by December 1809 even Labouchere
was obliged to confess, albeit not with enthusiasm, that the results were
better than had been expected. 'The operation R.M. is liquidating and
would do well if the houses in Russia were either more intelligent or more
honest.' 3
  Examination of the quantities sold and the profit margins achieved
reveals that the results were indeed better than had been anticipated-more
so, in fact, than Labouchere admitted. A notable aspect is the wide
differences in the profit margins achieved by the various merchants. In
the case of hemp, the average profit in Riga was 12 %, whereas Meyer in
St. Petersburg made 19 %. Only 8 %was earned on flax. On tallow, Wolff &
Schliisser made a profit of 17 %, while Blessig hardly managed to break
even. On sailcloth, Blessig could make no more than 51- %profit, whereas
Meyer achieved between 1 I % and 16 %. Blessig made a loss of 1- % on
Flemish linen, while Wolff & Schliisser made a profit of 4 %. These margins
are based on a rate of exchange of 17 stuivers to the rouble at the time of

                                    237
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA

purchase of the goods, and a mean rate of 15 stuivers for the post-sale
remittances. These figures reflect the order of intelligence-and also per-
haps of honesty-of the merchants involved. It is evident from this that,
despite all Labouchere's criticism, Meyer was worthy of the confidence
placed in him.
 The figures also show that the market for linen fabrics was not particu-
larly good; however, their keeping qualities and low storage cost enabled
them to be kept in anticipation of better times. Of the stock of iron -also
a commodity with a long storage life-only 5 % was sold, the gross profit
obtained being I I %. By 1st January 1810, cf 955,100, representing 39 %
of the total sum invested in the various commodities, had been remitted
to Amsterdam. 1
 Sales in 1810 were substantially below the 1809 level. As explained
earlier, Napoleon made an all-out effort to isolate England economically
from Continental Europe, and this included exerting pressure on Russia
to take more stringent measures against British ships. Meanwhile, in
England itself the abnormal volume of imports from Russia in 1809 had
produced a sharp fall in prices, and thus profits were reduced. Remit-
tances to Holland in 1810 totalled only one-seventh of the figure for 1809.
The merchants in Russia, however, were doing their best, and the levels of
profit on such sales as they did achieve were very reasonable, particularly
because rising rouble prices compensated the falling rate of exchange. 2
With linen fabrics, in particular, the merchants were more fortunate than
in 1809. Meyer & Bruxner's profit on sailcloth in 1810 was only 9 % gross,
but Cramer Bros. made 18 % and Blessig achieved a remarkable 221 %.
Bothlingk & Co., who had contributed nothing to Operation R.M. in
1809, made handsome profits, viz.an average of 20 % on Flemish linen and
371 % on raven-duck. It is conceivable that stockpiling by the Russian
government had an influence on the prices of these products. In Archangel,
Alexander Becker's only success lay in iron, on which he made a net profit
of 13%. He suffered a loss of 9 % on the sale of four-fifths of the stock of
pitch, and fared even worse with tar, of which half the stock was sold at
a net loss of 35 %.3
 In September 1810, Meyer sold a further 30,000 poods of the iron lying
in St. Petersburg at twice the purchase price. He did not, however, remit
the proceeds to Amsterdam, for with the rouble, as stated earlier, standing
at less than 9 stuivers, remittance would have been uneconomic. After
consulting Hope, Meyer deposited the money with the Bank, where it
would earn interest at 5 %. The plan was to withdraw the capital, plus
interest, in the following Spring, by which time the rate of exchange would
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

 hopefully have improved sufficiently to justify remittance. Other houses
followed this example. Within the Company, a sombre view was taken of
the future of the operation, and at the end of 1810 the remaining stocks
 were written down by cf 200,000- 8 %of the original investment.!
  The progress of Operation R.M. during the first half of 1811 served to
confirm Hope's pessimism. Despite all efforts, practically nothing was
sold; when, at the end of June, Labouchere set off for Russia, the stock of
potash was still virtually intact, and 86 % of the iron also remained. Of
the linen fabrics, nearly all the damask and sailcloth had been disposed of,
 but of the Flemish linen and the raven-duck, two-thirds was still in the
warehouses. Not a metre of the calamancoes or the coarse and plain linen
had been sold, but this was due in part to the high import duty in England,
the principal market. The Russian merchants together held Hope assets
worth 130,000 roubles. 2 Although the Continental System as such had
ceased to be effective, strict control of the neutrality of vessels entering
the Russian ports made the shipping season of 1811 a poor one. The
Americans, who derived the most benefit from the new situation, took
Russian goods in exchange for the colonial produce which they shipped
in (in large quantities), but Russian exports to England scarcely equalled
half the figure for the previous year. 3
  Labouchere lost no time in setting about the task of liquidating the
stocks as far as possible. He had the entire stock of potash shipped,
stimulated the sale of linen fabrics to the best of his ability, and put
pressure on the Russian merchants to remit the proceeds of sales with a
minimum of delay. As the exchange rate had eased upwards to 9-10
stuivers since the Spring, monies could be remitted without undue losses.
By the end of 1811, thanks to Labouchere's efforts, the entire stock of
plain linen and calamanco had been disposed of. By the end of November,
only one-third of the original stock of Flemish linen remained, and just over
half the stock of raven-duck. But of the coarse linen, less than 5 % had
been sold. In many instances, these articles were bought by other Russian
merchants with an eye to speculation. Owing to the rate of exchange,
among other factors, these sales were generally effected at a loss, which in
the case of the coarse linen and part of the calamancoes reached 14 %.4
Unsold stocks at the end of November were valued, at ruling prices, at
more than 1,350,000 roubles, of which iron, the quantity of which had not
changed, represented two-thirds and linen fabrics one-third. Labouchere
had considered using a portion of the funds available in Russia for a
speculation in colonial produce such as cotton and sugar-the prices of
which had declined as a result of the large American shipments-but when

                                    239
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

it became clear that the large-scale re-exports of these to other European
countries made it impossible to achieve the margins which he desired, he
decided against such a transaction. 1

The negotiations concerning the interest payment due on 1st January
1812 opened with a memorandum from Labouchere, in which he set out
the Russian government's position. The Court had only to find the
cf 4,240,000 to cover interest at the beginning of the year, since funds
were already available for the monthly redemption of 100 bonds. 2 After
deducting sundry assets such as 50 % of the Russian government's claim
against De Smeth and the proceeds of the sale of Russian goods abroad,
e.g. in Austria and Sweden, a sum of cf 2,400,000 would be needed.
According to Labouchere, this could best be obtained by the repurchase
of 4-5,000 bonds at 80 % between August and the end of the year. As the
price was now 56-57, this would go some way towards compensating
holders who had bought their bonds at par. To make the repurchase more
attractive, he stipulated that the Russian government should agree to
make roubles available in St.Petersburg, if desired, at exchange rates of
9 stuivers on Amsterdam or 941 centimes on Paris and to allow the roubles
thus obtained to be used for the purchase of Russian goods or colonial
produce, and also that the Court should offer free storage of either type
of goods in government warehouses until 1st July 1813. It would also be
necessary to allow the tax-free export of the goods by land or sea. Clearly,
Labouchere's memorandum was written while he was still hopeful of a
speculation in colonial produce.
  The repurchased bonds could either be placed on the market gradually,
or simultaneously by contract at a price of 60. The proceeds could be
used for the interest payment on 1st January 1812. If it should prove
impossible to dispose of all the bonds by that date, Hope & Co. would
advance the deficit. Labouchere further suggested that 300 bonds, and
not 100, should be redeemed on 1st January 1812 in order to restore the
price to 60, the figure upon which the whole transaction was based. It
would also assist the sale of bonds if an imperial declaration were issued,
guaranteeing that the Russian bonds, together with both matured and
due interest vouchers, would at all times be accepted, at par value and at
the rate of exchange ruling on the day, in payment for the purchase of
 Russian land within the context of the domestic loan, or for other pay-
ments to the Crown. To this end, bonds and coupons could be exchanged
at the Company's office for receipts countersigned by the Russian consul
general in Amsterdam. Measures of this nature, Labouchere felt, would
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

assist the market price of the bonds and reduce Russia's interest burden,
and also enhance the price of the land which was to be sold, thus benefiting
the amortization of the paper money.1
  Finally, Labouchere reiterated the Company's plea on behalf of the
entrepreneurs, who in the meantime had addressed a letter to the czar,
seeking absolution from the penalty of cf 400,000. The granting of their
request, he said, would benefit the price of the Russian bonds in Holland.
  In his reply, Guryev concurred in the basic proposal, i.e. the purchase of
4,000 bonds at 80 % and their resale at 60 %. This implied contracting a
debt of cf 3,200,000 for a payment of cf 2,400,000 on 1st January I8I2.
The debt would have to be repaid in four instalments in the years I8I2-
18 I 5, but no interest would be payable in this period because, in Guryev's
view, the bonus of cf 800,000 was sufficient recompense. The government
was willing to provide bonds issued by the Bank and others relating to the
domestic loan to a total value of eight million roubles as security, but it
insisted that the interest on these bonds should accrue to the Russian
Court. The minister also agreed that 300 bonds should be redeemed on
1st January 18 I 2 and that the matured interest vouchers should be ac-
cepted, at the day-rate, as payment for customs duty or for the purchase
of land. 2 He made no reference to the provision of roubles at fixed rates
of exchange or to the facilities asked for in relation to the purchase of
goods in Russia; on the subject of payments in Russia, he referred only
to the vouchers, but not to the bonds themselves.
  Despite fresh representations by Labouchere, Guryev remained adamant
in the matters of furnishing roubles in St.Petersburg and the payment of
interest on the new bonds. Only new bonds which had been drawn by lot
would be accepted for the purchase of land or the payment of import or
export dues, and only those vouchers of the existing Russian bonds which
had become payable, but not the bonds themselves, would be acceptable
for these purposes. The minister did not refer to tax-free exports, and he
made it clear that the purchasers of the new bonds would in any case not
receive interest. 3
  Labouchere was understandably disappointed at this, the second rejec-
tion of his proposals; but the final decision by the ministerial council,
when it came, corresponded fully with the spirit of Guryev's reply. The
council's only concession to Labouchere's demands was that new bonds
which had been drawn and, during the year in which they matured,
vouchers relating to the existing issue should be accepted in payment for
land or for customs dues. Finally, it was agreed that the cf 400,000
forfeited by the entrepreneurs should be reimbursed in the form of metallic
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

bonds relating to the domestic loan. 1 All these decisions were confirmed
in a ukase dated 28th September 181 I.
  Even though not everything turned out as Labouchere had envisaged, he
was not completely dissatisfied. The Russian Court, he informed the
partners in London, still showed evidence of its desire to fulfil its commit-
ments, though this might involve major sacrifices. Therefore, he con-
tinued, while it was not his aim to expand the Company'~ interests in
Russia, the creation of the new bonds as an additional security for the
whole was justified. We may safely assume that this statement was made
in order to forestall certain objections to the new arrangement on the part
of the partners in London. 2 The ominous facet of the arrangement lay in
the fact that it provided only for the payment due on 1st January 1812,
and that fresh negotiations would be necessary during the course of that
year. Before leaving St.Petersburg, LabouchCre had received a solemn
undertaking from the czar that nothing would be allowed to interfere with
his decision loyally to meet his obligations, and that LabouchCre could
set the minds of the Hollanders at rest on this point. The limited time
scale of the arrangement, however, indicated otherwise. 3
  LabouchCre left St. Petersburg on 18th September 18Il and, travelling
via Riga, Berlin, Leipzig and Frankfurt, arrived in Amsterdam on 25th
October. While in Leipzig he had a meeting with Hieronymus Sillem, who
had travelled from Carlsbad for the purpose, and during this it was finally
agreed that Sillem should go to St.Petersburg to supervise Hope's inter-
ests there. 4
  Back in Amsterdam, Labouchere set about finalizing the arrangements
for placing the new bonds. He informed Guryev that, while the restitution
of the cf 400,000 had 'electrified' the entrepreneurs, the holders of the
earlier bonds were now less inclined to sell, and therefore a contract
between Hope and WilIem Borski had been signed on 11th December
 18Il providing for the latter to take over new bonds to a nominal value
of cf 3,200,000, for which he would pay cf 2,400,000 in twelve monthly
instalments of cf 200,000 commencing on 1st January 1812. Borski also
had the option of paying the instalments in Russian bonds, which for this
purpose would be valued at 60. As the new bonds could not be dealt in on
 the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, Hope undertook to advance a sum of
between five and six hundred thousand guilders upon demand, and at 5 %
interest, on bonds which were not in their year of maturity, for which
purpose a price of 80 would apply. Moreover, the Company bound itself
to repurchase, if Borski should so wish, bonds to a nominal value of
cf 800,000, divided equally over the maturing dates, at a price of 75. 5
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Upon reading the last-mentioned terms, one may wonder why the Com-
pany was prepared to commit itself financially towards Borski to such an
extent, and whether it would not have been simpler to make the new bonds
saleable on the Exchange. Among the probable reasons is that the issue of
new Russian bonds would have undermined the price of earlier ones,
thereby demolishing one of the pillars upon which the new operation
rested. Moreover, deals via the Exchange would have required the prior
approval of the French government, and a request for this might well
have sparked off an official inquiry into Hope's affairs-something which
the Company would not have relished at that juncture. Labouchere, it
will be remembered, was planning to retire on 31st December 18II, and
John Hope-who had become the senior partner following the death of
Henry Hope early in 18 II - was pursuing a policy of retrenchment, the
safeguarding of funds and the transfer of these to England. In any case,
there was no question of actual repurchase because the 4,000 bonds were
in the hands of friends.
 The agreement with Borski was therefore no more than a smoke screen
behind which Hope's funds were transferred to a place of safety. It was
agreed between the parties that 2,170,000 guilders worth of the new bonds
out of the total of cf 3,200,000, would be in the name of Adrian Elias
Hope. More than half this sum was deposited with Willem Borski, in
whose name the bonds were registered. The balance was lodged with
Berck and Entrop Muller, who administered the affairs of the mentally
weak Adrian Elias. But even this amount of camouflage did not satisfy
the partners. As Adrian Elias Hope continued to reside in Holland, assets
in his name could not be classified as enemy capital, and the partners, who
were in England, utilized this situation to safeguard their share in the new
bonds. Their action emerged when, at the end of 1812, the initial
cf 800,000 of the loan was repaid: ~ ~ ths went to John Hope, ~ gths to Hope
& Co. (i.e. to John Hope and his cousins by marriage, Thomas, Henry
Philip and Adrian Elias), -laths to P.C.Labouchere, and a similar portion
to Willem Borski. Whether, and in what degree, Borski acted for others
in this matter, it is impossible to say.1
 In practice, Hope must thus have furnished the greater part of the deficit
of cf 2,400,000 which existed on 3 I st December 181 I. The 'payments'
made during 1812 were thus purely ledger entries. Nevertheless, the pay-
ment of interest and the redemption of 300 bonds on 1st January 1812,
which Labouchere had stipulated, had a beneficial effect upon the Russian
bonds, the price of which rose from 56-57 in the autumn to 65 and even
higher in December and January. 2

                                    243
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Early in January 1812, Sillem visited Amsterdam for consultations prior
to accompanying Labouchere to Paris. Despite the fact that he had
retired from Hope & Co., the latter had been approached by a sizeable
group with interests in the Russian loan, with a request that he should
visit Russia again and personally intervene in the matter of the interest
payment due at the end of 1812. Labouchere had planned to take his wife
to the south of France again in the summer, but he felt that he could not
ignore such a call from the bondholders; he did, however, enquire through
his friend Nesselrode, who had meanwhile returned to St.Petersburg,
whether his arrival would be agreeable to the czar, and whether he could
be certain of obtaining a passport in the event of a radical change in the
political situation. 1
 As a journey of this nature also required a special permit from the
French authorities, Labouchere journeyed with Sillem to Paris, where,
he reasoned, his connexions in the highest circles of government might be
of benefit both to himself and his companion. In Amsterdam, Sillem had
received ten receipts for deposited interest vouchers to a value of cf 9,550,
which were countersigned by Smirnov, the Russian consul general there,
and had been instructed to try to encash these when he reached St. Peters-
burg. On the basis of these, Hope could ascertain whether such a trans-
action would be sufficiently advantageous. Sillem was also instructed to
register in the names of the entrepreneurs the metallic bonds given to them
as compensation for the cf 400,000 penalty. The share accruing to Strockel
& Van Dijk, who had meanwhile left the consortium, was divided equally
between Hope and Borski. 2
  At the beginning of February 1812, Labouchere approached the Duke of
Bassano, the French Foreign Minister, with a request for a passport for
Sillem and his servant with the minimum of delay. He did not ask for one
for himself, probably because he wished first to consult Nesselrode, who
was due to visit Paris with a special mission. In this matter, however, the
political circumstances were very much against Labouchere. Although it
had been clear since the end of 1811 that war between France and Russia
was not far away, both parties continued to avoid precipitating the con-
flict. The czar's reasons for staying his hand were that he wished to let
Napoleon appear as the aggressor and that he was anxious to sign a peace
treaty with Turkey first, in order to have the whole of his army available
to meet the French; Napoleon, for his part, was obliged to wait until the
roads had dried up and until sufficient forage for the horses had been
stockpiled. 3 As part of his game of political chess, the czar kept Napoleon
on a line with promises of NesseIrode's arrival in Paris for the purpose of

                                    244
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

starting talks on the differences between the two governments; but, for
mysterious reasons, Nesselrode was repeatedly prevented from leaving
St.Petersburg. The postponements were the more displeasing to Labou-
chere because Guryev had written to say that the emissary was authorized
to discuss with him a new financial operation in the interest of the pay-
ments due at the end of the year. Even though he failed to realize that the
linking of the talks on the interest payment with a vague, specious affair
such as Nesselrode's mission was a bad omen, and in spite of the fact that
he was still confident about a payment at the end of the year, Labouchere
refrained from pressing the matter of his visit to Russia. 1
  While he was waiting, Labouchere bought the contents of Talleyrand's
library for 350,000 francs, of which 100,000 francs was paid in cash and
the balance in Russian bonds. The purchase was made on behalf of John
Hope in London. Painful though this step was, Talleyrand had no option,
having suffered serious losses following the bankruptcy of Simons & Co.,
the house which had contributed to the faIl of De Smeth. As neither John
Hope nor his cousins by marriage, Thomas and Henry Philip, had any
personal interest in the works, which numbered 10,000 volumes,
Labouchere was instructed to have the entire library shipped to Harman
& Co. in London. Labouchere was moved to enquire whether the English-
language volumes, which accounted for a substantial portion of the whole,
could not better be sold in France; but John Hope insisted that every-
thing be sent to London, and after considerable argument with French
customs officials the books were allowed to be exported. 2 It is surprising
that Talleyrand was willing to accept Russian bonds as payment at a time
when war with that country was inevitable. He must have been confident
of making an exchange profit in the long term; certainly this accords with
his political outlook.
  Anticipating Sillem's departure, Labouchere wrote letters of introduc-
tion for him to Guryev, Rumyantsev and Speranski, the last-named a
confidant of the czar. Sillem received comprehensive instructions, and
was briefed on the history of the Russian loans. Labouchere impressed
upon him the need to make the Court understand that it could not count
upon further advances by Hope & Co.: the government must first display
a more serious attitude in the matter of remittances. There was already
bear speculation in Russian issues, and investors abroad (this reference
will certainly have included France) were hoping that the prices would
further decline. This could only be averted by prompt or, better still, early
repayments of capital. If war between France and Russia came, funds
could be remitted to Harman & Co. or Baring Bros. in London. Labou-

                                    245
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA


chere took a dismal view of the trading situation. According to him, the
losses suffered and difficulties experienced by the Americans in their
shipmenh to Russia had been such that these would not be repeated. But
on his arrival in Russia, Sillem was able to send more cheerful news:
despite everything, American vessels continued to arrive in large numbers.
Early in June 1812, however, the war between England and the United
States heralded the disappearance of American vessels from European
waters, and thus Labouchere's prediction was ultimately borne out.
  Like Robert Melvil, SiIIem was given comprehensive information con-
cerning persons with whom he might be involved commercially. Broadly
speaking, the information corresponded to that previously communicated
to Melvil. 1
  By 14th April matters had progressed to the point where Sillem was able
to depart for St.Petersburg-a great favour, as Labouchere subsequently
learned, for at that time no other passports were issued. Sillem reported
that he had had an extremely unpleasant journey, the roads being in very
poor condition following the advance of units of the Grande Armee,
which was preparing for the attack on Russia. As postal services in
Germany were irregular, Sillem and the managers agreed with Hope that
their letters would be numbered so that they would know immediately if
one went astray. As they advanced, the French commandeered grain for
which they paid little and left only a bare minimum for the inhabitants. 2
This occurred not only in Danzig, but also in Konigsberg and Elbing.
  The nearer Sillem came to his destination, the more obstacles he en-
countered. At Polangen, his servant was sent back because his name did
not appear in Sillem's passport. Deeper in Russia, the roads had just
commenced to thaw, and SilIem's coach became bogged down in the mud.
It took hours of toil to get him on his way. On 6th May he arrived in
Mitau, where he requested a visa, only to learn that such matters were
dealt with in Schaulen, twelve miles further on. There he was informed
that his passport would have to be sent to Wilno, thirty-six miles away.
When his request to be allowed to visit Riga in the meantime, to attend to
his affairs there, was refused, Sillem had no choice except to wait, fuming
with impatience, for a week until the document was returned. After a
lightning visit to Riga, he finally reached St.Petersburg on 28th May. His
first act was calmly to take stock of the situation. 3
  Labouchere was annoyed by John Hope's preoccupation with liquidating
the current business and his reticence to offer Sillem the prospect of a
 salary.4 The bondholders, Labouchere wrote, had offered him 2 % of any
principal and interest which they received as a result of his efforts, but no
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

such offer had been made to Sillem. It was unlikely that the latter would
be keen to run the gauntlet in St.Petersburg on a commission basis; he
must at least be offered a salary. During a somewhat acrimonious ex-
change of correspondence, John Hope allowed himself to be persuaded to
offer SiIlem cf 20,000, but this he did grudgingly. Relations between the
partners took on a decidedly sharp note when Hope began to press for
the transfer of the Company's Russian loans to Insinger & Co. He insisted
that this should at the latest be accomplished by the time the new partner-
ship came to an end, i.e. late in 1814, but added that the sooner it was
done the better. Labouchere replied that such a development would not
be well received, either by the public or the managers in Amsterdam. When
Labouchere wrote this, on 15th May 1812, war between France and Russia
was imminent. He pointed out that if John Hope were to carry through
his plan at such a time, the investors would rightly be incensed; moreover,
it was by no means certain that Insinger would undertake to manage the
loans under the circumstances or, if he did, that he would be able to
continue. After all, the price of the Russian bonds had fallen since Febru-
ary from 65 to 50, and it would look as if Hope had abandoned the loan
in the hour of danger.
  In his reply, John Hope yielded some ground. While he continued to
insist upon the transfer of the Russian loan 'or any other concern of ours'
to Insinger, he consented to delay the operation until a moment which
Labouchere deemed appropriate. The letter ended with the suggestion that
Labouchere should broach the subject to both the managers and Insinger. 1
  In the meantime, Sillem had got to work in St.Petersburg, and had
secured the acceptance of the receipts bearing the countersignature of the
Russian consul general in Amsterdam. However, there were many for-
malities to be complied with before the Russian customs officials would
accept these as payment. Guryev did not wish large numbers of receipts
to be tendered at once, for they involved remittances abroad, and a flood
of these could adversely affect the rate of exchange. 2 In fact, the risk of
an excess of receipts was small, since ordinary bondholders displayed
little interest in this form of interest payment. Such vouchers as were
tendered nearly all emanated from the Hopes' private holdings, and even
if war should break out the family could count on a payment via London.
There was also the fact of Smirnov's departure from Amsterdam at the
end of May, which followed an 'official visit' to Varel earlier in the month.
This meant that receipts could no longer be countersigned by him, and
gave the Russian government a formal excuse for refusing to accept any
which lacked his signature. 3

                                    247
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

As far as the prime objective of Sillem's journey was concerned, the
early signs were favourable. The czar graciously received him in audience
and gave the impression that the interest due on 31st December would be
promptly paid. Soon however-indeed, before the formal outbreak of
hostilities on 24th June 1812-Guryev commenced to express doubt as to
the possibility of remitting sufficient funds to Holland, blaming the situa-
tion on the inadequate postal service in Germany and the scarcity of
sound drafts on foreign capitals. Sillem reported that the latter excuse
was not valid, because exports, particularly from the Black Sea port of
Odessa, were running at a high level, so that remittances were quite
feasible.! But the minister continued to funk a direct reply and, in spite
of memoranda and audiences, Sillem was unable to obtain clarification.
On 5th July, Guryev announced officially that the czar had decided to
suspend all payments, both of interest and principal, relating to the loan
in Holland. The decision, it was stated, flowed from the outbreak of war
between Russia and France. 2
  The conflict brought an early improvement in relations between Russia
and England, and on 18th July 1812 this was manifested in a treaty be-
tween the two countries. In the negotiations leading to this, Russia had
demanded that the British government should assume responsibility for
Russian debts in Amsterdam, but this the English negotiators had refused
to do. We may assume that Guryev's announcement to SilIem concerning
the suspension of the payments followed this refusal. 3 In his formal letter
to Sillem, the minister stated that the repayment of the first quarter of the
advance of cf 3,200,000 would not be affected and that the instalments of
principal already advertised (which covered the period up to and including
1st September) would also be met by the Russian Court.4
  The decision came as a severe blow to SilIem, and he weighed the respec-
tive merits of going to the czar's headquarters at Wilno and approaching
him personally, and of sending him a memorandum. In the end he decided
on the latter course and despatched the memorandum to Guryev with a
request that it be transmitted to the czar. Thus, he reasoned, the minis-
terial council could not feel that it had been by-passed. On the one hand
Sillem wished that Laboucbere were present, so that he would be relieved
of some of the blame for the way in which matters had gone; on the other
hand he realized that Labouchere's presence would make little difference,
for there was no question of the czar reversing his decision. s
  Laboucbere, who, with his wife, was staying in Kassel, was the first to
receive the sad news. With somewhat forced optimism, he continued for
a time to hope that the decision had emanated from the 'college des
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


finances,' and not from the czar himself. Perhaps 'this piece of kite-flying'
was for the purpose of testing public reaction in Amsterdam? 1 For the
Company, however, the main issue was what to do next. According to
Labouchere, there were two possibilities: either France would soon be in
a position to dictate peace terms to Russia, in which case Napoleon would
look after the interests of his subjects-interests which he knew extremely
well-or the campaign would drag on, in which case the Company would
do better not to diminish the legal weight of its claims by dragging them
through the mire. With this cryptic utterance, Labouchere probably meant
to convey that, in the event of a prolonged campaign, Hope would be
well advised not to depend too manifestly and unilaterally upon French
support.
  Upon examination of the measure announced, Labouchere could not
discern any intention hostile to the lenders. He understood the Russian
action up to a point, although he could not of course approve of it under
any circumstances. At the same time, the decision fell well short of
infringing the rights of the lenders or renouncing the obligations towards
them. The czar's statements during the last audience before Labouchere's
departure had been too specific for anything of this nature. One of the
most grievous aspects of the suspension was that many people who lived
on their capital would be forced into ruinous transactions which would
benefit a handful of speculators. The best course of action seemed to him
to be for Borski, Voombergh and a few others to call a meeting of bond-
holders, at which advice would be given concerning the measures to be
adopted. It would be necessary for the meeting to elect a committee with
power to act on its behalf; the committee's first task would be to request
Hope & Co. to disclose the true state of affairs. It would also be necessary
to consider addressing a memorandum to the Duke of Bassano, and to
arrange for this to be shown to Napoleon in order that he might display
his paternal vigilance for the interests of his subjects. To counterbalance
this, it would also be important to send a delegation to London to discuss
with John Hope the steps which could be taken by Sillem. Labouchere
felt that Willem Borski was best suited to this role. His own advice now
counted for little with Hope, and his intervention would probably do
more harm than good to the cause. If Borski was unwilling to go alone,
Labouchere's brother, Samuel Pierre, might be persuaded to accompany
him. The French government would certainly issue the necessary pass-
ports.
  Under the terms of Hope's contract with Willem Borski dated lIth
December lSI I, monthly instalments of cf 200,000 had been paid up to

                                    249
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

and including 1st August. Labouchere recommended that these payments
should cease and that the balance of the instalments should be met with
Russian bonds at a price of 60. As the transaction affected only Hope and
a circle of close associates, the bonds would not have to be physically
deposited, but each of the interested parties would retain his share.!

To the managers in Amsterdam and to Willem Borski, Guryev's an-
nouncement came as a bombshell. The letter containing words of con-
solation and advice which Labouchere had sent to the managers had not
arrived by the time the bad news reached them on 29th August. After
prolonged discussions with the confidants, Borski, Berck and Bondt,
William Gordon Coesvelt, one of Hope's new managers, was despatched
to Frankfurt for consultation with Labouchere, who was then in that city.
A report from St. Petersburg prohibiting further ballots for the Russian
bonds had already been received in Amsterdam, and this news caused the
price of the bonds to fall from 46 to between 38 and 39. 2
  In his talks with Coesvelt, Labouchere reiterated the points of view with
which we are already familiar. He added that he had been startled by the
'disposition des esprits a Amsterdam' -a reference not only to the reaction
of the investing public, which he described as 'insensee et impolitique,'
but also to the state of mind of a man like Borski (to whom he addressed
a separate letter of consolation). Borski, he maintained, ought not to be
so overcome with dismay; this was not in keeping with his character. He
should not bemoan the misery of others, but should do something to help
them. He must join with the managers and Bondt and appeal to the
public; he must retain the initiative, and not allow the public to take
action. Borski would be the ideal person to go to England; Coesvelt and
Van der Hoop, another new manager, could not undertake the mission,
for that would create the impression of 'une affaire concertee,' and this
would produce an even worse situation. Borski should not await Labou-
chere's return before embarking on the journey; Labouchere no longer
desired to play an active role, but longed to retire and 'vegetate,' and
devote himself to his ailing wife. 3
  John Hope, however, was not sympathetic towards his partner's desire
for inactivity, and continued to press him ~o go to Russia. Hope countered
the wording of Guryev's official announcement-in which it was stated
that the czar had commanded that remittances to enemy countries should
cease-by asserting that in the principal debenture of 1798, Hope & Co.
was referred to as 'actuellement a Londres,' and that this situation again
applied since all the partners in the firm now resided there. But neither
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA

this somewhat tortuous assertion nor reminders of the Company's earlier
services to Russia could alter the czar's decision.!
  In Amsterdam, the managers and their advisors, aided by Labouchere's
moral support, resumed an active role. A dignified letter on the lines set
out by Labouchere was sent to Guryev. In this, while naturally protesting
against the measure, they expressed confidence in the future, when the
war was over. The letter requested the minister to consult with Sillem
with the aim of arriving at measures which could at once reassure those
living on their capital and prevent speculation.
  In accordance with Labouchere's proposal, a meeting of bondholders
was called for 17th September 18 I 2. This was extremely well attended, and
the announcement of the orders from the Russian Court concerning the
cessation of interest payments made a deep impression on the audience.
In spite of the shock suffered by the public, the discussion was restrained
and not one offensive word was uttered. The establishment of an inde-
pendent committee was felt to be unnecessary, since all present had the
fullest confidence in the Company. 2
  When the meeting drew to a close, the managers received a visit from
J.van der Poll, C.van der Oudermeulen, J. de Burlett and J. van der Man-
dele, representatives of the bondholders present, who, together with
Bondt, had come to report on the decisions of the meeting. After reiter-
ating their confidence in the faits et gestes of the Company, the bond-
holders urgently requested that Labouchere should revisit Russia or, if
this were not possible, that he should take other action in the matter of
the loan. They asked the Company to accept vouchers for the payment
due on 1st January 1813 from those bondholders who wished to surrender
them, but at the holders' responsibility. The meeting thus sought to
contribute, albeit with provisionally non-negotiable paper, to the costs.
The announcement caused the bond price to fall from 37 to 32, but
compared with the gravity of the measure the decline was modest. 3 Borski
and Samuel Pierre Labouchere journeyed to Frankfurt to convey the
bondholders' request to Labouchere. It proved relatively easy to persuade
him to resume an active part, but he made his co-operation conditional
upon both emissaries agreeing to go to England for consultation with
John Hope. Borski more than once objected on the grounds that he had
never been to sea and that the autumn was anything but a good time to
embark on such an adventure, but Labouchere stood his ground. Even
Borski's lamentations over his large family, the impossibility of neglecting
the management of his affairs, his longing for peace and quiet and his
dislike of any interruption of the manner of life to which he was accus-

                                    25 1
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

tomed were of no avail, and in the end he was obliged to submit. 1
  Pierre Cesar Labouchere thereupon threw himself into the task of ar-
ranging the two journeys with the minimum of delay. Requests for pass-
ports for himself and for Borski and S.P.Labouchere were submitted to
the Director-General of Police in Amsterdam, Devilliers du Terrage, and
the Minister of Police in Paris, the Duke of Rovigo. In support of the
applications, Labouchere wrote to the Foreign Minister, while Robert
Vofite-who had been appointed by Napoleon to a senior financial post-
added his recommendation in memoranda to Governor Lebrun and
Mollien, the Treasury Minister. The request submitted to the Duke of
Rovigo was accompanied by a similar document addressed to Napoleon.
In this, however, it was explained that the applicants sought to give the
Russian government an opportunity to reverse its decision 'even before
the end of hostilities brings the inevitable consequence of the success of
your campaigns.' 2 This piece of flattery was obviously added for the
purpose of reconciling Napoleon to the fact that Hope & Co. already
desired contact with the Russian government. When the request was
made, on 30th September 1812, the first report of Napoleon's entry into
Moscow on the 14th of the month had just reached Amsterdam, and it
looked as if the French emperor was in a position to dictate peace terms
to the czar.
  Sillem's services were invoked for the purposes of the formalities at the
Russian end. He was instructed to submit a request to Guryev for a pass-
port for Labouchere. While the passports from the French government
were speedily forthcoming, as had been anticipated, Sillem's efforts met
with a polite but firm refusal from Guryev. The official reason given was
that Labouchere, in his journeys to England, had undertaken semi-diplo-
matic negotiations on behalf of King Louis Napoleon of Holland and
also Napoleon himself, and that a visit by him to Russia could be con-
strued as a diplomatic mission aimed at bringing about a rapprochement
between France and Russia. 3 Although couched in elegant terms, the
refusal boiled down to the fact that the Russian government had no
intention of resuming the payments and therefore did not welcome so
'powerful' a mission.
  Labouchere took the refusal philosophically. Because its tone remained
extremely friendly towards the Company, he felt that no unfavourable
significance need be attached to it as far as the bondholders were con-
cerned. At the same time, he deemed it advisable to cancel the steps taken
in Paris in connexion with his passport as quickly as possible and im-
mediately to shift the emphasis to the contact with England. 4

                                   252
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

Developments in the military sphere also pointed in this direction. The
conquest of Moscow was followed by a fire which rendered the city
unsuitable as winter quarters for the French troops. Moreover, Napoleon
wasted a whole month in fruitless efforts to arrive at negotiations with the
czar. By the time he had decided on a withdrawal, the Russians had
brought up fresh troops and the French were forced to retire along the
route which they had plundered during their advance. The unexpectedly
early onset of winter added to the ordeal of their disorderly retreat.
  Immediately prior to the news of the French setbacks, the price of the
Russian bonds reached a new low; on 24th October they stood at 25.
Early in November, when reports of the withdrawal began to trickle
through from Moscow, the rate rose to 30, and by the end of the month
it had reached 35. 1 The sudden change of fortunes, which grew into a
catastrophe for the Grande Armee, soon attracted speculators. Thanks to
the speed with which reports concerning the situation in Russia reached
him, Count von Stackelberg, formerly the Russian envoy to the Kingdom
of Holland and now occupying the equivalent post in Vienna, was among
the first to approach Hope & Co. In October he instructed the Company
to purchase ten thousand guildersworth of Russian bonds. 2 He was
followed early in December by Moritz Bethmann of Frankfurt, with
whom Labouchere was at that moment staying, with an order for fifty
thousand guildersworth. 3
  With the cancellation of Labouchere's visit to Russia, SiIIem's operations
in St.Petersburg became indispensable. The matter of the remuneration
for his services again became an issue at the end of 1812 when John Hope
changed his mind yet again and refused to pay Sillem a penny unless the
other interested parties contributed. In his morbid state of irritability, he
despatched a stream of letters urging the early collection of outstanding
debts and the sale of any bonds which could not be transferred to England
or taken to other places of safety. In Amsterdam, the consequence of
this action was to confront the managers with a serious shortage of liquid
assets. On 1st August 1812 they had only cf 40,000 in hand, yet faced
three monthly payments of cf 100,000 each.4 Only with the greatest diffi-
culty could John Hope be persuaded to place sufficient funds from his as-
sets in Holland at the disposal of the managers to enable them to meet
their current commitments. 5
  In spite of John Hope's refusal, the managers decided at the end of 1812
to pay Sillem a sum of cf 10,000 for his efforts in the matter of the
Russian loans during the previous six months. In a letter to John Hope,
Berck expressed his great dismay at the former's directives concerning

                                    253
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


Sillem; if Sillem had not received any remuneration, he stated, Hope's
honour would have been at stake. Berck went on to say that Sillem was
too valuable to lose: by obtaining a repayment against the loan of
cf 3,200,000 and the metallic bonds relating to the reimbursed penalty dur-
ing 1812, he had more than justified the expense incurred. l
 John Hope also strongly opposed the planned visit of Borski and
S.P.Labouchere to England on the grounds that 'they can be of no use
here on account of the Government.' Harman and Baring were said to
have shared this view. Following the approval by the French government
of the passport applications, a request for similar facilities, with Harwich
or Gravesend as the point of disembarkation, was made to the British
authorities via Baring. News of the approval of this request came at the
end of February 1813, but now John Hope's letter raised doubts concern-
ing the probable outcome. The managers, supported by Berck, advised
against the journey but, at the insistence of the bondholders, Borski and
S.P.Labouchere decided to go. By cancelling the agreement entered into
with the Company for payment for their journey, they left themselves
financially free in their approach to Hope. 2
  The two emissaries left for England early in March 1813. But they were
not destined to meet John Hope, for he had died on 12th February. In all
probability, his urge for liquidation and the settlement of affairs was
prompted by the decline in his already poor health. Faced with this
situation, Borski and S.P.Labouchere approached Harman and Baring,
but after spending only a few days in London they received an official
ultimatum to leave the country without delay. Their expulsion, it ap-
peared, had been motivated by the Russian Court, which desired to avoid
fresh claims. 3
  With the suspension of the payments, Sillem's role in St.Petersburg had
necessarily become a passive one. The lack of progress in rounding off
Operation R.M. also contributed to this situation. Small quantities of iron
were sold from time to time, but there could be no question of disposing
of the stock of linen until trade with America was restored, and this
depended upon a cessation of hostilities between England and the United
States. 4 In a review of Operation R.M. undertaken at the end of November
1812, it was established that losses had been incurred on linseed and
potash. One ship carrying potash had sunk, and another had fallen prey
to Danish pirates. As we have seen, the stock of tar had also been sold at
a loss; indeed, the price obtained for the cargo which Becker had shipped
to London did not even cover the freight charges. All thes,e commodities
had originally been purchased with a view to early resale, and although

                                    254
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

this failed to materialize, the efforts of Labouchere and Sillem had at
least kept the operation alive.!
  Following the news of the suspension of the ballots, the parties to the
agreement with Willem Borski dated I Ith December 18 II met their
monthly commitment of cf 200,000 on 1st September 1812 in Russian
bonds at 60 %, as we have already seen. Sillem was instructed to apply to
Guryev for the payment of the four remaining instalments, which totalled
cf 800,000. The minister was not particularly pleased by the request, but
he had earlier approved the agreement with Borski and in the end he was
obliged to pay. Sillem received a commission of I % on the first quarter of
the cf 3,200,000 and the four instalments of cf 200,000. In addition, La-
bouchere left his share of these payments in Sillem's hands for a year in
order that he might invest the money and enjoy the interest thereon. 2
  After the signal failure of Napoleon's Russian campaign, Sillem received
numerous letters from Holland and France, requesting him to trace
missing relatives and provide them with money. This was not a simple
task, for the prisoners were spread over a number of provinces and there
was no central administration. As a last resort, people took to adver-
tising in the St.Petersburg and Moscow newspapers, but this quickly
assumed immense proportions, and for a time such advertisements were
banned on superior orders. Finally the czar commanded the provincial
governors to draw up lists of prisoners of war in their areas and to send
these to St.Petersburg. 3
  For Napoleon, the defeat in Russia was the beginning of the end. Late
in February 1813, Prussia signed a treaty with Russia, and Sweden sent
troops to Germany. By the Spring of 1813, the French had difficulty in
maintaining their position west of the Elbe. However, Napoleon suc-
ceeded in assembling new armies, and a number of successes in Saxony
enabled him to restore the military balance, at least temporarily. He then
requested, and obtained, an armistice, and this took effect on 4th June
1813. To the consternation of England, which, in its struggle against
Napoleon, could ill afford to lose the continental armies, the Austrian
Foreign Minister, Von Metternich, adopted a policy of neutrality towards
France and Russia, thereby threatening the joint military efforts against
France. At the Reichenbach Convention on 15th June 1813, England
agreed to provide subsidies for Russia and Prussia on condition that both
powers fielded armies of a certain strength. 4
  For Russia, the Reichenbach offer implied a grant of It million pounds
sterling during the course of 1813, subject to the proviso that the money
should be used only for military purposes. England, however, was suffer-

                                   255
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

ing from a scarcity of cash, and on 30th September 1813 a clause was
added to the agreement, providing for a portion of the subsidy to be paid
in bills of credit. These bills, which were issued by the Exchequer and bore
interest, did not become encashable until one month after the signing of
a general agreement ending hostilities. 1
  The political and military developments were reflected in the market
price of the Russian bonds. This rose from 35 at the end of November
1812 to 40 at the beginning of 1813, albeit not without temporary relapses.
On 20th March, shortly after Prussia declared war on France, the rate
briefly reached 50, but on 1st June, following Napoleon's victories in
Saxony, it rose no higher than 41. The news of the ceasefire on 4th June,
however, brought an improvement to 46. 2 In January 1813, Labouchere
had been somewhat nettled by the fact that the bonds had reached 40 and
more, a situation which he described as 'just as absurd' as the low of 25 in
the previous October. If no interest payment was forthcoming at the end
of the year, he predicted, another low was inevitable. On this occasion,
however, he was mistaken. 3
  During the ceasefire, peace negotiations took place between Napoleon
and the allies. The Company attempted, with the aid of Robert Voute,
who was then in Paris, to have a clause providing for a resumption of the
Russian payments incorporated in any peace treaty which might be ne-
gotiated, but the breakdown of the talks on I I th August 18 13 put an end
to these efforts.4 Hostilities were resumed, and now Austria opposed
 Napoleon. While the negotiations were still in progress, Von Stackelberg,
as usual well informed, instructed Hope to safeguard his funds and secu-
rities in Holland against confiscation by entering them in another name
in the accounts and holding them at the disposal of a Swiss house. He also
instructed the Company to sell his Italian bonds, which in his view would
very probably fall sharply in the event of Napoleon's defeat. In fact, the
 news of the resumption of hostilities alone had caused these to fall to 40
 on the Milan Exchange. 5 The news had also caused the Russian bonds to
fall to 40 in Amsterdam, but Von Stackelberg made no mention of selling
his holding of these. We can but imagine his surprise and anger when, in
 September, he received news from Hope & Co. that not only the 33
 certificates of his Italian bonds, but also his 27 Russian bonds, had been
 sold, and with this a curt explanation that it had appeared necessary to
 dispose of the Russian bonds in order to make good the losses on the
 Italian securities and that he would be receiving a draft on Sillem in
 St.Petersburg for the sum of the proceeds. 6 Enraged, the envoy wrote to
 the managers in Amsterdam and to Labouchere in Frankfurt, saying that
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


he had neither asked for his Russian bonds to be sold nor for a draft on
SilIem, and that the disposal of the bonds was scandalous because, with
the war against Napoleon going so well (the French emperor had been
defeated by the allies at Leipzig in a battle lasting from r6th to r8th
October), everything pointed to a boom in the price of the bonds. 1
  The solution to this puzzling event was not revealed until the second half
of November, after the liberation of Holland. Despite the fact that La-
bouchere was greatly respected in the highest circles of government in
France, the authorities in Amsterdam watched the activities of the 'Anglo-
maniac' house of Hope & Co. like hawks. In a confidential report to the
Minister for Home Affairs in Paris, the Prefect of the Zuyderzee departe-
ment, De Celles, complained that Labouchere, with his quasi-diplomatic
journeys to England and Russia and his continual toings and froings
between Amsterdam, Paris and Frankfurt, behaved like an unaccredited
agent of a foreign power. The present managers in Amsterdam, he
continued, were no better: Coesvelt had lived in Spain for years, and at
the time of the revolt there had mixed first with the rebels and then with
the French armies. It was he 'who gives the orders, after which the Ex-
change has to toe the line.' Van der Hoop, he wrote, came from a noto-
riously pro-Orange family, and Lestapis, although a native of Bayonne,
had been brought up in England and was an enemy of the French govern-
ment. Together, these men supported Russia's credit in such a manner
that, incredible as it might seem, Dutch merchants, who in other respects
were good at arithmetic, valued the issue at 45 % even though no interest
had been paid in either the previous or the current year. 2
  Faced with a comparatively unfavourable political situation, the French
government exercised strict supervision of sales of French and Italian
stocks, because such sales could be construed as indicating a lack of
 confidence in the future of the Napoleonic regime. When Von Stackel-
berg's instructions had reached the managers, they had sought advice
from Labouchere. The settlement of John Hope's estate and the assess-
ment of death duties were expected to involve inspection of the Company's
books by the French authorities, and the managers knew that a simulated
transaction would be bound to emerge. With the full approval of La-
bouchere, they thereupon decided to sell both the Italian and Russian
bonds and, by means of the draft on Sillem, to make it clear to the
 French authorities that Von Stackelberg's assets were beyond their grasp. 3
  In the meantime, Czar Alexander had paid a visit to Bethmann in
 Frankfurt, and Labouchere had availed himself of the opportunity for a
 meeting with him. The czar repeated his assurance that the interests of

                                    257
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

the Dutch creditors would be closely watched, but on the subject of a
resumption of payments he remained vague. In an effort to expedite the
matter, Labouchere handed Nesselrode, who had accompanied the czar,
a memorandum addressed to Guryev. In this, Labouchere set out a plan
to put the Russian farmers in the devastated provinces on their feet, and
at the same time to enable the interest due in 1812 and 1813 to be paid on
1st January 1814. The sum required as interest would be 10 % of
cf84,000,000 i.e. cf 8.4 million, or 15,655,555 roubles. Under the plan, a
committee would lend each of the million or so stricken farmers a sum
of 10-12 roubles for between 5 and 10 years at 5% per annum. On the
strength of the certificates of indebtedness, the committee would issue
rescriptions which could be exchanged in Amsterdam for interest vouchers
maturing on 1st January in the years 1813 and 1814. Redemption in
guilders or roubles, at the holder's option, could be effected in five instal-
ments. At the same time it would be necessary to announce the resump-
tion of interest payments during the ensuing year; the first of these, at the
end of 1813, would be no problem because, partly as a result of meeting
the last four instalments for 1812 in bonds, the Russian government
would have at least 1,300 bonds at its disposal, and with the news of the
resumption of interest payments these would certainly rise substantially
in price and, when sold, provide a portion of the necessary funds. In this
way, Russia would be able to payoff the 8-!- million guilders over a
period of 10 years, while the creditors in Amsterdam would have an
incentive to raise Russia's prosperity as far as possible. 1 Even if La-
bouchere's plan tallied in mathematical terms, it failed to take account of
the true situation in Russia. The Russian civil service would have been
unable to set up such a detailed administrative system in peacetime, let
alone just after an exhausting war and in an area which had been occu-
pied by the enemy.
  At the beginning of January 1814, P.C.Labouchere set off for London,
travelling via Amf>terdam. On his advice, the managers sent Guryev a
letter in the spirit of Labouchere's proposals, adding that, during his visit
to London, Labouchere could perhaps arrange for the aid, in the form of
subsidies, which stood at Guryev's disposal there to be used to meet the
commitments in Holland. 2 This new attempt, like others, failed. The
Company's letter was ignored, and Labouchere's memorandum was re-
turned to Sillem in March-a clear indication that Guryev did not wish to
discuss the resumption of the interest payments. 3

In December 1813, Sillem had drawn Labouchere's attention to the
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

potential value of the bills of credit as part of a new arrangement for the
payment of overdue interest. In February I8I4, Guryev and Bethmann
both introduced Hope to Councillor of State De Gervais, who had been
appointed Russia's representative on the committee charged with issuing
the bills of credit, and who would temporarily be residing in Amsterdam. 1
As the British government had specifically stated that the bills might not
be sold, but used only as security for advances by merchants, De Gervais
enquired of Hope regarding the possibilities in that respect in Amsterdam.
In a letter from London, Labouchere explained to De Gervais how the
stock of capital in Holland had become depleted as a result of the reduc-
tion by two-thirds of the State's domestic debt and the cessation of
principal and interest payments on various foreign loans. In addition,
the new government had introduced an accelerated tax, the effect of
which had been to swallow up such funds as were still available. As if all
this were not enough, foreign demands were being made on the Amster-
dam money market at a moment when Dutch commerce and industry
had scarcely got into motion after a long period of stagnation. Not only
was it extremely doubtful whether there would be any money for the
Russian and Prussian bills of credit, but there was also the danger that
these would become objects of speculation and decline in value out of all
proportion, because they would not commence to be redeemable until a
month after the signing of peace, and it was anybody's guess when that
would come. Such a decline in value would be decidedly unacceptable to
the British government. If, however, the Russian Court would agree to
accept matured Russian interest vouchers for half its quota of the bills,
up to a maximum of eight million guilders, it might yet be possible to
launch an operation. 2
 As De Gervais was in urgent need of money, Pierre Cesar authorized the
managers to place half a million guilders at the disposal of the Russian
commissar. Before doing so, he had sought the views of Alexander Baring,
who in fact was the only partner in the Company at that moment, and of
Harman, who, together with Baring, had looked after Hope's interests in
England and had been co-opted by the British government in connexion
with the transfer of subsidies to the Continent. 3 The managers were told
that the advances given to De Gervais must as far as possible be financed
in Holland-for example, from the funds held by Hope & Co. on behalf
of Adrian Elias. As Elias was no longer able to manage his affairs, it
would be necessary to consult David Berck, one of his trustees. With the
death of Willem Borski on 5th February I814, a valuable link with the
Dutch capitalists had been lost, but it was conceivable that his widow

                                   259
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


would be able and willing to advance a sum of money. In addition, the
managers were authorized to sell, if necessary, 200 Portuguese bonds and
the balance of the Russian bonds which they held; the price of the latter
had meanwhile risen to 56.1
  The Amsterdam house must thus generate its own funds as far as
possible, and not draw on Baring, because the rates of exchange in
England had become extremely unfavourable as a result of the govern-
ment's subsidy commitments. Pro forma drawings on Baring Brothers
were allowed, but on condition that the drafts were sent to Alexander
Baring, for the account of Henry Hope & Co., the London house which
managed the interests of the Hope family.2
  While De Gervais had yet to present himself to the managers, Samuel
Pierre Labouchere, who headed a merchant hou~e in Rotterdam, received
news from Harman that shipments of gold consigned to Hope & Co. were
on their way. He was instructed to accept these at Hellevoetsluis and
arrange for their conveyance to Amsterdam. With the ports still largely
blocked by ice after a long and severe winter, and difficulty in moving
goods by road, this was not an easy task. Samuel Pierre therefore decided
to employ a trusted agent, in the manner of the Jewish money dealers,
and to send him to Hellevoetsluis to attend to the inward clearance of the
gold and its journey via the offices of the customs agents along the route,
at each of which the passport for the gold had to be signed by the excise
authorities. 3
  Because De Gervais required cash immediately for the maintenance of
 the Russian armies, the managers in Amsterdam set about buying gold
coin in Holland even before Harman's consignments arrived. Samuel
Pierre Labouchere in Rotterdam and, later, Bethmann in Frankfurt were
 also brought into this operation. 4 Between the end of February and the
end of April 1814, more than cf 750,000 in cash was placed at the disposal
 of De Gervais. In the early stages, the managers recouped their costs by
 simply retaining equal sums out of Harman's consignments, but De
 Gervais informed them that he required all the money and that they
 would have to finance their purchases by drawing on the credit opened in
 his name with Harman. 5
  The nature of the coinage given to De Gervais varied during the first
 two months. During February and the first half of March, he received
 not only Napoleons d'or (which were primarily destined for occupied
 French territory), but also large quantities of guineas and Hanoverian
 pistoles, of which the last two were in circulation in Germany, especially
 in Hanover. The British government had minted the pistole in England

                                   260
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

with a view to its use in Germany, but in the eyes of Pierre Cesar La-
bouchere the measure served also to circumvent the ban on the export of
gold bullion. 1 He was annoyed at the delay in setting up the Mint in
Utrecht, the result of which was that in March 1814 there was still no
means of converting gold bars into ducats, a form of coinage which had
long been in circulation outside the Netherlands. According to Labou-
chere, government circles in England were amazed by the slowness with
which everything was done in Holland, and he maintained that such signs
of exhaustion served to diminish foreign interest and willingness to do
anything to assist Holland's recovery. 2
  Following the capitulation of Paris on 31st March 1814 and Napoleon's
abdication twelve days later, the Russian armies were especially in need
of French money. This is reflected in the records of the purchases made
by the managers after 1st April, in which French coinage, especially silver
Napoleons, predominated. The Napoleons, packed in kegs, were sent to
Paris by special courier. 3
  The plan to meet half the bills of credit with overdue Russian vouchers
had made little headway in the meantime. Admittedly, Pierre Cesar La-
bouchere recognized the difficulties. At the end of February 1814, with
Napoleon'S downfall still in doubt, Labouchere was most anxious to
avoid the personal intervention of De Gervais if the question of borrowing
on the security of the bills should arise, for 'the name of the Company
must not appear.'4 Collaboration with another house was out of the
question for the same reason. Moreover, the supplementary convention
to the Reichenbach Treaty, dated 30th September 1813, expressly stipu-
lated that the bills of credit were to be used only for the prosecution of
the war, and thus England would probably raise objection to a payment in
overdue Russian vouchers. There was also the possibility that the Prus-
sians would complain on the grounds that many of the vouchers had
come into the hands of speculators, often at less than half their nominal
value. Such men would thus be in a position to offer the bills of credit for
sale at 80 % or less of their value, and make a handsome profit to boot.
Prussia would then be faced with the choice between keeping the bills
allotted to her until all those from Russia had come on to the market, or
accepting a substantial loss. Added to all this, it was of the greatest
importance to England-and not only for reasons of prestige-that the
bills should retain their par value. After all, they had been devised in
order to assist Russia and Prussia in their struggle against Napoleon, and
not to line the pockets of a handful of speculators. 5 These considerations
led to the issue of the bills being repeatedly postponed. Guryev's rejection
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


of Labouchere's plan for the Russian vouchers was thus not such a severe
blow. The reaction from the czar's headquarters, where Labouchere's
proposals had been learned of through De Gervais and Nesselrode, was
similarly negative. Just how little the rate for the bills of credit interested
the Russian government emerged from Guryev's disclosure to Sillem that
any losses suffered on realizing the bills were for the account of the
British government, and that he, Guryev, was concerned only with the
amount of money which he received. 1
  With the date for the issue of the bills receding, the British government
was obliged to seek other ways to meet the urgent needs of its allies.
Among these were to allow the foreign powers to draw on London, to
transmit money to the Continent, and to send drafts to the head of the
British payment office in Amsterdam, Sir George Burgmann, with in-
structions to hand them to the representatives of Russia and Prussia. The
commissary-in-chief, John Rerries, who was responsible for providing
British troops abroad with funds and supplies-and was therefore con-
cerned with the subsidies for the allies-resorted increasingly to the last
of these methods, since this was the only way to prevent the pound sterling
declining further under the influence of indiscriminate drawings. The lack
of concern on the part of the allies in this respect was also clear from
Guryev's remark to Sillem. In his transactions, Rerries employed the
services of Nathan Mayer Rothschild, who at that time headed the
London office of the well-known Frankfurt banking house and who had
previously rendered great service to Rerries in the financing of the British
army in Spain. 2
  Labouchere was convinced of the need for Rope & Co. to give all
possible help to Russia, even ifno early settlement of the interest payment
issue was forthcoming. To this end, the Company must decline all com-
missions, complete all current affairs as quickly as possible, and in any
case maintain 'une caisse bien garnie' -even if the loss of interest thereby
incurred should more than swallow up the total commission on the trans-
actions. Labouchere maintained that profit was of less importance than
demonstrating goodwill at that moment, and he greatly regretted the fact
that the uncertainty concerning the future of the Company was an ob-
stacle to increasing the aid still further. 3
  After Napoleon's abdication and his banishment to Elba at the begin-
ning of May, there remained the question of a peace treaty with France
and, allied to this, the encashment of the bills of credit. Under the terms
of the convention of 30th September 1813, the bills were to become
negotiable one month after the general armistice; but the bills themselves

                                     262
                         PER ASPER A AD ASTRA

had not yet been issued! Early in May 1814, Rerries travelled to Paris to
settle these matters. Re went by way of Amsterdam, where he had dis-
cussions with Sir George Burgmann. Besides De Gervais and the repre-
sentatives of Prussia and Austria, the visitors to Paris included Pierre
Cesar Labouchere, who had journeyed to France with Alexander Baring. 1
  Rerries succeeded in extracting promises from the Prussian and Austrian
representatives that subsidy funds would no longer be drawn on London
without the prior consent of the British Treasury. Instead, they would
receive the necessary monies through the Treasury agents in Paris or
elsewhere. To seal the agreement, sizeable sums were promptly placed at
the disposal of the two countries, an action realized with the assistance of
the Rothschilds. 2 De Gervais also consented in principle to the new
arrangement, but he added that the final decision rested with Guryev. In
view of this, he was not empowered to accept the 200,000 pounds sterling
which Rerries had placed at his disposal in Amsterdam. To avoid awk-
ward discussions, De Gervais left Paris shortly after this. Before depart-
ing, however, he persuaded Pierre Cesar Labouchere to furnish a letter of
credit on Baguenault of Paris for one million francs, thus ensuring that
the Paymaster-General of the Russian army in France was not without
funds. Re offered bills of credit for an equivalent sum as security. 3
 The Russian and Prussian governments had sent memoranda to the
British Foreign Secretary, Viscount Castlereagh, giving their views on
how the bills of credit should be dealt with. Both countries desired that
the bills should be directly converted into 6 % bonds via Sir George
Burgmann's department, thus keeping them out of the hands of third
parties. They also asked for a firm date from which the instalments over-
due since the signing of the Reichenbach Convention would bear interest.
On 15th March 1814, nine instalments were owing (the convention was
signed on 15th June 1813), and as Paris had capitulated on 31st March
1814, the first of April seemed a suitable date for the interest to commence.
If the British government would agree to make available all matured bills
of credit or bonds, Russia and Prussia would undertake not to put them
into circulation, but only to use them as security. It would, moreover,
please the governments if the bonds could be made negotiable at centres
other than Amsterdam alone. Finally, Russia and Prussia wished for the
advances already made against the bills to be deducted from the final
payment due from the British government.
  The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury broadly concurred in these
requests, albeit they were only willing to extend the area of negotiability
to centres where not less than one million Prussian talers had been
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


advanced on the security of the bonds. They indicated that they wished
to settle the matter of the advances not upon the final instalment, but
during the ensuing months; moreover, where such advances had been
made in foreign currencies, settlement would be made at the rate of
exchange ruling on the date of the advance. This, of course, meant that
Russia and Prussia would still suffer the exchange losses brought about
by their draft transactions. 1
  With the signing on 30th May 1814 of what was later to become the
first Treaty of Paris, the bills of credit or corresponding 6 % bonds became
normal drafts, of which one million Prussian talersworth were negoti-
able monthly for a period of fifteen months. This implied that, if not
freely negotiable, they were discountable and possessed the advantage
over normal drafts of bearing interest at 1- % per month. 2 Of the total of
15 million Prussian talers, Russia received two-thirds and Prussia one-
third.
  Even before the treaty was signed, De Gervais wrote to P.C.Labouchere,
who was then in London, requesting an advance against the matured
Russian bills of credit. In return, he offered seven monthly instalments,
totalling 4,666,666-t Prussian talers, and, in addition to the monthly in-
terest of t %, a discount of I % per month. He asked for the advance to
 be made in equal instalments in Hamburg, Berlin and Frankfurt or
Leipzig. He required the money urgently in order to withdraw the Russian
assignats with which the German states had become flooded since the
entry of the Russian troops. Just how urgent was the Russian govern-
ment's need of funds became apparent from a letter from De Gervais a
 week later, in which he offered to raise the discount from I % to 2 %
 provided the whole sum could be put at his disposal by 1st July 1814.3
  Labouchere's reaction was cautious in the extreme. The future of the
 Company had still not been determined, for Alexander Baring had made
 his decision dependent upon the outcome of the allied rulers' deliberations
 concerning Holland, and this was still not forthcoming. Under such
 circumstances, the reserves were inadequate to undertake so large an
 operation as this, with its attendant risks. In Labouchere's view, the
 principal obstacle lay in the indeterminate rates of exchange which, by
 reason of the subsidies and the extent of the British government's financial
 needs on the Continent, were subject to considerable fluctuation. He
 therefore declined to go beyond an offer to permit acceptances on Hope &
 Co. once the maturing dates and rates of exchange of the bills had been
 established. The best arrangement seemed to him to be to make De
 Gervais's drafts on the Company payable at Hope's offices one month
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


after the corresponding bill matured. De Gervais would thus be permitted
to draw I million guilders on Hope, due on I5th August, against the
666,6661 Prussian talers which became payable on I5th July. As there
was no longer any question of large-scale advances, Labouchere agreed
to accept a commission of 2 %.1
  Such a conservative approach, however, was not what De Gervais had
in mind, nor did it meet his needs. Fortunately for him, there was another
house which, by reason of its extensive transactions on behalf of the
British government, had adequate reserves and could influence the ex-
change rates-the prime obstacle in Labouchere's eyes. The house of
Rothschild, which at that time sought to establish relations with as many
governments as possible, grasped the opportunity to serve the Russian
Court and at the same time to demonstrate its financial strength. On 17th
June 1814, De Gervais informed Labouchere that he had entered into a
contract covering the first six months' matured bills, and that under this
he would receive hard cash in Hamburg, Dresden and Warsaw. While
expressing regret that it had not been possible to reach agreement with
Labouchere in this matter, he said that clearly the inconveniences which
stemmed from the long distances had been against this. De Gervais
discreetly refrained from naming the house which had succeeded in
bridging these long distances. 2
  Officially, Labouchere could only be relieved by the news that De Ger-
vais had succeeded elsewhere, but privately he was saddened by the
thought that the Company had been forced to decline a transaction which
it would certainly have accepted in earlier times, when the assets of the
Hopes were available. Undoubtedly this reflection added to his annoyance
when it transpired that De Gervais was willing to meet Labouchere's
advance of I million francs in Paris in bills of credit, but refused to repay
the credit of cf 500,000 given at the end of February 1814 in the same
manner. This, he wrote in bitter tones, was the gratitude for Hope's
support of De Gervais's operations at a time when the fortunes of war
were uncertain, when no one would accept the bills of credit as security,
and when money was so scarce and dear that it was almost impossible to
get bills discounted. 3
  Labouchere was equally dissatisfied with the commission of 5 % which
De Gervais was willing to allow the Company on the advance of 1
million francs made in Paris. In February 1814, when Hope's reserves
were fully committed in supporting De Gervais, Sir George Burgmann
had offered the Company bills of credit as collateral at 9 % interest.
Subsequent to the agreement with Rothschild, De Gervais had himself
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

offered the house of Gontard in Frankfurt 7 % interest plus 2 % commis-
sion for an advance against the November 1814 instalment. 1 Despite these
protests, however, Labouchere adhered to his standpoint that the interests
of the Russian Court were paramount. It was with this in mind that he
had declined to speculate in the bills of credit. As far as the single monthly
instalment of 666,666t Prussian talers which had been allotted to Hope &
Co. was concerned, he wished only to receive the sum in guilders which
the Company had originally advanced. Therefore, the credit of cf 500,000
given in February must be debited at par value in the normal manner, plus
a bank commission of 1% and interest at 5 % per annum. 2 In order to
ensure that De Gervais should not distort the facts when he returned to
Russia, a comprehensive report on all that had taken place was sent to
SilleminOctober 1814.3

A victim of circumstances, Sillem had achieved little in the matter of the
Russian loans. For the time being, his activities remained limited to
collecting the annual repayment of cf 800,000 against 3,200,000 guilders-
worth of newly created bonds and keeping an eye on the commodity
markets in Russia in the hope of opportunities to round off Operation
R.M. Sillem had by now become financially interested in the operation,
he and P.C.Labouchere each having acquired one-half of Hope's 176ths
share. Early in 1813 he reported to Hope that the previous autumn had
been bad from the point of view of shipments, because foreign markets
were more than adequately supplied with Russian goods. An early end
to the war in America should result in a good market for the linen goods,
for considerable quantities of linen had been destroyed in the burning of
Moscow. 4 Sillem succeeded in selling about 4,500 poods of iron to a ship's
master who required ballast for his vessel, and shortly afterwards he
disposed of 1,000 pieces of raven-duck and 400 pieces of Flemish linen to
the American Company in Russia, which was preparing an expedition.
The proceeds of these sales, however, scarcely covered the original cost,
let alone the loss of interest or the storage charges. 5
  In spite of this poor result, Sillem was optimistic regarding the future.
The reopening of the routes to America was bound to produce a substan-
tial rise in iron prices, for there was no more than I! million po ods on the
market, and with mine owners complaining that selling prices did not even
cover their costs, there would be no large-scale deliveries for the time
being. The output of the linen mills had fallen for the same reason, and
most spinners had gone over to cotton textiles. But the army needed linen
goods, and thus peace in America could not fail to produce a boom. 6

                                     266
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

 However, the peace from which Sillem expected so much was not to
come until 24th December 1814, and so sales of the goods involved in
Operation R.M. remained at a very low level. The Spring of 1814 did
indeed bring some improvement in linen prices in Russia, but the slow
progress which Sillem was able to achieve with Guryev in the matter of
the resumption of the interest payments made him decide to leave af-
fairs in Russia where they were for the time being and return to western
Europe. As long as the czar remained abroad, no decisions of any mag-
 nitude were taken in Russia, and the time had come for Sillem to build
for his future. He was anxious first to review the situation in Hamburg
and assess the prospects for starting a new house there, and then to
cross to England -something which Labouchere had repeatedly urged
him to do. 1
  Sillem left St.Petersburg on 3rd May 1814. After a smooth journey he
arrived at Altona, from where he travelled on to Amsterdam in early
June. There, he discussed the Russian affairs with De Gervais. He did not
stay long in Amsterdam, for Labouchere urged him to cross to England
without delay, because the czar and Nesselrode were there and it might
be possible to obtain an audience to discuss the Russian interest pay-
ments. 2 In Paris, Labouchere had approached Nesselrode with a request
to be presented to the czar, but the latter, with his peculiar charm, had
replied that, as Labouchere was an old friend, there was no question of
formal presentation, and that he would invite him to dinner. However,
by delaying the invitation, the czar had kept the guest-and his awkward
questions-at a distance. Eventually, Labouchere and Alexander Baring
had been obliged to return to London, and therefore Labouchere had
pinned his hopes on the czar's visit to that country. But once again he
was disappointed, for the czar was kept so busy with festivities that there
was no time left for a meeting with Labouchere and Sillem. 'Everyone
here is so agog with excitement that one does not notice anybody, and
nobody is in a mood for anything,' an irritated Pierre Cesar said in a
letter to Amsterdam. 3
  On 27th June 1814, Czar Alexander embarked at Dover for the journey
back to Russia. En route he visited Holland-probably with the aim of
promoting a marriage between his sister, Anna, and the Crown Prince-
and during his stay he received the managers of Hope & Co. in audience.
To them he repeated the promises which he had earlier made to Labou-
chere concerning the resumption of the interest payments. In the style of
true courtiers, the managers wrote to Guryev, saying that the most enjoy-
able days of their lives were 'those during which we had the inestimable
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


good fortune to come near to His Imperial Majesty, and to receive from
this Grand Monarch himself the most moving assurance of the interest
which he still condescends to take in Holland.' 1
  Now that the czar was back in Russia, it was time for Sillem to return
to his post in St.Petersburg in case any decisions should be taken there
prior to the Congress of Vienna, which was due to open on 1st October
1814. Sillem also faced an important personal decision. Prior to his
journey to western Europe, Labouchere had approached him regE:rding
a partnership in a new house of Hope & Co., and during his stay in
England this had been among the central issues during three days of talks
with Labouchere and Alexander Baring at Tunbridge Wells. It was there
that the decision to breathe new life into the Company was taken. 2 In the
meantime, the future of Holland-upon which Baring's final decision
depended-had been discussed at a ministerial meeting in London, and
on 21 June 1814 the allied powers had signed a protocol agreeing to the
unification of Belgium and Holland. Nesselrode, on behalf of Russia, had
signed subject to the czar's approval, but he later announced that, in
return for Russia's support, Alexander desired England and Holland
jointly to assume responsibility for Russia's debt in Holland. The final
decision on this, however, would be taken in Vienna. 3
  Whereas this declaration in principle by the allied powers had been
sufficient to enable Baring to decide upon rejuvenating the Company,
Sillem continued to delay his decision regarding a partnership. Early in
August he had journeyed to Amsterdam in the company of Labouchere,
who remained there to make the necessary arrangements. Only after his
return to St.Petersburg in mid-September 1814 did Sillem write confirming
his acceptance of Labouchere's offer, in order that they might together
continue to serve the Company; he thus explicitly coupled his name with
that of Pierre Cesar Labouchere. It is probable that Sillem's decision
depended in part on the arrangements which he was able to make in
Hamburg concerning his association with the house of Benecke & Co. in
the partnership Sillem Benecke & Co. 4
  This new turn of events imposed limits on Sillem's stay in Russia, since
it was desirable that he should be back in Amsterdam at the end of the
year in order to take his place in the reborn Hope & Co. on 1st January
1815. No fresh negotiations of importance were anticipated in St.Peters-
burg in the immediate future, for the czar had left for Vienna on 13th
September, and in his absence discussions with ministers would be as
unfruitful and devoid of commitment as in the past. Furthermore, as
already stated, the decision regarding the resumption of the Russian

                                  268
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

interest payments was to be taken in Vienna and not in St. Petersburg.
  It was, however, important that the remains of Operation R.M. should
be cleared up before Sillem's departure. As far as the iron was concerned,
Sillem, on his own admission, was extremely fortunate. Less than a month
after his return, he had sold 200,000 po ods to an Armenian merchant,
Ivan Gabriel Michailov, who offered him 3 roubles per pood, the rate
of exchange for the deal being fixed at lot stuivers to the rouble. Sillem
could not understand what had moved Michailov to make such an offer
at a time when peace between England and America seemed so far away.!
Remembering that, in fact, it came about at the end of 1814, it seems
likely that Michailov was able to look back on a successful speculation,
although whether this stemmed from sound political information or pure
luck is a matter for conjecture. A fortnight later the remainder of the
stock of iron and copper was sold at a slightly higher figure still. The
linen goods were far slower to move, and finally Sillem accepted a cash
offer from Stieglitz & Co. of St.Petersburg in order to avoid further delay,
and also because it had been found that too long a period in storage
resulted in a loss of quality. 2
  A closer examination of these final sales reveals that, in contrast to
Sillem's optimistic view, the iron was the least profitable. Allowing for
the fall in the value of the rouble from 17 stuivers or thereabouts in 1809
to lot stuivers in 1814, the profit on iron, after deduction of costs, was
2 %. Linen and raven-duck, however, produced a net return of 20 %.The
operation was now five years and four months old. If we put the loss of
interest at 5 % per annum, we find that ultimately losses of 241 % were
made on the iron, and 61 % on the linen goods. The principal cause of
this unfavourable end to the operation will have lain in the war between
England and America. 3
  For Sillem, there remained little to do except to give letters of introduc-
tion to the new firm of Hope & Co. to the correspondents in St.Peters-
burg, and to collect the penultimate instalment of cf 800,000. Before
leaving, he corresponded with the managers in Amsterdam regarding the
houses in St. Petersburg and their respective merits. When Holland was
liberated, a number of these had made proposals to Hope concerning
financial transactions and the sale on commission of Russian goods, but
the Company had declined them all in order to leave itself free for De
Gervais's operations. But now these lay behind, and the Company could
again think of mercantile matters. According to Hope, hemp, tallow and
grain were the only commodities for which a ready market existed in
Holland. The demand for tallow probably resulted from diminished
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


stocks; the boom in grain reflected the heavy demands of distillers, who
used large quantities of dried rye, in particular.!
  Sillem left St. Petersburg at the beginning of December 1814 and, travel-
ling via Riga, Berlin and Hamburg, reached Amsterdam at the end of
January 1815. A mild winter had left the roads in Russia and Prussia
almost impassable, and the river crossings were not without danger. In
Amsterdam, Sillem found temporary shelter above the offices on the
Doelenstraat, whence the Company had transferred its seat. Upon the
death of John Hope, the house on the banks of the Keizersgracht had
passed to his widow, and she and her second husband, Baron Von Dopff,
were so hostile towards Hope & Co., that it had become impossible for
the Company to remain there. 2
  As had been agreed, the question of the settlement of Russia's debts in
Holland was again raised at the Vienna Congress. The British cabinet at
first showed little inclination to implement the undertakings which
CastIereagh had given the Russians on this point. By the end of 1814 the
allied camp was rife with dissension, and early in January 1815 England,
Austria and France entered into a secret alliance in order to resist, with
force if necessary, the Russian and Prussian demands in matters concern-
ing Poland and Saxony. However, CastIereagh had gone beyond the
instructions of his government in becoming a party to the alliance, and
thus the English delegation was anxious to settle the matter amicably.
Among the means to achieve a more moderate approach on the part of
the Russians was a proposal that Russia, England and Holland should
each accept responsibility for one-third of the debt in Holland. The Dutch
delegates, who had no part in the actual negotiations, proposed that
Russia should shoulder one half of the burden, and that the other half
should be shared between England and Holland. They argued that Russia
had earlier made her approval of the unification of Holland and Belgium
dependent upon a settlement concerning her debt in Holland. The terri-
tory now awarded to Holland was less than had originally been asked for
by William I, and thus the quid pro quo which Holland was called upon to
give could be smaller. 3 In view of the objections on the part of the cabinet
in London, to which reference has been made, this line of reasoning suited
the British delegation extremely well. Castlereagh thereupon drew up a
memorandum on the lines of the Dutch proposal, but he made the pay-
ments by Holland and England dependent upon the North and South
Netherlands remaining united.
  When, on 4th March 1815, news of Napoleon's landing in the south of
France reached Vienna, the restoration of unity among the allies became
                                      A           v            I           s.
    Let etroru et I" uens«. que .. Bllui... fl' obhgh de r.ire DOft Mult"' " t pour                         1' __
    pOtunr en IIh2 Ull ;ftjIUlt: &aUi.leat • • • i. roUt d.ftrair. I. ulprlrad'l qQ~ ,'floil .... raJ"' I.
    Fn.nc. e' ff'nd.... aux 1u.1«. nahOd.l ('elle illt.ll~ndliDc. II ('f'('oli elh. II lfur bonhf'DT tl 1
    It"r pr... ~rlll, n'unl pu rt'nai.. A IAJ£ TE L'£l'P£Rtl'n d, 10,,1('& It'. nUilUiu. d.
    c'onLinuu ,"n I. m\!.,.. uaclilude • rt.nplir lu tnS'It-Inn) 'lilt' ~I ""JWltt. Prldtc .... CI("•
    .....oint rrh ~nvt',. lu intfrult. d.,U. lu "atpna.nu d. RI.I.u it fin UGllantk.

        t('. ~\'tn"'lQu. ntraonlloairu ct.. qUire ana.kJ q .. i ".ennoal d. ,'«Outer I .oa. plw qa.•
    IIlL • .IIU pOur Ju.tili r ceUt lu.ptn.liou aup .... U lollt C.. UI: Ifui .. urOnl ulculu 1(11 cU,.llI •
    cl'l1o, IQUe qui, .bo. lOa. priad.,.. tloit .i ull"le, t ."prkiu· In ..... nblu du. auccu don I
      lie • ~tf couronah. L. ('.we d. loulu Ie... ation., ullt de l'bWllaniU, dlVOlt pau(!r ..... lIl
    \.OIU i ,aals Jorsqu,," I. mviut> Provid",,,   • dalla' b~nir lu .nne~ d~          "'HJE Tt t( lui
    • t.ll ~lIt~,.oir l·e.~r•• ct de I. pau;, Ie. pnaC:il""'. d.. Ju.. hee ~t rl. ma,n.,uaute! de c:et
    AtlJuste toulfqU(I ont llOr'l .~. pnom.ien .oiru AI .,.i.er IU InO) ..I1. It 1 phu c:o''''~n ... blu
     "'indtmniaer lu iIlJtrt'ul. un.. 1« i:.u'p"nLa d Rw.ie fin Holland.              ca.",'nell qu'iI...... o..

    I" e'
    i t'Dt lprouy~ dan. 1. payement du iQtlt"4t-t II"" Inr ftoi (lut"
               tliS.
                                                                               pallr Ie. nuh, .au, 18.3,


           Cctte lomra d'.f'"rtr..,u e.t btou.coup tror eoruid'rable pour qu'Qn poilu "oDler iI Pec ...
    quinu en _raUl eG'eeli!. L'ltal tncor. lu,u.i .. anl du ComrlluCti datu 10111 JIEurope, I(I IL
    ,'nlul; la nlcutiU d pour.oir juqu·. eo jon a I'entreliu dt •• roupu lluun hon WI
    l'Empin, Qt!I pt'rm tt nt poin t . SA MAJE TE UIPtRUL£ d C.lre ....C'ctuer pour eel o'bjClt
    de. relni.H, qai d'ra.n&nolt.nt non ",welDent touttl Ie, op4ration. de I. TrtI!loreri. [mpfrialo
    mail ~ueo,. tOil, lei rtritemt.u eonufttJ't"'''u dt' Ii I" aujcrb de '/I, MAJ[ Tt. et Co'H(
    d'apus cu ("oR.id.lnti ru, qA'Ello • ~ ..i,d a.nlter lilt ~ll~lIftt.at raYorable done. N. W. HOPE
    d C·. OAt I,l la lah.radion d. communiquer ptfalalt. &lI~nt lei huu au rgbUo, do donI ib
    ont loumi. ~n dll0 d' b.tt tou. Ie. lill.ib 11 M. ll. IH Com*OI....itt'l qlli. daJl-J l'lIUUI'e ,8.21.
    «-...oieot flf nOlliml. ,.. t tu Action,..iru pollr ..r tonCett('f I lir If'lIr. iln4-~lI. Ce .fOnt It"
    dftaib que M. M. UOPE d C·. ero1ut devoir porter lIIainlnA-DI l I. eonnoia .. nco du pu-
    blic, en 1.1 a.Dnon~.at qulH • pM .. SA MAJ£STt L'.EWP£IU. R elf' IGtUt,. Ie. l\u.IIiu, pu
    VA Dlcret l'Udu. i. &rUII ta uto 11." U Oelobt        d.eTAier I d'arrlleT tt d'onlol1.Q.u CII q\li ,....at:




          Lu inltrlt.l Ic.l:au. lu. JaDY'ier 1813,    .1.
                                                       tl , S.S, 1'1 iL 'dtooir III t J.Qwitr" . 8 . 6, .aC"CII-
    ,.v.111 Ii. jntf"". d~ S p I. pa.r art nlr lu lroil pf'l'lU ih      a,nnks d· ... trfulu, l putir d.
    la elale d. legt «hlance H.lpeCUy., .in i qu,,", lei prim     d.. j IOOJOOO:-,/'15,CJOO1-. '5o,.aoo1 ...
    d f    ~,ooo: -, ac.eordfci ~IIUL. dtdolDm.,~.nl .III p.aytmClut I!.U Obh,aliolll &U He", d'u,tnt




Announcement of the resumption of interest and principal payments on the Russian
                         loans, dated November 1815
                          PER ASPERA AD ASTRA


the most important issue. Castlereagh, who had meanwhile returned to
England, gave instructions that a written guarantee of the payment by
England and Holland of the Russian debt in Holland was to be given to
the czar. However, he stipulated that this was not to be handed over until
Russia had signed the treaty drawn up at the end of the Congress. It was
also agreed-again at Castlereagh's suggestion-that the negotiations on
the elaboration of this decision-in-principle should take place in London,
in consultation with the British Treasury. 1
  The negotiations opened in the British capital on 30th April 1815. La-
bouchere who, like the Dutch delegates, had been kept out of affairs in
Vienna, now found himself being consulted as an expert by the Russian
ambassador to Great Britain, Count Lieven. Labouchere had taken the
precaution of having the relevant documents sent to him from Amster-
dam, and these he now handed to the ambassador. During a meeting
with Count Lieven and Baron Von Nicolai on Sunday, 14th May, La-
bouchere gave the total figure for the claims on Russia, namely
cf 101,486,000.2 From Lieven and Von Nicolai he learned of the commit-
ments which England and Holland had assumed in regard to the payment
of interest. In addition to the fact that both countries were obligated to pay
interest on cf 25,000,000, Russia could claim I % of this sum as a con-
tribution towards the repayment of principal. Indeed, this contribution
could be increased to 3 % at Russia's request, but in that case Russia
would have to pay a similar percentage over her share of the debt. 3
  Labouchere strenuously urged that the payment of interest should be
resumed at the end of 18 I 5, but Lieven informed him that neither England
nor Holland was prepared to pay immediately, because the war against
Napoleon imposed an extremely heavy burden on their financial re-
sources; moreover, it had an adverse effect upon rates of exchange. We
may assume that Russia welcomed the delay also. Labouchere made a
particular issue of the stipulation that the British and Dutch commitments
would lapse in the event of Holland and Belgium being separated. 4 The
Sovereign Ruler had proclaimed himself King of the Netherlands after
the return of Napoleon, but in Labouchere's judgement the Belgians were
only waiting for a sign to throw themselves into the arms of the French
once again. 5
  At the moment when Labouchere learned of the stipulations from Count
Lieven, the convention remained to be signed, and the strictest secrecy
was imposed on him and also on the partners in Amsterdam. Even after
the signing on 19th May 1815, the Company was obliged to await an
official report from Guryev before making an announcement to the bond-
                                     272
                         PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

holders. Fortunately, the campaign against Napoleon ended soon after
the victory at Waterloo, and thus Russia's finances were spared further
testing. Under the second Peace of Paris (20th November 1815), a war
levy of 700 million francs was imposed on France. From her share of this,
Russia could more easily transfer monies to Amsterdam. The czar went
so far as to accede to a request by Labouchere that the bondholders
should receive an additional douceur, by allotting a bonus of cf 250,000
to be distributed, by ballot, among holders of overdue vouchers which
had matured in the years 1812-1815 inclusive. 1
  On 9th November 1815, Hope & Co., acting on behalf of the Russian
Government, issued a circular giving details of the arrangement for dealing
with the overdue vouchers. The matured vouchers, plus interest at 5 %
per annum, would be capitalized and converted into bonds, which would
be identical to those of 1798 and be considered as part of that issue.
Commencing on 1st January 1816, all bonds would again bear interest at
5 %per annum. On 1st July of each year, beginning in 1816, at least 1,000
bonds would be redeemed by ballot. In the event of war between Russia
and Holland, the payment of interest and principal would continue. This
new arrangement superseded the ukase of 16th/28th September 1811, in
which the interest vouchers assumed monetary value for the purposes of
buying Russian land and paying customs duty.2
  The draw for the bonus on the interest vouchers took place on 9th
December 18 I 5 in the presence of Hieronymus Sillem, representing Hope
& Co., and Messrs.Jan Bondt, Jan van de Poll, Cornelis van der Ouder-
meulen, Jan de BurIett and Johannes van der Mandele, representing the
bondholders. A few days later, in an official letter on behalf of all with an
interest in the Russian loan, these gentlemen expressed their gratitude for
all that the Company had done to secure full recognition of the Russian
debt, and announced their desire to discuss the matter of recompensing
Hope for the costs incurred. 3 Replying on behalf of the partners, Adriaan
van der Hoop politely declined any form of recompense because, among
other factors, it was the intention of Czar Alexander to compensate all
concerned in the Russian negotiation to the greatest possible extent. By
circulating copies of all the correspondence, the bondholders' representa-
tives brought Hope's handsome gesture to the notice of those for whom
they acted. The decision to do so, they wrote, had been taken 'in the
interests of greater satisfaction on the part of all concerned.' 4
  There were indeed sound reasons for this 'satisfaction.' The 'Old Rus-
sians,' as the bonds were soon to become known, were the first on which,
after a period of stagnation, interest was paid in full. Moreover, the

                                    273
                        PER ASPERA AD ASTRA

capitalization of the overdue vouchers made good the losses incurred in
earlier years. The fact that final redemption had been put back to some
time in the distant future was less weighty by comparison, though it did
influence the market price of the bonds. During the second half of 1815,
the price fluctuated between 66 and 75. In 1816, following the ballot for
the bonus and the announcement of the first interest payment on 1st
January 1817, it rose to between 82 and 88, but during the next three
years it showed scarcely any improvement; not until the second half of
1819 did it exceed 90. 1
  This early, full resumption of interest and principal repayments earned
Russia a reputation for creditworthiness and solidity. This in turn in-
gratiated her with a wide circle of investors in Holland-a situation from
which she was to profit until the collapse of the czarist regime in 1917.




                                  274
    IBERIAN AFFAIRS:

SILVER, DIAMONDS AND COCHINEAL
Silver
                               CHAPTER NINE

               EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN



       I wish that the house might always have as its motto 'honour and profit';
        bllt if either o/these words must be erased, I would that it be the latter.
          Pierre Cesar LabouchereJo Vincent Nolte, 22nd January 1806.


With the coming to power of the House of Bourbon at the beginning of
the eighteenth century, Spain commenced to raise itself from the state of
decay into which it had sunk during the preceding century. A start was
made with centralizing the machinery of government and reorganizing
the civil service on modern lines. 1
  Round about 176o, under Charles III, came the introduction of 'en-
lightened despotism.' Among the ways in which this was manifested was
a well-defined government policy aimed at increasing prosperity. The rise
in farm prices and the resumption of growth in the production of silver in
Spanish America, where Mexico now emerged as the leading producer of
the precious metal, served to boost the Spanish economy. 2
  The favourable circumstances contributed to a growing desire to regain
the monopoly of trade with the Spanish colonies. To this end, and on the
analogy of England and the Netherlands, privileged trading companies
were established for particular areas. At the same time, the monopoly en-
joyed by Cadiz in respect of trade with the colonies was gradually dis-
mantled, and by 1778 the principal Spanish ports had obtained access to
the majority of the colonies in Central and South America. 3
  This flourishing development was interrupted by the war between the
North American colonies and England, in which Spain, in company with
France, chose the side of the rebels. But so completely did the English fleet
succeed in severing Spain's links with its colonies that the Spanish govern-
ment faced a severe financial crisis. To meet the deficit, it was decided to
issue vales reales, a form of paper money which, however, was not legal
tender in the retail trade or for the payment ofwages. 4
  On the advice of his foremost financial adviser, Francisco Cabarrus, one
of the leaders of the 'Enlightenment' in Spain, Charles III established the
Bank of San Carlos in 1782. The bank's principal task was to effect a
gradual withdrawal from circulation of the vales reales, but it was also

                                          279
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

charged with the discounting of bills and dealing with incoming and out-
going remittances on behalf of the Crown. 1
 The war against England also delayed the ambitious canalization project
which was aimed both at reducing the cost of inland transport and pro-
viding a source of irrigation. One of the plans, dating from the time of
Charles Y, was based on a canal alongside the Ebro, the so-called Imperial
Canal. By 1778 the stretch from Tudela to Saragossa was complete, but
a further extension and the cutting of branches, such as the Tauste Canal,
were threatened by lack of funds.
 In 1779, 1780 and 1781 the board which controlled the Imperial Canal
and the Tauste Canal succeeded in having three loans floated by the
Amsterdam house of Echenique Sanchez & Co. Two of these were of two
million guilders and ran from 1st May 1778 and 1st January 1779 re-
spectively. The third, which ran from 1st November 1780, was to have
been for cf 2,41 6,000, but the subscriptions totalled only cf 2,298,000. 2
 All three loans bore interest at 3! % and were for a period of twenty
years; however, the royal letters patent under which they were authorized
were so worded as to leave open the possibility that this period would be
exceeded. The first ofthese documents expressly guaranteed the continued
payment of interest after twenty years, while the third announced the
setting up of a separl:1-te fund at the Treasury for the purpose of meeting
interest payments. No mention was made of repayment. The terms provi-
ded for half the sum of each of the loans to be repaid, if desired, with
bonds relating to earlier loans, which would thus be converted. This
circumstance may explain the unusual sum of the third loan and also the
fact that this was not fully subscribed. In many cases of conversion and
repayment, a portion of the bonds was surrendered much too late, or not
at all, probably as a result of inadequate notification of holders.3
 As the war against England dragged on, the financial plight of the govern-
ment, exhausted by years of fruitless beleaguering of Gibraltar, worsened.
Through the intermediary of Cabarrus & Lalanne, Madrid, the merchant
house in which Francisco Cabarrus had an interest, the Spanish Court
succeeded in concluding a loan of three million guilders at 5 %interest with
Hope & Co. and Fizeaux Grand & Co., the alliance of Amsterdam houses
which at this time was also negotiating loans for Sweden. The date of
commencement of the loan was 1st November 1782, and repayment was
to be effected in four equal portions in the period 1789-1792. As with the
Swedish business, the loan was scrupulously divided between Hope and
Fizeaux Grand. 4
Entries in the grootboeken show that while the principal was remitted via

                                   280
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 Cabarrus & Lalanne, the interest was received via the Bank of San Carlos.
 A probable explanation for this procedure is that the Bank of San Carlos
 did not open its doors until 1st June 1783, so that payments prior to this
 date necessarily passed through other channels. The fact that Cabarrus
 was the central figure in the bank and also in the loan transaction does not
 necessarily imply that the capital furnished was applied for the benefit of
 the bank. Not only are there no indications in the grootboeken and cor-
 respondence of Hope & Co. that this was so, but, as experience was soon
 to show, the Bank of San Carlos had an excessive amount of capital. 1
  After peace had been concluded with England in 1783, the Spanish
 economy quickly recovered and, strictly in accordance with the agree-
 ment, the loan from Hope and Fizeaux Grand was repaid between 1789
 and 1792.2 No fresh loan was negotiated immediately, although the sub-
ject was raised in correspondence, and the reason lay in an absence of
agreement between the erstwhile partners. In 1788 Fizeaux Grand & Co.
had become Hogguer Grand & Co. and, according to Pierre Cesar La-
 bouchere, Hogguer and Hope trod different paths in loan matters. It is
conceivable that the partners in Hope & Co. disliked Hogguer himself,
but there is the fact that since the Company had concerned itself with
loans for Russia it had declined to collaborate with any other house. For
a company which felt strong enough to undertake an issue alone, associa-
tion with another house had little appeal: it halved the profit and fre-
quently doubled the worries. 3
  The Spanish government, however, declined to accept the situation. In
the autumn of 1792 the Minister of Finance, Don Diego de Gardoqui, sent
his brother, Juan Ignacio, to Holland, and early in the following year a
contract was arranged between him and the Company providing for a
loan of six million guilders at 41 % interest, the rate which had applied to
the contract entered into with Russia in August 1792. Repayment, in
annual instalments of cf 600,000, was to commence on 1st November 1798
and would thus be completed by 1st November 1807.
  As had been the case with Russia, the loan was to be the first of a long
series. When the initial six million had been taken up, a further loan for
a similar sum would be floated and then a third, bringing the total to
eighteen million guilders. 4
  The marked increase in the sum of these loans, compared with the one of
1782, was probably attributable to Spain's urgent need of funds at a time
of preparation for war against the French. The course of events in France,
particularly the actions against Louis XVI, had not gone unnoticed among
the king's kinsmen in Spain; indeed, they had aroused widespread anti-

                                    281
                        EARL Y LOANS TO SP AIN

French feeling. Following the storming of the Tuileries and the imprison-
ment of the French royal family in August 1792, the Spanish Prime Minis-
ter, Aranda, deliberately headed for a conflict.
  The declaration of war, however, came from the French side, in March
1793. It followed a similar action against the Stadholder of Holland. The
spread of the theatre of war towards the Republic prevented Hope from
getting beyond the first tranche of six million guilders. The defeat of the
allied armies by the French in September 1793 caused Dutch funds to dry
up, just as had occurred at the time of the Russian loans. 1
  In their war against the French revolutionaries, the Spanish fared as
badly as the Dutch. At the end of 1792 Charles IV, who had ruled since
1788, replaced his Prime Minister, Aranda, by Manuel Godoy, a protege
of the queen but a man with no political experience. The war against
France turned into a fiasco and it was not long before the revolutionary
armies penetrated deep into Catalonia. In August 1795 the Spanish
government followed the example of Prussia and signed a peace treaty
with the French at Basle. 2
  Dislike and fear of England, whose influence was penetrating ever deeper
into the Spanish colonies, served to drive the Spaniards into the arms of
France, and in August 1796 the two even entered into an alliance. The
war with England, to which this alliance gave rise, was even more disas-
trous for the Spanish economy than the war of 1779. The vital flow of
silver from Mexico again ceased and the vales reales, of which ever larger
quantities were issued, rapidly declined in value. A decree of 1799 im-
posing an arbitrary rate of exchange of 94 % backfired and ultimately the
 vales stood at 25 %of their par value. 3
  These financial perils naturally had an effect upon the payment of inter-
est and principal money on the Spanish loans in Holland. Threatened by
 the advance of the French armies, the Hopes had fled to England at the
 end of 1794. In 1795, and again in the following year, they succeeded in
 remitting the interest from London, though the payments from Spain
 arrived very late and only after repeated requests.
  In 1797 the payment of interest in Holland was resumed. By this time
 England and Spain were at war and it was considered that the operation
 could more safely be conducted from the newly established Batavian
 Republic. The matter of the Spanish interest was entrusted to H.A.In-
 singer & Co. This house had conducted the sale of Portuguese diamonds
 sent to Hope & Co. prior to 1795 under the terms of a contract with a
 Portuguese merchant. Correspondence from Insinger to the Hopes in
 London shows clearly that this firm also found it extremely difficult to
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 obtain remittances from Spain, and how long it was obliged to wait for
reimbursement of the advances which it made.!
  The year 1798 brought fresh distress to the government of Spain in the
shape of the need to repay the first loan from Echenique and also the 1792
loan from Hope & Co. As far as the latter was concerned, no further
effort was demanded from Insinger because the Spanish Court had in 1798
appointed the Amsterdam house of Weduwe E.Croese & Co. as its ban-
kers. A partner in the firm had travelled to Madrid to seek the appoint-
ment and had been supported in his efforts by Valckenaer, the envoy of
the Batavian Republic in Spain.2
  An attempt in May 1798 to float a loan of 3 million guilders at 5 %
interest via Croese had failed. Despite the added attraction of a lottery
with 600 prizes and the possibility to use the 600 redeemed Hope
bonds as cash, the reaction of investors was so lukewarm that the loan did
not get off the ground. The avoidance of any mention of repayment of the
first Echenique loan probably did much to lessen the interest. 3
  In October 1799 Croese, again with Valckenaer's support, succeeded in
obtaining a royal patent for a new loan, of which half could be met with
Echenique bonds. The 600 bonds from Hope & Co., which were due for
redemption on 1st November 1800, could also be used for payment and,
indeed, would even carry a bonus of 6 %. Holders of bonds relating to the
abortive loan of May 1798 were given the opportunity to exchange their
holdings for new bonds, and those who did so received a 5 % bonus and
an extra 4 % as compensation for loss of opportunity to win a prize in the
lottery. The loan was for 3 million guilders at 5 % and ran for eight
years from 1st September 1799. 4
  On 1st November 1800 Croese issued a second loan, this time for 21-
million guilders, on practically identical conditions. A dubious feature
of this loan was that the house was permitted to resell Echenique
bonds accepted for conversion, but not cancelled, at the time of the
previous loan, plus those tendered for conversion for the purposes of the
new loan, at the market price, provided that this was not below 50 %.
Clearly the Spanish Court was in such financial straits that it was obliged
to sabotage its own conversion loan. 5
  The reasons for its plight were set out in the opening lines of the royal
patent dated 17th June 1801, relating to the third loan, namely expendi-
ture arising from the war with Portugal, the high cost of equipping the
fleet at Cadiz and the interest which the Court was committed to pay to
Holland. This third loan, which was for 41 million guilders at 5 %interest,
commenced to run on 1st September 1801 and, like the two previous ones,
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

was for a period of eight years. Once again Croese was given permission to
resell converted Echenique bonds provided the price was not below 50 %.1
 According to Labouchere, only 8 million guilders of the nominal
total of 10 millions was subscribed to these three loans. Of the 4,000
Echenique bonds which could be converted, 1,000 at the most were
redeemed, so that following the floating of the three 'Conversions Es-
pagnoles' more than 5,000 Echenique bonds remained in circulation. 2

It is true that the Treaty of Amiens in 1802 provided a brief respite and
enabled Spain to export large quantities of silver from Mexico, but in
May 1803 hostilities again broke out between England and France. Spain
was anxious to keep open the lanes of communication with the colonies,
but this was possible only if it were exempted from its treaty obligation to
provide military assistance to France. Bonaparte was more in need of
money than manpower at that moment and thus the parties were able to
reach agreement, albeit after some tough negotiations, in October 1803.
Spain undertook to pay 6 million francs per month with effect from the
outbreak of the war on 20th May 1803. Of this sum, 2 million francs
per month were deductable in respect of supplies delivered to France. 3
 But while France was urgently in need of money for armaments, Bona-
parte discovered to his intense annoyance that the Spaniards were in no
hurry to pay the subsidy. There was little silver in Spain itself, and efforts
to obtain loans in Amsterdam, Paris and Hamburg were in vain. In
Amsterdam, De Smeth and Hogguer, in addition to the Court Bankers,
Croese, were involved in these efforts at the beginning of 1804. The loan
proposed was of 10 million guilders for ten years at 51- % interest. To
make it more attractive to investors, the issue price was 95 % and a bonus
of 5 % on repayment was offered. Despite these incentives, none of the
houses succeeded in obtaining the approval of the government of the
Batavian Republic for the loan.4
 In the meantime the deficits incurred by the French Treasury had reached
such alarming proportions that the minister concerned, Barbe Marbois,
was forced to contemplate a shortfall of 116 million francs by September
1804. Of the 40 million francs due from Spain in March of that year, only
18 million had been received. Admittedly, bills for the full amount had
been lodged with the French Treasury, but while Spain remained in default
there was little that Marbois could do with these. S
 Not knowing what to do next, the minister approached the Compagnie
des Negociants Reunis, in which the prominent army and naval contrac-
tors Ouvrard, Vanlerberghe and Desprez had joined forces. On 4th April
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 1804 an agreement was concluded between the Compagnie and Marbois;
 under this, Ouvrard was to receive drafts on the Spanish Treasury to a
 value of 32 million francs, representing eight months' subsidies. Of this
 sum, half was immediately made available to the minister and the re-
 mainder was used to meet outstanding invoices for goods supplied to the
 army and the navy. 1
  As security, the Compagnie accepted obligations entered into by the
 Receveurs Gem?raux, the collectors of direct taxes. It was their custom at
 the commencement of each fiscal year to enter into an obligation to the
Treasury regarding the total sum which they anticipated collecting in taxes
 in each month. Their commitment lapsed four months after the taxes in
each of the months concerned were considered to have been received in
full. Thus, nearly eighteen months passed before the whole of this revenue
became available, and to meet this the Treasury had the habit of discount-
ing the obligations promptly at the beginning of each fiscal year. The
obligations transferred to the Compagnie were entrusted to Desprez. 2
  The preparations for the assault on England increased the French Trea-
sury's need for funds still further, and in June 1804 Barbe Marbois again
approached the Compagnie, this time with a request for 150 million francs.
Ouvrard again agreed to furnish advances but, as previously, after the
deduction of sums outstanding for deliveries to the army and navy, then
amounting to 48 million francs. In order to deal more adequately with
business on such a gigantic scale, the Compagnie established connexions
with Armand Seguin and the brothers Michel the Elder and Michel the
Younger, men of questionable propriety who were later to cause the
Compagnie no end oftrouble. 3
  It will be clear from the foregoing that Ouvrard was the soul of the whole
affair. Gabriel Julien Ouvrard, speculator, naval contractor, banker and
architect of the most grandiose financial projects, was born at Nantes in
1770. By skilful speculation, he amassed a fortune while the French Revo-
lution was still young. When in 1793, during the Reign of Terror, Carrier
was settling his score with the counter-revolutionaries by means of his
notorious noyades, Ouvrard succeeded in keeping his head above water
by joining the republican army which was fighting the royalists in the
Vendee. From there he journeyed to Paris to present to the Convention
the banners captured from the counter-revolutionaries. Once in Paris he
stayed there, using his experience in the Vendee to become one of the most
successful contractors to the French fleet. His fabulous riches and his
grand style of living made him a textbook example of the nouveaux riches
from whom the era of the Directory derived its notoriety.4
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

After the seizure of power by Bonaparte in 1799, conditions became less
favourable for Ouvrard. The new dictator had an inveterate dislike of
les fournisseurs, the contractors to the army and navy, who in his view
took advantage of the impecuniosity of the government to make scan-
dalously large profits. When Ouvrard presented Bonaparte with an out-
standing account for deliveries, the First Consul ordered an investigation
of the ledgers with the result that Ouvrard was summarily arrested and
ordered to repay one and a half times the sum which he had claimed was
due to him.1
  But Bonaparte could not manage without the connexions and talent for
organizing possessed by the fournisseurs. Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe, his
new partner, accordingly played a significant role in the preparations for
the Italian campaign of 1800-1801, albeit they employed a man of straw
to submit their tenders. As subsequent events will show, Ouvrard em-
ployed this artifice on numerous occasions. For a man such as Bonaparte,
this dependence upon persons whom he hated and despised was well-nigh
intolerable, and he adopted the policy of delaying payment of accounts
from thefournisseurs for as long as possible. 2
  Ouvrard was no stranger to Hope & Co. They had been in contact in
 1802 in connexion with the Rescriptions Bataves, bonds issued by the
Batavian government and covering half of the war levy which France had
imposed on the vanquished Holland in 1795. In time of war, bonds to a
value of 3 million guilders would be redeemed annually; in time of
peace, double this sum. Because of its acute financial position, the French
government had disposed of these rescriptions as quickly as possible. In
view of the uncertainty whether the situation was one of war or peace, a
highly speculative stock was marketed, and this must have been attractive
to a man like Ouvrard. 3
  In 1804 there was very frequent contact between Hope & Co. and the
 Compagnie des Negociants Reunis. As explained elsewhere, Labouchere
 had signed an agreement with Barbe Marbois on 21st April of that year
providing for Hope and Baring to acquire all bonds relating to the
 Louisiana loan, in return for which they would, inter alia, furnish a sum
 of 5,825,000 francs in Paris and take over French bonds to a value of
 15 million francs which became due for redemption in the following
 September and October. As the Compagnie, through the agreements of
 April and June 1804, had become very closely concerned in French finances,
 Hope's payments in respect of the Louisiana loan passed directly via
 Desprez. 4
 After this, however, Labouchere for a time appeared reluctant to become

                                   286
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

involved in the affairs of the Compagnie. He declined a request by Desprez
for a credit of between I and 2 million guilders against the security of
bonds from the Receveurs Generaux, giving as his reason that Hope & Co.
were wholly occupied with the payments for the Louisiana loan and the
Portuguese subsidy to France. 1 According to Labouchere, the demand on
the Amsterdam money market from Paris was so heavy that every financial
transaction was hazardous. 'People are trying to do too much at once,'
wrote the Paris house of Baguenault & Co.; and Labouchere agreed
fully with the sentiment. In his view, Desprez could keep his operations
going only at the expense of every rate of exchange in Europe. 2
 Early in May 1804 Hope & Co. were approached by the Marquis de la
Colonilla, acting on behalf of the Spanish Court. The Marquis, a French
banker, had received his title in Spain and headed a firm in Madrid. The
aim of his visit was to speed up the payment of the Spanish subsidy to
France. De la Colonilla proposed that Hope should negotiate a loan of
5 million piastres at 6 % interest, the equivalent of which, in francs, was
to be transmitted to Paris. Repayment, in piastres, would be effected in
Madrid in three equal instalments in the years 1807, 1808 and 1809; the
Spanish authorities would permit the free export of the piastres. 3
  Labouchere's initial reaction was lukewarm. De Smeth, Hogguer and
Croese were already active on behalf of Spain, though not with much
success; moreover, De la Colonilla had lowered the prestige of the pro-
posed negotiation by hawking it in Paris prior to writing to Hope & Co.
Quite apart from the question whether the Batavian government would
withdraw its objections to a foreign loan, little response could be antici-
pated from the Dutch public since many were saddled with large stocks
of colonial produce which was very slow-moving as a result of the scarcity
of money. Labouchere expressed the view that it might be feasible to start
with a small sum, say one million piastres, and to accept as payment the
outstanding bonds of Hope's 179210an.4
 Such a proposal did not, of course, fit in with the aims of the Spanish
government. In an effort to progress the matter, Labouchere inquired of
Alexander Baring whether perhaps the English East India Company
would be interested in acquiring piastres in Spain at two-thirds of the
current rate of exchange. In England, however, the return to power of
Pitt had produced a much more uncompromising policy towards France
and her allies, and thus Baring did not respond to Labouchere's over-
tures. s
 In the latter part of September 1804, rumours of tension between
England and Spain commenced to circulate in Amsterdam. A month
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

later it was reported that English men-of-war, in the absence of a decla-
ration of war, had seized three Spanish frigates which carried nearly five
million piastres.
  To Labouchere, the only possibility now lay in De la Colonilla initiating
expeditions from Spanish American ports to Amsterdam, calling at a port
in the United States en route; but he did not press the matter.! There was
little point in continuing to negotiate with De la Colonilla, for early in
1805 Hope & Co. became involved in the transactions which Ouvrard
had meanwhile commenced with Spain.
  As we saw in the preceding pages, Ouvrard took over from Barbe Mar-
bois a claim for 32 million francs on the Spanish Treasury in April 1804.
At the insistence of Napoleon, who was anxious to see the security of
32 million francs in the form of debentures from the Receveurs Generaux
returned to his Treasury as quickly as possible, Ouvrard journeyed to
Spain at the beginning of October 1804. There he succeeded in winning
the favour of the powerful Godoy by quickly satisfying the acute financial
needs of the Court, with which an agreement was concluded whereby
Ouvrard assumed the role of France as creditor for the sum of the Spanish
subsidy.2 Much greater successes lay ahead of him, however.
  On 26th November 1804, a new series of agreements were signed which
gave Ouvrard a position of financial power in Spain equal to that which,
via the Compagnie, he possessed in France. Under these, he first under-
took to supply two million quintals of corn to alleviate the famine in
Spain. Ouvrard was destined to become a contractor to the Spanish army
and navy, and even to meet the immediate financial needs of the State.
The latter activity involved the Caja de Consolidacion, a sinking fund
established for the purpose of withdrawing the vales reales but which in
practice served as an ancillary source of funds for the government. The
Bank of San Carlos was originally established for this purpose, but mis-
management and speculative losses had destroyed much of its credit.
  The Caja obtained a loan of 10 million francs plus extensive credits
from French houses such as Michel the Elder and Michel the Younger. In
addition, Ouvrard undertook to float a loan of 10 million guilders in
Holland-something which De Smeth and Hogguer had thus far failed to
realize. For all these credits, and others which were to follow, Ouvrard
received drafts from the Caja de Consolidacion. 3
  Ouvrard's crowning glory, however, came with an agreement between
himself and Manuel Sixto Espinosa, who as Contador General acted as
representative of the Spanish Crown. This agreement provided for the
establishment, with joint capital, of the house of Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co.

                                   288
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

which, for the duration of the war against England, was given a monopoly
of imports and exports in all the Spanish colonies. This included the
export of gold and silver. 1
 It must have been a source of satisfaction to the Spanish government, in
theory at least, to regain some control of trade to and from the colonies.
As we have seen, trade with America was thrown open to all Spanish ports
in 1778, but was very expressly limited to Spaniards. With the outbreak of
the war against England in 1796, this monopoly ceased to have practical
meaning, and in 1797 the Spanish government could do no better than to
open the ports in Spanish America for neutral trade, on condition that no
prohibited articles such as precious metals were exported and that the
vessels plying the trade should call at a Spanish port on the homeward
voyage. American ships profited especially from the easier situation, but
breaches of the restrictions were so widespread that in 1799 all Spanish
American ports were closed to trade except for the import of food. Oppo-
sition to this action was so fierce that these ports were reopened in 1801,
albeit a system of special licences was introduced. During the brief sus-
pension of hostilities from 1802 to 1804, the Spanish monopoly was
restored, butin December 1804 the licensing system was revived. Many of
those who were in favour at the Court obtained the right to sell licences,
to which end they employed agents. Such an arrangement was, of course,
in flagrant contravention of the monopoly granted to Fran~ois Ouvrard
& Co., but at the same time it was characteristic of the general atmosphere
of corruption which pervaded the Spanish government machine. The
effects of this on Ouvrard's transactions will become clear as our story
unfolds. 2
 In a subsequent agreement dated 4th December 1804, Espinosa asserted
the rights of his government more emphatically. Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co.
were now compelled to ship goods to and from the American colonies for
the account of the Spanish government. In addition, the house's com-
mission on shipments of gold and silver was reduced from I %to 1- %.3
 For Ouvrard, access to the piastres from America, which he had ob-
tained through these agreements, formed the hub of all his transactions
with Spain. Only with these could the impoverished Spanish government
pay Ouvrard and, through him, France. The French Treasury, too, was
interested in the early mobilization of the Mexican silver because its lack
of resources was becoming steadily more acute. As Napoleon rejected any
form of consolidated national debt and, still mindful of the assignats, was
equally unwilling to resort to issuing paper money, the arrival of Mexican
silver was the only solution to the shortage of funds. Fresh conquests,
                         EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 which could help to fill the state coffers, were as yet not forthcoming.
 During the absence of this silver-and with the projected loan in Amster-
 dam still unrealized-Ouvrard, in order to meet his commitments towards
Spain, was obliged to fall back upon the French Treasury and the Banque
de France, via the Compagnie des Negociants Reunis, a course which added
to France's monetary plight. 1
  Clearly, Ouvrard's financial juggling had to be brought to an end as
quickly as possible; but this could only be done if he succeeded in obtain-
ing the English government's approval for the shipment of the piastres.
From a purely commercial point of view, there was a chance that he
would do so, for the need for precious metals was just as great in England
as in France-and if permission were forthcoming at least a portion of the
shipped piastres would remain behind in England. Initially, however,
Ouvrard's appeal to Pitt fell on deaf ears. Pitt was aware of the financial
difficulties which faced Napoleon, and while the French army at Boulogne
seriously threatened England's security Pitt was not at all disposed to
assist in alleviating Napoleon's difficulties. 2
  Labouchere was kept posted regarding Ouvrard's faits et gestes by his
Paris correspondents, Baguenault and Hottinguer. To them he expressed
his annoyance at the manner in which Ouvrard peddled his plans from
door to door. In Labouchere's opinion, Ouvrard's efforts to draw the
Americans into the affair was 'an error of judgement' accompanied by
talent and even by genius-a situation which could exist only in France.
Ouvrard need not think that any Englishman would become a party to
such a transaction and thereby compromise himself in the eyes of his own
government. 3
  Ouvrard's efforts to arouse American interest in his projected transaction
were, however, not original: negotiations with the son of the United
States envoy in Paris, Robert L.Livingstone, and his compatriot, the
merchant and speculator Daniel Parker, had taken place in the winter of
1803. They offered to purchase 15 million piastres from Spain, deliverable
in Vera Cruz, Havana and Montevideo. The equivalent, 57 million francs,
would be paid in Amsterdam, Hamburg and Paris in four equal instal-
ments. Despite urgings by the French Foreign Minister, Talleyrand, who
was commercially concerned, the projected transaction did not take place.
At the last moment Godoy refused to give his consent, partly from un-
willingness to pay the subsidy and partly from fear of unfavourable reac-
tions from England. 4
  Early in March 1805 Labouchere received, via Baguenault, a letter from
Count de Cabarrus, on whose initiative the Bank of San Carlos had come

                                    290
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

into being. At the time of the French Revolution he had fallen into dis-
favour on account of his enlightened views, but now he stood so high in
the esteem of the Spanish Court, to which he acted as financial adviser,
that he had been raised to the nobility. Labouchere's reply indicates that
De Cabarrus had approached him on the subject of getting Mexican
piastres to Spain, a transaction of a similar nature to that for which
Ouvrard had obtained a monopoly.
  Labouchere's reply was cautiously worded, but did not amount to a re-
jection of the plan. One must naturally be circumspect when putting
proposals to one's English connexions, he wrote, but it was quite feasible
for the shipments to be routed direct from North America to Amsterdam
without by-passing London. Labouchere had sufficient confidence in
Baring and his American associates to advance monies against the piastres
when news reached him of the receipt by Baring of the funds.
  In order to comprehend this somewhat obscure passage, we must bear in
mind that a substantial part of the large British exports to the United
States were paid for out of the proceeds of American exports to the
Continent. There was thus a constant stream of monetary transactions
between the principal import centres on the Continent and London, and
this could be used for the payment for the piastres. Indeed, Baring & Co.
were specialists in intermediacy.
  Labouchere, however, was curious about the relationship between De
Cabarrus's proposals and the arrangements existing between the Spanish
Court and Ouvrard who, after all, had also received drafts on the Mexican
Treasury. If such documents were to find their way into various hands,
their value would depreciate. Labouchere knew that De Cabarrus had
laid his plan before Hogguer, and he did not take very kindly to this: if
De Cabarrus, like Ouvrard, knocked on all doors simultaneously, he
might find that none was opened. 1
  When Labouchere spoke in such reserved terms about Ouvrard he had
already been approached, via Desprez, concerning the great transaction.
On 14th February 1805 he reported to Desprez that his company was
greatly honoured by the offer, both as regards the piastres and also the
licences to trade with Spanish America. Discretion on the part of Hope &
Co. was guaranteed, but the lack of secrecy on the other side caused
Labouchere to flinch. In some ways there was nothing novel about the
operation, for Spain had since 1797 made repeated efforts to arrive at
transactions of this nature. The publicity which had surrounded all these
plans had made Hope extremely reserved towards them. Even on the
highly attractive conditions announced by the Spanish Court in 1800 and

                                   29 1
                          EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 r801, the Company had never dared to offer more than 50% of the value
 of the piastres for spot purchase. Ultimately a fairly sizeable operation
 was mounted, but the peace preliminaries of 1801 had thrown a spanner in
 the works.
  The Company was thus well informed concerning the sort of transactions
 about which Desprez had written, and was willing to accept the offer if
 agreement could be reached. The advances which Desprez had requested
 were out of the question, if only because of the attendant publicity, but
 Labouchere was agreeable to providing one million francs at 6 % interest
 upon the transfer of the drafts on Mexico. Secrecy was of the utmost
importance and therefore Labouchere was not disposed to commit details
of the affair to paper. He insisted that trusted agents should assemble the
funds on the spot and transmit them. If Hope & Co., who were at that
moment fully occupied with the payments relating to the Louisiana loan,
assumed an active role in the affair a month later, the drafts could be
presented in Mexico in four or five months time.
  Once the wheels were in motion, the tempo could be adjusted to suit the
requirements. Labouchere proceeded on the basis that 'our friends in
America' could be in receipt of the first consignment of piastres during
the month of September r805 and that Desprez could count upon re-
mittances from Hope & Co. commencing in October or November. For
the completion of the French aspect of the affair, Desprez would have to
deal with Baguenault, with whom Labouchere was wont to transact all
delicate business in Paris.
  If the affair could be kept completely' American,' the cause of secrecy
would be served and the costs reduced. The piastres were the focal point
of the transaction, and the use of the import and export licences would
have to be made subservient to these. Labouchere feared that excessive
sailings to Mexico might attract English cruisers; he therefore proposed
that the port of Vera Cruz be temporarily closed to all vessels save those
engaged in transporting the piastres.
  It is interesting to see how, in this letter to Desprez, the principles for the
operation were in fact laid down in the absence of any further contact
with Ouvrard. The assertion in Ouvrard's memoirs, that Messrs.Hope
almost fell from their chairs when, early in April r805, he broached the
matter to them in Amsterdam, is thus fallacious. 1
  After a month of negotiation the parties reached agreement, and on 6th
May r805 the contract between Hope & Co. and Fran.;;ois Ouvrard & Co.
was drawn up. The signatory on behalf of Ouvrard & Co. was Fran.;;ois
Ouvrard, the nominal head of the firm and, in this instance, a figurehead

                                      292
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

 acting on behalf of his brother. Ouvrard had initially proposed that Hope
 should become a party to his contract with the Spanish Court, but La-
 bouchere declined the opportunity. Hope & Co. thus functioned purely as
 commission agents, in which role they formally undertook to comply with
 the instructions contained in the contract. Those instructions, however,
 were fully in accordance with the draft laid before Desprez by Labouchere
 in February.
   The agreement stipulated that Hope should appoint a general agent in
 the United States, whose task would be to direct cargoes from Europe to
 the United States, and from there to the Spanish colonies. The agent would
 also be responsible for shipments from the colonies to the United States
 or direct to Europe. In order to carry out these operations, the general
 agent was permitted to appoint special agents in the various Spanish
colonies, insofar as the transactions made this necessary. He was also
given discretion to enlist the aid of merchant houses in the United States
for the operation. The appointment of merchant houses in the Spanish
colonies, however, remained the prerogative of Franyois Ouvrard & Co.
   Hope & Co. also undertook to try to obtain guarantees of safe passage
from the English government, but with the proviso that their efforts
should be circumspect so that in the event of refusal the other operations
would not be jeopardized. The maximum sum payable for a safe passage
was 4 %of the value of the cargo.!
  A supplementary agreement, in which the commissions to be paid to
Hope were stipulated, was signed in September 1805. On their own ship-
ments to Spanish America the Company would receive a commission of
2 %, and on shipments for third parties, in either European or American
waters, I %. Return cargoes from America and consigned to Hope would
also carry a commission of 2 %, and those bound for other European
ports I %. One-half per cent commission would be payable on all insur-
ance. Hope & Co. would be required to pay the general agent's com-
mission out of their remuneration. 2
  The commission on the piastres shipped was remarkably low, a mere
1- %. Against this, however, the Company was free to export any desired
portion of the piastres for its own account at the price which the piastres
would have yielded had they been exported directly for the account of
Ouvrard & Co., and also to deduct from this price the costs incurred. 3
  In practice, since Franyois Ouvrard & Co. were unable to export the
piastres themselves, this meant that Hope & Co. could do with them as
they wished. The price which the Company would be required to pay for
the piastres was not stipulated in the contract, but it was agreed between

                                   293
                        EARLY LOANS TO SPAIN

Labouchere and Ouvrard that this would be 3 francs and 75 centimes for
each piastre. 1 On the basis of a nominal rate of exchange of 50 stuivers for
the piastre, and with the franc standing at just over 91- stuivers, Hope &
Co. would thus have made a gross profit of 14 stuivers on each piastre.
 It was not in Ouvrard's nature to leave this profit entirely to Hope. In
addition to the two agreements between the Company and Franr;:ois
Ouvrard & Co., a third was concluded which provided that the stipu-
lations relating to the piastres 'rest jointly between Messrs.Hope & Co.
and M.Auguste Ouvrard.' Hope & Co. undertook to open an account
into which all profits accruing from the aforementioned stipulations
would be paid. The balance of this account was to be shared equally
between the Company and Auguste Ouvrard. Although somewhat ob-
scure, the wording reveals clearly that Ouvrard, via another brother,
obtained his share of the profit made from the piastres. 2
 Before leaving for Paris two days after the signing of this agreement,
Ouvrard handed Labouchere drafts on the Mexican Treasury to a value
of nearly two million piastres. Hope also received fifty licences for a simi-
lar number of expeditions to the Spanish colonies. 3
  Ouvrard took the view, as did Labouchere, that this was but the begin-
ning of a transaction which, if all went well, could be enlarged to any
desired scale. An efficient and reliable network of agents was indispensable,
and every attention should be paid to achieving this.
  A second and no less important aim was the removal of political ob-
stacles, and for this it was necessary to bring Hope's closest business
associates, Francis Baring & Co., into the affair.




                                    294
                           CHAPTER TEN

                THE FRANCO-SPANISH
                 FINANCIAL CRISIS


On lOth May 1805, just two days after Ouvrard had left Amsterdam,
Labouchere wrote to Sir Francis Baring concerning the Spanish American
operation. It was of the utmost importance that neutral vessels should be
adequately protected against arrest by English cruisers, and subsequent
confiscation, when carrying piastres and colonial produce from Spanish
America to England or an English colony, and on the return voyage
British produce.
  Baring was requested to lay strong emphasis on the latter operation in
his approach to his government. He was to play an important role in the
export of produce from England and the import of colonial produce and
piastres. The British government, wrote Labouchere, must be interested
in thus obtaining the piastres, of which the country was in constant need,
and at the same time recovering part of the trade which North America
had virtually monopolized in recent years.
  Labouchere also pointed out with urgency that the Americans must not
be hampered in their trade with Spanish America, in order to avoid
'remarks and jealousy' from a certain quarter, which could bring about
the failure of the entire operation. Whether or not he had Napoleon in
mind when referring to the 'remarks' is not of major importance; what is
important is that he was anxious to keep open a route via the United
States in addition to one via England.!
  Sir Francis Baring did not reply to the letter immediately, so that La-
bouchere was able to devote all his attention to the establishment of the
agency network in North America. First and foremost, the right persons
had to be found. The man considered by Labouchere for the post of
general agent, David Parish, had been approached at the time of the
negotiations with Ouvrard, and agreements had been made with him. 2
  Parish was a younger son of a Scottish merchant, John Parish, who had
accumulated a large fortune in Hamburg. David Parish had established
his own company in Antwerp following the Treaty of Amiens. A timely
piece of advice from Talleyrand, with whom he was on good terms, had
enabled him to make a considerable profit from speculation in colonial
produce at the time of the renewed hostilities against England. As the war

                                   295
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

continued, however, business in Antwerp became less and less interesting
for him. Labouchere's offer opened up all manner of new prospects in a
completely new area. The financial aspects of the deal were also an attrac-
tion: 25 % of the profit on all transactions which he was instructed by
Hope & Co. to supervise. A separate account was to be maintained,
showing the profit shares accruing to Hope and to Parish, which would
be paid to them out of the account held jointly with Auguste Ouvrard- who
quickly appeared as Auguste Ouvrard & Co. in Hope's books.! In addi-
tion, Parish would be reimbursed for all travelling and hotel expenses
incurred by him, and he was permitted to do business for his own account.
Labouchere was evidently very keen to recruit this enterprising and astute
young man, who was renowned for his engaging manner and his psycho-
logical insight, for the new operation. 2
  Labouchere's choice for the agency at Vera Cruz fell on Armand Pierre
Lestapis, a native of Bearn in Southern France, who was employed as
Spanish correspondent at the office in Amsterdam. He had earlier worked
for the house of Juan Plante in Santander. Upon the death of another
employee of the house, Jose Gabriel de Villanueva, his birth certificate
fell into the hands of Lestapis. Fearing that the Mexican authorities might
raise objections to the arrival of a foreigner, Labouchere persuaded Lesta-
pis to assume the identity of De Villanueva for the journey to Vera Cruz.
It was in this name that the application for his passport was made to
Madrid. 3
  A third agent was to be stationed at New Orleans. For this post, La-
bouchere's eye fell on Vincent Nolte, who was employed in his younger
brother's merchant house in Nantes, and whose excellent style of cor-
respondence had attracted Labouchere's attention. Nolte had little to do
in Nantes and was keen to travel to America. On 13th May, a week after
the signing of the contract with Ouvrard, he set out for Amsterdam to
collect his instructions. 4
  Early in July 1805 Nolte sailed from Amsterdam in the 'Flora,' bound
for New York. Parish had matters to attend to for his firm in Antwerp,
after which he journeyed to Paris for discussions with Ouvrard. Lestapis
was detained in Amsterdam, problems having arisen concerning his pass-
port for Mexico. 5
  In their role of commission agents for Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co., Hope
 ordered a consignment of Silesian linen from their correspondent in
 Hamburg, Matthiesen & Sillem. Ouvrard was not favourably impressed
 by the initiative and urged the necessity for caution in view of the proba-
 bility that the consignment would be delayed by the developing naval
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

war.1 In April 1805, the French squadron from Toulon had succeeded in
eluding Nelson and, together with Spanish naval units, had made for
Martinique in the West Indies. The plan was that they should wait there
until the squadron from Brest joined them, and thus lure Nelson's ships
to the West Indies. If this ruse succeeded, the Franco-Spanish fleet would
return with all speed to the Channel to pave the way for the French
invasion army to cross to England. Ouvrard's anxiety concerning the
situation in the Caribbean was certainly well founded, but there was the
additional factor that 'engagements reels' were extremely inconvenient to
him because the French and Spanish finances absorbed all his funds. 2
  Besides the preparations for the great American operation, there was the
lo-million guilder loan to Spain to consider. Ouvrard had undertaken to
float this on behalf of the Spanish Court, but he had failed to reach
agreement on this during his meetings with the partners of Hope & Co. in
April 1805. In July, Walter Boyd, acting on Ouvrard's instructions, again
raised the matter with the Company in a letter sent from Paris.
  The warrant or 'cedula' issued by the King of Spain entrusted the nego-
tiation of the loan to the house of Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard. Ouvrard
wished the last line of the document to be left blank so that the name of
Hope & Co. could be inserted, but the Spanish government was unwilling
to accede to the request, probably to avoid offending De Smeth and
Hogguer, with whom negotiations had been in progress for longer.
Ouvrard had thus been compelled to offer the loan to these houses, but
by imposing very severe conditions he had obliged them to decline the
business. 3
  Labouchere objected to the appearance of the names of Vanlerberghe
and Ouvrard in the warrant on the grounds that this would deter investors,
who would find themselves bound up with the common interests of France
and Spain. Also, he regarded the issue price of 95 %proposed by Boyd as
too high; this, he felt, should not be more than 92 %. Furthermore, he
desired a purely formal relationship with the Spanish government: the
Spanish Court must issue an instruction for the proceeds of the loan to be
paid to Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard, whose receipt must be recognized by
the Caja de Consolidacion as official payment. Also, Vanlerberghe and
Ouvrard must be the effective owner of the constituent bonds, which
Hope & Co., for a commission of 7 %, would dispose of. The drafts on
Mexico, which totalled nearly 8t million piastres, should not remain
under the control of the Caja, he maintained, but should be deposited
with a notary in Amsterdam (as had been done in the case of the Croese
conversion loans).4

                                   297
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

The error of allowing the names of Vanier berghe and Ouvrard to appear
on the warrant came home to Boyd, but to the intense annoyance of
Labouchere he reacted by writing to Ouvrard in Madrid, requesting a new
warrant in which, in addition to Hope & Co., the house of Van der
Hoeven & Co. of Amsterdam was mentioned. Labouchere tartly informed
Boyd that even though Van der Hoeven might have connexions with
Vanlerberghe, their participation would constitute a ground for Hope
abandoning the loan. Even after a conversation during which Van der
Hoeven expressed his deep disappointment at Labouchere's views, there
was no other course open to Boyd than to write to Ouvrard again, this
time to request a warrant in the form desired by Labouchere. 1
  Within the context of the new loan, Labouchere raised the matter of the
Echenique loans. Strictly speaking, these were perhaps not a matter for
the Spanish Court; nevertheless, the king had entered into a lasting
guarantee in respect of them. Labouchere's aim was that Ouvrard should
persuade the Spanish government to convert the Echenique bonds still in
circulation into new 5 % bonds and to redeem these on a date ten years
after the signing of a peace treaty between Spain and England. The con-
version operation could best be undertaken by Echenique and would,
moreover, yield a commission of 2 % for that house. It might also be
possible to obtain drafts on Mexico to serve as security for the new bonds.
But this well-meant plan in the interest of the Echenique loans fell on deaf
ears in Madrid. 2
  Boyd having had the warrant amended to conform with Labouchere's
various wishes, the final text was agreed at the end of September, after
which the document was sent from Madrid to Amsterdam. The com-
mencement date for the loan, as prescribed in the principal debenture,
was 1st July 1805. The rate of interest was 5-!- % and repayment of the
principal money, plus a premium of 5 %, was to be effected over a period
of ten years, i.e. the duration of the loan. Security was provided in the
form of ten drafts on the Royal Treasury in Mexico, totalling 8,484,375
piastres. The maturing dates of these were so arranged that in the event
of non-payment by the Spanish government, the relevant sums could be
in the possession of Hope & Co. before 1st July of the year concerned. 3
  The Company received a commission of 5 % on the sum of the loan. The
official letter from the finance minister referred to 7 %, but we may
assume that the difference of 2 % accrued to Ouvrard. One-half per cent
commission was payable on sums of interest, and I % on principal repay-
ments. The price at which the issue was to be taken over was fixed at
92-!- %, it being stipulated that the bonds should not be offered to the
public at less than 95 %. 4
              REAL CEDULA
                           DE S.M.

              r SENORES DEL CONSE]O,
      ACEPTANDO LA PROPOSICION HECHA
      por la Casa de Hope y Companla , del Comercio de
      A-nsterdam, de pooer eo la Caxa de Consolidacioo
      de! Vale3 13 cantidad de diez. millones de ftorines
        corrientes de! Holanda en calidad de pre tamo,
             baxo las condiciones que se expresan.




                 ANO                           180S·




               MADRID EN LA IMPRENTA REAL.




Rcal Cedilla issued by the Spanish king and relating to the lo-million
                         guilder loan of 1805
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 While all this was going on, Ouvrard's Compagnie, still without the
piastres from Mexico, had got into such serious financial difficulties that
 on 1st October 1805 Boyd humbly approached Hope & Co. with a request
 that the promised advance of one million guilders be transferred even
before the arrival in Amsterdam of the royal warrant.! Labouchere replied
 that the Company could not advance any monies until such time as
complete agreement had been reached with the Spanish government. The
 loan could not be opened until I st November at the earliest, for on that
date Croese was due to pay about a million guilders in capital and interest
on the loan provided by Hope in 1793, and it was generally assumed that
the greater portion of this sum was being reinvested. Croese had made
payments of capital and interest on the three conversion loans on 1st
September 1805, but the new loan had not then been finalized and so the
opportunity to channel the liquid resources thus released in the direction
of the new loan had been missed. 2
  Croese had received drafts on Paris houses early in October, but let it be
known that he would not pay the sum due on 1st November unless
these were negotiated before that date. There was every reason for this
reticence: the Caja de Conso/idacion was sinking deeper into the financial
quagmire, and the situation in Paris gave grounds for anxiety. Labouchere
therefore offered to take over the drafts from Croese and provide him
with funds to meet his commitment on 1st November. Vanlerberghe and
Ouvrard concurred in the proposal and gave permission for Hope & Co.
to deduct the sum of the drafts from the proceeds of the loan operation.
Labouchere, however, was unwilling to take any risks and he sent the
drafts to Baguenault & Co. with instructions not to release them until
debentures to an equal value were received from the Receveurs Generaux
as security. After an agitated exchange of correspondence and the appli-
cation of the necessary pressure on Croese, the matter was settled at the
eleventh hour. 3
  Diplomatic pressure from Paris and a number of hurried visits to The
Hague finally combined to secure the approval of the Batavian govern-
ment for the loan and its opening on the scheduled date, 1st November.
During an audience with the Raadpensionaris, Schimmelpenninck, it be-
came apparent to Labouchere that the rate of stamp duty on the loan had
been increased from t %to I %. Schimmelpenninck had informed Ouvrard
of this in April, but, to Labouchere's annoyance, the information had not
been passed on. In the event, however, Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard agreed
to pay the excess. 4
The pressure exerted from Paris on the Batavian government to sanction
                                    300
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 the Spanish loan was a by-product of the continuing deterioration of
  France's financial position. Immediately after the signing of the agree-
 ment with the Company in May 1805, Ouvrard had paid another visit to
 Spain to arrange matters there. The success of the various agreements
 depended upon the early arrival of piastres from Mexico. Ouvrard's
 efforts, through the intermediary of the British consul in Madrid, to reach
 an accord with Pitt in this matter failed, however, and because of this
 Ouvrard's financial edifice commenced to rock on its foundations. 1
   By the end of June 1805, payments to army and naval contractors had
 so sapped the liquid reserves of the Banque de France that Barbe Marbois
 was obliged to appeal urgently to the Spanish government for a payment
 of three million piastres. The money, however, was slow to arrive, with
 the result that the Banque's reserves continued to fall. At the end of
 September a mere 1,200,000 francs remained. 2
   The exporting of the piastres brought pressure upon the Caja de Conso-
lidacion and thus upon the price of the vales reales, for the redemption of
which it had, of course, been established. When the value of the vales
 began to fall sharply, the Spanish government resorted, as it had done in
 1799, to the imposition of an artificial rate. The result was similar: specie
disappeared and the vales fell to 58 % below par.
   The depreciation of the vales placed the Spanish government's creditors
in a very difficult position. This was particularly true of Ouvrard, who
faced the prospect of being paid for his purchases of corn and his de-
liveries to the fleet and the army in a heavily devalued form of tender. To
keep his head above water, Ouvrard was forced to bolster up the price of
the vales, and the only means of achieving this was to suspend the export
of piastres. 3
  Deprived of its lifeline, the Banque de France sank deeper into the mire;
its plight was not lessened by the ever-increasing demands made by the
Compagnie des Negociants Reunis in an effort to meet the needs of the
army. Late in September 1805 Napoleon had embarked on his campaign
against the Austrians and the Russians, and this taxed the Banque and the
military contractors to the limit. Napoleon was aware of the country's
financial distress, but in his view a major military victory offered the only
solution. As he said to Mollien, the director of the Sinking Fund: 'The
financial position is serious, the bank is meeting with difficulties; my task
of putting these things in order does not lie here.' 4
  Desprez had meanwhile got into such a predicament that he resorted to
the direct collection of monies received by the Receveurs Generaux. He
had earlier discounted the corresponding debentures from the Receveurs

                                    301
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

with the Banque de France, which was thus obliged to meet the cost of
redemption in full on the due dates. Increasing the quantity of banknotes
in circulation afforded but a temporary alleviation and fanned the growing
embers of mistrust. More and more people began to exchange their bank-
notes for coin and when, at the beginning of November, it became known
that the Compagnie was in difficulties, a veritable run on the Banque de
France ensued. Simultaneously Vanlerberghe, acting on behalf of the
Compagnie, disclosed that there was a deficit of 70 million francs, of
which 26 million were owed to the Treasury. The principal cause of the
crash lay in Spain's failure to honour its commitments. 1
 In view of the fact that Napoleon's campaign against the Austrians was
in full swing, Barbe Marbois continued to support the Compagnie, even
though the Treasury was in very great straits. On 27th October 1805 he
advised Hope & Co. that the Spanish loan-the documents pertaining to
which, he stated, were being despatched-had been transferred from Van-
lerberghe & Ouvrard to Desprez. Marbois had concerned himself with
the matter because the proceeds of the loan, 'en derniere analyse' would
accrue to the Treasury. Desprez wrote to Hope on the same day, urgently
requesting an advance; but Labouchere would go no further than to
remit the drafts from Croese. The emperor had admittedly forced an
Austrian army to capitulate at VIm, but that did not signify the end of the
war, and the financial situation continued to be critical. 2
 On 5th November, Barbe Marbois urgently requested that one of the
partners of Hope & Co. should visit Paris. Labouchere arrived there on
the nineteenth to find a large company assembled; Ouvrard, however, was
not present.
 With his customary optimism, Labouchere wrote that the situation in
Paris was not as serious as the stories which had been circulating had
suggested, and that means would be found to overcome the problems
expected in the month of December. 3 This did not mean that there
were then no difficulties in Paris. Prior to his departure for Spain,
Ouvrard had laid the foundations for a large-scale exchange operation
or circulation between Desprez, the capitals of all the French depar-
tements and the houses of Doyen, Recamier, Fulchiron and Thornton
Power. The basis for the circulation was formed by debentures to
a value of 12,000,000 francs issued by the Receveurs Generaux;
these had been discounted by the Banque de France and Ouvrard had
committed himself to replace them with piastres from Spain in September
1805.
Owing to the catastrophic consequences of the enforced rate for the

                                   302
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 vales, Ouvrard, as we have seen, was unable to honour his promise, with
the result that the circulation collapsed and Recamier and Fulchiron were
 forced to suspend their payments. 1
  Even more disturbing were the consequences of the exchange operations
 set in train by the Caja de Consolidacion with the houses of Hervas and
 Bastide in Paris, Croese in Amsterdam and Meyer Michel David and Van
 Heyningen & Co. in Hamburg. The Caja had furnished drafts on Mexico
to a value of two million piastres as security, but when Ouvrard failed to
produce funds and the rate for the vales collapsed, the Mexican drafts
became temporarily worthless.
  Logically, in view of all these distressing events, the meeting attended by
Labouchere in Paris sent a report by express messenger to Ouvrard in
Madrid, and with it a request that he return as soon as possible. He did
not, however, arrive until 6th December and even then was unable to
offer any comfort. He had the greatest difficulty in keeping his feet and
did not think twice about sacrificing the interests of others to save himself. 2
One after the other, those who had participated in the circulation by the
Caja were ruined; first Hervas and Bastide, then Croese and finally David
and Van Heyningen in Hamburg. Hervas, who for a time had served as
the French Charge d'Affaires in Spain and, at the request of Napoleon,
had been given the title of Marquis d' Almenara, sought a way out of his
difficulties by accepting the post of Spanish envoy in Constantinople. 3
  No such opportunity, however, existed for Croese and he was forced to
apply to the Schepenen of the City of Amsterdam for a twelve-month mora-
torium. As receivers they appointed Paul Iwan Hogguer, Joan Hodshon
and Pierre Cesar Labouchere. The last-named was not particularly keen
to undertake the task, but he saw only too well that he could not decline
in view of the house's deep involvement with Hope's Spanish interests.
Moreover, Hope & Co. were in a better position than any other house to
defend Croese's interests before the Caja de Consolidacion by reason of
the substantial securities which they held. 4 In addition to the business
with Spanish America and the loan of 10 million guilders, the Company
could also bring into the discussion the 2,590 bales of Spanish wool which
Hope and Baguenault jointly had received from Ouvrard for sale on
commission. There was also the matter of 2,465 bales of Spanish wool
which Ouvrard had had shipped direct to Ball Davis & Vaughan in
Bristol, to which, if need be, a claim could be laid via Baring. 5
  With the collapse of his edifices of credit, Ouvrard's position and that of
his Compagnie began to crumble. To start with, Ouvrard was confronted
with the resignation of Desprez, whose role as co-ordinator at the Treasury

                                     30 3
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

was transferred to a syndicate of the Receveurs Generaux. Next, Barbe
Marbois demanded a statement of Ouvrard's account with the Treasury.
Payment of his claims against the Ministry of War and the Admiralty was
postponed until the account with the Treasury had been examined. Lastly,
Ouvrard was obliged to subordinate his claims on Spain and other coun-
tries to settling his affairs with the French Treasury-a task which could not
be completed before the emperor had returned. Thus, by the time Napo-
leon arrived in Paris, the activities of the Compagnie had largely ceased
and the day of reckoning for Ouvrard had dawned.!
  Labouchere's own dealings with Ouvrard, after the latter's return to
Paris, were partially successful. To his great annoyance, Labouchere could
make no headway in matters of benefit to Croese, because Ouvrard re-
jected every compromise. In a letter to Baring, Labouchere wrote of
Ouvrard: 'There is in the man's disposition a spirit of distrust and avarice
which cannot easily be conceived.' In Labouchere's view, Ouvrard was
damaging his own plans by his short-sighted self-interest just when these
were about to bear fruit. This was the only occasion on which Labouchere
voiced explicit criticism of Ouvrard. 2
  In the matter of the piastre transaction, Labouchere made slightly more
progress, though no settlement was reached. On 12th December 1805 a
provisional agreement was reached between the two, after which Labou-
chere offered to take over drafts for between 10 and 15 million piastres at
a rate of exchange of 3 francs and 75 centimes. Ouvrard, whose position in
 France and Spain had been undermined by events, was hesitant about
entering into a definitive agreement, and he wrote to Madrid requesting
approval. In anticipation of this, Labouchere took back to Amsterdam
drafts worth 6t million piastres. At the end of January 1806, Labouchere
 made a further attempt to finalize matters, but by that time Ouvrard had
 other things on his mind. 3

Napoleon returned to Paris on 26th January. On the very next day he
summoned his ministers and demanded from them an explanation for the
financial crisis. Mollien, of whom Napoleon was very fond, was invited to
be present. Barbe Marbois launched into a lengthy speech about the state
of the national finances, but was interrupted by the emperor, who con-
cluded that the Compagnie, by means of the resources of the Treasury and
the Banque de France, had succeeded in meeting the needs of both France
and Spain. Since Spain had only been able to promise piastres, France
had ultimately paid a subsidy to Spain, instead of the other way round.
Napoleon thereupon insisted that Ouvrard, Desprez and Vanlerberghe

                                    304
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

should be stripped of their possessions, which were to be given to the
Treasury, and that Spain should honour its commitments. Marbois was
accused of allowing himself to be taken in by the Compagnie and of giving
Desprez a free hand with Treasury funds. The emperor then relieved him
of his office.
  After this ominous beginning, Ouvrard, Vanlerberghe and Desprez were
summoned and treated to one of Napoleon's notorious verbal broadsides.
In the face of threats of imprisonment, and even execution before a firing
squad, Vanlerberghe and Desprez burst into tears; but Ouvrard remained
absolutely calm.
  When the emperor's fury was spent, Ouvrard attempted to convince him
that he, Ouvrard, was the best person to carry the complex financial
operations, which were conducted via Holland, England and the United
States, to a successful conclusion. But such were Napoleon's sense of
irritation and his abhorrence of military contractors that he peremptorily
gave Ouvrard and his friends the choice between criminal prosecution and
the surrender of all their possessions. All three chose the latter. This
sweeping reconstruction of France's upper financial echelon was com-
pleted by the appointment of Mollien to the post of Minister of the Trea-
sury.!
  In a decree dated 8th February 1806, it was stated that Ouvrard, Desprez,
Vanlerberghe and Michel the Elder together owed the Treasury 87 million
francs. As the first instalment of their debt, they were to hand over to the
Treasury the proceeds of the Spanish loan negotiated through Hope & Co.,
drafts on Mexico to a value of 9,802,000 piastres and others to a value of
32} million francs issued by the Caja de Consolidacion. The wool which
Ouvrard had shipped to Hope and Baguenault for sale on commission
was also declared the property of the French Treasury. Supplies for the
army and navy were subjected to a discount of 50 %, with a maximum of
18 million francs. 2
 The drafts on Mexico, to a value of 6} million piastres, which Ouvrard
had given to Labouchere during their meeting, but for which no approval
had been forthcoming from Spain, were also among the assets confiscated.
Mollien instructed Hope & Co. to surrender these to one of his officials,
Daumont, who journeyed to Amsterdam in order to receive them. The
partners, however, refused to part with the drafts without Ouvrard's
permission. Only when he arrived in Amsterdam were the drafts handed
to Daumont. The drafts for 5 million piastres which had already been
sent to David Parish for collection escaped Mollien's grasp.3
Hope & Co. expressed to Mollien their willingness to exchange their
              THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

draft agreement with Ouvrard of 12th December 1805 for one in the same
form with the French Treasury. As regards the drafts which had already
been despatched, Hope was prepared to settle with the minister, via
Baguenault, when remittances were received. David Parish was instructed
not to enter into any fresh transactions until further notice. 1
 Labouchere took advantage of Ouvrard's presence in Amsterdam to
settle other matters such as the placing of the balance of the IO-million
guilder loan. Dealings with the entrepreneurs had commenced in Novem-
ber 1805 at a price of 921- %, but the Franco-Spanish financial crisis and
the ensuing bankruptcies had gradually forced the rate down. Hope
wished to reserve the right to dispose of the remaining 4,800 bonds at
90 %. It was agreed that Ouvrard & Co. would guarantee the interest and
principal due on 1st July 1806. 2
 Ouvrard returned to Paris at the end of February 1806. It soon became
clear that the power of decision no longer rested with him. Mollien in-
sisted on a price of 3 francs 75 centimes for the piastre with a monthly
payment of I million francs, commencing on 1st March 1806. The price
for the piastres was acceptable to Labouchere, but he was strongly op-
posed to the idea of fixed instalments, because it was impossible to predict
whether the proceeds of the sale of the piastres would arrive with the
desired regularity. Mollien yielded to Labouchere's objections in respect
of the bills which had already been despatched, but as far as the available
ones were concerned he stood firm on minor points, with the result that
the negotiations became deadlocked. 3
 For Ouvrard, the heavens grew darker and darker. Mollien had ordered
a further investigation of the Treasury's books, which were anything but
easy to interpret, and this revealed that the Compagnie had debts totalling
not 87 million francs, but something approaching 142 million. Its assets
amounted to 80 million francs or thereabouts, so that the true deficit was
of the order of 60 million. Security for this deficit comprised drafts on
Spanish America to a value of nearly 20 million piastres and others worth
321- million francs issued by the Caja de Consolidacion. A substantial
portion of the latter drafts had been given by Ouvrard to French houses
as security for credits granted to Spain. For example, Michel the Younger
held drafts to a value of nearly 111- million francs, and Armand Seguin
held others worth something like 7 million.
 Spain, however, had given Ouvrard drafts totalling considerably more
than it had received in money and goods. This is understandable because
the proceeds of the drafts on Spanish America had still to be received.
Now, all the drafts which Ouvrard had held had been transferred to the

                                    306
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

 French Treasury, and it would be most unfair to make Spain responsible
 for the payment in full of these. 1
   The man appointed to negotiate on behalf of Spain was Don Eugenio
 Izquierdo, Godoy's personal agent, who, over the heads of his country's
 official diplomatic representatives, liaised with the French authorities.
 Since 1797 Izquierdo had undertaken numerous secret diplomatic mis-
 sions to France on behalf of Godoy. In 1806 Godoy set out to obtain
 Napoleon's agreement to a partition of Portugal, whereby he, Godoy,
 would acquire a kingdom of his own. With this great prize in view, he was
 prepared to go to any lengths to meet Napoleon's financial demands. An
 obstacle to an early settlement was the inability of the Caja de Consoli-
 dacion to honour the drafts drawn on it. Efforts by Izquierdo, with the
 assistance of Talleyrand's confidential representative, Michel Simons, to
 negotiate a loan of 30 million guilders with De Smeth in order to provide
 the Caja with much-needed funds, produced no immediate result. 2
  On loth May 1806, Mollien and Izquierdo finally agreed that the onus
 which could reasonably be imposed on Spain was limited to the actual
 deficit of the Compagnie, i.e. 60 million francs. This sum was to be paid by
 means of drafts on Spanish America totalling 10 million piastres, for
which a rate of exchange of 3 francs 75 centimes was agreed, and others
to a value of 24 million francs drawn on Espinosa. As France already held
drafts on Spanish America totalling 20 million piastres and others on
Espinosa to a value of 321 million francs, the balance of 10 million
piastres and 81 million francs, was given back to Spain. It was agreed that
the drafts on Espinosa would be met in cash at the rate of 3 million
francs per month, commencing on 31st May 1806, and that the governors
of the colonies in Spanish America were to be instructed to permit the
French Treasury or its agents to freely export the 10 million piastres
accruing to it. 3
  In addition to this official agreement with the French Treasury-indeed
on the same day-Izquierdo reached a compromise with the Compagnie.
This concerned the difference between the deficit of 60 million francs
which Spain was committed to pay to France and the 34 million francs
which the Compagnie had actually advanced to Spain. Under pressure
from Mollien, Ouvrard and his partners in the consortium undertook to
return all drafts from the Caja which were in their possession, since these
would no longer be honoured by the Caja, and also to persuade other
holders, such as Michel the Younger and Seguin, to do the same. It was
left to the Compagnie to settle with them.
The Compagnie also undertook to pay the Spanish Treasury a sum of
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

12 million francs; this would comprise 4 million from the balance of the
proceeds of Hope & Co's loan of 10 million guilders, 3 million from the
proceeds of the wool shipped to Hope and Baguenault, and 5 million in
the form of drafts bearing the joint signatures of the members of the
consortium.
  The agreements reached on loth May had far-reaching consequences for
Hope & Co. With the protesting of their drafts by the Caja, Seguin and
Michel the Younger, sensing impending trouble, had taken timely steps
to secure the judicial attachment of those assets of Vanlerberghe &
Ouvrard which were held by Hope & Co. Fulchiron, another victim of the
failure of the Compagnie, followed their example. 1
  On the day of the agreement with Izquierdo, Desprez advised Hope &
Co. that as far as the loan of 10 million guilders and the consignment of
wool were concerned, Izquierdo's instructions must henceforth be obeyed.
Having divested themselves of the responsibility for these matters, Van-
lerberghe & Ouvrard considered themselves absolved from guaranteeing
the payment of interest and principal on the approaching 1st July.2
  The latter announcement was particularly displeasing to Hope & Co. be-
cause they were then on the point of entering into a contract with Willem
Borski for the remaining 3,900 bonds at the attractive price of 92 %. The
terms of the agreement, however, gave the entrepreneurs the option of
paying with interest vouchers and bonds which became due on 1st July
1806. The news of the withdrawal of Ouvrard's guarantee caused Borski
to suspend the negotiations, but a week later he made a fresh offer. In this,
he not only reserved the right to effect payment by means of the interest
vouchers and bonds which became due on 1st July, but also partly with
interest vouchers relating to the Echenique loans, the payment of which
had to be advertised by 23rd June 1806 at the latest. It is probably safe
to assume that this condition in fact emanated from Labouchere and that
its purpose was to remind the Spanish government of its financial com-
mitments.3
  At the end of May 1806, Hope received a visit from Michel Simons,
Talleyrand's confidential agent, who, as we have seen, was busy trying to
negotiate a loan of 30 million guilders with De Smeth. As the author-
ized representative of Izquierdo, he sought control of the Ouvrard assets
held by the Company. Labouchere made it plain to him that the Com-
pany's hands were tied until such time as the writs of attachment secured
by Michel the Younger, Seguin and Fulchiron were withdrawn. Labou-
chere was quite prepared to allow Simons to take over all the Vanler-
berghe & Ouvrard assets held by Hope & Co. on condition that he also

                                    308
               THE FRANCO-SPANISH FINANCIAL CRISIS

accepted responsibility for the claims which attached to them. That, how-
ever, was not what Simons had come for: his orders were to obtain money
-if possible, 4 million francs from Hope's Spanish loan and a further
3 million from the consignment of wool.
  After much discussion, Labouchere consented to advance the 4 mil-
lion francs from the loan on condition that the interest vouchers and
bonds falling due on 1st July and also the vouchers relating to interest on
the Echenique loans, which had become due on 1st May but had not been
paid, were accepted as part of the sum. In view of the slow progress made
with the sale of the wool, Labouchere was willing to advance only I
million francs on this, and then only after he had obtained the consent of
his partner in the consortium, Baguenault. 1 Moreover, his offer was sub-
ject to the lifting of the attachment. There was little prospect of this, for
Michel the Younger, who had also travelled to Amsterdam, announced
that he would make efforts in Madrid to realize his claims and that pend-
ing the outcome the garnishment would continue. 2
  The emergence of other figures and the gradual eclipse of Ouvrard con-
stitutes a suitable point at which temporarily to draw a veil over the
events on the Continent. Looking back on these, it is clear that the col-
laboration with Ouvrard produced results quite different from those which
the partners in Hope & Co. had envisaged. Thanks to a cautious policy
born of sagacity, however, the Company emerged unscathed from the
financial crisis of 1805-1806. By insisting on security for all credits, it
avoided the fate which befell Recamier, Hervas and Fulchiron. It recog-
nized the dangers attaching to Ouvrard's flimsy financial schemes in good
time, and took care not to become too deeply involved in these. Further-
more, the Company remained true to the principle that a country cannot
undertake new loans until clear arrangements have been made to repay
previous ones.
  The operation had got off to a good start, but the financial crises in
Spain and France, followed by Napoleon's drastic intervention, had
caused the flow of drafts to cease abruptly. By then, however, drafts to a
value of 5 million piastres had been sent to Parish and could not be
recovered. Under the agreement of loth May 1806, the Company could at
most anticipate drafts for a further 5 million piastres from France. The
transfer of these by the French Treasury took much longer than was
anticipated. The reason for this will emerge in a subsequent chapter, when
we come to deal with the events in England and America.
                          CHAPTER ELEVEN

                          ACCOUNT 'X'



At about the moment when Napoleon was putting an end to Ouvrard's
plans, the network established in America to carry out those plans com-
menced to operate. Vincent Nolte had arrived in New York in September
1805, to be followed shortly afterwards by Lestapis. They waited there for
David Parish, who arrived early in 1806. Rumours of the transaction had
preceded him and this fact made his task decidedly more difficult. 1
  Shortly after he set foot on American soil, Parish received a request from
Baring & Co. to hold back the Mexican drafts. There were good prospects
for an agreement with the British government, and this would pave the
way for the direct shipment of the piastres from Vera Cruz to London.
Parish, who had had far-reaching discussions with Sir Francis Baring in
London before setting off for America, was content to await further news.
After all, Sir Francis was a director of the East India Company and had
excellent connections in high government circles, while his son, Alexander,
was a director of the Bank of England. 2 But when fresh instructions from
Baring & Co. failed to materialize-for reasons which will become ap-
parent-Parish, seeing the time passing, found himself in a quandary.
Eventually Lestapis, carrying drafts for a million piastres, left for Vera
Cruz with instructions to present them to the Mexican Treasury and to
deposit the funds obtained with friendly houses in Vera Cruz for the time
being. During his sojourn there, De Villanueva, as Lestapis thereafter
became known, acted in conjunction with the houses of Pedro Miguel de
Echeverria and Francisco Luis de Septien.
  Parish also found it difficult to work with blank licences for trade with
the Spanish colonies. During his stay in New York he had succeeded in
disposing of three to Archibald Gracie, but the majority of merchants
there were highly sceptical, demanding proof of Parish's monopoly of
trade with Spanish America before committing themselves to an expedi-
tion. In mid-February, Parish decided to move his headquarters to Phila-
delphia in the hope of finding more takers. 3 But instead of fresh prospects,
Parish found competitors there. As we have seen, the Spanish Court, in a
flagrant breach of the monopoly granted to Ouvrard, had also given a
number of favoured persons and senior civil servants the right to issue

                                    3I l
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

licences, and these were sold, via agents, to anyone who would buy them.
Espinosa sent Francisco Sarmiento to the United States for this very
purpose. Sarmiento was a brother-in-law of the Philadelphia merchant
John Craig, who thus obtained six licences for trade with Vera Cruz.
Another brother-in-law of Craig, the Baltimore merchant Robert Oliver,
also became involved. Robert Oliver and his brother John headed one of
the richest and most dependable merchant houses in that city. The
Spanish envoy in Philadelphia, the Marquis de Yrujo, was aware of the
affair and supported Craig and the Olivers.l
  To Parish, this complication meant further delay in disposing of the
licences which he held. His first act was to send a letter to Madrid, de-
manding in the strongest terms that the Minister of Finance, Soler, take the
necessary action to maintain his monopoly. In the meantime he had to
contend with a situation in which others had already prepared five expe-
ditions to Vera Cruz and in which his efforts to obtain the support of the
Spanish envoy were without avail.
  Lengthy discussions with Craig and Robert Oliver finally led to an agree-
ment in late March or early April 1806. This provided for Craig and the
Olivers to take over the licences held by Parish, in consideration whereof
they were to pay commissions of 2t %, based on the invoice value of the
goods shipped, to Parish himself and 3J! %, based on the nett proceeds,
to his principals. Parish gave a guarantee against confiscation in Vera
 Cruz, but was not required to bear responsibility in respect of cargoes lost
through shipwreck or piracy while bound for Vera Cruz. 2
  Import duties were levied both in the colonies and in Spain. In consul-
 tation with the Spanish envoy in Philadelphia, Craig and the Olivers
 consented to give Parish 20 % of the invoice value; he would take steps to
 ensure that these monies were paid, via Hope & Co., to the Caja de
 Consolidacion. Parish was to receive a further 5 % commission for these
 services.
  The nett profit was deemed to be the sum remaining after the deduction
 of commissions, insurance, freight charges and dues payable in Vera Cruz.
 In addition to the commissions already referred to, 6t % of the gross
 proceeds in Vera Cruz was due to Villanueva and the Spanish house which
 acted as intermediary for the sale.
  The dues levied in Vera Cruz varied during the operation. Import duties
 ranged from IO % to 20 % of the pro forma invoice value, and in one or
 two instances reached 30 %. Other dues, which were sometimes levied and
 sometimes not, included a consular fee, which ranged from 1 % to 5 %;
 war tax, also between 1 % and 5 %; and an Admiralty tax, which varied

                                    312
E I Rey se ha servido conceder permiso a la Casa
de                                                       para que
desde el puerto de                                pucda despachar
con pabellon                                    ycon arteglo a fa
R eal Orden de 24 de D iciembre de 1804                       1
                      tlombrado

      D ios gum-de a            v.       muchos tlnos.
                           de                  de 180




     Blank licence for trade with the Spanish colonies
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

between 5 % and 71 %. The total percentage of dues gradually increased,
from I I %in May 1806 to 33 % in the second half of 1807, but this varied
within such wide limits that no clear line is discernible. 1
  The insurance premium for the round voyage amounted to 121 % of the
value of the cargo. To ensure that, in the event of the loss of a ship and its
cargo, the insurance premium and the 71- % commission for Parish and
Hope would be recovered, the Olivers inflated the estimated value of the
cargo.2
  From the archives of Robert and John Oliver, documents relating to
22 expeditions have survived, and these show the nett profit, of which
one-third was due to Parish's principals. This amounted to approximately
two-thirds of the difference between the nett value of the cargo when it
left Baltimore and the nett proceeds of the sale in Vera Cruz. The remain-
ing one-third represented freight charges, insurance and other costs in-
curred by the Olivers.3
  Craig's death, in June 1807, opened the way for a new and very different
agreement between the Olivers and Parish. Instead of one-third of the nett
profit, Parish had to be content with 371- % of the nett value of the cargo
in Baltimore; moreover, the 20% import duty and Parish's own com-
mission were to be paid from this, leaving a mere 15% for other 'com-
pensations.'
  For Parish and his principals, the new situation was decidely less favour-
able than the old. In place of 20 % import duty plus 21- % commission for
Parish himself and 5 %for Hope & Co., all calculated on the nett value of
the cargo, plus 3J! % of the nett profit, there now remained only a bare
15 % of the nett value of the cargo. This arrangement, it appears, was
applied to eight shipments.
  The last two cargoes shipped by the Olivers under licences obtained from
Parish were subject to another arrangement. The 371- % of the nett value
was retained, but the expeditions were undertaken jointly by Parish and
the Olivers. In view of the extremely unfavourable nature of the 371- %
system, one may wonder whether the arrangement reached for the two
final expeditions did not perhaps apply to the preceding eight. When
Craig died, it was more or less a foregone conclusion that someone would
take his place. The expeditions in the months of February to May 1807
produced nett profits in excess of the nett value of the cargoes. Parish's
commercial insight being what it was, it is extremely unlikely that he
would have been prevailed upon to accept such less favourable terms.
  In settling their accounts with Auguste Ouvrard & Co. and the Caja, the
Company maintained the 371- % system, i.e. import duty at 20 % and 15%
                                     3 14
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

'compensations', based on the nett value of the cargo, continued to be
entered.
  However, we know that another, more advantageous method of calcu-
lation was employed for 22 of the 32 cargoes shipped by the Olivers.
Although there are no details of the commission received by Parish in
respect of licences disposed of to third parties, it is clear that the appli-
cation of the n! %system to all licences left a highly attractive margin for
Parish and Hope.
  In order to establish the profits derived from the Oliver shipments, it is
necessary to separate the three arrangements. On the first 22 shipments the
Company received 33t % of the nett profit plus 5 % commission on the
nett value of the cargo, making in all more than 410,000 dollars, the
value of the dollar then being on a par with that of the piastre.! On the
last ten shipments the Company received a further 15% of the nett value,
amounting to 96,000 dollars, in the form of 'compensations.'
  If we now apply the method of profit-sharing between the Olivers and
Parish to the last 2 shipments only, the question arises: what portion of
the profit may be regarded as 'nett profit'? For the first 22 shipments, the
proportion, as stated earlier, was about two-thirds. Ifwe apply this to the
final shipments, we see that Parish received a further 60,500 dollars, or
one-third of the gross profit. On this basis, the proceeds from the pre-
ceding 8 shipments would have amounted to nearly 164,500 dollars;
as stated, however, this is no more than a hypothesis. 2 In all, thus, the
earnings from the expeditions carried out through Robert and John
Oliver must have totalled at least 566,500 dollars.
  Understandably, the Olivers were anxious to avoid competition from
other houses in the trade with Vera Cruz. But, as has been established,
Parish, prior to his arrival in Philadelphia, had transferred a number of
licences to Archibald Gracie of New York. Nolte had taken 6 with him
to New Orleans, where he disposed of them to Amory & Callender, with
whom he worked closely. In spite of strenuous appeals from Oliver, Parish
reserved the right to grant licences to whosoever he wished, although the
quantity concerned was not large. Among the recipients were Isaac McKim
and John Donnell, both of Baltimore, who carried out four expeditions,
two jointly and two for McKim's account. It is clear from surviving details
that one cargo constituted very direct competition with those of the
Olivers. Of the other three, one consisted chiefly of military uniforms,
dyes and paint, and the remainder, which were shipped in November and
December 1807, comprised southern European produce such as brandy,
almonds, cork, writing paper and iron and steel. The goods which made

                                    315
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

up these three cargoes were probably of Spanish manufacture and shipped
on behalf of the Spanish government, and as such did not constitute
serious competition for the Olivers.l
  Besides shipping two cargoes for his own account, John Craig partici-
pated with the Olivers in four expeditions to Montevideo under the pro-
tection of licences furnished by Parish. The house of Robert Gilmor &
Sons had an interest in all four, and was supported in two of them by Le
Roy Bayard & McEvers and Archibald Gracie of New York. Alas, there
are no details of the proceeds of the sale of these four cargoes. Single
licences were given to James Brown of New York (who travelled as
supercargo) and to Geo.T.Phillips of New Orleans.
  Pro forma invoices and final accounts relating to fifteen expeditions by
merchants other than the Olivers have survived. The invoices total more
than a million dollars. On the basis of the relatively unfavourable 37t %
system, there would have been a balance of 15 %, or nearly 155,000 dollars,
for 'compensations.' 2
  Hope & Co's account to Auguste Ouvrard & Co. and the Caja de Con-
solidacion was for the total invoice value of the 53 cargoes, amounting
to approximately 2,900,000 dollars. Import duty at 20 %, totalling more
than 560,000 dollars, was paid to the Caja, and the 15 % for 'com-
pensations', amounting to 422,000 dollars, less expenses, losses and
commissions, was shared between the Caja and Auguste Ouvrard &
CO.3 By our calculations, Parish probably received 566,000 + 155,000 =
721,000 dollars, which implies that a margin of nearly 300,000 dollars
remained for the Company.
  All these items were credited to Account 'X,' the account in which all
transactions relating to the Spanish American operation were entered.
  The size of the profit on cargoes shipped to Spanish America was, of
course, governed by the prices which the goods fetched at the port of
unloading. The more closely the cargo was matched to the local require-
ments, the greater was the profit on its sale. The Oliver archives reveal
that goods imported by third parties also occupied an important place. It
grieved the Olivers to find that the Spanish government was also under-
mining Parish's monopoly for the benefit of others. The house of Gordon
& Murphy of London, which had received permission to obtain piastres
from Vera Cruz on behalf of the Spanish government, also proved to be
liberally supplied with trading licences. The only hope of averting the
ruination of the market in Vera Cruz lay in co-ordinating the activities of
the two houses, and this the Olivers set out to impress upon the London
merchants. 4

                                   316
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

In order to arrive at a suitable range of goods for shipment, the Olivers
sent an agent to reconnoitre the market in Vera Cruz. He returned bearing
a list of items which had been specially recommended by De Echeverria.
In place of Silesian linen, 'English Goods' such as fancy chintz, calicoes,
corded dimity, cambric dimity and black velvets were specified. 1 These,
however, were not readily saleable on the North American market and
consequently would have to be specially ordered from England. Through-
out 1806 there was talk of peace negotiations between England and France,
and if these should be brought to a successful conclusion it would not be
advisable to be left with stocks of goods for Spanish America. If peace
were to be restored, Spain would certainly close its ports to foreign
vessels and the Olivers would be left with the task of disposing of goods
which were not in great demand.
  Greater care in matching the supply to the demand enabled the antici-
pated rise in profits to be achieved in the short run. This trend emerged
clearly after October 1806, but profits declined in the autumn of the
following year. This was partly due to inability on the part of the Olivers
to supply a number of current items, but changes in the pattern of demand
in Vera Cruz, whereby certain articles went out of favour, was also a
contributory factor. 2 Profit margins on the 'loose' expeditions were gen-
erally higher in the second half of 1807 than previously, but these ship-
ments arrived in Mexico so late in the year that the prices which they
fetched may have been favourably influenced by the United States em-
bargo on foreign trade which had been imposed in the meantime.

From the Company's point of view, the method of transporting piastres
on the return voyage from Vera Cruz to the United States constituted
another very important facet of the agreement with the Olivers. Archibald
Gracie's vessels had already carried piastres to New Orleans, and the first
ship despatched under a licence obtained from Parish, the schooner
'Messenger', arrived in Baltimore in June 1806 carrying 133,000 piastres,
of which 50,000 had been shipped by Villanueva for Parish's account.
 The Olivers objected to this method of shipment on the grounds that, in
their eyes, the piastres were the property of the Spanish Crown and as
such were a sure prey for British cruisers. The fact that they were really
destined for the French Treasury merely increased the danger. To avert
this, it was decided that in future the Olivers would only carry piastres
which were their rightful property. In pursuance of the decision, they
purchased, at a discount of 21 %, drafts drawn by Parish on Villanueva.
This price applied to a sum of 500,000 piastres, but soon Parish was pro-
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

testing at the discount, which he considered too high. He succeeded in
getting the rate reduced to 17 % for subsequent shipments, but even this
was excessive in his opinion. When, in October 1806, it became known
that vessels in ballast were to be allowed to enter the port of Vera Cruz
free of licence, Parish was given the freedom to ship piastres separately
from consignments of goods. 1
  Nothing is known concerning the extent of these 'free' shipments, but
much can be deduced. In all, some 6.450,000 piastres were exported from
Vera Cruz through the agency of Parish. Of these, 1,450,000 were shipped
for the account of the Olivers, and thus 5,000,000 must have been ex-
ported by other means.
  The expeditions to Spanish America and the return cargoes of piastres,
however, represent only a part of the activities reflected in Account 'X.'
Parish also had the task of getting the piastres to Europe. Various possi-
bilities existed. The most obvious of these was to ship them direct, but
little use was made of this method, and according to Hope's ledgers only
two shipments totalling 60,000 piastres were undertaken. 2
  By far the greater portion was used to make advance payment to North
American merchant houses for goods which they shipped to Europe. The
houses then drew on the consignees for the sum of the advance plus
interest at 6 % per annum. Parish sent the drafts to Hope & Co., who
presented them for payment on the dut. date.
  Hope & Co. was not the only house in Amsterdam to be involved in
transactions of this nature. Parish also remitted drafts drawn on Couderc
& Brants, Daniel Crommelin & Sons, W. and J.Willink, P. and C. van
Eeghen, Van Staphorst & Co., Severijn & Hazebroek, Braunsberg & Co.,
Ruys & Zimmerman and Raymond & Theodore de Smeth. The first five
of these had long-established connexions with the United States. The
Rotterdam link was formed by Littledale & Dixon, while in Antwerp
most of the business was transacted via David Parish & Co. and the
remainder via Ridgway & Mertens. Completing the chain were Trotreau &
Labouchere, the house controlled by P.C.Labouchere's younger brother,
and De La Roche & Co. in Nantes.
  This extremely simple and obvious model allowed of variation, each
variant affording a given rate of profit according to the relationship be-
tween the rates of exchange. For example, Parish could draw on Baring &
Co. and remit the drafts to them. As we have established, the United
States had a deficit on its balance of trade with England and so negotiable
documents on well-established British houses were very much in demand.
Baring, in turn, could remit to Hope & Co. drafts which American houses

                                   318
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

had drawn on their continental consignors and negotiated in London. In
some cases Baring remitted direct to Paris-after all, the monies were
destined for the French Treasury. But as a general rule Hamburg was
preferred for remittances to the Continent because it was on the exchange
market there that the deficit in Britain's trade with Russia was adjusted. 1
 The transfer to Paris of funds held by the Company was achieved in part
by way of remittances to Baguenault & Co. or by drafts drawn by
Baguenault on Hope. In order not to bring the exchange rate for drafts
between Amsterdam and Paris under pressure, a system was also employed
in which other houses drew on Hope & Co. and themselves remitted to
Paris. The houses concerned were Matthiessen & Sillem in Hamburg
(who thus were able to deal with remittances from Baring), Littledale &
Dixon in Rotterdam, David Parish & Co. in Antwerp and Bethmann
Brothers in Frankfurt.

The operations for Account 'X' naturally had a major influence on Hope's
own commercial relations with the United States. The initial contacts,
which were probably influenced by the Company's relationship with
Baring & Co., dated from the early 1790s. 2 But no more than ten con-
signments per year were involved and the total value of the goods did not
exceed half a million guilders. The American consignments ceased after
1795 and the accounts with American houses remained dormant until
1801, when they were all struck off the books. 3
 The years 1802 and 1803 saw a modest revival of the trade, with one or
two consignments, but in 1804 the number grew to fifteen with a total
value of nearly 2 million guilders. In the following year there were
twenty-eight representing a value of 2,340,000 guilders. The records
reveal that an upward surge occurred in 1806, when goods to a value of
more than 91- million guilders, distributed over ninety-five accounts,
arrived. The climax came in 1807, when the value of goods totalled more
than 10,80,000 guilders spread over a hundred and six accounts.4
 The remittances from David Parish, however, did not match the value of
the goods. In 1807, for example, his remittances, including those which
passed through Baring & Co., totalled just under 6,800,000 guilders-and
this included remittances for consignments to other houses. It may thus
be concluded that only a part of the consignments to Hope were a result
of Parish's activities. Whether or not the volume of this trade would have
increased so sharply without Parish's intervention can no longer be
ascertained, but we may assume that, once having discovered Hope & Co.,
the houses concerned continued to consign cargoes to the Company with-

                                    3 19
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

out prepayment or partial financing. Although incomplete, the reports
sent to David Parish concerning the arrival of American vessels in Am-
sterdam reveal that the consignments to Hope & Co. exceeded those
addressed to Couderc & Brants-a firm of importance in its field-by
something like 50 %.1
  It is not possible to deduce from the archive material available just
which American houses Parish employed for the purpose of his remit-
tances to Europe. But the fact that houses which were concerned in
Parish's operations to Spanish America appear on the list of shippers
warrants the assumption that they profited from the advance payments in
piastres.
  Chief among these were Robert and John Oliver; John Donnell, Robert
Gilmor & Sons and Thomas Tenant in Baltimore; Archibald Gracie in
New York; John Craig in Philadelphia; and Amory & Callender and
Geo.T.Phillips in New Orleans.
  The Oliver archives reveal that both that house and Craig in Philadelphia
had their own 'troops,' merchants to whom they advanced money, on
behalf of Parish, for consignments shipped to Europe. The names of these
persons and firms indeed appear in the grootboeken and on separate
accounts in the Hope archives. Examples are: in Baltimore, John Sherlock,
Mark Pringle, Smith & Buchanan, Hollins & McBlair, William Patterson
& Sons and Lemuel Taylor; in Philadelphia, Willings & Francis, Stephen
Girard and Savage & Dugan. But there were others in more distant ports,
such as James & Th.Perkins of Boston, Gracie & Andersons of Peters-
burg, Virginia, and Geo.M.W.Woolsey of New Orleans. 2
  The majority of the cargoes from America consisted of sugar, coffee,
tobacco, rice and cotton. In correspondence with Parish, Labouchere
complained from the outset about the malaise in the sugar trade, a result
of the supply exceeding the demand. The cause of the surplus lay in a
substantial expansion of the sugar cane plantations in the non-British
areas of Central America, the effect of which had been to bring about
fierce competition. 3
  Throughout the Spring of 1806 Labouchere remained optimistic con-
cerning the markets for the remaining commodities, but the knowledge
that a British negotiator had gone to France for peace talks brought
dealings in colonial produce to a virtual standstill. There were also com-
plaints concerning the merchant houses in Rotterdam, which, 'being al-
ways inclined to extremes,' did not sell within a system. By 'system' was
meant a mild form of cartel in which a number of large houses would
maintain prices at a certain level in order to deter bear operators and

                                   320
                               ACCOUNT 'X'


profiteers. Such a system, however, could operate to the disadvantage of
stockholders; in the case of cotton, for example, the brokers, who were
also buyers, banded together to keep prices down. Moreover, there was
strong competition in this commodity from the Rotterdam merchants
who, using agressive selling methods, covered the German hinterland. 1
  Hope & Co. also complained about the invoices issued by the American
houses, which, in terms of the description of the goods, were usually
unreliable. Goods were often too highly priced, making their sale at a
profit an impossibility and causing good opportunities to be missed.
  When, early in August 1806, it was rumoured that the documents herald-
ing peace between England and France had been signed, Labouchere
anticipated panic followed by selling at any price. He did his very utmost
to interest speculators in the low-priced sugar, but his efforts were
thwarted by new customs regulations in western Germany. As part of the
redistribution of lands in that area, Napoleon's brother-in-law, Murat,
had been assigned the Grand Duchy of Cleves and Berg, which subse-
quently became part of the Confederation of the Rhine, a conglomeration
of satellite states which were closely allied to France. 2
  By 1st October Labouchere had become so pessimistic about the sugar
situation that he could scarcely contemplate the recovery of the payments
made in advance. It was decided that Parish would have to stay in the
United States for a further year at least, in order to give the market an
opportunity to recover. Labouchere did not subscribe to the view that
peace was imminent. Later in the month of October he reported that none
of the current expeditions in sugar and coffee were profitable. Whenever
an opportunity arose to dispose of some sugar, there was always a house
willing to undercut the price. At times the Company even bought sugar
in an effort to halt the panic, but it was only able to resell it in times of
political tension, when war threatened and everyone was on the alert. The
tension was highest in Germany, where an extremely obscure tug-of-war
was in progress; this centred around Prussia, which vacillated between
war with France and peace. 3
  The ultimatum of 1st October 1806 by Prussia, which finally chose war,
and the breaking off by England of the peace negotiations had the effect
of breathing some fresh life into the commodity markets. Coffee was the
first to revive, but sugar remained inactive. Even the news of the Prussian
defeats at Jena and Auerstadt failed to bring any real improvement, for
 the further pattern of events was uncertain and, according to Labouchere,
 uncertainty meant death to trade. 4
The news of the Berlin Decree of 21st November 1806, by which Napo-

                                    321
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

leon fore bade the importation of British goods into all allied or occupied
territories, ordered the confiscation of all British goods within his grasp,
and even excluded from harbours under his control or in friendly coun-
tries any ship which had called at a British port, served to revitalize trade
and improve prices. In Holland, the decree was underlined by a regulation
covering all incoming vessels: these were allowed to dock only after an
authorization had been obtained from King Louis Napoleon, and were
required to obtain permission to leave. However, when it transpired that
the permit system was applied extremely liberally and that, for Holland at
least, the traffic to and from England was scarcely affected, the commodity
market suffered a relapse.!
  Despite the relatively small stocks, prices-particularly that of sugar-re-
mained low throughout the Spring of 1807 in anticipation of large-scale
imports during the ensuing summer. The stocks of coffee were not large,
but a considerable amount was being smuggled from England; at the
same time, consumption was declining under the influence of growing
poverty in Holland and the confused situation created in northern Ger-
many by the war between Sweden and France. 2
  At the end of April 1807, Labouchere reported that huge quantities of
sugar were being imported from America and England, although no
demand existed. Furthermore, substantial amounts were being returned
from Brabant because the high French import duty rendered it uneconom-
ic to export sugar to France. Sales in general improved during the months
of May and June, albeit sugar prices remained low. In July the market
again collapsed in the wake of renewed rumours of peace negotiations
between France and England. Moreover, buyers were seen to be awaiting
the outcome of the peace talks between France and Russia, which were
taking place at Tilsit. 3
  A peace treaty was signed at Tilsit on 9th July 1807, but this did not end
the uncertainty, for it was followed by anxiety concerning relations be-
tween England and the United States. Late in June 1807 a British man-of-
war had stopped the American frigate 'Chesapeake' off the coast of
Virginia, overpowered her crew and taken off a number of British de-
serters. In Amsterdam, fears of an Anglo-American conflict were so great
that underwriters refused to insure American vessels. The commodity
buyers, gripped by fear and uncertainty, remained inactive. But when the
rumours of war increased, they came to life again, motivated by the
thought that a conflict would lead to the rupture of communications with
the United States and thus force up prices. 4
Danger also threatened from another direction, however. Following the

                                    322
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

 Treaty of Tilsit, Napoleon firmly made up his mind to close the whole of
 Europe to British goods, and he proceeded to apply pressure to Louis
 Napoleon with the aim of tightening the prohibitive measures in Holland
 and elsewhere. On 16th September 1807, King Louis issued a new decree
 providing for the confiscation of any vessel which had called at a British
 port or which carried a British cargo.!
   While these developments were taking place, the atmosphere on the
 commodity market remained lively and prices continued to rise, helped
 by the action of the American consul in Amsterdam in advising the masters
 of American vessels to leave as quickly as possible. In spite of the arrival
 of fresh cargoes from America, the market remained active throughout
 the autumn. 2
  The end of the boom was nevertheless in sight. On 11th November 1807,
 partly under pressure from a faction having commercial interests in the
 West Indies, Orders in Council were issued in England which made it
 virtually impossible for neutral countries to continue shipments to the
 Continent. The acceptance of a certificate of neutrality from a French
 consul would henceforth lead to the confiscation of the cargo concerned.
 Vessels of neutral states bound for the Continent were required to call at
 an English port en route and there to pay tax on the goods carried. 3
  Napoleon's reply to this was the Milan Decree of 17th December 1807,
 which laid down that any vessel which had called at a British port would
 be declared a prize. The door was finally closed when, on 22nd December,
the United States Congress approved a proposal by President Jefferson
banning all traffic to foreign ports. With this, American trade with
Holland steadily declined. Early in January 1808 four vessels managed to
slip in via Texel, but at about the same time six American ships were
captured and taken to French ports, where they were later confiscated. 4
  On 23rd January King Louis closed all Dutch ports to foreign shipping.
Occasional evasions occurred, but these were of little importance to the
Company since it could not base its advice to American merchants on
such mere coincidences.
  In mid-February 1809 Labouchere informed Parish that not a single
pound of sugar, coffee or cotton remained. Examination of the accounts
for American imports, however, reveals that, as in his previous report,
LabouchCre took a somewhat sombre view. In 1808 the value of the goods
to which these accounts related was in excess of 5,650,000 guilders, and in
1809 nearly one and a half million guilders, indicating that the decline
in the volume of business with America was more gradual than Labou-
chere suggested. 5 Nevertheless, by early May the Company decided that
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

the time had come gradually to close the American accounts. The era of
copious shipments, from which the Company had made substantial prof-
its, was at an end.!
While the proceeds from the initial batch of drafts on Mexico were
trickling into Europe, in the shape of colonial produce, the Company, in
wnsultation with Baring & Co., was busy devising a more rapid method
for the collection of the drafts which were at that moment still held by the
French Treasury. Labouchere had first raised the matter in a letter to Sir
Francis Baring on loth May 1805, after which it had lapsed. Late in
September of the same year he raised it again. He proposed that two or
three American vessels should take cargoes from Spain to that country's
colonies and there take on board piastres, which would be unloaded at an
English port. If this were not feasible, the operation could be routed via
America, for American account. 2
  Baring's reaction was to send his confidential agent, James Richards, to
Amsterdam, but when he arrived, late in November, he found that La-
bouchere had just left for Paris to attend to matters arising from the
"financial crisis between Spain and France. 3
  The memoranda which Richards-who followed Labouchere to Paris-
carried with him reveal that the attitude of the British government to-
wards the projected operations was somewhat inconsistent. On the one
hand it was keen to stimulate the export of British goods to the Spanish
colonies, to which end it was prepared to allow British traders to export
goods from Jamaica to Vera Cruz and from there to import Mexican
products and precious metals, provided that such imports were the prop-
erty of British subjects (this, of course, implied that the Spanish govern-
ment would have to issue similar trading licences); on the other hand,
however, it was opposed to the exportation to England of unlimited
quantities of piastres because four-fifths or five-sixths of these would
 ultimately find their way into the Spanish or French Treasuries and thereby
 become 'sinews of war.' A limited operation involving, say, five to ten
million piastres would be acceptable, though even this was likely to arouse
 sensitivities, particularly in naval circles. 4
  The affair had clearly been rendered more urgent by the arrival in
 London of a Spaniard named Saratea, who made efforts, via the house of
 Gordon & Murphy, to obtain licences for the export of British manu-
 factures to ports such as Lima, Buenos Aires, Caracas and Vera Cruz. He
 stated that he was in a position to acquire the necessary Spanish licences
 and also permits for the export to England of unlimited quantities of
 piastres. s

                                   32 4
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

This threat of competition made it vital that Labouchere should obtain
the licences requested from the Spanish government without delay. In
December 1805 he and Richards held discussions with Ouvrard, following
which there was every indication that the matter would soon be settled.
In view of Baring & Co.'s desire to participate in future piastre trans-
actions, Labouchere wrote to Alexander Baring in the following January,
urging him to come to Holland as soon as possible so that final agreement
could be reached with Ouvrard regarding the twelve million piastres
which had been offered. Baring replied that there were signs of progress
in regard to the affair in England, but that owing to Pitt's illness it was
difficult to obtain a decision from the government.!
  Pitt's death on 23rd January 1806 and the coming to office of the more
peace-seeking cabinet headed by Grenville-Fox brought a sudden change
in the situation. In France, the dramatic encounter between Napoleon
and Ouvrard on 27th January put an abrupt end to the latter's gigantic
plans.
  The scene thus changed completely. So much more sympathetic did
Alexander Baring find the new British government that on 18th February
he was able to report optimistically that: 'We are again in a fair way on a
new track on this side and can encourage you to move. Our position gives
better security than it has ever done.' 2
  Simultaneously, however, Hope & Co. were obliged to surrender their
holding of Mexican drafts to the French Treasury, with the result that all
the negotiations had to be started afresh. Whereas the urge for peace on
the part of the British government had facilitated Baring's negotiations,
it formed an obstacle to the Company's efforts to reach agreement with
the French Treasury inasmuch as a restoration of peace would render its
services as a mediator superfluous. 3
  In March 1806 Labouchere was still optimistic about an early decision,
but by April his attitude had become tinged with reservation. We have
already seen how Mollien, having abandoned his original demand for
fixed monthly payments, refused to yield on minor details.4
  Despite the slow progress of the negotiations with the French Treasury,
Alexander Baring considered the matter of sufficient importance to justify
making his long-postponed visit to Amsterdam, where he arrived at the
beginning of June 1806. He hoped to be able to take a signed contract
back to England, but the French government continued to raise objec-
tions, chief among which was that, should peace come, Hope and Baring
would make far too large a profit on the terms offered. 5
A positive facet of the visit was that it enabled the two companies to

                                   32 5
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

agree on terms and conditions. Their discussions were based on the prem-
ise that both would act as buyers and not as agents. Freight costs, marine
risk and other hazards not covered by insurance would be met jointly and
equally. In preparation for a final agreement, two contracts were drawn
up. In the first of these, Baring Bros. & Co. undertook to pay 3 francs
75 centimes in Paris for every piastre collected. In the second, they prom-
ised to pay a sum (which was unspecified) to Hope & Co. in London for
each piastre. The latter figure was to be the price at which Baring would
sell the piastres. The difference between the two figures represented the
profit, and this was to be shared equally by the two houses.
  The first draft contract was for external consumption. In it, Hope under-
took to deliver, via their agent in Vera Cruz, up to 6 million piastres on
board Spanish or neutral vessels, from which they would be transferred
to vessels authorized by Baring to load piastres in the Vera Cruz roads.
Baring Bros. & Co. were committed to pay 3 francs 75 centimes for each
piastre in Paris within sixty days of the receipt of the bills of lading re-
lating to these shipments, up to a maximum of two million francs per
month. Sums remaining unpaid after the expiry of the sixty-day period
would incur interest at 1- %per month.
  Hope & Co. also committed themselves to make every effort to obtain
guarantees from the French and Spanish governments that no attack
would be made on Baring's property, irrespective of the political situation.
It was also necessary to ensure that the authorities in Mexico would not
impede the movement of the piastres to the waiting vessels, even if these
were British warships. The piastres were to be delivered on board free of
duty or charges, and vessels used exclusively for the carriage of piastres
were to be exempted from all import or export duties.
  Baring Bros. & Co. agreed to pay all freight charges and marine risk, but
the consequences of arrest by warships or by freebooters flying the flag of
France, Spain or a country allied to them were for Hope's account until
the piastres were delivered to an American port on the Gulf of Mexico or
a port in a British colony, or were put aboard a British man-of-war.
 The other draft contract, in which the transaction was approached from
the Company's position, provided for the Company to deliver the piastres
at a port in the British West Indies or in the United States. Baring Bros. &
Co. undertook to accept the piastres thus delivered and, via their autho-
rized agents, to issue receipts for these. Upon presentation of these re-
ceipts in London, Baring would pay an unspecified sum per piastre to
Hope. A different, and similarly unspecified, sum would be paid for
piastres conveyed in a British man-of-war. Baring Bros. & Co. undertook
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

 to obtain from the British government a guarantee that the Company
 would not be hampered in its participation in the transaction and that it
 would be free to remit abroad the monies accruing to it. Baring also
 undertook to try to obtain from the British government armed protection
 for any neutral vessel which Hope might employ for the shipment of the
 piastres and, if possible, British licences for such vessels. Although the
 piastres were for Hope's account and at their risk until such time as they
 were handed over to Baring's authorized agent, Baring agreed to pay to
 the Company a sum of four shillings and sixpence for each piastre in the
event of a ship carrying piastres being arrested and seized by a British
man-of-war or by a freebooter, in spite of sailing under a British licence.!
  Before leaving Amsterdam in July 1806, Alexander Baring was given
drafts on Mexico to a value of 1,250,000 piastres for onward transmission
to David Parish. Hope & Co. had received these drafts from Ouvrard;
they represented the Spanish government's contribution to the capital of
Franl;ois Ouvrard & Co., and as such had been excluded from the drafts
restored to Mollien. 2
  From July onwards, little was written concerning the piastre contracts,
although the negotiations with the French Treasury were pursued. In mid-
November Napoleon inquired impatiently of Mollien how matters stood
in regard to the drafts on Mexico. In December he authorized Mollien to
sign any reasonable contract, provided the rate of exchange at which he
had originally accepted the piastres, i.e. 3 francs 75 centimes, was main-
tained as a minimum. 3
  Early in February 1807, Councillor of State Louis travelled to
Amsterdam, where he had various matters to attend to. Among them was
the conclusion of a contract for the Mexican drafts. As Hope & Co. had
settled the matter with Baring in the previous July, it did not take long to
reach agreement with Louis. The rate of exchange of 3 francs 75 centimes
embodied in the draft contract in July served as the basis for an agreement
covering in all 5 million piastres. 4 A report of the agreement was sent
to Baring Bros. & Co. with a request that they settle matters with the
British authorities. When this had been done, Baring Bros. & Co. would
be in a position to sign a firm contract with the Company, a copy of which
would be sent to Amsterdam.
  When Baring Bros. & Co. approached the authorities in search of their
approval, they met with an unpleasant surprise. Gordon & Murphy and
Reid Irving & Co. had already negotiated a contract to ship 10 million
piastres for the account of the Spanish government, and the British
government had undertaken not to sanction any fresh operations until

                                    32 7
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

this contract had been completed. Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving &
Co. had reached virtual agreement with Saratea regarding the IO million
piastres during the winter of 1805, but the peace negotiations between
England and France had caused the Spanish government to hesitate be-
fore giving its approval. But the negotiations had been resumed during
the French campaign against the Prussians in October, and had ended in
agreement. 1
  Nevertheless, Alexander Baring, by reason of his position on the board
of the Bank of England, succeeded in negotiating a contract for the de-
livery of piastres. Alas, his letters to Hope & Co. do not reveal the manner
of his success. 2
  The way was now clear for Baring to sign the contract with Hope and
send it to Amsterdam. With the countersignature of the document by
Hope & Co. on 24th March 1807, the matter was settled-to the immense
relief of Louis, who, with mounting impatience, had remained in The
Hague to await the completion. 3
  On 17th April, Labouchere received drafts on Mexico to a value of
2,753,170 piastres. He also received drafts on Havana and Caracas, in
each case for 700,000 piastres, making a total of more than 4 million.4
  In correspondence with the Company, Baring Bros. & Co. indicated a
desire to extend the contract to cover drafts sent to Parish but which
remained uncollected. Hope & Co. had agreed to this in order to avoid
the two houses competing with each other in Vera Cruz. Baring was not
greatly interested in the drafts on Havana, the value of which was in-
sufficient to warrant despatching a British warship there. The piastres
from Caracas were also something of a problem, but it was felt that these
could probably be collected at the same time as those in Vera Cruz. 5
  Mollien gave his approval to the extension of the contract on condition
that a price of 3 francs 85 centimes per piastre was paid for the most recent
 drafts-ten centimes above the contract figure. The parties reached agree-
ment on this point, and on 20th July 1807 Hope & Co. and Baring Bros. &
 Co. signed a supplementary contract. The original contract thus now
 covered the entire sum of the drafts on the Spanish colonies which the
 Company held. Parish continued as principal agent, but Baring Bros. &
 Co. took over control from Hope & Co. with all the attendant dangers
 and risks. 6
  The agreement with the French Treasury also covered the drafts which
 Mollien had sent to the French consul general in Philadelphia, De Beau-
jour, in 1806 with instructions to dispose of them. De Beaujour had
 offered them to all the merchants in Philadelphia but had found no
                               ACCOUNT 'X'

takers: no one was willing to risk dealing in politically-tainted drafts. In
desperation, the consul turned to David Parish, who was perfectly willing
to put them through Account 'X.' During the three years 1807-1809,
more than a million piastres was paid to De Beaujour. 1
 In the meantime, Baring Bros. & Co. had energetically set about imple-
menting the contract. Late in May 1807 the frigate 'Diana,' with Charles
Baring on board as supercargo, had set sail. Unfortunately, the documents
sent from Madrid did not include an order for the vessel to be admitted to
Caracas and thus this part of the expedition had to be abandoned. The
drafts on Caracas were transferred by endorsement to Baring's agents in
Jamaica, Atkinson & Co., in order that they could make an attempt to
present them at a later date. 2
 On 20th October 1807 Baring Bros. & Co. reported that the 'Diana' had
arrived safely at Portsmouth with 3,679,835 piastres on board. The freight
charges and attendant expenses had to be repaid to the Bank of England.
A sum of 25,780 pounds sterling, representing commissions for Charles
Baring and Sir Francis Baring, and incidental expenses, was claimed. The
nett proceeds totalled just over 772,000 pounds sterling, which means that
the sum paid per piastre was four shillings and twopence. 3 The French
Treasury was recompensed at the rate of 3 francs 85 centimes for each
piastre received in London plus i %commission for Hope & Co.'s agents,
making approximately 3 francs 90 centimes in all. Assuming the pound
to have been equal to cf I 1.50 ,and the franc to 48 guilder cents, it can be
calculated that Hope and Baring made a joint profit of 52 guilder cents on
each piastre. This, however, is only an approximate figure because it is
impossible to ascertain the exact rates of exchange applying to these
remittances.
 While the 'Diana' was loading the piastres off Vera Cruz, another
British man-of-war set sail for Malta carrying a cargo of two million
piastres for Gordon & Murphy's account. Thus, the deliveries of piastres
for the Spanish government continued normally alongside the Hope-
Baring operations. 4

The developments concerning the drafts on Havana to a value of
700,000 piastres were considerably more adventuresome. In September
r807 Parish had sent an agent to Cuba with instructions to present the
drafts, but shortly after arriving there the man had died of yellow fever. 5
Parish thereupon requested Nolte to wind up his affairs in New Orleans
and take charge of the collection in Havana. The original plan provided
for New Orleans to play an important role, both for the shipment of

                                    32 9
                              ACCOUNT 'X'

merchandise and the reception of cargoes of silver. But under the sub-
sequent contract with the Olivers the majority of cargoes were shipped
from Baltimore and the vessels, laden with piastres, returned to that port.
Such silver as did arrive in New Orleans could be remitted only with the
utmost difficulty owing to the scarcity of safe drafts on ports in the
northeastern part of the country and on England. 1
 When Nolte arrived in Cuba he was faced with an unforeseen problem.
The letter of advice from the Spanish Minister of Finance, which accom-
panied the drafts, referred specifically to payment in silver coin. With the
interruption, by the war with England, of communications with Mexico,
the golden dubio on had become the sole coinage in Cuba, and thus
payment in the stipulated coinage could not be made. Nolte's reaction to
this situation was to propose to the Intendant of Cuba, Don Rafael
Gomez Roubaud, that the drafts on Havana should be exchanged for
drafts on Vera Cruz. At first the Intendant was not sympathetic towards
the suggestion, but veiled references to the displeasure of Don Rafael's
patron, Talleyrand, and the prospect of a handsel, finally won him over
to Nolte's point of view. 2 In exchange for the draft for 700,000 piastres,
he received one on Vera Cruz for 945,000 piastres.
  Nolte had reasoned that the rate of exchange of the piastre in relation to
the dubloon was lower in the United States than in Cuba. He accordingly
maintained that in order to collect the required sum in piastres in America,
the amount in dubloons would need to be increased by one-sixth. More-
over, because the Spanish government had failed to meet its obligation to
effect payment in Cuba, he felt it necessary to include an insurance pre-
mium of 25 % for the voyage from Vera Cruz to Philadelphia. Even with
a surchange of 35 %, or 245,000 piastres, it would pay the Spanish govern-
ment to settle on these terms. In all probability, the handsel of 14,000
piastres was the decisive factor. 3
 At the end of 1807 the dqlft for 945,000 piastres was sent to Vera Cruz,
where it was promptly accepted and paid. For Nolte, the homeward
voyage proved to be an anti-climax. The vessel in which he travelled was
wrecked on a reef near one of the Florida Keys, and he and the crew were
washed up on an uninhabited island. Although they were soon rescued by
a fishing boat from Nassau, in the Bahamas, it was mid-March before
Nolte reached Philadelphia. 4
  As a result of this unexpected delay, Mollien heard about Nolte's trans-
action before Hope & Co. The Intendant of Cuba reported on it to
Talleyrand, and the letter, carried by a Spanish vessel which evaded the
English cruisers, actually reached Talleyrand. According to Mollien, the

                                    33 0
                               ACCOUNT 'X'


Intendant had complained about the manner in which Nolte had dictated
the terms. 1
  Faced with this situation, Labouchere could do no more than promise to
obtain further information at the earliest possible moment. He did, how-
ever, immediately point out that Nolte's action had averted a redraft,
which would have added at least 28 % to the costs. After receiving Nolte's
report, Labouchere offered to pay 4 francs 50 centimes per piastre for the
700,000 covered by the draft, an increase of 60 centimes per piastre on the
contracted figure. Mollien, however, persisted in his demand that the
amount be paid in full, and eventually Labouchere agreed to this at a
price of 3 francs 75 centimes; but a substantial sum was deducted to
cover the expenses incurred. 2
  The Havana affair was officially concluded in September 1809 when
Nolte (who had meanwhile returned to Europe) and Labouchere together
tendered the final account to Mollien. During the meeting, Mollien re-
iterated the message of gratitude from the emperor which he had earlier
conveyed to Labouchere.
  With this happy ending, we have anticipated the remainder of our story.
Summarizing, it can be said that of the 10 million piastres, in the form of
drafts, which remained in French hands, more than 6 million were
collected via the United States. The treaty of July 1807, under which the
balance of the drafts were entrusted to the care of Baring Bros. & Co.,
was probably inspired in part by the increasing harassment by British
cruisers of the schooners despatched by the Olivers, and the impossibility
of obtaining British licences to cover their voyages. 3
  Whether or not Baring Bros. & Co. would succeed in carrying out further
expeditions as smoothly as the first, depended to a very great extent upon
the political situation. In the following chapter we shall see how a political
reversal in Spain completely blocked the piastre affair.




                                     33 1
                        CHAPTER TWELVE


                BETWEEN SATELLITES
                 AND NAPOLEONITES


As we saw at the end of Chapter Ten, the winding-up of Ouvrard's busi-
ness relationship with the French and Spanish governments on 10th May
1806 led to the formal transfer to Spain of the balance of the proceeds of
the 1805 loan and also of the wool which Ouvrard had shipped to
Baguenault and Hope.
 After protracted negotiations with the Company, Michel Simons suc-
ceeded in obtaining for Spain an advance of one million francs on the sale
of the wool. As the transfer of ownership to Spain had been effected to
enable that country to payoff its debts to France, Labouchere instructed
Baguenault & Co. to pay the million francs into the French Treasury on
30th June 1806. 1 The placing with the entrepreneurs of the balance of the
bonds relating to the loan of 1805 had been accomplished sooner than
had been expected, so that Hope & Co. were able to make further pay-
ments totalling 2,300,000 francs on 31st July and 25th August, for the
purposes of which the attachments by Seguin, Michel the Younger and
Fulchiron of the Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard funds held by Hope & Co.
were suspended. 2
 Where payments for the benefit of Spain were concerned, however, the
attachments, and also the Company's claims, were fully maintained. When
Espinosa failed to remit the monies to cover the redemption, with interest
due, of 1,000 bonds on 1st July 1806, a sum of more than 1,400,000
guilders was debited to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard's account, and it was
made clear that the entry would not be expunged until such time as an
official notification was received from the Spanish government stating
that the sum might be met from the sale of the wool. Thus, as far as the
Company was concerned, Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard's guarantee of the
payment due on 1st July remained fully 111 force, whatever had been
stated in writing from Paris.3
 Spain's continuing, acute shortage of finances necessitated searching for
possible new sources in Holland. Simons's efforts to negotiate a loan of
30 million guilders with De Smeth having failed, Izquierdo made a
formal approach to Hope & Co. at the end of August 1806. Labouchere's
response was cool. Informal discussions had earlier been held with Simons

                                  333
             BETWEEN SA TEL LITES AND N APOLEONITES

on this subject, but certain conditions put forward by him had thus far
made it unlikely that the entrepreneurs would be greatly interested.
 It was essential that the new loan should serve as a means for the con-
version of the outstanding portions of all the previous Spanish loans
obtained in Holland, with the exception of the one of 1805. Moreover,
measures would have to be taken to put an end to the Spanish habit of
reissuing bonds accepted upon conversion-and at lower price at that.
This practice had caused more than enough trouble in connexion with the
conversion loans issued by Croese.
 Labouchere felt that it would be advisable to reduce the rate of interest
from the 6 % referred to in the royal warrant which Simons brought with
him to 51 %, and to lower the premium from 5! to 5 %, thereby matching
the conditions of the new negotiation to those of the loan of 1805 and
protecting the entrepreneurs against losses on 1805 bonds which were still
in their possession. He also proposed that the initial repayment should
be deferred from the end of the first year to the end of the third, in order
to avoid overloading Spain's finances. He made it plain that there could
be no question of limiting commission to bonds actually sold: in many
instances, it was precisely the initial lots which demanded substantial
sacrifices in the shape of reductions, etc. to secure placement. If the
Spanish government refused to yield on this point, the loan was unlikely
to get off the ground. Finally, it was for Labouchere a conditio sine qua
non that as yet unhonoured drafts drawn by Croese on the Caja de Con-
solidacion should be met by way of the new loan in order that that house
could resume normal business. 1
 Fortunately for Hope & Co., time was not on Izquierdo's side. The
French continued to press the Spanish Court for prompt payment of the
agreed 3 million francs per month, and the Negociants Reunis had
protested the drafts for 5 million francs which had been given to
Izquierdo on loth May 1806, with the result that he was unable to fall
back on this reserve. Moreover, Mollien had no intention of allowing
Spain to share in the 50 % discount on supplies to the army and navy
which he had forced upon the Negociants Reunis for the benefit of the
Treasury. Faced with this situation, Izquierdo temporarily sought refuge
in chicanery-something which fitted in well with the policy of Godoy,
who in the summer and early autumn of 1806 was considering breaking
off relations with France. 2
 Following the great French military successes against the Prussians at
Jena and Auerstadt, however, Godoy abandoned his plan and devoted
himself to the task of getting back into Napoleon's good books. The early

                                    334
              BETWEEN SA TELLlTES AND NAPOLEONITES

 negotiation with Hope & Co. of a loan, which would enable the payments
 desired by France to be effected, was thus of some political importance.
   But final agreement with the Company was not immediately forthcom-
 ing. Izquierdo had on his own initiative raised the capital sum of the loan
 to 36 million guilders in order to provide additional monies for payment
 to France. Labouchere rejected the proposed increase, adding that even
 30 million was excessive. In days gone by, an issuing house could enter
 into contracts with entrepreneurs which provided guarantees for the lender
 of payment at set times; but the majority of the entrepreneurs had long
 since disappeared and now a house could consider itself fortunate if it
 succeeded in placing a loan in dribs and drabs among the few entrepre-
 neurs who remained. Unless the Company received remittances for inter-
est and principal on the 1793 loan on 1st November, there was no hope
 of floating the new one. 1
  This ultimative conclusion failed to elicit any word from Madrid, but,
 acting on behalf ofIzquierdo, Simons-who had visited Amsterdam in the
company of Ouvrard at the end of October-authorized the Company to
advertise the payments on 1st November. With this step, a foundation
 upon which the parties could come to terms was laid. 2 By the 13th
 November they had agreed to the point where Labouchere was able to
apply to King Louis for formal permission to open the loan. 3
  The proposed loan was of 30 million guilders for twelve years, com-
mencing on 1st November 1809. The rate of interest was to be 51 %, and
a bonus of 5 % would be payable on principal sums repaid. As security
for the loan, the Company received drafts on Mexico totalling nearly
281 million piastres which matured regularly throughout the period, and
which could be collected in Vera Cruz in the event of the Spanish govern-
ment failing to meet its obligations towards the lenders.
  Hope & Co. expressed their willingness to take over the loan at 90 %. In
addition, they stood out for, and secured, a commission of 7 % on the
value of bonds placed-which implied that Labouchere had acquiesced in
the Spanish demands on this point. It was agreed that I % commission
would be payable on principal repayments and 1 % on interest. Interest
would be payable from 1st November 1806 and a bonus of six months'
interest would be paid 'aux preneurs des obligations.' Time would reveal
that preneurs and entrepreneurs were one and the same.
  The following were to be accepted in lieu of cash for the purposes of the
loan: the balance of the bonds of the Echenique loans, in value totalling
more than five million guilders, at the price of 95 %; the balance of the
Croese conversion loans, totalling 4,300,000 guilders; and the last 1,200

                                    335
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

bonds relating to Hope & Coo's loan of 1793, which fell due in equal
portions on 1st November 1806 and 1st November 1807. To these could
be added the interest due on all the bonds up to the date of redemption,
the interest and principal payment announced by Croese in 1805 (the
bonds concerned having been deposited but not encashed) and the pro-
ceeds of the redemption of 1,000 bonds on 1st July 1806, with which
Hope & Co. had provisionally debited Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard. Finally,
it was stipulated that the sum of interest due on 1st November 1808
would be deducted in advance from the proceeds of the loan.
  The nett result would be to adjust debts by Spain totalling cf 14,428,000
via the new loan. In addition, the Company reserved the right to use as
payment drafts on the Caja de Consolidacion totalling cf 1,462,000 which
were held by Croese.
  After the deduction of the 10 % margin on the issue price, Hope & Coo's
commission of 7 % and the Spanish commitments totalling cf 15,890,000,
just over ten million guilders remained. It was agreed that when the loan
had been floated the Company would aim to make It million francs
monthly available to the French Treasury, but it was stressed that
its ability to do so would depend upon the success of the loan operation.
The Company also agreed to try to obtain a reduction, from 5 % to I %,
of the stamp duty demanded by the Netherlands government on the 10
million guilders which would actually be furnished. Of this I % only a
quarter would be borne by the Company.!
  Labouchere had every reason for satisfaction with this loan contract.
Thanks to Godoy being in a tight corner, the Company had secured the
conversion of all the old Spanish loans-something which had not been
achieved at the time of the 1805 negotiation. Furthermore, the Croese
affair, which had bothered Labouchere since 1805, would shortly be re-
solved. From a business point of view also, the deal afforded interesting
prospects. The Echenique bonds, which could be converted at 95 %, stood
at 60% or thereabouts at the end of 1805. A timely purchase of these
 bonds could thus lead to a very substantial profit; this fact will not have
 escaped Simons and his patron, Talleyrand. 2
  This hopeful and potentially profitable beginning gave way to immense
disappointment. On 18th November 1806 the Dutch Minister of Finance,
 Gogel, reported that King Louis had decided to withhold approval of the
 new Spanish loan. 3 Izquierdo, who had meanwhile arrived in Holland,
 immediately set off for The Hague, where it was made clear to him that
 the king's decision was less than final. The news cheered him somewhat,
 but it did little to dispel the problem of meeting the claims by Hope & Co.
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

for the payments made by them on 1st July and 1st November of that
year-claims which he knew the Company would not allow to remain
unmet for long. He offered drafts on Mexico to a value of 3,200,000
piastres but these were refused by Labouchere on the grounds that com-
munication by sea had been rendered extremely uncertain by the Berlin
Decree of 21st November 1806. The problem was solved by an offer by
Auguste Ouvrard & Co. to guarantee the sums advanced. Here, too, the
American operations provided the Company with indispensable cover in
the back in its dealings with Spain. 1
 In late December 1806 Ouvrard sent Jean Baptiste Ouin to Amsterdam
as his agent, for the purpose of settling those of his affairs in which Hope
& Co. were concerned. To Labouchere's intense displeasure, a deed
stating that Auguste Ouvrard & Co. owed It million francs to Fran~ois
Ouvrard & Co. was signed in Paris at the same time. Ouin attempted to
persuade the Company to pay a similar sum to Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co.
from remittances received from America for Auguste Ouvrard. Such re-
mittances were not to be used for other purposes until such time as the debt
to Fran~ois Ouvrard & Co. had been settled. The effect of this 'milking' of
Auguste Ouvrard & Co. would be to devalue that company's guarantee in
respect of the advances made by Hope & Co. on 1st July and 1st No-
vember 1806 for quite a long time. 2
 Labouchere protested against what he regarded as tampering with ac-
counts, and consented only to discuss Ouvrard's interests privately with
Ouin without reference to the Paris contract. At the same time, being
mindful of Ouvrard's urgent need of funds to finance his supplies to the
French army and navy, he was at pains not to be too inflexible, with the
result that Ouin was able to return to Paris in mid-January with an
agreement in his pocket. Labouchere, however, made the implementation
of the agreement conditional upon the approval of Espinosa, Seguin,
Michel the Younger and Fulchiron. He also stipulated that any monies
placed at Ouin's disposal would be channelled via Baguenault & Co. in
Paris-with the full maintenance of the Company's claims. When, at the
end of January, Ouin transferred monies received via Baguenault to
Desprez, Labouchere declared that he would have nothing more to do
with the arrangement and would in future deal only with Baguenault. 3
 The affair was finalized early in April 1807 by a joint statement by Ouin,
Desprez and Vanlerberghe. Labouchere had limited his claim on Auguste
Ouvrard & Co. to the sum of the payment made on 1st November and
had instructed Baguenault to pay to Desprez the equivalent of the re-
deemed bonds plus the interest on these. The bonds would thus serve as an

                                    337
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

additional security. Auguste Ouvrard & Co., however, remained guar-
antors for the full sum pending settlement by the Spanish Court. 1
 The Company reserved in full its claims in respect of other credit bal-
ances on Auguste Ouvrard & Co.'s account, including sums receivable.
The drafts for 1,250,000 piastres, which had earlier been handed to
Alexander Baring, were specifically referred to in this respect. By carefully
avoiding any reference to Fran<;ois Ouvrard & Co., the Company re-
emphasized its refusal to recognize the transfer of Auguste Ouvrard's
assets.
 This statement elicited the formal approval of Michel the Younger and
Fulchiron, but no word was received from Seguin or Espinosa. There
could thus be no question of unfettered access to the monies placed in
Baguenault's charge. For Hope & Co., this arrangement at least had the
significant advantage that they were absolved from any further manipu-
lations on Ouvrard's part. Incoming credits for Ouvrard's account were
transferred to Baguenault, after which the question of who was to receive
the money became one for Ouvrard and his creditors to squabble about.
Hope & Co. were required to do no more than exercise formal super-
vision. 2
 Although dissociating itself from Ouvrard and his affairs, the Company
had by no means abandoned him. This became clear to Councillor of
State Louis when, during his sojourn in Amsterdam in the Spring of 1807,
he haughtily demanded to be allowed to inspect Ouvrard's various ac-
counts. Labouchere replied that the Company was under no obligation
to disclose to Louis whether or not it controlled funds belonging to
Ouvrard, adding that Louis must be aware of the impropriety of his
question. That the rebuke had found its mark was shown by Louis's first
letter following his return to Paris: in this, he asked which of his actions
in Holland had seemed to Labouchere to be out of place. 3
  Apart from this verbal duel, Louis's contacts with Hope & Co. were
valuable and fruitful. As explained earlier, they led to agreement con-
cerning the method of dealing with the drafts on Mexico which remained
in the possession of the French Treasury. Moreover, Louis was charged
with making a further effort to obtain the approval of King Louis Napo-
leon for the floating of the Spanish loan. Labouchere, too, made many
journeys to The Hague for this purpose, in addition to which the good
offices of the French and Spanish envoys were invoked. 4
  The various audiences with King Louis showed that he first wished to see
a loan for Holland placed, and that his approval for the loan to Spain
depended upon this. When the councillor of state requested the king's
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

 final word on the matter, the latter replied: 'I will gladly give it when my
 loan is assured, but not before.' 1
   Hope & Co. were thus obliged to embark willy-nilly on a negotiation for
 the considerable sum of 40 million guilders-and this for the benefit of
 a government of which Labouchere wrote: 'it can attribute its discredit
 only to its own bad financial policy.' Following the intercession of Robert
Voute, acting in the capacity of Director of the Treasury under the regime
 of King Louis, a consortium was formed consisting of Hope & Co.,
 Raymond and Theodore De Smeth, W. & J.Willink, J.Hodshon & Son
 and W.van Brienen & Son, all of Amsterdam. These houses jointly de-
clared their willingness to launch a loan of 40 million guilders at 6 %
interest. To encourage investors, bonuses and even an additional bonus
were offered. The loan was to run from 1st April 1807 to 1st April 1825.
 A sum of 4 million guilders was to be set aside annually from the taxes
collected in Amsterdam, and placed in a sinking fund to be set up for the
purpose. All matured but unpaid interest vouchers relating to the national
debt, including the debts of the Oost-Indische Compagnie which had been
taken over by the government, were to be accepted in lieu of cash, as were
matured drafts payable by the Receiver General, Daniel Hooft.2
  It was of the utmost importance to the Company that subscriptions to
the loan should be forthcoming speedily and in such a volume that the
king could not withhold his approval for the loan to Spain. On 7th April,
one week after the loan had opened, 10 million guilders had been sub-
scribed; by the 12th the 15t million mark was reached. But then the flow
ceased. By 19th April just over 18 million had been received, and from
that point the total inched upwards, finally reaching 22 million on 11th
May.3
  This point having been reached, Labouchere felt that the market should
be left to settle until the end of the month. In the meantime, a start could
be made with the Spanish loan, the Berigt of which he wished to have
published by the 19th. But the death of the king's son and the ensuing
Court mourning caused publication to be postponed until the 25th.4
  This did not mark the end of Hope & Co. 's involvement with Napoleon's
family. Early in May 1807 another Napoleonite approached the Company
regarding a loan. Acting on instructions from King Joseph of Naples,
Gerardin, his equerry, visited the Company's offices bearing a letter of
introduction from Louis. The nature of his instructions and the conver-
sations which followed made it clear that King Joseph desired to bring his
country to the notice of the capital market in Holland by means of a
modest loan. 5

                                    339
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

Labouchere explained the pros and cons of such a loan to Gerardin.
Naples was unknown to the Dutch public as a borrower, and thus little
interest could be expected from investors, certainly in the beginning. On
the other hand, King Louis was well disposed towards the loan which his
brother sought; indeed, he was understood to be considering putting part
of the 5 % reserve on his own loan, which was provisionally blocked, into
the loan to Naples.
   In view of King Joseph's total lack of experience of loans in Holland,
Labouchere made a proposal on the lines current at the time. It would be
necessary for the king to furnish a principal debenture for a loan of 3
million guilders; a model for this was given to Gerardin. The loan would
be for seven years, commencing on 1st July 1807, and interest, at 6 %,
would be payable annually on a set date. Repayment, at the rate of
500,000 guilders per year, would commence at the end of the second year,
which implied that the loan would be paid off on 1st July 1814. The
required security would comprise the revenues of the Kingdom of Naples
in general, and those of the domain of Tovegliere, in the province of
Puglia, in particular.
   Hope & Co. were willing to take over the bonds at 90 %, in addition to
which they required a commission of 5 % on the principal sum. It was
stipulated that a commission of I % would be chargeable on payments of
interest and principal, and that stamp duty on the principal sum, esti-
mated to be I %, would be payable by the Kingdom of Naples. The sum
of the interest due on I st July 1808 would be deducted from the proceeds
 of the loan and remain in the Company's charge. A similar stipulation
had been made in respect of the loan to Spain in order to guarantee at
least the initial interest payment and thereby to give the entrepreneurs an
 opportunity to place the loan on the market gradually. As a final con-
dition for the Naples loan, Labouchere insisted that Hope & Co. should
 be clearly designated agents for King Joseph, and nothing more; in this
 role, they would not be required to guarantee the success of the loan. On
 the same day, 13th May 1807, Gerardin accepted Labouchere's conditions
 and authorized the Company to float the loan. He thereupon departed for
 Paris, leaving the Company to obtain the formal approval of King Louis.!
   Labouchere, however, was preoccupied with the Spanish loan. Even
 before the Berigt appeared, Raymond and Theodore De Smeth and
 Willem Borski had become involved in the matter. Hope & Co. accepted
 responsibility for half the loan sum, De Smeth for 130 ths and Borski for
  120 ths. All risks attaching to advances to Spain were to be shared in this

 ratio, as were the subsequent profits. 2

                                    340
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

The Berigt appeared in the newspapers on 25th May 1807. On the same
day, Hope & Co. and Willem Borski, acting on behalf of an anonymous
group of entrepreneurs, signed the initial contract for the acceptance of
3,000 Spanish bonds relating to the new loan. Payment was to be effected
in four monthly instalments. In addition to enjoying interest with effect
from the date of the first instalment, the entrepreneurs received a com-
mission of 5 % and a bonus of six months' interest, which was equal to an
extra commission of 2i- %. Half of the sums which comprised the in-
stalments were to be paid in cash, and for this purpose the matured
vouchers relating to the Echenique loans and Hope's loan of 1793 would
be regarded as cash. The same was to apply to all payments advertised by
Croese but not effected because of his moratorium. The entrepreneurs
were also permitted to meet up to one-quarter of their obligations, or
cf 750,000, with Echenique bonds and a similar amount with bonds re-
lating to Croese's conversion loans or Hope's 179310an.l
  This pattern was broadly maintained in all subsequent contracts, albeit
the 'cash' portion gradually increased to tths and in some cases reached
17oths. In the period up to 1st November 1807, 23,000 bonds were trans-
ferred to Borski and his fellow entrepreneurs. 2 With this, activity virtually
ceased, the entrepreneurs merely taking options on 3,000 bonds until 1st
January 1808, on 2,000 between 1st January and 1st March 1808 and on
the remaining 2,000 between 1st March and 1st May 1808. Izquierdo was
advised that the Company's ability to maintain the monthly payments of
I t million francs to the French Treasury depended upon these options
being converted into firm contracts. In no case did this occur,
however, and Hope's final payment was accordingly made in November,
by which time 9 million francs had been paid over from the proceeds of
the loan. 3
  To Labouchere's annoyance, Izquierdo was slow in making his payments
to the French Treasury. Immediately after the floating of the loan in June
1807, Labouchere had complained to Mollien that Izquierdo was delaying
the payments on purely formal grounds. In July the delay had assumed
such proportions that Baguenault & Co. commenced to charge interest
on the funds which they had made available but which had remained idle
because of Izquierdo's dilatory tatics. Mollien ultimately ordered the
attachment of the Izquierdo assets which were in Hope's charge, but this
had little effect. 4
  The explanation for Izquierdo's conduct probably lay in his sincere
desire to defend Spain's weak financial position against the French, inso-
far as this lay in his power. Political developments in the second half of

                                    34 1
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND N APOLEONITES

1807 were to prove beneficial to his efforts. In July, following the Treaty of
Tilsit, Napoleon demanded of Portugal that it should sever all political
and economic links with England. The Spanish government was not told
of this in advance, but now that it seemed that Portugal was at last being
dealt with, the matter of its partition-and with it Godoy's aspiration
after a kingdom of his own -again came up for discussion. 1
 The negotiations on this subject opened in Paris in September. In Napo-
leon's view, they afforded a suitable opportunity to put pressure on
Izquierdo, as Godoy's agent, concerning the arrears in the Spanish pay-
ments to France. For Izquierdo, it was an opportunity to repeat his usual
excuses about Spain's poverty, but now with added emphasis: if Napoleon
wished Spain to mount an army against Portugal, he ought not simul-
taneously to demand her last resources.
 This argument must have convinced the emperor. The grootboek entries
relating to the Spanish Crown and to the loan of 30 million guilders
reveal that on 11th November 1807 a sum of I-} million francs was placed
at Izquierdo's disposal; in contrast to the five previous entries, however,
there is no reference to payment of this sum to the French Treasury. 2
 Ifwe examine the accounts relating to this loan in 1807 in their entirety,
we observe that the sale of 23,000 bonds yielded something over 20
million guilders. Of this sum, nearly 9 million guilders was subscribed in
the form of vouchers and bonds from earlier loans. Of the balance, more
than d- million was paid to the French Treasury. Because Spain failed
to make any remittances in respect of interest or capital repayments,
totalling cf 3,850,000, in 1807, this sum was charged to the new loan.
Unmet drafts on the Caja de Consolidacion which were held by Croese,
and which totalled cf 1,400,000, were also charged to the account. The
balance of cf 1,750,000 had been used by Izquierdo himself, who had
purchased two thousand bonds of the new loan; but it had been stipulated
that these should remain in the charge of De Smeth until such time as all
the conditions applying to the loan had been met. This implied the pay-
ment in full of Croese's drafts or approval for Hope & Co. to deduct the
sum from the proceeds of the loan, the exchange of all old Spanish bonds
with payment for overdue vouchers, and the full discharge of Spain's
financial commitments to France. 3
 The submission by Hope of the annual account for 1807 concerning the
loan produced no response from either Izquierdo or Espinosa, a fact
which did not please Labouchere. The silence on the part of the Spanish
Court implied the withholding of its approval of the account and a possi-
bility of subsequent objection to certain items. We shall in due course see

                                    34 2
                    BERICHT
   Van eene Negotiatie groot DRn: MILLIOENEN GULDENS Hollnnds Cou.
rnntgeld, ten Comptoire de Heeren HOPE EN COMP. , voor rekening
van zijnc Koninglijkc Majesteit JOSEPH NAPOLEON , Koning van
Napels, Sicilien &c. &c. onder verband von aile de Inkomll:cn van Hoogst-
deszelfs Rijk cn Kroon, en Speciaal der Domeinen van Tavogtiere in de
Provincie van Pouillc, dewelke door H oogstgednchte Zijnc Koninglijke Ma·
jesteit, Specianl zijn afgezonderd, tot berating der IntIesfen en der Termij.
nen vaG Afiosling de:z.er Negoriati e.


D e lnmsfen mlleo • 6 pCe. 's Joan worden bewld op Coupoos, WUMII de ..rile vcr-
f.beenen zat zijn • Julij .808.
  Dcczc   egoul d. aI gcrclIlboureetrd worden op de vol&end. Termijnen:
                I JuJij 1809.                              1500000 : -
                I Julij .8ro.                              • 500000:-
                1 Julij .8 ••.                             • 500000 : -
                • Julij .8u.                               • 500000 : -
                I Julij . 8' 3,                            • 500000 : -
                1 Julij 18 14.                              • 500000 : -
   En dat bij toting, da>r roe in dcr djd voor NOlllrls cn GetUl~ Ie doeD, om Rcclico,
ieder von Honden! yolgeode Nummcro·..
   De Provifionede Recepbfeo voor de Fonmisfemtnrcn decKr Negotiatie, door de Heerm
HOPE en COMPo ulnegevtn, zullen zoocIn mo,.Ujk regcn Obligullen, met de nodig. I.a-
IrcSl!>ewij= foorzien, en door den Now Mr. W. VAN HOMRIGH, gecoDcnlignecrd
worden ingcrrollen en vcrwisfelcl.




                             Bericllf of the loan to Naples, 1807
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

how a series of events increased Spain's inertia-and how the Company
attempted to arm itself against the consequences.

In addition to the Spanish loan, with all its ramifications, there was the
matter of the loan to Naples. The moves which led up to an agreement
with the representative of the Neapolitan Court at the beginning of May
1807 have already been described. The important thing now was to obtain
official sanction for the loan and then to choose a propitious moment at
which to float it. The negotiation for Spain and the fitful progress of the
Dutch loan temporarily hampered a public subscription, and with this
fact in mind Labouchere approached Louis, who had introduced Gerardin
to the Company. Labouchere knew from Louis's letters that the emperor
was interested in the success of the loan, and he therefore felt that it would
be reasonable to expect the French Treasury to contribute a portion of the
sum. At the same time, he asked Robert Voute to find out whether
Mollien would be prepared to put up a million guilders towards the
Naples loan, adding that, if necessary, the money could be furnished from
Hope's monthly payments on behalf of Spain.!
 Labouchere also inquired of Voute whether King Louis was still dis-
posed to participate in the loan to his brother and whether he would
agree to a million guilders from the 5% reserve relating to the Dutch
loan being invested in the one for Naples. He was convinced that unless
these contributions were forthcoming, the loan was doomed to failure. 2
 Gerardin and Roederer, the Neapolitan Minister of Finance, did not take
kindly to Labouchere's reasoning. His original letter, they argued, had
contained no reference to the need for French and Dutch participation,
and it looked as if the Company was searching for excuses to delay float-
ing the loan. 3 Their argument was not entirely without foundation, for
when permission for the loan was suddenly given, Labouchere sought
refuge in the stipulation that a copy of the principal debenture must be
sent to the minister of finance. And when this condition was met, he
sought to win time by pleading the absence of support by the French
Treasury. This could not be anticipated until the emperor returned from
Tilsit, where he had negotiated peace. 4
 When Labouchere remained adamant, Roederer suggested limiting the
loan initially to 2 million guilders, in the hope that France or Holland
would furnish a further million at a later date. The Neapolitan Treasury
was in urgent need of cf 300,000 to repay a debt to the house of Falconnet
& Co. of Naples, which fell due on 1st July, and Roederer sought to draw
on Hope & Co. for this sum. Labouchere consented to this and also
                                     344
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

 expressed his readiness to float the loan on condition that King Louis
 agreed to furnish 1 million guilders. 1
  A further complication, in the shape of news from V oute that the king
 was not prepared to go beyond cf 500,000, caused publication of the
 Berigt to be delayed; but on 14th October Labouchere was able to an-
 nounce that the loan had opened at a nominal price of 95-96 %. It was
 stated that the bond allocations would be very small indeed, and this
 implied that the loan would be placed gradually. Labouchere had set his
 sights on rentiers, who would keep their bonds in portfolio and not use
them to play the market. 2
  The issue price of 95 % proved too high, but on 5th November Hope &
 Co., reported the signing of a contract with the entrepreneurs for
cf 500,000 at 90 %, with 5 %commission. The bonds did not move far, for
 Hope, in conjunction with Willem Borski, acted as their own entrepreneur.
 King Louis ultimately agreed to furnish cf 400,000 towards the loan, for
which, at the price of 90 %, he received 440 bonds; these were transferred
to the directors of the sinking fund relating to the 40-million guilder loan. 3
  On 24th December 1807 Hope & Co. advised Roederer that a further
cf 500,000 had been placed with the entrepreneurs at a price of 90 %.
Simultaneously Baguenault & Co., acting on behalf of anonymous prin-
cipals, applied for bonds to a nominal value of cf 500,000. We may
assume that they were instructed by Napoleon, who thus acquired an in-
direct share in the loan. The reason for his secrecy is a matter for con-
jecture, but it is probable that he did not wish to create an imperial
precedent and at the same time desired the freedom to resell the bonds
whenever he pleased. He employed the same strategy when, some time
later, a Prussian loan was floated in Amsterdam. 4
  With 2 million guilders already secured, Hope and Borski felt justified
in jointly providing the remaining million from their own funds, thus
completing the obligation towards King Joseph. 5
  During the great political upheaval which took place in the early months
of 1808, Joseph exchanged the throne of Naples for the throne of Spain.
His departure from Naples was preceded by a number of financial reforms
which concerned Hope & Co. Responsibility for the repayment of the
loan raised in Holland was transferred to the sinking fund, and Hope &
Co. were instructed to deal with its director, Prince De Gerace, on future
matters concerning interest and principal payments. 6 On 25th June 1808
Roederer informed the Company that King Joseph had instructed him to
transfer 500,000 francs from the proceeds of the loan to Paris for his civil
list. This would enable the monarch to bridge the gap between the ces-

                                     345
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

sation of one rule and the commencement of the next, and ensure that he
did not arrive in his new kingdom, Spain, completely without funds. 1

The second half of 1807 saw Ouvrard sinking deeper and deeper into the
financial morass. In June he had attempted to persuade Hope to shift the
overdue commitment for interest and principal repayment in 1806 from
his account to the new Spanish loan of thirty million guilders, but had
failed. Labouchere informed him politely but firmly that this was a matter
between Ouvrard and Espinosa. 2
  In France itself also, Ouvrard's position was becoming steadily more
perilous. Louis wrote to Labouchere early in June informing him that
Mollien had officially forbidden Ouvrard to leave Paris. The minister was
afraid that Ouvrard would go to Amsterdam and there try, to the detri-
ment of his creditors, to lay hands on the funds which Hope & Co. held
in his brother's name. Louis could not understand why a man with so
high a sense of loyalty and duty as Labouchere should protect an individ-
uallike Ouvrard against his legal creditors. All the bitterness felt by Louis
concerning his failure to get his way with Hope in February 1807 emerged
from his letter. 3
  In his reply, Labouchere flatly denied being on Ouvrard's side. The fact
that Ouvrard's assertions were precisely the opposite of Louis's proved
this. The Company was willing to be of service to Ouvrard for as long as
it believed that his ideas and plans were of general benefit or that, by
doing so, harmful operations could be avoided. There was no question of
 Hope conspiring with Ouvrard to hide funds; everything was duly ac-
counted, albeit the Company maintained its claims on Ouvrard's assets.
The Company would never lend itself to operations which conflicted with
its 'delicatesse' or with the principles of sound business. 4
  Labouchere in turn complained about a certain Maury, who had called
 upon the Company bearing a letter of recommendation from Louis.
 Maury, a partner in Sarraille & Maury, proved to be the agent for Gordon
 & Murphy. In the letter of recommendation, Louis had indicated that
 official pressure had been exerted on him to arrange piastre contracts via
 Maury. It was not clear to Labouchere whether this amounted to a hint
 to Hope & Co. to co-operate with Gordon & Murphy in the piastre deals;
 but it was very clear to him that Hope & Co. wanted nothing to do with
 a person like Maury. Three years earlier Sarraille & Maury had gone
 bankrupt, and the manner of the bankruptcy had led to criminal pro
 ceedings on grounds of embezzlement.
 Labouchere had deemed it prudent not to disclose too much information
              BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

to the visitor, and had parried his questions by saying that Hope and
Baring functioned merely as intermediaries. Gordon & Murphy had
crossed Hope's plans during the American business; their operations on
behalf of Spain had been none too successful and now it looked as if they
were going all out to get a foothold in Paris. 1
  Eventually, however, the point was reached at which Labouchere's sup-
port could no longer save Ouvrard. In the autumn of 1807 the Compagnie
des Negociants Reunis ceased payment, and on 31st December of that
year Vanlerberghe and Ouvrard had no choice but to follow suit. 2
  A fortnight before he applied for a moratorium, Ouvrard authorized
Hope to correspond directly with Espinosa regarding accounts in the
name of Auguste Ouvrard & Co. This came as a great relief to Labou-
chere, for it had long been obvious that the disgrace which attached to
Ouvrard in Spain also reflected on Hope & Co. It had vainly been as-
serted that all funds belonging to Auguste Ouvrard & Co. were intact and
that the only payments made from these had been to Spain. In the absence
of supporting accounts, Espinosa had ignored the assertions. He had even
ordered the seizure of the Mexican drafts to a value of 1,250,000 piastres
which Labouchere had given to Alexander Baring in July 1806, of which
I million piastresworth had meanwhile been collected. 3
 In the light of mistrust in Spain concerning the Company, and the un-
satisfactory nature of communications, Labouchere had decided in June
1807 to send a confidential agent to Madrid. His choice fell upon William
Gordon Coesvelt, a native of the West Indies, who had previously ren-
dered valuable services to Hope & Co. in connexion with the settlement
of long-standing claims on planters in the Western Hemisphere. Labou-
chere was aware that further piastre shipments were under discussion in
Spain and felt that it was advisable to have a man on the spot via whom
further steps could, if necessary, be taken. To all intents and purposes,
Coesvelt would visit Spain as 'a man of pleasure' and would carry no
instructions from Hope. The Company was still sparing in the granting of
authority to act on its behalf, especially to agents who had still to prove
their worth. 4
 At the end of July Coesvelt received a memorandum giving him the full
history of Hope & Co.'s relations with Spain since 1782. His principal
task was to inform the authorities in Spain of the true conduct of affairs,
and by so doing dispel the erroneous impression to which Izquierdo's
actions had probably given rise there. Furthermore, he was instructed to
keep an ear open for news of fresh Spanish piastre expeditions and, in a
plain but not obtrusive manner, to stress to those concerned the reliability

                                    347
              BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

of the Company's system of collection. Coesvelt was warned not to have
any contact with Michel the Younger, who, as stated earlier, had gone to
Madrid with his drafts on the Caja de Consolidacion in the hope of getting
them honoured. Thanks to his wife's charms, Michel the Younger had
become Murat's confidential agent and go-between in dealings with
Godoy, and thus it was on the cards that he would succeed in having his
drafts exchanged for others on Mexico. 1
 Coesvelt broke his journey in Paris, where he called on Izquierdo. The
latter showed no sign of abandoning his negative attitude. At the end of a
lengthy discourse, during which he dealt with all sorts of issues of prestige,
he informed Coesvelt that he wished to see an end to the French Treasury's
seizure of the Spanish assets held by Hope & Co. Having insisted that all
matters should pass through his hands, he then threatened to block them
until he got his own way. He also repeated his earlier accusation that
the Company favoured the French government at the expense of the
Spanish. 2
 Labouchere wrote to CoesveIt, instructing him to collaborate with
Adriaan van der Hoop, a partner in Wed.E.Croese & Co., in an effort to
settle the matter of the drafts on the Caja once and for all. Despite the
fact that these had been specifically included in the loan contract, Espinosa
persisted in his refusal to recognize the claim. Hope had already paid the
sum of the drafts to Croese, but in return had demanded a guarantee of
Espinosa's eventual approval. A united effort on the part of Van der Hoop,
CoesveIt and the Dutch envoy to Spain, Verhuell, succeeded in breaking
down Espinosa's resistance and enabled the matter to be finally disposed
of.3
  Labouchere had a favourable opinion of Espinosa, whom he regarded
as extremely loyal to his country, though blind to the fact that his associ-
ates and subordinates did not always match him in this respect. If it
should transpire that Espinosa was embarrassed by the drafts on Gordon
& Murphy, Coesvelt was empowered to offer to take over 100,000 pounds-
worth, provided that half of the proceeds were used for the interest and
principal instalments due on 1st July 1808. 4
  To CoesveIt, Espinosa poured forth his grievances about the role played
by Ouvrard. Labouchere admitted in a letter to Coesvelt that Ouvrard's
policies had had adverse effects for Spain, but he remained convinced that
Ouvrard had always meant well and that his failings stemmed from in-
experience. In Labouchere's opinion, Espinosa would do better to free
himself gradually from Ouvrard rather than break off the association
abruptly: after all, the contract between the Caja and Franr,;ois Ouvrard &
              BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

Co. would remain in force at least until the end of the war at sea. As
regards the trade with the Spanish colonies-for which, according to
Coesvelt, Espinosa was willing to enter into an arrangement with Hope-
Labouchere considered the risks at that moment (late December 1807) to
be too great. He agreed to re-examine the question in the following Spring,
by which time it would be clear whether the Orders in Council and the
Milan Decree amounted to anything or not. If Espinosa felt that he
would fare better by continuing to deal with Gordon & Murphy in
regard to the piastres, he must do so; but under no circumstances would
Labouchere consider collaborating with such people. 1
  Tn his discussions with Coesvelt, Espinosa had also broached the subject
of deliveries of Venezuelan Varin as tobacco to the State monopoly in
Spain. Labouchere was not averse to a transaction of this nature and he
sought information on the subject from Dixon in Rotterdam. Hope & Co.
already had 500 hogsheads, making them one of the largest stockholders.
The quantity required, 4,000 hogsheads annually, made the affair too
risky: Varinas tobacco was traditionally the property of the Crown, and
the Governor of Venezuela was hesitant to sell it to American traders.
When it was learned that Hogguer had also been approached on the sub-
ject of Varinas tobacco, Labouchere lost interest and Coesvelt was in-
structed to refer Espinosa to Hogguer. 2
  Coesvelt reported with some satisfaction that Espinosa was prepared to
remit to Hope the IOO,OOO pounds sterling in drafts on Gordon & Murphy,
and also to allow half the proceeds to remain in Amsterdam in prepara-
tion for the payments due on 1st July 1808. The trade decrees had severely
restricted traffic to and from England, but Labouchere confidently antici-
pated that the drafts could be presented via Baring Bros. & Co. He would be
very pleased if Coesvelt also succeeded in obtaining permission for the
1,031,250-piastre draft on Mexico, which constituted security for the in-
terest payment due on 1st November 1808, to be met via Hope. Labou-
chere did not rely greatly on Espinosa's assertion that he would arrange
for funds to be remitted from Madrid. 3 Early in February a report reached
Amsterdam stating that the Company was free to collect the draft on
Mexico, provided that one for 500,000 piastres for the Spanish govern-
ment was presented with it.4
  Upon receipt of the news, Labouchere immediately wrote to Henry Hope
in London, asking whether he could arrange for the drafts to be sold there.
The drafts did not form the subject of any contract with Baring Bros. & Co.
and so it was worthwhile trying to keep the profit in the firm. A month later
Henry Hope replied that the operation could not be carried out solely for

                                    349
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

the Company's account as the insurance would then not be valid in law.
After investigating the possibilities, he had after all settled on Baring Bros.
& Co., who had undertaken to send a warship to Vera Cruz to collect the
piastres; the vessel was prepared to remain there for up to thirty days for
this purpose. Baring Bros. & Co. would pay 177 pounds 10 shillings for
every 1,000 piastres reported to have been placed on board.!
  In the meantime, the situation on the Iberian peninsula was steadil)
approaching a climax. The Franco-Spanish treaty providing for the par-
tition of Portugal was signed at the end of October 1807. French troops
now had the right to traverse northwestern Spain on their way to the
Portuguese frontier. However, they also had the opportunity to penetrate
deeper into Spain without attracting attention. When, at about the same
time, the French envoy to Spain compromised himself by his involvement
in an intrigue aimed at eliminating Godoy in favour of the Crown Prince
in the event of the death of Charles IV, Napoleon's thoughts turned in-
creasingly towards the replacement of the weak and unreliable Bourbon
regime by a satellite government headed by one of his brothers. 2
  Since the end of December 1807 Labouchere had been perturbed by the
developments in Spain, and on more than one occasion he inquired of
Coesvelt regarding the movements of the French troops. With the ad-
vance of the armies, financial transactions had become perilous: all
manner of adventurers followed in the wake of the troops, in search of
easy profits, and their operations undermined the rates of exchange.
Espinosa could thus scarcely anticipate any early remittances from Am-
sterdam. 3
  At the end of February 1808 Izquierdo was commanded by Napoleon to
deliver an ultimatum to the Spanish government: Spain must cede to
France the territory north of the Ebro. Upon hearing of Izquierdo's
sudden departure for Madrid, Labouchere instructed Coesvelt to make
 contact with the Spanish government so that in the event of Izquierdo
 distorting the facts, the truth could be established without delay.4
  In spite of the serious nature of Izquierdo's mission and the haste with
 which this was undertaken, Coesvelt succeeded in arranging a meeting
 with him in Godoy's presence. Izquierdo lost no time in stating that he
 was directly responsible to the minister of finance and that he was there-
 fore not obliged to show his accounts to Espinosa. When Coesvelt pointed
 out that it was the Caja de Consolidacion which had the greatest interest
 in the loan, Izquierdo suddenly produced the letters addressed to him by
 Hope & Co. and the accounts to which these referred. It was impossible
 to see much of the contents, for Izquierdo hurriedly put the papers away

                                     35 0
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

again. His excuses for not having written to the Company were so vague
and incoherent that Godoy ordered him to approve those of Hope's
accounts with which he agreed and to write to the Company about
matters on which he disagreed, and to do so immediately he returned to
Paris. According to Coesvelt, the true reason for Izquierdo's resentful
attitude lay in his having been refused interest on the 2,000 bonds de-
posited in his name with De Smeth. 1
 Soon after this episode the anxieties concerning Spain's financial position
were eclipsed by a series of major political events. Amid the general
uncertainty, and with rumours of continuing French military advances
rife, a popular revolt broke out at Aranjuez on the night of 17th March.
This led to the fall of Godoy and his subsequent imprisonment, and to the
abdication of Charles IV in favour of the Crown Prince. 2
  Coesvelt and Van der Hoop jointly wrote to Labouchere about the
sudden turn of events. Confidence in the new government, they said, was
very high, but they wondered whether the pace-by-pace advance of French
troops towards Madrid was as innocuous as official circles maintained.
The absence from official French statements of any reference to the new
monarch, King Ferdinand VII, and his government was to the writers a
bad omen. Nevertheless, they were of the opinion that there were oppor-
tunities for business. The aura of enthusiasm had changed the fortunes of
the vales reales, which now stood at nearly 50 %. If Labouchere could buy
some vales drafts on Spain before the great news spread, the Company
could make a handsome profit. 3
  In his reply, Labouchere was obliged to disappoint Coesvelt and Van
der Hoop. The vales displayed little fluctuation in Holland, and offered
no opportunities for speculation. Clearly, everyone was waiting to see
how the situation in Spain would develop.4
  In view of Spain's uncertain future, Labouchere impressed upon Coesvelt
the importance of steering clear of politics, which did not form part of the
Company's area of operation. This, he pointed out, was limited to Spanish
financial commitments in Holland. 5
  The warning came at a very opportune moment, for since the uprising in
March the situation in Spain had altered with immense rapidity. The
change in the monarchy had given Napoleon the opportunity for swift
intervention which he had sought. The Commander-in-Chief of the French
forces in Spain, Murat, received orders to occupy Madrid. Ferdinand VII
was enticed to the northern part of the country and from there to Bayonne,
in France. Similar tactics were employed against Charles IV and his wife.
When the royal family was reunited on French soil, Napoleon forced

                                    35 1
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

Ferdinand to abdicate in favour of his father. Charles promptly abdicated
in favour of Napoleon, who then had his brother Joseph, previously the
King of Naples, appointed King of Spain by a council of Spanish noble-
men.!
 On 2nd May 1808, while Charles IV was still officially the monarch, the
popular revolt against the French broke out in Madrid. The revolution-
aries had little chance against the orderly French troops, but their action
was a sign for a campaign of resistance throughout the country. Napoleon
at first underestimated the power of the resistance movement, and re-
turned to Paris in June confident that the Spaniards would soon resign
themselves to the new order.
  With the entry of King Joseph into Madrid on 20th July, Coesvelt's
uncertainty ended-at least for the time being. During Ferdinand's brief
reign, Espinosa had been replaced as contador general of the Caja by a
directorate consisting of the Marquis de Fuerte Hisar and Don Antonio
Cortabarria, both of whom were complete outsiders where financial
matters were concerned and accordingly had to be advised from the
outset. 2 In the interim period Coesvelt had been forced to mark time, but
under King Joseph the situation seemed to be improving. Count de
Cabarrus, with whom we have already made acquaintance, was appointed
minister of finance and contador general of the Caja, and this implied that
the Company could in future deal directly with the minister of finance on
loan matters. De Cabarrus also had close ties with Baguenault & Co., and
thus Labouchere hoped to gain access to him via them. In correspondence
with Coesvelt, Labouchere stressed that he must concentrate on the pay-
ment of interest and principal on the Spanish loans. In the still obscure
situation, any vague offers concerning a new loan to Spain with jewels as
security, or concerning deliveries of tobacco, must be discouraged. 3
 The wisdom of this advice soon emerged. Eleven days after entering
Madrid, Joseph, accompanied by some of his ministers, transferred his
seat to the northern part of the country because he no longer felt safe in
Madrid. His fears were not altogether without foundation, for on 22nd
July a French army had been obliged to surrender to the Spaniards at
Baylen, in the south. On 1st August, a British expeditionary force led by
Arthur Wellesley landed in Portugal. A month later, Wellesley, aided by
Portuguese patriots and units of the Spanish army, forced the French
general Junot and his men to capitulate. With this defeat, little remained
of French authority on the Iberian peninsula, except in a limited area to
the north of the Ebro.
For Hope & Co., this debacle had unwelcome consequences. The pay-

                                   35 2
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

 ments due on 1st July in respect of the 1805 loan could be met from the
 available funds, but a question mark hung over the interest and principal
 due on Croese's conversion loans on 1st September and the interest due on
 1st November on the 30-million guilder loan: apart from anything else,
 there was no confirmation that the drafts on Mexico had been met.
 Admittedly, De Cabarrus had given Coesvelt permission for the payments
 on the Croese loans on 1st September, but he had since departed, with
 King Joseph, to Vittoria, in northern Spain; Coesvelt, however, was still
 in Madrid, although Van der Hoop and Verhuell had left the city. To
 support his reasons for staying, Coesvelt could cite the example of the
 Russian, Austrian and American ambassadors, all of whom still resided
 in Madrid.!
  Viewed in the light of the rapid sequence of events, the correspondence
from Labouchere at that juncture seems almost unreal. While letters were
leaving Amsterdam addressed to De Cabarrus in Madrid, Coesvelt was
 negotiating with a group of ministers and senior civil servants who had
remained in Madrid but were in close touch with the Central Junta in
Aranjuez. This body had been set up during Ferdinand's brief reign and
now functioned as a sort of Free Spanish Government. Acting in the
name of the Caja de Consolidacion, the Marquis de Fuerte Hisar in-
structed Hogguer to secure the attachment of those of Ouvrard's funds
which were in Hope & Co.'s charge. Simultaneously, De Cabarrus, who
was in Vittoria, instructed the Company to collect all monies owed by
Ouvrard and his associates, and at the same time revoked the authority
vested in Izquierdo. Both parties inquired of Hope regarding the collec-
tion of the million and a half piastres in Mexico. 2
  Labouchere was very concerned about the fate of these drafts. Reports
indicated that De Villanueva was preparing to leave Vera Cruz at the end
of May 1808, since there was a possibility that the United States embargo
and the obstacles to trade in Europe would put an end to the activities of
Hope's American network. 3 In September came a report stating that on
19th June (that is to say, after news of the events in Spain had reached
that country's colonies) the British warship 'Melpomene' had sailed from
Jamaica bound for Vera Cruz. On 7th July she hove to off that port, but
after a delay, during which the drafts were refused, she sailed again. On
14th August the vessel again made for Vera Cruz, where the previous
pattern was repeated. It became clear from the reports of what was hap-
pening in Mexico that De Villanueva had left Vera Cruz in the nick of
time. The news of the change of government in Spain resulted in the
emergence of popular movements sympathetic towards the former Spanish

                                   353
              BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

government, and for Lestapis, to which name he had reverted, such a
situation could have been dangerous. 1
 Labouchere meanwhile faced the problem of the interest due on the
30-million guilder loan on 1st November 1808. Although it was stipu-
lated that this should be paid from the proceeds of the loan, no sub-
scriptions to this had been received since 1st November of the previous
year. It was then that the value of the claims on Ouvrard's funds became
apparent. After some solid pressure had been applied to Ouvrard, Hope &
Co. received authority from Auguste Ouvrard & Co. to meet the interest
payment from funds held by the Company on their behalU Labouchere
thereupon advised De Cabarrus that he hoped to recover the sum paid
out from the sale of the remaining 7,000 bonds. De Cabarrus had earlier
made it plain that the payment need not be effected and that he did not
desire the sale of further bonds, because a French military victory would
naturally enhance King Joseph's credit. Labouchere had ignored these
instructions, however; in his opinion, failure to pay the interest due would
harm the loan to the point of rendering the sale of the remaining bonds
impossible for a long time. 3
  De Cabarrus's indifference in the matter of Spain's obligations towards
Hope & Co. was partly a product of his annoyance at the fact that
Coesvelt had chosen to remain in Madrid. While apologizing on behalf
of the Company for Coesvelt's conduct, Labouchere made it appear that
Coesvelt had intended to accompany De Cabarrus to Vittoria but had
been prevented by exceptional circumstances from leaving Madrid. 4
  John Williams Hope, who had meanwhile travelled to England via
Germany, despatched a strong reprimand to Coesvelt-so strong, in fact,
that Labouchere felt obliged to stand up for Coesvelt. He informed Hope
that while he also would have preferred Coesvelt to leave Madrid, the
fact that he had not done so must be attributed to the fear that the Com-
pany might be pushed out by Gordon & Murphy. He explained that
Coesvelt had allowed himself to be persuaded to undertake the mission
because of his loyalty to Henry Hope, and added that too powerful an
'extinguisher' could have a harmful effect, and might even alienate him
from the Company. The relationship with De Cabarrus had not been
completely ruined, because contact with him had been maintained from
Amsterdam. And anyway Coesvelt was not an official agent of Hope &
Co., so the Company could not be held responsible for his actions. In so
confused a situation as then existed, the wisest thing was to remain as pas-
sive as possible while, of course, covering oneself against all eventualities. 5
This, however, was easier said than done. De Fuerte Hisar, on behalf of

                                     354
             BETWEEN SA TELLITES AND NAPOLEONlTES

 the central junta, had authorized Hope & Co. to use the Spanish funds
 held by Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co. in the event of the
drafts for It million piastres proving un negotiable in Mexico. At about
the same time, a similar authorization had reached the Company from De
Cabarrus. 1 Labouchere was temporarily relieved of the necessity to make
a painful choice, for the junta's days in Aranjuez were numbered.
  Napoleon had not submitted tamely to the capitulation at Baylen and
Junot's defeat. Since early November his armies had been on the offensive
all over the country, and on 2nd December 1808 French forces marched
into Madrid for the second time. The central junta fled to the south,
choosing Seville as a temporary residence. 2
  This development came as a relief to Coesvelt. The junta had become
increasingly unwieldy and had ultimately assumed control over all sorts
of ministries. As far as the loans from Holland were concerned, Coesvelt
was dependent upon a committee formed from members of the junta who
knew nothing whatever about the matters with which they were supposed
to deal, and accordingly failed to reach any decisions. 3 Moreover, thanks
to Labouchere's letters, the relationship between De Cabarrus and Coes-
velt proved not to have been permanently harmed, and normal contact
was soon re-established. At the beginning of January 1809 De Cabarrus
finally gave his approval for the payment made on 1st November of the
preceding year out of Auguste Ouvrard's funds. 4
  The possibility of further shipments of piastres from Mexico, however,
had evaporated. The early days of February 1809 brought news of the
definitive protestation of the drafts for It million piastres. Coesvelt and
Labouchere were still hoping for a favourable turn of events as a result of
a letter which the Caja was to send to the Viceroy of Mexico, in which it
was to be clearly stated that the protested drafts were for the purpose of
meeting a Spanish debt to Holland and that they were in no way con-
cerned with the situation in Spain itself. Labouchere was anxious for
Baring & Co. to persuade the central junta in Seville to write a similar
letter, thus achieving support from both sides for Hope's case. It was just
possible that France would assist financially in order to bolster up King
Joseph's prestige. 5
  In a subsequent chapter we shall see whether these optimistic expec-
tations were realized. The prospects were none too favourable. On 14th
January 1809 the British government signed a peace treaty with the junta
and also undertook to support it in the struggle against Napoleon. This
opened the way for silver from Spanish America, which was then still
loyal, to reach Seville unhindered. 6

                                   355
             BETWEEN SATELLITES AND NAPOLEONITES

The situation had indeed altered radically. For Hope & Co. there was
no more silver from Mexico, not even in the shape of colonial produce,
and it remained to be seen whether they would have free access to Spanish
funds held in England. The greater part of Spain was in French hands,
but outside the cities a guerilla campaign exploded which almost de-
stroyed the country economically. The practical significance, under such
circumstances, of King Joseph's authority and financial position would
soon become evident to Hope.
                       CHAPTER THIRTEEN

                THE SPANISH MORASS



With the disappearance of the resources from America, Coesvelt's efforts
to obtain funds in Spain itself for interest and principal payments assumed
greater importance. Labouchere took the view that France had a duty to
relinquish her claim on the proceeds of the remaining 7,000 bonds, and
De Cabarrus agreed to write to Mollien on these lines.!
  Coesvelt was meanwhile busy in his own way. At the end of February
1809 a report was received stating that the junta in Seville had ordered
the seizure of the funds held by Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co.
Little could thus be anticipated from London, and so Coesvelt cautiously
approached Labouchere with a proposal for a new loan, for which na-
tionalized Church property would serve as security. Labouchere, how-
ever, resolutely resisted any precipitate action: Amsterdam had lost three-
quarters of its resources and also its influence on the investors. Apart
from this, the 30-million guilder loan had yet to be fully subscribed; only
then could any new venture be embarked upon. At the time of Labou-
chere's letter, in March 1809, everyone was anxiously waiting to see
whether war would break out between France and Austria, and in such
a situation it was pointless to approach the market with a new loan. 2
  Labouchere and his wife planned to visit the south of France during the
summer; she suffered from rheumatism and wished to take the waters at
Bagneres. The trip would also provide an opportunity to discuss future
policy with Coesvelt in person. During Labouchere's absence from Am-
sterdam, the day-to-day supervision could be entrusted to the managers
who had been appointed in 1808, at the time of John Williams Hope's
departure for England. They were Henry John Hope Jr., the eldest son of
John Williams Hope, and John Dixon, a former partner in Littledale &
Dixon of Rotterdam. 3
  Labouchere advised De Cabarrus that the Company was proposing to
dispose of a part of the remaining 7,000 bonds to the entrepreneurs at 70 %
(approximately the quoted price) with a bonus of six months' interest.
85 % of the purchase price was due in cash or redeemable vouchers, and
the remainder in Echenique bonds. This would provide funds for the
payments due on 1st July and 1st November 1809, thereby raising the

                                   357
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

price of the issue and making it possible to dispose of the remaining bonds
at a more advantageous price. Coesvelt was under the impression that the
emperor had already released the 7,000 bonds, but Labouchere knew
better: Napoleon had left for Germany in April in view of the impending
war against Austria, and in his absence no decision on this matter could
be taken in Paris. 1
 This postponement afforded Coesvelt an opportunity to revert once
again to his plan for a loan secured by former possessions of the Church.
For this, it would be necessary for the Spanish government to place the
property of the Maltese Order in Catalonia at the disposal of the bond-
holders, who in return would be required to furnish 50 million reales in
coin and a further 30 million in vales reales; for this purpose the real was
considered to be equal to 21 stuivers or 121 guilder cents. The vales reales
stood at 60 % below par, and thus the true sum involved was 62 million
reales in coin. However, interest, at 5 % per annum, would be payable on
the whole of the 80 million, giving bondholders an effective interest rate
of6i%·
 Bondholders would have the right to sell their share in the land, subject,
of course, to surrender of the relevant bonds. The Spanish government
would have to undertake to buy back land remaining unsold after four
years; this it would do by redeeming the bonds at the market price plus a
bonus of 5 %. In order not to jeopardize Spain's credit in Holland, 12
million of the 62 million reales would have to be retained in Holland to
meet the payments due in 1809. Finally, Coesvelt proposed that he should
receive a commission of I %.2
 Coesvelt's plan offered no solution to De Cabarrus's immediate financial
needs, and for this reason the minister authorized the Company to dispose
of the remaining 7,000 bonds. No reference was made to permission
having been obtained from Napoleon. Subject to the stipulation that I
million francs remained for the Spanish Treasury-which sum De Ca-
barrus required immediately-up to 15% was payable in Echenique
bonds. The letter was accompanied by a draft for 100,000 pounds sterling
on Gordon & Murphy and another for 177,000 pounds sterling on Reid
Irving & Co. 3
 Although the British government had blocked these funds for the benefit
of the central junta in Seville, De Cabarrus was confident that the junta
would recognize the duty to make the payments to Hope & Co. John
Murphy, who had just been released from captivity in France, simul-
taneously wrote to his office in London, supporting the claim.4
Labouchere was not impressed by Coesvelt's letter, nor by the one from
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

 De Cabarrus. In his view, a new loan could not succeed. The turnover in
 shares on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange totalled only 50,000
guilders a day, and business was as dead as it had ever been. There was, of
course, no question of accepting De Cabarrus's draft for I million francs;
as a reason for refusing, the managers could point to the fact that the
 French Treasury had not relinquised its claim to the 7,000 bonds.!
  From Brussels, where Labouchere interrupted his journey to allow his
wife to recover from an attack of fever, the travellers journeyed cautiously
to Paris, where they arrived on 17th May. Labouchere availed himself of a
pause in that city to discuss the Spanish affair with Mollien, Louis,
Ouvrard and Baguenault. Mollien was ultimately persuaded to consent to
the withdrawal by the French Treasury of its claim to the 7,000 bonds,
subject, of course, to the emperor's approval. 2
  While in Paris, Labouchere was visited by Colonel Clary, an adjutant of
King Joseph and a relative of the queen, who bore a letter from the
Spanish monarch. It was clear from this that the sum of I million francs
was for the king's personal use, and indeed was destined for investment in
Russian and American securities. Labouchere took the view that the
question of honouring the draft for this sum was best left to the managers
in Amsterdam. He did, however, advise them to hold as security any bonds
which might be purchased until such time as news concerning the drafts
on Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co. was received from London. 3
  After staying for a week or so in Paris, the Laboucheres moved slowly
southwards. They frequently travelled at night in order to spare the
patient the discomfort of the heat during the daytime. At the end of May,
having journeyed via Poitiers and Bordeaux, the company reached Orthez,
where the Labouchere family had its origins. There, mail from Amster-
dam, Paris and Madrid awaited them.4
  The managers in Amsterdam reported that they had received a visit from
Colonel Clary and that they had made it plain to the young man that
there could be no question of yielding to the king's 'personal views' until
such time as arrangements were made for the payments due on 1st July
and 1st November. s
  A letter from Coesvelt stated that he would be making for Bayonne with
a military convoy which was due to leave Madrid on or about 5th June.
During his absence, matters would be taken care of by Sanchez Toscano,
a former partner in the house of Echenique. Coesvelt's expectations were
not high, for Toscano suffered from consumption and had been at death's
door on two occasions during the previous year; moreover, he was a
Spaniard and a timid one at that.

                                   359
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

De Cabarrus had requested the Viceroy of Mexico to honour the drafts
deposited with Hope & Co. as security for the payments due on 1st No-
vember 1809. Coesvelt, however, had as little faith in the payment of these
drafts as of those for 1st November 1808. 1
  At the end of a long and tiring journey lasting twenty days, Coesvelt
arrived in Bayonne on 25th June 1809. Shortly afterwards he joined the
Laboucheres, who had meanwhile moved to Bagneres. 2 In addition to
reiterating his proposal for a loan secured by former Church property, he
produced a plan devised by De Cabarrus for a loan coupled with a lottery.
In an accompanying letter addressed to King Joseph, De Cabarrus set out
to show that of the anticipated total revenue of 92 million reales, only
16,300,000 had in fact been collected. In the provinces, in particular, the
meagre revenues had been totally absorbed by the cost of maintaining the
troops. Then there had been the taxes levied by the French military
commander. In Madrid itself, the growth of illicit trading had caused
revenues to steadily diminish. The Mint would soon have to cease opera-
tions because of the shortage of precious metals, and this while the
reserves for expenditure by the Court and by ministers were insufficient
for one month.
  To meet the deplorable financial situation, De Cabarrus proposed that
a lottery loan be entered into; this would cost Spain a great deal of money,
but under the circumstances it was the only solution. The loan would be
of 6 million pesos duros at 20 reales per peso, half of which would be
payable in coin and the balance in vales reales at their full nominal value.
10,000 bonds each of 600 pesos would be issued, and these would bear
interest at 4 % and be redeemable within five years. In addition to the
fixed interest, annual bonuses, the total of which would have to be in-
creased year by year, would be balloted: these would be necessary in order
to attract capitalists who were not interested in the purchase of nation-
alized Church property. Under this plan, the Spanish government would
have to spend 7,856,332 pesos in order to obtain 4,200,000 pesos. Outside
Spain, facilities for subscription would exist at the offices of Hope & Co.
in Amsterdam, Chapeaurouge in Hamburg, Paul Maistre in Geneva and
Roux Freres in Marseilles. Clearly, the minister anticipated greater results
from the provincial towns in France and from the satellite states than
from Paris. The plan had still to be approved by Napoleon. 3
  Coesvelt discussed all these plans with Labouchere, after which he out-
lined the De Cabarrus project with Baguenault; the latter, however, saw
little chance of a loan in France succeeding. 4
His discussions with Labouchere having been completed, Coesvelt left
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

for Amsterdam to submit his plans to the Company's managers. Their
reaction, following Clary's visit, was predictable: they rejected the idea of
any fresh loan until the old one had been fully subscribed. If Spain failed
to meet its commitments on 1st July and 1st November, it could abandon
all thoughts of a new loan. 1
  The problems surrounding the payments on 1st July 1809 were formi-
dable. There was still no news from England concerning the fate of the
drafts on Gordon & Murphy and Reid Irving & Co. The Company had
a claim to assets of Auguste Ouvrard & Co., but as the Spanish American
operations had to all intents and purposes come to an end, the remittances
in favour of this account were becoming smaller and smaller. Moreover,
Ouvrard had just lost an action brought against Vanlerberghe and himself
by Seguin, and this had cost him 7 million francs. There was thus all the
more reason to view critically the guarantee which Ouvrard had provided
on behalfofSpain. 2
  Fortunately, an official report had arrived from Paris stating that the
French Treasury had relinquished its claim to the 7,000 bonds. The way
was thus clear for a definitive contract with Borski for 2,600 bonds at a
transfer price of 70 %. As had been the case in the previous contracts, the
entrepreneurs received a bonus of six months' interest. The interest
vouchers which fell due on 1st July 1809 and the bonds of the loan of 1805
which became redeemable on the same date were both acceptable as
payment. Bonds and vouchers relating to the loan floated by Hope & Co.
in 1793 and those of Croese's conversion loans were also acceptable, as
were 160 bonds relating to the Echenique loans; for the last-named, the
price was fixed at 95 %. In addition, Borski was permitted to exchange
350 Echenique bonds at 95 % for a similar number of bonds of the 30-
million guilder loan. 3
  In essence, this agreement meant that the entrepreneurs exchanged ma-
tured bonds and vouchers for new ones. The effect of this procedure
(which also applied to a number of older Spanish loans) was to clear up
as many old Spanish bonds as possible under the umbrella of the Auguste
Ouvrard guarantee. And since Hope & Co. held funds belonging to that
company, no risk would be involved even if Spain failed to meet its
obligation.
 The action of the managers in thus securing breathing space in con-
nexion with the July payment was fortunate indeed, for the plan with the
drafts on England miscarried completely. At the end of June 1809, Baring
& Co. reported that Reid Irving & Co. had transferred all the Spanish
funds which they had held to the junta in Seville. Gordon & Murphy
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

would have followed suit had it not been for the fact that certain of their
assets in Mexico had been seized and they were thus retaining the balance
on the Spanish account by way of security. In any case, the British govern-
ment would in no circumstances lift its embargo on these.!
 After visiting Amsterdam, Coesvelt proposed to cross to England to
attend to private business. There would thus be an opportunity for con-
sultation with the partners in London. His journey, however, was any-
thing but straightforward, for on 30th July 1809 a British expeditionary
force had landed on the island of Walcheren and had advanced to the
outskirts of Bergen op Zoom. In the panic which ensued, the wildest
rumours circulated, including one to the effect that a fresh British landing
at Den Helder was imminent. This led to an embargo being placed on all
Dutch ports. 2
 In addition to other matters, Coesvelt had been instructed to discuss the
loan to the Kingdom of Naples with the partners of Hope & Co. The
relationship with the director of the Neapolitan Sinking Fund had from
the outset been less than satisfactory. There had been no difficulties with
the interest payment on 1st July 1808, because the sum involved had been
retained out of the proceeds of the loan. De Gerace had clearly been
disappointed by Hope's lack of interest in participating to a substantial
extent in the Neapolitan Consolidated Debt. This debt, which amounted
to 14 million ducats, was for the purposes of buying out the tax farmers
and compensating the former owners of Church property which had been
nationalized. According to Falconnet & Co., there were good profit
opportunities for foreigners, because the shortage of money in Naples had
depressed the rates of exchange. This shortage was in turn a product of
stagnation of exports under the influence of the Continental System. 3
 Hope & Co.'s reply to this tempting offer was to the effect that the
Company might consider participating if Naples made regular remittances
for the interest payments due in the following year. 4 It had rapidly become
clear that this was not a simple matter, for few commercial contacts had
been established between Italy and Holland, with the result that drafts
were scarce on the market. Hope & Co. had advised De Gerace to spread
the net to embrace Leghorn and Genoa, but this did little to increase the
tempo of the remittances. 5
 De Gerace was also anxious to commence repayment of the loan as soon
as a sum of any magnitude reached Hope, and it was only with the
greatest difficulty that he could be convinced of the irrevocability of the
payment date of 1st July laid down in the principal debenture. 6 He there-
upon demanded interest on the monies which he remitted, up to the day
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

 upon which these were paid to the investors. Even after extremely pro-
 tracted correspondence De Gerace refused to accept the fact that the
 Company never paid interest on remittances of this nature and, moreover,
that the total stagnation of trade ruled out any profitable investment of
 the monies concerned. 1
   De Gerace took his revenge by withholding remittances to Amsterdam
even beyond the payment date of 1st July, with the result that the Com-
pany was repeatedly obliged to make advances. By 1st July 1809, Cf210,000
had been advanced out of a total of cf 692,875. Needless to say, this
was a constant source of annoyance. At the same time, De Gerace had no
scruples about allowing one of his subordinates, Gennaro Francesconi,
to draw on Hope & Co. for his personal requirements, leaving the Com-
pany to recover the sums from a firm in Genoa. Later, De Gerace merged
his private activities into the commercial operations of Gennaro Fran-
cesconi & Co., a mercantile house which was to play an important role in
foreign remittances. 2
  Late in July 1809 Labouchere and his wife embarked on their journey
northwards. For much of the time he was deep in thought, searching for
a solution to the problem of the Spanish payment in November. In his
correspondence with Sanchez Toscano, Labouchere continued to toy with
the idea of covering the 4 million guilders due on that date by the
transfer of the possessions of the La Oliva cloister at Navarre and other
ecclesiastical assets in that region; but the weakness of King Joseph's
authority outside the towns rendered this plan as illusory as those put
forward by Coesvelt. 3 Labouchere hoped that the Napoleonic victory
over the Austrians at Wagram and the ensuing armistice of 12th July 1809
would lead to sterner military action in Spain, but as things stood this was
tantamount to wishful thinking.
  All the plans for the November payment crashed in ruins when De
Cabarrus rejected the contract with Borski for the 2,600 bonds; the rejec-
tion also threatened the payments due on 1st July 1809. Hope & Co. were
even deprived of their authority to negotiate further contracts with the
entrepreneurs. De Cabarrus had also lost faith in the payment of the
drafts on the English houses and those on Mexico, which were to cover
the payments on 1st November, and he forbade the Company to incur any
further expense in connexion with these. 4
  In their reply, the managers pointed out that De Cabarrus had earlier
given permission for the payment on 1st July, and that the contract with
the entrepreneurs was the only means by which to obtain the money
required. They urgently requested De Cabarrus to make such arrange-
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

ments for the 1st November payment as would ensure that Spain's credit
abroad did not collapse suddenly. They stated that the outgoings could
provisionally be limited to the payment of interest. The 2,500 bonds which
were due to be drawn by lot for redemption could then be used, at the
holder's option, for the purchase of Spain's national possessions. 1
 Shortly after the letter was despatched, a later one from De Cabarrus
arrived at Hope's offices. In this the minister set forth a plan for a loan of
3 million francs, for which fifty or more paintings from the Escorial
would serve as security. The loan would be for three years and bear
interest at 6 %, and there would be a commission of 2 %. Labouchere's
reply was that any attempt to raise new money for Spain would be
doomed to failure unless the payments due on 1st November were forth-
coming. Even if the idea of such a loan were to be entertained, he stated,
it would first be necessary to send an expert to Spain to value the paint-
ings. 2 Also, the lenders would probably insist that these be removed from
Spain to the safety of Amsterdam.
  Startled, De Cabarrus replied that he had envisaged a private transaction
with Hope & Co. and not a public one. If the Company was unwilling to
undertake this, he would negotiate with 'a few of your capitalists.' The
pictures could be given into the custody of the lenders, but would only
become their property if Spain defaulted in its repayments. 3
  On his journey back to Amsterdam, Labouchere stayed in Paris. While
he was there, Izquierdo made repeated visits to his address, initially
without success. Labouchere had not forgotten Izquierdo's failure to
reply to all his letters, and had made up his mind 'to be as costive in
speaking as Izquierdo (had) been in writing.'4
  Eventually Izquierdo managed to see Labouchere and to unburden
himself. As a loyal servant of Charles IV, he had come to humbly plead
for the 2,000 bonds lodged with De Smeth in his name. The interest on
these alone would make him a happy man, for his former sovereign was
now in Marseilles, poor, ill and overwhelmed by debts following the
failure of the French Treasury to pay him his civil list. He had bor-
rowed 230,000 francs from Doyen & Co. and they were now pressing him
for repayment.
  Labouchere gave no immediate reply to the request but instead inquired
why Izquierdo had ignored all the letters from Hope. When the latter
commenced to make vague references to 'political reasons,' Labouchere
asked what a simple acknowledgement had to do with politics. Izquierdo
thereupon embarked on a story about having been afraid of hampering
the Company's progress and thereby prejudicing it against himself. La-
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

 bouchere, mindful of the stories which Izquierdo had told in Coesvelt's
presence, let him go on. When at last he spoke, he said that there could be
no question of acceding to the request: the 2,000 bonds would remain in
De Smeth's keeping, and Izquierdo would not receive the interest.! A
payment of this nature could be interpreted as a political decision, and the
Company could not afford to run such risks.
  While in Paris, Labouchere also met Nolte, who, as explained earlier,
had gone there to present the final account for the piastre transactions to
the French government. He drew Nolte into a plan which Ouvrard and the
Minister of Finance, Fouche, had devised and which was clearly inspired
by Hope's Spanish American transactions. The plan envisaged the crea-
tion of one hundred licences, with the aid of which American or neutral
vessels would be able to bring colonial produce into the Neapolitan ports
and, in exchange, export goods from the country itself.
  Murat, the new King of Naples, had been informed about the plan, but as
he was with his armies in Austria the negotiations proceeded slowly. The
safety of the inward-bound cargoes of colonial produce constituted a
problem: after all, a decree had been issued in Milan prohibiting such
imports. Labouchere accordingly insisted that a sum of 2 million ducats
be deposited in advance to cover any goods which might be confiscated.
As the date of the emperor's return to Paris drew nearer, Murat and
Fouche became less and less enthusiastic about the project. When La-
bouchere left Paris at the beginning of October, nothing definite had been
decided. Nolte travelled with him to Amsterdam. 2
  By now, a decision whether or not to make a payment on Spain's behalf
on 1st November had become a matter of urgency. When a final appeal to
Mollien to save Spain's credit remained unanswered, Hope & Co. placed
an advertisement stating that no interest or principal would be paid. The
bonds thereupon fell to 50 %, but later recovered to 55-56 %.3
  Under the circumstances, the wisest course appeared to be for Coesvelt,
who had returned to Amsterdam from England at the beginning of
November 1809, to make his way back to Spain and find out what could
be salvaged. No communication had been received from De Cabarrus
since Labouchere's negative reaction to his proposal for a loan secured by
works of art, and it was not clear whether, like his predecessors, he was
hiding behind a barrier of silence or whether his couriers had been de-
tained, or even murdered, by guerillas. 4
  At the same time, King Joseph appeared to be more firmly in the saddle
following the French military successes. The authority of the junta in
Seville had collapsed after the battle of Ocana on 19th November 1809.
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

The junta withdrew to the Isla de Leon, an almost impregnable peninsula
in the vicinity of Cadiz, where, with the support of the English fleet, it was
able to maintain its existence. 1
  Late in December, De Cabarrus, no doubt encouraged by these suc-
cesses, sent Hope & Co. a decree from King Joseph which amounted to
no more than an official proclamation of the lottery loan plan launched
previously. The decree referred to a loan of 21 million guilders at 6 %, a
higher rate of interest than had originally been proposed. The sum of the
payments due on 1st November 1809 and 1st July 1810 was to be met from
the proceeds of the loan, the balance being transferred to Spain. No
reference was made to the 4,000 unsold bonds of the 180710an.2
  In the meantime, Coesvelt had travelled via Paris to Bayonne, where he
awaited a military convoy to Madrid. While in Bordeaux, he had met
Duclerc, De Cabarrus's agent, who had explained the loan plan to him.
Coesvelt was fairly optimistic about the success of such a scheme, but
with the proviso that the matter of the 4,000 bonds of the 1807 loan would
have to be settled first. 3
  Labouchere took a considerably less sanguine view; he found it highly
regrettable that Coesvelt had not waited for him in Paris so that they
could have discussed the subject in detail. Labouchere had been charged
by King Louis with a peace mission to England and this required his
presence in Paris. He was opposed to a new loan such as De Cabarrus
had proposed. The previous Spanish loan had declined in price to 46 %,
 and in the light of this it was pointless to go to the market with a new
issue. The interest due on 1st November 1809, and with it the 5 % bonus
 on the maturing bonds, must first be paid, and this must be repeated on
 1st July 1810. The sum of these payments was of the order of two million
guilders and this could be obtained through a loan of five million francs,
 for which Crown jewels and paintings could serve as security; these
 would be deposited for safe keeping with Cabarrus & Co. of Bayonne, the
 partners in which were related to the minister. A loan of this nature could
 be limited to a small circle of investors. If this failed, consideration might
 be given to the issue of warrants valid for the purchase of national
 possessions in Spain. It might be possible to find a group of speculators
 willing to take over warrants of this kind. Also, bonds drawn on 1st
 November 1809 and 1st July 1810, but not redeemed, could be exchanged
 for the warrants; holders not wishing to do this could be offered prolon-
 gation of their bonds. 4
   Coesvelt remained in Bayonne from late January until early April 1810,
 during which period he was intensively engaged in correspondence with
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

Labouchere and De Cabarrus on the subject of new loans for Spain. It
became clear that an impasse had been reached: Labouchere was un-
willing to undertake any new issue until the arrears of interest had been
paid, and De Cabarrus insisted that the arrears should be met from the
proceeds of a new loan. Coesvelt was aware that a loan against the
security of Crown jewels was out of the question, since these had already
been sent to Baguenault in Paris to be sold. 1
 As he contemplated his forthcoming journey to Madrid, Coesvelt was
reminded that this was taking him farther and farther away from Am-
sterdam, where at that moment important decisions were about to be
taken. Early in r8IO Henry Hope Jr. had revealed his disinterest in the
Company's activities by resigning his directorship and leaving Amster-
dam. Some time previously John Dixon had suffered a stroke, and despite
a partial recovery he had ceased to take an active part in day-to-day
affairs. In order not to leave the Company entirely without management
during Labouchere's absence, executive power had been vested in Pierre
Firmin Lestapis, a younger brother of Armand Pierre, with whom we have
already made acquaintance. 2
 Coesvelt, who eagerly desired a similar position, wrote one agitated
letter after another to Labouchere. In these, he repeatedly blamed himself
for having journeyed on to so remote a place as Bayonne instead of
awaiting Labouchere's further orders in Paris. He was not at all keen to
go on to Spain, if only because of the dangers which threatened travellers,
and he had lost faith in the idea of a new Spanish loan since he had learned
that Spain would be obliged to maintain the French troops stationed on its
territory. This, he considered, would ruin the country completely.3
 It was a very reluctant Coesvelt who, on 9th April 1810, joined a military
convoy bound for Madrid. Just before his departure he had received a
letter from Labouchere, setting out in some detail the latter's idea of
asking the French government to provide funds for the interest and
principal payments on 1st July 1810. Labouchere, too, had heard that
France proposed to place the full burden of maintaining its garrison in
Spain on that country's Treasury, and he took the view that as France
would thus save huge sums annually, it could well afford to spend some
of this money to restore Spain's credit abroad.
 At the end of a journey fraught with privation and peril, Coesvelt
arrived in Madrid on 3rd May. There he learned that De Cabarrus had
died. 4 His successor was the Marquis d' Almenara, a victim of Ouvrard's
Franco-Spanish operations, who is already familiar to the reader. It was,
of course, necessary to recapitulate events for D'Almenara's benefit. Ac-
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

cording to Coesvelt, the change might well prove to be for the better since
De Cabarrus 'could not refuse those who were present and ... forgot his
obligations towards those who were absent.' 1
  Coesvelt was received in audience by D'Almenara on a number of occa-
sions, but the results were meagre. They discussed the possibility of
France standing as guarantor for the current debt-which was in line with
Labouchere's thinking-but no decision on this could be taken in Madrid.
The situation had in one respect been simplified by the incorporation of
the Kingdom of Holland into the French Empire, which was officially
accomplished on 1st July 1810. The people of Holland thereby became
direct subjects of Napoleon and as such could count upon him to protect
their financial interests. 2
  A long memorandum dealing with the plan followed from Coesvelt, but
the first of July 1810 had meanwhile come and gone without payment of
interest or principal. Spain had nothing to offer, neither money nor wool,
and the king desired to keep the remaining diamonds for private purposes.
Coesvelt, however, received an offer of several 'remarkable' paintings as
security for a private loan of 250,000 or 500,000 francs, which was to be
payable when the paintings reached a safe place. Coesvelt sought the
advice of Labouchere and also offered him a half share in the loan.
Labouchere replied that nothing would induce him to participate and
that Coesvelt would be well advised to have nothing to do with the affair.
Amsterdam was the only place where the paintings could be properly
valued, and who was to be responsible for any damage which might occur
in transit?3
  Coesvelt's doubts regarding his mission increased when he learned that
D' Almenara would be leaving for Paris early in August for talks with the
imperial government. Under such circumstances, he saw no point in re-
maining in a country where utter chaos reigned and the most scandalous
forms of cunning were the order of the day. Added to this, Spain's
financial resources were in fact controlled by French military men who
attempted to collect taxes behind the Spanish government's back. Nego-
tiating with D' Almenara's deputy, Don Francisco Angulo, meant explain-
ing everything from the beginning for the umpteenth time in the know-
ledge that no decision would be forthcoming. If anything was to be
achieved, Labouchere would have personally to raise the matter with
 D'Almenara and the imperial authorities in Paris.4
  Labouchere paid little heed to this advice. He had made two journeys to
Paris in the space of six months, and the time had come to prepare for his
 retirement from the Company at the end of the year. The peace mission to
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

England on behalf of King Louis had failed. He was subsequently ap-
proached on the same subject by Ouvrard, who appeared to be acting on
instructions from the emperor. Labouchere wrote to Alexander Baring
and Lord Wellesley, but made no more progress than on the previous
occasion. When news of the correspondence reached Napoleon's ears, he
was furious. It then transpired that Ouvrard had not been acting on behalf
of the emperor at all but, in company with Fouche, had ventured a private
attempt to secure peace. Fouche was dismissed from office, and Ouvrard
was returned to the prison from which, thanks partly to Fouche's inter-
vention, he had been released in 1809. Labouchere was summoned to
Paris to explain his role, but so well did he succeed in convincing his
questioners that he had acted in good faith that he left without a stain on
his character. Just how perilous his position was at that moment, however,
is revealed in letters from Coesvelt referring to his great anxiety over
reports from Paris that Labouchere had been arrested, or was about to
be.!
  Against this background, Labouchere decided that the negotiations with
D' Almenara should be conducted by David Parish. Parish had arrived in
England early in July 18 IO and had crossed to Amsterdam in August to
present his report and accounts concerning the Spanish American busi-
ness. In mid-September he left for Paris carrying letters of introduction to
Talleyrand, D' Almenara and numerous French ministers. 2
  Labouchere instructed Parish to test reactions to the idea of disposing of
the total Spanish debt in Holland to the United States in exchange for
3/0 bonds, of which I/o would be redeemed annually. Payment would
be required in Amsterdam in guilders, or in dollars at a rate of
exchange of 50 stuivers per dollar. The United States would thus
receive 37 million guilders or 14% million dollars at 5t % interest, plus a
5 % bonus on redemption. On the basis of 3/0 bonds, which then
stood at 60 %, the whole exchange would cost the United States less
than 9 million dollars. In addition there were the drafts on Mexico,
which had been calculated at the favourable rate of 32 stuivers to the
piastre. 3
  To make the deal even more attractive to the United States, it would be
necessary for Spain to agree to sell Florida to the United States for the
sum of the debt in Holland. The effect of this would be to confront
Mexico with the choice between approving the cession of Florida or
meeting the Spanish debt; if it chose the latter, the United States would
greatly btnefit financially. The crux of the matter, of course, was whether
Napoleon would agree to such a settlement. If it was true that Florida had
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

declared its independence and had asked the United States for protection,
it would almost certainly be to Napoleon's advantage to approve the sale.
  At Labouchere's suggestion, Parish also consulted Daniel Parker, the
merchant and speculator whose name has already appeared in connexion
with the piastre affair. Parker, who had long experience in the sale ofland,
proposed a shift of emphasis. He felt that it would be feasible to combine
Spain's financial requirements and her need to repay her debt in a new
loan of 40 million guilders at 51- % interest, three-quarters being payable
in existing bonds and the balance, 10 million guilders, in cash. The new
loan would be redeemable in ten years by the sale of 20 million acres of
rich farmland on the shores of the Gulf of Mexico. During the ten-year
period, an estimated 2 million acres could be sold at 10 dollars per acre,
enabling the loan to be repaid in full. The remaining 18 million acres
would fetch 2 dollars an acre, making 36 million dollars. At the conclusion
of the loan, every bondholder would be entitled to one forty-thousandth
part ofthis sum, i.e. 900 dollars.!
  In the matter of the interest payment, Parish and Parker adopted a plan
put forward by D' Almenara and the Spanish envoy in France, the Marquis
de Santa Fe. This envisaged placing at Hope & Co.'s disposal 30,000
quintals of quicksilver, which lay in Seville, at a price of 100 guilders
per kilogram. Half of the proceeds, i.e. cf 1,500,000, would have to be
placed at the disposal of the Spanish government, and the balance would
serve for the payment of the interest. 2
  Labouchere's initial reactions were unfavourable in the extreme. He was
not at all impressed by Parker's ideas about selling land in Florida:
'Nothing would induce the Dutch to invest more money in land in
America, whatever people there may think. It will take half a century to
erase the consequences of earlier errors from European minds.' This was
plain speaking indeed-certainly towards Parish, who had himself indulged
in land speculation in America on a large scale.
  To Labouchere, the ideas put forward by D' Almenara and De Santa
Fe reflected the old misconception on the part of the Spanish Court that
its foreign debts constituted a source of new revenue. The ominous rise in
the number of bankruptcies throughout the empire ruled out any chance
which a proposal of this nature by Spain might otherwise have had. 3
  The 30,000 quintals of quicksilver were nominally valued at 4 million
guilders. According to Labouchere, the demand on the Continent did not
exceed 20,000 pounds in a year-and there was continuous competition
from German and Austrian quicksilver. He took the view that the Com-
pany could be well satisfied if it succeeded in selling 10,000 pounds per

                                   370
                          THE SP ANISH MORASS

 year, so that it would take three hundred years to dispose of the stock. In
 Paris, Nicolas Clary was still left with some quicksilver which had been
 captured in the Tyrol during Napoleon's campaign in 1800.
  To achieve larger sales, it would be necessary to export the material to
 North and South America; but this would require Spanish, French and
 British licences. If these could be obtained, it would be quite a different
 matter: if American vessels were used, it might be possible to combine the
 exporting of the quicksilver with the importing of North American to-
 bacco for the Spanish tobacco monopoly. In considering tobacco imports,
 Labouchere reverted to an earlier plan; but again he did not go beyond
the realm of contemplation.!
  Early in November 1810 Simons returned to Amsterdam, this time in the
 role of negotiator for D'Almenara. Once again the familiar issues were
listed: the disposal of the remaining 4,000 bonds, the potential use of
warrants for the purchase of nationalized Church property, the 30,000
quintals of quicksilver (which might produce some immediate funds) and
the possible importation of American tobacco. Only one thing was missing,
the thing which interested the Spanish government above all others,
namely ready cash. 2
  Simons was thus obliged to return to Paris empty-handed. He arrived
there just in time to impart the disappointing outcome to D' Almenara
before his departure on lIth November 1810. Simons's own future soon
became uncertain, however, for he was obliged to seek a moratorium at
the end of November 1810. He carried with him the house of Raymond &
Theodore de Smeth, which got into such difficulties that at the beginning
of January 181 I it was obliged to cease payment altogether. 3
  For David Parish, the beginning of I8Il coincided with a desire to
terminate the association with the Spanish American affair. He had earlier
declined a seat on the board of Hope & Co., and now he resigned from his
company in Antwerp, though this provisionally continued to bear his
name. It was his intention to return to the United States and seek his
fortune there. 4
  Account 'X', which Parish had now finally closed, has already been
referred to. No good purpose would be served by repeating the estimates
of the profits from the various transactions which passed through this
account, the more so as the Hope archives do not reveal a grand total
from which the level of profit could be determined with certainty. We
shall thus have to accept Nolte's estimate, which refers to a profit of
862,250 pounds sterling, or just over 3,800,000 piastres. This figure does
not include the profit on the 4 million piastres shipped direct from

                                    37 1
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

Vera Cruz to England. According to our rough calculations, this was just
over 83 0 ,000 piastres. 1
  The shipments to Spanish America under licences issued by Parish were
to have a long and disagreeable sequel. Early in 1809, following the out-
break of the civil war in Spain, Espinosa's agent, Sarmiento, reported that
he had received instructions from the Caja de Consolidacion henceforth to
deal directly with the American merchants concerning the import duties
due to Spain. At the same time he demanded from Parish and the Olivers
import duties totalling It million dollars, which was equivalent to 50 %
of the value of the cargoes. Although Sarmiento acted on behalf of
Charles IV, it quickly became clear that the demand had originated from
the junta in Seville, which thereby attempted to secure funds. 2
  Parish's lawyer in Philadelphia, Charles W.Hare, saw it as his first task
to obtain copies of the contracts between Espinosa and Ouvrard and
between Ouvrard and Hope. He also proposed that committees of in-
vestigation be sent to Europe to interrogate witnesses and, if necessary,
summon them to appear in the United States. In Hare's opinion, it was
of the utmost importance that Hope & Co. should produce documents
showing that all monies transferred by Parish had indeed been remitted
to the Caja. 3
  The case dragged on for eight years, the hearings taking place in one
court after another. In the autumn of 1808 it was the Philadelphia Court
of Common Pleas; in 1810 it came on in the Pennsylvania Supreme Court;
and finally it reached the United States Circuit Court. Whenever a judge
found in favour of Parish and the Olivers, Sarmiento appealed to a higher
court.4
  The questionnaire used by the investigating committees revealed that
Parish was suspected of having shipped goods to Vera Cruz on his own
initiative and having failed to remit to Hope the duties due on these.
Among the other matters investigated were whether Hope & Co. had
acted as the agent of the Caja de Consolidacion and whether any monies
had been paid to the governments of Joseph Napoleon, Charles IV or
Ferdinand VII. 5
  In Labouchere's eyes, the matter was a simple one. Hope's principal had
been Auguste Ouvrard & Co., and the Company had settled its account
with them. If the Spanish king sought to derive extraordinary authority
from the decree upon which the trading licences had been based, he should
 address himself to those to whom the licences had originally been issued,
namely Auguste Ouvrard & Co. In pursuance of this view, Labouchere
declined to hand over copies of contracts with Ouvrard or to answer the

                                   37 2
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

committees' questions. His response to requests to look into the circum-
stances under which Charles IV and Ferdinand VII had surrendered the
Spanish throne to Napoleon, and whether they had been within their rights
in doing so, was that these were too ridiculous even to discuss. 1
  However, in the face of an urgent appeal from Alexander Baring to
answer the questions, in order not to prejudice Parish's position, La-
bouchere agreed in June 18Il to issue a brief statement. In this he af-
firmed that the monies received from Parish had been accounted for to
Auguste Ouvrard & Co., but that because the Spanish government had
debts in Holland which exceeded the sums received, these had, with the
prior knowledge of the Spanish government, been applied to the payment
of these debts. The Spanish government, he maintained, had never been
concerned in the dealings with Auguste Ouvrard & Co. and Parish. 2
 This, however, did not settle the matter. In 1812 the case was heard by
the United States Circuit Court. The prosecution demanded that Parish
should furnish a bond of 150,000 dollars, and this was upheld. Parish's
lawyers, who also represented the Olivers, submitted that the case should
be struck off the list on the grounds that the Court could not put forward
a person as the King of Spain unless that person had been so recognized by
the government of the United States. This was an embarrassing point and
one which the Court, while giving no reason, refused to pursue. After a
brief consultation, Parish's counsel decided to withdraw the submission
and to concentrate on a complete denial of the prosecution's 'cause of
action.' For this, however, counsel required copies of all the contracts
with Ouvrard and all accounts relating thereto. 3
  Labouchere viewed the request for documents as indiscreet, to put it
mildly. If it were acceded to, details of Hope's transactions, including
those which had no bearing on the case, would be revealed to all and
sundry. 'Let Sarmiento bring an action against Hope & Co. in a court of
justice in London, where Messrs.Hope will gladly address themselves to
him,' was his reply.4 Again Alexander Baring intervened, this time to
point out that the court in America would construe a refusal to answer
the questions as recalcitrance, and that this would jeopardize a favourable
verdict. For the second time, Labouchere allowed himself to be influenced
by Baring and furnished the replies requested. 5
 In order to be in as strong a position as possible, Labouchere desired
the return of all unmet drafts on Mexico and Caracas. To achieve this,
Baring went so far as to write to Echeverria, into whose custody De
Villanueva had given the remaining drafts. 6 Early in 1813 the question-
naires, duly completed by Labouchere, and the relevant accounts and

                                   373
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

authentic copies, all attested by a notary and by the American Consul-
General in Amsterdam, Sylvanus Bourne, were despatched to the United
States, where a very distressed David Parish awaited their arrival. 1
  In the early weeks of 1814, by which time Holland had been liberated,
an American landed in Amsterdam with instructions to obtain fresh
answers to the questions. His arrival intensely annoyed Labouchere, to
whom the legal battle was as ludicrous as it was irritating. To him, Ameri-
can justice was a riddle: Parish had won his case, yet here was the action
being brought again-and without an appeal being entered!2
  The greatest problem facing Parish was that he was unable to prove that
the Spanish government had been among the parties to the transaction.
This evidence was only forthcoming when Ouvrard re-emerged from the
prison into which he had disappeared in 1810. It was not until after the
fall of Napoleon that he was released-and indeed this was the excuse
which he tendered to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for his long
silence. Ouvrard himself still hoped to reach a settlement with the Spanish
Court, and pending this he was prepared to offer any assistance in clari-
fying matters. Our sources do not reveal whether or not this clarification
was achieved, but we do know that Parish secured a definitive legal victory
over Sarmiento in 18 I 6. 3
  After that brief diversion, let us see how fortune was dealing with
Coesvelt. We take up our story with D'Almenara's return to Spain in
November 1810, still without any promise from Labouchere or Coesvelt
regarding fresh loans. In a letter sent other than by the official mail,
Coesvelt set out his cheerless view of the situation in Spain. Ministers,
he wrote, avoided discussions which might lead to clear conclusions or
firm agreements. Not that this was surprising, for Spain was bankrupt
and unable to meet its creditors. The only solution lay in the transfer of
freely-controlled national possessions and private property to a value
equal to the total Spanish debt. This debt would then be soundly consoli-
dated and, with such security, up to 6 or 7 million guilders could be
advanced. 4
  Viewed from Amsterdam, Coesvelt's assessment of the situation was
unrealistic, for in the economic crisis of I8IO-I8u an advance of any
magnitude was out of the question. Furthermore, Coesvelt was obliged
soon afterwards to report that the custodian of Spain's national posses-
sions had personally stated that, because much had already been sold and
because communications with the provinces had virtually been severed by
guerilla activities, the possessions which could be assembled would be
worth less than 30 million reales. 5

                                   374
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

 Soon after this Coesvelt gave up the idea of coming to an arrangement
 in Madrid. Ultimately, he wrote, any negotiations or decisions would have
 to take place in or come from Paris. It would be best if Spain were to be
 incorporated into France, for King Joseph's authority was steadily
 waning. It might be possible to limit the annexation to the area north of
 the Ebro and, subsequently, to compensate King Joseph in Portugal for
 the loss of territory. On neither count was there any point in his remaining
 in Spain, for he was merely being kept on a string. 1
   Indeed, partly as a result of developments within the Company, Coes-
 velt's stay in Spain was drawing to a close. With the death of Henry Hope
 in February 181 I, new arrangements had become necessary. Labouchere
 had earlier intimated his wish to retire, and in April of the same year he
 reached agreement with John Williams Hope, who had changed his name
 to John Hope following the death of Henry Hope. It was agreed that
 Labouchere should leave the Company at the end of I8II, but that he
should continue to sign documents on its behalf. John Hope undertook
to indemnify Labouchere against any consequences arising from the use
of his signature. In practice, this meant that Labouchere appeared to the
outside world to be still a partner of Hope & Co. but that he was absolved
from the financial responsibilities attaching to the position. It was further
agreed that Coesvelt, Adriaan van der Hoop and Pierre Firmin Lestapis
should be given power of procuration. 2
  In the light of these arrangements, it was of importance that Coesvelt
should make his way to Amsterdam as quickly as possible, the more so
since Labouchere proposed to go to Russia and wished to settle all out-
standing matters before he left. Moreover, he was anxious to speak to
Coesvelt before he sought Van der Hoop's reaction to the proposed
appointment. Pierre Firmin Lestapis, who was 'always perfectly well dis-
posed,' would concur in any arrangement. Coesvelt left Madrid early in
May and arrived in Amsterdam on loth June. By the 15th, matters had
all been settled and the circulars signed. 3
  Before embarking on his duties in Amsterdam, Coesvelt wished to visit
England and settle his affairs there. He took with him drafts on Vera Cruz
to a value of 50,000 piastres, which were to be sold in London. These had
been received from Gennaro Francesconi & Co., the company in which
Prince de Gerace had merged his business activities. Drafts for a further
300,000 piastres arrived after he had left, and these were forwarded to
him in London. 4
  In spite of these transactions, relations with De Gerace were anything
but smooth. On 1st July 1810 the Sinking Fund was still nearly

                                    375
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

100.000 guilders in arrears with its payments, and by 1st July of the
following year the deficit had risen to nearly cf 150,000.1 Meanwhile,
the squabbling over the date for the payment of interest and prin-
cipal on the Neapolitan bonds (which was among the causes of the slow-
ness in making remittances) continued. 2 The atmosphere did not improve
when, at the beginning of November I8Il, Coesvelt returned to Amster-
dam with the news that the assets of the drawer of the piastre drafts
-whose name was not disclosed-had been confiscated, and that other,
similar drafts had been returned protested. 3 De Gerace began by accusing
Hope & Co. of having underestimated the premium on the guilders banco.
When this allegation was refuted, he cast suspicion on the slowness with
which the redeemed bonds were surrendered. Assertions by Hope & Co.
that this was a common phenomenon, and was due to poor communi-
cations with the bondholders, were treated almost with incredulity.4
  As if this were not enough, De Gerace also complained that, in dealing
with his remittances, the Company did not adhere sufficiently to the due
date, with the result that the Neapolitan Court was deprived of a portion
of the discount. Hope's managers pointed out that payees of drafts on
Italy usually remitted the funds to a third centre and therefore desired
some latitude in respect of the due date, but without consequences for the
rate at which bills were accepted. They added that, in general, De Gerace
 benefited by dealing with Hope, because bills bearing the Company's
signature were frequently accorded a better rate than those presented by
other firms. 5
  By 1st July 1812 the arrears of remittances from Naples had risen to
cf 175,000, while the Company, in consequence of the death of Henry Hope
 and the policy of liquidation pursued by John Hope, was experiencing a
 steady decline in liquidity. The managers referred this problem to La-
 bouchere, who, with his wife, was at that moment in Bad Pyrmont.
 Labouchere replied that he was not enamoured of De Gerace's manner,
 but that he had little doubt that Naples would honour its obligations. In
 the light of this advice, the managers decided to make the payment due,
 but at the same time to address a rebuke to De Gerace and to demand
 immediate settlement of the arrears. 6
  When, following the death of John Hope in February 1813, the Company
 actually went into liquidation, there was no longer any question of ad-
 vancing money on behalf of Naples. In March of that year De Gerace was
 warned that the payment on 1st July would be limited to the sum held by
 the partners. The majority of the remittances were in the form of bills
 drawn by Gennaro Francesconi & Co. on Agostino Serra and Giulio di
                                                                                 ,A.Jt.U U .D,U( 15 JOlI'& l B. f .




                              "r      c hi ve Ihe honor to acqdaint you th.ilt we hav-c gn.nttd the
             fi rJll or our )10USr: to ouf fril" Ods i\t' \\JLLlAlt GOflDON COESV£LT t M ~ A.DRIA~
             V Al' DU   UOOI' Q.nd 11 PETER f'£ Rln~ J.ESTAPJS, who hue .U long enjo)ed
             our con6dence antl ha,-e 113d an opporh tnily of C\"iJ1CinK liJeir fiUo to il in V.1.n(llus
             .situ.Jlion$ of tn1,t in ,.. Lieh \vl" have l"lllpto)c:d them .   ' Vc add ;1 ruot their r"C$pcC"liH'
             " gmUdre.$ and fe\lu~,1 Ilwt you win b..: ple:ueLl 10 pay the U Dle oll k uliol'l 10 th
             IN to lho~o    ,\ biel. are already   ~no\\n    I\)   you .
                              \\'0 I"tUl;.in with pelf~(; t rtgarJ ,


                                                                                  Yom mos l obed I .. er\'illllll.



                                                                           ~~~~
                                                                                              /

             Sign.t",. of    M~   \Y. C. COl:.SI'ELT. .            • • • •     r) //r ' .,0
             Si natW"<l or M ~ A. ,..LX D .... HOOP.




              Signatur ••r M! P. F. LESTAPIS.             • • • • • • •            c.#tjllb




Circular of 1811 announcing the granting of power of procuration to Van der Hoop,
                               Coesvelt and Lestapis
                          THE SPANISH MORASS

 Grossi, both in Genoa, and it was virtually impossible to get these ac-
 cepted in Amsterdam. 1
   On 30th June 1813 De Gerace was advised that there was still a deficit of
 cf 140,000 and that therefore only 365 of the 500 bonds due for redemp-
 tion had been drawn. Although this news evoked a response unparal-
leled in terms of language, a remittance was soon forthcoming, enabling
 an announcement of the drawing of the remaining 135 bonds to be made
 on 1st November.2 There still remained a deficit of cf 25,000, but it was
greatly in the interest of the managers not to antagonize the French
authorities who, following the defeat at Leipzig, were on edge and easily
 incensed. 3
  Napoleon's abdication at the beginning of April 1814 cast a shadow over
the final payment by Naples of interest and principal, which was due on
 1st July of that year. After the rout of the Grande Armee in Russia, Murat
had hurried off to Naples to seek popularity among his subjects. He had
simultaneously commenced negotiations with the British government. He
had again fought on the side of Napoleon at Leipzig, but immediately
after the defeat there he returned to Naples. In January 1814, Murat
signed a treaty with Austria. In this he undertook to help to drive the
French out of northern Italy, and in return was given a guarantee of the
safety of his kingdom. While Napoleon's abdication remained uncertain,
Murat gave only lukewarm support to the Austrians in northern Italy,
and when the emperor finally renounced the throne he lost no time in
returning to his capital.
  As a result of all these events, it was five months before Hope & Co.
again heard from De Gerace. In April 1814 another irate letter arrived.
In this, De Gerace slated the Company for daring to pay four months'
additional interest on the 135 bonds redeemed on 1st November 1813.4
The remittances to Amsterdam continued, but the amounts were so small
that Labouchere, who by then was in Paris, felt it necessary to warn the
managers that under no circumstances were payments to exceed the sums
received. In view of the size of the remittances, he advised them to limit
payments to the interest, and this was done. 5
  The measure produced further angry letters from De Gerace, but the
managers were by now accustomed to his outbursts. When he continued
to demand restitution of the four months' interest, they informed him
that they proposed to lay the matter before Murat himself. The threat had
the desired effect. Although he remained convinced that Hope & Co. had
kept the additional interest for themselves, De Gerace was obliged to
submit and to recognize the right of every bondholder to interest up to
the day ofredemption. 6                378
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

Fresh remittances from De Gerace enabled 75 bonds to be redeemed on
1st November 1814, but Labouchere continued to warn against granting
any advances in view of the uncertainties of the political situation in
Naples. 1
  Since the opening of the Congress of Vienna, which was occupied with
the redisposition of Europe, Metternich had changed his mind about
Murat's position. In northern Italy, which was now controlled by Austria,
Murat's presence might well give rise to lasting nationalist agitation. He
decided to drop Murat. In January 1815, with the knowledge of the
British government, he signed a secret agreement with Louis XVIII of
France providing for Murat to be driven out of Naples and for the resto-
ration of the house of Bourbon.
  Murat was aware of the plots against him and he therefore moved more
and more towards Napoleon, who had been granted the island of Elba as
his empire and who, from there, was continuously engaged in preparations
for a return to France. As early as mid-November 1814 Labouchere
warned of the risk of sudden hostility on the part of Murat, which might
lead to the interruption of remittances from Naples to Genoa; in the
event, however, it proved possible to redeem 50 bonds on 1st January 1815
and a similar number on 1st ApriI.2
  With this, matters provisionally came to a standstill. On 1st March 1815
Napoleon landed in the south of France, and on the 20th he again took
up residence at the Tuileries in Paris. For Murat, this was the signal to
declare himself against Austria and to call upon the peoples of Italy to
unite. Early in May 1815, even before the Battle of Waterloo, he was
defeated by the Austrians, whereupon the throne of Naples was restored
to the Bourbons. A desperate effort by Murat to bring about a revolt in
Naples ended with his imprisonment and subsequent execution in the
latter part of October 1815. Fortunately for the Company, Ferdinand I of
Naples recognized the existence of the loan, so that it was possible for a
further 80 bonds to be redeemed on I st April 18 16 and the balance of 245
on 1st June 1818. 3
  With Coesvelt's return to Amsterdam, a silence descended on the
Spanish loan. The next reference to it in the Hope archives is a message of
congratulation to the Caja de Consolidacion on the occasion of the libera-
tion of the two countries, with which was coupled the hope that it would
not be long before agreement was reached on the loans granted to Spain.4
  This was followed by a fresh silence. Eventually Labouchere approached
the newly appointed Dutch envoy to Spain, Cambier, who consented to
plead the cause of the Dutch bondholders with the Spanish government. 5

                                   379
                         THE SPANISH MORASS

In recognition of Cambier's assistance, Labouchere provided him with
letters of credit drawn on Baguenault & Co. in Paris and Sanchez Toscano
in Madrid. Cambier's early reports from Madrid were couched in reason-
ably optimistic terms, but by March 18 I S he, too, had lost heart. 1 In a
letter sent in August, which for safety was written in Dutch and carried
by a private courier, he explained the situation more fully.
  'We are making little or no headway in the matter,' he wrote. 'And if we
continue to follow the royal path, we shall not easily reach our destina-
tion. Two persons of relatively subordinate rank enjoy the full confidence
of the Master of the Royal Household and administer its funds, almost to
the exclusion of those who appear in the books. It is said they are ex-
tremely approachable, with the proviso that one friendship must be repaid
with another. This, however, is not unusual and is even found among
judges. Since no one is paid, how could it be otherwise?' 2
  This lengthy citation reveals a very great deal about the situation in
Spain in the period after 18ls-and indeed before that. Weak monarchies,
favouritism, corruption and poverty are the hallmarks. While the scope
of this treatise precludes us from following step by step the later fortunes
of the Dutch loans to Spain, we can, as it were from a distance, envisage
the remaining Dutch claims gradually sinking into the Spanish financial
morass.
  The brief period of liberal government from 1820 to 1823 brought a
resumption of interest payments on the debt to Holland. In 1830 and 1831
the loans in their entirety were converted into s% perpetual rentes on
which interest was paid until a second conversion was effected in 1834.
This conversion in fact amounted to a reduction by one-third: of the
S % perpetuals, two-thirds were converted into a S % active debt, and
the remaining one-third into a passive debt which carried no interest. In
the event, the payment of interest on the active debt continued only up
to 1836.3
  Little purpose would be served by recording the progress of this twice-
converted debt. Suffice to say that it was not until the end of the 19th
century that Spain became ripe for a period of expansion such as took
place in the middle of the 18th century, at which point in history our
story opened.
Diamonds
                           CHAPTER FOURTEEN

     THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN



We have selected this measure as the means to introduce the reestablishment of our House
with eclat, by manifesting the most conciliatory disposition and unequivocal proof of our
                         attachment to the interest of the country.
            Henry Hope, in a letter to P. C. Labouchere, 3rd August 1802.

The powerful military expansion which took place in France following
the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789 had disastrous consequences for
Portugal. As members of the first coalition of the European powers against
France during the wars of the French Revolution, Portugal and Spain
had become involved in the campaign of 1793; but Portugal had been
unable to follow Spain's example in suing for peace two years later. To
have done so would inevitably have meant a break with England, and this
was something no Portuguese government could afford. Since the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century the country had been largely dependent
upon England in the economic sphere, and the French Revolutionary Wars
had increased that dependence. If the English navy, with its supremacy,
were to cut off Portugal's vital imports from the colonies or, worse still,
occupy her overseas territories, she would be helpless.
  As Spain became more and more a satellite of France, the situation along
Portugal's frontiers became more perilous. Added to this, French pirates,
operating from Spanish ports, interfered with shipping in Portuguese
waters. The consequences were catastrophic: falling revenues and rising
expenditure brought the threat of economic collapse.
  To meet the situation, the prince regent appointed the energetic Don
Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho to the post of Minister with responsibility
for the colonies, the navy and the country's finances. This combination of
posts was not fortuitous, and by rebuilding the Portuguese fleet and
pursuing the war at sea with greater vigour he succeeded in controlling
the pirates, thereby enabling shipping to move freely again and thus
improving the country's financial position. The modernized Portuguese
fleet even operated with success against the French off Malta and in the
coastal waters of Egypt. 1
  For Napoleon, the peace treaty with Austria was a prelude to settling
accounts with Portugal and simultaneously bringing about the closure of
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Portuguese harbours to British ships. Spain had bound herself to assist in
accomplishing this, and as a reward had been offered a prospect of addi-
tional territory-at Portugal's expense. As British support was limited to
a few subsidies, Portugal could offer little resistance to this attack.
  The conflict was as brief as it was insignificant. On 6th June 1801 Spain
signed a peace treaty with Portugal at Badajoz. The settlement included
the cession of some Portuguese territory. Despite the fact that the French
envoy to Spain, Lucien Bonaparte, had been a signatory to the treaty,
Napoleon refused to ratify the settlement on the grounds that, in his
opinion, both his brother and the foreign minister, Talleyrand, had been
bribed by the Portuguese. Further negotiations led to the Treaty of
Madrid on 29th September 1801-two days prior to the signing of peace
preliminaries by England and France. For Portugal, the price of peace
included keeping her ports closed to British ships until a final settlement
in Europe was negotiated, and the payment to France of a war levy of
ten million crusados, the equivalent of more than I I million guilders.
  Faced with this short-term commitment, for which it simply did not
possess the funds, the Portuguese government was in an acutely embar-
rassing position. A loan was the obvious solution, but the chances of
obtaining one were poor unless adequate security could be provided. With
the possible exception of a tax revenue, no suitable security existed in
Portugal. Her colony, Brazil, however, produced an article which was
ideal for the purpose, namely diamonds.
  The discovery in 1727 of rich diamond deposits in what is now the state
of Minas Gerais had made Brazil the world's largest producer of this
precious stone. The Portuguese government, realizing the possibilities,
had assumed control of mining operations and thereby obtained a virtual
monopoly. The marketing of the diamonds was left to merchants, who
entered into a contract with the government; in this, they undertook to take
a certain minimum quantity during a set period at a fixed price per carat. 1
  The Hope archives reveal traces of the Company's repeated efforts over
a long period to secure this 'diamond contract.' In 1765, the Hopes in-
voked the aid of the Danish Court, with which they maintained good
relations. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Baron von Bernstorff,
consented to transmit a memorandum from Hope on this subject to the
Danish envoy in Portugal, together with his recommendation, and to
instruct the envoy to present it to the government. 2 But the 'balances'
relating to the years which followed contain nothing to suggest that the
contract was obtained, and thus it must be assumed that this remained in
the hands of its possessor, the house of Gildemeester.
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

In 1777, the fall from grace of the powerful Portuguese minister Pombal
brought a fresh opportunity. There was every chance that those who had
enjoyed his protection would also disappear from the scene. The house
of Thomas Mayne & Co. in Lisbon wrote in most optimistic terms about
such a development, even going so far as to give themselves a good chance
of securing the contract. If this occurred, Hope & Co. might become
Mayne's commision agents in Amsterdam-a disappointing prospect for
a house which itself sought the contract! 1
  But there were others with an eye to the main chance. Robert Lewis
Cantofer, a Lisbon merchant, informed Hope that, thanks to his contacts
in government circles, he would certainly be considered for the contract
(although the price per carat offered was also a factor of importance),
and in that event he would gladly join forces with Hope. A fixed quantity
of 60,000 carats would have to be taken annually, on conditions cor-
responding to those which Gildemeester had imposed on the Jewish
diamond merchants at Amsterdam in previous years. This implied that
a fixed quantity would be delivered quarterly at a fixed price and with a
six-month advance at 3 %interest per annum. Against the 60,000 carats to
be delivered, Canto fer wished to draw cf 450,000-about two-thirds of
the estimated value-quarterly. The balance would become payable after
the principal annual sales. 2
 All these efforts were to no avail, however, for shortly afterwards Mayne
reported that Gildemeester's contract would expire in the normal way. In
1787 a further attempt failed, but in 1791 Hope had at least a measure of
success. 3 Joachim Pedro Quintella, the new contractor, appointed the
Company as his agents in Amsterdam for the duration of his contract, i.e.
until the end of 180 I.
  The correspondence with houses in Lisbon contains numerous references
to Hope's wide experience in the diamond trade. This embraced the sale of
uncut diamonds in Amsterdam as well as the export of polished stones,
especially to Russia and Turkey. The former activity related to commis-
sions from Jewish diamond merchants in London. The earliest surviving
'balance,' which dates from 1763, contains such names as Eleasar Salo-
mons, Gompertz & Heyman, Salomon de Silva and Nathan Salomons.
  Perusal of the grootboeken for 1770 and the following years shows that
the quantities traded varied greatly from one year to another. In some
cases the cause can be attributed to political factors, as in 1779-80 and
1793-94, but in others no such influences are discernible. Generally
speaking, the annual totals were fairly high: in 14 of the 25 years between
1770 and 1794, more than 15,000 carats were sold. 4
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

It is worthy of note that, commencing in 1785, the Company also effected
sales on behalf of Jewish merchants in Amsterdam. According to the
grootboeken, one of these, Ruben Harmsz. Kijzer-who later became
Hope's and Insinger's confidential representative-had previously been a
diamond merchant in London, and must therefore have moved to Am-
sterdam later. 1
 The sales made on behalf of Quintella in the years 1791 to 1801 inclusive
display the same irregularity as those for the London merchants, but here
the cause lay partly in the war. In 1795, following the departure for Lon-
don of the partners of Hope & Co., diamonds ceased to be consigned via
the Company.2 It is true that a new channel-which led via London and
Hamburg to the Amsterdam house of Insinger & Co.-was established in
the succeeding years, but that house received so few diamonds in 1798 and
1799 that it was moved to issue a warning to Labouchere. The cessation of
supplies in 1795 had already caused serious damage; if the existing situation
continued, lasting harm would be done to the diamond polishing industry,
and this in turn would have an adverse effect on the market for the gems. 3
Fortunately, supplies were restored at the beginning of the 19th century.
 That advancing money against diamonds and lending money on the
security of diamonds differed only in degree, became clear round about
the turn of the century. Quintella had approached Messrs. Hope in Lon-
don in the matter of a loan in 1796, and in March 1800 he did so again. On
both occasions the partners declined. Since Quintella's first proposal, the
demand for diamonds in Holland had risen and sales had improved, but
the money market in England was no place for loans on the security of
private property.4 They did, however, offer, jointly with Francis Baring &
Co., to advance a reasonable sum for a shorter period-say, 100,000
pounds sterling for two years at 6 %interest plus a commission of 5 %.
 The interest and a portion of the principal could be paid out of the dia-
mond sales effected by Insinger & Co. in Amsterdam; the balance of the
debt would be payable by Quintella on the due date, by way of a remit-
tance. As security, Hope would require diamonds totalling 40,000 carats,
'pour notre tranquillite personnelle.' The diamonds, which represented a
value of cf 1,765,000 or 147,000 pounds sterling, would be deposited with
the Bank of England. 5
 This implies that Hope, in company with Baring, was prepared to ad-
vance a sum equal to two-thirds ofthe value of the security for a period of
two years. This differs little from the earlier situation, in which two-thirds
was advanced for one year. In their correspondence with Quintella, the
partners accordingly kept the whole affair strictly in the sphere of trade by
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 placing the proposed transaction on the same footing as commission sales
 of wool and silk. 1
   Early in 1801 the Company was approached for the first time, albeit
 indirectly, by the Portuguese government. The partners' reply was cau-
 tious but did not amount to a rejection. They said that, in such turbulent
 times, there was naturally little incentive to tie up their funds in an article
 which could only be placed on the market slowly, but that if the Court was
 prepared to dispose of a high proportion of the diamonds which it held
 and to refrain from releasing any more on to the market for a given period,
 a transaction would merit serious consideration. 2 They went to great
 lengths to recommend the participation of Quintella, since it seemed to
 them unwise to ignore such a respectable and powerful house.
   After the Peace of Madrid, however, the Portuguese government had no
 time for guarded moves of this nature: it needed money, and quickly, in
 order to meet its commitment to France. It thus sought a house able and
willing to provide immediate advances, and also to float a loan on the
English market. As the partners of Hope & Co. had not actively pursued
their profession of merchants and bankers since their flight to England,
the principal role at this juncture passed almost automatically to Baring &
Co., a house which had achieved wartime prominence by the handling of
international finance.
   During the early days of October 1801, Baring & Co. were approached
by John Stanley of Lisbon concerning a loan of 300,000 pounds sterling
to the Portuguese Court. It quickly transpired that Stanley, a long-stand-
ing business contact of Barings, had close connexions with Jacinto Fer-
nandez Bandeira, a rich and influential merchant who was acting as agent
for the Court in the matter of the loan. After a favourable response from
Baring, more information was forthcoming. The French government had
initially demanded a cash payment of four million crusados, plus dia-
monds to a value of three million crusados and a similar sum in cotton
and sugar. One million crusadosworth of diamonds and a further million
in drafts had been given in mid-November. Now, the French were insis-
ting that the balance be paid in cash, and to meet this Stanley proposed
that the loan should be increased to 1,200,000 pounds sterling. This would
enable the Court to settle its debt to France and also 'to provide at once
for all the exigencies of Government for a long time.'3
  In a 'Plan d'un emprunt' drawn up by Don Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho
on the orders of the prince regent and transmitted to London by Bandeira,
the Portuguese government set out the conditions upon which it wished to
negotiate. The payment of interest and repayment, over ten years, of the
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

principal could be made from the revenue from the tobacco lease or that
from the Crown lands. In addition, the Court was willing to deposit imme-
diately diamonds to a value of 250,000-300,000 pounds sterling with the
Bank of England. These would be placed at the disposal of the house
which assumed responsibility for the loan, and the proceeds of their sale
could be used to repay the principal. The diamond consignments would
continue until the final repayment against the loan was made. The Court
required the monies subscribed to the loan to be made available in ten
monthly instalments, commencing on 1St November 180 1.1
  It may be assumed that the Portuguese Court, in drawing up these con-
ditions, took account of the wishes of Francis Baring & Co., and that this
house, in turn, sought the advice of Messrs. Hope, who after all were more
experienced in such matters. The deposition of diamonds with the Bank of
England-a point raised by Hope in the previous year-points to this.
Later correspondence shows also that the proposed loan carried the ap-
proval and patronage of the British government. This is not surprising, for
prompt settlement of the French claim would mean the restoration ofPortu-
gal's freedom of action, and this could only be to England's advantage. 2
  By this time, Labouchere had left for the Continent to make prepara-
tions for the re-establishment of the Company in Amsterdam once peace
between England and France became a reality. During his stay he had
been regularly informed of the position in regard to the Portuguese affairs,
and now that the negotiations were beginning to take shape he received
instructions from John Williams Hope in London to hold himself in
readiness for a journey to Portugal. 3
   The fact that Labouchere was to conduct the negotiations enabled the
partners to reconcile themselves to some extent with the subordinate role
which the Company had up to then played in the affair. Robert Voute was
 negotiating with the government of the Batavian Republic on the condi-
 tions for a resumption of the Company's business, but, alas, he had not
 made sufficient progress to permit an early return to Amsterdam, 'where
 we might embrace a greater object by participating or dividing the Con-
 cern with the publick.' 4 It was agreed that the name of the Company
 should not be mentioned for the time being; but the major part which
 Labouchere was to play in the preparations for the affair would certainly
 become known, and this would naturally draw attention to the Company.
   The affair possessed attractive facets from the points of view of both
 houses: for Hope it presented an opportunity to gain complete control of
 the diamond trade, and for Baring the prospect of becoming sole agent for
 the Portuguese Court in matters involving foreign transactions. The re-
                 THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

spective interest of the two houses were reflected in the agreed ratio of
participation, namely five to two, Hope taking the larger share. Both
were of the opinion that the sum requested, 1,200,000 pounds sterling,
was too large, and initially they were unwilling to go beyond 700,000
pounds, of which 400,000 pounds would be made available on 31st
January 1802 and further sums of 100,000 pounds on 30th April, 31st July
and 31st October of that year.!
 Against all expectations, the Company was accorded recognition of the
position which it so ardently desired. On the day after John Williams
Hope recorded his chagrin concerning the opportunities in Amsterdam
which were being missed, it was decided, on the advice of Francis Baring,
to transfer the entire Portuguese negotiation to the Batavian Republic.
While we can only guess the motives which led to this sudden change of
course, it would be safe to assume that the settlement reached with the
Batavian government at the end of November, concerning the long-
standing claims against the Hope family, had a bearing upon it. Only
when this obstacle had been overcome did a return to Amsterdam be-
come feasible, and the move, in turn, was a prerequisite for introducing
the Portuguese negotiation. Repatriation and Portuguese affairs thus
became interwoven-a circumstance which was subsequently to produce
com plications. 2
 The news of the momentous decision reached Labouchere in Paris. It
was expedient to have the Portuguese affair settled by the time the peace
treaty between England and France was signed, whereupon the house
would be able to resume operations in Amsterdam. Labouchere was in-
formed that he should therefore depart for Lisbon without delay, leaving
matters of secondary importance such as the restoration of trade links
with Madrid and Cadiz. If possible, he should charter a vessel in order to
avoid the long and circuitous overland journey. 3
  Accompanied by George Baring, the youngest son of Sir Francis, Labou-
chere travelled via Nantes, La Rochelle and Bordeaux to Bayonne, where
both men tried to charter a vessel to take them to Portugal; but their
efforts were in vain. Deeply conscious of the need for haste, they hired
a train of mules and a driver, by which means they travelled for nine days
in bitter winter weather to Madrid, where they arrived on 20th January.
The journey was continued at the same tempo, and on 28th January
Labouchere was able to report from Lisbon to his principals that he was
ready to commence the negotiations. 4
  He was certainly not handicapped by lack of instructions. Mail had
preceded him during his journey, and in Lisbon a stack of letters from
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

both Hope and Baring awaited his arrival. In essence, the plans had not
altered since mid-November 1801, which implied that the principals
adhered to the 'Plan d'un emprunt,' albeit the sum of the loan was limited
to 700,000 pounds sterling. Moved by a spirit of caution, John Williams
Hope in particular exhorted his negotiator to keep his eyes open and to
ensure that the interest payments against the loan commenced on 1st
January 1802. Labouchere was advised that the loan instalments should
be as widely spaced as possible, since Baring and Hope were about to
participate in a loan in England and therefore their liquid resources would
be somewhat stretched for a time. In view of the pressure of time, the two
houses had agreed to allow Don Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho to draw
100,000 pounds sterling on Hope & Co. in Amsterdam, but they were
fervently hoping that Labouchere would reach Lisbon before the sum was
drawn. 1 This limited ad vance reflected a certain fear of competition. 2
 Labouchere's first impressions were wholly favourable. The sovereign
and the minister both inspired him with confidence, and the securities
which they offered were so solid that nothing in England could match
them. The only real hazards lay in the political sphere, for there were clear
signs of French intrigue inside Portugal; but provided that the peace
congress at Amiens produced the desired results, Labouchere did not
envisage any dangers in the current year.
 In order not to leave the minister in doubt, Labouchere drew up a 'First
Overture to His Excellency,' in which he set out the basis upon which the
two houses wished to negotiate. First, they required the minister's approv-
al for the transfer of the loan to Amsterdam. This would be in the interest
of the Portuguese Court also, for foreign loans were difficult to place in
England and very costly.3 In Holland, where the house of Hope would
resume its activities as soon as peace was restored, the situation was much
more favourable, for there loans of this sort had long been commonplace.
Although the majority of government bonds yielded more than 6 %,
Labouchere deemed it wiser to fix the interest on the new loan at 5 % and
to lower proportionately the price at which the loan would be taken over.
If a 6 % loan stood at par, a 5 % loan should command 83t %. However,
6 % Americans commanded 96 %, and on this basis the price of the Portu-
guese loan would be 80. This corresponded to the prices of Austrian,
Spanish and even Dutch issues. As a special favour, however, Labouchere
offered to place the Portuguese Court on a level with the Russian Court,
or even on a higher plane. Thanks to Hope's tireless efforts, the Russian
bonds then stood at 88-89, and against this Labouchere offered the
minister a takeover price of 90.4

                                    390
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 The size of the loan was left in abeyance. The minister desired
 cf 13,000,000, payable in instalments of cf 1,000,000 in the months January
 to November and a final payment of cf 2,000,000 on 31st December 1802.
 Labouchere consented in principle to this arrangement, adding that he
 hoped to be in a position to accomplish the desired increase of the prin-
 cipal sum. This, however, would require consultation with his friends,
 and pending this it would be necessary to limit the formal contract to
 cf6,500,000.1 Of this, cf 4,500,000 would be made available on the signing
 of the contract and the handing over of the diamonds in Portugal. The
 balance would follow after the arrival from Brazil and transfer of the
 diamonds which were available there. In all probability, Hope and
 Baring were prepared to place a larger sum at the minister's disposal once
 the contract had been signed.
  If we compare the instalments specified by the minister with those in the
'Plan d'un emprunt,' we observe that the number was increased from ten
to twelve, and that the date for the final payment was put back from 1st
August to 31st December 1802. Labouchere, for his part, made the pay-
ments conditional upon the handing over of the diamonds: 4t million
guilders following the signing of the contract and the depositing of
 114,000 carats, and 2 million guilders upon the arrival and transfer of
the Brazilian portion of the security, which was estimated at about
100,000 carats. Observing that the two deposits of diamonds represented
a value of more than 5 million guilders, Labouchere's action in urging
his principals to double the sum offered is not in the least surprising. 2
  As Don Rodrigo lacked experience in matters of this nature, it was left to
Labouchere to indicate the official documents which had to be prepared.
First and foremost was the contract between the minister and Labouchere,
as the authorized representative of Hope and Baring, and an allied decree
bearing the prince regent's confirmation and approval of the agreement.
Two further decrees were required in order to safeguard the sum of
cf 1,700,000 needed yearly for interest and principal payments. One of
these would serve to mortgage the total output from the diamond mines
and transfer it to the two houses during the life of the loan, and the other
would give Hope and Baring a yearly payment order for cf 1,700,000
from the tobacco lease. The latter sum was a maximum and would reduce
annually by the sum of the proceeds of the diamond sales in the year in
question. It would be necessary for the tobacco duty farmers, as a group, to
officially accept this payment order and undertake to pay the sum indicated.
fn addition, each would be required to give a personal guarantee in respect
of both the payment order and the undertaking. Lastly, there was the
principal debenture.
                                   39 1
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Interest on the loan was to run from 1st January 1802, and the principal
sum was to be repaid within ten years. In the matter of commission,
Labouchere asked for 5 % on the nominal sum of the loan and I % on the
interest and principal payments, in both cases to be shared between the
two houses.
  The negotiations were based on these points and proceeded smoothly.
There were differences of opinion, but the pressure of time and the urgent
geed for funds made it almost impossible for the minister to make a stand
against the greatly more experienced Labouchere. On the morning of
Sunday, 7th February, Labouchere was summoned by the minister and
informed that the terms were acceptable. On the following day the two
men put their signatures to the contract.
  Labouchere's wishes were met on almost all points: the life of the loan,
limitation of the formal commitment to half the principal sum requested,
and the commission. As if this were not sufficient, the two houses were
appointed Court Bankers- Hope & Co. in the Batavian Republic and
Baring & Co. in Great Britain. Only the matter of the takeover
price remained unresolved: the contract stipulated 92, but the houses
retained the right to consult the Portuguese government in the event of it
proving difficult to place the bonds at this figure. 1
  The decrees issued by the prince regent relating to the mortgaging of the
diamonds and to the payment order for cf 1,700,000 from the tobacco
leases were also dated 8th February. Quintella and Bandeira, as agents
for the contracting houses, were to receive the diamonds in Lisbon and
send them on to London. Stones destined for the polishing industry in
Portugal, others which by tradition were reserved for the Court and those
which, by reason of their size, might not be sold, were exempted from the
agreement. These breaches of the monopoly were later to hamper diamond
 sales. 2
  Following this rapid success, it took some time to settle the details. A
great deal of effort was required to achieve exactly the desired wording of
the documents. During the translation into Portuguese, differences of
emphasis occurred repeatedly, causing Labouchere to rack his brain in
 an effort to detect contrasts of word and nuance in a language which was
 strange to him.3 On 16th February-by which date all the obstacles had
 been surmounted-the minister suddenly raised the question of the rate of
 exchange of the guilder. Nothing less than a specific, written undertaking
from Labouchere that the same rate would apply to both the funds to be
 placed at the disposal of the Portuguese government and the payments of
 interest and principal would satisfy him. The final document was not

                                   39 2
     ~" ~U.I":r~'''"-'
            J,,~, ...f
                         {.., ••                            /."./.". f. .)"C_
                              0"7""" (f.),... 2W'./,1L~ /Jt>.-.-1. V." ...
            ~1?J.,•• .1.1J> ~"r" u.. ~~ ..... l .• JIj~~ • ..,.<...l' ,I..J/t..Q~
             I,l .s0,,,.o<~. (.~o_:      ....
                                          06" .t.lM ~....."" .. C1h ... .9_.~
            l4"'1J.~II.  J"""U.4-1CO IIllU-q,.,J.   l "/"'-,,.,~c) ff:.y'UII"'.... .~ (' .
                                                                                        411


             (. YC"'''.;)'' k (1,,/.. ./?iN>;) ".... ci>..£.o C.".". /}. {,,,,,,,,/...




       Acceptance of the payment order for cf 1,700,000 per annum
from th e tobacco leases as part collateral for the Portuguese diamond Joan,
                    signed by the tobacco lessees, 1802
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

handed to Labouchere until 26th February. On 2nd March, Labouchere
and George Baring embarked in the Dutch corvette 'Diana' for the voyage
to Gibraltar, from whence they journeyed via Madrid to Paris, where they
arrived on 17th April. 1
  During the negotiations in Lisbon, Labouchere had promised Don
Rodrigo that he would intercede with the French government in an
attempt to have the levy on Portugal reduced or, if this failed, to urge
that the payments be spread over a longer period. In the event, Talley-
rand, the French Foreign Minister, proved unwilling to reduce the sum,
but Labouchere eventually persuaded him to extend the period. Under
the new arrangement, a cash payment of 3 million livres before 1st June
was demanded, and thereafter monthly instalments of I million livres, the
last of which would fall due on 31st August 1803. (The value of the livre
at that time can be put at cf 0.48). These sums, together with the 2 million
livres which the French government wished to be paid in Lisbon in con-
nexion with the expedition to the rebellious Santo Domingo (for which
sum Bandeira and Quintella had drawn on Hope in March and April),
made up the sum of the war levy.2
  As we have seen, the issue of the transfer price had not been settled.
Labouchere had agreed conditionally to a price of 92, but from the outset
he doubted whether this could be achieved, particularly in view of the
prices of other government issues. The news that the government of the
Batavian Republic had floated a 30-million guilder loan at an issue price
of 75, and bearing the same rate of interest as the Portuguese loan, added
a convincing dimension to his argument. The agreement reached with the
French government had the effect of increasing the commitment by
Baring and Hope to the full 13 million guilders, and this will un-
doubtedly have made the Portuguese government more receptive to
advice and persuaded it to agree to a transfer price of 90. 3
   As promised in the 'Plan d'un emprunt,' the diamonds which lay in
Lisbon were placed at Labouchere's disposal immediately after the sign-
ing of the contract. There were 114,342 carats with an estimated value of
cf 2,740,000. Bandeira and Quintella had the stones packed in six parcels
and sent to London, from whence they were consigned to lnsinger & Co.
in Amsterdam-the house to which Hope, with a mixture of wisdom and
caution, provisionally continued to entrust diamond sales. 4 By the end of
1802, 54,342 carats had arrived in Amsterdam, and of these more than
33,000 carats were sold in the same period. The remaining 60,000 carats
were despatched during the first quarter of 1803. By the end of that year,
45,000 carats of the total stock remained. 5
                                    394
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Now that the wheels were beginning to turn, it was time to prepare for
the placing of the loan on the Dutch market. Robert VOllte had also done
some spadework in this connexion. He reported that the signing of the
Peace of Amiens had distinctly improved the prospects for the Portuguese
loan, but added that it should not be placed while the new Batavian loan
of 30 million guilders was still on the market. 1 As it was necessary to
obtain government approval for foreign loans, VOllte had already had an
exploratory discussion in The Hague with the Treasurer-General, De Vos
van Steenwijk, whose office was comparable with that of a minister of
finance. During their meeting, VOllte made it appear that he had visited
Hope in London in January 1802 with the aim of keeping the diamond
trade in Holland, and that the Company had subsequently sent a partner
to Lisbon. The emissary had achieved his goal, but as a quid pro quo a
Portuguese loan would have to be floated in Amsterdam. The discussion
ended with the Treasurer General indicating his approval and promising
to place matters before the Staatsbewind-a governing board with twelve
members, in which executive power had been vested since the previous
year-and to inform VOllte of its decision. 2
  An unforeseen complication arose in the shape of a Bill aimed against
the contracting of foreign loans in the Batavian Republic. If adopted by
the Legislative Assembly, this would make it illegal for persons living in
the Republic to raise money on behalf of foreigners or foreign powers
unless such persons were able to furnish security in the form of a mortgage
on their own assets to a value of twice the sum to be raised. VOllte pro-
posed to await the arrival in Amsterdam of one of the partners of Hope &
Co. before publishing the Berigt concerning the Portuguese loan.3 With
this legislative obstacle looming on the horizon (the Bill was due to be-
come law on 1st June), it was important that the arrival should not be
unduly delayed. VOllte accordingly urged Labouchere, who was then in
Paris, to return to the Republic as quickly as possible. However, the
negotiations with the French government took longer than had been
anticipated, and it was May before Labouchere was able to free himself
from the Portuguese matters. Even then there was no question of him
travelling to Amsterdam, for more pressing affairs required his presence
in London. The re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam necessitated
revision of the deed of partnership, since it was imperative for the house
to arm itself against all manner of contingencies and dangers which could
threaten it in the event of a fresh outbreak of war.
  Upon the completion of the arrangements for the new partnership-to
which reference was made in the introductory chapter-Labouchere left

                                   395
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

London for Amsterdam, where he arrived early in July 1802. There, he
and VOllte jointly drafted the Berigt, whereupon the two men journeyed
to The Hague to plead their case with the authorities. VOllte, who had
contacts in government circles, asked that his presence be made known to
Spoors, a member of the Staatsbewind, by whom he was received. By the
time Labouchere joined them, Vollte had explained the matter and had
obtained Spoor's assurance that he would do his utmost to ensure a
favourable decision on the difficult issue of the date-which was subse-
quent to the decree of 1st June. At this point, a discussion arose between
Labouchere and Spoors which became increasingly heated and finally
deteriorated into an argument. From the somewhat veiled description of
the scene in VOllte's handwriting, it appears that Labouchere informed
Spoors in a fairly sharp tone that the French government had given its
approval to the loan, and that Spoors interpreted this as an attempt to
intimidate the Staatsbewind. VOllte succeeded in restoring calm, but
Spoors sought refuge in officialdom and remained clearly displeased. 1
  Spoor's touchiness was in all probability allied to the failure of the efforts
to secure the withdrawal of French troops from the Batavian Republic.
Despite its promises, the French government had maintained its occu-
pation of the Republic after the Peace of Amiens. Spoors had recently
reached agreement with the French government for the withdrawal of its
forces, and, with some pressure, secured the approval of his colleagues in
the Staatsbewind. But the troops had not departed and thus fresh nego-
tiations would be necessary-a situation which compromised Spoors. 2
   Despite this inauspicious beginning, it was important not to lose any
more time. Before the day was out, Labouchere and VOllte, assisted by
 Hope's lawyer in The Hague, Van Son, had prepared a written request to
the Staatsbewind and submitted this in person to the president of that
 body, Van Hoogstraten. The president welcomed them in a most friendly
 manner, and was very sympathetic towards the matter of the loan. At the
 end of this emotional day, Labouchere, having no further business in The
 Hague, returned to Amsterdam.
   On 13th July, the request came up for discussion in the Staatsbewind. In
 it, the petitioners stated that the loan had been entered into at the begin-
 ning of the year, and that the principal sum had already been advanced.
 Now that the house of Hope & Co. was proposing to return to Holland, it
 desired to transfer the loan to Amsterdam. As a token of its loyal dispo-
 sition, the house was willing to pay a tax of! % on the nominal sum, and
 to submit to stamp duty on the bonds at the rate of six stuivers. The Staats-
 be wind referred the request to the Treasurer-General and the councillors of
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

the Treasury for advice, and they, in turn, requested the petitioners to
furnish a facsimile of the proposed bonds and a copy of the Berigt. 1
  From the outset, Van Son, Hope's lawyer, was pessimistic concerning
the outcome. VOllte did all he could to advance the matter, and this in-
cluded having a further interview with the Treasurer-General, who again
promised his support. After this he, too, left The Hague-not for Amster-
dam, but for his newly acquired country residence, Middagten, to recover
from the rheumatic fevers which plagued him.2
  With growing impatience and irritation, Labouchere awaited the out-
come of the request; but days and weeks passed without a decision. VOllte
had difficulty in restraining him from taking fresh steps. VOllte was of the
opinion that it would be better to withdraw the request. How could it be
proved that the loan sum had actually been furnished in England? The
house could not allow the Staatsbewind to inspect its books! The only
convincing proof lay in not announcing the loan in Holland; to attempt
further action in The Hague could only lead to the conclusion that Hope
indeed planned to place the bonds in the Republic. It would be best if
Labouchere went his way and left the whole thing to VOllte, who could
then say that he knew with certainty 'that matters now rest in England,
between your friends and those of Sir Francis.' 3
  VOllte's strategy was obviously aimed at allowing plenty of time for the
heated tempers to cool and then broaching the matter afresh. Of course,
it remained to be seen whether an issue which had penetrated so deeply
into the regions of prestige would emerge from them in the short term.
In this context, it was unfortunate that the proceeds of the loan would
largely find their way into the French Treasury coffers, for this fact em-
bodied a painful reminder of France's overall superiority. It was doubtful
whether the Staatsbewind would be in favour of allowing Dutch investors
to contribute in any shape or form to the payments. It was all very well
for Labouchere to contemplate that rejection of the request would merely
imply altering the name 'Amsterdam' on the bonds to 'London,' and that
the bonds, in this form, would still appear on the Amsterdam Stock Ex-
change; for opponents of the loan, this was one more reason for resisting
it. 4
  On 5th August 1802, the Treasurer-General and the councillors of the
Treasury, after ample deliberation, tendered their advice to the Staatsbe-
wind. They recommended that the loan be approved. But in the meantime
the president of the Staatsbewind, Van Hoogstraten, had joined the
opponents (probably under Spoor's influence), and when the matter was
referred to a committee-of which Van Hoogstraten and Spoors were

                                    397
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

members-the future looked bleak for the petitioners. 1 On 20th August,
Van Son reported to Voute that the request had been turned down.
  Labouchere did not experience the setback at first hand. On 23rd July,
acting on Voute's advice, he had left for Paris, from whence he had
journeyed on 15th August to London. 2 There, his report of the way things
had gone produced deep disappointment. Even before the news of the
official rejection was received, Henry Hope had expressed his anxiety to
Labouchere. If the Staatsbewind were to turn down the request, he argued,
one of the principal sources of 'circulation and prosperity' in Holland
would be blocked and the opportunity to float future foreign loans
destroyed for good. A full explanation of all the circumstances surround-
ing the Portuguese loan ought to have immediately satisfied the Batavian
government, 'for we have selected this measure as the means to introduce
the reestablishment of our House with eclat, by manifesting the most
conciliatory disposition and unequivocal proof of our attachment to the
interest of the country.' 'But,' he continued, 'if we are obliged to believe
that we are suspected of not dealing in good faith, a regard for the
character we have always maintained and which we never will abandon
might result in our revising completely the plans concerning ourselves. If
those in Holland abandon the vital principle of circulation, neither our
capital nor ourselves, nor even the country, will be of any use. And as far
as talents and diligence are concerned, these are present in the neigh-
bouring countries in equal, if not greater, measure.' In participating in the
loan, at Baring's invitation, Hope also aimed at securing the diamond
trade for Holland and for the house, thereby preventing the English de-
veloping into competitors in that sector. It had been Hope's idea to
 transfer the loan to Holland, and it was he who had proposed doubling
the principal sum. 3 Holland could surely not object to the houses of Hope
and Baring investing part of their idle funds in this relatively small loan?
Their action in doing so also showed clearly that they were not proposing
 to draw capital away from an exhausted country. On the contrary, the
return of the Hope family would bring a great deal of money into the
country-and without Henry Hope having to sell a single one of the Portu-
guese bonds which he held. It would, of course, be necessary for a portion
 of the loan to be placed on the Amsterdam market, if only to arrive at
a quotation, and to satisfy the Portuguese Court. But Hope was certain
 that this 'circulation' would not rise above the sum required annually for
 interest and principal payments.
   In Hope's opinion, it was about time the leading statesmen in Holland
got down to considering where the country's true interest lay. And that
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

was clearly in rendering itself 'as much as possible, the general pivot of the
World, upon which everything should turn.' Countries like England and
France, with their rich resources, could regulate and restrict as it pleased
them; for Holland, 'a comparatively nothing,' such a course would be
fatal, however. In the artificial situation in which Holland was doomed to
subsist for an eternity, circulation would prove to be the basis for trade
-not only because trading enterprises were linked to foreign loans and
circulation, but also because a healthy circulation had to be founded on
capital if it was to beget trade and nourish it. Limiting the use of capital
on the grounds of a temporary emergency could destroy the chance of
prosperity in the future.
  If permission for the loan were to be refused, Barings were prepared to
establish a first-class house in Antwerp with the funds which arose from
the Portuguese operation. If the diamond contract and an agency for
imports from the island of Tobago (and perhaps also one for goods from
Martinique) could be added to the loan, the foundations would be laid
for a house which could become one of the most important in Europe and
which would enjoy the support of the powerful and enterprising firm of
Baring & Co. Then the Portuguese bonds would circulate in Hol-
land-only they would bear the name Baring instead of Hope, and Ant-
werp as the place of domicile instead of Amsterdam!
  For Hope & Co., there was little incentive to return to Amsterdam if this
implied being limited to trade in Holland. The Company's capital was too
great for so small an arena: it had to be free to swell, to flow in any direc-
tion and to be invested in, or withdrawn from, exchange transactions,
loans or mercantile operations at will. 1
 The manner in which Henry Hope coupled his family's return to Amster-
dam with the maintenance of the free movement of capital makes one
wonder whether the threat to establish a branch in another country was
really so serious. We cannot be certain, though we may assume that
Henry Hope's arguments were intended for a wider audience than Labou-
chere alone, who certainly knew the writer's views and would probably
have shared them. One thing is certain: at that time, Sir Francis Baring
had plans for a complete merger between Hope & Co. and his own house.
Thus the reference to an initiative on his part for the establishment of a
branch in Antwerp may well contain an element of truth. 2
  There can be no doubt as to the genuineness of Henry Hope's disap-
pointment. In February 1803 he confessed to John Williams Hope that
the failure of the Portugal affair had given his nerves a severe jolt, 'and
enhanced on the natural effect of advancing years, so that I find myself

                                    399
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

unfit for the business ... and absolutely unequal to the shock of any
untoward accident in the course of it.' He became steadily less disposed to
visit Holland, 'from several causes, not the least of which is the coup de pied
de /' {me which we have received, which I shall never be able to digest.' 1 This
was not the first occasion on which Henry Hope had spoken of retiring from
business, as the introductory chapter reveals. Moreover, a return to Holland
would mean adapting to totally changed circumstances in that country-an
extremely difficult task for anyone of his age. The steadily deteriorating
relations between England and France constituted yet another reason
for following Voiite's advice to maintain a safe pied aterre in England.
 There was, however, no question of abandoning the idea of returning to
Amsterdam, or even of a lengthy postponement of the move. It was true
that capital was mobile, and that talent and diligence were to be found in
equal measure elsewhere; but the protection which friends in Amsterdam
could offer in time of need was not easily matched. Amsterdam appeared
as the place of issue for the loan in all the agreements with the Portuguese
government-indeed, it had been especially recommended during the
negotiations-and so a unilateral amendment was out of the question.
Towards the end of August, Paulus Taay had gone to the trouble of
airing and tidying the house in Amsterdam and opening the cases con-
taining the beds and bedding which had been sent from London. 2
 The Laboucheres arrived in Holland round about loth October 1802,
to be followed shortly afterwards by Mrs. Williams Hope and her family.
John Williams Hope stayed on in England. He was still there on 5th
November, the date of the circular informing friends and business asso-
ciates of the re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam. 3 His reason for
putting off his journey becomes clearer if one recalls the opposition to the
Portuguese loan. Among the elements of this opposition was a lingering
antipathy in radical-patriotic circles towards the Anglo-Orangist 'emi-
grant house.' In the summer of 1802 a pamphlet was circulated, de-
nouncing those 'who desert the Republic in time of danger, and return in
time of peace.' 4 The Portuguese envoy in The Hague, Bezerra, was in-
formed openly that another house would have been given permission to
open a loan, and although the truth of this assertion may be doubted, the
hostility towards Hope was unmistakable. 5 For this very reason, Voiite
advised John Williams Hope that when the moment for his return arrived,
he should avoid The Hague at all costs, re-establish himself quietly in
Amsterdam and refrain from discussing the Portuguese affair. This could
wait until the beginning of November, when Voiite, who was in The
Hague, proposed to visit Amsterdam. 6 Under such circumstances, it is

                                     400
B                            c     11      1".




    Bericht of the Portuguese loan, 1802
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

understandable that John Williams Hope kept on postponing his return,
the more so since he had little desire to return to Amsterdam. To Sir
Francis Baring, this hesitant attitude was a source of irritation - to the
point, indeed, that, shortly after John Williams Hope's arrival in Amster-
dam, Sir Francis tersely informed him that he could perhaps understand
his conduct were he proposing to transform the Amsterdam house into a
sort of Andries Pels & Sons-by which he meant a house which had the
means to do anything, but did nothing. Such behaviour, the letter con-
tinued, smacked of weakness and a lack of the energy which was vital if a
house was to be kept 'in the real rank ofthe great and prominent.' 1
  In dealing with the Portuguese loan, however, caution was a more impor-
tant attribute than energy. The request to the Staatsbewind having been
turned down, there was little choice except to have the bonds signed
outside the Batavian Republic. In order to avoid any risk of giving offence,
it was decided that the task should be entrusted to Bandeira in Lisbon. 2
Just how wise this decision was, emerged during a chance meeting be-
tween Voiite and Spoors at Bezerra's residence. When 'the affair and the
person' (i.e. the Portuguese loan and Labouchere) were mentioned,
Spoors flew into a temper, becoming if anything more enraged than on
the previous occasion. According to Voiite, some unrepeatable things were
said-all in the presence of Bezerra, who, Voiite added by way of conso-
lation, was nonetheless prepared to institute an advertisement concerning
the first payment of interest and principal. 3 Indeed, in the closing days of
the year, two Dutch newspapers carried an announcement by the Portu-
guese envoy, stating that the Portuguese Court had furnished Hope & Co.,
'Banquiers de la Couronne de Portugal,' with funds to enable it to make a
payment of interest and principal, together totalling cf 1,033,000, in
respect of the Court's debt to Hope & Co. of 13 million guilders
Hollands Courant. 4 Simultaneously with this announcement, Bezerra
informed the Staatsbewind of the payment in a formal note. As neither
document bore a reference to the place of issue of the loan, and as Hope
& Co. acted only in their capacity of Court Bankers, the announcements
produced no reaction from the government.
  But although matters appeared on the surface to be proceeding smooth-
ly, the situation backstage was less satisfactory. The tobacco lessees in
Lisbon, who were bound by contract to furnish a sum cf 1,700,000 annu-
ally (admittedly, less the proceeds from the diamonds sold in the year
concerned) for the payment of interest and principal, had been so lax in
regard to their commitment that Baring had been obliged to make good
the deficit in order that the payment announced could be effected. The
                                    402
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

men in Lisbon promised to mend their ways in time for the payments in
the following year, but Sir Francis Baring deemed it advisable to remind
them that their tobacco contract had been renewed only after an express
request by Labouchere, and that any further deficit or other shortcoming
in their remittances might even at this stage be construed by the Minister
of Finance as a reasonable ground for cancelling their contract.!
  In the early months of 1803, the need to advance monies on behalf of the
tobacco lessees was anything but convenient to Barings, for the house
stood on the threshold of a major transaction which would probably
demand a great deal of capital. Since Christmas 1802, Alexander Baring
had been in Paris, where he sought to obtain for his company a share in
the financial transactions which would arise in the event of Napoleon
deciding to sell Louisiana to the United States. 2
  With all these matters to attend to, Baring's personal participation in
the Portuguese loan was extremely limited. By the end of 1802, 3,418 of
the 5,000 'sold' bonds had been taken over by the firm of Henry Hope &
Co. Of these 3.4 18, 1,793 had been resold, principally to members of the
family, and 942 had been set aside as 'Hope & Co., reserve.' A further 972
had been sold to 'sundry investors,' a term which covered business friends
like Voute and Insinger, members of Pierre Cesar Labouchere's family
and clients and acquaintances such as William Gordon Coesvelt, Quin-
tella, Bandeira and the Portuguese envoy in Paris, Don Jose Maria de
Souza. 3 The list reveals that the Amsterdam house was most circumspect
in its sales and, as far as 1802 was concerned, had substantiated Henry
Hope's view that the magnitude of the Portuguese 'circulation' would not
exceed the sum available annually for interest and principal payments. 4
  In 1803, in order to avoid ugly rumours, the partners fell back on their
trusted circle of friends in Amsterdam. In that year, 1,000 bonds were
transferred to a consortium of entrepreneurs headed by Willem Borski at
a price of 95. Henry Hope & Co. repeated their purchase of 1802, taking
3,000 bonds, also at 95. Purchases by friends and acquaintances in 1803
totalled 571 bonds. s By 31st December 1804, the group headed by Borski
held 2,678 bonds; a year later their holding amounted to 3,201. 6

In spite of prompt 'payment of the loan instalments by the houses which
were parties to the contract, Portugal's financial position remained so
serious that eventually the government took the plunge and approached
the Company for a fresh loan. If the house would be so kind as to furnish
2 million guilders or, if that was not feasible, then at least I million,
the necessity to draw on Bandeira or Quintella for the overdue remittances
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

-a step which would be most inconvenient to the government-could be
averted. The balance could be of use in connexion with the establishment,
in Lisbon, of a bank in which the Court, as a 'private Person,' desired to
associate itself with a number of merchants. 1
  As was to be expected, the reaction of the two issuing houses was one of
flat refusal. Sir Francis Baring pointed to the critical political situation
and to the danger of being unable to withdraw from such a bank having
once become involved in it. In a letter to Hope, he expressed a preference
for leaving it to smaller houses to participate, 'whilst we hold the candle.' 2
Labouchere succeeded in making it plain to Bezerra that it was unwise to
display special reserves in a situation in which war between England and
France could break out at any minute. Perhaps the envoy could tactfully
suggest to his government that it would be wise to sell a portion of its
silver plate in London. Silver prices were very high at that moment, and to
leave the plate lying idle in Lisbon would be to expose it to all manner of
hazards-a prediction which was to prove all too accurate. Apart from
this, however, Labouchere was unwilling to give even the faintest ray of
hope until the diamond shipments from Brazil arrived. 3
  In the threatening political situation, the non-arrival of these diamonds
from Brazil was a source of great anxiety. According to the promises
made, they should have arrived at the end of 1802; in fact, they were not
received until early in May 1803. But the chain of command in Brazil was
long, and the civil servants were slow to react. In the case in point, the
Viceroy in Brazil, upon receipt of orders from Lisbon, had to instruct the
Captain General of the Minas Gerais area to despatch the diamonds to Rio
de Janeiro. The latter, in turn, had to pass the order on to the directors of
the Royal Diamond Mines at Tijuco. In the event, however, there had
been such a muddle that a special messenger had had to be sent from Rio
de Janeiro to collect the stones. 4 The reports concerning the size of the
consignment varied widely. At first there was talk of 85,000 carats, but
later this rose to 120,000 carats. The increase was attributed to the sup-
pression of a gang of mulattoes- 'desperate fellows' - who, it was said, had
discovered new gold and diamond fields in the interior and had established
a lively trade in contraband stones, which were sold in Rio de Janeiro. It
was reported that their activities had been brought to a sudden halt, with
the result that the output from the mines had been raised. 5
  In Europe, the tension between England and France had meanwhile
erupted into conflict. On 12th May, the English envoy, Lord Whitworth,
departed from Paris, thereby confirming the breach between the two
countries. With this, the onward transmission of the Brazilian diamonds,
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

which, as we have seen, arrived in Portugal at the beginning of May, was
in jeopardy. Sir Francis Baring had given instructions that the diamonds
were to be shipped aboard a man-o'-war, and had chartered the frigate
'Amazone' for the purpose. She sailed from Portsmouth on 12th July
with orders to take the whole consignment- 104,000 carats, as it now
transpired-on board. But on 13th July the mailboat 'Duke of York'
left Lisbon with 15,000 carats on board. This vessel arrived safely in
Falmouth on 3rd August. The 'Amazone' arrived in Lisbon on 25th or
26th July. Shortly before this, the mailboat 'King George Packet'-un-
wittingly in contravention of Sir Francis's instructions-had left for Eng-
land carrying a further 15,000 carats; this vessel was less fortunate than
the 'Duke of York,' for on 1st August, after a ficrce encounter, she fell
prey to the French privateer 'La Repn!saille,' operating from Bordeaux. 1
  The whole affair was extremely painful, and if mismanaged could
disrupt the delicate intermediary role which Hope and Baring would
henceforth have to play in the Portuguese affair. In a lttter to the Portu-
guese envoy in Paris, Sir Francis, in a moment of thoughtful abstraction,
suggested that Portugal might withhold the final instalment of her debt to
France, thus putting pressure on the French government; but ultimately
he decided that it would be wiser to make a protest and leave it at that.
Such a protest would have to be based on the premise that the diamonds,
although addressed to Barings, were the property of the Portuguese
Crown and were in transit to Hope & Co., who had been instructed to sell
them in order to recoup advances made to Portugal to meet the war levy
due to France. 2 However, the official steps taken by Don Jose Maria de
Souza produced no results, for on 16th September the owners of the
privateer had succeeded in obtaining from the Prize Court a 'decision de
bonne prise et de possession,' and, as Talleyrand explained to the envoy,
such a decision was irreversible. 3
  For Portugal, the consequences of the new conflict between France and
England were just as disastrous as those of the earlier one. On 3rd June
1803, in an effort to steer a course between the belligerents, the prince
regent proclaimed Portugal's neutrality, but even this feeble attempt at
independence was unacceptable to France. The heavy political pressure
exerted on the Lisbon government by the French envoy, Lannes, led
first to the dismissal of the most powerful ministers, including Don
Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho, on a charge of 'Anglomania.' Don Rodri-
go's successor, Don Louis de Vasconcellas, was forced to sign a treaty in
which France recognized Portuguese neutrality, but in exchange for this
exacted a contribution of I million francs per month for the duration
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of the war.1 Thus, within four months of being liberated from her finan-
cial commitments towards France (the final monthly payment had been
made on 31st August), Portugal was again obliged to make sacrifices
-this time for a neutrality which was fictitious from the outset. But the
Treasury coffers were as empty as they had been at the beginning of the
year. While the negotiations with France were in progress, Bandeira had
sought the views of Hope and Baring regarding the possibility of a sup-
plementary loan, for which diamonds would again constitute a security.
Of the two houses, Barings, in particular, were opposed to such an
operation -a very understandable reaction in view of the war situation. It
was not feasible to destine the diamonds for a second loan while the first
had still to be completed. That would shock public confidence and bring
both operations into disrepute. It was difficult enough in such times to
keep up the price of the Portuguese bonds, even nominally, and thus the
government would be well advised to try to meet its needs at home. 2
Labouchere, while concurring in this view, was clearly less opposed to
becoming involved in the new Portuguese payments to France and incur-
ring certain commitments, always provided that these were balanced by
sound guarantees in case the government's emergency resources failed to
flow sufficiently rapidly. He would have liked to see England standing as
guarantor, but if this were not possible the tobacco lessees would suf-
fice. 3 Enquiries made by Baring showed that Labouchere's expectations
concerning a guarantee by England were illusory. In 1802 the British
government had encouraged the Portuguese loan because at that time the
prompt payment of the war levy offered a means to lessen French influ-
ence on the country. Now, with a new war ahead, London had no desire
to stimulate a loan which would pave the way for remittances from a
neutral country to France. 4
  In the meantime, the French government had to some extent moderated
its demands on Portugal. The open-ended financial demand had been
replaced by one for 16 million francs, payable within sixteen months.
Even so, it was as much as the Portuguese government could do to make
ends meet, and it was not until 19th March 1804-exactly three months
after the signing of the treaty of neutrality-that the parties finally reached
agreement. The French negotiators in Lisbon had adhered to the demand
for 16 million francs within sixteen months, and had stipulated that
the period should run from 1st December 1803. One month after the
exchange of the ratification documents, the sum then due had to be paid
in Paris, while the Portuguese envoy was required to deposit undertakings,
bearing his own signature, in respect of the balance. 5

                                    406
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

The Hope correspondence contains only slanting references to the
events in Portugal. The partners made no mention of them in their letters
to Don Louis de Vasconcellas, and such news as did circulate emanated
from Baguenault, of the house of Baguenault & Co. of Paris. On 18th
May, he reported that the payments relating to the contribution would be
made via Bandeira and Quintella, and he added a wish that Hope might
also be drawn into the process. 1 When Baguenault wrote this, Hope had
already decided to assist with the payments which Bandeira was required
to make on the instructions of the Portuguese government. 2 There was
thus no question of an advance of any kind to the government; the trans-
action was a purely commercial one between two merchant houses, in
which one received payment orders from the other. These formed the
subject of a separate account, designated F.R., in which debits and credits
were required to balance as far as possible from month to month. The
necessary funds reached Hope partly in the form of remittances from
Bandeira, and partly from the proceeds of the shipment of produce to
French ports, which Bandeira had entrusted to the Hope management.
The principal cargo was cotton, which went chiefly to Nantes but also to
Caen, Rouen, Dieppe and Marseilles. 3 As far as dealings with Barings
were concerned, however, no sharp distinction was made between these
trading activities and the Portuguese loan, and in a letter to that house
the partners said: 'these concerns ... are connected with our joint adven-
ture as explained verbally to your Mr.Alex. Baring, and will continue in
common in the same proportion for profit and loss, till the negociation
shall be run off.' 4 Here, as in the case of the Swedish loans, we find mer-
cantile transactions being freely mingled with loan matters.
 The transactions entered in Account F.R. in 1804 included one which,
while probably allied in origin to the Portuguese payments to France,
stood quite apart from these in execution, and was of earlier date. This
was related to a contract between Bandeira and Hope for the supply and
sale of pernambuco wood, or brazilwood, a dyewood; the Portuguese
government had a monopoly of the sale of this wood and, as with dia-
monds, leased the annual proceeds for a given period of time. If the lessee
resided in Lisbon, he could enter into a contract with one or more houses
in other European cities.
  In October 1803, Hope was approached by Bandeira's confidential
agent, John Stanley, who enquired whether the house would be interested
in a contract for brazilwood. He explained his offer by saying that the
lessee, Bandeira, was dissatisfied with his Amsterdam agents, Tomasachi
Marcella & Co., and that as their contract was due to expire at the end
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of the year he was anxious to make a change.! If one realizes that Ban-
deira himself was at that moment trying to persuade Hope to agree to a
supplementary loan for the Portuguese government, one tends to take the
motive for the offer with a pinch of saIto Labouchere's reaction was fa-
vourable yet cautious, 'as on this score much must depend on political
circumstances, which may materially impede our communications.' 2 A
week later, however, he again wrote to Stanley, this time dealing at great
length with the trade in pernambuco wood-about which he had evidently
obtained information in the meantime. In this sector, sound organization
was the key to success, and in Labouchere's opinion this had been lacking
of late. Markets for dyewood existed in London and Amsterdam, and
approximately equal quantities were sold on each of these. Sales in Ham-
burg were small-about 50-60,000 pounds annually. France obtained
supplies direct from Lisbon, and thus sales in that country need not harm
the market in Holland, provided that satisfactory price limits were set.
But Brabant and Flanders should be included in the territory covered
from Amsterdam. 3
  Early in 1804, Hope & Co. took over 160,000 pounds of pernambuco
wood from Tomasachi Marcella and became the agent for Amsterdam. In
his correspondence with Bandeira, however, Labouchere let it be known
that he had higher ambitions, namely to control the whole of the European
market for this commodity. He accordingly enquired whether the Portugu-
ese government could supply unlimited quantities of the wood, and whether
contractors were required to take any quantity which might be offered. 4
  Bandeira replied that intensive felling in earlier years had increased the
distance between the source and the point of shipment, thus adding to
the time and cost of transport, and that he therefore anticipated a reduc-
tion in the supply. But Labouchere remained sceptical. He reasoned that
the stock was virtually inexhaustible, and that if transport from the
existing supply areas became a major problem it would be solved simply
by drawing on a new forest. What guarantee had he that the Portuguese
government, faced with a financial crisis, would not put ever larger
quantities on the market? The consumption of pernambuco wood fluc-
tuated widely and was to some extent governed by competition from
other dyewoods, which would flood the market if peace were to come. It
was also possible that, in the event of traffic between Brazil and Portugal
being interrupted, supplies of pernambuco wood would be carried in
American vessels, thereby eclipsing the contractors. In all probability,
stocks of sufficient size to last for several years-and also to ruin the unfor-
tunate contractor-were already lying in Brazilian ports.

                                     408
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

It was a prerequisite for long-term planning that Bandeira's lease con-
tract be extended beyond 1808, the year in which it was due to expire. If
this could be done, Hope could simply enter into annual contracts with
Bandeira. Provision would have to be made for reduction of the contract
price if peace should be negotiated during the year. Naturally, Labou-
chere wrote, sales would have to be limited to the Company, with the
proviso that the Portuguese government could reserve 150,000 pounds for
home consumption and for export to Spain-via contraband channels-
and the Barbary Coast. 1
  Bandeira's reply to this letter has not survived. Much later, in a report
to Barings concerning the 'Portugal Concern' in 1804, Hope wrote: 'The
wood concern was intended to embrace the article of Fernambucq wood
throughout Europe, but remains limited to this place, where however we
hope it will make a satisfactory appearance in this year's account.'2
  Clearly, Hope's sales efforts were concentrated on Amsterdam. In
February 1804, the Company, in a letter to Bandeira, had hinted at the
possibility of raising the quantity sold annually to 3-400,000 pounds at
44-45 guilders banco per quintal (I quintal = 100 pounds), and in the
course of that year it proved that it was capable of substantiating this
pretentious proposal. 3 On the 9th April 1804, Hope, acting through the
broker L.H. Voute, sold to Messrs. Jacob Muhl and Van Winter 'two
hundred thousand Pounds of Whole Fernabuck wood with the original
mark R, at the price of forty-five Guilders Banco per Hundred Pounds
with Two per Cent Discount.' The sale was conditional upon the buyers
being given a monopoly of this wood in the Netherlands and upon a ban
on exports of dyewood from Lisbon to Brabant and to French ports
north of Dieppe. The buyers took an option on a further 100,000 pounds
at the same price, and subject to Hope having this much in stock. The
Company, for its part, undertook to store any brazilwood received during
the rest of that year, and not to sell to third parties inside or outside the
Batavian Republic. It was agreed that further negotiations with Voute
concerning the conditions should take place in December at the latest.
 On 4th October 1804, Voute converted the option for 100,000 pounds
into a firm agreement, and on 19th November he purchased 300,000
pounds, which had arrived in the meantime, at the same price. 4 The
contract relating to the latter purchase stipulated that the price of dye-
wood in England should not be lower than that in Amsterdam and that,
in the event of a fall in the rate of exchange, the prices in England should
be raised proportionately, 'being the adjustment necessary for the suc-
cess of the article on both markets.' This shows that agreements between
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

parties concerning the establishment of prices were feasible. The fact
that the price in London could influence the price in Amsterdam in such
a manner is further proof of the close contact which existed in spite of the
state of war between the two countries.
  L.H.Vollte entered into an agreement with the house of Muhl & Van
Winter whereby he took a half-share in the purchase of the dyewood, 'the
gradual sale of which they, alone and in their own names, will conduct.'
This agreement also applied to all future transactions involving the article.
Hope & Co., in turn, confirmed in writing to Vollte that the undertaking,
although entered into in the latter's name, related solely to the Company. 1
Once again, circumstances had been turned to the best possible advantage:
Muhl & Van Winter continued to pursue their trade, and Hope, unbeknown
to all but a select circle, shared in the benefits. The contract was renewed
largely on the same terms in 1805, 1806, 1807, 1808 and 1811. 2


                                      .
'Voila cette affaire en bon train,' said~Baguenault in June 1804, in a letter
to Labouchere concerning the payment of the Portuguese 'contribution';
but his optimism was to prove less than well-founded. 3 In the official
announcement to Talleyrand, Hope said cautiously that the Company
would be pleased to learn which department of the government the monies
should be remitted to, 'depending upon the extent to which we are enabled
to effect the payments.' 4 By the same post, the Company informed the
Portuguese envoy, De Souza, that it held payment orders amounting to
only 2 million francs, and urged him in the strongest terms to press the
French government to extend the instalment periods. 5 This placed the
envoy in a difficult position, for how was he to reconcile this instruction
with the terms of the Franco-Portuguese treaty, which stipulated lump-
sum payment of all instalments due since 1st December 1803? According
to the letter of the treaty, 7 million francs were due at that moment,
but only 2 million were available. It is no wonder that Baguenault
observed 'une incertitude et vacillation continuelle' on the part of De
Souza. 6 To make matters worse, there had been a clear mistrust of the
envoy in French government circles since early in 1803, when it had
emerged that, on his own initiative, he had suspended payments to the
French Treasury.7 Fresh evidence to show that this mistrust was not
entirely misplaced was about to be presented. At De Souza's instigation,
Hope's official announcement to Talleyrand of the commencement of the
payments to France was delayed for a week, and the 2 million francs
held at De Souza's disposal by Baguenault were deposited with the
Banque de France instead of being paid to the Treasury.

                                    410
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 De Souza was no less stubborn in his efforts to avoid signing under-
 takings relating to the balance of the payments to France. 1 He began by
sounding Baguenault regarding the possibility of having Hope's drafts
accepted upon Bandeira's responsibility. If that were not feasible, he
desired that Hope should guarantee his commitments or, if this were not
possible either, that BaguenauIt should guarantee them for Hope's ac-
count. 2 But all these propositions met with a blank refusal from Labou-
chere; he had resolved to make payments only when the necessary funds
had been made available, and had no inclination to depart from this
principle. At the same time, he anticipated that, as had been the case with
the earlier payments, Talleyrand would be willing to extend the instal-
ment period if the Portuguese Court provided convincing proof of poverty
and lack of funds. 3 The ensuing events showed that he had been right, and
in the end the French government agreed to accept 2 million francs in
cash and the balance in five monthly sums of I million francs following
the payment of the final instalment. 4
  With all these 'lenteurs diplomatiques,' nearly half the month of July
passed without the 2 million francs which Baguenault had deposited
with the Banque de France being paid over to the Treasury. The French
government, incensed by these 'tricks,' demanded immediate payment and
the replacement of De Souza. s On 14th August, Bandeira instructed
Baguenault that in future he should make prompt payments to the French
Treasury, and that he was not to accept orders from De Souza in the mat-
ter. By the time the letter reached Paris, De Souza had taken it upon him-
self needlessly to delay the payment of the third million for a week. 6 But
the days of his chicanery were numbered, and although he was not recal-
led until the end of October he was increasingly by-passed in diplomatic
affairs. 7

In spite of all Stanley'S exalted stories concerning subdued mulatto
gangs and the suppression of smuggling, parcels of diamonds continued
to reach Amsterdam through other channels. In its report to the Portu-
guese Minister of Finance concerning the position of the loan in 1803, the
Company had already complained that the market was being ruined by
illicit parcels which were offered at cut price. 8 The problem stemmed not
only from the consignment of 15,000 carats which had been seized at sea,
and which appeared on the market at prices 5-10 % below Hope's figure,
but also from a stream of large parcels which reached Amsterdam and
London direct from Lisbon. 9 Amsterdam houses such as Gildemeester &
Co., made offers for parcels of 20,000 carats, the composition and price

                                   411
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of which were approximately the same as those handled by Hope. Partic-
ularly painful was the discovery that Lorla & Co. in Amsterdam had
received a 2,000-carat parcel consisting of exceptionally large and fine
stones, and that not only was there a similar parcel in London, but that
others were on their way from Lisbon.l Labouchere emphasized to Quin-
tella that the situation threatened Hope's sales, and that the tobacco
lessees would thus have to transfer larger sums for the interest and prin-
cipal payments due on 1st January of the following year.
  Matters took a much more serious turn when it was reported that the
Portuguese Court was attempting to secure a loan of 500,000 pounds
sterling in London on the security of diamonds. In a letter to the minister,
De Vasconcellas, Labouchere pointed out that this not only undermined
the diamond market, but also adversely affected the price of the Portu-
guese bonds. After all, he reasoned, the value of the bonds was largely
based on the security - the proceeds of the entire output from the diamond
mines-and if this was jeopardized, the market price of the bonds would
inevitably decline. If the loan was obtained in England, it would in any
case fall to the Company to sell the diamonds given as security.2 Quintella
replied that the prince regent had been obliged to make a present of an
insignificant parcel of large stones a few months previously and, more
recently, under pressure of circumstances, to dispose of a fairly large
parcel of small stones. The latter was in the hands of the Paris agent,
Diogo Dittmer, and was at Hope's disposal; indeed, Dittmer had been
instructed to negotiate with the Company concerning the future of these
stones. 3 As far as the large stones were concerned, Quintella was obliged
to use the gift story, because their sale would have contravened the terms
of the mortgage agreement. Regarding the small diamonds, there could
be no excuse other than the acute shortage of money from which the
Portuguese government suffered in the Spring of 1804. This might even have
driven the government to seek a loan in London after it had been refused
by Hope and Baring. Quintella, however, flatly denied the suggestion.
  In spite of Quintella's convolutions, the affair continued to be depres-
sing. Diogo Dittmer ignored all correspondence, and parcels of diamonds
continued to trickle into Amsterdam, where they changed hands at prices
below those fixed by Hope. The effect on the market was felt throughout
1804, and in their report to Don Louis de Vasconcellas the partners stated
with bitter satisfaction that because of the illicit shipments their sales for
the year had amounted to only 4,5651- carats. 4
 Although the political situation remained threatening, some time passed
before the storm broke over Portugal. With the resumption of hostilities

                                    412
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 in 1803, Napoleon at first concentrated on his planned invasion of Eng-
 land to the exclusion of all else. When this proved incapable of being
 accomplished, fresh wars against Austria, Russia and Prussia caused his
 armies to move to central and eastern Europe.
  This, however, did not imply that the emperor had lost sight of other
 regions on the Continent. In a decree issued in Berlin in November 1806,
 while the war in the east was still raging, he proclaimed the famous Con-
tinental System forbidding all the countries of Europe to trade with Eng-
 land. It was patently obvious that Portugal, which still maintained close
economic ties with England, would be among the victims of the system.
At the Peace of Tilsit, which brought hostilities between France and the
 Russo-Prussian alliance to an end in July 1807, Napoleon and Czar
Alexander I agreed that Portugal, Denmark and Sweden should be forced
to adopt the Continental System. As far as Portugal was concerned,
 Napoleon did not let the grass grow under his feet. On 12th August 1807,
the French envoy in Lisbon handed the Portuguese government an ulti-
matum demanding an early and complete break with England. By the
time the government acquiesced, French troops were advancing on Por-
tugal's frontier, supported militarily by Spain, to whom an area of Portu-
guese territory had been promised. The Moniteur of 13th November
1807 carried an official notice stating that the House of Braganza had
ceased to rule. 1
  The report of the deposition brought an end to the protracted hesitation
on the part of the prince regent. On 27th November, he and his family
embarked in a British naval squadron which lay ready in the Lisbon
roads, taking with them their treasures in the form of gold and diamonds.
On 29th November the vessels set sail for Brazil. On the following day,
the spearhead of the French force, led by General J unot, entered Lisbon. 2
  The partners of Hope & Co. watched the developments in Portugal with
rising anxiety. How were the future payments of interest and principal to
be realized, now that the Portuguese government had its seat in Rio de
Janeiro? The diamonds could presumably be sent direct from Brazil to
England and would thus reach Hope, but the government no longer had
any control over the vital remittances from the tobacco lessees. Without
these remittances, which thus far had totalled about a million guilders
annually, it would be impossible for the Court to effect further payments.
Urgent requests for information were sent to Stanley, Bandeira and Quin-
tella, and these were followed by even more urgent requests for remit-
tances; but all remained unanswered. 3
The silence on the part of the tobacco lessees can be attributed in part to
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

the upsurge of unrest in Portugal. On the heels of the revolt by the
Spaniards against the rule imposed on them by the French, an uprising
broke out in Portugal one month later, in June 1808. Soon the whole
country was up in arms, and with the landing on 1st August of a British
expeditionary force led by Wellesley, who later became the Duke of Wel-
lington, things began to look black for Junot. Aided by units of the Portu-
guese resistance and Spanish regulars, Wellesley defeated Junot at Vimeiro
and forced him to capitulate with his entire army. In exchange for a safe
passage to France, the army withdrew from Portuguese territory On 18th
September the regency council, which had been left behind when the prince
regent fled, was restored to power, albeit under the supervision of the
British commander-in-chief. Portugal was free again-for a time, at least. 1
  During this highly eventful period in Portugal's history, the remittances
from the tobacco lessees had practically dried up. Hope could do little
with the 46,500 guilders which had been forthcoming. The Company had
succeeded in substantially raising the volume of diamond sales-to 45,000
carats- but there nevertheless remained a deficit of cf 567,606.16.8. This
was partially offset by broaching the private accounts of Bandeira and
Quintella, and the balance, amounting to cf 194,976.1.8, was met with
drafts on the tobacco lessees to the order of Baring.2
  In May 1809, Bandeira and Quintella replied to the letters addressed to
them. They explained that because the war had prevented them from
making any payments, they had approached the head of the department
of finance, Cypriano Ribeiro Freire, with a request that he should
arrange for the deficit to be met. Freire, pleading lack of knowledge of the
matter, had asked for time to study the papers. 3 His closing observation
that, in the critical situation which then existed, all available funds were
needed for defence against the enemy, did not augur well for the request.
Napoleon, it must be remembered, had not acquiesced in his defeats on
the Iberian peninsula, and had personally led a major counteroffensive in
the autumn of 1808. By the beginning of the new year the war had spread
to the northern part of Portugal, and now battles were swaying to and fro
across large areas of the country. The consequences of the conflict were
disastrous for the populace and also for the nation's economy. To all this
was added the economic emancipation of Brazil. The decree of 28th
January 1808 which opened Brazilian ports to the ships of all friendly and
neutral states heralded a sharp decline in trade relations between Portugal
and Brazil. Produce from Brazil now travelled direct to its destination,
without the ships calling first at Lisbon, and imports into Brazil were
handled by foreigners, mainly Englishmen. 4
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Not surprisingly in view of these circumstances, Hope's claims embar-
rassed the regency council-so much so indeed that it issued a decree
forbidding the tobacco lessees to meet the Company's drafts and also
suspending their commitment for the duration of the war, on the grounds
that this concerned payment to Dutchmen, i.e. enemies. 1 Hope's conten-
tions that the provisions of the principal debenture remained valid in
time of war, that Holland was not at war with Portugal, that Hope & Co.
had been an English company at the time when the contract was signed,
and that the drafts would be collected by Barings, all failed to make any
impression on the council.
  In spite of all this, however, the payment of interest and principal at the
end of 1808 and 1809 took place normally. In 1808, the Company assisted
to the extent of about two hundred thousand guilders, but as nearly half
the bonds were held by Henry Hope & Co., a proportional amount of the
advance was, as it were, merely transferred from waistcoat pocket to
trouser pocket. In 1809 the sales of the remaining diamonds, amounting
to 54,500 carats, produced nearly one and a half million guilders. This left
a deficit of just over a quarter of a million guilders, half of which was
covered by funds from the Bandeira and Quintella accounts and the
balance by drafts on the tobacco lessees to the order of Baring.2
  Hope's efforts in Lisbon, which were as numerous as they were fruitless,
were viewed with disfavour by Alexander Baring. In his opinion, all these
approaches to people who, because of the war, had no money were point-
less and even dangerous. The next thing would be that the government in
Rio de Janeiro would use the requests from Lisbon as an excuse for not
paying. There was only one place to achieve anything, and that was Brazil,
where the highest authority lay and where the means of payment existed. 3
  The necessity to make representations in Brazil had not escaped the
notice of the partners of Hope & Co. Indeed, they had realized this
immediately after the prince regent's departure, but correspondence with
faraway Rio de Janeiro, where the situation was still confused and ob-
scure, would certainly be a slow procedure and would in all probability
produce little result. To get anywhere, it was vital to have a capable and
reliable confidential agent on the spot, who could represent the Hope-
Baring interests in person at the Court. In February 1808, Hieronymus
Sillem, a partner in the house of Matthiessen & Sillem of Hamburg, put the
partners in touch with a man who appeared to possess the qualities
required. This was Kieckhoefer, a merchant, who at that moment resided
in Hamburg. Kieckhoefer stated that he had lived in Portugal for many
years, during which he had learned to speak the language fluently and had
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

met many influential Portuguese. Now that Brazil was open for all
foreign trade, he foresaw good opportunities for himself, especially in the
trade in Silesian linen, and was planning to emigrate with his family to
Rio de Janeiro and to establish a merchant house there. To this end, he
was anxious to obtain the support of three first-class houses, in Hamburg,
Amsterdam and London, and Matthiessen & Sillem, Hope & Co. and
Baring Brothers & Co. seemed to him to be the most reliable.!
  After lengthy discussions with Kieckhoefer, the partners of Hope & Co.
agreed to invest jointly with Barings a sum of 60,000 marks banco in the
new house, on condition that Matthiessen & Sillem also participated. In
return, Kieckhoefer would have to undertake to represent Hope and
Baring to the best of his ability in negotiations with the Portuguese
government in Rio de Janeiro.2 In the latter part of July 1808, Kieck-
hoefer, travelling on a Russian passport, journeyed via Wismar to Sweden,
where he embarked at Gothenburg for the crossing to England. He made
a good impression on the Barings, to whom Hope had introduced him,
although his plans were considered 'rather premature.' While in London,
Kieckhoefer also had a meeting with the Portuguese envoy to England,
Don Domingo de Souza Coutinho, a brother of the former Minister of
Finance and now, in Rio de Janeiro, the Prime Minister. As they parted,
the envoy casually requested him to enquire of Barings regarding the
position of the Portuguese loan, but without mentioning his name.
Evidently the envoy had reasons for not enquiring himself. 3
  Coutinho's attitude did not bode well for the success of the mission to
Brazil. Kieckhoefer and his family arrived in Rio de Janeiro at the end of
April 1809 after a voyage lasting fifty-two days. The city was inundated
with emigres who complained loudly of the intense heat and lack of
comfort, and Kieckhoefer did not find it easy to obtain accommodation.
His first task was to call upon the Prime Minister, who accorded him a
most friendly welcome and made a point of asking that his regards should
be transmitted to Labouchere. The purpose of these gestures became
plain during the ensuing discussion, in which the minister repeatedly
touched upon the theme of a new loan, but carefully avoided any refer-
ence to diamond shipments for the purposes of the existing one. When,
later, Kieckhoefer, ill with malaria, hurried to the Prime Minister's office
upon receiving a report that diamonds to a value of one million crusados
were to be exported, Coutinho curtly requested him to make an offer for
the parcel, adding that he could have the stones in exchange for drafts for
half the estimated value. In the absence of instructions from Baring and
Hope, Kieckhoefer was obliged to let the parcel gO.4

                                   416
                    THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

Faced with the news that fresh consignments of diamonds would soon be
arriving in England, Hope and Baring set about dealing with the problem
of how they should react. Consultation between the two had become easier
since John Williams Hope's return to England in the autumn of 1808.
Alexander Baring felt that it would be best to feign innocence, to simply
enquire of the Portuguese envoy whether the diamonds had arrived and,
if so, to express readiness to accept them 'and transmit them to their
ulterior destination.' 1 He decided against threatening to recoup the
overdue payments from the loan which the English government was to
make to Portugal, on the grounds that no official support for such an
action could be expected.
  As usual, Labouchere took a more optimistic view. He pointed out that
the necessary steps had been taken to ensure the payment of interest and
principal at the end of the year, and that the balance to be claimed was
scarcely worth worrying about. Provided that no political difficulties
arose, and that agreement could be reached with the tobacco lessees
regarding their arrears, he was even prepared to consider a new loan in
the following year. 2 There was something fishy about the diamond
deliveries, but Labouchere did not regard this as a machination aimed at
repudiating responsibility for the loan, but rather as a desperate attempt
to obtain funds on the spot. 'Want knows no tie or law,' he wrote. More-
over, he felt sure that the British government, at whose instigation the loan
had been arranged, would not permit Portugal to be discredited for the
sake of so small a sum. 3
  The consignment of diamonds about which Kieckhoefer had written,
and which totalled 50,000 carats, had arrived in England in September
1809, but had remained in the custody of Don Domingo de Souza
Coutinho pending a reply from Rio de Janeiro concerning the loan
statements which Kieckhoefer had handed to the Prime Minister. Baring
offered to open a separate account for the envoy in the meantime, if he
was prepared to surrender the diamonds to the house, and even to allow
him immediate advances on the stones. When these had been sold, the
balance of the proceeds would be placed at his disposal, and he would be
free to use all or part of this for Portugal's creditors, according to his
instructions from Rio de Janeiro.4
  Don Domingo declined the proposal, but he offered Baring 25,000
carats which he had had valued and made up into collections, at an
average of 3 pounds sterling per carat. He wished to postpone the sale
of the other half until the Court's decision became known, but in the event
of his receiving permission to sell, Baring would again be given first refusal. 5

                                      4 17
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

In the view of Alexander Baring, the envoy was asking too high a price.
Hope's accounts showed that the carat price in Amsterdam had averaged
only 241- guilders in the preceding months. 1 Sir Francis Baring had earlier
informed Don Domingo in writing that in England no absolute valuation
could be given for the whole consignment, 'as there is no person in this
country who understands the trade sufficiently for the purpose of forming
a general assortment, in order to establish an average value; the Jews and
Jewellers being very little better than shopkeepers in that respect.'2 Alex-
ander Baring accordingly refused to advance more than 2 pounds
sterling per carat and, moreover, insisted that the stones should be sold by
Hope in Amsterdam. 3 The envoy, however, would not go below 3
pounds sterling, and he announced his intention to commence marketing
the stones in parcels of 2,000 carats a week later in order to discover the
true price. Baring had until then to buy the whole consignment if he
wished. 4 An agitated Alexander Baring replied by return of post, warning
of the harm which such fragmentary sales would inflict upon the diamond
trade. To John Williams Hope, Baring unburdened himself concerning
Don Domingo's attempts at intimidation and the tone of his letters,
which Baring described as 'civilly impertinent' and 'not a little provoking.'
He had, he wrote, been tempted 'to treat him rather roughly,' but, remem-
bering the unfortunate sequel to Labouchere's handling of Spoors, he
had decided against it.5
  Thus, moderation prevailed-temporarily at least, and under pressure
from John Williams Hope-and minds were centred on making the best
possible showing to the government in Rio de Janeiro.6 This, however,
did not imply that no further steps were taken in England, least of all
when it became known that Don Domingo had carried out his threat and
had sold half the consignment to the house of Goldsmith in London. 7 John
Williams Hope's reaction was to inform the Secretary of State for War and
the Colonies, Lord Liverpool, of the situation and to promise to furnish
him with a brief summary of the loan affair. B Alexander Baring attacked
Don Domingo's assertion that no official instructions had been received
from Rio de Janeiro. This could not be attributed to the absence of official
documents, for his brother in Rio de Janeiro had received them all.
There was also the point that the two houses were keenly interested in the
future of the small case of diamonds which had reached the envoy a short
time before. If Don Domingo dared to allege that Barings had offered
only 2 pounds per carat, he would be guilty of a manifest untruth, for
'our offer was to advance to that amount in anticipation, accounting to
you for any surplus they might produce.' 9
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

In spite of all Alexander Baring's good intentions, the correspondence
became so rancorous that on 18th January 1810 Don Domingo was
moved to write to Sir Francis Baring, 'of whose friendship and civility to
me I have never failed to receive constant proofs.' Much as he regretted
it, the envoy said, he would in future be compelled to ignore letters from
Barings concerning diamonds unless they bore Sir Francis's signature,
since there was someone in that house who signed his letters on behalf of
the firm but 'who does not know how to write to me.'
  At the moment when the conflict between Alexander Baring and Don
Domingo came to a head, the long-awaited instructions from Rio de
Janeiro were on their way. Having been kept on a line for some time with
the statement that the government was still studying the papers, Kieck-
hoefer was suddenly informed by the Prime Minister that he had in-
structed his brother to reach a settlement with Hope and Baring. 1 To
have achieved so little after dancing attendance on the government for so
long was hard, and Kieckhoefer's letters reveal an unmistakable note of
bitterness. In his view, the principal cause lay in the fact that he lacked
the status of an official negotiator for the two houses and was thus not in
a position to put his foot down at critical moments. The lack of appre-
ciation for all his efforts dismayed him, and he complained of insinuations
on the part of Barings to the effect that he had neglected the matter of the
loan. 2 It is true that little confidence in the newly fledged linen merchant
was forthcoming from that quarter: Alexander Baring described him to
John Williams Hope as 'more of an Intriguant than a Merchant,' thereby
revealing his fear that Kieckhoefer's tendency to speculate might well
result in the rapid disapparance of the loaned capital. 3
  In essence, the outcome of Kieckhoefer's discussions with the ministers
was that the latter would deem it a great favour if Baring and Hope would
agree to take over the loan of 600,000 pounds sterling which the Portu-
guese Court had obtained from the British government in April 1810.
References to the old loan were limited to a few hollow phrases and vague
promises. But the friendly note which had been sounded at the outset was
fading, and by 29th May, when Kieckhoefer had an audience with De
Souza Coutinho, it had completely disappeared, to be replaced by a
tirade against the two houses, especially Hope & Co. Why, the Prime
Minister asked, had these gentlemen not used their powerful influence on
Bonaparte to have the balance of the loan paid while the French occupied
Portugal? He had counted on that, and had acted accordingly. As for the
diamonds, in spite of all Alexander Baring's assertions the fact remained
that Goldsmiths in London had offered 3 pounds sterling per carat.

                                    4 19
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

He would not dream of handing over the diamonds to Hope, thereby
running the additional risk of their being confiscated. It was impossible
to do business with Baring, for there had lately been so much evidence of his
'atrocious behaviour' that no government could continue to deal with him.!
  The Prime Minister's conduct showed very plainly that news of the row
between Alexander Baring and Don Domingo had filtered through to
Rio de Janeiro. The Lord Treasurer, Count d' Aguiar, showed Kieckhoefer
a letter in which Don Domingo stated that Baring planned to use the
diamonds solely for the repayment of the old loan, and that they were
therefore not to be surrendered to him under any condition. 2 By thus
distorting the truth, the envoy succeeded in having a 17,500-carat parcel
of fine stones, which were for the purpose of repaying the British govern-
ment's loan, consigned to him and not to Baring. He was, however,
instructed to negotiate with Baring on a new loan of 4-500,000 pounds
sterling, the securities for which would be those which served for the
original loan. 3
  Following the explosion in January, those in London had come to the
conclusion that good relations with the Portuguese envoy had to be
maintained at all costs. Sir Francis Baring, to whom so many urgent
appeals had already been made, was obviously the best person to initiate a
reconciliation. In this he was supported by Labouchere, who, through a
fortunate combination of circumstances, was just then heading for
England. The semi-independent Kingdom of Holland was viewed with
growing disfavour by Napoleon for being insufficiently strict in its imple-
mentation of the Continental System. In the autumn of 1809, the emperor
summoned his brother to Paris, where he informed him of his plan to
annex Holland. Louis Napoleon, whom fear had endowed with inge-
nuity, developed the theory that the English would go to any lengths to
prevent the annexation, and that the mere prospect of it would be enough
to bring them to the negotiating table. Napoleon encouraged him in this
notion and advised him to bring the issue discreetly to the notice of the
English : 'You have an opportunity, for in Amsterdam you have nego-
tiators who are associated with English houses. So take advantage of it,
and show the English the threat which hangs over them,' he is reported to
have said. 4
  The emperor's utterances were clear beyond any doubt, and it was not
surprising that the mission was entrusted to Labouchere, who had both
business and family ties with England. On 5th February 1810 he landed at
Yarmouth; a month later he returned to Holland, having achieved com-
paratively little.

                                    420
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

From the point of view of a resumption of negotiations with Don
Domingo, however, Labouchere's presence in England was of great value.
As one who was familiar with the conditions of the loan and its history,
he was an ideal partner for Sir Francis in defending the interests of the
two houses and straightening out matters distorted by emotions, the more
so since he was not handicapped by recrimination. By the beginning of
April, relations had improved to the point where serious negotiation on a
plan to repay the old debt became feasible.
  In the view of Alexander Baring, it would be best if all outstanding
claims on the Portuguese Court were incorporated into the loan granted
to the Court by the British government. There would then be no problem
concerning the arrival of diamonds.! As an alternative, Sir Francis
Baring suggested that, as previously, the two houses should receive the
diamonds and should assume responsibility for payments of interest and
principal. If the proceeds of the diamond sales were inadequate for the
purpose, the houses could advance the deficit up to the full value of the
diamonds deposited with them. In any case, the envoy would have to
limit his search for a solution to England, and not look to Holland for a
fresh loan. 2
  Early in August 1810 a serious counterproposal from Don Domingo
imparted relief to the negotiations. He intimated that he did not wish to
concern himself with Hope's existing claims on the tobacco lessees: these
were matters for the lessees, the prince regent and the houses concerned
to settle among themselves. He was prepared to furnish the monies
required for the interest and principal payments due on 31st December
1810 in two instalments, the first on the due date and the second on 31st
March 181 I. The two houses would be required to effect the final pay-
ments in respect of the loan on the due date, 31st December 18I1, but
they would not be reimbursed immediately. The envoy requested an
extension until 31st December 1812 to give time for the repayment to be
made from the proceeds of the sale of colonial produce which was to be
sold in France and Holland. Baring and Hope were required to approach
the British and French governments for licences to import the produce. 3
  Alexander Baring met this with yet another proposal in which great
emphasis was placed on the claims against the tobacco lessees in Lisbon.
This was important in view of the fact that the prince regent had, at last,
ordered the lessees to meet their obligations. 4 Quintella had earlier written
to Hope, offering, subject to the approval of the prince regent, to send the
remainder of the stock of tea, which had arrived in 1808, in part-settle-
ment of the debt. 5 In May 1810, Labouchere wrote to the French Minister

                                    421
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

of Home Affairs, the Count of Montalivet, concerning the possibility of
importing the consignment, consisting of 2,000 chests, for this purpose. 1
  Regarding the payments due on 31st December of the years 1810 and
1811, Baring expressed his willingness to accept De Souza's drafts on the
Portuguese government's London agents, Lucena and De Paiva. The
diamonds which had been mortgaged to the two houses would then be
placed at the disposal of the Portuguese government. 2 No reply to this
proposal was forthcoming. In a letter to Labouchere dated 15th October
1810, Alexander Baring commented: 'Mr. de Souza continues amusing us
with plans and projects about tho: Portugal concern without it having been
yet in our power to bring him to anything specific.' He also gave the
reason for this galanty show: poverty in Rio, in London, in Lisbon,
everywhere. The summer of 1810 had brought Portugal even greater
disasters than the previous year. Under pressure from Massena's offen-
sive, the British commander-in-chief, Wellesley, had gradually withdrawn
his troops to prepared positions at Torres Vedras, a little to the north of
Lisbon. For the unfortunate populace, this meant being exposed once
again to the miseries of war. 3 Under such circumstances, no useful
purpose would be served by irrevocably linking the payments at the end
of the year to the claims against the tobacco lessees: 'Arguments you
know are unavailing where there is nothing,' Baring explained to Labou-
chere. 4 If the houses simply stood their ground, De Souza would be forced
to pay up, because he could not afford to be in arrears at the end of
the year and thus gamble his country's creditworthiness. Conversely, it
would be wise 'to square our claims at last to his means,' and thus avoid
driving the man to distraction; to obtain a fresh admission of the debt
and to have it brought to a state of liquidation would be a major step
forward.
  Baring proved to have been a good judge of the situation, for on 13th
December 1810 the envoy, on behalf of the prince regent, signed a new
agreement with Hope and Baring. In this, the houses jointly undertook
to advance to the Court the sum of the payment due on 31st December,
totalling cf 1,700,000. As an earnest for the repayment of the advance,
Don Domingo handed over 30,000 pounds sterling and a parcel of dia-
monds weighing 44-45,000 carats and with an estimated value of 100,000
pounds sterling. The balance of 50,000 pounds sterling was to be met
from the sale of diamonds, which were to be consigned exclusively to
Hope and Baring until such time as the Portuguese loan and the various
sums advanced to the Portuguese government by the two houses had been
completely liquidated. The choice of market and method of sale of the

                                   422
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

  diamonds would be matters for De Souza to determine, but it was
 stipulated that if no instructions were forthcoming from him one year
 after the arrival of a parcel, the houses would be free to choose their
  methods of sale. The agreement also provided that Hope and Baring
 would use their best endeavours to secure licences from the British and
 French governments for the importation into Napoleon's Europe of
 colonial produce from Brazil, the proceeds of which would be used for
 the payment of interest and principal on 31st December 18II. Should
 this plan fail, the houses would do their best to secure the approval of the
 bondholders for the capitalization of the final instalment of principal, at
 an annual rate of interest of 5 %. Finally, the agreement upheld in full the
 guarantee given by the tobacco lessees, and gave Hope and Baring a free
 hand to obtain the arrears from this source.!
   It was with justification that Alexander Baring reported: 'We have got
 more out of de Souza than I expected.' 2 Labouchere, he knew, would be
 less than satisfied with many details of the agreement, 'but we could not
 do better.' Indeed, they could not have done better: on one side of the
 scales lay an advance of 50,000 pounds sterling on 31st December 1810
 and the payment of interest at cf 80,350 per annum until the final liqui-
dation of the debt, and on the other the restitution, supported by numer-
ous signatures, of the diamond monopoly.3 Whether the monopoly would
benefit Hope in Amsterdam remained to be seen, for in the second half of
 1810 Napoleon had modified his economic strategy against England and
now occasionally allowed the import of colonial produce upon payment
of a special duty of 50 % ad valorem. If the diamonds were to be classed
as 'colonial produce,' and Amsterdam eliminated as a market, the houses
could always fall back on London for the lion's share of the sales, and
leave the rest to smugglers. With Portugal in such a piteous state, the re-
established guarantee by the tobacco lessees was of greater significance
for the future than the present, and it was a good thing that Baring had
not made the negotiation of the agreement contingent upon the payments
in Lisbon.
  The news of Barings' success reached Hope & Co. on Christmas Day
1810, a few days after Labouchere had received a new passport for Eng-
land from Lebrun, Duke of Plaisance, Arch-Treasurer of the Empire and,
since July 1810, Lieutenant General of Holland, now annexed to France. 4
Agreement having been reached with Don Domingo, the urgency of
Laboucbere's journey to London had diminished and he was free to
devote all his attention to the interest and principal payments due on the
last day of the year. This was no sinecure, for Amsterdam, like other

                                    42 3
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

European centres, had been in the grip of a serious financial crisis since
the autumn of 1810. But in spite of the acute shortage of money, Labou-
chere succeeded in assembling the funds for the Portuguese payments and
others, and on 27th December he wrote with just pride: '. .. notwith-
standing the penury and the shortness of the notice ... the payment is
announced to the public together with those for Russia and Louisiana,
together seven million florins which must assist the circulation mate-
rially.' 1
  By late January 181 I, matters had been settled to the point where
Labouchere was able to turn his attention to his journey. Finding it
impossible to obtain a passage from a Dutch port, he journeyed to
France and crossed from there. He was given a passport on condition
that he visited Paris on his return and gave the emperor a reliable and
unbiassed report on the political situation in England. 2
  In a tragic sense, Labouchere's arrival in England was opportune, for
shortly beforehand, on 25th February, the death had occurred of Henry
Hope. Much of Labouchere's stay was taken up with discussion of mat-
ters relating to the continued existence of the house. Having reached
agreement with John Williams Hope (who now called himself John Hope)
on the measures to be adopted, he departed for the Continent at the end
of April. 3 As agreed, he travelled via Paris to report to Napoleon.
  While in Paris, Labouchere took the opportunity to write to the Minister
of Finance, the Duke of Gaeta, requesting approval for the importation of
diamonds and colonial produce from Brazil. He informed the minister
that although he had the emperor's permission to import diamonds into
Holland on his homeward journey, the London agents of the Portuguese
government had refused to part with the stones because they feared that
these would be subject to the high import duty levied on colonial produce.
In the letter, he requested total exemption from import duties for this
article, 'and to allow us to authorize our correspondents in London to
accept them on this basis and to send them over when the opportunity
arises.' He also asked for import licences for Brazilian produce such as
sugar, cotton, hides and dyewood, the sale of which would provide the
funds necessary for the payments due on 31st December 18II. He sug-
gested that the French government would welcome the opportunity thus
created to export certain French products to Brazil, 'and of creating
there a demand which will imperceptibly make those regions more
directly dependent upon France.' 4
  Pending the reply to his letter, Labouchere journeyed to Amsterdam,
where he proceeded to reorganize the house in the manner agreed. With
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

 the death of Henry Hope and what amounted to aloofness on the part of
 John Hope, it was necessary to infuse some new blood into the firm, and
to this end William Gordon Coesvelt, Pierre Firmin Lestapis and Adriaan
van der Hoop were made directors of the firm. Affairs having thus been
 satisfactorily settled, the ways parted, Labouchere leaving for St. Peters-
 burg to attend to some very urgent matters relating to the Russian loans,
while Coesvelt travelled to London on family business and also for the
purpose of collecting the diamonds which had been withheld from Labou-
chere. Although a letter from the French Minister of Home Affairs, stating
that diamonds imported into France would be taxed only on the basis of
their weight, had arrived on the eve of Coesvelt's departure, Barings
sought confirmation of the fact from the house in Amsterdam. 1
  Whereas it was clearly difficult to convince Barings that reliance could
be placed on the reduced scale of import duty, it proved an impossible
task where the Portuguese were concerned. In spite of all assurances and
the production of official French documents, the Portuguese government
agents in London persisted in their mistrust. Ultimately a solution was
reached in which the two houses purchased the parcel of diamonds then
in London at 47 shillings per carat, thereby departing from the customary
practice of sale on commission. As all risks were now borne by Hope and
Baring, and as it was difficult to obtain cover, the parcel of 24,191 carats
in Coesvelt's possession when he left London on 19th October was
uninsured. Fortunately he arrived safely in Amsterdam, where the stones
were gratefully accepted by Insinger & Co. Despite the scarcity of dia-
monds at the time, the sale was disappointing. The parcel contained many
third and fourth grade stones, whereas the demand was principally for the
highest grades. 2 It was obvious, Hope and Insinger both wrote to Barings,
that Goldsmiths in London had put their own interests first when sorting
the stones. 3 The high import duties levied by the Russians on goods from
Napoleon's realm -a symptom of the growing estrangement between the
two empires-had brought the export of diamonds to Russia almost to a
standstill, while in Amsterdam itself the absence of regular consignments
since 1809 had produced a decline in the numbers of cleavers and polishers,
and with this a fall in the demand for diamonds. 4
  In the agreement of 13th December 1810, Don Domingo de Souza had
made the redemption of the last 1,607 bonds on 31st December I8II
contingent upon the importation into France of colonial produce from
Brazil. The request which Labouchere had submitted to the Minister of
Finance on this subject, and the subsequent approaches to the government
by Baguenault, however, were fruitless, and thus the holders of the bonds
                   THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

had to be content with 5% interest.! Early in 1812 Labouchere left for
Paris to make a final appeal on the subject to a number of ministers who
were well disposed towards him.2 But this attempt, too, failed, for the
emperor rejected the request 'pour des motifs d'une importance majeure.'3
  Little progress had meanwhile been made in regard to the final settle-
ment of the Portuguese loan. At the end of August, Barings wrote to say
that, in the absence of a suitable opportunity, they had not dared to send
the diamonds: despite the official French import permit, the house
trusted only 'the very best hands.' 4 This news caused immense disappoint-
ment in Amsterdam, for Insinger & Co. were rapidly getting through
their stock and, in contrast to the previous year, the smaller stones were
fetching extremely good prices. 5 In February 1813 Insinger appealed
urgently for fresh stocks, adding that the market was 'extremely bare' and
that it would be a catastrophe if the polishers, who had so courageously
started up again a short time before, should again find themselves without
work. According to Ruben Harmsz. Keyzer, Insinger's confidential
representative, the firm could easily sell between one and one and a half
million guildersworth of diamonds annually. 6
  In the absence of the diamonds, the problem of meeting the interest
payment due on 31st December 1812 bore increasingly heavily on the
managers in Amsterdam, for John Hope allowed them very little freedom
in the financial sense. On 20th October, after repeated requests and on
the advice of Alexander Baring, he gave instructions for the interest to be
paid. He was, he wrote, relying on the available funds being adequate for
the purpose, 'the more so as almost one half of this sum will be credited to
us.' 7
  After John Hope's death in February 1813, his heirs transferred the
partnership and all pertinent matters to Alexander Baring, upon whom
the decision whether or not to pay the interest on the Portuguese loan
thus devolved. In reply to a question from the managers in Amsterdam in
the autumn of 1813, he consented to the payment, but said that the
advertisement should be postponed for a little longer 'for caution's sake.' 8
This circumspection is the more understandable if one realizes that
Baring's letter was written on 14th October 1813, a day or two before the
Battle of Leipzig, which was decisive for the whole of Europe. At that
moment it was impossible to predict Holland's future with any degree of
certainty. He did not run a major financial risk, for the diamonds con-
tinued to arrive from Brazil, providing him with an equivalent security. In
selling them, however, he did not use the services of the Amsterdam
house, and such of the stones as found their way to the market there were
                  THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN

bought in London by houses such as Braunsberg. The reborn Amsterdam
house of Hope & Co., headed by P.C.Labouchere, Sillem and two of the
managers of the former firm, A.van der Hoop and P.F.Lestapis, com-
menced its existence on 1st January 1815, but it was not until 24th No-
vember of that year that Baring could bring himself to entrust the sale of
the Portuguese diamonds to the new house, which under the arrangement
accepted full responsibility for any profits or losses which might ensue
from future operations connected with the liquidation of the loan. 1
  Matters having been thus arranged, the partners announced that the
remaining 1,607 bonds would be redeemed on 31st December 1815.
Shortly before the end of the year the first consignment of diamonds,
totalling 20,000 carats, arrived, and this was followed by a parcel of
similar size in 1816. For the first time in years it was possible to write
down the Portuguese loan.2 In 1817, the diamond shipments totalled
only 20,000 carats, which fact prompted the partners to remind the
Ministry of Finance in Lisbon that a reduction in supplies would result in a
reduction in the ranks of diamond polishers and thus to a reduction in
demand for the gems. 3
  Hope's claims against the tobacco lessees, which dated from the annual
accounts for 1808 and 1809, remained outstanding until the end of 1818,
when the arrival of a new consignment of diamonds enabled the Portu-
guese loan to be finally written off. 4 The final accounts for all the dia-
monds could not be submitted until the following year, the partners
wrote, 'but we have grounds for hoping that the result will be such as to
move the Court to continue to accord to our market the preference which
it has justly acquired above all others by its very organization, by its
connexions and its superior avenues for marketing, and by all the other
local advantages which it would not be appropriate for us to mention in
detail here.' 5
  The fact that, in a period of malaise in Holland, such things could
truthfully be written about the Amsterdam diamond market and the
branch of industry which was allied to it, was due in large measure to the
loan which just then was drawing to a close.
Cochineal
                         CHAPTER FIFTEEN

                   COCHINEAL IN THE
                    PATRIOTIC ERA
                A SPECULATION WHICH WENT AWRY


 'The spirit of emancipation is gaining ground every day and operates in
 all countries in accordance with the genius of the people,' said Henry
 Hope in a letter of 9th August 1787 to the French banker Laborde de
 Mereville. In Hope's view, the French government was still so strong
 that it had no reason to fear the evil consequences of the development;
 but in the Republic the picture was gloomier: 'here ... everything has
 been upset, and it can only end in absolute tyranny, whether by the
Prince or by the people-the inevitable outcome of the complete anarchy
which reigns today.' 1
  As explained in the introductory chapter, the confrontation between the
Patriots and the supporters of the prince reached a climax in the summer
of 1787; in Amsterdam, indeed, it led to a complete battle. Surrounded by
the tumult of war, Henry Hope had remained at his post and had con-
centrated on trade-'the neglected issue amid all this confusion'-which
had stagnated since the end of the fourth war against England in 1784.
Hope, however, consoled himself with the thought that the malaise could
not be fatal, for 'trade is frequently ailing, but never dies.' 2
  The truth of this statement was demonstrated by Henry Hope himself
when he seized upon the slump to embark on a speculation in a com-
modity which, in his view, had reached rock-bottom price and, because
it was scarce, could be controlled with relative ease. This was cochineal, a
valuable carmine dyestuff produced in Mexico by drying the bodies of
females of the cochineal insect, which are found on certain types of cacti.
The annual harvest or raeoTla was transported from the interior to Vera
Cruz and shipped from there to Cadiz, where it arrived between January
and the end of June. Anyone who succeeded in tracing and buying up the
stock after June could be sure of a free hand until the following year.
Cochineal also possessed a high intrinsic value and could be kept for a
long time. These factors made it attractive as an investment affording
protection against a contingent 'revolution in public affairs, which
naturally diminishes the value oflanded and funded property.' 3
  According to Henry Hope, the stocks of cochineal throughout Europe
amounted to no more than 1,750 bales or seroons, and were distributed

                                    43 1
                 COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

as follows:
430 seroons in the hands oflarge importers or 'first hand' in Cadiz;
433 seroons held by traders or 'second hand' in Cadiz;
450 seroons in London;
437 seroons in Amsterdam. 1
  Users' stocks, he believed, had dwindled almost to nothing, for with
prices falling, buyers had covered only their immediate needs. The new
racolta would be only mediocre, because the continuing low prices of
recent years had produced a sharp decline in the breeding and collection
of the cochineal insect. 2 Thus, the slightest movement in trade would
rapidly send prices upwards. Hope planned to buy as much cochineal as
possible-at least three-quarters of the available stock-at the low price.
He would place his orders in such a manner that purchases were made
simultaneously, thus preventing any warning signals being passed be-
tween centres. In this way he hoped to secure 1,200-1,500 seroons with-
out forcing up the price. He estimated the investment at I -t-2 million
guilders.
  Hope had written to both Laborde de Mereville and his London asso-
ciates, the house of John and Francis Baring & Co., concerning the specu-
lation, but Laborde showed little interest and so further negotiations were
limited to Barings. 3
  There was no element of risk, Hope argued, for the extremely low prices
which persisted in the face of low stocks, and which were 'occasioned
greatly, at least in this country, by political fears and great scarcity of
money and the general depressed state of trade,' afforded the certainty
that no losses would result from this enterprise, even though the high
expectations were not being fulfilled. 4
  The house in Cadiz which Henry Hope proposed to entrust with the
purchases, Thomas Ryan & Co., was 'perfectly au fait of the article'; it
could therefore grade the purchased bales according to quality, and send
the finest grades, which were suitable for the London market, to Baring
and the balance to Amsterdam. If necessary, some could be sent to Mar-
seilles or Rouen.
  Henry Hope explicitly sought Baring's views on the speculation as such,
and enquired as to the sum which that house was prepared to invest. He
also asked for information regarding estimated stocks of cochineal in
London and the quantity which Barings felt they could buy up without
forcing up the price. The correspondence between the two houses
breathes an intimacy which is decidedly lacking in the letter to Laborde.
The operations in Amsterdam were to be handled by Robert Vonte, 'our

                                   43 2
                 COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

 little friend ... and you may be assured they will be executed in char-
 acter.'! Baring could expect to receive a separate letter from him, and
 Henry Hope was confident that in this Voilte would be able to convince
 Barings of the solidity of the whole undertaking. Although it was cus-
 tomary for the larger houses to employ brokers in their transactions, and
 although speculations of this nature were founded on their knowledge of
the market and the commodity, it was not usual to accord them so much
influence or so great a say. The departure from this principle in the
 cochineal affair can only be explained by Voilte's exceptional qualities
and the friendship which bound him to the partners of Hope & CO.2
   With the arrival of a letter containing Baring's consent to take a one-
fourth share in the speculation, the way was open. Thomas Ryan & Co.
received instructions to purchase immediately as much cochineal as they
could find. For the ordinary Amsterdam quality, they were empowered to
pay 65-67 ducats per arroba (a unit equal to 2J! Amsterdam pounds) and
proportionately more for the finer grades, which were suitable for the
English and French markets. Of prime importance at the outset were the
first hand stocks which, if necessary, could be purchased for cash. Ryan
was provided with the necessary funds by way of letters of credit on two
Paris houses, although he was not permitted to despatch these until after
completion of the purchases. 3 This arrangement ensured that no one
would discover the whys and wherefores of the credits until after Ryan
had made his move. Urgent letters could be addressed to Boyd Kerr &
Co. in Paris, while normal correspondence, in a plain envelope, was to be
addressed to the Administrateur des postes in Antwerp. This would
reduce the delivery time by a few days and also afford greater secrecy.
  Hope anticipated that Ryan would complete his purchases in ten to twelve
days, and this period was borne in mind when despatching the pur-
chasing orders to Rouen and Marseilles, two markets which, together
with St.Petersburg, were brought into the speculation after further con-
sultation. 4 Voilte felt that Baring, in London, should start immediately
but act with the utmost caution, 'as your place is the most difficult and
most susceptible of sensation on any transaction of moment.' In Amster-
dam, 'where a better harvest is more probable than anywhere else,' and
where secrecy was so much more easily maintained, the offensive would
be opened ten days later, on the 27th.
  The choice of purchasing agent in Rouen fell on P. Bournissien Des-
preaux et Fils, with whom Hope had earlier done business in dyestuffs. The
partners of this house were instructed to buy up between two-thirds and
three-quarters of the available cochineal in such a manner as not to in-

                                   433
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

fluence the price. As Hope planned to resell the cochineal in Rouen, the
agents were informed that commissions and other charges were to be kept
to a minimum. 1 The order for purchases in Marseilles went to Veuve
Councler et Fils Aine. As at Rouen, Hope estimated the stocks here to
total 150-200 seroons, although the price limits indicated to Councler
were considerably lower, namely 15-15-! livres per pound in Marseilles
against 20-21-! livres in Rouen. 2 According to Hope, this was 'as near as
possible the pair with 25-! to 26-! in loco.' This was his way of saying that a
pound of cochineal costing, say, 15 livres in Marseilles would have to
fetch 25-!-26-! schellingen in Amsterdam in order to cover freight, insurance
and other charges. These par values could not be stated precisely, how-
ever, for account had naturally to be taken of current prices in the various
markets, which in turn were influenced by factors such as demand,
turnover and trading customs. 3 As in the plan for simultaneous purchases,
the main aim was to prevent speculative sales between markets. The
order sent to Ryan on 17th August 1787, it was estimated, would take
three weeks and would thus arrive on 7th September. News of Hope's
transactions in Rouen and Marseilles would not reach Cadiz until the 22nd
at the earliest, so Ryan would have fourteen days in which to complete his
purchases. As an added precaution, the letters to Bournissien and Coun-
cler were held back until 30th August. If we assume that an urgent letter
to Rouen took five to six days, and one to Marseilles ten to eleven days,
we see that it was feasible to complete the purchases at those places by
 25th September without forcing the market. 4
  In St. Petersburg, the house of Sutherlands & Bock was chosen as buying
 agent. The principal partner in this firm was Richard Sutherland. He was
 banker to the Russian Court, but engaged in trading activities through
the house which bore his name. Hope estimated that between 300 and 400
 seroons of cochineal were available there. After purchasing the stock,
 Sutherlands & Bock would arrange for storage pending instructions for
 resale. They were instructed to look first for superior grades, 'such as is in
 general imported from London,' then for cochineal from Amsterdam, and
 lastly that from Cadiz.5
  Sutherland had since the Spring of 1787 increasingly channelled trans-
 actions relating to the Russian Crown through Hope & Co. Their con-
 nexion formed a most pleasant basis for combining normal business with
 the cochineal operation. Sutherland, in his role as Court Banker, could
 take over the drafts which Sutherlands & Bock were to draw on Hope,
 and use these for his remittances to Hope. This would not only ensure
 secrecy, but would also bolster up the rate of exchange of the rouble. 6

                                     434
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA

In order to complete the circle of market control, it was decided to bring
 Hamburg into the speculation. As Hope had no knowledge of prices or
 stocks of cochineal there, instructions were sent to the elderly Beerend
 Roosen to purchase 'up to the last market price known to you' or, if
 necessary, up to 4 % above this. In contrast to St. Petersburg, preference
 was to be given to cochineal imported direct from Cadiz, but 'none of
 that which they adulterate, sift and make up for the Russian market;
 however, we have nothing against that which has been sent from repu-
 table houses in London, and under no circumstances any from Jews.' 1
  By the beginning of September, all the purchasing instructions which
 Hope and Baring considered necessary to secure the lion's share of the
 cochineal available in Europe had been issued. The extent of this share,
 however, had risen substantially since Henry Hope had launched his
 plan. Adding the estimated stocks at Marseilles, Rouen, St.Petersburg
 and Hamburg to the 1,750 seroons already referred to produced a total
 of 2,650 seroons, of which the speculators needed to acquire nearly 2,000
-an increase of more than 500 seroons. Obviously the preliminary infor-
mation had not been correct. We are left with the impression that Voute's
intense preoccupation with purchases of tea and his numerous journeys
abroad for that purpose adversely affected the preparations for the co-
chineal speculation.
  The stiff resistance put up by the Patriots in Amsterdam, which was
referred to in the introductory chapter-and which, as Messrs. Hope were
to discover, continued after the capitulation-sorely tried Henry Hope's
patience. Trade declined under the influence of the Prussian blockade of
all the major roads to Amsterdam, and auctions had to be postponed
'owing to the public unrest which at present occupies minds to the ex-
clusion of business.' 2 Practically no progress was made with the purchase
of cochineal either. The rumours of an early outbreak of hostilities be-
tween England and France, which radical elements in Amsterdam ex-
ploited in an attempt to keep up their spirits, greatly disturbed Henry
Hope: 'This event will bring about a very profound revolution in business
and will impart an infinite degree of lustre to our speculation, although
this was in no way motivated by that consideration; we should be very
sorry if it were to owe all its merit to a revolution so distressing to human-
ity.' 3
  Nevertheless, the prime objective was to get the flagging speculation into
motion again as quickly as possible. If the market was to be swept clean
in a single operation and without substantial price increases, speed was
imperative: the desired two-thirds or three-quarters of the stock must be

                                    435
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

acquired before the end of September. Cadiz, the fountainhead of the
speculation, was the focal point in this respect. On the 22nd of that month
-the agreed final date for his purchases-Ryan reported that he had ~e­
cured 658 seroons and I I I sobernales or half-seroons at prices within the
limits laid down. 1 He had done well, although he had let a consignment of
145 seroons held by the Five Gremios slip through his fingers by failing to
bid promptly even though the price had been well within his limits.2 Hope
viewed this as 'a terrible check in our speculation' and authorized Ryan
to go to 75 ducats per arroba in a final attempt to secure the consignment.
Hope found it extremely regrettable that Ryan had ignored 100 seroons
of very poor quality cochineal, for 'bad as it may be it may do us much
harm, more even than if it was of good quality, as under the name of
cochineal it diminishes the nominal quotation.' 3 And why had Ryan not
succeeded in securing the consignment from Prasca & Arbore? This was
now being shipped abroad, principally to London, where it would have to
be bought up at a high price, which implied that others would walk off
with a portion ofthe profit. 4
  Under such circumstances, a rapid completion of the buying programme
followed by the 'setting up' of selling prices was an impossibility. It was
not until 6th November that Ryan reported that he had secured the 145
seroons from the Five Gremios at 70 ducats per arroba. At this point he
held 1,005 seroons and I I I sobernales-almost the whole of the stock in
Cadiz, it was hoped, although there was no certainty of this because
Ryan's information had earlier proved to be incomplete and at times even
contradictory. Altogether the speculators now held twice as much
cochineal at Cadiz as they had anticipated buying there, but in spite of
this it transpired that more stocks existed in all sorts of unexpected places.
In many cases these were held by 'rich and tenacious Spaniards,' and it
required long and hard bargaining to persuade them to part with their
stocks, not all of which were fresh. 5
  Gradually it became clear that the speculators were busy saddling them-
selves with a dead stock of cochineal. This was anything but a pleasant
discovery, for Hope's plan was based on the assumption that the quantity
of cochineal existing in Europe was limited and scarcely covered the
annual consumption. Now that the true position had proved to be so
different, the dead stock would have to remain dead for the time being.
 Hope, however, remained confident that the damage which had been
suffered would be amply compensated by the profit when sales com-
menced. 'We think the Chapter of Events is very greatly in our favour,' he
wrote to Baring - but without specifying the events to which he referred. 6
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

In Amsterdam, too, matters were not going according to plan. On 21st
August 1787, Robert Voute had commenced to purchase 'little straggling
parcels' which fell outside the normal trade. The actual purchases in Am-
sterdam had been entrusted to the brokerage house of De Bruin Abois &
De Bruyn, but it was not long before Hope became as dissatisfied with
them as with Ryan. At the end of a campaign lasting a fortnight they had
secured only half the available stocks, leaving an opening for possible
counterspeculation. 1 If Hope had not felt a moral obligation, on grounds
of past connexions, to employ De Bruyn, with his narrow mind and
limited outlook, and instead had used 'our little friend,' the market would
have been emptied in one sweep! Early in September, Hope had got De
Bruyn to the point of agreeing to collaborate with Voute, but owing to
the political upheavals the results were still below expectations. Only with
the capitulation of Amsterdam did things start to move again. On 12th
October-Hope's unlucky day on the Stock Exchange-470 seroons were
bought at gradually rising prices. 2 As had been the case in Cadiz, how-
ever, small parcels continued to trickle in, and by the end of November
Hope's stock in Amsterdam totalled 600 seroons-nearly 50 % more than
the estimated total stock. 3
  In London, Barings completed their purchases in exemplary fashion.
On 4th September, when De Bruyn had with difficulty reached 200
seroons, the figure in London was 364, and by 28th September this had
risen to 550. The 'better harvest' which Hope had prophesied in Amster-
dam was in fact gathered in London. The phenomenon of the 'lurking
parcels' was as apparent there as in Amsterdam, and by the end of
November repeated ancillary purchases had brought Baring's stock to
nearly 800 seroons. 4
  Meanwhile, in Marseilles, Councler had shown himself to be made of
the right stuff. On loth September, the day on which Hope's letter
reached him, Councler was able to report the purchase of 123 seroons, all
within the prescribed price limits. Hope duly praised the 'mesures sages
et intelligentes' with which Councler had shown that he understood the
spirit of the instructions and had been capable of acting in accordance
with this. Proof of the wisdom of Councler's conduct lay in the absence
of any alarm in Marseilles, where his purchases were seen as an invest-
ment or simply as an abortive speculation, 'observing that there is little
sign of any boom in this article, which has been almost forgotten by the
commercial world.' 5 Councler had expressed some misgivings concerning
the port of Genoa, but Hope was able to give him every assurance that no
orders had been placed there because he, Hope, had been unable to

                                    437
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA

overcome his deep-rooted prejudice against Italian ports, particularly in
the case of an article such as cochineal, which could so easily be tampered
with.! Councler's decision to continue purchasing beyond the prescribed
period, and not to adhere too strictly to the estimated quantity of 200
seroons, similarly earned Hope's full approval. Councler was advised
that in the event of cochineal arriving from Leghorn or Genoa, he was
free to buy it and to use his discretion in the matter of price. When the
market neared exhaustion, he could buy up the balance at up to 20 %
above the limit, thereby establishing a datum point for the subsequent
resale. 2
  Bournissien Despreaux proved to be a weak link in the chain. Rouen was
not among the important markets for cochineal, and the stocks there were
so widely distributed that individual purchases were limited to very small
quantities. By the end of the set period Bournissien had secured only 40
seroons and, moreover, had gone above the limit for the greater part of
this.3 Worse still, these purchases, small as they were, had quickly
sparked off rumours elsewhere. Sources in London, for example, were so
well informed as to be able to tell Hope exactly what had been bought and
what instructions the principals had given to Bournissien. This leak added
to the difficulties confronting Hope's brokers in Amsterdam: several
stockholders who had initially been willing to sell at the ruling price of
26 schellingen per pound now withdrew in anticipation of further de-
velopments. 4
  As had been the case in Cadiz, Hope was unable to discover just how
much cochineal existed in Rouen. As the correspondence with Bournissien
progressed, the quantities-and the prices-steadily increased. Reports
reaching Hope from another source referred to a counterspeculation in
Rouen. This, it was said, had been based on the outbreak of hostilities
between England and France, and when this failed to materialize the
holders had tried to get rid of their stocks to Hope at the best possible
price. In a letter to Baring, Hope voiced the suspicion that Bournissien
might be tempted to indulge in double-dealing, and might even have been
involved in the counterspeculation. 5
  According to Sutherlands & Bock, Hope's information regarding the
stocks of cochineal in St.Petersburg was inaccurate. There were, they said,
no more than 83 seroons, and the price was above Hope's limits. Hope
raised the limit, albeit with some reticence, but the relevant letter crossed
one from Sutherlands & Bock reporting a steady rise in prices in St. Peters-
burg, the effect of which was to exceed Hope's limits once again. Hope's
initial reaction was to refuse a further increase, 'as we only wish them a
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRI0TlC ERA

 happy riddance of what they have on hand at such prices,' but as it would
 doubtless benefit the resale operation 'to set up that market,' he finally
 consented. At the same time he expressed to Sutherlands & Bock his
surprise at such price increases 'when the article is in disgrace in every
 other place.' 1 But an even greater surprise was in store: in mid-Novem-
ber, Sutherlands & Bock reported that they had purchased 931 seroons,
two-thirds of which had been obtained at less than the lowest price
limits.2 There was now practically no more cochineal in Moscow, for 65
seroons or thereabouts had been sent to Astrakhan in exchange for raw
silk. The Russian markets were principally transit points for cochineal,
much of which found its way from them to the Islamic countries in Cen-
tral Asia where, in accordance with the Koran, only dyes made from scale
insects were used for dyeing fezzes and tarbooshes. 3
  The unexpected extension of the speculation, both in time and volume,
made it difficult to close off the account and draw up a resale plan. When
the original buying period expired at the end of September, 1,415t seroons
had been acquired; by early November the figure had risen to 2,288t, and
by the end of the month it was 2,860-1,000 seroons more than the total
stock originally thought to exist in Europe and twice the amount which
the speculators had anticipated purchasing. Baring's misgivings about 'the
final success of the undertaking' are understandable if one reflects that
by the end of November some 5 million guilders had been invested in
the speculation.
  Details of the sales plan were discussed with VOllte, 'as it will be chiefly
directed by him.' 4 Vollte expressed the view that the stocks held in Mar-
seilles and Rouen should be shipped to Amsterdam and London, and
those from Cadiz to Marseilles, 'to keep up the circulation and augment
the appearance of demand.' This, he maintained, could not be done if the
cochineal was resold where it lay. VOllte advised delaying the sale be-
cause, France having capitulated in the struggle involving the Patriot
party, small consignments from all manner of sources would be coming on
the market at the beginning of November. If the speculators were to
emerge simultaneously, it would appear that they, too, had gambled on a
war, and this would inevitably depress prices. Under these circumstances,
he advised buying up any cochineal offered at a reasonable figure and
then waiting, even though this implied a risk that the new racolta from
Mexico would meanwhile reach the market in Cadiz, 'which we must not
lay ourselves open to the effects of but on the best grounds.' 5
  The exporting of cochineal from France in the manner which VOllte had
envisaged was fraught with difficulties. Hope had instructed Councler to

                                    439
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

transfer half of the 250 seroons purchased into barrels and send these by
road to Amsterdam. But the Chambre de Commerce in Marseilles
protested at what it described as 'ransacking the local market.' 1 As the
regulations governing sea cargoes were less stringent, Hope made efforts
to charter vessels to take the bales to Amsterdam, but this, too, proved
far from easy, for sea transport in the stormy winter season was costly
and dangerous, added to which there were few regular sailings to Mar-
seilles from either Amsterdam or London. 2 Meanwhile, Councler was
instructed to commence repacking the cochineal, and was told that if the
Chamber of Commerce raised an alarm he could simply offer a quarter of
the stock at 24 livres per pound; he was also authorized to give an assur-
ance that parcels of 25-50 seroons could be ordered from Cadiz as
required. 3 Towards the end of December, in response to an urgent plea
from Councler, Hope abandoned his export plans. It is probable that
rising costs and growing stocks had made him more receptive to Coun-
cler's argument that 'drawing on the one hand and stocking up on the
other' was costly, and that it would be wiser to allow Councler to meet
the substantial demand for cochineal for export to the Greek archipelago,
Turkey and the Levant from his stock. There was also the point that
transport by sea would not be possible until February.4 Similar consider-
ations led to Bournissien being allowed to retain his stock, and to Rouen
being designated 'un depot pour fournir tous les environs.' 5
  The events in France having rendered Voilte's stock transfer system
impracticable, it became necessary to ship the cochineal lying in Cadiz
direct to London and Amsterdam. At first Voilte proposed sending 200
seroons of the best quality to London and a similar quantity of the lesser
quality to Amsterdam, but later he decided that Rotterdam would make a
better central storage point, since it could be shipped from there to other
ports at comparatively low cost. Voilte maintained that, in contrast to
Rotterdam, cochineal could not be imported into London 'without
eclat' and that as the quantity held by Baring was more than sufficient
to meet consumption in England, news of such a large stock on hand
might well have an adverse effect on the latter's sales. But Baring was not
to be convinced by this line of reasoning and in the end Voilte had to
agree to ship 400 seroons to Rotterdam and 200 to London. The fact
that trade in the Republic was in the doldrums will almost certainly have
had a bearing on this arrangement. 6
  As fal as actual sales were concerned, Voilte's advice at the beginning of
November had been to wait. The resulting delay had played a role in the
drawing up of the plans. Before conceding to the pressing desires of the

                                   440
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

houses in France and Spain to commence selling, it was necessary to
establish the price ratios to be maintained between the four principal
markets, namely Cadiz, London, Amsterdam and Marseilles. The prices
in Amsterdam were relatively the lowest, and thus it was expedient to
raise these. Hope thought in terms of an increase from 3 I schellingen to 33-
34 per pound, but this was contingent upon the return of Voute, 'whose
animating genius is extremely necessary.' 1 Following his return on 13th
December, 'the parr of the markets' was determined. The point of depar-
ture was a given price per arroba in Cadiz, from which each of the houses
arrived at the selling price on its market. On this basis, Counc1er was
permitted to sell 25 seroons at the equivalent of 98 ducats in Cadiz, while
Bournissien's price for 12 seroons had to be based on 100 ducats. Ryan
was initially given permission to sell 100 seroons at 90 ducats per arroba,
but this was subsequently reduced to 25 seroons at 100 ducats with the
proviso that sales were limited to three or four buyers. Baring was given a
price indication of 95 ducats. 2 The two French houses received sound
marketing advice from Hope. It was very important not to force matters,
but to wait for the emergence of demand. As sales progressed, efforts
would be made to raise the price, but the increase had to be natural and a
product of demand. In some instances it would be possible to assist
Nature by fixing a prix general on which a discount could be given to any
buyer who took a certain quantity. This incentive would attract the
commission agents, who in turn would stimulate individual buyers. 3
 The sales plan was thus complete, but no actual sales materialized. Trade
was slack in the winter, and such demand as there was for cochineal could
provisionally be met from other sources. The speculators were well aware
that the impending arrival of the new racolta was among the factors
responsible for the lack of demand, and this filled them with anxiety. The
main questions were how much would arrive from Mexico, and when?
Hope wrote that the new racolta would be 'regular but not abundant,'
totalling 1,500-1,600 seroons, but this was not confirmed and the uncer-
tainty was reflected in the prices quoted in Cadiz. Despite all Ryan's
assurances that there was no cochineal whatsoever on the market, prices
there refused to rise above 72 ducats per arroba. And while Cadiz remain-
ed low, Voute's 'parr of the markets' would have no significance.
 As we have seen, the cochineal price in Amsterdam was also low. In the
latter part of December 1787 the brokers had with difficulty succeeded in
reaching 36 schellingen, but on 1st January 1788 they were obliged to drop
to 32, albeit with the idea of gradually climbing back to 36. This level was
indeed achieved for the odd bale or retail sale during January, but with

                                    441
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

the news of the arrival in Cadiz of part of the new harvest from Mexico,
the price again fell to 32 in mid-February.!
 Early in January Hope, dissatisfied with the situation in Cadiz, decided
to employ another house there. His eye fell on Bohl Bros. & Co., an
extremely solid and capable house, 'for many years devoted to us.' Ryan
had rendered good service in the purchase of cochineal, but he was not
the right man to keep the price up in Cadiz, 'for lack of bold and animated
conduct.' The unexpected arrival in London of63 seroons, of which Ryan
had made no mention, was the last straw. 2 After a thorough dressing
down in which Hope, in veiled terms, accused him of taking part in a
counterspeculation, Ryan was to all intents and purposes dropped. 3
 In the instructions issued to Bohl, priority was given to raising the price
of cochineal in Cadiz. The speculators had lost two months as a result of
bungling on the part of Ryan, who had failed to buy up the remaining
parcels of cochineal at 80-90 ducats and thus block any underspeculation
on the other markets. This delay made it imperative for Bohl to be in-
formed as quickly and accurately as possible regarding the consignments
expected from Mexico, the vital issue being whether the greater part
would arrive during the first two months of the year or between March
and June. Enclosed with the letter to Bohl were three sealed envelopes
containing instructions. The first of these was to be opened if 4-500
seroons arrived in January and February, with the anticipation of a further
700-1,000 seroons in June; the second in the event of the bulk of the
harvest arriving first and the balance later; and the third if only a couple
of hundred seroons arrived during the first six months and the balance
thereafter. 4
 The tactics differed in the three letters of instruction, but always the aim
was to buy as few arrobas as possible at the highest possible price and to
take an option on the balance of the stock. This kept up expectations
among the sellers, while giving the speculators time to dispose of their
stocks elsewhere at good prices. If the cochineal market were to fall again
at the end of the year, the speculators could replenish their stocks at low
prices. In this manner, large investments in the article could be avoided.
 A westerly wind in the Atlantic favoured the ships, but played havoc with
Hope's support plan. Almost at the same moment as the instructions to
Bohl were being written, four vessels arrived in Cadiz with more than 500
seroons of cochineal on board. They had completed the voyage from
Havana in the unusually rapid time of 45 days.5 At that moment no house
in Cadiz held orders from Hope to support the price, and the result was
that a considerable amount of cochineal changed hands at 72 ducats per

                                    442
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

 arroba-three ducats below the minimum price for which Hope was
 aiming.
  When the first report of the arrival of the vessels was received, Hope had
 ordered Bohl to carry out Instruction Number One, but when it became
clear from the second letter, which was dated 21st February, that the
position was virtually irretrievable, Bohl was given greater freedom of
action. 1 Hope expressed deep regret at his inability to entrust 'the man-
agement of this important concern' to Bohl at an earlier date, and added
that this was not 'a mere speculation, but rather an investment of money
in a branch of trade which will be continued.' However, the letter bore a
postscript replacing the greater freedom of action with an instruction to
cease all buying until further notice, 'as it would be idle now to attempt to
force the prices above their strength, which would be only favouring the
late low priced purchases.' 2
  The extent to which the slowness of the post hampered merchants and
made it impossible for them to react adequately to certain market devel-
opments is evidenced by the time which elapsed before Bohl received
instructions matched to the situation. Hope's original instructions of 7th
January did not reach Bohl until the end of the month. On the 29th,
Bohl wrote to Hope, giving details of the adverse developments in Cadiz
since 7th January. Meanwhile, Hope had received Bohl's letter of the 8th
announcing the arrival of the four cochineal ships. In reply to this, Hope
instructed him on the 31st to implement Instruction Number One. Bohl's
letter of the 29th January reached Hope on or about 20th February, and
in the reply to this the execution of Instruction Number One was replaced
by a ban on further purchases. This did not reach Bohl until the middle
of March and thus more than six weeks elapsed before he was in posses-
sion of corrected instructions. During this period Bohl, acting largely on
his own initiative, had cautiously bought small quantities; in this he was
supported by Ryan who, at his own risk, bought up all the small parcels
which came on the market, intending to offer them to Hope later at a
higher price. 3 Ryan's parcels were declined, but Bohl's action in contin-
uing to buy met with Hope's full approval even though it conflicted with
the directives of 21st February, which probably stemmed from a fear of
unbridled stockpiling. Now that Bohl had shown himself to be made of
the right stuff, the reins could be slackened-the more so since his actions
had been successful and prices in Cadiz were recovering well. 4
  The speculators had extricated themselves as best they could from the
difficulties in Cadiz, but it was clear that their escape was temporary and
that the difficulties still existed. Hope confessed to Baring that he was at a

                                    443
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

loss to know what to do: 'We have a great share of timidity and little
faith even in the arguments we have used' (i.e. towards Bohl). If only they
could be sure that 1,000-1,200 seroons would be sold before the bulk of
the new racolta arrived, and had even a rough idea how much would
arrive and when, 'we should have sufficient strength of mind to give
pretty haughty orders to Cadiz.' But in the absence of even a rough idea,
Hope found himself in a most unpleasant situation of uncertainty and
indecision which was aggravated by the urgent need for a firm plan. Did
Baring perchance have a plan? If so, Hope would gladly consider it.!
  In spite of the anxieties and doubts which beset him, Hope was obliged
to maintain an optimistic tone in his correspondence with others con-
cerning the speculation. This was necessary because the events in Cadiz
had not left the other markets untouched, particularly since the instruc-
tion 'sell, sell large quantities' had been issued. In Marseilles, relatively
close to Cadiz, Councler was having an exceptionally difficult time. It was
at his insistence that Hope had agreed to leave the bought stock there,
and he felt honour bound to sell it quickly and profitably. But all his
efforts were thwarted by the arrival of small parcels from Italy and Cadiz.
The par price which had originally been indicated to Councler was far too
high in view of the fall in prices in Cadiz, and had a reverse effect. Coun-
cler began by buying up as many as possible of the parcels which appeared
on the market at this price, but when these continued to flow in he lost
courage. A further reduction of the par price had no effect whatsoever and
in the end he was instructed to sell at one or two ducats beneath the Cadiz
price, provided that this was still profitable. 2 Hope instructed him to
cease buying for the purpose of supporting the price: 'ce serait la mer a
boire'; if no more were purchased, these imports would dry up. Councler
would be well advised to ignore the criticasters who predicted that the
speculation was destined to fail; if it succeeded, they would alter their
tune. 3 Hope gratefully seized upon reports of more stable prices in Cadiz
to revive Councler's spirits, although to Baring he confessed to fears that
speculative purchases might well have played a significant part in the
 recovery.4 It was perhaps this fear which led him to instruct Councler to
 cease selling if the bottom were to fall out of the market. In that case he
 was to wait, while at the same time doing all in his power to get the price
 rising again.
   Councler succeeded in selling a few parcels of between 2 and 4
 seroons, but over February and March the total amounted only to about
 30 seroons and this made little impact. To cheer him up, Hope hinted,
 as he had done to Bohl, that although it was not proposed to perpetuate

                                    444
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

the operation, this could well span several years. In all probability a polit-
ical development-for example, the war against the Turks-would favour-
ably influence the speculation, though Councler should not bank too
heavily on this but should meanwhile try to sell as much as possible. Hope
conveyed the impression that the speculators were able to influence prices
in Cadiz, 'comme il convient au bien de la chose.' In view of the extremely
limited nature of Bohl's brief, this was a bold assertion.!
  In Rouen, sales were practically nil and even a gradual decline in price
levels produced little or no improvement. Hope, in a somewhat bitter
mood, implied that Bournissien had earlier asked for a depot for cochi-
neal, but was unable to justify the central position which he claimed in the
sales plan. Bournissien had initially attributed his lack of success to the
high par price which, he maintained, had resulted in buyers ordering
direct from Cadiz and thus supporting prices there. This argument, how-
ever, had ceased to be valid following the price reductions, for buyers in
Cadiz were now reported to be paying 78-80 ducats per arroba and Bour-
nissien could scarcely have difficulty in competing with this in Rouen?
Bournissien had repeatedly made vague references to a war, and anything
of that nature could certainly influence sales. Hope did not relish the
idea, but if Bournissien had any information, those in Amsterdam would
like to know about it as soon as possible. War did not seem very probable
to Hope, 'in view of the disorderly finances of the Sovereign Courts and
of the strange tricks they play.' 2 War or no war, the fact remained that
there was no demand in Rouen for Hope's cochineal. On 27th March, in a
burst of optimism, Hope wrote to Bournissien saying that he had read
somewhere that the 'fabriques' in France were showing signs of revival.
On 7th April he lamented that the stagnation in trade could not last for
ever. 3
  The tone of the correspondence with Baring at the beginning of April
concerning the policy to be followed was if anything more pessimistic
than that of a month earlier. The primary aim of the speculation-to
corner the market in cochineal while prices were low and to sell when
prices subsequently rose-had not been achieved. Hope was unable to put
his finger on the exact causes of the failure, but one thing was clear:
wherever the speculators had assembled stock, there had been a refusal
to buy. The later observer is less convinced of the existence of a boycott
and is more inclined to attribute the absence of demand to the economic
malaise of the time, from which France in particular suffered. There was
certainly a threat of war, which could have forced prices upwards, but it
did not occur and this fact was a disadvantage rather than an advantage

                                     445
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

to the speculators because, in the prevailing uncertainty, buyers became
even more reticent. The war which did take place, between Russia and
Turkey, added to the difficulties, because the hostilities in the border areas
impeded the cochineal trade with Asia. 1
  Baring took a much more optimistic view of the future than his partner
in the speculation. The London house felt that attention should continue
to be focussed on Cadiz, 'to keep up a certain spirit there as the spring of
every other,' and this required that one-third or one-fourth of all the
cochineal which arrived in Cadiz be bought up by the speculators. The
result would be to keep up the price of the remaining stocks, and this in
turn would assist prices elsewhere to the benefit of the speculators, whose
sales, Baring was convinced, would greatly exceed their additional pur-
chases in Cadiz, so that on balance the 'stock on hand' would diminish.
He added that the issuing of instructions to Bohl was a matter of some
urgency if they were not to be too late for the arrivals in June. 2
  Hope and Voute regarded Baring's view as far too optimistic. In the
light of 'the general combination which seems formed against us,' they
saw little possibility of a surplus of sales, and in addition they had no
inkling of the quantities which would arrive from Mexico. It could well be
that, following the report of improved prices in Cadiz, all the manpower
available in Mexico had been directed to the collection of cochineal
insects and also that every scrap of old stock would also be put on the
market. If Bohl was stimulated prematurely or on too large a scale, the
speculators might soon find themselves saddled with a further 1,000
seroons merely in order to keep up the price, while it might be necessary
to change the policy altogether if such colossal stocks actually arrived on
the market. 3 It therefore seemed prudent to Hope and Voute to await
further news before issuing fresh instructions to Boh!.
  Hardly had this letter been written when Hope received news from Bohl
that the frigate 'The Confidence' had arrived in Cadiz with 295 seroons of
cochineal and that the 'Mentor' and the 'St.Raphael,' together carrying
400-500 seroons, were expected shortly. Hope's letter instructing Bohl
that no more purchases were to be made had reached him at about the
same time as 'The Confidence' arrived. Faced with this order, Bohl had
made no move, with the result that several parcels had gone to other
buyers at 76 ducats per arroba. Bohl added that he would continue to
support prices of between 76 and 80 ducats and hoped that these would be
maintained. Ryan wrote to say that he would purchase for his own
account any cochineal offered at 74 ducats. 4
Thus the time lag between Hope's instructions and the market develop-
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

ments in Cadiz was repeated in March, and it looked as if the same
situation would arise when the 'Mentor' and the 'St. Raphael' arrived. On
24th March, Hope had despatched fresh orders to Bohl, authorizing him
to make limited purchases and instructing him to support prices at the
level which he had thus far maintained. But although Hope assumed that
the letter would reach Bohl before the arrival of the two vessels, it will
certainly not have done SO.1 In a letter to Baring, the partners in Amster-
dam showed that they knew where the crux of the problem lay: 'In fine
everything turns out for the best, tho we are really much indebted to good
luck for it, as we have continued to be too late in our orders.' 2
  Whether or not all came right in the end, the letterbooks of the day do
not reveal. The last letter concerning the cochineal speculation bears the
date 16th April 1788, and later surviving correspondence bears no refer-
ence to the subject. We are, however, in possession of details of the
'Cochineal Account' covering the years 1788 to 1793 and this shows that
the speculation fared badly. At the end of 1793, 3,368 seroons and 124
sobernales, which up to that moment had cost cf 6,128,34148, including
warehouse rental, freight, insurance and other costs, stood on the debit
side. Against this stood sales of 2,435 seroons, 27 sobernales and 904
pounds, totalling cf 4,OIO,748.I4.0. This implies that a loss of more than
two million guilders, or one-third of the purchase price plus costs, was
incurred. Hope had written off cf 300,000 'for losses' from his three-
quarter share in 1788, and a further cf 100,000 in 1791. 3 Against the debit
balance, however, stood a stock of unsold cochineal totalling 91 I seroons
and 88 sobernales which, on the basis of the Amsterdam market quotation
of28schellingenperpound in December 1793, was worth cf 1,603,400. But
this was a theoretical value, for more than three-fifths of the stock lay in
Russia and a further fifteen per cent or so in Marseilles. 4
  In the interest of clarity, the details of the 'Cochineal Account' are
reproduced in three summaries, which the reader can consult. 5 It should
be noted that these statistics possess only relative value, for whereas Table
F-I shows that cochineal sales in 1788 were limited to Amsterdam, we
know from the correspondence in the period January-April of that year
that parcels had also been sold in London and Marseilles. In all proba-
bility Hope entered these sales in 1789, and it may be assumed that similar
overlaps also occurred in later years, though it is not clear to what ex-
tent. The summaries do, however, provide answers to the questions: How
did the sales progress subsequently, and what were the prices obtained?
 At first sight, one is struck by the extremely disappointing results
achieved in Amsterdam, both in terms of quantities sold and price. In

                                    447
                 COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

1794 even the original stock remained unsold, while the 500 seroons
transported from Cadiz had in fact been sent on to St.Petersburg and
Moscow (see Table F-m).l It was natural that Hope should do this,
because losses had been suffered on 504 of the 568 seroons sold in Amster-
dam, and these had increased as the years went by.2 A remarkable aspect
and one which defies immediate explanation is the difference between the
prices obtained for the cochineal in Amsterdam in each of the years and
the average market quotations for the years concerned as shown in Post-
humus's Nederlandsche Prijsgeschiedenis. Whereas the difference in
1789 was 19 cents per Amsterdam pound, it had risen to cf 3.15 by 1793. 3
This is the more remarkable because the prices paid by Hope during the
buying period corresponded exactly to the average monthly market
quotations; moreover, the efforts to set up the price can all be traced: 3 I
schellingen or cf 9.30 in December 1787 and 36 schellingen or cf 10.80
in January 1788, with a fallback to 32 schellingen or cf 9.60 in February.4
  The results achieved in London were also unsatisfactory. While it was
true that virtually the whole of the stock on hand was disposed of, 60 %
was sold at a loss of between cf 1.33 and cf 2.42 per pound, based on the
average purchase price there. Admittedly about a quarter of the bales sold
had come from Cadiz, where they had been bought at a favourable price,
but this did not prevent an adverse balance in the end. 5 Indeed, if one
considers the higher purchase price, the results obtained in London were
even worse than those in Amsterdam. One gets the impression that the
speculators were anxious to reliquidate their investment and, if necessary,
were prepared to accept a substantial loss. In all probability the lower-
priced grades of cochineal were not marketed until a later date; if so, this
would partly explain the crumbling of the prices. 6
  The consignments from Cadiz more than doubled Councler's stock in
Marseilles. By 1794 he had succeeded in selling 80% of the total, albeit at
steadily declining prices and steadily greater losses but nearly always at
levels above those achieved by Hope in Amsterdam, while the purchase
prices at the two centres had been practically the same.
  Probably under the influence of the growth of radicalism in revolutionary
France, 106 seroons were shipped at the speculators' expense from Mar-
seilles to various ports in Asia Minor and the Levant. 7 These shipments
produced no profit, for the 61 seroons which Councler sold in 1793
fetched as much per pound as the 41 sold in Constantinople and Smyrna.
  In St.Petersburg and Moscow, the speculators were unfortunate in the
extreme. Of the total stock of 6281 seroons at these two places, no more
than II seroons had been sold by the end of 1793. Furthermore, two of
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA

the three houses to which the cochineal had been consigned ran into
serious difficulties in that year. Richard Sutherland had died in 1792, and
an investigation had revealed that his affairs were in a state of chaos. The
Russian Court demanded 3,700,000 roubles from his heirs as compen-
sation for serious neglect of the interests of the Court. Robert Voute,
who had visited Russia in 1793 on behalf of Hope & Co. in connexion
with Polish and Russian loans, sought through the personal intervention
of Empress Catherine II to prevent Sutherland's merchant house be-
coming involved in the debacle, but he had no success. Sutherland was
declared bankrupt in March 1794, Hope & Co. being involved to the
extent of 351,000 roubles; it is probable that this sum included a claim
relating to cochineal consignments. 1
  The difficulties which concerned G. Thomson Rowand & Co. in Moscow
were fortunately of a less serious nature. Like many others, the house had
been hit by the acute scarcity of money in Russia, a product of the dis-
ruption of trade in western Europe by the French wars of conquest.
Voute submitted a claim on Hope's behalf in which a sum of cf 586,404
relating to the cochineal account figured, but it proved possible to save
the house from collapse.
  Hope's fortunes in the matter of this claim fall outside the scope of this
story. Suffice to say that Pierre Cesar Labouchere, during a sojourn in
St.Petersburg in 1811, disposed of the claim on Thomson Rowand & Co.
to another debtor to Hope & Co. in order to be rid of the worry. 2
  Thus ended a speculation which certainly caused Messrs. Hope a great
deal of anxiety and undoubtedly brought heavy losses. The failure of the
house of Sutherland and the delay in settling the claim on Thomson
Rowand & Co. will have necessitated the writing off of further sums.
Nevertheless, this unsuccessful affair fits into the general picture of the
house of Hope & Co., for in the world of business one must continually
take risks, and if the house had not done so it would never have achieved
eminence. But it was characteristic of the policy of the partners that the
cochineal speculation, like other ventures, was a calculated risk; the
house could permit itself to undertake this investment. While millions of
guilders were tied up in cochineal for years on end, Hope & Co. embarked
upon one Russian loan after another without ever incurring problems
of liquidity. Nevertheless, the cochineal affair was a source of anxiety,
especially in the early stages. In the letter books which we consulted, the
letters referring to the speculation outnumbered those dealing with the
Russian loans by more than five to one. And it was at this very time that
the first Russian loans were being floated.

                                    449
                  COCHINEAL IN THE PA TRIOTIC ERA

Let us examine the causes of the failure of the speculation. Chief among
these was the incompleteness of the information regarding the stocks of
cochineal in Europe. The true figure will have been more than double the
1,750 seroons to which Henry Hope referred at the outset, and these
stocks were far more widely distributed than was thought. If we ask
ourselves who was primarily responsible for the incompleteness, we are
forced to the conclusion that it was Robert Vollte. He was the broker
with specialized knowledge of dyestuffs; it was he who, prior to the com-
mencement of the speculation, supplied information concerning potential
sales in Russia; and he helped to draw up the entire plan. His too numer-
ous absences and his preoccupation with other matters are bound to have
had an adverse effect on the execution of the plan. This opinion, however,
is not expressed in the correspondence, and, in spite of the unhappy note
on which the undertaking ended, Vollte continued to enjoy the confidence
of the partners, who called upon his services in many important matters.
  The lack of demand for cochineal on the various markets greatly vexed
the speculators, particularly as they were powerless to alter the situation.
In planning the speculation, they proceeded from the premise that, in
spite of the malaise, a revival of demand was inevitable, and when the
inevitability of this was not borne out they became obsessed with the
notion of a plot.
  Besides the malaise in the French textile industry, which has already
been mentioned, the factors leading to the failure of the speculation in-
cluded the system of par prices, the effect of which was to cause holders of
parcels of cochineal to either foist these on to the speculators or their
agents, or sell them to third parties at a fraction less than the par price.
The overextended buying period also played a role. This was in part
allied to the underestimation of the existing stocks, but political factors
beyond control of the speculators were also among the causes. For exam-
ple, the disturbances involving the Patriots in Amsterdam and the after-
math of these demonstrably slowed the buying programme in that city,
while the subsequent appearance on the market of stocks released by
disappointed war speculators hampered its completion. The time-con-
suming work necessitated by a lack of drive on the part of some agents,
such as Ryan and Bournissien, was yet another factor.
  The slowness of communications with distant ports such as Cadiz was
also a major obstacle. This, after all, made it impossible to issue orders in
time to meet the fluctuating market situation. The cry 'too late' echoed
repeatedly during this episode. Amsterdam, which by its sales record so
sadly demonstrated its fall from the position of central market, was no

                                    450
                 COCHINEAL IN THE PATRIOTIC ERA

exception in this respect. Whereas Voute expected the 'better harvest' to
be reaped in Amsterdam, the purchases in London were 40 %greater. In
terms of sales, the contrast was sharper still: compared with Baring's
total of 1,222 seroons, only 563 were sold in Amsterdam. Viewed against
this background, the financial strength of Hope & Co. becomes even more
impressive.




                                  45 1
ILLUSTRATIONS
Gerard Sanders (1702- 1767)                        Dulwich College Picture Gallery. London
                                                                 (by courtesy of the owner)
                              Archibald Hope, merchant at
                                Rotterdam (1664- 1743)

                                          455
Cosmo Alexander (1724-1772)                         National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh
                                                                  (by courtesy of the owner)

                              Adrian Hope (1709- 1781)
                               at the age of fifty-four
Mezzotint by C.H.Houges (I764- tR37)                           Bank Mees & Hope N.Y.,
after a p ainting. now lost,                                               Amsterdam
by Sir Joshua Reynolds (J 731- J 791)

                                   Henry Hope (1735 - 181 J)
                                    at the age of forty-one
                                              457
Cosmo Alexander (1724- 1772)                              Owner unknown

                               John Hope (1737-1784)
                               at the age of twenty-six
Angelica Kauffm a nn (1741 - 1807)                       Ba nk Mees & Hope N .V" Amsterdam

                                John Williams Hope (1757-1813)



                                             459
Angelica Kauffmann (1741 - 1807)                          Bank Mees & Hope N.Y. , AmSierdam

                                   Anne Goddard (1736-1820),
                                   wife of John Williams Hope
Jacques Henri Sablet (1749- 1803)                                        Lords Cricket Gallery,
                                                              Marylebone Cricket Club, London
                                                                     (by courtesy of the owner)

                                 Thomas Hope (1769-1831)
                    playing cricket with friends in the Italian countryside
By an unknown artist                                Bank Mees & Hope N.Y., Amsterdam

                       Pierre Cesar Labouchere (1772- 1839)
Lithograph by H.W.Couwenberg (,8'4- ,845)                    J.A.siliem, The Hague

                             Hieronymus Sillem (1768-1833)
                                                                                                                      "'¢
                                                                                                                      \D
                                                                                                                      "'¢
Mezzotint by I .Ward ([769-[8S9)                                                          Bank Mees &; Hope. N.V .•
after a painting by                                                                                    Amsterdam
Sir Thomas Lawrence ([769-[830)
                                    The partners of John and Francis Baring & Co.
                                   From left to right : Sir Francis Baring, John Baring
                                     and Charles Wall, a son-in-law of Sir Francis
Sir Thomas Lawrence (1769-1830)                                  Baring Bros. & Co. LId .• London
                                                                       (by courlesy of the owner)
                                  Alexander Baring ([774-[848)
By an unknown artist                              Voute Vereniging, Amsterdam
                       Robert Voute (1747-1823)
Miniature on ivory by an unknown artist                            J.L.lnsinger, Laren (N.-H.)

                           Hermann Albrecht Insinger (1757-1805)
The Hope residence, Keizersgracht 444-446, Amsterdam.
The building now houses the Municipal Public Library
The warehouses Kerkkroon A and B,
 Prinsengracht 659-661, Amsterdam
                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                             t-
                                                                                                                             '7




Engraving by Benjamin Comte (circa 1760-1 845)                                                      Bank Mees & Hope N.V.,
after a drawing by H.P.Schouten (1747- 1822)                                                                    Amsterdam
                               'Weigeiegen,' Henry Hope's country seat in Haariem, drawn in 1791.
                                       Henry Hope owned this property from 1788 to 1808
  'Welgelegen' as it is today, It is now the centre of
local government for the province of Noord-Holland



                         471
  Fish-eye view of the circular music room at 'Welgelegen.'
This is now used for the meetings of the Executive Committee
  or Gedeputeerde Staten of the province of Noord-Holland


                            472
 Nederhorst den Berg Castle.
The property of John Hope and
  his heirs from 1774 to 1803


            473
          Scales with weights in carats.
Now in the possession of Bank Mees & Hope N .V.




                     474
APPENDICES
                                                     A. ANNUAL TURNOVER
        millions of
        guilders banco

                                       DE SMETH
         55                            HOGGU ER*
                                       HOPE
         50

         45

         40

         35
                                                                                                                                          >
                                                                                                                                          "I:j
                                                                                                                                          "I:j
         30                                                                                                                               t"r1
~
-...l                                                                                                                                     Z
 0\
         25                             • For the s,ake of darity, the name Hogguer hiS been u~ed throughout. In (acL the t itle of       (')
                                                                                                                                          "
                                       t he house changed several limes between 1720 and 181 S. FOl.mded as Hogguer Bros .. It            t"r1
                                                                                                                                          en
                                       bct..1me Horneu Hogguer & Co. in 1762 (ollowlng the merger with Horneu. In 1773 Daniel
         20                            Hogguer resigned and his place was taken by Henri Fizeau., whereupon the house usumed
                                       the ti tle Horne,a Fizeau)C & Co _When Horneca left the rlrm in 1779. Fiz.eaux beume ilnoci.
                                       lIed with George Grand. a SWISS. and the name wi.So chinged to Fizeaul( Grand & Co from
          15                           1785 101787 the house bore the title Henri Flzeau x & Co. In 1 788 P,ullwan Hogguer. the son
                                       of D~nlel Hogguer. became a partner In what then beume Hogguer Grand & Co. From 179S
                                       onwards the house bore the t itle Hogguer & Co. cr. Chapler- Two.
          10

           5
                                                            •••••_. _ _ . "r.. :-. :.::::• • •• ••                                    ~
               ....   --.... -.:.:::::.-:.:.:.;:- -------
          1720 1721 1722 1723 1724 1725 1726 1727 1728 1729 1730 1731 1732 1733 1734 1735 1736 1737
           A-I. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Hope, Hogguer and De Smeth, in
                                                                                           the period 1720-1737
      millions of
      guilders banco

                               PELS
       55
                               ell FFORD
                               MUILMAN
       50

       45

       40

       35
                                                                                                                           >
       30                                                                                                                  "'CI
                                                                                                                           "'CI
~
                                                                                                                           m
-.J                                                                                                                        Z
-.J    25                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                           (')
                                                                                                                           m
       20 ,                                                                                                                en
           ,
       1 5~ \.
       10                                                                                                    .~
                 ,
                     ,
                        ,                                  - -- - --
        5                 "---"- ...                                                                         . ....... .
                 ................................................................

        1720 172 1 1722 1723 1724 1725 1726 1727 1728 1729 1730 1731 1732 1733 1734 1735 1736 1737
      A-I. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Pels, Clifford         and Muilman, in
                                                                             the period 1720-1737
        millions of
        gui lders banco
                   i


                            HOPE
         5J
                            DE SMETH
                            HOGGUER
         50~                HORNECA
         45

         40

         35
                                                                                                                                                                               >
         30                                                                                                                                                                    "1:1
                                                                                                                                                                               "1:1
                                                                                                                                                                               m
~
-...J                                                                                                                                                                          Z
 00      25                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                               ()
                                                                                                                                                                               m
         20
                                                                                                                                                                               '"
         15

         10                                                                                                                                                    --------
          5
                          ~~.~.~.~.::::
                                            ':!· ...- ..
                                                                                                               .. _--
                                                           r.:.:.7.:.:.:: .. 7.:-.:::-.-: .•.•..•·•·••·• ..............•..•.•
                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                ............................................
          1737 1738 1739 1740 1741 1742 1743 1744 1745 1746 1747 1748 1749 1750 1751 1752 1753 1754
          A-n. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Hope, Hogguer, Horneca and
                                          De Smeth, in the period 1737-1754
                                                                                       ,,
                                                                                            ,,
                                                                                                 ,                      "   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                     '\ ,                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "C
                                                                                                            '...... "               \                                                                             "C
                                                                                                                                        ,                                                                         tTl
                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                                            ,,                                                                    Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (")
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tTl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CI'l
                                                                                                                            ~                    ,
                                                                                                                                                 ................... - ---- ,


10
                    .........................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                       .. ........... .... ... .. .............. ............ .
 5


 1737 1738 1739 1740 1741 1742 1743 1744 1745 1746 1747 1748 1749 1750 175 1 1752 1753 1754

A-II. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Pels, Clifford and                                                                                             Muilman, in
                                                          the period 1737-1754
         millions of
         guilders banco

                          DE SMETH
          55              HDPE
                          HDRNECA
          50              HOGGUER
          45

          40

          35
                                                                                                                                                                                                       :>
          30                                                                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~
.j::>.                                                                                                                                                                                                 m
 00                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z
 0        25                                                                                                                                                                                           o
                                                       ---- .. _--                                                                                                                                     ("l
                                                                                                                                                                                                       m
          20                                                                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                   //'._.-.'.          "'\                                                             ............................"..........
                                                                                ,
          15                                                                                                     ',.
                                            ,   .-. ...... . .,.                    '.,                           ....
                                                                                                               ,,'
             I    ,"                    ,                                                                            .' ,\.
                                   ,.                                                       \            ,,'
          10                                                                                      \ ",
                                                                                                                              ,\
                             ,."                                                                  .,'                              \
                                                                                                .,'                                    ,
                                                                                          ..'                                              \
           5                                                                        .....                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,-'
                             ...................................... .............                                                                  -----------
           1754 1755 1756 1757 1758 1759 1760 1761 1762 1763 1764 1765 1766 1767 1768 1769 1770 1771
         A-Ill. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the                          houses of Hope, Hogguer, Horneca and
                                                                   De Smeth, in the period 1754-1771
        millions of
        guilders banco

                               PELS
         55                    CLIFFORD
                     .............. MUILMAN
         50

         45

                                                                                       ",' -~   ,
         40                                                                       --
                                              ,                                                     ,,
                                                                                                     ,,
         35                                                                                                                                                   ;..
                                                                                                                                                              '"C
                                                                                                                                                              '"C
.j:>.                                                                                                                                                         m
 00      30                                                                                                                                                   Z
                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                              (")
         25                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                                              C/l



         20

         15
                                                                                  ..................
         10                           .........................................                           ................................. .

          5 ro······ ...

          1754 1755 1756 1757 1758 1759 1760 1761 1762 1763 1764 1765 1766 1767 1768 1769 1770 1771
         A-III. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Pels, Clifford and                                            Muilman, in
                                                                             the period 1754-1771
         millions of
         guilders banco

                                        HOPE
          55                            HOGGUER
                                        DE SMETH
          50

          45

          40

          35                                                         ----/                                                                                                              ;I>
                                                                                                                                                                                        '"0
                                                                                                                                                                                        '"0
.j::>.                                                                                                                                                                                  m
 00
          30'
 IV
                                                                                                                                                                                        Z
                                                                                                                                                                                        o
          25                                                                                                                                                                            (")
                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                                                    .............................
                                                                                                                                                                                        '"
          20

          15 ...........•.•..•.•. ...
                                    ;,/:.:.::.:;;;.:.:::.:.::.:...........•...•.../ •.•.....•.•../ ..•..::.:•... ,\.\ ....•                                          " ..... , ,
                                                                                                                   ,,                                                              ,,
                                                                                                                       , , , ................   ...".
          10                                                                                                             ','"                    ......
                                  ,,
           5


           1771 1772 1773 1774 1775 1776 1777 1778 1779 1780 1781 1782 1783 1784 1785 1786 1787 1788
          A-IV. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Hope, Hogguer and                                                               De Smeth,
                                                                        in the period 1771-1788
        mi llions of
        guilders banco

                            ______ CLIFFORD
         55                     MUILMAN
                            _ _ PELS
         50

         45

         40
                        ,
                    ,
                            "I I
                                                                                                                                                                                               ;l>
         35 ~,'               I
             ,                I                                                                                                                                                                -0
                               I                                                                                                                                                               -0
                                I                                                                                                                                                              m
.j:>.
                                I
 00      30                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                               Z
w                                  I                                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                                                                               !'")
         25                                                                                                                                                                                    t":':
                                                                                                                                                                                               C/l

                                                                                                                                                                     ..................... .
         20 ~                          I                                                                                                                  ........
         15 f··················\··································.................................................................... ........ .. ....


         10

                                           I
           5
                                           \\
                                           I
                                               I
                                               I
                                               ~

          1771 1772 1773 1774 1775 1776 1777 1778 1779 1780 1781 1782 1783 1784 1785 1786 1787 1788
         A-IV. Annual turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Pels, Clifford and
                                                                                       Muilman, in
                                            the period 1771-1788
                                                                              APPENDICES




millions of
guilders banco

                                                                                                                  HOPE
 80                                                                                                               MUILMAN
                                                                                                                  HOGGUER
 75                                                                                                               DESMETH

 70




                                                       ..........
 35
                                     .............
 30
                ..................
 25
 20   :.:. ,.(~:.
                                                                   /
                                                                       ,- ... - ... - ,
 15                                                        I
                                                               I                          ,
                                                                                              ,
                                                       I                                          ,
                                                   I                                                  ,

 10                       ... ---
                                               I                                                          ,
                                                                                                              ,

  5


  1788 1789 1790 1791 1792 1793 1794 1795 1796 1797 1798 1799 1800

 A-V. Annual   turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of
         Hope, Hogguer, De Smeth and Muilman, in the period 1788-1800
       millions of
       guilders banco


                            HOGGUER
        55
                            DE SMETH
                            MUILMAN
        50
                            HOPE

        45

        40

        35                                                                                                    »
                                                                                                              "0
....                                                                                                          "0
 DC     30                                                                                                    m
Vl                                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                              o
        25                                                                                                    (")
                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                              r/J

        20                          ,f,f··............. .
                                   t~", '~,:..
        15                                             ~.
                                                            ,
        10
                                                -,
                                     - - :;,;;::.~:;,;.:::.:
          5

         1800 1801 1802 1803 1804 1805 1806 1807 1808 1809 1810 1811 1812 1813 1814 1815 1816 1817
       A-VI. Annual     turnover with the Amsterdam Exchange Bank of the houses of Hope, Hogguer, De Smett:
                                           and Muilman, in the period 1800-1808
         B. THE HENRY HOPE COLLECTION
                  OF PICTURES


                             CATALOGUE A


 OF PICTURES IN THE HOUSE NO. I THE CORNER OF HARLEYSTREET,
  BELONGING TO MR. HENRY HOPE, ON WHICH IS ENSURED TWELVE
                          THOUSAND POUNDS


Master             Subject                           Value in £

Albano             Diana & Acteon                       160.-
 Do.               Bacchus & Ariadne                    160.-
 Do.               The Fortune Teller                    50.-
Bolognese          2 Landscapes                         100.-
Lud.Backhuysen     View on the Maze                    200.-
Bassano            The Saviour comforted                 40.-
N.Berghem          Landscape                            120.-
 Do.                Do.                                 100.-
Bloemaert          A Patriarch                           40.-
Bourdon            Jacob & Laban                         10.-
Breughel           Stable in Bethlehem                   20.-
Ch.le Brun         Family of Jabach                   1,000.-
 Do.               Allegorical                           50.-
 Do.                Do.                                100.-
Lod.Caracci        Birth of Bacchu~                      50.-
 Do.               A Saint comforted                     20.-
 Do.               Holy Family                           80.-
 Do.               Diana & Acteon                      500.--
 Do.               St.John in the Wilderness           200.-
 Do.               Hercules & Cacus                    300.-
Guido Canachi      Susanna & Elders                    100.--
C.Cigniani         Virgin & Child                        50.-
 Do.               Woman & three Children                40.-
Corregio           Ascension of the Virgin             100.-
 Do.               Holy Virgin                         100.-
 Do.               Two Children                        160.-
Seb.Concha         Virgin & Child                        10.-
Cocci              Diogenes & Alexander                  20.-
Pedro de Cortona   A Bible Composition                 100.-
 Do.               Herodes' Cruelty                    100.-
 Do.               Holy Family                         100.-
Crocci             Holy Family                           60.-
Crespi             Jupiter & Semele                      20.-
Cuyp & v.d.Elst    Landscape & Figures                 110.-

                                   4 86
                          APPENDICES

Master          Subject                                      Valuein£

B.Denner        Portrait                                        40.-
 Do.             Do.                                            20.-
 Do.            Young Elector Palatine                          20.-
And.del Sarto   Holy Family                                    120.-
 Do.             Do.                                           100.-
P.Dorner        Roman Charity                                   10.-
Domenichino     Susan & Elders                                 300.-
Doudijns        Allegory                                        20.-
Carlo Dolci     A Magdalen                                      50.-
 Do.            Head of the Virgin                              70.-
 Do.            Dying Magdalen                                  40.-
Dufresnoy       Achilles discover'd                            100.-
VanDyck         Two Children                                    20.-
 Do.            Portrait, halflength                           100.-
 Do.            Paris                                          150.-
 Do.            Portrait                                        40.-
 Do.             Do.                                            40.-
 Do.            Dr.de Vos                                      150.-
 Do.            D.hisWife                                      150.-
 Do.            Full length portrait of Gaston de F oix        300.-
Elsheimer       Toby & the Angel                                20.-
van der Elst    Portrait                                        40.-
 Do.             Do.                                            40.-
Verelst          Do. Flemish Woman                              10.-
Dom.Faeti       Dedalus & Icarus                               150.-
F.Fery          Landscape                                       40.-
 Do.             Do.                                            40.-
 Do.            Joseph sold                                     40.-
 Do.            Jacobs departure                                40.-
Franceschini    Holy Family                                     20.-
 Do.            Landscape & figures                             40.-
Giorgione       Christ triumphant                              150.-
 Do.            Warrior                                         50.-
Goltzius        Susanna & Elders                                50.-
 Do.            Magdalen's head                                 50.-
Guido           Angel Gabriel                                   50.-
 Do.            St.John & the Lamb                              60.-
 Do.            Magdalen                                        60.-
 Do.            Ecce Homo                                      500.-
 Do.            St.John                                         60.-
 Do.            Virgin & Child (oval)                           20.-
 Do.            Magdalen treading underfoot the Vanitas of
                 this world                                    700.-
 Do.            Cleopatra dying                                500.-
Guercino        Virgin & Child                                 150.-
Grimaud         Portrait, half length                           20.-
Hamilton        Death of Lucretia                              150.-
                               4 87
                            APPENDICES

Master            Subject                        Valuein£

Hobbema           Landscape                        100.-
Cs.v.Harlem       Christ crucified                  50.-
Fs.Hals           North Holland Woman               20.-
J.van Huysum      Landscape & figures               20.-
L.Jordano         The hot & cold blower            tOO.-
Ph.Laura          A Charity                         20.-
G.de Lairesse     Narcissus                         45.-
 Do.              Allegorical composition          100.-
C.Lorain          Landscape                        500.-
 Do.               Do.                             500.-
 Do.               Do.                             150.-
C.Maratti         A Madonna                         50.-
 Do.              Holy Family                       50.-
 Do.              Parce somnum sumere              300.-
 Do.              Theseus & Ariadne                 50.-
 Do.              Titan & Aurora                    70.-
 Do.              Venus rising from the Sea         70.-
 Do.              Venus & Adonis                   150.-
 Do.              Virgin & Child                    50.-
Metsu             A Woman at Supper                 20.-
Raphl Mengs       St.John                          100.-
v.Mieris          Boy blowing bubbles               50.-
 Do.              A Boors family                   100.-
Moucheron         Landscape                         40.-
F.Mola            Mary Magdalen                     20.-
Murillo           Holy Family                      550.-
 Do.              St.Ignatius                      100.-
Mancini           Female Saint with Holy Ghost      40.-
Miereveld         Van Tromp                         30.-
LeNain            Adoration of the Shepherds        50.-
Ostade            Landscape                        220.-
Palma             Peters Apostasy                   40.-
Palma the young   A Nymph pursued by Satyrs         20.-
Pagi              Venus & Cupid                     50.-
Parmeggianino     Holy family                      300.-
 Do.               Do.                             150.-
 Do.               Do.                             100.-
Perino del Vaga   Holy family                      200.-
Poelenburgh       Two Seasons                       20.-
 Do.               Do.                              20.-
 Do.              Landscape & figures               50.-
Poussin           Jupiter & Antioche               600.-
 Do.              Allegory                          50.-
 Do.              Venus & Satyrs                   100.-
 Do.              Holy family                      200.-
 Do.              Ascension, sketch                 50.-
 Do.              Phocion                          300.-
                                4 88
                            APPENDICES

Master            Subject                                    Value in £

 Do.                Do.                                        300.-
Rembrandt         Family piece                                 500.-
 Do.              The Saviour & Mary Magdalen                   50.-
 Do.              Family piece                                 300.-
 Do.              Landscape (oval)                             100.-
Raphael           Holy family                                   60.-
 Do.              Virgin & Child                               100.-
Ricci             The Saviour suffering                         40.-
Julio Romano      Mars & Venus                                 100.-
Romanelli         Virgin & Child                                20.-
 Do.              Holy family                                   40.-
 Sal. Rosa        Landscape                                    520.-
Rottenhammer      The Muses                                     20.-
 Do.              Landscape & figures                           20.-
 Do.               Do.                                          20.-
 Do.               Do.                                          20.-
Rubens            Woman taken in Adultery                      700.-
 Do.              Christ triumphant over Sin & Death           500.-
 Do.              Deluge of Philemon                           500.-
 Do.              Landscape                                    100.-
Reynolds          Venus & Cupid                                100.-
Siro feri         Holy family                                   20.-
Sassoferrato      2 Madona's                                    60.-
Schedoni          Holy family                                  100.-
Eliz.Sirani       Magdalen                                     150.-
Spagnoletta       Roman Charity                                 80.-
Le Sueur          Cupid stealing the thunder of Jupiter        100.-
 Do.              Abraham & Hagar                              100.-
 Do.              AIIegorical Composition                      150.-
 Do.              Death of Dorcas                              300.-
Van Teelden       Nessus & Deianira                             50.-
David Teniers     Landscape                                    500.-
Titian            Lucretia                                      20.-
 Do.              Venus & Cupid                                100.-
 Do.              The Woman cured by touching the Saviours
                   Garments                                    100.-
 Do.              Holy family                                  150.-
 Do.              Full length portrait Duchess of Parma        500.-
 Do.              The Graces                                   500.-
Tintoretto        Madonna & Child                               70.-
Trevisani         Death of Adonis                               70.-
 Do.              Apollo & Marsias                              70.-
Wm van de Velde   A Stormy Sea                                 300.-
Ale'Veronese      Loth & his Daughters                          40.-
 Do.              Hercules & Omphale                           220.--
 Do.              Samson & Dalila                              100.-
pi Veronese       Rebecca                                       50.-
                                4 89
                             APPENDICES

Master             Subject                               Valuein£

 Do.               Mars & Venus                             100.-
 Do.               Marriage in Cana                         300.-
Velasquez          Family portrait                          300.-
Van der Werff      Loth & his Daughters                      40.-
 Do.               A Magdalen                               100.-
 Do.               Nymph & Satyr                            200.-
West               Landscape & figures                      150.-
 Do.               Fable                                     70.-
 Do.                Do.                                      80.-
Ph. Wouwermans     Landscape with Warriors                   20.-
DeWitte            Lisera & Jahel                            20.-
Zuccarella         Joseph sold                               50.-
                                                         24,915.-
London 17 December 1795
(signed)
Henry Hope



                             CATALOGUE B


 OF PICTURES IN THE HOUSE NO. I THE CORNER OF HARLEYSTREET,
         BELONGING TO MR. HENRY HOPE, ON WHICH IS ENSURED
                       TEN THOUSAND POUNDS


Master             Subject                               Value in£

Alexander          Mary Queen of Scots                      20.-
Antonissen         Landscape                                20.-
 Do.                Do.                                     20.-
 Do.                Do.                                     20.-
C.Bega             Inside of a Boors house                  10.-
 Do.               Boors housekeeping                       10.-
L.Backhuysen       Sea piece                               200.-
 Do.                Do.                                    100.-
 Do.               View of a Warehouse in India             40.-
Beschey            Boors house with figures                 40.-
N.Berchem          Landscape with buildings                140.-
G .Berckheyde      14 views of Dutch Towns                 140.-
Breughel           View in Brabant                          10.-
J.&A.Both          Landscape & Waterfall                   300.-
B.Breenbergh       St.John preaching in the Wilderness      30.-
H.deCort           View of a City                           30.-
A.Cuyp             Landscape, Cattle & Herd                300.-
Dusart             Boor housekeeping                        20.-
Gerd.Dou           Dutch Kitchenmaid                      1,000.-
                                  49 0
                             APPENDICES

Master             Subject                               Valuein£

 Do.               Woman asleep by a Candle                 50.-
Dirk van Deelen    Inside of a Church                       25.-
Van Dijck          Ascension of the Virgin                 400.-
J.van Elst         Flower piece                             10.-
P.Ghijsels         City view full of action                 30.-
 Do.               Game, still life                         10.-
B.Graaf            Nymphs bathing                           10.-
R.Greffier         3 views on the Rhine                     30.-
Goltzius           Vertumnus & Pomona                       10.-
J.van der Heyden   View of a Village & Church               90.-
Van der Heyden &
Van de Velde       View of a Convent & great Church        150.-
 Do. &Do.          View of the Harlem pt. in Amsterdam     100.-
Huchtenburg        Shock of Cavalry                         10.-
 Do.                Do.                                     to.-
Holbein            Portrait                                 40.-
Hamilton           Copy of Titian's sleeping Venus          60.-
M.Hondecoeter      Poultry                                  40.-
 Do.               Landscape with Do.                       50.-
 Do.               Landscape with Poultry                   60.-
Van Huysum         2 Landscapes                             50.-
 Do.               A Flower piece                          300.-
 Do.               Fruit                                   400.-
 Do.               Arcadian Landscape                      200.-
De Hoog            Inside of a Room with figures            35.-
Janson             Landscape with figures                   20.-
 Do.                Do. with Cattle                         20.-
Ch.du Jardin        Do. falcon chase                       250.-
 Do.                Do. a horse & two Oxen                  40.-
Ph.Koning          Inside of a house                        10.-
Limburg            The Infant Ajax                          30.-
 Do.               Ariadne                                  30.-
J.Lingelbach       2 Italian Markets                        80.-
Lentz              Historical                              100.-
 Do.               Minerva                                  30.-
G.de Lairesse      Death of Cleopatra                       80.-
Metsu              Appartment a Man & a Woman              160.-
 Do.               Dutch Appartment                        150.-
 Do.               A Man writing                           110.-
 Do.               A Woman writing                          80.-
P.v.Mieris         The Old Shrimp Eater                    450.-
 Do.               Gentleman & Lady                        300.-
Wm.v.Mieris        Judgment of Paris                        50.-
  Do.              Vertumnus & Pomona                       50.-
 Do.               A Woman with Grapes                      50.-
  Do.              Lady, Maidservant and Dog                50.-
 Do.               Chandlers Shop                           20.-
                                  49 1
                               APPENDICES

Master               Subject                                  Vallie in £

 Do.                 Green Shop                                   20.-
P.Mile               Landscape                                    80.-
Moucheron             Do.                                         20.-
 Do.                  Do.                                         20.-
P.v.Mieris Jun T •   Women playing with bones                     30.-
L.de Monie           A fortune teller                             10.--
 Do.                 2 Fish boors (a pair)                        10.-
J.de Maubeuge        Virgin & Child                               40.-
Netscher             Lady with a Parrot                           60.-
 Do.                 Young Man in a niche                         20.-
A.van Ostade         Landscape & Boors                            30.-
 Do.                 Conversation                                 50.-
 Do.                 Landscape & Boors                           250.-
Poelenburgh          Offering of the wise men                     20.-
Poelenburgh          Glaucus on the Sea Shore                     15.-
Paul Potter          Stable with horses                          150.-
 Do.                 Landscape, Oxen & Sheep                     120.-
 Do.                 Do. 3 Standing & One resting Oxen           150.-
Rembrandt            Sea piece                                   500.-
Rottenhammer         Ascension of the Virgin                      40.-
 Do.                 Feast of the Gods                            20.-
Rottenhammer &
 Breughel            A repose in Egypt                            50.-
Schou man            Birds                                        10.-
  Do.                Inside Appt. & 3 Figures                     10.-
Schalken             Man lighting his pipe                        30.-
B. v .Slingeland     A Woman in a Niche with a brass kettle       40.-
Saftleven            View on the Rhine                            20.-
B.v.Staveren         Hermit reading                               50.-
Stork                Sea piece                                    10.-
  Do.                 Do.                                         10.-
Jan Steen            Flemish lying in visit                       50.-
  Do.                Flemish fair                                 50.-
  Do.                Flemish family                               40.-
G.Terborch           Lady and Guitar                              50.-
  Do.                Corps de Guard                              100.-
  Do.                Gentleman writing                           120.-
  Do.                Lady at Toilet                               50.-
  Do.                Lady and Gentleman                           50.-
David Teniers        Corps de Guard l
                                                                 300.-
  Do.                 Do.             f
D.vanTol             Boor Schoolmaster                            20.-
Uchterveld           Violin player                                10.-
Van derUlft          Roman Market                                 30.-
  Do.                Italian Seaport                              50.-
W m •van de Velde    2 Seapieces                                 220.-
  Do.                  1 Do.                                     400.-
                                    49 2
                              APPENDICES


Master             Subject                             Value in £

A. van de Velde    View in the Hague                        300.-
  Do.              Landscape with Cattle                    200.-
  Do.               Do.                                      50.-
  Do.               Do.                                      50.-
pl.Veronese        Bathseba                                  80.-
manner of Do.      Diana and Nymphs                         150.-
Verkolje           Susanna & Elders                          20.-
  Do.              Bathseba bathing                          90.-
  Do.               Do.                                      20.-
J.Weenix           Poultry                                   60.-
 Do.               Architecture & Still life                 40.-
  Do.              Game still life & barking Dog             60.-
A.v.d.Werff        St.Thomas                                350.-
  Do.              Magdalen reading                         250.-
P. Wouwermans      A rich Landscape                         350.-
 Do.               Falcon Chase                             150.-
J.Wijnants         Landscape, Mountainous                    80.-
R.Xavery           Entry into the Arch                       10.-
                                                       12,515.-
London 17th December 1795
(signed)
Henry Hope



                             CATALOGUE C


OF PICTURES IN THE HOUSE NO. I IN THE CORNER OF HARLEYSTREET,
         BELONGING TO MR. HENRY HOPE, ON WHICH IS ENSURED
                     FOUR THOUSAND POUNDS


Master             Subject                             Value in £

Bassano            Christ array'd before the People          50.-
Berghem            Falcon chase                             300.-
Berger             Achilles & Briseis                        20.-
Bolomey            2 Portraits                               50.-
Giov.Bellini       Salvator Mundi                           100.-
F .Bartholomeo     Monk in devotion}                        40.-
 Do.               St.Sebastian
Lod.Caracci        Dying Magdalen                           150.-
Aug.Caracci        Holy family                              100.-
Corregio           Virgin & Child                           150.-
 Do.               Magdalen repenting                       300.-
Denis              Landscape                                 20.-
Demarez            Lucretia receiving Tarquin                40.-
                                   493
                            APPENDICES

Domenichino       St. Cecilia                           150.-
 Do.              St.Thomas                              50.-
Ducos             Landscape, Water Colours               20.-
A.del Sarto       Holy family                            50.-
 Do.              Jonas & the Whale                      50.-
Gauffier          Achilles discover'd                    30.-
 Do.              Repose in Egypt                        20.-
Geminiani         Travellers to Emaus                    50.-
Giorgione         Judith with the head of Holofernes    100.-
L.Giordano        Womanshead                             20.-
Benven.Garofalo   Holy family                           100.-
Guido             Ecce Homo                              50.-
 Do.              Ariadne & Bacchus                     150.-
 Do.              Magdalen repenting                    100.-
Guercino          St.John & the Lamb                    100.-
 Do.              Apollo with the violin                150.-
Lentz             Venus chastising Cupid                 50.-
a.Lorain          Landscape                             100.-
A.Martigna        The Saviour scourged                   50.-
F.Mola            Peter repenting                        50.-
Pannini           Campo vaccino                          50.-
Palma vecchio     Venus & Cupid                          50.-
Parmeggianino     Stable in Bethlehem                   100.-
P.Peregrino       Maria & Child                          50.-
Poligraphick      Landscape (C.Lorain)                   10.-
Sal. Rosa         The Hermit bound                       50.-
 Do.              View of Castellamare                  100.-
 Do.              (on paper) Warriors                    20.-
 Do.              Jonas & the Whale                      50.-
Julio Romano      Hell in uproar                         50.-
Reynolds          2 Portraits                            50.-
Rubens            Travellers in Emaus                   150.-
 Do.              View in Ancona                         40.-
Sable             MoonShine                              50.-
 Do.              Roman rural Composition                20.-
E.Sirani          Nessus & Deianira                      50.-
after Schalken    Womanshead                             10.-
Titian            Ecce Homo                             100.-
 Do.              The Saviour betrayed                  150.-
Tintoretto        Madonna & Child                       100.-
                                                       4,010.-
London 17 December 1795
(signed)
Henry Hope




                                  494
                      c. SWEDISH LOANS



        C-I, SUMMARY OF LOANS NEGOTIATED BY HOPE                & CO.
                    ON BEHALF OF THE SWEDISH CROWN


No.   Negotiators      Principal     Inter-      Issue date      Period    Com-
                         sum           est        (official                mis-
                                               commencement                 sion
                                                  of loan)

  Hope & Co.          cf 750,000      5%      1 December 1767   10 years
2 Hope &Co.           cf 1,000,000    5%      1 December 1770   10 years   4t%
  Horneca
  Hogguer & Co.
3 Hope &Co.           cf 2,000,000    4%      1 November 1775   half 10    4t%
  Horneca                                                       years
  Fizeaux & Co.                                                 half 12
                                                                years
3 ditto               cf 1,000,000    4%      1 November 1775   15 years   4t%
4 Hope&Co.            cf 750,000      4%      1 March 1780      12 years    8%
  Fizeaux
  Grand&Co.
5 ditto               cf 750,000      4%      1 December 1780   15 years   9t%
5 ditto               cf 500,000      4%      1 December 1780   15 years   9t%
6 ditto               cf 1,250,000    4%      (1 June)
                                              1 March 1782      16 years    7%
 7 ditto              cf 1,500,000    5%      1 December 1783   15 years    4%
 8 ditto              cf 2,000,000   4t%      1 December 1784   15 years    6%
 9 Hope&Co.           cf 1,500,000   4t%      1 February 1786   15 years    6%
   Henri
   Fizeaux & Co.
10 ditto              cf 1,500,000    4%      1 November 1787   half 12     6%
                                                                years
                                                                half15
                                                                years




                                      495
                                     APPENDICES




               C-II. SUMMARY OF THE SWEDISH LOANS IN                  1808

      Negotiators            Principal           Issue date        Inter-        Sum
                               sum                                   est     outstanding
                                                                               in 1808

Hope&Co.             cf2,000,000 1 December 1784                   41%       cf 1,429,000
Fizeaux Grand & Co.
Hope & Co.           cf 1,500,000   1 February 1786                41%       cf1,108,OOO
Henri Fizeaux & Co.
 ditto               cf 1,500,000 1 November 1787                    4%      cf 903,000
Jan and Carl Hassel-
green & Co.          cf 1,000,000 1 February 1788                    4%      cf 600,000
 ditto               cf 3,000,000 1 January 1789                     5%      cf2,056,000
Hogguer Grand & Co. cf 1,500,000 1 August 1789                       5%      cf1,015,OOO
 ditto               cf 250,000 1 August 179O                        5%      cf 171,000
Jan and Carl Hassel-
green & Co.          cf 3,000,000 1 1 June 1791                      5%      cf 2,048,000
Hogguer & Co.        cf 1,250,000 1 September 1797                   5%      cf 856,000




I   The loan arranged by Jan and Carl Hasselgreen and dated 1St June 1791 was divided into
    six tranches off 500,000 designated Litterae A to F.
                     D. RUSSIAN LOANS




           D-I. LOANS ISSUED BY HOPE          & CO. ON BEHALF OF
                     RUSSIA BETWEEN       1787 AND 1793

No.     Amount       Inter-    Life       Date of     Date of      Nos. and
                       est                 loan       authori-      qty. of
                      rate                             zation       bonds

 1    cf 3,000,000   41-%     1Oyrs.     1- 2-1788   24-12-1787   6, A-F.
 2    cf 3,000,000   41%      12 yrs.    1- 2-1788   24-12-1787   6,G-M.
 3    cf 3,000,000   41%      1Oyrs.     1- 7-1788   22- 3-1788   6,N-S.
 4    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 2-1789   13-12-1788   6, T-IJ.
 5    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 5-1789   13-12-1788   6,AA-FF.
 6    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 9-1789    9- 5-1789   6,GG-MM.
 7    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 1-1790    9- 5-1789   6,NN-SS.
 8    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 5-1790   18- 2-1790   6, TT-IJIJ.
 9    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 8-1790   18- 2-1790   6,ZA-ZF.
10    cf3,000,000     5%      12 yrs.    1-11-1790   18- 2-1790   6,ZG-ZM.
11    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 2-1791   23- 9-1790   6,ZN-ZS.
12    cf 3,000,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 9-1791    7- 4-1791   6,ZT-ZIJ.
13    cf3,000,000     5%      12 yrs.    1-11-1791    7- 4-1791   6,AZ-FZ.
14    cf3,ooo,ooo     4%      12 yrs.    1- 2-1792   17-12-1791   6, GZ-MZ.
15    cf 3,000,000    4%      12 yrs.    1- 2-1792   17-12-1791   6, NZ-SZ.
16    cf3,ooo,ooo    4!-%     12 yrs.    1- 6-1792   17- 5-1792   6,AH-AN.
17    cf3,ooo,ooo    41%      12 yrs.    1- 6-1792   17- 5-1792   6, AO-AT.
18    cf 2,500,000    5%      12 yrs.    1- 8-1793   22- 6-1793   5, TN-TR.




                                        497
                                                        APPENDICES




                              D-II. NUMBER OF ENTREPRENEURS AND NUMBER
                                  OF LOANS IN WHICH THEY PARTICIPATED

                                                                                                              ,                 I   I
                                                                                                                                                            .:
                                                                                                I
                                               i                   I                                  i       I                 i   I         !         :
                                                                   I                                          I         !       I   I         ;             0.
                                                                                    C
                                                                                    0
                                                                                   00
                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                    ,         I";.... U     E
                                                                                                                                                            0
No.                 Loans              Int.        Principal sum        Entre-     ~                                    I       I
                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                    1..:<          C
                                                                                    os .~                                           I"
                                                                                                                                    I~
                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                   ~
                                                                                                                                                            ~
                                       rate                            preneurs'
                                                                                   5 ~ ~ ..:<u
                                                                                        C
                                                                                          0                 c ..c                       C;;       ..§
                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                    <l      "
                                                                                            "              B u                          ::: c 0 ..:<u       "
                                                                                   '5
                                                                                                                  OJ)

                                                                                        ::s ~ ~ c :> .§
                                                                       commis-
                                                                         sian
                                                                                            ...
                                                                                             0         .S  .9                             en OJ) U 0
                                                                                                                                              " ~ ,z;...
                                                                                          ""
                                                                                   ~ ... ;; ;;   u ~
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                            ;; ~  "
                                                                                   1l0 .~" ,D..; illco cco ,D..; ;;
                                                                                                                                        '0    0
                                                                                                                                         cco :t .,; ..:<
                                                                                                                                          ()




                                                                                   ....                          ..,:                    ... ;;
                                                                   I                                < .... .... <                                           ~ ~
                                   1
      1                            I           I                                          ~                                             p;.       ~
                                                                                                                                    I

                                                                                                                  xl~l~
 1        Sweden, 1-3-1780            4%           cf 750,000                       x
 2        Sweden, 1-12-1780        I  4%
                                               I
                                               I   cf 750,000
                                                                         It%
                                                                         It%
                                                                                          xlxlx
                                                                                                             Ix  x ixlx
                                   II                                                                        I
 3        Sweden, 1-3(6)-1782         4%       I   cf 1,250,000          1%         x           Ix x  x: I   Ix     x x
 4        Sweden, 1-12-1783           5%       I   cf 1,500,000          1%         x           ix x  x x    Ix     x
 5        Sweden, 1-12-1784           4t%          cf 2,000,000                     x                    x     x    X x3
                                               I                         It%                    Ix
 6        Sweden, 1-2-1786            4t%          cf 1,500,000          1%         x               x    x     x    x x
                                                                                                IX
 7        Sweden, 1-11-1787           4%           cf 1,500,000          It%        x               x    x     x    x x
 8        Poland, 1-6-1786            5%           cf 2,000,000          2%                     Ix x     x x   x    x x
 9        Russia, 1-2-1788 (I)        4t%          cf 3,000,000          1%         x               x    x x   X x2 X x
10        Russia, 1-2-1788 (II)       4t%          cf 3,000,000          1%         x                    x x   x x  x x
                                                                                                   iX
11        Russia, 1-5-1789            5%           cf 3,000,000          2%         x               x    x x, x x x x
12        Russia, 1-9-1789          I 5%           cf 3,000,000          2%                         x    x x x      x x
13        Russia, 1-1-1790
                                   1
                                      50'
                                   I /0
                                                   cf 3,000,000          2 0/0/                 I   X   Ix X XI       X4         x
14        Russia, 1-5-1790
                                   i 5%            cf 3,000,000          2%         x           I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                          x             Ix x xl Ix x
                                      5 0/0/                                        x                                    x x x x x X
                    1
15        Russia, 1-8-1790                         cf 3,000,000          2%                               x
16        Russia,    11-2-1791
                        11 1790
                       - _         I   5%          cf 6,000,000          2%         x                     x              x x x x x x
                                   1
                      1-9-1791
17        Russia,    1-11-1791         5%
                                               I
                                                   cf 6,000,000          2%         x                     x                 x x x x x X
18        Russia, 1-2-1792         I 4%                                             x                     x                 x x Ix x x x
                                                                                             I
                                               I cf 6,000,000            2%
19        Russia, 1-6-1792
                                                                                   I ~ I I Ix I~I~ Ixlx I~ x
                                                                                                              I
                                       4t%       cf 6,000,000      I     2%                                                                                      x
                                                                                                      Ix
                                                                                                                                        XiX
20
      I   Spain, 1-11-1792
                                   I   4t%
                                               I cf 6,000,000
                                                                   I
                                                                         2%


                1Hereafter V.Ketwich & Voomberg.
               2 Hereafter V.Hogenhuysen & Visser.
               3 Hereafter Albert Strockel.
               4 Hereafter Strockel & V.Dijk.
               5 In this contract, A.H.Vermeulen, W.H.Dreux.
               6 Hereafter Stadnitski & Son.
               7 Hereafter V.Zwijndregt & Gossiaux.
               8 Hereafter Pieter ten Kate.
               9 Hereafter V.Maarseveen & Le Jolle.
              10 In these contracts the words 'for Jacob de Kempenaer' were added.
                            APPENDICES

Master            Subject                                    Value in £

 Do.               Do.                                         300.-
Rembrandt         Family piece                                 500.-
 Do.              The Saviour & Mary Magdalen                   50.-
 Do.              Family piece                                 300.-
 Do.              Landscape (oval)                             100.-
Raphael           Holy family                                   60.-
 Do.              Virgin & Child                               100.-
Ricci             The Saviour suffering                         40.-
Julio Romano      Mars & Venus                                 100.-
Romanelli         Virgin & Child                                20.-
 Do.              Holy family                                   40.-
 Sal. Rosa        Landscape                                    520.-
Rottenhammer      The Muses                                     20.-
 Do.              Landscape & figures                           20.-
 Do.               Do.                                          20.-
 Do.               Do.                                          20.-
Rubens            Woman taken in Adultery                      700.-
 Do.              Christ triumphant over Sin & Death           500.-
 Do.              Deluge of Philemon                           500.-
 Do.              Landscape                                    100.-
Reynolds          Venus & Cupid                                100.-
Siroferi          Holy family                                   20.-
Sassoferrato      2 Madona's                                    60.-
Schedoni          Holy family                                  100.-
Eliz.Sirani       Magdalen                                     150.-
Spagnoletta       Roman Charity                                 80.-
Le Sueur          Cupid stealing the thunder of Jupiter        100.-
 Do.              Abraham & Hagar                              100.-
 Do.              Allegorical Composition                      150.-
 Do.              Death of Dorcas                              300.-
Van Teelden       Nessus & Deianira                             50.-
David Teniers     Landscape                                    500.-
Titian            Lucretia                                      20.-
 Do.              Venus & Cupid                                100.-
 Do.              The Woman cured by touching the Saviours
                   Garments                                    100.-
 Do.              Holy family                                  150.-
 Do.              Full length portrait Duchess of Parma        500.-
 Do.              The Graces                                   500.-
Tintoretto        Madonna & Child                               70.-
Trevisani         Death of Adonis                               70.-
 Do.              Apollo & Marsias                              70.-
Wm van de Velde   A Stormy Sea                                 300.-
Ale r Veronese    Loth & his Daughters                          40.-
 Do.              Hercules & Omphale                           220.--
 Do.              Samson & Dalila                              100.-
pI Veronese       Rebecca                                       50.-
                                   4 89
                              APPENDICES




       D-III. NUMBER OF SUBSCRIPTIONS BY THE ENTREPRENEURS
      AND MEAN, LOWEST, HIGHEST AND TOTAL SUMS SUBSCRIBED


No.    Name o/house   Num-      Total         Mean       Lowest      Highest
                       ber

   Wed.E.Croese &
   Compo              19     cf 3,525,500   cf186,000   cf 25,000   cf400,000
 2 Franc;ois Walbeek  19     cf2,775,000    cf146,000   cf 25,000   cf250,000
 3 Abraham van Vloten 19     cf 1,992,000   cfl05,000   cf 25,000   cf2oo,000
 4 Rijk Strockel      18     cf 4,147,500   cf230,000   cf 25,000   cf5oo,000
 5 Isaac van Eyck     18     cf 3,812,500   cf212,000   cf 25,000   cf5oo,000
 6 Pieter Stadnitski  17     cf 4,295,000   cf253,000   cf 25,000   cf675,000
 7 Johs Menkema &
   Son                17     cf 1,995,000 cf125,000 cf 25,000 cf200,000
 8 A.H.Vermeulen,
   Rotterdam          17     cf 1,012,500 cf 60,000 cf 25,000 cf 75,000
 9 J .Bourcourd       16     cfl,587,5oo cf 99,000 cf 25,000 cf2oo,000
10 D.W.van Vloten,
   Utrecht            16     cf 950,000 cf 53,000 cf 25,000 cf150,000
11 A.van Ketwich      15     cf 1,825,000 cf122,000 cf 50,000 cf3oo,000
12 Samuel and David
   Saportas           14     cf 1,625,000 cf116,000 cf 25,000 cf250,000
13 Herman Hoogewal 14        cf 975,000 cf 70,000 cf 25,000 cfloo,OOO
14 Van Maurik and
   Willink            13     cf 1,375,000 cf106,000 cf 25,000 cf2oo,000
15 Anthony Charles    13     cf 650,000 cf 50,000 cf 50,000 cf 50,000
16 J.Gossiaux         12     cf 1,500,000 cf125,000 cf 25,000 cf250,000
17 Arend van der
   Werf, Dordrecht    12     cfl,175,000 cf 97,000 cf 25,000 cf150,000
18 Daniel Huttemans,
   Haarlem            12     cfl,loo,OOO cf 92,000 cf 25,000 cf150,000
19 P.van Hogenhuysen
   Junior             10     cf 1,292,500 cf 129,000 cf 30,000 cf2oo,000
20 H.J.Koopman &
   Compo              10     cf 950,000 cf 95,000 cf 50,000 cf150,000
21 N.Ad.van Goetzee   10     cf 900,000 cf 90,000 cf 25,000 cf 150,000
22 H.van Maarseveen    9     cfl,625,000 cf181,000 cf 50,000 cf300,000
23 Wouter Jochems,
   Den Haag            9     cf 650,000 cf 72,000 cf 50,000 cfloo,OOO
24 Herman Ten Kate     8     cf 1,000,000 cf 125,000 cf 75,000 cf2oo,000
25 Van Vloten &
   De Gijselaar        8     cf 650,000 cf 81,000 cf 50,000 cfloo,OOO
26 Huybertvan
   Vloten, Utrecht     8     cf 475,000 cf 59,000 cf 50,000 cf 75,000
27 I.E. Guerin         7     cf 1,100,000 cf157,000 cfl00,OOO cf2oo,000

                                   500
                                  APPENDICES


No.    Name of house      Num-        Total       Mean        Lowest      Highest
                           ber

28 Pama de Kempenaer         7 cf 900,000       cf 129,000 cf 75,000      cf 150,000
29 Paschier Soetbrood,
   Leiden                    7 cf 450,000 cf 65,000 cf 50,000 cf 75,000
30 Wouter Zeelt              6 cf 625,000 cf 104,000 cf 25,000 cf150,000
31 Abraham van Broek         6 cf 437,500 cf 73,000 cf 25,000 cf150,000
32 Vlaer & Kol,
   Utrecht                   6   cf   350,000   cf 58,000    cf 50,000    cf 75,000
33 W.C.Tack & Son            4   cf   500,000   cf 125,000   cf 50,000    cf150,000
34 Donker & Son              3   cf   500,000   cf 167,000   cfl00,000    cf2oo,000
35 Euke Siblesz              3   cf   200,000   cf 67,000    cf 50,000    cf100,000
36 Jan Koning                3   cf   162,500   cf 54,000    cf 50,000    cf 62,500
37 Johs.Bouman               2   cf   100,000   cf 50,000    cf 50,000    cf 50,000
38 Pieter Du Montier             cf   125,000
39 I.D.Croese, Utrecht           cf   100,000
40 Adriaan Maint,
   Westzaan                      cf    25,000
41 Albs.Brinkman                 cf    25,000
42 N.Ad.Gockel                   cf    25,000




        D-IV. ASSESSMENT BY WILLIAM PORTER OF THE SOLIDITY
           OF THE DEBTORS OF GEO. THOMSON ROW AND                 & CO.


KALUSTOV
Four brothers, two of whom are named Martin and two Avet. The most promi-
nent Armenian merchants. Trade in cochineal, cloth and all manner of other
articles, which they barter in Astrakan, principally for Persian silk which they
sell to merchants in Moscow. They are quite rich, and would have been more so
had they not suffered exchange losses.
ZAKHAREV and REBININ
Trade in pots and pans and knives. The leaders in their field. Nevertheless, they
are in difficulties as a result of exchange losses and the new edict prohibiting the
import of all manner of articles. Retailers are not buying, on the one hand be-
cause they are still trying to liquidate their stocks, and on the other because they
are of the opinion that the importation and sale of these goods will be prohibited
on 1st January 1794. If, however, the ban does not materialize, these debtors
will be able to sell their stock at a large profit.
MANUSHIN
Trades under the name of the previous debtors. Zakharev's son-in-law. Deals in
woollen goods, which he sells mainly in the Ukraine. Has suffered heavy losses,
but continues to be regarded as safe.

                                         501
                                   APPENDICES

SHOROKOV
A young house. Has suffered heavy exchange losses by issuing drafts in foreign
currencies.
P.NASHOTKIN
Little capital, active, deals in India price goods.
P.UVAROV
Russian jeweller, reliable, old customer of Thomson Rowand.
IVAN GREBENSHCIDKOV
Moscow retailer dealing in cloth. Very rich, but has applied for moratoriums for
1,2 and 3 years. Thomson Rowand holds assets of his as security, though these
are probably inadequate.
STRAPOZHNIKOV
Wholesale grocer in Moscow. Highly reliable.
ZHIGAREV
One of the China traders; a general merchant; considered worthy of a credit of
3-400,000 roubles.
GUBIN
A wealthy man, but has taken too much money out of his business and invested
it in land.
KIRYAKOV
Safe. A brother-in-law of Gubin, with whom he is not on good terms.
PLONKIN and SIROTIN
Plonkin has earned a lot of money by trading with Leipzig. He has bought land
and has largely retired from business. Sirotin is now running the house; safe.
M.KOLOSOV
Owner of a silk mill in Yaroslavl'. Not particularly rich, but industrious and
honest.
K.GORBUNOV
One of the most reliable shopkeepers. Importer, wholesaler and retailer of cloth.

The principal debtor, GUSYATNIKOV, is not referred to in this summary.




                                         502
                D-V. POLlSH LOANS TAKEN OVER BY THE CZAR OF RUSSIA ON 30TH JUNE AND 29TH OCTOBER 1797
                                                               a: 30th June 1797
                                                              ~--------       ---   ---------
         Name of debtor      Issuing house     Loan sum        Int.   Opening         Principal      Interest       Total          Deed
                                                               rate    date          outstanding     overdue     taken over      enacted by
                                                                                                      since
                                                                       ----------


        The King of        Hope & Co.         cf 2,000,000     5%     1- 1-1786      cf 700,000      1- 1-1794   cf 840,000     C.v.Homrigh
        Poland
        The King of        Q.W.van Hoom
        Poland             and Th.Giilcher
                           & Mulder           cf 1,500,000     5%     1- 3-1791      cf 1,500,000    1- 9-1793   cfl,815,000    A.v.Beem      >
                                                                                                                                              "C
                           Hogguer Grand                                                                                                      "C
        Republic of                                                                                                                           ttl
VI      Poland             &Co.and            cf 2, 100,000    5%     1-11-1790      cf 2, 100,000   1-11-1793   cf2,538,000    A.v.Beem      Z
 0
f..;j                                                                                                                                         ....0
                           R. & Th.de Smeth   cf 955,555              1- 1-1791      cf 955,555      \- \-1794   cfl,146,666
                                                                                                                                              ("l
        Republic of        Pieter de Haan     cf 3,500,000                                                                                    ttl
                                                                                                                                              til
        Poland             P.Zn.              of which         5%     1- 6-1792      cf 760,000      \-12-1792   cf 953,166     C.v.Homrigh
                                              cf 760,000
                                              subscribed
        Prince Alexander   Th.GiiIcher &
        Lubomirski         Mulder             cf 525,000       5%     1-10-1787      cf 330,000      \- 4-1794   cf 391,875     A.v.Beem
        Prince Alexander   Q.W.vanHoom
        Lubomirski         and Th.Giilcher
                           & Mulder           cf 1,500,000     5%     1- 1-1792      cf 1,300,000    \- 1-1794   cf 1,560,000   A.v.Beem
        Prince Joseph      Th.GiiIcher &
        Lubomirski         Mulder             cf 1,000,000     5%     1-12-1789      cf 760,000      1-12-1793   cf 915,166.! A.v.Beem
        Count Michael      Pieter de Haan
        Oginski            P.Zn.              cf 1,000,000     5%     1- 2-1791      cf 1,000,000    1- 8-1793   cf 1,220,833   C.v.Homrigh
                                                            b: 29th October 1797

        Name of debtor        Issuing house     Loan sum      Int.    Opening       Principal     Interest      Total         Deed
                                                              rate     date        outstanding    overdue     taken over    enacted by
                                                                                                    since

     Prince Stanislaw       Th.Gii1cher &
     Lubomirski             Mulder              cf315,OOO     5%     15-12-1781    cf 158,000    15-12-1793   cf 189,929   A.v.Beem
     Prince Adam            R. en Th.de Smeth
     Czartoryski            and Hogguer
                            Grand & Co.         cf535,OOO     5%      1- 1-1793    cf535,000      1- 1-1796   cf588,500    A.v.Beem
     Prince Antoine         Th.GiiIcher &                                                                                                :>
     Barnabe Chrisostom     Mulder                                                                                                       "d
                                                                                                                                         "d
     de Pruss Jablonowski                       cf525,000     5%      1-10-1787    cfI58,OOO     15- 1-1794   cf189,270    A.v.Beem      trl
Ul
0                                                                                                                                        Z
~    Counts Ignace and      Th.GiiIcher &                                                                                                t:::I
     Jean Potocki           Mulder              cf525,OOO             1- 8-1786    cf21O,OOO      1- 2-1793   cf261,625
                                                                                                                                         ....
                                                              5%                                                           A.v.Beem      n
                                                                                                                                         trl
     Count Vincent          Th.Giilcher &
     Potocki                Mulder              cf787,OOO     5%      1- 1-1792    cf787,OOO      1- 1-1793   cf983,750    A.v.Beem      '"
     Matthew and            Pieter de Haan
     Michael Sobanski       P.Zn.               cf350,000     5%      1-12-1791    cf245,OOO                  cf245,OOO    C.v.Homrigh
                                APPENDICES




          D-VI. ESTATES MORTGAGED BY POLISH MAGNATES IN
              CONNEXION WITH THEIR LOANS IN HOLLAND

PRINCES ALEXANDER and JOSEPH LUBOMIRSKI
Prince Joseph Lubomirski sold to his brother, Alexander, the land which he had
provided as security against his loan. This, together with lands given by Alex-
ander himself as security for two loans, comprised the Pobereje estate, which
Alexander ultimately sold to the Russian Crown.
COUNT MICHAEL OGINSKI
Supra, page 156, note 2.
PRINCE STANISLAW LUBOMIRSKI
The estates of Konstantinow in Wolhinia, Wisniez and GreeLeLin (the reference
to the last of these bears a note 'Imperia!'). Prince Stanislaw had died. His
widow, the Dowager Princess Lubomirska, nee Czartoryska, lived at Lanc;ut.
PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI
Klerwan and Zuckow in Wolhinia, in the Luck district, and Konenskowola in the
province of Lublin (marked 'Imperial').
PRINCE ANTOINE BARNABE CHRISOSTOM DE PRUSS JABLONOWSKI
Annopol, Pluzne, Krzywin and Kilikijow, in Wolhinia, in the Luck district, and
Krzemincec.
COUNTS IGNACE and JEAN POTOCKI
The county of Sidra in the wojewodztwo Troki, in the Grodno district, and the
Radzyn estate in the wojewodztwo Lublin, in the Luckow district (marked 'Im-
perial').
COUNT VINCENT POTOCKI
The town of Niemierow and 40 villages, situated in the wojewodztwo Bradaw, in
the Winnica district.
MATTEUS and MICHAEL SOBANSKI
Obodowka, situated in the wojewodztwo of Bradaw, together with 22 bailiwicks
known as Slobada, Josefowka, Cybrolowka, Pisanowka, Ruska, Klemibowka,
Sciana Pisanowka Woloska, Krzykliwiec, Ruskiy Woloski, Howe Pole Palow,
Palowka Maydan, Torkanski, Torkanowka Katazyn, Zabokruyeska, Pictkowka
Balanowka and Dimedowka, together incorporating 19,961 'Ames chretiennes'
and 3,690 farm cottages.
                                  APPENDICES



        D-VU. CREDITS ALLOCATED TO HOUSES IN THE BALlIC AREA
       BY H.E.MONSIEUR BARBE MARBOIS, MINISTER OF THE FRENCH
       TREASURY, AS SET OUT IN HIS LETTER OF 27TH MARCH 1804

J.Morison, Riga                                                      Frs. 2,400,000
Helmund & Son, Riga                                                  Frs. 300,000
Justus Blanckenhagen, Riga                                           Frs. 1,400,000
Melchior Tromposky, Riga 1                                           Frs. 400,000
Toussaint Bros, Konigsberg 2                                         Frs. 500,000
Various merchants in St.Petersburg, upon a visa issued by
Citizen De Lesseps, Consul General of the French Republic
in St. Petersburg 3                                                   Frs. 1,800,000
Senator Meyer, Hamburg, upon a visa issued by Citizen
Ollivier, Agent of the Minister for the Navy in Hamburg 4             Frs. 800,000
Three as yet unnamed merchants from Emden 5                           Frs. 1,400,000
                                                                      Frs. 9,000,000
                                                   at a rate of exchange of Fr. 2.15
                                                   for cf 1.00 = cf 4,186,046.10.0.
I Tromposky was subsequently removed from the list, and his credit was transferred to
  Blanckenhagen.
2 Toussaint Bros, were later replaced by Schwink & Koch, alsof of Konigsberg, for the
  purchase of 3,000 ship-pounds of hemp.
3 These were F.W.Isenbeck, Ant.Colombi, Rd. Mitton and Blandow & Co. The lastnamed
  went bankrupt during the operation.
4 Senator Meyer's place was later taken by Pehmoller & Droop.
S These were Thomas van Cammenga, Claas Tholen and Philippus Julius Abegg. Abegg's
  name was subsequently removed from the list.


              D-VIII. 'PAPIERS CONCERNANT L'OPERATION R.M.'
              RECORD OF PURCHASES AS AT 10TH JULY 1809
RIGA

      500 ship-pounds     Clean hemp at 16i Albertustalers per ship-pound
      500 ship-pounds     Clean hemp at 17!- Albertustalers per ship-pound
    1,000 ship-pounds     Clean hemp at 17-!- Albertustalers per ship-pound
ARCHANGEL

 9,000 barrels of tar     (forward, August delivery) 285 kopecks per barrel
 6,000 barrels of tar     (forward, June/July delivery) 300 kopecks per barrel
15,000 barrels of tar     for forward delivery
 6,OOOpoods               (forward, August delivery) 67 kopecks per pood
 4,OOOpoods               (forward, June/July delivery) 70 kopecks per pood
10,000 poods              for forward delivery
15,000 large mats         (forward, June/July delivery) Ro. 130 per 1,000
30,000 poods iron         spot at 165 kopecks per pood

                                        506
                             APPENDICES

ST PETERSBURG
 0




Flax               Spot
11,000 poods       Roo 60 per pood
 3,ooopoods        Roo 61 per pood
14,000 poods
                   Forward
 5,000poods        Roo 59 }
 6,000poods        Roo 631 all for cash
 2,000 poods       Roo 65     partly for cash
13,000 poods

Clean hemp         Spot
14,000 poods       Roo 49
 2,000 poods       Roo 46
 5,000 poods       Roo 45~
16,4361 poods      Roo 451
 2,500 poods       Roo 45*
24,920 poods       Roo 44
64,8561 poods
                   Forward
26,500 poods       Roo 45 }
23,000 poods       Roo 451 partly for cash
 4,000poods        Roo 44~ all for cash
 2,000poods        Roo 441   1
 3,000 poods       Roo 44 ~ all for cash
 3,000poods        Roo 431 J
61,500 poods

Hemp, low-grade
 1,940poods        spot Roo 42
 7,000 poods       forward Roo 40 partly for cash
 5,000poods        forward Roo 381 all for cash
13,940 poods
Hemp, semi-clean
 1,000 poods       forward Roo 34t all for cash
 3,507* poods      spot Roo 36
   440 poods       spot Roo 37
 4,947* poods
Yellow tallow
 7,000poods        forward Roo 57    Siberian soap tallow, all for cash
 2,600 poods       forward Roo 51    Soap tallow, all for cash
 2,OOOpoods        spot Roo 52       all for cash
11,600 poods
                                APPENDICES


Potash
25,000 poods            forward Ro. 43 )
10,000 poods            forward Ro. 43t all for cash
 2,ooopoods             forward Ro. 44
 7,500poods             forward Ro. 46
44,500 poods
Linseed
 1,500 chetverts        forward Ro. 9 } 1 chetvert = 2.09 hectolitres
 1,500 chetverts        spot Ro. 10     all for cash
 3,000 chetverts
Copper
  989 po ods            spot Ro. 26t
Iron
 70,000 poods forward Kop. 210 1st Old Sable Iron       all for cash
 22,500 poods forward Kop. 180 Old Sable P.S.F.         25 kopecks cash
127,500 po ods forward Kop. 175 Old Sable P.S.F.        25 kopecks cash
 20,000 poods spot       Kop. 165 Old Sable P.S.F.
  15,744 poods spot      Kop. 170 Old Sable P.S.F.
 20,000 poods spot       Kop. 165 Guryev's iron
 62,636.11 poods forward Kop. 170 Broad Iron
338,380.11 poods
Calamancoes (also known as drillings)
  400/2 pieces        Kop. 40 per arshin (l piece = approx. 35 arshins)
2,489 pieces          Kop. 41 per arshin
1,450 pieces          Kop. 42 per arshin
4,339/2 pieces
Diaper (a type of damask)
54,832 arshins          Ro. 225 per 1,000 arshins   Broad Diaper
 1,933 arshins          Ro. 175 per 1,000 arshins   Narrow Diaper
 6,000 arshins          Ro. 170 per 1,000 arshins   Huckaback
62,765 arshins
Sailcloth
   350 pieces           Ro. 3D-!- per piece
   600 pieces           Ro. 30 per piece
 1,949 pieces           Ro. 29 per piece
 1,309 pieces           Ro. 28t per piece
 1,054 pieces           Ro. 28 per piece
   450 pieces           Ro. 27t per piece
 2,250 pieces           Ro. 27 per piece
   410 pieces           Ro. 261- per piece
 1,600 pieces           Ro. 26 per piece
 1,000 pieces           Ro. 23-!- per piece
10,972 pieces

                                       508
                                APPENDICES


Flemish Linen
   96 pieces            Ro. 28 per piece
  560 pieces            Ro. 27-!- per piece
1,400 pieces            Ro. 27 per piece
  300 pieces            Ro. 26i- per piece
  400 pieces            Ro. 26-!- per piece
  780 pieces            Ro. 26 per piece
  420 pieces            Ro. 25-!- per piece
1,100 pieces            Ro. 25 per piece
  620 pieces            Ro. 24-!- per piece
  350 pieces            Ro. 23-!- per piece
  500 pieces            Ro. 22-!- per piece
6,526 pieces
Raven-duck
   704 pieces           Ro. 18 per piece
 1,300 pieces           Ro. 17-!- per piece
 9,880 pieces           Ro. 17 per piece
 1,000 pieces           Ro. 16-!- per piece
   266 pieces           Ro. 15-!- per piece
    72 pieces           Ro. 15-!- per piece
~pieces                 Ro. 1# per piece
13,572 pieces
Crash (a coarse linen fabric) and linen
200,000 arshins           Ro. 110 per 1,000 arshins Crash
 50,000 arshins           Ro. 105 per 1,000 arshins Crash
140,000 arshins           Ro. 115 per 1,000 arshins Crash
 50,000 arshins          Ro. 120 per 1,000 arshins Crash
440,000 arshins                     Crash
20,000 arshins          Ro. 115 per 1,000 arshins Linen
27,000 arshins          Ro. 175 per 1,000 arshins Linen
 6,000 arshins          Ro. 195 per 1,000 arshins Linen
 4,037-!- arshins       Ro. 330 per 1,000 arshins Linen
10,000 arshins          Ro. 350 per 1,000 arshins Linen
12,000 arshins          Ro. 380 per 1,000 arshins Linen
79,037-!- arshins                Linen
                                 APPENDICES




              D-IX. ROBERT MELVIL'S TRAVELLING EXPENSES

Coach                                                             cf 884.16.
Wages of travelling servant for 8-!- months at 10 louis d'or
(cf 11.14) per month                                              cf 994.10
Expenses on outward journey via Leipzig                           cfl,600.00
Expenses on return journey via Berlin                             cf 1,400.00
Lodging expenses in St. Petersburg                                cf2,867. 3
                                                                  cf7,746. 0.9

               INVESTMENT PER HOUSE BY ROBERT MELVIL


In Riga
Sum of drafts for purchases of hemp
J.D.Drachenhauer & Co.                  8,359.15 rixdollars
B.J.Zuckerbacker Klein & Co.           47,669.13 rixdollars
Cumming Fenton & Co.                   17,412.47 rixdollars
                                       73,441.75 rixdollars      cf 183,603.15
In St.Petersburg and Archangel
St. Petersburg :
Meyer & Bruxner                         Ro.l,103,252.18
Porter Brown & Co.                      Ro. 227,328.25
Thornton Cayley & Co.                   Ro. 113,690.26
Bothlingk & Co.                         Ro. 104,068.71
Cramer Bros.                            Ro. 167,611.-
Wolff & Schliisser                      Ro. 312,500.01
P.J.Blessig & Co.                       Ro. 238,965.51
100 barrels of potash, transported
overland                                Ro.    20,290.87
Bergien & Co.                           Ro.   268,980.-
Archangel:
Alex.Becker                             Ro.   104,598.82
                                        Ro.2,661,285.61
                                        at a rate of exchange
                                        of 17 stuivers          cf 2,262,092.15
                                                                cf 2,445,696.10




                                      5 10
                                   APPENDICES



              D-X. ASSESSMENT OF VARIOUS MERCHANTS IN
            ST.PETERSBURG BY P.C.LABOUCHERE, EARLY 1812

MOLLWO BROS
Solid and pleasant to deal with.
MEYER & BRUXNER
An excellent house. Meyer is an annoying person; Bruxner is rich and not hap-
pily married.
LIVIO
A wealthy and solid house. The man himself is tiresome and sentimental.
CRAMER & SMITH
An active house; has done a great deal of business with America. Cramer him-
self is somewhat too animated and jolly.
COLOMBI
Spaniards; reputed to be solid.
CAYLEY
Formerly the house of Thornton; excellent people.
BLESSIG
A good reputation. Looks sly, but appears to be honest. Good company.
VENNING
In association with Fischer. A reasonably sound firm.
SCHLUSSER
A sombre, boring firm. The man is rich but lach finesse.
BAGGE & CO.
A good firm. The manager, Tesche, has a pleasant wife.
PICHLER & CO.
Former partner of Livio. The proprietor now holds a position related to the
Sinking Fund. Has a large family, and is not at home to anybody.
KIRCHENER
A poor head for business; the czar has lent him 400,000 guilders. His debts are
said to run into several million. A nice man. His wife is one of the most remark-
able and striking women in St.Petersburg.




                                      5Il
       E. THE PORTUGESE DIAMOND LOAN




           E-1. QUANTITIES, IN CARATS, SOLD ON BEHALF
                     OF LONDON DIAMOND MERCHANTS


Year      Quantity         Year          Quantity      Year       Quantity
1770      7,324             1778         19,411t       1786       18,269/6
1771      2,532             1779          3,116-i-     1787       17,252i
1772      1,75Ji            1780          5,325 196    1788       11,694i-
1773      8,864i            1781         17,007i       1789       21,055l
1774     34,605             1782         22,345/6      1790       15,7271-
1775     21,713~ ~          1783         21,598 176    1791       17,189 136
1776      8,752~ ~          1784         19,866g       1792       16,675i
1777      8,921-!-          1785         23,437-!-     1793          782i
                                                       1794        1,224i




                       E-U. QUANTITIES, IN CARATS,
                      SOLD ON BEHALF OF QUINTELLA


             Year         Quantity           Year     Quantity

             1791         30,349l            1797     17,378~ ~
             1792         18,721l            1798      2,041i
             1793         23,023             1799      3,976
             1794         30,860~ ~          1800     10,961  t
             1795                            1801     19,170
             1796         12,458




                                      5 12
                                   APPENDICES




       E-Ill. SUMMARY OF QUANTITIES, IN CARATS, OF DIAMONDS
          (A) RECEIVED IN LONDON BY BARING BROS. & CO.
  (B) ACCOUNTED FOR TO THE PORTUGUESE COURT BY HOPE                       & CO.

Year          (A) Received by Baring            (B) Accounted         Sum
                                                 for by Hope
1802        114,000                                33,000       cf 821,390. 4.0
           { 75,000 per 'Amazone'                  36,000       cf 936,383. 0.8
1803
             15,000 per 'Duke of York'              4,500       cf 99,607. 3.0
1804
1805         30,000 per 'Pomona'                   35,000       cf 840,881. 4.0
1806          9,500 per 'St.Margarita'             20,000       cf 455,009. 6.0
1807                                               30,000       cf 768,848.12.0
1808         15,000 per 'Lively'                   45,000       cf 1,110,586.17.0
1809                                               54,500       cfl,496,970.17.8
1810

In addition to the official diamond account with the Portuguese government,
Hope maintained one headed 'Diamonds for our account' in which settlements
for small quantities were entered each year.




              E-IV. DIVISION OF THE PORTUGUESE BONDS
                INTO VARIOUS CATEGORIES, 1803-1805


                                         1803          1804      1805
        Unredeemed                       10,882       9,743      8,548
        Henry Hope & Co.                  4,205       3,907      3,421
        Relatives and friends             1,377       1,264      1,032
        'Reserve Hope & Co.'                928         894        894
        'Concern' (unsold)                3,372       1,000
        Borski and associates             1,000       2,678       3,201




                                      5 13
                                    APPENDICES




               E-V. QUANTITIES OF BRAZIL WOOD TAKEN BY
               THE HOUSE OF JACOB MUHL               & VAN WINTER

Year                 Date                       Quantity               Price per qUintal
1804                                       600,000 pounds                f45. banco
1805           28th January                100,000 pounds                f45. banco
1805           10th December               300,000 pounds                f40. banco
1806           20th November               150,000 pounds                f40. banco
1807           28th May                    150,000 pounds                f40. banco
1807           14th September              300,000 pounds                f45. banco
1808            3rd December               200,000 pounds                f 72.50 banco
1811            4th December               130,000 pounds                f85. banco


               E-VI. METHOD OF PAYMENT OF INTEREST AND
            PRINCIPAL ON THE PORTUGUESE DIAMOND LOAN


Year      Transferred from        Received(rom the
          diamond account          tobacco lessees
1802      cf 585,939.15.0         cfl,113,890. 5.0
1803      cf 715,694. 6.8         cf 984,489. 3.8
1804      cf 581,424. 0.0         cfl,122,103. 6.0
1805      cf 637,388.14.0         cf 1,061,582.16.0
1806      cf 696,681. 2.0         cf 1,008,321. 5.0
1807      cf 821,615. 2.0         cf 878,769.18.0
1808      cf 1,086,330. 6.8       cf 46,498.17.0 1
1809      cfl,444,794. 9.8        cf 256,816.16.8 in drafts on the tobacco lessees
1810      cf                      cfl,713,063. 8.0 in drafts on Baring Bros. &Co.

1 A deficit of cf 567,606.16.8 remained after the payment of these sums. This was met with
  drafts on the tobacco lessees.
                                                                       F. COCHINEAL



                                F-I. SALES, PER YEAR AND PER MARKET, IN SEROONS, SOBERNALES AND POUNDS

                                          --      ---


     Year           Amsterdam           London          Cadiz (Boh!)              Marseilles          Rauen      St.Petersburg   Hamburg           Total
     -                                                               --- - - - - - - - -    --        ----- -------

     1788                 62                                                                                                                        62
     1789                201               140                  10                          87                                                     438
     1790                142               486                                              50          16             5                           699
     1791                 52               555 and                                         164                         6                           777 and
Vl
H                                           94 pounds                                                                                               94 pounds
Vl
     1792                104                                                               131 and      79 and                                     314and
                                                                                            25 sob.      2sob.                                      27 sob.
     1793                  2                 41 and                                        102                                                     145 and
                                            810 pounds                                                                                             810 pounds
     Total Sales         563              1,222 and             10                         534and       95 and        II                         2,435
                                            904 pounds                                      25 sob.      2sob.                                      27 sob. and
                                                                                                                                                   904 pounds
     Total               628'               866             1,282 and                      308 and     111            91 and       60 and        3,346 and
     Purchases                                                 59 sob.                       3 sob.                   61 sob.       1 sob.         124sob. 2
                                                            (Ryan and
                                                             Bohl)
                                                            -~-~--
                                                                             --

     1   During '792,22 seroons were purchased for the purpose of replenishing other bales. These cannot, of course, be included in the sales.
     2   Adding the 22 bales bought in I792 brings the total to 3368 seroons and 124 sobernales.
            F-II. AVERAGE SELLING PRICES FOR COCHINEAL IN EACH YEAR ON EACH MARKET, EXPRESSED IN GUILDERS AND
                                                        SCHELLING EN PER AMSTERDAM POUND1)

                                                                                                                                        -   ---------


        Year     Average         Amsterdam              London                Cadiz              Marseilles               Rauen               Sf.Petersburg
                quotation 2
                    at
               Amsterdam         cf      sch.          cf      sch.         (f     sch.         cf      sch.           cf       sch.           (f      sch.
                                                                              ------

        1788      9.66          9.76    32t
        1789      8.44          8.25    27t           7.98     26~         7.93    26 1        9.53     311-
        1790      8.15          7.60    25t           9.44     31 1                            8.31     27-fo        11.29     37j            11.14    37-(0    >
                                                                                                                                                                "C
                                                                                                                                                                "C
        1791      8.35          7.87    26t           7.94     26t                             8.00     26j                                    9.60    32       trl
Vl
.....   1792      8.25          6.55    21i                                                    7.42     24-(0          5.91    19 170                           z
0\                                                                                                                                                              tl
                                                                                                                                                                .....
        1793      8.93          5.78    19-fo         6.89     23                              7.35     241                                                     (')
                                                                                                                                                                trl
        Average purchase                                                                                                                                        '"
        price on market         8.54    28t           9.31     31         7.75     25i         8.58     28t           9.75     321            11.32    37io
                                                                                                                            ----




        I The average selling prices have been calculated from the 'Cochineal Account,' the entries in which relate to Hope's three-quarter share. The seroon
          was taken to be 200 Amsterdam pounds, and the sobernal IOO.
        2 According to N.W.Posthumus, Nederlandsche Prijsgeschiedenis, I, p. 422_
Page from the Ballance bookje of Hope & Co.
                                     APPENDICES




          F-III MOVEMENTS OF COCHINEAL BETWEEN THE VARIOUS
                       MARKETS IN THE PERIOD                 1788-1793
                    (QUANTITIES IN SEROONS AND SOBERNALES)


            Amsterdam                    London                 Cadiz (Ryan)            Marseilles
1788     Stock          628      Stock             866         Stock    1,158        Stock      308
         from Cadiz     400      from Cadiz        200         to A'dam   400           + H-(sob.)
         to London       26      fromA'dam          26         to London 200         from Cadiz 50
         Sold            62                                    to Mars.    50
1789     Stock      940          Stock      1,092              Stock         508     Stock       358
         from Cadiz 100          from Cadiz   100              toA'dam       100        + It (sob.)
         fromH'burg 54           Sold         140              to London     100     from Cadiz 308
         Sold       201                                        to Mars.      308     Sold          87
                                                               Ryan's stock      0
                                                               Bohl's stock 124
                                                                  + 29-} (sob.)
                                                               Sold             10
1790     Stock          893      Stock     1,052               Stock       114       Stock       579
         to St.P.       102      fromA'dam     3                 + 29t (sob.)           + It (sob.)
         to London        3      Sold        486                                     Sold          50
         Sold           142
1791     Stock          646      Stock             569         Stock          114    Stock       529
         to Moscow      215      from Cadiz         25            + 29-} (sob.)         + It (sob.)
         Sold            52      Sold              555t        to London        25   Sold        164
1792     Stock           379      Stock             45         Stock          89     Stock        365
         to St.P.          6               +t                    + 29t (sob.)            + It (sob.)
         to Moscow       110                                                         to East.
         Sold            104                                                         Med.         106 2
                                                                                     Sold         131
                                                                                         + 12t (sob.)
1793     Stock           159      Stock             45         Stock          89     Stock        117
         to St.P.         85               +t                    + 29t (sob.)        Sold          61
         Sold              2      Sold              45
rem.
at
                                                         1
end                       72                             2                     89                    56
of                                                                + 29-1-(sob.)
1793
 I   In 1788, at Hope's request, Beerend Roosen in Hamburg had placed orders with Rey &
     Brandenburg, Bohl Brothers & Co. and Ellerman Schliepen & Co., all of Cadiz, for 6, 5
     and 6 seroons respectively, for the purpose of supporting the price in Cadiz.


                                             518
                                            APPENDICES




  Rauen               Sf. Petersburg                    Moscow                   Hamburg
Stock 111           Stock          91                                        Stock          43
                      + 30t (sob.)                                               +t (sob.)
                                                                             from Cadiz     17
                                                                             (support purch.) 1
                                                                       ---
Stock 111           Stock          91                                        Stock          60
                      + 30} (sob.)                                               + t (sob.)
                                                                             toA'dam        54




Stock 111           Stock           91                                       Stock              6
Sold   16              + 30t (sob.)                                              + t (sob.)
                    from A'dam 102
                    Sold             5

Stock   95          Stock     188               Stock                        Stock              6
                      +30Hsob.)                 fromA'dam 215                    +t(sob.)
                    Sold        6
Stock 95            Stock         182           Stock      215
Sold   79              + 30t (sob.)             from A'dam 110
+2 (sob.)           from A'dam      6




Stock   15          Stock         188           Stock            325         Stock              6
                       + 30t (sob.)                                              + t (sob.)
                    from A'dam 85


        15                       273                             325                            6
                       + 30t(sob.)                                               + t (sob.)


          2 In 1793, Paul Thoron and M.W.Qm.Salomon Fua sold 24 and 4 seroons respectively in
            Constantinople, while I.B.Geraud & Co. of Smyrna sold 13 seroons.




                                                 5 19
                G. CAPITAL AND PROFIT




    G-I. CAPITAL OF HOPE          & CO. AND THE SHARE OF THE PARTNERS
       THEREIN, IN 'GULDENS COURANT,' IN THE PERIOD        1762-1785

Year       Capital!        Thomas Hope      Adrian Hope       Henry Hope         John Hope

1762     4,279,000.16.8   2,733,657.11.8   1,489,005. 9.8       57,326.15.8
1763     4,604,943. 2.0   2,813,745. 7.8   1,616,342. 1.0      129,061, 0.0       45,794.13.8
1764     4,801,855.18.8   2,469,417. 2.8   1,701,929.17.0      174,186. 8.8      456,322.10.8
1765     5,088,126.15.0   2,567,873. 3.8   1,815,805.10.8      229,546.13.0      474,901. 8.0
1766     5,420,954. 3.8   2,681,567. 2.8   1,939,409.15.8      286,398,11.8      513,578.14.0
1767     6,033,320.18.8   2,900,567. 7.0   2,170,621.17.8      392,401,19.0      569,729.15.0
1768     6,448,212.16.8   3,051,751.19.0   2,326,403.15.8      463,482.18.0      606,574. 4.0
1769     6,815,487.16.8   3,190,554. 2.8   2,457,971. 0.0      518,874. 3.0      648,088.11.0
1770     7,253,232.18.8   3,357,637.14.0   2,631,526. 3.8      576,390. 7.0      687,678.14.0
1771     7,647,772. 6.8   3,537,317. 8.8   2,733,587.12.8      631,008.16.8      745,858. 9.0
1772     7,827,364. 5.0   3,613,629. 4.0   2,824,807. 4.0      642,414.14.8      746,513. 2.8
1773     8,037,999. 3.0   3,697,550.10.0   2,918,158. 4.8      668,537.16.8      753,752.12.0
1774     8,086,819. 5.0   3,725,985.19.0   2,999,720. 1.0      687,743.17.0      673,369. 8.0
1775     8,385,834. 4.0   3,849,196.12.0   3,114.438. 2.0      730,628.14.0      691,570.16.0
1776     8,762,299.15.8   3,997,201.17.8   3,252,453. 3.8      778,653,10.0      733,991. 4.8
1777     9,189,353.14.0   4,164,877.18.8   3,414,792.11.0      831,749. 8.0      777,933.16.8
1778     9,629,990.17.0   4,320.818. 2.0   3,586,492. 4.0      884,555. 9.0      838,125. 2.0
1779    10,055,063. 7.8   4,488,803.14.8   3,753,909.15.0      938,315.16.8      874,034. 1.8
1780    10,333,858.16.8                    3,929,618.10.8      977,418. 8.0    5,426,821.18.0
1781     9,056,172.11.0                                      2,376,573. 1.0    6,679,599.10.0

Year        Capital         N.Bauduin        J. Williams      Henry Hope         John Hope
                                                Hope

1782     8,731,205. 0.0      30,543. 1.8      15,919. 2.0    2,223,787.11.0    6,460,955. 5.8
1783     9,174,575. 5.8      69,095.17.8      50,662. 0.0    2,420,691.1 0.8   6,634,125.17.8
1784     9,911,548. 9.0     208,139.13.8      90,100. 3.8    2,728,786.12.8    6,784,521.19.8 •
1785    10,777,177.17.8     318,243.19.8     294,439. 5.8    2,943,118.11.8    7,213,734. 0.0'


I A guilder is divided into 20 stuivers each consisting of 2 groten. As one groot is made up of
  8 penningen, it is represented in the accounts by the figure 8. The number of stuivers and
  penningen appear on the right ofthe guilder amounts, e.g. cf715,694. 6.8.
2 'John Hope's heirs.'




                                            520
                                        APPENDICES




                 G-J. PROFITS AND THE SHARE OF THE PARTNERS
        IN THESE, IN 'GULDENS COURANT,' IN THE PERIOD                    1762-1785

Year    Distributed     Thomas Hope     Adrian Hope   Henry Hope     John Hope       Remaining
          profit                                                                      in credit
                                                                                        (elf)
1762   412,766.0.0 '     206,388. 0.0   137,588.13.0  68,794.17.0
1763   461,124.13.0 2    153,708. 4.0   153,708. 4.0  76,854. 2.8  76,854. 2.8
1764   309,895. 6.8      103,298. 9.0   103,298. 9.0  51,649. 4.8  51,649. 4.8
1765   365,661.15.0      121,887. 5.0   121,887. 5.0  60,943.12.8  60,943.12.8
1766   394,638. 9.8      131,546. 3.0   131,546. 3.0  65,773. 1.8  65,773. 2.0
1767   720,906. 4.0      240,302. 1.0   240,302. 1.0 120,151. 1.0 120,151. 1.0
1768   514,457.14.8      171,485.18.0   171,485.18.0  85,742.19.8  85,742.19.8
1769   487,234.13.8      162,411.11.0   162,411.11.0  81,205.15.8  81,205.15.8
1770   565,660.19.0      188,553.13.0   188,553.13.0  94,276.16.8  94,276.16.8
1771   619,935. 3.0      206,645. 1.0   206,645. 1.0 103,322.10.8 103,322.11.0
1772   300,000. 0.0      100,000. 0.0   100,000. 0.0  50,000. 0.0  50,000. 0.0      225,243. 4.8
1773   331,916.14.8      110,638.18.0   110,639.18.0  55,319. 9.0  55,319. 9.8      400,000. 0.0
1774   300,000. 0.0      100,000. 0.0   100,000. 0.0  50,000. 0.0  50,000. 0.0      289,981.19.0
1775   400,000. 0.0      133,333. 6.8   133,333. 6.8  66,666.13.8  66,666.13.8      194,294.17.0
1776   500,000. 0.0      166,666.13.0   166,666.13.0  83,333. 7.0  83,333. 7.0      135,698.16.0
1777   540,000. 0.0      180,000. 0.0   180,000. 0.0  90,000. 0.0  90,000. 0.0      138,439. 9.0
1778   560,685. 3.0      186,895. 1.0   186,895. 1.0  93,447.10.8  93,447.10.8
1779   508,710. 8.0      169,570. 2.8   169,570. 2.8  84,785. 1 8  84,785. 1.8
1780   542,935.18.8 3                   180,978.13.0 135,733.19.8 226,223. 6.0
1781   504,000. 0.0 4                                210,000. 0.0 294,000. 0.0       71,832. 2.8

Year    Distributed      N.Bauduin      J.Williams    Henry Hope     John Hope      Remaining
          profit                          Hope                                       in credit
1782   480,000. 0.0 5     30,000. 0.0    30,000. 0.0 175,000. 0.0 245,000. 0.0      147,051. 7.8
1783   672,000. 0.0       42,000. 0.0    42,000. 0.0 245,000. 0.0 343,000. 0.0      140,299. 3.8
1784   768,000. 0.0 6     96,000. 0.0    96,000. 0.0 280,000. 0.0 296,000. 0.0 '2    56,674.0.0
1785   975,000. 0.0      120,000. 0.0   120,000. 0.0 350,000. 0.0 370,000. 0.0 12    56,179.13.8


For footnotes, see page 525.




                                             521
                                      APPENDICES




  G-II. CAPITAL OF HOPE            & CO. AND THE SHARE OF THE PARTNERS
       THERE IN, IN 'GULDENS COURANT,' IN THE PERIOD        1786-180 I

Year        Capital        J.C.Hartsinck     J.Williams       Henry Hope       John Hope's
                                               Hope                               heirs

1786    11,152,807. 6.0       1,333. 6.8     406,386.15.0    3,077,042. 4.8   7,668,045. 0.0
1787    11,705,850. 9.0         743.16.8     599,692. 9.8    3,058,186.10.0   8,047,227.13.0
1788    11,338,146.11.8       9,372. 3.0     641,233.19.8    2,736,758.16.8   7,950,781.12.8
1789    11,298,262.10.8                      652,867.18.0    2,672,493. 5.8   7,972,901. 7.0

Year        Capital        Thomas Hope       J.Williams       Henry Hope       Adrian Elias
                                               Hope                             and Henry
                                                                               Philip Hope

1790    11,796,570. 1.0    2,785,133.15.8     728,273. 1.0   2,819,741.10.0   5,463,421.14.8
1791    13,023,649.10.8    2,970,204.15.0     939,302.15.0   3,268,533.16.0   5,485,608.14.8
1792    13,367,527.11.8    2,915,823.14.0   1,031,942.17.8   3,396,879.15.8   6,022,880. 4.8
1793    13,462,222. 4.0    2,847,612.16.0   1,103,329. 3.8   3,460,352. 3.0   6,050,928. 1.8
1794    13,435,648. 7.8    2,941,817.11.0   1,156,920. 2.0   3,466,605.13.8   5,870,305. 1.0

Year        Capital        Thomas Hope       J.Williams       Henry Hope       Adrian Elias
                                                Hope                            and Henry
                                                                               Philip Hope

1795    13,650,499. 8.0    3,014,463. 2.0   1,229,588. 3.0   3,444,065.10.0   5,962,382.13.0
1796    13,697,487. 4.0    3,061,968. 9.8   1,274,374.14.0   3,410,659. 0.0   5,950,485. 0.8
1797    14,080,063.18.8    3,147,982. 9.8   1,353,422. 1.0   3,568,116.19.0   6,020,542. 9.0
1798    14,649,647. 2.8    3,233,802, 3.8   1,464,130.16.0   3,793,432.18.0   6,158,281. 5.0
1799    14,913,048.14.8    3,214,233.12.8   1,575,533.16.0   3,992,503.18.8   6,130,777. 7.8

Year        Capital        Thomas Hope       J.Williams       Henry Hope       Adrian Elias
                                               Hope                               Hope

1800     15,229,568.13.8   3,214,535. 7.0   1,678,544.17.0   4,194,377. 3.8   3,354,083.10.0
                                                                              Henry Ph.Hope
                                                                              2,788,027.16.0
                                                                                Adrian Elias
                                                                                   Hope
1801     16,561,849.14.0   3,305,350.15.8   1,942,730. 4.0   4,759,761. 2.0   3,589,888. 8.8
                                                                              Henry Ph.Hope
                                                                              2,964,119. 4.0




                                             522
                                         APPENDICES




                 G-ll. PROFITS AND THE SHARE OF THE PARTNERS
        IN THESE, IN 'GULDENS COURANT,' IN THE PERIOD 1786-1801

        Distributed      J.C.Hartsinck   J.Williams     Henry Hope      John Hope's    Remaining
          profit                           Hope                            heirs        in credit
                                                                                          (elf)

(1785)                     15,000. 0.0
1786 1,058,390. 0.0 7      15,000. 0.0 130,423.17.0     443,803. 7.0   469,163.10.0
1787 918,528. 1.8 8        15,000. 0.0 225,881.19.0     329,411. 5.0   438,234.17.8
1788   480,000. 0.0 9      30,000. 0.0  70,000. 0.0     185,000. 0.0   195,000. 0.0      3,269.15.8
1789   378,000. 0.0 10                  58,800. 0.0     155,400. 0.0   163,800. 0.0

         Distributed     Thomas Hope     J.Williams     Henry Hope      Adrian Elias   Remaining
           profit                           Hope                         and Henry      in credit
                                                                         Ph.Hope

1790 720,000. 0.0"        127,500. 0.0   112,500. 0.0   277,500. 0.0 202,500. 0.0
1791 1,457,376. 0.0       258,077. 0.0   227,715. 0.0   561,697. 0.0 409,887. 0.0           30. 6.0
1792 720,000. 0.0         127,500. 0.0   112,500. 0.0   227,500. 0.0 202,500. 0.0          406. 7.8
1793   526,080. 0.0        93,160. 0.0    82,200. 0.0   202,760. 0.0 147,960. 0.0          277. 5.0
1794 560,000. 0.0          99,167. 0.0    87,500. 0.0   215,833. 0.0 157,500. 0.0       16,777.14.0

Year    Distributed      Thomas Hope     J.Williams     Henry Hope      Adrian Elias   Remaining
          profit                           Hope                          and Henry      in credit
                                                                        Philip Hope

1795   560,000. 0.0        99,167. 0.0    87,500. 0.0   215,833. 0.0   157,500. 0.0    119,416. 7.0
1796   465,280. 2.8        85,000. 0.0    75,000. 0.0   185,500. 0.0   135,000. 0.0     14,219.17.8
                                                                                        (too much
                                                                                       distributed)
1797   624,000. 0.0       110,500. 0.0    97,500. 0.0 240,500. 0.0   175,500. 0.0        8,661. 3.0
1798   840,000. 0.0       148,750. 0.0   131,250. 0.0 323,750. 0.0   236,250. 0.0        8,336. 1.0
1799   840,000. 0.0       148,750. 0.0   131,250. 0.0 323,750. 0.0   236,250. 0.0       11,909. 1.0
1800   840,000. 0.0       148,750. 0.0   131,250. 0.0 323,750. 0.0    Adrian Elias      77,835.13.0
                                                                         Hope           (too much
                                                                     118,125. 0.0      distributed)
                                                                      Henry Philip
                                                                         Hope
                                                                     118,125. 0.0
1801 1,920,000. 0.0       340,000. 0.0   300,000. 0.0   740,000. 0.0 270,000. 0.0       41,381. 5.8
                                                                      Adrian Elias
                                                                         Hope
                                                                     270,000. 0.0

For footnotes, see page 525.




                                               52 3
                                       APPENDICES


Year       Capital           Henry Hope      P.C.Labouchere    Adrian Elias       J.Williams
                               & Co.                              Hope              Hope

1802     5,180,928.14.8     5,000,000. 0.0     180,928.14.8
1803     5,232,382. 3.0     5,000,000. 0.0     232,382. 3.0
1804     5,276,211.13.0     5,000,000. 0.0     276,211.13.0
1805     5,360,211. 9.8     5,000,000. 0.0     360,211. 9.8
1806     5,496,114.10.0     5,000,000. 0.0     496,114.10.0
1807     5,601,308. 3.8     2,000,000. 0.0     601,308. 3.8    3,000.000, 0.0
1808     5,710,834.14.0     2,000,000. 0.0     710,834.14.0    3,000.000. 0.0
1809     5,485,717. 7.0                        485,717. 7.0    3,000.000. 0.0   2,000,000. 0.0
1810     5,403,700. 6.8                        403,700. 6.8    3,000.000. 0.0   2,000,000. 0.0
1811     2,443,700. 6.8                        443,700. 6.8                     2,000,000. 0.0
        'Oude Boeken'                                                              John Hope
1812       378,000. 0.0 1                                                         378.000. 0.0
       'Nieuwe Boeken'                                                             John Hope
1812     1,000,000. 0.0 2                                                       1,000,000. 0.0
        'Oude Boeken'                                                             Henry Hope
                                                                                     & Co.
1813     1,000,000. 0.0                                                         1,000,000. 0.0
       'Nieuwe Boeken'                                                            Henry Hope
                                                                                     & Co.
1813    1,000,000. 0.0                                                          1,000,000. 0.0

Year       Capital                              A.Baring                         Henry Hope
                                                                                   & Co.

1814    1,433,019.14.8                          433,019.14.8                    1,000,000. 0.0
1815    1,750,000. 0.0                        1,750,000. 0.0

1 Carried forward to the account of Hope & Co., London, in 1813 as 'Debt owed by John
  Hope.'
2 Credit.
                                          APPENDICES


Year    Distributed       Henry Hope      P.G.Labou-                                      Remaining
          profit            & Co.            chare                                         in credit
                                                                                             (clf)

1802 1,161,300. 0.0 '3     995,400. 0.0 165,900. 0.0                                      408.17.0
1803 840,000. 0.0          720,000. 0.0 120,000. 0.0                                   14,004.18.0
1804 574,000. 0.0          492,000. 0.0     82,000. 0.0                                 1,048. 0.0
1805 980,000. 0.0          840,000. 0.0 140,000. 0.0                                    1,296.10.0
1806 1,190,000. 0.0      1,020,000. 0.0 170,000. 0.0                                      650. 2.8
1807 910,000. 0.0          780,000. 0.0 130,000. 0.0                                    3,092. 6.0
1808 938,000. 0.0          804,000. 0.0 134,000. 0.0                                      918. 3.0
1809 735,000. 0.0 '4       615,000. 0.0 120,000. 0.0                                   15,875.17.0
1810    44,100. 0.0         36,900. 0.0      7,200. 0.0                                 2,483.17.8
18ll   245,000. 0.0        205,000. 0.0     40,000. 0.0
1812 212,715.18.8        (loss, charged to Henry Hope & Co. in 1813) (,OudeBoeken')
1812    18,421. 9.8      (loss, charged to Henry Hope & Co. in 1813) ('Nieuwe Boeken')
1813    41,350.14.8      (loss, 'Oude Boeken')
1813    59,454. 5.0      (profit, 'Nieuwe Boeken')
1814 106,223.18.0        (profit)

         Distributed        H.Sillem       A.v.d.Hoop    P.F.Lestapis      A.Baring        Remaining
           profit                                                                           in credit

1815    220,000. 0.0        55,000. 0.0    27,500. 0.0    27,500. 0.0   ltO,OOO. 0.0        3,022.14.0

 1 In 1762 the profit was shared as follows: Thomas Hope 3/6ths, Adrian Hope 2/6ths, Henry Hope
    '16th.
 2 From 1763 to 1779 the shares were: Thomas Hope '/3rd, Adrian Hope '/3rd, Henry Hope 11oth,
    John Hope 'loth.
 3 In 1780 the shares were: Adrian Hope '/3rd, Henry Hope 1/4th, John Hope '/,2ths.
 4 In 1781 the shares were: Henry Hope '/'2thS, John Hope 7/'2ths.
 5 In 1782 and 1783 the shares were: Henry Hope 3S196ths, John Hope 49/96ths, Nicolas Bauduin
     6/ 96 ths, John Williams Hope 6/96ths.
 6 In 1784 and 1785 the shares were: Henry Hope 3S196ths, John Hope's heirs 37/96thS, Nicolas
     Bauduin 12/96ths, John Williams Hope 12/96ths.
 7 In 1786 the shares were: Henry Hope 3S196ths plus 3S/ nnds of 12/96ths, John Hope's heirs
     37 196ths plus 37 Innds 0[12/96ths, John Williams Hope 12/96ths.

 8 In 1787 the shares were: Henry Hope 3S/ 96 ths, John Hope's heirs 37/96ths, John Williams Hope
     24/96ths.
 9 In 1788 the shares were: Henry Hope 37/96ths, John Hope's heirs 39/96ths, John Williams Hope
     '4/96ths, J.C.Hartsinck 6/96ths.
10 In 1789 the shares were: Henry Hope 37/90thS, John Hope's heirs 39/90ths, John Williams Hope
     '4/90ths.
I I From 1790 to 1801 the shares were: Henry Hope 37/96ths, John Williams Hope lS/96thS, Thomas
     Hope 17/90ths, Adrian Elias and Henry Philip Hope 27/96ths (in 1800 and 1801 their joint share
     was divided into two equal sums).
12 In 1784 and 1785 'John Hope's heirs.'
13 From 1802 to 1808 the profit was shared as follows: Henry Hope & Co. 6/7ths, P.C.Labouchere
   '/7th.
14 From 1809 to 181 I the shares were: Henry Hope & Co. 41/49ths, P.C.Labouchere 8/49 ths.

It is clear from the profit figures shown above that the Hope millions did not stem from profits on the
firm's capital. This becomes the more evident if one reflects that the growth of this capital was
achieved by consistently ploughing back a substantial portion of the distributed profit. The real
profits were made on private transactions financed by the partners from their private accounts.

                                                 525
SOURCES AND A LIST OF WORKS CITED
                               SOURCES




The most important source of information for this study was, of course, the
Hope archives, which are at present kept at Messrs. Mees & Hope's offices in
the Coolsingel in Rotterdam. These archives have not yet been put in order, and
in view of this the references to archival sources in the Notes are as comprehen-
sive as possible, thus simplifying the task of tracing them when the whole has
been placed in its correct sequence.
  As regards the accountancy details, all the Journals and Grootboeken from
1770 onwards are available. In the case of the grootboeken, the alphabetical
registers for the years 1776-1794 inclusive are missing, with the result that it
takes considerably longer to obtain information from these sources. The Balance
Sheets date from 1763, but those for the periods 1777-1785 and 1800--1808 have
not survived. There are also smaller account books and single account sheets,
most of which relate to specific transactions and afford more detailed informa-
tion about these than do the grootboeken. They are denoted by a certain name,
letter or number in the Notes.
 The correspondence can be divided into incoming and outgoing. As stated
above, the references to incoming letters are as complete as possible. The ma-
jority of the outgoing letters were copied in the letter books, of which the fol-
lowing are still in existence:
15th January 1795-18th April 1800: 'Letter book for Replies.' This contains
copies of correspondence between Paulus Taay, in Amsterdam, and Hope &
Co.'s business associates on the Continent. This letterbook is numbered A XXIV
in the Notes.
15th May 1798-22nd November 1803: Letter book of the partners in London,
numbered VI.
22nd November 1803-9th May 1805: Letter book of the partners in Amster-
dam, numbered A II.
2nd Januari 1807-24th January 1809: Letter book of the partners in Amster-
dam, numbered VII.
24th January I 809-3 1St December 18B: Letter book of the partners and man-
agers in Amsterdam, numbered A XXVII, Nos. i and ii.
2nd January 1812-30th December 1814: Letter book of the managers in Amster-
dam, numbered A XXVIII.

                                      529
                                  SOURCES

7th October 1802-8th March 1809: Letter book of Henry Hope & Co., London,
numbered A I.
16th March 1809-30th June 1823: Letter book of Henry Hope & Co., London,
and their bookkeeper, numbered A v.
3rd June 1803-25th July 1806: Letter book of Henry Hope, London, numbered
Am.
19th September 1806-6th February 18u: Letter book of Henry Hope, London,
numbered A XXVI.
In addition to these general letter books, there are a number which relate to
specific transactions or to correspondence with particular persons. On some
occasions when the subject matter was too confidential to appear in the general
letter book, a separate book headed 'Private correspondence' was maintained.
Of these special letter books, the following have survived:
19th June 1787-31st December 1787: Private correspondence concerning the
cochineal speculation and the Swedish, Polish and Russian loans. This also
contains copies of letters to Vandenijver Freres & Co., in Paris. Abbreviated in
the Notes to P.C. '87.
1st January 1788-18th April 1788: Private correspondence concerning the
cochineal speculation and the Russian loans. Abbreviated in the Notes to P.C.
'88 and numbered A XXIII.
25th May 1798-26th June 1798: Letter book of P.e. Labouchere during his
visit to Hamburg in connexion with the Martin Dorner affair. Numbered
A xxv.
5th December 1805-30th April 1807: Letter book containing correspondence
from the partners in Amsterdam to David Parish. Designated D.P. I.
6th May 1807-22nd November 1808: Letter book containing correspondence
from the partners in Amsterdam to David Parish. Designated D.P. II. The
letters are numbered from vl-ha-34 to VI-ia- I 3.
4th October 1805-loth November 1807: Letter book of the partners in Amster-
dam relating to Franco-Spanish loan and silver transactions. Designated O.E.
I and numbered A IV.

14th December 1807-2nd November 1810: Letter book of the partners in Am-
sterdam relating to Franco-Spanish loan and silver transactions. Designated
O.E. 2 and numbered VIII.
1st October I 807-1 6th June 1808: Letter book containing correspondence from
the partners in Amsterdam to William Gordon Coesvelt. Designated W.G.e. I
and numbered A XXXII, i.
30th June 1808-17th November 1810: Letter book containing correspondence
from the partners in Amsterdam to William Gordon Coesvelt. Designated
W.G.e. II and numbered A XXXII, ii.
5th August 18II-25th May 1812: Letter book containing correspondence from


                                     53 0
                                   SOURCES

P.C.Labouchere and the managers in Amsterdam to Hieronymus Sillem and
Russian officials. The letters are numbered from vl-ga-92 to vl-ha-1 I.
There are also loose copies ofletters. Many were clearly written in haste and are
difficult to read, particularly those in the handwriting ofP.C.Labouchere.
The Hope archives also contain information books, in which details concerning
other houses and obtained from third parties were recorded. Four such books
exist, covering the periods 1779-1787, 1791-1803, 1803-18II and 1811-1819
respectively.
 There are also books containing the texts of contracts, letters, memoranda,
 deeds of procuracy, receipts and brief notes on accountancy matters. The three
 largest of these bear the title 'Diversen Documenten.' 'Diversen Documenten
laast van 1700-begin 1800' covers the period 1770-1805 and 'Diversen Docu-
 menten 1802 en later,' numbered vl-da-7, the period 1802-1808, while 'Diversen
 Documenten,' numbered vl-da-8, deals mainly with matters current in 1802 and
 1803. A smaller book, numbered vl-ea-73, contains similar material and covers
the period 15th November 1805 to 31st December 18II. In a continuation of
this, which runs from 1st January 1812 to 9th July 1816, the contents are indi-
vidually numbered from Vl-ea-73 to vl-fa-84. Correspondence and accountancy
data relating to Operation R.M. are to be found in the book marked 'R,' in
which the individual documents are numbered from vl-fa-87 to vl-ga-34.
  The information contained in the municipal archives in Amsterdam is of im-
portance in compiling a history of Hope & Co. This applies particularly to the
Notarial Archives and those of the Amsterdam Exchange Bank. In the former,
the deeds enacted by the notaries Adriaan Baars, Cornelis van Homrigh Sr.,
Cornelis van Homrigh Jr., Willem van Homrigh, Jan BareIs the Younger, Daniel
van den Brink and Pierre Fraissinet Jr. are of value in this context. The most
important of these deeds were enacted by Adriaan Baars and the Van Homrighs.
  Other sources included the register of births of the Mennonite Community and
the baptismal registers of the English Presbyterian Church and the English
Episcopal Church in Amsterdam. The registers of banns and of deaths were also
examined during the investigations. The Quytscheldingen (Debt Remissions)
provided interesting data relating to the purchase and sale of houses. Infor-
mation obtained from 'Handel en Nijverheid' (Trade and Industry') was of
importance in relation to the loans. Details of the early correspondence from
Archibald Sr. and Isaac Hope of Rotterdam and Archibald and Thomas Hope
of Amsterdam are to be found in the Brants archives, under reference numbers
1620 and 1638. Facts concerning Thomas Hope's years as a director of the
Dutch East and West India Companies can be found in the 'Heerenboekje' and
in theParticuliere Notulen ofMr. Pieter Rendorp.
  The Rotterdam municipal archives provided information concerning the ear-
liest generation of Hopes in Holland. Here, too, the Notarial Archives con-
stitued the principal source, the deeds enacted by the notaries Philips Basteels,
Jacobus de Bergh, Gommer van Bortel and Johan van Weel being of impor-
tance in relation to the Hopes. Also in Rotterdam, the baptismal register of the
Scottish Church and the register of births of the Mennonite Community were
consulted, as were extracts from the registers of deaths.

                                      53 1
                                  SOURCES

 In the municipal archives in The. Hague, the register of conveyances was con-
sulted in connexion with the purchase of 'Het Tapijthuis' by John Hope. The
Notarial Archives were consulted for a single deed enacted by the notary
Adrianus van der Wijck.
 In the General State Archives, in The Hague, the Hope Collection (number 8468)
revealed details of Thomas Hope's activities as a director of the Dutch East
India Company. Facts relating to the loan floated by the Kingdom of Holland
in 1807 are to be found under the heading 'Financien.'
The Voute archives, which are at present in the custody of Mrs.A.G.Voute-
Esser in Amsterdam, also contain information which is of importance for the
history of Hope & Co.
In Edinburgh, Mr. Gavin M. Goodfellow consulted the Roll of Burgesses and the
Marriage Register of that city and also the Hopetoun Papers, which are pre-
served at Hopetoun House.




                                     53 2
                A LIST OF WORKS CITED




Nederland's Adelsboek, XXXI, XL. The Hague, 1933 and 1942.
AItamira, R. A History of Spain. New York, 1949.
Alting Bosken,J.A. Over geldleeningen hier te lande door vreemde mogendheden
 aangegaan. Utrecht, 1864.
Amburger, E. Geschichte der Behordenorganisation Russlands von Peter dem
 grossen bis 1917. Leiden, 1966.
Andersson, I. A History of Sweden. London, 1955.
d'Angeberg, V.A. Recueil des Traites et Actes diplomatiques concernant la
 Pologne. Paris, 1862.
Baasch,E. Holliindische Wirtschaftsgeschichte. Jena, 1927.
Balfour Paul,J. ed. 'The diary of Sir James Hope 1646-1654,' in: Publications of
 the Scottish History Society, Second Series, Vol. XIX, Miscellany III, 97-168.
Baumgarten, H. Geschichte Spaniens vom Ausbruch der franzosischen Revolution
 bis aufunsere Tage, 1. Leipzig, 1856.
Baumgarten, S. Le CY(!puscule Neo-Classique: Thomas Hope. Paris, 1958.
Baumgarten, S. 'Emprunts de Suede a Amsterdam.' Tijdschrift voor Geschiede-
 nis, LXXVII (1964) 439-47.
Nouvelle Biographie Generale, 46 vols. Paris, 1855-1866.
Dictiona~y of National Biography, 63 vols. London, 1885-1900.
Blauw,K. 'Het Provinciehuis van Noord-Holland'. Haerlem 1958 (1959).
Blauw, K. 'Van 'Hofstede' tot 'Paviljoen' Welgelegen.' Haerlem 1962 (1963).
Blok,P.J. Geschiedenis van het Nederlandsche Volk, 2nd ed .. Leiden, 1912-1915.
Blum,K.L. Ein russischer Staatsmann. Des Grafen Jakob Johann Sievers Denk-
 wiirdigkeiten, III. Leipzig and Heidelberg, 1858.
Boxer, C.R. The Portuguese Seaborne Empire. London, 1969.
Bruchey,S.W. Robert Oliver, Merchant of Baltimore, 1783-1819. Vol. LXXIV, i of
 The John Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political Science. Balti-
 more, 1956.
Brugmans,I.J. Paardenkracht en Mensenmacht. Sociaal-economische geschiede-
 nis van Nederland 1795-1940. The Hague, 1961.
Buijnsters,P.J. 'Swedenborg in Nederland.' Tijdschrift voor Nederlandse Taal- en
 Letterkunde, LXXXIII, iii (1967).
Burke's Genealogical and Heraldic History of the Peerage and Baronetage, the
 Priv~v Council and Order ofPrecedence. 99th ed. of 1949, London.
Butterfield,L.H. ed. Diary and autobiography of John Adams, IV. Cambridge,
 Mass., 1961.

                                     533
                          A LIST OF WORKS CITED

Buys,J.T. 'De Nederlandsche staatsschuld sedert 1814.' Werkzaamheden van de
 Afdeeling Koophandel der Maatschappij onder de Zinspreuk Felix Meritis te
 Amsterdam, (1857).
Carter, A.C. 'Dutch foreign investment, 1738-1800.' Economica, xx (1953).
Casanova,G. Memoires, II (1756--1763), texte presente et annote par Robert
 Abirached. Paris, 1959.
Channing,E. A History of the United States, IV. New York, 1917.
Colen brander, H. T. De Patriottentijd, 3 vols. The Hague, 1897-1899.
Colenbrander,H.T. De Bataafsche Republiek. Amsterdam, 1908.
Colenbrander,H.T. ed. Ontstaan der Grondwet, II. Rijks Geschiedkundige Publi-
 catien, Kleine serie, VII. The Hague, 1909.
Colenbrander,H.T. ed. Gedenkstukken der algemeene geschiedenis van Neder-
 land, van 1795 tot 1840. I-IX. Rijks Geschiedkundige Publicatien, I, II, III, IV, V,
 VI, XI, XII, XIII, XVI, XXIII, XXV, XXVII, XXX, XXXI, XXXVII. The Hague, 1905-1917.
Colenbrander,H.T. Schimmelpennick en Koning Lodewijk. Amsterdam, 191 I.
Colenbrander,H.T. lnlijving en Opstand, 2nd ed .. Amsterdam, 1941.
Colenbrander,H.T. Vestiging van het Koninkrijk. Amsterdam 1927.
Corti, E.C. Conte. Der Aufstieg des Hauses Rothschild. Leipzig, 1927.
Crouzet, F. L' economie britannique et Ie blocus continental (I 806-181 3), 2 vols.
 Paris, 1958.
Crouzet, F. 'Groupes de pression et politique de blocus: remarques sur les
 origines des Ordres en Conseil de novembre 1807.' Revue Historique, 86,
 CCXXVIII (1962).
Damme,A.van. De bUitenplaatsen te Heemstede, Berkenrode en Bennebroek.
 Haarlem, 1903.
Dillen,J.G.van. 'Eenige brieven der firma Hope & Co.'. Economisch-Historisch
 Jaarboek, I (1915).
Dillen,J.G.van. 'Honderd jaar economische ontwikkeling van het Noorden' in:
 Algemene Geschiedenis der Nederlanden, VII. Utrecht, 1954.
Dillen,J.G.van. Mensen en Achtergronden. Studies uitgegeven ter gelegenheid van
 de tachtigste verjaardag van de schrijver. Groningen, 1964.
Dillen,J.G.van. Van rijkdom en regenten. Handboek tot de economische en sociale
 geschiedenis van Nederland tijdens de Republiek. The Hague, 1970.
Ehrenberg, R. Grosse Vermogen, ihre Entstehung und ihre Bedeutung. Jena, 1902.
Elias,J.E. De Vroedschap van Amsterdam, 2 vols. Amsterdam, 1903-1905.
Enno van Gelder,H. De Nederlandse munten. Utrecht, 1965.
Fugier,A. Napoleon et I'Espagne, 1799-1808,2 vols. Paris, 1930.
Gerhard, D. England und der Aufstieg Russlands. Munich and Berlin, 1933.
Golovkine, F. La cour et Ie regne de Paul ler. Paris, 1905.
Grandmaison, G.de. L' Espagne et Napoleon. Paris, 1908.
Hamilton,E.J. 'The foundation of the Bank of Spain.' The Journal of Political
 Economy, LIII(1945).
Hamilton,E.J. War and Prices in Spain. Vol. LXXXXI of The Harvard Economic
 Studies. Cambridge, Mass., 1947.
Heckscher,E. The Continental System. Oxford, 1922.
Heckscher, E. An economic history of Sweden. Cambridge, Mass., 1954.
Heertje, H. De diamantbewerkers van Amsterdam. Amsterdam, 1936.
Herr, R. The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain. Princeton, 1958.

                                        534
                         A LIST OF WORKS CITED

Heyliger, R.Y. De Nederlandsche wetgeving op de vreemde geldligtingen. Leiden,
  1854·
Memoir of the Public Life of the Right Hon.John Charles Herries, in the reign of
 George III,George IV, William IV and Victoria, by his son Edward Herries, CB.,
 I. London, 1880.
Hidy,R.W. The House of Baring in American Trade and Finance. Cambridge,
 Mass., 1949.
Hoekstra,P. Thirty-Seven Years of Holland-American Relations, 1803-1848.
 Grand Rapids, 1916.
Hogendorp,D.C.A. van, ed. Memoires du General Dirk van Hogendorp. The
 Hague, 1887.
Hovy,J. Het voorstel van 1751 tot instelling van een beperkt vrijhavenstelsel in de
 Republiek (propositie tot een gelimfteerd porto-franco). Groningen, 1966.
Nieuwe Nederlandsche Jaarboeken, 1787. Leiden and Amsterdam, 1787.
Japikse, N. De geschiedenis van het Huis Oranje-Nassau, II. The Hague, 1948.
Jong-Keesing,E.E.de. De economische crisis van 1763 te Amsterdam. Amster-
 dam, 1939.
Kannegieter,J.Z. Geschiedenis van de vroegere Quakergemeenschap te Amster-
 dam: 1656 tot begin negentiende eeuw. Amsterdam and Haarlem, 1971.
Kannegieter,J.Z. 'Een stoomwerktuig op de buitenplaats van een Amsterdams
 regent in het jaar 1781.' Amstelodamum, LXVI (1973).
Karmin,O. 'Autour des negociations Anglo-Prusso-Russes de 1813.' Revue
 Historique de la Revolution et de [,Empire, XI-XII (1917).
Katzenelsohn, P. Zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der Finanzen Russlands, I. Berlin,
 19 1 3.
Kernkamp,G.W. 'Bengt Ferrners dagboek van zijne reis door Nederland in
 1759.' Bijdragen en Mededeelingen van het Historisch Genootschap, XXXI (1910).
Kooy, T.P. van der. Hollands Stapelmarkt en haar verval. Amsterdam, 1931.
Labouchere,G. 'P.C.Labouchere, un financier diplomate au siecle dernier.'
 Revue d' Histoire Diplomatique, XXVII (1913).
Lacour-Gayet,G. Talleyrand, II. Paris, 1930.
Laing,D., ed. A Diary of the Public Correspondence of Sir Thomas Hope of
 Craighall. From the original in the library at Pinkie House. Printed for the
 Bannatyne Club. Edinburgh, 1843.
Lanzac Laborie,L.de. Le monde des affaires et du travail. Paris, 1910.
Lasky,H. 'David Parish: a European in American Finance. 1806-1816.'
 (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Ann Arbor).
Law,H.W. and Law, I. The Book of the Beresford Hopes. London, 1925.
Lesage, C. Napoleon I, creancier de la Prusse. Paris, 1924.
Levy, A. Un grand profiteur de guerre sous la Revolution, I' Empire et la Restau-
 ration: G.J.Ouvrard. Paris, 1929.
Livermore,H.Y. A New History ofPortugal. Cambridge, 1966.
Lobanov-Rostovski,A.A. Russia and Europe, 1789-1815. Duke University
 Press, 1947.
Lord,R.H. The Second Partition ofPoland. Cambridge, Mass., 1915.
Lord, R.H. 'The third partition of Poland.' Slavonic Review, III, i (1925).
Luthy,H. La Banque Protestante en France de la Revocation de [,Edit de Nantes
 ala Revolution, II. Paris, 1961.
                                       535
                        A LIST OF WORKS CITED


Mangerjr.,J.B. Recherches sur les relations economiques entre fa France et fa
 Hollande pendant la Revolution Fran{:aise 1785-1795. Besan~on, 1923.
Mansvelt, W.M.F. Rechtsvorm en gefdelijk beheer bij de Oost-Indische Compag-
 nie. Amsterdam, 1922.
Marion, M. Histoire financiere de fa France depuis 1715, I. Paris, 1914.
Martens,F.de. Supplement au Recueil des Traites, v, 1808-1814. Gattingen,
 18 1 7.
Meischke, R. 'Het Kasteel Nederhorst Den Berg.' Amstelodamum, XL (1957).
Meulen,A.J.van der. Studies over het ministerie van Van de Spiegel. Leiden,
 190 5.
Meulen, W.W.van der. 'Beschrijving van eenige West-Indische Plantageleenin-
 gen. Bijdrage tot de kennis der geldbelegging in de achttiende eeuw.' Bijdragen
 en Mededeelingen van het Historisch Genootschap, xxv (1904).
Mollien,Comte. Memoires d'un ministre du Tresor Public, 1780-1815, I. Paris,
 1898.
Morris, A.C. ed. Diary and Letters of Gouverneur Morris, I. London, 1889.
Nicolson,H. The Congress of Vienna, a study in allied unity, 1812-1822. New
 York,1946.
Nierop, L.van. 'Henry Hope te Boston.' Amstelodamum, XXVI (1939).
Nierop,L.van. 'Over het huis Thomas en Adrian Hope te Amsterdam.' Am-
 stelodamum, XXVII (1940).
Nisbest-Bain, R. Gustavus III and his contemporaries, II. London, 1894.
Nisbet-Bain, R. Scandinavia, Cambridge, 1905.
Nolte, V. Fiinfzig Jahre in beiden Hemispheren. Hamburg, 1853.
Ouvrard, G.J. Memoires sur sa vie et ses diverses operations financieres. Paris,
 1826.
Posthumus, N.W. Nederlandsche Prijsgeschiedenis, 2 vols. Leiden, 1943-1964.
Pribram,A.F. and Fischer,E. 'Ein politischer Abenteurer (Karl Glave Kol-
 bielski, 1752-1831).' Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, philosophisch-
 historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, Band 216, Abhandlung V (1937).
Ramon, G. Histoire de la Banque de France. Paris, 1929.
Renier,G.J. Great Britain and the establishment of the Kingdom of the Nether-
 lands, 1813-1814: a study in British foreign policy. The Hague, 1930.
Roosegaarde Bisschop, W. De opkomst der Londensche geldmarkt 1640-1826.
 The Hague, 1896.
Rutkowski,J. Histoire Economique de la Pologne avant fes partages. Paris, 1922.
Sarrailh,J. L'Espagne eclairee de la seconde moitie du XVIlIme siecle, Paris,
  1954·
Sautijn Kluit, W.P. De Amsterdamsche Beurs in 1763 en 1773. Amsterdam, 1865.
Schafer, H. Geschichte von Portugal, v. Gotha, 1854.
Schaffer,!. 'De vonnissen in Averij Grosse van de Kamer van Assurantie en
 Avarij te Amsterdam in de 18de eeuw.' Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek, XXVI
 (1956).
Seton-Watson,J. The Russian Empire 1801-1917. Oxford, 1967.
Sillem, J.A. Het leven van MrJohan Valckenaer, II. Amsterdam, 1876.
Soloveytchik, G. Potemkin. London, 1938.
Staring, W.C.H. De binnen- en buitenlandsche maten en gewichten van vroeger en
  tegenwoordig; met hunne onderlinge vergelijkingen en herleidingen. Schoon-
 hoven, 1902.
                         A LIST OF WORKS CITED

British and Foreign State Papers, edited by the Librarian of the Foreign Office, I.
 London, 1838.
Stavenow,L. Geschichte Schwedens, 17[8-1772. Gotha, 1908.
Stavenow,L. 'Der aufgekliirte Absolutismus des 18en Jahrhunderts in Schwe-
 den.' Bulletin of the International Committee of Historical Sciences, v, iii, 20
 (1933)·
Thiers, A. H istoire du Consulat et de l' Empire, I-II. Brussels, 1845-1846.
Trende,A. Barthold Georg Niebuhr als Finanz- und Bankmann. Forschungen zur
 internationalen Finanz- und Bankgeschichte. Berlin, 1930.
Treue, W. Wirtschaftsgeschichte der Neuzeit. Stuttgart, 1962.
Vandal, A. Napoleon Ier et Alexandre Ier, 3 vols. Paris, 1891.
Vicens Vives,J. An Economic History of Spain. Princeton, 1969.
Voute-Esser, A.G. Robert Voute als zakenman en financier. Amsterdam, by the
 Author, 1969.
Vreede, G. W. Mr. Laurens Pieter van de Spiegel en zijne tijdgenooten (1737-1800),
 IV. Middelburg, 1877.
Vries,J.de. De economische achteruitgang der Republiek in de Achttiende Eeuw.
 Amsterdam, 1959.
Waliszewski, K. Alltour d'un trone: Catherine II de Russie, ses collaborateurs.
 Paris, 1894.
Waliszewski, K. Le fils de lagrande Catherine, Pauller. Paris, 1912.
Waliszewski, K. Le regne d' Alexandre Ier, I. Paris, 1923.
Walters,P.G. and Waiters jr.,R. 'The American career of David Parish.' The
 Journal of Economic History, IV (1944).
Watkin, D. Thomas Hope 1769-18Jl and the Neo-Classical Idea. London,
  1968.
Webster,CK. The foreign policy ofCast/ereagh, 1812-1815, I. London, 1931.
Weeveringh,J.J. Handleidillg tot de geschiedenis der staatsschulden, 2 vols.
  Haarlem, 1852-1855.
Weill, G. 'Le financier Ouvrard.' Revue Historiqlle, XLIII, 127 (1918).
Westermann,J.C 'Beschouwingen over de opkomst en den bloei des handels in
  de Gouden Eeuw' in: Zeven Eeuwen Amsterdam, ed. A.E.d'Ailly, Amsterdam,
 s.a.
Westermann,J.C Kamer van Koophandel en Fabrieken voor Amsterdam, Gedenk-
  boek, I. Amsterdam, 1936.
Wilson,CH. Anglo-Dutch Commerce and Finance in the Eighteenth Century.
  2nd ed .. Cambridge, 1966.
Winter, P.J.van. Het aandeel van den Amsterdamschen handel aan den opbouw
  van het Amerikaansche gemeenebest, 2 vols in: Werken van het Nederlandsch
  Economisch-Historisch Archief The Hague, 1927-1933.
Winter, P.J. van. 'Lousiana gekocht en betaald' in: Verkenning en Onderzoek.
  Groningen, 1965.
Winter,P.J.van. 'De Amerikaanse zaken van CJ.M.de Wolf.' Mededelingen
  vall de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone
  Kunsten van Belgii!. Klasse der Letteren, XXXII, ii (1970).
Wolff, O. Die Geschiifte des Herrn Ouvrard. Frankfurt a. Main, 1932.
Niellw Nederlalldsch Biografisch Woordenboek, 10 vols. Leiden, 1911-1937.
Wijnman, H.F. Historischegids van Amsterdam, 2 vols. Amsterdam, 1971.
                                       537
NOTES
                            ABBREVIATIONS




A.R.A. Algemeen Rijks Archief(General State Archives)
G.A.      Gemeente Archief(Municipal Archives)
Not.Arch. Notarieel Archief(Notarial Archives)
V.A.      Voute Archief(Vofite Archives)
                                    CHAPTER ONE




    PAGE 3

I   Letter of 12th March 1776 from John Hope, The Hague, to the Earl of Hopetoun,
    Hopetoun Papers, Hopetoun House. With grateful acknowledgement to Mr.Gavin
    M. Goodfellow, who conducted investigations in Edinburgh to establish the Hopes'
    Scottish origin.

    PAGE 4

I Johan E. Elias, De Vroedschap van Amsterdam, II (2nd ed.; Amsterdam, 1963), 94r.
  Nederland's Adelsboek, XXXI (The Hague, 1933), 30r. Ibid., XL (The Hague, 1942),
  632-633. Burke's Peerage Baronetage and Knightage (99th ed.; London, 1949), 1032.
  H.W.Law and Irene Law, The Book of the Beresford Hopes (London, 1925), 16.
  Also investigations by Mr.Goodfellow of the Roll of Edinburgh Burgesses and the
  Edinburgh Marriage Register. We did not succeed fully in elucidating the origin. As
  the are many contradictions, we proceeded from the fact that the generations as a
  rule followed each other in the Roll of Edinburgh Burgesses and the Edinburgh
  Marriage Register at intervals of thirty years. Assuming that the first Jolm Hope was
  admitted as a Guild Brother in 1528, his sons could have followed him in 1560 or
  thereabouts (allowing the necessary margin). In the following generation, Henry
  Hope, who married Jacqueline de Tot (or de Jot), would have been eligible round
  about 1590. Indeed, he was appointed a Burgess and Guild Brother in 1588. Thirty
  years later-in 1619, to be precise-Henry's son, James, became a Guild Brother.
  James died in 1634, leaving a son, Henry or Harry, who was probably then still a
  minor. The keen interest which Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall displayed in his
  nephew points in this direction. D.Laing, ed., A Diary of the Public Correspondence
  o/Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall. From the original in the library at Pinkie House.
  Printed for the Bannatyne Club, (Edinburgh, 1843). Henry or Harry became a Guild
  Brother of Edinburgh in' 1642, a logical step since his father had died and he himself
  had for some time carried on, the profession of merchant. In 1646 he married
  Catherine Jonkin. He was thus very young to be a husband and father, but not too
  young. The daughter of Sir Thomas Hope of Craig hall, Anna, was married in 1653
  to William Cochrane, and can thus not have been the wife of Henry Hope of
  Rotterdam. J.Balfour. Paul, ed., 'The diary of Sir James Hope 1646-1654,' in:
  Publications of the Scottish History Society, Second Series, Vol. XIX, Miscellany III,
  97-168.
2 G.A. Rotterdam. Baptismal Registers of the Scottish Church. 7th December 1664:
  Arch(i)bald.


                                          54 1
                                  NOTES PAGES 4--9

  Father: Hendry Hop. Mother: Anna Hop. In these registers, the mother appears
  under her maiden name. Margaret and Henry, born on 23rd January 1667 and 20th
  January 1669, presumably died young.
3 G.A. Rotterdam, Not. Arch., 1137-56.
4 G.A. Rotterdam, Not. Arch., 926-401, 927-164,1498-164,1508-352.
  J.Z.Kannegieter, Geschiedenis van de vroegere Quakergemeenschap te Amsterdam
  (Amsterdam, 1971), 52,154.

    PAGE 5

I G.A. Rotterdam, Not. Arch., 2091-612.
2 G.A. Rotterdam, Not. Arch., 1487-106. At the time ofthe authorization, Charles
  Hope of Hopetoun was no more than twenty years of age. His father had lost his life
  in a shipwreck in 1682. This probably explains why the authority was signed by his
  mother, Margaret. Charles Hope was made the first Earl of Hopetoun in 1703. Burke,
  Peerage, 1230.
3 Kannegieter, Quakergemeenschap, 155 note 3,165,166.
  G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 8592-492.
4 Concerning Pels: Elias, Vroedschap, li, 813-817, 1062. Like Archibald Jr., Andries
  Pels, who in 1707 established the very well known house which bore his name, was
  not a self-made man. His father, Jean Lucas Pels, had already established a
  reputation as a merchant in Amsterdam.
  Concerning Muilman: Elias, Vroedschap, li, 864-870. Like Pels, Muilman and
  Meulenaer came from well-to-do merchant families and thus had adequate capital
  from the outset.
  Concerning Hogguer: Elias, Vroedschap, II, 979-985, 1054-1058; Herbert LUthy, La
  Banque Protestante en France de la Revocation de l' Edit de Nantes ala Revolution, II
  (Paris, 1961),331-342.

    PAGE 6

I G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 8598-709.
2 Concerning Clifford: Elias, Vroedschap, II, 880-886, 1045-1046.
  Concerning De Smeth: Elias, Vroedschap, II, 796-800. Clifford and De Smeth were
  also among the leading houses at the time when Archibald Jr. commenced business in
  Amsterdam.
3 Infra, Appendix A.
4 J.G.vanDillen 'Bloeitijdder Amsterdamse Wisselbank, 1607-1701,' Mensen en
  Achtergronden (Groningen, 1964), 397-398.

    PAGE 8

I G.A. Rotterdam. Extracts from registers of deaths.
2 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 8613-1726. The earliest deed bearing a reference to
  Thomas and Adrian Hope is dated 1735.
  G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 8726-884.

    PAGE 9

I J.Hovy, Het voorstel van 1751 tot instelling van een beperkt vrijhavenstelselin de
  Republiek (propositie tot een gelimiteerd porto-franco) (Groningen, 1966), 253.
2 Ibid., 334.


                                           542
                                NOTES PAGES 10-13

    PAGE 10
I   Ibid., 397-408.
2   Ibid., 622-628; Van Dillen, Van Rijkdom en Regenten. Handboek tat de econamische
    en saciale geschiedenis van Nederland tijdens de Republiek (The Hague, 1970),
    531-533-

    PAGE II
  Hovy, Propasitie, 336. E.E.de Jong-Keesing, De ecanomische crisis van 1763 te
  Amsterdam (Amsterdam, 1939), 19-20.
2 Letter of 4th December 1730 from Henry Hope, Boston, to Messrs. Archibald and
  Thomas Hope, merchants in Amsterdam, in Amsteladamum, XXVI (1939),160. As
  early as 1720, Archibald and Isaac Hope in Rotterdam were concerned with the
  conveyance of passengers to the United States: G.A. Amsterdam, Brants archives,
  number 1638; letter of 4th January 1720 from Archibald and Isaac Hope, Rotterdam,
  to Simon Bevel, Haarlem. During the War of the Austrian Succession, Thomas and
  Adrian Hope traded, via SLEustatius, with Thomas Hancock of Boston. This trade
  was illegal and therefore quite risky: Discoveries made by Dr. Leonie van Nierop in
  the John Hancock Papers (1728-1761) in the Library of the Massachusetts Historical
  Society, Amstelodamum, XXVII (1940),47 et seq.

    PAGE 12
I Letters of 29th July, 22nd, 29th and 30th August, 2nd, 4th and 8th September, 31st
  October, 6th, 9th, loth and 12th November, 2nd and 21st December 1758; 2nd, I !th,
  14th, 23rd, 24th, 25th and 28th January, 1st, 3rd, 24th and 26th February, 3rd, 6th,
  15th and 16th June, 14th, 16th, 17th and 25th July, 18th, 29th, 30th and 31st October
  1759, from Isaac and Zachary Hope, Rotterdam, to Thomas and Adrian Hope,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 14th August 1759 from La Compagnie des Indes, Paris, to Thomas and
  Adrian Hope, Amsterdam; 23rd November 1759 and 3 I st October 1760 from
  P.F.Goossens, Paris, to Thomas and Adrian Hope, Amsterdam. LUthy, La Banque
  Pratestante, II, 322.
3 I. Schaffer , 'De vonnissen in Averij Grosse van de Kamer van Assurantie en Avarij te
  Amsterdam in de I 8de eeuw,' Economisch-Histarisch Jaarboek, XXVI (The Hague,
  1956),108-109. De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763,19. note 2.
4 Ibid., 43-45. Van Dillen, Rijkdam en Regenten, 601.

    PAGE 13
I De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763,121-129, 159-172. Van Dillen, Rijkdam en Regenten,
  605.
2 De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763,121, 159-160. Van Dillen, Rijkdam en Regenten, 605.
  With Baring, the name Pels was still a byword for lack of action and flexibility in
  1802. Infra, 402.
3 De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763, 110,123. Elias, Vraedschap, II, 799, note q.
4 G.A. Amsterdam, register of banns: Archibald Hope Junior and Geertruyd Reessen,
  20th December 1725; Thomas Hope and Margareta Marcelis, I Ith December 1727.
  Elias, Vraedschap, 11,937-939.




                                         543
                                  NOTES PAGES        14-17

     PAGE 14

I G.A. Amsterdam, Quytscheldingen, C 6, 66 of 17th January 1758. H.F.Wijnman,
  Historische Gids van Amsterdam, II (Amsterdam, 1971),410.
  Elias, Vroedschap, II, 942, note ss.
2 G.W.Kernkamp, 'Bengt Ferrner's dagboek van zijne reis door Nederland in 1759,'
  Bijdragen en Mededeelingen van het Historisch Genootschap, XXXI (1910),367-368.
  Ferrner noted that the Hopes had an office staff of 26, which at that time must have
  been large. The Hopes had earlier received special or famous visitors from abroad.
  According to his memoirs, Casanova was received in Amsterdam by a banker whom
  he identified only by a single letter (d'O.), and who is assumed to have been Thomas
  Hope. However, the story of the mysterious Esther, the daughter of his host, with
  whom Casanova had his umpteenth affair, renders it improbable that Thomas Hope
  was the banker concerned, for he had only a son. The innocence, bordering on
  naivety, with which Casanova's host is said to have allowed himself to be persuaded
  to take part in a sort of spiritualistic seance is very much out of keeping with other
  descriptions of Thomas Hope: G. Casanova, Memoires, II (1756-1763). Texte presente
  et annote par Robert Abirached (Paris, 1959), 134-147, 160-161, 166-167, 170.
  Henry Hope continued the tradition of receiving eminent foreign guests, for example
  Benjamin Franklin. Emanuel Swedenborg, the famous Swedish scientist, philosopher
  and theosopher, frequently dined with Henry Hope, who also looked after his
  financial affairs: P.J .Buijnsters, 'Swedenborg in Nederland,' Tijdschrift voor
  Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde, LXXXIII, 3 (1967), 200.

     PAGE 16

I G.A. Amsterdam, 'Particuliere Notulen van Mr.Pieter Rendorp. Aanteekeningen
  wegens de deliberatien en Resolutien genoomen bij Burgemeesteren, 1st July 1750'.
  G.A. Amsterdam, Heerenboekje 1760.
  A.R.A., The Hague, Hope Collection, 8468. Extract from 'De resolutien van de
  0.1. COlflp. ter Kamer Amsterdam van 7 April 1766 en van 13 September 1770'.
  W.M.F.Mansvelt, Rechtsvorm en geldelijk beheer bij de Oost-Indische Compagnie
  (Amsterdam, 1922), 106 note I.
2 Nederland's Adelsboek, XXXI, 302.
3 Circular dated IstJanuary 1762. G. A. Amsterdam,
  Not. Arch., 12358-193.
4 Letter of 9th August 1787, to Laborde de Mereville, Paris, P.e. '87, 83.
5 Obituary in 'The Times' of 5th March 18I1.
6 H.W. and I.Law, Beresford Hopes, 272-273. The reference is to the diary of a cousin
  of John Williams Hope, Loveday Sarah Gregor.

      PAGE 17

      Partnership contract entered into by H.Hope, J.Hope, N.Bauduin and J.Williams
      Hope, enacted in the presence of C.van Hornrigh, notary, on 4th July 1782. Elias,
      Vroedschap, II, 936, 942. Vincent Nolte, Funfzig Jahre in beiden Hemispheren
      (Hamburg, 1853),46,193.
    2 G.A. Amsterdam, Baptismal Register ofthe Mennonite Community, 14th February
      1737, Nos. 298, 162. Baptismal Register of the Presbyterian Church of England, 13th
      June 1756, Nos. 137, 153.



                                           544
                                NOTES PAGES 18-21

    PAGE 18

  Elias, Vroedschap, II, 933---934, 940-941. John Hope had a fire engine built for his
  country estate. This was a type of steam engine, and was used to pump water into the
  ponds. It attracted a great deal of attention. The pump, or a copy of it, is to be
  found at the entrance to Groenendaal Park in Heemstede. The business
  correspondence of the Hopes contains no reference to the steam engine as a source of
  power in industry. J.Z.Kannegieter, 'Een stoomwerktuig op de buitenplaats van een
  Amsterdams regent in het jaar 1781,' Amstelodamum, LXVI (1973),27-29.
  A.van Damme, De buitenplaatsen te Heemstede, Berkenrode en Bennebroek
  (Haarlem, 1903),53,56.
2 G.A. The Hague, Register of Conveyances. Conveyance of'Het Tapijthuis,' situated
  on the north side ofthe Nieuwe or Korte Voorhout, from Jhr.Carel Bigot,
  Burgomaster of Stavoren and Deputy of the States of Friesland, to John Hope.
  R.Meischke, 'Het Kasteel Nederhorst Den Berg,' Amstelodamum, XL (1957), 90. John
  Hope also acquired the title 'Master of's Graven-Ambacht:' Elias, Vroedschap, II,
  934·
    PAGE 19

  Van Dillen, Rijkdom en Regenten, 457-458.
2 Ibid., 458-459. Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1046-1050.
  E.Baasch, Holliindische Wirtschaftsgeschichte (Jena, 1927), 194,201-203.
3 Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1050. Infra, Chapter Fourteen.
4 Infra, I 12.

    PAGE 20

I Infra, 74-90. Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1059.
  G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12403-263. The loan to Count Louis of Nassau-
  Saarbrlicken must have totalled cf 250,000, for 50 bonds were redeemed annually
  in the period 1770-1774.
2 W. W. van der Meulen, 'Beschrijving van eenige Westindische Plantage-leeningen,'
  Bijdragen en Mededeelingen van het Historisch Genootschap, XXV (1904),509-510.
3 Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1059. Ch. Wilson, Anglo-Dutch Commerce & Finance in the
  Eighteenth Century (2nd ed., Cambridge, 1966), 182-183. Van der Meulen,
  Westindische Plantage-Ieeningen, 52I. Van Dillen, Rijkdom en Regenten, 587.
4 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12404-468; 12410-447; 12413-1010, 101 I. Wilson,
  Anglo-Dutch Commerce, 183-184. The loans concerned were those made to Patrick
  Maxwell and John Balfour, the security for which consisted of plantations on
  Tobago; to Charles Irvine and John Leith, also against the security of plantations on
  Tobago; to Alexander Campbell, against the security of plantations on Grenada;
  and finally to Robert Tuite, for which plantations on St.Croix served as security.

    PAGE 21

  W.P.Sautijn Kluit, De Amsterdamsche Beurs in [763 en [773 (Amsterdam, 1865),
  65-67,71-72. Wilson, Anglo-Dutch Commerce, 170. Van Dillen, Rijkdom en
  Regenten, 609-6I O.
2 Van Dillen, Rijkdom en Regenten, 611-613. Wilson, Anglo-Dutch Commerce, 187.
  J .de Vries, De economische achteruifgang der Republiek in de Achttiende Eeuw
  (Amsterdam, 1959),77-78.


                                         545
                                NOTES PAGES 21-27

  De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763, 72 note I. Adrian Hope was appointed trustee
  following Clifford's bankruptcy: Sautijn Kluit, Amsterdamsche Beurs, 98.

  PAGE 22
I Letters of 4th, 15th, 18th and 22nd May, 1st and 3rd June 1770 from Alexander
  Fordyce, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th November 1770 from Henry Neale & Co., London, to Gurnell Hoare &
  Harman, London.
  Letter of I Ith June 1772 from Gurnell Hoare & Harman, London, to Henry Neale &
  Co., London.
  Letter of 25th December 1772 from J.Harman, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 16th February 1774 from Cust, Ward & Matthews, London, to Gurnell,
  Hoare & Harman, London.
  Memorandum of 16th June 1775 concerning the Fordyce affair.
2 De Vries, Economische achteruitgang, 78-79. Wilson, Anglo-Dutch Commerce, 182,
  187. Van Dillen, Rijkdom en Regenten, 608.
3 Letter of 30th January 1807 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Infra, 112.

  PAGE 23
I Infra, 94.
2 During the fourth war against England, Hope, in association with the Paris houses of
  Pourrat Freres and Vandenijver Freres & Co., floated French annuity loans on the
  Amsterdam market. The number ofloans and the sums involved vary from one
  source to another. LUthy quotes sums of cf 3,000,000 in 1782 and cf I, I 00,000 in 1784
  (LUthy, La Banque Protestante, 11,522,534,546). The Notarial Archives in
  Amsterdam contain only the deeds relating to one loan on behalf of Pourrat Freres
  and one on behalf of Vandenijver Freres & Co., the sums being cf 282,000 and
  cf 1,100,000 respectively (12463-345,12474-631). Thegrootboeken refer to a loan of
  Cf2,IOO,000 and not cf 1,100,000. Grootboek 1785, 83, 92, 94. Hope was at this time
  also engaged in the movement of shipbuilding materials for the benefit of the French
  fleet, Infra, 197.

  PAGE 24
I Memorandum of 24th October 1793 from Robert Voute, St.Petersburg, to the
  Attorney General, Samaylov, St.Petersburg, Infra, 135.
2 P.J. van Winter, Het aandeel van den Amsterdamschen handel aan den opbouw van het
  Amerikaansche Gemeenebest, II (The Hague, 1933),466-468,470,472.

  PAGE 26
1 Infra, Appendix D-II.
2 Infra, 86.


  PAGE 27
1 Infra, Appendix C-I.
2 Infra, 79, 82.
3 Infra, 100, 167-168.
4 Infra, 116-117.
                                NOTES PAGES 28-34

    PAGE 28
I Infra, 340,345, 394·
2 Infra, 78, 112, 115.
3 Infra,98.
4 Infra, 82, 84, 107-108.

  PAGE 29
I A.Trende, Barthold Georg Niebuhr als Finanz- und Bankman. Forschungen zur
  internationalen Finanz- und Bankgeschichte (Berlin, 1930), 5 I. Niebuhr later achieved
  fame as a historian. Infi"a, 136.
2 Infra, 336.
3 Infra, 249·
4 Infra, 109.

    PAGE 30
I Infra, Chapter Five,passim; 126-136,240-242,247-248,253-255,258,266,268-270;
  Chapter Thirteen, passim; 413-427.
2 Infra, 334-336.

    PAGE 32
I Infra, 115.
2 Infra, 104-105. Henry Hope's Anglo-American origin, and with this his English
  nationality, will probably have influenced his refusal ofthe Russian title.
3 Infra, Chapter Five,passim.
4 Infra, 178, 182, 184-185, 190-191,201.
5 Infra, 341-342, 347-349, 350-35 1, 364-365.
6 Infra, 257.
7 Infra, 366, 369,420.

  PAGE 33
I T.P.van der Kooij, Hollands Stapelmarkt en haar verval (Amsterdam, 1931), 18-26.
2 J.C.Westermann, 'Beschouwingen over de opkomst en den bloei des handels in de
  Gouden Eeuw,' Zeven Eeuwen Amsterdam, ed. A.E.d'AiIIy, II (Amsterdam,
  undated), 98. Wilson, Anglo-Dutch Commerce, 1 I. De Vries, Economische
  achteruitgang, 34. Van DiIIen, 'Honderdjaar economische ontwikkeling van het
  Noorden,' Aigemene Geschiedenis der Nederlanden, VII (Utrecht, 1954),278-279.
3 Infra, 432.
4 Infra, 433, note I.

    PAGE 34
I Infra, 125.
2 Infra, 127-128, 139-149,150-151.
3 Infra, 289, 311 -3 12,411 -412.
4 Infra, 144-145,448-449.
5 For example, Lestapis, Nolte and Parish in connexion with the Mexican silver
  transaction, Coesvelt for the Spanish loans, Robert Melvil for the purchase of
  Russian produce, and Hieronymus Sillem for the sale of this produce.
  Infra, Chapter Eleven, passim; 347-356, Chapter Thirteen, passim; 210-214,
  216-226,242-248,252-254,266-267,269.

                                          547
                                 NOTES PAGES 35-38

  PAGE 35

I Infra, 237-239.
2 Infra, 443,446-447, 450.
3 De Vries, Economische achteruitgang, 70. De Vries treats the subject cautiously here.
  The investigations which formed part of our study point towards the development of
  certain principal facets in the activities; however, this was not accompanied by the
  relinquishing of other activities. As in the various branches of trade, there were
  dividing lines, albeit these were obscure and were repeatedly disregarded. A far-
  reaching quantitative investigation of the journals and grootboeken, to which the data
  obtainable from the correspondence would have to be related, would undoubtedly
  throw more light on this.
4 Infra, 431.

  PAGE 36

I De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763, 72-78. The picture presented in this book accords
  with the findings from the Hope archives.
2 Infra, 173.
3 Infra, 124.
4 Infra, Appendix G.

  PAGE 37

  Infra, 177. Labouchere describes here how RaIl of St.Petersburg prided himself on
  having a cash reserve of 100,000 roubles. Hope maintained a balance at the
  Exchange Bank, the size of which grew as the number of debits increased. In 1752,
  the half-yearly balance stood at cf 175,000, while the debits totalled approximately
  700 per half-year. De Jong-Keesing, Crisis 1763, 70.
2 Letter of 22nd January 1806 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Vincent Nolte,
  B.1. 12.
3 Nolte, FiinfzigJahre, 178-182.
4 Infra, 348, note I.
54th July 1782: Partnership agreement between H.Hope, J.Hope, N.Bauduin and
  I.Williams Hope.

    PAGE 38

I Infra, Appendix G.
2 12th May 1785: Partnership contract between H.Hope, Nicolas Bauduin,
  J.Williams Hope and J.C.Hartsinck. 3rd April 1765: Contract wherein Nicolas
  Bauduin bound himself to Messrs. Hope & Co. for a period of twelve years,
  commencing on 1st January 1765. As a 'clerk,' Bauduin was to receive 5,000 carolus
  guilders per annum. On 1st February 1772 his salary was raised to 10,000 carolus
  guilders.
3 16th November 1789: Deed of resignation ofJ.C.Hartsinck. 29th November 1789:
  Receipt signed by J.C.Hartsinck. On 13th March 1787, the remaining partners paid
  to Paul Degalz, the executer of Nicolas Bauduin's Will, a sum of cf 304,252. 10.8
  representing Bauduin's share in the capital of the firm. Bauduin's share of the profit
  from 31st December 1785 until his death on 18th January 1787, totalling
  cf33,578.1.8, was also paid. Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1015.
                                NOTES PAGES        39-43
    PAGE 39

  16th November 1789: Convention between Henry Hope, J. Williams Hope and the
  widow of John Hope.
2 S.Baumgarten, Le Cflipuscule Neo-Classique, Thomas Hope (Paris, 1958), 25, 3 1-40.
  H.W.Law and I.Law, Beresford Hopes, 19-26. On Thomas's activities as a collector
  and patron of the arts: D. Watkin, Thomas Hope 1760-1831 and the Neo-Classicalldea
  (London, 1968).
3 A.G.Voute-Esser, Robert Voute als zakenman en financier (Amsterdam: By the
  Author, 1969).
4 Grootboek 1785: 252;grootboek 1786: 224;grootboek 1787: 82, 141, 146.

    PAGE 40

  Nolte, Funfzig Jahre, 47-48. As in other instances, Nolte's account is not entirely
  reliable.
2 R.W.Hidy, The House ofBaring in American Trade and Finance (Cambridge, Mass.,
  1949),3-13.
3 Hidy suggests that the relationship between Hope and Baring was based on an
  exceptionally rapid and profitable sale of drafts by Baring on behalf of Hope
  (p. 14-15). The oldest survivinggrootboek, which dates from 1770, contains an
  account in the names of John and Frederick Baring of London. In some later years,
  however, no entries were made in the account, and it was not until the mid-1780s,
  when the houses jointly engaged in speculations, that really large sums appeared. At
  the same time, Hope's letters to Francis Baring reveal that a large measure of
  confidence and deep respect for Baring's judgement already existed in 1787.
  Infra, 432.

    PAGE 41

  H.T.Colenbrander, De Patriottentijd, (3 vols, The Hague, 1897-9), I, 324-332,
  Chapter VIII, and n, Chapter I.
2 Ibid., 11,116-117,121,128-139.
3 Ibid., II, Chapter IV, and III, Chapter II.
4 Ibid., III, 205-206, 207, note I; Infra, 88,431-432.

    PAGE 42

  Letter of 9th August 1787 to Laborde de Mereville, Paris, P.C. '87, 83.
2 K.Blauw, 'Het Provinciehuis van Noord-HolIand,' Haerlem,jaarboek 1958 (HaarIem,
  1959),69-83.
  K.BIauw, 'Van "Hofstede" tot "Paviljoen" Welgelegen,' Haerlem,jaarboek 1962
  (HaarIem, 1963),53-64.

    PAGE 43

I Infra, Appendix B. Henry Hope's great liking for the Italian baroque painters is
  evidenced by the fact that he had copies of works by Guido Reni and Annibale
  Caracci mounted in the skylight above the staircase of 'Welgelegen.' Blauw, 'Het
  Provinciehuis,' 78.
2 Colenbrander, Patriottentijd, III, chapter VI.
3 Letter of 30th August 1787 to Vve. Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.C. '87, 120.
  Letter of 14th September 1787 to J. & F.Baring, London, P.C. '87,143.
4 Colenbrander,Patriottentijd, III, 282-283, 285, 287.

                                         549
                                NOTES PAGES 44-49

    PAGE 44

I Letter of 4th October 1787 to Vve. Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.e. '87, 173.
2 Nieuwe Nederlandsche Jaarboeken [787 (Leiden and Amsterdam), 5374.
3 Ibid., 5376, 5380. Colenbrander,Patriottentijd, III, 288.
4 Nieuwe Nederlandsche Jaarboeken [787, 5381.

    PAGE 45

I Letter of 18th October 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rouen, P.C. '87, 200.
  Letter of 23rd October 1787 to J.&F. Baring, London, P.C. '87, 208.
2 Infra, 86, 114-115.
3 Infra, 90.
4 Infra, 95---96 .
5 Infra, 9 8-99.

    PAGE 46

I Infra, 104.
2 Infra, 105.
3 Infra, 107.
4 J.B. Manger Jr., Recherches sur les relations economiques entre la France et la
  Hollande pendant la Revolution Franc:aise, [785-[795 (Besan90n, 1923),67-68,70.
  Colenbrander, De Bataafsche Republiek (Amsterdam, 1908), 33. Van Dillen, 'Eenige
  brieven der Firma Hope & Co., medegedeeld door Dr.J.G.van Dillen,' Economisch-
  Historisch Jaarboek, I (The Hague, 1915),267-268. Van Dillen, Rijkdom en Regenten,
  621. Alice Carter, 'Dutch foreign investment, 1738-1800' Economica, Vol. xx
  (London, 1953), 329, 338-339. Grootboek 1789: 248, 264, 271, 281.

    PAGE 47

I Manger, Recherches, 75-77.
2 Infra, 108.
3 Infra, 109,281-282.
4 Infra, 109.
    PAGE 48

I Van Dillen, Rijkdom en Regenten, 618-620.
2 Infra, 94, 141.
3 Letter of 4th October 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, VII,498.
  Letter of 27th October 1808 to R. Melvil, Amsterdam, R.1.
4 The Diary and Letters ofGouverneur Morris, I, ed. by Anne Cary Morris (London,
  1889),303.
5 Colenbrander, Bataafsche Republiek, 24, 27.
6 Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken der Algemeene Geschiedenis van Nederland van [795 tot
  [840, I (The Hague, 1905),473.
  Infra, 109, 138.

    PAGE 49

I Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, I, 475-476.
2 A.J.van der Meulen, Studies over het ministerie van Van de Spiegel (Leiden, 1905),
  342-344,375-376.
  Van de Spiegel visited Henry Hope at 'Welgelegen' in 1788. In 1790 Henry Hope

                                         550
                                 NOTES PAGES        49-52
  received the stadholder, William v, there. H.W. and I.Law, Beresford Hopes, 272.
  Van Winter, Aandeel, 1,125, note 2.
3 Letter of 21St October 1974 from A.Caxtier to J. Williams Hope, London.
  Letter of 11th November 1794 from I.Eckhardt, to J.Williams Hope, London. On
  21st August 1794 Thomas Hope advertised seven horses and two carriages for sale in
  the 'Amsterdamsche Courant:' Baumgarten, CYI!puscule, 25-26. There is no truth in
  the story that Mrs. Williams Hope stayed in Amsterdam, or returned there, in order
  to defend Hope's property: Letter of 17th June 1797 from Hope & Co., London, to
  J.J.Voute Jr., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 50

I 12th July 1794: unsigned letter headed 'My Lord.'
  I Ith October 1794: unsigned letter to 'Monsieur Ie Baron.'
2 Letter of 19th January 1795 from Jacob Hoogland, Den Helder, to Paulus Taay,
  Amsterdam.
3 H.W.Law and I.Law, Beresford Hopes, 272. On 28th March 1799, Henry Hope, John
  Williams Hope, Thomas, Adrian Elias and Henry Philip Hope, partners in the firm
  of Hope & Co., informed the Office of Commercial Commissioners that 8,000 pounds
  sterling constituted 10 % of their income. This 10 % income tax was levied annually as
  a special contribution for the prosecution ofthe war.
4 Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, 1,366.

    PAGE 51

I Letter of 26th February 1795 from P.Taay, Amsterdam, to Vilmain, Nantes, A XXIV,
  14·
2 G.A. The Hague, Not. Arch., 3893-48.
  Letters of 3rd/6th and 19th May 1795 from P. Taay, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  London. Taay gave a moving description of the difficulties which faced him: 'In
  order to uphold your noble honour and house, I was obliged to go and beg from one
  or other good friend, a task which came very hard to me. The one was deaf and could
  not grasp my meaning, another wanted to help but was in great straits himself, a
  third had no money to hand, and so on and so forth. When a bill of yours is
  protested, I am consumed with anxiety and get the fever. I am already so ashamed
  that I do not dare to show myself in the street during the daytime ... '
3 Infra, 282.
4 Hermann Albrecht Insinger was born on 6th January 1757 in Biickeburg. In 1768 he
  moved to Amsterdam, where on 19th August 1787 he married Anna Maria Swarth.
  He initially traded under the name of Insinger & Prins, and later as Insinger &
  Swarth. On 30th December 1800 he founded the house ofInsinger & Co., which has
  retained the name up to the present day. Insinger probably visited the Caribbean,
  and is said to have been shipwrecked there. Such a visit would explain his numerous
  contacts with plantation owners in the area. Data obtained from the Insinger
  archives and furnished by Mr.J.Nauta, adviser to Insinger & Co.
5 Supra, 51, note 2. Infra, 282.

    PAGE 52

    Letters of 26th November 1796, and 4th, 17th, 20th and 21St January, and 20th
    February 1797 from J.J.Voute, Jr., Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London. An

                                          55!
                                NOTES PAGES 52-55

  attempt was made in association with the Swedish East India Company to set up a
  speculation in tea, but this probably failed to materialize.
  Letters of lIth and 18th June, and 16th July 1796 from De Coninck & Co.,
  Copenhagen, to Voute & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 18th and 21st June, and 9th July 1796 from Voute & Co., Amsterdam, to De
  Coninck & Co., Copenhagen. De Coninck's correspondence shows also that the
  plantation owners on St.Croix sent produce to Copenhagen to be sold, in order to
  provide funds for interest and principal instalments. At the end of May 1798,
  Insinger paid Taay a sum of cf 8,000, which was debited to the account headed
  'St.Croix negotiations A and B.'
  Letter of 2nd June 1798 from H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Hamburg.
2 Letters of 25th March, 28th April and 17th June 1797 from Hope &Co., London, to
  J.J.Voute Jr., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 13th April, 28th June, 4th and 5th July 1797 from J.J.Voute Jr.,
  Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London.
3 Infra, 162-163, 165-166.
4 Infra, 168.
5 Infra, 163-164.

    PAGE 53

I Infra, 173-176.
2 Van Winter, Aandeel, II, 367 note I. Van Winter, 'Louisiana gekocht en betaald,'
  Verkenning en Onderzoek (Groningen, 1965),380-382. We are indebted to Prof.van
  Winter for allowing us to consult the revised edition of his book Aandeel van den
  Amsterdamschen handel aan de opbouw van het Amerikaansche Gemeenebest which is
  to be published in English.
3 Van Winter, 'Lousiana gekocht en betaald,' 382-383. Hidy, House of Baring, 28-30.
4 Henry Hope, John Williams Hope, Thomas Hope and Henry Philip Hope each
  shouldered a quarter of the cost. The Hopes acquired 445,334-!- acres, for which they
  paid 48,126 pounds sterling. Expenses up to 1804 totalled 5,360.12.6 pounds sterling
  against which stood revenues totalling 3,067.9.10 pounds sterling. VI-ba-8 ('America.')

    PAGE 54

I Letter of 12th June 1799 to William Gordon Coesvelt, St.Croix.
  Letter of 4th April 1800 from Friderici, Paramaribo, to Mr .Hope, London.
2 Infra, 387. Letters of 16th and 24th March, 15th and 17th August 1799, and 20th May
  1800, and 1I undated letters from Count Starhemberg, London, to Messrs. Hope,
  London.
  Letters of 14th June, 16th and 19th July, 2nd and 6th August 1799 from J. Schubach,
  Hamburg, to Hope & Co., London; of 16th July, 2nd and 23rd August 1799, from
  Count von Pergen, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., London; and of 1st October 1799 to
  J.Schubach, Hamburg, VI, I 18.
  Letter of 12th April 1800 from Count von Pergen, Vienna, to Hope & Co., London.

    PAGE 55

I 30th April 1801: Memorandum to Robert Voute.
2 Letter of 30th June 1801 from R.Voute, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London.


                                         55 2
                                 NOTES PAGES         55-60
3 Letter of 8th November 1801 from R.Voilte, The Hague, to H.Hope, London.
  Letter of 5th December 1801 from R.Voilte, Utrecht, to H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam.
  The total value was then put at cf 825,000.
4 Infra, Chapter Fourteen.

    PAGE 56
I Early July 1802: 'Circumstances,' written by Robert Voilte, Middagten, to Hope &
  Co., London.
2 Letters of 4th May 1802 from R.Voilte, The Hague, to J.WilIiams Hope, London,
  and 22nd May 1802 from R.Voilte, Middagten, to J.Williams Hope, London.
  Infra, 399, note 2.
3 Letter of 6th November 1802 from Henry Hope, London, to J. Williams Hope,
  Norwich.

    PAGE 57
I Infra, 396,402.
2 Infra, 407-410.
3 Infra, 201-202.
4 Infra, 188-190.
5 Infra, 192. 'Propositions faites au Ministre du Tresor Public par M.Labouchere,
  associe de la Maison Hope & Cie. d' Amsterdam.' Labouchere received from the
  minister drafts from F.Baring & Co. to a value of 34t million francs. These were
  dated 3rd May 1803 and had been accepted by Hope & Co. In exchange for these,
  Hope was required to furnish: I) drafts issued by the Receveurs Gemiraux and
  totalling 15 million francs, of which 5 million fell due on 30 Fructidor of the year: 12
  and 10 million on 30 Vendemiaire of the year 13; 2) eight bonds involving in all 12
  million francs and falling due at monthly intervals from I st May 1804 to the end of
  that year; these were to be used for credits opened by the French Admiralty; 3) a sum
  of 5,825,000 francs in the form of six bonds from Hope & Co., payable in Paris; these
  payments, however, would not be made until the remaining two-thirds of the bonds
  had been surrendered to Hope, and pending this the Company would pay t %
  interest per month on the sum remaining unpaid. In recognition of the acceleration
  of the payments, Baring and Hope were allowed a discount of 1,675,000 francs.

    PAGE 58
I Van Winter, Aandeel, 11,387-388.
2 Ibid., 388. VI-ba-8 ('America').
3 Van Winter, 'Louisiana gekocht en betaald,' 386-387.
4 1804: Contract between Hope & Co. and R.&Th.de Smeth.
5 VI-ba-8 ('America').

    PAGE 60
I Letter of 15th February 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to A.Baring,
  London. Because of the poor rate of exchange, an issue quoted at 98 in London came
  out at 105 in Amsterdam. The nominal price there was 107, but the arrival on the
  market of a large number of bonds would have rendered this unattainable.
2 Van Winter, Aandeel(revised edition}.
3 Van Winter, Aandeel, 11,388, note 5. 'Louisiana 6 %, Staat van Deelneeming in


                                          553
                                 NOTES PAGES         60-63

  Americaansche Fondsen,' 1805-1821. The 1,346 bonds purchased would each have
  grossed the participants cf 120.
4 Infra, 394·

    PAGE 61

I Infra, 292-294.
2 Infra, 306-309.
3 Infra, 327-328.
4 Infra, 331.

    PAGE 62

I Infra, 335-336, 340-342.
2 Infra, 338-339.
3 Infra, 339-340, 344-346.
4 MECKLENBURG-SCHWERIN: Letter of 26th May 1808 to Van Herzeele, Amsterdam,
  VII, 384. BADEN: Letters of 23rd September 1808 and 31st January 1809 to Gronovius,
  Karlsruhe, VII, 491. GRAND DUCHY OF WARSAW: Letter of 15th January 1808 to Jean
  Ant.Noffolk, Warsaw, VII, 282. PRUSSIA: Letters of 5th January and 16th February
  1808 to Niebuhr, Berlin, VII, 261, 315; of loth and 19th February 1808 from Niebuhr,
  Berlin, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam; and ohth April 1808 from Hope & Co. to
  R.Voute, Utrecht, VII, 342. Ch.Lesage, Napoleon I, Crt?ancier de la Prusse (Paris,
  1924),232. DENMARK: Letter of 5th February 181 I from P.F.Lestapis, Amsterdam, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Antwerp. KINGDOM OF ITALY: Letters of 17th July and 4th August
  1809 to Rougemont de Lowenberg, Paris, A XXVII, 127, 141; of 24th July 1809 from
  Rougemont de Lowenberg, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam, and of 18th August
  1809 from Nic.Hubbard, Geneva, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.

    PAGE 63

I In a 'report concerning the foreign policy of the Netherlands' dated 23rd January
  1829, the sum of the capital invested in foreign loans was estimated to be
  cf640,000,000. Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, IX; (The Hague, 1917),474. In
  October 1829, O.J.A.Repelaer van Driel, director ofthe Algemeene Maatschappij in
  Brussels, put the figure at cf 1,600,000,000, a difference of 1,000 million guilders.
  Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, IX, ii, 913. In the Netherlands, the heaviest losses
  were incurred on domestic loans. In 1814 the national debt amounted to 1,250
  million guilders, of which only one-third bore interest, which was at the rate of 21- %.
  Ofthe interest-free portion, four million guilders, later to be increased to five
  million, was to be transferred annually to the interest-bearing debt. In 184 I the
  interest-free debt, which then totalled nearly 900 million guilders, was converted to
  an interest-bearing loan; the conversion rate was 6.8 % and the interest rate 21- %.
  J.T.Buys, 'De Nederlandsche staatsschuld sedert 1814,' Werkzaamheden van de
  Afdeeling Koophandel der Maatschappij onder de Zinspreuk: Felix Meritis te
  Amsterdam (Haarlem, 1857), 1I2, note I, 156-157. J.J.Weeveringh, Handleiding tot
  de Geschiedenis der Staatsschulden, I (Haarlem, 1852), 2 I 4.
2 Infra, 338.
3 Infra, 196.
4 Infra, 366,368-369,420,424.



                                           554
                               NOTES PAGES         64-69

    PAGE 64

I Infra, 336, note 2.
2 Infra, 257.
3 Letter of 13th August 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Pyrmont, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam. The French campaign against Russia had dislocated postal
  communications in Germany.
4 A.Trende, Niebuhr, 40, 46,47 note 71, 50, 55. As a precondition for any loan to
  Prussia, Labouchere stipulated that a settlement be reached in the matter of a loan
  granted to Austria against the security of revenues from Silesia, which Prussia had
  seized from Austria in 1742. No interest had since been paid on the loan, and the
  principal repayments had ceased immediately following the seizure. The loan sum
  was cf 4,800,000. Niebuhr also feared that Labouchere, by reason of his contacts with
  Talleyrand, was fully aware of Prussia's extremely vulnerable position vis-a-vis
  France.

    PAGE 65

I Letter of 1st December 1808, from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to I.WilIiams Hope,
  London.
2 Infra, 357-360, 366-368, 374-375.
3 Infra, 413-415.
4 Obituary of Henry Hope in 'The Times' of 5th March 1811.

    PAGE 66

I Letters of 3rdAprii 181 I from John Hope, London, to Mr.Shadwell, London, and
  14th and 15th April 181 I from John Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere, London.
2 Infra, 375.
3 Infra, 246-254. Letters of 28th September 1812 from John Hope, London, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam, A V, 142, and of 28th February 1813 to John Hope, London.
4 Infra, 253·
5 Infra, 426.

    PAGE 68

I Letter of 23rd March 18 I 3 to Mrs.J .Hope, London, A V, 170-17 I.
2 Agreement of 17th July 1813 between Mrs.Anne Hope of the one part, and Thomas
  and Henry Philip Hope of the other part.
3 Deed of assignment and transfer by Thomas and Henry Philip Hope to Alexander
  Baring, dated 3rd September 1813.
4 Infra, 265.

    PAGE 69

I Infra, 246-248, 252, 254-255, 266-267, 268-270.
2 Concerning Hogguer: Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1058.
  Infra, 91, note 3. Concerning De Smeth: infra, 235, 371. Concerning Muilman: Elias,
  Vroedschap, II, 869 note n.




                                         555
                                    CHAPTER TWO




    PAGE 73

I   Ingvar Andersson, A History 0/ Sweden (London, 1955),261.

    PAGE 74

I Eli F.Heckscher, An Economic History o/Sweden (Cambridge, Mass., 1954), 197.
2 L.Stavenow, Geschichte Schwedens, 1718-1772 (Gotha, 1908),350-359.
  R.Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III and his contemporaries, II, (London, 1894), 30-3 I
3 Stavenow, Geschichte Schwedens, 364.
  Van Dillen, 'Bloeitijd der Amsterdamse Wissel bank,' 309.
4 Stavenow, Geschichte Schwedens, 368-378.
  Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 30-3 I.
  R.Nisbet-Bain, Scandinavia (Cambridge, 1905), 355.

    PAGE 75

I G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12380-100, 155. The State Treasury or Comptoir
  Royal d'Etat, in tum, was dependent upon the revenues of the kingdom. The
  extraordinary security pertaining to these notes lay in the fact that they became
  negotiable in the event of Sweden failing to pay.
2 Stavenow, Geschichte Schwedens, 388.
3 Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 49.
  Stavenow, Geschichte Schwedens, 395-396. The English and Danish envoys also
  supported the Caps.
4 Ibid., 396.
  Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 49. While the riksdag was in session, units of the Danish
  and Russian fleets were cruising off the Swedish coast. Stavenow, Geschichte
  Schwedens, 401.

    PAGE 76

I Ibid., 403. Request to the king by the riksdag, dated 17th November 1769, to
  negotiate a loan abroad, in G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12395-136.
2 Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1057. Cancelled contract between the Swedish king and Hope &
  Co. and Fizeaux Grand & Co., late November- early December 1780.
3 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12394-889.
4 Supra, 76, note I.
5 As coins of relatively high value were also minted from copper, these were met in the
  form of blocks of the metal weighing up to nearly 20 kilograms. Because copper coins


                                          55 6
                                  NOTES PAGES 73-82

    were costly to transport, a severe fall in the value of paper money was necessary to
    bring about a flight of capital in coin. Heckscher, Economic History, 88, 197.

    PAGE 77

I Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 64. This transaction does not seem to have resulted in a
  public loan.
2 Stavenow, Geschichte Schwedens, 427-433; Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 105-140.
3 Nisbet-Bain, ibid., 117. The name of Grill & Co. also appears in the deeds of
  settlement issued by Hope to the Swedish government in later years. In the 18th
  century the Dutch silver ducat was commonly used in trading circles in the Baltic. It
  was equal in value to 2t guilders and for this reason was also referred to as a
  rixdollar. H.Enno van Gelder, De Nederlandse munten (Utrecht, 1965), 149,225,
  259-260.
4 Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 159.

  PAGE 78

I Nisbet-Bain, ibid., 166-167; Hecksher, Economic History, 198; Stavenow, 'Der
  aufgeklarte Absolutismus des 18en Jahrhunderts in Schweden,' Bulletin of the
  International Committee ofHistorical Sciences v, iii, 20 (1933),766.
2 Daniel Hogguer resigned from the firm in 1773, whereupon Jan Jacob Horneca
  entered into a partnership with Henri Fizeaux under the name of Horneca Fizeaux &
  Co. Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1057.
3 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12426-725,765.
4 The first million guilders were repaid after 10 years, the second after 12 years and the
  third after 15 years. The 1770 loans, like those negotiated in 1767, ran for 10 years.
5 Vide photo of the annual settlement. The text reveals that the bonds could be
  obtained in exchange for others dated 1767, which were redeemable in 1777. This
  implied a profit to Sweden of I % on conversion for the year 1777.

    PAGE 79

I Letter of 1st December 1787, from Hope & Co. to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 297;
  Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 169.
2 Nisbet-Bain, ibid., 170et seq.
3 Horneca resigned from the firm in April 1779. Fizeaux formed a new partnership
  with George Grand, a Swiss. Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1057. At the time of the seizure of
  power by Gustav ill, Grand was living in Stockholm. It was at his house that De
  Vergennes met the leaders of the conspiracy, and in recognition of his services he was
  given a title by the King of France. It was thus extremely appropriate that he should
  become part of a firm concerned with negotiating loans for Sweden. Diary and
  autobiography ofJohn Adams, edited by L.H.Butterfield, IV (Cambridge, Mass.,
  1961 ),64-65.
4 The term commenced on 1st March 1780. Three debentures, each of 100,000
  rixdollars, issued by the State Treasury were given by way of special security. The
  principal debenture dated from 13th September 1779. In: G.A. Amsterdam, Not.
  Arch., 12451-24.
    PAGE 82

  Diversen Documenten, laast 1700-begin 1800,23.
2 Div. Doc., 25.

                                            557
                                 NOTES PAGES        83-85

    PAGE 83

I   Div. Doc., 26-28; the bonds relating to this loan were dated 7th February 1781. They
    were, however, numbered from 75 I to 1250 and thus corresponded to the bonds of
    the loan of I st December 1780. The debentures issued by the State Treasury bore the
    date 14th June 1780, the date of the bonds relating to the suspended loan. The
    principal debentures ofthe two loans also bore the same date, namely loth November
    1780.
2 Div. Doc., 28-29; Hope and Fizeaux received a commission of 7 %, of which I /'~ was
    passed on to the entrepreneurs. The latter, however, were not required to pay interest
    for the period 1st-15th June on that part of their share which had not been claimed
    and paid up. The loan was for 16 years commencing on 1st March 1782, and bore
    interest at 4 %. The interest for the period 1st March to 1st June accrued to the
    Swedish king. Of the Bargum loan, cf 125,000 had been repaid by 1781.
3 Nisbet-Bain, Gustav III, II, 258-259. The political situation in Europe in 1784 also did
 .. not favour a war with Denmark.
4 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12469-658.
5 Div. Doc., 32. Hope and Fizeaux had negotiated a 5 %loan for Spain in 1782.
6 Ibid., 33.

    PAGE 84

I Volkmar subscribed cf 250,000, Ten Kate & Berck cf 500,000 and Hope cf 275,000.
2 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12476-83. Dr.Sandor Baumgarten, 'Emprunts de
  Suede it Amsterdam,' Tijdschrift voor Geschiedenis, LXXVII (1964),439-440.
3 Baumgarten, ibid., 440. Regarding Liljencrantz's preference for Hasselgreen, see
  letter of 27th December 1786, from J. Andersson, Gothenburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 P.J.B1ok, Geschiedenis van het Nederlandsche Volk, III (Leiden, 1914),585.
5 Div. Doc., 50-5 I. The principal debenture bore the date 20th October 1784; the loan
  was for 15 years, commencing on 1st December 1784. The public were to be invited to
  subscribe during the month of February, and the loan was officially opened on 1st
  March 1785. The interest due on the bonds in the period 1st December 1784 to 1st
  March 1785, accrued to the Swedish Crown.

    PAGE 85

I The floating million was thus also included, so that the deductions from the shares
  taken by the entrepreneurs diminished.
2 Div. Doc., 49.
3 Div. Doc., 49. The entrepreneurs thus enjoyed a respite until 1st September.
4 Div. Doc., 49-50. The contracts with the Swedish Crown reveal that Fizeaux Grand &
  Co. became Henri Fizeaux & Co. on 1st January 1785. The change escaped the notice
  of Elias. (Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1057-1058).
5 Hope and Fizeaux's first instalment to Liljencrantz, of cf 250,000, was not paid until
  loth March 1785, at the earliest.
6 Baumgarten, 'Emprunts de Suede,' 442. The text 'No us appliquerons d'ailleurs au
  remboursement en question votre assignations sur nous ... ' and, previously, , ... et
  en les dirigeant, comme pour Ie premier million ... ' shows clearly that we are
  concerned with the second million.
7 Baumgarten, ibid., 442. Cf. previous note
8 Baumgarten, ibid., 442.

                                          55 8
                                NOTES PAGES        86-88
        PAGE 86

  Baumgarten, ibid., 443.
    I
2 Financial relations between the Swedish Crown and the house ofSmets in Antwerp
  certainly existed in 1787.
3 The peace preliminaries were signed in Paris on 20th September 1785. Blok,
  Geschiedenis van het Nederlandsche Yolk, III, 589.
4 The principal debenture was dated 12th December 1785. The loan bore interest at
  41- %and was for a period of 15 years, commencing on 1st February 1786. G.A.
  Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12481 -9. The principal sum was to be furnished in four
  equal instalments during the months of January to April inclusive and was payable by
  70-day drafts. Div. Doc., 68-69.
5 The contract with the entrepreneurs was signed on 31st December 1785. Div. Doc.,
  12 9- 1 30.
6 Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, 11,5.

        PAGE 87

I Nisbet-Bain, ibid., 289.
2 To the letters in 1786 Hope appended the name J.von Jacobsen. Letters in the same
  handwriting and dated 1788 and 1789, however, bear the signature of Jacob
  Andersson.
3 27th September 1786. J.Andersson, Gothenburg, in a letter to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter dated 27th December 1786, from J.Andersson, Gothenburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 M.Marion, Histoire Financiere de la France depuis 1715, I (Paris, 1914),31. The name
  of the intermediary in Paris was De Montessuy.
6 The balance consisted of 12,520 'paniers' or 1,513,793 Amsterdam pounds. The letter
  book refers to 1,252 paniers, but this is presumably due to an error in transcription
  since paniers weighing 600 kilograms do not exist. A weight of 60 pounds, however, is
  normal. (Information supplied by T.H.Kimm, Curator ofthe Niemeyer Netherlands
  Tobacological Museum, Groningen). Letter of 14th Augustus 1787 to Baron de
  Ruuth, P.c. '87, 86.
7 Letter of 19th June 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.c. '87,4.
8 Letter of 19th June 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 4.

        PAGE 88

I Letter of 23rd June 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 6. Ferdinand Grand was also
  banker to the United States. Butterfield, Diary ofJohn Adams, IV, 64.
2 Hope foresaw a fall in prices if the auction were publicly announced in advance.
3 Letter of 14th August 1787, to Baron de Ruuth, P.c. '87, 86 et seq. Four days later
  Hope wrote to say that a report had been received from Grand stating that the
  Fermiers had broken off the negotiations and had even refused to bid at the public
  auction. This auction had meanwhile been cancelled (letter of 18th August 1787 to
  Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 95).
4 Letter of7th July 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.c. '87, 26.
  Letter of 17th July 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 43, 46 and 47.




                                         559
                                NOTES PAGES         89-91
    PAGE 89

I Letter of 14th August 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87,90.
2 'La Couronne de Suede, S/Cte Courant de Tabac.' The account totalled
  cf 393,604.7.8. After deduction of Hope's costs, including those concerned with
  arranging the auction, the sale netted cf 210,801.5.0 for Cohen. The advantage to the
  latter lay in the fact that the import duty did not become due until the tobacco had
  been sold, thus avoiding a substantial loss of interest on the (high) ad valorem duty.
  Moreover, because tobacco was subject to a rapid loss in value (estimated at between
  4 %and 8 %between the moment of importation and the moment of sale), the fact that
  the duty, ad valorem, did not become due until the time of sale was an advantage in
  itself. Cohen's ultimate plan was to supply much larger quantities oftobacco to Sweden.
  His correspondents there would store the tobacco in the Crown warehouses at the
  various ports during the period offreedom from duty, and would sell it from there in
  the presence of a customs officer, who would collect the duty from the purchasers.
  The plan misfired. Cohen was obliged to pay immediately and was later reimbursed.
  Faced with this situation, he declared that he could not compete with the tobacco
  smugglers. Letter of 16th February 1788 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '88,162-164.
3 Letter of 23rd June 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87,9.
4 Letter of 28th July 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 60-62. The repayment to
  Hasselgreen probably concerned the loan of 1776 (vide page 78),

    PAGE 90

I Letter of 28th July 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 62-63.
2 The conditions referred to here were incorporated, without modification, into the
  official contract dated 25th August 1787 (Div. Doc., 239). The principal debenture
  bore the date 8th August 1787. G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12487-452. On 7th
  August, De Ruuth reported that the king had agreed to the conditions. Letter of 25th
  August 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, II I.
3 Div. Doc., 235. The commission to be paid to the entrepreneurs was based on the
  sums converted or provided by them.
4 Letter of 1st December 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, P.e. '87, 298-299. This letter was
  despatched to Sweden by express messenger on the same day. A copy was sent by
  ordinary post on 4th December. Following publication of the Berigt (Report) of the
  loan by Hasselgreen, Hope repeated their objections. Letter of 3rd December 1787 to
  Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '87, 316.

    PAGE 91

I Infra Appendix Cn.
2 Letter of 5th January 1788 to Baron de Ruuth, P.C. '88, 15.
3 Elias, Vroedschap, n, 1058. In 1798 the outstanding portions of all Swedish loans
  floated in the Netherlands were merged into a single fund totalling cf 15,000,000, the
  interest on which was raised to 5 %. The management of the fund was entrusted to the
  erstwhile competitors, Hogguer & Co. (successors to Hogguer Grand & Co.) and Jan
  and Carl Hasselgreen. The terms provided for half a million guilders of the fund to be
  repaid annually. The loans arranged by Hope and Fizeaux in the years 1784, 1786 and
  1787 were embodied in the fund. When, in 1808, Sweden again became embroiled in a
  war with Russia, the Swedish government suspended the payment of interest and
  principal money on the fund in the Netherlands. The country's foreign loans were


                                          560
                                  NOTE PAGE        91

reduced by two-thirds by the riksdag held at Orcbro in 1812, and the balance was
subsequently abrogated. In 1814, following the Napoleonic wars, steps were taken in
the Netherlands with a view to recouping the debt and the accumulated interest. A
memorandum on the subject was sent to the Netherlands envoy in Stockholm. In this,
the sum owing was stated to be cf 14,700,000. However, many bonds had been
purchased for Swedish account since I 808-at a low price, of course. Whether these
had been bought by the Swedish government or by private investors was not clear. Of
the managers of the fund in 1798, little remained: Hogguer & Co. had been
completely liquidated, and Jan and Carl Hassclgreen had, according to the
memorandum, 'lost all credit and substance, so that it cannot be anticipated that the
public would willingly support the continuation of this intermediary.' In 1815 a
meeting of those with interests in the Swedish loans was held, and this led to G.van de
Poll being despatched to Sweden with instructions to plead the cause of the Dutch
bondholders. He succeeded in moving the authorities to recognize one-third of the
debt, repayment of which ensued in 1816. His efforts to obtain the interest owed
failed, however: 1.1 .Weeveringh, Handleiding tot de geschiedenis der Staatsschulden, II
(Haariem, 1855),781-783. Cf. instructions sent to 'Mr.de Zuylen' in Stockholm, 12th
November 1814.
                                  CHAPTER THREE




    PAGE 93

I Weeveringh, Geschiedenis staatsschulden, II, 708 et seq.
2 According to Elias (Vroedschap, II, 798 and 800), cf 4,000,000 was borrowed in 1769;
  cf 500,000 in 1770; and cf 1,000,000 in 1774. P.Katzenelsohn, Zur Entwicklungsge-
  schichte der Finanzen Russlands, I (Berlin, 1913), 104-105, quotes the following
  amounts: 1769, cf 500,000 at 3 %; in 1773 and 1774 a total of cf 4,000,000 at 5 %.
3 Katzenelsohn, Entwicklungsgeschichte, 105.
4 Supra, 77, 83.

    PAGE 94

I Letter of 9th April 1787 from R.Voute to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Grootboek 1783: 219, 246, 270, 295, 314, 25, 39.48,84,152,156.
  Grootboek 1784: 15,24,37,45,133,146,197,229,259.
  Grootboek 1785:24,33.34,40,45,47,87, 135, 145, 192,263,274,292,354.
  Grootboek 1786:7,25,33,55,47,89, 134, 180, 179,232,260,282,318.
  This summary appears more impressive than it really is. The majority of these
  accounts consisted merely of small balances left over from earlier transactions. These
  'dead' accounts were carried forward year after year. In fact, business of significant
  proportions mainly related to a few houses in St.Petersburg, e.g. Thomson Peters
  Bonar & Co. and William Porter & Co. In Moscow, the only connexion of
  importance was with Thomson Rowand & Co. Voute advised Hope to spread his
  business over a number of houses, so that if one should become bankrupt the loss
  could be made good out of profits from the other transactions; after all, 'the object of
  commission and interest on monies should be a sure profit.'
3 Letter of 18th December 1787 to Alexander Henry Sutherland, P.C. '87, 351.
4 Journal for 1787: 384,427,673,696. Decree by Alexander Nicolayvich relating to the
  Sutherland affair, 28th April 1794.
5 Journal for 1786: 1934. Journal for 1787: 694, 696, 774, 783, 794, 848, 878, 907, 909,
  916,934,938,989, 1001, 1005, 1047, 1062, 1082, 1089, 1109, 1125. 1144.
6 Infra, 432-433.
7 Grootboek 1788: 74, 227, 288.
  Grootboek 1789: 196.
  Grootboek 1790: 161.
  Grootboek 1791: 46, 275.
  Grootboek 1792: 46, 328.



                                          562
                                 NOTES PAGES 93-98

        PAGE 95

  Letter of 9th October 1787 to Richard Sutherland, 'Banquier de la Cour,'
    I
  St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 184.
2 Infra, 435.
3 Letter of 9th October 1787 to Richard Sutherland, St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 186.

        PAGE 96

  Letter of 9th October 1787 to Richard Sutherland, St. Petersburg, P.C. '87,187.
    I
2 The members of the Committee for Foreign Loans in 1787 were: the Attorney
  General, Prince Vyazemsky; the Vice-Chancellor, Count Ostermann; the Director of
  the Assignat Bank, Count Shuvalov; and the President of the Board of Trade, Count
  Vorontsov.
3 The entrepreneurs were permitted to furnish their shares of the 5th December loan in
  three equal instalments in the months of March, April and May 1787. The names of
  the entrepreneurs were almost identical to those concerned with the contract of 30th
  July 1787 for a loan to Sweden (supra, 91). Interest payments were scheduled to
  commence on 1st February 1788; no capital repayments were permitted during the
  first six years. The debentures took the same form as those relating to the earlier loans
  made by De Smeth, and the securities provided were the same. Members of the
  public who purchased bonds from Hope & Co. received a commission of t %, but this
  was not deducted from the I % bonus paid to the entrepreneurs. Hope commenced to
  accept investments on 5th December.
4 The conditions of the second loan largely corresponded to those of the first. The
  Company sent 'plans' of both loans to the Committee. A remarkable feature ofthese
  is that they refer to four monthly instalments by the entrepreneurs, whereas in fact the
  period was three months. Thus, the entrepreneurs were enabled to place both loans
  more quickly than was disclosed to the Committee by Hope. It may be that this
  stratagem afforded Hope some latitude in meeting their commitments to the Court,
  but whether or not this was its purpose is not known because the contracts between
  Hope and the Russian Court have not survived. 'Plan' for the first loan, letter of 6th
  December 1787 to R.Sutherland, St. Petersburg, P.C. '87, 314. 'Plan' for the second
  loan, letter of 1Ith December 1787 to Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg,
  P.C. '87, 331.
5 Letter of I Ith December 1787 to R.Sutherland, St.Petersburg, P.e. '87, 329.

        PAGE 98

I Letter of 21st December 1787 to R.Sutherland, St.Petersburg, P.e. '87, 359.
  The loan obtained from Goll was of cf 2,500,000 and was secured by debentures
  issued by the Bank of Vienna (Elias, Vroedschap, II, 1052). The first loan in this sum
  succeeded; a second, for the same amount, is reported to have been withdrawn owing
  to lack of interest. Letter of 22nd January 1788 to Beerend Roosen, Hamburg, P.e.
  '88,94·
  In correspondence with Sutherland, Hope referred to their Swedish loan of
  cf 2,500,000. In fact, this loan was for only cf 1,500,000, while Hasselgreen was in the
  market with a loan ofcf 1,000,000 (Supra, 90). This suggests that Hope was unwilling
  to admit to Sutherland that another house was also busy with a loan for Sweden.
  Letter of 21st December 1787 to R.Sutherland, St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 359.
2 Letter of 6th December 1787 to R.Sutherland, St.Petersburg, P.e. '87, 31 I.
                               NOTES PAGES 98-100

  Letter of 21St December 1787 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 359.
  Letter of 8th December 1787 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.C. '87, 3 I 7.
  Letter of I Ith December 1787 to the Committee, St. Petersburg, P.C. '87, 331.
3 Letter of 15th January 1788 to the Committee, St.Petersburg, P.e. '88, 53.
  The receipt of the approval was acknowledged in a postscript.
4 Letter of 11th December 1787 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 329.
5 Letter of 18th December 1787 to J. and F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 352.

    PAGE 99

I Letter of 6th December 1787 to the Committee, St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 319.
  Letter of I Ith December 1787 to the Committee, St.Petersburg. P.C. '87, 331.
  Letter of I Ith December 1787 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.C. '87, 334.
  The silence imposed on the parties to the contract will also have enabled the public
  subscription to the first loan to be completed smoothly, leaving minds free to
  concentrate on the second.
  Van der Meulen, Ministerie Van de Spiegel, 349.
2 Letter of 18th December 1787 to A.H.Sutheriand, London, P.e. '87, 351. Sutherland
  will also have had opponents among the members of the Committee for Foreign
  Loans. Vyazemsky was known to be opposed to loans from abroad. Katzenelsohn,
  Entwicklungsgeschichte, 106.
3 Letter of 8th December 1787 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.C. '87, 317.
4 Letter of 6th December 1787 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.e. '87, 3 I I.
5 Letter of 6th December 1787 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, P.C. '87, 319.
6 Letter of 21st December 1787 to R.Sutheriand, St. Petersburg, P.C. '87, 359.

    PAGE 100

I Letter of 14th January 1788 to e.M.J.de Wolf, Antwerp, P.C. '88,44.
  Letter of 15th January 1788 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.C. '88, 50.
  The loan issued by De Wolf was ultimately fully subscribed. The proceeds were
  remitted to Hope & Co. and subsequently placed at Sutherland's disposal.
  Groothoek 1788: 101,222,303; letter of 14th March 1788 to the Committee,
  St.Petersburg, P.C. '88, 252.
  P J.van Winter, 'De Amerikaanse zaken van C.J.M.de Wolf,' Mededelingen van de
  Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone Kunsten van
  Belgie. Klasse der Letteren, XXXII, ii (1970), 10, 14.
2 Letter of 19th February 1788 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.C. '88,171.
3 Letter of 19th February 1788 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.C. '88,171.
4 Letter of 15th January 1788 to R.Sutheriand, St.Petersburg, P.C. '88, 50.
  Letter of 15th January 1788 to the Committee, St. Petersburg, P.C. '88, 53.
  Groothoek 1788: 133,322. Groothoek 1789: 56,265. Groothoek 1790: II3,312.
  Groothoek 1791 : 90. Hope & Co. thus received a gross commission of 6t %which
  included I %on the shares taken by the entrepreneurs (whose remuneration later rose
  to It % and, later still, to 2 %), t %on the value of public subscriptions and t %for
  the brokers. Hope's share of both the first and second loans was cf 750,000. There are
  no details of the contracts for the third and fourth loans, and thus the Company's
   share in these is not known.
                               NOTES PAGES 101-103

    PAGE 101

I Letter of 14th March 1788 to the Committee, St.Petersburg, P.C. '88, 252. The loan
  was for 10 years and the rate of interest 4t%. The interest was to be payable from 1st
  July 1788 and to accrue to the entrepreneurs; they were committed to furnish their
  portions of the loan in three equal instalments on 15th July, 15th August and 15th
  September. The entrepreneurs thus enjoyed a douceur. Cf. 'Plan' for this loan,
  enclosed with letter of 14th March to the Committee.
2 The name of Regny was mentioned in letters addressed by the Committee in
  St. Petersburg to Hope & Co. on 28th August and 8th September 1808. Sutherland's
  efforts to borrow money in Genoa had the approval of Hope, provided that the rate
  of interest did not exceed 4t %. Letter of 19th February 1788 to R.Sutheriand,
  St. Petersburg, P.e. '88,171.

    PAGE 102

I Letter of 25th March 1788 to Beerend Roosen, Hamburg, P.e. '88, 285.
2 Letter of 23rd November 1787 to J.Cambiasso, Leghorn, P.e. '87, 262. Cambiasso
  shrank from undertaking any business in which Sutherland was involved. Hope
  attributed this reticence to a lack of financial strength on the part of those who had
  acted for Sutherland in Amsterdam. In this, he was probably referring to De Smeth.
3 Letter of 22nd March 1788 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.e. '88, 280. J.Seton Watson,
  The Russian Empire 1801-1917 (Oxford, 1967),46-48.
4 Letter of 24th March 1788 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.C. '88, 283.
  In addition to occupying the office of Advocate Fiscal to the Admiralty in
  Amsterdam, Joan Cornel is van der Hoop was a member of the Council appointed to
  assist the stadholder-admiral-general. He was on intimate terms with the partners in
  Hope & Co., and his son, Adriaan, became a partner in the Company in 1815.
  Nieuw Nederlandsch Biogra/isch Woordenboek, VI, 801 -802.
5 Letter of 25th March 1788 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.C. '88, 284.
  Letters of 25th and 28th March 1788 to J.&F. Baring, London, P.C. '88, 287, 296.
  Letter of 29th March 1788 to J.C.van der Hoop, The Hague, P.C. '88, 392. Hope was
  fobbed off with references to 'the interests of the State.'
6 Letters of 2nd and 7th April 1788 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.e. '88, 310, 323.

    PAGE 103

I Letters of 29th March and 1st April 1788 to De Coninck & Reyersen, Copenhagen,
  P.e. '88, 301, 309; 4th April 1788 to Kalichev, The Hague, P.e. '88, 319.
  A rate of 16t shillings per ton per month had earlier been agreed in London; in the
  Republic this would be equal to about eleven guilders per last (of two tons).
  Insurance on the London market would cost t % per month. At the outset, when there
  seemed little prospect of obtaining the approval of the Netherlands government,
  Hope thought of proposing to De Coninck & Reyersen that they should purchase
  vessels in the RepublIc and sail them under the Danish flag. De Coninck & Reyersen
  supplied the Russian squadron with hardtack.
2 Nisbet-Bain, Gustavus III, II, 14-16.
3 The fifth loan ran for 12 years from I st May 1789, and bore interest at 5 %. The
  settlement period for the entrepreneurs commenced on 1st May and ended on 1st
  August. Hope undertook not to place any further loans before 1st September 1789
  without the consent of the entrepreneurs.
                              NOTES PAGES 104-105

    PAGE 104

1 Letters of 25th and 29th September 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron
  Sutherland, St.Petersburg. The entrepreneurs were thus two months in arrears
  according to the terms ofthe contract, which provided for payment in four monthly
  instalments in the period November to February. They received a bonus of 2 %. The
  loan was for twelve years commencing on 1st September 1789, but provision was
  made for repayment after seven years. Hope's share was cf 590,000, nearly one-third
  of the total sum.
2 Letter of 13th October 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg.
3 Letters of loth and 24th November 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron
  Sutherland, St.Petersburg.
4 Letter of loth November 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg.

    PAGE 105

I Letter of 4th December 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg.
2 Letter of 25th December 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg. Count Vorontsov, in particular, objected to the commission paid to
  Hope. The contracts between Hope and the Russian Court are missing, so we do not
  know whether the figure of 6-!- %included commission on interest and capital
  payments. This seems probable, however, because Hope here compares the Russian
  commission with the Polish figure of 6 % plus 1 %for interest payments and 2 % for
  repayments of capital (the last figure is incorrect: Hope received only I % on capital
  repayments). Even if the commission paid to Hope by the Russians did not include
  remuneration for such payments, the comparison would be unfortunate. We must
  assume that the total comprised 5 % on the sum of the loan, I %on capital
  repayments and t %on interest payments.
  If a separate commission of 1 %on capital repayments had been granted, this would
  have been payable only from the eighth to the twelfth years-assuming that the loan
  was for twelve years with provision for repayment after seven years. On the basis of a
  five per cent loan, payment of the commission on the repayment of capital at the
  commencement of the loan, instead of after the eighth year, would have given Hope a
  profit on interest of t %. For a 12-year loan, the half per cent on the interest
  payments, if paid on the principal sum, is equal to something like It % on the
  interest due if this were paid annually. The grootboeken contain no reference to
  commission on interest paid; capital repayments were then not yet due. Hope's
  reasons for not undertaking any loans except those for Russia are self-explanatory:
  the Company worked with a fixed group of entrepreneurs who could only place a
  certain number of bonds and, as our story shows, were kept busy enough doing that.
3 Letter of 25th December 1789 from H.Hope, Amsterdam, to Baron Sutherland,
  St.Petersburg. As the preceding note shows, we have no information concerning the
  terms of payment agreed between Hope and the Russian Court. It is conceivable that
  Hope requested indulgence when the entrepreneurs got into arrears with their
  payments for the fifth loan. A similar indulgence in respect of the sixth loan would
  largely have benefited Hope because, under the relevant contract, the entrepreneurs



                                         566
                                NOTES PAGES 105-107

    were committed to pay interest on their shares 'beyond the Month previously laid
    down, in which the monies are to be furnished.'

    PAGE 106

I Contract for the seventh loan dated 16th February 1790. The period of the loan
  commenced on I st January 1790. The entrepreneurs were obliged to furnish their
  shares in the months of March, April, May and June. Provision was made for
  repayment after seven years. Hope, whose share amounted to cf 800,000, undertook
  not to negotiate any fresh loans before 1st July 1790.
2 Contract for the eighth loan, dated 13th August 1790. The period of the loan
  commenced on 1St May 1790. The period for settlement by the entrepreneurs ran
  from October 1790 to February 1791 inclusive. Hope undertook not to float further
  loans until 1st March 1791. Provision was made for the loan to be repaid after seven
  years. Hope did not have a share in this loan.
3 Contract for the ninth loan, dated 6th January 1791. A 12-year loan, this commenced
  officially on I st August 1790, which fact reveals that it had been arranged some time
  before. Here, too, repayment was allowed only after seven years. The entrepreneurs
  had from March to June inclusive to furnish their shares. No fresh loan might be
  floated until 1st July 1791 without the approval of the entrepreneurs. The interest rate
  was5%·

    PAGE 107

I Contract for the tenth and eleventh loans, dated 28th February 1791. Both were for
  twelve years, the tenth loan commencing on 1st November 1790 and the eleventh on
  1st February 1791. It appears that the second portion remaining from the previous
  year was linked to a new loan. Repayment was possible after seven years. The
  entrepreneurs had from May to October inclusive to meet their commitments. The
  loans bore interest at 5 %. No fresh loans were permitted before 1st November 1791
  without the approval of the entrepreneurs. Hope's share ofthese loans totalled
  cf325,000.
2 Contract for the twelfth and thirteenth loans, dated 18th July 1791. These were for 12
  years, the twelfth commencing on 1st September 1791 and the thirteenth on 1st
  November 1791. Provision was made for repayment after seven years. The period for
  settlement by the entrepreneurs ran from September 1791 to February 1792,
  inclusive. The interest rate was 5 %. Hope undertook not to float any new loans until
  1st March 1792 without the approval ofthe entrepreneurs. Hope's share was again
  cf325,000.
3 Contract for the fourteenth and fifteenth loans, dated 21st December 1791. Both were
  for twelve years commencing on 1st February 1792. Repayment after seven years was
  provided for. The entrepreneurs had from 1st February to 30th June to meet their
  commitments. The loans bore interest at 4 %. Any fresh loan by Hope before 1st July
  1792 was made subject to the approval of the entrepreneurs. Hope's share of these
  loans totalled cf 600,000.
4 Manger, Recherches, 69-7 I .
5 G.W.Vreede, Mr. Laurens Pieter van de Spiegel en zijne tijdgenooten ([737-[800), IV
  (Middelburg, 1877),386. This reference concerns a memorandum from Henry Hope
  to Lord Auckland, British envoy in The Hague.
                               NOTES PAGES 108-109

    PAGE 108

I   Van Winter, Aandeel, II, 156, 157, 16I. The fact that the American diplomat Short
    knew about the fourteenth and fifteenth loans on 28th December 179 I (page 157.
    note I) was not so surprising, since the contract had been signed on 21st December.
    The commencement of the official period of the loan on 1st February 1792 was not of
    major significance.
    Van Winter, 'Zaken C.J.M.de Wolf,' 15.

    PAGE 109

I Contract for the sixteenth and seventeenth loans dated 6th August 1792. Both were
  for a period of twelve years commencing on 1st June 1792, with provision for
  repayment after seven years. The period for settlement by the entrepreneurs was from
  September 1792 to April 1793, inclusive. The loans bore interest at 4t%. The
  minimum selling price was fixed at 99t % for these loans also. Hope did not
  participate financially.
2 24th October 1793, Memorandum from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Count Samaylov.
  St.Petersburg.




                                          568
                                   CHAPTER FOUR




  PAGE II I

I 27th July 1793, Letter from R.Vollte, Warsaw, to J.Williams Hope, Amsterdam.
2 R.H.Lord, The Second Partition ofPoland(Cambridge, Mass., 1915),460.

  PAGE 112

I J.Rutkowski, Histoire Economiqlle de la Pologne avant les pm·tages (Paris, 1922),232.
2 Constitution ofthe sejm held in Warsaw in 1776, entitled 'L'assurance de Nos dettes
  royales.'
3 Rutkowski, Histoire Economique de la Pologne, 26, 23 1-232.
4 G.A.Amsterdam, 'HandelenNijverheid,'N 12.16.03·
S Grootboek 1777: 299,42 I. Cf. ordinance by King Stanislaw for the loan of 1786. The
  grootboeken for the years 1777 to 1787, inclusive, reveal that interest and capital were
  duly paid.

  PAGE 114

I Constitution of the sejm held in Grodno on 4th October 1784, entitled 'Etablissement
  du fonds pour payer Ie reste de Nos dettes royales.'
2 Elias, Vroedschap, 1,333-334. The Van Hoorn loan bore interest at S %. For the 1786
  loan, the Court Bankers furnished Hope with drafts in favour of Giilcher & Mulder;
  this house, as we shall see, also negotiated loans for the Polish magnates.
3 From the protocol of the Commission Economiqlle du TI"I?sor de Sa Majeste, dated Sth
  January I 78S.
4 Excerpt from the proceedings of the session of the Chamber of Finances of the King
  held on 22nd Apnl 178S.
S Declaration by the Treasury Committee, made at the request ofthe Economic
  Committee of His Majesty, on 13th August 178S.

  PAGE lIS

I Lord, Second Partition, 71, 72.
2 Letter of 31st December 178S from King Stanislaw, Warsaw, to De WickeJe,
  Amsterdam. As a young man, the king had travelled in western Europe.
3 Letters of Isth February and 19th March 1786 from King Stanislaw, Warsaw, to De
  Wickede, Amsterdam.
4 Contract dated 7th April 1786. The entrepreneurs were committed to settle in three
  equal instalments on 1st August, 1st October and 1st December. If, on Isth May, the
  principal obligation was not properly signed, or the contract with De Wicke de was
                                NOTES PAGES         II5-II9
    not in order, the entrepreneurs were to be relieved of their obligations and Hope was to
    pay them!- %of the sum subscribed, by way of compensation for the risks borne by
    them. The latter provision clearly served as a lever in the negotiations with
    De Wickede. In the event, the contract with him was not signed until 5th May 1786.
    Hope's share ofthe loan was cf 500,000.

    PAGE II6

I The mortgages in the principal debenture dated 2 I st April 1786 now comprised:
  I. The subsidium charitativum, amounting to seven million Polish guilders;
  2. 'All the wealth and property, present and future, which belongs to us';
  3. The income paid to the king by both Treasuries, amounting to four million Polish
     guilders per annum.
  Repayment was to be effected in 20 half-yearly instalments, commencing on 1st July
  1787.
2 350,000 ducats at cf 5.5.0 (the rate of exchange of the ducat for the purpose of the
  loan of 1777): cf 1,837,500
  94 % ofcf 2,000,000, less I % of7 months' interest (on IstJanuary 1787): cf 1,871,167.
3 Grootboek 1787: 128. Also Receipt dated 3rd June 1786, from Tepper and Blanc for
  the proceeds of the 1786 loan.
4 Letters of 15th February and 19th March 1786 from King Stanislaw, Warsaw, to De
  Wickede, Amsterdam.
5 Hope suffered a small loss in connexion with the terms of settlement for the
  entrepreneurs, but this was more than compensated by the favourable interest
  computation.
6 Letters of 24th and 25th June 1787 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to De Wicke de,
  Amsterdam, P.C. '87,9, I I.

    PAGE lI7

I Letter of 25th June 1787 to King Stanislaw, Warsaw, P.e. '87,13.
  Letter of 4th January 1788 to King Stanislaw, Warsaw, P.e. '88, 10.
  Letter of 4th January 1788 to De Wickede, Amsterdam, P.C. '88, I I.
2 Grootboek 1790: 177.
3 Rutkowski, Histoire Economique de la Pologne, 232-233.
4 Lord, Second Partition, 125.

    PAGE lI8

I Ibid., 287.
2 Ibid., 391.
3 W.Roosegaarde Bisschop, De opkomst der Londensche geldmarkt 164(}-I826 (The
  Hague, 1896),98-99.
4 K.L.Blum, Ein russischer Staatsmann: des Grafen Jakob Johann Sievers
  Denkwurdigkeiten, TIl (Leipzig and Heidelberg, 1858), 59-60, 109-1 10.

    PAGE lI9

I Letter of 27th July 1793 from R. Voute, Warsaw, to J. Williams Hope, Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 19th August 1793 from R.Voute, Warsaw, to J.Williams Hope, Amsterdam.




                                            570
                                NOTES PAGES 120-121

    PAGE 120
I   Lord, Second Partition, 474-475.
2   Letter of 19th August 1793 from, R.Voute, Moscow, to I.Williams Hope,
    Amsterdam.

    PAGE 121
I   Voute was mistaken about thIS. As we saw earlier, the instalments of interest and
    principal were guaranteed by the sejm: in other words, by the Republic itself.
    Subsequent events also conflict with Voute's statement.




                                            57 1
                                    CHAPTER FIVE




  PAGE 123

I Grootboek 1788: 32 and 322; grootboek 1789: 32, 102; grootboek 1790: 28, 291 ;
  grootboek 1791: 28; grootboek 1792: 28, 156; groo/boek 1793: 28, 167,372. Besides
  cochineal, Hope & Co. shipped sugar, diamonds, tea, indigo, madder and drugs to
  Thomson Rowand, the cost of which was remitted. Thomson Rowand did not ship
  goods to Hope. This underlines the latter company's role as importers, reference to
  which is made on pages I 25-I26.

  PAGE 124

  Documents and correspondence between the partners in Thomson Rowand & Co.
  and those of Rowand Carr & Co., and correspondence with Raikes & Co. All were
  enclosed with Voute's letter of 30th August 1793 to John Williams Hope. Hope's
  confidential agent, Le Chevalier, who had obtained foreign experience while working
  for De Coninck in Copenhagen, offered to join Thomson Rowand & Co. as a clerk.
  Letter of 2nd January 1792 from T.Le Chevalier, Suyderwoude, Monnikendam, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 26th August 1793 from Robert Voute, Moscow, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 125

  Infra, Appendix D-IV.
2 Letter of 4th January 1794 from R.Voute, Moscow, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th January 1794 from R. Voute, Moscow, to G. Thomson Rowand & Co.,
  Moscow.
  W.Treue, Wirtschaftsgeschichte der Neuzeit (Stuttgart, 1962),279. Under the ukase of
  April 1793, goods already in Russia were allowed to be sold until the end of January
  1794. The Russian merchants were afraid that they would not be able to dispose of
  their stocks in time, and they used this as yet another excuse for not paying their debts
  on the due date. An edict issued at the beginning of January 1794 increased the list of
  prohibited articles, but extended the sale period until March (in his letter of 9th
  January, Voute states that the extension was up to 1st July 1794).
3 Letter of 16th September 1793 from R.Voute, Moscow, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE I26

I In the light ofthe considerably more favourable assessment of the Moscow


                                           57 2
                              NOTES PAGES         123-127
  merchants contained in Appendix D-Iv, Voiite's opinion in this case seems extremely
  pessimistic.
2 Letters of 26th and 29th August 1793 from R.Voiite, Moscow, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  On 9th September, Voiite reported to John WilIiams Hope that he had extracted from
  Gusyatnikov a promise to meet the claims of his Amsterdam creditors over a period
  of four years, during which they would receive interest at 5 %per annum on the sums
  owed. Voiite is believed to have acted also for the house of Braunsberg & Co. of
  Amsterdam in this matter.

  PAGE 127

1 Letter of 2nd September 1793 from R.Voiite, Moscow, to J.WilIiams Hope,
  Amsterdam. The disparaging remarks concerning his profession were the more
  hurtful to Voiite because not only had he withdrawn from his own firm, Jan Jacob
  Voiite & Sons, at the end of 1792, but, indeed had abandoned the profession of
  broker early in 1788 in order to devote himself to financial and economic matters.
  According to Voiite, one of the partners of Tamesz, a man named Pipping, had gone
  bankrupt in St.Petersburg and had then become a broker, before finally being
  admitted to the firm through the influence of his father-in-law, Bacharacht. The house
  seemed to Voiite to be an 'intrigue continuelle.' Voiite's vanity at times took on a
  childish note. For example, on 28th December 1793, he wrote to John Williams
  Hope; 'Mr.Van de Spiegel (the Grand Pensionary) wrote to Hogguer (the Republic's
  envoy in St.Petersburg) saying that he was vexed to hear that I had departed without
  taking leave of him, and he appears to have said a lot of nice things about me.'
2 Letter of 12th September 1793 from R.Voiite, Moscow, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam. Deeds dated I Ith September 1793. Carr would continue to receive
  expenses until I st October, in addition to which he would receive from Rowand Carr
  & Co. a sum of two thousand roubles; this would either be paid in cash or deducted
  from any sum which he might owe to that house. He was also empowered to conclude
  for his own account a number of Rowand Carr's deals which he had personally
  handled. Carr purchased the furniture and fittings of the St.Petersburg house for
  2,500 roubles. The company coach became the property of Hawes and Grant. Carr's
  allowance for household expenses was 5,000 roubles per annum.
3 Letter of 19th August 1793 from R.Voiite, Moscow, to J.WilIiams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letters of 16th, 19th and 28th September 1793 from R.Voiite, Moscow, to
  J.Williams Hope, Amsterdam. Grant's recalcitrance served to lower Voiite's
  opinion of him. Grant, he said, stilI possessed 'genius,' but his principles were not
  particularly high; his father had been 'un mauvais sujet,' and such an example always
  rubbed off.
5 Letters of 29th August and 12th September 1793 from R.Voiite, Moscow, to
  J.Williams Hope, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 28th September 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J.WilIiams Hope,
  Amsterdam. It was a fortunate coincidence that Voiite's departure from Moscow was
  delayed, because just then the new Turkish ambassador passed through that city on
  his way to take up his appointment following the conclusion of peace between the
  Porte and Russia. Because of the size of his entourage- 'sa cohorte detestable,' as
  Voiite described it - the ambassador needed 1,000 horses at every staging post,


                                          573
                               NOTES PAGES 127-130

  which meant a total of 22,000 for the journey from Moscow to St.Petersburg.
  Porter proved to be an agreeable travelling companion except when he became
  involved in arguments about payment for the horses, for then his parsimony could
  be positively embarrassing.

  PAGE 128

  'Stukken aangaande de vordering op M.G. Trosien' (Documents relating to the claim
  against M.G .Trosien). 18th April 1793: Power of attorney granted by J.&C.
  Hasselgreen. A.Vereul and the Voute brothers of Amsterdam to Messrs. Amburger &
  Son, Messrs. Fran\tois Raimbert & Co. and Messrs. Rowand Carr & Co., all of
  St. Petersburg (Voute archives). These houses reported to the creditors that they could
  anticipate receiving the remaining 50 % of the monies owing to them when the
  greatest single debtor in Russia, i.e. Trosien, met his commitments. It is thus clear
  that a 50 %payment had been made.
2 Letter of 4th June 1793 from the agents appointed by De Bary & Co., Amsterdam, to
   M.G.Trosien, St.Petersburg.

  PAGE 129

  Letter of 30th September 1793 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam. Mercury was already being used for the treatment of syphilis.
2 Voute wrote concerning the commission on the 13th and 14th loans. These, however,
  do not constitute a pair, for the contract for the 13th was dated 18th July I791 and
  that for the 14th was entered into on 21st December 1791. The commission,
  however, was disputed on the grounds that Sutherland had died prior to the official
  date of authorization for the two loans; this applies to the 14th and 15th loans, but
  not to the 13th. (In/ra, Appendix D-I).
3 Letter of 30th September 1793 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  E.Amburger, Geschichte der Behordenorganisation Russlands von Peter dem grossen
  bis 1917 (Leiden, 1966),20,75,132.
  K.Waliszewski, Autour d'un trone, Catherine II de Russie, ses collaborateurs (Paris,
  1894),15,231.
  G.Soloveytchik, Potemkin (London, 1938),40,66, 100.
  While Voute, in his correspondence, usually referred to Samaylov, he occasionally
  spelled the name Samoylov. The former spelling has been used in this chapter.
4 Letter of loth October 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to J.WiIliams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th February 1794 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Letter of 28th November 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  Waliszewski, Autourd'un trone, 158-165.
  Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 85-86.

  PAGE 130

  Concerning Markov: Waliszewski, Autourd'un trone, 20 et seq., 27.
  Waliszewski describes Ostermann as 'une nullite absolue' (12, 21, 40). In
  F.Golovkine'sLa cour et Ie regne de Paul ler (Paris, 1905), Ostermann is referred to as
  'un chef pompeux et pedantesque.'

                                          574
                              NOTES PAGES 130-133

2 Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 229.
  K. Waliszewski, Le fils de la grande Catherine, Pauller (Paris, 1912), 145.
  Alexander Zablukov is described in both works as the president of the 'Manufacturers
  College,' a State Commission. According to Amburger, he held the office from
  1797- I 798 and again from 1799-1800. Voute obviously received a hospitable
  welcome from Zablukov. On 16th October 1794, Bagge Van Eyssel & Co. of
  St.Petersburg informed Voute, who by then was back in Holland, that Zablukov's
  eldest daughter hoped that the French would invade Holland, because then 'Mister
  Voot' would return to Russia.
3 Letter of 15th March 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 131

I Letters of 8th and 29th January, 6th February and 15th March 1794 from R.Voute,
  St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. According to Voute, Ritter received
  5,000 roubles for his services. A week later, however, he approached the bank with a
  request for the repayment of the sum which he had advanced, at the rate of 10,000
  roubles per week. 'And to think that this was the man who asserted that Hope & Co.
  had made millions out of Russia,' Voute scornfully added.
  Letter of 31st January 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 28th November 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 132

I Letter of 28th November 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 15th March 1794 from R.Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  'Considerations favourable to Baron Sutherland,' dated 7th March 1794, paragr. 7.
  Sutherland was said to have left only 230,000 roubles.
2 Letters of 23rd October and 28th November 1793.
  According to Voute, little was done during the brief summer to lay in stocks for the
  winter.
3 Letter of loth December 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 28th December 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 133

I Letters of 30th September and 4th October 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to
  J.Williams Hope, Amsterdam.
  Golovkine, Le regne de Paul ler, 373 note I.
  Blum, Sievers, III, 98.
2 Letter of 4th October 1793 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 28th October 1793 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.


                                         575
                                NOTES PAGES        133-138

    Waliszewski, Autour d'un trone, 396.
    Soloveytchik, Potemkin, 168-169.
    Blum, Sievers, III, 99.
    Count Branicki had lost 65,000 ducats when Tepper went bankrupt.

    PAGE 134
I   Letter of 28th October 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
    Amsterdam. The ducat was to be valued at 108 stuivers for the purpose of the loans.
    Voiite was wrong about the ban imposed on foreign loans; such a measure was
    considered, but did not become law. Van der Meulen, Ministerie Van de Spiegel,
    399-400.

    PAGE 135
I Memorandum dated 21st October 1793 from R.Voiite for the benefit of Count
  Zubov.
2 Supra, I 16, note I.

    PAGE 136
I R.H.Lord, 'The third partition of Poland,' Slavonic Review, III, 9 (1925), 480.
  Letter of 23rd October 1793 from R. Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 30th October 1793 from Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 31st October 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 137
I Letter of3rd/4thDecember 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 3rd, 6th, loth and 14th December 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to
  J. Williams Hope, Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 14th and 28th December 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to
  J. Williams Hope, Amsterdam. These loans appear in the grootboeken of Hope & Co.,
  thus proving that the Company did finally undertake them.
  Letter of 13th May 1794 from R.Voiite, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letters of 13th and 27th November 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams
  Hope, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 25th December 1793 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to J. Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 18th January 1794 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Because Labouchere's handwriting was scarcely legible, Samaylov instructed one of
  his subordinates to make a copy of Labouchere's letter.

    PAGE 138
I   Letter of 18th January 1794 from R.Voiite, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
    Amsterdam.
                                 NOTES PAGES         138-142

2 Letter of loth December 1793 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 18th and 22nd January 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 139
I Letter of 22nd/23rd January 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Concerning Guthrie: Waliszewski, Le fils de la grande Catherine, 208.
2 Letter of 29th January 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Chinese rhubarb possessed laxative properties and was widely used as a medicine at
  the time ofVoute's sojourn in Russia. It was brought from China, in the dried state,
  by caravans. The state had a monopoly on its sale (information supplied by
  Dr.J.H.Zwaving, senior lecturer at the Laboratorium voor Farmacognosie en
  Galenische Farmacie of the University of Groningen).
3 October and November 1793: Two memoranda (one of which is in the handwriting
  ofR.Voute) concerning De Bary & Co.'sc1aims against M.G.Trosien.
  Letters of 29th January and 6th February 1794 from R.Voute, St. Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 140
I Letter of 31st January 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 31st January and 6th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope
  & Co., Amsterdam.
3 'Essay sur les Variations survenues dans Ie cours du change de la Russie avec la
  Hollande et l'Angleterre et ses suites,' dated 3rd December 1793.

    PAGE 141
1 For example, in a letter of 6th February 1794 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope
  & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 18th and 22nd February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  It is open to doubt whether the principles underlying Voute's argument were
  entirely original. The idea of expanding the exploitation of the mineral wealth was
  also developed by William Porter in two of his letters, one of 1st October 1793 to
  John Williams Hope and the other of 29th October 1793 to Sir Francis Baring.
  Voute also championed the cause of the serfs. He recommended that they be given
  the certainty of some property, however little, because they would till the soil better if
  they could be sure of sharing in the fruits of their labours.
2 Letter of 6th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 142
I   Blum, Sievers, III, 475-480. The king's debts totalled 34 million Polish guilders, which
    was equivalent to cf 10 million. Thus, one Dutch guilder can be said to have been
    worth 3-4 Polish guilders.


                                            577
                                  NOTES PAGE 142

2 Letter of 19th August 1794 from Charles de Glave Kolbielski, Amsterdam, to Thomas
  Christie, London. A.F.Pribram and E.Fischer, 'Ein politischer Abenteurer (Karl
  Glave Kolbielski, 1752-1831),' Akademie der Wissenscha/ten in Wien, Philosophisch-
  historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, Band 216, Abhandlung v (1937). Sievers is
  believed to have fallen from favour because he was too lenient towards the growing
  anti-Russian demonstrations. Meisner and his associate, Hasselgreen, who had had
  close ties with Sievers, temporarily lost some of their influence following Sievers's
  dismissal. The consignments of ducats from Hope & Co. served to keep Igelstrom out
  of Meisner's hands for quite a long time, but when a consignment of 30,000 ducats
  from the Company failed to materialize in time, Igelstrom was forced to fall back on
  Meisner. Letters of 8th, loth, 12th and 26th February 1794 from R.Voute,
  St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. Concerning James Durno, British Consul
  in Memel: Dietrich Gerhard, England und der Au/stieg Russlands (Munich and
  Berlin, 1933),299, note 77.
3 Letters of 6th and 12th February 1794 from R.Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Voute also delivered to Samaylov and Zubov memoranda in his own
  handwriting on this subject (both were dated loth February). After the failure of the
  transaction with Hope & Co., Igelstrom sent Charles de Glave Kolbielski, a politico-
  financial adventurer in the service of the Polish government, to Holland in the hope of
  achieving a resumption of the negotiations. The Polish rebellion, however, brought
  these discussions to an end (Pribram and Fischer, 'Politischer Abenteurer,' 36).
  Kolbielski asserted that he had played a major role in the negotiation of the loans to
  the Republic of Poland and to its king, and of many Dutch loans to Polish magnates
  (ibid., 30, 31, note 13). In a letter to Thomas Christie in London, Kolbielski referred
  specifically to the loan of cf 3,055,555 to the Republic of Poland through Hogguer
  Grand & Co. This was negotiated in 1790. In August 1794 we find Kolbielski in
  England, where he approached Thomas Christie on the subject of a loan to Russia.
  He proposed a loan of 12 million guilders, half to be furnished in cash and the
  balance in Dutch bonds relating to loans to Polish magnates, which had fallen to
  30--40 % below par as a result of the political situation and could thus be bought
  cheaply. The Russian government, which was in a position to sequestrate the
  mortgaged estates at any time, would have to accept the bonds at their par value.
  Under Kolbielski's plan, Hope & Co. would float the loan, half of the sum of which
  would ostensibly be subscribed by dummy investors in St.Petersburg, who would
  then privately exchange their Polish bonds for Russian bonds. Hope would receive
  the normal commission on the loan, but the conversion of the bonds relating to the
  Polish magnates would have to be effected without the intermediary of the Company.
  The necessary capital would have to come from English investors, and Kolbielski and
  his associates (who were probably senior officials) would be content with a small
  percentage.
  Christie rejected the plan on the grounds that loans to foreign countries were not very
  popular in England where, moreover, there was general abhorrence of Empress
  Catherine for her policies towards Poland. Christie also felt that the proposal was
  unfair to Hope & Co., who would only be in nominal control of a transaction of
  which the salient details remained hidden from them. He was sure that Hope's
  friends in London would not accept such a situation. At the precise moment at
  which Christie wrote this, the Company was engaged in transferring the focal point of
  its operations from Amsterdam to London.
                                 NOTES PAGES 142-145

  Letters of 16th September, 20th and 31st October 1794 from Thomas Christie,
  London, to Charles de Glave Kolbielski, Kassel.
4 Letter of 12th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Letters of 14th and 19th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 143

I The sum to be converted was now estimated at cf 700,000. The account relating to the
  1786 negotiation for the Polish Crown contains an entry dated 1St July 1793 covering
  a principal repayment of cf 100,000. This payment passed via Meisner; grootboek of
  1794: 87 and 331. A half-year's interest was paid on 1st July, also via Meisner.
2 Letter of 19th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. The subscriptions were so slow in coming that the entrepreneurs were
  unable to meet their commitments to Hope & Co.
3 Letter of22nd February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 25th February 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 It follows from this that, in contrast to the current versions, Henry Hope did not
  personally visit Russia to bring about the initial loan to that country. A somewhat
  obscure version appears in Elias, Vroedschap, II, 986.

    PAGE 144

I   At the time ofVoute's sojourn, the Russians still used the 'old style' Julian calendar,
    which between 1700 and 1800 lagged eleven days behind the 'new style' Gregorian
    calender then in general use in western Europe. Under the Russian system of dating,
    the carnival began on 14th February. Except where otherwise indicated, the dates
    referred to in this chapter are in accordance with the 'new style.'

    PAGE 145

I Sutherland, Browne and Whishaw were said to have failed to comply with an earlier
  instruction from Hope & Co. to invest certain funds in bank debentures, with the
  result that the sum involved came to be among Hope's claims following the
  bankruptcy. Letter of 20th October 1807 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to
  Matthiessen & SiIlem, Hamburg.
  Letter of7th March 1794 from W. Whishaw, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 7th March 1794 from W.Whishaw, St.Petersburg, to R.Voute,
  St.Petersburg.
  7th March 1794: 'Avis au sujet de la pretention de la Couronne sur la masse du feu
  Baron Sutherland.'
  7th March 1794: 'Considerations favourable to Sutherland' (in Voute's handwrIting).
2 Letter of 7th/8th March 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 8th/9th March 1794 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of II/13th March 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
                                            579
                                NOTES PAGES         145-I5I
  Letter of I Ith March 1794 from W.Whishaw, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Letters of 13th and 15th March 1794 from R. Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 146
I Letter of 5th March 1794 from R.Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Lord, 'Third Partition of Poland,' 482.
2 Letters of 13th March and 2nd May 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 31st March, 7th and 9th April 1794, from R.Voute, Moscow, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 147
I Letter of 17th April 1794 from R. Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  In a moment of aberration, Voute wrote: 'the prophet Elisha.' I Kings, 17: 6.
2 Letter of 17th April 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 148
I Letter of 18th April 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Concerning Sir Samuel Rogerson: Golovkine, Le regne de Paul ler, 200-201.
2 Letter of 26th April 1794 from R. Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 26th April 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Henry and J.W.Hope,
  Amsterdam. Whishaw reported that 20 % could be paid out in May and a further
  20 %two or three months later. Letter of 5th May 1794 from W.Whishaw,
  St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 149
I Letter of 26th/27th April 1794 from Anon~ cartier, St.PetersDurg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Decrees of 28th and 30th April 1794 issued by Alexander Nikolayvich, pertaining to
  the Sutherland affair. Concerning Voute's recovery: letter of 2nd May 1794 from
  R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Decree of 28th April 1794.

    PAGE 150
I Letter of 7th May 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. It
  was said that Zubov would have been made a prince had it not been for his handling
  of the Polish situation.
2 Letters of 13th and 16th May 1794 from R.Voute, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 It is not immediately apparent which illness VOIlte was suffering from. The yellowing
  of his skin and the 'bilious fever' might indicate jaundice, but the beneficial effect of
  the quinine powders and the regular recurrence of fever point to a form of malaria.
  (Information supplied by Dr.C.Russchen, specialist in internal medicine, of Zwolle).

    PAGE 151
I   Letter of 20th May 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.


                                          580
                               NOTES PAGES 151-154

  Concerning the objections to travelling overland: letter of 21st May 1794 from Andre
  Cartier, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 23rd and 30th May 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Trosien was in fact declared bankrupt in 1796, and his goods and chattels were sold
  on the orders ofthe court. A.G .Voute-Esser, Robert Voiite als zakenman en financier
  (Amsterdam: by the Author, 1969).
3 Letter of 30th May 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 152

    Letter of 6th June 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 153

I Letter of 26th June 1794 from R.Voute, in the Gulf of Finland, to' Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.                                                         •
2 Letters of loth and 14th June 1794 from R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter dated 1St July 1794 from R. Voute, then 10 miles past the island of Gotland, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Porter had been inconvenienced by inquisitive Prussian customs officials.
3 Letter of Isduly 1794 from R.Voute, then 10 miles past the island of Gotland, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 154

I Blohm was determined to show Voute by his welcome that he was worthy of Hope's
  recommendation, 'for there was no house for which he had so deep a regard.'
2 Letter of 6th July 1794 from R. Voute, Lubeck, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 13thJuly 1794 from R.Voute, .. .Ider, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
                                    CHAPTER SIX



    PAGE 155
1 Letter of 2nd May 1795 from Maria Hoogland, Den Helder, to Paulus Taay,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 28th May 1795 from Paulus Taay, Amsterdam, to Maria Hoogland,
  Den Helder.

    PAGE 156
1 Infra, Appendix D-v.
2 Breakdown of the loan to Oginski, furnished by P.de Haan Pietersz. to R.Voute:
  The 'oeconomy' ofWilnenska, in the wojewodztwo ofWilno              Pol. f. 3,300,000
  Rakow and Isabelin in the wojewodztwo of Minsk                      Pol. f. 3,000,000
  Chozow, Wigowice, Puzeli, Oborek and Bielew in the Osmiana
  district                                                            Pol. f. 2,000,000
                                                                        Pol. f. 8,300,000

  At an estimated 18 Polish guilders to one ducat, Pol. f. 8,300,000 was equivalent to
  cf 2,42 1,000. In Lithuania the courts oflaw valued estates at twenty times the
  estimated annual yield. Letter of I Ith April 1796 from Willink's agent in Grodno to
  J.A.Willink, Warsaw.
3 Jan Abraham Will ink was the son of Will em WiIlink, ofthe house of Will em and
  Jan Willink in Amsterdam.
  V.Winter, Aandeel, II, 268, 491.
  Concerning Repnin: Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 392.

  PAGE 157
I Letter of 9th January 1796 from J.A.Willink, Warsaw, to P.de Haan Pietersz.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of I Ith April 1796 from Willink's agent in Grodno to J.A.WiIlink, Warsaw.
  Oginski had bought the 'oeconomy' of Wilno from the princes Charles and
  Hieronymus Radziwill on 14th January 1790 for 3,400,000 Polish guilders. It had
  been given to the vendors in heriditary ownership by the sejm, in settlement of half
  their claim against the Republic, which totalled 4,000,000 Polish guilders. After
  mortgaging the 'oeconomy,' Oginski sold all the estates of which it consisted, with
  the exception of one, Game, which was valued at 250,000 Polish guilders; in June
  1795 this was awarded to Mme.Derkassowa in settlement of her claim of 150,000
  Polish guilders against Oginski.
                                NOTES PAGES 155-161

3 Of the estates in Minsk, Rakow was confiscated by the empress and given to General
  Soltikov, while between January and March Oginski sold to various persons Isabelin
  for 250,000 Polish guilders, Chozow for 120,000, and Wigowice and Bielew for
  77 ,000. Puzeli and Oborek had been confiscated and were administered by the
  Treasury.
4 Letter of 24th March 1796 from J.A.Willink, Warsaw, to P.de Haan Pietersz.,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 158

I De Haan instructed Willink to dismiss his agent in Grodno on the grounds that he
  was too expensive, but Willink persisted in his view that negotiations in St.Petersburg
  could only bear fruit if a document from the Supreme Court in Lithuania, which
  proved the validity of De Haan's claims, could be produced. As late as 30th July 1796,
  by which time Voute was already on his way to Russia, Willink sent memoranda on
  these lines to Repnin and to the empress. He probably did so in an attempt to obtain
  at least part of the bonus which was threatening to elude him.
  Letter of 6th May 1796 from J.A.Willink, Warsaw, to P.de Haan Pietersz.,
  Amsterdam. 'Emprunt d'Oginski,' May (?) 1796.
2 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 15145-139.
  Voute had earlier been empowered by Hope & Co. to act in the matter of the Polish
  loan of 1786.
3 Infra, Appendix D-v. Details of the various loans also appeared in the procuratorial
  deed dated 13th May 1796.

    PAGE 159

I G.A. The Hague, Not. Arch., 3893-48.
2 'Emprunt d'Oginski,' May (?) 1796. 'Mem(lire pour Monsieur Robert Voute,'
  undated. (Both are in De Haan's handwriting).
  Remarks (undated) made by R. Voute to P. de Haan Pietersz. with reference to
  J.A. Willink's letter of 24th March 1796.
3 Lord, 'Third Partition of Poland,' 494, 498.

    PAGE 160

I 24th July 1796. Memorandum to Kalichev, Berlin, in Voute's handwriting, V.A.
  The first loan, which ran for 10 years, dated from 1st February 1788.
2 Story of the life of Robert Voute by J.H.Veldhuyzen, V.A.Robert Voute had also
  received an extremely warm welcome from Bagge during his first journey to Russia.
  Letters of 16th and 18th October 1794 from Bagge & Van Eyssel, St.Peterburg, to
  R.Voute, Amsterdam.

    PAGE 16r

I   Story by J.H.Veldhuyzen, V.A. The Russian envoy in Copenhagen prevented Pierre
    Voute from travelling on to Hamburg. It is not clear whether he did so on his own
    initiative, or whether he acted on instructions.
    Letter of 6th September 1796 from Robert Voute, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
    London, V.A.
    Letter of 6th September 1796 from Robert Voute, St.Petersburg, to P.F. Voute,
    Amsterdam, V.A.
                               NOTES PAGES 161-163

2 Story by J.H.Veldhuyzen, V.A. According to the author, Maria Feodorovna played
  an active role in the settlement of the Polish debts. She is said to have informed Voute
  in a letter in July 1797 that Vasilyevhad reported to the czar on the discussions and
  that the czar, as an expression of his satisfaction, had commanded that the 'souvenir'
  (gift?) from Voute be accepted. The empress consulted Voute regarding the newly
  established - more accurately, the newly equipped - School of Commerce in Moscow,
  with which Count Sievers had also been concerned. The aim was said to be to modify
  the curriculum to bring it more into line with practice; such a change fitted in weII
  with Voute's views as he had expressed these in Moscow back in 1793. Voute's
  friendship with Maria Feodorovna continued until his death.
  Blum, Sievers, IV, 472, 475, 477. Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 163.
3 I 5th/26th January 1797. Convention between the Czar of Russia and the King of
  Prussia, to which the German emperor became a party. V.A.d'Angeberg, Recueil des
  Traites et Actes diplomatiques concernant la Pologne (Paris, 1862),403.

  PAGE 162

1 The sum of the king's debts was fixed at 34,000,000 Polish guilders in 1793. To this
  had meanwhile been added 3-4 years' interest at 5 %per annum.
2 30th June 1797. Acte de Cession between Alexei Vasilyev, Imperial Treasurer, and
  Robert Voiite, authorized agent of the creditors of the former Republic of Poland
  and a number of private individuals residing in the former Republic.
3 Letter of 8th November 1801 from R.Voiite, The Hague, to H.Hope, London.
  Concerning the positions of Bezborodko and Vasilyev: Amburger, Geschichte
  Behordenorganisation, 128, 2 I o. Others also resented the influence which Robert
  Voiite was able to exert by reason ofthe support of the empress. On 12th November
  1797, Count Rostopshin wrote to Vorontsov in London concerning 'Woot, premier
  commis de Hope. II est tres protege par I'Imperatrice.'
  Golovkine, Le regne de Paul ler, 158, note I. In 1802, members of the Committee for
  Foreign Loans in St.Petersburg gave Bergien, a merchant in that city, to understand
  that at the time there had been great opposition to Voute's activities, and that he had
  been able to continue these only 'par la Douairiere,' i.e. with the support of Maria
  Feodorovna. Czar Paul was by then dead. Letter of 18th February 1802 from
  J.C.Bergien, St. Petersburg, to R.Voute, The Hague.

  PAGE 163

  Two orders for payment dated 30th March 1792, for 7,500 and 7,000 ducats
  respectively, at 5 %interest, issued against the king's 'oeconomies' in Lithuania and
  accepted by Marcin Bedeni in his capacity of authorized agent for Prince Stanislaw
  Poniatowski, leaseholder of these 'oeconomies,' together with interest due since 1st
  August 1794. A draft dated 30th May 1792 issued by King Stanislaw in favour of Jean
  Meisner, in the sum of 23,000 ducats, together with overdue interest since 30th May
  1793. An acknowledgement of indebtedness by King Stanislaw to C.A.Hasselgreen
  dated 30th November 1794 in the sum of 8 I ,329 ducats, payable over a period of 4
  years and bearing 5 %interest. No interest had been paid. An acknowledgement of
  indebtedness by King Stanislaw to Theodoor Gillcher dated 26th September 1793 in
  the sum of 4,200 ducats et 6 %interest, payable by the Chambre des Finances; no
  interest had been paid. Four drafts dated loth September 1793 issued by the Republic
  of Poland in favour of Jean Meisner and signed by R.de Glogowa, Grand Treasurer
                                 NOTES PAGES        163-166

    of Poland, and J.Okeczki and D.Kamieniecki, both commissioners of the Treasury,
    together amounting to 873,096.16 Polish guilders. Meisner owed 21,000 ducats to
    De Smeth and 5,000 ducats to Hasselgreen; other claims against him amounted to
    some 175,000 ducats. The transfer of these debts and also those embodied in the
    second Acte de Cession (infra, 165-166) enabled Meisner to settle with his creditors.

    PAGE 164

I Letter of 30th August 1797 from Hope & Co. London, to H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam.
2 A.A.Lobanov-Rostovski, Russia and Europe, 178!}-1815 (Duke University Press,
  1947) 16-17.

    PAGE 165

I   Special instructions issued to Baron d'Asch, Privy Councillor, and Divov, a member
    of the Chancellery, both of whom were empowered by the czar to verify and liquidate
    the debts incurred by the Polish king and the former Republic of Poland. S.a., V.A.

    PAGE 166

I The loan to the Dowager Princess Jablonowska, amounting to cf 400,000 at 5 %
  interest, was negotiated in January 1792. Interest had been paid up to 1st January
  1794. Repayment, at cf 40,000 annually, should have commenced in January 1795.
  The security provided for the loan comprised the estates of Siemiatycesk in the Drohi
  district of the wojewodztwo of Pod lac hie (which became Prussian territory following
  the partitions of Poland), and Kockesens in the wojewodztwo of Lublinsk, which
  passed to Austria under the partition. The securities provided for the other loans by
  Polish magnates are listed in Appendix D-vI.
2 29th October 1797. Acte de Cession between Alexei Vasilyev, Imperial Treasurer, and
  Robert Voute, relating to the debts ofa number of Polish gentlemen. With the two
  actes, the czar accepted responsibility for debts totalling cf 15,907,585.19.0 Meisner's
  claim of 66,666j- ducats or 1,200,000 Polish guilders against Marquis Fran90is
  Wielopolski had been transferred to Voute by the creditor. Interest on this debt had
  been paid up to 31 st December 1797. The six bonds relating to Prince Dominique
  Radziwill bore interest at 7 %. The principal totalled cf 523,953.17, and the arrears of
  interest from 27th April 1793 to 31st December 1797 amounted to cf 171,463.17.
  After the signing of the convention on 29th October, Voute continued to correspond
  at length with the Sobanski brothers, who had always paid the interest on their loan
  but had fallen into arrears owing to difficulties in remitting two instalments of
  principal. Through Voute they requested, and obtained, permission from Vasilyev to
  continue to pay principal and interest to De Haan, who would remit the sums to De
  Smeth. As there were no facilities whatsoever for monetary transactions between
  Obodowka, where the brothers lived, and St.Petersburg (in fact, Amsterdam was
  nearer), they were given the option of making payments to the Court Bankers in
  Russia by means of drafts on Odessa, Riga or Moscow. In August 1798 the
  Sobanskis complained to Voute that the local authorities were threatening to sell
  their property under an execution on the grounds that they had been dilatory in
  providing details of the income derived from the property. Voute raised the matter
  with Vasilyev and succeeded in having the action of the local authorities brought to
  an end.
  Letters of 18th November 1797, 1st and 3rd February and 29th September 1798 from
                                NOTES PAGES         166-172

    R.Voute, St.Petersburg, to the Sobanski brothers, Obodowka; and of loth
    December 1797, 16th January, 2nd February, 12th April, 5th May and 22nd August
    1798 from the Sobanski brothers, Obodowka, to R.Voute, St.Petersburg.

    PAGE 167

  2nd November 1797. Eleven articles, in Robert Voute's handwriting, concerning the
  method of 'reconstituting' Russia's foreign loans. Subscriptions to the 18th loan
  floated by Hope & Co. ultimately totalled cf 2,500,000.
2 The converted Polish loans all bore interest at 5 %. Of the converted Russian loans, 15
  million guildersworth bore interest at 4t %, and 6 million guildersworth at 4 %. The
  rate of interest on the cf 3,000,000 loan from De Wolf in Antwerp was also 4t %.
3 Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschulden, II, 848, quotes the following average
  market prices for bonds during the second half of 1797: Russian 5 % bonds: 93;
  Russia 1788, 4t%, with I, 2 and 3 coupons: 94; Russia 1792, 4t%: 86. Thus the mean
  for the three types ofloan was still just below 90.

    PAGE 168

I 'Consideration relating to the commission granted to Hope for regulating Russia's
  former debts,' 1803. The matter of rewards to third parties is dealt with on page 179.
2 15th January 1798: Ukase issued by Czar Paull concerning Russia's foreign debts.
  The sums involved in the 'arrangements' totalled cf 15,892,414.1.0, which included
  Hope's commission of cf 3,892,414.1.0. To the latter must be added cf 330,000 in
  respect of repurchased bonds and cf 11,388,19.0 in cash, bringing the total of the
  commission to cf 4,233,803.0.0-the sum to which Voute had earlier referred in his
  memorandum to VasiIyev. Letter of 15th May 1798 from Hope & Co. Amsterdam, to
  Vasilyev, St.Petersburg, VI, 1.
3 Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 452.

    PAGE 170

  Letter of 30th August 1797 from Hope & Co., London, to H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 22nd June 1798 fromP.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R.Voute, St.Petersburg.
  Two members of the new government, Van Langen and Vreede, did not, however,
  regard it as beneath their dignity to visit Amsterdam to investigate the possibilities
  for a trade agreement with Russia, 'which, it had been suggested to the Government,
  could be realized through the influence of the citizen Voute of Petersburg (who was
  held in high esteem by the Court), or alternatively to secure for our trade any
  commercial advantages, but this proved impossible to obtain ... '
  Memorandum from Van Langen, Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, II, 613.
2 18th February 1798: Order from Czar Paul I to Chancellor Bezborodko and
  Treasurer VasiIyev concerning the payment of interest on Hope's commission.
3 The commission now became cf 4,233,803 plus 6t% interest thereon (cf 275,197) plus
  6t% on this sum (cf 17,887.7.0), making cf 4,526,887.7 in all. Letter of 15th May 1798
  to VasiIyev, St. Petersburg, VI, 1.

    PAGE 172

    Count Golovkin, in his memoirs, described the conversion as 'un desastreux
    projet' (Golovkine, Le regne de Pauller, 157). In Le fils de la grande Catherine, Paul
    ler, Waliszewski refers to 'Woot, un agent de la maison Hoop, theoricien chimerique


                                           586
                               NOTES PAGES 172-173

  ou filibustier adroit' (p. 258). Waliszewski, however, appears not to have seen through
  the nature of the conversion. On the one hand he refers to the conversion of the old
  Russian debts (p. 255), while on the other (p. 257) he states that Paul I negotiated a
  new loan ofcf 88,300,000 in Amsterdam in January 1797 (this should be 1798). As a
  result, the picture which he seeks to give of Russia's finances under Paul I is
  completely distorted. According to the merchant Bergien, Vasilyev's hostility towards
  the Company stemmed from dissatisfaction with the size of the gift presented to him
  and his wife. Letter of 18th February 1802 from J.C.Bergien, St.Petersburg, to
  R.Voute, The Hague. Bearing in mind Voute's previous experiences at the Russian
  Court, the cause is more likely to have lain in intrigue and corruption on the part of
  others - for example, Rail.
2 Story by J.H.Veldhuyzen, V.A.
3 Waliszewski, Leftls de la grande Catherine, 258 (I pood was equivalent to 16.3
  kilograms).
  Golovkine, Le regne de Paul IeI', 158. Waliszewski states that the entire plan was
  abandoned; but here he is mistaken, for a part of it was implemented (vide page 177).
  According to Golovkine, Voute was the spiritual father of a plan to establish an aid
  bank, the function of which would be to protect the nobility against usurious
  practices. This it could do by giving loans on security of estates, and the interest and
  principal payments could be effected in interest-bearing bank paper issued by the aid
  bank. Waliszewski states that Bezborodko copied Voute's ideas.
  Blum, Sievers, III, 121, describes Prince Alexei Kurakin as the auctor intellectualis of
  the project, and states that the bank was actually established on 18th December 1797.
  It is said to have commenced operations on 1st March 1798 and to have issued bank
  paper to a value of 500 million roubles in the space of a few months. An unwarranted
  issue of bank paper such as this, however, is so contrary to Voute's ideas in this field
  that we are moved to cast doubt upon his role as the initiator of the proposal for the
  bank. His correspondence at that time contains no reference whatever to the matter.

  PAGE 173

  Letter of 15th May 1798 to Vasilyev, St.Petersburg, VI, I.
2 Letter of 15th May 1798 to Vasilyev, St.Petersburg, VI, I.
  Letter of 13th April 1797 from J.J.Voute, Jr., Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London.
  14th May 1798: Printed announcement by the Dorner heirs that payments, suspended
  on 3rd May under the moratorium, were to be resumed.
3 Letter of 8th May 1798 from H.A.lnsinger, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London.
4 Letter of 25th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to Vasilyev, St.Petersburg,
  VI, 28. Story by J.H.Veldhuyzen, V.A.
5 I Ith May 1798: List of houses which accepted responsibility for the credit of the
  house of Martin Dorner. Johannes Schubach, B(anco) M(arks) 150,000;
  J.P.Averhoff,BM. 100,000; J.Parish, BM. 100,000; Sieveking, BM. 50,000; Pierre
  Voute, 'flir Voute Velho Rail & Co.,' BM. 300,000. The example set by these five
  houses was quickly followed by others: Joh.Gabe, BM. 50,000; M.J.Jenisch,
  BM. 50,000; Matthiessen & Sillem, 'flir einen Freund' (namely Hope & Co.),
  BM. 150,000; B.Roosen, BM. 50,000. In a letter to Hope, John Parish claimed that
  the initiative for the subscription had emanated from him. Letter of I Ith May 1798
  from J.Parish, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., London.
                               NOTES PAGES        174-176
    PAGE 174

  Letter of 12th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to H.A.lnsinger,
  Amsterdam, A xxv, 61.
  Letters of 15th and 29th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R.Voute,
  St.Petersburg, A xxv, 20, 32.
  Insinger reported that gossips in Amsterdam were saying that Labouchere had gone
  to Hamburg purely in order to obtain preferential treatment of Hope's claims.
  Letter of 5th June 1798 from H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Hamburg.
2 Labouchere described Gabe, who had commenced his commercial career in Portugal,
  as a man like Insinger, except that he too easily allowed himself to be persuaded by
  those whom he trusted; this, however, did not detract from his solidity. Gabe could
  fill the role of liaison man between Baring, in London, and Amsterdam in the matter
  ofthe loans on the security of plantations on the island of St.Croix, which were
  referred to by the letters A and B, thus enabling interest on these loans to be paid in
  the Republic. As it was, Hope had entrusted the supervision of these loans to
  Insinger in Amsterdam.
  Letter of 19th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R.Voute, St.Petersburg,
  A xxv, 21.
  Lawaetz was rich and reliable, but he was more interested in acquiring a title than in
  recruiting new correspondents. Chapeaurouge owed his immense fortune to his
  connexions with the French Republic, and was now concerned to find a safe place for
  the money which he had earned in the face of such enormous risks. Letter of 19th
  June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam, A xxv, 66.
  Concerning the events surrounding Frau.Matthiessen: Letter of 19th June 1798 from
  P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R.Voute, St.Petersburg, A xxv, 21. Concerning
  Pamela Fitzgerald and her husband: Dictionary of National Biography, XIX (London,
   1889), II 0-1 11,142-143. Insinger described Matthiessen & Sillem as 'being
  somewhat too deeply involved in French affairs.' Letter of 5th June 1798 from
  H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg.

    PAGE 175

I Letter of 19th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R.Voute, St.Petersburg,
  A xxv, 21. Sillem Jr.'s forename generally appears as Jerome, but this is a later
  Frenchification.
2 Letter of 19th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R.Voute, St.Petersburg,
    AXXV,2I.

    PAGE 176

    Letter of 12th June 1798 from P .C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to H.A.Insinger,
    Amsterdam, A xxv, 61.
    Letters of 15th, 26th and 29th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to
    R.Voute, St.Petersburg, A xxv, 20, 31,32.
    Letter of 25th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to Vasilyev, St.Petersburg,
    VI, 28. When Hope's account with Dorner was closed on 3 I st December 1798, there
    remained a credit of cf 908. 15 in favour of Hope. Thus matters had straightened
    themselves out completely. The Russian Court ultimately proved to owe a small sum
    to Domer. GroDthoek 1798: 15.


                                          588
                                 NOTES PAGES         I76-I78
  Roosegaarde Bisschop, Opkomst Londensche geldmarkt, 104-105.
2 In England, where the Company was not active, it availed itself of the services of
  Harman & Co. and Sir Francis Baring & Co.

    PAGE 177

I   Letter of 30th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to Matthiessen & Sillem,
    Hamburg, A xxv, 15. In his correspondence with Voute Velho RaIl & Co.,
    Labouchere sketched Voute as the man who had a great deal of influence with the
    emperor and who was completely au/ail with Hope's thinking. To Baron Von
    Nikolai, Czar Paul's former tutor, Labouchere also sang Voute's praises,
    emphasizing his important role in the firm of Court Bankers and the fact that he,
    'homme d'affaires, sans pretentions, instruit, integre et independant,' exerted an
    influence on the Court in spite of the fact that he lacked the manner which
    characterized the 'courtisan acheve.' Letter of 5th June 1798 to Voute Velho RaIl &
    Co., St.Petersburg, VI, 24. Letter of 5th June 1798 to Baron de Nikolai, St.Petersburg,
    VI,25·
2 Letter of 29th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to R. Voute, St.Petersburg,
  A XXV, 32.
  Letter of 30th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to Matthiessen & Sillem,
  Axxv,I1.

    PAGE 178

I Gabe's correspondence from Hamburg regarding the St.Croix loans was also to be
  addressed to James Smith. The St.Croix loans A and B were to be referred to as
  'Account A' in correspondence with Insinger, and Hope was to be known as 'our
  friend.' J.l.Voute Jr. was instructed to remit the interest on 100 Russian bonds to
  A.I.v.d.Hoeven of Rotterdam, an uncle of Thomas Hope. Voute was to retain the
  coupons pertaining to these bonds, but to send the relevant certificates to
  Matthiessen & Sillem. This procedure would make it impossible for the Batavian
  government to seize the bonds, while ensuring that V.d.Hoeven received his interest.
  Letters of 30th June 1798 to J.Gabe, Hamburg, A XXV, 80, and of 29th June 1798 to
  J.J.Voute, Jr., Amsterdam, A xxv, 90.
2 Letter of 29th June 1798 to H.A.lnsinger, Amsterdam, A XXV, 70. As Robert Voute
  had been in 1795, Insinger was instructed to furnish Taay with advice and funds
  whenever he might require these.
3 Letter of 12th June 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Hamburg, to H.A.lnsinger,
  Amsterdam, A xxv, 61.
  Letter of 6th July 1798 from P.C.Labouchere, Bremen, to J.J.Voute, Jr.,
  Amsterdam, A XXV, 90.
  Letter of 25th September 1798 from P. Voute, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London.
  Pierre de Smeth took his brother-in-law, Willem van de Poll, into partnership with
  effect from 1st January 1799, a step which, in Hope's opinion, would afford De
  Smeth the long-desired 'tranquillite de l'esprit' and 'loisir' -a need for rest which, as
  we have seen, was also present in the firm in 1788. In August 1799, Hope
  congratulated De Smeth on his safe return to Amsterdam after a long holiday,
  Letters of 5th October 1798 and 13th August 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to
  Pierre de Smeth, Amsterdam.
4 Golovkine, Le regne de Paul Ier, 174.
                               NOTES PAGES        178-179
  Waliszewski, Le fils de la grande Catherine, 202.
  Character sketch of Paul I in Robert Voute's handwriting, V.A.
5 Story by J .H. Veldhuyzen, V.A. Letters of 7th December 1798 and 22nd January
  1799 from Hope &Co., London, to R. and Th.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI, 51, 55.
  Letters of 17th February and 23rd March 1801 from R.Voute, London, to
  J.C.Bergien, St.Petersburg.
  Following Pierre Voute's resignation, the title of the firm was changed to Velho
  Rail & Rogovikov. Robert Voute's difficulties with Vasilyev and Rail resulted in his
  becoming ill; the circumstances of his indisposition were thus similar to those which
  had felled him in 1794 and 1796.
6 Letter of 8th March 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to Matthiessen & Sillem,
  Hamburg, VI, 66.

    PAGE 179

I Letters of 30th May and 25th June 1798 from Hope & Co., London, to Vasilyev,
  St.Petersburg, VI, 9, 28.
  Letter of 23rd November 1798 from Hope & Co., London, to David Berck,
  Amsterdam, VI, 47.
  Letters of 7th December 1798 and 22nd January 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to
  P.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI, 5 I, 55.
  Letter of 25th January 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to the Committee for
  Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, VI, 63.
2 Letters of 4th June and 26th July 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to Vasilyev,
  St. Petersburg, VI, 75, 92.
  Letter of 14th June 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to P.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI,
  76.
  Letter of 26th July 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to the Committee for Foreign
  Loans, St.Petersburg, VI, 96. On 25th June 1799, Vasilyev wrote to say that the
  principal debenture had been received from De Wolf. Hope thereupon received 4 %
  commission plus 6t %commission on the 4 %, i.e. cf 120,000 + cf 7,800. On 5th July
  1798, the principal debenture was entered in the Register of Private Deeds kept by
  the Town Clerk of Amsterdam (folio 66v).1t was exempted from stamp duty or
  'Kleinzegel' by a decree of 23rd March 1798 issued by the National Assembly, which
  at that time was known as the Constituent Assembly. The bonds bore a 6-stuiver
  stamp.
3 Deed enacted before W.v. Hornrigh, notary, on loth December 1798.
4 Letters of 12th and 16th March, 14th June and 13th August 1799 from Hope & Co.,
  London, to P.de Smeth,Amsterdam, VI, 67, 72, 76,100. Hope wished to give a ring
  costing between ten and fifteen thousand guilders. As the original plan provided for
  Von Stackelberg to stay on in Amsterdam, perhaps for between one and two years,
  the offer to assume responsibility for his domestic expenses involved a sum of
  10-15,000 guilders, i.e. the same as the cost of the ring. However, the circumstances
  of war forced Von Stackelberg to leave Amsterdam in November 1799. Letter of
  22nd November 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to P.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI,
  136.
5 Letters oi7th December 1798, 12th March, 14th June and 13th August 1799 from
  Hope & Co., London, to P.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI, 51, 67, 76,100.
  Letter of 13th August 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to D.Berck, Amsterdam, VI,
  107·

                                          590
                                NOTES PAGES 179-181

  Letter of 26th August 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to R. Voute, London, VI, Il2.
6 Notary van Beem was dissatisfied with the seven thousand guildersworth of bonds
  intended for him. His reaction was extremely unpleasant for the partners, who
  wished to satisfy all concerned. Their desire will certainly have been allied to the
  delicate position in which the Company then found itself. The correspondence and
  copy files which we have examined contain no reference to a reward for Insinger,
  but this can scarcely have been less than the 100 bonds given toJ.J.Voute, Jr.
  According to later accounts, Vasiliev's feud with Hope was exacerbated by the 'gift'
  which, in Vasilyev's opinion, was too small (supra, 172, note I).

  PAGE 180

I Letter of 5th October 1798 from Hope & Co., London, to P.de Smeth, Amsterdam,
  VI,38.
  Letter of 5th October 1798 from Hope & Co., London, to Vasilyev, St.Petersburg,
  VI, 40.
  Letter of 23rd November 1798 from Hope & Co., London, to D.Berck, Amsterdam,
  VI,47·
  Letter of 20th October 1798 from H.A.Insinger, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  London.
  Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschlilden, II, 848, dealing with the three types of
  Russian loan which were individually quoted during the first six months of 1798,
  gives the following prices: 5 per cent, 92; 41- per cent, 86; 4 per cent, 84. This author
  states that during the second half of 1798, when, following the conversion, only the
  5 %type was quoted, the average price fell to 86, a decline of 6 %. Insinger refers to
  an even sharper fall.
2 Letters of 22nd January and 26th March 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to
  P.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI, 55, 72.
  Letter of 25th January 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to the Committee for
  Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, VI, 63. The interest totalled cf 2,492,462.10.0.
  During the Spring of 1799, the prices of the Russian bonds fluctuated madly. In a
  letter of 26th March to De Smeth, Hope & Co. referred to a fall to 70, which they
  attributed mainly to the failure of the Russian government to make a repayment of
  principal. The Swedish bonds, which were previously lower than the Russian,
  recovered to 96 following the announcement of a modest principal repayment.
3 Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschlilden, II, 848.
4 Letter of 5th November 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to P.de Smeth, Amsterdam,
  VI,123·

  PAGE 181

I Early in November 1799, Matthiessen & Sillem received gold to a value of 150,00C'
  pounds sterling. The gold shipped by Harman travelled first to Copenhagen and
  thence to Hamburg. Harman probably played a part in the transfer of British
  subsidies to the Continent. Matthiessen & Sillem were instructed that in the event of
  their being unable to remit the full amount of the interest to De Smeth before 1st
  January 1800, they were to advise De Smeth that the money was indeed available.
  This would enable De Smeth to advertise this news and thus put the public's mind at
  ease. Letter of 5th November 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to Matthiessen &
  Sillem, Hamburg, VI, 125. Harman furnished Matthiessen & Sillem with 133,000


                                          59 1
                               NOTES PAGES 181-184

  pounds sterling in silver in December 1799; of this sum, 100,000 pounds belonged to
  the British government and was in Hamburg. It is conceivable that, following the
  signal failure of the Russo-Austrian campaigns, the British government had decided
  to dispose of the reserves of silver built up to finance subsidies. Harman despatched a
  further 50,000 pounds in silver in January 1800. Letters of 13th December 1799 and
  24th January 1800 from Hope & Co., London, to Matthiessen & SiIIem, Hamburg,
  VI, 149, 154.
2 Letter of 22nd November 1798 from Hope & Co., London, to Matthiessen & Sillem,
  Hamburg, VI, 134. Other correspondence on this subject appears on pages 125, 13 I,
  133,140,142,144,145,147,149,151,157 and 160. The interest totalled
  cf 3,828,750.0.0.
  Letter of 22nd November 1799 from Hope & Co., London, to P.de Smeth,
  Amsterdam, VI, 136.
    PAGE 182

I Early February 1801 : Description by De Coninck of the events in Copenhagen,
  addressed to Hope & Co.
  Lobanov-Rostovski, Russia and Europe, 63-65.
2 Weeveringh gives mean quotations for Russian bonds of 81 during the first half of
  1800, and 84 during the second half of the year.
3 30th April 1801: Memorandum from Hope & Co., London, to Robert Voiite.
  Letter of 27th April 1801 fromR.Voiite, London, to Hope & Co., London.
4 The account headed 'Bonds chargeable to the negotiation for His Imperial Majesty
  the Czar of Russia, negotiated by ourselves' contains an entry, dated 3 I st December
  1799, in respect of 4,528 bonds at 80% (groothoek 1799: 20). The commission to date
  totalled cf 4,526,887.7.0. On 3I st December 180 I, 346 bonds remained on this
  account. In the interim period a further 5 I bonds had been purchased or accepted as
  payment. In a letter of 27th April 1801 to Hope & Co., Voiite stated that he had no
  claim to the funds which stood to his credit in the Republic. When he wrote this, he
  was on the point ofleaving for the Republic.
5 Letters of 17th February, and 13th and 23rd March 1801 from R.Voiite, London, to
  J.C.Bergien, St.Petersburg.

    PAGE 183

I Letter of 24th March 1801 fromJ.C.Bergien, St. Petersburg, to R.Voiite, London.
2 Letter of 17th April 1801 fromJ.C.Bergien, St. Petersburg, to R.Voiite, London. The
  Company rightly anticipated that the rehabilitation would lead to a resumption of
  the earlier difficulties. Memorandum of 30th April 1801 from Hope & Co., London,
  to Robert Voiite.
3 Letter of 30th May 1801 from R.Voiite, Amsterdam, to J.C.Bergien, St. Petersburg.
4 Letter of 12th June 1801 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to R.Voiite, Amsterdam.

    PAGE 184

I   The transfer to the Portuguese Government of the proceeds of the diamond loan
    involved payments of cf 1,000,000 in each of the first eleven months of 1802, and
    cf 2,000,000 on 31st December ofthat year. A sum of cf 500,000, allocated from the
    proceeds of the sales of Russian bonds during 1800 and 1801, had been transferred to
    Insinger by way of advances on consignments of diamonds.
    Infra, 403.

                                          59 2
                                   NOTES PAGE r84

2 Memorandum of 30th April 1801 from Hope & Co., London, to Robert Voiite.
  This still refers to a sum of 463,000 pounds sterling which stood to the credit of the
  Russian Court.
3 Lord Hawkesbury became Foreign Secretary in February 1801. He will thus not
  have been aware of the Russian subsidy credit. Dictionary of National Biography,
  XXIX (1892),311-312.




                                           593
                                  CHAPTER SEVEN




    PAGE 187
I Letter of 17th June 1803 from J.Recamier, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 27th July 1803 from D.Parish, Antwerp, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam. In
  Hamburg, Chapeaurouge, Matthiessen & Sillem and Israel Dehn & Co. were said to
  be acting on Recamier's behalf.
3 Letter of 23rd September 1803 from Jos. Morison, Riga, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Morison received an advance of 50,000 albertustalers against a contract for masts
  valued at a far greater sum. Morison was not permitted to draw until shipment was
  effected, after which the 50,000 albertustalers would be deducted from the sum of
  the final shipments. In an attempt to tum this situation to good account, Hope
  proposed to Porter Brown & Co. in St.Petersburg that they should remit to the
  Company in the event of Farmbacher's purchases leading to drafts being drawn on
  Paris, and thus to a rise in exchange rates in Russia.
  Letter of 12th August 1803 to Porter Brown & Co., St.Petersburg, VI, 52 I.

    PAGE 188
    Van Winter, Aandeel, 11,377-379.
    Letters of 5th May and 9th June from A.Peyrousse, The Hague, to P.C.Labouchere,
    Amsterdam.
    Letters of 16th March and 16th May 1803 to A.Peyrousse, The Hague, VI, 423, 479.

    PAGE 190
  Van Winter, Aandeel, II, 383-385.
  Van Winter, 'Louisiana gekocht en betaald,' 43-44.
2 Van Winter, Aandeel, 11,386.
3 Napoleon had sent his brother-in-law, Leclerc, to Haiti in 1801 to subjugate the
  negro dictator, Toussaint Louverture, and restore French control on the island. The
  expeditionary force achieved successes initially, but was later so stricken with yellow
  fever that it was forced to withdraw at the end of 1803.
4 At this point, the sums were deposited in the Treasury. On 1st December 1803 an
  agreement was signed between Barbe Marbois and Labouchere providing for the
  former to receive drafts totalling 8 million francs.

    PAGE 191
    Letter of 7th July 1803 to De Stackelberg, The Hague, VI, 497.
    Letter of I st August 1803 from A.Baring, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.


                                          594
                                NOTES PAGES          187-193

  Letter of 29th December 1807 to J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, VII, 253.
  The Russian envoy to the Batavian Republic in 1803 was Gustav Ernst von
  Stackelberg. According to the list of envoys contained in Amburger's book, this Von
  Stackelberg was not the one who had signed the bonds in 1798-1799. Amburger,
  Geschichte BehOrdenorganisation, 446, 452, 569.
2 Letter of 14th July 1803 from J. Bergien, St.Petersburg, to R.Voute, The Hague.
  Letter of 12th August 1803 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, VI, 519.
  As an additional precaution, Hope made enquiries of Porter Brown & Co. regarding
  Bergien's status, in particular his prudence.
  Letter of 12th August 1803 to Porter Brown & Co., St.Petersburg, VI, 52 I.
3 Letter of 20 August 1803 from R.Voute, Middagten, to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg.
  Letter of 8th November 1803 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, VI, 593.
4 Letter of 4th December 1803 from Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 192

I Letter of 9th January 1804 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, A II, 54.
2 21st April 1804: 'Propositions faites au Ministre du Tresor Public par
  Mr.Labouchere, associe de la Maison Hope & Co. d' Amsterdam.'
  Van Winter, Aandeel, II, 386-387.
3 Letters of 13th May and 9th June 1804 from A.Peyrousse, The Hague, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 20th June 1804 from A.Peyrousse, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Labouchere had placed Peyrousse under an obligation by meeting a few of his private
  commitments from the war fund, thus sparing him from difficulties during the audit.
4 Letter of loth March 1804 from Decres, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 16th March 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 150.

  PAGE 193

I Letter of 23rd March 1804 from Roger, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th March 1804 from Barbe Marbois, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 30th March, 6th April, I Ith June and 6th August 1804 from Decres,
  Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 5th April and 31st May 1804 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A II, 177,221.
2 'Operations relatives a divers credits ass ignes a diverses maisons du Nord sur nous,
  par S.E.Mr.Barbe Marbois, Ministre du Tresor Public de France etcetera.'
  A detailed breakdown of the credits will be found in Appendix D-VII.
3 Timber to the following values was shipped from Riga:
                           Helmund & Son         cf 183,799.04.0
                           J. Morison            cf 1,380,360.14.0
                                               cf 1,564, I 59. I 8.0
  Morison thus handled 88 % of the consignments of timber. These were carried in 32
  vessels, of which 18, all flying the Prussian flag, sailed to Emden; 10, of which 9 flew
  the Swedish flag and I the Prussian flag, to Copenhagen; 2, under the Russian and
  Swedish flags, to Morlaix; I under the Prussian flag to Marseilles; and I under the
  Russian flag to Bordeaux.


                                           595
                               NOTES PAGES           193-194
  Helmund & Son shipped the timber which they purchased in 12 vessels, of which
  9 sailed to Emden under the Prussian flag, and 3 to Marseilles under the Swedish flag.
  Justus Blanckenhagen shipped hemp to a value of cf 901,716.5.0., which represented
  46 % of the total shipments of this commodity. He employed 20 vessels for the
  purpose, 5 of which sailed to Morlaix, 5 to Emden, 3 to La Rochelle, 3 to Nantes and
  I to Bordeaux. The destinations of the remaining three are unknown, as are the
  nationalities of all the vessels which he employed.
4 The hemp shipments from St.Petersburg were divided as follows:
                           F. W. Isenbeck       cf 416,850. 0.0
                           Ant. Colombi         cf 244,953. 2.0
                           Rd. Mitton           cf 20,948. 6.0
                           Blandow & Co.        cf 42,478. 3.0
                                                cf 725,229. I 1.0
  F.W.lsenbeck chartered 9 vessels, 4 of which sailed to Bordeaux, 2 to Nantes, I to
  Morlaix and I to an undisclosed port; the ninth ran aground.
  Ant.Colombi chartered 4 vessels, 2 for Bordeaux, I for La Rochelle and I which ran
  aground before reaching its destination.
  Rd. Mitton chartered one vessel for Dieppe or suitable alternative port, and
  Blandow & Co. one for Nantes.
5 Pehmoller & Droop shipped seven cargoes of copper valued at cf 124,535.11.0 to
  Emden. Schwink & Koch of Konigsberg shipped hemp to a value of
  cf306,030.13.0 in four vessels, 2 bound for Emden and 2 for Amsterdam; 3 of these
  flew the Prussian flag and I the Hamburg flag. The vessels themselves came from
  East Friesland. Morison and Helmund received a further 4 % commission on the
  value of the cargoes plus the 70 % overheads.
6 Helmund's charges were somewhat lower, but this firm had received part-payment
  in 1803. Morison's charges varied between 53 % and 83 % ofthe value of the cargo.

    PAGE 194

I All the merchants in St. Petersburg charged 13 %, covering commission, charges, etc.
  The only exception was Rd. Mitton, who charged 16%for one shipment. We have
  no details concerning the commissions paid to the St. Petersburg houses; however,
  if we take the 3 % paid to Schwink & Koch of Konigsberg as a basis, we may
  assume that transport charges, dues and storage in St. Petersburg will have totalled
  about 10%.
  Pehmoller & Droop charged 2 % commission on the shipments which they
  undertook. The actual cost of preparing the shipments did not exceed t-t %.
  Schwink & Koch supplied 16% of the hemp shipped in the operation, the total
  value of which was cf 1,932, 976.9.0.
2 Letters of 16th July and 20th August 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 282, 343.
  Letter of 17th August 1804 from Barbe Marbois, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  'Operations relatives' etc., 15, 17. The vessels arrested were the 'Vrouw Hermina'
  and the 'De Jonge Onnen Pieters Brouwer,' both of which were carrying cargoes
  from Blanckenhagen, and the 'De Generaal Von BlUcher,' with a cargo from
  Morison on board. The bills oflading and 'Operations' reveal that all three were
  bound for Emden. But, as the story will subsequently show (page 196), the three ships
  underwent neutralization and then made for France, where they were stopped.


                                         59 6
                               NOTES PAGES          194-198

3 The invoice value amounted to cf 503,914.5.0.
  Ryberg's charges on this totalled cf 171,000.
4 Letter of 1 Ith June 1804 from Decres, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of I Ith June 1804 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A II, 228.
  Letter of 2nd July 1804 to Decres, Paris, A 11,253.
5 Letters of 9th and 16th July 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 275, 282.
6 Letter of 23rd July 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 292.
  Letter of 30th July 1804 to Bergevin, Paris, A II, 303.

  PAGE 195
I Letters of 6th and 13th August 1804 to Decres, Paris, AlI, 317, 321. Hope advised
  Decres to consult Pehmi.iller & Droop in regard to the insurance in Hamburg. In
  Amsterdam, the premium for marine risks alone was 6/;; in August 1804, and this
  even applied to cargoes bound for Marseilles.
2 Letter of 23rd August 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 346. While Hope & Co., in spite of
  putting heavy pressure on the insurers, were obliged to pay a premium of at least 8 /~
  for hemp carried in Russian vessels, other houses paid only 4 /;; for shipments of tar
  and timber.
3 Letters of 30th August, and 10th, 13th and 17th September 1804 to Decres, Paris,
  A II, 358, 373, 380, 387.
4 Letters of23rd and 27th March 1804 from Roger, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 29th March 1804 to Roger, Paris, A II, 164.
  Letter of 30th March 1804 from Decres, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 5th and 19th April 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 175, 188.

    PAGE 196
1 Letter of 30th July 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 304.
2 Letter of 23rd March 1804 from Roger, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th September 1804 to Decres, Paris, A II, 399.
  Letter of 22nd October 1804 to Aug.Bergevin, Paris, A II, 433. Bergevin was
  'Commissaire Principal de Marine.'
3 Letters of 29th October and 7th November 1804 to Roger, Paris, A 11,442,457.
  Letter of 29th October 1804 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A II, 444.
4 Letter of 9th November 1804 from Roger, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
5 Letter of 12th November 1804 to Decres, Paris A 11,465.

    PAGE 197
  Letter of 26th November 1804 to Roger, Paris, A II, 487.
  Letter of 29th November 1804 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A 11,492.
2 Letter of 14th February 1805 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A II, 551. Napoleon had
  voiced his satisfaction with the services rendered by Hope.
3 Letters of 22nd March, and I Ith and 29th April 1805 to Decres, Paris, A 11,583,598,
  606. Decres approved the proposal regarding De Bondeville, but the name of this
  house does not appear in the accounts. It would thus appear that no intermediary was
  appointed in Paris.

    PAGE 198
1 Data obtained from 'Operations relatives,' etc.

                                         597
                                 NOTES PAGES 198-201

2 Letter of 4th June 1804 from Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 F.Crouzet, L' tkonomie britannique et Ie blocus continental ([806- [8 [3), I (Paris, 1958),
  1 65.


    PAGE 199

I Ibid., 1,21 I.
2 Stocks of ship supplies in Amsterdam were extremely limited at the beginning of
  1807. These consisted of 200,000 pounds of clean hemp from Konigsberg, at
  cf 120-121 per ship-pound; 10,000 pounds of clean hemp from Riga, at cf II 6- I 20
  per ship-pound; and 300,000 pounds of semi-clean hemp from St. Petersburg at cf 48
  per ship-pound. One ship-pound was approximately 150 kilograms. The Russian
  ship-pound or berkovich was equal to 10 pood, the latter being 16.3 kg. The shortage
  greatly encouraged speculation in hemp. Letter of 6th May 1807 to Decn':s, Paris, VII,
  75·
3 Letters of 13th, 20th and 23rd February, 27th April, 15th, 18th and 28th May, 1st
  June and 28th October 1806 from Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. When the potash was delivered, it was found to be below specification in
  terms of quality. Bergien thereupon offered to compensate the Company. As will
  become evident (page 2 I 3, note 2), lack of certainty regarding the quality of the
  Russian products was a common complaint.
4 Letters of 27th April and 13th November 1806 from Bergien & Co., St. Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 200

I Crouzet, Blocus continental, I, 128, note 5.
2 Letters of 16th, 19th and 26th December 1806 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg,
  to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Crouzet, Blocus continental, I, 2 I 6, note 8.
3 Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschulden, II, quotes the following prices: 1805, first
  half 98, second half 97; 1806, first half 95, second half 96. In Hamburg, the link
  between the stagnation of trade and the floating ofloans again became apparent. To
  provide an outlet for capital unemployed because of the blockade, Matthiessen &
  Sillem had floated two small loans in Hamburg in January 1807. Letter of 30th
  January 1807 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 In his letters, Hope's correspondent in Copenhagen, De Coninck, gave an eye-witness
  account of the events. To assist De Coninck, Hope granted him a credit of cf 100,000.
  Letter of 29th September 1807 to De Coninck & Co., Copenhagen, VII, 173.

    PAGE 201

I Crouzet, Blocus continental, I, 253-254.
2 Letter of 16th/28th May 1807 from Rall & Rogovikov, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 17th/29th May 1807 from Vasilyev, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 4th/16th June 1807 fromJ.Wulff, Copenhagen, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Letters of 2 1st July and 11th August 1807 to J.Wulff, Copenhagen, VII, 133, 149. In



                                            598
                               NOTES PAGES 201-203

  August the price rose briefly to 94. Weeveringh quotes an average figure of S5 for the
  first and second halves of I S07.
5 Letter of 15th/27th October IS07 from J.Wulff, Altona, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
6 Letter of I Ith August IS07 to J.Wulff, Copenhagen, VII, 149.
  Letter of 2nd November I S07 to De Smeth, Amsterdam, VII, 20S. Strangely enough,
  Wulff also suggested that Hope might consider buying bonds. It is not clear how
  funds could have been mobilized in this manner, unless Wulff was thinking of a
  speculation based on an exchange profit on resale.

  PAGE 202

I Letter of 23rd October IS07 to J.Wulff, Altona, VII, 204.
  Letter of 2nd/14th November I S07 from Th.Golubzov, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 26, 20S.
2 Letters of 20th September/2nd October and 24th September/6th October IS07 from
  Bergien & Co., St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 2nd November I S07 from R.Voute, Utrecht, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Letter of loth November IS07 to Bergien & Co., St. Petersburg, VII, 215.

  PAGE 203

I Letter of 20th October I S07 to Matthiessen & SilIem, Hamburg, VII, 202.
2 Letter of 29th October/loth November I S07 from Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 15th December IS07 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, VII, 237.
3 Letter of 29th December I S07 to J .A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, VII, 253.
  Letter of 29th December I S07 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, VII, 256. According to
  Bergien, Krehmer did not act on the basis of any authority. Bergien and Krehmer
  were said to have collaborated initially in the loan proposal, but later to have
  disagreed, whereupon each went his own way. Both houses-and in particular
  Krehmer-subsequently pestered Hope & Co. with proposals for the purchase of
  Russian goods, ostensibly on a fifty-fifty basis but in reality with Hope advancing the
  whole of the sum required. The Company parried these advances with polite but
  noncommittal replies at a distance.
  Letters of 13th/25th, 17th/29th March, 15th/27th May, 2nd/14th June, I Sth/30th,
  19th/31st August ISOS from J.A.Krehmer Lang & Co., St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam; 29th April and 12th July ISOS to J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, VII, 367,
  439; 27th March/7th April, 29th MaY/9th June ISOS from Bergien & Co.,
  St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. It later transpired that Krehmer had
  already purchased substantial stocks at his own risk and sought to use the Company
  to supplement his liquid assets. With the market still in a listless state, Krehmer was
  hoping and praying that Rumyantsev's negotiations, which were aimed at achieving
  peace between England and France, would succeed. The restoration of peace would
  benefit the prices of Russian products. The conditions for negotiations with England
  had been drawn up at Erfurt in October. Letters of 16th/2Sth October, 13th/25th
  November I SoS from J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Albert Vandal, Napoleon ler et Alexandre ler, I (Paris, IS91), 474-475.
4 Letter of 31st December IS07/12th January ISOS from N.Rumyantsev and
  Th.Golubtsov, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.


                                          599
                               NOTES PAGES 204-206

  PAGE 204

I Letter of 9th February 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St. Petersburg. On
  1st January 1807, Hope & Co. held 4,525 repurchased bonds, and De Smelh 4,702.

  PAGE 205

I Letter of Ioth/22nd March 1808 from Golubtsov and Rumyantsev, St.Peterburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 5th February, 4th, 15th and 29th March, I st and 5th April 1808 to
  Golubtsov, St.Petersburg, vn, 299,324,335,339,340,341.
3 26th April, 1808. Deed oftransfer of Russian bonds to a value of 17 million guilders
  from Hope & Co. to W.Borski. Borski received a commission of t %.

  PAGE 206

I Letter of 29th April 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St. Petersburg, VII,
   368.
   Letter of 1st December 1808 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope,
   London.
   Letter of 17th December 181 I from W.Borski, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Hope subscribed cf 6,000,000, Borski cf 3,000,000, Strockel & Van Dijk cf 3,000,000.
  D.J.Voombergh cf 3,000,000, N. and J. and R.Staphorst cf 1,000,000 and
  W.&J.Willink cf 1,000,000.
2 Lobanov-Rostovski, Russia and Europe, 128-132.
  K.Waliszewski, Le regne d'Alexandre Ier, I (Paris, 1923), 191-192, 198,239.
3 Lobanov-Rostovski, Russia and Europe, 132, 162.
  Zenyavin left part of his fleet at Porte Ferrajo, on the island of Elba.
  Waliszewski, Regned'Alexandre Ier, 1,248,260.
4 Jean Calamai of Leghorn, to whom fell the role of providing funds for the fleet on
  Elba, preferred to draw on Hope. even when, subsequently, he received instructions
  to recover advances from the Russian envoy in Vienna, Prince Kurakin.
  Letter of 20th November 1807 from Jean Calamai, Leghorn, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of I rthDecember 1807 to Jean Calamai, Leghorn, VII, 232.
  To meet the needs of vessels at Trieste, Cesare Pellegrini, a merchant in that city, was
  permitted to draw on Hope & Co. During 1808 his drawings totalled cf 399.454. 12.8.
  Accounts of the Russian Crown, 1808.
5 Letter of 12th December 1807 to J.Wulff, Altona, vn, 236.
6 Letter of 31st JUlY/12th August 1807 from Golubtsov, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Lobanov-Rostovski, Russia and Europe, 132. Calamai drew on Hope for
  approximately cf I 15,000. On 28th June, he reported that the squadron at Porte
  Ferrajo had sailed. The destination later proved to be Toulon.
  Letter of 22nd July 1808 from J.Calamai, Leghorn, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 30th August/I Ith September 1808 from Zenyavin, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. One vessel, the corvette 'Spitsbergen,' remained at Vigo. It was left to
  the Russian consul-general in Lisbon, A.Dubatshevskoy, to meet the expense
  occasioned by her stay, and also to settle Zenyavin's accounts. Zenyavin sailed for
  Portsmouth on 12th September, and five days later Dubatshevskoy drew on Hope for


                                          600
                                     NOTES PAGES 206-210

        cf 202,688.5.0. Such were the sums drawn on the Company for the benefit of the
        Russian men-of-war that by 1st July 1808 no more than cf 326,000 was left to meet
        other needs on the part of the Russian government. Letter of 1st July 1808 to the
        Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, VII, 413. Just how saddened the French
        government was by Zenyavin's position in Lisbon was revealed by rumours which
        circulated in Paris, to the effect that France had purchased Zenyavin's entire fleet for
        16 or 18 million francs.
        Letter of 26th February 1808 to J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, VII, 321.

        PAGE 207

  Letter of 29th MaY/9th June 1808 from the Committee for Foreign Loans,
    I
  St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 1st June 1808 from R.Voute, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 2nd June 1808 to R.Voute, Amsterdam, VII, 385.
34th July 1808. Supplement to agreement with W.Borski and associates dated 26th
  April 1808.

        PAGE 208

I Letter of 5th July 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St. Petersburg, VII, 415.
2 Letter of 18th/30th January 1808 from J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Hope viewed Wulff's passing as a severe blow to the Ministry of
  Finance, 'as this gentleman had the clue of all transactions of the late minister.' Letter
  of 26th February 1808 to J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, VII, 321.
3 Letter of 4th December 1807 from Bergien & Co., St. Petersburg, to:Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 29th December 1807 to J.A.Krehmer, St.Petersburg, VII, 253.
  Letter of 13th/25th March 1808 from J.A.Krehmer & Co., St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam. There were rumours that France was prepared to furnish Russia
  with up to 200 million francs in subsidies, in exchange for substantial quantities of
  Russian produce. This should probably be viewed as an attempt to bind Russia to
  France in the economic sphere as well as in others, and thus to drive a wedge between
  her and England. Similar rumours emerge in later correspondence (see, for example,
  page 222), but there is no evidence that any such plan was carried through.

        PAGE 209

I Crouzet, Blocus continental, 1,292-293.
2 Letter of 21st August/2nd September 1808 from Th.Golubtsov, St.Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 21St October 1808 fromJ.Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 25th October 1808 to J.Sillem, Hamburg, VII, 516.

        PAGE 210

I Sillem, who had been to Carlsbad and Egra for his health, returned in mid-October
  1808 or thereabouts. The mere fact that he could afford to be away from Hamburg
  for five months is an indication of the depressed state of business in that city. Sillem
  was indeed little disposed to undertake a fresh journey.
  Letter of 2 I st October 1808 from J .Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 27th September 1808 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, VII, 489.


                                                601
                               NOTES PAGES 2IO-2I4

3 Letter of loth October 1808 from R.Melvil, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 21 1

1 Letter of 4th October 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, VII,
  498. Somewhat to the surprise of Hope & Co., Golubtsov wrote on 5th November to
  say that the Russian government had agreed to the 2 % asked for.
  Letter of 12th October 1808 to R.Melvil, Amsterdam, R.I.

    PAGE 212

1   Supra, 209.

    PAGE 213

1 On 27th October 1808, Hope & Co., in briefing Melvil, quoted the following prices, in
  roubles per pood, as being current: hemp, clean, 47-51 ; second-grade 40-44; hemp,
  semi-clean 40-43; flax, twelve-headed, 50; potash 51; beeswax 27; tallow, yellow, 62;
  tallow, white, 54; soap tallow 52; Russian leather 18; hemp oil4; brushes 22; linseed
    10-11.
2 Shortly before he left for London in 1794, Hope had bought large quantities of flax
  for shipment to ports in Spain, France, Italy and Portugal. Trial shipments were
  undertaken following his return to Amsterdam, but widespread complaints from the
  consignees concerning the quality of the material led the Company to abandon the
  trade. Supra, 199, note 3.

    PAGE 214

1 Letters of 12th and 27th October 1808 to R.Melvil, Amsterdam, R. 1 et seq.
  Letter of 25th October 1808 to J.Sillem, Hamburg, VII, 516.
2 Melvil also carried letters of recommendation addressed to Schickler Bros. in Berlin,
  Cumming & Fenton and J.Blanckenhagen in Riga, Bagge & Co., Bothlingk & Co.,
  Livio Bros. & Co., Arch. Cramp and Porter Brown & Co., all of St. Petersburg, and
  Brandt Rodde & Co. and R.van Brienen & Sons in Archangel. Generally speaking, all
  were houses which Hope considered suitable to be involved in the transaction. Melvil
  also received letters of credit for other houses, most of which were in Germany.
  These were Fred.Hoffmann & Son ofDilsseldorf, Jean Walter de Becke of Cologne,
  H.H.Kalm & Son of Brunswick, J.H.Pottgeisser of Coblenz, N. Turkheim of Mainz,
  Bethmann Bros. of Frankfurt, Mich.David & Son of Hanover, J.Brentano of Kassel,
  Dufour Bros. of Leipzig, Bassenge & Co. of Dresden, Benecke Bros. of Berlin,
  J.A.Noffolk of Warsaw, Toussaint & Co., of Konigsberg, J.D.Drachenhauer & Co.,
  of Riga and Bergien & Co., ofSt.Petersburg. All the letters bore the date 28th
  October 1808. During his visit to Hamburg, Melvil received from Matthiessen &
  Sillem a number ofletters of recommendation and credit from this house. In order to
  prevent fraud (the credit, after all, was unlimited), Melvil was required to provide 16
  specimens of his signature, which were then sent to the houses at which a credit had
  been opened in his name.
  Letter of 4th November 1808 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 2nd August 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, VII,
  462.


                                         602
                                NOTES PAGES 214-218

  Letter of 12th August 1808 to Golubtsov, St.Petersburg, VII, 468.
4 Letter of 28th August/2nd September 1808 from the Committee for Foreign Loans,
  St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. The accounts show that the Genoese lira,
  one-fifth of a piastre, was then worth just over 8 stuivers (41 guilder cents).

  PAGE 215

I Letter of 14th February 1809 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg, A
  XXVII,29·
  Letter of I Ith April 1809 to Golubtsov, St.Petersburg, A XXVII, 56.
  The consignment consisted of 10,000 rixdollars and II 0,000 piastres, together valued
  at cf 283,331.10.0, and bars of silver to a value ofcf 25,000.
2 Letter of 29th November 1808 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg,
  VII,553·
  Letter of 29th November 1808 from W.Borski, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 29th November to W.Borski, Amsterdam, VII, 581.
  Letter of loth January 1809 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St. Petersburg.

    PAGE 216

I Letter of 1St December 1808 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope,
  London.
  Letter of 29th November 1808 to W.Borski, Amsterdam, VII, 581.
2 Interest at 5 %was paid on 82,300 bonds, making a total of cf 4, I 15,000. In 1803,
  2,000 bonds were redeemed, and the interest on the 4,000 was provisionally held on
  deposit. Hope initially referred in correspondence to 5,000 bonds, but on loth
  January 1809 the Committee in St.Petersburg was advised that there were in fact only
  4,000.
3 Letter of 22nd November 1808 to R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, R. 32.
  Letter of 24th November 1808 from R.Melvil, Konigsberg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 7th December 1808 from R.Melvil, Riga, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Crouzet, Blocus continental, I, 371. According to Me1vil, 80 American vessels arrived
  at Russian ports during 1808; they were admitted without difficulty upon the
  production of evidence that they had come from neutral ports.
5 Letters of7th and loth December 1808 from R.Me1vil, Riga, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Drachenhauer charged 16i albertustalers per ship-pound for his
  services. Zuckerbacker Klein & Co. charged 17!- albertustalers per ship-pound.

    PAGE 217

I Letter of 8th/20th December 1808 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of9th/2lst March 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Matthiessen &
  Sillem, Hamburg.

    PAGE 218

I   Letter of 8th/20th December 1808 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
    Amsterdam. Monies deposited with the Bank gathered no interest for the first three
    months. After a year the interest was added to the capital.
                               NOTES PAGES 218-219

2 Letter of 22nd JanuarY/4th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to
  Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg.
3 Crouzet, Blocus continental, I, 380.
4 Letters of 26th February /9th March and 2nd/ 17th March 1809 from R.Melvil,
  St.Petersburg, to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg. The Russian government's
  requirements for coarse linen were put at 7 million arshins per annum (I arshin was
  equal to 0.71 metres). This was somewhat at variance with the information supplied
  by Hope, who viewed the government purchases as a means of supporting prices. On
  17th March, Melvil reported that the government had contracted to purchase 15
  million arshins of coarse linen at 130 roubles per thousand arshins. The house of
  Stieglitz specialized in flax.

    PAGE 219

I Letters of 3rd/15th January 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, and 29th JanuarY/9th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to
  Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg.
  Letter of 15th/27th December 1808 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  'Old sable iron,' the highest grade, was supplied by Nicolai Demidov, but his prices
  were then too high. Most of this iron was exported to England. A lower grade, known
  as P.S.F., was available in large quantities. The principal markets for this were North
  America and the European continent. Yakovlev was unable to manage his affairs
  owing to mental illness, and his firm, which owed money to the government, had been
  taken over. More than a million poods of iron lay in the stockyard of his factory, and
  some of this would certainly be sold to meet his debts to the government.
  Letter of 15th/27th December 1808 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Demidov was asking 235 kopecks per pood for his iron. Melvil
  ultimately purchased, for cash, 70,000 poods at 210 kopecks per pood. The
  commissars who managed Yakovlev's business had earlier declined an offer of 16C'
  kopecks on the grounds that the mines could not operate economically at such a
  price. Melvil was of the opinion that iron from Siberia could be transported more
  cheaply to a port on the Black Sea. Eventually he bought just over 185,000 poods of
  P.S.F. iron, of which 150,000 poods was ordered through Bergien. For spot quantities
  he paid 165-170 kopecks per pood in cash, and for forward purchases 175-180
  kopecks with an earnest of 25 kopecks. On 25th August 1809, Bergien offered Melvil
  a consignment of 1,900,000 poods from the government-controlled Yakovlev stock at
  195 kopecks per pood. Hope's reaction to this was to offer to establish a 'combinaison
  generale' in the form of a public loan, subject to the approval of King Louis
  Napoleon. The absence of any mention of the matter in the later correspondence
  (letter of 29th September 1809 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, A XXVII, 17) suggests
  that the royal approval was not forthcoming. The 185,000 poods of iron which Hope
  & Co. bought from the Yakovlev stock had been manufactured while Yakovlev was
  still of sound mind. It was reported that the quality of the iron produced by the firm
  deteriorated after the owner had ceased to exercise control. The stock in question
  took two years to travel from the mines to St.Petersburg.
2 Letter of 27th May 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 93.
                               NOTES PAGES 220-221

    PAGE 220

I  Letters of 12th/24th and 16th/28th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to
   Hope & Co., Amsterdam. Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 206.
   The Severin brothers-whose name appears as Severeyn on a number of occasions in
   the Hope accounts - were brothers of the widow of Velho, the erstwhile partner in
   Voute Velho Rail & Co. She was in dispute with Rail concerning her share in the
   firm. In Hope's view, Rail & Severin was not an attractive house, 'entreprenant
   beaucoup par deIa ses forces,' and while Rail continued to be a partner there could
   be no question of good relations. The wife of one of the Severin brothers was among
   the czar's mistresses. Waliszewski, Regne d'Alexandre Ier, I, 451.
2 Letter of 15th/27th December 1808 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
   Amsterdam.
3· Letter of 15th/27th December 1808 from R. Melvil, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
   Amsterdam.
   Letter of 29th December 1808/8th January 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to
   Hope & Co., Amsterdam. The founders of the houses of Bagge & Co. and Archibald
   Cramp were by now dead. Both houses continued under new management, but only
   in the case of Bagge & Co. was Melvil satisfied on the score of reliability. The house
   of Ant. Colombi, a Spaniard, was also widely respected. Stieglitz & Co., 'formerly
   Jews,' appeared to be wealthy; this firm maintained relations with Matthiessen &
   Sillem. In Archangel, Melvil chose the house of A. Becker, whom he had met in
   St. Petersburg and who had made a good impression upon him. As prices in
   Archangel were proportionately higher, the only commodities which lent themselves
   to speculation there were tar and pitch. Taken in conjunction with the rate of
   exchange, the prices of these were so low that manufacturers in Russia could
   hardly make a living.
   Letters of 14th/27th January 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
   Amsterdam, and 22nd JanuarY/4th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to
   Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg,

    PAGE22I
I Letters of 6th and 9th January 1809 to R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, R., 37, 39.
2 Letter of 22nd JanuarY/4th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 15th/27th January 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 29th JanuarY/9th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to
  Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg.
4 Letter of 15th/27th January 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Letter of 7th February 1809 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 12th/24th February 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
6 Letter of I 5th/27th January 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.




                                          60 5
                                NOTES PAGES 222-223

    PAGE 222

I Letter of 5th/17th March 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  We know from Voute's visits in 1793 and 1794 that referring a matter to the czar or
  the empress was among the means employed to defer a decision or camouflage a
  refusal.
2 Letter of 26th February 1809 from Bethmann, Frankfurt, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 5th/17th March 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Bethmann had again raised the matter with Rumyantsev during the latter's visit to
  Frankfurt but, finding that he had many other things on his mind, had deemed it
  wise to arrange for a reminder from Hope after Rumiantsev's return to
  St. Petersburg. In all probability, Rumyantsev put Bethmann off with a few vague
  remarks.
3 Labouchere, who at this time was staying in Paris, asked Mollien, the French
  Treasury Minister, whether Hope & Co., would be involved in further drawings for
  the benefit ofthe French navy. Rumyantsev had mentioned a sum of fifteen million
  francs to the merchants. Mollien, however, knew nothing of such a development,
  and was disinclined to believe on the report. It may be that the purpose of this piece
  of wishful thinking was to discourage anti-French feeling in Russia (letter of 18th
  May 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam). Bethmann,
  Rumyantsev's friend, feared 'the activities of a class of men in St. Petersburg who
  indulge in intrigues in order to prove that the present political system is contrary to
  the interests of the Empire.'
  Letter of 14th May 1809 from Bethmann Brothers, Frankfurt, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 223

I Hope urged Melvil (unnecessarily, since he had already done so on his own
  initiative) to profit from extremely low exchange rates by drawing on Amsterdam
  and using the proceeds to pay in advance for the purchases from Russian houses.
  Letter of 14th March 1809 to R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, A XXVII, 45.
  Letter of 23rd March/14th April 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to
  Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg.
2 Letters of 22nd and 25th April 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 70,
  78. Letter of 29th April 1809 to R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, R., 60.
3 Letters of 24th and 3I st March 1809 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Matthiessen & Sillem stated that if vessels carrying a portion of the purchased goods
  were sent to the North Sea, Hamburg was an ideal port for hemp. Yellow tallow,
  in contrast to the white variety, was a welcome commodity in England. Flax could
  also be sent to England, but not to Scotland. Iron could only be shipped as ballast
  with light cargo such as flax and hemp. Potash was unsaleable in England, as were
  linen goods.
  Letter of 20th June 1809 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.



                                           606
                                NOTES PAGES 224-225

    PAGE 224

I Letter of 23rd May 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 90.
  Since the Russian Court had come down on the side of France (in fact, this was only
  a gesture), Hope dared not risk sending goods by sea, 'as it remains to be seen
  whether the Tyrants of the Seas will continue to respect their (Le. the Russian-Ed.)
  navigation.' This is one of very few manifestly anti-British comments in Hope's
  correspondence.
2 Letters of7th/19th and 19th/31st May 1809 from R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 13th June 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 102.
  Letter of 29th June 1809 from Melvil & Co., Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Crouzet, Blocus continental, II, 424.
4 Fears that the Baltic trade would be severely hampered by the arbitrary orders of the
  Privy Council in England were still felt by Bethmann at the beginning of May.
  Letter of 14th May 1809 from Bethmann Brothers, Frankfurt, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Letters of 20th April/2nd May, 23rd April/5th May, 27th April/9th May, 1st/13th
  May, 4th/16th May, 7th/19th May, I Ith/23rd May, 22nd MaY/4th June 1809 from
  R.Melvil, St. Petersburg and Riga, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 16th June 1809 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 225

I Letters of 20th April/2nd May, 27th April/9th May, 19th/31st May 1809 from
  R.Melvil, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th May 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 93.
  At the moment when Golubtsov informed Me1vil that the transaction would not be
  cancelled, the rouble was valued at 16 stuivers. Cancellation would thus have
  resulted in a loss to the Russian government of It stuivers on every guilder paid out
  in Amsterdam. To Matthiessen & Sillem, the Company expressed fears that Melvil
  would not profit from the low exchange rate by drawing on Amsterdam. But, as we
  have seen (note 1, page 223), their anxiety was without foundation. 'R.M.'s vital fire
  is not equal to the goodness of his heart and who is a rare commercial character in
  the present state ofthe world, that of having too much prudence.'
2 Letter of 23rd March/4th April 1809 from R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 25th April 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 78.
3 Letters of 19th/31st May and 22nd MaY/4th June 1809 from R.Melvil, Riga, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 4th July 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 119.
  loth July 1809: 'Papiers concernant l'operation R.M.'
4 Early in May the Company reported that the British had proclaimed a blockade of
  the coast from the Ems river to Bayonne. This, it was stated, was in reply to the
  American Non-Intercourse Act, which prohibited trade with England and also
  France.
  Letter of 2nd May 1809 to Ma tthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVII, 80.
                               NOTES PAGES 225-226

    Crouzet, Blocus continental, II, 444.
    Eli Heckscher, The Continental System (Oxford, 1922), 137.

    PAGE 226

I   Infra, Appendix D-VIII.
2   Commodity                  Hope'sprice, quoted                Average price paid by
                                 on 27.10.1808                               Melvil
  Flax                               50 roubles                        Spot: 60-61 roubles
                                                                  Forward: 59-65 roubles
  Potash                              51 roubles                  Forward: 43-46 roubles
  Linseed                          10-11 roubles                              9- 10 roubles
  Yellow tallow                       62 roubles                                57 roubles
  Thus, only in the case of flax did Melvil have to pay more than the price indicated
  by Hope; but his purchases ofthis commodity represented only 6 % of the total.
3 In addition to brokerage, the houses which made purchases on Melvil's behalf
  received a commission of between I % and 2 %. The commission paid on a given
  commodity varied from one house to another. For example, Bothlingk received 2 %
  on his purchase of linen fabrics, while Blessig was paid only I %for the same article.
  Vide Cop. R, 'Notes diverses, etc.,' 'Notes,' 'M.' Melvil's travelling expenses,
  including the cost of the coach and the wages of his servant, totalled nearly cf 7,500.
  Infra, Appendix D-Ix.




                                           608
                                 CHAPTER EIGHT




    PAGE 227

I Letter of 28th January 1809 to J. Williams Hope, London.
  Letter of 21st February 1809 to R.Melvil, St. Petersburg, R., 47.
  Letter of 23rd March 1809 to J. Williams Hope, London.
  Letter of 4th July 1809 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg,
  A XXVII, 120.
2 Letter of 11th April 1809 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St. Petersburg,
  A XXVII, 61. Of the 4,109 bonds contracted in December 1808, only six or seven
  hundred had been sold by the following April.

    PAGE 228

I Letter of 1st June 1809 to J. Williams Hope, London.
  Letter of Ilth/23rd June 1809 from the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg
  to Hope & Co. Amsterdam.
  On 1st June 1809, 6,588 of the 13,109 bonds taken over
  had been sold, and 6,521 remained unsold. From the proceeds of the sale,
  cf 3,452,000 had been paid. Hope & Co. provisionally advanced cf 3,069,000.
2 Letter of 4th July 1809 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St. Petersburg,
  A XXVII, 120.
3 Letters of 17th and 21st July 1809 from P.C.LaboucMre, Bagneres, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of loth August 1809, from P.C.LaboucMre, Bordeaux, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 8th September 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 229

I Letter of 12th September 1809 to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg,
  A XXVII, 161. Hope asked for flax, hemp, potash, tallow, linen fabrics, iron, copper
  and linseed-products which Melvil had also purchased. The Company opened
  discussions with Bergien concerning the purchase of 190,000 poods of P.S.F. iron
  from Yakovlev. It was willing to pay 180 kopecks per pood, at a rate of exchange of
  15 stuivers, or another price at another rate of exchange, provided that the sum in
  guilders was the same. The Company reserved the freedom to meet the cost of
  purchase without resorting to drafts on St.Petersburg; in other words, with roubles
  provided by the Russian government.
                               NOTES PAGES 229-23I

  Letter of 29th September I S09 to Bergien & Co., St.Petersburg, A xxvn, 170. Letters
  of 22nd September IS09 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  and of 12th/24th October IS09 from Bergien & Co., St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 1st/13th November I S09 from the Committee for Foreign Loans,
  St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 It was reported that an attempt had been made in Genoa to obtain a loan of
  6 million Genoese lire, and others in Paris, Hamburg and Frankfurt. It may be
  assumed that these were undertaken after 1st July IS09, the date on which the clause
  in the contract with the entrepreneurs which referred to competition lapsed.
  Letters of 13th March ISIO to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A xxvn, 31S, and of 23rd May
  ISIO to Count Nesselrode, Paris, A XXVII, 357.
4 Letter of 6th January ISIO to the Committee for Foreign Loans, St.Petersburg,
  Axxvn,249.

  PAGE 230

I The rate of exchange of the rouble kept roughly in step with the ratio between the
  paper rouble and the silver rouble. On ISth February ISIO, Porter reported that
  2S5 paper roubles could be obtained for 100 silver roubles. Taking the par value of
  the rouble at 40 stuivers, this does indeed give an exchange rate of 14 stuivers to the
  paper rouble. Letter of ISth February ISIO from W.Porter, St. Petersburg, to
  J. Williams Hope, London. Letter of 30th November I S09 to Nicolas Clary, Paris,
  A xxvn, 209. Letter of 16th December IS09 from Melvil & Co., Amsterdam, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam. Letter of 16th February ISIO to Bethmann Bros.,
  Frankfurt, A xxvn, 29S. Letter of 27th February ISIO to Guryev, St.Petersburg,
  A xxvn, 315.
2 Letters of 12th/24th January and Sth/20th February ISIO from Guryev,
  St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 20S, 210.
  Letter of 13th March 1810 to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A xxvn, 318.
  Letter of 23rd May 1810 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Count Nesselrode,
  Paris. The Company required a commission of 21- %on the operation which it had
  proposed.
3 Letter of Sth/20th May 1810 from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. The Court was willing to pay Hope & Co. the 2t %commission for
   which they had asked, and also to meet the stamp duty on the new vouchers relating
   to the bonds.

    PAGE 231

I   Ukase of 27th May/8th June 1810 issued by Czar Alexander I, and concerning the
    loan in assignats opened in Russia. Land sales would be permitted for a period of
    five years. The principal sum would be one hundred million roubles, and this would
    be spread over five tranches of twenty million each. The first tranche would carry
    interest at 6 %and be redeemed in 1817. It was a condition ofthe entire loan that
    interest and principal would be paid in silver roubles. Payment for the bonds could
    be effected in assignats or paper roubles and at the advantageous rate oftwo paper
    roubles for one silver rouble. Where land belonging to the State was sold, payment
    could be made in bonds; this facility was also extended to foreign buyers. The


                                          6IO
                               NOTES PAGES 231-232

  assignats surrendered would be burnt, and the issue of new assignats would cease.
  Every Russian merchant who was a member of the First Guild (the association of
  large merchants) was permitted to purchase land on condition that payment was
  made in bonds ofthe new loan. This group, however, was prohibited from buying
  land from private individuals. The purchasers of State land were to enjoy manorial
  rights in respect of the estates so purchased, but remained in their own class and thus
  did not share the rights of the nobility. Payment for manorial assets purchased from
  the State could be effected in five annual instalments, interest being added. This
  provision was probably introduced in order to facilitate the purchase of land by
  noblemen. The first tranche, of 20 million roubles, was to be opened for
  subscription on 15th July ISIO.
2 Letter of 13th March ISIO to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVll, 31S.
  Letters of Sth/20th, ISth/30th May and 4th/16th July ISIO from Guryev,
  St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th June I SI 0 to R. Melvil, Amsterdam. During July and August, the
  rouble stood at about I Ii stuivers in Amsterdam. The cf S63,000 was remitted from
  St. Petersburg by the house of Antoine Colombi. The temporary elimination of RaIl
  must almost certainly be seen as a gesture to propitiate Hope & Co.
3 Letters of 17th June, 14th, 25th August, Sth and 25th September ISIO to Guryev.
  St.Petersburg, A XXVIT, 3S2, 406, 415, 421, 437.
  Vandal, Napoleon Ier et Alexandre Ier, IT, Ch. XI,passim.
4 Letter of 14th August ISIO to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVIT, 406.

  PAGE 232

I Guryev agreed to Labouchere's terms, but he refused to extend payment of interest
  up to the end of the year to bonds which would be redeemed in the course of lSI I or
  subsequently. Letter of 24th August ISIO to Count Nesselrode, Paris, A xxvn, 416.
  Letter of 26th August/7th September ISIO from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam. Letter of 24th September ISIO to the Prince Arch-Treasurer,
  Amsterdam, A XXVIT, 43S. Approval was given on 25th September.
2 Hope & Co. were on good terms with the Russian envoy to the Kingdom of
  Holland, Prince Sergei Dolgorukov. Letter of 2Sth September I SI 0 to Guryev,
  St.Petersburg, A XXVll, 445. Prince Alexander Kurakin had suffered serious injuries
  when fire broke out at a Court function which he was attending. The brother of
  Prince Alexander, Prince Alexei, who was just then in Paris for the purpose of
  conveying the czar's congratulations to Napoleon upon his second marriage, later
  took charge.
3 Letters of 2Sth September, 13th, 27th October, 3rd, 6th, 17th and 20th November
  ISIO to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVll, 445, 46S, 4S3, 490, 495, 497,503.
  Letter of 22nd November/4th December ISIO from Bergien & Co., St. Petersburg,
  to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3 1st December ISIO to W.Borski, Amsterdam, AXXVIT, 547. It is
  conceivable that, as previously, the balance ofthe bonds were sold to a consortium
  headed by Borski. However, no clear details are available.
4 Letter of 23rd November/5th December I SIO from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
5 Crouzet, Blocus continental, IT, 592-594.
  Vandal, Napoleon Ier et Alexander Ier, II, 443-446.


                                          6rr
                               NOTES PAGES 234-236

  PAGE 234

I Crouzet, ibid., 596-602. Vandal, ibid., 4S9-490, 493-494, 510-5 II. The newly elected
  successor to the throne, the former French marshal Bernadotte, privately promised
  the English that Sweden would interpret very broadly indeed the application oftheJ
  Continental System.
2 Vandal,ibid.,530-531.

  PAGE 235

I Letter of 24th November ISIO from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to J.Sillem,
  Hamburg, A XXVII, 510.
  Letter of 22nd January I SIO from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Matthiessen &
  Sillem, Hamburg, A XXVll, 561.
2 Letter of Sth December ISIO to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVll, 516, 524.
  Letter of Sth January I SI I from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Count von
  Stackelberg, Vienna, A XXVll, 555. The other Receivers were P.I.Hogguer and
  J.Hodshon. S.L.A.Keyzer and J.du Bois, of Amsterdam, also suspended payments.
  Labouchere attended to Von Stackelberg's private claims against De Smeth. Von
  Stackelberg was the Russian envoy in Vienna. In addition to the returned remittances,
  RaIl & Severin had a claim of about cf 300,000 against De Smeth's estate. Letter of
  5th January ISII to Prince Kurakin, Paris, A XXVll, 552.
3 Letter of 3rd/ 15th December I S10 from Prince Alexei Kurakin, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 22nd December lSI 0 to Guryev, St. Petersburg, A XXVII, 537.
  Letter of 22nd December IS 10 to Prince A.Kurakin, Paris, A XXVII, 535.
  Letter of 2Sth December lSI 0 from Prince A.Kurakin, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 31st December I8IO/12th January 18I1 from Guryev, St. Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Hope advanced Prince Kurakin a sum of cf 20,000 upon his personal responsibility
  pending official approval. Guryev allowed Hope to draw on Russian funds held by
  Matthiessen & Sillem. The Company was subsequently informed that Kurakin could
  draw up to cf 80,000.
  Letter of 5th February 181 I to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVII, 56S.
  Letter of 5th February lSI I to Prince A.Kurakin, Paris, A XXVII, 570.

  PAGE 23'"

I Letter of 29th December 1810 to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVll, 542.
2 A number of bankruptcies in Riga were among the causes of Croese's difficulties. RaIl
  was involved in Croese's bankruptcy to the extent of cf 220,000. Hope acted for RaIl
  in these matters.
  Letters of 24th JanuarY/5th February and 2Sth FebruarY/12th March lSI I from
  A.F.Rall, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of ISth May lSI I to Guryev, St. Petersburg, A XXVll, 5.
  Letter of 20th May I SI I from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam (?), to Baguenault,
  Paris.
  Letter of 20th June lSI I from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to John Hope, London.
  Following the death of Henry Hope, John Williams Hope ceased to use his second
  Christian name.

                                         612
                                 NOTES PAGES 236-240

4 Letter of I Ith June 181 I from MeIvil & Co., Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 237

I Letters of 22nd July and 19th August 1809 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg,
  A XXVII, 133, 146.
  Letter of 20th August 1809 from Bethmann Bros., Frankfurt, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 1st October 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Meyer was appointed to a post in the Ministry of Finance in St.Petersburg in
  January 181 I, whereupon he resigned from Meyer & Bruxner.
2 Letters of 25th July, 25th August and 19th September 1809 from Matthiessen &
  Sillem, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 2 I st November 1809 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 8th December 1809 from Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Henry Hope
  & Co., London.
  Letter of 5th December 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Henry Hope &
  Co., London.

    PAGE 238

I 'Notes diverses,' 'Notes,' 'M,' 'R.'
2 cf 137,287.8.0 in 1810, compared with cf955,IOO.O.O, in 1809. 'Notes.'
  Crouzet, Bloclis Continental, II, 576, 634.
3 'Notes.' In the case of tar, 17 %was added to the selling price to cover transport,
  storage, replenishment, registration fees (t %of the selling price), brokerage fees (also
  t %), additional charges (I %), del credere (2 %) and commission (2 %). For tar, the
  charges were appreciably lower, totalling less than 10 %. For iron, they represented
  only 3 %ofthc selling price. The stock oflinseed held by Meyer & Bruxner was sold
  at a loss of 5 %. It had, however, suffered a decline in quality owing to overheating.

  PAGE 239

I Letter of 20th June 181 I from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to John Hope, London.
2 Letter of I Ith June 181 I from Melvil & Co., Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 27th July/8th August 181 I from Meyer & Bruxner, St.Petersburg, to
  P.C.Labouchere, St.Petersburg.
  Crouzet, Bloclis Continental, II, 654-655, note 12,655.
4 'Notes,' 'Notes diverses.'

    PAGE 240

I   'State of Operation R.M. on 30th November 181 I.' Labouchere placed an order with
    Brandt Rodde & Co. in Archangel for purchases within narrow margins. Because of
    its eccentric position, Archangel escaped the Russian government's strict control over
    foreign ships, and thus ample supplies of colonial produce could be relied upon there.
    Moreover, the difficulties surrounding onward transport to other European countries
    were greater there than, for example, in St.Petersburg or Riga. The Archangel house
    was unable to meet the limits laid down by Labouchere, namely 10,000 poods oftop-

                                           61 3
                               NOTES PAGES 240-243

  grade Georgian cotton at 10 roubles per pood, 100,000 poods of white Havana sugar
  at 20 roubles and 100,000 poods of brown Havana sugar at 14 roubles, the prices in
  all cases being based on the St.Petersburg rate of 10 stuivers to the rouble. Letters of
  29th JUlY/loth August and 6th/18th September 181 I from p.e.Labouchere,
  St.Petersburg, to Brandt & Rodde, Archangel. From the time of Labouchere's arrival
  in Russia, remittances totalling cf 270,000 had reached Amsterdam.
2 To meet the payment due on I st January, a total of cf 1,450,000 could be remitted in
  the months of August to December 181 I without influencing the rate of exchange.
  The limits were cf 450,000 in August and September, cf 250,000 in October, cf 200,000
  in November and cf 100,000 in December.

  PAGE 241

I Memorandum from P.e.Labouchere, enclosed with his letter to Guryev of 24th
  JulY/5th August 1811.
2 Note from the Russian minister offinance, undated.
3 Letter of 24th August/5th September 181 I from Guryev, St. Petersburg, to
  p.e.Labouchere, St.Petersburg.

  PAGE 242

I Letter of 25th August/6th September 181 I from P.e.Labouchere, St.Petersburg, to
  Guryev, St.Petersburg.
  Letter of 1st/13th September 181 I from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to P.e. Labouchere,
  St.Petersburg.
2 Letter of 26th Augustl7th September 181 I from P.C.Labouchere, St.Petersburg, to
  John, Thomas and Henry Philip Hope, London.
3 Letter of 19th August 1812 from P.e.Labouchere, Kassel, to W.Borski, Amsterdam.
4 Letter of I rth/23rd September 181 I from P.e.Labouchere, Riga, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 4th October 181 I from P.e.Labouchere, Berlin, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 7th October 181 I from P.C.Labouchere, Leipzig, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of lIth December I8lI from P.e.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Guryev,
  St.Petersburg.
5 Contract of I rth December 181 I between Willem Borski and Hope & Co.

  PAGE 243

I Letter of 25th December 181 I to W.Borski, Amsterdam, A XXVII, ii, 128.
  Letter of 29th December I8lI to D.Berck and N.Entrop Muller, Amsterdam, A
  XXVII, ii, 129.
  Letter of 16th/28th August 1812 from J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, to J.Hope, London.
  Letter of 13th February 1812 from J.Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere, Paris.
  Borski bore no responsibility for the bonds transferred to him or for the five payment
  warrants which he had issued in favour of A.E.Hope.
2 Letter of 2nd January 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to De Ribeaupierre,
  St. Petersburg.
                               NOTES PAGES 244-246

    PAGE 244

  Letter of I Ith December 181 I from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Nesselrode,
  St.Petersburg. Nesselrode had returned to Russia in October 181 I.
  Waliszewski, Regned'Alexandre Ier, 1,354.
2 The metallic bonds, which totalled 217,600 roubles, were divided as follows:
  Ro. 15,000 in the name of P.C.Labouchere
  Ro. 79,251 in the name ofJohn Hope
  Ro. 12,800 in the name ofW. and J.Willink
  Ro. 12,800 in the name ofN. and J.P.van Staphorst
  Ro. 38,400 in the name ofD.J.Voombergh
  Ro. 59,349 in the name of Willem Borski
  Letter of 10th January 1812 to J.Sillem, Amsterdam, A XXVIII, 15. On 14th April 1812
  - probably as a precaution -a redistribution of metallic bonds, totalling
  Ro. 219,178.8. (equivalent to cf 400,000 at a rate of exchange of36t stuivers) was
  made, namely:
  Ro. 15,000 in the name ofP.C.Labouchere
  Ro. 79,25 I in the name of David Berck
  Ro. 12,800 in the name ofW. and J.Willink
  Ro. 47,749 in the name ofW.Borski
  Ro. 50,000 in the name ofW.Borski, plus a balance ofRo. 1,578.8.
  Letter of 14th April 18I2 to Gouryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 65.
3 Vandal, Napo/eon Ier et Alexandre Ier, III, 296, 412.

    PAGE 245

  Ibid., 295-296.
  Letter of 26th February 18I2 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Talleyrand's financial straits were such that, among other steps, he was obliged to sell
  his books. He had had eighty works auctioned in April 181 I. On 31st January 1812,
  Napoleon bought Talleyrand's house in the Rue de Varennes for Fr. 1,200,000. Thus,
  when Talleyrand sold his library to Labouchere, the worst of his financial problems
  were behind him. It is difficult to understand why he accepted Russian bonds as
  payment, since at that moment their value was largely speculative. Letters of 13th
  February and 24th June 1812 from J.Hope, London, to P.C. Labouchere, Paris and
  Amsterdam, A V, 119; of 15th May 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to
  J.Hope, London; of 18th August 1812 from Hottinguer & Co., Paris, to Harman &
  Co., London; of 23rd September and 28th October 1812 from Harman & Co.,
  London, to J.Hope, London; and of 18th February 1813 from Hottinguer & Co.,
  Paris, to Hope & Co., London. G.Lacour-Gayet, Talleyrand, II (Paris, 1930),297,
  300, 301, 304. Hottinguer, in Paris, was responsible for despatching the books.
  Talleyrand did not wish them to be sent in his name, since this would attract the
  attention of the newspapers in England. At his request, and against payment,
  Talleyrand received 52 volumes of the 'Annual Register' covering the years up to
  1808.

    PAGE 246

I Infra, Appendix D-x.
2 Letter of 1st May 1812 fromJ.SiIIem, Konigsberg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.


                                          61 5
                              NOTES PAGES 246-248

  Letter of 3rd May 1812 from J.SiIlem, Konigsberg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 8th May 1812 from J .SiIlem, Danzig, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 13th May 18 I 2 from J.SiIlem, Mitau, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 7th/ 19th May 1812 from J.SiIlem, Mitau, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of I Ith/23rd May 1812 from J.SiIlem, Riga, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 17th/29th May 1812 from J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letters of 13th February and 8th May 1812 from J.Hope, London, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Paris.

    PAGE 247

I Letters of 15th May and 1st June 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to J.Hope,
  Paris. John Hope's aversion to continuing the business increased following the
  discovery that, by manipulating the entries of bonds and vouchers, the cashier, Elinck
  Sterck, had embezzled 240,000 guilders. In 1809, he had speculated with 5,000
  Spanish vouchers, but just then the payment of interest on the bonds had been
  suspended, sending the price down. To cover his loss, he had speculated first in Dutch
  shares and later in Russian bonds. From the last of these malversations, there
  remained 61 bonds. Thanks to A. van der Hoop's keen eye, these frauds emerged
  when, under the new partnership, old and new business were separated for accounting
  purposes at the end of 181 I. John Hope urged that the man be prosecuted, but
  Labouchere preferred to merely dismiss him in order to protect the name of the
  Company. A similar case, albeit on a smaller scale, had occurred at the house of
  Moliere in The Hague. There, a clerk, who had meanwhile left, was found to have
  embezzled 10,000 guilders. Labouchere contributed one thousand guilders to a
  collection for the old Moliere who, at the age of 77, lived in rooms with his daughter
  and had scarcely enough to eat.
  Letter of 24th June 1812 from J.Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere, Pyrmont, A v,
  II8.
2 Meyer & Bruxner had received a number of receipts and had already spied out the
  land. Letters of 19th/31st January 1812 from Meyer & Bruxner, St.Petersburg, to
  W.Borski, Amsterdam, and of 5th/17th March 1812 from Pichler & Co.,
  St.Petersburg, to A. v.d.Hoop, Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 2nd, 16th and 20th May, and 16th June 1812 toJ.SiIIem, St.Petersburg,
  A XXVIII, 79, 86, 93, I 16.
  Letters of 17th/29th May and 29th MaY/loth June 1812 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg,
  to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 1st August 1812 to John Hope, London.

    PAGE 248

I Letter of 18th/30th June 1812 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co,
  Amsterdam
2 Letter of 25th June/7th July 1812 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Pyrmont.
  Letters of 25th June/7th July and 28th June/loth July/from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam. Sillem was able to send his report to Hope through the
  assistance of an ambassador who was leaving St.Petersburg following the declaration
  of hostilities.


                                         616
                                NOTES PAGES 248-252

3 H.T.Colenbrander, Inlijving en opstand, 2nd edition (Amsterdam, 194 1),25 I.
  G.J.Renier, Great Britain and the establishment of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
  1813-1814: A study in British foreign policy (The Hague, 1930),223.
4 Letter of 5th/ 17th July 1812 from Guryev, St. Petersburg, to J .SilJem, St. Petersburg.
  SiJlem carried evidence of ownership of cf 550,000 of the principal repayment of
  cf 800,000. Of this, cf 150,000 was to be paid in July, cf 200,000 in August and
  cf 200,000 in September.
5 Letter of 25th Junel7th July 1812 from J .SilJem, St.Petersburg, to P.CLabouchere,
  Pyrmont.

    PAGE 249

] Letter of 18th August] 81 2 from P.CLabouchere, Kassel, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 19th August 1812 fro, P.CLabouchere, Kassel, to W.Borski, Amsterdam.

    PAGE 250

] Letter of 19th August 1812 from P.CLabouchere, Kassel, to W.Borski, Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 5th September 1812 to John Hope, London.
3 Letters of 5th and 8th September 1812 from P.CLabouchere, Frankfurt, to
  A.v.d.Hoop, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 8th September] 812 from P.CLabouchere, Frankfurt, to W.Borski,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 251

] Letters of loth and 20th September 1812 from J.Hope, London, to J.SiJlem,
  St.Petersburg, A v, 133, 139.
  Letter of 24th September 1812 from J.Hope, London, to Guryev, St. Petersburg, A v,
  14 0 .
2 Letter of 25th September 1812 to J.Hope, London.
  Letter of 19th September 18 I 2 to J.SilJem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 17.
3 'Speech given on behalf of Hope & Co. by A.v.d.Hoop at the meeting on 17th
  September 1812.' 'Resolutie van de algemeene vergadering van geinteresseerden in de
  Russische leeningen,' held in the Doelen on 17th September] 8] 2.

    PAGE 252

I Letter of I Ith September 1812 from P.CLabouchere, Frankfurt, to J.SilJem,
  St .Petersburg.
  Letter of 22nd September 18 I 2 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 29th September 1812 to P.CLabouchere, Frankfurt, A XXVIII, 176.
  Letter of 7th November 1812 from W.Borski, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 22nd and 29th September 1812 from P.CLabouchere, Frankfurt, to
  A.v.d.Hoop, Amsterdam.
  Robert Voute had been appointed Director of the Central Fund by Napoleon. In this
  post he was responsible to the Intendant of Finances, Gogel, who in turn was
  responsible to the Govenor-general, Lebrun.
  Colen brander, Inlijving en Opstand, 56.


                                          617
                             NOTES PAGES 252-254

  Letter of 29th September 18 I 2 to P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, A XXVIII, 177.
  30th September 1812: requests to the Duke of Rovigo and the Emperor of the
  French, A XXVIII, 181, 183.
3 Letter of 14th/26th November 1812 from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to J.Sillem,
  St.Petersburg.
  Letter of 15th/27th November 1812 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Frankfurt.
  Letter of 31st December 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 31st December 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th January 1813 to P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, A XXVIII, 277. The
  managers decided not to publicize the fact that Labouchere had been refused a
  passport to enter Russia.

    PAGE 253

I Letters of 24th October, and 3rd, 14th and 28th November 1812 to J.Sillem,
  St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 194, 209, 221, 232.
  Letter of 29th October 1812 to J.Hope, London.
2 Letters of 12th and 21st November, and 1st December 1812 to Count von
  Stackelberg, Vienna, A XXVIII, 2 I 9, 229, 240.
  Amburger, Geschichte Behordenorganisation, 446, 447.
3 Letter of loth December 18 I 2 from M.Bethmann, Frankfurt, to A. v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  Bethmann anticipated that the price would fall to 25-26 in January, and this he
  regarded as the limit. In fact, the price varied between 37 and 41 in January.
4 Letters of loth July and 28th September 1812 fromJ.Hope, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, A V, 123, 142.
  Letter of 29th September 1812 from J.Hope, London, to D.Berck, Amsterdam, A V,
  145·
  Letter of 1st August 1812 to J.Hope, London.
  Letter of 22nd September 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
5 Infra, 426.
  Letter of 28th February 1813 from D.Berck, Amsterdam, to J.Hope, London. Berck
  went so far as to say that, if necessary, he would draw en London.

    PAGE 254

I Letter of 28th February 1813 from D.Berck, Amsterdam, to J.Hope, London.
2 Letter of 28th February 18 I 3 to J .Hope, London.
  Labouchere also dissociated himselffrom any reimbursement of travelling expenses.
  Letter of 1st March 1813 from W.Borski, Amsterdam, to Hope &Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 18th February 1813 from Baring Bros., London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 21st February 1813 from S.P.Labouchere, Rotterdam, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th February 1813 to Baring Bros., London, A XXVIII, 316.
  Letter of 22nd March 1813 from Harman & Co., London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

                                        618
                               NOTES PAGES 254-255

  Letter of 31st March 1813 from Hottinguer & Co., Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of22nd June 1813 to Baron Voute, Paris, A XXVIII, 372. The issue of the
  'Moniteur' dated 3 I st March 18 I 3 contained a report of the expulsion of Borski and
  S.P.Labouchere.
4 Letter of I Ith/23rd October 1812 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Nevertheless, a further cf 93,239-4.0., representing sales of goods, was
  credited to the account H. of Melvil & Co. during the course of 1812.

  PAGE 255

  30th November 1812: Report on Operation R.M.Sillem succeeded in getting Wolff &
  Schli.isser to reduce their exhorbitant charges of Ro. 4,960.4 by Ro. 4,000 by
  threatening to publish their charge account alongside that of Blessig in a Dutch
  newspaper.
  Letter of 8th/20th November 1812 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to R.Melvil,
  Amsterdam.
  The loss on the tar shipped by Becker amount ed to cf 56,030. Depreciation of
  cf200,000 was applied to Operation R.M. during 1810. In 1812, cf65,000 of this was
  restored under the head 'excess depreciation of profit and loss,' grootboek 1810:
  Account 7/ 16 , our account R.M., 199,grootboek 1812: Account 7 h6, our account R.M.,
  117. A further cf93,239.4 was transferred via Me1vil & Co. in 1812 (note 4, page 254).
  This represented remittances from Blessig, Meyer & Bruxner and Benecke & Co. of
  Hamburg; the last-named served as an intermediary for some remittances from
  Russia. In addition, Meyer & Bruxner remitted Ro. 69,757 to Baring Brothers in
  1812. The former had also placed a sum ofRo. 29,120 at the disposal of Sillem upon
  his arrival in St.Petersburg. During 1812, this house sold 40,065 poods of Demidov's
  iron, the net proceeds totalling Ro. 171,505.89, and 141 bales, or 420,000 arshins, of
  crash, which netted Ro. 75,065. Ofthe stock of metal, 17,345 poods of Demidov's
  common bar old sable iron, 37,134 poods ofYakovlev's broad iron, 200,884 poods of
  P.S.F. common bar old sable iron and 1.438 poods of copper then remained. Sillem
  received a commission of 2 %on the sums remitted to Holland since his arrival in
  Russia.
2 Letter of 28th November 1812 to J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 232.
  Letter of 28th November 1812 to Guryev, St.Petersburg, Axxvm, 237.
  Letter of 17th/29 January 1813 fromJ.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  It was not until 16th March 1813 that Guryev wrote to say that he recognized the
  duty to repay the cf 800,000 furnished in bonds; repayment, plus interest, was
  effected in twelve monthly instalments. Hope's connexions in England were of great
  value in this matter for, thanks to the English subsidies, it suited the Russian
  government to pay through Harman & Co.
  Grootboek 1814: Russian Crown, 19.
3 Prince Dolgorukov was reported to be particularly concerned about the Dutch
  prisoners of war. As mentioned in note 2 on page 232, Prince Dolgorukov had been
  his country's envoy to the Kingdom of Holland until 1810. Among the persons about
  whom Sillem was asked to enquire were Von Kretschmar, Joseph Charles Ie Bas,
  Charles Augustin Ie Bas, Morard de Galles, Joachim Rendorp, Colonel Wagner,
  Dc Pontecoulant and De Noinville. In July 1813, Sillem wrote to say that the

                                          61 9
                               NOTES PAGES         255-257
  correspondence concerning prisoners of war could better be entrusted to a Russian
  house because difficulty with the language hampered his contacts with the war and
  police departments.
4 British and Foreign State Papers, edited by the Librarian of the Foreign Office, I
  (London, 1838),58,63.

    PAGE 256

I O. Karmin, 'Autour des m:gociations financieres Anglo-Prusso-Russes de 1813,'
  Revue Bistorique de la Revolution et de ['Empire, XI, 1917, 177-197, XII, 1917,24-49,
  216-252.
  C. K. Webster, Theforeignpolicy ofCastlereagh, 1812-1815, I (London, 1931), 133.
  F. de Martens, Supplement au Recueil des Traites, v, 1808-1814 (Gottingen, 1817),
  568-570, 577-579. It was agreed at the Reichenbach Convention that paper money,
  to be known as 'argent federatif,' would be issued to a value of 5 million pounds
  sterling. Half of this sum was to be repaid by England, 2/6th by Russia and 1 16th by
  Prussia. Ofthe 5 million pounds, Russia would receive two-thirds and Prussia
  one-third. Grave doubts concerning the abIlity of Russia and Prussia to repay this
  money, coupled with the insistence of the Prussian statesman Von Stein that
  England alone should guarantee the paper money (something which that country
  was unwilling to do), resulted in the 'argent federatif' plan being dropped. Instead,
  England, in the supplementary convention of 30th September 18 I 2, undertook to
  payout half of the original sum, i.e. 21- million pounds sterling. This took the form
  of bills of credit which could later be exchanged for inscribed stock payable in cash,
  plus 6 %interest. Two-thirds of the bills went to Russia and one-third to Prussia.
  Memoir of the Public Life of the Right Bon. John Charles Berries, in the reigns of
  George Ill, George IV, William IVand Victoria, by his son Edward Berries, C.B., I
  (London, 1880),88.
2 Letters of 26th November and 31st December 1812 to J.Hope, London.
  Letters of 28th November 1812, and 9th January, 20th March, 1st June and 12th
  June 1813 to J. Sillem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 232, 270, 332, 362, 365.
  Letter of 17th January 1813 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to A.v.d. Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 17th January 1813 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to A.v.d. Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 12th June 1813 to J. Sillem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 365.
4 Letter of 22nd June to Baron Voute, Paris, A XXVIII, 372.
5 Letters of 4th and 14th August 1813 from Von Stackelberg, Vienna, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
6 Letters of 26th August and 9th September 1813 to Von Stackelberg, Vienna,
  A XXVIII,4II, 412.

    PAGE 257

I Letter of loth November 1813 from Von Stackelberg, Vienna, to Hope &Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of I Ith November 1813 from Von Stackelberg, Vienna, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Frankfurt.
21St November 1813: Confidential report by the prefect of the Zuyderzee departement
  to the minister for home affairs. H.T.Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, VI (The Hague,



                                          620
                              NOTES PAGES        257-259
   1911),478-479. The Rothschilds had been similarly watched by the French secret
  police in 1812, because they were suspected of having connexions with a relative,
   Nathan Mayer Rothschild, in London; Mollien, however, had protected them.
  E.C.Conte Corti, Der Au/stieg des Hauses Rothschild (Leipzig, 1927), 13 I -132. After
  Holland had been liberated, Labouchere, in company with Bethmann, made efforts
  to persuade the new government of the Netherlands to adopt a conciliatory policy
  which would include allowing those who had served Napoleon to continue in office
  and, if possible, reaching a compromise with the emperor himself. These semi-
  diplomatic attempts at mediation aroused the same sort of irritation and suspicion
  in the agent of the future King William I, Hans von Gagern - who had discussed the
  matter with Labouchere and Bethmann in Frankfurt in late November and early
  December 1813-as they had aroused inDe Celles a month earlier.H.T.Colenbrander,
  Gedenkstukken, VI, 1981; Gedenkstukken, VII (The Hague, 1914),371, 38S.
3 Letter of 23rd November IS13 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to Von
  Stackelberg, Vienna.
  Letter of 1st December 1813 from Von Stackelberg, Vienna, to P.C.LabouchCre,
  Frankfurt.
  Letter of loth December 1813 from P.C.Labouchere, Mannheim, to Von
  Stackelberg, Vienna.
  Letter of 15th March IS14 to A.Baring, London. Sillem was somewhat surprised by
  the unexpected draft.
  Letter of 4th/16th November IS13 from J. Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 258

I Waliszewski, Regne d'Alexandre ler, II, 203.
  Letter of 13th November 1813 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to Guryev,
  St.Petersburg.
  Letter of 15th November 1813 from P.C.Labouchere, Frankfurt, to J.Sillem,
  St.Petersburg.
  Letter of 2Sth November IS13 from P.C.LabouchCre, Mannheim, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Napoleon had also stayed with Bethmann in ISI3.
  Conte Corti, Au/stieg Rothschild, 453.
2 Letter of 15th January 1814 to Guryev, St. Petersburg, A XXVIII, 454.
  Letter of 1st January ISI4 to J.Sillem, SLPetersburg, A XXVIII, 452.
3 Letter of 25th March IS14 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 259

1 Letter of7/19th February IS14 from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of I Ith February IS14 from M.v. Bethmann, Frankfurt, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 25th March 1814 from J. Sillem, SLPetersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 18th March 1814 from De Gervais, Amsterdam, to P.C.LabouchCre,
  London.
  Karmin, •Autour des m:gociations,' 251-252. De Gervais was to work under the


                                         621
                              NOTES PAGES 259-261

  supervision of Nesselrode. Under Article 4 of the supplementary convention of 30th
  September 1813, the Russian and Prussian representatives were made responsible for
  ensuring that the credit of their respective countries was not harmed by the issue of
  the bills of credit. Prussia sent the well-known classicist and historian Barthold
  Niebuhr to Amsterdam as its representative. He had tried unsuccessfully to negotiate
  a loan for Prussia with Hope & Co. in 1808, and since then had demonstrated a clear
  dislike of the Company, and especially ofP.C.Labouchere.
2 Letter of 24th February 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to De Gervais,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 25th February 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 26th February 1814 to J. Sillem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 478.
3 Letter of 22nd February 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 260

I Letter of 25th February 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 4th March 1814 to D.Berck and N.A.Entrop Muller, Amsterdam,
  A XXVIII, 481.
2 Letter of22nd February 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 23rd February 1814 from S.P.Labouchere, Rotterdam, to A.v.d. Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 24th February 1814 from S.P.Labouchere, Rotterdam, to A.v.d. Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of I2th March 1814 to De Gervais, Amsterdam, A XXVIII, 489.
  Letter of 1st March 1814 to Bethmann Bros., Frankfurt, A XXVIII, 481.
5 Memoir Herries, 85.
  Letter of lOth/IIth March 1814 fromP.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 261

I Letter of 7th/8th March 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  After 1807 the Mint in Utrecht became the official Mint. Enno van Gelder, De
  Nederlandse Munten, 165, 167.
2 Letter of7th/8th March 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letters concerning purchases of money: of 28th February, 4th, 8th, I2th, 18th and
  24th March, 1st, 4th, 9th and 20 th April 1814 to De Gervais, Amsterdam,
  A xxvrn, 480, 483, 486, 489, 491, 493, 494, 495, 496-498, 507; of 12th May 1814 to
  De Gervais, Paris, A XXVIII, 519.
4 Letter of 25th February 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Letter of 7th March 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to D.Voombergh,
  Amsterdam. Labouchere felt that the machinations of the speculators could be
  brought to an end by making it compulsory to produce the covering bond when
  making a payment in matured vouchers.

                                         622
                               NOTES PAGES         262-264
    PAGE 262

  Letters of 25th March, and 5th April 1814 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 18th March 1814 from De Gervais, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  London.
  Letter of 1st April 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 23rd April 1814 to J. Sillem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 509.
2 Letter of 9th April 1814 from De Gervais, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th April 1814 to De Gervais, Amsterdam, A XXVIII, 498.
  Letter of 12th April 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Memoir Herries, 87, 89. Conte Corti, Au/stieg Rothschild, 139-140.
3 Letters of 22nd March and 5th April 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 263

I Letter of 29th April 18 I 4 to De Gervais, Amsterdam, A XXVIII,S I 5.
  Letter of7th May 1814 to J.SiIlem, St. Petersburg, A XXVIII, 517.
  Letter of 26th April 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Memoir Herries, 89, 237.
2 Ibid., 238, 239.
3 Letter of 17th May 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to De Gervais, Paris.
  Letter of 17th May 1814 from De Gervais, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Paris.
  Memoir Herries, 90, 240.

    PAGE 264

I Letter of 19th June 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Nesselrode(?)
  Letter from G. Harrison, Secretary to the Treasury, to William Hamilton, Under-
  Secretary of Foreign Affairs, in reply to Count Nesselrode's note of 14th May 1814.
  Although this letter is only a reply to a note from Nesse1rode, Harrison requests
  Hamilton to make Its contents known to Castlereagh, who had passed notes from
  both the Russian and Prussian governments to the Lords Commissioners. We may
  assume that the notes from the governments were almost identical. It is scarcely
  conceivable that the Lords Commissioners would have agreed to general measures
  relating to the bills of credit of the Russian and Prussian requests had differed
  widely. Memoir Herries, 92, 240.
2 The documents ratifying the peace treaty were exchanged prior to 15th June, and
  thus redemption of the bills of credit would have had to commence on 15th July at
  the latest. Letter of 7th June 1814 from De Gervais,
  Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere, London.
3 Letters of 31st May and 7th June 1814 from De Gervais, Amsterdam, to
  P.C.Labouchere, London. De Gervais announced in a Frankfurt journal that,
  during a period of two months, facilities would be provided in Berlin and
  Konigsberg whereby the assignats could either be exchanged for payment orders on
  the Russian Treasury, or for the first one-third in cash at the rate of 29 Prussian
  talers to 100 roubles or for 2-month drafts on London; for the second one-third in
  9-month, 7 %bonds in Prussian talers at the rate of 30 talers to 100 roubles; and for

                                          62 3
                                 NOTES PAGES        264-267

    the final one-third in similar bonds with a life of 18 months and bearing interest at
    7 %. Assignats in circulation in Germany were not allowed to be sent to Russia, lest
    this caused a further decline in the value of the rouble. Memoir Herries, 95. The low
    rate of exchange of the rouble produced such a demand for drafts on London that
    the exchange rate of the rouble there was adversely affected.

    PAGE 265

I Letters of7th, loth and 14th June 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 17th June 18 I 4 from De Gervais, Amsterdam, to P .C.Labouchere, London.
  Herries, representing the British Treasury, subsequently took over the agreement
  between Rothschild and the Russian government providing for accelerated payment
  of the first six monthly instalments, and also a second transaction relating to the last
  eight instalments. The assignment brought the British government a sizeable financial
  advantage, but we may assume that Rothschild also fared well. Memoir Herries, 93.
  R. Ehrenburg, Grosse Vermogen, ihre Entstehung und ihre Bedeutung (Jena, 1902),65.
  Conte Corti, Au/stieg Rothschild, 151-152.
3 Letters of 26th and 28th July 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 8th October 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to A.v.d. Hoop, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 22nd October 1814 to J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, A XXVIII, 583.

    PAGE 266

I Letter of23rdJuly 1814fromDe Gervais, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 25th July 1814 from Sir Geo. Burgmann, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. This concerned the monthly instalment due on 15th January 18 I 5. This
  was paid through Rothschild.
  Letter of 13th December 1814 to Salomon Mayer Rothschild, Amsterdam,
  A XXVIII, 616.
  Letter of 17th December 1814 to De Gervais, Berlin, A XXVIII, 617.
2 Letter of 26th July 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Labouchere's disappointment over the cf 500,000 advance is understandable.
  However, during their meeting in Paris in May, De Gervais had made it clear that he
  did not intend to repay this advance with bills of credit.
  Letter of 17th May 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 22nd October 1814 to J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, A XXVIII, 583.
4 Letter of 27th December 18 I 2/8th January 1813 from J .Sillem, St.Petersburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
5 Letters of 17th/29th June, 22nd JulY/3rd August and 9th/21st September 1813 from
  J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam. Sillem sold a further 300 raven-
  ducks in September 1813, but apart from these the market was totally dead.
6 Letter of 4/16th November 1813 fromJ.sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 267

    Letters of 18th FebruarY/2nd March and loth/22nd April 1814 from J.Sillem,
    St.Petersburg, to P.C.Labouchere, London. During Sillem's absence, his brother,
    Johann, took charge of affairs.
                               NOTES PAGES 267-269

2 Letter of 21St April/3rd May 1814 from J.SilIem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 24th May 18 I 4 from J .SilIem, Altona, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 7th and loth June 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of I 3th June 18 I 4 from De Gervais, Amsterdam, to P .C.Labouchere, London.
3 Letters of 14th and 21st June 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. On 19th June, Labouchere had a meeting with Nesselrode, who
  repeated his assurance that the Dutch investors could fully rely upon the loyalty of
  the czar. Guryev had said something similar to Sillem, but he had not elaborated on
  this.
  Concerning the festivities in London: H. Nicholson, The Congress of Vienna, a study
  in allied unity 1812-1822 (New York, 1946), 113-116.

    PAGE 268

I Letter of 5th July 1814 to Guryev, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 540. To meet the czar's
  expenses during his stay in Holland, Hope & Co. advanced 6,000 ducats at cf 5.14
  to the ducat. Grootboek 1814: Russian Crown, 19. Renier, Great Britain, 198.
2 Letter of I Ith July 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 H.T.Colenbrander, Ontstaan der Grondwet, II (RGP, Kleine Serie 7, The Hague,
  1909),32-33.
  Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, VII, 62, 79-82, 85-87,90, 16I.
  H.T.Colenbrander, Vestiging van het Koninkrijk, 1813-1815 (Amsterdam, 1927),
  178- 182,186.
  Renier, Great Britain, 260, 261, 295. The question of interest payments by Russia
  had arisen in negotiations between the allies prior to the first Peace of Paris
  (Cf. page 248). Russia had made it a condition of her signature to the treaty of
  Chaumont (9th March 1814), under which the allies entered into a 20-year pact to
  oppose France, that England and Holland should assume responsibility for her debt
  in Holland. Castiereagh had then rejected the ultimatum. Under the final clause of
  the protocol of 2 I st June 18 I 4, Nesselrode could press the claim.
4 Letter of 1st August 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Rotterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 4th/14th September 1814 from J.SilIem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 15th October 1814 to J. SilIem, St.Petersburg, A XXVIII, 579.

    PAGE   269
I Letter of 25th September/7th October 1814 fromJ. SilIem, St.Petersburg, to
  R.Melvil, Amsterdam. The deal concerned P.S.F. iron from Yakovlev. Michailov
  offered 40,000 roubles in cash and the balance in proportion to the deliveries of the
  iron, spread over 7 months and with interest at t %per month.
  Letter of 8th/ 18th November 18 I 4 to the widow of W.Borski, Matthiessen & Sillem
  and Bethmann Bros., A XXVIII, 605. The market revived following the sale of the
  200,000 poods of iron. Sillem put this down to commercial jealousy. A more
  probable explanation is that others also commenced to speculate on a resumption
  of trade with America in the next shipping season.
26th/18th November 1814: Purchase and Sale Accounts ofSchliisser & Co.,

                                          62 5
                                NOTES PAGES 269-270

  St.Petersburg, covering 2,950 pieces of raven-duck at Ro. 36 and 500 pieces of
  Flemish linen at Ro. 45t. 12th/24th November: Sale Account of Cramer Bros.,
  St.Petersburg, covering 1,930 pieces of raven-duck, of which 1,830 were sold at Ro. 36
  and 100 at Ro. 34 (owing to deterioration of quality). 13th/25th November 1814: Sale
  Account of N.D.Bothlingk, covering 1,5 I 6 pieces of Flemish linen at RO.45t and
  1,904 pieces of raven-duck at Ro. 36.
3 The purchasing costs of 238,000 poods of Yakovlev's P.S.F. iron, 9,725 poods of
  Demidov's iron and 1,428 poods of copper totalled cf 395,51 8, converted at a rate of
  17 stuivers to the rouble. The selling price, after deducting costs, was cf 403,223, based
  on the fixed rate of lOt stuivers to the rouble. Ignoring the loss of interest, the profit
  was thus 2 %. The raven-duck and the Flemish linen had in 1809 together cost
  cf 135,116, based on a rate of 17 stuivers. In 1814, at a rate of 10 stuivers, they fetched
  cf 159,078, after deducting costs. The profit on these, ignoring loss of interest, was
  therefore 20 %.

    PAGE 270

I Letters of 15th and 25th October 1814 to J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, A XXVID, 579, 589.
  Letter of 27th October/8th November 1814 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam. The cf 800,000 was furnished in the form of a letter of credit from
  Salomon Mayer Rothschild on Braunsberg & Co. of Amsterdam. This was made out
  in favour of Guryev and transferred by his endorsement to Hope & Co. 30th
  December 1814: Acknowledgement of receipt of cf 800,000 from Braunsberg & Co.
  Sillem received letters of introduction to 12 houses, namely Meyer & Bruxner,
  Colombi Zea & Co., Livio Bros. & Co., Amburger & Son, Stieglitz & Co.,
  Ph.Stieglitz, Bagge & Co., Blessig & Co., J.A.Krehmer and Messrs.J.Krause;
  J.D.Drachenhauer & Co. and B.J.Zuckerbacker Klein & Co., in Riga were the only
  houses outside St. Petersburg Sillem characterized a number of these houses:
  J A.Krehmer bit off more than it could chew, and would have lost heavily in 1814;
  Ph. Stieglitz was not a businessman, and had no opportunity to do anything abroad;
  Zuckerbacker Klein & Co. had been successful in recent years and was worth
  retaining by reason of the honesty, energy and intelligence of the manager; but it was
  necessary to keep a tight rein on the house because the partners still had the
  unfortunate habit of exceeding their capacity. Letter of 25th October 1814 to
  J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, A xxvm, 589.
  Letter of loth/22nd November 1814 from J.Sillem, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Hope informed Sillem that there was little demand for linen goods in
  Holland, but that prices were high on account of the small stocks. Little linseed was
  being sold, but not much was arriving either. Significant quantities of copper had
  been sold to Belgium, Germany and France during 1814, but strong competition
  from the Hamburg market adversely influenced sales in Amsterdam. The broker
  whom the Company employed in this sector was not particularly active, and for a
  commodity such as copper, which was not sold every day, this was a considerable
  handicap. Letters of 25th October and 1st November 1814 to J.Sillem, St. Petersburg,
   A xxvm, 589, 596.
2 Letters of 14th and 20th October 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Bordeaux and Nantes,
  to A.v.d.Hoop, Amsterdam.
   Letter of 15th October 1814 to J.Sillem, St. Petersburg, A xxvm, 579.
3 Renier, Great Britain, 297. Colenbrander, Vestiging,209-213.
                               NOTES PAGES 272-273

  PAGE 272

I Renier, ibid., 29S. Colenbrander, ibid., 213.
2 Letter of 2Sth April ISIS from P.F.Lestapis, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  London.
  Letter of 4th May ISIS from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Count Lieven, London. In
  their calculation of 15th April ISIS, the partners put the balance ofthe principal sum
  at cf S4,300,000. In fact, 2000 bonds out of the total of SS,300 had been redeemed in
  IS03 and a further 2,700 in the years lSI I and IS12, so that S3,600 remained. In
  calculating the principal sum, Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschulden, 11,673, took
  no account of the redemption of 2,000 bonds in IS03.
3 Letter of 9th May ISIS from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 16th May ISIS from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 At this time Talleyrand, who was in Vienna, kept Labouchere informed about
  political developments. His letters contain no reference to the unreliability of the
  Belgians.
  Letters of 6th, 9th and 23rd April ISIS from Talleyrand, VIenna, to P.C.Labouchen
  London.
  Letter of 31st March ISIS from P.C.Labouchere, London, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 273

  Letter of 13th/25th June ISIS from Count Lieven, London, to P.C.Labouchere,
  London.
  Early in ISI6, 2 million francs were remitted to Hope from Paris by Rothschild and
  Gontard; a further 21; million francs followed in the second half of the year. From
  these funds, two drafts each of cf 456,250 were issued for the dowry of the Grand
  Duchess Anna Paulowna, who married the Crown Prince in I SI 6.
  According to the marriage contract of ISIS, the grand duchess received a gift of I
  million roubles (N.Japikse, De geschiedenis van het Huis Oranje-Nassau, II, The
  Hague, 1945, 164). Observing that the rate of exchange of the rouble was then about
  10 stuivers, the sum remitted was nearly twice that referred to in the marriage
  contract. Letters of 24th JanuarY/5th February, 6th/1 Sth March, 22nd April/4th May,
  31st May/12th June, 1st/13th July, 5th/17th August and 30th September/12th
  October ISI6 from Guryev, St.Petersburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 2nd, Sth, 15th and 26th March I SI 6 from De Gervais, Paris, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
2 'Avis' dated 9th November ISIS, issued by Hope & Co. Vouchers which had
  matured on 1st January ISI3 participated in a ballot for cf 100,000, those maturing
  on 1st January ISI4 in a ballot for cf75,000, those which had matured on 1st January
  ISIS shared cf 50,000 and those which fell due on 1st January ISI6 shared cf 25,000.
  At the request of a large numner of bondholders, the bonuses were divided into lots of
  cf 1,000 in order that as many holders as possible could benefit. Letter of 13th
  November ISIS from A.Brinkman, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Stamp duty on the IS,OOO new bonds was limited to 9tstuivers. The 'Conseiller de
  College,' Perovsky, visited Amsterdam, for the purpose of countersigning the bonds.
  Because they were given in the form of bonds, the bonuses served to increase
  Russia's debt to cf 10 I ,600,000. The sums of interest capitalized were:
                                NOTES PAGES 273-274

    Over 1812 at 5%cf 4,104,000 interest on interest from I.1.13 to I.1.16 cf 615,600
    Over 1813 at 5%cf 4,180,000 interest on interest from 1.1.14 to 1.I.16cf 418,000
    Oven 814 at 5 %cf 4,180,000 interest on interestfrom I.I.15 to I.I.16cf 209,000
    Over 1815 at 5 % cf 4, I 80,000 interest on interest                   cf
                                                                              ---:--
                    cf 16,644,000                                           cf 1,242,600
                                                                              ---
                    Total to be converted plus bonus        cf 17,886,600
                                                            cf 250,000
                                                            cf 18,136,600

  Of this sum, cf 18,000,000 was met by the issue of 18,000 new bonds. The Russian
  Court also had at its disposal 1,307 bonds which, with interest on interest, arrears of
  interest and two bonuses, were worth cf 1,576,135. (The ballot on 1St June 181 I had
  reduced the number to 1,289). After the payment of the balance of cf 136,600 plus
  Hope's commission of 6-!- % on cf 18,000,000, i.e. cf 1,170,000, there remained
  cf 269,535 or 269 bonds plus cf 535. 'Compte General,' enclosed with Hope's letter of
  15th June 1816 to Guryev, St. Petersburg
3 Letter of 11th December 18 I 5 from J. v.d.Poll, C. v.d.Oudermeulen, J.Bondt,
  J.de Budett and J.v.d.Mandele, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 12th December 1815 from A.v.d.Hoop, Amsterdam, to J.v d.Poll, cum suis,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 274

I   Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschulden, II, 872-873.




                                           628
                                    CHAPTER NINE




  PAGE 279
I J. Vicens Vives, An Economic History of Spain (Princeton, 1969),475-476.
2 Ibid., 484, 486,507,547.
  Richard Herr, The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain (Princeton, 1958), I I.
3 Vicens Vives, Economic History, 576-578 Herr, Revolution, 121-122
4 Vicens Vives, Economic History, 585-586 Herr, Revolution, 146.
  Earl J.Hamilton, War and Prices in Spain (Harvard Economic Studies, LXXXXI),
  Cambridge, Mass., 1947,78-79.
  According to Hamilton, a syndicate of Spanish, French and Dutch merchants
  provided funds for an issue of vales. The Hope archives reveal no evidence that the
  Company was concerned in this.

    PAGE 280
  Concerning De Cabarrus as a promulgator of enlightened ideas: Jean Sarrailh,
  L'Espagne eclairee de la seconde moitie du XVIII siecle (Paris, 1954),passim.
  Concerning the Bank of San Carlos: Earl.J.Hamilton, 'The foundation ofthe Bank
  of Spain,' The Journal ofPolitical Economy, LID (1945),101.
2 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12441-719, 12444-796, 12454-592.
  In War and Prices in Spain Hamilton points to loans totalling more than two million
  guilders for Spanish account in Amsterdam in the period 1778-1880 (p. 78). It is
  possible that he was referring to the three canal loans ; but it is also conceivable that
  the reference was to a number of royal 'warrants' decreeing loans which in fact were
  not negotiated.
  Herr, Revolution, 132-133.
  Vicens Vives, Economic History, 515, 586.
3 The loans concerned were furnished by Badin & Co. on 1st March 1770 and 1st
  March 1773. The king of Spain gave a permanent guarantee in respect of the loans
  obtained from Echenique Sanchez & Co.
4 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 12464-558,559.
  The issuing houses received commission of 2 %on interest payments and I %on
  repayments of principal Although the loan was repaid in accordance with the terms,
  a large number of bonds were not tendered by the prescribed date. On 19th May
  1797, Paulus Taay, who was then a manager of Hope & Co., arranged for the official
  cancellation of 434 bonds; at the same time, Hogguer Grand & Co tendered 325
  bonds for cancellation. On 19th May 1801 Hogguer Grand & Co. had a further 79
  bonds cancelled.
                             NOTES PAGES 281-284

  PAGE 281

I E.J.Hamilton, 'The Foundation ofthe Bank of Spain,' 165.
  Grootboek 1783: 225, 352.
2 Grootboek 1789: 38, 304.
  Grootboek 1790: 60.
  Grootboek 1791: 337.
  Grootboek 1792: 81.
3 Labouchere's judgement, as expressed in his instructions to William Gordon
  Coesvelt, 22nd July 1807. W.G.C. I.
4 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 17984--95,96.
  Of the 6,000 bonds, the following numbers were cancelled on the dates shown: 24th
  October 1800: 1,193; 15th July 1801: 601; 4th March 1802: 592; 8th December 1802:
  500; 9th March 1803: 89; 7th October 1803: 16; 7th December 1803: 2; 5th January
  1804: 499; 8th February 1804: 63; 9th April 1804: 21; 18th July 1804: 4; 28th
  September 1804: I; 5th October 1804: I; 21st November 1804: 41 I; 6th December
  1804: 85; 4th January 1805: 38; 8th February 1805: 36; 4th April 1805: 18; 8th
  August 1805: 7; 15th October 1805: 3; 4th November 1805: 2; 21st November 1805:
  427; loth January 1806: 67.

  PAGE 282

I Letter from P.C.Labouchere to W.G.Coesvelt. W.G.C. I.
  R.Altamira, A History of Spain (New York, 1949), 514. Herr, Revolution, 286-287.
2 Herr, Revolution, 310, 314, 317, 323, 335.
  Altamira, History of Spain, 5 I 5.
3 Vicens Vives, Economic History, 586-587.
  Hamilton, War and Prices, 85.

  PAGE 283

I Letters of 13th January, 3rd, 20th February, 6th, 17th March, 26th May, 20th
  October 1798 from H.A.lnsinger, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., London.
2 J A.Sillem, Het leven van Mr.lohan Valckenaer, II (Amsterdam, 1876), 143, 144.
  Letter from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.G.Coesvelt, W.G.C. I.
3 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18001-285,286. Five drafts on the Mexican Treasury,
  totalling 1,319,000 piastres, were to be given as additional security.
4 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18007-103, 104.
5 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18009-375,376. Additional security was provided in
  the form of drafts on the Mexican Treasury totalling 1,319,000 piastres.

  PAGE 284

I G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18012-385, 386. Five drafts on the Mexican Treasury,
  totalling 1,800,000 piastres, were given as additional security.
  Letter of 22nd July 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.G.Coesvelt,
  W.G.C.I.
2 Letter of 22nd July 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Paris, W.G.c. I.
3 A.Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, 1799-1808, I (paris, 1930), 197-245.
4 Letter of 22nd July 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.G.Coesvelt,
  W.G.C.I.
                               NOTES PAGES        284-287

  Letter of 4th March 1803 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Sir F.Baring,
  London.
  Letter of 2nd August 1804 to the Marquis de la Colon ilia, Paris, A II, 308.
5 Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, 1,283.

  PAGE 285

I G.J.Ouvrard, Memoires sur sa vie et ses diverses operationsjinancieres (Paris, 1826),
  75·
  Arthur Levy, Un grand projiteur de guerre sous la Revolution, I'Empire et la
  Restauration; G.J.Ouvrard(Paris, 1929),94. Georges Weill, 'Le financier Ouvrard,'
  Revue Historique, XLIII, 127 (Paris, 1918),38.
  Otto Wolff, Die Geschiifte des Herrn Ouvrard(Frankfurt am Main, 1932), 104.
  The majority of authors of works concerning Ouvrard have drawn on his memoirs for
  material. These memoirs are unreliable in terms of both facts and figures. An
  example of this is given in the text.
2 Gabriel Ramon, Histoire de la Banque de France (Paris, 1929),58.
  A.Thiers, Histoire du Consulat et de l'Empire, I (Brussels, 1845), 13-14; II (Brussels,
  1846),8-9.
  Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, I, 284.
3 Wolff, Geschiifte OW'rard, 105.
  Ouvrard, Memoires, 78.
  Thiers, Histoire du Consulat, I, 13.
  Weill, 'Le financier Ouvrard,' 38.
4 Ibid., 33.
  Wolff, Geschiijie Ouvrard, 64-76.

  PAGE 286

I Arthur Levy, Un grand projiteur, 82-83.
2 L.de Lanzac Laborie, Le monde des affaires et du travail (Paris, 1910), 14-15.
3 Manger, Recherches, 128, 130, 132.
4 Van Winter, Aandeel, II, 386.
  Letters of 18th May, IstJune, 2nd, 30th July, 17th, 31st August, 14th September 1804
  from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letters of 15th March, 5th, 19th July, 26th, 30th August, 13th September 1804 to
  Baguenault & Co., Paris, A II, 134,261,289,330,353,377.

  PAGE 287

I Letter of 2nd August 1804 to Desprez, Paris, A II, 307.
2 Letters of loth and 24th August 1804 from A.Baguenault & Co., Paris, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 19th July 1804 to Baguenault, Paris, A II, 289.
3 'Cedule Royale' issued by the King of Spain and his Council on 6th June 1804.
4 Letters of roth and 24th May 1804 to the Marquis de la Colonilla, Paris, A II, 200,
  218.
5 Letter of 2nd July 1804 to the Marquis de la Colonilla, Paris, A II, 252.
  Letter of 28th July 1804 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to A.Baring, London.
                               NOTES PAGES 288-292

    PAGE 288

  Letters of2oth and 27th August, 17th and 24th September 1804 to the Marquis de la
  Colonilla, Paris, An, 308, 338, 351, 385, 395.
  Letters of 8th, 15th, 22nd and 25th October, 15th and 29th November 1804, and
  4th March 1805 to the Marquis de la Colonilla, Paris, An,414,420, 428, 437, 474, 493,
  564. Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, 1,316-317.
2 Ibid., n, 9-10.
  Wolff, Geschiifte Ouvrard, 110, 114.
  Thiers, Histoire du Consulat, n, 12.
3 Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, n, 10-11.
  Wolff, Geschiifte Ouvrard, 115.

    PAGE 289

I Ibid., Dokumente, n and ill, p. 302. In Ouvrard's memoires it is made to appear tha(a
  covenant was entered into directly with the king on 26th November 1804 (Wolff,
  115-1 17). The Hope archives contain a copy of an agreement between Espinosa and
  Franc;ois Ouvrard, the terms of which differ widely from those of the covenant with
  the king, as quoted by Ouvrard. The latter refers only to a commission of I %on
  shipments of gold and silver. Only with the conclusion of the supplementary
  covenant on 4th December 1804 (of which Hope's version and the one in Ouvrard's
  memoirs are almost identical) were commissions for commercial transactions laid
  down. It appears more likely that Charles IV confirmed the monopoly granted to
  Franc;ois Ouvrard & Co. in a decree, but had the actual partnership agreement
  between Ouvrard and Espinosa drawn up separately. According to the Hope version
  ofthe text ofthe covenant of 26th November, Franc;ois Ouvrard & Co. were obliged
  to pay import and export duties to the Spanish Treasury (Art. 18).
2 Stuart Weems Bruchey, Robert Oliver, Merchant ofBaltimore, 1783-1819 (The John
  Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political Science; Series LXXIV, No. I,
  Baltimore, 1956),263.
  Vicens Vives, Economic History, 580.
3 Ouvrard, Memoires, n, 338-342.
  4th December 1804: supplementary articles relating to the covenant of 26th
  November 1804, which concerned trade with the colonies ruled by the Spanish king.

    PAGE 290

I Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, n, 11-12.
  Lanzac de Laborie, Monde, 200.
2 Fugier, Napoleon et l' Espagne, n, 15.
  Ouvrard, Memoires, 108-109.
3 Letter of 4th March 1805 to Hottinguer, Paris, A n, 570.
  Letter of 4th March 1805 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, An, 571.
4 Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, 1,265-267.

    PAGE 291

    Letter of 4th March 1805 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, An, 571.

    PAGE 292

    Ouvrard, Memoires, 113.
                              NOTES PAGES 292-294

  Letter of 14th February 180S to Desprez, Paris.
  Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 79-80. Nolte asserts in his memoirs that he heard the story from
  the lips of Lab ouchere. Our story makes it abundantly clear that Labouchere was
  completely au fait with the situation when Ouvrard arrived, and had already laid the
  foundations for the transaction. Nolte's manuscript dates from round about 18so,
  which was 4S years later. It is conceivable that, wittingly or unwittingly, he
  borrowed the story from Ouvrard's memoirs.

  PAGE 293

16th May 180S. Agreement between Hope & Co. of Amsterdam and Fran<;:ois
  Ouvrard & Co. of Bordeaux (the latter represented by Fran<;:ois Ouvrard, who was
  at that moment in Amsterdam) relating to trade with the Spanish colonies.
  Letter of 22nd July 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.G.Coesvelt.
  During Ouvrard's stay in Amsterdam, Hope & Co. held exploratory discussions
  with persons who were being considered for the post of agent. The name of Parish
  already appeared in the supplementary agreement with Auguste Ouvrard dated 6th
  May 180S.
2 13th September 180S. Elaboration of Article 7 ofthe contract dated 6th May 180S.
  Cop. vr-fa-8s.
3 This ensued from Article 8 of the agreement of 6th May 180S. Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre,
  80, states that the commission on the piastres was S %; this is incorrect.

  PAGE 294

1 Letter of 22nd July 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.G.Coesvelt.
26th May I 80S. Agreement between Hope & Co. and Fran<;:ois Ouvrard & Co. In this
  it was stipulated that David Parish should receive a 'commission de gestion' equal
  to IS %ofthe sum of the nett profit on the Hope-Ouvrard account. Parish must
  therefore have formally accepted the post of general agent by 6th May.
3 Three letters from F. Ouvrard & Co., Amsterdam to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Matters centred around 2S9 drafts on Don Lorenzo Angulo y Guardamino of
  Mexico, totalling 1,939,003 piastres. These had been received from Gardoqui
  Neveux & Co. of Madrid and were payable in Vera Cruz to the order of Don Manuel
  Sixto Espinosa, whose blank endorsement they bore.
  On 8th May 180S Hope & Co. received from Fran<;:ois Ouvrard & Co. duplicate
  copies ofthe orders relating to trade with the Spanish colonies which the Spanish
  Court had issued to the Viceroy, the Governor and the Captain General of New
  Spain; the Viceroy, the Governor and the Captain General of Cuba; the Governor,
  the Captain General and the Intendant ofthe province of Venezuela; the Captain
  General and the Intendant of Buenos Aires; and the Spanish envoy to the United
  States.
                                  CHAPTER TEN




  PAGE 295
I Letters of loth and 11th May 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Sir
  Francis Baring, London.
  also: Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 274-275.
  Philip G. Walters and Raymond Walters Jr., 'The American Career of David
  Parish,' The Journal o/Economic History, IV, 1944, 151, note 4.
2 Supra, 294, note 2.

    PAGE 296

I Supra, 294, note 2.
  Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 276.
2 Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 87-88.
  Letters of 20th and 29th May 1805 from F. Ouvrard & Co., Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th May 1805 from D. Parish, Antwerp, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
3 Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 90, 113.
  Letter of 7th May 1805 from F. Ouvrard & Co., Amsterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 40, 44, 45.
  Letter of 27th May 1805 from D. Parish, Antwerp to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
5 Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 90.
  Letter of loth June 1805 from D. Parish, Antwerp, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 26th June 1805 from F. Ouvrard & Co., Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 22nd June 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to A.Baring, London.
  Labouchere made it appear to Alexander Baring that Nolte was travelling to
  America on behalf of his brother's firm, Trotreau & Labouchere of Nantes.
  However, Baring was informed of Parish's 'general superintendence' when the latter
  crossed to England late in September.
  Letter of 18th September 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to A.Baring,
  London.

    PAGE 297

I Letters of 17th and 20th May, 4th, 14th, 18th and 26th June 1805 from F.Ouvrard &
  Co., Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 26th June and 12th July 1805 from F. Ouvrard &Co., Paris, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
                                 NOTES PAGES     295-302
3 Letter of 9th July 1805 from Walter Boyd, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 15th July 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.Boyd, Paris.

    PAGE 298

I Letters of 16th, 20th and 31st August 1805 from W.Boyd, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 1st August 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.Boyd, Paris.
2 Letters of 1st August 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to W.Boyd, Paris,
  and of 7th, 8th and 9th October 1805 to J.Ouvrard, Madrid, A IV, 2 I, 34.
3 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18022-482.
  Translation from the Spanish of a royal patent issued by the King of Spain and the
  Gentlemen ofthe Council.
  Letter of 4th October 1805 to Miguel Cajetano Soler, Minister of Finance and of the
  Indies, Madrid, A IV, 3.
  Letter of 4th October 1805 to Manuel Sixto Espinosa, Director of the Real Caja de
  Consolidacion de Vales, Madrid, A IV, 7.
4 Letter of 4th November 1805 toJ.Ouvrard, Madrid, A IV, 68.
  Letter of 4th November 1805 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 62.

    PAGE 300

I Letter of 1St October 1805 from W.Boyd, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 4th October 1805 to W.Boyd, Paris, A IV, 17. Both the 'plan' for the loan
  and the advertisement held out a prospect that bonds of the Croese conversion loan
  which had matured on 1st September would be accepted as payment up to a total of
  600,000 guilders; 4~ % bonds of the Hope loan of 1793, which had matured on 1St
  November 1806, up to a total of 600,000 guilders; and the remaining bonds of this
  loan, which were due for redemption on 1St November 1807, also up to a total of
  600,000 guilders.
  Letter of 4th November 1806 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 62.
3 Letters of 8/9th October and 4th November 1805 to Julien Ouvrard, Madrid, A IV,
  34,68.
  Letters of I !th, 27th October 1805 from Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 17th, 28th October, 4th November (three letters) 1805 to Vanlerberghe &
  Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 45, 53, 59, 62, 66.
  Letters of 28th, 31st October 1805 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 56, 58.
4 Letters of7th October 1805 to Julien Ouvrard, Madrid, (two letters) A IV, 31, 32.

    PAGE 301

I Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 15.
2 Ibid., 16.
  Ramon, Histoire de la Banque de France, 66.
3 Fugier, Napoleon etl'Espagne, II, 17.
4 Comte Mollien, Memoires d'un ministre du Tresor Public, 1780-1815, I (Paris, 1898),
  410.

    PAGE 302

I   Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 18.
                             NOTES PAGES 302-305

2 Letter of 27th October 1805 from Barbe Marbois, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th October 1805 from Desprez, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 4th November 1805 to Desprez, Paris, A IV, 60.
  Letter of 4th November 1805 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A IV, 99.
  Letters of 20th, 23rd November 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 303

I Letter oflate January 1806 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Brothers & Co.,
  London.
2 Letters of 27th and 31st December 1805 from Matthiesen & Sillem, Hamburg, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th December 1805 from J. Osy, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th January 1806 to Barbe Marbois, Paris, A IV, 123.
  Letter oflate January 1806 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Brothers & Co.,
  London.
3 Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 41.
4 Letter of 24th December 1805 from Wed. E.Croese & Co., Amsterdam, to the
  Schepenen of the City of Amsterdam.
  Letter of 30th December 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to H.Croese
  Edm., Madrid.
  Letter of 30th December 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to the Marquis de
  la Colonilla, Madrid.
5 Letters of 4th November 1805 and 24th February 1806 to Baguenault & Co., Paris,
  A IV, 78, 146.
  Letter of 15th November 1805 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 109.
  Letter of 6th December 1805 from Sir F .Baring, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 20th January 1806 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 130. In
  Amsterdam, the wool was valued and sold byWillink &Co., on behalf of Hope &
  Co.

    PAGE 304

I Letter oflate January 1806 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Brothers & Co.,
  London.
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.

    PAGE 305

I Wolff, Geschii/te Ouvrard, 132-134.
  ArthurUvy, Ungrandpro/iteur, 160.
  Ouvrard, Memoires, 129-130.
  Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, 11,21.
2 Ibid.
3 Letter of 14th February 1806 from Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 21st February 1806 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Mollien, Paris.
  Letter of 22nd February 1806 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Auguste
  Ouvrard & Co., Paris.
                               NOTES PAGES       305-309
  Letter of 22nd February I S06 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Auguste Ouvrard &
  Co., Paris.
  Letter of 23rd February IS06 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 140, 145, 147.
  Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 56.

  PAGE 306

I Letter of 22nd February I S06 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Auguste Ouvrard &
  Co., Paris.
  Letter of 22nd February IS06 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to A.Baring,
  London.
2 Letter of 23rd February IS06 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, A IV, 140.
3 Letter of loth March IS06 from P.C.Labouchi:re, Amsterdam, to Mollien, Paris.
  Also: VI fa-S5: 'Offre de Vente.'

  PAGE 307

I Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 52-55.
2 Ibid., 51, 59.
3 Ibid., 55.

  PAGE 30S

I Ibid., 57, 5S.
2 Letter of loth May I S06 from Desprez, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of loth May IS06 from W. Borski, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchi:re,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of loth May IS06 to W.Borski, Amsterdam, A IV, 176.
  Letter of 12th May IS06 from W.Borski, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchi:re,
  Amsterdam.
  Letters of 12th and 19th May IS06 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 177, 191.
  Letter of 12th May IS06 to J. Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, ISS.
  Letter of 2Sth May IS06 from W.Borski, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 309

I Letter of 29th May IS06 to Michel Simons, Amsterdam, A IV, 194.
  Letter of 29th May IS06 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 201.
2 Letter of 30th May IS06 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 203.
  Michel Simons personally declared his willingness to take over 2,000 Spanish bonds
  on the terms accorded to Borski.
  Letter of 9th June IS06 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 304.
  Letter of 16th June IS06 from Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 19th June IS06 to Espinosa, Madrid, A IV, 209.
  Letter of 30th June IS06 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 214.
                                  CHAPTER ELEVEN




    PAGE 311

I Walters and Walters, 'American Career,' 152.
  Note, Fun/zig Jahre, 90, 94.
  Nolte gives the date of Parish's arrival as mid-November 1805. Labouchere,
  however, states that Parish left Dover on 17th November. Letter of 5th December
  1805 to D.Parish, New York, B.I. I. According to Walters, the origin of the rumours
  concerning the piastre operation lay in indiscreet remarks made by Nolte and
  Lestapis. Ouvrard himself had approached American merchants in 1805, and thus
  his plans must have been known prior to the arrival of Hope's agents.
2 Hidy, House 0/ Baring, 19-20,48.
  Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 277-278.
3 Herbert Lasky, in his treatise entitled: 'David Parish: A European in American
  Finance 1806--1816,' (unpublished Ph.d. dissertation, Ann Arbor, Michigan)
  questions whether Parish did in fact sell 3 or 4 licences to Gracie (p. 14, note 2). The
  consignment invoices show that he did indeed do so.

    PAGE 312

I Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 279-282.
  Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 112. Parish had also approached others who were in
  correspondence with Hope, such as Willing & Francis in Philadelphia, and Robert
  Gilmor & Sons and James & Thomas G.Perkins in Boston. James Perkins had
  visited Holland during the summer of 1805 -as had also Nathaniel Amory ofthe
  house of Amory & Callender of New Orleans, in whose name the consignment of
  Silesian linen had been ordered in Hamburg, and to whose address this was shipped,
  to the relief of Matthiessen & Sillem. The willingness ofthe last-named to swear on
  oath that the linen was the bona fide property of Amory & Callender was made
  conditional upon Hope & Co. issuing a positive assurance that this was the case.
  Letters of 1St September 1805 from James Perkins, Rotterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam; 13th September 1805 from James Perkins, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam; loth October 1805 from Nathaniel Amory, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam; 22nd October and 5th November 1805, 1St and 11th April 1806 from
  Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 John Craig died in June 1807. The Olivers continued the shipments, now for their
  own account.
  Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 331.
                                 NOTES PAGES         3II-317

    PAGE 314

I Vide consignment invoices and final accounts in the Hope archives. Bruchey, too,
  points to the random nature ofthe various dues (p. 307). The Olivers informed
  Parish by letter that they were frequently called upon to pay dues amounting to 50 %
  of the proforma invoice value. They did not, however, mention that this figure
  included the commission of6t % on the gross proceeds in Vera Cruz. If the gross
  proceeds were equal to twice the value shown on the pro-forma invoice, the
  percentages, based on the pro-forma invoice, would naturally rise sharply.
2 Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 391-392.
  The Olivers allowed 4,000 dollars for freight charges. As they carried the cargoes in
  their own vessels-fast schooners which were well able to excape from any pursuing
  British warships-the Olivers will have made a substantial profit on the operations.
3 Ibid., 329, 33 I.

    PAGE 315

I   nt % of the nett profit of 334,891 dollars, plus 5 %of the nett value (76,810 dollars)
  = 411,701 dollars.
2 The gross profit on the two final shipments amounted to 181,273 dollars.

    PAGE 316

I Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 31 I. In the case ofa shipment on behalf of Thomas Tenant
  of Baltimore, both the freight charges and the insurance premium for a voyage from
  Barcelona to Baltimore were quoted, thus clearly revealing that the cargo was of
  Spanish origin.
2 The consignment invoice values were as follows: McKim: 203,841 dollars; John
  Craig: 68,099 dollars; Archibald Gracie: 120,089 dollars: Amory & Callender:
  184,181.05 dollars; James Brown: 112,924 dollars; Geo. T.Phillips: 38,882 dollars.
  Total 728,017 dollars. The amounts on the final accounts were: McKim: 424,603
  dollars; John Craig: 151,095 dollars; Archibald Gracie: 245,996 dollars; Amory &
  Callender: 348,766 dollars; James Brown: 176,034 dollars; Geo. T.Phillips:
  73,295 dollars. Total 1,419,790 dollars. The gross profit was thus 690,000 dollars and
  the nett profit, which may be estimated at irds, 460,000 dollars.
  The pro-forma invoices relating to one expedition each by Archibald Gracie and
  John Craig and the four expeditions to Montevideo together totalled 283,357
  dollars. The grand total of the pro-forma invoices was 1,03 I ,374 dollars. Fifteen
  per cent of this sum is 154,760 dollars.
3 Hope & Co. returned a figure of 2,897,440.36 dollars to Auguste Ouvrard and the
  Caja. Documents in the Hope archives, however, show a figure of 2,913,688.3 I
  dollars, a difference of just over t %. In all, Hope's payments to the Caja totalled
  709,400.14 dollars. This sum was included in the balance in Auguste Ouvrard & Co.'s
  account, from whence it was transferred to the general account 'X.' Auguste
  Ouvrard & Co. received 463,000 dollars.
4 Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 314-317.

    PAGE 317

I   Ibid., 304. The house of Matthiessen & Sillem in Hamburg had in 1806 complained
    of an overabundance of European textiles, which depressed the prices of Silesian
    linen. Losses in excess of 27,750 dollars were incurred on two shipments of Silesian
                               NOTES PAGES 317-321

  linen to New Orleans, together valued at 137,000 dollars.
2 Ibid., 306.

    PAGE 318

I Ibid., 287-292. At a nominal exchange rate of 50 stuivers and a discount of 21 %,
  Parish received 39t stuivers for a piastre. The price of 3 frances 75 centimes per
  piastre agreed with the French Treasury was equal to about 36 stuivers, leaving a
  gross profit margin of 3t stuivers per piastre. A discount of 17% gave a gross profit of
  5t stuivers per piastre. Contracts were made with many other houses on the basis of a
  15 % discount, which have a gross profit of 6t stuivers.
2 The shipments concerned were each of 30,000 piastres from New Orleans to
  Liverpool in the vessels 'Joseph' and 'Wilhelm Tell.' The insurers paid 30,000 dollars
  in respect of the 'Joseph's' cargo, and this suggests that the vessel was either
  shipwrecked or captured.

    PAGE 319

I Remittances were occasionally made via Leghorn and Genoa. Some remittances to
  Paris were in the form of gold shipments.
2 Hidy, House ofBaring, 22.
3 Grootboek 1792: 159,268,242.
  Grootboek 1793: 46, 262, 371, 376.
  Grootboek 1794: 170, 194, 196,216,226,298,320.
  Grootboek 1801: 51, 63, 65, 38,40.
4 Grootboek 1802: 27.
  Grootboek 1803: 129, 132, 136.
  Grootboek 1804: II6, 136, 157, 160, 163, 164, 182.
  Grootboekl805: 144, 148, 152, 168, 171, 175, 176,178, 180, 185, 186,187,188, 194,
  195, 196,209.
  Groothoek 1806: 124, 132, 135, 136, 158, 159, 167, 168, 174, 186, 187, 191, 192, 193,
  194,201,202,209,210,211,213,217,219,220,223,225,226,233,243,244·
  Grootboek 1807: II2, II3, II4, II5, II6, II7, II8, II9, 120, 121, 122, 135, 138, 139,
  152,153,161,162,163,164,165,166,167,168, 193, 194,203,206, 207,243,244,25 1,
  252,253,258,259,260,265,266, 267,272.

    PAGE 320

I In 1806 and 1807 Hope & Co. received twice as many consignments as W.&.J.Willink
  and Daniel Crommelin & Sons.
2 Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 298.
3 F.Crouzet, 'Groupes de pression et politique de blocus: remarques sur les origines
  des Ordres en Conseil de novembre 1807,' Revue Historique, 86, CCXXVIII (1962), 49.
  P.Hoekstra, Thirty-Seven Years ofHolland-American Relations, 1803 to 1840 (Grand
  Rapids, N.J., 1916),57.

    PAGE 321

I Letters of 16th and 23rd July 1806 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. I.
2 Letters of 3rd and 25th August 1806 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. I.
3 Letters of3rd and 16th September, 1st, 3rdand 4th October 1806 to D.Parish,
  Philadelphia, D.P. I. According to Labouchere, the tobacco market was a shambles.
                                NOTES PAGES         32I-324

  Numerous consignments had been sacrificed by panic-stricken brokers. It was
  common for consignments to be sold and then to be resold within an hour at a price
  which might be as much as half a stuiver per pound higher or lower. It was thus quite
  impossible to quote any firm prices.
4 Letters of 7th, 18th and 25th October, 3rd and 16th November 1806 to D.Parish,
  Philadelphia, D.P. I.

   PAGE 322

I Hoekstra, Thirty-Seven Years, 44, 46, 47.
  Letters of loth and 27th December 1806 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. I.
2 Letters of 26th February, 9th and 17th March, 12th and 20th April 1807 to D.Parish,
  Philadelphia, D.P. I.
3 Letter of 29th April 1807 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. I.
  Letters of 16th and 19th May, 23rd June, 20th, 25th and 29th July 1807 to D.Parish,
  Philadelphia, D.P. II, VI-ha-35, 37, 44, 49,50, 5l.
4 Letters of 5th, 8th and 21st August 1807 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. II, vI-ha-52,
  53,56.
  E.Channing, A History o/the United States, IV (New York, 1917),370-371.

  PAGE 323

I Hoekstra, Thirty-Seven Years, 51-52.
2 Letters of I Ith and 18th September, 9th, 15th and 24th October, 3rd and 12th
  November 1807 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. II, vI-ha-60-72.
  Hoekstra, Thirty-Seven Years, 52-53.
  Hoekstra quotes reports from the Amsterdam merchant Backer who, in contrast to
  Labouchere, referred in optimistic terms to the sale of American produce.
3 Ibid., 60.
  Channing, History, IV, 376.
  Crouzet, 'Groupes de pression,' 72.
4 Channing, History, IV, 380-381, 399.
  Letters of 29th November 1807 and 8th January 1808 to D.Parish, Philadelphia,
  D.P. II.
  Parish succeeded in obtaining from President Jefferson permits to collect piastres.
  According to Nolte, Gallatin, the Secretary of the Treasury, was involved in the issue
  of these. Parish states in a letter that the President had been influenced by 'my friend
  the genera!.' This officer, however, was not named.
  Nolte, Fiin/zig Jahre, I7l.
  Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 333.
5 Hoekstra, Thirty-Seven Years, 63.
  Letter of 27th February 1808 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. II.
  Grootboek 1808: I28, 132,207,131,135,165, I29, 225, 130, 167, 130, 133, 129, 132,
  168,235,134,198,200,166,1 27,136,152,166,208.
  Grootboek 1809: 123, 165, 168, 173, 180, 181, 191,219,220.
  The turnover on the goods accounts totalled cf 5,651,849 in 1808. In 1809, the figure
  was cf I,475,60l.

  PAGE 324

I Letters of 15th April and I2th May 1808 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, D.P. II.
                               NOTES PAGES         324-327
2 Letters of I5th/22nd September 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Sir
  Francis Baring, London.
3 Letters of 22nd and 25th November 1805 from J.Richards, Amsterdam, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Paris.
  Letter of 23rd November 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 'Investigations.'
  25th November 1805: Memorandum concerning the possibilities for exporting
  piastres from Vera Cruz.
5 Memorandum concerning the Spanish piastres. Copy NO.2 (1st November 1805) and
  copy No. 3.

  PAGE 325

I Letter of 2nd December 1805 from J.Richards, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th December 1805 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter oflate January 1806 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Bros., London.
  Letters of 13th December 1805 and 7th January 1806 from A.Baring, London, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 18th February 1806 from A.Baring, London, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
3 Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 74.
4 Letters of 7th and 15th March, 2nd April, 3rd May 1806 from P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam, to A.Baring, London.
S Letter of 4th July 1806 from A.Baring, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 327

18th July 1806: draft contracts between Hope & Co. and Baring Bros. & Co. for the
  sale of piastres lying in Vera Cruz, and the collection thereof.
2 Letter of 8th July 1806 from A.Baring, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Adverse winds obliged Baring to stay in Den Helder for a week, awaiting a vessel to
  England. Letters of 9th, I rth, 13th and 15th July from A.Baring, Den Helder, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  A sum of 1,000,000 piastres, representing the collected portion of the drafts for Ii
  million, did, however, appear on the final account rendered to the French Treasury.
3 Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 183. The story as told here by Fugier is not
  confirmed by material in the Hope archives. Louis did not arrive in Amsterdam until
  February 1807.
4 Ibid., 184. Here, Fugier refers to a contract for piastres at a price of 3 francs and 55
  centimes. The draft contracts ofJuly 1806 and the contract of 12th March 1807 all
  embody a price of 3 francs 75 centimes. According to Fugier, the entire transaction
  was carried out at 3 francs 55 centimes per piastre; the account submitted to the
  French Treasury, however, shows that a price of 3 francs 75 centimes nett was
  maintained for the first five million piastres, and 3 francs 85 centimes for the second
  batch of drafts. It is conceivable that sticky fingers were at work in France, but the
  information in the Hope archives gives no hint as to where this might have occurred
  or who might have been responsible.
                                    NOTES PAGES 328-331

        PAGE 328

  Letter of 5th May 1807 from Sir Francis Baring, London, to Hope & Co.,
    I
  Amsterdam.
  Another letter of the same date contained details of a contract between the London
  house of Thomas O'Gorman and Espinosa for the collection of three million piastres
  from Lima. This contract also provided for O'Gorman to import Spanish products
  such as quicksilver and stationery. The house issued drafts on itself for piastres at the
  rate of 177 pounds sterling for 1,000 piastres.
2 Letters of 6th March 1807 from Baring Bros., London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  and of 7th, loth, 12th, 13th, 14th and 18th March from Sir Francis Baring, London,
  to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 14th, 16th, 18th, 19th, 20th and 23rd March 1807 to Louis, VII, 51, 55, 58,
  61; A IV, 38S, 386.
  Letter of 23rd March 1807 from Louis, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
4 Re(:u du TN!SOr Public; also vl-fa-85, 2S-26.
  17th April 1807: Receipt for drafts from the Governor of the Castilian Council.
S Letters of 18th and 29th May, I Ith and Isth June 1807 from A.Baring, London, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
6 Letters of 27th May 1807 from Mollien, Paris, to Hope &Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of sth June 1807 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Mollien, Paris.
  20th July 1807: supplementary contract between Hope & Co. and Baring Bros. & Co.

        PAGE 329

I Nolte, Fiin/zigJahre, 125.
  General Account 'X' for the year 1808 in current money, or appendix to that of' I 807.'
  Compte B du Trl!sor Public de France, June I 807-23rd May 1808.
  Le Tresor Public de France, Compte des Piastres, 2Sth October 1809.
2 Letters of 29th May, I I th June and 6th August 1807 from A. Baring, London, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 20th October 1807 from Baring Bros., London, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  'Account Sales of Dollars for account p. Diana, Frigate.'
  Letter of 17th November 1809 from A.Baring, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  To the expenses was added a sum of 3,000 pounds sterling, which had been set aside
  for the medical treatment of James Richards, who liaised between Hope and Baring
  during the winter of 180S, and who had subsequently become insane.
4 Letter of 29th October 1807 from A.Baring, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
S Letter of 3rd March 1808 to Mollien, Paris, VII, 324.

  PAGE 330

I Noite, Fiin/zigJahre, 13I.
2 Ibid., 143.
3 Ibid., 147.
4 Ibid., 149 and Chapter VII (150-16S).
        PAGE 331

I       vl-fa-8s, 37 and 38.
        'Nouveaux avis sur Ie recouvrement Ii la Havane, transmis au Ministre.'
                                 NOTES PAGE       331

  v1-fa-85,4°.
  Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 189, 190.
  Nolte makes it appear that the Intendant sought to get into TaUeyrand's good books,
  and not to complain of his, Nolte's, conduct.
2 Letters of 23rd May, 9th June and 10th November 1808 to the Minister (Mollien),
  v1-fa-85, 4 2 , 44, 47,51.
  v1-fa-86, 26.
  This sum included 236,927.56 francs for expenses incurred in Havana.
3 Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 319-322.
                                 CHAPTER TWELVE




    PAGE 333

I Letter of 26th June 1806 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 212.
2 Letters of 26th June, 24th July and 25th August 1806 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A
  IV, 212, 230, 245.
  Letters of 9th and 19th June, and 14th July 1806 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris,
  A IV, 203, 206, 226.
  Michel Simons at first agreed to take over 2,000 bonds, but later reduced this to 1,000.
  Borski thereupon assumed responsibility for the balance of the 3,900 bonds.
  Letter of 16th June 1806 from Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 19th June 1806 to Espinosa, Madrid, A IV, 209.
  Letter of 30th June 1806 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 214.

    PAGE 334

I Letter of 28th August 1806 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 246.
  5th September 1806: new plan for a loan to Spain, furnished by Izquierdo.
  Letter of 9th September 1806 to Izquierdo, Paris, A IV, 265.
2 Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 175.

    PAGE 335

I Letters of 9th and 23rd September 1806 to Izquierdo, Paris, A IV, 265, 280.
  Letters of 9th and 23rd September 1806 to Michel Simons, Paris, A IV, 272, 274, 281.
2 Letter of 12th January 1807 to J.B.Ouin, Amsterdam, A IV, 356.
  Letter of 3rd November 1806 to J.Ouvrard, for Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV,
  293·
  Letters of 5th and I Ith November 1806 to Michel Simons, Amsterdam, A IV, 297,
  304·
3 Letter of 13th November 1806 to Roell, Chancellor and Secretary of State,
  The Hague, A IV, 306.
  13th November 1806: Petition to the King of Holland to approve the loan, A IV, 308.

    PAGE 336

I   Letters of 29th November and 4th December 1806 to Izquierdo, Amsterdam, A IV,
    321,327.
    28th February 1807: Summary of proposed loan for Spain's account handed to the
    king at his request in connexion with his approval of the loan.
                               NOTES PAGES         336-338
2 Letters of 23rd September and 4th December 1806 to Michel Simons, Paris, A IV, 281,
  326.
  Simons reached agreement with Hope & Co. that they would come to a settlement
  with him regarding their share of the six months' additional interest. Hope's
  contracts with the entrepreneurs, however, provided for the extra interest, amounting
  to 2i %, to go to the entrepreneurs. Godoy's memoirs make mention of Talleyrand
  receiving 21- % as 'pot-de-vin;' this figure almost corresponds with the extra interest.
  It is conceivable that Simons received t%. If this be so, the question arises where did
  the 2i %for the entrepreneurs come from? Hope received a total commission of 7 %,
  yet paid 5 %+ 2i %= 7i % to the entrepreneurs. There is, however, the point that the
  purchase price of 90 % and the conversion at 100 % of the bonds and vouchers
  surrendered (with the exception of the Echenique bonds, for which the conversion
  rate was 95 %) left an appreciable margin.
  Fugier, NapoMon et I'Espagne, II, 177, 178, note 2.
3 Letter of 19th November 1806 to Gogel, The Hague, A IV, 310.

    PAGE 337

I Letters of 28th and 29th November 1806 to Izquierdo, Amsterdam, A IV, 319, 321.
  Letter of 8th December [806 to Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 325, 329.
  Letter of 29th November 1806 to Auguste Ouvrard & Co., Paris, A IV, 324.
  Letter of 15th December 1806 to J.Ouvrard, Paris, A IV, 333.
21st January 1807: Deed, drawn up in Paris on this day, signed by Auguste Ouvrard &
  Co. and by Blanchard, on behalf of Fran,>ois Ouvrard & Co.
  Letters of 3rd and 5th January 1807 from Desprez, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letters of [2th and [4th January 1807 to J.B.Ouin, Amsterdam, A IV. 356. 360.
  Letter of 14th January [807 to J.Ouvrard, Paris, A IV. 355. Cf 14th January 1807.
  vl-fa-85·
3 Letters of 14th and 16th January, 5th February 1807 to Baguenault & Co., Paris. A
  IV, 363. 373, 377-
  Cf 8th February 1807, vl-fa-85, 25.

    PAGE 338

  30th March 1807: draft deed.
  2nd April [807. Declaration by Auguste Ouvrard & Co., J.B.Ouin, Desprez,
  J.Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe.
  Letter of 28th March 1807 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 390.
24th April [807: Declaration in the name of Michel the Younger, given in the presence
  of the Amsterdam notary Chaussepie.
  4th and 6th April 1807: Declaration by Fulchiron, Paris.
  5th April 1807: Declaration by Michel the Younger, Paris.
  Letters of 9th, 13th and 30th April to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 396,400.406.
3 Nolte, Fiin/zig Jahre, 123.
  Wolff, Geschii/te Ouvrard, [35.
  Both authors aver that Louis visited Hope & Co. in 1806. The facts, however, point to
  the visit having taken place early in 1807.
  Letter of 4th April 1807 from Louis, Paris, to P.C.LaboucMre, Amsterdam.
                               NOTES PAGES 338-339

4 Letters of 13th February, 9th, 15th and 20th March 1807 from Louis, The Hague, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 339

   Letter of 9th March 1807 from Louis, The Hague, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Upon the initial repayment, on 1st April 1808, a premium of 3 %was to be paid on
  each bond drawn. This premium was to be repeated at each repayment and to
  increase by I % annually. The four million guilders allotted yearly to the sinking fund
  were transferred to the consortium, which used the monies for interest and principal
  payments. On 9th May 1807, King Louis decreed that the interest should be paid at
  half-yearly intervals.
  28th February 1807: Summary of the proposed loan to Spain, written by
  P.C.Labouchere, The Hague.
  9th March 1807: Correspondence and proposals, including a plan, concerning a loan
  of 40 million guilders to the debit of the Kingdom of Holland.
  March 1807: Agreement between R. and Th.de Smeth, Hope & Co., W. and
  J.Willink, J.Hodshon & Son and W.van Brienen & Sons, as joint managers for the
  loan of 40 million guilders desired by the king, and the entrepreneurs.
  A.R.A. The Hague, Decree issued by King Louis Napoleon on 31st March 1807,
  Financien NO.7. Extract from the Register of Resolutions of the Legislative Body of
  the Kingdom of Holland, dated 31st March 1807.
  1st April 1807: Report of a loan by the Kingdom of Holland, at 6 %interest.
  3rd April 1807: Extract from the Register of Orders issued by the Minister of Finance
  of His Majesty the King of Holland. Bethmann, in Frankfurt, and Matthiessen &
  Sillem, in Hamburg, proved not to be interested in the new Dutch loan.
3 Letters of7th, 8th, 12th, 15th and 18th April, 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th and I Ith May 1807
  from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert Voi'ite, The Hague.
  Littledale & Dixon, with whom Hope & Co. were associated, reported that
  malcontents in Rotterdam viewed the loan as payment by the Amsterdammers for the
  permission granted to them to import goods from England. In a letter to King Louis
  dated 24th July 1807, Gogel reported that he had ordered the seizure of two vessels;
  their documents, he said, were almost certainly false. Their cargoes were consigned to
  Insinger & Co., the company through which, it was said, Hope carried on trade with
  England. Two others carried cargoes consigned to W.&J.Willink who, Gogel
  reported, had confessed almost openly to him that the vessels were carrying sugar
  from a British territory. It was generally believed that, since undertaking the 40
  million guilder loan, Hope and Willink had been authorized by the king to import
  goods from England. This was the story which Dixon had put about at the beginning
  of April. Hope's reports to Parish concerning the arrival of American ships do not
  mention Insinger & Co. as consignees. This, of course, does not preclude the
  possibility that Gogel's story was true. Precisely because of their vulnerable position
  vis-a.-vis old-style Patriots such as Gogel, Hope & Co. went to great lengths to comply
  with trading restrictions. H.T.Colenbrander, Gedenkstukken, v (The Hague, 1910),
  306.
  Letter of 2nd April 1807 from Littledale & Dixon, Rotterdam, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Hoekstra, Thirty-Seven Years, 47-48.
4 Letter from M.Simons, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
                               NOTES PAGES         339-344
  Letter of 12th May 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert Voute, The
  Hague.
  Letter of 7th May 1807 to Michel Simons, 'of Paris,' A IV, 41 I.
  19th May 1807: Decree by King Louis Napoleon.
  On 29th October 1807 the consortium concerned with the Dutch loan transferred the
  balance of 12,000 bonds to the entrepreneurs, Willem Borski, Ketwich &
  V oombergh, Strockel Van Dijk and B.J. Weymar. The transfer price was 97. Payment
  for the bonds was to be effected between 31st October 1807 and 31st May 1808, the
  entrepreneurs enjoying interest from 1st October 1807. The agreement contained a
  provision for cancellation by the entrepreneurs, but the exercise by them of this option
  involved payment at 100 %for all bonds which they had accepted at 97 %.
5 Letter of 28th April 1807 from Councillor of State Louis, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letters of 4th and 5th May 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert
  Voute, The Hague.

  PAGE 340

I Letter of 13th May 1807 to Gerardin, Amsterdam, VII, 79.
  Letter of 13th May 1807 from Gerardin, Amsterdam, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 14th May 1807from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert Voute, The
  Hague.
2 20th May 1807: Agreement between Hope & Co., R.&Th.de Smeth and W.Borski.

  PAGE 34I.

I 25th May 1807: Agreement between Hope & Co. and W.Borski.
  Letter of 25th May to Izquierdo, Paris, A IV, 425.
21st, 8th, 22nd June and 27th July 1807: Agreements between Hope & Co. and
  W.Borski.
  Letters of 8th, 17th and 25th June, 27th July, 3rd August and 22nd October 1807 to
  Izquierdo, Paris, A IV, 436, 443, 453, 474, 478, 514·
3 Letters of22nd October, 5th November, loth and 31st December 1807, 4th and 29th
  February 1808 to Izquierdo, Paris, A IV, 514, 519; VII 232; OE II, I 1,24,46.
4 Letters of 18th June and 23rd July 1807 to Mollien, Paris, AIV, 444, 469.
  Letters of 6th and 20th August 1807 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A IV, 482, 498.
  Letter of 9th July 1807 to Izquierdo, Paris, A IV, 466.
  Letter of 14th December 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. I.

  PAGE 342

I Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, 11,216,254.
2 Ibid., 255-256.
3 Letter of 17th June 1807 to Izquierdo, Amsterdam, A IV, 442, 443.
  19th June 1807: Receipt from R. & Th.de Smeth, Amsterdam, VI-ea-73, 150.

  PAGE 344

I Letter of 8th June 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Louis, Paris.
  Letter of 30th June 1807 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Robert Voute, The
  Hague.
                              NOTES PAGES 344-345

2 Letter of 1st July 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert Voute, The
  Hague.
3 Letters of 23rd June and 11th July 1807 from Gerardin, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 2nd July 1807 to Gerardin, Paris, VII, 117.
  Letter of 2nd July 1807 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 120.
4 Letter of 30th June 1807 to the King of Holland, The Hague, VII, II3.
  Letters of 30th June, 4th and 28th July to Robert Voute, The Hague, VII, 114,122,
  147·
  Letter of 11th July 1807 from Gerardin, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  17th July 1807: Approval by King Louis Napoleon for the loan of three million
  guilders to Naples.
  Letter of 23rd July 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert Voute,
  The Hague.
  Letters of 27th July and 13th August to Max H.F.Freville, Tribun, Paris, VII, 142,
  151.
  Freville had accompanied Gerardin to Amsterdam as his adviser.
  Letter of 30th July 1807 from Robert Voute, The Hague, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 3rd and 21st August 1807 from Freville, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 345

I Letter of 15th September 1807 from Roederer, Naples, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 17th, 19th and 23rd September, 2nd, 5th, 7th, 8th, loth and 12th October
  1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam to Robert Voute, The Hague.
  Letters of 30th September, 6th and loth October 1807 to Robert Voute, The Hague,
  VII, 175, 184,191.
  Letter of 1st October 1807 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to the King of Holland,
  The Hague.
  Letter of 2nd October 1807 to Freville, Paris, VII, 176.
  Letters of 2nd and 8th October 1807 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 181, 188.
2 Letters of 14th, 15th and 21st October 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to
  Robert Voute, The Hague.
  Letters of 15th and 22nd October 1807 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 193,203.
3 Grootboek 1808: 209. Grootboek 1809: 101.
  Letter of 5th November 1807 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 212.
  Letter of 6th November 1807 from Roederer, Naples, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th November 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Robert Voute,
  Utrecht.
  Letter of 19th November 1807 to Robert Voute, Utrecht, VII, 217.
4 Letter of 24th December 1807 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 249.
  Letter of 31st December 1807 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, VII, 256.
  Lesage, Napoleon I, crfiancier de fa Prusse, 274-275.
5 Letter of 14th January 1808 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, VII, 275.
  Letter of 14th January 1808 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 270.
  Grootboek 1809:101.
  Letter of 19th February 1809 from Roederer, Naples, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 18th March 1809 to Roederer, Naples, VII, 336.
6 15th May 1809: Report submitted to the king by the minister of finance.
                              NOTES PAGES 345-348

  20th May 1809: Decree issued by Joseph Napoleon, King of Naples and Sicily.
  Letter of 2nd June 1809 from Roederer, Naples, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 346

I Letter of 25th June 1809 from Roederer, Naples, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of loth June 1807 to Auguste Ouvrard & Co., Paris, Vl-fa-85, 27.
3 Letters of 25th, 27th, 28th April and 5th June 1807 from Louis, Paris, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
4 Letters of 21st and 25th May, 5th and 8th June 1807 from P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam, to Louis, Amsterdam.

  PAGE 347

I Letters of 21st and 25th May 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Louis,
  Paris.
  Letters of 22nd May and 19th June 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to
  Baring Bros., London.
  Letters of 15th and 29th May 1807 from Louis, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 2nd November 1807 from Cordier, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 30th November 1807 to Cordier, Paris, VII, 223, Wolff, Geschiifte Ouvrard,
  145·
  Arthur Levy, Ungrandprofiteur, 170.
  G. J. Ouvrard, Memoires, 143.
3 Authorization, etc. from Auguste Ouvrard & Co., vl-fa-85, 36.
  Letters, etc. of 1st and 19th October 1807, Vl-fa-85, 31.
4 Letter of 19th June 1807 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Baring Bros.,
  London.

  PAGE 348

I Letter of 22nd July 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Paris, W.G.C.I.
  Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, n, 55, 95-96.
  Michel had obtained approval for the payment of his drafts on the Caja in March
  1806, but Mollien had prevented this taking place. According to Fugier, Michel
  succeeded in having the drafts exchanged for others on Mexico in July 1806.
  Coesvelt's letter, however, reveals that, in Labouchere's view, this may well have
  happened during the second half of 1807. Michel the Younger sent drafts for
  2t million piastres to Hope & Co. via Coesvelt, to be sold in London. Labouchere
  was anything but pleased about this, if only because the drafts bore the signatures of
  ministers in the government of Charles IV who had been replaced when Ferdinand VII
  acceded to the throne. It was a reliefto him when, after a good deal of shilly-
  shallying, Michel the Younger gave instructions for the bills to be sent to his house
  in Paris where, he stated, Gordon & Murphy were willing to give a better rate of
  exchange.
  Letters of 8th April, 5th and 19th May 1808 from Michel the Younger, Madrid, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 18th April, 19th and 23rd May, 9th June 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid,
  W.G.C.I.
  Letters of 18th April, 23rd May, 2nd and 9th June 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid,
  W.G.C.I.
                                         65 0
                               KOTES PAGES         348-352
  Letters of 18th April, 23rd May, 2nd and 9th June 1808 to Michel the Younger,
  Madrid, VII, 352, 378, 386,392.
  Letters of 12th and 19th May, 9th June 1808 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam, vI-fa-86, 24, 25, 25.
2 Letter of 8th August 1807 from W.G.Coesvelt, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th September 1807 from W.G.Coesvelt, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  vI-fa-86, 22.
3 Letter of 21st September 1807 from A.v.d. Hoop, Madrid, to the trustees of Croese &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 1st, 22nd and 29th October 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. 1.
4 Letter of 5th November 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. 1.

  PAGE 349

I Letter of 14th December 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. 1.
2 Letters of 21st and 24th December 1807 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. 1.
  Letter of 25th December 1807 to J. Dixon, VII, 250. In March 1808 Labouchere
  wrote to say that the price of tobacco in Amsterdam was exorbitant and that the
  article could not be shipped. Because of this, this he was making efforts via Barings.
  It is thus clear that, in spite of Hogguer's interest, Hope & Co. had not given up.
  Letter of 3rd March 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. 1.
  Letter of 2nd March 1808 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Bros., London.
3 Letters of 25th and 27th January 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. 1.
4 Letter of 8th February 1808 to Espinosa, Madrid, O.E. II, 38.

  PAGE 350

I Letter of 5th February 1808 to Henry Hope, London, O.E. II, 30.
  Letter of 8th March 1808 from H.Hope, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, n, 260-262, Chapter VII, Part I, ill.
3 Letters of 31st December 1807, and 8th February and 3rd March 1808 to
  W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. 1.
4 Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, II, 416, 417, 435.
  Letter of 3rd March 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. 1.

  PAGE 351

I Fugier, Napoleon et l'Espagne, II, 436.
  Letter of 14th March 1808 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  vI-fa-86,23.
2 Fugier, Napoleon et l' Espagne, n, 442.
3 Letter of 23rd March 1808 from A.v.d. Hoop and W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
4 Letter of IIthApril 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. 1.
5 Letter of IIth April 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. 1.

  PAGE 352

I Altamira, History a/Spain, 527.
2 Letter of 24th March 1808 from Thomas de Foronda and Gabriel Filipe Melendez,
  Madrid, to Baguenault & Co., Paris.
  Letter of 6th April 1808 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Baguenault & Co., Paris.
                               NOTES PAGES         352-355
3 Letter of 16th June 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. I.
  Letter of 15th August 1808 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, VII, 469, and O.E. II, 72.

    PAGE 353

I G. de Grandmaison,L'Espagneet Napoteon(Paris, 1908),317,319.
  Letters of 18th and 26th July 1808 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, VI-fa-86, 26, 26.
2 Letters of 15th and 29th August 1808 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, VII, 469, O.E. II, 72,
  O.E.n, 78.
  Letter of 3rd September 1808 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, VI-fa-86, 27.
  Letterof3rd September 1808 from the Marquis de Fuerte Hisar, Madrid, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 9th October 1808 from De Cabarrus, Vittoria, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 9th December 1808 from J.G.de Villanueva, Philadelphia, to J. W.Hope,
  London.
  Letter of 1st December 1808 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope,
  London.
  Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 171. Nolte states that De Villanueva left for Philadelphia at the
  end of the summer, but he was frequently guilty of inaccuracy in regard to time.
  Cf. Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 333, note 381.

    PAGE 354

I Letter ofJrd November 1808 to De Cabarrus, Vittoria, O.E. II, 97.
  Letters of 1st-7th December 1808 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope,
  London.
  Letter of 20th March 1809 from D.Parish, Philadelphia, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 1st December 1808 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope, London.
  31st October 1808: Approval by A.Ouvrard & Co., VI-fa-85, 51.
3 Letter of 9th October 1808 from De Cabarrus, Vittoria, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 15th August, 26th September and 3rd November 1808 to De Cabarrus,
  Vittoria, O.E. II, 72, 84, 97.
4 Letter of3rd November 1808 to De Cabarrus, Vittoria, O.E. II, 97.
5 Letter of 1st December 1808 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope, London.
  Letter of 5th January 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. II. 12.

    PAGE 355

I Letter of 15th November 1808 from the Marquis de Fuerte Hisar, Madrid, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3rd November 1808 to De Cabarrus, Vittoria, O.E. II, 97.
2 Letter of 2nd December 1808 from W.G.Coesve1t, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, VI-fa-86, 32.
3 Letter of 4th November 1808 from W.G.Coesve1t, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, VI-fa-86, 30.
4 Letter of 9th January 180g from De Cabarrus, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th February 1809 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. n, 108.
5 Letters of 6th and 9th February 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 16, 18.
                                NOTES PAGE       355

  Letter of 9th February 1809 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. 11,110.
  De Grandmaison, L' Espagne et Napoleon, 445.
6 H.Baumgarten, Geschichte Spaniens vom Ausbruch der franzosischen Revolution bis
  aufunsere Tage, I (Leipzig, 1865),377.
                                     CHAPTER THIRTEEN




        PAGE 357

I Letters of 9th and 27th February, 9th March 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid,
  W.G.c. II, 18, 19,22.
  Letter of 16th February 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, vl-fa-86, 32.
2 Letters of 16th February and 2nd March 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam, vl-fa-86, 32, 33.
  Letter of 16th March 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 26.
3 Letters of23rd March and J7thApril 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 27,
  29·
  Letter of 1st March 1808 to P.T.van Son, The Hague, VII, 324.
  Letter of 16th June 1808 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. I.
  Labouchere's brother, Samuel, became 'Premier Successeur' of the house at
  Rotterdam, which bore the name S.Labouchere & Co.
  Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 203.

        PAGE 358

I Letter of 16th March 1809 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. II, I I I.
  Letter of 20th March 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  VI-fa-86, 36.
  Letter of 17th April 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. II, 29.
2 Letter of 30th March 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  VI-fa-86, 37.
  Letter of 3rd April 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to De Cabarrus, Madrid.
3 Letter;of 11th April 1809 from De Cabarrus, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 11th April 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam,
  VI-fa-86, 39.
  Letter of I Ith April 1809 from the Caja de Consolidacion, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 12th April 1809 from John Murphy, Madrid, to Gordon & Murphy,
  London.

        PAGE 359

    I   Letter of 17th April 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. II, 29.
        Letter of I I th May 1809 to Pedro de Cifuentes, Madrid.
        Letter of 1st June 1809 to the Caja de Consolidacion, Madrid, O.E. II, 118.
                              NOTES PAGES 357-362

2 Letter of 6th June 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Poitiers, to D. Parish, Philadelphia.
  Letters of 18th and 20th May 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 18th and 20th May 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 6th June 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Orthez, to D.Parish, Philadelphia.
  Letter of 28th May 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Bordeaux, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3rd June 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Orthez, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
5 Letter of 13th June 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Orthez, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 360

I Letters of 22nd and 29th May 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to
  P.C.Labouchere,Orthez.
  Letter of I st June 1809 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. II, I 16.
  Letter of 1st June 1809 to the Caja de Consolidacion, Madrid, O.E. II, 118.
2 Letter of 25th June 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Bayonne, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Bagneres.
  Letter of 3rd July 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Bagneres, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3rd July 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Bagneres, to Henry Hope, London.
3 Letter of 1st June 1809 from De Cabarrus to the King, enclosing prospectus.
  Letter of 15th July 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Bagneres, to De Cabarrus, Madrid.
4 Letter of 6th August 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Rotterdam, to P.C.Labouchere.

    PAGE 361

I Letter of 11th August 1809 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to J.W.Hope, London.
2 Letter of 13th June 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Orthez, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 23rd June 1809 Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to J. W.Hope,London.
  June 1809: Draft contract for the transfer to Willem Borski of 2,600 bonds at 5-r %.

    PAGE 362

I Letter of 28th June 1809 from Baring Bros., London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 6th August 1809 from W.G.Coesvelt, Rotterdam, to P.C.Labouchere.
  Letter of loth August 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Bordeaux, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 17th August 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Nantes, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 11th August 1809 to J.W.Hope, London.
3 Letter of 5th August 1808 from Falconnet & Co., Naples, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 12th September 1808 to Falconnet & Co., Naples, VII, 476.
4 Letter of 29th November 1808 to Falconnet & Co., Naples, VII, 552.
  The Hope archives contain details of a draft procedure relating to a speculative
  transaction in Neapolitan funds held by Willem Borski.
5 Letterof3rd March 1809 from Prince de Gerace, Naples, to Hope &Co.,
  Amsterdam.
6 Letter of 6th April 1809 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, 57.



                                         655
                             NOTES PAGES 363-366

  PAGE 363
I Letter of 26th June 1809 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A xxvn, 112.
  Letter of 26th June 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Bagneres, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 26th June 1809 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, 112.
  Letter of 4th June 181S from Falconnet & Co., Naples, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3rd July 1809 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, I IS, 116.
3 Letter of 27th July 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Toulouse, to Manuel Sanchez
  Toscano, Madrid, W.G.C. II, 31.
4 Letter of 3rd August 1809 from De Cabarrus, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 364
I Letter of 19th September 1809 to Manuel Sanchez Toscano, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 33.
  Letter of Isth September 1809 to the King of Spain, Madrid, O.E. II, 134.
  Letters of Isth and 20th September, 6th October 1809 to De Cabarrus, Madrid,
  O.E. II, 137, 142, 148.
2 Letter of 27th September 1809 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. II, 144.
  Letter of 6th October to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. II, 146.
3 Letter of 4th December 1809 from De Cabarrus, Madrid, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam, VI-fa-86, I I.
4 Letter of 6th September 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE36S
I Letter of I Ith September 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.                                                          .
  Letter of 14th May 1809 from Izquierdo, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 207-208.
  Letter of 30th October 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Henry Hope,
  London.
  Letter of sth January 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 20th and 27th September, 6th October and loth November 1809 to
  Cabarrus, O.E. II, 142, 144, 146, 148.
  loth November 1809: Memorandum concerning the attitude of the Spanish
  government (in the handwriting of P. C.Labouchere).
  Letter of sth December 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to H. Hope & Co.,
  London.
4 Letter of sth December 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to H. Hope & Co.,
  London.
  Letter of 2nd January 1810 to W.G.Coesvelt, Paris, W.G.C. II, 3S.
  Letter of 28th January 1810 to De Cabarrus, Madrid, O.E. II, ISS.

  PAGE 366
I Baumgarten, Geschiclzte Spaniens, I, 41S.
2 Letter of 28th January 1810to W.G.Coesvelt, Bayonne, W.G.c. II, 38, 42.
  20th December 1809: Preliminary decree by Joseph Napoleon, King of Spain.
3 Letter of 12th January 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt, Bordeaux, to De Cabarrus, Madrid.
4 G.Labouchere, ·P.C.Labouchere, un financier diplomate au siecle dernier,' Revue
                                   NOTES PAGES       366-369
        d' Histoire Diplomatique, XXVII (I 91 3),430-43 I.
        Nolte, FiinJzig Jahre, 208-209.
        Letter of 28th January 1810 to W.G.Coesvelt, Bayonne, W.G.c. 11,38,42.

        PAGE 367

  Letters of 3rd, 5th, 8th, 9th, 18th and 22nd February, 5th, 6th, I rth, 20th, 26th and
    I
  30th March, 8th April 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Bayonne, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 20th February 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt, Bayonne, to De Cabarrus, Madrid.
  Ramon, Histoire de la Banque de France, 94.
2 Letter of 22nd September 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 30th September 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Henry Hope,
  London.
  Letter of 18th February 1810 from W.G .Coesvelt, Bayonne, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 6th March 1810 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, 317.
3 Letters of 26th and 30th March 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Bayonne, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 8th April 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Bayonne, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 14th April 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Vittoria, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3rd May 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.

        PAGE 368

I Letter of 14th May 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 16th and 31st May, 6th, 17th and 28th July 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt,
  Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 18th May 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Madrid, to D'Almenara, Madnd.
  Letter of 26th May 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to Hope &Co., Amsterdam.
  H.T.Colenbrander, Schimmelpenninck en Koning Lodewijk (Amsterdam, 191 1),212.
3 Letter of 28th July 1810 from W.G.CoesveIt, Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 15th September 1810 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.C. 11,69.
4 Letters of 5th, 12th and 24th August, 25th September, 18 IO from W.G .CoesveIt,
  Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.

        PAGE 369

  G.Labouchere, 'Un financier diplomate,' 437-442, 446-447.
  Letter of 26th July 1810 from D.Parish, London, to J.W.Hope, London.
  Letter of 22nd August 1810 to W.G.CoesveIt, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 68.
  Letter of 17th July 1810 from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 16th July 1810fromD. Parish, London, to J.W.Hope, London.
  Letter of 15th August 1810 from D.Parish, Antwerp, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
                              NOTES PAGES        369-373
  14th September 1810: Letters of introduction for Parish to the Duke of Cad are,
  Mollien, Count Esteve, Marquis d'Almenara, Prince de Benevento and Marquis de
  Santa Fe.
  Letter of 15th September 1810 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 69.
3 Letter of 2nd October to D.Parish, Paris, W.G .C. 11,72.

    PAGE 370

I Letter of I Ith October 1810 from D.Parish, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 2nd, 3rd and 4th October 1810 from D.Parish, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 12th, 13th and 15th October, 2nd and 17th November 1810 to D.Parish,
  Paris, W.G.C. II, 47, 83, 102.

    PAGE 371

  Letter of 2nd November 1810 to D.Parish, Paris, W.G.c. II, 83.
2 Letter of 2nd November 1810 to D'Almenara, Paris.
3 Letters of 12th November, 8th and 27th December 1810 from M.Simons, Paris, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 17th November 1810 to D.Parish, Paris, W.G.C. 11,102.
  Letter of I st December 18 I a from D.Parish, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letters of 8th and 14th December 1810 from Tourton Ravel & Co., Paris, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 14th December 18 I a from R. &Th.de Smeth, Amsterdam, to Emperor
  Napoleon Bonaparte.
  Letter of 27th December 1810 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to D.Parish, Paris.
4 Letter of 20th March 1809 from D.Parish, Philadelphia, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 15th September 1809 to W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, W.G.c. II, 69.
  Nolte, Fun/zig Jahre, 234-235.

    PAGE 372

I Ibid., 216-217.
  Bruchey, Robert Oliver, 333.
2 Letter of 9th February 1809 from D.Parish, Philadelphia, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Walters and Walters, 'American Career,' 154.
3 Letter of 3rd May 1810 from Charles W.Hare, Philadelphia, to D.Parish.
4 Walters and Walters, 'American Career,' 155.
5 July 18 I 0: Questionnaire pertaining to the action brought against David Parish by
  the King of Spain, vl-ba-82. Replies vI-ba-83.

    PAGE 373

  Letter of 15th September 1810 to Baring Bros., London, A XXVII, 428.
2 18th June 1811: Statement prepared by P.C.Labouchere.
3 Letter of 17th January 1812 from Ch.W.Hare, E. Tilghmann, William Meredith and
  Joseph Hopkinson to D.Parish, Philadelphia.

               .
4 Remarks by P.C.Labouchere concerning the letter of 17th January 1812 from
  Ch.W.Hare'and others .
                              NOTES PAGES 373-376

5 Letter of loth March IS12 from Baring Bros., London, to P.C.Labouchere.
  Letters of 27th March and 23rd April IS12 to Henry Hope & Co. and Baring Bros.,
  London, A XXVIII, 54, 72.
6 Letter ofSth April 1812 to Baring Bros., London, A XXVIII, 62.
  Letter ofSth Apnl IS12 to Pedro de Echeverria, Vera Cruz, A XXVIII, 63.
  Letter of 13th May ISI2 from Baring Bros., London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 374

I Letters of 3rd December 1812 and 13th January ISI3 to D.Parish, Philadelphia,
  A XXVIII, 240, 28 I.
  Letter of 20th August ISI2 from P.C.Labouchere, Kassel, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  27th January lSI 3: Statement by David Baillie Wiordery, Consul General of the
  United Slates in Paris, concerning the receipt of two parcels from Hottinguer & Co.,
  Pans.
2 Letter of 5th September ISI2 to Baring Bros., London, A XXVIII, 15S.
  Letter of 4th January ISI4 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to A.Baring, London.
  Letter of 1st February I SI4 to D.Parish, Philadelphia, A XXVIII, 469.
  The visiting Amencan was G.Emlen.
  The case was, of course, brought before a higher court, but it would appear that
  Labouchere failed to recognize the distinction between the various courts.
3 Wolff, Geschii/te Ouvrard, 16S.
  Walters and Walters, 'American Career,' 155.
  Letter of 15th February IS15 from J.Ouvrard, Paris, to the Chief Justice of the
  Supreme (?) Court of the United States, Philadelphia.
4 Letters of 15th and 2Sth December ISIO from W.G.Coesvelt, Madrid, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
5 Letters of2Sth December ISIO, 15th, 21st and 27th January ISII from W.G.Coesvelt,
  Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.

  PAGE 375

I Letter of ISth February ISII from W.G.CoesveJt, Madrid, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letters of 14th and 15th April lSI I from John Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere,
  London.
3 Letters of 25th May and 20th June lSI I from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to
  J.Hope, London.
  Circular from Hope & Co. dated 15th June ISII.
4 Letters of 12th June, 2nd, 26th and 30th August 181 I to Gennaro Francesconi,
  Naples, A XXVII 212, 240; A xxvlI-ii, 52, 57.
  Letter of 7th July 1811 from Gennaro Francesconi, Naples, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

  PAGE 376

I Letter of 3rd July 1810 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, 3S9.
  Letter of 26th June lSI I to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A xxvlI-ii, 19.
2 Letter of 18th December ISIO to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, 532.
  Letter of 9th February I SI I from P.F.Lestapis, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Antwerp.
                              NOTES PAGES         376-380

3 Letters of 22nd November 1811 and 31st January 1812 to Gennaro Francesconi &
  Co., Naples, A xxvII-ii, 101; A XXVIII, 26.
4 Letters of 20th and 22nd May 1809 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Prince de
  Gerace, Naples.
  Letters of 8th August 1810, and 8th January and 25th April 1811 to Prince de
  Gerace, Naples, A XXVII, 402, 549, 606.
5 Letters of 4th and 16th March, 21st October 1812 to Prince de Gerace, Naples,
  A XXVIII, 402, 549, 606.
6 Letters of 26th June and 14th August 1812 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 120,
  151.
  Letter of 6th July 1812 from P.C.Labouchere, Pyrmont, to A.v.d.Hoop, Amsterdam.

  PAGE 378

I Letter of23rd March 1813 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 333.
2 Letters of 30th June, 6th, 9th, 22nd and 27th July, 10th, 13th and 25th August, 14th
  September, I Ith and 22nd October 18 I 3 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 385,
  393,394,398,399,404,405,409,416,422,427.
  Letter of 1st July 1813 to Fa1connet & Co., Naples, A XXVIII, 390.
  G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18034-163.
3 Letter of 1st November 1813 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 429. Supra,
  256- 257.
4 Letters of 12th and 22nd April 1814 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 500, 51 I.
5 Letter of 12th May 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of7th and 17th June 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 2nd July 1814 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 539.
6 Letter of I st November 1814 to Prince de Gerace, Naples, A XXVIII, 597.
  Letters of 3rd and 5th November 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to A.v.d.Hoop.

  PAGE 379

I Letter of 13th November 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to A.v.d.Hoop,
  Amsterdam.
  Grootboek 1814: 22.
2 Grootboek 1816: 36.
  G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18035-315, 18035-2-82.
3 G.A. Amsterdam, Not. Arch., 18036-56.
  Grootboek 1816: 32.
  Grootboek 1817: 32.
  Grootboek 1818: 30.
4 Letter of 28th January 1814 to the Caja de Consolidacion, A XXVIII, 467.
5 Letter of I Ith March 1814 from P.C.Labouchere to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

  PAGE 380

I Letter of 24th June 1814 from P.C.Labouchere, London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 17th September 1814 from J.C.Cambier, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Letters of 8th October and 22nd December 1814 to J.C.Cambier, Madrid, A XXVIII,
  576,621.


                                          660
                                  NOTES PAGE        380

  Letters of 21st December ISI4 and 2nd March ISI5 from J.C.Cambier, Madrid, to
  Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of August ISI5 from J.C.Cambier, Madrid, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam (via
  The Hague).
3 Weeveringh, Geschiedenis Staatsschulden, II, 730-73I, 736-737.
  An extensive but not very lucid story by J.A.Alting Bosken, Over geldleeningen hier Ie
  lande door vreemde mogendheden aangegaan (Utrecht, I S64), SI -SS.




                                          66r
                               CHAPTER FOURTEEN




    PAGE 383

    H.Schiifer, Geschichte von Portugal, v (Gotha, 1854),610-616. H.V.Livermore, A New
    History ofPortugal (Cambridge, 1966),245-246.

    PAGE 384

I C.R.Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire (London, 1969), 157. Schiifer,
  Geschichte von Portugal, v, 192, 193, 194.
2 Letter of 15th March 1765 from Barend Wessely, Copenhagen, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 385

I Letter of 22nd April 1777 from Thomas Mayne & Co., Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 1st April 1777 from Lewis Cantofer, Lisbon, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Canto fer estimated that the 60,000 carats about which he wrote would fetch
  cf 2,710,000 in Amsterdam. The carat prices which he maintained were identical to
  those maintained by Hope in 1800. The prices for small and large stones differed
  greatly, the former being calculated at cf 28 per carat and stones of between 40 and 79
  grains at cf 100 per carat. A carat, which consists offour grains, may be put at about
  0.2 grams. Robert Paisley & Co. of Lisbon, whom Canto fer introduced in an
  accompanying letter, felt that the estimated yield was too high. In Mayne's view, it
  was not necessary to take more than 40,000 carats annually, although a contract for
  larger quantities was to be preferred. Hope expressed the view that the Amsterdam
  market could absorb 50-60,000 carats annually. The newly appointed Inspector of
  the Treasury, the Marquis of Angeja, had informed Mayne of an offer by Cantofer to
  take 80,000 carats annuallY-20,000 above the figure which he had indicated to Hope.
  Just who was guilty of an untruth isnotc1ear from the correspondence, but it may be
  assumed that Cantofer planned to sell the 20,000 carats behind Hope's back. As will
  emerge, a considerable quantity of diamonds reached Amsterdam by way of London.
3 The contract was awarded to Paulo Jorge and Joao Ferreira of Lisbon, who, it was
  reported, proposed to appoint Van Brienen & Co. as their agents in Amsterdam.
  Letters of loth and 17th April 1787 from Lewis Stephens, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
4 Infra, Appendix E-I. Thegrootboeken contain the names of the following London
  diamonds merchants: Aaron Goldsmid, Salomon Berend Gompertz, Benjamin and
  Abraham Goldsmid, Aaron and Salomon Norden, P.&S.Salomons & Co., Levy


                                          662
                                 NOTES PAGES         383-388
  Cohen, Meyer Asser & Co., Asser Asser, Ruben Harmsz. Kijzer and Eleasar Philip
  Salomons.

  PAGE 386

  The names of Joseph and Mordechai van Embden first appeared in the grootboek of
  1785 (folio 263), and that of Hartog Eleasar Cohen in the grootboek of 1788 (folio
  297)·
2 Infra, Appendix E-II.
3 Letter of 19th June 1798 from H.A.lnsinger, Amsterdam, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Hamburg.
4 Letter of 1st April 1800 from Hope & Co., London, to J.P.Quintella, Lisbon, VII,
  171-172.
5 Letter of 1st April 1800 from Hope & Co., London, to J.P.Quintella, Lisbon, VII, 174.
  The specification of the diamonds deposited with the bank reads as follows:
  4,000 carats of small stones at cf    28 per carat cf   112,000
  4,000 stones of   2      grainsatcf 30 per carat cf     120,000
  4,000 stones of 3-4 grains atcf 32 per carat cf         128,000
  4,000 stones of 5-6 grains at cf 34 per carat cf        136,000
  4,000 stones of 7-8 grains at cf 36 per carat cf        144,000
  3,500 stones of 9-10 grains at cf 38 per carat cf       133,000
  3,500 stones of I I - 12 grains at cf 40 per carat cf   140,000
  3,500 stones of 13-16 grains at cf 44 per carat cf      154,000
  3,500 stones of 17-20 grains at cf 58 per carat cf      203,000
  3,500 stones of 2 I -40 grains at cf 70 per carat cf    245,000
  2,500 stones of 41-79 grains at cf 100 per carat cf     250,000
                                                    CfI,765,000
  PAGE 387

  Letter of 27th May 1800 from Hope & Co., London, to J.P.Quintella, Lisbon, VII,
  181.
2 Letter of March 1801 from J.Williams Hope, London, to Sampayo, Lisbon.
  John Williams Hope said that it would take three to six years to market the quantity
  offered. On the basis of the sales figures for previous years (20-30,000 carats
  annually), this indicates that between 100,000 and 120,000 carats were offered.
  Following the agreement negotiated with the Portuguese government by Labouchere
  in 1802, this stock did indeed come into the Company's hands.
3 Letters of7th and 14th November 1801 from John Stanley, Lisbon, to F.Baring &
  Co., London.

  PAGE 388

I Letter of 14th November 1801: enclosure to letter of the same date from Bandeira.
2 Letter of 27th February 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Hope & Co., London.
  Labouchere maintained that the two houses had become involved in the Portuguese
  affair in order to gratify the wish of the British minister Addington, but in the light of
  the previous history this was, to say the least of it, a one-sided interpretation.
3 Letter of 7th December 1801 from J.Williams Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Paris. In a letter of 5th December, John Williams Hope informed Labouchere that
  the Portuguese government had asked for a loan of twice the original sum. While he
                                NOTES PAGES 388-391

  considered this excessive, he was interested in cotton and sugar from the point of view
  of the re-establishment of the house in Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 8th December 1801 from J. Willems Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Paris.

    PAGE 389

I Letter of 9th December 1801 from H.Hope, London, to Sir F.Baring, London.
2 It is also conceivable that Sir Francis Baring foresaw difficulty in placing this loan in
  England. As Hope had already pointed out, foreign loans were not popular there.
3 Letters of 15th and 29th December 1801 from J. Williams Hope, London to
  P.C. Labouchere, ...
  In Nantes, family matters awaited Labouchere's attention. In the margin against the
  passage concerning the chartering of a vessel there are notes: in pencil the word 'no,'
  and in ink the instruction 'I positively forbid, no hurry.' In all probability these
  remarks reveal concern on the part of Henry Hope, who did not wish to expose
  Labouchere to risks.
4 Letters of 21St and 23rd January 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Madrid to J.Williams
  Hope, London.
  Letter of23rd February 1802 from R.Voute, Amsterdam, to Henry Hope, London.
  Letter of 20th January 1802 from J.Stanley, Lisbon, to Sir F.Baring, London.

  PAGE 390

1 Letters of 5th, 18th, 25th and 26th January 1802 from J.WiIliams Hope, Bath, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon.
2 There were indeed others with an eye to the main chance. These were the house of
  Stephens in Lisbon and a partner in the firm of Wed. Croese & Co., of Amsterdam,
  both of whom attempted to thwart Labouchere's plan, but were forced to give up for
  lack of adequate funds. The partner concerned was probably H.Croese, who at that
  time was residing in Madrid in connexion with the Spanish 'conversion loans' (supra,
  283-284). According to Labouchere, Croese was out to blacken the name of Hope &
  Co.
  Letter of 17th February 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  London.
31st February 1802: the discussions which had taken place during the preceding days
  had been embodied in this 'Overture.'
4 This offer contained an element of 'sales talk.' The price of the bonds to which
  Labouchere referred was governed not only by the rate of interest which they bore,
  but also by the punctuality with which interest and principal instalments were paid.
  The prospects for the Portuguese bonds were decidedly favourable.

    PAGE 391

  If we add to this the 100,000 pounds sterling already advanced to De Souza
  Coutinho, we arrive at a total of 700,000 pounds sterling-the sum mentioned by
  John Williams Hope.
2 Hope & Co. made a further attempt to secure the stock of 55, 722t carats which had
  already been handed over to the French government, but they lost to two Jewish
  diamond merchants from London.
  Letters of 9th March 1802 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to H.A.Insinger & Co.,
                               NOTES PAGES         39I-395
    Amsterdam, and of 16th March 1802 from J. Williams Hope, London, to
    P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon.

    PAGE 392

I In his correspondence with Hope and Baring, Labouchere continued to work on a
  price of 90, even after the signing of the contract. He evidently viewed the price of 92
  referred to in the contract as a sham concession. Letters of 4th and 6th February 1802
  from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Sir F. Baring, London.
  8th February 1802: Contract between Don Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho, Minister of
  Finance, and P.C.Labouchere, representing Baring & Co. and Hope & Co.
2 Labouchere described this issue as 'a mere nothing' in his correspondence with Hope
  & Co. Letter of 17th February 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  London.
3 Letter of 17th February 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Hope & Co., London.

    PAGE 394

I Letters of 26th February 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  London, and of 6th and 27th April 1802 from R. Youte, The Hague, to J.Williams
  Hope, London.
2 Letter of loth May 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to R.de Souza Coutinho,
  Lisbon. Current Account Book relating to the Portuguese loan, 1802-1803. During
  Labouchere's discussions with Talleyrand, he was informed that France no longer
  required the funds in Lisbon, and that these should be transferred to Paris. Any
  exchange losses arising from the transfer were for Portuguese account. On 14th May
  1802, Labouchere paid to Citizen Esteve, Tresorier du Goul'ernement, the three
  million livres demanded (Current Account Book, Portuguese loan, 1802-1803). This
  sum was furnished by Perregaux and Baguenault, who drew on Hope for the purpose.
  In all, the Company paid 20 million livres to Esteve; the balance of 5 million livres
  (2 million crusados) had been paid by the Portuguese government in 1801.
3 The actual sum made available to the Portuguese government was 90 %of
  cf 13,000,000 less commission at 5 % = cf I 1,050,000. Acting on instructions issued
  by the prince regent on 16th February 1802, Bandeira had already drawn on Barings
  for cf 2,400,000.
  Letter of 30th March 1802 from R.Youte, The Hague, to Hope & Co., London.
4 Letter of 19th March 1802 from J.Williams Hope, London, to H.A.Insinger & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
5 Sales in 1802 totalled 33,069 3 /16 carats, which fetched cf 82 I ,390,4.0. In 1803 the
  totals were 36,228 9 / 16 carats and cf 936,383.0.8 respectively. In addition to these
  stocks, which carne direct from Lisbon, Hope & Co. had managed to lay hands on
  33,000 carats out of a parcel of 55,000 carats which the Portuguese government had
  surrendered to France. As explained in note 2 on page 39 I, these had come into the
  possession of two London diamond merchants. Upon reflection, these merchants,
  S.Salomons and L.de Symons, decided to sell the stones in Amsterdam and to
  employ Hope & Co. for this purpose. In June/July 1802, they received from the
  Company an advance of 40,000 pounds sterling on the sale.

    PAGE 395

I   Letter of 9th March 1802 from R.Youte, The Hague, to Hope & Co., London.

                                          665
                              NOTES PAGES         395-399
2 Letter of 30th March 1802 from R. Voute, The Hague, to Hope & Co./London.
  Under the State Regulations of 1801, the Minister of Finance had bee~ replaced by a
  Treasurer General and a Council of Finances.
3 Letters of 6th and lith April 1802 from R.Voute, The Hague, to Hope & Co.,
   London. Henry Philip Hope had arrived in the Batavian Republic in March, and had
   been followed in June by Thomas Hope. Neither, however, was an active partner in ~
  the firm.

  PAGE 396

I Letter of 26th July 1802 from R.Voute, Middagten, to Hope & Co., London.
2 Letter of 25th August 1802 from R. Voute, Middagten, to Hope & Co., London. At a
  subsequent meeting with a deputation from the Staatsbewind, Bonaparte made some
  adverse comments concerning Spoors.
  Colenbrander, Bataafsche Republiek, 280.

  PAGE 397

I Extract from Het Register der Resolutien van Thesaurier-General en Raden van
  Finantieen der Bataafsche Republiek, dated Wednesday, 14th July 1802, NO.4.
2 Letter of 26th July 1802 from R.Voute, Middagten, to Hope &Co., London.
3 Letter of 21st July 1802 from R.Voute, Middagten, to P.e.Labouchere, 'c/o 30 or 31,
  au Doelen du Gaarnalenmarkt,' Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 2 IstJuly, I 802 from P.e.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Van Son(?),
  The Hague.

  PAGE 398

I Letter of 3rd August 1802 from M.H.Van Son, The Hague, to P.e. Labouchere, (?).
  Letter of 18th August 1802 from R. Voilte, Middagten, to Hope & Co., London.
2 While in Paris, Labouchere had also discussed the Portuguese affair with
  Schimmelpenninck, the Batavian envoy to France, who was greatly in favour with
  Bonaparte. Schimmelpenninck attributed the hesitant attitude on the part ofthe
  Staatsbewind to Hope's offer to pay t % tax on the loan, which, he said, had aroused
  suspicions of ulterior motives. The envoy promised to put in a good word for Hope &
  Co. in The Hague, but this had no effect. It was said of Schimme1penninck that he
  had told his Portuguese counterpart that Portugal could have done better with
  another house, and that permission for the loan would then certainly have been
  forthcoming. Following the rejection of the request, Sir Francis Baring wrote to
  Talleyrand, asking him to instruct the new French envoy to the Batavian Republic,
  De Semonville, to make a further appeal for the approval of the loan.
  Letter of 25th August 1802 from R.Voute, Middagten, to Hope & Co., London.
3 This was a misstatement. As we have already seen, the proposal to transfer the loan
  to Amsterdam emanated from Sir Francis Baring.

  PAGE 399

I Letter of 3rd August 1802 from Henry Hope, London, to P.C.Labouchere, Paris.
2 Mr.Th.L.lngram, Archivist of Baring Brothers & Co. kindly allowed us to read a
  volume concerning the Portuguese loan which he has written and which is based on
  discoveries made by him in the Northbrook Papers, which are kept at the Company's
  offices in London. This reveals that Sir Francis Baring desired a far-reaching merger,


                                         666
                                NOTES PAGES        399-403
    and indeed continued to hope for such a development right up to the enactment of
    the new deed of partnership in October 1802. Voute had earlier referred to Sir
    Francis's plan for one of his sons to become a partner in Hope & Co. Letters of 4th
    and 22nd May 1802 from R. Voute, Middagten, to J. W.Hope, London.

    PAGE 400

I Letter of 21st February 1803 from H. Hope, London, to J.Williams Hope,
2 Letter of 17th September 1802 from Hope & Co., London, to P. Taay, Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 6th November 1802 from Henry Hope, London, to J. Williams Hope,
  Norwich.
4 Letter of 4th September 1802 from R.Voute, Middagten, to Hope & Co., London.
5 Letter of 13th September 1802 from R. Voute, The Hague, to Hope & Co., London.
6 Letter of 29th September 1802 from R.Voute, Middagten, to J.Williams Hope,
  London.

    PAGE 402

I Letter of 7th December 1802 from F. Baring, London, to J.Williams Hope,
  Amsterdam. Concerning Andries Pels & Sons: Supra, 5, I 1,13,21.
2 Letter of 30th December 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to R.Voute,
  The Hague.
3 Letter of 29th/30th December 1802 from R. VoGte, The Hague, to J. Williams Hope,
  Hope, Amsterdam. On 1st December 1802, Voute had taken his seat on a
  committee set up to study the nature and shape of the trade with the Asiatic
  colonies and the administration ofthese. D.C.A.van Hogendorp, ed., Memoires du
  General Dirk van Hogendorp (The Hague, 1887), 131-132, 138.
4 The advertisement also appeared in London on 14th January 1803.

    PAGE 403

I Sir Francis Baring's reply to a letter from J.Stanley, Lisbon, dated 1st February 1803.
2 Letter of 24th December 1802 from Hottinguer, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 27th December 1802 from P.B.Babut, Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
3 To reach the total of 5,000 it was necessary to include the 610 bonds which belonged
  to the 'Concern' and had been redeemed at the end of 1802. Henry Hope had
  purchased his 3,000 bonds at 90 %, and later 418 more at 95 %. All the other bonds
  were sold at these rates. Voute took 200, Insinger 50, A.P.Labouchere 20,
  S.P.Labouchere 23, W.G.Coesvelt 220 (of which he obtained 120 through Barings),
  Quintella 125, Bandeira 165 and J.M.de Souza 150. Labouchere himself took 19.
4 Controlling the sales in this manner also enabled the rate to be kept up. In fact, we
  are concerned here with receipts which could be exchanged for bonds at a convenient
  moment. During his stay in Lisbon in 1802, Labouchere had devised a plan for
  manipulating the market in such a manner that the bond price would gradually
  climb to the desired figure of95. But the subsequent phase envisaged by him-
  'throwing open' the market at that leve1- was not realized.
  Letter of 17th February 1802 from P.C.Labouchere, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  London.'
5 Insinger took a further 25, Taay received 7, W.G.Coesvelt a further 43, and
                               NOTES PAGES 403-406

  Bandeira, Quintella and J.M.de Souza each acquired an additional 100.
6 The available details of the distribution of the bonds cover the period up to the end
  of 1805.
  Infra, Appendix E-Iv.

  PAGE 404

I Letters of 5th March 1803 from J.Stanley, Lisbon, and J.P.Quintella and
  J.F.Bandeira, Lisbon, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Letter of 18th March 1803 from J. Stanley, Lisbon, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
  Also the royal instruction dated 7th March 1803, transmitted by Don Rodrigo de
  Souza Coutinho and enclosed with the letter of 12th March 1803 from
  J.P.Quintella and J.F.Bandeira to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 1st April 1803 from Sir F.Baring, London, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
3 Letters of 29th March and 5th April 1803 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to Sir
  F.Baring, London.
4 Extract from a letter of 22nd September 1802 from the Viceroy of Brazil to Don
  Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho, quoted in a letter of 5th April 1803 from I.Stanley,
  Lisbon, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
5 Letter of 24th July 1802 from J.Stanley, Lisbon, to Sir F.Baring, London;
  'Portugal Concern,' 3 I.

    PAGE 405

I The 'Amazone' carried 75,000 carats, and thus 90,000 carats in all reached England.
  At the auction of the seized diamonds. Hope's agent only managed to secure 1,200
  carats, because his limits were too low. Other buyers included the house of Couderc
  in Amsterdam.
  Letters of 23rd, 26th, 30th and 31st August 1803 from Sir Francis Baring, London,
  to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 25th August 1803 from Sir Francis Baring, London, to Don I.M.de Souza,
  Paris.
3 Letter of 13th October 1803 from J.M.de Souza, Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.

    PAGE 406

I Schafer, Geschichte von Portugal, v, 620-621.
  In letter book VI, 558: an effusive valedictory letter to Don Rodrigo de Souza
  Coutinho (which was not despatched). The letter which was sent, and which was
  couched in much calmer terms, will be found in A IT, 2.
2 Letter of 13th December 1803 from F. Baring & Co., London, to J.F.Bandeira,
  Lisbon.
  Letter of 26th January 1804 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Don Louis de
  Vasconcellas, Lisbon.
3 Letter of 20th January 1804 to F.Baring & Co., London, A IT, 72.
4 Letter of22nd January 1804 from F.Baring & Co., London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. This letter may have reached Labouchere before he wrote to Don
  Louis; if so, this would explain his change of mind.
5 Letter of 29th June 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.



                                           668
                               NOTES PAGES 407-410

  PAGE 407

I Letter of 18th May 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
  Baguenault's interest in this matter was professional, for the payments in Paris were
  routed via the house which bore his name.
2 The first indication ofthis appears in a letter of 26th March 1804 to J.Stanley,
  Lisbon, A II, 161. Cf. 'Kasboek 1804-1806,' VI-ba-62.
3 'Kasboek 1804-1806,' vl-ba-62, 18-49.
4 Letter of 28th February 1805 to Francis Baring & Co., London, All, 561.
    PAGE 408

I Letter of 21st October 1803 to John Stanley, Lisbon, VI, 581.
2 Letter of 28th October 1803 to John Stanley, Lisbon, VI, 586.
3 Letter of 28th October 1803 to John Stanley, Lisbon, VI, 586.
4 Letter of 13th February 1804 to John Stanley, Lisbon, All, 94.
  Letter of 13th February 1804 to J.F.Bandeira, Lisbon, A 11,95.
    PAGE 409

I Letters of 21st and 24th May 1804 to J.F.Bandeira, Lisbon, 208 et seq. Bandeira
  was not 0 bliged to take more than two million pounds annually. The royal
  storehouse in Lisbon contained 600,000 pounds, and supplies in 1804 were expected
  to total 1,700,000 pounds. Labouchere took the view that if such a quantity were to
  materialize in 1804, imports in the ensuing year would have to be limited to 1-1.2
  million pounds if a fall in prices was to be avoided.
2 Letter of 28th February 1805 to F. Baring & Co., London, A 11,561.
3 Letter of 13th February 1804 to J.F.Bandeira, Lisbon, All, 96.
4 'Diversen Documenten laast qoo-begin 1800,' 5 II -513.
  PAGE 410

I Letter of 13th April 1804 to Voute Bros., en ville, A II, 184. Barings participated in
  the brazilwood concern to the same extent as in Account F.R. and the entire
  Portuguese affair, namely one-quarter. The ratio of 5: 2 in favour of Hope, to which
  reference was made on page 389, was thus subsequently altered.
2 There are no reports concerning the contract between Bandeira and Hope, but the
  settlement accounts show clearly that the Company acted simply as agents for
  Bandeira and that they paid him promptly for the quantities contracted with
  Voute, having of course deducted insurance premiums, commission, etc. The
  quantities and prices are shown in Appendix E-v.
3 Letter of 13th June 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 18th June 1804 to Talleyrand, Paris, All, 230.
5 Letter of 18th June 1804 to J.M.de Souza, Paris, All, 231.
6 Letter of 29th June 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
7 Hope & Co. were not concerned with these payments, for which Bandeira employed
  the house of Rougemont. When this house went bankrupt, in· February 1803, the
  Portuguese government lost 450,000 livres. When it became dear that this loss would
  not have been sustained if De Souza had adhered to his instructions concerning the
  payments, he was held responsible for the consequences. His conduct in this matter
  set a pattern which was later to be emulated by the Spanish agent, Izquierdo.

                                          669
                                  NOTES PAGES 411-413

        PAGE 411

I Letters of 25th June and 6th September 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to
  P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam. Accounts relating to the Portuguese Loan, 1804-1806,
  1-2. Talleyrand's distrust of De Souza was so intense that he sent a personal
  representative to attend a meeting between Baguenault and De Souza.
2 Letter of 29th June 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
3 Letter of 5th July 1804 to Baguenault & Co., Paris, A II, 259.
4 Letter of 13th July 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam. The plan provided for the undertaking to be signed by Bandeira, and
  it is probable that this occurred. The payments were not made at strict monthly
  intervals, but on 29th June, 6th July, 22nd August and 5th November 1804; 26th
  January, 12th March, 9th April, 21st May, 13th July, 20th September, 12th October
  and 24th December 1805; and 25th February, 27th May, 1st and 6th August 1806.
  According to another source, Hope & Co. were obliged to advance monies for the
  last two instalments. Fugier, Napoleon et I'Espagne, II, 65.
5 Letter of 17th August 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam. The Portuguese Court unjustly accused Hope and Baguenault of
  failing to make payment direct to the French Treasury. In fact, the houses followed
  the practice adopted in 1802 and 1803.
6 Letter of 6th September 1804 from Baguenault & Co., Paris, to P.C.Labouchere,
  Amsterdam.
7 The fact that De Souza's wife, the former Countess de Flahaut, had been one of
  Talleyrand's mistresses evidently did not save him. Nouvelle Biographie Gemirale,
  xuv,275·
8 'State of the Loan, as stated to the Minister,' 31st December 1803.
9 Letter of 2nd February 1804 to J.Stanley, Lisbon, A 11,85,103.

        PAGE 412

  Letter of 9th March 1804 to J.P.Quintella, Lisbon, A II, 128.
    I
2 Letter of loth May 1804 to Don Louis de Vasconcellas, Lisbon, A II, 195 et seq.
3 Letter of 12th June 1804 J.P.Quintella, Lisbon, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 8th October 1804 to J. Stanley, Lisbon, All, 413.
  Letter of loth January 1805 to Don Louis de Vasconcellas, All, 526 et seq.

        PAGE 413

    I Letter of 13th November from R. Voute, Utrecht, to P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam.
      Schafer, Geschichte von Portugal, v, 627.
    2 Ibid., 629.
    3 Letters of 15th January, 9th June, 11th August and 8th December 1808 to the Baron
      de Quintella and Jacinto Fernandes da Costa Bandeira, Lisbon, VII, 28 I, 390, 467,
      564. On 8th December the Company wrote acknowledging receipt of the letters of
      8th and 13th October.
      Letters of 14th January, 8th April, 9th June, 11th August and 8th December 1808
      to J.Stanley, Lisbon, VII, 267, 344, 391,466,563. The letter of 8th April was carried
      by G.J.Ouvrard, who visited Lisbon on business. Ouvrard had promised to take
      Stanley under his wing. Stanley wrote on 4th May 1808 to say that General Junot
      had recognized his naturalization and that of his son.
                               NOTES PAGES         414-417

  PAGE 414
I Schafer, Geschichte von Portugal, v, 664.
2 Letter of 24th January 1809 to the Departement des Finances, Lisbon, A XXVII, 13.
  Letter of 24th January 1809 to J.F.da Costa Bandeira, Lisbon, A XXVII, 2.
  Letter of 24th January 1809 to Baron de Quintella, Lisbon, A XXVII, 7.
  Hope drew on Bandeira and Quintella to the extent of their credit balances, which
  totalled cf 343,861. I 5.0 and cf 28,769.0.0. respectively. These balances remained
  frozen until the drafts were met.
3 Letter of 20th January 1810 to the Baron de Quintella and J.F.da Costa Bandeira,
  Lisbon, A XXVII, 206-207.
4 Schiifer, Geschichte von Portugal, V, 702, 703. Under the terms of a trade treaty dated
  19th February 18 I 0, the English paid only half the import duty levied on traders of
  other nationalities.

    PAGE415
I Letter of 25th September 1809 from Baring Bros., London, to G.Kieckhoefer, Rio de
  Janeiro. Kieckhoefer saw in this measure the hand of the government in Brazil.
2 Letter of 20th January 1810 to the Departement des Finances, Lisbon, A XXVII, 260.
  Letter of 20th January 1810 to the Contractants de la Ferme Royale, Lisbon,
  A XXVII, 264.
  Letter of 20th January 1810 to J.F.da Costa Bandeira, Lisbon, A XXVII, 271.
  Letter of 20th January 1810 to Baron de Quintella, Lisbon, A XXVII, 275.
  The method employed at the end of 1808 was thus followed here. This time, a sum of
  cf 127.409.6.0. was drawn on the tobacco lessees.
3 Letter of 6th August 1809 from Baring, London, to J.Williams Hope, Harley Street,
  London.

    PAGE 416
I Letter of April 1808 from G. Kieckhoefer, Hamburg, to Hope & Co., Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 17th May 1808 to Matthiessen & Sillem, Hamburg, VII, 377.
  Letter of 12th July 1808 to Baring Bros., London, VII, 435. Hope envisaged a lo-year
  investment with interest at 4 % per annum, the capital being repaid in five equal
  instalments commencing at the end of the sixth year.
3 Letter of 20th February 1809 from G.Kieckhoefer, Falmouth, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. Kieckhoefer wanted to export Silesian linen to Brazil. This could only
  be done via England, where the linen was subject to a heavy tax imposed under the
  Orders in Council, the British answer to Napoleon's Continental System. The
  Portuguese envoy promised to support the measures taken by Kieckhoefer to obtain
  exemption from the tax.
4 Letter of 30th April 1809 from G.Kieckhoefer, Rio de Janeiro, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 3rd June 1809 from G.Kieckhoefer, Rio de Janeiro, to J.Williams Hope,
  East Sheen, Surrey.

    PAGE4 17
I Letter of 14th August'1809 from A.Baring, London, to J.Williams Hope, London.
2 Letter of 6th Septemb'er 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
                              NOTES PAGES 417-420

3 Letters of 14th and 22nd September 1809 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope &
  Co., Amsterdam.
4 Letter of 6th October 1809 from F .Baring, Stratton Park, Winchester, to Don Dom.
  de Souza Coutinho, London.
5 Letter of 6th October 1809 from F. Baring, Stratton Park, Winchester, to J.WiIliams
  Hope, East Sheen, Surrey.

    PAGE 418

  Letter of II th October 1809 from A.Baring, Bishopsgate, London, to J. Williams
  Hope, East Sheen, Surrey.
  Baring's calculations agree with the proceeds of the diamonds sold in 1808, after the
  deduction of commission at 4 %, del credere, etc. The average price obtained during
  1809, however, works out at cf26.50, which, at a rate of exchange ofcf9.6-9.8 to the
  pound sterling, was still less than the three pounds which Don Domingo demanded.
2 Letter of 6th October 1809 from F.Baring, Stratton Park, Winchester, to Don
  Domingo de Souza Coutinho, London.
3 Letter of 17th October 1809 from A.Baring, London, to Don Domingo de Souza
  Coutinho, London.
4 Letter of 20th October 1809 from Don Domingo de Souza Coutinho, London, to Sir
  F.Baring, London.
5 Letters of 20th and 21st October 1809 from A.Baring, London, to J.WiIliams Hope,
  London. Don Domingo persisted in addressing his letters to Sir Francis even though
  the replies came from Alexander Baring.
6 Letter of 3rd November 1809 from A.Baring, Carshalton, to J. Williams Hope, East
  Sheen, Surrey.
7 According to Kieckhoefer, this house bought between 22,000 and 25,000 carats at
  three pounds sterling per carat.
8 Letter of 9th January 1810 from J. Williams Hope, London, to Lord Liverpool,
  London.
9 Letters of 2nd and 13th January 1810 from A.Baring, London, to Don Dom.de
  Souza Coutinho, London.

    PAGE 419

I Letter of 13th January 18lOfrom G.Kieckhoefer, Rio de Janeiro, to J.WiIliams
  Hope, London. Don Domingo's authority to negotiate with Baring and Hope was
  vested in him by a decree issued by the prince regent on 16th December 1809. Letter
  of 8th June 1810 from B.I. Targini, Rio de Janeiro, to Baring and Hope, London.
2 Letter of 7th May 1810 from G.Kieckhoefer, Rio de Janeiro, to A.Baring, London.
3 Letter of 25th September 1809 from A.Baring, Banchurch, to J. Williams Hope,
  London.

    PAGE 420

I Letter of 29th May 1810 from G. Kieckhoefer, Rio de Janeiro, to A.Baring, London.
2 Letter of 2nd June 1810 from G .Kieckhoefer , Rio de Janeiro, to A.Baring, London.
3 Letter of 8th June 18 I 0 from G .Kieckhoefer, Rio de Janeiro, to A. Baring, London.
4 Labouchere, 'Un financier diplomate,' 427.
                                NOTES PAGES 421-425

    PAGE 4 2 1

I Letter of 24th April 1810 from A.Baring, London, to J.Williams Hope, London.
2 Letter of April 1810 from Sir Francis Baring, London, to Don Domingo de Souza
  Coutinho, London. It is not clear from the text whether Sir Francis was thinking also
  of the repayment of the loan from the British government, though it is probable that
  he was.
3 Letter of 6th August 18 I 0 from Don Domingo de Souza Coutinho, London, to
  A.Baring, London.
4 Letter of 4th July 1810 from John Stanley Jevons, Lisbon, to A.Baring, London.
5 Letter of 17th March 1810 from Baron de Quintella, Lisbon, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 422

I Letter of May 1810 from P.CLabouchere, ... , to the Count of Montalivet, Paris.
2 Letter of 14th August 1810 from A.Baring, London, to Don Domingo de Souza
  Coutinho, London.
  14th August 18 I 0: Proposal to Don Domingo de Souza Coutinho concerning the
  Portuguese Loan.
3 Schiifer, Geschichte von Portugal, v, 668-677.
4 Letter of 15th October 1810 from A.Baring, London, to P.CLabouchere, ...

    PAGE 423

I 'Portugal Concern,' 39 et seq. J.E.Lucena and M.S.de Paiva, Portuguese government
  agents in London, acted as witnesses. It is probable that the payment ofthe 30,000
  pounds sterling was made through them. Barings did not participate in the advance of
  50,000 pounds sterling. This house had had no part in the advancing offunds at the
  end of 1808 and 1809. In contrast to Henry Hope & Co., Barings had no financial
  interest in the loan. When the diamonds were sold, however, they resumed their
  one-fourth share.
2 Letter of 14th December 1810 from A.Baring, London, to P.C.Labouchere, ...
3 1,607 bonds were to remain unredeemed on 31St December 18I!, from which date
  they bore interest at 5 %.
4 Letter of 26th December 1810 to The Prince Arch-Treasurer etc., A XXVII, 539.

    PAGE 424

I Letter of 27th December r810 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to D.Parish,
  Paris.
2 Letters of 13th, 14th, 15th and 18th February 18r I from D.Parish, Paris, to
  P.CLabouchere, Antwerp.
  Labouchere, 'Un financier diplomate,' 435-447.
  Letter of I rth March 181 I from Jean Fran<;ois Ie Bras, Morlaix, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
3 Labouchere, 'Un financier diplomate,' 453-454.
4 Letter of 2nd May 181 I from P.CLabouchere, Paris, to The Duke of Gaeta, Paris.

    PAGE 425

    Letter of 20th June 18 I I from P.CLabouchere, Amsterdam, to John Hope, London.
    Hope had approached the Lieutenant General at the end of 18 I 0 with a request that
                                NOTES PAGES 425-426

  supplementary duty be waived in the case of the diamonds. Letter of 26th December
  ISIO to The Prince Arch-Treasurer, etc., A XXVII, 539.
  Letter of 12th July lSI I from the Count of Montalivet, Paris, to \\<·.G.Coesvelt,
  Amsterdam.
  Letter of 26th August ISII from Baring Bros. & Co., London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 'Compte de Vente d'une boite de diamants bruts du Bresil, vendu d'ordre de Son
  Excellence Monsr.le Chevalier de Souza Coutinho et pour compte de la Couronne de
  Portugal' and 'Invoice of a parcel of Brazil diamonds, purchased on joint account
  with Mrs.Hope & Co. of Amsterdam and delivered to W.G.Coesvelt Esq.' Both
  documents show that the parcel totalled 24,220 carats gross. From this, however, 29
  carats had to be deducted for false stones and a further 121 carats (j. %) for reduced
  weight, a sort of tare. The remaining 24,070 carats were sold at 47 shillings per carat,
  yielding 56,564.10 pounds sterling gross. After the deduction of brokerage, sorting
  costs, etc., a nett balance of 54,52S.S pounds remained. Insinger's account shows that
  this house settled with Hope for 24,OS9 1 / 16 carats which fetched cf 569,OS6. I I.S nett,
  indicating an average price of just over cf23.50 per carat. At a rate of exchange of
  cf 10, the two houses thus made a profit of about cf 24,000 on the deal.
  Grootboek IS12: 77.
3 Letter of ISth October lSI I from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Bros., London.
  Letter of loth January IS 12 from Insinger & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Bros. & Co.,
  London.
  Letter of loth January ISI2 from Hope & Co., Amsterdam, to Baring Bros. & Co.,
  London.
4 Any lengthy interruption in supplies produced a reduction in the number of cleavers
  and polishers. To offset the drain, Hope had taken timely steps to subsidize the
  training of diamond polishers. In the grootboek for I S05, the Account relating to the
  Portuguese Crown contains the following entries: 31st July, 'Paid to Keyzer for 7
  apprentice diamond polishers at f 150: f 1,050;' 31st August, 'Ditto for three
  apprentices: f 450;' 30th September, 'Ditto for 4 apprentices: f600;' 31st December,
  'Ditto for 2 apprentices: f 300.'
  The export of diamonds to Turkey had also ceased.

  PAGE 426

  Letter of Sth January I SI 2 to the Departement des Finances, Lisbon, A XXVIII, 6.
  Letter of Sth January IS 12 to Baring Bros. & Co., London, A XXVIII, S. Hope drew on
  Baring for the sum paid in Amsterdam.
2 Letter of 21st January IS12 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam. In Paris he visited the Ministers of Home Affairs, Finance and Police.
3 Letter of Sth March ISI2 from P.C.Labouchere, Paris, to John Hope, London.
4 Letter Of2SthAugust ISI2 from Baring Bros. &Co., London, to Hope &Co.,
  Amsterdam. Don Domingo's successor proved to be opposed to the export of
  diamonds to Holland, and under the terms of the contract of 13th December ISIO the
  decision rested with him. Baring thereupon disposed ofthe stones to Goldsmith. The
  proceeds, 53,400 pounds sterling, were handed to the envoy, 'Mrs.Baring not having
  received any money for that object.' The size of the parcel will have been of the order
  of 22-23,000 carats.
5 Letter of 29th October ISI2 from P.C.Labouchere, Amsterdam, to John Hope,
  London.
                                NOTES PAGES 426-427

6 Letter of 23rd February 1813 from H.J.Swarth, Amsterdam, to John Hope, London.
7 Letter of 20th October 1812 from John Hope, London, to D.Berck, Amsterdam, A v,
  151.
8 Letter of 14th October 1813 from Baring Bros. & Co., London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.

    PAGE 427

I Letter of 24th November 1815 from Baring Bros. & Co., London, to Hope & Co.,
  Amsterdam.
2 The first parcel was of 19,751 5 Is carats and fetched cf 540,597.17.onett; the second, of
  19,898-!- carats, fetched cf 587,669. I7.0 nett. The mean price per carat for the first
  parcel was just over cf 29.50. Grootboek 1815: 249;grootboek 1816: 220. The loan
  sum was reduced by cf 1,055,208.8.0 at the end of 1816.
  Grootboek 1816: 215.
3 The exact quantity was 19,767 carats, which fetched cf 562,562.7.0, an average of just
  under cf28.50 per carat. Grootboek 18I7: 271.
4 At the end of 1819, settlement was made in respect of25,8637 Is carats. These fetched
  cf825,851.12.0., an average of cf 30.50 per carat. Grootboek 1819: 274. This was the
  nett figure after the deduction of various expenses. The market price was
  approximately one guilder per carat higher.
5 Letter of 8th January 1819 to the Departement des Finances, Lisbon, A XXIX, 462.
  Confirmation of this will be found in H.Heertje, De Diamantbewerkers van
  Amsterdam (Amsterdam, 1936),25.
                                 CHAPTER FIFTEEN




    PAGE 431

  Letter of 9th August 1787 to Laborde de Mereville, Paris, 'Private Correspondence
  begun 19th June, ended 31st Dec. 1787' (hereafter abbreviated to P.C. '87), 82.
2 Letter of 9th August 1787 to Laborde de Mereville, Paris, P.e. '87, 84.
3 Letter of 21st February 1788 to Bohl Bros., Cadiz, 'Private Correspondence 1788'
  (hereafter abbreviated to P.e. '88), 190.

    PAGE 432

I In his letters to Laborde, Hope made it appear that he was inpossession of detailed
  information.
2 Letter o£1th August 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 8I. Cochineal prices in
  Amsterdam had indeed declined steadily since 1770, albeit a mild recovery took place
  during the years of the American War of Independence. Since December 1786 the
  monthly average had been f 7.80 per pound. The yearly averages since 1770 had been
  as follows: 1770: f 13.83; 1771: f 14.99; 1772: f 13.68; 1773: f I I.41; 1774: f I I .14;
  1775: f 10.28; 1776: f 8.62; 1777: f9.74; 1778: f 10.06; 1779: f 10.08; 1780: f 10.55;
  1781: f -. -; 1782: f 10.56; 1783: f9.15; 1784: £1.62; 1785: £1.96; 1786: £1.9I.
  N.W.Posthumus, Nederlandsche Prijsgeschiedenis, I (Leiden, 1943),422. Hope was
  also counting on a new arrangement for official trade with the West Indies delaying
  future imports of cochineal. Letter of 5th February 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London,
  P.C. '88, 13I.
3 Laborde, Hope's correspondent, became well known for his advanced political views.
  He was among the architects of the Declaration of Human Rights, and he swore the
  Oath of the Tennis Court. He wIll certainly have been on the side of the Patriots in the
  party conflicts in the Republic. This was evidently no impediment to a friendly
  exchange ofletters with Henry Hope. Nouvelle Biographie Genl!rale, XXVII (Paris,
  1858),381-384.
4 Letter of 7th August 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 80. On 28th July, Henry
  Hope wrote to the Swedish Minister of Finance, Ruuth, complaining of 'the
  thanklessness of the political circumstances in this country, which has a dominant
  influence on business, especially at the present time, when the Stock Exchange is
  feeling the effects of bankruptcies which add to the discomfort and mistrust.' Letter
  of 28th July 1787 to Baron de Ruuth, Stockholm, P.C. '87, 61.

    PAGE 433

I   Concerning VoGte: Nieuw Nederlandsch Biographisch Woordenboek, II, 1508-1510.
                                NOTES PAGES 431-434

  Transactions between merchants, such at took place in Rouen, were viewed by Hope
  as unusual: 'We find that in Rouen everything is traded between the merchants and
  not thro' brokers, by which means a great deal of time is required and more skill than
  generally falls to the share of merchants in the detail of selling and buying.'
  Letter of 9th October 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 189.
2 Voute was subsequently to render valuable services to the Company during two
  missions to St.Petersburg in connexion with Russian and Polish loans (supra,
  Chapter Five, passim, 158-172). Voute had written to Hope on 9th April 1787
  concerning the potential market for cochineal in Russia. By then, however, Hope had
  already written to Ryan on the matter.
3 Hope fixed the arroba at 23 ' /8 Amsterdam pounds (of 494 grams) and the suron or
  seroon at just under 87 / ,0 arrobas. A seroon thus weighed 200 Amsterdam pounds,
  or nearly 98.8 kilograms. Letters of 16th and 18th April 1788 to Thos. Littledale,
  Rotterdam, P.e. '88, 347, 349. W.C.H.Staring, De hinnen- en buitenlandsche maten,
  gewichten van vroeger en tegenwoordig, met hunne onderlinge vergelijkingen en
  herleidingen (Schoonhoven, 1902),91, 106. The par value of the ducat can be put at
  2t guilders; at the rate of exchange ruling when the speculation was set up, it was
  worth f 2.30. Staring, Maten en gewichten, 146. Posthumus, Prijsgeschiedenis, 1,585.
  The two Paris houses concerned were Boyd Kerr & Co and Vandenyver Freres & Co.
4 Letter of 17th August 1787 to J.&F.Baring. London, P.C. '87, 97. As Henry Hope
  had not referred to these two centres in his original plan, we may assume that he was
  influenced by Baring.

    PAGE 434

I Letter of 30th August 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rouen, P.C. '87, II6.
2 Letter of 31st August 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87,126. Posthumus, in his
  Prijsgeschiedenis, states that the average price for cochineal in August 1787 was f 7.80
  or 26 shillings per pound.
3 At the rate of exchange ruling in August 1787, the livre can be put at f 0.45. The limits
  in Marseilles thus lay between f6.75 and f6.98, and those in Rouen between f9.00
  and f 9-45. Bournissien and Counc1er also received letters of credit; these were drawn
  on Cottin & Fils and Jauge in Paris, because drawing too heavily on a single house
  might have attracted attention. Like Ryan, they could not draw on the credits until
  the purchases had been completed.
4 Bournissien replied to the letter of 30th August on 6th September (P.C. '87,140).
  Counc1er's reply was sent on loth September (P.e. '87,149). Ryan replied to Hope's
  letter of 17th August on 7th September. These dates show that the estimated
  transmission times were correct (P.e. '87, 187). A normal letter took 3-4 days longer
  to reach Cadiz.
5 Sutherlands & Bock were given a price limit of 165 roubles per pood for cash, or 180
  roubles for 12 months' credit. One pood can be put at 16.38 kilograms. If we assume
  that the rouble at that time was worth f 1.85, we arrive at a price off9.25 or
  thereabouts per Amsterdam pound for cash. Letter of 21St August 1787 to
  Sutherlands & Bock, St.Petersburg, P.C. '87,102. The house was also authorized to
  buy up cochineal in Moscow.
6 Letter of 21st August 1787 to R.Sutheriand, St. Petersburg, P.e. '87, 99. The
  preparations for the war against the Turks had greatly increased Russia's financial
  commitments abroad.
                                NOTES PAGES 435-437

    PAGE 435

I Letters of 1st and 8th September 1787 to B.Roosen, Hamburg, P.e. '87,129,136.
  Hope estimated the stock in Hamburg to be between 50 and 100 seroons. Roosen put
  the figure at 20-25, but he was later obliged to revise this figure. This instance shows
  how difficult it was for even a local merchant to accurately assess the quantity
  available.
2 Letter of 17th September 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fills, Rouen, P.e. '87,
  145·
3 Letter of 1st October 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux, Rouen, P.e. '87,166--167.

    PAGE 436

I These averaged 65 ducats per arroba for seroons, and 6330 ducats for sobernales.
  Letter of 18th October 1787 to Th.Ryan, Cadiz, P.C. '87, 200.
2 The Five Gremios asked 66 ducats per arroba for cash.
  Letter of 4th October 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87,180.
3 Letters of 10th and 18th October 1787 to Th.Ryan, Cadiz, P.C. '87,194,201.
  Letter of 12th October 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87,196.
4 On 4th October 1787 Hope wrote to Baring, advising him of the arrival in Marseilles
  of 25 seroons from Cadiz. On 28th September, 65 seroons had arrived in London
  (P.C. '87,177). On 13th November, two vessels carrying 90 seroons arrived in
  London, and later a further 50 seroons reached Amsterdam. Letters of 23rd
  November and 4th December to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 269, 303. In
  addition, small quantities continued to arrive from Mexico-in all some 280 seroons,
  in three ships-a portion of which was bought by Ryan on a rising market, at prices
  up to 68 ducats per arroba. Letter of 19th October 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London,
  P.C. '87, 207.
5 This report from Ryan did not reach Hope until 27th November. The breakdown,
  according to quality, was as follows:
      300 seroons 1st superior } bl k d       D L d
      260 seroons 2nd superior     ac an grey, or on on
      300 seroons for Marseilles and Amsterdam
      145 seroons extraordinary good, for Amsterdam
    1,005 seroons

      24 sobernales 1st superior} . .                  .
                               .   principally grey, sUitable for London
      48 so bernaIes 2nd superIor
      39 sobernales suitable for Marseilles or Amsterdam
    I I I sobernales

  The colour, i.e. black or grey, was determined by the method of treatment of the
  cochineal insects after collection. Heating them in an oven caused them to turn grey,
  while contact with hot iron turned them black. Letter of 30th November 1787 to
  J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 291.
6 Letter of 27th November 1787 to J. &F .Baring, London, P.C. '87, 287.

    PAGE 437

    Letters of 7th and 11th September 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87,134,137.
    De Bruyn had bought 244 seroons on I Ith September. The information available
                                 NOTES PAGES 437-439

  indicated that a further 243 seroons were held by other houses. On 7th September the
  stock which had not been purchased was described as 'not in our way,' but by lith
  September opinions had changed. The price paid for the 244 seroons averaged 26
  schellingen (f 7.80) per pound.
2 Letters of 25th and 28th September, and 9th and 12th October 1787 to J.&F.Baring,
  London, P.e. '87,152,158,189,195.
3 Since 30th October the price had remained at 30 schellingen (f 9.00) per pound.
  The gaps in the monthly quotations in Posthumus'sPrijsgeschiedenis for the months
  of October and November can be filled in with figures off 8-40 and f 9.00 respectively.
4 Letters of 4th and 28th September 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 130,
  160-163. By 28th September, Hope's brokers had succeeded in purchasing only 393
  seroons. At the end of November, Baring's stock totalled 798 seroons. The price rose
  from 14 shillings and 8 pence in early September to about 17 shillings in October and
  November.
5 Letters of 24th and 27th September 1787 to Vve Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles,
  P.e. '87,149, 158, and 25th September 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87,152.
  By the end of the 15-day purchasing period, Councler held 159 seroons. In
  Amsterdam some saw it as an (unsuccessful) operation on the part of English
  speculators. Others had earlier burned their fingers on cochineal.

    PAGE 438

  Letter of 1st October 1787 to Vve Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.C. '87,168.
2 Councler was thus free to go to 18-18t livres per pound, but in fact he bought only 6
  seroons at 18livres. During November and December he went no higher than 17.1
  livres. By the end of November his purchases totalled 265 seroons.
3 Letters of 17th, 20th and 27th September 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils,
  Rouen, P.e. '87,145,147,153, and 28th September 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London,
  P.e. '87,158. Hope had authorized Bournissien to pay up to 24livres for small
  parcels. Bournissien also bought up parcels in Le Havre and others which were en
  route to that port.
4 Letters of 17th and 27th September 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rouen,
  P.C. '87,145,154, and 21st September to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87,148. In the
  last ofthese, Hope wrote: 'We have found that a house here (i.e. in Amsterdam) has
  started up as a buyer.' He thereupon raised the price to 26!--27 schellingen per pound,
  but only managed to secure 20 seroons. By the end of November, Bournissien had
  bought 108 seroons.
5 Letters of 8th November 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rouen, P.C. '87,
  239-240, and 9th November to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 241. Baring had
  informed Hope about a counterspeculation involving 90 seroons. Hope ultimately
  accepted 27 seroons at between 24.5 and 25.1 livres per pound, but declined a further
  40. Bournissien's reply to Hope's 'insinuations of suspicion of unfair dealings' struck
  Hope as 'plausible.' Letter of 1st January 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 2.

    PAGE 439

I   The original limits were 165 roubles per pood for cash, or 180 roubles for 12 months
    credit. The ruling price, however, was 180-185 roubles for 12 months credit. Hope
    therefore consented to an increase to 185 roubles for credit, or 170-175 for cash.
    Letter of 5th October 1787 to Sutherlands & Bock, St.Petersburg. P.C. '87,176. On
                               NOTES PAGES 439-440

  the same day, however, Sutherlands & Bock wrote to say that the price for 12 months
  credit had risen to 195-200 roubles, and the cash price to 180-185 roubles. Upon
  receipt of this news, Hope authorized the house to go to 180-190 roubles for cash, or
  200-210 with credit, but in such a manner as to produce averages of 185 roubles for
  cash or 205 for credit. Letter of 19th October 1787 to Sutherlands & Bock,
  St.Petersburg, P.C. '87, 203. In his correspondence with Baring, Hope made no
  reference to suspicions of bad faith on the part of Sutherland. But as a quid pro quo he
  asked to be allowed to discount payments against credit at the low rate of exchange
  ruling at the time.
2 Letter of 18th December 1787 to Sutherlands & Bock, St.Petersburg, P.e. '87, 350.
  The average price for credit sales was just under 200 roubles per pood.
3 The rules prescribed in the Koran related to kermes, a dyestuff obtained in the
  Mediterranean region by drying the bodies of scale insects of the same name.
  Cochineal, however, had secured a firm place in the Moslim countries because of its
  fine bright red colour.
4 Letter of 6th November 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 233.
5 Letters of 9th and 16th November 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 240,247.

    PAGE 440

I It was Hope's intention to have the cochineal sent to Amsterdam via Lyons and
  Strasbourg. As 'compact and valuable goods' were involved, the transport costs
  would not exceed 4 %ad valorem, and the journey would not take more than four
  weeks. The cochineal would have to be packed in barrels, each of which could hold
  six seroons. If the full barrels were too heavy for the carts, the contents could be
  reduced to four seroons. When filling the barrels, the cochineal was to be consolidated
  in order to prevent powdering as a result of friction. Letters of22nd October 1787 to
  Vve Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.C. '87, 21 I, and 16th November 1787 to
  J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 247.
2 Hope also considered chartering a vessel in Leghorn, or arranging for a British silk
  carrier to call at Marseilles. Letter of7th November 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London,
  P.C. '87, 281.
3 Letters of 16th November 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 247, and 23rd
  November to VveCouncler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.e. '87, 265. On 17th December
  1787, Hope enquired of Councler concerning the composition and powers of the
  Chamber of Commerce in Marseilles. His action was prompted by questions put to
  him in connexion with a plan to establish a similar body in Amsterdam with the aim
  of finding the causes of the decline in Holland's trade and proposing suitable
  remedies. Hope viewed the plan as 'nne idee bizarre de quelques individus ambitieux.'
  The date given by Westermann for the draft Articles of Association, i.e. 1786, thus
  appears to be too early. Letter of 17th December 1787 to Vve Councler & Fils Aine,
  Marseilles, P.C. '87, 343; J.C.Westermann, Kamer van Koophandel en Fabrieken voor
  Amsterdam, Gedenkboek, I (Amsterdam, 1936),3-4, Appendix I.
4 Letter of 24th December 1787 to Vve Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.C. '87, 366.
5 Letters of 3rd and loth December 1787 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rouen,
  P.C. '87, 293, 326, and I Ith December to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '87, 334-335.
  Even after giving permission for these sales, Hope did not entirely abandon the idea
  of 'keeping up a circulation.'
6 Letter of 1st January 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 2. On 17th December


                                           680
                                NOTES PAGES         440-443
    1787 Hope instructed Ryan to send 600 seroons to Rotterdam, but on the 3 I st he
    issued amended orders providing for 300 seroons to go to Rotterdam and 200 to
    London. The Rotterdam consignment was subsequently increased by 100 seroons.
    The 400 seroons were accepted in Rotterdam by Thos. Littledale & Co., on behalf of
    Hope, at the end of April 1788 and provisionally placed in their warehouse.
    Little dales were requested to complete the inward clearance with the minimum of
    fuss, 'in an easy and satisfactory manner,' Letter of 18th April 1788 to Thos.
    Littledale & Co., Rotterdam, P.e. '88, 349.

    PAGE 441

I Letter of 4th December 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 305.
2 Letters of 14th December 1787 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '87, 337-338; 17th
  December to Thos. Ryan & Co., Cadiz, P.e. '87, 344, and 17th December to
  Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rauen, P.e. '87, 344.
3 Letters of 24th December 1787 to Vve Councler & Fils Aim!, Marseilles, P.e. '87,
  368, and 17th December to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rauen, P.e. '87, 344.

    PAGE 442

I Councler was frightened by a rum our concerning the arrival of 1,000 seroons in
  January 1788. Hope attributed the rumour to regret and anger on the part of sellers
  and outsiders, but privately those concerned were none too sure of their ground in
  view of' Ryan's defective information.'
  Letters of 24th December 1787 to Vve Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.e. '87,
  367; 30th November, 21St and 28th December 1787 to J.&F.Baring. London, P,e.
  '87,290,363,374; 1st, 15th and 22nd January, 5th, 12th and 19th February 1788 to
  J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '88, 1,60,96, 131, 145, 179; 18th February 1788 to Vve
  Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.e. '88, 164; and loth and 24th January 1788 to
  Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rauen, P.e. '88, 37, 105.
2 Letters of 31st December 1787 to Thos. Ryan & Co., Cadiz, P.e. '87, 378; and 4th
  and 8th January 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '88,13,31. Bohl Bros. & Co.
  was a German house.
3 The 63 seroons shipped to London in the 'Hesther' proved to have come from
  owners who had sold other parcels to Ryan. Hope was informed that no export duty
  had been paid on the consignment. Baring succeeded in laying hands on 50 of the 63
  seroons. Hope complained to Baring about the 'defective conduct of our factor' (i.e.
  Ryan). Letters of 1st, 4th, 15th and 22nd January 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London P.C.
  '88, I, 13,62,96; and 21st February to Bohl Bros. & Co., Cadiz, P.C. '88,192.
4 Letter ohth January 1788 to Bohl Bros. & Co., Cadiz, P.C. '88, 20. Hope made it
  appear to Bohl that the Company was acting on behalf of third parties.
5 Hope wrote to Bohl on 7th January; the four ships together carried 5 I 6 seroons and
  29 sobernales.
  Letters of 1st and 5th February 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '88,121,131.

    PAGE 443

I   Letter of 21st February 1788 to Bohl Bros. & Co., Cadiz, P.C. '88, 189-190. The
    order to Bohl to implement Instruction Number One was given on 31st January 1788
    (P.C. '88, 119). On the same day, Ryan was given permission to purchase the bulk of
    the new stock at 70 ducats. He was also authorized to take an option on large parcels


                                           68r
                               NOTES PAGES 443-446

  at 75-78 ducats per arroba and, if necessary, to give a bonus of I ducat. For the stock
  as a whole, Ryan's buying limits were competitive with those imposed on Bohl; for
  smaller parcels, they were less favourable. After all that had happened, this order can
  scarcely be taken seriously; in all probability it served as a 'safety net' beneath Boh!.
2 Letter of 21st February 1788 to Bohl Bros. & Co., P.e. '88, 193.
3 Hope assured Boh! that Ryan's purchases were not made on behalf ofthe speculators.
  Ryan had probably secured some of the parcels which had changed hands at 72
  ducats. At the same time, Ryan was addressed in an encouraging tone in order to
  prevent large-scale sales-and with them a decline in prices. The order given to Ryan
  on 31st January was cancelled in a letter dated 31st March (P.e. '88, 224).
  Letters of 14th and 21st February, and 3rd March 1788 to Thos. Ryan, Cadiz, P.C.
  '88,154, 189,221.
4 On 14th March, Hope reported to Baring that the purchase by Bohl of 48 seroons had
  served to raise the price of current grades to 78-80 ducats, and that of the highest
  grades to 85-88 ducats. By then, the 500 seroons which had arrived in January had
  practically disappeared from the market.

    PAGE 444

I Letters of 29th February and 4th March 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.e. '88, 212,
  226.
2 The 'parr ofthe market' for Marseilles had originally been fixed at 98 ducats. This
  was subsequently lowered, first to 85-90 and then to 74-84 ducats. Letters of 21st,
  24th and 31st January, and 14th February 1788 to Vve Councler & Fils Aim!,
  Marseilles, P.C. '88, 88,101, 115,148.
3 Letter of 14th February 1788 to Vve Councler & Fils Aim!, Marseilles, P.C. '88,150.
4 Letter of 14th March 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 260.

    PAGE 445

I Letter of 31st March 1788 to Vve Councler & Fils Aine, Marseilles, P.e. '88, 306.
2 Letters of 28th February and 6th March 1788 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils,
  Rouen, P.C. '88, 208, 232.
3 Letters of 27th March and 7th April 1788 to Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, Rouen,
  P.C. '88, 290, 328.

    PAGE 446

I Letters of 18th and 28th March 1788 to Sutherlands & Bock, St.Petersburg, P.C. '88,
  269,295; and 14th March to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 263-264.
2 Letter of 8th April 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 330. The fact that
  Barings had only a one-fourth share in the purchases will certainly have contributed to
  their optimism and boldness. The purchases up to this date totalled just over 5t
  million guilders.
3 Letter of 8th April 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 331. The same guarded
  tone is discernible in the letter of 28th March 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88,
  296. Voute had again been abroad in March. He returned on the 21st, but it was the
  26th before he found time to discuss the cochineal affair with Hope. Letter of 25th
  March 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 288.
4 Bohl wrote to Hope on 18th March. Hope's letter of 21st February had reached him
  round about mid-March. Letter of loth April 1788 to Bohl Bros. & Co., Cadiz, P.e.


                                           682
                               NOTES PAGES 446-449

  '88,335. Hope was not willing to take over any cochineal which Ryan might buy.
  Letter of loth April 1788 to Thos. Ryan & Co., Cadiz, P.C. '88, 333, 335.

  PAGE 447

  Letter of 24th March 1788 to Bohl Bros. & Co., Cadiz, P.C. '88, 281. Bohl was
  authorized to buy a further 50-100 seroons; Hope was anxious that the price should
  not drop below 75 ducats, preferring to see it rise to 80. On loth April, Hope
  confirmed to Bohl the receipt of the latter's letter of 18th March. Letter of loth April
  1788 to Bohl Bros. & Co., Cadiz, P.e. '88, 335. On lIth April Hope wrote to Baring:
  'By letters from Cadiz we have advice of the arrival of The Confidence from Vera
  Cruz with 295 surons cochineal & that The Mentor & St.Raphael were daily expected
  with about 400 surons more.' (P.e. '88, 339). When a letter dated 18th March refers
  to 'daily expected,' one of 24th March which takes three weeks to reach its destination
  cannot be in time.
2 Letter of I rth April 1788 to J.&F.Baring, London, P.C. '88, 339, 340.
3 For Hope, with a three-fourths share, this meant a loss of cf 1,588,194.8.0. Of this
  sum, cf 400,000 was written off.
4 The figures quoted here were obtained from the 'Cochineal Account' which appears
  in 'Balance of Several Accounts Anno 1793,' folios 8-24.
  Infra, Appendix F-I-II-III.
5 The selling prices are expressed in guilders and cents (in conformity with Posthumus's
  Prijsgeschiedenis) and in schellingen. No distinction is made between the terms 'bale'
  and 'seroon' in these accounts.

  PAGE 448

  Between 1790 and 1794 a total of 5 I 8 seroons were exported to Russia.
2 In 1788,62 seroons were sold at a profit of cf 0.22 per pound. From then on, losses
  were suffered: in 1789, cf 0.27 per pound on 21 I seroons; in 1790, cf 0.94 per pound
  on 142 seroons; in 1791, cfo.67 per pound on 52 seroons; in 1792, cf 1.99 per pound
  on 104 seroons; and in 1793, cf 3.15 per pound on 2 seroons. The 2 seroons in 1793
  were cochineal dust and thus of lower value.
3 In 1788, Hope's average selling price was cfo.lo above the mean of the quotations
  over the year. In 1789, it was cfo.19 below, in 1790 cfo.55 below, in 1791 cfo-49
  below and in 1792 cf 1.70 below.
4 In September 1787 De Bruyn had purchased 244 seroons at an average price of26 schel-
  tingen, or cf7.80 per pound. This corresponded to the average of the quotations for
  the months January to September 1787 inclusive. Posthumus, Prijsgeschiedenis, I, 422.
5 The profit on the remaining 40 %was no more than cf o. I 5 per pound.
6 The low selling prices achieved by the speculators show that their stock was indeed
  'dead stock' and that the demand at that time was little greater than the normal
  supply. It is unlikely that the steady decline in selling prices was caused by reduction
  in quality, for the article had good storage properties.
7 38 seroons went to Paul Thoron & Co. and M.A.Qm.Salomon Fua in
  Constantinople, 22 to J.J.Guerin in Aleppo and 6 to Alexandria.

  PAGE 449

1 Supra, 123. In view of the fact that, according to the account of 1793,198 seroons and
  61 sobernales were held by Sutherland, a claim by Hope relating to the speculation
                                      NOTES PAGE 449

    must have existed. A further 75 seroons were consigned to Wm.Porter & Co. in 1793.
2   Labouchere sold the claim to Lawrence C.Brown, the former partner of William
    Porter, for cf 25,000. Brown was in financial difficulties, partly as a result of errors in
    speculation and partly because of the Russian government's anti-British attitude.
    Letters of 6th/18th September 1811 from P.C.Labouchere, St.Petersburg, to
    G.Thomson Rowand & Co., Moscow, and 6/18th September 1811 from
    P.C.Labouchere, St.Petersburg, to Lawr.C.Brown, St.Petersburg.
                                     INDEX




Abegg,P.J., merchant in Emden, 192,506       -diamond industry of. 62, 386. 425, 426,
Addington, Henry, Lord, British               427,674
 minister, 663                               -as a financial centre, 12. 22. 23. 24, 28,
Admiralty, French, 192, 197                   62,63,69, 287.357
Adolph Frederick, King of Sweden, 74,        -Schepenen of/44, 128,303
 75                                          -Stock Exchange of, 13,29,44,74,89.
d'Aguiar, Count, Lord Treasurer of the        143,208,231.234,236.242,243,256,
 Portuguese government in Brazil, 420         359,397
Alexander, Russian Grand Duke, 136           Andersson,J., correspondent in
Alexanderr, Czar, 183, 198,200,205,210        Gothenburg, 87
 215,219,227,228,234,235,241,242.            Angulo, Don Francisco, deputy of
 244,248,249,250,252,255,257,258,             d' Almenara, Spanish Minister of
 262,267,272,273,413,625                      Finance, 368
d' Almenara, Marquis, vide Hervas            Anna Paulovna, Grand Duchess. later
Altesti, secretary ofPl.Zubov, 129, 134       wife of the Crown Prince of the
Amburger & Son, merchant house in             Netherlands. 627
 St. Petersburg, 128,626                     Anne, Princess. widow ofStadholder
Amiens, Peace of, 55,184,198.284,295,         William IV, 10, 12
 390,395,396                                 Antwerp, 56, 86, 91, 99.100,167,295,
Amory & Callender, merchant house in          296,399.433
 New Orleans, 320, 638, 639                  Aranda.P.B.A., Count de Bolea. Spanish
Amory,N., merchant in New Orleans, 638        minister, 282
Amsterdam, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, I 1.12,17.18.   Aranjuez,351
 26,41,43-46,49,50,52,54,55.56-58•           Archangel, 208. 216, 238. 510,605, 613
 60,62,65.66,82,86,87, 91, 95.~1 16,126.     Argent Jederatif, 620
 139, 143, 154, 181, 183, 184, 187. 190,     Asch,J.F., Baron von, Russian Privy
 192,194,195,200,209,210,212.213,             Councillor, 585
 217,220,221,225,227,230,234,236,            Asser.A., diamond merchant in London,
 23 8,240,242,244,249,251,253,257,            663
 258,259,263, 267,268,270,284,290,           Asser & Co .• M., diamond merchants in
 291,295,296,297,298.300.305,309,             London, 663
 319,320,325,327,339,349,359,                Assignats,
 361-363,367,368,375,378,379,385,            -French, 46, 107,289
 388,389,394-397,399,400,408-410.            -Russian, 93.141,152.264.610, 6II,
 412,416,418,420,423,424,426.432,             623, 624
 435,437,438,439-441,445,447,448,            Astrakhan, 439
 450,451,515,516,518,626;647,662,            Auerstadt, battle of. 199,321.334
 680                           "             Austerlitz, battle of. 198, 199
-crisis of 1763 in, 12, 13,22                Austria, 24, 47,54,58,63, I I I, 117.156,
-crisis of 1772 in, 20, 21, 22                159,162,166,179,182.198,200. 21 5,

                                         68 5
                                        INDEX

 222,223,228,240,256,263,270,301,                   Francis, married to P.C.Labouchere,
 302,358,363,365,378,379,383,413,                   54,357,359,363,376
 555                                               Baring, (Sir) Francis, 40, 54, 56, 68,132,
-loans to, 30,54, 55,98, 105,390                    295,311,324,329,389,398,399,402,
Averhoff,J.P., merchant in Hamburg,                 403,404,405,418-421,549,664,666,
 587                                                672,673
                                                   Baring, George, 389, 394
Babeuf,Gr.,164                                     Baring, John (I), father of John (II) and
Babut,P.B., merchant house in Paris, 215            Francis Baring, 40
Bacharacht, merchant in St.Petersburg,             Baring, John (II), 40
 139,573                                           Baring & Co., (John and) Francis, later
Backer, merchant in Amsterdam, 641                  Baring Bros. & Co., merchant house in
Badajoz, Peace of, 384                              London, 39,40,43-45,52,53,56,57,60,
Bad Pyrmont, 64, 376                                98,119,121,123,124,125,127,146,188,
Bagge, partner of Bagge & Van Eyssel in             190,191,192,245,254,260,291,294,
 St.Petersburg, 131, 147, 150, 160,583              303,304,311,318,319,324-329,33 1,
Bagge & Co., merchant house in                      349,350,355,361,386,387,388,390,
 St.Petersburg, 51 I, 602, 605, 626                 391,392,394,398,399,402,403,405,
Bagneres, 228, 357, 360                             406,407,412,415,416,417,419,
Baguenault & Co., merchant house in                 420-423,425,426,427,432,433,
 Paris, 215, 263, 287, 290, 292, 300, 305,          436-441,443-447,45 1,464,5 13,5 14,
 306,308,309,3 19,333,337,338,341,                  549,553,619,679,681,682
 345,352,359,380,407,410,411,425,                  Bary & Co., De, merchant house in
 665,669,670                                        Amsterdam, 128, 151
Balfour,J., planter on Tobago, 545                 Bas,Ch.A.de, 61 9
Ball Davis & Vaughan, merchant house               Bas,J.Ch.de, 619
 in Bristol, 303                                   Basle, Peace of, 282
Baltimore, 314, 317, 330                           Bassano, Hugues, Duke of, French
Bandeira,J.F., merchant in Lisbon, 387,             Foreign Minister, 244, 249, 252
 392,394,402,403,406-409,411,414,                  Bassenge & Co., merchant house in
 415,667,668,669,670                                Dresden, 602
Bank for the aid of the Russian nobility,          Bastide & Co., merchant house in Paris,
 58 7                                               303
Bank, Assignat, in St.Petersburg, 93,130,          Batavia, 52
 202,203,217,232,235,238,241, 603                  Bauduin,N., employe, later partner of
Bank of England, 21,31 I, 328, 329, 386,            Hope & Co., 37, 38, 520, 521, 525, 548
 388                                               Bavaria, Elector of, 20
Bank of San Carlos, 279,281,288,290                Baylen, 352
Bank, State Loan, in St. Petersburg, 217           Bayonne, 257, 351,360, 366,367, 389
Banque de France, 290, 301, 302, 304, 410          Beaujour,F.de, French Consul-General
Banque, Riksen Slanders, 78                         in Philadelphia, 328, 329
Barbary Coast, 409                                 Becke,J.W., merchant house in Cologne,
Barbe Marbois, Fran90is, Marquis de,                602
 French Minister of Finance, 188, 190,             Becker,A., merchant house in Archangel,
 192,195,196, 284, 285,286,288,                     225,238,254,510,605,619
 301-305,594                                       Bedeni,M., agent for King Stanislaw
Baring, Alexander, 32, 50, 53, 54, 56, 57,          Poniatowski, 584
 58,68,69,155,188,190,259,260,263,                 Beem,A. van, notary in Amsterdam, 158,
 264,267,268,287,325,327,328,338,                   59 1
 347,369,373,403,407,415,417-423,                  Belgium, 69, 270, 272, 626; vide also
 426,465,634,672                                    Netherlands (Southern)
Baring, Charles, 329                               Benecke Bros., merchant house in Berlin,
Baring, Dorothea, daughter of Sir                   602


                                             686
                                      INDEX

Benecke & Co., merchant house in           Bondt,1., confidant oflIope & Co., 31,
 lIamburg, 268, 619                         250,25 1,273
Bentinck,Ch.J., favourite ofStadholder     Bordeaux, 193,389,405
 William IV, 9                             Borski,W., broker in Amsterdam and
Berck,D., broker in Amsterdam, later        confidant oflIope & Co., 58, 60,182,
 confidential agent of lIope & Co., 24,     184,201,205,207,210,215,227.228,
 66,134,179,243,250,253,254,259             242- 244,249,250-252,254,255,259,
Bergien,J.C., merchant in St.Petersburg,    308,340,341,345,361,363,403,513,
 183,191,192,198,199,202,203, 204,          600,611,614,615,648
 208,211,220,584,587,599                   Bosbeek, estate of, 18
Bergien & Co.,J.C., merchant house in      Bothlingk & Co.,N.D., merchant house
 St.Petersburg, 219, 225, 226, 510, 598,    in St.Petersburg, 209, 21 I, 219, 220, 225,
 602,604,609                                226,238,5 10,602,608
Berlin, 159, 199,225,264,623               Boulogne, 290
-Decree of, 321, 337,413                   Bourne,S., American Consul-General in
Bernstorff,A.P., Count of, Danish           Amsterdam, 374
 minister, 384                             Bournissien Despreaux & Fils, merchant
Bethmann Bros., merchant house in           house in Rouen, 433, 438, 440, 441,445,
 Frankfurt, 202, 209, 210, 214, 220,222,    450,677,679
 228,260,3 19,602                          Boyd Kerr & Co., merchant house in
Bethmann,M., merchant in Frankfurt,         Paris, 433
 253,257,259,606,621                       Boyd,W., merchant in Paris, 297, 298, 300
Bezborodko, Prince Alexander, Russian      Brabant, 26,99, 100, 138, 143,322,408,
 minister, 129, 130, 140, 150, 162, 165,    40 9
 172,178,587                               Brabant Revolution, 105
Bezerra,J.P.de, Portuguese envoy in the    Braem,G.van, merchant in Rotterdam, 4
 Batavian Republic, 400, 402, 666          Brandt Rodde & Co., merchant house in
Bills of Credit, 256, 259, 261-264, 266,    Archangel, 602, 613
 622                                       Branicka, Alexandra, Countess, 133, 134,
Bingham,W., American banker and land        136
 speculator, 53, 188                       Branicki, Xavier, Count, 133, 134,576
Blaauw & Wilkieson, merchant house in      Brants,J., merchant in Amsterdam, 64
 Amsterdam, 94, 126                        Braunsberg & Co., merchant house in
Blanc, banker in Warsaw, 119, 142           Amsterdam, 318, 427, 573, 626
Blanc & Co., banking-house in Warsaw,      Brazil, 65, 384, 391, 404, 408, 413-416,
 116,118, 119, 142                          423,424,426,671
Blanckenhagen & Co., merchant house in     Brazilwood, monopoly and sale of, 57,
 London, 127, 128                           407-410,424,669
Blanckenhagen & Son,1., 193, 194,21 I,     Breda, 48
 506,596,602                               Bremen, 40,181,199
Blandow & Co., merchant house in           Brentano,J., merchant house in Kassel,
 St.Petersburg, 506, 596                    602
B1essig & Co.,P.J., merchant house in      Brest, 297
 St.Petersburg, 220, 221, 224-226, 237,    Brest-Litowsk, 112, 135
 238,510,511,608,619,626                   Brienen & Son,W.van, merchant house
Blohm, merchant in Lubeck, 154,581          in Amsterdam, 339, 662
Boas, merchant house in The lIague, 101    Brienen & Sons,R.van, merchant house
Bohl Bros. & Co., merchant house in         in Archangel, 602
 Cadiz, 442-447, 515, 682, 683             Britain, vide England
Bois,J.du, merchant in Amsterdam, 612      Brown,J., merchant in New York, 316,
Bonaparte, Lucien, 384                      639
Bonaparte, Napoleon, vide Napoleon         Brown,L.C., partner ofW.Porter & Co.
BondeviIle,De, merchant in Paris, 197       ofSt.Petersburg, 131, 147,211,686
                                         INDEX

Browne, partner of Sutherland & Co. of          Carr, G., partner of G. Thomson Rowand
 St.Petersburg, 128, 129, 144, 145,203,          & Co. in Moscow, 123, 124, 127
 579                                            Casanova,G·,544
Bruin Abois & De Bruyn, De, brokers in          Castlereagh, Viscount, British minister,
 Amsterdam, 437                                  263,270,272,623,625
Brunswick, Ferdinand, Duke of, 138              Catherine II, Empress of Russia, 32, 48,
Brushes trade, 213, 219                          75,77,93, 104,105,112,114,117-11 9.
Buchholtz, Prussian envoy in Poland,             121,129,133-137,140,145,148,150,
 119,121                                         151-157,161-163,449
Bukhara, 126                                    Cayley, merchant house in
Burgmann, Sir G., head of the British            St.Petersburg, 51 1
 Payment Office in Amsterdam, 262, 263,         Celles,A.C.F.de, Prefect of the
 265                                             Zuyderzee departement, 32, 257
Burlett,J.de, representative of the holders     Chapeaurouge, merchant in Hamburg,
 of Russian bonds, 31, 251, 273                  588
Bury St.Edmunds, 5                              Chapeaurouge & Co, merchant house in
'Bijltjes',41                                    Hamburg, 360
                                                Charles III, King of Spain, 279
Cabarrus & Co., merchant house in               Charles IV, King of Spain, 282, 350-352,
 Bayonne, 366                                    364,372,373,632
Cabarrus, (Count) F.de, adviser of              Charles XII, King of Sweden, 73
 Charles III of Spain, 279, 281, 290, 291,      Charles XIII, King of Sweden, 223
 352,355,357-360,363-368                        Chaumont, Treaty of, 625
Cabarrus & Lalanne, merchant house in           Chevalier,T.le, confidential agent of
 Madrid, 280, 281                                Hope & Co., 572
Cadiz, 33, 279, 283, 389,431,432,434,           China, 126
 448,450,515,516,5 18                           Christie,Th., merchant in London, 578
Caen,407                                        Clary, Colonel J.M.B., adjutant of King
Caillard,A.B., French charge d'affaires          Joseph of Spain, 359, 361
 in The Hague, 46                               Clary,N., merchant in Paris, 371
Caja de Consolidacion, 288, 297, 300, 301,      Claus, Anna, wife of Archibald (I) Hope,
 303,305-308,312,3 14,316,334,336,               4
 342,348,350,355,372,379,639,650                Cleves and Berg, Grand Duchy of, 321
Calais, 4                                       Cley, member of the College of Medicine
Calamai,J., merchant in Leghorn, 600             in St. Petersburg, 149
Calamanco trade, 218, 219, 225, 226, 239,       Clifford & Sons, merchant house in
 508                                             Amsterdam, 6, 8, I 1,12,21,69,477-483,
Cambiasso,J., merchant in Leghorn, 102,          542
 5 65                                           Cochineal trade, 33,431,676
Cambier,J.C., Dutch envoy to Spain,             -Hope's speculation in, 36, 39, 43,123,
 379,380                                         379,432-451,515,678-680,682,683
Camcnenga,Th.van, merchant in Emden,            Coecq & Son,H., Amsterdam agent of
 193,194,196,506                                 the Fermiers Generaux, 87
Campbell,A., planter-on Grenada, 545            Coesvelt,W.G., agent of Hope & Co. in
Canal, Imperial, 280 •                           the Caribbean and in Spain, later
Canal, Royal Tauste, 280                         director of Hope & Co., 54, 65, 66, 250,
Cantofer,R.L., merchant in Lisbon, 385,          257,347-355,357-360,362,365-369,
 662                                             374-377,379,403,425,667
Caps, Swedish political faction, 73-77          Coffee trade, 321, 322
Caracas, 328, 373                               Cohen,H.E., diamond merchant in
Caribbean, the, 297                              Amsterdam, 663
-plantation loans in 20, 54                     Cohen,L., diamond merchant in London,
-trade with, II, 12                              663


                                              688
                                        INDEX

 Cohen & Son,B., merchant house in           Croese,H., partner of Wed E. Croese &
  Amsterdam, 87-89, 560                       Comp., 283, 284, 664
College of Medicine, official department     Croese & Comp., Weduwe E., merchant
  in St.Petersburg, 130                       house in Amsterdam, 24, 236, 283, 284,
Cologne, 6                                    287,300,302-304,334,336,341,342,
Colombi,A., merchant house in                 348,612
  St.Petersburg, 21 I, 235, 506, 51 1,596,   Crommelin & Sons,D., merchant house
  605,6II                                     in Amsterdam, 3 I 8, 640
Colombi Zea & Co., merchant house in         Cuba, 329, 330
  St.Petersburg, 626                         Cumming Fenton & Co., merchant house
Colonilla, Marquis de la, 287, 288            inRiga,211,217,5 IO ,602
Colonies of Spain in America, 295, 303,      Curacao island, 12
  307,349,355                                Czartoryski, Prince Adam, 504, 505
-trade with the, 61, 279, 284, 288, 289,
  291,293,311-318,320,324                    Danzig, 246
-vide also Mexico                            Daumont, official of the French
Committee for Foreign Loans in                Treasury, 305
  St.Petersburg, 96, 98,101,104,105,107,     David,M.M., merchant house in
  108,201,205-209,217,219,221,222,            Hamburg, 303, 602
  227,228,230                                Debt, Neapolitan Consolidated, 362
Compagnie des Negociants Reunis, 284-        De Coninck & Co., merchant house in
  288,290,298,301 -308,334,347                Copenhagen, 52, 572
Confederation of the Rhine, 32 I             De Coninck & Reyersen, merchant house
Constantinople, 132,448                       in Copenhagen, 103,552,567
Continental System, 64, 199,200,205,         Decn!s,D., French Minister for the
  210,223,228,23 1,232,234,235,239,           Navy, 192, 194-197
  362,4 13,420,671                           Demidov,N., Russian owner of iron
Copenhagen, 52, 160, 161,200,201,552          works 604, 619, 626
Copper trade, 76, 194,226,269,508,619,       Den Helder, 50,180
  626                                        Denmark, 9, 20,73, 83, 103, 138, 181,
-exploitation in Russia of, 141, 172, 177     182,200,384,4 13
Cortabarria, Don A., Director of the         Derkassowa,Mrs.,582
  Caja de Consolidacion, 352                 De Smeth,J., 6
Cotlin & Fils, merchant house in Paris,      De Smeth,P., partner ofR. & Th. de
  677                                         Smeth,179,235,589
Cotton trade, 239, 321,407,424,614,          De Smeth,R. & Th., merchant house in
 664                                          Amsterdam, 6, 8, I 1,13, 18,22,23,32,
Couderc & Brants, merchant house in           48,52,57,58,69,93-96,99,104-108,
 Amsterdam, 3 I 8, 320, 668                   155,158,170, 17 1,172,176,177,179,
Councler et Fils Aine, Vve, merchant          180,182,184,201,202,204,205,235,
 house in Marseilles, 43, 44, 434, 437-       236,240,245,284,287,288,297,307,
 44 1,444,445,448,677,681                     308,318,339,340,351,364,365,371,
Court of Common Pleas, Philadelphia,          476-485,503,504,542,567,585,591,
  37 2                                        612
Court, Philadelphia Supreme, 372, 374        Desprez, Frenchfournisseur and banker,
Court, United States Circuit, 372, 373        197,284-287,291-293,301-305,308,
Craig,J., merchant in Philadelphia, 312,      337
  314,3 16,320,639                           Deutz, merchant house in Amsterdam,
Cramer Smith & Co. (later Cramer              19
 Bros.), merchant house in St.Petersburg,    Devilliers-Duterrage, Director-General
 211,220,221,225,226,238,5 10,511             of Police in Amsterdam, 252
Cramp,A., merchant house in                  Diamonds trade, 51,62,282,384-386,
 St. Petersburg, 2 I I, 602                   391,392,394,395,404,405,411,412,
                                         INDEX

 415-422,424-427,474,512,513,662-              Eeghen,P. and C.van, merchant house in
 665,668,672,674,675                            Amsterdam, 318
-monopoly for the sale of, 34, 57, 384,        Elba, island, 262, 379
  385,388,392,399,412,422,423                  Elbe,river, 182, 198, 199,255
Dieppe, 3,407,409                              Elbing, 224, 246
Dittmer,D" Paris agent of the                  Elinck Sterck, cashier of Hope & Co., 616
 Portuguese government, 4 I 2                  Embden,J.and M., diamond merchants
Divov, member of the Chancellery in             in Amsterdam, 663
  St.Petersburg,5 85                           Emden, 193-195,596
Dixon,J" partner of Littledale & Dixon         Emperor of Germany, 19, 161
 in Rotterdam, later manager of Hope &         Ems, river, 198
  Co., 65, 349, 357, 367                       England, 5,12,23,48,49,51,54-58,60,
Doelenstraat, Amsterdam, 270                    63,65,82, 92,95, 102, 109, I 18, 132, 153,
Dolgorukov, Prince J.V., Governor               155, 164,173,176,179,181,182, 183,
  General of Moscow, 151                        187,190,198-200,206,208,210,212,
Dolgorukov, Prince S., Russian envoy to         214,224,232,234,237-239,243,246,
  the Kingdom of Holland, 6 I I, 6 I 9          248,252-255,257,259,260,261,264,
Donnell,J., merchant in Baltimore, 3 15,        265,267-270,272,279,280-282,284,
  320                                           285,287,289,290,293,295,297,305,
Dopff,J.F.P., Baron von, lover and              31 1,3 17,318,3 19,321-3 25,327,328,
  husband of Anne Goddard, 65, 270              330,349,355,356,358,362,365,366,
Dorner & Co., Martin, merchant house            369,372,375,373,379,383,384,386,
  in Hamburg, 173, 174, 177                     388-390,392,397,399,400,404-406,
Dorner,M., merchant in Hamburg, 36,             409,412,413,418,420,421 ,423,435,
  51,53,155,173,174,175,177                     438,591,592,599,601,607,619,620,
Doyen & Co., French merchant house,             624, 625,664,673
  302,364                                      -loans to, 105
Drachenhauer & Co.,J.D., merchant              Entrepreneurs in Holland, 24, 25, 26, 27,
  house in Riga, 216, 510,602, 626              28,29,47,5 8,79,82-86,89-9 1,95,96,
Dresden, 265                                    98-101,103-108,115,116,134,158,204,
Dubatshevskoy,A., Russian Consul-               205,207,208,214-216,222,226-228,
  General in Lisbon, 600                        232,241,242,244,306,308,333-335,
 Dubno, 133, 134                                340,341,345,357,361,363,403,558,
 Duchess street, London, 39                     563,565,566,567,569,570,610,646,
 Duclerc, agent of Count F.de Cabarrus,         648
  3 66                                         -names of the, 498-499
 Dufour Bros., merchant house in               -number of subscriptions of the, 500-50 I
  Leipzig, 602                                 Entrop Muller,N.A., guardian of
 Dujardin de Ruze, French merchant, 197         Adrian Elias Hope, 243
 Dumouriez,C.F., French general, 47, 48,       Erfurt, Conference of, 210, 215, 599
   109                                         Espinosa,M.S., Contador Generalofthe
 Durno,J., merchant and British Consul           Caja de Consoliadcion, 288, 289, 307,
  in Memel, 142,578                              312,333,337,338,342,346-350,352,
                                                 372,632
East India Company, British, 2 I, 287, 3 I I   Esteve, Treasurer of the French
East India Company, French, 12                   government, 665
East Sheen, estate near Richmond, 50           Etats Gemiraux, 103
Echenique loans, vide Spain                    Exchange Bank of Amsterdam, 5, 6,
Echenique Sanchez & Co., merchant                8-10,13,18,19,21,22,47,48,75,126,
 house in Amsterdam, 280, 359                    54 8
Echeverria,P.M.de, merchant in Vera
 Cruz, 311,317,373                             FaIconnet & Co., merchant house in
Edinburgh, 3, 4                                 Naples, 344, 362
                                       INDEX

Farmbacher, X., agent of Recamier, 187       Fructidor, coup d'etat of, 170
Ferdinand I, King of Naples, 379             Fuerte Hisar, Marquis de, Director of the
Ferdinand VII, King of Spain, 35 I, 352,      Caja de Consolidacion, 352-354
  372,373                                    FuIchiron, French merchant house, 302,
Fermiers Generaux, 87, 88, 559                303,308,309,333,337,338
Ferreira,P.J. and J.F., merchant house in
  Lisbon, 662                                Gabe,J., partner of the merchant house
Fermer,B., Swedish professor, 14,544           J. Gabe & Co., in Hamburg, 174,587,
Finland, 168,205                               588
Fitzgerald, Lord Edward, 174                 Gaeta, Duke of, French Minister of
Fizeaux & Co., Henri, merchant house in        Finance, 424, 425
  Amsterdam, 45, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 495,    Gagem,H. von, agent of King William I
  49 6,55 8                                    of The Netherlands, 621
Fizeaux Grand & Co., merchant house          Galicia, 112,133,228
  in Amsterdam, 28, 79, 82, 83, 84, 88,      Gallatin,A., Secretary of the Treasury of
  280,281,495,496,557                         the United States, 641
Flanders, 138,408                            Galles, Morard de, 619
Flaxtrade,212,213, 216,218, 219, 226,        Gardiner,W., British envoy in Poland,
  237,602,604,606,608                          120
Fleurus, battle of, 154                      Gardoqui, Don Diego de, Minister of
Florida, 369, 370                             Finance of Spain, 281
Fock, Court Broker in St.Petersburg,         Gardoqui, Don Juan Ignacio de, brother
  150                                         of the Spanish Minister of Finance,
Fordyce,A., partner of Neale & Co., 21,       281
  22,34                                      Gardoqui Neveux & Co, merchant house
Fouche,J., French Minister of Police, 365,    in Madrid, 633
  369                                        Genlis,S.F., Countess of, 174
France, 3,4,9, 12,41,43,46,54-58,65,         Genlis, Pamela de, wife of Lord Edward
  82,109, II8, 137, 138, 164, 170, 179,       Fitzgerald, 174
  180-182,1 87,191,193,197-200,206,          Genoa, 145,215,362,437,610,640
  210,214,222,223,228,232,234,235,           -loans issued in, 166,214
  243-245,247-249,252,254-257,270,           Gerace, Prince de, Director of the
  273,279,281,282, 284,286, 287,289,          Sinking Fund of Naples, 345, 362, 363,
  290,297,301,304,307,309,317,320-            375,376,378,379
  322,324-326,328,333,334,342,344,           Gerardin, Equerry of King Joseph of
  348,368,379,383,384,387-390,399,            Naples, 339, 340, 344
  400,404-406,408,410,411,421,423-           Germany, 138, 164, 180, 182, 199,246,
  425,431,435,438-440,445,450,596,            255,260,321,358, 624,626
  599,601,607, 625,626,665                   Gervais, De, Russian Councillor of
-interference in Sweden by, 73, 75, 76,       State, 259-267, 269, 623
  77                                         Gildemeester & Co, merchant house in
-issue of domestic loans in, 23, 46           Amsterdam, 384, 385,41 I
-loans to, 105, 107                          Gilmor & Sons,R., merchant house in
-revolution in, 46, 47, 48, 50,103, 107,      Baltimore, 316, 320
  285,383                                    Girard,S., merchant in Philadelphia, 37,
Francesconi & Co.,G., merchant house in       320
  Naples, 363, 375                           Glogowa,R.de, Grand Treasurer of
Francis II, Emperor of Austria, 108           Poland, 584
Frankfurt, 251, 257, 264, 610                Goddard, Anne, daughter of John
Franklin, Benjamin, 544                       Goddard and Henrietta Maria Hope,
Frederick William II, King of Prussia, 43     wife of John Williams Hope, later of
Freire,C.R., head of the Portuguese           Baron J.F.P.von Dopff, 17,65,66,68,
 department of finance, 414                   109,270,400,460,551,711
                                       INDEX

Goddard,J., husband of Henrietta Maria       Grenville-Fox, British Ministry, 325
 Hope, 17                                    Grill & Co., merchant house in
Godoy,M., favourite of Queen Maria            Amsterdam, 77, 557
 Louise of Spain, 282, 288, 290, 307, 334,   Grimm, Baron, Russian envoy to the
 336,342,348,350,351,646                      Kreits of Lower Saxony and the
Goejanverwellesluis, 43                       Hanseatic towns, 173
Gogel,I.J.A., Dutch Minister of Finance,     Grodno, 1I4, 1I8, 1I9, 121, 135, 142,
 336, 61 7,647                                156,162
Goldsmid,A., diamond merchant in             Groenendaal, estate of, 18, 545
 London, 662                                 Groningen,40
Goldsmid,B. and A., diamond merchants        Gronsfelt,B.P.S.A., Count of, favourite
 in London, 662                               of Stadholder William IV, 9
Goldsmith, diamond merchants in              Grossi, Giulio di, merchant in Genoa,
 London, 418, 419, 425, 674                   376-378
Goll & Co., merchant house in Amster-        Guadeloupe, 54
 dam, 98, 563                                Guardamino, Don L.Angulo y, 633
Golowkin, Countess, 147                      Gubin, merchant in Moscow, 502
Golubtsov,F., head of the Russian            Guise, Mary of, second wife of James V of
 Treasury, 201, 203, 209, 212, 214, 217,      Scotland, 3
 219,220-224,229,230                         Gillcher, Th.,~merchant in:Amsterdam,
Gomez Roubaud, Don R., Spanish                partner of Th.Gillcher & Mulder, 134,
 Intendant of Cuba, 330, 331                  142,161,163,584
Gompertz & Heyman, diamond                   Gillcher & Mulder,Th., merchant house
 merchants in London, 385                     in Amsterdam, 114, 119, 155, 158,503,
Gompertz,S.B., diamond merchant in            504
 London, 662                                 Gurnell Hoare & Co., merchant house
Gontard & Co., merchant house in              in London, 16
 Frankfurt, 266, 267                         Gurnell Hoare & Harman, merchant
Gorbunov,K., merchant in Moscow, 502          house in London, 21
Gordon & Murphy, merchant house in           Guryev,D., Russian Minister of Finance,
  London, 316,324, 327, 328,329, 346-         229-232,235,241,242,245,247,248,
  349,354.355,357-359,361,650                 250-252,255,258,259,261-263,267,
Gothenburg, 12,86,234,416                     268,272,612,619,625
Gouvernante, the, vide Anne. Princess        Gustav III, King of Sweden, 28, 76-79,
Gracie,A., merchant in New York, 311,         83,86,89,91,557
  315-3 17,320,639                           Gustav IV, King of Sweden, 223
Gracie & Anderson, merchant house in         Gusyatnikov, merchant in Moscow, 126,
  St.Petersburg, Virg., U.S.A., 320           502,573
Grain trade, 269, 270                        Guthrie, British doctor in St.Petersburg,
Gra(e)nada. island, 20, 22                    138,139,147,150,151
Grand,F., merchant in Paris, 88
Grand,G., partner in Fizeaux Grand &         Haan Pietersz.,P.de, merchant house in
  Co., 557                                    Amsterdam, 155-158, 164,503,504,
Grant,A., partner ofG.Thomson                 583
  Rowand & Co. in Moscow, 123-125,           Haarlem, 26, 42, 46
  127,146,147,573                            Haarlemmerhout,42
Grebenshchikov,I., merchant in]Moscow,       Hague, The, 3, 18,41,43,55, 101,156,
  502                                         300,328,336,395,396,397,400
Greek archipelago, 132,440                   Hague, Treaty of The, 163
Grernios, Five, Spanish Company of           Haiti, island, 190
  Merchants, 436                             Hamburg, 9, 51, 53, 74, 153, 154, 173-
Grenville, William, Lord, British             176,180-182,187,193-195,199,200,
  Minister,:49                                210,212,213, 21 5,221,224,235,264,
                                      INDEX

 265,267,284,290,386,408,415,416,          Herengracht, Amsterdam, 13, 18
 435,5 15,601,606,610,626                  Herries,J.C., British Commissary-in-
Hamilton,W., British Under-Secretary of     Chief, 262, 263, 624
 Foreign Affairs, 623                      Hervas, Don J.M., later Marquis
Hancock,Th., merchant in Boston, Mass.,     d' Almenara, banker in Paris, 303, 309,
 543                                        367-37 1,374
Hanover, 181,260                           Heyningen & Co., Van, merchant house
Hare,Ch.W., lawyer in Philadelphia,         in Hamburg, 303
 372                                       Hides trade, 219, 424
Hare pelts trade, 2 I 3                    Hodshon,J .. partner ofJ.Hodshon &
Harley Street, London, 50, 486, 490, 493    Son, 303. 612
Harman & Co., merchant house in            Hodshon & Son,J., merchant house in
 London, 178, 180, 181, 184,245,254,        Amsterdam, 339
 259,260                                   Hoeven,A.I.van der, uncle of Thomas (rr)
Harman Hoare & Co., merchant house          Hope, 589
 in London, 39                             Hoeven & Co., Van der, merchant house
Harris,J., British envoy to the Dutch       in Amsterdam, 298
 Republic, 4 I                             Hoeven, Philippina Barbara van der,
Harris, Consul-General of the United        wife of John (III) Hope, 17, 18,38.39
 States in St.Petersburg, 220              Hoffmann & Son, merchant house in
Harrison,G., Secretary to the British       DUsseldorf, 602
 Treasury, 623                             Hogguer, merchant house in Amsterdam,
Hartsinck Czn,J.c., partner of Hope &       6,8,18,22,32,47,51,69,281,284,287,
 Co., 38,39 522,523,525                     288,291,297,349,353,476-485
Hasselaer,G.A., burgomaster of             Hogguer,D., merchant in Amsterdam.
 Amsterdam, 9                               76,577
Hasselgreen,c., partner of J.&             Hogguer,J.c., merchant in Amsterdam,
 C.Hasselgreen & Co., I19, 121, 131,        5
 136,140,142,158,163,563,578,584           Hogguer,P.I., partner of Hogguer Grand
Hasselgreen & Co.,J.& c., merchant          & Co., 303, 612
 house in Amsterdam, 28, 32, 78, 84, 89,   Hogguer & Co., merchant house in
 90,91,126,128,139,496,560,561              Amsterdam, 195,496,560,651
Hats, Swedish political faction, 73-76     Hogguer Grand & Co., merchant house
Havana, 290, 328                            in Amsterdam, 91,92, 155,281,496,
-drafts on, 329-33 I                        503,504,629
Hawes,Th., partner ofG.Thomson             Holland, vide Netherlands
 Rowand & Co. in Moscow, 123-125,          Holland, Court of, 158
 127,146                                   Holland, Kingdom of, 64,65,23 1,232,
Hawkesbury, Robert, Lord, British           234,322,325,344,3 68,420
 Minister, 184,4 I 8, 593                  -loan of 1807 to, 29, 62, 202, 338, 339, 344
Heemstede, 18, 545                         Holland, Province of, 12,41
Heidenstam,G.von, Swedish charge           Holland, Provincial States of, 9,18,43,
 d'affaires in The Hague, 79                49,5 2
Hellevoetsluis, 49, 188,260                Holland, representatives of the People of,
Helmund & Son, merchant house in             164
 Riga, 193,211,506,595,596                 Hollins & Mc.Blair, merchant house in
Hemp trade, 193-195, 210, 212, 213,         Baltimore, 320
 216-218,222,225,226,237,269,506,          Homrigh,C.van, notary in Amsterdam,
 507,598,606                                75,76,78
Henry Hope & Co., firm in London,          Hooft,D., Receiver General in the
 56,5 8,66,260,403,4 15,513,524,525         Kingdom of Holland, 339
Hereditary Prince (later King William I)   Hoogstraten,S.v., President of the
 of the Netherlands, 49, 270, 272, 621      Staatsbewind, 396, 397
                                         INDEX

Hoop,A.van der, director, later partner        Hope, Henry Philip, son of John (m)
 of Hope & Co., 66, 69, 257, 273, 348,          Hope, 38,49,66, 243, 245, 522-525, 666
 351,353,375,377,425,427,616                   Hope, Isaac, son of Archibald (I) Hope
Hoop,J.c.van der, Advocate Fiscal to            of Rotterdam, merchant in Rotterdam,
 the Admiralty in Amsterdam, 102,567            5, I I, 12,543
Hoorn,Q.W.van, merchant house in               Hope, James, Burgess of Edinburgh,
 Amsterdam, 114, 116, 155, 158,503              factor in Dieppe, 3, 541
Hope, Adrian, merchant in Amsterdam,           Hope, Jean de (John (I) ?), Burgess of
 son of Archibald (I) Hope, 8,12,13,14,         Edinburgh, 3, 54 1
 37,39,76,115,456,520,521,525,543              Hope, John (n), son of Archibald (I)
Hope, Adrian Elias, son of John (m)             Hope of Rotterdam, 5
 Hope, 38,49, 56,243,259, 522-525              Hope, John (m), son of Thomas (I) Hope,
Hope, Ann, daughter of Sir Thomas               merchant in Amsterdam, 3,13,16,17,
 Hope of Craighall, supposed wife of            18,38,39,75,458,520,521,525,545
 Henry (nA) Hope, 4                            Hope, Thomas (I), son of Archibald (I)
Hope, Anna, wife of Henry (nB) Hope,            Hope of Rotterdam, merchant in
 4,542                                          Amsterdam, 5, 6, 8, 9-14,17,39,115,
Hope, Anna, daughter of Henry (nB)              520,521,525,543,544
 Hope of Rotterdam, 4, 54 I                    Hope, Thomas (n), son of John (III)
Hope, Archibald (I), son of Henry (uB)          Hope of Amsterdam, 38, 39,49, 66, 68,
 Hope, merchant in Rotterdam, 4, 5, 7,          243,245,461,522,523,525,551,666
 II,455,543                                    Hope, Thomas & Adrian, merchant
Hope, Archibald (n) Jr., son of Archibald       house in Amsterdam, 8, II, 12, 13, 16
 (I) Hope, merchant in Amsterdam, 5-8,         -the house on the Keizersgracht of, 14,
 13                                             468
Hope, Bethea, daughter of Henry (uB)           Hope, Zachary, son of Archibald (I)
 Hope of Rotterdam, 4                           Hope of Rotterdam, merchant in
Hope, Edward, Burgess of Edinburgh,             Rotterdam, I 1,12
 3,54 1                                        Hope & Co., merchant house in
Hope, Elisabeth, daughter of Henry (nB)         Amsterdam, passim
 Hope of Rotterdam, 4                          Hope of Craig hall, Sir Thomas, uncle of
Hope, Henrietta Maria, daughter of              Henry enA) Hope, 4, 541
 Henry (m) Hope, wife of John Goddard,         Hope of Hope to un, Charles, 1st Earl, 5,
 16,71 I                                        7,542
Hope, Henry (I), Burgess of Edinburgh,         Hope of Hopetoun, family of, I I, 50,233
 3,541                                         Hope of Hopetoun, John, 2nd Earl, 3
Hope, Henry (uA) or Harry, Burgess of          Horneca Fizeaux & Co., merchant house
 Edinburgh, supposed ancestor ofthe             in Amsterdam, 78, 79, 8 1,495
 Dutch Hopes, 3, 4, 541                        Horneca Hogguer & Co., merchant
Hope, Henry (uB), merchant in                   house in Amsterdam, 76,495
 Rotterdam, 4, 542                             Hottinguer & Co., merchant house in
Hope, Henry (m), son of Archibald (I)           Paris, 290, 6 15
 Hope of Rotterdam, 5, II, 16,543              Hovy,H., merchant in Amsterdam, I26
Hope, Henry (IV), son of Henry (m)             Huguet Hotel, St.Petersburg, 139, 147
 Hope, 16, 17, 18,32,35,38-46,48-50,
 64-66,94-96,98-105,109,138,148,184,           Iberian peninsula, 12
  198,243,349,354,375,376,398-400,             Igelstrom, Count, Russian general and
 403,424,425,431 435,450,457,520-               envoy in Poland, 138, 142,578
 525,579,664,667,711                           Insinger,H.A., merchant, partner of
-collection of pictures of, 42, 43, 486-494,    Insinger & Co., 5 1,55, 159, 164, 176,
 549                                            178,180,403,467,551,552,588,589,
Hope, Henry (v) Jr., son of John                59 1,667
  Williams Hope, 65, 357, 367                  Insinger & Co., merchant house in
                                         INDEX

  Amsterdam, 247, 282, 386, 425, 426,551,     Kamperduin (Camperdown), naval
  647,674                                      battle of, 170
Ipswich,5                                     Kate, Ten, Amsterdam broker, 24, 84, 85
Ireland, 5, 174, 176                          Keizersgracht, Amsterdam, 13, 14, 16,50
Iron trade, 213,219,226,238,239,254,          Kerkkroon A and B, vide Prinsengracht
  266,269,508,604,606,609,613,619,            Ketwich & Voombergh, Amsterdam
  625,626                                      brokers, 60, 648
Irvine,Ch., planter on Tobago, 545            K(e)ijzer,R.H., diamond merchant in
Isenbeck,F.W., merchant in                     London, later in Amsterdam, 386,426,
  St.Petersburg, 506, 596                      663,674
Isla de Leon, 366                             Keijzer,S.L.A., merchant in Amsterdam,
Israel Dehn & Co., merchant house in           612
 Altona, 201,202                              Khlebnikov, head of the second
fialy, 95, 180, 182,215,362,376,378,379,       department in St.Petersburg, 149
 444                                          Kieckhoefer,G., merchant in Hamburg,
Izquierdo, Don Eugenio, confidential           later in Rio de Janeiro, 415, 416, 419,
  agent of Godoy, 32, 307, 308, 333-336,       67 1
  341,342,348,350,353,364,365,669             Kirchener, merchant in St.Petersburg,
                                               5Il
Jablonowska, Dowager Princess, 165,           Kiryakov, merchant in Moscow, 502
 5 85                                         Klin, 147
Jablonowski, Prince A.B.Chr.de Pruss,         Kobrin, Il2, 135
 504,505                                      Kolbielski,Ch.de Gl., politico-financial
Jamaica, island. 324                           adventurer, 578
James v, King of Scotland, 3                  Kolosov,M., merchant in Moscow, 502
Jauge, merchant house in Paris, 677           Konigsberg, 193-195,214,216,246,598,
Jefferson, Thomas, President of the            623
 United States, 188, 190,323,641              Koran, the, 439
Jena, battle of, 199,321,324                  Kosciuzko,T.A.B., Polish freedom
Jenisch,M.J., merchant in Hamburg,             fighter, 164
 587                                          Krause, Messrs., merchant house in
John VI, King of Portugal, vide Prince         St.Petersburg, 626
 Regent                                       Krehmer,J.A., merchant in
Joseph II, Emperor of Austria, 40, 41,45,      St.Petersburg, 203, 204, 208, 220, 599,
 84,86,93                                      626
Joseph Bonaparte, King of Naples, later       Krehmer Lang & Co., merchant house
 of Spain, 62, 209, 339, 340, 345, 352-356,    in St.Petersburg, 203
 359,362,365,366,372,375                      Kretschmar, Von, 619
Jot,Jacq.de, vide Tot,Jacq.de                 Kronstadt, 153, 160, 161,208
Junot,A., French general, 206, 352, 355,      Kiimmel,F.W., merchant in
 413,4 14,670                                  St. Petersburg, 220
Junta, Central, Free Spanish                  Kurakin, Prince Alexander, 178, 183,232,
 Government, 353, 355, 357, 358, 361 ,         235,236,611,612
 365, 37 2                                    Kurakin, Prince Alexei, 178, 183,220,
                                               587,611
Kalichev,S.A., Russian envoy in The           Kutaysov,J.P., favourite of Czar Paull,
 Hague, later in Berlin, 99, 102, 128, 149,    17 8
 159, 162, 166                                Kutchuk Kainardji, Treaty of, 93
Kalm & Son,H.H., merchant house in
 Brunswick, 602                               Laborde de Mereville, Marquis F.L.J.de,
Kalustov, merchant in Moscow, 501              French banker, 41, 431,432,676
Kaminiecki,D., Commissioner of the            Labouchere,P.c.. employee, later partner
 Treasury of Poland, 585                       of Hope & Co, 29, 30, 32, 37,40, 50,
                                      INDEX

 53-57,60,63-66,69,138,155,173-178,         Linseed trade, 214, 226, 254, 508,608,
 183, 187, 192, 193, 196,228,229,231,         613,626
 232,234-237,239-253,255-259,261-           Lisbon,51,60,206,385,389,392,395,
 268,272,273,281, 284,286, 287,290-          402-409,411-415,421,422,427,665,
 298,300,302-306,308,309,320-325,            670
 331,333-341,344-355,357-360,363-           Lithuania, Grand Duchy of, I I, 112,
 376,378-380,386,388-398,400,402-             156
 404,406,408-412,417,420-427,462,           Littledale & Co., Thos., merchant how;e
 524,525,548,594,615,621,622,625,            in Rotterdam, 39, 681
 627,633,634,650,663-667,669                Littiedale & Dixon, merchant house in
Labouchere,S.P., merchant in                 Rotterdam, 318, 647
 Rotterdam, 249, 251, 252, 254, 260, 667    Liverpool, Lord, vide Hawkesbury
Lambert, Le Chevalier, French               Livingstone,R.L., son of the United
 merchant, 197                               States envoy in Paris, 290, 3 I 9
Langen,S.J.van, member of the Batavian      Livio Bros. & Co., merchant house in
 Executive Committee, 586                    St. Petersburg, 5 II, 602, 626
Lannes,J., French envoy in Portugal,        Livonia, 168
 405                                        Loans, issued in the Dutch Republic,
Law,J.,6                                    -development of, 19,20
Lawaetz, merchant in Hamburg, 588           -technique of, 23-32
Lebrun,C.F., Lieutenant General of          London, 4, 21, 22,50,54, 57, 65, 69, 139,
 Holland as part ofthe French Empire,         150,212,245,247,250,254,258,259,
 231,252,423,673                             262,263,267,268,270,282,291,311,
Lefebure, Swedish manufacturer, 14           326,357,359,373,385-388,394,396,
Leghorn, 362,438, 640                        398,408,409,412,416,422,423,425,
Leiden,26                                    427,432,433-435,437-442,447,448,
Leipzig, 264                                 451,512,515,516,518,681
-battle of, 257, 378,426                    Loria & Co., merchant house in
Leith,J., planter on Tobago, 545             Amsterdam, 412
Le Roy Bayard & Mc Evers, merchant          Louis,(Baron) J.D., senior official of
 house in New York, 3 I 6                    Napoleon, 63, 327,328, 338, 344, 346,
Lesseps,J.B.B.de, French Consul-             359
 General in St.Petersburg, 193, 196,506     Louis XVI, King of France, 281
Lestapis,A.P., Hope's agent in Vera         Louis XVIII, King of France, 379
 Cruz, 296, 311,312, 317, 353,354           Louis Napoleon, King of Holland, 32, 62,
Lestapis,P.F., employee, later director      63,65,202,231,252,322,323,335,336,
 and partner of Hope & Co., 65, 66, 257,     338,340,344,345,366,369,420.604,
 367,377,425,427,638                         647
Lestevenon van Berkenrode,M., 13            Louisiana, vide United States
Levant, the, 440, 448                       LUbeck, 151, 154, 199
Lever & De Bruine, merchant house in        Lubomirski, Prince Alexander, 162, 503,
 Amsterdam, 20                               505
Liege, 46                                   Lubomirski, Prince Joseph, 162, 503,
Lieven,C.L., Count, Russian ambassador       505
 to Great Britain, 272                      Lubomirski, Prince Stanislaw, 134,504,
LiIjencrantz,J.W., Baron, Swedish            505
 Minister of Finance, 28, 77, 79, 83-86,    Lucca, 145, 153
 91                                         Lucena,J.E., agent for Portugal in
Lima, 643                                    London, 422
Limpicki, Count, 134                        Lulofs,W., uncle of Archibald (I) Hope, 5
Linen trade, 218, 219, 225, 226, 237-239,   Luneville, Peace of, 54, 182
 254,266,269,296,317,416,509,604,           Lutine, frigate, 180
 606,619,626,639,671                        Lyons,S
                                        INDEX

McKim,!., merchant in Baltimore, 3 I 5,      Meulenaer,D., Amsterdam merchant, 5,
  639                                         54 2
Madeleine of France, wife of James v of      Mexico, 296, 301,326,353,355,362,431,
 Scotland, 3                                  441,442,446
Madrid, 283, 287, 296, 298, 304, 312, 325,   -drafts on the Treasury of, 37, 61, 291,
 349-351,354,355,359,360,366,367,             292,294,297,298,303-307,309,3 11 ,
 375,380,3 89,394                              324,325,327,328,330,331,335,337,
-Peace of, 384, 387                            338,347,348,349,353,355,3 60,363,
Magnates, Polish, I I I                        369,373,650
-loans to, 29, 52,119,121,135,156,159,       -flow of silver from, 30, 279, 282; vide
  162,1 65,166,503-505,585                    also Piastres
Maine, 53                                    -trade with, 312-317
Maistre,P., merchant in Geneva, 360          Meyer,J.e., partner of Meyer & Bruxner,
Malta, 179, 181,329,383                       211,220,221,225,237,23 8,613
Maltese Order, 358                           Meyer & Bruxner, merchant house in
Mandele,J.v.d., representative ofthe          St.Petersburg, 220, 238, 510, 5Il, 613,
 holders of Russian bonds, 31, 251, 273       619,626
Manushin, merchant in Moscow, 501            Meyer, Senator in Hamburg, 506
Maria Feodorovna, Empress of Russia,         Michailov,LG., merchant in
 161,178,5 84                                 St. Petersburg, 269, 625
Marcelis, Margareta, wife of Thomas (I)      Michel the Elder, French merchant, 285,
 Hope, 13                                     288,305
Markov. secretary of Bezborodko, 130,        Michel the Younger, French merchant,
 137,153                                      37, 285,288,306,307,308,309,333,337,
Marseilles, 364,407,432-435,437,439-          338,348,650
 441,444,447,448,515,516,518,680             Middagten, 397
Marselis,J.v., Amsterdam merchant, 9         Milan, Decree of, 323, 349, 365
Martinique, island, 297,399                  Minas Gerais, 384,404
Massena,A., French marshal, 423              Minsk, 121, 159
Matthiessen,H., partner of Matthiessen &     Mitau, 246
 Sillem, 175,296                             Mitton,R., merchant in St.Petersburg,
Matthiessen & Sillem, merchant house in       506,596
 Hamburg, 53, 69,174-177,180,200,            Moliere & Co., merchant house in
 202,203,209-211,214,223,228,235,             The Hague, 616
 319,415,416,587,588,591,602,605,            Moliien,F.N., Minister of the French
 606,63 8,639                                 Treasury, 252, 301,304-307,325, 327,
Maury, agent for Gordon & Murphy, 346         328,330,33 1,334,341,344,346,357,
Maxwell,P., planter on Tobago, 545            359,365,606,650
Mayne & Co.,Th., merchant house in           Mollwo Bros., merchant house in
 Lisbon, 385, 662                             St. Petersburg, 5 I I
Mediterranean the, 95,102,132,181            Montalivet,}.P., Count of, French
Meisner,}., banker in Warsaw, 119, 131,       Minister, 422, 425
 142,1 63,166,578,584,585                    Montevideo, 290,316, 639
Melvil & Co., merchant house in              Morison,}., merchant in Riga, 187,192-
 Amsterdam, 139,210,216,619                   194,211,506,594-596
Melvil, R., Hope's agent in Russia, 35,      Morlaix, 193
 64,210,211-21 4,216-226,228,237,246,        Morris, Gouverneur, agent of President
 510                                          Washington, 48
Memel,224                                    Moscow, 34, 123-127. 140, 146, 147, 2II,
Mennonite Community of Amsterdam,             252,253,255,266,448,5 19
 17                                          Muhl & Van Winter,}., merchant house
Metternich, Prince Clemens von,               in Amsterdam, 57,409.410,514
 Austrian minister, 255, 379                 Muilman,P., Schepen of Amsterdam, 44
                                      INDEX

Muilman,P.S., merchant in Amsterdam,        Neufville,L.P.de, Amsterdam merchant,
 5,542                                       13
Muilman & Son, merchant house in            Neutrality, Treaty of (1800), 181
Amsterdam, 5, 6, 18,22,48,69,127,           New Orleans, 296, 315, 329, 330, 640
477-485                                     New York, 296, 311
Murat,J., brother-in-law of Napoleon,       Nicolai, Baron Von, Russian diplomat,
 321,348,351,365,378,379                     272,589
Murphy,J., partner of Gordon &              Niebuhr,B.G., agent of Prussia, 29, 62,
 Murphy, 358                                 64,555,622
Muyden,E.A.v., Schepen of Amsterdam,        Noffolk,J.A., merchant house in
44                                           Warsaw, 554, 602
Myatlev, Director of the Assignat Bank      Noinville,de,619
 in St.Petersburg, 130, 150, 153            Nolte,V., agent of Hope &Co. in
                                             New Orleans, 37, 65, 296, 31 1,315,
Nantes, 40, 193,285,296,389,407,664          329-33 1,365,371,633,634,638,644
Naples, 179,344,362365,376,378,379          Norden,A. and S., diamond merchants in
-loanto,28,62,202,339,340,343,344,           London, 662
 376                                        Novgorod, 146
Napoleon Bonaparte, General, later          Nystad, Peace of, 73
 First Consul and Emperor of France, 32,
 54,55,61-64,179,181,182, 187,188,          Ocana, battle of, 365
  190,196,198,200,205,209,210, 21 5,        Odessa, 248
 216,228,231,234,238,244,249,252,           Oginski, Michael, Count, 156, 157, 159,
 253,255-257,261,262,270,272,284,            162,503,505,582
 286, 289,290,295,301-305,307,309,          -estates of, 582, 583
 311,321,322,323,325,342,344,345,           O'Gorman,Th., merchant house in
 350-352,355,357,358,360,368-370,            London, 643
 372,374,378,379,383,384,403,412,           Okeczki,J., Commissioner of the
 414,419,420,423,424,426,611,617,            Treasury of Poland, 585
  621,660                                   Olitzka, 112, 135
Napoleons d'or, 260, 261                    Oliva, La, cloister in Navarre, 363
Nashotkin,P., merchant in Moscow,           Oliver,R., Baltimore merchant, 312
 502                                        Oliver,R. and J., merchant house in
Nassau-Saarbriicken, Count Louis of,         Baltimore, 312, 314-317, 320, 330, 331,
 loan to, 20, 545                            372,373,639
Neale & Co., merchant house in              Ollivier, agent in Hamburg of the French
 London, 21                                  Minister for the Navy, 506
Necker,J., French Minister, 46              Oost-Indische Compagnie (Dutch East
Nederhorst den Berg, Castle of, 18,473       India Company), 8, 14, 16, 18, 49, 339
Negotiaties van Belening (loans on          Orange, House of, 164, 198
 security to Sweden), 75                    Orangists, party of the, 38,41.55.82,87,
Nelson, Horatio, Viscount, British           92,431
 admiral, 297                               Orders in Council of November 1807,
Nesselrode,K.R., Count, Russian              323,349,671
 diplomat, 232, 244, 245,258, 262,267,      Orebro, Riksdag at, 561
 268,622, 625                               Orthez,359
Netherlands, The, 69, IlO, 257, 259, 261,   Ostermann,J.A., Count, Vice-Chancellor
 264,267-270,272,273,305,398,408,            of Russia, 128, 130, 131, 137, 153,563,
 409,415,421,426,625                         574
-Northern Netherlands, vide also            Ostrolenka, 146
 Holland and Republic                       Oudermeulen,C.van der, representative
-Southern (Austrian) Netherlands, 46-48,     of the holders of Russian bonds, 31, 251
  105, 108, 109                              273
                                         INDEX

Ouin,J.B., agent ofG.J.Ouvrard, 337           Penobscot, river, 53
Ouvrard,G.J., speculator-financier, 32,       Perkins,J., merchant in Boston, Mass.,
 61,63,284-286,288-298,300-309,311,             638
 325,327,333,338,346-348,353,354,             Perkins,J. & Th., merchant house in
 359,361,365/367,369,372,374,631-               Boston, Mass., 320, 638
 633, 638, 670 -                              Pernambuco wood, vide Brazilwood
Ouvrard (& Co.), Auguste, 294, 296, 314,      Perovsky, Russian 'Conseiller de
 337,339,347,354,355,3 61 ,372,373,             College', 627
 639                                          Perregaux Laffitte & Co., bankers in
Ouvrard & Co., Fran<;ois, 288, 289, 292,        Paris, 229, 235, 665
 293,296,327,337,338,348,632                  Persia, 126
                                              Peter the Great, Czar, 73, 93
Paisley & Co., R., merchant house in          Peyrousse,A., French paymaster, 192,595
 Lisbon, 662                                  Philadelphia, 31 1,328,330
Paiva,M.S.de, agent of Portugal in            Phillips,Geo.T., merchant in New
 London, 422                                    Orleans, 316, 320, 639
Palace, Tauric, in St. Petersburg, 150        Piastres, 287-295, 298, 301, 302, 304, 306,
Panin,N.P., Count, civil governor of            317,324,326-329,347,349,353,355,
 Lithuania, 157                                 356,371,375,640,642
Paris, 46, 47, 60, 64, !O7, 109, 187, 188,    Pichler & Co., merchant house in
 190,228,236,240,244,252,256,257,               St.Petersburg, 5 II
 261,263,265,267,284-286,287,290,             Pipping, partner of Tamesz & Co. in
 294,296,297,300,302,304,319,324,               Moscow, 573
 326,333,337,338,340,342,345,347,             Pistole, Hanoverian, 260, 261
 348,350,352,358,359,361,364,365-             Pitch trade, 225, 238, 605
 369,378,379,389,394,395,398,403,             Pitt, William, the younger, British
 411,424,426,610,640,669                       statesman, 287, 290, 291, 301, 325
-First Peace of, 264                          Plantation loans, 20, 51, 552, 588
-Second Peace of, 273                         Plante & Co., J., merchant house in
Parish,D., 187,295,296,305,309, 3I1,            Santander, 296
 312,314-321,323,327-329,369,370-             Plonkin & Sirotin, merchant house in
 374,633,638                                    Moscow, 502
Parish,J., Scottish merchant in Hamburg,      Poland, 24, 73,105, chapter four passim,
 295,587                                        131,133,137,142,146,148,149-151,
Parish & Co., D., merchant house in             156,157,159,270
 Antwerp, 295, 318, 319, 371                  -loans to, 28, 29, 51, 52, 121, 135-137,
Parker,D., American merchant and                142,143,146,155,158,160-162,1 64-
 speculator, 290, 370                           166,449,577,584
Patriots, party of the, 41, 43, 44, 45, 55,   -first loan to, 22, 28, 112, 114,135
 82,87,92,95,164,43 1,435,439,450             -second loan to, 26, 28,45, 114-117, 118,
Patterson & Sons, merchant house in             137,142,503
 Baltimore, 320                               -first partition of, 77, I I I
Paul, Russian Grand Duke, 32, 54, 144,        -second partition of, I18-121, 136
 14 8                                         -third partition of, 156, 159, 166
Paull, Czar, 161, 164, 166, 170, 174, 178,    Polangen, 246
 181,182,183,225                              Poll,J.v.d., representative of the holders
Pehmoller & Droop, merchant house in           of Russian bonds, 31, 251,273
 Hamburg, 193,506,596,597                     Poll,W.v.d., partner ofR. & Th. de
Peking, 132                                    Smeth of Amsterdam, 589
Pellegrini,C., merchant in Trieste, 600       Pombal, Marquis de, Portuguese
Pels & Sons, Andries, merchant house in         Minister, 385
 Amsterdam, 5, 6, 8, II, 13,21,69,402,        Poniatowski, Prince Joseph, heir of
 477-483,542,543                               King Stanislaw Poniatowski, 115
                                        INDEX

Poniatowski, Stanislaw, King of Poland,         198,199,232,255,256,261-264,270,
 32,45, II2, II4-II8, 120, 121, 135-137,       282,321,328,413,620, 62 3
  142,158,1 65,584                            -King of, 117,120,161,200
-loans to, vide Poland                        -loan in Holland to, 62, 64, 345, 555, 622
Pontecoulant, De, 619                         Pye Rich & Co., merchant house in
Poor Relief Board, Gere/ormeerde               Amsterdam, 94
  Nederduitsche, 109
Porter,W., merchant in St.Petersburg,         Quicksilver trade, 19,370,371
  II9-121, 123, 124, 129,574,577              Quintella,J.P., merchant in Lisbon,
Porter & Brown (& Co.), merchant house         385-387,392,394,403,412,414,4 15,
 in St.Petersburg, 21 1,225,510,594,602        421,5 12,667,668
Porter & Co,W., merchant house in
  St.Petersburg, 119,127,562,686              Racolta, annual harvest of cochineal, 43 I,
Portugal, 24, 55, 65, 200, 205, 206, 307,      432,439,44 1
  342,350,375,383,384,389,390,392,            Radziwill, Prince Charles, 582
 400,403,405-409,412-415,417,419,             Radziwill, Prince Dominique, 166,585
 422-424,425,427,663                          Radziwill, Prince Hieronymus, 582
-Court of, 387, 388, 390, 392,402,41 I,       Radziwill, Prince Matthias, 166
  412,419,421                                 Raikes & Co., merchant house in
-diamond loan of 1802 to, 19, 28, 30, 54,      London, 123, 124
  56,57,60,62,64-66,184,384-427,513,          Raimbert & Co.,F., merchant house in
  514,592,665-667                              St.Petersburg, 128
-payment of subsidy to France in 1803         Rall,A.F., partner of Sutherland & Co.,
  and 1804 of, 287, 405, 407, 410              later Russian Court Banker, 129, 131,
-tobacco lease and lessees in, 388, 391,       133, 134, 136, 137, 142, 149, 172, 173,
  393,402,403,406,413,414,423,427,             177,178,182,191,200,202,203, 204,
  514                                          211,219,236,548,605,611,612
Pot,C.v.d., merchant in Rotterdam, 5          Rail & Severin, Court Bankers in
Potash trade, 199, 214, 223, 226, 239, 254,    St.Petersburg, 220, 235, 236, 605
  508,5 10,606,608                            Raven-duck trade, 213, 225, 238, 239,
Potemkin,G., favourite of Catherine II,        266, 269,509, 624,626
  94, 128, 130, 13 I, 144, 149                Recamier,J., banker in Paris, 187,302,
Potocka, Countess, 133, 137                    303,309
Potocki, Felix, Count, 133                    Receveurs GemJraux, collectors of direct
Potocki, Ignace and Jean, Counts, 504,         taxes in France, 285, 287, 288, 300-303,
  50 5                                         553
Potocki, Prote, Polish banker, 164, 165       Reessen, Geertruyd, wife of Archibald (I)
Potocki, Vincent, Count, 504, 505              Hope, 13
Pottgeisser,J.H., merchant house in           Regny & Co., merchant house in Genoa,
  Coblenz, 602                                 101,214,567
Pourrat Freres, bankers in Paris, 546         Reichenbach, Convention of, 255, 261,
Prasca & Arbore, merchant house in             263,620
  Cadiz, 436                                  Reid Irving & Co., merchant house in
Presbyterian Church of Amsterdam, 17           London, 327,328,355,357, 358, 359,
Pressburg, Peace of, 228                       36 1
Prince Regent (later King John VI) of         Rendorp,J., 61 9
  Portugal, 387, 392, 405, 412-414, 421,      Repnin, Prince Nicolay, Russian
  422                                          military governor of Lithuania, 156, 157,
Pringle,M., merchant in Baltimore, 320         583
Prinsengracht, Amsterdam, 14,469              Republic, Batavian, 55, 64,163,164,168,
Proposition, the, 9, 10                         170,180,184,19 1, 284,286,287,388,
Prussia, 12, 13,29,38,43,74,92, I I, 118,      389,392,394-396,398,399,402,409
  121,148,156,159,162, 165,166,181,           -loan to the, 394, 395


                                          700
                                       INDEX

Republic of the Seven United Nether-            Rowand,J., merchant in Moscow, 36,
  lands, 8,10,18,19,47,48, 84t92, 95,            123-125
  102,134,135,137,142,153,155,282,              Rowand Carr & Co., merchant house in
  431                                            St.Petersburg, 123, 127, 128,573
-economic decline of the, 9, 45, 48, 98,       Rumyantsev,N.P., Count, Russian
 440; vide also Proposition                      Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Rescriptians Bataves, 286, 300                   201,203, 21 4,220,222,224,230,245,
Rhine, river, 108                                599,606
Rhubarb, Chinese, 139,577                      Rusanov, Brigadier, 156, 157
Richards, James, confidential agent of         Russia, 19,24,28,30,35,51,58,63,68,
 Sir Francis Baring, 324, 325, 643               69,73,92, 104- 107,110,112,130,132,
Richards, John, agent of Hope & Co. in           135,137,143,145,149,159,160,162,
  Maine, 53                                      165,173,179,180-183,187,194,196,
Ridgway & Mertens, merchant house in             198- 200,205,206,208,209,216,223,
 Antwerp, 3 I 8                                  227,228,229,232,234,235,236,238,
Riga, 193-195,208,212,216,217,222,               239,241,242,244,245-252,255,257,
 224,225,237,246,506,510,613                     262-264,266-268,270,272-274,281,
Riksdag, vide Sweden                             282,301,3 22 ,375,378,4 13,425,447,
Rio de Janeiro, 404, 413, 415-420,'422          449,573,601,604,620,623-625,686
Ritter, merchant in St.Petersburg:131,         -Court of, 27,129,134,136,138,139,
 133,139,140,149,575                             175,191,204,207,208,211,222,223,
Roche & Co., De la, merchant house in           227,228,229,234,235,23 6,240- 242,
 Nantes, 318                                    245,248,25 1,254,259,266,434,449,
Roederer,P.L., Count, Minister of               607
 Finance of Naples, 344, 345                  -loans to, 45, 47,51,52,55,56-58,66,
Roger, director of the Draits Reunis, 196       91,99,101,103,108,135-137,143,148,
Rogerson, Sir Samuel, physician to              155,158,180,182-185,191,201-208,
 Catherine II, 148, 151                         228,230,235,247,248,253,255,25 8,
Rogovikov,N.; Russian Court Banker,             266,27 1- 274,390,424,449,497,586,
 178, 200, 220 -                                591,598
Roosen,B., merchant in Hamburg, 101,          -loans of De Smeth to, 22, 93, 95, 104,
 128,435,587,678                                106, 108
Rostopshin,F.V., Count, 584                   -first loan of Hope & Co. to, 91,96,102,
Rothschild, family of merchants and             105,497,563
 bankers, 68, 263, 265, 621, 626, 627         -second loan to, 91, 96, 497, 563
Rothschild,N.M., banker in London,            -third loan to, 100, 101,105,497,565
 262,621, 624                                 -fourth loan to, 100, 101, 103,497
Rotterdam, 4, 5, 6, 8, I 1,12,17,26,320,      -fifth loan to, 103-105,497,565
 321 ,440,647,681                             -sixth loan to, 104,497,566
Rouble, exchange rate of, 101, 125, 140,      -seventh loan to, 104, 105,497,567
 141,177,180,190,200,202,203,208,             -eighth loan to, 104, 105, 106,497,567
 209,212,213,218,221,222,224-226,             -ninth loan to, 104, 105, 106,497,567
 229,230,232,234,236-241,269,434,             -tenth loan to, 104, 105, 106,497,'567
 607,610,611,614,623,\624,626                 -eleventh loan to, 106,497,567
Rouen,33,407,432-435,43 8-440,445,            -twelfth loan to, 107,497,567
 515,5 16,519,677                             -thirteenth loan to, 107,497,567
Rougemont, merchant house in Paris, 669       -fourteenth loan to, 108,497,567
Roux Freres, merchant house in                -fifteenth loan to, 108,497,567
 Marseilles, 360                              -sixteenth loan to, 108,497,568
Rovigo, Duchess of, wife of the French        -seventeenth loan to, 108,497,568
 Minister of Police, 64                       -eighteenth loan to, 109, 136-138, 143,
Rovigo,A., Duke of, French Minister of          497,5 86
 Police, 64, 252


                                        701
                                        INDEX

-nineteenth loan to, 109, 136, 137, 139,       Saratea, Spanish agent, 324, 328
  143                                          Sarmiento,F., agent of M.S.Espinosa in
-conversion of 1798 of, 29, 52,160,166-          the United States, 312, 372, 373
  173                                          Sarraille & Maury, French merchant
-domestic loan in, 230, 231,240,241              house, 346
-bonds of 1812 of, 241-243, 254-266,           Savage & Dugan, merchant house in
  2 69                                           Baltimore, 320
-trade with, 48,60,94,95,125,126,139,          Saxony, 13,73,255,256,270
  141,152,187,319                              -Elector of, 115
-interference in Poland of, 93, I I, I 17-     Schaulen, 246
  121,133,156                                  Scheidt, river, 40, 84, 86
-interference in and war with Sweden of,       Schepenen, vide Amsterdam
  73,75,103,104,109, 117                       Schickler Bros., merchant house in
-war against the Turks of, 77, 83, 93-95,        Berlin, 602
  102,103, 109, 110, 117, 132,206,445,         Schimmelpenninck,R.J., lawyer, later
  446,677                                        Batavian envoy in Paris and
Ruuth,E., Baron, Swedish Minister of             Raadpensionaris, 179, 300,666
  Finance, 86-91, 676                          Schliisser, merchant in St.Petersburg,
Ruys & Zimmerman, merchant house in              5 11
  Amsterdam, 3 I 8                             School of Commerce in Moscow, 584
Ryan & Co.,Th., merchant house in              Schoppens,J., merchant in London, 4
  Cadiz, 432-434, 436,441-443, 446, 450,       Schubach,J., merchant in Hamburg, 587
  518,678,681,682                              Schwink & Koch, merchant house in
Ryberg & Co., merchant house in                  Koningsberg, 506, 596
  Copenhagen, 194                              Scodiac, river, 53
                                               Scotland, 3, 5, 606
Saeftinge, 84                                  Seguin,A., Frenchfournisseur and
Sailcloth trade, 213, 218, 225, 237, 238,        merchant, 285, 306-308, 333, 337, 338,
 508                                              36 1
St.Croix, island, 20,177,588                   Sejm, Polish parliament, II 1,112, "4,
St.Domingo, island, 394                           117-121,142,162,164
St.Eustatius, island, 12, 54                   Sejmiki, local diets in Poland, I I I, 112
St.John, island, 20                            Semon ville, Marquis de, French envoy
St.Petersburg, 48, 98,108,121,126,127,            to the Batavian Republic, 666
 13 1,142,146,150,151,156,159,160,             Septien,F.L.de, merchant in Vera Cruz,
 168, 187,193,195,196,198,199,202,                311
 207,208-210,216-222,224,231,232,              Sercey,H.de, wife of H.Matthiessen,
 235-238,240-242,244-247,255,256,                 partner of Matthiessen & Sillem in
 268, 269,425,433,434,435,438,448,                Hamburg, 174
 510,515,516,519,613                            Serra,A., merchant in Genoa, 376
St. Thomas, island, 20                         Severin, merchant in St.Petersburg, 131
Sale,S., merchant in London, 4                  Severin Bros., merchant house in
Salomons,E., diamond merchant in                  St.Petersburg, 219, 220, 605
 London, 385                                   Severijn & Hazebroek, merchant house
Salomons & Co.,P.& S., diamond                    in Amsterdam, 3 I 8
 merchants in London, 662, 665                  SeviIIe,355, 357,358,361 ,365, 370,372
Samaylov,A.N., Count, Russian                   'Share in a joint property of original
 AttomeyGeneral, 129-131, 133, 135-               American Stocks', 58-60
 146, 148-150, 152-154                          Sherlock,J., merchant in St.Petersburg,
Sanchez Toscano,M., merchant in                   320
 Madrid, 359, 363, 380                          Shorokov, merchant house in Moscow,
Santa Fe, Marquis de, Spanish envoy in            502
 France, 370                                    Short,W., American diplomat, 568


                                             702
                                       INDEX

Shuvalov,A.P., Count, director of the         371,373-375,380,383,384,408,413,
 Russian Assignat Bank, 563                   441
Sieveking, merchant in Hamburg, 587         -Court of, 280, 283, 288-291, 293, 297,
Sievers,J.J., Baron, Russian envoy in         298,334,342,360,370
 Poland, II8, II9, 121, 136, 142,578,       -loans to, 51, 63, 65,282, 284,287, 352,
 5 84                                         355,358,360,364,365,369,370,379,
Silesia, loans on the security ofrevenues     380,390,629
 from, 19,555                               -Echeniqueloansto, 30, 280,283,284,
SiIIem,G.H., partner of Matthiessen &         298,308,309,336,341,357,358,361
 Sillem in Hamburg, 175                     -loan of 1793 to, 47,51,281,283,287,
SiIIem, Hieronymus, partner of                300,336
 Matthiessen & Sillem in Hamburg,           -"conversion' loans ofCroese to, 283,
 later partner of Hope & Co., 69, 175,        284,300,334,341,353,361
 210,220,235,237,242,244-249,               -loan of 1805 to, 28, 61, 297, 298, 299-
 251-258,262,266-270,273,415,427,             303,305-309,353
 463,601,625                                -loan of 1807 to, 28, 29, 30, 61, 202, 334-
SiIlem Benecke & Co., merchant house         336,338-342,344,353,354,357,3 63,
 in Hamburg, 268                             367
Silva,S.de, diamond merchant in London,     -silver transactions of, vide Mexico and
 3 85                                        Piastres
Silver, vide Mexico and Piastres            Speranski,M.M., confidant of Czar
Simons,M., confidant of Talleyrand,          Alexander I, 245
 307-309,333-336,371,645,646                Spiegel,L.P.v.d., Raadpensionaris, 49, 573
Simons & Co., merchant house of             Spoors,]., member of the Staatsbewind,
 Talleyrand's confidant, 245                 396,397,402,418,666
Smets, Weduwe Jean & Martin, merchant       Staasbewind, executive committee in the
 house in Antwerp, 85                        Batavian Republic, 55, 56, 64,183.192,
Smirnov, Russian Consul-General in           395-398,402,666
 Amsterdam, 240, 244, 247                   Stackelberg,G .E., Count von, Russian
Smith & Buchanan, merchant house in          envoy to the Batavian Republic, the
 Baltimore, 320                              Kingdom of Holland, Prussia and
Smyrna, 448                                  Austria, 214, 253, 256, 257, 595, 612
Sobanski,M. and M., 504, 505,585            Stackelberg,J.G., Baron von, Russian
Soler,M.C., Spanish Minister of Finance,     envoy in various princedoms in
 312,330                                     Germany, 168, 179,590
Soltikov, Count, Russian general, 157,      Stadnitski,P., merchant in Amsterdam,
 583                                         24
Son,M.H.van, Dutch lawyer in                Stanley,J., merchant in Lisbon, 387,407,
 The Hague, 396, 397, 398                    408,41 I, 670
Souza, Don J .M., Portuguese envoy in       Staphorst & Co., Van, merchant house in
 France, 403,405,410, 411, 667-670           Amsterdam, 3 I 8
Souza Coutinho, Don D., Portuguese          Staphorst,N. & J. & R.van, merchant
 envoy in Great Britain, 416-423, 425        house in Amsterdam, 60, 600, 615
Souza Coutinho, Don R., Minister for        Stein, Heinrich von, Prussian statesman,
 the Colonies, the Navy and of Finance,      620
 later Prime Minister of the Portuguese     Stephens & Co.,L., merchant house in
 government in Brazil, 383, 387, 390-392,    Lisbon, 664
 394,403,405,416,417,419,668                Stieglitz & Co., merchant house in
Spain, 24, 51,54,61,63,64,105,188,205,       St.Petersburg, 219, 264, 604, 605, 626
 209,216,262,279-284,287-289,291,           Stieglitz,Ph.,626
 297,301-305,316,317,324,326-331,           Stock Exchange of Amsterdam, vide
 333-335,337,341,342,347,348,350-            Amsterdam
 352,355,356,359,360,363,368,370,           Stowmarket, 5
                                         INDEX

Strapozhnikov, merchant in Moscow, 502          Hope & Co., 50-52,155,400,551,629,
Strockel & Van Dijk, merchant house in          667
 Amsterdam, 244, 600, 648                      Talleyrand, Charles Maurice, Prince of
Subsidium charitativum, Polish tax, 112,        Benevento, French Minister of Foreign
 114, 115                                       Affairs, 60, 64, 245, 290, 295, 330, 336,
Sugartrade,239,320,321,322,424, 61 4,           384,394,405,410,411,555,615,627,
 664                                            644,646,665,666,670
Sutherland,A.H., merchant in London,           Tallow trade, 213, 218, 219, 226, 237, 269,
 94, 102, 144                                   507,606,608
Sutherland Jr., son of R. Sutherland, 129,     Tamesz & Co., merchant house in
 144                                            Moscow, 127,573
Sutherland, (Baron) R., Russian Court          Tapijthuis, The Hague, 18, 545
 Banker, 34,45,48,94-96,98-100, 102,           Targowica, Confederation of, 117,133
 104,105,128,131,132,140,14 1,144-             Tar trade, 225,238, 254,597,605,613,
 146,149,151,152,170,173,203,434,               619
 449,567,575,579,680                           Taylor,L., merchant in Baltimore, 320
Sutherlands & Bock, merchant house in          Tenant,Th., merchant in Baltimore, 320,
 SLPetersburg, 94, 434, 438, 439, 688           639
Sutherland & Co., firm of R.Sutherland,        Tepper,P.F., banker in Warsaw, 112, 114,
 Russian Court Banker, 128, 130, 142,           116,119, 124,142,162
 144, 145, 148                                 Texier,H., partner of Matthiessen &
Svensksund, naval battle of, 104                Sillem in Hamburg, 175
Sweden,9,24, 63,73-79,87,92, 101, 104,         Tholen,Cl., merchant in Emden, 193, 194,
  105, 109,138,161,181,200,205,223,             506
 234,240,255,280,322,4°7,413,416               Thomson (Peters) Bonar & Co.,
-Crown of, 41, 87, 89, 91                       SLPetersburg merchant house, 2 I I, 562
-loans to, 22,27,45, 51,75, 91,93,495,         Thomson Rowand & Co., Geo.,
 496,560,561,591                                merchant house in Moscow, 36, 119,
-Hope's loan of 1768 to, 20, 74, 75, 495        123-125,127,140,146,150,151,211,
-Horneca Hogguer's loan of 1770 to, 76,         220,449,562
 79                                            Thornton Cayley & Co., merchant house
-Bargum's loan of 1770 to, 76, 82, 558          in St.Petersburg, 225, 510
-Hope's and Horneca Hogguer's loan of          Thornton Power, French merchant
  1770to, 76, 79,495                            house, 302
-loan of 1775 to, 28, 78" 80, 81 89,495        Tilsit, Peace of, 200, 201, 205, 206, 210,
-Hasselgreen's loan of 1776 to, 78, 89          322,323,342,344,413
-loan of March 1780 to, 79, 495                Timber trade, 12, 193, 194,597
-loan of December 1780 to, 79, 82, 495         Tobacco trade, 41,87-89,349,371,559,
-loan of 1782 to, 83,495                        560,640,641,65 1
-loan of 1783 to, 83,495                       Tobago, island, 20, 22, 399
-loan of 1784 to, 84,495,496,560               Tomasachi Marcella & Co., merchant
-loan of 1786 to, 85, 86, 116,495,496,          house in Amsterdam, 407, 408
  560,561                                      Torres Vedras, 422
-loan of 1787 to, 89, 90, 98, 495, 496, 560,   Tot, Jacqueline de, wife of Henry (I)
  561 ,563                                      Hope, 3,541
-Riksdag of, 20, 73-77, 86, 87, 9 I            Toulon, 137
Swedenborg,Em., philosopher, 544               Toussaint Bros. (later & Co.), merchant
Switzerland, 181                                house in Konigsberg, 506, 602
Symons,L.de, diamond merchant in               Tovegliere, domain of, 340
  London, 665                                  Trafalgar, battle of, 198
Szawel, 112, 135                               Trave, river, 198
                                               Travemiinde, 154
Taay, Paulus, clerk in the office of           Treasury, British, 263, 264, 272
                                         INDEX

Treasury, French, 57, 60, 61, 196, 197,       Vanlerberghe,J.P., 284, 286, 298, 302,
 284,285,288-290,302-307,309,317,              304,305,337,347,361
 319,324,325,328,329,333,334,336,             Vanlerberghe & Ouvrard, merchant
 338,341,342,344,348,359,361,364,              house in Paris, 297, 298, 300, 308, 333,
 397,410,411,640,642,670.                      33 6
Treasuries, Polish, 112, 114, 115, 116,117,   Vasconcellas, Don Louis de, Portuguese
 165                                           Minister, 405, 407, 41 I, 412
Treasury, Portuguese, 406                     Vasilyev,A.I., head of the Russian
Treasury, Russian, 202, 209, 21 I              Treasury, 56, 162, 164, 165, 170, 172,
Treasury, Spanish, 280, 285, 288, 307,         173,177-179,182-1 84,19 1,201,208,
 324,358,367,632                               225,584,585,587,59 1
Treasury, Swedish State, 74, 76, 79, 556      Velho,J.P.c., Russian Court Banker,
Triqetti, designer of 'Welgelegen', 42         172,177,605
Tromposky,M., merchant in Riga, 506           Velho Rail & Rogovikov, Russian Court
Trosien,M., merchant in St.Petersburg,         Bankers, 590
 127-130,139-142,145,150-152,581              Venning, merchant in St.Petersburg, 51 I
Troteau & Labouchere, merchant house          Vera Cruz, 290, 292, 296, 31 I, 312, 314-
 in Nantes, 3 I 8                              316,318,324,326,328,329,335,350,
Tsarkoye Selo, palace of the czar, 151,153     353,372,375,431,639, 683
Tuite,R., planter on St.Croix, 545            Vereul,A., merchant house in
Turkey, 93, 102, 138, 198,244,440,446,         Amsterdam, 128
 573                                          Vergennes, Charles, Count of, French
Turkheim,N., merchant house in Mainz,          diplomat, 76, 77, 557
 602                                          Verhuell,C.A., envoy of Holland in
Tutolmin,T.l., Governor General of             Spain, 348, 353
 Minsk, 157                                   Victor, French general, 188
Twer,146                                      Vienna, 30,268-270
Tyuco,404                                     -Congress of, 68, 268,270,272,379
                                              Villanueva,J.G.de, vide A.P.Lestapis
Ulm, capitulation of, 302                     Vimeiro,4 14
United States of America, 24, 60, 69,188,     Vittoria, 353, 354
 246,266,269,288,305,321,326,330,370          Vloten, Abraham and Dirk van,
-loans to, 24, 58,62, 369, 370,373,374,        merchant house in Amsterdam, 24, 498,
  390                                          500
-Louisiana loan to, 57, 58,59,60,62,          Volkmar, Amsterdam broker, 24, 84, 85
  188-190,192,286,287,292,424,553             Voombergh,D.J., Amsterdam broker,
-Non-Intercourse Act of, 323, 353, 607         249,600,615
-trade of, 61, 290, 318, 319, 322, 323        Vorontsov, Alexander, Count, President
-trade with Russia of, 210, 216, 239, 254,     of the Board of Trade of Russia, 563,
 603                                           566
-trade with the Spanish-American              Vorontsov, Simon, Count, Russian envoy
 colonies of, 289, 293, 295, 312-318, 324      in Great Britain, 177, 584
Utrecht, 26, 43                               Vroedschap, of Amsterdam, 17,38
-Mint of, 261                                 -of Rotterdam, 17
-Province, 41                                 Vos van Steenwijk,J.A.de, Treasurer
Uvarov, P., merchant in Moscow, 502            General of the Batavian Republic, 395,
                                               396,397
Valckenaer,J., Batavian envoy in Spain,       VOllte, Jan Jacob, eldest brother of
 283                                           Robert VOllte, 52,159,160,179
Vales reales, 279, 282, 288, 301-303, 351,    VOllte, Jean Jacques, father of Robert
 358,360, 629                                  VOllte,39
Vandenijver Freres & Co., merchant            Vollte,L.H., broker in Amsterdam, 409,
 house in Paris, 47,546                        410,669
                                       INDEX

Voiite, Pierre, nephew of Robert Voiite,     Welgelegen, country seat of Henry Hope,
  I60, I6I, I63, I64, I72, I73, I77, I78,     42,65,470,47 I,472
  396,583,587,590                            Wellesley, Arthur, later Duke of
Voiite, Robert, broker in Amsterdam           Wellington, 32, 352, 4I4, 422
  and confidant of Hope & Co., 33, 34, 39,   Wellesley, Richard (Cowley), Marquis of,
  5I,52,63,93, I82, I83, I9I, 202,207,        British Minister, 369
  252,256.339,344,348,400,402,403,           Weser, river, I98, I99
 466,573,577,583,584,587,589,590,            West India Company, Danish, 20
  592,617,667,677                            West-Indische Compagnie (Dutch West
-voyage to Russia in I793/94 of, 32, I09,     India Company), 8, I4
  IIO, III, II8, I2I,chapterfivepassim,      Weymar,B.J., merchant in Amsterdam,
  57I,577,582                                 648
-voyage to Russia in I797/98 of, 30,         Whishaw, partner of Sutherland & Co.
  I58-I68, I70, I72, I73, I76-I79,584,        in St. Petersburg, I29, I44, I45, I47, 203,
  586,587                                     579,580
--efforts for the return of the Hopes to     Whitworth, Lord, British envoy in
  Holland of, 54-56, 388, 394, 400            France, 404
-efforts for the Portuguese loan of,         Wickede, de, envoy of the King of
  395-398                                     Poland, II4-I 17,570
-activities during the cochineal specu-      Wielopolsky, Fran<;ois, Marquis, I66, 585
  lation of, 432, 433, 435, 437, 439, 440,   Wilhelmina, Princess, wife ofStadholder
  44I, 446, 450, 45I, 682                     William v, 43
Voiite Bros., brokers in Amsterdam, I28      William I, King of The Netherlands. vide
Voiite & Co., brokers in Amsterdam, 57        Hereditary Prince
Voiite & Sons, Jan Jacob, brokers in         William IV, Stadholder, 8-IO
  Amsterdam, 573                             William V, Stadholder, 17,38, 4I, 43, 80,
Voiite Velho Rail & Co., Russian Court        I02,282,43I
  Bankers, I72, I73. I76, I78,587            Williams Hope, John. protege of Henry
Vreede,P., member of the Batavian             Hope, later partner of Hope & Co., 17,
  Executive Committee, 586                    37,38,39,44,48,49,56,64,65, I84, I87,
Vyazemsky,A.A., Prince, Attorney              354,357,375,388,389,390,399,400,
  General of the Russian government,          402,4I7, 4I8, 4I9, 424, 459, 520-525
  I44, I49,563,564                           -as John Hope, after the death of Henry
                                              Hope, 66,68, 243, 245,246, 247, 249-
Wagner, Colonel, 6I9                          254,257, 270, 375, 376,424-426, 6I2,
Wagram, battle of, 228, 363                   6I5,6I6
Wahrendorff, merchant in Stockholm,          Willings & Francis, merchant house in
 87                                           Philadelphia, I90, 320, 638
War, of the Austrian Succession, 8-IO        Willink,J.A., agent ofP.de Haan in
War, Fourth Anglo-Dutch, 46,82                Poland, I56-I57, I59
War, the Great Northern, 73                  Willink,W. and J., merchant house in
War oflndependence, American, 82, I05,        Amsterdam, 58, 3I8, 339, 600, 6I5, 640,
 I98,279                                      647
War, Seven Year's, 8, IO, I I, I4, I6, I8,   Wilnenska, oeconomy of, I 57, 582
 2I,22,73                                    Wilno, I59, 246, 248
Warsaw, II, II2, II8, II9, I34, I38, I42,    Wolf,C.J.M.de, merchant in Antwerp, 28,
 I6I, I63, I64, I78, 265                      99, IOO, I08,I67, I68,I79,566,586
-Grand Duchy of, 228                         Wolff & Schliisser, merchant house in
Washington, George, President of the          St.Petersburg, 220, 22I, 224-226, 237,
 United States, 48                            5IO,6I9
Waterloo, battle of, 273, 379                Wool trade, 303, 305,308,309,333
Waxtrade, 2I9                                Woolsey, Geo.M., merchant house in
Wegelin, merchant in St.Petersburg, I3I       New Orleans, 320
                                            INDEX


Wulff,J., Russian Councillor of State,         Zakharev & Rebinin, merchant house in
 178, 190, 191, 20 I, 202, 208, 599, 60 I       Moscow, 501
                                               Zakrevsky, President of the College of
Yakovlev, Russian owner of iron works,          Medicine in St. Petersburg, 149
 604,609,619, 625,626                          Zenyavin,N.I., Russian admiral, 206, 21 5
Yeames, cashier of Sutherland & Co., 149       Zhigarev, merchant in Moscow, 502
Yrujo, Marquis dc, Spanish envoy to the        Zubov, Platon, favourite of Catherine II,
 United States, 3 I 2                           129,134,135,137,14 2,145,148,150-
                                                153,1 83
Zablukov,A., Imperial Treasurer of the         Zuckerbacker Klein & CO.,B., merchant
 Russian government, 130,575                    hOLise in Riga, 2 I 6,5 I 0,626
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
          AND
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



The Hope Family in 1802                                                     frontispiece
Seated, from left to right: Henry Hope; his sister, Henrietta Maria, the widow of John
Goddard; Anne Goddard, her daughter and the wife of John Williams Hope, who
stands on her right. Behind the table stand the Williams Hopes' children, from left to
right: Henry, Adrian, Elisabeth and Henriette Dorothea Maria. Mrs. Williams Hope
holds her youngest son, Francis.

Power of Attorney Granted by Charles Hope of Hopetoun to Archibald
Hope of Rotterdam, 170 I                                                               7

Circular Announcing the Establishment of Hope & Co., 1762                            15

Part of the Entrepreneurs' Contract Relating to the 8th Russian Loan of
May, 1790                                                                            25

Final Report of the Representatives of the Holders of Russian Bonds,
Dated December, 1815. This States that Messrs. Hope Decline the Offer
by the Bondholders to Share in the Costs Incurred                                    31

Prospectus of the 'Share in a Joint Property of Original American Stocks',
1803                                                                                 59

Circular Announcing the Re-establishment of Hope & Co. in 1815

Annual Settlement between Hope & Co. and Horneca Fizeaux & Co.
Relating to the Swedish Loan of November 1775                                    80-81

Berigt of the First Russian Loan in 1788, with Notes Concerning Con-
verted Bonds                                                                         97

Authorization by King Stanislaw of Poland to Pierre Tepper & Co. to
Negotiate with Hope & Co. in the Matter of a Loan, 1785                             II3

Ukase Issued by Czar Paul I Concerning the Conversion of Russian
Loans Issued in Amsterdam and Antwerp, 1798

Announcement by the House of De Smeth, Consenting to Convert the
Russian Bonds                                                                       17 1

Certificate Issued by James Madison, State Secretary, Relating to the
Text of the Act of Congress which Approved the Louisiana Loan


                                         711
                          LIST OF ILLUSTRA TlONS

Blank Authorization for the Transfer to Hope, De Smeth and Willink
of the Louisiana Stock, which was Domiciled in Amsterdam. The Hope
Coat of Arms which Appears on the Seal is Identical to the Coat of Arms
of the Scottish Branch of the Family. The Motto' At Spes Non Fracta'
was Used by Both the Dutch Hopes and the Hopes of Hopetoun                233

Announcement of the Resumption of Interest and Principal Payments
on the Russian Loans, Dated November 1815.                                271

Real Cedula Issued by the Spanish King and Relating to the Io-Million
Guilder Loan of 1805                                                      299

Blank Licence for Trade with the Spanish Colonies                         3 13

Bericht of the Loan to Naples, 1807                                       343

Circular of 1811 Announcing the Granting of Power of Procuration to
Van Der Hoop, Coesvelt and Lestapis.                                      377

Acceptance of the Payment Order for Cf 1,700,000 per Annum from the
Tobacco Leases as Part Collateral for the Portuguese Diamond Loan,
Signed by the Tobacco Lessees, 1802                                       393

Bericht of the Portuguese Loan, 1802                                      401

Archibald Hope, Merchant at Rotterdam, by Gerard Sanders                  455

Adrian Hope, by Cosmo Alexander

Henry Hope, by C. H. Hodges, after a Painting by Sir Joshua Reynolds      457

John Hope, by Cosmo Alexander                                             45 8

John Williams Hope, by Angelica Kauffmann                                 459

Anne Goddard, wife of John Williams Hope, by Angelica Kauffmann

Thomas Hope, by Jacques Henri Sablet                                      561

Pierre Cesar Labouchere, by an Unknown Artist

Hieronymus Sillem, by H. W. Couwenberg

The Partners of John and Francis Baring & Co., by J. Ward, after a
Painting by Sir Thomas Lawrence

Alexander Baring, by Sir Thomas Lawrence

Robert Voilte, by an Unknown Artist

Hermann Albrecht Insinger, by an Unknown Artist


                                        7 12
                              LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

The Hope Residence, Keizersgracht 444-446                            468

The Warehouses Kerkkroon A and B, Prinsengracht 659-661              469

'Welgelegen', by Benjamin Comte, after a Drawing by H. P. Schouten   47 0

'Welgelegen' as it is today                                          471

Fish-eye View of the Circular Music Room at 'Welgelegen'             472

Nederhorst den Berg Castle                                           473

Scales with Weights in Carats                                        474

Page from the Balance Bookje of Hope & Co.                           517




                                      7 13
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS



PREFACE                                                                VII


INTRODUCTION
THE FAMILY AND THE FIRM


Chapter One       The Family and the Firm
                  Some Observations on Commerce and Banking in
                  the Late 18th Century                                  3


BALTIC AFFAIRS
SWEDISH, POLISH AND RUSSIAN LOANS                                       71

Chapter Two       Swedish Prelude                                       73
Chapter Three     Money for the Turkish War                             93
Chapter Four      Polish Interlude                                     III
Chapter Five      A Dutch Broker at the Russian Court                  123
Chapter Six       The Great Conversion                                 155
Chapter Seven     'Les Traites du Nord' and Operation R. M.            1 87
Chapter Eight     Per Aspera ad Astra
                  From the Suspension of Payments to the Arrangement
                  of 1815                                              227

IBERIAN AFFAIRS
SILVER, DIAMONDS AND COCHINEAL                                         275

Silver                                                                 277
Chapter Nine     Early Loans to Spain                                  279
Chapter Ten      The Franco-Spanish Financial Crisis                   295
Chapter Eleven Account 'X'                                             311
Chapter Twelve Between Satellites and Napoleonites                     333
Chapter Thirteen The SlJanish Morass                                   357

Diamonds
Chapter Fourteen The Portuguese Diamond Loan

Cochineal                                                              429
Chapter Fifteen   Cochineal in the Patriotic Era
                  A Speculation which Went Awry                        43 1

                                       71 4
                         TABLE OF CONTENTS

ILLUSTRATIONS                                           453


APPENDICES                                              475

             A. Annual Turnover                         476
             B. The Henry Hope Collection of Pictures   486
             C. Swedish Loans                           495
             D. Russian Loans                           497
             E. The Portuguese Diamond Loan             512
             F. Cochineal                               515
             G. Capital and Profit                      520


SOURCES AND A LIST OF WORKS CITED                       527

             Sources                                    529
             A List of Works Cited                      533


NOTES                                                   539


INDEX                                                   685


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS AND TABLE OF CONTENTS             709

             List of Illustrations                      711
             Table of Contents                          714
COLOPHON



Design:
Wim de Valk gvn, Rotterdam

Printed by
the Koninklijke Drukkerij Van de Garde,
Zaltbommel

Bound by
Van Rijmenam, The Hague

Photographs:
Walter de Maar b.v., Rijswijk Z.H.
Frits J.Rotgans, Amsterdam
Annan, Glasgow

Diagrams:
J.J.Smit, Amsterdam
H.J.Buist, Groningen
Dienstencentrum of
the Mees & Hope Groep N.V.,
Alblasserdam

Pictorial Research:
Gavin M.Goodfellow, Edinburgh

Translated by
Derek S.Jordan,~Canterbury




                                          7 I6
