Ex  Libris 
C.  K.  OGDEN 


//"  //// 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


THE    RIGHT    HON. 

JOHN    CHABLES   HEEBIES 

VOL.  II. 


LOSDOS  t    FOISTED    BT 

8POTTISWOODB    ASD    CO.,    KETV-STUEKT    SQUABS 
ASD    PAULJA1IKST    STUEET 


MEMOIE 


THE  PUBLIC  LIFE  OF    THE  EIGHT  HON. 


JOHN    CHARLES    HERRIES 


IN  THE  REIGNS  OF  GEORGE  III.,  GEORGE  IV. 
WILLIAM   IV.  AND   VICTORIA 


BY    HIS    SON 


EDWAED    HERRIES,   C.B. 


WITH   AN   INTRODUCTION   BY   SIR   CHARLES   HERRIES,  K.C.B. 


IN    TWO     VOLUMES VOL.   II. 


LONDON 
JOHN    MURRAY,     ALBEMARLE     STREET 

1880 

All     rights    reserved 


THENAEUM 

CANCELLED, 
JBRAR'.' 


N       "'  U 


V. 
CONTENTS 


THE     SECOND    VOLUME. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

PAGE 

From  the  completion  of  the  Goderich  Cabinet  to  its  dissolution — New 
system  of  taxation  projected  by  Herries — Eastern  question — Whig 
intrigues — Lord  Holland — Goderich  resigns  and  returns — Finance 
Committee — Tierney's  meddling  —  Difference  between  Herries  and 
Huskisson — The  Premier's  indecision — Proposed  repeal  of  Foreign 
Enlistment  Act — Lyndhurst's  intervention  produces  final  catastrophe  1 

CHAPTEE  VII. 

Formation  of  Wellington  Cabinet — Herries  Master  of  the  Mint — Cor- 
respondence— Mysterious  incident — Ministerial  explanations  in  Par- 
liament—  Attacks  upon  Mr.  Herries,  and  successful  defence  — 
Subsequent  statement  of  real  causes  of  breaking  up  of  Goderich 
Cabinet — Refutation  of  Lord  Palmerston's  posthumous  slanders  .  59 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Cabinet  changes — Correspondence  with  the  Duke — Finance  Committee 
— Reform  of  the  Sinking  Fund — Dr.  Bo  wring — Catholic  Emancipa- 
tion— Proposed  Indian  appointment — Board  of  Trade — Settlement 
of  old  dispute  with  the  United  States — Parliamentary  duties — 
Close  of  the  Wellington  Administration — Financial  management  of 
Tories  and  Liberals  compared 87 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Tories  in  Opposition — Herries's  activity — Praed — Government  influence 
at  Harwich  defied — Theory  of  Treasury  ownership — Scurrility  of 
Liberal  press — Reform — Timber  duties:  defeat  of  the  Ministry — 


/"•?•/"»  '~*  f  O  O 

UoooSo 


[6]     CONTENTS  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME. 

I'AOK 

Russian-Dutch  loan:  historical  view;  Herries's  action  —  Duke  of 
Wellington's  attempt  to  form  a  Cabinet — Helpless  condition  of  Con- 
servative party — Croker  and  the  '  Quarterly  Review  ' — Reformed 
Parliament — Herries  in  Peel  Cabinet — Goes  to  Italy — Parliamentary 
business — Metropolitan  improvements  —  Stockdalo  and  Hansard — 
Defeat  of  Melbourne  Ministry  on  Herries's  motion — His  intervention 
with  a  Conservative  journal  in  favour  of  Palmerston's  policy  solicited 
— Debates  on  the  Budget  of  1841 — Huskisson's  commercial  policy 
elucidated  .  119 


CHAPTER  X. 

Herries  driven  by  evictions  from  Harwich:  beaten  by  bribery  at 
Ipswich;  not  included  in  Peel  Cabinet  —  Satisfactory  assurances 
from  Prime  Minister — Correspondence  with  him  and  Goulburn — 
Herries  out  of  office  consulted  by  Ministers — His  correspondence 
with  Sir  R.  Peel  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  on  new  plan  of 
finance,  &c. — Metropolis  Improvements  Commission — Thames  Em- 
bankment, &c. 188 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Return  to  Parliament,  1847 — Monetary  crisis — Bank  Charter  Act — 
Repeal  of  the  Navigation  Laws— Answer  to  Mr.  Cobden's  motion  for 
reduction  of  estimates — Derby  Cabinet,  1852 — Herries,  President 
of  the  Board  of  Control  .  .  224 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Work  at  the  India  Office — Correspondence  on  Burmese  War,  &c. — 
Exercise  of  patronage — Letters  to  Croker  and  others — Recognition 
of  French  Empire — Resignation  of  Derby  Cabinet — Mr.  Herries 
retires  from  Parliament  —  Letter  from  Brougham  —  Opinions  of 
eminent  public  men — Death — Liberal  testimony — General  view  of 
Mr.  Herries's  political  principles  and  practice — Conclusion  .  .  247 

INDEX  .  289 


MEMOIR  OF  J.  0.  HERRIES. 

CHAPTER   VI. 

From  the  completion  of  the  Goderich  Cabinet  to  its  dissolution — New  system 
of  taxation  projected  by  Herries — Eastern  question — Whig  intrigues — 
Lord  Holland — Goderich  resigns  and  returns — Finance  Committee — 
Tierney's  meddling — Difference  between  Herries  and  Huskisson — The 
Premier's  indecision — Proposed  repeal  of  Foreign  Enlistment  Act — 
Lyndhurst's  intervention  produces  final  catastrophe. 

AFTER  the  conclusion  of  the  Ministerial  peace  (or  sus- 
pension of  arms)  Mr.  Herries  went  abroad,  and  returned 
to  England  in  October  1827  with  partially  renovated 
health.  The  notices  found  among  his  papers  of  occur- 
rences previous  to  the  renewal  of  hostilities  in  the 
Cabinet  are  scanty  and  for  the  most  part  unimportant. 

As  to  his  financial  administration,  we  are  not  able 
to  say  anything.  We  gather,  however,  from  a  paper 
belonging  to  a  later  period  what  was  the  nature  of  the 
policy  which  he  had  in  view,  and  which  met  with  the 
concurrence  of  the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Mr. 
Huskisson : — 

'  Being  convinced  that  the  accumulated  wealth  of 
the  nation  ought  to  contribute  in  a  greater  proportion 
than  it  had  done  to  the  support  of  the  burdens  of  the 
country,  consisting  in  so  large  a  degree  as  they  did  of 
the  charge  of  accumulated  debt,'  and  that  '  the  very 
great  preponderance  assigned  in  our  system  of  taxation 

VOL.  II.  B 


2  CONFIDENCE  IN  ILERRIES.  OH.  vi. 

to  the  duties  derived  from  manufactures  and  consump- 
tion was  not  only  impolitic  but  unsustainable,'  he 
intended  *  to  propose  a  property  tax  by  way  of  commu- 
tation for  some  of  the  then  existing  taxes  which  were 
most  obstructive  to  the  interests  of  the  country,  and  con- 
sequently most  detrimental  to  it  in  its  growing  rivalry 
with  the  manufactures  of  the  Continent,  and  also  most 
obnoxious  to  public  feeling.' 

That  he  continued  to  enjoy  the  undiminished  con- 
fidence of  the  mercantile  and  moneyed  class  may  be 
gathered  from  the  following  letter,  addressed  to  him  on 
November  26  by  a  great  commercial  notability  of  that 
time,  Mr.  Hart  Davis,  member  for  Bristol  in  several 
Parliaments  : — 

'  I  am  in  almost  daily  communication  with  two  or 
three  of  the  largest  holders  of  English  stock,  and  I 
observe  that  the  great  fear  operating  in  their  minds  is 
not  so  much  the  political  state  of  the  world  as  the 
expected  Finance  Committee,  which  they  fear  may  be 
so  formed  as  to  recommend  measures  of  finance  of  a 
very  novel  character.  .  .  .  The  great  stockholders  above 
referred  to  put  all  their  trust  in  you,  and  I  can  assure 
you  with  truth  that  they  would  not  at  this  moment 
hold  any  English  stock  if  you  were  not  the  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer.' 

The  attention  of  the  Cabinet,  however,  must  have 
been  devoted  less  to  financial  than  to  foreign  affairs,  and 
especially  to  that  constant  vexation  of  all  Cabinets,  the 
Eastern  Question.  Of  the  deliberations  of  the  Ministry 
on  this  subject  not  much  is  known  ;  but  it  appears  that 
differences  of  opinion  existed  among  them,  similar  to 


CH.  vi.  EASTERN  AFFAIRS— MEMORANDUM.  3 

those  which  seem  to  have  divided  their  successors  under 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  as  to  the  mode  of  carrying  out 
the  treaty  of  July  6  for  the  pacification  of  Greece. 
There  were  some  who  desired  to  give  that  treaty  an 
extended,  and  others,  a  restricted,  application. 

As  an  illustration  of  conflicting  views  and  arguments 
the  following  paper  in  Mr.  Herries's  handwriting  may 
be  not  devoid  of  interest.  It  is  docketed  in  pencil : — 

'  Mem.  of  grounds  of  opposition  to  a  proposal  made 
by  Huskisson  to  press  the  operations  against  Turkey  to 
the  extent  of  our  becoming  parties  to  a  plan  for  invading 
her  by  Russia. — Made  between  the  time  when  we  first 
heard  of  the  battle  of  Navarino  and  the  receipt  of  further 
explanations  on  the  subject.  N.B.  Huskisson's  pro- 
posal actually  made  before  the  news  of  the  battle  : ' — 

'  The  question  is  whether  we  shall  now,  without 
further  delay,  accede  to  the  proposal  of  Russia  that  the 
Porte  should  be  distinctly  threatened  by  the  allied 
Powers  with  an  invasion  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  if 
she  does  not  submit,  within  a  specified  period,  to  the 
terms  prescribed  by  the  mediating  Powers  ;  and,  further, 
that  if  the  invasion  of  the  provinces  by  the  Russian 
troops  shall  take  place,  it  shall  be  with  the  common 
consent  of  the  three  Powers,  and  with  an  agreement 
between  them  that  they  shall  only  be  held  by  Russia  for 
the  object  of  the  Triple  Treaty  and  as  a  means  of  en- 
forcing it,  and  shall  be  evacuated  on  the  attainment  of 
that  object.  The  grounds  upon  which  our  acquiescence 
in  this  proposal  is  recommended,  are — 

'  That  Russia  will  be  no  longer  controllable  by 
us  and  by  France  if  we  refuse  to  do  so,  and  that  the 

B    2 


4  MEMORANDUM.  OH.  vi. 

invasion  of  Turkey  will,  in  that  event,  be  undertaken  by 
Russia  without  any  restrictions  upon  her  further  pro- 
ceedings ;  and  much  stress  is  laid  upon  the  expectation 
that  Turkey  will  submit  under  the  influence  of  such  a 
measure. 

'  This  argument  has  obviously  more  reference  to  the 
importance  of  averting  the  danger  which  we  apprehend 
from  Russia  than  to  that  of  securing  the  object  which 
we  seek  to  obtain  for  Greece. 

*  The  objections  to  the  proposal  are  that  it  leads 
directly  to  war  in  the  event  of  the  continued  refusal  of 
the  Porte  to  submit;  and  we  must  first  consider  its 
consequences  in  that  view  of  the  alternative,  whatever 
expectation  we  may  entertain  of  the  effect  of  intimida- 
tion on  the  Porte. 

'We  must  regard  this  step  as  being  in  effect  the 
first  declaration  on  our  part  of  an  intention  to  enforce 
by  war  (commencing  by  a  territorial  invasion  by  Russian 
troops)  the  terms  with  respect  to  Greece  which  the 
Treaty  of  July  was  intended  to  secure. 

'In  every  former  stage  of  the  proceedings  on  this 
subject,  Great  Britain  has  most  distinctly  and  emphati- 
cally asserted  that  the  mere  refusal  of  the  Porte  to 
accept  the  mediation  of  the  allied  Powers  would  not  by 
Great  Britain  be  considered  as  a  just  cause  of  war. 

'It  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  admitted  that  the 
Treaty,  where  it  contemplated  the  contingency  under 
which  we  might  be  called  upon  to  concert  ulterior 
measures  for  the  enforcement  of  its  objects,  must  have 
had  war  in  view  as  one  of  the  measures  then  to  be  made 
the  subject  of  consideration. 


CH.  vr.  MEMORANDUM.  5 

'  We  are,  therefore,  as  yet  perfectly  free  to  determine 
whether  a  war  with  Turkey  merely  for  the  purpose  of 
enforcing  a  satisfactory  arrangement  between  that  Power 
and  its  subjects  is  a  fit  course  to  pursue  ;  and,  then,  it  is 
open  to  us  to  consider  whether,  if  we  do  adopt  it,  the 
mode  of  aggression  suggested  by  Russia  is  the  best. 

'  As  it  has  hitherto  been  maintained  in  our  diplo- 
matic communications  that  the  refusal  of  the  Porte  to 
accept  our  mediation  should  not  be  considered  a  ground 
of  war,  what  are  the  reasons  or  circumstances  which 
should  now  induce  us  to  declare  it  to  be  a  ground  of 
war  ? 

'Is  the  battle  of  Navarino  an  event  which  would 
justify  such  a  change  of  principle?  Without  further 
information  upon  the  origin  of  that  battle  we  certainly 
are  unable  to  solve  that  question.  The  battle  of 
Navarino  may  have  sprung  out  of  circumstances  afford- 
ing just  ground  of  complaint,  and  perhaps  even  of  war, 
against  Turkey  ;  but  it  may  also  be  quite  otherwise,  and 
the  blame  of  it  may  be  on  our  side.  At  present,  there- 
fore, it  should  rather  operate  as  a  reason  for  awaiting 
further  intelligence  before  we  take  any  new  decision  in 
this  matter,  than  as  affording  a  ground  for  such  a 
decision  as  is  proposed  to  us. 

1  This  view  is  greatly  strengthened  when  we  consider 
that  the  battle  of  Navarino  must,  in  all  human  proba- 
bility, have  produced  at  Constantinople  some  strong 
decision  one  way  or  the  other,  of  which  we  shall,  within 
a  short  time,  receive  information. 

'  Either  the  Porte  will  resent  that  action  violently 
and  do  some  act  which  will  itself  be  a  just  cause  of  war 


6  MEMORANDUM.  CH.  vi. 

on  our  part ;  or  it  will  be  intimidated  and  submit  to  the 
terms  prescribed  to  it. 

'  The  intermediate  course  of  continuing  passively 
sulky  and  obstinate  seems  almost  impossible. 

'  In  either  of  the  two  former  cases  we  shall  get  out 
of  our  present  embarrassing  position  without  having 
committed  ourselves  to  a  measure  of  war  upon  grounds 
on  which  the  opinion  of  the  country  will,  to  say  the 
least  of  it,  be  much  divided.  If  the  Porte  submits,  we 
shall  have  triumphed  without  having  broken  through 
the  pacific  professions  which  we  have  hitherto  main- 
tained :  if  she  gives  us  new  ground  for  war  by  ag- 
gression or  insult,  we  shall  enter  upon  it  without  any 
inconsistency  with  those  professions. 

1  Supposing  the  Porte  to  adopt  the  third  course,  then 
we  shall  still  be  in  the  same  position  as  we  now  are 
with  regard  to  our  ulterior  measures. 

*  If  it  be  contended  that  Russia  will  take  such 
offence  at  our  even  suspending  our  decision  upon  her 
proposal  that  we  may  incur  the  risk  of  seeing  her  break 
from  our  alliance  and  invade  Turkey  without  our  con- 
currence, it  must  at  once  be  manifest  that  that  supposition 
implies  a  conviction  of  such  bad  faith  on  her  part,  and 
such  uncontrollable  ambition  to  accomplish  her  ultimate 
designs  upon  Turkey,  that  the  project  of  restraining  her 
by  the  terms  of  the  alliance  must  be  utterly  hopeless. 
It  must  be  observed,  then,  that  we  ourselves  shall  be 
acting  under  the  conviction  that  her  fidelity  to  her 
engagements  can  only  be  depended  upon  so  long  as 
everything  is  done  that  can  suit  her  purpose  ;  for  she  is 
unquestionably  bound  to  us  in  good  faith  not  to  take 


CH.  vr.  DISCORD.  7 

any  steps  against  Turkey  for  the  pacification  of  Greece 
except  in  concert  with  us ;  whether  those  steps  which 
are  prescribed  in  the  Treaty  or  such  others  as  the  three 
Powers  may  agree  upon.' 

From  a  passage  in  the  Diary  of  Mr.  Greville 
(Dec.  13,  1827)  it  would  seem  that  he  had  been  made 
acquainted  by  some  member  of  the  Cabinet  with  the 
plan  propounded  by  Mr.  Huskisson,  who,  although  de- 
sirous to  bring  Russian  arms  into  Turkey,  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  a  very  ardent  Philhellene  ;  for,  if 
we  are  to  believe  Greville,  in  a  conversation  with  the 
latter  he  spoke  ('  Diary,'  Sept.  15)  irreverently  of 
Greece  as  a  '  humbug.'  According  to  Lord  Palmerston's 
1  Journal,'1  a  proposal  made  by  him  in  December  for 
sending  a  land  force  to  the  Morea  '  to  sweep  the  Turks 
from  Greece  '  did  not  meet  with  Huskisson's  approval. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  these  discussions  were  not 
conducive  to  harmony  in  a  Cabinet  composed  of  discord- 
ant elements,  the  prolonged  co-existence  of  which  in 
the  same  body  was  soon  found  to  be  impossible.  The 
inevitable  dissolution  of  the  Administration  was  pre- 
cipitated by  circumstances  never  hitherto  clearly  ex- 
plained. 

We  have  mentioned  the  strong  desire  of  the  Whig 
section  of  the  Cabinet  for  the  introduction  of  Lord 
Holland,  and  the  no  less  strong  repugnance  of  the 
King  (with  whom  the  Prime  Minister  agreed)  to  his 
admission,  which,  as  anyone  possessing  a  grain  of  poli- 
tical sense  must  have  perceived,  would  have  been  incon- 
sistent with  the  basis  of  the  Government.  Such  a  step 

1  Lord  Dolling 's  Life,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  288. 


8  LORD  HOLLAND  AGAIN.  en.  TT. 

would  have  implied,  not  only  the  abandonment,  but  the 
reversal,  of  the  Canning  programme,  to  which  Lord 
Goderich  and  his  colleagues  professed  to  adhere.  It 
was  morally  impossible  that  Lord  Holland  should 
consent  to  desist  from  the  advocacy  of  the  views — 
wholly  opposed  to  those  of  Mr.  Canning — which  he  had 
constantly  and  vehemently  sustained  on  many  questions 
of  the  first  importance,  and  notably  on  that  of  Parlia- 
mentary reform.  Equally  certain  was  it  that,  unless 
the  Cabinet  was  to  become  nothing  but  a  sort  of  club 
of  individual  office-holders,  who  might  or  might  not 
occasionally  exchange  a  few  casual  remarks  on  the  state 
of  public  affairs,  every  question  could  not  be  left  an 
open  one,  like  that  of  Catholic  Emancipation.  It 
followed,  therefore,  of  necessity,  that  the  bringing  in  of 
Lord  Holland  involved  the  adoption  by  the  Cabinet  of 
the  principles  which  he  represented,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  conversion  of  a  coalition  Ministry,  pledged  against 
Reform,  into  a  Whig — and  an  advanced  Whig — Minis- 
try, in  favour  of  Reform.  And  there  cannot  be  a  doubt 
that  such  was  the  object  in  view. 

For  a  while  the  importunities  of  the  Whig  members 
of  the  Government  ceased,  and  the  matter  was  allowed 
temporarily  to  rest.  By-and-by,  little  by  little,  a 
change  came  over  the  spirit  of  the  central  division  of 
the  Cabinet.  The  so-called  Canningites — described  by 
Lord  Dalling  as  neither  Whigs  nor  Tories — began, 
gradually  and  insensibly,  to  drift  away  from  the  princi- 
ples Mr.  Canning  had  always  maintained,  and  towards 
the  principles  he  had  always  resisted.  Day  by  day, 
drawn  by  the  Whig  current,  they  dropped  out  of  their 


CH.  vi.  WHIG  INTRIGUE.  9 

course  a  little  to  leeward.  But  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  did  not  drift.  He  never  drifted.  Throughout 
his  whole  life  he  '  kept  station,'  because  throughout 
his  life  his  '  principles  were  fixed,  his  views  defined.' 

At  length  the  tune  arrived  when  it  was  deemed 
expedient  to  give  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  the 
silent  progress  of  conversion  by  stamping  a  decidedly 
Whig  character  upon  a  Cabinet  not  originally  intended 
to  be  Whig,  and  the  pressed  Premier  urged  the  King  to 
accede  to  the  demand  which  three  months  before  he  had 
advised  his  Majesty  to  reject.2 

Lord  Palmerston  (who  in  his  '  Autobiography ' 
strangely  omits  any  allusion  to  this  business),  in  a 
letter  to  his  brother  of  December  18,  1827  (Bulwer's 
'Life'),  mentions  that  Lord  Goderich,  after  having 
unsuccessfully  offered  a  verbal  recommendation  for  the 
admission  of  Lords  Holland  and  Wellesley,  'wrote  the 
King  a  letter  again  urging  the  matter,'  and  stating  that 
'  without  such  an  addition  of  strength  to  the  Govern- 
ment he  felt  himself  unable  to  make  himself  responsible 
for  carrying  on  the  King's  service  ;  and  unless  his 
advice  was  adopted  he  begged  leave  to  retire.  To  this 
Lansdowne  and  Huskisson  were  parties,  and  they  were 
prepared  to  abide  by  the  same  alternative.  But  then 
Goderich  added  to  this  letter  a  postscript,  which  nobody 
saw,  and  in  which  he  stated  that  he  felt  himself,  from 
domestic  circumstances  affecting  the  health  of  one  most 
dear  to  him,  wholly  incapable  of  continuing  to  perform 
the  duties  of  his  station.' 

8  This  appears  from  Mr.  Planta's  letter  to  Huskisson  of  August  21 — '  To 
this  proposal  Lord  Goderich  has  no  inclination  to  accede,  and  the  King  has 
decided  objections  to  it.' 


10  SECRET  PROCEEDINGS.  CH.  YI. 

Neither  in  this  letter  nor  anywhere  else  does  Lord 
Palmerston  say — as  he  might  have  said,  for  it  was  the 
fact — that  the  steps  taken  by  the  Prime  Minister  on 
December  8  and  11,  in  concert  with  some  of  his 
colleagues,  were  kept  concealed  until  the  13th  from 
others  who,  as  was  well  known,  would  have  protested 
against  them. 

So  that  we  get  at  this  :  Lord  Lansdowne  and  Mr. 
Huskisson  took  part  with  Lord  Goderich  in  a  course  of 
action  leading  necessarily  to  the  immediate  dissolution 
of  the  Government  in  the  not  improbable  event  of  the 
King's  refusal  to  comply  with  demands  put  forward 
without  the  knowledge,  and  against  the  wishes,  of  some 
of  its  principal  members  ;  and  the  Prune  Minister  then 
took,  on  private  grounds,  a  separate  course,  tending  to 
the  same  result,  without  the  knowledge  of  those  who 
thought  they  were  in  his  particular  confidence. 

The  manner  in  which  the  secret  action  of  a  portion 
of  the  Cabinet  became  at  last  known  to  other  members 
of  it,  and  the  resolutions  taken  in  consequence  of  the 
tardy  discovery,  will  appear  from  a  record  left  by  Mr. 
Herries,  and  from  his  correspondence,  which  show  that 
a  persistence  on  the  part  of  Lord  Goderich  and  some  of 
his  colleagues  to  force  Lord  Holland  upon  the  King 
(and  they  could  no  longer  have  receded)  must  have 
broken  up  the  Government  at  no  distant  date.  It 
would  have  had  the  effect  of  driving  out  the  Tory  ele- 
ment of  the  existing  mixed  Cabinet,  which  would  thus 
have  come  to  an  end.  The  vacant  places  could  only 
have  been  filled  up  from  the  ranks  of  the  Whig  party, 
and  the  result  would  have  been  a  Whig  Administration, 


CH.  71.  FINANCE  COMMITTEE.  11 

such  as  the  King  did  not  wish  to  have,  and  Parliament 
would  not  have  supported.  The  conclusion  is  un- 
avoidable, therefore,  that,  from  this  cause  alone,  the  days 
of  the  Goderich  Ministry,  at  the  close  of  December  1827, 
were  numbered. 

But  there  was  another  embarrassment  which  was 
made  the  immediate  and  ostensible  cause  of  its  destruc- 
tion. 

It  has  been  clearly  pointed  out  that  the  appointment 
of  a  Finance  Committee,  announced  by  Mr.  Canning 
for  the  session  of  1828,  was  a  measure  which  originated 
with  Mr.  Herries.  He  proposed  it  to  Mr.  Canning,  as 
he  had  already  done  to  Lord  Liverpool ;  and  this  fact 
was  positively  affirmed  by  him  without  contradiction 
in  the  House  of  Commons.3  The  Committee  was  his 
child,  and  therefore  he  was  in  a  peculiar  degree  inte- 
rested in  its  success.  That  his  special  connection  with 
the  plan,  independently  of  departmental  considerations, 
was  recognized,  is  shown  by  the  circumstance  that 
one  of  the  conditions  of  the  compromise  suggested  by 
Mr.  Huskisson  on  August  30  was  that  Mr.  Herries, 
as  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  should  have  the 
management  of  this  Finance  Committee,  which,  when 
he  was  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  became  a  matter 
belonging  to  his  own  particular  department.  No  one 
having  any  ordinary  sense  of  propriety  can  fail  to  per- 
ceive that  nothing  relating  to  this  business  ought  to 
have  been  done  without  previous  concert  with  him. 

Great,  then,  was  his  astonishment,  and  equally  great 
his  displeasure,  at  learning  casually,  in  the  course  of 

3  Speech  in  Ministerial  explanations,  February  18,  1828. 


12  TIERNEyS  MEDDLING.  OH.  vi. 

conversation  on  other  matters,  that  steps  had  been  taken, 
without  his  knowledge,  towards  the  formation  of  the 
Committee,  Mr.  Tierney,  who  was  not  called  upon  to 
act  in  any  way  in  the  matter,  having  taken  upon  himself 
to  select  for  the  chair  a  prominent  member  of  the  Whig 
party,  and  induced  both  Lord  Goderich  and  Mr.  Hus- 
kisson — the  leader  in  the  House  of  Commons — inadver- 
tently to  assent  to  the  choice  of  Lord  Althorp,  without 
previously  consulting  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Mr.  Huskisson  and  Lord 
Goderich  had  the  least  intention  to  give  offence  to  their 
colleague,  although  they  were  undoubtedly  too  hasty 
in  sanctioning  the  proposal  of  Mr.  Tierney,  with  regard 
to  whom  we  cannot  conscientiously  express  the  same 
opinion.  On  the  contrary,  looking  at  the  personal  ani- 
mosity recently  displayed  by  him  towards  Mr.  Herries, 
on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  at  the  want  of  any 
good  reason  for  his  interference  in  an  affair  in  which 
he  was  not  directly  concerned,  we  are  drawn  to  the  con- 
viction that  one  of  the  motives  for  his  action  was  a 
desire  to  give  offence,  and,  by  rendering  the  position  of 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  untenable  with  credit, 
to  push  out  of  the  Cabinet  the  man  whose  entrance  into 
it  he  had  strenuously  endeavoured  to  prevent. 

What  ensued  may  best  be  told  in  Mr.  Herries's  own 
words,  preserved  in  the  following 

STATEMENT  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. 

1  On  November  28  Mr.  Herries,  having  occasion  to 
communicate  with  Mr.  Huskisson  on  some  business  de- 


CH.  vi.  HERRIES'S  STATEMENT.  13 

pending  between  the  Treasury  and  the  Colonial  Office, 
learned,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  from  him  that 
Lord  Althorp  had  been  thought  of  as  the  chairman  of 
the  Committee  of  Finance. 

1  Mr.  Herries  expressed  thereupon  the  favourable 
opinion  which  he  entertained  of  Lord  Althorp,  and 
observed  that,  so  far  as  his  own  personal  feelings  were 
concerned,  such  an  appointment  would  by  no  means  be 
unsatisfactory  to  him.  But  the  proposition  came  upon 
him  by  surprise ;  and  he  did  not  understand,  when  the 
subject  was  first  mentioned,  that  it  had  been  formally 
considered,  entertained,  and  acted  upon. 

'  Mr.  Tierney  came  in  just  at  this  time,  apparently 
for  the  express  purpose  of  communicating  with  Mr. 
Huskisson  on  the  subject  of  the  Committee  of  Finance. 
Some  remarks  which  fell  from  him  conveyed  the  im- 
pression of  something  like  a  final  agreement  with  Lord 
Althorp,  after  a  negotiation  with  Lord  Spencer  on  the 
subject.  But  they  were  not  addressed  to  Mr.  Herries ; 
they  passed  between  Mr.  Tierney  and  Mr.  Huskisson. 

'  Some  discussion  then  took  place  concerning  the  sub- 
jects which  it  might  be  proper  to  refer  to  the  attention 
of  the  Committee  of  Finance ;  this  was  terminated  by 
the  entrance  of  Mr.  S.  Bourne. 

'  Mr.  Herries 's  first  reflection  upon  what  had  trans- 
pired in  this  interview,  after  he  returned  home,  satisfied 
him  that  the  step  which  had  been  taken  was  highly  in- 
expedient, and  that  the  manner  in  which  it  had  been 
adopted,  without  communication  with  him,  was  not  only 
irregular,  but  very  derogatory  to  the  character  of  the 
office  which  he  held. 


14  HERRIES'S  STATEMENT.  OH.  vi. 

*  He  determined  accordingly  to  communicate  imme- 
diately with  the  head   of  the  Government  upon  the 
subject. 

*  He  could  not  see  Lord  Goderich  before  the  following 
morning.     To  him   Mr.   Herries  stated   what   he  had 

c5 

learned,  and  at  the  same  time  the  grounds  of  his  objec- 
tion and  complaint  against  it. 

'  He  was  then,  however,  told  by  Lord  Goderich  that 
his  lordship  also  was  aware  of  the  proceedings  with 
respect  to  Lord  Althorp ;  and  Lord  Goderich  informed 
him  that  when,  on  a  late  occasion,  he  had  enquired  of 
Mr.  Huskisson  whether  Mr.  Herries  had  been  consulted 
in  the  matter,  and  was  informed  that  he  had  not,  he 
(Lord  Goderich)  had  expressed  the  greatest  regret  and 
surprise.  But  it  appears  that  no  communication  of  the 
proceedings  was  even  then  immediately  made  to  Mr. 
Herries. 

'  On  the  same  day  Mr.  Herries  wrote  to  Mr.  Huskisson 
on  the  subject;  but  before  the  letter  was  despatched  he 
received  a  request  that  he  would  call  on  Mr.  Huskisson. 
This  message  was  the  consequence  of  what  Mr.  Herries 
had  said  to  Lord  Goderich. 

1  In  the  interview  which  followed  Mr.  Herries  stated 
his  objections  to  the  measure  adopted,  and  to  the  man- 
ner in  which  it  had  been  executed. 

'  When  he  returned  he  despatched  the  letter  already 
written,  with  a  note,  stating  that,  notwithstanding  the 
verbal  conference,  it  appeared  right  to  him  to  send  as  a 
written  protest  the  letter  which  he  had  stated,  in  the 
conference,  that  he  had  previously  prepared. 

'  This  letter  was  answered  by  a  short  note  from  Mr. 


CH.  vi.   CORRESPONDENCE — HERRIES   TO  HUSKISSON.        15 

Huskisson,  stating  that  Mr.  Herries  had  some  right  to 
complain  of  Lord  Goderich  and  himself,  but  adding 
that  he  still  thought,  for  certain  reasons,  that  it  would 
be  advisable  to  have  Lord  Althorp  in  the  chair  of  the 
Committee.  This  note  was  accompanied  by  the  copy 
of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Huskisson  to  Mr.  Tierney,  sug- 
gesting the  propriety  of  entire  forbearance  from  any 
further  steps  on  the  subject  of  the  Committee. 

1  Mr.  Herries  to  Mr.  Huskisson. 

' "  (Private  and  confidential.) 

'"Downing  Street:  November  29,  1827. 

'  "  My  dear  Huskisson, — I  send  you  the  letter  which, 
as  I  told  you,  I  had  written,  though  not  closed,  when 
you  sent  to  let  me  know  that  you  were  alone.  It  is 
right  that  you  should  have  my  written  protest  against 
the  course  which  has  been  pursued.  I  am  quite  sure 
that  you  cannot  think  differently  from  me  upon  the 
subject  of  the  ground  of  complaint  which  I  have  against 
it.  Truly  yours, 

'  "  J.  C.  HERRIES." 

'  "  My  dear  Huskisson, — When  you  mentioned  to  me 
yesterday  what  were  your  views  with  respect  to  Lord 
Althorp  as  chairman  of  the  Finance  Committee,  I  was 
not  aware  of  the  length  to  which  the  negotiation  with 
him  had  proceeded,  nor  did  I  know  until  this  day  that 
it  had  been  some  time  in  progress. 

'  "  When  Mr.  Tierney  came  in  and  referred  to  the 
communications  which  he  had  had  with  Lord  Spencer  as 
well  as  with  Lord  Althorp,  I  was  indeed  made  aware 


16       CORRESPONDENCE — IIERR1ES  TO  HUSKTSSON.    CH.  vi. 

of  the  fact  that  the  business  was  understood  to  be  actu- 
ally settled. 

' "  I  did  not,  however,  think  it  a  fit  opportunity  for 
making  any  other  remark  than  what  I  then  said  (and 
with  great  sincerity)  as  to  my  personal  respect  for  Lord 
Althorp. 

1 "  But  I  felt  at  once  (and  reflection  has  since  made 
me  feel  much  more  strongly)  that  the  commencement, 
progress,  and  termination  of  this  arrangement  without 
the  slightest  communication  with  me  must  place  me  in 
a  very  awkward  position. 

'  "  A  further  reflection  has  also  tended  to  satisfy  me 
that,  in  the  present  state  of  parties  and  the  present 
situation  of  our  Government,  the  choice  is  not  a  happy 
one.  The  alarm  and  distaste  of  those  who  are  opposed 
to  Finance  Committees  as  instruments  of  too  extensive 
and  dangerous  reforms  will  not  be  diminished  by  the 
appointment  of  Lord  Althorp,  who  is  regarded  as  the 
most  prominent  member  of  the  most  reforming  party  in 
the  House. 

' "  It  appears  also  that  the  steps  which  have  been 
taken  are  not  confined  to  the  chair  of  the  Committee. 
Other  persons  have  been  communicated  with,  and,  as  I 
understand,  have  received  promises  of  being  nominated 
as  members  of  it  in  the  same  manner,  without  any  in- 
timation of  these  proceedings  to  me. 

'  "  I  have  been  speaking  to  Lord  G-oderich  this  day 
on  the  subject.  I  think  he  entirely  concurs  in  my  view 
of  the  matter,  and  entertains  the  same  feelings  as 
myself  upon  it,  so  far  at  least  as  relates  to  the  irre- 
gularity of  the  course  which  has  been  pursued.  What 


CH.  vi.      CORRESPONDENCE — HUSKISSON  TO  HERRIES.      17 

can  now  be  done  to  set  matters  right  again  I  do  not 
know,  but  I  will  call  on  you  and  talk  the  matter  over 
as  soon  as  I  can  find  an  opportunity  of  seeing  you. 

Truly  yours, 

' "  J.  C.  HERRIES. 

<  "Downing  Street :  November  29, 1827." 

1  Mr.  HusJcisson  to  Mr.  Herries. 

1 "  (Private.) 

<"  S.  P. :  November  30, 1827, 

8  A.M. 

1 "  My  dear  Herries, — I  wrote  to  Tierney  before  I 
left  the  office  last  night — indeed,  before  I  received  your 
letter. 

'  "  I  enclose  to  you  a  copy  of  what  I  said  to  him. 

'  "  I  retain  my  opinion  that  upon  a  balance  of  incon- 
veniences and  advantages  Althorp  will  be  safer  in  the 
chair  than  a  leading  personage  in  the  Committee,  kept 
at  a  jealous  distance  by  the  friends  of  Government. 

*  "  But  this  was  no  reason  for  communicating  with 
him  at  present. 

' "  In  respect  to  yourself  I  must  admit  that  both 
Goderich  and  I  must  take  some  blame  to  ourselves  for 
not  having  sooner  informed  you  of  what  Tierney  had 
mentioned  to  Goderich  on  the  subject ;  but  I  am  sure 
you  will  acquit  both  of  us  of  anything  intentional  in 

this  delay.     Yours  very  truly, 

* "  W.  HUSKISSON. 

1 "  I  am  going  to  Claremont  in  the  expectation  that 
we  shall  have  no  message  till  Sunday." 

VOL.II.  c 


18      CORRESPONDENCE — HUSKISSON  TO  TIERNEY.    CH.  YI. 
*  Mr.  lluskwson  to  Mr.  Tierney. 

1 "  (Private  and  confidential.) 

• "  Downing  Street :  November  29, 1827. 

*  "  Dear  Tierney, — There  might  arise  so  much  serious 
embarrassment  from  its  becoming  known  that  particular 
names  had  been  pointed  out  as  members  of  the  Finance 
Committee,  as  well  in  respect  to  the  manner  in  which 
their  claims  and  pretensions  would  be  canvassed  pre- 
maturely out  of  doors  (as  we  say)  as  to  the  sort  of 
applications  which  it  would  bring  upon  me  and  other 
members  of  the  Government,  that  I  am  sure  you  will 
excuse  my  suggesting  to  you  not  to  hold  out  expecta- 
tions to  any  of  the  individuals  who  were  thought  of  or 
mentioned  yesterday  as  persons  to  be  put  upon  the 
Committee.  Indeed,  it  will,  I  am  sure,  be  the  safest 
course,  where  so  many  jealous  and  conflicting  feelings 
may  be  excited  in  the  different  parties  into  which  the 
House  is  split,  for  the  members  of  the  Cabinet  to  abstain 
from  all  discussion  upon  this  matter,  except  strictly 
among  themselves. 

'  "  Upon  reflection  I  incline  to  think  this,  at  least  for 
the  present,  would  have  been  the  most  prudent  line  even 
in  respect  to  Althorp ;  but  I  am  sure  it  is  very  desir- 
able, in  respect  to  others,  that  no  further  step  in  advance 
should  be  made  in  this  business  till  we  come  nearer  to 
the  time  of  meeting  Parliament,  and  have  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  talking  it  over  more  fully  among  ourselves. 
Yours  very  faithfully,  ,  „  w_  HusKISSON/, 


43H.  vi.  HERRIES'S  STATEMENT.  19 

'  Here  the  matter  rested.  Mr.  Herries  remained  in 
expectation  for  some  days  of  receiving  a  communication 
concerning  the  course  which  it  might  be  proposed  to 
pursue,  or  the  measures  to  be  adopted  for  undoing  those 
which  had  been  taken.  But  there  were  other  matters 
of  extreme  and  urgent  importance  then  occupying  the 
attention  of  the  Cabinet ;  and  the  arrangement  of  the 
Finance  Committee  was  obviously  one  which  might  be 
postponed  for  some  time.  He  felt  confident  at  least 
that  no  further  step  would  now  be  taken  without  con- 
sultation with  him. 

1  It  was  within  about  a  week  of  this  time  that 
Mr.  Herries  received  intimations  of  some  projected 
changes  of  great  importance  in  the  Government ;  they 
were  vague  as  to  the  purport  of  the  proceedings  going 
on,  although  not  doubtful  as  to  the  fact  of  some 
measures  being  actually  on  foot.  In  this  state  of 
anxiety  and  surmise  he  remained  in  daily  expectation 
of  receiving  some  intimation  from  the  head  of  the 
Government  of  the  nature  of  those  proceedings,  but 
nothing  was  made  known  to  him  on  the  subject  until 
after  Lord  Goderich's  resignation  had  taken  place.  He 
then  found  the  apprehensions  which  he  had  been  led  to 
entertain  fully  justified.  Negotiations  of  the  most 
pressing  nature  had  been  carried  on,  with  the  concur- 
rence of  a  part  of  the  Cabinet,  for  effecting  a  material 
change  in  its  composition,  which  had  ended  in  the 
retirement  of  Lord  Goderich. 

'  His  return  took  place  on  December  19,  and,  as  it 
then  appeared  to  Mr.  Herries,  without  any  settlement 
concerning  the  projected  changes,  although  he  soon 

c  2 


20         CORRESPONDENCE — HERRIES  TO  GODERICH.  CH.  vr. 

afterwards  discovered  that  he  had  formed  that  conclusion 
erroneously. 

'The  proper  time  appeared,  therefore,  to  be  now 
arrived  for  calling  upon  Lord  Goderich  to  come  to  a 
decision  respecting  the  Finance  Committee. 

'  Mr.  Herries's  general  views  and  principles  on  the 
subject  had  been  stated  to  Lord  Goderich  in  the  con- 
versations which  had  passed  between  them. 

*  He  therefore  addressed  to  him  the  following  letter, 
which  led  to  the  correspondence  annexed  to  it : — 

« "  Downing  Street :  December  21, 1827. 

'  "  My  dear  Goderich, — It  is  now  full  time  that  some 
further  steps  should  be  taken  with  respect  to  the  Com- 
mittee of  Finance. 

'  "  It  would,  I  believe,  naturally  be  my  duty  to  bring 
that  subject  under  the  consideration  of  the  Cabinet  ; 
but,  after  what  has  passed  (and  I  advert  to  it  with 
much  pain),  I  feel  that  it  is  not  at  present  in  my  hands. 
I  must,  therefore,  learn  from  you,  as  head  of  the  Govern- 
ment, what  is  the  course  intended  to  be  pursued  for  the 
formation  of  this  Committee  and  the  regulation  of  its 
proceedings. 

'  "  What  has  hitherto  been  done  in  this  matter  has 
taken  place  without  consultation  or  communication 
with  me,  although  it  would  seem  to  belong  principally 
to  my  department  of  the  public  business.  A  negotia- 
tion has  been  carried  on,  and  completed  by  Mr.  Tierney, 
with  your  sanction  and  that  of  Mr.  Huskisson,  for  the 
nomination  of  the  chairman  of  the  Committee. 

'  "  The  Government  is,  I  presume,  fully  committed  to 


CH.  vi.    CORRESPONDENCE— HERRIES  TO  GODERICH.         21 

the  individual  fixed  upon  for  the  purpose,  and  to  the 
noble  family  of  which  he  is  a  member ;  and  this  pro- 
ceeding, as  I  am  given  to  understand,  has  been  adopted 
with  a  view,  in  a  great  measure,  to  a  political  object, 
and  as  being  calculated  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  the 
Administration . 

'  "  I  doubt  much  whether  that  view  be  correct,  and 
whether  the  calculation  be  a  just  one.  But  I  have  an 
objection  to  the  arrangement  upon  a  much  higher 
ground.  I  conceive  that,  in  order  to  derive  in  the 
utmost  possible  degree  from  this  important  measure  all 
the  public  benefit  which  it  is  capable  of  affording,  and 
at  the  same  time  to  avoid  the  inconveniences  to  which 
it  is  liable,  all  political  views  of  the  narrower  kind — all 
those  which  are  connected  with  particular  parties  and 
influences  only — should  be  utterly  discarded  in  the 
formation  of  the  Committee. 

'  "  It  appears  to  me  that  these  objects  would  be  best 
secured  if  the  Committee  were  composed  of  the  most 
eminent  individuals  of  the  several  parties  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  and  the  chair  filled  by  some  person  of 
high  character  and  respectability,  either  entirely  un- 
connected, or  connected  as  little  as  possible,  with  any 
of  the  political  parties  into  which  the  House  is  divided. 

'  "  Whether  this  be  a  proper  view  of  the  subject,  and 
whether,  if  it  be  so,  you  could  yet  proceed  upon  such 
a  principle,  you  and  Huskisson  are  best  able  to  judge. 
I  do  not  feel  that  I  could  act  in  it  upon  any  other.  In 
order,  therefore,  to  relieve  you  from  any  difficulty,  as 
connected  with  my  situation,  respecting  the  course 
which  you  may  deem  it  expedient  to  pursue,  I  beg  to 


22         CORRESPONDENCE— GODERICII  TO  IIERRIES.    en.  vi. 

assure  you  that  if,  by  putting  my  office  into  other  hands, 
you  can  more  satisfactorily  execute  this  difficult  and 
delicate  measure,  you  may  command  my  most  ready  and 
cheerful  resignation  of  it.  I  place  it  (and  I  beg  it  to  be 
understood  as  being  done  in  the  most  friendly  manner) 
entirely  at  your  disposal.  Yours,  &c., 

«  "  J.  C.  HERRIES." 

' "  Downing  Street :  December  24, 1827. 

1 "  My  dear  Herrles, — I  received  your  letter  of  the 
21st  instant  on  Saturday  evening.  I  agree  with  you  hi 
thinking  that  the  time  is  at  hand  when  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  consider  the  question  of  the  Finance  Committee 
in  all  its  bearings,  both  as  to  its  character  and  composi- 
tion and  as  to  the  mode  in  which  its  duties  can  best  be 
performed  for  the  public  good  and  with  credit  to  all 
parties  interested.  When  Huskisson  returns  to  town, 
which  will  be  in  two  or  three  days,  this  matter  must  be 
taken  in  hand  and  brought  to  a  final  issue. 

' "  In  the  meantime  I  owe  it  both  to  you  and  to 
myself  to  explain  what  you  seem  greatly  to  have  mis- 
understood, viz.  the  degree  to  which  I  was  a  party  to 
anything  like  a  settlement  of  the  question  with  respect 
to  the  chairman  of  the  proposed  Committee. 

'  "  I  thought,  indeed,  that  I  had  already  explained 
verbally  to  you  that,  as  far  as  I  was  concerned,  nothing 
had  passed  but  some  casual  conversation  between  Mr. 
Tierney  and  myself;  and  I  certainly  was  greatly  sur- 
prised when  I  learned  that  any  step  whatever  had  been 
taken  in  the  business. 

' "  The  facts  of  the  case,  as  regards  myself,  are  as 
follow  : — Some  weeks  ago  Mr.  Tierney,  having  to  call 


OH.  vi.    CORRESPONDENCE— GODERICH  TO  HERRIES.         23 

upon  me  upon  some  other  business,  mentioned  incident- 
ally that  he  thought  it  would  be  a  very  good  thing  if 
the  confidence  of  the  Government  were  shown  to  Lord 
Althorp  in  respect  to  the  Finance  Committee ;  and  upon 
my  stating  that  I  thought  he  ought  to  be  a  member  of 
the  Committee,  Mr.  Tierney  explained  that  what  he 
suggested  was  to  place  him  in  the  chair.  I  stated  to 
Mr.  Tierney  that  that  was  a  proposition  which  ought  to 
be  well  considered  before  any  decision  could  be  taken, 
but  that  personally  I  had  a  regard  for  Lord  Althorp, 
arising  out  of  old  friendship  and  esteem.  There  the 
matter  ended  at  the  time  ;  and,  as  we  were  all  occupied 
with  other  matters  (I  think  it  was  in  November),  I  took 
no  further  notice  of  what  I  considered  to  be  a  loose 
suggestion.  A  few  days  after  Mr.  Tierney  spoke  to  me 
again  in  the  Cabinet  Room,  and  I  then  answered  that 
to  whatever  the  members  of  the  Cabinet  in  the  House 
of  Commons  might  think  advisable  upon  the  subject  I 
should  not  object,  not  anticipating  that  anything  could 
be  acted  upon  without  such  a  communication  with  all  of 
them,  and  not  myself  supposing  that  the  matter  pressed 
for  an  immediate  decision. 

' "  When  I  afterwards  learned  that  Mr.  Huskisson  had, 
in  consequence  of  a  communication  with  Mr.  Tierney, 
acquiesced  in  the  idea,  and  that  some  sort  of  communi- 
cation had  been  made  to  Lord  Althorp,  the  first  thing 
I  did  was  to  enquire  of  Mr.  Huskisson  whether  he  had 
spoken  to  you,  and  whether  you  were  a  party  to  the 
arrangement ;  and  I  found,  to  my  great  surprise,  that 
you  had  never  heard  anything  of  the  proposition  and 
were  in  no  way  a  party  to  it. 


24        CORRESPONDENCE— OODER1CH  TO  IIERRIES.     en.  VL 

'"I  have  thought  it  right  to  state  these  circum- 
stances, because  you  appear  to  think  that  I  was  aware 
of  the  communication  (whatever  it  may  have  been) 
which  was  made  to  Lord  Althorp  before  it  was  actually 
made  to  him. 

*  "  With  respect  to  the  latter  part  of  your  letter,  in 
which  you  place  your  office  at  my  disposal,  I  can  truly 
say  (what  I  am  sure  you  can  easily  believe)  that  I 
cannot  conceive  a  case  in  which  it  would  be  a  con- 
venience to  me  that  you  should  retire  ;  but  at  all  events 
I  should  hope  that  you  will  not  take  any  final  step 
upon  that  subject  until  we  shall  have  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  giving  to  the  whole  question  the  fullest  and 
most  unreserved  consideration.  Yours,  &c., 

' "  GODERICH." 

'  Two  personal  communications,4  by  desire  of  Lord 
Goderich,  took  place  upon  this  subject  between  Lord 
Goderich  and  Mr.  Herries,  one  on  December  29,  1827, 
and  another  on  January  2,  1828.  Nothing  materially 
bearing  on  this  question  took  place  in  these  interviews, 
beyond  what  is  noticed  either  in  the  preceding  or  in 
the  following  portion  of  this  correspondence. 

' "  Downing  Street :  January  4,  1828. 

1 "  My  dear  Herries, — Having  had  much  communica- 
tion with  Huskisson  on  the  subject  of  our  recent  corre- 
spondence respecting  the  proposed  nomination  of  Lord 
Althorp  to  be  chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Finance, 
I  have  distinctly  ascertained  from  him,  and  now  think 

4  Memoranda  of  these  conversations  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  this 
statement. 


CH.  vi.    CORRESPONDENCE— GODERICH  TO  HERRIES.        25 

it  right  to  tell  you  without  reserve,  that  he  feels  it  to 
be  quite  impossible  for  him  to  acquiesce  in  giving  up 
that  nomination  :  it  is  clear,  therefore,  that  such  a  deci- 
sion of  the  question  would  at  once  dissolve  the  Ad- 
ministration. I  cannot  but  feel  that  your  resignation, 
on  the  other  hand,  would  in  all  probability  have  the 
same  effect.  It  becomes,  therefore,  indispensably  neces- 
sary, both  on  public  and  private  grounds  of  the  greatest 
urgency,  that  I  should  distinctly  understand  from  you 
whether  it  is  your  fixed  determination  to  resign  the 
seals  of  the  Exchequer  unless  Lord  Althorp's  nomina- 
tion be  abandoned.  I  would  not  press  you  for  an 
answer  in  so  strong  a  manner  were  it  not  for  the 
near  approach  of  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  and  that 
infinite  embarrassment  to  the  King's  service  and  to  the 
public  interests  would  arise  if  this  matter  were  not 
brought  to  a  speedy  determination ;  and  the  King 
would  certainly  have  the  right  to  complain  if  he  were 
not  apprised  of  the  state  of  things  as  long  before  the 
meeting  of  Parliament  as  possible. 

'  "  There  certainly  has  been  an  unfortunate  misun- 
derstanding upon  this  subject,  and  I  deeply  regret  upon 
every  account  that  I  was  not  aware  on  Wednesday, 
December  19,  when  I  stated  to  the  Cabinet  my  readi- 
ness to  go  on,  provided  they  continued  to  entertain  their 
former  sentiments  towards  me,  that  this  point,  respect- 
ing the  Committee  of  Finance,  was  likely  so  soon  to  bring 
the  Government,  and  especially  myself,  into  jeopardy. 

'  "  That,  however,  cannot  now  be  helped,  and  I  have 
only  to  hope  that  you  will  let  me  know  your  determina- 
tion, in  order  that  I  may  regulate  my  own  conduct. 
Yours,  &c.,  '"  GODERICH." 


26    CORRESPONDENCE— HERR1ES  TO  OODERICH.  CH.  TI. 

« "  Montreal :  January  6,  1828. 

*  "  My  dear  Goderich, — I  received  your  letter  of  yes- 
terday at  this  place  last  night. 

' "  You  inform  me  that,  after  much  conversation  with 
Huskisson,  you  have  ascertained  that  he  feels  it  impos- 
sible for  him  to  acquiesce  in  giving  up  the  nomination 
of  Lord  Althorp  to  the  chair  of  the  Finance  Committee, 
and  that  a  decision  of  the  question  to  that  effect  must 
at  once  dissolve  the  Government. 

'  "  You  add  that  you  think  my  resignation  would  in 
all  probability  have  the  same  consequence. 

'  "  Upon  these  grounds  you  desire  to  know  distinctly 
whether  I  should  resign  the  Exchequer  seals  if  that 
nomination  were  persevered  in. 

* "  In  answer  to  this  question  allow  me  once  more 
to  refer  you  to  my  letter  of  December  21,  and  also  to 
request  your  recollection  of  what  passed  between  us  in 
the  two  interviews  which  I  have  since  had  with  you 
upon  this  subject. 

' "  In  both  those  interviews  I  distinctly  explained 
to  you  that  I  felt  it  to  be  imperative  upon  me  to  abide 
strictly  by  the  terms  of  my  letter,  and  that  I  must 
consequently  leave  it  entirely  to  you  to  dispose  of  me, 
with  reference  to  the  conditions  therein  stated,  in 
such  manner  as  might  appear  to  you  to  be  the  most 
expedient  for  the  public  service  and  for  the  interests  of 
your  Government. 

'  "  It  is  scarcely  necessary  for  me  to  repeat  on  this 
occasion  the  declaration  which  I  have  already  several 
times  made  to  you,  and  which  I  distinctly  made  to 
Huskisson  also,  that,  far  from  feeling  even  the  shadow 


CH.  vi.    CORRESPONDENCE— HERRIES  TO  GODERICH.         27 

of  any  personal  objection  to  Lord  Altliorp,  I  should,  on 
the  contrary,  have  had  much  satisfaction  in  transacting 
business  with  him  as  Chairman  of  the  Committee,  on 
account  of  the  esteem  and  respect  in  which  I  hold  his 
character,  if  his  appointment  could  be  made  consistent 
with  the  public  principles  upon  which  it  appeared  to 
me  to  be  indispensable  that  the  Committee  should  be 
formed,  in  order  to  be  productive  of  the  utmost  possible 
benefit  to  the  public. 

'  "  As  to  the  soundness  of  that  principle,  I  have  not 
understood  that  you  differ  in  the  least  degree  from  me  ; 
nor  have  I  heard  that  it  is  disputed  by  anyone  else. 

'  "  With  respect  to  the  regret  which  you  express  on 
account  of  your  not  having  been  aware,  on  December 
19,  when  you  stated  your  willingness  to  go  on  with  the 
Government,  that  the  '  point  now  in  question  was  likely 
to  bring  the  Government,  and  especially  yourself,  into 
jeopardy,'  permit  me  to  observe,  that  if  I  had  been  in 
your  confidence  with  regard  to  the  important  steps 
which  you  had  taken  before  the  19th,  and  also  as  to  the 
arrangements  connected  with  the  resolution  then  an- 
nounced (but  which  arrangements  were  at  that  time 
only  made  known  to  some  and  not  to  all  of  your 
colleagues),  I  should  have  been  better  enabled  (as  I 
should  sincerely  have  desired)  to  study  your  personal 
convenience  with  respect  to  the  best  time  for  urging  a 
settlement  of  the  question  of  the  Finance  Committee. 
Yours,  &c.,  '  "  J.  C.  HERRIES." 


28         COTiRESPONDENCE-GODERICH  TO  HERRIES.      CH.  vi. 

'  "  Blackheath  :  January  5,  1828. 

*  "  My  dear  Henries, — The  more  I  reflect  upon  this 
unfortunate  question  respecting  the  Finance  Committee, 
the  more  I  am  convinced  that  the  view  which  you  have 
taken  up  is  founded  upon  a  misconception  both  of  the 
circumstances  themselves,  which  took  place  at  the 
end  of  November,  and  of  the  consequences  which  would 
result  from  placing  Lord  Althorp  in  the  chair  of  that 
Committee.  I  am  quite  convinced  that  there  was  no 
intention  whatever  of  treating  you  with  disrespect,  or  of 
exposing  you  to  the  embarrassment  of  not  being  in 
your  proper  place  in  all  that  relates  to  a  matter  so 
closely  connected  with  your  own  department. 

'  "  It  is  certainly  unfortunate  that  anything  whatever 
was  said  to  Lord  Althorp  before  it  was  settled  that 
something  should  be  said  ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows 
from  that  circumstance  that  the  Government  ought  to 
be  placed  in  jeopardy,  if  it  can  be  avoided,  especially 
at  a  moment  so  peculiarly  inconvenient  to  the  King's 
service  and  the  public  interests  as  the  present  must 
necessarily  be.  Now  as  to  the  appointment  itself,  I 
must  say  that  it  appears  to  me  that  you  greatly  over- 
rate the  objections  and  difficulties. 

1 "  Lord  Althorp  is  a  man  of  perfect  honour  and 
integrity,  and  if  he  consented,  with  the  approbation 
of  the  Government,  to  take  the  chair  of  that  Com- 
mittee, it  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  would  do  so 
without  giving  his  fair  and  honourable  confidence  to 
the  Government.  I  do  not  mean  that  he  would  or 
could  compromise  his  own  opinions  ;  but  I  am  per- 


,cu.  vi.   CORRESPONDENCE— HERRIES  AND  GODERICH.       29 

suaded  tliat  neither  hostility  nor  mischief  would  enter 
into  his  views  or  feelings  in  discharging  his  duties. 
I  wish  very  much  that  you  would  well  consider  this 
matter  before  you  decide  to  withdraw  from  the  Go- 
vernment under  circumstances  which  would  cause  so 
much  embarrassment. 

1  "  If  I  thought  I  was  counselling  anything  discredit- 
able to  you  personally,  nothing  would  induce  me  to 
lay  this  view  of  the  case  before  you.  But  we  all 
owe  much  to  the  King  and  to  the  public  good,  and 
although  I  feel  more  and  more  the  extent  of  the 
sacrifice  which  office  requires,  and  the  pressure,  bodily 
and  mental,  which  it  imposes,  I  feel  that  we  ought,  if 
possible  at  all  events,  to  meet  Parliament  to  justify 
our  measures,  and  then  leave  it  to  Parliament  to  take 
what  course  they  may  choose  in  deciding  upon  our 
fate.  Yours,  &c,  '"GoDERiCH." 

'"Montreal:  January  5, 1828. 

'  "  My  dear  Goderich, — Before  I  received  your  letter, 
of  which  I  return  you  a  copy  (as  you  desire),  I  had 
despatched  an  answer  to  yours  of  yesterday,  which 
reached  me  last  night.  But  having  no  messenger 
here,  I  sent  it  by  a  conveyance,  which  may  perhaps 
not  be  expeditious  in  the  delivery  of  it. 

1 "  The  effect  of  it  was  precisely  the  same  as  what  I 
have  stated  to  you  twice  verbally,  when  we  discussed 
the  unpleasant  subject  of  the  Finance  Committee. 

'  "  I  will  not  reply  to  what  you  have  now  written 
to  me  until  I  have  done  what  you  desire — again  very 
carefully  considered  the  matter. 


30  CORRESPONDENCE  AND  STATEMENT.          en.  n. 

'  "  Of  one  thing,  however,  I  wish  to  assure  you,  lest 
a  misapprehension  should,  on  that  point,  remain  on 
your  mind.  I  am  not  actuated  by  the  least  feeling  of 
offence  or  disgust  in  the  determination  which  I  adopt. 
I  was  unquestionably  hurt,  and  very  much  so,  when 
I  first  learned  what  had  been  done,  on  account  of  the 
slight  which  appeared  to  have  been  put  upon  me  in 
my  official  cJiaracter.  But  I  have  too  much  friendship 
for  Huskisson  to  entertain  a  belief,  or  to  harbour  any 
suspicion,  that  he  would  intentionally  do  me  any 
wrong.  I  need  not  say  that  the  same  observation 
would  apply  to  yourself  in  the  strongest  manner, 
independently  even  of  the  explanation  which  you  have 
given  me  of  the  small  part  which  you  had  in  the 
business.  In  short,  my  conduct  will  not  be  governed 
by  any  unpleasant  feelings  towards  any  individual  in 
this  matter.  :  ,  „  j  <,  HERRIES  „ 

'  In  consequence  of  Lord  Goderich's  request,  another 
interview  on  this  subject  took  place  on  January  7. 
The  same  arguments  and  observations  as  had  been 
urged  and  answered  in  the  former  interviews  were 
repeated,  and  little  more  occurred  deserving  of  par- 
ticular notice,  except  that  Lord  Groderich  laid  stress 
upon  the  circumstance  that,  after  all,  no  positive  or 
definite  engagement  had  been  made  with  Lord 
Althorp,  and  that  the  negotiation  could  hardly  be 
said  to  have  been  carried  beyond  the  ascertaining 
that  Lord  Althorp  and  his  friends  would  be  satisfied 
by  the  appointment  if  it  were  offered.  To  this  Mr. 
Herries  answered  by  some  observations,  the  substance 


en.  vi.    CORRESPONDENCE— HERRIES  TO  GODERICIT.         31 

of  which  will  be  found  in  the  following  letter,  written 
in  consequence  of  Lord  Goderich's  particular  request 
to  receive  an  answer  in  that  form  to  his  last  letter. 
It  was  sent  to  him  very  soon  after  the  termination  of 
the  interview : — 

' "  Downing  Street :  January  7, 1828. 

1 "  My  dear  Goderich, — I  have,  as  you  requested  in 
your  last  letter  (and  as  I  promised  in  my  answer  that 
I  would),  carefully  reconsidered  the  subject  of  my 
letter  of  December  21. 

'  "  I  regret  to  be  compelled  to  state  that. the  recon- 
sideration so  bestowed  upon  it  has  not  conduced  to  any 
alteration  of  the  judgment  which  I  had  previously 
formed  and  communicated  to  you. 

'  "  The  question  at  issue,  and  upon  which  your  judg- 
ment— not  mine — is  to  be  formed,  is  obviously  not  the 
mere  nomination  of  Lord  Althorp.  That  nomination 
cannot  be  treated  as  an  insulated  point,  disconnected 
from  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  determined 
upon  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  settled  ;  nor 
(which  is  of  much  more  importance)  can  it  be  fairly 
considered  without  reference  to  the  principles  by  which 
I  have  stated  that  I  think  every  step,  in  the  formation 
of  the  Committee  of  Finance,  ought  to  be  guided. 

'  "  In  your  last  communication  to  me  you  gave  me 
to  understand  that  I  had  been  mistaken  in  supposing 
that  a  conclusive  engagement  with  Lord  Althorp  had 
been  made.  It  appears,  from  your  view  of  the  matter, 
that  little  more  had  been  done  than  to  ascertain  that 
Lord  Althorp  would  undertake  the  office.  If  such 
be  the  case,  I  cannot  but  observe  that  it  renders  the 


32          CORRESPONDENCE— IIERRIES  TO  GODERICH.  en.  vi. 

positive  determination  of  Huskisson  to  adhere  peremp- 
torily to  that  choice,  and  even  to  refuse  all  discussion 
of  the  reasons  upon  which  I  think  a  different  course 
ought  to  be  pursued,  not  only  more  unintelligible 
to  me,  but  more  difficult  for  me  to  acquiesce  in.  I 
should  have  thought  that  it  might  upon  such  grounds 
have  still  been  an  open  question. 

' "  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  of  renewing  the 
assurance  which  I  have  already  given  you  that  your 
determination,  as  the  result  of  your  judgment  in  the 
matter,  to  advise  the  King  to  confide  to  other  hands 
the  seals  which  I  now  hold,  will  not  have  the  slightest 
tendency  to  diminish  the  friendship  which  I  feel  both 
for  you  and  for  Huskisson,  nor  to  abate  the  sincere 
wishes  which  I  entertain  for  the  future  success  of  your 
Administration. 

4  "  I  feel  that  where  parties  of  such  unequal  weights 
are  placed  by  an  unfortunate  concurrence  of  circum- 
stances in  two  opposite  scales,  there  ought  not  to  be  a 
moment's  hesitation  (with  reference  to  the  interests  of 
the  Government)  in  so  disposing  of  me  as  to  retain  the 
invaluable  services  of  our  common  friend.  Yours,  &c., 

4"J.  C.  HERRIES." 

4  Memorandum  of  a  Conversation  with  Lord   Goderich 
between  11  and  12  o'clock  on  December  29,  1827. 

4  Lord  Goderich  began  by  stating  the  embarrassment 
in  which  he  was  placed  by  the  letter  which  he  had 
received  from  me  on  the  subject  of  the  Committee  of 
Finance.  He  appeared  to  be  in  doubt  as  to  the  sense  in 


CH.  VT.  MEMORANDUM.  33 

which  he  should  understand  it,  and  expressed  a  wish 
to  know  from  me  whether  he  was  to  conclude  that  I 
had  determined  upon  resigning  my  situation  in  con- 
sequence of  what  had  been  done.  In  putting  the  ques- 
tion in  this  mode  he  referred  to  his  explanation  by 
letter  of  the  part  which  he  had  himself  taken  in  the 
affair,  and  which  he  conceived  I  had  materially  mis- 
understood. 

'  It  appeared  to  me  sufficiently  clear  that  his  object 
was  to  draw  from  me  the  declaration  that  my  resigna- 
tion was  to  be  considered  rather  as  final  than  contingent, 
and  tendered  on  account  of  what  had  already  been  done, 
without  opening  for  any  other  course  that  might  now 
be  adopted. 

'  I  met  this  mode  of  treating  the  subject  by  recalling 
to  his  attention  the  terms  of  my  letter,  and  by  pointing 
out  to  him  that  it  was  in  his  power  upon  that  letter  to 
dispose  of  me  as  he  might  judge  best  for  the  interests  of 
the  public  and  those  of  his  own  Government.  It  was 
for  him  to  judge  whether  I  could  usefully  for  both 
objects  continue  in  my  situation,  and  that  the  question 
must  be  decided  materially  with  reference  to  what  he 
himself  might  think  it  right  to  do  with  respect  to  the 
engagement  with  Lord  Althorp. 

'  I  insisted  strongly  upon  the  public  and  personal 
objections  to  the  measure  which  I  had  before  stated,  and 
I  availed  myself  of  his  declaration  that  the  matter  had 
been  conducted  and  concluded  without  his  own  know- 
ledge to  impress  upon  him  that  he  was  therefore  the 
more  clearly  at  liberty  to  decide  upon  it  now  in  such 
manner  as  for  the  public  interest  might  seem  the  best. 

VOL.  II.  D 


34  MEMORANDUM.  en.  YI. 

'  From  the  manner  in  which  the  conversation  was 
conducted  on  his  part  it  was  very  obvious  to  me  that 
he  was  above  all  things  anxious  to  avoid  this  difficulty 
(personal  to  himself)  by  drawing  from  me  some  defini- 
tive and  unqualified  expression  of  a  determination  to 
resign.  But  I  resisted  carefully — but  with  the  fullest 
and  most  candid  explanation,  and,  as  I  think,  the  fairest 
and  most  honest  statement  of  the  real  case — all  these 
endeavours.  I  made  him  clearly  understand  that  my 
resignation,  so  far  as  he  might  leave  it  to  my  own  choice 
(confessing  that  he  was  clearly  empowered  by  me  to 
leave  me  no  choice  in  the  matter),  must  be  contingent 
only  upon  his  perseverance  in  the  measure  into  which 
he  had  been  drawn  by  others.  But  I  left  him  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  if  that  course  were  persevered  in 
my  determination  would  be  susceptible  of  change.  He 
appeared  himself  to  be  unable  to  imagine  that  I  could, 
consistently  with  my  own  character,  with  what  was  due 
to  my  office,  and  what  was  due  to  the  public  interests 
in  the  view  which  I  took  of  them  (and  the  correctness 
of  which,  be  it  observed,  he  never  once  attempted  to 
dispute),  continue  to  hold  the  office  which  I  fill. 

1  The  conversation  was  continued  by  many  lamenta- 
tions on  his  part,  and  expressions  of  the  embarrassment 
and  difficulty  in  which  he  was  placed — being  repeti- 
tions only  of  what  he  had  said  to  me  on  many  previous 
occasions. 

*  In  the  course  of  these  I  took  the  opportunity  of 
desiring  to  know  whether  I  had  distinctly  understood 
him  on  the  subject  of  the  prospective  change  in  the 
Government.  He  then  repeated  to  me  that  the  King 


en.  vi.  MEMORANDUM.  35 

had  assented  to  the  introduction  of  Lord  Holland  "  at 
Easter,"  he  first  said,  and  then,  correcting  himself,  "  be- 
fore Easter."  I  asked  him  if  Lord  Wellesley  was  like- 
wise to  be  introduced.  He  said,  hesitatingly,  "  Yes, 
he  thought  so  ;"  but  he  added  that  he  had  been  very 
ill-used  about  Lord  Wellesley ;  that  Lord  W.  had 
been  forced  upon  him  on  several  occasions,  and  rather 
strangely  on  this  occasion  ;  and  that  it  was  not  an  act 
of  his  own  choice.  All  this  was  uttered  in  an  uncertain 
and  hesitating  and  confused  manner,  as  if  more  the 
expression  of  his  own  ruminations  than  intended  as  a 
distinct  communication  to  me.  I  took  the  opportunity, 
however,  of  telling  him  on  my  part,  very  distinctly, 
that  I  feared  that  these  measures  were  all  pressed  upon 
him  by  persons  out  of  the  Cabinet  in  communication 
with  a  part  of  ourselves,  and  that  I  was  afraid  he  would 
in  the  end  experience  all  the  evils  and  misfortunes 
which  had  attended  all  other  parties  or  persons  who  had 
been  governed  by  the  suggestions  of  Mr.  Brougham.' 

'  Memorandum  of  a  Conversation  with  Lord  Goderich  this 

Morning. 

1  January  2,  1828. 

'  He  sent  to  me  about  eleven  o'clock  to  request  I 
would  call  upon  him.  I  did  so  very  soon  afterwards. 

'  After  some  remarks  upon  indifferent  topics  he  said 
he  had  desired  to  see  me  again  on  the  subject  of  the 
letter  which  I  had  written  to  him  concerning  the  Com- 
mittee of  Finance. 

'  He  reverted  to  the  difficulties  of  his  situation, 
and  repeated  his  lamentation  on  the  hardship  of  being 

D  2 


36  MEMORANDUM.  CH.  vr. 

placed  in  it,  against  his  own  choice  and  inclination,  to 
serve  the  purposes  of  others. 

'  I  allowed  him,  without  contradiction  or  interrup- 
tion, to  pursue  the  strain  of  these  lamentations. 

*  He  then  came  to  the  particular  difficulty  which  my 
letter  created,  and  asked  me  in  the  same  terms  as  he 
had  done  in  the  last  conversation  on  the  same  subject, 
"  What  was  he  to  do  ?    How  was  he  to  understand  it  ? 
How  was  he  to  act  upon  it  ?     I  must  be  sensible,"  he 
said,  "  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  for  him  to  come 
to  some  decision  in  a  matter  which  might  concern  the 
existence  of  the  Government." 

'  He  pressed  me,  in  short,  precisely  in  the  same  tone 
and  manner  as  on  December  29  last,  to  declare  categori- 
cally whether  I  was  determined  to  resign  my  office 
or  not. 

*  I  treated  the  question  in  the  same  way  as  on  the 
former  occasion.      I  desired   him  to  look  well  at  my 
letter,  which  had  nothing  ambiguous  or  obscure  in  it, 
and  to  act  upon  it  as  he  might  judge  best  for  the  public 
service  and  most  consistent  with  his  duty  to  the  King 
and  his  Government.     I  observed  to  him  that  he  had 
said  nothing  to  induce  me  to  alter  the  opinions  ex- 
pressed in  my  letter,  either  by  explaining  the  conduct 
of  the  persons  mentioned  in  it  (except  so  far  as  con- 
cerned the  extent  of  the  sanction  which  he  had  given 
to  their  proceedings)  or  by  controverting  the  principles 
which  I  had  laid  down  in  it ;  and  I  could  therefore  only 
reiterate  my  adherence  to  what  I  had  therein  declared 
to  be  my  conviction  and  determination. 

'  He  then  said  that  the  other  parties  remained  equally 


CH.  vi.  MEMORANDUM.  37 

convinced  that  the  course  adopted  by  them  was  right,  and 
that  they  were  determined  not  to  yield,  so  that  probably 
they  might  resign  if  it  were  determined  to  make  any 
change  in  it. 

'  I  observed  that  in  that  case  we  were  fairly  at  issue, 
and  it  must  be  for  him  to  decide  as  he  thought  best 
and  to  act  upon  my  letter  accordingly. 

'  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  he  stated  that  he 
thought  I  was  mistaken  as  to  the  extent  to  which  the 
parties  in  question  were  pledged  by  their  proceedings. 
It  appeared  to  him  that,  after  all,  they  had  only  sounded 
Lord  Al thorp,  and  that  they  could  not  be  understood 
as  having  so  completed  the  arrangement  with  him  as  to 
be  positively  bound  by  it. 

'  I  immediately  availed  myself  of  that  declaration  to 
point  out  to  him  that,  in  that  case,  his  decision  would 
be  perhaps  less  difficult,  and  certainly  less  embarrass- 
ing. It  appeared  that  he  could  set  aside  the  nomina- 
tion of  Lord  Althorp  without  much  inconvenience. 

'  He  then,  however,  denied  that  he  could  do  so,  ob- 
serving only  that  there  were  cases  in  which  an  under- 
standing between  parties  could  not  be  set  aside  without 
giving  as  much  offence  as  by  the  violation  of  a  more 
formal  engagement. 

1 1  was,  therefore,  left  to  conclude  that,  whether  as 
an  understanding  or  as  a  compact,  the  arrangement  was 
deemed  by  Huskisson  and  Tierney  irrevocable. 

'  Our  discussion  (if  such  it  can  be  called)  continued 
some  time,  with  many  words  on  his  part  and  very  few 
on  mine,  but  made  no  progress  towards  an  agreement. 
I  steadfastly  refused  to  make  any  declaration  beyond 


38  MEMORANDUM.  CH.  vi. 

that  which  the  letter  contained,  or  to  adopt  any  step  by 
which  the  matter  would  be  taken  out  of  his  hands. 

4  He  hinted  that  he  supposed,  if  I  resigned,  some  of 
the  minor  adherents  of  the  Government  would  follow 
me.  I  took  no  notice  of  the  hint. 

*  The  conversation  at  one  tune  diverged  from  the 
point  immediately  in  question  to  other  topics  connected 
with  the  state  of  the  Government.  I  observed  to  him 
among  other  things  that  the  change  proposed  to  be 
made  by  introducing  Lord  Holland  appeared  to  me 
most  unwise  at  this  particular  moment,  independently 
of  the  objections  that  might  be  urged  against  it  upon 
more  general  grounds,  because  I  was  convinced  that,  in 
the  present  temper  of  the  country,  and  as  the  Parlia- 
ment was  now  composed,  there  would  be  at  least  five 
votes  alienated  by  that  junction  for  every  vote  con- 
ciliated by  it.  He  made  no  answer  to  that  remark. 

1  He  said  he  had  communicated  my  letter  to  Huskis- 
son,  but  not  to  Tierney.  I  told  him  he  was  of  course 
quite  at  liberty  to  communicate  it  to  both  of  them,  or  to 
anybody  else. 

'  He  had  said  in  a  former  communication  that  Hus- 
kisson  denied  the  correctness  of  some  part  of  the  letter, 
but  did  not  say  of  what  part.  He  made  no  remark  of 
that  kind  on  this  occasion. 

1  He  complained  of  the  "  Times  "  newspaper,  to  which 
I  adverted  as  having  announced  the  determination  that 
some  of  us  (I  supposed  myself,  of  course,  among  the 
number),  who  were  not  liberal  and  enlightened  enough, 
should  be  turned  out  as  soon  as  Don  Miguel's  departure 
should  have  left  the  King  more  at  leisure.  He  said 


CH.  vr.  MEMORANDUM.  39 

significantly  "  there  was  something  about  the  '  Times ' 
which  required  explanation  ;  he  should  not  allow  that 
system  to  go  on." 

'  I  did  not  leave  him  without  strongly  impressing 
upon  him  that  he  owed  it  to  me  and  to  my  office  well 
to  consider  the  situation  in  which  he  allowed  me  to  be 
placed.  Whatever  there  was  difficult  and  unpleasant 
in  the  dilemma  which  my  letter  occasioned  to  him, 
he  must  admit  that  it  was  not  created  by  any  act  of 
mine,  and  that  I  could  take  no  other  course  than  that 
which  I  had  adopted.  He  admitted  fully  that  I  was 
justified  in  what  I  had  done,  and  that  I  could  hardly 
have  acted  otherwise.  In  short,  he  objected  in  no 
respect,  either  on  this  occasion  or  in  the  former  con- 
versation, to  my  conduct  in  the  business.' 


Mr.  Huskisson,  thinking,  or  persuaded  by  others, 
that  he  was  too  far  pledged  to  be  able  creditably  to  draw 
back  from  the  sort  of  engagement  he  had  unwarily 
allowed  himself  to  be  led  into  by  Mr.  Tierney,  refused 
to  give  way,  and  declared  it  to  be  his  intention  to  with- 
draw from  the  Government.  But,  as  appears  from  the 
explanations  given  by  him  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
he  was  induced  by  the  solicitations  of  Lord  Lansdowne 
and  others  to  suspend  the  actual  transmission  of  his  re- 
signation, and  to  ask  Lord  Goderich  instead  '  whether 
the  proffered  resignation  of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exche- 
quer might  not  be  accepted.' 

It  is  also  evident,  from  the  memoranda  of  conversa- 
tions between  Mr.  Herries  and  the  Prime  Minister,  and 
from  their  correspondence  on  this  subject,  that  attempts 


40  NEW  CAUSE   OF  STRIFE.  CH.  vi. 

were  made  to  draw  an  absolute  and  final  resignation 
from  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  who  was  left  for 
several  days  in  total  ignorance  of  Mr.  Huskisson's 5 
announced  determination  to  retire. 

But  he  persisted  in  adhering  to  the  line  he  had 
taken,  and  in  leaving  the  question  whether  he  was  or 
was  not  to  remain  in  office  to  be  decided  upon  by  the 
head  of  the  Government. 

While  the  perplexed  Prime  Minister  was  lamenting 
over  the  difficulties  that  beset  him,  a  new  cause  of  strife 
was  suddenly  introduced  into  the  distracted  Cabinet. 

Letters  from  Lord  Bexley  mention  a  proposal  made 
by  Sir  James  Scarlett,  then  Attorney-General,  one  of 
the  Whigs  who  had  joined  Mr.  Canning,  that  a  measure 
should  be  brought  forward  for  the  repeal  of  the  Foreign 
Enlistment  Act  of  1819.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  a 
question  of  such  political  importance  could  have  been 
raised  at  such  a  moment  except  in  concert  with  some 
members  of  the  Cabinet,  who  must  have  looked  forward 
to  one  of  two  results — either  the  adoption  of  the  pro- 
posal by  the  majority  of  their  colleagues,  followed  by 
the  certain  secession  of  the  dissentients,  or  its  decided 
rejection,  followed  by  their  own  retirement.  If,  now, 
the  line  previously  taken  on  this  question  by  the 
Whig  party  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  Mr.  Canning  with 
the  Tories  on  the  other,  be  considered,  the  connection 
between  the  strange  move  made  by  the  Whig  Attorney- 

5  His  declaration  that  he  no  longer  considered  himself  as  a  member  of 
the  Government  was  made  on  December  29,  just  before  a  meeting  of  the 
Cabinet  at  which  Mr.  Herries  was  present ;  but  the  fact  of  Mr.  Huskisson's 
resignation  was  not  made  known  until  January  6  to  Mr.  Herries,  who 
afterwards  learned  its  date  for  the  first  time  from  Mr.  Huskisson's  speech  on 
February  18. 


<JH.  TL  FOREIGN  ENLISTMENT  ACT.  41 

General  and  the  contemplated  change  in  the  composition 
and  system  of  the  Government  will  become  apparent. 

The  condemnation  of  the  heretical  pravity  of  the 
Foreign  Enlistment  Act  (destined  at  a  future  time  to 
be  rendered  more  stringent  by  a  Liberal  Ministry) 
filled  for  many  years  a  large  space  hi  the  Liberal  sylla- 
bus of  damnable  Tory  errors,  and  was  to  be  accepted  as 
an  undoubted  Whig  dogma  under  pain  of  major  ex- 
communication. 

The  degree  of  detestation  in  which  this  Act  was 
held  was  the  measure  of  the  degree  of  Whig  orthodoxy 
as  taught  in  Holland  House.  He  who  was  not  con- 
vinced by  the  eloquence  of  Sir  James  Mackintosh,6 
exhorting  the  House  '  to  exclaim  with  the  brave  barons 
of  former  days,  Nolumus  leges  Anglice  mutari !  ' — not 
convinced  by  the  arguments  of  Lord  Holland,7  de- 
monstrating that,  as  the  consequence  of  the  passing 
of  the  Bill  then  under  discussion,  '  the  State  '  would 
be  '  converted  into  a  prison  for  the  confinement  of  its 
subjects ' — not  convinced  by  the  oratory  of  ardent 
champions  of  freedom,  as  understood  and  practised  in 
South  American  republics,  that,  because  British  bucca- 
neering was  unimpeded  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth, 
filibustering  ought  not  to  be  prevented  by  the  Govern- 
ment of  King  George — was  deemed  a  friend  to  tyrants, 
and  an  enemy  to  the  sacred  cause  of  revolution  all 
over  the  world. 

Lord  Holland,  who  was  about  to  be  brought  into 
the  Cabinet  at  the  end  of  1827,  had  been  the  leader  of 

6  Speech  in  the  House  of  Commons,  June  10,  1819. 

7  Speech  in  the  House  of  Lords,  June  28,  1819. 


42  FOREIGN  ENLISTMENT  ACT.  CH.  vi. 

the  opposition  to  the  Foreign  Enlistment  Bill  in  1819  ; 
and  Lord  Lansdowne,  the  person  most  active  in  the 
negotiation  for  his  admission,  had  warmly  supported 
him  in  the  debate  on  the  occasion  above  referred  to.8 

Lord  Althorp,  the  unfortunate  treaty  with  whom 
concerning  the  Finance  Committee  caused  so  much 
embarrassment,  had  been  the  mover  of  the  repeal  of  the 
obnoxious  Act  a  few  years  before,  and  Mr.  Tierney, 
who  set  that  treaty  on  foot,  had  vehemently  condemned 
the  Bill  at  the  time  of  its  introduction. 

Who  can  fail  to  see  a  clear  connection  between  all  these 
facts,  and  to  draw  from  them  the  conclusion  that  the 
abrogation  of  the  neutrality  legislation9  so  resolutely 

8  Lord  Lansdowne's  speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  June  28, 1819,  was 
not  in  a  very  high  tone.     Two  of  its  principal  arguments  against  the  Bill 
were  that  it  would  (a)  deprive  several  half-pay  officers  of  the  means  of 
profitably  employing  their  activity,  and  (b)  check  the  development  of  a 
rising  branch  of  British  industry. 

9  It  seems  to  be  generally  forgotten  that  Bills  for  the  repeal  of  the 
Foreign  Enlistment   Act  were  passed    by  the  first  reformed    House  of 
Commons  in  the  two  successive  sessions  of  1833  and  1834,  but  were,  for- 
tunately for  us  all,  burked  in  the  House  of  Lords.     Let  anyone  having  the 
least  amount  of  historical  knowledge,  of  political  judgment,  and  of  imagi- 
nation, considering  also  what  a  vast  store  of  latent  fanaticism  exists  in 
England,  ready  at  any  moment  to  be  evoked  by  any  stump  orator,  and 
how  profound  is  our  insular  ignorance  of  international  rights  and  duties, 
picture  to  himself  the  certain  consequences  to  this  country  of  the  efforts, 
had  they  been  successful,  of  the  Liberal  party,  in  the  first  instance  to 
defeat,  and  afterwards  to  annul,  the  wholesome,  wise,  just,  and  necessary 
measure  propounded   and   carried  by  a  Tory  Government  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  our  obligations  towards  other  States.     There  is  hardly  a  nation 
in  the  world  which  would  not  have  suffered,  from  the  cupidity  of  British 
adventurers  and  the  frenzy  of  British  partisans,  an  accumulation  of  unen- 
durable wrongs  calling  for  vengeance.     With  regard  to  the  United  States 
particularly,  if,  through  fraudulent  evasions  of  the  law,  we  were  exposed 
to  the  imminent  peril  of  a  conflict  ruinous  to  both  countries,  what  would 
have  happened  had  there  been  no  law  to  evade  ?     Instead  of  one  or  two 
semi-piratical  cruisers  stealthily  fitted  out,  whole  fleets  would  have  been 
openly  equipped  for  hostile  operations,  and,  with  regiments  on  board,  levied, 


OH.  n.  FOREIGN  ENLISTMENT  ACT.  43 

combated  by  the  Whig  party,  was  intended  to  be  a 
principal  part  of  the  new  system  to  be  inaugurated  by 
the  advent  of  Lord  Holland. 

The  filibustering  policy  of  that  nobleman  and  his 
friends  never  was,  and,  as  we  have  a  right  to  assume, 
never  would  have  been,  the  policy  of  Mr.  Canning,  who 
warmly  supported  the  Foreign  Enlistment  Act  in  its 
origin,  and  steadily  maintained  it  afterwards,  because 
he  thought  that  the  neutrality  of  England  ought  to  be 
a  real,  not  a  sham,  neutrality.  If  he  had  believed 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  his  country  to  pour  out  her 
blood  and  treasure  on  behalf  of  communities  whose 
misgovernment,  discord,  and  convulsions  have  never 
ceased  to  offend  civilization  ;  if  he  had  thought  (as,  for- 
tunately for  present  and  future  British  income  tax 
payers,  he  and  his  colleagues  did  not  think)  that  Great 
Britain  was  under  any  obligation  to  enter  upon  a 
tremendous  conflict  with  France,  backed  by  all  the 
great  military  Powers  of  Europe,  in  defence  of  an 
impracticable  constitution  in  Spain,  he  would  have 
counselled  open,  not  covert,  hostilities. 

Never  would  he  have  connived  at  so  mean  an^  so 
iniquitous  a  course  as  State  neutrality  with  private 
belligerency — unofficial  war  under  the  disguise  of  offi- 
cial peace. 

The  following  selection  from  correspondence  illus- 
trates the  Ministerial  crisis  : — 

armed,  and  trained  in  England,  would  have  sailed  from  our  ports  to  engage 
in  a  quarrel  in  which  no  Englishman  had  a  shadow  of  right  to  interfere. 
The  certain  result  would  have  been  a  desperate  war,  which  might  have  lasted 
for  many  years. 


44  CORRESPONDENCE.  CH.  vi. 

Mr.  Herries  to  Lord  Bexley. 

'Downing  Street :  December  28,  1827. 

1  My  dear  Lord  Bexley, — I  send,  in  the  same  box 
with  this,  a  letter  upon  the  unpleasant  subject  of  our 
distractions  in  the  Cabinet. 

'  Pray  read  it  with  a  recollection  of  the  difficult 
circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed,  and  let  me  have 
the  benefit  of  your  calm  and  excellent  j  udgment  when 
we  meet. 

*  The  more  I  think  of  the  proposal  which  has  been 
forced  upon  the  King,  the  more  I  wonder  at  the 
imprudence  of  urging  it  at  this  period,  and  without  any 
consultation  with  us. 

'  I  cannot  imagine  any  motive  but  mere  party  in- 
terest (and  that  ill  understood)  for  this  proceeding. 

1  What  really  public  object  could  it  promote  ?  It 
could  not  be  supposed  that  Lord  Holland  could  bring 
any  useful  addition  of  knowledge  or  ability  to  the 
Government  in  the  management  of  our  domestic 
concerns  ;  and  it  will  hardly  be  pretended  that  his 
principles  and  opinions  as  to  our  foreign  policy  and 
Continental  affairs,  proclaimed  and  disclosed  as  they 
have  been  in  various  ways,  are  of  a  nature  to  smooth 
the  difficulties  in  which  our  foreign  relations  are  at  this 
time  involved.  It  would  not  be  impossible,  I  think,  to 
prove  the  contrary. 

'  I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  the  King  is  distressed  and 
unwell  in  consequence  of  all  these  things.  Mount- 
charles  (who,  by-the-bye,  went  to  him  to  disclose  that 
he  should  go  out  of  office  if  Lord  Holland  came  in)  gives  a 


CH.  vi.  CORRESPONDENCE.  45 

bad  account  of  him  in  that  respect.  I  fear  he  will  have 
no  peace  till  he  makes  a  strong  Government,  either 
Whig  or  Tory.  The  mixed  Cabinet  requires  a  firmer 
hand  and  sounder  judgment  to  govern  it  than  he  can,  I 
fear,  at  present  command.  Most  truly  yours, 

1 J.  C.  HERRIES.' 


Mr.  Hemes  to  Lord  Bexley. 

f  Downing  Street :  December  28,  1827. 

'My  dear  Lord  Bexley, — I  have  carefully  and 
anxiously  reconsidered  all  that  has  passed  between  us 
on  the  subject  of  the  proposed  change  in  the  Cabinet, 
which  has  been  consented  to,  as  I  understand,  reluc- 
tantly, and  after  much  objection,  by  the  King,  upon  a 
very  pressing  requisition  on  the  part  of  Lord  Goderich. 
This  requisition  was  made  without  any  previous  com- 
munication with  us,  and  it  appears  that  there  existed 
no  intention  of  even  communicating  to  us  at  present 
the  prospective  arrangement  adopted  as  the  result  of  it. 
Had  it  not  been  for  a  surmise  on  your  part  by  which 
you  were  induced  to  require  a  categorical  explanation 
from  Lord  Goderich,  we,  and  others  of  our  colleagues, 
would,  I  apprehend,  at  this  moment  have  been  unap- 
prised  of  it,  although  it  was  well  known  to  another 
portion  of  the  Cabinet.  Having,  however,  already 
expressed  my  opinion  upon  the  subject  of  these  partial 
confidences  in  the  Cabinet,  I  shall  at  present  say 
nothing  more  on  that  topic,  but  submit  to  you  what 
occurs  to  me  upon  the  proposition  itself. 

'  In  order  to  judge  of  the  effect  which  may  be  pro- 


46  CORRESPONDENCE.  en.  vi. 

duced  upon  the  existing  constitution  of  the  Government 
by  the  introduction  into  the  Cabinet  of  a  leading  and 
most  influential  member  of  the  extreme  Whig  party, 
it  is  necessary  to  advert  to  the  principles  upon  which 
that  Government  has  been  formed,  as  well  as  to  the 
manner  in  which  it  is  at  present  composed. 

*  The   present  Cabinet   consists  in  part  of  persons 
avowedly  attached    to   the   political   principles   which 
have   prevailed   in   the   Government   of   this   country 
during  the  last  forty  years  (with   the   exception  of  a 
very     short    interval),     and    in    part   of    individuals 
previously  accustomed  to  act  in  systematic  opposition 
to  those  principles  and  to  that  Government   upon  all 
the  most  important  questions  of  domestic  and  foreign 
policy. 

1  Of  these  individuals,  however,  it  must  be  added 
that  they  were  distinguished  from  the  majority  of  the 
party  with  which  they  habitually  acted  by  the  greater 
moderation  of  their  principles  and  proceedings,  and  by 
a  greater  approximation  on  many  topics  of  public 
policy  to  the  opinions  held  by  the  persons  who  exer- 
cised the  power  of  Government. 

*  The  union  of  these  moderate  Whigs  with  the  Tories 
was  first  accomplished  by  Mr.  Canning,  and  in  forming 
a  Government   embracing   these   varieties   of  political 
persuasion  it  was  distinctly  laid  down  by  him  that  the 
ruling   character    of  the    Government   should   be   the 
same  as  that  of  Lord  Liverpool.     The  members  of  the 
opposite  party  who  joined  Mr.  Canning  accepted  office 
under  that   express  explanation   and   condition.     The 
Government  thus  constituted  was  therefore  essentially 


ctf.  vr.  CORRESPONDENCE.  47 

Tory,  although  composed  of  persons  who  had  not  all  of 
them  theretofore  been  classed  under  that  political  dis- 
tinction. 

'  The  death  of  Mr.  Canning  changed  nothing  in  the 
principle  on  which  the  Government  was  constituted. 
That  principle  was,  on  the  contrary,  confirmed  and 
enforced  by  the  declaration  of  the  King  to  his  Ministers 
when  he  appointed  Lord  Goderich  to  the  office  of  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury. 

1  The  principle  so  laid  down  and  so  confirmed  is  in 
point  of  fact  no  other  than  the  principle  of  Mr.  Pitt's 
Government,  transmitted  through  his  several  successors 
(with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Fox's  short  Administration 
in  1806)  to  Lord  Liverpool,  Mr.  Canning,  and  Lord 
Goderich.  It  is  in  that  character  that  it  challenges 
the  confidence  and  support  of  the  country,  and  if  that 
character  be  abandoned,  its  Pittite  or  Tory  adherents, 
both  in  and  out  of  office,  are  not  only  absolved  from 
their  engagements  towards  it,  but  their  reputation  for 
consistency  and  uprightness  in  their  public  conduct  is 
perhaps  materially  implicated  by  the  support  which 
they  may  continue  to  give  to  it. 

*  Public  character  in  this  country  is  the  creation  of 
public  opinion  only:  it  makes  the  general  estimation, 
for  worth  and  ability,  in  which  the  men  who  take  part 
conspicuously  in  the  management  of  public  affairs  are 
held,  and  determines  usually  the  place  in  the  service  of 
the  State  which  they  may  aspire  to  occupy.  There  is 
no  point  upon  which  the  public  opinion  is  more  severely 
exercised  than  on  that  which  concerns  the  consistency 
between  the  professed  opinions  and  the  real  conduct  of 


48  CORRESPONDENCE.  en.  vr. 

public  men.  Upon  this  subject  the  public  are  greatly 
and  justly  jealous.  Changes  of  political  principles  and 
of  party  connections  are  scarcely  tolerated  even  where 
they  are  accompanied  by  declared  conviction  and  dis- 
tinct recantation;  but  where  there  is  anything  like  a 
mysterious  compromise  for  the  sake  of  the  adyantages 
of  office,  the  conclusion  is  fatal.  The  compromise  is 
designated  a  political  juggle,  and  the  actors  in  it  are 
considered  with  less  respect  than  even  avowed  apos- 
tates. For  my  own  part,  I  acquiesce  in  this  mode  of 
judgment,  because  I  think  the  principle  a  just  one  and 
the  severity  of  its  application  useful  to  the  public 
service. 

'  Now,  I  apprehend  that  the  Tory  members  of  the 
present  Government  will  be  in  great  danger  of  incur- 
ring the  penalties  of  that  judgment  if  they  do  not  take 
measures  to  avert,  or  rather  to  avoid,  it  upon  the  intro- 
duction of  Lord  Holland  into  the  Cabinet. 

'  The  principle  of  the  Government  being  such  as  I 
have  stated,  it  is  obvious  that  any  person  of  the  same 
political  opinion  as  Lord  Liverpool  might  be  added 
to  it  without  inconsistency  or  compromise,  but  that  it 
would  be  impossible  without  the  one  or  the  other  to 
bring  into  it  an  individual  of  diametrically  opposite 
opinions,  and  more  especially  if  he  should  be  a  person 
of  great  eminence,  whose  opinions,  frequently  and 
vehemently  asserted,  are  universally  known  to  be  en- 
tertained hi  an  extreme  degree. 

'  Such  is  the  case  with  respect  to  Lord  Holland,  who, 
through  a  long,  active,  and  conspicuous  political  career, 
has  espoused  the  principles  and  doctrines  of  the  Whig 


CH.  vi.  CORRESPONDENCE.  49 

party  in  the  utmost  length  to  which  they  have  ever 
been  carried;  and  who,  even  so  late  as  the  month  of 
May  last,  took  an  opportunity  of  solemnly  declaring 
that  on  whatever  side  of  the  House  he  might  sit  he 
would  never  fail  to  vote  for  Parliamentary  reform,  nor 
refuse  to  move,  whenever  called  upon  to  do  so,  the 
repeal  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts. 

1  The  consequence  of  the  accession,  at  this  time,  to 
the  King's  Councils  of  a  person  thus  pledged  to  these 
political  opinions  must,  I  think,  upon  the  grounds  which 
I  have  stated,  be  destructive  either  of  the  principles  of 
"  Lord  Liverpool's  Government "  or  of  all  public  confi- 
dence in  the  political  professions  of  the  individual  him- 
self. The  one  or  the  other  must  be  renounced.  Coincide 
they  never  can.  I  will  not  for  a  moment  suppose  that 
Lord  Holland  will  abnegate  the  principles  which  he  has 
so  long  maintained,  and  some  of  the  most  prominent  of 
which,  as  subjects  of  special  difference  between  him  and 
"  Lord  Liverpool's  Government,"  he  has  so  recently  re- 
asserted. If  the  head  of  the  Government  is  equally 
steadfast  in  his  adherence  to  the  "  principle  of  Lord 
Liverpool's  Administration,"  there  must  arise  disunion 
highly  detrimental  to  the  public  service ;  if  otherwise, 
discredit. 

'  In  the  country,  too,  and  in  Parliament,  it  would  be 
worse  than  idle  to  expect  that,  after  such  a  junction,  the 
Government  should  any  longer  be  considered  as  repre- 
senting both  the  great  political  parties  in  the  State. 
The  accession  of  Lord  Holland  would  necessarily  be 
the  signal  for  the  adhesion  of  all  the  Whigs,  ultra  and 
moderate,  to  the  Government ;  and  equally  so  for  the 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  CORRESPONDENCE.  CH.  YI. 

entire  and  hostile  separation  of  the  Tories  from  it, 
whereby  those  members  of  it  who  are  professedly  at- 
tached to  the  "principles  of  Lord  Liver pooTs  Govern- 
ment" would  be  placed  in  a  very  unfavourable  and  false 
position.  They  would,  in  fact,  be  under  the  necessity 
of  carrying  on  a  contest  in  alliance  with  persons  whose 
principles  do  not  coincide  with  their  own  against  the 
political  party  with  which,  in  principle,  they  are  identi- 
fied. This  state  of  things  would,  in  my  apprehension, 
be  productive  alike  of  public  inconvenience  in  the  con- 
duct of  our  affairs  and  of  personal  discredit  to  the  sub- 
servient minority  in  the  Cabinet. 

1  The  consequences  of  these  degradations  of  public 
men  in  the  public  opinion  extend  much  beyond  the 
circle  of  their  own  personal  interests.  They  produce  a 
general  depreciation  of  all  political  character  in  the  eyes 
of  the  country.  I  think  I  may  safely  say  that  the  last, 
or  rather  the  present,  coalition  in  which  the  Whigs  have 
been  subordinate  has  lowered  that  party  in  the  public 
estimation.  If  the  Tories  act  a  similar  part  and  show 
themselves  also  disposed  to  compromise  their  principles, 
then  all  respect  for  those  who  are  entrusted  with  the 
management  of  public  affairs  must  be  greatly  diminished. 

'  These  observations  and  arguments  are  applicable 
generally  to  the  members  or  supporters  of  "  Lord  Liver- 
pool's late  Government"  who  now  form  a  part  of  the 
present  Administration.  But  the  position  and  circum- 
stances of  each  individual  will  render  them  applicable  in 
various  degrees,  and  with  various  modifications,  to  his 
own  particular  case. 

4  My  position  is   marked    by   striking   peculiarities 


CH.  71.  CORRESPONDENCE.  51 

whereby  I  am  certainly  placed  in  a  painful  dilemma 
between  conflicting  obligations.  I  can  most  truly 
affirm,  however,  that  an  attachment  to  the  honours  and 
advantages  of  office  (which  I  do  not  affect  to  underrate 
or  to  despise)  forms  no  part  of  that  difficulty,  and  adds 
no  perceptible  weight  to  the  embarrassment  under  which 
I  am  compelled  to  form  my  decision. 

'  The  manner  in  which  I  was  placed  in  the  situation 
which  I  now  hold — so  far  above  my  pretensions  and 
so  much  beyond  my  wishes — has  laid  upon  me  a  debt 
of  gratitude  to  the  King  and  to  those  who  then  advised 
him  which  must  induce  me  to  contribute  every  effort 
in  my  power  to  the  support  of  the  Government  of  which 
I  was  thereby  made  a  member.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  very  circumstances  which  impose  that  obligation 
upon  me  constitute  also  a  peculiar  ground  for  more  than 
common  solicitude  on  my  part  to  maintain  above  all 
suspicion  the  consistency  and  independency  of  my  public 
character.  It  is  in  a  most  especial  manner  due  to  the 
King,  who  so  graciously  and  firmly  insisted  upon  my 
appointment,  against  the  endeavours  of  a  party  which 
opposed  it  on  the  ground  of  my  political  principles,  that 
I  should  uphold  those  principles  without  spot  or  blemish, 
and  that  I  should  take  care  to  afford  no  ground  for  the 
misconstruction  by  which  it  was  attempted  on  that  occa- 
sion to  attribute  my  appointment  to  private  and  personal 
rather  than  to  public  motives.  Such  a  misconstruction 
would  be  greatly  promoted  by  any  act  of  apparent 
subserviency  on  my  part,  such  as  would  be  indicated 
by  conduct  inconsistent  with  my  avowed  principles  and 
opinions  and  by  a  readiness  to  hold  office  upon  terms 

B  2 


52  CORRESPONDENCE.  CH.  rr. 

at  variance  with  those  under  which  I  accepted  it. 
Whenever,  therefore,  such  changes  shall  take  place  in 
the  policy  of  the  Government,  or  in  the  composition  of 
the  Administration,  as  must  lead,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
public,  to  the  abandoning  or  compromising  of  the  "prin- 
ciples of  Lord  Liverpool's  Administration"  my  sense  of 
what  I  owe  to  the  King,  to  the  country,  and  to  my  own 
honour  will  leave  me  no  choice  but  to  resign  my  office. 
Believe  me,  my  dear  Lord  Bexley,  ever  truly  yours, 

*  J.  C.  HERRIES.' 

On  January  5,  1828,  Mr.  Herries's  private  secretary, 
Mr.  Spearman,  wrote  to  him  thus,  communicating  recent 
confidential  information : — 

1 called  soon  after  you  were  gone.     He  had 

just  seen  Brougham,  and  he  came  to  report  the  con- 
versation he  had  had  with  him.  He  said  that  B.  was  in 
high  spirits,  and  was  quite  satisfied  that  they  were  all  in 
the  right  course  ;  that  Lord  Holland  would  certainly 
come  in ;  that  none  of  the  present  men  would  go  out  on 
that  account — that  one  of  them  might  indeed  go,  but  no 

more.     asked  him  if  he  thought  the  Government 

could  be  carried  on  by  the  Whigs ;  to  which  Brougham 
replied  that  he  did  not  doubt  that  the  present  men, 
reinforced  as  they  would  be,  could  carry  it  on  perfectly 

well ;  to  which rejoined,  "  Take  my  word   for  it, 

Brougham,  that  you  have  broken  up  the  Government." 
Holmes  has  been  here  this  morning.  He  saw  the  Chan- 
cellor late  last  night.  The  Chancellor  was  yesterday 
again  with  Lord  Goderich.  He  repeated  then  to  Lord 
G.  and  to  Huskisson  his  determination  upon  the  subject 


OS.  VI.  CORRESPONDENCE.  53 

of  the  Government — that  he  was  determined  imme- 
diately to  communicate  with  the  King,  in  order  that  the 
state  of  the  Government  might  not  come  upon  H.M. 
unawares  ;  and  it  was  then  settled  that  Lord  Anglesey 
should  accompany  the  Chancellor  to  the  King.  In 
about  an  hour,  however,  he  received  a  letter  from  Lord 
Anglesey,  declining  to  go  with  him  on  the  ground  of 
his  ill  health. 

'  He  apprehends  that  Lord  A.  or  some  other  person 
is  therefore  to  go  alone  and  without  him  ;  and  he  thinks 
it  is  still  hoped  that  a  patched-up  Government  will  be 
attempted,  but  he  expressed  his  intention  of  taking  care 
to  prepare  H.M.  beforehand  for  the  intended  visit  if 
he  did  not  immediately  go  down  himself.  He  appears, 
from  Holmes's  account,  to  be  now  deeply  intent  on  sub- 
mitting his  own  views  and  of  breaking  with  the  Whigs ; 
for  Holmes  says  that  he  will  make  known  to  the  King 
that  he  will  not  serve  with  them. 

'  It  is  said,  among  other  things,  that  Grant  will 
remain  if  it  be  a  patched-up  Government,  and  will 
succeed  you.  .  .  .' 

The  5th  of  January  seems  to  have  been  a  busy  day 
with  Ministerial  correspondents. 

We  find  two  letters  of  that  date  from  Lord  Bexley, 
who  wrote : — 

'  Dear  Herries, — I  met  the  Lord  Chancellor  at  Lord 
Dudley's,  and  he  spoke  to  me  two  or  three  times  on  the 
falling  state  of  the  Government,  which  he  said  was 
breaking  down  from  two  distinct  causes,  viz.  the  Fi- 
nance Committee  and  Lord  Holland's  appointment.  .  .  . 


54  CORRESPONDENCE,  CH.  vi. 

'  I  did  not  profess  to  the  Chancellor  more  than  a 
general  knowledge  that  things  were  going  ill  from  the 
causes  he  mentioned.  I  called  his  attention  to  a  box  I 
had  seen  just  before  dinner,  containing  a  proposal  from 
Scarlett  to  repeal  the  Foreign  Enlistment  Act  and  the 
two  Libel  Acts  of  1819.  He  agreed  with  me  that 
nothing  could  be  more  foolish,  and  I  have  written 
strongly  to  Goderich  on  the  subject.  I  do  not  think 
the  Chancellor  has  seen  the  King,  who  is  in  bed  with 
the  gout. 

1  Dudley  thanked  me  for  my  letter  on  the  Greek 
question,1  and  said  he  agreed  with  me,  but  that  he 
found  both  Lieven  and  De  Roth  much  out  of  humour 
at  our  backwardness.  I  suspect  we  shall  hear  that  the 
Russians  have  passed  the  Pruth.  Under  these  circum- 
stances I  think  your  line  is  clear  not  to  resign,  but  to 
let  the  King  (or  Goderich,  if  he  will  take  upon  himself 
to  do  so)  decide  between  you  and  your  opponents.  I 
believe,  however,  it  will  end  in  a  break-up  without  any 

distinct  cause  avowed.     Yours  sincerely, 

'  BEXLEY.' 

'  My  dear  Herries, — Since  I  wrote  by  your  mes- 
senger I  have  met  the  Chancellor  at  Don  Miguel's.  He 
told  me  he  had  intended  to  go  to  the  King,  to  represent 
the  state  of  the  Government  to  him,  but  that  he  would 
not  go  alone  for  fear  of  misrepresentation,  and  that  Lord 
Anglesey  had  declined  to  go  with  him.  He  asked  me 

1  Mentioned  in  a  previous  letter,  dated  January  l,in  which  Lord  Bexley 
says,  '  I  have  written  Dudley  a  very  pacific  letter  upon  the  Greek  question, 
and  I  think  we  may  certainly  he  of  some  use  in  supporting  a  moderate  and 
prudent  line  of  conduct,  to  which,  indeed,  some  of  the  Cabinet,  who  may 
not  always  think  like  us,  seem  sufficiently  inclined.' 


OH,  vi,  CORRESPONDENCE.  55 

whether  Lord  Goderich  had  given  any  answer  to  your 
letter  about  the  Finance  Committee.  I  told  him  I  under- 
stood that  you  had  seen  him  twice,  but  that  he  had  said 
nothing  distinct,  only  lamenting  the  hardship  of  his 
own  situation.  The  Chancellor  said  that  was  all  he 
did  when  he  was  with  him.  He  quite  approved  of  my 
having  written  to  Lord  G.  about  Scarlett's  proposition, 
upon  which  I  think  we  are  as  likely  to  split  as  any- 
thing,  for  if  it  is  pressed  in  Cabinet  I  shall  desire  our 
respective  opinions  may  be  laid  before  the  King.  I 
omitted  this  morning  to  mention  that  the  Chancellor 
told  me  yesterday  that  Tindal 2  would  resign  if  Lord 
Holland  was  appointed.  Our  conversation  this  morning 
was  very  short,  as  Mountcharles  and  Villa  Real  came 
in  to  conduct  us  to  the  Prince.  .  .  .' 

Mr.  Herries  to  Lord  Lyndlmrst. 

The  same  date. 

1  My  dear  Lord  Chancellor, — After  what  you  said 
to  me  at  our  last  meeting  I  would  of  course  take  no 
step  without  previous  communication  with  you.  I  then 
told  you  of  my  conversation  with  Goderich  on  the  same 
day.  I  now  send  you  a  letter  which  he  has  written  to 
me,  and  the  answer  which  I  propose  to  make  to  it,  if 
you  see  no  objection  to  it  arising  out  of  the  state  of  our 
affairs  in  other  respects  which  I  maybe  ignorant  of.  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  object  of  Goderich' s  letter  is  to 
draw  from  me  some  positive  and  unconditional  declara- 
tion, which  he  may  make  use  of  in  order  to  dissolve  the 

2  Sir  Nicholas  Tindal,  Solicitor-General,  afterwards  Loid  Chief  Justice 
of  the  Common  Pleas. 


56  CORRESPONDENCE.  CH.  n. 

Government  on  grounds  convenient  to  him  and  those 
who  are  advising  him.  In  my  answer  I  endeavour  to 
keep  firmly  upon  the  condition  of  the  public  principle 
involved  in  my  letter  of  December  21,  and  so  to  compel 
him  to  make  the  decision  with  respect  to  me  upon  that 
principle  alone.  .  .  .' 

Lord  Lyndhurst  to  Mr.  Berries. 

1  George  Street :  Sunday.8 

'  Your  letter  to  Goderich  went  last  night.  I  rather 
think  Goderich  is  acting  for  [or  from]  himself,  and  I 
am  pretty  confident  not  by  the  advice  of  either  Dudley 
or  Huskisson.  We  shall  cut  a  pretty  figure  after  all 
that  has  passed,  both  publicly  and  privately,  when  we 
meet  Parliament,  according  to  the  wish  of  Goderich 
expressed  in  his  last  note,' 

Mr.  Spearman  to  Mr.  Herries. 

'  Sunday  Morning. 

4  It  appears  to  me  that  they  are  now  trying  to  make 
it  appear  distinctly  that  you  would  go  on  with  Lord 
Holland  and  the  Whigs  if  it  were  not  for  the  Finance 
Committee ;  and  if  they  can  get  you  to  give  up  that 
point  and  go  on  to  Parliament,  when  the  Government 
would  assuredly  be  broken  to  pieces,  they  will  turn 
round  and  say  that  you  never  would  have  refused  to 
serve  with  Lord  Holland  on  principle,  and  that  you 

3  Lord  Lyndhurst's  letters  to  Mr.  Herries,  of  which  we  find  several, 
never  bear  the  date  of  the  month  or  year.  Their  handwriting  is  in  general 
deplorably  difficult  to  read. 


CH.  vi.  CORRESPONDENCE.  57 

only  take   advantage  of  the  breaking  up.     They   are 
cunning  enough,  God  knows/ 

Lord  Bexley  to  Mr.  Herries. 

'  Foot's  Cray  Place :  January  7,  1828. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — I  have  read  your  correspondence 
with  Lord  Goderich  with  more  regret  than  surprise.  I 
have  for  some  time  been  convinced  that  the  Govern- 
ment could  not  hang  together,  but  it  is  painful  to  me 
to  think  that  its  downfall  should  be  occasioned  by  your 
act  or  mine.  At  the  same  time  I  do  not  think  that 
under  the  circumstances  you  could  take  any  other 
course  than  you  have  done.  I  do  not  enter  into 
particulars,  as  I  mean  to  see  you  to-morrow  morning  ; 
and  I  feel  that,  with  a  view  to  my  own  conduct,  it  may 
be  necessary  for  me  to  have  some  conversation  both 
with  you  and  with  Lord  G.  .  .  .' 

On  the  following  day  Lord  Goderich,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  intervention  of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  drew 
the  King's  attention  to  some  at  least  of  the  Ministerial 
dissensions  ;  and  the  King,  who  seems  to  have  been 
then  for  the  first  time  made  aware  of  the  diiferences 
between  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  and  the 
Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies,  cut  the  knot,  which 
the  Premier  had  been  unable  to  untie,  by  charging  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  with  the  formation  of  a  new 
Cabinet.4 

4  Although  it  is  not  our  business  to  correct  all  the  grievous  errors  with 
which  Mr.  Walpole's  book  abounds,  we  cannot  refrain  from  protesting 
against  his  description,  quite  unworthy  of  a  serious  history  of  England,  of 
the  last  interview  between  Lord  Goderich  and  the  King,  He  sets  down  as 


58  CARICATURE  OF  HISTORY.  OH.  TI. 

matter  for  record  a  bit  of  facetiousness  current  among  the  wags  of  the  day. 
and  communicated  to  Lord  Colchester  in  a  letter  of  gossip  from  his  son. 
'  llis  Majesty  offered  him  [Lord  Goderich]  his  pocket-handkerchief.'  Mr. 
Walpole  ought  to  have  known  that  George  IV.,  whatever  may  have  been 
his  failings,  was,  at  any  rate,  not  a  vulgar  buffoon,  and  that  the  retiring 
Premier,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  his  capacity  as  a  statesman,  was  a 
refined  gentleman,  not  to  be  addressed  with  insolent  personalities. 


CH.  vii.  WELLINGTON  CABINET.  59 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Formation  of  Wellington  Cabinet— Herries  Master  of  the  Mint — Correspond- 
ence— Mysterious  incident  —  Ministerial  explanations  in  Parliament — 
Attacks  upon  Mr.  Herries,  and  successful  defence — Subsequent  statement 
of  real  causes  of  breaking  up  of  Goderich  Cabinet — Refutation  of  Lord 
Palmerston's  posthumous  slanders. 

MB.  HUSKISSON  agreed  to  become  a  member  of  the  new 
Government  on  condition  l  that  Mr.  Herries  should  not 
continue  to  hold  the  office  of  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, although  he  did  not  refuse  to  be  his  colleague 
in  the  Cabinet.  It  was,  besides,  thought  desirable  that 
there  should  be  nothing  to  connect  the  new  Ministry 
with  the  questions  which  had  disturbed  its  predecessor. 

For  these  reasons  the  Duke  of  Wellington  deemed 
it  expedient  to  put  into  the  Exchequer  a  person  who 
had  not  been  a  member  of  Lord  Goderich's  Cabinet — 
Mr.  Goulburn — offering  to  Mr.  Herries  instead  of  it  the 
Mint,  vacated  by  Mr.  Tierney,  who,  together  with  his 
purely  Whig  colleagues,  Lords  Lansdowne  and  Carlisle, 
was  left  out  of  the  new  Government. 

If  Mr.  Herries  had  been  made  aware  (which  was 
not  the  case)  of  Mr.  Huskisson's  stipulation,  he  would 
probably  not  have  accepted  the  offer  made  to  him  by 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  ;  and  we  incline  to  the  opinion 
that  he  would  have  done  better  if  he  had,  even  without 
such  knowledge,  refused  to  take  a  seat  in  the  new 

1  See  Wellington  Correspondence. 


GO  LETTERS.  CH.  vii. 

Cabinet  as  the  holder  of  an  office  having  no  adminis- 
trative importance.  But  it  is  impossible  for  us,  calmly 
considering  the  matter  after  a  lapse  of  fifty  years, 
correctly  to  appreciate  all  the  motives  which  led  him  to 
a  different  decision.  Among  them  must  principally  be 
reckoned  the  persuasions  of  friends,  and  a  reluctance  to 
show  anything  that  could  have  been  construed  into 
ill-will  towards  the  Tory  leaders,  to  whom  he  desired 
to  give  his  political  support. 

A  few  letters — all  that  remain — relating  to  this 
subject  may  be  here  inserted. 

'  Lin.  Inn  Hall :  Saturday 

(probably  January  12). 
« (Confidential.) 

'  My  dear  Herries, — The  arrangements  are  going 
on  but  slowly.  Should  anything  occur  material  to  be 
communicated  to  you  before  Monday,  I  will  send  by 
your  messenger.  I  will  take  care  that  no  misrepresen- 
tation shall  be  made  with  effect  as  to  the  course  which 
you  pursued.  No  such  attempt  has  yet  been  made, 
nor  is  there  any  prospect  of  it.  Ever  yours,  <  T  » 2 

'  Sunday,  2  o'clock. 

*  My  dear  Herries, — I  cannot  give  you  any  informa- 
tion upon  the  subject  of  the  proposed  arrangements, 
because  we  have  agreed  to  preserve  in  the  progress  of 
them  the  most  absolute  secrecy.  What  I  wish  to  know 
is  whether  the  state  of  our  Exchequer,  Treasury,  &c., 
will  admit  of  the  postponement  of  Parliament  for  a 
week.  You  must  feel  that  this  would,  under  existing 

3  Lyndhurst. 


en.  vn.  LETTERS.  61 

circumstances,  be  very  desirable.     Pray  send  me  a  full 

and  a  speedy  answer.     Ever  yours,        ,  T 

'  LFNDHUEST. 

'  George  Street :  Monday. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — Pray  write  me  a  line  and  let 
me  know  how  matters  stand  ;  or  if  you  wish  to  see  me 
I  shall  be  here/?w?-  four  o'clock.  Ever  yours,  <  T  , 

'  George  Street :  Tuesday. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — I  have  been  with  the  Duke 
to-day  to  Windsor,  and  the  King  has  desired  me  to 
make  a  communication  to  you.  Can  you  make  it  con- 
venient to  call  here  this  evening  at  nine  o'clock  ?  Ever 
truly  yours,  ,  LYNDHURST_, 

On  the  back  of  this  note  there  is  the   following- 

o 

memorandum  in  Mr.  Herries' s  handwriting  : — 

'  Tuesday,  January  15,  1828. 

'  I  went  to  him  at  nine  o'clock  this  night. 

'  He  surprised  me  much  by  informing  me  that  very 
shortly  before  I  arrived  he  had  received  a  communica- 
tion which  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  tell  me 
then  what  he  had  been  commissioned  to  state  to  me  ; 
but  he  promised  to  come  to  me  to-morrow.  He  did 
not  fix  the  time. 

'  I  suppressed  the  vexation  which  I  felt,  and  after 
talking  over  some  other  matters  left  him.  My  reason 
for  not  appearing  to  resent  this  versatility  and  mystery 
towards  me  was  that  the  whole  was  professed  to  be 
done  in  the  King's  name.  I  could  not,  therefore,  with 
propriety  speak  my  sentiments  upon  it.  I  wrote  a  note 


62  MYSTERIOUS  INCIDENT.  en.  vn. 

to  Arbuthnot,   complaining  confidentially,  and  I  sent 
to  request  Holmes  to  call  upon  me.'  8 

'Apsley  House:  January  16,  1828. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — I  am  grieved  that  for  one 
single  moment  you  should  have  had  an  atom  of  an- 
noyance. 

'  I  had  known  that  the  Chancellor  was  to  talk  to 
you  ;  but  it  was  for  reasons  which,  when  known,  could 
not  affect  your  peace  of  mind  for  a  single  instant.  The 
Duke  of  Wellington  went  from  Windsor  to  S.  Saye  to 
take  leave  of  Don  Miguel,  and  I  fear  that  before  he 

3  How  is  this  mystery  to  be  explained  ?  It  may  be  assumed  that  the 
communication,  which  arrived  only  just  in  time  to  prevent  the  Lord 
Chancellor  from  delivering  the  King's  message,  could  have  come  from  no 
one  but  the  Prime  Minister.  The  King  would  hardly  have  had  time  to 
make  it  even  if  he  had  changed  his  mind — a  most  improbable  supposition. 
But  the  Duke  of  Wellington  having  been  at  Windsor  with  Lord  Lyndhurst, 
the  message  must  have  been  given  in  his  presence  or  with  his  cognizance, 
and  consequently  with  his  approval.  If  he  had  seen  any  grounds  for  object- 
ing to  it  he  certainly  would  have  stated  them  at  once.  It  is  to  be  presumed 
that  the  two  Ministers  returned  to  London,  as  they  had  gone  to  Windsor, 
together,  and  that,  in  the  course  of  their  two  or  three  hours'  drive,  no  reason 
for  delaying  the  execution  of  the  King's  commands  being  suggested  to  the 
Lord  Chancellor,  none  presented  itself  to  the  mind  of  the  Duke,  whose  later 
injunction  can  only  be  attributed  to  the  intervention  of  a  third  person.  Who 
this  influential  counsellor  may  have  been,  or  what  his  motives,  it  would  be 
idle  to  conjecture.  The  conclusion,  however,  is  safe  that  he  was  a  man  of 
more  cautious  temperament  and  less  straightforward  habits  than  the  Duke 
of  Wellington.  Perhaps  also  he  was  not  so  well  disposed  towards  the 
individual  principally  interested.  We  do  not  pretend  to  know  what  was 
the  real  nature  of  the  message.  The  mode  of  its  intended  transmission,  and 
the  fact  that  it  did  not  reach  its  destination,  sufficiently  demonstrate  the 
inanity  of  the  fictions  invented  by  Lord  Palmerston  and  others  about  secret 
communications  between  George  IV.  and  Mr.  Herries,  to  whom  the  King 
could  easily,  if  so  minded,  have  caused  his  wishes — whatever  they  were — 
to  be  conveyed,  without  risk  of  impediment,  through  the  private  channel  of 
Sir  William  Knighton.  In  this  business  there  were,  undoubtedly,  conceal- 
ment and  intrigue,  but  not  on  the  part  of  the  King  or  of  his  ex-Chancellor  of 
tlie  Exchequer. 


CH.  VIT.  LETTERS.  63 

comes  up  to-morrow  I  could  not  venture  to  write  to 
you  respecting  the  subject  about  which  the  Chancellor 
had  to  talk  to  you.  You  may  rely  upon  my  friendship 
that  I  would  not  leave  you  in  suspense  for  a  moment 
if  there  was  anything  which  regarded  your  honour  or 
your  peace  of  mind.  I  do  assure  you  that  in  the  breast 
of  no  one  is  there  towards  you  the  most  distant  suspicion 
or  distrust.  On  the  contrary,  everything  that  I  have 
heard  spoken  of  you  in  every  quarter  has  been  most 
gratifying  and  satisfactory  ;  and  so  you  will  thoroughly 
agree  with  me  when  I  see  you  and  tell  you  what  the 
Chancellor  had  been  desired  to  say. 

'  I  cannot  bear  to  appear  mysterious  ;  but  believe 
me  as  a  friend  that  you  will  be  entirely  satisfied  when 
I  explain  the  whole  to  you  as  soon  as  we  meet,  and  I 
will  take  care  to  see  you  the  very  instant  that  I  am 
able.  Ever,  dear  Herries,  most  truly  yours, 

'  C.  ARBUTHNOT.' 

'  I  cannot  bear  to  leave  you  in  suspense.  I  think 
I  shall  tranquillise  you  entirely  by  saying  that,  it  being 
understood  that  the  Whigs  mean  to  make  a  storm  in 
Parliament  about  the  Finance  Committee  and  Lord 
Althorp,  it  has  been  thought  very  necessary  that  the 
new  Government  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  a 
discussion  to  which  it  has  been  a  stranger.  You  may 
see  there  is  nothing  to  worry  you.' 

'  Wimbledon :  Saturday. 

*  My  dear  Herries, — I  will  be  in  George  Street  at 
four  o'clock  on  Monday,  and  everything  shall  be  pre- 
pared for  the  fatal  ceremony.  I  wish  I  could  also  get 


64  SURREPTITIOUS  PUBLICATION.  en.  YII. 

out  of  my  turmoil,  but  it  cannot  be.  Brougham  means, 
I  am  told,  to  lead  the  House  of  Commons.  He  says 
the  lead  can't  be  conferred  like  a  place  or  dignity.  Ever 

'  LYNDHUKST.' 


A  premature  and  surreptitious  publication  of  the 
list  of  the  new  Cabinet  in  the  '  Morning  Chronicle  ' 
gave  rise  to  an  unpleasant  incident,  to  which,  as  it 
speedily  passed  over  without  any  consequences  of  the 
slightest  importance,  we  should  not  have  alluded  if  an 
undue  prominence  had  not  been  given  to  it  elsewhere. 
It  chanced  that  one  day  Mr.  Herries  inadvertently  left 
lying  on  his  writing  table,  when  he  went  for  a  few 
minutes  into  another  room,  a  memorandum  of  the  com- 
position of  the  new  Ministry.  During  his  short  absence 
a  visitor  was  ushered  in,  who,  reading  the  names  and 
offices  in  the  paper  on  the  table,  made  a  note  of  them 
for  communication  to  the  '  Chronicle.'  This  unlucky 
accident  (and  that  it  could  have  been  nothing  but  mere 
accident  ought  to  have  been  manifest,  because  the 
'  Chronicle,'  which  had  libelled  him  outrageously,  was 
obviously  the  very  last  journal  to  which  Mr.  Herries 
would  have  thought  of  conveying  any  information) 
roused  the  anger  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who 
displayed  his  irritation  in  the  hasty  and  somewhat 
intemperate  tone  not  unfrequently  perceptible  in  his 
correspondence.  '  I  assure  you,'  he  wrote  in  a  letter  of 
January  21,  'that  there  never  was  an  event  compara- 
tively so  trifling  in  itself  that  will  produce  such 
important  consequences  on  the  destinies  of  this  country 
as  will  the  premature  disclosure  in  the  newspapers  of 


CH.  vn.         THE   DUKE'S   UNREASONABLE   WRATH.  65 

the  names  of  the  new-formed  Ministry,  notwithstanding 
the  precautions  and  the  pains  I  took  to  prevent  such 
disclosure.'  If  any  ordinary  mortal  had  written  this 
sentence  it  would  be  treated  as  an  absurd  exaggeration  ; 
for  certainly  the  most  sensitive  politicometer  could 
never  have  indicated  the  slightest  disturbance  of  the 
destinies  of  this  country  from  the  pre-official  printing 
of  the  names  of  the  new  Ministers  in  an  Opposition 
newspaper. 

The  unreasonableness  of  the  great  Duke's  wrath 
is  apparent  from  the  following  letter,  showing  that  the 
list  had  been  sent  right  and  left  by  the  '  whip  '  of  the 
Tory  party  some  days  before  it  appeared  in  the 
'  Chronicle  : ' — 

'  Holmes  called  about  five  minutes  after  you  were 
gone.  He  says  there  will  be  a  very  strong  neutral 
bench. 

'  Dawson  called  on  Holmes  last  night,  and  not 
finding  him  at  home,  left  for  him  a  confidential  list  of 
the  new  Administration.  It  corresponded  exactly  with 
that  in  the  "  Chronicle."  Holmes  wrote  him  an  answer 
expressing  his  thanks  for  the  confidential  list,  for  which, 
indeed,  he  said  that  he  was  the  more  obliged  because 
it  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  the  list  which  he  had  sent 
on  Thursday  to  Mr.  Harrison  at  Brighton,  and  which 
he  believed  would  be  found  to  have  been  published  at 
Dublin  on  Saturday  last.  He  did  not  add  to  Dawson, 
however,  that  he  had  sent  the  list  to  Dublin  on  Thurs- 
day. How  particularly  absurd,  therefore,  to  make  such 

VOL.  II.  F 


66  MINISTERIAL  EXPLANATIONS.  en.  vn. 

a  clamour  about  the  publication  of  what  was  so  gene- 
rally known.  .  .  .  Ever  truly,  yours, 

'A.  Y.  SPEARMAN. 

'  Tuesday,  January  22, 1828.' 

Soon  after  the  meeting  of  Parliament  explanations, 
which,  however,  were  not,  and  perhaps  could  not  have 
been,  complete,  were  furnished  by  the  persons  princi- 
pally concerned  in  the  strangely  involved  transactions 
which  had  preceded  the  fall  of  the  Goderich  Cabinet. 
They  are  to  be  found  in  '  Hansard,'  and  need  not  there- 
fore be  repeated  in  detail. 

Mr.  Herries  concluded  an  elaborate  statement  on 
February  18,  with  a  peremptory  and  unequivocal  denial 
of  accusations  made  against  him,  openly  out  of  doors 
and  covertly  in  the  House  of  Commons,  of  having  con- 
spired with  the  King,  or  with  the  leaders  of  the  Tory 
party,  or  with  both  together,  to  upset  the  Government 
to  which  he  had  belonged.  He  declared  that  he  had 
never  had  any  communication  respecting  his  resignation 
with  any  individual  out  of  the  Cabinet,  and  that  he  had 
'  received  no  advice  from  any  person  whatever  before 
his  letter  of  December  21  was  written.'  He  added  that 
he  believed  that '  in  the  quarter  alluded  to  not  one  single 
circumstance  relative  to  those  transactions  was  known 
till  the  communication  of  them  was  made  to  the  other 
House  by  Lord  Goderich,'  and  ended  by  saying,  '  There 
is  not  a  shadow  of  reason,  or  the  slightest  foundation, 
for  the  base  statement  that  has  gone  abroad.' 

His  clear  explanations  produced  a  very  favourable . 
impression   upon   the   House.     No   better  evidence  of 
their  effect  can  be  adduced  than  the  following  letter 


CH.  vir.  COMPLETE  VINDICATION.  67 

from  a  gentleman  always  distinguished  for  his  judge- 
ment, tact,  and  high  sense  of  honour — Mr.  Yilliers, 
afterwards  known  to  the  world  as  the  Earl  of  Clarendon 
— who,  although  not  at  this  time  directly  engaged  in 
party  politics,  had  Whig  connections  and  inclinations: — 

'  I  cannot  go  to  bed,  my  dear  Mr.  Herries,  without 
offering  you  my  hearty  congratulations  upon  your 
triumph.  I  have  long  and  eagerly  desired  that  you 
should  have  the  opportunity  which  this  night  has 
afforded  of  stating  the  simple  truth,  because  I  felt  sure 
that  universal  approbation  of  conduct  like  yours  must 
be  the  immediate  consequence. 

'  You  needed  not  the  applause  of  this  night  to  con- 
firm to  yourself  the  conscious  feeling  of  your  own 
integrity,  but  there  is  no  man  that  must  not  feel  pride 
at  complete  vindication  from  unjust  and  malignant 
attack,  and  I  believe  that  you  yourself  cannot  feel  more 
joy  than  I  do  at  the  result  of  to-night's  debate  and  at 
hearing  as  I  did  all  round  me  such  marked  expressions 
of  satisfaction.  No  one  that  I  have  heard  speak  upon 
the  subject  thought  you  said  a  word  too  much  about 
Lord  Gr.  If  you  erred  at  all  it  was  certainly  not  on 
that  side.  Ever  yours  sincerely, 

'  GEORGE  VILLIERS.'  * 

In  the  course  of  his  speech,  in  which  he  elucidated 
all  that  had  taken  place  concerning  the  Finance  Com- 
mittee, Mr.  Herries  said  that  it  was  impossible  to 
suppose  that  his  proffered  resignation  was  of  sufficient 

4  The  writer  of  this  letter,  who  heard  the  debate,  was  not  a  member  of 
the  House  of  Commons. 

F  2 


68  FURY  OF  FACTION.  CH.  vn. 

importance  to  cause  the  breaking  up  of  the  Government ; 
that,  owing;  to  circumstances  which  had  shaken  the 

o 

Government  to  its  foundation  before  his  letter  of  De- 
cember 21  was  written,  its  fall  was  apparently  inevitable  ; 
and  that  occasion  was  taken  of  this  letter  for  doing 
that  which  sooner  or  later  must  have  happened  without 
it.  He  added  unguardedly  in  the  heat  of  the  moment — 
*  I  say  that  I  know  it  was  so  acted  upon ' — an  expression 
which  he  afterwards  qualified  by  the  explanation  that 
lie  meant  that  he  drew  the  positive  conclusion  from  the 
circumstances  that  it  must  be  so.  The  solid  grounds 
for  this  assertion  have  been  already  set  forth,  but  it  was 
met  by  Lord  Goderich  with  a  positive  denial  in  the 
House  of  Lords. 

Then  burst  out  all  the  fury  of  disappointed  faction. 
In  a  succeeding  debate  in  the  House  of  Commons  on 
the  21st  the  man  who  had  been  guilty  of  the  'inex- 
piable wrong '  of  hindering  the  realization  of  Whig 
aspirations  stood  at  bay  against  a  throng  of  fierce 
assailants,  who  stormed  at  him  with  threats,  taunts, 
gibes,  and  insinuations,  going  to  the  very  verge  of  per- 
sonal insult,  from  which  he  had  to  compel  more  than  one 
speaker  to  draw  back.  Among  the  foremost  of  the  at- 
tacking party  was  Mr.  Thomas  Slingsby  Buncombe,  one 
of  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Radical  reformers  of  his 
day.  His  speech  on  this  occasion  (February  21),  like 
his  previous  discourse  on  the  18th,  which  is  said  to 
have  l  made  a  great  sensation,'  was  composed  and  put 
into  his  mouth,  as  we  learn  from  Mr.  Greville, 5  who 

5  Mr.  Greville's  comments  (vol.  i.  p.  130)  on  these  speeches  are  instruc- 
tive.     '  And  what  are  the  agents  who  have  produced  such  an  effect  ?    A 


CH.  TIT.  DIFFICULT   POSITION.  69 

seems  to  have  had  a  hand  in  its  concoction,  by  the 
Honourable  Henry,  afterwards  Lord,  de  Ros. 

Called  upon  to  substantiate  by  proof  the  declaration 
which  had  been  contradicted,  Mr.  Herries  refused  to 
enter  into  any  further  explanations,  and  confined  him- 
self to  the  reiterated  expression  of  the  conviction  he 
entertained.  That  conviction  was  well  founded  ;  but 
its  soundness  could  not  have  been  demonstrated  without 
a  revelation  of  the  whole  of  the  secret  history  of  the 
Cabinet  in  which  Mr.  Herries  had  lately  sat  along  with 
some  of  his  present  colleagues  then  by  his  side.  He 
must  have  told  all  that  he  had  learnt  concerning  the 
series  of  underhand  intrigues  (no  other  description  can 
be  given  to  those  proceedings)  for  the  transformation 
of  the  Ministry — -intrigues  in  which  Mr.  Huskisson  had 
taken  an  active  part,  and  of  which  Lord  Palmerston 
had  at  any  rate  been  cognizant  ;  he  must  have  made 
known  to  the  House  the  information  he  had  been  able 
to  gather  as  to  what  had  passed  between  Lord  Goderich, 
some  members  of  the  Cabinet,  and  the  King,  in  Decem- 
ber, but  not  alluded  to  by  Lord  Goderich  himself  in  the 
House  of  Lords  ;  and,  moreover,  in  order  to  make  all 
this  matter  clear,  he  must  have  gone  back  to  the  period 
of  the  formation  of  Lord  Goderich's  Cabinet,  and  spoken 
of  the  pressure  then  put  upon  the  King  for  the  admis- 
sion of  Lord  Holland.  Obviously  he  could  not  make 

man  of  ruined  fortune  and  doubtful  character,  whose  life  has  been  spent  on 
the  race-course,  at  the  gaming-table,  and  in  the  green-room  ;  of  limited 
capacity,  exceedingly  ignorant,  and  without  any  stock  but  his  impudence  to 
trade  on  ;  only  speaking  to  serve  an  electioneering  purpose,  and  crammed  by 
another  man  [and  what  a  man  !]  with  every  thought  and  every  word  that 
he  uttered.' 


70  HUSKISSON'S  SPEECH.  CF,  vn. 

such  revelations.  His  tongue  was  tied  ;  and  he  found 
himself  in  the  position  in  which  we  suppose  many  a 
public  man  in  England  is  placed,  who  is  obliged  to 
submit  to  attack  without  employing  in  his  defence  all 
the  weapons  he  possesses. 

His  statements,  however,  which  he  could  not  con- 
firm by  proof  positive,  were  mainly  borne  out  by 
declarations,  already  adverted  to  by  us,  which  were 
made  by  Mr.  Huskisson  in  his  speech  on  February  18, 
to  the  effect,  that  by  the  advice  of  some  of  his  colleagues 
he  (Mr.  Huskisson)  had  endeavoured  to  induce  Lord 
Goderich  to  act  upon  Mr.  Herries's  letter  of  December 
21  by  making  the  contingent  offer  of  resignation  con- 
tained in  it  absolute.  And  this  course  was  suggested, 
said  Mr.  Huskisson,  as  the  best  means  of  preventing 
the  dissolution  of  the  Cabinet.6  The  futility,  therefore, 
of  the  allegation,  that  the  downfall  of  the  Administration 
was  caused  by  the  conditional  resignation  of  the  very 
man  whose  positive  dismissal  was  deemed  necessary  for 
its  preservation,  becomes  at  once  apparent.  Conse- 
quently Mr.  Herries  was  warranted  in  affirming,  as  he 
did,  that  his  resignation  was  not,  and  could  not  have 
been,  the  true  cause  of  the  break-up,  for  which  it  was 
made  to  serve  as  a  colourable  pretext.  The  following 
paper  in  justification  of  his  assertion  was  afterwards 
drawn  up  by  him. 

6  In  the  same  speech  Huskisson  said :  '  Before  the  26th  of  December  .  .  . 
there  had  occurred  many  circumstances  which  tended  materially  to  impair 
the  strength,  and  shake  the  stability,  of  the  Administration.' 


CH.  vir.        GROUNDS  FOR  HERRIES'  DECLARATION.  71 


STATEMENT  BY  MR.  HERRIES  OF  THE  EVENTS  WHICH 
LED  TO  THE  DISSOLUTION  OF  THE  ADMINISTRATION 
OF  LORD  GODERICH. 

'As  it  appears  to  be  probable  that  no  further  ex- 
planations in  Parliament  will  now  be  given  on  the 
subject  of  the  dissolution  of  the  late  Government,  con- 
cerning which  Mr.  Herries  expressed  in  one  House  an 
opinion  widely  different  from  that  which  was  pro- 
nounced by  Lord  Goderich  in  the  other,  it  appears 
right  to  Mr.  Herries  that  he  should  state,  for  the  in- 
formation of  his  own  friends  (but  without  comment  or 
argument)  such  of  the  grounds  upon  which  his  declar- 
ation was  founded,  as  appear  to  him  to  be  amply 
sufficient  to  justify  it. 

'  Lord  Goderich  has  so  described  the  late  change  in 
the  Administration  as  to  leave  a  very  general,  if  not  an 
universal,  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  public  that  it 
was  produced  entirely  by  the  differences  on  the  subject 
of  the  Finance  Committee.  And  he  has  afforded  room, 
by  the  manner  in  which  he  has  noticed  these  differ- 
ences, for  the  imputation  of  blame,  by  implication,  to 
Mr.  Herries,  in  respect  of  the  time  and  mode  in  which 
his  resignation  was  proffered. 

'  Mr.  Herries,  on  the  other  hand,  has  declared  his 
entire  conviction  that  his  resignation  was  too  slender  a 
matter  to  be  of  itself  a  sufficient  cause  for  the  termina- 
tion of  the  late  Government  ;  and  he  has,  at  the  same 
time,  asserted  his  knowledge  of  other  causes  which,  in 
his  judgment,  produced  the  event,  and  under  the  opera- 


72  STATEMENT  OF  EVENTS.  en.  vn. 

tion  of  which  the  more  unimportant  incident  of  the 
Finance  Committee  became  merely  the  occasion  of  it. 

*  That  declaration  was  grounded  upon  the  following 
facts  : — 

'  In  the  early  part  of  last  December,  Lord  Goderich 
proposed  to  the  King  (with  the  knowledge  and  con- 
currence of  only  a  part  of  his  colleagues)  the  introduc- 
tion of  Lord  Holland  and  Lord  Wellesley  into  the 
Cabinet,  upon  the  ground  of  an  indispensable  necessity 
for  some  addition  of  strength  to  the  Administration. 

'  The  proposal  not  having  been  acceded  to,  it  was 
urged  again  by  a  letter  on  December  11,  in  which  it 
was  intimated  that  Lord  Goderich  could  not  be  answer- 
able for  carrying  on  the  government  if  it  were  not 
adopted. 

*  On  December  13  these  proceedings  became  known, 
after  a  Council  held  at  St.  James's,  to  several  of  the 
Ministers  who   had   till  then   been  ignorant  of  them. 
The  retirement  of  Lord  Goderich  was  made  known  at 
the  same  time,  and  was  understood  to  be  occasioned  by 
domestic   circumstances,  which   at   that   time   pressed 
anxiously  upon  him,  and  the  representation  of  which 
had  formed  part  of  the  letter  to  his  Majesty. 

1  On  the  14th  Mr.  Herries  expressed  to  Lord  Goderich 
the  great  pain  which  the  information  had  given  to  him. 
He  regretted  that  a  measure  affecting  so  materially  the 
character,  and  even  the  existence,  of  a  mixed  Adminis- 
tration, such  as  was  then  established,  should  have  been 
adopted  without  an  equal  confidence  and  communica- 
tion with  all  its  members.  He  also  stated  his  decided 
conviction  that  the  junction  with  Lord  Holland  would 


CK.  vn.  STATEMENT  OF  EVENTS.  73 

have  been  fatal  to  the  Government,  as  then  constituted, 
if  the  proposition  had  been  acceded  to. 

'  Mr.  Herries  said  enough  on  that  occasion  (although 
he  considered  the  Government  as  being  dissolved)  to 
leave  no  doubt  upon  the  mind  of  Lord  Goderich  that 
he,  Mr.  Herries,  would  not  have  continued  in  his 
situation  if  the  intended  coalition  with  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  opponents  of  the  political  principles  upon 
which  the  then  existing  Government  was  founded  had 
been  carried  into  effect. 

'  An  interval  followed,  during  which  some  steps 
were  taken  unsuccessfully  for  supplying  the  place  of 
Lord  Goderich  in  the  Administration.  It  was  ter- 
minated by  his  return  on  December  19. 

'  The  members  of  the  Government  being  assembled 
on  that  day  were  informed  by  Lord  Goderich  himself 
that  the  difficulties  which  had  occasioned  his  retire- 
ment, and  which  had  in  some  degree  been  misunder- 
stood, were  removed,  and  that  if  his  colleagues  had  no 
objection  to  it,  he  was  then  ready  to  resume  his  station, 
such  being  his  Majesty's  pleasure.  Lord  Goderich 
adverted  at  the  same  tune  to  the  proposition  which  had 
been  submitted  to  the  King;  for  strengthening  the 

O  O  O 

Administration,  but  the  particulars  of  that  proposition 
were  not  stated,  nor  were  the  names  of  the  parties 
declared,  who  were  the  subjects  of  it. 

'  It  was  on  that  occasion  observed  by  Mr.  Herries 
that  if  any  change  was  still  in  contemplation  which 
might  be  productive  of  a  difference  of  opinion  among 
the  members  of  the  Government,  it  would  be  better 
that  it  should  be  communicated  at  that  time  than  made 


74  STATEMENT  OF  EVENTS.  en.  nr. 

known  at  a  later  period  when  any  discussion  or  dis- 
memberment of  the  Administration,  consequent  there- 
upon, might  occur  under  circumstances  very  incon- 
venient for  the  public  service,  as,  for  example,  in  the 
midst  of  the  active  business  of  a  session  of  Parliament. 

*  This  observation  was  met  by  a  declaration  from 
Lord  Goderich  in  general  terms  that  he  had  no  inten- 
tion of  altering  the  principle  of  the  Government,  whereby 
Mr.  Herries  was  satisfied,  and  pressed  the  subject  no 
further. 

'  A  noble  lord  7  then  present,  who  had  been  unac- 
quainted with  the  circumstances  which  had  occasioned 
the  recent  occurrences,  was,  as  well  as  Mr.  Herries, 
impressed  by  this  conversation  with  the  belief  that 
no  change  was  then  intended  in  the  composition  of  the 
Government.  But  he  was  induced  afterwards  to  con- 
sider that  some  more  explicit  information  of  Lord 
Goderich's  intentions  was  necessary ;  and  at  an  inter- 
view which  he  obtained  for  that  purpose  two  days 
after  the  meeting,  he  was  informed  that  Lord  Goderich 
was  positively  pledged  to  bring  Lord  Holland  into  the 
Administration  at  an  early  period. 

*  The  noble  Lord  made  this  known  to  Mr.  Herries, 
and  stated  that  he  had  expressed  in  strong  terms  his 
opinion   and  feelings  on  account  of  the  want  of  con- 
fidence shown  towards  him,  and  also  upon  the  injurious 
effects  of  the   late   occurrences   upon   the   credit   and 
character  of  the  Government. 

'  He  added  that  he  had  declared  to  Lord  Goderich 
that  he  reserved  his  determination  as  to  any  steps 

7  Lord  Bexley. 


CH.  vir.  STATEMENT  OF  EVENTS.  75 

which  he  might  think  it  right  to  take  in  consequence 
of  the  measure  to  which  Lord  Goderich  was  pledged, 
until  the  King's  domestic  engagements  at  Windsor 
connected  with  the  reception  of  Don  Miguel,  should 
be  terminated. 

'  Mr.  Herries  afterwards  saw  Lord  Goderich  on  the 
same  subject,  and  obtained  the  same  information  from 
him.  He  again  stated  his  opinion  of  the  inexpediency 
of  the  course  about  to  be  pursued,  and  declared  his 
intention  of  following  the  example  of  his  noble  col- 
league in  postponing  any  step  thereupon  which  might 
break  in  improperly  at  that  time  upon  his  Majesty's 
arrangements. 

'  In  the  meantime,  and  before  those  engagements 
were  concluded,  Lord  Goderich  received  other  com- 
munications of  great  importance  as  to  the  state  of  his 
Government ;  but  of  these  Mr.  Herries  was  not  aware 
until  after  the  date  of  his  last  letter  on  the  subject  of 
the  Finance  Committee. 

1  Lord  Goderich  was  informed  by  one  of  the  most 
influential  of  his  colleagues,8  that  in  his  judgment  it 
was  essential  for  the  public  interests  that  no  time 
should  be  lost  in  representing  to  the  Throne  the  un- 
favourable state  of  the  public  opinion  with  respect  to 
the  Government,  and  the  apparent  want  of  sufficient 
support  from  one  branch  at  least  of  the  Legislature 
(if  not  from  both)  to  enable  it  to  meet  Parliament  with 
any  fair  prospect  of  carrying"  on  the  public  business 
with  success.  He  was  told  that  if  he,  Lord  Goderich, 
did  not  take  that  course,  his  colleague,  who  was  then 

8  Lord  Lyndhurst. 


76  STATEMENT  OF  EVENTS.  CH.  vu. 

advising  him,  would  deem  it  incumbent  upon  him  to 
adopt  it  himsel£ 

1  It  appears  by  Mr.  Huskisson's  statement  in  reply 
on  February  18,  that  a  similar  representation  was  made 
to  him  by  two  members  of  the  Administration,  and 
that  he  referred  them  to  Lord  Goderich  as  the  proper 
quarter  to  which  such  a  communication  should  be 
addressed. 

'  It  was  in  this  state  of  things,  and  with  this  crisis 
impending,  that  instead  of  taking  to  the  King  the 
resignation  of  Mr.  Herries,  freely  and  amicably  offered, 
whereby  one  difficulty,  at  least,  would  have  been  re- 
moved from  the  execution  of  the  proposed  change  in 
the  Government,  Lord  Goderich  put  an  end  to  his 
administration,  on  the  ground  of  the  differences  between 
his  two  colleagues. 

'In  Lord  Goderich' s  account  of  the  event,  these 
difficulties  alone  are  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  it.  No 
allusion  is  made  to  any  other. 

'  Mr.  Herries,  having  in  mind  the  facts  and  proceed- 
ings above  stated,  asserted  that  the  termination  of  the 
Government  was  produced  by  the  pressure  of  much 
more  important  circumstances,  and  that  the  conten- 
tion about  the  Finance  Committee,  which  but  for  the 
existence  of  those  circumstances  would  have  been  easily 
obviated  by  the  acceptance  of  his  resignation,  was,  at 
the  utmost,  only  the  occasion  of  its  accomplishment. 

'  Lord  Goderich,  by  remarking  in  his  statement  on 
the  postponement  of  Mr.  Herries' s  final  proceeding 
respecting  the  Finance  Committee,  without  noticing 
at  the  same  time  the  strange  events  which  had  occupied 


CH.  vri.  RENEWED  ASSEVERATION.  77 

the  interval,  and  whereby  the  Government  itself  had 
been  suspended,  gave  occasion,  unintentionally  no 
doubt,  to  the  imputation  raised  by  others  that  Mr. 
Herries  was  influenced  in  his  conduct  respecting  the 
Finance  Committee  by  communications  from  a  higher 
quarter.  He  has  solemnly  protested,  and  he  now  as 
solemnly  repeats,  that  there  is  not  the  shadow  of  a 
foundation  for  the  charge  ;  and  that  his  determination, 
as  expressed  in  his  letter  of  December  21,  was  adopted 
upon  his  own  judgment  and  conviction  alone,  unin- 
fluenced by  advice,  suggestion,  or  communication  from 
any  quarter  whatsoever.' 

'  Great  George  Street :  March  1,  1828.' 

The  renewed  and  unqualified  asseveration  at  the  close 
of  the  foregoing  paper  ought  to  be  amply  sufficient  with- 
out corroboration  ;  and  we  should  abstain  from  attempt- 
ing to  give  it  any  superfluous  support,  if  'the  base 
statement '  so  positively  contradicted  had  not  been  re- 
peated in  Lord  Palmerston's  '  Autobiography.' 9  The 

9  '  Huskisson  blamed  me  for  not  having  stood  out ;  he  said  if  I  had  in- 
sisted upon  the  fulfilment  of  Goderich's  promise  that  promise  would  not  have 
been  retracted,  especially  as  it  was  spontaneously  made,  and  Herries  would 
not  have  been  thrown  like  a  live  shell  into  the  Cabinet  to  explode  and  blow 
us  all  up. 

'  At  the  appointed  time  he  did  explode.  He  picked  a  quarrel  with  Hus- 
kisson. .  .  .' — Autobiography. 

Lord  Palmerston  does  not  say  when  the  remarks  attributed  to  Huskisson 
were  made ;  but  from  the  context  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  conversation 
above  related  took  place  soon  after  Huskisson's  return  to  England  and  the 
settlement  of  the  dispute  concerning  the  office  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 
This  supposition,  however,  is  inconsistent  with  the  proved  fact  that  Huskis- 
son showed  a  very  friendly  disposition  towards  Mr.  Herries  in  that  matter. 
It  is  to  be  observed,  moreover,  that  Huskisson  did  not  urge  the  appointment 
of  Lord  Palmerston,  whose  name,  indeed,  was  not  once  mentioned  in  the 
course  of  the  negotiation  which  followed  Huskisson's  arrival.  If,  in  spite  of 


78     CALUMNY  REVIVED  BY  PALMERSTON.     en.  vii. 

old  calumny  having  thus  being  revived,  we  are  called 
upon  to  refute  it. 

As  a  preliminary  observation,  we  have  to  remark 
that  Lord  Palmerston,  sitting  on  the  Treasury  Bench, 
heard  Mr.  Herries,  his  colleague  in  the  Cabinet,  pledge 
his  word  of  honour,  in  a  tone  of  singular  solemnity,  to 
the  truth  of  his  denial ;  that  he  continued  to  be,  both 
in  office,  and  out  of  office,  on  very  good  and  amicable 
(though  not  very  intimate)  terms  with  him  ;  and  that 
during  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  Mr.  Herries's  life  he 
never  gave  him  the  least  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
personal  esteem  always  professed  by  Mr.  Herries  for 
Lord  Palmerston  was  not  reciprocal. 

We  have  here  something  very  startling.  Do  what 
we  may — turn,  twist,  shift,  re-arrange  these  facts  as  we 
can — they  drive  us  at  last  into  a  dilemma  from  which 
there  is  no  possible  escape.  Either  Lord  Palmerston 

logical  sequence,  we  are  to  assume  that  Huskisson's  tender  reproach  was  ad- 
dressed to  Pahnerston  at  a  later  period — that  is  to  say,  about  the  time  of 
the  break-up  of  the  Goderich  Cabinet — we  shall  be  forced  also  to  conclude, 
against  all  probability,  that  from  Huskisson's  memory  every  trace  of  trans- 
actions in  which  he  had  been  actively  engaged  some  four  months  previously 
had  been  entirely  effaced.  This  is  strange ;  still  more  extraordinary  is  it 
that  Lord  Palmerston  likewise  should  have  forgotten  all  that  had  happened 
to  himself  in  August  1827.  At  that  time  it  was  certainly  known  both  to 
Palmerston  and  to  Huskisson  that  the  reason  why  the  understanding  between 
Goderich  and  Palmerston  could  not  be  carried  out  was  that  the  King  posi- 
tively put  his  veto  on  the  proposed  arrangement.  If,  therefore,  Goderich's 
'  promise  had  not  been  retracted,'  and  he  had  persisted  in  opposing  it  to  the 
King's  decided  refusal,  the  Prime  Minister  must  necessarily  have  resigned 
and  destroyed  his  half-formed  Cabinet.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  Huskis- 
eon,  if  he  really  used  the  words  alleged,  blamed  Pahnerston  for  not  having 
prevented  the  consolidation  of  the  Ministry,  the  impending  dissolution  of 
which  he  lamented.  But  so  foolish  a  saying  ou  the  part  of  Huskisson  seems 
impossible.  Consequently  we  are  justified  in  concluding  that  the  words 
cited  were  not  the  words  of  Huskisson  speaking  to  Palmerston,  but  those  of 
Palmerston  speaking  to  Bulwer. 


en.  vir.  REFUTATION.  79 

contentedly  sat  in  the  same  Cabinet,  and  frequently 
at  the  same  table,  with  a  man  whom  he  believed  to  have 
been  guilty,  not  only  of  the  most  odious  treachery,  but 
of  the  most  revolting  perjury,  and  during  the  space  of 
more  than  twenty  years  met  that  man  on  a  footing  of 
friendly  intercourse  without  ever  manifesting  towards 
him  the  abhorrence  which  such  conduct  must  have 
inspired  in  the  breast  of  any  man  of  honourable  feeling; 
• — or  he  left  recorded  for  posthumous  publication,  against 
a  dead  man,  a  monstrous  accusation,  in  the  truth  of 
which  he  did  not  believe. 

Having  premised  this  much,  we  proceed  to  show 
the  grounds  on  which,  independently  of  Mr.  Herries's 
denial,  we  declare  the  charge  to  be  false. 

1.  Not  a  particle  of  evidence  in  support  of  it  was 
ever  put  forward. 

2.  The  papers  produced  and  cited  by  us  establish, 
beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  the  fact  that  during 
the  negotiations  between  Lord  Goderich  and  the  King 
concerning   Lord    Holland   in   the    first    fortnight    of 
December,    Mr.    Herries,    like   other    members   of  the 
Cabinet  not  admitted  into  the  Whig  sub- Cabinet,  was 
in  total  ignorance  of  what  was  going  on  ;  that,  until 
the  13th,  when  Lord  Goderich's  resignation  was  an- 
nounced, he  knew  nothing  of  the  Prime  Minister's  letter 
to  the  King,  written  under  the  direction  of  Lord  Lans- 
downe  and  Mr.  Huskisson ;  and  that  he  was  afterwards 
made  aware   of  what   had  been  done  in   this  matter 
subsequently  to  Lord  Goderich's  return  to  power,  not 
through  any  secret  channel  of  communication  with  the 
Palace,   but   simply  by  another    Cabinet   Minister   on 


80  REFUTATION. 


CD.  VII. 


December  21,  the  day  on  which  the  letter  alleged  to 
have  been  written  in  consequence  of  secret  commu- 
nications was  addressed  to  Lord  Goderich.  But  from 
the  King's  point  of  view  it  was  manifestly  desirable 
that  those  members  of  the  Cabinet  (Mr.  Herries  being 
one  of  them)  who  were  opposed  to  Lord  Holland's 
admission  should  be  perfectly  informed  of  what  was 
going  on,  in  order  that  they  might  be  able  to  help  his 
Majesty  to  resist  the  renewed  demand.  Nevertheless 
they  were  not  informed.  And  it  is  absolutely  incredible 
that  if  the  letter  of  the  21st  concerning  the  Finance 
Committee  was  prompted  by  the  King,  no  secret  informa- 
tion should  have  been  imparted  to  Mr.  Herries  on  a 
subject  infinitely  more  interesting  to  the  King  than 
Lord  Althorp's  nomination. 

3..  The  form  in  which  Mr.  Herries' s  resignation  was 
offered  to  Lord  Goderich  was  inconsistent  with  the 
supposition  of  its  having  been  concerted  with  the  King 
for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  Government,  in  which 
case  it  would  have  been,  not  conditional,  but  absolute 
and  immediate. 

4.  It  is  quite  clear  that  both  the  Lord  Chancellor 
and  Lord  Bexley,  who  were  in  confidential  and  fre- 
quent communication   with   Mr.  Herries,  were  at  the 
beginning  of  January  under  the  impression  that  the 
King  was  ignorant  of  the  disputes  in  the  Cabinet ;  and 
such  a  persistent  deception  as  must  have  been  practised 
upon  them  both,  if  the  Palmerston  theory  were  true,  is 
wholly  inconceivable. 

5.  In  the  latter  part  of  December  the  King  was 
absorbed   in   preparations   for  the   reception   of  Doni 


OH.  vn.  REFUTATION.  81 

Miguel,  and  it  was  well  known  that  he  was  very  un- 
willing to  be  disturbed  in  them  by  political  business. 
So  strongly  was  this  felt,  that  Lord  Bexley,  in  pro- 
testing against  the  Holland  negotiation,  told  Lord 
Goderich  that  he  reserved  his  determination  as  to  any 
steps  which  he  might  think  it  right  to  take  until  the 
King's  domestic  engagements  at  Windsor  should  be 
terminated ;  and  Mr.  Herries  also  declared  that  he 
would  postpone  any  further  action  which  might  break 
in  improperly  at  that  time  upon  His  Majesty's  arrange- 
ments. It  is  impossible  that  at  that  very  moment  he 
should,  in  concert  with  the  King,  have  done  anything 
calculated  to  produce  an  explosion  which  would  most 
effectually  have  interfered  with  those  arrangements. 

6.  On  January  10,  two  days  after  the  final  disso- 
lution of  the  Goderich  Cabinet,  Mr.  Herries  addressed 
to  Sir  William  Knighton  the  following  confidential 
letter : — 

'  Downing  Street :  January  10,  1828. 

1  My  dear  Sir  William, — It  is  right  that  you  should 
be  in  possession  of  the  accompanying  paper.  It  contains 
the  whole  story  honestly  told  (and  told  by  documents) 
of  the  subject  on  which  the  Whigs  and  I  have  been 
divided. 

'  The  time  must  come,  I  presume,  when  it  will  be 
my  duty  to  render  an  account  to  the  King  of  my 
conduct  in  this  affair.  I  will  wait  with  patience  for  it, 
and  not  add  to  the  troubles  imposed  upon  his  Majesty 
by  any  undutiful  importunity  on  my  part.  Most  truly 
yours, 

M.  C.  HERRIES.' 

VOL.  II.  G 


82  REFUTATION. 


CH.   VII. 


This  authentic  document  is  conclusive.  Xo  person 
of  ordinary  intelligence  can  read  it,  and  still  entertain 
the  least  doubt  of  the  perfect  truth  of  the  writer's  de- 
claration in  the  House  of  Commons.  It  proves  indis- 
putably that,  until  some  time  after  the  Goderich 
Ministry  had  ceased  to  exist,  the  King  received  no 
information  from  Mr.  Herries,  either  directly  or  in- 
directly, concerning  the  differences  between  him  and 
his  colleagues,  and  therefore  entirely  excludes  any 
supposition  of  concerted  action. 

7.  With  regard  to  imaginary  communications  with 
the  Tory  leaders,  the  following  letter,  intended  to  be  sent 
to  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  is  not  less  decisive. 

'  Downing  Street:  January  1828. 

'  My  dear  Lord  Duke, — I  transmit  to  you  herewith 
a  copy  of  my  correspondence  with  Lord  Goderich  on 
a  subject  on  which  you  have  perhaps  heard  much 
from  others.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  few  observations 
necessary  for  the  clear  understanding  of  the  circum- 
stances which  are  referred  to  in  it. 

'  I  trust  that  your  Grace  will  appreciate  the  motives 
which  have  induced  me  to  maintain  up  to  this  time 
the  strictest  silence  on  this  matter  towards  your  Grace, 
although  I  could  not  but  feel  an  earnest  desire  that  no 
erroneous  impression  should  be  made  upon  your  mind 
by  the  manner  in  which  the  subject  of  this  correspon- 
dence has  been  treated  in  the  public  papers. 

'  I  have  judged  it  to  be  the   most  fair,  the  most 

1  There  is  a  rough  draft  as  well  as  a  fair  copy  signed  and  ready  for  trans- 
mission, which,  however,  apparently  did  not  take  place. 


CH.  vn.  REFUTATION.  83 

honourable,  and  the  most  delicate  course  towards  all 
the  parties  who  have  been  concerned  in  the  transaction, 
to  maintain  the  most  scrupulous  reserve  upon  it  while 
the  formation  of  a  new  Government  was  depending,  and 
above  all,  to  have  no  communication,  direct  or  indirect, 
relating  to  it,  either  with  your  Grace  or  with  any  of 
the  persons  with  whom  or  under  whom  I  have  hereto- 
fore had  the  satisfaction  of  acting  in  any  political 
capacity. 

'  The  time  being  now,  however,  come  when  that 
reserve  is  no  longer  required,  nor  proper,  I  transmit  the 
correspondence  to  your  Grace,  with  a  strong  conviction 
that  you  will  find  in  it  nothing  to  diminish  that  good 
opinion  which  your  Grace  has  on  so  many  occasions 
evinced  in  the  most  flattering  manner  of — Your  most 
faithful,  &c.,  Ac.,  ,  j  a  HERKIEg/ 

Here  we  might  close  the  case  ;  but  in  order  to 
leave  nothing  unsaid  we  will  add  this.  Let  us  suppose 
that  no  declarations  were  made  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, and  that  the  testimony  of  no  documents  could 
be  cited.  We  would  still  contend  that  the  charge  made 
in  one  form  or  another  fifty  years  ago,  and  latterly 
brought  forward  again  by  Lord  Dalling  in  Lord  Pal- 
merston's  name,  ought  to  be  rejected  by  every  impartial 
judge  on  account  of  its  own  inherent  improbability, 
and  of  the  enormous  absurdities  to  which  its  admission 
must  necessarily  lead. 

No  free  man  becomes  a  traitor  and  exposes  himself 
to  ignominy  and  detestation,  when  he  has  nothing  to 
gain,  but  much  to  lose,  by  his  treachery. 

G    2 


84  REFUTATION.  CH.  nt. 

An  Eastern  slave  alone  will  commit  acts  of  base 
turpitude,  at  great  risk  to  himself,  merely  in  obedience 
to  the  behest  of  a  king.  A  silent  clock  may  be  care- 
fully adjusted  and  regulated  for  the  destruction  of  a 
vessel  in  mid-ocean  ;  but  no  eloquence  will  persuade 
one  of  the  chief  officers  of  the  ship  to  stow  it  away  in 
his  cabin — a  course  closely  analogous  to  that  which, 
according  to  Lord  Palmerston,  Mr.  Herries  was  induced 
to  take  by  George  IV.  If  the  King  had  urged  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  to  blow  up  the  Cabinet, 
that  Minister  (had  he  been  capable  of  entertaining  the 
proposal)  would  have  replied,  '  But  I  shall  blow  myself 
up  along  with  my  colleagues  ;  and  before  doing  so,  I 
must  be  quite  sure  that  I  shall  fall  on  my  feet  without 
being  hurt  by  the  explosion.  Your  Majesty  must  give 
me,  if  no  more,  at  least  assurance  of  safety.'  It  is 
morally  impossible  that  such  an  agreement  as  that 
alleged  could  have  been  come  to  without  a  positive 
pledge  on  the  part  of  the  King  that  in  any  change 
Mr.  Herries  should  be  maintained  in  his  then  position, 
or  should  obtain  an  equivalent  for  it.  But  it  is  patent 
that  no  such  bargain  was  struck,  and  that  he  received 
no  assurance.  For  it  is  certain  that,  personally,  he  was 
in  every  respect  a  loser  by  the  breaking  up  of  the 
Goderich  Administration — a  loser  in  point  of  station,  of 
consequence,  of  the  means  of  acquiring  increased  repu- 
tation, and  of  emolument. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  King's  motives,  on  the 
Palmerston  hypothesis,  are  wholly  unintelligible.  As 
we  have  already  observed  there  was  nothing  to  prevent 
him  from  calling  in  the  Duke  of  Wellington  on  the 


OH.  vil.  KEFUTATION.  85 

death  of  Mr.  Canning.  He  need  not  have  postponed 
for  six  months  the  construction  of  a  Tory  Government, 
interposing  another  Ministry  only  to  have  the  trouble 
of  getting  rid  of  it  by  subtle  contrivances.  The  Gode- 
rich  Cabinet  was  a  constant  source  of  vexation  and 
apprehension  to  him.  Its  internal  dissensions,  together 
with  the  harassing  dictation  and  pretentious  impor- 
tunities to  which  he  was  almost  incessantly  subjected 
by  some  of  its  members,  left  him  no  peace  and  quiet. 
During  the  first,  and  during  the  last,  months  of  its 
brief  existence,  he  was  always  in  hot  water.  He  seems 
to  have  been  obliged  even  to  make  a  struggle  for  a 
tranquil  Christmas  dinner.2  And  we  are  expected  to 
believe  that,  without  the  slightest  necessity,  he  imposed 
upon  himself  this  burden  which  made  his  life  wretched, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  he  devised  a  cunning  scheme 
for  its  removal  after  a  period  of  extreme  torment.  We 
are  gravely  told  that,  in  the  process  of  its  formation, 
the  King  took  care  to  put  a  '  live  shell '  into  the  Cabinet, 
in  order  that,  at  a  moment  singularly  inconvenient  to 
himself,  an  explosion  might  destroy  the  Government, 
and  enable  his  Majesty  to  do  in  January  that  which  he 
could  easily  have  done  in  August,  with  a  saving  of  a 
world  of  annoyance.  This  is  not  all.  A  higher  pin- 
nacle of  nonsense  has  yet  to  be  reached. 

The  explosion  of  the  '  live  shell '  was  rendered  un- 
necessary by  the  act  of  the  Prime  Minister  himself, 
who,  on  December  11,  as  we  have  seen,  blew  up  his 

z  Greville  tells  us  that  '  the  King  said  he  did  not  see  why  he  was  to  be 
the  only  gentleman  in  his  dominions  who  was  not  to  eat  his  Christmas  dinner 
in  quiet,  and  he  was  determined  he  would.' 


86  REFUTATION. 


en.  vn. 


Cabinet  without  giving  warning  to  anybody.8  The 
King  thereby  became  quite  free  to  send  for  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  and  dismiss  the  ministers  whom  he  disliked. 
Instead  of  doing  so,  he  allowed  Lord  Goderich,  after  a 
week's  retirement,  to  resume  the  station  he  had  aban- 
doned, and  revive  the  Government,  which,  two  days 
after  its  re-establishment,  was  to  be  again  blown  up — 
according  to  the  Palmerston  legend — at  a  signal  from 
the  King. 

This  is  the  culminating  peak  of  absurdity.  Having 
attained  it,  let  us  *  rest  and  be  thankful,'  in  the  confi- 
dence that  our  readers  will  agree  with  us  in  pronouncing 
the  charge  we  have  refuted  to  be,  not  only  calumnious, 
bat  ridiculous  and  impossible. 

3  The  silence  of  the  Autobiography  on  this  point  is  extraordinary. 


CH.  viri.  CABINET   CHANGES.  87 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Cabinet  changes — Correspondence  with  the  Doke — Finance  Committee — 
Reform  of  the  Sinking  Fund — Dr.  Bowring — Catholic  emancipation — 
Proposed  Indian  appointment  —  Board  of  Trade — Settlement  of  old 
dispute  with  the  United  States — Parliamentary  duties — Close  of  the 
Wellington  administration — Financial  management  of  Tories  and  Liberals 
compared. 

WHEN  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Huskisson  and  his  friends, 
precipitated  by  the  inopportune  rigidity  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  made  a  partial  redistribution  of  places  in 
the  Cabinet  necessary,  Mr.  Herries,  who  had  correctly 
described  himself  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Canning  as  belong- 
ing to  the  working  class  of  politicians,  addressed  the 
following  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  expressing 
his  desire  to  be  removed  to  some  office  of  more  real 
business  than  the  Mint,  where  he  felt  that  he  was  out 
of  his  element  : — 

'  Great  George  Street :  May  28,  1828. 

1  My  dear  Lord  Duke, — After  having  reflected 
upon  the  plan  which  you  showed  me  this  morning  for 
the  reconstruction  of  the  Government,  and  bearing  in 
mind  all  the  circumstances  under  which  you  have  been 
called  upon  at  this  time  to  make  a  new  arrangement  of 
it,  I  feel  that  I  should  not  be  doing  justice  to  the 
interest  wliich  I  take  in  the  stability  and  success  of 
your  Administration,  nor  to  my  own  feelings  of  a  more 


88  HERRIES  TO  THE  DUKE.  CH.  vni. 

personal  nature,  if  I  were  not  to  draw  your  attention  to 
my  particular  situation. 

*  The  office  which  I  now  fill  is  a  mere  sinecure, 
and,  connected  as  it  is  with  a  seat  in  the  Cabinet,  is 
such  as  might  be  held  by  any  person  who,  by  high 
rank  or  influential  connections,  though  unqualified  by 
official  ability  or  experience,  might  add  to  the  strength 
of  your  Government. 

'  My  only  means,  if  I  have  any,  of  being  in  any 
degree  useful  to  you  in  the  public  service  must  consist 
in  the  efficient  discharge  of  some  public  duties  ;  and  I 
confess  that  I  feel  myself  out  of  my  proper  position  so 
long  as  I  occupy  an  office  suited  to  the  station  and 
influence  which  I  do  not  possess,  and  unsuited  to  the 
exercise  of  any  little  ability  which  I  may  have  ac- 
quired by  the  previous  occupations  of  my  official  life. 

'  When  my  present  office  was  conferred  upon  me, 
there  were  circumstances  of  a  peculiar  nature  which  pre- 
cluded me  from  putting  forward  these  considerations ; 
but  I  feel  it  to  be  right,  now  that  you  are  about  to 
make  a  new  distribution  of  the  offices  at  your  disposal, 
to  put  you  in  possession  of  my  sentiments  on  the  sub- 
ject, and  candidly  to  state  that  it  would  have  given  me 
more  satisfaction  if  I  had  found  that  it  would  have 
accorded  with  your  arrangements  to  place  me  in  a 
situation  of  more  labour  and  responsibility  than  that 
which  I  now  hold. 

'  Having  thus  frankly  expressed  my  sentiments  on 
this  subject,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  assure  your 
Grace  that  whatever  may  be  your  ultimate  arrangements, 
and  in  whatever  situation  I  may  be  placed,  I  shall  use 


CH.  vnr.  THE  DUKE  TO  HERRIES.  89 

my  best  endeavours  to  justify  the  confidence  reposed  in 
me,  and  to  prove  how  much  I  value  the  honour  and 
advantage  of  being  connected  with  an  Administration  of 
which  your  Grace  is  at  the  head.  Believe  me,  &c., 

'  J.  C.  HEKRIES.' 

The  Duke's  reply  was  very  friendly,  though  he  was 
not  able  immediately  to  make  a  new  arrangement. 

«  London :  May  29, 1828. 

'  My  dear  Mr.  Herries, — I  was  not  able  to  answer 
your  letter  yesterday  or  this  day ;  and  I  now  steal  a 
moment  from  my  rest  to  reply  to  you. 

*  Particular  circumstances  placed  you  in  the  office 
of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  for  which  you  are 
highly  qualified  ;  and  another  train  of  circumstances 
rendered  it  necessary  to  remove  you  from  it.  You  are 
now  in  the  Cabinet,  and  holding  an  oifice  which  has 
not  much  business  connected  with  the  Government ; 
and  for  that  very  reason  your  being  in  the  Cabinet  is 
the  more  honourable  to  your  character.  You  are  like- 
wise in  that  situation  in  which,  having  not  much 
business  to  transact  in  your  own  immediate  office,  you 
can  materially  assist  the  Government  on  a  variety  of 
subjects  with  which  you  are  well  acquainted  into  which 
they  must  make  inquiries.  This  you  could  not  do  if 
employed  in  an  office  of  which  the  business  might  be 
sufficient  to  employ  all  your  time. 

'  I  entreat  you  then  to  be  satisfied,  and  have 
patience,  and  be  assured  that  you  must  rise  eventually 
to  offices  of  more  business,  though  not  of  more  import- 
ance, or  more  honourable  to  your  character,  than  that 
which  you  now  hold.  Ever  yours  most  faithfully, 

'  WELLINGTON.' 


90  THE  KING'S  SUGGESTION.  CH.  vm. 

From  the  Duke's  published  correspondence  we  learn 
the  fact,  of  which  we  should  otherwise  have  been 
ignorant  (there  being  no  allusion  to  it  in  Mr.  Herries's 
papers)  that  the  King  had  proposed  a  new  Ministerial 
list,  in  which,  Mr.  Goulburn  being  transferred  from  the 
Exchequer  to  the  Colonies,  his  place  was  to  be  taken 
by  Mr.  Herries.  In  his  reply  the  Duke  expressed  his 
entire  concurrence  in  (to  use  Mr.  Walpole's  words) 
'  the  King's  estimation  of  the  fitness '  of  the  person 
recommended  for  the  Finance  department ; l  but  gave 
particular  reasons  for  concluding  that  'the  arrange- 
ment suggested  would  not  answer  ' — in  the  first  place 
because  Mr.  Goulburn  was  a  West  India  proprietor,  and 
secondly  because  the  re- appointment  of  Mr.  Herries  to 
the  post  which  he  had  before  held  might  afford  ground 
for  the  assertion  that  existing  Ministerial  difficulties  were 
in  some  way  connected  with  the  breaking  up  of  Lord 
Goderich's  Administration,  and  '  occasion  the  secession 
of  the  Ministers  who  belonged  '  to  it.  In  a  memoran- 
dum apparently  of  about  the  same  date  as  his  letter  to 
the  King,  the  Duke  states  as  a  reason  for  not  making 
any  change  in  Mr.  Herries's  position,  that  it  would 
*  remove  him  from  Parliament  and  from  the  Finance 
Committee.' 

This  Committee,  which  had  been  the  cause  of  so 
much  strife,  was  appointed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Session  of  1828,  Sir  Henry  Parnell  being  put  into  the 
chair.  Although  both  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 

1  '  There  cannot  lie  found  a  gentleman  more  highly  qualified  than  he  is 
for  this  office,'  said  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  never  said  what  he  did 
not  thiuk. 


ca.  via.  FINANCE  COMMITTEE.  91 

and  Mr.  Huskisson  were  members  of  it,  the  management 
of  the  business  on  behalf  of  the  Government  was  en- 
trusted to  the  Master  of  the  Mint. 

Those  who  desire  to  understand  the  financial  system 
of  the  country  at  this  period  would  do  well  to  consult 
the  exhaustive  statement  made  by  him  to  the  Commit- 
tee, as  Lord  Althorp  remarked  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
'  in  a  very  able,  clear,  and  satisfactory  manner.'  In  a 
debate  in  1830  (March  12)  Sir  James  Graham — a 
vehement  adversary  of  the  then  Government,  never 
very  friendly  to  Mr.  Herries,  and  at  that  time  far  from 
being  so — said  on  this  subject:  'I  also  place  every 
reliance  on  the  evidence  and  the  statements  made  by 
the  Right  Honourable  gentleman  opposite,  the  Master 
of  the  Mint,  in  evidence  before  the  Committee  ;  and  I 
will  go  the  length  of  saying  that  the  clearest  statement 
of  the  financial  concerns  of  this  country  I  have  ever 
seen  is  that  of  the  Right  Honourable  gentleman  in  the 
Fourth  Report,  which  makes  the  whole  of  our  compli- 
cated accounts  clear  to  the  plainest  understanding,  and 
contains  many  valuable  suggestions  which  the  extinction 
of  the  Committee  will,  I  regret  to  say,  prevent  from 
being  carried  into  effect.'  And  three  years  later,  in  a 
debate  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  March  25,  1833, 
Sir  James  Graham,  then  in  office,  alluding  to  the  same 
statement,  used  the  strong  expression — '  which  I  shall 
never  cease  to  consider  as  one  of  the  most  able 
financial  statements  ever  made.' 

The  Fourth  Report  itself  ('  for  which,'  said  Sir 
Henry  Parnell,  the  chairman,  '  the  House  and  the 
country  are  indebted  to  the  exertions  of  the  Right 


92  FINANCE  COMMITTEE.  en.  vm. 

Honourable  gentleman  the  Master  of  the  Mint')  was 
also  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Herries. 

The  chief  recommendations  of  that  Report  related 
to  the  Sinking  Fund,  on  which  point  it  was  entirely  in 
conformity  with  the  views  indicated  in  the  Financial 
Memorandum  already  cited  which  was  written  by  Mr. 
Herries  in  1827. 

The  Act  of  1823  (4  Geo.  IV.  c.  19)  which  modified 
previous  arrangements,  prescribed  the  annual  payment 
of  a  fixed  sum  of  5,000,000/.  (with  accumulations  of 
interest)  towards  the  redemption  of  debt.  The  sums 
actually  issued,  pursuant  to  this  Act,  for  that  purpose 
were,  in 

£ 

1823  ....   6,069,210 

1824  ....   5,196,912 
1826    ....   6,528,528 

1826  ....   5,612,465 

1827  ....   5,762,987 

£27,159,102 

This  total  amount  exceeded,  by  6,871,290/.,  the 
aggregate  surplus,  for  the  same  period,  of  Income  over 
Expenditure  (including,  on  both  sides,  advances  for 
Public  Works,  &c.,  and  repayments),  which  was 
20,28  7,812/.  Without  the  items  mentioned,  the 
surplus  amounted  to  22,741,820/.,  or  4,417,282£.  short 
of  the  Sinking  Fund. 

The  surplus,  inadequate  as  it  was  to  meet  the  legal 
requirements  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  must  have  been  very 
considerably  smaller  but  for  the  contributions  derived 
from  the  wonderfully  complicated  contrivance  known 
as  the  Dead  Weight  Annuity,  and  devised,  primarily, 


en.  vin.  SINKING   FUND.  93 

as  the  means  of  defraying  the  charge  for  Military  and 
Naval  half-pay  and  pensions,  but  in  reality  also,  '  with 
a  view  of  creating  an  addition  to  the  income  of  the 
State,  whereby  the  surplus  required  to  satisfy  the 
Sinking  Fund  of  5,000,000/.  fixed  by  law  might  still 
be  provided,  notwithstanding  a  considerable  reduction 
of  the  taxes  then  existing.' 

On  account  of  this  annuity  of  585, 740/.,  sold  to  the 
Bank  for  13,089,419^,  there  were  received,  in  the  five 
years  specified  above,  11,114,049/.,  the  aggregate  amount 
of  the  annual  payments  to  the  Bank  having  been  on  the 
other  hand  2, 6  3  5, 8  3  01.  The  difference  was  applied  to 
the  reduction  of  debt,  '  but  the  sale  of  the  annuity  was 
itself  a  creation  of  debt,  and  it  was  therefore  not  correct 
to  call  that  a  Sinking  Fund,  which  only  served  to 
extinguish  in  one  shape  a  debt  which  it  established  in 
another.' 

It  appeared  that  the  maintenance  of  '  the  semblance 
of  a  Sinking  Fund  by  this  intricate  contrivance '  had 
been,  and  must  necessarily  be  in  future,  attended  with 
considerable  expense  ;  and  as  the  measure  was  '  wholly 
useless  as  an  expedient  to  supply  a  nominal  amount 
of  Sinking  Fund,  the  Committee  had  no  hesitation  in 
recommending  '  its  abandonment. 

With  regard  to  the  future  application  of  surplus  to 
the  reduction  of  the  National  Debt,  the  Report  states 
that  '  the  Committee  is  impressed  with  a  strong  con- 
viction of  the  sound  policy  of  applying  a  surplus 
revenue  perseveringly,  in  those  times  during  which  no 
extraordinary  resources  need  be  raised,  in  the  reduction 
of  the  debts  accumulated  to  defray  the  expenses  of 


94  SINKING   FUND.  en.  vin. 

antecedent  periods  of  difficulty  and  exertion.  Without 
offering  at  present  any  opinion  on  the  comparative 
advantages  of  defraying  the  charges  of  war  by  the 
immediate  imposition  of  taxes  to  the  amount  of  those 
charges,  or  by  raising  the  required  supplies  by  loans, 
the  Committee  consider  that  if  a  nation  has  been  in- 
duced, for  the  sake  of  greater  present  facilities  and 
safety,  to  provide  for  such  exigencies  by  a  system  of 
borrowing,  whereby  a  permanent  annual  charge  has 
been  created,  that  nation  is  bound,  on  the  return  of 
peace,  to  make  every  effort,  consistent  with  a  due 
regard  to  the  other  burthens  upon  the  people,  for  the 
reduction  of  that  charge.  A  course  of  policy  founded 
upon  the  avowed  principle  of  raising  loans  for  the 
exigencies  of  the  State  in  time  of  war,  and  of  making 
no  provision  for  diminishing  the  permanent  charge  of 
those  loans  in  time  of  peace,  must  appear  an  abandon- 
ment of  all  consideration  for  the  credit  and  safety  of  the 
country  in  the  eventual  occurrence  of  future  difficulties 
and  dangers. 

'  If  the  accumulated  debt  of  each  period  of  extra- 
ordinary exertion  is  to  be  handed  down  undiminished 
as  a  load  upon  those  who  are  thereafter  to  meet  the 
exigencies  of  other  struggles  and  other  difficulties,  it  is 
too  obvious  to  require  an  argument  that  the  time  can- 
not be  very  distant  (according  to  the  ordinary  vicissi- 
tudes of  peace  and  war  in  the  history  of  human  affairs) 
when  the  combined  weight  of  the  past  and  present 
burthens  must  become  too  great  for  the  most  pros- 
perous people  to  support,  and  the  fabric  of  public  credit 
must  crumble  under  the  accumulated  pressure.  .  .  . 


CH.  viri.  SINKING   FUND.  95 

'  Impressed  with  these  sentiments  the  Committee 
would  have  recommended  a  perseverance  in  the  resolu- 
tion of  1819  to  apply  5,000,000/.  annually  to  the 
gradual  extinction  of  debt,  if  that  measure  could  have 
been  accomplished  by  the  application  of  a  surplus 
revenue,  and  without  the  necessity  of  borrowing  or  of 
adding  new  burthens  upon  the  country. 

1  But  it  is  obvious  .  .  .  that  there  is  at  present  no 
clear  surplus  to  that  amount,  nor  any  immediate  pro- 
spect of  such  a  surplus  arising The  Committee 

are  of  opinion  that,  instead  of  a  fixed  Sinking  Fund, 
the  real  surplus  of  revenue  only  should  be  appropriated 
annually,  in  the  mode  hereafter  stated,  to  the  reduction 
of  debt. 

'  The  Committee  upon  the  whole  are  of  opinion 
that  the  following  principles  in  the  future  regulation 
of  the  Sinking  Fund  should  be  adopted  :  That  ...  it 
will  be  expedient,  in  estimating  the  Supply  and  Ways 
and  Means,  to  keep  in  view  the  necessity  of  a  surplus 
of  not  less  than  3,000,000/.  in  each  year,  but  that  in 
case  the  eventual  annual  surplus  should  not  amount  to 
three  millions,  the  deficiency  ought  not  to  be  supplied 
by  borrowing. 

'  They  are  also  of  opinion  that  all  Funded  Debt 
redeemed  by  the  application  of  the  real  surplus  Revenue 
should  be  cancelled.' 

The  Report  concludes  with  the  observation  that 
while  the  Committee  '  are  deeply  impressed  with  the 
conviction  that  in  the  present  state  of  the  public 


96  SINKING   FUND.  CH.  vra. 

finances  a  severe  economy  in  every  branch  of  the 
national  expenditure  is  imposed  as  a  sacred  duty  upon 
the  Government  and  upon  Parliament,  they  derive  from 
their  inquiries  the  strongest  confidence  in  the  resources 
of  the  country  to  fulfil  all  its  engagements,  and  to 
maintain  unimpaired  its  high  station  in  the  world.' 

The  recommendations  of  the  Committee  were  defini- 
tively carried  into  effect  in  the  following  year,  1829,  by 
the  Act,  10  Geo.  IV.  c.  27. 

Upon  the  evidence  of  all  the  facts  presented — that 
Mr.  Herries  proposed  the  constitution  of  a  Committee 
of  Financial  Inquiry ;  that  at  the  same  time  he  dwelt 
upon  the  necessity  of  altering  the  then  existing  system 
of  the  Sinking  Fund  ;  that  he  was  the  member  of  the 
Government  who  laid  before  the  Committee,  when  ap- 
pointed according  his  suggestion,  all  the  information 
relating  to  the  general  working  of  the  mechanism  of 
the  finances  which  it  required  for  its  deliberations  ; 
and  that  finally  he  drew  up  the  Report  which  embodied 
its  most  important  general  conclusions — we  consider 
ourselves  as  fully  warranted  in  claiming  for  him  the 
credit  of  having  been  principally  instrumental  in  bring- 
ing about  the  salutary  financial  reform  above  described.2 

3  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  Mr.  Spencer  "Walpole,  who  has  devoted 
large  space  in  his  history  to  details  more  or  less  inaccurate  concerning  this 
question  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  in  order  to  convict  Tory  financiers  of  error, 
should  have  heen  able  to  find  no  more  room  than  the  corner  of  a  foot-note 
for  the  mention  of  the  useful  labours  of  the  Committee  which,  chiefly  under 
the  guidance  of  one  particular  Tory  financier,  rectified  previous  mistakes. 
This  author  has,  with  his  customary  carelessness,  committed  an  extraordinary 
"blunder  in  his  account  of  the  modification  of  the  Sinking  Fund  system  which 
was  effected  in  1823.  He  says :  '  Vansittart  applied  a  sum  of  money  which 
he  had  not  got,  and  which  he  had  no  prospect  of  getting,  except  by  borrow- 
ing. Robinson,  on  the  contrary,  proportioned  his  Sinking  Fund  to  his 


CH.  Tin.  LIBERAL  AND  TORY  DOCTRINES.  97 

The  fashionable  doctrine  of  the  day  among  Liberals 
— a  doctrine  now  repudiated — was  the  contrary  of  that 
maintained  by  the  Tories.  It  was  deemed  impolitic  for 
a  nation,  like  the  individual  censured  by  a  cynical  wit, 
to  '  muddle  away  its  money  in  paying  its  debts.' 3 
*  What  real  good,'  Liberal  economists  scornfully  asked, 
1  could  be  done  by  applying  some  three  millions,  or  five 
millions,  a  year,  towards  the  redemption  of  800,000,000/.  ? 
A  diminution  of  taxes  to  the  same  amount  would  afford 
us  a  much  greater  relief.' 

When  stripped  of  the  pedantic  varnish  of  sham 
science  which  covered  it,  this  principle,  once  greatly  in 
vogue,  appears  as  nothing  but  the  crude  expression  of 
selfishness,  which  says  :  '  By  taking  our  money  out  of 
our  pockets  to  pay  our  debts,  instead  of  leaving  it  to 
fructify  for  our  own  benefit,  we  are  depriving  ourselves 
of  present  enjoyments  for  the  benefit  of  posterity.  But 
what  is  posterity  to  us  ?  Let  us  rather  spend  our 

surplus,  and  devoted  only  the  balance  of  income  and  expenditure  to  the 
reduction  of  debt.'  It  is  manifest  that  the  writer  of  this  passage  cannot 
have  read,  or  understood,  the  Act  of  1823  (Robinson  being  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer)  founded  upon  Vansittart's  resolutions  of  1819,  which  were  re- 
cited in  the  preamble.  Its  imperative  directions  required  the  annual  pay- 
ment of  five  millions — surplus  or  no  surplus.  And  if  Mr.  Walpole  had 
taken  the  trouble  to  inspect  the  public  accounts  referred  to  above  he  would 
have  discovered  the  fact,  opposed  to  his  theory,  that  in  1826  the  amount 
issued  by  Robinson,  according  to  law,  for  the  reduction  of  debt,  did  very 
largely  exceed  the  balance  of  income  over  expenditure.  '  Et  voila  comme  on 
ecrit  Vhistoire :  puisjiez  vow  d,  messieurs  les  savans.' 

3  Long  after  this  phrase  had  been  written  the  same  quotation  was  used 
with  reference  to  the  same  subject  by  a  great  popular  orator  in  a  speech 
at  a  public  meeting ;  but  he  applied  it,  apparently,  to  the  policy,  not  of  the 
Liberals  but  of  their  opponents.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  Liberal  lumin- 
aries, such  as  Mr.  Joseph  Hume,  Mr.  Poulett  Thomson,  Sir  Henry  Parnell, 
Lord  Althorp,  and  others,  always  opposed  and  derided  the  persistent  en- 
deavours of  '  stupid  Tory '  Governments  to  effect  large  reductions  of  debt. 
(  Base  is  the  slave  that  pays,'  was  a  Liberal,  not  a  Tory,  maxim. 

VOL.  II.  H 


98  IIEKRIES'S  VIEWS.  OH.  vin. 

money  on  cakes  and  ale  without  taking  thought  of 
future  distress.  Perish  posterity,  rather  than  that  we 
should  give  up  for  it  one  crumb,  or  plum,  of  nice  cake, 
or  one  drop  of  good  ale.  If  posterity  is  crushed  by  the 
burdens  bequeathed  by  us,  with  the  addition  of  new 
ones  imposed  by  its  own  necessities — so  much  the 
worse  for  it.' 

In  a  debate  on  the  Budget  in  1828,  Mr.  Herries,  in 
the  course  of  a  speech  in  which  he  refuted  an  accusation 
brought  by  Mr.  Hume  against  Mr.  Canning  of  having 
misled  the  House  by  inaccurate  statements,  took  an 
opportunity  of  again  expressing  his  opinion,  and  that 
of  the  Government,  on  the  subject  of  the  Sinking  Fund, 
as  to  which  he  said  :  '  No  one  was  more  anxious  than 
myself  to  enable  the  Finance  Committee  to  arrive  at  the 
real  principle  on  which  it  was  founded,  and  to  divest 
it  of  all  the  intricacy  of  borrowing  on  the  one  hand  to 
discharge  what  was  due  on  the  other  ;  and  indeed  I 
may  venture  to  say  that  the  proposition  of  the  measure 
originated  with  the  members  of  the  Government.  At 
the  same  time,  both  on  my  own  part  and  on  the  part 
of  those  who  were  members  of  the  Government  in  the 
Committee  with  me,  I  must  entirely  disclaim  any 
participation  in  the  views  of  those  who  thought  it  was 
just,  wise,  and  salutary  utterly  to  abandon  all  endea- 
vours to  effect  any  reduction  of  the  debt.4  .  .  . 

1  The  object  with  some  is,  not  to  maintain  the 
surplus  for  the  exclusive  purpose  of  applying  it  to  a 

4  It  is  well  known  that  this  was  Lord  Althorp's  view.  His  avowed 
hostility  to  the  principle  of  providing  a  surplus  for  the  redemption  of  debt 
was  one  of  the  grounds  on  which  Mr.  Herries  objected  to  his  being  made 
chairman  of  the  committee. 


CH.  vni.  HERRIES'S  VIEWS.  99 

Sinking  Fund,  but  to  render  it  occasionally  available 
for  other  purposes  ;  and  I  contend  that  if  once  you 
do  this,  you  involve  (sic)  the  principle  altogether.  The 
majority  of  the  Committee  were  in  favour  of  keeping 
up  a  Sinking  Fund  of  5,000,000?.  if  it  were  possible ; 
and  it  was  with  great  regret  that  they  found  it  neces- 
sary to  recommend  that  it  should  be  reduced  from 
5,000,000?.  to  3,000,000/.  I  fully  concur  in  that  pro- 
posal, and  if  3,000,000/.  actual  surplus  could  not  be 
raised,  I  should  say,  make  the  Sinking  Fund  even  lower 
than  that — in  short,  never  have  the  Sinking  Fund 
larger  than  the  actual  surplus  of  your  income/  After 
some  other  remarks,  he  added  :  '  When  gentlemen  bring 
their  accusations  against  the  past  times  of  war,  and 
speak  of  Mr.  Pitt  in  a  spirit  of  so  much  condemnation, 
I  think  that  they  are  bound  to  recall  the  circumstances 
under  which  that  statesman  brought  forward  the 
measure  of  the  Sinking  Fund  ;  he  did  so,  no  doubt, 
with  the  expectation  that  the  war  would  only  extend 
to  a  period  of  two  or  three  years,  and  that,  at  the  end 
of  that  time,  the  country  would  be  in  a  state  to  rid 
itself  of  some  of  its  burdens.' — (Mirror  of  Parliament.) 

It  was  in  this  debate  that  Mr.  Poulett  Thomson 
broached  his  celebrated  fructification  theory,  which  is 
now,  we  suppose,  wholly  exploded. 

The  labours  of  the  Committee,  although  very  useful, 
were  incomplete.  Four  reports  were  presented  in  the 
course  of  the  Session  of  1828.  The  first  report  merely 
conveyed  a  recommendation  in  six  lines.  The  second, 
on  the  Ordnance  Estimates,  contains,  among  other 

H  2 


100  REPORTS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.  PH.  vni. 

general  observations  upon  expenditure  and  retrench- 
ment, the  following  :  '  The  Committee  .  .  .  unequivo- 
cally declare  their  full  assent  to  the  principle  that  no 
Government  is  justified  in  taking  even  the  smallest 
sum  of  money  from  the  people,  unless  a  case  can  be 
clearly  established  to  show  that  it  will  be  productive 
of  some  essential  advantage  to  them  .  .  .  and  the 
Committee  think  that  the  Legislature  of  this  country 
is  more  particularly  bound  never  to  deviate  in  the 
slightest  degree  from  that  principle  in  consequence  of 
the  great  permanent  burdens  which  the  vast  amount  of 
the  National  Debt  has  imposed  upon  the  people.  .  .  . 
With  regard  to  retrenchment,  the  Committee  are  sensible 
of  the  great  difficulty  which  lies  in  the  way  of  its 
accomplishment.  .  .  .  But  the  present  circumstances  of 
our  finances  render  the  attempt  absolutely  indispen- 
sable. .  .  .' 

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  these  remarks  had  the 
full  concurrence  of  the  Master  of  the  Mint,  the  most 
active  Ministerial  member  of  the  Committee.  The 
words  of  the  Report  exactly  represent  the  principles 
he  always  preached,  and,  so  far  as  in  him  lay,  always 
practised. 

In  the  Third  Eeport  the  subjects  of  Military  and 
Naval  Half-pay,  Civil  Superannuations,  and  Diplomatic 
Pensions — the  regulations  recommended  for  the  grant- 
ing of  which  last  were  adopted  by  the  Civil  List  Com- 
mittee in  1831  and  established  as  they  now  exist,  with 
some  reductions  of  the  amount  in  each  class — were 
dealt  with. 


OH.  vffl.         ITS  ABANDONMENT.      DR.  BO  WRING.  101 

The  Fourth  and  last  Report  we  have  already  men- 
tioned. 

The  Army,  Navy,  Colonial  Establishments,  and 
other  branches  of  expenditure,  were  left  for  further 
inquiry.  But,  for  some  reason  with  which  we  are  not 
acquainted,  the  Committee  was  not  re-appointed.  The 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1829  alleged  as  a  ground 
for  its  postponement  the  pressure  of  other  business  ; 
but  the  Government  had  probably  some  other  motive 
for  their  determination.  It  may  at  any  rate  be  assumed 
that  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Leader  in  the  House 
of  Commons  were  adverse  to  a  continuance  of  the 
inquiry,  which,  according  to  letters  written  in  1827 
by  an  intimate  friend  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  was 
viewed  with  dislike  by  the  Duke  when  the  intended 
appointment  of  the  Committee  was  announced  by  Mr. 
Canning.  Its  abandonment  may  be  considered  as  an 
error  of  judgment,  because,  in  spite  of  the  large  reduc- 
tions of  expenditure  that  were  undoubtedly  effected,  it 
gave  rise  to  unjust  imputations  against  the  Cabinet  of 
want  of  sincerity  in  their  economical  professions. 

In  connection  with  the  business  of  this  Committee 
a  long  and  curious  correspondence  took  place  between  a 
man  of  note  in  later  years,  Dr. — afterwards  Sir  John — 
Bowring  and  the  Master  of  the  Mint.  At  the  instance 
of  the  Finance  Committee  a  Commission  was  appointed 
in  1828  to  inquire  into  the  system  of  Public  Accounts, 
and  Mr.  Herries  desired  that  Dr.  Bowring — whose 
special  qualifications  were  known  to  him,  and  against 
whom  he  had  no  prejudice  on  account  of  his  Radical, 
or  Benthamite,  opinions — should,  as  one  of  the  Com- 


102  BO  WRING  AND  HERRIES.  CH.  vm. 

missioners,  visit  foreign  countries — and  Holland  es- 
pecially— for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  methods 
there  pursued.  But,  owing  to  the  decided  hostility  of 
the  Prime  Minister  and  others,  this  intention  could  not 
be  entirely  carried  out.  Mr.  Herries,  however,  did  his 
utmost  to  promote  what  he  considered  as  a  very  impor- 
tant object,  giving  Dr.  Bowring  all  the  assistance  in 
his  power  for  the  prosecution  of  inquiries  which  seem 
to  have  been  impeded  by  official  obstacles  abroad,  and 
perhaps  by  official  spokes  in  the  wheel  at  home.  The 
good  disposition  shown  to  him  by  one  member  of  the 
Government  was  always  recognized  very  handsomely 
by  Dr.  Bowring,  who,  four  years  later,  when  his  friends 
were  in  power,  wrote  as  follows  to  Mr.  Herries  in  op- 
position :  '  I  cannot  avoid  this  occasion  of  re- assuring 
you  of  my  sense  of  obligation  for  the  part  you  then 
took,  being  thoroughly  persuaded  that  you  did  every- 
thing to  prevent — and  to  mitigate — my  then  disappoint- 
ment. It  will  be  a  subject  of  great  delight  to  me  if  in 
any  future  period  of  my  existence  I  am  able  to  testify 
to  you  how  much  and  how  truly  I  am,  my  dear  sir, 
your  obliged,  &c.' 

When  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  Cabinet  was  forced 
by  political  necessity  to  bring  forward  the  measure  of 
Catholic  Emancipation  which  caused  the  rupture  of  the 
Tory  party,  Mr.  Herries  was  less  embarrassed  by  his 
previous  conduct  on  this  question  than  the  two  distin- 
guished leaders  of  the  Government,  or  than  many  of 
his  other  colleagues.  He  had  formerly  voted  against 
the  Catholic  claims,  but  his  opposition  was  always  free 
from  passion  or  fanaticism.  He  certainly  did  not 


.CH.  viil.  CATHOLIC   EMANCIPATION.  103 

entertain  the  notion  which,  according  to  Peter  Plymley, 
had  '  crept  into  the  world,  that  difference  of  religion 
would  make  men  unfit  to  perform  together  the  offices 
of  common  and  civil  life ;  that  Brother  Wood  and 
Brother  Goose  could  not  travel  together  the  same 
circuit  if  they  differed  in  creed,  nor  Cockell  and 
Mingay  be  engaged  in  the  same  cause  if  Cockell  was  a 
Catholic  and  Mingay  a  Muggletonian.'  He  did  not 
*  suppose  that  Huskisson  and  Sir  Henry  Englefield 
would  squabble  behind  the  Speaker's  chair  about 
the  Council  of  Lateran,  and  many  a  turnpike  bill  mis- 
carry by  the  sarcastical  controversies  of  Mr.  Hawkins 
Brown  and  Sir  John  Throckmorton  upon  the  real 
presence.' 

He  cared  very  little  for  theological  theory,  but  very 
much  for  priestly  practice,  which  he  believed  to  be  still, 
as  in  all  former  ages,  antagonistic  to  the  reason,  the 
civilization,  and  the  freedom,  of  mankind. 

He  regarded  the  Catholic  Question,  not  from  a 
religious,  but  from  a  political  point  of  view.  Upon 
grounds  of  political  expediency  he  considered  the 
original  exclusion  of  Papists  from  political  functions  as 
a  rational  measure  ;  and  he  was  not  convinced  that 
there  had  ceased  to  be  good  grounds  for  maintaining  it 
— believing  as  he  did  that,  although,  where  the  Church 
was  not  concerned,  a  Catholic  Member  of  Parliament 
might  fulfil  his  duties  quite  as  faithfully  and  loyally  as 
a  Protestant,  whenever  the  interests  of  his  Church 
came  or  appeared  to  come  into  conflict  with  the  interests 
of  the  State,  his  allegiance  to  the  Vatican  would  cer- 
tainly overpower  his  sense  of  national  obligation  ;  and 


104  CATHOLIC  EMANCIPATION.  <SH.  vm. 

that,  in  dealing  with  many  questions  of  political  or 
social  importance,  his  chief  consideration  would  be, 
not  how  they  might  affect  the  welfare  of  the  country, 
but  how  they  might  be  viewed  by  an  external 
authority. 

On  the  other  hand,  insurrection  appeared  to  him 
a  far  greater  evil  than  any  which  could  be  apprehended 
from  the  admission  of  Catholics  ;  and,  having  to  choose 
between  prospective  difficulties  and  the  imminent  peril 
of  civil  war,  he  could  not  hesitate  in  giving  his  voice 
for  that  course  which  public  safety  pointed  out.  The 
Coronation  Oath,  as  an  objection  to  legislative  change, 
had  absolutely  no  force  in  his  eyes. 

Few  persons  will  now  refuse  to  admit  that  the 
respectable,  but  inconvenient,  scruples  of  George  III.'s 
conscience,  which  prevented  the  settlement  of  the 
question  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  are  greatly 
to  be  regretted,  and  that  it  was  impolitic  to  defer  until 
the  year  1828  an  inevitable  concession  which  might 
have  been  granted  many  years  sooner.  But,  at  the 
same  time,  it  can  hardly  be  denied,  that  the  arguments 
constantly  put  forward  by  the  Emancipationists,  if  now 
to  be  produced,  would  need  considerable  recasting 
before  they  could  be  read  by  the  light  of  all  the  sayings 
and  doings  of  the  Vatican  and  its  supporters  during 
the  last  twenty  or  thirty  years. 

Half  a  century's  experience  of  incessant  agitation 
has  demonstrated  the  vanity  of  the  expectations  fondly 
entertained  of  Irish  tranquillity  and  content.  It  would 
be  easy  to  show — facts  in  hand — that  every  single  pre- 
diction, and  every  argument — except  that  of  necessity — 


CH.  viii.  INDIAN  FINANCES."  105 

in  favour  of  emancipation,  have  been  proved  false  by 
subsequent  events. 

In  1829  the  following  correspondence,  which  has  a 
public  as  well  as  a  personal  interest,  took  place  between 
Mr.  Herries  and  Lord  Ellenborough,  then  President  of 
the  now  extinct  Board  of  Control,  who  pressed  him 
strongly  and  repeatedly  to  go  out  to  India,  and  en- 
deavour to  effect  the  cure  of  the  chronic  disorder  from 
which  the  finances  of  the  Eastern  Empire  were  at  that 
time,  as  they  are  still,  suffering.  Every  inducement  to 
accept  the  offered  post,  in  which  perhaps  he  might 
have  rendered  great  service  to  the  State,  was  held  out 
to  him,  but  domestic  considerations  forced  him  to 
decline  it. 

'  India  Board  :  April  19,  1829. 
'  (Private.) 

1  My  dear  Herries, — Our  Indian  finances  are  in  a 
bad  state,  and  very  much  require  your  experienced  hand 
to  bring  them  round.  The  expense  of  collecting  the 
revenue  increases,  the  salaries  of  all  the  public  officers 
increase,  the  manufactures  of  the  country  are  undersold 
by  ours,  and  India  cannot  pay  its  way.  We  must  find 
a  remedy  for  this,  and  none  will  be  found  until  we  can 
place  one  strong  and  practised  mind  at  the  head  of  the 
whole  finance  of  the  Empire. 

'  The  first  object  is  to  diminish  the  unnecessary 
charges.  I  really  believe  we  cannot  increase  the 
revenue  until  we  diminish  taxation,  and  by  diminish- 
ing taxation  enable  the  people  to  acquire  wealth,  and 
to  rise  elastically  as  the  weight  which  now  crushes 
them  is  removed. 


106         CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  ELLENBOROUGH.   CH.  viri. 

1  Whatever  commerce  we  now  have  with  India  must 
be  in  great  measure  confined  to  the  supply  of  the  wants 
of  the  British  residents.  We  should  endeavour,  not 
only  to  create  in  the  body  of  the  native  population  a 
taste  for  British  manufactures,  but  to  give  them  the 
means  of  gratifying  their  taste. 

*  There  can  be  no  profitable  commerce  with  a  pauper 
people. 

4  These  opinions  have  pressed  strongly  upon  my  mind 
ever  since  I  have  been  at  the  India  Board  ;  but  I  am 
satisfied  I  made  but  little  (sic)  from  hence. 

'  Would  you  undertake  the  general  management  of 
the  finances  of  India,  as  a  sort  of  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  to  the  Governor-General  ?  If  you  would  do 
so  you  might,  I  am  convinced,  not  only  confer  a  very 
great  benefit  upon  the  public,  but  illustrate  your  own 
name  much  more  than  you  could  as  Governor  of  any  one 
of  the  Presidencies. 

'  If  you  should  be  inclined  to  look  at  the  office  as 
one  which  you  might  possibly  undertake,  I  am  disposed 
to  think  that  I  should  have  no  great  difficulty  in 
inducing  the  Directors  to  make  it  worth  your  while  to 
go  to  India.  You  would  live  very  much  with  the 
Governor-General,  and  as  you  would  not  be  required  to 
keep  any  establishment,  I  should  think  you  might  save 
5,OOOJ.  or  7,OOOJ.  a  year  out  of  the  10,OOOJ.  or  12,OOOJ. 
which  we  could  manage  to  give  you. 

1  Will  you  think  of  it? 

'  You  might  depend  upon  being  supported  here. 
Lord  W.  Bentinck.  has  lately  appointed  .a  Commission 
to  inquire  generally  into  the  increase  of  expenditure, 


cs,  viii,  CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  ELLENBOROUGH.        107 

and  if  you  would  go  you  would  just  find  the  labours  of 
the  Commission  finished,  and  all  the  materials  ready  to 
your  hands.  A  few  years  would  enable  you  to  redeem 
the  errors  of  half  a  century,  and  to  lay  the  foundation 
of  a  permanent  system  which  might  endure  for  as  long 
a  period  as  men  can  presume  to  look  forward  to.  Be- 
lieve me,  my  dear  Herries,  very  truly  yours, 

*  ELLENBOKOUGH.' 

'Great  George  Street:  April  20, 1829. 

'  My  dear  Lord  Ellenborough, — I  am  just  leaving 
London  to  pass  a  few  days  at  Brighton,  or  I  would 
have  called  on  you  to  answer  your  letter  by  a  personal 
communication  rather  than  by  a  written  one. 

'  Upon  the  first  view  of  your  proposition  as  it 
respects  the  office  itself,  I  have  great  doubts  of  your 
being  able  so  to  constitute  your  Indian  Chancellorship 
of  the  Exchequer  as  to  effect  your  great  object  of 
regenerating  the  whole  system  of  Indian  finance 
without  danger  of  interfering  with  some  other  very 
important  objects  of  Indian  government. 

'  I  fear  you  would  find  it  difficult  to  make  such  an 
office  sufficiently  substantive  and  independent  for  the 
accomplishment  of  such  a  task  without  making  it  too 
much  so  for  the  authority  and  influence  of  the  Governor- 
General — which  will  hardly  admit  of  any  diminution. 
In  short,  I  think  your  Finance  Minister  in  India  would 
be  either  a  mere  adviser  of  the  Governor-General,  and, 
as  such,  would  have  no  substantive  weight  or  power, 
or  he  would  be  a  troublesome — perhaps  a  dangerous — 
check  upon  him. 


108        CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  ELLENBOROUGH.  CH.  vin. 

'  But  these  opinions  are  formed,  as  I  said,  upon  the 
first  view  only  of  your  plan.  You  are  much  better 
acquainted  with  the  subject  than  I  am,  and  have  thought 
more  upon  it.  My  objections  might  possibly  be  over- 
ruled by  you  in  a  few  minutes'  conversation  on  the 
matter. 

4  But  with  respect  to  my  undertaking  such  an  office 
if  it  could  usefully  be  instituted,  there  are  personal  and 
domestic  reasons  which  would  preclude  my  undertaking 
it,  even  if  I  could  bring  myself  to  agree  in  your  much 
too  favourable  opinion  of  my  fitness  for  it. 

'If  in  any  of  the  financial  parts  of  your  labours  at 
home,  either  for  preparing  for  the  establishment  of  such 
an  office,  or  on  any  other  occasion,  I  can  be  of  any 
service  to  you,  I  beg  you  to  be  assured  that  you  may  at 
all  times  freely  command  my  services.  Believe  me,  &c. 

'J.  C.  HERRIES.' 

« India  Board  :  April  22,  1829. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — I  should  hardly  venture  to 
think  of  creating  the  office  I  spoke  to  you  of  unless  I 
was  certain  of  being  able  to  place  you  in  it,  for  I  know 
no  other  man  I  think  fit. 

'  Such  an  officer  without  talent,  experience,  and 
high  station  in  England,  all  combined,  would  be 
incapable  of  doing  good  ;  but  with  these  qualities  and 
with  the  support  of  the  authorities  at  home  he  might 
do  extensive  good. 

*  Lord  W.  Bentinck  wished  to  have  a  Vizir,  and  he 
does  still. 

'  I  am  very  much  obliged  to   you  for   your  kind 


CH.  virr.   CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  ELLENBOROUGH.         109 

offers  of  assistance  in  the  Financial  Department.  I 
may  take  advantage  of  them  perhaps  too  largely.  Be- 
lieveme,  &c.  <  ELLENBOEOUGH.' 

It  appears  that  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Control 
was  in  the  habit  of  consulting  his  colleague,  the  Master 
of  the  Mint,  on  Indian  matters.  Thus  we  read  in  one 
letter  :  '  I  am  afraid  I  trouble  you  very  much  with 
my  Indian  business  ; '  and  in  another,  '  You  will  do 
me  a  great  favour  if  you  will  read  the  accompanying 
memorandum  and  letter  to  Bombay  on  the  subject 
of  establishing  a  Government  Bank  there,  and  give  me 
your  opinion  upon  it.  ...  I  have  thrown  out  the 
doubts  which  have  arisen  in  my  mind  on  reading  the 
memorandum,  but  I  have  great  hesitation  in  acting 
upon  my  own  unassisted  judgment  in  matters  of  this 
kind  which  are  new  to  me,  and  I  shall  be  disposed  to 
defer  to  your  opinion  should  it  be  against  the  validity 
of  my  doubts.  A  mass  of  papers  was  sent  to  me  with 
the  letter,  which  you  shall  have  if  you  require  them.' 

Advice  from  the  same  quarter  was  sought  by  Lord 
Ellenborough  many  years  afterwards,  when  he  was 
Governor-General  of  India,  and  his  correspondent  a 
private  individual,  as  we  gather  from  this  letter,  which 
may  not  be  out  of  place  here,  though  written  in  1842. 

'  My  dear  Lord  Ellenborough, — Your  letter  about 
my  son 5  was  most  gratifying  to  me.  There  is  nothing 

5  Captain  (afterwards  Brevet-Major)  William  Robert  Herries,  43rd  Light 
Infantry  and  3rd  Light  Dragoons,  Aide-de-camp  to  the  Governor-General. 
He  was  killed  in  action  at  Moodkee  in  1845,  when  serving  in  the  same 
capacity  on  the  staff  of  the  late  Lord  Hardinge. 


110         CORRESPONDENCE  WTTTI  ELLENBOBOUGH.  cmr.  vm. 

I  more  desire  than  that  he  should  continue  to  give 
satisfaction  to  you.  The  employment  you  are  giving 
him  will  be  of  immense  use  to  him. 

'  He  writes  to  me  in  the  strongest  terms  of  your 
kindness  and  of  his  devotion  to  your  service. 

1 1  have  been  prevented  by  a  continued  absence  from 
London  from  obtaining  some  information  which  I  have 
sought  for  on  the  subject  of  the  present  system  of 
control  and  check  upon  the  current  public  expenditure 
in  India.  The  defect  of  the  system  which  you  advert 
to  lies,  I  have  no  doubt,  in  the  want  of  a  systematic 
supervision  of  the  public  outgoings  in  their  earliest 
stages,  whereby  the  mischief  of  a  lax  administration  by 
the  financial  authorities,  or  a  reckless  profusion  by  civil 
or  military  servants  who  spend  the  public  money,  may 
be  nipped  in  the  bud.  The  ultimate  examination  or 
audit  of  the  public  accounts  is  not  sufficient  for  that 
object.  It  comes  too  late  for  prevention  and  generally 
in  such  a  shape  that  the  highest  authority  cannot  easily 
sift  the  mass  of  payments  made  with  a  view  to  general 
correction  and  improvement.  In  this  country  there 
has  long  (I  think  from  the  time  of  Godolphin)  existed 
a  department  for  advising  the  Treasury  upon  all  extra- 
ordinary military  expenditure  if  possible  before  it  is 
incurred,  and  when  the  nature  of  the  service  will  not 
admit  of  that,  then  as  soon  after  the  payments  made  as 
information  of  the  accounts  rendered  will  admit  of.  .  . 
This  has  no  doubt  prevented  a  good  deal  of  wasteful 
expenditure  by  Governors  and  military  officers  abroad, 
and  Commissaries  on  foreign  service.  These  Comp- 
trollers of  Army  Accounts  were  until  lately  a  separate 


CH.  vni.     PRESIDENT  OF  THE  BOARD   OF  TRADE.  Ill 

Board.  The  office  is  now  merged  in  the  Auditors  of 
Public  Accounts — one  of  whom  is  especially  assigned 
to  this  service — that  is,  of  advising  the  Treasury  upon 
proposed  incipient  expenditure.  I  know  not  if  you 
have  any  corresponding  check  in  India.  I  should 
think  it  would  be  even  more  useful  there  than  at 
home. 

'  Sir  R.  Peel  is,  no  doubt,  quite  right  in  postponing 
to  a  future  session  any  general  explanations  of  Indian 
finance.  It  is  highly  desirable  on  every  account  to 
avoid  at  this  time  discussions  upon  that  point  and  upon 
Indian  policy  in  general.  An  Indian  Budget  and 
Indian  debates  will,  I  hope,  be  ushered  in  under  more 
favourable  auspices  when  you  have  been  a  twelvemonth 
at  the  head  of  the  Indian  Government. 

'  We  have  just  learned  by  telegraph  the  arrival  of 
the  mail  of  June  1 ....  In  the  meantime  I  wish  you 
heartily  joy  of  the  progress  already  made  towards  the 
restoration  of  the  credit  of  our  arms  in  Afghanistan. 

Yours'&c'  <J.  C.  HEKHIES.' 

In  1830,  Mr.  Yesey  Fitzgerald,  having  been  com- 
pelled by  severe  illness  to  retire,  was  succeeded  in  the 
office  of  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  by  Mr.  Herries, 
who  continued  to  hold  together  with  it  that  of  Master 
of  the  Mint. 

During  his  tenure  of  office  at  the  Board  of  Trade  he 
had  the  satisfaction  of  contributing  by  active  co-opera- 
tion to  the  settlement  of  the  long-vexed  question  of  the 
commercial  intercourse  between  the  British  West  India 
Islands  and  the  United  States.  After  much  amicable 


112     SETTLEMENT  OF  DISPUTE  WITH  AMERICA.    CH.  vm. 

negotiation 6  between  the  British  Government  and  Mr. 
MacLane,  the  American  Minister — who  renewed  the 
discussions  which  had  been  carried  on  at  intervals 
during  many  years — the  dispute,  injurious  to  both 
parties,  was  terminated  by  the  removal  of  retaliatory 
restrictions  on  both  sides,  and  the  direct  trade  was  at 
last  opened  to  British  and  American  vessels  on  a  foot- 
ing of  equality  by  the  repeal,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the 
American  Acts  of  Congress  of  which  Great  Britain  com- 
plained, and,  on  the  other,  of  the  British  Orders  in 
Council  which  were  objected  to  by  the  United  States. 

This  arrangement,  which  appears  from  the  Duke  of 
Wellington's  correspondence  to  have  been  very  re- 
luctantly assented  to  by  him,  was  facilitated  by*  a 
considerable  diminution  of  the  import  duties  charged 
in  the  United  States  on  several  articles  of  British 
Colonial  produce. 

At  the  same  time  a  measure  was  proposed  to 
Parliament  the  object  of  which  was  to  give,  in  accord- 
ance with  then  generally  prevalent  ideas,  protection 
and  encouragement  to  the  trade  of  the  North  American 
Colonies  with  the  West  Indies  by  means  of  a  new  scale 
of  discriminating  duties  in  favour  of  certain  articles 
imported  from  the  former  colonies  into  the  latter. 

In  submitting  it  to  the  House  of  Commons  on 
November  8,  1830,  a  few  days  before  the  adverse  vote 
which  overthrew  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  Cabinet, 
Mr.  Herries  said  :  '  I  have  the  gratification  of  being 

6  We  believe  that  we  should  be  justified  in  saying  that  the  conduct  of 
this  negotiation  devolved  chiefly  upon  Mr.  Herries,  and  that  he  deserves  the 
credit  of  having  brought  it  to  a  successful  issue. 


CH.vm.  MR.  HERKIES'S  SPEECH.  113 

able  to  state  that  a  topic  of  discussion  between  two 
nations,  which  has  occupied  the  longest  time  and  was 
of  the  most  intricate  character  of  any  within  memory, 
and  which  has  been  subject  to  many  varieties  of  pre- 
tension on  both  sides,  has  now  been  amicably,  and  I 
trust  for  ever,  terminated  to  the  satisfaction  of  both 
parties.  ...  We  have  only  to  regret  that  the  United 
States  having  at  length  adopted  and  accepted  these 
terms,  they  had  not  done  so  at  an  earlier  period.  That 
country  has,  however,  now  subscribed  to  them  fully 
and  unconditionally,  and  I  am  bound  to  state — in  fact 
I  should  not  be  doing  justice  to  the  American  Govern- 
ment were  I  not  to  do  so — that  it  is  impossible  for  any 
Government  to  have  conducted  a  negotiation  involving 
such  important  interests  in  a  more  friendly,  civil,  con- 
ciliatory, straightforward,  and  therefore,  I  should  say, 
in  a  more  wise  and  prudent  manner  than  that  pursued 
by  the  United  States.  It  would  not  become  me  to 
express  any  strong  opinion  on  a  foreign  Government, 
did  circumstances  not  render  it  indispensably  necessary; 
but  having  adverted  to  the  many  infructuous  attempts 
to  settle  this  subject,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  I  believe 
on  this  occasion  neither  party  has  had  the  slightest 
reason  to  utter  a  complaint  against  the  other  on  its 
final  adjustment,  but  that  every  real  ground  of  satis- 
faction and  confidence  has  been  acted  on.  ... 

*  The  American  Government  have  repealed  those  Acts 
which  contained  the  obnoxious  proposals.  .  .  .  and  lest 
any  ambiguity  should  arise,  the  most  distinct  explana- 
tions have  been  required  on  the  one  side  and  given  on 
the  other.  His  Majesty's  Government  have  adopted  this 

VOL.  II.  I 


114  WORK   IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS.         CH.  vrn. 

course  in  order  to  remove  the  possibility  of  any  after- 
claps,  which  I  am  sorry  to  say  we  have  frequently  had 
occasion  to  regret  as  arising  out  of  treaties  in  the  drawing 
up  of  which  the  closest  eye  had  perhaps  not  been  used.1 7 

In  the  following  year  the  measure  proposed  was 
taken  up  again  and  carried,  with  some  alterations  in 
the  scale  of  duties,  by  Lord  Grey's  Government.  Mr. 
Poulett  Thomson,  who,  as  Yice-President  of  the  Board  of 
Trade,  had  charge  of  the  Bill  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
while  endeavouring  to  prove  that  his  tariff  was  better 
than  that  of  Mr.  Herries,  distinctly  recognized  the  pro- 
priety— or  necessity — of  affording  to  the  trade  of  the 
Northern  Colonies  the  protection  of  discriminating  duties, 
one  of  the  alleged  improvements  of  this  new  scheme  being 
indeed  a  temporary  increase  of  the  protection  so  given. 

Lord  Palmerston  was  pleased  to  remark,  in  one  of 
his  letters  preserved  for  the  benefit  of  posterity,  that 
'  Herries  is  entirely  mute,'  but  this  observation,  like 
many  others  left  on  record  by  Lord  Palmerston,  had 
the  defect  of  being  untrue.  A  simple  reference  to  the 
'  Mirror  of  Parliament '  or  to  '  Hansard '  shows  that  in 
the  Sessions  of  1828,  1829,  and  1830,  Mr.  Herries  took 
at  least  his  fair  share  of  the  business  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  He  spoke  not  unfrequently,  and  on  various 
subjects — on  one  occasion  indeed  in  answer  to  a  motion 
made  by  Lord  Palmerston  himself  on  the  affairs  of 
Portugal — but  chiefly  on  those  with  which  he  was  most 
perfectly  acquainted.  We  may  cite  particularly  a  speech 

7  The  italics  are  ours.  Later  Governments,  too,  have  had  occasion  to 
regret  after-claps  arising  out  of  treaties  '  less  accurate '  than  they  ought  to 
have  been. 


CH.  vin.  THE  CURRENCY  QUESTION,  115 

on  the  currency  question  (a  matter  of  more  importance 
to  the  English  people  than  the  constitution  of  Portugal 
and  the  tyranny  of  Dom  Miguel)  in  opposition  to  a 
motion  made  by  Mr.  Attwood  for  the  adoption  of  a 
double  standard  by  making  gold  and  silver  coins  a 
legal  tender  in  the  relative  proportions  established  in 
1717,  and  for  the  re-introduction  of  small  notes. 

In  the  course  of  the  debate,  Mr.  Huskisson  said  :  '  I 
am  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  answer  that  my  Right 
Honourable  friend  (Mr.  Herries)  made  to  this  branch  of 
the  subject ;  and,  I  will  add,  a  more  able  or  argumenta- 
tive speech  of  the  kind  I  never  heard.'  And  Sir  Robert 
Peel,  commenting  upon  what  Mr.  Attwood  had  called 
his  '  practical  measure,'  remarked  that  '  it  would  be 
almost  waste  of  time  to  endeavour  to  show  the  absurdity 
of  it,  after  the  able  and  eloquent  speech  of  my  Right 
Honourable  friend  near  me.' 

The  Wellington  Cabinet,  which  was  destroyed  by 
the  ricochet  of  a  French  revolution,  and  by  the  impolitic 
junction  of  advanced  Tories  with  advanced  Liberals, 
was,  as  well  as  its  predecessor  the  Liverpool  Ministry, 
held  up  to  obloquy  by  the  party  in  the  ascendant  in 
times  of  popular  effervescence  when  defenders  of  bygone 
Tory  Governments  had  no  better  chance  of  fair  hearing 
than  a  Papist  denounced  by  Titus  Gates,  or  a  British 
Ambassador  accused  of  Turkophilism  at  a  Bulgarian 
atrocity  meeting.  The  prejudice  created  fifty  years  ago 
by  those  who  had  possession  of  the  public  ear  has  never 
since  been  entirely  removed,  and  even  now  any  mob- 
orator  or  pamphleteer  can  easily  find  ignorant  listeners 
or  readers  ready  to  take  upon  trust  his  declamations 

i  2 


1 1 0  TORY  AND   LIBERAL  FINANCE.  en.  YIII. 

against  what  he  may  please  to  call  Tory  misrule  before 
the  days  of  reform.  But  in  one — and  that  the  most 
important — branch  of  administration  it  can  without 
much  difficulty  be  demonstrated  that  Tory  management 
was  far  more  advantageous  to  the  nation  than  that  of 
the  Liberals. 

Let  the  rollers  at  the  old  Tory  system  place  side  by 
side  the  financial  results  of  its  three  last  years,  1828, 
1829,  1830,  and  those  of  the  three  last  years  of  the 
ensuing  Reform  Governments,  1839,  1840,  1841.  In 
the  former  triennial  period  they  will  find  immense  and 
most  beneficial  reductions  of  taxation  terminating  in  a 
very  large  surplus  (nearly  three  millions)  bequeathed  to 
the  incoming  Whigs,  in  whose  unskilful  hands  it  was 
immediately  transmuted  into  a  heavy  deficit ;  in  the 
latter,  a  growing  excess  of  expenditure  culminating  in 
enormous  and  dangerous  deficiency  left  to  be  dealt  with 
by  a  Conservative  Government. 

Or  let  the  declaimers  calculate  how  much  lighter  our 
burdens  would  now  be  than  they  are,  if  the  diminution 
of  the  charge  of  the  funded  and  unfunded  debt  had 
continued  at  the  same  rate  as  during  the  three  years  of 
the  Wellington  Administration — due  allowance  being 
made  for  subsequent  additions  of  debt,  and  likewise 
for  the  relief  derived  from  the  simple  expiration  of 
annuities.  In  those  years  it  amounted  to  785, 875/.,  if 
actual  payments  be  taken,  or  to  1,081,615£.,  if  the 
terminable  and  life  annuities  be  converted  into  equiva- 
lent permanent  annuities  according  to  Mr.  Finlaison's 
computation  (Parliamentary  Paper,  1831). 

Another   comparison   may  be   made.     In   the  last 


en.  viii. 


RESULTS  COMPARED. 


117 


eight  Tory  pre- Reform  years,  1823-1830,  without  any 
deficit,  the  total  real  surplus  (local  advances  and  re- 
payments, as  well  as  the  sums  received  from  and  paid  to 
the  Bank  under  the  '  Dead  Weight '  arrangement,  being 
eliminated  from  the  accounts)  which  was  applicable  to 
the  redemption  of  debt,  amounted  to  22,242, 231/.,8  while 
the  aggregate  net  surplus  (after  deduction  of  the  defi- 
ciencies of  nine  years)  of  the  next  twenty  years,  1831— 
1850,  was  only  8,986,698/. 

This  is  not  all.  The  net  remission  of  taxation  in 
these  eight  Tory  years  exceeded  qy  nearly  37  per  cent, 
that  which  was  effected  in  the  twenty  Liberal  and  Peelian 
years;  the  totals  being,  respectively,  14,509, 239/.,  and 
10,598,761/.9  The  annual  rate  of  such  remission  was, 
in  the  first  period,  1,811,746/.,  and  in  the  second, 
529,938/.  The  yearly  excess  on  the  Tory  side  was 
therefore  no  less  than  1,283,716/.  To  make  the  com- 
parison complete,  let  the  results  above  stated  be  put 
together  thus  : 


Surplus       .... 
Net  Remission  of  Taxation  . 

Eight  Tory  Years 

Twenty  Liberal,  &c. 
Years 

22,242,231 
14,509,239 

8,986,698 
10,598,761 

Total     .... 

36,751,470 

19,585,459 

Tory  Excess  . 

17,166,011 

The  annual  average  was,  for  the  eight  years,  4,593,933/., 
and,  for  the  twenty  years,  979,272/. 

8  For  reasons  which  would  require  too  long  an  explanation,  we  believe 
that  we  have  understated  this  surplus  by  more  than  a  million. 

9  These  results  have  been  obtained  from  a  table,  the  correctness  of  which 
may  be  assumed,  in  Mr.  Giffen's  Essay  on  the  Reduction  of  the  National  Debt. 


118  TORY  SUPERIORITY.  CH.  vrn. 

It  must  be  remembered  that,  although  in  the  first 
period  there  were  some  years  of  plenty  and  prosperity 
advancing  by  leaps  and  bounds  until  reckless  speculation 
leapt  and  bounded  into  an  abyss  of  bankruptcy,  they 
were  followed  by  others  of  deep  depression  and  dire 
distress,  agricultural,  manufacturing,  and  commercial. 

In  order  to  remove  the  least  suspicion  of  unfairness, 
let  the  most  lauded  portion  of  the  twenty  years  above 
mentioned — namely  the  five  years,  1842-1846  of  the 
Peelian  system — be  set  against  five  years,  1823-1827,  of 
the  pre- Reform  system.  It  will  be  found  that  the  net 
surplus  of  the  former  quinquennial  period — 7,483,8 15/. 
— was  little  more  than  half  of  that  of  the  latter — 
14,263,601 — while  the  gross  amount  of  taxes  taken  off 
in  the  five  years  1842-1846,  being  8,145,628^.,  feU  far 
short  of  the  net  reduction  represented  by  10,934,847^., 
in  the  five  years  1823-1827. 

This  may  be  added.  In  the  ten  years  1821-1830, 
the  Tories,  with  an  unreformed  Parliament,  diminished 
taxation  to  the  extent  of  17, 107,00 7l.1  In  the  thirty-six 
years  following,  successive  administrations  took  off 
only  25,940,994/.,  including  the  taxes  imposed  for  the 
Crimean  War. 

In  the  face  of  all  these  facts  it  seems  difficult  to 
sustain  the  doctrine  propounded  by  Liberal  orators,  as 
an  article  of  faith  not  to  be  questioned,  that  bad  finance 
is  the  necessary  concomitant  of  Tory  government,  while 
the  progress  of  the  redemption  of  debt  and  of  the  reduc- 
tion of  taxation  is  always  in  direct  ratio  to  the  increase 
of  democratic  influence. 

1  14,747,442/.  (net)  had  been  previously  remitted  since  the  Peace. 


CH.  ix.  TOEIES  IN  OPPOSITION.  119 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Tories  in  opposition — Herries's  activity — Praed — :Government  influence  at 
Harwich  defied — Theory  of  Treasury  ownership — Scurrility  of  Liberal 
press — Reform — Timber  duties:  defeat  of  the  Ministry — Russian-Dutch 
loan :  historical  view ;  Herries's  action — Duke  of  Wellington's  attempt 
to  form  a  Cabinet—Helpless  condition  of  Conservative  party — Croker 
and  the  '  Quarterly  Review  ' — Reformed  Parliament — Herries  in  Peel 
Cabinet — Goes  to  Italy— Parliamentary  business — Metropolitan  improve- 
ments— Stockdale  and  Hansard  —  Defeat  of  Melbourne  Ministry  on 
Herries's  motion — His  intervention  with  a  Conservative  journal  in  favour 
of  Palmerston's  policy  solicited — Debates  on  the  Budget  of  18-il — II  us- 
kissou's  commercial  policy  elucidated. 

DURING  the  dark  period  of  the  fortunes  of  the  Tory 
party,  reviled  and  proscribed  after  the  transfer  of  power 
to  the  Whigs,  no  one  was  more  active  for  its  interests 
in  various  ways  than  Mr.  Herries,  whose  exertions, 
which  sometimes  brought  upon  himself  heavy  pecuniary 
loss,  were  not  a  little  useful  in  holding  the  party  to- 
gether at  times  when  it  seemed  likely  to  go  to  pieces. 
His  house  was  often  resorted  to  for  the  discussion  of 
plans  and  arrangements.  He  was  one  of  the  originators 
of  the  Carlton  Club,  the  feeble  precursor  of  which  was 
a  place  of  meeting  for  party  purposes  established  to 
a  great  extent  under  his  auspices  in  Charles  Street, 
St.  James's  Square,  and  an  object  of  much  derision 
to  enemies,  who  in  their  urbane  style  designated  its 
habitual  frequenters  as  '  the  Charles  Street  gang.' 
Bearing  no  malice  to  the  angry  Tories  by  whose  unwise 


120  IIEIOUES'S  ACTIVITY.  en.  ix. 

coalition  with  its  Liberal  assailants  the  Cabinet  to 
which  he  had  belonged  had  been  turned  out  of  office, 
he  busied  himself  hi  endeavouring  to  heal  still  rankling 
animosities  and  effect  a  reconciliation  between  the  se- 
ceders  and  the  leaders  of  the  party.  As  a  means  of 
bringing  them  together  again,  and  as  a  manifestation 
of  renewed  concord,  it  was  proposed  in  the  summer 
of  1831  that  the  *  Friends  of  the  Constitution '  should 
meet  at  a  political  banquet.  There  is  in  Mr.  Herries's 
writing  a  rough  draft  of  a  paper  for  circulation  on 
this  subject  with  a  list  of  '  noblemen  and  gentlemen 
connected  with  the  landed,  commercial,  colonial,  and 
other  great  interests  of  the  Empire,'  to  be  requested 
to  act  as  stewards.  To  this  suggestion  the  Duke  of 
Wellington 1  returned  a  favourable  reply. 

'  Walmer  Castle :  June  2, 1831. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — I  have  received  your  letter  of 
yesterday,  and  I  am  very  sorry  that  I  shall  not  have 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  here. 

'  I  don't  see  any  objection  to  the  proposed  dinner. 
Indeed,  I  conceive  that  such  a  meeting  would  have  the 
effect  of  reviving  the  drooping  spirits  of  the  gentlemen 
of  the  country,  if  it  should  be  well  attended.  But  we 
must  assume  a  good  title,  and  must  have  good  names 
as  managers  in  order  to  be  certain  of  being  well  at- 
tended. 

'  We  ought  to  rest  our  pretensions  to  the  confidence 
of  the  publick  on  our  desire  to  protect  and  preserve 

1  Several  letters  on  a  variety  of  subjects  from  the  Duke,  who  was  very 
cordial  towards  Mr.  Herries  and  often  consulted  him  during  many  years,  are 
preserved. 


OH.  ix.  CORRESPONDENCE.  121 

property  and  all  the  great  establishments  and  interests 
of  the  country,  rather  than  especially  on  our  opposition 
to  the  Bill,  or  on  the  opinions  of  all  or  any  of  us  upon 
Reform. 

1  Then  for  managers,  &c.,  we  ought  to  have  moderate 
Reformers,  great  bankers  and  merchants  [they  were 
strongly  represented  on  Mr.  Herries's  list]  as  well  as 
noblemen  and  gentlemen.  Believe  me  ever  yours  most 

sincerely, 

'  WELLINGTON. 

'  I  understand  that  you  are  going  down  to  Sir  Robert 
Peel's,  and  you  had  better  speak  to  him  on  this  subject.' 

Sir  Robert's  answer,  in  a  letter  of  the  same  date, 
humorously  pointing  out  all  the  possible  inconveniences 
of  the  plan,  was  discouraging.  A  few  days  later  he  wrote 
again  :  1 1  am  sorry  that  the  dinner  is  still  in  agitation. 
The  object,  I  presume,  is  a  formal  party  union  with  the 
ultra- Tories.  This  may  be  right  or  it  may  be  wrong  ; 
but  at  any  rate  it  is  a  matter  that  requires  in  my 
opinion  more  consideration  than  the  acceptance  of  a 
mere  dinner  engagement  would  render  necessary  ;  and  so 
far  as  the  dining  implies  a  new  party  connection  it  is  a 
point  on  which  everyone  must  be  at  liberty  to  decide 
for  himself.  I  shall  most  certainly  claim  that  privilege 
for  myself  individually.  .  .  .' 

Mr.  Herries  had  a  strong  sense  of  the  necessity,  not 
sufficiently  felt  by  others,  of  recruiting  his  party  with 
young  men  of  ability,  and  was  always  anxious  that 
every  encouragement  should  be  given  to  rising  talent ; 
but  he  found  little  or  no  disposition  to  second  his  views, 


122  W.   M.  PRAED.  CH.  ix. 

and  he  often  lamented  the  disheartening  tone  of  slight 
or  indifference  which  chilled  enthusiasm  and  depressed 
energy,  if  it  did  not,  as  was  sometimes  the  case,  convert 
an  adherent  into  an  enemy.  One  of  those  whom  he  was 
eager  to  assist  in  bringing  forward  in  political  life  was 
Winthrop  Mack  worth  Praed,  a  convert  from  the  early 
errors  of  an  undergraduate,  whose  loyal  character,  as 
well  as  poetical  genius,  he  greatly  admired.  The 
following  letter  shows  that  Praed,  returned  in  December 
1830  for  the  Tory  nomination  borough  of  St.  Germains, 
a  few  weeks  later  than  the  election  of  his  Cambridge 
contemporary  Macaulay  for  the  Whig  nomination 
borough  of  Calne,  owed  his  entrance  into  Parliament 
in  great  measure  to  the  exertions  of  Mr.  Herries,  who 
never  had  any  borough  interest  of  his  own.  l  You 
have  heard  that  I  am  at  last  in  the  situation  to  which 
your  kindness  more  than  anything  else  has  contributed 
to  raise  me.  I  am  now  about  to  return  to  town  with 
my  new  duties  ;  and  I  cannot  set  out  without  bespeak- 
ing for  myself  a  continuance  of  your  goodwill.  Until 
you  first  honoured  me  by  your  notice,  I  never  dreamed 
of  being  where  I  am ;  and  if  I  feel  a  little  giddy 
occasionally  at  my  unlooked-for  elevation,  I  trust  the 
same  hand  that  lifted  me  up  will  be  held  out  to  keep 
me  steady. 

'  I  have  another  inducement,  however,  to  make  me 
venture  upon  writing  to  you.  1  know  that  I  am 
wretchedly  awkward  at  expressing  by  word  of  mouth 
my  sense  of  personal  obligation.  And  therefore  I  am 
anxious,  before  I  meet  you  again,  to  assure  you  that  I 
am  very  grateful  for  all  you  have  done  for  me,  and 


OH.  ix.  FRIENDSHIP  FOR  BERRIES.  123 

that  my  old  longings  after  distinction  become  doubly 
eager  from  the  desire  I  feel  to  show  myself  not  quite 
unworthy  of  your  good  word. 

'  I  have  always  told  my  friends,  and  I  have  said  as 
much  to  you,  that  I  have  been  an  overrated  man,  and 
that  my  services  are  likely  to  be  scarcely  worthy  the 
asking.  If  it  should  prove  so,  I  hope  people  will 
forget  that  you  ever  took  up  a  blockhead,  though  I 
shall  remember  it  myself  with  very  useless  gratitude. 
If  I  have  better  fortune  than  my  fears  prophesy,  I  shall 
indeed  hold  myself  your  debtor  for  the  larger  half  of 
whatever  success  may  be  my  lot  in  the  career  you  have 
opened  to  me.  .  .  .  About  the  13th  I  shall  be  settled 
in  the  Temple,  and  ready  to  work  hard  under  your 
auspices.  .  .  .' 

Subsequent  letters  show  how  earnestly  he  acted  up 
to  his  intentions,  and  how  ardently  he  devoted  himself 
to  the  cause  which  he  had  espoused.  But  instead  of 
being  welcomed  as  a  valuable  acquisition,  Praed  was 
received  with  repulsive  coldness  by  the  leader  of  the 
Conservative  Opposition  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
His  attachment  to  Mr.  Herries  was  never  loosened,  and 
he  continued  to  look  upon  him  as  his  best  friend  in  the 
political  world.  This  sentiment  is  strongly  expressed 
in  a  letter  in  which,  at  the  time  of  the  canvass  for  the 
General  Election  of  1832,  Praed  bitterly  complains  of  en- 
couragement indirectly  given  to  his  opponent  at  St.  Ives 
by  some  Tory  magnates,  and  ends  by  saying,  '  Pray  for- 
give this  long  scrawl.  I  am  furious,  as  you  see  ;  and  I 
shall  grow  cooler  now  that  I  have  poured  out  my  fury  for 
the  amusement  of  the  only  one  of  my  political  guides  to 


124  TREASURY  BOROUGH  THEORY.  en.  u. 

whom  I  feel  indebted  for  kindness,  or  in  whom  I  trust 
for  support.  Whether  chaired  into  Parliament  or 
cheated  out  of  it,  I  shall  always  be  yours,  &c.' 

Out  of  office  Mr.  Herries  successfully  resisted  during 
many  years  the  efforts  of  the  Liberal  Government  to 
eject  him  from  the  representation  of  Harwich,  opposing 
to  Ministerial  influence,  supposed  to  be  all-powerful 
there,  his  own  well-established  personal  influence.  The 
organs  of  the  Reform  Administration  propounded,  with 
a  crudeness  unsurpassed  by  the  most  inveterate  borough- 
monger,  the  theory  of  absolute  ownership  of  the  so- 
called  Treasury  boroughs  ;  and  the  holders  of  such  seats, 
elected  under  the  former  Government,  were  summoned, 
in  the  terroristic  style  of  the  period,  immediately  to  quit 
their  wrongful  occupancy.  The  more  obnoxious  of  the 
two  Tory  members  for  Harwich  in  particular  *  was 
assailed,  in  the  Whig  '  Morning  Chronicle '  especially, 
with  extraordinary  virulence.  A  libellous  attack  in  a 
letter  from  a  correspondent — real  or  pretended — called 
for  a  denial,  which  was  published  in  the  discourteous 
manner  too  common  half  a  century  ago,  of  a  specific 
allegation.  The  inadequacy  of  the  reparation  moved 
the  injured  person  to  address  to  the  editor,  Dr.  Black, 
personally  and  not  as  an  abstraction,  the  following 
dignified  and  decided  remonstrance  which  seems  to  have 
led  to  apologies  and  to  have  prevented  any  repetition  of 
the  offence. 

'  By  inserting  the  contradiction  which  appears  in 
your  paper  of  this  day,  to  the  only  substantive  assertion 
contained  in  the  letter  of  "  Interrogator,"  you  have  to  that 
extent  done  an  act  of  justice  to  me  ;  but  you  must  permit 


en.  rx.  NEWSPAPER  SCUTCPJLITY.  125 

me  to  state  that  I  think  you  have  failed  to  do  the  same 
justice  to  yourself  by  omitting  to  condemn  and  to 
repudiate  the  personal  scurrility  which  pervades  the 
letter  containing  that  assertion. 

'  I  write  to  you,  Sir,  under  a  belief  impressed  upon 
me  by  assurances  from  some  persons  acquainted  with 
you  that  I  am  addressing  a  gentleman  of  good  and 
honourable  feelings,  who  would  not,  without  disgust, 
see  personal  calumny  or  coarse  personal  vituperation  em- 
ployed in  the  prosecution  of  political  controversy,  and 
who  would  still  less  behold  with  approbation  such  dis- 
creditable means  resorted  to  bv  anonymous  assailants. 

'  I  judge,  from  the  manner  in  which  the  letter  in 
question  was  inserted  in  your  paper,  that  the  writer  of 
it  must  be  entitled  to  some  attention  from  you.  If  so  I 
have  a  right  to  request  you  to  inform  him  that  if  he 
will  put  any  question  to  me  hi  his  own  name  and  under 
that  fair  responsibility  which  he  will  then  incur,  he  will 
find  me  quite  ready  to  deal  with  his  communications  as 
may  become  them,  and  him,  and  me. 

*  But  as  there  must,  in  all  civilised  society,  be  some- 
where lodged  a  due  responsibility  for  every  insult 
offered  by  one  individual  to  another,  you  will,  I  think, 
admit  that  the  editor  of  a  newspaper  who  publishes 
anonymous  attacks  on  private  character  must  be  himself 
responsible  for  the  offence  if  he  refuses  to  disclose  the 
name  of  the  offender. 

'  I  assure  you,  Sir,  that  this  letter,  addressed  to  you 
under  the  impression  with  respect  to  yourself  which  I 
have  before  stated,  is  written  without  any  resentment, 
but  with  a  very  firm  determination  not  to  permit 


126        THE  GOVERNMENT  DEFIED  AT  HARWICH. 


en.  rx. 


personal  insult  to  be  thrown  upon  me  through  the 
medium  of  a  respectable  paper  such  as  yours  with 
impunity.  .  .  .' 

It  was  not  merely  in  newspapers  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  indefeasible  right  of  the  Treasury  to  the  repre- 
sentation of  certain  places  was  asserted.  In  the  House 
of  Commons  it  was  put  forward  in  the  most  unqualified 
manner,  and  by  the  most  advanced  Reformers.  Mr. 
Hume  complained  that  '  those  who  hold  what  are 
called  Treasury  boroughs  voted  against  Ministers  ; ' 
and  Mr.  O'Connell  said,  with  regard  to  the  same  ad- 
verse vote,  that  'it  is  seen  that  those  members  who 
form  this  Opposition  hold  their  seats  by  the  existence  of 
Treasury  boroughs  which  they  represent,  and  which 
boroughs  are  known  to  belong  to  the  Government. 
They  who  are  the  nominees  of  private  individuals 
usually  give  up  their  seats  when  their  opinions  differ 
from  those  of  their  patrons.  Not  so,  however,  in  the 
case  of  the  holders  of  the  Treasury  boroughs,  who  thus 
pursue  at  least  a  factious  line  of  conduct.' 

During  many  years,  the  utmost  exertions  were 
made  in  vain  by  the  combined  forces  of  the  Treasury, 
the  Admiralty,  and  the  Woods  and  Forests,  to  turn 
Mr.  Herries  out.  Ministerial  patronage  and  favours 
were,  with  hardly  any  attempt  at  decent  disguise, 
bestowed  for  votes.  The  Ministerial  screw  was  applied 
with  ruthless  severity  to  electors  directly  or  indirectly 
dependent  upon  the  Crown.  No  Tory  Duke  of  New- 
castle ever  showed  a  more  stern  determination  to  '  do 
what  he  pleased  with  his  own.'  All  was  of  no  avail. 
Falsehood,  slander,  promises,  rewards,  threats,  punish- 


en.  ix.  LIBERAL   AMENITIES.  127 

ment,  were  thrown  away.  The  enemy  could  not  be 
dislodged.  In  the  teeth  of  the  Whig  Government,  the 
limited  constituency  before,  and  the  enlarged  con- 
stituency after,  the  Reform  Act,  persisted  in  returning 
the  Tory  ex-Minister,  at  the  General  Elections  of  1831, 
in  the  white  heat  of  the  Reform  agitation,  when  popular 
intimidation,  aided  by  the  abuse  of  the  King's  name,  in 
most  places  overpowered  all  resistance  ;  of  1832,  when, 
in  the  delirium  of  Reform  triumph,  the  Opposition 
minority  was  reduced  to  a  lamentable  rump  ;  of  1837 
(at  the  election  of  1834  he  was  in  office),  when  the 
boundless  affection  of  the  nation  for  the  young  Queen 
was  turned,  with  indecent  disregard  of  constitutional 
principle,  to  the  account  of  the  waning — almost  ex- 
tinct— popularity  of  elderly  Whig  Ministers.  At  one 
of  these  elections  a  pleasant  little  surprise  was  prepared 
for  the  successful  Tory  candidate  at  Harwich  by  some 
of  the  Liberal  party,  exasperated  by  renewed  defeat.  As 
a  clear  manifestation  of  indignant  public  opinion,  a 
plan,  fortunately  detected  in  time,  was  formed  to  make 
a  salutary  example  of  him  by  means  of  a  noose  to  be 
thrown  by  dexterous  Liberal  hands  over  his  head  as  he 
passed  in  the  '  chairing '  procession  over  a  certain 
bridge  (we  are  not  acquainted  with  the  topography), 
whereby  he  would  be  deftly  hauled  out  of  the  chair, 
and  flung  into  the  river — a  process  which,  if  effectually 
completed,  as  intended,  would  necessarily  have  resulted 
in  the  instant  death  of  the  offending  Tory  member. 
Similar  methods  of  combating  erroneous  opinions  con- 
cerning the  electoral  franchise  and  the  distribution  of 
seats  were  not  unusual. 


128  PARLIAMENTARY   REFORM.  en.  rx. 

In  addressing  his  constituents  on  his  election  in 
1831,  Mr.  Herries  declared  that,  although  strongly 
opposed  to  the  measure  proposed  by  the  Government, 
he  was  not  absolutely  hostile  to  all  Parliamentary 
Reform.  This  was  true.  He  was  often  heard  to  express 
applause  of  Pitt's  early  endeavours  to  effect  the  reform 
of  '  the  rotten  part  of  the  Constitution  ; '  although  he 
also  thought  that  the  great  statesman  was  wise  in 
abandoning  Reform  when  it  became  the  watchword  of 
the  lovers  of  French  revolutionary  principles.  He  had 
no  particular  affection  for  Old  Sarum.  He  had  no 
great  admiration  of  exclusive  aristocratic  influence. 
But  what  he  above  all  things  dreaded  and  detested  was 
democratic  despotism  ;  and  if  he  was  mistaken  in 
thinking  that  '  the  Bill '  would  lead  to  its  establishment, 
soon  or  late,  he,  at  any  rate,  erred  in  very  good  com- 
pany. On  one  point  he  was  not  mistaken.  He  did 
not  share  in  the  belief  entertained  by  Lord  John  Russell 
and  Mr.  Secretary  Stanley  that  the  empirical  creation 
of  a  uniform  ten-pound  franchise,  resting  neither  on 
principle  nor  on  antiquity,  would  prove  the  final  settle- 
ment of  the  electoral  question. 

Although  he  did  not  frequently  address  the  House, 
Mr.  Herries  was  not  '  entirely  mute.'  On  some  occa- 
sions he  spoke  with  great  effect,  and  it  is  a  fact  that 
the  gravest  embarrassments  suffered  by  the  Government 
on  questions  not  relating  to  Reform  were  directly 
caused  by  his  intervention.  The  defeat  of  the  Cabinet, 
three  days  before  the  second  reading  of  the  Reform 
Bill  in  1831,  by  a  majority  of  forty -six  on  a  proposed 


CH.  ix.  TIMBER  DUTIES.  129 

alteration  of  the  timber  duties,  was  generally  attributed 
to  his  action,  although  the  formal  motion  for  the  post- 
ponement of  the  Ministerial  plan  was  in  reality  made 
by  Mr.  Attwood.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
had  previously  announced  his  intention  of  proposing  an 
increase  of  the  duty  on  Canadian  timber  for  Budget 
purposes.  On  March  18,  1831,  without  further  notice, 
he  took  a  new  departure,  and  suddenly  submitted  to 
the  House  quite  different  resolutions  for  the  reduction 
of  the  duty  on  Baltic  timber.  In  other  words,  he 
substituted  for  a  purely  revenue  question  the  entirely 
distinct  question  of  the  protection  to  be  afforded  to 
colonial  and  shipping  interests.  Mr.  Herries  opposed 
the  motion,  not  so  much  on  its  own  merits,  as  on  the 
ground  of  its  being  a  surprise  ('a  political  trick,'  he 
called  it),  contending  that,  without  time  for  deliberation, 
the  House  could  not  fairly  be  called  upon  to  decide 
upon  the  new  Ministerial  scheme.  It  was  in  fact  the 
sudden  change  of  front  that  he  objected  to — a  legitimate 
objection,  by  no  means  deserving  the  imputation  of 
factiousness  thrown  upon  it  by  the  Ministers  and  their 
supporters.2  It  was  asserted,  as  a  reproach  to  the 
members  of  the  former  Government — and  particularly 

2  As  might  have  been  expected  from  the  writer  of  a  history  the  prin- 
cipal object  of  which  seems  to  be  the  converse  of  that  of  Dr.  Johnson's 
Parliamentary  Reporting — '  that  the  Whigs  should  always  have  the  worst  of 
it ' — the  action  of  the  Opposition  on  this  occasion  is  unfairly  and  incorrectly 
represented  by  Mr  Spencer  Walpole,  as  the  passage  in  Hansard  referred  to 
by  himself  is  sufficient  to  show.  But  we  are  inclined  to  doubt  whether  he 
ever  looked  at  his  own  reference ;  and  for  this  reason.  Speaking  of  Lord 
Althorp's  change  of  plan,  he  says, '  This  concession,  however,  failed  to  satisfy 
the  Protectionists.'  This  phrase  is  copied  (not  quoted)  verbatim  et  literatim, 
without  the  alteration  of  a  comma,  from  an  equally  unfair  account  of  the 
game  debate,  in  Sir  Denis  Le  Marchant's  Memoir  of  Earl  Spencer. 

VOL.  II.  K 


130  TIMBER   DUTIES.  CH.  ix. 

to  Mr.  I  Terries — who  voted  against  Lord  A 1  thorp's 
motion,  that  they  had  intended,  if  they  had  remained 
in  office,  to  make  a  similar  proposal.  The  Attorney- 
General  even  declared  that  they  were  pledged  to  do  so. 
But  the  assertion  was  positively  denied  both  by  the 
President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  and  the  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  Adminis- 
tration. The  well-merited  check  which  the  Ministers 
met  with  might,  in  any  other  circumstances,  have 
proved  fatal  to  them ;  but  in  view  of  the  more  important 
question  of  Reform  which  they  had  in  hand,  they, 
perhaps  wisely,  made  up  their  minds  to  digest  their 
discomfiture.  But  it  is  evident  from  Lord  Grey's  pub- 
lished correspondence  with  the  King  that  '  the  unto- 
ward event,'  as  he  calls  the  vote  on  the  timber  duties 
in  one  letter,  was  considered  as  very  seriously  damaging 
to  the  Government.  The  feeling  of  their  supporters, 
however,  is  exhibited  in  an  article  of  the  '  Times '  of 
March  20,  which,  scouting  the  supposition  of  the  re- 
signation of  the  Cabinet,  says,  in  the  '  thorough '  style 
of  English  Reformers  of  the  day — a  style  not  very  far 
removed  from  the  a  la  lanterns  formula  of  French 
reformers  forty  years  before — '  Canada  is  a  respectable 
colony,  and  the  shipowners  are  a  respectable  body  ;  but 
the  British  nation  would  rather  see  the  Canadas  swept 
for  ever  from  the  map  of  the  Western  world,  with  all 
the  shipowners  dangling  from  its  red  and  yellow  pines, 
than  suffer  the  grand  measure  of  Parliamentary  regen- 
eration to  be  lost.' 

A  previous  article  in  the  same  paper  contains  some 
curious  observations,  which  might  not  be  inapplicable 


en.  ix.  RUSSIAN  DUTCH  LOAN.  131 

to  many  discussions  at  the  present  day.  '  It  cannot  be 
denied  that  the  tone  taken  by  some  of  the  friends  of  the 
measure  has  been  very  offensive,  and  we  may  perhaps 
be  allowed  to  take  this  opportunity  of  denouncing  that 
parrot  gabble  about  political  economy,  which  is  now  so 
common  in  and  out  of  Parliament.  A  person  attends 
a  few  lectures  of  some  pedant  :  he  gets  by  rote  a  few 
abstract  rules,  and  because  he  has  acquired  a  little 
knowledge,  just  a  degree  above  the  nursery,  he  sets  up 
for  a  statesman.  .  .  .  The  coxcombs  in  question  may 
waste  as  much  paper  as  they  please  in  scribbling,  but 
they  should  not  be  suffered  to  meddle  with  public 
affairs.  They  injure  every  cause  which  they  touch, 
and  render  contemptible  every  party  which  admits 
their  fellowship.  .  .  .' 

On  another,  and  a  far  more  important,  question 
relating  to  the  legality  of  the  continuance  of  payments 
on  account  of  what  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  Rus- 
sian-Dutch Loan,  the  Member  for  Harwich  gave  much 
trouble  to  the  Whig  Ministry. 

The  true  history  of  the  strange  engagement,  by 
which  the  people  of  this  country  have  been  saddled  for 
a  century  with  debts  of  the  Russian  Empire  to  Dutch 
bankers,  was  not  known  to  Parliament  either  at  the 
time  when  it  was  first  sanctioned,  or  sixteen  years 
afterwards  when  it  was  again  the  subject  of  discus- 
sion. It  has  been  to  a  great  extent  revealed  by  the 
publication  of  the  correspondence  of  Lord  Castlereagh, 
Lord  Liverpool,  and  the  Duke  of  Wellington ;  but 
some  obscure  points  connected  with  it  still  need  eluci- 
dation. 


132  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  en.  ix. 

In  the  year  17883  the  Empress  Catherine  contracted 
with,  or  through,  the  house  of  Hope  and  Co.  of  Amster- 
dam, a  loan  of  eighty  million  florins,  for  the  purpose,  as 
stated  by  Mr.  Alexander  Baring  (whose  authority  on 
such  a  subject  can  hardly  be  contested)  in  the  House  of 
Commons  on  July  12,  1832,  of  providing  the  means  of 
effecting  the  subjugation  of  Poland.  Mr.  Whitbread 
said  on  May  26,  1815,  that  the  loan  was  primarily 
intended  for  the  Turkish  war,  which  in  1791  nearly  led 
to  hostilities  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain.  The 
interest  due  having  for  some  years  been  left  unpaid, 
the  Russian  Government,  soon  after  the  re-establish- 
ment of  amicable  relations  with  this  country  in  1812, 
expressed  an  earnest  desire  that  Great  Britain  should 
assume  the  charge  of  this  debt.4  So  extravagant  a 
request  was  very  properly  refused  ;  but  in  February 
1814,5  'the  intended  aggrandizement  of  Holland  sug- 
gested a  new  occasion  on  which  Russia  hoped  to  relieve 
herself  of  this  incumbrance.'  When,  in  return  for  the 
sacrifices  made,  and  to  be  made,  by  England  for  ths 
common  cause,  Lord  Castlereagh  at  Troyes  asked  for 
an  engagement  on  the  part  of  the  Allies  that  they  would 
promote  the  attainment  of  certain  objects  deemed  most 
essential  to  her  interests — the  principal  point  insisted 
upon  being  the  union  of  the  Belgic  Provinces  with 
Holland — Austria  and  Prussia,  readily  recognizing  the 
justice  of  the  claim,  promptly  declared  their  acquiescence 
without  any  shabby  shuffling.  But  the  conduct  of 

3  The  date   is  taken   from  Fenn  on  the  Funds,   a  work  of  admitted 
authority. 

4  Castlereagh  Correspondence,  3rd  series,  vol.  i.  Letter  to  Lord  Clancarty. 

5  Ibid.  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Liverpool,  February  1814. 


en.  TX.  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  133 

Russia  was  different.  She  tried  to  drive  a  bargain,  and 
make  money  out  of  the  proposed  arrangement.  '  You 
will  observe/  wrote  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Clan- 
carty,  ;  Austria  is  quite  unqualified  in  her  stipulation  ; 
Prussia  not  less  so  in  substance.  .  .  .  Russia  alone  has 
held  back,  not  upon  any  objection,  but  from  a  desire 
to  make  conditions.  .  .  .  The  object  is  to  prevail  upon 
Great  Britain  and  Holland  to  take  upon  them  jointly  a 
debt  of  eighty  millions  of  florins  which  Russia  owes  in 
Holland.  .  .  .  And  why  pay  Russia  rather  than  Austria 
and  Prussia  ?  It  comes  as  a  condition  with  the  worse 
grace,  after  our  recent  gratuitous  concession  to  Den- 
mark, to  fulfil  a  Russian  engagement.' 

Their  sturdy  importunity  having  been  repelled,  the 
Russian  Government  accepted  the  Projet  de  Convention 
after  considerable  delays.  But  although  Lord  Castle- 
reagh negatived  the  demand,  he  unfortunately  did  not 
discourage  the  hope  that  the  resistance  of  the  British 
Ministry  might  be  overcome.  His  colleagues,  however, 
still  remaining  obdurate,  the  annexation  of  Belgium 
was  settled  in  principle  by  the  Treaty  of  Paris  of  May 
30,  1814,  without  the  desired  concession  which  was 
afterwards  untruly  asserted  to  have  been  the  condition 
sine  qua  non  of  the  Russian  assent. 

Between  two  and  three  months  later,  by  a  Con- 
vention with  the  Netherlands  signed  on  August  13, 
Great  Britain  agreed  to  restore  all  the  Dutch  Colonies 
fairly  conquered  by  British  valour  in  a  war  unjustly 
waged  against  her  by  Holland,  the  vassal  of  France, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Demerara, 
Essequibo,  and  Berbice,  ceded  to  Great  Britain,  in  con- 


134  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  en.  ix. 

sideration — so  it  was  said — of  an  engagement,  first,  to 
pay  to  Sweden  1,000,000/.  which  Holland  had  pre- 
viously been  held  liable  to  furnish;  secondly,  to  advance 
a  sum  of  2,000,000£.  for  the  defences  of  the  Low 
Countries  ;  and  thirdly,  '  to  bear  equally  with  Holland 
such  further  charges  as  might  be  agreed  upon  between 
the  high  contracting  parties  and  their  allies  towards  the 
final  and  satisfactory  settlement  of  the  Low  Countries 
in  union  with  Holland,  and  under  the  dominion  of  the 
House  of  Orange,  not  exceeding,  in  the  whole,  the  sum 
of  3,000,000/.  to  be  defrayed  by  Great  Britain.'  6 

This  last  prospective  engagement  had  evidently  in 
view  the  pressure  brought  to  bear  upon  Holland  by 
Russia.  But  it  was  an  engagement  to  Holland — not  to 
Russia — and  it  did  not  bind  this  country  to  be  a  party 
to  any  special  arrangement  between  the  two  States, 
although  we  were  obliged  to  assist  the  former  in  the 
payment  of  the  black  mail  likely  to  be  levied  upon  her. 
Russia,  however,  was  determined  to  drag  England  into 
the  transaction  she  was  bent  on  effecting  for  the  liquida- 
tion of  her  outstanding  debt ;  and  her  pertinacity  was 
rewarded  with  success. 

Nothing  can  be  more  completely  proved  than  the 

6  It  seems  worthy  of  notice  that  the  French  text  of  this  very  important 
article  is  much  more  complete  and  precise  than  the  English  version,  which 
ought  to  be,  but  which  is  not,  its  exact  equivalent.  Among  several  other 
variations,  there  is  a  manifest  difference  between  the  opening  words  of  the 
paragraph — '  A  supporter,  conjointement,  et  en  portion  egale  avec  la  Hottande 
.  .  .'  —and  their  intended  counterpart — '  To  bear  equally  with  Holland  .  .  .' 
The  word  conjointement  is  not  redundant.  It  has  a  distinct  signification. 
"Why,  then,  is  it  not  rendered  into  English  ? 

Instances  of  similar  divergence,  whether  arising  from  sheer  carelessness, 
from  iinguistical  deficiency,  or  from  any  other  cause,  are  too  common  in 
treaties  between  Great  Britain  and  other  countries. 


en.  ix.  HISTORICAL   REVIEW.  135 

repugnance  of  Lord  Liverpool  (and  presumably  also  of 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  Mr.  Vansittart)  to  the 
Russian  scheme,  which  in  his  own  name,  and  in  that  of 
his  colleagues  at  home,  he  opposed,  until  at  last  their 
hands  were  forced  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  and  perhaps 
also  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  In  his  letters  of 
October  28,  November  2,  December  22,  1814,  and 
January  6, 1815  (see  Yonge's  '  Life  of  Lord  Liverpool,' 
and '  Supplementary  Despatches  of  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton '),  the  Prime  Minister  repeatedly  and  most  earnestly 
exhorted  Lord  Castlereagh,  then  at  Vienna,  to  abstain 
from  any  engagement  with  Russia  as  to  the  Dutch  debt 
— a  matter  which  the  Cabinet  evidently  considered  as 
one  of  great  consequence.  It  seems  very  probable  that 
these  objections  were  alluded  to  in  a  despatch  from 
Lord  Castlereagh  dated  February  13,  1815,  a  selected 
extract  from  which  was  communicated  to  the  House  of 
Commons  in  1847  by  Lord  Palmerston.  All  that  the 
public  has  been  permitted  to  know  of  the  contents  of 
that  despatch  is  a  plea  for  the  policy  of  the  arrangement 
to  which  the  Cabinet  was — rjustly,  as  we  think— 
opposed.7 

After  his  return  to  London,  Lord  Castlereagh, 
convinced  of  the  utility,  or  necessity,  of  bribery,  suc- 
ceeded in  inducing  the  Cabinet  to  adopt  his  views  ;  and 

7  Mr.  Cooke,  Under-Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  who  was  with 
Lord  Castlereagh  at  Vienna,  took  the  same  view  of  the  matter  as  Lord 
Liverpool,  to  whom  he  wrote,  on  December  24,  1814 :  '  The  only  point  I 
really  fear  for  us  is  the  Dutch  Loan.  Is  it  not  capable  of  statement  so  as 
to  affect  our  honour  as  a  nation  after  Russian  conduct  and  our  protests 
against  it  ?  ...  I  think  the  subscribing  the  Polish  arrangement,  on  other 
matters  being  adjusted,  defensible,  but  adding  six  millions  as  a  bonus  very 
difficult  to  swallow.' —  Wellington  Supplementary  Despatches. 


HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  en.  ix. 

the  result  was  this  instruction,  sent  on  March  12,  1815, 
to  the  Duke  of  Wellington.8 

'  I  should  hope,  from  the  state  of  business  at  Vienna, 
that  your  Lordship  would  find  no  great  difficulty  .  .  . 
to  prevail  upon  the  Powers  to  sign  at  once  a  treaty 
placing,  by  an  early  ratification,  all  the  arrangements 
already  agreed  upon  9  out  of  the  reach  of  doubt.  .  .  . 
If  you  can  effect  this,  you  may  give  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  in  conjunction  with  the  Dutch  plenipotentiary, 
an  assurance  that  the  half  of  the  Dutch  loan,  under  the 
regulations  as  agreed  upon  [it  does  not  appear  what 
they  were,  or  when  the  agreement  was  come  to]  will  be 
defrayed  by  us  ;  it  being  understood  that  His  Imperial 
Majesty  will  act  in  concert  with  us  in  the  other  measures 
remaining  to  be  settled. 

'  I  suggest  a  written  assurance  to  remove  doubts.  .' 
The  giving  of  this  assurance  was  made  to  depend  upon 
two  conditions.  Therefore,  the  British  Government 
was  still  free  to  withhold  it.  The  Duke  of  Wellington, 
on  March  28,  communicated  to  Count  Nesselrode  offi- 
cially the  words  of  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch,  with 
the  unaccountable  omission  of  the  important  phrase 
relating  to  future  concert.  It  must  be  supposed,  how- 
ever, that  the  understanding  mentioned  by  Lord  Castle- 

8  See  Supplementary  Despatches  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  vol.  ix. 

9  They  were  those  relating  to  Poland,  Saxony,  the  reconstruction  of 
Prussia,  the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  Hanover,  besides  others  of  minor 
importance.     But  the  definitive  treaty  "which  confirmed  these  arrangements 
was  not,  in  fact,  signed  until  more  than  two  months  later.     Possibly  an 
equivalent  may  have  been  found  in  the  Treaty  of  Alliance  of  March  25  against 
Napoleon,  binding  the  contracting  parties  to  maintain  the  stipulations  arising 
out  of  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  which  had  been  determined  upon  (by  protocols) 
and  signed  at  the  Congress-  of  Vienna. 


CH.  ix.  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  137 

reagh  was  coine  to,  although  the  practical  value  of  the 
agreement  is  proved  by  the  decisive  evidence  of  Lord 
Clancarty,  first  British  plenipotentiary  at  the  Congress 
after  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  departure,  to  have  been 
nil.  '  How  the  subject  of  the  Dutch  loan,'  he  wrote 
to  Lord  Castlereagh  on  May  19,  1815,  '  has  reached 
Lord  Grey's  ears,  except  through  the  Kussian  Chancery, 
I  cannot  guess  ;  but  sure  I  am  that,  so  little  has  this 
Emperor  kept  faith  with  us,  in  aiding  us  in  the  con- 
cluding negotiations  here,  that  he  seems  to  me  to  have 
forfeited  all  claim  to  our  future  assistance.'  This 
remonstrance  came  too  late.  On  the  day  when  Lord 
Clancarty 's  letter  was  written,  the  object  which  the 
Russian  Government  had  at  heart  was  secured  by  a 
convention  signed  in  London  between  Russia,  the 
Netherlands,  and  Great  Britain,  by  which,  after  a  pre- 
amble setting  forth  that  the  King  of  the  Netherlands, 
being  desirous,  upon  the  final  re-union  of  the  Belgic 
Provinces  with  Holland,  to  render  to  the  Allied  Powers 
a  suitable  return  for  the  heavy  expense  incurred  by 
them  in  delivering  the  said  territories  from  the  power 
of  the  enemy  ;  and  the  said  Powers  having  agreed  to 
waive  their  pretensions  in  favour  of  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  .  .  .l  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  had  re- 
solved to  execute  with  His  Imperial  Majesty  a  conven- 
tion, to  which  His  Britannic  Majesty  had  agreed  '  to  be  a 

1  Of  the  Allied  Powers  mentioned,  the  one  who  had  principally  'in- 
curred heavy  expense  in  delivering,  &c.,'  was,  without  doubt,  England. 
Therefore,  if  the  averment  of  this  preamble  were  true,  it  would  result  that 
England  having  a  pretension  to  a  '  suitable  return '  from  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands,  waived  that  pretension  in  favour  of  Russia,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  agreed  with  the  Netherlands  to  pay  money  in  satisfaction  of  that  very 
pretension  so  assigned  by  herself.  A  singular  arrangement  truly  ! 


138  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  CH.  ix. 

party,  in  pursuance  of  engagements  taken  by  his  said 
Majesty,  with  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  in  a  con- 
vention signed  at  London  on  the  18th  day  of  August, 
1814,'  Great  Britain  and  the  Netherlands  agreed 
respectively  to  take  upon  themselves  a  portion- 
amounting  for  each  of  them  to  25,000,000  florins  (or, 
according  to  a  Parliamentary  Paper,2  2, 2  7 2, 7 2 11.) — of 
the  capital  and  arrears  of  interest  of  the  Russian  loan 
(raised  by  accumulated  arrears  from  80,000,000,  its 
original  amount,  to  100,000,000  florins),  with  an  annual 
interest  of  five  per  cent.,  besides  a  yearly  payment  for 
Sinking  Fund,  of  one  per  cent.,  which  was  liable  to 
be  increased  to  three  per  cent,  on  the  demand  of  the 
Russian  Government.3 

But  the  fifth  article  of  the  convention  contains  the 
important  proviso  that  all  these  obligations  shall 
'  cease  and  determine,  should  the  possession  and  sove- 
reignty (which  God  forbid)  of  the  Belgic  Provinces  at 
any  tune  pass  or  be  severed  from  the  dominions  of  His 
Majesty  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  previous  to  the 
complete  liquidation  of  the  same.'  Great  value  was 
attached  to  this  stipulation  by  the  British  Government. 
It  appears  from  a  letter  *  addressed  by  Lord  Castlereagh 
to  Count  Nesselrode,  announcing  the  conclusion  of  the 

2  Laid  before  the  House  of  Commons  in  1815.    In  a  later  return,  by  a 
different  calculation,  the  English  equivalent  of  25,000,000  florins  is  stated  as 
2,083,333J. 

3  It  does  not  appear  that  under  this  one-sided  convention  either  Great 
Britain  or  the  Netherlands  had  the  power  of  accelerating  the  redemption  of 
the  debt,  the  paying  off  of  which  at  once  would  obviously  have  been  advan- 
tageous to  this  country  at  least.    But  that  would  not  have  suited  the  views 
of  Russia,  whose  bidding  we  bound  ourselves  to  do. 

4  May  28,  1815.     Castlereayh  Corresjxmdence. 


en.  ix.  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  139 

convention,  that  Count  Lieven,  the  Russian  plenipoten- 
tiary, '  was  desirous  that  the  fifth  article  should  have 
been  confined  in  its  operation  to  the  part  of  the  debt 
falling  to  the  share  of  Holland ' — the  effect  of  such 
proposed  limitation  being  that,  in  the  event  of  the 
separation  of  Belgium,  Holland  would  be  relieved  from 
the  burthen  assumed  by  her  in  consideration  of  the 
annexation,  while  England  would  still  continue  to  be 
charged  with  the  share  she  took  for  the  sole  purpose 
(ostensibly  at  least)  of  diminishing  the  pressure  upon 
Holland.  And  this  most  absurd  result,  which  the  Tory 
Government  in  1815  were  determined  to  guard  against, 
was  actually  brought  about  through  the  complaisance 
of  Whig  Ministers  in  1832. 

'  But  this  change,'  observed  Lord  Castlereagh  in  his 
letter,  '  whilst  it  would  have  been  at  variance  with  all 
my  arguments,  as  employed  both  at  Vienna  and  since 
my  return,  to  reconcile  the  Government  to  the  measure, 
would  have  destroyed  my  whole  case  in  Parliament,  by 
enabling  my  opponents  to  describe  the  arrangement  as 
one  made  not  upon  the  principle  of  a  fair  equivalent 
with  Holland,  but  as  a  gratuitous  concession  to  Russia 
for  an  object  that  might  not  survive  the  present 
crisis.' 

By  an  additional  article  in  two  paragraphs,  which 
was  kept  secret  until  1832,  it  was  agreed,  first,  that 
in  the  event  of  a  part  of  the  Belgic  Provinces  being  at 
any  time  severed  from  the  dominions  of  His  Belgic 
Majesty,  a  proportionate  reduction  only  of  the  charge 
to  be  borne  by  the  Netherlands  and  Great  Britain  should 
take  place  ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  invasion  or  tempo- 


140  HISTORICAL   REVIEW.  en.  ix. 

rary  occupation  of  those  provinces  by  an  enemy  (words 
which  do  not  occur  in  the  first  paragraph)  should  not 
be  considered  as  determining  any  part  of  the  stipulated 
payments,  unless  continued  beyond  the  period  of  a  year 
— a  special  provision  obviously  made  for  the  eventuali- 
ties of  the  coming  campaign. 

Presented  to  a  puzzled  Parliament,  in  connection 
with  the  Netherlands  Colonial  Treaty,  and  the  Treaty 
with  Sweden  for  the  settlement  of  the  wonderful  affair 
of  Guadeloupe  (not  the  least  of  all  the  marvels  of 
British  diplomacy) — the  three  instruments  forming  to- 
gether a  bewildering  labyrinth  of  cessions,  retrocessions, 
cross  compensations,  and  unintelligible  transfers — this 
'  fantastical  and  incomprehensible  plan,7  as  it  was  well 
termed  by  Mr.  Baring  (speech  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
May  26,  1815),  received,  after  a  feeble  opposition,  the 
approval  of  the  Legislature.  And  so  it  came  to  pass 
that  the  British  nation,  taking  upon  itself  the  liquidation 
of  debts  for  funds  employed  in  the  extinction  of  the 
Polish  nationality,  became  an  accessory  after  the  fact  to 
that  political  crime. 

The  persistence  by  which  Russia,  after  many  rebuffs, 
attained  her  ends  in  this  business,  appears  at  first  sight 
strange.  In  the  case  of  Holland,  some  plausible  pretext 
could  be  found  for  her  demand,  and,  after  all,  the 
practical  effect  of  the  agreement  was  only  the  transfer  of 
a  loss  sustained  by  a  few  Dutch  capitalists  through 
Russian  insolvency  to  the  whole  body  of  the  Dutch 
taxpayers.  But  upon  England,  Russia  had  no  sort  of 
claim,  and  it  was  not  reasonable  that  English  taxpayers 
should  be  compelled  to  indemnify  Messrs.  Hope  and  Co. 


CH.  ix.  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  141 

Why,  it  may  be  asked,  did  not  the  Russian  Emperor, 
if  unsatisfied  with  the  lavish  assistance  furnished  by 
England,  simply  solicit  additional  subsidies  either  in 
money  or  in  stores  for  military  purposes,  instead  of 
pressing  for  aid  in  an  unusual,  and  a  most  objectionable 
form  ?  The  answer  must  be,  that  he  wanted  the  power 
of  borrowing ;  that  so  long  as  his  debts  remained  unpaid 
he  could  have  found  no  lenders ;  and  that  the  credit  of 
Great  Britain  afforded  a  much  better  security  than  that 
of  the  newly  created  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands.  The 
explanation  of  the  whole  of  this  affair  may,  perhaps,  be 
found  hi  the  fact  that  a  few  months  after  the  signature 
of  the  convention  of  May  19,  a  new  Russian  loan  was 
raised  at  Amsterdam.5 

However  vicious  in  principle,  however  onerous  in 
practice,  the  engagement  may  have  been,  and  whatever 
were  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  wrung  from  the 
British  Government,  once  taken,  the  honour  of  the 
nation  required  its  strict  fulfilment,  but  no  more.  To 
pay  the  uttermost  farthing  stipulated  in  the  contract 
was  a  positive  duty — to  pay  the  thousandth  part  of  a 
farthing  beyond  the  covenant  was  degrading  subservi- 
ency. The  terms  of  the  bond  were  precise.  The  Treaty, 
and  the  Act  of  Parliament  which  embodied  and  gave 
effect  to  it,  had  at  least  the  merit — very  rare  in  Acts  of 
Parliament,  and  still  more  so  in  treaties — of  accuracy 
and  clearness  of  expression  ;  so  that  nothing  was  re- 
quired for  their  interpretation  but  a  sufficient  knowledge 
of  the  English  tongue.  At  length  the  case  distinctly 
provided  for  in  both  instruments  did  arise.  '  The 

8  In  1815.     See  Fenn  on  the  Funds. 


142  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  CH.  ix. 

possession  and  sovereignty  of  the  Belgic  Provinces  '  did 
*  pass,'  and  were  *  severed  from  the  dominions  of  His 
Majesty  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  ; '  and  consequently 
the  time  arrived  when,  according  to  the  positive  words 
of  the  Treaty  and  the  law,  the  payments  were  to  '  cease 
and  determine/  Nevertheless  they  were  continued  by 
the  Government  of  which  Lord  Grey,  who  in  1815  had 
been  vehement  in  his  opposition  to  the  Treaty,  was  the 
head. 

From  a  very  tardy  communication  to  Parliament 
(in  1847)  it  appears  that  on  January  25,  1831,  a  memo- 
randum (''Notice  Confidentielle')  was  addressed  to  Lord 
Palmerston  by  the  Russian  plenipotentiaries  Prince 
Lieven  and  Count  Matuszewic  containing,  in  reply 
apparently  to  some  representation,  the  nature  of  which 
has  not  been  made  known,  an  elaborate  plea  for  the 
unimpaired  validity  of  the  claims  of  Russia  under  the* 
Convention  of  1815,  in  spite  of  the  actual  separation  of 
Belgium  from  Holland.  It  is  inconceivable  that  so 
important  a  document  should  have  received  no  answer 
from  the  British  Secretary  of  State  ;  but  none  has  ever 
been  made  public — a  reticence  on  the  part  of  the  Foreign 
Office,  which,  common  though  it  was  under  the  Palmers- 
ton  rule,  is  yet  to  be  lamented  for  the  sake  of  history, 
and  also  for  the  credit  of  British  diplomacy. 

The  principal  contention  of  the  Russian  plenipoten- 
tiaries was  that  the  proviso  contained  in  the  fifth 
article  of  the  convention  had  solely  in  view  the  possi- 
bility of  foreign  invasion  and  conquest,  and  was  there- 
fore not  applicable  to  the  case — never  contemplated,  as 
the  plenipotentiaries  asserted — of  a  separation  brought 


en.  rx.  HISTORICAL   REVIEW.  143 

about  by  internal  revolution — an  inference  drawn  from 
the  additional  article  which  in  one  place  speaks  of 
'  invasion  or  temporary  occupation  by  an  enemy.'  But 
if  acquiescence  had  not  been  thought  more  convenient 
than  refutation,  which  would  not  have  been  difficult, 
the  Foreign  Office  might  have  replied  that  the  words 
cited  occurred  only  in  the  second  paragraph,  which 
manifestly  had  in  view  a  danger  actually  imminent  at 
the  moment  when  the  convention  was  signed ;  and 
that  the  fact  of  their  not  being  used  either  in  the  first 
paragraph  of  the  additional  article,  or  in  the  fifth 
article  itself,  in  both  of  which  severance  was  spoken  of 
in  general  terms  without  any  specification  of  the  mode 
of  its  accomplishment,  led  reasonably  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  operation  of  the  fifth  article  was  not  meant  to 
be  limited  to  the  particular  case,  provided  for  by  the 
second  paragraph  of  the  additional  article,  of  invasion 
by  an  enemy.  It  might  have  been  added  that  the 
supposition  of  any  such  intended  limitation  was  an 
improbable  one,  because  what  was  important  to  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands — the  party  primarily  concerned, 
and  upon  whose  obligation  ours  depended — was  the  fact, 
not  the  manner,  of  the  separation  of  his  Belgic  Pro- 
vinces, his  acquisition  of  which  was  the  sole  ground  for 
his  assumption  of  a  portion  of  the  Russian  debt,  and 
the  loss  of  which,  from  whatever  cause  ensuing,  would 
leave  him  in  the  same  position  as  if  he  had  never 
possessed  them. 

On  November  16,  1831,  the  day  after  the  signature 
of  the  Treaty  for  the  separation  of  Belgium  from  Hol- 
land, a  new  convention  between  Great  Britain  and 


144  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  cw.  ix. 

Russia  relative  to  the  Dutch  loan  was  signed  in  London. 
In  its  preamble,  containing  several  averments,  the  truth 
of  which  never  was,  or  perhaps  could  have  been,  sub- 
stantiated, not  a  word  is  said  of  the  consideration  for 
which  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  bound  himself  by 
the  former  Convention  of  1815.  He  is  not  even  men- 
tioned as  having  been  a  party  to  that  convention,  which 
is  spoken  of  as  if  it  had  been  one  simply  between  the 
other  two  Powers.  Nor  is  there  any  allusion  to  the 
engagement  in  respect  of  the  ceded  Dutch  colonies, 
which  is  stated  in  the  preamble  of  the  Convention  of 
1815  to  have  been  the  reason  for  British  participation, 
and  which  must  indeed  be  deemed  to  have  been  the 
only  ground  for  it,  unless  that  engagement  is  to  be 
looked  upon  merely  as  a  colourable  pretence  put  forward 
to  give  the  whole  transaction  a  decent  appearance,  and 
veil  the  displeasing  nudity  of  an  agreement  to  throw 
some  of  the  unsatisfied  liabilities  of  a  defaulting  Czar 
upon  the  shoulders  of  the  British  people. 

The  King  of  the  Netherlands  being  dropped  out,  by 
the  new  convention  His  Britannic  Majesty  bound  him- 
self to  recommend  to  his  Parliament  to  enable  him  to 
undertake  to  continue  on  his  part  the  payments  stipu- 
lated in  the  former  one ;  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia, 
on  the  other  hand,  promised  that  if  the  arrangements 
agreed  upon  for  the  independence  and  neutrality  of 
Belgium  should  be  endangered,  he  would  not  contract 
any  other  engagement  without  a  previous  agreement 
with  His  Britannic  Majesty  and  his  formal  assent.  An 
entirely  new  departure  was  thus  taken.  The  first 
treaty  was  based  on  the  union  of  Belgium  and  Holland  ; 


CH.  ix.  HISTORICAL  REVIEW.  145 

the  second,  on  their  separation.  It  was  for  the  purpose 
of  effecting  l  the  final  and  satisfactory  settlement  of  the 
Low  Countries  in  union  with  Holland  and  under  the 
dominion  of  the  House  of  Orange  '  that  Great  Britain 
became  a  party  to  the  former  convention  :  it  was  in 
order  to  secure  the  independence  of  Belgium  and, 
therefore,  the  '  final  and  satisfactory  settlement  of  the 
Low  Countries,'  in  separation  from  Holland  and  not 
4  under  the  dominion  of  the  House  of  Orange,'  that 
Great  Britain  concluded  the  latter. 

This  agreement  amounted  in  effect  to  the  sale  of 
an  Imperial  policy.  For  a  valuable  consideration,  the 
proud  autocrat  Nicholas  alienated  his  eventual  right  of 
independent  action  in  an  European  question  of  the  first 
magnitude,  putting  himself  under  the  control  of  Henry 
John,  Viscount  Palmerston,  and  his  Lordship's  lawful 
successors  in  Downing  Street.  It  is,  however,  not  to 
be  believed  that  the  Emperor  would  have  entered  into 
so  humiliating  a  bargain,  if  he  had  been  convinced 
that  the  purchase  money  was  already  his  of  right — that 
he  was  entitled  to  claim  it  purely  and  simply  in  virtue 
of  a  pre-existing  contract.  The  convention  of  Novem- 
ber 1831  would  manifestly  not  have  been  signed,  unless 
the  Russian  Government  had  been  persuaded  that  the 
obligations  created  by  the  previous  convention  had 
4  ceased  and  determined.' 

We  now  come  to  a  further  step  in  the  process  of 
mystification.  On  the  meeting  of  Parliament  in  the 
following  month,  no  allusion  to  the  new  convention  or 
to  any  negotiations  relating  to  the  loan  was  made  in  the 
Speech  from  the  Throne,  although  it  announced  the 

VOL.  II.  L 


146  PROCEEDINGS  IN  PARLIAMENT.  en.  ix. 

conclusion  of  the  treaty  (likewise  unratified)  for  the 
separation  of  Belgium,  which  did  not,  as  the  former  in- 
strument did,  require  the  sanction  of  Parliament  for  its 
execution.  This  curiosity  of  constitutional  practice  in 
the  full  tide  of  the  Reform  agitation  seems  to  deserve 
notice.  Motions  for  papers,  &c.,  were  soon  made.  One 
of  these  by  Mr.  Herries  was  for  '  copies  or  extracts  of 
any  communications  between  his  Majesty's  Government 
and  the  Government  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands 
relating  to  the  payment  of  the  Russian  loan  in  Holland, 
after  the  separation,  &c.'  The  return  to  the  address 
was  a  very  short  one — Nil.  If  this  statement  had  not 
been  made  upon  the  responsibility  of  the  Secretary  of 
State,  it  would  appear  absolutely  incredible.  It  seems 
indeed  passing  strange  that  during  the  whole  of  the 
year  1831,  while  the  question  of  the  continued  operation 
of  the  Convention  of  1815  was  pending,  and  was  a  sub- 
ject of  discussion  between  the  Russian  and  British 
Governments,  the  Foreign  Office  should  have  been 
so  reticent,  or  so  little  curious,  as  never  to  have  en- 
deavoured to  ascertain  the  views  of  the  co-partner  of 
England  concerning  their  joint  engagement, — that  the 
Netherlands  Government  should  not  have  attempted  to 
elicit  the  opinion  of  the  British  Government, — and  that 
no  interchange  of  observations  on  this  important  mat- 
ter, in  which  they  were  equally  interested,  should  have 
taken  place.6 

6  Perhaps  the  terms  of  the  motion  were  not  sufficiently  comprehensive 
to  prevent  evasion  through  technical  subtleties.  Persons  who  are  not  ex- 
perts ought  always  to  avoid  the  use  of  the  word  '  communication  '  in  matters 
diplomatical,  because  by  diplomatic  persons  it  is  frequently  used  in  a  '  non- 
natural'  sense. 


CH.  ix.  MR.   HERRIES'S  MOTION. 

After  some  preliminary  discussions,  the  subject  was 
brought  formally  before  the  House  by  Mr.  Herries,  who, 
on  January  26,  1832,  moved  resolutions,  the  conclusion 
of  which  was — '  that  the  application  of  the  public 
money  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  any  payments  on  the 
part  of  Great  Britain,  on  account  of  the  Russian  loan  in 
Holland,  after  the  possession  and  sovereignty  of  the 
Belgic  provinces  had  passed  from  the  dominions  of  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands,  is  contrary  to  the  provisions 
of  the  Act  55  Geo.  III.  c.  115,  and  is  unwarranted  by 
any  authority  of  Parliament.'  Without  discussing  the 
very  questionable  wisdom  of  the  Convention  of  1815,  or 
the  possible  expediency  of  its  renewal  with  the  sanction 
of  Parliament,  he  rested  his  case  entirely  upon  the 
legal  and  constitutional  ground,  that  on  an  imaginative 
construction  of  a  treaty,  inconsistent  with  its  plain 
terms,  Ministers  could  not  be  justified  in  issuing  money 
to  a  foreign  power  in  direct  opposition  to  the  unam- 
biguous and  imperative  words  of  an  Act  of  Parliament 
prescribing  the  conditions  under  which  the  payments 
were  to  be  made.  In.  the  conclusion  of  his  speech  he 
said — '  I  have  not  treated  this  as  a  party  question  ;  I 
have  not  had  recourse  to  any  of  those  taunts  or  asperities 
which  too  frequently  are  admitted  into  statements  of 
this  nature,  both  on  one  side  and  on  the  other.  ...  I 
feel  that  the  subject  is  one  which  must  be  discussed 
entirely  by  itself ;  ...  for  it  must  be  treated,  not  with 
reference  to  any  party  views  or  sentiments,  but  with 
reference  to  the  authority  of  Parliament  and  the  con- 
stitutional privileges  of  this  House  with  regard  to  the 
distribution  of  the  public  money.  Honourable  gentle- 

L  2 


1 48  SPEECH. 


CH.   IX. 


men  who  sit  on  the  other  side  have  been  much  in  the 
habit,  particularly  for  some  time  past,  of  casting  reflec- 
tions in  the  way  of  comparison  upon  those  who  sit  near 
me,   with  respect  to  this  very  subject  of  the  jealous 
solicitude  with  which  we  should  regard  our  control  over 
the  public  expenditure.     We  have  been  accused — too 
frequently,  because  always  unjustly — of  great  laxity  on 
this  point  in  comparison  with  themselves.  ...  It  has 
been   attempted   to   be   shown   that   there   was  a  less 
anxious  solicitude  in  respect  of  public  economy  among 
the  members  who  now  sit  upon  these  benches,  than 
among  those  who  sit  upon  the  opposite  ones.     Now  I 
do  not  advert  to  that   endeavour  for  the  purpose  of 
reviving   past   discussions,  or  raising   fresh   animosity 
between  parties — but  I  advert  to  it  for  the  purpose  of 
impressing  upon  gentlemen  opposite  that  this  is  perhaps 
almost  the  only  opportunity  that  will  be  afforded  us  of 
establishing  a  test  by  which  to  judge  of  their  future 
operations.    ...    If  you  reject  my  motion  you  vote 
away   5,000,000/.    of    public   money.      His    Majesty's 
Ministers  have  already  voted  it  away ;  and  if  you  refuse 
to  second  me,  you  sanction  their  grant.     To  all  those 
who  are  of  opinion  that  this  principle  is  of  the  highest 
importance — that  all  directions  for  the  expenditure  of 
the  public  money  should  be  implicitly  obeyed  ;  to  all 
those   who   believe   that   the  assumption   of  the  least 
latitude  in  the  observance  of  that  high  constitutional 
principle  is  fraught  with  the  greatest  danger  to   the 
constitution   itself  and   the   liberty   of  the   subject,  I 
strongly  recommend  the  most  earnest  consideration  of 
this  question  and  motion  before  they  venture  to  vote 


CH.  ix.         WHIG  HIGH  PREROGATIVE  DOCTRINE.  149 

against  the  latter.  All  those  who  think  that  eventually 
it  might  be  right  to  concede  such  a  grant — but  who 
never  will  hear  of  its  being  conceded  without  Parliament 
being  first  consulted  and  its  opinion  being  expressed 
upon  it — I  reckon  upon  as  parties  who  will  vote  with 
me  ;  all  those  who  from  what  they  may  now  hear,  or 
from  their  knowledge  of  this  transaction  as  it  now 
stands,  are  inclined  to  be  convinced  that  we  ought  not 
at  all  events  to  make  such  a  grant  ;  and  that  we  are  so 
far  absolved  from  our  engagements  as  to  make  it  right 
that  we  should  save  this  sum  of  money  to  the  public 
till  we  are  better  advised  (and  I  confess  that  I  am  one 
of  these) — they,  I  say,  will  unquestionably  vote  for  my 
proposition.  .  .  .' 

The  Ministers,  advised  by  the  Law  Officers  of  the 
Crown,  and  adopting  the  Russian  theory  without 
adducing  a  particle  of  evidence  in  support  of  it,  con- 
tended that  the  obligations  of  Great  Britain  under  the 
Convention  of  1815  still  subsisted,  not  being  aifected 
by  the  Belgian  Revolution.  The  Whig  Attorney- 
General  took  a  high  prerogative  tone  worthy  of  Mr. 
Attorney  Noy,  arguing  that  the  King's  right  of  making 
and  interpreting  treaties  could  not  be  limited  by  an  Act 
of  Parliament.  But  such  a  '  slavish  doctrine,'  better 
suited,  as  some  modern  Shippen  might  have  exclaimed, 
to  the  meridian  of  St.  Petersburg  than  to  that  of  London, 
could  not  pass  unchallenged  by  the  Opposition,  which 
had  no  lack  of  legal  strength.  Wetherall,  Sugden,  and 
Pollock,  lawyers  second  to  none  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  or  in  Westuiinster  Hall,  vigorously  sup- 
ported the  motion,  and  destroyed  the  unconstitutional 


150  LORD  PALMER9TON.  CH.  ix. 

sophistry  of  the  Whig  jurists.  Lord  Palmerston,  clothed 
with  all  the  authority  of  the  Foreign  Office,  boldly  con- 
fronted his  adversaries  with  unfounded  asseverations,  of 
which  let  one  serve  as  a  specimen.  Speaking  of  the 
conduct  of  Russia  in  the  negotiation  of  the  Convention 
of  1815,  he  said:  '  Of  her  own  accord — and  this  is  im- 
portant to  the  question — the  payment  of  the  loan  was 
made  contingent  on  the  integrity  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Netherlands, — that  is,  Russia  knew  that  it  was  a  matter 
of  paramount  importance  to  England,  that  the  union  of 
the  kingdoms  of  Belgium  and  Holland  under  one 
Monarchy  should  be  observed  inviolably  by  other 
nations  ;  and  accordingly,  Russia,  solely  with  a  view  to 
manifest  her  ardent  desire  to  co-operate  with  England, 
declared,  in  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  that  the  loan  should 
cease  to  be  obligatory  when  a  separation  between 
Belgium  and  Holland  took  place.  .  .  .  And  I  ask,  is 
this  gratuitous  generosity  on  the  part  of  Russia  to  be 
now  turned  against  herself  by  those  in  whose  favour  she 
volunteered  it  ? '  This  positive  statement,  made  with 
all  the  weight  of  supposed  official  information,  is  proved, 
beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  to  have  been  contrary 
to  the  truth,  by  the  evidence  of  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter, 
above  cited,  to  Count  Nesselrode,  which  shows  that  the 
condition  alleged  by  Lord  Palmerston  to  have  been 
offered  spontaneously  by  Russia,  with  'gratuitous 
generosity'  towards  England,  was  in  reality  insisted 
upon  by  the  British  Government,  and  most  unwillingly 
accepted  by  the  Russian  Plenipotentiary,  who  did  his 
utmost  to  put  it  aside.  But  the  House  of  Commons 
was  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  that  letter. 


CH.  rx.  MOTION  REJECTED.      DECEPTION.  151 

The  case  made  out  against  the  Government  was  so 
strong  that  some  of  the  most  thoroughgoing  Liberals — 
among  others  Mr.  Joseph  Hume,  and  Mr.  O'Connell, 
who  spoke  as  a  lawyer — declared  that  it  was  impossible 
for  them  to  resist  the  motion  of  censure.  Even  the 
Secretary  at  War,  Sir  Henry  Parnell,  preferring  his  con- 
victions to  his  place,  left  the  House  refusing  to  vote 
with  his  colleagues.  And  on  the  final  division  the 
main  resolution  was  rejected  by  only  the  small  majority 
of  twenty-four — a  result  which,  though  a  formal  absolu- 
tion, was  a  virtual  condemnation. 

While  the  Ministers  and  the  Crown  lawyers  in  the 
course  of  this  debate,  as  on  a  former  occasion  in  answer 
to  a  question  from  Sir  Robert  Peel,  affirmed  with 
frequent  and  angry  iterance  that  the  old  Convention 
still  bound,  and  the  Act  of  1815  still  enjoined,  the 
Government  to  pay  the  interest  on  the  loan,  the  House 
of  Commons  was  studiously  kept  in  ignorance  of  the 
fact  that  there  lay  concealed  in  a  red  box  a  new  Con- 
vention absolutely  inconsistent  with  the  former  one, 
which  they  declared  to  be  still  in  force,  and  by  its 
express  words  rendering  necessary  the  new  enactment 
which  according  to  their  emphatic  assertions  would  be 
wholly  supererogatory. 

That  the  Reform  Ministry  were  guilty  of  gross 
deception  cannot  be  denied.  But  this  is  not  the  only 
imputation  to  which  they  are  open.  If,  as  they  pro- 
fessed to  believe,  the  honour  of  the  British  Crown 
required  the  uninterrupted  discharge  of  all  the  liabilities 
incurred  by  the  first  Convention,  then  they  did  not  act 
honourably  towards  the  Emperor  of  Russia  in  imposing 


152  CONTRADICTIONS.  CH.  IT. 

upon  him  an  entirely  new  condition  for  their  fulfil- 
ment of  what  they  recognized  as  an  honourable  engage- 
ment— in  compelling  him  to  enter  into  a  distasteful 
bargain  for  the  continuance  of  a  payment  which,  if 
their  theory  were  true,  they  had  no  right  to  withhold. 

The  story  of  contradictions  does  not  end  here.  The 
Auditor  of  the  Exchequer,  Lord  Grenville,  a  statesman 
of  the  first  rank,  having  expressed  grave  doubts  as  to 
the  legality  of  any  issue  for  the  dividend  falling  due  in 
January  1832,  they  were  overcome  by  the  opinion  of 
the  Law  Officers  that  the  money  ought  to  be  paid 
pursuant  to  the  Act  of  1815  ;  but  at  the  beginning  of 
June — the,  until  then,  hidden  Convention  of  November 
1831  being  still  unratified,  and  all  the  circumstances 
being  therefore  precisely  the  same  as  before — the 
Treasury  informed  Messrs.  Hope  that  without  the 
sanction  of  Parliament  they  had  no  authority  to  make 
any  further  payment.  What  was  declared  to  be  re- 
quired by  law  in  January,  was  declared  to  be  contrary 
to  law  in  July. 

At  last,  seven  months  after  its  signature,  the  ratified 
Convention  was  brought  to  light,  and  laid  before  Parlia- 
ment. In  due  course  of  tune  effect  was  given  to  it  by 
an  Act  passed,  not  without  many  sharp  debates,  in  which 
many  hard  facts  and  cogent  arguments  reminded  the 
Whigs  in  the  hour  of  their  triumph  that  even  they  were 
fallible.  On  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer's  motion 
for  going  into  Committee  to  take  the  new  Convention 
into  consideration  on  July  12,  Mr.  Herries,  reviewing 
all  the  past  transactions,  pointing  out  the '  extraordinary 
discrepancies  '  between  the  information  tardily  given  to 


OH.  ix.  NEW  MOTION  OF  CENSURE.  153 

the  House  '  and  all  the  arguments,  all  the  statements 
of  His  Majesty's  Government  on  an  antecedent  step  of 
this  important  question,'  and  adding  to  his  former 
arguments  against  the  conduct  of  Ministers  those 
furnished  by  their  own  recorded  admissions,  moved  the 
following  resolution  :  '  That  it  appears  to  this  House 
that  the  payment  made  by  the  Commissioners  of  the 
Treasury  on  account  of  the  interest  due  on  the  Russian 
loan  in  Holland  in  January  last,  when  the  obligation 
and  authority  to  make  any  such  payment  had,  according 
to  the  terms  of  the  Convention  with  Holland  and 
Russia,  and  of  the  Act  of  Parliament  founded  thereon, 
ceased  and  determined,  and  also  when  a  new  Convention 
with  Russia,  not  then  communicated  to  this  House,  had 
been  entered  into  recognising  the  necessity  of  recurring 
to  Parliament  for  power  to  continue  such  payments 
under  the  circumstances  which  had  attended  the  separa- 
tion between  Holland  and  Belgium,  was  an  application 
of  the  public  money  not  warranted  by  law.' 

But  although  the  production  of  the  new  matter 
enabled  the  mover  and  his  backers,  Mr.  Baring,  Sir 
Charles  Wetherall,  Mr.  Pollock  (afterwards  Lord  Chief 
Baron)  Sir  Edward  Sugden  (Lord  St.  Leonards)  Mr. 
Croker,  and  the  leader  of  the  Opposition,  Sir  Robert 
Peel — to  show  a  far  stronger  case  than  in  the  previous 
discussion  in  January,  the  resolution  of  censure  was 
negatived  by  the  larger  majority  of  forty- six,  several  of 
those  in  the  Liberal  ranks  who  had  on  the  former 
occasion  voted  against,  now  voting  for,  the  Government, 
while  avowing  that  their  opinions  remained  unchanged. 
Colonel  Davies,  one  of  the  reformers,  said  that  '  although 


154  CONVICTIONS  AND  VOTES.  OH.  ix. 

he  fully  concurred  in  the  general  position  of  the  right 
honourable  gentleman  the  member  for  Harwich,  it  was 
impossible  for  him  to  vote  for  the  resolutions.  ...  He 
concurred   with   him   in  thinking   that  His  Majesty's 
Ministers   acted   illegally  in   making   the   payment  of 
January  last,  and  that  the  Convention  they  have  since 
made  with  Russia,  acknowledging  that  that  payment  was 
contrary  to  law,  has  placed  them  in  a  worse  situation 
than  they  were  in  before.'     Observing  that  the  question 
was  so  plain  and  simple  that  a  child  could  understand 
it,  and  that  he  could  find  no  ground  on  which  Ministers 
could  be  entitled  to  act  as  they  had  done,  the  gallant 
and  Liberal  member  wound  up  a  series  of  arguments 
proving   that  their  conduct  was   censurable  with  the 
declaration  that  he  would  not  vote  for  their  censure. 
Mr.  Joseph  Hume  subsequently  explained  that  he  had 
1  voted  for  the  Whigs  though  he  believed  them  to  be  in 
the  wrong,'  and  that  '  it  was  his  intention  to  support 
the   Government,   right   or  wrong,'     a  candid   avowal 
which  drew  from  Sir  Robert  Peel  the  remark  :  '  This  I 
will  venture  to  say,  that  if  any  unfortunate  member  for 
a   rotten  borough — for  one  of  those  condemned  insti- 
tutions which  were  so  condemned  because  men  supported 
Ministers  against  then*  consciences.  ...  I  say  if  any 
member  of  those  condemned  boroughs  had  avowed  that 
he  was  ready  to  vote  that  black  was  white,  and  that 
what  was  illegal  in    January  was   legal   in  July,  we 
should  never  have  heard  the   last  of  the  reprobation 
which  would  have  been  launched  upon  the  head  of  that 
member  for  a  borough  constituency.' 

It  is  worthy  of  observation,  as  an  example  of  the 


CH.  ix.          MINISTERS  WITHHOLD  INFORMATION.  155 

high-handed  way  in  which  Parliament  was  treated  by 
the  Liberal  Government,  that  in  the  whole  course  of  the 
debates  concerning  engagements  imposing  onerous  and 
durable  charges  upon  the  British  people  for  the  benefit 
of  a  foreign  potentate,  no  correspondence,  no  documen- 
tary information  throwing  light  upon  the  recent  or  upon 
the  previous  transaction — not  even  the  Russian  memo- 
randum, of  which  the  Ministerial  speakers,  making  it 
their  brief,  used  the  very  words — was  produced.  The 
communication  of  the  bare  Convention  with  Russia  was 
unaccompanied  by  a  single  elucidatory  paper ;  and 
when  Mr.  Baring,  on  July  16,  moved  for  those  papers 
which  the  House  of  Commons  had  a  right  to  ask  for, 
the  motion  was  met  with  a  peremptory  refusal,  and 
rejected  by  a  ministerial  majority  of  thirty-six.  Such 
was  the  expression  of  Liberal  views  of  the  constitutional 
relations  of  the  Crown  to  the  House  of  Commons  just 
after  the  passing  of  the  Reform  Bill. 

The  payment  of  the  tribute  to  Russia  by  this  nation, 
whose  deliverance  from  it  the  senior  member  for  Har- 
wich had  so  much  at  heart,  will  '  cease  and  determine ' 
in  June  1915,  when,  at  last,  one  hundred  years  after  the 
original  imposition  of  the  charge,  the  liabilities  incurred 
by  the  late  Empress  Catherine  for  iniquitous  purposes 
being  extinguished  by  the  operation  of  the  Sinking  Fund, 
\vill  no  longer  be  a  burden  upon  British  tax -payers. 
The  total  sum  then  paid  for  the  satisfaction  of  sundry 
Dutch  creditors  of  Russia  will  have  amounted  to  con- 
siderably more  than  double  the  maximum  contribution 
of  3,000,000/.  which  in  1814  Great  Britain  undertook  to 
make  by  her  agreement  with  Holland.7 

7  The  aggregate  amount  of  our  payments  in  respect  of  this  loan  from 


156  THE  PALMERSTON   METHOD.  OH.  it. 

Once  again  this  subject  was  discussed  in  the  House 
of  Commons  in  1847,  when  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr. 
Hume,8  for  the  discontinuance  of  these  payments,  on 
the  quite  untenable  ground  of  the  annexation  of  Cracow 
to  Austria.  On  this  occasion  Lord  Palmerston,  having,  as 
he  said,  caused  enquiry  to  be  made  at  the  Record  Office, 
laid  upon  the  table  a  paper,  in  eleven  pages  (including 
four  pages  of  translation)  described  as  '  Correspondence 
relating  to  the  Russian  Dutch  Loan,  1815  and  1831.' 
Its  contents  are  the  extract  from  Lord  Castlereagh's 
despatch  of  February  13,  1815,  and  the  '  Notice  Confi- 
dentielle  '  of  January  26,  1831,  above  mentioned.  This 
is  the  whole  of  the  information  ever  imparted  by  Lord 
Palmerston  to  the  House  of  Commons  concerning  the 
correspondence  of  the  Foreign  Office  on  this  matter,  not 
a  single  paper  of  any  kind  signed  by  himself  (except 
the  Convention  of  1831),  nor  any  despatch  addressed  to 
him  by  a  British  representative  at  The  Hague,  or  at 

January  1, 1816,  to  December  31, 1871,  was  6,445,406J.  8s.  8d.  The  capital 
redeemed  was  1,166,666/.  13*.  4rf.,  leaving  still  to  be  paid  off  916,6661.  IBs.  4d., 
bearing  interest  at  five  per  cent. 

8  His  speech  (March  4,  1847)  affords  a  good  example  of  the  historical 
ignorance  which  members  of  Parliament  frequently  display  in  debates  on 
foreign  questions.  In  stating  his  case,  and  in  order  to  make  it  clear,  he  said  : 
'  By  the  fourth  article  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  an  agreement  was  entered 
into  between  England,  Russia,  and  Holland,  respecting  the  Russian  Dutch 
loan  borrowed  by  Holland  from  Russia  and  payable  upon  two  conditions.' 
It  would  be  difficult  to  compress  into  the  space  of  a  single  sentence  a  greater 
quantity  of  nonsense  than  that  which  is  comprised  in  these  words.  For 
(1)  the  article  cited  contains  no  allusion  whatever  to  England,  to  Holland, 
or  to  any  loan ;  (2)  no  agreement  concerning  the  Russian  Dutch  loan  is 
mentioned  in  any  part  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna ;  (3)  the  loan  in  question 
was  borrowed,  not  by  Holland  from  Russia,  but  by  the  latter  in  the  former 
country ;  (4)  no  loan  was  ever  raised  by  Holland  in  Russia.  But  these 
absurdities  were  allowed  to  pass  without  notice.  Perhaps  they  were  not 
perceived. 


CH.  ix.      CONDUCT  OF  THE  NETHERLANDS.        157 

St.  Petersburg  on  the  subject  having  been  suffered  to 
appear.  A  future  generation  may  perhaps  be  better 
enlightened  in  1915,  when  the  suppressed  papers  of  the 
Castlereagh  and  Palmerston  periods  being,  possibly, 
allowed  to  emerge  from  the  recesses  of  the  Foreign  Office, 
this  nation  may  at  last  be  enabled  to  learn  the  true 
and  complete  history  of  a  century  of  debt  imposed 
by  Russian  pressure  upon  British  weakness. 

It  is  necessary  now  to  mention  the  course  pursued 
by  our  co-partner  in  the  transaction  of  1815.  Holland, 
interpreting  the  fifth  article  of  the  Convention  of  that 
year  according  to  the  simple  and  natural  meaning  of 
its  words,  ceased,  in  1831,  to  pay  her  portion  of  the 
interest,  &c.,  of  the  loan.  But  as  she  did  not  recognize 
the  independence  of  Belgium  until  1839,  Russia  main- 
tained that  up  to  that  date,  at  all  events,  the  payments 
were  due.  The  question  was  under  discussion  for  many 
years  between  the  two  Governments,  and  was  finally 
settled  in  1850  by  a  Convention,  by  which  the  Nether- 
lands agreed  to  pay  one  million  and  a  half  of  florins 
(the  amount  payable  for  about  one  year  and  a  half — 
Great  Britain  paid  in  1831,  1,056,250  florins)  and  re- 
ceived in  return  quittance  in  full  of  all  claims — an 
arrangement  implying  an  admission  on  the  part  of 
Russia  that  the  interpretation  put  upon  the  Convention 
of  1815  by  Holland  and  by  the  Tory  Opposition  in  the 
British  House  of  Commons  (notably  by  the  member  for 
Harwich)  was  the  true  one  ;  that  the  Russian  interpre- 
tation adopted  by  the  Whig  Cabinet  in  England  was  a 
false  one  ;  and  that  the  demands  acceded  to  by  the 
Government  of  Great  Britain,  but,  with  more  spirit, 


158     THE  DUKE'S  ATTEMPT  TO  FORM  A  CABINET.    CH.  ix. 

rejected  by  the  Government  of  the  Netherlands,  were 
groundless,  extortionate,  and  fraudulent. 

Enough,  perhaps  too  much,  has  been  said  of  the  new 
way  to  pay  old  Russian  debts. 

A  recently  published  letter  from  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  to  William  IV,  dated  May  12,  1832, 
on  the  subject  of  the  Duke's  abortive  attempt  to  con- 
struct a  Reform  Cabinet  when  Lord  Grey  resigned  in 
consequence  of  the  King's  refusal  to  create  a  large  batch 
of  Peers,  begins  with  the  statement  that  '  The  Duke  of 
Wellington  has  seen  in  the  course  of  this  day  some  of 
the  gentlemen  mentioned  by  Your  Majesty.  The  Duke 
is  apprehensive  that  Mr.  Herries  as  well  as  Mr.  Goul- 
burn  will  be  unwilling  to  serve.  .  .  .' 

From  this  it  would  seem  that  Mr.  Herries's  name 
was  suggested  by  the  King,  but  that  before  any  direct 
communication  had  been  made  to  him,  he  manifested  his 
determination  to  be  no  party  to  the  proposed  arrange- 
ment. He  was  frequently  heard  to  speak  of  it  after- 
wards in  terms  of  the  strongest  condemnation,  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  always  looked  upon 
the  step  taken  by  the  Duke  as  a  deplorable  error  of 
judgment.  It  may  safely  be  assumed  that,  firm  Con- 
stitutionalist as  he  was,  he  viewed  with  no  favour- 
able eye  the  subsequent  negotiation  by  which  the 
Sovereign  induced  the  Duke  and  other  Peers  to  pledge 
themselves  to  abandon  their  legislative  duties  in  order 
to  avert  the  risk  of  a  forced  increase  of  the  Upper 
House. 

The  following  letter  dated  May  23,  1832  (when  the 
Reform  Bill  was  in  Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords), 


en.  ix.  LETTER  FROM   A   FRIEND.  1.59 

from  a  friend  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  has  reference 
to  this  transaction. 

'  The  Duke  thought  he  could  not  do  otherwise  than 
assure  the  King  that  he,  for  one,  would  do  nothing  to 
embarrass  him.  Having  said  this,  he  now  is  positive 
that  he  cannot  directly,  or  indirectly,  take  any  part  in 
the  Bill,  and  indeed  I  don't  think  that  he  could  with 
honour.  .  .  .  The  Duke  says  that  he  was  peculiarly 
circumstanced,  but  that  this  need  not  cause  others  to 
follow  his  example.  He  thinks  it  very  hard  that  people 
will  have  no  judgment  of  their  own.  I  reply  that, 
hard  or  not,  the  fact  is  that  people  look  to  him  for 
an  example,  and  follow  the  one  he  has  set ;  and  that, 
inconvenient  as  this  may  be  in  an  instance  like  the 
present,  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  have  a  Party 
and  act  upon  a  system  if  the  great  mass  did  not  act  as 
their  chief  does.  Indeed  I  added  that  he  would  be  the 
first  to  find  fault  if  upon  general  subjects  every  one  was 
acting  for  himself ;  and  that  he  could  not  be  surprised 
if,  at  a  moment  of  great  distress,  there  was  great  con- 
fusion when  the  Party  found  itself  without  a  leader. 
What  is  now  to  be  done  ?  In  the  House  of  Commons 
Peel  will  not  stir.  .  .  .  The  Duke  on  his  part  has 
bound  his  honour  not  to  embarrass  the  King.  His 
particular  friends  in  the  House  of  Lords,  such  as  Lords 
Aberdeen,  Bathurst,  and  Rosslyn — will  not  move  with- 
out him  ;  and  indeed  they  seem  to  think  that  any 
attempt  to  improve  the  Bill  would  cause  the  immediate 
creation  of  Peers.  ...  I  come  to  the  conviction  that 
there  is  nothing  to  be  done.  You  had  better  see  Lord 
Ellenborough  and  consult  with  him.  He  will  not  quit 


1GO  MR.  IIERRIES  AND  THE  HOME  OFFICE.        CH.  rx. 

his  post.9  He  is  active  and  intelligent  and  he  will  be 
able  to  let  you  know  whether  by  any  effort  we  could 
make  there  would  be  a  possibility  of  rallying  to  such  an 
extent  as  to  alter  the  Bill  on  the  third  reading.  ...  I 
hope  you  will  have  communicated  with  Lord  Melbourne 
respecting  the  projects  of  the  Political  Unions.  In  the 
desperate  state  to  which  we  are  reduced,  I  would  rather 
communicate  with  the  Ministers  themselves  than  be 
overtaken  by  the  storm  without  striving  to  avoid  it. 
Our  leaders  have  left  us.  .  .  .' 

In  the  previous  year  Mr.  Herries  had  conveyed  to 
the  Home  Office  some  secret  intelligence  probably  of  a 
similar  nature  to  that  above  alluded  to.  On  November 
21,  1831,  Mr.  Gr.  Lamb,  Under- Secretary  of  State,  wrote 
to  him  :  '  I  return  you  many  thanks  for  the  communi- 
cation of  Mr. 's  letter  which,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is 

too  much  in  consonance  with  other  information  from  the 
same  quarter.  ...  I  have  immediately  transmitted  it 
to  my  brother  [Lord  Melbourne]  accompanied  with  all 
the  cautions  which  you  wish  to  be  observed  in  any  com- 
munications with  the  quarter  from  which  it  comes,  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  affords  an  opportunity 
for  availing  ourselves  of  a  most  valuable  channel  of  in- 
formation if  dexterously  used  in  the  way  you  point  out. 
I  have  only  to  assure  you  that  it  shall  be  considered 
as  strictly  confidential,  and  that  I  feel  much  obliged  by 
the  trust  reposed  in  me,  which  can  have  no  motive  but 
the  promotion  of  publick  security  and  tranquillity.' 

The  following  l  Rough  sketch  of  a  paper '  written 

9  He  did  not  quit  his  post,  and  voted  according  to  his  convictions. 


CH.  ix.       PAPER  ON  COMING  ELECTIONS.        161 

by  Mr.  Herries  not  long,  apparently,  before  the  passing 
of  the  Bill,  has  no  date. 

1  The  question  of  Reform  is  now  irrevocably  decided. 
All  hope  of  any  beneficial  result  from  any  combined 
opposition  to  the  measure  in  its  present  shape  must  be 
abandoned  ;  and  it  therefore  only  remains  for  those  who 
have  acted  together  as  a  party  in  opposing  it  to  decide 
what  other  steps  they  can  or  ought  to  take  hi  order  to 
avert  or  mitigate  its  destructive  consequences. 

'  Very  great  anxiety  prevails  among  the  principal 
members  and  indeed  throughout  the  whole  body  of 
that  Party  to  learn  the  determination  or  disposition  of 
their  two  leaders  upon  this  point.  Their  opponents  are 
already  active  in  the  field  for  the  ensuing  elections,  and 
the  Tory  party  must  take  their  measures  at  once  and 
with  great  vigour,  or  give  up  all  chance  of  forming  any 
considerable  part  of  the  new  Parliament.  .  .  .  The 
isolated  endeavours  of  individual  volunteers  will  effect 
little  in  such  a  crisis  as  the  present.  Many  generous 
and  resolute  men  will,  no  doubt,  be  found  who  will 
spontaneously  incur  the  expense  and  inconvenience  of 
contesting  counties  and  boroughs  upon  Conservative 
principles  in  opposition  to  Radical  brutality.  Some  of 
them  may  succeed  ;  but,  unless  there  be  a  combined 
effort,  unless  the  majority  of  the  Tory  candidates  be 
invited,  encouraged,  and  in  some  cases  aided,  by  the 
influence  and  the  means  of  the  Tory  party  acting  under 
the  guidance  of  its  acknowledged  chiefs,  the  utmost  that 
can  be  expected  from  such  individual  exertions  will  be 
the  return  of  a  fraction  of  that  body — deprived  of  some 
of  its  most  active  and  experienced  supporters,  insufficient 

VOL.  II.  M 


162  CONSERVATIVE  APATHY.  OH.  ix. 

in  numbers  or  in  weight  to  produce  any  effect  in  a  Re- 
formed House. 

1  Whether  by  a  great  combined  exertion  a  more 
successful  result  can  be  obtained  is  a  question  which 
appears  to  require  speedy  attention  and  most  deliberate 
consideration.  For  this  purpose  is  it  not  advisable — 
is  it  not  indeed  urgently  expedient — that  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  and  Sir  Robert  Peel  should  without  delay 
assemble  the  most  influential  of  the  Peers  and  Com- 
moners who  act  with  them,  and,  taking  these  persons 
into  council  on  the  present  most  critical  posture  of  our 
affairs,  should  determine  after  mature  deliberation  what 
course  it  may  be  best  for  the  Tories  as  a  body — if  they 
are  to  continue  such — to  pursue  ?  ' 

But  they  had  almost  ceased  to  be  a  body,  and  for  all 
practical  purposes  they  had  no  leaders.  Although,  as 
the  writer  of  the  above  paper  expected,  '  many  generous 
and  resolute  men '  were  found  ready  to  come  forward, 
the  '  combined  effort '  which  he  desired  was  wanting. 
There  was  no  unity  of  action  and  little  disposition 
generally  to  make  sacrifices  for  a  common  cause.  '  I 
hear  that  there  is  no  idea  of  assisting  any  candidate  with 
money,'  writes  one  very  estimable  candidate  ;  'so  Holmes 
tells  us  and  Bonham,  and  all  who  can  be  supposed  to 
have  means  of  knowledge.'  A  letter  from  an  intelligent 
man  with  an  illegible  signature  to  Lord  Aberdeen,  and 
by  him  communicated  to  Mr.  Herries  shows  a  dismal 
prospect  for  the  Conservatives  on  the  eve  of  the  General 
Election  at  the  end  of  1832.  '  It  is  impossible  not  to 
be  struck  on  the  one  hand  with  the  great  activity  dis- 
played in  various  parts  of  the  country  by  the  reforming 


CH.  ix.  DESPONDENCY   AND   DOUBT.  163 

Whig  and  revolutionary  parties  ;  and,  on  the  other, 
with  the  torpor,  listlessness,  and  Turkish  waiting  upon 
Providence  displayed  by  the  Conservative  party.  Truth 
to  say,  there  seem  but  the  two  former  parties  in  the  field, 
displaying  certainly  all  the  incipient  symptoms  of  that 
rancorous  hostility  which  is  likely  to  distinguish  their 
hereafter  bearing  towards  each  other.  Arise  how  it 
may,  this  apathy  of  the  Conservative  side  is  a  fatal 
presage  for  the  future.  I  have  been  led  to  think  that  it 
may  be  ascribed,  not  so  much  to  want  of  faith  in  the 
cause,  as  to  the  utter  inadequacy  of  the  agents  and 
agency  (in  former  circumstances  effective  enough)  to 
grapple  with  the  new  system.  .  .  .' 

In  the  disorganised  remnant  of  the  Conservative 
Party  after  the  election  of  the  first  reformed  House  of 
Commons  there  was  a  general  feeling  of  despondency, 
which  the  attitude  and  tone  of  its  leader  was  not 
calculated  to  lessen.  Right  or  wrong,  the  belief  was 
common  that  he  wished  to  abandon  his  followers,  whom 
he  no  longer  seemed  to  care  to  direct  or  encourage.  The 
complaint  was  universal  that  no  one  knew  what  were 
his  views.  Even  those  who  had  been  most  in  his  confi- 
dence found  it  difficult  to  obtain  from  him  any  clear 
indications  of  policy,  as  the  following  letter  shows. 

'January  4,  1833. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — Being  desirous  of  eliciting  from 
Peel  his  opinions  and  views  as  to  the  course  which  it 
would  be  most  expedient  for  us  to  pursue  in  Parliament, 
I  wrote  to  him  when  I  was  last  at  Cambridge.  My 
letter  stated  what  I  considered  to  be  the  difficulties  of 
our  situation — suggested  the  importance  of  perfect  union 

M    2 


1G4  THE   LEADERS.  CH.  n. 

and  complete  concert  with  all  who  called  themselves 
Conservative,  as  the  only  hope  of  keeping  a  party  to- 
gether, and  urged  that  without  a  strong  party,  strong 
in  union  more  than  in  numbers,  there  was  no  hope  of 
our  being  of  any  use.  I  enclose  you  his  reply  which  I 
received  this  morning.  I  agree  with  his  general  view, 
though  I  feel  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  the  neutral 
position  which  he  recommends.  I  am  sorry  to  see 
(what  perhaps  others  would  not  observe)  still  an  un- 
willingness to  unite  cordially  with  the  Ultras,  but  this 
may  easily  be  softened  by  our  joint  management.  Of 
course  the  letter  is  for  your  private  information,  and 
when  you  have  read  it  you  will  return  it  to  me.  I  am 
obliged  to  divide  it  into  two  letters,  as  it  is  over  weight 
for  one Yours,  &c,  <H  GOULBUBN.' 

Even  as  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  steadfastness, 
distrust,  though  quite  unfounded,  seems  to  have  been 
felt  in  some  quarters.  Idle  reports  were  circulated  of 
his  intention  to  give  up  politics  and  leave  England. 
To  Mr.  Herries,  who  thought  that  such  rumours  were 
likely  to  have  an  injurious  effect,  the  Duke  wrote  as 
follows  : 

« Belvoir  Castle  :  January  5,  1833. 

1  My  dear  Herries,  — Arbuthnot  has  shown  me  a 
letter  from  you  on  the  subject  of  the  paragraph  in  the 
*  Morning  Post/  '  Standard,'  &c.,  respecting  my  Intention 
of  going  abroad.  It  is  difficult  to  judge  what  was  the 
Intention  of  these  Gentry  in  publishing  such  an  article  ; 
which,  till  I  saw  your  letter,  I  considered  a  matter  of 
indifference.  It  is  still  more  difficult  to  contradict  the 


CH.  ix.  THE  DUKE  TO  HERRIES.  165 

existence  of  an  Intention  excepting  from  authority  ;  but 
as  I  never  have  had,  so  I  never  will  have  anything  to 
say  to  any  of  the  newspapers. 

'  But  the  Intention  is  supposed  to  exist  because  there 
has  been  a  reduction  of  Establishments,  servants,  &c. 
This  fact  may  be  contradicted  if  it  is  judged  necessary. 
In  fact  I  have  as  many  servants  as  I  have  ever  had  ; 
and  more  horses  because  I  am  in  the  habit  of  going  out 
hunting  more  frequently  than  heretofore. 

'  No  Establishment  has  been  diminished,  not  even 
that  for  preserving  Game  ;  notwithstanding  that  since 
the  enactment  of  the  Game  Bill  to  put  down  poaching 
there  has  been  such  an  increase  of  that  crime,  as  that 
there  is  no  Game  to  preserve. 

1  This  is  all  that  can  be  said  upon  the  subject.  But 
I  would  prefer  to  say  nothing  ;  and  to  leave  this  Lye  to 
take  the  usual  course  ;  that  is  to  be  the  wonder  of  nine 
days  ;  and  to  be  the  subject  of  various  anonymous  and 
abusive  letters  to  myself ;  and  then  be  forgotten,  unless 
others  should  wish  it  to  be  contradicted  by  a  contra- 
diction of  the  facts.  Believe  me  ever  yours  most 
sincerely,  <  ™r , 

A  letter  received  shortly  before  the  meeting  of  the 
new  Parliament  from  Sir  Robert  Peel  exhibits  a  balance 
of  inconveniences  to  be  calculated. 

'  I  have  only  this  moment  got  your  letter.  ...  I 
hope  it  is  true  that  the  Radicals  mean  to  declare  war 
against  the  Government — I  am  adverse  to  any  course  of 
proceeding  on  our  part  which  should  justify  the  Govern- 


166  PEEL  TO  HERRIES.  CQ.  ix. 

ment  in  the  eyes  of  the  country  in  forming  a  cordial 
union  with  the  Radicals.  That  I  think  would  be 
tantamount  to  positive  destruction,  because  it  would  be 
tantamount  to  the  adoption  of  the  views  and  principles 
of  the  Radicals,  and  their  practical  enforcement  through 
the  Crown  and  Government. 

'  At  the  same  time  I  cannot  advise  us  to  make 
any  compromise  of  the  principles  which  we  have  main- 
tained by  acquiescing  in  any  declarations  of  opinion 
which  may  be  proposed  in  the  address  with  one  or  other 
of  two  views — either  to  compel  us  to  such  a  compromise 
or  to  expose  our  numerical  weakness  by  refusing  to 
make  it.  Of  the  two  in  my  judgment  the  exposure  of 
our  weakness  will  be  the  least  evil. 

'  I  hardly  think  it  worth  while  to  notice  the  very 
foolish  and  mischievous  reports  countenanced,  if  not 
propagated  by  our  journals — of  junctions  with  the 
Government  or  at  least  coquetting  with  the  Government 
by  individuals.  Disunion  of  the  Conservative  party  on 
any  ground  would  be  bad  enough — but  disunion  on 
the  ground  of  individual  accessions  to  a  Government 
constituted  like  the  present  would  be  an  intolerable  evil. 

'  The  reports  originate  possibly  in  the  surmise  that 
there  are  differences  among  the  members  of  the  Cabinet 
— surmises  for  which  the  language  of  the  '  Times,'  and 
the  '  Globe '  seem  to  afford  ample  foundation.  What- 
ever be  their  origin,  they  have  none  in  any  communica- 
tion, direct  or  indirect,  on  any  matter  of  public  concern 
with  me  or  with  any  one  to  my  knowledge.  Ever  most 
faithfully  yours, 

<R.  P.' 


CH.  ix.  CHOKER  AND   'THE  QUARTERLY.'  167 

About  this  time  there  began  a  series  of  letters 
from  Mr.  Croker  concerning  his  political  articles  for 
the  '  Quarterly  Review.'  On  January  10,  1833,  he 
wrote : 

'  Dear  Herries, — .  ...  I  have  obtained  leave  to  show 
the  enclosed  to  some  one  who  can  say  whether  it  suits 
the  views  of  our  party — pray  look  at  it — alter  on  the 
margin  what  you  please.  Your  notes  will  only  be  seen 
by  me.  If  the  paper  be  altogether  wrong,  say  so  ;  for 
we  wish  to  keep  the  Review  a  good  Tory  on  all  points. 
When  you  have  done,  return  the  paper  to  my  address 
at  Mr.  Murray's  over  the  way  [Mr.  Herries  then  lived  in 
Albemarle  Street,  opposite  to  the  eminent  publisher's]. 

YOUrSeYer'  'J.W.CKOKEB. 

'  The  article  is  nearly  twice  too  long  ;  any  omissions 
therefore  which  you  would  suggest  would  be  very 
acceptable  advice.' 

Letters  from  the  same  writer  asking  for  information 
or  criticism  were  frequent  during  many  years.  One 
without  date  of  year,  says  :  '  Many  thanks  for  your 
excellent  advice,  to  which  I  shall  give  effect.  .  .  .  Lord 
George  Seymour  has  called  in  with  a  report  that  the  D. 
of  W.  is  going  to  Ireland  as  L.L.  If  you  hear  that  I 
am  made  Bishop  of  Waterford  you  may  equally  be- 
lieve it.  .  .  .' 

Although  the  Conservative  Opposition  during  the 
Sessions  of  1833  and  1834  was  impotent  and  dis- 
heartened, the  member  for  Harwich  did  not  desert  his 
Parliamentary  duties.  He  never  spoke  for  the  sake  of 


168  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS.  CH.  nr. 

speaking  without  a  practical  purpose,  but  on  several 
questions  of  importance  he  expressed  his  opinions — as,  for 
example,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Bank  Charter  Bill,  when, 
together  with  Sir  Rohert  Peel,  he  strenuously  opposed 
the  provision  for  making  Bank  notes  a  legal  tender — on 
the  Slavery  Abolition  Bill,  when  he  strongly  objected, 
not  indeed  to  its  principle,  which  he  approved,  or  to  the 
grant  of  20,000,000/.  as  compensation,  which  he  thought 
equitable,  to  the  planters,  but  on  constitutional  grounds, 
from  which  he  never  swerved  in  the  least,  to  the  dis- 
cretionary power  given  to  the  Government  as  to  the 
mode  of  raising  the  money,  asserting,  as  he  always  did, 
the  absolute  right  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  determine 
the  conditions  of  loans — and  on  various  other  subjects. 
He  was  once  even  imprudent  enough  to  bring  forward 
an  Indian  case,  such  as  neither  the  House  nor  the 
public  can  ever  be  induced  to  pay  attention  to,  advo- 
cating in  a  long  speech  the  cause  of  the  King  of  Oude 
against  the  Board  of  Control. 

Among  the  changes  introduced  by  the  Whig  Minis- 
try, one  important  measure  for  the  thorough  reform  of 
one  of  our  most  ancient  institutions — the  Exchequer — 
by  the  abolition  of  many  offices  become  useless — those 
of  Auditor,  the  Clerk  of  the  Pells,  the  four  Tellers,1 
with  their  subordinates  —  and  the  substitution  of 
simpler  forms  in  accordance  with  modern  habits  of 

1  A  special  exception  was  made  by  the  Bill  in  the  case  of  Lord  Camden, 
whose  office  was  retained  as  a  mark  of  respect  for  the  public  spirit  displayed 
by  him  in  spontaneously  giving  up  to  the  nation  during  many  years  con- 
siderable emoluments  to  which  he  was  fully  entitled,  and  amounting  in  the 
aggregate  to  upwards  of  a  quarter  of  a  million.  He  was  a  staunch  Tory — 
a  friend  and  disciple  of  Pitt. 


CH.  rx.       REFORM  OF  THE  EXCHEQUER.         169 

business,  for  the  antiquated  and  cumbrous  machinery 
belonging  to  the  times  of  the  Norman  Kings,  with  its 
tallies,  grotesque  notation,  barbarous  Latin  jargon,  and 
impracticable  system  of  Roman  numerals,  received  the 
cordial  approval  of  Mr.  Herries,  at  whose  suggestion 
some  improvements  were  made  in  the  details  of  the  Bill. 
He  took  an  opportunity  of  pointing  out,  as  Lord  Granville 
Somerset  had  previously  noticed,  that  in  fact  it  was 
mainly  founded  upon  the  labours  of  a  Royal  Commis- 
sion presided  over  by  himself,  which  had  been  ap- 
pointed in  1830,  when  the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  in 
office,  to  enquire  into  the  management  of  the  Revenue. 
It  appears,  indeed,  that  the  matter  had  been  long  under 
consideration  ;  for  in  the  appendix  to  the  Report  of 
another  Commission  in  1831,  there  is  a  letter  from  the 
Clerk  of  the  Pells  in  1828,  stating  that  early  in  the 
previous  year  he  had  received  communications  from  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  (Mr.  Robinson)  and  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  (Mr.  Herries)  directing  his 
attention  to  the  possible  simplification  of  business,  and 
reduction  of  establishment,  which  might  be  effected  by 
the  consolidation  of  existing  offices. 

The  reform  of  the  ancient  procedure  of  the  Exchequer 
was  indirectly  associated  with  the  destruction  of  the 
ancient  seat  of  the  Legislature  of  England  at  the  last 
moment  of  the  existence  of  the  first  reformed  House  of 
Commons.  The  old  tallies  which  represented  the  admin- 
istrative history  of  this  nation  during  many  centuries 
having  been  doomed  to  the  flames,  lighted  the  fire  which 
consumed  the  venerable  Palace  of  Westminster,  rich 
in  the  glorious  memories  of  that  Parliamentary  history 


170  PEEL   CABINET.  CH.  ix. 

which  long  before  the  year  1832  was  studied  with  ad- 
miration by  the  civilized  world. 

When  Sir  Robert  Peel  was  hastily  summoned  from 
Rome  to  assume  the  direction  of  the  Government  at  the 
end  of  1834,  he  offered  to  Mr.  Herries  a  seat,  which  was 
accepted,  in  his  shortlived  Cabinet,  with  the  office  of 
Secretary  at  War — a  Department  with  the  business  of 
which  Mr.  Herries  was,  from  old  experience,  well 
acquainted.  He  had  not  been  long  installed  when  he 
received  (on  January  5,  1835),  from  the  new  Prime 
Minister  the  communication  of  a  confidential  letter  to  the 
Duke  of  Wellington,  expressing  Sir  Robert  Peel's  desire 
that  the  King's  speech  should,  if  possible,  announce  the 
fact  that,  notwithstanding  all  former  reductions,  the  esti- 
mates of  the  year  1838  were  lower  than  any  preceding 
estimates  since  1793,  and  that  the  head  of  each  Depart- 
ment should  commence  without  delay  a  consideration  of 
what  retrenchments  could  be  made  consistently  with 
the  true  and  permanent  interests  of  the  public  service — 
but  adding  that  he  would  not  purchase  the  advantage 
of  such  a  declaration  by  any  reduction  that  could  not 
safely  be  made. 

The  Premier's  wishes  were  fully  entered  into  by  the 
Secretary  at  War,  who  yielded  to  no  member  of  the 
House  of  Commons — not  even  to  Mr.  Joseph  Hume 
himself,  as  he  once  told  that  gentleman  in  debate — in 
love  of  economy.  It  has  already  been  shown  how  eager 
he  was  for  retrenchment  after  the  Peace,  and  again  in 
1827.  Carrying  out  his  own  constant  views  he  framed 
those  Army  Estimates  for  1835,  which  many  years 
afterwards  were  held  up  by  the  Manchester  school  as  a 


CH.  ix.  RETRENCHMENT.      ELECTIONS.  171 

model  for  peipetual  imitation,  and  even  now  seem 
occasionally  to  be  looked  back  upon  with  fond,  but 
unavailing,  regret.  They  were  in  fact  lower  than  any 
estimates  which  have  ever  been  voted  since  1793,  the 
first  year  of  the  Great  Revolution  War.  Perhaps  they 
were  too  low.  Such,  indeed,  appears  to  have  been,  some 
years  later,  the  impression  of  the  Minister  who  pre- 
sented them  to  Parliament.  It  must,  however,  be 
presumed  that  they  were  not  laid  before  the  House  of 
Commons  without  the  previous  consideration  and  ap- 
proval of  the  Duke  of  Wellington. 

The  following  letters  written  during  the  progress  of 
the  General  Election  show  what  appeared  to  be  the 
Ministerial  prospects. 

'  January  10,  1836. 

'  My  dear  Peel, — The  accounts  from  the  boroughs 
this  morning  are  not  so  good  as  those  of  yesterday. 
Out  of  21  members  returned  we  have  only  7.  The 
balance  is  therefore  materially  changed.  It  now  stands 
thus  :  For,  138  ;  Against,  133  ;  Hopeful,  17  ;  Doubt- 
ful, 3. 

1  Among  our  hopefuls  and  doubtfuls  there  are  two 
or  three  respecting  some  of  whom  Bonham  thinks  you 
can  give  some  account.  .  .  .  But  the  failure  of  the 
Lords  and  Secretary  of  the  Admiralty  is  still  the  most 
pressing  subject  of  difficulty.  I  have  been  so  strongly 
impressed  with  it,  that  I  wrote  last  night  to  Shaw  to 
suggest  to  him  the  great  importance  of  putting  Sir 
George  Cockburn  into  an  Irish  borough,  if  there  were 
yet  tune  for  it,  and  any  one  were  available  for  the 
purpose.  It  occurred  to  me  that  Kinsale  might  be  so. 


172  CORRESPONDENCE.  OH.  ix. 

I  hope  I  did  right.  There  was  no  time  to  be  lost,  and 
1  had  no  person  to  advise  with  here.  If  you  approve 
of  my  suggestion,  you  will  perhaps  write  to  Shaw  in 
the  same  sense.  .  .  .  Now  that  Grant  has  lost  his 
chance  of  a  seat,  may  not  Patrick  Stewart  be  put  on  the 
list  of  persons  from  which  you  will  have  to  choose  your 
Chairman  of  Ways  and  Means?  I  think  he  is  in  favour 
with  the  House,  and  might  be  more  easily  carried  than 
a  pure  Tory Truly  yours,  <  j  c  HERRIES; 

'  January  10,  1836. 

1  My  dear  Praed, — I  despatched  your  servant  yester- 
day with  the  "  yes  "  which  you  said  would  suffice  for 
him.  That  is  not  the  usual  answer  carried  away  from 
this  office,  I  assure  you. 

'  You  have  done  admirably  well,  and  it  is  with  more 
satisfaction  than  I  can  well  express  that  I  confess  my- 
self in  the  case  of  Yarmouth  to  have  been  a  false 
prophet,  and  a  vain  Croker.  I  trembled  for  you.  I 
thought  it  but  fair  to  send  your  letter  to  Peel,  who  is  at 
Brighton.  .  .  . 

'  We  are  doing  quite  as  well  as  I  expected  in  the 
country.  We  have  a  clear  majority  on  the  whole  of  the 
returns  up  to  this  date,  and  I  feel  tolerably  confident 
that  we  shall  maintain  it  to  the  end.  But  it  will  be  a 
bare  majority.  Truly  yours,  «  j  c  HEEBIES.' 

'  January  11,  1835. 

'  My  dear  Herries, — I  return  Praed' s  letter.  He 
has  fought  a  good  fight  and  his  triumph  is  a  very  use- 
ful one. 


CH.  ix.  CORRESPONDENCE.  173 

'  Bonham's  calculations  are  the  most  flattering  I 
have  seen  as  to  numbers.  I  am  the  last  to  despair  of 
success  in  the  great  contest  in  which  we  are  engaged. 

'  My  confidence  arises  less  from  the  returns  them- 
selves than  from  the  conviction  that  we  shall  do  all 
that  can  be  reasonably  and  justly  required,  and  that,  in 
spite  of  clamour  and  menace,  reason  and  justice  will 
still  prevail. 

*  A  good  infusion  of  s s  and s  is  by 

no  means  to  be  deprecated.  The  violence  of  such  empty, 

frothy  fellows  as  Dr. ,  is  of  no  disservice  to  a 

Government.  Ever  yours,  '  KOBERT  PEEL.' 

Same  date. 

'  I  write  one  line  to  say  that  I  quite  agree  with  you 
as  to  Cockburn,  and  that  I  think  the  suggestion  of 
Patrick  Stewart  worthy  of  the  fullest  consideration.  .  . 
In  spite  of  returns,  and  occasional  mishaps,  I  have  a 
confidence  in  our  success  which  arises  mainly  from  this 
reflection  : — If  what  we  shall  propose  to  the  House  of 
Commons  will  not  satisfy — who  are  the  men  that  will 
propose  that  something  which  is  to  satisfy  ? 

1 1  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  I  feel  that  I  can  do 
more  than  any  other  man  can  who  means  his  reforms 
to  work  practically,  and  who  respects,  and  wishes  to 
preserve,  the  British  Constitution. 

'  I  think  this  must  ultimately  prevail,  and  attract 
for  us  more  support  than  we  at  present  calculate  upon. 

'  However,  though  God  knows  as  utterly  indifferent 
to  the  tenure  of  my  present  post  as  any  man  can  be 
on  all  private  grounds,  I  am  very  confident  and  very 


174  EXCHEQUER  BILLS.  CH.  ix. 

sanguine  —  and  though  this  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure 
success,  I  am  sure  despondency  and  despair  would  at 
once  prevent  it.  Ever  yours,  ,  ROBEKT 


The  attention  of  the  Secretary  at  War  seems  not  to 
have  been  confined  to  the  business  of  his  own  depart- 
ment and  the  general  policy  of  the  Cabinet.  Evidence 
of  his  having  been  consulted  on  administrative  questions 
not  connected  with  his  office  is  afforded  by  a  long  letter, 
in  many  sheets,  in  answer  to  enquiries  from  Sir  Robert 
Peel,  on  Exchequer  Bills,  their  origin,  nature,  history, 
uses,  and  possible  dangers,  with  some  suggestions  of  an 
eventual  change  of  system  in  their  issue,  for  the  sake  of 
greater  security.  The  following  passages  hi  this  paper 
appear  to  have  some  historical  interest. 

1  The  counterbalancing  objection  to  these  ad  vantages 
is  the  very  great  possible,  though  not  probable,  danger 
to  which  the  Treasury  is  exposed  by  the  existence  of  a 
debt  professedly  payable  on  the  demand  of  the  creditor 
without  any  means  of  making  that  payment  if  it  should 
be  actually  demanded.  The  present  practice  is  to  ad- 
vertise periodically  the  payment  of  all  Exchequer  Bills 
more  than  a  twelvemonth  old  with  an  offer  to  the 
holders  to  give  new  Bills  in  lieu  of  money  if  they  desire 
it.  This  is  done  in  full  confidence  that  the  money  will 
not  be  called  for  —  and  generally  with  the  perfect  cer- 
tainty that,  if  it  should  be  demanded,  it  would  not  be 
forthcoming  at  the  Exchequer. 

1  The  enormous  danger  that  may  arise  under  this 
system  was  exemplified  at  the  period  of  the  Panic  in 
1825.  There  is  little  doubt  but  that  the  shock  to 


CH.  re.  RESIGNATION  OF  MINISTERS.  175 

Public  Credit  which  produced  such  terrible  results  on 
that  occasion  was  increased  by  the  course  which  the 
Treasury  was  compelled  to  adopt  with  respect  to 
Exchequer  Bills.  The  period  for  advertising  a  large 
portion  of  them  happened  to  fall  in  with  the  first  indica- 
tions of  alarm  and  distress  in  the  City.  Exchequer  Bills 
fell  to  a  discount,  and  no  doubt  could  be  entertained 
that  if  the  advertisement  had  been  published  in  the 
usual  manner,  money  would  have  been  demanded  for 
nearly  the  whole  amount.  In  that  case  the  Exchequer 
would  have  been  bankrupt.  Some  delay  consequently 
took  place  before  an  arrangement  could  be  made  with 
the  Bank  for  meeting  the  emergency  ;  but  the  mere 
postponement  of  the  advertisement  became  an  additional 
source  of  alarm  and  pressure.  .  .  .' 

To  the  well-known  history  of  the  brief  struggle 
which  ended  in  the  resignation  of  the  Ministers  there  is 
nothing  to  be  added.  They  gladly  withdrew  from  an 
untenable  position,  into  which  they  had  been  brought 
by  circumstances  not  the  consequences  of  their  own 
acts.  His  own  sentiments  as  well  as  those  of  all  his 
colleagues  on  the  termination  of  the  hopeless  contest 
were,  no  doubt,  correctly  expressed  by  Mr.  Herries, 
when  he  wrote  in  a  private  letter  on  April  19  :  'We 
shall  probably  be  out  of  office  to-morrow  ;  and,  so  far 
as  we  are  personally  concerned,  I  am  sure  that  there  is 
not  one  of  us  who  will  not  feel  the  release  as  a  most 
welcome  deliverance  from  a  most  painful  burthen.' 

A  first  visit  to  Italy,  where  he  passed  several  months 
in  the  following  year,  afforded  to  Mr.  Herries  a  pleasant 
and  a  wholesome  change  from  House  of  Commons 


176  VISIT  TO  ITALY.  CD.  n. 

business,  and  the  worry  of  party  politics.  The  keen 
enjoyment  which  he  derived  from  the  study  of  art  and 
antiquity,  of  which  he  was  a  true  lover,  without  dilet- 
tantist  affectation,  was  lessened  only  by  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  effects  of  misrule  hi  many  parts  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  especially  at  Rome,  where  his  own 
observation,  confirming  him  hi  the  opinion  he  had 
always  entertained,  made  him  more  than  ever  deplore 
the  part  taken  by  Great  Britain  hi  the  restoration  of  the 
most  odious  and  the  most  contemptible  of  all  European 
Governments.  *  Once  overthrown,'  he  would  say,  *  it 
never  ought  to  have  been  allowed  to  be  set  up  again  ; 
and,  if  we  could  not  prevent  the  re-establishment  of 
such  a  system,  at  any  rate  we  ought  not  to  have  had  a 
hand  hi  it.'  Government  by  Priests  appeared  to  him 
hardly,  if  at  all,  less  offensive  than  government  by  mobs. 
The  duty  of  an  Opposition,  said  Mr.  Tierney,  is 
threefold — always  to  oppose — never  to  propose — and  to 
turn  out  the  Government.  That  duty  was  upon  the 
whole  fairly  well  discharged  by  the  Conservative  adver- 
saries of  Lord  Melbourne's  Cabinet.  But  it  can  hardly 
be  said  that  then*  proceedings — or  indeed  those  of  the 
Government — during  the  first  three  or  four  years  at 
least,  had  a  very  interesting  character.  It  may  indeed 
be  doubted  whether  any  portion  of  our  Parliamentary 
and  political  history  since  the  accession  of  George 
III.  is  so  little  attractive  to  present  readers  as  that 
which  comprised  the  existence  of  the  Melbourne  Ad- 
ministration. To  the  general  tediousness  of  the  debates 
of  the  greater  part  of  this  period  Mr.  Herries  contributed 
little  or  nothing,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  with  perhaps 


CH.  ix.  METROPOLITAN  IMPROVEMENTS.  177 

more  advantage  to  the  public,  he  took  a  considerable 
share  of  Parliamentary  work  of  a  practically  useful  kind. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  Committee 
of  1838,  and  subsequent  sessions,  on  Metropolitan  Im- 
provements— a  subject  in  which  he  never  ceased  to  take 
the  most  lively  interest — to  whose  recommendations  we 
owe  the  formation  of  many  new  thoroughfares,  such  as 
the  prolongation  of  Oxford  Street ;  the  extension  of 
Cannon  Street ;  the  line  from  Piccadilly  to  St.  Martin's 
Lane;  the  enlargement  of  the  approaches  to  London 
Bridge ;  and  other  additions  to  previously  existing 
means  of  communication. 

The  greater  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  second,  the 
most  comprehensive,  Report  of  1838,  was  written  by 
Mr.  Herries. 

On  the  great  Privilege  question  of  Stockdale  and 
Hansard,  when  the  House  of  Commons,  not  venturing 
to  punish  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England  and  the 
other  Judges  whose  decisions  it  condemned,  or  the 
Juries  who  had  given  verdicts  adverse  to  its  pretensions, 
visited  with  its  wrath  the  Plaintiff  in  actions  which  it 
had  more  than  once  directed  the  Attorney- General  to 
defend,  the  Plaintiff's  solicitor,  the  solicitor's  clerk,  and 
the  Sheriffs,  who,  under  pain  of  attachment  for  default, 
had  executed  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Queen's 
Bench, — when  night  after  night  the  subjects  of  debate 
were  the  hazardous  shortness  of  the  neck  of  one  incar- 
cerated Sheriff,  and  the  perilous  '  turgescence '  of  the  liver 
of  the  other — Mr.  Herries,  differing  entirely  from  the 
Conservative  leader,  whom  he  respected  and  honoured, 
but  would  not  blindly  follow,  and  believing  that  the 

VOL.  II.  N 


178  PRIVILEGE  QUESTION.  OH.  «. 

course  pursued  was  arbitrary,  illegal,  unjust,  subversive 
of  judicial  independence,  dangerous  to  the  liberty  of  the 
subject,   and  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  the  House 
itself,  voted  repeatedly  in  the  opposing  minority,  in  the 
lists  of  which  his  name — the  only  one  of  the  lay  Con- 
servative members  of  the  rank  of  Privy  Councillor — is 
to  be  found  along  with  those  of  C.  Cresswell,  Sir  W. 
Follett,  W.  E.  Gladstone,  T.  Pemberton,  Sir  F.  Pollock, 
Sir  E.  Sugden,  F.  Kelly,  &c.,  &c.,  against  the  majority 
composed  of  Ministerialists,  advanced  Radicals,  and  Sir 
Robert  Peel's  supporters.     Though  he  did  not  think 
himself  called  upon  to  attempt  to  add  anything  to  the 
arguments  of  the  eminent  lawyers  whose  views  he  shared, 
his  feeling  on  this  question  was  very  strong.     He  held 
the  opinion  that  in  the  famous  precedent  case  of  Ashby 
and  White  Chief- Justice  Holt  and  the  House  of  Lords 
were  in  the  right,  and  the  House  of  Commons  in  the 
wrong.    Being  convinced  that  '  neither  House  of  Parlia- 
ment hath  any  power  by  any  vote  or  declaration  to 
create   to   themselves   any  new   privilege   that   is   not 
warranted  by  the  known  laws  and  customs  of  Parlia- 
ment,' and  applying  to  the  present  occasion  the  words 
of  the  Lords'  resolutions  of  1704,  he  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  '  The  House  of  Commons  .  .  .  had  assumed 
to  themselves  alone  a  legislative  authority  by  pretending 
to  attribute  the  force  of  a  law  to  their  declaration,  had 
claimed  a  jurisdiction  not  warranted  by  the  Constitution, 
and  had  assumed  a  new  privilege  to  which  they  could 
have  no  title  by  the  laws  and  customs  of  Parliament, 
and  thereby,  so  far  as  in  them  lay,  subjected  the  rights 
of  Englishmen  and  the  freedom  of  their  persons  to  the 


en.  ix.  STATE  OF  THE  FINANCES.  179 

arbitrary  votes  of  the  House  of  Commons.'  Arbitrary 
violence  in  any  shape,  whether  exercised  by  the  Crown 
or  by  the  House  of  Commons,  he  abhorred.  The  only 
mode  of  government  which  appeared  to  him  tolerable 
was  that  of  government  by  law — fixed,  defined,  known — 
and  he  refused  to  recognise  the  validity  of  any  '  tyrant's 
plea,'  under  cover  of  which  a  bare  majority  of  the 
House  of  Commons  might  destroy  all  securities  for  pro- 
perty, liberty,  or  even  life,  and  substitute  for  English 
freedom,  and  English  justice,  the  execrable  despotism  of 
a  French  Convention.  But  although  he  was  opposed 
to  the  claim  of  the  House  to  make  a  privilege  whatever 
it  might  at  any  time  think  proper  to  declare  to  be  such, 
he  at  the  same  time  thought  that  the  absolute  right  of 
publication  ought  to  be  secured  to  Parliament  by  law. 
He  therefore  rejoiced  at  the  rational  termination  of  an 
unseemly  conflict  by  an  act  of  legislation  which  might 
have  prevented  it. 

While  this  question  was  still  pending,  the  existence, 
becoming  more  precarious  every  day,  of  the  Melbourne 
Cabinet  received  from  the  member  for  Harwich  the 
rudest  shock  which  it  had  sustained  since  its  temporary 
resignation  in  1839. 

The  condition  of  the  finances  was  deplorable,  and 
there  was  no  prospect  of  improvement.  Instead  of 
having  an  annual  surplus  available  for  the  reduction  of 
debt,  the  country  had  fallen  into  a  state  of  chronic 
deficit,  which  grew  year  by  year,  and  the  only  remedy 
for  which  appeared  to  be  increased  taxation.  On 
February  13,  1840,  Mr.  Herries  made  a  motion  for 
accounts  and  estimates,  to  throw  light  upon  the  subject 

N   2 


180  MR.  HERRIES'S  MOTION.  CH.  ix. 

to  which  he  forcibly  drew  the  attention  of  the  House. 
'  The  finances  of  the  country/  he  said,  *  now  presented 
such  an  aspect,  and  things  had  now  arrived  at  such  a 
pass,  that  it  became  the  imperative  duty  of  a  faithful 
House  of  Commons  to  look  the  affairs  of  the  nation  in 
the  face  ...  at  a  moment  when  their  financial  affairs 
were  in  a  state  which  he  did  not  scruple  to  designate  as 
most  dangerous.  The  duty  which  the  House  would 
have  to  perform  was  one  of  an  extremely  painful  nature, 
and  the  painfulness  of  that  duty  was  in  no  slight  degree 
increased  by  the  reflection  that  we  were  now  in  the 
twenty-sixth  year  of  peace.'  Admitting  that  his 
motion  was  unusual,  he  argued  that  it  was  justified  by 
unusual  circumstances.  '  Was  it  too  much  to  ask  that 
light  should  be  let  in  upon  a  state  of  things  respecting 
which  the  public  were  as  yet  ignorant  and  uninformed  ? 
.  .  .  .The  conditions  and  prospects  of  the  country  were 
such  as  to  render  the  information  which  he  sought  of 
immense  importance.  There  existed  with  reference  to 
it  extreme  solicitude  in  the  public  mind.  There  was  no 
society  into  which  he  went  where  he  did  not  hear  en- 
quiries made,  surmises  hazarded,  and  a  universal  anxiety 
manifested  ;  there  was  no  person  with  whom  he  con- 
versed that  did  not  appear  full  of  apprehension  as  to  the 
prospects  of  the  country.'  He  pointed  out  that  in  1837 
there  had  been  a  deficiency  of  726,000/.  ;  in  1838,  of 
440,000/.  ;  in  1839,  of  1,512,OOOZ.,  making  a  total  of 
2,678,000/.  ;  which  he  calculated  would  be  raised  at 
the  end  of  1840  to  the  aggregate  deficit  of  certainly 
4,678,000/.,  or,  probably,  of  nearly  six  millions.  Such 
disastrous  results  he  contrasted  with  those  of  the  period 


Cfl.  ix.  DEFEAT  OF  MINISTERS.  181 

of  peace  between  1817  and  1828,  when  by  means  of  a 
large  surplus  income  '  there  had  been  a  reduction  of 
3,500,000/.  on  the  charge  of  the  debt,  while  in  the  same 
time  26,000,000^.  of  taxes  had  been  taken  off ; '  and  of 
that  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  Administration  when 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  had  reduced  taxes 
to  the  amount  of  between  6,000,000^.  and  7,000,000/. 
a  year,  and  had  still  left  a  surplus  revenue  to  his 
successor,  Lord  Althorp,  of  3,000,000^.  While  he 
1  believed  that  there  never  existed  a  more  solemn  obliga- 
tion on  the  House  than  at  this  time,  to  take  proper 
steps  to  put  a  stop  to  the  present  financial  embarrass- 
ments of  the  country,'  he  recommended  the  House, 
however,  '  to  guard  themselves  against  forming  an  ex- 
aggerated or  too  gloomy  view  of  the  general  state 
and  situation  of  the  country.  .  .  .  He  believed  that  our 
resources  were  unimpaired,  that,  indeed,  we  were  more 
competent  than  at  any  former  period  of  our  history  to 
make  great  exertions.  .  .  .  He  utterly  repudiated  the 
foolish  saying  that  England  was  laid  prostrate  under 
the  weight  of  its  seven  hundred  millions  of  debt.  .  .  .' 

The  motion  was  carried  against  the  Government  by 
a  majority  of  ten,  in  which  the  names  of  two  such 
decided  Liberals  as  Mr.  Grote  and  Mr.  Hume  appear. 
This  defeat  on  a  matter  of  primary  importance  was  a 
*  heavy  blow  and  a  very  great  discouragement,'  from 
which  the  tottering  Cabinet  never  entirely  recovered. 
From  a  Member  of  Parliament  Mr.  Herries  received  the 
following  note  of  approval  : — '  It  is  impossible  to  write 
to  you  without  congratulating  you  on  Thursday  last. 
I  do  so  most  sincerely.  Notwithstanding  a  tearing 


182  EASTERN  QUESTION.  OH.  ix. 

cough,  I  listened  to  every  word  you  said,  and  a  more 
clear  and  conclusive  statement,  and  one  more  damaging 
to  our  opponents  I  never  heard.  I  believe  that  night 
to  have  been  le  commencement  de  la  fin.1 

Among  a  variety  of  letters  of  the  year  1840,  there 
appears  the  following  curious  note  addressed  to  Mr. 
Herries  a  few  days  after  the  signature  of  the  famous 
Quadruple  Treaty  of  July  15,  by  one  of  the  plenipoten- 
tiaries, an  old  acquaintance. 

'  Could    you  muzzle  the  's    [a   Conservative 

journal]  nonsense  on  the  Eastern  Question,  which  he 
does  not  understand?  The  writer  of  the  two  leading 
articles  of  yesterday  and  to-day  does  not  see  that  he  is 
playing  the  game  of  France  and  spoiling  ours.  .  .  .' 

The  veteran  diplomatist  knew  the  character  of  his 
correspondent,  whose  aid  he  solicited  to  prevent  embar- 
rassment to  the  policy  of  the  Government.  He  knew 
that  he  was  writing  to  a  man  who  although  strongly 
attached  to  his  party,  and  a  decided  opponent  of  the 
Liberal  Ministry,  would  never,  like  the  Liberals  during 
the  whole  of  the  great  war,  sacrifice  national  interests 
to  party  animosity.  A  question  here  presents  itself. 
Is  it  not  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  step 
taken  by  the  foreign  plenipotentiary  to  obtain  the  inter- 
vention of  a  leading  member  of  the  Conservative 
Opposition  was  made  known  to  Lord  Palmerston  in 
the  course  of  the  frequent  conversations  which  must 
have  been  held  on  the  state  of  affairs  ;  if,  indeed,  the 
intention  to  take  it  was  not  previously  communicated  to 
his  Lordship,  who  may  possibly  even  have  suggested 
the  writing  of  the  note  ? 


CH.  ix.  DIPLOMACY  AND  THE   PRESS.  183 

Taking  the  same  view  as  his  diplomatic  friend,  Mr. 
Herries  lost  no  time  in  recommending  the  matter  to  the 
attention  of  a  political  manager,  from  whom  he  received 
the  following  answer : — 

*  Your  correspondent  is  quite  right  in  saying  that 
the  articles  in  question  are  playing  the  game  of  France, 
but  not  equally  so,  I  suspect,  in  supposing  that  the 
writer  does  not  understand  the  question.  Whether  he 
misstates  I  know  not,  but  am  satisfied  that  he  does 
understand  the  question.  Between  ourselves,  they  come 
from  a  person  who  has  some  knowledge  at  least  of  the 
French  policy  on  the  Eastern  affairs  ;  .  .  .  but  if  you 
could  satisfy  me  that  the  course  taken  by  the  paper 
(which  commits  only  itself)  is  injurious  to  the  Party, 

I  have  probably  sufficient  influence  with to  stop 

the  course,  or  at  least  I  would  try  it ;  but,  as  at  present 
advised,  though  approving  Palmerston's  policy,  I  see  no 
harm  that  can  arise  from  the  paper's  taking  its  own  line. 
After  all,  however,  when  we  talk  of  Party,  does  one 
remain,  for  any  useful  purpose? ' 

At  the  time  when  one  of  Lord  Palmerston's  political 
adversaries,  moved  by  patriotic  sentiments,  showed  his 
anxiety  to  silence  some  of  the  assailants  of  the  Minister 
who  was  engaged  at  a  most  critical  moment  in  defend- 
ing the  permanent  interests  of  England,  one  of  Lord 
Palmerston's  own  colleagues  was,  far  more  dangerously 
than  the  Conservative  journal,  'playing  the  game  of 
France,'  and  doing  his  best  to  '  spoil  ours.'  Lord 
Holland,  a  cosmopolite,  whose  patriotic  sentiments  were 
never  so  strong  as  his  sympathies  with  foreigners  of 
various  sorts,  was,  indeed,  at  this  moment  '  a  live  shell 


184  BUDGET  DEBATES.  OH.  ix. 

in  the  Cabinet,'  the  intended  explosion  of  which  would 
have  destroyed  not  only  Lord  Palruerston's  position  and 
policy,  but  together  with  them  the  credit  of  England 
and  her  power  in  the  East. 

Mr.  Herries  approved  Lord  Palmerston's  policy  in 
1840,  and  did  not  believe  that  it  would  lead  to  war — 
from  which,  if  necessary,  he  would  not  have  shrunk 
then,  or  at  any  other  time.  His  views  do  not  seem  to 
have  been  shared  completely  by  the  generality  of  his 
party,  if  the  following  passage  in  a  letter  written  to 
him  in  October  by  the  confidential  manager  before 
alluded  to  may  be  taken  as  an  indication  of  prevalent 
Conservative  opinion.  '  With  my  general  deference  to 
your  judgment,  I  yet  entirely  doubt  the  possibility  of 
avoiding  war.' 

In  the  following  year  Mr.  Herries  took  an  active 
part  in  the  long  and  agitated  debates  on  the  financial 
and  commercial  policy  of  the  Government,  which  ended 
in  its  defeat  by  a  majority  of  thirty- six.  In  the  first 
debate,  or  conversation,  upon  the  well-known  Budget 
of  1841,  he  observed  that  '  although  he  would  not  enter 
into  the  general  question  as  to  the  two  first  propositions 
respecting  timber  and  sugar,  yet  after  what  he  had 
heard  from  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  (Mr. 
Labouchere)  he  thought  he  went  very  nearly  with  him. 
As  he  understood  that  gentleman,  his  object  was  not 
to  bring  forward  any  sweeping  or  general  measure  of 
alteration  in  our  commercial  code.  He  did  not  embrace 
the  views  of  the  Import  Duties  Committee  :  he  did 
not  say,  there  should  be  no  protection  ;  but  he  had 
endeavoured  to  arrive — whether  he  had  or  not  was  a 


OH.  ix.  HUSKISSON  AND  HERRIES.  185 

question  for  future  discussion — at  that  point  which 
afforded  the  requisite  degree  of  protection,  consulting  at 
the  same  time  the  interests  of  the  consumer.  And 
he  could  assure  the  right  honourable  gentleman  that 
when  he  brought  forward  single  cases  in  this  way,  as 
any  demand  for  relief  might  arise,  and  founded  on  such 
principles,  he  would  find  no  one  more  willing  to  give 
such  propositions  a  fair  and  impartial  consideration 
than  himself.' 

The  following  passages  may  also  be  quoted  from  a 
somewhat  earlier  speech  in  a  debate  concerning  import 
duties  in  British  colonies,  as  indications  of  the  speaker's 
views  on  the  subject  of  Protection.  They  likewise  show 
what  were,  and  always  had  been,  his  sentiments  with 
regard  to  the  commercial  policy  of  Mr.  Huskisson,  to- 
wards whom  systematic  hostility  has  been  falsely 
attributed  to  him  by  sundry  diarists,  letter- writers,  and 
pamphleteers.  Alluding  to  the  Report  of  the  Import 
Duties  Committee,  he  said  :  '  He  felt  and  admitted  the 
actual  necessity  of  carrying  much  further  the  enquiry 
whether  there  should  or  should  not  be  a  continuance  of 
protecting  duties.  He  begged  to  remind  the  House 
that  Mr.  Huskisson  endeavoured,  by  the  effect  of  his 
legislation,  to  adjust,  not  to  abrogate,  protecting  duties. 
Mr.  Huskisson  endeavoured  to  find  the  point  at  which 
protecting  duties  were  indispensably  necessary,  and  he 
proposed  to  dispense  with  every  shackle  upon  commerce 
that  was  not  necessary.  .  .  .  For  his  own  part,  he  felt 
bound  to  express  the  great  satisfaction  he  felt  upon  every 
occasion  when  any  measure  proposed  and  carried  into 
effect  upon  the  legislation  promoted  by  Mr.  Huskisson 


186  LORD  JOHN  RUSSELL.  CH,  ix. 

produced  the  benefits  which  had  been  anticipated. 
He  himself,  so  far  as  his  humble  endeavours  went,  had 
always  acted  with  Mr.  Huskisson  in  the  promotion  of 
the  principles  which  that  statesman  entertained  on  this 
subject.  He  had  never,  on  the  subject  of  the  principles 
of  free  trade,  had  any  difference  of  opinion  from  that 
right  honourable  gentleman,  and  he  could  say,  as  all 
those  who  had  acted  with  him  could  say — those  who 
had  been  spoken  of  as  illiberal,  while  Mr.  Huskisson 
had  been  praised  as  liberal — .  .  .  .  that  they  had 
given  a  most  cordial  concurrence  in  all  those  measures 
which  Mr.  Huskisson  had  proposed.  .  .  .  Mr.  Huskis- 
son never  was  an  indiscriminate  promoter  of  free  trade, 
and  it  was  equally  unjust  to  suppose  that  those  who 
acted  with  him  were  not  as  liberal  as  he  was  in  the  view 
which  he  took  in  adapting  our  commercial  system  at  the 
close  of  the  war,  and  in  a  new  state  of  things,  to  that  of 
other  countries,  and  in  relieving  our  commerce  from  all 
those  shackles  that  could  possibly  be  dispensed  with.  .  .' 
Lord  John  Russell,  following  Mr.  Herries,  said  that 
*  he  wished  to  address  a  few  observations  to  the  House 
after  the  right  honourable  gentleman  who  had  just  sat 
down,  because,  interesting  as  this  conversation  rather 
than  debate  had  been,  there  was  no  speech  from  which 
he  had  derived  greater  satisfaction  than  that  of  the 
right  honourable  gentleman.  He  agreed  with  him  in 
his  description  of  the  general  policy  of  Mr.  Huskisson, 
although,  perhaps,  there  was  something  to  be  added  to 
that  description.  He  was  pleased,  however,  to  hear 
that  hi  that  policy  ....  the  colleagues  of  Mr.  Huskis- 
son had  cordially  concurred.  ...  It  was  well  known, 


CH.  ix.  HERRIES'S  POLITICAL  POSITION.  187 

too,  that  Mr.  Canning.  .  .  .  eagerly  supported  the 
principles  involved  in  those  measures.  The  right 
honourable  gentleman  (Mr.  Herries)  opposite  had 
himself  declared  his  adherence  to  them  ;  and  he  re- 
joiced to  hear  from  testimony  so  valuable  and  undeni- 
able that  such  principles  were  likewise  to  be  found 
amongst  the  most  enlightened  of  the  party  to  which  the 
right  honourable  gentleman  belonged.  .  .  .' 

The  language  used  by  Lord  John  Russell,  and  by 
other  distinguished  members  on  the  Ministerial  side  of 
the  House,  marks  the  importance  of  the  political  position 
which  belonged  to  Mr.  Herries  in  the  judgment  of  his 
contemporaries.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
(Mr.  F.  Baring)  spoke  of  him  as  the  individual  who 
had  more  practical  experience  in  financial  matters  than 
any  other  member.  Mr.  Charles  Yilliers,  the  able  and 
consistent  advocate  of  the  repeal  of  the  Corn  Laws  long 
before  Mr.  Cobden's  appearance  on  the  political  stage, 
rising  to  reply  to  Mr.  Herries  in  the  sugar  debate,  said 
that  '  he  had  listened  to  the  right  honourable  member 
with  great  interest,  for  knowing  that  he  had  been  con- 
nected with  the  finances  of  the  country,  and  expecting 
that  he  might  soon  be  so  again,  he  was  anxious  to  learn 
his  views  on  the  state  of  that  financial  emergency  in 
which  he  had  described  the  country  to  be  placed.  .  .  .' 
From  these  and  many  other  expressions  it  was  quite 
manifest  that  on  the  Ministerial  side  of  the  House 
Mr.  Herries  was  looked  upon  as  the  person  most  likely 
to  become  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  a  new 
Administration. 


188  LOSS  OF  SEAT.  CH.  x. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Herries  driven  by  evictions  from  Harwich  :  beaten  by  bribery  at  Ipswich ; 
not  included  iu  Peel  Cabinet — Satisfactory  assurances  from  Prime 
Minister — Correspondence  with  him  and  Goulburn — Herries  out  of  office 
consulted  by  ministers — Ills  correspondence  with  Sir  R.  Peel  and 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  on  new  plan  of  finance,  &c. — Metropolis 
Improvements  Commission — Thames  Embankment,  &c. 

MR.  HERRIES,  who  had  contributed  not  a  little  assistance 
towards  the  discomfiture  of  the  Melbourne  Ministry,  was 
not  one  of  the  great  Conservative  majority  which  in  a 
new  Parliament  carried  Sir  Robert  Peel  triumphantly 
into  power  for  the  protection  of  British  agriculture.  He 
found  that  the  Whig  Government  had  at  last  become  too 
strong  for  him  at  Harwich,  where  intimidation  and 
eviction  had  done  their  work  so  surely  as  to  render  his 
re-election  impossible  without  bribery,  to  which  he  never 
would  resort.  His  principal  supporter  for  many  years 
— a  gentleman  of  high  respectability  and  considerable 
local  influence — was  driven  away  from  the  borough  by 
the  destruction  of  his  business  as  a  ship-builder,  which 
he  had  for  a  long  time  carried  011  in  premises  belonging 
to  the  Crown.  His  steady  adherence  to  the  Tory 
member,  whom  the  Government  were  bent  on  ejecting, 
after  having  procured  for  him,  as  well  as  others,  a  series 
of  vexations,  finally  called  forth  a  peremptory  notice, 
enforced  with  needless  harshness,  to  quit  his  shipyard, 
slips,  dwelling-house,  workshops,  &c.,  &c.  A  copy  of 
tliis  document  is  extant,  signed  by  the  Postmaster- 


CH.  x.  EVICTION  AND   BRIBERY.  189 

General,  two  Commissioners  of  Woods  and  Forests,  and 
two  Lords  of  the  Treasury.  Such  was  the  manner  in 
which  freedom  of  election  was  maintained  by  a  Liberal 
Ministry  seven  years  after  the  passing  of  the  Reform 
Bill  to  secure  the  perfect  representation  of  the  people, 
undisturbed  by  undue  influence  and  especially  that  of 
wicked  Tory  landlords.  The  Whig  Government  '  did 
what  they  pleased  with  their  own.' 

Banished  from  his  old  seat  by  the  decree  of  those  in 
power,  Mr.  Herries  was  induced  by  delusive  calculations 
in  a  luckless  hour  to  offer  himself  at  the  General  Election 
as  a  candidate — in  conjunction  with  the  late  Sir  Fitz- 
roy  Kelly — for  the  borough  of  Ipswich,  where,  to  their 
great  surprise,  the  two  Conservatives  were  defeated.  But 
the  election  of  their  Liberal  opponents  was  in  the  ensu- 
ing session  declared  void  by  reason  of  bribery.  Upon 
this  mischance  Sir  Robert  Peel  wrote  to  Mr.  Herries  on 
July  4  :  '  I  am  very  much  disappointed  at  your  failure, 
though  not  at  all  surprised  that  you  should  refuse  to 
resort  to  the  means  by  which  alone  success  could  have 
been  obtained.  From  what  I  had  heard  before  I  left 
London,  I  had  sanguine  hopes  of  your  success,  though 
no  part  of  them  was  founded  on  a  favourable  opinion  of 
Ipswich  voters.  ...  I  care  little  as  to  the  loss  of  the 
seat  compared  with  that  of  your  valuable  assistance  and 
support.  I  now  wish  you  had  tried  some  constituency 
better  qualified  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  your  value 
and  qualifications  as  a  representative  than  these  Ipswich 
gentlemen.'  From  Mr.  Goulburn  also  he  received  a 

o 

letter  full  of  expressions  of  friendly  sympathy  :  '  I  hope 
you  cannot  doubt  my  great  regret  at  the  issue  of  the 


190  NEGOTIATIONS.  OH.  x. 

Ipswich  election.  I  do  not  know  what  your  own 
anticipations  may  have  been,  but  I  confess  that  my 
disappointment  was  aggravated  by  the  result  being  so 
contrary  to  my  previous  expectations.  I  am  in  hopes 
that  your  disappointment  in  this  quarter  will  not  per- 
manently exclude  you  from  the  House  of  Commons. 
For  as  far  as  regards  myself  I  can  truly  say — and  I  think 
my  feeling  is  only  that  of  all  those  who  have,  like  us, 
borne  the  heat  and  brunt  of  the  day — that  there  is  no  one 
whose  assistance  and  society  I  should  more  regret  to 
lose  in  what  I  may  at  least  call  days  of  more  prosperous 
fortune.  .  .  .' 

While  the  petition  against  the  sitting  members 
was  pending,  a  strong  desire  was  manifested  in  some 
quarters  to  compromise  the  matter  in  the  manner 
fashionable  among  electioneering  experts  of  the  day. 
Many  proposals,  suggestions,  and  hints  were  made  with 
that  view  to  Mr.  Herries,  but  he  declined  to  enter  into 
any  arrangement.  To  Mr.  G-oulburn,  then  just  installed 
in  the  Exchequer,  in  forwarding  a  letter  concerning 
some  revenue  business  from  an  Ipswich  local  politician, 
he  wrote  :  '  The  concluding  paragraph  of  it  adds  to  my 
conviction  that  Wason  and  Rennie  will  be  ousted  on 
petition.  I  have  no  doubt  that  if  good  Conservative 
candidates  be  sent  down  on  the  vacancy  the  two  seats 
may  be  now  secured.  There  is,  however,  a  hankering 
after  a  compromise.  I  have  already  stated  to  you  that 
I  am  no  party  to  advising  or  encouraging  such  a  pro- 
ceeding in  any  shape,  and  least  of  all  in  one  which 
might  render  me  liable  to  the  imputation  of  tripping  up 
the  heels  of  Kelly.'  On  the  same  subject  he  wrote,  in 


CH.  I.  PEEL   CABINET.  191 

the  latter  part  of  1841,  to  a  Conservative  gentleman  at 
Ipswich  :  '  I  have,  as  you  know,  avoided  making  any 
statement  or  declaration  to  you  upon  those  intimations, 
— not  only  while  I  was  uncertain  whether  Mr.  Kelly 
was  disposed  to  relinquish  his  claims  upon  the  borough, 
but  even  after  I  had  understood  from  you  that  he  had 
positively  declared  that  he  would  have  nothing  more  to 
do  with  it.  The  truth  is  that  it  did  not  appear  to  me 
to  be  either  necessary  or  becoming  that  I  should  say 
anything  of  my  own  views  or  feelings  on  the  subject 
until  some  distinct  proposition  should  be  made  to  me. 
...  It  is  right,  therefore,  that  you  should  know  that 
it  is  far  from  probable  that  I  should  be  in  a  situation  to 
avail  myself  of  the  good  wishes  of  the  Conservative 
Party  at  Ipswich  in  the  event  of  a  vacancy,  and  that  you 
must  consequently  be  prepared  to  give  your  support 
to  some  other,  I  hope,  more  influential  and  effective 
representative  on  the  right  side  of  politics  than  my- 
self. .  .  .'  Endeavours  were  made  to  find  a  seat  for  him 
elsewhere,  and  several  places  were  suggested  as  offering 
fair  chances  of  success.  If  his  party  had  been  still  in 
opposition,  it  is  probable  that  he  would  have  taken  the 
advice  of  his  friends  and  put  himself  forward  as  a 
candidate  on  some  suitable  vacancy  occurring.  But 
as  matters  then  stood  he  thought  that  by  doing  so  he 
might  bring  himself  into  a  false  position. 

Against  general  expectation,  he  was  not  included 
in  the  list  of  the  new  Cabinet  formed  on  Lord  Mel- 
bourne's resignation  in  September,  the  sole  cause  of 
his  omission  being,  as  Sir  Robert  Peel  himself  declared, 
his  absence  from  Parliament.  What  passed  between 


192  COMMUNICATION  FROM  THE  PREMIER.          CH.  x. 

them  on  this  subject  is  recorded  in  the  following  memo- 
randum of  a  conversation  on  September  10. 

*  Mr.  Herries  waited  on  Sir  R.  Peel  in  consequence 
of  a  note  received  on  the  8th  making  an  appointment 
for  this  day. 

'  Sir  R.  Peel  received  him  with  the  greatest  cordiality, 
and,  after  a  few  commonplace  general  observations,  en- 
tered upon  the  subject  of  the  interview. 

'  He  began  by  saying  that  he  had  been  desirous  of 
communicating  the  matter  he  was  about  to  state  at  an 
earlier  period,  that  he  had  even  commenced  a  letter, 
which  he  found  would  be  a  long  one  if  he  explained 
himself  so  fully  as  he  desired,  but  that  his  incessant  and 
pressing  occupations,  some  of  them  of  the  most  harass- 
ing and  perplexing  kind,  had  prevented  him  from 
going  on  with  it.  He  then  said  that  he  had  no  doubt 
Mr.  H.  was  perfectly  aware  of  his  earnest  desire  to  have 
the  benefit  of  his  services  and  assistance  in  his  new 
Government,  and  he  assured  him  that  he  was  fully 
prepared  to  have  recommended  him  for  an  office  with  a 
seat  in  the  Cabinet  if  the  difficulty  arising  from  his  want 
of  a  seat  in  Parliament  had  not  presented  such  an 
obstacle  as  he  could  not — circumstanced  as  he  was  with 
respect  to  other  people — contrive  to  overcome.  He  then 
said  there  were  strong  claims  upon  him  on  the  part  of 

Mr. ,  Lord ,  Lord  ,  Mr.  ,  &c.  ;  that 

if  he  had  set  aside  a  general  rule  of  exception  which 
existed  in  Mr.  H.'s  case,  it  would  have  been  impossible 
for  him  to  resist  the  various  claims  and  pretensions  put 
forward  by  those  and  other  persons ;  that  it  had  cost 
him  much  to  come  to  this  decision,  and  he  had  done  so 


en.  x.  FRIENDLY   ASSURANCES.  193 

very  reluctantly  and  with  considerable  regret,  but  that 
he  found  himself  really  unable  to  do  otherwise.  He 
said  that  Mr.  H.  might  be  well  convinced  of  his  earnest 
desire  to  have  removed  this  obstacle  by  seeing  him  pro- 
vided with  a  seat  in  Parliament  by  the  circumstance  of 
his  having  sent  the  deputation  from  Bradford  to  him.  .  . 
He  said  that  so  strongly  was  he  desirous  of  having 
Mr.  H.  for  one  of  his  colleagues,  that  he  had  been  pre- 
pared to  suggest  to  Sir to  waive  his  pretensions 

on  this  occasion  to  facilitate  an  arrangement  for  Mr.  H., 
and  with  a  pretty  good  knowledge  that  he  would  have 
experienced  no  difficulty  in  that  quarter.  He  then 
went  on  to  say  that  it  would  be  satisfactory  to  Mr.  H. 
to  know  that  the  other  members  of  the  Cabinet  (and  he 
specifically  mentioned  Lord  Stanley  and  Sir  James 
Graham)  would  have  been  well  pleased  with  any 
arrangement  that  should  have  placed  Mr.  H.  among 
them.  He  said  that  some  observations  had  been  made — 
he  forgot  by  whom — that  a  difficulty  might  arise  from 
the  placing  of  Lord  Ripon  and  Mr.  H.  in  the  same 
Cabinet.  He  asked  Mr.  H.  if  any  such  objection  would 
have  existed  on  his  part,  and  upon  being  answered  in 
the  negative,  he  stated  that  he  had  every  reason  to 
suppose  that  Lord  Ripon  was  equally  free  from  any 
feeling  incompatible  with  their  sitting  in  Council  to- 
gether with  perfect  cordiality.1 

He  added  that  he  would  at  once  frankly  state  that 
if  any  objection  had  been  suggested  by  Lord  Ripon  to 

1  This  obviously  could  not  have  been  the  case  if  Lord  Ripon  had  believed 
that  there  was  the  least  truth  in  Lord  Palmerstou's  story  about  the  imaginary 
blowing  up  of  the  Goderich  Cabinet. 

VOL.  II.  O 


194  FRIENDLY  ASSURANCES.  CH.  x. 

the  admission  of  Mr.  Herries  into  the  Cahinet  he  should 
in  that  case  at  once  have  declared  that  he  would  not 
admit  the  objection,  and  that  Lord  Ripon  could  not  be 
a  member  of  his  Cabinet.2  He  said  that  these  statements 
would  convince  Mr.  Herries  of  the  high  estimation  in 
which  he  stood  with  him  and  of  his  sincere  desire  to  have 
him  again  for  a  colleague  if  the  circumstances  of  his  case 
had  allowed  of  it,  and  he  added  that  he  thought  that  such 
declarations  proceeding  from  him,  and  given  in  perfect 
truth  and  sincerity,  ought  to  be,  and  would  be,  sufficient 
to  remove  from  the  mind  of  Mr.  H.'s  friends  any  un- 
pleasant feelings  which  they  might  be  induced  to  enter- 
tain by  the  mere  view  of  the  fact  of  Mr.  Her  lies' s  not 
being  included  in  the  recently  formed  arrangements. 
He  then  asked  Mr.  Herries  whether  he  intended  to  come 
into  Parliament  (as  Mr.  H.  understood),  his  words 
being,  '  I  suppose  you  will  come  into  Parliament.'  To 
this  it  was  answered  Mr.  H.  did  not  exactly  see  the  way 
.  at  present ;  that  his  ability  to  come  into  Parliament 
might  with  some  constituencies  depend  a  good  deal 
upon  the  position  which  he  might  happen  to  occupy 
with  relation  to  the  Government. 

Mr.  H.  then  adverted  to  the  borough  of  Ripon,3 
and  to  his  having  suggested  to  Sir  Robert  Peel  some 
time  back  that  Ripon  and  some  other  boroughs  would 
probably  be  at  his  disposal.  Sir  R.  Peel  observed  that 
with  respect  to  Ripon  Sir  George  Cockburn  had  a 

2  This  shows  what  was  Sir  Robert  Peel's  estimation  of  the  relative  value 
•of  the  two  men. 

3  About  to  be  vacated  by  Sir  E.  Sugden  on  his  appointment  as  Lord- 
Chancellor  of  Ireland. 


CH.  x.  CORRESPONDENCE.  195 

peculiar  claim,  inasmuch  as  he  had  entertained  an  expec- 
tation of  coming  in  upon  a  vacancy  at  Sandwich  which 
it  appeared  was  likely  now  not  to  occur.  .  .  . 

He  then  expressed  his  hope  that  Mr.  H.  would  com- 
municate with  him  as  confidentially  upon  public  matters 
as  usual  .  .  .  and  the  interview  terminated  in  the  most 
friendly  manner.' 

It  gave  rise  to  the  following  correspondence: — 

'September]].  1841. 

1  My  dear  Peel, — I  returned  home  too  late  to  write 
to  you  by  the  post  yesterday,  or  I  should  not  have 
allowed  it  to  depart  without  a  few  lines  to  assure  you 
that  my  conversation  with  you  had  afforded  me  very 
great  satisfaction  in  relieving  my  mind  from  an  un- 
pleasant though  undefined  misgiving  as  to  the  cause  of 
my  having  heard  nothing  from  you  during  the  progress 
of  your  official  arrangements. 

'  Your  frank  and  friendly  explanation  has  dispelled 
the  vague  surmises  which  had  been  haunting  me  ;  and 
I  have  now  the  certainty  that  not  only  were  you 
desirous  of  once  more  proposing  me  to  the  Crown  for 
a  Cabinet  office,  but  that  such  an  accession  to  your 
Councils  would  not  have  been  unwelcome  to  any  of 
your  colleagues  ;  my  want  of  a  seat  in  Parliament 
being  the  only  obstacle  to  your  wishes  in  that  respect. 

'  After  these  gratifying  assurances  from  you  upon  a 
point  of  so  much  interest  and  importance  to  me,  I  shall 
pass  into  the  retirement  to  which  the  unlucky  result  of 
the  Ipswich  election  has  alone  consigned  me,  without 
any  painful  feeling  except  that  of  sincere  regret  that  I 
am  not  able  in  the  hour  of  success  to  rejoin  those  ranks 

o  2 


19G  CORRESPONDENCE.  CH.  x. 

in  which,  under  your  guidance,  through  many  a  year 
and  many  a  turn  of  good  and  ill  fortune  to  our  common 
cause,  I  have  witnessed  all  the  good  fights  and  good 
management  which  have  ultimately  led  to  it. 

1 1  trust  that  I  am  not  wrong  in  the  understanding 
that  I  am  at  liberty  to  state  to  my  own  anxious  and 
inquiring  friends  what  have  been  your  feelings  and 
intentions  in  respect  to  my  position,  and  what  has  been 
the  only  impediment  to  your  acting  upon  them.  Be- 
lieve  me,  &c.,  ,  j  c  HEREIES  , 

'  Whitehall :  September  18. 

1  My  dear  Herries, — You  certainly  are  at  liberty  to 
mention  to  any  of  your  relations  or  friends  with  whom 
you  may  deem  it  desirable  to  communicate  upon  the 
subject,  that  if  on  being  recently  called  upon  by  Her 
Majesty  to  form  an  Administration,  you  had  been  a 
member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  I  cannot  doubt  that 
I  should  have  invited  you  to  render  the  Government 
your  valuable  assistance  as  a  member  of  it  with  a  seat 
in  the  Cabinet. 

'  I  do  not  believe  that  I  should  have  met  with  the 
slightest  impediment  in  the  way  of  such  an  offer  from 
any  one  of  my  present  colleagues,  and  if  I  had,  I  should 
not  have  permitted  it  to  prevail.  Believe  me,  my  dear 
Herries,  with  sincere  regard,  most  faithfully  yours, 

'  ROBERT  PEEL.' 

A  few  days  later  another  communication  took  place. 

4  September*  21. — A  messenger  from  Sir  Robert  Peel 

arrived  at  ^-past  5.     I  found  him  at  my  house  on  my 


CH.  i.  A   SEAT   OFFERED  BY   SIR  R.   PEEL.  197 

return  home  at  ^-past  6.  He  brought  a  letter  desiring  rny 
immediate  presence  at  Sir  Robert's,  on  the  subject  of  a 
proposal  of  a  seat  in  Parliament. 

'  I  returned  with  the  messenger,  and  found  Sir 
Robert  at  his  house  at  10  o'clock. 

'  He  told  me  that  the  conduct  of  Sir  E.  Sugden  had 
provoked  a  motion  by  Wilde  to  which  it  had  been 
found  necessary  to  give  way,  and  that  the  writ  for  Ripon 
had  consequently  been  moved.  This  he  said  had  in- 
conveniently precipitated  his  arrangements,  and  he  now 
offered  Ripon  to  me  in  such  a  manner  that  an  immediate 
decision  was  indispensably  requisite.  I  must  go  down  this 
night,  or  to-morrow  by  the  very  first  train,  if  I  accepted 
the  seat.  He  said  that  he  had  destined  it  for  Sir  George 
Cockburn,  but  that  he  was  glad  to  offer  it  to  me  in  the 
first  instance,  hoping  that  Cockburn  might  find  an 
opening  in  some  other  place.  .  .  .  He  pointed  out  in 
strong  terms  the  advantages  of  Ripon  as  a  seat — its 
certainty — its  probable  permanency — the  terms  on  which 
it  might  be  held,  &c.  In  short,  he  said,  it  is  the  very 
best  seat  in  England.  He  added,  however,  that  the 
offer  of  the  seat  was  to  be  considered  as  being  unaccom- 
panied by  any  other  proposal.  This  I  understood,  and 
no  doubt  correctly,  to  intimate  that  he  had  no  proposal 
to  make  to  me  respecting  office. 

1 1  told  him  that  I  was  a  great  deal  taken  by  sur- 
prise so  far  as  Ripon  was  concerned,  because  in  a  former 
interview  he  had  apprised  me  of  a  different  destination 
for  it.  I  said  that  I  was  sensible  of  his  kindness  in 
making  me  the  offer,  but  that  my  present  intention  was 
to  decline  any  seat  under  the  immediate  nomination  of 


198  OFFER   DECLINED.  CH.  x. 

the  Government  at  the  present  time,  when  I  had  so 
recently  been  left  out  of  the  official  arrangements  in  the 
formation  of  it  on  the  sole  ground  that  I  was  not  pro- 
vided with  one. 

*  He  seemed  surprised  by  my  decision,  and  suggested 
various  grounds  to  induce  me  to  reconsider  the  matter. 
I  thanked  him  heartily  for  his  kindness  on  this  occasion, 
and  for  that  which  he  had  expressed  in  assuring  me 
that  he  had  fully  intended  to  associate  me  with  him  in 
his  Cabinet  if  I  had  been  in  Parliament,  and  I  expressed 
my  earnest  hope  that  nothing  would  occur  to  disturb 
the  mutual  regard  between  us.  But  I  added  that  I  felt 
so  strongly  that  I  should  be  in  a  false  and  very  un- 
satisfactory position  were  I  to  occupy  such  a  seat  as 
Ripon  while  I  was  entirely  unconnected  with  my  former 
friends  in  office,  that  I  must  positively  decline  it.  I 
assured  him  that  I  should  always  be  ready  to  afford  any 
assistance  to  him,  and  that  I  thought  I  could  be  more 
useful  when  out  of  Parliament  than  in  it  under  such 
circumstances.  .  .  .' 

The  views  indicated  above  are  brought  out  still  more 
clearly  in  a  communication  to  Mr.  Goulburn. 

'  September  29,  1841. 

*  My  dear  Goulburn, — In  the  conversation  which  I 
had  with  you  after  I  had  declined  the  proposal  to  go  to 
Ripon,  you  appeared  to  me  to  enter  into  the  feelings 
which  I  then  described  as  having  actuated  me,  and  I 
think  you  assented  to  the  argument  upon  which  my 
conclusion  was  built,  though  I  do  not  remember  that 
you  expressly  said  so. 


CH.  x.  LETTER  TO  GOULBURN.  199 

'  I  have  since  thought  a  good  deal  about  that  matter. 
The  enclosed  memorandum  which  I  send  you  in  con- 
fidence contains  shortly  my  view  of  the  subject.  I  am 
anxious  that  you  should  read  it  with  a  friendly  attention, 
and  that  I  should  have  the  benefit  of  your  judgment 
upon  it.  It  is  seldom  that  a  man  thinks  very  clearly 
or  judges  quite  soundly  when  his  feelings  are  strongly 
moved  by  the  subject  to  which  his  thoughts  are 
directed.  I  am  the  more  anxious,  therefore,  to  have 
your  advice  and  opinion. 

1  You  will  see  that  the  present  object  of  my  solici- 
tude is  that  my  separation  in  political  life  from  those 
with  whom  I  have  so  long  and  so  cordially  acted,  may 
be  effected  in  the  manner  least  likely  to  occasion  a 
severance  in  other  respects. 

'  Do  not  think  that  I  expect  an  immediate  attention 
to  this  affair  of  mine.  Let  me  hear  from  you  at  your 
leisure Most  truly  yours,  t  j  c  HERRIES; 

Memorandum. 

'  The  more  I  have  reflected  on  the  offer  of  the  seat 
for  Ilipon  from  Sir  Robert  Peel,  accompanied  by  the 
declaration,  by  way  of  caution,  that  it  was  not  connected 
with  any  other  proposal — by  which  I  understood  that 
no  prospect  of  employment  was  held  out  to  me — the 
more  am  I  satisfied  that  it  was  right  on  my  part  to 
decline  the  favour  thus  proffered  to  me. 

*  My  position  is  this  :  I  was  called  into  the  higher 
departments  of  political  life  by  Lord  Liverpool  from  the 
lucrative  permanent  situation  which  I  then  filled,  on. 


200  MEMORANDUM.  CH.  x. 

the  ground  of  my  supposed  experience  and  capacity 
in  public  business.  From  the  period  when  that  occurred 
(now  twenty  years  since)  I  have  been  in  close  and  con- 
fidential connection  with  the  party  which  I  then  joined, 
and  steadfastly  devoted  to  the  same  political  principles. 
I  have  occupied  some  very  prominent  stations,  both  in 
subordination  to  the  Government  and  as  forming  a  part 
of  it.  I  have  taken,  on  some  occasions,  a  very  forward, 
and,  at  all  times,  a  labouring,  part  in  Parliament,  in 
concert  with  the  chiefs  of  my  party.  I  have  maintained 
out  of  office,  at  a  considerable  cost,  during  more  than 
ten  years,  and  at  four  elections,  against  all  the  power  of 
the  Government,  a  seat  theretofore  invariably  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Treasury  for  the  time  being.  Driven  at 
length  from  thence  by  the  overwhelming  weight  of  that 
power,  I  embarked,  with  every  fair  prospect  of  success, 
in  a  contest  at  Ipswich,  which  proved  unfortunate  by 
reason  of  the  pecuUar  hostility  of  the  Whigs  to  me  ;  and 
I  now  find  myself  temporarily  deprived  of  a  place  in 
the  House  of  Commons  at  the  very  time  when  the  party 
and  the  principles  with  which,  and  for  which,  I  so  long 
have  been  fighting,  have  triumphantly  prevailed. 

'  On  the  occasion  of  this  great  change  every  indivi- 
dual, so  far  as  I  know,  having  any  fair  claims  to  office, 
or  favour  or  distinction,  high  or  low,  has  derived  some 
advantage  from  it,  or  received  some  public  recognition 
of  his  pretensions  or  services,  except  myself.  But  I  have 
received  the  assurance  that,  had  it  not  been  for  the  un- 
fortunate mischance  of  the  lost  election,  and  the  conse- 
quent want  of  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons,  a  high 
station  in  office  would  have  been  assigned  to  me. 


CH.  x.  MEMORANDUM.  201 

*  On  my  part  it  is  perfectly  true  that  I  have  not  asked 
for  office  ;  that  I  have  urged  no  vain  or  selfish  preten- 
sions to  employment  ;    and  that,  on  the    contrary,    I 
have  submitted  myself  entirely  to  the  judgment  of  my 
leader  to  employ  me  or  not,  as  to  him  might  seem  most 
expedient  for  the  public  service.     I  did  so  in  perfect 
sincerity  and  good  faith,   prepared  to    abide,    without 
objection  or  remonstrance,  by  the  decision,  be  it  what 
it  might. 

'But  while  I  submit  myself  entirely  to  that  determi- 
nation, formed  upon  grounds  of  public  expediency  (not 
in  any  degree  affecting  my  character),  whereby  I  stand 
excluded  from  office,  I  am  far  from  being  indifferent  to 
the  effect  which  might  be  produced  upon  the  estimation 
in  which  I  have  hitherto  been  held  in  public  and  private 
life  by  the  manner  of  my  retirement  and  the  circum- 
stances attending  it.  Any  unfavourable  misconstruction 
as  to  the  cause  of  my  official  severance  from  the  Con- 
servative party  might  prove  a  thousandfold  more  painful 
to  me  than  the  mere  fact  of  my  being  laid  aside. 

*  It  happens,  unfortunately,  that  the  most  obvious 
conclusion  with  respect  to  my  present  insulated  position 
is  precisely  that  which  has  the  smallest  foundation  in 
truth.     It  is  supposed  (and  I  know  the  fact  from  having 
been  called  upon  to  refute  the  error)  that  I  have  urged 
pretensions  to  a  particular  office,  or  at  least  to  office  of 
a  certain  rank,  without  which  I  would  not  be  satisfied, 
and  that  a  difference  between  me  and  Sir  Robert  Peel 
on  that  point  has  led  to  the  result.  This  is  as  unfavour- 
able to  me  as  it  is  devoid  of  truth.     Other  conjectures 
equally  unfounded  have  been  made  ;  naturally  enough, 


202  MEMORANDUM.  CH.  x. 

because  the  real  cause  is  not  obvious,  and  indeed  to 
many  persons,  even  when  distinctly  stated,  it  is  not 
easily  intelligible.  They  will  not  understand  how  the 
want  of  a  seat  in  Parliament,  which  could  be  so  easily 
supplied  now  that  my  friends  are  in  power,  either  by 
them  or  by  my  own  exertions,  could  so  definitively  have 
closed  the  door  against  me.  The  vacancy  at  Ripon  was 
foreseen  by  every  one  even  before  the  new  Government 
was  formed,  and  if  I  had  accepted  the  offer  of  that  seat, 
the  very  fact  of  my  now  filling  it  would  have  rendered 
my  separation  from  office  more  unaccountable.  The 
assurance,  which  I  should  have  given  to  everyone,  that 
it  was  only  because  the  vacancy  did  not  actually  exist  at 
the  very  moment  when  my  former  fellow-labourers  were 
called  into  employment  again,  would,  if  urged  under 
such  circumstances  as  an  explanation  of  my  exclusion, 
rather  have  tended,  I  think,  to  create  than  to  remove 
any  unfavourable  doubts.  I  should  hardly  have  stood 
clear  and  well  in  the  public  eye  in  such  a  position,  and 
with  nothing  more  to  offer  than  such  an  assurance 
(strictly  true  though  it  be)  to  account  for  it.  In  short, 
I  do  not  see  how  I  could  at  the  present  moment  satis- 
factorily take  a  private  station  in  Parliament  under  the 
immediate  auspices  of  the  Government,  but  unconnected 
with  it,  except  on  the  clear  and  avowed  understanding 
that  I  had  spontaneously  renounced  public  employ- 
ment, and  was  determined  to  retire  from  all  public  duties 
beyond  those  of  an  individual  member  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  That  would  undoubtedly  be  a  high  position, 
and  one  which  any  man  might  be  proud  of.  But  it 
is  not  mine,  and  I  ain  not  the  man  to  assume  a  false 


en.  x.  MEMORANDUM.  203 

character,  or  to  allow  sentiments  and  pretensions  to  be 
unduly  ascribed  to  me  not  strictly  in  accordance  with 
the  truth. 

4  What,  therefore,  remains  for  me,  after  so  long  a 
period  of  active,  and  I  hope  not  wholly  unuseful  service, 
and  after  so  great  a  sacrifice  of  personal  interest  as  I 
have  made,  except  to  abide  quietly  by  my  fireside,  and 
to  watch  with  friendly  anxiety  the  progress  of  a  better 
order  of  things  in  the  hands  of  those  who  are  now  called 
to  the  administration  of  public  affairs  ? 

'  But  I  must  take  care  that  my  retirement  be  not  ex- 
posed to  misconstruction,  and  that  it  bring  no  spot  or 
speck  upon  my  good  name.  In  this  I  confidently  hope 
for  the  assistance  of  all  my  friends  in  office,  in  concur- 
rence with  Sir  R.  Peel,  who  will,  I  am  sure,  do  what- 
ever may  be  most  conducive  to  afford  clear  evidence 
that  my  connection  with  his  Government  is  not  severed 
by  reason  of  any  diminution  of  the  good  opinion  or 
goodwill  towards  me  of  those  who  compose  it.  It 
would  indeed  be  as  little  to  their  credit  as  to  mine  if 
any  mystery  should  hang  over  my  separation  from 
them.  After  having  so  long  been  before  the  public  I 
must  pass  from  official  into  private  life  as  an  upright 
public  servant,  and  as  a  gentleman  and  a  man  of  honour 
ought  to  do.' 

Mr.  Goulburn,  in  his  reply,  concluded  thus  :  '  I  can 
truly  say  that  I  have  never  heard  your  exclusion  from 
office  attributed  to  any  other  than  the  real  cause,  and 
what  our  old  friendship  would  make  an  imperative  duty 
on  me  is  felt,  I  believe,  by  all  your  friends  in  the  Gov- 
ernment, that  if  any  surmise  to  the  contrary  was  to 


204  FINANCIAL  CONSULTATIONS.  en.  x. 

reach  them  they  would  be  prompt  and  eager  in  its  refu- 
tation.' .  .  . 

Although  removed  from  active  political  life,  Mr. 
Herries  continued  to  be  consulted,  as  he  had  been  dur- 
ing the  greater  part  of  his  existence,  on  many  impor- 
tant questions,  and  his  aid  and  advice,  frequently  sought, 
were  always  readily  given.  As  we  write  we  see  before 
us  a  bulky  packet  of  comparative  financial  statements 
and  calculations  for  each  of  the  Administrations  since 
the  Peace,  enclosed  in  a  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton, shortly  before  the  meeting  of  the  new  Parliament. 

'August  21, 1841. 

'  My  dear  Lord  Duke, — I  think  the  accompanying 
papers  contain  the  answers  to  the  several  points  on 
which  you  put  questions  to  me,  with  the  exception  of 
the  sugar,  on  which  I  hope  you  have  received  ample 
information  from  the  quarters  in  which  I  made  inquiry. 

'  With  respect  to  the  prices  of  sugar,  I  find  some  of 
the  best  West  Indians — Irving  in  particular,  and  I  dare 
say  Grant — beginning  to  be  alarmed  about  the  lowness 
of  the  price.  They  expect  what  they  call  bad  times 
from  the  abundance  of  the  supply.  If  there  is  reason 
for  their  fear  in  that  respect,  the  argument  becomes  so 
much  stronger  against  the  framers  of  the  Budget. 

*  My  servant  will  return  to  me  to-night,  and  if  you 
wish  for  any  further  information  that  I  can  afford,  you 
will  perhaps  send  a  line  to  me  by  him.  Believe  me, 
&c., 

'J.  C.  HERRIES.' 

Not  very  long  after  the   formation  of  Sir  Robert 


CH.  x.  FINANCIAL  CONSULTATIONS.  205 

Peel's  Government,  we  were  present  when  the  quiet  of 
the  retired  politician  was  rudely  disturbed  by  a  hot  and 
hurried  Treasury  messenger  driven  up  to  his  door  at 
full  speed  in  a  post-chaise — the  bearer  of  a  short  but 
urgent  missive  from  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
beginning  with  the  ominous  words,  '  Peel  and  I  are  in  a 
cleft  stake,'  and  entreating  that  his  friend  would  in- 
stantly repair  to  London  for  the  purpose  of  trying  to 
extricate  them  from  that  unpleasant  position.  Respond- 
ing to  this  earnest  appeal  he  hastened  to  town,  where 
he  learned  that  the  difficulties,  on  account  of  which  his 
help  was  wanted,  had  arisen  out  of  a  funding  operation 
rendered  necessary  by  the  deficit  bequeathed  by  the 
outgoing  Whigs.  It  did  not  appear  to  the  person  called 
in  that  the  embarrassment  (which,  in  his  opinion,  might 
have  been  avoided)  was  a  very  serious  one,  and  he  sug- 
gested means  for  its  removal.  Then  ensued  a  curious 
incident.  The  two  heads  of  the  Treasury,  closeted 
with  a  great  capitalist,  discussed  the  terms  of  a  proposed 
arrangement,  while  in  an  adjoining  room  their  concealed 
counsellor  from  the  country  sat  apart  for  occasional 
consultation.  He  returned  to  his  fields,  wondering  why 
he  had  been  called  away  from  them,  and  reflecting  upon 
the  much  more  difficult  negotiations  which  in  much 
more  critical  times  he  had  often  concluded  with  far  less 
trouble,  and  without  seeking  any  external  aid. 

On  a  far  more  important  matter,  his  opinion  was 
thought  worth  taking  soon  afterwards,  as  may  be  seen 
from  the  following  paper  in  reply  to  a  letter,  dated  No- 
vember 5,  1841,  from  Sir  Robert  Peel,  in  which,  refer- 
ring to  an  interview  with  Mr.  Herries  on  the  same  day, 


206  LETTER  TO   PEEL.  OH.  x. 

he  encloses  correspondence  (returned  uncopied),  '  on 
the  subject  of  some  extensive  scheme  of  finance  for  the 
purpose  of  supplying  the  existing  and  the  contemplated 
deficiency  by  much  more  legitimate  and  satisfactory 
means  than  have  been  hitherto  resorted  to  ' — and  adds, 
*  I  shall  be  very  much  obliged  by  your  ca~  eful  perusal 
of  these  papers,  and  by  the  communication  of  your  opi- 
nions on  matters  of  such  paramount  importance.' 

'Novembers,  1841. 

*  My  dear  Peel, — A  hasty  glance  at  the  papers  which 
you  sent  to  me  on  Friday  night  was  sufficient  to  show 
me  that  great  attention  ought  to  be  brought  to  the 
perusal  of  them,  and  being  very  pressingly  engaged 
with  the  matters  which  had  brought  me  to  London,  I 
was  obliged  to  postpone,  until  my  return  hither,  the 
careful  consideration  of  these  important  documents.  I 
return  them  herewith. 

1  Although  they  embrace  several  topics  and  some  de- 
tails of  considerable  interest,  the  main  point  to  which  all 
of  these  a,re  subordinate  is  of  such  paramount  importance 
that  I  think  I  shall  best  fulfil  your  wishes  in  confining 
my  observations  almost  exclusively  to  it.  The  question 
for  decision  is,  whether  the  existing  insufficiency  of  the 
Revenue  to  meet  the  annual  expenditure  can  be  supplied 
in  any  manner  more  suitable  to  the  present  circum- 
stances of  the  country  than  by  the  imposition  of  a  tax 
on  Income  derived  from  Property?  ' 4 

4  From  this  past-age  and  subsequent  observations,  as  well  as  the  words 
quoted  above  from  Sir  Robert  Peel's  own  letter  of  November  5,  it  is  mani- 
fest that  the  primary  object  which  he  had  in  view  when  he  submitted  the 
question  so  stated  to  the  consideration  of  Mr.  Ileiries  was  the  restoration  of 
the  lost  financial  equilibrium.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  reimposition 


en.  x.  THE  DEFICIT.  207 

*  Your  estimate  of  the  actual  deficiency  for  future 
years  is  3,000,000/.,  and,  I  presume,  you  contemplate 
the  necessity  of  making  provision  to  the  extent  of  about 
1,000,000/.  beyond  that  as  a  surplus,  indispensable  for 
the  sake  of  security  and  the  maintenance  of  the  public 
credit. 

'  I  assume,  of  course,  that  all  intention  to  dabble  with 
the  disastrous  state  of  things  by  temporary  expedients, 
involving  the  creation  of  new  debt,  is  to  be  entirely 
rejected,  as  being  a  course  bad  in  itself,  and,  moreover, 
peculiarly  unfitted  to  the  position  of  the  present  Go- 
vernment, and  to  the  expectations  that  are  entertained 
of  it. 

'  Such  being  the  case,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  de- 
claring my  firm  conviction  that  no  other  safe  and  prac- 
ticable expedient  is  open  to  you  than  a  recourse  to 
direct  taxation,  and  that  a  Property  Tax  is  the  best 

of  a  property  or  income  tax  was,  at  that  time  at  least,  contemplated  as  a 
means,  in  the  first  instance,  of  supplying  die  continuous  deficiency  of  the 
Revenue  which  had  to  be  made  good.  Sir  Robert  Peel's  own  words  on 
bringing  forward  the  measure  in  1842  point  to  the  same  conclusion.  But 
when  Mr.  Herries,  in  moviug  for  a  diminution  of  the  income  tax  in  1851, 
asserted  that  such  had  been  its  original  and  principal  purpose — observing  at 
the  same  time  that  he  knew  the  fact  from  having  himself  been  consulted  on 
the  subject — he  was  contradicted  in  a  somewhat  too  peremptory  tone  of 
authority.  It  had  then  become  the  fashion  to  treat  as  a  matter  of  quite 
secondary  importance  the  perilous  financial  condition  of  the  nation  at  the 
beginning  of  1842,  described  by  Sir  Robert  Peel  as  the  '  mighty  and  growing 
evil '  which  he  proposed  to  remedy,  and  to  represent  the  income  tax  as 
having  been  from  the  outset  devised  solely,  or  chiefly,  as  an  engine  for 
effecting  a  complete  change  of  fiscal  policy. 

It  seems  worthy  of  observation  that  in  the  passage  above,  'a  tax  on  in- 
come derived  from  property  '  is  spoken  of.  Whether  in  the  original  scheme 
brought  under  the  cognizance  of  Mr.  Herries  the  tax  was  intended  to  be  so 
limited,  or  whether  the  words  used  by  him  implied  a  suggestion  of  his  own, 
we  have  no  means  of  knowing. 


208  PROPERTY  TAX.  CH.  x. 

description  of  direct  taxation  that  you  can  adopt  under 
present  circumstances. 

'  I  have  the  less  difficulty  in  arriving  at  this  conclu- 
sion, because  I  have  very  long  entertained  the  convic- 
tion that  the  burthens  of  this  country,  consisting  in  so 
large  a  degree  of  accumulated  debt,  ought  to  be  defrayed, 
in  a  greater  proportion  than  they  have  hitherto  been 
since  the  Peace,  by  the  contribution  of  accumulated 
wealth  ;  and  that  the  very  great  preponderance  assigned 
in  our  system  of  taxation  to  the  duties  derived  from 
manufactures  and  consumption,  was  not  only  impolitic 
but  unsustainable. 

'  I  was  so  deeply  impressed  with  this  belief  more 
than  fifteen  years  ago  that  when  I  held  the  office  of 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  I  had  come  to  the  deter- 
mination, in  entire  concurrence  with  Huskisson  and 
Lord  Ripon,  to  propose  a  Property  Tax  by  way  of 
commutation  for  some  of  the  then  existing  indirect 
taxes,  which  were  most  obstructive  to  the  industry  of 
the  country,  and  consequently  most  detrimental  to  it  in 
its  then  growing  rivalry  with  the  manufactures  of  the 
Continent,  and  also  most  obnoxious  to  the  public 
feeling  ;  and  therefore  likely  to  be  wrenched,  sooner  or 
later,  out  of  the  hands  of  any  Government.  The  change 
of  Ministry  put  an  end  to  these  intentions,  but  I  have 
never  ceased  to  think  that  they  were  right  in  principle  ; 
and  I  am  still  convinced  that  by  adopting  such  a  course 
at  that  period  the  crisis  in  which  we  are  now  involved 
would  have  been  averted.  We  should  have  anticipated 
the  necessity  under  which  we  are  now  compelled  to 
re  vert  4o  direct  taxation. 


en.  x.  CAUSE  OF  DEFICIENCY.  209 

'I  need  not  point  out  to  you  that  our  present  insuffi- 
ciency of  public  income  does  not  arise  from  any  really 
extravagant  or  unforeseen  excess  of  expenditure  on  the 
one  hand,  nor  from  any  decay  of  wealth  or  diminution 
in  the  means  of  consumption  or  contribution  to  the 
public  revenue  in  the  nation  at  large  on  the  other.  If 
the  expenditure,  such  as  it  is  even  now,  is  compared 
with  the  estimate  formed  by  the  Committee  of  Finance 
in  [1817  or  1828 — the  figures  are  uncertain],  there  is 
nothing  to  complain  of.  And  if  the  actual  produce  of 
the  revenue  be  contrasted  with  the  amount  to  which  it 
would  have  been  reduced  by  the  taxes  taken  off  if  con- 
sumption had  remained  stationary,  the  augmentation  is 
prodigious. 

'  It  is,  in  truth,  therefore,  solely  to  the  abandonment 
of  taxes  that  we  owe  the  present  deficiency  ;  and 
although  that  abandonment  may  have  been  made  in 
some  respects  unnecessarily,  and  in  others  unskilfully, 
by  the  late  Government,  I  am  still  thoroughly  persuaded 
that  no  Government,  however  skilful  or  strong,  could 
have  resisted,  or,  if  they  could,  ought  to  have  resisted, 
the  inducement  to  a  large  reduction  of  the  indirect 
taxation  which  the  circumstances  and  the  feelings  of 
the  country  created. 

'  Among  the  mistakes  Lord  Spencer,  who  may  be 
reckoned,  perhaps,  the  very  worst  of  the  financial 
managers  who  have  had  charge  of  the  Exchequer, 
committed,  the  greatest  perhaps  was  the  giving  up  of 
the  taxes  on  houses  and  windows  (taxes  upon  pro- 
perty), and  laying  a  duty  upon  raw  cotton.  It  was 
moving  exactly  in  the  wrong  direction.  Even  the 

VOL.  II.  P 


210  POST  OFFICE  REVENUE.  CH.  x. 

unwise  reduction  of  the  Post  Office  revenue5  was  more 
justified  upon  principle  than  that  measure. . 

5  In  the  judgment  of  the  writer  of  this  letter,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Sir 
Robert  Peel,  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  the  change  of  the  postal  system  in- 
troduced in  1840  was  imprudent  because  it  greatly  increased  the  deficiency 
of  the  Revenue.  This,  and  no  other,  was  the  ground  of  the  opposition  to 
the  measure  on  the  part  of  the  Conservatives ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  deny 
that  their  financial  objections  were  well  founded.  The  immediate  loss  of 
revenue  was  enormous.  In  the  year  ended  January  5,  1830  (the  last  com- 
plete year  under  the  old  system),  the  net  revenue  of  the  Post  Office  was 
1,659,5097.,  including  45,1567.,  the  amount  of  postage  charged  on  Govern- 
ment departments.  In  the  year  ended  January  5,  1841  (the  first  year  of 
the  penny  post),  the  net  revenue  was  only  500,7897.,  including  90,7617. 
charged  on  Government  departments.  The  real  loss  to  the  public,  therefore, 
was  1,204,3257.  Ten  years  later  the  net  revenue  was  no  more  than  803,8987., 
from  which  being  deducted  100,5237.  for  Government  postage — a  mere 
matter  of  account — there  remained  only  694,3757.,  falling  short  of  the  real 
receipts  for  profit  of  1838  by  919,9787.  As  compared  with  the  latter  year, 
the  returns  for  1860,  when  the  new  system  had  been  in  operation  for  twenty 
years,  still  show  a  deficiency  of  372,2357.,  not  reduced  to  less  than  174,3747. 
in  1862,  after  which  date  the  Post  Office  accounts  are  made  up  on  a  different 
principle.  But  this  is  not  the  whole  case ;  because,  while  these  accounts 
previous  to  the  last-mentioned  year  include,  under  the  head  of  receipts,  the 
postage  charged  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  letters,  &c.  conveyed  by  British 
mail  steamers,  they  exclude  from  the  expenditure  side  the  sums  paid  under 
contract  for  the  conveyance  of  those  mails.  And,  moreover,  the  actual  cost  of 
the  manufacture  of  postage  stamps  has  hitherto  been  defrayed,  not  by  the 
Post  Office,  but  by  the  Inland  Revenue  department. 

However  great,  therefore,  the  advantages  of  cheap  postage  have  been — 
and  they  are  undeniable — to  all  classes  of  the  community  in  other  respects, 
the  expectations  of  financial  success  held  out  by  the  promoters  of  the  reform 
were  delusive.  It  is  incontestable  that  the  adoption  of  the  Rowland  Hill 
system  added  very  largely  to  the  already  dangerous  deficit,  which  must  have 
gone  on  growing  until  it  had  reached  the  most  formidable  proportions  if  the 
Liberal  Government  which  carried  the  postal  reform  had  remained  long  in 
office ;  because  that  Government  was  adverse  to  the  application  of  the  remedy 
— the  only  efficacious  one — by  which  the  evil  was  cured — the  income  tax. 

Consequently,  those  who  with  Sir  Robert  Peel  resisted  the  postal  change 
when  it  was  brought  forward  were  fully  j  ustified  in  saying — before  you 
throw  away  existing  revenue,  put  an  end  to  the  existing  deficit. 

Persons  who  now  deride  an  opposition  which  they  attribute  to  Con- 
servative factiousness  or  stupidity,  and  to  official  obstructiveness,  would  do 
well  to  take  notice  of  the  opinion  strongly  expressed  against  Rowland  Hill's 
reform,  sixteen  years  after  its  introduction,  by  Mr.  McCulloch,  a  decided 
Liberal  and  an  eminent  economist,  in  his  Commercial  Dictionary,  ed.  1856. 


CH.  x.  SUGAR  DUTIES.  211 

'  But  I  should  bore  you,  and  very  unnecessarily,  if 
I  were  to  pursue  reflections  upon  this  subject  only 
tending  to  the  same  conclusion,  that  a  Property  Tax  is 
the  best  expedient  for  restoring  the  balance  of  our 
income  and  expenditure.  As  I  formerly  thought  that 
direct  taxation  should  be  substituted  for  indirect  con- 
tributions to  the  public  income,  which  I  foresaw  could 
not  be  preserved,  so  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  is  the  only 
proper  mode  of  supply  ing  the  place  of  those  duties  now 
that  they  are  wrested  from  you.  It  is  still,  in  truth, 
only  a  substitution  of  the  one  for  the  other. 

'  I  have  already  said  that  I  should  confine  myself  to 
a  distinct  statement  of  my  opinion  on  the  questions  of 
overwhelming  importance  on  which  you  have  asked 
for  it. 

*  There  may  be  opportunities  hereafter  for  remarks 
upon  the  detached  observations  (some  of  them  of  great 
value)  which  have  been  submitted  to  you  by  others. 

'  I  will  only  say  that,  with  respect  to  the  House 
Tax,  it  is  much  easier  to  wish  that  it  had  never  been 
abandoned  than  to  suggest  that  it  would  be  wise  and 
practicable  just  now  to  re-establish  it. 

'  With  regard  to  the  reduction  in  sugar '  [that  is  to 
say,  reduction  of  duty  on  British  Colonial  sugar] ,  '  I 
confess  that  I  entertain  more  than  a  doubt  of  the  pro- 
priety of  effecting  it  at  present.  Our  expectations  of  a 
supply  from  the  West  and  East  Indies,  sufficient  to  meet 
the  entire  consumption,  have  not,  I  believe,  been  realised  ; 
and,  so  long  as  the  monopoly  exists  in  favour  of  our 
own  growers,  with  a  supply  at  all  within  the  consump- 
tion of  the  country,  the  remission  of  the  duty  would,  in 

p  2 


212  FISCAL  DIFFICULTIES.  CH.  x. 

a  great  degree,  be  a  boon  to  the  planter  at  the  expense 
of  the  Exchequer.  If,  hereafter,  the  produce  should  so 
much  exceed  the  consumption  as  to  force  prices  at  home 
to  a  level  with  those  on  the  Continent,  then,  indeed,  it 
may  be  an  act  of  justice  to  the  planter  (since  the  benefit 
of  the  bounty  is  taken  from  him)  to  make  some  reduc- 
tion of  the  duty. 

1  Of  the  practical  difficulty  of  framing  an  Act  for  the 
imposition  of  a  Property  Tax  6  under  existing  circum- 
stances, and  of  the  skill  and  judgment  and  labour  which 
will  be  required  for  adjusting  the  burthens  upon  the 
several  descriptions  of  property  and  income,  which  ought 
to  be  made  in  different  proportions  to  contribute  to  it, 
I  am  fully  sensible. 

'  It  will  be  an  Herculean  task,  indeed,  to  prepare  the 
Act,  and  the  fighting  it  through  Parliament  will  be  no 
trifling  undertaking.  But  I  do  not  anticipate  much 
opposition  in  the  House  of  Commons  to  the  adoption 
of  the  principle.  On  the  contrary,  I  am  led  to  believe 
that  you  will  have  a  great  majority  in  favour  of  the 
measure  there.'  .  .  . 

That  the  views  indicated  in  this  paper  really  had 
been  seriously  entertained  by  the  writer  at  a  much 
earlier  period,  is  proved  by  a  passage  in  a  speech  de- 
livered by  him  in  the  House  of  Commons  in  1830,  on 

6  The  difficulty  was  immensely  increased  by  the  absence  of  records  illus- 
trative of  the  working  of  the  former  Act.  All  the  old  income  tax  returns, 
&c.  were  unwisely  destroyed  in  1818,  in  compliance  with  a  motion  from 
Mr.  Brougham.  The  practical  effect  of  this  fiscal  concession  to  public 
opinion  was  that,  on  the  renewal  of  the  income  tax  in  1842,  the  fruits  of 
past  experience  were  lost  to  those  who  had  to  frame  the  new  Act  and  put 
it  in  execution,  public  utility  having  been,  neither  for  the  first  nor  for  the 
last  time,  sacrificed  to  popular  clamour. 


CH.  x.  INCOME    TAX.  213 

Mr.  Poulett  Thomson's  motion  for  a  Committee  for  a 
Revision  of  Taxation  ;  when,  referring  to  some  previous 
remarks  by  Mr.  Huskisson,  he  said  :  *  My  right  ho- 
nourable friend,  the  member  for  Liverpool,  on  a  former 
evening  appealed  to  me,  in  confirmation  of  the  assertion 
that  I  had  long  since  been  favourable  to  some  change  in 
taxation,  by  which  its  pressure  might  be  transferred 
from  one  portion  of  the  community  to  another.  This 
undoubtedly  is  the  case,  "and  I  concur  with  my  right 
honourable  friend  in  the  principle,  and  would,  under 
certain  circumstances,  be  glad  to  see  it  carried  into 
effect/ 

He  approved  the  renewal  of  the  Income  Tax  in  1845 
(when  he  was  out  of  Parliament)  for  another  period  of 
three  years  ;  aud  he  thought  that  it  was  again  war- 
ranted by  the  circumstances  of  the  time  in  1848.  But 
in  1851,  being  in  the  House  of  Commons,  he  made  a 
motion  for  a  diminution  of  the  tax,  with  a  view  to  its 
gradual  abandonment.  This  was  no  reversal  of  the 
policy  he  had  recommended  in  1841,  and  which  he  had 
intended  to  take  up  in  1828.  The  reasons  which  at 
those  two  periods  had  convinced  him  of  the  expediency, 
or  necessity,  of  the  imposition  of  an  Income  Tax  no 
longer  existed.  The  condition  of  the  national  finances 
was  entirely  changed.  The  distribution  of  fiscal  bur- 
thens was  widely  different.  Mr.  Herries  did  not  ask 
for  the  immediate  and  complete  cessation  of  the  Income 
Tax  ;  nor  did  he  propose  that  a  reduction  of  this  charge 
should  be  compensated  by  the  substitution  of  a  corre- 
sponding amount  of  indirect  taxation.  The  question 
at  issue  was  not  whether  the  Income  Tax  should  be 


214  LETTER  ON  BRAZIUAN   TREATY.  CH.  x. 

retained  as  the  best  means  of  repealing  duties  on  articles 
of  consumption,  but  whether  a  certain  proportion  (two- 
sevenths)  of  the  then  existing  rate  of  Income  Tax  should, 
or  should  not,  be  still  maintained,  instead  of  another 
existing  direct  impost — the  Window  Tax — which  Mr. 
Herries  believed  to  be  less  generally  obnoxious. 

Another  letter,  written  in  the  same  month,  relates 
to  the  Sugar  question  and  the  pending  negotiations 
with  Brazil.  It  very  clearly  marks  the  writer's  views, 
which  were  opposed  to  monopoly  on  the  one  hand,  and 
to  any  encouragement  of  slavery  on  the  other. 

'  Sevenoaks :  November  29, 1841. 

'  My  dear  Peel, — I  return  the  projet  of  the  Brazilian 
Treaty  and  the  paper  connected  with  it.  I  had  intended 
to  take  them  to  you  to-day,  and  to  state  verbally  what 
occurred  to  me  upon  the  subject.  But  I  am  prevented 
from  leaving  this  place. 

'  In  a  former  letter  to  you,  I  expressed  much  doubt 
with  respect  to  the  propriety  of  making  a  considerable 
reduction  in  the  Sugar  Duties  generally,  so  long  as  the 
monopoly  in  favour  of  our  own  colonies  continued  to 
be  effective  by  reason  of  the  insufficiency  of  the  supply 
from  thence  to  meet  the  full  demand  for  our  home  con- 
sumption. I  understood  at  that  time  that  such  was  the 
state  of  things,  and  I  understand  that  it  is  still  not  ex- 
pected that  our  sanguine  expectations  of  an  ample  im- 
portation of  British  Possession  sugar  will  be  realised  in 
the  present  year. 

'  But  a  new  view  of  the  case  is  presented  by  the 
proposal  now  under  your  consideration,  and  if  foreign 
sugars  are  to  be  admitted  upon  such  terms  as  will  leave 


en.  x.  SUGAR  AND   SLAVERY.  215 

only  a  reasonable  protection  to  the  British  grower,  and 
thereby  abolish  his  monopoly,  the  groundwork  of  my 
objection  is  removed,  and  the  reduction  of  the  Sugar 
Duty,  coupled  with  the  condition  that  the  estimated 
loss  of  Revenue  thereby  to  be  created,  is  to  be  made 
good  by  an  equivalent  amount  of  new  taxation,  becomes 
a  fair  question  of  financial  and  commercial  expediency. 
I  assume,  of  course,  that  you  are  fully  satisfied  that,  by 
the  terms  of  your  treaty  with  Brazil  and  the  qualified 
character  of  the  competition  to  be  established  between 
slave-grown  and  free-labour  sugar,  the  objection  on 
which  we  insisted  so  strongly  last  year  [last  Session 
should  have  been  written],  on  the  score  of  slavery,  will 
be  removed  ;  and  that  no  danger  to  the  successful  pro- 
gress of  the  measure  of  emancipation  in  our  Colonies 
is  to  be  apprehended  from  it.  Upon  that  point  I  am 
hardly  competent  to  form  an  opinion,  and  I  need  not 
suggest  to  you  how  important  it  will  be  to  be  able  tc 
establish  it  in  argument  consistently  with  the  course 
pursued  on  our  side  against  the  propositions  of  the  late 
Government. 

'  You  are  no  doubt  prepared  to  hear  from  thorn,  that 
they  also  proposed  to  give  to  the  consumer  some  benefit 
by  an  approach  to  competition  between  the  sugars  of 
our  own  labourers  and  those  of  Brazil ;  that  they  did  so 
professedly  with  the  view  of  enlarging  our  trade  with 
that  country,  and  of  preparing  for  the  renewal  of  our 
commercial  treaty  with  it :  but  that  their  plan  was  to 
accomplish  these  objects  not  only  without  a  loss  of 
Revenue  from  sugar  but  with  an  augmentation  of  it ; 
and  that  the  additional  benefit  in  the  price  of  the  article 


21 C  WEST  INDIAN  MONOPOLY.  en.  x. 

(something  more  than  a  penny  per  Ib.)  which  your  plan 
will  confer  upon  the  consumer  beyond  theirs,  by  the 
reduction  of  the  duty,  must  be  purchased  by  the  imposi- 
tion of  a  new  burthen,  which  may  be  found  more  onerous 
to  him,  &c.,  &c.  This  is  not  my  argument,  but  one 
which  will,  I  think,  be  used  by  a  Whig  Opposition  by 
way  of  appeal  to  the  anti- Property  Tax  feelings  of  the 
House.7 

'  I  judge  from  the  confidential  paper  which  you 
send  me,  that  there  is  yet  some  uncertainty  as  to  the 
disposition  of  Brazil  to  accede  to  your  propositions  on 
the  subject  of  slavery ;  but  I  take  it  for  granted  that 
you  are  fully  satisfied  that,  if  she  does  adopt  them, 
they  will  be  effectual  for  then*  object.  I  should 
otherwise  have  entertained  some  fears  upon  that 
point. 

'  I  am  also  led  to  suppose  that  the  details  of  the 
discriminating  duties  are  as  yet  rather  sketched  out 
than  determined  upon.  On  the  rates  of  duty,  I  should 
be  unwilling  to  offer  an  opinion  without  more  consulta- 
tion than  I  could  now  venture  to  have  with  practical 
men  on  the  subject.  The  form  in  which  it  is  proposed 
to  describe  and  enact  the  differential  duties  on  sugar 
appears  to  me  to  be  susceptible  of  improvement  by  sim- 
plification ;  but  that  is  altogether  a  minor  consideration. 

'  Upon  the  whole,  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  proposed  measure  satisfactorily  and  success- 
fully carried  out.  The  tendency  of  my  opinions  has  always 
been  rather  in  opposition  to  the  West  Indian  monopoly,  more 

7  This  Sugar  Question,  as  we  know,  waa  not  brought  forward  by  Sir 
Robert  Peel  in  1842. 


en.  x.  LETTER   TO  GOULBUKN.  217 

especially  since  the  settlement  with  them  on  the  emancipation 
of  their  slaves :  and  nothing  but  a  clear  conviction  of  the 
justice  and  weight  of  our  anti-slavery  argument  against  the 
Whig  proposition  of  last  Session  would  have  induced  me  to 
enter  so  heartily  as  I  did  into  opposition  to  it? 

'  I  shall  be  in  London  in  the  course  of  the  week,  and 
will  take  my  chance  of  finding  you  at  leisure. 
1  Believe  me,  &c., 

'  J.  C.  HERRIES.' 

On  March  7,  1842,  four  days  before  Sir  Robert 
Peel's  celebrated  financial  statement  was  made  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  a  very  long  letter  was  addressed  to 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  commenting  upon 
some  points  still  under  consideration.  A  few  extracts 
from  it  may  be  worthy  of  perusal. 

'  Sevenoaks :  March  7, 1842. 

'  My  dear  Goulburn, — You  wished  me  to  write  to 
you  after  a  little  reflection  on  the  two  points  which 
were  mentioned  when  I  saw  you  the  other  day,  viz., 
the  exemption  of  Ireland  from  the  proposed  tax  on  pro- 
perty, and  the  remission  of  the  sugar  duty. 

'  The  first  took  me  very  much  by  surprise.  I  had 
always  contemplated  the  re-imposition  of  a  property 
tax  (whether  as  the  ultimate  resource  for  meeting  a 
public  exigency,  or  as  a  commutation  for  other  bur- 
thens) as  being  to  be  borne  uniformly  by  all  property 
of  the  same  description  in  every  part  of  the  United 
Kingdom.  And  the  more  I  have  since  thought  upon 

8  The  italics  are  those  of  the  Editor.    The  passage  is  not  underlined  iu 
the  original  draft. 


218  PROPERTY  TAX  :   IRELAND.  CH.  x. 

the  subject  the  less  I  can  reconcile  my  judgment  to  the 
justice  or  policy  of  omitting  Ireland  from  its  due  share 
of  this  assessment. 

'  It  must,  however,  be  observed,  that  I  have  not 
heard  the  arguments  on  the  other  side.  You  had  no 
time  to  explain  them  to  me  when  we  met ;  and  this  is 
a  subject  upon  which  I  cannot,  until  your  plans  are 
published,  venture  to  invite  discussion  with  other  per- 
sons. I  have  therefore  nothing  to  deal  with  but  my 
own  suggestions ;  and,  as  my  opinions  have  long  been 
fixed  in  favour  of  the  extension  of  the  tax  to  Ireland, 
the  other  side  of  the  question  has  not  had  a  fair  chance 
in  my  cogitations. 

'  I  know  nothing  but  by  conjecture  of  the  feelings 
of  the  English  landlords,  capitalists,  or  professional  men 
on  such  a  subject ;  but  I  should  apprehend  that  they 
would  not  easily  be  reconciled  to  bear  the  whole  bur- 
then of  this  imposition,  by  the  consideration  of  the  in- 
direct taxes  which  you  propose  to  create  in  Ireland  ; 
consisting  chiefly  of  alterations,  which  will  only  bring 
Ireland  more  nearly  to  a  level  with  England  with  regard 
to  those  taxes.  .  .  . 

'  But  these  objections  are  all  upon  the  surface,  and 
must  have  been  considered  fully,  together  with  many 
others,  before  you  adopted  your  present  resolution. 
The  answers  to  them  are,  however,  not  equally  obvious  ; 
and  I  must  fairly  confess  to  you  that  the  only  two 
points  which  you  mentioned  to  me,  viz.  :  1st,  The 
difficulty  of  establishing  a  machinery  in  Ireland  for  the 
collection  of  an  Income  Tax  ;  and  2ndly,  That  of  per- 
suading the  Irish  members  to  submit  to  it, — do  not 


CH.  x.  SUGAR  DUTIES.  219 

appear  to  me  to  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  considerations 
of  so  much  magnitude. 

'  To  the  first  of  these  I  cannot  attach  much  weight. 
It  was  urged  long  ago,  and  for  many  years,  against  the 
application  of  the  Poor  Laws  to  Ireland.  It  has  been 
overcome  in  that  matter,  in  which  it  was  probably  a 
more  formidable  obstacle  than  it  would  be  found  in  the 
assessment  of  a  Property  Tax. 

'  The  latter  is,  I  daresay,  the  substantial  impediment 
which  you  have  to  grapple  with.  I  am  far  from  being 
insensible  to  the  embarrassment  which  it  presents.  I 
remember  that  Lord  Londonderry  bore  testimony  to 
the  weight  of  it  when  there  was  a  question,  at  the  close 
of  the  war,  of  continuing  a  modified  Property  Tax  in- 
stead of  abandoning  wholly  that  which  then  existed.  He 
felt  the  difficulty  of  imposing  it  in  Ireland  ;  but  he  also 
felt,  if  I  mistake  not,  that  without  that  condition  it  ought 
not  to  be  re-imposed  at  all.  My  own  belief  is  that  at 
the  present  time,  and  under  present  circumstances,  a 
good  majority  of  the  House  of  Commons  would  support 
you  both  in  the  imposition  of  a  Property  Tax,  and  in 
the  extension  of  it  to  Ireland.  .  .  . 

'  Now,  with  respect  to  the  remission  of  a  large  pro- 
portion of  the  Sugar  Duties. 

'  You  know  what  my  opinion  is  upon  that  subject, 
supposing  that  the  supply  from  our  Colonies  and  pos- 
sessions be  not  greater  than  the  average  consumption  of 
the  United  Kingdom,  and  consequently,  that  under  their 
present  monopoly  of  our  home  market,  the  planters 
would  derive  the  chief  benefit  from  the  reduction  of  the 
duty.  However  much  I  may  be  a  well  wisher  to  the 


220  QUESTIONS  TO  BE  CONSIDERED.  en.  x. 

East  and  West  Indians,  I  am  not  prepared  to  make  so 
great  a  sacrifice  to  them  as  that  would  be.  On  the  other 
hand,  supposing  the  colonial  supply  of  sugar  to  be 
abundant,  and  the  price  in  consequence  to  be  regulated 
by  the  general  European  market — or  supposing  the  pro- 
jected treaty  with  Brazil  to  be  brought  to  bear,  so  that  a 
modified  competition  between  foreign  sugar  and  that  of 
the  Colonies  would  secure  to  the  consumer  the  advantage 
of  the  reduction  of  duty — in  either  of  these  cases  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  remission  of  the  tax  upon  sugar 
would  be  desirable.  But  you  must  bear  in  mind  that 
in  the  present  instance  we  have  not  the  good  fortune 
to  be  considering  what  concessions  of  taxation  may 
be  made  from  a  surplus  Revenue,  but  what  are  the  fittest 
subjects  for  a  Commutation.  It  is  a  question  between 
Sugar  Duty  and  Property  Tax.  I  calculate  roughly  (but  I 
have  not  seen  your  estimates  and  papers)  that  the  duty 
proposed  to  be  taken  off  sugar  will  be  equivalent  to 
about  1  per  cent,  of  the  Property  Tax  to  be  imposed. 
To  the  consumer  it  may  make  a  difference  in  the  price 
of  the  sugar  of  something  more  than  Id.,  and  less  than 
l£e?.,  per  Ib.  The  point  to  be  decided,  therefore,  is 
whether  such  a  reduction  of  price  in  that  article  to  the 
consumer  generally  is  the  best  boon  you  can  give  to 
the  community  in  compensation  for  the  imposition  of 
1  per  cent,  on  Income  and  Property. 

'  In  determining  upon  that  question,  it  should  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  remission  of  Sugar  Duty  will 
have  less  influence  on  the  interests  of  commerce  and 
manufactures  (except  it  be  done  in  combination  with  a 
good  Brazilian  treaty)  than  the  taking  off  of  duties 


CH.  x.  ADVICE.    PEEL'S  BUDGET.  221 

from  raw  materials  of  manufacture  or  supplies  from 
foreign  countries.  This  will  be  still  more  the  case  in 
consequence  of  the  measures  now  in  progress  for  the 
encouraging  the  intercourse  between  our  colonies  and 
other  countries  ;  our  own  produce  and  manufactures 
will  no  longer  possess  the  exclusive  benefit  of  our 
colonial  consumption.  .  .  . 

'  But  ...  I  am  hardly  in  a  condition  to  compare 
the  general  advantages  of  a  diminution  of  the  Sugar 
Duties  with  that  of  other  alterations  of  the  tariff  which 
you  may  not  yet  have  determined  to  make.  In  the 
present  state  of  my  information  I  can  only  express  a 
hope  that  it  will  not  be  preferred  to  a  reduction  of  the 
charges  on  the  importation  of  raw  materials  of  our 
manufacture. 

*  All  which  is  humbly  submitted.     Truly  yours, 

<  J.  C.  HERRIES.' 

A  reference  to  Sir  Robert  Peel's  financial  speech  on 
March  11,  shows  a  remarkable  coincidence  between  his 
arguments  against  the  expediency  of  a  reduction  of 
Sugar  duties,  which,  under  existing  circumstances 
would  have  benefited  the  British  colonial  producer 
alone,  and  those  strongly  urged  against  it — if  unaccom- 
panied by  the  admission  of  foreign  competition — in  the 
letters  above  cited.  But  it  is  evident  from  this  corre- 
spondence that  a  reduction  of  some  sort  was  originally 
contemplated  as  one  of  the  measures  to  be  proposed,  and 
that  the  question  was  still  undecided  almost  on  the  eve 
of  the  introduction  of  the  famous  budget. 

That  confidential  communications  of  this  kind  were 


222  LATER  CONSULTATIONS.  on.  x. 

habitual,  may  be  assumed  from  a  letter,  dated  February 
28,  1844,  to  Mr.  Herries  from  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  on  the  subject  of  the  proposed  reduction  of 
the  31  per  Cents,  and  different  plans  for  effecting  it. 
'  I  have  deferred  writing  to  you,'  he  says,  '  because  I 
have  been  in  the  hopes  of  seeing  you,  but  as  I  cannot 
learn  whether  you  intend  being  in  London  I  think  it 
better  to  ask  for  your  advice  by  letter.  .  .  . 

'  Would  you  be  good  enough  to  give  me  your 
opinion  on  this  matter  by  return  of  post  ?  Your 
experience  in  such  matters  makes  you  a  better  judge 
than  most  persons,  and  I  should  be  unwilling  to  act 
without  a  previous  knowledge  of  your  views.  ...  I 
find  I  am  too  late  for  the  post,  so  I  send  this  by  a 
messenger  in  the  morning.' 

In  the  course  of  the  Peel  Administration,  Mr. 
Herries  rendered  good  service  to  the  public  as  a  member 
of  the  Royal  Commissions  on  Metropolitan  Improve- 
ments and  Railway  Termini.  The  first  Report  (1844) 
of  the  former  Commission  was  chiefly  devoted  to  the 
question  of  the  Thames  Embankment,  part  of  which 
was  originally  projected  by  that  great  English  artist, 
Sir  Christopher  Wren,  who  designed  a  commodious 
quay  from  Blackfriars  to  the  Tower.  To  Sir  Frederick 
Trench  is  due  the  credit  of  having  proposed  to  Parlia- 
ment a  more  extended  plan  for  an  embankment  and 
public  thoroughfare  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  river 
between  Westminster  and  London  Bridges.  His  Bill 
for  this  purpose  was  brought  forward,  but  afterwards 
dropped,  in  1825.  In  1840  the  subject  was  submitted 
to  the  examination  of  a  Committee  of  the  House  of 


CH.  x.  THAMES   EMBANKMENT.  223 

Commons  which  collected  much  valuable  evidence,  but 
went  no  further.  The  Royal  Commission  appointed 
by  Sir  Robert  Peel  studied  all  the  different  plans  pro- 
posed, and  strongly  recommended  the  execution  of 
the  work  in  accordance  with  one  of  them  particularly. 
Mr.  Herries  being  entirely  convinced  of  the  utility 
and  feasibility  of  the  undertaking — although  individu- 
ally he  preferred  another  plan  (that  of  Mr.  Walker) 
to  the  one  selected — did  his  utmost  to  promote  it, 
endeavouring  to  persuade  the  Government  of  the  day 
to  carry  it  out,  and  to  enlist  influential  persons  in 
support  of  the  views  of  the  Commission.9  But  the 
Prime  Minister,  whose  countenance  was  necessary,  threw 
cold  water  on  the  project ;  and  few  could  be  made  to 
feel  the  advantage  of  a  scheme  generally  looked  upon 
as  an  impracticable  bore,  detrimental  to  wharfingers 
and  the  owners  of  gardens,  and  not  worth  an  addi- 
tional tax  of  so  many  pence  per  ton  of  coals.  More 
than  twenty  years  were  destined  to  elapse  before  the 
public  hailed  the  accomplishment,  on  a  greatly  improved 
plan,  of  the  noblest  work  of  modern  London  ;  but  the 
efforts,  though  unsuccessful,  of  those  who  did  not  live 
to.  see  its  execution,  deserve  record  and  recognition. 

9  He  continued  his  advocacy  after  Sir  R.  Peel's  retirement. 


224  RETURN  TO  PARLIAMENT  URGED.  en.  xi. 


CHAPTER  XL 

1846—1852. 

Return  to  Parliament,  1847 — Monetary  crisis — Bank  Charter  Act — Repeal 
of  the  Navigation  laws — Answer  to  Mr.  Cobden's  motion  for  reduction 
of  estimates — Derby  Cabinet,  1862 — Homes,  President  of  the  Board  of 
Control. 

AT  the  beginning  of  1846,  a  strong  desire  was  ex- 
pressed by  the  most  prominent  members  of  the  sur- 
prised and  derelict  Conservative  party  that  Mr.  Herries, 
whose  principles  were  well  known  to  them,  should 
return  to  Parliamentary  life.  But,  though  he  entirely 
disapproved  the  sudden  change  of  the  course  of  his 
political  Mends  in  office,  he  felt  no  disposition  to  enter 
into  a  conflict  with  them.  To  an  obliging  suggestion 
from  a  distinguished  person,  that  arrangements  might 
be  made  for  the  immediate  fulfilment  of  the  wishes  of 
those  who  were  anxious  that  he  should  re-enter  the 
House  of  Commons,  he  replied  :  '  Your  letter  has  found 
me  in  a  state  of  health  and  spirits  little  suited  to  the 
arduous  task  which  it  suggests  to  me.  Whoever  may 
be  the  friends,  of  whose  wishes  you  are  the  kind  inter- 
preter, I  beg  sincerely  to  assure  them  and  you  that  I 
feel  highly  gratified  by  their  too  favourable  opinion  of 
such  public  services  as  I  should  be  able  to  render  in 
Parliament  at  the  present  most  critical  period.  Had  I 
been  a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons  at  this  time, 


en.  xt.  INVITATIONS.  225 

I  should,  I  trust,  not  have  shrunk  from  the  duty  of 
freely  discussing  all  the  bearings  of  the  fearful  experi- 
ment which  is  about  to  be  made  upon  the  existing 
social  and  political  constitution  of  this  country  :  but  I 
feel  no  desire  to  leave  my  present  retirement  to  take 
part  in  such  a  fray  ;  and  the  less  so  when  I  consider 
that  I  might  be  occupying  a  place  which  would  be 
better  filled  by  a  younger  and  stouter  combatant  than 
myself  at  a  time  of  such  extraordinary  difficulty  and 
peril/ 

Twelve  months  later  he  was  again  urged  to  come 
forward,  by  a  letter  from  an  active  manager  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  who  wrote  to  him  :  '  I  believe 
there  is  a  great  probability  of  a  vacancy  occurring 
within  a  few  days  of  a  seat,  which  I  believe  we  can 
secure  to  you.  I  need  hardly  say  that,  if  you  were  in 
the  House,  you  would  render  great  services  to  a  large 
party.'  .  .  . 

To  this  invitation  he  replied  :  '  My  long  absence 
from  the  Carltori  has  been  owing  to  long  and  severe 
illness,  from  which  I  am  slowly  recovering.  I  thank 
you  much  for  your  letter,  and  the  very  friendly  terms 
in  which  you  advert  to  the  subject  of  it.  I  fear  that 
you  greatly  overrate  my  power  of  rendering  service 
to  the  good  cause  :  but  I  shall,  at  all  events,  be  very 
glad  to  meet  you,  and  I  will  go  to  London  on  Friday 
for  that  purpose  if  I  possibly  can.' 

These  communications,  however,  had  no  immediate 
result. 

About   the   same  time  some   correspondence   took 

VOL,  II.  Q 


226  IRISH  RAILWAYS.  CH.  xr. 

place  on  the  subject  of  Lord  George  Bentinck's  proposed 
measure  '  for  the  prompt  and  profitable  employment  of 
the  people  by  the  encouragement  of  railways  in  Ire- 
land,' between  the  then  leader  of  the  Opposition  and 
Mr.  Herries,  who  cordially  approved  the  principle  of  the 
Bill,  while  he  suggested  some  alterations  in  its  details. 

'  February  3,  1847. 

'  My  dear  Lord, — I  beg  to  thank  you  for  the  perusal 
of  the  draft  of  a  Bill  herewith  returned,  which  I  received 
this  morning  only.  ...  I  have  not  been  able  to 
bestow  such  attention  upon  it  as  it  deserves.  ...  I 
have  no  hesitation,  however,  in  stating  that  the  general 
scope  of  the  measure  appears  to  me  to  be  excellent,  and 
that  the  detailed  enactments  suggested  for  the  execution 
of  it  appear  generally  to  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose. 

'  If  the  principle  of  the  measure  should  be  adopted 
by  Parliament,  the  clauses  in  the  Bill  relating  to  the 
mode  of  raising  and  applying  the  money  required  must, 
of  course,  be  left  mainly  in  the  hards  of  the  Treasury. 
That  part  of  the  [illegible]  would  present  no  practical 
difficulty,  and  the  money  and  [illegible]  clauses  might 
perhaps  be  presented  in  a  more  simple  form.  ...  I 
venture  to  express  a  doubt  of  the  propriety  of  giving 
authority  to  the  Treasury  to  create  and  sell  Stock  for 
the  purpose.  It  is,  I  think,  an  unconstitutional  course 
that  any  permanent  debt  should  be  contracted,  except 
under  conditions  subject  to  the  immediate  control  of 
Parliament.1  When  that  expedient  was  introduced  into 
the  Savings  Banks  Bill  I  objected  to  it,  and  the  then 

1  The   writer   always  adhered  inflexibly   to   this  sound   constitutional 
doctrine. 


CH.  xi.  LORD  GEORGE  BENTINCK.  227 

Whig  Government  admitted  the  general  principle  of  the 
objection,  although  they  did  not  alter  their  course. 
Brokers  care  nothing  for  these  matters. 

*  In  the  present  case  it  seems  to  be  unnecessary. 
The  sum  to  be  raised  is  comparatively  small,  and  the 
Treasury  might  well  make  provision  for  this  and  other 
exigencies  during  the  sitting  of  Parliament,  either  by  a 
small  loan  or  an  increased  [uncertain  in  the  draft ; 
some  words  appear  to  be  omitted]  credit  of  Exchequer 
Bills. 

'  It  seems  to  me  that  that  part  of  the  task  might  well 
be  left  upon  their  shoulders. 

'  I  am  really  sorry  to  be  obliged  to  write  so  hastily 
on  a  subject  of  so  much  importance.  I  cannot  conclude 
without  expressing  my  sincere  well  wishes  for  your 
success  in  this  very  useful  and  highly  important 
measure.  Believe  me,  &c.,  <  j  c  HERRIES; 

Lord  George  Bentinck  wrote  on  the  same  day  : — 
'  I  am  much  obliged  by  the  trouble  so  kindly  taken 
by  you  in  glancing  over  my  Bill  for  me,  and  greatly 
encouraged  by  your  approbation  of  it ;  the  pretence  for 
rejecting  even  its  introduction  is  the  disturbance  it  will 
create  in  the  money  market,  and  the  dread  that  public 
securities  may  be  lowered,  and  commerce  and  trade 
screwed  down  by  another  raising  of  the  price  of  dis- 
counts by  the  Bank  of  England.  To  my  mind  such 
apprehensions  are  the  most  ridiculous  that  timidity  and 
ignorance  ever  sowed  in  the  mind  of  any  visionary. 
But,  nevertheless,  I  have  gathered  in  private  conversa- 
tion with  Lord  John  that  the  opposition  to  be  raised. 

Q  2 


228  LORD  GEOrOE   BENTINCK.  CH.  xi. 

against  me  will  be  mainly  founded  and  built  up  upon 
this  rotten  ground. 

'  Now  your  opinion  on  all  financial  matters  stands 
not  only  deservedly  high  with  our  Parliamentary 
friends,  but  would  have  great  weight  in  the  City,  and  a 
pithy  note  from  you,  giving  a  strong  opinion  upon  this 
point,  which  I  might  be  at  liberty  to  read  aloud  in  the 
House  of  Commons  would,  I  think,  have  a  stunning 
effect,  and  very  likely  turn  the  fortunes  of  the  day.  So 
valuable  should  I  deem  it,  that  if  this  note  should  fail  to 
catch  you  before  you  leave  town,  or  should  catch  you 
too  late  to  give  you  time  to  answer  it  before  you  set  out 
for  Kent,  I  should  very  little  regard  the  expense  of  an 
express  to  bring  me  such  a  note  before  five  o'clock  in  the 
evening. 

'  I  am  much  obliged  for  your  general  advice,  which 
1  will  not  fail  to  follow.'  .  .  . 

The  answer  was  to  the  following  effect : 

'  I  have  only  just  now  (in  the  afternoon)  received 
your  letter.  I  am  very  sure  that  you  ascribe  infinitely 
too  much  influence  upon  the  public  mind  to  any  opinion 
of  mine,  and  that  no  communication  from  me  could  have 
rendered  such  assistance  to  you  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons as  you  are  kind  enough  to  suppose  it  might  have 
done.  I  must,  however,  candidly  add  that  even  if  there 
had  been  time  for  me  to  convey  such  a  communication 
to  you,  I  should  have  been  most  reluctant  to  have  had  it 
put  forward  by  you  in  the  House,  and  with  so  much 
more  importance  attached  to  it_than  it  could  possibly 
have  deserved.' 


CH.  XT.  RETURN  TO  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS.  229 

Yielding  to  repeated  solicitations,  Mr.  Herries  at 
length  made  up  his  mind  to  become  a  candidate  for  a 
seat  at  the  general  election  of  1847,  when  he  was  re- 
turned, together  with  the  Marquis  of  Granby,  for  the 
borough  of  Stamford,  after  a  smart  contest,  of  a  local 
and  personal,  rather  than  a  political,  nature,  with  a  Con- 
servative opponent.  His  parliamentary  revival  is  thus 
gracefully  and  justly  noticed  in  a  brilliant  contemporary 
work.2  '  Lord  George  Bentinck,  however,  gained  an 
invaluable  coadjutor  by  the  reappearance  of  Mr.  Herries 
in  public  life,  a  gentleman  whose  official  as  well  as 
parliamentary  experience,  fine  judgment,  and  fertile 
resource  have  been  of  inestimable  service  to  the  protec- 
tionist party.' 

A  protectionist — not  a  prohibitionist — he  was  then, 
as  he  always  had  been,  but  in  a  lower  degree  probably 
than  the  majority  of  the  party  to  which  he  belonged. 
His  desire  was  not  to  prevent,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to 
favour  competition  ;  foreign  competition  with  British 
industry,  but  also  British  competition  with  foreign 
industry.  He  was  opposed  to  protective  duties  too  high 
to  admit  the  former,  but  he  advocated  the  imposition 
of  protective  duties  just  high  enough,  but  no  higher, 
to  make,  according  to  his  view,  the  latter  possible.  It 
has  been  seen,  in  the  case  of  sugar,  from  his  letters  to 
Sir  Robert  Peel  and  Mr.  Goulburn,  that  he  objected  to 
a  diminution  of  duty  on  the  produce  of  British  colonies 
on  the  ground  that  it  would  have  been  in  effect  an 
augmentation  of  the  protection  then  enjoyed  by  it,  and 
which,  deeming  it  excessive,  he  would  have  been  willing 

-  Lord  Geort/c  Bentinck  :  A  Political  Biography.     By  B.  Disraeli,  p.  442. 


230  SENTIMENTS.      WARM  RECEPTION.  en.  xi. 

to  reduce  considerably,  but  for  the  question  of  slavery. 
He  believed  that  British  agriculture,  the  ruin  of  which 
would,  in  his  opinion,  be  a  national  calamity,  stood  in 
need  of  protection,  because,  owing  to  causes  not  remov- 
able either  by  legislation  or  by  individual  exertion,  the 
unassisted  competition  of  British  producers  with  those 
of  all  other  countries  could  not  (as  he  thought)  be  per- 
manently sustained. 

Evidence  is  to  be  found  in  confidential  communi- 
cations from  friends  and  supporters  of  a  feeling  of  hos- 
tility on  the  part  of  some  at  least  of  the  Peelites,  who 
were  anxious  to  prevent  the  election  of  Mr.  Herries,  and 
would  have  been  glad  if  it  could  have  been  made  void. 
But  how  little  there  was  of  personal  animosity  in  his 
sentiments  towards  them  may  be  seen  from  a  letter  to 
him  from  Croker,  dated  June  27,  1847,  concerning  an 
impending  attack  in  the  '  Quarterly  Review '  : — 

'  You  will  see  that  I  have  attended  to  all  your  sug- 
gestions, and  omitted  or  altered  everything  that  you  had 
queried,  much  to  the  improvement  of  the  article.  I  have 
also  lowered  a  few  expressions  which  you  would  have 
marked,  no  doubt,  had  you  gone  on  marking.  It  is 
impossible  not  to  feel  indignation  at  the  apostasy  and 
at  the  mischief  it  has  done,  but  personally  I  really  have 
quite  the  reverse  of  ill-will  or  a  desire  to  give  pain,  and  so 
am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  moderating  hints.' 

The  warmth  of  Mr.  Herries's  reception  on  resuming 
his  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons  was  very  gratifying. 
Sir  Robert  Peel  took  the  first  opportunity  to  '  express, 
in  common  with  the  House  generally,  his  satisfaction  at 
the  return  to  this  house  of  his  right  honourable  friend, 


en.  xi.  BANK   CHARTER  ACT.  231 

and  his  congratulations  that,  by  his  return,  the  House 
would  have  the  benefit  of  his  great  intelligence  and 
great  practical  experience.'  By  the  occupants  of  the 
Treasury  Bench,  and  especially  by  Lord  John  Russell, 
Prime  Minister,  Sir  Charles  Wood  (Lord  Halifax), 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  (the  frequent  contests 
between  whom  and  Mr.  Herries  were  always  charac- 
terised by  the  utmost  courtesy),  and  Mr.  Labouchere 
(the  late  Lord  Taunton),  he  was  invariably  treated,  in 
spite  of  strong  opposition,  not  only  with  due  civility, 
but  with  marked  respect. 

The  monetary  disasters  of  the  autumn  of  1847,  and 
the  extra-legal  course  taken  by  the  Government  in  con- 
sequence of  them,  made  the  meeting  of  the  new  Parlia- 
ment in  November  necessary,  and  required  its  immediate 
attention.  The  subject  was  one  in  which  Mr.  Herries 
took  great  interest.  He  believed  that  the  crisis  had 
been  intensified,  if  not  caused,  by  the  restrictions  im- 
posed upon  the  Bank  by  the  Act  of  1844,  from  the 
operation  of  which  he  had  always  feared  that  dan- 
gerous embarrassment  would  arise.  He  predicted  its 
recurrence,  and  he  could  not  be  persuaded  that  a  law  was 
a  good  one  which  involved  the  necessity  of  its  own  perio- 
dical violation  by  the  assumption  of  a  '  dispensing  power ' 
on  the  part  of  the  Crown.  He  took  an  early  opportu- 
nity of  expressing  his  views  in  a  debate  on  the  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer's  motion  for  a  committee  to 
inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  recent  commercial  dis- 
tress. In  doing  so  he  said  that  '  he  was  satisfied  that  the 
day  would  come  when  Parliament  would  again  be  called 
upon  to  interfere.'  He  did  not  live  to  see  the  fulfilment 


232  LORD  JOHN  RUSSELL.  en.  xi. 

of  his  prophecy  ten  years  afterwards,  in  1857,  and 
again,  with  another  interval  of  nine  years,  in  1866. 

Lord  John  Russell,  who  replied  particularly  to  Mr. 
Herries's  speech,  observing  that  in  the  course  of  the 
discussion  some  novel  opinions  had  been  thrown  out, 
and  there  had  been  a  great  deal  of  discursive  disquisi- 
tion, said  :  '  I  am  happy  to  find,  therefore,  that  in  fol- 
lowing the  right  honourable  gentleman,  I  follow  one 
who  has  kept  himself  within  the  limits  of  that  which  is 
properly  the  subject  of  debate,  and  who  has  given 
opinions  which,  whether  I  agree  with  them  or  not,  at 
any  rate  must  be  listened  to  with  the  greatest  respect, 
coming  as  they  do  from  a  person  of  his  influence,  his 
experience,  and  his  knowledge  both  of  the  financial  and 
the  constitutional  history  of  the  country.'  The  person 
alluded  to  was  reluctant  to  allow  his  name  to  be  placed 
on  the  list  of  the  committee,  but  consented  to  do  so  in 
compliance  with  the  desire  strongly  manifested  by  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  who  said  that  it  would  be 
a  great  public  disadvartage  if  he  should  decline  to  serve 
on  it.  Soon  after  the  Christmas  holidays  Mr.  Herries 
brought  the  subject  forward  again  by  moving  two  reso- 
lutions, the  first  of  which,  approving  the  recommenda- 
tion given  by  the  Government  to  the  Bank,  was  adopted, 
but  the  second,  declaring  the  expediency  of  a  suspension 
of  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the  Acts  of  1844  and 
1845,  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of  41.  The  motion 
came  too  late.  The  October  panic  had  passed  away, 
Consols  were  rising,  and  the  pressure,  no  longer  felt, 
was  almost  forgotten. 

The  repeal  of  the  Navigation  laws  proposed  for  the 


cu.  xr.  NAVIGATION  LAW,  233 

first  time  by  the  Government  in  1848,  and  effected  in 
1849,  was  the  most  important  question  dealt  with  by 
the  House  of  Commons  during  those  sessions,  or  indeed 
during  the  whole  existence  of  that  Parliament.  '  The 

o 

resistance,'  says  Lord  George  Bentinck's  illustrious 
biographer,  '  was  led  with  great  ability  by  Mr.  Herries, 
and  the  whole  party  put  forward  their  utmost  strength 
to  support  him.'  In  a  fair  and  temperate  spirit,  as  some 
of  its  best  advocates  admitted,  he  opposed  the  measure 
of  the  Government,  believing  that  the  abrogation  of  the 
*  Maritime  Charter  '  would  expose  to  hazard  that  naval 
preponderance  which  it  had  been  designed  to  secure, 
and  to  the  maintenance  of  which,  looking  at  the  ques- 
tion from  the  point  of  view  of  national  greatness,  he 
made  all  other  considerations  entirely  subordinate.  But 
although  he  thought  that  it  was  rash  to  abolish  the 
code  which,  modified  indeed  in  some  of  its  parts,  had 
subsisted  for  two  centuries,  he  never  went  to  the  ex- 
treme length  of  saying  that  no  relaxation  in  any  of  its 
details  ought  ever  to  be  allowed.  He  professed  his 
readiness  to  assent,  as  he  had  done  more  than  twenty 
years  before,  to  such  alterations  as  a  change  of  circum- 
stances might  render  necessary.  His  opinions  were 
expressed  in  the  resolution  which,  in  concert  with  his 
friends,  he  moved  on  the  20th  of  May,  1848  :  '  That  it 
is  essential  to  the  national  interests  of  this  country  to 
maintain  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  existing 
Navigation  laws,  subject  to  such  modifications  as  may  be 
best  calculated  to  obviate  any  proved  inconvenience 
to  the  commerce  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  its  de- 
pendencies, without  danger  to  our  national  strength/ 


234  NAVIGATION  LAW.  en.  xi. 

What  he  meant  when  he  spoke  of  the  '  fundamental 
principles  of  the  existing  Navigation  laws,'  he  explained 
by  quoting  the  words  of  Mr.  Huskisson  :  '  The  funda- 
mental principle  of  the  Navigation  laws  is  that  of  giving 
by  law  in  our  foreign  trade  a  preference  to  British  ship- 
ping and  British  seamen,  so  far  as  we  can  do  so  con- 
sistently with  our  engagements  and  relations  with  other 
countries,  and  of  confining  our  domestic  trade,  our 
coasting  and  colonial  trade,  as  well  as  our  fisheries, 
exclusively  to  ourselves.'  .  .  .  To  these  principles 
Mr.  Huskisson  firmly  adhered.  The  legislative  changes 
effected  under  his  auspices,  and  in  which  Mr.  Herries, 
then  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  was  largely  a  collabo- 
rator, were  no  deviation  from  them.  It  was  contended, 
with  no  little  inconsistency,  by  many  of  those  who  at 
the  same  time  most  vehemently  demanded  the  total  re- 
peal of  the  Navigation  law,  denouncing  its  artificial 
restrictions  as  injurious  to  commerce,  to  the  consumer, 
and  to  the  shipping  interest  itself,  that  hardly  anything 
in  reality  remained  of  the  detested  statute.  With  vary- 
ing metaphor  it  was  said  that  the  substance  having 
been  taken  away  by  the  legislation  of  Wallace  and  Hus- 
kisson, and  by  the  reciprocity  treaties,  nothing  was  left 
but  a  shred,  a  rag,  a  shadow,  the  bark  of  the  tree  with- 
out its  trunk,  and  from  this  strange  fallacy  was  drawn, 
especially  by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  an  argumentumad  hominern, 
as  illegitimate  as  such  an  argument  commonly  is,  against 
Mr.  Herries,  who  was  twitted  with  his  useless  defence  of 
the  mere  semblance  of  a  protection,  which  he  himself  had 
helped  to  destroy.  But  such  reasonings,  however  smart 
they  may  have  appeared  in  debate,  will  not  bear  the 


en.  xr.  NAVIGATION  LAW.  235 

test  of  candid  examination.  The  so-called  Reciprocity 
Acts  of  1823  and  1824,  and  the  treaties  founded  upon 
them,  did  not  in  fact  touch  the  Navigation  Act  in 
the  slightest  degree.  They  dealt  simply  with  the 
equalization  of  discriminating  duties  on  ships  and  on 
the  goods  carried  in  them — charges  not  imposed  by 
the  Navigation  Act,  and  which  were  not  its  necessary 
consequence.  The  amended  Navigation  Acts  of  1822 
and  1825  removed  several  of  the  former  restrictions  on 
the  colonial  trade,  the  long  voyage  trade,  and  the 
European  carrying  trade,  some  of  which  had  no  longer 
any  meaning  or  importance,  and  others  had  been  ren- 
dered inapplicable  by  altered  political  circumstances. 
One  change  indeed,  by  which  the  interdiction  of  im- 
portations of  certain  commodities  from  the  Netherlands 
or  Germany,  was  taken  off,  was  nothing  but  a  return 
to  the  Act  of  1660.  But  after  all  these  concessions  to 
foreign  navigation,  the  main  provisions  of  the  law  were 
still  in  many  respects  intact.  A  Prussian  vessel  was 
enabled  to  carry  Prussian  produce  from  a  Prussian 
port  to  certain  ports  in  the  British  West  Indies,  and 
bring  home  colonial  produce.  But  it  could  not  carry 
a  cargo  of  British  goods  from  London  to  Jamaica,  or  a 
cargo  of  sugar  from  Trinidad  to  Liverpool.  A  Dutch 
ship  might  bring  over  to  England  from  Amsterdam 
French  wine  previously  imported  into  Holland,  but  not 
claret  from  Bordeaux,  port  wine  from  Oporto,  or  oranges 
from  Palermo.  The  transformation  of  colonies  into 
independent  States  required  the  adoption  of  new  rules 
for  the  trade  with  the  American  Continent,  but  the  old 
ones  to  a  great  extent  subsisted  for  the  import  trade 


236  NAVIGATION   LAW.  CH.  xi. 

with  Asia  and  Africa,  which,  for  all  practical  purposes, 
was  still  a  British  monopoly,  being  confined  to  British 
ships  or  those  of  the  country  of  origin  and  export. 
How  then  could  it  be  pretended  that  the  Navigation 
Act  was  reduced  to  a  mere  shadow  ?  To  the  reductio  ad 
absurdum  Mr.  Herries  replied  by  quoting  Mr.  Labou- 
chere's  words  on  introducing  his  bill  in  1849  : — '  The 
changes  I  am  about  to  recommend  are  of  a  far  more 
important  and  extensive  description  than  any  previously 
proposed  to  Parliament.  ...  I  do  not  disguise  from 
myself  that  these  alterations  are  of  a  very  grave  and 
serious  character.'  .  .  . 

Although  the  result  could  not  have  been  doubtful, 
the  contest  was  vigorously  sustained  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  where  Mr.  Herries's  motions  were  power- 
fully supported  by  Lord  George  Bentinck,  Mr.  Disraeli, 
Lord  Granby,  Mr.  Walpole,  and  other  speakers  who 
were  not  afraid  to  fight  a  losing  battle.  In  the  House 
of  Lords  the  Navigation  law  had  no  more  eloquent  de- 
fender than  Lord  Brougham.  He  often  took  counsel  on 
this  subject  with  Mr.  Herries,  at  whose  house  he  became 
a  frequent  visitor,  and  for  whom  he  professed  particular 
esteem  ;  his  sentiments,  which  at  an  earlier  period  had 
been  those  of  inveterate  hostility,3  having  undergone  an 
entire  change. 

3  It  was  displayed  both  in  and  out  of  Parliament.  Many  bitter  attacks 
in  newspaper  articles  and  reviews  were  known,  or  believed,  to  have  pro- 
ceeded from  Brougham's  pen.  A  passage  in  a  letter  written  by  him  to  Sir 
Robert  Wilson  in  1827  shows  his  animus.  '  I  fear  such  appointments  as 
that  ardent  ultra  [this  Whig  notion  at  that  time  was  entirely  erroneous] 
and  concealed  malignant  Herries  augur  no  great  good  to  the  godly.'  The 
godly  were  of  course  the  Whigs. — Narrative  of  the  Formation  of  Cannings 
Administration,  by  General  Sir  Robert  Wilson.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Herbert 
Randolph.  1872* 


CH.  XT.  EFFECTS  OF  REPEAL.  237 

It  must  be  conceded  that  the  apprehensions  of  those 
who,  adhering  to  the  policy  upheld  by  a  long  line  of 
English  statesmen,  from  Cromwell  to  Huskisson,  and 
advocated  by  the  greatest  of  English  econom'sts,  de- 
precated the  abrogation  of  the  law,  famous  in  the  history 
of  England  and  of  the  world,  '  for  the  encouragement 
of  British  Shipping  and  Navigation,'  have  not  been 
realized,  although  it  may  be  doubted  whether,  in  all 
respects,  their  predictions  have  been  proved  to  be  erro- 
neous by  results.  But  their  successful  adversaries  cannot 
justly  refuse  to  admit  that  the  maritime  and  commer- 
cial conditions  of  every  region  of  the  globe  which  ex- 
isted prior  to  the  year  1850,  and  in  view  of  which  the 
question  was  discussed,  have  since  that  time  been  wholly 
changed  by  the  operation  of  causes  not  then  foreseen. 
The  requirements  both  of  peaceful  trade  and  of  naval 
warfare  at  the  present  -day  are  far  removed  from  those 
of  the  year  1848. 

All  the  calculations  of  the  comparative  cost  of  build- 
ing and  navigating  British  and  foreign  ships  which 
were  made  at  a  time  when  the  number  of  steam  vessels 
was  relatively  insignificant,  and  wood  was  still  the 
material  principally  employed,  have  been  upset  by  the 
enormous  increase  of  steam  navigation,  and  of  the  use 
of  iron  in  the  construction  of  ships  ;  in  both  which 
respects  our  ability  to  defy  foreign  competition  needs 
no  demonstration. 

The  prodigious  augmentation  of  traffic  of  all  kinds 
between  all  countries,  far  exceeding  that  which  previous 
experience  could  have  warranted  anyone  in  reckoning 
upon,  has  demanded  a  corresponding  addition  to  the 
formerly  available  means  of  transport. 


238  NEW  CONDITIONS  OF  TRADE.  en.  xi. 

The  unexpected  access  of  Europeans  to  Japan  ; 
the  extension  of  trade  with  China  brought  about  by 
successful  war  ;  the  creation  of  new  centres  of  commer- 
cial activity  consequent  upon  the  gold  discoveries  of 
California  and  Australia  ;  the  opening  of  the  Suez  Canal 
by  French  enterprise  in  spite  of  the  senseless  opposition 
of  Lord  Palmerston  to  an  undertaking  beneficial  to  the 
world  in  general,  but  far  more  so  to  England  in  par- 
ticular, of  the  impotent  ill-will  of  British  diplomacy, 
and  of  the  prejudices  instilled  into  the  mind  of  the 
British  public,  led  by  persistent  invective  and  insinua- 
tion to  look  upon  the  great  work  now  placed  in  the 
category  of  '  British  interests '  of  the  first  magnitude, 
as  an  engine  malignantly  designed  for  the  destruction 
of  the  British  Empire,  and  upon  its  ingenious  and 
courageous  promoter,  as  a  deadly  enemy  bent  on  the 
ruin  of  all  that  was  most  sacred  to  a  Briton  :  these 
extraordinary  events,  not  even  remotely  referable  to 
free  trade  in  general,  or  to  free  trade  in  shipping,  speci- 
fically, have  given  such  an  impulse  to  steam  navigation 
on  the  largest  scale  as  no  man  could  have  contemplated 
in  1848. 

Another  revolution  not  then  to  be  imagined  was 
the  sudden  displacement  of  American  by  British  ship- 
ping :  the  result,  not  of  fair  competition  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  trade,  but  of  civil  war,  and  of  depredations 
exercised  by  '  volunteer  cruisers  '  fitted  out  through  the 
pernicious  activity  of  English  speculators. 

In  looking  at  comparative  statistics  of  British 
navigation,  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  conditions 
required,  formerly  and  now,  to  constitute  a  British 


CH.  xi.  WHAT   IS  A  BRITISH   SHIP?  239 

vessel  are  not  the  same.  What  was  legally  and 
technically  described  as  a  British  ship  under  the  old 
Navigation  law,  was  such  in  reality.  It  was  a  vessel 
built  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in  some  British  depen- 
dency, owned  by  a  British  subject,  navigated  by  a 
British  master,  and  manned  by  a  crew  of  which  at  least 
three-fourths  were  also  British  subjects.  It  is  now  pos- 
sible for  a  ship  to  have  a  British  register,  and  to  be 
entitled  to  sail  under  British  colours,  which  has  been 
built  in  Norway,  is  owned  by  a  Company  the  whole  of 
whose  capital  belongs  to  Americans,  commanded  by  a 
Dutchman,  and  manned  with  a  '  scratch  crew  '  of  mur- 
derous mutineers  of  no  known  nationality,  not  one  of 
whom  speaks  or  understands  the  English  tongue,  or 
cares  in  the  least  for  the  parallelogram  of  red  bunting 
with  a  particoloured  corner,  called  the  British  ensign, 
which,  manufactured  perchance  at  Ghent,  may  have 
been  purchased  by  a  German  bagman  in  a  slop-shop  at 
Antwerp.  What  is  there  British,  except  its  register, 
about  such  a  ship?  Even  the  belaying  pins  with  which, 
somewhere  in  the  South  Sea,  the  mate  kills  the  captain, 
the  boatswain  the  mate,  the  cook  the  boatswain,  and 
the  carpenter  the  cook,  are  probably  not  British  made  ; 
nor  the  knives  with  which,  after  scuttling  the  so-called 
British  ship,  the  piratical  crew  cut  each  other's  throats  ; 
leaving  the  last  survivor  in  possession  of  the  only 
British  articles  on  board — a  bottle  of  whisky  and  a  box 
of  biscuits. 

As  to  the  genuine  British  seaman  of  the  mercantile 
marine,  some  high  naval  authorities  have  held  the 
opinion  that  his  average  quality  has  deteriorated  since 


2  10  HERRIES  AGAINST  COBDEN.  en.  xi. 

the  adoption  of  the  modern  system.  But  this  is  a 
consideration  which  does  not  affect  the  question  of  cheap 
conveyance,  and  consequently  of  cheap  consumption, 
long  since  recognized  as  the  primary  object  of  human 
existence. 

On  Mr.  Cobden's  irrational  motion  (February  26, 
1849)  for  a  reduction  of  expenditure  by  ten  millions  in 
order  to  bring  it  down  to  the  standard  of  the  estimates  of 
1835,  without  regard  to  all  the  changes  which  fourteen 
years  had  brought  about  in  modes  of  warfare,  in  arms, 
in  the  numerical  strength  of  continental  armies,  and  in 
the  naval  and  military  preparations  of  foreign  Powers, 
Mr.  Herries,  supporting  the  Government,  animadverted 
severely,  but  justly,  upon  the  customary  misrepresenta- 
tions of  the  financial  and  economical  agitators.  '  The 
Right  Honourable  gentleman,  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,'  he  said,  '  had  complimented  the  honourable 
member  for  the  West  Riding  on  the  moderation  and 
forbearance  which  had  marked  his  observations.  In 
that  compliment  he  (Mr.  Herries)  could  not  join  ;  for 
although  the  tone  and  language  of  the  honourable 
member  were  moderate  and  sufficiently  tempered  to 
suit  the  atmosphere  of  that  House,  he  (Mr.  Herries) 
could  not  forget  that  the  speech  of  the  honourable 
member  was,  after  all,  but  a  repetition  of  that  which 
had  been  ringing  in  the  public  ear  for  the  last  six 
months  from  Liverpool,  from  Manchester,  and  every 
other  scene  of  agitation,  where  the  same  things  had  been 
said,  though  not  exactly  in  the  same  terms.  .  .  .  The 
honourable  member  was  violent  in  one  place,  and 
decorous  in  another  ;  but  if  the  honourable  gentleman 


CH.  xi.  EXPENDITURE  OF  ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE.    241 

was  to  have  the  privilege  of  using  inflammatory  and 
irritating  language  in  one  place,  and  sober  and  discreet 
language  in  another,  he  (Mr.  Herries)    would   much 
prefer  that  he  should   give   way  to  his  violence    and 
invective    in    that  House,    and    reserve   his    decorous 
argumentation   for   those   places   where   his   audiences 
consisted  of  multitudes  composed  of  more  inflammable 
materials.  .  .  .  The  honourable  member  had  instituted 
a  comparison  between  the  expenditure  of  the  Govern- 
ments of  England  and  France.     He  (Mr.  Herries)  being 
thus  provoked  to  follow  the  honourable  gentleman  in 
that  contrast,  was  compelled  to  declare  that  he  did  not 
think  he  had  studied  that  subject  quite  well  enough  to 
warrant  him  in  coming,  as  he  had  done,  to  a  conclusion 
in  respect  to  the  financial  administration  of  the   two 
nations  unfavourable  to  that  of  England.  ...  If  they 
reviewed   the   financial   progress   of  the   English   and 
French  nations  for  the  last  twenty-eight  years,  they 
would  see  much  more  cause  for  congratulation  than  for 
blame  or  regret,  in  the  comparative  good  management  of 
our  own  Government,  under  the  sanction  of  Parliament, 
when  placed  in  contradistinction  with  that  of  France.' 
.  .  .  He  then  gave  a  succinct  statement  of  the  expen- 
diture of  each  country  from   1820  to  1848  inclusive, 
showing,  as  the  result  of  the  comparison,  that  '  whilst  in 
England  they  commenced  in  1820  with  56,150,000?., 
and    ended    in    1848    with    55,596,000?.  ;   in    France 
they   commenced   with    35,000,000?.,   and   ended  with 
72,000,000?.     From    1824    the    average    amount   was 
about  38,000,000?.  until  the  year  1830.     In  that  year 
a  great   change   occurred.      There  was  a   revolution. 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  PEASANT  PROPRIETORS  AND  PEACE.          OH.  xi. 

Revolutions  were  expensive  things — a  fact  which  it 
would  well  become  those  who  were  disposed  to  promote 
them  to  bear  in  mind.  In  1830  an  enormous  increase 
of  expenditure  was  incurred  for  the  revolution  itself, 
whereby  the  amount  of  the  Budget  of  1831  was  swelled 
to  the  sum  of  60,000,000/.  ...  It  was  well  deserving 
the  attention  of  the  House  that  the  rapid  expansion  of 
public  expenditure  in  France  seemed  to  keep  pace 
with  the  progressive  infusion  of  more  popular  elements 
into  her  Government  and  Constitution  ;  and  this  re- 
markable circumstance  suggested  an  observation  on  a 
doctrine  which  had  been  propounded  to  the  good  people 
of  Manchester  by  the  member  for  the  West  Riding,  the 
effect  of  which  was  that  the  minute  and  progressive 
subdivision  of  property  which  prevailed  in  France, 
under  the  laws  of  that  country,  was  an  admirable 
safeguard  against  a  propensity  to  war,  by  its  tendency 
to  arrest  the  expenditure  by  which  war  was  always 
accompanied.  .  .  .  He  (Mr.  Herries)  had  been  greatly 
surprised  by  the  maintenance  of  such  a  doctrine  in  the 
face  of  history  and  experience.  Why,  let  the  honourable 
member  but  look  at  those  papers  to  which  he  had  just 
been  referring,  and  then  tell  him  what  he  meant  by 
stating  that  this  subdivision  of  property  must  have  the 
effect  of  preventing  war,  because  it  prevented  expen- 
diture. Did  he  not  know  that  this  very  subdivision  of 
property  and  all  this  expanding  expenditure  had  been 
going  on  together  in  France,4  and  that  a  great  part  of 

4  He  might  have  added  that  the  peasant  proprietors  of  France  were  the 
mainstay  of  Bonapartism  and  Sacerdotalism.  But  he  could  not  have 
predicted  that  a  Second  Em  ire,  created  and  supported  by  allied  pea- 


en.  XT.  COST  OF  DEMOCRACY.  .  243 

that  expenditure  was  for  the  Algerine  war — a  war 
which  had  been  forced  upon  the  Government  by  the 
pressure  from  without  ?  .  .  .  Let  the  honourable 
member  then,  whenever  he  again  addressed  the  people 
of  Manchester  on  the  subject  of  agitating  for  a  re- 
duction of  the  national  expenditure,  and  compared 
democratic  with  monarchical  institutions — let  him — if 
he  chose  to  give  the  preference  to  democracy,  tell  his 
audiences  that  all  history  taught  that  if  they  must  needs 
have  republics  and  democracies  in  preference  to  such  a 
monarchy  as  that  under  which  we  live,  they  must  be 
well  prepared  to  put  their  hands  deep  into  their  pockets 
to  pay  for  the  change.  .  .  .  The  honourable  member  told 
the  House  of  things  past  and  things  to  come,  and  of  his 
intense  desire  for  the  reduction  of  expenditure.  In  that 
he  was  not  singular.  Why,  so  was  he  (Mr.  Herries)  also 
for  reduction.  He  was  ready  to  go  along  with  the 
honourable  member  if  he  would  only  go  at  a  different 
pace.  .  .  .  With  agitators  he  was  not  prepared  to  go — 
with  an  agitation  that  was  based  on  no  solid  foundation 
he  could  not  co-operate — an  agitation,  too,  that  was  con- 
ducted in  a  spirit  of  hostility  and  hatred  against  particu- 
lar classes.  .  .  He  would  tell  the  honourable  gentlemen 

sant  proprietors  and  priests,  would  bring  ruin  upon  France  by  a  war  of 
aggression. 

It  might  also  have  been  suggested  to  Mr.  Cobden  as  a  matter  for  his 
consideration,  whether  the  Corn  Laws  could  have  been  repealed  without 
conflict  between  town  and  country,  if  in  1846  the  whole  soil  of  the  United 
Kingdom  had  been  owned  by  the  tillers  thereof,  numbering  with  their 
families  many  millions  directly  interested  in  the  maintenance  of  high  prices 
for  agricultural  produce,  their  sole  means  of  subsistence  ;  and  whether  the 
minute  subdivision  of  property  which  he  desired  would  not  inevitably  be 
followed  by  a  demand  on  the  part  of  those  millions  for  a  return  to  agricul- 
tural protection. 

B  2 


244  PROPOSED  REDUCTION  OF  SALARIES.  CH.  M. 

opposite  that  they  had  no  right  to  impute  to  him  or  to  his 
friends  any  indisposition  to  retrenchment  and  economy. 

They  were  prepared  to  promote  both  to  the  utmost.' 
....•• 

The  denial  of  the  dogma  that  infinite  subdivision  of 
land  among  little  cultivators  is  the  true  remedy  for  all 
maladies  of  the  body  politic  was  received  with  great 
indignation.  Mr.  Herries  was  told  that  he  was  in 
favour  of  an  increase  of  pauperism  for  the  better  preser- 
vation of  peace,  because  he  doubted  the  truth  of  the 
doctrine  laid  down  by  Mr.  Cobden,  and  interpreted  by 
another  speaker,  '  that  the  more  property  was  divided 
in  proportion  to  the  population,  as  in  France,  the  less 
danger  was  there  of  their  institutions  being  disturbed.' 
This  was  said  just  one  year  after  the  revolution 
of  February  1848,  followed  by  months  of  ruinous 
anarchy,  while  the  '  institutions '  and  society  of  Eng- 
land, where  property  was  not  'divided  as  in  France,' 
remained  unshaken.  But  concerning  '  peasant  pro- 
prietors '  anything  may  be  affirmed. 

In  spite  of  his  constant  desire  to  defer  to  the 
opinions  of  his  friends  in  opposition,  Mr.  Herries  was 
not  always  able  to  agree  with  them.  On  one  occasion, 
indeed,  he  felt  compelled  to  express  his  dissent  from 
a  motion  made  by  Mr.  Henley,  with  the  concurrence  of 
many  of  the  protectionist  party,  for  a  general  reduction 
by  ten  per  cent,  of  the  salaries  of  civil  servants,  from 
the  highest  to  the  lowest,  on  the  ground  of  an  alleged 
decrease  of  the  cost  of  living.  Being  convinced  that  such 
a  diminution  of  their  scanty  and  well-earned  incomes 
would  inflict  great  suffering  upon  an  immense  number 


CH.  xr,  DERBY   CABINET.  245 

of  meritorious  functionaries,  he  voted  with  the  Govern- 
ment against  the  proposal.  In  the  course  of  his  speech 
he  pointed  out  the  considerable  reductions  successively 
effected  since  1815 — the  ratio  of  diminution  having  been 
much  greater  in  salaries  than  in  the  number  of  officials. 
He  also  observed  that  when  the  price  of  wheat  rose 
from  395.  in  1835  to  705.  in  1839,  there  was  no  pro- 
position for  an  increase  of  salaries,  and  that  their  regula- 
tion by  the  price  of  corn,  with  a  necessary  alteration 
almost  year  by  year —  a  system  of  corn  salaries  instead 
of  corn  rents — would  be  most  detrimental  to  poor  clerks 
with  90/.  a  year  or  less,  who  could  not  reduce  their 
fixed  charges  for  rent,  insurance,  and  the  like. 

It  is  needless  to  follow  the  vicissitudes  of  the  ses- 
sions of  1850  and  1851,  the  history  of  which  is  written 
in  the  Book  of  Hansard. 

When  Lord  Palmerston's  swift  vengeance  drove  his 
late  colleagues  out  of  office  in  1852,  and  Lord  Derby 
was  forced  under  adverse  circumstances  to  undertake 
the  formation  of  a  new  Cabinet,  Mr.  Herries  accepted 
the  post  in  it  of  President  of  the  Board  of  Control.  It 
was  a  very  great  disappointment  to  him  that  the  place 
in  the  Cabinet  which  he  was  most  qualified  to  fill — the 
Chancellorship  of  the  Exchequer — could  not  be  assigned 
to  him.  Lord  Derby  explained  that  there  were  special 
reasons  which  compelled  him  to  unite  the  position  of 
leader  of  the  House  of  Commons  with  the  office  of 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  the  present  instance, 
and  that  this  had  been  already  arranged  with  Mr.  Dis- 
raeli. But  with  that  exception,  and  one  or  two  others, 
he  offered  him  his  choice.  So  strongly  did  Mr.  Herries 


246  BOARD  OF  CONTROL.  OH.  rr. 

feel  upon  the  subject  of  the  Exchequer,  that  he  begged 
for  a  short  time — though  there  was  but  little  to  spare — 
in  order  to  consider  what  course  he  should  pursue;  and 
in  the  same  afternoon  he  wrote  to  Lord  Derby  (whose 
great  kindness,  and  even  anxiety  to  satisfy  him,  he 
always  acknowledged),  offering  to  support  the  Govern- 
ment without  office,  or,  if  Lord  Derby  continued  to 
think,  as  he  had  said  in  their  interview,  that  it  was 
of  importance  to  the  Government  that  he  should  be  a 
member  of  it,  he  suggested  that  he  might  hold  some 
honorary  office  without  any  serious  duties  attached 
to  it. 

In  truth  he  felt  that,  at  his  time  of  life,  and  in  his 
state  of  health,  he  could  not  undertake  the  administra- 
tion of  a  department  involving  much  labour,  and  that 
his  intimate  knowledge  of  our  financial  system,  even  in 
its  minutest  details,  would  enable  him  to  deal  with  the 
Exchequer  with  the  greatest  ease. 

But  Lord  Derby  could  not  consent  to  either  of  these 
proposals,  and,  finally,  it  was  left  to  Mr.  Herries  to 
decide  between  the  Colonial  office,  the  Board  of  Control 
(India  Office),  and  the  Board  of  Trade.  He  selected 
the  India  Office,  being  averse  from  the  labour  which  he 
believed  the  Colonies  would  entail  upon  him.5 

5  There  is  much  confidential  correspondence  betweeen  Mr.  Herries  and 
Lord  Derby,  as  well  as  other  political  personages,  during  the  period  from 
1848  to  1853.  It  is  of  course  too  recent  for  publication ;  but  the  present 
Editor  may,  without  indiscretion,  remark  that  if  it  could  be  produced  it 
would  afford  indisputable  proof  of  the  very  high  estimation  in  which  Mr. 
Herries  was  held. 


CH.  xii.  WOKK  AT  THE   INDIA  OFFICE.  247 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Work  at  the  India  Office — Correspondence  on  Burmese  War,  &c. — Exercise 
of  patronage — Letters  to  Croker  and  others — Recognition  of  French 
Empire — Resignation  of  Derby  Cabinet — Mr.  Herries  retires  from  Parlia- 
ment— Letter  from  Brougham — Opinions  of  eminent  public  men — Death 
— Liberal  testimony — General  view  of  Mr.  Herries's  political  principles 
and  practice — Conclusion. 

HE  soon  perceived  that  age  had  weakened  the  capacity 
for  continuous  work  which  at  an  earlier  period  of  his 
life  had  been  immense,  and  some  premonitory  attacks, 
temporarily  disabling  him,  warned  him  that  he  was  en- 
deavouring to  do  more  than  his  strength  would  allow. 
If  the  Cabinet  had  appeared  to  be  firmly  established  he 
would  have  sought  rest  in  retirement,  but,  in  the  pre- 
carious state  of  its  existence,  a  sense  of  duty  to  his 
colleagues  restrained  him  from  abandoning  the  post  he 
had  been  persuaded  to  assume.  His  feeling  of  weariness 
is  expressed  in  a  letter  to  a  political  friend  of  former 
days  : — '  I  rejoice  to  observe  that  you  have  lost  none  of 
your  warmth  of  attachment  to  the  old  school  of  politics 
in  which  you  and  I  were  fellow-labourers  "a  long  time 
ago."  But  a  sad  change  has  come  over  the  spirit  of 
that  dream.  You  are  well  out  of  the  toil  and  turmoil 
of  a  struggle  with  the  augmented  and  augmenting 
powers  of  Radicalism.  I  heartily  wish  I  were  in  so 
quiet  a  position  as  you  are.  The  management  of  my 
immense  office  is  a  hard  task  at  my  time  of  life,  and 


248  CORRESPONDENCE.  CH.  xn. 

nothing  but  a  conscientious  devotion  to  a  good  cause 
would  have  induced  me  to  undertake  it.  .  .  .' 

But  there  is  certainly  no  want  of  vigour  or  care 
perceptible  in  his  correspondence,  official  or  private. 

The  second  Burmese  War,  the  intelligence  of  the 
commencement  of  which  reached  England  soon  after 
the  installation  of  the  new  Ministry,  and  the  Par- 
liamentary inquiry  into  the  system  of  government  in 
India  previous  to  the  expiration  of  the  Company's 
charter,  were  the  principal  objects  calling  for  the  atten- 
tion of  the  Indian  Department  during  Mr.  Herries's 
short  administration  of  it.  To  other  questions  of  per- 
manent importance  he  devoted  himself  with  the  greatest 
solicitude.  In  particular,  he  earnestly  pressed  forward 
the  construction  of  railways,  and  promoted  the  plans 
for  the  establishment  of  telegraphic  communication,  the 
honour  of  devising  which  belongs  to  Dr.  O'Shaugh- 
nessy. 

The  following  extracts  from  private  letters,1  written 
by  Mr.  Herries  at  this  time  show  his  views  on  these 
subjects,  and  his  mode  of  treating  them. 

To  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  March  4,  1852. 

'  In  obedience  to  your  wish  expressed  to  me  at  the 
Levee,  I  send  you  the  draft  of  the  letter  prepared  by 
Lord  ElleDborough  in  1829  after  consulting  you  on 
the  possible  renewal  of  the  Burmese  war,  together  with 
Lord  Ellenborough's  note  suggesting  a  reference  to 
it.  .  .  .' 

1  The  publication  of  the  present  Memoir  has  been  retarded  by  the  acci- 
dental discovery  of  a  large  volume  containing  this  correspondence. 


CH.  xii.  BUEMESE  WAR.  249 

To  the  Earl  of  Ellenborough. 

March  4. — '  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your 
letter.  I  saw  the  Duke  at  the  Levee,  and  I  reminded 
him  of  his  suggestions  to  you  on  the  subject  of  a  pos- 
sible renewal  of  a  Burmese  War  in  1829.  He  desired 
to  have  an  opportunity  of  reading  the  draft  of  your 
despatch.  I  have  accordingly  sent  it  to  him.  I  am 
anxiously  waiting  for  the  mail  from  India.  As  there  is 
every  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  Indian  Government 
to  avoid  war,  I  am  in  hopes  that  nothing  permanently 
mischievous  may  arise  from  the  reported  skirmish  off 
Rangoon.' 

To  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 

March  8. — *  Your  letter,  addressed  to  Lord  Brough- 
ton,  dated  January  23,  has  been  placed  by  him  in  my 
hands,  and  affords  me  the  first  opportunity  of  opening  a 
private  and  confidential  correspondence  with  you,  in 
my  present  official  position,  of  which  I  avail  myself 
with  much  pleasure.  .  .  . 

' .  .  .  Although  I  entertain  a  strong  expectation  that 
under  your  prudent  management  the  misfortune  of  a 
war  with  Ava  will  be  avoided,  I  think  it  may  be  useful 
and  interesting  to  you  to  refer  to  a  despatch  touching 
the  possible  danger  of  the  renewal  of  a  Burmese  war, 
which  you  will  find  in  your  archives  under  date  of  Sep- 
tember 29, 1829.  It  was  sent  out  by  Lord  Ellenborough 
after  a  communication  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
from  whom  I  have  just  received  the  note  enclosed,  after 
sending  it  to  him  for  perusal.  .  .  .' 


250  BURMESE  WAR.  CH.  xn. 

April  8. — '  Your  letters  by  the  last  mail  have  been 
of  great  interest,  and  we  await  with  much  solicitude  the 
result  of  your  prompt  and  decisive  measures  for  bring- 
ing the  Burmese  to  reason.  I  do  not  in  the  least  degree 
doubt  the  correctness  of  your  conclusion,  that  nothing 
short  of  vigorous  compulsion  would  produce  that 
effect.  .  .  . 

' .  .  .  With  more  discretion  on  the  side  of  the  naval 
negotiators,  and  a  strict  compliance  with  your  instruc- 
tions, the  affair  might  perhaps  have  been  terminated 
without  having  recourse  to  the  strong  measures  which 
you  are  now  forced  to  adopt.  .  .  . 

'  I  sincerely  hope  that  you  will  not  find  it  incon- 
venient, either  to  your  health  or  to  your  private  affairs, 
to  accede  to  the  request  which  Lord  Derby  has  made  to 
you,  and  which  I  also  subsequently  addressed  to  you 
through  the  Secret  Committee  (very  much  to  the  satis- 
faction of  the  Chairs),  that  you  would  consent  to  remain 
another  year  in  the  discharge  of  your  high  and  most 
important  functions.  Under  any  circumstances  a  com- 
pliance with  the  request  would  have  been  essentially 
advantageous  to  the  public  service.  The  recent  events 
and  present  prospect  of  affairs  in  India,  greatly  add  to 
the  importance  of  it.  .  .  .' 

May  24. — '  Your  letters  by  the  last  mail  have  put  us 
in  possession  of  all  your  proceedings  and  views  up  to 
the  starting  of  the  expedition  against  Rangoon.  They 
afford  no  ground  for  hope  that  any  answer  would  be 
received  from  Ava  such  as  might  authorise  General 
Godwin  to  bring  matters  to  a  peaceful  conclusion  with- 
out striking  a  blow.  I  therefore  expect  to  learn  by  the 


CH.  xn.  BURMESE   WAR.  251 

next  arrival  of  the  mail  that  Rangoon  has  fallen  and 
Martaban  also.  The  instructions  which  you  have  given 
to  the  General  are  in  every  respect  approved  of  by 
Lord  Derby  and  the  whole  of  the  Government  here, 
of  which  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  conveying  to  you  an 
assurance  by  my  secret  despatch  of  this  date.' 

June  7. — '  Your  despatches  of  the  22nd  and  your 
private  letter  of  the  24th,  have  brought  us  good  tidings, 
and  afforded  much  gratification  to  all  of  us.  I  heartily 
congratulate  you  on  the  complete  success  of  an  expe- 
dition prepared  so  immediately  under  your  personal 
superintendence  to  carry  out  your  own  policy,  in  which 
the  whole  of  the  Government  at  home  have  unreservedly 
concurred,  as  I  have  already  assured  you.  Although 
you  were  not  sanguine  at  the  date  of  your  letter  in  the 
hope  that  the  King  of  Ava  might  be  wise  enough  to 
profit  by  the  severe  lesson  which  you  have  given  him, 
I  must  confess  that  I  am  not  without  the  belief  and  ex- 
pectation that  such  a  blow  so  promptly  and  so  vigor- 
ously administered  may  have  the  effect  of  subduing 
even  Burmese  pride,  and  thereby  lead  to  a  speedy  con- 
clusion of  the  war.  Heaven  grant  it  may  be  so. 

'  The  state  of  the  health  of  the  army  is  the  only 
subject  of  anxiety  to  us.  It  does  not  appear  from  any 
accounts  we  possess  whether  the  cholera,  of  which  some 
cases  had  occurred,  was  of  Rangoon  origin,  or  carried 
with  them  by  the  troops  from  Madras  or  Calcutta. 
We  are  assured  here  by  persons  assuming  to  have 
knowledge  by  experience  of  the  locality,  that  Rangoon 
is  not  invariably  an  unhealthy  place.  The  reminis- 


252        ELECTRIC  TELEGRAPH.     BURMESE  WAR.      OH.  in. 

cences  of  our  last  military  occupation  of  it  are  not 
decisive  upon  that  point.  In  that  instance  there  was 
a  neglect  of  all  those  precautions  and  provisions  for  the 
health  and  comfort  of  the  men  which  in  this  case  you 
have  so  carefully  attended  to.  ... 

'  Our  Committee,  on  the  renewal  of  the  "  East 
Indian  Territories "  Act  proceeds  quietly  and  satis- 
factorily. There  is  a  general  inclination  towards  a 
maintenance  of  the  present  system  with  perhaps  some — 
not  very  important — modifications. 

'  I  took  the  liberty  of  communicating  part  of  your 
letter  to  me  to  the  Queen.' 

June  8. — '  I  will  attend  immediately  and  with  much 
interest  to  your  despatches  by  the  last  mail  on  the 
subject  of  the  electric  telegraph.  The  papers  are 
this  day  brought  under  my  consideration.  You  may 
depend  upon  my  warm  support  in  the  prosecution  of 
your  views,  and  on  my  giving  all  possible  attention  to 
Dr.  O'Shaughnessy  when  he  arrives.  It  is  a  matter  of 
immense  importance  to  the  Government  of  India.' 

June  23. — '  It  affords  me  much  pleasure  to  be  able 
to  relieve  your  mind  of  one  subject  of  solicitude,  which 
appears  (by  your  last  letter  of  May  3)  to  occupy  it. 
You  were  then  under  the  impression  that  the  Burmese 
War  is  unpopular  here.  But  ...  I  am  able  confi- 
dently to  assure  you  that  war  with  Ava  stands  in  no 
disfavour  in  the  public  mind ;  while,  on  the  contrary, 
there  certainly  does  prevail  a  very  general  admiration 
of  the  manner  in  which  you  have  commenced  and 


CH.  xii.  SOLDIERS  AND   SAIL011S  APPLAUDED.  253 

hitherto  conducted  it.  Your  earnest  endeavours  to 
avoid  it  are  duly  appreciated.  We  have  published  in 
an  Extraordinary  Gazette  the  documents  relating  to 
the  capture  of  Rangoon  and  Martaban,  and  I  trust  that 
in  the  forthcoming  Queen's  Speech  notice  will  be  taken 
in  becoming  terms  of  approbation  of  your  own  share  of 
these  important  achievements,  as  well  as  of  the  valour 
and  discipline  of  the  troops  engaged  in  them.  They 
are,  indeed,  beyond  all  praise,  considering  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  climate  with  which  these  brave  fellows 
had  to  contend. 

'  The  good  health  of  the  army  and  the  favourable 
condition  of  the  wounded  are  subjects  of  much  gratifi- 
cation to  all  of  us.  .  .  .' 

With  reference  to  the  two  last  letters,  Lord  Dal- 
housie  wrote  on  August  7  : — '  You  have  gratified  me 
by  the  kind  terms  in  which  you  have  disabused  my 
mind  of  the  belief  that  this  war  is  obnoxious  in  England. 
I  do  not  affect  to  be  insensible  to  any  approbation 
which  may  be  felt  of  my  own  share  in  the  matter,  or  to 
be  by  any  means  indifferent  to  the  expression  of  it,  but 
I  can  also  most  unaffectedly  declare  that  my  chief  care 
is  that  her  Majesty's  Government  should,  at  the  fitting 
time,  give  full  praise  and  reward  to  the  soldiers  and 
sailors  who  have  done  their  work  so  well.  They  are 
noble  fellows.  By  my  life  they  are  noble  fellows ! 

'  Your  very  prompt  and  complete  adoption  of  all 
our  proposals  regarding  the  electric  telegraph  has  been 
most  gratifying  to  us  here.  Be  assured  it  is  a  work 
whose  importance  and  value  to  this  country  cannot  be 
over-estimated.'  .  .  . 


254  BURMESE  WAR.  on.  XIL 

To  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 

July  24. — '  Your  letters  of  June  2  have  brought  to 
us  the  satisfactory  intelligence  of  the  capture  of  Bassein. 

1  The  movement  upon  that  place  was  well  planned 
and  happily  executed. 

'  The  occupation  of  Bassein  and  the  consequent 
command  of  the  branch  of  the  river  on  which  it  is 
situated,  is  an  important  addition  to  the  possession  of 
Rangoon  and  Martaban. 

• '  General  Godwin's  opinion,  confirmed  by  your  own, 
on  the  impolicy  of  a  forward  movement  under  present 
circumstances  is  entirely  acquiesced  in  here.  I  have 
submitted  the  papers  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  It  is 
a  remarkable  circumstance  that  you  should  remain  so 
entirely  uninformed  of  the  disposition  or  condition  of 
the  Court  of  Ava.  There  must  be  some  special  cause 
for  the  absence  of  information  from  thence.  I  am 
inclined  to  impute  it  to  some  convulsion  in  that  Go- 
vernment, and  I  am  not  without  hope  that  we  may  reap 
the  benefit  of  their  distracted  councils  in  a  concession 
which  may  relieve  us  from  the  necessity  of  a  march 
upon  Ava. 

'  Happen  what  may,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  you 
will  make  the  Burmese  pay  our  expenses.  In  the 
present  state  of  our  Indian  finances,  we  can  ill  afford 
to  incur  extra  charges  for  punishing  their  misconduct. 
I  am  aware  of  your  anxious  attention  to  the  subject  of 
the  income  and  expenditure  of  India,  and  I  trust  you 
will  permit  me,  in  the  course  of  the  present  recess,  to 
open  an  unreserved  correspondence  with  you  on  that 


CH.  xn.  TELEGRAPH  AND   RAILWAYS.  255 

important  topic.  ...  I  have  seen  Dr.  O'Shaughnessy, 
and  am  much  pleased  with  him.  I  will  do  everything 
in  my  power  to  forward  his  business  here,  and  to  pro- 
mote your  intentions  with  respect  to  the  electric  tele- 
graph system  in  India.  We  are  doing  what  we  can  in 
pushing  on  the  construction  of  your  railways.  I  could 
not  agree  with  the  Directors  on  the  question  whether 
the  Madras  Railway  should  be  executed  by  the  East 
India  Company  itself,  or  by  contract,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  others  now  in  progress.  The  great  advantage  of 
inducing  the  investment  of  British  capital,  and  the 
application  of  British  enterprise  to  Indian  improve- 
ments, taken  in  conjunction  with  the  apparently  suc- 
cessful progress  (hitherto)  of  the  contract  system  in 
the  construction  of  the  Bombay  and  Bengal  railways, 
induced  me  to  overrule  the  resolution  of  the  Court  of 
Directors  in  favour  of  the  other  course.  .  .  . 

'  You  will  observe  in  our  newspapers  that  great 
havoc  has  been  made  in  the  ranks  of  the  late  Parliament 
by  the  elections  now  nearly  brought  to  a  close.  There 
are  few  of  us  who  have  not  lost  personal  friends  in  the 
general  slaughter  ;  and  independently  of  all  political 
bias  there  are  some  whose  absence  from  Parliament  I 
shall  sincerely  deplore.' 

August  24. — '  I  have  received  your  private  letter  of 
3rd  July.  If  you  wrote  to  me  by  the  preceding  mail 
(which  we  fear  is  lost),  I  am  without  hope  of  ever 
seeing  your  letter.  It  is  not  in  my  power  to  write  to 
you  on  this  occasion  as  fully  as  I  should  have  wished 
...  by  the  next  mail  you  may  confidently  expect 
a  full  and  explicit  communication  of  the  views  and 


256  PEGU.      LORD  FALKLAND.  CH.  HI. 

decision  of  the  Government  upon  the  several  alterna- 
tives set  forth  in  your  minute  of  the  30th  of  June,2 
concerning  the  ulterior  measures  to  be  pursued  in  the 
settlement  of  the  Burmese  question.  .  .  / 

To  the  Duke  of  Wellington. 

September  2. — '  Your  paper  of  suggestions  on  the 
annexation  of  Pegu  has  been  acted  upon.  I  have 
drawn  the  instructions  to  the  Governor- General  accord- 
ingly, in  concert  with  Lord  Derby,  and  they  are  now 
with  the  Queen  for  approval.  I  thought  it  right  to 
inform  her  Majesty  that  your  advice  had  been  taken  by 
Lord  Derby  upon  the  subject.' 

To  Viscount  Falkland.3 

September  6. — ' ....  You  may  be  assured  that 
there  is,  and  always  will  be,  a  ready  disposition  on  my 
part,  and  on  that  of  the  other  members  of  H.M.  Go- 
vernment, to  repel  unjust  or  injurious  attacks  upon 
the  public  servants  abroad,  as  a  duty  to  them  upon 
general  public  grounds,  independently  even  of  the 
personal  respect  which  they  entertain  for  your  Lord- 
ship and  others  who  like  you  are  discharging  important 
duties  in  distant  lands.  ...  In  a  former  letter  to  you 
I  have  adverted  in  just  terms  of  approbation  to  the 
admirable  celerity  with  which  the  orders  of  Lord 
Dalhousie  were  executed  at  Bombay  in  the  preparation 
of  the  Naval  Force  required  from  thence  for  the 
expedition  to  Rangoon.  The  subsequent  conduct  of 
the  Indian  steamers  in  the  Rivers  of  Pegu  has  been 

2  Papers  presented  to  Parliament  March  15, 1853,  p.  37. 

3  Governor  of  Bombay. 


CH.  xii.  LORD  DALHOUSIE'S  INSTRUCTIONS.  257 

sufficient,  I  trust,  to  dispel  all  prejudices  which  may 
have  existed  against  your  naval  establishment. 

'I  have  read  with  attention  and  interest  your 
remarks  upon  the  financial  condition  of  your  Lord- 
ship's Presidency.  You  are  justly  entitled  to  a  full 
allowance  for  all  the  circumstances  to  which  you  advert, 
as  necessary  causes  of  the  apparently  unfavourable 
balance  of  the  Income  and  Expenditure  of  Bombay.  I 
am  about  to  enter  upon  a  full  investigation  of  the 
financial  condition  of  all  the  Presidencies,  and  you  may 
be  assured  that  the  important  facts  to  which  you  direct 
my  attention  will  not  be  overlooked.  .  .  .' 

To  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 

September  1. — '  I  have  received  your  private  letters 
of  the  14- 15th  June,  and  of  the  14th  July  ;  the  earlier 
ones  after  the  latter  ;  they  were  retarded  by  the  failure 
of  the  Ajduha. 

'  I  wrote  by  the  last  mail  to  inform  you  that  we 
had  received  your  important  minute  of  the  30th  June. 
I  regretted  that  I  could  not  by  the  same  opportunity 
send  you  the  opinions  of  the  Government  upon  it.  The 
mail  which  brought  it  arrived  later  than  usual,  and  my 
colleagues  were  so  dispersed  that  I  was  unable  to  lay 
before  the  Queen  the  draft  of  the  instructions  which 
you  so  earnestly  and  so  naturally  requested  to  receive 
in  the  most  explicit  terms,  in  time  for  the  outgoing 
mail. 

'  Those  instructions 4  will  reach  you  when  you 
receive  this  letter.  The  fullest  consideration  has  been 

4  September  6.    Papers  presented  to  Parliament  March  15, 1853,  p.  52. 
VOL.  II.  S 


258  VIEWS  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT.  CH.TO. 

given  to  all  the  points  adverted  to  in  your  Minute. 
Lord  Derby  thought  it  right  to  take  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  into  our  councils.  .  .  .  You  will  observe 
how  entirely  all  your  measures  are  approved  of,  and 
how  cordially  all  your  motives  are  concurred  in  by  the 
Government  at  home.  The  only  point  on  which  we 
somewhat  diverge — not  from  any  of  your  positive  views 
— but  from  a  suggestion  connected  with  your  fifth  and 
last  proposed  alternative — is  one  upon  which  I  trust 
that  you  will  ultimately  agree  with  us. 

'  We  see  no  practicable  or  safe  termination  of  the 
warfare  in  which  you  are  engaged  with  Burmah  except 
by  compelling  the  King  of  Ava  to  conclude  it  by  a 
treaty  such  as  may  satisfy  our  interests  and  vindicate  our 
honour,  or  by  driving  him  from  his  capital  and  extin- 
guishing his  rule.  We  have,  therefore,  not  adopted  the 
course,  rather  hinted  than  expressly  proposed  in  your 
minute,  of  confining  our  military  operations  to  the 
expulsion  of  the  Burmese  from  Pegu  and  then  leaving 
them  to  do  the  worst  they  can  against  us. 

'  I  see  with  satisfaction  your  determination  to  go 
yourself  to  Rangoon.  Your  presence  cannot  but  have 
an  excellent  effect  there.  .  .  .  On  the  whole  we  look 
forward  with  confident  hope  to  the  ultimate  issue  of 
the  operations  into  which  you  have  been  compelled  to 
enter.  My  own  expectation  is  that  they  will  put  an 
end  for  ever  to  all  danger  and  trouble  on  your  eastern 
frontier,  and  open  new  and  important  sources  of 
advantage  to  the  commerce  of  this  country  and  of 
India.' 


CH.  xn.  PUBLIC  OPINION.  259 

To  Sir  J.  W.  ffogg,  Bart.,  Chairman  of  the  Court  of 
Directors. 

September  1. —  .  .  .  '  We  differ  very  slightly  from 
the  Governor-General  as  to  the  modus  terminandi  of  the 
war  which  he  commenced  with  so  much  reluctance  and 
has  prosecuted  with  so  much  skill  and  vigour.  What- 
ever may  be  thought  of  it  by  others,  /  look  forward  to 
great  benefits  to  India  to  be  ultimately  derived  from 
the  ample  punishment — perhaps  the  expulsion  of  the 
Burmese  from  our  eastern  frontier  there.  .  .  .' 

To  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 

September  23. — 'I  have  received  your  letter  of  the 
7th  August  after  your  return  from  Rangoon.  The 
information  which  it  brings  to  us  relating  to  the  health 
and  general  good  condition  of  the  troops  is  so  satisfac- 
tory that  I  have  thought  it  right  to  communicate  the 
contents  of  it  to  the  Queen.  I  have  also  deemed  it 
advisable  to  publish  in  the  ordinary  Gazette  the  de- 
spatches relating  to  the  affair  at  Prome.  It  appears  to  be 
desirable,  in  order  to  prevent  idle  misrepresentation,  to 
keep  the  public  mind  well  informed  upon  the  state  of 
things  in  Burmah,  and  that  it  should  be  prepared  by 
correct  intelligence  for  the  results  to  which  your 
measures  are  inevitably  tending.  A  great  change  has 
already  taken  place  in  the  general  feeling  in  this 
country  respecting  an  extension  of  our  Indian  posses- 
sions eastward.  Unless  I  am  much  mistaken  there 
prevails  at  present  a  stronger  disposition  to  deprecate 
too  much  forbearance  and  self-denial  than  to  quarrel 

8  2 


260  THE  DUKE'S  ADVICE.      HIS  DEATH.          en.  xii. 

with  conquest  and  aggrandisement  in  the  quarter  into 
which  you  have  so  successfully  carried  an  unavoidable 
war.  There  would,  I  am  confident,  be  an  accusatory 
outcry  of  disappointment  if  Pegu  were  not  to  be  added 
to  our  eastern  Empire.  I  hope  you  will  find  our 
instructions  sent  out  by  the  last  mail  as  explicit  as  you 
could  desire.  The  opinion  of  our  great  old  Duke  upon 
the  subject,  given  at  the  request  of  Lord  Derby,  was 
perhaps  the  last  advice  of  any  political  importance 
which  he  was  called  upon  to  give.  He  was  peremptory 
upon  the  point  of  compelling  the  Burmese  to  cede  Pegu 
by  a  definitive  treaty,  or  driving  them  out  of  Ava; 
subject  in  the  latter  case  to  such  further  punishment  as 
our  sacrifices  of  men  and  money  might  justify  and 
require.  .  .  . 

'  The  public  mind  is  at  this  moment  wholly  en- 
grossed here  by  the  death  of  our  great  hero.  Having 
been  warmly  attached  to  him  myself  during  the  last 
thirty  years,  I  feel  deeply  and  lament  sincerely  the  loss 
of  him.  But  his  departure  has  been  to  me  more  a  sub- 
ject of  regret  than  of  surprise.  The  last  letter  which  I 
received  from  him  (a  few  days  only  before  his  death) 
was  scarcely  legible  or  intelligible. 

'  I  have  several  important  papers  on  your  public 
affairs  now  under  my  consideration  which  I  reserved  on 
account  of  their  magnitude  for  a  day  of  leisure.  .  .  . 
One  of  our  first  acts  when  Parliament  meets  must  be 
the  reappointment  of  the  Committee  on  the  renewal  of 
the  Indian  Government  Act.  I  do  not  anticipate  any 
very  serious  opposition,  but  immense  trouble,  in  obtain- 


CH.  xn.   GENERAL  GODWIN.   LORD  DALHOUSIE.     261 

ing  the  consent  of  Parliament  to  a  continuation  of  it.  I 
trust  that  the  late  Government  will  concur  with  the 
present  in  the  promotion  of  that  object.  We  worked 
harmoniously  in  the  Committee  in  the  last  session.  .  .  .' 
October  8. — '  I  have  received  your  letter  of  August 
21.  It  is  full  of  interest,  and  presents  altogether  a 
very  satisfactory  prospect  of  the  successful  termination 
of  the  warfare  into  which  you  have  been  dragged  by  the 
insolent  and  impracticable  Burmese.  .  .  . 

1 1  know  nothing  personally  of  General  Godwin. 
But  the  good  opinion  which  you  have  formed  of  him 
leads  me  to  expect  that  once  put  in  motion  under  your 
direction,  and  with  the  well-appointed  army  placed  in 
his  hands,  his  movements  will  be  prompt  and  vigorous 
— such  as  appear  to  be  especially  required  for  the  speedy 
success  of  the  campaign  which  is  before  him,  and  the  de- 
struction of  the  enemy  with  which  he  has  to  cope.  .  .  .' 

To  the  Earl  of  Derby. 

October  5. — '  The  mail  from  India,  which  reached 
me  last  night,  brings  intelligence  which  requires  our 
immediate  attention. 

'  The  Governor-General  has,  somewhat  hastily,  as 
it  appears  to  me,  adopted  a  course  with  respect  to  his 
operations  in  Burmah  which  is  indeed  conformable  to 
the  suggestions  thrown  out  towards  the  conclusion  of 
his  elaborate  Minute,  but  which  we  did  not  approve  of. 
I  now  send  you  his  letter  to  General  Godwin,  showing 
the  determination  to  which  he  had  come  after  fully 
considering  all  that  had  been  submitted  to  him  by  the 


262       SUBMISSION  OR  SUBJUGATION  NECESSARY.  CH.  xn. 

military  and  naval  commanders  at  Rangoon — whether 
it  was  in  conformity  with  their  opinions  he  does  not 
state.  .  .  . 

'I  also  send  you  copies  of  his  two  latest  private 
letters  to  me.  In  the  last  of  these  he  does  not  enter  into 
any  explanation  of  his  recent  resolves. 

'  The  receipt  of  our  instructions,  which  (in  confor- 
mity with  his  own  especial  and  repeated  request)  are 
most  explicit,  on  the  question  of  policy  upon  which  he 
applied  for  directions,  and  which  he  seems  now  to  have 
decided  for  himself,  will,  I  hope,  have  produced  the 
effect  of  inducing  him  to  alter  his  arrangements,  if  not 
his  opinions,  and  to  take  vigorous  steps  for  finishing 
the  war  which  we  have  been  forced  to  commence. 
There  can  be  no  satisfactory  or  final  conclusion  of  the 
warfare  in  Burmah  except  by  a  treaty,  or  by  the  subju- 
gation of  the  enemy.  The  Duke's  memorandum  leaves 
no  doubt  upon  that  point.  It  is  fortunate  that  Dal- 
housie  has  made  full  preparations  for  carrying  the  war 
beyond  the  point  at  which  he  appeared  disposed  to  stop 
when  he  wrote  to  Godwin.  It  is  also  satisfactory  to 
know  that  the  enemy  is  miserably  unprepared  to  meet 
the  pressure  of  a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.  .  .  . 
They  can  look  to  no  quarter  for  aid.  On  the  side  of 
Munipore  they  are  threatened  with  hostility ;  on  the 
other  side  the  Shans  give  them  no  countenance.  .  .  . 
Their  chief  reliance  is  upon  some  tradition  of  a  lucky 
spot  near  Ava ! — a  poor  obstacle  to  oppose  to  the  most 
efficient  force  and  the  best  provided  with  all  the  require- 
ments of  war  that  has,  perhaps,  ever  been  put  into  the 
field  by  us  in  India. 


CH.  xu.   LORD  CHANCELLOR.      MILITARY  OPINIONS.        263 

'  I  am  not  sure  that  you  have  got  a  complete  copy 
of  these  instructions  [dated  September  6].  I  therefore 
send  one.  You  will  see  that  I  incorporated  in  toto 
your  paragraph.  ...  I  sent  a  copy  to  the  Chancellor. 
I  enclose  his  note  of  approval  in  returning  it.  The 
dispersion  of  our  Cabinet  rendered  it  impracticable  for 
me  to  send  it  round  to  all  its  members.  There  was  more- 
over no  time  for  it.  I  now  enclose  for  your  consideration 
a  sketch  for  a  secret  despatch,  which  I  should  be  glad  to 
send  out  by  the  mail  which  departs  on  Friday  next.' 

The  Lord  Chancellor's  note  above  alluded  to  was  as 
follows  : — 

'  My  dear  Herries, — Although  it  is  unimportant 
whether  I  approve  or  disapprove,  yet  I  cannot  withhold 
my  approbation.  It  would  be  manifestly  impolitic  to  stop 
short  in  the  career  of  conquest  at  the  point  which  you 
desire  to  retain,  and  then  remain  on  the  defensive.  I 
admire  the  tone  and  composition  of  the  paper  itself. 

Yours>&c->  '  ST.  LEONARDS.' 

From  General  Godwin's  '  Memorandum  on  the 
strength  of  the  army  I  think  requisite,  to  enable  me  to 
march  into  the  heart  of  Burmah,  and  to  subjugate  it,' 
and  from  Sir  John  Littler 's  Minute  of  November  4 
(both  of  which  documents  are  published  in  the  papers 
presented  to  Parliament),  it  is  evident  that  the  military 
authorities  perceived  no  extraordinary  difficulty  in  the 
execution  of  the  instructions,  which  the  Governor- 
General  was  determined  not  to  carry  out,  for  an  advance 
upon  Ava  in  the  event  of  refusal  or  delay  on  the  part  of 
the  King  to  treat  for  peace  on  the  basis  of  the  cession 
of  Pegu. 


264    LORD  DALHOUSIE'S  PLANS :  OVERWORK.  OH.  xu. 

Mr.  Berries  to  the  Earl  of  Derby. 

October  22. — '  I  have  prepared  a  secret  despatch 
[October  23  :  published  in  Burmah  Papers]  to  Lord 
Dalhousie,  in  which  I  have  noticed  his  change  of  plans, 
and  the  probability  that  he  has  been  induced  by  the 
earlier  advance  of  the  force  under  General  Godwin  to 
anticipate  in  his  Minute  of  August  10  our  final  instruc- 
tions, which  he  justly  observes  he  could  not  receive  hi 
time  for  a  September  movement  of  the  troops.  I  have 
so  worded  it  as  to  show  that  we  adhere  to  those  instruc- 
tions, and  to  intimate  our  belief  that  they  will  square 
very  well  with  the  onward  movement  which  he  proposes 
to  make,  although  our  view  of  the  ulterior  policy  to  be 
pursued  differs  from  that  which  is  laid  down  in  his 
Minute.' 

To  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 

October  25. — '  I  heartily  congratulate  you  on  the 
state  of  your  army.  .  .  .  Your  letter  of  the  7th  is  rer 
plete  with  good  tidings,  except  in  one  particular,  in 
which  I  sincerely  sympathise  with  you.  Your  labour 
is  enormous,  and  I  fear  that  in  such  a  climate  it  may 
prove  distressing  to  you.  But  are  you  not  in  some 
measure  the  cause  of  this  pressure  ?  If  I  mistake 
not,  your  indefatigable  industry  has  heaped  upon  your 
single  shoulders  much  of  a  weight  distributed  by  your 
predecessors  among  others,  and  thus  you  are  accumu- 
lating a  burden  which  may  hereafter  break  the  back  of 
one  of  your  successors.  .  .  . 

'  If  you  have  had  time  to  look  at  our  newspapers 
you  will  have  seen  that  my  estimation  of  the  public 


CH.  xn.       FAVOURABLE  ESTIMATES  MISTRUSTED.  265 

feeling  here  on  the  subject  of  your  war  was  quite  cor- 
rect. •  The  cry  now  is  for  conquest  and  annexation. 
The  mercantile  and  manufacturing  interests  begin  to  an- 
ticipate the  advantages  which  they  may  derive  from  our 
possession  of  the  seaboard  of  Burmah.  .  .  .  Let  us  also 
bear  in  mind  that  some  other  Power  might  have  picked 
a  quarrel  there,  and  have  become  a  thorn  in  our  side,  if 
we  had  not  been  compelled  to  establish  ourselves  in 
Pegu.  .  .  .' 

November  8. — 'Your  last  letter  brings  most  cheerful 
accounts  of  the  health  and  conduct  of  the  army  in 
Burmah.  It  would  almost  appear  as  if  you  had  sent 
them  thither  as  to  a  kind  of  sanatorium.  .  ,  . 
'  '  Your  financial  metamorphosis  of  an  estimated  de- 
ficiency into  an  actual  surplus  for  the  year  1850-51  is 
so  pleasing  and  so  singular  (in  my  long  experience  the 
change  has  always  been  of  a  converse  complexion),  that 
I  can  hardly  receive  it,  even  from  you,  without  some 
little  apprehension,  and  mistrust  of  some  possible  draw- 
back. However  correct  your  statement  no  doubt  must 
be  of  the  mere  cash  account,  I  am  tempted  to  inquire 
whether,  as  a  semice  account  the  result  will  wear  an 
equally  favourable  aspect.  Are  there  no  postponements 
of  expected  payments,  and  no  accelerations  of  estimated 
receipts  .  .  .  ?  I  need  not  recommend  to  your  vigilant 
mind  an  inquiry  upon  these  points.  I  shall  do  what  I 
can  here  to  obtain  a  clear  view  of  the  subject,  before  I 
venture  to  crow  very  loudly  in  the  House  of  Commons 
upon  it.5 

5  He  seems  to  have  felt  that  with  regard  to  Indian  estimates  '  Confi- 
dence is  a  plant  of  slow  growth  in  aged  bosoms.'    An  expert  in  accounts,  he 


266  EXCHANGE  OPERATIONS.     GODWIN.          CH.  xn. 

1  We  have  had  some  startling  occurrences  in  our 
exchange  operations  with  India  in  this  country.  I 
readily  yielded  to  the  urgent  request  of  the  Chairs  to 
lower  the  rate  on  which  they  offered  bills  when  it  was 
found  that  scarcely  any  could  be  got  at  2s.  the  rupee. 
But  I  stickled  for  a  reduction  to  Is.  ll^d.  only.  They 
however  urged,  and  I  yielded  to  them,  the  necessity  of 
a  further  diminution,  viz.,  to  Is.  lid.  At  that  rate  a 
torrent  of  bills  was  poured  in,  and  we  were  compelled 
to  put  up  the  exchange  again  to  Is.  ll^d.,  and  after- 
wards to  2s.  The  abundance  of  capital  is  wonderful, 
and  the  caprices  of  speculation  are  unfathomable.  I  rely 
in  these  matters  greatly  on  the  knowledge  and  ex- 
perience of  the  Chairs,  who  sit  in  the  very  heart  of  the 
money  market.  .  .  . 

' ...  In  this  case,  however,  they  have  all  been  at 
fault.  .  .  .' 

To  Lord  Raglan. 

November  21. — 'I  return  the  extracts  from  General 
Godwin's  letters.  .  .  . 

'  I  hope  the  day  will  soon  arrive  when  I  and  others 
will  be  in  a  condition  to  do  justice  to  General  Godwin 
and  the  army  in  Parliament.  .  .  .  Nothing  can  have 
been  better  than  the  conduct  of  all  the  authorities,  civil 
and  military,  in  the  preparation,  dispatch,  and  manage- 
ment of  the  expedition  to  and  at  Rangoon.  .  .  .  The 
operations  of  the  troops  at  the  time  when  Godwin's 

looked  at  them  with  caution,  lest  an  apparent  surplus  should  turn  out  to  be 
a  real  deficit.  Possibly  he  may  have  been  convinced  from  long  experience 
that  the  results  of  the  incomings  and  outgoings  of  Indian  finance  belonged  to 
the  category  of  '  those  things  that  no  fellow  can  find  out.' 


CH.  in.         GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S  INSTRUCTIONS.  267 

letters  were  written,  were  wholly  at  the  discretion  of 
Lord  Dalhousie.  He  himself  disclaimed  the  necessity 
of  any  instructions  from  home  in  that  respect :  but  no 
mail  went  out  without  conveying  to  him  cordial  ap- 
proval and  encouragement.  On  the  other  hand,  he  did 
apply  for  distinct  instructions  and  directions  respecting 
the  policy  to  be  ultimately  adopted  in  the  prosecution 
and  termination  of  the  war.  They  went  out  to  him 
full,  distinct,  and  explicit,  in  the  earliest  possible  reply 
to  his  dispatch.  We  consulted  the  great  Duke  before 
I  framed  them  (with  Lord  Derby),  and  sent  them  to 
the  Queen  for  sanction.  They  not  only  give  Dalhousie 
full  scope  to  do  all  that  he  contemplated,  but  they  enjoin 
him  to  do  more.  He  is  therefore  anything  but  fettered 
by  the  Government  at  home.  But  Dalhousie  could  not 
receive  these  instructions  before  the  middle  of  October. 
His  application  for  them  was  only  dispatched  from 
India  on  the  3rd  of  July.  .  .  .' 

To  the  Marquis  of  Dalhousie. 

December  23. — '  As  this  is  the  last  occasion  of  my 
writing  to  you  as  President  of  the  Board  of  Control,  I 
have  much  pleasure  in  availing  myself  of  the  oppor- 
tunity to  assure  you  of  the  gratification  which  your 
confidential  communications  have  afforded  me.  I  shall 
always  reflect  with  much  satisfaction  on  the  harmony 
and  good  understanding  which  have  prevailed  in  our 
correspondence,  and  upon  the  light  which  it  has  thrown 
upon  the  zeal,  activity,  and  judgment  which  have  been 
constantly  displayed  in  the  discharge  of  your  most 
arduous  duties  in  the  government  of  India  ;  to  which  I 


268  LAST  LETTER  TO  LORD  DALHOUS1E.         en.  xn. 

shall  at  all  times  be  ready  to  bear  my  humble  testimony 
whether  in  or  out  of  Parliament.  I  have  written  a  short 
secret  letter 6  to  you  this  mail,  with  which  I  trust  you 
will  be  satisfied.  I  have  avoided  touching  upon  any 
controversial  topics,  and  have  confined  myself  to  the 
notice  of  your  proposed  modus  operandi,  which  will  I 
hope,  practically  accomplish  the  end  of  our  instructions. 
'  The  wretched  and  barbarous  Court  of  Ava  appears 
to  be  in  such  a  state  of  impotency  that  even  a  moderate 
degree  of  pressure  ought  to  be  sufficient  to  reduce  it 
to  submission,  while  you  have  prepared  the  means  of 
subjecting  it  to  much  more  than  a  moderate  degree  of 
coercion. 

'  But  I  feel  that  I  am  trespassing  upon  the  province 
of  my  successor.  Whoever  he  may  be  [Sir  Charles 
Wood  succeeded  him  ;  but  the  new  Cabinet  was  not 
formed  at  the  date  of  this  letter],  he  cannot  be  half  so 
content  to  assume  the  office  as  I  am  to  relinquish  it.  I 
harnessed  myself  again  in  the  public  service  with  great 
reluctance,  and  only  in  compliance  with  the  wishes  and 
entreaties  of  my  political  friends,  who  had  strong  claims 
upon  my  humble  services.  I  can  now  sing  my  nunc 
dimittis  with  hearty  satisfaction,  and  enjoy  my  retire- 
ment with  a  satisfied  conscience.' 

Nothing  could  have  been  more  handsome  than  the 
manner  in  which  Lord  Dalhousie  appears  to  have  been 
treated  by  the  Government,  to  which  he  was  well  known 
to  be  strongly  opposed  in  political  opinions.  '  Dal- 
housie,' Mr.  Herries  wrote  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Lord 

6  December  23.     Burmah  Papers,  p.  96. 


CH.  xn.      POLICY   OF  THE  CABINET.      PATRONAGE.         269 

Derby,  '  is  no  friend  to  our  party.'  But,  for  the  public 
interest,  the  Prime  Minister  urged  the  Governor- General 
to  remain  at  his  post,  and  the  President  of  the  Board  of 
Control  cordially  supported  the  request.  Both  the  pri- 
vate correspondence  of  Mr.  Herries  and  the  published 
despatches  written  by  him  in  the  name  of  the  Secret 
Committee,  testify  the  earnest  desire  of  the  Government 
to  afford  to  Lord  Dalhousie  the  utmost  encouragement. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  can  hardly  be  affirmed  that  he 
displayed  an  equal  readiness  to  act  in  conformity  with 
their  views.  And  the  day  may  perhaps  come,  when 
native  insolence,  or  foreign  intrigue,  in  Burmah,  will 
make  Englishmen  regret  that  the  bold  and  decisive 
policy  inculcated  by  the  Derby  Cabinet  twenty-eight 
years  ago,  was  not  then  carried  into  effect.7 

A  general  belief  erroneously  prevailed  that  the 
Indian  patronage  of  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Control 
was  almost  boundless.  Mr.  Herries,  sharing  probably 
the  fate  of  his  predecessors  and  successors,  before  the 
introduction  of  the  system  of  competition,  was  speedily 
overwhelmed  with  applications,  far  beyond  his  means 
of  complying  with  them — for  cadetships,  admissions  to 

7  Letters  written  by  Mr.  Herries  in  1853  contain  the  following  passages  : 
'  In  my  last  short  despatch  of  December  1852,  in  reply  to  Dalhousie 's  long, 
feeble,  and  inconclusive  objections  to  those  instructions  (which  he  neverthe- 
less professed  it  to  be  his  duty  to  obey),  I  approved  of  the  measures  which 
he  proposed  to  take,  because  I  observed  that  they  would,  if  carried  out, 
fulfil  the  object  of  those  instructions.  ...  If  our  orders  had  been  frankly 
and  promptly  carried  into  effect,  Ava  would  have  been  in  our  possession 
before  this  time ,  and  the  war  and  its  expenses  at  an  end.  .  .  .  He  (Dal- 
housie) is  a  difficult  man  to  manage.  .  .  .  We  should  have  been  in  Ava 
long  before  this  time  if  our  instructions  had  been  obeyed.  In  the  present 
state  of  China  that  might  have  been  of  the  greatest  consequence ;  for  we 
should  have  been  in  immediate  and  close  river  communication  with  its 
western  provinces.  .  .  .' 


270  WELLINGTON.      NELSON.      MACREADY.        CH.  in. 

Addiscombe  or  Haileybury,  and  the  like — a  certain 
number  of  which,  in  accordance  with  usage,  were 
placed  at  his  disposal  not  long  before  he  quitted  office. 
Three  cases  in  which  he  had  the  gratification  of  render- 
ing services  to  individuals  on  public  grounds,  are  of 
sufficient  interest  to  deserve  mention.  The  first  was 
an  appointment  asked  for  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
in  one  of  his  latest  letters,  which  could  not  easily  be 
deciphered.  The  Duke  made  an  earnest  request  on 
behalf  of  a  young  friend,  observing  at  the  same  time 
with  some  bitterness,  that  similar  applications  on  his 
part  had  been  constantly  neglected  in  other  quarters. 
The  answer  was  as  follows  : — 

'  September  2, 1852. 

'  My  dear  Lord  Duke, — It  will  gratify  me  exceedingly 
to  put  at  your  disposal  the  first  nomination  to  an 
appointment  at  Haileybury  which  will  be  at  mine.  No 
patronage  has  yet  been  assigned  to  me.  It  is  in 
November  that  the  nominations  to  writerships  are 
distributed.  The  holder  of  my  office  is  generally  put 
upon  the  same  footing  as  the  Chairman  of  the  Directors. 
It  will  give  me  very  sincere  pleasure  to  do  justice  to 
your  wishes.  .  .  .' 

In  the  second  instance  alluded  to,  Mr.  Herries  was 
able  at  the  last  moment,  but  not  apparently  without 
some  difficulty,  to  secure  a  nomination  of  some  kind  for 
a  grandson  of  Lord  Nelson,  recommended  to  his  care  by 
an  exalted  and  patriotic  personage. 

To  art  also  due  honour  was  rendered.  After  the 
greatest  of  British  warriors  on  sea  and  on  land,  a 
famous  British  tragedian  must  be  named. 


CH.  xii.  CLAIMS  TO  PATRONAGE.  271 

To  W.  C.  Macready,  Esq. 

1  My  dear  Sir, — I  am  very  glad  to  find  that  my  offer 
of  an  Addiscombe  Cadetship  for  your  son  is  acceptable 
to  you.  I  believe  it  is  the  best  mode  of  entering  into 
the  East  India  military  service.  It  therefore  affords 
me  much  satisfaction  that  I  am  enabled  by  this  appoint- 
ment not  merely  to  meet  the  wishes  of  a  friend,  but  at 
the  same  time  to  testify  my  sense  of  the  just  claim  to 
public  patronage  of  a  gentleman  who  has  so  largely 
contributed,  as  you  have,  to  the  gratification  and  im- 
provement of  the  public.  Believe  me,  &c., 

'  J.  C.  HERRIES.' 

In  another  instance,  one  of  the  much  coveted  ap- 
pointments to  what  were  called  direct  cavalry  cadet- 
ships  was  given,  in  preference  to  many  well  recommended 
applicants,  to  the  son  of  a  distinguished  officer  now 
living,  solely  on  account  of  the  military  services  of  his 
father — then  only  a  Captain,  but  well  known  to  the 
public — with  whom  the  President  of  the  Board  of 
Control  was  not  personally  acquainted. 

Among  the  miscellaneous  correspondence  of  this 
time  there  are  some  letters  to  and  concerning  Mr. 
Herries's  much  maligned  old  friend  Croker,  on  literary 
and  historical  matters.  One  of  them,  in  answer  to 
queries  about  some  transactions  alluded  to  as  '  Charles 
Fox's  dealing  with  Irish  Pells,'  says  : — '  I  can  recollect 
nothing  (if  indeed  I  ever  knew  anything)  of  the  matter 
to  which  you  call  my  attention.  I  put  the  inquiry  into 
hands  which  I  thought  might  gather  some  information 


272      CHOKER.   FOX.   LORD  MONTE AGLE.    cn.xn. 

for  me,  but  I  have  just  now  received  the  answer — nil.  . 
It  occurs  to  me  while  I  am  writing  that  Monteagle 
might  ferret  out  some  information.  .  .  . 

'  I  admire  your  fortitude  and  perseverance,  and  most 
heartily  wish  that  they  were  not  put  to  so  severe  a 
test.' 

To  Lord  Monteagle,  with  whom,  in  or  out  of  office, 
he  had  for  many  years  maintained  excellent  relations, 
Mr.  Herries  wrote  on  this  subject : — 'I  send  you  a  letter 
from  Croker  asking  for  information  which  I  cannot  get 
for  him.  It  occurs  to  me  that  you  might  perhaps  be 
able  to  refer  me  to  some  source  of  knowledge  on  the 
subject  which  would  be  useful  to  him.  His  fortitude 
and  energy  in  his  wretched  condition  are  admirable.' 
There  is  something  curious  in  this  application  from  a 
veteran  Tory  to  an  ex- Whig  Minister  and  a  former 
contributor  to  the  '  Edinburgh  Review,'  for  materials 
to  be  used  by  a  '  Quarterly '  Reviewer,  a  Tory  of 
Tories,  respecting — perhaps  against — Fox. 

Another  letter  throws  considerable  doubt  on  an 
historical  point  supposed  to  be  certain,  and  completely 
disproves  assertions  connected  with  it  too  confidently 
made  by  some  writers. 

'  November  9, 1852. 

1  My  dear  Croker, — My  recollections,  imperfect  as 
they  are,  all  tend  to  negative  the  stories  which  I  have 
heard  and  read  about  the  compromise  between  Lord 
Liverpool  and  George  IV.  for  the  disposal  of  the  library 
of  George  III.  I  believe  them  to  be  without  foundation. 

'  There  may  have  been  some  private  discussion 
between  the  King  and  his  Minister  on  the  subject  of 


CH.  xir.  LIBRARY  OF  GEORGE  ITL  273 

these  books,  which  some  officious  and  half-informed 
intriguer  may  have  converted  into  the  substantial 
allegations  which  have  obtained  a  sort  of  credit  (partly, 
if  I  mistake  not,  through  the  *  Quarterly  Review  ')  in 
the  public  mind.  But  I  doubt  the  existence  even  of 
such  a  slight  foundation  as  that.  I  never  heard  Lord 
Liverpool  mention  it,  although  at  that  period  he  was 
very  unreserved  in  his  morning  conversations  with 
myself  and  Arbuthnot  touching  his  communications 
with  the  King. 

*  The  application  of  money  from  the  French 
Indemnity  Fund  towards  the  works  going  on  at 
Buckingham  House  had  no  connection  whatever  with 
the  library.  I  myself  had  the  conduct  of  that  affair, 
and  conducted  the  defence  of  it  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons when  it  was  attacked  by  M.  A.  Taylor. 

'  I  believe  Nash  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  affair  of 
the  books.  .  .  .  Truly  yours,  <  J  C  H 

'I  hope  your  pulse  and  hearing  continue  in  their 
amended  state/ 

It  is  probably  this  letter  which  is  alluded  to  in  a 
foot-note  to  an  article  on  the  British  Museum  in  the 
'Quarterly  Review'  for  December  1852,  saying  : — 'We 
have  received  a  strong  remonstrance,  accompanied  with, 
as  it  seems  to  us,  very  strong  evidence,  against  the 
whole  and  every  part  of  the  anecdote  related  in  our 
number  for  December  I860,  relative  to  the  motives  and 
manner  of  the  transfer  by  George  IV.  of  his  father's 
library  to  the  museum.  We  took  the  anecdote  from 
the  original  and  full  edition  of  the  Handbook  for  Spain ; 
VOL.  TI.  T 


.274  CHOKER  AND  '  THE  QUARTERLY.'  en.  xn. 

but  think  Mr.  Ford  must  have  been  misled  by  some 
of  the  loose  talkers  among  his  Majesty's  Whig  ex- 
friends.'  8 

A  letter  of  an  earlier  date  relates  to  the  politics  of 
the  day. 

'  My  dear  Croker, — I  have  just  had  time  to  cast  my 
eye  over  your  excellent  article.  But  I  have  done 
better  for  you.  I  have  induced  Derby  to  do  the  same, 
and  I  send  you  the  note  I  have  just  received  from  him. 

'  Your  view  is  surely  the  correct  one.  What  we  are 
now  threatened  with  is  a  coalition  of  which  ultra- 
democracy  is  a  powerful  ingredient,  and  of  which  it 
promises  to  become  the  predominating  element.  .  .  . 
Yours,  &c.,  <J  C  H  ' 

8  The  story  alluded  to  here,  and  which  has  since  been  repeated,  was  to  the 
effect  that  George  IV.  having  entered  into  negotiations  for  the  sale  of  his 
father's  library  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  was  deterred  by  the  strong  re- 
monstrances of  his  ministers  from  carrying  them  into  effect ;  and  that  al- 
though he  made  a  merit  of  the  presentation  of  the  Royal  collection  of  books 
to  the  British  Museum,  he  stipulated  for  a  sum,  to  be  paid  to  him  out  of  the 
money  received  as  indemnity  from  France,  equivalent  to  the  amount  which 
he  would  have  obtained  by  the  projected  sale.  As  to  the  alleged  applica- 
tion of  the  French  indemnity  funds,  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Herries,  who  was 
perhaps  better  acquainted  than  any  other  person  with  everything  relating  to 
the  receipt,  transfer,  and  disposal  of  every  penny  of  them,  is  absolutely  con- 
clusive. It  proves  that  the  assertion,  in  whatever  quarter  it  may  have 
originated,  was  nothing  but  a  simple  lie,  invented  no  doubt  for  party  pur- 
poses. We  may  add,  although  corroboration  is  superfluous,  that  we  have 
inspected  several  ponderous  bundles  of  papers  concerning  the  French  in- 
demnity, without  the  discovery  of  the  least  trace  of  any  allusion  to  the  sup- 
posed bargain  with  the  King.  On  the  other  point,  that  of  the  representations 
said  to  have  been  necessary  on  the  part  of  the  King's  ministers,  Mr.  Herries's 
negative  testimony  does  not  of  course  exclude  their  possibility ;  but  it  seems 
in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  both  he,  who  was  in  confidential  com- 
munication both  with  the  Prime  Minister  and  with  Sir  William  Knighton, 
the  King's  Private  Secretary,  and  his  predecessor  as  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  Mr.  Arbuthnot,  should  have  remained  in  total  ignorance  of  such  a 
transaction  if  it  had  really  occurred. 


CH.  xn.  THE  SECOND  EMPIRE.  275 

One  of  the  last  acts  of  the  first  Derby  Cabinet  was 
the  unavoidable  recognition  of  that  Second  Empire  de- 
clared to  be  synonymous  with  peace,  but  which  brought 
a  sword.  The  fact  is  merely  alluded  to  here  because  it 
affords  an  opportunity  of  stating  that  the  person  whose 
actions  and  opinions  we  are  endeavouring  faithfully  to 
record,  although  he  accepted  this  political  necessity, 
looked  upon  the  great  December  crime  with  all  the 
abhorrence  which  it  could  not  fail  to  arouse  in  the  mind 
of  every  man  to  whom  law,  justice,  truth,  honour,  hu- 
manity, and  freedom  were  not  vain  words  void  of  sense. 
He  would  not  have  been  induced  by  any  consideration 
to  cover  with  fulsome  adulation  the  successful  adventurer 
at  whose  feet  this  nation  soon  precipitated  itself  in  a 
torrent  of  sycophancy.9 

After  the  resignation  of  the  ministiy  and  the 
formation  of  the  coalition  Government  presided  over 
by  Lord  Aberdeen,  Mr.  Herries  ceased  to  feel  much 
inclination  for  party  contentions,  and  acted  inde- 
pendently during  the  last  year  of  his  parliamentary 
life.  In  the  debates  on  the  India  Government  Bill, 
some  parts  of  which  he  opposed,  he  joined  with  the 
Ministers  in  resisting  Lord  Stanley's  motion  for  sus- 
pension. He  agreed  with  his  successor  in  office,  Sir 
Charles  Wood,  as  to  the  principle  of  the  continuance  of 
the  political  functions  of  the  East  India  Company, 
although  he  was  well  aware  of  defects  requiring  remedy. 

9  Several  letters  written  at  a  subsequent  period  manifest  on  the  part  of 
Mr.  Herries  towards  Napoleon  III.,  whom  he  always  designates  by  the  initials 
L.  N.  B.,  the  greatest  distrust.  He  was  not  the  only  person  who  thought 
that  the  nephew  had  all  the  selfishness  and  all  the  perfidy,  without  a 
spark  of  the  genius,  of  the  uncle. 

I  2 


276  INDIA  GOVERNMENT  BILL.  en.  xu. 

The  system  of  double  government  has  been  destroyed, 
and  is  perhaps  generally  condemned  ;  but  it  is  open  to 
doubt  whether  the  new  Imperial  rule  is  in  all  respects 
superior  to  it  in  efficiency.  Experts  in  Indian  matters 
may  be  found  who  declare  that  the  former  method  en- 
sured a  more  thorough  sifting  of  important  questions, 
and  a  more  complete  despatch  of  business,  than  the 
present  machinery.  They  also  say  that  the  Council 
of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  is  no  more  a  reality 
than  the  Secret  Committee  was,  in  whose  name  the 
President  of  the  Board  of  Control  addressed  his  in- 
structions to  the  Governor-General.  Persons  who  are 
not  experts  may  be  excused  if  they  are  unable  to  dis- 
cern in  recent  occurrences  any  clear  proof  that  all  is  for 
the  best  under  the  best  of  all  possible  Indian  Govern- 
ments, and  if  they  observe  that  in  the  later  history  of 
the  old  Charter  no  such  administrative  monstrosity  can 
be  perceived  as  the  financial  mystification  which  crowned 
the  edifice  of  Lord  Lytton's  Viceroy alty. 

Warned  by  failing  health  that  he  could  no  longer 
sustain  the  fatigue  of  constant  attendance  to  the  duties 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  at  the  end  of  the  session  of 
1853  Mr.  Herries  resigned  his  seat,  and  finally  closed 
his  public  career.  On  doing  so  he  addressed  this  letter 
to  the  Speaker,  Mr.  Shaw  Lefevre  (Lord  Eversley)  : — 

'  My  dear  Mr.  Speaker, — I  cannot  take  my  leave  of 
Parliament,  and  subside,  as  I  do  from  mere  weariness 
and  exhaustion,  into  private  life,  without  a  farewell 
word  to  yourself,  and  an  expression  of  my  personal 
thanks  for  the  courtesy,  kindness,  and  assistance  which 
I  «o  often  experienced  from  you,  and  especially  at  the 


CH.  xn.  RETIREMENT.      TESTIMONIES.  277 

time  when  I  took  a  more  active  part  in  the  business  of 
the  House,  when  that  assistance  was  invaluable.'  .  .  . 

Among  many  friendly  letters  which  were  addressed 
to  him  on  this  occasion,  the  following  was  not  the  least 
remarkable,  coming,  as  it  did,  from  a  former  enemy  : — 

'Brougham:  August  29,  1853. 

*  Dear  Mr.  Herries, — I  saw  with  regret  your  retire- 
ment from  Parliament,  but  you  are  the  best  judge  how 
far  it  was  fitting. 

*  I  cannot  help  mentioning  to  yourself  what  I  have 
often  stated  to  others — because  it  may  be  satisfactory 
to  you — I  mean  the  very  strong  opinion  once  and  again 
expressed  to  me  by  my  friend,  A.  Baring,  afterwards 
Ashburton.     He  said  you  were,  of  all  the  men  he  had 
ever  seen  in  the  financial  department — and  I  think  he 
added  transacted  business  with — by  far  the  most  com- 
petent.    He  was  by  no  means  apt  to  be  easily  pleased 
with  the  extent  and  accuracy  of  any  one's  knowledge. 

Believe  me  sincerely  yours, 

'  H.  BROUGHAM.' 

The  opinion  repeatedly  expressed  by  so  well  qualified 
a  judge  as  the  first  Lord  Ashburton,  and,  apparently, 
endorsed  by  Lord  Brougham,  may  to  many  persons 
seem  more  important  than  the  contrary  opinion  of 
Mr.  Spencer  Walpole.  It  agrees  in  a  striking  manner 
with  George  the  Fourth's  '  estimate  of  fitness  '  which 
provokes  a  sneer  from  that  writer  at  the  King  and 
the  Minister.  Alexander  Baring's  observation  of  '  the 
financial  department '  embraced  a  long  period,  and  the 
administration  of  many  Chancellors  of  the  Exchequer, 


278  OLD  RECOLLECTIONS.  OH.  xii. 

for  he  was  born  in  1774,  and  sat  in  the  House  of 
Commons  from  1812  to  1835,  when  he  was  raised  to 
the  Peerage. 

His  view  coincided  also  with  that  manifested  more 
than  once  to  a  permanent  public  servant  of  high  rank 
(on  whose  authority  we  state  the  fact)  by  (then)  Lord 
John  Russell,  who  declared  that,  as  he  believed,  Mr. 
Herries  knew  more  of  the  finances  of  this  country  than 
any  other  man  in  England. 

To  a  kind  letter  from  his  old  friend,  Mr.  Goulburn, 
Mr.  Herries  replied:  1 1  am  much  obliged  to  you  for 
your  letter.  It  brought  pleasantly  to  my  mind  the 
recollection  of  old  times,  when  we  commenced  together 
our  political  career  under  good  old  Tory  auspices,  and 
[something  illegible]  real,  not  radical,  liberality. 

*  I  was  sorry  to  hear  from  our  common  friends  that 
you  had  been  so  unwell  in  the  Spring,  and,  like  myself, 
much  absent  from  Parliament  on  that  account. 

4 1  retired  when  I  found  that  it  was  seriously  detri- 
mental to  my  health  to  attempt  to  give  regular  atten- 
dance in  the  House  of  Commons.  I  do  not  say  what 
I  might  have  done  to  struggle  against  the  difficulty,  if 
there  had  been  any  personal  or  public  inducement  to 
stimulate  the  exertion  or  the  sacrifice.  In  the  absence 
of  any  such  motive  I  have  subsided  quietly  into  private 
life,  with  a  calm  conscience  and  a  hearty  disposition  to 
enjoy  it. 

'  I  heartily  wish  you  the  same  peaceful  quietus  when 
it  shall  be  your  turn  to  follow  my  example.' 

Mr.  Croker  wrote  to  him  thus  on  August  15  : 
( Thanks  for  your  letters  (the  paper  is  not  yet  come). 


CB.  xu.  PARLIAMENT  AND   PARTIES.  279 

My  object  is  to  examine  what  colonies  can  be  worth, 
over  which  we  have  no  control.'  [This  refers  to  a  for- 
mer letter  asking  for  information  '  as  to  the  military  and 
naval  expenses  of  our  colonies.']  .  .  . 

'  I  had  heard  some  days  ago  of  your  intended  re- 
tirement from  Parliament  and  public  life.  I  am  not,  as 
Juvenal  was,  "  digressu  veteris  confusus  amici."  .  .  . 
It  is  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  better  that  you  should 
eclipse  yourself.  ...  I  hope  it  may  succeed  as  well 
with  you  as  it  did  with  me.  I  have  had  twenty  years 
of  quiet,  and  I  may  add  happiness,  and,  till  the  last  two 
years,  of  health,  since  I  ceased  to  be  M.P.,  which  may 
now  be  interpreted  member  of  Pandemonium  ;  in  my 
day  it  was  only  Purgatory. 

'  I  should  like  very  much  to  know  what  are  your 
speculations  on  parties.  I  begin  to  be  interested  for 
Aberdeen,  for  I  see  not  who  is  to  succeed  him.  Gra- 
ham seems  to  me  to  stand  the  most  forward  for  the  suc- 
cession, but  what  between  his  boldness  of  language  and 
timidity  in  action,  I  should  be  afraid,  for  him  and  for 
us,  of  some  great  catastrophe  ;  but  he  is,  I  think,  the 
cleverest  administrator  in  the  Cabinet.  .  .  .' 

Though  he  had  done  with  party  politics,  Mr.  Herries 
lost  none  of  his  interest  in  national  concerns.  He 
anxiously  watched,  but  without  any  confidence  in  the 
result,  the  efforts  of  the  Government  to  control  Russian 
arrogance  by  pacific  diplomacy,  directed  by  Lord 
Clarendon,  an  old  friend,  for  whom,  though  politically 
opposed,  he  never  ceased  to  entertain  the  most  sincere 
regard.  He  lamented  the  feebleness  of  Lord  Aber- 
deen, which  allowed  the  country  without  preparation 


280  RUSSIAN  WAR.     DEATH.  OH.  xn. 

to  *  drift '  into  a  war  the  Minister  neither  dared  to 
make  ready  for,  nor  knew  how  to  avert.  If  he  ap- 
plauded the  tardy  resolution  of  the  Cabinet  to  employ 
the  only  means  by  which  Russian  aggression  ever  has 
been  checked — force — he  deplored  the  want  of  fore- 
thought which  exposed  our  arms  to  the  risk  of  humilia- 
tion ;  and,  remembering  as  he  did,  the  stern  solemnity 
of  the  hour  of  Nelson's  last  departure,1  he  was  sad- 
dened by  the  vulgar  exhibition  of  buffoonery,  swagger, 
and  bombastic  braggadocio,  which  made  '  the  judicious 
grieve'  on  the  sailing  of  the  worst  manned  fleet  that 
within  human  memory  had  left  a  British  port  to  en- 
counter an  enemy.  But  manners  and  language  were 
not  more  different  than  times  and  men.  If  the  careless 
levity  which  marked  the  despatch  of  the  Baltic  expedi- 
tion was  unlike  the  earnest  exertion,  the  terrible  deter- 
mination, of  the  eve  of  Trafalgar  ;  if  the  sorry  fustian  of 
the  Reform  Club  banquet,  and  the  vainglorious  vapour- 
ing of  the  Copenhagen  address,  were  lamentably  out  of 
keeping  with  the  simple  grandeur  of  the  famous  signal 
of  October  21 ;  it  was  equally  true  that  Napier  was  not 
Nelson,  any  more  than  Aberdeen  was  Pitt,  or  Nicholas 
Napoleon. 

Mr.  Herries  died  suddenly  on  April  24,  1855. 

The  following  notice  of  this  event  is  to  be  found  in 
a  newspaper,  '  The  Examiner/  representing  opinions 
the  very  antipodes  of  those  of  the  deceased. 

1  Mr.  Herries  was  probably  on  duty  at  Nelson's  funeral,  as  a  Lieutenant 
of  the  Light  Horse  Volunteers,  which  corps  held  on  that  occasion  the  highly 
honourable  post  of  the  front  of  the  Admiralty,  where  the  coffin  was  deposited 
on  January  8,  1806,  and  whence  the  procession  started  on  the  following 
morning. 


OH.  xrr.  '  THE  EXAMINER.'  281 

1  The  journals  of  the  week  contain  the  announce- 
ment of  the  death  of  the  Right  Hon.  J.  C.  Herries  at 
the  age  of  seventy-seven.  He  was  one  of  the  few  sur- 
vivors of  that  race  of  public  men  whose  services  may 
be  dated  from  the  beginning  of  the  century  ;  he 
was  a  sincere  and  upright  politician ;  and  his  career, 
spent  in  the  discharge  of  many  important  and  varied 
duties,  was  .honourable  and  useful.  Those  who, 
like  ourselves,  were  opposed  to  him  and  his  political 
views,  could  not  fail  to  esteem  in  him  the  rare  quality 
of  consistency  ;  and  to  his  own  party  the  withdrawal 
of  his  wise  and  moderate  counsels  must  be  a  severe  loss. 
He  was  respected  by  all  who  knew  how  to  respect  an 
uncompromising  integrity,  and  his  strong  sagacity  made 
him  always  invaluable  as  an  adviser.  Mr.  Herries 
entered  Parliament  in  middle  life,2  and  had  not  the  gifts 
of  an  orator.  He  was  neither  a  frequent  nor  a  brilliant 
speaker  :  and  when  his  speeches  made  an  impression  on 
the  House,  it  was  owing  to  the  matter  and  not  to  the 
manner  of  them.  It  was  therefore  to  the  force  of  his 
intellect,  to  his  clear  judgment,  and  to  his  honourable 
character,  that  his  position  as  a  public  man  was  due ; 
but  those  who  had  the  privilege  of  knowing  him  in 
private  life,  knew  in  him  all  the  fine  qualities  of  the 
understanding  joined  to  those  of  the  heart,  with  a 
benevolence  which  never  ceased  to  exercise  itself  upon 
all  around  him.  Among  his  intellectual  qualities  a 
discerning  and  liberal  taste  in  literature  and  art  was 
conspicuous  ;  and  he  was  an  accomplished  scholar  both 
in  the  dead  and  living  languages  of  Europe.  .  .  .' 

a  At  the  age  of  forty-five — considerably  past  the  '  mezzo  del  camming 


282  POLITICAL  PRINCIPLES.  OH.  xii. 

These  remarks  appeared  in  the  radical  '  Examiner.' 
The  spirit  of  candour  they  breathe  towards  a  political 
adversary — very  different  from  the  uncandid  tone  of 
systematic  detraction  perceptible  in  another  quarter — 
is  highly  honourable  to  the  editor  of  the  paper  at  that 
time,  Mr.  John  Forster,  whose  advanced  Liberal  senti- 
ments are  well  known. 

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  Mr.  Herries  was  at 
some  period  more  justly  appreciated  by  members — and 
those  not  the  least  important — of  the  party  to  which  he 
was  opposed,  than  by  some  of  the  party  to  which  he 
belonged.  And  yet  he  served  his  party  well  and  con- 
stantly in  '  either  fortune ' — in  adversity  as  in  prosperity 
— in  the  broken  line  of  a  discomfited  minority,  as  well 
as  on  the  Treasury  bench  supported  by  a  compact 
majority.  He  never  sailed  under  false  colours,  or  was 
afraid  to  show  his  own.  He  had  no  taste  for  a  patent 
reversible  flag  suitable  for  all  uses  ;  nor  did  he  try  to 
wash  down  his  '  true  blue '  into  a  neutral  tint.  But 
although  he  steadfastly  adhered  to  his  principles — the 
result  of  reflection,  not  the  product  of  emotion — he  did 
not  push  them  to  extreme  and  dangerous  consequences. 
At  no  time  '  passion's  slave,'  he  eschewed  violent 
courses,  and  deprecated  rash  resolutions.  What  he 
desired  was  the  maintenance  of  lawful  authority,  good 
government,  for  the  benefit  of  all  classes,  according  to 
law,  subject  to  the  constitutional  control  of  Parliament 
— but  of  Parliament  alone — and  unswayed  by  the 
capricious  clamour  of  ignorant  multitudes  guided  by 
ambitious  men  for  their  own  ends.  But  while  he 
detested  political  agitation,  and  objected  to  unnecessary 


CH.  xii.  RATIONAL  TORYISM.  283 

changes  made  merely  for  love  of  novelty  and  excite- 
ment, he  was  always  friendly  to  salutary  remedies  of 
real  defects,  and  ready  to  promote  well-considered 
measures,  whether  legislative  or  administrative,  of  prac- 
tical improvement.3  Having  no  superstitious  veneration 
for  antiquity,  he  would  gladly  have  concurred  in  the 
removal  of  many  of  its  relics  which  he  did  not  admire. 
In  particular  he  would  have  hailed  with  satisfaction  law 
reforms  much  larger  than  any  attempted  in  his  time,  or 
likely  to  be  effected  in  the  present  generation  ;  for  he 
was  not  convinced  of  the  superlative  wisdom  of  our 
system  of  jurisprudence,  civil  or  criminal.  He  was, 
what  he  professed  to  be,  a  moderate,  rational,  govern- 
mental— not  transcendental — Tory.  The  toryism  to 
which  he  addicted  himself  was  that  of  the  school  of 
Pitt,  whom  he  considered  as  incomparably  the  great- 
est of  English  statesmen — not  that  of  the  school  of 
Bolingbroke,  whom  he  did  not  look  upon  as  a  model 
for  imitation.  Had  he  lived  in  the  early  years  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  he  would  probably  have  been  called 
a  Whig — as  an  adherent  of  the  Revolution  Settlement.* 
He  had  no  fancy  for  anachronous  revivals.  Revived 
Stuartism  was  repugnant  to  his  reason.  Revived 
Laudism  excited  his  scorn.  In  no  sense  of  the  word  a 

8  In  a  letter  from  him,  dated  August  25,  1 853,  the  following  words 
occur : — ' .  .  .  My  steadfast  Toryism,  and  opposition  to  organic  changes  in 
the  British  Constitution  .  .  .  while  I  promoted  all  the  measures  for  the 
extension  and  liberation  of  commerce  introduced  hy  Huskisson  and  Liver- 
pool and  Canning — those  truly  liberal  improvers  and  anti-Radical  re- 
formers. .  .  .' 

4  Like  his  forefathers.  According  to  family  tradition  his  grandfather 
was  injured  by  the  Jacobites  in  '  the  '45 '  on  account  of  his  '  Hanoverian ' 
proclivities. 


284  THE  CHURCH.     FOREIGN  POLICY.  CH.  xn. 

High  Churchman,  he  viewed  with  strong  dislike  the 
uprising  of  Sacerdotalism  described  as  the  '  Oxford 
movement,'  and  condemned  the  prelatical  pusillanimity, 
or  connivance,  which  favoured  the  Homeward  course. 
In  matters  of  Ecclesiastical  polity  he  was,  in  truth, 
a  sound  Erastian.  The  Church,  connected  with  the 
State,  upheld  by  the  State,  but  subordinate  to  the  State, 
and  controlled  by  the  State,  was  valued  by  him  as  a 
preservative  institution  very  beneficial  in  its  action, 
if  judiciously  directed.  But  when  he  spoke  of  the 
Church,  he  meant  the  Protestant  Church  of  England  by 
law  established — a  Church  regulated  by,  and  subject  to, 
the  law  of  the  land.  He  did  not  mean  an  anti- Pro- 
testant Church,  beyond  the  law,  above  the  law,  hostile 
to  the  law,  claiming  by  virtue  of  a  supernatural  au- 
thority attributed  to  itself  by  itself,  a  right  of  inde- 
pendent action  as  '  liber  a  Chiesa  '  in,  no  longer,  '  libero 
StatoJ  over  which,  and  over  a  prostrate  laity,  a  legion 
of  parochial  popelings  should  reign  supreme. 

He  thought  that  the  bases  of  the  foreign  policy  of 
the  Crown  should  be  the  scrupulous  fulfilment  of  all 
its  own  engagements,  with  an  inflexible  resolution  to 
require  the  observation  of  all  engagements  towards 
itself;  the  preservation  of  a  general  equilibrium  as  the 
only  security  for  peace,  and  for  the  independence  of  all 
nations ;  and  the  vindication,  in  all  parts  of  the  world, 
at  all  times,  at  all  hazards,  of  British  honour  and 
interests,  which  he  would  never  have  been  prepared  to 
sacrifice  to  all  '  the  aspirations '  of  all  '  the  nationalities ' 
and  all  *  the  races.'  An  ethnological  and  philological 
foreign  policy,  regardless  of  history,  geography,  strategy, 


CH.  xii.  PARLIAMENTARY  SPEAKING.  285 

public  faith,  or  state  interest,  and  necessarily  involving, 
if  carried  to  its  legitimate  consequences,  the  dismember- 
ment of  almost  every  State  in  Europe,  beginning  with 
the  United  Kingdom  itself,  seemed  to  him  fit  only  for 
discussion  in  an  assembly  of  lunatics.  Not  being  able 
to  admit  that  Welshmen  ought  to  be  absolved  from 
their  allegiance  to  the  English  Crown  because  Sussex 
farmers,  as  a  general  rule,  could  not  comprehend  the 
mysteries  of  Eisteddfod,  he  did  not  understand  why  it 
should  be  deemed  iniquitous  on  the  part  of  a  foreign 
sovereign  to  retain  under  his  sceptre  persons  speaking 
divers  languages,  and  classified  by  learned  professors 
under  different  ethnographical  denominations. 

Such  were,  as  we  believe,  in  general  terms,  his 
political  opinions,  as  gathered  from  private  conversation 
more  than  from  his  public  utterances,  which,  indeed, 
were  not  very  frequent.  Coming  into  Parliament  too 
late  in  life  to  acquire  skill  in  the  art  of  political  speak- 
ing, he  did  not  add  to  the  too  large  number  of  those 
who  unsuccessfully  attempt  oratorical  display.  He 
never  quite  overcame  the  diffidence  which  commonly 
restrains  men  of  mature  years  who  have  not  practised 
debating  when  young.  It  very  often  happened,  besides, 
that  he  was  prevented  from  taking  part  in  the  discus- 
sion of  important  questions  by  an  affection,  destroying 
his  power  of  making  himself  heard,  to  which  he  was  con- 
tinually liable.  Nevertheless,  when  he  addressed  the 
House  he  generally  did  so  with  effect,  from  knowledge 
of  the  subject  of  which  he  had  to  treat.  One  remark 
maybe  added.  Some  writer  once  described  him  satirically 
as  'the  man  of  figures,'  and  he  was  skilled  in  their  use. 


286  TRANSACTION  OF  BUSINESS.  en.  in. 

But  in  his  speeches  he  did  not  abuse  them.  It  is  obser- 
vable that  he  was  comparatively  sparing  of  statistics  in 
what  may  be  called  the  statistico-commercial  period  of 
our  parliamentary  history,  the  student  of  which  is  startled 
by  the  appearance  of  their  formidable  masses  filling  up 
the  columns  of  Hansard  with  arithmetical  eloquence. 
Every  sentence  a  sum,  every  parenthesis  a  percentage, 
the  reports  of  five  speeches  out  of  six  must  be  reckoned, 
rather  than  read,  through.  From  simple  addition  there 
is  but  a  step  to  compound  multiplication  of  a  painful 
kind  ;  and  he  is  fortunate  who  does  not,  in  the  course  of 
two  pages,  find  himself  exposed  to  double  rule  of  three 
in  its  most  virulent  aspect. 

In  the  transaction  of  public  business,  it  is  not  to  be 
denied  that  in  the  judgment  of  his  contemporaries  of 
different  parties  Mr.  Herries  showed  ability  of  a  very 
high  order  ;  and  of  his  constant  efforts  to  secure  or 
increase  the  efficiency  of  the  public  service  sufficient 
proof  has  been  furnished  in  the  preceding  pages. 

We  have  completed  the  unwelcome  task  forced  upon 
us  by  attacks  which  it  was  our  sacred  duty  to  repel. 
In  vindicating  the  memory  which  has  been  unjustly 
assailed  by  others  we  cannot  pretend  to  have  been  free 
from  bias,  but  we  are  not  conscious  of  having  been 
guilty  of  exaggeration  or  unfairness.  Nothing  has 
been  intentionally  overcoloured,  nothing  thrown  into 
the  shade.  There  has  been  neither  invention  nor 
concealment  in  our  narrative.  For  all  that  we  have 
advanced  we  have  shown  what  we  believe  to  be  solid 
grounds.  If  the  necessities  of  our  defence,  and  a  firm 
determination  to  tell  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  nothing 


CH.  XTI.  CONCLUSION.  287 

but  the  truth,  have  compelled  us  sometimes  to  disturb 
popular  notions,  and  to  exhibit  facts  detrimental  to 
established  reputations,  we  have  done  so  with  regret, 
but  without  fear.  Refutation,  not  apology,  was  the 
object  we  had  in  view.  It  was  not  our  purpose  with 
bated  breath  to  deprecate  hostility  and  sue  for  con- 
donation, but  to  overthrow  calumny,  and  encounter 
malice  with  the  genuine  records  of  a  long  and  spotless 
life. 

We  lay  them  before  the  public,  whose  impartial 
judgment  we  confidently  await  upon  the  question, 
whether  we  have,  or  have  not,  succeeded  in  proving 
that  the  injurious  assertions  we  undertook  to  meet  were 
wholly  false,  and  that,  far  from  deserving  the  aspersions 
of  his  slanderers,  John  Charles  Herries  was  justly 
entitled  to  the  fame  of  a  most  faithful,  zealous,  and 
able  servant  of  the  Crown  and  the  Nation. 

'  E  questo  fia  suggel,  ch'  ogni  uomo  sganni.' 


INDEX. 


ABERCROMBY 

A  BERCROMBY,  Right  Hon.  J., 
-tl    i.  127 

Aberdeen,  Lord,  conduct  of,  respect- 
ing Reform  Bill,  ii.  159;  letter 
communicated  by,  to  Herries,  162 ; 
Prime  Minister,  275,  279,  280 

Accounts,  scrutiny  of,  i.  108 ;  of 
foreign  payments,  251,  261 

Alexander,  Emperor,  the  Pope's 
claims  opposed  by,  i.  106 

Allies,  supplies  for,  i.  30,  60,  61,  62, 
63,  84 ;  subsidies  to,  88,  89,  90, 
91,  92,  94,  95,  96,  102,  103,  104, 
108,  237,  245,  247,  251,  261 

Althorp,  Lord,  ii.  12-18,  23-28,  30, 
31,  33,  37,  42,  80,  91,  181,  209 
(Spencer) 

Arbuthnot,  Right  Hon.  0.,  i.  13,  21, 
114  note,  119,  145,  ii.  62,  164,  273 

Ashburton,  Lord,  ii.  277  (see  Baring) 

Austria,  subsidies  to,  i.  88,  90,  238, 
239,  245,  246,  251,  261 


BANK  OF  ENGLAND,  i.  66  and 
note,  67,78,  142,  220,  226,227, 
242,  ii.  93,  227;    Charter,  168, 
231 

. —  at  Bombay,  ii.  109 
Baring,  Mr.  A.,  concerning  Russian- 
Dutch  loan,  ii.  132,  140,  155 ;  his 
opinion  of  Herries,  i.  220  note,  ii. 
277 
VOL.  II.  U 


BUDGET 

Bath,  Order  of  the,  Herries  appointed 
Secretary  to,  i.  16 

Bathurst,  Lord,  i.  12,  77,  78,  88,  ii. 
159 

Bennet,  Hon.  II.  G.,  motion  of  cen- 
sure by,  i.  109 

Bentinck,  Lord  George,  ii.  226,  227, 
229,  233 

Beresford,  Marshal,  requisitions  from, 
i.  34 

Bexley,  Lord,  correspondence  with, 
i.  207,  210,  ii.  44,  45,  63,  54,  57; 
mentioned,  i.  212,  224  note,  ii.  40, 
74,  80,  81 

Bills  of  Credit  due  to  Allies,  i.  91, 
92,  93,  240,  246,  260,  270,  272 

Bisset,  Commissary-General,  letters 
to,  i.  25,  39,  48,  66,  72,  75 ;  pri- 
vate bargains  condemned  by,  74 

Black,  Dr.,  ii.  124 

Bonham,  Mr.,  ii.  162, 171, 173 

Bourne,  Right  Hon.  W.  S.,  i.  132, 
154,  169,  170,  173, 174,  178  note, 
192,  193  note,  204,  205,  207,  215, 
219 

Bowring,  Dr.,  efforts  in  favour  of,  ii. 
101 

Brazil,  project  of  treaty  with,  ii.  214 

Brougham,  Mr.,  i.  205,  206,  ii.  35, 

52,64 
-  Lord,  ii.  236  ;  letter  from,  277 

Buckingham  Palace,  i.  216,  217,  218 

Budget,  the,  of  1816,  letter  and  re- 


290 


INDEX. 


BULOW 

marks,  i.  116, 110, 117;  of  1841, 
debates  on,  ii.  184 ;  of  1842,  com- 
munications with  Peel  and  Goul- 
burn  concerning,  206,  214,  217, 
221 

Billow,  von,  Baron,  i.  102 

Burmese  War,  ii.  248 ;  correspond- 
ence respecting,  ibid,  to  268  ;  269 
and  note 


CAB,  the,  money  dealing  combina- 
tion, so  called,  i.  74 

Camden,  Marquis,  i.  178  note,  ii.  168 

Campaign  of  1815,  arrangements  for, 
i.  97,  98,  99, 101 

Canning,  George,  administration  of, 
i.  122;  hostility  of,  to  Reform, 
123,  127  note ;  sentiments  for 
Herries,  123 ;  junction  of  Whigs 
with,  126,  127,  128 ;  communica- 
tion from,  129;  letters  to,  131, 
134;  Knighton's  remarks  upon, 
137 ;  rumoured  intrigues  against, 
138;  alluded  to,  148;  death  of, 
149;  preservation  of  his  Govern- 
ment, 203,  209 ;  feelings  of  his 
friends,  208,  211 ;  Lord  Grey's 
speech  against,  211 ;  combination 
formed  by,  214 ;  the  Bang's  deter- 
mination to  support,  215;  his 
confidence  in  Herries,  219 ;  men- 
tioned, 223,  227 ;  principles  of,  ii. 
8 ;  Finance  Committee  proposed 
to,  11 ;  neutrality  policy  of,  40, 
43 ;  remarks  on  his  Government, 
46, 47  ;  measures  of,  described,  283 
note 

Canningites,  drifting,  ii.  8 

Canova,  A.,  assistance  given  to,  by 
British  Government,  i.  105  and 
note',  treatment  of  by  the  Em- 
peror Alexander  and  by  the  Prince 
Regent,  106 

Carlton  Club,  ii.  119,  225 


CHOKER 

Castlereagh,  Lord,  i.  88,  92  note,  ii. 
132,  133,  135,  136,  137, 138, 139, 
150 
Catherine,  Empress,  debt  contracted 

by,  ii.  132,  155 

Catholic  Question,  i.  21,  123,  ii.  102 

Certificates  for  raising  money,  issued 

at  Lord  Wellington's  request,  i. 

75 

Ciudad   Rodrigo,  Napier's  remarks 

on  siege  of,  i.  37 
Clarendon,  Earl  of,  ii.  67,  279 
Clothing  of  troops,  i.  33,  34,  45, 

55-63 
Cobbett,  pamphlet  by  Herries  against, 

introduction,  [18],  i.  8,  9 
Cobden,  Mr.,  ii.  187  ;  motion  of,  for 
reduction  of  estimates,  240  ;  doc- 
trine laid  down  by,  244 
Cockburn,  Sir  George,  ii.  171,  173, 

194 

Coinage,  fabulous,  described  by 
Napier,  i.  80  ;  foreign,  at  the  Royal 
Mint,  85,  100,  244,  245 
Colchester,  Lord,  irrelevant  refer- 
ences to  his  correspondence,  i. 
179,  218 

Commissariat  Service,  British,  de- 
fects and  reforms  in,  i.  24,  26,  27, 
28 ;  promotions  and  appointments 
in,  24,  25,  26 ;  superiority  of,  to 
that  of  the  Allies,  98 
Commissary-in-Chief,  functions  of,  i. 
23 ;   Herries  appointed,   17,   19 ; 
office  of,  abolished,  106 
Comptrollers  of  Army  Accounts,  i. 

17,  26, 107,  ii.  110 
Contractors,  failures  of,  i.   31,  32, 
33  ;  slanderous  assertion  concern- 
ing, 37 

Convoy  regulations,  i.  35 
Cresswell,  C.,  ii.  178 
Croker,  Right  Hon.  J.  W.,  i.  13  ; 
correspondence  with,  ii.  167,  230, 
271,  272,  278 


INDEX 


291 


CURRENCY 

Currency,  speech  on,  ii.  115 
Customs  consolidation,  i.  121 


TVALHOUSIE,  Marquis  of,  corre- 

-L'  spondence  with,  ii.  249-255, 
257,  259,  261,  264,  265,  267;  in- 
structions to,  256,  257,  262,  263, 
264,  267,  269  and  note  ;  treatment 
of,  268 

Davies,  Colonel,  ii.  154 

Decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan,  i.  14, 
15 

Democracy,  cost  of,  ii.  243 ;  ultra, 
274 

Derby,  Earl  of,  Cabinet  formed  by, 
ii.  245,  246  ;  correspondence  with, 
ibid.,  261,  264,  269;  mentioned, 
250,  251,  256,  258,  260,  267 

Disraeli,  Mr.,  ii.  229,  233,  236,  245 

D'lvernois,  Sir  F.,  writings  of,  i.  11 ; 
on  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  14, 
15 

Dom  Miguel,  ii.  54,  62,  75,  81,  115 

Drummond,  Commissary  -  General, 
fruitless  missions  of,  i.  66  note 


ononGE 


•^ASTERN  QUESTION, 

-L^     sions  on,  ii.  2 ;    memorandum 

concerning,  3  ;  newspaper  writing 

on,  182;   Palinerston  policy,  183, 

184 
East  India  Company,  Directors  of,  i. 

220,  225,  ii.  259,  270 
Ellenborough,  Lord,  correspondence 

with,  ii.  105-109,  249;  conduct 

of,    respecting   the  Reform  Bill, 

159,  160 
Entrenching  tools,  erroneous  charges 

concerning,  i.  37-46 
Estimates  for  181  G,i.  117;  for  1835, 

ii.  171,  240 
'  Examiner,'  the,  notice  of  Herries 

in,  ii.  281 


Exchequer,  reform  of  the,  ii.  168 
Expenditure,  i.  115,  117,  143,  145, 
ii.  100,  101,  170,  241 


TjlALKLAND,  Viscount,  letter  to, 
-C     ii.  256 

Farnborough,  Lord,  i.  147,  148,  216 

Finance,  pamphlet  on,  i.  7  ;  consult- 
ations on,  114,  ii.  204,  205,  206, 
222 ;  memorandum  on,  i.  139  ; 
plan  of,  ii.  1, 208 ;  Tory  and  Liberal 
compared,  ii.  116 

—  Committee,  appointment  of,  re- 
commended, i.  139,  ii.  11;  dis- 
putes concerning  (see  Herries, 
statement  by) ;  reports  of,  92-96  ; 
referred  to,  209 

Fitzgerald,  Right  Hon.  V.,  retire- 
ment of,  ii.  Ill 

Follett,  Sir  W.,  ii.  178 

Foreign  Enlistment  Act,  proposed 
repeal  of,  ii.  40,  54,  55 ;  Liberal 
condemnation  of,  41,  42 ;  note  on, 
42  ;  supported  by  Canning,  43 

Forster,  John,  Mr.,  ii.  282 

Fox,  C.  J.,  information  sought  con- 
cerning, ii.  272 

France,  Constitution,  i.  4,  6 ;  decrees, 
15,  16 ;  British  army  in,  81,  82, 
86,  88,  101,  238,  245 ;  King  of, 
funds  for,  88,  238 ;  expenditure, 
ii.  241 

French  money  procured  for  Lord 
Wellington,  i.  85,  245  (Appendix 
C.) 

C\  ENTZ,     Frederick,     translation 

vJ  from,  i.  1 ;  letter  from,  2 ; 
correspondence  with,  7 

George  III.,  disposal  of  library  of, 
ii.  272,  «74  note 

George  IV.,  i.  124;  views  attributed 
to,  128;  mentioned,  148,149;  ne- 
gotiations with,  154, 156, 157, 160, 


292 


INDEX. 


GLADSTONE 

161,  102, 163,  164,  168, 169, 175, 
179,  180,  182,  185,  187,  188,  190, 
191,  192,  193,  194,  195,  196,  197, 
198,  199,  203,  204,  207,  209,  211, 
214,  215,  221,  222,  223,  224,  232, 
233,  234,  235, 236 ;  determined  to 
support  Canning,  215  ;  his  hatred 
of  Whigs,  ibid. ;  Lord  Holland 
pressed  upon,  175,  195,  197,  232, 
ii.  7,  9,  10,  35,  44,  45,  72,  80 ; 
situation  of,  at  Canning's  death,  i. 
214;  anecdote  of,  216;  dismissal 
of  Lord  Goderich  by,  ii.  57  and 
note ;  message  from,  61 ;  reception 
of  Dom  Miguel  by,  75,  80 ;  fiction 
concerning,  77  note,  84,  85,  86 ; 
Ministerial  changes  proposed  by,  90 
Gladstone,  W.  E.,  ii.  178 
Goderich  Administration,  i.  [5],  [8], 

[9]  (Introduction) 

Goderich,  Lord,  suggestion  from,  i. 
124 ;  mention  of,  148,  149,  152 ; 
negotiations  of,  in  the  formation  of 
a  Cabinet,  153-236 ;  secret  pro- 
ceedings of,  ii.  9,  10,  69,  72,  74, 
79,  85 ;  led  astray  by  Tierney,  12 ; 
communications  with,  on  minis- 
terial difficulties,  14-57,  72-76; 
temporary  resignation  of,  9,  10, 
19,  27,  72,  78,  86 ;  dissolution  of 
his  Cabinet,  57 ;  his  statements 
concerning  it,  66,  68,  69,  71,  76; 
its  true  causes,  68,  70-77  (see 
Herries) 

Gordon,  Colonel,  Commissary-in- 
Chief,  i.  18,  24;  reports  Whig 
threats,  22  ;  commissariat  im- 
proved by,  24 ;  letter  to,  61 
Goulburn,  Right  Hon.  II.,  ii.  59; 
correspondence  with,  163,  189, 
190, 198,  203,  205,  217,  222 
Graham,  Sir  James,  remarks  of,  on 
Herries's  statement,  ii.  91 ;  men- 
tioned by  Peel,  193;  Croker's 
opinion  of,  270 


HERRIES 

Granby,  Marquis  of,  ii.  229,  236 

Grant,  Right  Hon.  C.,  i.  Ill,  180, 
224  note,  ii.  53 

Great  coats,  soldiers',  War  Office 
negligence  concerning,  i.  54 ;  Na- 
pier's false  charge  respecting,  re- 
futed, 65, 56,  57 

Greece,  views  concerning,  ii.  3  ;  Hus- 
kissou's  sentiments  for,  7 

Grenville,  Lord,  letter  from  Perceval 
concerning,  i.  12 ;  Auditor  of  the 
Exchequer,  hesitates  to  make  pay- 
ments for  Russia,  ii.  152 

Greuhm,  Mr.,  Prussian  Charge" 
d'Afiaires,  letters  to  and  from,  i. 
98,103 

Greville,  Mr.,  Passages  in  Diary  of, 
remarked  upon,  i.  217,  275 ;  on 
T.  Duncombe,  ii.  68  and  note 

Grey,  Earl,  letter  from  Perceval 
concerning,  i.  12 ;  his  speech 
against  Canning,  211  ;  his  view  of 
vote  on  timber  duties,  ii.  130; 
knowledge  of  Russian-Dutch  loan 
obtained  by,  137 ;  action  of,  con- 
cerning do.,  142 

Grote,  Mr.,  ii.  181 


HAMILTON,  Mr.  W.,  efforts  of, 
in  aid  of  Canova,  i.  105  note 
Hanover,   money  of  (see    Coinage); 

negotiation  with,  i.  106 
Hardinge,  Sir  H.,  letter  from,  i.  200 
Harrison,   Mr.    G.,    correspondence 

with  (see  Herries  and  Treasury)  ; 

mentioned,  i.  129,  ii.  65 
Hart  Davis,  Mr.,  letters  from,  i.  200, 

ii.  2 
Harwich,  i.   119, 123,  ii.  124,  126, 

127,  188,  200 

Herries  family,  notice  of,  Introduc- 
tion, 10 
Herries,  Colonel,  Introduction  [10] 

[15],  i.  10,  19 


INDEX. 


HERRIES 

Herries,  Right  Hon.  J.  C.,  early  life 
of,  Introduction,  10-20;  Vansit- 
tart's  secretary,  i.  1 ;  literary  oc- 
cupation, ibid.  7,  8,  9  ;  Perceval's 
secretary,  Secretary  to  Order  of 
the  Bath,  16 ;  employment  of,  in 
Ireland,  17 ;  Comptroller  of  Army 
Accounts,  ibid. ;  Commissary-in- 
Chief,  ibid.  19,  23;  his  attachment 
to  Perceval,  20;  obnoxious  to 
Whigs,  ibid. ;  commissariat  im- 
provements effected  by,  24,  25, 
26,  27,  97;  testimony  of,  29; 
Wilberforce  on,  31;  defence  of 
the  Storekeeper-General  by,  38, 42, 
46 ;  complains  of  injustice,  50 ; 
administrative  activity  of,  31,  34, 
35,  36,  45,  51,  53,  59,  60,  61,  63, 
64 ;  his  comments  on  Lord  Wel- 
lesley's  speech,  67 ;  monetary 
operations  of,  83,  85,  86,  87,  88, 
89,  90,  92,  93,  94,  99,  100,  104, 
237,  240,  243,  244,  245,  248,  249, 
273 ;  mission  of,  to  Paris,  89, 237  ; 
management  of  subsidies  by,  94, 
96, 102, 103,  104,  237,  247,  251, 
261;  his  office  abolished,  106; 
auditor  of  the  Civil  List,  109 ; 
recognition  of  his  services,  108, 
109,  110,  111,  273  ;  suppression  of 
truth  concerning,  111,  112;  con- 
sulted by  Lord  Liverpool,  114  and 
note  ;  his  desire  for  retrenchment, 
115,  117,  139,  143,  ii.  100,  170, 
243 ;  member  of  Revenue  Inquiry 
Commission,  i.  118;  Secretary  to 
the  Treasury,  and  enters  House  of 
Commons,  119  ;  effects  Customs 
consolidation,  121 ;  his  position 
under  Canning  (anecdotes),  122, 
123,  126;  wishes  to  leave  the 
Treasury,  124, 131, 134,  152  note ; 
injurious  statement  concerning, 
128 ;  hints  to,  from  Tory  seces- 
sionists, 136 ;  opinions  of  Welling- 


HERRIES 

ton  and  Peel  concerning,  138 ; 
the  '  Times '  on,  ibid. ;  paper  on 
Finance  by,  139 ;  views  of,  respect- 
ing African  Settlements,  145, 146  ; 
on  Windsor  Castle  Commission, 
147  ;  general  expectation  concern- 
ing, 150,  151,  152,  155,  180  note, 
220 ;  negotiations  with,  in  the  for- 
mation of  Goderich  Cabinet,  narra- 
tive by,  and  correspondence,  153- 
214;  comments  upon  the  same, 
214-236;  calumny  and  innuendoes 
against,  165,  166, 199,  200,  216, 
217,  218,  227,  234  ;  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer,  177; 
financial  reform  intended  by,  ii.  1 ; 
fundholders'  confidence  in,  2; 
memorandum  by,  on  Eastern  affairs, 
3 ;  his  fixed  principles,  9 ;  Finance 
Committee  proposed  by,  11 ;  dis- 
putes relating  thereto,  statement 
and  correspondence,  12-39 ;  resig- 
nation offered  by,  22,  39,  40 ;  ex- 
planations in  Parliament,  66-70 ; 
statement  by,  concerning  dissolu- 
tion of  Goderich  Administration, 
71 ;  Lord  Palmerston's  charge 
against,  refuted,  77-86 ;  Master  of 
the  Mint  in  Wellington  Cabinet, 
59 ;  mysterious  communications  to, 
61,  62  note ;  desires  a  change  of 
office,  87 ;  the  King's  proposal 
concerning,  90 ;  in  Finance  Com- 
mittee, 91 ,92,&c. ;  views  respecting 
Sinking  Fund,  i.  139,  ii.  96,  98 ; 
supports  Dr.  Bowring,  101 ;  sen- 
timents as  to  Catholic  Emancipa- 
tion, 102 ;  office  in  India  proposed 
to,  105 ;  consulted  by  Lord  Ellen- 
borough,  109  ;  President  of  the 
Board  of  Trade,  111 ;  negotiates 
settlement  of  American  dispute, 
112;  his  speech  thereupon,  ibid. ; 
speech  on  Currency,  115;  ac- 
tivity in  opposition,  119,  120 ;  as- 


294 


INDEX. 


HERRIES 

sists  W.  M.  Praed,  122,  123; 
keeps  his  seat  at  Harwich,  124, 
126,  127  ;  scurrilous  attacks  upon, 
124;  his  view  of  reform,  128; 
causes  a  Ministerial  defeat,  129; 
motions  of,  on  Russian  Dutch 
Loan,  147,  152;  disapproves  the 
Duke  of  Wellington's  negotiations 
with  William  IV.,  158 ;  communi- 
cates with  the  Home  Office,  160 ; 
urges  unity  of  Tory  action,  161  ; 
consulted  by  Croker,  167  ;  in  re- 
formed House  at  Commons,  168 ; 
Exchequer  reform  promoted  by, 
1G9;  Secretary  at  War  in  Peel 
Cabinet,  170-175;  goes  to  Italy, 
175 ;  promotes  metropolitan  im- 
provements,!. 121,  ii.  177;  opinions 
of,  on  Privilege  question,  178  ;  de- 
feats Melbourne  Ministry,  179 ; 
his  assistance  solicited  by  foreign 
diplomatist,  182 ;  his  view  of  Pal- 
merston's  Eastern  policy,  184; 
takes  part  in  budget  debates, 
184 ;  elucidates  Huskisson's  com- 
mercial policy,  185 ;  his  political 
position,  187  ;  loses  seat  in  Parlia- 
ment, 188;  Sir  R,  Peel's  assur- 
ances to,  192 ;  offer  of  a  seat  to, 
197 ;  consulted  on  financial  mat- 
ters, 204,  205 ;  advice  on  pro- 
perty tax,  sugar  duties,  &c.,  206- 
221  ;  later  consultations  of,  222 ; 
serves  on  commissions,  ibid. ; 
Thames  Embankment  advocated 
by,  223;  his  return  to  Parliament 
urged,  224 ;  consulted  by  Lord 
George  Bentinck,  226 ;  elected  at 
Stamford,  229;  sentiments  of, 
229,  230 ;  warm  reception  of,  ibid. ; 
course  taken  by,  on  monetary 
crisis,  231  ;  on  navigation  law, 
233 ;  on  Cobden's  motion,  240^; 
on  Henley's  motion,  244;  Presi- 
sident  of  Board  of  Control  in  Derby 


HERRIES 

Cabinet,  245 ;  hi»  work,  247,  248 ; 
correspondence  of,  on  Burmese 
War,  &c.,  248-268  ;  support  given 
to  Lord  Dalhousie  by,  209 ;  non- 
execution  of  his  instructions,  ibid, 
note ;  exercise  of  patronage  by, 
269;  his  feelings  towards  the 
Second  Empire,  275  and  note;  last 
year  of  his  Parliamentary  life,  275 ; 
retirement  of,  276;  opinions  of 
eminent  men  concerning  him,  277, 
278 ;  his  interest  in  national  con- 
cerns, 279 ;  death  of,  280 ;  notice  of, 
by  the  'Examiner,'  281;  general 
view  of  his  principles,  282 
Herries,  Right  Hon.  J.  0.,  letters 
from,  to  Bank,  governor  of,  for 
tokens,  i.  67 

—  Bentinck,  Lord  G.,  on  Irish  Rail- 
way Scheme,  ii.  226,  228 

—  Bexley,  Lord,  on  Ministerial  diffi- 
culties, i.  207,  ii.  44,  45 

—  Bisset,  Commissary-General,  on 
commissariat    patronage,    i.    25 ; 
supply    of    specie  and  monetary 
arrangements,  66  72, 75 

—  Black,  Dr.,  complaining  of  scurri- 
lity in  the  '  Morning  Chronicle,'  ii. 
124 

—  Canning,  Mr.,  expressing  a  desire 
to  leave  the  Treasury,  i.  131,  134 

—  Castlereagh,     Lord,     concerning 
Bills  of  Credit,  i.  92  note 

—  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  on 
Rothschild's     operations,     i.    86; 
funds  for  the  King  of  France,  88 
note ;     proceedings     of    Russian 
agents,  95  note ;  Russian  fleet,  97 ; 
French  coinage  at  the  Mint,  99 

—  Commissary-General   at    Dublin, 
on  inaccurate  military  requisitions, 
i.  33 

—  Correspondents,  various,  on  Com- 
missariat patronage,  i.  25,  26 ;  con- 
tractors, 32;    transport    deficien- 


INDEX. 


295 


BERRIES 

cies,  35 ;  purchase  of  shoes,  50 ; 
Russian  dealings,  90 ;  a  super- 
abundant military  chest,  101 ;  re- 
specting proposed  return  to  Parlia- 
ment, ii.  224,  225 ;  Burmese  War, 
269  note;  Napoleon  III.,  275 
note  ;  his  own  principles,  283  note 
Herries,  Right  Hon.  J.  C., letters  from, 
to  Oroker,  Mr.,  in  answer  to  ques- 
tions concerning  C.  J.  Fox,  ii.  271 ; 
as  to  George  III.'s  library,  272 ;  on 
an  article,  274 

—  Dalhousie,  Lord,  respecting  the 
Burmese  War,  telegraphs,  railways, 
finance,  &c.  ii.  249,  250,  251,  252, 
254,  256,  257,  259,  261,  264,  265, 
267 

—  Derby,  Lord,  on  Lord  Dalhousie 's 
instructions,  ii.  261,  264 

—  Ellenborough,    Lord,    respecting 
Indian  finance,  ii.  107,  109 ;  Bur- 
mese War,  249 

—  Falkland,  Lord,  assurance  of  sup- 
port, &c.  ii.  256 

—  Farnborough,  Lord,  on  the  fur- 
nishing of  Windsor  Castle,  i.  148 

—  Goderich,  Lord,  respecting  Chan- 
cellorship of  the  Exchequer,  i.  181, 
182,  186,  191 ;  on  termination  of 
Ministerial  crisis,  209 ;    offers  of 
resignation,  ii.  20,  26,  29,  31 

—  Goulburn,    Mr.,    on    a    proposal 
from  Sir  R.  Peel,  ii.  198  ;  on  Pro- 
perty tax  and  Sugar  duties,  217 ; 
on  retirement  from  Parliament,  278 

—  Gordon,  Colonel,  on  Spanish  and 
Portuguese  clothing,  &c.,  i.  60 

—  Harrison,  Mr.  G.  (Treasury),  on 
Russian  behaviour,  i.  95 ;    lavish 
expenditure,  115 ;  results  of  mis- 
sion to  Paris  (Appendix  A),  237  ; 
proposed  monetary  operations  (Ap- 
pendix   B),    240;    payments    to 
Foreign    Powers    (Appendix  D), 
247 


HERRIES 

Herries,  Right  Hon.  J .  C.,  lettersfrom, 
to  Herries,  Robert,  respecting  Hus- 
kisson  and  pamphlets,  i.  8 

—  Hogg,   Sir  J.  W.,  on    Burmese 
War,  ii.  259 

—  Huslrisson,  Mr.,  on  abandonment 
of  African  Settlements,  i.  146 ;  on 
his  return  to  England,  202 ;    re- 
specting Finance  Committee,  ii.  15 

—  Knighton,    Sir     W.,     respecting 
Windsor  Castle,  &c.,  i.  149  ;  Minis- 
terial arrangements,  183, 206  ;  dis- 
putes with  the  Whigs,  ii.  81 

—  Lyndhurst,  Lord,  on  Ministerial 
crisis,  ii.  55 

—  Macready,  Mr.,  cadetship  for  his 
son,  ii.  271 

—  Merry,   Mr.   W.  (War    Office), 
delays,  i.  54 

—  Monteagle,  Lord,  asking    for  in- 
formation, ii.  272 

—  Peel,  Sir  Robert,  concerning  elec- 
tions, ii.    171 ;    Exchequer  Bills, 
174 ;  on  Property  tax  and  Sugar 
duties,  206,  214 

—  Planta,    Mr.,  suggesting    official 
changes,  i.  124 

—  Pole,  Mr.  W.  W.,  on  Catholics  and 
Whigs,  i.  21 

—  Praed,  Mr.  W.  M.,  on  his  election, 
ii.  172 

—  Raglan,  Lord,  respecting  General 
Godwin  and    Lord  Dalhousie,   iit 
266 

—  Rosenhagen,  Mr.,  on  Commissariat 
defects  and  reforms,  i.  26,  27 ;  on 
bad  subsidy  treaties,  96  ;  the  Bud- 
get of  1816, 115 

—  Rothschild,  N.  M.,  directing  pay- 
ment for  Canova,  i.  104 

Baroness,    on   her     husband's 

death,  229 

—  Secretary   of    the   Treasury,  on 
Commissariat  patronage,  26 

—  Sister,  his,  on  negotiations  with 


296 


INDEX. 


BERRIES 

Lord  Goderich,  Whig  proceedings, 
&c.,  i.  189,  201,  203,  211 
Herries,  Right  lion.  J.   C.,  letters 
from,  to  Speaker,  Mr.,  on  retire- 
ment, ii.  270 

—  Storekeeper-General,  on  contrac- 
tors, i.  32;   lamenting  injustice, 
60;    respecting   great  coats,   64; 
Spanish    and  Portuguese     equip- 
ments, 61 

—  War  Department,  on  supplies  for 
Prussia,  i.  63  note 

—  Wellington,  Lord,  in  defence   of 
Storekeeper-General,  i.  38,  42 

Duke  of,  transmitting  corre- 
spondence with  Lord  Goderich,  ii. 
82 ;  on  Herries's  situation  in  the 
Government,  87 ;  with  financial 
calculations,  204 ;  on  the  Burmese 
War,  248, 256  ;  promising  appoint- 
ment, 270 

—  Letters  to,  from  Arbuthnot,  Right 
Hon.  C.,  i.  13,  114  note,  119,  ii. 
62 

—  Bentinck,  Lord  G.,  ii.  227 

—  Bexley,  Lord,  i.  210,  ii.  53,  54, 
67 

—  Brougham,  Lord,  ii.  277 

—  Croker,   Right  Hon.   J.   W.,  ii. 
167,  230,  278 

—  Dalhousie,  Lord,  ii.  253 

—  D'lvernois,  Sir  F.,  i.  14 

—  Ellenborough,  Lord,  ii.  105, 108, 
109 

—  Gentz,  Frederick,  i.  2 

—  Goderich,  Lord,  i.  186, 189, 198, 
199,  209,  ii.  22,  24,  28 

—  Goulburn,  Right  Hon.H.,  ii.  163, 
189,  203, 222 

—  Greuhm,  Mr.,  i.  103 

—  Huskisson,  Right   Hon.    W.,   i. 
145,  ii.  17 

—  King,  the  (George  IV.),  i.  185, 
214 

—  Knighton,  Sir  W.,  i.  201 


HUME 

Herries,  Right  Hon.  J.  C.,  letters  to, 
from  Lyndhurst,  Lord,  i.  160, 181, 
ii.  66,  60,  61,  63 

—  Peel,  Sir  R.,  ii.  121,  166,  172, 
173,  196,  206 

—  Perceval,  Right  Hon.  S.,  i.  12, 
13,  15,  18 

—  Planta,  Mr.,  i.  125, 133, 178,  186, 
202,  212 

—  Praed,  Mr.  W.  M.,  ii.  122,  123 

—  Rosenhagen,  Mr.,  i.  101 

—  Rothschild,  N.  M.,  i.  93  note 

—  Spearman,  Mr.,  i.  138,  ii.  62, 56, 65 

—  Treasury,  Assistant  Secretary  of, 
i.  73,  108,  273  (Appendix  E.) 

—  Trotter,  Mr.,  i.  46 

—  Vansittart,  Right  Hon.  N.,  i.  11 

—  Villiers,  Mr.,  ii.  67 

—  Wellington,    Lord,    i.    41,    47 ; 
Duke  of,  ii.  64,  89,  120, 164 

Herries,  Sir  W.,  i.  28 
Herries,  Major  W.  R.,  ii.  109 
Holland,   French    money    procured 
from,  i.  85 ;  monetary  operations 
in,  241 ;  aggrandisement  of,  ii.  132 ; 
Russian  deht  in,  132-158 ;  British 
engagements  to,  134;   separation 
of  Belgium  from,  142,  143,  145, 
150,  163 ;  course  pursued  by,  con- 
cerning the  Russian  loan,  167 

—  Lord,  observations   of,  on    Per- 
ceval, i.  20    note;    intrigues   for 
admission  of,  into  Goderich  Cabi- 
net, 160  and  note,  175,  176,  195, 
197,  232,  ii.  7, 8,  9, 10,  35,  38,41, 
42-49,  62,  53,  55,  66,  69,  72,  74, 
79;    his    opposition    to    Foreign 
Enlistment  Act,  41,  43;  his  en- 
deavours to  upset  Lord  Palmer- 
ston,  183 

Hope,  Messrs.,  creditors  of  Russia, 
ii.  132,  140  ;  notification  to,  from 
the  Treasury,  152 

Hume,  Joseph,  Mr.,  opposed  to  re- 
demption of  debt,  ii.  97  note; 


INDEX. 


297 


HUSKISSON 

supports  Herries's  motion,  151 ; 
votes  that  black  is  white,  154; 
nonsense  uttered  by,  156  ;  his  love 
of  economy,  170  ;  votes  with  Her- 
ries  against  Ministers,  181 
Huskisson,  Rt.  Hon.  "W.,  mentioned 
in  Letters,  i.  8,  11, 13  ;  opinion  of, 
on  proposed  taxes,  114  note ;  com- 
mercial policy  of,  123,  219,  ii.  185, 
283  nnte ;  ill  health  of,  i.  135 ;  cor- 
respondence of,  with  Herries,  on 
African  Settlements,  145 ;  trans- 
actions of,  in  the  formation  of  Go- 
derich  Cabinet,  155  and  nnte,  164, 
165,  168,  169, 170, 172,  178, 174, 
175, 178  note,  179, 180,  187,  188, 
192,  198,  201,  202,  203,  204, 
205,  206,  207,  208,  212,  223,  230, 
232,  235 ;  friendly  conduct  of,  to- 
wards Herries,  175  and  note,  212  ; 
magnanimity  of  Herries  esteemed 
by,  212  ;  concurrence  of,  in  Her- 
ries's financial  plans,  ii.  1,  208, 
213 ;  .proposal  from,  respecting 
Russia  and  Turkey,  3 ;  his  feeling 
for  Greece,  7 ;  participation  of,  in 
Whig  intrigues,  9,  10,  69;  pro- 
ceedings of,  with  respect  to  the 
Finance  Committee,  12-15, 17, 18, 
20-24,  26,  30,  32,  37-40 ;  friend- 
ship of  Herries  for,  30, 32  ;  enters 
Wellington  Cabinet,  59 ;  retires 
from  it,  87 ;  applauds  Herries's 
speech,  115;  Navigation  Laws 
dealt  with  by,  234 


INDIA,  exchange,  ii.  266  ;  finance, 
105-111,  254, 257,  265  and  note ; 
government,  248,   252,  275;    pa- 
tronage, 269 ;  railways   and  tele- 
graphs,    248,     252,    253,    255; 
steamers,  256 
Ipswich,  election  at,  ii.  189 
Irving,  Mr.,  i.  227 


LYNDHURST 

KELLY,  Sir  F.,  ii.  178, 189,  190 
Kennedy,  Sir  R.,  Commissary- 
General  in  the  Peninsula,  i.  39, 45, 
51,  56,  57,  59  note 


T  ABOUCHERE,  Rt.  Hon.  II.,  ii. 

JU    231,236 

Lamb,  Hon.  G.,  thanks  for  secret 
intelligence,  ii.  160 

Lansdowne,  Marquis  of,  discussions 
respecting  Herries,  i.  163,  168, 
170,  196,  207,  222,  223,  231 ;  in- 
tended resignation,  176,  177  note ; 
bewildering  statement  by,  178 
note ;  satisfaction  given  to,  176, 
177, 212,  232 ;  his  condemnation  of 
libel  against  Herries,  172,  229; 
speculations  concerning,  210,  211 ; 
negotiations  respecting  Lord  Hol- 
land, 195 ;  ii.  9  ;  speech  on  Foreign 
Enlistment  Bill,  42  note 

Light  Horse  Volunteers,  notice  of, 
Introduction,  [11]  ;  ii.  280 

Liverpool,  Earl  of,  complaint  to,  from 
Lord  Wellington,  i.  37 ;  paper  sent 
to,  67  ;  representations  to,  85,  88, 
96,  98;  consults  Herries,  114  and 
note ;  brings  him  into  political  life, 
119 ;  ii.  199 ;  his  reliance  upon 
him,  i.  120  ;  his  attention  to  busi- 
ness, ibid.,  note;  his  government, 
principles  of,  ii.  46-50,  52 ;  op- 
posed to  payment  of  Russian 
debt,  135;  alleged  transaction  of, 
with  George  IV.,  272 ;  his  mea- 
sures of  Reform,  283  note 

Londonderry,  Lord,  views  of,  con- 
cerning Property  tax,  ii.  219 

Louis  XVIII.,  funds  advanced  to, 
i.  88,  238 

Lyndlmrst,  Lord,  communications 
with  Herries,  i.  150, 151,  156, 181, 
234,  ii.  55,  56,  60,  61,  (52  note,  63, 
80 ;  with  the  King,  Goderich,  and 


298 


INDEX. 


LYTTON 

others,  i.  169,  170,  174,  207,  ii. 
52,  63,  54,  56,  67,  76 ;  his  advice 
to  Herries  concerning  libel,  i.  107 
Lytton,  Lord,  ii.  270 


MABERLY,  Mr.,  assistance  from, 
i.  107,  201 
Mackintosh,  Sir  J.,  i.  178  note ;  speech 

on  Foreign  Enlistment   Bill,  ii. 

41 

MacLane,  Mr.,  United  States  Minis- 
ter, negotiations  with,  ii.  1 12 
Macready,  W.  C.,  claims  recognised, 

cadetship  for  his  son,  ii.  271 
Manchester  School,  estimates  of  1835 

loved  by,  ii.  170 
Maritime  law,  Herries  on,  i.  2 
Metropolitan   improvements,  i.  121, 

ii.  177,  222 
Military  requisitions,  inaccuracy  of, 

i.  33,  34 
Mint,  Royal,  Hanoverian  coinage  at, 

i.  85,  245 ;  French  louis-cCor  struck 

at,  100, 245 ;  secret,  Napier's  fable 

concerning,  80 

Monetary  operations  (see  Herries) 
Monteagle,  Lord,  letter  to,  about  Fox, 

u.  272 


NAPIER,  Sir  W.,  errors  of,  i.  28, 
37,  65,  56,  57,  58,  76,  77,  80, 
81,  82,  83 
Napoleon,  Emperor,  i.  55 

—  III.,  ii.  275  and  note 

Nash,  Mr.,  evidence  respecting  Buck- 
ingham Palace,  i.  216 ;  mentioned, 
ii.  273 

National  Debt,  reduction  of,  i.  14, 
142,  ii.  93,  97  and  note,  98  and 
note,  116,  117,  118,  181 

Navigation,  neutral,  i.  2,  4 

—  Act,  debates  on  repeal  of,  ii.  233- 
236 ;  remarks,  237-240 


PEEL 

Nelson,  Lord,  appointment  fur  hia 
grandson,  ii.  270 


/YCONNELL,  D.,  Mr.,  vote  of,  on 
\J     Russian-Dutch  Loan  question, 
ii.  161 

O'Shaughnessy,  Dr.,  Indian  telegraph 
system  devised  by,  ii.  248, 262, 256 


PALMERSTON,  viscount,  HUS- 

-L  kisson  on,  i.  13 ;  administration 
of  War  Office  by,  53,  225  note ; 
opposed  to  retrenchment,  116; 
false  statements  in  'Autobio- 
graphy' of,  128,  163, 162  note,  193 
note,  194  note,  216,  234,  ii.  77- 
86,  193  ;  Herries  declines  to  serve 
under,  at  the  Treasury,  i.  129; 
offer  of  the  Exchequer  to,  by  Go- 
derich,  169  note,  194 ;  the '  Times ' 
on,  226;  operations  against  the 
Turks  proposed  by,  ii.  7 ;  remark 
on  Herries  by,  114 ;  Russian  com- 
munication to,  142 ;  Emperor  Ni- 
cholas subjects  himself  to,  145 ; 
untrue  assertion  by,  150  ;  informa- 
tion withheld  from  Parliament  by, 
156;  Eastern  policy  of,  182,  183; 
Lord  Holland  against,  ibid. ;  his 
opposition  to  the  Suez  Canal,  238  ; 
Russell  Ministry  overthrown  by, 
245 

Parnell,  Sir  Henry,  chairman  of 
Finance  Committee,  ii.  90,  91 ; 
prefers  convictions  to  place,  151 

Patronage,  exercise  of,  in  commis- 
sariat, i.  24,  25,  26 ;  by  Herries  at 
India  Board,  ii.  269-271 

Peasant  proprietors,  doctrines  con- 
cerning, ii.  242  and  note,  244 

Peel,  Mr.  and  Sir  R.,  secession 
from  Canning,  i.  122 ;  opinion  of 
Herries,  138 ;  speculations  con- 


INDEX. 


299 


PEMBEfcTON 

cerning,  211 ;  mentioned,  214 ; 
observations  on  Herries's  speech, 
ii.  115 ;  correspondence,  121 ;  on 
Russian-Dutch  Loan  question,  151, 
153,  154 ;  mentioned,  159 ;  letter 
concerning,  162 ;  letter  from,  165  ; 
action  on  the  Bank  Charter,  168  ; 
Cabinet  formed  by,  170  ;  communi- 
cation from,  ibid. ;  correspondence 
with,  171-174;  views  on  Pri- 
vilege question,  178;  in  power, 
188 ;  letter  from,  189 ;  commu- 
nications with  Herries  respecting 
Ministerial  arrangements,  &c.,  192- 
198 ;  assistance  given  to,  205 ; 
consults  Herries  on  financial  plan, 
ibid. ;  letters  to,  on  the  same  sub- 
ject, 206,  214 ;  postal  reform  op- 
posed by,  210  note ;  financial  state- 
ment of,  221 ;  Thames  Embankment 
discountenanced  by,  223 ;  wel- 
comes Herries's  return  to  Parlia- 
ment, 230 ;  in  debate  on  Naviga- 
tion Law,  234 

Pemberton,  C.  R.,  i.  176  and  note 

—  T.,  ii.  178 

Peninsular  War,  i.  28-87 

Perceval,  Right  Hon.  Spencer,  let- 
ters from,  to  Colonel  Herries,  i. 
10,  19 ;  to  J.  C.  Herries,  12,  13, 
15,  18;  letter  to,  from  Wilber- 
force,  31 :  makes  Herries  his  pri- 
vate secretary,  10 ;  firmness  of, 
towards  the  Prince  Regent,  17; 
obtains  appointments  for  Herries, 
ibid,  and  19;  his  friendship  for 
him,  20  ;  his  virtues,  ibid. ;  party 
malignity  against,  ibid,  and  note, 
168  note ;  untrue  charge  against, 
29 ;  Lord  Wellington's  declaration 
concerning,  48 

Pitt,  Mr.,  Introduction  [17],  ii.  47, 
99,  283 

Pius  VII.,  gratitude  of,  to  British 
Government,  i.  105  note 


RIPON 
Planta,  Mr.,  i.   124,  125,  133,  136, 

149,  150,  153-156,  164,  165,  178, 

186,  192,  202,  212 
Pole,  Right  Hon.  W.  W.,  i.  17,  18; 

letter  to,  from  Herries,  21 
Pollock,  Sir  F.,  ii.  149,  153, 178 
Portland  Administration,  i.  10 
Post  Office  revenue,  ii.  210  and  note 
Praed,  W.  M.,  brought  into  Parlia- 
ment, ii.  122 ;  supported  by  Her- 

ries,  ibid.  123,  124 
Prince  Regent,  dealings  with,  i.  17, 

19  ;  reception  of  Canova  by,  106 
Private  bargains,  i.  48  and  note,  72, 

73,74 

Privilege  question,  ii.  177 
Prussia,  supplies  for,  i.  63  note,  98 ; 

subsidiary  arrangements  with  (see 


QUADRUPLE  TREATY,  letter 

W/    from  a  Plenipotentiary,  ii.  182 

'  Quarterly  Review,'  Croker's  articles 

in,  ii.  167,  230,  272,  274  ;  remarks 

on  George  III.'s  library  in,  273, 

274  note 


T)  AGLAN,  Lord,  letter  to,  ii.  266 

J-t  Railways  in  Ireland,  ii.  226 ; 
in  India,  248,  255  ;  Termini,  Royal 
Commission,  222 

Retrenchment  desired  by  Herries,  i. 
115,  117,  139,  143,  ii.  100,  170, 
243 ;  resisted  by  departments  (see 
Palmerstmi),  i.  115,  116,  143;  re- 
commended by  Finance  Committee, 
ii.  100 ;  effected  by  Wellington 
and  Peel  Administrations,  101, 
170 

Ripon  borough,  seat  for,  offered  to 
Herries,  ii.  197,  198, 199 

—  Lord,  question  respecting,  ii.  193 
and  note 


300 


INDEX. 


ROB1NSOX 

Robinaon,  Right  lion.  F.,  negligence 
of,  i.  120  and  note  ;  historical  error 
concerning,  ii.  96  note 

Homo,  misgovern  men  t  at,  ii.  176 

Rosenhagen,  Mr.,  Comptroller  of 
Army  Accounts,  correspondence 
with,  i.  26,  05,  101, 116 

Rosslyn,  Lord,  conduct  of,  respecting 
the  Reform  Bill,  ii.  159 

Rothschild,  N.  M.,  operations  of,  i. 
85,  86,  87,  89,  93,  104,  247 ;  libel 
on  Herries,  concerning,  166,  227, 
228 ;  Herries's  friendship  for,  228, 
229 

—  Baroness,  letter  to,  i.  229 

Russell,  Lord  John,  remarks  of,  ii. 
186, 187,  231,  232  ;  his  opinion  of 
Herries,  278 

Russia,  conduct  of,  in  money  matters, 
i.  90,  91,  94,  95,  97;  fleet  of, 
maintained  by  Great  Britain,  97 
and  note ;  subsidiary  arrangements 
with  (see  Subsidies) ;.  enticement  of 
manufacturers  by,  95  note;  pro- 
posal from,  as  to  invasion  of  Turkey, 
ii.  3 ;  war  with,  280 

Russian-Dutch  Loan,  i.  106,  260, 
271 ;  history  of,  ii.  131 ;  Herries's 
motions  concerning,  147,  153 ; 
Ministerial  deceit  and  conceal- 
ment respecting,  151,  155,  156 ; 
amount  paid  by  Great  Britain,  155 
and  note;  renewed  discussion  on, 
156  ;  nonsense  in  House  of  Com- 
mons respecting,  ibid,  note ;  course 
of  the  Netherlands  concerning, 
157 


ST.    LEONARDS,     Lord,    letter 
from,  ii.  263 

Salaries,  proposed  reduction  of,  ii.  244 
Scarlett,  Sir  James,  repeal  of  Foreign 
Enlistment   Act  proposed  by,  ii. 
40,  54,  55 


SUPPLIES 

Second  Empire,  recognition  of,  ii. 
276 

Shoes  for  the  army  in  the  Peninsula, 
i.  39,  41,  43,  46,  50 

Sidmouth,  Lord,  letter .  from  Perceval 
respecting,  i.  12 

Sinking  Fund,  Lowndes'e  plan  for,  i. 
13;  opinions  of  Herries  concern- 
ing, 139,  142,  ii.  92,  96,  98,  99 ; 
report  of  Finance  Committee  on, 
92;  Mr.  S.  Walpole'e  blunders 
concerning,  96  note 

Slavery,  ii.  214,  215,  216,  217 

Speaker,  the,  Mr.  Shaw  Lefevre, 
letter  to,  ii.  276 

Spearman,  Mr.,  character  of,  i.  94 ; 
able  assistance  of,  ibid.,  108,  250, 
273,  274 ;  letters  from,  ii.  52,  66, 
65 

Specie,  dearth  of,  and  measures  for 
procuring,  i.  65-72,  76,  78,  79, 
83-87,  98,  99,  100,  110,  111,  240, 
243,  244,  245,  248 ;  prices  of,  81 
note 

Stamford,  return  for,  ii.  229 

Stanley,  Mr.,  i.  178  note ;  ii.  128 

—  Lord,  ii.  193,  276 

Stewart,  Patrick,  ii.  172,  173 

Storekeeper-General  unjustly  cen- 
sured, i.  37  ;  vindicated  by  Herries, 
38,  40,  42-46 

Subsidies,  arrangements  concerning, 
i.  88-111,  237-273 

Sugden,  Sir  E.,  ii.  149,  153,  178, 
197 

Supplies  for  the  army  provided  by 
Oommissary-in-Chief,  i.  23 ;  for 
Peninsular  service,  35,  36,  45,  52, 
53,  58 ;  for  Spaniards  and  Por- 
tuguese, 32,  33,  34,  45,  55,  60, 
61,  62 ;  for  West  Indies  and 
Canada,  51,  53  ;  for  Allies  in  Ger- 
many, &c.,  63  and  note ;  abundance 
of,  in  1815, 97,  98 


INDEX. 


301 


TAXES 

rpAXES,  deliberations  concerning, 

•*-  i.  114 ;  imposition  of,  impracti- 
cable, 141 ;  Herries's  views  con- 
cerning, ii.  1,  208, 212  ;  remissions 
of,  117,  118,  181,  209 

Thames  Embankment,  ii.  222 

Tierney,  Right  Hon.  G.,  financial 
resolutions  moved  by,  Introduction, 
[17]  ;  his  hostility  to  Herries,  i.  20, 
22,  163,  168,  174  note,  196,  206, 
207,  227,  231,  275,  ii.  12 ;  alleged 
agreement  of,  with  Canning,  i.  127, 
128 ;  improbable  story  concerning, 
174  note;  Brougham's  hatred  of, 
206 ;  expected  to  resign,  208 ; 
subdued,  212;  behaviour  to  the 
King,  223 ;  his  interference  with 
the  Finance  Committee,  ii.  12-19, 
87,39 

Timber  Duties,  Reform  Cabinet  de- 
feated upon,  ii.  129 

Tory  Government,  Napier  attacks,  i. 
65 ;  effects  restitution  of  works  of 
art  to  Rome,  105;  wish  of,  for 
economy  thwarted,  116 ;  split  up, 
126  ;  re-establishment  of,  difficult, 
208;  unfairness  towards,  ii.  115; 
superiority  of  its  financial  admin- 
istration, 116, 117,  118 

Tory  party,  rupture  of,  ii.  102 ; 
Herries's  services  to,  119,  282; 
efforts  for  union  of,  120,  121,  161, 
164  ;  leaderless,  160,  162 

Transports,  captured,  i.  30 ;  deten- 
tion of,  35  ;  insufficient,  ibid. 

Treasury,  Herries  clerk  in,  Introduc- 
tion,!. [16] ;  commissariatpatronage 
by,  25 ;  Lord  Wellington  dis- 
pleased with,  36 ;  report  to,  from 
Herries,  52;  support  of  Herries 
by,  53 ;  business  thrown  upon  him 
by,  63,  64;  fruitless  inquiry  by, 
66  note ;  instructions  of,  to  com- 
missaries, 70,  71,  72;  deference 
shown  by,  to  Lord  Wellington,  73, 


WALPOLE 

74 ;  objections  of,  to  private  bar- 
gains, ibid. :  yields  to  Lord  Wel- 
lington's judgment,  75 ;  minute  on 
Hanoverian  coinage,  85  note ; 
Herries  sent  to  Paris  by,  89  ;  in- 
convenience to,  from  Russian  deal- 
ing, 90 ;  letter  to  Secretary  of, 
94 ;  minute  on  abolition  of  Com- 
missary-in-Chiei's  office,  107 ;  ap- 
probation of  Herries  by,  108,  273 ; 
Herries  appointed  Secretary  to, 
1 19 ;  and  his  proposed  retirement 
from,  124,  131,  134,  mentioned 
passim. 


FTNITED    STATES,    commercial 
*J     intercourse    of,    with    British 
West  Indies,  ii.  111-114 


T7ANSITTART,RightHon.  N.,let- 
'  ter  from,  i.  11 ;  negotiation  with, 
12 ;  Herries's  plans  approved  by, 
85 ;  communications  with,  86,  88, 
95, 96, 97, 99, 242 ;  speech  of,  109  ; 
financial  statement  of,  117 ;  allu- 
sions to,  242,  244, 246,  247 ;  blun- 
ders concerning,  ii.  96  note 

Villiers,  Mr.,  congratulates  Herries, 
ii.  67 

—  Right  Hon.  C.,  repeal  of  Corn 
Laws  advocated  by,  ii.  187 ;  allu- 
sion to  Herries  by,  ibid. 


WALPOLE,  Right  Hon.  S.   H.f 
speeches  on  Navigation  Laws, 
ii.  326 

Walpole,  Spencer,  Mr.,  History  of 
England  by,  remarks  on,  Intro- 
duction, and  i.  Ill,  153,  100,  174 
note,  175  note,  177  note,  193  note, 
200  note,  212  note,  216-219,  220 
note,  ii.  9(5  note,  129  note,  277 


302 


INDEX. 


WELLESLET 

Wellesley,  Marquis,  his  philippic, 
comments  on,  by  Herries,  i.  67 ; 
proposed  admission  of,  into  Gode- 
rich  Cabinet,  ii.  9,  36,  72 

Wellington,  Lord,  and  Duke  of,  i.  25, 
27,  28,  29,  35;  fault-finding,  86; 
erroneous  judgments  of,  ibid,  and 
note ;  complains  of  stores,  37 ; 
letters  to,  from  Herries,  concern- 
ing tools,  shoes,  &c.,  38,  42;  re- 
plies from,  41,  47,  51  ;  exertion  to 
supply,  51 ;  corn  contract  directed 
by,  52  ;  misquoted  despatch  from, 
65;  correspondence  on  clothing, 
66 ;  orders  of,  respecting  great 
coats,  67;  unfounded  complaints 
of,  58,  59 ;  complains  of  the  Bank, 
6(3  note ;  alleged  interference  of 
Government  with,  paper  on,  67 ; 
deference  of  the  Treasury  to,  73, 
74,  76 ;  pretended  opposition  to, 
ibid. ;  specie  supplied  to,  77,  78, 
79,  83,  84,  86,  88, 101,  112  note, 
238,  244,  246;  story  of  coining 
by,  80 ;  wheat  supplied  by,  to 
Prussian  army,  98 ;  Herries  sent 
to,  at  Brussels,  101 ;  treaties  of 
subsidy  concluded  by,  102  ;  seces- 
sion of,  from  Canning,  122 ;  return 
of,  desired  at  Windsor,  137  ;  sen- 
timents of,  concerning  Herries, 
138  ;  abandonment  of  African  Set- 
tlements urged  by,  145 ;  on  Wind- 
sor Castle  Commission,  147 ;  letter 
to,  from  Lord  Westmoreland,  151 ; 
from  Sir  H.  Hardinge,  165;  his 
visit  to  Windsor,  215 ;  charged 
with  the  formation  of  a  Cabinet,  ii. 
67 ;  offers  the  Mint  to  Herries,  59 ; 
Huskissou's  stipulation  with,  ibid. ; 
goes  with  Lyndhurst  to  Windsor, 
61 ;  letter  and  note  concerning, 
62 ;  unreasonable  wrath  of,  64, 
65  ;  intended  letter  to,  from  Her- 
ries, 82 ;  rigidity  of,  towards  Hus- 


wniQ9 

kisson,  87  ;  letter  to,  from  Herries, 
ibid.;  reply  from,  89;  opinion  of 
Herries  expressed  by,  90  ;  his  dis- 
like of  the  Finance  Committee, 
101  ;  hostility  of,  to  Dr.  Bowring, 
102 ;  arrangement  with  America 
reluctantly  assented  to  by,  112; 
Cabinet  of,  destroyed,  115;  good 
financial  management  of  his  Ad- 
ministration, 116-118  ;  correspond- 
ence of,  with  Herries,  120 ;  his  cor- 
respondence respecting  Russian- 
Dutch  Loan,  131,  136;  instruc- 
tions to,  from  Lord  Castlerea^h, 
136  ;  attempted  construction  of  a 
Cabinet  by,  158  ;  pledge  given  by, 
to  the  King,  159 ;  action  of,  urged 
by  Herries,  162 ;  letter  from,  to 
Herries,  164 ;  letter  to,  from  Sir 
B.  Peel,  170 ;  consideration  of 
estimates  by,  171 ;  financial  calcu- 
lations for,  204;  letter  to,  248; 
his  suggestions  concerning  Bur- 
mah,  249 ;  papers  submitted  to, 
254  :  letter  to,  256  ;  consulted  on 
Burmese  war,  258,  267  ;  last  poli- 
tical advice  of,  260 ;  death  of,  ibid. ; 
memorandum  by,  262;  appoint- 
ment of  a  friend  of,  270 
Wetherell,  Sir  Charles,  ii.  149, 163 
Whigs,  animosity  of,  against  Her- 
ries, i.  20,  22,  ii.  200;  junction 
of, with  Canning,  126, 137 ;  pledges 
of,  127 ;  conduct  of,  in  formation 
of  Goderich  Cabinet  (see  Herries, 
1  Narrative '  and '  Correspondence,' 
passim)  ;  mutual  hatred  between 
them  and  George  IV.,  i.  216;  re- 
marks upon,  222,  223,  227,  231, 
233  ;  intrigues  of,  ii.  9  ;  against 
Foreign  Enlistment  Act,  40,  41, 
42  and  note,  43  ;  letter  from  Her- 
ries respecting,  45 ;  views  of 
Brougham  and  Lyndhurst  con- 
cerning, 52,  53 ;  cunning  of,  57 ; 


INDEX. 


303 


WILBERFORCE 

storm  from,  preparing,  63 ;  Her- 
ries  to  Knighton,  about,  81 ;  action 
of,  at  Harwich,  126, 127, 188, 189 ; 
make  deficits,  116,  179,  205 ;  allu- 
sions to,  passim 

Wilberforce,  Mr.,  letter  from,  to  Per- 
ceval, i.  31 


WORKS 
William  IV.,  negotiations  with  the 

Duke  of  Wellington,  ii.  158 
Wood,  Sir    Charles,  ii.    231,  268, 

275 
Works  of  art,  restitution  of,  to  the 

Pope,  i.  104,  105 


THE    END. 


i.oynox  i  rniNTKn  BT 

SPOTTISWOODK    AA'I)    I O.,    SKW-STBKKT    flQUAUH 
AND     PAIU.IAMKXT    STRKKT 


50,  ALBEMABLE  STBKET,  LONDON. 

MR.  MURRAY'S 
GENERAL    LIST    OF    WORKS. 


ALBERT  MEMORIAL.  A  Descriptive  and  Illustrated  Account 
of  the  National  Monument  erected  to  the  PKINCE  CONSORT  at 
Kensington.  Illustrated  by  Engravings  of  its  Architecture,  Decora- 
tions, Sculptured  Groups,  Statues,  Mosaics,  Metalwork  Ac.  With 
Descriptive  Text.  By  DOVNK  C.  BSLL.  With  21  Hates.  Folio.  12*.  12*. 

—  HANDBOOK  TO.     Pott  8vo.    Is.;  or  Illus- 
trated Edition,  2s.  6rf. 

—  (PRINOB)  SPEECHES  AND  ADDRESSES.    Fcap.  8vo.  Is. 

ALBERT  DURER  ;   his  Life,  with  a  History  of  his  Art.  By  DR. 

THAUSISG,  Keeper  of  Archduke  Albert's  Art  Collection  at  Vinnna. 
Translated  from  the  German.  With  Portrait  and  Illustrations.  2  vols. 
Medium  8vo.  [/n  ttt  Presi. 

ABBOTT  (RET.  J.).     Memoirs  of  a  Church  of  England  Missionary 

in  the  North  American  Colonies.   Post  8vo.    2s. 
ABERCROMBIE  (JOHN).     Enquiries  concerning  the  Intellectual 

Powers  and  the  Investigation  of  Truth.    Fcap.  8vo.     3*.  6d. 

ACLAND  (REV.  CHAKLKS).  Popular  Account  of  the  Manners  and 
Customs  of  India.  Post  8vo.  2s. 

AESOP'S  FABLES.  A  New  Version.  With  Historical  Preface. 
By  Rev.  THOMAS  JAMKS.  With  100  Woodcuts,  by  TKKNIKL  and  WOLF. 
Post  8vo.  '2s.  6d. 

AGRICULTURAL  (ROYAL)  JOURNAL.     (Published  half -yearly.) 

AIDS  TO  FAITH  :  a  Series  of  Essays.  Miracles ;  Evidences 
of  Christianity;  Prophecy  and  Mosaic  Record  of  Creation :  Ideology  »nd 
Subscription;  The  Pentateuch ;  Inspiration;  Death  of  Christ;  Scripture 
and  its  Interpretation.  By  various  Authors.  8vo.  9*. 

AMBER-WITCH  (THE).  A  most  interesting  Trial  for  Witch- 
craft. Translated  by  LADT  DOFF  GORDON.  Post  8vo.  2*. 

APOCRYPHA:  With  a  Commentary  Explanatory  and  Critical, 
by  various  Writers.  Edited  by  KKV.  PEOFKSSOB  WACE.  2  V<>IH. 
Medium  Svn.  [la  the  Pi  ess. 

ARISTOTLE.     See  QUOTE,  HATCH. 

ARMY  LIST  (THE).    Publisted  Monthly  by  AutJiority. 

(THE  NEW  OFFICIAL*.    Published  Quarterly.    Royal 

8vo.    15*. 
ARTHUR'S  (LITTLE)  History  of   England.     By    LADT    CALLCOTT. 

Neto  Edition,  continued  to  1872.    With  36  Woodcuts.    Fcap.  8vO.     li.  W. 

ATKINSON  (DR.  R.)  Vie  de  Seint  Auban.  A  Poem  in  Norman- 
French.  Ascribed  to  MATTHEW  PARIS.  With  Concordance,  Glossary 
and  Notes.  Small  4to.  10*.  (W. 

AUSTIN  (JOHN).  LECTURES  OH  GENERAL  JURISPRUDENCE  ;  or,  the 
Philosophy  of  Positive  Lair.  Edited  by  ROBKHT  CAMPBELL.  9  Vols. 
8ve.  32*. 

-  STUDENT'S   EDITION,  compiled   from  the  above   work, 
by  ROBEBT  CAMPBELL.    Post  8vo.     1'it. 
-  Analysis  of.   By  GORDON  CAMPBELL.   Post  8vo.  6*. 


LIST  OF   WORKS 


ADMIRALTY  PUBLICATIONS;  Inaned  by  direction  of  the  Lordi 

Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty: — 

A  MANUAL  OF  SCIENTIFIC  ENQUIRY,  for  the  U«e  of  Traveller*. 
Fourth  Edition.     Edited  by  KOBIBT  MAIM,  M.A.    Woodcuts.    Post 
8vo.    8*.  64. 
GREENWICH    ASTRONOMICAL   OBSERVATIONS,   1841  to  1847, 

and  1847  to  1877.     Royal  4to.    20*.  each. 
GREENWICH  ASTRONOMICAL  RESULTS,  1847  to  1877.    4to.    Si. 

each. 
MAGNETICAL  AND  METEOROLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS,   1844 

to  1877.    Royal  4to.    20*.  each. 
MAGNETICAL  AND  METEOROLOGICAL  RESULTS,  1S4S  to  1877. 

4to.    3<  each. 
APPENDICES  TO  OBSERVATIONS. 

1837.   Logarithms  of  Sines  and  Cosine*  in  Time.    Si. 

1842.  Catalogue  of  1439  Stan,  from  Observations  made  in  1836. 

1841.  4. 

1«45.  Longitude  of  Valentia  (Chronometric&l).    3*. 
1847.  Description  of  Altazimuth.    :).». 

Description  of  Pbotograpliic  Apparatus.    2*. 
1851.  Maskelyne's  Ledger  of  Stars.    3*. 
165-2.  I.  Description  of  the  Transit  Circle.    3*. 
185?.  Bestel's  Refraction  Tables.     3*. 
1854.   I.   Description  of  the  Reflex  Zenith  Tube.    3«. 

II.  Six  Years'  Catalogue  of  Star.-,  from  Observations.     1343 

to  1853.    4*. 

1«60.  Reduction  of  Peep  Thermometer  Observation'.    2«. 
1862.  IL    Pl«n  of  Ground  and   Buildings  of  Royal  Observatory. 

Greenwich.    3*. 

III.  longitude  of  ValentU  (Galvanic).    2«. 
1864.   I.  Moon's  Semi-diameter,  fiom  Occult*ti:>n».     2f. 

II.  Reductions  of  Planetary  Observati  ns.     18U  to  W5.    2« 
1868    I.  Conec'ions  of  Elcmen'8  of  Jupiter  and  ?a'iirn.    2«. 

II.  Second  Seven  Yens'  Catalogue  of  2760  Stars.    1861-7.    4*. 
Ill    Description  of  the  Great  Equatorial.    .'!-. 
1871.  Water  Te'escnpe.    3*. 
1873.  Regulations  of  the  Royal  Observatory.    2s. 
1876.  II.  Nine  Years' Cattlofcne of  22*3  Stars.    (lS<il  67.)    4*. 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  Observations  (Star  Ledgers) :  1856  to  1863.  2>. 
— — 1856.    5*. 


Astronomical  Results.   1857  tol«S58.    5*. 


Capn  Catalogue  of  1159  Stars,  reduced  to  the  Epoch  I860.    St. 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  A  ~tr.  nomical  Results.    1859  to  1860.     ,V. 

-  1871  to  1S7S.    5*. 

-  1874  to  1876.    5*.      ch. 

Report  on  Teneriffe  Astronomical  Experiment.    1856.    5«. 
Paramatta  Catalogue  of  7385  Stars.     1822  to  1826.    4*. 

REDUCTION   OF   THE   OBSERVATIONS  OF  PLANETS.    1760 
1830.    Royal  4to.    20*  each. 

-  LUNAR  OBSERVATIONS.     175' 
to  1830.    3  Vols.    Royal  4to.    20*.  each. 

1831  to  18S1.     4K>. 


GREENWICH  METEOROLOGICAL  OBSERVA- 


TIONS.    Chiefly  1S47  to  1873.    6*. 

ARCTIC  PAPERS.    13«.  6d. 

BERNOULLI'S  SEXCENTENARY  TABLE.    1779.    4to.    6». 

BESSEL'S  AUXILIARY  TABLES  FOR  HIS  METHOD  OF  CLEAR- 
ING LUNAR  DISTANCES.  8vo.  2*. 

ENCKE'S  BERLINER  JAHRBUCH,  for  1830.    Berlin,  1828.    8vo.    9*. 

HANSEN'S  TABLES  DE  LA  LUNE.     4to.     20*. 

HANNYNGTON'8  HAVER3INES. 

LtAX'S  TABLES  FOR  FINDING  THE  LATITUDE  AND  LONGI- 
TUDE. 1821.  8vo.  10*. 

LUNAR  OBSERVATIONS  at  GREENWICH.  1788  to  1819.  Compared 
with  the  Tables,  1821.  4to.  7*.  64. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY. 


ADMIRALTY  PUBLICATIONS — continued. 

MACLEAR  ON  LACAILLE'S  ARC  OF  MERIDIAN.  2  Vols.  20«.eacl> 
MAYER'S     DISTANCES    of    the     MOON'S    CENTRE     from     the 
PLANETS.    1822,  3».;  1823.  4*.  Gd.    1824  to  1835.     Svo.    4*  each 

TABULA  MOTUUM  SOLI3  ET  LUN.fi.     1770.    6*. 

ASTRONOMICAL    OBSERVATIONS    MADE   AT   GOF- 

TINGEN,  from  1756  to  1761.     1826.     Folio.    It.  M. 
NAUTICAL  ALMANACS,  from  1767  to  1883.    2».  6d.  each. 

—  SELECTIONS  t'KOM,  up  to  1812.    tiro.    f» 
1834-64.    6*. 

—  SUPPLEMENTS,  1828  to  1838,  1837  and  18H8. 


2s.  each. 

TABLE   requisite  to  be  used  with  the  N.A 


1781.    Svo.    5*. 
SABINE'S  PENDULUM  EXPERIMENTS  to  DBTERMIHE  THE  FLJCBE 

OK  THE  EARTH.    1825.    4to.    40*. 

SHEPHERD'S    TABLES   for  CoRBECTiMa   LCHAB   DISTANCES.     1772 
Royal  4to.    21». 

-  TABLES,    GENERAL,  of   the   MOON'S    DISTANCE 
from  the  SUN,  and  10  STARS.    1787.    Folio.    6».  6A 
TAYLOR'S  SEXAGESIMAL  TABLE.    1780.    4to.    16». 
-  TABLES  OF  LOGARITHMS.    4to.    60«. 
TIARK'S    ASTRONOMICAL    OBSERVATIONS  for  the 
of  MADEIRA.     1822.    4to.    5*. 
—  CHRONOMETRICAL  OBSERVATIONS    for 


of  LONGITUDE  between  DOVER,  PORTSMOUTH,  and  FALMOOTH.    1823. 

4to.    6*. 
VENUS  and  JUPITER:   OBSERVATIONS  of,  compared  with  the  TABLES 

London,  1822.    4to.    2s. 
WALES     AND    BAYLY'S     ASTRONOMICAL     OBSERVATIONS. 

1777.    4to.    21». 
---     REDUCTION    OF    ASTRONOMICAL     OBSERVATIONS 

MADE  IS  THE  SOUTHERN  HEMISPHERE.    1764—1771.    1788.    4tO.    10*.  6(1 

BARBAULD   (Mas.).      Hymns    in    Prose    for    Children.     With 

100  Illustrations.     ICmo.    3*  M. 

BARCLAY  (BISHOP).  Selected  Extracts  from  the  Talmud, 
chiefly  illustrating  the  Teaching  of  the  Bible.  With  an  Introduction. 
Illustrations.  Svo.  14s. 

BARELEY  (H.  C.).   Five  Years  among  the  Bulgarians  and  Turks 
between  the  Danube  and  the  Black  Sea.    Post  Svo.    10s.  6d. 

-  Bulgaria  Before  the  War  ;  during  a  Seven  Years' 

Experience  of  European  Turkey  and  its  Inhabitants.     Post  Svo.     10*.  6<i. 

—  My  Boyhood  :  a  True  Story.     A  Book  for  School- 

boys and  others.     With  Illustrations.     Post  Svo.    6*. 

BARROW    (JOHN).     Life,  Exploits,  and  Voyages  of  Sir   Francis 

Drake.    Post  Svo.    2». 

BARRY  (CANON).     The  Boyle  Lecture?,  1877-78.     The  Manifold 

Witness  for  Christ.     Being  an  Attempt  to  Exhibit  the  Combined  F.  re  > 

of  various  Evidences,  Direct  ani  Indirect,  of  Christianity.    Svo.    12*. 

-  (Ecw.  ),  R.A.      Lectures  on  Architecture,  delivered  before 

the  Royal  Academy.    Svo.  [In  Preparation. 

BATES  (H.  W.)     Records  of  a  Naturalist  on  the  Amazons  during 

Eleven  Years'  Adventure  and  Travel.    Illustrations,    Post  Svo.    7*.  64. 

BAX  (CA.PT.}.  Russian  Tartary,  Eastern  Siberia,  China,  Japan, 
and  Formosa.  A  Cruiie  in  H.M.S.  Dwarf.  Illustrations.  Cr.  «vo. 
12>. 

BELCH  BR  (LADY).  Account  of  the  Mutineers  of  the  'Bounty,' 
and  their  Descendants;  with  their  Settlements  in  Pitcairn  and  Norfolk 
Islands.  Illustrations.  Post  Svo.  12*. 

n  3 


LIST  OP  WORKS 


RELL  (Si»  CHAS.).     Familiar  Letters.     Portrait.     Pobt  8vo.     12*. 
C.).     Notices  of  the  Historic  Persons  buried  in 


the  Chupel  of  St  Peter  ad  Vineula,  In  the  Tower  of  London,  with  an 

account  ot  the  discovery  of  the  supposed  remains  of  Queen  Anne  Boleyn. 

Wiih  Illustration*.    Crown  8vo.    14*. 
BERTRAM  (JA8.  G.).    Harrest  of  the  Sea  :  an  Account  of  British 

Food  Fishes  including  Fisheries  and    Fibber  Folk.     Illustrations. 

Pest  Svo.    »«. 
BIBLE    COMMENTARY.     THE  OLD  TESTAMEKT.    EXPLANATORY 

•nd  CBITICAL     With  a  REVISION  of  the  TRANSLATION.    I'.y  BISHOPS 

•nd  CLERGY  of  the  ANGLICAN  CHURCH.    Edited  by  F.  C.  COOK, 


JYJ    A-,    VrailUll   VI    X^ACUVA*        V      ¥  Vl» 

_.    -     (EXODUS. 

™'   1-     (LEVITICUS. 

^       |  NUMBER*. 
I  DBUTEBOKOMY. 

,     T.    f  JOSHUA,   JITDOM,   RUTH, 
°'8-  "•     SAMUEL,     KINGS,     CHRO- 
111  •    STOLES,  EZRA,  NEHEMIAH, 
"«•       I  ESTHER. 

THI  NEW  1 

!  JOB. 
Vou  IV.  '  p|*"^§ 

'             EcCLBBUffrM. 

SONO  or  SOLOMON. 
Vol.  V.    (  UAIAH. 
20*.       I  JKRXMIAH. 

vur  fsss^ 

(  MINOR  P»OPHET». 
'ESTAMEBT.   4  VOLS.  Medium  Svo. 
/'ROMANS,     CORINTHIANS, 
1  GALATIANS,  PHILIPPIANS, 
Vol    TIT   J  EPHKSIANS,    COLOSSIANS, 
"]  THKSSALOKIAN?,    PHILE- 
1  M<>H,  PASTORAL  EPISTLES, 
V,  HEBREWS. 
(  ST  JAMES.  ST.  JOHN,  ST. 
Vol.  IV.   •>  PETER,  ST.  JUDE,  REVE- 

(  LATION. 

SHT'S    EDITION.      Abridged     and 

R,    M.A.,   Vicar    of    Bexley.    (To     be 
s.  I.  to  HI.     Crown  Svo.     7«.  6d.  each. 

{INTRODUCTION. 
ST.  MATTHEW. 
ST.  MARK. 
ST.  LUKE. 

.,  .    IT     (ST.  JOHN. 
Vo1'  "'    I  Acre. 
20». 
THE     STUDI 

Edited    by    JOHN    M.    FULLE 
completed  in  6  Volumes.)    Vol 

BIGG- WITHER  (T.  P.).   Pioneering  in  South  Brazil;  Three  Years 

of  Forest  and  Prairie  Life  in  the  Province  of  Parana.   Map  and  Illustra- 
tions.   2  vein.    Crown  Svo.    24t. 

BIRCH  (SAMroi,).     A  History  of  Ancient  Pottery  and  Porcelain  : 

Egyptian,  Assyrian,  Greek,  Roman,  and  Etruscan.     With   Coloured 
Plates  and  200  Illustrations.    Medium  Svo.    42*. 

BIRD  (ISABELLA).  Hawaiian  Archipelago;  or  Six  Months  among 
the  Palm  Groves,  Coral  Reefs,  and  Volcanoes  of  the  Sandwich  Islands. 
Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  7s.  6d. 

Fnbeaten  Tracks  in  Japan :   Travels  of  a  Lady  in  the 

interior,  inc'nding  Visits  to  the  Aborigines  of  Yczo  and  tie  Shrines  of 
Nikko  and  Ise.    With  Map  and  Illustrations.    2  Vols.    Crown  Svo.   24*. 

A  Ladj'sLife  in   the  Rocky  Mountains.    Illustrations. 

Po^t  fcvo.    10».  &1. 

BISSKT  (SiR  JOHN).  Sport  and  War  in  South  Africa  from  1834  to 
1867,  with  a  Narrative  of  the  Doke  of  Edinburgh's  Visit  With 
Map  and  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  lit. 

BLUNT  (LADY  AKHE).  The  Bedouins  of  the  Euphrates  Valley. 
With  some  account  of  the  Arabs  and  their  Horses.  With  Map  aud 
Illustrations.  2  Vols.  Crown  Svo.  24». 

A  Pilgrimage  to  Nejd,  the  Cradle  of  the  Arab  Race,  and 

a  Visit  to  the  Court  of  the  Arab  Emir.    With  Illustrations  from  the 
Anthur's  Drawirgs.    2  Vols.    PostSvo. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY. 


Bl  UNT  (REV.  J.  J.).    Undesigned  Coincidences  in  the  Writings  of 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  an  Argument  of  their  Veracity  Post  8vo.  6*. 
-  History  of  the  Christian   Church  in   the  First  Three 
Centuries.    Post  8vo.    6s. 

Parish  Priest ;  His  Duties,  Acquirement*,  and  Obliga- 


tions.   Post  8vo.    6s. 

University  Sermone.     Post  8vo.     6*. 


BOSWELL'S    Life   of    Samuel    Johnson,   LL.D.     Including  the 
Tour    to   the  Hebrides.       Edited  by  Mr.    CUOKKR.     Seventh  Edition. 
Portraits.    1  vol.    Medium  8vo.    12*. 
BRACE  (C.  L.)      Manual  of  Ethnology;  or  the  Races  of  the  Old 

World.     Post  8vo.    6s. 

BREWER  (REV.  J.  S.).     English  Studies.     New  Sources  of  English 

History.      CONTENTS.      Green's    History.      The    Koyal    Supremacy. 

Ha  field  Houpe      The  Stuarts.     Shakespeare.     II  >w  to  Study  Eng'ish 

Histny.    Ac  cient  London.    8vo. 

BOOK    OF    COMMON    PRAYER.      Illustrated    with   Coloured 

Borders,  Initial  Letters,  and  Woodcuts.    8vo.    18*. 

BORROW  (GEORGE).  Bible  in  Spain;  or  the  Journeys,  Adventures, 
and  Imprisonments  of  an  Englishman  in  an  Attempt  to  circulate  the 
Scriptures  in  the  Peninsula.  PostSvo.  5s. 

Gypsies   of   Spain ;   their  Manners,    Customs,    Re- 
ligion, and  Language.    With  Portrait.    Post  8vo.   5s. 

-  Lavengro  ;  The  Scholar — The  Gypsy — and  the  Priest. 
Post  8vo.    5*. 

-    Romany  Rye — a  Sequel  to  "Lavengro."  Post  8vo.   5#. 
WILD   WALES  :  ita   People,   Language,   and  Scenery. 
Post  STO.    5*. 

Romano  Lavo-Lil ;  Word  Book  of  the  Romany,  or 
English  Gypsy  Language;  with  Specimens  of  their  Poetry,  anil  an 
account  of  certain  Gypsyries.  Post  bvo.  10s.  6cJ. 

BRITISH  ASSOCIATION  REPORTS.    8vo. 

York  and  Oxford,  1831-32,  13s.  6rf.  Cheltenham,  1856,  1R». 


Cambridge,  1833,  12s. 
Edinburgh,  1834, 15*. 
Dublin,  1835,  13s.  6d. 
Bristol,  1836,  12s. 
Liverpool,  1837.  16s.  6 
Newcastle,  1838,  15s. 


Dublin,  1857,  15s. 
Leeds.  1858,  20*. 
Aberdeen,  1859, 15s. 
Oxford,  1860,25s. 
Manchester,  1861,  15s. 
Cambridge,  1862,  20s. 


Birmingham,  1839,  13s.  M.  Newcastle,  1863,  25*. 

Glasgow,  1840,  15s.  Bath,  1864,  18s. 

Plymouth,  1841,  13s.  6d.  I        Birmingham,  1865.  2?«. 
Manchester,  1842,  10s.  6d.  Nottingham.  1866,  24«. 


Cork,  1843,  12s. 
York,  1844,  20s. 
Cambridge,  1845,  12.'. 
Southampton,  1846, 15s. 
Oxford,  1847,  18s. 
Swansea,  1848, 9s. 
Birmingham,  1849, 10s. 
Edinburgh,  1850, 15s. 
Ipswich,  1851,  16s.  6rf. 
Belfast,  1852,  15a. 


Dundee,  1867, 
Norwich,  1868,  25*. 
Exeter,  1869,  2'2s. 
Liverpool,  1870,  18*. 
Edinburgh,  187 1,  16s. 
Brighton,  1872,  24j. 
Bradford,  1873,  25s. 
Belfast,  1874,  25>. 
Bristol,  1875,  25«. 
G lasso w.  IST 


Hull,  1853,  10s.  6d.  Plymouth,  1877,  24». 

Liverpool,  1864,  l£s.  l)ut>,in.  1S78,  24.< 

Glasgow,  1855,  15s.  i        Sheffield,  Ib79,  24s. 

BRUGSCH  (PROFESSOR).  A  History  of  Egypt,  under  the 
Pharaohs.  Derived  entirely  from  Monument*,  witli  a  Mflmoir  on  the 
Exodim  of  the  Israelites.  Translated  by  PHILIP  SMITH,  B.A.,  with 
new  preface  and  notes  by  the  author.  Mips  2  voU.  bvo. 


LIST  OF  WORKS 


BUN  BURY  (E.  H.).  A  History  of  Ancient  Geography,  among  the 
Greeks  and  Romans,  from  tli.-  Karliest  Ages  till  the  Fall  of  the  R'>nian 
Empire.  With  Index  mid  20  Maps.  2  Void.  8v«>.  42«. 

BURBIDGE  (P.  W.).     The  Gardens  of  the  Suu:  or  A  Naturalist's 

Journal  on  the  Mountains  and  in  the  Forests  and  Swamps  of  Borneo  and 
the  Sulu  Archipelago.    With  lllustrat inns.    Crown  8vo. 

BURCKHARDT'3  Cicerone;  or  Art  Guide  to  Painting  in  Italy. 

Translated  from  the  German  by  MBS.  A.  CIXHJOH.  New  Edition,  revised 

by  J.  A.  CBOWB.    Post  8vo.    6$. 
BURN    (CoL.).     Dictionary    of   Naval    and    Military    Technical 

Terms,  English  and  French— French  and  English.    Crown  8vo.    15». 

BUTTMANN'8     Lexilogus ;     a     Critical   Examination     of  the 

Meaning  of  numerous  Greek  Words,  chiefly  in  Homer  and  Heslod. 
By  Rev.  J.  R.  FIBHLAKC.    8vo.    12«. 
BUXTON  (CHARLKS).    Memoirs  of  Sir  Thomas  Powell  Buzton, 

Bart.    With  Selections  from  his  Correspondence.     Portrait.    Bvo.    Ifti. 
Popular  Edition,     Fcap.  8vo.    5». 

(SYDNEY  C.).     A   Handbook  to  the  Political  Questions 

of  the  Day  ;  with  the  Arguments  on  Either  Side.    8vo.     6*. 
BYLES    (SiR  JOHH).    Foundations  of  Religion  in  the  Mind  and 

Heart  of  Man.    PootSvo.    6s. 
BYRON'S  (Loan)  LIFE  AND  WORKS:— 

LIFE,  LETTERS,  AND  JOURNALS.     By  THOMAS  MOOBF.     Cabinet 

Edition.    Plates.    6  Vols.    Fcap.  8vo.     18*.;  or  One  Volume,  Portraits. 

Royal  8vo.,  7s.  6d. 

LIFE  AND    POETICAL    WORKS.    Popular  Edition.    Portraits. 

2  v'o's.     Rnyal  8vo.     15*. 

POETICAL  WORKS.  Library  Edition.  Portrait  6  Vol».  8vo.  45*. 
POETICAL  WORKS.  Cabinet  Edition.  Plates.  10  Vole.  12mo.  80s. 
POETICAL  WORKS.    Pocket  Ed.   8  Vols.    16mo.    In  a  case.   21s. 
POETICAL  WORKS.  Popular  Edition.   Plates.  Royal  8vo.  Is.  Qd. 
POETICAL  WORKS.     Pearl  Edition.      Crown  8vo.    2«.  6d. 
CHILDE  HAROLD.     With  80  Engravings.     Crown  8vo.     12s. 
CIIILDE  HAROLD.     16mo.     2«.  %d. 
CHILDE  HAROLD.     Vignettes.     16mo.    1«. 
CHILDE  HAROLD.     Portrait.    16mo.     6d. 
TALES  AND  POEMS.     16mo.    2«.  6d. 
MISCELLANEOUS.     2  Vols.     ICiuo.     5«. 
DRAMAS  AND  PLAYS.     2  Vols.     ICnio.     5«. 
DON  JUAN  AND  BEPPO.     2  Vols.    16mo.    5«. 
BEAUTIES.    Poetry  and  Prose.     Portrait    Fcap.    8vo.    3s.  6d. 
CAMPBELL    (LORD).     Lord    Chancellors   and   Keepers   of   the 
Great  Seal  of  England.    From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of  Lord 
Eldon  in  1838.      10  Vols.     Crown  8vo.    6*.  each. 

. Chief  Justices   of  England.    Prom  the  Norman 

Conquest  to  the  Death  of  Lord  Tentarden.  4  Vols.  Crown  8vo.  Bt.  each. 
Life  and   Letters  :   Based  on  his  Autobiography, 


Journals,  and   Correspondence.     Edited  by  his  daughter,  Mrs.   llar.i- 
castle.    2  Vols.    8vo. 

—  (Taos.)    Essay  on    English  Poetry.     With  Short 
Lives  of  the  British  Poets.    Post  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

CARNARVON    (LORD).      Portugal,    Gallicia,    and    the    Basque 
Provinces.    Post  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

The   Agamemnon  :     Translated   from    ^Eschylus. 

8m.  8vo.    6s. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY. 


CARNOTA  (CONDB  DA).  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Eventful  Career 
of  F.M.  the  Dnke  of  Saldinhi;  Soldier  and  S'atenman.  With 
Selections  from  hU  Correspondence.  2  Vols.  8vo.  32«. 

CAIITWRIGHT  (W.  C.).  The  Jesuits:  their  Cuutitution  and 
Teaching.  An  Historical  Sketch.  8vo.  9«. 

CAVALCASELLE'S  WORKS.     [See  CEOWE.] 

CESNOLA  (GEN.).  Cyprus;  its  Ancient  Cities,  Tomb?,  and  Tem- 
ples. Researches  and  Excavations  during  Ten  Years'  Residence  in  that 
Ibland.  With  400  Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.  60«. 

CHILD  (CHAPLIN).  Benedicite  ;  or,  Song  of  the  Three  Children  ; 
being  Illustrations  of  the  Power,  Beneficence,  and  Design  manifested 
by  the  Creator  in  his  Works.  Post  8vo.  6*. 

CHISHOLM  (Mrs.).  Perils  of  the  Polar  Seas;  True  Stories  of 
Arctic  Discovery  and  Adventure.  Illustrations.  Post  8vo.  6*. 

CHUR.TON  (ARCHDEACON).  Poetical  Remains,  Translations  and 
Imitations.  Portrait.  Post  8vo.  It.  6d. 

CLASSIC     PREACHERS    OF    THE     ENGLISH    CHUKCH. 

St.  James's  Lectures. 

-  1877,  DONNE,  by  Bishop  of  Durham  ;  BARROW,  by 
Prof.  Wace  :  SOUTH,  by  Dean  Lake;  BEVKRIDOE,  by  Rev.  W. 
R.  Clark;  WILSON,  by  Canon  Farrar;  BUTLER,  by  Dean  Goul- 
burn.  With  Introduction  by  J.  E.  Kempe.  Post  8vo.  7s.  Cd. 

1878,  BULL,  by  Kev.  \V.  Warburton  ;  HORSLEY,  by 
Bishop  of  Elv;  TAYLOR,  by  Canon  Barry;  SANDKIISOK,  by  Bishop 
<.f  Ueiry  ;  TiLLorsaN,  by  Rev.  W.  G.  Humphry;  AHDBKWKS,  by 
Rev.  H.  J.  North.  PostSvo.  7*.  6d. 

CLI  VE'S  (LoRD)  Life.    By  RJSV.  G.  R.  GLEIQ.     Post  8vo.    Zs.  6d. 

CLODE  (C.  M.).  Military  Forces  of  the  Crown  ;  their  Administra- 
tion and  Government.  2  Vols.  fcvo.  21«.  each. 

Administration  of  Justice  under  Military  and  Martial 
Law,  as  applicable  to  ihu  Army,  Navy,  Marine,  and  Auxiliary  Forces. 
8vo.  12s. 

COLERIDGE'S  (SAMUEL  TAYLOR)  Table-Talk.  Portrait.  12mo.  3s.6c7. 
COLONIAL  LIBRARY.     [See  Home  and  Colonial  Library.] 
COMPANIONS  FOR  THE  DEVOUT  LIFE.     A  Series  of  Lee- 


tares  on  well-known  Devotional  Woiks.     Crown  Svo.    6*. 


DKIMITATIONECHRIHTI.  Canon  Fa  rrar. 

PENr-BEg  OF    BLAISB    PASCAL.         DeaU 

Church. 
S.     FRANCOIS     DK     SAI.KS.        Dean 

Qoulburu. 
BAXTKB'S  SAINTS'  REST.     Archbishop 

of  Dublin. 
3.  AUGUSTINE'S  CONFESSIONS.    Bishop 

of  Deny. 
JEREMY  TAYLOR'H  HOLT  LIVING  AND 

DYING.    Rev.  Dr.  Humphry. 


THBOLOOIA 

Ashwell. 


GERMANIC  A.        Canon 

SOVRES     SPIBITUELLEB. 

Rev.  T.  T.  Carter. 
ANDKEWES*    DEVOTIONS.      Bishop  of 

E'y. 

CHKISTIAN  YBAR.      Cnnon  Barry. 
PARAOISS  LUST.    Rev.  E.  U.  Bicker- 

btftU. 

PILGRIM'S  PBOQRK^S.   Deinllowson 
PBAYEtt  BOOK.    Deau  Burgon. 


CONVOCATION  PRAYER-BOOK.     (See  Prajer-Book.) 

COOKE  (E.  W.).  Leaves  from  my  Sketch-Book.  Being  a  Selec- 
tion from  SkeUh  H  made  during  many  Tours.  With  Descriptive  Text. 
60  Plates.  2  Vois.  Small  tolio.  31*.  tid.  each. 

COOKERY  (MODERN  DOMESTIC).  Founded  on  Principles  of  Economy 
and  Practical  Knowledge.  By  a  Lady.  Woodcuts.  Fcap.  Svo.  5«. 


LIST  OF  WORK8 


CEABBE  (R«v.  GioBoi).     Life  and  Poetical  Works.    With  Ilia* 

tratlons.    Royal  8vo.     7i. 

CRAWFORD  &  BALCARRES  (Earl  of).    Etruscan  Inscription*. 

Analysed,  Translated,  and  Commented  upon.    8vo.    12*. 
CRIPPS  (WILFRED).  Old  English  Plate  :  J'cclesiaptical,  Decorative, 
and  Domestic,  iU  Makers  and  Marks.     With  a  Complete  Table  of  Date 
Letters,  Ac.    maturations.     Medium  Svo.    VI*. 

Old  French  Plate;   Furnieling  Tables  of  the  Paris  Date 

Letters,  and  Factimilei  of  Other  Marks.   With  Mustra'ioni.  8vo.  8j.6d. 

CROKER     (J.     W.).       Progressive     Geography     for    Children. 
ISmo.   !«.&*. 

Boswell's   Life   of  Johnson.      Including  the  Tour  to 
the  Hebrides.    Seventh  Edition.     Portraits.    8vo.    12«. 

-  Historical  Essay  on  the  Guillotine.     Kcap.  8vo.     !«. 
CROWE  AMD  CAVALCASELLE.     Lives  of  the    Early  Flemish 

Painters.    Woodcuts.     Post  8vo,  7».  M. ;  or  Large  Paper,  Svo,  15«. 

History   of    Painting  in  North  Italy,  from    14th    to 

16th   Century.     Derived  from  Researches  in  that  Country.    With  Il- 
lustrations.   2  VoU.    8vo.    42*. 

Life  and  Times  of   Titian,  with  some  Account  of  his 

Family,  chiefly  from  be*  and  unpublished  records.    With  Portrait  and 
Illustrations.    3  vols.    8vo.    42*. 

CUMM1NG  (R.  GORDON).    Five  Years  of  a  Hunter's  Life  in  the 

Far  Interior  of  South  Africa.    Woodcuts.     Post  8vo.  6*. 

CDNYNGHAME  (Sin  ARTHUR).    Travels  in  the  Eastern  Caucasus, 

on  the  Caspian   and  Blxck  Seas,  in  Daghestan   and  the  Frontiers  of 
Persia  and  Turkey.     With  Map  and  Illustrations.    Svo.     18*. 

CURTIUS'  (PROFESSOR)  Student's  Greek  Grammar,  for  the  Upper 
Forms.    Edited  by  Da.  Wx.  SMITH.    Post  Svo.    6*. 

-  Elucidations  of  the  above  Grammar.      Translated  by 
EVELVM  ABBOT.    Post  Svo.    7».  6d. 

—  Smaller   Greek   Grammar  for  the  Middle  and  Lower 
Forms.    Abridged  from  the  larger  work.    12mo.    3t.  6d. 

Accidence  of  the  Greek  Language.      Extracted  from 

the  above  work.    12mo.     2*.  61. 

-  Principles  of  Greek  Etymology.     Translated  by  A.  S. 
WILXINB,  M.A.,  and  E.  B.  ENGLAND,  M.A.    2  vols.    Svo.     15*.  each. 

-  The  Greek  Verb,  its  Structure  and  Development. 
Translated  by  A.  S.  WILKINB,  M.A.,  ani  E.  B.  ENGLAND,  M.A. 
8vo.  l*t. 


CURZON  (How.  RORERT).  Visits  «o  the  Monasteries  of  the  Levant. 

Illustrations.    Post  Svo.    It.  Set. 

CU8T  (GKRERAL).  Warriors  of  the  17th  Century— The  Thirty  Years' 
War.  2  Vols.  16*.  Civil  Wars  of  France  and  England.  2  Vols.  16*. 
Commanders  of  Fleets  and  Armies.  2  Vols.  18*. 

Annals  of  the  Wars — 18th  &  19th  Century. 
With  Maps.    9  Vola.    Post  Svo.    5«.  each. 

DAVY  (SiR  HUMPHRY).  Consolations  in  Travel;  or,  Last  Days 
of  a  Philosopher.  Woodcuts.  Fcap.  Svo.  3t.  6rf. 

-  Salmonia;    or,    Days     of    Fly     Fishing.      Woodcut*. 
Fcap.  Svo.    3.«.  6d. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY. 


DARWIN  (CHARLES)  WORKS  :— 

JOURNAL  OF  A  NATURALIST  DURING  A  VOYAGE  ROUND  THE 
WOBLD.  Crown  8vo.  9*. 

ORIGIN  OP  SPECIES  BT  MEANS  OF  NATURAL  SELECTION  ;  or,  the 
Preservation  of  Favoured  Kaees  in  the,  Struggle  for  Lite.  Woodcuts. 
Crown  8vo.  7t.  6d. 

VARIATION  OP  ANIMALS  AND  PLANTS  UNDER  DOMESTICATION. 
Woodcurs.  2  Vols.  Crowu  8vo.  18». 

DESCENT  OF  MAN,  AND  SELECTION  IN  RELATION  TO  SEX. 
Woodcuts.  Crowu  8vo.  9«. 

EXPRESSIONS  OF  THE  EMOTIONS  IN  MAN  AND  ANIMALS.     With 

Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     12*. 

VARIOUS  CONTRIVANCES  BT  WHICH  ORCHIDS  ARE  FERTILIZED 
BY  INSECTS.  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  9*. 

MOVEMENTS  AND  HABITS   OF    CLIMBING   PLANTS.      Woodcuts, 

Crowu  8vo.    6». 

INSECTIVOROUS  PLANTS.     Woodcuts.     Crown  8vo.     14& 

EFFECTS  OF  CROSS  AND  SELF- FERTILIZATION  IN  THE  VEGETABLE 
KINGDOM.  Crown  bvo.  Us. 

DIFFERENT    FORMS   OF    FLOWERS   ON    PLANTS    OF   THE    SAME 

SPECIES.    Crown  8vo.    1C*.  <od. 
THE  POWER  OF  MOVEMENT  IN   PLANTS.     Woodcuts.    Cr.  8vo. 

LIFE  OF  ERASMUS  DARWIS.      With  a  Study  of  his  Works  by 

EttXKsr  KBAUBK.    Portrait.    Crown  8vo.    7».  6d. 

FACTS  AND  ARGUMENTS  FOR  DARWIN.  By  FRITZ  MULLER. 
Translated  by  W.  8.  DALLAS.  Woodcuts.  Post  8vo.  6*. 

DE  COSSON  (B.  A.).  The  Cradle  of  the  Blue  Nile;  a  Journey 
through  Abyssinia  and  Soudan,  and  a  Residence  at  the  Court  of  King 
John  of  Ethiopia.  Map  and  Illustrations.  2  vols.  PostSvo.  2U. 

DENNIS  (GEORGE).  The  Cities  and  Cemeteries  of  Etrnria.  A 
new  Edition,  revised,  recording  nil  the  latest  Discoveries.  With  20 
Plans  and. 200  Illustrations.  2  vols.  MediU'u  8vo.  4'2g. 

DENT  (EMMA).  Annals  of  Winchcombe  and  Sudeley.  With  120 
Porti aim,  Plates  and  Woodcuts.  4to.  42«. 

DERBY  (EARL  OF).  Iliad  of  Homer  rendered  into  English 
lilauk  Verse.  With  Portrait.  2  Vols.  Post  8vo.  10«. 

DERRY  (BISHOP  OF}.  Witness  of  the  Psalms  to  Christ  and  Chris- 
tianity. The  Hampton  Lectures  for  1876.  8vo.  Us. 

DEUTSCH  (EMANUEL).  Talmud,  Islam,  The  Targums  and  other 
Literary  Kemains.  With  a  briet  Memoir.  8vo.  l'2». 

DILKE  (SiR  C.  W.).  Papers  of  a  Critic.  Selected  from  the 
Writing*  of  the  late  CHAS.  WKNIWOKTU  DILKB.  Wiih  a  Biographi- 
cal Sketch.  2  Vols.  8vo.  24s. 

DOG-BREAKING,  with  0<lds  and  Ends  for  those  who  love  the 

Dog    and    Gnn.     By    (JEM.     HUTCHINSON.      With    40   Illustrations. 

Ctown  bvo.      "a.  6d. 
DOMESTIC   MODERN   COOKERY.      Founded  on  Principles  of 

Economy  and  Practical  Knowledge,  and  adapted  for  Private  Families. 

Woodcuts.    Fcap.  8vo.    DJ. 


10 


LIST  OF   WORKS 


DOUGLAS'S   (SiR   HOWARD)   Theory  and   Practice  of  Gunnery. 

Platen.     8»o.    21t. 

(WM.)  Horse-Shoeing;  As  it  Is,  and  As  it  Should  be. 

Illustrations.    Post  8vo.    7*.  64. 
DRAKE'S    (SiR  FRANCIS)  Life,  Voyages,  and  Exploits,  by  Sea  and 

Land.    By  JOB*  BABBOW.    Pout  8vo.    2». 
DRINK  WATER    (JoHH).      History   of   the   Siege   of  Gibraltar, 

1779-1783.    With  a  Description  and  Account  of  that  Garrison  from  the 

Earliest  Periods.    Post  8vo.    2». 
DUCANGE'S  MKDLSVAL  LATIN-ENGLISH  DICTIOHART.    Re-arranged 

and  Edited,  in  accordance  with  the  mode'n  Sciecce  of  Philology,  by  Rev. 

E.  A.  DAYMAN  andJ.  II.  ilxssF.LS.    Small 4to.  [Jn  f  reparation. 

DU  CHAILLU  (PAUL  B.).     EQUATORIAL  AFRICA,  with  Accounts 

of  the  Gorilla,  the    Nest-building    Ape,  Chimpanzee,  Crocodile,  die. 
Illustrations.    8vo.     21«. 

—  Journey  to  Aehango  Land ;  and  Further  Pene- 
tration into  Equatorial  Africa.    Illustrations    8vo.    21«. 

DUFFERIN  (LORD).  Letters  from  High  Latitudes;  a  Yacht 
Voyage  to  Iceland,  Jan  Mayen,  and  Spitrbergen.  Woodcuta,  Post 
8vo.  It.  6d 

-    Speeches    and   Addresses,    Political    and    Literary, 
delivered  m  the  Houee  of  Lords,  in  Canada,  and  e'sewhere.    fcvo. 

DUNCAiN  (MAJOR.  History  of  the  Royal  Artillery.  Com- 
piled from  the  Original  Records.  Portraits.  2  Vols  8*0.  13*. 

Euglith  in  Spain;  or,  The  Story  of  ibe  War  of  Suc- 
cession. 1824-1840.  Compiled  from  the  Reports  of  the  brituh  Com- 
m.ksioners.  With  Illustrations.  8vo.  It;. 

EAST  LAKE  (SiR  CHARLES).  Contributions  to  the  Literature  cf 
the  Fine  Arts.  With  Memoir  of  the  Author,  and  Selections  from  his 
Correspondence.  By  LAI  Y  EABTI.AKK.  2  Vols.  8vo.  24«. 

EDWARDS  (W.  H.).     Voyage  up  the  River  Amazon,  including  a 

Visit  to  Para.     Post  8vo.    Zi. 

EIGHT  MONTHS  AT  ROME,  during  the  Vatican  Council,  with 
a  Daily  Account  of  the  Proceedings.  By  POMPOHIO  LETO.  Trans- 
lated from  the  Original.  8vo.  lit. 

ELDON'S  (LoRD)  Public  and  Private  Life,  with  Selections  from 
his  Correspondence  and  Diaries.  By  HORACE  Twiss.  Portrait.  2 
Vols.  PostSvo.  21*. 

ELGIN   (LORD).   Letters    and    Journals.      Edited  by  THEODORE 

WALBOSD.     With  Preface  by  Dean  Stanley.    8vo.  Us. 

ELLESMERE    (LORD).     Two    Sieges    of  Vienna  by  the  Turks. 

Translated  from  the  German.    Post  870.     2s. 

ELLIS  (W.).  Madagascar  Revisited.  Setting  forth  the  Perse- 
cutions and  Heroic  Sufferings  of  the  Native  Christians.  Illustrations. 

favo.     Vis. 

Memoir.       By    His    SON.       With   his   Character  and 
Work.    By  RJEV.  HENBY  ALLOK,  D.D.    Portrait.    6vo.    1C».  6d. 
—  (RoBiusoH)  Poems  aiid  Fragments  of  Catullus.    16mo.  5s. 

ttLPHlNSTONE  (Hoa.  MOUNTSTUART).  History  of  India— the 
Hindoo  and  Mahomedan  Periods.  Edited  by  PEOFESSOR  COIVELL. 
Map.  8vo.  18*. 

—  (H.  W.).     Patterns   for  Turning  ;     Comprising 
Elliptical  and  other  Figures  cut  on  the  Lathe  without  the  use  ot  any 
Ornamental  Chuck.    With  70  Illustrations.    Small  4to.    i:,t. 

ELTON  (CAPT.)  and  H.  B.  CoTTERILL.  Adventures  and 
Discoveries  Among  the  Lukes  and  Mountains  of  Eastern  and  Central 
Africa.  With  Map  and  Illustrations.  8vo.  21s. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.  II 


ENGLAND.      [See  ARTHUR,  CROKER,  HUME,  MARKHAM,  SMITH, 

and  STANHOPE. J 
ESSAYS   ON    CATHEDRALS.     Edited,   with    an  Introduction. 

By  DEAN  UOWSOK.    8vo.    12». 

FERGUSSON    (JAMES).    History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries 
from  the  Earliest  Times.  With  1,600  Illustration*.  4  Vols,  Medium  8vo. 
Vol.  I.  &  II.  Ancient  and  Mediaeval.     63s. 
Vol.  III.  Indian  &  Eastern.  42s.    Vol.  IV .  Modern.  31s.  6d. 

—  Rude  Stone  Monuments  in  all  Countries;  their  Age 
and  Uses.     With  230  Illustrations.     Medium  8vo.  2»s. 

Holy   Sepulchre  and   the  Temple  at  Jerusalem. 


Woodcuts.    8vo.    7*.  6rf. 

-  Temples  of  the    Jews   and   other   buildings  in 
the  Haram  Area  at  Jerusalem.     With  Illustrations.    4 to.     42*. 
FLEMING  (PROFESSOR).     Student's  Maaual  of  Moral  Philosophy. 

With  Quotations  and  References.    Post  Svo.    7*.  6J. 
FLOWER  GARDEN.    By  REV.  THOS.  JAMES.    Fcap.  8ro.    1*. 

FORBES  (CAPT.  C.  J.   F.   S.)     British   Burma  and  its  People; 
sketches  of  Native  Manners,  Customs,  and  Heligion.     Cr.  8vo.   1C*.  6d. 
FORD  (RICHARD).    Gatherings  from  Spain.     Post  Svo.     3s.  Qd, 

FORSYTH  (WILLIAM).  Hortensius;  an  Historical  Essay  on  the 
Office  and  Duties  of  an  Ad  vocHte.  Illustrating,  fcvo.  7s.  Qd. 

—  Novels    and    Novelists    of   the  18th  Century,  in 
Illustration  of  the  Manners  and  Morals  of  ihe  Age.    Post  8vo.    10».  6d. 

FOR3TER  (JOHN).  The  Early  Life  of  Jonathan  Swift.  1667-1711. 
With  Portrait  8vo.  15*. 

FRANCE  (HISTORY  OF).  [See  JERMS— MARK.HAM — SMITH — Stu- 
dents'— TOCQUEVILLE.] 

FRENCH  IN  ALG1EK8;  The  Soldier  of  the  Foreign  Legion— 
and  the  Prisoners  ef  Abd-el-Kadir.  Translated  by  Lady  DUFF  GORDOB. 
PostSvo.  2*. 

FRERK  (SIR  BARTLE).    Indian  Missions.    Small  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

-  Eastern  Africa  as  a  Field  for  Missionary  Labour.     With 
Map.    Crown  Svo.    5*. 

-  Bengal     Famine.     How    it  will  be  Met  and  How    to 
Prevent  Future  Famines  in  India.    With  Maps.    Crown  Svo.      5*. 

GALTON    (F.).     Art  of  Travel ;  or,  Hints  on  the  Shifts  and  Con- 
trivances available  in  Wild  Countries.     Woodcuts.    Post  Svo.  7*.  6d. 
GEOGRAPHY.     [See  BUNBURY — CHOKER — SMITH — STUDENTS'.] 
GEOGRAPHICAL  SOCIETY'S  JOURNAL.    (Publialied  Yearly.) 

GEORGE  (ERNEST).  The  Mosel ;  a  Series  of  Twenty  Etchings,  with 

Descriptive  Letterpress.    Imperial  4to.    42*. 

Loire   and    South   of  f  ranee ;    a    Series  of   Twenty 

Etchings,  with  Descriptive  Text.    Folio.     42«. 
GERMANY  (HISTORY  OF).     [See  MAKKHAM.] 
GIBBON   (EDWARD).     History   of  the   Decline   and   Fall   of  the 

Koman  Empire.      Edited   by  MILMAN,   GUIZOT,  and  Dr.  WM.  SMITH. 

Maps.    8  Vols.   Svo.    60*. 

—  The  Student's  Edition ;  an  Epitome  of  the  above 
work,  incorporating  the  Besearches  of  Recent  Commentators.  By  Dr. 
WM.  SMITH.  Woodcuts.  Post  Svo.  7*.  6d. 


12 


LIST  OF  WORKS 


GIPFARD  (EDWARD).     Deeds  of  Naval  Daring;   or,  Anecdote*  of 

the  British  Navy.    Fcap.  8vo.    St.  6d. 
GILL    (CAPT.    WILLIAM),   R.  E.        The   Fiver   of    Oolden   Sand. 

Narrative  of  a  .lourne?  through  China  to  Bunnah      With  a  Preface  by 

Col.  H.  Yule,  (J.B.    Maps  ana  Illustrations.    2  Vols.     8vo.    80*. 
(Mas.).     Six  Months  in  Ascension.     An  Unscientific   Ac- 

c->nnt  of  a  Scieniifi'!  Exped'Hon.    Map.    Crown  STO.    9«. 
GLADSTONE    (W.  E.).     Rome  and   the    Newest  Fashions    in 

Religion.    Three  Tracts.    8vo.    7».  6d. 

Gleanings  of  Past  Years,  1843-78.    7  vola.     Small 

8vo.  2».  ft',  each.  I  The  Throne,  the  Prince  f-on^ort,  the  Ctbinet  and 
Constitution.  II.  1'ers -nul  and  L'terary.  111.  UiNtoricul  and  Specu- 
lative. IV.  Foreign.  V.  and  VI.  Ecclesiastical.  VII.  Miscellaneous. 

GLEIG  (G.  R-).     Campaigns  of  the  British  Army  at  Washington 
and  New  Orleans.     Post  8vo.    2/. 

-  Story  of  the  Battle  of  Waterloo.     Post  8vo.     3*.  6d. 

—  Narrative  of  Sale's  Brigade  in  Afghanistan.    Post  8vo.  2«. 
—  Life  of  Lord  Clive.     Post  8vo.     3*.  6rf. 

—  Sir  Thomas  Munro.     Post  8vo.    8*.  6rf. 
GLYNNE    (SiR   STEPHEN  R.).     Notes   on  the  Churches  of  Kent. 

With  Preface  by  W.  H.  Gladstone,  M.P.    Illustrations.    8vo.     12*. 
GOLDSMITH'S  (OLIVER)  Works.     Edited  with  Notes  by  PETBB 

CUSHINOHAM.     Vignettes.    4  Vols.    8vo.    80*. 
GOMM  (FIKLD-MAKSHAL  SIR  Wn.   M.),  Commander-in-Chief  in 

India,  Cunstahle  of  the  Tower,  Hnd  Colorel  of  the  t'oldstream  Gunrds, 

1784— 1S79.     His  Life,  Letiers,  and  Journals.     Kdited  by  F.  C.  Carr 

Gomm.    With  Portrait.    8vo. 

GORDON  (Sis  ALEX.).     Sketches  of  German  Life,  and  Scenes 

from  the  War  of  Liberation.    Post  8vo.    St.  6d. 

-  (LADT    DDFK)  Amber- Witch :    A  Trial    for   Witch- 

craft.     Post  8vo.    2*. 

French    in   Algiers.      1.  The  Soldier  of  the  Foreign 
Legion.    2.  The  Prisoners  of  Abd-el-Kadir.    Post  STO.    2*. 
GRAMMARS.     [See  CURTIUS  ;   HALL;    HUTTOS;   KINO  EDWARD; 
LKATHES;  MAETZKER;  MATTHI.K;  SMITH] 

GREECE  (HISTORY  or).    [See  GROTK— SMITH — Student*'.] 
GROTE'S  (GKOROB)  WORKS:— 

HISTORY  OF  GREECE.     From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  close 
of  the  generation  contemporary  with  the  Death  of  Alexander  the  Great. 
Library    Edition.     Portrait,    Maps,  and    Plans.     10  Vols.    8vo.     120*. 
Cabinet  Edition.     Portrait  and  Plans.   12  Vols.     Post  8vo.  6*.  each. 
PLATO,  and  other  Companions  of  Socrates.     3  Vols.   8vo.    45*. 
ARISTOTLB.     With  additional  Essays.     8vo.    18*. 
MIKOR  WORKS.      Portrait.    8ro.    14*. 
LETTERS  ON  SWITZERLAND  IN  1847.     6*. 
PERSONAL  LIFE.     Portrait.     8vo.     12*. 

GROTE  (MRS.).     A  Sketch.    By  LADY  EASTLAKK.    Crswn  8vo.    6s. 
HALL'S    (T.   D.)    School    Manual  of  English  Grammar.     With 
Copious  Exercises.     12m o.    3*.  61. 

-  Manual  of  Entlish  C  imposition.    With  Copious  Illustra- 
tions aud  Practical  Exercise-i.    12mo.    3*.  6<J. 

-  Primary   English    Grammar    for    Elementary   Schools. 
Based  on  the  larger  work.    I6mo.    If. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.   MURRAY.  13 

HALL'S  (T.  D.)—  continued. 

Child's  First  Latia  Book,  comprising  a  full  Practice  of 

Nouns,  Pronouns,  and  Adjectives,  with  the  Active  Verbs.    16mo     •'« 

HALLAM'8  (HENRY)  WORKS  :— 

THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND,  from  the  Acces- 
sion of  Henry  the  Seventh  to  the  Death  of  George  the  Second.  Library 
EdMrm,  3  Vols.  8vo.  30*.  Cabinet  Edition,  3  Vols.  Post  8vo.  12*.  &(». 
tieni's  Edition,  Host  8vo.  It.  6d. 

HISTORY    OP    EUROPE   DURING   THE    MIDDLE   AGHS.    Library 

Edition,  3  Vols.  8vo.  30*.  Cabinet  Edition,  3  Vols.  Post  8vo.  12s. 
Student's  Edition,  Post  8vo.  7s.  6'i. 

LITERARY  HISTORY  OP  EUROPE  DURING  THE  15in,  16TH,  AND 
17TH  CENTUBIES.  Library  Edition,  3  Vols.  8vo.  36*.  Cabinet  Edition 
4  Vols.  Post  8vo.  16*. 

HALLAM'S  (ARTHUR)  Literary  Remains;  in  Verse  and  Proae. 
Portrait.  Fcap.  8vo.  3*.  fid. 

HAMILTON  (Gun.  SIR  F.  W.).  History  of  the  Grenadier  Guard*. 
From  Original  Documents.  &c.  With  Illustrations.  3  Vols.  8vo.  £!». 

(ANDREW).  Rheinsberg  :  Memorials  of  Frederick  tlie 

Great  and  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia.  2  Vols.  Crown  8vo.  21*. 

HART'S  ARMY  LIST.    (Published  Quarterly  and  Annually.) 

HATCH  (W.  M.).  The  Moral  Philosophy  of  Aristotle,  con- 
sisting of  a  translation  of  the  Nichomachean  Ethics,  and  of  the  Para- 
phrase attributed  to  Andronicus,  with  an  Introductory  Analysis  of  each 
book.  8vo.  IS*. 

KATHERLEY  (LORD).  The  Continuity  of  Scripture,  as  Declared 
by  the  Testimony  of  our  Lord  and  of  (he  Evangelists  and  Apostles 
8vo.  6s.  Popular  Edition.  Post  8vo.  2».  6d. 

HAY  (SiR  J.  H.  DRUMMOND).     Western  Barbary,  its  Wild  Tribes 

and  Savage  Animals.     Post  Svo.    2». 
HAYWAKD  (A.).    Sketches  of  Eminent  Statesmen  and  Writers, 

with  other  Essays.  Reprinted  from  the  "  Quarterly  Review,"  with 
Additions  and  Correctic  n«.  Contents:  Tiiiers,  Bismarck,  Cavonr, 
Metternich,  Montalerabert,  M'lbournc,  W«resley,  Byron  and  Tenny- 
son, Venire,  St.  Simon,  Sevigne",  Du  UeffdU'l,  Holland  Houi-e,  Straw- 
berry Hil'.  2  Vo's.  *vo. 

HEAD'S  (SiR  FRANCIS)  WORKS  :— 

THE  ROYAL  ENGINEER.     Illustrations.     8vo.  12s. 
LIFE  OP  SIR  JOHN  BURGOYNE.     Post  8vo.     Is. 
RAPID  JOURNEYS  ACROSS  THK  PAMPAS.     Post  Svo.     2«. 
BUBBLES  FROM  THK  BRUNNEN  OF  NASSAU.     Illustrations.     Post 

8vo.    It.  6d. 
STOKERS  AND  POKERS  ;   or,   the  London  and  North  Western 

Railway.     Post  8vo.    2*. 

HEBER'S  (BISHOP)  Journals  in  India.     2  Vols.     Post  Svo.     7«. 
—  Poetical  Works.     Portrait.     Fcap.  8ro.     3*.  Qd. 

. Hymns  adapted  to  the  Church  Service.     16mo.     1«.  6d. 

HERODOTUS.  A  New  English  Version.  Edited,  with  Notes 
and  Essays,  Historical,  Ethnographical,  and  Geographical,  by  CANON 
RAWLINSON,  SIB  H.  RA.WLINSON  and  SIB  J.  G.  WILKINSON.  Maps  and 
Woodcuts.  4  Vols.  Svo.  48*. 

HERRIES  (Ri.  HON.  JOHN).  Memoir  of  his  Public  Life  during 
the  Reigns  of  George  III.  and  IV7.,  William  IV.,  and  Queen  Victoria, 
Founded  rn  his  Letters  and  other  Unpublished  Documents.  Hy  Uig 
son,  Edward  Herrius,  C.B.  2  vols.  8vo. 

HERSCHEL'S  (CAROLINE)  Memoir  and  Correspondence.  By 
MBS.  JOHN  HEBSCIIKL.  With  Portraits.  Crown  Svo.  It.  <  .1. 


14 


L1HT  OK   WOKKS 


FOREIGN  HANDBOOKS. 
HAND-BOOK— TRAVEL-TALK.   English,  French,  German,  and 

Italian.    18mo.    3».  M. 

-  HOLLAND  AND  BELGIUM.     Map  and  Plans. 
Post  8vo.     fa. 

-    NORTH     GERMANY     and     THE    RHINE,— 

The  Black  Forest,  the  Hartz,  TliUrinperwald.  Saxon  Switzerland, 
Rlli-en,  the  Giant  Mountains,  Taunus,  Odenwald,  Klass,  and  Lotu- 
ringen.  Map  and  Plans.  Post  8vo.  10«. 

SOUTH     GERMANY,  — Wurtemburg,     Bavaria, 


Austria,  Styria,  Salzburg,  the  Alps,  Tyrol,  Hungary,  and  the  Danube, 
from  Ulm  to  the  Black  Sea.   Maps  and  Plan*.  Poet  8vo.  10» 

PAINTING.  German,  Flemish,  and  Dutch  Schools. 


Illustrations.  2  Vols.   Post  8vo.   24*. 

LIVES  AND   WOKKS   OF   EARLY  FLEMISH 


Painters.    Illustrations.    Post  8vo.    7».  M. 

SWITZERLAND,    Alps  of  Savoy,  and  Piedmont. 


In  Two  Parts.     Maps  and  Plans.     Post  8vo.     10«. 

FRANCE,  Part  I.  Normandy,  Brittany,  the  French 


Alps,  the  Loire,  Seine,  Garonne,  and  Pyrenees.      Maps  and  Plans. 
Post  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Part  II.    Central  France,  Anvergne,  the 


Cevennes,  Burpnndy,  the  Rhone  and  Saone,  Provence,  Niraes,  Arle«, 
Marseilles,  the  French  Alps,  Alsace,  Lorraine,  Champagne,  &c.  Map* 
and  Plans.  Post  8vo.  7*.  M. 

MEDITERRANEAN—  its  Principal  Islands,  Cities, 


Seaports,  Harbours,  and  Border  Lands.    For  travellers  and  yachtsmen. 
Maps  and  Plans.    Post  8vo. 

ALGERIA    AND   TUNIS.     Algiers,   Constantino, 


3*.  6d. 


Oran,  the  Atlas  Range.     Maps  and  Plans.    Post  8vo.     10«. 

PARIS,  and  its  Environs.     Maps  and  Plans.    16mo. 

SPAIN,  Madrid,  The  Castiles,  The  Basque  Provinces, 

Leon,  The  Asturias,  Galicia,  Estremadura,  Andalusia,  Konda,  Oranada, 
Murcia,  Valencia,  Catalonia,  Aragon,  Nararre,  The  Balearic  Islands, 
<fcc.  &c.  Maps  and  Plans.  Post  8vo.  2r«. 

PORTUGAL,    LISBOH,   Porto,   Cintra,  Mafra,  fee. 


Map  and  Plan.     Post  8vo.    12«. 

NORTH    ITALY,     Turin,    Milan,  Cremona,    the 


Italian  Lukes,  Bergamo,  Brescia,  Verona,  Mantua,  Vicenza,  Padua, 
Ferrara,  Bologna,  Ravenna,  Rimini,  Piacenza,  Genoa,  the  Riviera, 
Venice,  Parma,  Modena,  and  Romagna.  Maps  and  Plans.  PostSvo.  10«. 


Marches, Umbria,  &c.     Maps  and  Plans.     PostSvo.  10*. 

ROME    AND  ITS    EHVIEONS.       Majs    and    Plans. 


Post  8vo. 


SOUTH  ITALY,   Naples,  Pompeii,  Herculaneum, 

and  Vesuvius.    Maps  aud  Plans.    Post  8vo.    10*. 

PAINTING.    The  Italian   Schools.     Illustrations. 


2  Vols.    Post  8vo.    30». 

LIVES  OF  ITALIAN  PAINTERS,  FROM  CIMABUE 

to   BASSANO.    By  Mrs.  JAMMOH.     Portraits.    Post  8vo.    12*. 

NORWAY,  Christiania,  Bergen,  Trondhjem.   The 


Fjelds  and  Fjords.    Maps  and  Plans.    Poht  8vo.    9». 

SWEDEN,   Stockholm,  Upsala,    Gothenburg,   the 


Shores  of  the  Baltic,  &c.    Maps  and  Plan.    Post  8vo.    6s. 


PUBLISHED   BY   MR.  MURRAY.  15 

HANDBOOK— DENMARK,  Sleswig,  Holstein.  Copenhagen,  Jut- 
land, Icelanl.    Maps  and  Plans.    PostSvo     6». 

-   RUSSIA,  ST.  PETERSBURG,   Moscow,   POLAND,  and 
FINLAND.     Maps  and  Plans.    Post  Svo.     18*. 

GREECE,  the  Ionian    Islands,  Continental  Greece, 


Athens,  the  Peloponnesus,  the  Islands  of   the  ^Egean  Sea.  Albania, 
Ttiessaly,  and  Macedonia.     Maps,  Plans,  and  Vi^ws.     Post  8vo.     15*. 

TURKEY   IN   ASIA— CONSTANTINOPLE,    the    Bos- 


phorus,  Dardanelles,  Bronsa,  Plain  of  Troy,  Crete,  Cyprus,  Smyrna, 
Ephesus,  the  Seven  Churches,  Coasts  of  the  Black  Sea,  Armenia, 
Euphrates  Valley,  Route  to  India,  &c.  Maps  and  Plans.  PostSvo.  15*. 
EGYPT,  including  Descriptions  of  the  Course  of 


the  Nile  through  E^ypt  and  Nubia,  Alexandria,  Cairo,  and  Thebes,  th« 
Suez  Canal,  the  Pyramids,  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  the  Oases,  the 
Fyoom,  &c.  In  Two  Parts.  Maps  and  Plans.  Post  Svo.  15*. 

HOLY   LAND — STRIA,   PALESTINE,  Peninsula    of 


Sinai.  Edom,  Syrian  Deserts, Petra,  Damascus  ;  and  Palmyra.  Maps 
and  Plans.  PostSvo.  20s.  *.*  Travelling  Map  of  Palestine.  In  a 
case.  12*. 

INDIA.      Maps  and    Plans.      Post  8vo.      Part  I. 


BOMBAY,  12s.    Part  II.  MADRAS,  15*. 


ENGLISH    HANDBOOKS. 

HAND-BOOK— ENGLAND  AND  WALES.  An  Alphabetical 
Hand-Book.  Condensed  into  One  Volume  for  the  Use  of  Travellers. 
W  ith  a  Map.  Pout  8vo.  10*. 

-  MODERN    LONDON.    Maps  and    Plans.      16mo. 

3*.  GtL 

-  ENVIRONS  OF  LONDON  within    a  circuit  of  20 

mile''.     2  Vols.    Crown  Svo.     2U. 

ST.    PAUL'S    CATHEDRAL.      20    Illustration*. 


Crown  Svo     10*.  6<<. 

EASTERN  COUNTIES,  Chelmsford,  Harwich,  Col- 


chester,  Maldon,  Cambridge,  Ely,  Newmarket,  Bury  St.  Edmunds, 
Ipswich,  Woodbrldge,  Feiixstowe,  Lowestoft,  Norwich,  Yarmouth, 
Cromer,  &c.  Map  and  Plans.  Post  8vo.  12* 

CATHEDRALS  of  Oxford,  Peterborough,  Norwich, 


Ely,  and  Lincoln.     With  90  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.     18*. 

KENT,    Canterbury,   Dover,   Ramogate,  Pheerness, 


Rochester,  Chatham,  Woolwich.     Maps  and  Pl»ns.     PostSvo.    7*.  6d. 
SUSSEX,  Brighton.  Chlchester,  Worthing,  Hastings, 


Lewes,  Arunde!,  &c.     Maps  and  Plans.     PostSvo.     6*. 

SURREY  AND  HANTS,  Kingston,  Croydon,  Rei- 


£ate,  Guildford,  Dorking,  Boxhill,  Winchester,  Southampton,  He* 
Forest,  Portsmouth,  ISLK  OF  WIGHT,  &o.  Maps  and  Plans.  Post  Svo. 
10*. 

BERKS,   BUCKS,   AND    OXON,  Windsor,   Eton, 


Beading,  Aylesbury,  Uxbridge,  Wycombe,  Henley,  the  City  and  Uni- 
versity of  Oxford.  Blenheim,  and  the  Descent  of  the  Thames.  Maps 
and  Plans.  Post  Svo. 

-  WILTS,  DORSET,   AND   SOMERSET,  Salisbury, 
Chippeuham,  Weymouth,  Sherborne,  Wells,   Bath,  Bristol,  Taunton, 
&c.     Map.     Post  Svo.    10*. 

-  DEVON,    Exeter,   Ilfracombe,    Linton,   Sidmouth, 
Dawlish,  Teignmouth,  Plymouth,  Devonport,  Torquay.  Maps  and  Plans, 
Post  Svo.    7*.  6d. 


18  LIST  OP  WORKS 


HAND-BOOK — CORNWALL,  Launceston,  Penzance,  Falmouth, 

the  Lizard.  Land's  End,  Ac.     Maps.      Poet  STO.    6*. 

CATHEDRALS  of  Winchester,   Salisbury,   Exeter, 

Wells,  Ohichester.  Rochester.  Canterbury,  and  St.  Album.      With  130 
Illustrations.     2  Yols.    Cr.  8vo.  36*.     St.  A  Ibaus  separately ,cr.  8vo. 

GLOUCESTER,  HEREFORD,  AND  WORCESTER, 


Clrenceater,  Chelteubam.  Stroud,  Tewkesbtiry,  Leominster,  Rose,  Mal- 
vern,  Kidderminster,  Dudley,  Bromsgrove,  Evesham.   Map.    PoatSvo. 

CATHEDRALS  of  Bristol,  Gloucester,   Hereford, 


Worcester.and  Liobfield.  With  60  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.    16*. 

NORTH  WALES,  Bangor,  Carnarvon,  Beaumaris, 


Snowdon,  Llauberis,  Dolgelly,  Cader  Idris,  (Jouway,  <tc.    Map.    Post 
8vo.    Is. 

SOUTH    WALES,   Monmouth,    Llandaff,   Merthyr, 


Vale  of  Neath,  Pembroke,  Carmarthen,  Tenby,  Swansea,  The  Wye,  Ac. 
Map.    Post  8vo.    7a. 

CATHEDRALS     OF    BANGOR.    ST.    ASAPH, 


LJaudaff,  and  St.  David's.    With  Illustrations.    Poet  8vo.    15*. 

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE     AND      RUTLAND— 


Northampton,  Peterborough,  Towcestwr,  Daventry,  Market  Har- 
borongh,  Kettering,  Wallingboioagh,  Tbrapston,  Siamfoid,  Uppiug- 
ham,  Oakham.  Maps.  PostSvo.  7*.  6d. 

DERBY,    NOTTS,    LEICESTER,     STAFFORD, 


Matlock,  Bakewell,  Chatsworth,  The  Peak.  Buzton,  Hardwick,  Dove 
Dkle,  Ashborne.  Southwell,  Mansfield,  Retford,  Burton,  lielvoir,  Melton 
Mowbray,  Wolverhampton,  Lichfield,  Walsall,  Tamworth.  Map. 
Post  Svo.  9*. 


low,    Bridgnorth.    Oswestry,    Chester,    Crewe,    Alderley,    Stockport, 
Birkenhead.    Maps  and  Plans.    Poet  bvo.    ft*. 

LANCASHIRE,     Warrington,    Bury,    Manchester, 


Liverpool,  Burnley,  Clitheroe,  Bolton,  Blackburn,  WigaK,  Preston, 
Rochdale,  Lancaster,  South  port,  Blackpool,  &c.  Maps  and  Plans. 
Post  8vo.  7«.  6d. 

YORKSHIRE,  Doncaster,   Hull,  Selhy,   Beverley, 


Scarborough,  Wbitby,  Harrogate,  Ripon,  Leeds,  Wakefield,  Bradford, 
Halifax,  Huddersfield,  Sheffield.    Map  and  Plans.    PostSvo.     12*. 

CATHEDRALS  of  York,  Ripon,  Durham,  Carlisle, 


Chester,  and  Manchester.  With  60  Illustrations.   2  Vols.  Cr.  8vo.  21«. 
DURHAM    AFD    NORTHUMBERLAND,     New- 


castle,  Darlington,  Gateshead,  Bishop  Auckland,  Stockton,  Hartlepool, 
Sunderland,  Shields,  Berwick-on-T»eed,  Morpeth,  Tynemonth,  Cold- 
stream,  Alnwick,  &c.  Map.  Post  870.  9s. 

WESTMORLAND    AHD    CUMBERLAND— Lan- 


caster,  Fatness  Abbey,    Ambleslde,  Kendal,   Windermere,  Coniston, 
Keawick,  Grasmere,  Ulswater,  Carlisle, Cockermouth,  Penrith,  Appleby. 
Map.    Post  8vo. 
*»•  MURRAY'S  MAP  OF  THE  LAKE  DISTRICT,  on  canvas.    3s.  6d. 

-  SCOTLAND,  Edinburgh,  Melrose,  Kelso,  Glasgow, 
DumMes,  Ayr,  Stirling,  Arran,  The  Clyde,  Oban,  Inverary,  Loch 
Lomond,  Loch  Katrine  and  Trossachs,  Caledonian  Canal,  Inverness, 
Perth,  Dundee,  Aberdeen,  Braemar,  Skye,  Caithness,  Ross,  Suther- 
land, &c.  Maps  and  Plans.  Post  8vo.  9*. 

IRELAND,    Dublin,     Belfast,  the  Giant's  Cause- 


way, Donegal,  (Jalway,  Wexford,  Cork,  Limerick,  Waterford,  Killar- 
ney.  Bantry,  Glengariff,  <fcc.    Maps  and  Plans,    Post  bvo.    10*. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY. 


17 


HOME    AND    COLONIAL    LIBRARY.    A  Series    of    Worka 

adapted  for  all  circles  and  classes  of  Readers,  having  been  selected 
for  their  acknowledged  interest,  and  ability  of  the  Authors.  Post  8vo. 
Published  at  2s.  and  3*.  6d.  each,  and  arranged  under  two  distiuctive 
heads  as  folio  ITS  : — 


CLASS   A. 


HISTORY,    BIOGRAPHY, 

1.  SIEGE  OF  GIBRALTAR.     By 

JOHN  DBINKWATBB.    2*. 

2.  THE    AMBER-WITCH.         By 

LADY  DUFF  GORDON.     2s. 

8.  CROMWELL   AND  BUNYAN. 

By  KOBBBT  SOUTHEY.      2s. 

4.  LIFE  OF  SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE. 
By  JOHN  BABROW.    '2s. 

6.  CAMPAIGNS  AT   WASHING- 
TON.  By  REV.  G.  R.  GLEIO.   2s. 

6.  THE   FRENCH    IN  ALGIEKS. 

By  LADY  DUFF  GORDON.    2s. 

7.  THE  FALLOF  THE  JESUITS. 

81. 

8.  LIVONIAN  TALES.    2/. 

9.  LIFE  OF  CONDfi.  By  LORD  MA- 

HON.    3*.  &*. 

10.  SALE'S    BRIGADE.      By    REV. 
Q.  K.  GLEIO.    Vs. 


AND    HISTORIC    TALES. 

11.  THE    SIEGES    OF    VIENNA. 

By  LOBD  ELLESMEBK.    2s. 

12.  THE   WAYSIDE  CROSS.      By 

CAPT.  MILMAN.    2s. 

13.  SKETCHES  OF  GERMAN  LIFE. 

By  SIB  A.  QOBDOV.    3*.  M. 

14.  THE  BATTLE  OF  WATERLOO. 

By  KBV.  G.  R.  GLBIO.    3t.6d. 

15.  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  8TEF- 

FENS.    2.1. 

16.  THE     BRITISH    POETS.     By 

THOHAS  CAMPBELL.    3s.  6d. 

17.  HISTORICAL     ESSAYS.      By 

LOBD  MAHOH.    3,<.  6d 

18.  LIFE  OF   LORD  CLIVE.     By 

REV.  G.  R.  GLBie.    8*.  6d. 

19.  NORTH  -  WESTERN       RAIL- 

WAY.  By  SIB  F.  B.  HBAB.    is. 

20.  LIFE  OF  MUNRO.    By  R«v.  G. 

R.  GLEIO.    3i.  6d. 


CLASS   B. 
TRAVELS,    AND    ADVENTURES. 


VOYAGE 

1.  BIBLE  IN  SPAIN.    By  GKOBOK 

BOBBOW.    3s.  64. 

2.  GYPSIES  OF  SPAIN.  By  GBOBOK 

BORBOW.    3s.  6d. 
3&4.  JOURNALS  IN  INDIA.   By 

BISHOP  HBBEB.    2  Vols.    7s. 
6.  TRAVELS  IN  THE  HOLY  LAND. 

By  IKBY  and  MANOLBS.    2s. 

6.  MOROCCO  AND  THE  MOORS. 

By  J.  DBUMMONO  HAY.    2.». 

7.  LETTERS  FROM  THS  BALTIC. 

By  a  LADT. 

8.  NEW  SOUTH  WALES.  By  MBS. 

MEBBDITH.    2s. 

9.  THE  WEST  INDIES.    By  M.  G. 

LEWIS.    2s. 

10.  SKETCHES  OF  PERSIA.     By 

SIB  JOBS  MALCOLM.    3s.  M. 

11.  MEMOIRS  OF  FATHER  RIPA. 

2s. 

12  &  13   TYPEE  AND  OMOO.     By 
1 1  KKMANH  MELVILLE.  2  Vols.  la. 
14.  MISSIONARY  LIFE  IN   CAN- 
ADA.    By  KBV.  J.ABBOTT.    2s. 

%*  Each  work  may  be  had  separately 


15.  LETTERS  FROM  MADRAS.  By 

a  LADY.    2s. 

16.  HIGHLAND     SPORTS.         By 

CHABLBS  ST.  JOHN.    3s.  6d. 

17.  PAMPAS  JOURNEYS.    By  Sia 

F.  B.  HEAD.    2s. 

18   GATHERINGS  FROM  SPAIN. 
By  RIOHABD  FOBD.    3s.  6i 

19.  THE    RIVER    AMAZON.      By 

W.  H.  EDWABDB.    2s. 

20.  MANNERS    A    CUSTOMS   OF 

INDIA.  ByREV.C.AcLAMD.  2s. 

21.  ADVENTURES     IN    MEXICO. 

By  G.  F.  RUITOK.    8s.  6d. 

22.  PORTUGAL    AND    GALICTA. 

By  LORD  CARNARVON.    3s.  6& 

23.  BUSH  LIFE  IN  AUSTRALIA. 

By  REV.  H.  W.  HAYOABTU.    !fs. 

24.  THE   LIBYAN   DESERT.      By 

BAYLB  ST.  .Ions     2s. 

26.  SIERRA  LEONE.     By  A  LADV. 
8s.  64. 


18 


LIST  OF  WORKS 


HOLLWAY  (J.  O.).     A  Month  in  Norway.     Fcap.  8vo.     2*. 
HONEY  BEE.     Bj  REV.  THOMAS  JAMBS.     Fcap.  8vo.  1*. 
HOOK  (DBAN).     Church  Dictionary.      8vo.  16X 
(THKODORB)  Life.  By  J.  G.  LOCKHART.     Fcap.  8vo.     la. 

HOPE  (A.  J.  BBRESFORD).     Worship  in   the  Church  of  England. 

8vo.    9».,f>r,  Popular  Selection*  from.    8vo.    2i.  6d. 
HORACE  ;  a  New  Edition  of  the  Text.     Edited  by  DBAS  MJLMAH. 

With  100  Woodcuts.    Crown  8vo.     7«.  6d. 
HOUGHTON'3  (LORD)  Monographs,  Personal  and  Social.     With 

Portraits.    Crown  8vo.    10«.  6>t. 

-    POETICAL  WORKS.     Collected  Edition.     With  Por- 

traif.    SVols.     Fcap.  8vo.    12*. 
HOTJSTOUN  (MRS.).     Twenty  Years  in  the  Wild  West  of  Ireland, 

or  Life  in  Connanght.     Post  8vo.    9». 

HUME  (The  Student's).  A  History  of  England,  from  the  Inva- 
sion of  Julian  CVsar  to  the  Revolution  of  1688.  New  Edition,  revised, 

corrected,   nod  cnnMn'icH   ti   the  Treaty  of  Berlin,  1878.     By  J.    8. 

BBKWER,  M.A.   With  7  Coloured  Mnps  At 70  Woodcuts.  Post  8vo.  7«.  3d. 
HUTCHINSON  (GK».).     Dog  Breaking,  with  Odds  and  Ends  for 

those  who  love  the  Dog  and  the  Gun.    With  40  Illustrations.    Crown 

8vo.    7«.  6d. 
HUTTON  (H.  E.).   PrincipiaGraeca;  an  Introduction  to  the  Study 

of  Greek.    Comprehending    Grammar,    Delectus,   and  Exercise-book, 

with  Vocabularies.     Sixth  Edition.     12mo.    8*.  6d. 

HYMNOLOGY,  DICTIONARY  OF.     See  Julian. 

INDIA  in  1880.     By  Sir  Richard  Temple.     8vo. 

IRBY  AND  MANGLES'  Travels  in  Egypt,   Nubia,  Syria,  and 

the  Holy  Land.    Post  8vo.    2s. 

JAMES'  (REV.  THOMAS)  Fables  of  ^Bsop.  A  New  Translation,  with 
Historical  Preface.  With  100  Woodcuts  by  TutMWL  and  WOLT. 
Post  8vo.  2«.  64. 

JAMESON    (MRS.).      Lives    of    the    Early    Italian    Painters— 

and  the  Progress  of  Painting  in  Italy — Cimabue  to  Bassano.    With 
60  Portraits.    Post  8vo.    12*. 

JAPAN.    See  BIRD,  HCSSUAN,  MOCNSET,  REED. 

JENNINGS  (Louis  J.).  Field  Paths  and  Green  Lanes  in  Surrey 
and  Sussex.  Illustrations.  Post  8vo.  10*.  6d. 

-  Rambles  among  the  Hills  in  the  Peak  of  Derbyshire 
and  on  the  Sinth  Downs,  from  Petersfield  ti  Beachv  Head.  With 
sketches  of  people  by  the  way.  With  Illustrations.  PostSvo. 

JERVIS  (REV.  W.  H.).  The  Gallican  Chuich,  from  the  Con- 
cordat of  Bologna,  1516,  t->  the  Revolution.  With  an  Introduction. 
Portraits.  2  Vols.  8vo.  28». 

JESSE  (EDWARD).   Gleanings  in  Natural  History.  Fcp.  8vo.   3*.  Qd. 

JEX-BLAKE  (EEv.  T.  W.).  Life  in  Faith :  Sermons  Preached 
at  Cheltenham  and  Rugby.  Fcap.  8vo.  3*.  6<f. 

JOHNSON'S  (DR.  SAMUEL)  Life.  By  James  Boswell.  Including 
the  Tonr  to  the  Hebrides.  Edited  by  MR.  CKOKKB.  1  vol.  Royal 
8vo.  12«.  Jfete  Edition.  Portraits.  4  Vols.  8vo.  [/n  Preparation. 

JULIAN  (REV.  JOHN  J.).  A  Dictionary  of  Hymnology.  A 
Companion  to  Existing  Hymn  Book*.  Setting  forth  the  Origin  and 
History  of  t)  e  Hymns  contained  in  th«  PrincHal  Hymnals  used  by  the 
Churches  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  -various  Dissenting 
Bodies,  «  ith  Notict  s  of  their  Authors.  Post  STO.  [In  the  frets. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.  19 


JONIUS'  HANDWRITING  Professionally  investigated.  By  Mr.  CHABOT, 
Expert.  With  Preface  and  Collateral  Evidence,  by  the  Hon.  EDWABD 
TWISLKTOB.  Witt  Facsimiles,  Woodcuts,  &c.  4to.  £3  3s. 

KERR  (ROBERT).  Small  Country  House.  A  Brief  Practical 
Discourse  on  the  Planning  of  a  Residence  from  2000C.  to  50002. 
With  Supplementary  Estimates  to  7000J.  Post  8vo.  3s. 

-    Ancient   Lights ;     a   Book   for    Architects,   Surveyors, 
Lawyers,  and  Landlords.    8vo.     5*.  6d. 

(R.   MALCOLM)   Student's   Blackstone.      A    Systematic 


Abridgment  of  the  entire  Commentaries,  adapted  to  the  present  state 
of  the  law.    PostSvo.     7s.  6d. 
KING  EDWARD  Vlin's  Latin  Grammar.     12mo.     3s.  6d. 

-    First     Latin    Book.     12mo.    2«.  6d. 

KING  (R.  J.).  Archaeology, Travel  and  Art;  being  Sketches  and 
Studies,  Historical  and  Descriptive.  8vo.  l'2s. 

KIRK  (J.  FOSTER).  History  of  Charles  the  Bold,  Duke  of  Bur- 
gundy. Portrait.  3  Vols.  Sv9.  iot. 

KIRKES'  Handbook  of  Physiology.  Edited  by  W.  MOERAIIT 
BAKBR,  F.R.C.S.  With  400  Illustrations.  Post  8vo.  14s. 

KUGLER'S  Handbook  of  Painting.— The  Italian  Schools.  Es- 
vised  and  Remodelled  from  the  most  recent  Researches.  By  LAUY 
EASTLAKB.  With  140  Illustrations.  2  Vols.  Crown  8vo.  30s. 

Handbook  of  Painting. — The  German,  Flemish,  and 

Dutch  Schools.    Revised  and  in  part  re-written.    By  J.  A.  CKOV/K. 
With  60  Illustrations.    2  Vols.    Crown  8vo.    2ls. 

LANE  (E.  W.).    Account  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  Modern 

Egyptians.     With  Illustrations.     2  Vols.   Post  8vo.     12* 

LAWRENCE  (Sin  GEO.).  Reminiscences  of  Forty-three  Years' 
Service  in  India;  including  Captivities  in  Cabul  among  the  Affghr.ns 
and  among  the  Sikhs,  and  a  ISarrative  of  the  Mutiny  in  Rajputaiia. 
Crown  8vo.  10*.  6d. 

LAYARD  (A.  H.).  Nineveh  and  its  Remains.  Being  a  Nar- 
rative of  Researches  and  Discoveries  amidst  the  Ruins  of  Assyria. 
With  an  Account  of  the  Chaldean  Christians  of  Kurdistan ;  the  Yezedis, 
or  Devil-worshippers;  and  an  Enquiry  into  the  Manners  and  Arts  of 
the  Ancient  Assyrians.  Plates  and  Woodcuts.  2  VoK  8vo.  36s. 

%*  A  POPULAR  EDITION  of  the  above  work.     With  Illustrations. 
Post  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Nineveh  and  Babylon  ;  being    the  Narrative  of  Dis- 
coveries in  the  Ruins,  wuh  Travels  in  Armenia,  Kurdistan  and  the 
Desert,  during  a   Secoud    Expedition    to    Assyria.      With  Map  and 
Plates.    8vo.    21.'. 

%*  A  POPULAB  EDITION  of  the  above  work.      With  Illustrations 

Post  8vo.    7s.  6<i. 
LEATHES'    (STANLEY)    Practical  Hebrew  Grammar.      With  the 

Hebrew   Text  of   Genesis  i.—vi.,   and  Psalms  I.— vi.     Grammatical 

Analysis  and  Vocabulary.    PostSvo.    7s.  M. 
LENNEP  (REV.  H.  J.  VAN).     Missionary  Travels  in  Asia  Minor. 

With  Illustrations  of  Biblical  History  and  Archeology.     With  Map 

and  Woodcuts.    2  Vols.    Post  8vo.    24s. 
Modern  Customs  and  Manners  of  Bible  Lands  in 

Illustration  of  Scripture.    With  Coloured  Maps  and  300  Illustrations. 

2  Vols.    8vo.    2ls. 

LESLIE  (C.  R.).  Handbook  for  Young  Painters.  With  Illustra- 
tions. Post  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

Life  and  Works  of  Sir  Joshua    Reynolds.     Portraits 

and  Illustrations.    2  Vols.    8vo.    42s. 

c  2 


20 


LIST  OF  WORKS 


LETO  (POMPOHIO).  Eight  Months  at  Rome  daring  the  Vatican 
Council.  With*  daily  account  of  I  tie  proceedings.  Translated  from 
tbe  ortfrinxl.  8vo.  12*. 

LETTERS  FROM  THE  BALTIC.     By  a  LADY.    Post  8vo.     2«. 
MADRAS.    67  a  LADT.    Post  8ro.    2«. 

—  SIERRA  LEONE.    By  a  LADT.    Post  Svo.   8«.  6d. 

LEVI  (LEONE).  History  of  British  Commerce :  and  Economic 
Progress  of  the  Nation,  from  1763  to  1878.  8vo.  18*. 

LEX  SALIC  A;  the  Ten  Texts  with  the  Glosses  and  the  Lex 
Emcndata.  Svnopticul'y  edited  by  J  H  HKSHH.H  With  Notes  on 
tbe  FrAiikish  Words  in  the  Lex  Salica  by  H.  KRRK,  of  Leyden.  4to.  42*. 

LIDDELL  (DEAR).  Student's  History  of  Rome,  from  the  earliest 
Times  to  the  establishment  of  the  Empire.  Woodcuts.  Post  8vo.  7*.  6d. 

LISPINGS  from  LOW  LATITUDES;  or,  the  Journal  of  the  Hon. 
ImpntsiaGustiington.  Edited  by  LORD  DUFHKRIW.  With24Plates.4to.21t. 

LIVINGSTONE  (Da  ).  Popular  Account  of  his  First  Expedition 
to  Africa,  1840-56.  Illustrations.  Post  Xvo.  7«.  tid. 

Second  Expedition  to  Africa,  1858-64.  Illustra- 
tions. Post  «vo.  7*.  6d. 

—  Last  Journals  in   Central  Africa,  from  1865  to 
his  Death.  Continued  by  a  Narrative  of  his  last  mom.  nts  and  Bufferings. 
By  Rev.  HOBACB  WALI.KB.    Maps  and  Illustrations,    a  Vols.    Svo.    15*. 

Memoirs  of  his   Personal   Life.     From  his  un- 


published Journals  and  Correspondence.    By  Wm.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D. 
With  Map  and  Portrait.    Svo. 

LIVINGSTONIA.  Journal  of  Adventures  in  Exploring  Lake 
Nyassa,  and  Establishing  a  Missionary  Settlement  there.  By  E.  D. 
YOITHO,  R.N.  Maps  Post  Svo.  7».  6d. 

LI  VON  IAN   TALES.     By  the  Author  of   "  Letters   from    the 

Baltic."    Post  8vo.     2». 

LOCKHART  (J.  G.).    Ancient  Spanish  Ballads.     Historical  and 

Romantic.    Translated,  with  Notes.    Illustrations.    Crown  Svo.    6*. 

Life  of  Theodore  Hook.     Fcap.  Svo.     1». 

LOtfDON  (MRS.).    Gardening  for  Ladies.     With  Directions  and 

Calendar  of  Operations  for  Every  Month.  Woodcuts.  Fcap.  Svo.  3*.  6d. 

LYELL  (SiR  CHARLES).     Principles  of  Geology;  or,  the  Modern 

Changes  of  the  Earth  and  its  Inhabitants  considered  as  illustrative  of 

Geology.    With  Illustrations.    2  Vols.    Svo.    32«. 

Student's  Elements  of  Geology.     With  Table  of  British 

Fossils  and  600  Illustrations.    Third  Edition,  Revised.     Post  8vo.    8s. 
—  Geological     Evidences     of     the    Antiquity    of    Man, 
including  an  Outline  of  Glacial  Post-Tertiary  Geology,  and  Remarks 
on  the  Origin  of  Species.     Illustrations.    Svo.    14*. 

(K.  M.).     Geographical  Handbook  of  Ferns.    With  Tables 

to  show  their  Distribution.    Post  Svo.    7».  6d, 
LYTTON  (LORD).  A  Memoir  of  Julian  Fane.    With  Portrait.   Post 

Svo.    6» 

McCLINTOCK    (SiR  L.).     Narrative  of  the    Discovery  of  the 

Fate  of  Sir  John  Franklin  and  his  Companions  in  the   Arctic  Seas. 
With  Illustrations.    Post  Svo.    7*.  M. 

MACDOUGALL  (CoL.).   Modern  Warfare  as  Influenced  by  Modern 

Artillery.     With  Plans.    Post  Svo.    12i. 

MACGREGOR  (J.).  Rob  Roy  on  the  Jordan,  Nile,  Red  Sea,  Gen- 
nesareth,  &c.  A  Canoe  Cruise  in  Palestine  and  Egypt  and  the  Waters 
ot  Damascus.  With  Map  and  70  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  It.  6d. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.  21 


MAETZNER'S  ENGLISH  GRAMMAR.  A  Methodical,  Analytical, 
and  Historical  Treatise  on  the  Orthography,  Prosody,  Inflections,  and 
Syntax.  By  CLAIB  J.  GRECK,  LL.D.  3  Vols.  8vo  3Cs. 

MAHON  (Lone),  see  STANHOPE. 

MAINE  (SiR  H.  SUHNBR).    Ancient  Law:  its  Connection  with  the 

Early  History  of  Society,  and  its  Relation  to  Modern  Ideas.  Svo.  12s. 
-  Village  Communities  in  the  East  and  West.  8vo.  12s. 
—  Early  History  of  Institutions.  8vo.  12s. 

MALCOLM  (SiR  JOHN).     Sketches  of  Persia.     Post  8vo.     3«.  6d. 
M ANSEL    (DEAN).      Limits   of    Religious    Thought    Examined. 

Post  8vo.    8s.  6d. 

Letters,  Lectures,    and  Reviews.     8vo.     12a. 

MANUAL     OF     SCIENTIFIC    ENQUIRY.      For  the   Use  of 

Travellers.    Edited  by  REV.  R.  MAIN.  Post  Svo.    3s.  6d.     (Publislud  t>y 

order  oftht  Lords  of  the  Admiralty.) 

MARCO  POLO.  The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo,  the  Venetian. 
Concerning  the  Kingdoms  and  Marvels  of  the  East  A  new  EngliHh 
Version.  Illustrated  by  the  light  of  Oriental  Writers  and  Modern 
Travels.  By  COL.  HEN-BIT  YULE.  Maps  and  Illustrations.  2  Vols. 
Medium  Svo.  63i. 

MARKHAM  (Mas.).  History  of  England.  From  the  First  Inva- 
sion by  the  Romans.  Woodcuts.  12mo.  3s.  6</. 

-   History  of  France.      From   the  Conquest  by   the 
Gauls.    Woodcuts.    12mo.    3s.  M. 

—  History  of  Germany.    From  the  Invasion  by  Marine. 

Woodcuts.    12mo.    3s.  6rf. 

—  (CLEMENTS  R.).      A  Popular  Account  of  Peruvian 
Bark  and  its  intr  duction  into  British  India,  Ceylon,  &c.,  and  of  the 
Progress  and  Extent  of  its  Cultivation.    With  Maps.    PostSvo. 

MARRYAT  (JOSEPH).  History  of  Modern  and  Mediaeval  Pottery 
and  Porcelain.  With  a  Description  of  the  Manufacture.  Plates  aud 
Woodcuts.  Svo.  42». 

MARSH  (G.  P.).  Student's  Manual  of  the  English  Language. 
Edited  with  Additions.  By  DR.  WM.  SMITH.  Post  &vo.  7*.  W. 

MASTERS  in  English  Theology.  The  King's  College  Lectures, 
1877.  HOOKER,  by  Canon  Barry;  ANDREWS,  by  Dean  Church  ; 
CBILLINGWOKTU,  by  Prof.  Plumptre ;  WBICHCOT*  and  SMITH,  by 
Canon  Westcott ;  JEREMY  TAYLOR,  by  Canon  Farrar ;  PEARSON, 
by  Archdeacon  Cheethain.  With  Introduction  by  Canon  Barry. 
Po§t  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

MATTHl^E'S  GKKKK  GRAMMAR.  Abridged  by  BLOMFIBLD, 
Revised  by  E.  S.  CROOKS.  12mo.  4s. 

MAUREL'S  Character,  Actions,  and  Writings  of  Wellington. 
Fcap.  Svo.  Is.  6d. 

MAYO  (LORD).  Sport  in  Abyssinia;  or,  the  Mareb  and  Tack- 
azzee.  With  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  12s. 

MEADE  (Hon.  HJCRBKKT).  Ride  through  the  Disturbed  Districts  cf 
New  Zealand,  with  a  Cruise  among  the  South  Sea  Islands.  With  Illus- 
trations. Medium  Svo.  12s. 

MELVILLE  (HERMANN).  Marquesas  and  South  Sea  Islands. 
S  Vols.  Post  Svo.  7». 

MEREDITH  (MRS.  CHARLES).  Notes  and  Sketches  of  New  Sooth 

Wales.    Post  Svo.    2«. 

MICHAEL  ANGELO,  Sculptor,  Painter,  and  Architect.  His  Life 
and  Works.  By  C.  UBATU  WILSOM.  Illustration*.  KoyalSvo.  26s. 


22 


LIST  OF  WORKS 


M1DDLETON  (Cuts.  H.)  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the 
Etched  Work  of  Rembrandt,  with  Life  and  Introductions.  With 
Explanatory  Cuts.  Medium  8v<>.  31s.  6d. 

MILLINGTON  (R*v.  T.  S.).    Signs  and  Wonders  in  the  Land  of 

Ham,  or  the  Ten  Plagues  of  Egypt,  with  Ancient  and  Modern  Illustra- 
tions. Woodcuts.  1'ost  8vo.  la.  6d. 

MILMAN'S  (DEAN)  WORKS:— 

HISTOKT  or  THE  JEWS,  from  the  earliest  Period  down  to  Modern 
Times.    8  Vols.    Post  8vo.    18». 

EARLY  CHRISTIANITY,  from  the  Birth  of  Christ  to  the  Aboli- 
tion of  Paganism  In  the  Roman  Empire.    8  Vols.     Post  8vo.     !(•«. 

LATIN    CHRISTIANITY,   including    that  of  the  Popes  to    the 
Pontificate  of  MchoUs  V.    9  V»ls.   PostSvo.  64*. 

HANDBOOK  TO   ST.    PAUL'S  CATHEDRAL.     Woodcutn.      Crown 
8vo.    10i .  6«J. 

QUINTI  HORATII  FLACCI  OPERA.     Woodcuts.     8m.  8vo.  7«.  6d. 

FALL  OF  JERUSALEM.     Fcap.  8vo.    Is. 

-  (CAPT.  E.  A.)  Wayside  Cross.     Post  8vo.    2«. 

(BISHOP,  D.D., )  late  Metropolitan  of  India.     His  Life. 

With  a  Selection  from  his  Correspondence  and  Journals.  15y  his 
Sister.  Map.  Bvo.  12*. 

MIVAKT  (Si.  GEORGE).     Lessons  from  Nature;  as  manifested  in 

Mind  and  Matter.    8vo.     15*. 

The  Cat.     An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Backboned 
Animals,  especially  Mammals.     Wi'h  Lumerous  Illustrations.    8vo. 

[/«  the  Press. 

MOORE  (THOMAS).  Life  and  Letters  of  Lord  Byron.  Cabinet 
Edition.  With  Plates.  6  Vols.  Fcap.  8vo.  1&». ;  1'opular  Edition, 
with  Portraits.  Royal  8vo.  7*.  6d. 

MOBESBY  (CAPT.),  R.N.    Discoveries  in  New  Guinea,  Polynesia, 

Torres  Straits,  &c.,  during  the  cruise  of  U.M.S.  13asili.sk.  Map  and 
Illustrations.  8vo.  I5i. 

M03SM AN  (SAMUEL).  New  Japan  ;  the  Land  of  the  Rising  Sun  ; 
its  Annals  during  the  past  Twenty  Years,  recording  the  remarkable 
Progress  of  the  Japanese  in  Westein  Civilisation.  With  Map.  8vo.  15*. 

MOTLEY  (J.  L.).  History  of  the  United  Netherlands :  from  the 
Death  of  William  the  Silent  to  the  Twelve  Years'  Truce,  1609.  Portraits. 
4  Vols.  Post  8vo.  6*.  each. 

Life     and    Death    of    John    of    Barneveld, 

Advocate  of  Holland.  With  a  View  of  the  Primary  Causes  and 
Movements  of  the  Thirty  Year*'  War.  llluutiaiions.  '2  Vols. 
Post  8vo.  12*. 

MOZLEY   (CANON).    Treatise   on  the   Augustinian    doctrine    of 

Predestination.    Crown  8vo.   9*. 
MUIRHBAD  (JAS.).  The  Vaux-de-Vire  of  Maistre  Jean  Le  Houx, 

Advocate  of  Vire.  Translated  and  Edited.  With  Portrait  and  Illus- 
trations. 8vo.  21s. 

MUNRO'S  (GENERAL)  Life  and  Letters.     By  Rsv.  G.  R.  GLBIO. 

PoatSvo.    8*.  6d. 
MURCHISON  (SiB  RODERICK).      Silaria  ;   or,   a  History  of  the 

Oldest  rock.3  containing  Organic  Remains.   Map  and  Plates.    8vo.    18*. 
Memoirs.     With  Notices  of  his  Contemporaries, 

and  Rise  and  Progress  of  Palaeozoic  Geology.    By  ARCHIBALD  OBIKIB. 

Portraits.   2  Vols.   8vo.    30*. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.  23 


MURRAY  (A.  S.).  A  History  of  Greek  Sculpture,  from  the  Earliest 

Tirana  down  to  the  Age  ol  Phidias.    With  Illustrations.    Roy.  8vo. 
MUSTERS'   (CAPT.)    Patagoniaus;     a    Year's    Wanderings    over 

Untrodden   Ground   from  the  Straits  of  Magellan  to  the  Rio  Negro. 
Illustrations.    Post  8vo.     7t.  Gd. 

NAPIER  (SiR  WM.).    English  Battles  and  Sieges  of  the  Peninsular 

War.     Portrait.    PostSvo.    9*. 

NAPOLEON     AT     FONTAINEBLKAU      AND    ELBA.      Journal     of 

Occurrences   and    Notes  of  Conversations.    By  SIB  NKIL  CAMPBELL 
Portrait.    8vo.    15*. 

NARES  (SiR  GEOBGE),  R.N.     Official  Report  to  the  Admiralty  of 

the  recent  Arctic  Expedition..     Map.    8vo.    2«.  6d. 
NASMYTH  AND  CARPENTER.    The    Moon.     Considered  as  a 

Planet,  a  WorM,  and  a  Satellite.     With  Illustrations  from  Drawings 

made  with  the  aid  of  Powerful  Telescopes,  Woodcuts,  &o.    4to.    80s. 
NAUTICAL    ALMANAC    (THE).     (By  Authority.)      2s.  Qd. 
NAVY  LIST.    (Monthly  and  Quarterly.)    Post  8vo. 
NEW    TESTAMENT.     With    Short    Explanatory   Commentary. 

By   ARCHDEACOX   CHUBTON,   M.A.,    and  the   BISHOP  OF  ST.  DAVID'S. 

With  110  authentic  Views,  &c.     2  Vols.    Crown  8vo.     21s.  bound. 

NEWTH  (SAMUEL).  First  Book  of  Natural  Philosophy;  an  Intro- 
duction to  the  study  of  Statics.  Dynamics,  Hydrostatics,  Light,  Ilea", 
and  Sound,  with  numerous  Examples.  Small  8vo.  St.  6d. 

Elements  of  Mechanics,  including  Hydrostatics, 

with  numerous  Examples.     Small  8vo.    &s.  Qd. 

Mathematical  Examples.        A  Graduated  Series 


of  Elementary  Examples  in  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  Logarithms,  Trigo- 
nometry, and  Mechanics.     Small  8vo.    8s.  M. 

NICOLAS  (SiR  HARRIS).  Historic  Peerage  of  England.  Exhi- 
biting the  Origin,  Descent,  and  Present  State  of  every  Title  of  Peer- 
age which  has  existed  in  thin  Country  since  the  Conquest.  By 
WILLIAM  COURTHOPB.  8vo.  30*. 

NILE  GLEANINGS.    See  STUART. 

N1MROD,  On  the  Chace—  Turf— and  Road.  With  Portrait  and 
Plates.  Crown  8vo.  5s.  Or  with  Coloured  Plates,  7».  6d. 

NORDHOFF  (Cms.).  Communistic  Societies  of  the  United 
States;  including  Detailed  Accounts  of  the  Shakers,  The  Amana, 
Ont-.ida,  Bethel),  Aurora,  Icarian  and  other  existing  Societies;  with 
Particulars  of  their  Religious  Creeds,  Industries,  and  Prtseat  Condi- 
tion. With  40  Illustrations.  8vo.  15». 

NORTHCOTE'S  (SiR  JOHN)  Notebook  in  the  Long  Parliament. 
Containing  Proceedings  during  its  First  Session,  1640.  Edited,  with 
*  Memoir,  by  A.  H.  A.  Hamilton.  Crown  6vo.  Ss. 

OWEN  (LiEoi.-CoL.).  Principles  and  Practice  of  Modern  Artillery, 
including  Artillery  Material,  Gunnery,  and  Organisation  and  Use  of 
Artillery  in  Warfare.  With  Illustrations.  8vo.  15«. 

O  XENH A  M  (RKV.  W.).  English  Notes  for  Latin  Elegiacs  ;  designed 
for  early  Proficients  in  the  Art  of  Latin  Versification,  with  Prefatory 
Rules  of  Composition  iu  Elegiac  Metre.  12ino.  3*.  «d. 

PALGRAVE  (R.  H.  I.).     Local  Taxation  of  Great  Britain  and 

Ireland.    8vo.     6*. 

PALLISER  (Mas.).  Mottoes  for  Monuments,  or  Epitaphs  selected 
General  Use  and  Study.  With  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  7*.  GJ. 

PARIS  (DR.)  Philosophy  in  Sport  made  Science  in  Earnest  ; 
or,  the  First  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy  inculcated  by  aid  of  the 
Toys  and  Sports  of  Youth.  Woodcuts.  Post  8vo.  1t.6d. 


24 


LIST  OF  WORKS 


PARKYNS'  (MABSFIXLD)  Three  Years'  Residence  in  Abyssinia: 

with  Travel!  In  tl.at  Country.     With  Illustrations.     Post  bvo.    li.&d. 

PEEL'S  (SiB  ROBERT)  Memoirs.     2  Vols.     Po*t  Svo.     15*. 

PENN  (RICHARD).  Maxims  and  Hinta  for  an  Angler  and  Chess- 
player. Woodcuts.  Fcap.  Bvo.  1*. 

PERCY  (JoHH.  M.D.).  METALLURGY.  Fuel,  Wood,  Peat,  Coal, 
Charcoal,  Coke.  Fire-Clays.  Illustrations,  bvo.  30*. 

Lead,  including  part  of  Silver.    Illustrations.    8vo.    30*. 
—  Silver  aud  Gold.     Part  I.     Illustrations,     fevo.    bO». 
1'i.RRY  (REV.  CAKOH).    Life  of  St.  Hugh  of  Avalon,  Bishop  of 

Lincoln.    Post  Svo.     1C*.  64. 

PHILLIPS    (Jons).     Geology   of   Yorkshire,   The    Coast,    and 

Limestone  District.    Platen.     2  Vols.    4to.    31».  (M.  each. 

(SAXUXL).  Literary  Ecsays  from  "  The  Times."     With 

Portrait     2  VoU.     Fcap.  Svo.    7«. 

POPE'S  (ALKAHDER)  Works.  With  Introductions  and  Notes, 
by  R«v.  WHITWBLL  ELWIM.  Vols.  I.,  II.,  VI.,  V1L,  VIII.  With  For- 
traits.  Svo.  1<>*.  W.  each. 

PORTER  (REV.  J.  L.).  Damascus,  Palmyra,  and  Lebanon.  With 
Travels  among  the  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan  and  the  Uauran.  Map  and 
Woodcuts.  Post  Svo.  It.  6d. 

PRAYER-BOOK  (ILLUSTRATED),  with  Borders,  Initials,  Vig- 
nettes, Ac.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  REV.  THUS.  JAMBS.  Medium 
Svo.  18*.  cloth;  31*.  fid.  calf;  36/.  morocco. 

(THE  CONVOCATION),  with  altered  rubiics,  show- 
ing the  book  if  amended  in  conformity  with  the  reoomii  endatioDS  of 
the  Convocations  of  Canterbury  and  York  iu  1S79.  Post  bvu.  5». 

PRINCESS  CHARLOTTE  OF  WALES.  A  Brief  Memoir. 
With  Selections  from  her  Correspondence  and  other  unpublished 
Papers.  By  LADY  ROSB  WKIOALL.  With  Portrait.  Svo.  fc*.  W. 

PRIVY  COUNCIL  JUDGMENTS  in  Ecclesiastical  Cases  re- 
lating to  Doctrine  and  Discipline.  With  Historical  Introduction, 
by  G.  C.  BBOUKICK  and  W.  H.  FEEMAMTLB.  Svo.  10«.  6<2. 

PdALMS  OF  DAVID.  With  Notes  Explanatory  and  Critical  by 
the  Dean  of  Wells,  Canon  Elliott,  and  Cauon  Cook.  Medium.  Svo. 

PUSS  IN  BOOTS.     With   12   Illustrations.     By  OTTO  SPKCKTKK. 

16mo.     1*.  6d.    Or  coloured.  2j.  Gd. 

QUARTERLY  REVIEW  (THE).    Svo.    6«. 

RAE  (EDWARD).  Country  of  the  Moors.  A  Journey  from  Tripoli 
in  Barbary  to  tLe  Holy  City  of  Kairwan.  Map  and  Etchings.  Crown 
Svo.  12«. 

RAMBLES  in  the  Syrian  Deserts.     Post  Svo.     10«.  6d. 

RASSAM  (HORMUZD).  British  Mission  to  Abyssinia.  With 
Notices  of  the  Countries  from  Massowah  to  Magdala.  Illustrations. 
2  Vols.  Svo.  28*. 

RAWLINSON'S  (CAKOH)  Herodotus.  A  New  English  Ver- 
sion. Edited  with  Notes  and  Essays.  Maps  and  Woodcut  4  Vols.  Svo.  48s. 

Five  Great  Monarchies  of  Cbaldaea,  Assyria,  Media, 

Babylonia,  and  Persia.  With  Maps  and  Illustrations.  3  Vols.  Sve.  42'. 
(Sis  HENRY)  England  and  Russia  in  the  East ;  a 


Series  of  Papers  on  the  Political  and  Geographical  Condition  ol  Central 
Asia.    Map.    Svo.     12«. 


PUBLISHED   BY  MR.  MURRAY.  25 


REED  (Sir  E.  J.)  Iron-Clad  Ships;  their  Qualities,  Performances, 
and  Cost.  With  Chapters  on  Turret  Ships,  Iron-Clad  Rams.&c.  With 
llliutratlous.  8vo.  l'2j. 

Letters  from  Russia  in  1875.     8vo.     5*. 

Japan  :    Its  History,  Traditions,  and  Religions.      With 

Narrative  of  a  Visit  in  Ib79.   Illustrations.  '2  Vols.  8vo.     28*. 

REJECTED  ADDRESSES  (THE).     By  JAMKS AHD  HORACK  SMITH. 

Woodcuts.     Post  8»o.  3i.  6d. ;  or  Popular  Edition,  Fcap.  8vo.  1*. 

REMBRANDT.  A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  his  Etched  Work  ; 
wiih  Life  i>nd  I  nt  rod  no:  ions.  By  CHAS.  11.  MIDULETON,  13.A. 
Woodcuts.  Medium  bvo.  81*.  6d. 

REYNOLDS'   (SiR  JOSHUA)    Life  and  Times.     By  C.  R.  LESLIE, 

R.A.  aud  Ton  TASLOB.     Portraits.    2  Vols.    8vo.    42*. 
RICARDO'S   (DAVID)    Political   Works.     With   a   Notice   of  his 

Life  aud  Writings.    By  J.  R.  M'CTJLLOCH.    8vo.    Ifts. 
RIPA  (FATHEH).   Thirteen  Years  at  the  Court  of  Peking.     Post 

8vo.     -'.-•. 
ROBERTSON  (CANON).     History  of  the  Christian  Church,  from 

the  Apostolic    Age  to   the  Reformation,    1517.     8  Vols.     Post  8vo. 

d».  each. 

ROBINSON  (REV.  DR.).    Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine  and  the 

Adjacent  Regions,  1838— 52.     Maps.    3  Vols.    8vo.   42*. 

-   (VVn.)  Alpine  Flowers  for  English  Gardens.     With 
70  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.    7*.  6d. 

-- Sub-Tropical  Garden.  Illustrations.  Small  8vo.  5». 
ROBSON   (E.    R.).      SCHOOL   ARCHITECTURE.      Remarks  on   the 

Planning,    Designing,    Building,    and    Furnishing   of    school- h<m-.fs. 
Illustrations.     Medium  8vo.    18*. 

ROM  E  (HISTORY  OF).    See  GIBBON — LIDDELL — SMITH — STUDENTS'. 

ROYAL  SOCIETY  CATALOGUE  OP  SCIENTIFIC  PAPERS. 

8  vols.    8vo.    20«.  each.     Half  morocco,  i8s.  ea'-li. 

RUXTON  (Gxo.  P.).  Travels  inMexico;  with  Adventures  among  Wild 
Tribes  and  Animals  of  the  Prairies  and  Rocky  M  >un  tains.  Post  8vo.  3*.HJ. 

ST.  HUGH  OF  AVALON,  Bishop  of  Lincoln;  his  Life  by  G.  G. 

PERKY,  Canon  of  Lincoln.     Post  8vo.    10».  6d. 
ST.  JOHN    (CHARLES).     Wild  Sport"  and    Natural  History  of  the 

Highlands  of    Sco'land.      New,  and  beautifully  illustrated   Edition. 

Crown  8vo.     15*.     Cheap  Edition,  Post  8vo.  3».  M. 

—  (BAYLE)  Adventures  in  the  Libyan  Desert.  Post  8vo.  2*. 
SALDANHA    <DCKE   OF),  Soldier  and   Statesman,    Memoirs   of 

the  Eventful  O'eerof.     By  the  CONDB  DA  CARKOTA.    Portraits  aud 

Maps.    U  Vols.    bvo.    32*. 
SALE'S  (SiR  ROBERT)  Brigade  in  Afghanistan.  With  an  Account  of 

the  Defence  ol  Jellalabad.    By  REV.  O.  R.  GLBIO.     Post  8vo.    2*. 
SCEPTICISM    IN    GEOLOGY;   and   the    Reasons  for   It     An 

assemblage  of  facts  from   Nature  combining  to  rt-fnte  the    theory  of 

"Causes  now  in  Action."    By  VERIFIES.    Woodcuts.    Crown  8vo.  6s. 
SCOTT  (SiR  GILBERT).      Lectures  on  the  Rise  and  Development 

nf  Meditoval  Architecture.     Delivered  »t  the  Royal  Academy.     Wiih 

400  lllUhtratiuus.     2  Vols.     Medium  8vn.     42f. 

Secular  and  Domestic  Architecture,  Present  and    Future. 

8vo.    9,5. 


28 


LIST  OP  WORKS 


SCHLIEMANN  (Da.  HENRY).  Troy  and  Its  Remains.  A  Narra- 
tive of  Rest- arches  and  Discoveries  made  on  thw  Site  of  Ilium,  and  in  the 
Trojan  Plain.  With  60J  Illustrations.  Medium  Svo.  42*. 

-    Discoveries  on  the  Sites  of  Ancient  Mycenae 

and  Tiryns.     \\'ith  500  Illustra 'ions,  Medium  8vo.    60s. 

Ilius ;  A  Complete  History  of  the  City  and 
Country  of  the  Trojans,  including  nil  Hece  it  Discoveries  and  Re- 
searches madn  on  the  Site  of  Try  and  the  Troad  in  1871-3  and  lb78-9. 
With  an  Am  obi  grapijy  of  the  Author.  With  nearly  2010  Illustrations. 
Imperial  bvo.  5  «. 

SCHOMBERG  (GENERAL).  The  Odyssey  of  Homer,  rendered 
into  English  blank  versa,  Books  I— XII.  Svo.  V2s. 

frEEBOHM  (HKNRY).  Siberia  in  Furore  ;  a  Naturalist's  Visit  to 
the  Valley  of  the  IVichora  in  North  Eastern  Ku-s!a.  With  notices 
Birds  and  their  migrations.  With  Map  and  Illustrations.  Crown 
Svo. 

SELBORNE  (LORD).     Notes  on  some  Passages  in  the  Liturgical 

History  of  the  Reformed  English  Church.    8vo.    6*. 

SHADOWS   OF  A  SICK  ROOM.       Preface  by  Canon  LIDDON. 

16mo.    2s.  Gd. 

SHAH  OF  PERSIA'S  Diary  during  his  Tour  through  Europe  in 
1873.  Translated  from  the  Original.  By  J.  W.  KKUHOUBB.  With 
Portrait  and  Coloured  Tide.  Crown  8vo.  12*. 

SHAW  (T.  B.).  Manual  of  English  Literature.  Post  8ro.    Is.  6d. 

Specimens  of  English  Literature.      Selected  from  the 

Chief  Writers.    Post  8vo.    It.  6d. 

(ROBERT).  Visit  to  High  Tartary,  Yarkand,  and  Kasbgar 

(formerly  Chinese  Tartary),  and  Return  Journey  over  the  Karakorum 
Pass.     With  Map  and  Illustrations.    Svo.     16*. 

SIERRA  LEONE ;  Described  in  Letters  to  Friends  at  Home.     By 

A  LADY.    Post  Svo.    3».  6d. 

SIMMONS  (CAPT.).    Constitution  and   Practice    of  Courts-Mar- 
tial.   8vo.    15*. 
SMILES'   (SAMCKL,  LL.D.)  WORKS  :— 

BRITISH  EKQINEERS  ;  from  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  death  of 

the  Stephenson-.    With  Illustrations.   5  Vols.  Cruwn  Svo.    7*.  6d.  each. 

LIFB  OF  A  SCOTCH  NATURALIST  (THOS.  EDWARD).    Illustrations. 

Crown  8vo.     10-.  6d. 

LIFE  OF  A  SCOTCH  GEOLOGIST   A»D  BOTANIST    (ROBERT  DICK). 

Illustrations.    Crown  Svo.     12*. 
HUGUEKOTS    IN    EHGLAHD    AND    IRELAND.       CrOWU  8VO.     7«.  6d. 

SELF-HELP.      With   Illustrations  of  Conduct  and  Persever- 
ance.   Post  Svo.  6*.    Or  in  French,   5». 

CHARACTER.  A  Sequel  to  "  SKLF-HKLP."  Post  8ro.  6». 
THRIFT.  A  Book  of  Domestic  Counsel.  Post  Svo.  6«. 
DUTY.  With  Illustrations  of  Courage,  Patience,  and  Endurance. 

Post  Svo.    6s. 

INDUSTRIAL  BIOGRAPHY;  or,  Iron  Workers  and  Tool  Makers. 

Post  Svo.    6*. 

BOY'S  VOYAGK  ROUND  THE  WORLD.    Illustrations.    Post  Svo.  6.s. 
SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  DICTIONARIES:— 

DICTIONARY    OF    THE     BIBLB;    its    Antiquities,    Biography, 
Geography,  and  Natural  History.    Illustrations.    3  Vols.  Svo.  105«. 


PUBLISHED  BY   MR.  MURRAY.  27 


SMITH'S  (D a.  Wii.)  DICTIONARIES — -continued. 

CONCISE  BIBLE  DICTIONARY.    With  300  Illustrations.     Medium 

8vo.    21*. 
SMALLER    BIBLE     DICTIONARY.       With    Illustrations.     Post 

8vo.     7s.  Qd. 

CHRISTIAN  ANTIQUITIES.  Comprising  the  History,  Insti- 
tutions, and  Antiquities  of  the  Christian  Church.  With  Illustrations, 
2  Vols.  Medium  8vo.  31.  13*.  W. 

CHRISTIAN  BIOGRAPHY,  LITERATURE,  SECTS,  AND  DOCTRINES; 
from  ihe  Times  of  the  Apostles  t»  the  Age  of  Charlemagne.  Medium  Svj. 
V.ila.  I.  &.  II.  31>  6d.  eac)i.  (To  be  completed  in  4  Vols.) 

GREEK  AND  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES.  With  500  Illustrations. 
Medium  8vo.  2&s. 

GREEK  AND  ROMAN  BIOGRAPHY  AND  MYTHOLOGY.     With   600 

Ihudtratieus.     3  Vols.     Medium  8vo.     41.  4< 

GREEK  AND  ROMAN  GEOGRAPHY.  2  Vois.  With  500  Illustra- 
tions. Medium  bvo.  56*. 

ATLAS  OF  ANCIENT  GEOGRAPHY — BIBLICAL  AND  CLASSICAL. 
Folio.  61.  6«. 

CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY  of  MYTHOLOGY,  BIOGRAPHY,  AND 
GBOOBAPHY.  1  Vol.  With  750  Woodcuts.  8vo.  18*. 

SMALLER  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY.    Wun  209  Woodcuts.   Cro\vn 

bvo.     7*.  6d. 

SMALLER  GREEK  AND  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES.     With  200  Wood- 
cuts.   Crown  8vo.    7*.  6d. 
COMPLETE  LATIN  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.     With  Tables  of  the 

Roman  Calendar,  Measures,  Weights,  and  Money.     8vo.     21*. 
SMALLER  LATIN-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.     12uio.     la.  Qd. 
COPIOUS  AND  CRITICAL  ENGLISH-LATIN  DICTIONARY.     8\ro.    21*. 
SMALLER  ENGLISH-LATIN  DICTIONARY.     12mo.  7«.  6d. 
SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  ENGLISH  COURSE  :— 

SCHOOL  MANUAL  OF  ENGLISH  GRAMMAR,  WITH  COPIOUS  EXERCISES. 

Post  8vo.     3».  6d. 

PRIMARY  ENGLISH  GRAMMAR.     16mo.     Is.  6rf. 
MANUAL  OF  ENGLISH  COMPOSITION.      With  Copious    Illustra- 
tions and  Practical  Exercises.     12mo.   3*.  6</. 
PRIMARY  HISTORY  OF  BRITAIN.     12ino.     2s.  6d. 
SCHOOL   MANUAL    OF    MODERN    GEOGRAPHY,    PHYSICAL    AND 

Pulitical.     Post  8vo.     5*. 

A  SMALLER  MANUAL  OF  MODERN  SCHOOL   GEOGRAPHY.     Post 

8vo.    2<.  6<J. 

SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  FRENCH  COURSE:— 

FRENCH  FEINCIPIA.      Part  I.  A    First  Course,  containing  a 

Grammar,  Delectus,  Exercises,  and  Vocabularies.     12mo.     St.  64. 

FRENCH  FRINCIPIA.  Part  11.  A  Reading  Book,  containing 
Fable-",  Storifs,  and  Anecdotes,  Natural  Hi.-tory,  and  Scenes  from  the 
History  of  France.  With  Grammatical  Questions,  Notes  and  copious 

.     Etymological  Dictionary.     12mo.     4«.  6d. 

FRENCH  PRINCIPIA.  Part  III.  Prose  Composition,  containing 
a  Systematic  Cuurt-e  of  Exercises  on  the  Syntax,  with  the  Principal 
Rules  of  Syntax.  12mo.  [/»  the  rreu. 

STUDENT'S  FRENCH  GRAMMAR.  By  C.  HERON-WALL.  With 
Introduction  by  M.  Littre.  Postf-vo.  1*.6d. 

SMALLER  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE.  Abridged 
from  the  above.  Umo.  3s.  6d. 


28  LIST  OF  WORKS 


SMITH'S  (DR.  \VM.)  GERMAN  COURSE  :— 

GERMAN  IRINCIPIA.  Part  I.  A  First  German  Course,  con- 
txining  a  Grammar,  DeKctuB,  ExercUe  Book,  and  Vocabularies. 
1  iiiio.  3*.  64. 

GERMAN  I'RIKCIPIA.  Part  II.  A  Reading  Book  ;  containing 
Kable»,  Stories,  ai.d  Arecdotes,  Namral  lli-tory,  and  Scenes  from  tlio 
History  of  Germany.  Wnh  Grammatical  Questions,  Note*,  and  Uic- 
tuniHi-y .  ivin  >.  ;;.«.  ini. 

PRACTICAL  GERMAN  GRAMMAR.     Post  8vo.     30.  6d. 
SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  ITALIAN  COURSE:— 

ITALIAN  PKINCIPIA.  An  Italian  Cour.-e,  containing  a  Gran. mar, 
Delectuf,  Exercise  H<w>k,  with  Vocil  uUiirs.  mid  Materials  for  Italian 
Conversation.  By  Signor  Kicci,  1'iuU-hbor  ol  Italian  at  tbe  Li  y  of 
Litdou  College.  12mo.  3i.  (></. 

SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  LATIN  COURSE:— 

THE  YUUNO  BEGINNER'S  FIRST  LATIN  BOOK  :  Coi  tainiug  tbe 
hadinients  of  Gramiiiar,  Kasv  Oramiuatical  Que-'ioi.s  und  Exercise*, 
with  Vtcabularies.  Hcin^  n  Stepping  titui.e  to  i'jiiicipia  Lutiua,  i'art  I  , 
for  Young  Children,  ilium.  -J». 

THE  YOUNO  BEGINNER'S  SECOND  LATIN  BOOK  :  Containing  au 
v>Ky  Latin  Reading  Book,  witli  an  Aimly.-is  uf  the  Sentences,  Notes, 
andal  irtioi  ary.  Being  a  Stepping-  stone  to  Frincipia  Latiua,  Part  II., 
tor  Young  Children.  I2mo.  2». 

PRINCIPIA  LATINA.     Part  I.  First  Latin  Course,  containing  a 

Grammar,  Delectus, and  Exercise  Book,  with  Vocabularies.  12mo.  3».Kd. 

*»*  In  t  Ms  Edition  the  Cases  of  the  Nouns,  Adjtcnves,  and  Pronouns 

are  arrargrd  both  as  in  tl  e  OHDINABT  GRAMMARS  and  an  in  the  PUBLIC 

SCHOOL  PRIMER,  together  with  the  corresponding  Exercises. 

APPENDIX  TO  PRINCIPIA  LATINA  Part  I.;  being  Additional 
Exercises,  with  Examination  Papers.  12mo.  24.  64. 

PRINCIPIA  LATINA.  Part  II.  A  Reading-book  of  Mythology, 
Geography,  Komau  Antiquities,  and  History.  With  Notes  and  Dic- 
tionary. 12nio.  St.  6d. 

PRINCIPIA  LATINA.     Part  III.     A  Poetry  Book.     Hexameters 

and  Peiitameters;  Eclog.  Uvidiante;  Latin  frosody.  12mo.    3».  6d. 

PRINCIPIA  LATINA.     Part  IV.     Prose  Composition.     Rules  of 

Syntax    with   Examples,  Explanations  of  Synonyms,  and  Exercises 
on  tbe  Syntax.     12mo.     3*.  6d. 

PRINCIPIA  LATINA.     Part  V.  Sbort  Tales  and  Anecdotes  for 

Translation  into  Latin.     12mo.    3s. 
LATIN-ENGLISH     VOCABDI/ART     AND     FIRST      LATIN-ENGLISH 

DICTIONARY  FOR PH^KDRUS,  COBKELIUS NEPOS,  ANI>CJESAR.  limo.  Sa. 6d. 
STUDENT'S  LATIN  GRAMMAR.     For  the  Higher    Forms.     Post 

8vo.    0*. 
SMALLER  LATIN  GRAMMAR.    For  the  Middle  and  Lower  Forms. 

12mo.    3s.  6d. 
TACITUS,    Germania,   Agricola,    &c.      With    English   Notes. 

iLino.     Sa.  &l. 

SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  GREEK  COURSE:— 

INITIAGR^ICA.  Parti.  A  First  Greek  Course,  containing  a  Gram- 
mar, Delectus,  and  Exercise-book.  With  Vocabularies.  12mo.  3s.  6d. 

INITIA  GKSCA.  Part  II.  A  Reading  Book.  Containing 
Short  Tales,  Anecdotes,  Fables,  Mythology,  and  Grecian  History. 
12mo.  3*.  60. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.  29 

SMITH'S  (DR.  WM.)  GREEK.  COURSE — continued. 

JNITIA  GR.SCA.   Part  III.    Prose  Composition.    Containing  the 

Hules  of  Syntax,  with  copious  Examples  and  Exercises.     I2mo.    3* .  6d. 
STUDKNT'S   GRKKK   GRAMMAU.     For   the  Higher  Forms.     By 

CUKTIUB.    Post  8vo.     6*. 
SMALLER  GRKKK  GRAMMAR.   Fjr  the  Middle  and  Lower  Forma. 

Itfmo.     3*.  6d. 

GREEK  ACCIDENCE.     12mo.     2s.  6d. 

PLATO,  Apology  of  Socrates,  &c.    With  Notes.    12mo.  3.>\  6d. 
SMITH'*  (DK.WM.)  SMALLER  HISTORIES:— 
SCBIPTURE  BISTORT.     Woodcuts.    16mo.     3s.  6d. 
ANCIENT  HISTORY.     Woodcuts.   16mo.    3s.  6d. 
ANCIENT  QBOGRAPHT.    Woodcuts.     16mo.     3*.  6d. 
ROME.     Modern  Geography.     Woodcuts,     lo'mo.     3s.  6rf. 
GRKECK.     Woodcuts.     16mo.     3s.  Qd. 
CLASSICAL  MTTHOLOGT.  WoodcuU.     16mo.     3s.  6d. 
ENGLAND.    Woodcuts.    16mo.     3*.  6d. 
ENGLISH  LITERATURE.      16mo.     3s.   6d, 
SPECIMENS  or  ENGLISH  LITERATURE.     16mo.     3«.  6rf. 
SMITH   (GEO.).      Life   of   John     Wileon,    D.D.    (of    Bombay), 
Fif'y  Yeara  Missionary  and  PliiUnthropist.     Portrait.     Post  8vo.    9». 
—  (PHILIP).  History  of  the  Ancient  World,  from  the  Creation 

to  the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  A.D.  476.    3  Vols.    8vo.     31*.  6d. 
BOMEBVILLE  (MART).    Personal  Recollections  from  Early  Life 
to  Old  Age.     Portrait.    Crown  8vo.    12*. 

-   Physical  Geography.     Portrait.     Post  8vo.   9«. 
—  Connexion   of   the  Physical  Sciences.     Portrait. 

Post  8vo.    9s. 

Molecular  &  Microscopic   Science.      Illustrations. 


2  Vols.    Poit  8vo.    21*. 
SOTTTHEY  (RoBT).  Lives  of  Bunyan  and  Cromwell.  Post  8vo.   2«. 
hTAEL  (MADAMK  DK).     See  STEVKNS. 
STANLEY'S  (DKAN)  WORKS:— 

SINAI  AND  PALESTINE,  in  connexion  with  their  History.    Maps. 

8ro.    14s 
BIBLE  IN  THE  HOLT  LAND  ;  Extracted  from  the  above  Work. 

\V«odcii'g.    Fcap.  8vo.     2*.  6d. 

EASTERN  CHURCH.    Plans.    8vo.    12s. 

JEWISH  CHURCH.     From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Christian 

Era.    3  Vols.  8vo.    38*. 

EPISTLES  or  ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.     8vo.    18s. 
LIFE  or  DR.  ARNOLD,  OF  RUGBT.  Portrait.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vxx  120. 

IIlSTOKT  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  SCOTLAND.       8VO.       7«.  6rf. 

MEMORIALS    OF  CANTKRBURT  CATHEDRAL.     Post  8vo.     7s.  6rf. 
WESTMINSTKR    ABBET.     Illustrations.    8vo.     15s. 
SERMONS  DURING  A  TOUR  IN  THE  HAST.     8ro.    9s. 
MEMOIR  OF  EDWARD,  CATHERINE,  AND  MARY  STANLEY.  Cr.  8vo.  9s. 
CHRISTIAN  INSTITUTIONS.  Essays  on  Ecclesiastical  Subjects.  8vo. 
STEPHENS  (REV.    W.  R,  W.).      Life  and   Times  of  St.  John 

Chrys"stom.    A  Sketch  of  the  Church  and  tbe  Empire  in  the  Fourth 

Century.    Portrait.    870.  12i. 


30  LIST  OF  WORKS 


STEVENS  (Da.  A.).  Madome  de  Ptael;  a  Study  of  her  Life 
and  Tin.--.  The  Kir-t  K.<Y»I  nt  im  and  the  First  Empire.  2  Vols.  Cr.  8vo. 

STRATFORD  I.E  REDCL1FFE  (LORD).  The  Eastern  Question. 
Being  *  Selection  from  his  Writings  during  the  last  Five  Years  of  bin 
Life.  With  a  Preface  by  I  can  Sianley.  I'-st  8vo. 

STREET  (0.  E.1.  Gothic  Architecture  in  Spain.  Illustrations. 
Royal  8vo.  80*. 

Italy,  chiefly  in   Brick  and 
Marble.   With  Notes  on  North  of  Italy.  Illustrations.   Royal  Svo.  26*. 

STUART  (VILLIERS).   Nile  Gleanings:  The    Ethnology,  History, 

and  Art  of  Ancient  Egypt,  as  Revenlrd  by  Paintings  and  Has- 
Reliffs.  With  Descilptlrns  of  Nubia  »nd  its  Great  Rock  Temples, 
63  Coloured  Illustrations  ic.  Medium  Svo.  3l«.  9d. 

STUDENTS'  MANUALS:— 

OLD  TKSTAMBKT  HISTORY  ;  from  the  Creation  to  the  Return  of 

the  Jews  from  Captivity.    Maps  and  Woodcuts.     Post  Svo.     7*.  &'. 
NEW  TESTAMENT  HISTORY.     With  an  Introduction  connecting 

the  Hihtory  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.    Maps  and  Woodcuts. 

Post  Svo.    It.  6rf. 
ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY.    The   Christian  Church  during  the 

First  Ten  Centuries ;  From  its  Foundation  to  the  full  establishment 
of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  and  the  Papal  Power.  Post  Svo.  7*.  6d. 

EKQLISH  CHURCH  HISTORY,  from  the  accession  of  Henry  VIII. 
to  the  Mlencing  of  Convocati<  n  in  U.e  18th  Century.  By  Canon 
PEBBT.  Post  8vo.  It.  6rf. 

ANCIENT  HISTORY  OF  THB  FAST  ;  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylonia, 
Media,  Persia,  Asia  Minor,  and  Phoenicia.  Woodcuts.  Post  Svo.  7«.  6d. 

ANCIENT  GEOGRAPHY.  By  Canon  BEVAN.  Woodcuts.  Post 
8vo.  It.  6d. 

HISTORY  OF  GREECE  ;   from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Roman 
Conquest.    By  WM.  SMITH,  P.C.L.     Woodcuts.    Crown  Svo.    7«.  64. 
%*  Questions  ou  the  above  Work,  12mo.    2«. 

HISTORY  OF  ROME;  from  the  Earliest  Timee  to  the  Establish- 
ment of  the  Empire.  By  DEAM  LIDUELL.  Woodcuts.  Crown  «vo.  1i.  6d. 

GIBBON'S  DECLINE  AND  FALL  OF  THB  ROMAN  EMPIRE.  Woodcuts. 
Post  8vo.  7*.  M. 

HALLAM'S  HISTORY  OF  EUROPE  during  the  Middle  Ages. 
Post  8ve.  It.  6d. 

HISTORY  OF  MODETN  EUROPE,  from  the  end  of  the  Middle 
Ages  to  the  Treaty  of  Berlin,  1878.  PcstSvo.  [In  the  Pre»t. 

HALLAM'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  ;  from  the  Accession  of 
Henry  VII.  to  the  Death  of  George  II.  Post  Svo.  It.  6d. 

HUME'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  from    the   Invasion  of  Julius 
Csesar  to  the  Revolution  in  1688.    Revised,  corrected,  and  continued 
down  to  the  Treaty  of  Berlin,  1878.      By  J.  S.  BBEWRB,  M.A.    With 
7  Coloured  Maps  &  70  Woodcuts.     Post  Svo.    7«.  6rf. 
***  Questions  on  the  above  Work,  12mo.    2,«. 

HISTORY  OF  FRANCE  ;  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Estab- 
lishment of  the  Second  Empire,  1862.  By  H.  W.  JKBVIS.  Woodcuts. 
Post  Svo.  It.  6d. 

ENGLISH  LANGUAGE.  By  GEO.  P.  MARSH.  Post  Svo.  7s.  6d. 
ENGLISH  LITERATURE.  Bj  T.  B.  SHAW,  M.A.  Pott  Svo.  7«.6rf. 
SPECIMENS  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE  from  the  Chief  Writers. 

By  T.  B.  SHAW.    Post  Svo.    7«.  6rf. 
MODERN  GEOGRAPHY  ;  Mathematical,  Physical  and  Descriptive. 

By  CAKOX  BBVAN.  Woodcuts.  Post  Svo.  It.  M. 
MORAL  PHILOSOPHY.  By  WM.  FLEMING.     Post  Svo.  7s.  6d. 
BLACKSTONE'S  COMMENTARIES  ON  THK  LAWS  OF  ENGLAND.     By 

MALCOLM  KF.KR.     Post8v«.    7*.  firf. 


PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY. 


STANHOPE'S  (EARL)  WORKS  :— 

HISTORY  OF   ENGLAND  FKCM   THE  FEIGN   OP  QUEEN  ANNE  TO 

THE  PEACE  OF  VERSAILLES,  1701-83.     9  vols.     Post  8vo.    6s.  each. 
LIFE  OF  WILLIAM  PITT.     Portrait c.    3  Vols.      8vo.     36s. 
BRITISH  INDIA,  FROM  ITS  ORIGIN  TO  1783.    Post  8vo.     3a.  6d. 
HISTORY  OF  "  FORTY-FIVE."   Post  8vo.     3s. 
HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL  ESSAYS.     Post  8vo.     3s.  6d. 
FRENCH  RETREAT  FROM  Moscow,  OTHER  ESSAYS.  Post  8vo.  7s  6rf. 
LIFE  OP  BKLISARIOS.     Post  bvo.     10s.  6rf. 
LIFE  OP  CONDE.     Post  8vo.     8s.  6d. 
MISCELLANIES.    2  Vols.     Post  8vo.     13-». 
STORY  OF  JOAN  OF  ARC.     Fcap.  8vo.     Is. 
ADDRESSES  ON  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS.     16mo.     Is. 

SUMNER'S  (BISHOP)  Life  and  Episcopate  during  40  Years.     By 

Rev.  G.  H.  SUMNEE.    Portrait.    8vo.    14f. 
SWAINSON    (CANON).      Nicene     and   Apostles'   Creeds;    Their 

Literary  History  ;  together  with  some  Account  of  "The  Creed  of  St 

Atbanasius."    8vo.     16s. 

SYBEL  (VoN)  History  of  Europe  during  the  French  Revolution. 

1789—1795.    4  Vols.    8vo.    48*. 
SYMONDS'  (REV.  W.)  Records  of  the  Rocks;  or  Notes  on  the 

Geolofty,  Natural  History,  and  Antiquities  of  North  and  South  Wales. 

Siluria,  bevon,  and  Cornwall.    With  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  12s. 
TALMUD.     See  BARCLAY;  DETJTBCH. 
TEMPLE  (SiR  RICHARD).     India  in  1880.     8vo. 
THIBAUT'S  (ANTOINE)   Purity  in  Musical  Art.     Translated  from 

the  German.    With  a  prefatory  Memoir  by  W.   H.  Gladstone,  M.I'. 

Post  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

THIELMANN  (BARON).  Journey  through  the  Caucasus  to 
Tabreez,  Kurdistan,  down  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  to  Nineveh  and 
Pabylon,  and  across  the  Desert  to  Palmyra.  Translated  by  CHAS. 
HENEAGE.  Illustrations.  2  Vols.  Post  8vo.  18s. 

THOMSON  (ARCHBISHOP).     Lincoln's  Inn  Sermons.   8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Life  in  the  Light  of  God's  Word.     Post  8vo.     5s. 

—  Word,  Work,  &  Will :  Collected  Essays.  Crown  8vo.  9s. 

TITIAN'S  LIFE  AND  TIMES.  With  some  account  of  his 
Family,  chiefly  from  new  an<?  unpubli-hed  Records.  By  CROWK  and 
CAVALCASKLLB.  With  Poi trait  and  Illustrations.  2  Vols.  8vo.  42». 

TOCQUEVILLE'S  State  of  Society  in  France  before  the  Revolution, 
1789,  and  on  the  Causes  which  led  to  that  Event.  Translated  by  HENRY 
REEVE.  8vo.  14s. 

TOMLINSON(CHAs.);  The  Sonnet;  Its  Origin,  Structure,  and  PI  ace 
in  Poetry.  With  translations  from  Dante,  Petrarch,  &c.  PostSvo.  9s. 

TOZER  (REV.  H.  F.)  Highlands  of  Turkey,  with  Visits  to  Mounts 
Ida,  Athos,  Olympus,  and  Pelion.  2  Vols.  Crown  8vo.  24*. 

—  Lectures  on  the  Geography  of  Greece.    Map.      Post 

8vo.    9». 

TRISTRAM  (CANON).  Great  Sahara.  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  15s. 
Land  of  Moab  ;  Travels  and  Discoveries  on  the  East 

Side  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Jordan.  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  15s. 
TRURO  (BISHOP  OF).  The  Cathedral :  its  Necessary  Place  in 

the  Life  and  Work  of  the  Church.     Crown  Svr>     6s. 


82       LIST  OP  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY   MR.  MURRAY. 


TWENTY  YEARS'  RESIDENCE  among  the  Greek*,  Albanian*, 

Turku,  A'meriianN,  nnd  Bulgarian*,  by  an  ENGLISH  LAUY.  Edited 
by  STANLEY  LAKE  POOLK.  2  Vols.  Crown  8vu.  21*. 

TWTSS'  (HoRAC*)  Life  of  Lord  Eldou.    2  Vols.     Poet  8vo.    21«. 
TYLOR  (E.   B.)  Researches  into  the  Early   History  of  Mankind, 

and  Development  of  Civilization.    3rd  Edition  Revised.     Bvo,     1  v*. 

Primitive  Culture ;  the  Development  of  Mythology, 

Philosophy,  Religion.  Art,  and  Custom.    2  Vols.    Hvo.     24*. 

VIRCHOW    (PROFESSOR).      The    Freedom    of    Science    in    the 

Modern  State.    Fcap.  8vo.    2*. 
WELLINGTON'S   Despatches  during    his   Campaigns  in  India. 

Denmark,  Portugal,  Spain,  the  Low  Countries,  and  France.    8  Vols. 

8vo.    Mi.  each. 

Supplementary  Despatches,  relating  to  India, 

Ireland,  Denmark,  Spanish  America,  Spain,  Portugal,  France,  Con- 
gress of  Vienna,  Waterloo  and  Paris.  14  Vols.  Bvo.  20i.  each. 
"«•  An  Index.  8vo.  20*. 

Civil  and  Political  Correspondence.    Vols.  I.  to 


VIII.     8vo.     20«.  each. 

Speeches  in  Parliament.    2  Vols.    8vo.    42«. 


WHEELER  (G.).  Choice  of  a  Dwelling  ;  a  Practical  Handbook  of 
Useful  Information  on  Building  a  House.  Plans.  Post  8vo.  Is.  M. 

WHITE  (W.  H.).  Manual  of  Naval  Architecture,  for  the  use  of 
Naval  Officer*.  Shipowners,  Shipbuilder-,  and  Yachtsmen.  Illustra- 
tions, fcvo.  24s. 

WHYMPER  (EDWABD).    The  Ascent  of  the  Matteihorn.    With 2 

Maps  and  100  Illustrations.      Medium  8vo.     10*.  6d. 

WILBERFORCE'S  (BISHOP)  Life  of  William  Wilberforce.  Portrait. 

Crown  8vo.    6*. 

(SAMUEL,  LL.D.),  Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford  and 

Winchester;  his  Life.    By  C«non   ABHWELL,  D.D.      With  Portrait. 
Vol.  I.    bvo.    16*. 

WILKINSON  (SiR  J.  G.).  Manners  and  Customs  of  the 
Ancient  Egyptians,  their  Private  Life,  Laws,  Artfl,  Relig'on,  &c.  A 
new  edition.  Edited  by  SAMUKL  BIRCH,  LL.D.  Illustrations.  3  Vols. 
8vo.  84a. 

-  Popular  Account  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians.    With 
600  Woodcuts.     2  Vols.     Post  8vo.    12*. 

WILSON  (JOHN,  D.D.),  of  Bombay,  Fifty  Years  a  Philanthropist 
and  Missionary  in  tlie  East;  his  Lile.  By  GKOBOR  SMITH,  LL.D. 
Portrait.  Post  8vo.  »». 

WOOD'S  (CAPTAIN)    Source  of  the  Oxus.    With  the  Geography 

of  the  Valley  of  the  Ozus.     By  COL.  YULE.     Map.    8vo.     12*. 

WORDS  OF  HUMAN  WISDOM.  Collected  and  Arranged  by 
E.  S.  With  a  Preface  by  CANON  LIDDOH  Fcap.  8vo.  3«.  Bd 

YORK  (ARCHBISHOP  OP).  Collected  Essays.  Contents. — Synoptic 
Gospels.  Drath  of  Christ.  Gcd  Exists.  Worth  of  Life.  Design  in 
Nature.  Sports  and  Pastimes.  Emotions  in  Preaching.  Delects  in 
Missionary  Work.  Limits  of  Philosophical  Enquiry.  Crown  8vo.  9*. 

YULE  (COLONEL).  Book  of  Marco  Polo.  Illustrated  by  the  Light 
ot  Oii,  ntal  Writers  and  Modern  Travels.  With  Maps  aud  SO  Hates. 
2  Vols.  Medium  8vo.  63* 

A.  F.     A  Little  Light  on  Cretan  Insurrection.    Post 

8vo.     2*  6<i. 


BRADBURY,  AONEW,   <fe   CO.,   PRINTERS,   WHITBFEIAR8. 


' 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


Form  L9-Series  4939 


DA    536.       H43H43 


REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


I 


PLEASE  DO  NOT    REMOVE 
THIS   BOOK  CARD. 


University  Research  Library 


