^Jl 



^'^~«W^««fcUgigga^ 







PRESJi>jrNT Whjte Library, 
Corn !•: ll u n { ve r sf ty. 




3 1924 088 008 499 




The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924088008499 



THE RIGHT HON. 

JOHN CHAELBS HEEBIES 

VOL. II. 



LONDON : pniNTED IJY 

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-BTREET SQUAEB 

AND PAELIAMEKT STEEET 



MEMOIB 



THE PUBLIC LirE OE THE RIGHT HON. 



JOHN CHARLEfe HERRIES 

IN THE REIGNS OF GEORGE III., GEORGE IV. 
WILLIAM IV. AND VICTORIA 



BY HIS SON 



EDWARD HEEEIES, C.B. 



WITH AN INTRODUCTION by SIR CHARLES HERRIES, K.C.B. 



IN TWO VOLUMES VOL. II. 



LONDON 
JOHN MUREAY, ALBEMARLE STREET 

1880 

A II rights reserved 



CONTENTS 

OP 

THE SECOND VOLUME. 
CHAPTER VI. 

PJRE 

From the completion of the Goderich Cahinet to its dissolution— New 
system of taxation projected by Harries — Eastern question — Whig 
inti-igues — Lord Holland — Goderich resigns and returns — Finance 
Committee — Tierney's meddling — Difference between Herries and 
Husldsson — The Premier's indecision — Proposed repeal of Foreign 
Enlistment Act — Lyndhurst's intervention produces final catastrophe 1 

CHAPTER VII. 

Formation of Wellington Cabinet — Herries Master of the Mint — Cor- 
respondence — Mysterious incident — Ministerial explanations in Par- 
liament — Attacks upon Mr. Herries, and successful defence — 
Subsequent statement of real caiises of breaking up of Goderich 
Cabinet — Eefutation of Lord Palmerston's posthumous slanders . 59 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Cabinet changes — Correspondence with the Duke — Finance Committee 
— ^Eeform of the Sinking Fund — Dr. Bowring — Catholic Emancipa- 
tion — Proposed Indian appointment — Board of Trade — Settlement 
of old dispute with the United States — Parliamentary duties — 
Close of the Wellington Administration — Financial management of 
Torieai and Liberals compared 87 

CHAPTER IX. 

Tories in Opposition — Herries's activity — Praed— Government influence 
at Harwich defied — Theory of Treasiu'y ownership — Scurrility of 
Liberal press — Keform — Timber duties : defeat of the Ministry — 



[6] 



CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 

I'AOi! 



Russian-Dutch loan: historical view; Herries's action — Duke of 
Wellington's attempt to form a Cabinet — Helpless condition of Con- 
servative party — Croker and the ' Quarterly Eeview ' — Reformed 
Parliament — Herries in Peel Cabinet — Goes to Italy — Parliamentary 
business— Metropolitan improvements — Stockdale and Hansard — 
Defeat of Melbourne Ministry on Herries's motion — His intervention 
with a Conservative journal in favour of Palmerston's policy solicited 
— Debates on the Budget of 1841 — Huskisson's commercial policy 
elucidated 119 



CHAPTER X. 

Herries driven by evictions from Harwich: beaten by bribery at 
Ipswich; not included in Peel Cabinet — Satisfactory assurances 
from Prime Minister — Correspondence with him and Goulbura — 
Herries out of office consulted by Ministers — His correspondence 
with Sir R. Peel and Chancellor of the Exchequer on new plan of 
finance, &c. — Metropolis Improvements Commission — Thames Em- 
bankment, &c. 188 



CHAPTER XI. 

Return to Parliament, 1847 — Monetary crisis — Bank Charter Act — 
Repeal of the Navigation Laws — Answer to Mr. Cobden's motion for 
reduction of estimates — Derby Cabinet, 1852 — Herries, President 
of the Board of Control 224 



CHAPTER XII. 

Work at the India Office — Correspondence on Burmese War, &c. — 
Exercise of patronage — Letters to Croker and others — Recognition 
of French Empire — Resignation of Derby Cabinet — Mr. Herries 
retires from Parliament — Letter from Brougham — Opinions of 
eminent public men — Death — Liberal testimony — General view of 
Mr. Herries's political principles and practice — Conclusion . . 247 

INDEX 289 



MEMOIE OF J. C. HEEEIES. 

CHAPTER VI. 

From the completion of the Godericli Cabinet to its dissolution — New system 
of taxation projected by Herries — Eastern question — Whig intrigues — 
Lord Holland — Goderich resigns and returns — Finance Committee — 
Tierney's meddling — Diiference between Herries and Huskisson — The 
Premier's indecision — Proposed repeal of Foreign Enlistment Act — 
Lyndhurst's intervention produces final catastrophe. 

After the conclusion of the Ministerial peace (or sus- 
pension of arms) Mr. Herries went abroad, and returned 
to England in October 1827 with partially renovated 
health. The notices found among his papers of occur- 
rences previous to the renewal of hostilities in the 
Cabinet are scanty and for the most part unimportant. 

As to his financial administration, we are not able 
to say anything. We gather, however, from a paper 
belonging to a later period what was the nature of the 
policy which he had in view, and which met with the 
concurrence of the First Lord of the Treasury and Mr. 
Huskisson : — 

' Being convinced that the accumulated wealth of 
the nation ought to contribute in a greater proportion 
than it had done to the support of the burdens of the 
country, consisting in so large a degree as they did of 
the charge of accumulated debt,' and that ' the very 
great preponderance assigned in our system of taxation 

VOL. II. B 



2 CONFIDENCE IN HEREIES. ch. vi. 

to the duties derived from manufactures and consump- 
tion was not only impolitic but unsustainable,' he 
intended ' to propose a property tax by way of commu- 
tation for some of the then existing taxes which were 
most obstructive to the interests of the country, and con- 
sequently most detrimental to it in its growing rivalry 
with the manufactures of the Continent, and also most 
obnoxious to public feeling.' 

That he continued to enjoy the undiminished con- 
fidence of the mercantile and moneyed class may be 
gathered from the following letter, addressed to him on 
November 26 by a great commercial notability of that 
time, Mr. Hart Davis, member for Bristol in several 
Parliaments : — 

' I am in almost daily communication with two or 
three of the largest holders of English stock, and I 
observe that the great fear operating in their minds is 
not so much the political state of the world as the 
expected Finance Committee, which they fear may be 
so formed as to recommend measures of finance of a 
very novel character. . , . The great stockholders above 
referred to put all their trust in you, and I can assure 
you with truth that they would not at this moment 
hold any English stock if you were not the Chancellor 
of the Exchequer.' 

The attention of the Cabinet, however, must have 
been devoted less to financial than to foreign afi'airs, and 
especially to that constant vexation of all Cabinets, the 
Eastern Question. Of the deliberations of the Ministry 
on this subject not much is known ; but it appears that 
differences of opinion existed among them, similar to 



CH. VI. EASTERN AFFAIRS— MEMORANDUM. 3 

those which, seem to have divided their successors under 
the Duke of Wellington as to the mode of carrying out 
the treaty of July 6 for the pacification of Greece. 
There were some who desired to give that treaty an 
extended, and others, a restricted, application. 

As an illustration of conflicting views and arguments 
the following paper in Mr. Herries's handwriting may 
be not devoid of interest. It is docketed in pencil : — ■ 

' Mem. of grounds of opposition to a proposal made 
by Huskisson to press the operations against Turkey to 
the extent of our becoming parties to a plan for invading 
her by Russia. — Made between the time when we first 
heard of the battle of Navarino and the receipt of further 
explanations on the subject. N.B. Huskisson's pro- 
posal actually made before the news of the battle : ' — 

' The question is whether we shall now, without 
further delay, accede to the proposal of Russia that the 
Porte should be distinctly threatened by the allied 
Powers with an invasion of Wallachia and Moldavia, if 
she does not submit, within a specified period, to the 
terms prescribed by the mediating Powers ; and, further, 
that if the invasion of the provinces by the Russian 
troops shall take place, it shall be with the common 
consent of the three Powers, and with an agreement 
between them that they shall only be held by Russia for 
the object of the Triple Treaty and as a means of en- 
forcing it, and shall be evacuated on the attainment of 
that object. The grounds upon which our acquiescence 
in this proposal is recommended, are — 

' That Russia wiU be no longer controllable by 
us and by France if we refuse to do so, and that the 

B 2 



4 MEMOEANDUM. ch. vi. 

invasion of Turkey will, in that event, be undertaken by 
Russia without any restrictions upon her further pro- 
ceedings ; and much stress is laid upon the expectation 
that Turkey will submit under the influence of such a 
measure. 

' This argument has obviously more reference to the 
importance of averting the danger which we apprehend 
from Russia than to that of securing the object which 
we seek to obtain for Greece. 

' The objections to the proposal are that it leads 
directly to war in the event of the continued refusal of 
the Porte to submit ; and we must first consider its 
consequences in that view of the alternative, whatever 
expectation we may entertain of the effect of intimida- 
tion on the Porte. 

' We must regard this step as being in effect the 
first declaration on our part of an intention to enforce 
by war (commencing by a territorial invasion by Russian 
troops) the terms with respect to Greece which the 
Treaty of July was intended to secure. 

'In every former stage of the proceedings on this 
subject. Great Britain has most distinctly and emphati- 
cally asserted that the mere refusal of the Porte to 
accept the mediation of the alHed Powers would not by 
Grpat Britain be considered as a just cause of war. 

'It must, on the other hand, be admitted that the 
Treaty, where it contemplated the contingency under 
which we might be called upon to concert ulterior 
measures for the enforcement of its objects, must have 
had war in view as one of the measures then to be made 
the subject of consideration. 



CH. 71. MEMORANDUM. 5 

' We are, therefore, as yet perfectly free to determine 
whether a war with Turkey merely for the purpose of 
enforcing a satisfactory arrangement between that Power 
and its subjects is a fit course to pursue ; and, then, it is 
open to us to consider whether, if we do adopt it, the 
mode of aggression suggested by Russia is the best. 

' As it has hitherto been maiatained in our diplo- 
matic communications that the refusal of the Porte to 
accept our mediation should not be considered a ground 
of war, what are the reasons or circumstances which 
should now induce us to declare it to be a ground of 
war ? 

' Is the battle of Navarino an event which would 
justify such a change of principle? Without further 
information upon the origin of that battle we certainly 
are unable to solve that question. The battle of 
Navarino may have sprung out of circumstances afford- 
ing just ground of complaint, and perhaps even of war, 
against Turkey ; but it may also be quite otherwise, and 
the blame of it may be on our side. At present, there- 
fore, it should rather operate as a reason for awaiting 
further intelligence before we take any new decision in 
this matter, than as affording a ground for such a 
decision as is proposed to us. 

' This view is greatly strengthened when we consider 
that the battle of Navarino must, in all human proba- 
bility, have produced at Constantinople some strong 
decision one way or the other, of which we shall, within 
a short time, receive information. 

' Either the Porte will resent that action violently 
and do some act which will itself be a just cause of war 



b MEMORANDUM. en. vi. 

on our part ; or it will be intimidated and submit to the 
terms prescribed to it. 

' The intermediate course of continuing passively 
sulky and obstinate seems almost impossible. 

' In either of the two former cases we shall get out 
of our present embarrassing position without having 
committed ourselves to a measure of war upon grounds 
on which the opinion of the country will, to say the 
least of it, be much divided. If the Porte submits, we 
shall have triumphed without having broken through 
the pacific professions which we have hitherto main- 
tained : if she gives us new ground for war by ag- 
gression or msult, we shall enter upon it without any 
inconsistency with those professions. 

' Supposing the Porte to adopt the third course, then 
we shall still be in the same position as we now are 
with regard to our ulterior measures. 

' If it be contended that Russia wUl take such 
offence at our even suspending our decision upon her 
proposal that we may incur the risk of seeing her break 
from our alHance and invade Turkey without our con- 
currence, it must at once be manifest that that supposition 
implies a conviction of such bad faith on her part, and 
such uncontrollable ambition to accomplish her ultimate 
designs upon Turkey, that the project of restraining her 
by the terms of the alliance must be utterly hopeless. 
It must be observed, then, that we ourselves shall be 
acting under the conviction that her fidelity to her 
engagements can only be depended upon so long as 
everything is done that can suit her purpose ; for she is 
unquestionably bound to us in good faith not to take 



CH. vr. DISCORD. 7 

any steps against Turkey for the pacification of Greece 
except in concert with us ; whether those steps which 
are prescribed in the Treaty or such others as the three 
Powers may agree upon.' 

From a passage in the Diary of Mr. Greville 
(Dec. 13, 1827) it would seem that he had been made 
acquainted by some member of the Cabinet with the 
plan propounded by Mr. Huskisson, who, although de- 
sirous to bring Russian arms into Turkey, does not 
appear to have been a very ardent PhilheUene ; for, if 
we are to believe G-reville, in a conversation with the 
latter he spoke (' Diary,' Sept. 15) irreverently of 
Greece as a ' humbug.' According to Lord Palmerston's 
'Journal,'^ a proposal made by him in December for 
sending a land force to the Morea ' to sweep the Turks 
from Greece ' did not meet with Huskisson's approval. 

It may be supposed that these discussions were not 
conducive to harmony in a Cabiaet composed of discord- 
ant elements, the prolonged co-existence of which in 
the same body was soon found to be impossible. The 
inevitable dissolution of the Administration was pre- 
cipitated by circumstances never hitherto clearly ex- 
plained. 

We have mentioned the strong desire of the Whig 
section of the Cabinet for the introduction of Lord 
Holland, and the no less strong repugnance of the 
King (with whom the Prime Minister agreed) to his 
admission, which, as anyone possessing a grain of poli- 
tical sense must have perceived, would have been iucon- 
sistent with the basis of the Government. Such a step 

' Lord Dcdling's Life, &c., vol. i. p. 288. 



» LORD HOLLAND AGAIN. ch. vr. 

would have implied, not only tlie abandonment, but the 
reversal, of the Canning programme, to which Lord 
Goderich and his colleagues professed to adhere. It 
was morally impossible that Lord Holland should 
consent to desist from the advocacy of the views — 
wholly opposed to those of Mr. Canning — which he had 
constantly and vehemently sustained on many questions 
of the first importance, and notably on that of ParKa- 
mentary reform. Equally certain was it that, unless 
the Cabinet was to become nothing but a sort of club 
of individual office-holders, who might or might not 
occasionally exchange a few casual remarks on the state 
of public affairs, every question could not be left an 
open one, like that of Catholic Emancipation. It 
followed, therefore, of necessity, that the bringing in of 
Lord Holland involved the adoption by the Cabinet of 
the principles which he represented, or, in other words, 
the conversion of a coalition Ministry, pledged against 
Keform, into a Whig — and an advanced Whig — Minis- 
try, in favour of Reform. And there cannot be a doubt 
that such was the object in view. 

For a while the importunities of the Whig members 
of the Goyernment ceased, and the matter was allowed 
temporarily to rest. By-and-by, little by little, a 
change came over the spirit of the central division of 
the Cabinet. The so-called Canningites — described by 
Lord Dalling as neither Whigs nor Tories — began, 
gradually and insensibly, to drift away from the princi- 
ples Mr. Canning had always maintained, and towards 
the principles he had always resisted. Day by day, 
drawn by the Whig current, they dropped out of their 



CH. VI. WPna INTRIGUE. 9 

course a little to leeward. But the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer did not drift. He never drifted. Throughout 
his whole life he ' kept station,' because throughout 
his life his ' principles were fixed, his views defined.' 

At length the time arrived when it was deemed 
expedient to give an outward and visible sign of the 
sUent progress of conversion by stamping a decidedly 
Whig character upon a Cabinet not originally intended 
to be Whig, and the pressed Premier urged the King to 
accede to the demand which three months before he had 
advised his Majesty to reject.^ 

Lord Palmerston (who in his ' Autobiography ' 
strangely omits any allusion to this business), in a 
letter to his brother of December 18, 1827 (Bulwer's 
'Life'), mentions that Lord Goderich, after having 
unsuccessfully offered a verbal recommendation for the 
admission of Lords Holland and Wellesley, ' wrote the 
King a letter again urging the matter,' and stating that 
' without such an addition of strength to the Grovem- 
ment he felt himself unable to make himself responsible 
for carrying on the King's service ; and unless his 
advice was adopted he begged leave to retire. To this 
Lansdowne and Huskisson were parties, and they were 
prepared to abide by the same alternative. But then 
Goderich added to this letter a postscript, which nobody 
saw, and in which he stated that he felt himself, from 
domestic circumstances affecting the health of one most 
dear to him, wholly incapable of continuing to perform 
the duties of his station.' 

* TMs appears from Mr. Planta's letter to Huskisson of August 21 — ' To 
this proposal Lord Goderich has no inclination to accede, and the King has 
decided objections to it.' 



10 SECRET PROCEEDINGS. ch. vi. 

Neither in this letter nor anywhere else does Lord 
Palmerston say — as he might have said, for it was the 
fact — that the steps taken by the Prime Minister on 
December 8 and 11, in concert with some of his 
colleagues, were kept concealed until the 13th from 
others who, as was well known, would have protested 
against them. 

So that we get at this : Lord Lansdowne and Mr. 
Huskisson took part with Lord Goderich in a course of 
action leading necessarily to the immediate dissolution 
of the Government in the not improbable event of the 
King's refusal to comply with demands put forward 
without the knowledge, and against the wishes, of some 
of its principal members ; and the Prime Minister then 
took, on private grounds, a separate course, tending to 
the same result, without the knowledge of those who 
thought they were in his particular confidence. 

The manner in which the secret action of a portion 
of the Cabinet became at last known to other members 
of it, and the resolutions taken in consequence of the 
tardy discovery, will appear from a record left by Mr. 
Herries, and from his correspondence, which show that 
a persistence on the part of Lord Goderich and some of 
his colleagues to force Lord Holland upon the King 
(and they could no longer have receded) must have 
broken up the Government at no distant date. It 
would have had the effect of driving out the Tory ele- 
ment of the existing mixed Cabinet, which would thus 
have come to an end. The vacant places could only 
have been filled up from the ranks of the Whig party, 
and the result would have been a Whig Administration, 



CH. Ti. FINANCE COMMITTEE. 11 

such as the King did not wish to have, and Parliament 
would not have supported. The conclusion is un- 
avoidable, therefore, that, from this cause alone, the days 
of the Goderich Ministry, at the close of December 1827, 
were numbered. 

But there was another embarrassment which was 
made the immediate and ostensible cause of its destruc- 
tion. 

It has been clearly pointed out that the appointment 
of a Finance Committee, announced by Mr. Canning 
for the session of 1828, was a measure which originated 
with Mr. Herries. He proposed it to Mr. Canning, as 
he had already done to Lord Liverpool ; and this fact 
was positively affirmed by him without contradiction 
in the House of Commons.^ The Committee was his 
child, and therefore he was in a peculiar degree inte- 
rested in its success. That his special connection with 
the plan, independently of departmental considerations, 
was recognized, is shown by the circumstance that 
one of the conditions of the compromise suggested by 
Mr. Huskisson on August 30 was that Mr. Herries, 
as President of the Board of Trade, should have the 
management of this Finance Committee, which, when 
he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, became a matter 
belonging to his own particular department. No one 
having any ordinary sense of propriety can fail to per- 
ceive that nothing relating to this business ought to 
have been done without previous concert with him. 

Great, then, was his astonishment, and equally great 
his displeasure, at learning casually, in the course of 

' Speech in Ministerial explanations, Februaiy 18, 1828. 



12 TIERNEY'S MEDDLING. ch. vi. 

conversation on other matters, that steps had been taken, 
without his knowledge, towards the formation of the 
Committee, Mr. Tierney, who was not called upon to 
act in any way in the matter, having taken upon himself 
to select for the chair a prominent member of the Whig 
party, and induced both Lord Goderich and Mr. Hus- 
kisson — the leader in the House of Commons — inadver- 
tently to assent to the choice of Lord Althorp, without 
previously consulting the Chancellor of the Exchequer. 
It is not to be supposed that Mr. Huskisson and Lord 
Goderich had the least intention to give offence to their 
colleague, although they were undoubtedly too hasty 
in sanctioning the proposal of Mr. Tierney, with regard 
to whom we cannot conscientiously express the same 
opinion. On the contrary, looking at the personal ani- 
mosity recently displayed by him towards Mr. Herries, 
on the one hand, and, on the other, at the want of any 
good reason for his interference in an affair in which 
he was not directly concerned, we are drawn to the con- 
viction that one of the motives for his action was a 
desire to give offence, and, by rendering the position of 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer untenable with credit, 
to push out of the Cabinet the man whose entrance into 
it he had strenuously endeavoured to prevent. 

What ensued may best be told in Mr. Herries's own 
words, preserved in the following 

STATEMENT AND CORRESPONDENCE. 

' On November 28 Mr. Herries, having occasion to 
communicate with Mr. Huskisson on some business de- 



CH. VI. HEERIES'S STATEMENT. 13 

pending between the Treasury and the Colonial Office, 
learned, in the course of conversation, from him. that 
Lord Althorp had been thought of as the chairman of 
the Committee of Finance. 

' Mr. Herries expressed thereupon the favourable 
opinion which he entertained of Lord Althorp, and 
observed that, so far as his own personal feelings were 
concerned, such an appomtment would by no means be 
unsatisfactory to him. But the proposition came upon 
him by surprise ; and he did not understand, when the 
subject was first mentioned, that it had been formally 
considered, entertained and acted upon. 

' Mr. Tierney came in just at this time, apparently 
for the express purpose of communicating with Mr. 
Huskisson on the subject of the Committee of Finance. 
Some remarks which fell fi:om him conveyed the im- 
pression of something like a final agreement with Lord 
Althorp, after a negotiation with Lord Spencer on the 
subject. But they were not addressed to Mr. Herries ; 
they passed between Mr. Tierney and Mr. Huskisson. 

' Some discussion then took place concerning the sub- 
jects which it might be proper to refer to the attention 
of the Committee of Finance ; this was terminated by 
the entrance of Mr. S. Bourne. 

' Mr. Herries's first reflection upon what had trans- 
pired in this interview, after he returned home, satisfied 
him that the step which had been taken was highly m- 
expedient, and that the manner in which it had been 
adopted, without communication with him, was not only 
irregular, but very derogatory to the character of the 
ofiice which he held. 



14 HERRIES'S STATEMENT. en. ti. 

' He determined accordiBgly to communicate imme- 
diately with the head of the Government upon the 
subject. 

' He could not see Lord Goderich before the following 
morning. To him Mr. Herries stated what he had 
learned, and at the same time the grounds of his objec- 
tion and complaiat against it. 

' He was then, however, told by Lord Goderich that 
his lordship also was aware of the proceedings with 
respect to Lord Althorp ; and Lord Goderich informed 
him that when, on a late occasion, he had enquired of 
Mr. Huskisson whether Mr. Herries had been consulted 
in the matter, and was informed that he had not, he 
(Lord Goderich) had expressed the greatest regret and 
surprise. But it appears that no communication of the 
proceedings was even then immediately made to Mr. 
Herries. 

' On the same day Mr. Herries wrote to Mr. Huskisson 
on the subject; but before the letter was despatched he 
received a request that he would call on Mr. Huskisson. 
This message was the consequence of what Mr. Herries 
had said to Lord Goderich. 

' In the interview which followed Mr. Herries stated 
his objections to the measure adopted, and to the man- 
ner in which it had been executed. 

' When he returned he despatched the letter already 
written, with a note, stating that, notwithstanding the 
verbal conference, it appeared right to him to send as a 
written protest the letter which he had stated, in the 
conference, that he had previously prepared. 

' This letter was answered by a short note from Mr. 



CH. VI. CORRESPONDENCE — HERRIES TO HUSKISSON. 15 

Huskisson, stating that Mr. Herries had some right to 
complaia of Lord Goderich and himself, but adding 
that he still thought, for certain reasons, that it would 
be advisable to have Lord Althorp m the chair of the 
Committee. This note was accompanied by the copy 
of a letter from Mr. Huskisson to Mr. Tierney, sug- 
gesting the propriety of entire forbearance from any 
further steps on the subject of the Committee. 

' Mr. Herries to Mr. HusMsson. 

' " (Private and confidential.) 

' " Downing Street : NovemTser 29, 1827. 

' " My dear Huskisson, — I send you the letter which, 

as I told you, I had written, though not closed, when 

you sent to let me know that you were alone. It is 

right that you should have my written protest against 

the course which has been pursued. I am quite sure 

that you cannot think differently from me upon the 

subject of the ground of complaint which I have against 

it. Truly yours, 

' " J. C. Herriks." 

' " My dear Huskisson, — When you mentioned to me 
yesterday what were your views with respect to Lord 
Althorp as chairman of the Finance Committee, I was 
not aware of the length to which the negotiation with 
him had proceeded, nor did I know until this day that 
it had been some time in progress. 

' " When Mr. Tierney came in and referred to the 
communications which he had had with Lord Spencer as 
well as with Lord Althorp, I was indeed made aware 



16 CORRESPONDENCE — HERRIES TO HUSKISSON. ch. ti. 

of the fact that the business was understood to be actu- 
ally settled. 

' " I did not, however, think it a fit opportunity for 
making any other remark than what I then said (and 
with great sincerity) as to my personal respect for Lord 
Althorp. 

' " But I felt at once (and reflection has since made 
me feel much more strongly) that the commencement, 
progress, and termination of this arrangement without 
the shghtest communication with me must place me in 
a very awkward position. 

' " A further reflection has also tended to satisfy me 
that, in the present state of parties and the present 
situation of our Government, the choice is not a happy 
one. The alarm and distaste of those who are opposed 
to Finance Committees as instruments of too extensive 
and dangerous reforms will not be diminished by the 
appointment of Lord Althorp, who is regarded as the 
most prominent member of the most reforming party in 
the House. 

' " It appears also that the steps which have been 
taken are not confined to the chair of the Committee. 
Other persons have been communicated with, and, as I 
understand, have received promises of being nominated 
as members of it in the same manner, without any in- 
timation of these proceedings to me. 

'"I have been speaking to Lord Goderich this day 
on the subject. I think he entirely concurs in my view 
of the matter, and entertains the same feelings as 
myself upon it, so far at least as relates to the irre- 
gularity of the course which has been pursued. What 



CH. VI. CORRESPONDENCE — HUSKISSON TO HERRIES. 17 

can now be done to set matters right again I do not 
know, but I will call on you and talk tbe matter over 
as soon as I can find an opportunity of seeing you. 
Truly yours, 

' " J. C. Heeeies. 

' "Downing Street : Noyember 29, 1827." 

' Mr. HusMsson to Mr. Herries. 

' " (Private.) 

' " S. P. : November 30, 1827, 

8 A.M. 

' " My dear Herries, — I wrote to Tierney before I 
left the office last night — indeed, before I received your 
letter. 

' " I enclose to you a copy of what I said to him. 

' " I retain my opinion that upon a balance of incon- 
veniences and advantages Althorp will be safer in the 
chair than a leading personage in the Committee, kept 
at a jealous distance by the friends of Government. 

* " But this was no reason for communicating with 
him at present. 

' " In respect to yourself I must admit that both 
Goderich and I must take some blame to ourselves for 
not having sooner informed you of what Tierney had 
mentioned to Goderich on the subject ; but I am sure 
you will acquit both of us of anything intentional in 
this delay. Yours very truly, 

' " W. HUSKISSON. 

* " I am going to Claremont in the expectation that 
we shall have no message till Sunday." 

VOL.II. c 



18 COREESPONDENCE — HUSKISSON TO TIEENEY. ch. v:. 



' Mr. Huskisson to Mr. Tierney. 

' " (Private and confidential.) ' 

' " Downing Street : November 29, 1827. 

' " Dear Tierney, — There might arise so much serious 
embarrassment from its becoming known that particular 
names had been pointed out as members of the Finance 
Committee, as well in respect to the manner in which 
their claims and pretensions would be canvassed pre- 
maturely out of doors (as we say) as to the sort of 
applications which it would bring upon me and other 
members of the Government, that I am sure you will 
excuse my suggesting to you not to hold out expecta- 
tions to any of the individuals who were thought of or 
mentioned yesterday as persons to be put upon the 
Committee. Indeed, it will, I am sure, be the safest 
course, where so many jealous and conflicting feelings 
may be excited in the different parties into which the 
House is split, for the members of the Cabinet to abstain 
from all discussion upon this matter, except strictly 
among themselves. 

' " Upon reflection I incline to think this, at least for 
the present, would have been the most prudent line even 
in respect to Althorp ; but I am sure it is very desir- 
able, in respect to others, that no further step in advance 
should be made in this business till we come nearer to 
the time of meeting Parliament, and have had an oppor- 
tunity of talking it over more fuUy among ourselves. 
Yours very faithfully, . ,, ^_ Huskisson." 



CH. vi. HERRIES'S STATEMENT. 19 

' Here the matter rested. Mr. Herries remained in 
expectation for some days of receiving a communication 
concerning the course which it might be proposed to 
pursue, or the measures to be adopted for undoing those 
which had been taken. But there were other matters 
of extreme and urgent importance then occupying the 
attention of the Cabinet ; and the arrangement of the 
Finance Committee was obviously one which might be 
postponed for some time. He felt confident at least 
that no further step would now be taken without con- 
sultation with him. 

' It was within about a week of this time that 
Mr. Herries received intimations of some projected 
changes of great importance in the Grovernment ; they 
were vague as to the purport of the proceedings going 
on, although not doubtful as to the fact of some 
measures being actually on foot. In this state of 
anxiety and surmise he remained in daily expectation 
of receiving some intimation from the head of the 
Government of the nature of those proceedings, but 
nothing was made known to him on the subject until 
after Lord Goderich's resignation had taken place. He 
then found the apprehensions which he had been led to 
entertain fully justified. Negotiations of the most 
pressing nature had been carried on, with the concur- 
rence of a part of the Cabinet, for effecting a material 
change in its composition, which had ended in the 
retirement of Lord Goderich. 

' His return took place on December 19, and, as it 
then appeared to Mr. Herries, without any settlement 
concerning the projected changes, although he soon 

c 2 



20 COREESPONDENCE — HEERIES TO GODERICH. ch. vr. 

afterwards discovered that he had formed that conclusion 
erroneously. 

' The proper time appeared, therefore, to be now 
arrived for calUng upon Lord Goderich to come to a 
decision respecting the Finance Committee. 

' Mr. Herries's general views and principles on the 
subject had been stated to Lord Goderich in the con- 
versations which had passed between them. 

' He therefore addressed to him the following letter, 
which led to the correspondence annexed to it : — 

' " Downing Street : Decemlier 21, 1827. 

' " My dear Goderich, — It is now full time that some 
further steps should be taken with respect to the Com- 
mittee of Finance. 

' " It would, I believe, naturally be my duty to bring 
that subject under the consideration of the Cabinet ; 
but, after what has passed (and I advert to it with 
much pain), I feel that it is not at present in my hands. 
I must, therefore, learn from you, as head of the Govern- 
ment, what is the course intended to be pursued for the 
formation of this Committee and the regulation of its 
proceedings. 

' " What has hitherto been done in this matter has 
taken place without consultation or communication 
with me, although it would seem to belong principally 
to my department of the pubUc business. A negotia- 
tion has been carried on, and completed by Mr. Tierney, 
with your sanction and that of Mr. Huskisson, for the 
nomination of the chairman of the Committee. 

' " The Government is, I presume, fully committed to 



CH. Ti. CORRESPONDENCE— HERRIES TO GODERICH. 21 

the individual fixed upon for the purpose, and to the 
noble family of which he is a member ; and this pro- 
ceeding, as I am given to understand, has been adopted 
with a "view, in a great measure, to a political object, 
and as being calculated to strengthen the hands of the 
Administration. 

' " I doubt much whether that view be correct, and 
whether the calculation be a just one. But I have an 
objection to the arrangement upon a much higher 
ground. I conceive that, in order to derive in the 
utmost possible degree from this important measure all 
the public benefit which it is capable of affording, and 
at the same time to avoid the inconveniences to which 
it is liable, all political views of the narrower kind — all 
those which are connected with particular parties and 
influences only — should be utterly discarded in the 
formation of the Committee. 

' " It appears to me that these objects would be best 
secured if the Committee were composed of the most 
eminent individuals of the several parties in the House 
of Commons, and the chair filled by some person of 
high character and respectability, either entirely un- 
connected, or connected as httle as possible, with any 
of the poUtical parties into which the House is divided. 

' " Whether this be a proper view of the subject, and 
whether, if it be so, you could yet proceed upon such 
a principle, you and Huskisson are best able to judge. 
I do not feel that I could act in it upon any other. In 
order, therefore, to relieve you from any difficulty, as 
connected with my situation, respecting the course 
which you may deem it expedient to pursue, I beg to 



22 COREESPONDENCE— GODERICI-I TO HEEBIES, ch. vi. 

assure you that if, by putting my office into other hands, 
you can more satisfactorily execute this difficult and 
delicate measure, you may command my most ready and 
cheerful resignation of it. I place it (and I beg it to be 
understood as being done in the most friendly manner) 
entirely at your disposal. Yours, &c., 

' " J. C. Herries." 

' " Do-wning Street : December 24, 1827. 

' " My dear Herries, — I received your letter of the 
21st instant on Saturday evening. I agree with you in 
thinking that the time is at hand when it will be neces- 
sary to consider the question of the Finance Committee 
in all its bearings, both as to its character and composi- 
tion and as to the mode in which its duties can best be 
performed for the public good and with credit to all 
parties interested. When Huskisson returns to town, 
which will be in two or three days, this matter must be 
taken in hand and brought to a final issue. 

' " In the meantime I owe it both to you and to 
myself to explain what you seem greatly to have mis- 
understood, viz. the degree to which I was a party to 
anything like a settlement of the question with respect 
to the chairman of the proposed Committee. 

' " I thought, indeed, that 1 had already explained 
verbally to you that, as far as I was concerned, nothing 
had passed but some casual conversation between Mr. 
Tierney and myself; and I certainly was greatly sur- 
prised when I learned that any step whatever had been 
taken in the business. 

' " The facts of the case, as regards myself, are as 
follow : — Some weeks ago Mr. Tierney, having to call 



CH. vr. COERESPONDENCE— GODERICH TO HERRIES. 23 

upon me upon some other business, mentioned incident- 
ally tliat he thought it would be a very good thing if 
the confidence of the Government were shown to Lord 
Althorp in respect to the Finance Committee ; and upon 
my stating that I thought he ought to be a member of 
the Committee, Mr. Tierney explained that what he 
suggested was to place him in the chair. I stated to 
Mr. Tierney that that was a proposition which ought to 
be well considered before any decision could be taken, 
but that personally I had a regard for Lord Althorp, 
arising out of old friendship and esteem. There the 
matter ended at the time ; and, as we were aU occupied 
with other matters (I think it was in November), I took 
no further notice of what I considered to be a loose 
suggestion. A few days after Mr. Tierney spoke to me 
again in the Cabinet Room, and I then answered that 
to whatever the members of the Cabinet in the House 
of Commons might think advisable upon the subject I 
should not object, not anticipating that anything could 
be acted upon without such a communication with aU of 
them, and not myself supposing that the matter pressed 
for an iuunediate decision. 

' "When I afterwards learned that Mr, Huskisson had, 
in consequence of a communication with Mr. Tierney, 
acquiesced in the idea, and that some sort of communi- 
cation had been made to Lord Althorp, the first thing 
I did was to enquire of Mr. Huskisson whether he had 
spoken to you, and whether you were a party to the 
arrangement ; and I found, to my great surprise, that 
you had never heard anything of the proposition and 
were in no way a party to it. 



24 COEEESPONDENCE— GODERIOH TO JIEEEIES. en. ti. 

' " I have thought it right to state these circum- 
stances, because you appear to think that I was aware 
of the communication (whatever it may have been) 
which was made to Lord Althorp before it was actually 
made to him. 

' " With respect to the latter part of your letter, in 
which you place your office at my disposal, I can truly 
say (what I am sure you can easily believe) that I 
cannot conceive a case in which it would be a con- 
venience to me that you should retire ; but at all events 
I should hope that you will not take any final step 
upon that subject until we shall have had an oppor- 
tunity of giving to the whole question the fullest and 
most unreserved consideration. Yours, &c., 

' " GODERICH." 

' Two personal communications,* by desire of Lord 
Goderich, took place upon this subject between Lord 
Goderich and Mr. Herries, one on December 29, 1827, 
and another on January 2, 1828. Nothing materially 
bearing on this question took place in these interviews, 
beyond what is noticed either in the preceding or in 
the following portion of this correspondence. 

' " Downing Street : January 4, 1828. 

' " My dear Herries, — Having had much communica- 
tion with Huskisson on the subject of our recent corre- 
spondence respecting the proposed nomination of Lord 
Althorp to be chairman of the Committee of Finance, 
I have distinctly ascertained from him, and now think 

* Memoranda of these conversations will be found at the end of this 
statement. 



CH, Ti. COERESPONDENCE— GODERICH TO HEERIES. 25 

it right to tell you without reserve, that he feels it to 
be quite impossible for him to acquiesce ia giving up 
that nomiiiation : it is clear, therefore, that such a deci- 
sion of the question would at once dissolve the Ad- 
ministration. I cannot but feel that your resignation, 
on the other hand, would in all probability have the 
same effect. It becomes, therefore, iadispensably neces- 
sary, both on public and private grounds of the greatest 
urgency, that I should distinctly understand from you 
whether it is your fixed determination to resign the 
seals of the Exchequer unless Lord Althorp's nomina- 
tion be abandoned. I would not press you for an 
answer in so strong a manner were it not for the 
near approach of the meeting of Parliament, and that 
infinite embai-rassment to the King's service and to the 
public interests would arise if this matter were not 
brought to a speedy determination ; and the King 
would certainly have the right to complain if he were 
not apprised of the state of things as long before the 
meeting of Parliament as possible. 

' " There certainly has been an unfortunate misun- 
derstanding upon this subject, and I deeply regret upon 
every account that I was not aware on Wednesday, 
December 19, when I stated to the Cabinet my readi- 
ness to go on, provided they continued to entertain their 
former sentiments towards me, that this point, respect- 
ing the Committee of Finance, was Ukely so soon to bring 
the Government, and especially myself, into jeopardy. 

' ' ' That, however, cannot now be helped, and I have 
only to hope that you will let me know your determina- 
tion, in order that I may regulate my own conduct. 

Yours, &C., ' " GODEEICH." 



26 COEEESPONDENCE— HEERIES TO GODEEICH. ch. ti. 

' " Montreal : January 5, 1828. 

' " My dear Goderich, — I received your letter of yes- 
terday at this place last night. 

' " You inform me that, after much conversation with 
Huskisson, you have ascertained that he feels it impos- 
sible for him to acquiesce in giving up the nomination 
of Lord Althorp to the chair of the Fmance Committee, 
and that a decision of the question to that effect must 
at once dissolve the Government. 

' " You add that you think my resignation would in 
all probability have the same consequence. 

' " Upon these grounds you desire to know distinctly 
whether I should resign the Exchequer seals if that 
nomination were persevered in. 

' " In answer to this question allow me once more 
to refer you to my letter of December 21, and also to 
request your recollection of what passed between us in 
the two interviews which I have since had with you 
upon this subject. 

' " In both those interviews I distinctly explained 
to you that I felt it to be imperative upon me to abide 
strictly by the terms of my letter, and that I must 
consequently leave it entirely to you to dispose of me, 
with reference to the conditions therein stated, in 
such manner as might appear to you to be the most 
expedient for the public service and for the interests of 
your Government. 

' " It is scarcely necessary for me to repeat on this 
occasion the declaration which I have already several 
times made to you, and which I distinctly made to 
Huskisson also, that, far from feeling even the shadow 



CH. VI. COERESPONDENCE— IIERRIES TO GODERICH. 27 

of any personal objection to Lord Althorp, I should, on 
the contrary, have had much satisfaction in transacting 
business with him as Chairman of the Committee, on 
account of the esteem and respect in which I hold his 
character, if his appointment could be made consistent 
with the public principles upon which it appeared to 
me to be indispensable that the Committee should be 
formed, in order to be productive of the utmost possible 
benefit to the public. 

' " As to the soundness of that principle, I have not 
understood that you diflfer in the least degree from me ; 
nor have I heard that it is disputed by anyone else. 

' " With respect to the regret which you express on 
account of your not having been aware, on December 
19, when you stated your willingness to go on with the 
Government, that the ' point now in question was likely 
to bring the Government, and especially yourself, into 
jeopardy,' permit me to observe, that if I had been in 
your confidence with regard to the important steps 
which you had taken before the 19th, and also as to the 
arrangements connected with the resolution then an- 
nounced (but which arrangements were at that time 
only made known to some and not to aU of your 
colleagues), I should have been better enabled (as I 
should sincerely have desired) to study your personal 
convenience with respect to the best time for urging a 
settlement of the question of the Finance Committee. 
Yours, &c., ' " J. C. Herkies." 



28 COREESPONDENCE— GODEKICH TO HERRIES. ce. vi, 

' " Blackheath : January 5, 1828. 

' " My dear Hemes, — The more I reflect upon this 
unfortunate question respecting the Finance Committee, 
the more I am convinced that the view which you have 
taken up is founded upon a misconception both of the 
circumstances themselves, which took place at the 
end of November, and of the consequences which would 
result from placing Lord Althorp in the chair of that 
Committee. I am quite convinced that there was no 
intention whatever of treating you with disrespect, or of 
exposing you to the embarrassment of not being in 
your proper place in all that relates to a matter so 
closely connected with your own department. 

' " It is certainly unfortunate that anything whatever 
was said to Lord Althorp before it was settled that 
something should be said ; but it by no means follows 
from that circumstance that the Government ought to 
be placed in jeopardy, if it can be avoided, especially 
at a moment so peculiarly inconvenient to the King's 
service and the pubHc interests as the present must 
necessarily be. Now as to the appointment itself, I 
must say that it appears to me that you greatly over- 
rate the objections and difficulties. 

' " Lord Althorp is a man of perfect honour and 
integrity, and if he consented, with the approbation 
pf the Government, to take the chair of that Com- 
mittee, it cannot be supposed that he would do so 
without giving his fair and honourable confidence to 
the Government. I do not mean that he would or 
could compromise his own opinions ; but I am per- 



en. VI. COERESPONDENCE— HERRIES AND GODERICH. 29 

suaded that neither hostility nor mischief would enter 
into his views or feelings in discharging his duties. 
I wish very much that you would well consider this 
matter before you decide to withdraw from the Go- 
vernment under circumstances which would cause so 
much embarrassment. 

' " If I thought I was counselling anything discredit- 
able to you personally, nothing would induce me to 
lay this view of the case before you. But we all 
owe much to the King and to the public good, and 
although I feel more and more the extent of the 
sacrifice which office requires, and the pressure, bodUy 
and mental, which it imposes, I feel that we ought, if 
possible at all events, to meet Parliament to justify 
our measures, and then leave it to Parliament to take 
what course they may choose in deciding upon our 
fate. Yours, &c., '"Godeeich." 

'"Montreal: January 6, 1828. 

' " My dear Goderich, — Before I received your letter, 
of which I return you a copy (as you desire), I had 
despatched an answer to yours of yesterday, which 
reached me last night. But having no messenger 
here, I sent it by a conveyance, which may perhaps 
not be expeditious in the delivery of it. 

' " The effect of it was precisely the same as what I 
have stated to you twice verbally, when we discussed 
the unpleasant subject of the Finance Committee. 

' " I will not reply to what you have now written 
to me untO. I have done what you desire — again very 
carefully considered the matter. 



30 CORRESPONDENCE AND STATEMENT. en. vi. 

'"Of one thing, however, I wish to assure you, lest 
a misapprehension should, on that point, remain on 
your mind. I am not actuated by the least feeling of 
offence or disgust in the determination which I adopt. 
I was unquestionably hurt, and very much so, when 
I first learned what had been done, on account of the 
slight which appeared to have been put upon me in 
my official character. But I have too much friendship 
for Huskisson to entertain a belief, or to harbour any 
suspicion, that he would intentionally do me any 
wrong. I need not say that the same observation 
would apply to yourself in the strongest manner, 
independently even of the explanation which you have 
given me of the small part which you had in the 
business. In short, my conduct will not be governed 
by any unpleasant feelings towards any individual in 
this matter. , .< -^ ^_ Heretes." 

' In consequence of Lord Goderich's request, another 
interview on this subject took place on January 7. 
The same arguments and observations as had been 
urged and answered m the former interviews were 
repeated, and little more occurred deserving of par- 
ticular notice, except that Lord Goderich laid stress 
upon the circumstance that, after all, no positive or 
definite engagement had been made with Lord 
Althorp, and that the negotiation could hardly be 
said to have been carried beyond the ascertaining 
that Lord Althorp and his friends would be satisfied 
by the appointment if it were offered. To this Mr. 
Herries answered by some observations, the substance 



en. Ti. COREESPONDENCE— HERRIES TO GODERICH. 31 

of whicli will be found in the following letter, written 
in consequence of Lord Goderich's particular request 
to receive an answer in that form to his last letter. 
It was sent to him very soon after the termination of 
the interview : — 

' " Downing Street : January 7, 1828. 

' " My dear Goderich, — I have, as you requested in 
your last letter (and as I promised in my answer that 
I would), carefully reconsidered the subject of my 
letter of December 21. 

'"I regret to be compelled to state that the recon- 
sideration so bestowed upon it has not conduced to any 
alteration of the judgment which I had previously 
formed and communicated to you. 

' " The question at issue, and upon which yowr judg- 
ment — not mine — is to be formed, is obviously not the 
mere nomination of Lord Althorp. That nomination 
cannot be treated as an insulated point, disconnected 
from the circumstances under which it was determined 
upon and the manner in which it was settled ; nor 
(which is of much more importance) can it be fairly 
considered without reference to the principles by which 
I have stated that I think every step, in the formation 
of the Committee of Finance, ought to be guided. 

' " In your last communication to me you gave me 
to understand that I had been mistaken in supposing 
that a conclusive engagement with Lord Althorp had 
been made. It appears, from your view of the matter, 
that little more had been done than to ascertain that 
Lord Althorp would undertake the office. If such 
be the case, I cannot but observe that it renders the 



32 CORRESPONDENCE— BERRIES TO GODERICH. ch. vi. 

positive determination of Huskisson to adhere peremp- 
torily to that choice, and even to refuse all discussion 
of the reasons upon which I think a different course 
ought to be pm-sued, not only more unintelligible 
to me, but more difficult for me to acquiesce in. I 
should have thought that it might upon such grounds 
have still been an open question. 

' " Let me take this opportunity of renewing the 
assurance which I have already given you that your 
determination, as the result of your judgment in the 
matter, to advise the King to confide to other hands 
the seals which I now hold, will not have the slightest 
tendency to diminish the friendship which I feel both 
for you and for Huskisson, nor to abate the sincere 
wishes which I entertain for the future success of your 
Administration. 

' " I feel that where parties of such unequal weights 
are placed by an unfortunate concurrence of circum- 
stances in two opposite scales, there ought not to be a 
moment's hesitation (with reference to the interests of 
the Government) in so disposing of me as to retain the 
invaluable services of our common friend. Yours, &c., 

' " J. C. Hereies." 

^Memorandum of a Conversation with Lord Goderich 
between 11 and 12 o'clock on December 29, 1827. 

' Lord Goderich began by statmg the embarrassment 
in which he was placed by the letter which he had 
received from me on the subject of the Committee of 
Finance. He appeared to be in doubt as to the sense in 



CH. VI. MEMORANDUM. 33 

which he should understand it, and expressed a wish 
to know fi-om me whether he was to conclude that I 
had determined upon resigning my situation in con- 
sequence of what had been done. In putting the ques- 
tion in this mode he referred to his explanation by 
letter of the part which he had himself taken in the 
affair, and which he conceived I had materially mis- 
understood. 

' It appeared to me sufficiently clear that his object 
was to draw from me the declaration that my resigna- 
tion was to be considered rather as final than contingent, 
and tendered on account of what had already been done, 
without opening for any other course that might now 
be adopted. 

' I met this mode of treating the subject by recalling 
to his attention the terms of my letter, and by pointing 
out to him that it was in his power upon that letter to 
dispose of me as he might judge best for the interests of 
the public and those of his own Government. It was 
for him to judge whether I could usefully for both 
objects continue in my situation, and that the question 
must be decided materially with reference to what he 
himself might think it right to do with respect to the 
engagement with Lord Althorp. 

' I insisted strongly upon the public and personal 
objections to the measure which I had before stated, and 
I availed myself of his declaration that the matter had 
been conducted and concluded without his own know- 
ledge to impress upon him that he was therefore the 
more clearly at liberty to decide upon it now in such 
manner as for the public interest might seem the best. 

VOL. II. D 



34 MEMORANDUM. ch. ti. 

' From the manner in which the conversation was 
conducted on his part it was very obvious to me that 
he was above all things anxious to avoid this difficulty 
(personal to himself) by drawing from me some defini- 
tive and unqualified expression of a determination to 
resign. But I resisted carefully — but with the fuUest 
and most candid explanation, and, as I think, the fairest 
and most honest statement of the real case — all these 
endeavours. I made him clearly understand that my 
resignation, so far as he might leave it to my own choice 
(confessing that he was clearly empowered by me to 
leave me no choice in the matter), must be contingent 
only upon his perseverance in the measure into which 
he had been drawn by others. But I left him no 
reason to suppose that if that course were persevered in 
my determination would be susceptible of change. He 
appeared himself to be unable to imagine that I could, 
consistently with my own character, with what was due 
to my office, and what was due to the public interests 
in the view which I took of them (and the correctness 
of which, be it observed, he never once attempted to 
dispute), continue to hold the office which I fill. 

' The conversation was continued by many lamenta- 
tions on his part, and expressions of the embarrassment 
and difficulty in which he was placed — being repeti- 
tions only of what he had said to me on many previous 
occasions. 

' In the course of these I took the opportunity of 
desiring to know whether I had distinctly understood 
him on the subject of the prospective change in the 
Government. He then repeated to me that the King 



CH. Ti. MEMORANDUM. 35 

had assented to the introduction of Lord Holland " at 
Easter," he first said, and then, correcting himself, " be- 
fore Easter." I asked him if Lord Wellesley was like- 
wise to be introduced. He said, hesitatingly, " Yes, 
he thought so ;" but he added that he had been very 
ill-used about Lord Wellesley ; that Lord W. had 
been forced upon him on several occasions, and rather 
strangely on this occasion ; and that it was not an act 
of his own choice. All this was uttered in an uncertain 
and hesitating and confused manner, as if more the 
expression of his own ruminations than intended as a 
distinct communication to me. I took the opportunity, 
however, of telling him on my part, very distinctly, 
that I feared that these measures were all pressed upon 
him by persons out of the Cabinet in communication 
with a part of ourselves, and that I was afraid he would 
in the end experience all the evils and misfortunes 
which had attended all other parties or persons who had 
been governed by the suggestions of Mr. Brougham.' 

' Memorandum of a Conversation with Lord Goderich this 

Morning. 

' January 2, 1828. 

' He sent to me about eleven o'clock to request I 
would call upon htm. I did so very soon afterwards. 

' Afi;er some remarks upon indifferent topics he said 
he had desired to see me again on the subject of the 
letter which I had written to him concerning the Com- 
mittee of Finance. 

' He reverted to the difficulties of his situation, 
and repeated his lamentation on the hardship of being 

D 2 



36 MEMORANDUM. ch. ti, 

placed in it, against his own choice and inclination, to 
serve the purposes of others. 

' I allowed him, without contradiction or interrup- 
tion, to pursue the strain of these lamentations. 

' He then came to the particular difficulty which my 
letter created, and asked me in the same terms as he 
had done in the last conversation on the same subject, 
" What was he to do ? How was he to understand it ? 
How was he to act upon it ? I must be sensible," he 
said, "that it was absolutely necessary for him to come 
to some decision in a matter which might concern the 
existence of the Government." 

' He pressed me, in short, precisely in the same tone 
and manner as on December 29 last, to declare catesrori- 
cally whether I was determined to resign my office 
or not. 

' I treated the question in the same way as on the 
former occasion. I desired him to look well at my 
letter, which had nothing ambiguous or obscure in it, 
and to act upon it as he might judge best for the public 
service and most consistent with his duty to the King 
and his Government. I observed to him that he had 
said nothing to induce me to alter the opinions ex- 
pressed in my letter, either by explaining the conduct 
of the persons mentioned in it (except so far as con- 
cerned the extent of the sanction which he had given 
to their proceedings) or by controverting the principles 
which I had laid down in it ; and I could therefore only 
reiterate my adherence to what I had therein declared 
to be my conviction and determination. 

' He then said that the other parties remained equally 



CH. VI. MEMORANDUM. 37 

convinced that the course adopted by them was right, and 
that they were determined not to yield, so that probably 
they might resign if it were determined to make any 
change in it. 

' I observed that in that case we were fairly at issue, 
and it must be for him to decide as he thought best 
and to act upon my letter accordingly. 

' In the course of the conversation he stated that he 
thought I was mistaken as to the extent to which the 
parties in question were pledged by their proceedings. 
It appeared to him that, after aU, they had only sounded 
Lord Althorp, and that they could not be understood 
as having so completed the arrangement with him as to 
be positively bound by it. 

' I immediately availed myself of that declaration to 
point out to him that, in that case, his decision would 
be perhaps less difficult, and certainly less embarrass- 
ing. It appeared that he could set aside the nomina- 
tion of Lord Althorp without much inconvenience. 

' He then, however, denied that he could do so, ob- 
serving only that there were cases in which an under- 
standing between parties could not be set aside without 
giving as much oflfence as by the violation of a more 
formal engagement. 

' I was, therefore, left to conclude that, whether as 
an understanding or as a compact, the arrangement was 
deemed by Huskisson and Tierney irrevocable. 

' Our discussion (if such it can be called) continued 
some time, with many words on his part and very few 
on mine, but made no progress towards an agreement. 
I steadfastly refused to make any declaration beyond 



38 MEMORANDUM. ch. vi. 

that which the letter contained, or to adopt any step by 
which the matter would be taken out of his hands, 

' He hinted that he supposed, if I resigned, some of 
the minor adherents of the Government would follow 
me. I took no notice of the hint. 

' The conversation at one time diverged from the 
point immediately in question to other topics connected 
with the state of the Government. I observed to him 
among other things that the change proposed to be 
made by introducing Lord Holland appeared to me 
most unwise at this particular moment, independently 
of the objections that might be urged against it upon 
more general grounds, because I was convinced that, in 
the present temper of the country, and as the Parlia- 
ment was now composed, there would be at least five 
votes alienated by that junction for every vote con- 
ciliated by it. He made no answer to that remark. 

' He said he had communicated my letter to Huskis- 
son, but not to Tierney. I told him he was of course 
quite at liberty to communicate it to both of them, or to 
anybody else. 

' He had said in a former communication that Hus- 
kisson denied the correctness of some part of the letter, 
but did not say of what part. He made no remark of 
that kind on this occasion. 

* He complained of the " Times " newspaper, to which 
I adverted as having announced the determination that 
some of us (I supposed myself, of course, among the 
number), who were not liberal and enlightened enough, 
should be turned out as soon as Don Miguel's departure 
shoiild have left the King more at leisure. He said 



CH. Ti. MEMORANDUM. 39 

significantly " there was something about the ' Times ' 
which required explanation ; he should not allow that 
system to go on." 

' I did not leave him without strongly impressing 
upon him that he owed it to me and to my ofiice well 
to consider the situation in which he allowed me to be 
placed. Whatever there was difficult and unpleasant 
in the dilemma which my letter occasioned to him, 
he must admit that it was not created by any act of 
mine, and that I could take no other course than that 
which I had adopted. He admitted fuUy that I was 
justified in what I had done, and that I could hardly 
have acted otherwise. In short, he objected in no 
respect, either on this occasion or in the former con- 
versation, to my conduct in the business.' 



Mr. Huskisson, thinking, or persuaded by others, 
that he was too far pledged to be able creditably to draw 
back from the sort of engagement he had unwarily 
allowed himself to be led into by Mr. Tierney, refused 
to give way, and declared it to be his intention to with- 
draw from the Government. But, as appears from the 
explanations given by him in the House of Commons, 
he was induced by the soHcitations of Lord Lansdowne 
and others to suspend the actual transmission of his re- 
signation, and to ask Lord Goderich instead ' whether 
the proffered resignation of the Chancellor of the Exche- 
quer might not be accepted.' 

It is also evident, from the memoranda of conversa- 
tions between Mr. Herries and the Prime Minister, and 
from their correspondence on this subject, that attempts 



40 NEW CAUSE OF STRIF E. ch. ti. 

were made to draw an absolute and final resignation 
from tlie Chancellor of the Exchequer, who was left for 
several days in total ignorance of Mr. Huskisson's " 
announced determination to retire. 

But he persisted in adhering to the line he had 
taken, and in leaving the question whether he was or 
was not to remain in office to be decided upon by the 
head of the Government. 

While the perplexed Prime Minister was lamenting 
over the difficulties that beset him, a new cause of strife 
was suddenly introduced mto the distracted Cabinet. 

Letters from Lord Bexley mention a proposal made 
by Sir James Scarlett, then Attorney-General, one of 
the Whigs who had joined Mr. Canning, that a measure 
should be brought forward for the repeal of the Foreign 
Enlistment Act of 1819. It is not conceivable that a 
question of such political importance could have been 
raised at such a moment except in concert with some 
members of the Cabinet, who must have looked forward 
to one of two results — either the adoption of the pro- 
posal by the majority of their colleagues, followed by 
the certain secession of the dissentients, or its decided 
rejection, followed by their own retirement. If, now, 
the line previously taken on this question by the 
Whig party on the one hand, and by Mr. Canning with 
the Tories on the other, be considered, the connection 
between the strange move made by the Whig Attorney- 

^ Hia declaration that he no longer considered himself as a member of 
the Government was made on December 20, just before a meeting of the 
Cabinet at which Mr. Herries was present ; but ihe fact of Mr. Huskisson's 
resignation was not made known until January 5 to Mr. Herries, who 
afterwards learned its date for the first time from Mr. Huskisson's speech on 
February 18. 



CH. VI. FOKEIGN ENLISTMENT ACT. 41 

General and the contemplated change m the composition 
and system of the Government will become apparent. 

The condemnation of the heretical pravity of the 
Foreign Enlistment Act (destined at a future time to 
be rendered more stringent by a Liberal Ministry) 
filled for many years a large space in the Liberal sylla- 
bles of damnable Tory errors, and was to be accepted as 
an undoubted Whig dogma under pain of major ex- 
communication. 

The degree of detestation in which this Act was 
held was the measure of the degree of Whig orthodoxy 
as taught in Holland House. He who was not con- 
vinced by the eloquence of Sir James Mackintosh,^ 
exhorting the House ' to exclaim with the brave barons 
of former days, Nolumus leges Anglice mutari ! ' — not 
convinced by the arguments of Lord Holland,^ de- 
monstratiug that, as the consequence of the passing 
of the Bill then under discussion, ' the State ' would 
be ' converted into a prison for the confinement of its 
subjects ' — not convinced by the oratory of ardent 
champions of freedom, as understood and practised in 
South American republics, that, because British bucca- 
neering was unimpeded in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, 
filibustering ought not to be prevented by the Govern- 
ment of King George — was deemed a friend to tyrants, 
and an enemy to the sacred cause of revolution all 
over the world. 

Lord Holland, who was about to be brought into 
the Cabinet at the end of 1827, had been the leader of 

^ Speecli in the House of Oommons, June 10, 1819. 
' Speecli in the House of Lords, June 28, 1819. 



42 FOREIGN ENLISTJIENT ACT. ch. vi. 

the opposition to the Foreign Enlistment Bill in 1819 ; 
and Lord Lansdowne, the person most active in the 
negotiation for his admission, had warmly supported 
him in the debate on the occasion above referred to.® 

Lord Althorp, the unfortunate treaty with whom 
concerning the Finance Committee caused so much 
embarrassment, had been the mover of the repeal of the 
obnoxious Act a few years before, and Mr. Tierney, 
who set that treaty on foot, had vehemently condemned 
the BUI at the time of its introduction. 

Who can faU to see a clear connection between all these 
facts, and to draw from them the conclusion that the 
abrogation of the neutrahty legislation^ so resolutely 

^ Lord Lansdowne's speecli in the House of Lords on June 28, 1819, wag 
not in a very high tone. Two of its principal argumentsi against the Bill 
were that it would (a) deprive several half-pay officers of the means of 
profitably employing their activity, and (6) check the development of a 
rising branch of British industry. 

° It seems to be generally forgotten that Bills for the repeal of the 
Foreign Enlistment Act were passed by the first reformed House of 
Commons in the two successive sessions of 1833 and 1834, but were, for- 
tunately for us all, burked in the House of Lords. Let anyone having the 
least amount of historical knowledge, of political judgment, and of imagi- 
nation, considering also what a vast store of latent fanaticism exists in 
England, ready at any moment to be evoked by any stump orator, and 
how profound is our insular ignorance of international rights and duties, 
picture to himself the certain consequences to this country of the efforts, 
had they been successful, of the Liberal party, in the first instance to 
defeat, and afterwards to annul, the wholesome, wise, just, and necessary 
measure propounded and carried by a Tory Government for the fulfil- 
ment of our obligations towards other States. There is hardly a nation 
in the world which would not have suffered, from the cupidity of British 
adventurers and the frenzy of British partisans, an accumulation of unen- 
durable wi'ongs calling for vengeance. With regard to the United States 
particularly, if, through fraudulent evasions of the law, we were exposed 
to the imminent peril of a conflict ruinous to both coimtries, what would 
have happened had there been no law to evade ? Instead of one or two 
semi-piratical cruisers stealthily fitted out, whole fleets would have been 
openly equipped for hostile operations, and, with regiments on board, levied, 



CH. Ti. FOREIGN ENLISTMENT ACT. 43 

combated by the Whig party, was intended to be a 
principal part of the new system to be itiaugm-ated by 
the advent of Lord Holland. 

The filibustering policy of that nobleman and his 
friends never was, and, as we have a right to assume, 
never would have been, the policy of Mr. Canning, who 
warmly supported the Foreign Enlistment Act in its 
origin, and steadily maintained it afterwards, because 
he thought that the neutrality of England ought to be 
a real, not a sham, neutrality. If he had believed 
that it was the duty of his country to pour out her 
blood and treasure on behalf of communities whose 
misgovernment, discord, and convulsions have never 
ceased to offend civilization ; if he had thought (as, for- 
timately for present and future British income tax 
payers, he and his colleagues did not think) that Great 
Britain was under any obligation to enter upon a 
tremendous conflict with France, backed by all the 
great military Powers of Europe, in defence of an 
impracticable constitution in Spain, he would have 
counselled open, not covert, hostilities. 

Xever would he have connived at so mean and so 
iniquitous a course as State neutrality with private 
belligerency — unofficial war under the disguise of offi- 
cial peace. 

The following selection from correspondence illus- 
trates the Ministerial crisis : — 



armed, and trained in England, would have sailed from our ports to engage 
in a quarrel in whicli no Englishman had a shadow of right to interfere. 
The certain result would have been a desperate war, which might have lasted 
for many years. 



44 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. ti. 

Mr. Hemes to Lord Bexley. 

'Downing Street : December 28, 1827. 

' My dear Lord Bexley, — I send, in the same box 
with this, a letter upon the unpleasant subject of our 
distractions in the Cabinet. 

' Pray read it with a recollection of the difficult 
circumstances ia which I am placed, and let me have 
the benefit of your calm and excellent judgment when 
we meet. 

' The more I think of the proposal which has been 
forced upon the King, the more I wonder at the 
imprudence of urging it at this period, and without any 
consultation with us. 

' I cannot imagine any motive but mere party in- 
terest (and that ill understood) for this proceeding. 

' What really public object could it promote ? It 
could not be supposed that Lord Holland could bring 
any useful addition of knowledge or ability to the 
Government in the management of our domestic 
concerns ; and it will hardly be pretended that his 
principles and opinions as to our foreign policy and 
Continental affairs, proclaimed and disclosed as they 
have been in various ways, are of a nature to smooth 
the difficulties in which our foreign relations are at this 
time involved. It would not be impossible, I think, to 
prove the contrary. 

' I am sorry to hear that the King is distressed and 
unwell in consequence of all these things. Mount- 
charles (who, by-the-bye, went to him to disclose that 
he should go out of office if Lord Holland came in) gives a 



CH. vr. CORRESPONDENCE. 45 

bad account of him in that respect. I fear he will have 
no peace till he makes a strong Government, either 
Whig or Tory. The mixed Cabinet requires a firmer 
hand and sounder judgment to govern it than he can, I 
fear, at present command. Most truly yours, 

' J. C. Hereies.' 



Mr. Hemes to Lord Bexley. 

' Downing Street : December 28, 1827. 

'My dear Lord Bexley, — I have carefully and 
anxiously reconsidered all that has passed between us 
on the subject of the proposed change iu the Cabinet, 
which has been consented to, as I understand, reluc- 
tantly, and after much objection, by the King, iipon a 
very pressing requisition on the part of Lord Goderich. 
This requisition was made without any previous com- 
munication with us, and it appears that there existed 
no intention of even communicating to us at present 
the prospective arrangement adopted as the result of it. 
Had it not been for a surmise on your part by which 
you were induced to require a categorical explanation 
from Lord Goderich, we, and others of our colleagues, 
would, I apprehend, at this moment have been unap- 
prised of it, although it was well known to another 
portion of the Cabinet. Having, however, already 
expressed my opinion upon the subject of these partial 
confidences in the Cabinet, I shall at present say 
nothing more on that topic, but submit to you what 
occurs to me upon the proposition itself 

' In order to judge of the effect which may be pro- 



46 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. vr. 

duced upon the existing constitution of the Government 
by the introduction into the Cabinet of a leading and 
most influential member of the extreme Whig party, 
it is necessary to advert to the principles upon which 
that Government has been formed, as well as to the 
manner in which it is at present composed. 

' The present Cabinet consists in part of persons 
avowedly attached to the political principles which 
have prevailed in the Government of this country 
during the last forty years (with the exception of a 
very short interval), and in part of individuals 
previously accustomed to act in systematic opposition 
to those principles and to that Government upon all 
the most important questions of domestic and foreign 
policy. 

' Of these individuals, however, it must be added 
that they were distinguished from the majority of the 
party with which they habitually acted by the greater 
moderation of their principles and proceedings, and by 
a greater approximation on many topics of public 
policy to the opuiions held by the persons who exer- 
cised the power of Government. 

' The union of these moderate Whigs with the Tories 
was first accomplished by Mr. Canning, and in forming 
a Government embracing these varieties of political 
persuasion it was distinctly laid down by him that the 
ruling character of the Government should be the 
same as that of Lord Liverpool. The members of the 
opposite party who joined Mr. Canning accepted office 
under that express explanation and condition. The 
Government' thus constituted was therefore essentially 



CT. vr. CORRESPONDENCE. 47 

Tory, although composed of persons who had not all of 
them theretofore been classed under that political dis- 
tinction. 

' The death of Mr. Canning changed nothing in the 
principle on which the Grovernment was constituted. 
That principle was, on the contrary, confirmed and 
enforced by the declaration of the King to his Ministers 
when he appointed Lord Goderich to the office of First 
Lord of the Treasury. 

' The principle so laid down and so confirmed is in 
point of fact no other than the principle of Mr. Pitt's 
Government, transmitted through his several successors 
(with the exception of Mr. Fox's short Administration 
in 1806) to Lord Liverpool, Mr. Canning, and Lord 
Goderich. It is in that character that it challenges 
the confidence and support of the country, and if that 
character be abandoned, its Pittite or Tory adherents, 
both in and out of office, ai'e not only absolved from 
their engagements towards it, but their reputation for 
consistency and uprightness in their public conduct is 
perhaps materially implicated by the support which 
they may continue to give to it. 

' Public character in this country is the creation of 
pubHc opinion only : it makes the general estimation, 
for worth and ability, in which the men who take part 
conspicuously in the management of public affairs are 
held, and determines usually the place in the service of 
the State which they may aspire to occupy. There is 
no point upon which the public opinion is more severely 
exercised than on that which concerns the consistency 
between the professed opinions and the real conduct of 



48 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. vr. 

public men. Upon this subject the public are greatly 
and justly jealous. Changes of political principles and 
of party connections are scarcely tolerated even where 
they are accompanied by declared conviction and dis- 
tinct recantation ; but where there is anything like a 
mysterious compromise for the sake of the advantages 
of office, the conclusion is fatal. The compromise is 
designated a political juggle, and the actors in it are 
considered with less respect than even avowed apos- 
tates. For my own part, I acquiesce in this mode of 
judgment, because I think the principle a just one and 
the severity of its application useful to the public 
service. 

' Now, I apprehend that the Tory members of the 
present Grovernment will be in great danger of incur- 
ring the penalties of that judgment if they do not take 
measures to avert, or rather to avoid, it upon the mtro- 
duction of Lord Holland into the Cabinet. 

' The principle of the Government being such as I 
have stated, it is obvious that any person of the same 
political opinion as Lord Liverpool might be added 
to it without inconsistency or compromise, but that it 
would be impossible without the one or the other to 
bring into it an individual of diametrically opposite 
opinions, and more especially if he should be a person 
of great eminence, whose opinions, frequently and 
vehemently asserted, are universally known to be en- 
tertained in an extreme degree. 

' Such is the case with respect to Lord Holland, who, 
through a long, active, and conspicuous political career, 
has espoused the principles and doctrines of the Whig 



CH. VI. CORRESPONDENCE. 49 

party in the utmost length to which they have ever 
been carried; and who, even so late as the month of 
May last, took an opportunity of solemnly declaring 
that on whatever side of the House he might sit he 
would never fail to vote for Parliamentary reform, nor 
refuse to move, whenever called upon to do so, the 
repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts. 

' The consequence of the accession, at this time, to 
the King's Councils of a person thus pledged to these 
political opinions must, I think, upon the grounds which 
I have stated, be destructive either of the principles of 
" Lord Liverpool's Government " or of all pubhc confi- 
dence in the political professions of the individual him- 
self. The one or the other must be renounced. Coincide 
they never can. I wiU not for a moment suppose that 
Lord Holland will abnegate the principles which he has 
so long maintained, and some of the most promiaent of 
which, as subjects of special difference between him and 
" Lord Liverpool's Government," he has so recently re- 
asserted. If the head of the Government is equally 
steadfast in his adherence to the " priaciple of Lord 
Liverpool's Administration," there must arise disunion 
highly detrimental to the public service; if otherwise, 
discredit. 

' In the country, too, and in Parliament, it would be 
worse than idle to expect that, after such a junction, the 
Government should any longer be considered as repre- 
senting both the great political parties in the State. 
The accession of Lord Holland would necessarily be 
the signal for the adhesion of all the Whigs, ultra and 
moderate, to the Government ; and equally so for the 
VOL. II. E 



50 COREESPONDENCE. ch. ti, 

entire and hostile separation of the Tories from it, 
whereby those members of it who are professedly at- 
tached to the ^'■principles of Lord LiverpooVs Govern- 
ment^^ would be placed in a very unfavourable and false 
position. They would, in fact, be under the necessity 
of carrying on a contest in alliance with persons whose 
principles do not coincide with their own against the 
political party with which, in principle, they are identi- 
fied. This state of things would, in my apprehension, 
be productive alike of public inconvenience in the con- 
duct of our affairs and of personal discredit to the sub- 
servient minority in the Cabinet. 

* The consequences of these degradations of public 
men in the pubHc opinion extend much beyond the 
circle of their own personal interests. They produce a 
general depreciation of all political character in the eyes 
of the country. I thmk I may safely say that the last, 
or rather the present, coalition in which the "Whigs have 
been subordinate has lowered that party in the public 
estimation. If the Tories act a similar part and show 
themselves also disposed to compromise their principles, 
then all respect for those who are entrusted with the 
management of public affairs must be greatly diminished, 

' These observations and arguments are applicable 
generally to the members or supporters of " Lord Liver- 
pooVs late Government" who now form a part of the 
present Administration. But the position and circum- 
stances of each individual will render them applicable in 
various degrees, and with various modifications, to his 
own particular case. 

' My position is marked by striking peculiarities 



CH. vr. CORRESPONDENCE. 51 

whereby I aiii certainly placed in a painful dilemma 
between conflicting obligations. I can most truly 
afiirm, however, that an attachment to the honours and 
advantages of office (which I do not affect to underrate 
or to despise) forms no part of that difficulty, and adds 
no perceptible weight to the embarrassment under which 
I am compelled to form my decision. 

' The manner in which I was placed in the situation 
which I now hold — so far above my pretensions and 
so much beyond my wishes — ^has laid upon me a debt 
of gratitude to the King and to those who then advised 
him which must induce me to contribute every effort 
in my power to the support of the Government of which 
I was thereby made a member. But, on the other hand, 
the very cii'cumstances which impose that obligation 
upon me constitute also a pecuhar ground for more than 
common solicitude on my part to maintain above all 
suspicion the consistency and independency of my public 
character. It is in a most especial manner due to the 
King, who so graciously and firmly insisted upon my 
appointment, against the endeavours of a party which 
opposed it on the ground of my political principles, that 
I should uphold those principles without spot or blemish, 
and that I should take care to afford no ground for the 
misconstruction by which it was attempted on that occa- 
sion to attribute my appointment to private and personal 
rather than to pubUc motives. Such a misconstruction 
would be greatly promoted by any act of apparent 
subserviency on my part, such as would be indicated 
by conduct inconsistent with my avowed principles and 
opinions and by a readiness to hold office upon terms 

£ 2 



52 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. ti. 

at variance with those under which I accepted it. 
Whenever, therefore, such changes shall take place in 
the policy of the Government, or in the composition of 
the Administration, as must lead, in the judgment of the 
public, to the abandoning or compromising of the '■'■prin- 
ciples of Lord LiverpooTs Administration" my sense of 
what I owe to the King, to the country, and to my own 
honour will leave me no choice but to resign my office. 
Believe me, my dear Lord Bexley, ever truly yours, 

' J. C. Herkies.' 

On January 5, 1828, Mr. Herries's private secretary, 
Mr. Spearman, wrote to him thus, communicating recent 
confidential information : — 

' called soon after you were gone. He had 

just seen Brougham, and he came to report the con- 
versation he had had with him. He said that B. was in 
high spirits, and was quite satisfied that they were all in 
the right course ; that Lord Holland would certainly 
come in ; that none of the present men would go out on 
that account — that one of them might indeed go, but no 

more. asked him if he thought the Government 

could be carried on by the Whigs ; to which Brougham 
replied that he did not doubt that the present men, 
reinforced as they would be, could carry it on perfectly 

well ; to which rejoined, " Take my word for it. 

Brougham, that you have broken up the Government." 
Holmes has been here this morning. He saw the Chan- 
cellor late last night. The Chancellor was yesterday 
again with Lord Goderich. He repeated then to Lord 
G. and to Huskisson his determination upon the subject 



cs. Ti. CORRESPONDENCE. 53 

of the Government — that he was determined imme- 
diately to communicate with the King, in order that the 
state of the Government might not come upon H.M. 
unawares ; and it was then settled that Lord Anglesey 
- should accompany the Chancellor to the King. In 
about an hour, however, he received a letter from Lord 
Anglesey, declining to go with him on the ground of 
his ill health. 

* He apprehends that Lord A. or some other person 
is therefore to go alone and without him ; and he thinks 
it is stUl hoped that a patched-up Government wiU be 
attempted, but he expressed his intention of taking care 
to prepare H.M. beforehand for the intended visit if 
he did not immediately go down himself. He appears, 
from Holmes's account, to be now deeply intent on sub- 
mitting his own views and of breaking with the Whigs ; 
for Holmes says that he will make known to the King 
that he will not serve with them. 

' It is said, among other things, that Grant will 
remain if it be a patched-up Government, and will 
succeed you. . . .' 

The 6th of January seems to have been a busy day 
with Ministerial correspondents. 

We find two letters of that date from Lord Bexley, 
who wrote : — 

' Dear Herries, — I met the Lord Chancellor at Lord 
Dudley's, and he spoke to me two or three times on the 
falling state of the Government, which he said was 
breaking down from two distinct causes, viz. the Fi- 
nance Committee and Lord Holland's appointment. . . . 



54 CORRESPONDENCE, ch.ti. 

' I did not profess to the Chancellor more than a 
general knowledge that things were going ill from the 
causes he mentioned. I called his attention to a box I 
had seen just before dinner, containing a proposal from 
Scarlett to repeal the Foreign Enhstment Act and the 
two Libel Acts of 1819. He agreed with me that 
nothing could be more foolish, and I have written 
strongly to Goderich on the subject. I do not think 
the Chancellor has seen the King, who is in bed with 
the gout. 

' Dudley thanked me for my letter on the Greek 
question,' and said he agreed with me, but that he 
found both Lieven and De Roth much out of humour 
at our backwardness. I suspect we shall hear that the 
Russians have passed the Pruth. Under these circum- 
stances I think your liae is clear not to resign, but to 
let the King (or Goderich, if he will take upon himself 
to do so) decide between you and your opponents. I 
believe, however, it will end in a break-up without any 

distinct cause avowed. Yours sincerely, 

' Bexley.' 

' My dear Herries,^ — Since I wrote by your mes- 
senger I have met the Chancellor at Don Miguel's. He 
told me he had intended to go to the King, to represent 
the state of the Government to him, but that he would 
not go alone for fear of misrepresentation, and that Lord 
Anglesey had declined to go with him. He asked me 

1 Mentioned in a previous letter, dated January 1, in wHoh Lord Bexley 
says, ' I have written Dudley a very pacific letter upon the Greek question, 
and I think vre may certainly he of some use in supporting a moderate and 
prudent line of conduct, to which, indeed, some of the Cabinet, who may 
not alvrays think like us, seem sufficiently inclined.' 



OH. TT. CORRESPONDENCE. 55 

whether Lord Goderich had given any answer to your 
letter about the Finance Committee. I told him I under- 
stood that you had seen him twice, but that he had said 
nothing distinct, only lamentrrig the hardship of his 
own situation. The Chancellor said that was all he 
did when he was with him. He quite approved of my 
having written to Lord G. about Scarlett's proposition, 
upon which I think we are as likely to split as any- 
thing, for if it is pressed in Cabinet I shall desii'e our 
respective opinions may be laid before the King. I 
omitted this morning to mention that the Chancellor 
told me yesterday that Tindal ^ would resign if Lord 
Holland was appointed. Our conversation this morning 
was very short, as Mountcharles and Villa Real came 
in to conduct us to the Prince. . . .' 

Mr. Hemes to Lord Lyndhurst. 

The same date. 

' My dear Lord Chancellor, — After what you said 
to me at our last meeting I would of course take no 
step without previous communication with you. I then 
told you of my conversation with Goderich on the same 
day. I now send you a letter which he has written to 
me, and the answer which I propose to make to it, if 
you see no objection to it arising out of the state of our 
affairs in other respects which I may be ignorant qf. It 
seems to me that the object of Goderich's letter is to 
draw from me some positive and unconditional declara- 
tion, which he may make use of in order to dissolve the 

^ Sir Nioliolas Tindal, Solicitor-General, afterwards Lord Chief Justice 
of the Common Pleas. 



56 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. vi. 

Government on grounds convenient to him and those 
who are advising him. In my answer I endeavour to 
keep firmly upon the condition of the public principle 
involved in my letter of December 21, and so to compel 
him to make the decision with respect to me upon that 
principle alone. . . .' 

Lord Lyndhurst to Mr. Herries. 

' George Street : Sunday.' 

' Your letter to Goderich went last night. I rather 
think Goderich is acting for [or from] himself, and I 
am pretty confident not by the advice of either Dudley 
or Huskisson. "We shall cut a pretty figure after all 
that has passed, both publicly and privately, when we 
meet Parliament, according to the wish of Goderich 
expressed in his last note.' 

Mr. Spearman to Mr. Herries. 

' Sunday Morning. 

' It appears to me that they are now trying to make 
it appear distinctly that you would go on with Lord 
Holland and the Whigs if it were not for the Finance 
Committee ; and if they can get you to give up that 
point and go on to Parliament, when the Government 
would assuredly be broken to pieces, they will turn 
round and say that you never would have refused to 
serve with Lord Holland on principle, and that you 

^ Lord Lyndhurst's letters to Mr. Hemes, of which we find several, 
never hear the date of the month or year. Their handvyriting is in general 
deplorably difficult to read. 



CH. VI. CORRESPONDENCE. 57 

only take advantage of the breaking up. They are 
cunning enough, God knows.' 

Lord Bexley to Mr. Hernes. 

' Foot's Cray Place : January 7, 1828. 

' My dear Herries, — I have read your correspondence 
with Lord Goderich with more regret than surprise. I 
have for some time been convinced that the Govern- 
ment could not hang together, but it is painful to me 
to think that its downfall should be occasioned by your 
act or mine. At the same time I do not think that 
under the circumstances you could take any other 
course than you have done. I do not enter into 
particulars, as I mean to see you to-morrow morning ; 
and I feel that, with a view to my own conduct, it may 
be necessary for me to have some conversation both 
with you and with Lord G. . . .' 

On the following day Lord Goderich, in conse- 
quence of the intervention of the Lord Chancellor, drew 
the King's attention to some at least of the Mmisterial 
dissensions; and the King, who seems to have been 
then for the first time made aware of the differences 
between the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the 
Secretary of State for the Colonies, cut the knot, which 
the Premier had been unable to untie, by charging the 
Duke of Wellington with the formation of a new 
Cabinet.* 

* Although it is not our business to coiTect all the grievous errors with 
which Mr. "Walpole's hook abounds, we cannot refrain from protesting 
against his description, quite unworthy of a serious history of England, of 
the last interview between Lord Goderich and the King. He sets down aa 



58 CARICATURE OF HISTORY. ch. ti. 

matter for record a tit of facetiousness current among the wags of the day, 
and communicated to Lord Colchester in a letter of gossip from his son. 
' His Majesty offered him [Lord Goderich] his pocket-handkerchief.' Mr. 
Walpole ought to have known that George IV., whatever may have heen 
his failings, was, at any rate, not a vulgar buflfoon, and that the retiring 
Premier, whatever may be thought of his capacity as a statesman, was a 
refined gentleman, not to be addressed with insolent personalities. 



, CH. vn. "WELLINGTON CABINET. 59 



CHAPTER VII. 

Formation of Wellington Cabinet — Hemes Master of the Mint — Correspond- 
ence — Mysterious incident — Ministerial explanations in ParKament — 
Attacks upon Mr. Herries, and successful defence — Subsequent statement 
of real causes of breaking up of Goderich Cabinet — Refutation of Lord 
Palmerston's posthumous slanders. 

Mr. Huskisson agreed to become a member of the new 
Government on condition ^ that Mr. Herries should not 
continue to hold the office of Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, although he did not refuse to be his colleague 
in the Cabinet. It was, besides, thought desirable that 
there should be nothing to connect the new Ministry 
with the questions which had disturbed its predecessor. 

For these reasons the Duke of Wellington deemed 
it expedient to put into the Exchequer a person who 
had not been a member of Lord Goderich's Cabinets 
Mr. Goulburn — oflPering to Mr. Herries instead of it the 
Mint, vacated by Mr. Tierney, who, together with his 
purely Whig colleagues. Lords Lansdowne and Carlisle, 
was left out of the new Government. 

If Mr. Herries had been made aware (which was 
not the case) of Mr. Huskisson's stipulation, he would 
probably not have accepted the offer made to htm by 
the Duke of Wellington ; and we incline to the opinion 
that he would have done better if he had, even without 
such knowledge, refused to take a seat in the new 

' See Wellington Correspondence. 



60 LETTERS. ca. vii. 

Cabinet as the holder of an office having no adminis- 
trative importance. But it is impossible for us, calmly 
considering the matter after a lapse of fifty years, 
correctly to appreciate all the motives which led him to 
a different decision. Among them must principally be 
reckoned the persuasions of friends, and a reluctance to 
show anything that could have been construed into 
ill-will towards the Tory leaders, to whom he desired 
to give his political support. 

A few letters — all that remain — relating to this 
subject may be here inserted. 

' Lin. Inn Hall : Saturday 

(probably January 12). 
' (Confidential.) 

' My dear Herries, — The arrangements are going 
on but slowly. Should anything occur material to be 
communicated to you before Monday, I will send by 
your messenger. I wiU take care that no misrepresen- 
tation shall be made with effect as to the course which 
you pursued. No such attempt has yet been made, 
nor is there any prospect of it. Ever yours, < j > 2 

' Sunday, 2 o'clock. 

' My dear Herries, — I cannot give you any informa- 
tion upon the subject of the proposed arrangements, 
because we have agreed to preserve in the progress of 
them the most absolute secrecy. What I wish to know 
is whether the state of our Exchequer, Treasury, &c., 
will admit of the postponement of Parliament for a 
week. You must feel that this would, under existing 

* Lyndhurst. 



CH. Til. LETTERS. 61 

circumstances, be very desirable. Pray send me a full 
and a speedy answer. Ever yours, , t 

^ •' J ) ' LrXDHUKST. 

' George Street : Monday. 

' My dear Herries, — Pray write me a line and let 
me know how matters stand ; or if you wish to see me 
I shall be herefrom, four o'clock. Ever yours, < j , 

' George Street : Tuesday. 

' My dear Herries, — I have been with the Duke 
to-day to Windsor, and the King has desii-ed me to 
make a communication to you. Can you make it con- 
venient to call here this evening at nine o'clock ? Ever 

^ y ^ ' ' Lyndhuest.' 

On the back of this note there is the following 
memorandum in Mr. Herries' s handwriting : — 

' Tuesday, January 15, 1828. 

' I went to him at nine o'clock this night. 

' He surprised me much by informing me that very 
shortly before I arrived he had received a communica- 
tion which rendered it impossible for him to tell me 
then what he had been commissioned to state to me ; 
but he promised to come to me to-morrow. He did 
not fix the time. 

' I suppressed the vexation which I felt, and after 
talking over some other matters left him. My reason 
for not appearing to resent this versatility and mystery 
towards me was that the whole was professed to be 
done in the King's name. I could not, therefore, with 
propriety speak my sentiments upon it. I wrote a note 



62 MYSTERIOUS INCIDENT. ch. rn. 

to Arbuthnot, complaming confidentially, and I sent 
to request Holmes to call upon me.' ^ 

' Apsley House: January 15, 1828. 

' My dear Herries, — I am grieved that for one 
single moment you should have had an atom of an- 
noyance. 

' I had known that the Chancellor was to talk to 
you ; but it was for reasons which, when known, could 
not affect your peace of mind for a single instant. The 
Duke of Wellington went from Windsor to S. Saye to 
take leave of Don Miguel, and I fear that before he 

' How ia this mystery to lie explained ? It may be assumed that the 
eommunication, which arrived only just in time to prevent the Lord 
Chancellor from delivering the King's message, could have come from no 
one hut the Prime Minister. The King would hardly have had time to 
make it even if he had changed his mind — a most improhahle supposition. 
But the Duke of Wellington having heen at Windsor with Lord Lyndhurst, 
the message must have been given in his presence or with his cognizance, 
and consequently with his approval. If he had seen any grounds for object- 
ing to it he certainly would have stated them at once. It is to be presumed 
that the two Ministers returned to London, as they had gone to Windsor, 
together, and that, in the course of their two or three hours' drive, no reason 
for delaying the execution of the King's commands being suggested to the 
Lord Chancellor, none presented itself to the mind of the Duke, whose later 
injunction can only be attributed to the intervention of a third person. Who 
this influential counsellor may have been, or what his motives, it would be 
idle to conjecture. The conclusion, however, is safe that he was a man of 
more cautious temperament and less straightforward habits than the Duke 
of Wellington. Perhaps also he was not so well disposed towards the 
individual principally interested. We do not pretend to know what was 
the real nature of the message. The mode of its intended transmission, and 
the fact that it did not reach its destination, sufficiently demonstrate the 
inanity of the fictions invented by Lord Palmerston and others about secret 
communications between George IV. and Mr. Herries, to whom the King 
could easily, if so minded, have caused his wishes — whatever they were — ■ 
to be conveyed, without risk of impediment, through the private channel of 
Sir William Knighton. In this business there were, undoubtedly, conceal- 
ment and intrigue, but not on the part of the King or of his ex-Chancellor of 
the Exchequer. 



CH- vir. LETTERS. g3 

comes up to-morrow I could not venture to write to 
you respecting the subject about which, the Chancellor 
had to talk to you. You may rely upon my friendship 
that I would not leave you in suspense for a moment 
if there was anything which regarded your honour or 
your peace of mind. I do assure you that in the breast 
of no one is there towards you the most distant suspicion 
or distrust. On the contrary, everything that I have 
heard spoken of you in every quarter has been most 
gratifying and satisfactory ; and so you will thoroughly 
agree with me when I see you and tell you what the 
Chancellor had been desired to say. 

' I cannot bear to appear mysterious ; but believe 
me as a friend that you will be entirely satisfied when 
I explain the whole to you as soon as we meet, and I 
will take care to see you the very instant that I am 
able. Ever, dear Herries, most truly yours, 

' C. Akbuthnot.' 

' I cannot bear to leave you in suspense. I think 
I shall tranquiUise you entirely by saying that, it being 
understood that the Whigs mean to make a storm in 
Parliament about the Finance Committee and Lord 
Althorp, it has been thought very necessary that the 
new Grovernment should have nothing to do with a 
discussion to which it has been a stranger. You may 
see there is nothing to worry you.' 

' Wimbledon : Saturday. 

' My dear Herries, — I will be in George Street at 
four o'clock on Monday, and everything shall be pre- 
pared for the fatal ceremony. I wish I could also get 



64 SUEEEPTITIOCJS PUBLICATION. ch. tii. 

out of my turmoil, but it cannot be. Brougham means, 
I am told, to lead the House of Commons. He says 
the lead can't be conferred like a place or dignity. Ever 

•^ ' ' Lyndhuest.' 

A premature and surreptitious publication of the 
list of the new Cabinet in the ' Morning Chronicle ' 
gave rise to an unpleasant incident, to which, as it 
speedily passed over without any consequences of the 
slightest importance, we should not have alluded if an 
undue prominence had not been given to it elsewhere. 
It chanced that one day Mr. Herries inadvertently left 
lying on his writing table, when he went for a few 
minutes into another room, a memorandum of the com- 
position of the new Ministry. During his short absence 
a visitor was ushered in, who, reading the names and 
offices in the paper on the table, made a note of them 
for communication to the ' Chronicle.' This unlucky 
accident (and that it could have been nothmg but mere 
accident ought to have been manifest, because the 
' Chronicle,' which had libelled him outrageously, was 
obviously the very last journal to which Mr. Herries 
would have thought of conveying any information) 
roused the anger of the Duke of Wellington, who 
displayed his irritation in the hasty and somewhat 
intemperate tone not unfrequently perceptible in his 
correspondence. ' I assure you,' he wrote in a letter of 
January 21, 'that there never was an event compara- 
tively so trifling in itself that will produce such 
important consequences on the destinies of this country 
as will the premature disclosure in the newspapers of 



CH. vn. THE DUKE'S UNREASONABLE WRATH. 65 

the names of the new-formed Ministry, notwithstanding 
the precautions and the pains I took to prevent such 
disclosure.' If any ordinary mortal had written this 
sentence it would be treated as an absurd exaggeration ; 
for certainly the most sensitive politicometer could 
never have indicated the slightest disturbance of the 
destinies of this country from the pre-official printing 
of the names of the new Ministers in an Opposition 
newspaper. 

The unreasonableness of the great Duke's wrath 
is apparent from the following letter, showing that the 
list had been sent right and left by the ' whip ' of the 
Tory party some days before it appeared in the 
' Chronicle : ' — 

' Holmes called about five minutes after you were 
gone. He says there will be a very strong neutral 
bench. 

' Dawson called on Holmes last night, and not 
finding him at home, left for him a confidential list of 
the new Administration. It corresponded exactly with 
that in the " Chronicle." Holmes wrote him an answer 
expressing his thanks for the confidential list, for which, 
indeed, he said that he was the more obliged because 
it confirmed the accuracy of the list which he had sent 
on Thursday to Mr. Harrison at Brighton, and which 
he believed would be found to have been published at 
Dublin on Saturday last. He did not add to Dawson, 
however, that he had sent the list to DubKn on Thurs- 
day. How particularly absurd, therefore, to make such 

VOL. II. F 



66 MINISTERIAL EXPLANATIONS. ch, vii. 

a clamour about tlie publication of what was so gene- 
rally known, . . , Ever truly, yours, 

'A, Y. Spearman. 

' Tuesday, January 22, 1828.' 

Soon after tbe meeting of Parliament explanations, 
which, however, were not, and perhaps could not have 
been, complete, were furnished by the persons princi- 
pally concerned in the strangely involved transactions 
which had preceded the fall of the Goderich Cabmet. 
They are to be found in ' Hansard,' and need not there- 
fore be repeated in detail. 

Mr. Herries concluded an elaborate statement on 
February 18, with a peremptory and unequivocal denial 
of accusations made against him, openly out of doors 
and covertly in the House of Commons, of having con- 
spired with the King, or with the leaders of the Tory 
party, or with both together, to upset the Government 
to which he had belonged. He declared that he had 
never had any communication respecting his resignation 
with any individual out of the Cabinet, and that he had 
' received no advice from any person whatever befoi'e 
his letter of December 21 was written.' He added that 
he beheved that ' in the quarter alluded to not one single 
circumstance relative to those transactions was known 
till the communication of them was made to the other 
House by Lord Goderich,' and ended by saying, ' There 
is not a shadow of reason, or the slightest foundation, 
for the base statement that has gone abroad.' 

His clear explanations produced a very favourable 
impression upon the House. No better eAddence of 
their effect can be adduced than the following letter 



OH. vn. COMPLETE VINDICATION. 67 

from a gentleman always distinguished for his judge- 
ment, tact, and high sense of honour — Mr. Villiers, 
afterwards known to the world as the Earl of Clarendon 
— who, although not at this time directly engaged m 
party pohtics, had Whig connections and inclinations : — 

' I cannot go to bed, my dear Mr. Herries, without 
offering you my hearty congratulations upon your 
triumph. I have long and eagerly desired that you 
should have the opportunity which this night has 
afforded of stating the simple truth, because I felt sure 
that universal approbation of conduct like yours must 
be the immediate consequence. 

' You needed not the applause of this night to con- 
firm to yourself the conscious feeling of your own 
integrity, but there is no man that must not feel piide 
at complete vindication from unjust aad malignant 
attack, and I believe that you yourself cannot feel more 
joy than I do at the result of to-night's debate and at 
hearing as I did all round me such marked expressions 
of satisfaction. No one that I have heard speak upon 
the subject thought you said a word too much about 
Lord Gr. If you erred at all it was certainly not on 
that side. Ever yours sincerely, 

' George Villiers.' * 

In the course of his speech, ia which he elucidated 
aU that had taken place concerning the Finance Com- 
mittee, Mr. Herries said that it was impossible to 
suppose that his proffered resignation was of sufficient 

* The writer of this letter, who heard the debate, was not a member of 
the House of Commons. 

F 2 



68 FURY OF FACTION. ch. vir, 

importance to cause the breaking up of the Government ; 
that, owing to circumstances which had shaken the 
Government to its foundation before his letter of De- 
cember 21 was written, its fall was apparently inevitable ; 
and that occasion was taken of this letter for doing 
that which sooner or later must have happened without 
it. He added unguardedly in the heat of the moment — 
' I say that I know it was so acted upon ' — an expression 
which he afterwards qualified by the explanation that 
he meant that he drew the positive conclusion from the 
circumstances that it must be so. The solid grounds 
for this assertion have been already set forth, but it was 
met by Lord Goderich with a positive denial in the 
House of Lords. 

Then burst out all the fury of disappointed faction. 
In a succeeding debate in the House of Commons on 
the 21st the man who had been guilty of the 'inex- 
piable wrong ' of hindering the realization of Whig 
aspirations stood at bay against a throng of fierce 
assailants, who stormed at him with threats, taunts, 
gibes, and insinuations, going to the very verge of per- 
sonal insult, from which he had to compel more than one 
speaker to draw back. Among the foremost of the at- 
tacking party was Mr. Thomas Slingsby Buncombe, one 
of the most celebrated of the Radical reformers of his 
day. His speech on this occasion (February 21), like 
his previous discourse on the 18th, which is said to 
have 'made a great sensation,' was composed and put 
into his mouth, as we learn from Mr. Greville, ^ who 

' Mr. Greville's comments (vol. i. p. 130) on these speeclies are instruc- 
tive. ' And what are the agents vrho have produced such an effect ? A 



CH. Til. DIFFICULT POSITION. 69 

seems to have had a hand in its concoction, by the 
Honourable Henry, afterwards Lord, de Ros. 

Called iipon to substantiate by proof the declaration 
which had been contradicted, Mr. Herries refused to 
enter into any further explanations, and confined him- 
self to the reiterated expression of the conviction he 
entertained. That conviction was well founded ; but 
its soundness could not have been demonstrated without 
a revelation of the whole of the secret history of the 
Cabinet in which Mr. Herries had lately sat along with 
some of his present colleagues then by his side. He 
must have told aU that he had learnt concerning the 
series of underhand intrigues (no other description can 
be given to those proceedings) for the transformation 
of the Ministry — intrigues in which Mr. Huskisson had 
taken an active part, and of which Lord Palmerston 
had at any rate been cognizant ; he must have made 
known to the House the information he had been able 
to gather as to what had passed between Lord Goderich, 
some members of the Cabinet, and the King, in Decem- 
ber, but not aUuded to by Lord Goderich himself in the 
House of Lords ; and, moreover, in order to make all 
this matter clear, he must have gone back to the period 
of the formation of Lord Goderich's Cabinet, and spoken 
of the pressure then put upon the King for the admis- 
sion of Lord Holland. Obviously he could not make 

man of ruined fortune and doubtful character, whose life has heen spent on 
the race-course, at the ganjing-tahle, and in the green-room ; of limited 
capacity, exceedingly ignorant, and without any stock but his impudence to 
trade on ; only speaMug to serve an electioneering purpose, and cramnaed by 
another man [and what a man !] with every thought and every word that 
he uttered.' 



70 HUSKISSON'S SPEECH. ch. tii. 

sucli revelations. His tongue was tied ; and he found 
himself in. the position in which we suppose many a 
public man in England is placed, who is obliged to 
submit to attack without employing ia his defence all 
the weapons he possesses. 

His statements, however, which he could not con- 
firm by proof positive, were mainly borne out by 
declai'ations, already adverted to by us, which were 
made by Mr. Huskisson in his speech on February 18, 
to the effect, that by the advice of some of his colleagues 
he (Mr. Huskisson) had endeavoured to induce Lord 
Goderieh to act upon Mr. Herries's letter of December 
21 by making the contingent offer of resignation con- 
tained in it absolute. And this course was suggested, 
said Mr. Huskisson, as the best means of preventing 
the dissolution of the Cabinet.^ The futility, therefore, 
of the allegation, that the downfall of the Administration 
was caused by the conditional resignation of the very 
man whose positive dismissal was deemed necessary for 
its preservation, becomes at once apparent. Conse- 
quently Mr. Herries was warranted in affirming, as he 
did, that his resignation was not, and could not have 
been, the true cause of the break-up, for which it was 
made to serve as a colourable pretext. The following 
paper in justification of his assertion was afterwards 
drawn up by him. 

^ In the same apeecli Huskisson said : ' Before the 26th of Decemher . . . 
there had occurred many circumstances which tended materially to impair 
the strength, and shake the staMlity, of the Administration.' 



CH. vn. GROUNDS FOR HERRIES' DECLARATION. 71 



STATEMENT BY MR. HERRIES OE THE EVENTS WHICH 
LED TO THE DISSOLUTION OF THE ADMINISTRATION 
OF LORD GODERICH, 

'As it appears to be probable that no further ex- 
planations ill Parliament will now be given on the 
subject of the dissolution of the late Government, con- 
cerning which Mr. Herries expressed in one House an 
opinion widely different from that which was pro- 
nounced by Lord Goderich in the other, it appears 
right to Mr. Herries that he should state, for the in- 
formation of his own friends (but without comment or 
argument) such of the grounds upon which his declar- 
ation was founded, as appear to him to be amply 
sufficient to justify it. 

' Lord Goderich has so described the late change in 
the Administration as to leave a very general, if not an 
universal, impression on the minds of the public that it 
was produced entirely by the differences on the subject 
of the Finance Committee. And he has afforded room, 
by the manner in which he has noticed these differ- 
ences, for the imputation of blame, by impUcation, to 
Mr. Herries, in respect of the tune and mode in which 
his resignation was proffered. 

' Mr. Herries, on the other hand, has declared his 
entfre conviction that his resignation was too slender a 
matter to be of itself a sufficient cause for the termina- 
tion of the late Government ; and he has, at the same 
time, asserted his knowledge of other causes which, in 
his judgment, produced the event, and under the opera- 



72 STATEMENT OF EVENTS. ch. vir. 

tion of which the more ununportant incident of the 
Finance Committee became merely the occasion of it. 

' That declaration was grounded upon the following 
facts : — 

' In the early part of last December, Lord Goderich 
proposed to the King (with the knowledge and con- 
currence of only a part of his colleagues) the introduc- 
tion of Lord Holland and Lord Wellesley into the 
Cabinet, upon the ground of an indispensable necessity 
for some addition of strength to the Administration. 

' The proposal not having been acceded to, it was 
urged again by a letter on December 11, in which it 
was intimated that Lord Goderich could not be answer- 
able for carrying on the government if it were not 
adopted. 

' On December 13 these proceedings became known, 
after a Council held at St. James's, to several of the 
Ministers who had till then been ignorant of them. 
The retirement of Lord Goderich was made known at 
the same time, and was understood to be occasioned by 
domestic circumstances, which at that time pressed 
anxiously upon him, and the representation of which 
had formed part of the letter to his Majesty. 

' On the 14th Mr. Herries expressed to Lord Goderich 
the great pain which the information had given to him. 
He regretted that a measure affecting so materially the 
character, and even the existence, of a mixed Adminis- 
tration, such as was then established, should have been 
adopted without an equal confidence and communica- 
tion with all its members. He also stated his decided 
conviction that the junction with Lord Holland would 



CH. TO. STATEMENT OF EVENTS. 73 

have been fatal to the Govemment, as then constituted, 
if the proposition had been acceded to. 

' Mr. Herries said enough on that occasion (although 
he considered the Government as being dissolved) to 
leave no doubt upon the mind of Lord Goderich that 
he, Mr. Herries, would not have continued in his 
situation if the intended coalition with one of the most 
distinguished opponents of the pohtical principles upon 
which the then existing Government was founded had 
been carried into eifect. 

' An interval followed, during which some steps 
were taken unsuccessfully for supplying the place of 
Lord Goderich in the Administration. It was ter- 
minated by his return on December 19. 

' The members of the Government being assembled 
on that day were informed by Lord Goderich himself 
that the difficulties which had occasioned his retire- 
ment, and which had in some degree been misunder- 
stood, were removed, and that if his colleagues had no 
objection to it, he was then ready to resume his station, 
such being his Majesty's pleasure. Lord Goderich 
adverted at the same time to the proposition which had 
been submitted to the King for strengthening the 
Administration, but the particulars of that proposition 
were not stated, nor were the names of the parties 
declared, who were the subjects of it. 

' It was on that occasion observed by Mr. Herries 
that if any change was still in contemplation which 
might be productive of a difference of opinion among 
the members of the Government, it would be better 
that it should be communicated at that time than made 



74 STATEMENT OF EVENTS. ch. tii. 

known at a later period when any discussion or dis- 
memberment of the Administration, consequent there- 
upon, might occur under circumstances very incon- 
venient for the public service, as, for example, in the 
midst of the active business of a session of Parliament. 

' This observation was met by a declaration from 
Lord Goderich in general terms that he had no inten- 
tion of altering the principle of the Government, whereby 
Mr. Herries was satisfied, and pressed the subject no 
further. 

' A noble lord ^ then present, who had been unac- 
quainted with the circumstances which had occasioned 
the recent occurrences, was, as well as Mr. Herries, 
impressed by this conversation with the belief that 
no change was then intended in the composition of the 
Government. But he was induced afterwards to con- 
sider that some more exphcit information of Lord 
Goderich's intentions was necessary ; and at an inter- 
view which he obtained for-that purpose two days 
after the meeting, he was informed that Lord Goderich 
was positively pledged to bring Lord Holland into the 
Administration at an early period. 

' The noble Lord made this known to Mr. Herries, 
and stated that he had expressed in strong terms his 
opinion and feelings on account of the want of con- 
fidence shown towards him, and also upon the injurious 
effects of the late occurrences iipon the credit and 
character of the Government. 

' He added that he had declared to Lord Goderich 
that he reserved his determination as to any steps 

^ Lord Bexley. 



CH. VII. STATEMENT OF EVENTS. 75 

which he might think it right to take in consequence 
of the measure to which Lord Goderich was pledged, 
until the King's domestic engagements at Windsor 
connected with the reception of Don Miguel, should 
be terminated. 

' Mr. Herries afterwards saw Lord Goderich on the 
same subject, and obtained the same information from 
him. He again stated his opinion of the inexpediency 
of the course about to be pursued, and declared his 
intention of following the example of his noble col- 
league in postponing any step thereupon which might 
break in improperly at that time upon his Majesty's 
arrangements. 

' In the meantime, and before those engagements 
were concluded, Lord Goderich received other com- 
munications of great importance as to the state of his 
Government ; but of these Mr. Herries was not aware 
until after the date of his last letter on the subject of 
the Finance Committee. 

' Lord Goderich was informed by one of the most 
influential of his colleagues,^ that in his judgment it 
was essential for the public interests that no time 
should be lost in representing to the Throne the un- 
favourable state of the public opinion with respect to 
the Government, and the apparent want of sufficient 
support from one branch at least of the Legislature 
(if not from both) to enable it to meet Parliament with 
any fair prospect of carr5mig on the public business 
with success. He was told that if he. Lord Goderich, 
did not take that course, his colleague, who was then 

* Lord Lyndhurst. 



76 STATEMENT OF EVENTS. ch, tu. 

advising him, would deem it incumbent upon him to 
adopt it himself. 

' It appears by Mr. Huskisson's statement in reply 
on February 18, that a similar representation was made 
to him by two members of the Administration, and 
that he referred them to Lord Goderich as the proper 
quarter to which such a communication should be 
addressed. 

' It was in this state of things, and with this crisis 
impending, that instead of taking to the King the 
resignation of Mr. Herries, freely and amicably offered, 
whereby one difficulty, at least, would have been re- 
moved from the execution of the proposed change in 
the Government, Lord Goderich put an end to his 
administration, on the ground of the differences between 
his two colleagues. 

'In Lord Goderich' s account of the event, these 
difficulties alone are mentioned as the cause of it. No 
allusion is made to any other. 

' Mr. Herries, having in mind the facts and proceed- 
ings above stated, asserted that the termination of the 
Government was produced by the pressure of much 
more important circumstances, and that the conten- 
tion about the Finance Committee, which but for the 
existence of those circumstances would have been easily 
obviated by the acceptance of his resignation, was, at 
the utmost, only the occasion of its accomplishment. 

' Lord Goderich, by remarking in his statement on 
the postponement of Mr. Herries' s final proceeding 
respecting the Fmance Committee, without noticing 
at the same time the strange events which had occupied 



en. VII. RENEWED ASSEVERATION. 77 

the interval, and whereby the Government itself had 
been suspended, gave occasion, unintentionally no 
doubt, to the imputation raised by others that Mr. 
Herries was influenced in his conduct respecting the 
Finance Committee by communications from a higher 
quarter. He has solemnly protested, and he now as 
solemnly repeats, that there is not the shadow of a 
foundation for the charge ; and that his determination, 
as expressed in his letter of December 21, was adopted 
upon his own judgment and conviction alone, unm- 
fluenced by advice, suggestion, or communication from 
any quarter whatsoever.' 

'Great George Street: March 1, 1828.' 

The renewed and unqualified asseveration at the close 
of the foregoing paper ought to be amply sufficient with- 
out corroboration ; and we should abstam from attempt- 
ing to give it any superfluous support, if 'the base 
statement ' so positively contradicted had not been re- 
peated in Lord Palmerston's 'Autobiography.'^ The 

' ' Huskisson blamed me for not having stood out ; he said if I had in- 
sisted upon the fulfilment of Goderich's promise that promise wovdd not have 
been retracted, especially as it was spontaneously made, and Hen-ies would 
not have been thrown like a live shell into the Cabinet to explode and blow 
us all up. 

' At the appointed time he did explode. He picked a quarrel with Hus- 
kisson. . . .' — Autobiography. 

Lord Palmerston does not say when the remarks attributed to Huskisson 
were made ; but from the context it may be inferred that the conversation 
above related took place soon after Huskisson's return to England and the 
settlement of the dispute concerning the office of Chancellor of the Exchequer. 
This supposition, however, is inconsistent with the proved fact that Hu.skis- 
son showed a very friendly disposition towards Mr. Herries in that matter. 
It is to be observed, moreover, that Huskisson did not urge the appointment 
of Lord Palmerston, whose name, indeed, was not once mentioned in the 
course of the negotiation which followed Huskisson's arrival. If, in spite of 



78 CALUMNY EEVIVED BY PAOIERSTON. ch. th. 

old calumny having thus being revived, we are called 
upon to refute it. 

As a preliminary observation, we have to remark 
that Lord Palmerston, sitting on the Treasury Bench, 
heard Mr. Herries, his colleague in the Cabinet, pledge 
his word of honour, in a tone of singular solemnity, to 
the truth of his denial ; that he continued to be, both 
in office, and out of office, on very good and amicable 
(though not very intimate) terms with him ; and that 
during the whole of the rest of Mr. Herries's life he 
never gave him the least reason to suppose that the 
personal esteem always professed by Mr. Herries for 
Lord Palmerston was not reciprocal. 

We have here something very startling. Do what 
we may — turn, twist, shift, re- arrange these facts as we 
can — they drive its at last into a dilemma from which 
there is no possible escape. Either Lord Palmerston 

logical sequence, we are to assume that Huskisson's tender reproach was ad- 
dressed to Palmerston at a later period — that is to say, about the time of 
the break-up of the Goderioh Cabinet — ^we shall be forced also to conclude, 
against all probability, that from Huskisson's memoiy every trace of trans- 
actions in which he had been actively engaged some four months previously 
had been entirely effaced. This is strange ; still more extraordinary is it 
that Lord Palmerston likewise should have forgotten all that had happened 
to himself ia August 1827. At that time it was certainly known both to 
Palmerston and to Huskisson that the reason why the understanding between 
Goderioh and Palmerston could not be carried out was that the King posi- 
tively put his veto on the proposed arrangement. If, therefore, Goderich's 
'promise had not been retracted,' and he had persisted in opposing it to the 
King's decided refusal, the Prime Minister must necessarily have resigned 
and destroyed his half-formed Cabinet. It follows, therefore, that Huskis- 
son, if he really used the words alleged, blamed Palmerston for not having 
prevented the consolidation of the Ministry, the impending dissolution of 
which he lamented. But so foolish a saying on the part of Huskisson seems 
impossible. Consequently we are justified in concluding that the words 
cited were not the words of Huskisson speaking to Palmerston, but those of 
Palmerston speaking to Bulwer. 



en. VII. REFUTATION, 79 

contentedly sat in the same Cabinet, and frequently 
at tlie same table, with a man whom he believed to have 
been guilty, not only of the most odious treachery, but 
of the most revolting perjury, and during the space of 
more than twenty years met that man on a footing of 
friendly intercourse without ever manifesting towards 
him the abhorrence which such conduct must have 
inspired in the breast of any man of honourable feeling; 
— or he left recorded for posthumous publication, against 
a dead man, a monstrous accusation, ia the truth of 
which he did not believe. 

Having premised this much, we proceed to show 
the grounds on which, independently of Mr. Herries's 
denial, we declare the charge to be false. 

1. Not a particle of evidence in support of it was 
ever put forward. 

2. The papers produced and cited by us establish, 
beyond the possibility of doubt, the fact that during 
the negotiations between Lord Goderich and the King 
concerning Lord Holland in the first fortnight of 
December, Mr. Herries, like other members of the 
Cabinet not admitted into the Whig sub- Cabinet, was 
in total ignorance of what was going on ; that, until 
the 13th, when Lord Goderich's resignation was an- 
nounced, he knew nothing of the Prime Minister's letter 
to the King, written under the direction of Lord Lans- 
downe and Mr. Huskisson ; and that he was afterwards 
made aware of what had been done in this matter 
subsequently to Lord Goderich's return to power, not 
through any secret channel of communication with the 
Palace, but simply by another Cabinet Minister on 



80 REFUTATION. ch. vii. 

December 21, the day on which the letter alleged to 
have been written in consequence of secret commu- 
nications was addressed to Lord Goderich. But from 
the King's point of view it was manifestly desirable 
that those members of the Cabinet (Mr. Herries being 
one of them) who were opposed to Lord Holland's 
admission should be perfectly informed of what was 
going on, in order that they might be able to help his 
Majesty to resist the renewed demand. Nevertheless 
they were not informed. And it is absolutely incredible 
that if the letter of the 21st concerning the Finance 
Committee was prompted by the King, no secret informa- 
tion should have been imparted to Mr. Herries on a 
subject infinitely more interesting to the King than 
Lord Althorp's nomination. 

3. The form in which Mr. Herries's resignation was 
offered to Lord Goderich was inconsistent with the 
supposition of its having been concerted with the King 
for the purpose of destroying the Government, in which 
case it would have been, not conditional, but absolute 
and immediate. 

4. It is quite clear that both the Lord Chancellor 
and Lord Bexley, who were in confidential and fre- 
quent communication with Mr. Herries, were at the 
beginning of January under the impression that the 
King was ignorant of the disputes in the Cabinet ; and 
such a persistent deception as must have been practised 
upon them both, if the Palmerston theory were true, is 
wholly inconceivable. 

5. In, the latter part of December the King was 
absorbed in preparations for the reception of Dom 



CH. vir. REFUTATION. 81 

Miguel, and it was well known that lie was very un- 
willing to be disturbed in tbem by political business. 
So strongly was tbis felt, tbat Lord Bexley, in pro- 
testing against the Holland negotiation, told Lord 
Groderich that he reserved his determination as to any 
steps which he might think it right to take untU the 
King's domestic engagements at Windsor should be 
terminated ; and Mr. Herries also declared that he 
would postpone any further action which might break 
in improperly at that time upon His Majesty's arrange- 
ments. It is impossible that at that very moment he 
should, in concert with the King, have done anything 
calculated to produce an explosion which would most 
effectually have interfered with those arrangements. 

6. On January 10, two days after the final disso- 
lution of the Goderich Cabinet, Mr. Herries addressed 
to Sir William Knighton the following confidential 
letter : — 

' Downing Street : January 10, 1828. 

' My dear Sir William, — It is right that you should 
be in possession of the accompanying paper. It contains 
the whole story honestly told (and told by documents) 
of the subject on which the Whigs and I have been 
divided. 

' The time must come, I presume, when it will be 

my duty to render an account to the King of my 

conduct in this affair. I will wait with patience for it, 

and not add to the troubles imposed upon his Majesty 

by any undutiful importunity on my part. Most truly 

yours, 

' J. C. Hekkies.' 

VOL. II. G 



82 REFUTATION. 



OH. VII. 



This authentic document is conclusive. No person 
of orduaary intelligence can read it, and stUl entertain 
the least doubt of the perfect truth of the writer's de- 
claration in the House of Commons. It proves indis- 
putably that, untn some time after the Goderich 
Ministry had ceased to exist, the King received no 
information from Mr. Herries, either directly or in- 
directly, concerning the differences between him and 
his colleagues, and therefore entirely excludes any 
supposition of concerted action. 

7. With regard to imaginary communications with 
the Tory leaders, the following letter, intended to be sent 
to the Duke of Wellington, is not less decisive. 

' Downing Street : January 1828. 

' My dear Lord Duke, — I transmit to you herewith 
a copy of my correspondence with Lord Goderich on 
a subject on which you have perhaps heard much 
from others. It is accompanied by a few observations 
necessary for the clear understanding of the circum- 
stances which are referred to in it. 

' I trust that your Grace will appreciate the motives 
which have induced me to maintain up to this time 
the strictest silence on this matter towards your Grace, 
although I could not but feel an earnest desire that no 
erroneous impression should be made upon your mind 
by the manner in which the subject of this correspon- 
dence has been treated in the public papers. 

' I have judged it to be the most fair, the most 

' There is a rough draft as well as a fair copy signed and ready for trans- 
mission, which, however, apparently did not take place. 



CH. VII. REFUTATION. 88 

honourable, and the most dehcate course towards all 
the parties who have been concerned in the transaction, 
to maintain the most scrupulous reserve upon it while 
the formation of a new Government was depending, and 
above aU, to have no communication, direct or indirect, 
relating to it, either with your Grace or with any of 
the persons with whom or under whom I have hereto- 
fore had the satisfaction of acting in any political 
capacity. 

' The time being now, however, come when that 
reserve is no longer required, nor proper, I transmit the 
correspondence to your Grace, with a strong conviction 
that you will find in it nothing to diminish that good 
opinion which your Grace has on so many occasions 
evinced in the most flattering manner of — Your most 
faithful, &c., &c., , j_ (._ Herries.' 

Here we might close the case ; but in order to 
leave nothing unsaid we will add this. Let us suppose 
that no declarations were made in the House of Com- 
mons, and that the testimony of no documents could 
be cited. We would stiU. contend that the charge made 
in one form or another fifty years ago, and latterly 
brought forward again by Lord Bailing in Lord Pal- 
merston's name, ought to be rejected by every impartial 
judge on account of its own inherent improbability, 
and of the enormous absurdities to which its admission 
must necessarily lead. 

No fi'ee man becomes a traitor and exposes himself 
to ignominy and detestation, when he has nothing to 
gain, but much to lose, by his treachery. 

G 2 



84 REFUTATION. ch. tit. 

An Eastern slave alone will commit acts of base 
turpitude, at great risk to himself, merely in obedience 
to the behest of a king. A silent clock may be care- 
fully adjusted and regulated for the destruction of a 
vessel in mid-ocean ; but no eloquence will persuade 
one of the chief officers of the ship to stow it away in 
his cabin — a course closely analogous to that which, 
according to Lord Palmerston, Mr. Herries was induced 
to take by George IV. If the King had urged the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer to blow up the Cabinet, 
that Minister (had he been capable of entertaining the 
proposal) would have replied, ' But I shall blow myself 
up along with my colleagues ; and before doing so, I 
must be quite sure that I shall fall on my feet without 
being hurt by the explosion. Your Majesty must give 
me, if no more, at least assurance of safety.' It is 
morally impossible that such an agreement as that 
alleged could have been come to without a positive 
pledge on the part of the King that in any change 
Mr. Herries should be maintained in his then position, 
or should obtain an equivalent for it. But it is patent 
that no such bargain was struck, and that he received 
no assurance. For it is certain that, personally, he was 
in every respect a loser by the breaking up of the 
Goderich Administration — a loser in point of station, of 
consequence, of the means of acquu-ing increased repu- 
tation, and of emolument. 

On the other hand, the King's motives, on the 
Palmerston hypothesis, are wholly unintelligible. As 
we have already observed there was nothing to prevent 
him from calling in the Duke of Wellington on the 



OH. VII. REFUTATION. 85 

death of Mr. Canning. He need not have postponed 
for six months the construction of a Tory Government, 
interposing another Ministry only to have the trouble 
of getting rid of it by subtle contrivances. The Gode- 
rich Cabinet was a constant source of vexation and 
apprehension to him. Its internal dissensions, together 
with the harassing dictation and pretentious impor- 
tunities to which he was almost incessantly subjected 
by some of its members, left him no peace and quiet. 
During the first, and during the last, months of its 
brief existence, he was always in hot water. He seems 
to have been obliged even to make a struggle for a 
tranquU Christmas dinner.^ And we are expected to 
believe that, without the slightest necessity, he imposed 
upon himself this burden which made his life wretched, 
while, at the same time, he devised a cunning scheme 
for its removal after a period of extreme torment. We 
are gravely told that, in the process of its formation, 
the King took care to put a ' Live shell ' into the Cabiaet, 
in order that, at a moment singularly inconvenient to 
himself, an explosion might destroy the Government, 
and enable his Majesty to do in January that which he 
could easily have done in August, with a saving of a 
world of annoyance. This is not all. A higher pin- 
nacle of nonsense has yet to be reached. 

The explosion of the ' live shell ' was rendered un- 
necessary by the act of the Prime Minister himself, 
who, on December 11, as we have seen, blew up his 

' Greville tells us that ' tlie King said he did not see why he was to be 
the only gentleman in his dominions who was not to eat his Christmas dinner 
in quiet, and he was determined he would.' 



86 -EEFUTATION. ch. tii. 

Cabinet without giving warning to anybody.^ The 
King thereby became quite free to send for the Duke of 
Wellington and dismiss the ministers whom he disliked. 
Instead of doing so, he allowed Lord Goderich, after a 
week's retirement, to resume the station he had aban- 
doned, and revive the Government, which, two days 
after its re-establishment, was to be again blown up — 
according to the Palmerston legend — at a signal from 
the King. 

This is the culminating peak of absurdity. Having 
attained it, let us ' rest and be thankful,' in the confi- 
dence that our readers will agree with us in pronouncing 
the charge we have refuted to be, not only calumnious, 
bat ridiculous and impossible. 

* The silence of the Autobiography on this point is extraordinary. 



OH. Tin. CABINET CHANGES. 87 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Cabinet changes — Correspondence witli the Duke — Finance Committee — 
Reform of the Sinking Fimd — Dr. Bowring — Catholic emancipation — 
Proposed Indian appointment — Board of Trade — Settlement of old 
dispute with the United States — Parliamentary duties— Close of the 
WelUngton administration — Financial management of Tories and Liberals 
compared. 

When the retirement of Mr. Huskisson and his friends, 
precipitated by the inopportune rigidity of the Duke of 
Wellington, made a partial redistribution of places in 
the Cabinet necessary, Mr. Herries, who had correctly 
described himself in a letter to Mr. Canning as belong- 
ing to the working class of poHticians, addressed the 
following letter to the Duke of Wellington, expressing 
his desire to be removed to some office of more real 
business than the Mint, where he felt that he was out 
of his element : — 

' Great George Street : May 28, 1828. 

' My dear Lord Duke, — After having reflected 
upon the plan which you showed me this morning for 
the reconstruction of the Government, and bearing in 
mind all the circumstances under which you have been 
called upon at this time to make a new arrangement of 
it, I feel that I should not be doing justice to the 
interest which I take in the stability and success of 
your Administration, nor to my own feelings of a more 



88 HERRIES TO THE DUKE. ch. rar. 

personal nature, if I were not to draw your attention to 
my particular situation. 

' The office which I now fill is a mere sinecure, 
and, connected as it is with a seat in the Cabinet, ia 
such as might be held by any person who, by high 
rank or influential connections, though unqualified by 
official ability or experience, might add to the strength 
of your Grovemment. 

' My only means, if I have any, of being in any 
degree usefal to you in the public service must consist 
in the efficient discharge of some public duties ; and I 
confess that I feel myself out of my proper position so 
long as I occupy an office suited to the station and 
influence which I do not possess, and unsuited to the 
exercise of any little abihty which I may have ac- 
quired by the previous occupations of my official life. 

' When my present office was conferred upon me, 
there were circumstances of a peculiar nature which pre- 
cluded me from putting forward these considerations ; 
but I feel it to be right, now that you are about to 
make a new distribution of the offices at your disposal, 
to put you in possession of my sentiments on the sub- 
ject, and candidly to state that it would have given me 
more satisfaction if I had found that it would have 
accorded with your arrangements to place me in a 
situation of more labour and responsibility than that 
which I now hold. 

' Having thus frankly expressed my sentiments on 
this subject, it only remains for me to assure your 
Grace that whatever may be your ultimate arrangements, 
and in whatever situation I may be placed, I shall use 



CH. Yiir. THE DUKE TO HERRIES. 89 

my best endeavours to justify the confidence reposed in 
me, and to prove how much I value the honour and 
advantage of being connected with an Administration of 
which your Grace is at the head. Believe me, &c., 

' J, C. Heeries.' 
The Duke's reply was very friendly, though he was 
not able immediately to make a new arrangement. 

' London : May 29, 1828. 

' My dear Mr. Herries, — I was not able to answer 
your letter yesterday or this day ; and I now steal a 
moment from my rest to reply to you. 

' Particular circumstances placed you in the ofiice 
of Chancellor of the Exchequer, for which you are 
highly qualified ; and another train of circumstances 
rendered it necessary to remove you from it. You are 
now in the Cabinet, and holding an office which has 
not much business comaected with the Government ; 
and for that very reason your being in the Cabinet is 
the more honourable to your character. You are like- 
wise in that situation in which, having not much 
business to transact in your own immediate office, you 
can materially assist the Government on a variety of 
subjects with which you are well acquainted into which 
they must make inquiries. This you could not do if 
employed in an office of which the business might be 
sufficient to employ all your time. 

' I entreat you then to be satisfied, and have 
patience, and be assured that you must rise eventually 
to offices of more business, though not of more import- 
ance, or more honourable to your character, than that 
which you now hold. Ever yours most faithfully, 

' Wellington.' 



90 THE KING'S SUGGESTION. ch. Tiir. 

From the Duke's published correspondence we learn 
the fact, of which we should otherwise have been 
ignorant (there being no allusion to it in Mr. Herries's 
papers) that the King had proposed a new Ministerial 
list, in which, Mr. Goulburn being transferred from the 
Exchequer to the Colonies, his place was to be taken 
by Mr. Herries. In his reply the Duke expressed his 
entire concurrence in (to use Mr. Walpole's words) 
' the Kmg's estimation of the fitness ' of the person 
recommended for the Finance department ; ^ but gave 
particular reasons for concluding that 'the arrange- 
ment suggested would not answer ' — in the first place 
because Mr. Goulburn was a West India proprietor, and 
secondly because the re-appointment of Mr. Herries to 
the post which he had before held might afford ground 
for the assertion that existing Ministerial difficulties were 
in some way connected with the breaking up of Lord 
Goderich's Administration, and ' occasion the secession 
of the Ministers who belonged ' to it. In a memoran- 
dum apparently of about the same date as his letter to 
the King, the Duke states as a reason for not making 
any change in Mr. Herries's position, that it would 
' remove him from Parliament and from the Finance 
Committee.' 

This Committee, which had been the cause of so 
much strife, was appointed at the beginning of the 
Session of 1828, Sir Henry Parnell being put into the 
chair. Although both the Chancellor of the Exchequer 

> ' There cannot be found a gentleman more Uglily qualified than he is 
for this office,' said the Duke of Wellington, who never said what he did 
rot thinlc. 



ca. viit. FINANCE COMAUTTEE. 91 

and Mr. Huskisson were members of it, the management 
of the business on behalf of the Grovernment was en- 
trusted to the Master of the Mint. 

Those who desire to understand the financial system 
of the country at this period would do well to consult 
the exhaustive statement made by him to the Commit- 
tee, as Lord Althorp remarked in the House of Commons, 
' in a very able, clear, and satisfactory manner.' In a 
debate in 1830 (March 12) Sir James Graham — a 
vehement adversary of the then Grovernment, never 
very friendly to Mr. Herries, and at that time far from 
being so — said on this subject : ' I also place every 
reliance on the evidence and the statements made by 
the Right Honourable gentleman opposite, the Master 
of the Mint, in evidence before the Committee ; and I 
will go the length of saying that the clearest statement 
of the financial concerns of this country I have ever 
seen is that of the Right Honourable gentleman in the 
Fourth Report, which makes the whole of our compli- 
cated accounts clear to the plainest understanding, and 
contains many valuable suggestions which the extinction 
of the Committee wUl, I regret to say, prevent from 
being carried into efli'ect.' And three years later, in a 
debate in the House of Commons on March 25, 1833, 
Sir James Graham, then in office, alluding to the same 
statement, used the strong expression — ' which I shall 
never cease to consider as one of the most able 
financial statements ever made.' 

The Fourth Report itself ('for which,' said Sir 
Henry Parnell, the chairman, ' the House and the 
country are indebted to the exertions of the Right 



92 FINANCE COMMITTEE. ch. viii. 

Honourable gentleman the Master of the Mint') was 
also drawn up by Mr. Herries. 

The chief recommendations of that Report related 
to the Sinking Fund, on which point it was entirely in 
conformity with the views indicated in the Financial 
Memorandum already cited which was written by Mr. 
Herries in 1827. 

The Act of 1823 (4 Geo. IV. c. 19) which modified 
previous arrangements, prescribed the annual payment 
of a fixed sum of 5,000,000/. (with accumulations of 
interest) towards the redemption of debt. The sums 
actually issued, pursuant to this Act, for that purpose 



were, m 




£ 




1823 


. 6,059,210 




1824 


. 5,195,912 




1825 


. 5,528,528 




1826 


. 5,612,4(55 




1827 


. 5,762,987 
£27,159,102 



This total amount exceeded, by 6,871,290/., the 
aggregate surplus, for the same period, of Income over 
Expenditure (including, on both sides, advances for 
Public Works, &c., and repayments), which was 
20,287,812/. Without the items mentioned, the 
surplus amounted to 22,741,820/., or 4,417,282/. short 
of the Sinking Fund. 

The surplus, inadequate as it was to meet the legal 
requirements of the Sinking Fund, must have been very 
considerably smaller but for the contributions derived 
from the wonderfully complicated contrivance known 
as the Dead Weight Annuity, and devised, primarily. 



en. Till. SINKING FUND. 93 

as the means of defraying the charge for Military and 
Naval half-pay and pensions, but in reality also, ' with 
a view of creating an addition to the income of the 
State, whereby the surplus required to satisfy the 
Sinking Fund of 5,000,000^. fixed by law might still 
be provided, notwithstanding a considerable reduction 
of the taxes then existing.' 

On account of this annuity of 585,740/., sold to the 
Bank for 13,089,419/., there were received, in the five 
years specified above, 11,114,049/., the aggregate amount 
of the annual payments to the Bank having been on the 
other hand 2,635,830/. The difference was applied to 
the reduction of debt, ' but the sale of the annuity was 
itself a creation of debt, and it was therefore not correct 
to call that a Sinking Fund, which only served to 
extinguish in one shape a debt which it established in 
another.' 

It appeared that the maintenance of ' the semblance 
of a Sinking Fund by this intricate contrivance ' had 
been, and must necessarily be in future, attended with 
considerable expense ; and as the measure was ' wholly 
useless as an expedient to supply a nominal amount 
of Sinking Fund, the Committee had no hesitation in 
recommending ' its abandonment. 

With regard to the future apphcation of surplus to 
the reduction of the National Debt, the Report states 
that ' the Committee is impressed with a strong con- 
viction of the sound policy of applying a surplus 
revenue perseveringly, in those times during which no 
extraordinary resources need be raised, in the reduction 
of the debts accumulated to defray the expenses of 



94 SINKING FUND. en. Tin. 

antecedent periods of difficulty and exertion. "Without 
offering at present any opinion on the comparative 
advantages of defraying the charges of war by the 
immediate imposition of taxes to the amount of those 
charges, or by raising the required supplies by loans, 
the Committee consider that if a nation has been in- 
duced, for the sake of greater present facilities and 
safety, to provide for such exigencies by a system of 
borrowing, whereby a permanent annual charge has 
been created, that nation is bound, on the return of 
peace, to make every effort, consistent with a due 
regard to the other burthens upon the people, for the 
reduction of that charge. A course of policy founded 
upon the avowed principle of raising loans for the 
exigencies of the State in time of war, and of making 
no provision for diminishing the permanent charge of 
those loans in time of peace, must appear an abandon- 
ment of all consideration for the credit and safety of the 
country in the eventual occurrence of future difficulties 
and dangers. 

' If the accumulated debt of each period of extra- 
ordinary exertion is to be handed down undiminished 
as a load upon those who are thereafter to meet the 
exigencies of other struggles and other difficulties, it is 
too obvious to require an argument that the time can- 
not be very distant (according to the ordinary vicissi- 
tudes of peace and war in the history of human affairs) 
when the combined weight of the past and present 
burthens must become too great for the most pros- 
perous people to support, and the fabric of public credit 
must crumble under the accumulated pressure. . . . 



CH. VIII. SINKING FUND. 95 

' Impressed with these sentiments the Committee 
would have recommended a perseverance in the resolu- 
tion of 1819 to apply 5,000,000/. annually to the 
gradual extinction of debt, if that measure could have 
been accomplished by the application of a surplus 
revenue, and without the necessity of borrowing or of 
adding new burthens upon the country. 

' But it is obvious . . . that there is at present no 
clear surplus to that amount, nor any immediate pro- 
spect of such a surplus arising The Committee 

are of opinion that, instead of a fixed Sinking Fund, 
the real surplus of revenue only should be appropriated 
annually, in the mode hereafter stated, to the reduction 
of debt. 

' The Committee upon the whole are of opinion 
that the following principles in the future regulation 
of the Sinking Fund should be adopted : That ... it 
will be expedient, in estimating the Supply and Ways 
and Means, to keep in view the necessity of a surplus 
of not less than 3,000,000/. in each year, but that in 
case the eventual annual surplus should not amount to 
three milHons, the deficiency ought not to be supplied 
by borrowing. 

' They are also of opinion that all Funded Debt 
redeemed by the application of the real surplus Revenue 
should be cancelled.' 

The Eeport concludes with the observation that 
while the Committee 'are deeply impressed with the 
conviction that in the present state of the public 



96 SINKING FUND. ch. viii. 

finances a severe economy in every branch of the 
national expenditure is imposed as a sacred duty upon 
the Government and upon Parliament, they derive from 
their inquiries the strongest confidence in the resources 
of the country to fulfil all its engagements, and to 
maintain unimpaired its high station in the world.' 

The recommendations of the Committee were defini- 
tively carried into effect in the following year, 1829, by 
the Act, 10 Geo. IV. c. 27. 

Upon the evidence of all the facts presented — that 
Mr. Herries proposed the constitution of a Committee 
of Financial Inquiry ; that at the same time he dwelt 
upon the necessity of altering the then existing system 
of the Sinking Fund ; that he was the member of the 
Government who laid before the Committee, when ap- 
pointed according his suggestion, all the information 
relating to the general working of the mechanism of 
the finances which it required for its deliberations ; 
and that finally he drew up the Report which embodied 
its most important general conclusions — we consider 
ourselves as fully warranted in claiming for him the 
credit of having been principally instrumental in bring- 
ing about the salutary financial reform above described.^ 

^ It is somewliat remarkable that Mr. Spencer Walpole, who has devoted 
large space in liis history to details more or less inaccurate concerning this 
question of the Sinking Fund, in order to convict Tory financiers of error, 
should have been able to find no more room than the corner of a foot-note 
for the mention of the useful laboiu's of the Committee which, chiefly under 
the guidance of one particular Tory financier, rectified previous mistakes. 
This author has, with his customary carelessness, committed an extraordinary 
Hunder in his account of the modification of the Sinking Fund system which 
was effected in 1823. He says : ' Vansittart applied a sum of money which 
he had not got, and which he had no prospect of getting, except by borrow- 
ing. Kobinson, on the contrary, proportioned his Sinking Fund to his 



CH. Tin. LIBERAL AND TORY DOCTRINES. 97 

The fashionable doctrine of the day among Liberals 
— a doctrine now repudiated — was the, contrary of that 
maintained by the Tories. It was deemed impolitic for 
a nation, like the individual censured by a cynical wit, 
to ' muddle away its money in paying its debts.' ^ 
' What real good,' Liberal economists scornfully asked, 
' could be done by applying some three millions, or five 
millions, a year, towards the redemption of 800,000,000/. ? 
A diminution of taxes to the same amount would afford 
us a much greater rehef.' 

When stripped of the pedantic varnish of sham 
science which covered it, this principle, once greatly in 
vogue, appears as nothing but the crude expression of 
selfishness, which says : ' By taking our money out of 
our pockets to pay our debts, instead of leaving it to 
fructify for our own benefit, we are deprivmg ourselves 
of present enjoyments for the benefit of posterity. But 
what is posterity to us ? Let us rather spend our 

surplus, and devoted only the balance of income and expenditure to the 
reduction of debt.' It is manifest that the writer of this passage cannot 
have read, or understood, the Act of 1823 (Robinson being Chancellor of the 
Exchequer) founded upon Vansittart's resolutions of 1819, which were re- 
cited in the preamble. Its imperative directions required the annual pay- 
ment of five millions — surplus or no surplus. And if Mr. A^'alpole had 
taken the trouble to inspect the public accounts referred to above he would 
have discovered the fact, opposed to his theory, that in 1820 the amount 
issued by Robinson, according to law, for the reduction of debt, did very 
largely exceed the balance of income over expenditure. ' .Ei voild comme on 
ecrit Vhistoire : puisjiez votes d, messieurs les savans.' 

' Long after this phrase had been written the same quotation was vised 
with reference to the same subject by a great popular orator in a speech 
at a public meeting ; but he applied it, apparently, to the policy, not of the 
Liberals but of their opponents. It is certain, however, that Liberal lumin- 
aries, such as Mr. Joseph Hume, Mr. Poulett Thomson, Sir Henry Parnell, 
Lord Althorp, and others, always opposed and derided the persistent en- 
deavours of ' stupid Tory' Governments to effect large reductions of debt. 
' Base is the slave that pays,' was a Liberal, not a Tory, maxim. 

VOL. II. H 



98 IIEREIES'S VIEWS. en. Tin. 

money on cakes and ale without taking thought of 
future distress. Perish posterity, rather than that we 
should give up for it one crumb, or plum, of nice cake, 
or one drop of good ale. If postei-ity is crushed by the 
burdens bequeathed by us, with the addition of new 
ones imposed by its own necessities — so much the 
worse for it.' 

In a debate on the Budget in 1828, Mr. Herries, in 
the course of a speech in which he refuted an accusation 
brought by Mr. Hume against Mr. Canning of having 
misled the House by inaccurate statements, took an 
opportunity of again expressing his opinion, and that 
of the Government, on the subject of the Sinking Fund, 
as to which he said : ' No one was more anxious than 
myself to enable the Finance Committee to arrive at the 
real principle on which it was founded, and to divest 
it of all the intricacy of borrowing on the one hand to 
discharge what was due on the other ; and indeed I 
may venture to say that the proposition of the measure 
originated with the members of the Government. At 
the same time, both on my own part and on the part 
of those who were members of the Government in the 
Committee with me, I must entirely disclaim any 
participation in the views of those who thought it was 
just, wise, and salutary utterly to abandon all endea- 
vours to effect any reduction of the debt.* . . . 

' The object with some is, not to maintain the 
surplus for the exclusive purpose of applying it to a 

^ It is well known that this was Lord Althorp's view. His avowed 
hostility to the principle of providing a surplus for the redemption of deht 
was one of the grounds on which Mr. Herries ohjected to his being made 
chairjaan of the committee. 



CH. vm. HERRIES'S VIEWS. 99 

Sinking Fund, but to render it occasionally available 
for other purposes ; and I contend that if once you 
do this, you involve (sic) the principle altogether. The 
majority of the Committee were in favour of keeping 
up a Sinking Fund of 5,000,000Z. if it were possible ; 
and it was with great regret that they found it neces- 
sary to recommend that it should be reduced from 
5,000,000/. to 3,000,000/. I fully concur in that pro- 
posal, and if 3,000,000/. actual surplus could not be 
raised, I should say, make the Sinking Fund even lower 
than that — in short, never have the Sinking Fund 
larger than the actual surplus of your income.' After 
some other remarks, he added : ' When gentlemen bring 
their accusations against the past times of war, and 
speak of Mr. Pitt in a spirit of so much condemnation, 
I think that they are bound to recall the cncumstances 
under which that statesman brought forward the 
measure of the Sinking Fund ; he did so, no doubt, 
with the expectation that the war would only extend 
to a period of two or three years, and that, at the end 
of that time, the country would be in a state to rid 
itself of some of its burdens.' — (Mirror of Parliament.) 

It was in this debate that Mr. Poulett Thomson 
broached his celebrated fructification theory, which is 
now, we suppose, whoUy exploded. 

The labours of the Committee, although very useful, 
were incomplete. Four reports were presented in the 
course of the Session of 1828. The first report merely 
conveyed a recommendation in six lines. The second, 
on the Ordnance Estimates, contains, among other 

H 2 



100 EErORTS OF THE COMmTTEE. oh. viii. 

general observations upon expenditure and retrench- 
ment, the following : ' The Committee . . . unequivo- 
cally declare their full assent to the principle that no 
Government is justified in takmg even the smallest 
sum of money from the people, unless a case can be 
clearly established to show that it will be productive 
of some essential advantage to them . . . and the 
Committee think that the Legislature of this country 
is more particularly bound never to deviate in the 
sHghtest degree from that principle in consequence of 
the great permanent burdens which the vast amount of 
the National Debt has imposed upon the people. . . . 
With regard to retrenchment, the Committee are sensible 
of the great difficulty which lies in the way of its 
accomplishment. . . . But the present circumstances of 
our finances render the attempt absolutely indispen- 
sable. . . .' 

It cannot be doubted that these remarks had the 
full concurrence of the Master of the Mint, the most 
active Ministerial member of the Committee. The 
words of the Rejoort exactly represent the principles 
he always preached, and, so far as in him lay, always 
practised. 

In the Third Report the subjects of Military and 
Naval Half-pay, Civil Superannuations, and Diplomatic 
Pensions — the regulations recommended for the grant- 
ing of which last were adopted by the Civil List Com- 
mittee in 1831 and established as they now exist, with 
some reductions of the amount in each class — were 
dealt with. 



CH. vm. ITS ABANDONMENT. DR. BOWKING. 101 

The Fourth and last Report we have already men- 
tioned. 

The Army, Navy, Colonial Establishments, and 
other branches of expenditure, were left for further 
inquiry. But, for some reason with which we are not 
acquainted, the Committee was not re-appointed. The 
Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1829 alleged as a ground 
for its postponement the pressure of other business ; 
but the Grovernment had probably some other motive 
for their determination. It may at any rate be assumed 
that the Prime Minister and the Leader in the House 
of Commons were adverse to a continuance of the 
inquiry, which, according to letters written in 1827 
by an intimate friend of the Duke of Wellington, was 
viewed with dislike by the Duke when the intended 
appointment of the Committee was amiounced by Mr. 
Canning. Its abandonment may be considered as an 
error of judgment, because, in spite of the large reduc- 
tions of expenditure that were undoubtedly effected, it 
gave rise to unjust imputations against the Cabinet of 
want of sincerity in their economical professions. 

In connection with the business of this Committee 
a long and curious correspondence took place between a 
man of note in later years. Dr. — afterwards Sir John — 
Bowriug and the Master of the Mint. At the instance 
of the Finance Committee a Commission was appoiated 
in 1828 to inquire into the system of Public Accounts, 
and Mr. Herries desired that Dr. Bowring — whose 
special qualifications were known to him, and against 
whom he had no prejudice on account of his Radical, 
or Benthamite, opinions — should, as one of the Com- 



102 BOWRING AND HEREIES. ch. ysji. 

missioners, visit foreign countries — and Holland es- 
pecially — for the purpose of investigating the methods 
there pursued. But, owing to the decided hostility of 
the Prime Minister and others, this intention could not 
be entirely carried out. Mr. Herries, however, did his 
utmost to promote what he considered as a very impor- 
tant object, giving Dr. Bo wring all the assistance in 
his power for the prosecution of inquiries which seem 
to have been impeded by official obstacles abroad, and 
perhaps by official spokes in the wheel at home. The 
good disposition shown to him by one member of the 
Government was always recognized very handsomely 
by Dr. Bowring, who, four years later, when his friends 
were in power, wrote as follows to Mr. Herries in op- 
position : ' I cannot avoid this occasion of re-assuring 
you of my sense of obligation for the part you then 
took, being thoroughly persuaded that you did every- 
thing to prevent — and to mitigate — my then disappoint- 
ment. It will be a subject of great dehght to me if in 
any future period of my existence I am able to testify 
to you how much and how truly I am, my dear sir, 
your obliged, &c.' 

When the Duke of Wellington's Cabinet was forced 
by political necessity to bring forward the measure of 
CathoUc Emancipation which caused the rupture of the 
Tory party, Mr. Herries was less embarrassed by his 
previous conduct on this question than the two distin- 
guished leaders of the Government, or than many of 
his other colleagues. He had formerly voted against 
the Catholic claims, but his opposition was always free 
from passion or fanaticism. He certainly did not 



CH. VIII. CATHOLIC EMANCIPATION. 103 

entertain the notion whicli, according to Peter Plymley, 
had ' crept into the world, that difference of religion 
would make men unfit to perform together the offices 
of common and civil life ; that Brother Wood and 
Brother Goose could not travel together the same 
circuit if they diflfered in creed, nor Cockell and 
Mingay be engaged in the same cause if Cockell was a 
Catholic and Mingay a Muggletonian.' He did not 
' suppose that Huskisson and Sir Henry Englefield 
would squabble behind the Speaker's chair about 
the Council of Lateran, and many a turnpike bill mis- 
carry by the sarcastical controversies of Mr. Hawkins 
Brown and Sir John Throckmorton upon the real 
presence.' 

He cared very Uttle for theological theory, but very 
much for priestly practice, which he believed to be still, 
as in all former ages, antagonistic to the reason, the 
civilization, and the freedom, of mankind. 

He regarded the Catholic Question, not from a 
religious, but fi-om a political point of view. Upon 
grounds of pohtical expediency he considered the 
original exclusion of Papists from political functions as 
a rational measure ; and he was not convinced that 
there had ceased to be good grounds for maintaining it 
— beHeving as he did that, although, where the Church 
was not concerned, a Catholic Member of Parliament 
might fulfil his duties quite as faithfully and loyally as 
a Protestant, whenever the interests of his Church 
came or appeared to come into conflict with the interests 
of the State, his allegiance to the Vatican would cer- 
tainly overpower his sense of national obligation ; and 



104 CATHOLIC EMANCIPATION. k3h. viir. 

that, in dealing witli many questions of political or 
social importance, his chief consideration would be, 
not how they might aifect the welfare of the country, 
but how they might be viewed by an external 
authority. 

On the other hand, insurrection appeared to him 
a far greater evil than any which could be apprehended 
from the admission of Catholics ; and, having to choose 
between prospective difficulties and the imminent peril 
of civil war, he could not hesitate in giving his voice 
for that course which public safety pointed out. The 
Coronation Oath, as an objection to legislative change, 
had absolutely no force in his eyes. 

Few persons will now refuse to admit that the 
respectable, but inconvenient, scruples of George III.'s 
conscience, which prevented the settlement of the 
question at the beginning of this century are greatly 
to be regretted, and that it was impolitic to defer until 
the year 1828 an inevitable concession which might 
have been granted many years sooner. But, at the 
same time, it can hardly be denied, that the arguments 
constantly put forward by the Emancipationists, if now 
to be produced, would need considerable recasting 
before they could be read by the light of all the sayings 
and doings of the Vatican and its supporters during 
the last twenty or thirty years. 

Half a century's experience of incessant agitation 
has demonstrated the vanity of the expectations fondly 
entertained of Irish tranquillity and content. It would 
be easy to show — facts in hand — that every single pre- 
diction, and every argument — except that of necessity — 



GH. viir. INDIAN FINANCES.' 105 

in favour of emancipation, have been proved false by- 
subsequent events. 

In 1829 tbe following correspondence, wbich has a 
public as well as a personal interest, took place between 
Mr. Herries and Lord Ellenborough, then President of 
the now extinct Board of Control, who pressed him 
strongly and repeatedly to go out to India, and en- 
deavour to effect the cure of the chronic disorder from 
which the finances of the Eastern Empire were at that 
time, as they are still, suffering. Every inducement to 
accept the offered post, in which perhaps he might 
have rendered great service to the State, was held out 
to him, but domestic considerations forced him to 
dechne it. 

' India Board : April 19, 1829. 
' (Priyate.) 

' My dear Herries, — Our Indian finances are in a 
bad state, and very much require your experienced hand 
to bring them round. The expense of collecting the 
revenue increases, the salaries of all the public officers 
increase, the manufactures of the country are undersold 
by ours, and India cannot pay its way. We must find 
a remedy for this, and none will be found until we can 
place one strong and practised mind at the head of the 
whole finance of the Empire. 

' The first object is to diminish the unnecessary 
charges. I really believe we cannot increase the 
revenue until we diminish taxation, and by diminish- 
ing taxation enable the people to acquire wealth, and 
to rise elastically as the weight which now crushes 
them is removed. 



106 COKRESPONDENCE WITH ELLENBOROUGH. ch. yiii. 

' Whatever commerce we now have with India must 
be in great measure confined to the supply of the wants 
of the British residents. We should endeavour, not 
only to create in the body of the native population a 
taste for British manufactures, but to give them the 
means of gratifying their taste. 

' There can be no profitable commerce with a pauper 
people. 

' These opinions have pressed strongly upon my mind 
ever since I have been at the India Board ; but I am 
satisfied I made but little (sic) from hence. 

' Would you undertake the general management of 
the finances of India, as a sort of Chancellor of the 
Exchequer to the Governor- General? If you would do 
so you might, I am convinced, not only confer a very 
great benefit upon the public, but illustrate your own 
name much more than you could as Governor of any one 
of the Presidencies. 

' If you should be inclined to look at the office as 
one which you might possibly undertake, I am disposed 
to think that I should have no great difficulty in 
inducing the Directors to make it worth your while to 
go to India. You would live very much with the 
Governor-General, and as you would not be required to 
keep any establishment, I should think you might save 
5,000/. or 7,000/. a year out of the 10,000/. or 12,000/. 
which we could manage to give you. 

'Will you think of it? 

' You might depend upon being supported here. 
Lord W. Bentinck has lately appointed a Commission 
to inquire generally into the increase of expenditure, 



ca. VIII. CORRESPONDENCE WITH ELLENBOROUGH. 107 

and if you would go you would just find the labours of 
the Commission finished, and all the materials ready to 
your hands. A few years would enable you to redeem 
the errors of half a century, and to lay the foundation 
of a permanent system which might endure for as long 
a period as men can presume to look forward to. Be- 
lieve me, my dear Herries, ver'y truly yours, 

' Ellenborough.' 

' Great George Street : April 20, 1829. 

' My dear Lord Ellenborough, — I am just leaving 
London to pass a few days at Brighton, or I would 
have called on you to answer your letter by a personal 
communication rather than by a written one. 

' Upon the first view of your proposition as it 
respects the office itself, I have great doubts of your 
being able so to constitute your Indian Chancellorship 
of the Exchequer as to efi'ect your great object of 
regenerating the whole system of Indian finance 
without danger of interfering with some other very 
important objects of Indian government. 

' I fear you would find it difficult to make such an 
office sufficiently substantive and independent for the 
accomplishment of such a task without making it too 
much so for the authority and influence of the Governor- 
General — which will hardly admit of any diminution. 
In short, I think your Finance Minister in India would 
be either a mere adviser of the Governor- General, and, 
as such, would have no substantive weight or power, 
or he would be a troublesome— perhaps a dangerous — 
check upon him. 



108 COREESPONDENCE WITH ELLENBOROUGH. ch. viii. 

' But these opinions are formed, as I said, upon the 
first view only of your plan. You are much better 
acquainted with the subject than I am, and have thought 
more upon it. My objections might possibly be over- 
ruled by you in a few minutes' conversation on the 
matter. 

' But with respect to my undertaking such an office 
if it could usefully be instituted, there are personal and 
domestic reasons which would preclude my undertaking 
it, even if I could bring myself to agree in your much 
too favourable opinion of my fitness for it. 

' If in any of the financial parts of your labours at 
home, either for preparing for the establishment of such 
an office, or on any other occasion, I can be of any 
service to you, I beg you to be assured that you may at 
all titnes freely command my services. Believe me, &c. 

'J. C. Herries.' 

« India Board : AprU 22, 1829. 

' My dear Herries, — I' should hardly venture to 
think of creating the office I spoke to you of unless I 
was certain of being able to place you in it, for I know 
no other man I think fit. 

' Such an officer without talent, experience, and 
high station in England, aU combined, would be 
incapable of doing good ; but with these qualities and 
with the support of the authorities at home he might 
do extensive good. 

' Lord W. Bentinck wished to have a Vizir, and he 
does still. 

' I am very much obliged to you for your kind 



CH. vm. CORRESPONDENCE WITH ELLENBOROUGH. 109 

offers of assistance in the Financial Department. I 
may take advantage of tliem perhaps too largely. Be- 
lieve me, &c. , T^ 

liLLENBOEOUGH. 

It appears that the President of the Board of Control 
was in the habit of consulting his colleague, the Master 
of the Mint, on Indian matters. Thus we read in one 
letter : ' I am afraid I trouble you very much with 
my Indian business ; ' and in another, ' You will do 
me a great favour if you will read the accompanying 
memorandum and letter to Bombay on the subject 
of establishing a Government Bank there, and give me 
your opinion upon it. ... I have thrown out the 
doubts which have arisen in my mind on reading the 
memorandum, but I have great hesitation in acting 
upon my own unassisted judgment in matters of this 
kind which are new to me, and I shall be disposed to 
defer to your opinion should it be against the validity 
of my doubts. A mass of papers was sent to me with 
the letter, which you shall have if you require them.' 

Advice from the same quarter was sought by Lord 
EUenborough many years afterwards, when he was 
Governor-General of India, and his correspondent a 
private individual, as we gather from this letter, which 
may not be out of place here, though written in 1842. 

' My dear Lord EUenborough, — Your letter about 
my son ^ was most gratifjmig to me. There is nothing 

5 Captain (afterwards Brevet-Major) William Robert Herries, 43rd Light 
Infantry and 3rd Light Dragoons, Aide-de-camp to the Governor-General. 
He was billed in action at Moodkee in 1845, when serving in the same 
capacity on the staff of the late Lord Hardinge. 



110 OOREESPONDENCE A^^TH ELLENBOROUGH. ch. viii. 

I more desire than that he should continue to give 
satisfaction to you. The employment you are giving 
him wUl be of immense use to him. 

' He writes to me in the strongest terms of your 
kindness and of his devotion to your service. 

' I have been prevented by a continued absence from 
London from obtaining some information which I have 
sought for on the subject of the present system of 
control and check upon the current public expenditure 
in India. The defect of the system which you advert 
to lies, I have no doubt, in the want of a systematic 
supervision of the public outgoings in their earliest 
stages, whereby the mischief of a lax administration by 
the financial authorities, or a reckless profusion by civil 
or military servants who spend the public money, may 
be nipped in the bud. The ultimate examination or 
audit of the public accounts is not sufiicient for that 
object. It comes too late for prevention and generally 
in such a shape that the highest authority cannot easily 
sift the mass of payments made with a view to general 
correction and improvement. In this country there 
has long (I think from the time of Godolphin) existed 
a department for advising the Treasury upon all extra- 
ordinary military expenditure if possible before it is 
incurred, and when the nature of the service will not 
admit of that, then as soon after the payments made as 
information of the accounts rendered will admit of. . . 
This has no doubt prevented a good deal of wasteful 
expenditure by Grovernors and military officers abroad, 
and Commissaries on foreign service. These Comp- 
trollers of Army Accounts were until lately a separate 



en. Tin. PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF TRADE. Ill 

Board. The office is now merged in the Auditors of 
Public Accounts — one of whom is especially assigned 
to this service — that is, of advising the Treasury upon 
proposed incipient expenditure. I know not if you 
have any corresponding check in India. I should 
think it would be even more useful there than at 
home. 

' Sir R. Peel is, no doubt, quite right in postponing 
to a future session any general explanations of Indian 
finance. It is highly desirable on every account to 
avoid at this time discussions upon that point and upon 
Indian policy in general. An Indian Budget and 
Indian debates will, I hope, be ushered in under more 
favourable auspices when you have been a twelvemonth 
at the head of the Indian Grovernment. 

' We have just learned by telegraph the arrival of 
the mail of June 1 .... In the meantime I wish you 
heartily joy of the progress already made towards the 
restoration of the credit of our arms in Afghanistan. 

Y*^"^^' ^''' ' J. C. Heeeies.' 

In 1830, Mr. Vesey Fitzgerald, having been com- 
pelled by severe illness to retire, was succeeded in the 
office of President of the Board of Trade by Mr. Herries, 
who continued to hold together with it that of Master 
of the Mint. 

During his tenure of office at the Board of Trade he 
had the satisfaction of contributing by active co-opera- 
tion to the settlement of the long-vexed question of the 
commercial intercourse between the British West India 
Islands and the United States. After much amicable 



112 SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTE WITH AMERICA, ch. vin. 

negotiation "^ between the British Government and Mr. 
MacLane, the American Minister — who renewed the 
discussions which had been carried on at intervals 
during many years — the dispute, injurious to both 
parties, was terminated by the removal of retaliatory 
restrictions on both sides, and the direct trade was at 
last opened to British and American vessels on a foot- 
ing of equality by the repeal, on the one hand, of the 
American Acts of Congress of which Great Britain com- 
plained, and, on the other, of the British Orders in 
Council which were objected to by the United States. 

This arrangement, which appears from the Duke of 
Welling-ton's correspondence to have been very re- 
luctantly assented to by him, was facilitated by a 
considerable diminution of the import duties chai"ged 
in the United States on several articles of British 
Colonial produce. 

At the same time a measure was proposed to 
Parliament the object of which was to give, in accord- 
ance with then generally prevalent ideas, protection 
and encouragement to the trade of the North American 
Colonies with the "West Indies by means of a new scale 
of discriminating duties in favour of certam articles 
imported from the former colonies into the latter. 

In submitting it to the House of Commons on 
November 8, 1830, a few days before the adverse vote 
which overthrew the Duke of Wellington's Cabinet, 
Mr. Herries said : ' I have the gratification of being 

We believe that we should be justified in saying that the conduct of 
this negotiation devolved chiefly upon Mr. Herries, and that he deserves the 
credit of having brought it to a successful issue. 



CH. TOT. MR. HERHmS'S SPEECPt. Il3 

able to state that a topic of discussion between two 
nations, which, has occupied the longest time atid was 
of the most intricate character of any withm memory, 
and which has been subject to many varieties of pre- 
tension on both sides, has now been amicably, aiid I 
trust for ever, terminated to the satisfaction of both 
parties. . . . We have only to regret that the United 
States having at length adopted and accepted these 
terms, they had not done so at an earlier period. That 
country has, however, now subscribed to them fully 
and unconditionally, and I am bound to state — in fact 
I should not be doing justice to the American Govern- 
ment were I not to do so — that it is impossible for any 
Grovemment to have conducted a negotiation involving 
such important interests in a more friendly, civil, con- 
ciliatory, straightforward, and therefore, I should say, 
in a more wise and prudent manner than that pursued 
by the United States. It would not become me to 
express any strong opinion on a foreign Government, 
did circumstances not render it indispensably necessary; 
but having adverted to the many infructuous attempts 
to settle this subject, I am bound to say that I believe 
on this occasion neither party has had the slightest 
reason to utter a complaint against the other on its 
final adjustment, but that every real ground of satis- 
faction and confidence has been acted on. . . . 

' The American Government have repealed those Acts 
which contained the obnoxioiis proposals. . . . and lest 
any ambiguity should arise, the most distinct explana- 
tions have been required on the one side and given on 
the other. His Majesty's Government have adopted this 

VOL. II. I 



114 WORK IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS. ch. vni. 

course in order to remove the possibility of any after- 
claps, which I am sorry to say we have frequently had 
occasion to regret as arising out of treaties in the drawing 
up of which the closest eye had perhaps not been used.'' ^ 

In the following year the measure proposed was 
taken up agaia and carried, with some alterations in 
the scale of duties, by Lord Grey's Government. Mr. 
Poulett Thomson, who, as Yice-President of the Board of 
Trade, had charge of the Bill m the House of Commons, 
while endeavouring to prove that his tariiF was better 
than that of Mr. Herries, distmctly recognized the pro- 
priety — or necessity — of affording to the trade of the 
Northern Colonies the protection of discriminating duties, 
one of the alleged improvements of this new scheme being 
indeed a temporary increase of the protection so given. 

Lord Palmerston was pleased to remark, in one of 
his letters preserved for the benefit of posterity, that 
' Herries is entirely mute,' but this observation, like 
many others left on record by Lord Palmerston, had 
the defect of being untrue. A simple reference to the 
' Mirror of Parliament ' or to ' Hansard ' shows that in 
the Sessions of 1828, 1829, and 1830, Mr. Herries took 
at least his fair share of the business of the House of 
Commons. He spoke not unfrequently, and on various 
subjects — on one occasion indeed in answer to a motion 
made by Lord Palmerston himself on the affairs of 
Portugal — but chiefly on those with which he was most 
perfectly acquainted. We may cite particularly a speech 

' The italics are ours. Later Governments, too, have had occasion to 
regret after-claps arising out of treaties ' less accurate ' than they ought to 
nave been. 



CH. VIII. THE CURRENCY QUESTION. 115 

on the currency question (a matter of more importance 
to the English people than the constitution of Portugal 
and the tyranny of Dom Miguel) in opposition to a 
motion made by Mr. Attwood for the adoption of a 
double standard by making gold and silver coins a 
legal tender in the relative proportions established in 
1717, and for the re-introduction of small notes. 

In the course of the debate, Mr. Huskisson said : ' I 
am perfectly satisfied with the answer that my Right 
Honourable friend (Mr. Herries) made to this branch of 
the subject ; and, I will add, a more able or argumenta- 
tive speech of the kind I never heard.' And Sir Robert 
Peel, commenting upon what Mr. Attwood had called 
his ' practical measure,' remarked that ' it would be 
almost waste of time to endeavour to show the absurdity 
of it, after the able and eloquent speech of my Right 
Honourable friend near me.' 

The Wellington Cabinet, which was destroyed by 
the ricochet of a French revolution, and by the impolitic 
junction of advanced Tories with advanced Liberals, 
was, as well as its predecessor the Liverpool Ministry, 
held lip to obloquy by the party in the ascendant in 
times of popiilar effervescence when defenders of bygone 
Tory Governments had no better chance of fair hearing 
than a Papist denounced by Titus Oates, or a British 
Ambassador accused of Turkophilism at a Bulgarian 
atrocity meeting. The prejudice created fifty years ago 
by those who had possession of the pubUc ear has never 
since been entirely removed, and even now any mob- 
orator or pamphleteer can easily find ignorant listeners 
or readers ready to take upon trust his declamations 



116 TORY AlVD LIBERAL FINANCE. en. viii. 

against what lie may please to call Tory misrule before 
the days of reform. But in one — and that the most 
important — branch of administration it can without 
much difficulty be demonstrated that Tory management 
was far more advantageous to the nation than that of 
the Liberals. 

Let the railers at the old Tory system place side by 
side the financial results of its three last years, 1828, 
1829, 1830, and those of the three last years of the 
ensuing Reform Governments, 1839, 1840, 1841. In 
the former triennial period they will find immense and 
most beneficial reductions of taxation terminating in a 
very large surplus (nearly three millions) bequeathed to 
the incoming Whigs, in whose unskilful hands it was 
immediately transmuted into a heavy deficit ; in the 
latter, a growing excess of expenditure culminating in 
enormous and dangerous deficiency left to be dealt with 
by a Conservative Government. 

Or let the declaimers calculate how much lighter our 
burdens would now be than they are, if the diminution 
of the charge of the funded and unfunded debt had 
continued at the same rate as during the three years of 
the Wellington Admmistration — due allowance bemg 
made for subsequent additions of debt, and likewise 
for the relief derived from the simple expiration of 
annuities. In those years it amounted to 785,875^., if 
actual payments be taken, or to 1,081,615/., if the 
terminable and life annuities be converted into equiva- 
lent permanent annuities according to Mr. Finlaison's 
computation ( Parhamentary Paper, 1831). 

Another comparison may be made. In the last 



en. VIII. 



EESULTS COMPARED. 



117 



eight Tory pre-Reform years, 1823-1830, without any 
deficit, the total real surplus (local advances and re- 
payments, as well as the sums received fi-om and paid to 
the Bank under the ' Dead Weight ' arrangement, being 
eliminated fi'om the accounts) which was applicable to 
the redemption of debt, amounted to 22,242,231/.,** while 
the aggregate net surplus (after deduction of the defi- 
ciencies of nine years) of the next twenty years, 1831- 
1850, was only 8,986,698/. 

This is not all. The net remission of taxation in 
these eight Tory years exceeded qy nearly 37 per cent, 
that which was efi'ected in the twenty Liberal and Peelian 
years; the totals being, respectively, 14,509,239/., and 
10,598,761/.^ The amaual rate of such remission was, 
in the first period, 1,811,746/., and in the second, 
529,938/. The yearly excess on the Tory side was 
therefore no less than 1,283,716/. To make the com- 
parison complete, let the results above stated be put 
together thus : 



Surplus .... 
Net Remission of Taxation . 


Bigbt Tory Tears 


Twenty Liberal, &c. 
Years 


22,242,231 
14,509,239 


8,986,698 
10,598,761 


Total .... 


36,751,470 


19,585,459 


Tory Excess . 


17,166,011 



The annual average was, for the eight years, 4,593,933/., 
and, for the twenty years, 979,272/. 

^ For reasons which would require too long an explanation, we believe 
that we have understated this surplus by more than a million. 

' These results have been obtained from a table, the correctness of which 
may be assumed, in Mr. Giffen's Essay <m the Reduction of the National Debt. 



118 TOEY SUPERIORITY. ch. vm. 

It must be remembered tbat, although in the first 
period there were some years of plenty and prosperity 
advancing by leaps and bounds until reckless speculation 
leapt and bounded into an abyss of bankruptcy, they 
were followed by others of deep depression and dire 
distress, agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial. 

In order to remove the least suspicion of unfairness, 
let the most lauded portion of the twenty years above 
mentioned — namely the five years, 1842-1846 of the 
Peelian system — be set against five years, 1823-1827, of 
the pre-Reform system. It will be found that the net 
surplus of the former qumquennial period — 7,483, 815Z. 
— was little more than half of that of the latter — 
14,263,601 — while the gross amount of taxes taken off 
in the five years 1842-1846, bemg 8,145,628/., feU far 
short of the net reduction represented by 10,934,847/., 
in the five years 1823-1827. 

This may be added. In the ten years 1821-1830, 
the Tories, with an unreformed Parliament, diminished 
taxation to the extent of 17,107,007/.^ In the thirty-six 
years folio wmg, successive administrations took off 
only 25,940,994/., mcluding the taxes imposed for the 
Crimean War. 

In the face of all these facts it seems difficult to 
sustain the doctrine propounded by Liberal orators, as 
an article of faith not to be questioned, that bad finance 
is the necessary concomitant of Tory government, while 
the progress of the redemption of debt and of the reduc- 
tion of taxation is always in direct ratio to the increase 
of democratic influence. 

■■ 14,747,442/. (net) had been previously remitted since the Peace. 



CH. IS. TORIES IN OPPOSITION. 119 



CHAPTER IX. 

Tories in opposition — Hemes's activity — Praed — Government influence at 
Harwich defied — Theory of Treasury ownership — -Scurrility of Liberal 
press — Reform — Timher duties : defeat of the Ministry — Russian-Dutch 
loan : historical view ; Herries's action — Duke of Wellington's attempt 
to form a Cabinet — Helpless condition of Conservative party — Croker 
and the ' Quarterly Review ' — Reformed Parliament — Harries in Peel 
Cabinet — Goes to Italy — Parliamentary business — Metropolitan improve- 
ments — Stockdale and Hansai-d — Defeat of Melbourne Ministry on 
Herries's motion — His intervention with a Conservative journal in favour 
of Palmerston's policy solicited — Debates on the Budget of 1841- — Hus- 
Msson's commercial policy elucidated. 

During tlie dark period of tlie fortunes of the Tory- 
party, reviled and proscribed after the transfer of power 
to the Whigs, no one was more active for its interests 
in various ways than Mr. Herries, whose exertions, 
which sometimes brought upon himself heavy pecuniary- 
loss, were not a little useful in holding the party to- 
gether at times when it seemed likely to go to pieces. 
His house was often resorted to for the discussion of 
plans and arrangements. He was one of the originators 
of the Carlton Club, the feeble precursor of which was 
a place of meeting for party purposes established to 
a great extent under his auspices in Charles Street, 
St. James's Square, and an object of much derision 
to enemies, who in their urbane style designated its 
habitual frequenters as 'the Charles Street gang.' 
Beariag no malice to the angry Tories by whose unwise 



120 HEEEIES'S ACTIVITY. ch. tx, 

coalition with its Liberal assailants the Cabinet to 
which he had belonged had been turned out of office, 
he busied himself in endeavouring to heal still ranl?:ling 
animosities and effect a reconciliation between the se- 
ceders and the leaders of the party. As a means of 
bringing them together again, and as a manifestation 
of renewed concord, it was proposed in the summer 
of 1831 that the 'Friends of the Constitution' should 
meet at a political banquet. There is in Mr. Herries's 
writing a rough draft of a paper for circulation on 
this subject with a list of ' noblemen and gentlemen 
connected with the landed, commercial, colonial, and 
other great interests of the Empire,' to be requested 
to act as stewards. To this suggestion the Duke of 
Wellington ^ returned a favourable reply. 

' Walmer Castle : June 2, 1831. 

' My dear Herries, — I have received your letter of 
yesterday, and I am very sorry that I shall not have 
the pleasure of seeing you here. 

' I don't see any objection to the proposed dinner. 
Indeed, I conceive that such a meeting would have the 
effect of reviving the drooping spirits of the gentlemen 
of the country, if it should be well attended. But we 
must assume a good title, and must have good names 
as managers in order to be certain of being well at- 
tended. 

' We ought to rest our pretensions to the confidence 
of the publick on our desire to protect and preserve 

1 Several letters on a variety of subjects from the Duke, who was very 
cordial towards Ml'. Herries and often consulted him during many years, are 
preserved. 



OH. IX. CORRESPONDENCE. 121 

property and all the great establishments and interests 

of the country, rather than especially on our opposition 

to the Bill, or on the opinions of all or any of us upon 

Reform. 

' Then for managers, &c., we ought to have moderate 

Reformers, great bankers and merchants [they were 

strongly represented on Mr. Herries's list] as well as 

noblemen and gentlemen. Believe me ever yours most 

sincerely, 

' Wellington. 

' I understand that you are going down to Sir Robert 
Peel's, and you had better speak to him on this subject.' 

Sir Robert's answer, in a letter of the same date, 
humorously pointing out all the possible inconveniences 
of the plan, was discouraging. A few days later he wrote 
again : ' 1 am sorry that the dinner is still in agitation. 
The object, I presume, is a formal party union with the 
ultra- Tories. This may be right or it may be wrong ; 
but at any rate it is a matter that requires in my 
opinion more consideration than the acceptance of a 
mere dinner engagement would render necessary ; and so 
far as the dining implies a new party connection it is a 
point on which everyone must be at liberty to decide 
for himself. I shall most certaualy claim that privilege 
for myself individually. . . .' 

Mr. Herries had a strong sense of the necessity, not 
sufficiently felt by others, of recruiting his party with 
young men of ability, and was always anxious that 
every encouragement should be given to rising talent ; 
but he found little or no disposition to second his views. 



122 W. M. PRAED. 



CH. rx. 



and he often lamented the disheartening tone of slight 
or indiiference which chilled enthusiasm and depressed 
energy, if it did not, as was sometimes the case, convert 
an adherent into an enemy. One of those whom he was 
eager to assist in bringing forward in political life was 
Winthrop Mackworth Praed, a convert from the early 
errors of an undergraduate, whose loyal character, as 
well as poetical genius, he greatly admired. The 
following letter shows that Praed, returned in December 
1830 for the Tory nomination borough of St. Germains, 
a few weeks later than the election of his Cambridge 
contemporary Macaulay for the Whig nomination 
borough of Calne, owed his entrance into ParHament 
in great measure to the exertions of Mr. Herries, who 
never had any borough interest of his own. ' You 
have heard that I am at last in the situation to which 
your kindness more than anything else has contributed 
to raise me. I am now about to return to town with 
my new duties ; and I cannot set out without bespeak- 
ing for myself a continuance of your goodwill. UntU 
you first honoured me by your notice, I never dreamed 
of being where I am ; and if I feel a little giddy 
occasionally at my unlooked-for elevation, I trust the 
same hand that lifted me up will be held out to keep 
me steady. 

' I have another inducement, however, to make me 
venture upon writing to you. I know that I am 
wretchedly awkward at expressing by word of mouth 
my sense of personal obligation. And therefore I am 
anxious, before I meet you again, to assure you that I 
am very grateful for all you have done for me, and 



CH. II. FEIENDSHIP FOR HEEBIES. 123 

that my old longings after distinction become doubly- 
eager from the desire I feel to show myself not quite 
unworthy of your good word. 

' I have always told my friends, and I have said as 
much to you, that I have been an overrated man, and 
that my services are likely to be scarcely worthy the 
asking. If it should prove so, I hope people will 
forget that you ever took up a blockhead, though I 
shall remember it myself with very useless gratitude. 
If I have better fortune than my fears prophesy, I shall 
indeed hold myself your debtor for the larger half of 
whatever success may be my lot in the career you have 
opened to me. . . . About the 13th I shall be settled 
in the Temple, and ready to work hard under your 
auspices. . . .' 

Subsequent letters show how earnestly he acted up 
to his intentions, and how ardently he devoted himself 
to the cause which he had espoused. But instead of 
being welcomed as a valuable acquisition, Praed was 
received with repulsive coldness by the leader of the 
Conservative Opposition in the House of Commons. 
His attachment to Mr. Herries was never loosened, and 
he continued to look upon him as his best friend in the 
political world. This sentiment is strongly expressed 
in a letter in which, at the time of the canvass for the 
General Election of 1832, Praed bitterly complains of en- 
couragement indirectly given to his opponent at St. Ives 
by some Tory magnates, and ends by saying, ' Pray for- 
give this long scrawl. I am furious, as you see ; and I 
shall grow cooler now that I have poured out my fury for 
the amusement of the only one of my political guides to 



124 TKEASUEY BOROUGH THEORY. ch. ix. 

wliom I feel indebted for kindness, or in whom I trust 
for support. Whether chaired into Parnament or 
cheated out of it, I shall always be yours, &c.' 

Out of office Mr. Herries successfully resisted during 
many years the efforts of the Liberal Government to 
eject him from the representation of Harwich, opposmg 
to Ministerial influence, supposed to be all-powerful 
there, his own well-established personal influence. The 
organs of the Reform Administration propounded, with 
a crudeness unsurpassed by the most inveterate borough- 
monger, the theory of absolute ownership of the so- 
called Treasury boroughs ; and the holders of such seats, 
elected under the former Government, were summoned, 
in the terroristic style of the pei-iod, immediately to quit 
their wrongful occupancy. The more obnoxious of the 
two Tory members for Harwich in particular was 
assailed, in the Whig ' Morning Chronicle ' especially, 
with extraordinary virulence. A libellous attack in a 
letter from a correspondent — real or pretended — called 
for a denial, which was published in the discourteous 
manner too common half a century ago, of a specific 
allegation. The inadequacy of the reparation moved 
the injured person to address to the editor, Dr. Black, 
personally and not as an abstraction, the following 
dignified and decided remonstrance which seems to have 
led to apologies and to have prevented any repetition of 
the offence. 

' By inserting the contradiction which appears in 
your paper of this day, to the only substantive assertion 
contained in the letter of " Interrogator," you have to that 
extent done an act of justice to me ; but you must permit 



CE. IS. NEWSPAPER SOUREILITY. 125 

me to state that I tliink you liave failed to do the same 
justice to yourself by omitting to condemn and to 
repiadiate the personal scurrility which pervades the 
letter containing that assertion. 

' I T\'rite to you, Sir, under a belief impressed upon 
me by assurances from some persons acquainted with 
you that I am addressing a gentleman of good and 
honourable feelings, who would not, without disgust, 
see personal calumny or coarse personal vituperation em- 
ployed in the prosecution of political controversy, and 
who would still less behold with approbation such dis- 
creditable means resorted to bv anonymous assailants. 

' I judge, from the manner in which the letter in 
question was inserted ia your paper, that the wi'iter of 
it must be entitled to some attention from you. If so I 
have a right to request you to inform him that if he 
wUl put any question to me in his own name and under 
that fair responsibility which he will then incur, he will 
find me quite ready to deal with his communications as 
may become them, and him, and me. 

' But as there must, in aU civilised society, be some- 
where lodged a due responsibility for every insult 
offered by one individual to another, you will, I think, 
admit that the editor of a newspaper who pub]ishes 
anonymous attacks on private character must be himself 
responsible for the offence if he refuses to disclose the 
name of the offender. 

' I assure you. Sir, that this letter, addressed to you 
under the impression with respect to yourself which I 
have before stated, is written without any resentment, 
but with a very firm determination not to permit 



126 THE GOVERNMENT DEFEED AT HARWICH, ch. ix. 

personal insult to be thrown upon me through the 
medium of a respectable paper such as yours with 
impunity. . . .' 

It was not merely in. newspapers that the doctrine 
of the indefeasible right of the Treasury to the repre- 
sentation of certain places was asserted. In the House 
of Commons it was put forward in the most unqualified 
manner, and by the most advanced Reformers. Mr. 
Hume complained that ' those who hold what are 
called Treasury boroughs voted against Ministers ; ' 
and Mr. O'Connell said, with regard to the same ad- 
verse vote, that 'it is seen that those members who 
form this Opposition hold their seats by the existence of 
Treasury boroughs which they represent, and which 
boroughs are known to belong to the Government. 
They who are the nominees of private individuals 
usually give up their seats when their opinions differ 
from those of their patrons. Not so, however, in the 
case of the holders of the Treasury boroughs, who thus 
pursue at least a factious line of conduct.' 

During many years, the utmost exertions were 
made in vain by the combined forces of the Treasury, 
the Admiralty, and the Woods and Forests, to turn 
Mr. Herries out. Ministerial patronage and favours 
were, with hardly any attempt at decent disguise, 
bestowed for votes. The Ministerial screw was applied 
with ruthless severity to electors directly or indirectly 
dependent upon the Crown. No Tory Duke of New- 
castle ever showed a more stern determination to ' do 
what he pleased with his own.' All was of no avail. 
Falsehood, slander, promises, rewards, threats, punish- 



CH. IX. LIBERAL AMENITIES. 127 

ment, were thrown away. The enemy could not be 
dislodged. In the teeth of the Whig Government, the 
limited constituency before, and the enlarged con- 
stituency after, the Reform Act, persisted ua returning 
the Tory ex-Minister, at the General Elections of 1831, 
in the white heat of the Reform agitation, when popular 
intimidation, aided by the abuse of the King's name, in 
most places overpowered all resistance ; of 1832, when, 
m the delirium of Reform triumph, the Opposition 
minority was reduced to a lamentable rump ; of 1837 
(at the election of 1834 he was in office), when the 
boundless affection of the nation for the young Queen 
was turned, with indecent disregard of constitutional 
principle, to the account of the waning — almost ex- 
tinct — popularity of elderly Whig Ministers. At one 
of these elections a pleasant httle surprise was prepared 
for the successful Tory candidate at Harwich by some 
of the Liberal party, exasperated by renewed defeat. As 
a clear manifestation of indignant pubhc opinion, a 
plan, fortunately detected in time, was formed to make 
a salutary example of him by means of a noose to be 
thrown by dexterous Liberal hands over his head as he 
passed in the ' chairing ' procession over a certain 
bridge (we are not acquainted with the topography), 
whereby he would be deftly hauled out of the chair, 
and flung into the river — a process which, if effectually 
completed, as intended, would necessarily have resulted 
in the instant death of the offending Tory member. 
Similar methods of combating erroneous opinions con- 
cerning the electoral franchise and the distribution of 
seats were not unusual. 



128 PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 



CH. rx. 



In addressing Ms constituents on his election in 
1831, Mr. Herries declared that, although strongly- 
opposed to the measure proposed by the Government, 
he was not absolutely hostile to all Parliamentary 
Reform. This was true. He was often heard to express 
applause of Pitt's early endeavours to effect the reform 
of ' the rotten part of the Constitution ; ' although he 
also thought that the great statesman was wise in 
abandoning Reform when it became the watchword of 
the lovers of French revolutionary principles. He had 
no particular affection for Old Sarum. He had no 
great admiration of exclusive aristocratic influence. 
But what he above all thuigs dreaded and detested was 
democratic despotism ; and if he was mistaken in 
thinking that ' the Bill ' would lead to its establishment, 
soon or late, he, at any rate, erred in very good com- 
pany. On one point he was not mistaken. He did 
not share in the belief entertained by Lord John Russell 
and Mr. Secretary Stanley that the empirical creation 
of a uniform ten-pound franchise, restmg neither on 
principle nor on antiquity, would prove the final settle- 
ment of the electoral question. 

Although he did not frequently address the House, 
Mr. Herries was not ' entirely mute.' On some occa- 
sions he spoke with great effect, and it is a fact that 
the gravest embarrassments suffered by the Government 
on questions not relating to Reform were directly 
caused by his intervention. The defeat of the Cabinet, 
three days before the second reading of the Reform 
Bill in 1831, by a majority of forty-six on a proposed 



CH. IX. TIMBER DUTIES. 129 

alteration of the timber duties, was generally attributed 
to Ms action, although, the formal motion for the post- 
ponement of the Ministerial plan was in reality made 
by Mr. Attwood. The Chancellor of the Exchequer 
had previously announced his intention of proposing an 
increase of the duty on Canadian timber for Budget 
purposes. On March 18, 1831, without further notice, 
he took a new departure, and suddenly submitted to 
the House quite different resolutions for the reduction 
of the duty on Baltic timber. In other words, he 
substittited for a purely revenue question the entirely 
distiuct question of the protection to be afforded to 
colonial and shipping interests. Mr. Herries opposed 
the motion, not so much on its own merits, as on the 
ground of its being a surprise ('a pohtical trick,' he 
called it), contending that, Avithout time for deliberation, 
the House could not fairly be called upon to decide 
upon the new Ministerial scheme. It was in fact the 
sudden change of front that he objected to — a legitimate 
objection, by no means deserving the imputation of 
factiousness thrown upon it by the Ministers and their 
supporters.^ It was asserted, as a reproach to the 
members of the former Government — and particularly 

^ As might have heen expected from the writer of a history the prin- 
cipal object of which seems to he the converse of that of Dr. Johnson's 
Parliamentary Keporting — ' that the Whigs should always have the worst of 

it ' the action of the Opposition on this occasion is unfairly and incorrectly 

represented by Sir Spencer Walpole, as the passage in Hansard referred to 
by himself is sufficient to show. But we are inclined to doubt whether he 
ever looked at his own reference ; and for this reason. Speaking of Lord 
Althorp's change of plan, he says, ' Tiiis concession, however, failed to satisfy 
the Protectionists.' This phrase is copied (not quoted) verbatim et literatim, 
•without the alteration of a comma, from an equally unfair account of the 
same debate, in Sir Denis Le Marohant's Memoir of Earl Spencer. 

VOL. 11. K 



130 TIMBER DUTIES. en. ix. 

to Mr. Ilerries — who voted against Lord Althorp's 
motion, that they had intended, if they had remained 
in office, to make a similar proposal. The Attorney- 
General even declared that they were pledged to do so. 
But the assertion was positively denied both by the 
President of the Board of Trade and the Chancellor of 
the Exchequer of the Duke of WelHngton's Adminis- 
tration. The well-merited check which the Ministers 
met with might, iu any other circumstances, have 
proved fatal to them ; but in view of the more important 
question of Reform which they had in hand, they, 
perhaps wisely, made up their minds to digest their 
discomfiture. But it is evident from Lord Grey's pub- 
lished correspondence with the King that ' the unto- 
ward event,' as he calls the vote on the timber duties 
in one letter, was considered as very seriously damaging 
to the Government. The feeling of their supporters, 
however, is exhibited in an article of the ' Times ' of 
March 20, which, scouting the supposition of the re- 
signation of the Cabinet, says, in the ' thorough ' style 
of English Reformers of the day — a style not very far 
removed from the a la lanterne formula of French 
reformers forty years before — ' Canada is a respectable 
colony, and the shipowners are a respectable body ; but 
the British nation would rather see the Canadas swept 
for ever from the map of the Western world, with all 
the shipowners dangling from its red and yellow pines, 
than suffer the grand measure of Parliamentary regen- 
eration to be lost.' 

A previous article in the same paper contains some 
curious observations, which might not be inapplicable 



CH. IS. RUSSIAN DUTCH LOAN. 131 

to many discussions at the present day. ' It cannot be 
denied that the tone taken by some of the friends of the 
measure has been very offensive, and we may perhaps 
be allowed to take this opportunity of denouncing that 
parrot gabble about political economy, which is now so 
common in and out of Parliament, A person attends 
a few lectures of some pedant : he gets by rote a few 
abstract rules, and because he has acquired a little 
knowledge, just a degree above the nursery, he sets up 
for a statesman. , . . The coxcombs in question may 
waste as much paper as they please in scribbling, but 
they should not be suffered to meddle with public 
affairs. They injure every cause which they touch, 
and render contemptible every party which admits 
their fellowship. . . .' 

On another, and a far more important, question 
relating to the legality of the continuance of payments 
on account of what is known by the name of the Kus- 
sian- Dutch Loan, the Member for Harwich gave much 
trouble to the Whig Ministry. 

The true history of the strange engagement, by 
which the people of this country have been saddled for 
a century with debts of the Russian Empire to Dutch 
bankers, was not known to Parliament either at the 
time when it was first sanctioned, or sixteen years 
afterwards when it was again the subject of discus- 
sion. It has been to a great extent revealed by the 
publication of the correspondence of Lord Castlereagh, 
Lord Liverpool, and the Duke of Wellington ; but 
some obscure points connected with it still need eluci- 
dation . 

K 2 



132 mSTORICAL REVIEW. ch. ix. 

In the year 1788 ^ the Empress Catherine contracted 
with, or through, the house of Hope and Co. of Amster- 
dam, a loan of eighty million florins, for the purpose, as 
stated by Mr. Alexander Baring (whose authority on 
such a subject can hardly be contested) in the House of 
Commons on July 12, 1832, of providing the means of 
effecting the subjugation of Poland. Mr. Whitbread 
said on May 26, 1815, that the loan was primarily 
intended for the Turkish war, which in 1791 nearly led 
to hostilities between Russia and Great Britain. The 
interest due having for some years been left unpaid, 
the Russian Government, soon after the re-establish- 
ment of amicable relations with this country in 1812, 
expressed an earnest desire that Great Britain should 
assume the charge of this debt.* So extravagant a 
request was very properly refused ; but in February 
1814,^ 'the intended aggrandizement of Holland sug- 
gested a new occasion on which Russia hoped to relieve 
herself of this incumbrance.' When, in return for the 
sacrifices made, and to be made, by England for the 
common cause, Lord Castlereagh at Troyes asked for 
an engagement on the part of the Allies that they would 
promote the attainment of certain objects deemed most 
essential to her interests — the principal point insisted 
upon being the union of the Belgic Provinces with 
Holland — Austria and Prussia, readily recognizing the 
justice of the claim, promptly declared their acquiescence 
without any shabby shufiling. But the conduct of 

' The date is taken from Fenn on the Funds, a work of admitted 
authority. 

* Castlereagh Correspondence, 3rd series, vol. i. Letter to Lord Olancarty. 
' Ibid. Lord Castlereagh to Lord Liverpool, February 1814. 



en. TX. HISTORICAL REVIEW. 133 

Russia was different. Slie tried to drive a bargain, and 
make money out of tL.e proposed arrangement. ' You 
will observe,' wrote Lord Castlereagh to Lord Clan- 
carty, ' Austria is quite unqualified in her stipulation ; 
Prussia not less so in substance. . . . Russia alone has 
held back, not upon any objection, but from a desire 
to make conditions. . . . The object is to prevail upon 
Great Britain and Holland to take upon them jointly a 
debt of eighty millions of florins which Russia owes in 
Holland. . . . And why pay Russia rather than Austria 
and Prussia ? It comes as a condition with the worse 
grace, after our recent gratuitous concession to Den- 
mark, to fulfil a Russian engagement.' 

Their sturdy importunity having been repelled, the 
Russian Government accepted the Projet de Convention 
after considerable delays. But although Lord Castle- 
reagh negatived the demand, he imfortunately did not 
discourage the hope that the resistance of the British 
Ministry might be overcome. His colleagues, however, 
still remaining obdurate, the annexation of Belgium 
was settled in principle by the Treaty of Paris of May 
30, 1814, without the desired concession which was 
afterwards untruly asserted to have been the condition 
sine qud non of the Russian assent. 

Between two and three months later, by a Con- 
vention with the Netherlands signed on August 13, 
Great Britain agreed to restore all the Dutch Colonies 
fairly conquered by British valour in a war unjustly 
waged against her by Holland, the vassal of France, 
with the exception of the Cape of Good Hope, Demerara, 
Essequibo, and Berbice, ceded to Great Britain, in con- 



134 HISTORICAL REVIEW. 



en. IX. 



sideration — so it was said — of an engagement, first, to 
pay to Sweden 1,000,000^. which Holland had pre- 
viously been held liable to furnish; secondly, to advance 
a sum of 2,000,000/. for the defences of the Low 
Countries ; and thirdly, ' to bear equally with Holland 
such further charges as might be agreed upon between 
the high contracting parties and then- allies towards the 
final and satisfactory settlement of the Low Countries 
in union with Holland, and under the dominion of the 
House of Orange, not exceeding, in the whole, the sum 
of 3,000,000/. to be defrayed by Great Britain.' ^ 

This last prospective engagement had evidently in 
view the pressure brought to bear upon Holland by 
Russia. But it was an engagement to Holland — not to 
Russia — and it did not bind this country to be a party 
to any special arrangement between the two States, 
although we were obliged to assist the former in the 
payment of the black mail likely to be levied upon her. 
Russia, however, was determined to drag England into 
the transaction she was bent on effecting for the liquida- 
tion of her outstanding debt ; and her pertinacity was 
rewarded with success. 

Nothing can be more completely proved than the 

^ It seems worthy of notice that the French text of this very important 
article is much more complete and precise than the English version, v?hich 
ought to be, hut which is not, its exact equivalent. Among several other 
variations, there is a manifest difference between the opening words of the 
paragraph — ' A supporter, conjointement et en portion egale avec la Hollande 
. . .' —and their intended counterpart — ' To bear equally with Holland . . .' 
The word conjointe?nent is not redundant. It has a distinct signification. 
Why, then, is it not readered into English ? 

Instances of similar divergence, whether arising from sheer carelessness, 
from iinguistical deficiency, or from any other cause, are too common in 
treaties between Great Britain and other countries. 



CH. IX. HISTOKICAL EEVIEW. 135 

repugnance of Lord Liverpool (and presumably also of 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Vansittart) to the 
Russian scheme, which in his own name, and in that of 
his colleagues at home, he opposed, until at last their 
hands were forced by Lord Castlereagh, and perhaps 
also by the Duke of Wellington. In his letters of 
October 28, November 2, December 22, 1814, and 
January 6, 1815 (see Yonge's ' Life of Lord Liverpool,' 
and ' Supplementary Despatches of the Duke of Welling- 
ton '), the Prime Minister repeatedly and most earnestly 
exhorted Lord Castlereagh, then at Vienna, to abstain 
from any engagement with Russia as to the Dutch debt 
— a matter which the Cabinet evidently considered as 
one of great consequence. It seems very probable that 
these objections were alluded to in a despatch from 
Lord Castlereagh dated February 13, 1815, a selected 
extract from which was communicated to the House of 
Commons in 1817 by Lord Palmerston. All that the 
public has been permitted to know of the contents of 
that despatch is a plea for the policy of the arrangement 
to which the Cabinet was — -justly, as we think — 
opposed.^ 

After his return to London, Lord Castlereagh, 
convinced of the utility, or necessity, of bribery, suc- 
ceeded in inducing the Cabinet to adopt his views ; and 

' Mr. Cooke, Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, who was with 
Lord Castlereagh at Vienna, took the same view of the matter as Lord 
Liverpool, to whom he wrote, on December 24, 1814 : ' The only point I 
really fear for us is the Dutch Loan. Is it not capable of statement so as 
to affect our honour as a nation after Russian conduct and our protests 
against it ? ... I think the subscribing the Polish arrangement, on other 
matters being adjusted, defensible, but adding six millions as a bonus very 
difficult to swallow.' — Wellington Supplementary Despatches. 



136 HISTORICAL REVIEW. ch. ix. 

the result was this instruction, sent on March 12, 1815, 
to the Duke of Wellington.^ 

' I should hope, from the state of business at Vienna, 
that your Lordship would find no great diificulty . . . 
to prevail upon the Powers to sign at once a treaty 
placing, by an early ratification, all the arrangements 
already agreed upon ^ out of the reach of doubt. . . . 
If you can effect this, you may give the Emperor of 
Russia, in conjunction with the Dutch plenipotentiary, 
an assurance that the half of the Dutch loan, under the 
regulations as agreed upon [it does not appear what 
they were, or when the agreement was come to] will be 
defrayed by us ; it being understood that His Imperial 
Majesty will act in concert with us in the other measures 
remaining to be settled. 

' I suggest a written assurance to remove doubts. .' 
The giving of this assurance was made to depend upon 
two conditions. Therefore, the British Government 
was still free to withhold it. The Duke of Wellington, 
on March 28, communicated to Count Nesselrode offi- 
cially the words of Lord Castlereagh's despatch, with 
the unaccoimtable omission of the important phrase 
relating to future concert. It must be supposed, how- 
ever, that the understanding mentioned by Lord Castle- 

* See Supplementary Desjicitches of the Duke of Wdlington, vol. ix. 

^ They were those relating to Poland, Saxony, the reconstruction of 
Prussia, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Hanover, besides others of minor 
importance. But the definitive treaty -which confirmed these arrangements 
was not, in fact, signed until more than two months later. Possibly an 
equivalent may have been found in the Treaty of Alliance of March 25 against 
Napoleon, binding the contracting parties to maintain the stipulations arising 
out of the Treaty of Paris, which had been determined upon (by protocols) 
and signed at the Congress of Vienna. 



CH. IX. HISTORICAL REVIEW, 137 

reagh was come to, although, the practical value of the 
agreement is proved by the decisive evidence of Lord 
Clancarty, first British plenipotentiary at the Congress 
after the Duke of Wellington's departure, to have been 
nil. ' How the subject of the Dutch loan,' he wrote 
to Lord Castlereagh on May 19, 1816, ' has reached 
Lord Grey's ears, except through the Russian Chancery, 
I cannot guess ; but sure I am that, so little has this 
Emperor kept faith with ua, in aiding us in the con- 
cluding negotiations here, that he seems to me to have 
forfeited all claim to our future assistance.' This 
remonstrance came too late. On the day when Lord 
Clancarty 's letter was written, the object which the 
Russian Government had at heart was secured by a 
convention signed in London between Russia, the 
Netherlands, and Great Britain, by which, after a pre- 
amble setting forth that the King of the Netherlands, 
being desirous, upon the final re-union of the Belgic 
Provinces with Holland, to render to the Allied Powers 
a suitable return for the heavy expense incurred by 
them in delivering the said territories from the power 
of the enemy ; and the said Powers having agreed to 
waive their pretensions in favour of the Emperor of 
Russia . . } the King of the Netherlands had re- 
solved to execute with His Imperial Majesty a conven- 
tion, to which His Britannic Majesty had agreed ' to be a 

* Of the Allied Powers mentioned, the one who had principally 'in- 
curred heavy expense in delivering, &c.,' was, without doubt, England. 
Therefore, if the averment of this preamble were true, it would result that 
England having a pretension to a ' suitable return ' from the King of the 
Netherlands, waived that pretension in favour of Russia, and, at the same 
time, agreed with the Netherlands to pay money in satisfaction of that very 
pretension so assigned by herself. A singular arrangement truly ! 



138 HISTORICAL REVIEW. 



CH. IX. 



party, in pursuance of engagements taken by his said 
Majesty, witli the Kiug of the Netherlands in a con- 
vention signed at London on the 18th day of August, 
1814,' Great Britain and the Netherlands agreed 
respectively to take upon themselves a portion — 
amounting for each of them to 25,000,000 florins (or, 
accordmg to a Parliamentary Paper,^ 2,272,727/.) — of 
the capital and arrears of interest of the Russian loan 
(raised by accumulated arrears from 80,000,000, its 
original amount, to 100,000,000 florins), with an annual 
interest of five per cent., besides a yearly payment for 
Sinking Fund, of one per cent., which was liable to 
be mcreased to three per cent, on the demand of the 
Russian Government.^ 

But the fifth article of the convention contains the 
important proviso that all these obligations shall 
' cease and determine, should the possession and sove- 
reignty (which God forbid) of the Belgic Provinces at 
any time pass or be severed from the dominions of His 
Majesty the King of the Netherlands previous to the 
complete hquidation of the same.' Great value was 
attached to this stipulation by the British Government. 
It appears from a letter * addressed by Lord Castlereagh 
to Count Nesselrode, amaouncmg the conclusion of the 

^ Laid before the House of Oommons in 1815. In a later retui'n, by a 
different calculation, the English equivalent of 25,000,000 florins is stated as 
2,083,333^. 

^ It does not appear that under this one-sided convention either Gi-eat 
Britain or the Netherlands had the power of accelerating the redemption of 
the debt, the paying off of which at once would obviously have been advan- 
tageous to this country at least. But that would not have suited the views 
of Russia, whose bidding we bound ourselves to do. 

'' May 28, 1815. Castlereagh Correspondence. 



CH. IX. HISTORICAL REVIEW. 139 

convention, that Count Lieven, the Russian plenipoten- 
tiary, ' was desirous that the fifth article should have 
been confined in its operation to the part of the debt 
falling to the share of Holland ' — the effect of such 
proposed limitation being that, in the event of the 
separation of Belgium, Holland would be relieved from 
the burthen assumed by her in consideration of the 
annexation, while England would still continue to be 
charged with the share she took for the sole purpose 
(ostensibly at least) of diminishing the pressure upon 
Holland. And this most absurd result, which the Tory 
Government in 1815 were determmed to guard agamst, 
was actually brought about through the complaisance 
of "Whig Ministers m 1832. 

' But this change,' observed Lord Castlereagh in his 
letter, ' whilst it would have been at variance with all 
my arguments, as employed both at Vienna and since 
my return, to reconcile the Government to the measure, 
would have destroyed my whole case m Parliament, by 
enabling my opponents to describe the arrangement as 
one made not upon the prmciple of a fair equivalent 
with Holland, but as a gratuitous concession to Russia 
for an object that might not survive the present 
crisis.' 

By an additional article in two paragraphs, which 
was kept secret until 1832, it was agreed, first, that 
in the event of a part of the Belgic Provinces being at 
any time severed from the dominions of His Belgic 
Majesty, a proportionate reduction only of the charge 
to be borne by the Netherlands and Great Britain should 
take place ; a,nd, secondly, that the invasion or tempo- 



140 HISTORICAL REVIEW. ch. ix. 

rary occupation of those provinces by an enemy (words 
which, do not occur in the first paragraph) should not 
be considered as determining any part of the stipulated 
payments, unless continued beyond the period of a year 
— a special provision obviously made for the eventuali- 
ties of the coming campaign. 

Presented to a puzzled Parliament, in connection 
with the Netherlands Colonial Treaty, and the Treaty 
with Sweden for the settlement of the wonderful affair 
of Guadeloupe (not the least of all the marvels of 
British diplomacy) — the three instruments forming to- 
gether a bewildering labyrinth of cessions, retrocessions, 
cross compensations, and unintelligible transfers — this 
' fantastical and incomprehensible plan,' as it was well 
termed by Mr. Baring (speech in the House of Commons, 
May 26, 1815), received, after a feeble opposition, the 
approval of the Legislature. And so it came to pass 
that the British nation, taking upon itself the hquidation 
of debts for funds employed in the extinction of the 
Polish nationality, became an accessory after the fact to 
that political crime. 

The persistence by which Russia, after many rebuffs, 
attained her ends in this business, appears at first sight 
strange. In the case of Holland, some plausible pretext 
could be found for her demand, and, after aU, the 
practical efi"ect of the agreement was only the transfer of 
a loss sustained by a few Dutch capitalists through 
Russian insolvency to the whole body of the Dutch 
taxpayers. But upon England, Russia had no sort of 
claim, and it was not reasonable that English taxpayers 
should be compelled to indemnify Messrs. Hope and Co. 



CH. IX, HISTORICAL REVIEW. 141 

Why, it may be asked, did not the Russian Emperor, 
if unsatisfied with the lavish assistance furnished by 
England, simply solicit additional subsidies either in 
money or in stores for military purposes, instead of 
pressing for aid in an unusual, and a most objectionable 
form ? The answer must be, that he wanted the power 
of borrowing ; that so long as his debts remained unpaid 
he could have found no lenders ; and that the credit of 
Great Britain afforded a much better security than that 
of the newly created Kingdom of the Netherlands. The 
explanation of the whole of this affair may, perhaps, be 
found in the fact that a few months after the signature 
of the convention of May 19, a new Russian loan was 
raised at Amsterdam.^ 

However vicious in principle, however onerous in 
practice, the engagement may have been, and whatever 
were the purposes for which it was wrung from the 
British Govei-nment, once taken, the honour of the 
nation required its strict fulfilment, but no more. To 
pay the uttermost farthing stipulated in the contract 
was a positive duty — to pay the thousandth part of a 
farthing beyond the covenant was degrading subservi- 
ency. The terms of the bond were precise. The Treaty, 
and the Act of Parliament which embodied and gave 
effect to it, had at least the merit — very rare in Acts of 
Parliament, and still more so in treaties — of accuracy 
and clearness of expression ; so that nothing was re- 
quired for their interpretation but a sufficient knowledge 
of the English tongue. At length the case distinctly 
provided for in both instruments did arise. ' The 

* In 18] 5. See Fenn ore the Funds. 



142 HISTOETOAL REVIEW. ch. ix. 

possession and sovereignty of the Belgic Provinces ' did 
' pass,' and were ' severed from the dominions of His 
Majesty the King of the Netherlands ; ' and consequently 
the time arrived when, according to the positive words 
of the Treaty and the law, the payments were to ' cease 
and determine.' Nevertheless they were continued by 
the Grovernment of which Lord Grey, who in 181.5 had 
been vehement in his opposition to the Treaty, was the 
head. 

From a very tardy communication to Parliament 
(in 1847) it appears that on January 25, 1831, a memo- 
randum {'■Notice ConfidentielW) was addressed to Lord 
Palmerston by the Russian plenipotentiaries Prince 
Lieven and Count Matuszewic containing, in reply 
apparently to some representation, the nature of which 
has not been made known, an elaborate plea for the 
unimpaired validity of the claims of Russia under the 
Convention of 1815, in spite of the actual separation of 
Belgium from Holland. It is inconceivable that so 
important a document shoiild have received no answer 
from the British Secretary of State ; but none has ever 
been made public — a reticence on the part of the Foreign 
Office, which, common though it was under the Palmers- 
ton rule, is yet to be lamented for the sake of history, 
and also for the credit of British diplomacy. 

The principal contention of the Russian plenipoten- 
tiaries was that the proviso contained in the fifth 
article of the convention had solely in view the possi- 
bility of foreign invasion and conquest, and was there- 
fore not applicable to the case — never contemplated, as 
the plenipotentiaries asserted — of a separation brought 



en. IX. HISTORICAL REVIEW. 143 

about by internal revolution — an inference drawn from 
the additional article which in one place speaks of 
' invasion or temporary occupation by an enemy.' But 
if acquiescence had not been thought more convenient 
than refutation, which would not have been difficult, 
the Foreign Office might have replied that the words 
cited occurred only in the second paragraph, which 
manifestly had in view a danger actually imminent at 
the moment when the convention was signed ; and 
that the fact of their not being vised either in the first 
paragraph of the additional article, or in the fifth 
article itself, in both of which severance was spoken of 
in general terms without any specification of the mode 
of its accomplishment, led reasonably to the conclusion 
that the operation of the fifth article was not meant to 
be limited to the particular case, provided for by the 
second paragraph of the additional article, of invasion 
by an enemy. It might have been added that the 
supposition of any such intended limitation was an 
improbable one, because what was important to the 
King of the Netherlands — the party primarily concerned, 
and upon whose obligation ours depended — was the fact, 
not the manner, of the separation of his Belgic Pro- 
vinces, his acquisition of which was the sole gTound for 
his assumption of a portion of the Russian debt, and 
the loss of which, from whatever cause ensuing, would 
leave him in the same position as if he had never 
possessed them. 

On November 16, 1831, the day after the signature 
of the Treaty for the separation of Belgium from Hol- 
land, a new convention between Great Britain and 



144 HrSTORICAL REVIEW. ch. ix. 

Russia relative to the Dutcli loan was signed in London. 
In its preamble, containing several averments, the truth 
of which never was, or perhaps could have been, sub- 
stantiated, not a word is said of the consideration for 
which the King of the Netherlands bound himself by 
the former Convention of 1815. He is not even men- 
tioned as having been a party to that convention, which 
is spoken of as if it had been one simply between the 
other two Powers. Nor is there any allusion to the 
engagement in respect of the ceded Dutch colonies, 
which is stated in the preamble of the Convention of 
1815 to have been the reason for British participation, 
and which must indeed be deemed to have been the 
only ground for it, unless that engagement is to be 
looked upon merely as a colourable pretence put forward 
to give the whole transaction a decent appearance, and 
veil the displeasing nudity of an agreement to throw 
some of the unsatisfied liabilities of a defaulting Czar 
upon the shoulders of the British people. 

The King of the Netherlands being dropped out, by 
the new convention His Britannic Majesty bound him- 
self to recommend to his Parliament to enable him to 
undertake to continue on his part the payments stipu- 
lated in the former one ; and the Emperor of Russia, 
on the other hand, promised that if the arrangements 
agreed upon for the independence and neutrality of 
Belgium should be endangered, he would not contract 
any other engagement without a previous agreement 
with His Britannic Majesty and his formal assent. An 
entirely new departure was thus taken. The first 
treaty was based on the union of Belgium and Holland ; 



CH. IX. mSTORICAL REVIEW. 145 

the second, on their separation. It was for the purpose 
of effecting ' the final and satisfactory settlement of the 
Low Countries in union with Holland and under the 
dominion of the House of Orange ' that Great Britain 
became a party to the former convention : it was in 
order to secure the independence of Belgium and, 
therefore, the ' final and satisfactory settlement of the 
Low Countries,' in separation from Holland and not 
' under the dominion of the House of Orange,' that 
Great Britain concluded the latter. 

This agreement amounted in effect to the sale of 
an Imperial policy. For a valuable consideration, the 
proud autocrat Nicholas alienated his eventual right of 
independent action in an European question of the first 
magnitude, putting himself under the control of Henry 
John, ^Viscount Palmerston, and his Lordship's lawful 
successors in Downing Street. It is, however, not to 
be beheved that the Emperor would have entered into 
so humiliating a bargain, if he had been convinced 
that the purchase money was already his of right — that 
he was entitled to claim it purely and simply in virtue 
of a pre-existing contract. The convention of Novem- 
ber 1831 would manifestly not have been signed, unless 
the Eussian Government had been persuaded that the 
obligations created by the previous convention had 
' ceased and determined.' 

We now come to a further step in the process of 
mystification. On the meeting of Parliament in the 
following month, no allusion to the new convention or 
to any negotiations relating to the loan was made in the 
Speech from the Throne, although it announced the 

VOL. II. L 



146 PROCEEDINGS IN PARLIAMENT. ch. ix. 

conclusion of the treaty (likewise unratified) for the 
separation of Belgium, which did not, as the former in- 
strument did, require the sanction of Parhament for its 
execution. This curiosity of constitutional practice in 
the full tide of the Reform agitation seems to deserve 
notice. Motions for papers, &c-, were soon made. One 
of these by Mr. Herries was for ' copies or extracts of 
any communications between his Majesty's Government 
and the Government of the King of the Netherlands 
relating to the payment of the Russian loan in Holland, 
after the separation, &c.' The return to the address 
was a very short one — Nil. If this statement had not 
been made upon the responsibility of the Secretary of 
State, it would appear absolutely incredible. It seems 
indeed passing strange that during the whole of the 
year 1831, while the question of the continued operation 
of the Convention of 1815 was pending, and was a sub- 
ject of discussion between the Russian and British 
Governments, the Foreign Office should have been 
so reticent, or so little curious, as never to have en- 
deavoured to ascertain the views of the co-partner of 
England concerning their joint engagement, — that the 
Netherlands Government should not have attempted to 
elicit the opinion of the British Government, — and that 
no interchange of observations on this important mat- 
ter, in which they were equally interested, should have 
taken place.® 

' Perhaps tlie terms of the motion -were not sufficiently comprehensive 
to prevent evasion through technical subtleties. Persons who are not ex- 
perts ought always to avoid the use of the word ' communication ' in matters 
diplomatical, because by diplomatic persons it is frequently used in a ' non- 
natural' sense. 



OH. IX. MR. HERRIES'S MOTION. 147 

After some preliminary discussions, the subject was 
brought formally before the House by Mr. Herries, who, 
on January 26, 1832, moved resolutions, the conclusion 
of which was — ' that the application of the public 
money for the ptirpose of effecting any payments on the 
part of Great Britain, on account of the Eussian loan in 
Holland, after the possession and sovereignty of the 
Belgic provinces had passed from the domiaions of the 
King of the Netherlands, is contrary to the provisions 
of the Act 55 Geo. III. c. 115, and is unwarranted by 
any authority of Parliament.' Without discussing the 
very questionable wisdom of the Convention of 1815, or 
the possible expediency of its renewal with the sanction 
of Parliament, he rested his case entirely upon the 
legal and constitutional ground, that on an imaginative 
construction of a treaty, inconsistent with its plain 
terms, Ministers could not be justified in issuing money 
to a foreign power in direct opposition to the unam- 
biguous and imperative words of an Act of ParUament 
prescribing the conditions under which the payments 
were to be made. In the conclusion of his speech he 
said^' I have not treated this as a party question ; I 
have not had recourse to any of those taunts or asperities 
which too frequently are admitted into statements of 
this nature, both on one side and on the other. ... I 
feel that the subject is one which must be discussed 
entirely by itself ; ... for it must be treated, not with 
reference to any party views or sentiments, but with 
reference to the authority of Parliament and the con- 
stitutional privileges of this House with regard to the 
distribution of the pubUc money. Honourable gentle- 

L 2 



1 48 SPEECH. 



CH. IX, 



men who sit on the other side have been much in the 
habit, particularly for some time past, of casting reflec- 
tions in the way of comparison upon those who sit near 
me, with respect to this very subject of the jealous 
solicitude with which we should regard our control over 
the public expenditure. We have been accused — too 
frequently, because always unjustly — of great laxity on 
this point in comparison with themselves. ... It has 
been attempted to be shown that there was a less 
anxious solicitude in respect of public economy among 
the members who now sit upon these benches, than 
among those who sit upon the opposite ones. Now I 
do not advert to that endeavour for the purpose of 
reviving past discussions, or raising fresh animosity 
between parties — but I advert to it for the purpose of 
impressing upon gentlemen opposite that this is perhaps 
almost the only opportunity that will be afforded us of 
establishing a test by which to judge of their future 
operations. ... If you reject my motion you vote 
away 5,000,000/. of public money. His Majesty's 
Ministers have already voted it away ; and if you refuse 
to second me, you sanction their grant. To all those 
who are of opinion that this principle is of the highest 
importance — that all directions for the expenditure of 
the public money should be implicitly obeyed ; to all 
those who believe that the assumption of the least 
latitude in the observance of that high constitutional 
principle is fraught with the greatest danger to the 
constitution itself and the liberty of the subject, I 
strongly recommend the most earnest consideration of 
this question and motion before they venture to vote 



CH. ir. WHia HIGH PEEROGtATIVE DOCTRINE. 149 

against the latter. All those who think that eventually 
it might be right to concede such a grant — but who 
never wUl hear of its being conceded without Parliament 
being first consulted and its opinion being expressed 
upon it — I reckon upon as parties who wiU vote with 
me ; all those who fi-om what they may now hear, or 
from their knowledge of this transaction as it now 
stands, are iaclined to be convinced that we ought not 
at all events to make such a grant ; and that we are so 
far absolved from our engagements as to make it right 
that we should save this sum of money to the public 
tUl we are better advised (and I confess that I am one 
of these) — they, I say, will unquestionably vote for my 
proposition. . . .' 

The Ministers, advised by the Law Officers of the 
Crown, and adopting the Russian theory without 
adducing a particle of evidence in support of it, con- 
tended that the obligations of Great Britain under the 
Convention of 1815 still subsisted, not being affected 
by the Belgian Revolution. The Whig Attorney- 
General took a high prerogative tone worthy of Mr. 
Attorney Noy, arguing that the King's right of makmg 
and interpreting treaties could not be limited by an Act 
of Parliament. But such a ' slavish doctrine,' better 
suited, as some modern Shippen might have exclaimed, 
to the meridian of St. Petersburg than to that of London, 
could not pass unchallenged by the Opposition, which 
had no lack of legal strength. Wetherall, Sugden, and 
PoUock, lawyers second to none in the House of 
Commons, or in Westminster HaU, vigorously sup- 
ported the motion, and destroyed the unconstitutional 



150 LOKD PALMEESTON. ch. ix. 

sophistry of the Whig jurists. Lord Palmerston, clothed 
with all the authority of the Foreign Office, boldly con- 
fronted his adversaries with unfounded asseverations, of 
which let one serve as a specimen. Speaking of the 
conduct of Russia in the negotiation of the Convention 
of 1815, he said : ' Of her own accord — and this is im- 
portant to the question — the payment of the loan was 
made contingent on the integrity of the kingdom of the 
Netherlands, — that is, Russia knew that it was a matter 
of paramount importance to England, that the union of 
the kingdoms of Belgium and Holland under one 
Monarchy should be observed inviolably by other 
nations ; and accordingly, Russia, solely with a view to 
manifest her ardent desire to co-operate with England, 
declared, in the terms of the treaty, that the loan should 
cease to be obligatory when a separation between 
Belgium and Holland took place. . . . And I ask, is 
this gratuitous generosity on the part of Russia to be 
now turned against herself by those in whose favour she 
volunteered it ? ' This positive statement, made with 
all the weight of supposed official information, is proved, 
beyond the possibility of doubt, to have been contrary 
to the truth, by the evidence of Lord Castlereagh's letter, 
above cited, to Count Nesselrode, which shows that the 
condition alleged by Lord Palmerston to have been 
offered spontaneously by Russia, with 'gratuitous 
generosity' towards England, was in reality insisted 
upon by the British Government, and most unwillingly 
accepted by the Russian Plenipotentiary, who did his 
utmost to put it aside. But the House of Commons 
was ignorant of the existence of that letter. 



CH. IX. MOTION REJECTED. DECEPTION. 151 

The case made out against the Government was so 
strong that some of the most thoroughgoing Liberals — • 
among others Mr. Joseph Hume, and Mr. O'Connell, 
who spoke as a lawyer — declared that it was impossible 
for them to resist the motion of censure. Even the 
Secretary at War, Sir Henry Parnell, preferring his con- 
victions to his place, left the House refusing to vote 
with his colleagues. And on the final division the 
main resolution was rejected by only the small majority 
of twenty-four — a result which, though a formal absolu- 
tion, was a virtual condemnation. 

While the Ministers and the Crown lawyers in the 
course of this debate, as on a former occasion in answer 
to a question from Sir Robert Peel, affirmed with 
frequent and angry iterance that the old Convention 
still bound, and the Act of 1815 stUl enjoined, the 
Government to pay the interest on the loan, the House 
of Commons was studiously kept in ignorance of the 
fact that there lay concealed in a red box a new Con- 
vention absolutely inconsistent with the former one, 
which they declared to be stUl in force, and by its 
express words rendering necessary the new enactment 
which according to their emphatic assertions would be 
wholly supererogatory. 

That the Reform Ministry were guilty of gross 
deception cannot be denied. But this is not the only 
imputation to which they are open. If, as they pro- 
fessed to believe, the honour of the British Crown 
required the uninterrupted discharge of all the liabilities 
incurred by the first Convention, then they did not act 
honourably towards the Emperor of Russia in imposing 



152 CONTRADICTIONS. ch. ix, 

upon him an entirely new condition for their fulfil- 
ment of what they recognized as an honourable engage- 
ment — in compelliag him to enter into a distasteful 
bargain for the continuance of a payment which, if 
their theory were true, they had no right to withhold. 

The story of contradictions does not end here. The 
Auditor of the Exchequer, Lord Grrenville, a statesman 
of the first rank, having expressed grave doubts as to 
the legality of any issue for the dividend falling due in 
January 1832, they were overcome by the opinion of 
the Law Officers that the money ought to be paid 
pursuant to the Act of 1815 ; but at the beginning of 
June — the, until then, hidden Convention of November 
1831 being still unratified, and all the circumstances 
being therefore precisely the same as before — the 
Treasury informed Messrs. Hope that without the 
sanction of Parliament they had no authority to make 
any further payment. What was declared to be re- 
quired by law in January, was declared to be contrary 
to law in July. 

At last, seven months after its signature, the ratified 
Convention was brought to light, and laid before Parlia- 
ment. In due course of time effect was given to it by 
an Act passed, not without many sharp debates, in which 
many hard facts and cogent arguments reminded the 
Whigs in the hour of their triumph that even they were 
fallible. On the Chancellor of the Exchequer's motion 
for going into Committee to take the new Convention 
into consideration on July 12, Mr. Herries, reviewing 
all the past transactions, pointing out the ' extraordinary 
discrepancies ' between the information tardUy given to 



OH. IX. NEW MOTION OF CENSURE. 153 

the House * and all tlie arguments, all the statements 
of His Majesty's Government on an antecedent step of 
this important question,' and adding to his former 
arguments against the conduct of Ministers those 
furnished by their own recorded admissions, moved the 
following resolution : ' That it appears to this House 
that the payment made by the Commissioners of the 
Treasury on account of the interest due on the Russian 
loan in Holland in January last, when the obligation 
and authority to make any such payment had, according 
to the terms of the Convention with Holland and 
Russia, and of the Act of Parliament founded thereon, 
ceased and determined, and also when a new Convention 
with Russia, not then communicated to this House, had 
been entered into recognising the necessity of recurring 
to Parliament for power to continue such payments 
under the circumstances which had attended the separa- 
tion between Holland and Belgium, was an application 
of the public money not warranted by law.' 

But although the production of the new matter 
enabled the mover and his backers, Mr. Baring, Sir 
Charles Wetherall, Mr. Pollock (afterwards Lord Chief 
Baron) Sir Edward Sugden (Lord St. Leonards) Mr. 
Croker, and the leader of the Opposition, Sir Robert 
Peel — ^to show a far stronger case than in the previous 
discussion in January, the resolution of censure was 
negatived by the larger majority of forty-six, several of 
those in the Liberal ranks who had on the former 
occasion voted against, now voting for, the Government, 
while avowing that their opinions remained unchanged. 
Colonel Davies, one of the reformers, said that ' although 



154 CONVICTIONS AND VOTES- ch. ix, 

he fully concurred in the general position of the right 
honourable gentleman the member for Harwich, it was 
impossible for him to vote for the resolutions. . . . He 
concurred with him ia thinking that His Majesty's 
Ministers acted illegally in making the payment of 
January last, and that the Convention they have since 
made with Russia, acknowledging that that payment was 
contrary to law, has placed them in a worse situation 
than they were ia before.' Observing that the question 
was so plain and simple that a child could understand 
it, and that he could find no ground on which Ministers 
could be entitled to act as they had done, the gallant 
and Liberal member wound up a series of arguments 
proving that then* conduct was censurable with the 
declaration that he would not vote for thetr censure. 
Mr. Joseph Hume subsequently explained that he had 
* voted for the Whigs though he believed them to be in 
the wrong,' and that ' it was his intention to support 
the Government, right or wrong,' a candid avowal 
which drew from Sir Robert Peel the remark : ' This I 
will venture to say, that if any unfortunate member for 
a rotten borough — for one of those condemned insti- 
tutions which were so condemned because men supported 
Ministers against their consciences. ... I say if any 
member of those condemned boroughs had avowed that 
he was ready to vote that black was white, and that 
what was illegal in January was legal in July, we 
should never have heard the last of the reprobation 
which would have been launched upon the head of that 
member for a borough constituency.' 

It is worthy of observation, as an example of the 



CH. IX. MINISTEKS WITHHOLD INFORMATION. 155 

high-handed way in which Parliament was treated by 
the Liberal Government, that in the whole course of the 
debates concerning engagements imposing onerous and 
durable charges upon the British people for the benefit 
of a foreign potentate, no correspondence, no documen- 
tary information throwing light upon the recent or upon 
the previous transaction — ^not even the Russian memo- 
randum, of which the Ministerial speakers, making it 
their brief, used the very words — was produced. The 
communication of the bare Convention with Russia was 
unaccompanied by a single elucidatory paper ; and 
when Mr. Baring, on July 16, moved for those papers 
which the House of Commons had a right to ask for, 
the motion was met with a peremptory refusal, and 
rejected by a ministerial majority of thirty-six. Such 
was the expression of Liberal views of the constitutional 
relations of the Crown to the House of Commons just 
after the passing of the Reform BUI. 

The payment of the tribute to Russia by this nation, 
whose deliverance from it the senior member for Har- 
wich had so much at heart, will ' cease and determine ' 
in June 1915, when, at last, one hundred years after the 
original imposition of the charge, the liabiUties incurred 
by the late Empress Catherine for iniquitous purposes 
being extinguished by the operation of the Sinking Fund, 
will no longer be a burden upon British tax-payers. 
The total sum then paid for the satisfaction of sundry 
Dutch creditors of Russia will have amounted to con- 
siderably more than double the maximum contribution 
of 3,000,000^. which in 1814 Great Britain undertook to 
make by her agreement with Holland.^ 

' The aggregate amount of oui payments in respect of this loan from 



156 THE PALMEESTON METHOD. ch. ix. 

Once again this subject was discussed in the House 
of Commons in 1847, when a motion was made by Mr. 
Hume,® for the discontinuance of these payments, on 
the quite untenable ground of the annexation of Cracow 
to Austria. On this occasion Lord Palmerston, having, as 
he said, caused enquiry to be made at the Record Office, 
laid upon the table a paper, in eleven pages (including 
four pages of translation) described as ' Correspondence 
relating to the Eussian Dutch Loan, 1815 and 1831.' 
Its contents are the extract from Lord Castlereagh's 
despatch of February 13, 1815, and the ' Notice Confi- 
dentielle ' of January 26, 1831, above mentioned. This 
is the whole of the information ever imparted by Lord 
Palmerston to the House of Commons concerning the 
correspondence of the Foreign Office on this matter, not 
a single paper of any kind signed by himself (except 
the Convention of 1831), nor any despatch addressed to 
him by a British representative at The Hague, or at 

January 1, 1816, to December 31, 1871, was 5,445,406?. 8s. 8d. The capital 
redeemed was 1,166,666/. 13s. 'id., leaving still to be paid off 916,666Z. 13s. Ad., 
bearing interest at five per cent. 

* His speech (March 4, 1847) affords a good example of the historical 
ignorance which members of Parliament frequently display in debates on 
foreign questions. In stating his case, and in order to make it clear, he said : 
' By the fourth article of the Treaty of Vienna an agreement was entered 
into between England, Eussia, and Holland, respecting the Eussian Dutch 
loan borrowed by Holland from Eussia and payable upon two conditions.' 
It would be difficult to compress into the space of a single sentence a greater 
quantity of nonsense than that which is comprised in these words. For 
(1) the article cited contains no allusion whatever to England, to Holland, 
or to any loan ; (2) no agreement concerning the Eussian Dutch loan is 
mentioned in any part of the Treaty of Vienna ; (3) the loan in question 
was borrowed, not by Holland from Eussia, but by the latter in the former 
country ; (4) no loan was ever raised by Holland in Eussia. But these 
absurdities were allowed to pass without notice. Perhaps they were not 
perceived. 



CH. IX. CONDUCT OF THE NETHEE,LANDS. 157 

St. Petersburg on the subject having been suffered to 
appear. A future generation may perhaps be better 
enlightened in 1915, when the suppressed papers of the 
Castlereagh and Palmerston periods bemg, possibly, 
allowed to emerge from the recesses of the Foreign Office, 
this nation may at last be enabled to learn the true 
and complete history of a century of debt imposed 
by Russian pressure upon British weakness. 

It is necessary now to mention the course pursued 
by our co-partner in the transaction of 1815. Holland, 
interpreting the fifth article of the Convention of that 
year according to the simple and natural meaning of 
its words, ceased, in 1831, to pay her portion of the 
interest, &c., of the loan. But as she did not recognize 
the independence of Belgium until 1839, Russia main- 
tained that up to that date, at all events, the payments 
were due. The question was under discussion for many 
years between the two Governments, and was finally 
settled in 1850 by a Convention, by which the Nether- 
lands agreed to pay one million and a half of florins 
(the amount payable for about one year and a half — 
Great Britain paid in 1831, 1,056,250 florins) and re- 
ceived in return quittance in full of all claims — an 
arrangement implying an admission on the part of 
Russia that the interpretation put upon the Convention 
of 1815 by Holland and by the Tory Opposition in the 
British House of Commons (notably by the member for 
Harwich) was the true one ; that the Russian interpre- 
tation adopted by the Whig Cabinet in England was a 
false one ; and that the demands acceded to by the 
Government of Great Britain, but, with more spirit, 



158 THE DUKE'S ATTEMPT TO FORM A CABINET, ch. ix. 

rejected by the Government of the Netherlands, were 
groundless, extortionate, and fraudulent. 

Enough, perhaps too much, has been said of the new 
way to pay old Russian debts. 

A recently published letter from the Duke of 
Wellington to WiUiam IV, dated May 12, 1832, 
on the subject of the Duke's abortive attempt to con- 
struct a Reform Cabinet when Lord Grey resigned in 
consequence of the King's refusal to create a large batch 
of Peers, begins with the statement that ' The Duke of 
Wellington has seen in the course of this day some of 
the gentlemen mentioned by Your Majesty. The Duke 
is apprehensive that Mr. Herries as well as Mr. Goul- 
burn will be unwilling to serve. . . .' 

From this it would seem that Mr. Herries'e name 
was suggested by the King, but that before any direct 
communication had been made to him, he manifested his 
determination to be no party to the proposed arrange- 
ment. He was frequently heard to speak of it after- 
wards in terms of the strongest condemnation, and 
there can be no doubt that he always looked upon 
the step taken by the Duke as a deplorable error of 
judgment. It may safely be assumed that, firm Con- 
stitutionalist as he was, he viewed with no favour- 
able eye the subsequent negotiation by which the 
Sovereign induced the Duke and other Peers to pledge 
themselves to abandon their legislative duties in order 
to avert the risk of a forced increase of the Upper 
House. 

The following letter dated May 23, 1832 (when the 
Reform Bill was in Committee of the House of Lords), 



CH. IX. LETTER FROM A FRIEND. 159 

from a friend of the Duke of Wellington has reference 
to this transaction. 

' The Duke thought he could not do otherwise than 
assure the King that he, for one, would do nothing to 
embarrass him. Having said this, he now is positive 
that he cannot directly, or indirectly, take any part in 
the Bill, and indeed I don't think that he could with 
honour. . . . The Duke says that he was peculiarly 
circumstanced, but that this need not cause others to 
follow his example. He thinks it very hard that people 
will have no judgment of their own. I reply that, 
hard or not, the fact is that people look to him for 
an example, and foUow the one he has set ; and that, 
inconvenient as this may be in an instance like the 
present, it would be quite impossible to have a Party 
and act upon a system if the great mass did not act as 
their chief does. Indeed I added that he would be the 
first to find fault if upon general subjects every one was 
acting for himself ; and that he could not be surprised 
if, at a moment of great distress, there was great con- 
fusion when the Party found itself without a leader. 
What is now to be done ? In the House of Commons 
Peel will not stir. . . . The Duke on his part has 
bound his honour not to embarrass the King. His 
particular friends in the House of Lords, such as Lords 
Aberdeen, Bathurst, and Rosslyn — ^will not move with- 
out him ; and indeed they seem to think that any 
attempt to improve the Bill would cause the immediate 
creation of Peers. ... I come to the conviction that 
there is nothing to be done. You had better see Lord 
EUenborough and consult with him. He will not quit 



160 ME. HEREIES AND THE HOME OFFICE. ch. ix. 

his post.' He is active and iatelligent and he will be 
able to let you know whether by any effort we could 
make there would be a possibility of rallying to such an 
extent as to alter the Bill on the third reading. ... I 
hope you will have communicated with Lord Melbourne 
respecting the projects of the Political Unions. In the 
desperate state to which we are reduced, I would rather 
communicate with the Ministers themselves than be 
overtaken by the storm without striving to avoid it. 
Our leaders have left us. ..." 

In the previous year Mr. Herries had conveyed to 
the Home Office some secret intelligence probably of a 
similar nature to that above alluded to. On November 
21, 1831, Mr. G. Lamb, Under-Secretary of State, wrote 
to him : ' I return you many thanks for the communi- 
cation of Mr. 's letter which, I am sorry to say, is 

too much ia consonance with other information from the 
same quarter. ... I have immediately transmitted it 
to my brother [Lord Melbourne] accompanied with all 
the cautions which you wish to be observed in any com- 
munications with the quarter from which it comes, and 
there can be no doubt that it affords an opportunity 
for availing ourselves of a most valuable channel of in- 
formation if dexterously used in the way you point out. 
I have only to assure you that it shall be considered 
as strictly confidential, and that I feel much obliged by 
the trust reposed in me, which can have no motive but 
the promotion of publick security and tranquillity.' 

The following ' Rough sketch of a paper ' written 

' He did not quit his post, and voted according to liis convictions. 



CH. IX. PAPER ON COMING ELECTIONS. 16l 

by Mr, Hemes not long, apparently, before the passing 
of tbe BiU, has no date. 

' The question of Reform is now irrevocably decided. 
All hope of any beneficial result from any combined 
opposition to the measure in its present shape must be 
abandoned ; and it therefore only remains for those who 
have acted together as a party in opposing it to decide 
what other steps they can or ought to take in order to 
avert or mitigate its destructive consequences. 

' Very great anxiety prevails among the principal 
members and indeed throughout the whole body of 
that Party to learn the determination or disposition of 
their two leaders upon this point. Their opponents are 
already active in the field for the ensuing elections, and 
the Tory party must take their measures at once and 
with great vigour, or give up all chance of forming any 
considerable part of the new Parliament. . . . The 
isolated endeavours of individual volunteers will effect 
little in such a crisis as the present. Many generous 
and resolute men will, no doubt, be found who will 
spontaneously incur the expense and inconvenience of 
contesting counties and boroughs upon Conservative 
principles in opposition to Radical brutality. Some of 
them may succeed ; but, unless there be a combined 
effort, unless the majority of the Tory candidates be 
invited, encouraged, and in some cases aided, by the 
influence and the means of the Tory party acting under 
the guidance of its acknowledged chiefs, the utmost that 
can be expected from such individual exertions will be 
the return of a fi-action of that body — deprived of some 
of its most active and experienced supporters, insufficient 

VOL. II. M. 



162 CONSEEVATIVE APATHY. ch. ix. 

in numbers or in weight to produce any effect in a Re- 
formed House. 

' Whether by a great combined exertion a more 
successful result can be obtained is a question which 
appears to require speedy attention and most deliberate 
consideration. For this purpose is it not advisable — 
is it not indeed urgently expedient — that the Duke of 
Wellington and Sir Robert Peel should without delay 
assemble the most influential of the Peers and Com- 
moners who act with them, and, taking these persons 
into council on the present most critical posture of our 
affairs, should determine after mature deliberation what 
course it may be best for the Tories as a body — ^if they 
are to continue such — to pursue ? ' 

But they had almost ceased to be a body, and for aU 
practical purposes they had no leaders. Although, as 
the writer of the above paper expected, ' many generous 
and resolute men ' were found ready to come forward, 
the ' combined effort ' which he desired was wanting. 
There was no unity of action and little disposition 
generally to make sacrifices for a common cause. ' I 
hear that there is no idea of assisting any candidate with 
money,' writes one very estimable candidate ; ' so Holmes 
tells us and Bonham, and all who can be supposed to 
have means of knowledge.' A letter from an intelligent 
man with an illegible signature to Lord Aberdeen, and 
by him communicated to Mr. Herries shows a dismal 
prospect for the Conservatives on the eve of the General 
Election at the end of 1832. ' It is impossible not to 
be struck on the one hand with the great activity dis- 
played in various parts of the country by the reforming 



CH. IX. DESPONDENCY AND DOUBT. 163 

Whig and revolutionary parties ; and, on the other, 
with the torpor, listlessness, and Turkish waiting upon 
Providence displayed by the Conservative party. Truth 
to say, there seem but the two former parties in the field, 
displaying certainly all the incipient symptoms of that 
rancorous hostility which is likely to distinguish their 
hereafter bearing towards each other. Arise how it 
may, this apathy of the Conservative side is a fatal 
presage for the future, I have been led to think that it 
may be ascribed, not so much to want of faith in the 
cause, as to the utter inadequacy of the agents and 
agency (in former circumstances effective enough) to 
grapple with the new system, . , ,' 

In the disorganised remnant of the Conservative 
Party after the election of the first reformed House of 
Commons there was a general feeling of despondency, 
which the attitude and tone of its leader was not 
calculated to lessen. Eight or wrong, the belief was 
common that he wished to abandon his followers, whom 
he no longer seemed to care to direct or encourage. The 
complaint was universal that no one knew what were 
his views. Even those who had been most in his confi- 
dence found it difficult to obtain from him any clear 
indications of policy, as the following letter shows, 

'January 4, 1833. 

' My dear Herries, — Being desirous of eliciting from 
Peel his opinions and views as to the course which it 
would be most expedient for us to pursue in Parliament, 
I wrote to him when I was last at Cambridge. My 
letter stated what I considered to be the difficulties of 
our situation — suggested the importance of perfect union 

M 2 



164 THE LEADERS. ch. ix. 

and complete concert with all who called themselves 
Conservative, as the only hope of keeping a party to- 
gether, and urged that without a strong party, strong 
in union more than in numbers, there was no hope of 
our being of any use. I enclose you his reply which I 
received this morning. I agree with his general view, 
though I feel the difficulty of maintaining the neutral 
position which he recommends. I am sorry to see 
(what perhaps others would not observe) stiU an un- 
willingness to unite cordially with the Ultras, but this 
may easily be softened by our joint management. Of 
course the letter is for your private information, and 
when you have read it you will return it to me. I am 
obliged to divide it into two letters, as it is over weight 
for one Yours, &c., , jj_ Goulburn.' 

Even as to the Duke of Welluigton's steadfastness, 
distrust, though quite unfounded, seems to have been 
felt in some quarters. Idle reports were circulated of 
his intention to give up politics and leave England. 
To Mr. Herries, who thought that such rumours were 
likely to have an injurious effect, the Duke wrote as 
follows : 

' Belvoir Castle : January 5, 1833. 

'My dear Herries, — Arbuthnot has shown me a 
letter from you on the subject of the paragraph in the 
' Morning Post,' ' Standard,' &c., respecting my Intention 
of going abroad. It is difficult to judge what was the 
Intention of these Gentry in publishing such an article ; 
which, till I saw your letter, I considered a matter of 
indifference. It is still more difficult to contradict the 



CH. IX. THE DUKE TO HERRIES. 165 

existence of an Intention excepting from authority ; but 
as I never have had, so I never will have anything to 
say to any of the newspapers. 

' But the Intention is supposed to exist because there 
has been a reduction of Establishments, servants, &c. 
This fact may be contradicted if it is judged necessary. 
In fact I have as many servants as I have ever had ; 
and more horses because I am in the habit of going out 
hunting more frequently than heretofore. 

' No Establishment has been diminished, not even 
that for preserving Game ; notwithstanding that since 
the enactment of the Game Bill to put down poaching 
there has been such an increase of that crime, as that 
there is no Game to preserve. 

' This is aU that can be said upon the subject. But 
I would prefer to say nothing ; and to leave this Lye to 
take the usual course ; that is to be the wonder of nine 
days ; and to be the subject of various anonymous and 
abusive letters to myself ; and then be forgotten, unless 
others should wish it to be contradicted by a contra- 
diction of the facts. Believe me ever yours most 
sincerely, t -ny , 

A letter received shortly before the meeting of the 
new Parliament from Sir Robert Peel exhibits a balance 
of inconveniences to be calculated. 

' I have only this moment got your letter. ... I 
hope it is true that the Radicals mean to declare war 
against the Government — I am adverse to any course of 
proceeding on our part which should justify the Govern- 



166 PEEL TO HERRIES. ch. ix. 

ment in the eyes of the country in forming a cordial 
union with the Radicals. That I think would be 
tantamount to positive destruction, because it would be 
tantamount to the adoption of the views and principles 
of the Radicals, and their practical enforcement through 
the Crown and Government. 

' At the same time I cannot advise us to make 
any compromise of the principles which we have main- 
tained by acquiescing in any declarations of opinion 
which may be proposed in the address with one or other 
of two views — either to compel us to such a compromise 
or to expose our numerical weakness by refusing to 
make it. Of the two in my judgment the exposure of 
our weakness wiU be the least evil. 

' I hardly think it worth while to notice the very 
foolish and mischievous reports countenanced, if not 
propagated by our journals — of junctions with the 
Government or at least coquetting with the Government 
by individuals. Disunion of the Conservative party on 
any ground would be bad enough — but disunion on 
the ground of individual accessions to a Government 
constituted like the present would be an intolerable evil. 

' The reports originate possibly in the surmise that 
there are differences among the members of the Cabinet 
— surmises for which the language of the ' Times,' and 
the ' Globe ' seem to afford ample foundation. What- 
ever be their origin, they have none in any communica- 
tion, direct or indirect, on any matter of public concern 
with me or with any one to my knowledge. Ever most 
faithfully yours, 

'R. P.' 



CH. IX. CROKER AND 'THE QUARTERLY.' 167 

About this time there began a series of letters 
from Mr. Croker concerning his political articles for 
the 'Quarterly Review.' On January 10, 1833, he 
wrote : 

' Dear Herries, — . ... I have obtained leave to show 
the enclosed to some one who can say whether it suits 
the views of our party — pray look at it — alter on the 
margin what you please. Your notes will only be seen 
by me. If the paper be altogether wrong, say so ; for 
we wish to keep the Review a good Tory on all points. 
When you have done, return the paper to my address 
at Mr. Murray's over the way [Mr. Herries then lived in 
Albemarle Street, opposite to the eminent publisher's]. 

^°"''^"^""' 'J.W.Ckokeb. 

' The article is nearly twice too long ; any omissions 
therefore which you would suggest would be very 
acceptable advice.' 

Letters from the same writer asking for information 
or criticism were frequent during many years. One 
without date of year, says : ' Many thanks for your 
excellent advice, to which I shall give effect. . . . Lord 
George Seymour has called in with a report that the D. 
of W. is going to Ireland as L.L. If you hear that I 
am made Bishop of Waterford you may equally be- 
lieve it. . . .' 

Although the Conservative Opposition during tlie 
Sessions of 1833 and 1834 was impotent and dis- 
heartened, the member for Harwich did not desert his 
Parliamentary duties. He never spoke for the sake of 



168 HOUSE OF COMMONS. ch. nr. 

speaking without a practical purpose, but on several 
questions of importance he expressed his opinions — as, for 
example, on the renewal of the Bank Charter Bill, when, 
together with Sir Robert Peel, he strenuously opposed 
the provision for making Bank notes a legal tender — on 
the Slavery Abolition Bill, when he strongly objected, 
not indeed to its principle, which he approved, or to the 
grant of 20,000,000/. as compensation, which he thought 
equitable, to the planters, but on constitutional grounds, 
from which he never swerved in the least, to the dis- 
cretionary power given to the Government as to the 
mode of raismg the money, asserting, as he always did, 
the absolute right of the House of Commons to determine 
the conditions of loans — and on various other subjects. 
He was once even imprudent enough to bring forward 
an Indian case, such as neither the House nor the 
public can ever be induced to pay attention to, advo- 
cating in a long speech the cause of the King of Oude 
against the Board of Control, 

Among the changes introduced by the Whig Minis- 
try, one important measure for the thorough reform of 
one of our most ancient institutions^the Exchequer — 
by the abolition of many offices become useless-^those 
of Auditor, the Clerk of the Pells, the four Tellers,- 
with their subordinates — and the substitution of 
sinipler forms in accordance with modern habits of 

' A special exception was made by tlie Bill in the case of Liord Camden, 
whose office was retained as a mark of respect for the public spirit displayed 
by him in spontaneously givitlg up to the nation during many years con- 
siderable emoluments to which he was fully entitled, and amounting in the 
aggregate to upwards of a quarter of a million. lie was a staunch Tory — 
a friend and disciple of Pitt. 



CH. IX. EEFORM OF THE EXCHEQUER. 169 

business, for the antiquated and cumbrous machinery- 
belonging to the times of the Norman Kings, with its 
tallies, grotesque notation, barbarous Latin jargon, and 
impracticable system of Roman numerals, received the 
cordial approval of Mr. Herries, at whose suggestion 
some improvements were made in the details of the Bill. 
He took an opportunity of pointing out, as Lord Granville 
Somerset had previously noticed, that in fact it was 
mainly founded upon the labours of a Royal Commis- 
sion presided over by himself, which had been ap- 
pointed in 1830, when the Duke of Wellington was in 
office, to enquire into the management of the Revenue. 
It appears, indeed, that the matter had been long under 
consideration ; for in the appendix to the Report of 
another Commission in 1831, there is a letter from the 
Clerk of the Pells in 1828, stating that early in the 
previous year he had received communications from the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Robinson) and the 
Secretary of the Treasury (Mr. Herries) directing his 
attention to the possible simplification of business, and 
reduction of establishment, which might be effected by 
the consohdation of existing offices. 

The reform of the ancient procedure of the Exchequer 
was indirectly associated with the destruction of the 
ancient seat of the Legislature of England at the last 
moment of the existence of the first reformed House of 
Commons. The old taUies which represented the admin- 
istrative history of this nation during many centuries 
having been doomed to the flames, lighted the fire which 
consumed the venerable Palace of Westminster, rich 
in the glorious memories of that Parliamentary history 



170 PEEL CABINET. ch. ix. 

wHch long before the year 1832 was studied with ad- 
miration by the civilized world. 

When Sir Robert Peel was hastily summoned from 
Rome to assume the direction of the Government at the 
end of 1834, he offered to Mr. Herries a seat, which was 
accepted, in his shortlived Cabinet, with the office of 
Secretary at War — a Department with the business of 
which Mr. Herries was, from old experience, well 
acquainted. He had not been long installed when he 
received (on January 5, 1835), from the new Prime 
Minister the communication of a confidential letter to the 
Duke of Wellington, expressing Sir Robert Peel's desire 
that the King's speech should, if possible, announce the 
fact that, notwithstanding aU former reductions, the esti- 
mates of the year 1838 were lower than any preceding 
estimates since 1793, and that the head of each Depart- 
ment shoiild commence without delay a consideration of 
what retrenchments could be made consistently with 
the true and permanent interests of the public service — 
but adding that he would not purchase the advantage 
of such a declaration by any reduction that could not 
safely be made. 

The Premier's wishes were fully entered into by the 
Secretary at War, who yielded to no member of the 
House of Commons — not even to Mr. Joseph Hume 
himself, as he once told that gentleman in debate — ^in 
love of economy. It has already been shown how eager 
he was for retrenchment after the Peace, and again ia 
1827. Carrying out his own constant views he framed 
those Army Estimates for 1835, which many years 
afterwards were held up by the Manchester school as a 



CH. IX. RETRENCHMENT. ELECTIONS. 171 

model for perpetual imitation, and even now seem 
occasionally to be looked back upon with fond, but 
unavailing, regret. They were in fact lower than any 
estimates which have ever been voted since 1793, the 
first year of the Great Revolution War. Perhaps they 
were too low. Such, indeed, appears to have been, some 
years later, the impression of the Minister who pre- 
sented them to Parliament. It must, however, be 
presumed that they were not laid before the House of 
Commons without the previous consideration and ap- 
proval of the Duke of Wellington. 

The following letters written during the progress of 
the General Election show what appeared to be the 
Ministerial prospects. 

' January 10, 1835. 

' My dear Peel, — The accounts from the boroughs 
this morning are not so good as those of yesterday. 
Out of 21 members returned we have only 7. The 
balance is therefore materially changed. It now stands 
thus : For, 138 ; Against, 133 ; Hopeful, 17 ; Doubt- 
ful, 3. 

' Among our hopefuls and doubtfuls there are two 
or three respecting some of whom Bonham thinks you 
can give some account. . . . But the failure of the 
Lords and Secretary of the Admiralty is still the most 
pressing subject of difficulty. I have been so strongly 
impressed with it, that I wrote last night to Shaw to 
suggest to him the great importance of putting Sir 
George Cockburn into an Irish borough, if there were 
yet time for it, and any one were available for the 
purpose. It occurred to me that Kinsale might be so. 



172 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. ix. 

I hope I did right. There was no time to be lost, and 
I had no person to advise with here. If you approve 
of my suggestion, you will perhaps write to Shaw in 
the same sense. . . . Now that Grant has lost his 
chance of a seat, may not Patrick Stewart be put on the 
list of persons from which you will have to choose your 
Chairman of Ways and Means? I think he is in favour 
with the House, and might be more easily carried than 
a pure Tory Truly yours, , j_ ^^ Herries.' 

' January 10, 1835. 

' My dear Praed, — I despatched your servant yester- 
day with the " yes " which you said would suffice for 
him. That is not the usual answer carried away from 
this office, I assure you. 

' You have done admirably well, and it is with more 
satisfaction than I can well express that I confess my- 
self in the case of Yarmouth to have been a false 
prophet, and a vain Croker. I trembled for you. I 
thought it but fair to send your letter to Peel, who is at 
Brighton. ... 

' We are doing quite as well as I expected in the 
country. We have a clear majority on the whole of the 
returns up to this date, and I feel tolerably confident 
that we shall maintain it to the end. But it will be a 
bare majority. Truly yours, , j ^^ ^^^^,^^^^ 

' January 11, 1835. 

' My dear Herries, — I return Praed's letter. He 
has fought a good fight and his triumph is a very use- 
ful one. 



CH. IX. CORRESPONDENCE. 173 

' Bonham's calculations are the most flattering I 
have seen as to numbers. I am the last to despair of 
success in the great contest in which we are engaged. 

' j\Iy confidence arises less from the returns them- 
selves than from the conviction that we shall do all 
that can be reasonably and justly required, and that, in 
spite of clamour and menace, reason and justice will 
still prevail. 

' A good infusion of s s and s is by 

no means to be deprecated. The violence of such empty, 

frothy fellows as Dr. , is of no disservice to a 

Government. Ever yours, , -0 -n > 

^ ' ' Robert Peel. 

Same date. 

' I write one line to say that I quite agree with you 
as to Cockburn, and that I think the suggestion of 
Patrick Stewart worthy of the fullest consideration. . . 
In spite of returns, and occasional mishaps, I have a 
confidence in our success which arises mainly from this 
reflection : — If what we shall propose to the House of 
Commons will not satisfy — who are the men that wHl 
propose that something which is to satisfj^ ? 

' I do not hesitate to say that I feel that I can do 
more than any other man can who means his reforms 
to work practically, and who respects, and wishes to 
preserve, the British Constitution. 

' I think this must ultimately prevail, and attract 
for us more support than we at present calculate upon. 

' However, though God knows as utterly indifferent 
to the tenure of my present post as any man can be 
on all private grounds, I am very confident and very 



174 EXCHEQUER BILLS. ch. is. 

sanguine — and tliougli this is not sufficient to ensure 
success, I am sure despondency and despair would at 
once prevent it. Ever yours, , ^^^^^^ p^^^_, 

The attention of the Secretary at War seems not to 
have been confined to the business of his own depart- 
ment and the general policy of the Cabinet. Evidence 
of his having been consulted on administrative questions 
not connected with his office is afforded by a long letter, 
in many sheets, in answer to enquiries from Sir Kobert 
Peel, on Exchequer Bills, their origin, nature, history, 
uses, and possible dangers, with some suggestions of an 
eventual change of system in their issue, for the sake of 
greater security. The following passages in this paper 
appear to have some historical interest. 

' The counterbalancing objection to these advantages 
is the very great possible, though not probable, danger 
to which the Treasury is exposed by the existence of a 
debt professedly payable on the demand of the creditor 
without any means of making that payment if it should 
be actually demanded. The present practice is to ad- 
vertise periodically the payment of all Exchequer Bills 
more than a twelvemonth old with an offer to the 
holders to give new Bills in lieu of money if they desire 
it. This is done in full confidence that the money wiU 
not be called for — and generally with the perfect cer- 
tainty that, if it should be demanded, it would not be 
forthcoming at the Exchequer. 

' The enormous danger that may arise under this 
system was exemplified at the period of the Panic in 
1825. There is little doubt but that the shock to 



CH. rx. RESIGNATION OF MINISTERS. 175 

Public Credit which produced such terrible results on 
that occasion was increased by the course which the 
Treasury was compelled to adopt with respect to 
Exchequer BUls. The period for advertising a large 
portion of them happened to fall in with the first indica- 
tions of alarm and distress in the City. Exchequer BUls 
fell to a discount, and no doubt could be entertained 
that if the advertisement had been published in the 
usual manner, money would have been demanded for 
nearly the whole amount. In that case the Exchequer 
would have been bankrupt. Some delay consequently 
took place before an arrangement could be made with 
the Bank for meeting the emergency ; but the mere 
postponement of the advertisement became an additional 
source of alarm and pressure. . . .' 

To the well-known history of the brief struggle 
which ended in the resignation of the Ministers there is 
nothing to be added. They gladly withdrew from an 
untenable position, into which they had been brought 
by circumstances not the consequences of their own 
acts. His own sentiments as well as those of all his 
colleagues on the termination of the hopeless contest 
were, no doubt, correctly expressed by Mr. Herries, 
when he wrote in a private letter on April 19 : ' We 
shall probably be out of office to-morrow ; and, so far 
as we are personally concerned, I am sure that there is 
not one of us who wUl not feel the release as a most 
welcome deliverance from a most painful burthen.' 

A first visit to Italy, where he passed several months 
in the following year, afforded to Mr. Herries a pleasant 
and a wholesome change from House of Commons 



176 VISIT TO ITALY. ch. ix. 

business, and the worry of party politics. The keen 
enjoyment which he derived from the study of art and 
antiquity, of which he was a true lover, without dilet- 
tantist affectation, was lessened only by the contempla- 
tion of the effects of misrule in many parts of the 
Peninsula, and especially at Rome, where his own 
observation, confirming him in the opinion he had 
always entertained, made him more than ever deplore 
the part taken by Grreat Britain in the restoration of the 
most odious and the most contemptible of all European 
Governments. ' Once overthrown,' he would say, ' it 
never ought to have been allowed to be set up again ; 
and, if we could not prevent the re-establishment of 
such a system, at any rate we ought not to have had a 
hand in it.' Government by Priests appeared to him 
hardly, if at all, less offensive than government by mobs. 
The duty of an Opposition, said Mr. Tierney, is 
threefold — always to oppose — never to propose — and to 
turn out the Government. That duty was upon the 
whole fairly well discharged by the Conservative adver- 
saries of Lord Melbourne's Cabinet. But it can hardly 
be said that their proceedings — or indeed those of the 
Government — during the first three or four years at 
least, had a very interesting character. It may indeed 
be doubted whether any portion of our Parliamentary 
and political history since the accession of George 
III. is so little attractive to present readers as that 
which comprised the existence of the Melbourne Ad- 
ministration. To the general tediousness of the debates 
of the greater part of this period Mr. Herries contributed 
little or nothing, but, on the other hand, with perhaps 



CH. IX. aiETROPOLITAN IMPROVEMENTS. 177 

more advantage to the public, lie took a considerable 
share of Parliamentary -vrork of a practically useful kind. 
He was one of the most active members of the Committee 
of 1838, and subsequent sessions, on Metropolitan Im- 
provements — a subject in which he never ceased to take 
the most lively interest- — to whose recommendations we 
owe the formation of many new thoroughfares, such as 
the prolongation of Oxford Street ; the extension of 
Cannon Street ; the line from Piccadilly to St. Martin's 
Lane; the enlargement of the approaches to London 
Bridge ; and other additions to previously existing 
means of communication. 

The greater part, if not the whole, of the second, the 
most comprehensive, Report of 1838, was written by 
Mr. Herries. 

On the great Privilege question of Stockdale and 
Hansard, when the House of Commons, not venturing 
to punish the Lord Chief Justice of England and the 
other Judges whose decisions it condemned, or the 
Juries who had given verdicts adverse to its pretensions, 
visited with its wrath the Plaintiff in actions which it 
had more than once directed the Attorney-General to 
defend, the Plaintiff's solicitor, the solicitor's clerk, and 
the Sheriffs, who, under pain of attachment for default, 
had executed the judgment of the Court of Queen's 
Bench, — when night after night the subjects of debate 
were the hazardous shortness of the neck of one incar- 
cerated Sheriff, and the perilous ' turgescence ' of the liver 
of the other — Mr. Herries, differing entirely from the 
Conservative leader, whom he respected and honoured, 
but would not blindly follow, and believing that the 

VOL. 11. N 



178 PRIVILEGE QUESTION. ch. ix. 

course pursued was arbitrary, illegal, unjust, subversive 
of judicial independence, dangerous to the liberty of the 
subject, and derogatory to the dignity of the House 
itself, voted repeatedly in the opposing minority, in the 
lists of which his name — the only one of the lay Con- 
servative members of the rank of Privy Councillor — is 
to be found along with those of C. Cresswell, Sir W. 
FoUett, W. E. Gladstone, T. Pemberton, Sir F. Pollock, 
Sir E. Sugden, F. Kelly, &c., &c., against the majority 
composed of Ministerialists, advanced Eadicals, and Sir 
Robert Peel's supporters. Though he did not think 
himself called upon to attempt to add anything to the 
arguments of the eminent lawyers whose views he shared, 
his feeling on this question was very strong. He held 
the opinion that in the famous precedent case of Ashby 
and White Chief-Justice Holt and the House of Lords 
were in the right, and the House of Commons in the 
wrong. Being convinced that ' neither House of Parlia- 
ment hath any power by any vote or declaration to 
create to themselves any new privilege that is not 
warranted by the known laws and customs of Parlia- 
ment,' and applying to the present occasion the words 
of the Lords' resolutions of 1704, he came to the con- 
clusion that ' The House of Commons . . . had assumed 
to themselves alone a legislative authority by pretending 
to attribute the force of a law to their declaration, had 
claimed a jurisdiction not warranted by the Constitution, 
and had assumed a new privilege to which they could 
have no title by the laws and customs of Parliament, 
and thereby, so far as in them lay, subjected the rights 
of Englishmen and the freedom of their persons to the 



CH. IX. STATE OF THE FINANCES. 179 

arbitrary votes of the House of Commons.' Arbitrary 
violence in any shape, whether exercised by the Crown 
or by the House of Commons, he abhorred. The only 
mode of government which appeared to him tolerable 
was that of government by law — fixed, defined, known — 
and he refused to recognise the validity of any ' tyrant's 
plea,' under cover of which a bare majority of the 
House of Commons might destroy all securities for pro- 
perty, liberty, or even life, and substitute for English 
freedom, and Enghsh justice, the execrable despotism of 
a French Convention. But although he was opposed 
to the claim of the House to make a privilege whatever 
it might at any time think proper to declare to be such, 
he at the same time thought that the absolute right of 
pubhcation ought to be secured to Parliament by law. 
He therefore rejoiced at the rational termination of an 
unseemly conflict by an act of legislation which might 
have prevented it. 

WhUe this question was still pending, the existence, 
becoming more precarious every day, of the Melbourne 
Cabinet received fi-om the member for Harwich the 
rudest shock which it had sustained since its temporary 
resignation in 1839. 

The condition of the finances was deplorable, and 
there was no prospect of improvement. Instead of 
having an annual surplus available for the reduction of 
debt, the country had fallen into a state of chronic 
deficit, which grew year by year, and the only remedy 
for which appeared to be increased taxation. On 
February 13, 1840, Mr. Herries made a motion for 
accounts and estimates, to throw light upon the subject 

N -2 



180 MR. HEREIES'S MOTION. ch. ix. 

to whicii he forcibly drew the attention of the House. 
' The finances of the country,' he said, ' now presented 
such an aspect, and things had now arrived at such a 
pass, that it became the imperative duty of a faithful 
House of Commons to look the affairs of the nation ia 
the face ... at a moment when their financial afi"airs 
were in a state which he did not scruple to designate as 
most dangerous. The duty which the House would 
have to perform was one of an extremely painful nature, 
and the painfulness of that duty was in no slight degree 
increased by the reflection that we were now in the 
twenty-sixth year of peace,' Admitting that his 
motion was unusual, he argued that it was justified by 
unusual circumstances. ' Was it too much to ask that 
light should be let in upon a state of things respecting 
which the public were as yet ignorant and uninformed ? 
. . . .The conditions and prospects of the country were 
such as to render the information which he sought of 
immense importance. There existed with reference to 
it extreme solicitude in the public mind. There was no 
society into which he went where he did not hear en- 
quiries made, surmises hazarded, and a universal anxiety 
manifested ; there was no person with whom he con- 
versed that did not appear full of apprehension as to the 
prospects of the country.' He pointed out that in 1837 
there had been a deficiency of 726,000^. ; in 1838, of 
440,000^. ; in 1839, of 1,512,000?., making a total of 
2,678,000?. ; which he calculated would be raised at 
the end of 1840 to the aggregate deficit of certainly 
4,678,000?., or, probably, of nearly six millions. Such 
disastrous results he contrasted with those of the period 



CH. IX. DEFEAT OF MINISTERS. 181 

of peace between 1817 and 1828, when by means of a 
large surplus income ' there had been a reduction of 
3,oOO,OOOZ. on the charge of the debt, while in the same 
time 26,000,000/. of taxes had been taken off; ' and of 
that of the Duke of Wellington's Administration when 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer had reduced taxes 
to the amount of between 6,000,000?. and 7,000,000?. 
a year, and had still left a surplus revenue to his 
successor, Lord Althorp, of 3,000,000?. While he 
' believed that there never existed a more solemn obliga- 
tion on the House than at this time, to take proper 
steps to put a stop to the present financial embarrass- 
ments of the country,' he recommended the House, 
however, ' to guard themselves against forming an ex- 
aggerated or too gloomy view of the general state 
and situation of the country. . . . He believed that our 
resources were unimpaired, that, indeed, we were more 
competent than at any former period of our history to 
make great exertions. . , . He utterly repudiated the 
foolish saying that England was laid prostrate under 
the weight of its seven hundred millions of debt. . . .' 

The motion was carried against the Government by 
a majority of ten, in which the names of two such 
decided Liberals as Mr. Grote and Mr. Hume appear. 
This defeat on a matter of primary importance was a 
' heavy blow and a very great discouragement,' from 
which the tottering Cabinet never entirely recovered. 
From a Member of Parliament Mr. Herries received the 
following note of approval : — ' It is impossible to write 
to you without congratulating you on Thursday last. 
I do so most suicerely. Notwithstanding a tearing 



182 EASTERN QUESTION. ch. ix, 

cougli, I listened to every word you said, and a more 
clear and conclusive statement, and one more damaging 
to our opponents I never heard, I believe that night 
to have been le commencement de la fm.^ 

Among a variety of letters of the year 1840, there 
appears the following curious note addressed to Mr. 
Herries a few days after the signature of the famous 
Quadruple Treaty of July 15, by one of the plenipoten- 
tiaries, an old acquaintance. 

' Could you muzzle the 's [a Conservative 

journal] nonsense on the Eastern Question, which he 
does not understand? The writer of the two leading 
articles of yesterday and to-day does not see that he is 
playing the game of France and spoiling ours. . . .' 

The veteran diplomatist knew the character of his 
correspondent, whose aid he solicited to prevent embar- 
rassment to the policy of the Government. He knew 
that he was writing to a man who although strongly 
attached to his party, and a decided opponent of the 
Liberal Ministry, would never, like the Liberals during 
the whole of the great war, sacrifice national interests 
to party animosity. A question here presents itself. 
Is it not in the highest degree probable that the step 
taken by the foreign plenipotentiary to obtain the inter- 
vention of a leading member of the Conservative 
Opposition was made known to Lord Palmerston in 
the course of the frequent conversations which must 
have been held on the state of affairs ; if, indeed, the 
intention to take it was not previously communicated to 
his Lordship, who may possibly even have suggested 
the writing of the note ? 



CH. IX. DIPLOMACY AMD THE PRESS. 183 

Taking the same view as his diplomatic friend, Mr. 
Herries lost no time in recommending the matter to the 
attention of a political manager, from whom he received 
the following answer : — 

* Your correspondent is quite right in saying that 
the articles in question are playing the game of France, 
but not equally so, I suspect, in supposing that the 
writer does not understand the question. Whether he 
misstates I know not, but am satisfied that he does 
understand the question. Between ourselves, they come 
from a person who has some knowledge at least of the 
French policy on the Eastern affairs ; . . . but if you 
could satisfy me that the course taken by the paper 
(which commits only itself) is injurious to the Party, 

I have probably suficient influence with to stop 

the course, or at least I would try it ; but, as at present 
advised, though approving Palmerston's policy, I see no 
harm that can arise from the paper's taking its own line. 
After all, however, when we talk of Party, does one 
remain, for any useful purpose ? ' 

At the time when one of Lord Palmerston's political 
adversaries, moved by patriotic sentiments, showed his 
anxiety to silence some of the assailants of the Minister 
who was engaged at a most critical moment in defend- 
ing the permanent interests of England, one of Lord 
Palmerston's own colleagues was, far more dangerously 
than the Conservative journal, 'playing the game of 
France,' and doing his best to ' spoil ours.' Lord 
Holland, a cosmopolite, whose patriotic sentiments were 
never so strong as his sympathies with foreigners of 
various sorts, was, indeed, at this moment ' a live shell 



184 BUDGET DEBATES. ch. ix. 

in the Cabinet,' the intended explosion of which would 
have destroyed not only Lord Palmerston's position and 
policy, but together with them the credit of England 
and her power in the East. 

Mr. Herries approved Lord Palmerston's policy in 
1840, and did not believe that it would lead to war — 
from which, if necessary, he would not have shrunk 
then, or at any other time. His views do not seem to 
have been shared completely by the generality of his 
party, if the followuig passage in a letter written to 
him in October by the confidential manager before 
alluded to may be taken as an indication of prevalent 
Conservative opinion. ' With my general deference to 
your judgment, I yet entirely doubt the possibility of 
avoiding war.' 

In the following year Mr. Herries took an active 
part in the long and agitated debates on the financial 
and commercial policy of the Government, which ended 
in its defeat by a majority of thirty-six. In the first 
debate, or conversation, upon the well-known Budget 
of 1841, he observed that ' although he would not enter 
into the general question as to the two first propositions 
respecting timber and sugar, yet after what he had 
heard from the President of the Board of Trade (Mr. 
Labouchere) he thought he went very nearly with him. 
As he understood that gentleman, his object was not 
to bring forward any sweeping or general measure of 
alteration in our commercial code. He did not embrace 
the views of the Import Duties Committee : he did 
not say, there should be no protection ; but he had 
endeavoured to arrive — whether he had or not was a 



OH. IX. IIUSKISSON AND HERRIES. 185 

question for future discussion — at that point which 
afforded the requisite degree of protection, consulting at 
the same time the interests of the consumer. And 
he could assure the right honourable gentleman that 
when he brought forward single cases in this way, as 
any demand for relief might arise, and founded on such 
principles, he would find no one more willing to give 
such propositions a fair and impartial consideration 
than himself.' 

The following passages may also be quoted from a 
somewhat earlier speech in a debate concerning import 
duties in British colonies, as indications of the speaker's 
views on the subject of Protection. They likewise show 
what were, and alwaj^s had been, his sentiments with 
regard to the commercial policy of Mr. Huskisson, to- 
wards whom systematic hostility has been falsely 
attributed to him by sundry diarists, letter-writers, and 
pamphleteers. AUuding to the Report of the Import 
Duties Committee, he said : ' He felt and admitted the 
actual necessity of carrying much further the enquiry 
whether there should or should not be a continuance of 
protecting duties. He begged to remind the House 
that Mr. Huskisson endeavoured, by the effect of his 
legislation, to adjust, not to abrogate, protecting duties. 
Mr. Huskisson endeavoured to find the point at which 
protecting duties were indispensably necessary, and he 
proposed to dispense with every shackle upon commerce 
that was not necessary. . . . For his own part, he felt 
bound to express the gi-eat satisfaction he felt upon every 
occasion when any measvire proposed and carried into 
effect upon the legislation promoted by Mr. Huskisson 



186 LOED JOHN RUSSELL. ch. ix. 

produced the benefits which had been anticipated. 
He himself, so far as his humble endeavours went, had 
always acted with Mr. Huskisson in the promotion of 
the principles which that statesman entertained on this 
subject. He had never, on the subject of the principles 
of free trade, had any difference of opinion from that 
right honourable gentleman, and he could say, as all 
those who had acted with him could say — those who 
had been spoken of as ilhberal, while Mr. Huskisson 
had been praised as liberal — . . . . that they had 
given a most cordial concurrence in all those measures 
which Mr. Huskisson had proposed. . . . Mr. Huskis- 
son never was an indiscriminate promoter of free trade, 
and it was equally unjust to suppose that those who 
acted with him were not as Hberal as he was in the view 
which he took in adapting our commercial system at the 
close of the war, and in a new state of things, to that of 
other countries, and in relieving our commerce from all 
those shackles that could possibly be dispensed with. . .' 
Lord John Russell, following Mr. Herries, said that 
' he wished to address a few observations to the House 
after the right honourable gentleman who had just sat 
down, because, interesting as this conversation rather 
than debate had been, there was no speech from which 
he had derived greater satisfaction than that of the 
right honourable gentleman. He agreed with bun in 
his description of the general policy of Mr. Huskisson, 
although, perhaps, there was something to be added to 
that description. He was pleased, however, to hear 
that in that policy .... the colleagues of Mr. Huskis- 
son had cordially concurred. .... It was well known. 



CH. IX. HEERIES'S POLITICAL POSITION. 187 

too, that Mr. Canning. . . . eagerly supported the 
principles involved in ttose measures. The right 
honourable gentleman (Mr. Herries) opposite had 
himself declared his adherence to them ; and he re- 
joiced to hear from testimony so valuable and undeni- 
able that such principles were likewise to be found 
amongst the most enlightened of the party to which the 
right honourable gentleman belonged. . . .' 

The language used by Lord John Kussell, and by 
other distinguished members on the Ministerial side of 
the House, marks the importance of the political position 
which belonged to Mr. Herries in the judgment of his 
contemporaries. The Chancellor of the Exchequer 
(Mr. F. Baring) spoke of him as the individual who 
had more practical experience in financial matters than 
any other member. Mr. Charles VUliers, the able and 
consistent advocate of the repeal of the Corn Laws long 
before Mr. Cobden's appearance on the political stage, 
rising to reply to Mr. Herries in the sugar debate, said 
that ' he had listened to the right honourable member 
with great interest, for knowing that he had been con- 
nected with the finances of the country, and expecting 
that he might soon be so again, he was anxious to learn 
his views on the state of that financial emergency in 
which he had described the country to be placed. . . .' 
From these and many other expressions it was quite 
manifest that on the Ministerial side of the House 
Mr. Herries was looked upon as the person most likely 
to become the Chancellor of the Exchequer in a new 
Administration. 



188 LOSS OF SEAT. ch. x. 



CHAPTER X. 

Hemes di-Wen by evictions from Harwich : beaten by bribery at Ipswich ; 
not included in Peel Cabinet — Satisfactory assurances from Prime 
Minister — Correspondence with him and Goulburn — Herries out of office 
consulted by ministers — His correspondence with Sir R. Peel and 
Chancellor of the Exchequer on new plan of finance, &c. — Metropolis 
Improvements Commission — Thames Embaninnent, &c. 

Mr. Heekies, wlio had contributed not a little assistance 
towards the discomfiture of the Melbourne Ministry, was 
not one of the great Conservative majority which in a 
new Parliament carried Sir Robert Peel triumphantly 
into power for the protection of British agriculture. He 
found that the Whig Government had at last become too 
strong for him at Harwich, where intimidation and 
eviction had done their work so surely as to render his 
re-election impossible without bribery, to which he never 
would resort. His principal supporter for many years 
— a gentleman of high respectabdity and considerable 
local uafluence — was driven away from the borough by 
the destruction of his business as a ship-builder, which 
he had for a long time carried on in premises belonging 
to the Crown. His steady adherence to the Tory 
member, whom the Government were bent on ejecting, 
after having procured for him, as well as others, a series 
of vexations, finally called forth a peremptory notice, 
enforced with needless harshness, to quit his shipyard, 
slips, dwelling-house, workshops, &c., &c. A copy of 
this document is extant, signed by the Postmaster- 



CH. X. EVICTION AND BRIBERY. 189 

General, two Commissioners of "Woods and Forests, and 
two Lords of the Treasury. Such was the manner in 
which freedom of election was maintained by a Liberal 
Ministry seven years after the passing of the Reform 
Bill to secure the perfect representation of the people, 
undisturbed by undue influence and especially that of 
wicked Tory landlords. The Whig Government ' did 
what they pleased with their own.' 

Banished from his old seat by the decree of those in 
power, Mr. Herries was induced by delusive calculations 
in a luckless hour to offer himself at the General Election 
as a candidate — in conjunction with the late Sir Fitz- 
roy Kelly — for the borough of Ipswich, where, to their 
great surprise, the two Conservatives were defeated. But 
the election of their Liberal opponents was in the ensu- 
ing session declared void by reason of bribery. Upon 
this mischance Sir Robert Peel wrote to Mr. Herries on 
July 4 : ' I am very much disappointed at your failure, 
though not at all surprised that you should refuse to 
resort to the means by which alone success could have 
been obtained. From what I had heard before I left 
London, I had sanguine hopes of your success, though 
no part of them was founded on a favourable opinion of 
Ipswich voters. ... I care little as to the loss of the 
seat compared with that of your valuable assistance and 
support. I now wish you had tried some constituency 
better qualified to form a just estimate of your value 
and qualifications as a representative than these Ipswich 
gentlemen.' From Mr. Goulburn also he received a 
letter full of expressions of friendly sympathy : * I hope 
you cannot doubt my great regret at the issue of the 



190 NEGOTIATIONS. ch. x. 

Ipswich election. I do not know what your own 
anticipations may have been, but I confess that my 
disappointment was aggravated by the result being so 
contrary to my previous expectations. I am in hopes 
that your disappomtment in this quarter will not per- 
manently exclude you from the House of Commons. 
For as far as regards myself I can truly say — and I think 
my feeling is only that of all those who have, like us, 
borne the heat and brunt of the day — that there is no one 
whose assistance and society I should more regret to 
lose in what I may at least call days of more prosperous 
fortune. . . .' 

While the petition against the sitting members 
was pending, a strong desire was manifested in some 
quarters to compromise the matter in the manner 
fashionable among electioneering experts of the day. 
Many proposals, suggestions, and hints were made with 
that view to Mr. Herries, but he declined to enter into 
any arrangement. To Mr. Goulburn, then just installed 
in the Exchequer, in forwarding a letter concerning 
some revenue business from an Ipswich local politician, 
he wrote : ' The concluding paragraph of it adds to my 
conviction that Wason and Eennie will be ousted on 
petition. I have no doubt that if good Conservative 
candidates be sent down on the vacancy the two seats 
may be now secured. There is, however, a hankering 
after a compromise. I have already stated to you that 
I am no party to advising or encouraging such a pro- 
ceeding in any shape, and least of all in one which 
might render me liable to the imputation of tripping up 
the heels of Kelly.' On the same subject he wrote, in 



en. X. PEEL CABINET. 191 

the latter part of 1841, to a Conservative gentleman at 
Ipswicli : ' I have, as you know, avoided making any 
statement or declaration to you upon those intimations, 
— not only while I was uncertain whether Mr. Kelly 
was disposed to relinquish his claims upon the borough, 
but even after I had tmderstood from you that he had 
positively declared that he would have nothing more to 
do with it. The truth is that it did not appear to me 
to be either necessary or becommg that I should say 
anything of my own views or feelings on the subject 
until some distinct proposition should be made to me. 
... It is right, therefore, that you should know that 
it is far from probable that I should be in a situation to 
avail myself of the good wishes of the Conservative 
Party at Ipswich in the event of a vacancy, and that you 
must consequently be prepared to give your support 
to some other, I hope, more rafluential and effective 
representative on the right side of politics than my- 
self. . . .' Endeavours were made to find a seat for him 
elsewhere, and several places were suggested as offering 
fair chances of success. If his party had been still in 
opposition, it is probable that he would have taken the 
advice of his friends and put himself forward as a 
candidate on some suitable vacancy occurring. But 
as matters then stood he thought that by doing so he 
might bring himself into a false position. 

Against general expectation, he was not included 
in the list of the new Cabinet formed on Lord Mel- 
bourne's resignation in September, the sole cause of 
his omission being, as Sir Robert Peel himself declared, 
his absence from Parliament. AVhat passed between 



192 COMMUNICATION FROM THE PREMIER. ch. x. 

them on this subject is recorded in the following memo- 
randum of a conversation on September 10. 

' Mr. Herries waited on Sir R. Peel in consequence 
of a note received on the 8th making an appointment 
for this day. 

' Sir R. Peel received him with the greatest cordiality, 
and, after a few commonplace general observations, en- 
tered upon the subject of the interview. 

' He began by saying that he had been desirous of 
communicating the matter he was about to state at an 
earHer period, that he had even commenced a letter, 
which he found would be a long one if he explained 
himself so fully as he desired, but that his incessant and 
pressing occupations, some of them of the most harass- 
ing and perplexing kind, had prevented him from 
going on with it. He then said that he had no doubt 
Mr. H. was perfectly aware of his earnest desire to have 
the benefit of his services and assistance in his new 
Government, and he assured him that he was fully 
prepared to have recommended him for an office with a 
seat in the Cabinet if the difficulty arising from his want 
of a seat in Parliament had not presented such an 
obstacle as he could not — circumstanced as he was with 
respect to other people — contrive to overcome. He then 
said there were strong claims upon him on the part of 

Mr. , Lord , Lord , Mr. , &c. ; that 

if he had set aside a general rule of exception which 
existed in Mr. H.'s case, it would have been impossible 
for him to resist the various claims and pretensions put 
forward by those and other persons ; that it had cost 
him much to come to this decision, and he had done so 



CH.x. FRIENDLY ASSUllANCES. 193 

very reluctantly and with considerable regret, but that 
he found himself really unable to do otherwise. He 
said that Mr. H. might be well convinced of his earnest 
desire to have removed this obstacle by seeing him pro- 
vided with a seat in Parliament by the circumstance of 
his having sent the deputation from Bradford to him. . . 
He said that so strongly was he desirous of having 
Mr. H. for one of his colleagues, that he had been pre- 
pared to suggest to Sir to waive his pretensions 

on this occasion to facilitate an arrangement for Mr. H., 
and with a pretty good knowledge that he would have 
experienced no difficulty in that quarter. He then 
went on to say that it would be satisfactory to Mr. H. 
to know that the other members of the Cabuiet (and he 
specifically mentioned Lord Stanley and Sir James 
Graham) would have been well pleased with any 
arrangement that should have placed Mr. H. among 
them. He said that some observations had been made — 
he forgot by whom — that a difficulty might arise from 
the placing of Lord Eipon and Mr. H. in the same 
Cabinet. He asked Mr. H. if any such objection would 
have existed on his part, and upon being answered in 
the negative, he stated that he had every reason to 
suppose that Lord Ripon was equally free from any 
feeling incompatible with their sittmg in Council to- 
gether with perfect cordiality.^ 

He added that he would at once frankly state that 
if any objection had been suggested by Lord Ripon to 

> This obviously could not have been the case if Lord Ripon had believed 
that there was the least truth in Lord Palmerston's story about the imaginary 
blowing up of the Goderich Cabinet. 

VOL. II. O 



194 FRIENDLY ASSURANCES. ch. x, 

the admission of Mr. Hemes into the Cabinet he should 
in that case at once liave declared that he would not 
admit the objection, and that Lord Ripon could not be 
a member of his Cabinet.^ He said that these statements 
would convince Mr. Herries of the high estimation ia 
which he stood with him and of his sincere desire to have 
him again for a colleague if the circumstances of his case 
had allowed of it, and he added that he thought that such 
declarations proceedmg from him, and given in perfect 
truth and sincerity, ought to be, and would be, sufficient 
to remove from the mind of Mr. H.'s friends any un- 
pleasant feelings which they might be induced to enter- 
tain by the mere view of the fact of Mr. Herries's not 
being included m the recently formed arrangements. 
He then asked Mr. Herries whether he intended to come 
into Parliament (as Mr. H. understood), his words 
being, ' I suppose you will come into Parhament.' To 
this it was answered Mr. H. did not exactly see the way 
at present ; that his ability to come into Parliament 
might with some constituencies depend a good deal 
upon the position which he might happen to occupy 
with relation to the Government. 

Mr. H. then adverted to the borough of Ripon,^ 
and to his having suggested to Sir Robert Peel some 
time back that Ripon and some other boroughs would 
probably be at his disposal. Sir R. Peel observed that 
with respect to Ripon Sir George Cockburn had a 

^ This shows what was Sir Rohert Peel's estimation of the relative value 
of the twu men. 

' About to be vacated by Sir E. Sugden on his appointment as Lord- 
Cbanoellor of Ireland. 



CH. X. CORRESPONDENCE. 195 

peculiar claim, inasmuch as he had entertained an expec- 
tation of coming in upon a vacancy at Sandwich which 
it appeared was likely now not to occur. . . . 

He then expressed his hope that Mr. H. would com- 
municate with him as confidentially upon public matters 
as usual . . . and the interview termmated in the most 
friendly manner.' 

It gave rise to the following correspondence: — 

'September]!. 1841. 

' My dear Peel, — I returned home too late to write 
to you by the post yesterday, or I should not have 
allowed it to depart Avithout a few lines to assure you 
that my conversation with you had afforded me very 
great satisfaction in relieving my mind from an un- 
pleasant though undefined misgiving as to the cause of 
my having heard nothing from you during the progress 
of your official arrangements. 

' Your frank and friendly explanation has dispelled 
the vague surmises which had been haunting me ; and 
I have now the certainty that not only were you 
desirous of once more proposing me to the Crown for 
a Cabinet office, but that such an accession to your 
Councils would not have been unwelcome to any of 
your colleagues ; my want of a seat in Parliament 
being the only obstacle to your wishes in that respect. 

' After these gratifying assurances from you upon a 
point of so much interest and importance to me, I shall 
pass into the retirement to which the unlucky result of 
the Ipswich election has alone consigned me, without 
any painful feeling except that of sincere regret that I 
am not able in the hour of success to rejoin those ranks 



196 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. x. 

in which, under your guidance, through many a year 
and many a turn of good and ill fortune to our common 
cause, I have witnessed all the good fights and good 
management which have ultimately led to it. 

' I trust that I am not wrong in the understanding 
that I am at liberty to state to my own anxious and 
inquiring friends what have been your feelings and 
intentions in respect to my position, and what has been 
the only impediment to your acting upon them. Be- 
lieve me, &c., < j ^^ ^^^^,^^, 

< Whitehall : September 18. 

' My dear Herries, — You certainly are at liberty to 
mention to any of your relations or friends with whom 
you may deem it desirable to communicate upon the 
subject, that if on being recently called upon by Her 
Majesty to form an Administration, you had been a 
member of the House of Commons, I cannot doubt that 
I should have invited you to render the Government 
your valuable assistance as a member of it with a seat 
in the Cabinet. 

' I do not believe that I should have met with the 
slightest impediment in the way of such an offer from 
any one of my present colleagues, and if I had, I should 
not have permitted it to prevail. Believe me, my dear 
Herries, with sincere regard, most faithfully yours, 

' Robert Peel.' 

A few days later another communication took place. 

' September 21. — A messenger from Sir Robert Peel 

arrived at ^-past 5. I found him at my house on my 



CH. X. A SEAT OFFERED BY SIR R. PEEL. 197 

return home at ^-past 6. He brought a letter desiring my 
immediate presence at Sir Robert's, on the subject of a 
proposal of a seat in Parliament. 

' I returned with the messenger, and found Sir 
Robert at his house at 10 o'clock. 

' He told me that the conduct of Sir E. Sugden had 
provoked a motion by Wilde to which it had been 
found necessary to give way, and that the writ for Ripon 
had consequently been moved. This he said had in- 
conveniently precipitated his arrangements, and he now 
offered Ripon to me in such a manner that an immediate 
decision was indispensably requisite. I must go down this 
night, or to-morrow by the very first train, if I accepted 
the seat. He said that he had destined it for Sir George 
Cockburn, but that he was glad to offer it to me in the 
first instance, hoping that Cockburn might find an 
opening in some other place. . . . He pointed out in 
strong terms the advantages of Ripon as a seat — its 
certainty — its probable permanency — the terms on which 
it might be held, &c. In short, he said, it is the very 
best seat in England. He added, however, that the 
offer of the seat was to be considered as being unaccom- 
panied by any other proposal. This I understood, and 
no doubt correctly, to intimate that he had no proposal 
to make to me respecting office. 

' I told him that I was a great deal taken by sur- 
prise so far as Ripon was concerned, because in a former 
interview he had apprised me of a different destination 
for it. I said that I was sensible of his kindness in 
making me the offer, but that my present intention was 
to decline any seat under the immediate nomination of 



198 OFFEK DECLINED. ch. x. 

the Grovernment at tlie present time, when I had so 
recently been left out of the official arrangements in the 
formation of it on the sole ground that I was not pro- 
vided with one. 

' He seemed surprised by my decision, and suggested 
various grounds to induce me to reconsider the matter. 
I thanked him heartily for his kindness on this occasion, 
and for that which he had expressed m assuring me 
that he had fully intended to associate me with him in 
his Cabinet if I had been m Parliament, and I expressed 
my earnest hope that nothing would occur to disturb 
the mutual regard between us. But I added that I felt 
so strongly that I should be in a false and very un- 
satisfactory position were I to occupy such a seat as 
Ripon while I was entirely unconnected with my former 
friends in office, that I must positively decline it. I 
assured him that I should always be ready to afford any 
assistance to him, and that I thought I could be more 
useful when out of Parliament than in it under such 
circumstances. . . .' 

The views indicated above are brought out still more 
clearly in a communication to Mr. Goulburn. 

' September 29, 1841. 

' My -dear Groulburn, — In the conversation which I 
had with you after I had declined the proposal to go to 
Ripon, you appeared to me to enter into the feelings 
which I then described as having actuated me, and I 
think you assented to the argument upon which my 
conclusion was built, though I do not remember that 
you expressly said so. 



CH. X. LETTER TO GOULBURN. 199 

' I have since thought a good deal about that matter. 
The enclosed memorandum which I send you in con- 
fidence contains shortly my view of the subject. I am 
anxious that you should read it with a friendly attention, 
and that I should have the benefit of your judgment 
upon it. It is seldom that a man thinks very clearly 
or judges quite soundly when his feelmgs are strongly 
moved by the subject to which his thoughts are 
directed. I am the more anxious, therefore, to have 
your advice and opinion. 

' You will see that the present object of my solici- 
tude is that my separation in political life from those 
with whom I have so long and so cordially acted, may 
be effected in the manner least likely to occasion a 
severance in other respects. 

' Do not think that I expect an immediate attention 
to this affair of mine. Let me hear from you at your 
leisure Most truly yours, , j ^^ Heeries.' 

Memorandum. 

' The more I have reflected on the offer of the seat 
for Ripon fi-om Sir Robert Peel, accompanied by the 
declaration, by way of caution, that it was not connected 
with any other proposal — by which I understood that 
no prospect of employment was held out to me — the 
more am I satisfied that it was right on my part to 
decline the favour thus proffered to me. 

' My position is this : I was called into the higher 
departments of political life by Lord Liverpool from the 
lucrative permanent situation which I then filled, on 



200 MEMORANDUM. ch. x. 

the ground of my supposed experience and capacity 
in public bu siness. From tbe period when that occurred 
(now twenty years since) I have been in close and con- 
fidential connection with the party which I then joined, 
and steadfastly devoted to the same political principles. 
I have occupied some very prominent stations, both in 
subordination to the Government and as forming a part 
of it. I have taken, on some occasions, a very forward, 
and, at all times, a labouring, part in Parliament, in 
concert with the chiefs of my party. I have maintained 
out of office, at a considerable cost, during more than 
ten years, and at four elections, against all the power of 
the Government, a seat theretofore invariably at the 
disposal of the Treasury for the time being. Driven at 
length from thence by the overwhelming weight of that 
power, I embarked, with every fair prospect of success, 
in a contest at Ipswich, which proved unfortunate by 
reason of the peculiar hostility of the Whigs to me ; and 
I now find myself temporarily deprived of a place in 
the House of Commons at the very time when the party 
and the principles with which, and for which, I so long 
have been fighting, have triumphantly prevailed. 

' On the occasion of this great change every indivi- 
dual, so far as I know, having any fair claims to office, 
or favour or distinction, high or low, has derived some 
advantage from it, or received some public recognition 
of his pretensions or services, except myself. But I have 
received the assurance that, had it not been for the un- 
fortunate mischance of the lost election, and the conse- 
quent want of a seat in the House of Commons, a high 
station in office would have been assigned to me. 



CH. X. MEMORANDUM. 201 

' On my part it is perfectly true that I have not asked 
for office ; that I have urged no vain or selfish preten- 
sions to employment ; and that, on the contrary, I 
have submitted myself entirely to the judgment of my 
leader to employ me or not, as to him might seem most 
expedient for the public service. I did so in perfect 
sincerity and good faith, prepared to abide, without 
objection or remonstrance, by the decision, be it what 
it might. 

' But while I submit myself entirely to that determi- 
nation, formed upon grounds of public expediency (not 
in any degree affecting my character), whereby I stand 
excluded from office, I am far from being indifferent to 
the effect which might be produced upon the estimation 
in which I have hitherto been held ia public and private 
life by the manner of my retirement and the circum- 
stances attending it. Any unfavourable misconstruction 
as to the cause of my official severance from the Con- 
servative party might prove a thousandfold more paiaful 
to me than the mere fact of my being laid aside. 

' It happens, unfortunately, that the most obvious 
conclusion with respect to my present insulated position 
is precisely that which has the smallest foundation in 
truth. It is supposed (and I know the fact from having 
been called upon to refute the error) that I have urged 
pretensions to a particular office, or at least to office of 
a certain rank, without which I would not be satisfied, 
and that a difference between me and Sir Kobert Peel 
on that point has led to the result. This is as unfavour- 
able to me as it is devoid of truth. Other conjectures 
equally unfounded have been made ; naturally enough, 



202 MEMORANDUM. ch. x. 

because the real cause is not obvious, and indeed to 
many persons, even when distmctly stated, it is not 
easily intelligible. They will not understand how the 
want of a seat in Parliament, which could be so easily 
supplied now that my friends are in power, either by 
them or by my own exertions, could so definitively have 
closed the door agamst me. The vacancy at Ripon was 
foreseen by every one even before the new Government 
was formed, and if I had accepted the offer of that seat, 
the very fact of my now filling it would have rendered 
my separation from office more unaccountable. The 
assurance, which I should have given to everyone, that 
it was only because the vacancy did not actually exist at ' 
the very moment when my former fellow-labourers were 
called mto employment again, would, if urged under 
such circumstances as an explanation of my exclusion, 
rather have tended, I think, to create than to remove 
any unfavourable doubts. I should hardly have stood 
clear and well in the public eye in such a position, and 
with nothing more to ofifer than such an assurance 
(strictly true though it be) to account for it. In short, 
I do not see how I could at the present moment satis- 
factorily take a private station in Parliament under the 
immediate auspices of the Government, but unconnected 
with it, except on the clear and avowed understanduig 
that I had spontaneously renounced public employ- 
ment, and was determined to retire from all public duties 
beyond those of an individual member of the House of 
Commons. That would undoubtedly be a high position, 
and one which any man might be proud of But it 
is not mine, and I am not the man to assume a false 



GH. X. MEMORANDUM. 203 

character, or to allow sentiments and pretensions to be 
unduly ascribed to me not strictly in accordance with 
the truth. 

' What, therefore, remains for me, after so long a 
period of active, and I hope not wholly unuseful service, 
and after so great a sacrifice of personal interest as I 
have made, except to abide quietly by my fireside, and 
to watch with friendly anxiety the progress of a better 
order of things in the hands of those who are now called 
to the administration of public aff'airs ? 

' But I must take care that my retirement be not ex- 
posed to misconstruction, and that it bring no spot or 
speck upon my good name. In this I confidently hope 
for the assistance of all my friends in office, in concur- 
rence with Sir R. Peel, who will, I am sure, do what- 
ever may be most conducive to afi'ord clear evidence 
that my connection with his Grovernment is not severed 
by reason of any diminution of the good opinion or 
goodwill towards me of those who compose it. It 
would mdeed be as little to their credit as to mine if 
any mystery should hang over my separation from 
them. After having so long been before the public I 
must pass from official into private life as an upright 
public servant, and as a gentleman and a man of honour 
ought to do.' 

Mr. Groulburn, in his reply, concluded thus : ' I can 
truly say that I have never heard your exclusion from 
office attributed to any other than the real cause, and 
what our old friendship would make an imperative duty 
on me is felt, I believe, by all your friends in the Gov- 
ernment, that if any surmise to the contrary was to 



204 FINANCIAL CONSULTATIONS. an. x. 

reach them they would be prompt and eager in its refu- 
tation.' ... 

Although removed from active political life, Mr. 
Harries continued to be consulted, as he had been dur- 
ing the greater part of his existence, on many impor- 
tant questions, and his aid and advice, frequently sought, 
were always readily given. As we write we see before 
us a bulky packet of comparative financial statements 
and calculations for each of the Administrations since 
the Peace, enclosed in a letter to the Duke of Welling- 
ton, shortly before the meeting of the new Parliament. 

'August 21, 184L 

' My dear Lord Duke, — I think the accompanying 
papers contain the answers to the several points on 
which you put questions to me, with the exception of 
the sugar, on which I hope you have received ample 
information from the quarters in which I made inquiry. 

' With respect to the prices of sugar, I find some of 
the best West Indians — Irving in particular, and I dare 
say Grant — beginning to be alarmed about the lowness 
of the price. They expect what they call bad times 
from the abundance of the supply. If there is reason 
for their fear in that respect, the argument becomes so 
much stronger against the framers of the Budget. 

' My servant mil return to me to-night, and if you 
wish for any farther information that I can afford, you 
will perhaps send a line to me by him. Believe me, 
&c., 

'J. C. Herries.' 

Not very long after the formation of Sir Robert 



CH. X. nXANCIAT. CONSULTATIONS. 205 

Peel's Government, we were present when the quiet of 
the retired politician was rudely disturbed by a hot and 
hurried Treasury messenger driven up to his door at 
fuU speed in a post-chaise — the bearer of a short but 
urgent missive from the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
beginning with the ominous words, ' Peel and I are in a 
cleft stake,' and entreating that his friend would in^ 
stantly repair to London for the purpose of trying to 
extricate them from that unpleasant position. Respond- 
ing to this earnest appeal he hastened to town, where 
he learned that the difficulties, on account of which his 
help was wanted, had arisen out of a funding operation 
rendered necessary by the deficit bequeathed by the 
outgoing Whigs. It did not appear to the person called 
in that the embarrassment (which, in his opinion, might 
have been avoided) was a very serious one, and he sug- 
gested means for its removal. Then ensued a curious 
incident. The two heads of the Treasury, closeted 
with a great capitalist, discussed the terms of a proposed 
arrangement, while in an adjoining room their concealed 
counsellor from the country sat apart for occasional 
consultation. He returned to his fields, wondering why 
he had been called away from them, and reflecting upon 
the much more difficult negotiations which in much 
more critical times he had often concluded with far less 
trouble, and without seeking any external aid. 

On a far more important matter, his opinion was 
thought worth taking soon afterwards, as may be seen 
from the following paper in reply to a letter, dated No- 
vember 5, 1841, from Sir Robert Peel, in which, refer- 
rino- to an interview with Mr. Herrles on the same day. 



206 LETTEE TO PEEL. ch. x. 

he encloses correspondence (returned uncopied), ' on 
the subject of some extensive scheme of finance for the 
purpose of supplying the existing and the contemplated 
deficiency by much more legitimate and satisfactory 
means than have been hitherto resorted to ' — and adds, 
' I shall be very much obliged by your careful perusal 
of these papers, and by the communication of your opi- 
nions on matters of such paramount importance.' 

' November 8, 1841. 

' My dear Peel, — A hasty glance at the papers which 
you sent to me on Friday night was sufficient to show 
me that great attention ought to be brought to the 
perusal of them, and being very pressingly engaged 
with the matters which had brought me to London, I 
was obliged to postpone, until my return hither, the 
careful consideration of these important documents. I 
return them herewith. 

' Although they embrace several topics and some de- 
tails of considerable interest, the main point to which all 
of these are subordinate is of such paramount importance 
that I think I shall best fulfil your wishes in confining 
my observations almost exclusively to it. The question 
for decision is, whether the existing insufficiency of the 
Revenue to meet the annual expenditure can be supplied 
in any manner more suitable to the present circum- 
stances of the country than by the imposition of a tax 
on Income derived from Property? ' * 

* From this passage and subsequent observations, as well as the -words 
quoted above from Sir Robert Peel's own letter of November 5, it is mani- 
fest that the primary object which he had in view when he submitted the 
question so stated to the consideration of Mr. Herries was the restoration of 
the lost financial equilibrium. It cannot be doubted that the reimposition 



CH. X. THE DEFICIT. 207 

' Your estimate of the actual deficiency for future 
years is 3,000,000^., and, I presume, you contemplate 
the necessity of making provision to the extent of about 
1,000,000/. beyond that as a surplus, indispensable for 
the sake of security and the maintenance of the public 
credit. 

' I assume, of course, that all intention to dabble with 
the disastrous state of things by temporary expedients, 
involving the creation of new debt, is to be entirely 
rejected, as being a course bad in itself, and, moreover, 
peculiarly mifitted to the position of the present Go- 
vernment, and to the expectations that are entertained 
of it. 

' Such being the case, I have no hesitation in de- 
claring my firm conviction that no other safe and prac- 
ticable expedient is open to you than a recourse to 
direct taxation, and that a Property Tax is the best 

of a property or income tax was, at that time at least, contemplated as a 
means, in tlie first instance, of supplying the continuous deficiency of the 
Revenue which had to he made good. Sir Robert Peel's own words on 
bringing forward the measure in 1842 point to the same conclusion. But 
when Mr. Herries, in moving for a diminution of the income tax in 1851, 
asserted that such had been its original and principal purpose — observins at 
the same time that he knew the fact from having himself been consulted on 
the subject — he was contradicted in a somewhat too peremptory tone of 
authority. It had then become the fashion to treat as a matter of quite 
secondary importance the perilous financial condition of the nation at the 
beginning of 1842, described by Sir Robert Peel as the ' mighty and growing 
evil ' which he proposed to remedy, and to represent the income tax as 
having been from the outset devised solely, or chiefly, as an engine for 
effecting a complete change of fiscal policy. 

It seems worthy of observation that in the passage above, ' a tax on in- 
come derived from property ' is spoken of. Whether in the original scheme 
brought under the cognizance of Mr. Herries the tax was intended to be so 
limited, or whether the words used by him implied a suggestion of his own, 
we have no means of knowing. 



208 PROPERTY TAX. ch. x. 

description of direct taxation that you can adopt under 
present circumstances. 

' I have the less diflSiculty in arriving at this conclu- 
sion, because I have very long entertained the convic- 
tion that the burthens of this country, consisting in so 
large a degree of accumulated debt, ought to be defrayed, 
in a greater proportion than they have hitherto been 
since the Peace, by the contribution of accumulated 
wealth ; and that the very great preponderance assigned 
in our system of taxation to the duties derived from 
manufactures and consumption, was not only impolitic 
but unsustainable. 

' I was so deeply impressed with this belief more 
than fifteen years ago that when I held the office of 
Chancellor of the Exchequer I had come to the deter- 
mination, in entire concurrence with Huskisson and 
Lord Ripon, to propose a Property Tax by way of 
commutation for some of the then existing indirect 
taxes, which were most obstructive to the industry of 
the country, and consequently most detrimental to it in 
its then growing rivalry with the manufactures of the 
Contment, and also most obnoxious to the public 
feeling ; and therefore likely to be wrenched, sooner or 
later, out of the hands of any Government. The change 
of Ministry put an end to these intentions, but I have 
never ceased to think that they were right in principle ; 
and I am still convinced that by adopting such a course 
at that period the crisis in which we are now mvolved 
would have been averted. We should have anticipated 
the necessity under which we are now compelled to 
revert to direct taxation. 



en. X. CAUSE OF DEFICIENCY. 209 

'I need not point out to you that our present insuffi- 
ciency of public income does not arise from any really 
extravagant or unforeseen excess of expenditure on the 
one hand, nor from any decay of wealth or diminution 
in the means of consumption or contribution to the 
public revenue in the nation at large on the other. If 
the expenditure, such as it is even now, is compared 
with the estimate formed by the Committee of Finance 
in [1817 or 1828 — the figures are uncertain], there is 
nothing to complain of. And if the actual produce of 
the revenue be contrasted with the amount to which it 
would have been reduced by the taxes taken off if con- 
sumption had remained stationary, the augmentation is 
prodigious. 

' It is, in truth, therefore, solely to the abandonment 
of taxes that we owe the present deficiency ; and 
although that abandonment may have been made ' in 
some respects unnecessarily, and in others unskilfully, 
by the late Government, I am still thoroughly persuaded 
that no Government, however skilful or strong, could 
have resisted, or, if they could, ought to have resisted, 
the inducement to a large reduction of the indirect 
taxation which the circumstances and the feelings of 
the country created. 

' Among the mistakes Lord Spencer, who may be 
reckoned, perhaps, the very worst of the financial 
managers who have had charge of the Exchequer, 
committed, the greatest perhaps was the giving up of 
the taxes on houses and windows (taxes upon pro- 
perty), and laying a duty upon raw cotton. It was 
moving exactly in the wrong direction. Even the 

VOL. II. P 



210 POST OFFICE REVENUE. ch. x. 

unwise reduction of the Post Office revenue ^ was more 
justified upon principle than that measure. 

^ lu the judp-ment of the writer of this letter, as -well as in that of Sir 
Robert Peel, to wliom it was addressed, the change of the postal system in- 
troduced in 1 840 was imprudent because it greatly increased the deficiency 
of the Revenue. This, and no other, was the ground of the opposition to 
the measure on the part of the Conservatives ; and it is impossible to deny 
that their financial objections were well founded. The immediate loss of 
revenue was enormous. In the year ended January 5, 1839 (the last com- 
plete year under the old system), the net revenue of the Post OflBce was 
1,659,609/., including 45,156/., the amount of postage charged on Govern- 
ment departments. In the year ended January 5, 1841 (the first year of 
the penny post), the net revenue was only 500,789/., including 90,761/. 
charged on Government departments. The real loss to the public, therefore, 
was 1 ,204,325/. Ten years later the net revenue was no more than 803,898/., 
from which being deducted 109,523/. for Government postage — a mere 
matter of account — there reinained only 694,375/., falling short of the real 
receipts for profit of 1838 by 919,978/. As compared with the latter year, 
the returns for 1860, when the new system had been in operation for twenty 
years, still show a deficiency of 372,235/., not reduced to less than 174,374/. 
in 1862, after which date the Post Office accounts are made up on a different 
principle. But this is not the whole case ; because, while these accounts 
previous to the last-mentioned year include, under the head of receipts, the 
postage charged in the United Kingdom for letters, &c. conveyed by British 
mail steamers, they exclude from the expenditure side the sums paid under 
contract for the conveyance of those mails. And, moreover, the actual cost of 
the manufacture of postage stamps has hitherto been defrayed, not by the 
Post Office, but by the Inland Revenue department. 

However great, therefore, the advantages of cheap postage have been — 
and they are undeniable — to all classes of the community in other respects, 
the expectations of financial success held out by the promoters of the reform 
were delusive. It is incontestable that the adoption of the Rowland Hill 
system added very largely to the already dangerous deficit, which must have 
gone on growing until it had reached the most formidable proportions if the 
Liberal Government which carried the postal reform had remained long in 
office ; because that Government was adverse to the application of the remedy 
— the only efficacious one — by which the evil was cured — the income tax. 

Consequently, those who with Sir Robert Peel resisted the postal change 
when it was brought forward were fully justified in saying — before you 
throw away existing revenue, put an end to the existing deficit. 

Persons who now deride an opposition which they attribute to Con- 
servative factiousness or stupidity, and to official obstructiveuess, would do 
well to take notice of the opinion strongly expressed against Rowland Hill's 
reform, sixteen ye.ars after its introduction, by Mr. McCulloch, a decided 
Liberal and an eminent economist, in his Commercial Dictionary, ed. 1856. 



CH. X. SUGAR DUTIES. 211 

' But I should bore you, and very unnecessarily, if 
I were to pursue reflections upon this subject only 
tending to the same conclusion, that a Property Tax is 
the best expedient for restoring the balance of our 
income and expenditure. As I formerly thought that 
direct taxation should be substituted for indirect con- 
tributions to the pubHc income, which I foresaw could 
not be preserved, so I am of opinion that it is the only 
proper mode of supplying the place of those duties now 
that they are wrested from you. It is still, in truth, 
only a substitution of the one for the other. 

' I have already said that I should confine myself to 
a distinct statement of my opinion on the questions of 
overwhelming importance on which you have asked 
for it. 

' There may be opportunities hereafter for remarks 
upon the detached observations (some of them of great 
value) which have been submitted to you by others. 

' I will only say that, with respect to the House 
Tax, it is much easier to wish that it had never been 
abandoned than to suggest that it would be wise and 
practicable just now to re-establish it. 

' With regard to the reduction in sugar ' [that is to 
say, reduction of duty on British Colonial sugar], ' I 
confess that I entertain more than a doubt of the pro- 
priety of effecting it at present. Our expectations of a 
supply from the West and East Indies, sufficient to meet 
the entire consumption, have not, I believe, been realised ; 
and, so long as the monopoly exists in favour of our 
own growers, with a supply at aU within the consump- 
tion of the country, the remission of the duty would, in 

p 2 



212 FISCAL DIFFICULTIES. ch. x. 

a great degree, be a boon to the planter at tbe expense 
of the Exchequer. If, hereafter, the produce should so 
much exceed the consumption as to force prices at home 
to a level with those on the Continent, then, indeed, it 
may be an act of justice to the planter (since the benefit 
of the bounty is taken from him) to make some reduc- 
tion of the duty. 

' Of the practical difficulty of framing an Act for the 
imposition of a Property Tax ® under existing circum- 
stances, and of the skill and judgment and labour which 
will be required for adjusting the burthens upon the 
several descriptions of property and income, which ought 
to be made in different proportions to contribute to it, 
I am fully sensible. 

' It will be an Herculean task, indeed, to prepare the 
Act, and the fighting it through Parliament will be no 
trifling undertaking. But I do not anticipate much 
opposition in the House of Commons to the adoption 
of the principle. On the contrary, I am led to believe 
that you will have a great majority in favour of the 
measure there.' . . . 

That the Adews indicated in this paper really had 
been seriously entertained by the writer at a much 
earlier period, is proved by a passage in a speech de- 
livered by him in the House of Commons in 1830, on 

* The difficulty -was immensely increased by the absence of records illus- 
trative of the working of the former Act. All the old income tiix returns, 
&c. were unwisely destroyed in 1818, in compliance with a motion from 
Mr. Brougham. The practical effect of this fiscal concession to public 
opinion was that, on the renewal of the income tax in 1842, the fruits of 
past experience were lost to those who had to frame the new Act and put 
it in execution, public utility having been, neither for the first nor for the 
last time, sacrificed to popular clamour. 



CH. X. INCOME TAX. 213 

Mr. Poulett Thomson's motion for a Committee for a 
Eevision of Taxation ; when, referring to some previous 
remarks by Mr. Huskisson, he said : ' My right ho- 
nourable friend, the member for Liverpool, on a former 
evening appealed to me, in confirmation of the assertion 
that I had long since been favourable to some change in 
taxation, by which its pressure might be transferred 
from one portion of the community to another. This 
undoubtedly is the case, and I concur with my right 
honourable friend in the principle, and would, under 
certain circumstances, be glad to see it carried into 
effect.' 

He approved the renewal of the Income Tax in 1845 
(when he was out of Parliament) for another period of 
three years ; and he thought that it was again war- 
ranted by the circumstances of the time in 1848. But 
in 1851, being in the House of Commons, he made a 
motion for a diminution of the tax, with a view to its 
gradual abandonment. This was no reversal of the 
policy he had recommended in 1841, and which he had 
intended to take up in 1828. The reasons which at 
those two periods had convinced him of the expediency, 
or necessity, of the imposition of an Income Tax no 
longer existed. The condition of the national finances 
was entirely changed. The distribution of fiscal bur- 
thens was widely different. Mr. Herries did not ask 
for the immediate and complete cessation of the Income 
Tax ; nor did he propose that a reduction of this charge 
should be compensated by the substitution of a corre- 
sponding amount of indirect taxation. The question 
at issue was not whether the Income Tax should be 



214 LETTER ON BRAZIL[AN TREATY. ch. x. 

retained as the best means of repealing duties on articles 
of consumption, but whether a certain proportion (two- 
sevenths) of the then existing rate of Income Tax should, 
or should not, be still maintained, instead of another 
existing direct impost — the Window Tax — which Mr. 
Herries believed to be less generally obnoxious. 

Another letter, written in the same month, relates 
to the Sugar question and the pending negotiations 
with Brazil. It very clearly marks the writer's views, 
which were opposed to monopoly on the one hand, and 
to any encouragement of slavery on the other. 

' Sevenoaks : NovemlDer 29, 1841. 

' My dear Peel, — I return the projet of the Brazihan 
Treaty and the paper connected with it. I had intended 
to take them to you to-day, and to state verbally what 
occurred to me upon the subject. But I am prevented 
from leaving this place. 

' In a former letter to you, I expressed much doubt 
with respect to the propriety of making a considerable 
reduction in the Sugar Duties generally, so long as the 
monopoly in favour of our own colonies continued to 
be effective by reason of the msufficiency of the supply 
from thence to meet the full demand for our home con- 
sumption. I understood at that time that such was the 
state of things, and I understand that it is stiU not ex- 
pected that our sang-uine expectations of an ample im- 
portation of British Possession sugar will be realised in 
the present year. 

' But a new view of the case is presented by the 
proposal now under your consideration, and if foreign 
sugars are to be admitted upon such terms as will leave 



CF. X. SUGAR AND SLAVERY. 215 

only a reasonable protection to the British grower, and 
thereby abolish his monopoly, the groundwork of my 
objection is removed, and the reduction of the Sugar 
Duty, coupled with the condition that the estimated 
loss of Revenue thereby to be created, is to be made 
good by an equivalent amount of new taxation, becomes 
a fair question of financial and commercial expediency. 
I assume, of course, that you are fully satisfied that, by 
the terms of your treaty with Brazil and the qualified 
character of the competition to be established between 
slave-grown and fi*ee -labour sugar, the objection on 
which we insisted so strongly last year [last Session 
should have been written], on the score of slavery, will 
be removed ; and that no danger to the successful pro- 
gress of the measure of emancipation in our Colonies 
is to be apprehended from it. Upon that point I am 
hardly competent to form an opinion, and I need not 
suggest to you how important it will be to be able tc 
establish it in argument consistently with the course 
pursued on our side against the propositions of the late 
Government. 

' You are no doubt prepared to hear from them, that 
they also proposed to give to the consumer some benefit 
by an approach to competition between the sugars of 
our own labourers and those of Brazil ; that they did so 
professedly with the view of enlarging our trade with 
that country, and of preparing for the renewal of our 
commercial treaty with it : but that their plan was to 
accomphsh these objects not only without a loss of 
Revenue from sugar but with an augmentation of it ; 
and that the additional benefit in the price of the article 



216 WEST INDIAN MONOPOLY. en. x. 

(sometliing more than a penny per lb.) wliicli your plan 
will confer upon the consumer beyond tlieirs, by the 
reduction of the duty, must be purchased by the imposi- 
tion of a new burthen, which may be found more onerous 
to him, &c., &c. This is not my argument, but one 
which will, I think, be used by a Whig Opposition by 
way of appeal to the anti-Property Tax feelings of the 
House.'' 

' I judge from the confidential paper which you 
send me, that there is yet some uncertainty as to the 
disposition of Brazil to accede to your propositions on 
the subject of slavery ; but I take it for granted that 
you are fully satisfied that, if she does adopt them, 
they will be effectual for their object. I should 
otherwise have entertained some fears upon that 
point. 

' I am also led to suppose that the details of the 
discriminating duties are as yet rather sketched out 
than determined upon. On the rates of duty, I should 
be unwilling to offer an opinion without more consulta- 
tion than I could now venture to have with practical 
men on the subject. The form in which it is proposed 
to describe and enact the differential duties on sugar 
appears to me to be susceptible of improvement by sim- 
plification ; but that is altogether a minor consideration. 

' Upon the whole, I shall be glad to see the prin- 
ciple of the proposed measure satisfactorily and success- 
fully carried out. The tendency of my opinions has always 
bee7i rather in opposition to the West Indian monopoly, more 

' This Sugar Question, as we know, was not brought forward by Sir 
Kobert Peel in 1842. ' 



CH. X. LETTER TO GOULBUEN. 217 

especially since the settlement with them on the emancipation 
of their slaves : and nothing hut a clear' conviction of the 
justice and weight of our anti-slavery argument against the 
Whig proposition of last Session would have induced me to 
enter so heartily as I did into opposition to it.^ 

' I shall be in London in the course of the week, and 
will take my chance of finding you at leisure. 
' Believe me, &c., 

' J. C. Heeries.' 

On March 7, 1842, four days before Sir Eobert 
Peel's celebrated financial statement was made in the 
House of Commons, a very long letter was addressed to 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, commenting upon 
some points still under consideration. A few extracts 
fi-om it may be worthy of perusal. 

' Sevenoaks : Marcli 7, 1842. 

' My dear Goulburn, — You wished me to write to 
you after a Uttle reflection on the two points which 
were mentioned when I saw you the other day, viz., 
the exemption of Ireland from the proposed tax on pro- 
perty, and the remission of the sugar duty. 

' The first took me very much by surprise. I had 
always contemplated the re-imposition of a pro^Jerty 
tax (whether as the ultimate resource for meeting a 
public exigency, or as a commutation for other bur- 
thens) as being to be borne uniformly by all property 
of the same description in every part of the United 
Kingdom. And the more I have since thought upon 

^ The italics are those of the Editor. The passage is not underlined in 
the original draft. 



218 PEOPEETY TAX : lEELAND. ch. x, 

the subject the less I can reconcile my judgment to the 
justice or policy of omitting Ireland from its due share 
of this assessment. 

' It must, however, be observed, that I have not 
heard the arguments on the other side. You had no 
time to explain them to me when we met ; and this is 
a subject upon which I cannot, until your plans are 
published, venture to invite discussion with other per- 
sons. I have therefore nothing to deal with but my 
own suggestions ; and, as my opinions have long been 
fixed in favour of the extension of the tax to Ireland, 
the other side of the question has not had a fair chance 
in my cogitations. 

' I know nothing but by conjecture of the feelings 
of the English landlords, capitalists, or professional men 
on such a subject ; but I should apprehend that they 
would not easily be reconciled to bear the whole bur- 
then of this imposition, by the consideration of the in- 
direct taxes which you propose to create in Ireland ; 
consisting chiefly of alterations, which will only bring 
Ireland more nearly to a level with England with regard 
to those taxes. . . . 

' But these objections are all upon the surface, and 
must have been considered fully, together with many 
others, before you adopted your present resolution. 
The answers to them are, however, not equally obvious ; 
and I must fairly confess to you that the only two 
points which you mentioned to me, viz. : 1st, The 
difficulty of establishing a machinery in Ireland for the 
collection of an Income Tax ; and 2ndly, That of per- 
suading the Irish members to submit to it, — do not 



CH. X. SUGAE, DUTIES. 219 

appear to me to be sufficient to outweigli considerations 
of so much magnitude. 

' To the first of these I cannot attach much weight. 
It was urged long ago, and for many years, against the 
application of the Poor Laws to Ireland. It has been 
overcome in that matter, iu which it was probably a 
more formidable obstacle than it would be found in the 
assessment of a Property Tax. 

' The latter is, I daresay, the substantial impediment 
which you have to grapple with. I am far from being 
insensible to the embarrassment which it presents. I 
remember that Lord Londonderry bore testimony to 
the weight of it when there was a question, at the close 
of the war, of continuing a modified Property Tax in- 
stead of abandoning wholly that which then existed. He 
felt the difficulty of imposing it in Ireland ; but he also 
felt, if I mistake not, that without that condition it ought 
not to be re-imposed at all. My own belief is that at 
the present time, and under present circumstances, a 
good majority of the House of Commons would support 
you both iu the imposition of a Property Tax, and in 
the extension of it to Ireland. . . . 

' Now, with respect to the remission of a large pro- 
portion of the Sugar Duties. 

' You know what my opinion is upon that subject, 
supposing that the supply from our Colonies and pos- 
sessions be not greater than the average consumption of 
the United Kingdom, and consequently, that under then- 
present monopoly of our home market, the planters 
would derive the chief benefit from the reduction of the 
duty. However much I may be a well wisher to the 



220 QUESTIONS TO BE CONSIDERED. ch. x. 

East and West Indians, I am not prepared to make so 
great a sacrifice to them as that would be. On the other 
hand, supposing the colonial supply of sugar to be 
abundant, and the price in consequence to be regulated 
by the general European market — or supposing the pro- 
jected treaty with Brazil to be brought to bear, so that a 
modified competition between foreign sugar and that of 
the Colonies would secure to the consumer the advantage 
of the reduction of duty — in either of these cases there 
can be no doubt that the remission of the tax upon sugar 
would be desirable. But you must bear in mind that 
in the present instance we have not the good fortune 
to be considering what concessions of taxation may 
be made from a surplus Revenue, but what are the fittest 
subjects for a Commutation. It is a question between 
Sugar Duty and Property Tax. I calculate roughly (but I 
have not seen your estimates and papers) that the duty 
proposed to be taken off sugar will be equivalent to 
about 1 per cent, of the Property Tax to be imposed. 
To the consumer it may make a difi"erence in the price 
of the sugar of something more than Id., and less than 
l\d., per lb. The point to be decided, therefore, is 
whether such a reduction of price in that article to the 
consumer generally is the best boon you can give to 
the community in compensation for the imposition of 
1 per cent, on Income and Property. 

' In determining upon that question, it should be 
borne in mind that the remission of Sugar Duty will 
have less influence on the interests of commerce and 
manufactures (except it be done in combination with a 
good Brazilian treaty) than the taking off of duties 



CH. X. ADVICE, peel's BUDGET. 221 

from raw materials of manufacture or supplies from 
foreign countries. This will be still more tlie case in 
consequence of tlie measures now in progress for the 
encouraging the iatercourse between our colonies and 
other countries ; our own produce and manufactures 
will no longer possess the exclusive benefit of our 
colonial consumption. . . . 

' But ... I am hardly m a condition to compare 
the general advantages of a diminution of the Sugar 
Duties with that of other alterations of the tariff which 
you may not yet have determined to make. In the 
present state of my information I can only express a 
hope that it will not be preferred to a reduction of the 
charges on the importation of raw materials of our 
manufacture. 

' All which is humbly submitted. Truly yours, 

'J. C. Heeries.' 

A reference to Sir Robert Peel's financial speech on 
March 11, shows a remarkable coincidence between his 
arguments against the expediency of a reduction of 
Sugar duties, which, under existing circumstances 
would have benefited the British colonial producer 
alone, and those strongly urged against it — if unaccom- 
panied by the admission of foreign competition — in the 
letters above cited. But it is evident from this corre- 
spondence that a reduction of some sort was originally 
contemplated as one of the measures to be proposed, and 
that the question was stUl undecided almost on the eve 
of the introduction of the famous budget. 

That confidential communications of this kind were 



222 LATER CONSULTATIONS. ch. x. 

habitual, may be assumed from a letter, dated February 
28, 1844, to Mr. Herries from tbe ChanceUor of the 
Exchequer, on the subject of the proposed reduction of 
the 3. I per Cents, and different plans for effecting it, 
' I have deferred writiag to you,' he says, ' because I 
have been in the hopes of seeing you, but as I cannot 
learn whether you intend being in London I think it 
better to ask for your advice by letter. . . . 

' Would you be good enough to give me your 
opinion on this matter by return of post ? Your 
experience in such matters makes you a better judge 
than most persons, and I should be unwUling to act 
without a previous knowledge of your views. ... I 
find I am too late for the post, so I send this by a 
messenger in the morning.' 

In the course of the Peel Administration, Mr. 
Herries rendered good service to the public as a member 
of the Royal Commissions on Metropolitan Improve- 
ments and Railway Termini. The first Report (1844) 
of the former Commission was chiefly devoted to the 
question of the Thames Embankment, part of which 
was originally projected by that great English artist, 
Sir Christopher Wren, who designed a commodious 
quay fi:'om Blackiriars to the Tower. To Sir Frederick 
Trench is due the credit of having proposed to Parlia- 
ment a more extended plan for an embankment and 
public thoroughfare on the northern shore of the river 
between Westminster and London Bridges. His Bill 
for this purpose was brought forward, but afterwards 
dropped, in 1825. In 1840 the subject was submitted 
to the examination of a Committee of the House of 



cu. X. THAMES EMBANKMENT. 223 

Commons which collected much valuable evidence, but 
went no further. The Royal* Commission appointed 
by Sir Robert Peel studied all the different plans pro- 
posed, and strongly recommended the execution of 
the work in accordance with one of them particularly. 
Mr. Herries being entirely convinced of the utility 
and feasibility of the undertaking — although individu- 
ally he preferred another plan (that of Mr. Walker) 
to the one selected — did his utmost to promote it, 
endeavouring to persuade the Government of the day 
to carry it out, and to enlist influential persons in 
support of the views of the Commission.' But the 
Prime Minister, whose countenance was necessary, threw 
cold water on the project ; and few could be made to 
feel the advantage of a scheme generally looked upon 
as an impracticable bore, detrimental to wharfingers 
and the owners of gardens, and not worth an addi- 
tional tax of so many pence per ton of coals. More 
than twenty years were destined to elapse before the 
public hailed the accomplishment, on a greatly improved 
plan, of the noblest work of modern London ; but the 
efforts, though unsuccessful, of those who did not live 
to see its execution, deserve record and recognition. 

^ He continued his advocacy after Sir R, Peel's retirement. 



224 RETURN TO PARLIAMENT URGED. ch. xi. 



CHAPTER XI. 

1846—1852. 

Return to Parliament, 1847 — Monetary crisis — Bank Charter Act — Repeal 
of the Navigation laws — Answer to Mr. CoMen's motion for reduction 
of estimates — Derby Cabinet, 1852 — Herries, President of the Board of 
Control. 

At the beginning of 1846, a strong desire was ex- 
pressed by the most prominent members of the sur- 
prised and derelict Conservative party that Mr. Herries, 
whose principles were well known to them, should 
return to Parliamentary life. But, though he entirely 
disapproved the sudden change of the course of his 
political friends in office, he felt no disposition to enter 
into a conflict with them. To an obliging suggestion 
from a distinguished person, that arrangements might 
be made for the immediate fulfilment of the wishes of 
those who were anxious that he should re-enter the 
House of Commons, he replied : ' Your letter has found 
me in a state of health and spirits little suited to the 
arduous task which it suggests to me. Whoever may 
be the friends, of whose wishes you are the kind inter- 
preter, I beg sincerely to assure them and you that I 
feel highly gratified by their too favourable opinion of 
such public services as I should be able to render in 
Parliament at the present most critical period. Had I 
been a member of the House of Commons at this time. 



CH. sr. INVITATIONS. 225 

I should, I trust, not have shrunk from the duty of 
freely discussmg all the bearings of the fearful experi- 
ment which is about to be made upon the existing 
social and political constitution of this country : but I 
feel no desire to leave my present retirement to take 
part in such a fray ; and the less so when I consider 
that I might be occupymg a place which would be 
better filled by a younger and stouter combatant than 
myself at a time of such extraordinary difficulty and 
peril.' 

Twelve months later he was again urged to come 
forward, by a letter from an active manager in the 
House of Commons, who wrote to him : ' I believe 
there is a great probability of a vacancy occurring 
within a few days of a seat, which I believe we can 
secure to you. I need hardly say that, if you were in 
the House, you would render great services to a large 
party.' . . . 

To this invitation he replied : ' My long absence 
from the Carlton has been owmg to long and severe 
illness, from which I am slowly recovei'ing. I thank 
you much for your letter, and the very friendly terms 
in which you advert to the subject of it. I fear that 
you greatly overrate my power of rendering service 
to the good cause : but I shall, at all events, be very 
glad to meet you, and I will go to London on Friday 
for that purpose if I possibly can.' 

These communications, however, had no immediate 
result. 

About the same time some correspondence took 
VOL. Ti. Q 



226 IRISH RAILWAYS. en. xr. 

place on the subject of Lord George Bentinck's proposed 
measure ' for the prompt and profitable employment of 
the people by the encouragement of railways in Ire- 
land,' between the then leader of the Opposition and 
Mr. Herries, who cordially approved the principle of the 
Bill, while he suggested some alterations in its details. 

' Februaiy 3, 1847. 

' My dear Lord, — I beg to thank you for the perusal 
of the draft of a Bill herewith returned, which I received 
this morning only. ... I have not been able to 
bestow such attention upon it as it deserves. ... I 
have no hesitation, however, in stating that the general 
scope of the measure appears to me to be excellent, and 
that the detailed enactments suggested for the execution 
of it appear generally to be sufficient for the purpose. 

' If the principle of the measure should be adopted 
by Parliament, the clauses in the Bill relating to the 
mode of raising and applying the money required must, 
of course, be left mainly in the hands of the Treasury. 
That part of the [illegible] would present no practical 
difficulty, and the money and [illegible] clauses might 
perhaps be presented in a more simple form. ... I 
venture to express a doubt of the propriety of giving 
authority to the Treasury to create and sell Stock for 
the purpose. It is, I think, an unconstitutional course 
that any permanent debt should be contracted, except 
under conditions subject to the immediate control of 
Parliament.'- When that expedient was introduced into 
the Savings Banks Bill I objected to it, and the then 

1 The writoi- always adhered inflexibly to this sound constitutional 
doctrine. 



CH. XI. LORD GEORGE BENTINCK. 227 

Whig Government admitted the general principle of the 
objection, although they did not alter their course. 
Brokers care nothing for these matters. 

' In the present case it seems to be unnecessary. 
The sum to be raised is comparatively small, and the 
Treasury might well make provision for this and other 
exigencies during the sitting of Parliament, either by a 
small loan or an iucreased [uncertain in the draft ; 
some words appear to be omitted] credit of Exchequer 
Bills. 

' It seems to me that that part of the task might well 
be left upon their shoulders. 

' I am really sorry to be obliged to write so hastily 
on a subject of so much importance. I cannot conclude 
without expressing my sincere well wishes for your 
success in this very useful and highly important 
measure. Believe me, &c., , ^ ^^ Hereies.' 

Lord George Bentinck wrote on the same day : — 
' I am much obliged by the trouble so kindly taken 
by you in glancing over my Bill for me, and greatly 
encouraged by your approbation of it ; the pretence for 
rejecting even its introduction is the disturbance it will 
create in the money market, and the dread that public 
securities may be lowered, and commerce and trade 
screwed down by another raising of the price of dis- 
counts by the Bank of England. To my mind such 
apprehensions are the most ridiculous that timidity and 
ignorance ever sowed in the mind of any visionarj^. 
But, nevertheless, I have gathered in private conversa- 
tion with Lord John that the opposition to be raised. 

Q 2 



228 LORD GEORGE BENTINCK. ch. xi. 

against me will be mainly founded and bnilt up upon 
this rotten ground. 

' Now your opinion on all financial matters stands 
not only deservedly high with our Parliamentary 
friends, but would have great weight in the City, and a 
pithy note from you, giving a strong opinion upon this 
point, which I might be at liberty to read aloud in the 
House of Commons would, I think, have a stunning 
effect, and very likely turn the fortunes of the day. So 
valuable should I deem it, that if this note should fail to 
catch you before you leave town, or should catch you 
too late to give you time to answer it before you set out 
for Kent, I should very little regard the expense of an 
express to bring me such a note before five o'clock in the 
evening. 

' I am much obliged for your general advice, which 
I will not fail to follow.' . . . 

The answer was to the following efifect : 

' I have only just now (in the afternoon) received 
your letter. I am very sure that you ascribe mfinitely 
too much influence upon the public mind to any opinion 
of mine, and that no communication from me could have 
rendered such assistance to you in the House of Com- 
mons as you are kind enough to suppose it might have 
done. I must, however, candidly add that even if there 
had been time for me to convey such a communication 
to you, I should have been most reluctant to have had it 
put forward by you in the House, and with so much 
more importance attached to it than it could possibly 
have deserved.' 



CH. XI. RETURN TO HOUSE OF COMMONS. 229 

Yielding to repeated solicitations, Mr. Herries at 
lengtli made up liis mind to become a candidate for a 
seat at tlie general election of 1847, when he was re- 
turned, together with the Marquis of Granby, for the 
borough of Stamford, after a smart contest, of a local 
and personal, rather than a political, nature, with a Con- 
servative opponent. His parliamentary revival is thus 
gracefully and justly noticed in a brilliant contemporary 
work.^ ' Lord George Bentiiick, however, gained an 
invaluable coadjutor by the reappearance of Mr. Herries 
in public life, a gentleman whose official as well as 
parliamentary experience, fine judgment, and fertile 
resource have been of inestimable service to the protec- 
tionist party.' 

A protectionist — not a prohibitionist — he was then, 
as he always had been, but in a lower degree probably 
than the majority of the party to which he belonged. 
His desire was not to prevent, but, on the contrary, to 
favour competition ; foreign competition with British 
industry, but also British competition with foreign 
industry. He was opposed to protective duties too high 
to admit the former, but he advocated the imposition 
of protective duties just high enough, but no higher, 
to make, according to his view, the latter possible. It 
has been seen, in the case of sugar, from his letters to 
Sir Robert Peel and Mr. Goulburn, that he objected to 
a diminution of duty on the produce of British colonies 
on the ground that it would have been in effect an 
augmentation of the protetition then enj oyed by it, and 
which, deeming it excessive, he would have been willing 

- Lord George Bentinck : A Political Biogrnphy, By Ti, Disraeli, p. 442. 



230 SENTIMENTS. WARM RECEPTION. en. xr. 

to reduce considerably, but for the question of slavery. _ 
He believed that British agriculture, the ruin of which 
would, in his opinion, be a national calamity, stood in 
need of protection, because, owing to causes not remov- 
able either by legislation or by individual exertion, the 
unassisted competition of British producers with those 
of all other countries could not (as he thought) be per- 
manently sustained. 

Evidence is to be found in confidential communi- 
cations from friends and supporters of a feeling of hos- 
tility on the part of some at least of the Peelites, who 
were anxious to prevent the election of Mr. Herries, and 
would have been glad if it could have been made void. 
But how little there was of personal animosity in his 
sei:itiments towards them may be seen from a letter to 
him from Croker, dated June 27, 1847, concerning an 
impending attack in the ' Quarterly Review ' : — 

' You will see that I have attended to all your sug- 
gestions, and omitted or altered everything that you had 
queried, much to the improvement of the article. I have 
also lowered a few expressions which you would have 
marked, no doubt, had you gone on marking. It is 
impossible not to feel indignation at the apostasy and 
at the mischief it has done, but personally I really have 
quite the reverse of ill-will or a desire to give pain, and so 
am very much obliged to you for your moderating hints.' 

The T^'armth of Mr. Kerries's reception on resuming 
his seat in the House of Commons was very gratifying. 
Sir Robert Peel took the first opportunity to ' express, 
in common with the House generally, his satisfaction at 
the return to this house of his right honourable friend, 



cii. XI. BANK CIIAKTER ACT. 231 

and his congratulations that, by his return, the House 
would have the benefit of his great intelligence and 
great practical experience.' By the occupants of the 
Treasury Bench, and especially by Lord John Russell, 
Prime Minister, Sir Charles Wood (Lord Halifax), 
Chancellor of the Exchequer (the frequent contests 
between whom and Mr. Herries T^/ere always charac- 
terised by the utmost courtesy), and Mr. Labouchere 
(the late Lord Taunton), he was invariably treated, in 
spite of strong opposition, not only with due civility, 
but with marked respect. 

The monetary disasters of the autumn of 1847, and 
the extra-legal course taken by the Government in con- 
sequence of them, made the meeting of the new Parlia- 
ment in November necessary, and required its immediate 
attention. The subject was one in which Mr. Herries 
took great interest. He believed that the crisis had 
been intensified, if not caused, by the restrictions im- 
posed upon the Bank by the Act of 1844, from the 
operation of which he had always feared that dan- 
gerous embarrassment would arise. He predicted its 
recurrence, and he could not be persuaded that a law was 
a good one which involved the necessity of its own perio- 
dical violation by the assumption of a ' dispensing power ' 
on the part of the Crown. He took an early opportu- 
nity of expressing his views in a debate on the Chan- 
cellor of the Exchequer's motion for a committee to 
inquire into the causes of the recent commercial dis- 
tress. In doing so he said that ' he was satisfied that the 
day would come when Parliament would again be called 
upon to interfere.' He did not live to see the fulfilment 



232 LOED JOHN RUSSELL. ch. xi. 

of his propliecy ten years afterwards, in 1857, and 
again, with another interval of nine years, in 1866. 

Lord John Russell, who replied particularly to Mr. 
Herries's speech, observing that in the course of the 
discussion some novel opinions had been thrown out, 
and there had been a great deal of discursive disquisi- 
tion, said : ' I am h;ippy to find, therefore, that in fol- 
lowing the right honourable gentleman, I follow one 
who has kept himself within the limits of that which is 
properly the subject of debate, and who has given 
opinions which, whether I agree with them or not, at 
any rate must be listened to with the greatest respect, 
coming as they do from a person of his mfluence, his 
experience, and his knowledge both of the financial and 
the constitutional history of the country.' The person 
alluded to was reluctant to allow his name to be placed 
on the list of the committee, but consented to do so in 
compliance with the desire strongly manifested by the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, who said that it would be 
a great public disadvar tage if he should decline to serve 
on it. Soon after the Christmas holidays Mr. Herries 
brought the subject forward again by moving two reso- 
lutions, the first of which, approving the recommenda- 
tion given by the Government to the Bank, was adopted, 
but the second, declarmg the expediency of a suspension 
of the restrictions imposed by the Acts of 1844 and 
1845, was rejected by a majority of 41. The motion 
came too late. The October panic had passed away. 
Consols were rising, and the pressure, no longer felt, 
was almost forgotten. 

The repeal of the Navigation laws proposed for tlie 



cu. xr. NAVIGATION LAW. 233 

first time by the Government in 1848, and effected in 
1849, was the most important question dealt with by 
the House of Commons during those sessions, or indeed 
during the whole existence of that Parliament. ' The 
resistance,' says Lord George Bentinck's illustrious 
biographer, ' was led with great ability by Mr. Herries, 
and the whole party put forward their utmost strength 
to support him.' In a fan- and temperate spirit, as some 
of its best advocates admitted, he opposed the measure 
of the Government, believmg that the abrogation of the 
' ]\rarifcime Charter ' would expose to hazard that naval 
preponderance which it had been designed to secure, 
and to the maintenance of which, looking at the ques- 
tion from the point of view of national greatness, he 
made all other. considerations entirely subordinate. But 
although he thought that it was rash to abolish the 
code which, modified mdeed in some of its parts, had 
subsisted for two centuries, he never went to the ex- 
tieme length of saying that no relaxation in any of its 
details ought ever to be allowed. He professed his 
readiness to assent, as he had done more than twenty 
years before, to such alterations as a change of circum- 
stances might render necessary. His opinions were 
expressed in the resolution which, in concert with his 
friends, he moved on the 20th of May, 1848 : ' That it 
is essential to the national interests of this country to 
maintain the fundamental principles of the existing 
Navigation laws, subject to such modifications as may be 
best calculated to obviate any proved inconvenience 
to the commerce of the United Kingdom and its de- 
pendencies, without danger to our national strength.' 



234 NAVIGATION LAW. ch. xi. 

What he meant when he spoke of the ' fundamental 
principles of the existing Navigation laws,' he explained 
by quoting the words of Mr. Huskisson : ' The funda- 
mental principle of the Navigation laws is that of giving 
by law in our foreign trade a preference to British ship- 
ping and British seamen, so far as we can do so con- 
sistently with our engagements and relations with other 
countries, and of confining our domestic trade, our 
coasting and colonial trade, as well as our fisheries, 
exclusively to ourselves.' ... To these principles 
Mr. Huskisson firmly adhered. The legislative changes 
effected under his auspices, and in which Mr. Herries, . 
then Secretary to the Treasury, was largely a collabo- 
rator, were no deviation from them. It was contended, 
with no little inconsistency, by many of those who at 
the same time most vehemently demanded the total re- 
peal of the Navigation law, denouncing its artificial 
restrictions as injurious to commerce, to the consumer, 
and to the shipping interest itself, that hardly anything 
in reality i-emained of the detested statute. With vary- 
ing metaphor it was said that the substance having 
been taken away by the legislation of Wallace and Hus- 
kisson, and by the reciprocity treaties, nothing was left 
but a shred, a rag, a shadow, the- bark of the tree with- 
out its trunk, and from this strange fallacy was drawn, 
especially by Sir Robert Peel, an argumentum.ad hominem, 
as illegitimate as such an argument commonly is, against 
Mr. Herries, who was twitted with his useless defence of 
the mere semblance of a protection, which he himself had 
helped to destroy. But such reasonings, however smart 
they may have appeared in debate, Avill not bear the 



CJT. xr. NAVIGATION LAW. 235 

test of candid examination. The so-called Reciprocity 
Acts of 1823 and 1824, and the treaties founded upon 
them, did not in fact touch the Navigation Act in 
the slightest degree. They dealt simply with the 
equalization of discriminating duties on ships and on ' 
the goods carried in them — charges not imposed by 
the Navigation Act, and which were not its necessary 
consequence. The amended Navigation Acts of 1822 
and 1825 removed several of the former restrictions on 
the colonial trade, the long voyage trade, and the 
European carrying trade, some of which had no longer 
any meaning or importance, and others had been ren- 
dered inapplicable by altered political circumstances. 
One change indeed, by which the interdiction of im- 
portations of certain commodities from the Netherlands 
or Germany, was taken off, was nothing but a return 
to the Act of 1660. But after all these concessions to 
foreign navigation, the main provisions of the law were 
sti!l in many respects intact. A Prussian vessel was 
enabled to carry Prussian produce from a Prussian 
port to certain ports in the British West Indies, and 
bring home colonial produce. But it could not carry 
a cargo of British goods from London to Jamaica, or a 
cargo of sugar from Trinidad to Liverpool. A Dutch 
ship might bring over to England from Amsterdam 
French wine previously imported into Holland, but not 
claret from Bordeaux, port wine from Oporto, or oranges 
from Palermo. The transformation of colonies into 
independent States required the adoption of new rules 
for the trade with the American Continent, but the old 
ones to a great extent subsisted for the import trade 



236 NAYIOATICW LAW. ch. xi. 

with Asia and Africa, wliich, for all practical purposes, 
was still a British monopoly, being confined to British 
shijDs or those of the country of origin and export. 
How then could it be pretended that the Navigation 
Act was reduced to a mere shadow ? To the reductio ad 
ahsurdum Mr. Herries replied by quoting Mr. Labou- 
chere's words on introducing his bill in 1849 : — ' The 
changes I am about to recommend are of a far more 
important and extensive description than any previously 
proposed to Parliament. ... I do not disguise from 
myself that these alterations are of a very grave and 
serious character.' . . . 

Although the result could not have been doubtful, 
the contest was vigorously sustained in the House of 
Commons, where Mr. Herries's motions were power- 
fully supported by Lord George Bentinck, Mr. Disraeli, 
Lord Granby, Mr. Walpole, and other speakers who 
were not afraid to fight a losing battle. In the House 
of Lords the Navigation law had no more eloquent de- 
fender than Lord Brougham. He often took counsel on 
this subject with Mr. Herries, at whose house he became 
a frequent visitor, and for whom he professed particular 
esteem ; his sentiments, which at an earlier period had 
been those of inveterate hostility,^ having undergone an 
entire change. 

^ It was displayed both iu and out of Parliament. Many bitter attaoka 
in newspaper articles and reviews were known, or believed, to have pro- 
ceeded from Brougham's pen. A passage iu a letter written by him to Sir 
Robert Wilson in 1827 shows his ajnmus. ' I fear such appointments aa 
that ardent ultra [this Whig notion at that time was entirely erroneous] 
and concealed malignant Herries augur no great good to the godly.' The 
godly were of course the Whigs. — Narrcitice of the Formation of Vanning i 
AdminisLratinn, hj General Sir Robert Wilson. Edited by the Rev. Herbert 
Randolph. 1872. 



en. XI. EFFECTS OF UEPEAL. 237 

It must be conceded tlicit the apprehensions of those 
who, adhering to the policy upheld by a long line of 
Eno-lish statesmen, from Cromwell to Huskisson, and 
advocated by the greatest of English econom'sts, de- 
precated the abrogation of the law, famous in the history 
of England and of the world, ' for the encouragement 
of British Shipping and Navigation,' have not been 
reahzed, although it may be doubted whether, in all 
respects, their predictions have been proved to be erro- 
neous by results. But their successful adversaries cannot 
justly refuse to admit that the maritime and commer- 
cial conditions of every region of the globe which ex- 
isted prior to the year 1850, and in view of which the 
question was discussed, have since that time been wholly 
changed by the operation of causes not then foreseen. 
The requirements both of peaceful trade and of naval 
warfare at the present day are far removed from those 
of the year 1848. 

All the calculations of the comparative cost of build- 
ing and navigating British and foreign ships which 
were made at a tjme when the niimber of steam vessels 
was relatively insignificant, and wood was still the 
material principally employed, have been upset by the 
enormous increase of steam navigation, and of the use 
of iron in the construction of ships ; in both which 
respects our ability to defy foreign competition needs 
no demonstration. 

The prodigious augmentation of traffic of all kinds 
between all countries, far exceeding that which previous 
experience could have warranted anyone in reckoning 
upon, has demanded a corresponding addition to the 
formerly available means of transport. 



238 NEW CONDITIONS OF TEADE, 



CH. XI. 



The unexpected access of Europeans to Japan ; 
the extension of trade with China brought about by 
successful war ; the creation of new centres of commer- 
cial activity consequent upon the gold discoveries of 
California and Australia ; the opening of the Suez Canal 
by French enterprise in spite of the senseless opposition 
of Lord Palmerston to an undertaking beneficial to the 
world in general, but far more so to England in par- 
ticular, of the impotent ill-will of British diplomacy, 
and of the prejudices instilled into the mind of the 
British public, led by persistent invective and insinua- 
tion to look upon the great work now placed in the 
category of ' British interests ' of the first magnitude, 
as an engine malignantly designed for the destruction 
of the British Empire, and upon its ingenious and 
courageous promoter, as a deadly enemy bent on the 
ruin of all that was most sacred to a Briton : these 
extraordinary events, not even remotely referable to 
free trade in general, or to free trade in shipping, speci- 
fically, have given such an impulse to steam navigation 
on the largest scale as no man could have contemplated 
in 1848. 

Another revolution not then to be imagined was 
the sudden displacement of American by British ship- 
ping : the result, not of fair competition in the ordinary 
course of trade, but of civil war, and of depredations 
exercised by ' volunteer cruisers ' fitted out through the 
pernicious activity of English speculators. 

In looking at comparative statistics of British 
navigation, it is well to remember that the conditions 
required, formerly and now, to constitute a British 



CH. XI. WHAT IS A BRITISH SHIP? 239 

vessel are not the same. What was legally and 
technically described as a British ship under the old 
Navigation law, was such in reality. It was a vessel 
built in the United Kingdom or in some British depen- 
dency, owned by a British subject, navigated by a 
British master, and manned by a crew of which at least 
three-fourths were also British subjects. It is now pos- 
sible for a ship to have a British register, and to be 
entitled to sail under British colours, which has been 
built in Norway, is owned by a Company the whole of 
whose capital belongs to Americans, commanded by a 
Dutchman, and manned with a ' scratch crew ' of miir- 
derous mutineers of no known nationality, not one of 
whom speaks or understands the English tongue, or 
cares in the least for the parallelogram of red bunting 
with a particoloured corner, called the British ensign, 
which, manufactured perchance at Ghent, may have 
been purchased by a German bagman in a slop-shop at 
Antwerp. What is there British, except its register, 
about such a ship? Even the belaying pins with which, 
somewhere in the South Sea, the mate kills the captain, 
the boatswain the mate, the cook the boatswain, and 
the carpenter the cook, are probably not British made ; 
nor the knives with which, after scuttling the so-called 
British ship, the piratical crew cut each other's throats ; 
leaving the last survivor in possession of the only 
British articles on board — a bottle of whisky and a box 
of biscuits. 

As to the genuine British seaman of the mercantile 
marine, some high naval authorities have held the 
opinion that his average quality has deteriorated since 



240 HERRIES AGAINST CCBDEN. ch. xi. 

the adoption of the modern system. But this is a 
consideration which does not affect the question of cheap 
conveyance, and consequently of cheap consumption, 
long since recognized as the primary object of human 
existence. 

On Mr. Cobden's irrational motion (February 26, 
1849) for a reduction of expenditure by ten millions in 
order to bring it down to the standard of the estimates of 
1835, without regard to all the changes which fourteen 
years had brought about in modes of warfare, in arms, 
in the numerical strength of continental armies, and in 
the naval and military preparations of foreign Powers, 
Mr. Herxies, supporting the Government, animadverted 
severely, but justly, upon the customary misrepresenta- 
tions of the financial and economical agitators. ' The 
Right Honourable gentleman, the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer,' he said, ' had complimented the honourable 
member for the West Riding on the moderation and 
forbearance which had marked his observations. In 
that compliment he (Mr. Herries) could not join ; for 
although the tone and language of the honourable 
member were moderate and sufficiently tempered to 
suit the atmosphere of that House, he (Mr. Herries) 
could not forget that the speech of the honourable 
member was, after all, but a repetition of that which 
had been ringing in the public ear for the last six 
months from Liverpool, from Manchester, and every 
other scene of agitation, where the same things had been 
said though not exactly in the same terms. . . . The 
honourable meraljer was violent in one place, and 
decorous in another ; but if the honourable gentleman 



CH. XI. EXPENDITUEE OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, 241 

was to have the privilege of using inflammatory and 
irritating language in one place, and sober and discreet 
language in another, he (Mr. Herries) would much 
prefer that he should give way to his violence and 
invective in that House, and reserve his decorous 
argumentation for those places where his audiences 
consisted of multitudes composed of more inflammable 
materials. . . . The honourable member had instituted 
a comparison between the expenditure of the Govern- 
ments of England and France. He (Mr. Herries) being 
thus provoked to follow the honourable gentleman in 
that contrast, was compelled to declare that he did not 
think he had studied that subject quite well enough to 
warrant him in coming, as he had done, to a conclusion 
in respect to the financial administration of the two 
nations unfavourable to that of England. ... If they 
reviewed the financial progress of the English and 
French nations for the last twenty-eight years, they 
would see much more cause for congratulation than for 
blame or regret, in the comparative good management of 
our own Government, under the sanction of Parliament, 
when placed in contradistinction with that of France.' 
. . . He then gave a succinct statement of the expen- 
diture of each country from 1820 to 1848 inclusive, 
showing, as the result of the comparison, that ' whilst in 
England they commenced in 1820 with 56,150,000/., 
and ended in 1848 with 55,596,000Z. ; in France 
they commenced with 35,000,000/., and ended with 
72,000,000Z. From 1824 the average amoimt was 
about 38,000,000/. until the year 1830. In that year 
a great change occurred. There was a revolution. 

VOL. II. R 



242 PEASANT PROPRIETORS AND PEACE. 



OH. XI, 



Revolutions were expensive things — a fact which it 
would well become those who were disposed to promote 
them to bear in mind. In 1830 an enormous increase 
of expenditure was incurred for the revolution itself, 
whereby the amount of the Budget of 1831 was swelled 
to the sum of 60,000,000?. ... It was well deserving 
the attention of the House that the rapid expansion of 
public expenditure in France seemed to keep pace 
with the progressive infusion of more popular elements 
into her Government and Constitution ; and this re- 
markable circumstance suggested an observation on a 
doctrine which had been propounded to the good people 
of Manchester by the member for the West Riding, the 
eiFect of which was that the minute and progressive 
subdivision of property which prevailed in France, 
under the laws of that country, was an admirable 
safeguard against a propensity to war, by its tendency 
to arrest the expenditure by which war was always 
accompanied. . . . He (Mr. Herries) had been greatly 
surprised by the maintenance of such a doctrine in the 
face of history and experience. Why, let the honourable 
member but look at those papers to which he had just 
been referring, and then tell him what he meant by 
stating that this subdivision of property must have the 
effect of preventing war, because it prevented expen- 
diture. Did he not know that this very subdivision of 
property and all this expanding expenditure had been 
going on together in France,* and that a great part of 

* He might ha-ye added that the peasant proprietors of France were the 
mainstay of Bonapartism and Sacerdotalism. But he could not have 
predicted that a Second Em ii'e, created and supported by allied pea- 



on. XI. COST OF DEMOCKAOY. 243 

that expenditure was for the Algerine war — a war 
wMch had been forced upon the Government by the 
pressure from without ? . . . Let the honourable 
member then, whenever he again addressed the people 
of Manchester on the subject of agitating for a re- 
duction of the national expenditure, and compared 
democratic with monarchical institutions — let bim — if 
he chose to give the preference to democracy, tell his 
audiences that all history taught that if they must needs 
have republics and democracies in preference to such a 
monarchy as that under which we live, they must be 
well prepared to put their hands deep into their pockets 
to pay for the change. . . . The honourable member told 
the House of things past and things to come, and of his 
intense desire for the reduction of expenditure. In that 
he was not singular. Why, so was he (Mr. Herries) also 
for reduction. He was ready to go along with the 
honourable member if he would only go at a different 
pace. . . . With agitators he was not prepared to go — 
with an agitation that was based on no solid foundation 
he could not co-operate — an agitation, too, that was con- 
ducted iu a spirit of hostility and hatred against particu- 
lar classes. . . He would tell the honourable gentlemen 

sant proprietors and priests, would bring ruin upon France by a war of 
aggression. 

It might also have been suggested to Mr. Oobden as a matter for his 
consideration, whether the Corn Laws could have been repealed without 
conflict between town and country, if in 1846 the whole soil of the United 
Kingdom had been owned by the tillers thereof, numbering with their 
families many millions directly interested in the maintenance of high prices 
for agricultural produce, their sole means of subsistence ; and whether the 
minute subdivision of property which he desired would not inevitably be 
followed by a demand on the part of those mOlions for a return to agricul- 
tural protection, 

K 2 



244 PROPOSED REDUCTION OF SALARIES. ch. xi, 

opposite tliat they had no right to impute to him or to his 
friends any indisposition to retrenchment and economy. 
They were prepared to promote both to the utmost.' 

The denial of the dogma that infinite subdivision of 
land among little cultivators is the true remedy for all 
maladies of the body politic was received with great 
indignation. Mr. Herries was told that he was in 
favour of an increase of pauperism for the better preser- 
vation of peace, because he doubted the truth of the 
doctrine laid down by Mr. Cobden, and interpreted by 
another speaker, ' that the more property was divided 
in proportion to the population, as in France, the less 
danger was there of their institutions being disturbed.' 
This was said just one year after the revolution 
of February 1848, followed by months of ruinous 
anarchy, whole the 'institutions' and society of Eng- 
land, where property was not ' divided as in France,' 
remained unshaken. But concerning 'peasant pro- 
prietors ' anything may be affirmed. 

In spite of his constant desire to defer to the 
opinions of his friends in opposition, Mr. Herries was 
not always able to agree with them. On one occasion, 
indeed, he felt compelled to express his dissent from 
a motion made by Mr. Henley, with the concurrence of 
many of the protectionist party, for a general reduction 
by ten per cent, of the salaries of civU servants, from 
the highest to the lowest, on the ground of an alleged 
decrease of the cost of living. Being convinced that such 
a diminution of their scanty and well-earned incomes 
would inflict great suffering upon an immense number 



CH. xr. DEEBY CABINET. 245 

of meritorious functionaries, he voted with the Govern- 
ment against the proposal. In the course of his speech 
he pointed out the considerable reductions successively 
effected siace 1815 — the ratio of diminution having been 
much greater in salaries than in the number of officials. 
He also observed that when the price of wheat rose 
from 39s. in 1835 to 70s. in 1839, there was no pro- 
position for an increase of salaries, and that their regula- 
tion by the price of corn, with a necessary alteration 
almost year by year — a system of com salaries instead 
of corn rents — would be most detrimental to poor clerks 
with 90^. a year or less, who could not reduce their 
fixed charges for rent, insurance, and the like. 

It is needless to follow the vicissitudes of the ses- 
sions of 1850 and 1851, the history of which is written 
in the Book of Hansard. 

When Lord Palmerston's swift vengeance drove his 
late colleagues out of office in 1852, and Lord Derby 
was forced under adverse circumstances to undertake 
the formation of a new Cabinet, Mr. Herries accepted 
the post in it of President of the Board of Control. It 
was a very great disappointment to him that the place 
in the Cabinet which he was most qualified to fill — the 
Chancellorship of the Exchequer — could not be assigned 
to him. Lord Derby explained that there were special 
reasons which compelled him to unite the position of 
leader of the House of Commons with the office of 
Chancellor of the Exchequer in the present instance, 
and that this' had been already arranged with Mr. Dis- 
raeli. But with that exception, and one or two others, 
he offered him his choice. So strongly did Mr. Herries 



246 



BOARD OF CONTROL. 



feel upon the subject of the Exchequer, that he begged 
for a short time — though there was but little to spare- 
in order to consider what course he should pursue; and 
in the same afternoon he wrote to Lord Derby (whose 
great kindness, and even anxiety to satisfy him, he 
always acknowledged), offering to support the Govern- 
ment without office, or, if Lord Derby continued to 
think, as he had said in their interview, that it was 
of importance to the Government that he should be a 
member of it, he suggested that he might hold some 
honorary office without any serious duties attached 
to it. 

In truth he felt that, at his time of life, and in his 
state of health, he could not undertake the administra- 
tion of a department involving much labour, and that 
his intimate knowledge of our financial system, even in 
its minutest details, would enable him to deal with the 
Exchequer with the greatest ease. 

But Lord Derby could not consent to either of these 
proposals, and, finally, it was left to Mr. Herries to 
decide between the Colonial office, the Board of Control 
(India Office), and the Board of Trade. He selected 
the India Office, being averse from the labour which he 
believed the Colonies would entail upon him.^ 

^ There is mucli confidential correspondence tetweeen Mr. Herries and 
Lord Derby, as well as other political personages, during the period from 
1848 to 1853. It is of course too recent for publication ; but the present 
Editor may, without indiscretion, remark that if it could be produced it 
would afford indisputable proof of the very high estimation in which Mr, 
Herries was held. 



CH. xu. WORK AT THE INDIA OFFICE. 247 



CHAPTER XII. 

Work at tlie India Office — Correspondence on Burmese War, &c. — Exercise 
of patronage — Letters to Oroker and others — Recognition of French 
Empire — Resignation of Derby Cabinet — Mr. Herries retires from Parlia- 
ment — Letter from Brougham — Opinions of eminent public men — Death 
— Liberal testimony — General view of Mr. Herries's political principles 
and practice — Conclusion. 

He soon perceived that age had weakened the capacity 
for continuous work which at an earlier period of his 
life had been immense, and some premonitory attacks, 
temporarily disabling him, warned him that he was en- 
deavouring to do more than his strength would allow. 
If the Cabinet had appeared to be firmly established he 
would have sought rest in retirement, but, in the pre- 
carious state of its existence, a sense of duty to his 
colleagues restrained him from abandoning the post he 
had been persuaded to assume. His feeling of weariness 
is expressed in a letter to a political friend of former 
days : — ' I rejoice to observe that you have lost none of 
your warmth of attachment to the old school of politics 
in which you and I were fellow-labourers " a long time 
ago!'' But a sad change has come over the spirit of 
that dream. You are well out of the toU and turmoil 
of a struggle with the augmented and augmenting 
powers of Radicalism. I heartily wish I were in so 
quiet a position as you are. The management of my 
immense oifice is a hard task at my time of life, and 



248 CORRESPONDENCE. ch. xit. 

nothing but a conscientious devotion to a good cause 
would have induced me to undertake it. . . .' 

But there is certainly no want of vigour or care 
perceptible in his correspondence, official or private. 

The second Burmese War, the intelligence of the 
commencement of which reached England soon after 
the installation of the new Ministry, and the Par- 
liamentary inquiry into the system of government in 
India previous to the expiration of the Company's 
charter, were the principal objects calling for the atten- 
tion of the Indian Department during Mr. Herries's 
short administration of it. To other questions of per- 
manent importance he devoted himself with the greatest 
solicitude. In particular, he earnestly pressed forward 
the construction of railways, and promoted the plans 
for the establishment of telegraphic communication, the 
honour of devising which belongs to Dr. O'Shaugh- 
nessy. 

The following extracts from private letters,^ written 
by Mr. Herries at this time show his views on these 
subjects, and his mode of treating them. 

To the Duke of Wellington, March 4, 1852. 

' In obedience to your wish expressed to me at the 
Levee, I send you the draft of the letter prepared by 
Lord Ellenborough in 1829 after consulting you on 
the possible renewal of the Burmese war, together with 
Lord EUenborough's note suggesting a reference to 
it. . . .' 

' The publication of the present Memoir has been retarded by the acci- 
dental discovery of a large volume containing this correspondence. 



CH. XII. BURMESE WAR. 249 

To the Earl of Ellenhorough. 
March 4. — ' I am much obliged to you for your 
letter. I saw the Duke at the Levee, and I reminded 
him of his suggestions to you on the subject of a pos- 
sible renewal of a Burmese War in 1829. He desired 
to have an opportunity of reading the draft of your 
despatch. I have accordingly sent it to him. I am 
anxiously waiting for the mail from India. As there is 
every disposition on the part of the Indian Government 
to avoid war, I am in hopes that nothing permanently 
mischievous may arise from the reported skirmish oflF 
Rangoon,' 

To the Marquis of Dalhousie. 

March 8. — ' Your letter, addressed to Lord Brough- 
ton, dated January 23, has been placed by him in my 
hands, and affords me the first opportunity of opening a 
private and confidential correspondence with you, in 
my present official position, of which I avail myself 
with much pleasure. ... 

' . . . Although I entertain a strong expectation that 
under your prudent management the misfortune of a 
war with Ava will be avoided, I think it may be useful 
and interesting to you to refer to a despatch touching 
the possible danger of the renewal of a Burmese war, 
which you wiU. find in your archives under date of Sep- 
tember 29, 1829. It was sent out by Lord EUenborough 
after a communication with the Duke of Wellington, 
from whom I have just received the note enclosed, after 
sending it to him for perusal. . . .' 



250 BUKMESE WAR. 



CH. Sir. 



April 8. — ' Your letters by the last mail have been 
of great interest, and we await with much solicitude the 
result of your prompt and decisive measures for bring- 
ing the Burmese to reason. I do not in the least degree 
doubt the correctness of your conclusion, that nothing 
short of vigorous compulsion would produce that 
effect. . . . 

' . . . With more discretion on the side of the naval 
negotiators, and a strict compliance with your instruc- 
tions, the affair might perhaps have been terminated 
without having recourse to the strong measures which 
you are now forced to adopt. . . . 

' I sincerely hope that you will not find it incon- 
venient, either to your health or to your private affairs, 
to accede to the request which Lord Derby has made to 
you, and which I also subsequently addressed to you 
through the Secret Committee (very much to the satis- 
faction of the Chairs), that you would consent to remain 
another year in the discharge of your high and most 
important functions. Under any circumstances a com- 
pliance with the request would have been essentially 
advantageous to the public service. The recent events 
and present prospect of affairs La India, greatly add to 
the importance of it. . . .' 

May 24. — ' Your letters by the last mail have put us 
in possession of all your proceedings and views up to 
the starting of the expedition against Rangoon. They 
afford no ground for hope that any answer would be 
received from Ava such as might authorise General 
Grodwin to bring matters to a peaceful conclusion with- 
out striking a blow. I therefore expect to learn by the 



CH. xn. BURMESE WAE. 251 

next arrival of tlie mail that Rangoon has fallen and 
Martaban also. The iastructions which you have given 
to the General are in every respect approved of by 
Lord Derby and the whole of the Government here, 
of which I have the satisfaction of conveying to you an 
assurance by my secret despatch of this date.' 

June 7. — ' Your despatches of the 22nd and your 
private letter of the 24th, have brought us good tidings, 
and afforded much gratification to all of us. I heartily 
congratulate you on the complete success of an expe- 
dition prepared so immediately under your personal 
superintendence to carry out your own policy, in which 
the whole of the Government at home have unreservedly 
concurred, as I have already assured you. Although 
you were not sanguine at the date of your letter in the 
hope that the King of Ava might be wise enough to 
profit by the severe lesson which you have given him, 
I must confess that I am not without the belief and ex- 
pectation that such a blow so promptly and so vigor- 
ously administered may have the effect of subduing 
even Burmese pride, and thereby lead to a speedy con- 
clusion of the war. Heaven grant it may be so. 

' The state of the health of the army is the only 
subject of anxiety to us. It does not appear from any 
accounts we possess whether the cholera, of which some 
cases had occurred, was of Rangoon origin, or carried 
with them by the troops from Madras or Calcutta. 
We are assured here by persons assuming to have 
knowledge by experience of the locality, that Rangoon 
is not invariably an unhealthy place. The reminis- 



252 ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH. BURMESE WAR. ch. xii, 

cences of our last military occupation of it are not 
decisive upon that point. In that instance there was 
a neglect of all those precautions and provisions for the 
health and comfort of the men which in this case you 
have so carefully attended to. . . . 

' Our Committee, on the renewal of the " East 
Indian Territories " Act proceeds quietly and satis- 
factorily. There is a general inclination towards a 
maintenance of the present system with perhaps some — 
not very important — modifications. 

' I took the liberty of communicating part of j^^our 
letter to me to the Queen.' 

June 8. — ' I will attend immediately and with much 
interest to your despatches by the last mail on the 
subject of the electric telegraph. The papers are 
this day brought under my consideration. You may 
depend upon my warm support in the prosecution of 
your views, and on my giving all possible attention to 
Dr. O'Shaughnessy when he arrives. It is a matter of 
immense importance to the Grovernment of India.' 

June 23. — ' It affords me much pleasure to be able 
to relieve your mind of one subject of solicitude, which 
appears (by your last letter of May 3) to occupy it. 
You were then under the impression that the Burmese 
War is unpopular here. But ... I am able confi- 
dently to assure you that war with Ava stands in no 
disfavour in the public mind ; whUe, on the contrary, 
there certainly does prevail a very general admiration 
of the manner in which you have commenced and 



CH. XII. SOLDIERS AND SAILORS APPLAUDED, 253 

hitherto conducted it. Your earnest endeavours to 
avoid it are duly appreciated. We have published in 
an Extraordinary Gazette the documents relating to 
the captm"e of Rangoon and Martaban, and I trust that 
in the forthcoming Queen's Speech notice wUl be taken 
in becoming terms of approbation of your own share of 
these important achievements, as well as of the valour 
and discipline of the troops engaged in them. They 
are, indeed, beyond all praise, considering the diffi- 
culties of the climate with which these brave feUows 
had to contend. 

' The good health of the army and the favourable 
condition of the wounded are subjects of much gratifi- 
cation to all of us. . . .' 

With reference to the two last letters. Lord Dal- 
housie wrote on August 7 : — ' You have gratified me 
by the kind terms in which you have disabused my 
mind of the belief that this war is obnoxious in England. 
I do not affect to be insensible to any approbation 
which may be felt of my own share in the matter, or to 
be by any means indififerent to the expression of it, but 
I can also most unaffectedly declare that my chief care 
is that her Majesty's Government should, at the fitting 
time, give full praise and reward to the soldiers and 
sailors who have done their work so well. They are 
noble feUows. By my Hfe they are noble fellows ! 

' Your very prompt and complete adoption of all 
our proposals regarding the electric telegraph has been 
most gratifying to us here. Be assured it is a work 
whose importance and value to this country cannot be 
over-estimated.' . . . 



254 BURMESE WAR. ch. xii. 

To the Marquis of Dalhousie. 

July 24. — ' Your letters of June 2 have brought to 
us the satisfactory intelligence of the capture of Bassein. 

' The movement upon that place was well planned 
and happily executed. 

' The occupation of Bassein and the consequent 
command of the branch of the river on which it is 
situated, is an important addition to the possession of 
Rangoon and Martaban. 

' General Godwin's opinion, confirmed by your own, 
on the impolicy of a forward movement under present 
circumstances is entirely acquiesced in here. I have 
submitted the papers to the Duke of Wellington. It is 
a remarkable circumstance that you should remain so 
entirely uninformed of the disposition or condition of 
the Court of Ava. There must be some special cause 
for the absence of information fi-om thence. I am 
inclined to impute it to some convulsion in that Go- 
vernment, and I am not without hope that we may reap 
the benefit of their distracted councils in a concession 
which may relieve us from the necessity of a march 
upon Ava. 

' Happen what may, I have no doubt but that you 
will make the Burmese pay our expenses. In the 
present state of our Indian finances, we can ill aff"ord 
to incur extra charges for punishing their misconduct. 
I am aware of your anxious attention to the subject of 
the income and expenditure of India, and I trust you 
will permit me, in the course of the present recess, to 
open an unreserved correspondence with you on that 



CH. XII. TELEGRAPH AND RAILWAYS. 255 

important topic. ... I have seen Dr. O'Shaughnessy, 
and am much pleased with him. I will do everything 
in my power to forward his busiaess here, and to pro- 
mote your intentions with respect to the electric tele- 
graph system in India. We are doing what we can in 
pushing on the construction of your railways. I could 
not agree with the Directors on the question whether 
the Madras Railway should be executed by the East 
India Company itself, or by contract, as in the case of 
the others now in progress. The great advantage of 
inducing the investment of British capital, and the 
application of British enterprise to Indian improve- 
ments, taken in conjunction with the apparently suc- 
cessful progress (hitherto) of the contract system in 
the construction of the Bombay and Bengal railways, 
induced me to overrule the resolution of the Court of 
Directors in favour of the other course. . . . 

' You will observe in our newspapers that great 
havoc has been made in the ranks of the late Parliament 
by the elections now nearly brought to a close. There 
are few of us who have not lost personal friends in the 
general slaughter ; and independently of all political 
bias there are some whose absence from Parhament I 
shall sincerely deplore.' 

August 24. — ' I have received your private letter of 
3rd July. If you wrote to me by the preceding mail 
(which we fear is lost), I am without hope of ever 
seeing your letter. It is not in my power to write to 
you on this occasion as fully as I should have wished 
... by the next mail you may confidently expect 
a fiiU and explicit communication of the views and 



256 PEGU. LORD FALKLAND. ch. xri. 

decision of the Government upon the several alterna- 
tives set forth ia your minute of the 30th of June,^ 
concerning the ulterior measures to be pursued in the 
settlement of the Burmese question. . . .' 

To the Duke of Wellington. 

September 2. — ' Your paper of suggestions on the 
annexation of Pegu has been acted upon. I have 
drawn the instructions to the Governor-General accord- 
ingly, in concert with Lord Derby, and they are now 
with the Queen for approval. I thought it right to 
inform her Majesty that your advice had been taken by 
Lord Derby upon the subject.' 

To Viscount Falkland? 

September 6. — ' .... You may be assured that 
there is, and always will be, a ready disposition on my 
part, and on that of the other members of H.M. Go- 
vernment, to repel unjust or injurious attacks upon 
the public servants abroad, as a duty to them upon 
general public grounds, independently even of the 
personal respect which they entertain for your Lord- 
ship and others who like you are discharging important 
duties in distant lands. ... In a former letter to you 
I have adverted in just terms of approbation to the 
admirable celerity with which the orders of Lord 
Dalhousie were executed at Bombay in the preparation 
of the Naval Force required from thence for the 
expedition to Rangoon. The subsequent conduct of 
the Indian steamers in the Rivers of Pegu has been 

* Papers presented to Parliament March 15, 1853, p. 37. 
^ Governor of Bombay. 



CH. xii. LORD DALHOUSIE'S INSTRUCTIONS. 257 

sufficient, I trust, to dispel all prejudices wliicli may 
have existed against your naval establishment. 

' I have read with attention and interest your 
remarks upon the financial condition of your Lord- 
ship's Presidency. You are justly entitled to a full 
allowance for all the circumstances to which you advert, 
as necessary causes of the apparently unfavourable 
balance of the Income and Expenditure of Bombay. I 
am about to enter upon a full investigation of the 
financial condition of all the Presidencies, and you may 
be assured that the important facts to which you direct 
my attention wUl not be overlooked. . . .' 

To the Marquis of Dalhousie. 

September 7. — ' I have received your private letters 
of the 14— 15th June, and of the 14th July ; the earlier 
ones after the latter ; they were retarded by the failure 
of the Ajduha. 

' I wrote by the last mail to inform you that we 
had received your important minute of the 30th June. 
I regretted that I could not by the same opportunity 
send you the opinions of the Government upon it. The 
mail which brought it arrived later than usual, and my 
colleagues were so dispersed that I was unable to lay 
before the Queen the draft of the instructions which 
you so earnestly and so naturally requested to receive 
in the most explicit terms, in time for the outgoing 
mail. 

' Those instructions * will reach you when you 
receive this letter. The fullest consideration has been 

* September 6. Papers presented to Parliament March 15, 1853, p. 62. 
VOL. 11. S 



258 VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT. ch. xii. 

given to all the points adverted to in your Minute. 
Lord Derby tliought it right to take the Duke of 
Wellington into our councils. . . . You will observe 
how entirely all your measures are approved of, and 
how cordially all your motives are concurred in by the 
Government at home. The only point on which we 
somewhat diverge — not from any of your positive views 
— but from a suggestion connected with your fifth and 
last proposed alternative — is one upon which I trust 
that you will ultimately agree with us. 

' We see no practicable or safe termination of the 
warfare in which you are engaged with Burmah except 
by compelling the King of Ava to conclude it by a 
treaty such as may satisfy our interests and vindicate our 
honour, or by driving him from his capital and extin- 
guishing his rule. We have, therefore, not adopted the 
course, rather hinted than expressly proposed in your 
minute, of confining our military operations to the 
expulsion of the Burmese from Pegu and then leaving 
them to do the worst they can against us. 

' I see with satisfaction your determination to go 
yourself to Eangoon. Your presence cannot but have 
an excellent eflfect there. . . . On the whole we look 
forward with confident hope to the ultimate issue of 
the operations into which you have been compelled to 
enter. My own expectation is that they will put an 
end for ever to all danger and trouble on your eastern 
frontier, and open new and important sources of 
advantage to the commerce of this country and of 
India.' 



CH. xn. PUBLIC OPINION. 259 

To Sir J. W. Hogg, Bart. , Chairman of the Court of 
Directors. 

September 1. — . . . ' We differ very slightly from 
tlie Governor-General as to the modus terminandi of the 
war which he commenced with so much reluctance and 
has prosecuted with so much skill and vigour. What- 
ever may be thought of it by others, I look forward to 
great benefits to India to be ultimately derived from 
the ample punishment — perhaps the expulsion of the 
Burmese from our eastern frontier there. . . .' 

To the Marquis of Dalhousie. 

September 23. — 'I have received your letter of the 
7th August after your return from Rangoon. The 
information which it brings to us relating to the health 
and general good condition of the troops is so satisfac- 
tory that I have thought it right to communicate the 
contents of it to the Queen. I have also deemed it 
advisable to publish in the ordinary Gazette the de- 
spatches relating to the affair at Prome. It appears to be 
desirable, in order to prevent idle misrepresentation, to 
keep the public mind well informed upon the state of 
things in Burmah, and that it should be prepared by 
correct intelKgence for the results to which your 
measures are inevitably tending. A great change has 
already taken place in the general feeUng in this 
country respecting an extension of our Indian posses- 
sions eastward. Unless I am much mistaken there 
prevails at present a stronger disposition to deprecate 
too much forbearance and self-denial than to quarrel 

s 2 



260 THE DUKE'S ADVICE. HIS DEATH. 



CH, XII. 



with conquest and aggrandisement in the quarter into 
which you have so successfully carried an unavoidable 
war. There would, I am confident, be an accusatory 
outcry of disappointment if Pegu were not to be added 
to our eastern Empire. I hope you will find our 
instructions sent out by the last mail as expHcit as you 
could desire. The opinion of our great old Duke upon 
the subject, given at the request of Lord Derby, was 
perhaps the last advice of any poHtical importance 
which he was called upon to give. He was peremptory 
upon the point of compelling the Burmese to cede Pegu 
by a definitive treaty, or driving them out of Ava ; 
subject in the latter case to such further punishment as 
our sacrifices of men and money might justify and 
require. . . . 

' The public mind is at this moment wholly en- 
grossed here by the death of our great hero. Having 
been warmly attached to him myself during the last 
thirty years, I feel deeply and lament siucerely the loss 
of him. But his departure has been to me more a sub- 
ject of regret than of surprise. The last letter which I 
received from him (a few days only before his death) 
was scarcely legible or intelligible. 

' I have several important papers on your public 
affairs now under my consideration which I reserved on 
account of then- magnitude for a day of leisure. . . . 
One of our first acts when Parliament meets must be 
the reappointment of the Committee on the renewal of 
the Indian Grovernment Act. I do not anticipate any 
very serious opposition, but immense trouble, in obtain- 



CH. III. GENERAL GODWIN. LORD DALHOUSIE. 261 

ing the consent of Parliament to a contimiation of it. I 
trust that the late Government will concur with the 
present in the promotion of that object. We worked 
harmoniously in the Committee in the last session. . . .' 
October 8. — ' I have received your letter of August 
21. It is full of interest, and presents altogether a 
very satisfactory prospect of the successful termination 
of the warfare into which you have been dragged by the 
insolent and impracticable Burmese. . . . 

' I know nothing personally of General Godwin. 
But the good opinion which you have formed of him 
leads me to expect that once put in motion under your 
direction, and with the well-appointed army placed in 
his hands, his movements will be prompt and vigorous 
— such as appear to be especially required for the speedy 
success of the campaign which is before him, and the de- 
struction of the enemy with which he has to cope. . . .' 

To the Earl of Derby. 

October 5. — ' The mail from India, which reached 
me last night, brings intelligence which requires our 
immediate attention. 

' The Governor-General has, somewhat hastily, as 
it appears to me, adopted a course with respect to his 
operations in Burmah which is indeed conformable to 
the suggestions thrown out towards the conclusion of 
his elaborate Minute, but which we did not approve of. 
I now send you his letter to General Godwin, showing 
the determination to which he had come after fully 
considering all that had been submitted to him by the 



262 SUBMISSION OR SUBJUGATION NECESSARY, ch. xii. 

military and naval commanders at Rangoon — whether 
it was in conformity with their opinions he does not 
state. . . . 

' I also send you copies of his two latest private 
letters to me. In the last of these he does not enter into 
any explanation of his recent resolves. 

' The receipt of our instructions, which (in confor- 
mity with his own especial and repeated request) are 
most exphcit, on the question of pohcy upon which he 
applied for directions, and which he seems now to have 
decided for himself, will, I hope, have produced the 
effect of inducing him to alter his arrangements, if not 
his opinions, and to take vigorous steps for finishing 
the war which we have been forced to commence. 
There can be no satisfactory or final conclusion of the 
warfare in Burmah except by a treaty, or by the subju- 
gation of the enemy. The Duke's memorandum leaves 
no doubt upon that point. It is fortunate that Dal- 
housie has made full preparations for carrying the war 
beyond the point at which he appeared disposed to stop 
when he wrote to Godwin. It is also satisfactory to 
know that the enemy is miserably unprepared to meet 
the pressure of a vigorous prosecution of the war. . . . 
They can look to no quarter for aid. On the side of 
Munipore they are threatened with hostility ; on the 
other side the Shans give them no countenance. . . . 
Their chief reliance is upon some tradition of a lucky 
spot near Ava ! — a poor obstacle to oppose to the most 
efficient force and the best provided with all the require- 
ments of war that has, perhaps, ever been put into the 
field by us in India. 



CH. xir. LORD CHANCELLOR. MILITARY OPINIONS. 263 

' I am not sure that you have got a complete copy 
of these instructions [dated September 6]. I therefore 
send one. You will see that I incorporated in toto 
your paragraph. ... I sent a copy to the Chancellor. 
I enclose his note of approval in returning it. The 
dispersion of our Cabinet rendered it impracticable for 
me to send it round to all its members. There was more- 
over no time for it. I now enclose for your consideration 
a sketch for a secret despatch, which I should be glad to 
send out by the mail which departs on Friday next.' 

The Lord Chancellor's note above alluded to was as 
foUows : — 

' My dear Herries, — Although it is unimportant 
whether I approve or disapprove, yet I cannot withhold 
my approbation. It would be manifestly impoUtic to stop 
short in the career of conquest at the point which you 
desire to retain, and then remain on the defensive. I 
admire the tone and composition of the paper itself. 
Y«"rs, &c., < S^_ Leonards.' 

From General Godwin's ' Memorandum on the 
strength of the army I think requisite, to enable me to 
march into the heart of Burmah, and to subjugate it,' 
and from Sir John Littler' s Minute of November 4 
(both of which documents are published in the papers 
presented to ParHament), it is evident that the military 
authorities perceived no extraordinary difficulty in the 
execution of the instructions, which the Governor- 
General was determined not to carry out, for an advance 
upon Ava in the event of refusal or delay on the part of 
the King to treat for peace on the basis of the cession 
of Pegu. 



264 LORD DALHOUSIE'S PLANS: OVERWORK. 



CH. XII. 



Mr. Hemes to the Earl of Derby. 
October 22. — 'I have prepared a secret despatch 
[October 23 : published in Burmah Papers] to Lord 
Dalhousie, ia which I have noticed his change of plans, 
and the probability that he has been induced by the 
earlier advance of the force under Greneral Godwin to 
anticipate in his Minute of August 10 our final instruc- 
tions, which he justly observes he could not receive in 
time for a September movement of the troops. I have 
so worded it as to show that we adhere to those instruc- 
tions, and to intimate our belief that they will square 
very well with the onward movement which he proposes 
to make, although our view of the ulterior policy to be 
pursued differs from that which is laid down in his 
Minute.' 

To the Marquis of Dalhousie. 

October 25. — ' I heartily congratulate you on the 
state of your army. . . . Your letter of the 7th is re- 
plete with good tidings, except in one particular, in 
which I sincerely sympathise with you. Your labour 
is enormous, and I fear that in such a climate it may 
prove distressing to you. But are you not in some 
measure the cause of this pressure ? If I mistake 
not, your indefatigable industry has heaped upon your 
single shoulders much of a weight distributed by your 
predecessors among others, and thus you are accumu- 
lating a burden which may hereafter break the back of 
one of your successors. . . . 

' If you have had time to look at our newspapers 
you will have seen that my estimation of the public 



CH. XII. FAVOUEABLE ESTIMATES MISTKUSTED. 265 

feeling here on the subject of your war was quite cor- 
rect. The cry now is for conquest and annexation. 
The mercantile and manufacturing interests begin to an- 
ticipate the advantages which they may derive from our 
possession of the seaboard of Burmah. . . . Let us also 
bear in mind that some other Power might have picked 
a quarrel there, and have become a thorn in our side, if 
we had not been compelled to establish ourselves in 
Pegu. . . .' 

November 8. — ' Your last letter brings most cheerftd. 
accounts of the health and conduct of the army in 
Burmah. It would almost appear as if you had sent 
them thither as to a kind of sanatorium. . . . 

' Your financial metamorphosis of an estimated de- 
ficiency into an actual surplus for the year 1850-51 is 
so pleasing and so singular (in my long experience the 
change has always been of a converse complexion), that 
I can hardly receive it, even fi*om you, without some 
little apprehension, and mistrust of some possible draw- 
back. However correct your statement no doubt must 
be of the mere cash account, I am tempted to inquire 
whether, as a service account the result will wear an 
equally favourable aspect. Are there no postponements 
of expected payments, and no accelerations of estimated 
receipts . . . ? I need not recommend to your vigilant 
mind an inquiry upon these points. I shall do what I 
can here to obtain a clear view of the subject, before I 
venture to crow very loudly in the House of Commons 
upon it.^ 

* He seems to have felt that with regard to Indian estimates ' Confi- 
dence is a plant of slow growth in aged bosoms.' An expert in accounts, he 



266 EXCHANGE OPERATIONS. GODWIN. ch. xii, 

' We have had some startling occurrences in our 
exchange operations with India in this country. I 
readily yielded to the urgent request of the Chairs to 
lower the rate on which they oflfered bills when it was 
foiuid that scarcely any could be got at 2s. the rupee. 
But I stickled for a reduction to Is. ll^c?. only. They 
however urged, and I yielded to them, the necessity of 
a further diminution, viz., to Is. lie?. At that rate a 
torrent of bUls was poured in, and we were compelled 
to put up the exchange again to Is. ll^d., and after- 
wards to 2s. The abundance of capital is wonderful, 
and the caprices of speculation are unfathomable. I rely 
in these matters greatly on the knowledge and ex- 
perience of the Chairs, who sit in the very heart of the 
money market. . . . 

' ... In this case, however, they have all been at 
fault. . . .' 

To Lord Raglan. 

November 21. — 'I return the extracts from General 
Grod win's letters. . . . 

' I hope the day will soon arrive when I and others 
will be in a condition to do justice to General Godwin 
and the army in Parliament. . . . Nothing can have 
been better than the conduct of all the authorities, civil 
and military, in the preparation, dispatch, and manage- 
ment of the expedition to and at Rangoon. . . . The 
operations of the troops at the time when Godwin's 

looked at them with caution, lest an apparent surplus should turn out to be 
a real deficit. Possibly he may have been con-pinced from long experience 
that the results of the incomings and outgoings of Indian finance belonged to 
the category of ' those things that no fellow can find out.' 



CH. xn. GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S INSTRUCTIONS. 267 

letters were written, were wholly at the discretion of 
Lord Dalhousie. He himself disclaimed the necessity 
of any instructions from home in that respect : but no 
mail went out without conveying to him cordial ap- 
proval and encouragement. On the other hand, he did 
apply for distiact instructions and directions respecting 
the pohcy to be ultimately adopted in the prosecution 
and termination of the war. They went out to him 
fuU, distinct, and explicit, in the earliest possible reply 
to his dispatch. We consulted the great Duke before 
I framed them (with Lord Derby), and sent them to 
the Queen for sanction. They not only give Dalhousie 
full scope to do all that he contemplated, but they enjoin 
him to do more. He is therefore anything but fettered 
by the Government at home. But Dalhousie could not 
receive these instructions before the middle of October. 
His application for them was only dispatched from 
India on the 3rd of July. . . .' 

To the Marquis of Dalhousie. 

December 23. — ' As this is the last occasion of my 
writing to you as President of the Board of Control, I 
have much pleasure in availing myself of the oppor- 
tunity to assure you of the gratification which your 
confidential communications have afforded me. I shall 
always reflect with much satisfaction on the harmony 
and good understanding which have prevailed in our 
correspondence, and upon the light which it has thrown 
upon the zeal, activity, and judgment which have been 
constantly displayed in the discharge of your most 
arduous duties in the government of India ; to which I 



268 LAST LETTER TO LORD DALHOUSIE, ch. xir. 

shall at all times be ready to bear my humble testimony 
whether ia or out of Parliament. 1 have written a short 
secret letter ^ to you this mail, with which I trust you 
will be satisfied. I have avoided touching upon any 
controversial topics, and have confined myself to the 
notice of your proposed modus operandi, which will I 
hope, practically accomplish the end of our instructions. 
' The wretched and barbarous Court of Ava appears 
to be iu such a state of impotency that even a moderate 
degree of pressure ought to be sufficient to reduce it 
to submission, while you have prepared the means of 
subjecting it to much more than a moderate degree of 
coercion. 

' But I feel that I am trespassing upon the province 
of my successor. Whoever he may be [Sir Charles 
Wood succeeded him ; but the new Cabinet was not 
formed at the date of this letter], he cannot be half so 
content to assume the office as I am to relinquish it. I 
harnessed myself again in the public service with great 
reluctance, and only in compliance with the wishes and 
entreaties of my political friends, who had strong claims 
upon my humble services. I can now sing my nunc 
dimittis with hearty satisfaction, and enjoy my retire- 
ment with a satisfied conscience.' 

Nothing could have been more handsome than the 
manner in which Lord Dalhousie appears to have been 
treated by the Government, to which he was well known 
to be strongly opposed in political opinions. ' Dal- 
housie,' Mr. Herries wrote in one of his letters to Lord 

* Decemter 23. Bunnah Papers, p. 96. 



CH. xn. POLICY OF THE CABINET. PATRONAGE. 269 

Derby, ' is no friend to our party.' But, for the public 
interest, the Prime Minister urged the Governor-General 
to remain at his post, and the President of the Board of 
Control cordially supported the request. Both the pri- 
vate correspondence of Mr. Herries and the published 
despatches written by him in the name of the Secret 
Committee, testify the earnest desire of the Government 
to afford to Lord Dalhousie the utmost encouragement. 
On the other hand, it can hardly be affirmed that he 
displayed an equal readiness to act in conformity with 
their views. And the day may perhaps come, when 
native insolence, or foreign intrigue, in Burmah, will 
make Englishmen regret that the bold and decisive 
policy inculcated by the Derby Cabinet twenty-eight 
years ago, was not then carried into effect.^ 

A general belief erroneously prevailed that the 
Indian patronage of the President of the Board of Control 
was almost boundless. Mr. Herries, sharing probably 
the fate of his predecessors and successors, before the 
introduction of the system of competition, was speedily 
overwhelmed with applications, far beyond his means 
of complying with them — for cadetships, admissions to 

' Letters written ty Mr. Herries in 1863 contain tlie following passages : 
' In my last short despatch, of December 1852, in reply to Dalhousie's long, 
feehle, and inconclusive objections to those instructions (which he neverthe- 
less professed it to be his duty to obey), I approved of the measures which 
he proposed to take, because I observed that they would, if carried out, 
fulfil the object of those instructions. ... If our orders had been frankly 
and promptly carried into effect, Ava would have been in our possession 
before this time, and the war and its expenses at an end. ... He (Dal- 
housie) is a diificult man to manage. . . . We should have been in Ava 
long before this time if our instructions had been obeyed. In the present 
state of China that might have been of the greatest consequence ; for we 
should have been in immediate and close river communication with its 
western provinces. . . .' 



270 WELLINGTON. NELSON. MACREADY. ch. xn. 

Addiscombe or Haileybury, and the like — a certain 
number of which, in accordance with usage, were 
placed at his disposal not long before he quitted office. 
Three cases in which he had the gratification of render- 
ing services to individuals on public grounds, are of 
sufficient interest to deserve mention. The first was 
an appointment asked for by the Duke of Wellington 
in one of his latest letters, which could not easily be 
deciphered. The Duke made an earnest request on 
behalf of a young friend, observing at the same time 
with some bitterness, that similar apphcations on his 
part had been constantly neglected in other quarters. 
The answer was as follows : — 

' September 2, 1852. 

' My dear Lord Duke, — It will gratify me exceedingly 
to put at your disposal the first nomination to an 
appointment at Haileybury which wiU be at mine. No 
patronage has yet been assigned to me. It is in 
November that the nominations to writerships are 
distributed. The holder of my office is generally put 
upon the same footing as the Chairman of the Directors. 
It wiU give me very sincere pleasure to do justice to 
your wishes. . . .' 

In the second instance alluded to, Mr. Herries was 
able at the last moment, but not apparently without 
some difficulty, to secure a nomination of some kind for 
a grandson of Lord Nelson, recommended to his care by 
an exalted and patriotic personage. 

To art also due honour was rendered. After the 
greatest of British warriors on sea and on land, a 
famous British tragedian must be named. 



CH. XII. CLAIMS TO PATRONAGE. 271 

To W. C. Macready, Esq. 

' My dear Sir, — I am very glad to find that my offer 
of an Addiscombe Cadetship for your son is acceptable 
to you. I believe it is the best mode of entering into 
tbe East India military service. It therefore affords 
me much satisfaction that I am enabled by this appoint- 
ment not merely to meet the wishes of a friend, but at 
the same time to testify my sense of the just claim to 
public patronage of a gentleman who has so largely 
contributed, as you have, to the gratification and im- 
provement of the public. Believe me, &c., 

' J. C. Herries.' 

In another instance, one of the much coveted ap- 
pointments to what were called direct cavalry cadet - 
ships was given, in preference to many well recommended 
applicants, to the son of a distinguished officer now 
living, solely on account of the military services of his 
father — then only a Captain, but well known to the 
pubHc — ^with whom the President of the Board of 
Control was not personally acquainted. 

Among the miscellaneous correspondence of this 
time there are some letters to and concerning Mr. 
Herries's much maligned old friend Croker, on Hterary 
and historical matters. One of them, in answer to 
queries about some transactions alluded to as ' Chaides 
Fox's dealing with Irish PeUs,' says : — ' I can recollect 
nothing (if indeed I ever knew anything) of the matter 
to which you call my attention. I put the inquiry into 
hands which I thought might gather some information 



272 CROKER. FOX. LORD MONTEAGLE. ce.xit. 

for me, but I have just now received the answer — nil. . 
It occurs to me while I am writing that Monteagle 
might ferret out some information. . . . 

' I admire your fortitude and perseverance, and most 
heartily wish that they were not put to so severe a 
test.' 

To Lord Monteagle, with whom, ui or out of office, 
he had for many years maintained excellent relations, 
Mr. Herries wrote on this subject : — 'I send you a letter 
from Croker asking for information which I cannot get 
for him. It occurs to me that you might perhaps be 
able to refer me to some source of knowledge on the 
subject which would be useful to him. His fortitude 
and energy in his wretched condition are admirable.' 
There is something curious in this application from a 
veteran Tory to an ex- Whig Minister and a former 
contributor to the ' Edinburgh Review,' for materials 
to be used by a ' Quarterly ' Eeviewer, a Tory of 
Tories, respecting — perhaps against — Fox. 

Another letter throws considerable doubt on an 
historical point supposed to be certain, and completely 
disproves assertions connected with it too confidently 
made by some writers. 

' November 9, 1852. 

' My dear Croker, — My recollections, imperfect as 
they are, all tend to negative the stories which I have 
heard and read about the compromise between Lord 
Liverpool and George IV. for the disposal of the library 
of George III. I believe them to be without foundation. 

' There may have been some private discussion 
between the King and his Minister on the subject of 



CH. xir. LIBRARY OF GEORGE III. 273 

these books, which some officious and half-informed 
intriguer may have converted into the substantial 
allegations which have obtained a sort of credit (partly, 
if I mistake not, through the ' Quarterly Review ') in 
the public mind. But I doubt the existence even of 
such a slight foundation as that. I never heard Lord 
Liverpool mention it, although at that period he was 
very unreserved in his morning conversations with 
myself and Arbuthnot touching his communications 
with the King. 

' The application of money from the French 
Indemnity Fund towards the works going on at 
Buckingham House had no connection whatever with 
the library. I myself had the conduct of that affair, 
and conducted the defence of it in the House of Com- 
mons when it was attacked by M. A. Taylor. 

' I believe Nash had nothing to do with the affair of 
the books. . . . Truly yours, ' J C H 

'I hope your pulse and hearing continue in their 
amended state.' 

It is probably this letter which is alluded to in a 
foot-note to an article on the British Museum in the 
' Quarterly Review ' for December 1852, saying : — ' We 
have received a strong remonstrance, accompanied with, 
as it seems to us, very strong evidence, against the 
whole and every part of the anecdote related in our 
number for December 1850, relative to the motives and 
manner of the transfer by George IV. of his father's 
library to the museum. We took the anecdote from 
the original and full edition of the Handbook for Spain ; 

VOL. II. T 



274 CROKEK AND ' THE QUARTERLY.' ch, xn. 

but think Mr. Ford must have been misled by some 
of the loose talkers among his Majesty's "Whig ex- 
friends.' ^ 

A letter of an earlier date relates to the politics of 
the day. 

' My dear Croker, — I have just had time to cast my 
eye over your excellent article. But I have done 
better for you. I have induced Derby to do the same, 
and I send you the note I have just received from him. 

' Your view is surely the correct one. What we are 
now threatened with is a coalition of which ultra- 
democracy is a powerful ingredient, and of which it 
promises to become the predominating element. . . , 
Yours, &c., 'J C H ' 

^ The story alluded to here, and which has since heen repeated, was to the 
effect that George IV. having entered into negotiations for the sale of his 
father's library to the Emperor of Russia, was deterred by the strong re- 
monstrances of his ministers from carrying them into effect ; and that al- 
though he made a merit of the presentation of the Royal collection of books 
to the British Museum, he stipulated for a sum, to be paid to him out of the 
money received as indemnity from France, ec^uivalent to the amount which 
he would have obtained by the projected sale. As to the alleged applica- 
tion of the French indemnity funds, the evidence of Mr. Henies, who was 
perhaps better acquainted than any other person with everything relating to 
the receipt, transfer, and disposal of every penny of them, is absolutely con- 
clusive. It proves that the assertion, in whatever quarter it may have 
originated, was nothing but a simple lie, invented no doubt for party pur- 
poses. "We may add, although corroboration is superfluous, that we have 
inspected several ponderous bundles of papers concerning the French in- 
demnity, without the discovery of the least trace of any allusion to the sup- 
posed barg-ain with the King. On the other point, that of the representations 
said to have been necessary on the part of the King's ministers, Mr. Herries's 
negative testimony does not of course exclude their possibility ; but it seems 
Ln the highest degree improbable that both he, who was in confidential com- 
munication both with the Prime Minister and with Sir William Knighton, 
the King's Private Secretary, and his predecessor as Secretary of the 
Treasury, Mr. Arbuthnot, should have remained in total ignorance of such a 
transaction if it had really occurred. 



CH. XII. THE SECOND EMPIRE. 275 

One of the last acts of the first Derby Cabinet was 
the unavoidable recognition of that Second Empire de- 
clared to be synonymous with peace, but which brought 
a sword. The fact is merely alluded to here because it 
affords an opportunity of stating that the person whose 
actions and opinions we are endeavouring faithfully to 
record, although he accepted this political necessity, 
looked upon the great December crime with all the 
abhorrence which it could not faU to arouse in the mind 
of every man to whom law, justice, truth, honour, hu- 
manity, and freedom were not vain words void of sense. 
He would not have been induced by any consideration 
to cover with fulsome adulation the successful adventurer 
at whose feet this nation soon precipitated itself in a 
torrent of sycophancy.^ 

After the resignation of the ministry and the 
formation of the coalition Government presided over 
by Lord Aberdeen, Mr. Herries ceased to feel much 
inclination for party contentions, and acted inde- 
pendently during the last year of his parliamentary 
life. In the debates on the India Government Bill, 
some parts of which he opposed, he joined with the 
Ministers in resisting Lord Stanley's motion for sus- 
pension. He agreed with his successor in office. Sir 
Charles Wood, as to the principle of the continuance of 
the political functions of the East India Company, 
although he was well aware of defects requiring remedy. 

^ Several letters written at a subsequent period manifest on the part of 
Mr. Herries towards Napoleon HI., whom he always designates by the initials 
L. N. B., the greatest distrust. He was not the only person who thought 
that the nephew had all the selfishnea.s and all the perfidy, without a 
spark of the genius, of the uncle. 

T 2 



276 INDIA GOVERNMENT BILL. ch. xii. 

The system of double government has been destroyed, 
and is perhaps generally condemned ; but it is open to 
doubt whether the new Imperial rule is in all respects 
superior to it in efficiency. Experts in Indian matters 
may be found who declare that the former method en- 
sured a more thorough sifting of important questions, 
and a more complete despatch of business, than the 
present machinery. They also say that the Council 
of the Secretary of State for India is no more a reality 
than the Secret Committee was, in whose name the 
President of the Board of Control addressed his in- 
structions to the Governor-General. Persons who are 
not experts may be excused if they are unable to dis- 
cern in recent occurrences any clear proof that all is for 
the best under the best of all possible Indian Govern- 
ments, and if they observe that in the later history of 
the old Charter no such administrative monstrosity can 
be perceived as the financial mystification which crowned 
the edifice of Lord Lytton's Viceroyalty. 

Warned by failing health that he could no longer 
sustain the fatigue of constant attendance to the duties 
of the House of Commons, at the end of the session of 
1853 Mr. Herries resigned his seat, and finally closed 
his public career. On doing so he addressed this letter 
to the Speaker, Mr. Shaw Lefevre (Lord Eversley) : — 

' My dear Mr. Speaker, — I cannot take my leave of 
Parliament, and subside, as I do from mere weariness 
and exhaustion, into private life, without a farewell 
word to yourself, and an expression of my personal 
thanks for the courtesy, kindness, and assistance which 
I so often experienced from you, and especially at the 



CH. XII. RETIREMENT. TESTIMONIES. 277 

time when I took a more active part in the business of 
the House, when that assistance was invaluable.' . . . 

Among many friendly letters which were addressed 
to him on this occasion, the following was not the least 
remarkable, coming, as it did, from a former enemy : — 

' Brougham : August 29, 1853. 

' Dear Mr. Herries, — I saw with regret your retire- 
ment from Parliament, but you are the best judge how 
far it was fitting. 

' I cannot help mentioning to yourself what I have 
often stated to others — because it may be satisfactory 
to you — I mean the very strong opinion once and again 
expressed to me by my fi-iend, A. Baring, afterwards 
Ashburton. He said you were, of all the men he had 
ever seen in the financial department — and I think he 
added transacted business with — by far the most com- 
petent. He was by no means apt to be easily pleased 
with the extent and accuracy of any one's knowledge. 

Believe me sincerely yours, 

' H. Brougham.' 

The opinion repeatedly expressed by so well qualified 
a judge as the first Lord Ashbm-ton, and, apparently, 
endorsed by Lord Brougham, may to many persons 
seem more important than the contrary opinion of 
Mr. Spencer Walpole. It agrees in a striking manner 
with George the Fourth's ' estimate of fitness ' which 
provokes a sneer from that writer at the King and 
the Minister. Alexander Baring's observation of ' the 
financial department ' embraced a long period, and the 
administration of many Chancellors of the Exchequer, 



278 OLD EECOLLECTIONS. ch. xii. 

for he was born in 1774, and sat in the House of 
Commons from 1812 to 1835, when he was raised to 
the Peerage. 

His view coiacided also with that manifested more 
than once to a permanent public servant of high rank 
(on whose authority we state the fact) by (then) Lord 
John Russell, who declared that, as he believed, Mr. 
Herries knew more of the finances of this country than 
any other man in England. 

To a kind letter from his old friend, Mr. Goulburn, 
Mr. Herries replied: ' I am much obliged to you for 
your letter. It brought pleasantly to my mind the 
recollection of old times, when we commenced together 
our political career under good old Tory auspices, and 
[something illegible] real, not radical, liberality. 

' I was sorry to hear from our common friends that 
you had been so unweU in the Spring, and, like myself, 
much absent fi-om Parliament on that account. 

' I retired when I found that it was seriously detri- 
mental to my health to attempt to give regular atten- 
dance in the House of Commons. I do not say what 
I might have done to struggle against the dif&culty, if 
there had been any personal or public inducement to 
stimulate the exertion or the sacrifice. In the absence 
of any such motive I have subsided quietly into private 
life, with a calm conscience and a hearty disposition to 
enjoy it. 

' I heartily wish you the same peaceful quietus when 
it shall be your turn to follow my example.' 

Mr. Croker wrote to him thus on August 15 : 
' Thanks for your letters (the paper is not yet come). 



CH. XII. PAELIAMENT AND PARTIES. 279 

My object is to examine what colonies can be worth, 
over which we have no control.' [This refers to a for- 
mer letter asking for information ' as to the military and 
naval expenses of our colonies.'] . . . 

' I had heard some days ago of your intended re- 
tirement from Parliament and public life. I am not, as 
Juvenal was, " digressu veteris confusus amici." . . . 
It is perhaps, on the whole, better that you should 
eclipse yourself. ... I hope it may succeed as well 
with you as it did with me. I have had twenty years 
of quiet, and I may add happiness, and, till the last two 
years, of health, since I ceased to be M.P., which may 
now be interpreted member of Pandemonium ; in my 
day it was only Purgatory. 

' I should like very much to know what are your 
speculations on parties. I begin to be interested /or 
Aberdeen, for I see not who is to succeed him. Gra- 
ham seems to me to stand the most forward for the suc- 
cession, but what between his boldness of language and 
timidity in action, I should be afraid, for him and for 
us, of some great catastrophe ; but he is, I think, the 
cleverest administrator in the Cabinet. . . .' 

Though he had done with party politics, Mr. Herries 
lost none of his interest in national concerns. He 
anxiously watched, but without any confidence in the 
result, the efforts of the Government to control Russian 
arrogance by pacific diplomacy, directed by Lord 
Clarendon, an old friend, for whom, though politically 
opposed, he never ceased to entertain the most sincere 
regard. He lamented the feebleness of Lord Aber- 
deen, which allowed the country without preparation 



280 RUSSIAN WAR. DEATH. ch. xii. 

to ' drift ' into a war the Minister neither dared to 
make ready for, nor knew how to avert. If he ap- 
plauded the tardy resolution of the Cabinet to employ 
the only means by which Russian aggression ever has 
been checked — force — he deplored the want of fore- 
thought which exposed our arms to the risk of humilia- 
tion ; and, remembering as he did, the stern solemnity 
of the hour of Nelson's last departure,^ he was sad- 
dened by the vulgar exhibition of buffoonery, swagger, 
and bombastic braggadocio, which made ' the judicious 
grieve' on the sailing of the worst manned fleet that 
within human memory had left a British port to en- 
counter an enemy. But manners and language were 
not more different than times and men. If the careless 
levity which marked the despatch of the Baltic expedi- 
tion was unlike the earnest exertion, the terrible deter- 
mination, of the eve of Trafalgar ; if the sorry fustian of 
the Reform Club banquet, and the vainglorious vapour- 
ing of the Copenhagen address, were lamentably out of 
keeping with the simple grandeur of the famous signal 
of October 21 ; it was equally true that Napier was not 
Nelson, any more than Aberdeen was Pitt, or Nicholas 
Napoleon. 

Mr. Herries died suddenly on April 24, 1855. 

The following notice of this event is to be found in 
a newspaper, ' The Examiner,' representing opinions 
the very antipodes of those of the deceased. 

^ Mr. Herries was protaUy on duty at Nelson's funeral, as a Lieutenant 
of the Light Horse Volunteers, which corps held on that occasion the highly 
honourable post of the front of the Admiralty, where the coffin was deposited 
on January 8, 1806, and whence the procession started on the following 
morning. 



CH. xri. 'TPIE EXAMINEE,.' 281 

' The journals of the week contam the announce- 
ment of the death of the Right Hon. J. C. Hemes at 
the age of seventy- seven. He was one of the few sur- 
vivors of that race of public men whose services may 
be dated from the beginning of the century ; he 
was a sincere and upright politician ; and his career, 
spent in the discharge of manj'- important and varied 
duties, was honourable and useful. Those who, 
like ourselves, were opposed to him and his political 
views, could not fail to esteem in him the rare quality 
of consistency ; and to his own party the withdrawal 
of his wise and moderate counsels must be a severe loss. 
He was respected by all who knew how to respect an 
uncompromising integrity, and his strong sagacity made 
him always invaluable as an adviser. Mr. Herries 
entered Parliament in middle life,^ and had not the gifts 
of an orator. He was neither a frequent nor a briUiant 
speaker : and when his speeches made an impression on 
the House, it was owing to the matter and not to the 
manner of them. It was therefore to the force of his 
intellect, to his clear judgment, and to his honourable 
character, that his position as a public man was due ; 
but those who had the privilege of knowing him in 
private life, knew in him all the fine qualities of the 
understanding joined to those of the heart, with a 
benevolence which never ceased to exercise itself upon 
all around him. Among his intellectual quahties a 
discerning and Uberal taste in literature and art was 
conspicuous ; and he was an accomplished scholar both 
in the dead and living languages of Europe. , . .' 

"At the age of forty-five — considerably past the ' mezzo del cmmimi.' 



282 POLITICAL PRINCIPLES, 



CH, XII. 



These remarks appeared in the radical ' Examiner.' 
The spirit of candour they breathe towards a political 
adversary— very dijfferent from the uncandid tone of 
systematic detraction perceptible in another quarter — 
is highly honourable to the editor of the paper at that 
time, Mr. John Forster, whose advanced Liberal senti- 
ments are well known. 

There is reason to believe that Mr. Herries was at 
some period more justly appreciated by members — and 
those not the least important — of the party to which he 
was opposed, than by some of the party to which he 
belonged. And yet he served his party well and con- 
stantly in ' either fortune ' — in adversity as in prosperity 
— in the broken line of a discomfited minority, as well 
as on the Treasury bench supported by a compact 
majority. He never sailed under false colours, or was 
afraid to show his own. He had no taste for a patent 
reversible flag suitable for all uses ; nor did he try to 
wash down his ' true blue ' into a neutral tint. But 
although he steadfastly adhered to his principles — the 
result of reflection, not the product of emotion — ^he did 
not push them to extreme and dangerous consequences. 
At no time ' passion's slave,' he eschewed violent 
courses, and deprecated rash resolutions. What he 
desired was the maintenance of lawful authority, good 
government, for the benefit of all classes, according to 
law, subject to the constitutional control of Parliament 
— but of Parliament alone — and unswayed by the 
capricious clamour of ignorant multitudes guided by 
ambitious men for their own ends. But while he 
detested political agitation, and objected to unnecessary 



en. XII. RATIONAL TORYISM. 283 

changes made merely for love of novelty and excite- 
ment, he was always friendly to salutary remedies of 
real defects, and ready to promote weU-considered 
measures, whether legislative or administrative, of prac- 
tical improvement.^ Having no superstitious veneration 
for antiquity, he would gladly have concurred in the 
removal of many of its relics which he did not admire. 
In particular he would have hailed with satisfaction law 
reforms much larger than any attempted in his time, or 
likely to be effected in the present generation ; for he 
was not convinced of the superlative wisdom of our 
system of jurisprudence, civil or criminal. He was, 
what he professed to be, a moderate, rational, govern- 
mental — not transcendental — Tory. The toryism to 
which he addicted himself was that of the school of 
Pitt, whom he considered as incomparably the great- 
est of English statesmen — not that of the school of 
Bolingbroke, whom he did not look upon as a model 
for imitation. Had he lived in the early years of the 
eighteenth century, he would probably have been called 
a Whig — as an adherent of the Revolution Settlement.* 
He had no fancy for anachronous revivals. Revived 
Stuartism was repugnant to his reason. Revived 
Laudism excited his scorn. In no sense of the word a 

' In a letter from him, dated August 25, ] 853, the following words 
occur : — ' . . . My steadfast Toryism, and opposition to organic changes in 
the British Constitution . . . while I promoted all the measures for the 
extension and liberation of commerce introduced by HusHsson and Liver- 
pool and Oanning^those truly liberal improvers and anti-Eadical re- 
formers. . . .' 

* Like his forefathers. According to family tradition his grandfather 
was injured by the Jacobites in 'the '45 ' on account of his ' Hanoverian ' 
proclivities. 



284 THE CnUECH. FOREIGN POLICY. ch. xii. 

High Churcliman, he viewed with strong dislike the 
uprismg of Sacerdotalism described as the 'Oxford 
movement,' and condemned the prelatical pusillanimity, 
or connivance, which favoured the Romeward course. 
In matters of Ecclesiastical polity he was, in truth, 
a sound Erastian. The Church, connected with the 
State, upheld by the State, but subordinate to the State, 
and controlled by the State, was valued by him as a 
preservative institution very beneficial in its action, 
if judiciously directed. But when he spoke of the 
Church, he meant the Protestant Church of England by 
law established — a Church regulated by, and subject to, 
the law of the land. He did not mean an anti- Pro- 
testant Church, beyond the law, above the law, hostile 
to the law, claiming by virtue of a supernatural au- 
thority attributed to itself by itself, a right of inde- 
pendent action as ' libera Chiesa ' in, no longer, ' libero 
Stato,' over which, and over a prostrate laity, a legion 
of parochial popelings should reign supreme. 

He thought that the bases of the foreign policy of 
the Crown should be the scrupulous fulfilment of all 
its own engagements, with an inflexible resolution to 
require the observation of all engagements towards 
itself; the preservation of a general equilibrium as the 
only security for peace, and for the independence of all 
nations ; and the vindication, in all parts of the world, 
at all times, at all hazards, of British honour and 
interests, which he would never have been prepared to 
sacrifice to all ' the aspirations ' of all ' the nationalities ' 
and all ' the races.' An ethnological and philological 
foreign policy, regardless of history, geography, strategy, 



CH. XII. PAELIAMENTARY SPEAiaNG. 285 

public foith, or state interest, and necessarily involving, 
if carried to its legitimate consequences, the dismember- 
ment of almost every State in Europe, beginniag with 
the United Kingdom itself, seemed to him fit only for 
discussion in an assembly of lunatics. Not being able 
to admit that Welshmen ought to be absolved from 
their allegiance to the English Crown because Sussex 
farmers, as a general rule, could not comprehend the 
mysteries of Eisteddfod, he did not understand why it 
should be deemed iaiquitous on the part of a foreign 
sovereign to retain under his sceptre persons speaking 
divers languages, and classified by learned professors 
under different ethnographical denomiaations. 

Such were, as we believe, in general terms, his 
political opinions, as gathered from private conversation 
more than from his public utterances, which, indeed, 
were not very frequent. Coming into Parliament too 
late in life to acquire skill in the art of political speak- 
ing, he did not add to the too large number of those 
who unsuccessfully attempt oratorical display. He 
never quite overcame the difiidence which commonly 
restrains men of mature years who have not practised 
debating when young. It very often happened, besides, 
that he was prevented from taking part in the discus- 
sion of important questions by an affection, destroying 
his power of making himself heard, to which he was con- 
tinually liable. Nevertheless, when he addressed the 
House he generally did so with effect, from knowledge 
of the subject of which he had to treat. One remark 
may be added. Some writer once described him satirically 
as 'the man of figures,' and he was skilled in their use. 



286 TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS. 



CH. xri. 



But in Ms speeches he did not abuse them. It is obser- 
vable that he was comparatively sparing of statistics in 
what may be called the statistico-commercial period of 
our parliamentary history, the student of which is startled 
by the appearance of their formidable masses filling up 
the columns of Hansard with arithmetical eloquence. 
Every sentence a sum, every parenthesis a percentage, 
the reports of five speeches out of six must be reckoned, 
rather than read, through. From simple addition there 
is but a step to compound multiplication of a painful 
kind ; and he is fortunate who does not, in the course of 
two pages, find himself exposed to double rule of three 
in its most virulent aspect. 

In the transaction of public business, it is not to be 
denied that in the judgment of his contemporaries of 
diflferent parties Mr. Herries showed ability of a very 
high order ; and of his constant etforts to secure or 
increase the efficiency of the public service sufficient 
proof has been furnished in the preceding pages. 

We have completed the unwelcome task forced upon 
us by attacks which it was our sacred duty to repel. 
In vindicating the memory which has been unjustly 
assailed by others we cannot pretend to have been free 
fi"om bias, but we are not conscious of having been 
guilty of exaggeration or unfairness. Nothing has 
been intentionally overcoloured, nothing thrown into 
the shade. There has been neither invention nor 
concealment in our narrative. For all that we have 
advanced we have shown what we believe to be solid 
grounds. If the necessities of our defence, and a firm 
determination to tell the truth, the whole truth, nothing 



en. in. CONCLUSION. 287 

but the truth, have compelled us sometimes to disturb 
popular notions, and to exhibit facts detrimental to 
established reputations, we have done so with regret, 
but without fear. Refutation, not apology, was the 
object we had in view. It was not our purpose with 
bated breath to deprecate hostility and sue for con- 
donation, but to overthrow calumny, and encounter 
malice with the genuine records of a long and spotless 
life. 

We lay them before the public, whose impartial 
judgment we confidently await upon the question, 
whether we have, or have not, succeeded in proving 
that the injurious assertions we undertook to meet were 
wholly false, and that, far from deserving the aspersions 
of his slanderers, John Charles Herries was justly 
entitled to the fame of a most faithful, zealous, and 
able servant of the Crown and the Nation. 

' E questo fia suggel, ch' ogni uomo sganni.' 



INDEX. 



ABEECROMBT 

ABEROROMBY, Right Hon. J., 
i. 127 

Aberdeen, Lord, conduct of, respect- 
ing Reform Bill, ii. 159; letter 
communicated by, to Herries, 162 ; 
Prime Minister, 275, 279, 280 

Accounts, scrutiny of, i, 108 ; of 
foreign payments, 251, 261 

Alexander, Emperor, the Pope's 
claims opposed by, i. 106 

AlUes, supplies for, i. 30, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 84; subsidies to, 88, 89, 90, 
91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 102, 103, 104, 
108, 237, 245, 247, 251, 261 

Althorp, Lord, ii. 12-18, 23-28, 80, 
31, 33, 37, 42, 80, 91, 181, 209 
(Spencer) 

Arbuthnot, Right Hon. 0., i. 13, 21, 
114 note, 119, 145, ii. 62, 164, 273 

Ashburton, Lord, ii. 277 (see Baring) 

Austria, subsidies to, i. 88, 90, 238, 
239, 245, 246, 251, 261 



BANK OF ENGLAND, i. 66 and 
note, 67,78, 142, 220, 226,227, 
242, ii. 93, 227; Charter, 168, 
231 
— at Bombay, ii. 109 
Baring, Mr. A., concerning Russian- 
Dutch loan, ii. 132, 140, 155 ; his 
opinion of Herries, i. 220 note, ii. 
277 
VOL. II. U 



BUDGET 

Bath, Order of the, Herries appointed 
Secretary to, i. 16 

Bathurst, Lord, i. 12, 77, 78, 88, ii. 
159 

Bennet, Hon. H. G., motion of cen- 
sure by, i. 109 

Bentinck, Lord George, ii. 226, 227, 
229, 233 

Beresford, Marshal, requisitions from, 
i. 34 

Bexley, Lord, correspondence with, 
i. 207, 210, ii. 44, 45, 53, 54, 57 ; 
mentioned, i. 212, 224 note, ii. 40, 
74, 80, 81 

BUls of Credit due to Allies, i. 91, 
92, 93, 240, 246, 260, 270, 272 

Bisset, Commissary-General, letters 
to, i. 25, 39, 48, 66, 72, 75 ; pri- 
vate bargains condemned by, 74 

Black, Dr., ii. 124 

Bonham, Mr., ii. 162, 171, 173 

Bourne, Right Hon. W. S., i. 132, 
154, 169, 170, 173, 174, 178 note, 
192, 193 note, 204, 205, 207, 215, 
219 

Bowring, Dr., efforts in favour of, ii. 
101 

Brazil, project of treaty with, ii. 214 

Brougham, Mr., i. 205, 206, ii. 35, 
52,64 

— Lord, ii. 236 ; letter from, 277 

Buckingham Palace, i. 216, 217, 218 

Budget, the, of 1816, letter and re- 



290 



INDEX. 



BULOW 
marks, i. 116, 116, 117; of 1841, 
debates on, ii. 184 ; of 1842, com- 
mumcations with Peel and Goul- 
burn concerning, 206, 214, 217, 
221 

Bulow, von, Baron, i. 102 

Burmese War, ii. 248 ; correspond- 
ence respecting, ibid, to 268 ; 269 
and note 



/^AB, the, money dealing comhina- 

^ tion, so called, i. 74 

Camden, Marquis, i. 178 note, ii, 168 

Campaign of 1815, arrangements for, 
i. 97, 98, 99, 101 

Canning, George, administration of, 
i. 122; hostility of, to Reform, 
123, 127 note ; sentiments for 
Herries, 123 ; junction of Whigs 
with, 126, 127, 128 ; communica- 
tion from, 129; letters to, 131, 
134; Knighton's remarks upon, 
137 ; rumoured intrigues against, 
138; alluded to, 148; death of, 
149 ; preservation of his Govern- 
ment, 203, 209 ; feelings of his 
friends, 208, 211 ; Lord Grey's 
speech against, 211 ; combination 
formed by, 214 ; the King's deter- 
mination to support, 215; his 
confidence in Herries, 219 ; men- 
tioned, 223, 227 ; principles of, ii. 
8 ; Finance Committee proposed 
to, 11 ; neutrality policy of, 40, 
48 ; remarks on his Government, 
46, 47 ; measures of, described, 283 
Twte 

Canningites, drifting, ii. 8 

Canova, A., assistance given to, by 
British Government, i. 105 and 
note ; treatment of by the Em- 
peror Alexander and by the Prince 
Regent, 106 

Carlton Club, ii. 119,225 



CROKEE 
Oastlereagh, Lord, i. 88, 92 note, ii. 
132, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 
150 
Catherine, Empress, debt contracted 

by, u. 132, 155 

Catholic Question, i. 21, 123, ii. 102 

Certificates for raising money, issued 

at Lord Wellington's request, i. 

75 

Ciudad Rodrigo, Napier's remarks 

on siege of, i. 37 
Clarendon, Earl of, ii. 67, 279 
Clothing of troops, i. 33, 34, 45, 

55-63 
Cobbett, pamphlet by Herries against, 

introduction, [18], i. 8, 9 
Cobden, Mr., ii. 187 ; motion of, for 
reduction of estimates, 240 ; doc- 
trine laid down by, 244 
Cockburn, Sir George, ii. 171, 173, 

194 
Coinage, fabulous, described by 
Napier, i. 80 ; foreign, at the Royal 
Mint, 85, 100, 244, 245 
Colchester, Lord, irrelevant refer- 
ences to his correspondence, i. 
179, 218 
Commissariat Service, British, de- 
fects and reforms in, i. 24, 26, 27, 
28 ; promotions and appointments 
in, 24, 25, 26 ; superiority of, to 
that of the Allies, 98 
Commissary-in-Chief, functions of, i. 
23 ; Herries appointed, 17, 19 ; 
ofiice of, abolished, 106 
Comptrollers of Army Accounts, i. 

17, 26, 107, ii. 110 
Contractors, failures of, i. 81, 82, 
38 ; slanderous assertion concern- 
ing, 37 
Convoy regulations, i. 35 
Cresswell, C, ii. 178 
Oroker, Eight Hon. J. W., i. 13 ; 
correspondence with, ii, 167, 230, 
271, 272, 278 



INDEX 



291 



CURRENCY 

Currency, speech on, ii. 115 
Customs consolidation, i. 121 



DALHOUSIE, Marquis of, corre- 
spondence with, ii. 249-255, 
257, 259, 261, 264, 265, 267 ; in- 
sti-uctions to, 256, 257, 262, 263, 
264, 267, 269 and note ; treatment 
of, 268 

Davies, Colonel, ii. 154 

Decrees of Berlin and Milan, i. 14, 
15 

Democracy, cost of, ii. 243 ; ultra, 
274 

Derby, Earl of. Cabinet formed by, 
ii. 245, 246 ; correspondence with, 
ibid., 261, 264, 269; mentioned, 
250, 251, 256, 268, 260, 267 

Disraeli, Mr., ii. 229, 233, 236, 245 

D'lvernois, Sir F., writinp;g of, i. 11 ; 
on Berlin and Milan decrees, 14, 
15 

Dom Miguel, u. 54, 62, 75, 81, 115 

Drummond, Commissary - General, 
fruitless missions of, i. 66 note 



EASTERN QUESTION, discus- 
sions on, ii. 2 ; memorandum 

concerning-, 3 ; newspaper writing 

on, 182; Palmerston policy, 183, 

184 
East India Company, Directors of, i. 

220, 225, ii. 259, 270 
EUenborough, Lord, correspondence 

with, ii. 105-109, 249; conduct 

of, respecting the Eeform BUI, 

169, 160 
Entrenching tools, erroneous charges 

concerning, i. 37—46 
Estimates for 1816, L 117; for 1836, 

ii. 171, 240 
' Examiner,' the, notice of Herries 

in, ii. 281 



GEORCtE 

Exchequer, reform of the, ii. 168 
Expenditure, i. 115, 117, 143, 145, 
ii. 100, 101, 170, 241 

FALKLAND, Viscount, letter to, 
ii. 256 

Farnborough, Lord, i. 147, 148, 216 

Finance, pamphlet on, i. 7 ; consult- 
ations on, 114, ii. 204, 206, 206, 
222 ; memorandum on, i. 139 ; 
plan of, ii. 1, 208 ; Tory and Liberal 
compared, ii. 116 

— Committee, appointment of, re- 
commended, i. 139, ii. 11 ; dis- 
putes concerning (see Hemes, 
statement by) ; reports of, 92-96 ; 
referred to, 209 

Fitzgerald, Eight Hon, V., retire- 
ment of, ii. Ill 

Follett, Sir W., ii. 178 

Foreign Enlistment Act, proposed 
repeal of, ii. 40, 64, 55; Liberal 
condemnation of, 41, 42 ; note on, 
42 ; supported by Canning, 43 

Forster, John, Mr., ii. 282 

Fox, C. J., information sought con- 
cerning, ii. 272 

France, Constitution, i. 4, 6 ; decrees, 
15, 16 ; British army in, 81, 82, 
86, 88, 101, 238, 245 ; King of, 
funds for, 88, 238 ; expenditure, 
ii. 241 

French -money procured for Lord 
Wellington, i. 86, 245 (Appendix 
C.) 

GENTZ, Frederick, translation 
from, i. 1 ; letter from, 2 ; 
correspondence with, 7 
George III., disposal of library of, 

ii. 272, 274 note 
George IV., i. 124 ; views attributed 
to, 128 ; mentioned, 148, 149 ; ne- 
gotiations with, 154, 156, 157, 160, 



292 



INDEX. 



GLADSTONE 
161, 162, 163, 164, 168, 169, 175, 
179, 180, 182, 185, 187, 188, 190, 
191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 
198, 199, 203, 204, 207, 209, 211, 
214, 215, 221, 222, 223, 224, 232, 
233, 234, 235, 236 ; determined to 
support Canning, 215 ; his hatred 
of Whigs, ibid. ; Lord Holland 
pressed upon, 176, 195, 197, 232, 
ii. 7, 9, 10, 35, 44, 45, 72, 80 ; 
situation of, at Canning's death, i. 
214 ; anecdote of, 216 ; dismissal 
of Lord Goderioh by, ii. 57 and 
note ; message from, 61 ; reception 
of Dom Miguel by, 75, 80 ; fiction 
concerning, 77 note, 84, 85, 86 ; 
Ministerial changes proposed by, 90 

Gladstone, W. E., ii. 178 

Goderioh Administration, i. [5], [8], 
[9] (Introduction) 

Goderioh, Lord, suggestion from, i. 
124 ; mention of, 148, 149, 152 ; 
negotiations of, in the formation of 
a Cabinet, 153-236 ; secret pro- 
ceedings of, ii. 9, 10, 69, 72, 74, 
79, 85 ; led astray by Tierney, 12 ; 
communications with, on minis- 
terial difficulties, 14-57, 72-76; 
temporary resignation of, 9, 10, 
19, 27, 72, 73, 86 ; dissolution of 
his Cabinet, 57 ; his statements 
concerning it, 66, 68, 69, 71, 76 ; 
its true causes, 68, 70-77 (see 
Herries) 

Gordon, Colonel, Commissary-in- 
Chief, i. 18, 24; reports Whig 
threats, 22 ; commissariat im- 
proved by, 24 ; letter to, 61 

Goulburn, Right Hon. H., ii. 59; 
correspondence with, 163, 189, 
190, 198, 203, 205, 217, 222 

Graham, Sir James, remarks of, on 
Herries's statement, ii. 91 ; men- 
tioned by Peel, 193; Croker's 
opinion of, 279 



HERRIES 

Granby, Marquis of, ii. 229, 236 

Grant, Right Hon. C, i. Ill, 180, 
224 note, ii. 53 

Great coats, soldiers', War Office 
negligence concerning, i. 54 ; Na- 
pier's false charge respecting, re- 
futed, 55, 56, 57 

Greece, views concerning, ii. 3 ; Hus- 
kisson's sentiments for, 7 

Grenville, Lord, letter from Perceval 
conceimng, i. 12 ; Auditor of the 
Exchequer, hesitates to make pay- 
ments for Russia, ii. 152 

Greuhra, Mr., Prussian Ohargfi 
d' Affaires, letters to and from, i. 
98, 103 

Greville, Mr., Passages in Diary of, 
remarked upon, i. 217, 275 ; on 
T. Duncombe, ii. 68 and note 

Grey, Earl, letter from Perceval 
concerning, i. 12 ; his speech 
against Canning, 211 ; his view of 
vote on timber duties, ii. 130 ; 
knowledge of Russian-Dutch loan 
obtained by, 137 ; action of, con- 
cerning do., 142 

Grote, Mr., ii. 181 



HAMILTON, Mr. W., efforts of, 
in aid of Canova, i. 105 note 
Hanover, money of (see Coinage)', 

negotiation with, i. 106 
Hardinge, Sir H., letter from, i. 200 
Harrison, Mr. G., correspondence 

with (see Herries and Treasury) ; 

mentioned, i. 129, ii. 65 
Hart Davis, Mr., letters from, i. 200, 

ii. 2 
Harwich, i. 119, 123, ii. 124, 126, 

127, 188, 200 
Herries family, notice of. Introduc- 
tion, 10 
Herries, Colonel, Introduction [10] 

[15], i. 10, 19 



INDEX. 



293 



HEERIES 

Hemes, Eight Hon. J. C, early life 
of, Introduction, 10-20; Vansit- 
tart's secretary, i. 1 ; literary oc- 
cupation, ibid. 7, 8, 9 ; Perceval's 
secretary. Secretary to Order of 
the Bath, 16 ; employment of, in 
Ireland, 17 ; Comptroller of Army 
Accounts, ibid. ; Commiasary-in- 
Chief, ibid. 19, 23; his attachment 
to Perceval, 20; obnoxious to 
Whigs, ibid. ; commissariat im- 
provements effected by, 24, 25, 
26, 27, 97; testimony of, 29; 
WUberforce on, 31; defence of 
the Storekeeper^Q-eneralby, 38, 42, 
46 ; complains of injustice, 50 ; 
administrative activity of, 31, 34, 
35, 36, 45, 51, 53, 59, 60, 61, 63, 
64 ; his comments on Lord Wel- 
lesley's speech, 67 ; monetary 
operations of, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 
89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 99, 100, 104, 
237, 240, 243, 244, 245, 248, 249, 
273 ; mission of, to Paris, 89, 237 ; 
management of subsidies by, 94, 
96, 102, 103, 104, 237, 247, 251, 
261 ; his office abolished, 106 ; 
auditor of the Civil List, 109 ; 
recognition of his services, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 273 ; suppression of 
truth concerning. 111, 112 ; con- 
sulted by Lord Liverpool, 114 and 
note ; his desire for retrenchment, 
115, 117, 139, 143, ii. 100, 170, 
243 ; member of Revenue Inquiry 
Commission, i. 118 ; Secretary to 
the Treasury, and enters House of 
Commons, 119 ; effects Customs 
consolidation, 121 ; his position 
under Canning (anecdotes), 122, 
123, 126; wishes to leave the 
Treasury, 124, 131, 134, 152 note; 
injurious statement concerning, 
128; hints to, from Tory seces- 
sionists, 136 ; opinions of Welling- 



HEEEIES 

ton and Peel concerning, 138 ; 
the ' Times ' on, ibid. ; paper on 
Finance by, 139 ; views of, respect- 
ing African Settlements, 145, 146 ; 
on Windsor Castle Commission, 
147 ; general expectation concern- 
ing, 150, 151, 152, 155, 180 note, 
220 ; negotiations with, in the for- 
mation of Goderich Cabinet, narra- 
tive by, and correspondence, 153- 
214; comments upon the same, 
214-236 ; calimmy and innuendoes 
against, 165, 166, 199, 200, 216, 
217, 218, 227, 234 ; Chan- 
cellor of the Exchequer, 177; 
financial reform intended by, ii. 1 ; 
fundholders' confidence in, 2; 
memorandum by, on Eastern affairs, 
3 ; his fixed principles, 9 ; Finance 
Committee proposed by, 11 ; dis- 
putes relating thereto, statement 
and correspondence, 12-39 ; resig- 
nation offered by, 22, 39, 40 ; ex- 
planations in Parliament, 66-70 ; 
statement by, concerning dissolu- 
tion of Goderich Administration, 
71 ; Lord PaJmerston's charge 
against, refuted, 77-86 ; Master of 
the Mint in Wellington Cabinet, 
59 ; mysterious communications to, 
61, 62 note ; desires a change of 
office, 87 ; the King's proposal 
concerning, 90 ; in Fiaance Com- 
mittee, 91,92,&c. ; views respecting 
Sinldng Fund, i. 139, ii. 96, 98 ; 
supports Dr. Bowring, 101 ; sen- 
timents as to Catholic Emancipa- 
tion, 102 ; office in India proposed 
to, 105 ; consulted by Lord EUen- 
borough, 109 ; President of the 
Board of Trade, 111 ; negotiates 
settlement of American dispute, 
112 ; his speech thereupon, ibid. ; 
speech on Currency, 115; ac- 
tivity in opposition, 119, 120 ; as- 



294 



INDEX. 



HERRIES 
sist3 W. M. Praed, 122, 123; 
keeps Ms seat at Harwich, 124, 
126, 127 ; scmrilous attacks upon, 
124; his view of reform, 128; 
causes a Ministerial defeat, 129; 
motions of, on Eussian Dutch 
Loan, 147, 152; disapproves the 
Duke of Wellington's negotiations 
with William IV., 158 ; communi- 
cates with the Home Oifioe, 160 ; 
urges unity of Tory action, 161 ; 
consulted hy Croker, 167 ; in re- 
formed House at Commons, 168 ; 
Exchequer reform promoted by, 
169; Secretary at War in Peel 
Cahinet, 170-175; goes to Italy, 
176 ; promotes metropolitan im- 
proTements,i.l21, ii. 177; opinions 
of, on Privilege question, 178 ; de- 
feats Melhourne Ministry, 179 ; 
his assistance solicited hy foreign 
diplomatist, 182; his view of Pal- 
merston's Eastern policy, 184; 
takes part in budget debates, 
184 ; elucidates Huskisson's com- 
mercial policy, 185 ; his political 
position, 187 ; loses seat in Parlia- 
ment, 188; Sir B, Peel's assur- 
ances to, 192 ; offer of a seat to, 
197 ; consulted on financial mat- 
ters, 204, 205 ; advice on pro- 
perty tax, sugar duties, &c., 206- 
221 ; later consultations of, 222 ; 
serves on commissions, ibid. ; 
Thames Embankment advocated 
by, 223; his return to Parliament 
urged, 224 ; consulted by Lord 
George Bentinck, 226 ; elected at 
Stamford, 229; sentiments of, 
229, 230 ; warm reception of, ibid. ; 
course taken by, on monetary 
crisis, 231 ; on navigation law, 
233; on Cobden's motion, 240^; 
on Henley's motion, 244; Presi- 
sident of Board of Control in Derby 



HERRIES 
Cabinet, 246 ; hiu work, 247, 248 ; 
correspondence of, . on Burmese 
War, &c., 248-268 ; support given 
to Lord Dalhousie by, 269 ; non- 
execution of his instructions, ibid, 
note ; exercise of patronage by, 
269 ; his feelings towards the 
Second Empire, 275 and note; last 
year of his Parliamentary life, 276 ; 
retirement of, 276; opinions of 
eminent men concerning him, 277, 
278 ; his interest in national con- 
cerns, 279 ; death of, 280 ; notice of, 
by the ' Examuier,' 281 ; general 
view of his principles, 282 
Herries, Eight Hon. J. C, letters 
from, to Bank, governor of, for 
tokens, i. 67 

— Bentinck, Lord G., on Irish Eail- 
way Scheme, ii. 226, 228 

— Bexley, Lord, on Ministerial diffi- 
culties, i. 207, ii. 44, 45 

— Bisset, Oommisaary-Q-eneral, on 
commissariat patronage, i. 25; 
supply of specie and monetary 
arrangements, 66 72, 75 

— Black, Dr., complaining of scurri- 
lity in the ' Morning Chronicle,' ii. 
124 

— Canning, Mr., expressing a desire 
to leave the Treasury, i. 131, 184 

— Castlereagh, Lord, concerning 
Bills of Credit, i. 92 note 

— Chancellor of the Exchequer, on 
Rothschild's operations, i. 86; 
funds for the King of France, 88 
note ; proceedings of Russian 
agents, 96 note ; Eussian fleet, 97 ; 
French coinage at the Mint, 99 

— Commissary-General at Dubhn, 
on inaccurate military requisitions, 
i. 33 

— Correspondents, various, on Com- 
missariat patronage, i. 25, 26 ; con- 
tractors, 32; transport deficien- 



INDEX. 



295 



HEERIBS 
cies, 35 ; purchase of shoes, 60 ; 
Russian dealings, 90 ; a super- 
abundant military chest, 101 ; re- 
specting proposed return to Parlia- 
ment, ii. 224, 226 ; Burmese War, 
269 note; Napoleon III., 275 
note ; his own principles, 283 note 

Herries,RightHon. J. C.,lettersfrom, 
to Oroker, Mr., in answer to ques- 
tions concerning C. J. Fos, ii. 271 ; 
as to George III.'s library, 272 ; on 
an article, 274 

■ — Dalhousie, Lord, respecting the 
Biumese "War-, telegraphs, railways, 
finance, &c. ii. 249, 250, 251, 252, 
254, 256, 257, 259, 261, 264, 265, 
267 

— Derby, Lord, on Lord Dalhousie's 
instructions, ii. 261, 264 

— Ellenborough, Lord, respecting 
Indian finance, ii. 107, 109 ; Bur- 
mese "War, 249 

— Falkland, Lord, assurance of sup- 
port, &c. ii. 266 

— Farnborough, Lord, on the fur- 
nishing of Windsor Castle, i, 148 

— Goderich, Lord, respecting Chan- 
cellorship of the Exchequer, i. 181, 
182, 186, 191 ; on termination of 
Ministerial crisis, 209 ; offers of 
resignation, ii. 20, 26, 29, 31 

— Goulbui'n, Mr., on a proposal 
from Sir R. Peel, ii. 198 ; on Pro- 
perty tax and Sugar duties, 217 ; 
on retkement from Parliament, 278 

— Gordon, Colonel, on Spanish and 
Portuguese clothing, &c., i. 60 

— Harrison, Mr. G. (Treasury), on 
Russian behaviour, i. 95 ; lavish 
expenditure, 115; results of mis- 
sion to Paris (Appendix A), 237 ; 
proposed monetary operations (Ap- 
pendix B), 240; payments to 
Foreign Powers (Appendix D), 
247 



HEERIES 
Herries, Right Hon. J. C, lettersfrom, 
to Herries, Robert, respecting Hus- 
kisson and pamphlets, i. 8 

— Hogg, Sir J. W., on Bm-mese 
War, ii. 259 

— Huslrisson, Mr., on abandonment 
of Afi-ican Settlements, i. 146 ; on 
his return to England, 202 ; re- 
specting Finance Committee, ii. 15 

— Knighton, Sir W., respecting 
Windsor Castle, &c., i. 149 ; Minis* 
terial arrangements, 183, 206 ; dis- 
putes with the Whigs, ii. 81 

— Lyndhurst, Lord, on Ministerial 
crisis, ii. 55 

— Macready, Mr., cadetship for his 
son, ii. 271 

— Merry, Mr. W. (War Office), 
delays, i. 64 

— Monteagle, Lord, asking for in- 
formation, ii. 272 

— Peel, Sir Robert, concerning elec- 
tions, ii. 171 ; Exchequer Bills, 
174 ; on Property tax and Sugar 
duties, 206, 214 

— Planta, Mr., suggesting official 
changes, i. 124 

— Pole, Mr. W. W., on Catholics and 
Whigs, i. 21 

— Praed, Mr. W. M., on his election, 
ii 172 

— Raglan, Lord, respecting Q«neral 
Godwin and Lord Dalhousie, ii. 
266 

— Rosenhagen, Mr., on Commissariat 
defects and reforms, i. 26, 27 ; on 
bad subsidy treaties, 96 ; the Bud- 
get of 1816, 115 

— Rothschild, N. M., directing pay- 
ment for Canova, i. 104 

Baroness, on her husband's 

death, 229 

— Secretary of the Treasury, on 
Commissariat patronage, 26 

— Sister, his, on negotiations with 



296 



INDEX. 



EEERIES 

Lord Goderich, Whig proceedings, 
&c., i. 189, 201, 203, 211 
Hemes, Right Hon. J. C, letters 
from, to Speaker, Mr., on retire- 
ment, ii. 276 

— Storekeeper-General, on contrac- 
tors, i. 32 ; lamenting injustice, 
60; respecting great coats, 54; 
Spanish and Portuguese equip- 
ments, 61 

— War Department, on supplies for 
Prussia, i. 63 note 

— Wellington, Lord, in defence of 
Storekeeper-General, i. 38, 42 

Duke of, transmitting corre- 
spondence with Lord Goderich, ii. 
82 ; on Herries's situation in the 
Government, 87 ; with financial 
calculations, 204 ; on the Burmese 
War, 248, 256 ; promising appoint- 
ment, 270 

— Letters to, from Arbuthnot, Right 
Hon. 0., i. 13, 114 note, 119, ii. 
62 

— Bentinck, Lord G., ii. 227 

— Bexley, Lord, i. 210, ii. 53, 64, 
57 

— Brougham, Lord, ii. 277 

— Croker, Right Hon. J. W., ii. 
167, 230, 278 

— Dalhousie, Lord, ii. 253 

— D'lvernois, Sir F., i. 14 

— EUenborough, Lord, ii. 105, 108, 
109 

— Gentz, Frederick, i. 2 

— Goderich, Lord, i. 186, 189, 198, 
199, 209, ii. 22, 24, 28 

_- Goulhurn, Right Hon.H., ii. 163, 

189, 203, 222 
_ Greuhm, Mr,, i. 103 
Huskisson, Right Hon. W., i. 

145, ii. 17 

— King, the (George IV.), i. 185, 
214 

_ Knighton, Sir W., i. 201 



HUME 

Herries, Right Hon. J. 0., letters to, 
from Lyndhurst, Lord, i. 150, 181, 
ii. 56, 60, 61, 63 

— Peel, Sir R., ii. 121, 165, 172, 
173, 196, 206 

— Perceval, Right Hon, S., i. 12, 
13, 15, 18 

— Planta,Mr., i. 125, 133, 178, 186, 
202, 212 

— Praed, Mr. W. M., ii. 122, 123 

— Rosenhagen, Mr., i. 101 

— Rothschild, N. M., i. 93 note 

— Spearman, Mr., i. 138, ii. 52, 56, 65 

— Treasury, Assistant Secretary of, 
i. 73, 108, 273 (Appendix E.) 

— Trotter, Mr., i. 46 

— Vansittart, Right Hon. N., i. 11 

— ViUiers, Mr., ii. 67 

— Wellington, Lord, i. 41, 47 ; 
Duke of, ii. 64, 89, 120, 164 

Harries, Sir W., i. 28 
Herries, Major W. R., ii. 109 
Holland, French money procured 
from, i. 85 ; monetary operations 
in, 241 ; aggrandisement of, ii. 132 ; 
Russian debt in, 132-158 ; British 
engagements to, 134; separation 
of Belgium from, 142, 143, 145, 
150, 153 ; course pursued by, con- 
cerning the Russian loan, 157 

— Lord, observations of, on Per- 
ceval, i. 20 note; intrigues for 
admission of, into Goderich Cabi- 
net, 160 and note, 175, 176, 195, 
197, 232, ii. 7, 8, 9, 10, 35, 38,41, 
42-49, 52, 53, 65, 56, 69, 72, 74, 
79; his opposition to Foreign 
Enlistment Act, 41, 43; his en- 
deavours to upset Lord Pakner- 
ston, 183 

Hope, Messrs., creditors of Russia, 
ii. 132, 140 ; notification to, from 
the Treasury, 152 

Hume, Joseph, Mr., opposed to re- 
demption of debt, ii. 97 note; 



INDEX. 



297 



husk:sson 
supports Herriea's motion, 151 ; 
votes that black is white, 164 ; 
nonsense uttered by, 156 ; his love 
of economy, 170 ; votes with Har- 
ries against Ministers, 181 
Huskisson, Bt. Hon. W., mentioned 
in Letters, i. 8, 11, 18 ; opinion of, 
on proposed taxes, 114 note ; com- 
mercial policy of, 123, 219, ii. 185, 
283 nnte ; ill health of, i. 135 ; cor- 
respondence of, with Herries, on 
African Settlements, 145 ; trans- 
actions of, in the formation of Go- 
derich Cabinet, 155 and note, 164, 
165, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 174, 
175, 178 note, 179, 180, 187, 188, 
192, 198, 201, 202, 203, 204, 
205, 206, 207, 208, 212, 223, 230, 
232, 285 ; friendly conduct of, to- 
wards Herries, 176 and note, 212 ; 
magnanimity of Herries esteemed 
by, 212 ; concurrence of, in Her- 
ries's financial plans, ii. 1, 208, 
213 ; proposal from, respecting 
Russia and Turkey, 3 ; his feeling 
for Greece, 7 ; participation of, in 
Whig intrigues, 9, 10, 69 ; pro- 
ceedings of, with respect to the 
Finance Committee, 12-15, 17, 18, 
20-24, 26, 30, 32, 37-40 ; friend- 
ship of Herries for, 30, 32 ; enters 
Wellington Cabinet, 59; retires 
from it, 87; applauds Herries's 
speech, 115 ; Navigation Laws 
dealt with by, 234 



INDIA, exchange, ii. 266 ; finance, 
105-111, 254, 257, 265 and note ; 
government, 248, 252, 275 ; pa- 
. tronage, 269 ; railways and tele- 
graphs, 248, 252, 253, 255; 
steamers, 256 
Ipswich, election at, ii. 189 
Ii-ving, Mr., i. 227 



LTNDHUEST 



KELLY, Sir F., ii. 178, 189, 190 
Kennedy, Sir R., Commissary- 
General in the Peninsula, i. 39, 45, 
61, 56, 57, 59 note 



LABOUCHERE, Rt. Hon. H., ii. 
231, 236 

Lamb, Hon. G., thanks for secret 
intelligence, ii. 160 

Lansdowne, Marquis of, discussions 
respecting Herries, i. 163, 168, 
170, 196, 207, 222, 223, 231 ; in- 
tended resignation, 176, 177 note ; 
bewildering statement by, 178 
note ; satisfaction given to, 176, 
177, 212, 232 ; his condemnation of 
libel against Herries, 172, 229 ; 
speculations concerning, 210, 211 ; 
negotiations respecting Lord Hol- 
land, 195 ; ii. 9 ; speech on Foreign 
Enlistment Bill, 42 note 

Light Horse Volunteers, notice of, 
Introduction, [11] ; ii. 280 

Liverpool, Earl of, complaint to, from 
Lord Wellington, i. 87 ; paper sent 
to, 67 ; representations to, 85, 88, 
96, 98; consults Herries, 114 and 
note ; brings him into political life, 
119 ; ii. 199 ; his reliance upon 
him, i. 120 ; his attention to busi- 
ness, ibid., note; his government, 
principles of, ii. 46-50, 52 ; op- 
posed to payment of Russian 
debt, 135; alleged transaction of, 
with George IV., 272 ; his mea- 
sures of Reform, 283 note 

Londonderry, Lord, views of, con- 
cerning Property tax, ii. 219 

Louis XVIII., funds advanced to, 
i. 88, 238 

Lyndhm-st, Lord, communications 
with Herries, i. 150, 151, 156, 181, 
234, ii. 55, 56, 60, 61, 62 note, 63, 
80 ; with the King, Goderich, aud 



298 



INDEX. 



LYTTON 

Others, i. 169, 170, 174, 207, ii. 
62, 53, 54, 55, 57, 75 ; his advice 
to Hemes concerning libel, i. 167 
Lytton, Lord, ii. 276 



MABERLY, Mr., assistance from, 
i. 167, 201 
Mackintosh, Sir J., i. 178 note ; speech 

on Foreign Enlistment Bill, ii. 

41 
MacLane, Mr., United States Minis- 
ter, negotiations with, ii. 112 
Macready, W. C, claims recognised, 

cadetship for his son, ii. 271 
Manchester School, estimates of 1835 

loved by, ii. 170 
Maritime law, Herries on, i. 2 
Metropolitan improvements, i. 121, 

ii. 177, 222 
Military requisitions, inaccuracy of, 

i. 33, 34 
Mint, Eoyal, Hanoverian coinage at, 

i. 85, 245 ; French louis-d'ot- struck 

at, 100, 245 ; secret, Napier's fable 

concerning, 80 
Monetary operations (see Hemes) 
Monteagle, Lord, letter to, about Fox, 

ii. 272 



NAPIER, Sir W., errors of, i. 28, 
37, 65, 66, 57, 58, 76, 77, 80, 
81, 82, 83 
Napoleon, Emperor, i. 55 

— III., ii. 275 and note 

Nash, Mr., evidence respecting Buck- 
ingham Palace, i. 216 ; mentioned, 
ii. 273 

National Debt, reduction of, i. 14, 
142, ii. 93, 97 and note, 98 and 
note, 116, 117, 118, 181 

Navigation, neutral, i. 2, 4 

— Act, debates on repeal of, ii. 233- 
236 ; remarks, 237-240 



PEEL 
Nelson, Lord, appointment for his 
grandson, ii, 270 



O'OONNELL, D., Mr., vote of, on 
Russian-Dutch Loan question, 
ii. 151 
O'Shaughnessy, Dr., Indian telegraph 
system devised by, ii. 248, 252, 255 



PALMERSTON, Viscount, Hus- 
kisson on,i. 13; administration 
of War Office by, 53, 225 note ; 
opposed to retrenchment, 116 ; 
false statements in 'Autobio- 
graphy ' of, 128, 163, 162 note, 193 
note, 194 note, 216, 234, ii. 77- 
86, 193 ; Herries declines to serve 
under, at the Treasury, i. 129; 
offer of the Exchequer to, by Go- 
derich, 159 note, 194 ; the ' Times ' 
on, 225 ; operations against the 
Turks proposed by, ii. 7 ; remark 
on Herries by, 114 ; Russian com- 
munication to, 142 ; Emperor Ni- 
cholas subjects himself to, 145 ; 
untrue assertion by, 150 ; informa- 
tion withheld from Parliament by, 
156 ; Eastern policy of, 182, 183 ; 
Lord Holland against, ibid. ; his 
opposition to the Suez Canal, 238 ; 
Russell Ministry overthrown by, 
245 

ParneU, Sir Henry, chairman of 
Finance Committee, ii. 90, 91 ; 
prefers convictions to place, 161 

Patronage, exercise of, in commis- 
sariat, i. 24, 25, 26 ; by Herries at 
India Board, ii. 269-271 

Peasant proprietors, doctrines con- 
cerning, ii. 242 and note, 244 

Peel, Mr. and Sir R., secession 
from Canning, i. 122 ; opinion of 
Herries, 138 ; speculations con- 



INDEX. 



299 



PEMBEETON 

cerning, 211 ; mentioned, 214 ; 
observatior.s on Herries's speech, 
ii. 115 ; correspondence, 121 ; on 
Russian-Dutch Loan question, 151, 
153, 154 ; mentioned, 159 ; letter 
concerning, 162 ; letter from, 165 ; 
action on the Bank Charter, 168 ; 
Cabinet formed by, 170 ; communi- 
cation from, ibid. ; correspondence 
with, 171-174 ; views on Pri- 
vilege question, 178 ; in power, 
188 ; letter from, 189 ; commu- 
nications with Herries respecting 
Ministerial arrangements, &c., 192- 
198 ; assistance given to, 205 ; 
consults Herries on financial plan, 
ibid. ; letters to, on the same sub- 
ject, 206, 214 ; postal reform op- 
posed by, 210 note; financial state- 
mentof, 221 jThames Embankment 
discountenanced by, 223; wel- 
comes Herries's return to Parlia- 
ment, 230 ; in debate on Naviga- 
tion Law, 234 

Pemberton, 0. B., i. 176 and note 

— T., ii. 178 

Peninsular War, i. 28-87 

Perceval, Bight Hon. Spencer, let- 
ters from, to Colonel Herries, i. 
10, 19 ; to J. C. Herries, 12, 18, 
15, 18 ; letter to, from Wilber- 
force, 31 ; makes Herries his pri- 
vate secretary, 10 ; firmness of, 
towards the Prince Eegent, 17; 
obtains appointments for Herries, 
ibid, and 19; his friendship for 
him, 20 ; his virtues, ibid. ; party 
malignity against, ibid, and note, 
168 note ; untrue charge against, 
29 ; Lord Wellington's declaration 
concerning, 48 

Pitt, Mr., Introduction [17], ii. 47, 
99, 283 

Pius Vn., gratitude of, to British 
Government, i. 105 note 



EIPON 

Planta, Mr., i. 124, 125, 133, 136, 
149, 150, 153-156, 164, 165, 178, 
186, 192, 202, 212 

Pole, Bight Hon. W. W., i. 17, 18; 
letter to, from Herries, 21 

Pollock, Sir F., ii. 149, 153, 178 

Portland Administration, i. 10 

Post Office revenue, ii. 210 and note 

Praed, W. M., brought into Parlia- 
ment, ii. 123 ; supported by Her- 
ries, ibid. 123, 124 

Prince Begent, dealings with, i. 17, 
19 ; reception of Canova by, 106 

Private bargains, i. 48 and note, 72, 
73,74 

Privilege question, ii. 177 

Prussia, supplies for, i. 63 note, 98 ; 
subsidiary arrangements with (see 
Subsidies) 



QUADRUPLE TREATY, letter 
fi-om a Plenipotentiary, ii. 182 
' Quarterly Review,' Oroker's articles 
in, ii. 167, 230, 272, 274 ; remarks 
on George UI.'s library in, 273, 
274 note 



"DAGLAN, Lord, letter to, ii. 266 

J-i Railways in Ireland, ii. 226 ; 
in India, 248, 255 ; Termini, Boyal 
Commission, 222 

Betrenchment desired by Herries, i. 
115, 117, 139, 143, ii. 100, 170, 
243 ; resisted by departments (see 
Palmerston), i. 115, 116, 143 ; re- 
commended by Finance Committee, 
ii. 100 ; effected by Wellington 
and Peel Administrations, 101, 
170 

Bipon borough, seat for, oifered to 
Herries, ii. 197, 198, 199 

— Lord, question respecting, ii. 103 
and note 



300 



INDEX. 



ROBINSON 

Robinson, Right Hon. F., negligence 
of, i. 120 and note ; historical error 
concerning, ii. 96 note 

Rome, misgovernment at, ii. 176 

Rosenhagen, Mr., Comptroller of 
Army Accounts, correspondence 
with, i. 26, 95, 101, 115 

Rosslyn, Lord, conduct of, respecting 
the Reform Bill, ii. 159 

Rothschild, N. M., operations of, i. 
85, 86, 87, 89, 93, 104, 247 ; libel 
on Plerries, concerning, 166, 227, 
228 ; Herries's friendship for, 228, 
229 

— Baroness, letter to, i. 229 

RusseU, Lord John, remarks of, ii. 
186, 187, 231, 232 ; his opinion of 
Herries, 278 

Russia, conduct of, in money matters, 
i. 90, 91, 94, 95, 97; fleet of, 
maintained by Great Britain, 97 
and note ; subsidiary arrangements 
with (see Subsidies) ; enticement of 
manufacturers by, 95 note ; pro- 
posal from, as to invasion of Turkey, 
ii. 3 ; war with, 280 

Russian-Dutch Loan, i. 106, 260, 
271 ; history of, ii. 131 ; Herries's 
motions concerning, 147, 153 ; 
Ministerial deceit and conceal- 
ment respecting, 151, 165, 166 ; 
amount paid by Great Britain, 155 
and note; renewed discussion on, 
156 ; nonsense in House of Com- 
mons respecting, ibid, note ; course 
of the Netherlands concerning, 
157 



ST. LEONARDS, Lord, letter 
from, ii. 263 
Salaries, proposed reduction of, ii. 244 
Scarlett, Sir James, repeal of Foreign 
Enlistment Act proposed by, ii. 
40, 54, 65 



SUPPLIES 

Second Empire, recognition of, ii. 
275 

Shoes for the army in the Peninsula, 
i. 39, 41, 43, 46, 50 

Sidmouth, Lord, letter from Perceval 
respecting, i. 12 

Sinking Fund, Lowndes's plan for, i. 
13; opinions of Herries concern- 
ing, 139, 142, ii. 92, 96, 98, 99 ; 
report of Finance Committee on, 
92; Mr. S. Walpole's blunders 
concerning, 96 note 

Slavery, ii. 214, 215, 216, 217 

Speaker, the, Mr. Shaw Lefevre, 
letter to, ii. 276 

Spearman, Mr., character of, i. 94 ; 
able assistance of, ibid,, 108, 250, 
273, 274 ; letters from, ii. 52, 56, 
65 

Specie, dearth of, and measures for 
procuring, i. 65-72, 76, 78, 79, 
83-87, 98, 99, 100, 110, 111, 240, 
243, 244, 245, 248 ; prices of, 81 
note 

Stamford, return for, ii, 229 

Stanley, Mr., i. 178 note ; ii. 128 

— Lord, ii. 193, 275 

Stewart, Patrick, ii. 172, 173 

Storekeeper-General unjustly cen- 
sured, i. 37 ; vindicated by Herries, 
38, 40, 42-46 

Subsidies, arrangements concerning, 
i. 88-111, 237-273 

Sugden, Sir E., ii. 149, 153, 178, 
197 

Supplies for the army provided by 
Oommissary-in-Chief, i. 23 ; for 
Peninsular service, 35, 36, 45, 52, 
53, 58 ; for Spaniards and Por- 
tuguese, 32, 33, 34, 45, 55, 60, 
61, 62; for West Indies aud 
Canada, 51, 53 ; for Allies in Ger- 
many, &c., 63 and note ; abundance 
of, in 1815, 97, 98 



INDEX. 



301 



TAXES 

TAXES, deliberations concerning, 
i. 114 ; imposition of, impracti- 
cable, 141 ; Herries's views con- 
cerning, ii. 1, 208, 212 ; remissions 
of, 117, 118, 181, 209 

Thames Embankment, ii. 222 

Tierney, Rigbt Hon. G., financial 
resolutions moved by,lntrodiiction, 
[17] ; his hostility to Herries, i. 20, 
22, 163, 168, 174 note, 196, 206, 
207, 227, 231, 275, ii. 12 ; aUeged 
agreement of, with Canning, i. 127, 
128 ; improbable story concerning, 
174 note; Brougham's hatred of, 
206 ; expected to resign, 208 ; 
subdued, 212; behaviour to the 
King, 223 ; his interference with 
the Pitiance Committee, ii. 12-19, 
37,39 

Timber Duties, Reform Cabinet de- 
feated upon, ii. 129 

Tory Government, Napier attacks, i. 
65 ; effects restitution of works of 
art to Rome, 105; wish of, for 
economy thwarted, 116 ; split up, 
126 ; re-establishment of, diiiicult, 
208 ; unfairness towards, ii. 115 ; 
superiority of its financial admin- 
istration, 116, 117, 118 

Tory party, rupture of, ii. 102 ; 
Herries's services to, 119, 282; 
efibrts for union of, 120, 121, 161, 
164 ; leaderless, 160, 162 

Transports, captured, i. 30 ; deten- 
tion of, 35 ; insufiicient, ibid. 

Treasury, Herries clerk in, Introduc* 
tion,i. [16] ; commissariatpatronage 
by, 25 ; Lord Wellington dis- 
pleased with, 36 ; report to, from 
Herries, 52; support of Herries 
by, 53 ; business thrown upon him 
by, 63, 64; fruitless inc[uiry by, 
66 note ; instructions of, to com- 
missaries, 70, 71, 72; deference 
shown by, to-Lord Wellington, 73, 



WALPOLE 

74 ; objections of, to private bar- 
gains, ibid. ; yields to Lord Wel- 
lington's judgment, 75 ; minute on 
Hanoverian coinage, 85 note ; 
Herries sent to Paris by, 89 ; in- 
convenience to, from Russian deal- 
ing, 90 ; letter to Secretary of, 
94; minute on abolition of Com- 
missary-in-Chief's office, 107; ap- 
probation of Herries by, 108, 273 ; 
Herries appointed Secretary to, 
1 19 ; and his proposed retirement 
from, 124, 131, 184, mentioned 



UNITED STATES, commercial 
intercourse of, with British 
West Indies, ii. 111-114 



VANSITT ART, Right Hon. N., let- 
ter from, i. 11 ; negotiation with, 
12 ; Herries's plans approved by, 
85 ; communications with, 86, 88, 
95, 96, 97, 99, 242 ; speech of, 109 ; 
financial statement of, 117 ; allu- 
sions to, 242, 244,246, 247 ; blun- 
ders concerning, ii. 96 note 

Villiers, Mr., congratulates Herries, 
ii. 67 

— Right Hon. C, repeal of Corn 
Laws advocated by, ii. 187 ; allu- 
sion to Herries by, ibid. 



WALPOLE, Right Hon. S. H., 
speeches on Navigation Laws, 
ii. 326 
Walpole, Spencer, Mr., History of 
England by, remarks on. Intro- 
duction, and i. Ill, 153, 166, 174 
note, 175 note, 177 note, 193 note, 
200 note, 212 note, 216-219, 220 
note, ii. 96 note, 129 note, 277 



302 



INDEX. 



WELLESLET 

Wellesley, Marquis, his philippic, 
comments on, by Herries, i. 67; 
proposed admission of, into Gode- 
rich Cabinet, ii. 9, 35, 72 

Wellington, Lord, and Duke of, i. 25, 
27, 28, 29, 35; fault-finding, 36; 
erroneous judgments of, ibid, and 
note ; complains of stores, 37 ; 
letters to, from Herries, concern- 
ing tools, shoes, &c., 38, 42 ; re- 
plies from, 41, 47, 51 ; exertion to 
supply, 51 ; corn contract directed 
by, 62 ; misquoted despatch from, 
55 ; correspondence on clothing, 
56 ; orders of, respecting great 
coats, 57; imfounded complaints 
of, 58, 59 ; complains of the Bank, 

66 note ; alleged interference of 
Government with, paper on, 67 ; 
deference of the Treasury to, 73, 
74, 76 ; pretended opposition to, 
ibid. ; specie supplied to, 77, 78, 
79, 83, 84, 86, 88, 101, 112 note, 
238, 244, 245; story of coining 
by, 80 ; wheat supplied by, to 
Prussian army, 98 ; Herries sent 
to, at Brussels, 101 ; treaties of 
subsidy concluded by, 102 ; seces- 
sion of, from Oanniog, 122 ; return 
of, desired at Windsor, 137 ; sen- 
timents of, concerning Herries, 
138 ; abandonment of African Set- 
tlements urged by, 145 ; on Wind- 
sor Oastle Commission, 147 ; letter 
to, from Lord Westmoreland, 151 ; 
from Sir H. Hardinge, 165; his 
visit to Windsor, 215 ; charged 
with the formation of a Cabinet, ii. 

67 ; oiFers the Mint to Herries, 59 ; 
Huskisson's stipulation with, ibid. ; 
goes with Lyndhurst to Windsor, 
61 ; letter and note concerning, 
62 ; unreasonable wrath of, 64, 
65 ; intended letter to, from Her- 
ries, 82 ; rigidity of, towards PIus- 



WHIGS 

kisson, 87 ; letter to, from Herries, 
ibid.; reply from, 89; opinion of 
Herries expressed by, 90 ; his dis- 
like of the Finance Committee, 
101 ; hostility of, to Dr. Bowring, 
102; arrangement with America 
reluctantly assented to by, 112; 
Cabinet of, destroyed, 115 ; good 
financial management of his Ad- 
ministration, 116-118 ; correspond- 
ence of, with Herries, 120 ; his cor- 
respondence respecting Russian- 
Dutch Loan, 131, 135 ; instruc- 
tions to, from Lord Oastlereagh, 
136 ; attempted construction of a 
Cabinet by, 158 ; pledge given by, 
to the Kiag, 159 ; action of, urged 
by Herries, 162 ; letter from, to 
Herries, 164 ; letter to, from Sir 
R. Peel, 170 ; consideration of 
estimates by, 171 ; financial calcu- 
lations for, 204 ; letter to, 248 ; 
his suggestions concerning Bur- 
mah, 249 ; papers submitted to, 
254 ; letter to, 256 ; consulted on 
Burmese war, 258, 267 ; last poli- 
tical advice of, 260 ; death of, ibid. ; 
memorandum by, 262; appoint- 
ment of a friend of, 270 
Wetherell, Sir Charles, ii. 149, 153 
Whigs, animosity of, against Her- 
ries, i. 20, 22, ii. 200; junction 
of, with Canning, 126,187 ; pledges 
of, 127; conduct of, in formation 
of Goderich Cabinet (see Herries, 
' Narrative ' and ' Correspondence,' 
passim) ; mutual hatred between 
them and George IV., i. 215; re- 
marks upon, 222, 223, 227, 231, 
233 ; intrigues of, ii. 9 ; against 
Foreign Enlistment Act, 40, 41, 
42 and note, 43 ; letter from Her- 
ries respecting, 45 ; views of 
Brougham and Lyndhurst con- 
cerning, 62, 63 ; cunning of, 67 ; 



INDEX. 



303 



WILBERFORCE 

storm from, prepai'ing, 63 ; Her- 
ries to Knighton, about, 81 ; action 
of, at Harwich, 126, 127, 188, 189 ; 
make deficits, 116, 179, 205 ; allu- 
sions to, passim 
WUberforce, Mr., letter from, to Per- 
ceval, i. 31 



WORKS 

William IV., negotiations with the 
Duke of Wellington, ii. 158 

Wood, Sir Charles, ii. 231, 268, 
275 

Works of art, restitution of, to the 
Pope, i. 104, 105 



THE END. 



LONDOS : PRINTED BY 

9POTTISW0ODE ASD CO., NEW-STEEKT nQCTiQE 

ASD PAELIAMEST STREET 



A SELECTED LIST 



OF 



STiDARD PUBLICATIONS & REMAINDERS 

Offered for Sale at remarkably low prices by 

JOHN GRANT, BOOKSELLER, 
25 & 34 George IV. Bridge, 

EDINBURGH. 



Robert Burns' Poetical Works, edited by W. Scott 
J Douglas, with Explanatory Xotes, Various Readings, and Glossary, 

illustrated with portraits, vignettes, and frontispieces by Sam 
\ ;,Bough, R.S.A., and W. E. Lockhart, R.S.A., 3 vols, royal Svo, 

cloth extra (pub £,2 2s), i6s 6d. W. Paterson, 1S80. 

Dry den's Drainatic Works, Library Edition, with Motes 
and Life by Sir Walter Scott, Bart., edited by George Saints- 
bury, portrait and plates, 8 vols, Svo, cloth (pub £i^ 4s), £1 los, 
Paterson. 

Large Paper Copy — Best Library Edition. 

Moliirc's Dramatic Works, complete, translated and 
edited by Henri Van Laun, with Memoir, Introduction, and 
Appendices, wherein are given the Passages borrowed or adapted 
from Moliere by English Dramatists, with Explanatory Notes, 
illustrated with a portrait and 33 etchings, India proofs, by 
Lalauze, 6 magnificent vols, imperial Svo, cloth (pub £() 9s), £2 
iSs 6d. Wm. Paterson. 

The same, 6 vols, half choice morocco, gilt top 



(pub £12 I2s), £i\ i8s 6d. 

'* Not only the best translation in e.xistence, but the best to be hoped. It is a 
direct and valuable contribution to European scholarship." — Athencsum. 

Richardson's {Samuel) Works, Library Edition, with 
Biographical Criticism by Leslie Stephen, portrait, 12 vols, Svo, 
cloth extra, impression strictly limited to 750 copies (pub £(> 6s), 
£2 5s. London. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of tlie United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOIN GRANT, 25 & 34 George IT. Bridge, Edinliurgli. 



Choice Illustrated Works :- 
Burnet's Treatise on Painting, illustrated by ijo Etchings 
from celebrated pictures of the Italian, Venetian, Flemish, Dutch, 
and English Schools, also woodcuts, thick 4to, half morocco, gilt 
top (pub £d, los), £2 2S. 

Canova's Works in Sculpture and Modelling, 142 exqui- 
site plates, engraved in outline by Henry Moses, with Literary 
Descriptions by the Countess Albrizzi, and Biographical Memoir 
by Count Escognara, . handsome volume, imperial 8vo, half 
crimson morocco, gilt top (pub at £ii 12s), reduced to 21s. 

Cartel's Specimens of Ancient Sculpture and Painting now 
Remaining in England, from the Earliest Period to the Reign of 
Henry VHI., edited by Francis Douse, and other eminent anti- 
quaries, illustrated with 120 large engravings, many of which are 
beautifully coloured, and several highly illuminated with gold, 
handsome volume, royal folio, half crimson morocco, top edges 
gilt (first pub at ;^I5 15s), now reduced to £'i'i'i. 

Also uniform in size and binding. 
Carter's Ancient Architecture of England, including the 
Orders during the British, Roman, Saxon, and Norman Eras, 
also under the Reigns of Henry III. and Edward III., illustrated 
by 109 large copperplate engravings, comprising upwards of 2000 
Specimens shown in Plan, Execution, Section, and Detail, best 
edition, illustrated by John Britton (first pub at £\2 12s), now 
reduced to £1 2s. 

Castles {The) and Mansions of the Lothians, illustrated 
in 103 Views, with Historical and Descriptive Accounts, by John 
Small, LL.D., Librarian, University, Edinburgh, 2 liandsome 
vols, folio, cloth (pub £(i 6s), £2 15s. W. Paterson. 

Claude Lorraine's Beauties, consisting of Twenty-four of 
his Choicest Landscapes, selected from the Liber Veritatis, 
beautifully engraved on steel by Brimley, Lupton, and others, in 
a folio cloth portfolio (pub £•}, 3s), 12s 6d. Cooke. 

Marlborough Gems — The Collection of Getns formed by 
George Spence?-, Third Duke of Marlborough, illustrated by 108 
full-page engravings, chiefly by Bartolozzi, with Letterpress 
Descriptions in French and Latin by Jacob Bryant, Louis 
Dutens, &c., 2 handsome vols, folio, half crimson morocco, gilt 
top (selling price ^10 los), £2. 12s 6d. John Murray, 1844. 

The most beautiful Work on the " Stately Homes of England.'' 
Nash's Mansions of England in the Olden Time, 104 
Lithographic Views faithfully reproduced from the originals, with 
new and complete history of each Mansion, by Anderson, 4 vols 
in 2, imperial 4to, cloth extra, gilt edges (pub £6 6s); £2 los. 
Sotheran. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom 071 
receipt of Postal Order for the amou?it. 

JOIN GEAUT, 25 & 34 George lY. 'Bridge, EdinMrgli. 



2j <Sr= 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 3 

rv: LA ""'^Choice Illustrated 'Wor]siS— continued : — 
Lytidsay {Sir David, of the Mount) — A Facsimile of the 
ancient Heraldic Manuscript emblazoned by the celebrated Sir 
David Lyndsay of the Mount, Lyon King at Arras in the reign of 
James the Fifth, edited by the late David Laing, LL.D., from 
the Original MS. in the possession of the Faculty of Advocates, 
folio, cloth, gilt top, uncut edges (pub ;^io los), ^3 los. 
Impression limited to 250 copies. 

Also Uniform. 

Scottish Arms, being a Collection ot Armorial Bearings, 
A.D. 1370-1678, Reproduced in Facsimile from Contemporary 
Manuscripts, with Heraldic and Genealogical Notes, by R. R. 
Stodart, of the Lyon Office, 2 vols, folio, cloth extra, gilt tops 
(pub f\i. I2s), £,6, los. 

Impression limited to 300 copies. 
Several of the manuscripts from which these Arms are taken have hitherto been 
unknown to heraldic antiquaries in this country. The Arms of upwards of 600 
families are given, all of which are described in upwards of 400 pages of letter- 
press by Mr Stodart. 

The book is uniform with Lyndsay's Heraldic Manuscript, and care was taken 
not to reproduce any Arms which are in that volume, unless there are variations, 
or from older manuscripts. 

Strutt's Sylva Britannia et Scotice ; or, Portraits of 
Forest Trees Distinguished for their Antiquity, Magnitude, or 
Beauty, drawn from Nature, with 50 highly finished etchings, 
imp. folio, half morocco extra, gilt top, a handsome volume (pub 
£9 9s), £2 2S. 

The Modern Cupid {en Chenmi de Per), by M. Mounet- 
SuUy, of the Comedie Fran9ais, illustrations by Ch. Daux. A 
Bright, Attractive Series of Verges, illustrative of Love on the Rail, 
with dainty drawings reproduced in photogravure plates, and 
printed in tints, folio, edition limited to 350 copies, each copy 
numbered. Estes & Lauriat. 
Proofs on Japan paper, in parchment paper portfolio, only 65 

copies printed (pub 63s), £\ is. 
Proofs on India paper, in white vellum cloth portfolio, 65 copies 

printed (pub 50s), i6s. 
Ordinary copy proofs on vellum paper, in cloth portfolio, 250 
copies printed (pub 30s), los 6d. 
The Costutnes of all Nations, Ancient and Modern, 
exhibiting the Dresses and Habits of all Classes, ilale and Female, 
from the Earliest Historical Records to the Nineteenth Century, 
by Albert Kretschmer and Dr Rohrbach, 104 coloured plates 
displaying nearly 2000 full-length figures, complete in one hand- 
some volume, 4to, half morocco (pub £\ 4s), 45s. Sotheran. 
Walple's {Horace) Anecdotes of Painting in England, 
with some Account of the Principal Artists, enlarged by Rev. 
James Dallaway ; and Vertue's Catalogue of Engravers who have 
been born or resided in England, last and best edition, revised 
with additional notes by Ralph N. Wornum, illustrated with 
eighty portraits of the principal artists, and woodcut portraits of 
the minor artists, 3 handsome vols, Svo, cloth (pub 27s), 14s 6d. 
Bickers. 

The same, 3 vols, half morocco, gilt top, by one 

of the best Edinburgh binders (pub 45s), £\ Ss. 



John Grants Bookseller^ 



"Works on Edinburgh :— 

Edinburgh and its Neighbourhood in the Days of onr 
Grmulfathcrs ^ a Series of Eighty Illustrations of the more remark- 
able Old and New Buildings and Picturesque Scenery of Edin- 
burgh, as they appeared about 1S30, with Historical Introduction 
and Descriptive Sketches, by James Guwans, royal Svo, cloth 
elegant (pub 12s 6d), 6s. J. C. Nimmo. 
" The chapters are brightly and well written, and are all, from first to last, 

readable and full of information. The volume is in all respects handsome." — 

Scots7)ian. 

Edinburgli University — Account of the Tercentenary Fes- 
tival of the University^ including the Speeches and Addresses on 
the Occasion, edited by R. Sydney Marsden, crown Svo, cloth 
(pub 3s), Is. Blackwood & Sons. 

Historical Notices of Lady Yester''s Church and Parish, 
by James J. Hunter, revised and corrected by the Rev. Dr Gray, 
crown Svo, cloth (pub 2s 6d), gd. 
Of interest to the antiquarian, containing notices of buildings and places now 

fast disappearing. 

History of the Queeri s Edinburgh Rifle Volunteer Brigade, 
with an Account of the City of Edinburgh and Midlothian Rifle 
Association, the Scottish Twenty Club, &c., by Wro. Stephen, 
crown Svo, cloth (pub 5s), 2s. Blackwood & Sons. 
" This opportune voltime has far more interest for readers generally than might 
have been expected, while to members of the Edinburgh Volunteer Brigade it 
cannot fail to be very interesting indeed." — St James's Gazette. 

Leighton's (Alexander) Mysterious Legends of Edinburgh, 

illustrated, crown Svo, boards, Is 6d. 

Contents : — Lord Karnes' Puzzle, Mrs Corbet's Amputated Toe, The Brownie 
of the West Bow, The Ancient Bureau, A Legend of Halkerstone's Wynd, Deacon 
MacgiUvray's Disappearance, Lord Braxfield's Case of the Red Night-cap, The 
Strange Story of Sarah Gowanlock, and John Cameron's Life Policy.]] 

Steven's (Dr William) History of the High School of 
Edinburgh, from the beginning of the Sixteenth Century, based 
upon Researches of the Town Council Records and other Authentic 
Documents, illustrated with view, also facsimile of a School 
Exercise by Sir Walter Scott when a pupil in 17S3, crown Svo, 
cloth, a handsome volume (pub 7s 6d), 2s. 
Appended is a list of the distinguished pupils who have been educated in this 

Institution, which has been patronised by Royalty from the days of James VI. 
The Authorised Library Edition. 

Trial of the Directors of the City of Glasgow Bank, before 
the Petition for Bail, reported by Charles Tennant Couper, 
Advocate, the Speeches and Opinions, revised by the Council and 
Judges, and the Charge by the Lord Justice Clerk, illustrated 
with lithographic facsimiles of the famous false Balance-sheets, 
one large volume, royal Svo, cloth (pub 15s), 3s 6d. Edinburgh. 
Wilson's {Dr Daniel) ALemorials of Edirihurgh in the 
Olden Time, with numerous fine engravings and woodcuts, 2 vols, 
4to, cloth (pub £2 2s), i6s 6d. 



Se7it Carriage Free to any fart of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOO GRANT, 25 & 34 George IT. Bridge, Ediutargli. 



3j 6^ J4 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 5 



Works on the Highlands of Scotland :— 

Disruption WortJiies of tlie Highlands, a Series of Bio- 
graphies of Eminent Free Church Ministers who Suffered in the 
North of Scotland in 1S43 for the Cause of Religious liberty, 
enlarged edition, with additional Biographies, and an Introduc- 
tion by the Rev. Dr Duff, illustrated with 24 full-page portraits 
and facsimiles of the autographs of eminent Free Churchmen, 
4to, handsomely bound in cloth, gilt (pub £j is), 8s 6d. 

Gaelic iVa/zies of Plants, Scottish and Irish, Collected and 
Arranged in Scientific Order, with Notes on the Etymology, 
their Uses, Want Superstitions, &c., among the Celts, with 
Copious Gaelic, English, and Scientific Indices, by John Came- 
ron, Svo, cloth (pub ys 6d), 3s 6d. Blackwood & Sons. 
" It is impossible to withhold a tribute of admiration from a work on which 
the author spent ten years of his life, and which necessitated not only voluminous 
reading in Gaelic and Irish, but long journeys through the Highlands in search 
of Gaelic names for plants, or rather, in this case, plants for names already 
existing. " — Scotsman. 

Grant {Mrs, of Laggan) — Letters from the Mountains, 
edited, with Notes and Additions, by her son, J. P. Grant, best 
edition, 2 vols, post Svo, cloth (pub 21s), 4s 6d. London. 
Lord Jeffrey says: — "Her 'Letters from the Mountains' are among the 
most interesting collections of real letters that have been given to the public : 
and being indebted for no part of their interest to the celebrity of the names 
they contain, or the importance of the events they narrate, afford, in their suc- 
cess, a more honourable testimony of the talents of the author. The great 
charm of the correspondence indeed is its perfect independence of artificial 
helps, and the air of fearlessness and originality which it has consequently 
assumed." 

Historical Sketches of the Highland Clans of Scotland, 
containing a concise account of the origin, &c., of the Scottish 
Clans, with twenty-two illustrative coloured plates of the Tartan 
worn by each, post Svo, cloth, 2s 6d. 
" The object of this treatise is to give a concise account of the origin, seat, 

and characteristics of the Scottish Clans, together with a representation of the 

distinguishing tartan worn by each." — Preface. 

Keltic [John S.^ — A History of the Scottish Highlands, 
Highland Clans, and Highland Regiments, with an Account of 
the Gaelic Literature and Music by Dr M'Lauchlan, and an 
Essay on Highland Scenery by Professor Wilson, coloured illus- 
trations of the Tartans of Scotland, also many steel engravings, 2 
vols, imperial Svo, half morocco, gilt top (pub;!f3 los), £1 17s 6d 
Mackenzie [Alexander) — The History of the Highland 
Clearances, containing a reprint of Donald Macleod's '■ Gloomy 
Memories of the Highlands," "Isle of Skye in 1SS2," and a 
Verbatim Report of the Trial of the Brae Crofters, thick vol, 
crown Svo. cloth (pub 7s 6d), 3s 6d. Inverness. 

" Some people may ask. Why rake up all this iniquity just now? We answer. 
That the same laws which permitted the cruelties, the inhuman atrocities, 
described in this book, are still the laws of the country, and any tyrant who may 
be indifferent to the healthier public opinion which now prevails, may legally 
repeat the same proceedings whenever he may take it into his head to do so." 

Stewarts {General David, of Garth) Sketches of the 
Character, Instilutions, and Customs of tlie Higlilatrdcrs of Scot- 
land, crown Svo, cloth (pub 5s), 2s. Inverness. 
Stewart's sketches of the Highlands and Highland regiments are worthy to 

rank beside the Highland works of Sir Walter Scott, or even more worthy, for 

facts are stronger than fiction. Every Scottish lad should have the book in his 

hands as soon as he is able to read. 



John Grant, Bookseller^ 



Scottish Literature :— 

The genial A uthor of ' ' Nodes A mbrosiancE, " 

Christopher North — A Memoir of Professor Johii IVilson, 
compiled from Family Papers and other sources, by his daughter, 
Mrs Gordon, new edition, with portrait and ilhistrations, crown 
8vo, cloth {pub 6s), 2s 6d. 

" A writer of the most ardent and enthusiastic genius." — Henry Hallam. 

_" The whole literature of England does not contain a more brilliant series of 
articles than those with which Wilson has enriched the pages of Blacktvood's 
Magazine." — Sir Archibald Alison. 

Cockburn [Henry) — Journals of being a Continuation of 
the Memorials of his Time, 1S31-1S54, 2 vols, Svo, cloth (pub 
2is), 8s 6d. Edinburgh. 

Cochran- Patrick {P. W.) — Records of the Coinage of 
Scotland^ from the Earliest Period to the Union, numerous 
illustrations of coins, 2 vols, 4to, half citron morocco, gilt top, 
£df los. David Douglas. 

Also iLniform. 

Cochran-Patrick (P. IV.) — The Medals of Scotland, a 
Descriptive Catalogue of the Royal and other Medals relating to 
Scotland, 4to, half citron morocco, gilt top, £2 5s. David 
Douglas. 

Also uniform, 

Cochran-Patrick {P. IV.) — Early Peco?'ds relatifig to 
Mining in Scotland, 4to, half citron morocco, £1 Js 6d. David 
Douglas. 

"The future historians of Scotland will be very fortunate if many parts of 
their materials are so carefully worked up for them, and set before them in so 
complete and taking a form." — Athentpuni. 

" We have in these records of the coinage of Scotland not the production of a 
dilettante but of a real student, who with rare pains and the most scholarly dili- 
gence has set to work and collected into two massive volumes a complete history 
of the coinage of Scotland, so far as it can be gathered from ancient records." — 
A cadeniy. 

"Such a book .... revealing as It does the first developments of an 
industry which has become the mainspring of the national prosperity, ought to 
be specially interesting to all patriotic Scotsmen." — Saturday Revieixj. 

Crieff : Its Traditions and Characters, with Anecdotes of 
Strathearn, Reminiscences of Obsolete Customs, Traditions, and 
Superstitions, Humorous Anecdotes of Schoolmasters, Ministers, 
and other Public Men, crown Svo, is. 

" A book which will have considerable value in the eyes of all collectors of 
Scottish literature. A gathering up of stories about well-known inhabitants, 
memorable local occurrences, and descriptions of manners and customs." — 
Scotsman. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kiitgdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOHN &EANT, 25 & 34 George lY. Bridge, Edinburgli. 



-J '5^ 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 7 

Scottish Literature— conWnuerf; — 
Douglas' ( Gavin, Bishop of Dunkeld, 142^-^522) Poetical 

1 forts, edited, with Memoir, Notes, and full Glossary, by John 
Small, M.A., F.S.A. Scot., illustrated with specimens of manu- 
script, title-page, and woodcuts of the early editions in facsimile, 
4 vols, beautifully printed on thick paper, post 8vo, cloth (pub 
£3 3s), £1 2s 6d. W. Paterson. 

''The latter part of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century, a 
period almost barren in the annals of English poetry, was marked by a remark- 
able series of distinguished poets in Scotland. During this period flourished 
Dunbar, Henryson, Mercier, Harry the Mln^-trel, Gavm Douglas, Bellenden, 
Kennedy, and Lyndesay. Of these, although the palm of e.\cel!ence must beyond 
all doubt be awarded to Dunbar, — next to Burns probably the greatest poet of 
his country, — the voice of contemporaries, as well as of the age that immediately 
followed, pronounced in favottr of him who, 

' In barbarous age, 
Gave rude Scotland Virgil's page,' — 
Gavin Douglas. Wc may confidently predict that this wii 1 long remain the standard 
edition of Gavin Douglas ; and we shall be glad to see the works of other of the 
old Scottish poets edited with equal sympathy and success." — Athetuezint. 

Lyndsays {Sir David, of the Mount, i4go-i568) Poetical 
Works, best edition, edited, with Life and Glossary, by David 
Laing, 3 vols, crown 8vo, cloth (pub 63s), iSs 6d. 

Another cheaper edition by the same editor, 

2 vols, i2mo, cloth (pub 15s), 5s. W. Paterson. 

" When it is said that the revision, including Preface, Memoir, and Notes, 
has been executed by Dr David Laing, it is said that all has been done that 
is possible by thorough scholarship, good judgment, and conscientiousness." — 
Scots^fian. 

Lytteil {William, M.A.) — Landma7-ks of Scottish Life 

and Language, crown Svo, cloth (pub 7s 6d), 2s. Edinburgh. 

Introductory Observations ; Cumbrae Studies, or an "Alphabet" of Cumbrae 
Local Names; Arran Studies, or an "Alphabet" of Arran Local Names; 
Lochranza Places ; Sannox Scenes and Sights ; Short Sketches of Notable 
Places ; A Glance Round Bute ; Symbols ; Explanations, &c. &c. 

M'Kerlie's {P. H., F.S.A. Scot.) Histoiy of the Lands and 

their Chuners in i^alloway, illustrated by woodcuts of Notable 
Places and Objects, with a Historical Sketch of the District, 5 
handsome vols, crown Svo, roxburghe style (pub £1 15s), 26s 6d. 
W. Paterson. 

Ramsay {Allan) — The Gentle Shepherd, New Edition, 
with Memoir and Glossary, and illustrated with the original 
graphic plates by David Allan ; also, all the Original Airs to the 
Songs, royal 410, cloth e.\tra (pub 21s), 5s. W. & A. K. 
Johnston. 

The finest edition of the celebrated Pastoral ever produced. The paper has 
been made expressly for the edition, a large clear type has been selected, and 
the printing in black and red is of the highest class. The original plates by 
David Allan have been restored, and are here printed in tint. The volume con- 
tains a Prologue, which is published for the first time. 



on 



Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOHN GRANT, 25 & 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 



John Grant, Bookseller, 



Scottish Literature— con^/floefl'/ — 

77ie Earliest known Printed English Ballad. 

Scottysche Kynge — A Ballad of the, written by John 
Skelton, Poet Laureate to King Henry VIII., reproduced in 
facsimile, with an Historical and Biographical Introduction, by 
John Ashton, beautifully printed on thick paper, small 4to, cloth, 
uncut edges (pub i6s), 3s 6d. Elliot Stock. 
Southey says of him : — "The power, the strangeness, the volubility of his 

language, the audacity of his satire, and the perfect originality of his manner, 

made Skelton one of the most extraordinary writers of any age or country." 
This unique ballad wa.s printed by Richard Fawkes, the King's printer, in 

1513, immediately after the battle of Flodden Field, wjiich is described in it, and 

is of great interest. 

Every justice has been done to the work in this beautiful volume, the paper, 

printing, and binding of which are all alike excellent. 

One of the Earliest Presidents of the Court of Session. 

Seton (Alexander, Earl of Dunfermline, Chancellor of 
Scotland, 1555-1622) — Memoir of, with an Appendix contain- 
ing a List of the various Presidents of the Court, and Genealogical 
Tables of the Legal Families of Erskine, Hope, Dalrymple, and 
Dundas, by George Seton, Advocate, with exquisitely etched 
portraits of Chancellor Seton, and George, seventh Lord Seton, 
and his family ; also the Chancellor's Signatures, Seals, and Book- 
Stamp ; with etchings of Old Dalgety Church, Fyvie Castle, and 
Pinkie House, small 410, cloth (pub 2is) 6s 6d. Blackwood & Sons. 

" We have here everything connected with the subject of the book that could 
interest the historical student, the herald, the genealogist, and the archaeologist. 
The result is a book worthy of its author's high reputation." — Nott's andQimries. 

Jf^arden's {Alex, f.) History of Angus or Forfarshire, its 

Land and People, Descriptive and Historical, illustrated with 

maps, facsimiles, &c. , 5 vols, 4to, cloth (published to subscribers 

only at £2 17s 6d), ;^I 17s 6d. Dundee. 
Sold separately, vol 2, 3s 6d ; vol 3, 3s 6d : vols 4 and 5, 7s 6d ; 

vol 5, 3s 6d. 

A most useful Work of Reference. 
Wilson's Gazetteer of Scotland, deniy Svo (473 pp-); 

cloth gilt (pub 7s 6d), 3s. W. & A. K. Johnston. 

This work embraces every town and village in the country' of any importance 
as existing at the present day, and is portable in form and very moderate in 
price. In addition to the usual information as to towns and places, the work 
gives the statistics of real property, notices of public works, public buildings, 
churches, schools, &c., whilst the natural history and historical incidents con- 
nected with particular localities have not been omitted. 

The Scotsman says ; — *' It entirely provides for a want which has been greatly 
felt." 

Younger (John, shoemaker, St Boswells, Author of " River 
Angli7ig for Salmon and Troxtt" " Corn Law Khy)n^s," ^c.) — 
Atitohiography , with portrait, crown Svo (457 pages), cloth (pub 
7s 6d), 2s. 

" 'The shoemaker of St Boswells," as he was designated in all parts of Scot- 
land, was an excellent prose writer, a respectable poet, a marvellously gifted 
man in conversation. His life will be read with great interest ; the simple heart- 
stirring narrative of the life-struggle of a highly-gifted, humble, and honest 
mechanic, — a life of care, but also a life of virtue." — London Review. 

Sent Carriage Free to any fart of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOM GRANT, 25 & 34 George lY, Bridge, Edinliargli. 



2S 6^ J4 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 



Grampian Club Publications, of valuable MSS. 
and Works of Original Research in Scottish 
History, Privately printed for the Members :— 

The Diocesan Registers of Glasgow — Liber Protocollorum 
M. Cuthberti Simonis, notavii et scribjE capituli Glasguensis, a.d. 
1499-1513; also, Rental Book of the Diocese of Glasgow, A.D. 
I509-I570> edited by Joseph Bain and the Rev. Dr Charles 
Rogers, with facsimiles, 2 vols, 8vo, cl, 1875 (pub £2 2s), 7s 6d. 

Rental Book of the Cistercian Abbey of Coupar-Angus, 
xuith the Breviary^ of the Register, edited by the Rev. Dr Charles 
Rogers, with facsimiles of MSS., 2 vols, Svo, cloth, 1879-80 (pub 
£■2. 12s 6d), 10s 6d. 

■ The same, vol II., comprising the Register of 



Tacks of the Abbey of Cupar, Rental of St Marie's Monastery, and 
Appendix, 8vo, cloth (pub £\ is), 3s 6d. 



Estimate of the Scottish Nobility during the Minority of 
fames VI., edited, with an Introduction, from the original MS. 
in the Public Record Office, by Dr Charles Rogers, 8vo, cloth 
(pub los 6d), IS. 6d. 

The reprint of a manuscript discovered in the Public Record Office. The 
details are e.xtremely curious. 



Genealogical Memoirs of the Families of Colt and Coutts, 
by Dr Charles Rogers, 8vo, cloth (pub los 6d), 2s 6d. 

An old Scottish family, including the eminent bankers of that name, the 
Baroness Burdett-Coutts, &c. 



Rogers^ {Dr Charles) Memorials of the Earl of Stirling 
and of the House of Alexander, portraits, 2 vols, 8vo, cloth (pub 
£Z 3s), los 6d. Edinburgh, 1877. 

This work embraces not only a history of Sir William Alexander, first Earl of 
Stirling, but also a genealogical account of the family of .\lexander in all its 
branches ; many interesting historical details connected with Scottish State affairs 
in the seventeenth century ; also with the colonisation of America. 



Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOHN GRAlfT, 25 & 34 George IT, Bridge, Edinburgt. 



John Grant, Bookselle?; 



Histories of Scotland, complete set in 10 vols 
for £3 3s. 

This grand national series of the Early Chronicles of Scotland, edited by the 
most eminent Scottish antiquarian scholars of the present day, is now cornpleted, 
and as sets are becoming few in number, early application is necessary in order 
to secure them at the reduced price. 

The Series comprises : — 

Scoticronicon of John de Fordwi, from the Contemporary 
MS. (if not the author's autograph) at the end of the Fourteenth 
Century, preserved in the Library of \\'ollenbuttel, in the Duchy 
of Brunswicl';, collated with other known MSS. of the original 
chronicle, edited by W, F. Skene, LL.D., Historiographer-Royal, 
2 vols (pub 30s), not sold separately. 

The Metrical Chronicle of Andrew Wyntoiin, Prior of St 
Serfs Inch at Lochleven, who died about 1426, the work now 
printed entire for the first time, from the Royal MS. in the British 
Museum, collated with other MSS., edited by the late D. Laing, 
LL.D., 3 vols (pub 50s), vols i and 2 not sold separately. 
Vol 3 sold separately (pub 21s), los 6d. 

Lives of Saint Ninian and St Kentigern, compiled in the 
I2th century, and edited from the best MSS. by the late A. P. 
Forbes, D.C.L., Bishop of Brechin (pub 15s), not sold separately. 

Life of Saint Columba, founder of Hy, written by Adamnan, 
ninth Abbot of that ilonastery, edited by AVni. Reeves, D.D., 
JI.R.LA., translated by the late A. P. Forbes, D.C.L., Bishop 
of Brechin, with Notes arranged by W. F. Skene, LL.D, 
(pub 15s), not sold separately. 

The Book of Pluscarden, being unpublished Continuation 

of Fordun's Chronicle by M. Buchanan, Treasurer to the Dauphi- 

ness of France, edited and translated by Skene, 2 vols (pub 30s), 

I2s 6d, sold separately. 
A Critical Essay on the Ancient Inhaliitants of Scotland, 

by Thomas Innes of the Sorbonne, with Memoir of the Author by 

George Grubb, LL.D., and Appendix of Original Documents by 

\Vm. F. Skene, LL.D., illustrated with charts (pub 21s), 

los 6d, sold separately 

In connection with the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, a uniform series of 
the Historians of Scotland, accompanied by English translations, and illustrated 
by notes, critical and explanatory, was commenced some years since and has 
recently been finished. 

So much has recently been done for the history of Scotland, that the necessity 
for a more critical edition of the earlier historians has become very apparent. 
The history of Scotland, prior to the 15th century, must always be based to a 
great extent upon the work of Fordun ; but his original text has been made the 
basis of continuations, and has been largely altered and interpolated by his con- 
tinuators, whose statements are usually quoted as if they belonged to the original 
work of Fordun. An edition discriminating between the original text of Fordun 
and the additions and alterations of his continuators, and at the same time trac- 
ing out the sources of Fordun's narrative, would obviously be of great importance 
to the right understanding of Scottish history. 

The complete set forms ten handsome volumes, demy 8vo, illustrated with 
facsimiles. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOEfr eUANT, 25 & 34 George IV. Briflge, EdinMrgi. 



^5 ^ 34- George IV. Bridge, Edifihiirgh. 1 1 

Campbell {Colin, Lord Clyde)^Life of, illustrated by 

Extracts from his Diary and Correspondence, by Lieut. -Gen. 

Shadwell, C.B., with portrait, maps, and plans, 2 vols, 8vo, 

cloth (pub 36s), 6s 6d. Blackwood & Sons. 

"In .^U the annals of 'Self-Help,' there is not to be found a life more truly 
worthy of study than that of the gallant old soldier. The simple, self-denying, 
friend-helping, brave, patriotic soldier stands proclaimed in every line of General 
Shadwell's admirable m^mo\r.''—BlachwooiCs Magazine. 

De Witts {John, Gi-and Pensionary of Holland) Life ; 

or, Tii'Ciity i'cars of a Parliamentary Republic, by M. A. Pon- 
talis, translated by S. E. Stephenson, 2 vols, 8vo, cloth (pub 
36s), 6s 6d. Longman. 

Uniform with the favourite editions of Motley's " Netherlands" and "John of 
Barnveld," S:c. 

Johnson {Doctor') : His Friends and his Critics, by 
George Birkbeck Hill, D.C.L., crown Svo, cloth (pub Ss), 2s. 
Smith, Elder, c^ Co. 

"The public now reaps the advantage of Dr Hill's researches in a most 
readable volume. Seldom has a pleasanter commentary been written on a 
literary masterpiece. . . . Throughout the author of this pleasant volume 
has spared no pains to enable the present generation to realise more completely 
the sphere in which Johnson talked and taught." — Saturday Keviezv. 

Matheivs {Charles James, the Actor) — Life of, chiefly 
Autobiographical, with Selections froin liis Correspondence and 
Speeches, edited by Charles Dickens, portraits, 2 vols, Svo, cloth 
(pub 25s), 5s. Macmillan, iS/g. 
" The book is a charming one from first to hist, and JMr Dickens deserves a 

full measure of credit for the care and discrimination he has exercised in the 

business of editing. " — Globe. 

Brazil and Java — The Coffee Culture in America, Asia, 
and Africa, by C. F. Van Deldea Lavine, illustrated with 
numerous plates, maps, and diagrams, thick Svo, clpth (pub 25s), 
3s 6d. Allen. 
A useftil work to those interested in the production of coffee. The author was 

charged with a special mission to Brazil on behalf of the coffee culture and coffee 

commerce in the Dutch possessions in India. 

Smith {Captai7i John, 1579-1631) — The Adventures and 
Discoveries of, sometime President ofVirginia and Admiral of New 
England, newly ordered by John Ashton, with illustrations taken 
by him from original sources, post Svo, cloth (pub 5s), 2s. 
Cassell. 

" Full of interesting particulars. Captain John Smith's life was one peculiarly 
adventurous, bordering almost on the romantic ; and his adventures are related 
by himself with a terse and rugged brevity that is very charming." — Ed. 

Philip's Handy General Atlas of America, comprising a 
series of 23 beautifully executed coloured maps of the United 
States, Canada, &c., with Index and Statistical Notes by John 
Bartholomew, F.R.G.S., crown foHo, cloth (pub £\ Is), 5s.' 
Philip & Son. 
Embraces Alphabetical Indices to the most important towns of Canada and 

Newfoundland, to the counties of Canada, the principal cities and counties of the 

United States, and the most important towns in Central America, Mexico, the 

"West Indies, and South America, 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOHN &E,AlifT, 25 & 34 &eorge IV. Bridge, Edinljurgli. 



John Grant, Bookseller, 



Little's {/. Stanley) South Africa, a Sketch-Book of Men 
and Manners, 2 vols, 8vo, cloth (pub 21s), 3s 6d. Sonnenschein. 

Oliphaiit (Laure7ice) — The Land of Gilead, with Ex- 
cursions in the Lebanon, illustrations and maps, 8vo, cloth (pub 
2is), 8s 6d. Blackwood & Sons. 

"A most fascinating book." — Obser-ver. 

" A singularly agreeable narrative of a journey through regions more replete, 
perhaps, with varied and striking associations than any other in the world. The 
writing throughout is highly picturesque and effective." — Athensum. 

" A most fascinating volume of travel. . . . His remarks on manners, customs, 
■and superstitions are singularly interesting." — St Jajness Gazette. 

" The reader will find in this book a vast amount of most curious and valuable 
information on the strange races and religions scattered about the country." — 
Saturday Rei'ieiu. 

"An admirable work, both as a reecrd of travel and as a contribution to 
physical science." — Vanity Fair. 

Patte7'son {R. H.) — TJu Neiv Golden Age, and Lnfluence 
of the Preciotis Metals upon the Wai', 2 vols, 8vo, cloth (pub 
3IS 6d), 6s. Blackwood & Sons. 

Contents. 

Vol I. — The Period of Discovery and Romance of the New Golden 
Age, 1S48-56. — The First Tidings — Scientific Fears, and General Enthusiasm — 
The Great Emigration — General Effects of the Gold Discoveries upon Commerce 
— Position of Great Britain, and First Effects on it of the Gold Discoveries— The 
Golden Age in California and Australia — Life at the Mines. A Retrospect, — 
History and Influence of the Precious Metals down to the Birth of Modern 
Europe — The Silver Age In America — Effects of the Silver Age upon Europe — 
Production of the Precious Metals during the Silver Age (1492-1810) — Effects of 
the Silver Age upon the Value of Money (1492-1800). 

Vol II. — Period of Renewed Scarcity. — Renewed Scarcity of the Precious 

Metals, A.D. 1800-30 — The Period of Scarcity. Part II. — Effects upon Great 
Britain^The Scarcity lessens — Beginnings of a New Gold Supply — General 
Distress before the Gold Discoveries. " Cheai^ " and "Dear" Money — On 
the Effects of Changes in the Quantity and Valueof Money. The New Golden 
Age. — First Getting of the New Gold — First Diffusion of the New Gold — Indus- 
trial Enterprise In Europe — Vast Expansion of Trade with the East (a.d. 1855- 
75) — Total Amount of the New Gold and Silver — Its Influence upon the World 
at large — Close of the Golden Age, 1876-80 — Total Production of Gold and 
Silver. Period 1492-1848. — Production of Gold and Silver subsequent to 1848 — 
Changes in the Value of Money subsequent to a.d. 1492. Period a.d. 1848 
and subsequently. Period a.d. 1782-1865. — Illusive Character of the Board of 
Trade Returns since 1853 — Growth of our National Wealth. 

Tunis,' Past and Present, with a Narrative of the French 
Conquest of the Regency, by A. M. Broadley, Correspondent of 
the Times during the War in Tunis, with numerous illustrations 
and maps, 2 vols, post 8vo, cloth (pub 25s), 6s, Blackwood & Sons. 

" Mr Broadley has had peculiar facilities in collecting materials for his 

volumes. Possessing a thorough knowledge of Arabic, he has for years acted as 
confidential adviser to the Bey. . . . The information which he is able to place 
before the reader is novel and amusing. ... A standard work on Tunis has 
been long required. This deficiency has been admirably supplied by the author." 
— Morning Post. 

Sent Carriage Free to any pai't of the United Kingdo7n 
oil receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOra GRMT, 25 & 34 (Jeorge lY. Bridge, EdinMrgli. 



2J &= j^ George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 13 

Biir/iet [Bishop)--History of the Reformation of the 

Church of England, with numerous Illustrative Notes and copious 

Index, 2 vols, royal 8vo, cloth (pub 20s), los. Reeves & Turner, 

l8So. 

.'.' Bu'ii.et, in his immortal History of the Reformation, has fixed the Protestant 

rehgion in ihis country as long as any religion remains among us. Burnet is 

without doubt, the English Eusebius.' — Dr Apthoki-e. 

Burnet's History of his Own Time, from the Restoration 
of Charles II. to the Treaty of the Peace of Utrecht, with 
Historical and Biographical Notes, and a copious Index, com- 
plete in I thick volume, imperial 8vo, portrait, cloth (pub ^i 5s), 
Ss 6d. 

"I am reading Burnet's Own Times. Did you ever read that garrulous 
pleasant history? full of scandal, which all true history is ; no palliatives, but all 
'r if' wickedness that actually gave the moiru^Uum to national actors ; none 
of that cursed Humeian indifference, so cold, and unnatural, and inhuman," &c 

— CHARLE.S LaM13. 

Creasy {Sir Edward S.) — History of England, from the 
Earliest Times to the End of the Middle Ages, 2 vols (520 pp 
each), 8vo, cloth (pub 25s), 6s. Smith, Elder, & Co. 

Crittie — Bike's (Luke Owen) History of Crime in England, 
illustrating the Changes of the Laws in the Progress of Civilisa- 
tion from the Roman Invasion to the Present Time, Index, 2 
very thick vols, 8vo, cloth (pub 36s) los. Smith, Elder, & Co. 

Globe {The) Encydopadia of Useful Infonnation, edited 
by John JI. Ross, LL.D., with numerous woodcut illustrations, 6 
handsome vols, in half-dark persian leather, gilt edges, or in half 
calf extra, red edges (pub £i^ i6s), £2. Ss. Edinburgh. 
" A work of reference well suited for popular use, and may fairly claim to be 

the best of the cheap encyclopaedias." — Aifunaum. 

History of the War of Frederick I. agai?ist the Communes 
of Lomhardy, by Giovanni B. Testa, translated from the Italian, 
and dedicated by the Author to the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, 
(466 pages), 8vo, cloth (pub 15s) 2s. Smith, Elder, & Co. 
Freemasonry — Baton's {Brother C. 1.) Freemasonry and 
its firispnidence, according to the Ancient Landmarks and 
Charges, and the Constitution, Laws, and Practices of Lodges 
and Grand Lodges, Svo, cloth (pub los 6d), 3s 5d. Reeves & 
Turner. 

Freemasonry, its Symbolism, Religioics Nature, and 

Law of Perfection, 8vo, cloth (pub los 6d), 2s 6d. Reeves & 
Turner. 
Freefnasonry, its Two Great Doctrines, The Exist- 
ence of God, and A Future State ; also. Its Three Masonic 
Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity — in I vol, 8vo, cloth (pub los), 
2s 6d. Reeves & Turner. 

The fact that no -such similar works exist, that there is no standard of autho- 
rity to which reference can be made, notwithstanding the great and growing 
number of Freemasons and Lodges at home, and of those in the British 
Colonies and other countries holding Charters from Scotland, or affiliated with 
Scottish Lodges, warrants the author to hope that they may prove acceptable to 
the Order. All the oldest and best authorities — the ablest writers, home and 
foreign — on the history and principles of Freemasonry have been carefully con- 
sulted. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amoimt. 

JOM GEANT, 25 & 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 



14 John Grant, Bookseller, 

Arnold's ( Cecil) Great Sayings of Shakespea7-e, a Com- 
prehensive Index to Shakespearian Thought, being a Collection 
of Allusions, Reflections, Images, Familiar and Descriptive Pas- 
sages, and Sentiments from the Poems and Plays of Shakespeare, 
Alphabetically Arranged and Classified under Appropriate Head- 
ings, one handsome volume of 422 pages, thick 8vo, cloth (pub 
7s 6d), 3s. Bickers. 

Arranged^ in a manner similar to Southgate's " Many Thoughts of Many 
Minds." This_ index differs from all other books in being much more com- 
prehensive, while care has been taken to follow the most accurate text, and to 
cope, in the best manner possible, with the difificulties of correct classitication. 

The most Beautiful and Cheapest Birthday Book Published. 

Birthday Book — Friendship's Diary for Every Day in the 
Year, with an appropriate Verse or Sentence selected from the 
great Writers of all Ages and Countries, each page ornamented by 
a richly engraved border, illustrated throughout, crown 8vo, cloth, 
bevelled boards, exquisitely gilt and tooled, gold edges, a perfect 
gem (pub 3s 6d), is gd. Hodder c% Stoughton. 
This book practically has never been published. It only requires to be seen 

to be appreciated. 

Dobson ( W. T.) — The Classic Foets, their Lives and their 
Times, with the Epics Epitomised, 452 pages, crown 8vo, cloth 
(pub 9s), 2s 6d. Smith, Elder, & Co. 
Contents. — Homer's Iliad, The Lay of the NIbelungen, Cid Campeador, 

Dante's Divina Commedia, Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, Camoens' Lusiad, Tasso's 

Jerusalem Delivered, Spenser's Fairy Queen, Milton's Paradise Lost, Milton's 

Paradise Regained. 

English Literature : A Study of the Prologue and 

Epilogue in English Literature, froin Shakespeare to Dryden, by 
G. S. B., crown Svo, cloth (pub 5s), is 6d. Kegan Paul, 1884. 
Will no doubt prove useful to writers undertaking more ambitious researches 
into the wider domains of dramatic or social history. 

Bibliographer (The), a Magazine of Old-Time Literature, 

contains Articles on Subjects interesting to all Lovers of Ancient 
and Modern Literature, complete in 6 vols, 4to, antique boards 
(pub ^2 5s), 15s. Elliot Stock. 

" It is impossible to open these volumes an^'where without alighting on some 
amusing anecdote, or some valuable literary or historical note." — Saturday 
Revieiu. 

Book-Lore, a Magazine devoted to the Study of Biblio- 
graphy, complete in 6 vols, 410, antique boards (pub £2 5s), 15s. 
Elliot Stock. 

A vast store of interesting and out-of-the-way information, acceptable to the 
lover of books. 

Antiquary {The), a Magazine devoted to the Study of 

the Past, complete set in 15 vols, 4to, antique boards (pub ;^5 
I2S 6d), £1 15s. Elliot Stock. 
A perfect mine of interesting matter, for the use of the student, of the times of 
our forefathers, and their customs and habits. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOM GEANT, 25 & 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgli. 



25 ^ 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh. 15 ' 

Chaffers' Marks and Monograms on European and 

Oriental Pottery and Porcelain, with Historical Notices of each 
Manufactory, preceded by an Introductory Essay on the Vasa 
Fictilia of the Greek, Romano- British, and JNledifeval Eras, 7th 
edition, revised and considerably augmented, with upwards of 
3000 potters' marks and illustrations, royal 8vo, cloth extra, gilt 
top, £\ 15s. London. 

Civil Costutne of England, from the Conquest to the 
Present Time, drawn from Tapestries, Monumental Effigies, 
Illuminated MSS., by Charles Martin, Portraits, &c., 6l full-page 
plates, royal Svo, cloth (pub IDS 5d), 3s 6d. Bohn. 
In addition there are inserted at the end of the volume 25 plates illustrating 

Greek costume by T. Hope. 

Dyer {Thomas H., LL.D.) — Imitative Art, its Pj'inciples 
and Progress, with Preliminary Remarks on Beauty, Sublimity, 
and Taste, Svo, cloth (pub 14s), 2s. Bell & Sons, 1882. 

Great Diamonds of the World, their History and 
Romance, Collected from Official, Private, and other Sources, 
by Edwin ^Y. Streeter, edited and annotated by Joseph Hatton 
and A. H. Keane, Svo, cloth (pub los 6d), 2s 6d. Bell & Sons. 

Hamilton's (Lady, the Mist?-ess of Lord Nelson) Attitudes, 
illustrating in 25 full-page plates the great Heroes and Heroines of 
Antiquity in their proper Costume, forming a useful study for 
drawing fronr correct and chaste models of Grecian and Roman 
Sculpture, 4to, cloth (pub £1 Is), 3s 5d. 

Jewitt (Llewellyn, F.S.A.) — Half-Hours among some 

Knglish Antiquities, illustrated with 320 wood engravings, crown 

Svo, cloth gilt (pub (5s), 2s. Allen & Co. 

Contents : — Cromlechs, Implements of Flint and Stone, Bronze Implements 
among the Celts, Roman Roads, Temples, Altars, Sepulchral Inscriptions, An- 
cient Pottery, Arms and Armour, Slabs and Brasses, Coins, Church Bells, Glass, 
Encaustic Tiles, Tapestry, Personal Ornaments, &c. &c. 

King (Rev. C. W.) — Natural History of Gems and 
Decorative Stones, fine paper edition, post Svo, cloth (pub los 6d), 
4s. Bell & Sons. 
" Contains so much information, and of so varied a nature, as to make the 

work ... by far the best treatise on this branch of mineralogy we possess 

in this or any other language." — AihentEum. 

Leech's (John) Children of the Mobility, Drawn from 
Nature, a Series of Plumorous Sketches of our Young Plebeians, 
including portrait of Leech, with Letter on the Author's Genius 
by John Ruskin, 4to, cloth, 1S41 (pub 7s 6d), 3s 6d. Repro- 
duced 1875, Bentley & Son. 

Moi'elli (G.) — Ltalian Masters in German Galleries, 
translated from the German by L. M. Richter, post Svo, cloth 
(pub 8s 6d), 2s. Bell & Sons. 
" Signor Morelli has created nothins? less than a revolution in art-scholarship, 

and both by precept and e.xatnple has given a remarkable impulse to sjund 

knowledge and independent opinion." — Academy. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the a7noiint. 

JOM &E,ANT, 25 & 34 George lY. Bridge, Edinburgli 



1 6 John Grant, Bookseller. 

Exquisitely beautiful Works by Sir J. Noel Paton at a remarkably 
low price. 

Faton's {Noel) Compositions from Shakespeare' s Tempest, 
a Series of Fifteen Large Outline Engravings illustrating the 
Great Drama of our National Poet, with descriptive letterpress, 
oblong foHo, cloth (pub 21s), 3s. Chapman & Hall. 
Unifoi'in loith the above. 

Faton's {Noel) Cojupositions from Shelley's Frometheus 
Unbound, a Series of Twelve Large Outline Engravings, oblong 
folio, cloth (pub 2 is), 3s. Chapman & Hall. 

Smith {/. Moyr) — Ancient Greek Female Costume, illus- 
trated by 112 fine outline engravings and numerous smaller 
illustrations, with Explanatory Letterpress, and Descriptive 
Passages from the Works of Homer, Hesiod, Herodotus, yEschy- 
lus, Euripides, and other Greek Authors, printed in brown, crown 
8vo, cloth elegant, red edges (pub 7s 6d), 3s. Sampson Low. 

Bacon {Francis, Lord) — Works, both English and Latin, 
with an Introductory Essay, Biographical and Critical, and 
copious Indices, steel portrait, 2 vols, royal 8vo, cloth (originally 
pub £2 2s, ) t2s. 1879. 
" .'Vll his works are, for expression as well as thought, the glory ©f our nation, 

and of all later ages." — Sheffield, Duke of Buckinghamshire. 

"Lord Bacon was more and more known, and his books more and more 

delighted in ; so that those men who had more than ordinary knowledge in 

human affairs, esteemed him one of the most capable spirits of that age." 

Burn {R. Scott) — The Fractical Directory for the Im- 
provef/ient of Landed Property, Rural and Suburban, and the 
Economic Cultivation of its Farms (the most valuable work on 
the subject), plates and woodcuts, 2 vols, 4to, cloth (pub £t, 3s), 
15s. Paterson. 
Martineau {flarriet) — The flistoiy of British Rule in 
India, foolscap Svo (356 pages), cloth (pul) 2s 6d), gd. Smith, 
Elder, & Co. 

A concise sketch, which will give the ordinary reader a general notion of 
what our Indian empire is, how we came by it, and what has gone forward in it " 
since it first became connected with England. The book will be found to state 
the broad facts of Anglo-Indian history in a clear and enlightening manner ; and 
it cannot fail to give valuable information to those readers who have neither time 
nor inclination to study the larger works on the subject. 

Selkirk [J. Brown) — Ethics and ^Esthetics of Modern 

Poetry, crown 8vo, cloth gilt (pub 7s), 2s. Smith, Elder, & Co. 
Sketches from Shady Flaces, being Sketches from the 

Criminal and Lower Classes, by Thor Fredtrr, crown 8vo, cloth 

(pub 6s), IS. Smith, Elder, & Co. 

" Descriptions of the criminal and semi-criminal (if such aword may he coined) 
classes, which are full of power, sometimes of a disagreeablekind." — Athenoiiim. 

Southey's {Robert) Commonplace Book, the Four Series 
complete, edited by his Son-in-Law, J. W. Warter, 4 thick vols, 
Svo, cloth (pub 42s), 14s. Longmans. 
Warren's {Samuel) Ten Thousand a Year, early edition, 
with Notes, 3 vols, i2mo, cloth (pub i8s), 4s 6d. Blackwood, 
1853- 

Seiit Carriage Free to any part of the United Kiitgdom on 
receipt' of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOM GRANT, 25 & 34 George IV. Bridge, EdinMrgli. 



^5 ^ 34 Geoj'ge IV. Brid^e^ Edinburgh. 17 

Jones^ {Professor T. Rymer) Ge7ieral Ouilifie of the Or- 
ganization of the Animal Kingdom^ •^wA Manual of Comparative 
Anatomy, illustrated with 571 engravings, thick Svo, half roan^ 
gilt top (pub £\ IIS 6cl), 6s. A'an Voorst, 

fones^ {Professor T. Pyr/ie?') Natural His toij of A7iimals^ 
Lectures delivered before the Royal Institution of Great Britain, 
209 illustrations, 2 vols, post Svo, cloth (pub 24s), 3s 6d. Van 
Voorst. 

Hit7ite}-'s {Dr Joh?i) Essays on Natural History^ Ana- 
tomy, Physiology, Psychology, and Geology, to which are added 
Lectures on the Hunterian Collection of Fossil Remains, edited 
by Professor Owen, portrait, 2 vols, Svo, cloth (pub 32s), 5s. 
Van Voorst. 

Forestiy and Forest P^vducts — Prize Essays of the 
Edinburgh International Forestry Exhibition, 1884, edited by 
John Rattray, M.A., and Plugh Robert Mill, illustrated with la 
plates and 21 woodcuts, Svo, cloth (pub i5s), 55. David Douglas. 

Comprises : — 

Brace's Formation and Management of Forest Tree Nurseries. 

The same, by Thomas Berwicic, 

Stalker's Formation and Management of Plantations on different Sites,. 

Altitudes, and Exposures. 
The same, by R. E. Hodson. 
Milne's Afforesting of Waste Land in Aberdeenshire by Means of the Planting: 

Iron. 
Maclean's Culture of Trees on the ^Margin of Streams and Lochs in Scotland^ 

with a View to the Preservation of the Banks and the Conservation of Fish. 
Cannon's Economical Pine Planting, with Remarks on Pine Nurseries and on 

Insects and Fungi destructive to Pines. 
Alexander on the Various Methods of Producing and Harvesting Cinchona. 

Bark. 
Robertson on the Vegetation of Western Australia. 
Brace's Formation and Management of Eucalypus Plantations. 
Carrick's Present and Prospective Sources of the Timber Supplies of Great 

Britain. 
Oldrieve on the best Method of Maintaining the Supply of Teak, with Remarks 

on its Price, Size, and Quality; and on the Best Substitutes for Building 

Purposes. 
On the same, by J. C. Kemp. 

Alexander's Notes on the Ravages of Tree and Timber Destroying Insects. 
Webster's Manufacture and Uses of Charcoal. 
Boulger's Bye-Products, Utilisation of Coppice and of Branches and other 

Fragments of Forest Produce, with the View of Diminishing Waste. 
Stonhill's Paper Pulp from Wood, Straw, and other Fibres in the Past and 

Present. 
Green's Production of Wood Pulp. 

T. Andeuson Reid's Preparation of \\'ood Pulp by the Soda Process. 
Cross and Bevan's Report on Wood Pulp Processes. 
Yoshida's Lacquer {UrTtshi), Description, Cultivation, and Treatment of the 

Tree, the Chemistry of its Juice, and its Industrial Applications. 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the aiiiotint. 

JOHN &RANT, 25 & 34 George lY. Bridge, Edinburgli. 



1 8 John G^'ant, Bookselle?; 



Johnston's (W. & A. K.) Instructive Series :— 

Scientific Industries Explained, showing ho.v some of the 
important Articles of Commerce are made, by Alexander Watt, 
F. R.S.S.A., F"irst Series, containing Articles on Aniline Colours, 
Pigments, Soap-making, Candle-making, Paper-making, Gun- 
powder, Glass, Alcohol, Beer, Acids, Alkalies, Phosphorus, 
Bleaching Powder, Inks, Vinegar-making, Acetic Acid, Fireworks, 
Coloured Fires, Gun-cotton, Distillation, &c. &c., crown 8vo, cloth 
(pub 2s6d), IS. 

" Mr Watt discourses of aniline pigments and dyes ; of candles and paper; of 
gunpowder and glass ; of inks and vinegar ; of fireworks and gun-cotton ; . . . 
excursions over the whole field of applied science ; . . one of the best is that 
on 'gilding watch-movements.' A systematic arrangement of the subjects ha'^ 
been purposely avoided, in order that the work may" be regarded as a means of 
intellectual recreation." — Academy. 

Scientific Industries Explained, Second Series, containing 
Articles on Electric Light, Gases, Cheese, Preservation of Food, 
Borax, Scientific Agriculture, Oils, Isinglass, Tanning, Nickel- 
plating, Cements and Glues, Tartaric Acid, Stained Glass, Arti- 
ficial Manures, Vulcanised India-rubber, Ozone, Galvanic Batteries, 
Magnesia, The Telephone, Electrotyping, &c. &c., with illustra- 
tions, crown 8vo, cloth (pub 2s 6d), is. 

Mechanical Industries Explained, showing how many 
useful Arts are practised, with illustrations, by Alexander Watt, 
containing articles on Carving Irish Bog-oak, Etching, Galvanised 
Iron, Cutlery, Goklbeating, Bookbinding, Lithography, Jewellery, 
Crayons, Balloons, Needles, Lapidary, Ironfounding, Pottery and 
Porcelain, Typefounding, Bread-making, Bronze-casting, Tile- 
making, Ormolu, Papier-mache, &c. &c., crown 8vo, cloth (pub 
2s 6d), IS. 

"It would form a useful present for any boy with mechanical tastes." — 
Engineer. 



Science in a Nut-Shell, in which rational Amusement is 
blended with Instruction, with numerous illustrations, by Alex- 
ander Watt, crown Svo, illustrated boards (pub is), 5d. 
Contents : — Absorption of Carbonic Acid by Plants. — The Air-Pump. — 
Amalgams. — To Produce Artificial Ices. — Attraction : Capillary Attraction. — 
Carbon. — Carmine. — How to Make Charcoal. — To Prepare Chlorine. — Contrac- 
tion of Water — Crystallisation. — Distillation. — Effect of Carbonic Acid on Animal 
Life. — Electricity, — Evaporation, — E.\pansion by Heat, S:c. — Heat. — Hydrogen 
Gas. — Light. — To Prepare Oxygen. — Photographic Printing. — How to Make a 
Fountain. — Refractive Power of Liquids. — Reh-igeration. — Repulsion. — Solar 
Spectrum. — Specific Gravity Explained, — Structure of Crystals — Sympathetic 
Ink, &c. &c. 



Setit Carriage Free to aity part of the U?iited Ki?igdoni on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOEK aUANT, 25 & 34 George IV. Bridge, Edinlmrgli. 



-J '^"^ 3-/- George IV. Bridge., Edifiburgh. 19 

Steiiiart's {JDugald) Collected ll^orks, best edition, edited 
by Sir William Hamilton, with numerous Notes and Emendations, 
II handsome vols, Svo, cloth (pub £6 I2s), the few remaining 
sets for £2 IDS. T. & T. Clark. 

Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, 3 vols, 

Svo, cloth (pub £1 i6s), 8s 6d. 
Philosophy of the Active Poivers, 2 vols, Svo, cloth (pub 

;^i 4s), 6s 6d. 
Principles of Political Economy, 2 vols, Svo, cloth (pub 

£1 4s), 55. 

" As the names of Thomas Reid, of Diigald Stewart, and of Sir William Hamil- 
ton will be associated hereafter in the history of Philosophy in Scotland, as 
closely as those of Xenophanes, Parmenldes, and Zeno in the School of Elea, it 
is a singular fortune that Sir William Hamilton should be the collector and 
editor of the works of his predecessors. . . . The chair which he filled 
for many years, not otherwise undistinguished, he rendered illustrious." — 
AtJieniEuni, 

Dante — The Dlvina Comniedia^ translated into English 
Verse by James Ford, A.M., medallion frontispiece, 430 pages, 
crown Svo, cloth, bevelled boards (pub 12s), 2s 6d. Smith, 
Elder, ^; Co. 

" Mr Ford has succeeded better than might have been expected ; his rhymes 
are good, and his translation deserves praise for its accuracy and fidelity. We 
cannot refrain from acknowledging the many good qualities of Mr Ford's trans- 
lation, and his labour of love will not have been in vain, if he is able to induce 
those who enjoy true poetry to study once more the masterpiece of that literature 
from whence the great founders of English poetry drew so much of their sweet- 
ness and power." — Athenee^im. 

Pollok's {Robert) The Course of Ti?7ie, a Poem, beauti- 
fully printed edition, with portrait and numerous illustrations, 
i2mo, 6d. Blackwood & Sons. 
" 'The Course of Time' is a very extraordinary poem, vast in its conception, 

vast in its plan, vast in its materials, and vast, if very far from perfect, in its 

achievement." — D. M. MoiR. 

Monthly Interpreter^ a iVeit' Expository Magazine^ edited 
by the Rev. Joseph S. Exell, M.A., joint-editor of the "Pulpit 
Commentary," &c., complete from the commencement to its close, 
4 vols, Svo, cloth {pub £\ los), los 6d. T. & T. Clark. 

Vols. I, 3, 4. separately, 2s each. 
The aim of The Mo)tthly Interpreter is to meet in some adequate way the 
wants of the present-day student of the Bible, by furnishing him in a convenient 
and accessible form with what is being said and done by the ablest British, Ameri- 
can, and foreign theologians, thinkers, and Biblical critics, in matters Biblical, 
theological, scientific, philosophical, and social. 

Parkers {Dr Joseph^ of the City Temple) Weaver Stephen ; 

or, The Odds and Evens of English Religion, Svo, cloth (pub 

7s 6d), 3s 6d. Sonnenschein. 

" Dr Parker isfuo repeater of old remarks, nor is he a superfluous commentator 
His track is his own, and the jewels which he lets fall in his progress are from 
Kis own casks ; this wilt give a permanent value to his works, when the produc- 
tions of copyists will be forgotten." — C. H. Spurgeon. 

Skene {William F.^ LL.D., Historiog7'apher- Royal for 
Scotland) — The Gospel History for the Young, being Lessons on the 
Life of Christ, adapted for use in Families and in Sunday Schools, 
3 maps, 3 vols, crown Svo, cloth (pub 15s), 6s. Douglas. 
" In a spirit altogether unsectarian provides for the young a simple, interest- 
ing, and thoroughly charming history of our Lord." — Literary World. 

" The ' Gospel History for the Young ' is one of the most valuable books of 
the kind."— The Churchvian. 



John Grant, Bookseller, Edinburgh. 



By the Authoress of " The Land o' the Leal." £ s. D. 

Nairne's (Baroness) Life and Songs, with a 

Memoir, and Poems of Caroline Oliphant the Younger, edited 
by Dr Charles Rogers, porimit mid other illustrations, crown 
8vo, cloth (pub 5s) Griffin 026 

" This publication is a good service to the memory of an excellent and gifted 
lady, and to all lovers of Scottish Song." — Scotsman. 

Ossian's Poems, translated by Macpiierson, 

24mo, best red cloth, gilt (pub 2s 6d) 016 

A dainty pocket edition. 

Perthshire— Woods, Forests, and Estates of 

Perthshire, with Sketches of the Principal Families of the 
County, by Thomas Hunter, Editor of the Perthshire Consti- 
tutional and Journal, illustrated with ^o wood engravings, 
crown 8vo (564 pp), cloth (pub I2s 6d) Perth 046 

"Altogether a choice and most valuable addition to the County Histories of 
Scotland." — Glasgow Daily Mail. 

Duncan (John, Scotch Weaver and Botanist) 

— Life of, with Sketches of his Friends and Notices of the 
Times, by Wm. Jolly, F.R.S.E., H.M. Inspector of Schools, 
etclied portrait, crown 8vo, cloth (pub 9s) Kegan Paul 036 

"We must refer the reader to the book Itself for the many quaint traits of 
character, and the minute personal descriptions, which, taken together, seem to 
give a life-like presentation of this humble philosopher. . . , The many inci- 
dental notices which the work contains of the weaver caste, the workman's 
esprit dc corps, and his wanderings about the country, either in the performance 
of his work or, when that was slack, taking a'hand at the harvest, form an interest- 
ing chapter of social history. The completeness of the work Is considerably 
enhanced by detailed descriptions of the district he lived in, and of his numerous 
friends and acquaintance." — AtheiuEuin. 

Scots (Ancient)— An Examination of the An- 
cient History of Ireland and Iceland, in so far as it concerns 
the Origin of the Scots ; Ireland not the Hibernia of the 
Ancients ; Interpolations in Bede's Ecclesiastical History and 
other Ancient Annals affecting the Early History of Scotland 
and Ireland — the three Essays in one volume, crown 8vo, cloth 
(pub 4s) Edinburgh, 1883 010 

The first of the above treatises Is mainly taken up with an investigation of the 
early History of Ireland and Iceland, In order to ascertain which has the better 
claim to be considered the original country of the Scots. In the second and 
third an attempt is made to show that Iceland was the ancient Hibernia, and 
the country from which the Scots came to Scotland ; and further, contain a 
review of the evidence furnished by the more genuine of the early British Annals 
against the idea that Ireland was the ancient Scoti'i. 

Traditional Ballad Airs, chiefly of the North- 
Eastern Districts of Scotland, from Copies 

gathered in the Counties of Aberdeen, Banff, and Moray, by 
Dean Christie, and William Christie, Monquhitter, with the 
Words for Singing and the Music arranged for the Pianoforte 
and Harmonium, illustrated with Notes, giving an Account of 
both Words and Music, their Origin, &c. , 2 handsome vols, 
4to, half citron morocco, gilt top, originally published at 
£,\ 4s by Edmonston & Douglas, reduced to I 10 

Sent Carriage Free to any part of the United Kingdom on 
receipt of Postal Order for the amount. 

JOIN GRANT, 25 & 34 George IT. Bridge, Edinburgh. 



1 1.} #« 'm^'n'mwm 



